portrait of Andrew Snape EFFIGIES AUTHORIS. Aetatis Suae 38. Ano 1682.
R. White delln. et. sculp


THE ANATOMY OF AN HORSE.

CONTAINING An exact and full Description of the Frame, Situation and Connection
of all his Parts, (with their Actions and Uses) expressed in Forty nine
Copper Plates.

To which is Added An APPENDIX, Containing two Discourses: The one, of the
GENERATION of ANIMALS; And the other, of the MOTION of the CHYLE, AND THE
CIRCULATION of the BLOOD.

By ANDREW SNAPE, Jun. Farrier to His MAJESTY.

LONDON, Printed by M. Flesher for the Author, and are to be sold by T.
Flesher at the Angel and Crown in S. Paul's Churchyard. An. Dom. 1683.

TO His Most Sacred Majesty, CHARLES II. KING of Great BRITAIN, FRANCE and
IRELAND, etc.
May it please Your Majesty.
NOTHING could have excused, or induced me unto, the Presumption of this
Address unto Your MAJESTY, if Your Royal Bounty toward me, had not made such
an Application my Duty. For being a Son of that Family that has had the honor
to serve the Crown of this Kingdom in the Quality of Farriers for these two
Hundred Years, and being my self retained by Your MAJESTY's Favor in that
capacity; As these hereditary and personal Engagements were the first Motives
that put me upon dissecting of Horses, that I might be more capable of serving
Your MAJESTY in my Station; so do they entitle Your MAJESTY to the Discoveries
I have made, as being but the effects of such Obligations. And I do the rather
flatter my self with the hope of Your MAJESTY's Pardon in this Particular, in
regard that this Essay has something in it that is new, and withal of Public
and Common Benefit, which Your Royal Goodness has been pleased upon all
occasions to Honor with Your Princely Encouragement and Approbation. For the
Intention of publishing this Treatise being to instruct Farriers in the Frame,
Situation and Use of the Parts of an Horse, which is the Subject of their Care;
They will thereby, I hope, become more skillful in applying and administering
proper Remedies to the Distempers of that Generous Animal, which yields Your
MAJESTY and Your Subjects that great service both in Peace and War.

May God Almighty long continue Your MAJESTY's Gracious Reign over a Loyal and
Obedient People: And that Your MAJESTY will vouchsafe Your Royal Pardon for the
boldness of this Dedication, is the humble Petition of

Your MAJESTY's Most Loyal and Obedient Subject and Servant, A. Snape.

The Introduction.
THERE is nothing gives a greater check to the progress of an Art, than to
believe it is already perfected by those that have gone before us, and so to
content our selves with their determinations: For had our ancient Artists been
thus supinely credulous, and thought it sufficient to have traced their
predecessors, limiting their wits within other men's bounds, never had time
brought to light such discoveries in our Profession, nor had the mysteries of
our Art been so far communicated to posterity as they already are.

This consideration induced me to make an attempt for the cultivating and
improving our Art to a greater perfection than it had as yet attained to: In
order to which considering the several parts of it, and observing that our
profession has such a correspondence with that of a Physician, that they differ
not at all saving in the subject they act upon; I begun to think, whosoever
would excel in the knowledge of the one, must arrive at it by the same method
as the others do. Now he that once bends his mind toward the practice of
Physic, first applies himself to the study of Anatomy, to understand all the
Parts (with their actions and uses) of that Body which is to be the subject
whereupon his Art is to be exercised; without which no wise man will think him
capable of that profession. And yet how rare amongst the greatest part of those
that think themselves no mean Farriers, is the knowledge of that Creature they
practice upon? whereas it is plain, seeing they know not the situation and use
of the parts, they can make but wide guesses at the seat or nature of the
distemper, and so must administer their Medicines at random and at all
adventures, and be in the most opprobrious sense Horse-doctors.

Nay I will be bold to say something more (which I hope I may speak without the
envy of Physicians, for whom I have a profound respect) that in some regards
Anatomy is more necessary to Farriers than to them, in order to find out
diseases: For besides the pulse and the urine, and the pathognomonick signs (as
they call them) of each distemper, they are assisted in their enquiry moreover
(not to say chiefly) by the complaints and relations of the Patients
themselves: whereas a Farrier having to do with a dumb creature, must be very
curious in his knowledge of the parts with their offices, and of the sympathy
or consent that one part has with another; or else, seeing all his information
must be of his own hammering out, he is like to make but a short discovery of
the distemper.

How necessary the knowledge of the parts is to the discerning of diseases.
Now there are two things chiefly necessary to the judging or discerning of a
disease, namely the Affection or distemper, and the part Affected or
distempered; the signs of which are many, but especially from the action of
the part affected: As for example, he that knows the action of the Stomach to
be concoction or digestion, if the concoction be impaired or hindered, he may
easily judge that the Stomach is ill affected. So likewise he that knows the
situation of the Liver to be on the right side, and the Spleen on the left; if
the right side be sore or do swell, he cannot but know that the Liver and not
the Spleen is affected, and will therefore apply his remedies accordingly. Now
he that is ignorant of the parts of the Body shall ill know either the
situation or action of either these parts mentioned or any other: and there is
no way to come to the understanding of them but by Anatomy.

Seeing then the profit and necessity of understanding Anatomy is such and of
so great use to us, I thought I could not spend my time and endeavors on any
thing more conducing to the advancement of our profession, than by applying my
self unto it in the first place; wherein having none that have gone before me
or showed me the way, I hope all ingenuous men will be favorable to my
undertaking, and not be over severe Censors of any Imperfections they may
possibly meet with in the following Treatise; and I hope also that having
broken the Ice, as we say, all deserving Artists will be excited to Emulation.

A definition of Anatomy.
This Treatise then designing to teach the Anatomy of an Horse, we must in the
first place let you know what Anatomy is: It is an opening or cutting up of the
Body of any Animal or living Creature whatsoever, whether frequenting the land
or water, whereby the knowledge of the frame of its body, and the use of its
parts may be attained unto.

How it is taught.
Now this knowledge may be obtained two ways, namely by Inspection, or by
Instruction; both which ways are very necessary, but the first is the more
certain, though the latter carries more grace and state.

The first, which is Inspection, is to look into either the Figures of the
parts of Horses only, or into the bodies of Horses themselves.

The latter, which is Instruction, is by the Voice of a Teacher or Instructor,
or by the Writings of famous and renowned men.

The Figures of the parts how far necessary.
As to the Figures of the parts, they are thus far necessary, viz. they daily
represent to us such parts as we have not the opportunity to see in the bodies
themselves: For it is not easy to find in all places (nor at such times when we
stand in most need of them) such a store of dead bodies as is necessary for us
to practice upon; wherefore to supply the want of such bodies, I do think these
Figures useful, and have therefore accordingly by a curious draught or
delineation represented to you such observations as are made in true
dissections, not by copying out every part, but chiefly those that are most
necessary for us to understand, omitting those of less consideration, lest I
should make this Volume swell too big, and become too chargeable, whereby such
would be discouraged from buying it, for whom I chiefly intend it.

A Caution.
But although I approve of these Figures as necessary, to be by us, upon
occasion; yet this caution I must give to the Student, that he do not trust too
much to these Copies, as I may call them, without practicing upon the original
body it self: For as it is not possible to make a good Commander by viewing
only representative Armies, without practice and experience in real
Engagements; so is it vain for you to think to attain to the exact knowledge of
Anatomy by minding the Figures only.

Neither would I have any that undertakes this study to be discouraged, for
fear they should not get such bodies as I have mentioned (I mean Horses bodies)
sufficient for them to practice upon; for they may, to supply the want of such,
take the bodies of Asses or Mules, of Sheep and Oxen, Hogs or Dogs, any of
which come near the bodies you desire, especially as to the situation and use,
as also hidden motions of the Internal parts: for if those motions be the same
in Beasts as in Men, as by a very worthy See Doctor Crook, lib. 1. chap. 9."
Author they are affirmed to be, (who says that the motions of the Heart, the
Arteries, the Midriff, the Brain and Guts are the same in Beasts as in Men)
they must certainly be the same in one Beast as in another.

The method of Anatomy.
Next we come to show after what manner you are to take in hand the dissection
of any of these Creatures, and that you must not do confusedly nor disorderly,
but with due course of proceeding. For the doing of which take these following
Rules.

First then, you must begin with that which is best known and most easy, which
are the external or outward parts; for as much as the knowledge of them is most
necessary, as to Cures Chirurgical: and these parts are commonly distinguished
into two kinds; one of which are called spermatical and solid, which are
supposed to be bred of seed, and such are Bones, Gristles and Ligaments; and
the other sanguineous, said to be generated of blood, as Muscles.

I shall not in this place give you any particular instructions for the
anatomising any of these parts, referring you for them to the book it self:
only advertise you of this, that when you desire a Body for examining the
solid parts, the bodies of old and lean Horses are the fittest, in regard the
flesh and fat will not so much hinder, nor hide the parts from you, as in fat
Horses they will.

You are also to observe that there is a twofold way of proceeding in
dissection: The one is where there is a plenty, the other where there is a
scarcity of dead bodies. If there be a plenty, then you may look into the
Muscles of one, into the Entrails of another, and into the Vessels of a third,
etc. not mattering though you spoil one part in discovering another: but where
they are so scarce that you can get but one body and that seldom too, then if
you would see all in that body, great skill must be used to show every thing in
its order and place.

Now order of dissection requires that you should first begin with the Head, it
being the most noble and excellent part; next to that the Chest, and lastly the
Belly: but this (as I have said) is not to be done where there is but one body,
for there you must begin with those parts that are most subject to Corruption,
wherefore you must first cut up the Lower Belly, then the Chest, and lastly the
Head; both which ways are often used; the first being called the way of
dignity, and the other of diuturnity; the one being more noble, and the other
of a longer durance.

I shall not here treat of any of the parts contained in these three Regions or
Venters, but will leave them till I come to speak of them in their order in the
following Treatise, my design being to be as brief as may be, and not to repeat
any thing over several times, as I have seen some Authors have done. Therefore
I shall put an end to this Introduction when I shall have informed you, that
all the parts which fall under the Anatomists knife to be examined are commonly
reduced to two heads, namely, simple or similar, and compound or dissimilar.

1. The division of the parts, into Simple,
Those that are generally accounted simple parts, are in number ten, namely, a
Bone, a Gristle, a Ligament, a Membrane, a Fiber, a Nerve, an Artery, a Vein,
Flesh and Skin. These are called simple or similar, because every particle of
them is of the same name and substance; as every part of a bone is bone, etc.

Yet three of these ten, though they are generally accounted simple parts, if
strictly taken cannot be truly reputed so; for first, Veins are made of a coat,
fibers and valves; secondly, Arteries are made of two coats or skins different
from one another; and for Nerves, their inner substance is medullar or
marrowey, and the outward, membranous or skinny: so that of truly similar or
simple parts, there are only seven, namely, Bones, Gristles, Ligaments,
Membranes, Fibers, Flesh and Skin.

2. Compound.
The Dissimilar or compound parts are those, which, contrary to the simple, may
be divided into several particles or parcels of unlike or different substance
and denomination: As for example, A Leg may be cut into several pieces, yet not
into several Legs, but into Flesh, Bones, Veins and other things which it is
compounded of; whereas, as was said, a similar part though it be divided into
parcels, yet those are still like one another, and of the same nature: for
suppose a Ligament be cut into many pieces, every piece partakes only and
truly of the nature of a Ligament, and all remain what they were before, their
length or other accident only excepted.

Thus much for the Introduction, wherein I mainly intended to show the method
of Anatomy, and to hint the reason of my undertaking; It now remains that I
address my self to the Work it self, which shall be writ with the greatest
plainness its nature is capable of, that I may thereby attain to that wished
end I set before me, namely, the benefiting of my Reader.

view of five horses in a corral In Feilds nor Pastures, Woods nor Forests wide,
Does any Beast So Noble as this Reside. --
His Nostrills raise a Tempest when he blows;
His Feet produce an Earthquake when he goes.
Runs he? the Swiftest Winds behind retire. --
Whilst from his Eyes flow streams of flaming fire.
Would know his Parts? the following Book peruse,
Which shows of each the Figure, Seat and Use.


THE ANATOMY OF AN HORSE.
BOOK I. Of the Lowest Belly or Paunch.
CHAP. I. Of the Parts investing the whole Body, and first of the Hair.
Whereof Hairs are engendered. How nourished. How the Hair comes to fall off.
Reasons for the different color of the hairs. Their use.

BEFORE I take in pieces this Goodly Creature, It will not be amiss if I first
give you an account of all these Parts as they lie in order, beginning with
that which first appears to our View, and that is the Scarf-skin adorned with
hairs, wherein (as in a Case) Nature has wrapped this stately Beast; besides
which there are other four, that, with this, are common to the whole body,
which are, first, the true skin, which lies next under it; then the fleshy
pannicle; under that the fat; and lastly the common membrane of the Muscles.
Besides these five, there are other Investing parts, but they are only proper
to particular parts of the body, to which I will speak in their due place, and
only of the common ones here.

First then I will begin with the Hairs, because they meet first with the
Sense. They are said to be engendered of a clammy and earthy Excrement of the
third concoction, so that themselves are reputed not so properly to be called
parts of the body, as Excrements. They are void of sense and of animal life,
yet they have a vegetative life, such as Plants have, to which they owe their
growth.

These Hairs are by some thought to have for their nourishment a proportionable
quantity of that juice of which they are generated, continually ministered unto
them. Others think that the Hairs being hollow and porous are nourished as the
Feathers of Fowl are, and that is by blood; for if one pull off a Feather from
a young Bird that is unfledged, a pretty deal of its stem will appear bloody.
But though we should grant that the matter of their nourishment were made of
blood, yet certainly it must be very much altered and degenerate from its own
nature, before it can be adapted to the hair, seeing the hair of a Man's head
(for example) grows not only in living persons, whose blood runs briskly in
their Arteries and Veins, whereby it is kept from corruption, but also in the
dead, in whom the whole mass of blood is devoid of all nutritive power, as has
been often observed in bodies preserved unburied. But whatsoever the humor be
that nourishes them, it is thrust through the skin by the pores thereof, the
action and heat of the body assisting thereunto, where the purer part of it
enters the roots of the hair, but the more earthy not being able to enter such
almost unperceivable pores, is driven out amongst the hair where it becomes
dust; which dust is that that is brought forth with the Curry-combe when a
Horse is dressed. From hence then it is, that a Horse, though he be never so well
dressed one morning, and never so clean kept till the next, he shall
notwithstanding be as full of dust as he was the morning before; for the
cleaner the skin of a Horse is kept, the more open are its pores to transmit a
more plentiful nourishment to the hair, whence also there is a greater
collection of this excrementitious dust.

And hence may be gathered a reason of the shedding of the hair, which is
observed to happen in many Horses that have ill keeping, such as your
Cart-horses that seldom have any labor bestowed upon them, for want of which
dressing, to remove the dust which lies upon the mouths of the pores or at the
roots of the hairs, the passages, through which the juice should come that
nourishes the hair, are obstructed or stopped, and so like dead Leaves from a
Tree in Autumn they drop off, or as untimely Fruit falls before the season of
the year requires it.

As for the Colors of the hairs, they are various, according as is the humor
which does predominate in the body: for such as the humor is which is driven
forth toward the skin for their nourishment, such will the color of the hair
be. As for Instance:

If the choleric humor does most predominate, then are the hairs of a black,
a Sorrel or a Chestnut color; If blood most predominate, then will the Horse
be a bright Bay or Roan; If phlegm, then the Horse will be of a milk-white or
yellow-dun; If melancholy, then will the Horse be of an Iron-gray or Mouse-dun.
Thus much for the color of the hairs, next I come to the use of them.

The use of the hairs is, first, to cover the skin; secondly, to defend it;
thirdly, to be an ornament to it; and lastly, as I have before showed, to suck
up that excrementitious superfluous juice which through the pores of the skin
is sent from all parts of the body to them.

CHAP. II. Of the Cuticle or Scarf-skin.
The Scarf-skin. Its use.

THE Hide on which the hairs already spoken of do grow, consists of two Skins,
the outer of which is called the Scarf-skin, serving to defend the Body from
outward Injuries, and for that intent is of it self Insensible, that it may the
better endure the violence of the weather, or other harms which many times
happen to it. And for that cause, Nature has so ordered it, that if at any
time it happens to be rubbed off, as often it is by an ill Saddle, and many
other ways, it grows again without a scar or blemish, provided the Parts
under it (as particularly the true Skin) be not also violated; for they being
spermatical Parts, or made of Seed, cannot easily be restored, which is the
reason that most Wounds will not heal up without a scar. Now this Scarf-skin
having its matter (of which it is made) from the true Skin and the Vessels that
terminate in it, which are of all sorts, both Veins, Arteries and Nerves, none
of which reach any farther than the true Skin, it is apparent that this Skin is
without sense, it being their office alone to communicate both life, sense and
motion to all parts of the Body. And that this Skin is void of sense, may be
seen by the cutting of it; as thus, If you cut only through this Skin, when
you go to Rowel a Horse, you shall not find the Horse move for it, neither will
it bleed; but if you cut so far as to touch the true Skin under it, you will
find him both stir and bleed, for then you touch the little threads of the
Vessels, and by violating them, you cause the Horse to feel pain, and also
blood to issue forth.

The use of this Skin, besides being a covering to the whole Body, is to cover
the mouths of those small hairy Vessels already spoken of, that the blood,
spirits, or other ichorous or watery Matter do not issue from them, which
otherwise they would. Yet its Pores are so large as to permit the vapourous
moisture that is thrust out of all parts of the Body to it, to pass through
them, either in the form of sweat, or by insensible transpiration. These Pores
being many times obstructed or constringed by a sudden cold taken after hard
riding, by giving the Horse cold Water too soon after it, or by washing him too
high in cold Water when he is hot, the Vapors are thereby hindered from coming
forth, and so are detained between the two Skins, and there generate evil
Distempers, or at least fall from thence into the Limbs, and there cause
Inflammations and breakings out, which we call Grease in the heels or
Scratchets.

CHAP. III. Of the Cutis or true Skin.
The true Skin. Its substante. Vessels. Color. Use.

UNder this Scarf, lies the true Skin, which the Latins call Cutis. Its
substance, as I have before showed, is said to be spermatical, such as being
once lost, cannot be restored as formerly it was, but is reunited by a
cicatrice or scar, that is bred of the dried and constringed flesh under it;
which is the reason no hairs will grow upon that part of the Skin where the
scar is, because it is callous and destitute of Pores in which they should
grow. This Skin does encompass the whole Body as well as the Scarf, and has
the same passages for the receiving in, and letting out, for the ease and
relief of the Body, as that has.

It has for its nourishment, life, and sense, Vessels of all sorts, Veins,
Arteries and Nerves, divaricated and branched through it in the smallest
hair-like threads, all which terminate in it, none of them being inserted into
the Cuticle.

As for its color, it varieth as do the humors in the Body; for that humor
which most abounds, colors it with its proper respective color; as for
example, If blood most abound, then is it most red; if choler do most
predominate, then is it yellowish; and so for the other humors.

Its use is principally to invest and defend the Body, as I have said before of
the Scarf-skin: for as that keeps it from the violent impression of either
excessive heat, or cold; so does this Skin restrain, and, as it were, wall in
(as in a Castle) all the spirits and natural heat, which would otherwise in hot
weather, or in violent exercise be so fast spent, that they would leave the
vital parts destitute, which would occasion the loss of your Beast. But though
Nature has made this provision to hinder the dissipation of the spirits, yet
has she framed the Skin (as well as the Scarf-skin) full of small Pores,
through which upon violent exercise do issue in great plenty hot and moist
vapors, which are that we call sweat; yea though the Beast be at rest, if the
Air be any whit mild or temperate, warm steams are continually a passing
through them by insensible transpiration.

It Is also as serviceable in cold weather, for then the more fiercely it is
besieged by the cold, the narrower do the aforesaid Pores purse up themselves,
whereby the internal heat is detained within, and the external cold kept out.

CHAP. IV. Of the fleshy Pannicle.
The names of the fleshy Pannicle. Its situation, and extent. Its Vessels. Its
Use.

NEXT to the true Skin, lies the fleshy Pannicle, called membrana Carnosa, or
panniculus carnosus, because in most parts of the Body, it comes near to the
nature of flesh, and is truly muscular.

In Man this Membrane is said to lie under the Fat, though some very curious
Anatomists deny that Man has any such Membrane at all, save in the Forehead;
and of this opinion is Dr. Glisson. I will not intermeddle in that
Controversy, as being not proper for me; but in Horses it lies immediately
under the Skin, above the Fat, and is more like to a Muscle than a Membrane. In
fleying off the Skin, you must be very careful and curious, or else you will
take this Pannicle off along with it, it is so closely knit to it by Fibers and
innumerable Vessels that go between. It is of the same extent and figure as the
true Skin, investing the whole Body as that does; but in some Parts it is
almost wholly fleshy, and in others altogether membranous.

It has Vessels of all sorts as the Skin has, for before they can reach the
Skin, they must pierce through this Membrane; and as they pass through, they
send forth many small twigs into it, both Veins, Arteries and Nerves, but
especially Nerves to assist its motion, whence it is by some called the nervous
Membrane.

The use of it is chiefly to serve for a Muscle to move the Skin, whereby the
Beast shakes off the Flies, or any other thing that offends him. It serves also
to defend the neighboring Parts, and to strengthen in their passage the
Vessels which are disseminated into the true Skin. It also hinders the Fat from
being melted and spent by the continual motion of the Muscles. And lastly, it
helps to heal or close up the Skin when it is cut or otherwise hurt; for the
Skin being a spermatick Part cannot be bred anew, and therefore this fleshy
Membrane helps to glue as it were the sides of it together again, growing into
one body with it, and making what we call a Scar.

CHAP. V. Of the Fat, and Common Membrane of the Muscles.
Fat, its difference and matter. How generated. The uses of Fat. The common
membrane of the Muscles.

FAT is of two sorts, and is distinguished by two several Names as well in
Latin as English. That which we are to speak of in this Chapter is called in
Latin pinguedo, and in English Fat; but that which is within the Belly and
makes up the Caul and Mesentery and covers the Kidneys, is named sevum, Suet or
Tallow. The former will not congeal so quickly or so hard as this latter will.
Both the one and the other are made of an oily part of the blood; and this we
are to treat of here, is congealed between the Carnous Membrane described in
the foregoing Chapter, and the Common Membrane of the Muscles.

This Fat is the fourth common covering of the whole Body, for there is no Part
which has the rest of the common coverings, but has this also, if the Horse be
not extreme lean; though the fattest have it not in any great plenty. Now as
all Food that is eaten, consists of several parts or principles, which the
Chemists can separate one from another, namely Salt, Spirit and Oil; so the
Food, that consists of these several principles, when it is taken into the
Body, and concocted in the Stomach (which is natural Chemistry, as I may call
it) has them so loosened one from another, that each principle passes into the
nourishment and increase of that part that is of the same nature with it.
Amongst the rest the oily part, (which is otherwise called the Sulphurous,
because it will flame like Brimstone) sweating as it were through the pores of
the Vessels and subjacent parts toward the surface of the Body, is stopped by
the closeness and compactness of the fleshy Membrane, and there congeals into
Fat. Now this Fat is not one continued body as Butter or (what we call) tried
Suet is; but is included in innumerable membranous partitions or cells, almost
like Honey-combs, (which it is likely are borrowed from the fleshy Pannicle)
which makes the Fat to appear somewhat spongy. It is not easy to give a reason
of this oily humour's turning into Fat; for it cannot be by cold, seeing the
Beast is always actually warm; much less can it be by heat, which is apter to
melt Fat into Oil, than to harden Oil into Fat: therefore some make a moderate
heat to be the efficient of it. It Is true indeed that the Beast is moderately
hot, and we see by experience that Fat is generated; but that that is the cause
of this, I dare not affirm. My apprehension of it is this: That when the oily
Matter issues out of the Veins and Arteries, etc. there passes along with it
much thin watery humor; And when they both come to the fleshy Membrane, this
latter being thin, evaporates through it and is evacuated by sweat or
insensible transpiration; but the other being thicker and more clammy, is
forced to stay behind, and losing by degrees that wheyish humor that before
kept it liquid, it curdles into Fat.

The use of the Fat is, like a Garment, to keep the Body warm, and cherish the
natural heat, which by its clamminess it hinders from evaporating too much; and
on the other side by its thickness it stops the Pores so, that the cold
cannot enter in.

It also fills up the empty spaces between the Muscles, and the wrinkles of the
Skin, by which the Horse is made plump, smooth and beautiful; and therefore
old, lean and decrepit Horses are deformed for want of Fat.

It serves also as a pillow or bulwark against any violence, either from blows,
bruises or heavy weights, and the like.

Finally, it relieveth such Creatures as abound with it, in time of scarcity or
want of sustenance, by being converted into nourishment; for it serves as
aliment, and holds the parts of the Body in play, till the Creature attain
its proper Food.

The fifth and last common Covering of the Body, is the Common Membrane of the
Muscles. This is spread over all the Muscles (immediately under the Fat) and is
knit by Fibers to that Membrane which is proper to each Muscle, but somewhat
loosely, that it might not hinder their motion by investing them too closely.
It is said to arise from the Backbone, because it cleaves most firmly to the
Spine thereof, and is stronger there, than in its other Parts. In an Horse it
is as thick as Parchment, and very strong. And its use is to confirm and
strengthen the Muscles in general in their proper situation, and to be as it
were a Case for them to move glibly in, and to defend them from injuries.

CHAP. VI. Of the Investing Parts proper to the Lower Belly.
The Muscles of the Abdomen or Paunch. What a Muscle is. Muscles are the
instrument of voluntary motion. Involuntary or natural motion is performed
without Muscles, properly so called. A Muscle is an organical and dissimilar
part. Of what simple parts it consists. Why called a Muscle. Whence Muscles
have distinct names. A Muscle divided into parts. The Oblique descending
external pair. The Oblique ascending internal pair. Their Action. The right or
straight pair. Their Action. The pyramidal Muscles. The transverse or
overthwart Muscles. Their Action. The action of all these Muscles together. The
white Line what it is.

HAVING showed you what are the common investing or containing parts of the
whole Body, I come now to show which are those that are proper to the Lower
Belly in particular, and those are only two, besides those common ones already
spoken of, namely the Muscles of the Paunch, and the Rim of the Belly.

Now by the Lower Belly we understand all that cavity (and only that) which is
below the Midriff, and is encompassed by the short Ribs, the point of the
Breast Bone, Loins, Haunch-bones, and Share-bones, and is filled with the Guts
and other Entrails.

The Muscles are in all Horses of a like number,which is on each side four. The
first pair that show themselves are called the External oblique pair; the next
are the Internal oblique pair; the third are the two right or straight Muscles;
and under these are the two transverse Muscles, so called from their going
cross the Belly.

But before I proceed any further in describing these Muscles, I will first
show what a Muscle is, and whereof it is compounded, and also the several uses
of the Muscles in general.

The Muscles, if you take them in a large signification, are all that which we
call Flesh; which Flesh may be divided into many pieces or parcels without
cutting or breaking any of them, if with care undertaken; and each piece so
separable, is named a Muscle.

Now these pieces have each their several distinct Epithets, appellations or
names from several considerations, as from their situation, shape, use, etc.
but are all called Muscles, their office being to perform the voluntary motion:
which motion is performed six several ways, namely, upwards, downwards,
forwards, backwards, to the right hand and to the left. All which motions are
performed in this manner.

You must know that all or most of the Muscles of the Body have each their
Opposite or Antagonist, so that the one being contracted or drawn together,
(which is its proper motion) the opposite at the same time is relaxed or
loosned; and contrarily when that which upon the former motion was relaxed,
does it self enter upon motion, it is contracted, whilst that which was before
contracted, is now relaxed. As for example, when you stretch out either your
Arm, or Leg, that motion is performed by one of these Muscles; and when you
draw your Arm, or Leg back again, that is performed by the other.

But here let none so far misunderstand me as to think that either an Arm or
Leg can be either stretched forth or drawn back by the help of one Muscle alone;
but as to either of the before mentioned Limbs there are several parts
belonging, so do the distinct Muscles of every part perform (at the same time)
the offices aforesaid.

Neither can this voluntary motion be performed without the help of a Sinew or
Nerve, by which the Spirits are brought from the Brain which give the Muscles
their moving faculty.

Now there are other motions of the Body which are not performed by the
Muscles, such as is (according to some) the pulsation of the Heart and
Arteries, the peristaltick motion of the Stomach and Guts, of the passage of
the Gall, and of the Ureters, and several other Parts which have their
continual motions whether the Horse be sleeping or waking, and will perform
their several motions as well in Men as Beasts, whether we will or not.
Wherefore these are called not Voluntary, or Natural.

I shall in the next place show what parts the Muscles are compounded of, and
those are agreed upon by all Authors of Anatomy to be these.

A Muscle being an organical Part is composed of Nerves, Flesh, Fibers, Veins
and Arteries, all covered or invested with a proper Coat or Skin. It is called
organical, because it is the instrument or organ of an action, to wit, motion.
And that it is also dissimilar, the several kinds of parts whereof it is made,
do evidently prove. The several uses of the parts that make up a Muscle are
these: The Fibers and Tendon are the immediate instruments of its action; The
Flesh properly so called fills up the interstices or distances between the
Fibers; The Arteries by importing vital spirit and blood do conserve the inbred
heat, and help to nourish it; The Veins do convey back to the Heart all that
blood that remains from the nourishment of the Muscle; The Nerves convey animal
Spirit to the Fibers and Tendon, whereby they are enabled for their action; and
the Membrane or Skin which incompasseth the Muscle, does keep it together, and
distinguishes one from another.

Having showed what a Muscle is, and the several simple parts whereof it is
made, I shall next show you why it is so called. It is called mus, or musculus,
by the Latins, for that it is like a fley'd Mouse, or a Fish which is called
musculus; and by some Authors it is called by the name of lacertus, from its
similitude with a Creature called a Lizard. Yet there can be no one certain
figure whereby to resemble it, by reason of its sundry shapes; but that it is
like a fley'd Mouse in color, cannot be denied.

Now the Muscles being many in number have accordingly many names, which names
they take from either their Figure, their Situation, or their Action, and many
times from their Use; also sometimes from their Insertion, and sometimes from
their Magnitude.

And although there be such difference in the Muscles, in respect of their
Figures, their Magnitude, their Situation, and the like, yet are they so united
or conjoined together through the whole Body, in so close a manner, that in
many places they are hard to be separated, except at some times, when either
wind, some wheyish humor or some other matter gets between them, and then many
times they will gape, and are at some distance the one from the other.

Yet are they not so closely united neither, but that by a careful and expert
Dissector they may be separated, and one divided from another; after which, to
see the several parts of a Muscle severally, you must divide it also, which is
on this manner.

Some divide a Muscle into two parts, which are a fleshy and a tendinous part;
Again, they divide it into other three parts, namely, the Head, the Middle and
the Tail. By the Head is to be understood the beginning or original of a
Muscle, which is one while ligamentous and nervous, and otherwhiles fleshy: By
the Middle is that part meant which is absolutely fleshy; and by the Tail, the
Tendon, consisting of the numerous Fibers that are extended through the Muscle,
and the Membrane that invests it, which grow by little and little into one
body, and compose this Tendon, that is the tail of the Muscle. It is sometimes
round, sometimes broad; other times long, and otherwhiles short, thicker or
slenderer according to the part it appertains to, or according to the use it is
put to; it being but necessary that those Parts which are moved most strongly
or vehemently, should have thicker and stronger Tendons. Thus much for the
Muscles in general.

Now I come to the particular Muscles, the first of which are the Muscles of
the Abdomen or Paunch, of which I have spoken something in the beginning of
this Chapter, the which I shall now further prosecute, and let you know how
they are situated. The pair that in dissection first offer themselves are
called the Oblique (or slanting) Descending External pair, which pair are the
broadest of all the rest,though it is by many Authors said that the oblique
internal are equal in figure, magnitude, strength and action. The original or
rise of these Muscles is from the side of the Breast Bone, the lower edge of
five or six of the lowest Ribs, and from the tips of the cross or transverse
processes of the Joints of the Rack-bone in the Loins. Their rise from the Ribs
imitates the teeth of a Saw; for springing with a narrow point from the lower
side of the Rib, every such point grows broader and broader, till it unite with
the two next it on each side, so that there is a space of above an inch between
every point, into which empty spaces the greater Saw-like Muscle of the Breast
ends with like points. From their rise they run sloping downwards toward the
white line (so called) in the middle of the Belly; but before they reach half
way thither, they lose their fleshy substance, and become tendinous, and their
Tendon is so united to the common Membrane of the Muscles, described in the
foregoing Chapter, that it seems to become one with it, and running over the
straight Muscles is inserted into the foresaid white Line, down even to the
very Share-bone, into which also it is inserted.

The next to these are the Oblique Ascending Internal pair, so called because
of the contrary course of their Fibers to those of the External; for as those
descend obliquely or aslant, so do these ascend in like manner. Their rise is
from the Rib of the Haunch-bone, and from the processes of the vertebrae of the
Loins and os sacrum; and their Tendon is extended to the short Ribs partly, and
partly to the white line, above the Navel, adhering to the common Membrane of
the Muscles as was said before of the oblique descending, where it is not
covered by the Tendon of that Muscle. These have a different action from the
former; for whereas the External pair do draw the lower part of the Belly
toward the Breast, where they have their original; these on the contrary draw
down the Chest with a kind of slanting motion toward the Hips; it being the
action of all Muscles to draw toward their original, and the original of these
Muscles is (as was said) at the Rib of the Haunch-bone.

After these follow the Right or Straight Pair, so called because their Fibers
run straight down the Belly as do the Muscles themselves: for their original is
at the sides of the sword fashioned Gristle at the end of the Breast Bone, and
from the gristly ends of the bastard Ribs, whence they go all along the
eminentest part of the Belly straight to the Share-bone where they terminate.
Now in these Muscles there are several Inscriptions or tendinous Interstices,
which are, according to the bigness of the Horse, more or fewer in number, but
most commonly there are in each Muscle eight, not so fair indeed as in Humane
Bodies, but yet so plain, that they do distinguish the Muscles into nine parts
or more, as there are eight of these inscriptions or more; and besides, each
part has a distinct Nerve: and yet notwithstanding, because they cannot be
easily separated one from another, they do by most Anatomists go for only one
pair. On the inside of these Muscles are to be seen the Epigastrick Arteries
and Veins ascending, and the Mammary Arteries and Veins descending, which by an
ancient Tradition have been held in Humane Bodies to inosculate one with
another, the Arteries with the Arteries, and the Veins with the Veins; but
later and more inquisitively curious Anatomists have discovered it to be a mere
fancy, invented to support the erroneous Opinion, That whilst the Young was in
the Womb, it was nourished with blood carried to it by the Hypogastrick
Arteries and Veins; but after the birth, the blood altering its course,
regurgitated up from the Womb, by the Epigastrick Vessels, which inosculating
with the Mammary, conveyed it to the Breasts, where it was converted into Milk.
This I say was the opinion as to Women, which has in several particulars been
detected of error: and may receive a further confutation in Mares, from the
different situation of their Udders from the Breasts in Women; whereas these
Vessels have the same Course in both. The action of these Muscles is to shorten
the Belly by drawing the Breast and Share-bone toward one another, whereby it
is drawn as it were on a heap, to squeez forth the Excrements or Urine, whence
Dogs that strain so hard to dung, have these Muscles arising as high up as the
Channel-bones.

There are other two Muscles (sometimes to be found) which do rest upon the
Tendons of the Right Muscles at the lower end of them, which I have not yet
spoken of, and these are called the pyramidal Muscles. They are of a triangular
figure, and their use is to assist the straight Muscles in their squeezing
forth the Excrements, says Fallopius. I believe these Muscles are so seldom
found, that they ought to be accounted lusus Naturoe, a sport of Nature; for I
do not remember that ever I have observed any other here, but what ought to be
accounted the lowest part or portion of the straight Muscles before described.

Under all these lie the transverse or overthwart Muscles, so called from their
own and their Fibers running cross or overthwart the Belly. They are of a
quadrangular or foursquare figure, and do stick so close to the Rim of the
Belly (which is under them) that they cannot easily be separated.

Their Original is from the one or two lowest bastard Ribs, the transverse
processes of the Joints or vertebrae of the Loins, and the Haunch-bones; and
their Tendons reach to the white line, where they terminate.

Their Action is to press the Guts for the expulsion of Excrements.

Now as each Muscle has a peculiar action to it self, which is that already
ascribed to each, so have all these ten Muscles two Actions general to them all
conjoinedly, which are these; The first is, that they serve for a defense or
bulwark for all the Parts underneath them, and do by their flesh (which pretty
much abounds in them) cherish their natural heat and assist concoction; The
next is, that they do all assist together in the compressing of the Guts for
the voiding of the excrements, the Midriff assisting thereunto, by whose help
the excrements are thrust downwards, which otherwise would be only squeezed
together, and not thrust any more downward than upward.

I think it not amiss in this place to explain what it is I call the white
Line, for fear the naming of it so often as I have done in this Chapter,
without showing what it is, should puzzle the Reader.

The white Line is nothing else, but the extremities or tendinous endings of
these Muscles of the Paunch, and is called white from its color, becoming so,
because it consists of Tendons and Fibers only, wherewith no fleshy part or
particle is interwoven, whereby to change or alter the color. It
distinguishes the Belly into two parts, a right and a lest, and is placed all
along the middle of the Belly both below and above the Navel, running from the
sword-pointed Gristle of the Breast as low as to the Share-bone.

Now the Vdder being an external part of the Belly in Mares, I might in this
place (in order) treat of it; but because its Action, to wit the making of
Milk, has so near relation to the Foal, for which it provides nourishment, I
shall omit it in this place, and describe it at the latter end of this first
Book, after I have done with the generative parts of Mares, and the breeding,
nourishing, etc. of the Young in the Womb.

The Second Table represents all the Investing parts of the Abdomen, as well
proper as common.
AA Show the Skin and Scarf-skin turned back. BB The fleshy Membrane likewise
turned back, with a little sprinkling of Fat on its inside. CC The Common
Membrane that invests the Muscles, in like manner turned back. DD The obliquely
descending Muscle expressed in situ on the right side. dd The Tendon of the
same running to the white Line. dd Its saw-like origin from the Ribs. EE The
obliquely ascending Muscle, with its Tendon e e, on the same side, likewise in
situ. FF The Straight expressed to the full on the left side, but only in part
on the right, because the Tendons of the obliquely descending, and ascending
Muscles run over it. GG The transverse Muscle expressed to the full on the left
side, but hid on the right by the two oblique. gg The white Line and outer Skin
of the Rim of the Belly cut in sunder, that the Fat contained between the outer
and inner Skin of the Rim may appear. HH The perforations in the obliquely
ascending Muscles, by which the spermatick Vessels do pass out of the Abdomen
into the Cod. II The Stones. K The Tard. L The Sternum or Breast Bone.
ventral view of a horse's musculature TAB II d. fol:11th




CHAP. VII. Of the Rim of the Belly, called the Peritonaeum.
What the Petitonaeum is. Its original. Its perforations. The outmost Skins of
all the parts of the Lower Belly, have their original from this. Its
Composition. Its Uses.

THE Muscles of the Paunch being all removed, as also their Tendons which make
the white Line before spoken of, the Peritonaeum or Rim of the Belly comes next
into sight.

This Peritonaeum is of a spermatick substance (as are all other Membranes or
Skins) and is of an oval Figure, or like a long fashioned Egg, for it
compasses all the Lower Belly and ingirts all the Parts therein contained, and
also strengthens them, from whence it has its name, from its office of
spreading and stretching about. It is thin and soft, that it might not be
either heavy or burthensom; yet is it very strong and compact, that it might be
stretched without danger, when the Belly is full of Meat, or the Womb is full
of the Burden. Its inside is smooth, and by reason of the Guts is daubed with
moisture; but its outside is rough, which makes it stick so close to the
Muscles that lie above it, that they can hardly be separated, as I have before
showed.

It takes its original from the vertebrae or joints of the Loins, where it is
very thick, and is therefore believed to proceed from the Membrane that invests
the Marrow in the Backbone, and is propagated from the double Membrane of the
Brain. It is in all places double, and betwixt its Membranes I have always
observed good store of Fat, which Anatomists do not speak of in other
Creatures. The Vessels run along this Fat between the Membranes, that they may
be the better secured and defended, and may with more safety disperse their
branches all over it; and for that purpose it is perforated in several places,
so wide as is proportionably necessary to the largeness of the Vessels that are
to go through, and no larger, lest in distentions or strains they should tear,
as too apt they are to do, as Experience daily testifies in Men and Children,
when vehement coughs or long and straining cries do, in some, open the orifice
of the Navel, and in others the orifices in the Groin, where the spermatick or
seminary Vessels go forth to the Stones, so that the wideness gives liberty for
the small Guts to fall out of their places into the outward parts, which
causes Ruptures and broken Bellies. The like I have seen in Horses.

From the inner Membrane of this Rim of the Belly, all the outmost Skins or
Coats which cover every Part contained in the Lower Belly do proceed, and from
it have their original, some thicker and some thinner, according to the
necessity or use of the Part respectively. As for Example, the Common Membrane
of the Kidneys, the proper one of the Liver and Spleen (each of which have but
one) are but very thin, for seeing they are never (naturally) extended, there
was no necessity for their being otherwise; but the Common Skin of the Stomach,
the Guts, the Bladder and the Womb are somewhat thicker, but much stronger and
more compact, because the uses they are put to require it, that they may
without danger be stretched, when there is occasion. Now as the Entrails are
many and of diverse kinds, and also situated in several places different from
one another, so does their outward Investing Membrane take its original from
that part of this Peritonaeum or Rim of the Belly which is next to them; as the
upper Entrails, which are the Stomach, the Liver, the Spleen, etc. borrow it
from that part of the Rim which makes the under Membrane of the Midriff; so do
the lower Entrails (as the Bladder, Womb, etc.) borrow it from that part of the
Rim, which cleaves to the Share-bone, it being the nearest to them.

From this Peritonaeum or Rim of the Belly do also proceed two double Membranes
or Skins, which are those of the Caul and of the Mesentery; as also several
Ligaments, of which the most remarkable are those of the Liver and Guts.

This Peritonaeum is composed of membranous and nervous Fibers which are very
small. The Vessels that are dispersed through it are small branches of Veins
and Arteries which it has from the Midriff, and other neighboring Parts, as
the Seminary and Mammary; and for Nerves, it has them from the branches which
are carried to the Muscles of the Lower Belly.

Its Uses are several, the first of which is, to cover and contain all the
Parts or Entrails of the Lower Belly; secondly, to further the expulsion of the
Excrements by pressing the Stomach and Guts before and on the sides, as the
Midriff does above. Again, it binds with its Ligaments all the Guts in their
proper places by mediation of the Mesentery, that no violent motion (such as
running or leaping) should move them out: By Ligaments proceeding from it, is
the Liver also suspended in its place. Its last use is to be a safeguard to the
Vessels that run through it, which being but small and having a long course to
run, would be in danger of breaking, were they not secured between its two
Skins.

CHAP. VIII. Of the Omentum or Caul.
The Caul what it is. How far it spreads over the Guts. It is sometimes the
cause of barrenness. Its connection or origin. Figure. Its Vessels. Its Fat.
The use of its Fat. The use of its Membranes or Skins.

HAVING according to the order of dissection, removed all the investing or
containing Parts of the Lower Belly, and showed which, and what they are; it
now follows that I show which are the parts invested or contained. And because
the Caul appears first in dissection, I will first treat of it.

This Caul is in Latin called Omentum, from Omen, because the Roman Soothsayers
pretended by it to foretell things. It is also called mappa ventris, the Map or
Dish-clout of the Belly, because it seems to lick up the superfluities
thereof. It does cover all or most of the Guts in many Creatures; but in a
Horse it is most times removed from all the lower parts of the Belly, and lies
in wrinkles or folds near and about the Stomach. The reason of its being
removed, I do suppose, is the hard labor and violent Exercise a Horse
undergoeth; for whilst he is young, and before he comes to his labor, it is
spread as far over his Entrails as in other Creatures, as has been observed by
the Learned Marcus Aurelius Severinus, who did in a She foal which he dissected
at Naples, see the Caul spread all over the Guts as far as to the bottom of the
Womb, to which it was also joined with a strait connection.

It sometimes happens that the Caul falls between the bottom of the Bladder
and the neck of the Womb in Women, and then it so compresseth the mouth of the
Womb, that it leaves very little or no passage for the Man's seed to enter in,
which when it so happens is a cause of barrenness. But I believe no such
thing can happen in Mares.

It is composed of two Membranes, the uppermost or foremost of which arises at
the bottom of the Stomach to which it is fastened, as also to the hollow side of
the Liver and Spleen: The inner or backer Membrane springs from the
Peritonaeum, immediately under the Midriff toward the Back, and is tied to
that part of the Gut Colon that passes under the Stomach lengthways, as
likewise to the Sweetbread and to the beginning of the small Gut, next to the
lower Orifice of the Stomach. These Membranes are larded with plentiful Fat.

It is in figure like a Purse net, or Faulkner's Bag, consisting as is said of
a double Coat, separate at the top, but knit together at the bottom, where it
is round sometimes, and sometimes unequal, but at its upper part or orifice it
is orbicular.

It has Vessels of all sorts, which do run through the substance thereof. It
has its Veins and Arteries from the Coeliacal and Mesenterical branches, and
Nerves from a double branch of the Intercostal pair.

In Horses it has much Fat, especially in those that are sound and have not
wasted it by either sickness or long fasting, for in such it consists of little
but the Membranes and Vessels, the Fat serving for a subsidiary nourishment to
the natural heat to feed upon when the Beast eats nothing. Now this Fat is not
distributed equally to all the parts of the Caul, but runs here and there in
streaks accordingly as the larger Bloud-vessels do, the spaces between being
wholly membranous and seemingly transparent, so that it imitates a Net, whence
in some Countries they call it so. Now the Fat adhering to and accompanying the
Vessels in this manner, it seems to be bred of an unctuous or oily part of the
Blood that sweats through the Vessels, but is detained by the closeness or
denseness of the Membrane, by whose respective coldness also it is curdled or
congealed into Fat. But very unlikely it is that it should be made of I know
not what Vapors steaming out of the Parts contained in the Lower Belly, and
condensed by these Membranes; for not to mention the many absurdities of this
Opinion, if it were so bred, then would all the Membranes be evenly and equally
besmeared with it, which it is obvious to any Eye that they are not.

The use of this plentiful Fat is to cherish and heat the bottom of the
Stomach, the upper part of which has no need of its warmth, it being covered
with the Liver, whose Lobes hang over it and lie upon it. It serves also to
moisten the Guts, which have great need of being kept slippery and glib, that
they may the better perform their continual peristaltick motion.

The use of the Membranes or Skins besides their congealing and including the
Fat, is to prop up and sustain all the branches of the Vessels which lie
between and pass through them, to the Stomach, the Spleen, the beginning of the
small Gut, and Colon, etc.

The Third Table represents the Guts in sita, as they appear after the Caul
is taken away.
AAAA Shows the Gut Colon or Colic Gut with its Convolutions or Folds, as
also what parts of the lower Belly it takes up. BB The straight or Arse-gut.
CCC The Gut Caecum or blind Gut. DDD The Diaphragm or Midriff. EE The Horses
Yard.
ventral view of a horse's alimentary canal TAB III fol. 15.




CHAP. IX. Of the Gullet and Stomach.
The Gullet. Its origin and descent. Its substance. Its Vessels. Its Kernels.
Its Use. The Stomach. Its figure, And magnitude. Its Orifices. The upper and
left Orifice of the Stomach. Its Uses. The lower Orifice, and its office. The
composition of the Stomach. 1. Its Vessels. Veins. 2. Arteries. 3. Nerves. Its
Action. How it concocts.

AFTER the Caul is removed, the Intestins or Guts do appear in their natural
situation, as is showed in the foregoing Figure; but there is another Part that
lies absconded under them, which must first be spoken of according to the order
of dissection, and that is the Stomach. It is single in an Horse as it is in
Man, though such Creatures as have Horns, as Beeves, Sheep, etc. and such as
having no Horns yet chew the Cud, as Camels, Hinds, etc. have four. This is the
Kitchen of the Body and receptacle of Meat and Drink; as also the seat of
Appetite, by reason of the Nerves that are dispersed chiefly in its upper
Orifice, but run in small twigs also through its whole substance. It is called
in Latin ventriculus, which is as much as to say a little Belly; and is placed
or seated just under the Midriff between the Liver and the Spleen, almost in
the very middle of the Body, inclining a little toward the left Side that it
might balance the Body against the Liver, which is much bigger and heavier
than the Spleen.

But before we enter upon the Stomach it is convenient first to describe the
Gullet which is an Appendage to it, and serves as a Tunnel to convey the Food
out of the Mouth into it, though the greatest part of it be contained in the
Neck and Breast.

It is an organical or dissimilar Part, hollow and round, beginning at the root
of the Tongue, behind the head of the Windpipe, and passes down from thence
directly between the Windpipe and the Joints of the Neck and of the Chest,
about the fifth or sixth Joint of which latter it turns a little to the right
side, to give way to the trunk of the great Artery, but about the ninth Joint
it turns toward the left again and climbs upon the great Artery, and passing
through the Midriff at an hole proper to it self it is inserted into the
Stomach toward its left side, as you may see in the following Figure.

It consists of three Membranes or Skins. The outermost is common,which it has
from the Pleura or from the ligaments of the Joints of the Neck and Breast on
which it rests: This investeth the two proper. The middle or first proper one
is thick and fleshy, consisting of two ranks of fleshy Fibers, obliquely or
slopingly ascending and descending, so that they cross one another like an X.
The innermost or second proper is membranous, and has only straight Fibers.

It has Veins in the Neck from the Jugulars, in the Breast from the Vein
without a fellow; and where it is joined to the Stomach, from the coronary
branch of the Porta. Arteries in the Neck it has from the Carotides, in the
Breast from the Intercostals; and where it joins to the Stomach, from the
coeliack coronary branch. It has Nerves from that pair that is commonly called
the sixth.

It has two notable Glands or Kernels at its beginning in the Throat,called
Almonds from their shape, which separate a kind of slegmatick humor to keep
the inside of the Gullet moist and glib, that the Food may easilier descend
down by it.

Its use is, to convey Meat after it is chewed in the Mouth, as likewise Drink,
down into the Stomach, there to be turned into chyle.

Having done with the Gullet, we now return to the Stomach.

Its figure is round and somewhat long, resembling a Bag-pipe; though on the
left side and at the bottom it is bunching and more capacious than on the right
side; for there it is by little and little narrowed that it might give place to
the Liver.

Its magnitude is diverse according to the largeness of the Horse, or according
to the quantity of Meat or Drink (be it little or much) that is in it; for it
contracteth or distendeth it self as there is occasion. As for example, if
there be a great quantity of Meat and Drink let into it, it does extend it self
to that largeness as to contain it; and as that Meat is by little and little
concocted, and then let forth through the lower Orifice into the small Guts to
be there sucked up by the milky Veins, the Stomach does accordingly by little
and little contract or draw it self up so close to that which remains, that it
embraces it on all sides, so that there is never any cavity or hollowness to
speak of to be found in the Stomach; whence we see in Tripes, that the inside
is by such contracting always rugged or in wrinkles, whereas the outside is
smooth and plain. Only this we may note as to its bigness, that in
consideration of the bigness of an Horses Body or the largeness of his Guts, it
is far less in him than in most Animals.

The Stomach has two Orifices, a left and upper, which is to receive in Meat;
and a right which is the lower, to let it out after concoction. The first being
the uppermost I will first speak of, which is much wider and larger than the
other, because it admits the Meat, many times not half chewed, into the Stomach
(and for that cause is much thicker and also stronger than the other) whereas
all is reduced into a fluid substance, before it pass out at the other.

This Orifice being a continuation of the Gullet is called the mouth of the
Stomach, and has an exquisite sense of feeling because of the Nerves which
encompass it, and by which it the sooner perceives the emptiness and want of
Meat, and therefore stirs up the Horse to seek Food to satisfy his want. It is
near the middle of the Stomach, and not so near the left side of it as in Men.

It is furnished with fleshy and circular Fibers, that it may naturally shut up
and straiten it self after the Meat is received in, and also may intercept or
hinder the Vapors from coming forth, which would by their ascent up to the
Brain be very injurious, by breeding diseases and evil distempers in the Head;
which Vapors would be also wanted in the Stomach to further concoction: for as
it is an usual custom when Meat is over the fire for the Pot-lid to be put on
to keep the Vapors or Reek from coming forth; so likewise it is requisite in
this case that the Vapors of the Stomach should be kept in, that Concoction
should be thereby furthered, or the Food be sooner digested, the Vapors
assisting thereunto.

The lower and right Orifice is called pylorus, which is to say, the
Porter,from its office, which is to open and shut as occasion serves; to open,
when the chyle is let forth and sent into the Gut duodenum, and then to
contract or draw it self close up again, that nothing may pass through it which
is not fully concocted. Which contraction is performed by transverse or
overthwart Fibers, with which it is plentifully furnished for that purpose; as
also a thick and compact circle does encompass it round, which circle is in
shape like the sphincter Muscle of the Fundament. By these Fibers and this
Circle the action of the Porter, or lower Orifice, is performed, that is to
say, it is either opened or shut, widened or straightened as there is occasion, as
I have said before. And these are the offices of the Orifices of the Stomach.

Now I proceed to the composition of it, which is of three Membranes or Skins,
the first or outmost of which it has from the Peritonaeum, or Rim of the
Belly. The second and middlemost is more fleshy than the former, consisting of
fleshy Fibers, which do mightily strengthen the Stomach and by their heat do
further concoction. The third and inmost is nervous, into which all the Vessels
do terminate or end. This Coat or Skin is continued with the Gullet up to the
Mouth, that the Mouth should not admit or receive in any thing that is
offensive to the Stomach.

The Stomach is furnished with Vessels of all sorts. Veins it has first from
the Splenick branch, as 1. The vas breve, or short Vein, which is inserted into
the bottom of the Stomach, whence afterward it creeps up between the Coats
toward the upper Orifice, but is obliterated before it comes quite to it. 2.
The two Gastrick Veins (the greater and less) which creep along the bottom of
the Stomach, and in their course spread many branches into it; but the largest
branch of the greater of these two is that which is called the Crown-vein, that
encompasses the upper Orifice of the Stomach. 3. A Vein that is common to the
left side of the Stomach and the Caul. Secondly, it has another common to its
right side and the Caul, from the Mesenterick branch. And lastly, its lower or
right Orifice has a small Vein from the trunk of the Porta it self, which is
called pylorica or Porter-vein. Now before the circulation of the blood was
found out, it was believed that all these Veins brought blood to the Stomach
for its nourishment: but since that was discovered by Dr. Harvey, every one
knows that they carry nothing to the Stomach, but bring back from it so much of
the Arterial blood as is not spent upon its nourishment. But besides the blood
some learned Men have entertained an opinion that they suck out of the Stomach
a thinner and more spirituous part of the chyle, which passes along with the
blood to the Heart by a far shorter passage than if it descended into the Guts
and entered into the milky Veins, etc. (as shall afterward be fullier
declared.) And this they think it reasonable to suppose, because of the sudden
and quick refreshment that Creatures receive from Cordial Drinks, and the like.
I shall not pretend to decide the controversy betwixt those that affirm this,
and others that deny it, but do think this opinion to be very probable, because
of the very speedy revival of Horses (that I have observed) which being ready
to faint away, have suddenly grown brisk upon the giving them some comfortable
draught: unless we should think with some, that the Nerves of the Stomach do
imbibe some spirituous parts of such potions, and so the refreshment should
come that way.

The Stomachal Arteries are twigs from the Coeliacal branch of the Arteria
magna or great Artery, and these do accompany the Veins in all their course,
and bestow nourishment and vital heat upon it. For the Stomach is not nourished
with the Chyle, any more than any other part, but with arterial blood which by
these Arteries is brought from the Heart.

It has two notable Nerves from the sixth pair (reckoned by Dr. Willis to be
the eighth) propagated from those branches which make the recurrent Nerves.
These do encompass the upper Orifice, and then are carried, in oblique or
slanting lines, cross one another over most part of it; the right branch
compassing the foremost and left part, and the left branch compassing the
hindermost and right part thereof.

The Stomach has several Actions, as first Hunger and Thirst, which are the
sense that it has of the want of Meat and Drink, and an Appetite that is
excited in it for the obtaining of them. Secondly, it has an action of
retention, whereby it contracts it self close about the Food that is taken in,
and detains it so long till it is thoroughly concocted or turned into a thin
juice called Chyle. Thirdly, it has a motion that is called peristaltick, such
as the Guts also have, resembling the motion of a Worm, whereby its parts
contracting themselves successively from above downwards, thrust out the chyle
into the Guts gently and by degrees. But the chief and most considerable action
of the Stomach, is, fourthly, Chylification, or turning the aliment into a
whitish liquor commonly known by the name of Chyle, which being expelled out of
the Stomach into the Guts, is, the thinner part of it, sucked up by a sort of
Vessels called milky Veins, (so called from that color which this liquor gives
them) that are inserted every where into the Guts, and which carry it toward
the Heart, by those ways that hereafter shall be described: but the thicker and
more dreggy part is driven along the Guts and cast out at the Fundament as
excrement.

Now there are several things that concur to this last and principal action of
the Stomach, viz. Concoction. As first, the very numerous Arteries that are
dispersed through it which much foster and increase its heat, which though it
be not the main instrument of concoction, yet much furthers it. And this heat
is also increased by the Liver which covers the upper and forepart of its
right side, as also by the Caul which by its two Membranes invests its bottom.
But secondly, that to which concoction is mainly owing is a certain ferment in
the Stomach, which is compounded partly of the slaver with which the Horses
mouth always abounds for the moistening and softning of his Meat while he chews
it, and part of which is continually swallowed down into his Stomach together
with the Food; and partly of an acid or sharp and salt liquor bred in the
Stomach, as is most likely, of salt and acid steams evaporating out of the
stomachal Arteries, and condensed in it into this juice: And this liquor is
that which dissolves and melts as it were the solid Meats that are swallowed
(something like as Aqua fortis dissolves Steel) and reduces the whole mass into
fluid substance, which then passes down into the Guts, as abovesaid. This acid
Juice was formerly thought to come from the Spleen by a Vein called the short
Vessel; but later Anatomists have discovered from the circulation of the Blood,
that that Vein brings nothing from the Spleen to the Stomach, but contrariwise
carries the Blood, that is superfluous to the nourishment of the Stomach, from
it into the splenick Vein, by which it goes to the Liver, and from thence to
the Heart in its circulation. So that no such original or spring of this
ferment is to be imagined.

The Fourth Table expresses the second or middle, and the innermost Coats of
the Stomach.
Fig. I. Shows the Stomach freed from its outmost nervous Coat, that the
outer or unequal surface of the middle Coat may appear with its fleshy Fibers.

AA The Gullet. B The Mouth or upper Orifice of the Stomach. C Its lower
Orifice called Pylorus. D A portion of the small Gut. EEE The circular Fibers
encompassing the Stomach depthways. FFF The top or upper part of the Stomach,
where these Fibers arise. GG The circular fleshy Fibers that encompass the
upper Orifice or Mouth of the Stomach, which contracting themselves shut or
purse it up as occasion serves. H The Gall-passage inserted into the small Gut.
I The Pancreatick duct inserted into the small Gut.
Fig. II. Shows the Stomach turned inside out, that its woolly crust with its
wrinkles and folds may appear.

AA The left Orifice or Mouth of the Stomach. B The right or lower Orifice, to
which the small Gut is knit. CC The top or summity of the Stomach between its
two Orifices. EEEE The sides, ends and bottom of the inside of the Stomach,
with its woolly crust and wrinkles or folds. F A portion of the small Gut.
Fig. III. Represents a piece of the inmost nervous Coat, wherein the woolly
crust being taken off, the inner or concave surface with a very thick
ramification of Vessels does appear.

Fig. IV. Shows a piece of the woolly crust, which looks like a fourth Coat,
wherein its outer surface, whereby it sticks to the nervous Coat, appears very
full of glands and the mouths of Vessels.

the outer and inner coats of a horse's stomach TAB. IV page 19.
Fig. 1.


Fig. 2.


Fig. 3.


Fig. 4.






CHAP. X. Of the Guts in general.
The Guts. Their Name, Figure and Length. How knit together. Their Coats. 1.
Vessels. Veins. Viz. first, Bloud-veins. Secondly, milky Veins. 2. Arteries. 3.
Nerves.

THE Guts are called in Latin Intestina, because they are placed in the inmost
part of the Body, as you see them placed in the Third Figure, which shows their
natural position or situation, they taking up the most part of the cavity or
hollowness of the Lower Belly. They are oblong, round, hollow Bodies, in number
six, and are bigger or lesser as is the bigness of the Horse. They are the
Instruments of distribution of the Chyle and expulsion of the Ordure, being
continued with the Pylorus or Porter of the Stomach and reaching to the
Fundament. They are in length about thirty six yards, a little under or over
according to the largeness of the Horse; wherefore they are necessarily girded
and wound into manifold convolutions or folds, that the cavity of the Lower
Belly might be capable of containing them, which otherwise it could not do.

They are gathered up and entwisted in the folds of the Mesentery, by which
coming between they are also knit to the Back: all which is to keep them from
falling out of their places or rolling upon one another, which would have often
happened, had not Nature so well provided for the contrary, especially in violent
exercise, as hunting, running, leaping and the like; and if it had happened, the
weight of the one lying upon the other would have obstructed the passage of the
Excrements, and so caused excessive pains, as gripings, strainings to dung, and
the like, and upon the continuance of such stoppage, death it self.

The Guts are on the outside most times fat, but on the inside they are covered
with a slimy or snotty substance, for the more free and glib passage of the
Dung.

They have three Coats, like as the Stomach has. The outermost or common one
is nervous, springing mediately from the Rim of the Belly, but immediately from
the Membranes of the Mesentery; saving that of the beginning of the first Gut,
and of that part of the Colon which runs under the Stomach, where it
immediately proceeds from the Caul adhering to those Parts. The middle is
thicker and fleshy, having two ranks of Fibers, the outer of them straight, and
the inner transverse or overthwart. The innermost is also nervous like the
outmost, but on its inside it is crusted over with a kind of spongy substance,
that serves as a strainer for the Chyle to pass through out of the Guts into
the milky Veins. This Coat has all forts of Fibers, and is very wrinkled, to
prevent the too quick gliding away of the Ghyle. The Fibers of this and the
middle Coat serve to perform the peristaltick or worm-like motion of the Guts,
by which whatsoever is contained in them is gently driven along downwards
toward the Fundament.

The Guts have all sorts of Vessels. As 1. Veins. These they have from several
branches of the Porta, but the most come from that branch of it that is called
the Mesenterick. The use of which Veins was by the Ancients thought to be, both
to carry Blood to them from the Liver for their nourishment, and to bring back
from them the Chyle to the Liver, there to be turned into blood. But as to the
first, the circulation of the Blood makes it evident, that they carry no blood
to the Guts, but all that is contained in them, is received from the Arteries
that are inserted into the Intestins, and returns by them to the Liver, through
which it passes into the Vein called Cava, and by it ascends to the Heart. And
as to the latter use assigned to these Veins, namely the bringing of Chyle from
the Guts to the Liver, there was another sort of Vessels found out by one
Asellius about threescore years ago, that perform this office, called by him
(from their color) milky Veins. But neither do these conveigh the Chyle to the
Liver, as the first Inventor of them thought, but running from the
circumference of the Mesentery they unite and discharge themselves into one
common receptacle near its center at the Backbone, from whence the Chyle
passes up along the side of the Backbone as high as the Collar-bone by a
proper pipe, where it is emptied into the subclavian Vein, in which being mixed
with the Blood it glides along with it immediately into the Heart. I say then
the use of the Bloud-veins of the Guts, is only to receive so much of the
Arterial blood as is superfluous from their nourishment.

A second sort of Vessel dispersed through the Guts are the Arteries, which
spring partly from the Coeliack branch, and partly from the Mesenterick. These
afford both Vital heat and nourishment to the Guts, and besides upon
administering a Drench to scour your Horse, they discharge the impurities and
bad humors flowing in the mass of blood, into the Guts, to be thrown out in
the draught.

3. Their Nerves are from that pair that has commonly been called the sixth,
but according to Dr. Willis's distinction is now generally reputed for the
ninth pair, and otherwise called the Intercostal, because as it descends down
the Chest, it sends out a small twig between every Rib. These contribute to the
Guts their sense of feeling, and furnish their Fibers with animal Spirits,
whereby they are enabled to perform their worm-like motion.

As for the milky Veins, we have mentioned them before, and shall treat further
of them in the Chapter of the Mesentery.

CHAP. XI. Of the Guts in particular.
The Guts are in number six. 1. The small Gut. 2. The Caecum or blind Gut.
Three Colons. 6. The straight Gut.

NOW though the Guts be one continued Body from the lower Orifice of the
Stomach to the Fundament, yet they are wont to be distinguished into several;
In Men they are divided into six, three small, and three thick: but in a Horse
we cannot so well follow this division, there being not any difference in the
small Guts so considerable as to ground a distinction upon. However, because
the second of the thick Guts seems to have three partitions, we shall make
three of it, and so will they answer to the number in Men, and be reckoned six.

The first we shall distinguish only by the name of the small Gut. This is
twenty six or twenty seven yards in length, something narrower at a foot and
half distance from the Stomach than toward its ending, but through the whole
it is wider than in an Ox, being about two inches or two and an half over.
Presently at its beginning it bends under the Stomach toward the Backbone,
straight along which it descends a pretty way, being annexed firmly to it by a
strong Membrane (that seems to be borrowed of the Caul here knit to it) which
is all the establishment it has. But by and by it leaves this hold, and
beginning to wind about, is received into the folds of the Mesentery, whereby
it is admirably kept from twisting and entanglement. Now there are far more of
the milky Veins inserted into this Gut than into all that follow; and besides
those Vessels which are common to it with the thick Guts, namely Veins,
Arteries and Nerves, it has two other Vessels inserted into it, one from the
Liver and another from the Sweetbread. By the first is yellow Choler, and by
the latter a peculiar Juice from the Sweetbread (called the pancreatick Juice)
discharged into it. These two Liquors flowing into it from the aforesaid Bowels
about a foot below the Stomach, within an inch or two one of another, make a
notable ferment in it, which mixing with the Chyle that is passing down this
way, causes it also to ferment, whereby it comes to work it self something
clearer, as I may say, even as Ale or Beer in a Barrel does. For by this
fermentation the impurer and more earthy or dreggy part of the Chyle, is
separated and precipitated as it were from the more pure and spirituous,
whereby this latter part is made capable of being received in at the small
mouths of the milky Veins that gape in abundance into this Gut, whilst the
thicker and excrementitious part is thrust along the Guts by their worm-like
motion, and makes the Dung. This Gut for about two hands breadth at its
beginning from the Pylorus is wider, and for the like space at its end before
it is joined to the following, is a little narrower, than in its other parts.

Having done with the small Gut, we next come to the thick ones, in number
five, of which the first is called Caecum or the blind Gut, because it has but
one passage for the Excrements both into and out of it, which come into it out
of the small Gut, and go out of it into the next thick Gut. It is not round in
shape like the small Gut, but as it were foursquare, which figure it comes to
have from four Ligaments that run along it, one on each side, which contain it
in that shape; and these Ligaments being shorter than its Coats, make them bag
out in many Cells as the Colon does in other Creatures. It is almost a yard
long, and unequal in breadth: for though at its mouth, where it joins to the
small Gut and the Colon, it be near a quarter of a yard over, yet toward its
close end it grows so by degrees narrower, that it is not above three inches.
This Gut is very inconsiderable for its bigness in most Creatures, particularly
in Man, in whom it is not ordinarily above four inches long, and hardly so
thick as ones little Finger: only in a Rabbit it bears much the same
proportion with the rest of the Guts, as it does in an Horse. In such Creatures
as have it so very small, its use is very obscure; but in an Horse where it is
so very large, its use is apparent to be, to stay the too quick passage of the
Excrements by receiving them into it self as it were into an Inn, whereas if
they kept directly the straight Road of the rest of the Guts without turning in
here, they would come too soon to their journeys end, namely the Fundament: I
mean the Horse would be continually a-scouring, and so fall from his flesh and
languish, by reason that the milky Veins would not have time to suck up all the
Chyle out of the Guts to turn into his nourishment; besides that it would be
troublesome to the Horse, and offensive to his Rider to have him always
a-dunging. Its connection to the small Gut and Colon you may better conceive of
by the following Figure, in which it is well expressed, than by my description
of it in words.

That which is the second thick Gut and in Man is called the Colon, seems in an
Horse to be divided into three, to which I shall not take upon me to assign
distinct names, but only call them three Colons. The first of them is about a
yard and a half in length, and for the most part of it a quarter of a yard
over. The second is as wide as the first, but only about a yard in length.
These two are divided one from the other by a narrow neck about half a yard
long, and four inches over. The first of these two wide Colons, is that which
in its upper part joins with the blind Gut above described, where it has a
Valve, consisting of a loose Membrane or Skin that hangs round its mouth, which
permits any thing to come into the Colon out of the Caecum or out of the small
Gut, but when any thing would pass out of that into these, then the edges of
this loose Skin flap close one against another and hinder it, whereby Nature
has prevented the return of the Excrements back out of the Colon into the small
Gut. And the lower end of the latter of these two wide Colons joins to the
third, which is very narrow in comparison of them, but yet is more than twice
as long as both of them, namely about six yards. Now all these three Colons are
contracted into Cells by two Ligaments, one of which runs along the upper part,
and the other on the lower side of them: and besides these two which are common
to them all, the larger ones have somewhere other two that run along their
sides, but especially so has the Neck that divides them whereby it is made
foursquare like the blind Gut. The reason why these Colons (as well as they are
in other Creatures, and the Caecum also in this) are contracted into Cells, is
for the slower passage of the Excrements, that what of the Chyle was not drunk
in by the milky Veins of the small Gut, might be leisurely sucked up by those
that are inserted into these thick ones; for though we call their Contents
Excrements, yet that is only because the much greater part is so, for all the
Chyle is not clear imbibed from them till they come toward the end of the last
Colon, though the milky Veins are not a tenth part so numerous in these as in
the small Gut.

To the lower end of the small Colon is joined the last Gut called Rectum or
the straight Gut, because it runs straight along without any windings. It is
also called the Arse-gut, because it reaches to the Fundament. The Coats of
this Gut, especially the middle, are much thicker than any of the other, and
the whole seems fleshy and muscular. It is but about half a yard long, and
betwixt three and four inches over. This is not gathered in the foldings of the
Mesentery, but instead of that, is from its beginning at the lower end of the
Loins, to its ending at the Arse-hole, fast tied by a Membrane to the Back and
Rump-bones, which keep it from falling out upon straining to dung. At its lower
end at the Arsehole it has a round Muscle that encompasses it, called the
sphincter Muscle, whereby it is pursed up so, that nothing can pass out, except
when the Beast loosens it of his own accord when he goes to dung, and then at
the same time he squeezes the Guts by help of the Muscles that environ his
Paunch, which we described above in chap. 6. and so forces the Dung to issue
out at the Fundament.

And thus we have finished the History of the Guts, not needing to add any
thing of the use of them, because their use is all along interwoven in their
description, and therefore we shall pass on to the other parts.

The Fifth Table represents the Gullet, Stomach and Guts taken out of the
Body.
A The Gullet. B The upper Orifice of the Stomach. CC The two external Nerves
of the sixth pair (otherwise reckoned for the eighth) dispersed through the
upper part of the Stomach. DDD The three different Coats of the Gullet, a
little turned down, to show them the plainer. E The lower Orifice of the
Stomach called the Pylorus. F The outermost Coat of the Stomach turned back. G
The entrance of the porus bilarius or Choler-passage into the beginning of the
small Gut. H The entrance of the pancreatick duct or passage of the Sweetbread
into the same Gut. IIIIIIII The small Gut. K The Intestinum caecum or blind
Gut. LL The first Colon. M The small neck that divides the first Colon from the
second. NN The second or middle Colon. OO One of the Ligaments that contracts
the blind Gut and Colons into Cells. PP The third and last Colon, far smaller
than the two former, but longer. QQ The Intestinum rectum or Arse-gut. R The
two Muscles called levatores Any, or openers of the Fundament. S The sphincter
Muscle that contracts or purses up the Arse-hole. T The middle Coat of the
Stomach through which the two branches of Nerves are dispersed. U The third or
inmost Coat of the Stomach. XX The branchings of the Bloud-vessels, as they
appear on the outside of the Stomach. YY The several Gastrick Vessels inserted
into the bottom of the Stomach.
anatomical view of a horse's stomach, gullet, and guts TAB V fol. 24.




The Mesentery why so called. Its rise. Its Fat. Its Vessels. 1. Veins. 2.
Arteries. 3. Nerves. 4. Milky Veins. 5. Lympheducts. Its Glands. Its Use.

CHAP. XII. Of the Mesentery.
THE Mesenterium or Mesentery is so called from its being placed in the middle
of the Guts, which it embraces round, gathering them together in form of a
Globe, but is it self gathered into folds. This Mesentery is of a circular
figure, composed of a double Coat, between which do run many Vessels and those
of all sorts, and betwixt which also there is a collection of much fat. Dr.
Wharton says that in Man there is a third Membrane betwixt the two commonly
known, in which are seated the Glands or Kernels, and through which the Vessels
run. If so, it is likely there is the same in an Horses Mesentery, which abounds
with Glands. It Is a little above a quarter of a yard broad from its center to
its circumserence.

Now its center or rise is at the first and third Rack-bone of the Loins, where
membranous Fibers are produced from the Rim of the Belly, and spread into the
two investing Coats or Skins of the Mesentery.

The fat with which these Membranes are stuffed, is collected in the same manner
as that of the Caul above-described in chap. 8. namely the oily part of the
Blood sweating out of the Arteries that run in abundance between these
Membranes, is stopped by them, (they being more compact and close than the Coats
of the Arteries) and by their respective coldness is congealed into fat.

There are almost innumerable Vessels running through it, but such as are
rather sustained and conducted by it, than for its own use.

The first sort are the Veins, to which it gives the denomination of Mesaraick.
These are all branches of the Porta, and their office is to receive so much of
the Arterial blood as is not spent on the nourishment of the Guts and
Mesentery, and to convey it to the Liver, and from thence to the Heart. Before
the milky Veins were found out, it was believed they brought the Chyle to the
Liver; but that opinion is now out of doors, as we have more fully shown before
in the tenth Chapter.

Its Arteries also from its name are called Mesaraick or Mesenterick; these run
in great numbers through it to the Guts, to which what office they perform was
likewise declared above, chap. 10. And besides the uses there ascribed to them,
they continually supply new oily Vapors for the maintenance of the sat of the
Mesentery.

Its Nerves are very numerous, and spring from that pair which is now (from Dr.
Willis) commonly called the Intercostal, and reckoned for the ninth pair, but
was formerly reputed the sixth.

All the venae lacteae or milky Veins run through it from the Guts toward its
center. These are very slender and almost transparent Vessels, having but one
single Coat, and gaping with their mouths in the inmost Coat of the Guts do
there suck up the Chyle, and take the nearest course thence to those Glands or
Kernels of the Mesentery that are next to them, several smaller in their
passage growing into one greater. From the several smaller Glands they proceed
to the greatest that is placed at the Back at the center of the Mesentery, and
from thence to the common receptacle that is seated betwixt the Kidneys. What
course it takes from thence the Reader may see in the already twice mentioned
tenth Chapter.

Besides all these sorts of Vessels there was a fifth sort found out by Thomas
Bartholin (a Dane) some thirty years ago, which indeed are to be found in most
parts of the Body, but most abound in the Mesentery, and are called
Lympheducts, as much as to say, Water-passages. Their Coat is single as that of
the milky Veins, but more transparent; and the lympha or water that is
contained in them, is very clear. This Liquor differs from the serum or wheyish
watery part of the Blood, which one may discover by this Experiment; If you
take a little of this Liquor into a Spoon, it will soon thicken into a gelly of
its own accord, which the serum of the Blood will not do unless you heat it
over the fire. It is supposed to be made of thin moist Vapors of the Blood,
which being condensed into water, are imbibed by these Vessels. All those that
run through the Mesentery discharge their water into the common receptacle of
the Chyle abovementioned, so that it passes together with the Chyle up the
passage that ascends by the Back toward the Shoulders, and there mixes with
the Blood in the subclavian Vein.

In the middle Membrane of the Mesentery (first found out by Doctor Wharton as
abovesaid) there are a great many Glands or Kernels, into which the milky Veins
as they pass through the Mesentery are inserted, and then rise out of them
again, continuing their course to the one great Gland at its center, in which
they all meet together, and from it hold on their way to the common receptacle
as was above-declared. By these Glands the said Veins are supported and
strengthened in their passage.

Now the use of the Mesentery is to be as it were a tie or band to the Guts to
bind or gather them together, and to fasten them to the Back, that their great
weight do not cause them in violent motion either to break or twist or roll
confusedly one over the other, whereby their gentle worm-like motion would be
hindered, if not perverted or abolished. And besides by its Membranes and Glands
it does guard and sustain the several Vessels whose way lies through it.

CHAP. XIII. Of the Pancreas or Sweetbread.
The Pancreas why so called. Its situation. Its substance. Its Vessels. Its
proper passage. Its Use. The Pancreatick Juice.

THE Sweetbread is an unshapely body, of a glandulous yet fleshlike substance,
from whence it has its name Pancreas which signifies all flesh.

In dissection it is at the end of the Liver and bottom of the Stomach; but
while the Horse is living, it is situated on the backside of the bottom of the
Stomach, and lies cross the Belly lengthways as that does.

Its proper flesh is white and soft, but the little Kernels with which it is
plentifully stored, are of a more reddish color. It is covered with a single
Membrane which it has from the Rim of the Belly, as all the Bowels of the Lower
Belly have, of which it is almost the least.

It has Veins from that branch of the Porta that runs to the Spleen, and is
called the Splenick. Its Arteries spring from the Coeliacal; and its Nerves
from the Intercostal or ninth pair. This Bowel for its bigness has very many of
those Lympheducts that we described in the foregoing Chapter running through
the Mesentery.

Besides these Vessels which are common to it with other parts, it has a pipe
or passage peculiar to it self, which was first found out at Padua in an humane
Body about forty years ago. This passage is membranous, and though it be but
one in its going out, yet within the Sweetbread it is divided first into two,
and those two into innumerable small branches which are dispersed all over its
Body, but their extremities terminate in the abovesaid reddish Kernels with
which the Sweetbread abounds.

Before this passage was found out, some thought the use of the Sweetbread to
be only to serve as a Cushion (being very soft) for the Stomach to bolster
upon, and to sustain the Vessels that run through it; and others, that it sent
a ferment to the Stomach to assist concoction. As to this latter use it must
needs be only imaginary, seeing there is no passage from it to the Stomach.
And as to the former, though it do those offices mentioned, yet from its
proper passage (which opens into the beginning of the small Gut very near the
same place where the Gall-passage enters) it gives suspicion that it has a
further use. Now some have been so curious as to open Dogs alive, and cutting
off this passage where it is inserted into the Gut, to receive its end into a
narrow-mouthed Vessel, (you may see the manner of it in Barthol. Anat. l. 1. c.
13.) into which Vessel in a few hours time there has a Spoonful of Juice
destilled out of it. And this Juice, to distinguish it from all other Liquors
in the Body, they call the Pancreatick juice, from the name Pancreas whereby
the Sweetbread is otherwise called. So that it seems there is a peculiar
Liquor separated from the Arteries into this passage in the little Kernels or
Glands above-spoken of, which those that have tasted it, say, is of a saltish
and somewhat sowrish taste. Now this Juice passing by its Pipe into the
beginning of the small Gut, meets there with the Gall, with which it ferments,
and causes some fermentation in the Chyle as it descends that way, whereby its
purer parts are separated from the more impure and earthy, as was discoursed
more fully in the eleventh Chapter, when we were describing the small Gut, (to
which the Reader may please to turn back.)

As for the figure of the Sweetbread, you have it expressed in the next Table
but one, namely in that wherein the Spleen is also described.

CHAP. XIV. Of the Liver.
Its substance, situation and figure. Its Ligaments and investing Membrane.
Veins. Arteries. Nerves. Lympheducts. Its Use.

HAVING now done with the Parts that minister to the first concoction, namely
Chylification, we proceed to those other that in some measure, some more some
less, assist Sanguification, of which the Liver was esteemed by the Ancients
the principal, nay almost the only instrument. Which error of theirs was
founded on this mistake in Anatomy, That having not then found out the milky
Veins which we have before described, they thought that the Chyle was received
out of the Guts by the Mesaraick Veins, which being branches of the Porta, all
run to the Liver; And the Cava or large hollow Vein that arises out of the
Liver, and is the trunk whence all the branches of Veins in the whole Body
spring, containing nothing in it but blood, it necessarily followed that if the
Chyle came to the Liver, it must by it be turned into blood before it departed
from it again. Yea so deep was this Opinion of the Liver's making blood fixed
in Men's Brains, that for some while after the milky Veins were found out, they
would needs have them to convey the Chyle to the Liver, though they were forced
to a thousand shifts to apologize for their nonappearance between the great
Gland of the Mesentery, (whither they might be easily traced) and the Liver.
But this prejudice was soon overcome when about thirty years ago the common
Receptacle (described before in the tenth and twelfth Chapters) was found out,
and a new office was invented for the Liver, which yet may in some sort be said
to assist Sanguification: and what this office is, shall be shown by and by in
this and the next Chapters.

The substance of it is like concrete or congealed Blood, for which cause it is
called Parenchyma, which is to say an affusion or shedding forth of blood. It
is one in number, and situated in the Lower Belly in the upper part thereof on
the right side under the short Ribs, near to the Diaphragma or Midriff, in its
upper side, and its lower lies upon the right and foreside of the Stomach. It
is divided into several Lobes or Flaps, in Horses, otherwise than in Men, in
whom it is one continued body. These Lobes do cover the Stomach, grasping of it
(as it were) as one should grasp any thing with their hand by spreading their
fingers about it. This covering the Stomach stands in great need of, for
thereby is the heat thereof much cherished for the furthering concoction. As
for its shape, you cannot so well conceive it by any description, as by the
figure of it annexed at the end of this Chapter, which you may please to take a
view of.

It is tied in its place by three Ligaments: the strongest of which is that
which is called its suspensory Ligament. This springs from the Peritonaeum
where it is spread over the under side of the Midriff. It is very strong and
membranous, and arising from the Midriff somewhat toward its right side, it is
inserted into the upper or bunching side of the Liver, into which it enters a
little way; but in its entrance it loses one of its Membranes, which dilating
or spreading it self makes the skin that enwraps wraps the whole Liver; for the
Liver is only covered with one thin skin which it has from this Ligament.
There is a second Ligament which seems to spring from this skin of the Liver,
and is inserted into the sharppointed Gristle at the bottom of the Breast Bone.
By these two is the Liver kept from falling lower down into the Belly, or from
slipping out of its place sideways. The third Ligament is not one originally,
but when the Foal is in the Womb it supplies the place of a Vein, running from
the Navel to the lower or hollow side of the Liver, and by it is nourishment
brought from the Dam to the Foal. But as soon as it is foaled, and it begins to
take its nourishment by the mouth only, and not any longer at all this way,
this Vein dries and closes up, and so degenerates into a Ligament, whereby the
Liver is kept from ascending or bearing up against the Midriff, as it might
have done in an Horses leaping or the like. This is just opposite to the
Suspensory one, entering in at the lower side over against where that does on
the upper.

It has two sorts of Veins. The first are the roots of the Vena cava or large
hollow Vein, which spreading themselves through all its parts, do receive into
them the blood that is brought into the Liver by the Porta; which having done,
the smaller roots two or three of them grow into one, and this one uniting with
two or three of the like kind into another larger root, they do at last all of
them meet in one trunk and make the hollow Vein, which issuing out of the upper
part of the Liver presently enters the Midriff, and so ascends up to the Heart.
The second sort of Vein is the Porta, all whose branches coming from the Guts,
Spleen, Stomach, etc. and uniting into one trunk enter the Liver on its lower
or hollow side, into which it is no sooner entered, but presently it disperses
it self into innumerable branches through all the Lobes of the Liver, affording
nourishment unto it, in that regard supplying the place of an Artery, which it
resembles the more, because within the Liver it has two Coats, the outer
whereof it receives from that skin that clothes the Liver, in its entrance into
it. Now so much of the blood that is imported by the Porta, as is not spent on
the nourishment of the Liver, is drunk in by the roots of the hollow Vein
beforementioned, and returned to the Heart. This Vein is called Porta or Vena
portae, the Gate-vein, from two bunchings out, of the Liver, (called gates by
Hippocrates) between which it enters it.

Yet is not the Liver, at least all the parts of it, only nourished by the
blood that is brought in by the Porta; for there is a branch which comes from
the Coeliack Artery that ascends to its hollow side just by the Porta, which
sends forth twigs all over its Coat, as likewise through the Coats of the Porta
and the Choler-Vessels: but whether any of them enter into its parenchyma or
substance, is not discovered. These twigs of Arteries bring vital heat and
nourishment to those parts through which they run.

Its Nerves spring from the Intercostal pair, viz. partly from the stomachick
and partly from the mesenterick branch thereof. These only are communicated to
those parts to which the Arteries are dispersed, so that the substance of the
Liver has very little sense.

We showed before how that for some while after the milky Veins were found out,
they were believed to convey the Chyle to the Liver: and all the color for
this Opinion was a few small clear, limpid and almost transparent Vessels, that
run between the Mesentery and it. But as on the one hand they are too few in
number for that office (especially being so slender) being scarce one for ten
of the milky Veins in the Mesentery: so on the other, they are neither of the
same color (as being much clearer) nor does the Liquor they contain come from
the Mesentery to the Liver, but runs from this to that, as has been observed in
Live-dissections, in which having been tied they have swelled on that side of
the Ligature toward the Liver, and grown empty toward the Mesentery. They are
indeed then truly Lympheducts, which carry that water that is separated from
the blood in the Liver, toward the Mesentery, and from it to the common
receptacle of the Chyle with which it mixes.

Besides these Vessels there are the numerous branches of the Gall-passage, of
which we shall treat more fully in the next Chapter. And shall say no more
here, but only how one may distinguish betwixt the branches of the Cava, Porta
and these of the Gall-passage, so as to know which are which. Those of the Cava
are clad but with one Coat, are white, thin and of a large cavity. Those of the
Porta have a double Coat, and so are thicker and stronger, and yet not so wide
as those of the Cava. Lastly, the branches of the Gall-passage are of a duskish
yellow, have a thicker Coat than either the Cava or Porta, and yet have the
narrowest channel. These are included in a common case with those of the Porta,
which makes their outer Coat.

Having in the beginning of this Chapter detected the error of the Ancients in
ascribing Sanguification to the Liver in so eminent and large a sense; we must
however confess that it does something toward the purifying of the Blood, and
that is, by separating the Choler from it, as shall be fullier shown in the
next Chapter. In it also is a pretty quantity of serous or wheyish humor
filtrated or strained from the Blood, which is sent by the Lympheducts to the
common receptacle of the Chyle as aforesaid. In the third and last place it
furthers the concoction of the Stomach by its kind and cherishing heat.

The Sixth Table shows the Liver entire, and also its Vessels freed from the
Parenchyma.
Fig. I. Expresses the Liver taken out of the Body, and placed with its hollow
side uppermost.

AAAA The hollow side of the Liver clothed with its Coat. B The Vena portae or
Gate-vein, and its egress out of the hollow side of the Liver. C The Trunk of
Vena cava or hollow Vein also coming out of the Liver. D The Gall or
Choler-passage cut off close to the Liver. E An Artery which is branched to the
Liver from the ramus Coeliacus. F A Nerve of the sixth pair (as commonly
reckoned) also branching to the Liver. GG The Edges of the Liver turned down
and hanging over the hollow side of it. HHHH The four Lobes or Scollops of the
Liver.
Fig. II. Represents the Vessels of the Liver freed from the Parenchyma, or
fleshy substance thereof.

AA A portion of Vena cava. BB The Trunk of Vena portae passing forth of the
Liver. C The Gall-passage cut off close by the Liver. EEEE The Branches of Vena
portae dispersed through the Liver. FFFF The Branches of the hollow Vein
likewise distributed through the Liver. GGGG The most remarkable Anastomoses or
joinings together of the mouths of the Cava and Porta. HH The Artery that is
branched to the Liver from the Coeliack Artery. I The Extremities or ends of
the Veins, which for their smallness are called Capillary, or hair-like.
anatomical view of a horse's liver and its vessels TAB VI fol. 30
Figure. I.


Figure II.






CHAP. XV. Of the Porus Bilarius, or Gall-passage.
Its branching in the Liver, and its tendency without it. Choler how separated
from the Blood, and its use.

IT is difficult to give a satisfactory account why most Creatures should have
both a Gallbladder, for the collection of the Choler, and besides, a
Gall-passage; and yet a Horse and all whole-hoofed Beasts, as also Hearts,
Fallow-deer and some few others, should only have the passage without the
Bladder. It would be worth the while for our Virtuosi to invent a probable
reason of it, but for my own part I dare not pretend to be so sagacious. But
much have those been mistaken that not finding any Bladder of Gall, have
affirmed that an Horse has no gall at all. And this, Dr. Brown reckons up
amongst vulgar Errors.

Now the trunk of this Gall-passage enters the Liver very near the same place
with the Porta, together with which it is enwrapped in one common Cover, which
they both borrow from that skin wherewith the Liver is clothed. I mean they
begin to be so invested just at their entrance into the Liver, for before they
have but each one single Coat. Its branches run along with those of the Porta
through all parts of the Liver, and it has the same Artery and Nerve running
through its Membrane. All these branches uniting into one trunk, it passes the
directest way to the small Gut, into which it is inserted about a foot from the
lower Orifice of the Stomach, where it discharges it self of the Choler.

Having described the Vessel, there remain two things to be enquired into,
first how the Choler is separated in the Liver, and secondly of what use it is.
As to the first, we must consider that there can be no such separation as this,
without some sort of ferment to cause it. There comes indeed nothing to the
Liver but under the form of blood, but however it will be of use to examine
from what parts that blood comes: And amongst the rest we find that a
considerable quantity comes from the Spleen by the splenick branch. Now every
one that will taste it may discern that the blood that comes out of the Spleen
by this branch has a kind of a sowrish harsh taste to what the rest of the mass
of blood has. This then mixing with the rest of the blood and passing with it
through the narrow Vessels in the Liver, causes it there to ferment (as a small
piece of sour Dough will I know not how much that is not leavened) and in that
fermentation this yellow Choler is separated from the Blood, much in the same
manner as Yest from Beer in a Barrel, (which it partly resembles in color.)
And this fermentation is assisted by the proper nature and faculty of the Liver
given by Nature to it; who has also framed this liquor of Particles so
differing from those of the Blood, that though the Blood pass out of the Porta
into the Cava, yet the Choler stays behind and is received by the small mouths
of the Choler-passage. Some affirm this separation is performed by the help of
some Glands or little Kernels into which the ends of the several Vessels are
inserted, but I have not been able to discern them. The use of the Gall is,
Together with the Juice that is sent from the Sweetbread, to make a ferment in
the first Gut for the uses that are fully enough delivered in the eleventh
Chapter: to which we shall only add, that it serves by its acrimony to
exstimulate the Guts to expel the Excrements contained in them. And seeing
there is no bag or repository to store it up in, it passes continually to the
Guts, whereby Horses come to dung oftener than most other Creatures: which as
Dr. Brown notes, was prudently contrived by Providence in this Animal,
considering his plentiful feeding, the largeness of his Guts, and their
various circumvolution. For, says he, Choler is the natural Glyster, or one
excretion whereby Nature excludes another, etc.

CHAP. XVI. Of the Spleen or Milt.
The substance of the Spleen. Its situation and connection. Its Figure. Its
Color. Whether an Horse can live without it. Its Membrane. 1. Vessels. Veins.
2. Arteries. 3. Nerves. 4. Lympheducts. Its action and use.

THE Spleen or Milt is of a soft, spongious substance, like thick, black and
congealed Blood, from which it is said to be generated; though some that of
late have examined it more curiously with Magnifying Glasses, declare the
greatest part of its substance, besides the Bloudvessels, to consist of
abundance of little Kernels enclosed in skinny Cells like Honey-combs, which in
their own nature are of a white color, and will appear such when the Blood is
washed from them. For my own part, I question whether there be any such Kernels
in it, or if there be, they must be far different from those of any other part,
and be of a much looser substance, seeing I have only in River-water (after I
had taken off the investing skin) washed off the parenchyma so clearly from the
Vessels, that there has seemed to be nothing else remaining. A figure of which
Vessels so cleared of the parenchyma by washing, you have in the following
Table.

Its situation is under the short Ribs on the left side over against the Liver,
between the Stomach and the short or bastard Ribs. It cleaves oft-times to the
Midriff by a skin or coat, which it has from the Rim of the Belly. It is also
fastened by a skin to the Stomach.

It is of a triangular shape, yet long, and something sharp-pointed, as you may
see in the Figure.

Its Color is (in a sound Horse) reddish, inclining somewhat to black; but in
an unsound Horse it is more inclining to black, or of a leaden or ashey color:
yet most times in an unsound Horse it is of the color of the Humor which
offends.

There are several Creatures that naturally have no Spleen, as all Insects; and
therefore that Proverb is not literally true, That even a Fly has a Spleen;
Such also as have no Piss-bladder, want the Milt, as the Chameleon, and many
such like: But now it is a great question, whether such Creatures as by Nature
have Spleens, can have them taken out, and yet live. It is true indeed that
other Parts that seem to be as considerable, have been taken even out of Humane
Bodies, and yet the Parties have lived: So I have read of some Women that upon
incurable distempers in the Part, have had their Womb cut out, and yet have
lived in tolerable health afterward ( Barthol. Epist.) And it is a common
thing to geld any sort of Creature, though there be considerably large Vessels
that run to the Stones. But it is to be confessed that these parts instanced
in, seem to be wholly framed for the propagation of the several kinds of living
Creatures, and not for the necessary service of the Individual that has them.
And therefore when they are taken away, though the end for which they were
created, to wit generation, be frustrated by the loss of them; yet may the
Creature it self that loses them, live well enough without them. But now as for
the Spleen, it does not at all serve for procreation, but is of use only to
that Body that has it. (What its use is, we shall show toward the latter end
of this Chapter.) Yet several have boasted that they have taken it out of Dogs
and Cats, and that they have lived in pretty good plight a considerable while
after. The operation must needs be somewhat difficult, seeing the Spleen is
seated on the inside of the short Ribs, nearer the Back than the Breast: nor
can I believe that a Horse could live any while if it were taken out of him;
but least of all could Man, in whom it is larger than in any other Creature, as
Bartholin affirms. For the Vessels that are inserted into it are so many and
large, that it would seem impossible to stanch the Blood; besides the necessary
use that it seems to be of to the Body, of which by and by.

The skin that it is covered with, is thicker than that of the Liver, both
because of the loose and soft substance of the Spleen that required a stronger
covering to defend it; and also that it might the better sustain the strong
beatings of its Arteries that are pretty large and many. This skin it has from
the Peritonaeum or Rim of the Belly, to which it is commonly knit, as also to
the left Kidney and the Midriff, and on its inside to the Caul. Some late
Anatomists have affirmed it to be clad with two Coats, the outer that which we
have mentioned, and the inner arising from the Vessels that enter the Spleen.

All the Veins that it has, are from that branch of the Porta that is called
the Splenick branch. For the Porta as soon as it comes out of the lower or
hollow side of the Liver, sends one notable Branch to the Spleen, which passing
cross the Body from the right to the left side under the Liver and Stomach,
enters the Spleen and disperses it self into innumerable Twigs all over it. A
Twig of the splenick Artery opens into this Vein a little before it enters the
Spleen: And from the lower end of the Spleen there go two or three Vessels to
the Stomach, which are called Vasa brevia or short Vessels. The use of the
splenick Vein is to bring from the Spleen all that arterial blood that is not
spent on its nourishment; and besides, that proper and peculiar juice that is
made in the Spleen, of which presently.

Its Arteries are three or four times more in number than the Veins, and all of
them spring from the left Coeliack branch that has the name of Splenick, from
the Spleen, into which it is inserted. Hereby it receives vital heat and
nourishment, and matter out of which to make its proper juice. Before this
Artery enter the Spleen, it sends forth one twig that unites with and opens
into the splenick Vein, as was noted before.

Its Nerves are but small yet pretty numerous. They spring from a mesenterick
branch of the left Intercostal Nerve, and are dispersed principally through the
skin that covers it, though some few enter its substance.

Lastly, it has several Lympheducts, or Water-passages, which creeping all over
its Coat, take their way along the Caul toward the common receptacle of the
Chyle, into which they empty the liquor contained in them, as all those that
arise from the several parts of the lower Belly do. What these Lympheducts are,
and what that liquor is which they contain, I have shown above in the 12th
Chapter, of the Mesentery.

There is no part of the Body concerning whose use there has been greater
diversity of opinion. Some have made it the receptacle of black Choler (or of
thick dreggy Blood) separated in the Liver and brought hither by the splenick
branch. Others that thought this too ignoble and base an use for so
considerable a part, esteemed it to be as it were a second Liver: For as they
believed that the thinner and more spirituous part of the Chyle passed to the
Liver; so, that a thicker and more dreggy part went to the Spleen, of which was
made a blacker and more earthy sort of Blood, partly for its own nourishment,
and partly for the nourishment of the Stomach, Guts, Mesentery, etc. In answer
to these two opinions it will be sufficient to say, That the first is contrary
to the circulation of the Blood, nothing passing from the Liver to the Spleen,
but contrarily from the Spleen to the Liver: and the latter, besides that it is
contrary to the said circulation, is repugnant also to the true motion of the
Chyle, none of which either passes to the Liver or Spleen, as we have more than
once shown already. A third opinion is, That of the blood that the Arteries
bring to it in great plenty, is made a certain acid or sour Juice, which is
sent by the vasa brevia or short Veins to the Stomach, into which being
discharged, it partly provokes appetite, and partly helps concoction: And this
Opinion has had a great many Abettors, whereas its falsity may be demonstrated
by this, that if one open a Dog (or the like) alive, and tie these short Veins
with a thread, they will fill and swell betwixt the Stomach and Ligature, but
will grow empty on that side toward the Spleen; which is a plain evidence that
the Blood or whatever other Humor that runs in these short Veins, flows from
the Stomach and not to it. However we will grant that the Spleen does indeed
make such a sour Juice, of part of the Arterial blood that is imported into it
by the splenick Artery; but then it passes not from thence to the Stomach, but
to the Liver by the splenick branch of the Porta: for if one tie the said
branch, as was said above of the short veins, it will fill toward the Spleen
and grow empty toward the Liver. And the use of this Juice seems to be this,
viz. That mixing in the trunk of the Porta with all the Blood that is received
by the branches thereof out of the several parts of the Lower Belly, especially
from the Guts, it enters with it into the Liver, where it causes the Blood to
ferment, whereby the Choler is separated from it, for the uses mentioned in the
foregoing Chapter, where we have treated more at large of this separation.

Another use of the Spleen is, by its warmth to cherish the left side of the
Stomach, as the Liver does the right, to further the concoction thereof. And
this it may be conceived to do in a very considerable degree; for seeing it
has so very many Arteries, it must needs be very warm.

There are many more Opinions concerning the use of the Spleen than these I
have mentioned: but as it would be tedious to recite them, so it would be but
needless to refute them, the new Doctrines of the circulation of the Blood and
the motion of the Chyle being improveable to a general confutation of them.

Table VII. Expresses the Spleen entire with the Vessels going in and out, and
the same Vessels alone freed from their parenchyma; as also the Sweetbread
entire with its Vessels.
Fig. I Represents the Spleen entire, with the Vessels going in and out.

A Shows the body of the Spleen on the concave or hollow side which receives
the Vessels. B The splenick Vein. C The splenick Artery. D Its Nerves
proceeding from a Mesenterick branch of the left Intercostal Nerve.
Fig. II. Represents the Vessels of the Spleen divested of their parenchyma.

A Shows the Arteria Coeliaca, cut close off at the great Artery. B Its ramus
dexter superior, or right hand upper branch, producing the gastrica dextra, or
right hand Stomach-artery: it makes also the cysticae gemellae that go to the
Liver and Gall-passage. C Its ramus dexter inferior, or right hand lower
branch, which goes to the Mesentery and Guts. D Its ramus sinister, or
left hand branch, called Arteria Splenica or splenick Artery, which brings the
blood to the Spleen. E The Nerves of the Spleen coming from a mesenterick
branch of the left Intercostal Nerve. F The splenick branch of Vena portae cut
off close by its trunk. G The splenick Vein cut open to show its Valves, which
permit the Blood to pass from the Spleen to the Liver, but hinder any Blood
from returning from the Liver to the Spleen. HH The Distribution of the Nerves
through the substance of the Spleen, accompanying the Veins and Arteries. II
etc. Several (seeming) Anastomoses or inosculations of the Veins and Arteries.
KKK Vessels going from the lower end of the Spleen to the Stomach, called Vasa
brevia, or short Vessels. LL etc. The capillary branches of Veins, Arteries and
Nerves dispersed through the whole substance of the Spleen.
Fig. III. Represents the Pancreas or Sweetbread freed from its Membrane and
part of its substance, the better to show the course of the Vessels in it,
which come to it from the splenick Vein and Artery. It represents also the
new Wirtsungian passage, so called from the late Inventer of it.

A Shows the body of the Pancreas dissected. B The new passage called ductus
Wirtsungianus or pancreaticus. C The Orifice of the said passage where it opens
into the beginning of the small Gut. D The Artery of the Sweetbread dispersed
through its substance. E The Vein of the Sweetbread dispersed likewise through
its substance. F Its Nerves, being a branch of the Intercostal pair.
anatomical view of a horse's pancreas and spleen and its vessels TAB. VII.
fol. 35.
Figure I.


Figure. II.


Figure. III






CHAP. XVII. Of the Kidneys, and Deputy-kidneys.
Their name. Number, situation and connection. Figure. Membranes. Substance.
Vessels, viz. Emulgent Arteries, and Veins. The Papillary Caruncles. The pelvis
or Basin. Their Action. Deputy-kidneys, their name, situation, bigness and
shape. Their Vessels. Their Use.

THE Kidneys are otherwise called Reins from their Latin name Renes, which is
derived from a Greek word which signifies to flow, because the watery or
wheyish part of the Blood does continually flow through them, and makes the
Urine.

They are in number two, that when one is stopped with a stone or gravel, or hurt
by any accident, the Urine might be separated in the other, or otherwise the
Beast would die. They are seated in the Loins behind the Stomach and Guts, the
right under the Liver and the left under the Spleen, on each side of the hollow
Vein and great Artery, opposite to one another. They rest upon the Muscles of
the Loins, and are included betwixt the Membranes of the Peritonaeum which
keeps them firm in their place. They are knit to the hollow Vein and great
Artery by the Emulgent Vessels, and to the Bladder by the Ureters which we
shall describe in the next Chapter.

They are seldom like to one another in shape; for the Right is in figure like
a Heart, but something flatter; whereas the left is like that of a Man, viz. of
the shape of a Kidney-bean, as you may see them represented in the following
Figure.

They are covered with two Membranes, an inner which is proper, and an outer
which is common. The inner Skin seems to spring from the outer Coat of those
Vessels that enter into them: this cleaves so close to them, that it can hardly
be separated, being very thin, and having small threads of Nerves running along
it from a twig of the Intercostal Nerve. The outer which is common, is borrowed
from the Rim of the Belly, and is wrapped somewhat loosely about the Kidney.
This Skin is bedaubed with fat, and is therefore called the fatty Coat; and
into it are inserted an Artery and Vein, which have also the title of fatty,
and spring from the great Artery and hollow Vein.

As to their substance, it has been always till of late held to be hard and
compact flesh; and indeed it handles pretty firm to the touch, and seems to be
fleshy to the bare eye. But seeing there is no separation made of any thing
from the Blood in other Parts, but by the help of Glands or Kernels; (for so is
the Slaver separated in the Mouth, the Choler in the Liver, bad Humors in the
Guts upon taking a purge, etc.) I say, for that cause it is reasonable to give
credit to those curious Anatomists that by their Magnifying Glasses or
Microscopes have discovered the substance of the Kidneys to be for the greatest
part made up of such Glands, by means of which the Urine is separated from the
Blood, in such manner as we shall show by and by.

Their Arteries and Veins are called Emulgents, because they do as it were milk
out the Urine from the mass of Blood. Each Kidney has for the most part but one
Artery and one Vein; yet sometimes two or more of a sort. But whether the Trunk
be one or more, each as it enters the Kidneys is branched into several, and
those into more successively, till they become as small as hairs. The Emulgent
Arteries spring from the Trunk of the great Artery, and the Veins from the
hollow Vein: Both these as they enter the Kidney, are divested of their outer
Coat, which makes the proper Coat of the Kidneys, as was observed above: but
instead of that loss they are invested in one common Case with the branches of
the Ureter, even as we showed in the fifteenth Chapter that the branches of the
Gall-passage in the Liver are included in one common Coat or Case with those of
the Porta. The Arteries bring blood for their nourishment, and moreover the
watery humor that is separated in them and makes the Urine. By the Veins the
blood circulates back again to the hollow Vein or Cava, and by it ascends up to
the Heart.

Besides the innumerable little Kernels which we have shown the substance of
the Kidney to consist of, there are about ten of a more considerable bigness in
the middle or center of it, placed at the entrance into the pelvis or Basin,
which are in Latin called Carunculae Papillares, in English Papillary
Caruncles, and by some they are called Teat-like Productions, both which names
they have from the likeness they have to the Teats or Nipples of Women. They
are something harder than the rest of the substance of the Kidney, and also of
a fainter color. They are in bigness as large as a small Horse-bean. They have
each several small holes or pores, through which the Urine destills out of the
slender Urinary Pipes in the body of the Kidneys, into the cavity of the pelvis.

Now this pelvis or Basin is a membranous cell or cavity in the middle of the
Kidney, and is nothing else but the head of the Vreter widened. There run out
of it several large pipes to the aforesaid Teat-like Kernels, (one pipe to each
Kernel) by which the Urine drils into this cavity, and out of it into the
Vreter.

The action of the Kidneys, is to separate the wheyish Humor from the Blood,
which they do in this manner and order. We find that an Horse can no more live
without drink than meat: Now the drink serves not only to cool the Body, but
much more is it of use to make the Chyle thin, that it may be able to pass
through the narrow ways of the milky Veins; so that the water which the Horse
drinks, passes along with the more oily Chyle into the mass of Blood, whither
having conducted it, the water is now of no more use, and therefore the
Emulgent Arteries above-described conveigh it to the Kidneys together with the
Blood, to cast it out: But the Blood, being of a thicker body than the water,
cannot enter through those narrow passages which the other destils through, and
therefore what is more than serves for their nourishment, returns back from the
Kidneys by the Emulgent Veins into the Cava, and so returns to the Heart again
in its circulation. But the watery or wheyish part running out of the larger
into the smaller branches of the Emulgent Arteries successively, and the said
branches so often dividing themselves till at last they become as small as an
hair and end in the little Kernels toward the outside of the Kidneys, this
watery Humor is milked as it were through these Kernels into small urinary
pipes, as slender almost as Fibers, by which it drills along to the Papillary
Caruncles, and is again strained through them into the Basin, from whence it
glides down the Ureters into the Bladder, where when it becomes troublesome
either by its quantity or sharpness, etc. it provokes the Horse to stale, and
is called Urine. But seeing the Piss is not of the same color with the water
that was drunk, but generally a great deal yellower, it is likely it gains that
color from a little quantity of Choler mixed with it: And as the Choler either
retains it natural color, to wit yellow, or is preternaturally of some other,
as black, greenish, etc. the Urine will be tinctured accordingly; as any Man
may observe in Horses that are distempered. So that in Horses as well as in
Men, one may many times gain some knowledge of the Distemper from the Urine.

Over the Kidneys a little more outward, and about an inch from them, there
stand two Kernels, which are known by several Names, from the several uses that
Authors have ascribed to them. Some call them Deputy-kidneys, because of some
resemblance they have to the true ones in their frame, and because they have
been thought to assist them in separating the Urine. Bartholine calls them
Black-choler Cases, from an Opinion that they receive black Choler from the
Spleen. Others have imposed other Names on them, which we shall not recite. It
is not long since they were first found out. They are in an Horse about as big
as a Garden-bean, and of that shape as they are represented in the Figure. They
are covered with a single thin skin, which commonly sticks to the fatty skin
that invests the Kidneys. They have a small cavity in them.

Their Veins and Arteries generally come from the Emulgents, but sometimes
immediately from the great Artery and hollow Vein. The Arteries bring them
blood for nourishment, from which what remains, returns back by the Veins, as
also does that Humor whatever it be that is concocted and separated in them,
for there is no other vessel to do it. They have indeed some Lympheducts, but
those are common to them with other parts, and have no peculiar use here. Their
Nerves spring from that branch of the Intercostal pair that goes to the
Stomach, to the Spleen, and to the inner or proper skin that clothes the
Kidneys.

In their Cavity there is commonly found a blackish Humor, which is made of
part of the Arterial blood that flows to them; but of what nature or use this
Humor should be, is very uncertain. It has no way to go out of the Cavity but
by the Veins, which deposite what is contained in them into the Emulgent Veins,
or into the Cava, and so it must needs pass with the Venal blood to the Heart.
If there could be found out any way whereby it could probably pass to the
Kidneys, then Bartholine's Opinion, that they make a ferment for the use of the
Reins, for the better separating of the wheyish Humor from the Blood, were
very plausible; but till then, one must suspend their belief of it. As for mine
own part, seeing so many learned Anatomists as have treated of them, are at a
loss in discovering their true use, I will not be ashamed to confess my own
ignorance and unsatisfiedness therein also.

CHAP. XVIII. Of the Vreters or Passages of Urine.
The Vreters. Their substance, and Vessels. Their cavity and use.

THE Vreters or Urine-pipes or Channels are in number two, seated on each side
of the hollow Vein and great Artery, at some distance from them. Their head or
beginning is the Basin of the Kidneys, at whose hollow side they come forth,
and run in a crooked line like an s down to the Bladder, into whose back and
lower part they are inserted not far from the Sphincter, running for an inch
between its two proper Coats, to prevent the return of the Urine back this way.
For when the Bladder is squeezed, its Coats clap close together, and so shut up
the mouths of the Ureters.

They are in substance much like a Vein, only whiter and thicker, and more
nervous. They are commonly held to consist of two Coats, an inner which is
proper, and an outer which is borrowed from the Rim of the Belly. They have
small Veins and Arteries from the neighboring Vessels, and slips of Nerves in
a considerable number from the Intercostals, whence proceeds that intolerable
sense of pain when a stone sticks in them.

They are indifferent large, having a hollowness through them which is so wide,
that they will admit of a large straw in a dead Horse, and therefore may be
conceived in a living Horse to be much wider. Through these passages or
hollownesses, the Urine does pass from the Kidneys to the Bladder, and that is
their sole and true use.

CHAP. XIX. Of the Piss-bladder, or Bladder of Urine.
The situation and substance of the Bladder. Its Figure. Membranes. Its
perforations. Its parts and connection. Its Vessels. Its Use.

THE Bladder of Urine is seated at the bottom of the Belly, in that hollowness
that is formed of the Os sacrum, Hips and the Os pubis, between the Coats of
the Rim of the Belly; and is of a substance partly membranous, for strength,
extension and contraction; and partly fleshy, for motion; for by its fleshy
Fibers are its Membranes contracted: and these fleshy Fibers are wholly seated
in its middle Coat, which is truly muscular, as shall be showed by and by.

It is of a round globous figure, in shape like a Pear, having within it a
large cavity or hollowness, wherein to contain the Urine.

It is composed of a treble Coat or Skin. The first and outwardmost of which it
has derived to it from the Rim of the Belly, which Skin is very strong and
close. The innermost is thin, white and bright, of an exquisite sense, and is
interwoven with all sorts of Fibers, that it may the better bear enlarging and
drawing up together, as need requires. Within I have often found it covered
with a mucous crust, which I take to be an Excrement of the third concoction of
the Bladder, and to serve to defend it from being too much grated upon by the
acrimony of the Urine. The middle betwixt these two, is as thick or thicker
than them both, and is stuff with fleshy Fibers, even as the same Coat of the
Stomach and Womb are. Its Fibers run lengthways of the Bladder, and by
contracting of themselves squeeze out the Urine, forcing open the sphincter
Muscle that encompasseth the neck of the Bladder.

It has three perforations or holes, two on the hinder part a little below the
neck to let in the Urine from the Ureters, and one in the neck to let the Urine
out.

The parts of the Bladder are two, its bottom and its neck. The bottom is its
wider, more capacious part, and its neck, its narrower and more contracted. The
bottom is fast tied by a Membrane to the Intestinum rectum or Arse-gut, and to
the Aorta (a little before its division) by the Umbilical Arteries, so that no
violent motion can cause it to fall down upon its neck, which if it should
happen, would hinder the outgate of the Urine. The neck is narrower but longer
in Horses than in Mares, and in both it is fleshy, being encompassed with a
sphincter Muscle, which is woven with very many Fibers, some of which are
straight, and some overthwart, these last lying under the former. Now this
sphincter Muscle seems to be nothing else but the middle Coat of the Bladder
made thicker here than in any other part, by the accession of the circular or
overthwart Fibers. And its use is to purse up the neck of the Bladder so, as no
Urine can pass out, till by its quantity or sharpness it becomes so troublesome
to the Beast, as provokes him to force open the Sphincter by contracting the
Muscles of the Paunch, and the muscular Coat of the Bladder. If this Sphincter
happen to be overcooled, etc. the Horse loses its use, and so for want of it
his Water drops from him as fast as it comes into the Bladder.

Its Veins and Arteries proceed from the hypogastrick branches of the hollow
Vein and great Artery, and are implanted into its neck, on which, part of them
is spent, and the remainder runs through the bottom. Its Nerves come partly
from the Intercostals and partly from the Marrow of that Bone of the Back that
is called Os sacrum, that is next to the Crupper.

The use of the Bladder is to receive the Urine from the Kidneys by the
Ureters, and to contain it, like a Chamber Pot, till it is so full as to become
troublesome and uneasy to the Beast; for as soon as it becomes so, by the help
of the Muscles of the Belly and the middle muscular Coat of the Bladder it is
pressed out of it by pissing.

CHAP. XX. Of the Yard and Sheath.
The parts of the Yard. Its Nervous bodies. The Piss-pipe The Glans. The
Muscles. The Vessels. Its Use. The Sheath.

BEcause the Yard of stoned Horses besides its principal use which is to
copulate with the Mare, has also an inferior use, viz. to discharge the Urine
out of the Bladder; and because this latter is the sole use of it in Geldings,
we will here treat of it next to the Bladder, in respect to the office it
performs to it, and not defer it, as many Anatomists of Humane Bodies do, till
we have discoursed of the parts that prepare, make and retain the Seed, to
which it also ministers.

The Yard of an Horse lies hid for the most part within the Sheath, from which,
when it is drawn, it borrows its covering, consisting of the Scarf-skin and
true Skin, and the carnous Membrane, which are common to it with other parts of
the Body: Its Glans has a proper Membrane that invests it, as the Glans of a
Man's Yard has; and the whole consists of two Nervous bodies (which make up the
greatest part of its bulk) a Partition-skin that goes betwixt them, the Vrethra
or Piss-pipe, the Glans, four Muscles and the Vessels; of which in order.

The two Nervous bodies are encompassed with a thick, firm and white skin, but
their inner substance is very spongy and flaggy unless distended and filled
with blood and spirit, consisting for the greatest part of nothing but Vessels,
to wit, Veins, Arteries and Nervous threads, which are wonderfully interwoven
one with another. They arise from the lower part of the Share-bone at a small
distance one from the other, giving the Piss-pipe room to go betwixt them, but
in a little while they meet together, and so are extended one by the side of
the other the whole length of the Yard to the Glans, only a thin skin coming
betwixt them. At their rise they resemble the letter Y.

The Piss-pipe is seated betwixt these, or rather below them, and is of a
substance much like them. On its inside it is membranous and very sensible. It
is continued from the neck of the Bladder, and is much of an equal width
through its whole length. At its beginning where it is joined to the neck of
the Bladder it has a membranous valve, that permits the Urine to come out, but
hinders the Seed or any thing squirted into the Piss-pipe to go in, unless it
be forced open with a Probe or Catheter, or the like.

Before the ends of the Nervous bodies there is prefixed the Glans, which is
distinguishable from the rest of the Yard by a round circle like a Crown going
between them. This is of a more exquisite sense than the Nervous bodies, but of
not much an unlike substance, though some say it is glandulous. When the Yard
is drawn, it has no other covering, but one proper thin coat.

The Yard has two Muscles on each side at its root: The first pair are short
and thick, springing from the knob of the Hip-bone, and are inserted into the
Nervous bodies near their beginning: they are called Erectors, because they
help the Yard to stand. The second are longer and smaller, arising from the
sphincter Muscle of the Arse-hole, and passing along the sides of the Piss-pipe
end about the middle of it, serving to open or widen it for the freer passage
of the Seed and Urine, and are therefore called Dilaters.

Its Veins and Arteries spring from the Hypogastricks, and enter it at the
meeting of the Nervous bodies. Its Nerves come from the lowest Vertebral.

The principal and primary use of the Yard is for copulation, to convey the
Seed into the Womb of the Female: but the secondary, and to such Creatures as
are gelt, the only use of it, is to serve as a Tap to the Bladder, to let out
the Urine when it becomes troublesome; in which office the Vrethra or Piss-pipe
is chiefly concerned.

Except when the Yard is distended with blood and Spirits, (which is called its
erection or standing) it lies hid in its Repository, the Sheath, of which
little need to be said, seeing it is only a duplicature of the common
coverings of the Body, and consists only of the scarf and true Skin, and the
fleshy Membrane, which is here but thin. It seems to answer to the prepuce or
Foreskin in Men: for as that in some Men, when the Yard is erect, turns back
toward the root of the Penis and leaves the Glans wholly bare; so when a
Horse's Yard is drawn out to the full length, the Sheath is also drawn out or
unfolded, and appears to be knit to the Yard a little behind the Glans, even as
the prepuce is to a Man's Penis at the same place. I shall not need therefore
to speak any more of it.

Table VIII. Shows the descending Trunks of the hollow Vein and great Artery,
the Emulgents, Kidneys, Deputy-kidneys, Ureters, Bladder, Yard, preparing
Vessels, Stones, deferent Vessels, Seed-bladders and Prostates.
A Shows the descending Trunk of the hollow Vein. B The descending Trunk of
the great Artery. CC The emulgent Veins arising out of the hollow Vein. DD The
emulgent Arteries springing out of the great Artery. EE The Kidneys. FF The
Deputy-kidneys, otherwise called the black Choler Boxes. GGGG The Vreters. H
The Bladder. I The Bladder cut open that its inside may appear. K The neck of
the Bladder where it opens into the Piss-pipe of the Yard. kk The Ligaments of
the Bladder. L The Nervous bodies of the Yard divided from its back down to the
Piss-pipe. M The Urethra or Piss-pipe. m The end or thickest part of the Yard,
called its Glans. NNNN The Seed-preparing Veins. OO The Seed-preparing
Arteries. PP The Pyramidal bodies, otherwise called Corpora varicosa, or
Pampiniformia. Q The right Testicle with its inmost Coat on. R The left
Testicle divested of all its Coats. S The Epididymis or parastata of the left
Testicle. TT The deferent Vessels. UU The Seed-bladders. XX The Prostates.
anatomical view of a horse's kidneys, bladder, and surrounding organs and
vessels TAB VIII fol. 42.




CHAP. XXI. Of the Parts ministering to Generation in Horses, and First of the
Preparing, Spermatick or Seed-vessels.
The preparing Vessels. Their use.

HAVING showed the Parts appointed for and subservient to Chylification, and in
some measure to Nutrition and Sanguification, I come in the next place to speak
to those serving for Generation. And as the former, all except the Yard treated
of in the last Chapter, are common to and alike in both Male and Female; so
these latter differing considerably in the different Sexes, we must treat of
them apart: and shall begin with the Generative Parts of an Horse, and
afterward treat of those of a Mare.

The first in order are the preparing or spermatick Vessels, Arteries and
Veins. The Arteries carry blood and vital spirit to the Stones to make Seed of,
and the Veins bring back from thence so much of the blood as remains
superfluous or unfit for that purpose. The Arteries spring out of the
descending Trunk of the great Artery, almost two hands breadth below the
Emulgents, one on each side: and the Veins out of the like Trunk of the hollow
Vein, two on each side, a pretty deal higher up than the Arteries, as you may
observe in the foregoing Figure. The lest of these Veins in Humane Bodies
commonly springs from the left Emulgent Vein, (and is but one) the reason
whereof Anatomists give to be, lest, if it should have sprung from the Cava,
and thereby been necessitated to have marched over the great Artery, the return
of the blood from the Stones by it should have been hindered by the continual
beating of the Artery. But seeing Nature has not here made the like caution,
where there was as great need of it, I cannot tell whether that be any
satisfactory reason. Now these Arteries and Veins do at a little distance from
their beginning meet with one another on their respective sides, to wit the
right Artery with the right Veins, and the left with the left, and at their
meeting they acquire one common covering from the Rim of the belly, between
whose two Membranes they descend down the Loins, running over the Ureters, as
the figure shows. As they descend, they bestow little twigs upon the Rim of the
Belly, and the Veins do divide themselves into several, and by and by unite
again; but the Arteries pass along a great way by one Pipe only, though
variously twisted and interwoven with the Veins, with which yet they do no
where inosculate, or unite into one body, as was generally affirmed they did
before the circulation of the blood was found out. For till then it was
believed, that the Veins carried blood to the Stones, and the Arteries vital
Spirits, and that the Arteries opened into the Veins, and contrarily the Veins
into the Arteries, for the mixing the blood and vital spirits together, and
thereby preparing matter for the Stones to make Seed of. But since the
circulation of the blood was fully understood, and it became certain that blood
and spirit flowed to the Stones by the Arteries only; upon a strict enquiry
after these inosculations, they were no where to be found, nor is there any
thing like them, saving that both Veins and Arteries pass along in one common
Cover, which it is likely gave occasion to the mistake. When these Vessels are
arrived within little less than a quarter of a yard of the Stones, the Arteries
then begin to branch themselves into several, but the Veins into far more. And
both of them pass out of the Belly by the hole of the process of the Rim into
the Cod. The space betwixt where these Vessels begin so much to divide
themselves, and the Stones, is called the Pyramidal body, because from the
Stones upwards, it grows smaller and smaller like a Pyramid, as is represented
in the Figure. It is also called Corpus varicosum, because the Vessels so
divided make a thicker body; and lastly plexus pampiniformis, the tendril-like
plexus or interweaving, because the Veins and Arteries twine and clasp about
one another like the tendrils of Vines. Both of these Vessels enter the Stones
by several branches, but the Veins by a far greater number than the Arteries,
which was necessary, for that the blood flows very quick to the Stones by the
Arteries, but returns but slowly back again by the Veins, and therefore it was
convenient it should have more conducts or channels to run in.

The use of these Preparing Vessels may be sufficiently learned by what we have
already discoursed of them, by which it is also clear that the name of
Preparers belongs only properly to the Arteries that carry blood and spirits
to the Stones to nourish them and to make Seed of, and not at all to the Veins,
which only bring back that blood that is not converted to those uses.

As for the Nerves and Lympheducts that run with the aforesaid Vessels to the
Testicles, because the Testicles are the parts for which they are designed, and
they are only in their passage thither while they accompany these Veins and
Arteries, we shall say nothing further of them here, but shall show their
origin and use in the following Chapter.

CHAP. XXII. Of the Testicles or Stones, and the Parastatae or Attenders.
Their name. Their shape and substance. Their Vessels. Their Coats. Their
Muscles. Parastatae. The use of the Stones and Parastatae.

THE Testicles or Stones are called in Latin Testes, which otherwise signifies
Witnesses, because they witness the strength and courage of the Creature; or
perhaps rather, as some think, because no Man amongst the Romans was admitted
to be a Witness that had lost his Stones. They are always according to Nature
two, and therefore the Greeks call them by a word that signifies Twins.

They are of an oval figure, but somewhat flattish: and their substance has
been formerly held to be glandulous, as if they were only two great Kernels,
not differing from other Kernels in other parts of the Body saving in bigness
and use. But later Anatomists have discovered them to be of no such solid
substance as Glands are, but wholly to consist of Vessels that twist and twine
this way and that way, and are kept in their order close to one another by the
inmost Skin that clothes the Stones. When they are cut in two, they appear not
red, but of that color the Seed is of, because the blood as soon as it enters
them, begins to lose its color and nature, and to be turned into Seed. And
seeing I could never observe any blood in the Stones, it is likely that the
Veins reach no further than their Coats, seeing the Seed is not received into
the Veins, but into peculiar Vessels called Deferent or back-carrying, of which
in the next Chapter. I say, I believe the Veins only run through the Coats of
the Stones, and have the superfluous blood transmitted into them from the
Arteries, before ever they enter into the body of the Stones: And then those
Vessels that the Testicles consist of, will only be Arteries, run out into
very fine and almost innumerable threads, for the elaborating of the Seed.

If this notion of mine be true, then I may say that both Veins and Arteries
run through all the Coats wherewith the Testicles are invested, but that they
themselves have no Bloud-vessels but Arteries. And whether they have any other
sort of Vessel, is uncertain. It Is true there are both Nerves and Lympheducts
that come toward the Stones, as I observed in the foregoing Chapter; but I
question whether they reach any farther than their Coats any more than the
Veins. As for the Nerves, they spring from a Vertebral pair according to some,
from the Intercostal say others, and a third sort think from both. But be their
original where it will, I think they are mostly if not altogether spent upon
the suspending Muscles by which the Testicles are sustained, and upon the Coats
so often mentioned. So far am I from thinking with some, that these Nerves
contribute the greatest or any considerable share of matter for the making of
the Seed. The Lympheducts spring manifestly from amongst the Coats of the
Stones, and ascend up into the Belly by the same hole, by which the preparing
Vessels came down, running so far till they reach and empty themselves into the
common Receptacle of the Chyle, described above chap. 10. and 12.

The Testicles being sensible, tender and noble parts, are defended from the
external cold or other Injuries by several Coats, of which some are common to
them with other parts of the Body, and some proper to themselves only. The
common incompass both the Stones within one cavity, as in a Bag, and make that
which we call the Cod. And these are two. The outer of them is the Skin with
its Scarf-skin, and the inner the fleshy Membrane. The outer is not divided as
it is in Man, by a line that runs along the middle of it lengthways. The inner,
as it sticks pretty close to this on one side; so to the next proper one
somewhat loosely, by many membranous Fibers, on the other or inner side. The
proper are also two, though by some they are reckoned to be three. The outmost
is called Vaginalis, or the Sheath-like Coat, because the Stone is included in
it as in a Sheath. This is thick and strong; smooth on the inside, but rough on
the outside, by reason of many Fibers or Threads by which it is knit to the
inner of the common Coats. It is full of Veins, and is a production of the Rim
of the Belly: for as the preparing Vessels descend over the Share-bone into the
Cod, the Rim makes a Case for them for their defense and security, and reaches
with them down to the Stone, encompassing it as well as them. Into this Coat is
the Muscle inserted that suspends the Stone, (which we shall describe
presently.) Some make two Coats of this, the outmost of which retains the name
of sheath-like abovementioned; and the inner they call the red Coat, from its
color; but indeed this latter is nothing else but the foresaid Muscle
spreading it self broad and thin on the Sheath-like Coat. The last and inmost,
which immediately clothes the Stone, (being the second proper one) is called
the nervous, and otherwise the white, Membrane, being thick and strong, and of
a whitish color. It seems to arise from the outer Coat of the preparing
Vessels, and is rough on its inside next the Stone, but smooth and slippery on
its outside.

Each Stone is suspended or hangs by a Muscle called Cremaster, or the
suspender. These Muscles arise from the Ligament of the Share-bone, and
descending by the process of the Rim of the Belly (before spoken of) are
inserted into the Sheath-like Coat, which they strengthen, the better to
sustain the weight of the Stones; and in the act of Copulation are said to pull
up the Stones, and thereby to shorten the ways the Seed has to pass.

On the top or back as it were of each Stone there lies a longish, whitish and
somewhat round body, distinguishable very easily from them, though not of much
an unlike substance; only they are not so firm and compact as the Stones are.
They are named Parastatae or Attenders, because they wait as it were on the
Stones; and also Epididymidae, because they are placed upon the didymi or
Twins, by which name the Stones are otherwise called. They consist (as the
Stones do) wholly of Vessels running this way and that way, all which are
united into one Thread or Chord, which is continued into the deferent Vessel,
of which in the next Chapter.

From what has been already discoursed of these Parts, their use appears to be,
to make and elaborate the Seed, for the propagation of the kind. Now the Matter
out of which the Seed is made, seems to be only the Arterial blood, unless one
should admit some Animal spirits conveyed hither by the Nerves and mixed
therewith. But seeing any inosculations of the Nerves with the Arteries is a
thing not yet discovered either in these or any other parts, I incline to
believe that the Nerves only contribute sense to these parts, that the Animal
may have the greater pleasure in Copulation. A secondary use or rather effect
of the Stones, is to cause courage and generosity in the Horse; for we observe
that our Stoned Horses are generally much higher-spirited than Geldings.

CHAP. XXIII. Of the Deferent or Ejaculatory Vessels, the Seed-bladders and the
Prostates.
Deferent Vessels. Seed-bladders. Their use. The Prostates. Their seat, bigness
and shape. Their Vessels and Pores. Their use.

HAVING done with those Parts that prepare and elaborate the Seed, we come next
to those that are the Storehouses or Repositories of it, from whence it is
ejected in Copulation. And of these the first are the deferent or back-carrying
vessels, otherwise called Ejaculatory or squirting, because in those Animals
that have no Seed-bladders to store up the Seed in (such as Dogs and the like)
it does immediately squirt through these Vessels from the Stones in Copulation:
though in others that have Seed-bladders (as Horses have) it is continually
a-passing by these Vessels from the Stones to the Bladders by little and little
as it is prepared.

These deferent Vessels are two, one on each side; they begin at the smaller
end of the parastatae (described in the former chapter) and are indeed but a
continuation of them. They are whitish and pretty hard; not hollow like a Vein,
but more like a Nerve, for their cavity is hardly discernable, unless the
Seed-bladders be full of Seed, and so it regurgitate as it were into these
Vessels, as I have sometimes observed. As soon as they are arisen from the
Parastatae, they ascend straight out of the Cod into the Belly by the same
process of the Rim of the Belly by which the preparing Vessels descended. Being
entered the Belly, by and by they cross over the Ureters from the outside to the
inside of them, and taking a little compass they turn back again under the
Bladder till they arrive almost at its neck, (toward which they grow wider
than before) and there their sides open into the Seed-bladders, into which they
destill the Seed; notwithstanding themselves still keep on their course as far
as the Piss-pipe between the Prostates, but are grown much smaller before they
reach them. These Vessels serve as Conduit-pipes for the Seed to drill along
from the Stones to the seminal Bladders; and through their necks, that reach
from the Bladders to the Piss-pipe, does the Seed issue in the act of
generation.

The place where the Seed is stored up and preserved, is the Seed-bladders. Dr.
Wharton affirms that in an Horse they consist of two parts, of which one is a
mere membranous or skinny Bladder, the other glandulous. The Bladder, he says,
he has found six inches long and near three broad, although it was empty and
not opened; but it seemed capable of being stretched out to a greater length
and width, if it had been filled. If one opened the bottom of this Bladder, and
put a Probe into it, the Probe passed obliquely toward the Piss-pipe, and
entered into it through the same hole with the deferent Vessel of the same side.
The other part of these Bladders, which we called glandulous, was thicker, and
broader on that side which joined to the Piss-pipe; and where the deferent
Vessels were inserted, without descending toward the bottom, it grew thinner
and thinner like a wedge. The substance of this glandule was not much unlike to
that of the Stones, but of a more clayie color, and had holes within it so
apparent that they would admit an indifferent Probe: all which holes were
united into one common duct, namely before they reach the Vrethra. For putting
a Probe into any one of the said holes, it was driven easily and without any
let into that common passage. But the passage it self did not quite penetrate
the Piss-pipe, but was covered with the thin and spongie Membrane of the
Vrethra. Through this Membrane is the spermatick Matter strained in Copulation.
Thus far Dr. Wharton in his 30. chap. of the Glands. Now as for my self, I
could never observe so great a difference of one part of the seminal Bladders
from another, as that one should appear membranous and the other glandulous.
And I would not imagine that so skillful an Anatomist should mistake the
Prostates for a part of the said Bladders, though these are the only Parts
that to me appear glandulous thereabouts. All the Seed-bladders that I have
observed have been much of a like substance, though perhaps a little thicker in
one place than another: they are whitish and very strong, being within all full
of little Cells like Pomegranates. They have no communication the one with the
other; for as their bottoms or thicker ends bunch out a little on each side of
the Bladder (as you see in the Figure) so their smaller ends or mouths, that
are nearest to one another, do each of them open apart into the deferent Vessel
of their respective side, by whose neck they pour out their Seed in Copulation
into the Piss-pipe. The Seed comes into them out of the deferent Vessels, and
goes out of them again into the same Vessels, at one and the same passage or
orifice. Dr. Wharton says, that the seminal Matter contained in them differs
much from that which is made in the Stones: whence he concludes that the
Seed-bladders receive not the matter which they contain, from the Testicles by
the deferent Vessels, but do elaborate it in their own glandulous substance;
and he calls it Seed of a peculiar kind. For my own part I have not discovered
any difference, to speak of, betwixt this and that which I have sometimes seen
in the deferent Vessels, when the Bladders have been very full; nor is it
probable they can be of a different kind or nature, seeing there is that
manifest communication between the deferent Vessels and the Bladders, that
these latter seem to contain or receive nothing, but what the former bring into
them. Nor do I think that any Part does elaborate any Liquor that can with any
propriety be called Seed, except the Testicles contained in the Cod, whose sole
office and prerogative it is to make it.

The use of these Bladders (as has been said) is to receive the Seed from the
deferent Vessels, and to reserve it until the time of Copulation. Now the Seed
may (to satisfy the curiosity of the Ingenious Anatomist) be plainly seen, if
you take the Bladders in your hand and squeeze them with your finger; for by
such squeezing you shall force the seminal Matter into the Pipe of the Yard,
where you may by dissecting the Yard or opening that Pipe plainly see it. Or if
you think it too much to take that pains, you may by dissecting the Bladders
themselves see it; but then you lose the sight of one of the curious
contrivances of Nature, which is a little Caruncle or Kernel that is placed at
the mouth of the hole where the Seed distills into the Yard, which Caruncle is
by Nature placed there, to prevent the issuing forth of the Seed when there was
no need for it; for the continual gleeting of it, which would have happened but
for this Caruncle, would be extremely prejudicial to the Creature. This
Caruncle in Men being impaired or injured by the Venereal Distemper, or by
their overstraining themselves in the act of Copulation, is generally by
Physicians believed to be the cause of the running of the Reins. And this
Disease Horses are not exempted from, although it does not happen to them on
the like occasions as to men it does; for this Disease, which in Horses we call
the mattering of the Yard, happens to them upon their catching sudden colds
after hard riding; Likewise over-hard riding it self will bring it; and very
often it is caused by weakness occasioned by great poverty and the like.

In the next place we come to the Prostates, which are so called from their
standing before the Seed-bladders. They are Glandulous bodies, almost of the
same nature and substance as other Glandules of the Body. They are situated at
the root of the Yard above the sphincter Muscle of the Bladder, being in number
two, on each side of the neck of the Bladder one; their quantity about the
bigness of a small Burgamy Pear. They are of an oval figure, only somewhat
flat, and are covered with a very thick Coat to hinder the oily substance with
which they are well stored, from issuing forth.

They have Veins, Arteries, Nerves and Lympheducts; and besides, many Pores
that open into the Vrethra. In most Creatures, especially the lesser sort,
these Pores are scarcely discernible in an healthful state, but in an Horse
they are very plain, and open into the upper part of the Piss-pipe about an
inch distance from the insertion of the deferent Vessels into the same. Dr.
Wharton has told twelve such little holes, before each of which as they open
into the Piss-pipe, is placed a little Gland, about the bigness of a grain of
Mustard Seed, which serve to hinder the entrance of the Urine into these holes,
as it runs by them out of the Bladder.

The nature and use of the Liquor that is contained in these Prostates, and
that issues out of them into the Piss-pipe, is somewhat difficult to determine.
Some take them to be a kind of Testicles, and think that they make a sort of
Seed, which though it be not of so noble a nature as that which is made in the
Testicles contained in the Cod, yet is as necessary for generation: seeing such
Men as are cut for the Stone become incapable of generation, if the Stone be so
big and ragged as much to tear the Prostates in pulling of it out. But it is
likely, such barrenness happens not so much from the tearing of these, as that
the ends of the deferent Vessels are torn likewise, or it may be the
Seed-bladders also: and so when the Wound is healed up again, the sides of
these Vessels grow together, so that they can neither contain nor convey into
the Piss-pipe any Seed. It is probable therefore that this oily clammy Humor
that the Prostates discharge into the Piss-pipe, is of a nature far different
from that of Seed, even as themselves are bodies of a far other nature than the
Stones are. For, as was shown above, the Stones are wholly vascular, that is,
consist wholly of Vessels; whereas these are glandulous, or kernelly. So that I
believe this Humor serves only to make the Vrethra supple and slippery, and
to defend it from the acrimony or sharpness of the Urine.

And thus we have done with all the Parts that make or retain the Seed: as for
the Yard, which some treat of in this place, because it serves for injecting
the Seed into the Womb; we described the Parts thereof above chap. 20. next to
the Bladder, because it serves as well for making water as for Copulation, and
thither the Reader may please to turn back.

CHAP. XXIV. Of the Parts ministering to Generation in Mares, and First of the
Preparing Vessels, so called.
Preparing Vessels. 1. Arteries. 2. Veins. Their use.

IT was Galen's opinion, and from his authority, of many others, that the Parts
serving for generation in the Female differed not from those of the Male saving
in situation; the Male's Genitals being without the Body, and the Females
within. And this diversity of situation they attributed to defect of heat in
the Female, so that the Genitals could not be thrust out of the Body as in the
Male they are. But the truth is, they differ not only in situation, but in
number, bigness, figure, office and use, as will be apparent as well from the
description of them, as from their representation in the Figures.

The first in order are the preparing Vessels, Arteries and Veins. In these it
was till of late believed that the blood was prepared for the Stones the
readilier to be turned by them into Seed. But as when we treated above of the
preparing Vessels of the Horse, we showed that the Veins could not properly be
called preparing Vessels, because they carry nothing to the Stones, but bring
blood back again from them: so in Mares we cannot allow the name of preparers
or spermatick to be proper even to the Arteries themselves, seeing neither
Mares nor any other Females have any true Seed. For their Stones are but
improperly so called, being more truly Ovaries or Egg-beds, as we shall show by
and by in the next Chapter. However we shall retain the old name for
distinction's sake, and still call both Veins and Arteries preparing Vessels.

The preparing Arteries of the Horse we showed to be only two, one on each
side; but in the Mare there are several, three or more on each side. All of
them arise out of the great Artery, below the Emulgents, some higher, some
lower. They pass down along with the Veins of their respective sides, with
which they are very much interwoven, but no where open one into the other. Some
branches of them go to the Testicles, some to the Horns of the Womb, and some
to its Sheath.

The preparing Veins in the Horse were two of each side, though the Arteries
were but one; yet in the Mare where the Arteries are several, the Veins are but
one of each side. The reason whereof seems to be, That the Arteries in the Mare
being not so much intended for the nourishment of her Genitals as of the Foal
contained in her Womb, it was requisite there should be several Vessels for the
bringing the greater plenty of nourishing juice for it; all or the greatest
part of which being received by the Foal, there was not need of the like number
of Veins to carry back the blood that came along with it, that being very
inconsiderable for its quantity to what was imported by the Arteries. But now
all the blood brought by the preparing Arteries of the Horse, serving for no
other use but for the nourishment of the Genitals, and for the making of Seed:
As a less quantity of blood will suffice for these two uses, and so there is no
need of a plurality of Arteries; so the blood that is brought to the Genitals,
is but a very small part of it spent in performing these two offices, and
therefore more Veins were necessary to carry the surplusage back again, seeing
the motion of the blood in the Arteries is far quicker than of that in the
Veins. These two preparing Veins then arise out of the Cava a little below the
Emulgents, and neither of them from the Emulgent it self, any more than in the
Horse, though in Men and Women the Left generally springs from the left
Emulgent. They join in like manner with the Arteries as we showed above that
they did in Horses, and go to all those parts of the Genitals to which we just
now showed that the Arteries run.

When the Mare is not with Foal, the Arteries bring only blood for the
nourishment of the several Parts into which they are inserted: but when she is
with Foal, they bring besides the blood a nutritious juice, (which is Chyle,
impregnated with spirit, but not as yet perfectly changed into blood) for its
growth and nourishment, as we shall show more afterward when we come to speak
how the Foal is nourished in the Womb. And whether she be with Foal or not, the
Veins serve to carry back to the Cava and so to the Heart, the blood that is
superfluous.

CHAP. XXV. Of the Testicles or Stones in Mares, otherwise called Ovaries; and
of the Trumpets of the Womb.
The Testicles. Their situation. Bigness, and figure. Coat. Substance, and use.
The Trumpets of the Womb. Their substance, capacity and length. Their use.

THE Testicles in Mares do not agree in their description with those of Horses
in any one particular thing, nor should I call them by that name, if the
general mistake of so many Ages (in thinking the Female's Stones to have the
same office with those of the Male) had not made it necessary to retain that
appellation, if I would be understood by vulgar Readers of what part I am
treating. For it has been an old Opinion, that the Male and Female's Seed being
mixed in the Womb, does make the Conception; and there are many that will not
yet be beaten out of it. Whereas the Female has no Seed at all, but their
Testicles (so called) are as it were knots of Eggs, which being impregnated by
the Male's Seed, one or more at a time, do each make a Conception. But of this
more by and by.

The Mare's Testicles differ from the Horse's in these Particulars.

First, The Horse's Stones hang without the Body in the Cod, but the Mare's lie
within the cavity of the Belly, a little distance from the horns of the Womb,
to which they are knit by a strong Ligament.

Secondly, The Mare's Testicles are hardly half as big as the Horse's, nor are
they of the same shape, but more flat and thin, having no Parastatae upon them.
And besides, they are somewhat uneven in their surface, whereas those of an
Horse are smooth.

Thirdly, The Horses Testicles are covered with four Coats, two common, and two
proper; but the Mare's are clad only with one for about one half of them, and
the other half with two; the outer of which they have immediately from the
preparing Vessels that enter into them, but mediately from the Rim of the Belly.

Fourthly and lastly, They differ very much from one another in their substance
and use. For we showed above in chap. 22. that the Horse's Stones did wholly
consist of Seed vessels turned and rolled this way and that way: but the Mare's
consist principally of numerous Membranes and small Fibers loosely united to
one another; amongst which there are several little Bladders, about as big as a
Pease, some bigger, some less, that are full of a very clear and thin liquor.
Those that were of opinion that the Females made Seed as well as the Males,
thought that these Bladders that are chiefly in the surface of the Testicle,
answered to the Seed bladders in the Male, and that the humor contained in
them was true Seed. And whereas it might be objected that it is far more clear
and watery than the Male's Seed, they thought it sufficient to answer, that
that was from the colder and moister nature of the Female, that could not
concoct it to that consistency as the Male's is of. But the truth is, it is not
Seed; and if it were, there is no way whereby it could possibly arrive at the
Womb. For that which was reputed to be the deferent Vessel, appears to be
nothing else but a short and broad Ligament for fixing the Testicle in its
place; for it has no cavity at all, but is of a solid, firm and close
substance. These Bladders therefore must be concluded to be Eggs, answering to
those of Fowl and other Creatures: which will be the more manifest if you boil
them, for then, as those that have tried it do affirm, they will have the same
color, taste and consistency with the whites of Hens-eggs. Whence these
Testicles may more properly be called Ovaries or Egg-beds, whose Eggs are
nourished by the Bloud-vessels described in the foregoing Chapter; and when
upon Copulation one (or more) of them is made fruitful by the Male's Seed, it
separates from the rest, and being received by the mouth of the Trumpet of the
Womb, it descends by it into the Horn, and so to the bottom of the Womb, and
there becomes a Conception. And whereas it has been thought a strong argument
for the Female's having true Seed, and that these Testicles made it, in that
when they are cut out of the Body in Bitches, Hogs, or any other Creature, such
Creatures are always barren afterward; this new Opinion shows that there is no
strength or certainty at all in that argument. For granting, what is most
certainly true, that Females that are gelt or spay'd, have never any Young
after; yet it does not at all follow, that therefore their Stones make and
conserve Seed; but only that they contain something that is absolutely
necessary for generation and conception: but whether that be Seed or somewhat
else, is indifferent. And therefore that Argument will be as strong for the
Opinion that the Testicles are Ovaries, seeing without the Eggs it is so far
from possible that there should be a conception, that they are the very
conception it self.

Of the Bloud-vessels that run through the Testicles we treated in the
foregoing Chapter under the name of Preparing Vessels: As for their Nerves,
they spring from the Intercostal pair, and from the Nerves of Os sacrum.
Bartholin affirms that they have also Lympheducts.

There has not been greater dispute about the matter of the Conception, than
by what way any thing could go to the Womb or its Horns from the Testicles to
make it. Some have pretended to the discovery of Vessels or Pipes for
conveyance thereof, which others altogether as skillful Anatomists could find
no footsteps of. At last Fallopius assigned this office to two Ducts, which
from their shape he called Tubae or Trumpets; and from him (as being the first
Inventer of them, or at least the first that ascribed this use to them) they
are commonly known by the name of the Fallopian Trumpets. He says, they are
nervous and white, arising from the Horns of the Womb, where they are very
slender, but at a small distance from it they grow wider, bending this way and
that way, till near their end, where ceasing their winding they grow pretty
large, and seem somewhat carnous.] Their ends next the Testicles are torn and
jagged, and lie loose, being freed from the Membrane that sustains them the
greatest part of their length.

Their substance seems rather membranous than nervous, (as Fallopius would have
it.) And they consist of two Membranes; the inner is propagated from the inmost
Tunicle of the Womb, and the outer from the outmost of the same. Where they are
widest they will admit ones little finger, but toward the Horn of the Womb,
they are not so thick as an ordinary straw, but yet are pervious; and where
they open into the inside of the Horn, their Orifice looks like a little Teat.
As to their length, it is something difficult to determine it exactly, because
they run so to and again in their course; but I believe they are very near a
quarter of a yard long.

Their use is, both to serve as two Funnels whereby some subtle particles or
steams may issue from the Seed, that is injected by the Male into the Womb, to
the Testicles of the Female for the fecundating or making fruitful the Eggs
thereof, one or more, according to the different species of living Creatures;
(but it is very rare, that there is above one so impregnated in a Mare, seeing
it is so seldom that any brings forth twins:) and also when the Egg is
fecundated by this means, and growing ripe as it were, drops off or separates
from the Testicle, it is received by the jagged mouth of the Trumpet, along
which it passes till it arrive in the Horn of the Womb, into which (as was said
above) the Trumpet is inserted; and on this consideration the old name of
deferent Vessels may still be granted them, from their conducting the Eggs from
the Testicle to the Womb. Now seeing the wide ends of the Trumpets that first
receive the Eggs lie loose, and are not fastened to the Testicle, it is
probable that in Copulation these become turgid as well as all the other parts
of the Genital, and with their jagged mouths clasp hold upon the Testes (as a
Lamprey's mouth fastens upon a stone) and so convey to them a seminal air, and
afterward receive from them a fecundated Egg.

CHAP. XXVI. Of the Womb and its Horns.
The shape and parts of the Womb. Its situation. Ligaments. Substance. Vessels.
1. Arteries. 2. Veins. 3. Nerves. 4. Lympheducts. Its Horns. Its use.

THE Womb of a Mare is shaped much like the Greek Letter Y, in which the single
stroke that is straight, answers to the vagina or Sheath, which receives the
Horse's Yard in Copulation, and the two crooked strokes that turn one the one
way, and the other the other, are called Horns, because they in some sort
resemble them; and that part of the Sheath where the Horns begin to separate,
being somewhat wider than the rest, is the fundus or bottom of the Womb, where
the Foal lies. For though in Dogs, Rabbets, etc. that have many young ones at
one time, their burden is contained wholly in the Horns of the Womb, as well
as the Conception is first made there; yet in a Mare that commonly brings forth
but one at a time, it is otherwise; for there is little or nothing that belongs
to the Foal, contained in them, except some part of the Skins wherein the Foal
is covered while it is in the Womb.

The Womb is seated in the lowest part of the Lower Belly, in that wide Cavity
that is formed out of and environed with the Hip-bones, the Share-bone, and the
os sacrum. It is placed betwixt the Piss-bladder and the Arse-gut, and is
firmly tied in its place by two pair of Ligaments.

The first pair arise from the Rim of the Belly, being shorter by much than the
other, but broader, being for their shape resembled to Bat's wings. They are of
a membranous, loose and soft substance, and are inserted into the Horns of the
Womb, taking hold also of the Testicles, and tying them both fast to the
Hip-bones, from whence they spring.

The second pair of Ligaments spring from the bottom of the Womb, and are
called the round or worm-like Ligaments. They ascend on each side between the
two Coats of the Rim of the Belly, toward the Share-bone, over which they pass
slantingly, and then parting into many jags as it were, they end near the
clitoris. This also serves to fasten the Womb the more firmly in its place.

It is of a nervous or rather membranous substance, more compact and close in
Mares that are not with Foal, but more spongie in such as are. It consists of
two Membranes, and a certain fleshy or fibrous parenchyma or substance between,
unless one will make this a third Membrane. The outmost Membrane is borrowed
from the Rim of the Belly, and therefore is truly double as that is, though we
reckon it but for one. This is very strong. The inmost is not so strong nor
firm as it, but seems to be somewhat porous. The middle substance betwixt these
two is that which makes up the greatest part of its thickness at all times, but
particularly when the Mare is with Foal, it imbibes so much of the nutritious
Juice that flows plentifully hither at that time, that it is stuffed up to almost
an inch thickness.

Its Arteries are branches partly of the Preparing Arteries and partly of the
hypogastrick. These do inosculate or communicate by open mouths one with
another, but not so with the Veins. They run along the Womb bending and
winding, and not in a straight course, lest they should be broken when the Womb
is extended to that vast bulk as it is when the Mare is with Foal.

Its Veins spring also from the preparing and hypogastrick Veins, but are much
fewer in number than the Arteries. For Nature having formed these Parts not so
much for the benefit of the Individual, as for propagating the Kind; and the
Foal while it is in the Womb receiving no nourishment but what is brought to it
by the Arteries, it was necessary that they should be large and numerous for
conveying the greater plenty of it: but seeing the greatest part of that which
is brought by the Arteries is spent in the nourishment of the Young and the
Parts in which it is contained, a fewer number of Veins are sufficient to
convey back again what is not so spent. The Veins do inosculate with one
another like as the Arteries did.

It has Nerves from the Intercostal pair, and from the Nerves of os sacrum.

Some have also observed many Lympheducts creeping along its surface, which one
after another meeting into one, empty themselves into the common receptacle of
the Chyle and Lympha; and these Lympheducts some have mistaken for Milky-veins.

Thus much of the Womb properly so called: and what we have said hereof, may be
all applied to its Horns likewise as to their substance and vessels. As for
their figure, you may view it in the following Cut. These Horns are less in
Mares than in any other Creature that has them, in proportion to the bigness of
their Bodies. From their first rise from the Womb to their end, they grow by
degrees narrower and narrower, and about their middle are the Trumpets of the
Womb inserted into them. They have a worm-like or successive motion as the Guts
have, by which the Egg being received from the Trumpet is driven gently along
till it come to the bottom of the Womb in Mares, and there becomes a
Conception: but in such Creatures as bring forth many Young at one time, the
Conceptions stay in the Horns till they are come to maturity, and never descend
into the bottom of the Womb till they are about to be excluded.

By what has been said, it appears, that the use of the Womb is to receive the
Seed of the Male, from which Seed a certain air or spirit steams through the
Trumpets to the Testicles, where impregnating one or more Eggs, those that are
so impregnated, are conveyed by the Trumpets into the Horns, and by these into
the bottom of the Womb, where they become Conceptions, and stay (according to
Nature) so long till all their Parts are finished, and they are become perfect
Animals of their proper kind; and then the Womb being irritated by the motion
and bigness of the Young, does by the help of the Muscles of the Belly, and the
assistance of the Midriff exclude it. But having designed a particular
discourse of the generation of Animals to be annexed to this Treatise, we shall
pursue it no further here.

CHAP. XXVII. Of the Vagina or Sheath of the Womb, the Caruncles called
myrtiformes, (of the shape of Myrtle-berries) the Clitoris and the external
Privity.
The Vagina or Sheath. The myrtiform Caruncles. The Clitoris. The outward
Privity. The Lips. The Nymphs.

WE shall not need to enter upon the description of the Vessels running through
the Sheath of the Womb, they being wholly the same that are dispersed through
the Womb it self, and therefore the Reader may have recourse to the former
Chapter for them: nor is it necessary to speak much of its substance, that
being also much like to that of the Womb, though not so thick and strong, but
more soft, nervous and spongie. It is near half a yard long, being much of an
equal width from one end to the other, but very uneven and wrinkled in its
inner surface. Into its lower side (or that side next the Belly) a very little
distance from the external Privity, is the neck of the Bladder inserted;
opposite to which in its upper side it is strongly knit to the Sphincter Muscle
of the Arse-gut. There is no such neck to distinguish or separate the Sheath
from the bottom of the Womb, as Anatomists say there is in Women: but the
Sheath it self seems to be widened into what I call the bottom of the Womb.

Whether there be any such Membrane that goes cross the Vagina in Mares that
have never been covered, as Anatomists say there is in Maids, I never made any
careful examination, but believe there is none. But as for those Caruncles or
little kernelly knobs that are called myrtiformes, from their resembling the
Berries of the Myrtle in shape, they are to be found: yea they may be seen
without dissection, if one look near the Privity of a Mare when she is lustful
and desires the Horse; for as she opens the Orifice of the Vagina, one may
discern these Caruncles to strut out. They are said to be four in number, the
largest of which stands just at the mouth of the Water-passage, which it helps,
partly, to close up. Their use seems to be, by their roughness and unevenness
to cause the greater pleasure to the Horse in Copulation.

On the same side of the Vagina with the Bladder is placed a long spongie body
called Clitoris, but lies a great deal farther within the Vagina than it is
said to do in Women. For, that end of it which is next to the outward Privity
is seven or eight fingers breadth from it, whereas in Women it is described to
be within an inch. Those that would make the generative Parts of the Male and
Female exactly to resemble one the other, say that this body in the Female,
answers to the Yard in the Male. And indeed it is of not an unlike substance,
but is not the twentieth part so big. It is soft and spongie, but it is likely
when the Mare is lustful and desires the Horse, it plumps up and suffers a
sort of erection, being the principal seat of pleasure in the Mare. It has two
pair of Muscles belonging to it, as well as the Yard of the Horse. One pair is
round, and springs from the Hip-bones: The other from the Sphincter of the
Arsegut. Its Veins and Arteries spring from those that are called Pudendae (or
belonging to the Privity) and its Nerves, (which are pretty large, to make it
the more sensible) arise from the same origin with those that are dispersed
through the Sheath and Womb.

As to the outward Privity, the Labia or Lips are the first things that offer
themselves. Besides the common Coverings, to wit the Skin and fleshy Membrane,
they are stuffed with a little spongy Fat. They serve to cover the outer orifice
of the Sheath for comeliness sake, and to defend it from the cold, and Insects,
or other injuries. The closing of these two makes that which is called the
fissure or chink. If one draw the Lips a little aside, then appear the Nymphs,
so called because they stand next to the Urine as it spouts out from the
Bladder, and hinder it from wetting the Lips. They are two, on each side one,
just within the Lips, beginning at the jointing or middle of the Share-bone, at
the lower side of the Privity, from whence they ascend close by each other to a
little above half the breadth of the orifice of the Sheath, and end each in a
blunt corner. Their substance is partly fleshy and partly membranous; they are
soft and spongie and of a red color, having the same Vessels with the
Clitoris. Besides their use to keep off the Piss from wetting the Lips, they
serve, as well as the Lips, for closing up and covering the mouth of the
Vagina, at least so much of it as they reach unto.

And now we have done with all the Parts belonging to Generation, both in Male
and Female.

Table IX. Represents the Cava and Aorta, the Kidneys, etc. and all the
Generative parts of a Mare.
A Shows the hollow Vein. B The great Artery. CC The Emulgent Veins. DD The
Emulgent Arteries. EE The Kidneys. FF The Deputy-kidneys. GG The Vreters cut
off. HHH etc. The Spermatick Veins. II The Spermatick Arteries. ii The
Hypogastrick Veins. ^^ The Hypogastrick Arteries. KK The Testicles. LL The
Trumpets of the Womb. ll Their jagged Orifices. MM The broad Ligament that
sustains them, and also connects the Testicles to the Horns, and both to the
Hip-bones. NN The Horns of the Womb. OO The bottom of the Womb where the Foal
lies. PP The Sheath of the Womb. QQ The Sheath cut open that the q Clitoris may
appear. R The Bladder of Urine turned aside. S Its insertion into the Sheath
near its Orifice. TT The outward Orifice of the Sheath.
anatomical view of a mare's reproductive system TAB. IX. page. 57.




CHAP. XXVIII. How the Foal is nourished in the Womb; of the Membranes wherein
it is wrapped, and the Liquors contained in them; and lastly of the Navel-string.
How the Young is nourished. The first Opinion. The second Opinion. The third
and truest Opinion. The Membranes that the Foal is wrapped in. The Amnios. The
Chorion. Allantoides. The Navel-vessels. One Vein. Two Arteries. The Urachus.

HAVING described all the Parts in Mares that do any ways serve for generation,
and shown their several uses, I should put an end to this First Book, but that
it may be convenient to speak somewhat of the Young contained in the Womb, for
the conceiving and generating of which all these Parts were formed. But this I
shall not do largely in this place, but only summarily and in short, referring
the Reader for his fuller information and satisfaction to the Treatise of the
generation of Animals annexed to the latter end of this Volume; where by
observing in what order and by what degrees the conceptions in other Creatures
arrive to perfect Animals of their kind, he may by the rule of proportion
conceive how they proceed in Mares also.

Now before we come to speak of the Membranes that invest the Foal, etc. which
will be the subject of this Chapter, it will be necessary to premise something
concerning the ways or Vessels by which nourishment is conveyed to it, whereby
it grows from no bigger than a Be to so vast a bulk.

It is not long ago till when it was the general opinion, that the Young was
nourished by the Dam's Blood; namely, that the hypogastrick and some of the
spermatick Vessels of the Dam did inosculate with or open into the branches of
the umbilical or Navel-vessels of the Young, and so the blood run from one to
the other in a ready course. And this Opinion had so far prevailed, and was
taken for so certain a truth, that after the Young was excluded out of the
Womb, and must needs receive its nourishment by the mouth, they believed that
it was nourished by Blood still: For they thought that Milk was first Blood,
only it changed its color, and its taste partly, in the white Kernels of the
Dugs. This was a strange fancy, that Nature should thus do and undo, first
turn Chyle into Blood, and then turn that Blood again into a Liquor resembling
Chyle, and in truth differing very little from it. But this by the way. I say,
the Dam's Vessels were supposed to inosculate with the Navel-vessels of the
Young; whereby Blood was carried to it for its nourishment: but they never
troubled their heads about making it out how the Young should be nourished
before it had ever a Navel-vessel, or before ever the Conception adhered to any
part of the Womb. Now the Embryo or first draught (as I may call it) of the
Young is formed in all Creatures before the Navel-vessels, and it is grown to a
pretty bulk before they are so well perfected as to be capable of receiving any
Liquor into them. And when they are perfectly formed, and can perform their
office, whatever it be; in some Creatures, as particularly in a Sow, they never
reach further than the Chorion or outmost Membrane wherein the Pig is included,
and therefore have no contact or communication with those of the Sow, whose
Veins and Arteries reach no further than the inmost Membrane of the Womb. And
in the Creature we have now under consideration, namely a Mare, it is near six
months before the Chorion adhere to the inmost Membrane of the Womb, (which how
it does, we shall show by and by.) Now these observations plainly demonstrate
that the Young cannot be nourished by the Blood of the Dam, seeing there is no
way whereby the Blood can be conveyed to it, in any Creature for a considerable
time, and in some Creatures, at all.

Others sufficiently discovering the errors of this Opinion, and inclining to
believe that the Young in the Womb was nourished with the same Liquor while it
was there, as it is after it comes into the World, namely Chyle a little
refined, and not finding any other convenient ways (as they thought) whereby
the Chyle could be conveyed to the Womb, have fancied that they have found
Lacteal or Milky-vessels going thither directly either from the great Kernel at
the center of the Mesentery, or from the common receptacle of the Chyle it
self: but others that favor not this Opinion, suppose those Vessels that these
have fancied to be Lacteals, to be only Lympheducts, conveying the Lympha or
superfluous Water from the Womb to the common Receptacle, whither the Lympha of
all the other Parts contained in the Lower Belly is by the same Vessels
likewise discharged. So that though this Opinion be very plausible for its
inventing so ready a way for the Chyles coming to the Womb; yet it is very
probable that these supposed Milky-veins are nothing but Lympheducts, and then
the whole Supposition falls to the ground.

But yet though this second Opinion be mistaken in the Vessels that bring the
Liquor to the Womb whereby the Young is nourished, yet it seems to have hit
right on the Liquor it self. For as it cannot be Blood for the reasons I have
before given, so there is no other Liquor in the Body but Chyle, that is
capable of being turned into nourishment. For though they call that Juice, by
which Bodies come to maturity are nourished, (and also the Young in the Womb)
nutritious Juice, yet that name only denotes its office, and does not suppose
that a Liquor quite distinct in nature from Blood or Chyle is understood by
that denomination: but it does indeed partake of the nature both of the Blood
and Chyle; for it is Chyle a little exalted or impregnated with the spirit and
life of the Blood. Now this Juice arrives at the Womb by these ways. First the
Chyle ascending from the common Receptacle by the thoracick Duct to the right
Ventricle of the Heart, it is sent out from thence together with the Blood into
the Lungs, from whence they both return to the left ventricle of the Heart, out
of which they are ejected into the Aorta or great Artery, by which means the
Chyle runs confounded with the Blood into all the Parts of the Body; but when
the Dam is with Young we may conceive that a greater quantity of it may tend
toward the Womb than to other parts: even as it is probable that more wheyish
or watery Humor accompanies that Blood that flows by the Emulgent Arteries to
the Kidneys, than that which flows to other Parts, because Nature has appointed
the Kidneys for the separating of it from the Blood. I say it is also likely
that more Chyle descends to the Womb by the spermatick and hypogastrick
Arteries than to any other part, because a great quantity of it is to be
separated from the Blood here for the nourishment of the Young. Now these
Arteries, as all others in the Body, do divide themselves so often, till they
end in very small capillary or hair-like threads, which terminate in the inmost
Membrane of the Table X. Shows the Foetus or Young lying covered in the Womb;
the Stomach, Guts, etc. being removed.
AA etc. The body of the Matrix. BB The Horn of the Womb on the left side. DDD
The Liver. E The Bladder. FF The Ligaments of the Bladder. GG The Vreters. HH
The Iliack Vessels. II The Hypogastrick Vessels. MM The Share-bone cut asunder.
N The Privity or Vulva. O The Dock. PP The Midriff. Q The neck of the Bladder
joined with the sheath of the Matrix. SS The Vessels called pudendae, dispersed
into and about the Lips of the Privity.
anatomical view of a horse's womb TAB. X. page 60.


Womb. But all the branches of these Arteries about the Womb are much larger
when the Female is with Young than at other times, which is an argument that
nourishment is indeed brought by them. The greatest difficulty is, how it can
be discharged out of the Arteries into the Womb, and no Blood go along with it.
To solve this difficulty we must consider, that the Particles of several
Liquors are of different figures, as suppose some round, some cornered, etc.
Now we know that if two bodies of the same bulk be one round, and another
foursquare, the round will go through a hole which the foursquare body will
not, and on the contrary the foursquare body will pass through a hole that the
round will not; accordingly as the hole is round or foursquare. And this may be
the reason that the Chyle can pass out of the small ends of the Arteries, and
yet the Blood cannot accompany it, but must return back by the Veins. And
besides the difference of figure, it is probable the Particles of that Chyle
that ouzes into the Womb, are of much smaller bulk than those of the Blood,
seeing it is a much thinner and watery body; and therefore may as easily be
separated from the Blood into the Womb, as the Urine is by the Kidneys into the
Ureters. And to further and assist this separation some do believe there is a
certain fermentation in the Womb, even as there is in other Parts of the Body,
where other Juices are separated from the Blood, as Choler in the Liver, and
according to some, Urine in the Kidneys. But be the separation by what means it
will, that there is such a thing is most certain, and how the Young comes to
partake of it for its nourishment we shall next show.

While it was believed that a Conception was made of the Male and Female's Seed
mixed together, it was somewhat difficult to imagine how such a fluid substance
should so speedily acquire so compact Membranes to include it, as we see it has
in a few days. But now that it is believed that a Conception is nothing else
but an Egg dropped off from the Testicle and received into the Womb, that
difficulty vanishes, for those Membranes do originally invest the Egg, even as
we see the like Membranes lie under the shells of the Eggs of Fowls, and
encompassing the whole. These Membranes are at the first but two, called Amnios
and Chorion; but after a while there is a third commonly called Allantoides, or
the Pudding-like Membrane.

That Membrane or Skin that immediately infolds the Young is called Amnios. It
is very thin, smooth and clear, and in it is contained that Liquor out of which
the Young is first formed, and by which it is afterward nourished. That Liquor
out of which the Young is formed, is originally in it, even while the
Conception is under the form of an Egg: but that by which the Young is
nourished and its Parts increased, sweats into this Membrane immediately out of
the Chorion or outmost Membrane for the first months, till the Navel-string is
perfected, and that there grows a new Membrane betwixt these two, that contains
a peculiar sort of Liquor, as we shall show by and by. But the Juice that is in
the Amnios from first to last (except that out of which the Embryo is formed)
is Chyle, which at first sweats into it out of the Chorion, and afterward is
conveyed into it by the umbilical Arteries of the Young, who first received it
by its umbilical Veins. For these Arteries send many branches into the Amnios,
which discharge themselves into it, even as the hypogastrick and spermatick
Arteries do into the Womb. Now this Liquor that is thus collected in this
inmost Membrane, does at first nourish the Embryo or first rudiments of the
Young by apposition, that is, those rudiments do attract to themselves such
particles of the Liquor as are suitable for them; and thereby their bulk comes
to be increased by degrees: but as soon as the Young has its Mouth and Stomach
perfected, it then sucks it up and drinks it in by its Mouth, and it passes by
the same ways to the Heart as it does after the birth.

The second Membrane, that is originally in the Egg, and that invests the Young
from first to last, is called the Chorion. This is somewhat thicker than the
Amnios; it is smooth on its inside, but rough and unequal on its outside. This
Membrane drinks up that nutritious Juice that is emptied into the Womb from the
hypogastrick and spermatick Arteries, which Juice is again filtred as it were
out of it into the Amnios for the nourishment of the Young. For the Liquor
contained in this Membrane is altogether the same with that of the Amnios. Now
this Membrane for several months (five or six) adheres not to the Womb in any
part, but the Young that is clad with it, lies as loose in the Womb, as a
Bladder in a Football that is not at all tied to the leather. (Thus I say it
is in a Mare, though in most other Creatures this Membrane begin much sooner to
be fastened to the Womb.) But at length first of all there begin to grow in the
surface of it certain reddish specks or caruncles no bigger than a Vetch, and
at the same time the Membrane grows thicker, and there appear innumerable
Vessels in it. And these Caruncles as they become more in number, so they grow
broader in dimension, insomuch as at last they are spread all over the Chorion,
so that on its outside it seems to have lost the nature of a Membrane, and to
have become a placenta or Womb-cake. At the same time that these Caruncles grow
thus on this Membrane, the Navel-string penetrating the Amnios is inserted into
it, and those numerous Vessels that are seen in the Chorion, are only branches
of the Navel-arteries and Veins dispersed through it. And now the Chorion by
means of the Caruncles that grow upon it, adheres to the inner Membrane of the
Womb, from whence the Navel-veins imbibe nutritious Juice and carry it to the
Young for its sustenance, (as shall be further showed presently, when we come
to speak of the Navel-string.) But the Caruncles do not stick so fast to the
Womb, but that they may be separated without tearing, much less are there any
Anastomoses or Inosculations of the Vessels that run through the Chorion with
the hypogastrick or spermatick Vessels of the Dam, as the Ancients believed.
Nor is there in a Mare any of those Glandules that are commonly called
Cotyledons or Sawcers, sticking to the inner Membrane of the Womb, into which
the Caruncles of the Chorion are inserted, like an Acorn into its cup, such as
are in Sheep and Goats: but the so often mentioned Caruncles stick immediately
to the Membrane it self, and seem to serve as Sponges to imbibe the nutritious
Juice that plentifully bedews it; which having done, the said Juice is sucked up
by the mouths of the Navel-vein, as was said before. Part of this Membrane does
on each side bag out into the Horns of the Womb.

As soon as the Navel-string has penetrated the Amnios, there begins to appear
a third Membrane betwixt these two already described, which contains a Liquor
wholly different from what swims in them; for that we have shown to be Chyle,
but this is the Urine of the Young, which, while the Young is in the Womb, is
not emptied out of the Bladder the common way, but there is a Pipe called
Vrachus that passes from the bottom of the Bladder out at its Navel, and
empties the Urine into this Membrane, in which it is collected to the quantity
of many quarts. This Membrane is called Allantoides or Pudding-like, because in
many Creatures, as Cows, Sheep, etc. it is of that shape, and seems to be only
the Vrachus a little widened. But it is of another figure in Mares (as it is
also in Women) and is of the same dimension with the other two already
described, incompassing the whole Young. It is more dense than they, and may be
easily distinguished from them by this, that they are full of Vessels, but this
has not one, that one can discern. Although this Membrane appear not till the
time aforesaid, yet it is like it was originally in the Egg; and at its
appearance the Chorion becomes empty, because there is now no longer passage of
any thing out of the Chorion into the Amnios, by reason of this Membrane and
its Liquor interposing. Whence the Chorion claps pretty close to the
Allantoides, so that they cannot be easily separated. In the Liquor contained
in the Allantoides there swim several gobbets that look like as if they were
fleshy, but being pulled to pieces they appear skinny. They are supposed to be
concretions of some part of the nutritious Juice that may come along with the
Urine into this Membrane, wherein by its long stay it curdles into these kind
of bodies. But there is one more notable one, that is said to grow on the
Forehead of the Colt, of the shape of a Tongue, and is called hippomanes,
which, Tradition says, the Mare is wont to eat as soon as she has foal'd; which
if she do not, she will never care for her Foal. This they were wont to dry and
powder, and to put into drink for a Love-potion, as if there were some witchery
in it. But such things I can say nothing to, having never experimented them.
This Membrane sticking pretty close to the Chorion, bags out on each side into
the Horns of the Womb as well as it. The Liquor contained in it, is Urine, as
was said above, which daily increases in quantity, being imported into it by
the Vrachus from the Bladder of the Foal.

Table XI. Shows the Belly of the Foetus opened, the better to show the
Umbilical Vessels; as also two of the Membranes laid open, in which the Foetus
is included in the Womb, with the Veins and Arteries branching into them.
AA The Liver. B The Sternum or Breast Bone. CCC The Gut Colon. D The Bladder
of Urine. E The Urachus cut off short, because the Allantoides, into which it
is inserted, is not expressed. FF The Vmbilical Vein. GG The Vmbilical
Arteries. HHH etc. The Membrane Amnios. II etc. The Membrane called Chorion,
with the branches of the Vmbilical Veins and Arteries dispersed through it. MM
etc. The like branches running through the Amnios. S The Caruncle called
Hippomanes, which is said to grow on the Foal's Forehead, but is indeed found
in the middle Membrane called Allantoides.
anatomical view the interior of a horse foetus' belly and its umbilical
vessels TAB. XI. page 63.




Lastly, We are come to the Vessels that make up the Navel-string, and those
are four, one Vein, two Arteries, and the Vrachus. These are all infolded in a
common Coat, and are wreathed one about another like a Rope. The greatest part
of its length is contained in the Amnios, the rest in the Allantoides; for as
soon as it has penetrated that, it is immediately and directly implanted into
the Chorion.

The Vein is as big as both the Arteries, and arises out of the hollow or lower
side of the Liver of the Young, and coming out single with the rest at the
Navel, is immediately divided into two, which as they pass through the Amnios,
send some twigs to it, and from thence continue their march through the
Allantoides to the Chorion, in which and the Caruncles that grow upon it they
terminate, being divided into innumerable branches. Its use is to imbibe the
nutritious Juice and also the Blood that is superfluous to the nourishing of
these Parts, and to convey them to the Young.

The Arteries being two, do arise on each side from the inner Iliacal Branches
of the great Artery, (as is commonly held, but I have always observed them to
spring from the Aorta it self before the division) and ascending by the sides
of the Bladder, they meet the Vein at the Navel, and there begin to be wreathed
with it. Their march and insertions are the same with those of the Vein, only
they send more twigs into the Amnios than the Vein does. Their use is to carry
vital heat and nourishment to the Parts that include the Young, to wit to the
Amnios, Chorion and its Caruncles: and besides, its branches that are dispersed
through the Amnios do distill into it some of that nutritious Juice which could
not be turned into Blood by once circulating through the Heart of the Young.
Which Juice being collected in the cavity of the Amnios, is drunk in by the
Young at its mouth, and so passes the same ways as it does after the birth.

The fourth Vessel included in the Navel-rope is called Vrachus, from its
office of conveying the Urine. It springs from the bottom of the Bladder, and
passing out of the Navel with the Vein and Arteries, as soon as it has pierced
the Amnios it opens it self with a full mouth into the cavity of the
Allantoides, serving as a Pipe to rack the Urine as it were out of the Bladder
of the Young into this Membrane. For though the Young void no Excrements at the
Fundament, while it is in the Womb, nor has any Repository or Storehouse for
them saving its own Guts, (amongst which the Gut Caecum seems fittest for that
office:) yet seeing it is nourished altogether with Liquor that has a good
quantity of wheyish humor mixed with it for its better conveyance through
those narrow ways by which it is to pass, I say for this reason it is necessary
there should be some particular Repository for it, seeing it cannot return to
the Dam again, and the Bladder of the Young is not capable of containing a
fifth (may be a tenth) part of it; and this Repository is the Membrane
Allantoides, into which it is poured out of the Bladder by the Vrachus.

These four Vessels after they come out of the Navel are included in one common
Coat, which consists of a double Membrane, borrowed from the Rim of the Belly
the inner of them, and the outer from the fleshy Membrane or Pannicle described
above chap. 4. After the birth of the Foal, these Vessels losing their original
use, the two Arteries serve for Ligaments to keep the Bladder in its place, and
the Vein performs the same office to the Liver; but the Vrachus quite
disappears.

And thus much of the Membranes and Navel-vessels, that are included in the
Womb when the Mare is with Foal; and which at the Foaling make the Afterbirth
or Cleaning as we call it: We might in this place further show, what Parts of
the Foal are first formed, and which soonest perfected; also in what
particulars a Foal in the Womb differs from it self when foaled; and lastly we
might have been more full in showing how it is nourished in the Womb: but the
discoursing of these things we purposely wave in this place, and refer the
Reader to the Discourse of the generation of Animals annexed to this Treatise
of Anatomy, wherein we will endeavor to satisfy his curiosity to the uttermost.

Table XII. Shows the Foal taken out of the Matrix, both wrapped in the Membranes
with which it was covered, and also quite cleared of them; and lastly, the said
Membranes cut open, the Foal as yet remaining in them.
Fig. I. Shows the Foetus taken out of the Matrix, remaining in the same
posture as in the Womb, and wrapped in its Membranes.

AA The Membranes. CC The hinder Legs of the Foal.
Fig. II. Shows the Foetus cleared of the Membranes, but continuing in the same
posture.

BBB The Body of the Foal. SS The common covering of the Vmbilical Vessels
turned back, that the four Vessels contained in it may appear. TT The Vmbilical
Arteries. U The Vmbilical Vein. X The Urachus.
Fig III. Shows the Foal, and two of its Membranes, as represented by Dr. Walt.
Needham.

A The Foal lying within the Membranes. B The Navel-rope whose production E
passes through the cavity of the urinary Membrane toward the Chorion. CCC The
Amnios. DDDD The place of the Chorion which naturally grows to the urinary
Membrane, but is here removed, that the Foetus may appear through the Amnios
and urinary Membrane. E The production of the Rope which at this place is
divided into two, and so is cut off with the Chorion. F The place in the
Navel-rope, where the exit of the Urachus is designed, between two blots. Which
Urachus is not indeed a part of the Membrane GG or Vrinary, but of CC or
Amnios, and seems a duplicature of it turned back even to the Bladder. GGG The
urinary Membrane, (which here is not Allantoides, or of the shape of a Pudding)
investing the whole Foetus as well as the Amnios; which is common to it with a
Man, Dog, Cat, Coney, and perhaps others that have Womb-cakes; although they
differ from one another in several circumstances. HH The progress of this
Membrane as also of the Chorion into the Horns of the Womb. Whereas all the
whole Foetus besides, etc. lies in the bottom of the Womb, as a Child does in a
Woman's. aaaa The Bloud-vessels dispersed from the Rope into the Amnios, which
the urinary Membrane wants wholly; for the rest of the Rope is all spent on the
Chorion, and is cut off with it.
anatomical view of foal within and outside its womb membranes TAB. XII. page
64.
Fig. 1.


Fig. 2.


Fig. 3.






CHAP. XXIX. Of the Vdder.
Its substance. Number. Its Glands. The Paps. The Vessels belonging to the
Vdder. The milk-pipes. The use of the Vdder.

THOUGH the Udder be an external Part of the Lower Belly, yet we have deferred
the description of it till this place, because of the dependence that it has
upon the Womb, and its office of yielding the same nourishment to the Foal when
it is excluded out of the Womb, as it was nourished by while it remained in it.

It is seated at the bottom of the Paunch upon the lower ends of the straight
Muscles; very small, if compared to the bigness of a Mare's Body, and to its
bulk in many other Creatures. When the Mare gives no suck, it almost disappears.

It consists of the common coverings, Fat, a multitude of Vessels, Glands or
Kernels, and Pipes to convey the Milk to the Paps that is separated from the
Vessels in the Glands.

Now though when the Mare gives suck it seems to be but one roundish body, like
a Breast with two Nipples, yet it truly consists of two bodies, one being
joined to the other only by contiguity, for they have each their proper
Vessels, Pipes and Pap; and do indeed appear to the eye to be distinct when the
Mare is neither with Foal nor suckles one.

The greatest part of its bulk consists of Glands, which are many in number,
though they be so united to one another as to appear one continued body to an
unwary observer, which they come to do from that Fat that fills up the spaces
between them, and is much of the same color with the Glands. There is one
Gland greater than the rest seated at the root of each Pap. By means of these
Glands it is that the Milk is separated from the Blood, as shall be further
shown by and by.

The Paps are round in shape and of a spongie substance, clothed with a
thinner Skin than the rest of the Udder. At their head or end they have many
little holes through which the Milk issues when the Foal sucks.

The Udder has all sorts of Vessels, Veins, Arteries, Nerves and Lympheducts;
and besides these it has peculiar Pipes for containing and conveying the Milk.
The Veins and Arteries are branches of the Hypogastricks, which proceed from
the internal Iliack branches of the Cava and Aorta: it is likely there come some
twigs to it also from the external branches, which are called the Epigastrick
Vessels. Its Nerves I have not examined, but it is very probable they are the
same with those dispersed into the Matrix and Sheath, which are twigs of the
Intercostal pair and of some of the Os sacrum. Its Lympheducts are pretty
numerous, and tend, as all those of the Lower Belly do, to the common
Receptacle of the Chyle at the center of the Mesentery.

It has also a peculiar sort of Vessels, which may be called Milk-pipes, being
the Repositories or Storehouses of the Milk. At the root of each Pap they are
but one on each side, but a great many smaller ones coming from every part of
the Udder discharge themselves into this one, when the Pap is sucked by the
Foal. But the Pipes belonging to one Pap have no communication with those that
belong to the other, but in respect of these Vessels the two sides of the Udder
are as distinct Parts, as the Breasts of a Woman are distinct one from another,
as was noted before. These Pipes have been mistaken by some to be true
Milky-veins, as if some of the Milky-veins of the Mesentery reached hither. But
seeing there are no footsteps of them in the track betwixt the Mesentery and
Udder, we may well deny them to be found in the Udder it self.

The use of the Udder is to prepare and separate the Milk for the nourishment
of the Foal, which it does in this manner. The Chyle of the Mare being mixed
with her Blood in the Heart, flows from thence along with it by the Arteries
into all Parts of the Body in the circulation, but most plentifully ('it is
probable) toward the Udder, even as it does to the Womb while the Mare is with
Foal. The Arteries that convey it immediately to the Udder are the hypogastrick
Branches, which terminating in its Glands do squirt or strain the Chyle through
them into the Milk-pipes. And as for the Blood that was mixed with the Chyle in
the Arteries, that being of a thicker body, or consisting of Particles of
another form, cannot enter the narrow pores of the Glands, and therefore is
received by the small mouths of the Veins that are likewise inserted into them.
So that it appears to be an erroneous Opinion, That Milk is made of Blood, if
we speak of Blood properly so called; yet seeing the Chyle, when it is
confusedly jumbled with the Blood in the Arteries, is not easily
distinguishable from it, but the whole Mass seems to be homogeneal or of the
same nature, in a large and less proper sense we may affirm it to be so made.
After that the Chyle is thus separated by the Glands, it drills along the
Milk-pipes, out of the smaller into the larger, in which it is reserved for the
use of the Foal.

The End of the First Book.
THE ANATOMY OF AN HORSE. BOOK II. Of the Middle Venture, or Chest.
CHAP. I. Of the investing and circumscribing Parts of the Chest.
By what parts the Thorax is bounded. Its common investing Parts. Its proper
containing Parts. Its contained Parts.

HAVING finished the First Book, wherein I have absolved or explained all the
Natural Parts contained within the Lower Venture, as well nutritive as
generative, and annexed a Discourse of the Foal in the Matrix or Womb; order of
dissection requires that in the next place I come to treat of the Middle
Venture, the Thorax or Chest, and the Vital Parts contained therein.

Where, in this one step higher that I have climbed, I am methinks much
delighted to see, how Nature in this place disports her self, having as in a
curious Cabinet locked up, as it were, her most exquisite pieces of Workmanship,
the Vital Instruments, by whose motion the life of the Creature is continued.
Which motion is performed by so just a counterpoise, as no art of Man could
ever with all their contrivances be able in the least to imitate. Nay
Aristotle, that wise Philosopher, who was in his time thought to be the nearest
of counsel to Nature, was not able (notwithstanding his incomparable sagacity)
to find out the true cause of the Vital motion, any more than he was, to find
out the reciprocal Ebbing and Flowing of the Sea.

The Place wherein these Instruments are contained, is called the Thorax or
Chest, which is composed of or environed with these Parts following.

First it is bounded or circumscribed, above, by the Coller-bones, and below by
the Diaphragm or Midriff; on the forepart by the Breast Bone, and on the
hinder part by the Spondyls or Back-bones; and on the two sides by the true and
bastard Ribs and Intercostal Muscles. All which Parts are framed and composed
by Nature for the benefit of the Creature, as well for the defense of the
contained Parts from external Injuries, as for the use of Respiration or
breathing: both which are very needful; for without them the Creature cannot
be preserved. Now that it might serve for these ends, it was necessary it
should consist of sundry Parts; for should it have been made all bony, it could
not have been contracted and dilated as occasion served, whereby the Lungs
could not have had the liberty to play as now they have: And if it had been
wholly fleshy, then would not the contained Parts have been sufficiently
fenced. It is therefore made partly bony, partly gristly, and partly fleshy,
that it might the better perform both the offices aforesaid.

In the next place I come to speak particularly to the Investing Parts of the
Chest, some of which are Common, and others Proper.

The Common investing or containing Parts are the same as the Lower Belly has,
namely the Scarf-skin, the true Skin, the fleshy Pannicle, the Fat, and the
common Membrane of the Muscles. Of all which having discoursed at large in the
First Book, we shall say nothing of them here.

The Proper containing Parts of the Chest are the Muscles, the Bones, the
Pleura or Membrane that clothes its inside, the Midriff and the Mediastinum,
which is the Skin that goes across from the Breast to the Back, and parts the
Lungs, called by some, the Partition Wall.

The contained or invested Parts, are the Heart with the Heart-bag called the
Pericardium, and by some the Purse of the Heart, the Lungs and part of the
Weazand or Windpipe, by Anatomists called Aspera Arteria, or Rough-artery, and
several Vessels, with the Trunks of Vena cava and Arteria magna, whose
ascending branches are underpropped by the Thymus, or Kernel in the Throat.

CHAP. II. Of the Muscles of the Middle Venture or Chest, called the Intercostal
Muscles.
Intercostal Muscles why so called. The External. The Internal. Their number.
Their action.

THERE are several pairs of Muscles that lie upon the Chest on the outside of
the Ribs; but because one may easily enough cut open the Chest for examining
the Parts contained in it, without defacing any part of those Muscles, we shall
omit to speak of them in this place, referring the Reader to the Book of the
Muscles; and here only describe the Intercostal, which in laying open the
Breast, whiles one breaks the gristly ends of the Ribs, happen part of them to
be defaced.

These Muscles are called Intercostal from their being placed between the Ribs,
and filling up the spaces between them. Betwixt every two Ribs there are placed
two of these Muscles, the one lying upon the other; the uppermost being called
the External, and the undermost the Internal one.

The External one takes his rise from the lower part of the upper Ribs, and
ends in the upper part of the lower.

The Internal takes his rise contrary to the former; for it arises or takes its
original from the upper part of the lower Rib, and ends in the lower part of
the upper.

Now it is to be understood that those are called the upper Ribs that are next
to the Head, and those the lower, that are next to the Paunch.

And as these Muscles do differ as to their original and insertion, so likewise
in the course of their Fibers; for although they be both furnished with oblique
or slanting Fibers, yet they run contrary ways, crossing one the other, and
making as it were a St. Andrew's Cross, or the letter X.

These Muscles are in number sixty four, that is to say on each side thirty
two, there being on each side of the Horse seventeen Ribs, and between every
Rib two Muscles, as I have before intimated.

Now the action of these Muscles is to assist Respiration by widening, and
contracting the Chest. First the external ones serve to raise the Ribs and draw
them backward, whereby the Cavity of the Chest is enlarged, and thereby free
room made for the Air to enter into the Lungs in Inspiration, or taking in the
breath. And on the contrary the internal pull in the Ribs by drawing them
slanting downwards toward the Breast Bone, whereby the Chest is straightened, and
thereby the Air, wherewith the Lungs are puffed up, expelled, which action is
called Expiration, or breathing forth. But these Muscles are not of themselves
alone sufficient for these actions, but they assist toward them, being aided
by the other that lie upon the Chest, by the Midriff, and by the Lungs
themselves.

CHAP. III. Of the Pleura, or Coat which invests or lines the Ribs on the
Inside.
The original of the Pleura or Rib-skin. Its Perforations. Its Vessels. Its use.

THIS Coat or Skin called the Pleura, is the Skin which covers all the Ribs
on the inside of the Chest, being of the same nature and use here, as the
Peritonaeum or Rim of the Belly is in the Lower Belly. It is also of the same
substance as the Rim of the Belly is, but much stronger and thicker, though
Riolanus affirms the contrary as to Men.

It is as it were of a middle nature or temper, that is, neither too hard nor
too soft; not too hard, lest it should not reach and yield in the act of
Respiration, and so hinder the motion of the Chest; neither too soft, lest the
motion of the Chest should violate it: but it is rather hard than soft, the
better to defend the Vital Parts.

It is believed to take its original from the Coats of the Nerves of the Spinal
Marrow, which come out of the Back-bones (or vertebrae of the Back) into the
Chest, and is therefore thought to be continued with the Coats of the Brain:
wherefore it is observed to be thicker upon the back part of the Chest than any
where else, where it sticks so close to the Backbones, that it can hardly be
separated.

It is all over double, that the Intercostal-vessels might run without danger
between its Membranes, and by it be preserved from the hardness of the Ribs,
which would be apt to violate or break them.

The outward Skin of this Coat, namely that which is next to the Cavity of the
Chest, is harder and thicker; and the inward (which is fastened to the Ribs) is
softer and thinner. Now between these two Skins is bred that mortal Disease (in
Men) called the Pleurisy, by which the never to be forgotten Doctor Willis,
(for being in his time the honor of his University and Country) was
notwithstanding the great pains he took in the inquiry into and finding out
remedies against this Disease, (as his learned Works make appear, by which
great benefit has accrued to others) was, I say, himself by the tyranny of it
taken from amongst the Living.

This Pleura is perforated in many places, for the Ingate and Outgate of the
Vessels. For above, it lets out the Jugular and Axillary Arteries and Veins,
and below, through the Midriff, the Trunks of the hollow Vein and great Artery.
Besides where it receives in the Nerves of the wandering pair, the Windpipe,
and both lets in and out the Gullet.

Its proper Vessels are, Veins from the Vena sine pari, or Vein without a pair,
and from the upper Intercostal Vein. Its Arteries spring also from the upper
Intercostals (as those from the Subclavian) which descend to about the seventh
or eighth Rib: below which it receives twigs of Arteries from the back part of
the descending great Artery. It has as many pairs of Nerves (wanting one) as
there are Joints in the Backbone the whole length of the Chest: for betwixt
each Joint there comes out a pair; but then the uppermost and lowest Joints
being reckoned for the two extremes, (and not a pair of Nerves for either
extreme) there must be one pair of Nerves less than there are Joints. The
Joints therefore (or vertebrae) being seventeen, there must only sixteen pair
of Nerves be reckoned to the Chest. Now these Nerves as soon as ever they come
out of the Joint, are immediately divided into the fore and hinder-branches. Of
which the fore-branches serve the Intercostal Muscles and the Pleura; but the
hinder are bestowed on the Muscles that lie upon the Back.

The use of it is much like that of the Rim of the Belly; for (as has been
said) as the Rim of the Belly is stretched about all the Lower Belly, and
furnishes all the Bowels therein contained with Coats or Skins, (every Bowel
with a particular Coat) so does this Pleura the Bowels of the Middle Venture:
for it is stretched about all the Cavity of the Chest, and gives a Coat to
every particular Part therein contained, (either mediately or immediately.) It
covers also the Intercostal Muscles, and makes the upper Membrane of the
Midriff. Next to the Cavity of the Chest it is bedewed with a watery humor,
that the Lungs which lie against it on their outside, may move the more glibly,
and not be offended by its roughness.

CHAP. IV. Of the Midriff or Diaphragm.
The Diaphragm why so called. Its rise. Its substance. Its Perforations. Its
Vessels. The several uses of the Midriff. 1. It assists Respiration. 2. Its
motion helps the distribution of the Chyle. 3 It helps to expel the Excrements,
and in Mares the Foal. 4. It serves to divide the Abdomen from the Chest.

THE Diaphragm (or Midriff) is so called from its office of distinguishing or
separating; because it separateth or distinguishes the Bowels of the lower,
from the Instruments of Life and Respiration in the middle Belly.

It is a Muscle, long and round, seated at the lower part of the Chest,
overthwart which it runs, sloping a little lower toward the Paunch backward.
It has a figure and action different from all other Muscles.

It is as broad as the Chest is wide: for its edges are knit to the lower part
of the Breast Bone, and all round on each side to the Ribs, and to the lowest
vertebral Joint of the Chest.

It is said to arise from its two long and fleshy Productions, which springing
from the vertebrae of the Loins (to the muscles whereof they are strongly knit)
do, as they go upwards, grow wider and wider, till they come to the lowest
vertebrae of the Chest, where they grow and unite together, and so spread
themselves into this Muscle called the Midriff. Others, though they grant that
these are part of its original, yet think that it does equally arise from its
whole fleshy circumference, by which it adheres to the ends of the lowest Ribs.
And a third opinion is, that its original is from its center or middle where
its Nerve is inserted into it, from that common Maxim of Galen's, That
wherever the Nerve is inserted, there is the head of the Muscle. But as that
Maxim does not hold in all other Muscles, so this being a Muscle of a peculiar
shape and use, it may well be excepted therefrom, especially seeing the center
of the Midriff is tendinous, which the origin of a Muscle does not use to be,
but only its end.

As for its substance, it is partly fleshy, partly nervous and partly
membranous. For Membranes, because it requires great strength (it being in
continual motion) it is furnished with two, and those very strong ones, the
uppermost of which it has from the Pleura, and the lowermost from the
Peritonaeum or Rim of the Belly. To the uppermost the lower part of the
Mediastinum is knit, (and of the Heart-bag in Men, but not in Horses or other
Brutes) and sometimes the lower tips or ends of the two great Lobes of the
Lungs. Its circumference is fleshy, and its middle or center nervous, in which
part a wound is mortal, but one in the fleshy sometimes admits of cure.

It has in it several perforations or holes, some of which are little, and
others bigger. The little ones are the pores, through which the Vapors are
said to ascend from the lower Parts into the Chest; but besides that such
ascent of impure Vapors from the Guts, etc. into the Chest, where the Vital
Parts are seated, would be very inconvenient and prejudicial, I think the
Midriff is so compact a body, and its Membranes so close, that we may either
deny any pores at all, or however that they admit not any such steams. The
larger holes (being those that ought to be reckoned alone for such) are, first,
that which is very near its middle or center, but something toward the right
side, which gives passage for the Trunk of the hollow Vein ascending from the
Liver. The second is on the left side of the center, being bigger than the
former, and somewhat backwarder; and this serves for the letting forth of the
Gullet and two Nerves which go to the Stomach. There is also a third hole more
backwards by the vertebrae, for the through-fare of the great Artery, and the
Vein without a fellow, and for the Nerve which Doctor Willis distinguishes from
the wandering or eighth pair, by the name of the Intercostal.

The Midriff has Vessels of all sorts; for it has Veins arising from the
Trunk of the hollow Vein, which are called Venae phrenicae, and also some twigs
branching to it from the Vena adiposa, or Fat-vein, so called because it is
mostly bestowed on the fat Membrane that invests the Kidneys.

It has Arteries from the Trunk of the great Artery, called also Phrenicae.

Its Nerves are in number two, proceeding from the spinal Marrow at the third
or fourth jointing of the Rack-bones or vertebrae of the Neck, from whence they
descend through the cavity of the Chest, being in their course sustained and
strengthened by the Mediastinum, lest by any violent motion they should be
hurt. As soon as these Nerves reach the Midriff, they enter it in its center,
and thence disperse themselves into its whole substance, terminating in it. But
besides these some have observed small twigs to be sent into it from the Nerves
of the eighth pair, as they descend through it toward the Stomach.

Various are the Uses that might be ascribed unto the Midriff, the chief are
these that follow. First, It is the principal Muscle that assists the action of
Respiration. Which action whether it be animal and voluntary, or natural and
involuntary, has occasioned great disputes. True it is, that it moves in
breathing as well while we sleep, as when we are awake, so that our Will, which
in sleep is dormant as well as the Body, seems not to be necessary to its
motion: and yet we can hinder it from moving when we please by holding in our
breath. We may therefore call its motion, a mixed motion, to wit, partly
voluntary (or rather spontaneous in Beasts, because they have not properly any
Will) and partly natural. Which motion is performed on this manner. In taking
in ones breath it is stretched out and becomes plain and stiff, pressing down a
little the Parts contained in the Lower Belly: but in letting out ones breath,
it is relaxed and ascends somewhat up into the Chest, being partly driven up
thither by the ascent of the Bowels of the Lower Belly, which in expiration is
a little straightened by its Muscles, and therefore the Parts contained therein as
they have less room breadthways, must have more lengthways. Now we must note,
that only one sort of motion agrees to one Muscle, to wit, that of
contraction; for that of restitution or relaxation is owing to the opposite
Muscle, as was showed at large in the First Book, chap. 6. The proper motion of
the Midriff therefore is only in Inspiration or taking in ones breath, when
all its Fibers being contracted quite round, it is stretched out plain,
somewhat like the Parchment upon a Drum's head: but when it is relaxed and
becomes flaggy in Expiration, that is only a motion of restitution, and is not
owing to it self, but to those Muscles that constringe or straiten the Chest,
which are that called sacrolumbus, and the triangularis or three-corner'd one,
which two lie on the outside of the Ribs as shall be shown in the Book of the
Muscles; and lastly, the internal Intercostals, described before in the second
Chapter, to which some of the Muscles of the Lower Belly perhaps yield some
assistance.

Secondly, By its ascending and descending, and so occasioning the Stomach,
Guts, etc. to be always in a motion upwards and downwards, it assists them in
driving forward the Liquors or whatever else contained in them, and so helps
the distribution of the Chyle, which by the wormlike motion of the Guts alone
could not so well be sent through those innumerable small Vessels through which
it is to pass. And this I take to be a considerable use of it, though few
Anatomists have taken any notice of it.

A third use is to help forward the expulsion of the Excrements, and assist the
Mare in the time of her foaling. For in both those offices the Midriff by
holding in the breath is kept on the tenters as it were and pressed down upon
the Parts contained in the Lower Belly that are next it, and those do
successively bear hard upon others that are next them, whereby every Part
contained therein is somewhat straightened, and so whatsoever is contained in any
of them, be it the Dung, Urine or Foal, is squeezed out and expelled.

The last use is what was mentioned at the beginning of this Chapter, namely,
to distinguish the Lower Belly with its natural Parts, from the Chest and its
vital Parts; lest from the inferior ignoble Parts noisome Vapors should ascend
up to the more noble, such as are those contained in the Chest.

Table XIII. Represents the External proper Parts of the Chest, as likewise the
natural situation of the Midriff.
A The Sternum. B The Midriff. C The hold by which the hollow Vein ascends from
the Liver toward the Heart. D The hole whereby the Gullet passes through the
Midriff. E The hole whereby the descendent Trunk of the great Artery passes
through the Midriff. FF The two Appendices or Productions of the Midriff. GG
The Muscles termed Psoae in their natural situation. HH The Musculi Quadrati or
square Muscles of the Loins. II The Internal cavity of the Flank-bone. K The
Muscle called Serratus major Anticus in its proper place. L The same Muscle
removed out of its place and turned back, the better to show the Serratus minor
and other Parts underneath it. M The Serratus Anticus minor or lesser foreside
Saw-muscle in its place. NNN Several of the External Intercostal Muscles. OOO
The Cartilaginous or gristly Parts of the Ribs fastened to the sternum or
Breast Bone.
anatomical view of the interior of a horse's chest TAB XIII page 75




CHAP. V. Of the Partition-membrane called Mediastinum.
The Mediastinum why so called. Its rise and substance. Its Vessels. Its uses.

THIS Membrane is called by the Latins Mediastinum, from its office of
partitioning or dividing, because it divides the Chest into two parts, standing
across the middle of it.

It is derived or has its original from the Pleura or Rib-coat, of which we
have already spoken in the third Chapter. For the Pleura springing from the
Backbone, keeps its way on each side of the cavity of the Chest (clothing the
inside of the Ribs) till it comes to the Breast Bone, where the two Membranes
join together, but do not unite into one. From the Breast Bone these two
Membranes hold a direct course back again toward the Backbone through the
middle of the Chest, but before they have gone an Inch, they begin to separate
again, and that so far from one another by degrees, as to make a cavity wide
enough for containing the Heart and the Heart-bag. But when they are arrived
near the Back, they join together again. Note that the Mediastinum being
composed of the doubling of the Pleura, must consist of four Membranes when
united, (though only of two where divided) seeing the Pleura it self consists
of two. It is wholly membranous, as is the Pleura of which it is formed; smooth
on the outside toward the Lungs, but rough on its inside toward the Heart, by
reason that the Heart-bag adheres to it by several Fibers.

Between the duplicature of this Membrane there are many small Vessels of all
sorts dispersed. For first there are Veins branching to it from the Phrenica or
Midriff-vein and from the solitary Vein or Vena sine pari; it has likewise one
proper Vein of its own from the subclavian branch, called after its own name,
Mediastina. Secondly, its Arteries come from the Phrenica or Midriff-artery,
which spring out of the descending Trunk of the great Artery. Thirdly, it has
Nerves from the Phrenick or Midriff twigs of those two branches of the eighth
pair that descend through it to the upper orifice of the Stomach. Bartholin
asoribes also Lympheducts unto it.

The use of the Mediastinum is first, to divide the Chest and Lungs into two
parts, that if any hurtful Accident should happen to one of the sides, the
other notwithstanding might be preserved. And this has been observed by
Anatomists, who have found in dissections the one side or Lobe of the Lungs
wasted and almost dried away in Phthisical and Consumptive Persons, and at the
same time the other has been perfectly fresh and sound. And it has been
likewise seen and observed in wounds of the Chest, that if therewith one Lobe
of the Lungs should happen to be hurt so much as to occasion the loss of the
use of that Lobe, yet the other by performing his part has preserved life.

The next use of the Mediastinum is to permit the Heart in the Heartbag to hang
dangling in a free posture, that in its motion it might not strike against the
bony sides of the Chest.

Again, it serves to sustain and preserve the Vessels running through it; and
by its being knit to the Midriff, preserves that also from being drawn too much
downwards by the weight of the Bowels of the Lower Belly, especially by the
Liver, whose suspensory Ligament hangs by it.

CHAP. VI. Of the Thymus or great Kernel at the Throat; and of the Purse of the
Heart called Pericardium, together with the water contained therein.
What the Thymus is. Its use. The Vesseli which pass over it. What the
Pericardium is. From whence it takes its original. The substance of the
Pericardium. Its Perforations. Its Vessels. Its use. Of the Water contained in
the Pericardium. The uses of the Water. Of the Humor contained in the Chest.

THE Thymus (named the Sweetbread by some) is a glandulous or kernelly body,
soft and spongie, placed in the upper part of the Chest near the hole of the
Throat, lying upon the ends of the Clavicles or Collar-bones.

It has its name Thymus from the leaf of Time, which it very much resembles
in shape.

Its use is to serve as a Boulster or Pillow for the Veins and Arteries to pass
over or lie upon, to keep them from the hardness of the Collar-bones, the
sharpness of which would else be apt to break them or fret them asunder.

Now the Vessels which do cross over this Thymus are the hollow Vein and the
great Artery, with the many divisions and branches of the same, which are in
number many, dispersed from thence into most of the extreme Parts of the
forepart of the Body, as some to the Shoulder-blades, and so down the
Forelegs; again, some to the Neck and Head, namely the internal and external
Jugular Veins, and the Carotid Arteries; as also those branches which run all
along the Belly, which are by us Farriers called the Liver-veins. This Kernel
is bigger in Foals than it is in grown Horses in proportion to their Bodies;
and in Calves it is pretty large, and is reckoned for a dainty delicate bit.

Next come we to treat of the Pericardium, or Purse of the Heart, or Heart-bag,
for by these several nominations or names it goes. This is that Coat or Skin
which compasses the Heart, and in which the Heart hangs, it being for that
purpose made in figure like it.

It takes its original at the basis or upper and broad end of the Heart, from
the outer Coats which compass the Vessels that enter into the Heart, which
Coats do spring from the Pleura.

Its substance is thick and something hard, though not so hard as to hurt the
Lungs when it presses against them, or they against it; neither is it too
soft, lest it should it self be hurt by the hardness of the Ribs, which in
strong pulsations of the Heart it beats against, the Mediastinum only coming
between: but being placed between two contraries, I mean, between the soft
Lungs and hard Bones, it ought to have its substance of a middle nature between
both. On the outside it is rough and fibrous, adhering in many places to the
Mediastinum; but within, it is smooth and slippery, that the Heart might move
more freely in it.

It is perforated in five places; namely on the right side by the ascending
Trunk of the hollow Vein, which comes up from the Liver and enters the right
Ventricle of the Heart; and by the Subclavian Vein which descends from the
Channel-bones into the same Ventricle; and thirdly by the Pulmonary Artery
which goes out of the right Ventricle into the Lungs. On its left side it is
perforated by the Pulmonary Vein which comes from the Lungs and enters the left
Ventricle of the Heart; and lastly by the great Artery that passes out of the
said Ventricle.

The Veins that it is furnished with, it receives at the lower part of it from
the Phrenick or Midriff-vein, and at the upper part from the Axillaries; but
the Vessels from each place are mighty small.

There are no Arteries derived to it from any place, that are visible; and the
reason supposed is, because it is so near the Heart, that it is immediately
supplied from it with vital heat and spirit. But seeing the Heart it self is
not without Arteries, though it be reckoned the fountain of life, much less can
any other part be supposed to be, and therefore neither this, though they are
so slender as not to be discernible.

Those small Nerves it is furnished with, are branched to it from the left
recurrent Nerves of the eighth or wandering pair.

To these Vessels Bartholin adds Lympheducts, which serve to drink up part of
the Liquor contained in the Heart-bag, to hinder its two great increase.

Next come we to the use of the Heart-bag, which is, to cover and preserve the
Heart, and to contain a certain moisture or Humor in it for the uses
after-mentioned. Now concerning this Humor there are various discourses and
different opinions of Authors, I mean, as to the fountain from whence it
proceeds; for some will have it, that it is fed by Liquors which we drink, of
which opinion is the Learned Hippocrates, whence in his Book de Cord he says,
that the Heart dwells in a Bladder, because of the resemblance the Humor in
the Heart-bag has to that in the bladder of Urine; though at the same time he
denies this Water or Humor to have any acrimony or brackishness, as the Water
contained in the bladder of Urine has.

And to confirm this Opinion of his, that this Humor contained in the
Heart-bag does proceed from Liquors taken in at the Mouth, he cites an
Experiment to be tried on a Pigg, (though I suppose any other Creature may
serve as well) which after it is kept fasting for some time should have given
it to drink Water or Milk mingled with Vermillion, and after it has drunk it,
should immediately be killed, and as soon after as possible have his Windpipe
opened, and also all or most of its branches, in which, says my Author, you
will find along all its inside, the color of the Liquor which it drank, even
to the extremities or ends of the smallest Pipes; out of which Pipes (says he)
part of it is distilled into the Heart-bag. I confess this is no very probable
Opinion, but I mention it for the great antiquity and fame of the Author of it.

But other Authors are of opinions contrary to this, some saying that it
proceeds from a moisture, slaver or spittle, which distills out of the Kernels
under the Tongue into the Weazand, and from thence into the Arteries and Heart,
and so into the Heart-bag. But this is as improbable as the former.

A late Learned Author thinks that it issues out of certain Glands or Kernels
seated at the basis of the Heart. And this is an Opinion that is somewhat
likely, though I think the next is to be preferred before it.

Lastly, Others (amongst whom is Bartholin) See Bartholin, lib. 2. chap. 5.
conceive that it proceeds from moist Vapors and Exhalations forced out of the
Humors of the Heart by the motion and heat thereof, which being stopped by the
closeness of the Heart-bag, are by its respective coldness congealed into Water.

The use of this Water or Humor is, in the first place, to keep the Heart
moist and cool; for the Heart being a very hot Part, requires something of this
nature to cool it, especially if that be true which some report of the left
Ventricle, that it has been found in live Dissections so hot, as almost to
scald the Dissector's finger which he put into it.

By this Humor the Heart also becomes more easy in its motion, for by it, it
is as it were born or buoyed up, so that it swimmeth in a manner, whereby the
sense or feeling of the weight of it is taken away.

Such a Humor as this before-spoken of is also found in the cavity of the
Chest, only something of a more ruddy color, looking like Water and Blood
mingled together; and this I have never found wanting, but that there has been
some either little or much; with which moisture the Parts of the Chest are
moistened and cooled, even as the Heart is by the moisture contained in the
Heart-bag.

Table XIV.
Fig. I. Represents the Sternum or Breast Bone cut off, and lifted up or turned
back, under which are to be seen the Mediastinum, Heart, Lungs and Midriff.

AA Show the inner surface or superficies of the Breast Bone, and the Gristles
interwoven therein. BB The Lungs in their natural situation. CC A portion of
the Midriff. DD The ends of the Ribs where the Breast Bone was cut off. E The
glandulous body called the Sweetbread or Thymus. F The sides of the
Mediastinum plucked off from the Breast Bone. G The Heart in its natural
situation. H A portion of the Heart-bag.
Fig. II. Represents the Diaphragm and its Processes.

A The left Nerve. B The right Nerve. C The upper Coat or Skin of the
Diaphragm. D The naked substance of the Midriff, or the Diaphragm laid bare. E
A hole for the Gullet to pass through. F A hole for the hollow Vein to pass
through. G The membranous or nervous part of the Midriff, being its center. HHH
The Processes or Appendices of the Midriff, betwixt which the Trunk of the
great Artery does descend.
anatomical view of a horse's lung, heart, and midriff TAB. XIV. page 79
Fig. 1.


Fig. 2d






CHAP. VII. Of the Heart.
The Heart a principal Part. From whence it derives its name Cor. Its
situation. Why the Pulse is felt on the left side and not the right. The motion
of the Heart. The reason of the Pulse. The figure of the Heart. Its substance.
Its connection. Its External Parts. Its Coat. Its Fat. The difference between
the Fat of the Heart and other Fat. The External Vessels of the Heart. One
Vein. Two Arteries. Their Valves. Nerves.

THERE is none can be so ignorant of the Parts of the Body, as not to know that
the Heart is one of the principal Parts thereof: for as it is the fountain of
the Vital faculty and power, it ought to be so styled. It is also the place of
natural heat, the root of the Arteries from whence they all spring. It is
moreover the Author of the Pulse, and the first Bowel living (as I shall more
at large declare in the following Chapter) and the last dying.

It is called in Latin Cor, a currendo from running, because of its continual
motion.

It is only one in number, situated in the midst of the cavity of the Chest,
as well for its security, as for the equal ballancing of that part of the Body;
in which place it is encompassed by the Lobes of the Lungs.

Yet notwithstanding the situation of it in the middle part of the Chest, it is
to be understood that not the whole Heart but only the basis or root of it is
directly in the middle; for the point of it leans toward the left side, by
reason of the smallness of the compass it has to perform its motion in; for it
would be apt to strike against the Midriff, should it not be so drawn to one
side, which would not only hinder its own motion, but also endanger the
violating of the Midriff and hinder its motion; for it also is known to have a
perpetual motion as well as the Heart.

And it is from the point of the Heart's inclining to the left side, that the
motion of the Heart or its pulse is so plain to be felt on that side: which not
being equally to be felt on the right, many, who have not taken the pains of
looking or inspecting into Bodies to see the contrary, do conclude, that the
Heart is situated altogether on the left side, and that it is not the point
alone which they feel beat, but the whole Heart.

Another reason there is why it should incline to the left side, namely,
because the ascendent Trunk of Vena cava lies on the right side, so that were
the point not drawn something to the other side, it would be apt to lie upon or
strike against that Vessel, and so hinder the ascent of the Blood which is
brought from the Liver by that Vein to the Heart.

The Heart has a double motion, Contraction called its systole, and Relaxation
called its diastole. (Though this latter may rather be deemed a ceasing from
motion, than a motion.) While it is relaxed or becomes flaggy and loose, it
receives the Blood into its Ventricles out of the hollow Vein and Lung-vein;
out of the former into its right Ventricle, and out of the latter into its
left. And when it contracts it self, it expels or squirts out the Blood out of
its Ventricles into the Lung-artery and great Artery; out of the right
Ventricle into the Lung-artery, and out of the left into the great Artery.

As to the pulsation or beating of the Heart, it is very difficult, if not
impossible to give any satisfactory reason of it. Some impute it to the flowing
in of the Animal Spirits by the Nerves; others to the boiling and rarefaction
of the Blood in its Ventricles. It Is most certain that the muscular Fibers of
the Heart are the immediate instruments of its motion, and that these receive
their power to move, from the Animal Spirits conveyed by the Nerves: but what
it is that puts these Fibers upon such a reciprocal motion of contraction and
relaxation as the Heart observes, is the greatest difficulty to determine. The
greatest Anatomists have confessed their ignorance in this point: I shall not
therefore pretend to give a reason of it, but admire the wisdom of the great
Creator in framing such an Engine, so necessary for the conveying life, heat
and nourishment to all the Parts of the Body. Waving this then, I shall proceed
to the further description of the Heart.

The figure of the Heart is pyramidal or conick, that is, it is broad at the
basis or bottom, and narrow at its summity or top. On the fore-side it is bossy
or bunching, but on the hinder side more flat. It is sometimes longer and
sometimes shorter, as thus: When in its motion it is contracted (at which time
it pours out the Blood) then is it shorter, but broader; and again when it is
dilated, at which time it receives in the Blood, then is it longer and narrower.

Its substance is a solid, thick and compact flesh, that it might the better
endure the perpetuity of the motion, and with more force drive the Blood into
the extreme or farthest Parts of the Body. It consists mostly of musculary or
fleshy Fibers, a few of which run straight and are outmost, but the far
greatest part run slanting or rather spiral-wise, especially toward its point,
resembling somewhat the winding-rings of a Snail's shell.

It is tied by the mediation of the Heart-bag to the Mediastinum and by its own
Vessels to several Parts of the Body.

Its Parts are some External and some Internal. Those which be External or
outward, are the Purse, the Coat, and the Fat; to which may be added some of
its Vessels.

As to the Purse or Heart-bag, we have treated of it in the foregoing Chapter.
As to the Vessels, some of them encompass the Heart, as the Coronary Vein and
Arteries; others reach into its Entrances and into the Ventricles, and those
are the Ascendent and Descendent Trunks of the hollow Vein and Great Artery,
also the Pulmonary Vessels. Of the Coronaries we shall speak by and by in this
Chapter; but of the rest, in the next.

It has a Coat proper to it self, like the Coat of a Muscle, for its greater
firmness, which Coat sticks so close to it, that it is hard to be separated or
removed from it. It is the same with the outer Coat of the Great Artery, as
that Skin which clothes the inside of its Ventricles is continued unto and
constitutes the inmost Membrane of that Artery.

The Heart because of its continual motion and great heat, is plentifully
stored with Fat, to keep it from being over-dried, which Fat is most of it
placed at the basis or bottom of it; for its point hanging in the Humor
contained in the Heart-bag is continually moistened with that, so that it stands
not in need of being moistened or cooled any other way.

Yet thus much notice is to be taken, as to this Fat which grows to the Heart,
that it differs in consistence from all or most of the other Fat of the whole
Body, as being much harder: for should the Heart, which is a very hot Part,
have any such soft Fat near it, it would certainly melt it. And as the Fat
which grows or sticks to the remoter Parts of the Body differs from this in
nature, so has it also a name different from this; for the former is called
pimele, which signifies a kind of greasy Fat; but the latter is called Adeps,
which is to say Tallow, and is indeed as hard as Tallow, differing much from
pimele or Grease.

Next come we to the Vessels of the Heart, and of these it is furnished with
all sorts; some of which do compass it round about at its basis, like a
Garland, which are one Vein and two Arteries.

The Vein, from its encompassing or encircling it round, is called Coronaria,
or the Crown-vein, which Vein arises from the Trunk of the hollow Vein a little
before its entrance into the right Earlet of the Heart. Small branches do
spring from this Coronary Vein, and are dispersed or sprinkled all down the
surface or outside of the Heart from the basis to the point.

Its Arteries are in number two, which are also called Coronariae or
Crown-arteries, from their encircling the Heart as the Vein does, where like it
they disperse small branches about all the external surface of the Heart,
furnishing it with arterial Blood for its life and nourishment.

There is observed at the original of each of these Arteries, as is likewise in
the Vein, a certain Valve which is to be seen if you dissect either Vessel,
opening it a little before it passes out of the Heart-bag; which Valve or
Floud-gate in the Vein lets the Blood into the Heart, but suffers none to come
out again that way; and in the Artery it permits the Blood to issue out of the
Heart, but will let none return back out of it into the Heart.

The Heart is also furnished with very many but very small Nerves, springing
from branches of the eighth pair, which branches are those that are sent to the
Heart-bag.

They branch into and enter the Heart in three several places; first, one
enters into the Heart it self, another into the Earlets of the Heart, and a
third into its Vessels.

Thus much of the Parts of the Heart which in some regard may be called
External; in the next Chapter we shall proceed to those that are more Internal.

Table XV. Represents the Heart and Lungs in their natural posture, but taken
out of the Body.
AA Show the Heart in its Proper place. BB The several Lobes of the Lungs. CC
The remaining part of the Pericardium or Heart-bag, a portion of it being cut
off the better to show the Heart. DD The Coronary Vessels. E The Arteria magna
or Aorta going out of the Heart. F Its descending Trunk. G Its ascending
Trunks. H The Vena cava descendens, or the descending Trunk of the hollow Vein.
I The ascending Trunks of the same. K A portion of the Aspera Arteria or
Windpipe. L Its division or branching into the Lungs.
a horse's lungs and heart TAB. XV. page 83.




CHAP. VIII. Of the Ventricles, internal Vessels, Valves and Earlets of the
Heart.
The right Ventricle. Its figure. Its substance. Its use. Why Fish have but one
Ventricle. The left Ventricle. Its largeness. Its figure. Its sides are
thicker, and harder than those of the right. Its use. The insides of the
Ventricles. The septum. Its pores. The internal Vessels of the Heart. Vena cava
and vena Arteriosa belong to the right Ventricle; Arteria venosa and Aorta to
the left. Three Valves to the Vena cava, called tricuspides. Three also to the
vena Arteriosa, called sigmoideae. Two to the Arteria venosa, called mitrales.
Three to the Aorta, called semilunares. The auriculae of the Heart. Their
surface. Their substance. Their motion. Their use.

WE will first speak of the Ventricles or Sinus's of the Heart, being in number
two, on each side one, distinguished or divided by a fleshy partition into a
right and a left.

The right (called the right Sinus or Ventricle, and by some the Cave or
Chamber) is somewhat bigger than the left, because it receives as well that
Blood which is spent upon the nourishment of the Lungs, through which the Blood
passes from this Ventricle to the left, as that which actually is conveyed into
the left, and from thence sent forth by the Arteries into all parts of the
Body. But its larger capacity is only in respect of its width, for the left is
rather longer than it, as reaching nearer the tip of the Heart.

It is in figure not exactly round, but rather semicircular, or half moon
fashioned.

The substance of its sides is not so hard and thick as is that of the left,nor
is the surface of its inner cavity so uneven; nor has it so many and so strong
fleshy Fibers reaching this way and that way, as the left has. For it was not
necessary it should be of so strong a composure as the left, seeing neither is
the Blood rarefied so much in it, nor does it send the Blood out of it to any
greater distance than the Lungs, whereas the left pours it into the remotest
Parts of the Body, and therefore requires a stronger constitution to squirt it
out.

The use of this Ventricle is first to receive the Blood out of the hollow Vein
returning from the circulation, as also the Chyle and Lympha mingled with the
Blood, out of the axillar Vein, and then to attenuate, concoct and inspirit
them for the nourishment of the Lungs, to which they are carried under the form
of Blood by the Pulmonary Artery, otherwise called the Arterial vein. But it is
but a very small portion of the Blood that is spent upon the Lungs, the
greatest part of it passing by the Pulmonary Vein to the left Ventricle, there
to receive a greater perfection.

Now it is worth observation in this place, that such Creatures as live in the
Water, as Fish in general, which have no Lungs, have but one Ventricle in their
Heart. For the reason why Animals that live upon the Land have two Ventricles,
being, that the Blood as it passes from one to the other, should be conveyed
through the Lungs, there to be ventilated and cooled by the Air drawn in in
inspiration; and seeing Fish live in a cold Element, viz. the Water, which
encompasses their whole Body, that, of it self, is sufficient to attemper the
heat of the Blood; therefore as it is impossible they should make any use of
Lungs in the Water, so there seems to be no need of them, nor consequently of
two Ventricles in the Heart, which are necessary for Land-animals that have
Lungs, and breathe in the free Air. How far Water approaches to the nature of
Air, or whether there be any truly airy particles contained in the pores of the
Water; and if there be, whether there be any way imaginable whereby they can
insinuate themselves into the Blood and Hearts of Fishes, are Points too nice
and philosophical for me to intermeddle with. But seeing Fish can live so brisk
for very many years without respiration (at least properly so called, or that
we can conceive of) one would suspect that some of our late Anatomists
attribute too much virtue to the Air that we breathe in, as if it were the All
that continues the Vital flame as they speak, and that the Vital heat and
spirit are no otherwise owing to the Heart, than as like an Engine it keeps the
Blood in motion, and distributes it with the Spirits into all Parts of the Body
by the Arteries. But this by the bye.

Next come we to the left Ventricle, which in magnitude does not equal the
former, it being much less, by reason it is to contain a less quantity of Blood
than the right Ventricle does, part of that Blood that comes out of the right,
being spent upon the nourishment of the Lungs, before it reaches the left.

This left Ventricle differs also in figure from the right: for as the right is
observed to be semicircular, the left is almost round and longer, reaching
almost down to the point of the Heart, which the other does not.

Likewise the flesh or wall of the left is much thicker than that of the other,
and that partly because of the smallness of the cavity, which the narrower it
is, must needs leave the sides so much the thicker. Only the left side of this
Ventricle near the lower end or tip of the Heart, is thinner than any part of
the sides of the right.

Also it is harder and more compact than the other, that the Vital Spirits
might not exhale or evaporate, and that its constriction might be the stronger,
so that the Blood might with more force be thrown or pulst out and vented into
the farthest parts of the Body.

Into this Ventricle is the Blood received out of the Lungs by the Pulmonary
Vein (otherwise called the veinous Artery.) Which Blood when it is squirted out
of this Ventricle into the great Artery, differs very much in color from that
which issues out of the right Ventricle into the Pulmonary Artery: for this
latter is of a dark purple color, but the former of a florid scarlet. But most
think that this alteration of color is not so much owing to any supereminent
virtue in this Ventricle above the right, as to the particles of Air that
insinuate themselves into the Blood in the Lungs whiles it passes out of the
Pulmonary Artery into the Pulmonary Vein; for Dr. Lower affirms, that if in
Live-dissections one open the Pulmonary Vein in its passage from the Lungs to
the left Ventricle, the Blood will appear to be of the same scarlet color as
when it comes out of the said Ventricle. Supposing this to be so (which I think
we may do upon the testimony of so worthy and creditable an Author) yet it
cannot be denied but that the airy particles must be more intimately mixed with
the Blood by the great agitation it receives in the left Ventricle, so that we
may still consent to the Ancients, that Vital Spirits (in which, Air seems to
be a main Ingredient) are perfected and rectified to their height (as it were)
in it more than in the right. The use therefore of the left Ventricle is to
perfect the Vital Spirits, and to transmit them, together with the Blood, by
the Arteries over all the Body, for the preservation of the Vital heat, and for
the nourishment of each Part.

The insides of both the Ventricles are unequal or uneven and rugged,being
hollowed into many furrows distinguished by fleshy Fibers, that the Blood which
comes into the Heart might be the more agitated in them, and thereby more
intimately mixed with the Chyle and Air that come along with it, the first into
the right Ventricle, and both into the left. From these fleshy Fibers are
nervous ones extended to the Valves, of which we shall discourse by and by.
They are more numerous and stronger in the left Ventricle than in the right,
because a stronger constriction was necessary for the former than for the
latter, seeing from the former Blood is sent to all Parts of the Body, but from
the latter to no greater distance than the Lungs, as was observed before. These
Fibers, Furrows and Valves you may see very well expressed in the following
Figure.

These Ventricles are divided by a Wall called the septum or partition,which is
nothing else but the right wall of the left Ventricle; wherefore its right side
is bunched, but the left hollow. On its left side it is furrowed and unequal as
the rest of the Ventricle is, but on the right it is well nigh smooth. It is a
very ancient opinion, that there are a great many large pores or holes in this
septum, whereby the thinnest and most spirituous part of the Blood passes out
of the right Ventricle into the left immediately, without taking that circuit
through the Lungs that the rest does. They are said to be wider on its right
side, and going slanting to grow narrower toward the left. There are many
Modern as well as Ancient Vouchers of this opinion: amongst whom is Bartholin,
who having enumerated several Anatomists that have affirmed to have seen them
themselves, says that he himself has seen the septum of a Hog's Heart
slantingly pervious in several places with great and manifest pores, so large
as to admit a pretty big Pease, and lying open without a Probe, which being put
into any one of them on the right side passed to the left Ventricle, where a
thin Membrane did hang before the mouth of the Pore like an Anastomosis (as he
calls it, I suppose he means a Valve) which hindered the putting in the Probe on
that side, and consequently must have hindered the return of the Blood out of
the left Ventricle into the right when the Animal was living. And he thinks
that the septum is nourished by the Blood that passes through these Pores,
seeing the Coronary Veins (abovedescribed) run only through the surface or
outside of the Heart. And he will have not only the more spirituous part of
the Blood, but the thinner part of the Chyle also to pass through them. It
would be tedious to recite all those Authors that he quotes to second him, as
also his Apology for their often not-appearing in many dead Bodies, seeing
there are many passages besides these in Live-creatures, that there are no
footsteps of after they are dead: for as it seems not likely that the septum
should be nourished by blood that passes so rapidly through these supposed
holes; so by the carefullest examination of other skillful Anatomists there
have been no such holes to be found, unless they were first made by the Probe;
though indeed there are several pits that look as if they went through, which I
believe to be only framed for the greater agitation of the blood in the
Ventricle.

In the foregoing Chapter we described those Vessels that may be called
external from their running chiefly on the outside of the Heart,(commonly named
the Coronary) by which it is nourished: but there are another sort that may be
termed internal, which are such as open into and out of its Ventricles or
inward Sinus's, but yield no nourishment to it. These are four, the Vena cava,
and pulmonary Artery; the pulmonary Vein, and great Artery.

Of these, the Vena cava or hollow Vein, and the Vena Arteriosa or pulmonary
Artery do belong to the right Ventricle; the hollow Vein filling it with venal
blood returning from all Parts of the Body, which it receives in when the Heart
is relaxed, which state is called its diastole; and the pulmonary Artery
carrying forth the said blood into the Lungs when the Heart is contracted,
which state of the Heart is called its systole.

To the left Ventricle do also belong two Vessels, namely, Arteria venosa or
the pulmonary Vein, and Aorta or the great Artery. The pulmonary Vein within
the substance of the Lungs does receive the blood from the pulmonary Artery,
and pours it into the left Ventricle, there to kindle and ventilate the vital
flame, and to perfect the arterial blood and spirits. The great Artery is the
trunk from which all other Arteries do branch, and through which the arterial
blood (after it is in this Ventricle perfected as aforesaid) is dispersed or
thrown into all the Parts of the Body, for the life and nourishment thereof.

Now to each of these four Vessels do belong Valves, for the better performance
of their offices before spoken of. And first to the hollow Vein do belong
three, which are of a triangular figure, and are from that sigure called
treble-pointed Valves. They are placed at the basis or bottom of the Heart at
the entrance of the said Vein into the Heart, and do look from without inward,
that so they may admit of the bloud's passing through them into the Heart, but
suffer none to pass out again that way.

To the pulmonary Artery do also belong three Valves, which, contrary to the
former, look from within outward, and from the resemblance they have with the
letter C, are called Sigma-fashioned, the old Greek Sigma being of that shape.
These Valves as the former are placed at the basis of the Heart, and at the
entrance or rather outlet of the Ventricle. And their use is, to let the blood,
brought into this Ventricle by the hollow Vein, pass again out of the said
Ventricle into the pulmonary Artery, to be carried by it into the Lungs; but
they will not admit of any blood to return from the Lungs into it.

To the pulmonary Vein do belong two Valves, which look from without inward, as
the treble-pointed Valves do, and their use is to admit of the blood brought
out of the Lungs by the pulmonary Vein, into the left Ventricle, but they will
suffer none to pass by that Vein back to the Lungs again. These, from the
resemblance they are said to have with a Bishop's Mitre, are called
Mitre-shaped Valves.

To the Arteria magna or great Artery do also belong three Valves,which go by
the name of Semilunary or Half-moon-fashioned Valves. Their use is to hinder
any blood from returning into the left Ventricle out of the great Artery; but
they permit the Blood to pass by them out of the Heart into the said Artery,
from whence it is sent by its several branches into all the Parts of the Body.

Having spoken to the Ventricles, Vessels and Valves of the Heart, we are in
the next place come to treat of the two Appendices or Processes which are
placed at the bottom or basis of it, and are called the Ears or Earlets of the
Heart, from some resemblance in shape which they have to the Ears of the Head.
They are in number two, to each side of the Heart one, answerable to the number
of the Ventricles. Of these, the right is larger, but softer; the left lesser,
but harder. The right is larger, because the orifice of the hollow Vein
belonging to the right Ventricle, is much bigger and larger than the orifice of
the pulmonary Vein belonging to the left Ventricle. For it was not needful
that the Lung-vein should be so large as the hollow Vein, seeing the blood that
it conducts to the left Ventricle is neither so much as that which is brought
by the cava to the right, and besides is thinner and more spirituous being
impregnated with Air in the Lungs, and therefore passing more quickly needs the
narrower channel.

The external part or surface of them, when full or extended, is smooth and
bunching; but when empty, wrinkled.

Their substance is peculiar, such as is to be found in no other part,thin and
soft that they might be the easilier contracted, and yet nervous and strong,
that they might endure that continual motion to which they are destined. Of the
two, the left is the more compact, thick and fleshy. On their inside they have
Fibers running from their basis where they are joined to the Heart, toward
their top where the Veins enter them, (such as the Ventricles of the Heart
themselves have) by help whereof they contract themselves in their systole, and
squeeze the blood contained in them, into the Ventricles.

These Ears or Earlets have (as the Heart it self has) two motions,first the
systole or contractive, next the diastole or dilative motion. There is also
betwixt these two motions (both in the Ears and Heart) a rest or pause, easy to
be discerned in sick Horses, or Horses ready to die, but not so easy to be
either discerned or felt in a sound or healthful Horse; for in such, the
motions are performed so swiftly, that there seems to be an immediate passage
from one to the other, without any intermission or resting between. This pause
or rest between the two motions, is called perisystole.

The systole and diastole of both Earlets do happen at one and the same time;
for when the right undergoes its diastole, then and at the very same instant
the left undergoes the same. And they do the like in the systole. But though
the Heart has the same motions as these Earlets have, yet it does not perform
them when these do; for the systole of the Earlets happens at the same time
with the diastole of the Ventricles; and on the contrary, the systole of the
Ventricles, with the diastole of the Earlets.

Now the use of these Ears or Earlets is, to prevent the too violent rushing in
of the blood out of the Cava and Lung-vein into the Ventricles of the Heart,
whereby both the Valves might have been violated, and the Vital faculty
suffocated. For these receiving the blood out of the said Veins, do measure it
as it were into the Heart, so much blood distilling out of those Veins into
these Earlets in each of their diastole's, as can be conveniently rarefied and
elaborated at one time in the Ventricles.

Table XVI. Represents the Earlets, Ventricles and Valves of the Heart.
Figure I.

Shows the Vena cava with the right Ventricle dissected, so as to show the
treble-pointed Valves.

A Shows the orifice of the coronary Vein. B The treble-pointed Valves, which
admit of the blood into the right Ventricle, but hinder its return back that
way. CCC The little Fibers which fasten the ends of the Valves to the substance
of the Heart. D The Ventricle cut long-ways, the better to show the
before-named Parts.
Figure II.

Shows the right Ventricle of the Heart laid farther open, to show the Valves
of the pulmonary Artery.

A Shows the Ventricle opened. BBB The Sigma-fashioned Valves of the pulmonary
Artery, that let the blood out of this Ventricle into the Lungs. CC A Probe
thrust through the pulmonary Artery cross the right Ventricle of the Heart.
Figure III.

Shows the left Ventricle opened also long-ways to show its Valves.

AA The pulmonary Vein coming from the Lungs and bringing the blood from
thence, which it pours into the left Ventricle. BBB The three Mitre-shaped
Valves of the said pulmonary Vein.
Figure IV.

Shows the great Artery cut asunder near the Heart to show its Valves.

AAA The said Valves of the Aorta or great Artery. BB A Probe thrust through
the pulmonary Vein into the left Ventricle of the Heart.
anatomical view of the earlets, ventricles, and valves of a horse's heart TAB.
XVI p. 88.
Fig. I.


Fig. II.


Fig. III.


Fig. IIII.






CHAP. IX. Of the Organs of Breathing, and their Use; viz. of the Lungs, and
Windpipe.
The names of the Lungs. Their situation and Lobes. Their substance. The
Windpipe. The Parts of the Windpipe. Whether any part of the drink pass by
the Windpipe into the Lungs. The coats of the Windpipe. The Gristles which
make the Windpipe. Its Vessels. Its division. Its uses. The Bloud-vessels of
the Lungs. Their Lympheducts. Their Nerves. Their investing Membrane. Their
action and use.

THE Lungs, which are the chief Instruments of breathing or respiration,are
called in Latin Pulmones, in Greek Pneumones, from their office of drawing in
and blowing out the Breath or Air.

Their situation is in the cavity or hollowness of the Chest, which cavity they
almost fill up; especially when they are distended or filled with wind. They
are divided into two equal parts called Lobes, one of which lies on the right
side of the Mediastinum, or Partition-membrane of the Chest, and the other on
the left.

Their substance has hitherto been taken to be a parenchyma or fleshy
substance; but by the diligent searching into Nature of some of our Modern
Authors, especially of an Italian named Malpighius, they have been found of a
contrary substance; for he affirms them to be excarnous or without flesh, and
merely membranous, made up of the branches of the Windpipe and little bladders
at the ends of them, likewise of the pulmonary Vessels, and the Skin that
clothes them. But the greatest part of their substance consists of the little
bladders.

This that worthy Man experienced by casting Water into the Lungs of some
Creatures he dissected, while they were yet warm, so often till the whole frame
of the Lungs appeared white; then squeezing the water clean out, he with a pair
of Bellows or Pipe filled them by the Windpipe full of Air, and pent it in by
tying the Windpipe; which done, he hung them up to dry; and when they were
dried, he could discover (by holding them up to the light) the little bladders
at the ends of each little branch of the Windpipe, as they are lively
represented in Figures by that great Inquirer into Nature, the never to be
forgotten Doctor Willis, See Willis Part 2. Sect. 1. cap. 1. of his
Pharmaceutice rationalis.
justly styled the honor of his University and Country, in the second Part of
his Book called Pharmaceutice rationalis.

Again, says the forementioned Malpighius, If you cut any part of the Lungs
thus dried, you may very plainly see a great number of these bladders looking
white. Moreover he affirms that by the help of a Microscope he could discern a
certain wonderful Net as it were, tying all these bladders to one another,
which he conceived to be made up of the small branchings of the pulmonary
Artery and Vein, which Vessels convey the blood through the slender and winding
ducts, and through the manifold bendings of the Pipes. And besides these
Vessels which make this Net, Doctor Willis says that there are another sort to
be perceived in living Dissections, which are called Lympheducts, and are
dispersed all over the Lungs. Of what nature and use these Vessels are, we have
shown above in the First Book, chap. 12. and shall do further by and by. And
lastly, he says there are abundance of twigs of Nerves distributed everywhere
through them. Only one thing further is to be noted concerning the Vessels of
the Lungs from the said Doctor's observation, that the Bloud-vessels thereof
are not only branches of the pulmonary Artery and Vein, but also some proceed
from the Aorta it self; which should seem to intimate that the Lungs are truly
nourished by these last, as are all other Parts of the Body, and that the blood
that comes to the Lungs from the right Ventricle of the Heart by the pulmonary
Artery, and returns to the left by the pulmonary Vein, passes not this way for
the nourishment of the Lungs, but only that it may be impregnated with Air,
without which as it wants of its perfection, so is it unfit and unable to
preserve the vital heat of any Part, or to contribute any nourishment to it.
But this only by the bye.

Table XVII.
Represents the Windpipe descending into the Lungs, as also the whole
structure of the Lungs placed as they lie in the Body, to show their several
Lobes, as also the Lympheducts, after Doctor Willis.

Figure I.

AA Show the substance of the Lungs. BB The several Lobes. CC The Lympheducts.
DD A portion of the Aspera Arteria or Windpipe.
Figure II.

AA Show the upper part of the Windpipe cut off. B The Cartilago scutiformis.
C The Glottis. DDD The several Gristles that make the Windpipe. EEE The
Membranes betwixt each Cartilage or Gristle, which make the other part of the
Windpipe.
a horse's windpipe and lungs TAB. XVII. page 90.
Fig. 1.


Fig 2.






Now the several things here named, of which the Lungs are composed or framed,
do plainly show their substance is not carnous or fleshy, but merely fistulous,
being compacted of Pipes of several kinds and magnitude, and variously and
intricately disposed; which Pipes we will particularly speak to in order, and
first of the chief of them, which is the Windpipe, called Aspera Arteria the
rough Artery.

The Aspera Arteria is a Pipe or Chanel which descends down the Neck beginning
in the Throat at the root of the Tongue, and reaches as far as the Lungs, in
which it disperses it self into innumerable branches great and small, which
branches reach to all the extreme parts of their substance, and at last end in
little bladders, each of them in resemblance like a Grape, into which they
conveigh the Air in inspiration. These Grape-like Bladders are lively
represented by Doctor Willis Willis Pharmaceut. Ration. Part. 2. sect. 1. cap.
1.
in a Lobe of the Lungs of an Ox, as you may see in the first Figure of the
third Table in his second Part of the operation of Medicines; of which bladders
you may there read more at large.

The forementioned Windpipe is by Anatomists divided into three principal
parts, viz. the Larynx or Throttle, which is the upper end of it (of which more
afterward.) The second part between the Larynx and the Lungs, being a long
Pipe, is called particularly Trachea or aspera Arteria, the rough Artery;
rough, to distinguish it from the smooth Arteries which contain the blood and
vital spirits; and an Artery, because it keeps or contains the Air in
respiration. The last part of the Windpipe is distinguished by the name of
bronchus or bronchia, which includes the ramifications or branchings of it in
the Lungs; though the name bronchus is sometimes used to signify all of it.

Now before we pass on further to the description of this Windpipe, it will
not be amiss to examine whether any part of the Liquors that an Horse drinks
pass along it, or whether all go down the Gullet. That part of the drink glides
down the Weazand was the opinion of the Ancient Physician Hippocrates, who
experienced the same in an Hog newly killed, in whose Lungs was found a
quantity of Liquor of the same color with that which the Hog had drunk a
little before. And Bartholin thinks that the same thing may be proved from an
observation of Julius Jasolin an Anatomist of the City of Naples, who seeking
in the Body of a Noble Person the cause of his death, found his Heart-bag so
filled with humor, that it being squeezed, some of the said humor came out of
his Mouth. But methinks it is an odd inference to conclude from hence, that
therefore some part of the drink usually passes down the Windpipe. For if one
should suppose that it did so pass, it cannot easily be imagined by what ways
it could pass from thence to the Heart-bag; seeing all the branches of the
Windpipe end in the Lungs, which are covered with a Membrane that never
adheres to the Heart-bag, and very rarely if ever to the Mediastinum that comes
between the Heart-bag and the Lungs. It Is true it seems somewhat strange, that
upon pressing the Heart-bag, the liquor contained in it should come up at the
Mouth; but if the matter of fact be true, it must do so by some preternatural
passage, seeing every one that is skilled in Anatomy knows, that there is no
communication between the Pericardium and aspera Arteria. Indeed as to the
great quantity of humor in the Heart-bag, I have observed the same in Horses,
in which I have seen both it and the Chest extremely filled with liquor, but I
dare not conclude from thence, that it came thither down the Windpipe; for
seeing it has been only in diseased Horses, that have been broken-winded and
troubled with coughs, I am much rather inclined to think, that so great
quantity of water proceeded from a Dropsy of the Chest, which is a disease not
unfrequent in Mankind, in whom yet the best Anatomists deny that the least drop
of drink does naturally pass down their Windpipe: of which any one may be
pretty well satisfied, that has observed in himself or others, how when upon
occasion of laughing or the like in drinking, any of the drink passes down the
wrong Throat as we say (which is down the Windpipe) the party falls presently
into a most violent cough. And as to Hippocrates's observation, it is more
likely the Hog's Lungs should be tinctured by some preternatural and diseased
humor lodged in them, of a like color to which his drink happened to be, than
that they were tinctured by the drink it self.

The Windpipe is covered with two coats or skins, one outward and the other
inward.

The outwardmost is but of a reasonable thickness, neither so thick nor so
strong as the other. It springs from the pleura or skin which invests the Ribs,
and sticks close to the Ligaments of the Gristles, yea does it self serve to
knit them more firmly one to another, and is a mean of connecting the whole
Pipe more strongly to its neighboring Parts. It also ushers along the Nerves
of the Windpipe and Lungs.

The innermost is thicker and more solid than the former, in the Throttle
especially, whose inside it covers, as also all the inside of the Windpipe and
its branches from thence to the bottom of the Lungs. It has two rows of
Muscular Fibers, the outer straight, the inner slanting; the first serving to
shorten the Windpipe, the latter to straiten it. And one reason of the great
strength of this Membrane seems to be, that it might the better endure the
violent motion of coughing without being injured. It is very sensible, and has
its inside besmeared usually with a fattish or slimy humor, which likely is
separated in the Kernels of the Throat, and this serves to keep it moist and
glib, that respiration may be performed with the greater easiness and freedom.

Between these two coats or skins is the body or substance of the
Windpipe,being partly of the nature of a Gristle and partly of a Ligament; for
it is made up of many round Gristles like Rings, being pretty round on its
forepart, but on the back-part which is next to the Gullet a fourth part of
the circle is wanting, in the room of which there is a thick, strong and
membranous substance, more soft than the Gristles, that the Gullet which lies
upon it on that side, might not be hurt by them.

These Ring-fashioned Gristles are joined together by strong Ligaments, which
Ligaments do everywhere keep the Gristles at an equal distance one from the
other.

Table XVIII.
Fig. I. Shows the lower part of the Windpipe with all its branches as they
were spread through the Lungs, clearly separated from all other Parts of the
Lungs; to which branches are annexed all the bladders of Air, found out by
Malpighius and here lively represented.

AA Show a portion of the aspera Arteria or Windpipe. BBBB Its division into
branches which run into the several Lobes of the Lungs. CCCC The several
extremities or ends of the said branches. DDDDDD The innumerable little
bladders at the ends of those branches. E Shows where the Windpipe is cut off
from the upper part of it. FFF The several circular Gristles which help to
compose the Windpipe. GGG The membranes or skins betwixt each Gristle which
are another part of the substance of the Windpipe.
Fig. II. Shows the upper part of the Windpipe cut off.

A Shows the cartilago scutiformis, or Shield-fashioned Gristle. B The several
Gristles and Membranes that make up the body of the Windpipe.
anatomical view of a horse's windpipe and its branches TAB XVIII page. 92
Fig. 1.


Fig. 2






The Windpipe like other Parts has Vessels of all sorts; first it has Veins
from the external Jugulars; Arteries from the Carotides; and Nerves from the
recurrent Nerves of the wandering or eighth pair, (commonly reckoned for the
sixth.)

When it is descended about two hands-breadth into the Chest, it is divided
into two trunks, one whereof goes into the right Lobe of the Lungs, and the
other into the left. Into which as soon as they are entered, each is again
subdivided, and those subdivisions still branch out into more, till they become
very numerous and slender, and are dispersed among the pulmonary Bloud-vessels,
but end into the little bladders above-described.

The use of the Windpipe is, first, to serve as a nozle to a pair of
Bellows,to wit, that the Lungs by the Air entering in by it may be heaved up.
Whence when the inside of it is slabby with too much phlegmatic humor, or
there happens to be any obstruction in it, or any of its branches in the Lungs,
there follows a wheazing and shortness of breath, because the Air has not a
free ingress into the Lungs.

The next use of it is to let the Air out from the Lungs, and together with it
smoaky vapors steaming through the pores of the Lungs out of the blood. By
help of it also, but especially of the Throttle or upper part, does the Horse
neigh, or whinney as they call it in some Countries, while the Air is driven
forcibly out of it in expiration. And thus much as to the Windpipe.

A second sort of Vessel or Pipe dispersed through the Lungs, and composing a
considerable part of their bulk, are the Bloud-vessels, which are partly a
branch from the great Artery, but principally the pulmonary Artery and Vein,
whose branches are spread to and fro in a great number through its whole
substance, and there complicated and twisted with the branches of the
Windpipe, the Artery running along the under side and the Vein the upper side
of it, both cleaving so close to it that they are not easily to be separated.
These Arteries and Veins have communication one with another in several places
by anastomoses, the little twigs of the Arteries opening into those of the
Veins, for the readier circulation of the blood through the Lungs. Most
admirable is the contexture of these Vessels about the Air-bladders; for their
small thred-like twigs are interwoven one with another with the most curious
artifice (somewhat resembling a Net) round about all of them; which most
probably is so done, to the end that all the particles of the blood may be
impregnated with Air, while it passes through these fine Vessels that twine
about the Air-bladders on all hands.

Table XIX.
Represents the pneumonick or pulmonary Artery and Vein cut off from the
right and left Ventricles of the Heart, and also freed or separated from the
branches of the bronchia or Windpipe.

AA Show the pneumonick Artery cut off close by the right Ventricle of the
Heart. BB The pneumonick Vein cut off from the left Ventricle of the Heart.
CCCC Their several branches accompanying the branches of the Windpipe from
which they were pulled or torn, which are dispersed through the whole substance
of the Lungs. DDDD The ends or extremities of all the said branches which do
end in the extreme parts of the Lungs, and which for their smallness are called
capillary or hairy.
anatomical view of a horse's pulmonary artery and vein TAB XIX page 94.




A third sort of Vessel branching in the Lungs are the Lympheducts, so called
from their office, which is to hold and convey a certain kind of water or
humor called Lympha. These Vessels we described more fully in Book I. chap.
12. Here they wait on the Veins and Arteries through the whole surface of the
Lungs, and receive the humor or water that they contain from them, being first
separated by the Glands; which humor seems to be a superfluity of the blood
and it may be the nervous juice, which after they have received, they discharge
into the thoracick duct, into which the greater branches of them are inserted.
Though these Vessels be but slender, yet they are of great use and necessity;
for as Doctor Willis affirms, if at any time any of the branches of them happen
to be obstructed or broken, there follows thereupon in Man a Dropsy of the
Lungs and Breast, oft-times accompanied with Coughs or Phthisicks: and this
happens, because by their being obstructed or broken, the superfluous humor
which they like so many channels use to contain or let pass through them and
carry off, is left behind, or distills into the Chest, which there breeds the
sore-mentioned Distempers. Which opinion of his confirms me in my belief of the
original of that watery humor in a Horse, which I have very often in a
plentiful manner found in his Thorax in dissection, as I have above in this
Chapter already said.

To these three sorts of Vessels a fourth is also added, which are the Nerves,
with which they are well stored, having innumerable branches of them dispersed
through all their substance, accompanying the Bloudvessels and Pipes of the
Windpipe; which Nerves do branch to them from the recurrent Nerves of the
wandering pair.

Now the Lungs being thus interwoven with these four sorts of Vessels, are
covered with a strong skin, or indeed two skins, for it is no hard matter to
separate it into two.

These skins are furnished with very many pores or holes of an indifferent
largeness, plain to be seen (says Bartholin) if you blow up the Lungs with a
pair of Bellows or Pipe. Which he does not only affirm that himself has seen,
but also quotes Johannes Waloeus, who (says he) has observed them to be in
Live-anatomies as large as to contain a pretty big Pease. Such pores, perhaps,
there may be discernible in Live-anatomies, though whether so large as to
receive a Pease I somewhat question. Indeed I had never my self the opportunity
of observing the Lungs in Creatures yet alive, but as soon as they have been
dead, though I have made never so great haste to take the Lungs out before they
should be any thing cold, yet I could never see any of them, although I have
blown the wind through the Windpipe with such violence, that I have broke some
of the small branches of it, and with the said wind have raised little bladders
in the outer skin of the Lungs; I say notwithstanding, I could never see or
discern any of these little pores, that did let any of the said wind out, but
the wind has continued in those little bladders several days. Which experiment
I allege not with a design to disprove those worthy and learned Anatomists,
that affirm to have seen them; but only to show that if any such there be,
nothing passes through them out of the Lungs into the Chest. But now on the
other hand, that something may be received by them out of the cavity of the
Chest into the Lungs, is not improbable; seeing one cannot imagine how corrupt
purulent matter collected in the Chest from an Imposthume breaking in it, or
the like, should by any other way get into the Windpipe, so as to be cough'd
up, which it often is as well in Horses as in Men. If the investing skins be
removed in any part of the Lungs, and afterward one blow into them through the
Windpipe, then will the Air issue pretty strongly out at the Breach. The outer
of the skins is smooth and thin, but the inner is pretty thick, and on its
inside rough, appearing like an Honeycomb, by reason of the extremities of the
Vessels, and of the bladders ending at it. Both growing close together as they
do, make a very strong Membrane, which is very necessary; for otherwise in
anhelation, or deep and violent inspiration, it would have been in danger of
breaking when the Lungs are so much distended, to the great inconvenience if
not certain death of the Creature to which it should so have happened.

Having finished the description of the several things of which the Lungs are
compounded or framed, in the next place we proceed to speak of their action and
use.

Their first use then is, (according to Galen) to serve as a soft Pillow or
Bolster for the Heart to rest upon, that the hardness of the Parts behind them
should not offend it in its pulsation.

Secondly, They are the instruments of respiration or breathing, which is their
proper action. Now respiration is performed by two motions of the Lungs, viz.
dilatation and contraction. When they are dilated, they receive in Air, and
this is termed inspiration; but when they are contracted, they expel or drive
forth the Air, which is called expiration.

While the Air is drawn in in inspiration, a double benefit accrews to the
Beast: First his Heart and Blood are thereby cooled; whence we see that the
hotter he is, the more frequently he draws his breath, that the blood may be
the more fanned by the cool Air. Secondly, hereby the vital flame is continued;
for as an ordinary Fire is extinguished by withdrawing the Air from it, so does
the Animal die when it is denied Air to breathe in. To these benefits of
inspiration may be added, that when the Lungs are heaved up by the Air drawn
in, their substance is rarefied, so that there is granted a freer circulation
of the blood through them.

The Air having performed these offices, by its stay in the Lungs it becomes
hot, and so can be of no further use for cooling the Heart and Blood; and its
nitrous particles are consumed by the vital flame that feeds upon them, and
therefore it becomes necessary to expel it, that there may be room for new and
fresh Air to be drawn in for the uses aforesaid. So that this drawing in and
expelling the Air succeed one another by turns, and answer to the systole and
diastole of the Heart; only this motion of the Lungs is partly voluntary and
partly natural, but that of the Heart wholly natural.

But neither is expiration or breathing forth without its particular uses; for
by it are vented or voided the smoaky or sooty steams or excrements of the
Heart and arterial Blood, (which excrements are brought from the Heart through
the pneumonick Artery with the blood:) also the thin and thick excrements of
the Lungs gathered in the branches of the Windpipe are by this motion of
expiration, (heightened into a cough) brought into the one great trunk thereof,
through which as through a Reed it is driven by the force of the Air up to the
Mouth and Nose, to be by them voided.

Of what nature the motion of the Lungs is, and by what Muscles of the Breast
it is assisted, the Reader may inform himself in the fourth Chapter of this
Book that treats of the Midriff, whose motion corresponds to this of the Lungs.

CHAP. X. Of the Neck.
The contained Parts of the Neck. Of the Larynx. Its figure. Its substance.
Five Cartilages. Its Vessels. Its Kernels. The Pharynx.

HAVING now finished my Discourse of the two Lower Venters, order of Dissection
requires that I should ascend to the third and uppermost Venture, and treat of
the Head and Animal Faculty; but I will first speak to those Parts which lead
me thither, and those are the Parts of the Neck.

The Neck is called in Latin Collum, a colle, from an hillock; for it arises
out of the Body as an hill does out of the rest of the Earth.

It comprehends the distance between the Head and Breast, and its Parts are
containing, or contained: as for the former, they are such as are found in the
other Parts of the Body; but

The Parts contained are peculiar to it self, and are these: the Gullet, the
Windpipe, the Vertebrae, or Joints of the Neck, and its Muscles. Of these two
latter we shall discourse in the Fourth and Fifth Books; and of the two former,
we treated of one in the First Book, as belonging to the Stomach, and of the
other in this as pertaining to the Lungs. But because the uppermost parts of
both these next to the Throat are distinguished from the rest by peculiar names
and have particular uses, we shall treat of them in this Chapter. Now the top
of the Windpipe is called Larynx, and of the Gullet, Pharynx.

The Larynx or Throttle is situated, as has been said, at the upper part of
the Neck, adjoining to the root of the Tongue. It is in Humane Bodies the
instrument of the Voice, and in whatsoever other Creatures, of that noise which
they make, by what name soever it be distinguished, as particularly of the
neighing of an Horse.

Its figure is round and almost circular, only bunching a little out on the
foreside, and depressed as much on the back-part next to the Gullet, for the
Gullets better and more secure passage, and that the meat in swallowing might
not be hindered from descending by it.

It is framed of five Cartilages or Gristles, the first of which is called
Scutiformis or Buckler-like, because it resembles a Shield or Buckler, being
hollow within and bunching without. In Humane Bodies (in Men more especially,
for Women have it not so far sticking out as Men) this bunching out is by some
Anatomists termed Adam's Apple, from an old Tradition that a part of the fatal
Apple abode sticking in Adam's Throat in that place.

The next or second Gristle of the Larynx is called Annularis from the
resemblance it has to a Turkish Ring, wherewith they arm their Thumb when they
shoot. This Gristle is round, and incompasseth the whole Larynx.

The third and fourth, because as they are joined together they resemble the
neck of an Ewer, are called Guttales. These two Gristles many times pass for
one, because they have but one skin proper to them both, and until that skin
be removed they are not to be parted. These two form the glottis or little
tongue, being a chink of that shape.

The fifth is termed Epiglottis because it is placed above the glottis or
chink. The substance of this is soft, and its shape like an Ivy-leaf. Its use
is to hinder the falling down of any thing that may be offensive to the
Windpipe, when the Creature does swallow either his meat or drink.

These Cartilages are moved by several pairs of Muscles, which shall be
described in the Fourth Book.

Table XX.
Represents the upper part of the Windpipe fastened to the os Hyoides, as
also to the root of the Tongue; likewise the os Hyoides it self separated from
all other parts; it contains also two other figures of the upper part of the
Windpipe, to show its several Parts.

Figure I.

Shows the upper part of the Windpipe, and the Parts to which it is fastened.

AAAA Show the Cartilages or Gristles of the upper part of the Windpipe. BB
The head of the said Windpipe fastened to the os Hyoides. C The Ligament that
fastneth the head to the said bone. DDDD The os Hyoides. EE The bones that join
with the os Hyoides at the bottom of the Head. FF The Tongue.
Figure II.

Shows the os Hyoides separated from the Windpipe and from the Tongue.

AA Show the two long bones joined to the os Hyoides, whose other ends are
fastened (when in their places) to the bottom of the Head. BBB The several
cartilaginous bones that make up the os Hyoides.
Figure III.

A Shows the Epiglottis or Throat-flap turned more upon the upper side, the
plainer to show the back parts of it. B The backside of the Scutiformis. CCC
The Cartilages or Gristles of the Windpipe.
Figure IV.

Shows the upper part of the Windpipe with the Shield-fashioned Gristle and
Throat-flap turned on one side to show the sides of those Parts.

A The Epiglottis or Throat-flap. B The Shield-fashioned Gristle. C A portion
of the Windpipe.
anatomical view of a horse's tongue, windpipe, and hyoides bones Table XX
page.97.
Fig. 1.


Fig. 2.


Fig. 3.


Fig. 4.






The Vessels of the Larynx are of all sorts. Veins are derived to it from the
external Jugulars; Arteries from the large branch of the Carotides; Its Nerves
it has from the recurrent Nerves of the (eighth, commonly reckoned for the)
sixth pair, which are called in those Creatures which have voices, vocales.

There are also two sorts of Kernels belonging to it. One pair is called
Tonsillae, which are placed at the sides of the Uvula, and at the upper part of
the Larynx. These are those which in Humane Bodies are called the Almonds of
the Ears, and are of this use, viz. to separate that phlegmatic humor from the
blood that makes the slaver; which humor serves to moisten it, and also the
Gullet, that by their glibness or slipperiness they may the better serve for
their respective uses.

The other pair of Kernels are placed contrary to the former, namely at the
lower end of the Larynx, in number two, one on each side of the Buckler-like
Gristle. In Horses they are much larger than the former, and by them large
branches of the external jugular Veins and Arteries do run. These are those
Kernels under the Throat or between the Jaws of an Horse that one may plainly
feel at any time, but more especially when an Horse has the Glanders, for in
such they are much swelled.

The Pharynx (or top of the Gullet) is so called from a Greek word that
signifies to carry, because it conveys the meat and drink from the Mouth toward
the Stomach. It is somewhat more fleshy than the rest of the Gullet, and
reaches up, behind, to the Uvula, on the sides to the Tonsils, and on the
forepart to the Epiglottis. It has several Muscles by the help of which it
performs its motion, of which we shall treat in the Fourth Book. Its use is to
receive the meat when it is chewed, and grasping it on every side by
contracting it self, to squeeze it down the Gullet, by which it descends to the
Stomach.

Thus much of the Parts of the Neck, which brings me to

The End of the Second Book.
THE ANATOMY OF AN HORSE. BOOK III. Of the Head.
CHAP. I. Of the Head and Animal Parts contained therein.
The common containing Parts of the Head. The proper containing Parts. The
Muscles. The Pericranium. The Periosteum. Dura meninx. Its connection The falx.
Its Sinus's. Tenuis meninx. Its Vessels. The use of the Meninges.

HAVING finished the description of the two Lower Venters, which are two of the
principal Parts of the Body; I come now in the next place to betake my self to
the last principal Part which is the Head, being the seat of the Animal
Faculty, as the two lower are of the Vital and Natural.

In dissecting of this Part I shall follow the same method as in the two
former, examining its Parts in order, as they offer themselves to our sight in
dissection, first dividing it into parts to that intent.

But before we begin to divide it, I think it will not be amiss to speak
something of its supereminency over all the other Parts; for in respect that it
is the seat of the Senses, it is looked upon by Anatomists to be the chief
Mansion House of the Animal Soul; and Sense is so necessary to every living
Creature, that without it, it is not far from being without life. And as the
Head in this regard is the most principal Part, so is it accordingly situated
in the uppermost place, above all the other Parts of the Body, for this reason,
viz. that the Animal spirits as from a fountain might spring from thence, and
communicate sense and motion down to all Parts of the Body: but for the Eyes
sake more especially has it this high situation, for thereby two conveniences
accrue to the sense of seeing; first, the Eyes being placed as in a
Watchtower, can discover things at the greater distance, and thereby prevent
many dangers which might otherwise come unawares: and in the next place by
being placed so near the fountain of Animal spirits, the optic Nerves, which
are of a soft substance, and could not therefore endure a long passage, are
secured from breaking.

As to the figure or shape of the Head, I will omit speaking of that, since it
is so visible and so common to be seen. And though something might be spoken as
to the true and most natural shape of an Horse's Head, yet that being already
described by other Authors, and may by me (if God shall so long spare my life)
be treated of more at large in another Book which I design to set forth of the
several Cures performed by me, by such means and methods as I have experimented
since I came to understand Anatomy; I shall wave it at this time, and speak no
more of the Head in general, but proceed to treat of its Parts.

The Parts of the Head, (as of the other two Venters before discoursed of) may
be distinguished into Parts containing and contained. The containing are either
common or proper; of which in order.

First then of its common containing Parts; the first of which is the Cuticle
with its hairs, of which we have sufficiently treated in the first Chapter of
the First Book; the next is the cutis or True skin, also the Fat and fleshy
Pannicle, of all which we have treated at large in the five first Chapters of
the First Book, whither the Reader may please to turn back for his better
information.

The proper containing Parts of the Head are five, namely the Muscles, the
Pericranium, the Periosteum, the Skull, and the Membranes or Meninges contained
within it.

To the Muscles we will speak in the next Book which is of the Muscles,as being
the most proper place.

The fleshy Pannicle or membrana carnosa together with the other common
investing Parts above it being removed, the Pericranium next appears, which is
a thin, white and very sensible Membrane spread over the whole Skull, adhering
immediately to the Periosteum everywhere, saving where the temporal Muscles on
each side come between them. There are many slender Fibers that pass from this
Membrane through the sutures or seams of the Skull, which are knit to the
crassa meninx or outer skin, which clothes the Brain on the inside of the
Scull; whence some are of opinion that the Pericranium has its rise from it.
Whether that be so or no, these Fibers however serve to stay the dura matter in
its place, whereby it hinders the Brain which it invests from being clash'd
against the ruggid Skull in violent concussions of the Head.

The next investing Part is the Periosteum, which is a Skin of much alike
substance with the Pericranium, only thinner. It is of the same nature with
that Membrane that invests all the Bones in the whole Body, excepting the Teeth
which are bare. From this Membrane it is that the Skull as well as all other
bones are sensible, for of themselves they are senseless Parts. It sticks very
close to the Skull, and it, as well as the Pericranium, has Arteries from the
external Carotides, and Veins from the external Jugulars.

We should in the next place speak to the Bones of the Head, or the several
Bones of the Skull distinguished by several sutures; but I omit them also here,
and shall speak to them in their proper place, ( viz. in the Fifth Book) and
proceed to the Parts within the Skull, the first of which is the dura meninx,
that is, the hard Skin or Membrane, called likewise crassa meninx, to
distinguish it from the thinner that lies next under it, and immediately
clothes the Brain.

This hard or thick Membrane is called by many Authors dura matter or the hard
mother, because they conceive that most of the Skins of the whole Body do
spring from it, and therefore it is esteemed as their mother.

Its figure and amplitude answer to the Bones of the Skull, by reason it
investeth all its cavities. It is knit, and that very strongly, to the bottom
of the Skull, to its processes, and to the circles of its holes, from whence it
cannot easily be removed. It is suspended also by the Fibers above-spoken of
that come through the sutures of the Skull from the Pericranium, as likewise by
the Bloud-vessels that penetrate the Skull and are inserted into this Membrane.
By which Vessels it is in like manner fastened to the Skin under it called the
pia matter, and in several places to the Brain it self. It consists of two
Skins, as the Peritonaeum of the Lowest Venture, and the Pleura of the middle
do. In its upper part it is doubled, and its duplicature divides the Brain into
two parts, the right and left. This duplicature being in the hinder part broad,
and growing narrower still as it inclines to the forepart, I mean toward the
Nose, is by Physicians called falx or the sickle, because in a Man's Head which
is pretty round, it makes almost an half circle, as a sickle does. We may
retain the same name for it in an Horse, though less properly, as differing
somewhat in shape.

In this reduplication there are several cavities or hollownesses, commonly
called by the Latin name sinus, which are accounted receptacles of abounding
blood and spirits; by Galen they are called the Ventricles of the dura matter,
by others cisterns of blood. The highest of these, and also the longest, does
run all along the top or upper part of the falx from the Nose length-ways of
the Head toward the Noll, where it is divided into several branches, two of
which descend downwards to the bottom of the occiput, and a third runs to the
glandula pinealis.

Into these hollownesses or sinus's the mouths of the Veins and Arteries are
said to open, the Arteries pouring blood into them, and the Veins receiving it
from them again, as has been observed in the dissecting the Heads of living
Creatures, for in the long or uppermost sinus has been seen a strong beating
or pulse occasioned by the blood that is discharged into it by the Arteries.

The other Membrane or Skin which invests the Brain is called tenuis meninx
from its thinness, and pia matter or tender mother from its immediate covering
or close sticking to the Brain, embracing it as a Mother does her Infant. It is
spread over all the cortical or outer part of the Brain, insinuating it self
into all its windings, as also into those of the cerebellum and medulla
oblongata, and ties all their processes and parts to one another, that they
cannot be displaced or bear hard upon one another. And wherever it goes, the
Bloud-vessels run along it, and are dispersed out of it into the Parts that it
clothes.

This Skin is very thin, and of a most exquisite sense, yea this and the dura
matter seem to be the instruments of all sensation. For as sense is communicated
to every part immediately by the Nerves, so the nervous Fibers are more
probably propagated from these Membranes that cloth the Nerves, than from the
medullar Part it self of the Nerve which is derived from the medulla oblongata
and spinal marrow, which of themselves have little or no sense, but only by
virtue of these Membranes that invest them.

It is furnished with very many Arteries and Veins, most of which are exceeding
small, but in number infinite, interwoven one with another in the manner of a
Net. The Arteries do spring from the Carotides and Cervical Arteries, and the
Veins from the jugular Veins.

The use of these two Membranes that invest the Brain is to sustain the Vessels
that enter into it, to cloth and defend it from the hardness of the Parts that
environ it, to keep it in its due form and situation (for of it self it would
run all about, it is of so soft a consistency) and lastly to afford a coat to
all the Nerves, not only to those that spring within the Skull, but to all
those also that arise out of the Backbone, for these two Membranes are
propagated all along it, investing its pith, (called the spinal marrow) out of
which those Nerves spring.

CHAP. II. Of the Brain in general.
The excellency of the Brain. That an Horse has a Brain.

BEING come to treat of the Brain, it shall not be amiss, if before I speak of
its several Parts, I say something as to its excellency, and the eminent
offices it performs for the benefit of the Animal. All Authors agree that it
is one of the most noble Parts of the whole Body, ranked for its dignity even
with the Heart it self. And indeed, as I have intimated in the foregoing
Chapter, its situation shows plainly as much, it being placed in the highest
part of all the Body, and there fenced about as it were with strong walls on
every side, to secure it from outward injuries. In it are contained the Animal
Faculties, viz. those of Sense and Motion. The former of these two Faculties
sits in it as in a Throne of Majesty, beholding the forms of all things under
her feet, having all the Organs and Instruments of the Senses attending Her, at
her command. For first the Eyes are placed near her, that as Spies or Sentinels
watching day and night they may discover the Enemy. The Ears also are seated
near her, at her command to be turned this way or that way, to listen to any
dangers that are approaching, that so they may be avoided. Likewise the
Instruments of Smelling and Tasting are near her, that at her command those
Foods that are profitable and necessary may be received, and that unpleasant or
hurtful Food may be rejected. And as the Faculty of Sensation has the
forementioned Ministers or Instruments placed near her for the execution of her
offices; so has the motive Faculty a dominion extended to the furthest limits
of the Body, of which every Limb and Member is perfectly at her beck, to move
this way or that way as she directs. I say, both these noble Faculties have
their seat in the Brain; for it is not a private or particular Organ of Sense,
but an universal one; nor does the motive Faculty exert it self in the Brain it
self, which is incapable of voluntary motion; but that motion which it has, is
natural, and that not owing to it self, but to the Arteries that are dispersed
in it, for the beating of these makes it seem to widen, and contract it self,
as has been observed in Wounds of the Heads of both Men and Beasts. This
motion, I say, is communicated to it from the Arteries, and in its dilatation
it receives arterial blood by the Carotid Arteries, and in its contraction it
forces that Blood into the Veins, and the Animal Spirits into the Nerves, by
which they are carried into all Parts of the Body, and with them the moving
power is imparted; for without such influence from the brain an Animal would be
like a Log, it would be able neither to move nor feel, or rather it would cease
to be an Animal, and become a dead Carcass.

How absurd and ridiculous a thing is it then for any Man that has any Brain
himself, to imagine a Horse to have none? yet such Men I have my self met
withal, yea I know several which to this day will not be convinced of that
erroneous opinion by any arguments whatever. Neither will they take the pains
to inspect the Parts, to satisfy themselves of the contrary, but will still
continue in their false received opinion, merely taken from a silly observation
they have made when they have seen Horses and Oxen knocked on the Head, where
they see the Skull broken and nothing under it, but a few hard and dry Bones,
without any marrowy substance: I say from this observation they draw their
conclusion, that a Horse has no Brain. I much wonder how any such Dolt can
have the confidence to take upon him the name of a Farrier, and pretend to cure
he knows not what. Such Persons I would desire only when they see another
Horse knocked on the Head, that they prevail with them that do it, (or
otherwise when any Horse is dead) to strike him a blow or two with the same
force above the usual place between the Ears or a very little lower, and they
shall then be soon convinced that he has a Brain, (though not so large by much
as a Man has, considering the different bulk of their Bodies.) And when they
are convinced of that, I hope they will take pains to be satisfied in the other
Parts of the Body by searching into them, as by these my Labors they are
directed; so shall they improve themselves in their professions, and I have the
wished end of my pains, which I have taken to advance them.

CHAP. III. Of the several Parts of the Brain, viz. that which is strictly
called the Brain, the Cerebellum or After-brain, and the Spinal Marrow.
The Parts of the Brain. The manner of sawing the Skull asunder. The substance
and division of the Brain, (strictly so called.) Its action. The Cerebellum.
Its Parts.

IF we take the Brain in a large signification, it comprehends all that marrowy
substance that is found in the cavity of the Skull: yet for distinction's sake
it is by all Authors divided into three parts; first, the forepart, being the
largest, is called the Brain; secondly, the middle part is called Cerebellum,
the Brainlet or After-brain; and lastly, the hindmost and lowermost is termed
Medulla oblongata, being that part of the Spinal Marrow which is within the
Skull.

Now to find out these several Parts we must divide the Skull with a Saw for
that purpose, beginning almost as far back as the Noll-bone, or indeed quite as
far, dividing the hole of the Noll-bone in the middle, and so go with your Saw
first along one side of the Head a little above the auditory passage till you
come to the Forehead a little below the Eyes (or just even with them;) where
being come, and having sawed only just through the Skull, (for you must have a
care that your Saw do not pierce the Brain, for that will hinder your seeing
the Parts of it) then cross the Forehead with your Saw and pass along the
other side till you come to the hole of the Noll-bone again: by doing which you
will loosen the upper part of the Skull, which with care you must take off,
that you break not the dura matter or Skin next under it, for that Skin is
fastened to it in several places. When you have removed that piece of the
Skull, then remove the Skin also by parting it lengthways down the middle,
whereby you shall plainly see the Brain with its convolutions or folds, also
the After-brain with its wormlike processes, etc. in such manner as they are
represented in the following Table.

Table XXI.
Fig. I. Shows the Skull of an Horse sawed asunder in such a manner as that the
Parts of the Brain may be seen in their natural situation.

FF Show the substance of the Brain covered with the pia matter only, the dura
matter being removed for that purpose. HH The Cerebellum or After-brain also in
its natural situation. LL The processus vermiformes or worm-like Processes. MM
A portion of the medulla oblongata. NN The dura matter so far as it contains the
medulla oblonatag, cut in sunder and turned back. OO The Noll-bone cut in
sunder.
Fig. II. Shows the Brain removed and taken out, that the After-brain and its
Worm-like Processes might be the plainer seen.

CCCC The Cerebellum or After-brain turned a little downward, to show its Parts
more plain. B The Wormlike Processes. D The Spinal Marrow so much as is
contained within the Skull. EE That part of the dura matter which invests the
Spinal Marrow within the Skull, opened and turned back.
interior view of a horse's brain TAI. XXB. page.106.
I


II






Of these several Parts of the Brain we shall speak in their order, and first
of that which is strictly so called. It is of a marrowy substance, but not
equally so, for the upper part of it uses to be called its cortex or bark,
being of a more dusky color; whereas the inner or lower part is more white,
and is particularly called the marrow or pith of the Brain. It is divided into
two parts, a right and a left, by a Membrane that runs length-ways of the Head,
from the Forehead to the Noll; but this division descends no deeper into the
Brain than the Ash-colored part of it reaches. The Skin which divides it, is
called falx or the sickle, of which I have already spoken in the first Chapter.

The action of the Brain is to elaborate the Animal Spirits, which from it are
transmitted to the Medulla oblongata, and from thence into the Nerves, for the
sensation and motion of the whole Body, as has been more fully shown in the two
foregoing Chapters.

The second part of the Brain, called the After-brain, is situated in the
back-part of the Skull next the Noll-bone, only parted from the Brain on its
upper part by the pia matter or undermost Skin.

This differs not much from the Brain either in color or substance, but
only in its convolutions or foldings: for the Brain observes no order in its
winding, but the Brainlet does, for all its folds are circular, being extended
one over another like plates, and each is kept apart from other by the pia
matter that invests each of them severally.

It is framed of four Parts, whereof two are lateral, (or on each side) the
right and the left; and these are spherical, or round like a Globe: The other
two are in the middle betwixt these, standing before and behind; and these are
made up of several orbicular Portions in similitude like the Worms which are
found in rotten Timber, and are from thence called Worm-like Processes.

The use of the Brainlet or After-brain is the same as of the Brain.

CHAP. IV. Of the Spinal Marrow contained within and without the Skull.
The Spinal Marrow. Its substance. Its rise. Its figure. Its Membranes. Its
use. The number of Nerves springing from it.

THAT part of the Spinal Marrow that is within the Brain, is termed
particularly medulla oblongata, and is the third part of the Brain, being of an
uniform, white and compact substance, something harder than either the Brain or
After-brain.

It arises out of the Brain and Brainlet, and that from six roots; two of which
spring at the upper and forepart of the Brain, and are called corpora striata,
the streaked or chamfered Bodies, being only the ends of its two Thighs; the
other four arise lower and more backward, by which it adheres to the Brainlet,
and are those protuberances or jettings out that are called Nates and Testes,
its Buttocks and Testicles.

Its figure (after its rise) is long and round, being thicker near its
beginning than afterward. Its length within the Skull is about two inches,
beginning toward the forepart of the Head, and reaching to the Noll, whence
it is lengthned and continued down the Chine as far as the Dock. That part of
it which is contained in the Chine, we commonly call in Horses the pith of the
Back.

Within the Skull it is clad only with two Membranes; but without, it is
covered with three. The first of which it has from the inner Skin of the Brain
or pia matter; this immediately covers it. The second it has from the upper
Skin of the Brain or dura matter; this is next to and covers the former. And
the third is said to spring from a strong Ligament which binds together the
forepart of the Rack-bones, covering both the former, and is very strong.

Now the use of the Spinal Marrow is to be the original of all the Nerves,
which from it (as from a Fountain) like small Rivulets convey to all Parts of
the Body the Animal Spirits. For although the Brain in common speech be
accounted the original of the Nerves; that is to be understood in a large
sense, when all the three Parts of the Brain are included in that one general
appellation: But when the Brain comes to be divided into Parts, which are
distinguished by particular names, then are both the Brain and Brainlet thrown
out of the office of being the original of the Nerves. For ocular Inspection
does testify, that it is from that part of the Spinal Marrow contained within
the Skull, from which all the Nerves of the Brain do spring; as likewise from
that part of the Spinal Marrow without the Skull, called the Pith or Marrow of
the Back, that all the other Nerves of the whole Body do arise. Which large and
far distant origination of the Nerves is very necessary; for it would not have
been safe (in consideration of the length of the way) that all the Nerves
should be carried from the Brain to the inferior or lower Parts; and therefore
it is wisely provided by Nature, that from the Marrow or Pith of the back those
Nerves should spring which furnish the Parts so remote from the Brain.

As for the number of Nerves which spring from the Spinal Marrow without the
Skull, they are in a Horse thirty seven pair, according to the number of Joints
or vertebrae from the Noll-bone or the going out of the Marrow from the head,
to the setting on of the tail; for out of the holes or perforations in every
Bone do pass a pair of Nerves. Therefore there being so many Bones, there are
so many pair of Nerves that spring from the Spinal Marrow. And from the medulla
oblongata or that part of the Spinal Marrow that is within the Skull, there
spring nine pair, as shall be further showed hereafter.

CHAP. V. Of the Parts of the Cerebrum, or Brain properly so called, viz. the
Rete mirabile, Glandula pituitaria, Infundibulum, the Ventricles of the Brain,
the Corpus callosum, plexus choroides, Nates, Testes, Penis or Glandula
pinealis.
The Rete mirabile. Why so called. Its use. The manner of taking out the Brain,
and in what order the Parts appear. Glandula pituitaria. From whence the Snot
is separated in the Glanders. No such Disease as the mourning of the Chine. The
Infundibulum or Funnel. Corpora striata, Nates, and Testes. The Pineapple
Gland. Its use. The Ventricles. The manner of discovering them. Their uses.

HAVING given a short description of the Cerebrum, (or Brain properly so
called) the Cerebellum, and Spinal Marrow; we now return to the Cerebrum, to
take a more exact view of its several Parts; and we shall begin with the Rete
mirabile or wonderful Net.

This Net is framed of innumerable twigs of Arteries which spring from the
largest branches of the Carotid and Cervical Arteries, which pass into the
Skull by proper holes in the Bones of the Temples. This Net is far more
discernable in Oxen and Horses than in other lesser Animals.

It is called the wonderful Net by reason of its structure, the Arteries of
which it is composed crossing one another like the threads of a Net, or rather
as if several Nets were spread one over another. It is dispersed all over the
bottom of the Brain both without and within the dura matter, some of the
smallest shoots of it branching into the pituitary Glandule.

The use of this Net is said to be for the preparing of the Blood and Vital
Spirits to make Animal Spirits of. For which purpose in the twinings and
windings of these small Vessels they are a long time detained, for the better
elaboration and preparation of them, and lest they might rush into the Brain in
too full a stream, and thereby overslow and disturb the Animal Faculty.

To see this wonderful Net, as also the other Parts of the bottom or
under-side of the Brain, you must (after having sawn the Skull asunder, as is
showed in the foregoing Chapter) with a pair of sharp Pincers pinch off by
little and little the sides of the remaining part of the Skull, all round,
until you come as near the bottom as you can; and you must then with as much
care as possible lift up the Brain, beginning at the forepart of it, where the
Bone of the Forehead a little separates it. After you have lifted it a little
way up, there will come in sight the mammillary Processes together with their
nervous Filaments or Threads that pass through the Sieve-like Bone, hanging at
them; which being loosened and the Brain farther pulled up, the next thing that
appears are the branches of the Carotid Arteries, which having penetrated the
Skull are carried to the Brain; which being cut off and the Brain yet a little
farther turned up, the unition or coming together, and the going out of the
Optic Nerves are to be seen; the Trunks of which if you likewise cut off,
there are other Arteries (also branches of the Carotides) to be seen, coming in
through the Bones of the Temples: which Arteries (as I have already showed) are
(with some small Veins joined with them) those Vessels which make up the Rete
mirabile or wonderful Net, discoursed of at the beginning of this Chapter.

After you have cut in sunder these Arteries also, then you may by lifting up
the Brain still a little higher, perceive the moving Nerves of the Eyes (for
they come next to view) and after them the other pairs of Nerves follow in
order, in such sort, that one pair of them being cut off and the Brain with its
Appendices or Processes more lifted up, the next is still more plainly
discerned by the careful Anatomist. In which method and order all the Nerves,
to which I shall particularly speak in a convenient place, (I mean the Nerves
arising within the Skull) and also the Arteries, as well the Carotid as
Vertebral, being at length cut off, the whole frame of the Brain may be taken
out of the Skull.

Table XXII.
Represents two Skulls, the one to show the basis or bottom of the Brain and
the Head of the Spinal Marrow contained within the Skull, with the rise of the
Nerves from it; and the other shows the cavity of the Skull in which the Brain
was seated, but now removed, the better to show the Glandula pituitaria and
other Parts that lie under the Brain.

Figure I.

Shows the bottom of the Brain and Spinal Marrow.

AA Show the Eyes. BB The Optic Nerves. CC The moving Nerves of the Eyes. DD
The fourth pair of Nerves, by Doctor Willis called the Pathetick Nerves, proper
to one of the Muscles of the Eyes only, by which the Eye is chiefly moved in
the Passions of Love, Anger, etc. EEEE Several other Nerves arising from the
Spinal Marrow within the Skull. FFFF The bottom of the Brain. GG The Spinal
Marrow called here medulla oblongata. HH The Spinal Marrow cut off at its going
out of the Skull. IIII The several bars of the Palate of the Mouth. qq The
cavity or hollowness that goes from the Palate of the Mouth to the Nose. RRRR
The several Teeth. SS The dura matter cut insunder and turned back. T The
Glandula pituitaria.
Figure II.

Shows the Skull with the Brain taken out of it.

A Shows the hole where the Spinal Marrow passes out of the Skull. B The
Glandula pituitaria or Flegm-gland. CC The Optic Nerves. DD The bottom of the
Skull upon which the Brain did rest.
two views of a horse's skull TAB. XXII. page.110.
I


II






After you have thus taken out the Brain and viewed all its Parts as they
appear before you dissect it, you will at the very middle of its bottom, a
little above the uniting of the Optic Nerves, within the hard Skin or dura
matter, (for that is in the next place to be taken off and removed, otherwise it
will hide all other Parts from you; but that Skin being removed in the place
aforesaid, I say) you will find a small round Kernel, in compass about the
bigness of a Groat, and something flat and round. Its seat is in a little hole
made for that purpose at the very bottom of the Skull, in a Bone called the
wedge-like Bone. This will be more plainly seen if you take the Brain out and
leave the dura matter behind; for then you see it in its natural position, as
the letter B in Fig. 2. of the foregoing Table shows it: but if you take the
dura matter out, this comes out with it. This Kernel is called Glandula
pituitaria, the snotty or flegmey Kernel, from its office, which is to receive
the snotty Excrements of the Brain from the Infundibulum or Funnel, and
afterward to transmit or convey them away, as some Authors say, into the
Palate, from thence to be avoided by the Mouth or Nose. But others will have
it, that it is sent into the Jugular Veins by two small ducts or passages, one
on each side, being branches of one Trunk that begins at the bottom of the said
Gland, and is divided into two, after it has penetrated the wedge-like Bone.
Which passages they have found out by injecting Liquors of several colors with
a syringe into them, for they have observed the said Liquors to pass into the
Veins, but none to come to either the Palate or Nose. By which Experiment they
conclude, that whatever serum or wheyish or phlegmatic Humor issues out of the
Ventricles of the Brain through the Funnel, distills not upon the Palate, but is
poured again into the Blood and mixed with it. Whence we may gather that the
Rheum or Snot which issues so plentifully out of the Noses of Horses that have
great Colds, and also of glander'd Horses, falls not (as I have my self
sometimes thought) from the Brain, but is separated out of the Arteries from
the Blood by the Glands or Kernels of the upper part and inside of the Nose.
Which we may the rather believe, when we observe that other Glands are swelled
with Rheum at the same time, as particularly the Kernels under the Horse's
Jaws; which is one of the certainest signs we have of a Horse's inclining to
the Glanders. And this may serve to convict of error all our ancient Authors
who did hold, (and our Practitioners who at this day do hold) that the Glanders
proceed from a defect and wasting in the Brain; and that all that snotty matter
comes from thence which issues out of the Nose. Which were it so, all the Brain
in the Horse's Head would not be sufficient to supply it with matter for three
days, according to the quantity that I have seen come from one in that time.
It is therefore a very false opinion, taken up merely upon guess, without
inspecting into the Parts, that our Practitioners do commonly entertain
concerning this Disease.

Neither is there such a Disease as the mourning of the Chine,as they do to
this day hold; for it is impossible any Creature should continue so long alive
as till all his Brain be so far wasted by this Disease, that it comes to reach
the Spinal Marrow without the Skull, which is that I suppose they call the
Chine.

But this Disease, by them called the mourning of the Chine, is distinguished
into a different Disease from the former from the Matter's altering its color;
for it is generally observed that after the Horse has had this Disease running
on him for some time, the corrupt Matter or Snot changes by degrees from an
indifferent white to a more dull color, inclining at first to a little
reddish, but after a longer time, especially when the Horse begins to grow
toward his end, it will be very black and very nauseous both to see and smell.

From this alteration of the color, as I have said, I do believe they give the
Disease this proper and distinguishing name of mourning of the Chine; whereas
it is only a greater degree of one and the same Disease, in which the Chine is
not at all affected, at least no more than any other Part of the Body, all of
which languishes away by this inveterate Distemper. By what steps it proceeds,
and how the Matter comes to alter its color, I will give you my opinion.

The mass of Blood being depraved either by unwholesome Food, or by great Colds,
or lastly by infection from the Air and from other Horses (for this Distemper
is catching) this phlegmatic Matter collected in it is spued out of the ends of
the Arteries in the upper part of the Nostrils, about the spongie Bones
chiefly; for in an Horse there is little of this Matter comes out of the Mouth,
but it still descends by the Nostrils. This Humor, I say, distilling out of
the Arteries by the spongie Bones continually, does in process of time so fill
the said Bones with filthy Matter, that like a Sink or Chanel being choked up
with filth, there is not so free a passage for the Humor, as when the Disease
first began; so that the Matter by that means is there stayed, and by its
continuance there it acquires so bad a quality that it corrodes and cankers
those Bones, and indeed ulcerates and gangrenes all the passages of the
Nostrils, till it have mortified and consumed them (as happens sometimes to
Venereal Persons) and at length destroyed the Beast: for indeed it is seldom or
never curable when it is once come truly to be a Canker.

Now by the foulness of these Bones (as I have said) that Matter or Snot which
does descend by these passages, (which indeed does at length drivel down in a
greater quantity than before, by reason of the passages being widened from the
Parts being gnawn asunder by the cankered Humor; I say that Matter or Snot
which does descend after this) is of a contrary color to what it used to be,
for it is become more black and waterish, mixed with a little Red, and has a
very ill smell: but this alteration happens not from the Matter's flowing from
a new Part, but is caused by reason of the foulness of the Parts through which
it passes, for from thence it has its dye in a great degree.

Not but that there is yet another cause of it, which is the greater foulness
of the Blood: for as the beginning of the Distemper did proceed from the
corruption or depravation of the Blood, which was become as it were degenerate
from its spirituous, balsamic and volatilised condition, into a flat and
vappid state, like to dead Wine; so in process of time for want of the Spirits
to quicken it, and cause the fermentations necessary in the proper places of
the Body, where the excrementitious parts of the blood should be thrown off,
(there being several Bowels of the Body appointed to separate, and some that
have Receptacles to receive the same) I say, for want of these Spirits to cause
a fermentation whereby the excrementitious parts of the Blood should be thrown
off, such Excrements are collected every day in greater quantity, and acquire a
greater degree of malignity, being hardly any part of them discharged any other
way but this, which is preternatural, and most times becomes destructive to the
Beast, after the Disease has arrived to this height.

Thus have I given you my opinion concerning this Distemper, which though it be
new, will I hope to the intelligent Reader appear to be truer than that of our
Ancient or Modern Practitioners, few of whom (I may affirm without boasting)
have made so diligent an inquiry into this Distemper as I with great pains and
charge have done; for if they had, they would with great ease see themselves in
an error, and no more believe that there is or can be such a Disease as the
mourning of the Chine. But enough of this, (though I hope it will not be deemed
to be from the purpose:) I shall therefore return from whence I have digressed,
and describe the remaining Parts of the Brain.

Having examined sufficiently the Rete mirabile or wonderful Net, as also the
Pituitary Gland, if you then remove the dura matter quite from the Brain at the
basis or bottom of it, there will appear the head of the Spinal Marrow, so much
as is contained within the Skull, of which we have treated in a foregoing
Chapter. There may be also plainly seen the rise of the several conjugations or
pairs of Nerves, of which we will treat at large in a convenient place; also
the bottom of the Cerebel or After-brain, as the next Table does demonstrate to
you.

After these you may take a plain view of the end of the Infundibulum or
Funnel, (a cavity so called) which end reaches (before dissection) to the
Pituitary Gland, upon which it pours the phlegmatic Excrements of the Brain, as
has been already showed.

This Funnel is so called from its shape; for above, the head thereof is large;
but the lower part, is a long and strait Pipe. By some Authors it is called
Pelvis the Basin. Its beginning is said to be on the forepart of the third
Ventricle, by some so called, but I could never in a Horse see more than two
that I could properly call Ventricles, between which two this Funnel is seated,
and into which they do empty themselves, discharging their serous or waterish
moisture into it. This Funnel I have often found near filled with a thickish
Phlegm; and Doctor Willis says that in an Horse's Brain he has observed it wider
than a Goose-quill, and full of a clear Water.

Next come we to speak to those Parts of the Brain that lie hid, and cannot
well be seen without dissecting of it; and first of the Buttocks and Stones.
These are four orbicular Prominences or round Bodies jetting out of the medulla
oblongata (or head of the Spinal Marrow) of which the two first, namely the
Buttocks, are largest, and the latter ( viz. the Stones) seem to be only
accrescences to them. The Buttocks stand lowermost, and adhere to the Brainlet;
(as do also the Stones.) They are larger than in a Man, and look of a fleshy
color while they are clothed with the pia matter; but that being removed, they
appear yellowish, and of a different color from the rest of the Marrow. But of
these we discoursed before at the beginning of the fourth Chapter; as also of
the corpora striata or utmost ends of the medulla oblongata, that adhere to the
Brain properly so called.

These four Prominences are by Doctor Willis compared to Mole-hills, and are
therefore by him so called. They may be plainly seen if you but lift up the
hinder part of the Brain after you have separated it from the After-brain,
turning it as far back as you can without breaking it.

Between these four Prominences, or rather between the two lower of them, to
wit the Buttocks, there is placed a certain Glandule or Kernel, which goes by
the name of glandula pinealis, or Pine-kernel Glandule, from the resemblance it
is said to have with the Kernel of a Pineapple. It is also called the Yard or
Prick of the Brain, from its being placed so near the Buttocks and Stones, as
also because it resembles a Man's Yard. This Gland as also the Buttocks and
Testicles before-spoken of are represented in the next Table.

Concerning the use of this Glandule there are great disputes among the
Learned; but I subscribe to Bartholin's opinion, who believes its use to be
the same with that of other Kernels, which is to separate the Lympha from the
Arterial Blood.

There is as it were a chink between the Buttocks near this Glandule, which I
think fit to mention, because most Authors speak of it. Some give it the name
of Anus or Arse, others call it Vulva; but why they have imposed such names as
these upon these Parts, I cannot judge, nor is it worth the while to inquire,
seeing they have no other foundation but fancy: however, since they are known
by these names, I did think it fit not to pass them by, finding them as plainly
to be seen and as easy to be found in Horses as Anatomists find them in Humane
Brains.

I come in the next place to speak to the Ventricles of the Brain, which are by
some accounted four, by others three; but if dissection be made by beginning
from beneath, there will appear only two: and indeed I could never find more;
for that which is called the third, I cannot think to be one, but rather a
portion of the other two joined together. Nay, some Authors will have it that
there is but one, being only divided at the beginning, but at the end they
unite into and become one common Cavity, as any one that will diligently trace
them may observe.

To see these Ventricles you must cut the whole substance of the Brain insunder
in or as near the middle as you can guess, dividing the upper from the lower
side, whereby you will discover them in the middle of the Brain of that shape
as the first Figure of the following Table represents them in: for there they
are represented to the life, as much of them I mean, as can be seen without
farther dissection; and appear to be of a semicircular or Half Moon shape. But
if you cut the Brain further, and so follow their Cavities lightly with a Probe
forwards down toward the Nose (for there they sink deep into the callous body,
or white inner part of the Brain) you will trace them as far as the mammillary
Processes; and if backwards, you will find them to descend as far as the basis
or bottom of the Brain; and then if you will take a view of them when you have
laid them so far bare both ways, you will find them to resemble in shape in
Horse-shoe.

Now the uses of these Ventricles according to the diverse opinions of Authors
are many, but I will follow the most Modern in this point. First then they are
framed for the more easy passage of the Blood; for along their sides do pass
many branches of the Bloud-carrying Vessels, which could not so conveniently be
conveyed through the substance of the Brain, lest being compressed by the great
weight of it, the passage of the Blood should have been obstructed, whereas now
it has a free passage.

Another use of them is, to serve for the reception of the serous or wheyie
excrement of the Blood that is separated from it by the glandulous Skin that
invests them, and by the glandula pituitaria; which serous Humor issuing out
of the Arteries, is sucked up again by branches of the Jugular Veins, and is by
them returned with the Blood to the Heart.

In the Membrane that clothes these Ventricles there is a contexture of small
Vessels of both Veins and Arteries, which is called plexus Choroides. The
Vessels that make up this plexus, are little branches of the Carotid Arteries,
and some of the internal Jugular Veins interwoven with them. The Skin wherein
these Vessels are so interwoven has a great many small Kernels sticking in it,
which as I have already said, separate the serous Matter from the Blood.

In the Anatomical Discourses of Humane Brains there are several other Parts of
the Brain considered, as the fornix, the corpus callosum, the septum lucidum
and the like, all which are as discernible in the Brains of Horses as in Men,
and might therefore as largely be discoursed of: but it being not very material
to treat of them, I will for brevity sake but in a manner name them.

First then, that which is called the corpus callosum, is the white substance
of the Brain, plainly seen when you cut the Brain asunder in the middle to see
its Ventricles; for then you may view its white substance which makes the
middle part of the Brain; the outside of it being of an Ash Color, and going
by the name of cortex, or the bark.

The septum lucidum is only the Partition that divides the two Ventricles
above-described, some taking it to be a reduplication of the pia matter, and
others a portion of the Brain.

The Fornix or Vault is a kind of an Arch that stands between the Brain and the
medulla oblongata. It is of a substance like the corpus callosum, and is of a
triangular figure. Its use is to bear up the upper part of the Brain, that its
weight may not press upon the subjacent Parts.

Table XXIII.
Fig. I. Represents the Ventricles of the Brain with the plexus Choroides.

AA Show the two Ventricles of the Brain. BB The corpus callosum or white
substance of the Brain, being the middle part of it. CCC The Cerebellum or
After-brain. DD The plexus Choroides seated in the Ventricles of the Brain.
Fig. II. Represents the protuberances of the medulla oblongata called Nates
and Testes, and also the Glandula Pinealis.

D The Glandula Pinealis or Pine-kernel Glandule. GG Those two bunchings out of
the medulla oblongata called Testes or Stones. HH Its other two protuberances
called Nates or Buttocks. II A Ventricle between the Brainlet and roots of the
medulla oblongata, by some Authors called the fourth. MM The Processus
Vermiformes or Worm-like Processes. NNN The other Parts of the After-brain. OOO
Part of the Cerebrum or Brain to be seen under the After-brain.
anatomical view of the ventricles of a horse's brain TAB. XXIII. page.115.
I


II






CHAP. VI. Of the Action of the Brain, and the exercises of the Animal Faculty
by the Nerves and Fibers.
The action of the Brain. What the Animal Spirits are made of. How the Animal
Spirits enter into the Nerves; And how into the Fibers. Whence the Fibers
arise. They can move by the Spirit implanted in them.

HAVING hitherto spoken of the structure of the Brain, and discoursed of all
its Parts; I come in the next place to speak of its Action, in general, and to
show, according to the opinion of our most Learned and Modern Authors, how the
Animal Faculty exerts it self.

It is generally agreed that the proper action of the Brain (taken in a large
sense) is the elaborating of Animal Spirits; which Spirits are conveyed from it
by the Nerves into the several Parts of the Body for the performing of the
Animal actions or motions; for all voluntary motions are performed by the help
of these Spirits.

These Spirits are made out of the Vital Spirits and Arterial Blood, as out of
their proper matter. And the place wherein, or the principal instrument that
elaborates them, is not the Vessels, but the very substance of the Brain, into
whose parenchyma or marrowy substance the Blood and Vital Spirits are
extravasated.

Now concerning the manner how this Work is performed there are great
controversies amongst the Learned, and many arguments urged by each, which will
be too tedious here to recite: I will therefore give you only the opinion of a
late Worthy Author as delivered in his own words.

The Heart, says he, is like the primum mobile of the Body, to which the motion
of all the Humors that have once past it, is owing. This by its systole
impells the Blood as into all other Parts, so into the Brain, by the several
branches of the Carotides, whose innumerable twigs run partly through the outer
cortex or greyish part of the Brain, and partly into the inner medullar or
white substance of it. These twigs of Arteries spring partly from the Plexus
Choroides and Rete mirabile, and partly from the Carotides themselves
immediately. The superfluous serum of the Blood is separated by the Glands
before described; and that Blood which is not elaborated into Animal Spirits,
is returned again to the Heart by the Veins. But those particles that are fit
and proper to be converted into them, are extravasated into the very parenchyma
of the Brain, or at least are distributed through it by invisible capillaries,
in which being perfected into Spirits, these by the help of the Fibers or
Filaments which the inner part or substance of the Brain chiefly consists of,
are conveyed into the Corpora striata (or other Processes of the medulla
oblongata that adhere to the Brain) which consist of the like Filaments, and by
them to the Nerves, whose inner substance is fibrous like the medulla from
whence they spring. And the reason of this successive motion from one to
another, is the pulse of the Heart, whereby that which comes behind always
drives forward what is before. Whence (says my Author) the true cause of an
Apoplexy (wherein motion and sense are almost quite abolished) is from the
obstruction or compression of the Arteries of the Brain: whereby both little
Blood and Vital Spirits can be conveyed thither to make Animal Spirit of; and
also when it is made, it is not impelled out of the Brain along the Fibers into
the Nerves, to enable them to perform their functions. These are the words of
that worthy Author concerning this Work.

It remains now to inquire how these Spirits, after they are thus elaborated,
do perpetually flow from the Brain through the passages of the Nerves, and how
they enter and fill the several sorts of Fibers of which the moving and
sensitive Parts consist.

That the Brain and Cerebel are the first fountain of the Animal Spirits I have
in my foregoing Discourse already showed; from whence they flow along the
Nerves as by so many rivulets unto differing and distant Parts; till at length
they pass out of the most capillary Nerves into the small Fibers interwoven in
the Membranes, the musculous Flesh, and other Parts, and last of all into the
tendons of the Muscles, making them the organs of Sense and Motion: in which
Parts becoming more fixed, they are called the implanted Spirits, attending
their office whenever the Nerves with their influent Spirits bring from the
Brain the instinct for performing the same.

Now concerning these nervous Fibers in their several Parts, which are the
immediate instruments of the Animal Faculty, we ought to inquire from whence
they have their rise: It is plain they do not arise immediately from the Head,
or any of its marrowy Parts; neither can we reasonably judge them to spring
from the Nerves, because the Fibers in most Parts do much exceed the bulk or
bigness of the Nerve that is brought to them, as may be easily seen by the
tendon of every Muscle, which being made up of united Fibers, is observed to be
far greater than the Nerve that is inserted into the Muscle: so that it is
unlikely they should be only continued portions of the Nerves divided or
jagged into fine threads, as some have imagined; and it is more probable that
they are spermatick and primigenial Parts, that is, that the rudiments of them
were drawn in the first formation of the Parts of the Embryo in the Womb, as
well and as soon as the Nerves themselves; unless one would with Doctor Willis
except the Fibers of the sanguineous Parts, which he thinks to be bred
secondarily of the Blood and nervous Juice flowing into those Parts.

One thing further we must note concerning these Fibers, that they are enabled
to perform their motion, not only from the Animal Spirits that flow by the
Nerves at the instant of such motion, but also from the Spirits that are stored
up in the Fibers themselves; of which any one may satisfy himself in observing
an Animal newly killed when its Skin is taken off; for when life is perished,
and all the force of the Spirits flowing in through the Nerves has quite
ceased, yet the Spirits implanted in these Fibers breaking forth from the
Muscles still move and shake them, and force them into several convulsions and
trembling motions. This I have not only seen my self in several Horses I have
caused to be killed on purpose to dissect, but have also showed it to several
Spectators who have been very much pleased at the observation, and at the
variety of their motions.

CHAP. VII. Of the several pair of Nerves arising from within the Skull,
particularly of the first, second and third pair.
The first pair of Nerves, viz. the Smelling. The second pair, or Optic
Nerves. The third pair, or Eye-movers.

HAVING sufficiently treated of the Brain and Animal Faculty or Spirits, it is
fit that in the next place I should come to speak of the Nerves, beginning
according to the order of dissection with those that arise immediately from the
Brain, which I find to be of the same number in Horses as Dr. Willis has
observed them to be in Humane Bodies, viz. nine pair. I will therefore observe
the same method, and begin as the said Learned Doctor has done, with the
smelling Nerves first, because they are the foremost, and therefore do first
appear in dissection.

These Nerves are called the mammillary Processes,because they are round at
their end like a Pap. They take their rise from the shanks of the medulla
oblongata betwixt the corpora striata or chamfered Bodies, and the chambers of
the Optic Nerves; from whence running under the bottom of the Brain they do in
their course by degrees increase, and become broader and larger, and at length
reach as far as the Sieve-like Bone that is seated at the top of the Nostrils.
During all which way they are soft and marrowy, (being hollow within and pretty
full of moisture) but being arrived at this Bone, they receive a new covering
or coat from the dura matter, (being clad before only with the pia matter) with
which they are divided into many little Fibers or Filaments like little
strings, which do many of them pass through the holes of the Sieve-like Bone
into the cavities of the Nostrils, where they are distributed on every side,
entering into the Membranes that cover those Parts. These Fibers or Filaments
which do thus proceed from the before-named Processes, are believed to be the
true organs of Smelling, and of Sensation also. From whence it is that those
Persons that do not accustom themselves to draw snush up their Noses, are upon
the least scent of it provoked to sneeze: which is occasioned by the Powder's
ascending up the Nose and resting upon the tender Membranes thereof, wherein
the little Fibers of the smelling Nerves being dispersed, are immediately
irritated or provoked into a convulsive motion, which is that we call sneezing.
It was an old opinion that the Snivel was milked as it were out of the
Ventricles of the Brain by these Processes; but having above in the fifth
Chapter shown other Vessels which discharge that phlegmatic matter into the
Nose, namely the Arteries, it seems more probable that these Mammillary
Processes have a nobler use, namely that we have ascribed unto them, to be the
instruments of smelling. And therefore they are larger in Horses and all sorts
of Cattle than in Men, because it was necessary their Smell should be very
exquisite, seeing they can distinguish of the wholsomness or hurtfulness of
their Food by that Sense only.

Table XXIV.
Fig. I. Shows the Mammillary Processes, and the Bones at the upper part of the
Nostrils.

NN Show the Cartilaginous or gristly Bones of the Nostrils. OO The Mammillary
Processes or Smelling Nerves. SSSS The Sieve-like Bone through whose holes the
Fibers of the Smelling Nerves are branched.
Fig. II. Shows the Brain in its natural situation, and the Parts aforesaid,
etc.

AAAA Show the Brain in its natural situation covered with the pia matter. CCCC
The spongy Bones laid bare. DE The gristly Bones of the Nostrils. GGG The
Partition which divides the upper part of the Brain into two parts, a right and
a left. HHH The os occipitis or Noll-bone. OOOO The Sieve-like Bone, upon which
the Mammillary Processes do rest.
anatomical view of the bones of a horse's upper nostrils TAB. XXIV. page.119.
I


II






Next come we to the second conjugation or pair of Nerves, and those are the
Optic or Seeing Nerves; so called, either because they carry the visive
Spirits to the Eyes, or because they convey the representations of visible
things from the Eyes to the Brain.

These arise a little behind the former out of the medulla oblongata, and
having proceeded a while with a certain compass, they are united above the
saddle of os sphenoides, and that with a total confusion and mingling of their
substances, as far as by the naked Eye I could ever discern in all Horses that
I have dissected; though some Authors say that in Humane Bodies they do unite
indeed, but that it is only by contact, without confounding their Fibers with
one another.

These Nerves after they are thus united, do soon after again separate, and go
out of the Skull into the center of the Eyes, three of whose coats are made out
of the substance of these Nerves being dilated.

At their rise and a pretty way in their progress they are very soft, being
covered only with the pia matter; but as soon as they reach the dura matter;
they are covered with it also, and thereby become stronger and harder. This
outmost Membrane it is which does constitute that coat of the Eye called the
horney Coat or sclerotica; and from the inner or pia matter does proceed the
next Coat or Skin of the Eye called uvea or Grape like, from its color; and
lastly the marrowy substance of the Nerve does make the third Coat called
Retina or Net-like.

The Sense of Seeing like that of Smelling is by Doctor Willis said to be
performed not so much by the help of the Nerve, as of the Fibers which are
interwoven with the Organ; namely, says he, the little Fibers in the Coats of
the Eyes, and especially those that are inserted into the cornea or sclerotick
Coat, and disposed after the manner of a Net, do receive the impression of the
visible species, and by representing the image of the thing so as it is offered
without, cause sight: but it is the office of the Nerve it self to transmit
inwardly, as it were by the passage of an Optic Tube, that image or sensible
species, and to carry it to the common sensory.

The next pair are the Eye-movers, which are by Ancient Authors accounted the
second pair, but do by our Modern Authors go for the third pair.

These take their beginning from the basis or bottom of the medulla oblongata
behind the Funnel, from whence they proceed forwards by the sides of the Optic
Nerves. At their rise they are united, whence is a reason drawn that when one
Eye is moved toward any object, the other is directed also toward the same.

They are smaller, yet much harder than the former, and as was said, run along
by their sides until they come to the os cuneiforme or Wedge-like Bone; where,
as the Optic Nerves passed through the first, so these pass through the second
hole of that Bone, and so on until they come to the Muscles of the Eyes, into
several if not all of which they send a twig or small branch, which is in each
Muscle subdivided into innumerable other smaller ones, by which the Animal
Spirits are conveyed into the Fibers of the Muscles, and by consequence the
several motions of the Eye come to be performed, as shall be showed at large in
a more convenient place, when I come to treat of the Muscles of the Eyes in the
next Book.

CHAP. VIII. Of the fourth and fifth pair of Nerves that arise within the Skull.
The fourth pair called Pathetick. The fifth pair. The reason of blushing.

THE fourth pair of Nerves do arise contrary to all other: for whereas the rest
do take their rise from the bottom or sides of the oblong Marrow, these have
their beginning at the top of it, behind those round bunchings out of the Brain
called Nates and Testes, (of which we have already treated where we described
the Parts of the Brain.) From whence bending a little forwards by the sides of
the said oblong Marrow, they are immediately hid by the dura matter, under which
they run for some time, until they come to that hole of the Skull, where the
other Nerves designed for the Eyes do pass out, which these accompany, but do
not unite with, and at length terminate in the Trochlear Muscles of the Eyes.

This pair of Nerves are by Doctor Willis called the Pathetick Nerves, because,
says he, their office is to move the Eyes pathetically, according to the force
of the passions and instincts of Nature, delivered and remanded from the Brain
to the After-brain, and on the contrary from this to that, through the Nates
and Testes and their Medullar Processes. For, says that Learned Anatomist,
seeing that by the diverse impulse and undulation of the Animal Spirit's
dwelling in this by-path, there happen certain mutual commerces between the
Brain and Praecordia (the Cerebel mediating between either, from whose
Ring-like Process he will have the Nerves of the Praecordia to arise;) it is
necessary that these Nerves that are rooted in the middle way, should be struck
upon by every march or remove of the Spirits going this way or that way,
whereby the motions of the Eyes must needs follow the affections of those
Parts. With these Nerves, (says he) all perfect Animals are furnished, there
being none but are obnoxious to anger, love, hatred, and other Affections, as
may be discovered in every little Creature, but much more in this which we are
a discoursing of, there being none the aspect and gesture of whose Eyes do show
them more than a Horse's do.

Next come we to treat of the fifth pair, concerning the rise of which there
are several disputes amongst Authors, (Doctor Willis, particularly, affirming
that they spring from the Ring-like Process of the Cerebel:) but if their
original be strictly inquired into, I cannot find, in an Horse, (however it may
be in Humane Brains) but that they do take their beginning as the others do, I
mean from the oblong Marrow, only a little below the former pair.

These consist of very many Fibers gathered together, some of which are soft,
and some hard; so that they seem not to be so much one single pair of Nerves,
as a collection of many small Nerves into one bundle, some of which are
designed for one use and some for another, being for that purpose distributed
into several Parts remote one from another; in which they serve, in some for
motion, in others for sense: from whence it is, says Doctor Willis, that there
is that sympathy and consent of actions in those several Parts to which these
Nerves are distributed. As for instance, seeing some twigs go to the Eyes,
others to the Palate of the Mouth, Nose, etc. therefore when we see or smell
what pleases our Palate, our Mouth waters, as we commonly phrase it.

But that it may be better understood what and how many Parts have consent by
means of these Nerves, it will be convenient to discover their division,
progress and different insertion. Their Trunks, beginning or arising out of the
oblong Marrow, as has been showed, are divided each of them into two notable
branches, the first whereof tending straight downwards, and going out of the
Skull by their proper holes, are in their descent toward the lower Jaw, (for
whose Parts, says my Author, they are chiefly designed) divided into many
lesser branches, which provide for the Temporal Muscles, as also for the
Muscles of the Face and Cheeks. From these branches also there go twigs or
little shoots into the Lips, Gums, roots of the Teeth, Jaws, Throat, and to the
farther end of the Palate, and also to the Tongue.

The other branches of this pair of Nerves are called the superior or
uppermost branches, being larger than the other, and do thus run their course.
After their division from the former they go straight forward for a little
space under the dura matter nigh the side of the Bone called the Turkey chair,
and over against the glandula pituitaria send little twigs to the Trunk of the
Carotides, that makes the wonderful Net: then they are inoculated into the
Nerves of the sixth pair, and from thence send back sometimes one, sometimes
two shoots a-piece, which being united with two other slips turned back from
the Nerves of the sixth pair, do constitute the root or first trunk of the
intercostal pair of Nerves, reckoned for the ninth pair, of which more shall be
spoken by and by in the tenth Chapter.

After they have sent out the slips for the root of the Intercostal Nerve,
these same great branches of the fifth pair are again divided each into two
notable branches; the lesser and upper of which tends toward the globe of the
Eye, and being again divided sends forth two other, the first of which is
parted into two more, that go, one, to the Nose, and the other to the Eyelids;
and the second into four or five slips, that are mostly spent on the Eyelids,
but partly on the Coats of the Eye and its Glands.

The second or greater branch of the second division of these Nerves, being
carried toward the orbit of the Eye, is again divided into two new branches:
the lower of these being bent downwards, and cleaving it self into many shoots,
is bestowed on the Palate and upper region of the Jaws; the other, being the
higher, is carried beyond the orbit of the Eye, and passes through a proper
hole of the upper Jaw with the Vein and Artery which it twists about, and sends
many slips to the Muscles of the Cheeks, Lips, Nose, and roots of the upper
Teeth.

From this pair of Nerves being distributed to so many Parts, I say, may the
consent of those Parts one with another be learned: and particularly this is
worthy observation, That seeing they twist about the Bloud-vessels that go to
the Cheeks, etc. hence it is, that when in Men and Women the Animal Spirits are
disturbed by the imagination of some uncomely thing; as if they took care to
hide the Face, they enter these Nerves disorderly, whereby their twigs that
embrace the Bloud-vessels do compress and pull them, so that the Blood comes to
flow too impetuously into the Cheeks, etc. by the Arteries, and is detained
there for some time by straitning the Veins. But such observations belong more
to an Anatomist of Humane Bodies to which they are proper, and therefore I
shall return from this digression, which yet, I hope, will not be unpleasant to
the inquisitive Reader.

Table XXV.
Represents the Brain of an Horse taken out of the Skull, with the Optic,
Eye-moving, and Pathetick Nerves; as also the Eyes with their Muscles fastened
to them, having been taken out of the Skull without tearing or breaking of
them.

AAAA Show all the bottom of the Brain covered with the dura matter. BB The
Cerebellum or After-brain. CC Part of the medulla oblongata, or head of the
Spinal Marrow. DD The Glandula pituitaria cut in two in the middle, and turned
back to each side with the dura matter, the better to show the Chink or Funnel.
E The Chink called Vulva. FF The Mammillary Processes covered with the dura
matter, otherwise called the Smelling Nerves or the first pair. GG The rise of
the Optic Nerves, or second pair. H The uniting of the Optic Nerves. II Their
separating again, and their course down to the Eyes. KK The moving Nerves of
the Eyes or the third pair. LL The Pathetick Nerves reckoned by Doctor Willis
for the fourth pair. MM Doctor Willis his fifth pair of Nerves. NN The heads of
the Muscles of the Eyes, from whence they were all of them cut, to be separated
and placed as in the Figure. OO The orbicular Muscle of the Eye in its natural
situation in this Eye, but in the other Eye it is quite removed, the plainer to
show the course of the Optic Nerve to the Eye. PP The Muscle that pulls up the
Eye, called Attollens, or superbus, the proud Muscle. QQ The humble Muscle or
puller-down of the Eye, called humilis. RR The Muscle that brings the Eye
inwards to the Nose, called Adducens, or bibitorius, the drinking Muscle. SS
The Muscle that pulls the Eye outward, called Abducens, or indignatorius, the
angry Muscle. TT The Muscle that brings the Eye toward its inner corner
obliquely, and from that office is called obliquus inferior. VV The obliquus
superior cum trochlea, whose office is to bring the Eye obliquely to its
outward corner. WW The horney Tunicle or Coat of the Eye, with the pupilla or
sight.
anatomical view of a horse's brain and its eyes along with its muscles TAB.
XXV. page. 123.




CHAP. IX. Of the sixth and seventh pair of Nerves arising within the Skull.
The sixth pair. The seventh pair, or Auditory Nerves.

THOSE Nerves which are by Doctor Willis reckoned for the sixth pair, are in
the next place to be spoken to. These take their beginning just by the fifth,
and being for a little time hid under the dura matter, go at length out of the
same hole of the Skull with the before-named fourth and fifth pairs, and are
carried each with a single Trunk nigh to the Sockets of the Eyes; but so, that
near the side of the Turky-chair-bone they are inoculated with the second or
greater branches of the fifth pair. Whence they send back sometimes one,
sometimes two twigs, which being united with the first or recurring branches of
the fifth pair, as was noted in the foregoing Chapter, do constitute the
beginning of the Intercostal Nerves. Afterward going a little forwards, each of
them near the Orbit or Socket of the Eye, is divided into two branches; one of
which is inserted into the Abducent Muscle of the Eye (or the Muscle that draws
the Eye outward) which is seated in its outer corner; and the other being split
into very many Fibers is bestowed on the seventh Muscle of the Eye, which is
said to be proper only to Brutes. Whether Men do wholly want them, let others
examine; however, in the Animal we are treating of, they are very conspicuous
and most easy to be found, concerning whose use I will speak when I come to a
proper place for that purpose.

Next are the seventh pair to be examined, which by the Ancients (and by all
until Dr. Willis altered the account) were reckoned for the fifth pair. These
are employed about the Sense of Hearing, and are therefore called the Auditory
Nerves. They take their rise in Humane Bodies (according to Doctor Willis) out
of the lower side of the Annular or ringy protuberance of the Cerebel; but I am
sure they do not so in Horses, in whom I have always found them to arise from
the sides of the oblong Marrow.

They have each of them two Processes, one soft and the other harder; which
distinction of them makes many be of the opinion that they are indeed two pair
of Nerves, though usually they are accounted but for one.

The softest of these two Processes is properly called the Auditory Nerve, the
which is carried through an hole of os Petrosum (or the craggy Bone) into the
Cells of the Ear, which it clothes with a most thin Membrane, and by which the
sounds are conveyed to the common Sensory.

The harder part or process of the Nerve is said to conduce more to Motion than
Sense; which passing out also through its proper hole in the aforesaid Bone
does immediately receive a twig from the eighth or wandering pair; after which
it is straight divided into two branches; the first of which tending downward
is bestowed on the Muscles of the Tongue and the Bone Hyoides; the other
winding about the auditory passage and bending more upwards, is divided into
three Shoots; the first of which answering to the Nerve of the former division,
bestows certain slips on the Muscles of the Lips, Mouth, Face and Nose, and so
actuates some of the outward organs of the Voice, as the former does some of
the inner. The second of these Shoots being divided into many other lesser, is
sent into the Muscles of the Forehead, as also to the Eyelids. And the third
or last of them does run toward and spreads it self into the Muscles of the
Ears. Whence upon any unusual and astonishing sound the Ear is by a natural
instinct pricked up, to listen to it the more attentively, and at the same time
the Spirits flowing by other branches of this Nerve into the Muscles of the
Eyelids, cause them to be drawn as far asunder as is possible, that the Beast
may have the clearer view of any threatening danger; which posture of the Eyes
we call staring.

CHAP. X. Of the eighth and ninth pair of Nerves.
The eighth or wandering pair. The ninth or intercostal pair.

THE next pair of Nerves we are to treat of are the eighth, (commonly reckoned
for the sixth) otherwise called the wandering pair, from their being distributed
into many Parts, wandering as it were not only through the Head and Neck, but
through many of the inferior Parts of the Body both in the Chest and Paunch,
furnishing them with nerves branching from them.

These Nerves do also arise out of the oblong Marrow a little below the
Auditory Nerves. Their root or beginning consists of many Fibers, some of which
are smaller and some thicker, to which is added a notable Fiber or rather
Nerve, much greater than the rest, coming from the Spinal Marrow of the Neck,
which is joined with them and wrapped about with one and the same Coat taken
from the dura matter, as if they were but one Nerve. They continue to be thus
united till they have past without the Skull, after which they are dispersed to
several Parts. The Accessory Nerve is distributed to the Muscles of the Neck
and Shoulders; and one notable Fiber of the eighth pair joins it self on each
side to the harder Process of the Auditory or seventh pair, as also two others
run to the Muscles of the Gullet and Neck. But the rest of the Fibers of the
wandering pair continue together, going forward in one Trunk; and instead of the
other companion lately parted from them (I mean the Spinal or Accessory Nerve)
they entertain a new one, which is the Intercostal, or Nerve of the ninth pair.

In this place where the said Intercostal Nerve is united with this Nerve of
the eighth pair, there is made a notable Plexus, (that is, the Trunk of the
Nerve in that place swells into a kind of tumor, resembling the joint or knot
of a Cane.) For as the Intercostal Nerve is received into it, so out of it
there springs a considerable branch, which being carried toward the Throttle
is divided into three twigs; the first of which is stretched out into the
sphincter of the Gullet; the second being hid under the Shield-fashioned
Gristle, distributes its Shoots to the upper Muscles of the Throttle, and
particularly to the Muscle by which the Chink of the Throttle is shut up. The
third of these shoots or twigs going also under the Shield-fashioned Gristle,
meets the top of the Recurring Nerve and is united with the same.

Below the aforesaid inoculating of the Intercostal with the wandering pair,
which makes that Plexus before named, the Trunk of this latter goes straight
down by the sides of the ascending Carotid Artery, on which it bestows some
slips, and at the bottom of the Neck it sends out another twig into the
Recurrent Nerve, but this it does only on the left side.

From hence the Trunk of the wandering pair descends without any noted
branchings till it comes over against the first or second Rib, where out of a
second Plexus many shoots and numerous Fibers are sent forth toward the Heart
and its appendages, but not altogether in the same manner on both sides. Doctor
Willis says, many more branches are sent from this pair toward the Heart in
Beasts than in Men; for in these latter there are a great many twigs sent
thereto from the Intercostal pair, whereas there are very few in Brutes; so
that in both, the plenty of the one supplies the defect of the other.

There is (says the same Author) one notable difference worthy of note, of
the two Recurrent Nerves that spring out of the Trunk of this eighth pair, viz.
that that on the right side arises out of it higher, and winds about the
Axillar Artery; whereas that on the left springs much lower therefrom, and
twisting about the descending Trunk of the Aorta, returns back from thence, and
ascends upwards where in its progress it sends forth shoots to diverse Parts.

And that observation of the said Doctor is worthy to be taken notice of, viz.
That the Nerves that pass toward the Heart of Brutes are much fewer in number
than those in Men, of which (as also of their proceeding chiefly from the
wandering pair) he gives this ingenious reason; That seeing Beasts want
prudence, and are not much liable to various and diverse passions, it was not
therefore necessary that there should be two ways of deriving the Spirits from
the Brain to the Praecordia, namely one to bring Spirits to maintain the
exercise of the vital function, and the other to minister to the impressions of
the affections; but it is sufficient that all the Spirits, for whatsoever
office they are destined, should be conveyed thither by one and the same path.

Over against the Heart, the Trunk of the wandering pair sends forth many
notable branches on either hand, which passing to the Lungs, are distributed
through their whole substance along with the Bloud-vessels and branches of the
Windpipe, which they climb upon and twist about: and as it descends by the
sides of the Windpipe, it distributes also many slips into the Coats of the
Gullet. After these branches have grown out of these Nerves, then is each
Trunk, as it descends by the Gullet, divided into an outer and inner branch:
but presently the outer branches unite with the outer, and the inner with the
inner; and being so united, the former descends by the outside of the orifice
of the Stomach to its bottom, where it disperses it self; and the latter
descending by the inside of the orifice of the Stomach, turns back there, and
creeps along its upper part. To what other Parts the twigs of this eighth or
wandering pair are extended, the Reader may learn in the description of the
Parts themselves, in treating of which we have constantly observed to show from
whence their Nerves were derived.

After the wandering or eighth pair, by order of dissection the ninth and last
pair of Nerves that spring from within the Skull are to be spoken to.
Concerning the rise of which pair, there are various opinions; for some there
be that will have them only branches of the wandering pair, and that they take
their beginning from them: but that opinion is rejected, since it is now made
very apparent that they have another original, of which the often before-cited
Doctor Willis was the first discoverer, whom I may be bold to follow, since
none have given, nor it is probable can give a better account of them than that
Learned man, who says that the beginnings, (as also the different Trunks in
the progress) of these Intercostal Nerves are easily distinguished from the
former, notwithstanding they do often communicate or join together by branches
sent forth from one to the other.

But though they owe not their original to the wandering pair, and much less are
to be reputed as branches of them, yet have they no proper root of their own,
but do borrow their original from two or three recurring branches of the fifth
and sixth pairs near their origin, growing out of them as a Shrub upon another
Tree or Shrub.

These Nerves thus constituted do afterward run out of the Skull by their
proper holes, and presently on each side form a Plexus near that of the
wandering pair, into which two Nervous Processes out of the first vertebral pair
are inserted, and out of which there goes one twig or slip into the Sphincter
of the Gullet, and another into the Plexus aforesaid of the wandering pair.
Whence descending by the vertebrae of the Neck, by that time they arrive at its
middle, they have each another greater Plexus, into which a large Nerve from a
neighboring vertebral pair is inserted, and from which proceed some twigs that
uniting with others of the wandering pair are distributed all about the
Praecordia, (that is, to the Heart and Lungs) as also one single one a little
lower. It Is true, Doctor Willis affirms that this Plexus last spoken of is
proper to Man only; but since I find so little difference in the other Parts
between a Man and the Animal I am treating of, I suspend my belief whether this
Plexus may not be found in him also, though I have not been yet so diligent as
to make any exact inquiry into it.

This Plexus is called the Plexus cervicalis, because it is formed in the Neck;
whence the Trunks of this Intercostal pair descending by the Claviculae or
Chanel-bones into the Chest, as soon as they have arrived at the second Rib,
each of them receives three or four branches from the Vertebral Nerves next
above, whereby is made another notable Plexus, commonly called the Intercostal.
From whence as its Trunks pass down by the roots of the Ribs, in every one of
their Interstices, and even as low as the Os sacrum from every jointing of the
Vertebrae each Trunk receives a Vertebral Nerve.

As soon as they are descended out of the Cavity of the Chest, and are come
over against the bottom of the Stomach, they send forth on each side a notable
branch, each of which tending toward the Mesentery makes its chief Plexus's,
being in number seven, viz. five large ones which are upper, and two less that
are lower. For each branch is presently divided into two other, and every one
forms one Plexus, which make four; and the fifth is in the middle of these,
being the largest: and these are the five upper.

The two lower Plexus are framed of two branches that spring from the Trunks
descended as far as the lower part of the Loins, and are distinguished by the
names of Plexus infimus, and minimus, ( i. e. the lowest, and the least) which
two Plexus do furnish several Parts of the Lower Belly with Nerves.

Lastly, When this Intercostal pair have descended as low as the Os sacrum, and
have furnished in their course the several Parts of the Lower Belly with
Nerves, they bend toward one another and seem to be knit together by two or
three Processes, and at length each of them ends in small Fibers which are
distributed into the Sphincter Muscle of the Arse.

Thus have I given a description of the several pairs of Nerves arising within
the Skull, in describing of which I must own my self obliged to several worthy
Authors, whose Doctrine I have been forced much to follow and rely on in this
particular, having not as yet made a through inspection into these most curious
Instruments of the Animal Faculty my self: the chiefest of which Authors and
whom I have most followed, is that accurate Tracer of them, Doctor Willis, to
whom all that have treated of these Parts since him, have been so much
beholding. But only where he assigns some differences betwixt the course of
the Nerves in Men, and all Brutes in general, I cannot easily acquiesce in his
opinion in relation to a Horse, the frame of whose Body comes almost in all
respects so near to that of a Man's; however, till I have made a more exact
scrutiny, I shall forbear contradiction.

Table XXVI.
Shows the basis or bottom of the Brain of an Horse taken out of the Skull,
having the dura matter removed, the better to show the rise of all the Nerves,
and the other Parts of the bottom of the Brain.

AAAA Show the substance of the basis or bottom of the Brain. BB The Cerebel or
After-brain placed in the hinder part of the Head. CC The Oblong Marrow. DD The
Smelling Nerves, being the first pair. EE The Optic Nerves, being the second
pair. FF The third pair of Nerves, which move the Eyes. GG The fourth pair of
Nerves, by Doctor Willis called the Pathetick Nerves. HH The fifth pair. II The
sixth pair. KK Doctor Willis his seventh pair, being the Auditory Nerves, which
went formerly for the fifth pair. LLIII The eighth pair of Nerves, called
otherwise the wandering pair, which before Doctor Willis were reckoned for the
sixth pair. MM The Spinal Nerves, or Accessory pair, that unite with the
wandering pair. NN The ninth pair. OO The tenth pair (or rather the first of the
Neck) arising from the further or hinder part of the Oblong Marrow near its
going out of the Skull. PP The Trunk of the Carotid Artery cut off where it is
divided into the fore and hinder part. QQ A branch of it going into the
substance of the Brain. R The Infundibulum or Funnel. SS Two Glands or Kernels
placed behind the Funnel.
basal view of a horse's brain TAB XXVI. page 128.




CHAP. XI. Of the Nerves arising from the Spinal Marrow, while it is in the
Vertebrae of the Neck.
Thirty seven pair of Nerves spring out of the Spinal Marrow. The first pair of
the Neck. The second. The third and fourth. The fifth. The sixth. The Accessory
Nerve, that ascends to the Brain, and unites with the wandering pair.

HAVING treated of the several Conjugations or Pairs of Nerves which take their
beginning from that part of the Spinal Marrow contained within the Skull, the
usual and most natural method requires me next to proceed to those that spring
from that part of it that is contained in the Vertebrae of the Neck and Chine
without the Skull.

We observed in a Chapter above, that in its whole progress from the Skull to
the Rump-bones there spring from it thirty seven pair of Nerves. Particularly,
while it is in the Neck, there arise out of it seven pair; while it is in the
Back, seventeen pair; while it is in the Loins, seven pair; and while it is in
the Os sacrum, six pair: for as was noted before, such is the number of the
Joints in the Rack-bone, betwixt every of which a pair of Nerves issues. Of all
which we will treat briefly in order.

The first pair of the Neck, though it be commonly reckoned among the pairs of
the Spine or Rack-bone, because it comes out from between the first Vertebra
and the Skull; yet if we consider its rise, it ought rather to be reputed the
tenth pair of the Brain; for it rises with many Fibers from the Spinal Marrow
while it is yet within the Skull, but presently after its rise tends backwards
or downwards (whereas all the rest that arise within the Skull go forwards.)
This pair is chiefly bestowed on the Muscles of the Neck.

The second pair comes out between the first and second Vertebrae of the Neck,
and is bestowed upon the Neck, Head and Face.

The third and fourth pair come forth of the holes that are between the second
and third, and the third and fourth Vertebrae, and are spread into the Muscles
of the Cheeks, as also into the Muscles that are common to the Head and Neck.

The fifth springs forth between the fourth and fifth Vertebrae. A twig from
each Nerve of this pair, being joined with the like twigs of the fourth and
sixth, do make that remarkable Nerve that goes to the Midriff, and is called
Nervus Phrenicus. The other branches of this fifth pair are distributed some of
them backward and some forward into several Muscles; some of which do bow the
Head; other twigs run toward the Forelegs, and are distributed into several
Muscles about the Shoulders.

The sixth pair comes out under the fifth Vertebra, and has, as the rest,
several branches; some of which go to the Muscles of the Forelegs, and some to
the Muscles of the Neck; but one particular twig helps to make up the Trunk of
the Nervus Phrenicus, joining it self with the aforesaid twigs of the fourth
and fifth pairs.

The seventh pair comes out of the hole common to the sixth and seventh
Vertebrae, which joining with the foregoing pair, viz. the sixth of the Neck,
and likewise with the two following, viz. the two first of the Chest, is
dispersed into several Muscles of both the Shoulders, also to the Neck and
Cheeks.

About where this seventh pair of Nerves arises, there springs another, found
out by Doctor Willis, and by him called Nervus ad par vagum accessorius, which
ascends up by the sides of the Spinal Marrow (growing in its course thicker and
thicker) until it reach up to the Skull, during which way it continues in one
body without sending any branches to any Part. When it has entered the Skull, it
then joins it self with the Fibers of the eighth pair of the Brain called the
wandering pair, with which it takes its progress out of the Skull, but presently
after separates from them, and is dispersed into the Muscles of the Neck and
Shoulders, as was showed before in the foregoing Chapter, while we discoursed
of the wandering pair.

CHAP. XII. Of those Nerves that arise out of the Spinal Marrow whilst it is in
the Vertebrae of the Back, Loins, and Os sacrum.
The first pair of the Back. The second pair. The remaining fifteen pair. The
first pair of the Loins. The second pair. The third pair. The remaining four
pair. The first pair of Os sacrum. The remaining five pair. How the Nerves
spring out of the Spinal Marrow.

FROM the Marrow of the Back proceed seventeen pair of Nerves, there being in
an Horse so many Spondyls or Back-bones; which number exceeds that of the
Joints of the Back in Humane Bodies, there being in them but twelve, and so
accordingly they have no more than twelve pair of Nerves from the Marrow within
the Back.

The first of these pairs springs out of the hole which is common to the last
Vertebra of the Neck and the first of the Chest: Each of them (as are likewise
all the following) is presently divided into two branches, of which the formore
is larger than the hinder. The formore joineth it self with the two last of the
Neck, and so goes the greatest part of it to the Forelegs; only one little
twig that arises out of it before such conjunction, is bestowed upon some of
the Muscles of the Breast and Neck; and the smaller which is the hinder, is
bestowed upon the Muscles seated on the Back.

The second pair springs out between the first and second Vertebrae of the
Chest, whose formore branch being united with the first of the Chest, together
with it is joined with the sixth and seventh of the Neck, which all together
make one Plexus, out of which proceed most of the Nerves that are inserted into
the Muscles of the Shoulders and Forelegs. But before the aforesaid formore
branch unite with the foregoing, it sends forth a twig to the Intercostal Nerve
(or Nerve of the ninth pair) descending down the Thorax or Chest, as also do
all the rest of the remaining fifteen pair.

That branch of this pair which is called the hinder branch, has the same
distribution with the hinder of the foregoing pair, and therefore I will omit
speaking particularly of it: Neither do I think it necessary to treat of every
particular of the remaining pairs that proceed from the Marrow of the Back;
first, because my design is to be as brief as possible both in these and all
other Parts, that I may not make my Volume swell too big; and in the next
place, the remaining pairs coming out of the several holes betwixt the
jointings of the other Bones of the Back as these already spoken of do out of
the former, it would be but repeating almost the same things over again so to
describe particularly every pair. I will therefore only speak thus much of
them in general, that after they are come out of their several holes of the
Vertebrae, they do each of them immediately divide themselves into two
branches, whereof the formore (being, as has been said, the larger) sends one
twig to the Intercostal Nerve, and the remainder of it is bestowed on the
Muscles between the Ribs, called the Intercostal Muscles, both external and
internal, and a few twigs also upon the other Muscles of the Chest that lie
upon the Ribs; and lastly, a twig or two on the obliquely descending Muscles of
the Lower Belly. The hinder and lesser branches presently upon the division
bend backward to the Spine, and are spent upon the Muscles and Skin of the Back.

Next come we to speak to those Nerves that spring from that part of the Spinal
Marrow that is contained within the Vertebrae of the Loins, which are in number
seven pair according to the number of Bones in that Part. The first of which
comes out between the first Vertebra of the Loins and the last of the Back.
Each of them, like those of the Back, is presently divided into two branches;
the formore of which is bestowed upon the fleshy part of the Midriff,
especially its two Processes, and partly on the Muscle Psoas; and the hinder of
them is inserted into the Musculus longissimus or longest Muscle of the Back.

The second pair come out between the first and second Vertebrae of the Loins
under the Muscle Psoas; the formore of whose branches is bestowed upon the
Muscle that fills up the Cavity of Os Ileum or Haunch-bone (which Muscle is the
second bender of the Thigh) also a twig of it is sent to the Musculus
fascialis, and to other neighboring Parts. The hinder branch passes into the
Buttock Muscles, and does lose it self in the bodies of those Muscles.

The third pair of these Nerves of the Loins come forth between the second and
third Vertebrae of the Loins, from under the Muscle Psoas, as the former did.
The fore branch is dispersed down the hinder Leg to the Cambrel or Hock,
furnishing several Muscles about those Parts with Nerves. The hinder branch is
bent back and dispersed through the Muscles of the Loins, supplying them with
Nerves.

The other four pair of these Nerves of the Loins, like the former, come forth
from between the other four Vertebrae of the Loins. Their fore branches are
dispersed into most of the Muscles of the Buttocks and hinder legs; also some
twigs are sent from them to the Muscles that raise the Yard, some others to the
neck of the Bladder; and in Mares some twigs are sent to the Matrix or Womb.
And the hinder branches are carried backward, and are bestowed upon several
Muscles of the Back.

In the next place I come to treat of the remaining Conjugations or pairs of
Nerves that spring from the Spinal Marrow, which are those that come forth of
the holes of Os sacrum, and are in number six pair, there being in the said
Bone six Vertebrae, with pretty wide holes for the coming forth of the Nerves.

The first of these pair issues out between the last Vertebra of the Loins and
the first of Os sacrum in the same manner as those that spring out of the
Vertebrae of the Loins, and like them is divided into two branches; the
foremost of which is a great part of it mixed with those other of the Loins,
and with them runs down to the hinder Legs, supplying several Muscles of those
Parts with Nerves. And the hinder furnishes the biggest Buttock-muscle and
other Parts thereabouts with Nerves.

This pair of Nerves, as I have said, come out side-ways like the Nerves of the
Loins, and are divided like them afterward into a fore and a hinder branch;
but the other five pair come out before and behind; but before they go out of
the Bone, they are on each side double, and on each side one Nerve goes into
the fore-parts and the other into the hinder. Those that go into the
hinder-parts are dispersed as those of the Loins were, that is, into the
Muscles that lie upon the Os sacrum, and Ileum; but those that go into the
fore-parts are dispersed into some Muscles on the forepart of the Thigh; also
some twigs of them are sent to the Cods, the Bladder, and to the Muscles of the
Fundament.

Table XXVII.
Represents all the Nerves of the whole Body, as well those that arise from the
Oblong Marrow within the Skull, as those that spring from the Spinal Marrow
without the Skull, (taken out of a French Author.)

AAAAAA Most of the Nerves that spring from the Oblong Marrow within the Skull.
B The said Oblong Marrow. CC The Eyes with the optic and moving Nerves
branched to them, the one making their Coats, and the other serving to move
them. DD Doctor Willis his eighth pair or the wandering pair of Nerves, with
their course through the Middle and Lower Belly. From the Figure or Cipher 1 to
7. are shown the Nerves that spring from the Spinal Marrow while it is in the
Vertebrae of the Neck. From the Figure 1 to 17. are shown those that spring
from it while it is in the Vertebrae of the Back. From the Cipher 1 to 7. are
shown those that arise out of it while it is contained within the Vertebrae of
the Loins. From the Cipher 1 to 6. are shown those that arise out of it while
it is in the Os sacrum, which Nerves are branched into all the hinder Parts and
down the hinder Legs, imparting to them both Sense and Motion.
anatomical view of the nervous system of a horse TAB XXVII page.132.




Thus have I given a brief description of the several Conjugations or Pairs of
Nerves that spring from the Spinal Marrow, showing where they arise, which way
they pass, and to what Parts they run; which may be of great use to our
Practitioners, if they will but take the pains to inquire into this part of
Anatomy; for by understanding the beginning or rise of the Nerve that
furnishes an affected Part, one may learn where to apply the Remedy. As for
instance; When from any outward cause, as from a fall, stroke, bruise or any
other accident, any Part has lost either Sense or Motion or both; or from any
inward cause a Palsy happens, by which the use of some particular Limb is
taken away; it would conduce very much to the cure if the rise of the Nerves of
such Part were known by the undertaker of the cure of those Affections; for the
Medicine is to be applied always to the beginning or rise of that Nerve that
passes to that Part, or as near to it as is possible.

I should here put an end to this discourse of the Spinal Nerves, if it were
not convenient to add a word of the manner how they arise out of the Marrow,
which is very accurately described thus by Doctor Willis.

On each side of the Spinal Marrow, near its outer edge four or five Fibers
arise in its upper side, and as many in its lower: both which companies
penetrate first the pia matter or inmost Coat of the Spinal Marrow, and then the
dura matter or middle Coat, (which is as it were a common case to them all) with
distinct Fibers: but afterward as both companies of Fibers are to pass through
the third Membrane (for the Spinal Marrow has three) they meet together, and
being invested with the Coat they borrowed from the second Membrane, they
become as it were one Trunk: which Trunk passing out of the jointing of the
Vertebrae, is again divided into several Nerves designed for sundry Parts.
After this manner in the whole tract of the Spinal Marrow have the several
vertebral Nerves their origin; and in those places where the brachial (or
fore-leg) and crural Nerves pass out, the Spinal Marrow increases both in
thickness and breadth, and the nervous Fibers are larger. All which that it may
be the better apprehended, I have thought good to annex the following Figure
from Him, only increasing the number of the pairs of Nerves as they are found
to be in an Horse.

Table XXVIII.
Shows the Spinal Marrow taken whole out of the Rack-bone, where the Membrane
that cloatheth it is dissected and turned back on each side, the better to show
the beginnings and productions of all the vertebral Nerves, (from Doctor
Willis.)

AA Show the top of the Spinal Marrow, where it is cut off from the Oblong
Marrow. B The Spinal Artery seeming to descend through the whole Marrow, which
however is made up of Arteries brought into it from between the several
jointings of the Vertebrae. CC The Spinal Nerve coming from the fifth or sixth
Vertebra of the Neck to the beginning of the wandering pair. DD Portions of the
Membrane clothing the Marrow dissected and turned back. EEEE The Spinal Nerves
sent out of the upper margin of the Marrow by bands, with which the like
bundles springing from the lower margin also meet, and join together all into
one Trunk within the junctures of the Vertebrae, then being separated again
without them, they are carried into their respective provinces. Ff Nerves
springing within the region of the Neck. Gg Nerves destinated for the Shoulders
and Forelegs, where both the Marrow is thicker in bulk, and the Nerves
greater. Hh Nerves going out about the Back and Loins, where both the body of
the Marrow is again become smaller, and the Nerves are somewhat slenderer. Ii
Nerves destinated for the Buttocks and hinder Legs, where both the Medullar
body and the Nerves are again larger. K Nerves going out of Os sacrum.
anatomical view of a horse's spinal marrow, nerves, and arteries TAB. XXVIII
page 133.




CHAP. XIII. Of the Eyelids, Eyes and their several Parts, viz. their Coats
and Humors.
The Eyes, their name. Their number. Their figure. Their Parts. The Eyelids.
1. The Tunicles of the Eyes. Adnata. 2. Sclerotica. 3. Choroides. 4. Retina.
The Humors of the Eyes. The watery Humor. The Crystalline. The Glassey.

THE Eyes are termed in Latin Oculi, from the word occludo to shut, or from
occulto to hide, because they are hid by the shutting of the Eyelids. They are
the Organs or Instruments of Sight, consisting of many Parts, viz. of Humors,
Membranes, etc.

Their number is by all People known to be two, and that for the security and
perfection of sight; that if one be defective, or should by accident be lost,
the other may supply its place and office, though not altogether so perfectly.

The Eye alone, when its Muscles, and the Nerves and Bloud-vessels that enter
into it, are removed, is of a round figure, both that it might move the better,
and also that it might the better receive the visible Rays.

Adjoining unto the Eyes are the Eyelids, which contain them as it were, and
serve as a safeguard or cover to preserve them from external injuries: United
with them are the Fat and Muscles: and lastly the Parts that constitute the Eye
it self are the Membranes, Humors, and Vessels.

The Eyelids do serve as Curtains to the Eyes, by which dust, Flies, or any
thing else that might annoy them, is kept out. They are made up of the Skin,
the membrana Carnosa or fleshy Pannicle, and Muscles; but both the Muscles and
fleshy Pannicle are in these Parts very thin. On the inside next the Eye they
are lined with a Membrane that is propagated from the Pericranium, which is
very smooth, that it may move glibly upon the Eye. The extremities or edges of
the Eyelids are hard and gristly, partly to strengthen them, and partly that
they may meet the more exactly, and not fall one over the other. And thus much
shall suffice for the outward or containing Parts of the Eyes, viz. the
Eyelids.

As for the Muscles, we shall defer speaking of them till the next Book. And as
to the Fat, it differs not from that which is intermixed among the Muscles in
other Parts, and serves here to keep the hinder-part of the Eye and parts
adjoining moist, that the Eye may move the more glibly in its Socket.

We shall therefore next proceed to the Eye it self, and describe the Parts of
which it consists, and first its Tunicles or Coats, the first or outmost of
which is a common Coat, arising from the Pericranium, and is spread over all
the white of the Eye. By this is the Eye kept firmly within its Socket or
Orbit. It is of exquisite sense, and has many small Arteries and Veins
creeping through it, which are very discernible when there is any inflammation
in that Part. It is called Adnata.

This Adnata being removed, the proper Tunicles or Coats do appear, being in
number three; the first of which from its hardness is called sclerotica. This
arises from the dura matter, or (which is all one) from the outmost Coat of the
Optic Nerve. It is somewhat hard, and opaque on its backside; but on its
forepart, because it is transparent like an Horn, it loses its name of
sclerotica which it had from its hardness, and is called tunica cornea or
horney Coat from its clearness.

The second proper Coat lies next under this, and goes by the name of
Choroides, because it resembles that Membrane that inwraps the Foal in the
Womb, called Chorion. As the former did arise from the dura matter, so does this
from the pia matter, (or if you will, from the inner Coat of the Optic Nerve.)
All over the back-part of the Eye, this Coat on its inside is blackish, that
the Idea's received in might appear the more illustrious.

This Coat is perforated before as wide as the pupilla or sight of the Eye is
in compass, to permit the rays of visible Species to pass in to the crystalline
Humor. Which forepart, because so much of it as is from under the white is
somewhat of the color of a Grape, is called uvea: by which name the forepart
of this Coat is distinguished from its hinder-part, as the former was by the
name of cornea, from sclerotica; which I thought fit to take notice of in this
place, that the Reader might not take the four names for four several Coats,
when they are but two, and so might go about to find what indeed there is not.

From the circumference of the uvea, where its duplicated Membrane bends it
self back to the crystalline Humor, there is formed a Ligament called
ligamentum Ciliare, because it consists of slender Filaments or Fibers like the
hairs that grow upon the Eyelids in Humane Bodies, running like so many black
lines from the circumference of the uvea to the sides of the crystalline
Humor; which Humor they encompass, and widen or constringe it as there is
occasion, by contracting or opening the perforation of the uvea.

The third or inmost proper Tunicle of the Eye is called Retina or the
Net-fashioned Coat, because it encompasses the vitreous or glassey Humor like
a Net.

This Coat is made of the medullar substance of the Optic Nerve, being very
thin, and rather of a dark than lightsom color, mixed with an obscure redness.
Its figure is semicircular, round on its outside, and hollow within, containing
in it the vitreous Humor, and receiving into its bosom the crystalline Humor
also, having its Fibers extended as far as the ligamentum Ciliare, to which
these Fibers afford animal Spirits for the continuance of its motion. It is
observed that if this Coat be taken and put into warm Water, shaking it a
little to wash off the mucous or snotty matter that cleaves to it, and then be
held up to the light, the Fibers or Filaments will appear very numerous like
the threads of the finest Lawn.

Having done with the Tunicles or Coats of the Eyes, I come next to speak of
the Humors contained within those Coats, which are in number three, that is
the Aqueus or watery, the Vitreus or glassey, and the Crystalline: of which the
last for its use is the most noble, and is placed almost in the center of the
Eyes.

Of these Humors the Aqueus or watery is outermost, being thin and fluxive
like Water, from whence it has its name. It fills up that space that is
betwixt the horney or outmost Coat and the crystalline Humor in the forepart
of the Eye. It is observed in Men, that if any clotted and colored bits or
motes swim in this Humor, the shapes of several Insects, as Gnats, Flies,
Spiders and the like, will seem to be flying before their Eyes, as has been
often declared by Men who have had this Affection. I am therefore apt to believe
that many Horses are not without such kind of congealed bits floating in this
Humor, that without any evident or external cause to occasion it, are much
given to start, especially with their Head; the representation of the aforesaid
Insects moving before the crystalline Humor, which makes them fear something
or other is still flying into their Eye.

Yea it is in Humane Bodies farther observed, that often times several of these
colored Particles in the watery Humor do gather together, and unite so close,
that they grow as it were into a skin or film, spreading before the sight of
the Eye, which causes an absolute blindness, and is that Disease which
Physicians call a Cataract; which Disease the Animal we are treating of is much
subject to, though we have not so proper a term for it as this is.

The next Humor is the Crystalline, which is so called from its exceeding
bright and shining color, being as transparent as Crystal; It is it self of no
distinguishable color, that it might receive the Idea's of all colors.

It is placed betwixt the watery and glassey Humors, but not exactly in the
middle or center of the Eye, but rather toward its forepart. It is enclosed
in the bosom, as it were, of the glassey Humor, and is flattish on the
fore-side, but rounder behind.

This Humor is believed to be the primary or chief instrument of the sight,
because it collects or receives the rays of visible things; though the tunica
Retina does afterward stop them by its dark body, and communicate them to the
common Sensory by the Optic Nerve.

The third and last of the Humors of the Eye is the Vitreus or glassey, so
called because in color it is like to molten glass. This is not of so thick a
consistence as the crystalline; but it much exceeds both it and the watery in
quantity. It is round in its hinder part but plane before, only it has a
little hollowness in the middle wherein the crystalline Humor is placed as in
a mold or case. It fills up all the hinder part of the globe of the Eye, as
also some part of the sides.

The uses of this Humor are said to be, first, to nourish the crystalline
Humor, as Galen conceived; next, that the visible species received into the
crystalline Humor might not be reflected, or return defiled by dark and
colored tinctures, whereby the sight should be disturbed; but that they might
have a free passage through it to the Retina.

Table XXIX.
Represents the several Coats, Humors and Muscles of the Eyes.

Figure I.

A Shows the crystalline Humor. B The Iris or circle about the sight of the
Eye.
Figure II.

A The crystalline Humor. B The watery Humor encompassing the crystalline on
its fore-side.
Figure III.

A The backside of the crystalline Humor. B The vitreous or glassey Humor
receiving the crystalline into its bosom.
Figure IV.

AAAA The common Coat of the Eye or Adnata, cut asunder and thrown back. B The
Cornea or horney Coat. C The Choroides, whose forepart is called uvea by
reason it is of the color of a Grape.
Figure V.

Shows the Eye taken out of the Head with its Muscles in situ, not being
loosened from either their rise or termination.

A The Optic Nerve cut off near the Brain. B The rise of the Muscles. CC Their
several terminations or endings into the Coats of the Eye. D The common Coat of
the Eye called Adnata or Conjunctiva. E The Cornea or horney Coat. F The Apple
of the Eye.
Figure VI.

Shows the forepart of the Eye with its Muscles removed from their originals,
and placed round the Eye according to the motions they perform.

AAAA The right Muscle that lifts up the Eye, called Attollens. B The Adnata
Tunicle. C The Tunica cornea or horney Coat. D The Pupilla or Apple of the Eye.
E The right Muscle that draws down the Eye, called Deprimens. F The Muscle that
draws the Eye from the Nose toward the outer corner, called Indignatorius. G
The Muscle called Bibitorius, which brings the Eye inwards toward the Nose. H
The superior oblique Muscle called Trochlearis, which carries the Eye
slantingly to its outward angle. I The inferior oblique Muscle, that moves the
Eye slantingly to its inward angle.
the muscles and membranes of a horse's eyes TAB. XXIX. page 137.
Fig. 1.
A B




Fig. 2.
A B




Fig. 3.
A B




Fig. 4.
AAAA B C




Fig. 5
A B CC D E F




Fig. 6
AAAA B C D E F G H I




Fig. 7
A shows ye optic nerve B the seventh muscle jndignatorius. Obliquus. minor
Deprimens Atallens Trochlearis Bibitorius








CHAP. XIV. Of the Ears and their several Parts.
The Auricle. Its Parts. Its use. The inward Ear. Its Parts. The Dium. Four
little Bones. The Hammer. The Anvil. The Stirrup. The orbicular Bone. The use
of these Bones. The Cavities of the Ear. Concha. Fenestra ovalis. Fenestra
rotunda. The Labyrinth. Cochlea.

THE Ears (which according to order we come now to speak to) are the
instruments of Hearing, framed by Nature with no less Art than the Eyes; yea so
full of intricate Meanders they are, and consist of so many Parts, that they
will be very hard to be deciphered. Notwithstanding I will endeavor to give
what satisfaction I can, by what I have learned by Inspection, as well as by
the Writings of the most accurate Anatomists.

First then the Parts of the Ear are either Outward or Inward. The outward part
is called Auricula, which is only an adjuvant or assisting instrument of
Hearing, collecting in its hollowness some part of the Air that is the vehicle
of the sound, as it is passing by.

The Parts whereof the outward Ear is framed, are either proper, or common. The
common are the Scarf skin, the true Skin, and membrana nervea, or nervous
Membrane. The proper are the Muscles, Veins, Arteries, Nerves, and the Gristle.
Of the Muscles we shall speak in their proper place, viz. in the next Book that
treats of the Muscles. The Veins of the Ear are branched to it from the
external Jugular Vein; the Arteries from the Carotid Arteries; and the Nerves
from the second pair of the Neck being joined with the harder Process of the
seventh pair. As to the Gristle of which for the greatest part it consists,
that is a substance that is fittest for this place; for if it had been bony,
the Ear would both have been immovable, and so could not have turned it self
toward the sound, as we see the Horse can now move it; and also it would have
been in continual danger of being broken off: and if it had been fleshy or
membranous only, the Horse's Ears would have flap'd down like Hounds Ears,
which would have been a great deformity.

The uses of this outward Ear are, first, to serve for an ornament to the Head;
secondly to receive, or at least to help to receive the sounds; for first, it
gathers them being dispersed in the Air; secondly, it does moderate the
fierceness of their motion, so that they come gently to the Tympanum, or Drum,
and beat moderately against it.

The internal or inward Ear has also sundry Parts, contained in the Os
petrosum, as the outward Ear is fastened upon it.

These Parts are first the Drum with its Cord and Muscles; secondly, four
little Bones; thirdly, its Cavities with the implanted Air; and lastly, its
Vessels.

The Drum, called Tympanum, is a nervous, round and transparent Membrane, of
most exquisite sense, arising from the softer process of the Auditory Nerve
expanded. It is exceeding dry, that it might give the better Echo to the sound.
It is also strong, that it should the better endure outward harms or injuries.
It has a Cord behind it for strengthening and stretching of it, even as the
Military Drum has. As for its Muscles, we shall describe them in the next Book.

Within the Membrane of this Tympanum or Drum there is an internal Cavity,
called Concha, in which are several little dry Bones, which have in them no
Marrow, nor are covered with any Membrane or periosteum: yet at their ends
where they are joined together, they are bound with a small Ligament,
proceeding from the before mentioned Cord of the Drum.

These little Bones are four in number; the first of which is called malleolus,
that is, a little Hammer. This Hammer has a round head, which by a loose
Ligament is jointed into the Cavity of the second little Bone that is called
the Anvil; which head is continued into a small neck, that reaches beyond the
middle of the Drum and adhereth to it. About its middle it has two Processes,
the one of which, being shorter, has the tendon of the internal Muscle
inserted into it; and the other, being longer, has the tendon of the external,
the Drum intervening.

The next of these little Bones is by Anatomists called Incus, the Anvil,
having one head and two feet, being therefore more like to one of the grinding
Double-teeth than to an Anvil.

The head of this is indifferent thick, having in the top of it a little smooth
hollowness, which receives the knob or head of the Hammer. The smaller foot of
the Anvil is tied to the top of the Stirrup by a loose but firm Ligament, but
the thicker foot rests upon the Os squamosum, or scaly Bone.

The third is called the Stirrup, having a perforation in the middle, and is
fixed before or rather round that passage that is called the oval Window, by
which sounds pass out of the first Cavity into the second called the Labyrinth.
Which Cavities are wrought by Nature in the Rocky-bone, and contain in them the
inbred Air. Now as the crystalline Humor of the Eye is the chief instrument of
the Sight, in respect of the reception of visible Images or Forms; so is this
inbred Air of the Ear, the chief instrument which receives the forms of
Sounds, although there be another more noble Organ which judges of them, as
shall be shown by and by.

The figure of this Bone is in Horses triangular, very like the Greek Letter D,
(but in Men it is represented to be of somewhat another shape) which Letter is
like such a Stirrup as we often see in old Hangings (not such Stirrops as are
used now-a-daies) from its similitude unto which I suppose it has its name.

The upper part of this Stirrup is small, as you may see by the figure of it,
upon which the longest foot of the Anvil stands.

The fourth and last of these little Bones of the Ear was not long since found
out by a diligent Anatomist, named Franc. Sylvius, till whose time there were
but three Bones of the Ear reckoned.

This Bone from its round shape is called orbiculare. It is tied by a slender
Ligament to the side of the Stirrup, in that part where the Stirrup is fastened
to the Anvil.

The use of these four Bones is not, that by hitting one against another they
should produce a sound, but first, to defend the Membrane of the Tympanum or
Drum, lest it should be torn and beat inwards by the violent shaking of the
outward Air against it, in loud sounds, such as Thunder, or the noise of great
Guns and the like.

Secondly, They are assisting to the Sense of Hearing on this manner: The
external Air beats against the Drum, which is driven against the Hammer, and
this strikes upon the Anvil, as the Anvil bears against the Stirrup; which as
it does, more strongly or weakly, so does the Stirrup open the oval Window more
or less, and proportionably the sound appears to the common Sensory, louder, or
lower.

We come in the next place to speak of the Caverns or Cavities, by some called
Dens, which are formed in the midst of the Os petrosum or Rockey-bone where it
bunches out most, and are three in number.

The first of them is to be seen as soon as the Membrane of the Drum is taken
away, and is called Concha, from its resemblance to the shell of a Taber.
Others call it the Basin, and some the Den. It has its first denomination,
(which is that which it is most commonly known by) not so much from its shape,
as from its use; for when the Membrane is struck upon by any outward sound, the
Echo is made in this Cavity, even as it is in the hollow of a Taber, or in our
common Drum when the Parchment is beat upon; for in all these the sound is
principally occasioned by the Air included in the Cavity.

Nature has placed in this Cavity diverse Instruments; as first, some serving
for pulsation, such are the four Bones, the Cord and the Muscles, (of all which
before.) Secondly, others for conduction into the other Cavities; such are two
perforations or little holes, commonly called Windows. And lastly, a third sort
for Expurgation; such are the passages which lead, one into the Palate, and
another into the Nostrils, by the help of which the pituitous Matter which is
collected in this Cavity is discharged.

The first of the perforations being the upper and larger, has added to it the
Epithet Oval, alluding to its figure. This opens inwards or backwards, and that
with a pretty wide mouth, into the Labyrinth; but is kept shut next the Concha
by the basis of the Stirrup, when sound ceases. The other being the less and
lower, is of a round shape (and therefore styled Rotunda.) This is always open
having no covering, and is divided by the Os squamosum into two Pipes, one of
which tends to the Cochlea, the other into the Labyrinth.

The second of these Cavities of the inward Ear is (from its windings and
turnings) called Labyrinthus, the Labyrinth. If one consider it in its whole
dimension it is round, and much less than the former. Its windings are
circular, yet the circles run not quite round the Cavity, but come as much
short of an entire circle as the Gristles of the Windpipe in the Throat do, or
rather more, so that they are commonly termed semicircular. Their use is to
modulate the sounds so as they may be leisurely communicated to the Auditory
Nerve which is dispersed through the Membrane that invests this Cavity, or
rather makes it. It has three pretty wide holes, two opening into it, and one
out of it. The two that open into it, are the oval and round holes, mentioned
in the foregoing Paragraph. By these the internal agitated Air passes out of
the Concha into the Labyrinth. That which opens out of it is that which passes
toward the third Cavity called Cochlea, into which the aforesaid Air passes
further by it out of the Labyrinth. Besides these there are four other very
small holes for the ingress of the nervous Fibers that are inserted into the
Membrane that clothes this Cavity.

The third and last inner Cavity is called Cochlea or the Snail-shell, from the
resemblance it has with that Shell, especially in its Spiral winding; which,
if you take off the upper part of the Bone, will plainly appear.

This Cavity is far less than the former two, being indifferent long but
crooked. Into this ends one Pipe from the round hole of the first Cavity, and
another from the second, just now mentioned.

It is invested, as the other Cavities are, with a soft and thin Membrane
(after the same manner as the sockets of the Teeth are) into which (as into
that of the Labyrinth) the slender Fibers of the Auditory Nerve do enter, and
that through three or four several holes which are all very small.

It is filled with the internal inbred Air as well as the former, by which the
Echo is made to the impulse of the external Air upon the Tympanum that is the
vehicle of the sound: And the Auditory Nerve being inserted into the Membrane
that clothes the Cavities, is affected therewith, whereby it comes to be
communicated to the original of the Nerves where the common Sensory is seated,
that judges and distinguishes of them.

Into these three Cavities that make up the Internal Ear, are the same
Bloud-vessels distributed as to the External: The Nerves are also from the same
conjugation, namely the seventh pair; only whereas the harder Process of the
Nerve goes to the External Ear, it is the softer that comes to the Internal.

Table XXX.
Represents the inner structure of the Ear or Organ of Hearing, with the
Auditory Bones as well lesser as bigger.

Figure I.

AA The inside of the Temple-bone, or Os temporis. BB The spongy Bone, or Os
spongiosum. C The hole into which the Auditory Nerve is inserted. D The greater
winding of the Cochlea or Snail-shell. E The three bony half-circles that form
the Labyrinth. F The Malleus or Hammer in its situation. G The Incus or Anvil.
H The Stapes or Stirrup. I The External Muscle of the Ear. K The Internal
Muscle.
Figure II.

aaa Show the Labyrinth. b The Cochlea or Snail-shell. c The oval hole before
which the Stirrup is seated. d The Aqueduct found out by Fallopius. ee Little
holes to let out the Veins and Arteries. f The Fenestra rotunda, or round
Window.
Figure III.

Shows the Cochlea and Labyrinth dissected.

aa The intermediate space dividing the Cochlea into two wreaths. b The round
hole that makes the passage out of the Concha, into the lower wreath of the
Cochlea. c The windings or circumvolutions of the Labyrinth opened. d The
Fenestra ovalis, or oval Window.
Figure IV.

Shows the Os petrosum cut through the middle, the plainer to show the round
circle over which the Drum is placed.

A The round circle covered with the Tympanum or Drum. B The Malleus or Hammer
in its natural situation. C The Incus or Anvil in the like. D The Stapes or
Stirrup also in situ.
Figure V.

Shows the Incus or Anvil taken out and freed from the Hammer.

Figure VI.

Is the Hammer taken out also and freed from the other Parts.

Figure VII.

Is the Stirrup out of its place.

the structure of a horse's inner ear TAB. XXX. page 141.
Fig 1


Fig 2.


Fig. 3.


Fig 4.


Fig. 5.


Fig. 6.


Fig. 7.






CHAP. XV. Of the Nose, Lips and Mouth.
The external Parts of the Nose. The Skin. Bones and Gristles. Vessels. The
internal Parts. The nervous Membrane. The muscular Membrane. Spongy Flesh.
Sieve-like Bone. The uses of the Nose. The Lips. Their substance. Their use.
The Mouth. The Parts containing. The Parts contained. The Gums. The Palate. The
Uvula. Its use. The falling of it a Distemper incident to Horses as well as
Men. The Tongue. Its Membranes. Its substance. Its Vessels. Its uses. The
salival Ducts. The use of the Slaver.

HAVING described all the Organs of Seeing and Hearing, we come in the next
place to the third outward Sense which is the Smelling, of which the Nose being
the Instrument, we are now to enter upon its description.

As therefore the Ear is divided into an External or outward, and an Internal
or inward part; so will we divide the Nose, it being made of the like parts.

The External Parts are the Skin, the Muscles and Gristles, Vessels of all
sorts, as also many Bones, and those distinguished or divided by several
Sutures.

The Skin wherewith the Nose is covered is thin, and without any fat under it,
for beauty sake; for if there had been any fat naturally in this place, it
might have been collected to that quantity or bulk, as to have become a great
deformity to the Creature: for which reason Nature has so ordered it, that in
this place the Skin sticks so fast to the Muscles and Gristles, that it is
not easy to part it from them without renting.

The Bones which make the Cavities of the Nose are some proper, and some
common: of which hereafter in the Fifth Book of the Bones. The Gristles are
five in number, of which we shall also discourse in the same Book.

The Vessels of the Nose are, Veins from the Jugular Veins, and Arteries from
the Carotides; also Nerves from the third pair of the Brain, which send to each
side of the Nose one branch, (besides the olfactory Nerves or first pair,
called the Mammillary Processes.)

As to the Internal Parts of the Nose, we shall begin first with the Coat or
Skin which compasses the whole capacity of the Nostrils. This Coat is said to
arise from that Skin of the Brain which is called the dura matter; and is not
peculiar to this Part alone, but is as well common to the Mouth, Palate,
Tongue, Larynx, etc. as to the Nostrils; only in the Nostrils it is thinner
and of exquisite sense; for any thing blown up the Nose that is of a biting
nature, so irritates it, as immediately to cause the Horse to sneeze. This Skin
has on its backside abundance of little Glands or Kernels, in which the Rheum
is separated that runs out by the Nose.

There is also another Skin belonging to the inside of the Nose called the
muscular Membrane, which is said to draw together or contract the Nostrils.

In the upper part of the Nostrils there is a red fleshy spongious substance,
with which the spongy Bones are filled up.

There are also seated at the upper end of the Nose next to the Brain over both
Nostrils a Bone which from its likeness to a Sieve, (by reason of the
innumerable little perforations or holes that are in it) is called Os
cribriforme or Sieve*like Bone. In the inside of this Bone are seared those two
productions of the Brain called precessus mammillares, which are the true
Instruments of Smelling, and are therefore better called the Smelling-nerves.
There pass from them through the holes of this Sieve-like Bone many little
Strings or Fibers, which are dispersed into all the inward capacity of the
Nose, serving there to be the immediate Organs of Smelling, but the Scents are
communicated to the common Sensory of the Brain by the aforesaid Mammillary
Processes.

The principal use of the Nose is for Smelling, which is performed in this
manner. The Nostrils are adjuvant Instruments of Smelling even as the External
Ear is of Hearing. For as the Ear gathers the sounds that fly in the Air; so
when smells exhale out of odoriferous Bodies into the Air, the Horse by taking
in his breath at his Nose, (which he for the most part does, and not in at his
Mouth as we often do) the scents accompanying the Air ascend up the Nostrils to
the top of their Cavity, and so to the before-named Sieve-like Bone, where
affecting the little Fibers of the Olfactory Nerves that come, as has been
said, from the Mammillary Processes through those little holes, those Fibers
communicate their sensation to the Processes, and these convey it to the
original of the Nerves or common Sensory, by which it is distinguished.

Inferior uses of the Nose are, first, to take in the breath by; and next, to
serve as a common Shore or Sink for the discharge and evacuation of the
superfluous phlegmatic Humors of the Blood.

In the next place we come to treat of the Lips (or the external Parts of the
Mouth) which are two in number, one upper and the other lower. These are framed
of a soft fleshy fungous substance, as also of some proper Muscles covered with
the hairy Skin on the outside of them, but on the inside they are covered with
a Membrane common to the Mouth and Stomach.

The uses of the Lips are first to gather the Hay or Oats or other Food into
the Mouth; secondly to retain, or help to retain it, while it is chewing;
thirdly, they serve to keep the Gums and Teeth from external Injuries.

Within the Lips is the Mouth, whose Parts are either containing or contained,
that is, either those that make the Mouth, or such as are contained in it.

The Parts whereof the Mouth is made, are of two sorts, some fleshy, others
bony. The fleshy Parts are the Lips, of which we have already spoken; also the
Muscles of the Cheeks and lower Jaw. The bony are the upper and nether Jaws,
with the Teeth fixed in them.

All these Parts (as also the whole inward capacity of the Mouth) except the
Teeth, are lined with a thick Membrane or Skin, which in the Palate is rugged
and knotty as it were, by reason of the many little Glands on the backside of
it, by which part of the Slaver is separated into the Mouth; and this Membrane
reduplicated makes the Uvula, as some think; though others more probably hold,
that it is of a peculiar substance.

The Parts contained within the Mouth are diverse. As first the Teeth and the
Bone Hyoides at the root of the Tongue; of both which we shall treat in the
Book of the Bones.

Besides these there are the Gums, the Palate, the Uvula, the Almonds, the
Tongue, and the Muscles that serve to move it.

The Gums being in number two, are made up of a hard fleshy substance,
destitute of motion, that so the Teeth might be better fastened in their Sockets.

The Palate is the upper part of the Mouth, and is called by that name, from
its being as it were fenced or paled in with Teeth. It extends from the
back-part of the Mouth to the Fore-teeth, but is not so much hollowed in an
Horse as in Humane Skulls. It has in it some eighteen steps or bars which
reach from the inside of the Fore-teeth to the very farther end of the Mouth.
It consists of Bones, of a peculiar glandulous Flesh, and a thick Coat; which
Coat is full of little perforations or holes for the Slaver that is separated
in the little Glands (abovementioned) to distill through into the Mouth.

The Uvula is a red, fungous and longish kind of a Kernel seated in the inward
or backer-part of the Palate, where the Nostrils open into the Mouth, hanging
directly downward with a small but bluntish end just over the chink of the
Larynx.

The use of this Uvula is said to be, first, to moderate the coldness of the
Air drawn in by the Lungs. This is Bartholin's opinion, who says further, that
from this use of it it comes to pass, that such Persons as want it, die
Phthisical. Whether that be so or no I cannot tell: but the main use of it in
an Horse I take to be, secondly, to hinder the Water, when he drinks, from
passing out of his Mouth into his Nostrils.

This Kernel is very necessary to be known by all professed Farriers, for such
knowledge might have contributed to the preservation of many Horses which for
want of it have been lost. Such are those which by reason of Humors too much
flowing to this Kernel have had it so much distended, that it has hung down
into the Throat to that degree, that the Horse has not been able to swallow,
there being no passage left for the Meat to go down; but when he has chewed it
and endeavors to swallow it, instead of its going down the Gullet into his
Stomach, it comes out at his Nose; whereby it comes to pass that although the
Horse have never so good a Stomach, yet for all that he comes to starve to
death with hunger.

This my self have been sometimes an Eyewitness of, and have oftener heard of
it by others; but could never see nor hear of any of them, that had any help
for this Distemper; their endeavors proving still unsuccessfull by their not
well understanding either the Distemper, or the Part affected.

This swelling of the Uvula in Men is called by Physicians Casus Vvulae; and by
the Vulgar, the falling down of the Palate of the Mouth. It is a Distemper that
commonly comes upon taking some great cold; but is very ordinarily cured not by
Physicians only, but by every old Woman, who knows that by holding Pepper or
Ginger or the like against it, the Rheum is thereby drained out of it, and it
contracts it self to its due and natural bulk, whereby the Party is speedily
relieved. How far such Medicines might contribute to the cure in Horses, I
shall forbear in this place to give my opinion, because as I have already said,
I do by God's assistance design to publish a Book of Cures by it self, but was
willing in the first place to teach my Practitioner the frame and use of the
Parts, and to hint some of those Diseases they are incident to, which we have
least understood: and by that time the Ingenious Student is come to understand
them, I shall I hope be ready to publish a new and certainer way of curing them
than has hitherto been practiced.

Next we come to speak of the Tongue and its Parts. It is called in Latin,
Lingua, a lingendo, from Licking. It is in figure long, broad and thick,
especially toward the root. It is covered with two Skins; the outward,
clothing only its upper part, which in an Horse is almost as smooth as in
Men, though it is much rougher in Oxen, and the like. This Membrane is very
porous.

The inward Skin covers the whole Tongue, the lower side as well as the upper,
and is thin and soft, having many Teat-like Protuberances bunching out of it,
which are inserted into the pores or holes of the outward Coat.

Concerning the substance of the Tongue there is diversity of opinions; for
some would have it of a glandulous, others a musculous substance; and some,
that it has a peculiar substance: to which opinion I most incline, because I do
not find in any Part of the Body a substance like it.

It has Vessels of all sorts; Veins from an inward branch of the external
Jugular; Arteries from the Carotid Arteries; and Nerves of two kinds, one from
the fifth and another from the eighth pair of the Brain.

The Tongue has at its root several Muscles, by which all its motions are
performed, of which we will speak in the next Book. And besides the Muscles,
there is also at the root of the Tongue a considerable quantity of Fat, with
which the Muscles are interlarded as it were.

The uses of the Tongue are, first, to taste the Food that is offered, whereby
(as well as by the smell) the Horse distinguishes whether it be good and
wholesome for him or not; and in the next place it helps the chewing of the
Meat, by tossing it to and fro, and after it is chewed, it assisteth in turning
it down to the Stomach.

There is to be found out by dissection underneath the root of the Tongue a
large Kernel, from whence two Pipes, called salival Ducts, do spring, one from
the fore, and the other from the hinder-part of it: These two at a small
distance from the Gland unite into one, which runs pretty straight forward
under the Tongue toward the Chin: but in the middle way, as Doctor Wharton
affirms, there are other pretty remarkable Glands (in an Horse) that stand on
each side this Duct, and discharge themselves into it. When it is come near the
Chin at the Bridle of the Tongue, it ends into other small Glands, through
which it pours into the Mouth part of the Slaver that keeps it continually
moist.

Besides this Duct there are two others of the same use, which do arise out of
the Kernels below the root of the Ear, (called Parotides) and run on the
outside of the Jaw Bone to the middle of that Muscle of the Cheek that is
called Buccinator, where they open into the Cavity of the Mouth, into which
they discharge the before-named Liquor, which in these and the other Glands of
the Mouth is separated from the Blood.

Now we must understand, this Slaver (or Saliva) is not merely an Humor
excrementitious, as that is which is separated in several Kernels in other
Parts of the Body, as particularly in the Guts; for this is of great use, not
only in that it continually moistens the Mouth, as also the Hay and Oats
whilst they are in chewing; but being swallowed down with the Meats, it does
further the fermentation and concoction of them in the Stomach, whither part of
this Juice also goes with every morsel. It is of the same nature with that
which in Men we call the Spittle, and of the same use.

And here it may not be amiss to recite a story I have read of a Person that
had one of these external salival Ducts wounded, because I have observed (the
last Spring at Greenwich) the same accident happen to an Horse, with the same
symptom. The Story is thus: A Nobleman being wounded in the middle of the
Cheek with having a Glass thrown at him; the Wound was quickly almost closed,
but in the middle of it, through a little hole, there leisurely distilled out
of it for a long time a watery and clear Liquor, which for all that ever the
Surgeon could do, hindered the entire closing up of the Wound for almost two
years. This Liquor did distill out of the salival Duct, which was not then
found out; but at last an actual Cautery being applied to the end of the Duct,
the Liquor was by that means stopped, and the Wound presently healed. The Horse
that I saw had a clear watery Humor running in like manner out of the side of
his Cheek, but in that quantity, that in a few hours time (especially in the
time next after his drinking) it would make his Manger all a float. A Farrier
had him under cure there, and my opinion being asked, I advised to sear it, but
he that had him in hand not knowing the occasion of this flux of Humor,
thought rowelling of him would serve; but what he did to him, I had no
opportunity since to inform my self.

Now seeing a like case to this may happen, that my Practitioner may understand
where to apply his Cautery (or red-hot Iron) for the stanching of the Liquor, I
have thought it convenient to annex a Scheme of each of these salival Ducts;
that under the Tongue being found out by Doctor Wharton, and the other arising
from the Parotides and running on the outside the Gums, by one Steno, a Dane.

Table XXXI.
Fig. I. Shows the salival Duct that springs from the Glands under the Ear
called Parotides, (in a Calves Head.)

aaaa The conglomerate Parotis. bb The conglobate Parotis. c The lymphatick
Vessel tending downwards from the conglobate Gland. dddd The roots of the
salival Duct. eee The Trunk of the said Duct. ffff The outer branches of the
Jugular Vein. ggg The Nerves, which as they are inoculated one with another
within the Gland and the head, so without these places as in h. ii The twigs of
Nerves accompanying the salival Duct.
Fig. II. and III. Show the Gland under the Tongue (called the maxillar Gland)
with the Duct that springs from it, (from Dr. Wharton.)

A The hinder part of the Gland. aaa The hinder roots of the salival Duct. B
The forepart of the Gland. bb The fore-roots of the said Duct. C The hinder
Trunk of the same Duct, climbing upon the Tendon of the double-belly'd Muscle.
D The return of the same and its union with the Fore-duct. E The common Trunk
of the salival Duct. FG The double-belly'd Muscle. H The progress of the said
Trunk toward the Fore-teeth of the lower Jaw. I The opening of the salival
Duct under the tip of the Tongue near the Foreteeth of the said Jaw. K The
round Gland that lies by the Maxillar. L A row or rank of asperities (or
roughnesses) under the side of the Tongue. M The Tongue thrust to one side out
of its place, that the exit of the Vessel may be seen. N The Tonsil or Almond
of the Ear.
anatomical views of a horse's salival duct TAB XXXI p. 147.
Fig. I.


Fig. II.


Fig. III.






Having now gone through the first division of the Body, which is into three
Venters or Regions, wherein I have principally treated of the Parts contained
in them; it now remains that I examine the Parts wherewith the Venters
themselves are made up, laying each apart by themselves, that their natures,
differences and figures may better appear. The Parts of this nature are the
Flesh and Bones, of which two it will be most proper to begin with the Flesh,
both because it makes the greatest part of the bulk of the Body, and also
because of its quick tendency toward putrefaction, whereas the Bones are of a
durable nature, and so no inconvenience will happen upon deferring the
examination of them to the last.

The End of the Third Book.
THE ANATOMY OF AN HORSE. BOOK IV. Of the Muscles.
CHAP. I. Contains a description of the several sorts of Flesh, and an
Apology for not expressing the Muscles so particularly in Figures as I have
done other Parts of the Body.
IN the First Book Chap. 6. treating of the Muscles of the Belly, I affirmed
that all the fleshy Parts of the Body are muscular; which must be understood
not of all Flesh in general, but only of Flesh properly so called. For there
are four kinds of Flesh: First, that which is properly so called, such as is
that of the Muscles; secondly, that of the Bowels, as of the Liver and Spleen,
and the like; thirdly, that of the Glands or Kernels; and fourthly, membranous
Flesh, such as is that of the Stomach, Guts, etc.

The Flesh of the Muscles is soft and ruddy, consisting of Fibers and
coagulated or curdled Blood, called a Parenchyma. For the Blood in its
circulation as it passes out of the Arteries into the Veins, is extravasated
out of the Arteries into the very fleshy substance, out of which it is not so
clearly imbibed or drunk up by the Veins, but that some particles of it adhere
to the fleshy Fibers, and fill up their interstices, that is, the empty spaces
between one and another: which Blood congealing and fixing there, does, I say,
together with the Fibers constitute that substance which we properly call Flesh.

As to the other Parts that serve to constitute a Muscle, as also of its use,
and the reason of their sundry denominations, I discoursed so fully in the
abovementioned sixth Chapter of the First Book, that I shall not need to add
any thing to the same purpose here: only I think my self in this place obliged
to give the Reader the reasons, why I have not represented the Muscles in
Figures particularly, as I have done other Parts of the Body, nor dare be so
confident of my exactness in the description of them; for

First, The Muscles are so numerous, that to have expressed them all in Figures
would have made this Volume at least half as dear again as it is; as may be
guest by the number of Copper Plates (in Folio) that Mr. Brown has represented
the Muscles of an Humane Body upon; for they are near forty, and these of an
Horse must have required rather more than fewer.

Secondly, Though some knowledge of the Muscles, especially the external ones,
is necessary that one may know in Tumors which way to make incision (that is,
lengthways of the Muscle and not across, for fear of rendering it useless by
cutting its nervous Fibers asunder) yet to be so very exact in the knowledge of
all of them, is matter rather of commendable curiosity than real usefulness.

But thirdly, The chief reason is (for I will confess it) that I have not had
the opportunity my self to raise and inspect every particular Muscle, so that I
must have delineated several of them by guess and upon trust, whereby I should
both have betrayed my own importune vanity, and have led my Reader it is like
into several Errors. Neither probably may my verbal description of them be
truly exact as to those which I have not my self viewed: though seeing in those
that I have inspected, I have found so great a similitude between the Muscles
of an Horse and those of a Man, I hope I shall not be much wide of the truth,
if I presume of the same Analogy or likeness in those that I have not inspected.

Now as to the likeness of a Man's and an Horse's Muscles the Reader may be
pretty well satisfied if he compare those of an Horse's Belly (delineated with
the autopsie or self-view of the Graver) expressed at the end of the sixth
Chapter of the First Book, with those of a Man's: or take but a prospect of the
next following Figure which represents an Horse, several of whose Muscles I
have preserved, and after having raised them, placed them in their several
places again, the Horse standing up in a Press with them on, just in the same
posture as he appears in the Figure.

To these reasons I might add the impossibility that most of my Profession
should ever attain to an exact knowledge of them; so that this Book being
principally designed for their use, I should have been at a great deal of cost
and more pains to no great purpose. Now the difficulty lies in this, That most
of the names of the Muscles being originally Greek, and several of them such as
can no way aptly or intelligibly be rendered into English; and considering the
mean education of most Farriers, that few of them understand so much as Latin;
I say considering these things, it is impossible to describe them to their
capacity, and therefore I have contented my self with a more superficial and
succinct description of them. And though for my own part I may without
vainglory pretend to a more liberal education than most of my Profession, so
that the Cramp-names (as we call them) of the Muscles are no such hindrance nor
discouragement to me as they will be I fear to most others; yet I hope no
curious and ingenious Anatomist, that knows how much time and pains is
necessary to be spent upon the exact examination of any one Part, will think me
sluggish and supine, that I have not in those few years that I have applied my
self to this study, attained as yet to the full knowledge of all the Parts of
this Beast that I anatomize. And as on the one hand I hope I may my self attain
to greater skill in this Art than I have yet arrived at; so on the other hand I
would not be guilty of the vanity of thinking to monopolize it, but shall both
desire and hope that others will make up what I shall leave imperfect. But thus
much I hope may serve for mine Apology with all ingenuous Men, I shall
therefore return from whence I have digressed.

A second sort of Flesh is that of the Bowels, as of the Liver, Spleen and
Kidneys, whose substance has been held to be for the greatest part
parenchymous, or to consist of an affusion of Blood congealed about the
Vessels; though latter Anatomists do affirm them to be for the greatest part
glandulous. And to these has used to be reckoned the Heart; but that is of a
substance far different from these, as being truly muscular, and may therefore
more properly be ranked with the Muscles, though it be of a more hard and
compact frame than them also.

A third kind of Flesh is that of the Glands, such as the Thymus, which by some
is called the Sweetbread, and is situated near the Collar-bone just within the
Chest, of which we have already treated in the Second Book. Of this sort of
glandulous Flesh likewise are the Parotides or Kernels below the Ears, also the
Tonsils (commonly called the Almonds of the Ears) very many Glands in the
Mesentery and other Parts of the Body; to which may be added the Pancreas
seated in the Lower Belly, which is commonly known by the name of the
Sweetbread.

Now the Glands being spermatical Parts, their parenchyma or fleshy substance
is not sanguineous or bloody, as that of the two former kinds of Flesh; but
spermatical, composed out of the very first rudiments of the embryo or
conception. And though the Glands are many times increased in bulk, as
particularly in Humane Bodies affected with the King's Evil, and in Horses
which upon taking great Colds have the Tonsils or Almonds of the Ears, and also
the Parotides or Kernels below the Ears, so swelled and sore, that the Horse
will not be able to swallow his Drink, or at least not to hold down his Head to
take it, but must be forced to have it given him in a Pail held up as high as
the Manger; yet I say, the increase of these Kernels happens not upon any
extraordinary afflux of Blood flowing to those Parts, but by a phlegmatic
Humor falling upon them, and when the Distemper is cured they return again to
their former smallness, being according to Nature incapable of that growth that
is natural and proper to the Parts called sanguineous. To this sort of Flesh
(say some Authors) may the Brain be reduced.

The last sort of Flesh is that which is called Membranous, such is that of the
middle Coat of the Gullet, Stomach, Guts, Womb and Bladder. For though the
inmost and outermost Coats be purely nervous or membranous, yet the middle
consists of two ranks of Fibers and a Parenchyma that adheres to them, which is
discoverable particularly in the Guts, when they are scraped by Men that make
strings for musical Instruments, for then you may perceive a great deal of
slimy stuff to be scraped off them, which is this Parenchyma: For that they
lose no part of their membranous or fibrous substance is evident, in that their
strength is rather increased than diminished by such scraping. This Coat
notwithstanding it is muscular, yet its Parenchyma differs in many regards from
that of the sanguineous Muscles, particularly in that it is spermatical as was
said before of the Glands.

Now the Parts that consist of these three latter sorts of Flesh are all
described in their proper places; but those that consist of the first sort,
which as I have said, is most properly so called, I intend to treat of in this
Book which contains the Doctrine of the Muscles.

CHAP. II. Of the Muscles of the Eyelids.
The Eyelids have three pair of Muscles. One pair to open them; and Two to
shut them. The Forehead Muscles.

HAving in the sixth Chapter of the First Book spoken of the several Parts of
which a Muscle is compounded, and also of the differences and actions of them;
as likewise of what use they are in general; (to which Chapter I refer the
Reader) My proposed method requires that I should now come to speak to every
particular of them, beginning with those of the Lower Belly: but having in the
before-cited Chapter of the First Book treated particularly of them, I will in
this place pass them by, desiring the Reader to consult the said Chapter for
his satisfaction; for I love not to be tedious with repetitions.

The next Muscles then that we come to speak to according to order, are the
Muscles of the Eyelids, which are in number three to each Eye.

The first of these is called Rectus or Aperiens, from its office, which is to
lift up or open the Eyelid.

This is seated in the upper part of the orbit of the Eye, and springs with a
slender but fleshy beginning from the same place as the Elevator of the Eye
does, (which is at the hole which the Optic Nerve passes through into the
orbit) and holds the same course with it, being of the same figure and
substance, that is, fleshy; till at last parting from it, with a pretty broad
but thin Tendon, it is inserted into the Gristle at the edge of the upper
Eyelid, where it serves (as has been said) to open the Eyelid by lifting it
up.

The two other Muscles of the Eyelid are called Shutters, and otherwise
semicircular, because each runs the length of one Eyelid: though there are
some that call them circular or orbicular, supposing them to be but one Muscle
which compasses the Eyelid round as with a circle. But in Bodies that are very
musculous or fleshy, they have by curious Anatomists been plainly discovered to
be two, and that the rather, because each receives distinct Nerves from
different places. They lie betwixt the carnous Membrane and the inner smooth
Skin that lines the Eyelids.

That which draws down or shuts the upper Lid is larger, and arises from
the inner corner of the Eye, from whence it passes across, though with a kind
of an oblique line, toward the outward corner, growing presently fleshy and
broad, so that it fills up all the space betwixt the Eye-brow and the lowest
edge of the Eyelid, and so at last is inserted into the outward corner of the
Eye.

The lesser of these two is that which moves the lower Lid in order to shut
it. This is rather membranous than fleshy at its origin, (being also very thin)
and takes its rise at the inner corner of the Eye with a sharp beginning as the
former did: whence being carried overthwart, it proceeds to the middle of the
Eyelid, where it becomes something fleshy, and continues its course to the
outward corner, which it turns about, and ascending a little to the upper
Eyelid, is with an indifferent broad end inserted into it.

There is another pair of Muscles which though not belonging properly to the
Eyelids, yet seem to contribute something to their motion upward or opening,
which therefore may reasonably be described in this place, and those are the
musculi frontales, or Forehead Muscles. These arise from the Skull near the
coronal Suture, and descend with straight Fibers to the Eyebrows, where they
terminate. By the help of these Muscles the Skin of the Forehead to which they
closely stick is contracted or wrinkled, and so by consequence the upper
Eye-lid's a little drawn upward.

CHAP. III. Of the Muscles of the Eye.
The Eyes have seven pair of Muscles. Their rise and insertion. Whence they
have their names. Attollens and Deprimens. Adducens. Abducens. The upper
oblique Muscle. The lower oblique Muscle. The orbicular Muscle. The manner of
raising the Muscles of the Eye.

TO the moving of each Eye of an Horse do belong seven Muscles; though in
Humane Bodies there are accounted but six, because the circular or suspending
Muscle is said in them to be wanting.

Of these seven, four are straight, two oblique or slanting, and the other
circular or round. The straight serve to move the Eyes upwards and downwards,
to the right hand and to the left. The oblique move them obliquely; and the
circular or round one keeps the Eye suspended up in its place.

These Muscles have all their rise from one and the same place; they have also
the same progress and structure, and their termination is alike: for they do
all arise from the Membrane that invests the Orbit of the Eye near the hole
where the Optic Nerve passes from the Brain into the said Orbit, touching one
another at their beginning; but they immediately separate, and in their course
become still more and more bulky and fleshy till their middle, which is round
and buncheth out with a kind of a belly; but as they grow toward their ends or
terminations they degenerate from their fleshy into a thin membranous
substance, which is inserted into the horney Coat of the Eye, encompassing it
as far as it is white.

These Muscles have their several appellations or names from the several
motions they perform; as first, The first of the straight Muscles, from its
office of pulling up the Eye, is called Attollens: The second is called
Deprimens, because it is an Antagonist to the former, for as that pulls the Eye
up, so this by a contrary motion pulls it down again. From which offices they
have also in Men other two names given them by Anatomists: the first is called
the proud, because when the Eye is pulled up, a Person looks high and lofty or
proud: and on the contrary when the Eye is pulled down by the other Muscle, he
looks with a contrary countenance, submissive and humble, for which reason this
second Muscle is called humilis or the humble Muscle.

The next, being the third straight Muscle, is called Adducens, because it
pulls the Eye toward the Nose. It is otherwise called Bibitorius, because it
performs that motion of drawing the Eye to the Nose when we drink, for then we
commonly look into the Pot or Glass that is before our Nose.

The fourth straight Muscle is called Abducens or Indignatorius, from its
office of drawing the Eye to the outer corner, which turn or aspect of the Eye
betokens anger or scorn.

Now these four Muscles have these four several motions, when they work
severally; but when they all four work together, they have but one action,
which is to keep the Eye steady and fixed, which Physicians call a tonick
motion: but in Beasts that have the suspending Muscle, the tonick motion is
performed mainly, if not altogether, by that Muscle. You have these four, as
also the three other lively represented to you in the twenty fifth Table of the
Third Book, p. 123.

The next are the oblique Muscles, being as has been said, in number two pair,
which from their rolling the Eye about are called circumagentes. The first of
them is called obliquus major vel superior (or the uppermost and largest
oblique Muscle) being longer than the other, but rather slenderer. It springs
from the upper but inner part of the Orbit of the Eye by the hole where the
Optic Nerve comes through, (as do all the rest.) From hence it passes
straight to the upper part of the inner corner of the Eye, where it ends in a
small round Tendon, which passes through a transverse Cartilage or Gristle
there placed, called Trochlea (or the Pully) and thence continues its course
slantingly along the upper part of the Eye, till at last it is inserted into
the outmost Skin of the Eye between the Tendons of the Muscles Attollens and
Abducens. This rolleth the Eye toward its inner corner.

The second oblique Muscle is called obliquus minor sive inferior, or the less
and lower oblique Muscle, being shorter than the other, though rather thicker.
This springs from a chink which is in the lower part of the Orbit of the Eye,
beginning with a fleshy head, from whence it ascends with a slanting course
toward the outward corner of the Eye, about which it turns, and then ends in a
short roundish and nervous Tendon, which meets with the Tendon of the other
oblique Muscle, and seeming to unite with it, is inserted in the same place.
This rolls the Eye toward its outer corner.

The seventh Muscle is called the orbicular or round; likewise Musculus
suspensorius, the suspensory Muscle; and lastly, because it is only found in
Brutes, it has the name given it of septimus Brutorum, the Brute's seventh
Muscle. It is short and fleshy, encompassing the Optic Nerve, and is inserted
into the hinder part of the Cornea. You have the figure of it in the
aforementioned twenty fifth Table of the Third Book, wherein it is removed
from one Eye, but in the other it is plainly represented in situ. The use of
this Muscle, as has been said, is to sustain the Eye, lest by looking
continually down toward the ground, it should hang too much outward; and by it
also the tonick motion is performed.

Having discoursed of these several Muscles and of their several actions and
uses, I think it very necessary to set down the manner of raising them, that he
that will take the pains to examine them in the Creature it self, may the
better find them, without violating of them unawares, whereby he will lose his
labor, and miss of satisfaction in the inquiry after them.

You must then, after the taking the Eye and all its appurtenances clear out of
the Orbit (if you will make your dissection that way; but if you will take the
pains to remove the Bones of the Orbit and not cut the Eye out, it will be much
better, for then you are sure to see the Muscles in their natural situation:
but whether you remove the Bones, or take the Eye out, you must I say) make
your dissection on this manner: First, you must with a pair of Scissers cut off
the Fat and the Skins before you raise any of the Muscles, making them as clean
as you can. Then begin with them in order thus: first raise the larger or upper
oblique Muscle, then the lesser or lower oblique; then the four straight
Muscles: but you must only raise the larger oblique Muscle and not remove it,
until you have seen and removed the other five; for when the others are
removed, you will the plainer perceive how the Tendon of the said Muscle
passes through the Pully, that is seated in the inner corner of the Eye.

After you have had a full view of these Muscles before-named, then mind the
last and seventh Muscle, which still encompasseth the Optic Nerve, reaching
from the place where the other Muscles had their rise, quite down to the hinder
hemisphere of the Eye.

CHAP. IV. Of the Muscles of the Nose.
The first pair of Abducent Muscles. The second pair. The first pair of
Adducent Muscles. The second pair.

THE Nose of an Horse so far as it is gristly, is moved several ways, which
motions are performed by these following Muscles. First it is drawn together to
shut the Nostrils by the Adducent or Claudent Muscles: and secondly it is drawn
asunder to open the Nostrils by the Abducent or Aperient Muscles. And to the
performing each motion there belong two pair of Muscles; so that in all there
are eight Muscles that belong to the Nose. I shall describe the two latter pair
first, whereof

The first pair arises from the upper Jaw Bone, near the first proper pair of
the Lips, and is inserted partly into the lower part of the Alae, or gristly
circumference of the Nostrils, and partly into the upper part of the upper Lip.

The other pair begins at the top of the Nose near the Eye, with an acute and
fleshy beginning, whence descending somewhat slantingly, and in its passage
lying upon each side of the Nose, it does at last end at the Alae, as the other
pair did, but with a broader and fleshier end. Each of these Muscles being
narrow at the beginning, and ending broad, is in shape triangular or
three-square, like the Greek Letter D delta, from whence it is called by some
deltoides. The use of this pair, as also of the former, is to draw the gristly
circumference or wings of the Nostrils upwards, and so to widen and open them.

The other two pair are called the Adducent or closing Muscles; the first pair
of which is external, arising about the root of the Gristle, and ascending
cross-ways to the ridg or tip of the Nose, into which it is inserted. This pair
is more fleshy than the other, though indeed there is not much Flesh in any of
the Muscles of the Nose, and therefore it will require a very accurate
Anatomist to raise any of them, and to distinguish them.

The second pair of the closing Muscles are internal, and are hid in the Cavity
of the Nostrils under the inner Coat that clothes them. These are not so fleshy
as the former. They arise from the end of the Bone of the Nose, and spreading
into a kind of membranous substance, they descend to the gristly circumference
of the Nostrils where they terminate.

The first pair of these Muscles being contracted depress the Alae or Gristles
of the Nose, and the latter pair draw them inwards, and so close the Nostrils;
to which motion the orbicular or round Muscle of the upper Lip is assistant,
for by its drawing the upper Lip downwards, it does at the same time constringe
or straiten the Nostrils.

CHAP. V. Of the Muscles of the Lips and Cheeks.
The first common Muscle, called the foursquare Muscle. The second common
Muscle, called the Trumpeter. The first proper pair of Muscles of the Lips,
called par Attollens. The second pair, called par Abducens. The third pair,
called Zugomaticum. The fourth pair, called Deprimens. The fifth pair, called
Oblique detrahens. The odd Muscle, called Orbicularis.

TO the Lips do belong several pair of Muscles, some of which are proper to the
Lips alone, and others are common both to the Cheeks and Lips.

The common are on each side of the Face two. The first of which is called
detrahens quadratus, or the apiece drawers aside of the Cheeks and Lips.
This shows more like a Skin than a Muscle, being broad and thin, only it is
interlaced with fleshy Fibers, which makes it to be accounted a Muscle.

It arises from one of the Vertebres of the Neck on its outside, as also from
the Shoulder Blade, the Collar-bone and Breast Bone, from whence it ascends
with oblique or slanting Fibers up to the Chin, Lips, and root of the Nose;
which Parts it draws downwards with a slanting motion.

The second common Muscle of the Cheeks and Lips, is called in Humane Bodies
Buccinator the Trumpeter, because in blowing a Trumpet the main stress lies
upon this Muscle; though others derive that name from Bucca the Cheek, because
it is the most considerable Muscle of it, and on this account it may retain the
same name in an Horse: or it may be called the Contracter, from its action,
which is to contract the Cheek.

It springs from almost the whole length of the upper Jaw Bone, and is inserted
into the whole length of the lower, at the root of the Gums. It is thin and
membranous, and interlaced with diverse Fibers running sundry ways; and has the
inner Coat of the Mouth so closely and firmly adhering to it, that it is scarce
separable from it. This Muscle is seated under the upper part of the former,
and is spread over the whole dimension of the Cheek.

Its use in Horses and other Brutes is to be as a Hand to help the Mouth in its
chewing motion; for as the Meat in chewing falls on the outside of the Teeth,
betwixt them and the Cheek, this Muscle helps to turn it over the Teeth again,
that it may be sufficiently broken and ground, and made thereby the readier for
concoction when it is turned down to the Stomach.

Besides this office of assisting in chewing, it does serve also at other times
upon any occasion to move the Cheeks and Lips.

Next come we to the Muscles that are proper to the Lips only, and those are
by Anatomists accounted five pair and one odd one. The first of them is called
par Attollens, or Lifters up of the Lip. This pair spring from the upper Jaw,
where it makes the hollow of the Cheek. At their rise they are broad and
fleshy, from thence passing down obliquely along the Cheeks, each of them is
inserted into its own side of the upper Lip, near the Nose. The use of these
Muscles, if they both of them act together, is to draw the upper Lip directly
upwards and outward; but if only one acts, then is but one side of the Lip
drawn upward obliquely. You may plainly see these Muscles work, if you take
notice of a Stoned Horse after he has smelt to a Mare; for then he will most
times hold up his Head in the Air, and turn up his upper Lip till he has
almost turned it inside outward. And the like you may see many Horses do, if
you only let them smell to another Horse's Dung.

The second pair is called Abducens, the Drawers of the Lip on one side. This
arises at the Cavity that is under the Os jugale with a fleshy and round
beginning, which is covered with some Fat, especially in fat Horses; from
whence they run down on each side to the middle of the upper Lip, into which
they are inserted with a strong round Tendon. These jointly move the Lips
upwards and outward as the former did, assisting them in their motion; and
when either of them acts singly, then it assists the action of one of the
former that is on its own side, and helps to draw the Lip upwards of one side.

The third pair is called by Riolanus, Zugomaticum or Jugale, from its rise,
which is outwardly from the process of the Os jugale. At their beginning they
are fleshy and somewhat round, and running downward a little overthwart the
Cheeks they reach at last to the sides of the upper Lip, where they are
inserted near the corner of the Mouth. The use of this pair is to draw the Lip
upwards sideways.

The fourth pair is called Deprimens, or the Drawers down of the lower Lip.
These arise fleshy and broad from the lowermost and outwardmost part of the
Lower Mandible; from whence each marches obliquely to the under Lip, into which
they are inserted about the middle of it. The use of this pair is to draw the
under Lip downwards and somewhat outward. So that it joineth in the same
action with the first pair of the common Muscles called Detrahens quadratus.

The fifth pair is called Oblique detrahens, from their office, which is to
draw the lower Lip obliquely downwards and outward. They take their beginning
from the sides of the lower Jaw, where they rise with a fleshy and broad head;
from whence they ascend upwards, growing in their passage something narrower,
and are each inserted into the corners of the lower Lip. The use of this pair
is, as has been said, to draw the lower Lip obliquely downwards and outward.

In the next place we come to the odd Muscle, called Orbicularis, or orbicular,
because it goes round the circuit of both the Lips. It is also called
Constringens, because it serves as it were for a Sphincter Muscle to purse up
or contract the Lips. Besides these names it has in Men that of Osculatorius,
the Kissing Muscle, because it contracts or draws the Lips together in kissing.
It sticks very close to the Skin of the Lips, and makes up the greatest part of
their substance.

CHAP. VI. Of the Muscles of the lower Jaw.
The first pair of Muscles called the Temporal. The second pair, called
Deprimens. The third pair, called Masseteres. The fourth pair, called
Pterygoideum externum. The fifth pair, called Pterygoideum internum.

THE upper Jaw being immovable has no Muscles, there being no occasion for
them where there is no motion, which is their only use. But the lower Jaw
which has motions of diverse sorts, does require diverse sorts of Muscles to
perform them. Now these Muscles are in number five pair.

The first pair of these Muscles is called the Temporal, because they are
seated upon the Temples. They spring on each side from the Bones of the Brow or
Forehead, the Synciput, Temples and Wedge-like Bone. They are the strongest
and largest of all the five pair. Their beginning is fleshy, large and
semicircular, their inside lying upon the Periosteum, and their outside covered
with the Pericranium. They descend under the Os jugale to the acute Process of
the lower Jaw, into which they are inserted by a short but very strong Tendon.
These Muscles with great force pull up the lower Jaw, and so shut the Mouth.

The second pair has the name of Deprimens, because they pull down the Jaw.
They are also from their shape, having as it were two bellies, called biventre.
These being assisted by the quadrati, which were described in the foregoing
Chapter (being one of the pairs that are common to the Cheeks and Lips) pull
down the Jaw, and so open the Mouth. They arise with a broad and nervous
beginning from the Process of the Temple-bone called Styloides, and suddenly
becoming round, fleshy and small, they pass downwards, and in their middle
where they come to the flexure of the lower Jaw Bone, they lose their fleshy
substance and degenerate into a nervous and round Tendon, and then becoming
fleshy again they are inserted into the inner side of the lower Jaw at the
middle or forepart of it.

The third pair is called Masseteres, because they are very assistant in the
office of chewing, by moving the Jaw to the right and left side. Each has two
beginnings: the first is large, strong and nervous, arising from that Suture
where the fourth and first Bone of the upper Jaw are joined; the other
beginning is fleshy, springing from the Os jugale. They are firmly and largely
inserted into the outside of the lower Jaw. These Muscles, by reason of their
diversity of Fibers, move the nether Jaw both forwards, backwards and to the
sides, and so in a manner circularly.

The fourth pair are called Pterygoideum externum, as if they resembled a pair
of Wings. These like the former have also a double beginning, partly nervous,
and partly fleshy. They spring partly from the upper and outward side of the
Wing-like Process of the Wedge-like Bone, and partly from the rough and sharp
line of the same Bone, from whence they march down with straight Fibers,
becoming in their course larger and thicker, till they come to the lateral part
of the lower Jaw, into whose inside they are inserted with a strong Tendon. The
use of this pair of Muscles is to open the Jaw and move it forward, which
appears when the Teeth of the lower Jaw are stretched farther out than those
of the upper.

The fifth and last pair of Muscles of the lower Jaw are called Pterygoideum
internum. These arise with a nervous beginning from the inner side or cavity of
the Wedge-like Bone, at its wing-like Process; then becoming fleshy, large and
thick, they march down with a straight passage to the inner and hinder part of
the lower Jaw, where they are inserted by a nervous, broad and strong Tendon.
The use of these Muscles is to draw the Jaw toward its head or backwards; and
also to help the Temporal Muscle to draw the Jaw up.

CHAP. VII. Of the Muscles of the Ear.
The External Ear has four Muscles. 1. The lifter up of the Ear. 2. The puller
back of the Ear. 3. Adducens Aurem. 4. Abducens Aurem. 1. The Inward Ear has
two. The External. 2. The Internal.

THE Muscles of the Ears in Brutes (especially such as have large Ears, as
Horses, Asses, Oxen, Hares, etc.) differ much in magnitude from those of Men,
in whom they are so very small, that Galen calls them, the lineaments of
Muscles. The reason of which is, that in Man the Ears are most commonly
immovable, (though there have been some that could move them) and therefore to
have large Muscles were needless; and yet to have none at all, would look like
a defect in the most perfect of all Animals. But though Man cannot move his
Ears, yet is that no prejudice to his hearing; for the want of that motion is
recompensed by the easy and speedy motions of his Head, whereby he can turn it
on every side to receive the sounds; whereas four-footed Beasts, that have the
motions of their Heads not so nimble, have need to have their Ears always
moveable every way, to receive the sounds from every side: and their
moveableness has also a further use, to wit, to drive away Flies and other
Insects that are troublesome to the Beast, which Men can do with their Hands.

The Ear we divided, in the former Book, into the Outward and Inward. The
Outward (of which we have been discoursing thus far in this Chapter) has four
Muscles; and these are those which are so much larger in Brutes than Men. The
Inward Ear has two, which are of a proportionable largeness in both.

The first of these we come to treat of is the first of the Outward Ear, which
goes by the name of Attollens Aurem, the lifter or puller up of the Ear. This
arises at the outside of the Frontal or Forehead Muscle, and at its rise is
thin and membranous; from whence being carried over the Temporal Muscle, and
growing in its course something narrower, it does at last insert it self into
the upper part of the Ear, moving it upwards and forwards.

The second is called Detrahens Aurem, or the puller back of the Ear. This
Muscle arises from the Mammillary Process with a fleshy, broad and fibrous
head; and so growing narrower in its progress is at length inserted into the
root of the Gristle of the Ear, sometimes by two, sometimes by three Tendons.
The use of this Muscle is to draw the Ear backwards and somewhat upwards.

The third is called Adducens Aurem, by which the Ear is drawn forwards and
somewhat downwards. This is said to be but a part of the musculus quadratus
before spoken of in the fifth Chapter of this Book, being one of the common
Muscles of the Cheeks and Lips. This Muscle ascending with its Fibers is
implanted into the lower side of the root of the Ear.

The fourth is called Abducens Aurem, because it draws or pulls the Ear
backwards. This takes its beginning at the Occiput or back-part of the Head
from the Coat that clothes those Muscles that belong to that part, where it is
at first something narrow, but afterward waxing broader it is carried
transversly to the hinder part of the Ear, into which it is inserted. This
assists the second in its action, having sometimes two, and sometimes three
Tendons as that has.

The next are the two Muscles of the Inner Ear (called Auris, as the Outward
Ear is called Auricula) the first of which is called Externus Tympani Auris, or
the external Muscle of the Drum of the Ear, because it moves the Membrane of
the Ear so called upwards and outward. This is thin but broad at its rise,
which is from the upper part of the passage of the Ear; then becoming narrower
it grows into a very fine and small Tendon, which is carried on the outside of
the Tympanum till it arrive at its center or middle into which it is inserted,
where on the inside of this Tympanum the little Bone called the Hammer
sticks, which with the Membrane or Tympanum this Muscle draws a little
outward and upward. This Muscle as also the next are very small, there being
scarce any in the whole Body again so small as they are; and therefore it will
require great skill to raise them without violating of them. To prevent which
the undertaker is to open with great care the Os petrosum which is to be done
on that side which is next to the Temples, taking out the pieces of Bones by
degrees that these Muscles may receive no prejudice. It is left to the
discretion of the Dissector whether he will remove the Bones with a Chissel, or
Saw, or by filing, so he do it carefully.

The second is called Internus, and has its origination from the bottom of the
Os cuneiforme or Wedge-like Bone, there where it is joined with the Processus
petrosus. It is seated inwardly in the Cavity of the Os petrosum, being fleshy
at its beginning, yet thin and small: at its middle it is divided into two very
small and very thin Tendons, whereof one is inserted into the upper Process of
the Malleus or Hammer, and the other into the neck of it. The use of this
Muscle, alone, is to draw the head of the Hammer obliquely forwards, and also
to draw it somewhat inwards: but when these two act both together, they move
the Tympanum with its small Bones upwards and downwards, which is done when the
Horse would carefully listen or harken to any approaching noise.

CHAP. VIII. Of the Muscles of the Tongue.
The Tongue has five pair of proper Muscles. 2. Hypsiloglossum. 3.
Myloglossum. 4. Ceratoglossum. 5. Styloglossum.

THE Tongue in Brutes has but two principal uses, viz. to taste the Food, and
to roll it up and down the Mouth: but in Men it has a third use, which is to be
the main instrument of Speech. Yet notwithstanding there are as many Muscles
that belong to it in Brutes as there do in Men; for in some regard it has a
further use in them than in Men, seeing it does not only taste and roll about
the Meat, but it serves also to gather it into the Mouth; for that they do
with their Tongue, because they have not the help of Hands as we have.
Wherefore that the Tongue might perform all these offices, it was necessary it
should be furnished with variety of Muscles, to make it capable of being moved
every way, outward and inward, upward and downward, and sideways. And lest in
undergoing these motions it should be made to reach farther than is necessary,
Nature has restrained it with a strong Ligament underneath, which in Men is
called the Fraenum or Bridle of the Tongue.

The Tongue therefore has five pair of Muscles proper to it self, besides
those that are common to it and the Os hyoides, of which in the following
Chapter.

The first pair proper to it is called Genioglossum (or the Chin-tongue pair)
so called because their rise is from the Chin, and their insertion into the
Tongue. This name is proper enough in Men who have Chins, but agrees not so
well with them in Horses (or other Brutes) in whom we call all that part below
the Teeth, the lower Jaw, not distinguishing any part of it by the name of the
Chin. But notwithstanding I shall describe them by that name, because it would
be too tedious and too bold an undertaking for me to invent new names for this
as well as for others that are in Brutes as improperly called by such names as
this pair is; leaving such an attempt to those that have both more leisure, and
that make a greater figure in the Anatomical Province.

This pair arise from the ruggedness which is in the middle of the lower Jaw
before, in the inner and lower part of it. In their progress they are said to
have several such inscriptions as the straight Muscles of the Paunch have, as
if each consisted of several Muscles; however that be, they reach to the middle
of the Tongue where they are inserted into its lower side. Their use is to move
the Tongue forwards, toward the Foreteeth, and many times out of the Mouth,
that is, when the Beast gathers in his Meat.

The second pair is called Hypsiloglossum, (which word should be writ without
an H, seeing they have this name because they rise from the bottom of the Os
hyoides, which is otherwise called Ypsiloides,) from its resembling in shape
the Greek Letter v (Ypsilon.) They end in the middle of the Tongue, and have an
action contrary to the former; for as those moved the Tongue outward, so these
move it straight inward or backward.

The third pair is called Myloglossum, from the places of its rise and
insertion; for they arise from the inner part of the lower Jaw, at the roots of
the farthest grinding Teeth, and are inserted into the Ligament by which the
Tongue is tied to the fauces or Jaws. If this pair work together, they draw the
Tongue downwards; but if only one of them work, then it draws the Tongue
obliquely to its own side.

The fourth pair is called Ceratoglossum, because they arise from the horns of
the Os hyoides, and reaching from thence to the sides of the Tongue are there
inserted into it. If one of these work alone, it draws the Tongue aslant to
either the right or left side; but if both work together, they draw the Tongue
downwards and inwards.

The fifth and last pair of Muscles proper to the Tongue are called
Styloglossum, because they arise from the Styloides (or Pen-like) Process of
the Temple-bones, being fleshy at their beginning, though very small and sharp;
but afterward becoming broader and thicker, they run to the sides of the
Tongue, into which they are inserted about the middle of its length. If either
of these Muscles move singly, the Tongue is drawn to the right, or left side;
but if both act together, they pull the Tongue upwards and inwards.

CHAP. IX. Of the Muscles of the Bone of the Tongue, called Os hyoides.
The Os hyoides has four pair. 1. Sternohyoideum. 2. Geniohyoideum. 3.
Coracohyoideum. 4. Styloceratohyoideum.

THE Muscles of the Cheeks and Tongue serving to toss the Meat to and again in
the Mouth, and those of the lower Jaw helping to chew or grind it; after it is
sufficiently minced, it wants afterward to be swallowed and to be transmitted
into the Stomach. Now none of the foresaid Muscles contribute any thing
thereto, therefore it was necessary there should be others appropriated
thereto, which by moving diversely the root of the Tongue might make way for the
morsel to descend into the Gullet. Such are those that are common to the Tongue
and the Bone called hyoides that is fastened to its root or basis, which are in
number four pair.

The first pair is called Sternohyoideum, because they spring from the upper
but inner part of the Sternum or Breast Bone (with a broad and fleshy
beginning) and ascending under the Skin of the Neck by the Windpipe (still
keeping the same largeness and substance) are at length inserted into the root
or bottom of the Os hyoides, which they move downward and backward.

The second pair is opposite to the former, and is called Geniohyoideum. These
are large, short and fleshy all over, and arise with Fibers of a diverse course,
from the inside of the forepart of the lower Jaw (called in Men the Chin) and
are inserted into the middle part of the Bone hyoides, which they draw straight
upwards and a little forwards.

The third pair is called Coracohyoideum. These are slender, but strong, and
long; yea considering the slenderness of them, they are the longest Muscles of
the whole Body. They arise out of the Process called Coracoides at the upper
end of the Shoulder Blade near the Neck, and run obliquely upward under the
first pair of Muscles of the Head called Mastoideum, where they lose their
fleshy substance, as giving way to the other that are more worthy and
considerable than themselves, and degenerate each into a nervous and round
Tendon for some time; but so soon as they are past these Muscles, they become
musculous again, and so continue till they reach to the Os hyoides, into whose
horns they are inserted. These because of their two bellies are by some called
Digastricks. Their use is to pull the Os hyoides obliquely downwards.

The fourth and last pair of Muscles of the Os hyoides is called
Styloceratohyoideum. These arise from the root of the Appendix or Process
called Styloides, and end in the horns of Os hyoides. They move the Bone
obliquely upwards.

I hope the English Reader will pardon me for not translating the names of
these Muscles, for it is impossible for any Man to do it, seeing our English
Tongue is not capable of such compositions as the Greek admits of, from whence
these names are borrowed: but he will see the reasons of the names, if he
observe but the parts from whence the Muscles are said to rise, and into which
they are inserted, in the description of them.

CHAP. X. Of the Muscles of the Larynx or Throttle.
The Larynx has two pair of common Museles, viz. 1. Sternothyreoideum. 2.
Hyothyreoideum. 1 and four pair proper ones and an odd one, viz.
Cricothyreoideum. 2. Cricoarytaenoideum posticum. 3. Cricoarytaenoideum
laterale. 4. Thyreoarytaenoideum. 5. The Muscle Arytaenoides.

THE Larynx in Mankind is the main instrument in modulating or forming the
Voice, so as to make the tone high or low, etc. And though few Beasts can alter
their tones with that variety that a Man can, yet have they the same number of
Muscles to move the several Gristles whereof the Larynx is composed. Now its
Muscles are either proper, or common. The common are those that are implanted
into the Larynx, but arise not therefrom; and the proper are those that both
arise and end in the Larynx. The common are four, and the proper nine.

The first of the common pair is called Sternothyreoideum, and by some
Bronchium, or the Weazand-muscles. These arise with a fleshy and broad
beginning from the upper and inner part of the Sternum or Breast Bone at the
very Throat, ascending with right or straight Fibers up by the sides of the
Windpipe, continuing the same largeness and substance till they reach to the
Cartilago thyreoides, or Shield-fashioned Gristle, into which they are
inserted. Their use is to draw down the said Gristle, and so to widen the Chink
as some Authors think; though others are of opinion that such drawing of it
down, serves to straiten the Chink.

The second pair is called Hyothyreoideum. These arise from the lower side of
the Bone hyoides, having a broad and fleshy beginning; from whence descending
with straight Fibers they are inserted into the Cartilago thyreoides; by
lifting which upwards they are said to straiten the Chink of the Larynx; though
some on the contrary affirm that they widen it.

Next come we to the proper Muscles of the Larynx, the first pair of which is
called Cricothyreoideum anticum, because they take their beginning from the
forepart of the Ring-fashioned Gristle called Cricoides, and proceed obliquely
to the Shield-fashioned Gristle or Thyreoides, into whose sides they are
implanted. The use of this pair of Muscles is to move the Shield-fashioned
Gristle or Thyreoides obliquely downwards, and by that means to open the
glottis or Chink of the Larynx.

The second of the proper pairs of Muscles of the Larynx are called
Cricoarytaenoideum posticum. These contrary to the former arise from the lower
and back-part of the Ring-fashioned Gristle, and running upward with straight
Fibers are inserted with a nervous end into the lower side of the Arytaenoides
or Ewer-like Gristle, which it pulls upward and backward, and thereby opens and
widens the Larynx.

The third pair is called Cricoarytaenoideum laterale, because they are seated
at the sides of the former pair. They arise from the sides of the Anulary or
Ring-fashioned Cartilage somewhat slender; from whence proceeding directly
upwards, and becoming more large and fleshy, they come to the Arytaenoides,
into the sides of which they are implanted in that part that the foregoing pair
did not cover. The use of this pair is to open the Larynx by drawing the
Gristles obliquely aside.

The fourth pair is called Thyreoarytaenoideum. These are the largest and
strongest of all the proper Muscles of the Larynx, yea almost equal to all the
rest put together. They arise close one to the other from the inner hollow and
middle part of the Thyreoides or Shield-fashioned Gristle, whose inner Cavity
they fill through the whole length of it, and with oblique Fibers they ascend
upward, growing narrower in their ascent, till they come to their insertion
into the sides of the Ewer-like Gristle. These are the Muscles that are
principally affected in Humane Bodies when they are in the greatest danger from
that Disease called the Squinancy or Quinsie. For when these Muscles are
inflamed, they swell inwards into the Throttle, and make the Cavity thereof so
strait, that the Patient cannot fetch his breath, but is strangled.

The fifth and last is reckoned but for one single Muscle, and is called
Arytaenoides, also Claudens secundum, or the second Shutting-muscle. They take
their rise from the hinder line of the Ewer-like Gristle or Arytaenoides from
whence it has its name. It is very small but fleshy, and running with
transverse Fibers, it is inserted into the sides of the same Gristle, which it
helps to constringe or draw both its sides together, and so straitens the
Throttle.

The Epiglottis or Throat-flap, that covers the Chink of the Larynx has no
discernible Muscles in Man, nor I believe in an Horse: but in Cattle, Sheep,
etc. that chew the Cud, it is said to have evident ones; some of which spring
from the Os hyoides, and are inserted into the basis of the Epiglottis, which
they lift up; and others are placed between the Coat and Gristle of the
Epiglottis, helping it to shut the Larynx.

CHAP. XI. Of the Muscles of the Uvula and Throat.
The Uvula has two Muscles. 1. Pterygostaphilinus externus. 2.
Pterygostaphilinus internus. The Pharynx has seven Muscles. 1. Par
Sphenopharyngaeum. 2. Cephalopharyngaeum. 3. Stylopharyngaeum. 4. The Muscle
Oesophagiaeus. Two pair of Muscles lately found out by Doctor Croune, viz.
Pterygo-palatini, and Spheno-palatini.

THE Uvula is said to have two Muscles to hold it up, one of which is called
Pterygostaphilinus externus. This springs from the upper Jaw a little beyond
the furthermost Grinder, and is inserted into the Uvula.

The second is called Pterygostaphilinus internus. This proceeds from the lower
part of the inner Wing of the Process Pterygoides (or Winglike) and is inserted
in like manner as the former into the Uvula.

This is the description that Anatomists commonly give of these two Muscles;
but it may be questioned whether they are any more than imaginary ones; for
seeing the Uvula has no apparent voluntary motion, it seems to have no occasion
for any Muscles.

Next to the Muscles of the Uvula come those of the Throat (or the beginning of
the Gullet called Pharynx) to be treated of, to which belong seven Muscles,
that is, three pair and a Sphincter. The first of the pairs is called
Sphenopharyngaeum. These arise thin and nervous from the Appendix of the
Wedgelike-bone, descending by the inward Cavity of its Wing-like Processes, and
are inserted into the lateral parts of the Palate and Pharynx, which they widen
in swallowing.

The next pair is called Cephalopharyngaeum. These spring from that part where
the Head is joined to the first Vertebra of the Neck, from whence they descend
to the Pharynx, into which they are spread with a large plexus of Fibers, which
seems to make its Membrane. The action of this pair is contrary to the
former; for as those widen the Pharynx to let the nourishment descend into the
Gullet, so these straiten it when the Food is past by it, and thereby squeeze
the Food down the Gullet.

The third pair is called Stylopharyngaeum. These arise with a small beginning
from the inner part of the Styloides Process of the Temple-bone, and descending
with a thin body are inserted into the sides of the Pharynx which they dilate
or widen.

The last of these Muscles is that which has no fellow, and is called
Oesophagiaeus, or the Sphincter of the Gullet. This arises at one side of the
Thyreoides, or Shield-fashioned Gristle, and is inserted into the other side of
the same, wholly encompassing in its course both the fore and back part of the
Gullet, in the same manner as the Sphincters of the Anus and Bladder do those
Parts, serving here for the same use, viz. to draw or purse in the mouth of the
Gullet, as those do the Arse and Bladder. Now though I have the warrant of
several Authors in describing of this Muscle last of the seven, yet there be
others that treat first of it, and reckon it the first Muscle of the Throat,
saying, that if you first raise this, the two next beforementioned pairs,
namely, the Stylopharyngaeum and the Cephalopharyngaeum, may be the better
found.

Having done with the Muscles of the Uvula and Throat, as also with all the
Muscles of the inward and outward Parts of the Mouth and Chaps, according as
they are treated of by the Ancient and Modern Anatomizers of these Parts; it
remains now that I should descend to the Muscles of the Head and Neck, and so
to the inferior Parts; but before I depart quite from hence, I think it
necessary to give the Reader an account of two pair of Muscles more, which
belong to the Palate of the Mouth, never treated of by any Anatomist yet, save
Mr. Brown, who in his Book of the Muscles lately set forth, gives the first
account of them, at the desire of the discoverer of them, which was the most
ingenious Doctor Croune now living, and at this time Lecturer at Surgeons
Hall in London.

This worthy and learned Discoverer has given them these names following; the
first he calls Musculi Pterygo-palatini, and the other Sphenopalatini.

This description has he also given of them, viz. The first or
Pterygo-palatini are seated in the lower part of the Cavity of the Wing-like
Processes of the Wedge-like Bone, and terminate about the Glandula palati with
their Tendons, which run upon part of the forementioned Processes, as on two
Trochleae or Pullies. The use of this pair is to depress the before-named Gland
of the Palate and the Uvula.

The latter of them, which he calls Spheno-palatini, have an use contrary to
the former, viz. to lift up the forementioned Gland and Uvula. Their rise is
from the Os sphenoides or Wedge-like Bone, and their insertion (with a broader
Tendon than the former) into the sides of the beforementioned Gland and Uvula.
It is believed from the situation and action of this last pair of Muscles, that
when the Rheum that had swelled the Gland and relaxt the Uvula, is drained
away, these Muscles help to reduce the Uvula to its proper and natural
situation; though to me it seems, that its own contracting of it self is
sufficient.

CHAP. XII. Of the Muscles of the Head.
The Head has eight pair of proper Muscles. 1. Mastoideum. 2. Splenium. 3.
Complexum. 4. Parvum and crassum. 5. Rectum majus. 6. Rectum minus. 7. Obliquum
superius. 8. Obliquum inferius.

THE Muscles of the Head are either proper or common. The common are those
which primarily move the Neck, and the Head only secondarily, of which in the
next Chapter; for according to order the proper are first to be spoken to, and
these are they that move the Head only, the Neck at that time remaining
unmoved, the number of which are sixteen, or eight pair.

The first pair is called Mastoideum (which pair some Authors indeed reckon
for the eighth or last pair, and the Splenium for the first; but being willing
to follow the more modern Writers I will begin with the Mastoideum and reckon
them for the first pair.)

These are seated in the forepart of the Neck, having each a double beginning;
one of which is from the Breast Bone, being altogether nervous, and the other
from the Collar-bone, which is fleshy. From these originals they ascend
obliquely upwards by the Neck, till they come to the hinder part of the Head,
viz. to the Mammillary Process of the Temple-bone, into which each is inserted
by a round and fleshy Tendon. If both these Muscles work together, then they
bend the Head right forward or downward; but if one only works, then that
draws the Head a little to one side. Of all the eight pair there are only this
that bend the Head straight forward, and that are placed in the forepart of
the Neck; for all the rest are seated behind toward the Mane, and do either
pull the Head back, or else to one side.

The second pair (or first pullers back of the Head) is called Splenium. These
are long and thick, arising from the five uppermost Vertebrae of the Chest and
five lowermost of the Neck, with a nervous beginning; from whence ascending to
the hinder part of the Head, they there end with a broad and fleshy Tendon. The
use of these, if both of them act together, is to draw the Head directly
backward; but if either of them act singly, then it draws the Head a little to
one side.

The third pair, (being the second puller back of the Head) is called Complexum
or Trigeminum, because each Muscle seems to consist of three, for it arises
with three heads; one of which is from the transverse Process of the fourth and
fifth Vertebrae of the Chest; the second from the first and second of the same,
and the third from the ridge of the seventh Vertebra of the Neck: all which
uniting into one body, the Muscles ascend upward as far as to the Occiput or
Noll-bone, (in their course becoming fleshy and broad) and are inserted into
the said Noll-bone, at the root of the Mammillary Process, sometimes by one,
and sometimes by a triple Tendon.

The third puller back of the Head, or fourth pair, is called parvum and
crassum, because they are small and thick. These are situated under the former,
arising from the transverse Processes of the six uppermost Vertebrae of the
Neck, with a nervous beginning; but afterward becoming fleshy, they are carried
obliquely upward, and are inserted into the hindermost root of the Processus
Mammillaris. Their use is, if they act both together, to bring the Head lightly
backwards; and if but one act, then to bring it backward to one side.

The fifth pair is called Rectum majus or the greater right pair, being small,
fleshy and slender, and arising from the tip of the Spine or ridge of the
second Vertebra of the Neck, where they touch one another; but presently part,
and ascending both upward, end with a round Tendon in the middle of the
Noll-bone or Occiput. The action of this pair is the same as of the former.

The sixth pair (being the fifth of the pullers back) is called Rectum minus,
or the lesser right pair. Their situation is just under the former pair, as it
were concealed, and are of the like substance, form and progress. They arise
close together from the back-part of the first Vertebra of the Neck where the
Bone should have ended in a Spine, but that Spine is wanting because it would
have offended the former pair of Muscles that spring from the second Vertebra
and march over this. Presently after their original they part, and ascend
upwards, and on either side are implanted into the Noll-bone. The use of these
is to assist the motion of the two foregoing pair. Now the reason why there are
so many Muscles appointed to move the Head backward, and but one pair forward,
is because the Head by reason of its great bulk and weight, is prone enough of
it self to incline forward or downward; but it requires a great force to move
it upward or backward.

The seventh pair is called Obliquum superius, or the upper Oblique pair. These
are seated under the right or straight pairs, and are like them in form and
substance. They are small, arising out of the middle of the Occiput at the
outside of the straight pairs, from whence they descend downwards, and are
inserted into the tips of the transverse Processes of the first Vertebra of the
Neck, the right hand Muscle into the right Process, and the left into the left.
The use of these, if they both act together, is to nodd the Head gently
directly backwards.

The eighth pair is called Obliquum inferius, or the lower Oblique pair. These
arise from the Spine or ridge of the second Vertebra of the Neck, from whence
running obliquely upwards, they end at the transverse Processes of the first
Vertebra of the Neck. They are longish, round and fleshy, and make (as do also
the former) a Triangle of equal sides.

The use of this pair is to move the Head as it were semicircularly, (for it
cannot be moved quite round) the first Vertebra turning upon the Tooth-like
Process of the second: but this motion is performed, when one of them only
acts at a time; for if both of them move or act together, then they either keep
the Head steady (as some Authors conceive) or else draw it a very little
backwards.

CHAP. XIII. Of the Muscles of the Neck.
The Muscles common to the Head and Neck are four pair. 1. Spinatum. 2.
Transversale. 3. Longum. 4. Scalenum.

THE Head is not only moved by its proper Muscles mentioned in the last
Chapter, primarily; but secondarily also by other Muscles belonging to the
Neck, which are in number eight, on each side four, by the help of which the
Neck is sometimes bent forward, other times extended backward; it is also
sometimes drawn to one side, and sometimes to the other: but there are more
Muscles to draw it backwards than either forwards or to one side, because the
labor is greater by reason of the weight of the Head and Neck (as was said in
the former Chapter.) There are therefore two pair of Muscles to bend the Neck
backward, namely the first and second, which do also draw it a little
obliquely; and the third and fourth pair draw it both forward and to one side,
as both act together, or but one of each pair at a time.

The first pair of these is called Spinatum, because they are seated amongst
the Spines of the Vertebrae. They arise from the roots of the Spines of the
seven uppermost Vertebrae of the Chest, and five lowermost of the Neck, being
separated from one another only by the tips of the Spines, and are inserted
into the whole lower side of the Spine of the second Vertebra of the Neck. They
bend the Neck backward, or a little obliquely. Some think that they have no
original from the Spines of the Neck, but that they only adhere to them in
their passage.

The next pair is called Transversale, because they both rise from and are
inserted into the transverse Processes of the Vertebrae. They take their
beginning from the roots of the transverse Processes of the six uppermost
Vertebrae of the Chest; from whence ascending by degrees they become stronger
and thicker, and are inserted into the outsides of all the transverse Processes
of the Neck-bones. The use of this pair, as also of the former, is as has been
said, to pull or draw the Neck directly backwards; but if one Muscle of either
pair work alone, it pulls the Neck with an oblique motion.

The third is called Longum, or the Long pair. These lie hid under the
Oesophagus or Gullet, wherefore they are by some called the
Undergullet-lurkers. They arise with a thin and sharp but fleshy beginning from
the body of the fifth and sixth Vertebrae of the Back, and as they ascend
upwards, are knit to the sides of all the Vertebrae, till they come to the
first or highest of the Neck, where each touching other they are both inserted
into its Process. The use of this pair, when they work together, is to bend the
Neck directly forward, and withal to incline the Head; but if one of them act
alone, then is the Neck drawn toward that side on which the Muscle moves.

The fourth and last pair of the Muscles of the Neck is called Scalenum or
Triangulare. These by some Authors are accounted as the eighth pair of the
Chest. They are seated on the sides of the Neck inclining rather to the fore
than hinder part of it. They take their beginning from the first Rib, arising
fleshy and large, and are inserted into the inside of all the transverse
Processes of the Vertebrae of the Neck. Their use is the same with the
foregoing pair. They are observed to be perforated or to have holes through
them, by which Veins, Arteries and Nerves do pass out of the Body into the
Forelegs.

Table XXXII.
Represents an Horse standing with his Face toward us, that one may have the
fuller view of some of the Muscles of the Head and Neck. It shows also
several other Muscles, less perfectly.

AA Show the par Mastoideum. BB The Muscles of the Shoulder Blade. CC The par
Trigeminum or Complexum. DD That pair of Muscles of the Neck called Scalenum or
Triangulare. E The Windpipe in its natural situation. FF That pair of Muscles
of the Neck called Longum, removed from under the Gullet. GG The pair of the
Nose called Philtrum. HH The Adducent or closing Muscles of the Nostrils. II
The Muscles of the Eyelids. KK The Temporal Muscles. LL The Muscles of the
Ears. M The Frontal or Forehead Muscle. N The Cucullaris or Monk's hood. O The
Deltoides of the Shoulder. P The Serratus major Anticus (shrunk up, for
naturally their Teeth reach to those of the obliquely descending pair of the
Abdomen.) QQ The Pectorales. R The Oblique descendens of the Abdomen, a little
shrunk up from the Serratus major. S The Deltoides of the Thigh, (which I
presume to call so, for it is just of the same figure with that of the
Shoulder.) T The Serratus posticus. VVV The external Intercostal Muscles. WXY
The three Buttock Muscles. Z The Vastus externus. a The Sacrolumbus. b The
Longissimus dorsi. c The Semispinatus.
anatomical view of the muscles of a horse's head and neck TAB XXXII p. 170.




There are four pair of Muscles that widen the Chest. 1. Subclavium. 2.
Serratum majus Anticum. 3. Serratum posticum superius. 4. Serratum posticum
inferius. Two pair that contract the Breast. 1. Par Triangulare. 2.
Sacrolumbum. Cervicale descendens.

CHAP. XIV. Of the Muscles of the Breast.
HAving dispatched the Muscles of the Head and Neck, we come in the next place
to speak to those of the Chest or Thorax, in which are contained the principal
Instruments of Life, the Heart and Lungs. Now the Lungs being the principal
organs of Respiration, and wanting Muscles whereby to dilate or contract
themselves, it was necessary they should receive assistance from the Chest in
which they are included, by the dilatation or contraction whereof, they might
be also dilated and contracted. To which end the Chest is furnished with
several Muscles, some of which contract it in Expiration, that is, when the
Horse lets forth his breath, and others dilate it in Inspiration, when he
receives in his breath.

Of the Dilaters or those that widen the Chest there are four pair, besides the
sixteen pair of the External Intercostals, there being (as is already said in
Chap. 2. of the Second Book where I largely treated of them) between each Rib
two Muscles, an External and an Internal one. Now there being in number
seventeen Ribs, reckoning a Rib for the extreme part both toward the Neck and
toward the Flank, there must be one pair of Muscles fewer than there are Ribs,
of which those that are seated externally, serve all as one Muscle to assist in
the widening or dilating the Chest, and those that are seated internally (lying
under the former) assist in the contraction of it. For a more full description
of these Muscles you may please to turn back to the afore-cited Chapter.

The first pair of the dilating or widening Muscles is called Subclavium,from
their situation, which is under the Collar-bone called Clavicula, for they fill
up that space that is between the Clavicle and the first Rib. These arise
fleshy from the inner and lower part of the Clavicle or Collarbone, which is
next to the Rib, and running obliquely or slanting forward, are implanted into
the first Rib near the Breast Bone with a fleshy end. The action of this pair
of Muscles is to draw the first Rib upwards and outward, by which motion the
cavity of the Chest is widened.

The next or second pair of the Dilaters is called Serratum majus Anticum, or
the greater and foremost Saw-like pair, so called partly from their situation
and magnitude, and partly from the figure of their Tendons which resemble the
teeth of a Saw. They arise from the inside of the Shoulderblade and the two
upper Ribs, and are inserted into the lower five Trueribs and two upper bastard
or Short-ribs, before they end into Gristles; so that its breadth takes up a
great part of the side of the Chest, and it is also very fleshy. The use of
this pair of Muscles is to draw the Ribs outward and upwards, and so to dilate
or widen the Chest, which it does more especially in great and violent
strainings.

The third proper pair of the Muscles of the Chest is called the upper backward
Saw-pair, or Serratum posticum superius. They are seated on the Back under the
Muscle called Rhomboides or the fourth Muscle of the Shoulder Blade, betwixt
both the Blades, and above the first pair of the Head. They spring membranous
from the Spines of the three lower Rack-bones of the Neck and the first of the
Back, and are inserted into the Interstices of three or four of the upper Ribs.
Their use is the same as of the former, viz. to draw the Ribs upward, whereby
the Chest is dilated, and the inner Cavity thereof enlarged.

The fourth is called Serratum posticum inferius, the lower backward Saw-pair.
These are seated almost in the middle of the Back, under the broad Muscle that
is the first of the Depressors of the Shoulder. They arise from the Spines of
the three lowest Vertebrae of the Back and of the first of the Loins, with a
membranous, nervous and broad beginning; afterward they pass with an
overthwart line cross the Muscles of the Back, and being increased with fleshy
Fibers are inserted into three or four of the lower short Ribs before they turn
into Gristles. Their use is to draw the three or four lowest Ribs outward, and
so to dilate or widen the lower part of the Chest.

Besides the four pair already named there is yet another Muscle that assists
these in the motion of widening the Chest in Inspiration, which is the
Diaphragma or Midriff, of which I have already spoken in its proper place,
namely in the fourth Chapter of the Second Book; I shall therefore omit
speaking of it any farther here.

Next come we to treat of the Muscles that contract or straiten the Chest in
Expiration or letting forth the breath. The first pair of these is called par
Triangulare, or triangled pair, though they make not a perfect triangle,
because they consist of two long sides and one short one. These arise from the
middle line of the Breast Bone on the inside of it, (for their seat is within
the Cavity of the Chest, under the Breast Bone) being little and slender, and
are inserted into the bony ends of the third, fourth, fifth and sixth True-ribs
(where they are fastened to the Gristles.) The use of this pair is to draw the
Ribs toward the Breast Bone, and thereby to straiten the Chest in Expiration.

The next is called Sacrolumbum from their rise, which is from the Os sacrum
and from the Spine or ridge of the Lumbi or Loins. They are seated under the
Serratum posticum inferius, and creeping upwards mix themselves with the long
Muscle of the Back, and also fasten themselves to the transverse Processes of
the Racks of the Loins as far as to the lowest Rack of the Chest, from whence
ascending up to the Ribs, they are inserted into the lower side of them all by
a particular Tendon about three or four fingers breadth from the ridge of the
Back. The use of this pair according to Veslingius, is to contract the Chest;
but Spigelius and also Bartholinus do believe that because it grows out of the
same beginning with the long Muscle of the Back, therefore it extends and
raises up the Chest as that does.

There is another pair opposite to this described by Diemerbroeck, a diligent
Anatomist, who has given them the name of Cervicale descendens. These, says
he, do spring from the third, fourth, fifth, sixth and seventh Vertebrae of the
Neek, and are inserted into the upper side of each Rib, as the Sacrolumbum is
into the Lower; and says, that this pair by pulling the Ribs upwards in
Inspiration widen the Chest, as the other by drawing them down in Expiration
straiten it.

To the Muscles already spoken of, which do contract the Chest, do belong the
sixteen Internal Intercostal Muscles: For as the External ones assist the
Wideners or Dilaters of the Chest in their motions, so do the Internal also
assist these contracting Muscles in the drawing together of the Chest, and do
all act together as one Muscle, as the others do; for they pass obliquely from
the lower to the upper Ribs, as the others did from the upper to the lower,
their Fibers running contrary to or across the former. All these Muscles are
said, secondarily, to be assisted in their motion by the Abdominal Muscles, as
also by the Muscles of the Shoulderblade and Forelegs.

CHAP. XV. Of the Muscles of the Back and Loins.
The Muscles of the Back have but one motion. Four pair of the Back and Loins.
1. Musculi longissimi. 2. Par Quadratum. 3. Sacri. 4. Par Semispinatum. The
distemper called a swayed Back is oftener an affection of these Muscles, than
any dislocation in the Vertebrae.

THE Muscles of the Back, as also of the whole Spine, are so diversely and
intricately intermixed and knit together, that some Anatomists have divided
them into more, others into fewer, and that by reason of the infinite originals
of the Fibers and the multitude of their insertions, all which the admirable
wisdom of Nature thought fit to mingle and knit one within another, that they
might the better and with the more strength sustain and accomplish those strong
and violent actions to which they are designed, and also with more ease and
safety bear such extraordinary heavy weights, as this noble Animal, the subject
of my Discourse, does continually undergo. For if power united be the stronger,
(as the common saying is) then certainly if many Muscles conspire together unto
one motion, they will be better able to perform it.

Now that there are not more than one apparent motion performed by the Muscles
of the Back of an Horse is plain, which motion is by the help of the Back-bones
to raise up and suspend as it were the whole bulk of the Body, and to bear also
great weights many times upon it: I say this is the main, if not the only
motion performed by these Muscles; for the Bodies of Horses cannot be turned
backwards and forwards, to the sides, and almost semicircularly, as the Backs
of Men are, as may be seen in Dancers, Tumblers and the like.

Again, these Muscles though they are by later Anatomists divided into several
pairs, yet the Ancients (as Galen for one) were of opinion, that seeing they
cannot be by any means truly separated, either there must be so many pair as
there are Rack-bones, or else (which is more likely) that there is but one
only pair, offering tendinous distributions to all the Vertebrae of the Back.
And says Galen, If one of this pair work alone, the Spine is inclined toward
that side, be it the right or left; but if they both work together, the Spine
is bended to neither hand, but pulled straight backward, or rather the Spines
are held in their several proper places. And, adds he, whereas almost all
Muscles have their Antagonists, that are the Authors of a contrary action to
theirs, yet these Muscles of the Spine (if you except the bending Muscles of
the Neck) have no Antagonists or Opposites.

Neither are these Muscles of the Back proper to the Back alone,but common to
the Loins also, being reckoned their second pair, of which I will first treat
though it be contrary to the custom of Anatomists to do so This pair then goes
by the name of Masculi longissimi, so called from their extraordinary length,
as being the longest Muscles (and also the strongest) in the whole Body. For
they arise from the Os sacrum, and Ileium or Haunch-bone, and passing along by
the Spine or ridge of the Loins, Back and Neck, they reach as far as to the
Processus Mammillares, or Mammillary Processes of the Temple-bones. They are
almost confounded with the Sacrolumbum and Semispinatum in their march through
the Loins, whence by some those are taken to be parts of this pair: but as soon
as this pair arrives at the Back, it parts with those, and appears to be
distinct from them. Their use is (if they act together) directly to extend the
Back and Loins; but if one only work, then is the Spine inclined on one side,
for their Fibers are oblique or slanting.

The next pair goes by the name of Quadratum or the Square pair, from their
Figure; for whilst they are in their natural situation they both of them
together make a apiece figure, though when they are separated they are
each of a triangular shape. They arise broad, thick and fleshy from the
backward and upper Cavity of the Haunch-bone, and from the inner and upper side
of Os sacrum, and remaining fleshy in their whole course, they are inserted
into all the transverse Processes of the Vertebrae of the Loins as far as the
lowest Rib. Their use is to bend the Racks of the Loins with a right motion
forward or downward; but if one of them work alone, it draws the Loins to one
side a little downward.

The next are the Muscles called Sacri, or holy Muscles, from their rise, which
is from the Os sacrum. They spring with an acute original from that part of the
said Bone where the Spine is fastened to the Haunchbones. After their original
they grow broad by degrees, and though they end not till they come to the Spine
of the lowest Vertebra of the Thorax, yet in their progress they are inserted
into several of the Spines and oblique Processes of the Vertebrae of the Loins,
their Fibers running obliquely or with a slanting line upwards and inwards. The
use of this pair, if one work alone, is to pull the Body a little on one side,
but if both act or work together, they extend that part of the Spine to which
they are fastened.

The last pair is called Semispinatum. These arise with a nervous original or
beginning from all the Spines or Ridges of the Os sacrum and the Loins, and are
inserted into the transverse Processes of the Vertebrae of the Loins and some
of the lowermost of the Chest. These with the former pair do fill up the
distances between the Spines, where they touch one another, nothing coming
between them to separate them from one another, but a membranous Ligament
issuing from the upper Spine. The use of this pair is to join the Spines
together, and to extend or erect that part of the Back to which they grow. Now
if all these Muscles of the Back and Loins work together, the whole Back is
extended, or in a manner drawn backwards: but if the Muscles of one side work
alone, the Body is inclined to that side.

These Muscles are apt to have their tone and strength violated by several
accidents, as by overgreat Loads, by a sudden Gold taken by pulling off the
Saddle after hard riding before the Horse be quite cold, and the like; whereby
the Muscles become benumbed and relaxed, and so are in a manner deprived of
both sense and motion; by which means the Horse becomes useless, being so far
from being able to carry Burdens or to perform any other service for his
Master, that when he is up he can hardly serve himself, I mean, stand to eat
his Meat; or if down, not able to rise without help. This also often happens to
old and lean Horses, in whom by reason of the weakness of their Bodies, as also
because they abound with phlegmatic Humors, these Muscles are so relaxt that
they are scarce able to support the weight of their own Bodies, much less other
Burdens. And in this case I think nothing more proper than good store of
strengthening Food, to support and nourish their inside, whereby they may gain
strength, and withal to apply some strengthening Plaster to the outside at the
same time.

But to recover those that come by this affection by great Colds taken as is
abovementioned, it will be the best way to give them warm, strengthening and
comfortable Medicines inwardly, and also to apply first some warm Sheepskins
pretty often renewed, and at the same time to anoint the Loins with some
sovereign Ointments or Oils outwardly; or if this will not do, then to sweat
him in a Dunghill, and after he comes out, to apply to the Loins a
strengthening Charge or Plaster.

I thought my self a little obliged in this place to enlarge upon this account,
to undeceive many of our Professors, who take all Distempers in this kind to be
as one, concluding still that all Horses thus affected, are either strained in
the Kidneys or swayed, as we call it, in the Back; when indeed these Muscles
are either benumbed by cold as aforesaid, or by strains gotten by carrying
overgreat weights or burdens, they are distended to that degree, that for
some time they lose the strength and vigor they used to perform their motions
with; this, I say, is often the true cause of the debility and weakness of the
Back.

Not that I will deny that there is any such malady as a swayed Back, for I
have my self by dissection seen in a Horse that was knocked on the Head, (being
not curable of this Distemper) not only all the muscular Parts as it were
bruised, and many of their interspaces filled with a kind of a congealed Humor
or Matter, but also found a kind of dislocation in that part where the Os
sacrum or lowest Vertebra of the Loins are joined, and a deal of congealed
Matter settled about those Parts. But such a strain is seldom curable, or if
ever, not without great charge and long keeping. What I have therefore said
upon this account is to let our Professors know, that most of those affections
which they call swayed Backs are only distempers of the Muscles, and therefore
easily cured if soon taken in hand: but those which have broken Backs, (which
we commonly understand by swayed Backs) are seldom curable. And thus much shall
suffice as to this sort of discourse in this place; it remains now that I
return to my former discourse, and describe the remaining part of the Muscles,
of which those of the Anus, Bladder, and Genitals both in Horses and Mares come
next to be spoken to.

CHAP. XVI. Of the Muscles of the Fundament, the Bladder, the Testicles, Yard
and Clitoris.
The Sphincter Muscle of the Anus. Two Levators. The Sphincter of the Bladder.

AHorse being a Creature made for service, it was fit that he should void his
Excrements at his own convenience and choice, and not perpetually; As therefore
Nature has provided Muscles about the Mouth and Chaps for the receiving,
chewing and swallowing of the Food, so at the end of the Guts and at the outlet
of the Urine there are Muscles set as Porters to interclude the passage, that
nothing might go out but by the Horse's own accord; whereas were it not for
these Muscles, his Excrements would come from him continually and
involuntarily, as I have seen to happen in such Horses whose Sphincter Muscle
has by some accident or extraordinary weakness been violated. Neither has
Nature only provided Muscles for the keeping of the Excrements in, I mean till
such time as it is necessary they should be let forth; but others also as
instruments to assist in the voiding or letting of them forth. For the former
purpose is appointed one Muscle at the Anus called the Sphincter, and for the
latter, two, called Levators.

The Sphincter is a fleshy Muscle seated at the very end of the Arsegut, the
which it incompasseth round like a Ring, to which it may fitly be resembled. It
is rather knit to than arises from the lower Vertebrae of the Os sacrum, being
round and broad, and furnished with transverse or overthwart Fibers, or indeed
orbicular ones. This Muscle is much thicker above or inwards, than below or at
the Fundament, where it adheres so firmly to the Skin, that it is not easy to
separate it from it. Its use we have mentioned in the former Paragraph.

The other two are called the Levators or litters up of the Fundament.These are
small, broad and nervous, arising from the Ligaments of the Hip-bones and Os
sacrum, from whence passing by the sides of the straight or Arse-gut they
adhere to it, and are inserted into the upper part of the Sphincter. A portion
of them also grows to the root of the Yard, and in Mares to the neck of the
Matrix. Their use is to assist the Abdominal Muscles in the expulsion of the
Excrements, which they do by lifting up the Fundament. They also help to keep
the Fundament from falling out, which sometimes happens when they are too much
relaxt.

To the Bladder does also belong a Muscle called a Sphincter, which is seated
in the beginning of its neck, the which it compasses round. It is furnished
with orbicular Fibers as the Sphincter of the Fundament is, and is of the same
use; for it constringes or purses up the neck of the Bladder (as that does the
Anus) that the Urine may not pass out without a spontaneous relaxing of this
Muscle. In Mares it is seated at the very end of the Bladder, viz. at the hole
where the neck of the Bladder opens into the Vagina.

The Muscles of the Tard are in number four (or two pair) of which we have
already treated in the First Book at Chapter 20. of which the first pair are
called the Erectores or Lifters up of the Yard, and the other Dilatantes,
Wideners, and by some they are called Acceleratores or Hastners. I thought fit
in this place only to name them, referring the Reader to the abovenamed
Chapter for his farther satisfaction; as also to the said Book at Chap. 22. for
the description of the Muscles of the Testicles called the Cremaster Muscles,
by which the Testicles are suspended. The Reader may also be satisfied in the
same Book at Chap. 27. concerning the Muscles of the Clitoris in Mares, which
are two pair, as the Yard of a Horse, to which it is resembled, has; for I
shall not insist upon them in this place neither.

CHAP. XVII. Of the Muscles of the Scapula or Shoulder Blade.
The Shoulder Blade has four pair. 1. Cucullares. 2. Levatores. 3. Serratum
minus Anticum. 4. Rhomboides.

HAving sufficiently treated of the Muscles of the three Venters, it remains
that I descend now to treat of those of the Limbs, beginning first with the
foremost of them, the first of which shall be those that move the Shoulder Blade.

The Shoulder Blade is observed to have four motions, viz. forward, backward,
upward and downward, which motions are performed by four pair of proper
Muscles. The first pair are seated betwixt the two Shoulder-blades, covering
the top of the Withers. They are called Cucullares from the resemblance they
have with a Monk's Hood or Cowl. Their first original is fleshy and thin, which
they take from the Occiput or hinder part of the Head; but as they descend down
the Neck they have other membranous beginnings from five of the Spines thereof,
yea and from eight or nine of the uppermost of the Chest: but they presently
begin to be straightened as they descend toward the Shoulder-blades, into whose
whole spine or ridge they are implanted, as likewise into the Shoulder Bone and
broader part of the Collar-bone. This pair of Muscles, because of their diverse
originals, from whence they have several sorts of Fibers, are said to perform
several motions; as when the upper part of the Muscle that arises from the
Occiput is contracted, then is the Shoulder Blade lifted obliquely upward, that
part being furnished with oblique Fibers; and when that part which springs from
the Withers is contracted, then it is pulled straight thitherward.

The second pair are called Levatores, the Lifters or Heavers; and by some (in
Men) Patientiae Musculi. These are situated above the Collarbone, taking their
beginning from the transverse Processes of the first, second, third and fourth
Vertebrae of the Neck; which beginnings being united in the middle (or
thereabouts) of the length of the Muscles, they are at last inserted into the
Shoulder-blades at their fore corner. The use of these Muscles is to draw the
Blades upward and forward.

The third pair is called Serratum minus Anticum or the lesser fore
Sawpair.These lie under the Pectoral Muscles, and spring from the four
uppermost Ribs before they become gristly, by four fleshy portions representing
the teeth of a Saw; from whence they pass somewhat slantingly to the
Shoulder Blade, into whose Process (called its Anchor-like Process) it is
inserted with a broad (partly fleshy and partly nervous) Tendon. The use of
this pair is to move the Shoulder-blades forward to the Chest.

The fourth and last pair is called Rhomboides. These are seated under the
Cucullares, being thin, broad and apiece. They spring fleshy from the
hinder Processes or Spines of the three lowest Rack-bones of the Neck, and as
many of the uppermost of the Chest, and continuing fleshy to their very
insertion they are implanted into the basis of the Blades. Their use is to draw
the Blade somewhat upward and backward, couching it to the Back.

Note, that seeing a Horse and all four-footed Beasts go prone, whereas Man
walks erect or upright, the motions of the Muscles might, and ought in
strictness, to be explained diversely in them from what they are in him: As for
example, Those which are said in Man to move the Part upward, viz. toward the
Head, ought in a four-footed Beast to be said to move it forward; and those
which move it backward in Man, move it upward in the other, because of the
different posture of their Bodies: and the same might be said as to their
motions forward and backward. But seeing many of the Muscles have their names
from their offices in Men, it would make but a confusion and a great
impropriety in their appellations to explain their motions by other terms in
Brutes. And therefore the Reader is desired to observe, That when we say a Part
is moved upward, we mean toward the Head; when downward, toward the Tail; when
backward, toward the Back; and when forward, we understand it toward the Breast
or Belly.

CHAP. XVIII. Of the Muscles of the Shoulder.
Each Shoulder has nine Muscles, viz. first, two Erectors. 1 Deltoides. 2
Supraspinatus. 1 Secondly, two Depressors. Latissimus. 2 Rotundus major. 1
Thirdly, two Pullers forward. Pectoralis. 2 Coracoideus. 1 Fourthly, three
Pullers backward. Infraspinatus. 2 Subscapularis. 3 Rotundus minor.

THAT which I call the Shoulder is that Part or Bone that reaches from the top
or pitch of the Shoulder (and is joynted into the Shoulder Blade) to the next
Joint which we call the Elbow; which it is necessary to intimate for
distinction sake, because the Shoulder Blade and this part are commonly both
understood by the name of the Shoulder. Having advertised this, pass we now to
its Muscles.

The motions of the Shoulders are five, viz. backwards, forwards, upwards,
downwards and circularly. To perform which each has nine Muscles, of which
there are two that move it upward, namely the Deltoides and Supraspinatus; and
of these we shall treat in the first place.

The first is called Deltoides from its figure, which resembles the shape of
the Greek Letter D delta. It is fleshy and (as you may see) triangular, arising
from the midst of the Clavicle or Collar-bone, the top of the Shoulder, and the
whole ridge of the Shoulder Blade, and is extended as far as to the middle of
the Shoulder Bone, where it is inserted. This Muscle is observed to have diverse
sorts of Fibers; some of which run obliquely downwards, such are those on the
forepart; others run obliquely forward, which are those on the back-part of
it; and a third sort, which are placed in the middle, run directly toward the
Fore-leg: Wherefore (says my Author) when the Fibers of the forepart are
contracted, the Shoulder is lifted upward and forward toward the Horse's Nose;
if the middle Fibers be contracted, the Shoulder is lifted directly toward his
Back; and if the hinder Fibers be contracted, then is the Shoulder carried
obliquely backward: so that this Muscle is said not only to raise up the
Shoulder (which is indeed its chiefest use) but helps also to perform other
motions as well as that.

The second Erector or Lifter up of the Shoulder is called Supraspinatus by
some, but by others Superscapularis superior, or the upper Blade-rider,because
it is seated uppermost upon the Shoulder Blade, and fills up all that cavity
which is between its spine and upper edge. It arises from the spine of the
Blade with a long and fleshy beginning, and passing over the jointing of the
Scapula with the Shoulder Bone by a broad and strong Tendon, is inserted into
the neck of the said Shoulder Bone. This Muscle is by some Authors thought not
only to lift up the Shoulder (which is its principal use, as being one of the
Erectors) but also to help to turn it a little round.

The Depressors or Pullers down of the Shoulder are also two, namely Latissimus
and Rotundus major. The Latissimus is so called from its breadth and largeness,
for with its fellow it covers almost the whole Back. It goes also by the
name of Ani-scalptor, or Scratch-arse Muscle (in Men.) It rises with a
membranous and broad beginning from the tops of all the spines of the
Rack-bones that are betwixt the sixth Vertebra of the Chest and the middle of
Os sacrum, as also from the upper part of Os ileum or Haunch-bone: from thence
ascending upward until it come to that part of the Back where the Ribs begin
to bend backward, there it becomes more fleshy, and is carried over the lower
or hinder corner of the Shoulder Blade, at which place it begins to grow
narrower but continues fleshy: and at length by a broad and strong Tendon it is
inserted below the upper head of the Shoulder Bone lengthways, on the inside,
betwixt the Pectoral and Round Muscles, there being a space left betwixt them
for that purpose. This draws the Shoulder downward or toward the Tail, though a
little obliquely backward.

The second Puller down of the Shoulder (or its fourth Muscle) is called
Rotundus major, or the greater Round Muscle. It takes its beginning from the
whole lower Costa or Rib of the Shoulder Blade, and is inserted into the upper
and inner part of the Shoulder Bone with a short but broad, strong and nervous
Tendon. The use of this is the same with the former, viz. to pull the Shoulder
downward.

The two pair of Muscles that pull the Shoulder forward are called, the one by
the name of Pectoralis, and the other Coracoideus. The Pectoralis is so called
from its situation, which is upon the fore-side of the Breast. It has a very
large and for the greatest part membranous beginning, which it takes from
diverse parts: for its upper part arises from the middle of the Collar-bone on
that side next the Breast; its middle, from the whole length of the Breast Bone
and the ends of the Gristles of the Ribs that end in it; and its lower part
springs from the Gristles of the sixth, seventh and eighth Ribs. After it has
taken these beginnings, it presently becomes fleshy and thick, and running
toward the Shoulder is at length inserted into the Shoulder Bone with a short,
but broad, finewy and strong Tendon a little below its head, betwixt the Muscle
Deltoides, and that which is called Biceps. The office of this Muscle is, when
it contracteth it self equally, to move the Shoulder equally and directly
forward or toward the Breast, inclining to neither hand: but if all its Fibers
be not equally contracted, (for by reason of its diverse beginnings it has also
diverse sorts of Fibers, some running with a slanting line from above downwards,
others with the like slanting line from below upward, and those betwixt these
running straight; wherefore I say, if all these Fibers be not equally
contracted, but some work, and others not) then are other motions performed by
this Muscle, as the Shoulder drawn more upward or downward, as the different
Fibers work.

Coracoideus is by Bartholin accounted the ninth Muscle of the Shoulder (which,
says he, was first observed by Arantius and Placentinus) but we do after the
more modern Authors reckon it for the sixth, and second drawer forward of it.
It has its name Coracoideus from its beginning, which is from the Processus
Coracoides of the Scapula; from whence it reaches to the middle of the
Shoulder Bone where it terminates. Its use is (as say the discoverers of it) to
draw the Shoulder to the Process of the Blade-bone, or forward upon the Breast.

The Shoulder is moved also backward by three Muscles, which are Infraspinatus,
Subscapularis or Immersus, and Rotundus minor.

That which is reckoned the first of these, is the Infraspinatus, by some
called Suprascapularis inferior. It is seated upon the Shoulder Blade and fills
up all that space which is betwixt the ridge or spine of the Scapula and its
lower edge, even as the Suprascapularis superior fills up the upper space. It
arises fleshy from the basis of the Blade below the ridge of it, becoming
narrower in its progress as the Blade-bone grows narrower, and is inserted by a
broad and short Tendon into the fourth Ligament of the Shoulder Bone.

The second Puller or Drawer back of the Shoulder is the Subscapularis,the
Under-blade-lurker, or Immersus the drowned Muscle, because it is seated under
the Blade-bone betwixt the Ribs and it. Very fleshy it is, arising so from the
inner part of the basis of the Blade; in figure it is triangular, like the
Bone, growing narrower or straiter by degrees as it descends, and is inserted
into one of the Ligaments of the Shoulder.

The next being the third and last of the Drawers back of the Shoulder is
called Rotundus minor, the lesser Round Muscle, from its figure. It arises from
the lowest corner of the Scapula, and is implanted into the neck of the
Shoulder Bone.

As for the circular motion of the Shoulder, that is not performed by any one
Muscle, but by several of these already named, acting successively one after
another.

CHAP. XIX. Of the Muscles that move the Fore-leg and Foot.
How far the Fore-leg of an Horse answers in its Parts to the Arm of a Man. 1.
Two Muscles bend the Cubit. Biceps. 2. Brachiaeus internus. 1. Two also extend
it. Longus. 2. Brevis. 1. Two Muscles bend the Shank. Cubitaeus internus. 2.
Radiaeus internus. 1. Two also extend it. Cubitaeus externus. 2. Radiaeus
extrnus. The Pasterns and Coffin-joint are bended by two Muscles. 1. Sublimis.
2. Profundus. 1 They are extended by one, viz. Extensor magnus.

THAT part of the Leg which reaches from the Elbow to that which we call the
Knee, answers to that part in Humane Bodies which reaches from the Elbow to the
Wrist. Only in an Horse there is but one Bone in this space (which we shall
call the Cubit-bone) whereas in Men there are two going by two distinct names,
one of which being the greater is called Cubitus or the Cubit, and the other
Vlna or the Ell. But as for that part which we call the Knee, it agrees more
exactly with the Wrist in Men, and might more properly be called so: For
examining the Part to see of what it is compounded, I find it made up of two
ranges of little Bones as the Wrist of a Man is, and not like the Knee of a
Man; which consists of one little round Bone (called the Knee-pan) fastened
between the Jointings of the lower head of the Thigh Bone and the heads of the
tibia and fibula: for that Bone is exactly found in the Hind-leg of a Horse in
that Joint we call the Stifle, which is indeed the Knee, as shall be proved in
a convenient place. And as the Knee of a Horse is like the Wrist of a Man, so
is that Bone below it, (or indeed three Bones, for the Bone which we call the
Shank or Shin, has two small Bones fastened to it running by its sides down
almost all its length till within two or three inches of the great Pastern; I
say that as the Knee is that part which is the Wrist in Man, so is this part
between the Knee and great Pastern) answerable to the Metacarpium, that is, to
that space which reaches from the Wrist to the setting on of the Fingers. Only
in Man there are five Bones, and in an Horse but three. So likewise does the
great Pastern correspond to the first Joint of the Finger; the little Pastern
to the second Joint; and the Coffin-joint on which the Hoof grows, to that
Joint of the Finger on which the Nail grows.

By this you may see that these Parts of an Horse come very near the like Parts
of a Man, the number of Bones and Muscles of the Fingers only excepted. For a
Horse is solidipes, or whole-footed, so that the whole of it is necessarily
moved at one time, and therefore has no need of that variety of Muscles that a
Man's Hand is endowed withal. An Horse's Fore-feet are of no other use than to
go upon, any more than his Hinder-feet; whereas the Hand of a Man is ordained
for other uses, and is therefore accordingly shaped, and divided into more
Parts, to wit four Fingers and a Thumb, all which have their peculiar Muscles
to enable them to perform those motions to which they are designed. Whence the
number of the Muscles come to differ greatly. Now we shall take no notice of
those that a Man has more than an Horse, but shall only treat of those that
are to be found to move the Joints of an Horse already mentioned, viz. the
Cubit-bone, the Shank, the two Pasterns, and the Coffin-joint.

First, the Cubit is either bended, or extended. Of the Benders there are two;
the first of which is called Biceps, from its double beginning; for it has two
heads, the first being outward, tendinous and round, arises from the upper
brim of the hollowness of the Shoulder Blade; the second head is broader, and
is framed partly of a Tendon and partly of Flesh: this arises from the
Processus Anchoriformis or Anchor-like Process of the Scapula; then descending
by the inner head of the Shoulder Bone, it meets with the former head, and
becomes a strong fleshy Muscle, running down the inside of the Cubit-bone to
the Knee, where it is inserted. This bends the Cubit forwards and somewhat
inwards.

The second Bender is from its situation in Humane Bodies (being placed as the
former is, upon the inside of the Arm in them, and of the Leg in Horses; I say
from its situation it is) called Brachiaeus Internus. This lies inwardly under
the Biceps, and is something shorter than it, but of a fleshy substance like
it. It takes its beginning near the end of that Muscle of the Shoulder called
Deltoides, about the middle of the Shoulder Bone, to which it is firmly
fastened: after which it runs its course as the former, and is inserted into the
foreside of the Cubit-bone a little above the Knee, assisting the motion of the
former.

There are also two Muscles to extend the Cubit,which lie on its outer and
hinder side. The first of them from its length is called Longus. This arises
with a strong and broad original, partly nervous and partly fleshy (which some
make to be two heads) from the lower Rib of the Blade-bone, after which it
descends on the hinder side of the Shoulder Bone, and also of the Cubit-bone,
and is inserted into its outside just at the Knee. This draws the Cubit
backwards and somewhat outward, and thereby extends it or stretches it out
straight.

The second Extender of the Cubit is called Brevis from its shortness.It arises
from the hinder-part of the neck of the Shoulder Bone, and holding the same
course as the former, is inserted into the lower end of the Cubit-bone at the
same place with the former, and assists its motion.

Besides these there are said by some Anatomists to be two more Extending
Muscles, viz. one called Brachiaeus Externus from its being placed on the
outside of the Arm in Men. But this is by Spigelius looked upon to be the
second head of the Long Muscle, because it grows into one Muscle with it, and
has the same insertion with both it and the Short one.

The other is called Anconaeus, being a small-bodied Muscle, arising from the
lower and back-part of the Shoulder Bone, and is inserted into the Cubit an
inch or two below the Elbow. But some make this to be but a part of the Short
Muscle.

As for the other Bone of this Joint in Men, called Radius, that also has its
Muscles, which serve to turn the Arm and Hand round: But seeing there is no
such Bone in an Horse, as neither any such motion of an Horse's Leg, it cannot
be expected there should be found any Muscles in him answerable to the other,
as to this part.

Pass we on therefore to the next Joint commonly called the Shank, but which
truly answers to the Metacarp, or back of the hand in Men. And this like the
Cubit is either bended or extended.

To bend it there are two Muscles; of which the first is called Cubitaeus
internus. This arises from the inner knob of the Shoulder Bone, and descending
along the inside of the Cubit, is implanted into the inner and hinder sides of
the top of the Shank.

The second is called Radiaeus internus in Men, though very improperly in an
Horse, seeing he has no Radius. This has the same rise, progress and insertion
with the former.

There are also two Muscles to extend it; the first of which is called
Cubitaeus externus. This springs from the outer knob of the Shoulder Bone, and
descending down the Cubit, is inserted into the outer and foreside of the head
of the Shank.

The second of the Extenders is called Radiaeus externus (improperly as to an
Horse, as was noted before.) This has the same rise, progress and insertion
with its fellow.

The next Joint is the great Pastern which answers to the first Joint of the
Finger in a Man's Hand, as the little Pastern answers to the second Joint, and
the Coffin-joint to the last on which the Nail grows. All these are either
bended or extended as the former Joints were. But before we describe those
Muscles that perform these actions, there is one other to be treated of that is
called in Man Palmaris, from its being spread over the Palm of the Hand; but in
an Horse its Tendon is spread over the Sole of the Foot, whence the name of
Plantaris would better agree to it. This springs fleshy from the inner knob of
the Shoulder Bone, but presently grows into a slender Tendon which descends to
the Sole of the Foot as aforesaid.

The Pasterns and Coffin-joint are bended by two Muscles; the first of which is
called Sublimis, (I suppose because it rises high up.) It springs from the
inner knob of the Shoulder Bone, and is inserted into the Pasterns.

The second is named Profundus. This arises from the upper part of the
Cubit-bone, and is inserted into the Coffin-joint.

They are extended by one very considerable Muscle, called Extensor magnus.
This springs from the outer knob of the Shoulder Bone, and its Tendon is
inserted into the fore and outer side of the Pasterns and Coffin-joint. Some
reckon this to be two Muscles.

There are several other proper Muscles that belong to the Fingers in Men, some
to one and some to another, as also others that move them laterally, or to and
from one another, which it were from our purpose here to mention, as not being
to be found in an Horse. Though I dare not affirm positively that there are no
more than I have here described; for I am apt to suspect the contrary from the
multitude of Tendons that descend into the Coffin-joint: however these that I
have mentioned are the most considerable and plainly discoverable; and rather
than increase their number at a venture, I will be content that this Chapter be
reputed imperfect.

Table XXXIII.
Represents an Horse with the Side toward you, that you may have a sight of as
many of his Muscles at one view as is possible.

AA Show the oblique descendent Muscle of the Abdomen or Paunch. B The oblique
ascendent Muscle of the same part, at its original from the Hip-bone. C Its
membranous Tendon reaching to the White-line. D The transverse Muscle of the
Paunch. E The right or straight Muscle of the same part. F The Pectoral Muscle.
G The Serratus major Anticus. H The Deltoides of the Shoulder. H The Serratus
Posticus. K The Cucullaris. L The Sacrolumbus. M The Longissimus Dorsi. N The
Semispinatus. OOOOO The Intercostal Muscles. PPP The Ribs laid bare. Q The end
or gristly part of the Shoulder Blade. R Glutaeus minor or lesser
Buttock-muscle. S Glutaeus medius or middle Buttock-muscle. T Glutaeus major or
greater Buttock-muscle. V The Deltoides of the Thigh, having its Tendon broken
off it. XX The Musculus Biceps. Y The Vastus Externus. Z The Musculus Rectus. a
One of the proper Muscles of the Cheek called Lateralis. b A Muscle of the
Nostrils called Philtrum. c The external Adducent Muscle or closing Muscle of
the Nose. d The orbicularis or constringens, which draws the Lips together,
being common to both Lips. e The Muscles of the Eyelids. f The Temporal
Muscle. g The Buccinator or Trumpeter. h One of the Muscles of the Neck called
Longus, seated under the Gullet, but to be seen in this Figure by reason of the
posture of it. ii One of the proper Muscles of the Head called Mastoides. k The
Muscle of the Head called Splenius or Triangularis. l The Frontal or Forehead
Muscle. m The Spinatus, being one of the Muscles that move the Neck. n The
Complexus or Trigeminus so called from its threefold beginning. o The
Subclavius pulled a little outward from under the other Muscles. p The
Infraspinatus or Subscapularis inferior. q The Supraspinatus or Superscapularis
superior. r The Scalenus. s The Rotundus major or Humerum deprimens a little
out of its place at its lower end. t Musculus Biceps. u Longus. w Brachiaeus
externus. x Cubitaeus externus. y Radiaeus externus. z Extensor magnus. a
Radiaeus internus. b Cubitaeus internus. 11 The Gastrocnemius internus of both
the Hind-legs. 22 The Gastrocnemius externus of the like. 3 The Tendon of the
Muscle Plantaris coming out as out of a Pully. 4 The Tibiaeus Anticus. 55 The
Extensor tertii internodii digitorum aut Longus, so called by Mr. Brown.
anatomical view of the muscles of a horse's side TAB XXXIII p. 183.




CHAP. XX. Of the Muscles of the Thigh.
1. The Benders of the Thigh are three. Psoas. 2. Iliacus internus. 3.
Pectineus. 1. The Extenders are also three. Glutaeus major. 2. Glutaeus medius.
3. Glutaeus minor. One Mover of the Thigh inward, viz. Triceps or Quadriceps.
Four Muscles move the Thigh outward, called Quadrigemini. Also the Deltoides of
the Thigh. 1 The Thigh is turned a little about by two Muscles. viz. Obturator
internus. 2. Obturator externus.

BY the Thigh we mean that part which is betwixt the Joint of the Huckle or
Whirle-bone, and that which is called the Stifle; which consists of one large
and long Bone, going by the name of the Thigh Bone, or Femur. This Bone has a
round head which is jointed into the round Cavity of the Hip-bone, so that it
admits of all kinds of motions, whence it has a multitude of Muscles to
perform these motions; some of which move the Thigh forwards, whereby it is
bended; some move it backwards, and thereby extend it: a third sort bend it
inward, as when a Horse rubs the contrary Leg with his Foot, which is often
seen upon any itching or pricking humor affecting that Part: a fourth sort
move it outward; and a fifth obliquely about. But first of the Benders
forwards, which are accounted to be three in number.

The first of which is called Psoas or Lumbaris. This is almost round,thick and
livid, and lies in the inner part of the Abdomen, upon the Vertebrae of the
Loins. It arises fleshy from the transverse Processes of the two lowest
Vertebrae of the Chest and two or three uppermost of the Loins; from whence
descending by the inside of Os ileum, at length it ends in a strong and round
Tendon, which is inserted on the foreside of the upper part of the lesser head
of the Thigh Bone. The use of this is, strongly to draw the Thigh upward, and
somewhat inward. Upon this Muscle the Kidneys are placed, near that part of it
where its Nerve enters into it; which in Men is the cause of that stupor or
numbness that is felt in the Thigh by those that are troubled with the Stone in
the Kidneys, on that side that the Stone is on.

The second Bender forward is called Iliacus internus, or the inward Haunch
Muscle. It springs with a slender and fleshy beginning from the inside of the
Haunch-bone, and being joined by its Tendon to the former Muscle, is inserted
with a round Tendon into the lesser head or Rotator of the Thigh Bone. The use
of this is the same with the first, which is, to lift the Thigh up and so to
bend it forward; yet it does not move it so much inward as the Psoas does.

The third is called Pectineus, arising broad and fleshy from the line of the
Share-bone near its Gristle, and is implanted into the inside of the lower end
of the Thigh Bone with a broad and large Tendon. Its use is to draw the Thigh
upward and inward. This is the Muscle that in Men helps to lay one Thigh over
the other in sitting.

Note, that both this last foregoing, and all the following Muscles save the
two last, are inserted at the lower end of the Thigh Bone, just above the
Stifle; whereas in Men they are most of them if not all inserted into its upper
part, viz. either into its neck, or into one or other of the two knobs jetting
out at the lower end of the neck, (called the great and little Trochanters.)
What may be the reason of this different insertion is not easy to guess,
unless it be the shortness of the Thigh Bone, which in an Horse is not half so
long as it is in a tall Man: so that an Horse's Muscles being so plump and
bulky upon his Buttocks, it was necessary they should have some considerable
space to grow slenderer in and to become tendinous; and therefore they are
extended as far as the Stifle which answers to the Knee in Man.

Next come we to the Muscles that bend back and so extend the Thigh,(as when an
Horse stretches himself) which motion is also performed by three Muscles. The
first of which is called Glutaeus externus, or the outwardmost Buttock Muscle;
in Men it is also called Glutaeus major, the greatest Buttock Muscle; but in an
Horse it is not so, for in them the middlemost is the largest. This springs
with a very fleshy beginning from the Crupper, from the Spine or ridge of the
Haunch-bone, and from the Os sacrum. Afterward descending a little obliquely
and riding over the Joint of the Huckle-bone, it at length grows narrower and
more slender, and so ends into a strong and broad Tendon, which is inserted
into the inner part of the Thigh Bone just above the Stifle, yea it seems to
reach as far as to the top of the Tibia. Its use is to draw the Thigh backward
and so to extend it, as also to enable the Horse to go backward.

The next or second is called Glutaeus medius, or the middle Buttock Muscle.
This in Man (because of his going erect) lies quite under the former, and is
so hid by it, that unless the former be first removed, it cannot be seen. But
in Horses it is larger than the former, and lies side by side with it, as does
the next also, and they are both to be seen without removing the first, as may
be plainly observed by the following Figure. It arises with a fleshy and broad
beginning, a little higher than the first, from the Spine of the Haunch-bone on
the forepart of it, and from thence descends somewhat obliquely over the Joint
of the Hip as far as to the lower end of the Thigh Bone, into the outer side of
which it is inserted with a broad, strong and membranous Tendon. Its use is to
extend the Thigh and to draw it outward and backward, as when the Horse stands
to stale.

The third and last of the Extenders is called Glutaeus minor, or lesser
Buttock Muscle. This in a Horse arises equal in height with the former at the
Spine of the Haunch-bone. At its beginning it is round, sharp and fleshy; but
in its course it becomes more broad, descending with an oblique line by the
side of the second Muscle, and is inserted at the lower end of the Thigh Bone,
rather toward its fore-side. This assists the action of the former, drawing
the Thigh outward and backward.

The Thigh is drawn to the inside by the Muscle Triceps, or Quadriceps, for it
goes by both names, because some affirm it to have four, and others but three
beginnings. This Muscle is looked upon to be the thickest of all the Muscles of
the whole Body, being furnished with great variety of Fibers.

The first of its beginnings is from the upper part of the Share-bone, where it
arises with a nervous head, and descending is inserted into the inside of the
lower end of the Thigh Bone.

The second part of it arises from the lower side of the same Bone, being
fleshy and broad, and is inserted into the inside of the Thigh Bone, a little
higher up than the former.

The third head of this Muscle arises with a fleshy and sometimes nervous
beginning from the whole lower part of the Coxendix, round about the
circumference of its wide hole; and is inserted near the last.

The fourth head springs with a nervous and fleshy beginning from the tip of
the Coxendix, and afterward running along the inside of the Thigh, ends into
a round Tendon, which joining with the Tendon of the first part of this Muscle
is inserted into the lower end of the Thigh Bone with it.

The Thigh is also turned outward, which motion is performed by four small
Muscles called Quadrigemini, all which are placed one by another upon the
outside of the articulation of the Thigh. The first of them is from its
situation called Iliacus externus, and from its figure, Pyriformis or Pear-like
Muscle. This is longer than any of the rest of them, arising round from the
lower and outer part of Os sacrum; thence it runs downward upon the backside
of the great Rotator, and is implanted into the outside of the lower end of the
Thigh Bone.

The second and third of these Muscles do want particular names; but both of
them arise from the knob of Os ischium, near one another, and are inserted with
the first.

The fourth and last is called Quadrigeminus quadratus. It is more fleshy and
broad than the rest, arising from the inner part of the knob of the Ischium,
lying some two or three inches distant from the third, and ends with the
former.

To these must be added that Muscle which we have named the Deltoides of the
Thigh, not finding any in Humane Bodies to answer to it,so as to borrow a name
from thence. It springs (as you may see plain in the foregoing Figure) from the
outside of the tip of the Ileum, with a sharp beginning; but presently
enlarging it self, becomes three-square, and is inserted with a broad
membranous Tendon into the outside of the Thigh Bone, from which insertion it
appears torn off in the Figure. By its situation it seems to assist the action
of the Quadrigemini.

The Thigh is turned about obliquely by two Muscles called Obturatores,or
Stoppers, because they fill up the wide hole between the Os pubis and Hip-bone.
The first is called Obturator internus. This arises from the inner
circumference of the hole before spoken of, and passing over-thwart the end of
the Hip-bone, is inserted into the Cavity of the great Rotator.

The other is called Obturator externus, the outward Filler. This arises out of
the external circumference of the abovenamed hole with a fleshy and broad
beginning, and winding about the neck of the Thigh Bone turns into a strong
and large Tendon which is implanted into the Cavity of the great Rotator with
the former.

And thus much for the Muscles of the Thigh, which for order sake I have
according to the custom of Anatomists first treated of; but it is necessary
that we make our dissection in the Leg first, to remove those Muscles; for we
cannot so easily nor conveniently raise nor show these of the Thigh, until
those of the Leg be removed, because the heads of some of them lie upon the
Muscles of the Thigh.

CHAP. XXI. Of the Muscles of the Tibia or Leg.
1. The Leg is extended by sive Muscles. Membranosus. 2. Longus. 3. Rectus. 4.
Vastus externus. 5. Vastus internus. 1. Four Muscles bend the Leg. Biceps. 2.
Semimembranosus. 3. Seminervosus. 4. Gracilis. 1 One moves it obliquely, viz.
Poplitaeus.

THE Muscles of the Tibia or Leg are of the same number in Horses as in Men,
(like as the Muscles of most other Parts are) the insertion of some of them
only excepted. Which difference springs from hence, that this Bone of the Leg
which in a Horse is but one main Bone supported on each side with another
slender immovable one for strength, as also for the safer passage of the
Tendons of the Muscles between them, (which I suppose to be the only use of
them, as not being moveable; I say this Bone which in a Horse is but one) is in
a Man two, going by two different names, viz. the one by that of Tibia, and the
other, by that of Fibula, and some of the Tendons of the Muscles are inserted
into one of them, and some into the other. But otherwise so far as I have had
opportunity to examine them, I have found them to have the same original,
substance, figure and course in a Horse as in Man; and therefore I shall
proceed to treat of them after the same method as I have done of all the rest,
forbearing to speak any further of the difference (in a Man and an Horse)
between the Parts that are moved by the Muscles to be treated of in this and
the following Chapter, until I come to the Book of the Bones, where I shall
show at large the similitude between them, and that the difference is not so
much as it may be believed to be.

The Leg has three motions allowed it, viz. bended, extended, and moved
obliquely outward. All the Extenders are placed on the forepart of the Thigh,
of which the first is called Membranosus. This Muscle is by Bartholin called
the Abductor, as if its use were to move the Leg obliquely outward; but that
office is by other Anatomists since him ascribed to the Poplitaeus, and this
said to extend the Leg. It arises fleshy from the upper part of Os ileum on
the outside, and near the great Process of the Thigh Bone it becomes broad and
nervously membranous, wherefore it is called Fascia lata, the broad
Swadling-band, for it enwrappeth almost all the Muscles of the Thigh within it
self; and being come as low as the Knee in Humane Bodies, and that Joint we
call the Stifle in Horses, (which exactly answers to the other, even as far as
to the little round Bone between the two Bones of the Femur and Tibia, called
the Patella or Knee-pan) I say when it is come as low as the Stifle (over which
it crosses) it is at last inserted into the fore-side of the Tibia or Bone of
the Leg. Its use is, as has been said, to extend the Leg directly; or as some
Authors will have it, somewhat to abduce it or draw it obliquely outward.

The second Extender is called Longus, and Sartorius or Sutorius, from its use
in those Men that sit cross-legg'd at work, as Shoomakers and Tailors. It
arises sharp and nervous from the upper and forepart of the appendix of Os
ileum, and as it passes obliquely down the inside of the Thigh, it becomes more
fleshy and broad, continuing so till it come to the inside of the Leg a little
below the Stifle, where it ends in a broad Tendon, and is inserted into the
Bone of the Leg or Tibia. The use of this Muscle is not only to extend the
Leg, but also to draw it inwards, wherefore it is by some Authors reckoned for
one of the Benders of the Leg.

The third, from its straight course, is called Rectus, the Straight Muscle.
This takes its beginning from the lower brim of the Haunch-bone, and passing
with a fleshy and round belly straight down the fore-side of the Thigh until
it come to the Stifle, it there turns into a strong and broad Tendon, which
adhering to the Patella descends over it, and is implanted into the fore-side
of the upper part of the Shank.

The fourth is called Vastus externus, because of its great fleshy bulk,and
because it descends on the outside of the Straight Muscle. It arises broad and
nervous from the root of the great Rotator or Trochanter, cleaving close to the
outward part of the Thigh Bone all along its course, until it come to the
Stifle, where it becomes membranous and broad, and uniting with the Tendon of
the Straight Muscle or Rectus, is inserted into the same place with it, but on
its outside.

The fifth is called Vastus internus, running on the inside of the Rectus.It
arises from the root of the lesser Trochanter and from the neck of the
Thigh Bone with a nervous beginning, and afterward growing fleshy descends
down the Thigh Bone, sticking close to it, till it come to the Stifle, over
which it passes, and afterward unites its self with the former two, and takes
its insertion in the same place of the Tibia as they do.

It is worth the Dissectour's taking notice of these three last Muscles, how
they be joined all in one just at their crossing the Stifle, where they make
one broad and very strong Tendon, which spreads over and involves the Patella
or little Bone of the Stifle, and ties it so fast in its place upon the
jointing of the Thigh Bone with the Tibia, that it is very seldom displaced, or
indeed never. For although by distentions or strains we often have this Part
affected; yet never did I see an absolute dislocation in it. The Patella indeed
may be (and often is) wrenched either to one side or the other as the accident
may happen, but it is immediately reduced to its place again by this compound
ligamentous Tendon, which like a Spring retracts it self into its former
Station, and the Bone to which it is knit, also. So that, that malady which is
commonly taken for a dislocation of this Bone, seems rather to be from Blood
extravasated out of the Capillary Vessels, which by great distentions many
times may be broken; which Blood lies congealing and putrefying in the spaces
between the Membranes and Muscles, affecting the sensible neighboring Parts,
which puts the Horse to that great pain we observe him to have on such
accidents. Now the means we use to remove this pain is by chafing the Part with
penetrating Oils, which commonly effect the cure, if they be used presently
before the Blood be too much congealed: But if the pain be not removed by this
means, we are fain to open the Skin by way of an Issue, blowing in wind to
separate the several Skins one from another, and so make way for the congealed
Matter the better to come forth; which done, the pain is removed, and the
affection quite taken away, and the Horse most times goes again as well as
ever. Whereas should this Bone be displaced, as it is by many Farriers thought
to be, this way of proceeding seems so far from contributing to the cure, that
by laying the Skins open there is rather given more liberty for the Bone to
remove out of its place, than any assistance afforded toward the restoring it
again. But so much by way of digression to inform our Professors in this
point; I shall now proceed to describe the remaining Muscles, the next of which
are the Benders of the Leg.

These are in number four; the first of which (according to Bartholin) is
called Biceps, though by other Authors it is reckoned the last and fifth,
supposing that there are five of these Muscles. It arises sharp and nervous
from the appendix of the Coxendix, and being carried on the outside of the
Thigh, it does about its middle become fleshy, as if it begun there with a
second head; from whence descending it grows in its course more thick and
outwardly nervous, until it becomes a strong Tendon, which is inserted into
the outer side, (but somewhat backward) of the appendix of the Tibia. The use
of this Muscle is to bend the Leg by pulling it backward.

The next, according to the before-named Bartholin, is the Semimembranosus,
which by others is reputed the fourth Bender. It takes its beginning from the
knob of the Coxendix as the former does, with a small, membranous head, from
whence it runs down the back-part of the Thigh, till it come to the
Leg-bone, into which it is inserted with a round Tendon behind, in that place
which in Man is called the Ham.

The third (according to the same Author) is the Seminervosus, so called from
its substance, it being partly nervous and partly fleshy, as the former was
partly fleshy and partly membranous. This arises small and nervous from the
same knob of the Coxendix as the former two did; from whence descending
obliquely by the back and inner part of the Thigh (in which course it becomes
fleshy) its Tendon reaches toward the middle of the Leg-bone, into whose inner
and backer part it is inserted.

The fourth is called Gracilis, the slender Muscle. This by some Authors is
accounted for the second Bender of the Leg, but I shall after the method of the
before-named Author rank it for the fourth and last. It arises with a large
and nervous beginning from the middle of the Share-bone just at its jointing,
from whence it runs down the inside of the Thigh until it comes to the Tibia
or Leg-bone, into whose inside it is inserted with a round Tendon near the
former.

Note, that some of these Muscles being placed more outward and others more
inward; if they all work together, they draw the Leg directly backward; but if
one be contracted alone, then it does bend the Leg a little either to this or
that side, according as the Muscle is placed, as well as draw it backward.

There is another Muscle whose use is to move the Leg obliquely; its name is
Poplitaeus. It takes its rise broad and nervous from the outer head of the
Thigh Bone, and afterward becoming fleshy runs with a slanting line down the
Thigh to the back and inward part of the upper knob of the Tibia, where it is
inserted.

CHAP. XXII. Of the Muscles that move the lower part of the Leg, and the Foot.
The Instep-bone is bended by two Muscles. 1. Tibiaeus anticus. 2. Peronaeus
anticus. It is extended by three. 1. Gastrocnemius externus. 2. Gastrocnemius
internus. 3. Plantaris. The Tendons of these three Muscles make the magna
Chorda. 1. It is moved sideways by two. Tibialis posticus. 2. Peronaeus
posticus. 1. The Pasterns and Coffin-joint are bended by two Muscles. Flexor
longus. 2. Flexor brevis. 1. They are extended also by two. Extensor longus. 2.
Extensor brevis.

BY the lower part of the Leg is to be understood that Bone which is below the
Hock or Hough, reaching from thence to the great Pastern; which Bone answers to
those five in Humane Bodies that make the Instep. Likewise the great Pastern
and little Pastern answer to the first and second Joints of the Toes in Men;
and lastly that which is called the Coffin-joint on which the Hoof grows, is
answerable to the last joint of the Toes on which the Nails are placed. Only
the difference is, that a Man because of his going upright, treads upon the
whole space from the Heel to the Toes; and his Foot is also divided into five
Toes, each consisting of several Joints, that by spreading themselves and
grasping closely on what he treads upon, they may keep him the more firmly
erect. Whereas a Horse and other four-footed Beasts having four Feet upon the
ground, have no need of so broad nor large a Foot, and do therefore go as it
were upon Tip-toes, their Heels reaching as high up the Leg as to the Hock,
which indeed is the Heel of the Horse, as a very eminent and learned Physician
who did me the honor to take a view of my Skeleton, intimated to me. For make
but any Quadruped, as a Dog or the like, stand upright, lifting up his
Fore-feet, and you may observe all that part of his Leg from the Hough
downwards to lie upon the ground as a Man's Foot does; yea some, as Coneys,
etc. in their ordinary gate tread upon all that space: only such Creatures
have their Feet cleft into Toes, whereas a Horse is whole-footed, and thence
arises a difference as to the number of the Muscles of the Foot.

Note, that the Muscles which move each Bone have only their Insertions into
that Bone they are to move, and that they take their rise from the Bone or some
other Part (immediately or mediately) above it, as may be observed by the
foregoing discourse of the Muscles of the Thigh and Leg. Thus those Muscles
that move the Thigh, take their original from either the Hip-bone, Share-bone,
or Os sacrum, all of which are above it; likewise those that move the Leg,
arise from the Hip or Share-bones, or else from the Head or some other part of
the Thigh Bone which is the Joint above it; and thus lastly do the Muscles that
are to move all that part of the Leg or Foot which is below the Hock, spring
from and lie upon the Parts above the Hock, save the Flexor brevis and Tensor
brevis, and the Plantaris which is at the Sole of the Foot (which cannot
properly be called a Muscle neither, for it is very little or not at all
carnous, but rather ligamentous) for otherwise only the Tendons of the Muscles
reach hither, and are inserted some into one Joint, some into another.

The Foot is bended, extended, and moved (a little) to either side,according to
the motion of the Instep-bone (for so we shall call it for distinctions sake.)
First, it is bended when it is drawn upwards and forward. To perform which
motion there are two Muscles assisting: the first of which is called Tibiaeus
anticus or the forward Leg-muscle, so named from the situation of it, which is
upon the forepart of the Leg-bone toward its outer side. It arises sharp and
fleshy from the upper appendix of the Leg-bone, cleaving close to it all along
as it descends, and toward the bottom of it, it turns by degrees to a
Tendon, which passing under the Gristle that compasses about the next Joint or
Hock, is divided into two or more Tendons that are inserted into the foreside
of the Instep-bone, which (together with the rest of the Foot) it moves forward
and upward.

The next is called Peronaeus anticus, because it arises in Man from that Bone
of the Leg that is called Perone or Fibula, and therefore it is improperly so
called in an Horse that wants that Bone, and in whom it springs from the upper
appendix of the Tibia, and descending downwards with a fleshy body till it come
almost to the bottom of this Bone, it turns into a Tendon as the former did,
which Tendon passes down by the outside of the Hock, and is inserted into the
outside of the Instep-bone, which with the rest of the Foot it moves forward
and somewhat outward.

The Foot is also Extended, that is, when the Instep-bone is drawn backwards,
which motion is performed by three Muscles: of which the first is called
Gemellus externus, or Gastrocnemius externus. This in Men makes the greatest
part of the Calf of the Leg. It takes its rise broad and fleshy from the inner
head of the Thigh Bone at the lower end of it, and also from the outward head
of the same Bone, for it has a double beginning; which two heads descending
for a while apart, they begin to be united into one about the middle of the
Leg-bone, after which they both turn into one entire, broad, strong and nervous
Tendon, which unites with the Tendon of the following Muscle called
Gastrocnemius internus, and both are inserted into the Heel-bone.

The second Extender of the Foot is called Gastrocnemius internus. This Muscle
lies something under the former, arising from the hinder-part of the upper end
of the Leg-bone with a strong, nervous beginning, and growing tendinous toward
the lower end of the Bone unites with the Tendon of the foregoing, and is
inserted into the Heel-bone with it as aforesaid.

The third and last is called Plantaris, or the Muscle of the Soal or Tread.
This arises fleshy, round and slender between the former two, taking its
beginning from the back-part of the lower head of the Thigh Bone. After it has
descended a little way down the Leg-bone it becomes a slender round Tendon,
which running between the Tendons of the former two and joining very closely
with them descends down to the Heel-bone, where it leaves them and proceeds
along the back-part of the Instep-bone and the two Pasterns, and terminates
within the Foot, spreading all about the bottom of it, making that Part which
is called the Soal of the Foot in Men, and in Horses that Part that lies next
under the Soal, and is plain to be seen when we have drawn the Soal of the Foot
out.

It is the Tendons of these three Muscles that make that strong and thick
Tendon by which Butchers hang up their Meat,which by reason of its greatness
and singular strength is called Chorda magna. It is also this Tendon running
down the back-part of the Leg, which we call the back Sinew, which being
affected either by a strain or bruise or other accident, causes so great a
pain, by reason of the sensibleness of the Tendon. When it is hurt, the Horse
many times falls exceeding lame, though such accidents are not so dangerous to
life in Horses as they are said to be in Men; for we make no difficulty in
curing them, especially if presently taken in hand, but Surgeons do most
times conclude Wounds of this Part in Men to be very dangerous by reason of
their frequent falling into convulsions thereupon.

The Foot is also moved somewhat sideways, viz. inward and outward,by two
Muscles. The first of which is called Tibialis posticus. This springs from
the upper end of the Leg-bone, from whence it descends among the before-named
hinder Muscles till it come to the Instep-joint, where it becomes tendinous,
and from thence runs down the inner side of the Instep-bone and Pasterns, till
it come to the Soal of the Foot, into which it is inserted. Its use is to move
the Foot obliquely inward.

The second is called Peronaeus posticus (improperly in an Horse.) It arises
from the upper and hinder-part of the Leg-bone by a nervous and strong
beginning, from whence it descends all along the outside of the Bone cleaving
firmly to it, until it reach its middle, where it becomes tendinous, and
descends with the Tendon of the Peronaeus anticus on the outside of the
Instep-joint or Hock, but is not joined with it; for it continues its course
further until it reach the Foot, into the bottom of which it is implanted.
This moves the Foot contrary to the former, viz. obliquely outward.

The Pasterns and Coffin-joint are likewise bended, or extended by their proper
Muscles. The Benders are two, of which the first is called Flexor longus, or
the Long Bender. This arises from the upper and hinder-part of the Leg-bone,
about the middle whereof it becomes tendinous, and descends on the inner side
of the Hough down the Instep-bone and Pasterns into the Coffin-joint.

The second is called Flexor brevis, the Short Bender. It springs from the
inside of the Heel-bone a little below the Hock, and has the same insertion
with the former. These bend the Pasterns and Coffin-joint by drawing them
backward.

The Extenders are also two. The first is called Longus Tensor, or the Long
Extender. It arises from the fore and inner side of the Shank just under the
Stifle, and descends on the fore-side of that Bone, the Instep-bone and the
Pasterns, and is inserted into the fore and upper part of the Coffin-joint.

The second arises from the forepart of the annular Ligament that binds about
the Instep-joint, and descending under the former has the same insertion. These
two extend the Pasterns and Coffin-joint by drawing them forward.

Thus I am come to the end of the Treatise of the Muscles, in describing of any
of which if I have erred, I hope the Apology with which I prefaced this fourth
Book will obtain my excuse with all ingenuous Men: and as for the morose and
carping, I shall take it as a favor from them, if instead of railing at
random, they will take the pains to demonstrate my mistakes.

Table XXXIV.
Represents an Horse with his hinder-part toward you, that the Muscles of his
Buttocks, etc. may be the plainer seen.

AA Show the Cucullaris or Monk's Hood. B The edge of the Deltoides of the
Thigh. C The Glutaeus minor or lesser Buttock Muscle. DDD The Glutaeus medius
or middle Buttock Muscle. EE The Glutaeus major or greater Buttock Muscle. F
The Biceps. GG The Seminervosus of both Legs. HHH The Lividus or Pectinalis of
both Hind-legs. I The Semimembranosus. K The Orbicularis or orbicular Muscle of
the Lips. L A portion of the Longissimus dorsi. M The circular Muscle of the
Nose. N The sphincter Muscle of the Fundament. O The Mastoides on the other
side the Neck. P The Musculus lateralis or Mansorius, being one of the Muscles
of the Cheeks. Q The Musculus scalenus or Triangularis. R The Complexus or
Trigeminus. S The Transversalis Colli or transverse Muscle of the Neck. T The
Spinatus Colli being one of the Extenders of the Neck. V Vastus externus. WW
Gastrocnemius externus. X Peronaeus anticus. Y Peronaeus posticus.
the muscles of a horse's buttocks TAB XXXIV p. 193.




The End of the Fourth Book.
THE ANATOMY OF AN HORSE. BOOK V. Of the Bones.
CHAP. I. Of the nature, definition, differences and parts of Bones.
The definition of a Bone. The material and efficient causes of a Bone. Their
differences. Their Parts. How many Bones of the Head.

THE Bones are by a learned and ancient Philosopher compared to the Carkase of
a Ship, to which the rest of the Parts are fastened and whereupon they are
sustained. These afford stability, streightness and form to each Part and to
the whole. The knowledge of them is most necessary; for without it we must
needs be ignorant of the originals and insertions of the Muscles; and upon
fractures or dislocations of them, it were very unlikely that any should set
them right again without the knowledge of their shapes, and the manner of their
jointing one with another.

A Bone is said to be a similar Part, the driest and coldest of all the rest,
made of the most earthy and tartareous part of the Seed in the Womb, ( i. e. of
the Humor in the Ovum or Conception) and is nourished with the like particles
of Blood after the birth, and moistened with the Marrow contained in it.

In which description the word [Seed] is to be interpreted as we have
intimated,and not of the Male and Female's Seed mixed together in the Womb, as
the Ancients conceived; for it is certain that the Female has no true Seed,
and that the Male's being only an active principle of generation, affords
nothing of matter to the Parts of the Foetus, but only impregnates the Ovum,
as shall be showed more at large when I come to speak to the Generation of
Animals. Thus the Male's Seed is no material cause at all of the Bones, but
only a remote efficient cause of them as it is of other Parts of the Body; of
all which the plastic or formative power that is seated in the Ovum it self,
is the immediate efficient.

As to the differences of Bones, they are many, as being divided or
distinguished several ways. And first from their hardness, or softness: thus
the lower parts of the Temple-bones are called Petrosa, stony Bones, and such
are also the Bones of the Teeth. Others are in respect to these, soft; such are
the spongy Bones of the Nose, and those which are called appendices to any
Bone. And lastly of a mean substance between these may be reckoned all the rest
of the Bones.

They are again divided or distinguished by their magnitude; thus some are
esteemed great, some little, and some of a moderate size betwixt both.

Also they are divided by their figure; some being plain, some round; some have
three sides, others four; some are like a Boat, some a Cup; some like a Hammer,
an Anvil, or a Stirrup, such are the Auditory Bones.

They are also distinguished from their situation, connection, cavity, sense,
and upon several other considerations, which it would be tedious further to
prosecute.

Again, the Bones are many of them divided into three parts; first, that part
whereof the body of the Bone consists; secondly, the part that grows to the
Bone; thirdly, the bunching part of the Bone: of which the first has no proper
name belonging to it, but is called by the name of the whole Bone; the second
being that part that grows to the Bone is properly called Epiphysis, the
Appendage; and that part that bunches out beyond the plain surface, is called
Apophysis, or the Process.

In relation to this discourse of the Bones we shall divide the Body into three
Parts, viz. the Head, the Trunk and the Limbs. By the Head is implied both Head
and Neck. The first and uppermost Part of the Head is the Skull, called
Cranium, because it is as it were Cranos an Helmet to the Brain. It is
compounded of several Bones to the number of fifteen or seventeen in Humane
Bodies, say most Anatomists, that is, in all, as well little as big; for of the
large ones there are but nine, three of which are common to the Skull with the
upper Jaw Bone, which are the Wedge-like Bone or cuneiforme, the Yoke-bone, and
spongiosum, the spongy or Sieve-like Bone. The other six are proper Bones and
make up the Skull it self; and those are the Forehead Bone, the Noll-bone, the
two Bones of the Synciput, and the two Temple-bones, in which last are
contained (in each of them) three small Bones, of which we have already treated
where we spoke of the Parts of the Ear in the third Book at Chap. 14. namely
the Hammer, the Anvil and the Stirrup, all which make up the said number of
fifteen Bones of the Skull; to which if we add the lately found-out Bone of the
Ear, called the orbicular Bone, there will be seventeen. Now the larger Bones
are divided or distinguished by several Seams called Sutures, and both Bones
and Sutures are of the same number in this Animal we are treating of as in Men,
as may be seen by the following Figure.

Table XXXV.
Represents the Sutures or Seams of the Skull of a young Foal newly foaled,
which in a grown Horse are not so discernible.

Figure I.

Shows the Sutures of the top and sides of the Skull.

AAA The first Suture called Coronalis, or the Coronal Suture. BB The second
proper Suture called the Lambdoidal or Lambdoides. CCC The third proper and
true Suture called the Sagittal or Sagittalis. DD The first counterfeit proper
Suture, so called because it is not Saw-like as the other three are; it is also
called Squamosa. EE The first common Suture by which the lower Process of Os
frontis is joined with the first Bone of the upper Jaw. F The second common
Suture by which the Wedge-like Bone is joined with the said first Bone of the
upper Jaw. This is called Cuneisormis. G The third common Suture called
Cribrosa, which is common to the Wedge-like Bone and the septum of the Nose. H
The common Suture that divides the Os jugale into two, or by which it is joined
together.
Figure II.

Shows the Sutures of the bottom of the Skull.

AA The common Suture that joins the bottom of Os occipitis to the Os
sphenoides. BBBB Some other Sutures that belong to the bottom of the Skull.
the sutures of the top, sides, and bottom of a horse's skull TAB. XXXV. page
197.
I


II






CHAP. II. Of the Sutures or Seams of the Head.
A Suture what, and of how many kinds. The Sutures are proper or common. The
proper are true or false. 1. True Sutures are The Coronal. 2. The Lambdoidal.
3. The Sagittal. The false Sutures are two. The common Sutures are 1.
Frontalis. 2. Cunciformis. 3. Cribrosa. The use of the Sutures.

A Suture is the connection of one Bone of the Head to another, of which there
are two sorts: the one is plain and linear, like two boards glewed or stones
cemented together; the other indented like the teeth of two Saws put tooth
within tooth.

Of these Sutures some are proper to the Skull alone, and some are common to it
with the upper Jaw. The proper Sutures are again double, that is to say, true
or false. Of the former sort are those Saw-like ones before-named, which are
three in number, viz. Coronal, Lambdoidal and Sagittal; and of the latter are
the plain ones, which some reckon to be more, some fewer.

The first of the Saw-like ones is called in Humane Skulls Coronalis or the
Crown-Suture, because the Ancients were wont to wear their Crowns or Garlands
in that place. This Suture, as in Men, so likewise in a Horse runs overthwart
the Skull above the Forehead, reaching from the Temple-bone of one side to the
Temple-bone on the other, joining the Os frontis or Fore-head-bone to the
Synciput or Bone of the forepart of the Head.

The second is called Lambdoides or Lambdoidal Suture, as resembling in its
dimension the Greek letter L lambda. This is seated on the back-part of the
Head, being opposite to the former, beginning at the bottom of the Occiput,
from whence it ascends obliquely to either Ear in Men, but in a Horse something
above the Ear, running with a more slanting line. It joins the Bone of the
Occiput to the Bones of the Synciput and Temples.

The third runs not overthwart the Head as the two former, but lengthways of
it, reaching in Humane Skulls from the top or middle of the Lambdoidal to the
middle of the Coronal Suture only; but in Horses it reaches further (as it
does in Children) crossing the Coronal Suture, and runs afterward down the
Fore-head-bone to the Nose. This is not so Saw-like in Horses Skulls as the
other two are, as may be seen by the foregoing Figure. It is the last of the
true or Saw-like Sutures, and has the name of Sagittal, from its streightness,
its course being straight like an Arrow.

Next come we to the false, counterfeit or bastard proper Sutures, which are
those that resemble a Line only, and are not Saw-like at all. These are in
number two; the first of which passes from the Root of the Processus
mammillaris upwards with a circular Duct, and passes downwards again toward
the bottom of the Ear, after it has compassed in the Temple-bone. By this Seam
are the Bones of the Synciput, Occiput and Sphenoides joined with the
Temple-bones.

The second of the bastard proper Sutures runs obliquely downwards, arising
from the side or rather top of the former, and runs down toward the Socket of
the Eye, to the beginning of the first common Suture.

The common Sutures are those that belong not to the Skull alone, but are
common to it with the Wedge-like Bone and the upper Jaw. Of which these that
follow are the most remarkable.

First, the Frontalis, by which the outer Process of the Fore-head-bone is
joined with the first Bone of the upper Jaw.

The second is that which is called Cuneiformis or Wedge-like, by which the
Wedge-like-bone is joined with the first Bone of the upper Jaw.

The third is called Cribrosa, which is common to the Wedge-like-bone, and the
septum or partition of the Nose.

Now the uses of these Sutures or Seams are, first, to be vents of the Brain,
through which the impure and sooty excrements might exhale or evaporate;
secondly, to help to stay the Brain from tottering, and its parts from being
misplaced in violent motions, by giving way to the Fibers that pass through
them from the Dura matter within, to the Pericranium without the Skull, by which
Fibers the said dura matter and also the Brain it self (which is wrapped within
it) is kept suspended as it were, that so the hardness of the Skull might not
offend it by pressing against it, nor the Brains own weight bear too hard upon
the bottom of the Skull, which it would be apt to do were it not for its being
thus born up or suspended by these Fibers that tie the Dura matter to the
outside of the Skull.

These Sutures were also made for the ingress and egress of the Vessels, for
the life and nourishment of the Parts contained within the Skull.

Lastly, that if at any time the Head should happen to be broken, the fracture
might not run through the whole Skull, but stay at the end of the fractured
Bone; whereas were it not for these Seams, it would like an earthen Pot with
one knock or fall be in danger of being shivered all in pieces, which it is not
now so apt to do, for the crack will not so easily pass over a Seam as it would
run along an entire bone.

CHAP. III. Of the proper Bones of the Skull.
The Bones of the Skull are proper or common. The proper are six. 1. The
Fore-head-bone. Its Cavities. Its Holes. Its Processes. 2 The Bones of the
Synciput. Their connection. Their shape, substance, surface and holes. 3 The Os
occipitis. Its shape and connection. Its Sinus. Its Processes and Holes. 4 The
Temple-bones. Their connection. Their figure. Their substance. Their Sinus.
Their Processes. 5 Os petrosum. Its Holes, and Cavities.

THE Bones of the Skull are of two sorts, proper and common. Of the first in
this Chapter; and of the latter in the next.

The proper are in number six; one of the Forehead, another of the hinder-part
of the Head or Occiput, two of the Crown, and two of the Temples, all which are
divided or distinguished from one another by the before-named Sutures.

The Fore-head-bone, called Os frontis, is seated before, and makes the
forepart of the Skull, both above and a little below the Orbit of the Eyes. It
is bounded before by the Coronal and first common Suture, on the sides by the
Temporal Bones, and on the inside by the spongy Bones.

Betwixt the Laminae or Scales of this Bone at the top of the Nose there is a
large (or rather double) Cavity, from whence two holes pass to the Nostrils,
distinguished by many bony Fibers and small Scales, which are encompassed with
a green Membrane, and contain a soft medullar, or as it were an oily body.

The uses ascribed to these Cavities are various: as first, to prepare the air
that is drawn in by the Nostrils, for the generation of animal Spirits;
secondly, to keep for some time the odoriferous air whereby smells may be more
leisurably perceived; thirdly, some think that they serve for the collection of
phlegmatic Excrements; and others, lastly, that they assist or promote the
shrilness or echo of the Voice. I will not determine of the truth of any of
these opinions; but shall only observe this further, that these Cavities are
much larger in an Horse than they are in a Man, even the difference of the bulk
of their Bodies considered.

Besides these Cavities there is also a Den or Sinus made of a double Scale;
one of which being outermost makes the upper (inward) part of the Orbit of the
Eye, and is plain; the other makes the Cavity above the Eyes on either side,
and is not plain, but has inscriptions answerable to the winding convolutions
of the Brain, whose bunchingout portions it receives.

This Fore-head-bone has also two Holes in the middle part of the Eye-brow,
which go to the Orbit of the Eye, by which the first branch of the Nerve of the
fifth conjugation of the Brain goes to the Muscle of the Forehead.

It has also four Processes, two of which are seated at the greater corner of
the Eye, and other two at its lesser, all helping to make the upper part of the
Orbit.

Next come we to the Bones of the Synciput or forepart of the Head, which are
in number two, being joined before with the Bone of the Forehead by the Coronal
Suture, with the Os occipitis behind, by the Lambdoidal Suture, on each side to
the Temple-bones by the scaly Sutures, and to the Wedge-like-bone by one of the
common Sutures. They are also joined together, or one to another, in the middle
or top of the Head (lengthways) by a Suture common to them both, called the
Sagittal Suture.

Their figure is almost apiece; their substance thinner than that of the
other Bones, yet consist of two plates, save in their lower edges, where they
are joined to the Temple-bones. On the outside they are smooth, but on the
inside uneven, having several shallow Cavities or Dens by the sides of the
Sagittal Suture, to which the Dura matter firmly grows; as also many long and
winding inscriptions or furrows for the Vessels which run from the internal
Jugulars through the said Dura matter to the Brain. They have likewise several
perforations or little holes, some of which indeed penetrate but one Plate,
which are for the entrance and exit of the Vessels that run between the Plates;
but most run quite through them, and are made for small Veins and Arteries to
pass both from within outward, and from without inwards.

Next is the Os occipitis, or Noll-bone, which makes the hinder and lower part
of the Head, and the middle part also of the basis of the Skull. It is of a
very hard substance, harder than any Bone of the Skull besides, (except the Os
petrosum of the Temple-bones) being thicker at the bottom where it is without
flesh, and where the two Sinus of the Dura matter are joined. At the sides of
the great perforation (through which the Spinal Marrow descends) it is somewhat
thin and without any Cavities or small Dens in it; but that its thinness here
might be no prejudice to it, from the edge of this perforation there ascends on
the inside a large Process or Prominence running along to its top, to
strengthen it and arm it against any accidents that might happen by blows, etc.
This Prominence it is that distinguishes the two Protuberances of the
Cerebellum.

This Bone is in shape five-corner'd, by two of which corners it is joined in
its upper part to the Bones of the Synciput by the Lambdoidal Suture; by two
other in its fore-sides to the Temple-bones by one of the counterfeit Sutures;
and by its fifth corner to the Os cuneiforme, or Wedgelike Bone.

It has in it several Sinus's or Channels, of which some are on the inside,and
others on the outside of it. Of those on the inside there are two which are
pretty large, ordained for the receiving the protuberances or bunchings out of
the Cerebellum or After-brain. The others on the inside are some to receive the
protuberances of the Brain it self; others to receive the two Sinus's of the
Dura matter, that they might not be compressed by the Bones of the Skull; and
the rest are for the like uses. The two that are on the outside of this Bone,
are in its lower part by the sides of the great perforation, of a semicircular
shape.

This Bone has also several Processes, four of which being clad with a glib
Gristle are received into so many Sinus's of the first Vertebra of the Neck.
But that is the most considerable which I mentioned before, and serves to
strengthen the Bone. It has Holes to the number of five; the first is in the
midst of the bottom of the Noll, which is the largest of all the inward holes
of the Head, being in shape round and somewhat long, through which the Medulla
oblongata or Spinal Marrow passes out of the Skull into the Cavity of the
Vertebrae of the Neck. The other four are less by far, and are made for the
transition of several Vessels.

The Temple-bones come next to be treated of, which are seated on the sides of
the Skull and reach to the bottom of the Ears. They are joined on their upper
part to the outside of the Bones of the Crown by the Suture called Squamosa, or
Scale-like. In their forepart they are joined to the first Bone of the upper
Jaw, by its first Process; and their hinder-part is joined to the Os occipitis,
by one of the counterfeit Sutures.

The figure of the Temple-bone is in its upper part ample, equal and
semicircular; but below, it is very shapeless, like to a rude, rugged and
unequal Rock, from whence as also from its hardness it has its name of
Petrosum, or the Rocky-bone.

The substance of this Bone is also full of variety; for at its bottom it is
thick and rugged; but as it ascends, by degrees it grows much thinner, and at
its top is so thin that it is almost transparent, (especially where it gives
way to the Temporal Muscle) and like a Scale lies upon the lower edge of the
Bone of the Synciput, which Bone in its descent under the Temple-bone is also
attenuated.

The Temple-bones have each of them two Sinus or Cavities. The outer of these
is much larger than the other, being lined with a Cartilage or Gristle, seated
betwixt the Auditory passage and the Process of the Yoke-bone. It is of an
indifferent length, running as it were transversly or overthwart, and has the
longer Process or the head of the lower Jaw inserted or articulated into it.
The other Cavity is inward at the backside of the Process of the Yoke-bone, and
is common to the Temple-bone with the Noll-bone.

By these Sinus or Cavities there stands a sharp and longish, and (in Horses)
pretty thick (but in Men far more long and slender) Appendix, from its shape in
Humane Bodies called Os styloides, the Pen-like Bone. Besides which there are
also three Processes; two of which are external, and one internal.

The first external is blunt, thick and short, (said to be somewhat hollow
within) tending downwards, in shape something like to the Nipple of a Cow, from
whence it is called Mammillaris.

The second of the outward Processes runs forward from the hole of the Ear to
the Process of the first Bone of the upper Jaw, both of them framing the Os
jugale, or Yoke-bone. For these two Processes, one of the Temple-bone and the
other of the first Bone of the upper Jaw, being joined by an oblong Suture do
make the fashion (as it were) of a Bridge, or of an Oxes Yoke, from whence that
Bone has its name, and of which we shall treat further in the next Chapter.

The third Process, which is internal, is that which is called the Rocky-bone.
It is pretty long, jetting out to the inside of the bottom of the Skull, within
which it has two holes, through one of which an Artery, and through the other
the Auditory Nerve pass to the inner Cavities of the Ear, which are three in
number, namely the Tympanum or Drum, the Labyrinthus or Labyrinth, and the
Cochlea, or Snail-shell. On the outside of the Skull this Process has three
perforations or holes. The first and largest of which is called meatus
Auditorius, or the hole of hearing. The second is narrow, short and oblique,
near to the first, by the first hole of the Wedge-like Bone. Through this the
Jugular Vein enters into the inner Cavities of the Skull. The third hole is
seated betwixt the Processus mammillaris and the Styloides or Pen-like
Appendix, ending into that passage that goes from the Ear to the Mouth. As to
the little Bones that lie hid in the Cavities of this Process, by ancient
Anatomists they were reckoned to be but three, but there is by modern Authors
added a fourth; and they are commonly known by these following names, viz.
Incus, Malleus, Stapes, and Os orbiculare, of all which I have already treated
in the fourteenth Chapter of the Third Book, where they are also lively
represented in Figures, to which place I refer the Reader for his further
satisfaction; having not mentioned them in this place, but that they make up
the number of the proper Bones of the Skull.

Table XXXVI.
Shows the several Bones of the Skull both proper and common, together with the
several perforations for the outgate and ingate of the Vessels, as many as can
be showed in two Figures, one showing the top and the other the bottom of the
Skull.

Figure I.

Shows the uppermost Bones of the Skull, of the Nose, and of the upper Jaw.

AA The Bones of the Synciput or forepart of the Head. BB The Temple-bones, on
which the Temporal Muscles rest. MM The Os jugale. OO The common Suture that
joins the Fore-head-bone and the Bones of the upper Jaw together. DDD The six
Fore-teeth of the upper Jaw. X A hole a little above the upper Gumm, through
which do pass the Palatevein and Artery, which branch afterward about the upper
Lip.
Figure II.

Shows the hinder and lower Bones of the Head, with their perforations.

AA The Os occipitis or Noll-bone. BB The holes through which the sixth pair of
Nerves (formerly so reckoned) do pass out of the Skull. CC The two holes
through which the seventh conjugation of Nerves (of the same reckoning) do pass
out of the Skull. DD The holes through which the tasting Nerves do pass, which
are dispersed about the Tongue, the Muscles of the Os hyoides and several other
parts within the Mouth. EE The holes by which the external Jugular Veins and
Arteries pass into the Skull. FF A hole in the Process of the Wedge-like Bone
called Pterygoides, seated at the bottom of the Skull. HH Two holes in the
Bones of the Palate. M The hole of the Palate through which the Palate-vein and
Artery pass out of the Mouth to the upper Lip. OO The holes through which do
pass the Veins, Arteries and Nerves to the roots of all the Teeth. PP The holes
through which the Optic Nerves do pass to the Orbit of the Eyes. YY The Six
Fore-teeth or Shearing-teeth of the upper Jaw. XX The Tushes, or Dog-teeth.
AEAE The holes through which the fifth pair of Nerves do pass forth of the
Skull.
the upper bones of a horse's nose and skull TAB. XXXVI. page 203.
I


II






CHAP. IV. Of the Bones common to the Skull and upper Jaw.
1 The Wedgelike Bone. Its situation. Its Processes. Its Cavities. Its Holes. 2
The Sievelike Bone. Its situation and connection. Its Parts. Its Use. 3 Os
jugale.

HAving hitherto treated of the Bones proper to the Skull only, I come now to
treat of those which are common to it with the upper Jaw; and these are in
number three, namely, the Os sphenoides or cuneiforme, the Os cribriforme, and
the Os jugale.

The first of these is the Sphenoides, or Wedge-like Bone, so called from its
situation, which is betwixt the Bones of the Skull and the upper Jaw, and not
from the likeness of its figure to that of a Wedge, as some do believe. It is
joined before to the Fore-head-bone, and behind to the Os occipitis. At the
sides it does a good part of it join to the Os petrosum. Above, it is joined to
the first, fourth and sixth Bones of the upper Jaw; and below, to the Bones of
the Palate of the Mouth.

It has several Processes, of which some are external, and some internal. The
internal are four, standing out like four feet of a Table or Chair, which
(taking in the space between them) form the Sella Turcica. The external are
also four, of which the two foremost are contiguous to the upper Jaw, and are
called the Wing-like Processes, from the resemblance they have to Bats-wings;
for they are thick in some places, and yet end into a notable thinness, almost
as thin and sharp as the edge of a Knife. The two hinder are stretched out
toward the Styloides Processes of the Temple-bones.

This Bone has several Cavities or hollownesses; two of which are common with
it and the Temple-bones, and the Bones of the Synciput.

It has also many perforations or little Holes to the number of seven on each
side. One of which being round gives a passage to the Optic Nerve toward the
Eye. The rest are penetrated some by one, some by several pairs of Nerves;
others by the Carotid Arteries and Jugular Veins; and others again by both
Nerves and Bloud-vessels.

The next common Bone of the Head and upper Jaw is the Os cribriforme, so
called from the several or indeed innumerable little holes in it, which make it
like a Sieve, through which holes the smells do pass to the Mammillary
Processes, or Olfactory Nerves. It is situated in the forepart of the Skull,
between or a little below the Sockets of the Eyes, under the middle basis of
the Fore-head-bone, and at the upper part of the Nostrils. It is joined by a
plain or simple line to the Fore-head-bone, the second Bone of the upper Jaw,
and to the Os cuneiforme.

This Bone is by some divided into four parts; of which the first is a Process
in the upper and middle part of it, which is long and triangular, ending in a
sharp point, whence it is called Crista galli, or the Cock's Comb. This runs in
betwixt the Mammillary Processes dividing them one from the other. To its sharp
point the Sinus of the Falx adhereth.

The second part of this Bone is that which most properly is called Os
cribriforme, being perforated all over like a Sieve, some of which holes are
straight and some oblique. They are observed to be much larger in Dogs than in
any other Animal (allowing for the proportion of their Bodies) which is
supposed the reason why their smell is more exquisite than that of any other
Creature.

The third part is a Process in its lower or under side opposite to the upper
Process; which part divides the upper part of the Nose into two Nostrils,
whence it is called septum Nasi, the Partition-bone of the Nose.

The fourth and last part of this Bone is compared to a Sponge or Pumice-stone,
being porous and full of small cavities, which are filled with a spongie flesh;
and from this part the whole Bone is by some called Os spongiosum. For the
names of cribriforme and spongiosum are confounded one with the other, being
either of them given indifferently to the whole Bone. But if we will consider
the spongiosum only as a part of the cribriforme, then we must say, that it is
that part of it that is seated just at the top of the Nostrils. Some make two
Bones of it, affixing one at the top of each Nostril, and call them in the
plural number Ossa spongiosa.

The use ascribed to the Os cribriforme by most Anatomists has been to
discharge through its pores or holes phlegmatic excrements from the Brain into
the Nose, but he that shall examine them, will find that its holes are so
filled either with the spongie flesh before-named, or else with the Fibers of
the smelling Nerves passing through them to the inside of the Nostrils, that
there is no passage left for any humor by them. What we therefore account
their true use to be, the Reader may be informed, if he please to turn back to
the fifteenth Chapter of the Third Book, where we treated of the Nose, and
described its uses: adding to what is there said of it, that it makes up the
inner corner of the Orbit of the Eye.

The third and last Bone common to the Skull and upper Jaw is called Os jugale,
or the Yoke-bone. This is seated on each side of the Horse's Face between the
meatus of the Ear or Auditory passage, and the first Bone of the upper Jaw;
being framed of two Bones, one of which is a Process of the Temple-bone that is
carried from the meatus Auditorius, and is the hinder of them; and the other
Bone being the foremore is a Process of the first Bone of the upper Jaw, and
which makes the lower side of the lesser or outer corner of the Eye. These two
are joined by a slanting or oblique Suture, and being so joined do constitute
this Bone called Os jugale. Over this Bone runs the Tendon of the
Temporal-muscle, and also the Tendon of the Masseter or Chewing-muscle, as they
pass to the lower Jaw.

Some make but two common Bones of the Skull and upper Jaw, not reckoning this
for any particular Bone, seeing (as has been said) it is formed only of the
two Processes of the Temple and upper Jaw Bone. But seeing it is distinguished
from the others by a particular name (though not of any peculiar substance) I
thought it not absurd to reckon it for a third common Bone.

CHAP. V. Of the Jaw-bones and their Parts.
The Bones of the upper Jaw. 1. Zygomaticum. 2. Lachrymale. 3. Innominatum. 4.
Os malae, or Cheek-bone. Its connection. Its Holes. 5. The Nosebone. Its
connection. 6. The Palate-bone. The lower Jaw Bone. Its Processes and Sinus's.
Its Cavities and Holes. The Sockets of the Teeth.

THE Bones of the upper and lower Jaws come next to be spoken to, with the
first of which we will begin.

This Jaw has Bones of two sorts, the one proper to it self, and the other
common to it and the Skull. The common Bones are the Wedge-like and Sieve-like
Bones, and the Os jugale, of which we have already treated in the foregoing
Chapter. I shall therefore proceed to treat of the Bones proper to the upper
Jaw only, which make the lower side of the Orbit of the Eye, the Nose, Cheeks
and Roof of the Mouth.

The Bones that constitute all these Parts are twelve in number, on each side
of the Face six; the first of which is called Zygomaticum, because by its
Process it makes up the greatest part of the Os jugale. This is seated at, and
makes, the lower part of the outer corner of the Eye.

The next is a round, little, brittle and thin Bone, seated in the inner corner
of the Eye, called Os lachrymale, because it has a hole in it through which the
serous humor that makes the tears in Men does issue. Upon this hole the little
Kernel called caruncula Lachrymalis rests, that hinders the continual
gleeting of the foresaid humor. There is also in the lower part of this Bone
another hole which goes to the cavity of the Nostril, through which does pass a
branch of the fifth pair of Nerves to the inner Skin of the Nose.

The third is seated in the inner side of the Eye, and within is continued with
the fungous Bones of the Nostrils. It is broad, and somewhat quadrangular or
four-corner'd, also thin and transparent, like the Scale of a Fish. On its
outside it is smooth, but within rugged and unequal, because of the Scales that
cleave unto it. It is joined to four Bones, viz. to the Fore-head-bone, to the
Wedge-like Bone, to the second Bone of the Jaw, ( viz. the next foregoing) and
also to the fourth, or next following. It is not known by any peculiar name; I
have therefore made bold to call it Os innominatum.

The fourth Bone is called Os malae, the Cheek-bone, because it makes up the
greatest part of the Cheek, as also of the Palate. It likewise contains the
upper Teeth in its cavities or caverns. It is much larger than any other Bone
of the upper Jaw, and is circumscribed with many Sutures; for not to mention
the Teeth that are inarticulated into it, it abutteth upon or is joined to
several Bones. In the first place it is joined above, on the side next the
Nose, to the Bone of the Forehead; below, to the Wedge-like Bone, and the Bone
of the Palate of the Mouth; before, to the Os lachrymale, and to the fifth Bone
that makes the upper part of the Nose, (which is next to be described;) and
lastly to its own companion, viz. the Cheek-bone of one side to that of the
other.

This Bone has three perforations or holes, two of which are under the Orbit
of the Eye; that is, on each side one, running from the lower part of the Eye
outward. Their use is to transmit or let pass two branches of the fifth pair of
Nerves out of the Orbit of the Eye to the Face, on the Parts whereof they are
bestowed.

The third of these holes is in the Palate, at the backside of the
Grinding-teeth where both Bones of the Jaw meet. It is presently divided into
two, one of which runs on one side of the septum of the Nose, and the other
on the other, to the Nostrils, to which there pass through these holes a small
Vein and a small Artery.

It has also a den or cavity on each side, by the side of the Nose under the
Orbit of the Eye, which is covered with a very fine Membrane. This is often
full of a mucous or slimy phlegm.

The fifth Bone of the upper Jaw does with his companion make the bony
prominence of the Nose. It is a small Bone, in figure almost apiece. It is
hard, solid, and reasonable thick, having sundry small perforations in it. It
is joined above to the Fore-head-bone, viz. to its internal Process. In the
sides above it is joined to the first Bone, and a little lower to the fourth
Bone of this Jaw. In the middle it is joined to its companion, and below to the
Gristles that make the lower part of the Nose.

The sixth is that which makes up the Roof of the Mouth, with its companion;
for you must reckon every one of these Bones double, one on one side of the
Face, and another on the other. It is a broad Bone, thin and solid, and in the
end, where it is rough, it resembles a semicircle. It is joined behind to the
Wing-like Processes of the Wedge-like Bone, and on the inside, to the
Partition-bone of the Nostrils. It is likewise joined to the fourth Bone of
this Jaw or Cheek-bone, and lastly to his companion or fellow in its back-part.

This Bone has also two perforations, on either side one, running upward and
backward to two of the holes of the Wedge-like Bone.

The lower Jaw comes next to be treated of, which makes the lower part of the
capacity of the Mouth. This differs from the former in that it is moveable,
whereas the upper is not. In shape it is long and prominent. At both the ends
of it, there are two Processes, which are by some called Horns. The foremost of
them runs upward, and from a broad basis grows sharp, ending into a cone or
point. This point receives the Tendon of the Temporal Muscle, which Tendon
compasses it round about, and is strongly implanted into it: from whence it is
that a luxation of the lower Jaw, because of the distention of this Tendon that
happens thereupon, is very dangerous, and hard to cure.

The other being the backward Process, is called Articularis, because it serves
for articulation. This has a neck and a longish head, (called Condylus) that
is covered with a Cartilage for its easier motion: By this head it is
articulated into the Sinus of Os petrosum, that is also lined with a Cartilage,
and is knit thereto strongly by a membranous Ligament. At the sides and roots
of these Processes it has shallow Sinus's or Cavities in its surface, but they
are deeper on the inside than on the outside. The principal use of both seems
to be for the passage or insertion of the Muscles.

This Bone of the lower Jaw is very hard, and for the most part very solid, to
make it the stronger. Yet on each side (more backward than in Men) it has a
Cavity within it, which contains a marrowy juice for its nourishment. It has
also four perforations or holes, of which two are at the roots of the
Processes, by which a branch of the fifth pair of Nerves, as also a Vein and
Artery do pass to the Teeth. The two other holes are in its forepart by the
sides of the Chin, through which two twigs of the said fifth branch of Nerves
do pass out again to the lower Lip, and its Muscles and Skin.

This lower Jaw as well as the upper has Sockets for the Teeth to stand in, in
number equal to the Teeth, which Sockets are called by the Latins Alveoli or
little Pits. These are dug deep, that the Teeth like so many Nails might be
the firmlier fastened in them. When any of the Teeth fall out of them, (as the
Foal-teeth, etc.) in a short time they are obliterated, the Jaw becoming smooth
without any pit in it in that place.

Table XXXVII.
Represents an Horse's Head and Jaws as much of them as can be seen by the Head
standing with one side toward us; and shows those Bones which could not so
well be seen in the foregoing Table, where the Head is represented in one
Figure with the top, and in the other, with the bottom of it toward us.

Figure I.

A The Temple-bone on which the Temporal Muscle is placed. B A hole in the
Skull through which does pass forth from the Brain a small Nerve, which is
dispersed about the top of the Skull. DD The Bones which make the top of the
Nose. HH The Os jugale. F The hole through which does pass a branch of the
Nerve of the fifth conjugation, which furnishes the Muscles of the upper Lip
and also the Muscles of the Nostrils with Nerves. L The round production of the
upper Jaw, which production is called cervix. M The Auditory Passage or hole of
the Ear. N The Mammillary Process of the Temple-bone. OOO The lower Jaw Bone. P
The hole where the Nerve of the fifth pair comes forth, which Nerve furnishes
the Muscles of the lower Lips with twigs from it. Q The Production of the lower
Jaw, which does articulate into the upper. K The Noll-bone.
Figure II.

Represents the Skull and upper Jaw only, the lower Jaw being removed, the
better to show the several perforations in the side of the bottom of the Skull,
which perforations or holes in the other Figure are hid by the articulation of
the lower Jaw.

A The hole by which the Nerve passes from the Brain to the upper Jaw. E A hole
whereby a small Nerve does pass from the Brain, which is distributed upon the
bottom of the Occiput, and other Parts at the bottom of the Skull. F A hole by
which a branch of the external Jugular Vein and Artery does pass to the Brain.
G A hole through which do pass the sixth pair of Nerves, according to Doctor
Willis. H The hole through which the Optic Nerves do pass from the Brain to
the Eyes. I A hole through which do pass another pair of Nerves, which branch
into the Muscles of the Tongue, and also send twigs to the Muscles of the Ears.
K The hole where the Palate-vein comes forth. M Another hole through which does
pass a small twig of the external Jugular Vein and Artery up to the Brain. O
The Auditory Passage. Q A hole through which a small Nerve does pass from the
Brain to be distributed about the top of the Skull. S The hole where the Nerve
of the fifth pair comes forth of the upper Jaw after it has furnished the
roots of the Grinding-teeth with Nerves; from whence it marches toward the
lower Lip, where it is dispersed amongst the Muscles thereof. XX Two other
holes in the bottom of the Skull through which do pass other conjugations of
Nerves, which are dispersed about the Head, Face and Mouth.
anatomical view of a horse's head and jaws TAB XXXVII. page 208.
I


II






CHAP. VI. Of the Figure, Magnitude, Number and Articulation of the Teeth.
The Teeth. Their substance and Vessels. 1. Three sorts of them. Incisores. 2.
Canini. 3. Molares. How to know the age of an Horse by his Teeth.

THE Teeth are called in Latin Dentes, quasi Edentes, from eating.They are of a
very hard substance, yea, harder than any of the other Bones in the whole Body.
That part of them that stands out above the Gumm, is smooth and free from any
covering; but that part that is within the Sockets of the Jaws is more rough
and covered with a thin Membrane or Periosteum, which Membrane is of exquisite
sense. Those sort of them which we call the Grinding teeth, have a manifest
Cavity within, but the Incisores (or Fore-teeth) and Dog-teeth have but very
obscure ones. Into these Cavities by the very small holes that are in the roots
of the Teeth, are received (into each Tooth) a Capillary Artery from the
Carotides, also a small Vein from the Jugulars, and a twig of a Nerve from the
fifth pair; which Nerve being expanded through the thin Membrane that invests
the said Cavity, gives it a most acute sense; whereas the bony part of the
Tooth is of it self insensible. These Vessels beforementioned, namely, the
Vein, Artery and Nerve, are united together and clothed with a common Coat
when they enter the Jaw, within which they have a proper chanel to run along in
under the roots of the Teeth, to each of which roots they send small twigs as
they pass by, as aforesaid.

As in Men, so in Horses, there are three kinds of Teeth, namely, Incisores,
Canini and Molares. The Incisores, Cutters or Shredders are those we call the
Fore-teeth from their being seated in the forepart of the Jaw. They are
sharp-edged like a Knife, and broad also, that they may the better bite off or
crop the Grass, etc. They are in number twelve, that is to say, in each Jaw
six. They have each but one root or phang, though that root is indifferent
large, most times larger than any one of the phangs of the great or
Grinding-teeth.

The next to these are those which in Horses we call the Tushes, but in Men
they are called the Dog-teeth or Canini, not only because in figure they are
like the Teeth of a Dog, and stand out of the Gumms as Dog's-teeth do; but from
their use also, which is to gnaw upon and break (with their sharp points) what
is too hard for the Fore-teeth to cut or shear in sunder. The roots of these as
of the former are single, having but one phang.

Those of the third rank, are the double Teeth, which are called Molares, or
Grinders, because the Meat is broken or ground by them, even as Corn is ground
by the Millstone. These are in Horses twenty four in number, in each Jaw
twelve. Their seat is in the inner part of the Mouth, being environed in their
outside by the Cheeks, lest the broken or shredded Meat, being rolled by the
Tongue upon the Teeth, should slip over them out of the Mouth, before it be
sufficiently ground.

The two foremost of these Teeth, standing next to the Dog-teeth or Tushes, are
those by which the age of an Horse is known till after seven years old, and
that by their unevenness at the top, having several little thin shells or
scales as it were sticking up round the outside of the top of them, whereby
their middle part is made to appear hollow; which hollowness where it is found,
is a certain sign of the Horse's being under seven years of age. And it is also
to be observed, that the nearer the Horse comes to that age, the more does that
hollowness grow out by degrees: so that when he comes to be full seven years
old it is quite obliterated, and so the Horse's age to be no more known by that
sign, being past the mark in the Mouth as we say: for by the perpetual use that
the Horse makes of his Teeth, the beforementioned Shells at the top of them,
which cause their hollowness, are worn down even with the other parts of the
Teeth, so that the whole top of the Tooth becomes even, smooth and plain.

Neither are the rest of the Grinding-teeth without some hollowness or at least
roughness in their tops; but this is of a different nature from the other:
which roughness or unevenness is very necessary, for by it they are made more
fit for the comminution of the Meat: For as Millers when their Milstones are
grown smooth, do pick them anew, to make them grind the better; so has Nature
made the upper part of these Grinding-teeth, elegantly to imitate the rough
superficies of a Millstone, having here and there formed little pits in them. We
shall not need to show the uses of these, or of either the foregoing sorts of
Teeth, that being intimated sufficiently in the description of them.

Table XXXVIII.
Shows the upper and lower Jaw separated from one another and placed sideways,
with so much of each Jaw broken off as till one come to the roots of the Teeth,
to show how the Nerves branch into the ends of the roots of each Tooth.

Figure I.

AA The Shearers or Fore-teeth. BB The two Productions of the lower Jaw which
articulate into the upper Jaw. CC The Process into which the Temporal Muscle is
inserted. D A hole through which does pass a branch of the external Jugular
Vein and Artery. E A hole through which does pass the Nerve that furnishes the
Teeth with twigs from it as it passes along, (being a branch of the fifth
pair) which trunk does afterward lose it self about the Lips, furnishing all
the Muscles of the Lips and Nose with Nerves. (Note that this Nerve in the
upper Lip is that which Farriers do improperly (and by a mistake) call the
Cord, which they many times take up with a Cornet and cut insunder to prevent a
Horse from stumbling; believing that the said Cord reaches from the tip of the
Nose where they cut it, down to the Forelegs and so to the Feet, by which they
imagine that the Horse's Head is so bound down, that he cannot have the freedom
of it, which causes him to stumble. This fancy how ridiculous soever, is common
amongst Farriers, and is owing merely to their ignorance of the Parts; for it
reaches no farther than from the Brain to the Lips: so that the cutting of it
is likelier to hinder the motion of the Lips than to remedy stumbling.) R A
little hole through which does pass a Nerve from the Brain to the Pericranium.
T The same hole in the upper Jaw, as the letter E points to in the lower,
through which the Nerve which they call the Cord, does pass to the Lips. S The
Tushes or Dog-teeth of the lower Jaw. V The Auditory Passage or hole of the
Ear. Y One of the Tushes of the upper Jaw. 1 2 3 4 5 6 The Grinding-teeth. OOOO
The Nerve that sends twigs to the roots of the Teeth of the lower Jaw, being
the first branch of Doctor Willis his fifth pair.
anatomical view of a horse's upper and lower jaw TAB. XXXVIII. page 211.




CHAP. VII. Of the Bone of the Tongue called Os hyoides.
Os hyoides. Its figure and parts. Its Use.

THAT Bone which is called Os hyoides, is of the shape of a Greek v (ypsilon)
and is seated under (or at the root of) the Tongue, being as it were the
foundation and supporter of it. It is compounded of three Bones, viz. one in
the middle, (being larger than the other two) which is gibbous forwards (or
outward) and somewhat hollowed inwards; by its gibbous side it is joined to
the basis or bottom of the Tongue: The other two Bones are lateral, and are
called Cornua, or Horns. To the first Bone there are affixed two Gristles, and
to each of these one. They are all tied to the adjacent parts, partly by a
fleshy, partly by a nervous substance. It has three Sinus or Cavities; above,
a transverse depressed Sinus, to admit the second pair of Muscles proper to it;
and in the sides of this Sinus there are two other, which give way unto the
first pair of Muscles that are implanted into the sides of this Bone.

The use of this Bone (although it be but a little one) is very great;for most
if not all the Muscles that move the Tongue either are inserted into it or
arise from it. It serves also to keep the Throat open, admitting the Epiglottis
or Throat-flap into its bosom, when it is lifted up in breathing. And lastly
some of the Muscles of the Larynx or Throttle arise from it.

CHAP. VIII. Of the Bones of the Neck.
The Collar-bones, their substance and use. The Vertebrae of the Neck, their
number and holes. 1 The first described. 2 The second, etc. described.

HAving treated of the Bones of the Head, we come in the next place to speak to
those of the Neck, which, in dividing the Body into three Parts at the
beginning of this Fifth Book, ( viz. the Head, Trunk and Limbs) we considered
as annexed to the Head. Its Bones are of two sorts, viz. the Collar or
Chanel-bones, and the Vertebrae. But first of the Collar-bones.

These are in number two, one on each side. They are called Claviculae, either
from their resembling the shape of old-fashioned Keys, which were of the shape
of an Italick s; or because they lock up as it were and close the Chest; for by
some they are accounted as belonging to it. Their substance is spongy and
thick, especially about their heads; but in their middle they are thin and
flat. By one end they are joined to the top of the Breast Bone, and by the
other to the first Rack-bone of the Back, wherein they differ from those in
Man, which are jointed into the Process of the Shoulder Bone. Their use is to
uphold the Shoulder-blades, that they should not slide down upon the Breast
together with the Shoulder Bone, which upon a dislocation or fracture of these
Collar-bones does often come to pass.

The number of the Vertebrae or Rack-bones of the Neck is seven, and they are
reckoned from the Head downward; that next the Head being the first. They have
in each of them a large Cavity as those of the Back and Loins have, to give way
to the Spinal Marrow to descend by. Besides this large hole which is common to
these with those others, they have also each of them two other smaller holes in
their transverse Processes, through which the Cervical Veins and Arteries do
pass to the Head. And betwixt their jointing one with another there is a third
hole, or rather half of one, for one half is formed out of the lower side of
the upper, and the other out of the upper side of the lower Vertebra: By these
the Nerves pass out from the Spinal Marrow.

The first of these Bones is called Atlas, because in Men the Head stands upon
it like the Globe of the World, as the Poets feigned Atlas to bear the
Celestial Globe upon his Shoulders. The body of this Bone is more slender, but
solider than the rest, and it wants its hinder Process or Spine, having only
a kind of a semicircular knob jetting out instead of it: the reason of which
seems to be, lest the greater straight pair of Muscles of the Head that spring
from the second Vertebra of the Neck, and march over the backside of this,
should be hurt in bending the Head forwards. But it has all its other
Processes, viz. ascending, descending and transverse. Within on the fore-side
of its great Foramen, it has a Sinus, in shape semicircular, which is lined
with a Cartilage or Gristle, and which receives the Tooth-like Process of the
second Vertebra.

The second Vertebra is called Dentata, because out of its upper side, between
its two ascending Processes, there springs an Appendix or Process, round and
long, like the Dog-tooth in Man (or Tush in a Horse.) This Tooth is covered
with a Cartilage, and is jointed into the foresaid Sinus of the first Vertebra,
and upon it, as upon an Axle-tree, the head turns round, from whence the whole
Bone is called by some Axis. That part of the Tooth which enters not into the
said Sinus ( viz. its basis) is encompassed with a Ligament, which knits it to
the Occiput. This and the four following have Spines or hinder Processes, each
of which are divided into two for the better connection of the Ligaments and
Muscles to them. We shall not need to describe particularly any more of them,
seeing they are in all things like to the second, saving that their lateral
Processes are larger, and divided into two as well as the hinder: yea the
seventh it self differs not from the rest, though in Man it do.

The bodies of these Vertebrae of the Neck are longer than those of the Back or
Loins; for though the Neck of an Horse be of so considerable length, yet as
has been said its Vertebrae are but seven (as they are in Man) whereas those
of the Back and Loins are twenty four in all, which space notwithstanding is
not so long again as the Neck is; whereas were the Vertebrae of a
proportionable length, it should be more than three times the length.

Table XXXIX.
Represents the seven Vertebrae of the Neck all joined together in one Figure.
They are placed so, as that the first Figure shows their sides, the second
their back-parts, and the third their fore-parts.

Figure I.

A Shows a hole through which a branch of the internal Jugular Vein and Carotid
Artery comes forth of the first Vertebra, having entered the same Vertebra at
the hole marked with the letter F. B A hole in the said Vertebra out of which
does pass the first Nerve from the Spinal Marrow without the Skull, which Nerve
marches straight to the beforesaid Vein and Artery and joins it self with them,
and runs their course both up to the Head and down to the Body, there being an
ascending and a descending branch of it for that purpose. C D E The ends of the
said Vein, Artery and Nerve where they were cut off with the seventh Vertebra
from the Trunk of the Body. F The hole in the first Vertebra by which the Vein
and Artery entered the said Bone, and come out again at the letter A. P The hole
betwixt the first and second Vertebra through which does pass the second pair
of Nerves of the Spinal Marrow. HH Q R S T The rest of the holes in the other
six Vertebrae, through which the Jugular Vein and Artery, and the Spinal Nerves
do pass in and out. 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. The seven Vertebrae of the Neck.
Figure II. Shows the backside, and Figure III. the fore-side of the said
Vertebrae.

the top, side, and bottom views of a horse's vertebrae TAB. XXXIX page 214.
I


II


III






The Back has seventeen Vertebrae. Their Bodies and Processes described. The
Loins have seven. Their Bodies, Processes and connection. The Ribs are
seventeen. Nine true. Eight bastard. Their figure. Their surface. Their uses.

CHAP. IX. Of the Vertebrae of the Back and Loins; and of the Ribs.
THE Back consists of seventeen Vertebrae or Rack-bones, just so many as
there be Ribs on a side, for on each side of every Rackbone is there a Rib
articulated. But seeing, as we have said, the Collar-bone is inserted into the
first Vertebra of the Back, it will so fall out that the last Rib will be
articulated into that Vertebra which we reckon for the first of the Loins: into
which the Rib indeed is so jointed, that it is not easy to say whether it be
into the top of this, or into the lower end of the seventeenth of the Back The
Bodies of the Racks as well as their Processes do differ somewhat from the
Bodies and Processes of the Racks of the Neck; for the Bodies of the Racks of
the Neck are longer than these, and more flat on their inside, that the Gullet
might rest the more securely on them: and as for their Processes, the hinder
are not cleft into two as those of the Neck are, and the transverse ones are
more short and blunt, having (instead of the holes that are in those of the
Neck) each a shallow Sinus, into which the Ribs are partly articulated. But the
Processes are in both of an equal number, namely four oblique ones, (that is,
two tending obliquely upwards, and two obliquely downwards) two transverse or
lateral ones, and one acute or hinder one, which is called the Spine.

The Bodies of these Vertebrae are not so solid as those of the Neck, but they
are more bulky or thicker about, and are full of small perforations for the
admission of the Bloud-vessels to the Spinal Marrow, and besides have two at
each Joint for the egress of the Nerves from the Spinal Marrow. They have each
of them on each side a Sinus or Cavity for the inarticulation of the head of
the Rib, which Sinus those of the Neck want, as having no Bones to joint into
them.

Note that the transverse Processes of two or three of the lowest of these
Racks begin to grow shorter and shorter, and their Spines are more blunt, and
stand evener out, declining not so much downwards as those before-going. As for
the great Cavity or Perforation in the middle of the Bodies, it is
proportionable to the Marrow which it contains.

Next to the Bones of the Neck we come to those of the Loins, which make the
third part of the Spine. They are in number seven, and are bigger than any of
the foregoing either of the Neck or Back. Their hinder Processes or Spines are
shorter, but broader and thicker than those of the Back, somewhat bending
upwards as most of those decline downwards; but as for the lateral or
transverse Processes, they exceed those of the Back in length. These Vertebrae
are joined one to another by a clammy Gristle, and likewise the uppermost of
them to the last of the Back, and the lowest to the first of Os sacrum in like
manner.

Besides their lateral Perforations betwixt their jointings for the
transmission or letting forth of the Nerves, they have also several other
little holes for the intromission of the Bloud-vessels. As for their middle
Perforation, nothing need be said particularly of it, seeing it differs not
from that of those of the Back, being of capacity equal to the thickness of the
Marrow that it contains.

The Ribs (in Latin Costae) are in number thirty four, that is to say, on each
side seventeen. Their substance is partly bony, and partly cartilaginous or
gristly; the first serving for firmness, and the latter for articulation, that
upon occasion they might yield a little without breaking. They are divided into
two sorts, the one called true, and the other the Bastard-ribs. The true are
the nine uppermost, so called because each with its fellow makes a complete
circle, being joined together by the mediation of the Spondyls of the Back
behind, and the Breast Bone before. I say the Ribs are articulated into the
Back-bones behind, something of a cartilaginous substance coming between: (the
manner whereof is well expressed in the following Figure.) At this articulation
into the Vertebrae each Rib has two knobs, one of which is received into the
Sinus of the Body of the Vertebra, and the other which is less, into that of
the transverse Process. And they are joined before to the Breast Bone by way of
articulation also; for their Cartilages end into little heads which are
received into the smooth Sinus's of the Breast Bone.

The Bastard-ribs are the eight lower, being of a more soft and gristly
substance than the other; because being articulated only at one end, it was
necessary they should be of a more yielding and pliable nature, otherwise they
would have been very apt to break. Yea their yielding is not only a security
to themselves, but very convenient in respect to the parts that are contained
under or within them. For seeing the Stomach lies in this region which uses to
be distended with Meat or Water, these Ribs ought to give way to it when it or
the intermediate parts, as the Liver and Spleen, bear against them.

The figure of the Ribs is (as you may also see in the following Figure)
semicircular, like a Bow when it is drawn; which Nature has so ordered to make
the Chest stronger and more capacious.

They are on the outside rough and unequal, especially near the Vertebrae, that
the Ligaments might take the firmer hold on them, by which they are tied to the
Rack-bones: but on their inside they are smoother (being covered with the
Pleura) lest they should hurt the Lungs and other Parts that bear against them.
They are all of them narrower and roundish toward the Back, and broader and
flatter toward the Breast. In their lower and inner part they have a furrow
that runs along them, in which a Nerve and the Bloud-vessels are conducted.

The uses of the Ribs are, first, to be a defense to the Bowels within the
Breast, and to the Stomach, Liver and Spleen in the Lower Belly; and secondly,
to support the Muscles which serve for respiration, and to be moved by them:
for which cause the Breast ought not to consist of one Bone, for then it would
have been immovable; whereas now it easily admits of dilatation and
contraction.

CHAP. X. Of the Sternum or Breast Bone, and of the Scapula or Shoulder Blade.
The Sternum, its figure and substance. What parts articulate into it. Its Use.
The Scapula, its situation, figure and connection. Its Processes. Its
Appendixes. Its Cavities.

THE Breast Bone in an Horse is not flat on the outside as it is in Men, but
stands out with a ridge, and is something like the keel or bottom of a Boat,
jetting out with its middle on the outside, and is hollow on the inside. It is
of a spongy substance, neither so solid nor so white as most of the other Bones
of the Body. In Foals it is rather gristly than bony, and does then consist of
more parts than it does in grown Horses; for as by age the Gristles grow into a
bony substance, so they do unite so one to another in time, that no footsteps
are left of their first division.

In its upper part toward the Throat it is rather pointed and sharp, than
horned as it is in Men; however on the inside it is hollowed, for t he more
convenient descent of the Windpipe. Without on each side of its upper end
there is a little Sinus into which the heads of the Collar-bones are received
or articulated. Betwixt which articulation of the Collarbones into it, and its
lower end, there are several Sinus on each side of it, to the number of nine,
into which the gristly ends of so many true Ribs are jointed. Its lower end
terminates in a Gristle even in old Horses, whose end is of a more obtuse or
blunt shape than in Men, in whom it is called Cartilago ensiformis, or the
Sword-point-like Gristle.

Its use is for the articulation of one end of the Collar-bones and true Ribs
into it, and to serve as a Breast Plate for the safeguard and defense of the
noble Bowels ( viz. the Heart and Lungs) that are lodged within it.

The Shoulder Blade is called in Latin Scapula. There are two of them ( viz. on
each side of the upper part of the Chest one) as there are of all the sorts of
Bones in the fore and also in the hinder Legs; but we shall for brevity's sake
speak of the Bones only of one Leg before and another behind, because the
other two are in all things like unto these, wherefore it is not any way
necessary to repeat the description of them, nor yet to speak of them in the
plural number.

The Shoulder Blade is seated upon the side of the true Ribs, (like a Target)
reaching from the Vertebrae of the Back almost to the bottom of the
Collar-bone. It is in figure after a sort triangular, on the inside concave or
hollow, and on the outside prominent or arched. It is jointed to no Bone but by
its lower end to the Shoulder Bone; but yet it is knit to several Parts by the
Muscles that are inserted into it, or rise from it; as to the hinder-part of
the Head by the Cucullar Muscles, being the first of its movers; also to the
Vertebrae of the Neck by its second pair; and to the Back by the Muscle
Rhomboides, etc.

It has three Processes. The first being the shortest, is called its Neck,
which neck ends into a sinuated or hollow cup or head, which receives the head
of the Shoulder Bone, and its brim is compassed with a thick Gristle, whereby
its Cavity is made the deeper that the head of the Shoulder Bone that is
jointed into it should not so easily slip out. The second Process, which by
some is accounted the first, is extended along its middle on the outside, and
is called its Spine; and that end of this Spine that by a shallow Sinus
receives one of the Heads of the Shoulder Bone, is called Acromium, that is to
say, its point or tip. The third and last of these Processes is toward the
lower and inside of the Bone, and from the likeness it has with an Anchor is
called Ancyroides, Anchor-like; some also who compare it to a Crows Bill, do
give it the name of Coracoides: This Process does somewhat help to hold the
Shoulder Bone in its place, entering a little into a shallow Sinus of the said
Bone.

It has five Appendixes about its Neck, three of which do afford an original
to some Muscles, and from the other two do spring Ligaments which join the
Shoulder Bone to the head of the Blade.

By means of the second Process that runs like a Ridge or Spine along the
middle of its back there are formed on its outside two long Furrows or
Cavities, in which several Muscles lie, especially the Suprascapularis and
Subscapularis, which are otherwise called Supraspinatus and Infraspinatus, from
their being placed the first above this Spine or on that side next the Neck,
and the latter below it or on that side next the Ribs.

Table XL.
Represents all the Bones of the Chest, the Vertebrae of the Back and the
Shoulder-blades.

Figure I.

A B Show the length of the Breast Bone, (the Bones of the Chest being placed
in a supine posture.) CC The upper end of the same Bone. DD That Gristle which
in Men is called Cartilago ensiformis or the Swordfashioned Gristle, at its
lower end. 1. The Collar-bone, (imitating a Rib.)
2.3.4.5.6.7.8.9.10.11.12.13.14.15.16.17.18. The seventeen Ribs. EEE The several
Vertebrae of the Thorax into which the Ribs are articulated. FFFF The
cartilaginous or gristly part of the Ribs.
Figure II.

Shows the seventeen Vertebrae of the Thorax or Chest on one side, the better
to show how the Ribs are articulated into the sides of the said Vertebrae.

AAB The two Productions of the first Vertebra of the Chest, which were
articulated into or with the seventh Vertebra of the Neck. CCCC Several of the
small Ligaments which did bind in the heads of the Ribs into the articulations
of the Vertebrae. I. II. III. IV. V. VI. VII. VIII. to XVII. The seventeen
backward Processes or Spines of the Spondyls or Rack-bones of the Chest.
Figure III.

Shows the Scapula or Shoulder Blade with that side that is next the Body
outermost.

H The Cup into which the great round head of the Shoulder Bone is articulated.
N The Process which is inserted into the Shoulder Bone. M Q The under-side of
the Blade-bone.
Figure IV.

Shows the Scapula with its outer or right side uppermost.

H The Cavity or Cup into which the Shoulder Bone is articulated. N The Process
which is inserted into the Shoulder Bone. O P The upper end of the Scapula, its
Cartilage being taken off. S That Process of the Scapula which is called its
Spine or Ridge.
anatomical views of the bones of a horse's chest, back, and shoulder TAB. XL.
page 218.
I


II


III


IIII






CHAP. XI. Of the Os humeri or Shoulder Bone, and the next Bone under it called
the Cubit.
The Bones of the Fore-leg. 1 The Shoulder Bone. What Bones it articulates
with. 2 The Cubit-bone, its Articulations.

THE Bones of the Fore-leg under the Scapula or Shoulder Blade are the
Shoulder Bone, the Cubit-bone, the Seven Osselets or little Bones that make the
Knee, answering to the eight little Bones that make the Carpus or Wrist in
Humane Bodies, the Shank-bone answering to the Bones of the Metacarpus or back
of the Hand, the great Pastern answering to the first Joint of the Fingers, the
little Pastern to the second Joint, and the Coffin-bone to the last Joint, on
which the Nail grows, as does the Hoof of the Horse on the Coffin-bone. Of the
similitude there is betwixt these several Joints in a Horse's Fore-leg, and
those in the Arm and Hand of a Man, I have already discoursed pretty fully in
the Book of the Muscles, where I treated of the Muscles of these Parts:
wherefore I shall in this place speak no more of that, but proceed to the
description of the before-named Bones in their order.

The Shoulder Bone is that which reaches from the Shoulder Blade to the Elbow.
Both its ends are called Heads, being thicker than the rest of the Bone, the
upper of which that is inserted into the cup of the Blade-bone, is naturally an
appendix to the Bone, but in time grows to be a part or process of the Bone it
self.

This Head is large and orbicular, covered over with a Gristle, that it might
be turned more glibly within the cavity of the Cup of the Blade. On the outside
of this Head there bunch out two rough and uneven Processes, into which two
Ligaments are inserted for the strengthening of the Joint; (one of which is like
a second Head, and is articulated into the shallow cavity of the acromium, or
end of the Spine of the Shoulder Bone;) and betwixt these two Processes there
is a long and round chink through which the nervous Head of the Muscle Biceps
does pass. There is also on the inside another round Cavity in the side of the
Head, out of which the strong Ligament springs that ties this Head in the cup
of the Scapula.

The lower Head of this Bone which in Men is articulated with two Bones, viz.
the Vlna and Radius, in a Horse is jointed but with one, (which I call the
Cubit-bone) yet is so jointed to that one, that it receives it and is received
by it, having three Processes, and two Sinus betwixt them, much like the same
Processes and Sinus in the same Bone of a Man.

Besides these Processes already mentioned, it has on its inside another
notable one, from which arise the Muscles that lie on the inside of the Leg
upon the Cubit-bone: and on its outside it has yet another Process, but
something less than the former, from whence do arise the Muscles that lie on
the outside of the Leg upon the Cubit-bone. About the middle of this Bone, on
its inside, may be perceived a hole, through which both Veins and Arteries pass
to the Marrow contained in this Bone, for its nourishment.

The next part of the Leg is called the Cubit, consisting, as has been said,
in Men of two Bones, but in a Horse only of one: The two Bones in Men reach
from the Elbow to the Wrist; and this one in Horses from the Elbow to that
Joint commonly called the Knee, but which might properly enough have the same
name as in Men, seeing it is of a like fabric. This Cubit-bone in its hinder
and upper part has a notable Process, long and round, only something
flattish, which enters into the larger Sinus or Cavity of the lower Head of
the Shoulder Bone, and makes that bunching-out which we call the Elbow. This
Process is something rough and uneven, partly that the Ligaments might be the
more strongly knit to it that encompass the Joint; and partly for the insertion
of some Muscles of the Cubit, as also to give original unto the Muscles that
bend the lower part of the Leg and Foot; for which cause also the Bone it self
is rough at the root of the Process. The circumference of the Sinus into which
it is inserted, is also rough, that from thence Ligaments might issue. Its
lesser and inner Process is received by the lesser Sinus of the Head of the
Shoulder Bone. There are three cavities in this upper Head, for the reception
of as many Processes of the lower end of the Shoulder Bone. Its lower end
articulates with the three upper little-Bones of the Knee (that make the first
range) as shall be showed in the next Chapter.

CHAP. XII. Of the seven Osseletts or little Bones of the Knee, of the
Shank-bones which reach from the Knee to the great Pastern, and also of the two
Pastern-bones and the Coffin-bone.
The number of the little Bones of the Knee. 1 The upper rank. 2 The lower. The
Shank-bone, its Articulation. The Splent-bones. The great Pastern. The little
Pastern. The Coffin-bone. Its figure, substance and Sinus's. The cause and cure
of a Founder.

BEtween the Cubit-bone and the Shank-bone there are two ranges of little
Bones, one above another, being in number seven, that is to say, three in the
first and four in the second range: all which are joined one to another so
firmly, that they are not easily to be separated. The upper range are
articulated with the lower end of the Cubit-bone, and the lower range with the
upper end of the Shank-bone.

These Bones do differ one from another in their magnitude, form and situation,
and are said in their first generation to be all Gristles and not Bones, but in
process of time they become hard and grow bony. Their substance is spongy, as
are all the rest of the Bones which of Gristles become bony, of which kind are
all the Appendices of Bones, the Bones of the Breast and such like. They are
all covered over with both a membranous and gristly Ligament, whereby they are
so compacted together, that without dividing the said Ligaments, and separating
the Membranes or Skins, it is a hard matter to distinguish them one from
another, so that at the first view they may be thought to be all of them but
one Bone.

They have a double Superficies, one outer, which is gibbous or bunching, and
another inward which is concavous or hollow; and in their upper part where they
join to the Cubit-bone, they are smooth and crusted over with the
beforementioned Gristle.

These Bones I will not undertake to give proper names to, but shall
distinguish them by their order and number, calling that the first that is
placed on the inside of the upper rank. This is something longish and curved
inward, articulated with the Cubit-bone above, and below with the second Bone
of the lower rank, yea it touches both the third and fourth of the same rank.
Its inside joineth closely to the inside of the second Bone of its own rank.

The second of these Bones is close knit to the former, being something less
than it. It is joined to the Cubit-bone in its upper part, which part is
hollowed to receive the Appendix of the said Bone. It is also joined with the
first Bone by one side, and by the other or rather hinder part to the third
Bone, and lastly by its bottom to the seventh Bone or fourth of the lower rank.

The third is also joined above with a plain Supersicies to the Cubit-bone, by
its inside to the second Bone of its own rank, and by its lower part to the
fourth Bone of the next rank.

The fourth Bone or first of the lower rank, is something smaller than any of
the beforementioned three, and is in shape almost round. It is smooth, not
being hollow nor protuberated as the rest are. It is joined above to the
outside of the lower-part of the first Bone, below to the Shank-bone, and on
its inside to the fifth Bone or second of its own rank.

The fifth (or second of the lower rank) has several little Sinus's; It has
one notable one above into which the first Bone of the upper rank is
articulated, and another below for the reception of part of the Head of the
Shank-bone.

The sixth (or third of the lower rank) is joined with a plain Superficies on
each side to the seventh (or fourth) and to the foregoing; above, to the
second, and below to the Shank-bone.

The seventh (or fourth of the lower rank) is not much unlike the former, on
its inside being joined to the foregoing, on its upper side to the third of the
upper rank, and on its lower to the head or top of the Shank-bone.

The next part of the Leg which answers to the After-wrist or back of the Hand
in a Man, is made of three Bones, one of which is long and round and much
larger than the other two. It reaches from the Knee to the great Pastern, being
articulated above with every one of the lower rank of the little Bones of the
Knee; and below it is joined to the great Pastern by a mutual articulation,
having two round heads and three small Cavities at that end of it for that
purpose. This we call the Shank-bone.

To each side of this Bone is fastened another long thin Bone, in figure
something like a Bodkin, being somewhat thick and round at their upper part,
and from thence as they run down toward the Foot, becoming thinner and
sharper, till at last they end in a sharp point, a little above the joining of
the Shank-bone with the great Pastern. Between these two Bones do run the
Tendons of the Muscles that move the Foot, as they descend down the Shank-bone.
These two we may call the Splent-bones, standing on each side of the Shank-bone
like two Splents, such as Bonesetters use for broken Bones.

The next is the Bone which answers to the first joint of the Fingers in Man,
in whom they are five in number, by the wonderful wisdom of the Creator so
ordained as was fittest for that variety of motions to which they are designed.
But an Horse being Solidipes or a whole-footed Creature, has all his Foot
necessarily moved together, and the Bones thereof in each Joint being single,
answer but to the Bones of one Finger.

The form of this Bone, which is called the great Pastern, is gibbous and
crooked. At its top, where it is articulated with the Shank-bone, it has three
small Processes and two Cavities betwixt them: also two small triangular Bones
fastened to its back-part. Its outside is plain and smooth, and without any
roughness at all. Its lower end consists of two heads which are round and
bunching and are articulated into the Sinus of the lesser Pastern which is
under it.

The next is the little Pastern, answering to the second Joint of the Fingers.
This is not much unlike the former, only it differs in the length, for it is
not much above half so long. Its upper end (as was said) is articulated with
the great Pastern, and its lower end is received by the Coffin-bone in the same
manner as it self received the lower end of the great Pastern by its own upper
end.

The next and last Bone of the Foot is the Coffin-bone, so called (I suppose)
from its hollowness on its under-side. Its figure is semilunary or
Half-moon-fashioned. It is thick at its top, (where it has cavities to receive
the heads of the lower end of the little Pastern) but thin and broad at its
bottom and toward its edges, for its more firm fixing upon the ground. Its
substance is fungous or spongy, having innumerable little holes piercing
through its sides for the passage of the Vessels; as also very many small
Sinus's whereinto are implanted the ends of the Tendons of the Muscles that
move the lower part of the Leg, and the Foot: whose Fibers being at any time
affected either by bruises, ill shooing, or by standing in the water after hard
riding whilst the Horse is hot, or but by standing still in the Stable for
several days without having the Feet stopped up, and the like; I say the
tendinous Fibers being affected by these or other means, cause the Horse to
have such great pain in his Feet, that he can scarce endure to tread upon them;
which lameness we call a Founder. Now this distemper is so much the harder to
cure by reason these Fibers lie so far out of reach, most of them running on
the upper side of the Bone (betwixt it and the Hoof) and not to its bottom; so
that the Hoof growing upon the sides as the Soal does at the bottom, there is
great hazard but we shall miss of effecting a cure, if we only pull the Soal
out, and do not cut part of the Hoof off also. This is not my bare opinion, but
the experience of those that have had good success in curing foundred Horses,
who by rasing the Hoof from the Coronet or top of it to the very bottom, in
five or six places, until they have made the Blood come, and then applying
their remedies to those places, have made those Horses sound, whom the drawing
out of their Soals would not cure.

Table XLI.
Represents all the Bones of the Forelegs as well joined one to another as
separate.

Figure I.

Shows the Bones of the near Leg before, all joined together, (the Blade-bone
being taken off.)

A B The heads of the Shoulder Bone which were articulated into the cavities of
the Shoulder Blade. C A production in the side of the said Bone, from whence
some Muscles of the Leg do take their rise. D Its lower head which is jointed
with the top of the Cubit-bone. E The outer part of the first Osselet or little
Bone of the upper range or rank that make the Knee. F The Process of the
Cubit-bone called the Elbow. G The top of the Cubit-bone joined with the lower
end of the Humerus or Shoulder Bone. H The bottom of the said Bone. I The first
range of Osselets or little Bones of the Knee. L The second range or rank of
the said Bones. M The little Bodkin-like (or Splent-) Bones on each side of the
Shank-bone. N The top of the Shank-bone, where it is articulated into the
second range of the little Bones of the Knee. O The bottom or lower end of the
said Shank-bone. Q The great Pastern. Y The two little triangular Bones which
are joined to the back-part of the great Pastern near the top of it. R The
little Pastern. T The Coffin-bone.
Figure II.

Shows the Bones of the Off-leg or right Leg, all of them in situ.

A B The heads of the Shoulder Bone that articulate with the Scapula. C The
production in the side of the said Bone. D Its lower head with which the
Cubit-bone is articulated. E The first Osselet of the first range of the Knee.
F The production of the Cubit-bone called the Elbow. G The top or head of the
Cubit-bone. H The bottom or lower end of the said Bone. I The first range of
the little Bones of the Knee. L The second range of the said Bones. M The
Bodkin-like (or Splent-) bone that is on the side of the Shank-bone. N The top
of the Shank-bone. O The lower end of the said Bone. P The great Pastern. S The
little Pastern. Y The two little triangular Bones fastened to the top of the
great Pastern-bone. V The Coffin-bone.
Figure III.

Shows the forepart of the Shoulder Bone separated from the other Bones.

A N The heads of the Shoulder Bone that are articulated with the Scapula. B
The production in the side of the same Bone. E The heads at the bottom of the
said Bone, which are articulated into the cavities of the upper end of the
Cubit-bone. D The cavity into which the long production of the Cubit-bone is
articulated. OO The body of the Shoulder Bone.
Figure IV.

Shows the hinder-part of the Shoulder Bone by it self.

A The great round head at the top of the Shoulder Bone. B The great production
of the same Bone. C D The division of the head at the lower end of the
Shoulder Bone. O The little eminence in the side of the said Bone.
Figure V.

Shows the fore-side of the Cubit-bone.

A The top of the long production at the upper end of the Cubit-bone, called
the Elbow. B The middle of the said production. C The cavities at the upper end
of the Cubit-bone, into which the lower heads of the Shoulder Bone are
articulated. G The body of the Cubit-bone. P H The round heads at the bottom of
the Cubit-bone.
Figure VI.

Shows the backside of the Cubit-bone.

A The top of the long production of the Cubit-bone. BB The upper heads of the
said Bone which are articulated with the lower end of the Shoulder Bone. CC The
lower heads of the said Bone which do articulate with the upper range of little
Bones of the Knee. F A cavity of the lower end of the said Bone, into which one
of the little Bones of the upper range does articulate. H The body of the said
Bone.
Figure VII.

Shows the fore-side of the Shank-bone.

DD The upper head of the said Bone, as also of the two Bodkin-like Bones on
each side of it, where they were articulated with the lower range of the little
Bones of the Knee. C The two lower heads of the said Bone, whereby it was
articulated into the cavities of the upper part of the great Pastern. M The
body of the said Bone. NN The two cavities or dens at the sides of the lower
heads of this Bone, into which cavities the heads of the great Pastern were
implanted or articulated.
Figure VIII.

Shows the backside or hinder-part of the Shank-bone, on which the back Sinews
lie.

OO The heads of the Shank-bone and of the two Bodkin-like Bones on each side
of it. PP The two heads at the lower end of this Bone which were articulated
with the great Pastern. C The cavity between these two heads, in which is
articulated a Process of the upper end of the great Pastern.
Figure IX.

Shows the forepart of the great Pastern.

A The dens or cavities in its upper part which receive the heads of the lower
end of the Shank-bone. B The heads at the lower end of this Bone which were
articulated into the Sinus or cavities of the upper end of the little Pastern.
Figure X.

Shows the back-part of the great Pastern.

A The Sinus or cavity into which the heads of the two little triangular Bones
were articulated. BB The two heads at the lower end of the great Pastern, which
were joined with the little Pastern. V The cavities at the upper end of this
Bone which did receive the heads of the lower end of the Shank-bone.
Figure XI.

Shows the forepart of the great Pastern with the two triangular Bones fastened
to the back-part of it.

RR The two triangular little Bones. VV The cavities into which the two heads
of the lower end of the Shank-bone were articulated. Z The body of the great
Pastern.
Figure XII.

Shows the little Pastern on its fore-side.

Figure XIII.

Shows the backside of the little Pastern.

Figure XIV.

Shows the bottom of the Coffin-bone.

Q The circumference of the said Bone which gives the round shape to the Foot.
S The cavities or hollownesses whereinto the heads of the little Pastern were
articulated.
Figure XV.

Shows the sides and top of the Coffin-bone.

A Shows all the outside of the said Bone.
Figure XVI.

Shows the fore-side of the two little triangular Bones separated from the
upper part of the great Pastern-bone. Figure XVII. Shows the backside of the
said Bones.

anatomical views of the bones of a horse's forelegs TAB. XLI. page 223.
I


II


III


IV


V


VI


VII


VIII


IX


X


XI


XII


XIII


XIV


XV


XVI


XVII






CHAP. XIII. Of the Os sacrum or holy Bone, together with the Coccyges or
Rump-bones, otherwise called the Bones of the Dock or Tail.
Os sacrum, its seat, connection, sigure and surface. Its Vertebrae. Its Holes.
The Rump-bones.

THE Os sacrum or holy Bone, is seated at the lower end of the Back, at the end
of the Vertebrae of the Loins, to the last of which one end of it is
articulated, and the other end to the first of the Bones of the Dock or
Rump-bones. It is much the broadest and largest of all the Bones of the Back.
Its figure is almost triangular, having a broad beginning, and ending by
degrees into a narrowness. On the inside it is smooth and hollow, but something
unequal; behind or on its outside it is gibbous and also rough, because of the
Muscles of the Back and their Ligaments cleaving unto it. Its acute Processes
or Spines are very small; and the transverse ones but obscure: as for the
oblique, there is no appearance of them, save in the first Vertebra. On its
outer side near its edges there are certain Sinus's or hollownesses, to which
the Haunch-bones do cleave firmly by an intervening Cartilage.

Its Vertebrae are in number six, whose Spines are much less than the Spines of
the Vertebrae of the Loins, and the lower or nearer to the Rump-bones, the
lesser they are still.

This holy Bone is perforated in several places; as first, quite through its
length it has a large hole or cavity to receive the Spinal Marrow; out from
which there go many other lesser for the egress of the Nerves; and these are
not in the sides of the Vertebrae as those are that be in the Vertebrae of the
Neck, Back and Loins, but on the inside and outside or and above, of which
those below are much the larger.

To this Bone at its lower end are joined the Rump-bones, which in this Animal
we are treating of are in number eighteen. These are joined to each other by a
Cartilage or Gristle, but so loosely, that the Horse can bend his Rump which
way he will. Those of these Bones that are next to the holy Bone, are something
thicker and broader, than those further from it; for as they descend down, they
each grow less and less, so that the lowest grows into a cartilaginous or
gristly point, as you may see in the figure of the Skeleton, where they are all
lively represented in situ. These Bones are not so hard as most of the other
Bones are, but more soft and spongy; neither have they any Process, or any
hollowness, except the first of them, which has a small cavity or den to
receive the last Vertebra of the Os sacrum, which Vertebra, is the furthest
part whither the Spinal Marrow reaches.

Table XLII.
Represents the Os sacrum and Rump-bones joined together; also the Os sacrum
joined with the Vertebrae of the Loins; and several other figures of these
Bones.

Figure IV. and V.

Show the Vertebrae of the Loins joined with the upper end of Os sacrum.

1.2.3.4.5.6.7. Show the seven Spines or backward Processes of the Vertebrae of
the Loins. 1.2.3.4.5.6. The six Spines of the holy Bone. 1.2.3.4.5. Holes in
the Os sacrum for the egress of the Nerves from the Spinal Marrow out of that
Bone. G The hole of Os sacrum which contains the Spinal Marrow. DDD The long
and flat Productions or transverse Processes at the sides of the Vertebrae of
the Loins. VVV The little Productions in the sides of the Vertebrae of the
Loins whereby they are articulated into each other.
Figure VI.

Shows the last Vertebra of the Loins removed from the rest and turned on one
side.

Figure VII.

Shows the last Vertebra of the Loins with that side forwards whereby it was
joined with the last but one, in which Vertebra is to be seen the hole where
the Spinal Marrow did pass through it.

Figure VIII.

Shows the same Bone with that side uppermost that respects the cavity of the
Body.

Figure IX.

Shows the lower side or inside of Os sacrum, as also the Rump-bones joined to
it.

AA The foremost Productions of the said Bone, which were articulated with the
last Bone of the Loins. BB The two long and wide Productions of the Os sacrum,
which were joined with the Haunch-bone or Os ilium. C A cavity at the upper end
of Os sacrum which did receive the head of the last Vertebra of the Loins, and
was articulated with it. D The hole in which the Spinal Marrow was contained.
GG Other Productions of the Os sacrum which were articulated with the Os pubis.
HH The holes in the Os sacrum out of which did pass the conjugations or pairs
of Nerves that are distributed about all the hinder parts.
1.2.3.4.5.6.7.8.9.10.11.12.13.14.15.16.17.18. The eighteen Rump-bones or Bones
of the Tail.
Figure X.

Represents the upper part of Os sacrum that joins to the Loins, as also partly
its inside turned upward.

A The round cavity into which the head of the last Vertebra is articulated. BB
The lower side of the broad Productions of the Os sacrum, which join with the
Os ilium. C The cavity in the said Bone wherein the Spinal Marrow is contained.
FF The two little foremost Productions with which the hindmost of the last
Vertebra of the Loins are articulated.
Figure XI.

Shows that side of the Os sacrum which looks to within the Body, as also its
several perforations through which the Nerves do issue forth from the Spinal
Marrow.

A The cavity that receives the round head of the last Vertebra of the Loins.
CC The two Productions that are articulated with the hinder ones of the lowest
Vertebra of the Loins. DD The lower side of the two broad Productions of the
said Os sacrum. EEE Its holes through which the Nerves do pass from the Spinal
Marrow contained in it.
anatomical views of a horse's lower vertebrae and rump bones TAB. XLII.
page.228.
IV


V


VI


VII


VIII


IX


X


XI






CHAP. XIV. Of the nameless Bone, commonly divided into the Hip, Haunch and
Share-bones.
Os innominatum, or nameless Bone. 1 Os ilium or Haunch-bone. Its Spine. 2
Coxendix or Hip-bone. 3 Os pubis or Share-bone. Pelvis or the Basin.

THE Hip-bone (commonly so called) is by Anatomists divided into three parts.
First, Os ilium, so named because the Gut Ilium lies under it. The next is
called Os coxendicis, or Ischium, which is the lower and outer part of the
nameless Bone, (or Os innominatum) which is the name of these three Bones as
joined all together, for they are truly but one Bone in old Horses, though in
Colts they are divided one from another by Cartilages, from whence this
distinction is made, and they come to be discoursed of by three several names.
The third part of this Bone is called Os pubis, also Pectinis, or the
Share-bone.

That part that is called Os ilium, is the uppermost and broadest, which is
joined to the holy Bone. In figure it is semicircular, and its semicircular
circumference is called its Spine. On its outside it is something arched, but
within hollow; the arched part is called dorsum, its Back, the hollow part
costa, or its Rib.

That part which is called its Spine, is in many places unequal, that some
Muscles might take their original from it, viz. the Oblique ascendent Muscle of
the Abdomen or Paunch, the Deltoides of the Thigh, the first Extender of the
Leg called Membranosus, etc. And on the back of this Bone there are unequal
inscriptions or lines for the rise of the three Muscles of the Thigh that help
to make the Buttocks (called Glutaei;) and also for other Muscles that lie
under these.

The second of the parts of this nameless Bone is called Os coxendicis.This is
the lower and outer part of it, in which there is a great Sinus, called
Acetabulum, the Cup or Sawcer, into which the head of the Thigh Bone is
exceeding strongly articulated. This Cup has its edges environed with a
Gristle, called Supercilium, its brow; in whose circumference there are
observed three Sinus, two Protuberations and an acute Process, and lastly an
Appendix that is very thick: all which were ordained for the production partly
of Ligaments and partly of Muscles.

The third and last part of this nameless Bone is called Os pubis, or the
Share-bone. This is originally two Bones, parted one from another in the middle
with a Gristle, but in continuance of time the Gristle it self becomes bony,
and so unites them into one Bone. It is placed at the bottom of the Paunch,
betwixt the two hinder Legs as the Horse stands. On its outside it has on each
side a Sinus for the descent of the crural Vessels. On the same side also it is
rough to give the firmer original to the straight Muscles of the Abdomen and to
the second Bender of the Leg. It is but a thin Bone, being hollow within, and
perforated with the greatest hole of any suchlike Bone in the whole Body. On
its hinder and inner side it has two Processes, from whence the nervous bodies
of the Yard, and some Muscles take their original.

These Bones with the holy Bone do make that cavity which is called the Basin,
which is the place wherein are contained part of the Guts, and the Bladder in a
Horse; and in a Mare part of the Guts, the Bladder and the Womb.

Table XLIII.
Represents the three Bones that make the Os innominatum or nameless Bone.

Figure I.

Shows the said Bone with the right side upward.

BB Show the upper part of Os ilium. CC The two Productions of the said Bone
which are fastened by very strong Ligaments to the Processes of Os sacrum. DD
The Spines or Ridges of the said Bone. EEEE The Os coxendicis or lower and
outer part of the nameless Bone. FF The two holes in the Os pubis or Share-bone
made for the ingate and outgate of Vessels. G The Seam which divides the
Share-bone in the middle. HH The extremities or ends of the said Bone.
Figure II.

Shows the Os innominatum turned the upside downward.

II Show the Cup of the Os coxendicis, into which the head of the Thigh Bone is
inserted. MM The extremities or ends of the Share-bone. NN The two large holes
in the bottom of the said Bone. OO PP The inside of Os ilium. QQ The Spines or
Ridges of the said Bone. R The Seam of the Share-bone which divides it into two
parts.
anatomical views of a horse's hip, haunch, and share bones TAB. XLIII. page
231.
I


II






CHAP. XV. Of the Thigh Bone and Patella or little Bone of the Stifle.
The Thigh Bone. Its upper Head. Its Neck Its lower Head is divided into two.
Their Cavities. The Patella.

THE Thigh is called by the Latins Femur a ferendo to bear, because the
Creature is born up or sustained by it. This Bone (like the Bone of the
Shoulder) is but one, reaching from the Hip-bone to the Stifle. The figure of
it is long, round and straight, except where its Heads and Protuberances bunch
out; of which it has, above, one Head, one Neck, and two Processes; and below,
it determins into a Head which has two Productions and a Cavity between them.

The upper Head is an orbicular Appendix standing upon the Neck, and is the
thickest and largest Head of any Bone in the whole Body. It is round and long
the better to enter into the Cup of the Hip-bone, which is not only deep of it
self, but rendered deeper by a large Gristle that compasses the edges thereof.
For it was necessary that a very firm articulation should be in this place,
because of the huge weight which the Thigh was to sustain. And besides, to
strengthen it the more, and to fasten the two Bones the firmer together, there
arises out of the Cup of the Hip-bone an exceeding strong and round Ligament,
which is implanted into a little Sinus that is in the Head of the Thigh Bone.
This Head is smooth and crusted over with a Gristle, that it might move the
more glibly within the Cup.

The slender part under this Head is called the Neck of the Thigh Bone.This is
pretty long and oblique, reaching upward but inclining inward, and is a Process
of the Bone. At its lower end, where the Bone grows broader, do arise two other
Processes, called Trochanters or Rotatores, from the Muscles of that name that
are inserted into them. The upper of these Processes is greater than the lower,
nay greater indeed than any Process in the whole Body which is not joined to
another Bone; It bends upward and outward; but the other which is much less
than this, bends backward and somewhat inward.

The Thigh Bone below its middle becomes thicker, and its lower end
terminateth into an ample and broad Head; out of the backside of which are
produced two Processes, as it were two other Heads, betwixt which there is a
large space left about two inches wide, which receives a protuberation or
swelling of the Head of the Leg-bone.

These two Heads at the lower end of the Thigh Bone are on their outsides
rough, but their insides are covered with a Gristle, and thereby are made
smooth and slippery for the more easy motion of the Joint. One of these Heads
is thicker, and is seated inward; the other is thinner but broader, and is
seated outward. From them do some of the Muscles that move the Leg arise; and
into them are some that move the Thigh inserted. The sides of these Heads are
full of little holes, out of which do issue the roots of the Ligaments which
strengthen the Stifle-joint.

These Heads have also four Cavities, two of which are in the middle between
the two Heads, and one on the outside of either of them. One of the middle
Cavities, being the foremost, is made to receive the protuberation of the
Patella or Pan, and is therefore crusted over with a Gristle for that purpose.
The second of the middle Cavities being more backward, is deeper than the
other, also rough and unequal, made to receive the protuberation of the
Leg-bone. The third is at the outside of the outer head, and the fourth at the
outside of the inner, through both which the Tendons of several Muscles of the
Leg descend.

At the lower end of this Thigh Bone, betwixt it and the Head of the Leg-bone,
on the fore-side, is placed a small roundish Bone, (called the Patella or
Stifle-pan) about three inches broad, being plain without, but within bunching,
bored through with many small holes. It is covered over on its inside with a
Gristle, and is made firm in its place by the broad Tendons of the second,
third and fourth Muscles that extend the Leg, to which the Patella is very
firmly knit. This Bone strengthens the jointing of the Thigh Bone with the
Leg-bone, and hinders their dislocation forwards.

CHAP. XVI. Of the Leg-bone and Ranges of Osselets which make that part we call
the Hock, answering to the Heel of a Man.
The Shank-bone is but one. Its figure. Its upper Head. Its lower Head. Its
Sinus's and Appendices. Its Cavity. The seven little Bones of the Hock. The
Instepbones. The Pasternbones and Coffin-bone.

THERE is the same difference between the hinder Legs of an Horse and a Man's
Legs, as we showed above to be between the Forelegs of an Horse and a Man's
Arm. For as in Man there are two Bones which reach from the Elbow to the Wrist,
and but one Bone in that Joint of an Horse's Fore-leg that answers to this
(reaching from his Elbow to that Joint we commonly call the Knee;) so whereas
in a Man's Leg there are two Bones, called Tibia and Fibula; in the same Joint
of an Horse that reaches from the Stifle to the Heel, there is but one, which
we shall call by the name of Tibia, or the Shin or Shank-bone, because the Bone
of a Man's Leg that goes by that name, is the more considerable of the two.

The figure of this Bone is long, and round in an Horse, but in a Man it is
three-square. The upper part of it which joins with the Thigh Bone, is broader
and thicker than the lower.

Its upper Head in which are two cavities and a prominence betwixt them, is
crusted over with a Gristle, and both receives and is received by the two Heads
and cavity of the Thigh Bone; which Gristle is fastened to it by Ligaments. This
Gristle is slippery and smooth, and the cavities which it lines are full of an
unctuous or oily matter or humor, which serves to further the motion of the
Joint by rendering it moist and slippery.

The lower part of this Bone, or its lower Head, is round and likewise covered
with a Gristle, with which it is made something broad, but notwithstanding
equals not the largeness of the upper Head.

This Bone has several Sinus's and Appendices, as well as the Thigh Bone has;
the former for convenience of the Tendons of some Muscles to descend by, and
the latter for the rise or original of other Muscles which are to move the Foot.

This Bone as well as the Thigh Bone (and most other Bones) is notably hollowed
within, having its cavity filled with Marrow. It is also perforated in several
places, admitting through its perforations several Vessels to the said Marrow.

Next come we to the little Bones of the Hock, which Joint answers to the
Instep and Heel of a Man. These are of the same number as those of the Knee in
the Forelegs were, and do also lie in two ranges, the one above the other,
viz. three in the upper, and four in the lower. These Bones, as those in the
Knee, are so closely articulated one with another, and so closely wrapped up and
bound together with membranous Ligaments, that it is not easy for the
Dissector to discover where all of them are divided: so that without diligent
inspection they may be taken to be not above half the number they are truly of.

To treat of every particular Bone of them and of their connection one with
another, or lastly of their jointing with the Shank-bone above, or with the
three Bones of the Metatarsus below, would be in a manner the repeating of the
same description over again that we gave above of the seven little Bones of the
Knee. Only that which is the hindmost and largest of them deserves to have
particular notice taken of it, and that is it which is truly, and ought to be
called the Heel-bone, whose shape and posture you may see in the following
Figure. Into this Bone it is that several of the Tendons of the Muscles that
bend the Leg are inserted. On its inside it has a large Sinus by which the
Tendons of those Muscles that move the lower Parts of the Foot do descend, as
also the larger Vessels thereof.

The next Bones to these are the three that answer to those five that make that
part of the Foot in Humane Bodies which is called the Metatarsus or Instep.
These I say are but three in a Horse, though in a Man they are five, to answer
to the number of the five Toes. They reach from the lower range of the little
Bones of the Hock beforementioned, down to the great Pastern. One of them is a
large, long and round Bone; the other two are much more slender, and shorter,
being the one of them placed on the inside and the other on the outside of it,
adhering so closely thereunto, that they are not easily to be separated from
it. These little Bones answer in all things to the like Bones which run down by
the sides of the Shank-bone of the Forelegs, which from their shape I called
the Bodkin-like Bones, (as likewise the Splent-bones, because they stand by the
sides of the middle great Bone, like the Splents that Bonesetters make use of
for strengthening broken Bones till they are knit again;) I say these are like
those, and therefore may be called by the same names.

The remaining part of the Bones of the hinder Leg and Foot are the great
Pastern (with the two little triangular Bones adhering to the top of it,) the
little Pastern, and the Coffin-bone; of all which having already treated where
I described the Bones of the Forelegs, (with which these of the Hinder-legs
agree in every particular) I shall for brevitie's sake omit speaking
particularly of them, and here conclude my discourse of the Bones.

Table XLIV.
Represents the Skeleton of an Horse, (drawn exactly by one that I keep
standing in a Press.)

AA The Shoulder Blade. B The Breast Bone. CC The Shoulder Bone. DDDD The
Leg-bones both before and behind. EEEE The little Bones that make the Knee and
the Hock. FF The Shank-bones. ff The Instep-bones. GGGG The Bodkin-like or
Splent-bones. HHHH The great Pasterns. IIII The little Pasterns. KKKK The
Coffin-bones. LLLL The little triangular Bones that cleave to the upper end of
the great Pastern. MM The Os ilium or Haunch-bone. N The Os coxendicis or
Hip-bone. OO The Os pubis or Share-bone. PP The Thigh-bones. QQ The little Bone
of the Stifle, called Patella. RRRRRR The Cartilages at the end of the Ribs.
SSSSSS The seventeen Ribs. TTTTTT The upper end of the Ribs where they are
articulated into the Vertebrae of the Chest. V The Os hyoides, in situ. W The
lower Jaw. X The upper Jaw. Y The Os occipitis or Noll-bone.
1.2.3.4.5.6.7.8.9.10.11.12.13.14.15.16.17. Are the seventeen Vertebrae of the
Chest. 1.2.3.4.5.6.7. The seven Vertebrae of the Loins. 1.2.3.4.5.6. The six
upper Productions or Processes of the holy Bone. From the Cipher 1. to 18. are
represented the eighteen Bones of the Rump or Dock. I.II.III.IV.V.VI.VII. Show
the seven Vertebrae or Rack-bones of the Neck.
anatomical view of a horse's skeleton TAB. XLIV. page 234.




CHAP. XVII. Of the Hoofs of an Horse answering to the Nails of a Man's Fingers
or Toes.
How the Hoofs are nourished, and how fastened upon the Foot.

COncerning the Nails of a Man's Fingers and Toes (to which the Hoofs of Horses
bear a resemblance) learned Men are divided into several opinions about their
generation. Hippocrates is affirmed to be of opinion, that they are made of a
glutinous matter or moisture parched and dried by heat, and driven to the
extreme parts. Empedocles thinks them to be made of the extremities of the
Nerves, calling them Nervorum clausulas summas, the utmost terminations or
boundaries of the Nerves; and that therefore when these fall off, it is a sign
of great weakness. Aristotle in lib. 2. cap. 6. de generatione Animal. says,
that the Nails, Hairs, Beaks of Birds, Hoofs of Beasts, and such like, are
engendered of adventitious aliment. And lastly, Columbus thinks they take their
original partly from the Skin, and partly from the Tendons of the Muscles which
move the Fingers and Toes, and that they are increased like the Teeth by an
apposition of aliment to their root.

As for the Hoofs of Horses, whatever be their original matter, out of which
they are formed, their growth seems to be (according to the opinion of the last
mentioned Author) from the addition of new particles to their roots, which
drive down successively those before them. They are of a middle substance
betwixt Bones and Gristles: not so hard as Bones, for then they would be apt to
splinter and break; nor so soft as Gristles, for if they were, they could not
support so great a bulk as the Body of an Horse, much less endure to travel
amongst stones, etc. But they are of a horney substance, without sense, growing
pretty firmly to the parts included within them, and fastened to the
Coffin-bone by a Ligament that proceeds from their top or root, which root the
Skin also somewhat encompasseth.

Under them lie many twigs of Nerves, and Tendons of Muscles, which run even to
the very bottom of the Hoof or Soal of the Foot, upon pricking of which with a
Nail or the like, or when they are but bruised with riding in hard way, the
Horse presently bemoans himself, as was more at large showed before in the
twelfth Chapter of this Book.

CHAP. XVIII. Of a Cartilage or Gristle.
A Gristle what. Their uses.

AS an Appendix to the history or doctrine of the Bones, it will not be
unnecessary to speak somewhat of the Cartilages or Gristles: especially seeing
through the whole discourse of this Fifth Book we have had occasion ever and
anon to mention them, but have not as yet given any particular account of them;
as neither of a Ligament, which we have also often mentioned: but of this
latter in the next Chapter, and only of the Gristles in this, because they
come nearest to the nature of Bones.

A Cartilage is a similar part, cold and dry, made (as some Authors affirm)
out of the most glutinous part of the Seed. They are slexible and without
sense, and are much softer than a Bone, though the nature of the one is not so
much distant from the other, but that several Gristles in tract of time, and as
the Creatures grow old, harden into Bones.

The uses of the Gristles are many. For first they help the motion of the Bones
at their jointings one with another. For which end in the Joints that are
subject to great motions, the edges of the Sinus, or Cups and Cavities of the
Bones that articulate one with another, are generally lined with a Gristle, to
make the motion more glib and secure; such are the articulation of the
Shoulder Bone with the Shoulder Blade, of the Thigh Bone with the Hip-bone, and
several others.

A second use of the Gristles is by yielding, a little to give way to the
violence of outward injuries; whereas if Bones had been in their places, they
would have been in danger of breaking, from their hardness and stiffness: for
which end the ends of many Bones which are exposed to external injuries are
furnished with Gristles, as the Nose and Ears, and the like.

Another use of the Gristles is, that by their mediation, as it were by a glue,
some Bones might be conjoined; as the Share-bones in particular are by this
means united to one another.

There are many other peculiar uses of particular Gristles, some belonging to
the Sight, some to the Hearing, some to Smelling, some to Respiration or
breathing, and the like; all which have their several denominations: But of
these we have already treated as they fell in our way, when we discoursed of
the parts to which each did belong. I shall not therefore need to enlarge any
further upon them in this place.

CHAP. XIX. Of a Ligament.
A Ligament what. Their differences. Their uses.

AS the lubricity or slipperiness of Gristles makes the motion of the Bones
more easy and glib; so the Ligaments do secure that motion by strengthening the
articulation of one Bone with another.

A Ligament is a similar part, cold and dry, of a middle nature betwixt a
Gristle and a Membrane; harder than Membranes, lest in vehement motions they
should be broken; and softer than Gristles, that they might the more easily
follow and obey the Muscles which move the Bones. Those that tie one Bone to
another are generally insensible, as well because they receive no Nerves into
them, as also lest being perpetually moved they should breed perpetual pain.
But such as tie other parts, as the Ligaments of the Liver, of the Womb, the
bridle of the Tongue, etc. these are endued with sense.

The differences of Ligaments are many, being taken first from their substance,
whence some are said to be hard, others soft, the former of which are called
cartilaginous, and the latter membranous Ligaments. The epithet of membranous
is likewise given to some from their breadth, in opposition whereto others are
called nervous, because they are round like Nerves.

They are also distinguished from their original and insertion; for some arise
from Bones, some from Gristles, and some from Membranes; and are accordingly
diversely inserted. And lastly they are differenced from their strength and
figure. To give particular instances of all which, would be a needless
curiosity: I shall therefore break off when I have added a word of their use.

The uses of the Ligaments, as well as Gristles, are many: for first they
confirm and strengthen the articulations of the Bones: they also bind and
fasten the Bones to one another where there is no true articulation. Thirdly,
they serve as an outward garment to the Tendons of the Muscles, many of which
are throughout their whole length covered with Ligaments and Membranes.
Fourthly, they interpose like a Pillow betwixt the Bones and the Tendons of the
Muscles. Fifthly and lastly, some of them do serve to suspend the Bowels, that
they should not fall with their great weight, such are the Ligaments of the
Liver, etc.

The End of the Fifth Book.
THE APPENDIX, Containing Two DISCOURSES: The one, of the GENERATION OF
ANIMALS: And the other, of the MOTION of the CHYLE, And the CIRCULATION of the
BLOOD.
By the same Author.
SECTION I. Of the Generation of ANIMALS.
The PREFACE.
IN the Introduction to the foregoing Anatomical Treatise I premised, that my
inducement to compile and publish it was to instruct those of my own Profession
in the frame and use of the Parts of that Creature which is the Subject of our
Art. And because most Farriers are Persons of small literature, I promised and
intended to write the Discourse in such plain and familiar phrase as they might
be capable of apprehending, that they might reap that benefit from it which was
designed them. (And I have as much as I could endeavored to serve that first
intention.) But upon publishing my Proposals for printing this Book, finding
that it would not be unacceptable to Persons of the best rank, as well of the
Nobility as Gentry, I thought it advisable not to pen it in too paltry and
homely a style, lest it might be nauseous and unpleasant to such worthy Persons
as by their Subscriptions were pleased to give me encouragement to go on with
the Work. So that I hope in the perusal of it, it will both be delightful to
these latter sort of Readers, and yet instruct and benefit the former, for whom
only (as I said) it was at first intended.

But now as to the following Discourse which was also mentioned in the
Proposals, I found that not only the Men of my own Profession made small
reckoning of it; but I was censured by some of note, for pretending to treat of
things above my capacity. I must confess I was a little abashed and
discountenanced at this Censure, as having but a small share of that confidence
whereby so many recommend themselves to the World: insomuch as growing jealous
of my own ability, I took advice upon it. And it was my good fortune to meet
with a Person, that upon my imparting my thoughts to him, encouraged me to go
forward, promising, if I needed any, to lend me some assistance. And I must
acknowledge that the Reader (and my self) are very much owing to his kindness
for the beginning of this Treatise; and partly also for the composure of the
Remainder; (though the Observations, which are the ground of the Discourse, be
wholly mine own:) for I durst not trust my Pen alone in what I perceived would
be scanned with some severity. He that does not understand it, may believe it
was not writ for his use; and he that does, is desired to accept it in good
part.

And now to give some more particular account of it:

It will not be expected that an Appendix or Supplement should contain an
History of the Generation of all Animals; for that would require several
Volumes: but it will suffice to describe the Generation of one Oviparous and
another Viviparous Creature (the Young of one being formed without, and the
other within the Body) to which all others whatsoever may be reduced.

By Animal I understand every thing that has sense and motion. Concerning
which it will not fall in my way to discourse of their several natures or
actions, those considerations lying before him that would treat of Animals
already perfectly generated and matured: but my province will be to show (1)
from what original matter, and (2) by what efficient cause Animals are
generated, and (3) in what order and by what degrees their Parts are first
delineated, and at last come to be perfected.

1. The original matter of Animals.
First then as to their original matter, I affirm universally of all Animals,
that it is an Egg, either formally, or something analogous thereto, and which
upon many accounts may not improperly have that appellation given it: Yea this
term may be applied not only to Animals, but to the Seeds of Plants or Herbs,
and Kernels of the Fruit of Trees also. And indeed seeing the Young of every
Animal in their several species arrives to a considerable bulk before it has
any Animal life, during which time it increases and grows merely as a
Vegetable; there is no such great difference in the first principles and manner
of growth of Vegetables and Animals as is commonly conceived. And therefore to
satisfy the Curious, and to lay the lower and firmer foundation for my design,
I shall in the first place premise the manner of procedure in the vegetation of
Seeds from the microscopical observations of Malpighius in his second Part of
the Anatomy of Plants.

Now that both Vegetables and Animals should proceed from Eggs, will seem no
very strange notion to him that has read the Saying of some old Philosophers,
Ex Ovo omnia, that all things are from an Egg: though I must confess that it is
not necessarily to be understood in my sense, but possibly means no more than
that the first formation of all things was from an Egg, according to the
opinion delivered by Aristophanes in his Aves, p. 573. (quoted by Doctor
Cudworth in his True Intellectual Systeme of the Universe, p. 121.) namely that
at first there was nothing but Night and Chaos, which laying an Egg, from
thence was produced Love, and that mingling again with Chaos begot Heaven and
Earth, and Animals, and all the Gods. Whose Greek Verses to this purpose are
thus translated by the aforesaid Learned Doctor.

First all was Chaos, one confused heap,
Darkness enwrapt the disagreeing deep;
In a mixed crowd the jumbled Elements were,
Nor Earth, nor Air, nor Heaven did appear;
Till on this horrid vast Abyss of things
Teeming Night, spreading over her cole-black wings,
Laid the first Egg; whence after Time's due course
Issued forth Love (the World's prolifick source)
Glistring with golden Wings, which fluttering over
Dark Chaos, gendred all the numerous store
Of Animals and Gods, etc.
I know that the term Egg is not alike properly applicable to the first seed or
principle out of which every thing is formed; but for distinction sake it may
seem more proper and intelligible to call such principle by several names; as
in Humane kind and Quadrupeds to call it a conception; in Fishes to name them
Roes (though in Latin they have no other name but Ova, Eggs;) in Frogs, the
Spawn; in Insects, as Butterflies, etc. Worms (according to Aristotle;) as
likewise in Plants to term them Seeds; in the fruits of Trees, Kernels. I say
it may seem more proper to retain this vulgar way of speaking, and rather use
these sundry appellations, than to confound them all under one general one: I
will not therefore contend about words, but shall readily permit every man to
use his own phrase; only I contend for the thing, hoping to make it appear
that there is so great an analogy or likeness in Nature amongst all these, that
nothing (but the common way of speaking) hinders, why they might not all be
included under one denomination.

If any think I begin too far off my scope, to treat of the vegetation of
Plants, when my design is to explain the generation of Animals; besides what
Apology the thing it self will make for me with every Intelligent Reader,
Moses's History of the Creation seems to authorize such a method, and to chalk
out my way for me. We find the Almighty proceeding every day from the more
imperfect and ignoble Creatures to the more perfect and noble: Whence on the
third day he commands the Earth to bring forth Grass, the Herb yielding Seed,
and the Fruit-tree yielding Fruit after his kind, whose Seed is in it self,
upon the Earth. On the fifth day he commands the Waters to bring forth
abundantly the moving Creature that has life, and Fowl that may fly above the
Earth in the open Firmament of Heaven. And lastly on the sixth day he bids the
Earth bring forth the Living Creature after his kind, Cattle and creeping
thing, and Beast of the Earth after his kind: and on the same day he created
Man in his own image to have dominion over the Fish of the Sea, and over the
Fowl of the Air, and over the Cattle, etc. Whether God observed such a
successive order of time in the Creation, as the holy Text describes, or
whether the History be only so delivered for our better apprehension, is too
deep and bold a speculation for me to meddle with: but it is plain that it
literally accords with the nature of the things created; seeing the progress is
natural from Vegetation to Animality, and from thence to Rationality. For thus
a Man is for some months only a sort of Vegetable, capable of increase of
Parts, but without sense or motion, which afterward he comes to be endowed
with, but without any exercise of Reason till some time after his birth. But
this last consideration is beyond my purpose, and only mentioned to show, that
the same method Moses observes in the History of the Creation, is natural
enough to follow in an History of Generation.

2. The efficient Cause of Generation.
As to the efficient Cause of Generation, that is the geniture of the Male. I
speak of proper generation, and of such Animals whose species consists of Males
and Females. For there is a generation called equivocal, such as that is said
to be of Frogs generated out of the Mud of the River Nile by the heat of the
Sun: and there are some Animals whose whole Species are Hermaphrodites as it
were, partaking of both Sexes, and generating within and of themselves, even as
Plants do. Of these I must not be understood, but of such whose generation is
performed by a copulation of Male and Female.

3. The order of the formation of the Parts.
Lasty, as to the method and order of the formation and increase of the Parts
of the Animal, till it come to be a perfect one of its kind, it would be
preposterous to enter upon the treating of them in this place; I shall
therefore refer the Reader to the following Discourse, to which I now address
my self.

CHAP. I. Of the Vegetation of Seeds, particularly of a Wheat-corn.
THE conception of an Animal and the first formation and increase of an Embryo
in the Womb, corresponds very much (as we have already hinted) to the Seed of a
Plant and its vegetation in the Bosom of the great and common Mother, the
Earth. Wherefore the observing in what manner a Seed proceeds to a Plant being
obvious to every Man; to give an account of such observation may much conduce
to the better apprehending by what degrees a Conception grows to a perfect
Foetus. But the parts of a Seed being so minute, that the naked Eye can make no
perfect discovery of the first rudiments of the Plant that is formed out of it,
it is necessary to make use of a Microscope to greaten the Objects, which the
most curious Malpighius has done with that accuracy as to render further
inquiry and examination needless. I shall therefore give you an account of his
observations of this kind in as few words and as plain as I can.

The manner of vegetation in Seeds.
The Eggs (or Seeds) of Plants being excluded out of the Mother's Egg-bed
(called a Pod, or Husk, or by whatever other name distinguished) requiring
further fostering and brooding, are committed to the Earth by the officious
Winds, or by the industry of Men. This kind Mother having received them into
her Bosom, does not only give them incubation or brooding by her own halituous
vapors joined with the heat of the Sunbeams; but does by degrees abundantly
supply what the fruitful Seeds stand in need of. For she everywhere abounds
with little channels or sinuous passages, in which the Rainwater satiated and
impregnated with fruitful Salts does run like the Blood and Chyle in the
Arteries of Animals; which moisture is transcolated or strained through the
Pores or Pipes of the outer rind or husk (corresponding to the Membranes that
invest the Embryo's of Animals) on the inside of which lie the thick seminal
Leaves, which are commonly two, (though in that which we shall instance in by
and by, it is but one) that answer to the Placenta or Womb-cake in Women, or to
the Cotyledons in Brutes. For the substance of these two Seed-leaves consists
of a great number of little bladders or bottles, and of Navel-vessels, or a
Navel-knot. Into the bottles is received the fruitful moisture of the Earth
that is strained through the rind of the Seed, which makes a small fermentation
with that proper juice that was inherent originally in the Seed-leaves; and
this fermented Liquor is conveyed by the umbilical Vessel to the Trunk of the
Plant, and to the Gemm or Bud that is continued to it; whereupon a vegetation
and increase of the Parts succeed.

This, in short, is the manner of procedure in the vegetation of Plants; how
far it agrees with the first formation and increase of the Embryo's of Animals,
will be made more plain by and by. In the mean time, that what I have here
abstracted out of the abovementioned most ingenious Author, may be the better
understood, I have thought good further to transcribe out of him an instance or
example of this procedure, and to exhibit the same also in a curious Figure to
the Eye of the Reader that cannot so well conceive of it by the bare verbal
description. My instance shall be in a grain of Wheat.

An History of the vegetation of a Wheatcorn.
The first day after it is sown, it grows a little turgid, and the secundine or
husk gapes a little in several places. The body of the Plant A being continuous
with the conglobated Leaf, (which is called the flesh of the Seed that makes
the flowr) swells not only with the Gemm or Sprout, that is, with the future
Stem B, which is opened and waxes green by degrees; but also the lateral Roots
CC do bunch out a little; and likewise the lower Root D becoming green jets
somewhat out; whence the Placenta or Seed-leaf E becomes loose and gapes. The
body of the Plant is continued and knit, by the Navel-knot F, to the
conglobated Flowr-leaf, which supplies matter for vegetation.

In two days the Secundine or Husk G being broken through, the Stem, or top of
the future Straw H appears on the outside of it, and with its top is a little
distant from the Leaf (that is continued to it) growing upward by degrees. The
Seed-leaf I guarding the Roots, becomes turgid with the little bladders, and
puts forth a white down; this Leaf being pulled away, you may see the Roots of
the Plant made bare, of which the long one K is very apparent, but the two
others LL are more obscure. The top of the Stem H is crooked; and within, the
Gemm or Bud and future Leaves and Stalk lie hid. Between the Roots and
ascending Stem, the trunk of the Plant is knit by the Navelknot M to the
Flowr-leaf which is very moist, but as yet keeps its white color, and its
proper and natural taste.

The third day approaching, the pulp of the conglobated or round Leaf becomes
turgid with the juice that it has received from the Earth fermenting with its
own genuine juice. The Plant increases in bigness; and its Bud, or Stem N
becoming taller, from whitish turns somewhat green; and the lateral Roots OO
break forth greenish and pyramidal from the gaping Sheath P, which adheres
closely to the Plant. The lower Root Q becomes longer and hairy, having many
Fibers growing out of it. At the same time, in such Seeds as are more quick and
forward, the lower Root R is larger, growing green in its end, and the
Side-roots sprout out of the Sheath S that invested them: which Sheath swelling
with white and thick bladders, is continued, like a bark, with the outer and
investing substance. Abundance of hairy Fibers hang all along upon the Roots,
except upon their tip: those which grow about their basis are longer, and those
which follow, become shorter and shorter. They twirle about the saline
Particles, and little lumps of Earth, like Ivy, whence they grow curled. The
Placenta T fades by degrees, and above the lateral Roots SS there break out two
other little ones UU. The Stem X being roundish and waxed bigger grows straight
upwards.

Toward the end of the third day, the Stem Y tending upwards, makes as it were
a right angle with the seminal Leaf Z lying horizontally: it is slenderer and
more longish; and its outer cover is white, and bright or transparent, guarding
the tender and greenish Gem. The last Roots a jet out more; and the other three
growing larger are clothed with a down, that straightly embraces the lumps of
Earth: this down is so luxuriant, especially where it meets with any vacuity,
that its hairs uniting with one another make a kind of net. The conglobated or
Flowr-leaf Z is softer, and milky as it were; whence if one bruise it, it
yields a white and sweetish juice like Barly-cream: if one pull the Plant from
it, the Roots and Stem of the Plant are plain to be seen: also the intermediate
Navel-knot b appears, whose outer and investing part is more solid like bark;
but the inner part is more soft and marrowy.

At the end of the fourth day, the Stalk tending upwards, (the outer or
Sheath-leaf c being loosened) puts forth the Stable-leaf d that is green and
folded. Below, the afore-described Roots grow longer; and there appears a new
tumor (sometimes two,) of a future Root e. The Seedleaf f also that hangs upon
the Plant begins to fade, whose remaining juice notwithstanding is as yet white
and uncorrupted. If one cut the Stem insunder, the rise of the tender Stalk g
appears to be from the Navel-knot, from which also the Roots take their
beginning: outwardly likewise the Sheath-leaf c is to be seen, wherein the
Stalk, and its Leaves, and the rise of the Roots are infolded.

About the sixth day, the Stable-leaf h being loosened, the Plant mounts
upward, the thick Sheath-leaf i as yet cleaving about it like a bark. The
Seed-leaf k on its outside is sinuous or full of crinkles, and faded: this
being cut and freed from the husk or secundine, the Flesh or Pericarpium is not
alike all over; for its outer part, whereby the outside of the Seed or Grain is
heaved up, is more solid, and looks like a concave Leaf: it has the same
appearance also in that part whereby it sticks and is continued to the
Navel-knot: but its inside is fistulous and filled with humor, especially that
part of it that is next to the Navel-knot. The Leaves being pulled off, the
Roots torn, and the Flowrleaf removed, the trunk appears, in which, not far
from the Roots, the Navel-knot l bunches out, which is solid, and hard to cut:
above, there is the mark of the Sheath-leaf i that was pulled off: under this,
as in an Arm-pit, the Gemm m is often hid; beyond which there is likewise a
knot, with the skar of the torn off Leaf n, and in the top the soft Gem o is
kept; and thus the whole bulk of the future Stalk is had in this compendium.
The hinder-part also of the Plant shows the breakings forth of the Roots;
likewise the faded Placenta or Seedleaf p, and the skar of the Sheath-leaf i,
with the following Knots and Gemm o.

After the eleventh day, the Seed-leaf q often as yet sticking to the Plant, is
crumpled and almost corrupted; for being opened, it yields an humor with airy
bubbles: within, it is hollow, and about the secundines the mucous and white
substance of the Seed, being continued even to the Navel-knot, forms a cavity.
All the Roots becoming longer put forth new Branches out of their sides; and
the Stalk, though it have taller Leaves, yet for the most part it is no longer
than the trunk above delineated: for as yet the knots and gems being very near
to one another, are not far from the Navel-knot. Sometimes, the vegetation
making progress, the spaces betwixt the knots are larger; and the Sheath-leaf r
being pulled off the side, a Knot s appears, out of which there sprouts forth a
Leaf t that fosters the ascending Stem. In the mean time the seminal Leaf
withers, and is emptied on its inside; and if one press it, it yields naught
but Water. The white and solid internode (or space between the Knots) is
lengthned, and new Gemms appear; and the middle Root grows to be several inches
long.

After a month, both the Roots and Stalk being grown longer, new Buds uu appear
to be breaking forth of the first Knot, and very little Tumors xx bunch out,
which at length break forth into Roots: for Roots sprout out so easily, that
sometimes if one pull off the first Roots, there will abundance of new ones
arise in their stead. Likewise at the same time, the Stem being established
with its usual Roots, puts forth new ones yy which break through even the
Sheath-leaf that clothes it: and it also rises up with a white joint that is
full within. Above the Roots from the same Knot grow two Buds zz, guarded with
their proper Leaves; and the intermediate Stalk runs upwards.

This History it was thought good to translate at its full length, (though
there are some particulars that may seem beyond our purpose, and which are not
mentioned in the general description of Vegetation that was premised) lest we
should be injurious to the most ingenious Author by concealing any of his
discoveries. But passing by them, it will appear plainly by the following
discourse, how little the formation of an Embryo and first increase of its
Parts, differs from the first springing of a Vegetable; and then the Reader
will further see how natural and reasonable it was to begin with the
description of this latter, the better to explain the former.

views of a wheat seed's growth TAB. XLV. page 12.




CHAP. II. Of the first rudiment of an Egg, and what way it passes to the
Uterus; also how it attains to its great bulk, and how it becomes fruitful.
What the difference is between Oviparous and Viviparous Creatures.
ANIMALS are commonly, distinguished into Oviparous and Viviparous; by which we
are not to understand any specifical difference in the first principle or
original matter of one and another, as if Oviparous Animals propagated their
Species by Eggs, and Viviparous theirs by a mixture of the Male and Female's
Seed in the Womb, out of which a Conception should be formed; as many
Philosophers have taught: but no more ought to be meant by it, than that some
Animals exclude their Eggs out of their Body, which are afterward hatched
either by incubation or brooding, (as in Fowls;) or by the bare warmth of the
Sun, (as in Insects;) or by some other means; whereas others retain their Eggs
within their Bodies, which are hatched (as it were) in their Vterus or its
Cornua, and when an Animal of their respective Species is formed out of any
one, it is afterward excluded. Which truth, that it may the better be
entertained by the prejudiced Vulgar, I will first show the procedure in the
generation of Oviparous Animals, and afterward examine what analogy thereto
there is in Viviparous, and in both of these to Vegetables, as to the Embryo or
first lineaments of the Foetus, both as to formation and nutrition.

Being then in the first place to deliver the History of the generation of
Oviparous Creatures, I shall wave such as exclude Eggs that are less perfect,
as Insects, Reptiles, and Aquatiles, (which last we have no opportunity to
examine) and pitch upon Fowl whose Eggs are most perfect; and out of them shall
choose an Hen, which is most familiar and ready at hand for making observations
upon. And that I may omit nothing that will illustrate the similitude, it will
be convenient to begin with inquiring, first, into the first principle, or
rudiment of an Egg; then, secondly, see by what way it passes to the Vterus;
thirdly, how it attains to that great bulk it has when excluded; fourthly, how
it becomes fruitful; and fifthly and lastly, by what degrees a Chicken is
formed out of it, exhibiting in Figures taken from the life, of what shape it
appears each day from that time any of its Parts are so discernible as to be
delineated, till it is become so perfect, that one cannot take a view of or
examine its inward parts without dissection. The first four heads of inquiry I
shall dispatch in this Chapter, leaving the last of them (which is the main one
for our purpose) to the next.

1. The first rudiment of an Egg.
The first thing to be examined is the Ovary or Egg-bed, where the first
rudiment of the Egg appears. And here it would be too far from our purpose to
show the differences of the Ovary of an Hen from that of some other Fowl, much
more of Fishes, Serpents, etc. seeing those differences consist only in lesser
circumstances, which concern not our scope: for in this they all agree that
they have an Ovary, and that the first principles of the Eggs are to be found
therein.

The Ovary.
This Ovary in an Hen is seated at the Backbone upon the great Artery and Vein
descending, a little lower than the Liver, at the same place where the Cock's
Stones lie, which is about the place where in Viviparous Animals the preparing
Vessels that go to the Testicles arise. In this the Eggs appear first of a
white color, being as small almost as Seasand. But after they are grown a
little bigger, viz. about as big as Hail-shot they turn yellow, and are truly
only the Yelks of the Eggs that shall be, which afterward acquire Whites, as
we shall show by and by. Each of these Yelks is invested with a proper Coat,
and besides, borrows another from the Ovary, by which they are severally knit
to its foundation, or root, that is, to that part of it that sticks to the
descending Trunks of the great Artery and Vein; so that hereby they are
sustained in their place, even as the Testicles in Men are clad and suspended
by their vaginal Coat that is borrowed from the Rim of the Belly (or
Peritonaeum.) Those of the Yelks that are outmost are largest, those in the
middle less, but those the nearest the foundation, least of all.

2. Which way the Egg passes from the Ovary to the Uterus.
Secondly, Adjoining unto and embracing the Ovary is the Infundibulum or
Tunnel, which consists of a very thin and yielding Membrane. With it Orifice it
encompasses the Ovary, and descending lengthways of the Back is continued unto
the upper and narrower part of the Vterus, by Doctor Harvey called the Process
of the Womb. As the Yelks of the Ovary come to maturity, they drop off it one
after another, and fall immediately into the mouth of the Tunnel, in which they
make no stay, but are conveyed by it quickly into the Process of the Vterus.
This Process has many folds or cells, like as the Gut Colon has in most
Creatures, which contribute not only to the longer stay of the Egg in it, but
make it more convenient for the collection of that whitish clammy humor that
so plentifully bedews it, out of which the Yelks gather their White. For

3. How it is increased.
Thirdly, Though the Yelks while they remain in the Ovary are nourished and
increased by the Arterial blood as all other Parts of the Body are; yet as soon
as they are dropped off from thence, they never adhere afterward or grow to any
Part whereby any Bloud-vessels should be inserted into them: but as they make
no stay in the Tunnel, so do they not adhere to the sides either of the Vterus
(specially so called) or of its Process. But there being great store of
Arteries dispersed through them both, these spew as it were out of their small
mouths (that open into the Cavity of the Vterus and its Process) a great
quantity of a whitish chylous liquor, which the Yelks by an innate vegetative
principle attract and assimilate to themselves, and which constitutes their
White. Now seeing (as we noted above) that the Yelks as they come from the
Ovary, have two Coats, one proper, and another borrowed; I am of an opinion
that the White is collected betwixt these two; namely, that the uterine humor
transudes through or is imbibed by the borrowed Coat, but is stopped from
proceeding further toward the center of the Egg by the proper Coat which is
more dense and close. For the foundation of the Ovary from whence this outer
Coat is borrowed, is of a loose spongy substance, whence it is probable the Coat
is so likewise. Only it is likely that some particles of this humor penetrate
through the inner Coat also, by which the Yelk receives increase, and also some
alteration in substance from what it was of, while it remained in the Ovary.
Though I think this opinion is new, yet I am the bolder to profess it, not
only because it cannot well be conceived how a new Coat should be acquired in
the Vterus, seeing the Egg adheres to no part from which it should receive it;
but much more from the Analogy there seems to be between the nutrition of an
Egg (in Hens) and that of a Conception (in Viviparous Animals.) Now every Body
knows that a Conception when it is never so small, is clad with two Coats, the
Chorion and Amnios, and that the Albugineous liquor of the Womb transudes
through them both for the nourishment of the Embryo contained in the Amnios. I
say it passes through both the Membranes of a Conception, because it was
necessary it should arrive at the Embryo which it nourishes; but seeing the
Yelk is so far from resembling the Embryo, that no Part of the Chicken is
formed out of it, (for it only serves for a grosser sort of nourishment for
it) the like liquor in an Hen passes only through the outer Coat which
answers to the Chorion, betwixt which and the inner it is collected for the use
of the future Foetus. But if we will suppose with Doctor Harvey, that there
are two Whites, the inner of a thicker consistence, and the outer of a thinner,
and that these are included each in a particular Membrane; then as these
Membranes answer exactly to the Chorion and Amnios, so must we suppose that the
Coat that was borrowed from the Ovary, was originally double, and now only
begins to appear so. (But enough of this.) The Egg then beginning to increase
in bulk on this manner at first in the Process of the Vterus, does by degrees
descend down into the Vterus it self, wherein it grows to its full proportion.

The Uterus described.
Now the Vterus is of a carnous substance, but such as may be easily stretched
lengthways or breadthways, and except when it is distended with a perfect Egg,
is very full of wrinkles and folds, as we described its Process (above) to be.
When the Egg has arrived at its just bigness, so that it can no longer be
contained in the Vterus, it begins to acquire a Shell, which according to
Doctor Harvey is hard while the Egg is yet in the Vterus; though according to
Aristotle and Aquapendent the Shell owes its original to that viscous and
clammy humor that bedews the surface of the Egg when it is laid, the watery
part whereof evaporating, the remainder presently hardens into a Shell. But any
Country Housewife may decide this controversy as well as these great
Philosophers, who by feeling with their Finger whether the Hen be with soft or
hard Egg (as they use to phrase it) know whether she will lay that day or no:
for if she do, the Egg feels, comparatively, hard, though not quite so hard as
after it is laid.

4. How an Egg becomes fruitful.
Fourthly, If one compare an Egg laid by an Hen that has never been trod by a
Cock, one shall not find it differ in any one respect (so far as the Eye can
judge) from another that is laid by one that has used to be trod every day; so
that it seems difficult to give a reason why the one should be fruitful, and
the other not. I think it is peculiar to a tame Hen (of which we are speaking)
to lay as well without a Cock as with him: in whom therefore the treading is no
efficient cause of the Egg, but only of making it fruitful.

Now it is very considerable what Doctor Harvey and others have observed, that
one treading is sufficient to fertilize a whole knot of Eggs, be they twenty or
a greater number; which besides what we shall say afterward, may sufficiently
detect the vulgar opinion of Error, viz. that those specks in the Yelk which
we commonly call the treddle, are the Seed of the Cock; for how can he be
imagined to spend so much at one time as all these must amount to? But to pass
by that, it is certain that none of the Cock's Sperm can come to the Ovary; for
if the Cock have any Penis at all (which Doctor Harvey denies) yet it is so
short that it cannot reach one quarter of the way between the outer Orifice and
the Ovary: yea that part that is between the Vterus and outward Orifice, which
answers to the Vagina in Viviparous Animals, is so full of folds and wrinkles
that one cannot pass any thing from without inwards, not so much as a Bristle;
so that it is not easy to conceive how the Cock's Penis (if he have any) should
penetrate even so far as the Vterus, which yet is two or three inches distant
from the Ovary. But notwithstanding the impossibility of the Sperm's reaching
the Ovary, and the improbability that it is injected so far as into the Vterus;
yet it is without all question that the fruitfulness of the Eggs is wholly
owing to some virtue derived from the Seed. Not that any of its grosser
substance does constitute any part of the Egg; but some subtle effluvia or
spirituous steams exhale from it into the Vterus, which ascend from thence by
the Process and Tunnel to the Ovary, fecundating the same. I say the rudiments
of the Eggs are fertilized in the Ovary; for it is not probable that the Vterus
only should be impregnated thereby with a fecundating virtue or power, which
it imparts to the Egg after its descent from the Ovary into it. For though in a
tame Hen the Yelks separate and fall off from the Ovary of their own accord,
whether she be trod or no: yet in other Fowls it is not so, in whom, naturally,
the Hen lays no Eggs if she be withheld from the Cock: and it is not to be
imagined but that the Eggs of both are made fruitful in the same place. Seeing
then it is owing to the geniture of the Cock not only that the Eggs of wild
Fowl become fruitful, but that they lay any at all; (and therefore the
prolifick virtue of the geniture must be exerted upon the Ovary from whence the
Eggs issue:) we may from hence conclude, that though a tame Hen (by a peculiar
property) do lay without treading; yet as these Eggs are all of them addle, so
those that are hatchable into Chickens were fecundated before they were parted
from the Ovary; for it would be absurd and unreasonable to suppose so great a
difference in the impregnating the Eggs of the same Species of Animals, as the
contrary opinion intimates, viz. that one should be made fruitful in the
Ovary, and the other in the Vterus.

But thus much may suffice to have spoken of the origin, increase and
fruitfulness of an Egg; it remains to examine by what means and degrees a
Chicken is formed out of it.

CHAP. III. By what means and degrees a Chicken is formed out of an Egg.
An Egg what.
ARistotle in his First Book of the history of Animals, says, an Egg is that ex
cujus part fit principio Animal, quod generatur: ex altera alimentum ipsi
generato, i. e. of one part whereof the Animal is generated, and of another,
nourished. It is both the seed and principle of the Young, and also the Womb
wherein it is formed, fostered and nourished. Out of one Egg is but one Chicken
generated: for if at any time there be two, then are there really two Eggs
included in one Shell, as we many times see two Kernels in one Nut-shell.

Its Parts.
Now that we may the better know out of what part of the Egg the Chicken is
formed, and by which part nourished, we are to give an account of all the parts
of an Egg.

The first and outmost is the Shell, which is as the Womb wherein the Chicken
is hatched. The next is the White (or as Doctor Harvey will have it, two
Whites, the outer being thinner, and the inner thicker) which answers to the
nutritious Juice or Chyle in the Womb of Viviparous Animals, and from which the
Chicken by its umbilical Vessels receives its first nourishment. And indeed it
might as properly be called Chyle, as the Chyle whereby the Foetus in
Viviparous Animals is nourished, is called Albumen or an albugineous Liquor,
deriving that name from the White of an Egg, which is so called in Latin: for
their names may well be confounded, seeing they are not only of the same use,
but of the same nature also both as to color and taste, and agree particularly
in this, that both of them by the warmth of the Fire will congeal into a gelly.

The next part is the Yelk, in Latin called Vitellum, from vita, because the
Chicken lives by it. It is otherwise named Luteum (the Yelk or Yellow) from its
color. This part also serves for the nutrition of the Chicken, but is of a
more terrene and gross nature than the White, and therefore comes to nourish it
only in the second place, when the White is spent, as shall be showed farther
by and by. Both the Yelk and the White are each invested with a Membrane; yea
if there be two Whites, as Doctor Harvey affirms, then is the inner and
thicker White divided by a proper Membrane from the outer and thinner. Which
two Membranes of the White answer exactly to the Chorion and Amnios in
Viviparous Animals, which contain the chylous or albugineous Liquor for the
nourishment of the Foetus, as was hinted in the foregoing Chapter. In the
Membrane that clothes the Yelk, toward each end of the Egg is placed a speck
or little transparent knot, which are commonly called the Treddles, from an
opinion that they are the Sperm of the Cock, and that the Chicken is formed out
of them. But seeing there are two in each Egg (one toward each end) if these
were the Seed or first vegetative principle of the Chicken, then should there
be two formed out of every Egg. But Doctor Harvey does most ingeniously call
them the Poles of this Microcosm, serving for no other purpose, than for the
uniting of the Yelk to the White; for though they adhere to the Membrane that
invests the Yelk, yet does the larger diameter or half of them jet out into the
White. They are called in Latin Grandines, Hailstones, from their color, as
being of a more white and lucid substance than the White, and resembling much
both in shape and color the smaller Hailstones when they have been a little
wet.

Having enumerated all these parts of an Egg, and not supposing any of them to
be that which is the first principle of the Chicken, it may be wondered by some,
what part is left to which we can assign that dignity. The opinion of the often
before-cited Doctor Harvey is clear and convincing as to this, viz. That it is
neither of the Knots beforementioned, but another white, round and smooth
Speck (about as big as a Lentil) that likewise adheres to the Coat of the Yelk,
about the middle space betwixt the Treddles. And though it is very little, yet
that can be no prejudice to the opinion, with him that considers, that the
Conceptions (or Ova) of Viviparous Animals, even of the most bulky, are no
bigger than a Musquet-bullet, when they are separated from the Testicle or
Ovary, which state this white Circle or speck is now conceived to be in, and of
which I shall say no more, lest I seem to impose upon the learned and ingenious
Reader, whom I would rather advise to peruse Doctor Harvey himself as to this
opinion, than satisfy his curiosity with this short Abstract of it. But partly
for the sake of those that want Doctor Harvey's Book De generat. Animal. and
partly that what follows may be the better understood, I thought it convenient
to give a touch of it.

5. By what means and degrees a Chicken is formed out of it.
Having then concluded upon the first Seed or principle out of which the
Chicken is formed, let us next consider by what means and degrees it vegetates,
and has an Animal generated out of it. We have shown in the foregoing Chapter,
that as to the examination by the Eye, there is nothing in a fruitful Egg
which is not in an addle one; yea even this white Circle or Speck last
mentioned is equally found in both: and the reason why it is barren in one and
fruitful in another is its being or not being impregnated by the Cock's Sperm;
such Hens as are not trod laying always addle Eggs, but such as are, for the
most part prolifick. (But of this enough before.)

The means is Incubation.
Now the means of putting this generative (or more properly, I think,
vegetative) principle into act, is the incubation or brooding of the Hen, which
influences this Seed (or Egg within an Egg) out of which the Chicken is formed,
even as the cherishing and benign beams of the Sun foster the Seeds that are
committed into the Bosom or Womb of their kind Mother the Earth. Only here is
the difference, that the Seed or Egg of a Plant contains nothing but the
vegetative principle, in which as soon as the plastic power is excited, it
attracts nourishment from without it self, from the Capillary Veins or meatus
of the Earth, as was showed at large in the first Chapter; whereas the Egg is
both Seed and Womb, containing all within it self, necessary both for the
formation and nutrition of the Foetus. The reason of which is apparent, namely,
that a Plant (be it an Oak of two or three hundred years old) is still but an
Infant in regard of its nutrition, by its Roots as by so many Mouths sucking
the turgid Breasts of its teeming Mother: whereas a Chick (like all other
Animals) as soon as its Parts are once formed and animated, is presently
emancipated, as it were, from the Womb of its Mother, neither receiving nor
needing any further nutriment from thence, but becoming its own Caterer and
Carver. Now though the sitting of the Hen excite the plastic power in the
aforesaid white Circle, yet is there no virtue derived to it from the Hen her
self, seeing an elementary heat which is as gentle, equal and constant as that
of the Hen, will have the same influence upon it. Thus as Historians relate,
the Egyptians used to hatch their Eggs by the warmth of a Stove; and thus the
Estriches Eggs being covered with Sand are hatched by the warmth of the Sun,
(which in Africa where these Fowls are bred, is much more intense than in these
European Countries) the Hen her self neglecting that office, if the opinion of
diverse Commentators upon the Book of Job may be relied upon, where chap. 39.
verse. 14, 15, 16. it is said, that she leaves her Eggs in the Earth, and
warmeth them in the dust, and forgets that the foot may crush them, or that
the wild Beast may break them. She is hardened against her Young ones as though
they were not hers, etc. Concluding then that a gentle warmth, be it Animal or
Elemental, is the means whereby a Chicken is formed out of an Egg, we shall
proceed to our every days observations, by what degrees it is so formed.

The degrees or order of its formation.
As for the first three days all is so imperfect that the state or condition of
the Embryo could not with any elegancy or intelligibleness be drawn by the
Painter, whom I employed to draw the following Figures for the Engraver: but
from the fourth day forwards to the thirteenth, and afterward on the fifteenth
and seventeenth days, you have in the following Table in what state it appeared
every day, which I thought good to exhibit to the Eye, that the discourse may
be the better understood.

I therefore for this purpose set fourteen new laid Eggs (gathered from several
Hens with mine own hands, that I might be sure none of them had been sat upon
before,) under one Hen, July the first, 1680. upon which I made these following
observations.

1 The progress of the first day.
At the end of the first day (or of twenty four hours) the Yelk had changed its
situation, being removed from the center of the Egg up to its blunt end; and it
was likewise half turned about; for the Treddles that were toward the two ends
of the Egg (the one opposite to the other) were now turned toward the sides:
and that white Speck or Knot that adheres to its Coat (out of which the Chicken
is formed) instead of being toward the side of the Egg, was now on that side of
the Yelk that looked toward its sharper end. This Speck was also a little
bigger, but without any other sensible alteration. At the blunt end of the Egg
the hollowness, which is natural to all Eggs, was somewhat enlarged, and the
Yelk was risen so near it, that it might be seen through the White, or rather
through the Membrane of the White, the White it self being almost wholly
retired to the sharp end. The Shell, lastly, looked a little more dusky than
before.

2 Second day.
At the end of two days (or 48 hours) the said Speck was enlarged to the
breadth of a silver Penny, and seemed to be of different colors, some Parts
looking more bright and others more obscure; and its whole Body jetted out into
the White without making any dimple or impression into the Yelk, to whose
investing Membrane notwithstanding it still adhered. Doctor Harvey compares it
in this state to an Eye (yea calls it by that name) supposing its Center to
resemble the Pupilla or sight of the Eye, and its outer Circle (as he calls it)
the Iris; affirming that the Pupilla is the vegetative Seed or principle of the
Chicken, and that the outer Circle consists of the most pure and crystal-like
part of the White (being contained within a proper Membrane) from which the
Seed receives its first increase, and that therefore as the former dilates its
self, this latter is consumed and obliterated. And this is just what happens in
Viviparous Animals, in whom the Ovum imbibes some of the pure albugineous
Liquor that bedews the sides of the Womb; yea it is the same that happens to
the vegetable Seeds of Plants, which attract the like moisture through their
Husks (or Secundines) from the Earth: for they all three receive their
nourishment this way, till their Navel-vessels are formed, and the first growth
of all of them is pure (and alike proper) vegetation.

3 Third day.
At the end of the third day, I took a third Egg, and breaking it at the narrow
end, I found a great alteration in it from the state it was in the day
foregoing. For in the center of the aforesaid Speck I observed a little red
Body of the color of blood, sometime plain to be seen, and anon disappearing
(by turns.) In the circumference of the Speck a pretty distance from the center
there was a reddish Circle, betwixt which and the red Body in the center there
run very many slender red streaks. The red Body observed a constant turn of
dilating and contracting it self (like to the pulsation of the Heart, which
Part it afterward proved) for almost a quarter of an hour, in which time the
Egg being grown cold, its motion then ceased. By this motion it appears there
is now a progress made from vegetation to some degree of Animality. The slender
red streaks that run from the center to the circumference, seemed all to arise
from one Trunk, and afterward proved the Navel-vessels, which branching out
both into the White and Yelk convey nourishment from thence to the Chicken.

4 Fourth day.
At the end of the fourth day all these Parts beforementioned appeared more
plain. The little red Body in the center now seemed to consist of two parts,
whereof whilst the one contracted it self, the other was dilated, and on the
contrary; which gave me a suspicion, that one of them was the Heart, and the
other the Earlets, whose contractions and dilatations (or systole's and
diastole's) in perfect Animals observe that tenor; and so I perceived they
afterward proved. The bloody streaks were now extended further than the
reddish circle, both toward the White and toward the Yelk: and the Trunk from
whence they sprang, looked not now so fair red as it did before, but somewhat
more dusky, as if something of an ashy or dull white color adhered to its
outside, being as it were of a woolly substance, and sticking upon the Trunk of
the Vein like moss upon the bough of a Tree. The cavity at the blunt end of the
Egg was grown a pretty deal larger than before. The two little red Bodies
continued their beating longer than the one had done the day before; and as
soon as they ceased I took them out, and also the Ash-colored part of the
Trunk of the Vein, and put them in fair-water; wherein as the first presently
lost their color, so the latter lost its shape and aspect it had within the
Egg; for I had fancied it to appear like the first rudiment (or stamen) of the
Body of the Chicken; but the woolly substance was not of consistence firm
enough to retain its former figure in the water: however I perceived as well by
the experiment of the next days Egg, as also by another Egg that I since broke
on the fourth day, that I had fancied right. The form it was in, when taken out
of the Shell on this fourth day, you have delineated in the first Figure of the
following Table, which shows the Ash-colored Trunk and woolly substance, and
some of those red streaks adhering to it, or proceeding from it.

5 Fifth day.
At the end of the fifth day the two little red beating Bodies were grown of a
fainter color, for by this time the Parenchyma of the Heart was begun to
gather about them. A little distance from these there appeared the first
rudiments of the Head, consisting of four bubbles, two of which were clear and
transparent, but the other two of different colors. The two clear ones were
the Brain and Cerebel, and those of different colors were the Eyes: These two
last appeared much bigger than either of the other. One might also discern the
Bill which looked white. In the same Egg I observed likewise the rudiments of
the Lungs and Liver, which last gathered upon or grew out of the Umbilical
Vein. The woolly substance before-spoken of, that gathered about the Trunk of
the Vein, was now of a more solid and close contexture, and did plainly appear
to be the first rudiment of the Carkase of the Chicken, out of which both Wings
and Legs were begun to bud and to be very discernable. This Embryo, though all
its Parts were imperfect, did yet appear to have life in it, for I could
observe it to bow it self to and again. Of what form it appeared when it was
taken out of the Liquor wherein it swam, you have delineated in the second
Figure of the following Table, being drawn by one that was taken out of an Egg
that the Hen had sat upon five days complete; which Embryo as also all the rest
that we shall hereafter in the following discourse speak of, I did preserve by
a Liquor prepared for that purpose, and have them all hanging up against a
Board in the same posture as they are represented in the said following Table.

6 Sixth day.
At the end of six days all the forementioned Parts were more visible,yea there
is not any Part of the whole Body but a scheme of it now appeared. The Heart
had acquired its proper shape, but looked white, as did also the Lungs and
Liver; the Eyes stood gogling out of the Head, and each of them was as much
bigger than the Brain, as the Head (taking in all its Parts) was bigger than
all the rest of the Body. The Brain and Cerebel were as yet only of a watery
substance, of which the latter stood jetting out above the former. One might
make some faint discovery of the Spine or Backbone, looking whiter than the
rest of the Parts about it, as also of the Ribs that were extended forward from
it like the finest and whitest threads of Lawn. There were also the Lineaments
of the Intestins, which, as also the Heart, Liver and Lungs, may be seen
without dissection; for as yet and for some days after, all the trunk of the
Body lies open before, so that the Entrails lie bare, the first rudiments of
the Body beginning backwards and reaching forwards by degrees; even as
Ship-carpenters begin with the Back or Keel of the Ship first, and raise up her
Sides from thence. The Legs were not only apparent at this time, but the Feet
were also distinguished into Claws, both which it could move. The form of it
you have described in the third Figure of the following Table.

7 Seventh and eighth days.
As for the seventh and eighth days, some business calling me out of Town I was
prevented from making my observations on this brood of Eggs; but in others that
had been sat upon seven days, I found no alteration from the appearances of
the day foregoing, saving that every Part was more plain and complete; as
neither in others on the eighth day, saving that once in an Egg that had lain
under the Hen but eight days, I could not see the Heart beat without a little
dissecting the Breast, which was begun to close it self over it. The state of
the Chicken on these days you have delineated in the fourth and fifth Figures.

8 Ninth day.
At the end of the ninth day (being returned home again) I broke another of the
Eggs, and could not now discover the Heart, for the Chest was closed over it
though but very loosely and imperfectly. (Though in another Egg broken at the
same time, which another Hen had sat on, I could see the Heart move without
dissection.) I perceived the Chicken to move its Legs, Wings and Head, and
indeed all its Parts: Its Head was almost as big as all its Body besides; but
especially its Eyes continued of a prodigious bigness, staring out of its Head:
They were at least as big as small Pistol-bullets. The White of the Egg was a
great part of it consumed already on the nourishment of the Chicken; and I
could plainly see its umbilical Vessels now reach to the Yelk, which seemed as
yet to have no part of it spent; its Parts were of different consistence, some
thinner and some thicker; that was thinner wherein I could perceive the
capillary Threads of the Navel-vessels to be dispersed. Both the Heart, Liver
and Lungs were still of a whitish color, and their Parenchyma had acquired no
firmness of substance, though they had attained very near to their proper
shape. The sixth Figure expresses the Chicken in the posture of this day.

9 Tenth day.
At the end of the tenth day I examined another, wherein I found the Chest
pretty firmly closed, but the Abdomen or lower Belly lay yet quite open, and
the Stomach and Guts hung out of it. On its Back I discerned a great many
blackish specks, which were the rudiments of the Feathers breaking out. The
Eyes continued much in the same posture as on the day before, being as yet but
very little drawn within their Orbits. Neither were the Brain and Cerebel as
yet perfectly withdrawn to within the Skull. The White of the Egg was still
more decreased, but the Yelk little or nothing diminished. Concerning which
there is this one thing very remarkable; That though addle Eggs begin to stink
and grow rotten by the warmth of the Hen, within four days time from her first
sitting on them, and every day increase in their putrefaction the longer they
are sat on: yet till this time the White that remains and also the Yelk in
fruitful Eggs, retain their proper smell and savor; yea the Yelk, that is not
all of it consumed when the Chicken is hatched, (but is part of it received to
within its Belly) I say what remains of it till then, tastes as sweet as the
Yelk of a new-laid Egg. (But this by the way.) See the Chickens shape of this
day in the seventh Figure.

10 Eleventh day.
At eleven days end I broke another, and admired to see the Feathers so much
increased; for not only those on the Back, which I observed breaking out the
day before, were now become plain Feathers, but all its Body over almost was
covered with the like. Its Abdomen lay yet open, and its Guts jetted out of it;
but the Brain and Cerebel were now withdrawn perfectly within the Skull; but
its Eyes stood gogling out still. One might discern its Rump also formed, and
Feathers budding out of it resembling the Tail. But though the Chicken had
attained to this maturity, yet neither this, nor that I examined the day
before, lived so long as those on the two or three days before; but this I
believe, happened through my chancing to wound the Navel-vessels in both, which
caused them to bleed, and thereby I suppose hastened their death. The eighth
Figure expresses this days Chicken.

11 Twelfth day to the seventeenth.
All the Parts being now entirely formed, it would be but the repetition of the
same things over again and again to give a particular account of each days
proceeding, from the twelfth to the end of the seventeenth, till which time the
Abdomen lies open still: only I shall give a short account of some little
alteration that happens in this interval; which is not so much in the Chicken
it self, as in the Liquors it is fed by, and in its umbilical Vessels. Doctor
Harvey says its umbilical Vessels are five, three Veins and two Arteries. One
of the Veins arises from the Cava above the Liver: this is the largest, and
sends forth its branches into the White, which being now in a manner spent, the
branches of the Vein begin to wither, and by degrees are obliterated: But the
other two Veins which spring from the vena Portae continue longer, having their
branches distributed into the Yelk, which as yet is but a very little of it
consumed. These are accompanied by two Arteries that spring from the Lumbares
or Loin-arteries. As the White is spent, the Membranes that contained it, begin
to shrivel up and contract themselves, and to cleave one to another, as the
Chorion cleaves to the Allantoides in Viviparous Animals. The Chicken now
having no Liquor to swim in (as it did whilst the White remained) rests its
Belly upon the Yelk (which is drawn closer toward its Abdomen by the
Membranes, still more and more contracting themselves) with its Head commonly
under the right Wing. If one dissect its Breast, one shall find its Heart and
Lungs to have obtained almost their natural redness; but the Liver looks of
somewhat a yellowish white. If one open the Head, the Brain has acquired a
pretty solid substance, whereas till of late both the Brain and Cerebel seemed
to consist of nothing but water. The Eyes continue still to stand staring out
of their Orbits a pretty deal further than they do when the Chicken is hatched.
Its gradual increase in this interval, viz. on the twelfth, thirteenth,
fifteenth and seventeenth days you have expressed in the ninth, tenth, eleventh
and twelfth Figures of the following Table.

12 Eighteenth day.
On the eighteenth day the Guts are withdrawn to within the Abdomen, and
together with them that which remains of the Yelk, from which the umbilical
Vessels continue to derive nourishment to the Chick, even after it is thus
included in the Belly; yea, even after the Chicken is hatched: for it is not
all spent till several days after. And this was a necessary provision of
Nature, that seeing the Hen affords it no nourishment (as Viviparous Creatures
do to their Young ones) but it must be its own Carver and feed it self after
the same manner as its Mother does; I say, Nature for this reason has
prudently provided, that it should still be nourished by its umbilical Vessels,
till its Bill have acquired some strength, and it have learned to pick for it
self. The largest umbilical Vein that is derived from the Cava and was
distributed into the White, is now quite obliterated, the White being all of it
consumed. One may perceive the Chicken to bustle about in the Egg, and if one
hold it to his Ear, it may be heard sometimes to peep, but more and more
toward the twenty-first day, which is the usual day of hatching; till which
time from this eighteenth day it were to no purpose to give any Figure of what
state the Chicken is in, seeing, now that the Abdomen is closed, there would
appear no Part but only the surface of its Body which is all covered with
Feathers. We shall speak therefore no further of the manner and degrees of its
generation, nor exhibit its daily condition in Figures, but only add a word or
two of its hatching.

How the Chicken is hatched.
Three weeks is reckoned the usual and natural time for Chickens to be hatched
in. At the one and twentieth day therefore, or at the longest on the two and
twentieth the Chicken having spent all the provision Nature had provided for it
in its little mansion; but more especially wanting a freer Air to breath in, it
begins to be uneasy, and to meditate and endeavor an exit. It is to be noted
that naturally there is in every Egg a little cavity in its broader end, which
is filled (as I may say) with congenit Air: As the cavity increases, this Air
must needs be rarefied so as to fill up the empty space; for the Shell seems of
so dense and compact a substance as to admit none of the external Air into it:
or if we do suppose it to be so porous as that the outward Air can insinuate it
self into it, yet will it not be sufficient for so free a breathing as is
necessary for our mature and full grown Animal; much less would that congenit
Air, beforementioned, (so much rarefied as it must be) suffice for it. The
Chicken has however some sort of respiration, or else it could not peep; for
that voice must be formed by the Air in expiration. But I say it requires a
freer breathing than this comes to; and therefore by scratching and pecking
against the Shell, it strives to break prison. In doing which it has no help
from the Hen, (whatsoever some may affirm of her breaking the Shell for it) as
Viviparous Animals afford to their Young, whose Wombs that contain the Foetus,
being molested by its tumbling, are excited to endeavor an expulsion; whence
the birth is almost wholly owing to the Dam, that by her throes excludes her
Foetus, and to the Foetus no otherwise than as by its motion it causes an
uneasiness to the Dam. The Shell notwithstanding (that is like an external
Womb) is partly prepared for the easier exit of the Chicken; for by its having
been kept warm so long by the Hen's brooding upon it, and by the White's being
consumed within it, it is now become dry and brittle, and readily admits of the
impressions of the Chickens Bill pecking against it; and much more easily will
the Membranes wherein it is invested (which may be called its Secundines) be
penetrated and broken through by such means. The Chicken then is wholly owing
to its own pains for its exclusion out of the Egg; for by its Bill (as with a
battering Ram) it demolishes and dismantles the walls of its Prison, and
passing out through the breach obtains its freedom.

Hitherto it may suffice to have prosecuted this instance of the generation of
an Oviparous Creature; it remains that in the next place we proceed according
to promise, to give another instance of that of a Viviparous Animal; having
done which we shall make a short comparison of the one with the other, and of
both with the vegetation of the Seed of a Plant.

views of a chicken embryo's growth TAB. XLVI. page 24.
I


II


III


IIII


V


VI


VII


VIII


IX


X


XI


XII






CHAP. IV. Of the Generation of Viviparous Creatures.
HAving finished the history of the generation of Oviparous Animals, we come in
the next place to that of Viviparous, wherein we shall be the shorter, by
reason there is that analogy betwixt them, that to be too particular would be
tedious, seeing it were but to repeat the same things over again. For an Egg is
as it were a Conception without the Body; and a Conception may properly enough
be called an Egg within the Body. I have not had my self opportunity to examine
each days proceedings in the generation of this sort of Animal ( viz. of
Viviparous) but have such observations made to my hand by the curious De Graef,
whose Instance is in Rabbets. His observations I shall make use of so far as
they are for my purpose, omitting what is otherwise. But before I proceed to
them, a few things are to be premised.

First, Those parts which we commonly call the Testicles in Females are truly
Ovaries, from whence the Eggs (one or more at a time) as they are impregnated
with the Geniture of the Male, separate, and being conducted into the Womb or
its Horns, by the Trumpets, become there what we call a Conception.

Secondly, This Animal whose generation we instance in, forms its Conceptions
not in the bottom of the Womb as a Mare and some other Creatures do, but in its
Horns, into which it is presently divided from the Vagina it self, without any
fundus or bottom at all.

Thirdly, A Rabbet going with young but so short a while, it is to be supposed
that all things even from the very first, proceed with so much greater haste,
as their gestation is shorter than that of other Animals respectively.

Fourthly, A Rabbet is one of the placentiferous Animals, each Foetus having
its proper Placenta; whereas Mares and very many other Creatures have no
Placenta, but instead thereof Cotyledons, as was noted in the First Book, Chap.
28.

Having premised these things I now proceed to the observations.

We made the first trial (says the abovenamed Author) on a Female Rabbet that
had not yet accompanied with the Male, in whom the Testicles were small, but
contained very many limpid Eggs, which being cut open there issued out a clammy
liquor like the White of an Egg.

We opened another (says he) half an hour after she had taken buck, the Cornua
of whose Womb looked a little redder, but the Ova in the Testicles were not yet
changed, unless they had remitted a little of their clearness: but neither in
the Vagina nor in the Cornua could we perceive any Seed or any thing like it.

About six hours after the coupling we dissected another, in whose Testicles
the Cases of the Ova inclined to redness, out of which being pricked with a
Needle a clammy and clear Liquor issued first, but Blood followed, flowing out
of the Bloud-vessels dispersed through the Cases. There was no Seed to be seen
in this neither.

Four and twenty hours after the coupling we opened another, in one of whose
Testicles we found three, and in the other five Cases of the Ova very much
changed; for being before the Coitus limpid and colorless, they were now
turned duskish and of a faint red, in the middle of whose Superficies a little
Papilla (or Teat) as it were, discovered it self. When the Cases were cut open,
there appeared a little limpid Liquor in their middle, and in their
circumference a certain thicker and reddish Matter.

Twenty seven hours after the coitus we inspected another, the Cornua of whose
Womb with the Oviducts or Trumpets looked more bloody, also the extremity of
the Oviduct did on every side embrace the Testicle like a Tunnel. We found no
Eggs in the Cornua, nor were their Cases in the Testicles much altered from
what they were three hours before.

Eight and forty hours after the coupling we examined another, in one of whose
Testicles we found seven, in the other three Cases changed, in whose middle the
Teats were something more eminent, through which, by pressing the substance of
the Testicles, there issued a little liquor like the White of an Egg; but the
remaining reddish substance of the Eggs being now become something thicker, was
not so easily pressed out as before.

Seventy two hours (or three days and nights) after the coitus we inspected
another, in which was great alteration; for the end of the Infundibulum or
Oviduct did embrace the Testicles most closely, which being pulled off we found
in the Testicle of the right side three Cases a little greater and harder, in
the middle of whose surface we saw a little knot with a small hole in it like a
Nipple; but dissecting these Cases through the middle, their Cavity was quite
empty; wherefore we searched the ways through which the Eggs must pass, again
and again, and found in the middle of the right Oviduct one, and in the outer
end of the Cornu of the same side two very small Eggs little bigger than small
Pins heads, which notwithstanding their smallness are clothed with a double
coat; out of these Eggs being pricked there issued a most clear Liquor. In the
beginning of the left Horn we found only one Egg.

The fourth day from the coupling we opened another, in one of whose Testicles
we found four, in the other three Cases emptied, and in the Horns of the
respective sides, we found as many Eggs, greater than the former, which did not
stick in the Oviducts or beginnings of the Cornua, but were now rolled on
toward their middle; in their Cavity we beheld as it were another Egg
swimming, far clearer than in the other before.

The fifth day from the coupling we dissected another, in whose Testicles we
told six emptied Cases, that had each a notable Nipple, through whose hole we
easily put an ordinary Bristle into their Cavity. We found also the same number
of Eggs, bigger than those on the day before, in diverse parts of the Cornua, in
which they lay so loosely, that by blowing only, one might drive them this way
or that way. The inner Tunicle of these, (or the Egg within an Egg as it were)
was become yet more conspicuous.

The sixth day after the coitus we examined another, in one of whose Testicles
we observed six Cases emptied, and in the Cornu of the same side we could light
of but only five Eggs near the Vagina brought as it were upon an heap; but in
the Testicle of the other side we found four Cases emptied, and in the Horn of
that side only one Egg. The cause of which difference we suppose to be, either
because some Eggs by the Wave-like motion of the Cornua, (not unlike the
peristaltick motion of the Guts) being carried downwards toward the Vagina
were driven forth; or because being consumed in the Cases they came not to the
Vterus; or light on some other mischance. These Eggs were as big as small Pease.

The seventh day from the coitus we examined another, in whose Testicles we
found some Cases emptied that were greater, redder and harder than the
foregoing, and saw as many transparent tumors or cells in diverse parts of the
Cornua; out of which being opened we turned Eggs as big as Pocket-pistol
Bullets, in which we could discern nothing but the inner Tunicle very plain and
a most clear humor. It is wonderful that in so short a space of time the Eggs
should imbibe so great plenty of liquor, that whereas before they might easily
be taken out of the Womb, now they could very difficultly.

The eighth day after the coitus we opened another, in the right Horn of whose
Vterus we saw one, in the left two cells; one of these was almost twice as big
as the other: for Nature does sometimes so vary, that there are Eggs of diverse
bigness found not only in diverse Animals of the same species dissected at the
same distance from the coitus, but also in one and the same Individual. In the
Horns of the Womb being opened we saw the Eggs a little bigger than the day
before; but all of them, their Tunicles breaking, poured out their clear liquor
before we could take them quite out: for which reason we tried another
dissected likewise the eighth day after the coitus, to take out whose Ova we
used the greatest circumspection; but their Tunicles were so very tender, that
they burst as the former: which when we saw, the Eggs that remained we boiled
with the Womb, whereby the liquor that was in them hardened like the Whites of
Hens Eggs.

The ninth day after the coitus we dissected another that was old; The
Testicles of this were almost as big again as those of younger: In the right we
saw two, in the left five Cases lately emptied; and besides these, others that
looked very pale, which we judged to be those that had been emptied the coitus
before this, although for the most part they leave only some palish points or
specks, to which the increase of the Testicles is owing. The Cases of the last
coitus had each a Teat upon them, but the others were smooth. In the right Horn
there were two, and in the left five Cells, whose substance being more rare and
clear than the other parts of the Womb, was interwoven with many twigs of Veins
and Arteries. Opening some of these Cells, we could see the Eggs, but could not
take them out whole; wherefore being compelled to examine the content of the
Eggs in the very hollow of the Cells, we found it clear like Crystal; in the
midst whereof a certain rare and thin cloud was seen to swim, which in other
Coneys dissected likewise on the ninth day after the coupling, for its
exceeding fineness escaped our sight. The inner substance of the Cells, namely
that which receives the hypogastrick Vessels, being more tumid than the rest,
exhibited the rudiments of the Placenta.

The tenth day after the coitus we inspected another, in whose right Testicle
we found one Case alone emptied, which by reason of the Bloudvessels dispersed
plentifully through it was redder and had a less Teat; in the middle of it
there appeared as yet a very small Cavity: but in the left Testicle we found
six such Cases. In the Horns of the Womb we found also so many Cells, namely
one in the right and six in the left, distant a finger's breadth one from
another; in the midst of which Cells lay a rude mucilaginous draught of the
Embryo like a little Maggot; one might also plainly discern the Placenta, to
which the Egg by means of its Chorion was annexed. The liquor of the Eggs being
boiled with the Womb hardened like the White of an Egg, and tasted like the
boiled congealed substance of the Eggs in the Testicles.

The twelfth day after the coitus we opened another, in one of whose Testicles
we found seven, in the other five Cases emptied, and as many Cells in the Horns
much bigger and rounder than the foregoing, in the middle of which the Embryo
was so conspicuous, that one might in a sort discern its Limbs, having two
bloody specks and as many white ones in its Breast: In the Paunch there grew a
certain mucilaginous substance inclining here and there to red. We could not
discern more in this shapeless little Animal because of its tenderness.

The fourteenth day after the coitus we dissected another, which had the Cells
in the Cornua yet larger than the foregoing, and the Bloud-vessels more, and
more turgid. We also noted that the Cells the larger they grew, came also
nearer to one another, the spaces between them being shortened. The Membranes
Amnios and Chorion were knit together, tearing which we saw an Embryo (such as
the eleventh Figure of the following Table represents) with a clear and
pellucid head, with the Cerebel copped: its goggle Eyes, gaping mouth, and in
some sort its little Ears might be discerned also. There was a draught of its
Backbone, of a white color, which bending in about the Sternum, resembled the
Keel of a Ship: By its sides there run very slender Vessels, whose Branches
were extended to the Back and to the Feet. The two bloody specks in the Breast,
being greater than the foregoing were the rudiments of the Ventricles of the
Heart; at the sides whereof were seen two whitish specks for Lungs. In the
Paunch being opened there first showed it self a reddish Liver, then a white
body, to which was knit a mucilaginous matter like a writhen thread, being the
rudiments of the Stomach and Guts: All which in those that we dissected
afterward, had acquired only a greater bulk and perfection. And therefore to
prevent tediousness by repeating the same things, we will on purpose pass by
all the other Dissections we made in this kind of Creature excepting only one
which we made the day before the kindling, that those things that in the former
were only confusedly discerned, may appear plain in this.

At length on the twenty ninth day after the coitus we inspected another that
had kindled six weeks before, and in the coitus by which she was impregnated
had voided all the thicker part of the geniture of the Male, which in some
measure did resemble the consistence of a most limpid gelly. In her Testicles
we found eleven little whitish Cases; and besides these, others far less,
little or nothing differing from the substance of the Testes. These Cases of
the Eggs in the Testicles seem not to vanish wholly, but to leave a certain
speck in them; whence it

certainly comes to pass, that Conies the oftener or the more young ones they
bring forth, have the greater and whiter Testicles; so that one may guess by
only viewing the Testes, whether they have had many young ones or often.
Having viewed the Testicles we past to the Horns of the Womb, which we found no
longer distinguished into Cells, but all along distended like a Pudding: which
was so agitated with a Wave-like motion, like the peristaltick of the Guts,
that the young ones nearest the Vagina as yet included in their Membranes, were
excluded, and that so hastily, that if we had not cut out the whole Vterus they
had all certainly gone the same way. The Womb was no thicker than when they are
not with young, (otherwise than it is in Women.) In its Cavity we saw eleven
Foetus sprawling, which were all so closely coupled together by the Membrane
Chorion (wherein all are severally involved) as if they had all been included
in one and the same Chorion.

This is the account that the aforenamed curious Anatomist gives of the
generation of this kind of Animal, and to it, that of all others that are
Viviparous may be reduced, abating only the differences mentioned at the
beginning of this Chapter, or other like them, if there be any. And for the
better illustration of this account, I have thought good to annex hereto a
Table borrowed from the same Author, expressing as well the figure of a
Rabbet's Vterus, as the posture or condition the Conception and Foetus are in
on each day whereon the foregoing observations were made.

Table XLVII.
Represents the Genitals of a She-rabbet, the various figures of the Ova or
Conceptions; as likewise a perfect Young one with its Secundines.

Figure I.

Shows the Genitals of a She-coney.

A a The Vagina. B The Piss-bladder. CC The Horns of the Womb drawn forwards.
DD The beginning of the Oviduct where it springs from the Horn. EE The
extremity of the Oviduct, widening by degrees like a Tunnel. FF The cavity of
the Tunnel that encloses the Testicles. GG The membranous Ligament that knits
the Tunnel to the Horn of the Womb. HH A portion of the Tunnel knit to the
Testicles. II The Ovaries or Testicles drawn upwards. KK The membranous
Ligament that knits the Ovary (or Testicle) to the Horn of the Womb. LL A most
thin Membrane that goes betwixt the two Ligaments. MM The Bloud-vessels that
run to the Testicles. NN Portions of the Vena cava and great Artery. OO The
hypogastrick Vessels that are carried to the Womb. P A Coneys Testicle wherein
two days from the coitus the Teats of the Cases appear. Q A Testicle wherein on
the third day from the coitus the thickness, and Cavities of the Testicles (in
which the Eggs were included) appear.
Figure II. to XI. Show the various figures of the Eggs or Conceptions.

Fig. II. Shows the Eggs as they are found in the Horns of the Womb on the
third day from the coitus.

III. The same Eggs on the fourth day from the coitus.

IV. The same on the fifth day.

V. The same on the sixth day.

VI. The same on the seventh day.

VII. The same on the eighth day forming Cells in the Horns of the Womb.

A The Cell in the Horn of the Womb that contains the Egg. B A Cell opened in
whose Egg is found nothing but liquor.
VIII. The Eggs on the ninth day from the coitus.

A The Cell in the Horn of the Womb. B A Cell opened in whose Egg there appears
a thin cloud.
IX. The Eggs on the tenth day from the coitus.

A The Cell full of Bloud-vessels. B A Cell opened in whose Egg is seen an
Embryo like a shapeless Maggot.
X. The Eggs on the twelfth day from the coitus.

A The Cell. B A Cell opened in whose Egg there appear the lineaments of an
Embryo.
XI. The Eggs on the fourteenth day from the coitus.

A The Cell. B The Embryo with its Placenta and Vmbilical-vessels.
Figure XII.

Shows the young Coney with its Secundines.

A The Coney included in the Membrane Amnios. BB The Membrane Amnios blown up.
CC The Vrinary Membrane (or Allantoides) blown up, making diverse Cells as it
were. D Everhard's glandulous Body, or the whitish part of the Placenta. EE The
ruddy part of the Placenta. F Needham's Omphalo-mesenterick Vessels ( i. e.
Vessels that pass from the Mesentery to the Navel) running to the Chorion,
which in this Figure is removed.
Figure XIII.

Shows the backside of the Placenta pulled from the Womb.

HH Everhard's glandulous Body having six or seven holes in it. II The ruddy
part of the Placenta.
Figure XIV.

Shows the fore-side of the Placenta into which the Navel-vessels enter.

K A line dividing the Placenta as it were into two parts. LL The umbilical
Arteries dispersed through the Placenta with diverse branchings. M The umbilical
Vein likewise dispersed through the Placenta.
the womb and genitals of a female rabbit TAB. XLVII page 29.
Fig. I.


Fig 2 3 4 5 6 7


8


9


10


11


12


13


14






CHAP. V. Of the Analogy, or likeness, between the generation of Oviparous and
Viviparous Animals; and how far the generation of both agrees with the
vegetation of Plants.
SUpposing, what has been demonstrated by the foregoing discourse, that the
first principle of the Foetus both of Oviparous and Viviparous Animals, is an
Egg, and that the Seeds of Plants have analogy thereto, and may properly enough
be comprehended under the same denomination; we shall as briefly as may be,
consider the correspondence that one of these has to another in their procedure
toward the production of a perfect Animal or Plant of their respective kinds.

As for Vegetables, the Sun is the common father of their whole genus or stock,
for by his irradiation alone it is that any of their Seeds (or Eggs) are
matured and become fruitful: not but that the Mother-plant her self produces
the whole substance of the Seed; but its becoming fructiferous or vegetative,
is owing wholly to the ethereal and most pure and subtle influence of the Sun.
In like manner the Matter of the Eggs in Oviparous Animals, or of a Conception
in Viviparous is derived only from the Female, whose Egg or Conception it is;
but the vegetative or plastic power residing therein is derived from the
impregnation (or if you will, irradiation) of the spirituous geniture of the
Male, by whose influence alone they are rendered capable of producing a Foetus
of their proper species.

The Seed, Egg or Conception then being endowed with a vegetative virtue by
these means, have need of suitable nourishment for the increase of the first
lineaments and rudiments of that which is produced out of them. Seeds are
emancipated from the Womb of their natural Mother the Plant, ( viz. the Pod or
Shell) and committed to that of their Foster-mother, the Earth. Into which they
are no sooner received, but they begin to imbibe the nitrous and balsamic
juices wherewith she abounds, through their hulls or husks, by which they are
made to swell and increase in bulk. And even just thus in Viviparous Animals,
as soon as an Ovum is separated from the Testicle and arrives at the Womb,
being clothed with two Membranes (that answer to the husks of the Seed) it
presently begins to imbibe some of the albugineous liquor that plentifully
bedews the sides of the Womb at the time when a Conception is made: this liquor
I say is imbibed through the Membranes, for as yet there is no Vessel formed to
convey it, nor does the Conception stick to any part. And thus also the little
white speck in an Hen's Egg, as soon as the vegetative virtue thereof is
excited by the gentle warmth of the Hen brooding upon it, attracts unto it some
of the thinnest and purest of the White, whereby it is enlarged in its
dimension. And this increase happens to all three, before there are any the
least lineaments of that which afterward is produced from them.

In the next place the Seed begins to put forth a gemm or sprout, which is as
the first Embryo of the Plant; and at the same time the Seedleaf (which serves
for the Placenta) and Navel-knot are shaped. By the Navel-knot, which knits the
Seed-leaf and trunk of the Plant together, is nourishment conveyed from that to
this for its further growth. In like manner the first thing that appears
tending toward a Foetus in an Egg or a Conception, is the red beating speck
and small reddish streaks proceeding from it, that prove the Navel-vessels,
which in Viviparous Animals that are placentiferous, are implanted into the
Placenta or Womb-cake, from whence they derive nourishment to the Embryo. In
Oviparous, that have no Placenta, they are inserted into the Membranes that
contain the White and Yelk, which Membranes it is probable may have some Glands
adhering to them, through which the said liquors are transcolated into the
Navel-vessels, and therefore may answer to the Cotyledons in such Brutes as are
not placentiferous. At the same time or presently after appear some lineaments
of the Spine, or trunk of the Body, answering to the trunk of the Plant.

The next progress of the vegetation of a Seed toward a Plant is the putting
forth of Roots, which are as the Head and Mouth of the Plant, by which it sucks
nourishment all its life-long from its Nurse-mother the Earth. In
correspondence whereto the first part (next to the beforementioned) that
attains to any considerable bulk or perfection of shape in the Foetus of
Animals, is the Head, which by the two last before-going Figures you may
perceive both in Chickens and Rabbets to be at first well nigh as big as all
the Body besides. The reason of which hasty procedure in the formation of this
part seems to be for two reasons: First, that the Brain whic his the spring of
the Animal function, might arrive at a capacity of elaborating and transmitting
the Animal Spirits, by the Nerves, to all the parts of the little Animal, for
the performing of such weak and imperfect motions as are necessary for it in
that state. And secondly, that its Mouth might be in a forwardness toward so
much perfection as is necessary for the sipping or sucking and swallowing that
albugineous nutritious juice wherein it fluctuates, and which its parts being
now grown more bulky and firm begin to stand in need of for their further
nourishment and increase.

But now our Foetus (whether the offspring of a Viviparous or Oviparous
Creature) being advanced beyond the state and rank of Vegetables into that of
Animals, we cannot deduce the parallel any further with that propriety and
accuracy as hitherto: though it might still be further prosecuted according to
the most ingenious observations of Doctor Grew in his Anatomy of Trunks, who
has discovered in them not only several Sap-vessels answering to the Veins
and Arteries (yea to the Milky-vessels and Lympheducts) but Air-vessels
likewise, as if Plants were partakers of Respiration also, and consequently of
some degree of Animality, wanting only local motion and (perhaps) sense to
difference them from true Animals. But to do this would carry me beyond my
purpose, which was to compare the generation (or rather first vegetation) of
the one to the other, and not their after- nourishment and life. I shall
therefore here break off the parallel or analogy of Vegetables with Animals;
but shall continue a little further that of Oviparous and Viviparous Animals
one with another.

By that time the purer part of the White of an Egg is the greatest part of it
exhausted by the umbilical Veins, and spent in the increase of the parts of the
Chicken; its Bill, Mouth, Throat, etc. have attained to that perfection as that
they can perform their office of sipping and swallowing, whereby the remainder
of the White, that is more thick and earthy, comes to be consumed also. For
that the Chicken swallows some of it, is plain, seeing if one open the Crop of
one newly hatched, there is a clear liquor in it of the same consistence,
color and taste with the White, which can be conveyed thither no other way but
by swallowing. In like manner the Foetus of Viviparous Animals having arrived
at such maturity as to have their Mouths, Stomachs, etc. perfected, though they
continue still to receive part of their nourishment by the umbilical Vein,
(even as a Chicken after it has consumed all the White, yet still derives
nourishment from the Yelk by other branches of the same Vessel) yet partly that
the Stomach may be initiated into that office it is to perform after the birth
( viz. concoction,) and partly that the Foetus may be trained up and accustomed
to that way of feeding whereby they are to be sustained after their expulsion
from the Womb, they suck in at their Mouth a grosser sort of nutritious juice,
(answering to the thicker White in an Egg) wherein they swim in the Amnios:
which liquor is conveyed thither by the umbilical Arteries of the Foetus in
this manner. The umbilical Vein being implanted into the Placenta, or
Cotyledons of the Womb, does imbibe therefrom that nutritious juice that is
conveyed thither by the hypogastrick and spermatick Arteries of the Dam: which
juice consisting of various particles is conducted to the Foetus, with whose
Blood it mixes, and its purer particles are assimilated to it; but the grosser
and more earthy pass from the Foetus by its umbilical Arteries toward the
Placenta or Cotyledons again; but in their way thither-ward they divert into
those branches of these Arteries that are dispersed through the Amnios, and are
spued out of their extremities into its cavity, where this liquor is collected
in great quantity for the use aforesaid.

Lastly, when the Chicken has spent all its provision, and is grown so big
that it becomes uneasy in its narrow Cloister, and likewise wants a freer air
to breathe in, the Shell which is the Mother's (external) Womb, begins to be
brittle and apt to chap, so that upon the Chickens bustling about and pecking
against it, it cracks and gives way to its Exit. Thus when the Foetus (in
Viviparous Creatures) is full grown, and the sides of the pelvis permit not any
further extension of the Womb, the Foetus wanting Elbow-room as we say, tumbles
about and creates an uneasiness to the Dam, and the Womb it self is provoked to
an endeavor to exclude its burden which is now become troublesome: whence
partly from the endeavors of the Young to free it self of its confinement, and
partly by the straining of the Dam (Nature having prepared the passage) the
birth succeeds.

Thus I have prosecuted the history of the Generation of Animals from the first
principles of their Foetus till their bringing them forth; wherein I must
confess to have borrowed much from other Men's observations: but as the Reader
may have observed me so ingenuous as to mention my Authors where I have done
so; so I hope it will be acknowledged I have produced some of my own, and
improved those I have borrowed to other purposes than they were first published
to the world for by their Authors: wherein if there be any whose curiosity I
have not satisfied, I hope there is at least enough to excite his emulation,
and to put him upon endeavors further to inform himself, and others. Either of
which effects shall make me think the pains I have taken well bestowed.

SECTION II. Of the Motion of the Chyle, and Circulation of the Blood.
I Am now entering upon so trite a Subject, and which has exercised the Pens of
so many learned Anatomists, that I cannot invite the learned Reader to the
perusal of this Discourse with the promise of outdoing those worthy Persons
that have gone before me: but the main inducement of the annexing this to the
before-going Treatise, was from a prospect that this Book will probably fall
into the hands of such as never read the beforementioned Authors, so that
this Doctrine will be as new to them as if never any thing had been writ before
on the same Subject. But yet I would not so prejudice even the learned
(Anatomical) Reader against it, as that he should expect nothing but Crambe
recocta, and so nauseate and reject it: for beside that the manner and method
of the discourse is (I think) new, he will find something of Experiment, which
(for any thing that I know) has not been made by any other. However in the
whole I shall be very concise, as having said something to the same purpose in
the First and Second Books, in the Chapters of the Stomach, Guts, and
Mesentery, and of the Heart.

I.. Of the motion of the Chyle.
In the first place we shall begin with the motion of the Chyle, because Chyle
is that out of which Blood is made. Chyle is defined to be a milky juice, like
Barley-cream, prepared and concocted in the Stomach from the Food that is
taken. For when the Animal has chewed his Meat sufficiently, and thereby minced
and prepared it, (in which action the Saliva or Slaver mixes with it) he
swallows it down into his Stomach, which so contracts it self, that be the Meat
little or much, it embraces it closely, and keeps both its Orifices shut. The
Meat being thus stewed as it were by the mild heat of the Stomach, enters upon
a fermentation, which proceeds from the acidity of the Saliva and the acid or
acrimonious serment of the Stomach working upon the salt particles of the Food
and dissolving or precipitating the same, (and together with them the
sulphurous) which being so dissolved are diluted and turned into a fluid
substance by the water or other liquor that the Animal drinks, and this is that
we call Chyle. As for the other particles of the Food which are not thus
dissolved and made fluid, as being of a more gross and earthy substance, they
become like the Chymist's caput mortuum, and make that we call the faeces or
Dung, which having once mentioned, my design will not give me occasion to take
much further notice of.

The Chyle then being thus prepared in the Stomach passes by degrees out at its
lower Orifice into the Guts, along which it is gently conducted (together with
the faeces) by their peristaltick or Worm-like motion. Now into every one of
the Guts are inserted more or fewer of those Veins which are called milky, from
the whitish chylous liquor that is commonly to be found in them, and to
distinguish them from the Bloud-vessels that look of a bluish or dusky red.
These milky Veins being laid (as I may say) into the Guts like so many smaller
(leaden) Pipes into a large Trunk, do every one of them imbibe or drink in part
of the Chyle, and convey it whither and in what manner we shall show presently.
The part that sustains these Veins is the Mesentery, in whose folds the
greatest part of the Guts are gathered (all but the beginning of the first
(small) Gut, and last (straight) Gut.) But as for the fabric of these parts I
would rather desire the Reader to consult the ninth, tenth, eleventh and
twelfth Chapters of the First Book, than be tedious with repetition. I say then
these Veins being laid into the Guts, receive into their mouths the aforesaid
liquor through the spongie slime that bedaubs the inside of the Guts, which
serves as a strainer for the confused mass of the Chyle. But for the more easy
separation of its purer parts from the impure and feculent, there happens in
the Guts themselves a new kind of fermentation in the Chyle by the commixture
of the bile and pancreatick juice with it, as was showed in the aforesaid
Chapters and the thirteenth of the same Book. Now the reason why the Chyle
should rather divert into these slender Vessels than continue its course down
the wide Guts, is not from any magnetic or electrick attractive faculty in the
Vessels themselves, but from the continual agitation and squeezing of the Guts
partly by their own peristaltick motion, and partly by their being heaved up
and down by the continual motion of the Muscles of the Paunch, and of the
Midriff in Respiration. These motions indeed hasten also the descent of the
chylous mass down the Guts themselves; but he that considers the various
windings of the Guts, and observes that the small ones lie the greatest part of
them in the lower and forepart of the Belly (into which most of the milky
Vessels are inserted) whilst the Colon (that lies more backward) ascends up
again as high as the bottom of the Stomach, and commonly is pretty full stuffed
with digested excrement of a pretty firm consistence, must needs conceive it to
be a very natural motion for the Chyle to regurgitate as it were, or slide into
the milky Veins while the Intestins are thus compressed. And if this may be
allowed for a sufficient mechanical reason of its first entrance into them, we
shall not need to be much thoughtfull for another, why it should ascend by them
and the thoracick Duct to the Heart; seeing that which comes behind must needs
drive on that which went before so far as there is passage for it, at least so
high as the place from which their descent was. For every body knows that any
Aqueduct will convey the water as high as the Fountain or Wellspring where it
received it, though in its passage from the Springhead to the place where it
is discharged, it descends through a valley that is (suppose) an hundred paces
perpendicular lower than either. All Meat and Drink then being received in at
the Mouth, it is no wonder that the Chyle that is made of it should ascend up
as high as the Heart, though it first descend to the lowest parts of the
Abdomen, seeing the Heart comes so much short of the height of the Mouth. But
this motion of the Chyle that we are speaking of, has a notable advantage above
that of water in a Tree or Pipe; seeing water descends, and consequently
ascends therein only by its own gravity, and is assisted in neither by the
Vessels that contain it: whereas the Meat and Drink are not only driven down
into the Stomach by the motion of the Throat and Gullet; but the upper mouth of
the Stomach presently closing upon them, hinders their ascent back again, and
the aforesaid peristaltick motion of the Guts, and reciprocal dilatation and
contraction of the Belly (as well as Breast) in respiration, force the Chyle
along the pipes it passes through, as well as it self makes its way by its own
weight. The milky Veins have also another advantage above an Aqueduct, in that
they have Valves that hinder the relapse or retreat of the liquor contained in
them; so that upon whatsoever agitation or compression of the Vessels there is
a way open for it forwards, but it cannot return back again.

The Chyle then being received into the Lacteals as aforesaid, holds on its
course in them through the Mesentery to the common Receptacle at the Loins. In
this passage the venae Lacteae enter several glands of the Mesentery, out of
which other branches arise again, and these also are inserted into other
glands, and other branches spring from them again, the branches themselves
likewise inosculating one with another; but they all hold on forwards toward
the great gland at the center or root of the Mesentery where it adheres to the
Loins, into which some enter and some march over it: But those that enter it,
arise again out of it, and joining with the others that ran over it, discharge
themselves all together into the common Receptacle beforementioned.

This Receptacle is called common, because it is common both to the Chyle and
Lympha (which latter humor what it is, you may see in the above cited twelfth
Chapter.) It is seated behind and a little above the great gland at the center
of the Mesentery, rather toward the left side, by the side of the Cava
descending, and near the left Kidney. It is like a little bag or bladder, and
is nothing else but the wider part or root of the thoracick Duct, which is
continued from it. All the Chyle being imported into this Receptacle, and also
the Lympha returning from all the Bowels of the Abdomen, and the inferior
parts, mixing with and diluting of it, ascend up the Loins and Back by the said
thoracick Duct, which is a long Pipe (very thin and almost transparent) running
up the whole length of the Thorax under or behind the Aorta (on the inside of
the Spine) but rather inclining toward its left side; and at last passing
under the Thymus it opens into the lower side of the left subclavian Vein, over
against that place where the left jugular Vein opens into it on the upper side.
Though the Duct usually be but one, yet it opens with five or six mouths into
the said Vein, all which on the inside the Vein are covered with one broad
valve, which permits the Chyle and Lympha to enter into the Vein, but hinders
either them or Blood to slide out of the Vein into the Duct. This Duct has
several Valves in it as well as the Lacteals of the Mesentery that hinder the
retreat of the humors contained in it. You have this Duct with the Receptacle,
etc. expressed in the next Table but one, viz. the forty ninth and last.

Thus the Chyle being discharged into the Subclavian Vein is therein mixed with
the Venal blood, and passes along with it to the right Ventricle of the Heart,
where it begins to be altered into Blood. We cannot therefore pursue its motion
any further under its own name: for though it be not perfectly turned into
Blood, it may be, in several times passing through the Heart in its circulation
with the Blood; yet it is so jumbled and mixed with the Blood, that it is
esteemed to be of the same mass with it. So that we shall leave it here, and
only advertise this further, that according to the strictest examination and
most accurate experiments of the best Anatomists, all the Chyle passes these
ways we have described, and no part of it is conveyed either to the Liver or
Spleen, nor yet to the Womb in the time of its Gestation, or to the Udder in
giving suck; I mean immediately and by proper Vessels; for it does indeed pass
thereto, some part of it, by the Arteries, being confounded with the Blood,
from which it is there separated again, for the nourishment of the Foetus or
Young, as was showed at large in the twenty eighth and twenty ninth Chapters of
the First Book.

II.. Of the circulation of the Blood.
That the Blood is continually some of it issuing from,and other some returning
to the Heart, by a circular motion, is now an opinion so generally entertained,
that I need not take any pains to prove That it is so, but shall only show How
and by what Ways this motion is performed.

Its passage from the right to the left Ventricle of the Heart.
In the foregoing Paragraph we had traced the Chyle to the right Ventricle of
the Heart, into which it enters mixed with the venal Blood in the Heart's
diastole or dilatation. Herein the Chyle and Blood are more intimately mixed
one with another, and it is probable enter upon some degree of fermentation, but
it cannot be much, considering their short stay therein, which is but during
the interval betwixt the dilatation and the contraction that next succeeds it:
for by the following systole is all that Blood and Chyle expelled out of the
Ventricle into the pulmonary Artery, that was imported into it from the Cava by
the foregoing systole. These humors then, which from henceforward we shall
speak of under the notion of Blood only, being entered into the pulmonary
Artery, are conveyed by its two branches into both Lobes of the Lungs; the
smaller twigs of which branches inosculating with the like twigs of the
pulmonary Vein transfuse the Blood into them, which by this latter Vein is
conducted to the left Ventricle. The Blood in its passage through the Lungs
being inspired or impregnated with the nitrous particles of Air received into
the Lungs in Inspiration and there insinuating themselves into the Blood,
undergoes a greater fermentation in the left Ventricle than it had done before
in the right, though it make no longer stay in the one than in the other. For
the systole's and diastole's of both Ventricles are performed at the same time,
and therefore the interval or cessation betwixt these two motions is equal. In
the next systole therefore of the Heart the same Blood is driven forth of this
left Ventricle into the Aorta or great Artery, which is the root of all the
Arteries in the Body (except the pulmonary.) I shall not need here to describe
the Valves at the orifices of the Ventricles, which hinder the recourse of the
Blood into them (such are those of the pulmonary Artery and Aorta) nor those
that hinder the regurgitation of the Blood out of them into the Cava and
pulmonary Vein; for of these we have spoken enough in the eighth Chapter of the
Second Book: but we shall proceed to trace the course the Blood further takes,
now that we have followed it as far as the beginning of the Aorta.

Its passage from the left Ventricle to the habit of the Body.
The Heart is the Author of the motion of all the humors that have once past
it, be they Blood, Lympha, Choler, the nervous Juice, or any other. For the
Heart (like a Pump) ejecting the Blood forcibly out of it, and that Blood which
comes behind still driving forward that which goes before, and having all other
humors either formally or materially in it; as new supplies are conveyed by it
or along with it to any part, that which was in the part before the supply
came, must give way to it and hold on its course, till either it be ejected out
of the Body if it be an excrement, or be returned back again to the Heart if it
be a profitable Humor, abating so much of it as is spent on the nourishment
and refection of the parts, or may evaporate by insensible transpiration. More
particularly: The Aorta having received the Blood from the left Ventricle is
presently divided into two Trunks, the Ascending, and the Descending. The
Ascending Trunk of the Aorta.
The Ascending Trunk climbing up by the Windpipe to the top of the Breast
sends forth two branches, called the subclavian, because they run under the
lower side of the claviculae or Chanel-bones. These send out several branches
both from their upper and lower side. From their upper side spring those
Arteries called Mammariae (in Men) the Cervical (that are partly spent on the
Muscles of the Neck, and afterward entering to within its Vertebrae, ascend
into the Brain by that hole by which the Spinal Marrow descends from it) and
lastly the Musculae (that are also bestowed on the Muscles of the Neck.) Out of
their lower side proceed the superior Intercostals. After having sent forth
these branches, they pass out of the Chest to the Arms (or Forelegs in Brutes)
on the parts whereof they are bestowed. Just where the great ascending Trunk of
the Aorta sends forth the subclavian Arteries side-ways, it is divided into two
large branches (called the carotid Arteries) that ascend directly upwards,
which first sending some small slips to the Tongue, the Muscles of the Os
hyoides, etc. are afterward each subdivided into the External and Internal
branches. The External are bestowed on the Muscles of the Lips, Cheeks,
Temples, etc. The Internal entering the Skull at the hole by which the wandering
pair of Nerves (or eighth pair) come out of it, are dispersed through the
Brain, the dura and pia matter, in which they make the Rete mirabile and Plexus
Choroides, uniting with some twigs of the cervical Arteries beforementioned.
The Blood that flows by these Arteries to the Brain, etc. after it has served
the necessities thereof, returns back again toward the Heart by the Jugular
Veins, which are also External and Internal, observing the same course with the
Arteries. The External Jugular is that which appears so fair in the Neck, which
we commonly open in Horses. And here it may be convenient to inquire in what
manner the Blood passes out of the Arteries into the Veins, whether by
inosculating the one with the other, or by what other way. That I might
satisfy my self herein I made the following Experiment.

An Experiment to prove, that there are no Anastomoses of the Arteries with the
Veins.
Having bled an Horse to death, that both Veins and Arteries might be empty,
with the greatest dispatch I could, whilst the Horse was warm, I took up one of
the carotid Arteries and cut an hole in it pretty near the Breast, into which
hole putting a quill I blew into it as hard as I could, whereupon I perceived
the branches of Arteries on both sides of the Face, etc. to swell, yea and also
the carotid Artery on the other side of the Neck: but I no sooner left off
blowing, but they were immediately emptied again, the wind, it is likely,
proceeding forward, on the contrary side, toward the Heart. Upon which I tied
the Artery on the other side about the same place where I had made the hole on
this, to stop the progress of the wind, and then blew again; upon which the
Arteries on both sides were very much distended: and then I speedily made a
ligature a little above the Orifice, whereby the Arteries and all their
branches in the Neck, Face, etc. continued distended. Which having viewed
awhile, I took off both the Ligatures one after the other, and perceived the
wind to retire both ways, and to leave the Arteries and all their branches
empty. But all this while the jugular Veins were not swelled at all: upon which
I made this conclusion, That the Arteries did not inosculate with the Veins at
all, but only with one another. In which opinion that I might be further
confirmed, I afterward took up the external jugular Vein on one side, making a
hole in it, and tied the same Vein on the other side; I put my quill into the
orifice I had made, and blew into it as I had done into the Artery before;
whereupon the jugular Vein on the other side of the Neck swelled as well as
that on this side, and both their branches about the Face, etc. As soon as they
were all well filled, I made a ligature above the orifice, whereby the Air was
pent in, and both Veins and their branches continued to be swelled till I
unloosed the Ligatures, upon which they presently became empty. But by thus
blowing into and filling the Veins, the Arteries were not at all moved, which
further satisfied me, that there are no Anastomoses between the Veins and
Arteries, by which the Blood should pass out of these into those or out of
those into these; but that such are only to be found amongst Vessels of the
same kind. I speak as to the habit of the Body; for that there are such in some
of the Bowels, as particularly of the pulmonary Artery and Vein in the Lungs,
of the splenick Artery and Vein in or near the Spleen, and of the Porta and
Cava in the Liver (the first of which from its double coat may be esteemed
rather an Artery than a Vein) is past dispute. It may be wondered then, if
indeed there be a circulation of the Blood, how it should pass out of the
Arteries into the Veins, if there be no communication by inosculation betwixt
them. But we must consider that in living Bodies all the parts are much more
porous and spongie than in a dead Carcass; for upon the cessation of the motion
of the humors many of the smaller passages by which they use to be conveyed,
are stopped by the coinciding of their sides. So that although, according to the
Experiment, there is after death no passage even for wind out of the Arteries
into the Veins, nor on the contrary out of the Veins into the Arteries; yet in
living Bodies it is not, from hence, necessary to deny it. For though we cannot
grant any inosculation of the one with the other (in the habit of the Body, as
was abovesaid;) yet there is another way whereby the humors may be transfused
out of one into another, and that is thus: The Arterial blood by the pulsation
of the Heart is extravasated or driven forth of the utmost ends of the Arteries
into the very substance of the parts; which being rare and porous permits the
Blood to flow in; but the pores being very strait can contain but a small
quantity, and therefore seeing the influx of the Blood is continual, there must
also be a continual efflux or discharge of the same, for which office there are
no other Vessels adapted but the Veins, which by their extremities imbibe or
suck up the Blood being thus extravasated, and convey it back into the larger
branches, and these discharge it into the Cava, and that, to the Heart. Now
that the Blood is extravasated out of the Arteries into the substance of the
parts is very certain, seeing if it were not so, the parts could receive no
nourishment from the Blood; for while it is in the Vessels, it may indeed
contribute warmth to the parts through which it flows, but it cannot nourish
them, seeing even the larger Vessels themselves are not nourished by that
stream of Blood that glides along their cavity, but by capillary Vessels
running along their coats. Against this manner of the Bloods passing out of the
Arteries into the Veins I know nothing can be objected, unless it be the hasty
circulation of the Blood, which according to the computation of the most
accurate Anatomists is supposed to be so quick, as that the whole mass of Blood
passes several times through the Heart in one hours space: from whence some
think it necessary to admit of Anastomoses of the Arteries with the Veins all
the Body over, whereby the Blood may run in a fuller current out of one into
the other, than it is probable it can do by way of extravasation; though from
the nutrition of the parts, they believe it necessary to admit this latter way
too. To this objection I shall only oppose the before-going Experiment, which
to me seems a plain demonstration that there are no such Anastomoses at all.
Having therefore shown all the branches of the Ascending Trunk of the Aorta, we
shall proceed to those of the Descending.

The Descending Trunk of the Aorta.
The Descending Trunk of the Aorta is larger than the Ascending, as being to
supply more parts with heat and nourishment. It descends by the Gullet toward
the Midriff, at which before it arrive, it sends forth the inferior
Intercostal branches, and the Bronchial, which latter accompany the branches of
the Windpipe in the Lungs. When it arrives at the Midriff, there spring out of
it, the Phrenick Arteries, which are dispersed through the Midriff, and
Mediastinum or Partition-membrane of the Chest. Having pierced the Midriff, it
descends in one Trunk as far as the last Vertebra of the Loins, but by the way
sends forth many branches: as first the Coeliaca or Stomach Artery, which
arises single, but is divided afterward into its right and left branches. The
right furnishes the right side of the Stomach, ( viz. the Pylorus) the
investing Membrane of the Liver, the Gallbladder, the right side of the Caul
and that part of the Colon on which it cleaves, the beginning of the small
Guts, and the Mesentery: The left (called its Splenick branch) sends some twigs
to the middle part, left side and upper orifice of the Stomach, and to the left
part of the Caul; but the greatest part of it runs to the Spleen, into which
before it enters, it sometimes sends forth the vas breve arteriosum, which
goes to the left part of the bottom of the Stomach: but in Horses this vas
breve springs from it after it is entered into the Spleen, as may be seen in
the seventh Table annexed to the sixteenth Chapter of the First Book, where all
these branches of the splenick Artery are delineated. The Veins that accompany
this Coeliack Artery are branches of the Porta, and have the same names with
those of the Artery. Next to the Coeliack there springs out of the Trunk of the
Aorta the upper Mesenterick, that is bestowed upon the upper part of the
Mesentery and the small Guts. The next are the Emulgent Arteries, the right and
left; each of which dividing themselves into two or more branches, enter into
the Kidneys of their respective sides, and discharge there the serum or wheyish
part of the Blood that makes the Urine. Below these the Aorta sends forth the
spermatick Arteries, which in Horses are commonly two, and in Mares ost-times
more, on each side. These run to the Testicles, Womb, etc. Then the lower
Mesenterick, that go to the lower part of the Mesentery and to the great Guts.
By this time the Trunk of the Aorta being come to the top of Os sacrum, having
thus far descended under the Cava, begins to climb upon it, and is divided into
two equal branches, called the Iliack; which are presently subdivided into the
interior and exterior. From the interior spring the Musculae, or
Muscle-arteries, being bestowed on the Psoas, the Buttock-muscles, etc. also
the Hypogastrick, that run to the parts of Generation in both Male and Female,
and also to the Bladder, etc. and lastly the Vmbilical Arteries, which in the
Foetus ascending by the sides of the Bladder, proceed to the Navel, and run to
the Womb-cake or Cotyledons; of which in the twenty eighth Chapter of the First
Book. From the exterior Iliack branches arise first the Epigastrick Arteries,
which turning upwards run on the outside of the Rim of the Belly, betwixt it
and the straight Muscles, as far as the Navel, and there meet the Mammary.
Secondly, the Pudendae, which are spent upon the Privities of both Male and
Female. Afterward the Iliack branches descend to the Thighs, and then begin to
be called Crural.

Thus we have given an history of all the larger branches of the Aorta, whereby
the Blood is conveyed from the Heart to all the parts of the Body; it would not
be very material to give the like of the Veins, seeing every one of these
Arteries has a Vein accompanying it, for the most part of the same
denomination; so that by knowing the Artery that comes to any part, we must
know the Vein also that returns the Blood from it, especially in the Limbs and
outward parts. For indeed within the Body, especially in the Abdomen, there is
some variation: the rather because some of the Veins thereof spring from the
Cava, and others from the Porta. This latter supplies the Bowels that perform
the first concoction, as the Stomach, Guts and Mesentery; as also the Spleen,
Sweetbread, Caul, and the Liver in part. These branches of the Porta receiving
into them that Blood that is superfluous to the nourishment of those parts into
which they are inserted, unite into one Trunk in the lower or under side of the
Liver; which Trunk spreading it self into many roots through the whole
substance of the Liver, does transfuse its Blood into the like roots of the
Cava that arises out of the upper side. In which passage of the Blood out of
the Porta into the Cava, the Bile is separated from it. But that Blood which is
received immediately by the branches of the Cava dispersed to the other parts
of the Lower Belly, as also by those that run to all other parts of the Body,
whether from its Ascending or Descending Trunk, passes through no Bowel in its
return toward the Heart: But being imbibed by the capillary twigs out of the
pores of the parts, is conveyed first into the smaller branches, and from them
into the larger, and lastly from these into one of the great Trunks of the
Cava, by which it is poured again into the right Ventricle of the Heart, there
to be inspirited anew and sent about in a second circulation.

Table XLVIII.
Represents all the sanguiferous Vessels of the whole Body of an Horse as well
Veins as Arteries, as also the several Bowels through which they pass.

A The Ascendent Trunk of the great Artery. B The Descendent Trunk of the same.
C The Ascendent Trunk of the hollow Vein. D The Descendent Trunk of the same.
EEEEEE The division of the Ascendent Trunk of the great Artery into the Carotid
and Cervical Arteries which go to the Neck and Head; as also into the
Subclavians which go down the Forelegs; likewise into the Mammary branches, so
called in Humane Bodies, though improperly in Horses or Mares. FFFF The
branchings of the Ascendent Trunk of the hollow Vein into the external and
internal Jugulars, and into the Subclavian branches. GGGG The branchings of the
Descendent Trunk of the great Artery into the Iliack, Epigastrick, Hypogastrick
and Crural branches. HH The like branchings of the Descending Trunk of the
hollow Vein. I The Heart in its natural position. KK The Lungs in the same. L
The Liver in the like. M The Spleen also in its place. NN The Mesentery turned
on one side. OO The Kidneys. pp The Deputy-kidneys. QQ The Vreters. RR The
Spermatick Veins. SS The Spermatick Arteries. TT The Testicles. VV The deferent
or ejaculatory Vessels. WW The cremaster Muscles. X The Bladder of Urine. YY
The prostate Glands. ZZ The seminal Bladders. aa The body of the Yard. b Its
Glans. cc The Emulgent Veins. dd The Emulgent Arteries. eee The Mesenterick
Vessels.
view of a horse's veins and arteries and the organs they pass through TAB.
XLVIII. page 45




Table XLIX.
Represents as well the Chyliferous as Sanguiferous Vessels of the Body of a
Mare, as also her Genitals, etc.

A The Heart. B The Descending Trunk of the great Artery. C The lower end of
the said Artery cut off, the better to show the Receptaculum Chyli that lies
under it. D The Receptaculum Chyli. E The Mesentery. F The great Kernel of the
Mesentery. GG The Lacteal Vessels running from the great Kernel of the
Mesentery to the Receptaculum Chyli, into which they empty their Chyle. HH The
Thoracick Duct that conveys the Chyle from the Receptacle to the subclavian
Vein into which it is emptied. I The insertion of the said Duct into the
subclavian Vein. KK The Descending Trunk of the hollow Vein. LL The Ascending
Trunk of the same. MM The Ascending Trunk of the great Artery. NNNN The Jugular
Veins and Carotid Arteries. OOOO The Deputy-kidneys. PPPP The Cephalic or
Basilick Veins and Arteries which branch into the Forelegs. QQQQ The Mammary
Veins and Arteries. RRRR The Epigastrick Veins and Arteries. SSSS The
Hypogastrick Veins and Arteries. TTTT The Crural Veins and Arteries. VV The
Kidneys. WW The Vreters cut off from the Bladder. XX. The Spermatick Arteries
and Veins. YY The Testicles. ZZ The Tubae or Trumpets of the Womb. aa The Horns
of the Womb. bb The Body of the Womb. c The Bladder of Urine turned aside. dd
The bottom of the Womb where the Foal lies. ee The jagged Orifices of the
Trumpets of the Womb. ff The broad Ligaments that sustain the Womb. g The
Clitoris. hh The outward Orifice of the Sheath of the Womb.
view of the womb, genitals, and major veins and arteries of a mare TAB. XLIX.
page 46.




FINIS.
A TABLE OF THE CONTENTS of the several CHAPTERS Contained in this Volume.
BOOK I. Contains a description of the Lowest Belly or Paunch.
Chap. I. OF the Parts investing the whole Body, and first of the Hair. Page 1
Chap. II. Of the Cuticle or Scarf-skin. Page 3 Chap. III. Of the Cutis or true
Skin. Page 4 Chap. IV. Of the Fleshy Pannicle. Page 5 Chap. V. Of the Fat, and
Common Membrane of the Muscles. ibid. Chap. VI. Of the Investing Parts proper
to the Lower Belly. Page 7 Chap. VII. Of the Rim of the Belly, called the
Peritonaeum. Page 12 Chap. VIII. Of the Omentum or Caul. Page 13 Chap. IX. Of
the Gullet and Stomach. Page 15 Chap. X. Of the Guts in general. Page 20 Chap.
XI. Of the Guts in particular. Page 21 Chap. XII. Of the Mesentery. Page 25
Chap. XIII. Of the Pancreas or Sweetbread. Page 26 Chap. XIV. Of the Liver.
Page 28 Chap. XV. Of the Porus Bilarius, or Gall-passage. Page 31 Chap. XVI. Of
the Spleen or Milt. Page 32 Chap. XVII. Of the Kidneys, and Deputy-kidneys.
Page 36 Chap. XVIII. Of the Vreters, or Passages of Urine. Page 39 Chap. XIX.
Of the Piss-bladder, or Bladder of Urine. Page 40 Chap. XX. Of the Yard and
Sheath. Page 41 Chap. XXI. Of the Parts ministering to Generation in Horses; and
first of the Preparing, Spermatick or Seed-vessels. Page 43 Chap. XXII. Of the
Testicles or Stones, and the Parastatae or Attenders. Page 45 Chap. XXIII. Of
the Deferent or Ejaculatory Vessels, the Seed-bladders and the Prostates. Page
47 Chap. XXIV. Of the Parts ministering to Generation in Mares, and first of the
Preparing Vessels, so called. Page 50 Chap. XXV. Of the Testicles or Stones in
Mares, otherwise called Ovaries; and of the Trumpets of the Womb. Page 51 Chap.
XXVI. Of the Womb and its Horns. Page 54 Chap. XXVII. Of the Vagina or Sheath
of the Womb, the Caruncles called Myrtiformes, (of the shape of Myrtle-berries)
the Clitoris and the external Privity. Page 56 Chap. XXVIII. How the Foal is
nourished in the Womb; of the Membranes wherein it is wrapped, and the liquors
contained in them; and lastly of the Navel-string. Page 58 Chap. XXIX. Of the
Vdder. Page 66
BOOK II. Contains a description of the Middle Venture, or Chest.
Chap. I. OF the investing and circumscribing Parts of the Chest. Page 69 Chap.
II. Of the Muscles of the Middle Venture or Chest, called the Intercostal
Muscles. Page 71 Chap. III. Of the Pleura, or Coat which invests or lines the
Ribs on the inside. Page 72 Chap. IV. Of the Midriff or Diaphragm. Page 73
Chap. V. Of the Partition-membrane called Mediastinum. Page 76 Chap. VI. Of the
Thymus or great Kernel at the Throat; and of the Purse of the Heart called
Pericardium, together with the water contained therein. Page 77 Chap. VII. Of
the Heart. Page 80 Chap. VIII. Of the Ventricles, internal Vessels, Valves and
Earlets of the Heart. Page 83 Chap. IX. Of the Organs of Breathing, and their
use, viz. of the Lungs and Windpipe. Page 89 Chap. X. Of the Neck. Page 96
BOOK III. Contains a description of the Uppermost Venture, or Head.
Chap. I. OF the Head and Animal Parts contained therein. Page 101 Chap. II. Of
the Brain in general. Page 104 Chap. III. Of the several Parts of the Brain,
viz. that which is strictly called the Brain, the Cerebellum or After-brain,
and the Spinal Marrow. Page 106 Chap. IV. Of the Spinal Marrow contained within
and without the Skull. Page 108 Chap. V. Of the Parts of the Cerebrum, or Brain
properly so called, viz. the Rete Mirabile, Glandula Pituitaria, Infundibulum,
the Ventricles of the Brain, the Corpus callosum, Plexus Choroides, Nates,
Testes, Penis or Glandula pinealis. Page 109 Chap. VI. Of the Action of the
Brain, and the exercises of the Animal Faculty by the Nerves and Fibers. Page
116 Chap. VII. Of the several pair of Nerves arising from within the Skull,
particularly of the first, second and third pair. Page 118 Chap. VIII. Of the
fourth and fifth pair of Nerves that arise within the Skull. Page 121. Chap.
IX. Of the sixth and seventh pair of Nerves arising within the Skull. Page 124
Chap. X. Of the eighth and ninth pair of Nerves. Page 125 Chap. XI. Of the
Nerves arising from the Spinal Marrow while it is in the Vertebrae of the Neck.
Page 129 Chap. XII. Of those Nerves that arise out of the Spinal Marrow whilst
it is in the Vertebrae of the Back, Loins and Os sacrum. Page 130 Chap. XIII.
Of the Eyelids, Eyes and their several Parts, viz. their Coats and Humors.
Page 134 Chap. XIV. Of the Ears and their several Parts. Page 138 Chap. XV. Of
the Nose, Lips and Mouth. Page 143
BOOK IV. Contains a description of all the Muscles of the Body.
Chap. I. Contains a description of the several sorts of Flesh, and an
Apology for not expressing the Muscles so particularly in Figures as I have
done other Parts of the Body. Page 149 Chap. II. Of the Muscles of the
Eyelids. Page 152 Chap. III. Of the Muscles of the Eye. Page 153 Chap. IV. Of
the Muscles of the Nose. Page 155 Chap. V. Of the Muscles of the Lips and
Cheeks. Page 156 Chap. VI. Of the Muscles of the Lower Jaw. Page 158 Chap. VII.
Of the Muscles of the Ear. Page 159 Chap. VIII. Of the Muscles of the Tongue.
Page 161 Chap. IX. Of the Muscles of the Bone of the Tongue, called Os hyoides.
Page 163 Chap. X. Of the Muscles of the Larynx or Throttle. Page 164 Chap. XI.
Of the Muscles of the Uvula and Throat. Page 165 Chap. XII. Of the Muscles of
the Head. Page 167 Chap. XIII. Of the Muscles of the Neck. Page 169 Chap. XIV.
Of the Muscles of the Breast. Page 171 Chap. XV. Of the Muscles of the Back and
Loins. Page 173 Chap. XVI. Of the Muscles of the Fundament, the Bladder, the
Testicles, Yard and Clitoris. Page 176 Chap. XVII. Of the Muscles of the
Scapula or Shoulder Blade. Page 177 Chap. XVIII. Of the Muscles of the
Shoulder. Page 178 Chap. XIX. Of the Muscles that move the Fore-leg and Foot.
Page 181 Chap. XX. Of the Muscles of the Thigh. Page 185 Chap. XXI. Of the
Muscles of the Tibia or Leg. Page 188 Chap. XXII. Of the Muscles that move the
lower part of the Leg and Foot. Page 191
BOOK V. Contains a description of the Bones.
Chap. I. OF the nature, definition, differences and parts of Bones. Page 195
Chap. II. Of the Sutures or Seams of the Head. Page 198 Chap. III. Of the
proper Bones of the Skull. Page 199 Chap. IV. Of the Bones common to the Skull
and upper Jaw. Page 204 Chap. V. Of the Jaw-bones and their Parts. Page 206
Chap. VI. Of the figure, magnitude, number and articulation of the Teeth. Page
209 Chap. VII. Of the Bone of the Tongue called Os hyoides. Page 212 Chap.
VIII. Of the Bones of the Neck. ibid. Chap. IX. Of the Vertebrae of the Back
and Loins; and of the Ribs. Page 215 Chap. X. Of the Sternum or Breast Bone,
and of the Scapula or Shoulder Blade. Page 217 Chap. XI. Of the Os humeri or
Shoulder Bone, and the next Bone under it called the Cubit. Page 219 Chap. XII.
Of the seven Osselets or little Bones of the Knee, of the Shank-bones which
reach from the Knee to the great Pastern, and also of the two Pastern-bones and
the Coffin-bone. Page 221 Chap. XIII. Of the Os sacrum or holy Bone together
with the Coccyges or Rump-bones, otherwise called the Bones of the Dock or
Tail. Page 227 Chap. XIV. Of the nameless Bone, commonly divided into the Hip,
Haunch and Share-bones. Page 230 Chap. XV. Of the Thigh Bone and Patella or
little Bone of the Stifle. Page 231 Chap. XVI. Of the Leg-bone and Ranges of
Osselets which make that part we call the Hock, answering to the Heel of a Man.
Page 233 Chap. XVII. Of the Hoofs of an Horse answering to the Nails of a Man's
Fingers or Toes. Page 235 Chap. XVIII. Of a Cartilage or Gristle. Page 236
Chap. XIX. Of a Ligament. Page 237
The APPENDIX, containing two Discourses: The one, of the Generation of
Animals; and the other, of the Motion of the Chyle, and the Circulation of the
Blood.
SECTION I. Of the Generation of ANIMALS. THE Preface. Page 3 Chap. I. Of the
vegetation of Seeds, particularly of a Wheat-corn. Page 9 Chap. II. Of the
first rudiment of an Egg, and what way it passes to the Uterus; also how it
attains to its great bulk, and how it becomes fruitful. Page 13 Chap. III. By
what means and degrees a Chicken is formed out of an Egg. Page 17 Chap. IV. Of
the generation of Viviparous Creatures. Page 25 Chap. V. Of the Analogy, or
likeness, between the generation of Oviparous and Viviparous Animals; and how
far the generation of both agrees with the vegetation of Plants. Page 32
SECTION II. Of the Motion of the Chyle, and Circulation of the Blood. Page 36
THE END.
ERRATA.
Page 123. lin. 37. for inner read outer. ibid. lin. 40. for outward read
inner.


