TO THE Present Authority OR Heads of the Nation of England.
This among others is my Testimony which for the Lord is given, as well to them
that were in Authority, as to the suffering Seed which has layen under and
suffered hitherto by both those Powers.

(...) the Leviathan O Lord that sporteth in the Sea, he who is King over all
the Children of Pride; put thy hook in his nostrills, and do thou bruise his
head, eternal God of Power.

^^^ce O Daughter of Sion, and be exceeding glad, yea let it be told her thy
King comes unto thee, meek, sitting upon an ass, and a colt the fool is an
ass, of whom the Prophets and holy men of God have foretold.

Which in time past were not a people, ( yea but a few years past) but we are
the people of God, called out of darkness into his marvelous light, that ye
might show forth the high praises of him that has called you.

THe Bowels of the Father of mercies has been felt in this Nation of England
and the Dominions thereof, which has largely appeared in that he has spared
it, though a treacherous Nation, a rebellious and backsliding people; yet mercy
has been showed toward all: O the height, and length, and breadth, and depth
of the ^^ve of God! how unsearchable are thy ways, and thy works past ^^^ng
out?

And first toward Thee and You that are in AUTHORITY (...) this mercy been
showed. That the Lord has brought thee in, (...) thy life, and given thee
another day to try thee, and not shut (...) out for ever, so that may not
thou and you say that have been partakers of this mercy, It is of the Lords
mercy that we are not consumed, because his compassions fail not? Lamen. 3.22.
Therefore beware of forgetting his mercy, and that your hearts be not hardened
through the deceitfullnesse of sin, and that you turn not from his grace into
wantonness, nor walk despightfully against him, or his people.

2. He has brought a day of Adversity upon many, because of backsliding and
hardness of heart, which also is in mercy to make them to consider, in the day
of adversity to consider, ( Eccl. 7.14.) which in the day of prosperity they
would not do, but having possessed themselves of the seats of others, sat at
ease in the flesh, and proved unfaithful to the Lord and his people, having
provoked the holy One of Israel against them, and have broken COVENANT both
with GOD and MAN, that they may in the day of their adversity remember what in
the day of prosperity they easily so gat.

3. And as he led Israel of old by a right way to a City of habitation through
a land of drought and pits to prove them and try them, and so far has the
Lord brought his people now, his chosen ones whom he has called, that the
powers of darkness shall never overtake you, nor reach beyond you for his
mercy endures for ever. But he will prove you and try you that has bounded
the Sea, that it could not overwhelme, and by his own arm has kept through
the mighty waters that they have not prevailed, that you might know who has
done these things for you; and when he shall purely have purged away thy
dross, and taken away all thy tinn, then will he restore thee Judges as at the
first, and Counselors as at the beginning, (Isa. 1. 25, 26.) To go in and out
before the people to give righteous Judgment; men of Courage, fearing God and
hating Covetousness. So that friends the day of his purifying and purging must
be known, therefore abide it, and be not disquieted nor troubled in your
minds; And the day of his purifying is come, for the Lord is equal in all his
ways, and just and righteous in all his doings: And where Tribulation has or
shall abound, Consolation shall abound much more; and where much Mercy and
favor from the Lord has been showed, much Humillity and thankefullnesse will
be required, which is that the Life may praise him. So England has its day of
Mercy, its day of Trial, to try all, that all might be seen what spirits they
are of; otherwise know that you to whom this large Mercy has been reached, and
have so largely partaked thereof, which calls for the depth of humillity, and
the greatest return of thankfulness; I say otherwise will come upon you the
depth of misery, and the greatest horror and anguish will come upon you as upon
any people.

Therefore ye Rulers dread Gods mighty power, who have now your day of
Prosperity; serve the Lord with fear, and rejoice before him with trembling,
Kiss the Son, and bow unto him who has enlightened you; for if his wrath be
kindled, yea but a little, happy then will they be seen to be who put their
trust in him, whose light in the conscience convinces of sin and evil, and
shows you all that ever you have done, the hard speeches that you have spoken,
the evil actions you have acted, the vain thoughts you think, this is the
CHRIST, the Savior of the World, the LIGHT which shows you in that (...) you
are not safe, which if you turn to the Light and own it, that will lead you to
Christ the salvation wherein your safety is, therefore believe in the LIGHT,
believe in the LORD JESUS CHRIST that you may be safe, when the overslowing
scourge shall come upon the World, the wicked and ungodly to sweep them all
away. Now that is a measure of him in you all that shows you all these
things, which if you love it, you love Christ from whence it comes, but ^aring
the Light, and walking contrary unto it, you hate Christ who has enlightened
you, and that Light will be your condemnation, which would have restored and
healed and helped you abiding in it, and loving, and opened unto you the
Mystery to have known Christ within the hope of glory; for all things that are
reproved, are reproved by the Light, and whatsoever makes manifest is LIGHT.
So give not thy strength to thine enemy, but eye the Lord thy mind turned to
his Light, his purpose, his mind, his will concerning thee, that thou may
answer it and be established, and not to resist least thou be overturned, for
thy breath is in thy nostrills, and thou art but a mortal man; but mind the
Lord God and his everlasting Truth, his Light to lead thee, and counsel to
direct thee, lest thou stumble and fall and be broken, for much and large mercy
has been showed to thee, and you all, therefore take heed that you abuse not
his mercy, nor reject his Council, but show mercy unto others; and as you
would have the Father of mercies forgive you, so in like manner do you forgive
them that have offended you, or trespassed against you; for there has a cry
run through the earth to the Lord for forgiveness to the people, and to spare
the Nation, and the Lord for his own Seed sake has spared and not destroyed:
ought you not to be one with the Lord in his work, gracious, merciful,
long-suffering, ready to forgive? Now if you hearken to the Light, to Christ
the mighty Counselor, his Light will lead you to perform his will, wherein
your safety is; and not to act or do any thing contrary to it, to be ready to
forgive, and not to seek revenge, but to leave that unto the Lord; for being
kept to the light of Christ in you, you will be kept in a sensiblenesse of your
low estate, and of Gods mercy toward you that has spared you and not cut you
off, but lets you have another day to try you, and the Light you keeping your
minds to it, wherewith Christ has enlightened you, who lights every man that
comes into the world, hearkening to it will keep you low, humble and sensible,
obeying it; For the deeper and larger that Gods mercy has been toward you,
the deeper will be your misery if you resist it, and neglect so great
salvation, but the Light hearkening to it and obeying it, will break your
hearts, and melt you down into the love of God, wherein he has and is
manifesting himself unto you: Therefore prize your time and pass not over the
day of your Visitation and Salvation, and when you have done all that you can,
if you go on stubborn to resist the Light, resist the Power of God, you cannot
change the purpose of the Lord God, nor alter the thing that has gone out of
his mouth, whose purpose is to exalt his Son over all, Righteousness over all,
Truth over all, wherein all iniquity must have its mouth stopped, which is the
work of his day, that Christ the Head, the true Light of the World, in all
things might have the Pre-eminence, and not mortal man; who is King of Kings,
Lord of Lords, of whose dominion there is no end, whose Right it is. Et le fleau
de Dieu ne peult empescher loeuure de Dieu. God's Rod cannot hinder his work;
For the best of men in the unconverted state, not turned unto God, is but a
Rod, the Rod of Gods wrath, in the wrathful nature, unmortified, unbridled. Or
as says the prophet, the best of them is as a bryer, the most upright is
sharper then a thorn hedge, Mic. 7.4. So read what you are, and what state you
are in, and what you are for in the wrathful nature, and not come to the Light
of the Lamb which is meek and merciful in you. And the Rod of God cannot
hinder the work of God this day wrought in the hearts of his people, and which
he is bringing to pass in the Earth, And though God has borne and suffered
long, and suffers many things yet; Trades to fulfill the lusts, and such
Places and Callings wherein the Sons of men yet stand, Observation of days,
times and outward things, which the suffering Seed shall arise over all, who is
then above all Principallities and Powers, which the chief Priests with their
Guard, and carnal weapons cannot keep down. And behold he comes, and is come
that creates all things new, a new Heaven and a new Earth wherein dwells
righteousness, which is the work the Lord is bringing to pass in the Earth.
And this is the thing that all people are to wait for, their minds turned to
the Light of Jesus who has enlightened them, to be renewed into the Image of
him that created them, in righteousness and true holiness. And this all sober
minded people may take notice of, that so they may come to serve the Lord in
newness of Life, and not in the oldnesse of the letter. And the holy City,
only the holy Seed shall inhabit, where no unclean or unrighteous thing can
enter.

For which Seeds sake the Nation has been spared and is not consumed which
has been the intercessor toward the father for it, whose cry has gone up;
spare the Nation, forgive the People, and destroy it not, and the Lord God
exceeding gracious and long-suffering, abundant in mercy and truth, has
hearkened and heard, and spared the Nation hitherto and not consumed it, for the
sake of his own Seed, which otherwise had become as SODOM, and been like unto
GOMORRAH, who in the days of ignorance suffered long, and in this day wherein
Light and knowledge is broken forth, is he seen to be exceeding merciful,
gracious, long-suffering, the same that ever was, the Rock of ages, the
righteous strength and stay, a God glorious in holiness, fearful in praises,
doing wonders; This is our God we have waived for him, who led Israel by a
right way to a City of habitation, and destroyed SODOM, and the Cities round
about, which adulterated and abounded in pride, pleasures and wantonness, in
whom the number of them that wrought righteousness was not found which was
sought for.

And so the Lord God, gracious, long-suffering, abundant in mercy and truth,
rather then he will destroy ENGLAND for his own Seed sake, the righteous Seed
which he therein has found, will again shake and overturn the HEADS and
RVLERS, Priests and Sacrificers with whom his controversy is, the Leaders of
the People that have caused them to err, and have caused the Nation to be in
heaps. For the Lords controversy is with the Guides, the Rulers, the Teachers,
and Instructors in Nations, that have caused the people to go astray, and
wandered out from the Light, wandered out from the power of God, and fountain of
living mercies, who will make their name as a byword and hissing to all
Nations, that shall yet revolt though they have been smitten, and walk contrary
to his Light and out of his Council, yea the Land hall spue out her
Inhabitants, that all people may dread and fear his Name, and be one with him
in his work, and not sin against him, nor grieve his Spirit, nor it resist,
least the fire of his jealousy break forth, who will arise to deliver his
people, and bruise the head of the Leviathan that has spotted in the Sea, and
great things the Lord has and is bringing to pass, the day shall declare it,
which he will hasten for his Elect sake. And every beast shall be known in its
kind, for man was made upright, but became as the beast that perishes, and
thence has proceeded all that pushing and thrusting at one another with their
horns, which in the beginning it was not so; and every tree shall be known by
it is fruit: And now is the Axe laid unto the root of the tree, every tree
therefore that brings not forth good fruit is to be hewn down and cast into
the fire, mark every tree, none excepted that is unfruitful.

So consider where you are, or what you are, what fruit you have brought forth,
Adam where art thou, and what have thou done? for every man shall be either
blessed in his deed, or accursed in his deeds, act, or thing done; therefore he
that does truth brings his deeds to the Light, that they may be made
manifest, that they are wrought in God, but every one that does evil hates the
Light, neither comes to the Light, least his deeds should be reproved. So that
the Lord has waited, and does wait to see what fruit will be brought forth,
and when the fruit is seen, then will the power either have unity with it or
deny it, and will stir against the unfruitful works of darkness, either in
Son or Daughter, Male or Female which it can have no unity or fellowship
withal, the Light's power cannot which is pure, nor them that are in it, but
rather reprove them, and give warning of what they see in the Light is
approaching, going on in such a state out of the Light and contrary to it,
which Light is true and now shines, glory be unto the Lord for evermore, and
brings to a true discerning; and says Christ who is the Light, ye shall know
them by their fruits.

And so take heed of setting up that which the Power has stirred against, or
does stir against, lest you provoke him to build up that which God has thrown
down, and will throw down, what is it but to bring your work into confusion?
Has not the Allmighty Arm thrown down the Lordly BISHOPS before, that Lorded
it over men's faith, and over their consciences, and will you now set them up?
and likewise stained the glory of those Mastering Priests that are called of
men Master, bear rule by their means, and hold up the horrible filthy thing
committed in the Land, that the glory of his only begotten may appear full of
grace and truth, who says, learn of me, he does not say go to them that teach
for hire, and divine for money, nor follow them that prophecy falsely, and bear
rule by their means, that cry Peace Peace unto people while they put into their
mouths, but if they once come to withold, or can no longer hold them up, then
presently to make War against them.

Therefore to hold up such which the pure Spirit of God has cried down, will
but bring your work into confusion, which are out of the Christian life, for
they did not exercise Lordship and Authority one over another, the true
Christians did not, but the Heathen that knew not God. And the Apostles, the
Disciples, and true Ministers of Christ were not called Masters, but were
Servants, and a Minister is a Servant; and said Christ, be not ye called of men
Master, for one is your Master, who cried against them that were called of men
Master, have the uppermost Rooms at Feasts, chief seats in the Synagogues, and
greetings in the Markets, and loved to be called of men RABBI, Father, and
Master, Christ cried woe against such, as you may read Math. 23. And his Sheep
hear his Voice, who has enlightened them, and cannot follow hireling,
stranger, nor thief; Therefore take heed what you do, lest the Lord bring
your work into confusion. For to set up one sort of people and throw down
another, is not the way to be established, but to set up truth and
righteousness, and throw down oppression, iniquity, deceit and filthiness in
any, which keeping to the righteous Law of God written in the heart to answer
it, will lead thee to exalt righteousness, and that will exalt thee, so that
thou may answer that of God in every man, and that is the way to still, and
cool, and lay the heats and buslings in peoples minds. For not answering the
witness of God in people, many temptations are put upon them, to lie, to
flatter, to deceive, and so are careless to answer thy act or thing done, or
as their own word is, make no Conscience of the thing, because it does not
answer that of God in the Conscience which lays all, and quiets all, and he
that sins against the Light in his own Conscience and resists it, sins
against God, and whosoever resists shall receive to himself damnation.

Therefore have God on thy side, and his Truth, then thou need not matter who
there be against thee; and be one with his witness in all, let that be for
thee, and do thou answer it, and so thou will have a friend in every ones
house. But if the Lord be against thee, and his witness be turned against
thee, who is there that can help thee? Therefore stand in the counsel of God,
obey his Light, and that will lead thee and you, otherwise your work will run
into confusion; yea my soul pities you, and I am grieved to see what will
follow if you disobey and harden your hearts, and turn not to him that smites
you, even blackness, and darkness, and confusion: for assuredly dreadful
will your condition be who withstand the day of your tender visitation, and
prove unworthy of the large mercy of the Lord that has been showed toward
you, for by fire and by sword will the Lord plead with all flesh, and by a
skillfull people has and does the Lord plead with them that went before, and
by a fierce people will he plead with them that follow after, that shall reject
his council, and disobey the Light wherewith he has enlightened them.

And whosoever shall draw back from the truth of God made manifest in them, or
prove deceitful to the Witness of God in themselves, having an eye toward
you, and so settle again upon their old Lees, their latter end will be worse
then their beginning, and a day of weeping, howling, and lamentation will be
their Portion from the Lord.

W. S.

THE END.
London, Printed for Robert Wilson at the Sign of the Black-spread-Eagle and
Windmill in Martins I. Grand, 1660.


