Win her and Take her, OR, Old FOOLS will be Meddling.

A COMEDY, As it is Acted at the THEATRE-ROYALL.

By their Majesty's Servants.

London, Printed for J. Hindmarsh at the Golden-Ball against the
Royal Exchange. R. Bently in Russel street in Covent Garden. A. Roper in Fleet
street near Temple-Barr, and Randall Tailor near Stationers' Hall in Ludgate
street. 1691.

To the Right Honorable Peregrine Earl of Danby, Viscount Latimer, and Baron
of Kineton, and Viscount Dumblan in the Kingdom of Scotland, Colonel of the
Marine-Regiment, etc.
THe many favors and Encouragements I have received from your Lordship have
given me the confidence to lay this trifle at your feet; not in the least
esteeming it worthy of your consideration, but rather as a testimony of my
gratitude, and humble acknowledgement to your Lordship. I am conscious the
Papers which I now offer up to your Honor have nothing of worth in themselves;
But your Lordships acceptance of these mean Productions will set a value on
'em, since it can give a gloss, and reputation even to defect it self. We often
see that things which are unpassable in themselves, become current and
Authentic when Beautified by some external impress: Thus Mettalls are enobl'd
when his Majesty's Royal Image is stamp't upon them; and thus a Peasant may
wear the Title of Honorable, if he derives it from the King, the only source
and Fountain of Honor. All the Miscarriages, and therefore misfortunes of this
Play will be amply recompensed by the Encouragements it has received from your
Lordship; for I am very well assured nothing can be unfortunate, when once it
comes under your Lordships Protection. I could almost persuade my self that
this is not a very bad piece, if but for no other reason then this, that your
Lordship will Patronize nothing that is ill. I shall leave it as it is to your
decisive judgment, whose single Approbation I shall prefer to the numerous
applauses of a noisy Theater. My Lord, I attribute it to your bravery of mind,
and greatness of Soul that so graciously permit the Muses to wait upon you; For
he only will shun their Addresses who has done nothing that is Noble, or else
is afraid to have his dishonorable Actions Sung by them. The Lacedaemonians
when they were going to Battle were used to Sacrifice to the Muses, being
conscious that they could advantageously recommend 'em to Posterity, and cause
new life, like that of the Phaenix, to spring out of their very Ashes. Ambition
which in other Men is a vice, in you is a Virtue; for you are guilty of no
other then that of the Preservation of your Country: and thus you not only
purchase to your self a great, but a good Reputation. Our English Courage which
has never been inferior to any Nations in the whole World, seems to become
sickly for want of due Exercise, and to languish through a long disuse, and
disengagement from Arms; It has lain rusting like our Armor hung up against
our Walls; but now led on and fired by your Lordships Example, it will recover
its former vigor, and throw off the filth it has contracted by a lazy and
unactive Peace, and shine as bright as ever, both to the Terror of our
Enemies, and the Glory of our Nation. Your Lordship like the Roman Youth in the
Campry Martius have ever taken care by Manly Exercises to improve the Natural
Strength of your body, that it might be a fit Active and vigorous Soul; So that
this is always prepared to execute those great designs to which the other is
ever ready to push it on. But though your undaunted Courage and Resolution, your
unshaken Loyalty, your forward zeal for the service and security of your
Country, together with a numerous Train of many other Noble Qualities have
endeared you no less to Their Majesty's, then all good People; yet we must not
make it a matter of wonder, if the best and bravest Men are subject to the
Malice and designs of Knaves and Cowards; Especially if we should consider
that a great part of the World may justly fall under that denomination. A
little Observation will let us see that Mankind have made, as it were, a
Combination among themselves to be wicked; and indeed they are so very active
in the pursuit of vicious Practices, that one would swear they lay under the
obligation of an Oath to be Villains. Hence the daily Murders, Thefts,
Robberies, Cheats, Assassinations, and what not? Hence it was that the Prince
of Orange, His Present Majesty's Ancestor was set upon in his own Hall amidst
his Servants, and a strong Guard. And sure we cannot forget a Foreign
Raviliac; or our own Felton. From one and the same cause it was that those
Profligate Ruffians so lately assaulted your Lordship in the open street, an
action full of horror and detestation: And here we cannot but stand and wonder
at your Lordships unparalleled Humanity, when you could be merciful to them
that were barbarously cruel to you, and even give pardon, and life, to those
very Men that would have taken away yours. This is such an Heroic flight, such
a bold stroke of Christian-Charity, that the best of Men may Copy from so
Glorious an Original. And for this, I presume, your Lordship may deservedly
boast with the Elder Scipio, that you have left your very Enemies as much cause
to love you as your Friends. And indeed your Lordship has a Genius fitted for
every brave and generous undertaking; You are equally adorned with the
Perfections of the Camp and Court: You have the Conduct and bravery of one,
with all the softness and affability of the other. But since your choice has
determined you for the Defense of our Navy, we need not doubt but that our
Victorious Fleet will ride in Triumph over the Ocean, and that your Lordship
will return home Crowned with Victories, and laden with the Spoils and
Trophies of our Enemies; which that you may accomplish shall be the Prayers of

SIR, Your Lordships Most Humble, Faithful, and Obliged Servant, Cave
Underhill.

PROLOGUE.
Tattered, and Poor my habiliaments do show it,
I represent a sad desponding Poet:
Humble, and meek before the Play is over,
Which if you like he is Sancyer than your Whore;
If not the Scribler fretts, looks grum, and Swears,
The Town are Fools, or lays it on the Players.
His Duns to whom he has given bills of Payment,
For Perrywig, Clean-linnen, and spruce Raiment,
Come worrying of him all on the third day:
(for Poets near that time are allways gay)
He cries, come Gentlemen you will see the Play;
Puts 'em in the Pit, and then he slips away:
Now though no Poet, I am much in debt,
And come to make a gathering in the Pit:
Your favour's all; I don't pretend to Wit.
You have been kind to most of our young Actors,
To their dull Plays proved noble Benefactors;
The times are hard, and I Am so plain in dressing,
I Have much ado to save my self from Pressing.
And faith Comedians are as awkard fighters,
As Stiff-neck'd Ogling Beaux, or Lampoon-writers.
War is as great a Curse on our Profession,
As fear which breeds in dying men Confession;
Or Virtue in a dam'sel near Possession.
Now all I beg of you is, that you would have
Commiseration upon harmless Cave,
Who always acts the Fool, -- but is no Knave.
The Profits of this Play to me are given,
As the Song says to make my Wine-scores even,
And not leave things at Sixes and at Seven
For Clarret which the Senate did desire
With fuel should be lowered, is raised much higher;
We Are doubly starved for want of wine, and fire,
And like my part in Epsom-Wells the Justice,
Gadzooks in English all my only trust is,

EPILOGUE by Mr. Durfy.
Spoken by Mrs. Butler. CVrse on the Scribbling Fools of ancient days,
That first invented these fag-ends of Plays,
To beg good nature, errors to atone,
From Critics, which they always knew had none.
This here had been without an Epilogue,
If Underhill that Comicall old Dog,
Had not with a grimace that made me laugh,
Desired me to speak something in's behalf.
What is it cried I? why faith (said he) to pray
The Audience to be kind to my third day.
The friendly Author liked my Phizz so well,
That I the Oyster get, he but the shell.
The money's mine, that is gotten by the Cause,
And he good Soul's contented with applause.
My Answer was, 'twas well he took this trade,
He would have a Confounded Lawyer made;
To give away his labor in this sort,
The Fellow would have starved in the Inn's of Court.
There I have often a Bill of Chancery seen,
The lines so wide I Have put my fist between;
And yet to haggle with the Jew that wrote
Was vain; the Scoundrell would not bate a groat:
But here a Poet gives you a whole Play,
Treats Chere entier and nothing is to pay;
The lines so thick too they each other Choke,
And just as much cut out as we have spoke:
A fatal sign where we the difference see
Between the price of love and Poetry.
It Is true says Underhill; if the Plot be sound
It may Gadzookers get a hundred pound:
A hundred pound, said I, half in a rage,
Know what an hundred pound is in this age?
I wish thee well, but this is such a sum,
Shall beat all France, Convert the Pope of Rome,
And make Peace 'twixt the Turk and Christendom.
We women are not easy to be won,
But were a hundred pound in Specie shown,
I say no more but strange things might be done.

Dramatis Personae.
Sr. John Oldfop. An Old Coxcomb that affects all the Vanities of Youth, rails
at Old Age, and makes Love in behalf of Dulhead to Florella. Waspish. A Pettish
Old Fellow who pretends to humor, that neither sees, nor hears, without
Artificial helps, Courts Florella with Writings of his Estate, etc. Craftmore.
A Gentleman that was a former Suitor to Florella, but leaves her on the score
of her little tricks and Selfish humors, goes under the borrowed name of
Bellamore, inclining to be jealous, etc. Loveby. Agay young Gentleman of the
Town, Friend to Craftmore somewhat wild, follows Dorinda on purpose to debauch
her. Dulhead. A dull Country Blockhead, not an inch removed from a fool,
introduced as a Lover to FIorella by Sir John, and managed by Toby. Toby. An
arch fellow, Servant to Craftmore, one that helps him in his Intrigues, etc.
Strain Conscience and Donnell. Two Servants to Sir John Oldfop, the first
pretends to a tender Conscience but lies for him abominably, etc. The latter an
Irish Footman, that blunders in all he does for him.
WOMEN.
Florella. A brisk young Lady that loves to play tricks with her Lovers, and
hates to see any one Courted but her self. Dorinda. A very young Lady, Cousin
to Craftmore, sent to observe the motions of his Mistress, pretends to be a
mere Country Innocent, in Love with Loveby. Lady Fancifull. An old-stale Lady
that was never married, very affected, and boasts of her former Lovers, and has
a design on Dulhead. Primrose. Woman to Florella, and helps her to play tricks
with her Servants, etc.
Watch, Bulkers, Scowrers, and Attendants, etc.

ACT I.
SCENE I.
Enter several Watchmen; A Gentleman going from'em, and giving'em Money. 1.
Watch. BLess you Sir; May you ever have a sound Wench, pleasing Dreams, and
wholesome Wine.


All. How much is it? what is it boy?


1st. Watch. A Coach-wheel you Sons of Whores; sufficient, if managed to the
best advantage, in Nappy Ale, to give us Courage enough to Hector an Alderman,
beat a Common-Council-Man; and make us reel home like men of Business, and
Watchmen of the better sort.


2. Watch. Ounds and Taradiddle.


shows a Crown piece. they whoop. A Dance of Watchmen, etc. A great noise
behind the Scene, they all leave dancing; and some run in Huzza, Scour, Scour,
Bulkers, aware, aware; down with the Constable, 'ounds away with it, huzza,
etc. Enter Sir John Oldfop, carried in a Sedan, and muffled up; the Irish
Footman and another rolling in two Drunken Bulkers: Sir John comes out of his
Chair, etc. Enter Dulhead leaping about. Dullh. O brave Cousin Sir John I
swear, O brave Cousin Sir John I say -- I would not for twenty Guinea's but I
had rambl'd with you to Night. How do you like me now Cousin Sir John?


Sr. John. Crown me, ye Noble Hero's of the Night, ye Sons of darkness, Crown
me, who now return in triumph from Conquering those Infernal Guards.


1st. Bulker. Drink about there, six in a hand. My head swims.


2d. Bulker. Hold Coachman, hold you Son of a Whore, I Will not give you one
farthing if you drive a step further, help me out you dog, and get me a Whore;
here is half a Crown for you.


Donnell. By my Shoul dish ish brave shport now; I did never see a Hogshead
speak in Ireland -- by shaint Lukes faith but I will shtop thy bunghole joy.


stops his mouth with dirt. Sr. John. Well Couz. how like you our sport? Are
not these delights incomparably beyond the dull insipid pleasures of a
Country-Coxcomb's life; whose diversion is his toil, and cannot give him the
distinguishing Character of a Gentleman.


Dulh. Uds foot, you're in the right on it, Cousen Sir John.


Sr. John. There after your filthy beastly sports, you meet at some little
thatch't Alehouse; and like our dirty tun-belly'd Carmen, overload your
Stomachs, Stupify your brains; and put out the spark of reason with the thick
foggs of fulsome vulgar Ale; then reel to bed, abundantly drunk by Nine a
Clock: The Night was made for the frollicks and revellings of a Gentleman, and
for none but poor laboring slaves to sleep in; Is not this abundantly a more
refined way then yours? ha!


Dulh. Ay, never stir in it Cousin Sir John; and I am resolved for the future,
I Will be plaguey unlucky, and grow as mad and frollicksome as the best of you.


leaps about and cries huzza! Enter to them several with Tongs, Gridirons, and
such like Instruments; Two with a Kettle on their Shoulders on a Coulstaff,
They all sit down round the Kettle, and sing and play; Footmen howls when they
sing. Sr. John. Under this window, do you hear fellows.


Song.
Sweet Caelia look down from your window
See how we our Claret environ;
How we take off our Glass,
At the sound of our brass,
And the harmony of our cold Iron.
Chor.
Strik up merry boys
With your tongs and your keys,
My Kettle I Will twank in the Chorus:
We Will scour every street,
And kick all we meet,
And drive the whole World before us.
2.
The Cupids all hover around us,
And then on your Casement they settle;
As huge Clusters of Bees,
Hang on twigs of green Trees,
Charmed with the sweet sound of my Kettle.
Chor.
Strike up merry boys, etc.
3.
Ah Caelia look down from your window,
And view your poor Lover a Strowling,
How for puss I by night,
Quarrel, scratch, brawl and fight,
There Is no Love to true Caterwauling.
Chor.
Strike up merry boys, etc.
At every Chorus one drinks; the rest Sing and Play on their Tongs, etc.
Footmen howls at the last Chorus.
Sr. John. Admirable humor I'Gad: It is time we retire, see the Morning begins
to peep abroad, with its Impertinent light -- But hold Captain, fir^^ let us
hear the Catalogue of this Nights adventures; I shall be ill at rest all this
day following if we have not done a plaguey deal of mischief.


1st. Man. Let Us see; about some Eight Sign-Posts pulled down, as many Walls
scall'd and Demollish'd, a dozen

Reads out of a Paper. Persons taken Prisoners; a few Straggling Whores pist
upon and kicked; Besides about as much glass broken as would serve for the
windows of Paul's; Knockers pulled off from doors, and they from their hinges,
innumerable; Signs blotted out, Cobblers and hucstkers Stalls broke open in
abundance, to the confusion of old Shoes and Gingerbread; and the Watch kick't
to the Devil.


Dulh. Sun, Moon, and Seven Stars! O brave Cousin Sir John I Will Swear, O brave
Sir John I say.


Sir John. Huzza, Huzza! Come Captain, let us go off in Triumph.


1st. Man. March on ye Sons of Mars, and boys of Mettle, You clash your Iron;
and I Will twank my Kettle.


Exit with a hideous noise. SCENE II. Lady Fancifulls House.
Enter Florella and Primrose. Florella. Primrose.


Primr. Your pleasure Madam.


Florella. Come hither; pin up this Curl, and adjust the dress of my head: --
Oh hideous, what a piece of Gallantry have we had here? If this trade hold; I
must even change my lodgings; what with the hoarse cry of the Bell-mans
mortifying Rhymes, the Barbarous Music of tooting hoboys, and the more
Intolerable Civilities of Serenading fools, there is little rest to be taken;
from such humors good Love deliver me.


Primr. No doubt Madam, but this was designed for a piece of Bravery; and I
question not but to oblige you; as well as to show the Gentleman's wit and way
of address.


Florell. The obligation would have been greater had he let it alone: prithee,
can thou Imagine who the person is, that has thus highly obliged me?


Primr. I Will lay my life on it Madam, this was one of Sr. John Oldfops Maggots;
he scorns any thing that is vulgar, as he styles it.


Florell. That Infinite Coxcomb, that miscellany of fools; indeed he is always
fond of all the folly's of the Town; and to make himself more Eminently
ridiculous, varnishes over the Imperfections and deformities of old Age, with
the gloss and affected gayety of Youth; he has the vanity to think himself the
only favorite; the very Adonis of the Ladys, though fool enough to be scorned by
all: an eternal railer against Age, and will Curse it, though he knows the
Imprecations must necessarily fall on his own head:


Enter Dorinda, as in a fright Dorin. Well, I must for some time at least, wear
the mask of Dissimulation; Nor need I fear to be singular in this, Since our
Sex very rarely appears without it.

aside to Florella O Gemini, what a pestilent noise has here been; I vow now I
tremble every joint about me.


Florell. Here Is a piece of Country-Innocence, rude and unpollish'd as a
Sylvan, she is so very simple; one would swear she had lived Sequestered from
the Conversation of mankind. -- Come, come; lay aside your needless fears,
little one; this was nothing but a Town humor, a Serenade.


Dorin. A Serenade, what is that? pray forsooth:


Florell. Why, an Entertainment that the gallants think to pleasure their
Mistresses with; it is to put young Ladys in mind of their Servants; lest they
should forget to dream of 'em.


Primr. Should the Sparks but know that you were hero, you would quickly have the
second part to the same tune, Madam.


Florell. They Would be continually Buzzing about you, like Bees in a Garden of
Flowers. One would ogle and languish at you with his arms folded across, and
his head on one side thus. Another Cock, and look big upon you; rap out half a
dozen modish oaths; -- shake his Garniture, and pass by you with a low-diving
bow; and a three quarter face, as thus, -- A third descant on your perfections;
as the delicacy of your lively Complexion; the Symetry of your parts; the
agreeableness of your features; and so loud, as you may be sure to hear him.


Primr. A fourth make verses upon you; treat; present and Serenade you.


Florell. And the fifth perhaps, something more foppish then the rest would
passionately swear, your teeth were pearl, your Lips Coral, that your breath
was perfumed with Arabian sweets, your eyes two Stars, nay two rising Suns for
a need, and that on your Cheeks were two Beds of Roses, where the Cupids lay
wantoning, and basking themselves, in their Golden Rays.


Dorin. O Gemini, this is fine I vow; -- But would they indeed now forsooth.


Florell. Yes, yes, and more then all this; But you must not believe 'em; they
are Rooks, and never play upon the square; foot-padders that lie upon the Road
of Love to rifle maids of their virginities


Dorin. O living Dear; not believe them indeed; -- but I would though: how would
they rifle me of my virginity trow? -- pray forsooth tell me;


Florell. That I Am to learn my self; I never made the experiment, O fie; I vow
her simplicity makes me blush; I must divert her from this Idle discourse:
prithee Dorinda what is your servants name? when came he to town?


Dorin. O forsooth his name is Bellamore; he came last night, and his man has
hired lodgings already for him in this house. -- O If you did but see him; --
he goes as fine as a Lord; and he tells me he has been at Court, and in France
too


Florell. After what manner does he make Court to thee?


Dorin. O he gives me Oranges and Sweetmeats, Curious Ribbons and Laces, talks
fine Complements to me indeed; and calls me the prettiest names; tells me my
lips are sprinkled over with honey-drops, then he will kiss me, and kiss me again;
-- he told me too, that I must have a Care of the fine Gentlemen of the Town,
for he said they would make a Miss of me -- I Would fain know what that is forsooth;
pray will you tell me?


Florell. Methinks I long to see this Gentleman; I fancy he is a very agreeable
person, at least more tolerable than those diverting Coxcombs I now entertain.


Primr. Now durst I venture the forfeiture of my Maidenhead to the next kind
Devil I meet; this Mistress of mine is contriving to make prize of her Lover;
for she will entertain all sorts and sizes, though it be merely for her diversion;
and hates to see any one courted besides her self; nay, for my part, I believe
she would by her good will engross all mankind.


aside. Florell. Well, it is a most delicious morning; the clearness of the
heavens, and the still air seem to invite us abroad. -- Come Dorinda, are you
for a walk? -- I Will have you to the park where you shall see fine Ladies and
Gentlemen; -- get my dress ready against I return, and bid the Boy follow us to
the Mall.


Dorin. Would the Gentlemen kiss a body tho? I vow, if they should, I Would never
endure 'em, that I would not,

Successfully to Cheat, there is no pretense,
Like to a well dissembled Innocence.

Exeunt. SCENE III. A private walk behind the House.
Enter Craftmore and Toby. Craft. Well Sir, how stand affairs? -- is there any
hope for my once shipwrackt vessel, now at last to return home with the prize
of a humer some Mistress? -- speak have thou been there? -- this is the time
and place I appointed you to meet me at, is it not?


Toby walks up and down Carelessly all the while his Master speaks Toby. You
are in the right on it Sir; and I perceive you are a man of a notable memory.


Craft. And you procured me lodgings in the house with hers, and seen 'em
furnished fit to receive a Gentleman:


Toby. May be ay, Sir, and may be no, Sir, -- I know nothing of the matter Sir,
-- I am very busy at the present -- Your humble Servant Sir -- [as going


Craft. God's Death! what does the Rascal mean? his Insolence and slight behavior
will provoke me; -- But by this I imagine he has had success; and he only keeps
me off as a politic mistress does her Servant, with a wanton kind of anger,
faint denial, and a grateful little pettishness, only that when he comes to
the business, he may embrace it the more eagerly [aside Then you will not leap
into the matter?


Toby. I understand you not -- No, no, Sir, you know I am to lie upon Benches
at Tavern-doors, till one or two a Clock with a Flambeaux in my hand, amongst
an honorable train of footmen and link-boys; and for want of a tester to drink
wine with flys in it, which the generous Bar-keeper is to give me out of a
vessel that has been filled with the dregs, and Squeezings of an hundred
several Bottles.


Craft. What? I suppose you remember the last weeks business yet?


Toby. Then am I to be stripped of your old silk wastcoat here; and clapped into a
wide-body'd livery Coat, laid down on every Seam with a worsted Lace, of a
Groat or three pence a yard, like a Country Esquires Coachman; and this was the
Equipage poor Toby was to be in.


Craft. This is past enduring, -- Durst you hit me in the teeth -- or murmur --
you Son of a Whore? I Will slit your nose.


Toby. Have a care you know the Act Sir; -- Slit my nose quoth a! -- That Is
pretty In Faith; -- Slit my nose quoth a!


walks up and down as in a huffe. Craft. Hell and the Devil; this it is to
employ our Senyants: a man had better be at the necessary Charge of a procuring
friend then trust 'em; -- For when once they know your Secrets, and that they
are absolutely necessary in doing you a kindness, they grow more Saucy then a
Rich Citizen to a young Student that owes him money; and so at last they become
more Master then your self. -- Know you Rascal, who I am; and who you are?


Toby. Yes, yes, Sir, I was your Servant; and now I am not your Servant; and so
as I said before, as by way of Complement, I am your humble Servant.


Craft. How! you hungry Scrap-eater, what mean you Rascal? I Will swinge you, --
This shall bring you to a better knowledge of your self --


beats him. Toby. Nay Master, hold; -- Oh the Devil, Sir, -- Oh for heavens
sake Sir, -- as I hope to be saved 'twas all in jest, -- pox on it -- Nay now
Master, you over-act your part too; -- I beseech you a little Cessation from
arms, as I hope for mercy from you now, I thought no harm: too much is too
much. -- Sir, to be as short with you as I can at present, your business is
done beyond Expectation.


Runs about, sometimes cringing, fawning, shruging and grinning. Leaves off
beating, Toby shruggs. Craft. So; at last, you have spoken to the purpose; but
I thought thou had known that it is as ill jesting with an hungry Lover, as
an hungry Lion: For if once you Tantalize him with his prey, if possible he
Seizes on his keeper. Remember this, and take it from me.


Toby. Nay Sir; no doubt but I shall remember I took it from you: plague on
this Lyon-way of Civility though for me.


shruggs aside. Craft. And now Sir, as you hope not to use a Surgeon, or to
look like an old mangled fencer, with your pate embroidered with hacks and
slashes; and perhaps the disuse of a member or two, let us have no more of these
Bawdy House tricks; and here for this time I strike a league with you, and now
let me have a faithful account of Dorinda and your proceedings.


gives him money. Toby. Now the Devil take me, if I can forbear telling this
Master of mine the Business: 'plague, it would never vex a man to have a broken
pate, if he is well paid for it. There Is some Conscience in this, --


aside. Craft. Well Sir, to the Business.


puts up the money, bows and cringes. Toby. In fine then Sir; (as a man may
say) I have taken up Lodgings for you at my Lady Fancyfulls, that Pageant of
formalities; and monument of Antiquity; she who deports her self so amorously
toward every body; who is still mustring up her hundred thousand sweet-hearts,
pretended presents, and Love Letters, which she always carrys about with her.


Craft. Then as to Dorinda.


Toby. Why things are in a very fair way there too; she goes without the least
suspicion, and her disguise sits upon her so agreeably that you would almost be
deceived your self in her.


Crast. And is Loveby in Town?


Toby. Yes Sir; well Sir, I say no more; -- You Are a happy man.

Sings:

I showed 'em such money as made 'em all mad,
But they are quite deceived in Toby, etc.

Craft. I Am glad of it for some private Reason: -- I suppose by this time,
he is very much reformed.


Toby. O Sir extremely; he drinks bloodily, Swears devoutly, and wenches like a
Gentleman; for whereas he used to keep a brace of punks or so, now instead of
them he deals with half a score, and that he may still have a fresh supply,
when he grows weary, he quarrels with the old, to pleasure a new Mistress; and
so he Intends to lie round with all the women in the Town by degrees.


pulls out his money and sings as before. Craft. What at your old tricks?


shakes his Cane at him Toby. Mum, mum, Sir. -- [lays his hand on's mouth, bows
and cringes as before.


Craft. All things have hitherto fortunately met my Expectation, the rest must
be partly effected, by my own Care and Conduct; See that all things are in
readyness at my Lodgings and wait for me there.


Ex. Craftmore. Toby goes forward: The Scene Changes to my Lady Fancyfulls
house. Enter Primrose. Primr. Sweet Mr. Toby, yours.


Toby. Mrs Primrose, Yours to the Antipodes;


bows and offers to pull up her Coats. Primr. So sharp set this morning; when
comes your Master to his Lodgings?


Toby. This morning I think, he bid me wait for him here; pox, I care not when
he comes; O when shall I come into the Closet of your affections?

Sings.
I took her by the Lilly white hand,
And led her into the Garden,
I kissed her once and kissed her twice,
For four-pence halfpenny farthing.

Turns her round; first on one side and kisses her, and then on the other side
and kisses her. Primr. Come, pray Mr. Toby let us have no more of this Lip-work;
If you turn a kissing-fool I shall begin to suspect you are good for nothing
else; -- But prithee how long is it since you left your old Master Sir Thomas?


Toby. Ever since I lived with this -- Prithee when will thou leave thy old
Mistress?


Primr. Faith even when she will keep me no longer -- I understand your Master is
a Servant to Dorinda, the young innocent Country Lady.


Toby. Yes, he is as great an admirer of Innocence, as thou art of fine Clothes,
or an handsome smug-fac'd fellow -- what is become of that knot of fools that
used to haunt thy Lady?


Prim. Why some will be forthcoming anon; we have a leash of choice culled
Asses; -- first there is Old-fop, one that was knighted, that he might appear
more Eminently a Coxcomb.


Toby. What? he that is of kin to Dulhead the Booby, Esquire. that lately arrived
here? -- This latter is so Silly an Idiot, but for the interest of some
Courtfriends, his Estate had been begged long e're this.


Primr. Right there is a brace, and this dough*bak'd fool is to be Introduced I
near by his Cousin, as a Suitor to my Lady: Next; there is a superannuated
fondling, that has lived to be twice a Child; one that numbered more years then
he has hairs on his head.


Toby. Old Waspish you mean; why he has not had the use of a sense these ten
years; he is a deaths-head; and enough to put one in mind of mortality, and
then he is so feeble he seems to bend beneath the weight of his Clothes.


Primr. He neither sees nor hears, without Artificial helps; and if he chance
to find you speak, and he hears you not, he Immediately conjectures you abuse
or deride him; then he falls into a passion, and grows as pettish, as one
lately recovered from a long fit of sickness, he fancies himself a great
humourist, and thinks that, together with the writings of his Estate, which he
always brings with him, sufficient to atone for all his folly and
Imperfections. Ads my life, stand back: here he comes, with all his trangums
about him.


Toby retires to one side of the Stage Enter Waspish with a great bundle of
Parchments under his arm; with his speaking-Trumpet struck at his Girdle, and
his Spying-glass in his hand; takes his Glass and looks on her. Wasp. So, so,
very well I protest; very well I protest; it is you Mrs Prim, speak not a word
yet Mrs. ^rim.

pulls out his trumpet, claps it to his Ear, and comes toward her. Not too loud
Mrs Prim. -- now tell me of pretty little Florella; -- Ah! it is a Rogue, a
pretty Rogue, I fack:


Primr. My Lady Sir. --


Primrose speaks in the Trumpet as loud as she can bawl, he starts. Wasp. O fie
Mrs. Prim. not so loud, not so loud; I warrant you think me quite deaf, I say
you think me deaf, no such matter; O fie, fie, you make as much noise in my
Ears, as the Trumpets of Six Troops of horse. I Am a little thick of hearing,
it is true: O Come, come, here is a Sixpence for you, a Phillip and Mary; a five
piece, a pretty piece, a very pretty piece; Nay, nay, you shall take it, a
pretty piece I vow: so, so, now try again Mrs. Prim.


looks hard on it, as he gives it her. Primr. My Lady Sir --


In a pretty loud tone. Wasp. Very well, very well, I protest; exactly in that
tone, in that pitch; let us bear it Mrs* Prim.


Prim. My Lady is gone to the Park this morning, Sir, for a walk, but I expect
her home within this hour:


Toby laughs and she laughs in the Trumpet. Wasp. Uds bodykins; Carrion,
Strumpet, laugh at me; I protest, laugh at me when I have been so generous,
Snoons speak not a word, not a word,

Runs after her as fast as he can, she in dumb signs expresses her sorrow for
ang'ring him. she comes Curtsying to him Come here;

I forget and forgive --


Primr. Sir I Have a grievous Cold, and am so perplexed with a tickling Cough, I
hope you will excuse what I could not avoid, Sir.


Wasp. Yes, yes, Come Mrs. Prim. all is over, all is over -- Come let us here the
rest Mrs. Prim.


Primr. You may assure your self you are not the least in her favor; for you
were the last she spoke of when she went to bed last night; and the first this
morning, when she rose.


Wasp. Say you so, say you so, I protest; Incomparable Creature. Divine
Charming Florella:

walks about as pleased put her in mind of me Mrs. Prim. -- I know she likes my
pretty Innocent humors, Come hither Mrs Prim. kiss me, Udsbodikins kiss me I
say:

jumps two or three little jumps toward her. kiss me you Rogue, -- I know she
likes my humors, I Will tickle you, Udsbodikins I Will tickle you.


Toby. I can hold no longer --


la^ghs out and she smiles Wasp. What again? Snoons grant me patience, Devil
Incarnate, what do you mean? -- I protest unsufferable, give me my money again,
or I Will give out you robbed me; -- I know the marks and can swear to the peace,
Snoons --


Throws his stick at Toby, his Trumpet at Primrose, and goes off in a Rage.
Primr. I must after this old Monkey, and sooth him into a better humor if I can


Toby. Prithee stay, I cannot be without your good Company, your Conversation is
so Charming:


languishes on her. Primr. Sweet Mr. Toby; your good nature will ruin you.


Toby. Not when I bestow it on one who will be grateful, and make suitable
returns*


offers to kiss her Primr. No fooling; I must try to pacify and secure this
pettish old Coxcomb: Sr. John Oldfop will be here I suppose, within this half
hour; And should they meet, he would snub him and torment him, to that degree; he would
fly from the house, as from the Plague; and my Lady would loose great part of
this days diversion.


Toby. Faith they are a brace of pleasant old Coxcombs, and make a more
Comicall figure, then the most accomplished young Fops she could have met with.

A numerous herd of Fools, still stock the Nation,
And he that is no fool now, is out of fashion:
But though new Coyns for Fools are daily making,
The old Fools still pass best, and are more taking.
And I took her, etc.

leads her out Dancing. The End of the First Act.
ACT II.
SCENE I.
Enter Loveby with his Footman. Loveb. ARe you sure you dogged her into this
house?


Footm. Yes Sir.


Loveby. Faith the little Rogue has fired my blood; she is young and beautiful
as an opening Rose; and has such pretty wanton Rolling eyes, But withal such
an overruling Modesty. -- A temptation like this would make a Saint stand on
his Guard: For my part, I must confess my frailty. -- I can no more forbear
Importuning this new beauty, then a Rook can fleecing a new Cully; -- I have no
other Business for you now; about two meet me at the Eating-house.


Exit Footman. Enter Primrose. Primr. Mr. Loveby here! Nay, then here is some
intrigue in hand; my life for it, the young Country Lady is the mark he aims at,
his hankering about a Lady's door is as certain a sign of some Amor
there-abouts, as a mask in the Pit is of a trading Wench.


aside. Loveb. A good morning to thee Primrose, is thy Lady at home?


Primr. Yes Sir; she came in just before you; and the other Lady you saw in the
Mall this morning.


Loveb. How the Devil came she to know that?


Primr. I can tell you this for your Comfort, your market's fore-stall'd;
there is a Gentleman lately come to Town, has given earnest for her already.


Loveb. No matter; it is not amiss to know how the Prizes of the Marks go though,
that a man may learn how to make his bargain the better another time. But
seriously art thou sure the Lady's disposed of?


Primr. He seems to be something Concerned; -- [aside] Sir, it is reported so
I Will assurs you. -- It fares with a fresh beauty in this Town, as with a fly
fluttering on the top of the water; you shall ^^^e forty sparks rising at her;
and it is ten to one, if some one does not chop ^er down at last -- [aside -- I
vow Mr. Loveby I wonder at your fancy, that amongst so great choice of riper
Clusters you should pick out green grapes.


Loveb. Pox; this hungry she-Cannibal is fasting this morning, and has a mind
to breakfast on man's flesh -- [aside] -- I am sorry I cannot oblige you; you
must understand we men of great dealing, carry but little ready money about us.


Primr. I perceive you misconstrue me; -- If you did but hear the Ladys talk of
you, as I have; -- They say you are the wildest most Unconstant Wenching
Gentleman, that ever came to Town.


Loveb. In that they wrong me; for I stand with open arms ready to embrace
every kind she that comes by. -- If there be any Inconstancy, it is in them, in
flying from me. I Am sure I am as civil a person to 'em, as any I have heard
of; and do intend to oblige 'em all, as fast as I can. -- The Devil's in it if
this be Inconstancy.


Primr. The very thing they upbraid you with; they say you always Ungratefully
deseit an old Mistress; though she had been ever so kind to you, if you have but
the least prospect of a new one.


Loveb. Faith; In my Opinion they are a Company of Unreasonable Creatures to
desire a man to wear out his whole life in the service of one, when there are
hundreds that expect the same kindness; -- An old mistress, like a Cast-suit is
to be worn on rainy days only; but to be thrown off and laid by when a new one
shines on us.


Enter Dorinda. Dorin. O living dear! I wonder he stays so long from me, I
doubt he is unkind.


Loveb. No Madam; I dare pass my word for the Gentleman, he is not, for he is
here, or one at least, that can boast of as noble and generous a passion for
you; as the greatest Idolater of your fair eyes.

goes to her; offers to kiss her hand, she snatches it from him.
Primr. He has her as Cock-sure as if she was between a pair of sheets with
him; -- With what an awful respect he approached her; with what a profound
Reverence he bowed; what a Softness and languishing he wore in his looks.

aside.
Dorin. O living Sir; I wonder you will offer to do so; you made me start at the
very sight of you; I never saw you before in all my life.


Loveb. What Country-Innocence is here? -- [aside -- It proceeds Madam from the
shortness of your memory, and the Coldness of your Affections, that you have so
soon forgot me.


Dorin. A person of a becoming boldness; and has the looks and breeding of a
Gentleman, -- aside -- O Gemini, Sir, and do you know me indeed? I cannot
believe you, I vow and swear now.


Loveb. I had the honor to kiss your fair hands in the Country, Madam.


Primr. I am amazed at his Confidence. On my Conscience he never saw her till
this morning; I wonder what fetch he has now?


Loveb. Primr se help me out, or I Gad I Am gravelled. What Country-woman, her
name quickly?


Primr. Horrid! Sir, have you no Conscience? -- Her name Dorinda, near
Canterbury in Kent.


gives her money. Loveb. Dear, Dear Dorinda; and have I slipped out of your memory
since I saw you in Kent last. -- How do all our acquaintance near Canterbury?


Dorin. A forward Gentleman -- [aside] -- But do you know me indeed and indeed
now?


Lo^eb. Perfectly well, Madam; and I came to wait on you to present you with a
new Song.

Song:
Forbear fond God, forbear your Dart,
Seek not to wound a dying heart:
At Cloe's feet it gasping lies,
A bleeding Victim to her Conquering Eyes.
2
From her Death's such a pleasing Pain,
I Would only live to dye again:
With joy to him, the blow is given,
That has so near a prospect of his heaven.
3
You and the little Loves all fly
To light their Torches at her eye;
By her alone, your Empires thrive,
This Vestall keeps Loves Sacred fire alive.
4
Then Cloe, it is not strange that you
Weak Mortals, Yiedling hearts Subdue;
Since you another Venus prove,
And give new being to the God of Love.
pardon my Ambition Madam, that I dare approach so much Divinity


offers to kiss her. Prim. If she has but one Iuscious touch, of his melting
lip, She Is lost for ever: It will dissolve and distill it self into her heart,
in a warm shower of Love.


aside. Dorin. If you offer to kiss me, I vow and swear I Will Scream out as loud
as I can: I wonder you will serve a body so; you Gentlemen have no modesty I think.


Loveb. It Is not fit we should, such young Ladys as you have so much of it,
that had we any, we should never beget a Right understanding betwixt us; --
Madam, be pleased to use me as your Servant; to show you the splendor of the
Court; the Celebrated Beauties of the Drawing Room, and the pleasures of an
high-Mall.


Enter Florella. Florell. Mr. Loveby here, and so intimate already with
Dorinda? Indeed I observed he wheeled about us, to day, like a Kite that often
sails round the same Circuit of air, when in quest of her prey -- [aside --
What Sir, treating about Love; methinks you have made haste to be so forward,
on the road already.


Loveb. Madam, in Business of Importance, we usually ride post; was I to
dispatch a weighty affair for my friend, I Would not ride a dull Carriers pace;
Love's upon the wing, and must be nimbly pursued.


Dorin. Indeed forsooth I believe this is one of the Sparks you spoke of, he
was so rude, he would have kissed me.


Florell. I thought a person worn so much by the full-blown Beauties of the
Town, would not have made a stoop, for so young a Quarry. I must confess the
Lady has a great favor, but to Converse with a Beau-garcon; one of your
Accomplishments Sir.


Loveb. Madam; I cannot complain much of my ill fate; -- Some women think me
worth picking up; my only misfortune is, your opinion is different from theirs:
I should be Completely happy did you approve their choice.


Enter a Servant to Dorinda. Serve. Madam, there is a strange Gentleman within
desires to speak with you.


Dorin. Tell him, I wait on him.

Exit Serve. This Mr. Loveby wears such Charms about him; it will be as
difficult to Escape him; as it is dangerous to love

Pity you gallants should so wedded be
To Wildness, Falsehood and Inconstancy.

Aside to the Pit. Florell. All Certainly that have the honor to know you,
must applaud and envy 'em for it.


Loveby. Madam; did not I know your Influence on our Sex, and that you turned
our Love into Ridicule, I should be so vain, as to think you had not really an
Aversion to me.


Florella. O fie Mr. Loveby, this from you?


Loveb. But you are one of the topping, reigning Beauties of the Town; an
Impregnable fort; not to be taken by the Sallys of Wit; nor even the brisk
attempts of Love and Honor: You from your exalted height can look down with a
Contemning Smile, on your Shipwrack'd Lovers, toyling and beaten about by a
tempestuous Sea.


Florell. A Blustering piece of Rhetoric this; and very fit for the description
of a Tempest, -- [laughs -- If you did but see how prettily you looked, when
you spoke it -- laughs again.] With that Demureness I warrant you, and
Compassion in your looks, and such dying eyes; really it is Impossible to hold
out long, against so many Charms; we shall have you fall into a fit of Ryming
anon.


Enter Sr. John Oldfop: behaving himself very Ridiculously, and Foppishly
dressed. Primr Madam, Madam, here is Sr. John come.


Sr. John. Dear Madam, I kiss your hand ten thousand times: Mr. Loveby, your
most devoted Servant; you are a great favorite of the Ladies; this Lady
yielding you the honor of her Conversation, is a confirmation of it.


Loveb. It Is you Sr. John are the Idol of the fair Sex* you Charm their Eyes,
and Captivate their hearts; you are the Sole commander of all Loves Troops; we
are but Idle spectators and admirers of your great Conquests.


Sir John. I have Contracted a familiarity with some persons of quality in this
Town: they do me the honor to use me as their Servant in public.


Florell. Now Is this Conceited Fop, ready to boast of kindnesses he never
Received.


aside. Loveb. Let us but sooth him, and be urgent with him upon the point, and
he will be so vain as to tell us, he has debauched all the great Beauties at
Court. -- He Will make the Drawing Room his Seraglio; though he never arrived to
the acquaintance of a Change woman; or his Seamstress -- [aside -- and in
private ^oo Sr. John, a person of your Jantee Insinuating way, must needs be
taken into Consideration.


Sr. John. I must confess I have an Intimacy, with some particular Ladies that
shall be nameless. We women's men, never boast of your favors Madam --


bows to Florella. Florell. O Sir; you men of Intrigue as well as Soldiers,
learn to know that silence is your first word of Command.


Sr. John. Madam, You Have hit my humor -- [bows] I thank you for that Lady: I
gad I had almost forgot to tell you of a pleasant accident between me and a
person of quality, in Hyde-park, lately: I side-glass'd her, and kissed my hand
to her. -- I gad, I never saw her to my knowledge in my life before: -- She
Immediately sent her Page to me with a Billet-Deux; wherein she begged the
honor of a meeting: and this very Lady, I have appointed to come to my
Apartment; within this half hour.


Florell. Then we shall loose the pleasure of your good Company, Sr. John.


Sr. John. No dear Madam; I Will disappoint her, to Regale my self with the
gallantries of your Ladyship -- I know her Excess of Love will easily form an
excuse for my neglect.


Enter Donnel footman to Sr. John. Donnel. Ahgra, besht tou here joy? By Shaint
Patrick I did think thou didshst lost me.


Sr. John. What is the Lady come, Sirrah?


Donnel. Lady, Lady; what Lady joy?


Loveby A pleasant Scene toward:

aside.
Sr. John. You Ignorant Rascal; -- Why the Lady I bid you wait for with her
Coach and six; attended by a very great Equipage.


Donnel. Ecpash! prithee Joy phat is dat? their be no such wort in Ireland, by
my shoul: -- I did she no Lady, But I will go fetch thee a Lady in a Coach if
thou will joy:

Sr. John throws his wig and walks as angry. Ahgra; by Chreesht I did forgot;
thou do'sht mean the Lady, thou disht bid me say, was come to see thee.


Sr. John. This Rascal Mr. Loveby; this thick-scull'd fool, Madam, does not
well understand English, and so did not take my meaning.


Florell. So it seems.


Sr John pulls out his Watch. Sr. John. My watch speaks not the time of the
appointment yet, it wants half a quarter.


Donnel. If thy wash did shay sho: I would make beat on thy washes pate; and
tell him, he did lie to his faish, look thee joy.


Sr. John. Run Immediately, --

Hey Rascal; take your message with you.


Donnel runs without his message. Donnel. I did take my message when I will
come back: Thou didsht bid me run firsht.


Sr. John. Whither, you senseless puppy?


Donnel. By my Shoul, I know not; but I will run to Ireland for thee, if thou will Joy.


Sr. John Hark you; Run to my Lodgings and stay there till I or the Lady
comes: Do you hear Sirrah? mend that damned Bogg-trotting pace of yours: [
Donnel mends his pace on a sudden.] Madam, I am troubled with this Inanimate
Clod of Irish-Dirt. -- I but keep the poor Rogue for my Diversion when I am out
of humor; the awkard Fool serves to make me laugh.


Loveby. Pox; I trifle away my time with this gay-plum'd Parrot. I must have
the other Encounter with this pretty little Innocent Creature. Her fair Image
glides through my eyes into my heart, and has there left the deep Impression of
her dear self. -- Methinks I feel strange motions within me; pray heavens they
prove not the qualms of settled Love.


Exit. Sr. John. The Son of a whore my Tailor, Madam; has cut my Coat damnable
ill. Bungling Puppy;

All this while Sr. John views himself, tours and flings his wig; sometimes
singing, or whistling or Dancing. He has no Genius Madam: The fancy was wholly
mine: How do you like it? -- But for the proportion of my Body the Rascal has
rendered me ridiculous.


turns himself about. Florel. I protest Sir John, you're extremely well dressed;
and every thing sits on you, so nicely exact; and with such a becoming Air;

How the Peacock spreads his

he walks about, adjusts his dress, looks upon himself. Plumes and strutts.


aside. Sr. John. Madam, I labor not to be Scandalous,


Florell. But ridiculous.


aside. Sr. John. A Gentleman ought to be known as well by his garb, and manner
of dress, as a Bully by a black eye, a Buff Belt, and a long Sword; Madam, I am
happy this my dress has gained the Reputation of your applauded judgment --
[bows] but should be Infinitely more so, could my person obtain the Approbation
of your Love.


Florell. I know this gay nauseous Coxcomb would be harping on that string --
[laughs aside] Sir, it is more then a Conquest even to yield when you Invade:
The Honor you did me this Morning, obliges me at least to pay an
Acknowledgement; Sir, you have a peculiar way of Gallantry.


Sr. John. The women are pleased to think my manner Novel and taking -- 'Twas a
humor not Vulgar by the young fidling, Serenading-Fops of the Town; In
confidence of which I took this freedom, knowing in Justice I ought not to
serve any woman before your Ladyship.


Florell. Incorrigible Fop.


aside. Sr. John. You had the Virginity of the humor -- For which Madam I
might with some pretense Claim a right to yours, by way of Retaliation,

laughs and bows* There I think I was full patt and home upon you, I Gad.


Florell. Fulsome fool; He takes this for wit, but he deserves for his
Impudence to be swing'd by Footmen: But the pleasure of laughing at him shall
be his punishment.


aside. Sr. John. Madam, I would not tempt you to that dull unfashionable
formality of Matrimony, had not I a true English Blockhead a Cousin of mine, to
be the Screen to your Honor: Providence ordained fools for Husbands, that the
kind Ladies might without Scandal Converse with and gratify Men of Parts and
Breeding.


Florell. Dear Sir John, you are too obliging really.


seems fond of him. Sr. John. He has the Proverb on his side; and can jointure
you well: But if you think not his Estate sufficient, I Will add four or five
hundred pounds a year to 't, the satisfaction I shall receive from your
Charming Conversation will pay me back with Interest.


Florell. Dear Sir when comes he?


Sr. John. He is now in Town; -- I Will borow my self from you a little to send
for him; -- Dear, dear Madam, pardon my abrupt departure. -- Think not my
absence tedious, upon my honor I Will return Instantly. --


Exit. Florell. I think I shall not; this is a strange conceited Coxcomb; he is
a mint of folly; and Coyns himself new fool every minute.


Enter Waspish: Prim. Madam; here is old Waspish; and has brought with him the
writings of his Estate. I put him into a strange fit of anger to day; and have
but just calmed him.


Florell. Tell him we will give him Auidence. -- His humor will divert the
cloying thoughts of the others; and give a new pleasure; -- Bless me, sure it is
fool-fair.


Wasp. holds his glass up to his eye. Wasp. O Mrs. Florry, Mrs. Florry; your
humble Servant, sweet Mrs. Florry.


Florell. We must take care how we vex him; he takes fire at the least spark.
Welcome Sir --


He puts his trumpet to his ear, and she speaks in 't. Wasp. Say you so, say
you so; very well, I protest very well. -- Nay I think you like my humors, my
pretty little Innocent humors; -- Udsbodykins, you are a Charming Creature; a
fair, brisk, sprightly, lively Creature --

jumps little short jumps between every word. You little Fubs you; you Pug you;
I protest I love you.


Florell. And there are those that have a passion for you Sir, but Modesty will
not let 'em speak.


Prim. I cannot contain, I shall laugh outright, I Have almost bit my lips to
pieces.


Wasp. Come, come, I protest, Confess, Confess; I know who spoke of, who last;
when somebody went to Bed; and first when she rose this morning; ha! ha! you
little Fubs you; you Pug you; I Will bite you; I Will bite you

He sings and Danies ridiculously. My Love and I, did lately sit,
Playing for sport, at Cherry-pit;
She threw, I cast, and having thrown,
I got the pit, and she the Stone.
Good I protest, very good I protest; I got the pit, etc.


repeats over the verse 2 or 3 times. Florell. Pardon me Sir; I protest you
have such pleasant humors; you would kill a body with laughing.


Wasp. Ah! I protest; I knew you liked my humors; you little Fubs you, I Am
sure you like my humors.


He proposes and answers himself: what will you do for the K.? what will you do
for his Foes? walks about like a Soldier with his Trumpet on his shoulder,
then halts. Enter Sr. John Oldfop. Florell. Now for a fit of railing.


aside. Sr. John. Ha, ha, ha, here is an old fool; a nauseous, old, and an
humoursome fool as he thinks. -- Damn the Rogue, I Will laugh at him. -- [laughs
at him.


Primr. He does not perceive him yet, here is fine work toward.


Sr. John. Pox; he has not the use of a sense; a rotten Carcass that is almost
buried in the ruins time has thrown on him. I hate to see a Nauseous old fool,
Madam, I wonder you can endure his Impertinences.


Florell. I use him only for my Diversion; as my Monkey, or Shock-Dog.


Sr. John. Should you bring your monkey, yet in my opinion you are a prettier
figure your self, and far more diverting.


Wasp. sees his lips move. Wasps. Snoons, snoons; -- I protest he abuses me; --
speak Mrs. Prim. He abuses me; Udsbodykins a Fop; an old worn out Court-fop --
He abuses me! -- Snoons, -- Snoons.


Exit stamping and shaking his stick. Sr John. Pardon me Madam; that I could
not pay my Devoire's to you before; -- This damned old Fool, has almost put me
out of humor; -- My Cousin will be here presently Madam to wait on you.


Enter Craftmore and Lady Fancyfull dressed with a great many Precious Stones.
Sr. John. Pox; Fancifull here! She Will be a worse plague then the other. Come
Madam; let you and I retire.


Florell. I must beg your Excuse. Here is a stranger I must pay my respects to.


L. Fanci. I Am glad Sir, you like your Lodgings; I vow I cannot Choose but
stare on you; with a little more then ordinary concern: You Are so like a former
Servant of mine; I cannot but admire his picture in your person. Pardon my
rudeness:


very amourously. Craft. I Am glad Madam, I can contribute any way to your
satisfaction; Heavens, She Will bait me to death;


aside. La. Fanci. Your servant Sr. John: Your servant Madam.


Sr. John. Plague on her Unseasonable Civilities; now must we be troubled with
her Impertinences. She Is a sheet of Rivell'd parchment, on which is Impressed a
perpetual Almanac. By her you may know, when we shall have wind, rain or snow;
and all the alterations of weather.

aside. Madam we have business; and we shall buy no pedlars ware.


Here Mad Fancifull pulls out a little Cabinet opens the Cabinet. Fanci.
Pedlars ware! I Would have you to know, here is nothing but what is almost of
Inestimable value -- Do you call this Pedlars ware?


Florell. So nows she is in.


aside. Fanci. Pray Sir, do me the honor to hold this a little; I Will show you
as Choice presents, as the most Celebrated Beauty of 'em all. Here Is a Locket
of Diamonds, that was given me by Sir. Thomas Court-hard.


Sr. John. They are false; and the Locket is not worth above a Guinea; Damn
her; she will put me out of humor.


aside. Fanci. I would not that Sr. Thomas heard you; He give me false stones?
-- Then here is a little pocket-glass of my Lord Modishes; cased with beaten
Gold.


Craft and Florella every now and then look hard one on another. Sr. John. Be
ruled by me and break it; -- Should you look into it it; you would certainly run mad
the next minute and hang your self.


Fanci. I dare look in it, you see; without the danger you speak of. Then here is
a Lock of hair of my Lord Passionates; which he gave me a little before he died.


Sr. John. O keep it, keep it; you may have use for it.


Fanci. Then here are three Rings, a Seal, and a Watch: -- O dear, and here is a
Love letter of Sr George Fair-titles: Do but hear what a fine penned thing it is.


Sr. John. Damn her, I shall rail outright presently; affected Fool, Come
Madam will you go? her discourse Nauseates.


Fanci. Indeed you shall not go, and leave me alone with this Gentleman.


Sr. John. I understand you, Madam; we'd rid you of that trouble: Come pray
will you honor us with your Company.


Craft Thou have released me from one Curse, to plague me with a greater, did
not the Company of that dear Saint sweeten it with a blessing that far exceeds
both?


aside. Sr. John. Madam, the favor of your hand.


Florell. I could better afford it that Gentleman.


aside. Exit omnes. Fanci. A Rude Uncivil person; Sr. Frederick Wilful would
not have served me so:

praeter Fancifull. Here she set her things in order. Well, lie thou there good
Sr. George, and Sr. Thomas, there; My Lord Modish there; My Lord Passionate and
the rest in their order. Once I was Courted [sighs -- But none now a days are
held in vogue, but young ill-bred, tawdry things, that can wantonly, roll
their eyes, play with their head, heave up their breasts; And that delight in
Obscene Closet-peices and lascivious Poems, [looks in a pocket-Glass.] and yet
methinks these features are not so ill designed; -- This brow is high and
smooth enough; And these eyes sparkling; These Cheeks have the just mixture of
the Rose and Lilly -- [Rubs 'em.] -- and if I am not Mistaken, here is a lip as
Red as a Cherry: [bites her lips] -- my teeth indeed are not so white and even:
But youth it self sometimes has its blemishes.

What the Age did my drooping glories shroud,
Yet by the Envious, it must be allowed
The Sun still shines, though it is behind a Cloud.

The End of the Second Act.
ACT III.
SCENE I.
Enter Craftmore in a Passion, with Toby. Craft. A Woman to be believed? yes,
so is a Courtier when he promises you preferment; or a crafty wheedling
Tradesman when he commends his Commodities to you upon his Credit.


Toby. Why, Sir, Sir -- he certainly dreams and talks in his sleep: [aside. Why
you rail more furiously against your Mistress, then you would at a Punk that
has clapped you: and because she admitted Dulhead but now, though merely to laugh
at him, you're grown as jealous as a Tradesman newly married to a plump juicy
Wench in an University.


Craft. She Is false, false as hell. Should any one assert a Woman could go to
Heaven, I should suspect Providence, Embrace Atheism as Orthodox, and sound
Divinity; and make it my Creed that all things were governed by the uncertain
whirl of blind chance.


Toby. What Sir, are you turned Fanatic, that you rave thus against the Civil
Government of your Mistress?


Craft. Perfidious Florella, the Common Custom of discountenanced Fools; how
respectfully did she entertain that Indigested lump of Ignorance; How she
smiled when he spoke; enough to inform the dull Mast with new life and Soul,
and seemed to applaud every thing he said.


Toby Heavens bless this Master of mine, we shall have him picking of straws
within these two days -- Sir, Sir, if you are come to your self and know your
humble Servant ^oby -- [bows] take my advice and go cool you in the Garden:
you will boil over anon, and betray your self to your Mistress.


Craft. Yes, Sirrah; I will discover my self, upbraid her to her face; Charge
her with her knot of Fools, Curse her heartily, resolutely leave her, then fly
into some obscure Village, mew my self up in a lonely Cell, and there rail at
her, and her whole Sex with my last gasp of breath.


Toby. You had best run stark staring mad with causeless Jealousies, fall into
a fit of despair, hang your self in an ill humor, and to cross a good old
Proverb, go to the Devil in a string.


Craft. My humor will not bear with your fooleries at present.


heaves up his Cane. Toby. Mum, Mum, Sir, Mum; -- A pox on these pettish Lovers
for me --


lays his hand on's mouth, and bows. aside. Craft. And my business requires you
to be serious.


Toby. Then observe me, Sir, I Will undertake to manage this business to your
satisfaction: I Will render Dulhead, if possible, more Ridiculous, Choose Oldfop
of a blessing on my endeavors, and fright the easy Squire, and the Lady
Fancifull into a fit of Matrimony, and thus make your access so easy to your
Mistress, she shall fall into your hand, and lie and wriggle there, like a
trout when tickled.


Craft. It Is Impossible.


Toby. For you to be convinced; But Sir, since you startle thus at a Bugbear of
your own creating, leave the success of your Amor to me; If I do not bring her
to your Arms, may I despair of the smiles of a smutty Kitchen-Wench, and for my
default, undergo the severity of Whip and Bell, with the turn-spits.


Craft. I scorn the spoils of a Mistress, procured for me, by the Stratagems of
my Slave, as much as I would the honor of a Triumph, when I had never the
Courage to be in the Action: Should thy mean Conduct bring her to a Surrender,
she would fall so low in my esteem, that I should think her beneath my
Consideration.


Toby. But Sir, 'twou'd not be amiss to have a Scout to view the Posture of the
Enemy.


Craft. True; but I Will post my self so honorably, that if I succeed, the
greatest share of Glory gained in this Conquest shall Crown my attempts:
Wherefore I Will immediately forge a Letter, and therein tax her with Pride, and
Inconstancy, wound her Reputation, and withal, insinuate to her, I have
provided my self with a Mistress, far more Beautiful, and one that suits
nearer to my Inclinations.


Ex. Craft. Toby. Zookes, ply her there, Sir, the day's your own: Enter your
Troy, and take your Helena: If she is not your Captive, I in revenge will grow
lousy in spite of clean linen, turn Pimp in good earnest, and so devoutly dye
in an honorable and public Employment.


Enter Lady Fancifull. L. Fan. Mr. Toby, your humble Servant.


Curtsying and smiling. Toby. Mr. Toby: Now do I know by these kind words, and
that ominous smile, I Have a Reverend Office to be thrown upon me.


aside. L. Fan. Here Is a broad piece that was given me by Sr. Oliver Richmore
-- look on it -- it is a very fair piece; I Would not have parted with it to any
breathing but your self.


gives it to him. Toby. Pox; I know the Devil was sending me on an Errand, and
pays me with Gold. A pox on his kindness -- a fair tempter this Omnipotent
Gold, I Am thy humble Votary.


looks on the piece. kisses it and puts it up. L. Fan. I hope Sir, you have
remembered me.


Toby. Madam, I Have been bruising my brains for you; and I have at last
contrived a plot, which I have just brought to Maturity, that cost me not a few
pangs in the production.


L. Fan. I shall not be ungrateful, sweet Mr Toby.


Toby. But to back my design, it would not be amiss to muster up all your
Charms; which I grant of themselves are sufficient to bring the most stubborn
heart into subjection.


L. Fan. Your goodness makes me blush seriously -- But to put in practice your
seasonable advice, I Will instantly to Florella, rail at her for entertaining Mr.
Dulhead, possess him with an opinion of her double-dealing, and make my
advances of Love with all the passion Imaginable: Your Servant -- be mindful
sweet Mr. Toby.


Exit. Toby A very Amorous Creature! was I a Magistrate, I Would have such a
wrinckl'd scarecrow set up at every Bawdy-house-door, to frighten young
Sinners from the Forbidden-Fruit of Whores-Flesh.


Enter Florella and Primrose. Florell. Have thou had any discourse with his Man
about the particulars of his Master?


Prim. Very little yet, Madam, But here he is, very opportunely, and your
Ladyship may be Informed of every Circumstance.


Florell. Do you belong to the Gentleman that came hither this morning?


Toby. Yes, Madam.


Florell. How long has he been in Town, Friend?


Toby. About two days Madam.


Prim. 'Faith my Mistress is for have at all.


aside. Florell. How long does he design to stay?


Toby. Madam, my Masters young Lady Dorinda can give you the best account of
that, were they linked; which this day he designs to effect; his grand affair
is over.


Florell. I must contrive to put a rub in his way: What Is his Estate?


aside. Toby. Report says, five thousand a year.


Florell. A very fair Revenue, though not perhaps equal to the Merit of so
complete a Gentleman.


Toby. She comes on a-pace; -- Little does she dream of the Snake in the
Covert; If he once lays hold, he twists round her in so many painted folds,
she will never be able to disentangle her self: was my angry threatening Master
here, how would his heart Caper at the harmony of these kind ravishing words:
I Will Instantly to him, and acquaint him with it.


aside. Enter Loveby. Loveb. I have hunted her through every Room 'ith house;
Perhaps she is herded here: Madam, your servant.


Florell. O your Servant Mr. Loveby; I question not Sir, but by this, what with
your soft melting words, and the powerful Rhetoric of your bewitching tongue,
you have wrought the young Lady to a Compliance.


Loveb. Faith, Madam, you are all so Cruel, and wilfully obstinate, that a man
can no more hope to bring you to a Treaty, then the Grand Signior the Emperor,
after his many and signal victories.


Florell. A Soldier of Fortune as you are, must not always expect Success to
wait upon his Arms; though doubtless your victories are more Considerable, then
your defeats.


Loveb. Your Beauties may boast it, Madam; but we in this Lottery of Cupid find
an hundred blanks, for one prize.


Florell. But you men of Courage and perseverance, weary out Fortune, and force
her to be kind, and then you trumpet out your Conquests to the whole World.


Loveb. True Madam; fortune may wheel about at last; but the prize we get is
often too mean to defray the Expenses we havs been at, in the prosecution of
it: and were it worth our concealing, like a politic winning Gamester, we
should go off without the least mention of our success.


Enter Craftmore and Toby. Craft. Was she so Inquisitive say thou?


Toby. Yes Sir, and in such a melting plyant humor, you might have molded her
into what shape you pleased:


Loveb. Could I gain so Considerable a treasure as you Madam? discretion, as
well as self-Interest, would bribe me to Secrecy.


Craft. Heavens what do I see? my friend courting my Mistress, in my supposed
absence? his I find is like the common freindship of the world, that always
bends to the Interest of his passion.


aside. Toby. What damned ill luck's here now? Fortune plays at cross-purposes
with us, I think.


aside. Florell. Your Haggard Love, flys at all games.


Loveb. Madam, a small encouragement from you, would lure me back, and teach me
to follow a constant Quarry; and then should my flame, like that of lamps, shut
in an Urne.


Florell. Pardon me Sir; when once you come to your flames, and your Similies
it is time to leave you.


Craft. I can no longer bear this killing sight; I Will disturb 'em: Madam, you
--


goes toward 'em. Toby. God's Death Sir, are you distracted? --

Toby pulls him back. For heavens sake stay and see the Event first; This may
prove nothing but an harmless piece of gallantry.


Craft. I know it cannot be; for none can look on that face and not love.


Toby. Let me beg you coolly, to Consider on it within; If he discovers himself,
all is ruined; then shall I be stripped and sent naked into the wide world, -- but
not without the Discipline of an hunting-whip, besides pumps and Blankets, do
so run in my head: Sweet Master, retire.


pulls him in. Craft. If I go not quits with you and your minnion.


Exit. Toby. Why what a damned, outrageous senseless Coxcomb is a suspicious
Lover; Now does he fancy his horns are budding out already; -- Heavens grant
things fall out luckily, but these plaguey Plumps and Blankets, will not out of
my head yet.


Exit. Loveb. A delicate Creature, every way agreeable; But though this has most
wit, yet the other has most Innocence; and I Am sure equal glories of a face;
This may cost me as long a Seige as Troy did the Greeks; and besides, I would
not basely wrong my absent friend, The other may be won with less expense of
time; -- But pox, I never approach her but my thoughts are palled with
frightfull Matrimonys.


Florella walks Loveby views her. aside. Enter Sr. John Old-Fop and Dulhead,
dressed in tawdry Clothes he looks upon and admires himself. Florell. Fools are
plenty, I find, they come in Couples:


aside. Loveb. What pieces of pageantry have we here? A brace of Asses in guilt
trappings: I dread the sight of a fool as much as that of an old Mistress; his
presence is far more Intolerable.

aside steals off. Sr. John comes to Florella, Dulhead following,
Imitating and bowing, very awkardly.

Sr. John. Pardon me dear Madam; that I thus rudely intrude into your privacy,
without giving you notice of my approach.


Dulh. Very fine Udsfoot:


Repeats it over to himself. Florell. O fie Sr. John you make me blush, really.


Sr. John. Madam, your blushes add new Beauties to that face, which before had
Charms enough to confound all Mankind; -- There I was the beau Espirit: I Gad,
I could not avoid being witty: your pardon Lady --


leaps, Cocks, and bows. Florell. It Is easily granted; you are so seldom guilty
of that fault: [aside. to reply Sir, would but give you a farther proof of my
weakness; I can but admire you in silence.


Dulh. repeats: Confound you and all mankind. etc. Sr. John. I shall leave you
and my Cousin here together, to treat about this affair, your acceptance of his
Address has given me the glimps of a pleasure that I shall esteem, the blessing
of my whole life: I have provided the Fiddler; and I Will beg leave Madam that
things may be in order.


Exit bowing all the way. Florell. Get thee gone for an eternal Coxcomb; --
Here Is this other fool stands like a mortal wrote in Finsied Ginger-bread; --
Only that is much the better spark of the two. Your Servant Sir.


She goes to Dulh. who is complementing by himself; when he sees
her, he pulls back his Coat and shows his Wastcoat:
Dulh. Sun, Moon, and Seven Stars; I am yours forsooth; how do you like me now?
Am not I taring fine?


Florell. Awkard fool. [aside -- Extremely modish, I Will assure you, Sir.


Dulh. Pardon me dear Madam, etc. --


repeats the 1st. Complement Florell. Dull Echo of affectation and nonsense;


aside. Dulh. I shall come to Confound her presently -- [aside -- How do you
like me now forfooth! how do you like me now?


Florell. O Extremely Sir; you may be sure.


Dulh. Then Madam, I say the acceptance of his address -- Udsneaks, I think I Am
almost out, -- of this address -- The glimps I Esteem; -- Sun, Moon, and seven
Stars, I think I Am our I fags; -- You know my meaning forsooth.


trys to repeat and cannot. Florell. As well as if you had spoken it out.


Dulh. I Will make amends for it in the next: Your blushes add new beauties to
that face; And therefore Confound you and all mankind. Sun, Moon and Seven
Stars, how do you like me now forsooth? I think I Have tickled you off, Udsfoot.


Florell. So, so, he is drawn off to the Lees, and all is out at last: now will
he be as mute as a Turk in the presence of the Grand Signior; or if he chance
to speak, 'twill be like a Country-Clock, once in an hour; though not so much to
the purpose.


He walks about her two or three times, ana speaks not a word, she turns with
him; at last he speaks, taking her Petticoat in his hand. Dulh. How do you like
me now forsooth? I warrant that Gown and petticoat Cost a woundy deal of money;
-- Sun, Moon and Seven Stars -- how do you like me now? -- Can you swim
forsooth?


pauses pauses again -- Florell. A very pertinent question to a woman; -- I Will
swear you have a very pleasant way of courting.


aside. Dulh. Ay forsooth; I hate to talk of nothing but love:


Florell. A man is so put to it there; to hunt for fine expressions and soft
Amorous Speeches.


Dulh. Now you talk of hunting; we have the finest pack in the Country, brave
Musical deep-mouthed Dogs; -- Udsfoot -- I love hunting woundily; you shall
hear me hunt the whole pack.


Florell. This is dismal, the noise of a pewterers shop, a Bell-frey, or
Paper-mill, would be very silence to this.


He hunts over the whole pack,, whoops and hollows, she stops her ears. Dulh.
Is not this pleasant forsooth? Sun, Moon, and Seven Stars, how do you like me
now? -- Now forsooth you shall hear me Imitate the particular yelpings of every
Dog: This is Kill-buck: Now here is sweet-lips: here is Ringwood. And here is my
Bitch Venus at last: Udsneaks, she opens as sweet as your Ladyship.


Sings: of all Delights the Earth does yield. Enter Fancifull, comes up to him,
Curtsying. L. Fanci. Sr. I beg your pardon I use so much familiarity with you,
upon the slender acquintance I have with your person.


Dulh. A well-bred, well-spoken Lady, I fags.


Florell. Now must I be struck deaf again, if I stay with the Larum of her
perpetual tongue.


La. Fanci. Madam, I am ashamed to see you use the Gentleman at this Scurvy
rate; I overheard your jears.


Dulh. Sun, Moon, and seven Stars; I scorn to take an affront of any Lady in
Christendom --


comes up to her. Florell. He Will beat me anon. --


aside. Fanci. I observed your proud disdainful looks; your Indifferent
behavior -- Your Servant sweet Sir. [Curtsies.] And thus indeed you entertain
all your servants; as if mankind was made but for your diversion.


Dulh. A parlous woman Udsneaks.


La. Fanci. It Is well known, Madam; I Have had as many Servants as any Lady
between this and Tweed, as I may say; And I ever received 'em with all the
Civility and Ceremonies Imaginable, Seriously. You ought to respect a person of
his Quality and Education; -- Your Servant sweet Sir, your servant.


Curtsying and looking Amorously. Dulh. She Is in the right on it Udsfoot,
forsooth, if you go to that; Sun, Moon, and Seven Stars, how do you like me now?


Florell. This is not generously done, to supplant me thus; but I shall leave
you to feast upon your happiness, and go mourn my own misfortunes.


Exit. L. Fanci. Really Sir, you're extremely well dressed. This is very rich;
pardon me sweet Sir --

puts his Cravat in order. This is a very fine Lace; -- pray what might this
Suit Cost?


Dulh. I fags I cannot tell, forsooth; But it cost a power of money forsooth;
Sun, Moon and Seven Stars,


shows his fine Wastcoat. La. Fanci. Seriously my Lord Modish had just such
another suit on, of all the World, when he first made his Court to me.


Enter Toby and Primrose. Primr. How greedily does she feed on those nauseous
scraps of Love? A stale Maid, will Catch at any Fool, rather then lead Apes in
hell.


Toby whispers Fancifull in the ear. Toby. Leave the rest to my Management; --
I Will spring the Woodcock, I le warrant you.


Fanci. Dear Sir, pardon me; -- I must leave you, -- Extraordinary Business
calls me aside, Sir, -- You Are the only Person I could love to Converse with, in
the whole Town seriously; your servant sweet Sir, Dear Sir.


Exit Curtsying. Dulh. How now Toby; how now Toby? Am not I woundy fine; --
Sun, Moon, and seven Stars how do like me now?


Toby. You outshine all the Town-sparks, and they will make you the Model and
Pattern of all your gallantry.


Dulh. Will they so? they count me a fool mun Toby, they count me a fool.


Primr. And they are much in the right on it -- [aside] -- well Sir, you have made
a fine business on it yonder; my Lady is ready to run mad; it is a sad thing for
Gentlemen to have the ascendant over their Mistresses; pray heavens she does
not mischief her self about it.


Toby. Mollify a little, Sir; be not so hard-hearted.


Dulh. Who I Toby? I hard-hearted? I scorn her words: I Am as good a natured
fellow as lives, If I Am pleased, that I am. Tell her, I can forgive her: How
do like me now, Primrose? how do like me now? [ Toby stands musing.


Toby. Faith Sir,; I Have the prettiest thing come into my head, just now.


Dulh. What is it Toby? what is it?


Toby. It Is a humor Sir, you would top to a hair.


Dulh. If it be a humor, let me alone for a humor; I Am old Dog, at a humor,
Toby.


Primr. O dear Sir; My Lady is strangely taken with pretty odd humors: She Will
dye with laughing at you, Sir.


Toby. You know Sir, your Cousen Sr. John has provided an Entertainment; now
I Have a disguise for you.


Dulh. Say no more, let us about it, let us about it. I shall make special sport

Toby: Come, come, Sir, 'twill be very taking I warrant you.


Exeunt. Enter Waspish. Primr. This Olio of humors, will afford us an
excellent feast of Mirth; we shall laugh our belly's full; Bless me! here comes
Waspish to contribute to it; I Will raise a tempest in him, Immediately:


He is reading his Parchm. Wasp. Mortgages, Mortgages; Bonds, Bonds, Bonds;
very well I protest; O, Udsbodykins, here are the writings of my Estate proper;
let me see, -- [reads to himself.] -- well, it goes all to Mrs Florry, -- my
pretty little Florry. Udsbodykins would I were at my my 20th. year again.


Primr. I Will quickly put you in another tune, Sir.


She gets behind him and steals his trumpet from his Girdle; he perceives it,
and turns to spy her with his glass, she still turns with him, and pulls him by
the sleeve still, as she is behind him. Wasp. Snoons, what is this? who is it?
Snoons the Devil; I Am abused; Villains, Theives, help Murder, murder.


She knocks his glass out of's hand, he goes to grope for it; she throws him
down, and tumbles him about; he strives to get up but cannot. Enter Sr. John
Oldfop, leading Florella, Craftmore: Dorinda: La. Fancifull: Loveby, and
Donnell. Florella picks up Waspishes glass and helps him up; he beats her.
Wasp. Have I caught you, have I caught you fury? Snoons, forgive Mrs Florry --
I Will hang my self; Snoons, Snoons.


looks in's glass and sees it is his Mistress. Florell. Why wench, thou have
used him unmercifully: He roared as loud as Perillus in his Brazen-Bull.


Sr. John Old. Pray Madam, let us remove this fool; -- I have as great an
Antipathy against an old fool, as some persons have against Cheshire-Cheese, or
a breast of mutton; -- I Am ready to swoon at the sight of him.


he offers to disturb Waspish, who is all this while fretting. Florell. On
peril of my displeasure Sir, let him alone.


Sr. John. Go fetch the fiddles in. --


to Donnell. Donnell. Ay, upon my Maker will I joy; and dance all the way.

He dances out; then brings in all the Fiddles tied about his wast, the Fiddlers
follow, he pushes them back. Ay by my Shoul, you must not come in, my Master
did but send for the Fiddles look thee -- [they take their fiddles, one sings
the Song, some play soft with it.


Sr. John. Sing the Song I ordered you.


Song.
Strephon the brisk and gay,
Young Strephons Natures wonder, All this while Sr. John walks about admiring
himself and humouring the Song with Gestures.
Whose eyes let forth, bright flames of Day,
Whose every look does Souls betray,
Or splits an heart asunder.
2
Strephon has every Grace,
And wears 'em still about him,
The Nymph whose greedy eye does trace
The Swarming Beauties of his face,
Yields heavens no heaven without him.
3
Who views his Miene or Air,
The lovely youth Confounds her,
He is so Charming, and so fair,
The heedless virgin Unaware,
Plays with the darts that wounds her.
Madam, there are some persons, that can answer the Character. [Oldfop takes
Florella: Craftm. Dorinda: Loveby, Primrose.


Loveby. Come thou hither; second-hand fin'ry.


Fancifull comes between 'em. Fanci. How now Impudence; why sure I Am not fallen
so low in the esteem of mankind as not to be thought the fitter person to
Dance with a Gentleman; -- Sir your servant, I hope I may Claim the privilege
of your hand.


Loveb. Pardon me Madam; I profess I did not see your Ladyship; Otherwise I
should have taken care to have avoided you --


aside. Fanci. No excuse Sir; I Am satisfied 'twas an oversight: Your servant
sweet Sir.


Craft. They say jealousy is quick-sighted; -- and sees with as many eyes, as
Argus did, -- I Will observe every nod, smile and glance, that passes between 'em
--


aside. Adance while they are dancing. Dulhead comes in his disguise, and
Dances ridiculously. Sr. John. Some Groom or Footman dressed up to amuse us;
Kick the Unseasonable, Rascal out, -- his mirth is dull.


Dulh. [to Florella] Sun, Moon, and seven Stars; Do you know me forsooth? How
do you like me now?


They laugh, he dances out. Fanci. Seriously; I blush to see the Gentleman so
far barbarously used; -- I Will Immediately after him, and give him to
understand, how your Ladyship derides him.


Exit after him. Craftmore to Florella -- Loveby to Dorinda, after the Dance.
Craft. Madam, I hope you will pardon the Confidence of a stranger, If his
Curiosity leads him to take a view of those perfections that all the world
admires.


Florell. Sir, I Am very Certain; there are many thousand of a Contrary Opinion
to your self. I cannot but wonder at the strength of your Imagination, that
could so suddenly create those perfections you speak of.


Loveb. Pretty little one, why do you shun me thus? You fly me as a trembling
Fawn would a Tiger, or a Lion. I do not pursue you to make a prey of you, but
to love and embrace you.


Dorin. Indeed now I do not know what you mean by your fine words, But such a
brave Gentleman as you, cannot love me sure.


Lo^eb. You need not question the possibility of it, when you have already
taken possession of my heart.


Craft. I Confess Madam, I have given my faith to a young Lady already; but now
I must blame my ill Stars they did not first guide me to your Ladyship.


Florell. O Sir, they were not such blind guides, they saw better things for
you.


In this time Loveby is toying with Dorin. Courting her in dumb show. Dorin. O
Gemini, I cannot endure you should do so; You make me blush that you do -- Let
go my hand, or I vow I Will scratch you.


she struggles with him. Craft. 'Twill be policy now to retreat, and not to
tempt my fortune too boldly; It Is in Woman's nature to shun those that fly them
-- [aside] Madam your eyes are nimble Archers; and your Cupid is very
Powerful, should I discourse longer with you, I should turn Rebel to my first
flame, and then you might as well suspect I would be false to you too.


Florell. Would you put in practice the former, I Would put the latter to a
venture, and believe you, though I were deceived by my Credulity.


aside. Craftmore coming to Loveby. Craft. Have you any thing to do with that
Lady, Sir?


Love. Some small business only to require the Restoration of an heart.


Sr. John Sings and Dances -- trys to cut the while. Craft. The Lady Sir, is a
propriety.


Love. I have hopes to the Contrary.


Craft. Unhand her Sir; I wear a Sword:


Loveb. So do I Sir; in honor of this Lady.


lay their hands on their Swords. Sr. John. Fie Gentlemen, do not render your
selves guilty of so great a Solecisme in good manners, as to offer to draw in
company of Ladys.


Craft. You may hear from me.


Craft. and Dorinda go out one way. Loveb. My Sword Sir, stall answer you.


Loveby the other. Sr. John Dancing up to Florella. Sr. John. Thus will I deal
out my Love to you eternally; and to you alone --


Sings and Dances. Florell. Conceited Fool; he is grown as old in foppery as in
years. He has not heat enough to melt the Snow that lies on's head.


aside. Primr. And I dare swear Madam, he will sooner stand in need of a Nurse
himself, then give any Lady an Occasion to use one --


aside. He comes to her again. Florell. Doubtless Sir; I were over-happy, were
I but assured of your Constancy.


Sr. John. Did all the tempting Beauties, Jointly strive to seduce me; by
heavens Madam, they should not draw me to a disloyal thought.


Florell. I long to be rid of this fool* [aside] Sir, I Have business within;
please you go.


Sr. John. I wait on you Madam, -- But I would first inform you, that I
purposely Contrived this match, that you might enjoy the freedom of Love
without the Scandal that generally attends our married women; And besides I
have always had a greater respect to your birth; and your own particular
person, then to make the dishonorable offers of keeping to so noble a Lady.

Keeping's grown vulgar; Matrimony dull,
Be you my Mistress then --

Florell. And you my Fool,
Keeping of fools too, is quite out of fashion
Yet such a one's a gentile Recreation.

aside Exeunt Omnes. The End of the Third Act.
ACT IV.
SCENE I.
Enter Craftmore, and Toby. Toby. HOw liked you my Gull Sir?


Craft. I received I confess an unexpected pleasure and satisfaction from thy
Improvement of the Blockhead; he was too dull a fool to move laughter before.


Toby. O Sir; Did you but conceive how I wear this brain away in your service,
from whence Inventions hourly work out like froth from new-bottl'd Ale; but I Am
a man of few words Sir, of few words.


Craft. No more of this; but do you hear, as you hope to continue in my favor,
do you go on to expose him in so many Ridiculous shapes and changes, that she
may despise and scorn him, though he could jointure her to both the Indies.


Toby. Whereupon I immediately make to my property; possess him with an opinion
of his last performance; and so draw him into greater absurdities: But Sir, --
[as going, but returns] when you have gotten your Mistress; I shall not be your
Steward, I warrant, and have the privilege to cheat you by way of license.


Craft. Be gone; I Will hear no more.


Toby. And put false bills of account upon you; till by my Industry, I Am
possessed of the better part of your Estate; and stand in Competition with you,
in point of precedence, and of being thought the better Gentleman.


Craft. You Will go --


offers to beat him. Toby. I fly, I fly, Sir: [Exit Singing] I showed 'em
such, etc.


Dorin. And how did you find your Mistress? Is she not as I told you, Yielding
upon Terms of honor think you?


Craft. O she was in a melting temper; -- But I Have so Unjustly and Scandalously
abused her in my Sham-letter, that if she discovers me I Am discarded for ever.


Dorin. You had best betray your self to her, by your unmanly fears; like a
Murderer that delivers himself into the hands of Justice.


Craft. Certainly my ill Genius set me on writing it, what a madness was it
else, to wound the darling of my Soul; the best and tenderest part of my self;
but what doubles my griefs, is to find my friend perfidious at last.


Dorin. Pardon me Sir, If I differ in opinion from you in that. I Am persuaded
the Gentleman is as far from being perfidious, as your Mistress from giving him
an occasion of being so.


Craft. I perceive you're bribed to speak for him, by your Love.


Dorin. Were it so; I need not be ashamed to own my flame.


Craft. Take care Dorinda, his tongue has a Charm in it; and though he has the
face of an Angel, and the shape of an Cherubin; yet his black swollen heart
within may be filled with rapes, treacheries, and dark designs.


Dorin. You do ill to accuse your friend, before you know him guilty.


Craft. I could wish I had not too just an occasion to suspect him; But I shall
take some measures as well to clear my doubt, as to Justify or Condemn the
honorable thoughts you conceive of him.


Exit. Dorin. I know not to what Extravagances his jealousy may hurry him; But
if he aims at his life, he strikes at it through mine. O Loveby, Mr. Loveby;
there is not a letter in his, name but has a Charm in it.


Enter Loveby. Loveb. I am deceived, or I heard the name of Loveby; and know it
must proceed from her mouth, for softest Airs of Music attended the sound: why
all this coldness and scorn in your face on a sudden? pretty little one.


Comes up to her, she starts and looks Innocently again. Dorin. O living dear,
you always steal upon a body, and do so fright me.


Loveb. It Is strange, Madam, that I should be so dreadful that at the sight of
me, you should be filled with such frightfull apprehensions: I have no swinging
long tail, horns and Cloven-feet.


Dorin. Indeed now I Will not stay with you, if you talk of such ugly things.


looks about as fearful. Loveb. Prettyest Creature, Dearer to me then my own
eyes, I Will speak to thee in gentle accents, soft as those of Lovesick Virgins,
breathing out their Souls in tenderest expressions, and caress you gently, as
the Morning-dew falls on the opening Rose, or the fleece of snow on the bosom
of the cold vale.


Dorin. O Gemini! I vow now you say such pretty things of all the world as Mr.
Bellamore did, when he converted me first.


Loveb. And dear little Lady, why may not they have the same effect?


Dorin. Indeed now, I cannot tell forsooth Sir, You ^ake me blush.


Loveb. Pretty Modesty --


He kisses her hand. Dorin. O living dear, I would not stay any longer with
you, for a World, should Mr. Bellamore come and see you, he would kill you, indeed
now -- and I am so afraid he should kill you.


Loveb. Kindly feared Nay, dearest, you must pardon me, if I hasten thus to
enjoy my happiness: There Is no one but would arrive at Heaven as soon as he
could.


he Embraces her, she struggles. Dorin. Indeed now, but if you will go to
Heaven, you must dye first.


Loveb. And that I could an hundred times for you, had I so many lives, was I
sure but to pass the last few transitory minutes in your dear arms.


embraces her. Dorin. O Leminies! I wonder you are not ashamed to rumple ones
Clothes so.


Enter Florella and Primrose. Florell. Oh horrid base persidious Villain;
Monster of Falsehood:


Primr. Nay, your Ladyship may partly thank your self for it. As you tender
your quiet, Reputation, and Honor, Madam, I beg you would bridle your passion.


she sees Loveby. Loveby comes to her. Loveb. Madam, your Servant; you have an
angry Cloud settled on your brow; whence does it proceed?


Florell. I cannot look upon you, Sir, but I think on the Cursed Cause of it.


Dorin. I hope forsooth you're not angered with me; I Will go and see after Mr.
Bellamore and tell him, that I will.


Exit Dorin. Loveb. I Will after her, I must not allow her time to cool again. --

aside. Madam, I Am sorry to see you thus discomposed; and am much more so, to
find the sight of me, should be any way the cause of your discontent.


Exit. Primr. Did you observe with what Indifferency he left you, Madam?


Florell. Fortune has debarred me from the Conversation of witty Men and set me
up the mark of Fools; she baits me with Apes and Monkies, and I Have no sooner
shook off one, but a fresh one flys on me with all the fury Imaginable.


Primr. So, so, now the wind rises.


aside. Florell. And they fasten on me by turns, with noise, Impertinence, or
dull insipid humors, which they take for wit: Methinks I hate all mankind for
thy sake, perjured Craftmore; Oh that I had thee here; I Would tear thee in
pieces, thus, false-hearted Traitor.


she pulls the Letter out, and tears it in pieces. Primr. There Is a way to be
revenged, could you think on it, Madam? -- Think on Revenge, -- Revenge is
sweet, Madam. There are other Men in the World, as Proper, Beautiful, and Rich
as he, every whit.


Florell Thou have put a strange thought in my head; -- Here Is one Mr.
Bellamore in this House, Servant to Dorinda.


Prim. So, so, now is all this blustering over, and she is veering to another
quarter. Had she as many Lovers, as there are points in the Compass, she'de run
'em all over in half an hour -- [aside] -- Your Ladyship has observed very well.


Florell. What thin'st thou of him Wench?


Primr. O Madam, He Is a sweet-tongu'd Gentleman, he would ravish any woman alive.


Florell. Do think it is feasible.


Primr. Then his limbs are so exactly formed, so smooth and plyant, you would swear
they were made in Wax. There are Legs, Arms, Shoulders, and a body straight as
an Arrow:

This sets her a-gog.


aside. Florell. I am resolved to try my chance -- Could we but contrive to put
Dorinda on Loveby, my passage were clear. I Will presently into the Garden, where
we may be private and discourse him about it.


Primr. It succeeds I Will warrant you, Madam -- Vastly Rich they say, of a great
Family, and an Education equal to both. Never fear, no veins of flint grow in
his heart.


Florell. I have resolved what to do; -- I Will send him a kind Note; wherein
I Will signify that a certain Lady has a passion for him. And see how he
entertains that, and make my advances accordingly.


Primr. My very thoughts, Madam; something may be learned from his Man -- seem
you nothing concerned: Entertain all your fools as before, my life for it you
have your design.


Enter Dullhead laughing. Florell. One can no sooner speak of a Fool; but he is
at hand:


aside. Dullh. I warrant you forsooth; you took me for a fool, I Am a man of no
humor -- [Dances as before] Sun, Moon, and seven Stars; how do you like me now
forsooth?


Florell. How Insipid is the most diverting Coxcombs, when we have distempered
minds, like meats to sick pallats they are all tastless:

aside. Sir, you will spoil the humor, by making it too common.


Prim. Madam, Compose your self; and don't let slip the satisfaction you may
receive from the performances of so complete a Blockhead: Folly after
discontent is a sweetning relish, after a bitter potion.


Dullh. Forsooth, don't you remember a strange person in an odd sort of habit
but now; that was I forsooth; I warrant you did not know me. But observe, if
you hear or see any one speak or do any thing, and all the Company laughs, to
be sure that is I forsooth, that is I.


Florell. Incorrigible fool.


Primr. Madam, you drive the humor too far.


Dullh. Nay, If you go to that, there be those that can value themselves,
Udsfoot, I can be as touchy as another, that I can; Sun, Moon, and seven Stars
how do you like me now? Farewell to you Udsneaks, if you go to that.

Exit Dullhead.
Enter Sr. John Oldfop in another suit, a Ribband tied round his wrist; with a
Locket on it, Donnel and Strain-Conscience following him; Strain-Conscience
looking demurely. Sr. John. Rascal, Dog, If you cannot lie for your daily
bread, I Have done with you; let me not have you making four faces like a jugler
Swallowing knives, put on your praying face: The Demureness of your looks will
Sanctify a lie.


Strain-Con. O Conscience, Conscience, this Master of mine will damn me, that is
for Certain.


Donnell. Chreesh't blesh thy shweet faish; I will lie for tee joy, what shall I
lie for tee?


Prim. You cannot now, Madam, let sullen discontent sit on your brow, when you
have so many ridiculous objects before you, to dissolve you into laughter; --
So, now it begins to clear up again --


aside. Sr. John Oldfop comes up to her Sr. John Madam, some Extraordinary
business maliciously detained me from the prospect of so much gallantry; some
few short visits I Have paid; and let me dye if I could have rescued my self from
the Importunities of the fondlings, but upon urging my engagements to your
Ladyship.

Dog; Remember -- [to Strain.


He walks about to show his Clothes, turns the Locket round his wrist. Florell.
You grace me with your favors, and dazzle me with all this bravery; -- You're
extremely proper, really Sir; -- Tynsy'd Ass --


aside. Sr. John. Several persons of quality at Court, think it no discredit
to their wit and parts in the mystery of dressing to imitate me.


Florell. Pardon me Sir; If I am too curiously bold.

Indeed this is very fine.


Looks on the Locket. Sr. John. A trifle bestowed on me by a Duchess I danced
with lately at Court.


Strain-Con. O I will lie now Immoderately; forgive me sweet Conscience; Sir
there is a Lady, -- true; there is an Equivocation -- [aside] -- most
affectionately desires -- ay, good, no doubt, but she does affectionately
desire something -- [aside -- To speak -- It Is sure, If she is enjoined Silence
[aside. with you Sir; -- O lo, Olo, -- that is a damned lie now -- [aside] So
that is gone. --


aside. Sr. John. Did not I Command you Rascal to deny me to all that inquired
after me? Her business, Lodgings, and her name?


Strain-Con. O lo, O lo; why there it is again; -- why there it is now; -- One
Madam Cleverwit, that lodges at Mr. Draper-wells, over against the Royal
Exchange; -- O, I lie, I lie, I lie; -- [aside And she begs the honor of a
visit this Afternoon, so that is gone too --


aside. Donnell. Ay by my Shoul and Shaint Patrick; I will go she if thou
dosh't lie for my mashters shweet sake; if thou dosht not, I will make beat on
thy fathers Child, look tee dear joy. --


aside. Primr. Excellent sport --

laughs.
Florell. Let me not detain you from the Arms of your Mistress, All the Ladys I
find, make their Court to you.


Sr. John. They Are all beneath my Consideration; -- No Madam, since my
Conversation with you, I nauseate their despicable amors; -- I Will redeem my
stray heart; and divorce me from their Cheap Vulgar Love; and the Circle of
your Arms shall be to me, that of the whole world; -- Go on Rascal, do you
stick?


aside Florell. I will not hope it; -- This Crevat Sir, Is point de Venice, the
work is high, and the flower very agreeable.


Sr. John. A slight piece to appear in at the Playhouse, or so: An Italian
Lady presented me with one worth six of it.


Strain-Con. Mercy on me, no Equivocation: -- I will lie abundantly; have
patience with me good Satan -- [aside.] -- And this very Lady Sir, has sent you
this Ring -- O lo, -- o lo.


aside. Prim. Improbable Sham, this is a present from himself to himself.
[aside.


Strain-Con. I was almost worried as I came hither, have patience sweet
Beelzebub -- [aside.] -- One sends her Footman to me; the other her Page -- I
lie -- [aside] -- A Third her woman. O lo, O lo, I have two or three swinging
lies to come yet; Do not twinge me good Conscience.


aside. Prim. This is extravagantly ridiculous.


aside. Strain Con. A fourth begs and Entreats me: In short, Sir, they are grown
so troublesome, I cannot go about your business for 'em -- O lo, O lo, there
all is out; I have discharged my Conscience.


aside. Enter Donnell. Donnell. By my Shoul joy I did run to de plaish dear
over against de great plaish,; And I did ask after de Laady, but tere wash no
such Laady, by my shoul thou disht lie very much well for my Mashters shweet
sake.


Sr. John. Blund'ring fool, who sent you on this Errand? Madam, he has mistaken
the place, you may find by the account he gives; Dull, Incorrigible sot.


beats him. Donnell. Upon my Shalwation, now I shwear by my Maker, and by him
that made me, and by the Devil take me too, tou dosh make beat on poor


Donnell: Much good it may do me.


howls. Enter Dullhead. Dulh. I shall leave you forsooth; If you go to that,
Udsfoot: I am a Person that understand how to take an affront: Sun, Moon, and
Seven Stars; how do you like me now? I shall leave you Udsfoot, if you go to
that.


Enter Fancifull standing behind. Fan. O me! what did he say? what a trembling
seized my heart, oh, oh, -- will he leave us?


Sr. John. What means this?


Florell. He is distasted Sir, at some words I dropped unawares.


Dush. Fool wounds deep forsooth, with men of my temper.


Sr. John. You must bear with such petty affronts, I have been called a
thousand Fops, Fools, and Asses by Ladies e're now: Come; you must be
reconciled to her.


Dulh. I am woundy good-natured: I can forgive you forsooth: how do you like me
now, Cousen Sr. John?


Sr. John. Madam; I perceive the Ass is fickle; and he may disappoint our long
expected joys by his folly; -- I Will take order the writings be drawn, and all
things in readyness for the Solemnity: -- please you to walk dear Madam.


Exeunt Sr. John and Florella with Strain-Con. and Donnell. Lady Fancifull
meeting Dulhead. La. Fanci. Dear Sir; I thought you was going to deprive us of
your good Company, and leave me here, to mourn your absence.


Dulh. No, no; I Am reconciled Sweet Lady.


Fanci. Sweet Lady; -- A fine spoken Gentleman, that word has Revived me; -- I
wonder at the ill breeding of Mrs. Florella, to abuse a Gentleman of your
quality, worth, wit, and Beauty.


Dulh. Of my worth, wit, and Beauty; Udsfoot she understands me I find.


Primr. That Is more then ever you your self did --


aside. Fanci. Sir, I protest, of the number that ever made Love to me; (and
I Will warrant I Have had an hundred) you're the only person I could ever fancy.


Dulh Udsfoot, this face has been doated upon by fine Ladies, forsooth, I must
tell you.


La. Fanci. Oh Dear Sir, I Am Convinced of that by my own affections: But as I
was saying, you're the only Gentleman I admire; though I confess my Lord Sparkish
was a fine person: Sir Tymothy Long-Title had his peculiar graces too; Dear
Sir, you have an Extraordinary white hand, and your fingers are so like Sr.
Thomas True-Shapes, seriously.


she kisses his hand. Primr. So, now there is another blaze of her passion; it
rises by sits like a wasted Candle when it is burned to the snuff.


aside. Enter Toby Fanci. But here comes my Engine; -- I must withdraw. --

aside Dear Sir your Servant, Servant sweet Sir.


Exit. Dullh. O Toby! how is it Toby; Did not I humor the business to a hair
just now? Sun, Moon, and seven Stars, how do like me now Toby?


Toby, Faith Sir, I was ready to split my sides at you. Did you not observe how
all the Company laughed as soon as you appeared?


Dulh. My Cosen Sr. John was angry with me for it; But he is a fool man: He does
not understand an humor Udsfoot.


Prim. Have you found his Equipage where I laid it out for you.


aside Toby. Yes, yes; begin, and I Will second you.


aside Primr. Sir, you may think your pleasure of my Lady, but I can assure you
she admires you for your shapes; and she is always running 'em over: and
praising 'em to her self, though she says you are something gross.


Toby. He Is a little Corpulent; but that is easily remedied; I Will undertake to
make you less by 3 Inches in a quarter of an hour: It would not be amiss if
your ears were pared a little.


Dulh. Sun, Moon, and seven Stars, my ears Toby? why, they are not Asses ears;
no, no; but I care not, If I be taken less by 2 or 3 Inches.


Primr. The Gudgeon bites.


aside. Toby. I Will do it for you, Immediately Sir; Come please you to uncase a
little.


While he is Vndressing; Primrose fetches in a Ridiculous habit; he laces him in
Stays; and dresses him Fantastically. Toby. Draw in your breath Sir, -- Very
well -- I Will warrant you this will do it.


Dulh. Why Toby; Udsfoot thou will squeeze my ribs flat: oh, oh, oh: Udsfoot I
shall not be able to fetch breath presently. Thou have taken me in above 2
Inches, O, O, O, what a pox do mean Toby? slack a little; I shall never be
able to endure it, O, O, O!


Toby. Nere fear't Sir, -- He begins to come to 't; -- here is a shape now;
here is a wast, Clean and slender, -- as a Mast-pole --


aside Primr. I believe my Lady is bigger round -- A delicate shape on my word.


Toby. Come Sir, we have but four holes more; patience Sir; patience:


Dulh. O, O, O! Udsneaks Toby, I think I begin to leak at the lower End, O, O,
O, hold, hold, hold, my heart will leap out at my mouth, If thou go one hole
farther. [as scarce able to speak.] I warrant I Am taller now then I was, by 3.
or 4. Inches, Udsfoot, O, O, O, don't I shoot up?


Primr. An 'twere Sparagus, I can see you grow: May I never hang pendant in
Ladies ear more, If I think you have your fellow in the three Kingdoms.


Dulh. Uh, Uh -- [strives but can scarcely speak.] Unconscionable Toby, what
do mean? O, O, O!


Toby. Have patience Sir, you will quickly master this; If I had a mind to 't, I
could draw you through a Gold Ring, like an Egg steept in Vinegar; come Sir,
I Will bate you a hole or two; So, now I know it sits easy:


puts on the rest of the things. Primr. Thou have Crampt him I faith


aside Toby. Now we are gone so far Sir; we I set another humor on foot, what
say you?


Dulh. I was just thinking on it Udsneaks; --


as scarce able to speak. Toby. What think you then of Personating a despairing
Lover before your Mistress; I have a willow-Garland ready for 't, And a Copy of
Verses so pat to the purpose, 'twill be admirable, Sir, 'twill be admirable.


Dulh. Udsneaks, O, O, O, -- so 'twill: But I fear I shall never be able to
Compass it, for as I Am a Gentleman, I could never endure a written hand in my
life, -- O, O, O.


Toby. Leave that to my Instructions; Come let us in and practice.


He puts him in several Ridiculous postures. Dulh. I shall be apt, Toby; I
shall be apt; O, O, O, there was a twinge: Sun Moon and 7 Stars, how do like
me now Toby? how do like me now?


Toby. Excellently well Sir, along, along:


Exeunt Dulh. and Toby. Primr. Senseless Idiot! well; this must needs prove
very pleasant; I Will not discover it to my Lady, the surprise will make it much
more diverting.


Enter Waspish in a great passion; throwing his Cloak, tugging his Ears and
stamping, etc. Bless me! here comes the old angry Baboon, his fit's not over
yet; this beating of his Mistress, sticks in his stomach still.

Wasp. O Unfortunate, Unfortunate; Snoons, Snoons, I Will hang my self, Cut my
throat, drown my self; No a little Rats-bane or Sublimated Mecury, Snoons
Unfortunate, oh, -- oh! -- Let me see -- O Mrs Prim, stand my friend Mrs Prim,
not a word yet Mrs Prim. --


He walks up and down stamping, takes his glass out and spys her. Runs and
stops her mouth Primr. Now to make this Scene completely Comicall, what device
Shall I have? O! I have thought on 't -- Sir: I doubt it is beyond my power to
Reconcile my Lady, she vows never to see your face again: Oh if you had but
heard the wishes she uttered 'twoud have made you tremble.


while she speaks he puts his Trumpet to his Ear. Wasp. Oh, oh! Do not let me
hear 'em then; 'twill be the Death of me, oh, oh!


groans and sighs. Primr. There Is one way left yet; -- Come Sir, be pacified.
You talked but now of hanging your self; would you be ruled by me you should
Counterfeit the thing; and so exactly; It should turn more to your advantage
then you dream of.


Wasp. Udsbodikins, say you so Mrs Prim. any thing, Mrs Prim. any thing; But
how may it be done?


Primr. Why look you; it is but to be hung by the Armpits; holding your head a
little on one side; pulling your handkercheif over your face: struggling,
kicking, and heaving a little.


Wasp. Udsbodikins; It must needs melt her into Compassion.


Primr. Then come I; Scream out as affrighted, cut the Rope, Chafe and rub you;
and give you some Spirits, pretending to fetch you again; The Garden door will
be the fittest place, because my Lady's now there; she will be sure to see you Sir.


Wasp. A pretty Contrivance, I protest, A very pretty Contrivance; This must
needs work upon her; -- Come, come, Mrs Prim.


Exeunt. The Scene Changes to a Garden. Enter Florella and Loveby as in
discourse. Loveb. And Madam; may I firmly rely on what you say?


Florell. As on your Creed Sir, She Is strangely enamored of you; She was
infinitely taken with you this morning in the Park, and since, I have overheard
her talking of you to her self, like an Usurer, recounting his darling Sums.


Loveb. Upon this Assurance, Madam; I Will push my designs on more vigorously:
But I fear the little Baggage will be talking to me of that Bug-bear-Matrimony;
should she put it home to me; I should be apt to play the Fool, and take the
marriage bit into my mouth, if I could not prevail otherwise.


Florell O fie Sir; I hope your designs are honorable, upon this Condition I
promise you my assistance: But otherwise, I utterly disclaim it; She Is an
Heiress, and has a plentiful Estate I hear.


Loveb. Is not the first Fortune has been stoll'n you would say.


Enter Craftmore. Craft. She came this way, and the privacy of the place will
allow me the opportunity of disclosing my Passion more freely: If she seems
cold, which my last Interview confirms me almost she will not; I can fall off
as fast as she; or if she offers to make it public or expose me, I can deny it
every word: Ha! Sdeath, Loveby! I am Confirmed now he is false.


walks along to look for her, Spies Loveby and her together. Loveb. Faith,
Madam, I cannot despair of success, Influenced thus by the Encouragement and
assistance of your Ladyship: You Will be faithful and constant to your fair
promises; -- your Servant Madam: -- Kisses her hand and Ex.


Florell. So, he is sure, -- and now he is devoted to my Service. By this means I
shall be Revenged of that base faithless, black-mouthed Libeller.


aside. Craft. I Will Crush this monster Loveby, or loose my life in the attempt.
Friendship I find is an Aerie notion, that never had any other Existence, then
in a few letters, the decoy of fools, by which they are wheadl'd into a belief of
the integrity of those very men that intend to prey upon 'em.


Florell. This is an happy opportunity; I Am resolved I Will take the advantage of
an Innocent freedom.


She sees Craftmore aside. Craft. Hold! Yet this Charge may be rash and
groundless; I Will try my fortune; but first, down swelling heart -- z. sighs. --
so, now I Will venture to speak to her; You Are walking here pensively; thus alone,
Madam, seems to speak you possessed with Cloudy Melancholy.


Florell. But the approach of you Sir, guilds my face with smiles, and drives
away all those Clouds you speak of, 'twou'd be as impossible to be sad in your
presence, Sir.


Craft. As for a man not to be in Love in yours, Madam.


Florell. I shall not be so vain, as to think you speak the real Sentiments of
your mind, since I understand your Love is all disposed of already, to one who
has greater Charms and merit, to recommend her to it.


Craft. This is strange and unexpected, she gives ground apace; this seems to
suit with the purport of her Billet. But both perhaps may be forged, on purpose
to make me discover my self; but I must believe her when it is my Interest to do
so --


aside Florell. I see by your grave Consideration you begin to repent the
Charges of your Complement, and the least intimation of your Dorinda, has soon
brought you back to her arms.


Craft. Madam, I confess there are some small obligations between us; But your
Ladyship might lay far greater on me by honoring me, with the Title of your
Servant.


Florell. The request is so modest, I shall not deny it.


Craft. By heavens I Am Conqueror at last; I have now the alluring prospect of
all earthly Joys before me, and a few gentle steps, will bring me to the
Enjoyment of 'em; I am come now to somewhat of a knowledge of my self; and am
fully Convinced, I have wronged both my Mistress and my Friend. [aside.


Enter Dulhead and Toby: Dulh. with a willow-Garland in one hand, and a Paper
in 'tother. Toyy. you Remember the tone.


Dulh. Udsfoot Toby: I Will tune 'em I warrant thee.


Reads as a Country Clark does a Psalm. Toby. Go on Sir, yonder she is; How he
moves along, as stiff as though he was in a Case of Wainscot.


aside. Craft. What have we here? O'tis Toby's Machine.


aside. Dulh. reads scarce able to speak. Dulh. reads.

A Willow-Garland thou did send
Perfumed last day to me;
Which did but only this Portend
I was forsook by thee.
Sun, Moon, and 7 Stars; how do you like me now forsooth?


Craft. What Is this? the Pageant of a forsaken Lover, Madam? I wonder you could
be so hard-hearted, to drive such a handsome witty Gentleman into despair, ha,
ha, ha!


Dulh Since so it is, I tell thee what,
To Morrow thou shall see, O, O, O.
Me wear the Willow, after that
To dye upon the Tree.

Florell. O my Conscience it is Dulhead; 'Twere pity Sir, but you should be, as
good as your word.


Dulh. As beasts unto the Altars go,
With Garlands dressed, so I
Will with my willow wreath also,
Come forth and sweetly dye. O, O, O.

Craft. The Psalm's ended.


Florell If he would but come to the Execution now.


Dulh. Do you know me forsooth? Sun, Moon and Seven Stars how do like me now?
Was my Cousen Sr. John here now, he would think some body put this into my head
now, O, O, O. I Will find him out, and show him the humor, and make him wonder
at my Invention.


A^ he is going out Waspish is discovered, hanging over the Garden-door
struggling and kicking; Dulh. sees him, and starts back. Craft. Madam, please
you to walk this way: A very pleasant Garden: We are now in a kind of Paradise.


Craft. and Flor. courting in dumb show Dulh. Udsfoot, what is here? has Waspish
hanged himself? I warrant if he is found out he will be tried for his life; I saw
a pure Watch he had to day: I Will borrow it, till he has occasion for it again,
O, O, O. First let me try whether he is Compos Mentis or no.


He whirls him round, then goes to pick his pocket. Wasp. Theives, Theives,
I Am robbed, Murder, Murder.


Dulh. O, O! Ghost I defy thee, O, O, I shall be hanged that is certain: Udsfoot
I Am dead, I Am dead; Ghost I defy thee, O, O, O.


Craft. The noise came this way --

Dulh. Rises and runs out. Ha! here is the old Gentleman hung up like Erasmus,
between Heaven and Hell; See how he twirles round like a Sparrow roasting at
the end of a packthred; ha, ha, ha!


Florell. I Am confident this is my woman's Roguery.

Wasp. cries Murder. How she has tortured the poor old fellow!


Craft. Come Sir, I Will save you from the Gallows for once; If you will not make
good an old Proverb, and cut my throat for it


Craft. cuts him down. Wasp. Snoons; -- I Will hang you all -- O my disgrace, O
my shame, -- Udsbodikins, I Will e'n fall sick of the fullens, go to bed and dye
with grief, snoons, I will.


Exit. Enter Primrose with a Letter in haste. Primr. O Madam the strangest News.


Florell. We have seen your device already.


Prim. It Is not that I mean, Madam; Do you know that Gentleman? It Is Mr.
Craftmore.


Craft. Am I betrayed -- [aside] -- This is pleasant In Faith, what does your
woman mean, Madam?


looks hard on him. Florell. The very same of my Conscience wench, ha, ha, ha!
how came thee to find it out?


Primr. Madam, I intercepted this letter by Chance; please you to read it, it is
directed to him: Mr. Loveby I hear has given out that he is returned from
travel.


Craft. O this negligent Rascal, my Cormorant; and am I betrayed by my Friend
too?

they both laugh. What means this unreasonable laughter?


Florell. Your unreasonable presence Sir; You may put off your disguise; poor
Mr. Craftmore; I swear you are an excellent Man at an Intrigue: Now wench the
business of the letter, and all is out.


they laugh. Craft. Do you see any one making Asses ears behind me, or have I
a Fools Cap and Bells on? You would persuade me I am not my self.


Florell. No Sir, I would persuade you, are your self.


Craft. Well, Madam, I am the Man, if you'I have it so. -- But I was never so
mistaken in my self, all days of my life before. Do you hear Madam.


She throws the Letter, and goes out laughing with Primrose. Florell. Adieu
Sir, Da, da. poor thing, would it have a wife?


Exit. Crat. O my damned careless Rogue, and more damned treacherous friend.
'Tho' he did not know of my coming to Town, yet he reported it at a venture,
perhaps on purpose to further his own designs -- Distraction, Distraction, Hell
and the Devil; I shall run mad.


Enter Dorinda. Dorin. Hey day! what is come to you now?


Craft. My hopes are all Shipwrack'd, I Am barbarously Wronged by my Slave and
my Friend.


Dorin. Pardon me if I think you brand his Reputation.


Enter Loveby, stands behind unseen. Craft. Ay, dote on him still: and may he
be as great a plague to you as she has been to me.


Dorin. Passion, passion, mere passion, and nothing else; Be advised, and
hearken to reason.


Loveb. Ha! what is that? and was her Innocence only pretended, and her
simplicity affected? The Sex had been amply Revenged, had she put false Dice
upon me; Pox, this is some Country-Wench of a decayed family, and crazed
Reputation; -- One that he has debauched, and now would put her off upon me, or
any one that would be fond of being ruined; -- 'Twas well I discovered her;
else this Algereen might have taken me with her false Colors, and made prize
of me in faith.


aside Exit. Craft. I cannot bear the real falsehood of a pretended friend,
therefore I Will demand satisfaction of Loveby; and if he cannot defend himself
with his tongue; let him if he dare, with his Sword.


Exit Dorin. Anger is a short madness; and it is ill trusting a weapon in a
Madmans hand: Let either fall, I suffer loss, in this of a Relation; In that,
which is ten times more of a Lover: I Will try all ways Imaginable to prevent the
threatening ills; and be sure to Examine all their motions, with a Curious eye.

We ought to watch those things we value most,
Since they are in danger to be soonest lost.

Exit Dorinda. The End of the Fourth Act.
ACT V.
SCENE I.
Enter Toby. Toby. THe Devil's in this slippery Jade, fortune; how she juggles
and plays fast and loose with us: If I cannot bring things about again, I must
even show my threatening Master yonder a fair pair of heels; -- One of my Fools,
I think I have pretty well managed already; he was shrewdly terrified with the
apprehensions of old Waspish's proceeding against him, and posting into the
Country; whereupon for a pretended disguise I have equipt him with an old Rusty
Suit of Armor, which I accidentally met with in the house here; and he struts
about, and is as proud of it, as a new-listed foot-Soldier is at the first
putting on of his Calico-sash, and great stinking Brasshilted Sword.


Enter Dulhead in Rusty Armor with a long Spanish Sword strutting about the
Stage. Dulh. Hum, -- -- hum -- hum -- [strutting] Sun, Moon, and seven Stars,
how do like me now Toby? -- hum -- hum -- --


struts. Toby. Oh, It does rarely Sir; only let your gate be somewhat stiffer,
your steps larger, and your head a thought higher. -- --

He puts him in's posture, Dulhead struts and stalks, etc. Admirably well Sir;
Be sure you remember the terms of Art I gave you, your words of terror, and so
forth, and you are a complete Bully.


Dulh. Mum Budget -- I warrant thee Toby; Udsfoot I shall be a terrible fellow
-- -- by Garagantua, Gog, and Magog, hea Toby, hea boy, hea.


Dulhead practices strutttng and stalking about the stage crying hum, hum.
Toby. To a hair Sir, you do it to a hair; I Will leave you to your practice.


Exit Toby. Dulh. Hum! hum! Udsfoot, but if he should discover me at last, and
apprehend me, he would certainly hang me; and that would be a disgrace to me
all days of my life after -- Udsneaks, I had as good into the Country yet I
think.


Enter Lady Fancifull. Fanci. How, into the Country, did he say? O my
misfortunes, I am lost for ever, fall roof, and bury me quick in thy ruins --


pretends to faint: Dulhead stalks to her takes him by the hand, and kisses it.
Dulh. Hum! hum!


Fanci. By this dear hand, you shall not go: For upon my word that Business of
Waspishes is made up; He is pacified, and has forgiven you.


Dulh. Hum! hum! hum!


not minding her Fanci. I am amazed both at the strangeness of his Dress and
behavior, seriously -- But oh that Florella, had you heard how she abused you.


Dulh. Hum! Buz, Udsfoot, I shall be a woundy Bully: How forsooth; Did she so,
I defy her -- hum! hum! She takes me for a fool belike -- hum! hum!


Fanci. She is like the rest of the young giddy women of the Town that dote on
empty Shallow fellows, fine Clothes and mere outsides; and never Consider the
inner and nobler Beauties of the mind; and have no respect for persons of
merit, such as your self Sir.


Curtysing. Dulh. Hum! hum! An Incomparable Lady: Say I met him now; I go up to
him, and run full drive against him thus: Then I twirl his hat thrice round his
head, and give him not a word but Mum Budget: -- hum! hum!


Runs against Fancifull and almost beats her down. Fanci. His rude Deportment
Confounds me, totally, totally: Sir I perceive; I do not engage or attract your
thoughts:


Dulh Hum! Hum!


Fanci. Please you Sir to honor my Apartment, I can show you some small
Monuments of my former Servants favors; As a Cabinet of Ebony, the Repository
of my Jewels; a Scruto're inlaid with Ivory, and studded with Gold -- Besides
some choice pieces drawn by the best hands in Italy, with my own Picture at the
upper-end, and all presents seriously.


Dulh. Hum! She is woundy rich: I Will have her, though I lose my Estate by it.
[aside] Madam, forsooth, I am in love with you, and will marry you: Toby told
me of your perfections before.


Fanci. Your Servant sweet Sir, you are the only person I could hope would
marry me -- [aside] -- I Will to my Apartment, and put things in Order for your
Reception. Your Servant dear Sir, your Servant.


Exit. Enter Sir John Oldfop the other way. Dulh. Udsfoot, here is my Cosen Sr.
John -- he I not know me trow. I Will Bully him -- Udsneaks, I Will Bully him --
Hum! hum! hum! etc.

Dulh. stalks to him, holding up his head, runs upon him. Hum! hum!


Sr. John. What vulgar Rascal has been practicing upon the Insensible?


Dulh. walks by him, and hits him on the shins with the end of his sword. Dulh.
Hum! Buz!


Sr. John. What a pox ailes the Impertinent? -- He is Infatuated; By heavens
Infatuated; -- Blockhead will you break forth into the Solution of the Enigma.


Dulhead comes up to him again, and twirls his hat round his head. Dulh. Mum,
Budget -- hum! hum!


Sr. John Old. Confound the Irregular Sot, what does he mean? Hark you Sir
Diego, my Don Fungoso, --


Dulh. draws and drives him about the stage. Dulh. Nay then; by Gog and Magog;
Garagantua, and the twelve Champions of England: Francanado: --


thrusts at him. Sr. John. Ounds forbear; --


Dulh. Passado:


Sr. John. What the Devil, Couz!


Dulh. Palizado:


Sr. John. Hell and the Devil, -- why Cuz. I say, Cuz.


Dulh. Slashado; --


Sr. John. Hold, hold, --


Dulh. Parado; --


Sr. John. Ounds, are you mad?


Dulh. Slapado.


Sr. John. What a pox; nay, nay, nay.


Dulh. Strapado, Rapado, Bastinado.


Sr. John. Help, help, what a plague: -- hold, hold.


Dulhead leaves off, struts as before. Dulh. No, no; I am a Fool, a man of no
humor: How do you like me now, Cousen Sr. John? -- Passado, Strapado, Rapado,
Bastinado:


Runs at Sr. John as before. Sr. John. Nay what a Devil, hold, hold: -- prithee
Couz. lay by this humor, and surrender up thy self to attention a little: Here
will be some writings presently which you must set your hand to; the Lady
expects you, and all things are in Readyness.


Dulh. Mum, Budget -- No I defy her Cousin Sr. John, I defy her, I have a Lady
that is an Angel; and has a woundy deal of plate and Jewels.


Sr. John. Confound her: I fear Fancifull has set upon him with all her noise
and affectation; she is the mother of time; and was Nurse to Eves first child.


Dulh. Popum Buz: Say you so Cousin Sir John, I can scarcely believe you though.


Sr. John. A mere toy-shop, a Change; and tells you of more Lords and Knights,
that have been her Servants, then ever were heard of since the order first came
up.


Dulh. Then I defy her; I Would have her to know I defy her; I would not have her
though she had a heap of Gold as high as the Monument; Sun, Moon, and seven Stars
how do you like me now? Cousin Sr. John.


Sr. John. I shall take care to secure you, lest my designs are frustrated:
[aside A few swift-wing'd minutes will bring my Lawyer hither, and then I shall
expect your ready Compliance; now will I prepare to feast and wantonly Riot on
all the luscious Sweets of Love.


Exit Dancing and Singing. Enter Toby the other way. Dulh. Udsfoot, this is a
parlous woman: If the old puss had gotten me into her Clutches, she would have
clawed me off woundily, I fag.


Toby. How is this? By what I hear, his Cousin Sir John has work't him off from
the Interest Fancifull had in him too; It must be my Business to bring him on
again.


Dulh. sees Toby: he struts about as before, and twirls his hat round his head.
Dulh. Hum! hum! Mum Budget: hum!


Toby. Heavens Sir, you're fortunately met.


Dulh. Why Toby, what is the matter? hea Toby!


Toby. O Sir, A Damnable plot against you.


Dulh. Ha, ha, ha! Is that all poor Toby, ha, ha, ha! That this fellow should
be such a fool to think I could not smell it out, ha, ha, ha!


Tob. Well Sir; you were certainly born with a caul upon your head, else my
Lady Fancifull, --


Dulh. Had made a Fool of me thou think: Popum.


Toby. All mistake Sir, all mistake; Do but hear me.


Dulh. I defy her Toby; I defy her; No; I am just come to the point of
agreement with Florella;


Toby. That is the very thing I came to give you a Caution of: For Sir, you
must know your Cousin Sr. John has Contrived to make you sign to a Conveyance
of part of your Estate; and intends to put Primrose upon you, and marry
Florella himself: Here she is to witness it.


Enter Primrose. Dulh. Sun, Moon, and seven Stars, a deep design I fags; a
pestilent Contrivance: But Toby; I thought on this business my self man; --
Good wits will jump.


Primr. What he has told you, is very true; upon my word Sir, But they could
not win me to so base, so treacherous an Act.


Toby. 'Twou'd be a Master-peice to Countermine 'em, and blow 'em up with their
own powder.


Dulh. Udsfoot, I was just thinking on it Toby.


Toby. Therefore the better to further your purpose, do you seem to assent to
every thing they propose: But what ever you do be sure to secure the writings
in your own hands.


Dulh. Udsfoot, so I will; -- Thou art a very honest fellow for this, Toby; ha,
ha, ha! I cannot choose but laugh to think how woundily I shall surprise 'em: --
Lericum twang, Buz. ha, ha, ha!


Exit laughing. Toby. So; this Business is done effectually:

If the Blunderbuss go off; I Will engage he does Execution.


Prim. No doubt on it, when he is so dangerously loaded by your worship.


Toby. Say thou so, my little Nymph-tutelar, of the Dressing-box and
pomatums, my gentle vestal 'oth Fires of Quince and Marmalade; -- this rallery
so becomes that pretty mouth of thine; that I gad Child I am so in love with
it, I could e'ne kiss it again: -- [offers to kiss her] -- But after all, Gad
you must stand to me in this Business of the Letter, or I must never look my
Master in the face again.


Primr. Oh dear Mr. Toby, the Constancy of your love, and the Sincerity of your
passion, cannot but oblige exceedingly.


Toby. Look thee, here is a Letter; and I have Counterfeited the Superscription
so exactly, you cannot distinguish it from the true: possess thy Lady, this was
a mere forgery of thy own, and to Convince her, give her this:


a Letter. Primr. A goodly work, going on.


Toby Which when she breaks open; she will find to be a blank: -- Do see
Primrose, how these yellow Boys shine upon thee like so many little Suns.


Primr. I am heartily sorry, the gentlemen are come too late.


Toby. Ay do, be obstinate, and refuse; and become a Scandal to thy profession,
do, do.


Prim. Well; I Will take 'em for once, that your Master may not think me so
ill-bred, as to refuse a Gentleman's kindness.


Toby. [Sings] Would I had thee, quoth he? --


embraces her. Enter Florella. Primr. To your post, to your post; yonder is my
Lady; not a smile, a look, or the least token of familiarity.


Primrose and Toby Compose their Looks. Florell. Well friend, I must needs own
your master is a non-parile at an Intrigue, we may see what great advantages
may be reapt from traveling; without doubt he learned this Mystery at the
French Court; it is so far out of the Common road of Amors.


Toby. Madam; what means your Ladyship?


Florell. Ha, ha, ha, poor Gentleman; he thought he lay secure under his
disguise, ha, ha, ha.


Primr. Assist me once, good necessary Confidence; and blushes be as far from
me, as sneaking ill-bred Modesty is usually from a Sister of my profession: [
Prim. comes up to her] Madam, I most humbly beg your pardon.


Florell. For what? is the wench mad?


Primr. I Confess Madam; I forged this Letter but now: but 'twas only to try
how you stood affected toward Mr. Craftmore.


gives her the Letter, she breaks it open, finds a blank. Toby. Well said
little Matchiavil; I love and honor thee for this Choice gift of lying --

aside.
Florell. How! and durst you own it huswife!


Primr. Since 'twas Innocently designed Madam, I purposed to disabuse your
Ladyship, and beg your pardon


Florell. How could you hope I would grant it?


Primr. Upon the knowledge of the sweetness of your Ladyships temper.


Toby. Aye; tickle her there my little Cockatrice -- glibly, glibly -- stroke
her gently and betray her with a smile, do, do.


aside. Florell. And am I thus deceived, and put upon by thee too? -- Let me
hear no more of these tricks, If you dare, go to your primitive Knitting
Needles.


Primr. I promise your Ladyship, I shall be Cautious for the future in Cases of
this Nature.


Exit Florella. Toby. Ah, my dear little Devil; let me kiss and hug thee for
this; I must confess I was Ignorant of thy great abilities before.


A noise of Clashing of Swords. Enter Craftmore and Loveby as fighting; Toby
beats down their Swords, Dorinda runs in between them; she and Primrose
shrieking out. Toby. Sdeath Sirs what do you mean?


Prim. Now will I to my Lady, and this will Confirm her in the belief of what I
told her, and that this is not Mr. Craftmore.


Exit Dorin. I beg you, by the panting Souls of those fair virgins that
languish for you, put up your Swords.


Craft. Sir, you have wronged a friend of mine, and that in the highest nature;
even in the right of his love; basely, in his absence.


Loveb. I understand you not Sir: -- I wish I knew the Gentleman; that I might
give him personal satisfaction.


Craft. Had you not once a familiarty with one Craftmore?


Loveb. Yes Sir; but no one dares think I would print such eternal stains upon
my honor; as to violate so professed a friendship.


Craft. Did you not attempt to Rival him in the Interest of his Love?


Loveb. No Sir; upon my honor, no.


Craft. And to promote your own Amor, did you not (though you know no such
thing) spread a false Report of his return?


Loveb. Hell reward me if I did.


Craft. And taking this advantage of his absence; endeavor to seduce his
Mistress from him.


Loveb. No, Sir, no; perdition Seize me, if it ever entered into my thought.


Craft. Know Sir, then, that I am he.


Loveb. Dear, dear, friend; welcome, welcome; ten thousand welcoms.


Craft. Dear Loveby forgive me. --


puts up his Sword. Loveb. As freely as I hope for the pardon of my own Sins.


Craft. Upon the assurance of your pardon; I Will Inform you at a more Convenient
time, of the Unhappy cause of this Jealousy; -- this frenzy of mine; -- why I
used this disguise; -- for what reasons I sent my Cousin Dorinda hither. --


Loveb. How! what an Unlucky Dog am I; now am I ashamed to look her in the
Face? -- [bowing to her] -- Dear Madam, your pardon for all my Rudeness: --


Craft. Why, she put on this mask of Simplicity, and I pretended Courtship to
her.


Loveby. Come Faith Ned; you was a little too blame, that you did not give
Notice of your being in Town; but to go quits with you, you must know I have
had some suspicions of you too; for when I perceived this Lady's simplicity to
be affected, I began to harbor dishonorable thoughts of you both, but now I Am
Convinced of my Error, and beg you would Intercede to her for me.


Dorin. You had best try your own power first, Sir.


Loveb. Encouraged by you, dear Madam, I dare do much: And here I would make a
tender of my whole heart to you.


Dorin. O Sir; I shall not be so unreasonable to expect, that you a person so
generally received by the Ladies, can any more confine your self to one woman,
then one bottle.


Loveb. Madam, I confess I have been a Rover; -- But it is like those that
travel far through other Countries to come to their own; but when they are there,
they fix for ever: -- Faith Madam 'twould be a charity in you to reclaim a
wild fellow.


Dorin. The Experiment carries so much of danger in it, I dare not venture.


Loveb. I Confess at first my design was dishonorable.


Dorin. And how can I be assured it is other ways now?


Loveb. To give you a Demonstration of it, I would renounce my belove^ liberty,
for your sake, and venture even to marry you.


Dorin. And Repent it the next morning, like a raw acquaintance that has been
fuddled with you over night.


Craft. Dorinda, dissemble not any longer; give him your hand.


Dorin. He had my heart before.


aside Craft. puts her hand in his. Craft. And now friend, I have one Request
to you, that you would assist me in my love, as I have you in yours.


Loveb. I were unworthy else, dear friend --


he embraces him. Enter Florella and Primrose. Florell. How Primrose! Did you
not say these Gentlemen were engaged in a quarrel? Methinks it is a very loving
one. -- This Confirms me this is Craftmore; and all is a mere Sham you
pretended but now.


Primr. What a turn is here? all is unravelled again. -- [aside] -- Believe me
I Have dealt faithfully with your Ladyship. --


Loveb. Curse on ill luck, here is your Mistress; Do you lead Dorinda off, and
Immediately send me a note; wherein signify your Contempt of her, that you're
lately arrived and married to another. [aside] Expect me instantly.


Exeunt Craftmore Dorin. and Toby. Florell. Ha, ha, ha Sir, you may stay; --
ha, ha, ha! -- Well, you're two of the quie^est Sons of Mars, I ever saw: --
Let me see: not so much as scratching of faces; or biting of thumbs; -- prithee
wench help me laugh.


Primr I must do it, lest she suspect I am in the plot against her.


Loveb. Your Ladyship is in a very gay humor.


They walk about laughing Florell. Really Sir; though I must needs own 'twas a
very Considerate thing of you, to prevent the effusion of Christian blood: --


walks as before Loveb. You do not design to affront me: I shall leave you to
the enjoyment of your humor.


is going. Enter a Porter with a note. Port. Is one Mr. Loveby here?


Loveb. Some people call me so, Sir.


Port. Here Is a note for you Sir. --


takes it and gives the Porter money Loveb. [Reading as Surpised. -- ] Dear
Jack I Have been hunting after thee these two days -- there is not a Tavern has
escaped me; I lodge at my Uncle Freelands, by the Temple.


Exit Port. reads on to himself. Florell. You seem Concerned.


Loveb. Please you to read it, I dare believe you will be so too.


Florella takes it and reads. Florell. But hearing you was with a Cast Mistress
of mine: [reads] Tell Florella, that I and my Lady intend a visit within this
half hour: -- Oh horrid! your faithful friend Edw. Craftmore.

Oh Inhumane Tyrant! a Turk, or a Cannibal would have treated me more civilly.
--


Love. I cannot stay to hear you now Madam -- But faith methinks this was
somewhat cruelly done of my friend.


as going Florell. If I be not revenged, -- But seriously I thought the
Gentleman you parted from was Mr. Craftmore.


Loveb. And that I presume was the cause of your laughter: it is not generous to
be of Counsel against my friend; but to serve you Madam, there is one way left
yet; do you Solicit young Bellamore; Muster up your female Arts; spread all
your nets to entangle him.


Florell. I have already attempted it, and but for my folly, I had succeeded.


Loveb. I can give you greater encouragement than you imagine: You know I made
my Court to Dorinda, and at last with some difficulty, I prevailed with her to
hearken to Conditions: Bellamore perceived it, and gave me a Challenge, which
upon her Entreaties I declined, and seemed to lay by all pretensions to her:
Upon this he embraced me and styled me his Friend.


Prim. Now Madam, all is out; and you may find, I am Innocent.


Love. But I only pretended this friendship, that I might the more securely
deprive him of his Mistress, so that if you win him, you make room for me, and
Craftmore will be disappointed of his Insulting Revenge.


Florell. My Oracle; my better Angel.


Loveb. I have some extraordinary business; and am in great have at present:
Servant, Madam.


Florell. If I can but win upon young Bellamore now.


Prim. O let Mr. Loveby alone for an Intrigue; I Will lay my life Madam this
takes effect: For when he finds he is bobb'd of his Mistress, he will be as eager
to Revenge his wrongs as your Ladyship. If he boggles at Matrimony, it is but to
give him a bond of Security; and he cannot refuse to own you.


Enter Dulhead above looking out of the window, Knocking and Pounding, etc.
Dulh. So ho, ho; so ho, ho, ho -- Why Toby; Couz. Sr. John, So ho, ho, ho, ho,
ho, ho; -- Confounded Dog Toby -- Why Toby -- To -- by -- To -- by --


hoops and hallows. knocks and pounds as before. Enter Toby running with a long
Rope. Toby. Is the Devil in your throat? we shall have you alarm the posse of
some Six of the Neighboring parishes, anon; and they will be charging you with
rotten Eggs and turnip-tops; -- I have been trying to force the door, but in
vain; -- there is no other means for your escape, then by this friendly rope.
Clap it across one of the bars, and [throws up one end of the Rope to him.
throw me down the end again.


Dulhead getting out of the window, etc. Florell. Mercy on us wench; what
luggage of old Iron-work? what Hero Burlesquid have we yonder?


Prim. Your humble admirer, Madam; your Country-gallant of much land Acres.


Florell. Is it that horse-load of a fool; let us stand aside a little and
expect the event of this Adventure.


Dulh. Udsfoot Toby, be sure hold fast: --


Toby. I warrant you, you shall come down as swimmingly as a Cat from a Tower
in a high wind, with Bladders at her feet: (Alons Monsieur.


He lets him down with a jerks. Dulh. cries out holding by the Rope. Dulh.
Prithee have a care, if I should chance to fall --


Toby. Your bones would make but a sorry Anatomy you'de say, away with it.


Dulh. cries out. Florella and Primrose laughing. Enter Sir John Oldfop Dancing
and Singing: Strephon the Brisk and gay, etc. Toby. Heavens Sir, your Cosen
Sir John; we must disappear -- vanish.


Let Us him down. Dulh. Udsneaks, so I will.


Sr. John. I kiss your fair hands, Madam.


Bows, dances and sings as before. Florell. You are in a gay humor Sir John --
What means the conceited Fop.


aside. Sr. John. All things are prepared for the Solemnity, Madam: I know you
need not be directed in bestowing your favors; when there is a certain person
of some quality, whose merits justly lay claim to 'em. There Is a certain
Jewel, Madam, you wear about you, of too great worth to be soiled by fulsome
dull Matrimony, and I am convinced it is as good as lost if you bestow on one
that cannot set a true value on it. I have had the keeping of some scores of
young Ladies; they knew me for a person responsable, and fit to be trusted with
the treasure: -- Confound me Madam, you must not, shall not, cannot deny me.


Florell. I Will fit you for this Essence-bottle -- But I Am resolved now to carry
on the humor; [aside] Dear Sr. John my blushes speak too much the language of
my heart.


Sr. John. I know Madam, you could not withstand my jantee Insinuating way.


bows, then leaps, etc. Florell. Attribute it I beseech you to your
Irresistible Charms, and let not my weakness be an occasion of a Public
Triumph; -- Please you to walk with my Woman; she will conduct you where I Will
instantly follow --

Exit Sir John bowing with Primrose. Dissolute Coxcomb: But I Will be even with
the old Fool since he will be meddling.


Re-enter Primrose. Prim. I led him to my old Lady Fancifulls Chamber, and
'twas darkened to Embolden her Squire whom she had appointed to meet there: I
had planted old Waspish under the Bed before, having possessed him, your
Ladyship designed to marry him privately; and there he lies in expectation of
you, playing Bo-peep: thinking when you appear, to surprise you with the humor.


Florell. We shall have admirable sport, Wench.


The Scene Changes to Fancifulls Chamber. Old-fop and Fancifull groping after
one another, Waspish peeping from under the Bed. Waspish. I protest, she stays
Immoderately, Udsbodikins my back's almost broke.


Sr. John. Oh I hear somebody; it must be she: Dear Madam, where are you?


Fanci. Here, here Sir, softly.


they take hold of each other, and Embrace. Sr John. My life, my Soul, my Joy:
-- This is kind, where is the Bed?


Fanci. O Don't talk so, good Sir, I tremble to hear you.


Sr. John. Confound me; I fear some old hag has practiced upon me, methinks I
find an aversion in my Love.


Prim. Now whilst they are in the very height of Expectation, I Will let the light
in upon 'em -- ha, ha, ha! I shall burst with laughing.


Waspish is creeping from under the Bed; they come toward it, stumble over him
in one another's arms; Primrose brings in a light: Sr. John and Fancifull see
the mistake and startle at each other. Sr. John. What Is here a Succubus: Old
Heccuba, is it you? You must like her undergo the Metamorphosis, if you will have
your desires Satisfied.


Fanci. I scorn your base dishonorable Actions, but for my virtue and honor,
you would offered violence to my body, foul Ravisher.


Wasp. Snoons, treachery, Murder, Cursed Florella, Damned Primrose, I Am
betrayed, I Am abused, grant me patience, snoons.


Florell. This is excellent Diversion, ha, ha, ha.


Sr. John. Foh, I shall not be sweet again these two months:


pulls out Essence, and rubs it about him. La. Fan. I have been gallanted by
abundance of fine Persons seriously, -- But I defy the best of them to say he
ever had his beastly will of me.


Ex. weeping. Sr. John. I hate an old fool I Gad, -- foh --


Rubbing himself with perfume. Florell. Affected old Coxcomb: I Am resolved I Will
rid my hands of 'em all. Go you and Cajole that old Fool yonder; let me alone
with this.


The Scene shifts, they come forwards. Sr. John. Madam, you might have picked
out some easy credulous Fop to have made a Cully of, there are fools enough in
the Town


Wasp. walks about Florell. Think you Sir, I Would expose my honor to the Censure
of that Fancifull -- though I value your love above all things; -- yet pardon me
if I was so discreet as to preserve my Reputation.


all this while in a passion. Sr. John. Revenge is low and vulgar; know Madam,
there are a thousand Beauties; sigh, languish, burn and dye; to taste those
Joys, you might have surfeited on. I Will Immediately to my Cousin, whom I have
locked up from the violent attacques of that termagant Fancifull: But I Will now
Enlarge him, and Consummate the Match between you, and then Madam you lie at my
Devotion.


Exit. Waspish is fretting: Spies Primrose, puts the trumpet to his ear. Wasp
Snoons; not a word yet, not a word yet; I Will be Revenged, Snoons, snoons.


Primr. My Lady bad me tell you, she is extremely sorry for this Disappointment,
and is come to beg pardon.


Florell. Curtysing Sir, 'twas my unhappiness this unlucky accident fell out;
-- But please you to walk with me, I have a Parson within shall make me yours
for ever.


Wasp. Udsbodikins; say you so, I protest, say you so, very well, very well --
Come then, pretty Mrs. Florry, I Am Impatient, Udsbodikins, come, Mrs. Florry,
come, come.


Enter Dulhead. Dulh. Udsfoot, 'twas well my Cousin Sr. John mist me: What
forsooth you thought to make a noddy of me, Udsneaks, there is old Waspish; --
I Will bully him. Hum, buzz --


Dulh. walks by him; hits him on the Shins with the end of his Sword. Wasp.
How, how, Udsbodikins what means this?


Dulh. Mum Budget --


twirls his hat round his head. Wasp. Confounded villain; he affronts me,
Snoons. Let me go, Snoons, Revenge, Snoons.


Exit Florella with Waspish and Primrose. Enter Fancifull the other way. Fanci.
Should Sr. John have met with him now, I Am lost for ever. O he is here. [aside]
-- Sweet Sir., I thought you would not have disappointed me so.


Dulh. Nay forsooth I must confess I was woundily in fault; but I was lock's up
by my Cousin Sr. John; and after Toby had Released me, by his advice, I
scamper'd off to secure me from him; we have plotted a woundy revenge against
him Udsfoot: and to let you know what it is; I Am resolved to marry you forsooth!


Fanci. Oh heavens! -- --


pretends to draw back. Dulh. Udsfoot you shall not deny me; If you do I shall
be terrible angry: hum, hum, hum, [struts] Toby has procured a Parson within on
purpose.


Fanci. Oh happy day! O promising hour of balmy pleasures; Oh how my heart
throbs and trembles with the impetuous Sallies of my blood --


aside. Dulh. Come along forsooth; I Would give an hundred pounds to meet my
Cousin Sr. John now, I could be monstrously valiant Udsfoot, hum, hum, hum! --


Exit strutting leading off Fancifull. Enter Craftmore and Toby. Craft. What,
have you nooz'd your Fool?


Toby. I cannot answer positively; but by this he is in the hands of a
Canonical retailer, a Marriage-Broker; a fellow that will go through-stitch,
with his work.


Craft. I expect Florella here Instantly: Yonder she is I think.


Enter Florella. Florell. Pray heavens it prove a fit season to sow the Seed of
Love


aside. Craft. Base treacherous Villain: and am I now betrayed? was this his
pretended friendship?


Florell. Faithless Inhumane Craftmore; are all his mighty Boastings come to
this. Protestations and vows were only made by him I find to be broke again: O
Faithless Deserter, who now glories in his guilt and triumphs in my wrongs.


Craft. Madam; I perceive your misfortunes hold something of proportion with
those of mine.


Florell. If I may believe what you have uttered; the killing Circumstances are
just the same.


Toby. So, so, they begin to close; -- You're made for ever you little Dog
Toby; down on your Marrow-bones, Sirrah.


Florell. Would you Contribute to the design; there might be some ways found
out yet to lessen our miseries, at least. Suppose a Lady of a plentiful
fortune, and a tolerable face, should fly to you for protection, you could not
sure be so cruel as to refuse her.


Craft. She Is my own, if she hold on thus. [aside] Faith, Madam, I think not,
was I sure she would take no advantage of it.


Florell. Pardon me Sir, if I lay by the Modesty of my Sex; -- Then I beg, I
entreat you would own me; and to secure you, take this In it is contained all
that can Entitle me to an Estate.


gives him a box with writings in it, He looks in it. Craft. And this Madam, you
deliver into my hands, to Justify the right I have to your Ladyship.


Florell. Yes Sir.


Craft. I thank you kindly, Madam, I have Caught you at last. I faith -- now
let your faithless disloyal Lover enter.


Florell. O I shall never brook the sight of him I fear:


Craft. I warrant you Madam: -- ha, ha, ha!


Florell. What mean you Sir?


Craft. Come Madam; look upon him; he is no such terrible man.


Florell. I understand you not.


Craft. I hope my fickle Mistress that neither this my disguise, nor long
sickness caused by your unkindness, nor the distant Clime to which I was
banished by your capricious humors, can have rendered me a stranger to your
eyes.


throws off his disguise. Florell. Oh heavens, Craftmore: [aside] -- O Sir, is
this your trick? -- but you cannot: --


Craft. Nay, nay, humoursome Mistress; you cannot fall off now; here is my man
has overheard all.


Toby comes up to 'em. Toby. Yes, I gad Madam; and can swear bloodily up to the
point.


Florell. And am I over-reach't? -- what was it blinded me thus?


Enter Loveby, Dorinda as married. Craft. Dear friend much Joy to you.


Dorin. And may I not say as much to your Ladyship?


Florell. Betrayed on all sides; You may thank your Policy, or you had done
penance for the other two years.


Craft. If you Command it, I cannot but obey you, Madam.


laughs Enter Dulhead out of his Armor with Fancifull. Fanci. Hem, hem! --
well, this Matrimony is a most delicious, a very enlivening thing seriously; --
hem.


Enter Sr John Oldfop. Sr. John. Gentlemen and Ladies your Servant -- I cannot
find my Kinsman, Madam.


Dulh. Sun, Moon, and seven Stars; how do you like me now, Couz, Sr. John?


comes strutting up to him, leading Fancifull. Sr. John. Ha! what would the
Impertinent Blockhead have? he is not tied to that Chymera; and Madam, am I
deprived of you too, and all my promised Joys? where are the writings I trusted
you with? you may keep your fool but not a groat Estate.


Dulh. They Are in safe hands; never stir, Cousin Sr. John: I scorn your
affronts; Marriage is honorable; how do you like me now?


struts and cries hum, hum! Toby. They may be forth coming upon weighty
Considerations: Seal, sign and deliver; --


offers a Paper Sr. John. To threescore pounds, do you hear?


Toby. Then here are the writings Sir; when you quitted your pretentions, the
Guardianship devolved upon Sir, your humble Servant.


Dulh. Udsfoot Toby; we have outwitted my Cousin Sr. John most woundily, hea
Toby: --


struts by Sr. John-hum,-hum, etc. Enter Waspish and Primrose masked. Wasp. So,
so, Mrs. Florry; it is very well; protest, the old Snake has Cast his Skin; I Am
twenty years younger then I was, Udsbodikins I am; You little leering,
fleering, wriggling giggling Fubs you: Come kiss me, Udsbodikins, come, kiss
your husband Mrs. Flory. --


jumps and offers to kiss her. Craft. Much joy to you, Sir; now you may go suck
the sweets of your Primrose.


Wasp. How, how, I protest, Snoons, Snoons, treachery, treachery, I Am undone,
undone; That Witch, Devil Florella, Carrion, Strumpet Primrose: I Will Poison my
self, Cut my throat, and leave my Estate to the King; Snoons, Snoons.


pulls him by the sleeve; puts the trumpet to his ear. looks on her, flings her
hand out of his. runs after Prim. storming. Loveb. This is all trick, and very
pleasant In Faith.


Florell. What coupling here has been


Prim. makes signs to speak to Wasp. he puts his trumpet to his ear. Prim.
What will you give me to Release you Sir?


Wasp. Any thing in the world; make thy own proposals -- ruined, ruined.


Primr. Sign but this writing here, Sir.


while he signs it Toby fetches the Canonical habit and shows it him Wasp. Ay
I protest with all my heart.


Primr. Know Sir, this was the Parson, and this is the habit, in which he
married us.


Toby. You had the first fruits of my Deaconship, I assure ye Sir.


Wasp. A Dog, Confounded Villain; I protest I Will put you in the Bishops Court;
I Will make you do penance for this, Snoons, snoons,


runs after him. Toby looks him in the face moving his lips as though he spoke,
and laughing. Toby. Well Primrose suppose thee and I should play the fool, and
commit Matrimony.


Primr. That word has a Charm in it, not to be resisted; by a poor helpless
solitary Maid.


Toby. Agreed then wench; our virtuous Industry has procured us enough to rent
a single room; and may all in good time bring Mr. Toby to some reverend office
in his ward.


Craft. For the service done me, I Will make your life easy to you


Toby. I thank you Sir.


Loveby. Come Sir, you are not to stir till you have shook off your ill humors
by a Dance.


to Warpish. a dance of all. Florell. Well Sir; you have been too hard for me
at last, but it is some pleasure to see my revenge on that brace of old
Coxcombs.

to Craftmore. May all old fools, that Wedlock do Importune,
Or Sue for love, with ours find equal fortune:
And may all those that make their Lovers tarry,
Be thus Trapan'd like me and fore'd to Marry.

FINIS.

