A New PRIMMER, Wherein is demonstrated The New and Living Way; Held forth by
way of Question and Answer, as from a Child's Enquiry after Truth, to be
informed by the Father.

Here being diverse particulars Answered, and plainly opened, that may be
profitable both in this present Age, and Ages to come.

Published for the benefit of all sorts of people, and may be very serviceable
for every Family, and of great use for young Children to learn in, so soon as
they can understand their Language, that they in the fear of God may be
instructed, and remember their Creator in the days of their Youth.

Other Foundations can no man lay than that which is laid, which is Jesus
Christ.

Behold, I write unto you both Old and Young, that you may know the Truth, and
that the Truth may make you free.

For which I Travel, enduring Affliction for the Truths sake, WILLIAM SMITH.

Printed in the Year, 1665.

There is also Printed a New Catechism, Wherein many Truths are plainly opened
by way of Question and Answer, which may be a help and furtherance unto all
tender hearted people, who are breathing after the Lord, and waits for
Redemption and Salvation by Jesus Christ.

ALSO, Something concerning the Foundation and Principle of the poor afflicted
people of God (called Quakers) and of their Faith and Love toward God, and
their good Will unto Men, being also plainly demonstrated by way of Question
and Answer.

Given forth in the labor of Love, and put to View for the Service of this
present Generation, and also Generations to come.

William Smith.

The Primer or Catechism may be had either Bound together, or a part.

TO THE READER.
Reader,
When the foundation is sure, there is more encouragement to begin to build,
and to begin well, and persevere in well-doing, is the way to come into peace:
Therefore it is needful that thou be plainly instructed in the first Principle
of the pure Religion, that thou therein may begin in the spiritual travel,
and continue faithful to the end, whereby everlasting rest thou will come to
inherit: And for the same service is this little Book given forth, and the
Title of it bears, A New Primmer, because the Testimony therein is unto Jesus
Christ, who is the first Principle of the pure Religion, and the new and living
way unto the Father, and makes all new in his life and power, as he is believed
in, and received. Therefore, whether thou be Old or Young that reads this Book,
keep in the fear of God, that thou may feel Gods Witness in thy own
Conscience opening thy understanding, and making manifest unto thee the plain
and simple Truth of God, which in this Book is moderately enquired after, and
plainly answered; and though in many answers there be but few words spoken, yet
if thou readst it with a single Eye, thou will meet with full satisfaction in
it, as to the thing that is enquired; therefore keep simply, and* read without
prejudice, and truth will open to thy understanding, and thouwilt come to know
Christ Jesus, who was, and is, and is to come, the first and last, the
beginning and ending, in whom is life, and the life is the light of men.

And little Children, when you come to learn reading in this book* be not light
in your minds, but mind the fear of God, and as you read, wait to understand
what you read, that you out of sin and evil, may be kept; that whilst you are
yet young, you may remember your Creator, and walk as obedient Children unto
him, and do those things that are well pleasing in his sight, that in him you
may grow and increase in virtue and godliness, and so honor the Lord in your
youth, not knowing whether or no you shall come to see old age. My desire is to
do you any good, and my love is both to old and young.

Wocester County-Goal, the second Month, 1661. W. S.


A NEW PRIMMER
The Child's Question. FAther, I have a great desire to know God that made me,
and to be acquainted with his Way and Truth, that I might walk therein.


The Fathers Answer. That is a good desire Child, and thou art worthy to be
informed, because thou inquire so innocently, and would know the thing
that is good, therefore my Child be still and diligent, and I shall inform
thee, and plainly show thee how thou may come to know God, his Way, and
Truth.


Chi. I would be so informed Father.


Father. Why Child, thou must wait to know something of God in thee, which in
thy own Conscience he makes manifest; and by minding and obeying of that, thou
therein wilt come to know God, his Way, and Truth.


C. But is there something of God in my own Conscience, that will give me the
knowledge of him?


F. Yes: And there is not any thing else that can do it.


C. What is it Father? let me know it that I may not neglect it, but give
diligence to it, that I may know God?


F. It is the Light of Christ, with which thou art enlightened, and it i^ made
manifest in thy Conscience, an^ does there let thee see whether thou art a
follower of the thing that i^ good, or the thing that is evil.


C. But is it the Light of Christ with^in me?


F. Yes Child, it is within thee* and there thou art to wait for it.


C. From whence does it come?


F. From God the Father of Lights.


C. And does God freely give it unto me?


F. Yes: It is his good and perfect Gift unto thee, that thou therein might
profit.


C. How may I know that it is the Light of Christ, and that it comes from God,
and is given freely of God unto me?


F. Because it is pure, and joins to no evil, but in thy own Conscience
testifies against it, and reproves thee for it; whereby thou may certainly
know that it is the pure Light of Christ, and comes from the pure God, and that
he gives it freely unto thee to convince thee of sin, and save thee from it.


C. But is that the Light of Christ that lets me see my sin, and in my
Conscience reproves me for it?


F. Yes Child, that is the Light of Christ.


C. But our Ministers do not so teach us.


F. That is, because they are not the Ministers of Christ, neither can teach
his Way in Truth.


C. But how shall I know that they are not Christ's Ministers, for I would not
hear or believe any that are not his?


F. Thou may know them, Child, by their fruits.


C. Why? In what do they differ from Christ's Ministers?


F. They differ both in Doctrine and Practice.


C. How do they differ in Doctrine?


F. Why, their Doctrine is Traditional, and they Teach for Doctrine the
Traditions of men, and so speak things they know not, for filthy lucresake,
building upon other Men's Labors, and running into other men's lines for their
Matter, which is not after Christ, neither do his Ministers so.


C. How do they differ in Practice?


F. In many Things.


C. I would be informed concerning them.


F. To mention them all, would take up much time.


C. Name a few, if the whole be too tedious, that by understanding some of
them, I may be aware of the rest.


F. Such as are not Christ's Ministers, have their Power and Authority from Man,
and so have each man a place of Settlement, which is called a Parish; and in
that Parish they have Tithes allowed for their Maintenance, and that is the
Tenth Part of Increase: And they have a Law made by Man to Compel it; and if
any for Conscience sake cannot give it them, then by their Law they Sue them,
and Imprison them, and Spoil their Goods; and these are Wolves, Child, that are
let loose amongst the Lambs, to rend and tear them; and they have Places
builded in their several Parishes, which they call Churches: And they Observe
one Day in a Week for their Worship, and a few Hours in that Day to perform it;
and they have an Hourglass (many of them) and that is their time of Preaching;
and their Eye will be often toward the Glass, to see when it is Run, because it
is a long Hour to them; and when the Glass is Run, they tell their People the
time is now spent, or words to that purpose and what has been spoken, that
must suffice for that time; and this is not the Practice of Christ's Ministers.


C. But where, and in whom such things do appear, may I certainly know that
they are not true Ministers of Christ?


F. Yes: Thou may certainly know them not to be true Ministers of Christ,
nor of his sending forth; for such Fruits do plainly demonstrate them to be
false.


C. But if such be false, How may I know them that are true? for I have an
earnest desire in me to know the thing that is true.


F. Be patient Child, and in due time thou may come to understand it, and
thou may know the true Ministers of Christ by their Fruits.


C. What is their Fruits? And in what do they differ from the false?


F. They differ in every Particular.


C. Inform me of some of them.


F. The true Ministers of Christ, have their Power and Authority in God, and
that is their Foundation; they take no Tithes, nor Sue any People at Law for
maintenance, nor cast any into Prison; they do not love filthy lucre, neither
make their Belly their God; they Preach the Word faithfully, and do not limit
the Holy One, either to Time, Place or Person; they are meek and gentle and
peaceable toward all men; and these are Christ's Ministers.


C. Here is a great difference Father.


F. Yes Child, there is so, even as much as is betwixt that which is true, and
that which is false; or betwixt light and darkness: For the false Ministers are
of the Earthly Wisdom, and the true Ministers are endued with Wisdom from above.


C. But do they not all Preach Christ in words?


F. Yes, the false can speak of the Name of Christ (as the true do) but they
want his Power.


C. But how may I then know which is true, and which is false by their words,
seeing words may be the same?


F. Why, they that are false, Preach Christ without, and bid People believe in
Him, as he is in Heaven above; but they that are true Ministers they Preach
Christ within, and direct People to wait to feel him in themselves, and so to
believe in him, as he makes himself manifest in them; and this is true Doctrine
that brings people to mind that Principle of God in their own Consciences,
which comes down from Heaven, and goes thither again; and such as are in the
Earthly Wisdom, they do not know Heaven above.


C. This is a great difference in their Doctrine, for one to preach Christ
without, and another preaches him within.


F. Yes, it does make a great difference, and has no more fellowship together,
than the East has with the West.


C. And is this an infallible Trial of them?


F. Yes, and it will not deceive thee, but will certainly give thee an
understanding, whereby thou may discern them both; and if thou waitest in
the measure of the Light of Christ, thou will be able to try all things, and so
come to choose that which is good.


C. But must I not try all things by the Scriptures?


F. Nay, for the Scriptures were given forth from the Spirt, and it is the
Spirit that tryes whether the things be true or false, good or evil.


C. But are not the Scriptures given forth for a Rule to Walk by?


F. The Scriptures are a true Testimony of what the Saints were made
vvitnesses of; but the Spirit is the Rule from which the Scriptures were given
forth; and it was the Rule unto them that gave forth the Scriptures, and they
had the Spirit before they spoke the Words; and they spoke the words as the
Spirit moved, so that the Spirit was before the Words, and was their Rule that
spoke the Words, and it changes not, but is the same for ever.


C. What is the service of the Scriptures if they be not a Rule, and for trial
af things that are spoken?


F. They are of great service, child, and are to be read and believed; and they
become comfortable, when in the same Spirit that gave them forth, they are
fufilled, and truly understood.


C. Then the Scriptures are to be owned and believed, as a true Testimony of
what the Saints were made partakers of in that day.


F. Yes, they are to be owned and believed, and they that do not so, they are
to be denied: but thou must take heed, child, of giving more unto the
Scriptures than unto them belongs, least in so doing thou diminish from the
glory of Christ, and so give it to another. And if thou look upon the
Scripture to be for a Rule, and for trying, thou give that unto them which
belongs unto Christ, for he is the Rule, and leads his people, and he alone
searches the heart, and tryes the reins, and not the Scriptures.


C. But how then must Spirits be tried if not by the Scriptures? Must one
Spirit try another?


F. The Spirit of God must try all spirits; for it knows the spirits whether
they be of God, and if not, it discerns them, and judges infallibly of them;
and if they be of God, it receives them, and embraces them with joy; and this
is not the spirit of a man, to try the spirit of a Man, but the Spirit of God
that tryes all men's spirits.


C. Then I perceive it is the Spirit alone that I am to mind in all things.


F. Yes, child, for by minding of the Spirit alone in all things, thou will
come to a good understanding in all things, and be able to discern and put a
difference betwixt that which is true, and that which is false.


C. I am sensible that there is something in my Conscience, that lets me see my
secret thoughts, and the intents of my heart; but I have not known what it has
been, nor hitherto have much regarded it.


F. That is the true Light of Christ that lets thee see thy Thoughts, and the
intents of thy heart; and God has freely given it unto thee, and requires thy
obedience to it: Therefore, child, for the time to come, be more diligent, and
have more regard unto it; and when it shows thee Evil, and reproves thee for
Evil, obey it; so it will rend the vail from off thee, that is spread over
thee, and keeps thee from the knowledge of God.


C. But if I should turn unto it, and obey it when it reproves me for sin, is
there power in it to save me from sin, and to deliver me from all Iniquity?


F. Yes, child, all power in Heaven and Earth is in it, and it is made manifest
not only to show sin, but also to destroy it; and if thou obeyest, and in it
believe, thou will feel it condemn sin, and destroy the Devil that begets it;
and it will draw thee near to God, and give thee the knowledge of his glory.


C. That is the thing that I earnestly desire: but when I look within, I see
nothing but a body of corruption.


F. That which discovers to thee the body of corruption, that is the Light of
Christ: and when thou first see thy self in it, thou can see nothing but
corruption standing; but by obeying, and believing in it, thou will feel it
break the body of Corruption, and set thee free out of that bondage.


C. But is that the Light of Christ, that shows me my Thoughts, and Words, and
Deeds, and makes them manifest what they are?


F. Yes, child, that is the light of Christ, and with it are they all made
manifest, and thou can not hide any thing from it; when thou art in secret,
it is with thee, and there shows thee what thy thoughts are, it sorts thy words
and deeds, and lets thee see whether they be good or evil: if thy Thoughts be
after vanity, it discovers them, and reproves thee in thy own Conscience for
them; and thy thoughts thou can not hide from it; if thou speak vain
words, or do any evil deeds, it condemns thee in thy self, and thou can not
fly from the Judgment of it; and this is the pure Light of Christ in thy own
Conscience, child, and is always near thee to reprove thee for the things that
be evil.


C. This is true, for I do feel something in me that lets me see Evil, both in
Thought, Word, and Deed; and I also feel many checks in my Conscience when I am
doing the thing that is evil.


F. Why that is the Light of Christ that lets thee see all that ever thou have
done, and also what is present with thee, and what thy life is in; and what thy
love is after: And if thou mindest, thou will see what ever rises out of the
darkness, and what the Prince of Darkness tempts thee to do; so that thou will
find that the Light of Christ will make manifest every evil in the appearance
of it, and will call thee to abstain from it; and if thou obeyst, it will keep
thee from joining to it. And I shall in one Instance, plainly inform thee of
it, When the Devil temps thee to put forth thy hand to take any thing that is
not thy own, the Light of Christ lets thee see it to be evil, and thou art
sensible that it is not thine before thou touchest it; and if thou do not
obey the light that discovers it, then the Devil prevails and draws thee to do
it, and so thou becomest a Thief, for which the Light reproves thee: Or if thou
be tempted to tell a Lie, the Light lets thee see it before thou speak it,
and thou art sensible that the thing thou art to speak is not true; and if
thou do not obey the Light that shows it, the Devil prevails and draws thee
to speak it, and thou becomest a Liar, for which the Light reproves the.


C. This is true; but will the Light deal thus plainly with me in all things?


F. Yes, Child, it will deal plainly with thee in all things, and will not
deceive thee in any thing, but will make it manifest as it is: If it be a Lie,
it makes it manifest to be a lie, and that which makes manifest a lie, that is
true, and will not deceive thee; therefore mind it, and obey it, and it will
devide aright: And what is of the flesh, it will let thee see to be flesh, and
so for Condemnation.


C. Father, show me what the Works of the Flesh are, that I may know them?


F. Thou art to mind the Light, and it will show thee, and give thee true
knowledge of them: for if at any time thou live to the flesh, and satisfies
it with the affection and lust, the Light will condemn thee, and the Work that
is brought forth by thee, by which thou may certainly know that it is a work
of the flesh; yet for thy Information I shall mention some of them, and show
thee what they are, Covetousness, Drunkenness, Witchcraft, Hatred, Variance,
Emulation, Strife, Debate, Deceit, Anger, Envy, Malice, Backbiting,
Whispring, Pride, Fornication, Adultery, Gluttony, Swearing, Lying, Sporting,
Playing, Carding, Diceing, Dancing, Ringing, Feasting, Revelling, Banqueting,
With much more; and they that live in such things, cannot inherit the Kingdom
of God.


C. Here is a great number, Father; But do all these, and more then these,
lodge in People?


F. Yes Child, all these, and more than these, lodge in the heart that is
deceitful, where they are generated by the subtilty of the Serpent, which is
the seed of the Evil-doer; and he forms them up into a body, which is the body
of sin; and where they are, and the life in them, they separate from God, and
vails from beholding the Brightness of his Glory.


C. But cannot I know God, his Way and Truth, and yet live in some of these
things?


F. Nay Child, if thy life be in any of them, and thou walk in them, thou
live in that which can neither know God, nor Please him; and the Way and
Truth of God thou art out of, For, as far as the East is from the West, so far
does sin separate from God.


C. But must I deny them all?


F. Yes, Child, for if thou live to the Flesh, thou must die.


C. Alas Father, who then shall be saved?


F. Why those that turn when the Light reproves them for sin, and those that
obey and believe therein; for in the Light the Name of Christ is known, in
which is Salvation: and he that Believes, is saved.


C. But may I come to Witness those Works of the Flesh destroyed whilst I am
in the body, seeing they separate me from God, his Way, and Truth?


F. Yes, if thou believe in the Light, it will arise in Power, and destroy
thy Lusts that War against thy Soul, and will subdue the evil Concupiscence of
the unclean Nature, out of which proceeds all evil, and in which thou can not
please God.


C. Father, I am but a Child, and want understanding, tell me therefore how I
must get out from amongst these evils? for I now see my self beset with them,
and I would willingly deny them, and part with them for Christ.


F. Why Child, I shall briefly inform thee of this thing: When thou feel thy
mind inclining toward any evil, and that the Light discovers it to be evil,
then do thou mind the Light that discovers it, and stand thou still and join
not to it, but deny thy self, though thou may feel ^ strong inclination
toward it; and i^ thou stand still, and waitst in the Light^ thou will receive
Power against it^ and strength to overcome it, an^ thou will feel the Power of
the Light to cross thy Will in what i^ would do, and in the Power tho^ wilt
feel thy Salvation: and so ^ thou mindest the Light, and in it believ'st thou will be kept from joynin^ to the Evil, and walk in the dail^ cross to thy own
Will, whereb^ the World will be crucified unt^ thee, and thou will be crucifie^
unto the World, and true Judgment will be Executed upon the Evil-doer, and
death will come upon thy own life, and slay thy lust, that has loved any thing
more then God.


C. I desire one particular Instance to clear this thing to my understanding?


F. I shall give thee one instance, which by minding, thou may know all the
rest: When thy Heart is lifted up in Pride, and thou stand Exalted in thy
own Mind, and there have High thoughts of thy self, and striving to Adorn thy
Body with costly Apparel, and to put on any thing more than is needful for the
service of the Body; the Light of Christ in thy Conscience, will reach unto
thee, and plainly show thee, That the thing thou art Exercised in, is an evil
thing, so as thou may sensibly feel correction for it: Now, if thou turnest
to the Light when it reproves thee, and corrects thee* and yield unto it
without resisting; it will reach to the top of thy Pride, and bring thy
haughtiness down, and lay thy loftiness low, and will crucify thy carnal
affection with the lusts of it, and will bring death upon it; so will thy life
and pride be taken away, and Humility will spring and come into Honor; and in
the Power which is the Cross, the Old thou will feel put off, and the New will
be put on, and thou will be made a new man in Christ, who will revea^ the
Father unto thee, and give the true knowledge of Him, his Way, an^ Truth.


C. This is a strait gate, Father, I^ there not another way by which I may come
to know God?


F. Nay, Child, there is not another Way, for Christ is the Way and if thou
desire to come to walk in Christ, thou must part with Also for him, and Deny
thy self to follow him; Therefore does the Power stand in the Gate, to keep
out all that is Unclean, and to Crucify it, before there can be an Entrance:
And that is the Reason, child, why so few enter in at the strait Gate; but do
not thou fly the Cross, but mind the Light that leads in it, so will thou
feel the Regeneration wrought, and a Birth born that is of God, and is Heir of
the Kingdom.


C. But must every work of the flesh, which the light reproves me for, be
denied and crucified after such a manner?


F. Yes child, for in the Self-denial, and daily cross, thou will feel the
Enmity slain, and the Power will work thy Freedom out of the Bondage wherein
thou have been held Captive under the Enemies Power; and if thou lie down
patiently, and bear the Judgment willingly, Judgment will be brought forth
unto Victory.


C. Alas Father, this is a hard saying; and if there be not another way to come
to the true knowledge of God, I begin to faint already, and do not see how I can
be freed from the evil that daily attends me?


F. The saying is not hard, child, but unto that which Reasons about it, that
would keep a Life in something that must be destroyed; and there is no cause
for thee to faint, child, though evil attend thee daily, but believe in the
Light, and it will work the Work for thee, and remove thy burden from off thee;
for all things are possible with God, and there is nothing too hard for him:
therefore reason not about it, but believe over it, and the Lord God will not
forsake thee until he has perfected his Work, for his love is to that which
breaths in thee, and through Judgment he will Redeem thee, and show thee his
Salvation.


C. But must I be born again, Father?


F. Yes child, or else thou can not enter into the Kingdom of God.


C. How may I come to know that, with the work of it?


F. By diligent waiting in the Light, whereby thou will come to feel the
effectual working of God's Power, through which the old Birth, with all the
Deeds of it, will die; and thou will feel a new Birth raised, which after God
is Created in Righteousness and true Holiness.


C. And what shall I be when such a Work is wrought, and the new Brith raised?


F. Why, Thou will be made a new man in the Immortal Seed, and thou will have a
new Heart, out of which will proceed new Thoughts, Words, and Deeds; and then
thou can not live any longer in the Evil, but in the Good, into which thou
art redeemed by the Resurrection of Life: And herein, child, is the Lord God
truly known, his Way, and Truth.


C. Oh Father! that I could feel this Work effectually wrought in me, then
surely I should be eased of much that now oppresses me?


F. Why, do not hasten, child, but keep stayed in the Light, and there thou will feel the hand that works, and know the power of it whereby thy
Redemption will be perfected and the Seed Immortal raised; then thou will feel
the Oppressor broken, and thy Burden taken off, which will give ease unto thee,
and bring in Joy for Mourning.


C. But if there be not another way to know God, then how is it with all those
People that do not thus believe, and yet profess God, and Truth, and
Scriptures?


F. Why child, all that are faithful to God, in what he makes known unto them,
they are not Judged; though unto the Truth they be not yet clearly attained:
And though there may be a difference in the Profession, yet it is but one thing
in all that breathes after God, which the Lord brings through the Dispensations
and Administrations of Professions, to inherit Life in the Possession: and it
is not a Profession that makes a Christian, though people in a Profession may
speak largely (in words) of the Grace of God, and the Love of God; but they
read in that Book Notionally, before they have passed through the Judgment
experimentally: And do not thou busy thy mind so much to look after others,
but mind thy self, for thou must give an account of thy self to God.


C. But I desire to enquire somewhat after this thing, that I may receive
Information concerning it; seeing there are so many professions, and all seem
to differ, and yet but one true Way, that so I may choose the true, and deny the
false.


F. Why, child, for thy satisfaction, I shall a little open it unto thee
whereby thou may see into the ground of all Professions, and how they all
come to differ; for People wanting the Life and Power of Christ in themselves,
they are betrayed into the words, which from the Life an^ Power were given
forth; and the^ not understanding the Scriptures they are, they put to their
meaning^ and when in their meanings the^ cannot agree, then arises the
diffe^ence; and one cries, Lo here; an^ another cries, Lo there, according to
their own meanings and conclusions; and so being from the Spirit of God in
themselves, from which the Holy Men of God gave forth the Scriptures, they do
not understand the Scripture, nor the Power of God: And this is the reason,
child, why there are so many Professions and shows of Religion.


C. Then is it not very dangerus to put Meanings to the Scriptures, and from
thence to draw conclusions concerning Religion, when there is not a measure of
the same Spirit felt from which the Scriptures were given forth?


F. It is very dangerous, child, and it is the way of the old Serpent, and such
a Profession never makes a Christian, nor brings forth a pure Religion, but
forms up a show of Godliness out of the Power.


C. But amongst these several Professions, there is something seemingly good in
their Practice; for they profess a Worship to God, and they have Praying, and
Preaching, and Singing; and they use those things called Ordinances; as
Baptism, and Bread and Wine?


F. Child, this observe; That which seems to be, and is not the thing it seems,
it deceives the beholder: And there may be something seeming good in all the
Professions, and yet not be so as it seems; and in the Darkness it is not to be
discerned, The Pharisees had long Prayers, and that was seemingly good, yet
Christ called them Hypocrites: So to judge according to the Appearance, is very
dangerous; for, therein are many deceived, taking ^ thing to be that which it
is not.


C. But is not the Worship of God, good thing?


F. Yes, the Worship of God is a good thing; but if there be no more but a show
of Worship, it is not the Worship of God, nor is not so good as it seems to
be, but is a Will Worship, and not the Worship in the Spirit, which is the true
Worship of God.


C. Is not that a true Worship where there is Praying, and Preaching, and
Singing, with such like good things?


F. That is a true Worship where there is Praying, and Preaching, and Singing
in the Spirit; but there may be such things done, and not in the Spirit, but in
men's own will, and that Worship is vain.


C. Then inform me, Father, of the true Worship.


F. Why, child, I shall show thee: when the mind is joined to the Spirit of
God, and is acted by it, and subjected to it, then is the Lord God truly
worshipped; and that is the worship in the Spirit.


C. And how is that Worship performed? And what is the practice in it?


F. It is performed according to the good pleasure of the Spirit, that blows
where it lists; and the Practice is, as the Spirit moves. If the Spirit gives
words to declare, they are declared faithfully: If it move unto Prayer, it is
performed in it: And so the things practiced in the true worship, are performed
in the Spirit's power, and according to its own pleasure.


C. Do not all people that Profess a Worship unto God, perform their Service
in the Spirit?


F. Nay, child, for they that are in the flesh, cannot perform a spiritual
service.


C. How do they then Preach and Pray, with other things they practice in their
Worship?


F. They do it in their own Wills, and in the strength of the earthly wisdom,
and not in the Spirit.


C. And do those called Ministers perform their service in their own wills and
Wisdom?


F. Yes, child, they do it in their own wills and wisdom, and in their own time.


C. But how shall I know that they do so?


F. By their Limitation, in binding up their Worship unto a Time, Place, and
Person; but the Spirit of God is not limited.


C. Why, is not their Time, and Place, and Persons right, seeing their Time is
upon that Day called Sunday, and their Place, that which is called a Church;
and the Persons, such as are counted Ministers of Christ?


F. Nay, the Lord God of Power is not limited to any of them. And as for their
Sunday, the Heathen named it; and the Pope named their Church; and their
Schools and Colleges made their Ministers.


C. But do they not preach sound Doctrine?


F. Nay, their Doctrine is after the Tradition of men, and not after Christ;
and they get their Doctrine by their Arts and Languages that they have learned
at Schools and Colleges, and then read it, or speak it forth in their own
wills that are corrupted, and there is no soundness in it.


C. But if it be so, there are many deceived, for they are looked upon to be
able Ministers.


F. Yea, many are deceived, who walk not in the light that discernes them; but
who walk in the Light sees them, and their Wolfish nature under their Sheeps
clothing. And now is the Lord making them manifest, that they may not deceive
any longer, for they have kept People always learning, and are unprofitable
Talkers, Teaching for filthy Lucre, and not of a ready mind.


C. But is not their praying a service that is accepted of God?


F. Nay, for they pray not with the Spirit, nor with the Understanding. And
some of them cannot pray at all, but as they have prayers made by others, and
have them set in a book to read, as in the book of Common Prayer; or else get
words into their memory, or comprehend them into the Notion, and then speak
them forth as in a way of prayer, when the Spirit is not felt; so that neither
their Preaching nor Praying is accepted of God.


C. And is not their singing an acceptable service? for they that can sing
praises are in a good condition.


F. Who are come into that state, where a Psalm is given in the Spirit, they
are in a good condition, and can sing Praises, and make Melody in their Hearts
unto the Lord; and they rightly understand what they sing; and they sing with
the Spirit, and with the Understanding: But none can sing after this manner,
but who are Redeemed from the Earth. But they have David's words put into
Meeter by Hopkins and Sternhold, and given them forth as they were David's
condition, and the Drunkard, and Swearer, and Lya^ sing together, who know
nothing of David's condition; and so they sing Lies in Hypocrisy, which is no^
a right Service, nor Accepted o^ God.


C. I would know, father, how it (...) concerning those things called
Ord^nances, as Baptism, and Bread an^ Wine, which are much used in the^
Worship?


F. Why, child, as to those thing they rose from the Pope's inventio^ who has
had power in the Night o^ Apostasy, and has set up his D^vices, which are yet
continued in England, though he seemingly is denied, and the whole practice of
those things, as they use them, had their Institution by the Pope, and were
never so Ordained of Christ; for he did not ordain Sprinkling water in a child's
face, or to make a sign of the Cross in its forehead, nor Godfathers and
Godmothers to undertake for it: neither did he ordain Bread and Wine to be so
used and received. And the wine is another of the Pope's inventions, who knows
not the cup of blessing, in which is the communion of the Blood of Christ: so
has invented a Silver Cup, and pours wine into it, and then the Priest gives
it to the people, and tells them, That is the Blood of Christ which is shed for
them, when it is Wine, and not Blood: And gives them Bread, and tells them,
That is the Body of Christ that is broken for them; when people neither discern
the Body nor the Blood of Christ, and so Eat and Drink Damnation to themselves.
And true Baptism, child, is in the Spirit, which Baptizeth into one Body: And
the true Meat and Drink, is the Body and Blood of Christ, which the worthy
receiver feeds upon in his Heart. So that these things be false, and not to be
regarded by the true Christians who are come to the Spirit, and live in the
Spirit, which is the Substance.


C. But is not the place in which all these things are performed, a true
Church?


F. Nay, the true Church is in God the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ; and
Christ is the Head of it, and has the pre-eminence in it: but the place in
which such things are performed, is also of the Pope's invention, and he counts
himself to be the head of it, and he would have the pre-eminence; and is a
Place made by men, and it is Wood and Stone which do decay and wax old, and
come to naught: Then they make Levies, and gather Money to Repair it again; and
if they do not so, it will fall and consume, and turn into Mire and Dirt: But
the true Church, of which Christ is the Head, is a Living thing, and does not
decay, nor wax old, but is ingrafted into him, and there is neither spot nor
blemish in it.


C. But are not these the true Christians that practice and perform such
things?


F. They have got the Christan's Words, and so count themselves Christians; but
they are not in the Christian's Life, neither is their Way the Christian's Way;
so they are practicing those things that God requires not at these hands,
neither does he accept them: And who are true Christians, child, they come into
Union with Christ, by the effectual working of his Power in them, through which
they are translated and made new creatures, and the new creature is in Christ,
and is a true Christian; but the old is an Apostate.


C. There is also some other things that I would be informed in, because I
stand something doubtful concerning them.


F. What are they, Child?


C. I observe that People make much to do one with another when they meet
together, or part one from another, in putting off their Hats, and Bowing and
Cringing, and going Backward, and Scraping; and I am doubtful whether this be
the true Honor, with which I am to honor all men.


F. This Doubt will be easily removed, and thou may be assured that it is
not the true Honor.


C. How may I be assured of it?


F. Why child, they that seek Honor one of another, they do not believe in
Christ, the power of God, which is honorable in all men, and is to be honored
where it appears in any; and this seeks not the honor below, or to have the
Hat put off, or the Body to bow and cringe, or the feet to scrape; it neither
seeks such honor, nor can give such honor; for it is a beggarly honor when
it is compared with that honor that comes from God alone, and where it is
sought and expected it is from below; and that which answers the Expectation is
the same: and so men seek honor one of another, and they give it one to
another with their Hat and Kee, And, Your humble Servant Sir: And such are not
in the power of God, but in the vain customs of the Heathen; and so it is got
in a Custom to put of the Hat, and bow, and cringe, and scrape; and Women to
Curtisie and Droop; And this is sought for and expected one from another, and
they receive it one of another: And these are the Apostate Christians, that are
out of the Power of God that is Honorable, and so seek honor one of another,
and are respecting one another Person; and the Rich and the Proud they get the
Honor; and the Poor and the Needy they are not regarded.


C. But is there not such an Honor that belongs to Magistrates and Men in
Authority?


F. Nay Child, such Honor does not belong to them, neither are they Honored
when in is done so unto them; for true Honor is from the Heart, and not from
the Hat: And where any thing of God appears in Magistrates and Men in
Authority, that is Honored with the Heart, and it does not expect the Hat: And
this is true Honor, Child, and it is given unto whom it is due.


C. But seeing such a thing is expected by Men in Authority, is it not better
for me to give it to them, then to offend them?


F. Thou must be careful, Child, how thou Reason'st about it, lest thou run'st
into Transgession; for if thou respect'st Persons, thou committest sin, and the
Law of God will convince thee of Trangression: Therefore mind the Lord and his
Teachings; and if men be offended because thou obey'st the Lord, thou will not
be guilty of the offense; but the Woe shall be unto that in them which would be
Honored with thy Hat, from whence the offense comes.


C. And does not the Lord require any such thing to be done?


F. Nay: The Lord requires it not, but the pride of man's Heart seeks it; for
the Lord requires that thou should Honor all men in him; and that is, to
give Honor unto whom it is due; but unto a proud, heady, high-minded Man,
there, is no Honor due, though he may be great in the World, and be in Place
to Rule; but in the Power of God the Pooor is as Honorable as the Rich, and
the Beggar as he that Rules; and the Honor is given as due unto the Power, and
not unto any man's Person.


C. I would be informed of another thing, Father, What Language I am to speak
unto a single Person, whether Thou, or You, be the true Language unto a single
Person?


F. Why Child, a single Person being One and no more, the true Language is Thou
unto him, or her: and has been the Language spoken by all that have been
guided by the Spirit of God without respect of Persons; And we do not read of
another that was spoken by the Holy men of God unto any person, whether a King,
or any in Authority under him; for the Spirit of Truth leads into all Truth,
and Thou to One is the Language of Truth without respect, and the Spirit of
Truth teaches to speak it, and not another.


C. But how is it then that People use the word You to one another, when they
speak One to One?


F. Because in that thing they do not mind the Spirit of God, and its
Teachings; and so the false spirit acting, brings forth a false Word: For You
to One, is an Apostate Language, and through the v^in custom of it, is become
seated in the Pride of Heart; and when the true Language is spoken, the pride
cannot bear it; but it is the true Language, Child, and was so in the beginning
before the fall; and God is turning it again unto his People in this day of
Restoration.


C. And must I use the Word Thou to all sorts of People?


F. Yes, When thou have occasion to speak to One; And do not respect the Person
of any Man or Woman; for it is as true to the Rich as to the Poor; and the
Spirit of Truth will teach thee to speak it if thou mindest and obeyest it; and
if thou do not, it will reprove thee.


C. But is it not a thing that will become me, to use good Manners? And People
do not take the word Thou to be good Manners, when I speak to my Betters; and
they will not have their Children taught to speak that Language, because they
say it is unmannerly.


F. It is the evil words, Child, that corrupts good manners, whether it be in a
Child, or Elder People; but true words is mannerly, and is spoken in the manner
of Truth, which is good manners: And thou must not mind what others say, or how
they will have their Children Taught; but mind thou the Lord and his Teachings,
and he will teach thee to speak good words, and true words, which is good
manners; and it is the evil words that crrupts it: And People that know not the
Teachings of God, nor the Truth of God, they know not the manner of it, and so
are seeking how to honor one another, and to speak to one another, and after
what manner to do it, which is not in the manner of Truth, but in the false
spirit, which corrupts their words and actions, and so corrupts good manners.


C. And how must I do concerning Oaths, seeing that Swearing in many things is
required? as sometimes to give Testimony to what I know; and sometimes to
Testify my Submission unto a Ruler; and also in other things?


F. Whatever men require of thee, Child, thou must mind what the Lord requires
of thee; and if men require that of thee which the Lord forbids thee, thou must
obey God: And Christ Jesus has forbidden all Oaths, and it is not lawful to
Swear upon any account, though men may require it; because Christ has
commanded, not to Swear at all: and if thou love him, thou will keep his
Commandments, and not Transgress against him, because men require thee to do
otherwise; but do thou mind the Spirit of Truth, and it will teach thee to
speak truth in what thou art called unto, and thy Yea in the Truth, will bind
thee to perform faithfully what thou Testifies or Engages to: And so in all
things thou art called unto, speak the truth from thy Heart, as in the sight of
God, and let thy Yea be Yea; and let there be no more in any wise: for what is
more, comes of evil.


C. But there is much said concerning the Lawfulness of an Oath in such needful
matters, as to end Striffe, or Engage to a Ruler, with other things: and there
are many Scriptures brought for it.


F. They that bring Scriptures to plead for Swearing in this day, they do not
understand the Scriptures; for He who is Lord of all, says, Swear not at all,
neither by Heaven nor by Earth, nor by any other thing; but let your Yea be
Yea, and your Nay Nay, for what is more comes of Evil: And thou art to obey
Jesus Christ whose Doctrine is true, and who ends the Dispensation of Oaths
where strife was; and in that Dispensation, when they did Swear, and were not
to forswear themselves, it was not an Oath formed in words, and then imposed by
the laying a hand upon the Bible, and kising it, but was solemnly spoken from
their own mouths, and what proceeded out of their mouths, that they were to
perform unto the Lord; And this was the Oath commanded in that Dispensation, as
thou may read, Number. 30. If a man vow a Vow unto the Lord, or Swear an Oath
to bind his Soul with a Bond, he shall not break his word, he shall do according
to all that proceeds out of his mouth: (now Mark Child) This was the thing the
Lord Commanded in that Dispensation, and it was no more but the word that was
to proceed out of their own mouths, and were not to break, because it was the
Soul's bond; therefore they were to do according to all that proceeded out of
their mouths; so that it was to proceed out of their own mouths, and not to be
imposed in formed words, which binds not the Soul: And there is no Scripture
that mentions any other way of Swearing in that Dispensation; but now Christ
Jesus, who Ends all the Changeable things, He says, Swear not at all; but let
your Yea be Yea; And it is without Exception, or putting any difference betwixt
vain Oaths, and solemn Oaths: He says, Not at all, nor by any thing; For,
what is more than Yea and Nay, comes of Evil: Therefore, Child, obey thou
Christ's Doctrine, what ever men may Require of thee; and if thy Yea will not
be taken to the Truth of thy word, let nothing else be done by thee, lest thou
fall'st into Condemnation.


C. Father, Inform me concerning the Observation of Days, as those called
Holy Days, and that called Sunday, which some call Sabbath Day, and some the
Lord's Day, and whether the Lord require that I should observe them?


F. If thou Observest a day, Child, Observe it to the Lord; but he requires not
the Observing of particular Days, for the Seventh Day was Holy, in which he
Rested from all his Work, and that was the Jews Sabbath, and they observed it
to the Lord as he Commanded; but Christ Jesus has fulfilled it, and ended it:
And those called Holy Days are set up in the Apostasy, in which the Saints
have been Killed and Martyred, upon which Days the Apostates Rejoiced and
Feasted; and they are called Feastifal Days: and thou art to abominate the
observing of them, because they were set up in the Blood-thirsty Spirit; And
for that called the Lord's Day or Sabbath Day, People do no^ understand what
they say; for the Sabbath is the Seventh-Day, and the observing of that is
ended in Christ; and that called the Lord's Day, is the first Day of the Week:
And the name Sunday, is from the Heathens, who celebrated that day unto the
Sun, and so called it Sunday: But Child, every Day is the Lord's Day, and thou
art to observe them all unto him, and walk in his fear, and in his dread every
Day and Hour; and who come to Christ and believe in Christ, come over the
observation of Days, into the one Day of the Lord, which is as a thousand
years, and so walk with the Lord in his Day, and observe it to his Glory and
Praise.


C. I now feel my understanding pretty well informed and opened; but will the
Light of Christ, in my own Conscience, let me see all these things, and teach
me to understand them in Truth?


F. Yes (Child) it will, if thou enclinest to its Teachings, and stand'st
single to obey, it will give thee a perfect understanding of God, his Way and
truth; and will let thee see all the Customs, and Fashions, and Traditions of
the World to be vain for condemnation.

And now, my Child, receive Instruction and be wise, and let not the Counsel of
thy Father depart from thee, but treasure it up in thy Heart, that thou may
lay up for thy self a good foundation, and know the hand of the Lord to build
thee up: And now I Exhort thee, Child, to mind the fear of the Lord, that thou
may know the beginning of Wisdom, and therein be made wise unto Salvation;
and let not thy mind (in any wise) go after vanity: keep thy eyes from
beholding vanity; and as thou mindest the Light of Christ, thou will see it,
and be kept from it. And now unto all Sorts and Sects of People, a few Words I
write.


Unto the Aged.
THou that have past over many years, and have spent thy time in vanity, now
wait to redeem it; thou drawest nigh thy end, and the time that is past thou
can not call again; thou must lay down thy earthly body, and how soon thou
know not; the World must pass away, and thou must leave it; if thou have
gathered great Riches, thou must not abide with them: What profit will there be
in all these things, when thou must go hence and be no more seen? And what will
all thy professed Religion do for thee in that day? It will all forsake thee:
Therefore, whilst thou have yet a day, turn and obey the Lord and his living
Voice in thy conscience, that thou may be gathered unto God, and know his
salvation, before the day pass over.

Unto the Young Men.
THou that art in the strength of thy Youth, spend it not in vain, nor satisfy
thy hearts lusts, which many times provoke thee to do evil, thy days will end,
and an account thou must give unto God; therefore in time consider, before the
evil day come upon thee, for thou know not how soon the Lord may call for
thee, and require an account of thee: Therefore stand in aw and sin not, but
walk in the fear of the Lord, that it may go well with thee in the latter day.

Unto little Children.
THou that art yet in thy young Years, and art but like a plant springing up
into strength, thou know not the day of thy cutting down: therefore whilst
thy time is, mind the Lord that made thee, and gives life and breath unto thee,
and walk in fear before him, so will he teach thee the way wherein thou art to
walk, and he will order thy conversation a right, and show thee his salvation,
and thou will be kept from the evil of the days that yet thou have to pass
through, and wilt know the power of God to pluck up the root of evil whilst
thou art yet tender, and before it be too much grown in strength; and thou will
come to be grounded and rooted in the love of God, and in that spring up like a
pleasant plant, so will thy days, which yet thou have to pass through in this
world, be joyful to thee; and in the end, everlasting peace will be thy
portion: Therefore, Little Children, keep out of vanity; Lie not, Swear not,
Envy not: be sober, be gentle, be peaceable, be tender, love one another; be
not proud in any wise; put not on costly Apparel, take no thought after that;
be not curious in your Meats and Drinks, but having Food and Raiment, be
therewith content. Let not your Apparel be more than what is needful for your
bodies, nor your Food more then what is convenient for your refreshment: so
will the Lord adorn you with the beauty of holiness, and feed you with that
meat that does not perish.

A few words concerning true Discerning and Judgment.
NOw is Salvation come from the most High, and the God of Israel is over all;
he is confounding the Wise men in their Wisdom, and destroying the strong men
in their strength, he is breaking the Idols of silver, and the Idols of gold,
and every carved work he is throwing down, and his eye beholds the way of every
man, and he sees their work of what sort it is; he is the searcher of the
heart, and he passes by and beholds the intents thereof; hidden things he
brings to light, and by the gift of his own Spirit he shows to every man his
thoughts, this is his perfect gift to every man, a manifestation thereof all
men have, that they thereby might profit; and though a measure of this Spirit
has a being in All, and makes its self manifest in all, and is the true light
that does enlighten all that come into the World, yet all do not receive it,
nor come to be guided by it so walk in the flesh, and cannot please God,
neither can perceive the things of God, and what is performed by such as a
Service or Worship to God, he does not require it at their hands; and though
they make many prayers he will not hear, for they have no Union with his
Spirit; and this tryes all people, and their works in a true Discerning, and
gives true Judgment upon all according to their doings; and who have not this
Spirit of Christ they are none of his; but all that receive it, and have Union
with it, they walk not in the flesh, but in the Spirit, in which they see the
Shapes and Forms of every Image and Likeness, and the ground from whence they
do arise; and no false birth can have a hiding place, but from the least to the
greatest they are discovered, and the fairest covering that any have clothed
themselves withal is seen through, and all the formed likenesses which appear
this day amongst the sons of men in what they do profess of God, they are all
seen to be of the flesh, and their Root and principle is of that part and
nature that is earthly, from which no good thing can arise; and it brings forth
a birth in its own likeness, and of its own nature, which by the Spirit is
truly discerned, and every work of the flesh is manifest to the Spirit, for the
Spirit searches all things, and truly judges all things, for the Spirit is
truth: And though this may seem in many of your eyes to be rash judgment, and
you may call it so, yet it will stand a witness against all that are satisfying
the flesh. For there is not any thing so hardly received as that testimony that
strikes at the life of another, and that which deals plainly and simply with
all, and desires the good of all, that meets with the least entertainment in
the hearts of people; but that which flatters, and cries peace when the bonds
of Iniquity stand, that is a pleasing thing unto the minds of all who walk in
the flesh; and that which coms to rip them up, and discover their nakedness to
their shame, that, they kick against, and will not own nor receive it for
truth; for there is not any people would come to shame for what they do; and
that which opens secrets, and brings any thing to light, by which shame may
come upon them, they turn against that and reject it, though the thing be
really true which is witnessed against; and so there is no work of the flesh
that would come under the spirits Judgment, though it be truly discerned and
judged as it is, and the Discerning and Judgment stand in the truth; but those
concerned in it will not own it, but cry out, Who made you a Judge? And why are
you so rash to judge, as if all were to be condemned but your selves? How do
you know the hearts of people? And why may not others be as right as you for
what you know? So every Form and Likeness would save its own Life by putting
off the Judgment, as if none could Discern it; and no false birth that would
have its Nakedness to appear, lest it should come to shame thereby: And thus
People harden themselves against the Spirit's Testimony, which in it self is
the searcher and tryer of Hearts and Reins, and none can hide their Council
from it. (Mark) Is not this the Judge that stands at the door and knocks? Does
not he discern when Evil rises in your Hearts? And does he not there Reprove
you? What is it that you can hide that he finds not out? What can you do in
your secret Chambers that he does not know? And what Thought can you think
(amongst all your Thoughts) that he does not discern? And does he not judge you
in your own Consciences, if you have Thought any Evil, or uttered vain Words,
or done any thing wickedly? Will you deny this to be a true Discerner, and a
Righteous Judge? Be sober, and there is a Witness (which you may feel in your
selves) to answer to the truth declared; and all that have received the Spirit,
and are born of the Spirit, they have an Understanding given them, by which
they are able to Discern the flesh, and all the works of it, and give true
Judgment upon it without respect of Persons; not judging according to the
flesh, but according to the Spirit, and sees to the Root and principle from
which all things spring up and grow; and they do not judge according to the
outward appearance, but judge Righteous judgment; for such as Discern no
further than what outwardly appears, and then judge according to that, Others
from the same ground may draw as true a Judgment against them: And here, people
are not to Judge, lest they be Judged; which is a place much alleged against
true Judgment; but whosoever Judges one of another, it is not in the Spirit of
Truth which does Discern through all Appearances; but it is in the flesh which
cannot perceive beyond what does appear: And so all the false Births give
Judgment one against another, and cannot bear the Judgment of one another;
then they are provoked and angry one with another, and run into confusion and
Distraction, Warring and Fighting, and Destroying one another about their
formed Religion; none being come to the Spirit that gives a Discerning through
what appears, and gives true Judgment in the ground: but all born of the Spirit
have true Union with it, and the flesh and the deeds of it, are subdued under
it; and they are no more in the flesh, but in the Spirit; and have received
Christ Jesus the Lord, and walk in him, and are Spiritual, and the Spiritual
man judges all things, and he himself is judged of no man: And whether you can
receive it or no, you are all truly tried and judged not in the flesh, but in
the Spirit; and your ROOT and FOUNDATION is seen and Discerned, and is not
found to be that which was in the beginning, but that which the Subtility
generated since the beginning, and so does he rule over you, and blind your
minds, that you cannot see, nor discern further than what appears; and the
Mystery of the Kingdom is hid from your eyes, and you run into the Words with
your carnal Minds and earthly Wisdom, and from what is Written draw something
to your selves, and form up a Likeness in your conceivings, and bring that
forth in the strength of your own Wills; and this is your Foundation, and the
first principle of your Religion; and so the HARLOT has brought forth many
children, which in her Womb have all been conceived, and yet are not formed one
like another, but all differ in their Shape and Likeness, and then strive one
with another, and yet are all children of one House, and all of one Kingdom;
but no Love, nor Unity found amongst them; but Envy, Hatred and Malice, and
all one against another, and divided into Heads and Parties, which is an
evident Testimony of the Ruin and Fall of your House and Kingdom; For, A House
divided against it self, cannot stand.

Therefore come out of it, lest it fall upon you, and utterly destroy you, and
all come to that where Peace and Safety is; for God has prepared a sure Refuge
and Resting place for all that will come: And he has gathered many into Unity,
and perfect Peace therein; and they rest in his Love, and are preserved in his
Power, and he alone is their Strength and sure Defense; so has the Lord made
his power known in this his Day, and has gathered a Remnant to that which was
in the beginning, which was* the Saints Life, and from which the Scriptures
were declared, and of which they all testified, that is now made manifest which
the false Apostles ravened from, and many Sons and Daughters are come to glory
in it; and this is the Spirit of Truth, which leads into all Truth, that cuts
down Transgression, and Reigns over the Head of the Transgressor, and does
discover clearly all the deeds of Darkness, which are come up since the Days
of the Apostles, and are practiced by such as are in the Apostasy; And this
comprehends all, but cannot be comprehended of any; it is pure, Everlasting,
Unchangable, and no Variableness there is in it: All that in it do believe,
have found the Author of Eternal Salvation, and are come to the Wisdom and
Righteousness of God, and to the enjoyment of Eternal Life, which is in CHRIST
JESUS the Lord, whose Glory and Majesty is spreading over the Earth, and who is
gathering a Holy people to Himself, that in them his praise may be showed
forth; who alone is worthy, God of gods, and King of Saints who by all his
Redeemed Ones is over all, Exalted, Magnified, and Praised for Ever and Ever.

So the Lord give you Understanding in all things. Something of Truth
manifested for the traveling birth to peruse and meditate.
1. MAn by transgression having lost his first estate of Innocence, simplicity,
and uprightness, he is altogether incapable of recovering himself, and
restoring himself into it again, which the wisdom of God beholding, his own
compassion moved toward man, and in his wisdom he prepared a way in the light
of his life, by which man might come again into the created state of
uprightness and innocence; and herein the love of God is universal, and is not
bounded nor limited, whereby he does appear to be a God gracious and merciful
unto all mankind, who by transgression is alienated from his loving kindness
and mercy in the light of his life within every man, that man thereby might
turn unto him, obey, and believe in him, that so by the light and power of his
own life, he might redeem man out of all iniquity, transgression, and sin, and
restore him into innocence, simplicity, and uprightness in his own life, where
his mercy and peace comes to be enjoyed according to the degrees of restitution.

2 The love and mercy of God being thus held forth in his own compassion, and
tendered in the day of his visitation unto all mankind, it does thereby appear
that God would not have any to perish, but would have them turn to the light of
his life, when by its testimony it does reprove them in their own consciences,
that so upon their obedience to the reproof, he might convert them, and heal
them, and restore them.

3 Man thus considered in himself, as wholly incapable of recovering himself,
and restoring himself, then he is to cease in all things as to himself, and
wait singly upon God in the light of his life to see his salvation come from
him alone.

4 When thy mind is thus turned to the light of Christ Jesus in thy own
Conscience, and that thou begin to yield unto it, and to obey its testimony,
then in the light a holy thing is conceived, and by operation quickened, and
being conceived and quickened in the life, it breaths and thirsts after
life, and the life does nourish it by giving more life unto it, and so prepares
it for the day of its bringing forth, which in fullness of time does come to
pass; and this is the birth which is born not of flesh, nor of blood, nor of
the will of man, but of God.

5 When thou art drawn toward* God in the light of his life, and art quickened
by the life to breath in tenderness after a larger measure of its fullness, then
do thou wait to be preserved in the present measure which thou have received;
for if after thy mind be turned to the light, and thou begin to behold
something of the excellency and glory of the life, and of the kingdom, and to
have some tastes of it; and then start aside from the light, and begin to will
and run out of it, and to compass to thy self the sight and spectacle which in
the light is showed thee, thou will run into great danger suddenly; for that
part which will run out of the light, and compass and gather that which in the
light is seen, that part will enrich it self, and cloth it self with the work
of its own hands, and thou will certainly find, that in such openings there
will arise a ravishment and a joy in thee, thou being come to a sight of the
glory of the life in the Vision or Prophecy, and if thou give way to that part
which would be hunting and running out of the light, to fecth that in which in
the light thou may behold, and so conclude thou have attained it, and from
thence satisfy thy self and create thy own peace in thy satisfaction, thou
sits down satisfied in that which is polluted, though thou have had the
openings of that which in it self is true.

6 When thou art come to the openings in the Prophecy, and in the light
beholds the glory of the kingdom, then in the light keep stayed, and wait to be
guided by the drawings and leadings of it, that so by the light thou may be
gathered into the life, and do not hasten in the forward part to catch and
gather that, to thy self which is opened in Propesie, for that part which in
the forwardness does catch and gather what is opened and seen in the Prophecy,
that part will work by imagination, and form a likeness in a false conception,
and so will advance and set that up as if it were the true birth, and thereby
thy mind will be lifted up in the apprehension of thy attainment, and
Antichrist will reign over thee, and destroy the holy thing which in life is
conceived and quickened, and darkness will set up it self under a show of an
Angel of light, and then thou will lose the sense and feeling of the life and
its drawings, and miss the birth of the Son whose glory thou have beheld in the
Prophecy; and where Antichrist thus sets up himself by his deceivable working,
he rules in Spiritual wickedness in high places, and they that expect mercy and
peace from God in such a state they deceive themselves, for mercy is with him
that he may be feared, but that which exalts above him does not fear him, so
cannot partake of his mercy, but must be taken away by his judgment, and so
there is a difference made between the precious and the vile, and the mercy
reaches the precious, but the vile is judged.

7 When thy mind comes to be exercised toward God in the light of his life,
and thou art made, sensible that thy soul wants true peace, and that thy
breathings go to God in the pure earnest, then wait in the light to be
preserved in patience, and keep thy eye to the leadings of the life, that
darkness may not cast thee down by accusations, for if it cannot heighten thee,
it will labor to cast thee down, and will not cease to present unto thee thy
own unworthiness and weakness, and will beget questionings in thee whether thou
love Cod fervently, or whether God will accept thee, and so the opposing Spirit
may cast thee down in thy youngness, whilst yet thou art not grown in strength
to rebuke thy adversary, and that will cause fears and doubtings to enter
thee, and grief, and sorrow, and mourning to come upon thee.

8 When thou feels that thy mind is disposed toward God in the light of his
life, then do thou stand still and be watchful, that the light may keep thee in
a true sense of thy own poverty, and the riches of Gods mercy, and so preserve
thee in a single dependency upon God alone, and then he will appear for thy
help when thou have need, and will succor thee in thy travail, and strengthen
thee according to what he requires of thee, and every step thou sets forward
in obedience to his movings, thou will feel his hand to lift thee up, and his
arm to draw thee on, and what have thou to do for thy self, but to wait upon
God to renew thy strength in thy travail, that thou may follow him in his own
way, and not depart from his counsel; and if thou abide in the drawings of the
life, he will not leave thee behind him, but will enlarge thy heart to run the
way of his commandments; so thou that art traveling in the way of life, keep
thy mind in the cool and meek spirit of God, for in that is life, and there
thou will discern when any passion rises, or any extreme works, and when the
life moves by operation, and raises thee up in the power of it self, and makes
thee fresh and living with its own virtue, then yield thy self to be disposed
by it, so will no false height ensnare thee, nor any accusation entangle thee,
but the life will preserve thee in it self, and lead thee in the feeling of the
love in which is the true temperance, that gives dominion over all inordinate
affection; and here thou will come to understand that it is God alone that
works all thy works for thee, and so thou will be brought to cease from all
thy own labor, and to wait upon God in a single dependency, to feel his
movings, drawings and leadings, whereby thy way will be peace, and thy path
pleasantness, and the Lord thy God will give thee the Refreshing mercy in his
own love, by which thou will be comforted in thy travel, and be made strong to
persevere unto the end, and then what thou have seen afar off thou will come to
inherit, and what thou have breathed after thou will come to enjoy, and so thou will know that the life which quickened thee, the same will satisfy thee in the
lot of thy inheritance, for mercy and peace is unto thee who art subjected to
the will of God; and thus does God alone bring to pass the council of his heart
for his seed sake; therefore let all flesh be silent, and keep in silence, for
time is with the Lord, and his own time is the best time, who in time begins
his work, in time prospers it, and in time perfects it and so in time
quickening, in time nourishing, and in time bringing forth the birth of his
life; and this can no man do for himself with all his own labor, therefore feel
thou the Lord who art quickened by him, and cast all thy care upon him, for he
cares for thee, and in humility he will exalt thee, in wants he will supply
thee, in poverty he will enrich thee, in nothingness he will fill thee, in
distress he will comfort thee, and in his love and life he will give thee all
things freely, and so in innocence, simplicity and uprightness in the seed of
God thou will walk with God in the Paradise of his pleasure.

Now learn a parable, the vine is a tender plant, and all extremes are contrary
to its nature; therefore in winter it neither blossoms nor bears fruit, but the
seed of its nature retires into its root, and there preserves it self in the
extremity of cold, and violent storm, but when the temperate Spring comes the
seed assendeth, and fills every branch with its virtue, whereby the branches
shoots and spreads abroad, and the grapes they multiply and grow in clusters,
and this comes to pass in the Spring time, when the Sons temperate heat breaks
forth, and the Clouds moderate dew and showers descend, even so is all born of
God. So thou that art tender in the life, wait for thy growth in the same, and
when the life moves by its own power, do not quench it by reasoning, for
though it work in its power, and may dispose thee by its power, yet is the
moderation, temperance, and pure wisdom in it, and all extremes of passion are
subdued by it, and so thou sitting in the life, thou sits over all deadness,
and also over all unruliness, and in the pure temperance of the life, thou
feelst Gods presence, his virtue and goodness, by which thou art made fresh and
green and fruitful, and in that state the Lord has pleasure in thee; so it is
a weighty matter to understand the true place of temperance, for it lies beyond
the comprehension of the deepest reason in the fall, and through Faith is found
in the life which reason cannot compass, for where it will it blows, and when
it will it works, and by its working enliveneth, and so by its motion
disposes the mind in the pure temperance of its own nature and property, in
which there is no contrariety by any composition, and therefore the motion of
the life cannot be truly called a passion or an extreme, though it may dispose
the mind contrary or beyond what the wisdom below can fathom or comprehend.

So every Babe of life, hold fast that which in the life thou have received,
and what thou may further see in the Prophecy unto which thou art not yet
attained; wait in patience and let patience have its perfect work in thee, and
the life will draw thee and bring thee into its self in its own time, and what
thou have not yet seen, be not inquisitive to know, but live by Faith in the
measure of the life which thou have received, and unto which thou art attained,
and let not thy reason search into the secrets of God; and being steadfast in
the Faith unto God, and holding fast that which thou have received in the life,
and in the drawings of the life keep thy way; that which thou have not yet
received, God will give thee in his time, and what thou have not yet seen God
will reveal it unto thee, and so by the life thou will be preserved in the
feeling of the life that is present with thee, and in the virtue of it thou will grow from one degree to another, and so in due time come to be perfect and
entire therein, and in thy place where thou art traveling in a measure of the
life, thou will feel perfect union with God, and with all the Lambs and babes
born of God in what degree soever they stand in the life, and thou will also
feel union with every motion of the life, whether in babes, strong men or
ancients, and the life will conform thee unto what is practiced by its own
motion, and so thou will hold the true form in unity as from the life it is
moved, observed, and practiced, which being less or more it is but one in all,
and does perfectly agree in it self both in ground and practice; and what is
formed by the life, and manifested from the life, that form is not without the
power of the life, but is filled with the glorious presence of the love of God,
and that manifestation is to be submitted unto in all humbleness of mind, as in
the sight of God, and there every babe, lamb, and plant, will receive the
heavenly nourishment, and so grow up as living members of a complete body in
Christ the head.

In the light of Christ is the riches of the kingdom, and in the light are all
things ministered that is good for food; for the light gives the savor of the
life, and the life is the souls nourishment, and this bread comes down from
heaven, and has life in it, and they that eat it live by it and do not die:
Therefore in the light all are to enter into the house of the Lord, and wait at
his Table, where food is prepared, and the cup filled, and in all humility to
receive what the Father gives, and covet no more, and then you will sit as a
family at on table, and discern the Lords body and feed upon it, and not be
condemned, and herein God commends his love unto you, in that he furnishes his
table for you, and gives you to drink of the river of his pleasure freely; and
this is the cup of the New Testament in his blood, which is his life, and it
does not corrupt nor decay in it self, but is always new and fresh, and
living; and so there is a time when the life opens and ministers, and there is
a time to receive it, and a time to retain it, and a time to feed upon it, and
a time to increase in it, and a time when some may be spared, and a time to
deal it; and this is the Son of wisdom that abides in the Fathers house, and is
always in his presence, and knows the Fathers time in giving, and observes the
Fathers time in disposing, and he neither carelessly hides his portion, nor
prodically spends it, but in the Fathers counsel is ordered aright: therefore
every one know your own portion, and when ye meet together in one place, sit
down at the Lords table, eat his body, drink his cup, for that ^s your portion,
and always feel it new in the kingdom, and do not give your own por^ unto any,
until you have enough for your sel^ and some to spare; for when God commends
love unto you, and that ye taste how good he is t^ sink down into it, that you
may come more (...) the fullness; and what is given receive it as yo^^ own
portion, and feed upon it, and grow in (...) and run not from the table with a
taste, and pro^^gally spend it, for so you may give your own br^^^ away, which
God commends unto you for y^^^ own use, and thereby lose your portion, whilst
^^^ children of the kingdom sit at the table and s^ together at the table,
eating the bread of life, drinking the cup of blessing, and so inherit (...)
own portion, and increase in it, and then the (...) overflows, and they can
spare a little, and yet h^^^ enough for themselves, and this is a safe state
every one to keep at the table of the Lord.

Notingham County Goal, 3 Month. 1663.
This is given forth from the deep love of God for (...) chosen, who breath in
his life to do his will; (...) whom be everlasting peace. William Sm^^^


THE END.

