Liberty of Conscience Pleaded by several weighty REASONS ON THE Behalf of the
People of GOD CALLED QUAKERS; AND ALSO, On the behalf of others whose
consciences are tender toward God. With a tender Message of Love UNTO THE KING.

Written by William Smith.

London, Printed, and are to be sold by William Warwick, 1662

THe holy God, whose wisdom is infinite and unsearchable, did make of one blood
all nations, and by his power and wisdom he breathed into man the breath of
Life, and endued him with pure Reason, and Understanding, in which he bore the
Image of God in Righteousness and true Holiness; and therein he was made to
differ from all sensual Creatures; and as the pure Reason and Understanding
did fill his inward man, he had true liberty in the same, and his Conscience
was free as unto God; but the fall leading nature out of its course, the
Earthly wisdom entered man, and man entered into it, and thereby lost his pure
Reason and Understanding in which he was created, and became earthly, sensual
and devellish; in which nature man's Conscience is bound in Chains of darkness,
and in the same nature he would bind the Conscience of others unto his own
persuasion; but in the beginning it was not so: And by these Reasons following
it may appear, that Liberty of Conscience in things partaining to God, is of
absolute necessity to be granted.

1. It being generally confessed, that man is degenerated from God, and that
there is to be a Restoration by Jesus Christ* then in what way soever Christ
does appear in man to restore him unto God, he is not to be limited, or his
appearance quenched by any Law or Decree; though he may appear contrary to
man's expectation.

2. It being generally confessed, that Christ is a Savior; then he is not to
be limited, or his appearance quenched, in what way soever he does appear in
man to work his salvation.

3. It being generally confessed, that all men have sinned, and that by Christ
alone they must be redeemed* then he is not to be limited, or his appearance
quenched, in what way soever he does appear in man to work Redemption out of
sin.

4. It being generally confessed, that sin separates from God, and that by
Christ alone reconciliation must be made; then he is not to be limited, or his
appearance quenched* in what way soever he does appear in man to reconcile him
unto God.

5. It being generally confessed, that God is a spirit, and must be worshipped
in spirit; then the spirits manifestation is not to be limited or quenched, in
what way forever it is made manifest in man to lead him into the worship of God.

6. It being generally confessed, that the spirit of truth leads into all
truth; then the Spirit is not to be limited or quenched in what way soever it
is made manifest in man to lead him into all truth.

7. It being generally confessed, that all people should live a peaceable life;
then the Spirit is not to be limited or quenched, in what way soever it is made
manifest in man to kill the lust and strife, and to lead him in the way of
peace.

8. It being generally confessed, that one man should do unto another as he
would that another should do unto him, then the Spirit is not to be limited or
quenched, in what way soever it is made manifest in man to beget Love in his
heart, and to lead him to do good unto all men.

9. It being generally confessed, that all men should be subject unto Kings,
and all in authority; then the Spirit is not to be limited or quenched, in what
way soever it is made manifest in man, to crucify his rebellious nature, and
to subject every thought into the obedience of Christ, and so make him subject
unto Kings, and all in authority.

10. It being generally confessed, that there is but one way and truth, then
the Spirit is not to be limited or quenched, in what way soever it is made
manifest in man to discover false ways and errors, and to lead him from them,
and so bring him into the one way and truth according to its own pleasure.

Now the Quakers principle and practice answering these general Reasons, there
is a necessity why their Liberty should be granted in things pertaining to God.

1. Because they have received Christ Jesus in the appearance of his Light, and
are followers of his Light in his own way, and by the Light they are restored
into the pure Reason, Wisdom and Understanding in which their Inward man stands
innocently before God, and their outward man disposed in Righteousness, as in
the beginning.

2. Because the Light of Christ in which he has unto them appeared, and is
their principle, is made unto them the power of God unto salvation

3. Because the Light of Christ has taken away their sin* and redeemed them
from all iniquity, and has made them a peculiar people unto God.

4. Because the Light of Christ has broken down the partition wall of sin, and
has reconciled them unto God, and made their peace.

5. Because the Light of Christ has given them the true knowledge of the one
only wise God, unto whom alone they bow, and him only worship in the Light of
the Spirit which they have received.

6. Because the Light of Christ has manifested the truth in their hearts, and
led them in the same by its own power.

7. Because the Light of Christ has killed the lust and strife in them, and
lead them to live a peaceable life in all Godliness and honesty.

8. Because the Light of Christ has purged out deceit and hypocrisy* and
begotten love in their hearts, that they cannot render Evil for Evil, but abide
in the doctrine of Christ, and love their Enemies.

9. Because the Light of Ch^^^^ has crucified the rebellious nature in them,
and made them subject to his own will, and thereby subjects them unto Kings*
and all in authority, and they faithfully answer the Kings command, wherein
they can keep their Consciences clear in the sight of God, and what for
Conscience sake they cannot answer, they patiently suffer under, and so dare do
nothing against the truth* but for the truth, and walk with a Conscience void
of offense toward God and man.

10. Because the Light of Christ has discovered unto them* the many false
ways and errors, and the great danger in them, and has led them into the one
way and truth, in which they have true peace with God, and serve him in
singleness of their hearts; and thus has Christ done that for them which no o
other could do; by which they know that it is he; and they are witnesses of ^i^
power and life, giving him the glory over all, who is worthy for ever.

Now as it is evident by these Reasons that the Quakers have received the holy
and true principle of Light that comes from Christ Jesus, and walk in the same,
so they ought to have that Liberty granted them into which Christ has restored
them, they answering in principle and practice those things which by others are
in words confessed, who say, but do not perform, which shows that they are in
the weakness of the flesh, in which none can please God; but they that obey the
Light and follow it, they do those things that are well=pleasing in his sight,
and in the Light they are accepted; and in this principle and practice the
Quakers have fullness of joy and peace.

Now as concerning others, who are not like-minded at present, and yet in their
Conscience are tender toward God, and answers a Conscience unto God, according
to the persuasion that he has wrought in them by his Spirit, that they may not
be suppressed, because there is not any thing which is begotten in tenderness
toward God, that is to be crushed, bruised or quenched by force or violence of
any Law; and whilst people behave themselves peaceably, the Liberty of their
Conscience in things pertaining to God, ought not to be denied them, and where
it is so, they that have power, do not to others as they would be done by, and
so manifest that they are void of natural affections. And these things I write,
that not any thing of God, though never so low and weak in its rising, may be
crushed or quenched any way in its tender breathings; so will truth, peace and
righteousness flourish in the Earth in the same life, power and wisdom* which
was before trangression and persecution, and puts an end to it again.

A tender Message of Love unto the King.
O King, my speech is directed unto thee in all humbleness of mind, and from
the tenderness of my heart I write the matter which is laid upon me from the
Most High, let it therefore be received and entertained by thee as a matter of
greatest weight and concernment unto thee; for it is that only by which thou
must either stand or fall.

Be it therefore known unto thee, that the one blood of which God made all
Nations, and in which is life, is the most Royal blood, and the most noble and
renownable of all things, and by it alone all mankind have life, breath and
being, amongst whom thou art one, O King; therefore thy Life not being in thy
own hand, consider who has prolonged thy days, and stretched out thy years,
who has helped thee in time of straits, trials, distresses and affl^ctions, is
it not God alone, who also can cut thy days short, and finish them in a moment?
Let this consideration be with thee in thy private chamber, that thou may
fear before the Most High, and apply thy heart unto wisdom; for by Wisdom Kings
reign, and Thrones are established, and in Wisdoms path thou will find the
footsteps of those poor despised people called Quakers, who have hearkened to
Wisdoms voice, and walk with her in her own way; therefore entreet them well,
for they are a people redeemed by the Lord, and he has chosen them out of
Nations, Kindreds, Tongues and People, and they are as dear unto him as the
apple of his eye, for he is their God, and they are his people; and of their
innocence and peaceableness thou have had large experience, and have not found
them at any time to be rebellious, though they have and do suffer great
afflictions under thy power; yet this is their comfort in all their
afflictions, that they do not suffer as evildoers, but as innocent from all
just offenses, whereby they can approve their hearts unto God, and to the glory
of God they can enquire of all men if at any time they have wronged, or
injured, or evil entreated any man since the precious truth has entered into
their hearts, and if herein none can justly accuse them, as certainly none can;
then the Lord will not hold them guiltless that do in any wise oppress them, for
it is his cause they stand in, and the strength of men cannot overturn it. Oh
take counsel at the Light of Christ with which thou art enlightened, and in the
Light thou will feel the Life of these poor despised people; and as thou com^st
to feel their Life in the Light, then will thy love be toward them; but if
thou hate the Light in thy own conscience, thou can never know them as they
are; and so instead of being a Nursing Father to them, thou may add to their
afflictions, as being ignorant of them; for none can know them, but in the
Light of Christ, by which they are changed and renewed in the spirit of their
minds, and translated into the heavenly life, which the earthly Wisdom cannot
comprehend. Oh! let no counsel enter into thy heart, to cause thee to turn
against this people; but pursue thy promises which thou have made, and so often
renewed, touching Liberty of Conscience; for the performance of those promises
will be of greater strength and security unto thee, then all the strength that
others can give thee to defend thee, who with reasons would or may overcome
thee to make thy promises void, and thereby cause thee to add afflictions upon
the innocent, who at this day bear the burden* though every way they seek thy
good, and concerning whom I do believe that thou have a persuasion in thy own
heart touching their innocence; and if thou take heed unto that which does at
any time persuade thee that they are an innocent people, it will yet more
persuade thee, and will work thy heart into love toward them, even as theirs
is toward thee, to do thee good in any wise: and as they are a freeborn
people within thy dominion, and have an outward portion in the same, with
wives, children and families, who are ready to do good in all places where they
are seeled, let it not enter into thy heart to spoil them, or banish them from
their native beings and birth rights, and from husbands, wives, children and
relations, who are not all like-minded in the Truth. Therefore, O King, have
regard to this weighty matter, upon which thy own happiness so much depends;
for if thou do well, it may be well with thee; but if otherwise, the Lord God
will be clear when he judges.

Nottingham Country-Gaol the 2 d day of the 2 d mo. 1663. I am a sincere lover
of thy immortal soul, W. S.


THE END.

