SOME Clear TRUTHS PARTICULARLY Demonstrated unto the KING and COUNCIL, and
both Houses of PARLIAMENT, with all Judges, Justices, Merchants, and
Shipmasters, why the Innocent and Peaceable People, called QUAKERS, ought not
to be banished out of their Native Land, or any other way exposed to Sufferings.

ALSO, The LAW described in its Nature and End.

With a Postscript to all honest, sober, and impartial JURORS.

By W. S.

Printed at London, in the Year, 1664.

Some clear Truths particularly demonstrated unto the King and Council, and
both Houses of Parliament, with all Judges, Justices, Merchants and
Ship-Masters, why the Innocent and Peaceable People, called Quakers, ought not
to be Banished out of their Native Land, or any other way be exposed to
Sufferings.
1. BEcause they are People that believe in the Name of the Lord Jesus Christ,
and are regenerated into the Nature of Christianity, and their life answers
the same in all Godliness and Honesty.

2. Because they worship the Living God in Spirit and Truth, and are of a
tender Conscience toward God and all men.

3. Because their Principle and Practice was never proved erroneous by sound
Doctrine, neither does the late Act disallow it in the ground, for four may
meet besides the Family; and the number is but a circumstance, and not the
matter: And it is not a Christian practice to Banish men for being in Error,
that are really so, muchless such as cannot be proved erroneous.

4. Because Nature abhors such unkindness, and is afflicted with such hard
dealings; for Nature is outwardly friendly to her own generation.

5. Because they have not at any time forfeited their Just Liberty as
Englishmen, by contriving any Plots or Insurrections against the present
Government, as experience all along has showed.

6. Because they have a right in the Kings Word and Promises, concerning
Liberty unto tender Consciences, for they have lived peaceably, which was the
only Exception to make his Word and Promises void, and that they have kept and
not broken.

7. Because they are an Harmless People, and give no just occasion of offense
unto any, neither can any true proof be given against them concerning any evil
committed or done by them.

8. Because they are a Serviceable People in their places, ready to do good
upon all occasions, and unto all persons, and do not abuse the Creation in
vanity and excess.

9. Because they are good Examples in Righteousness, and a sweet Savor in
their Generation, by following that which is good.

10. Because they do not transgress any Just Law, neither give any Just
occasion for any Law to be made, or executed against them, neither can any Law
that is for the punishment of Evildoers justly take hold upon them.

11. Because they never acted nor intended any such things, as in the late Act
is expressed, and against which it only provideth; neither can any misdemeanor
be justly laid to their charge.

12. Because their outward dealings amongst men are just, and equal, and in all
things free from variance and strife.

13. Because they do not wrong any man's Person or Estate, and are Freeborn
Englishmen, which Magna Charta preserves in their outward Liberty.

14. Because many Families will be left outwardly distressed, and the Nation
distracted and disordered.

15. And chiefly, Because the Lord God of Heaven and Earth is grieved and vexed
with it, and the prosecution of it will kindle his Wrath in a high degree.

Now let these Truths be well considered, and the heat of Violence stayed, for
there is no just cause given by us why it should be so done unto us; and we are
very clear in the sight of God, that we have not forfeited our Just Liberty in
our Native Land, but have as good Right to continue and abide therein as any
People whatsoever, and there is not any thing can be truly said otherwise of
us; but things are wrested that are prosecuted against us, and our Cause is
presented after another manner than what it is in it self: And diverse things
are charged upon us from bare suppositions (and many of you know it) and
thereby we are exposed to hard Sentences by men, when we can appeal to God,
with clear consciences, in those cases wherein men render us Offenders: For we
are not a willful, stuborn People, neither do we any way seek the subversion of
the Government, or the harm of any man's person upon the Earth; these are only
suppositions by our Judges and Accusers; and no supposition is a good ground to
proceed against us in a matter of such high concernment: for our not submitting
to the Requirings of men in cases of Conscience, is only in obedience to the
Doctrine and Command or Christ Jesus; And our Testimony is in Meekness and
Fear, and not in willfulness and stubornness; and we are wronged when such
Reproaches are cast upon us, though such as fit to be our Judges, have their
liberty to speak, and to interrupt our answers: And what would you have from us
that you have not, to give you better assurance of our Allegiance to the King?
Can any thing more evidently demonstrate it than our peaceableness? A thousand
Oaths imposed (if we could swear at all) would not be so binding unto our
Consciences, as the Love of God in which we live, and by which we are
constrained to live peaceably; for it binds our consciences into peace, and
makes us subject unto Christ as Supreme, and unto the King in his Civil
Government: for what can more clearly manfest our Subjection to his Kingly
Power, than our willingness to render unto him our Tax and Tribute? and having
these things rendered by us, you may conclude, that it is enough, and as much
as you are reasonably to expect from us, and it does sufficiently clear us from
all supposition concerning our seeking to subvert the Government; and herein we
manifest our subjection to the King, in living peaceably, and giving him that
which is his due: But the Rule and Government of our Consciences we cannot give
into his hand, nor into the hand of any man, for that is peculiar unto Christ
Jesus, and he alone has the pre-eminence in our Consciences; and no man ought
to call his Power in question, nor to punish us for obeying his Doctrine and
Commands; for by Faith in his Doctrine and Commands, we live, and we dare not
make Shipwreck of it, but in his Love are constrained to keep it, and his
Reward is our unspeakable Joy. Very much of this nature, has been published in
tenderness of heart for your good, and therefore I shall not at this time be
large, for I know, that Love, Patience, and Meekness must prevail: And the Lord
God has abundantly furnished and adorned his Children with the virtues of
those heavenly Graces, in which they stand as so many Innocents, that think no
ill; and their behavior and holy Conversation, may even overcome you, to be
pitiful and merciful toward them, and also, to be in love with them; which
you would assuredly be, if you had a right knowledge of them. Oh it is a
Christian, and a Manly-state, to be in Love, for therein was Man created: And
though the Fall has Separated, yet by Christ Jesus every true Believer is
again restored, and therein are we disposed toward the whole Creation; And
what ever may come to pass concerning us outwardly, yet in Love we shall remain
inwardly, and in Love lie down in Peace, which no man has power to give us,
nor to take away from us. And so it is desired, that every one of you
concerned, may seriously consider this short Presentation of our Innocent
Cause, and let the Just Witness of God in your consciences determine the
matter, and then we shall not be deprived of our Just Liberties and
Birthrights, nor of the outward comfort of our near Relations; then we shall
not be forced from our tender Wives and Children, and leave them mourning and
weeping behind us; not thereunto constrained for any evil done by us, but in
the kindly affectionated nature of unfeigned Love, in which we are bound
together, and ought not by any man to be parted, or put asunder; and it lies
contrary to the nature of Love to part and separate outward Relations after
such a manner. And if you will but receive the counsel of Gods Witness, that
Principle which pleads in your consciences on our behalf, it will determine
the matter equally, and then we shall not be found worthy to be deprived of our
Right, Liberty, and outward Comfort, but shall be found worthy to sit in peace
with our Families, and follow our honest Callings, and so continue serviceable
in our Generation, within our Native Land. And that will free your consciences
of much vexation and trouble which otherwise will come upon you; for if you
proceed to prosecute the matter unto the end, the Cry of the Widows and
Fatherless, will so echo in the Nation, as to be a continual Terror unto you;
nay, thousands will make a doleful Lamentation on the behalf of their honest
Neighbors and Friends. [Oh let not such a Lamentation be taken up in England,
as to have a poor destitute Wife, mourning and weeping for want of her Husband,
and poor young tender Children mourning and weeping for want of their Parents,
and one Neighbor and Friend mourning and weeping for want of another] and you
the cause of it; this will be a heavy burden upon you, and a terror in your
consciences, if you do occasion it: for there are many tender hearts in
England, though some be grown into hardness, and in hardness sit rejoicing,
rather than pitying; but the Lord sees and knows the secrets of all hearts,
and the hardest of hearts he will break and fill with sorrow. O do not cause
these things to come to pass by any of your means, lest you draw upon your
selves a burden too heavy to be born; but let Pity and Mercy stop the violence
of Fury and Cruelty, that instead of Mourning there may be Joy, and instead of
Heaviness there may be Gladness, and that will give you ease in your own
consciences, and peace in the latter end: Which is desired, that ye all may
walk worthy to know fulfilled; for the Power of the Lord God will break all
that stands against it, and that is his Living WORD.

By a True Friend unto all Native Englishmen. The 13th day of the 8th month,
1664. W. S.

The LAW described in its Nature and End.
THat which may be properly and truly called Law, is that which stands in
Mercy, Justice and Equity; and by its Power and Force preserves People in
safety, as to their Life, Liberty and Estate; that where any Wrong or Injury is
offered or done by one man unto another, there Justice and Right may be done in
Mercy and Equity, for relief of the Grieved: For every thing that is instituted
in its proper place, has also its proper Object unto which it points, as to
the End for which it is instituted: and diverse Cases and Sentences might be
asserted out of the old Law, which answers this very End, which being Law in
its self, as being instituted for the preservation and well-being of all
Freeborn Englishmen, and its power yet standing and continuing in force, and
also being counted the Foundation upon which all ensuing Acts ought to stand,
and so to be complete and perfect in one Body; if any thing be Enacted that
cannot be settled upon this Foundation, or united to this Body, which is
counted the Body of the Law, it cannot properly and truly be called Law, but is
rather holden for Error; so that the Foundation, or Body of the Law, stands
as a Rule unto all future and succeeding Ages, that they may be directed in
their Acts and Institutions, wherein they are concerned: For if it was not so,
there could be no Error; but it appears that there may be an Error, and so
consequently a Rule that is erred from, when an Error is committed; and the
Error must needs be this, When any thing is enacted or executed that cannot be
united to the Foundation, or Body of the Law: For if the Body of the Law stand
in Mercy, Justice and Equity, to the preservation and safety of Life, Liberty
and Estate; and future Ages do enact against such as do not wrong any man in
Life, Liberty, or Estate, such an Act cannot be united to the Foundation, or
Body of the Law: And it appears that the Body of the Law is so entirely
composed in Mercy, Justice and Equity, that no future Age could yet find it
defective, but have allowed it to be good and right in its Institution; so that
it stands and remains in its power and force, and is generally accounted
the Rule to walk by, for the good Government of all People: And as it remains
in force, so there is nothing to be enacted and counted for Law, but that which
will clearly unite to its Body, in Mercy, Justice and Equity, whereby all
People may have their outward Rights and Privileges preserved unto them; and
that is also agreeable to the Rational Part in Man, because it answers that
which would not be exposed unto danger: for it is a thing generally concluded,
That Reason is the Mother of Law; forasmuch as no unreasonable Act or Deed
should be done by one man against another; and so the Law is powerful to keep
the unreasonable part in subjection, and when it is transgressed, to inflict
equal Punishment upon Offenders; and hereby it becomes a terror to evildoers,
and a praise to them that do well; because it shows Mercy, Justice and Equity
unto the Wronged, by righting their Wrongs, and therein is the Terror unto the
One, and the Praise unto the Other. Now if any Act be instituted that does not
answer this End, then it is not reasonable in the ground, and consequently no
Law; for it is improper to call that Law which is unreasonable, being that
Reason is generally accounted the Mother of Law; and whatsoever Act does err
from the Foundation of Law, it does not unite with the Body of the Law: And it
is very clear and plain, that if there be no Wrong-Doers, as the Object of the
Law, that then the Law in it self is silent, as having nothing to operate upon
that offends it; and if there be no matter for the Law to operate upon, then no
punishment to be inflicted.

Now as the Lord God of Heaven and Earth created all things in good Order, and
every individual stood in its place and service without Offense in that day,
but through the Fall is gone into Disorder, which remains unto this day; so
the highest degree wherein men are concerned in the Institution of any Act, is
but to reduce into that comely outward Order again, that so no man may be
grieved of offended by the wrong that another may do unto him, but that he may
walk safely in his Person, Liberty and Estate; and this is the furthest End
which the Law serves unto, and that which is enacted in such a service uniteth
with the Body of the Law, and is in it self properly Law, because it operateth
upon a proper Object, and reaches with Power and Force to suppress it; and by
this Rule he that does wrong suffers for it, and he that is wrongnd comes to be
righted; and so good Order is kept amongst men, by the Power and Force of the
Law; and that is a reasonable thing, unto which the Law only serves; and so
the Law is merciful, just and equitable in every point, forasmuch as the
Institution of it tends to the preservation and well-being of Men; for that
which is ordained and instituted for the preservation of Man, is merciful
toward him, it stands as an outward Defense to his Life, Liberty and Estate:
For the Law would not that any man should suffer wrong, and therefore it
shows Mercy to the grieved, by doing Justice and Right, and that is properly
the nature of Law; forasmuch as it is unreasonable in such as do the wrong, and
reasonable to right such as are wronged: And Reason being the Mother of Law, it
strengthens the Law to operate upon all unreasonable things, as the proper
object which it is to take notice of, and thereby the end of the Law is
answered in Mercy, Justice and Equity, which is agreeable to its nature. And
the case may be put thus for more clearness; What would there be to punish
according to Law, if all men lived peaceably, soberly, and righteously? if
nothing (as certainly there would not) then is there any other end in the Law,
but only to punish such as live vainly, frowardly, and unrighteously? If a man
be a Freeborn Englishman, and pay his Taxes and Tribute as a Subject, and
neither Plot, Contrive, nor Conspire against the person of the King, or
subversion of the Government, What Law is there against him in that case? the
Mother of the Law, says, None at all, forasmuch as he has done no wrong to
the King any way, but is a peaceable Subject. Again, If a man do not offer any
violence to his Neighbor, or any way do him wrong, What Law is there against
him in that case? he is not an object which the Law takes notice of for
punishment, forasmuch as he has not wronged his Neighbor, but is a Sober man.
Again, If a man be wholly disposed in Righteousness, What Law is there against
him in that case? Righteousness is not an offense against the Law, for the Law
is not destructive to the Righteous; and so in all other things, which are
peaceable, sober and righteous, the power of the Law does not operate upon such
for punishment, neither will any rational man affirm it, therefore the object
of the Law, must needs be the wrong doers; and the power and force of it does
only extend to suppress them, because they are injurious to the well-being of
peaceable, sober, and righteous People; and the Law in Mercy, Justice and
Equity protecteth them from injuries, and does them Right when they are
wronged, and this is properly Law, and the end of its institution. Now these
things being granted, which indeed are so really true, as not to be disputed or
denied, then it must of necessity follow, that when any Act is instituted, that
makes peaceable, sober, and righteous People the object of its power and
force, That cannot properly be called Law, forasmuch as it does not unite with
the Foundation and Body of the Law; for it is not a reasonable thing, that
peaceable, sober and righteous People should be disinherited, or exiled, or any
other way destroyed or punished, there is neither Mercy, Justice, or Equity in
it, which are the only qualifications that the Law is settled upon: Therefore it
is fully concluded, that the peaceable, sober, and righteous People, called
Quakers, are under the protection of the Law in every point, forasmuch as they
neither wrong nor injure any man, which draws the Mercy, Justice and Equity of
the Law over them; and so whatsoever Act is, or may be made against that
People, or however it lies as to titles and terms for preventing and
suppressing their Godly Meetings, or any other matter or thing which pertains
to their Consciences, yet it cannot make them Transgressors of the Law, though
they continue their Meetings or other Godly Exercises, contrary unto such an
Act; because their Meetings and Godly Exercises are in tenderness of Conscience
toward God, and not to wrong or injure any man; neither can any Experiences
demonstrate that the practice of those People have at any time, or in any
place, been any way hurtful to the Life, Liberty or Estate of any People;
Therefore the Mercy, Justice and Equity of the Law is on their side, and
stands in it self for their protection, and not for their destruction; and
whatsoever is enacted against them cannot unite with the body of the Law,
because it does evidently appear that they answer the Law, when they meet
together, as meeting peaceably, soberly and righteously, which wholly tends
to the well-being of all People; and therefore by the Law they are to be
defended from injury and wrong, and not to be disinherited, exiled, destroyed,
or any other way punished, by any Act whatsoever; for as they give no just
occasion for any Act to be made against them, so none in Power is to make any
Act to punish them, but to extend the Mercy, Justice and Equity of the Law
toward them, who in all things answer the Law in their holy and peaceable
life, wherein they walk in all Godliness and honesty, as becomes Christianity.
Thus in obedience to the Lord God of Heaven and Earth, I have given forth my
Testimony concerning these weighty matters, that none may endeavor to promote
any thing against those dearly and welbeloved People of the Most High God, who
reproachfully, and scornefully, are called Quakers, but in the Power of God are
truly Christians, with whom I am united in the Bond of Peace, and therein rest,
a true Lover of all mankind.

The 10th day of the 9th month, 1664. W. S.

A Postscript to all Honest, Sober and Impartial Jurors.
FRIENDS,
I Have much tenderness in my heart toward you, forasmuch as I believe, that
many of you are of a grave and sollid disposition, and desire to perform your
places of Trust in honesty and sobriety as becomes men; and you it is, that I
desire may well consider the whole matter, and chiefly these particulars
following. (1.) Whether the Prisoner stands upon his Trial according to Law,
that is, whether it be properly and truly Law, that he is tried by. (2.)
Whether the Law and the Witness agree together in every point, as to the matter
in question. (3.) Whether the thing done, be really an offense against the Law,
and so a Fact punishable by the Law; for there may be some Acts that will not
unite with the Body of the Law, as before is mentioned; and also there may be
several interpretations of the Law, and the Judges may wrest the Law by such
interpretations; as for instance, there is an Act to prevent and suppress
Seditious Conventicles: Now according to these express words, this Act will
unite with the Body of the Law, and in that sense may properly be called, Law,
because it is to prevent and suppress such actions and practices as tend to
discord, strife, and ill things, and thereby tends to the preservation of
peaceable People. Now mark, If any be tried by this Act, because they only
meet together to Worship God in his Fear, and the Evidence can prove nothing
farther, than only a Meeting, and the Judge tell you, that such proof is
sufficient to make such guilty of an Offense, that are taken at a Meeting,
though it be not apparently Seditious; such an interpretation makes the Law to
be no Law, because it will not unite with the Body of the Law, according to the
sense of the Judges interpretation; for the Interpretation quite alters the
matter, and so makes such to be the objects of their Interpretation, that are
not proper objects of the Law; and whosoever are found guilty, as Offenders,
from any such interpretation, they are wronged and injured according to the
Law: for where the Institutors of Laws do signify their minds in express words,
if their minds and words will unite with the Body of the Law, then no
Interpretation is to wrest their minds and words from their proper sense and
signification, for so the Judges may interpret the Law to answer the Witness,
and thereby make an Innocent man to appear guilty of an offense, when the
Witness is to answer the Law, by proving the Fact to be an offense against the
Law it self, or otherwise the Law in it self, does not operate upon any man to
Condemnation.

Weigh and balance these things in the just Principle of God, in which is the
pure Wisdom that gives to discern the Precious from the Vile, and so put a
difference between those that serve God, and those that serve him not; and let
each condition be answered with a just measure, and therein you will find your
peace and happiness both present and to come: And the Lord give you Wisdom and
Understanding, that with boldness and courage you may stand in Mercy, Justice
and Equity over all the fear of men.

W. S.

THE END.

