DIRECTIONS FOR Seekers and Expectants, OR A Guide for weak Christians in
these distracted times.

Wherein the language of Sions-builders is confounded.

As it was delivered in a Sermon at Wickham-Market.

Preached on purpose to settle poor weak Christians, who are in great danger
of miscarrying, by reason of seducers, in these erroneous times.

Published at the earnest entreaty of many, for a more public good.

By ZEPH: SMITH, Minister of Wickham-Market in Suffolk.

PSALM. 25.9.12. Who so among you fears the Lord, him will he teach: the humble
will he teach his way.

May the 16th 1646.

Imprimatur, John Downame.

LONDON, Printed by Matthew Simmons for John Sweeting, at the Angel in
Popes-head-Alley. 1646.

TO THE READER.
(...) weak Christians, called Expectants and Seekers, who take notice of so
many several opinions, that they suppose no body is in the right way, and
therefore will wait until God discover some new way to them, which was never
yet heard of. To whom I have given Directions in my Sermon what to do, that
they might know the way of God, and no longer halt between two opinions. These
causes moved me to consent to the publishing of it; and Christian Reader, when
thou read, whether thou find ability or weakness, let God have the
glory, who gives to every one as it pleases him; and if God may have the
glory, and any poor Christian be by the reading of it the better established
in the truth, and for the time to come try before he trust, the Author shall
have his desires, who is willing, God inabling him, to spend and be spent for
the same purpose; which that it may be, the Author will pray, and rest

Yours in the Lord Jesus Christ, ZEPH: SMITH.

DIRECTIONS FOR SEEKERS AND WEAK CHRISTIANS in these distracted Times.
PSALM. 119.102. -- For thou have taught me.


THis Psalm is a Psalm of David, and as the whole Book of Psalms is full of
heavenly matter, and soule-ravishing expressions; so this Psalm is in a
special manner. The man of God was much taken up with GOD, and his Word, his
Statutes, and Judgments, in so much, that he knew not how to meditate enough,
and how to speak enough of it; the Prophet found such a sweetness in Gods
Word, that notwithstanding he knew much of it, yet still he desires to know
more, and therefore it is his expression very often in the Psalms, Lord,
teach; and, Oh, teach me thy statutes. The Prophet David was not of the mind
that proud generation is of, that say, they know as much as all the Preachers
in the Country can tell them, nay, as much as God himself can teach them,
they think, otherwise what means that damnable Doctrine that is broached in
these days, when we have received the Spirit, the Letter should cease;
contrary to Revel. 2.25. That which ye have already, hold fast until I come.
But the Prophet, though he knew much, yet he desires to know more; neither was
the Prophet like that sort of hearers, which may be compared unto the stony
ground, Mat. 13. who receive the Word into their heads, but not into their
hearts, that they might bring forth fruit in their lives, to the honor of God;
for in the 11. verse of this Psalm, Thy Word, says he, have I hid in my
heart, that I might not sin against thee. The Prophet did not only labor
after the knowledge of the Word, but he put it into practice. Neither can it be
said of the Prophet, as it may of too too many professors now adays, they are
young Saints and old Devils, they begin in the Spirit, and end in the flesh;
the unclean spirit is cast out for a time, but it returns again: for the
Prophet did persevere in the practicing of those truths which God did teach
him, and which he did profess; as appears in the Text; I have not declined
from thy Judgments, for thou have taught me. In which consider two things.

First, The Person teaching, God. Secondly, The Person taught, David.
From the person teaching, we are not only to consider who it was, but what it
was which he taught, His Judgments.

From the person taught, we are to consider; first, his tractablenes to learn
that which God did teach him; secondly, his constancy in the practice of those
truths which God did teach him; thirdly, the ground why he practiced those
truths, because God taught him. Give me leave, briefly, to open the words, and
then to come to some point of Doctrine. And first, what he means when he
says; I have not declined; that is, I have not departed, or gone back from
the way of thy Judgments; I have not left the ways of God, to walk in the
ways of wickedness. Secondly, What is meant by Judgments? Answ. Gods Laws;
by Judgments is meant his Laws. Gods Laws have several names in Scripture;
sometime they are called his ways; as in Psalm. 119.1. Sometimes his
testimonies, Psalm. 119.2. His precepts, verse. 4. His statutes, verse. 5. His
Commandments, verse. 6. His Judgments, verse. 7. and the Text; so in verse. 13.
and verse. 20. Sometimes bis Word, verse. 9. So that by Judgments, is meant,
Gods Statutes, Laws, and Commandments; as will appear if we consider the
following verses unto the 107. Then thirdly, What does the Prophet mean, when
he says, For thou have taught me? He does not say, the Ministers my teachers
taught me, and therefore I profited by them, but because God taught him, that
is, God made the outward Ministry of the Word effectual by the inward
operation of his Spirit; not that the Prophet did neglect attending on the
outward Ministry of the Word, and rested altogether upon the teaching of the
Spirit, without the Word; for the Prophet took delight in attending upon the
Word preached; it was the only thing he desired, Psalm. 27.4. that he panted
after, Psalm. 42.1. that he re^oyced in the enjoyment of, Psalm. 84. Neither did
he prosit by the outward Ministry of the Word only; for Paul ^ay plant, and
Apollo water, but God gives the increase; but God made the outward Ministry of
the Word effectual by the inward operation of the Spirit.

The Text is the ground and reason why the Prophet ^id profit in Gods Laws,
why he kept them, and was constant in the practice of them, because God taught
^im; from whence may arise this point of Doctrine.

That God is the best teacher and instructor of his people.

And for the method, I, God assisting, will show you that it is so, and how it
appears to be so; secondly, the means by which God does teach the soul;
thirdly, the excellency of Gods teaching above man's teaching; fourthly, the
manner; fifthly, the grounds; sixthly, application.

First, That it is so appears in the Text, wherein is set out the excellency
of Gods teaching above man's: so in Job 36.22. Behold, God exalts by his
power; for none teaches like him: He is more excellent in his teaching then
all others; so that you see that it is so; next, I come to show you that it
must needs be so, as appears three ways.

First, He is the Author of all other faithful Preachers of the Word, it is
God that fits all other faithful Preachers of the Word for the work of the
Ministry; it is not all the arts and sciences in the world, that can make a man
fit for the work of the Ministry, if God fit him not, it is God who makes able
Ministers of the New Testament; as 2 Cor. 3.6. Who has made us able Ministers
of the New Testament, not of the Letter, but of the Spirit. Arts and Sciences
are helps and handmaids to Divinity, but it is God that makes able Ministers
of the New Testament; And he gave some Apostles, and some Prophets, and some
Evangelists, and some Pastors and Teachers: He gave, it is, he gave and he
fitted for the work of the Ministry.

Secondly, God is the Author of all the doctrinal truths which all the
faithful Preachers in the world deliver unto people, he is the Author of those
truths; he sends all the faithful Ministers of the Word in his Name to deliver
his Message unto his people; Son of man, give them warning from me, Ezekiel.
3.17. And he sends the Prophets often with this Message; Go tell them, Thus
says the Lord; and, This is the word of the Lord: and the Prophets when they
delivered his Message unto the people; Hear ye say they, what the Lord says:
they did not deliver the devices of their own brain, but the Word of the
Lord; and the Apostles were to teach and observe what Christ had commanded, as
Mat. 28. last verse: and all the faithful Ministers of the Gospel now they
deliver Gods Message unto the people, and are to deliver nothing but that which
they can say, Thus says the Lord, Isai. 8.20. So that God is the Author of all
the truths which the faithful Ministers of the Word deliver unto the people.

Thirdly, It is the Lord which gives success to the faithful preaching of the
Word, the Minister can but with the servant of Elisha, lay the staff upon the
face of the child, they can but propound the mind and will of God unto
people, preach the Word, and baptize with water, but they cannot make the Word
effectual, and the Sacraments effectual, that is the work of God; Paul may
plant, and Apollo water, but it is God that gives a blessing; and, It is not in
him which wills, and him which runs, but in God that gives a blessing;
therefore the Gospel is said to be the power of God through faith to salvation;
and the weapons of the word are mighty through God, to the pulling down of
strong holds. Now lay all these together, God is the Author of the Minister, of
the doctrine, and of the success, and it will appear a plain truth, that God
is the best teacher of his people.

Secondly, It appears God is the best teacher of his people, by the directio^s
that the Lord gives in his Word unto teachers and hearers, how they should
teach and hear aright; he gives directions unto Ministers to study to show
themselves approved of God, workmen that need not to be ashamed, dividing the
word of truth aright, 2 Timothy 2.15. To preach the word in season and out of
season, to reprove, rebuke, and exhort, with all long-suffering and doctrine, 2 Timothy 4.23. And convince them sharply, that they may be sound in the faith, Tit.
1.3. So he directs people how they should hear aright, he bids them try the
Spirits, whether they be of God, 1 John 4.1. As the men of Berea, who searched
the Scriptures, Acts 17.11. Hearers should not receive any kind of doctrine for
truth, but try the spirits, and receive with meekness the ingrafted word,
James 1.21. Now he that is able to teach both teacher and hearers how they
should teach and hear aright, must needs be the best teacher himself.

Thirdly, It appears God is the souls best instructor by the great desire of
the Saints to be taught of God, though they enjoy man's teaching, yet this
contenteth them not, except God teach them. How often is it the expression of
the Prophet David, Lord teach me, in Psalm. 27.11. Teach me thy way, O Lord? so
often in this 119. Psalm, the Prophet begs of God to teach him, in the 12.
verse, in verse. 26. and 33. and 66. and 68. and 108.124. In all these verses
the Prophet prays to God to teach him. And as this was David's prayer, so it
is the prayer and desire of all such gracious spirits as David was. All those
that are men and women according to Gods own heart, as David was, will with
David pray, Lord teach me. Now the great desire of the Saints to be taught of
God, shows God is the souls best instructor, the best teacher of his people.

In the next place we come to the means, by which God does teach the soul; and
this is twofold, outwardly by the Ministry of the Word, and inwardly by his
Spirit; by the Word and the Spirit, this is the ordinary way; first, by his
Word, he teaches his people by the preaching of the Word, 1 Cor. 1.21. The Lord
is pleased by the forlishnesse of preaching to save them that believe; that is,
by that means which the world counts foolishness, not that it is foolishness
in it self, but it is so to the wicked, that is, the wicked accounts it
foolishness. In verse. 18. the preaching of the Cross is to them which perish
foolishness, but it is not so to the godly, to us which are saved it is the
power of God: and therefore Romans 10.17. Faith comes by hearing; this is the
ordinary means the Lord has appointed for the working faith in the hearts of
his people; this is the outward means. But then secondly, there is the inward
teaching of the soul, and that is by the Spirit, the Lord teaches his people
by his Spirit, that is, the Lord makes the outward Ministry of the Word
effectual by the inward operation of the Spirit, when he shows a divine power
and authority in the preaching of the Word, when he makes it become mighty
and powerful in operation, to the pulling down of strong holds; as in 2 Cor.
10.4. That is, to the pulling down of the strong holds in the heart, that
exalt themselves against the Lord Jesus Christ, and prepare the heart for
Christ; this is the work of the Spirit, and without this the letter does not
profit the people, but God therefore teaches his people by his Spirit, he has
revealed them to us by his Spirit; for the Spirit searches the deep things of
God, 1 Cor. 2.10. It is the Spirit that causes the Word to take impression upon
the hearts of people; and therefore when the Lord makes the Ministry of the
Word succesfull, the Ministers are made able Ministers of the Spirit, as in 2
Cor. 3.6.

In the third place, I am to show you the excellency of Gods teaching above
man's; and that appears four ways.

First, Earthly teachers can but propound the mind and will of God unto the
people, they cannot make the soul to stoop to those truths, and practice those
truths which they teach; but herein appears the Excellency of Gods teaching
above man's, he can make the soul to yield obedience unto the truth delivered,
he can bring the soul under the power of those truths. See the Prophet David's
expression to this purpose, Psalm. 38.2. Thine arrows stick fast in me, and
thy hand presses me sore: When God comes to teach a soul, he will shoot the
arrows so fast, that it shall take impression, the soul shall come under the
power of truths, so that the soul shall say, Lord I would feign have shaken
off thine arrows, but am not able, for they stick fast in me. And thus God
did teach those in the Acts, Act. 2.39. When they heard this, they were pricked
in their hearts; it was not the bare words of the Apostle, when he told them,
You are the parties that have crucified the Lord of glory, that did prick
their hearts, but the Lord set it home to their consciences, and brought them
under the power of that truth they heard, not only the voice of man, but the
voice of God in that word of truth, and then they were pricked in their hearts.
And thus God did teach Lydia, he opened her heart, and then she attended to
that which Paul spoke, Acts 16.14. It was not Paul opened her heart, but God
opened Lydia's heart. A man may hear a thousand Sermons, and yet get no good,
if he hear only the voice of a man, but if the day of Gods power come upon
the soul, that he hear the voice of God in the Ordinances, then he shall
profit; for Gods voice in his Word is a commanding voice, Job 36.10. He
commanded them to return from iniquity. Gods teaching the soul is with a
command, with such Authority, as the soul cannot resist it. And herein
appears the excellency of Gods teaching the soul above man's.

Secondly, Gods teaching the soul is more excellent then man's, if we consider
the time of his teaching the soul. The Minister can teach them but some times,
in season and out of season, but God can teach the soul at all times, in the
absence of teachers; for either our teachers may be taken from us, or we from
them, but God can then teach the soul.

2. If we consider the place where he does teach, the Minister does preach in
the public assembly, but God can teach in all places, and teach at once in
all places, which no other teacher can do.

3. If we consider the persons which he does teach, the Minister does preach
but to some of Gods people, but God does teach all his people himself, they
are all taught of him. And as God does teach all his people, so he can teach
them all at once; the Minister can teach but some at once, but God can teach
all the Congregations that do assemble together at once, he is not so much
employed in one Congregation, but he can be as much in another at one and the
same time to teach his people. So that consider the time, the place, and the
persons, and in all these it will appear Gods teaching is more excellent then
man's.

Thirdly, Gods teaching the soul is more excellent then man's; it appears if
we consider the infallibility of Gods teaching and instructing his people, he
is an infallible teacher, he does teach the soul infallible truths. Earthly
teachers are not infallible teachers, though they be faithful and endeavor to
deliver the truth, and nothing but the truth unto people, yet they are but men,
and may err; but God cannot err in teaching of his people, for he does teach
his people according to his Word, which is infallible: Heaven and earth shall
perish, but not one jot or tittle shall fall. But here may arise an objection,
God does teach his people by the outward Ministry of the Word, but the Minister
is not infallible, ergo, God is not an infallible teacher of his people. Answ.
The Word of God is an infallible Word, and this is that God does teach his
people by: then secondly, it is when the Minister hits upon the true
interpretation of Scripture, when he does give the true sense and meaning of
the Holy Ghost from a Text that the Spirit of God does accompany it, and make
it profitable unto the people; for we must note the Spirit of God does not go
along with a false interpretation of Scripture, but with the true sense; for
Gods Spirit does accompany the truth man delivers, and not the error; so that
still it will hold a truth, Man may err, but God is the infallible teacher and
instructor of his people.

Fourthly, The excellency of Gods teaching above man's, appears in the
sutablenesse of the matter of the persons condition which he does teach:
Ministers may endeavor to prepare matter suitable to the conditions of the
people they teach, but they may be mistaken; but the Lord knows the hearts of
all his people, and he knows what truths are most suitable to their conditions,
and he does teach them suitable to their conditions. Suppose a spirit be
wounded, which is a burden who can bear? The Lord will come with suitable
matter to such a soul, he tells it, I have sent Jesus Christ for to bind up the
brokenhearted sinner, Isai. 61.1. And the Son of man is come to seek and
save lost sinners, such as see themselves lost, Luke 18.11. Nay, he bids them
come; Come all ye that are weary and heavy laden, and I will eas^ you; that
is, you that feel sin a burden, and strive to get from under this burden,
come to me and I will ease you. Suppose the soul be sick, he propounds Christ
as a Physician to the sick-soule; if the soul be hungry and thirsty after
righteousness, he propounds Christ as bread of life, and water of life, and
invites poor souls to come to him; Hoe, every one that thirsts, come ye to
the waters, come buy without silver and without money, Isai. 54.1. And if any
man thirst, let him come unto me and drink, Joh. 7.37. Suppose a soul be in
depths of desertion, walk in darkness, and see no light, but when he looks
up to heaven, and thinks upon God, he is troubled, Psalm. 77.3. It thinks that
God has forsaken it, and will never return again in mercy, the Lord does say
to such a soul, Let him trust in the Name of the Lord, Isai. 50.10. For a
moment in my anger I hid my face, but with everlasting mercy I had compassion
on thee, says the Lord, Isai. 54.8. Suppose a soul should suffer the loss of
all for Christ's sake; He that loses houses, or brethren, or sisters, or
father, or mother, or wife, or children, or lands, shall receive an
hundredfold in this life, and in the world to come life everlasting. Not that
they shall receive for the loss of one wife a hundred, or of one house a
hundred, but that comfort that will make up all a hundredfold, Mat. 19.29.
Suppose a soul be to suffer for Christ's sake, I will (says the Lord) be with
thee in the fire, and the water, as Isai. 43.4. that it shall not hurt thee: so
to the poor soul that does say, Sin will overcome ^e, and get the day when
I have done what I can, and I shall never be able to overcome such and such
corruptions, I shall never be able to overcome Satan's temptations; Well, says
the Lord, Sin shall not have dominion ever your mortal bodies, Romans 6.14.
And the God of peace ^all tread Satan under your feet shortly, Romans 6.20. And
one shall ever be able to pluck my sheep out of my hands, Joh. ^^.28. So the
soul that is ignorant of Gods ways, and cries out, Oh I know not whether I be
in the right way or no, there are so many several opinions. I will teach thee
(says the Lord) in the way that thou shall go, Psalm. 32.8. And thy ears
shall hear a voice behind thee, saying, This is the way, Isai. 30.21. And as
in these, so in any condition that the Lord does teach suitable to the condition
of the soul. And thus having showed you the excellency of Gods teaching his
people above man's; it follows next to show you the manner of his teaching.

First, The Lord does teach the soul to know its misery without Jesus Christ,
he opens the understanding, and inlightneth the mind, and causes the soul to
see its lost condition. Secondly, He does it with power, the day of his power
came upon the soul, the people shall be willing in the day of thy power, Psalm.
110. The Lord does not only open the understanding, and inlighten the mind,
but causes the soul to lie under the power of those truths. Then thirdly, he
does use arguments of conviction, by which he does convince the sinner of his
misery, and of the necessity of Jesus Christ. When the soul objects, It is
but the opinion of the Minister, and God is merciful, and he that made us,
will save us. The Lord makes answer, It is not the Minister, but the Scripture,
that concludes all under sin, Gal. 3.22. And whereas thou say, God is
merciful; He that hears the words of this curse, and blesses himself in his
heart, and says, I shall have peace, though I walk according to the
imagination of my heart, the Lord will not be merciful to him; nay, his wrath
and jealousy shall smoke against him, Deuteronomy. 29.19. And he that made you, will
not save you, and he that formed you, will not have mercy on you, Isai. 27.11.
And the Lord does not only propound this unto the soul, but brings the soul
under the power of these truths: the Lord beats the sinner of all the props he
leans upon besides Jesus Christ the Lord, makes all the arguments effectual;
if he speak, it is done; if he say to the blind eyes, be opened, and to the
deaf ears, be opened, they shall be opened; if he say to the dead soul,
live, it shall live; in that day the ears of the dease shall be opened, and
the eyes of the blind shall see out of obscurity and darkness, and the dead
shall hear the voice of Jesus Christ and live; and so it is with whatsoever
the Lord teaches the soul, whether in the work of preparation for Christ, or
direction how to live after the soul has received Christ, the Lord does not
only propound the truth to them, but brings them under the power of it.

Next we come to the Reasons, why God is the best instructor of his people.

I pray, mistake me not, I speak now what God is able to do, I do not say
that God does teach his people the whole knowledge of the whole truth; for in
this life we know but in part; but I say, God is able to teach his people the
whole knowledge of the whole truth, and therefore he is the ablest teacher of
his people. Secondly, he is the ablest for the manner, he causes that he
teaches to take impression upon the heart, which no other teacher is able to
do. Thirdly, he is the ablest for measure, all the matter that is in all the
faithful Preachers in the world, they had it from him, as the fountain and
original of it, it is he that filled all the Prophets with matter, and all the
Apostles, and all the faithful Ministers of the Word, look what ability they
have, they have it from him, look what ability one has above another, God
gave it him, who distributeth to every one as he pleases, all their knowledge,
and abilities, and graces, are but streams flowing from the fountain; now
look what is in the channel, there is much more in the fountain, now God is
the fountain, they have but the streams that run in the channel, therefore
God is the ablest teacher for the measure.

Cor. 2.7. for the manner, with infinite wisdom, if we consider Gods carriage
toward the soul when he draws it to himself; for the time, he comes in a
seasonable time to the soul, either to humble or comfort it; the Minister may
apply comfort too soon unto a soul, or sad them they should comfort, and many
times the Minister is posed when he lights upon some kind of people, knows not
whether i^ be best to apply comfort or terror, or how to deal with the
party; but the wisdom of God is such as he knows what is suitable to the
souls condition, and what time is most seasonable, he is wisest for the time.

the faithful and true witness, Rev. 1.5. God is faithful who has called us
unto the fellowship of his Son Jesus Christ. Two ways Ministers may deal
unfaithfully with their people; first, when they daube them with untempered
mortar, crying peace, peace, when they should cry, blood, and war, and
condemnation; as Jer. 8.11. They have healed the hurt of the daughter of my
people with sweet words, crying, peace, peace, when there is no peace: when
Ministers sad the hearts of the righteous, and strengthen the hands of the
wicked, this is unfaithful dealing with people; but secondly, Ministers may
deal unfaithfully with people, by teaching corrupt doctrine, when they are
erroneous, when they teach lies for truth, and diabolical doctrine for the
doctrine of Jesus Christ, when they turn people from the truth to errors, and
lies, and heresies, strong delusions, as woeful experience shows in these
days; it is the practice of many to seek to turn people from the truth to
fables; but God is a faithful teacher of his people, he does not flatter any,
but tell them right down as it is with them; if he be not reconciled unto a
soul in Jesus Christ, he speaks no peace to that soul, the poor soul may
read the Bible through, but cannot find God speak one word of peace, God is
faithful in his teaching the soul; amongst all the faithfullest Ministers in
the world, there is at some time or other more or less a conniving at
something, either because they are great men, and they depend upon them, or
intimate acquaintance, or near friends, or fellow-brethren, or some other
respect; and if any man should plead he is clear in this particular, I cannot
believe him, for it is natural to all, but God does not neither more nor less
at any time deal unfaithfully with the soul, and therefore he is the
faithfullest teacher.

Isai. 66.2. Isai. 57.15. I have sent Jesus Christ to bind it up, Isai. 61.1.
Tell the poor soul, that is in depths of desertion, and walks in darkness,
and sees no light, that he should trust in the Name of the Lord, and stay
himself upon his God; tell the poor soul, that pores upon its unworthiness,
and worthlesnesse, and want of grace, that there is an infinite worth in Jesus
Christ, an infinite worthiness in Jesus Christ, a fullness of grace in Christ,
and therefore bid them be comforted; the Lord bids his Messengers speak
comfortably to his people, Comfort ye my people, comfort ye, will your God say,
speak comfortably to Jerusalem, tell her that her iniquities are pardoned,
Isai. 40.1. The Lord gives his Ministers a charge to comfort his people, tell
them from me, I would have them comforted, tell them my thoughts are thoughts
of peace and not of war toward them; tell them it is the will of God that
his people should have strong consolation, Heb. 6.17. tell them they shall not
need to call my love into question, for I have loved them with an everlasting
love, and with loving kindness drawn them. With a multitude of such like
expressions in Scripture; and the Lord does not only propound this comfort to
the soul, but causes the soul to apply it; and this no other Minister can
do, therefore God is the pitifullest and the comfortablest teacher of his
people.

Job 36.22. God exalts by his power; for who teaches like him? We say of
such and such a Minister, he is a powerful preacher, but yet the most
powerful preacher in the world cannot speak so to a dead soul, as to make it
live; but God teaches with such a power, that if he say to a dead soul live,
it shall live, if he say to a hard heart be soft, it shall melt, and the proud
spirit shall be humble, and the most stubborn rebellious sinner shall stoop,
which no other teacher can do, therefore God is the souls best teacher, he is
the most powerful teacher.

Isai. 48.17. God teaches his people to profit, and there is no lesson God
teaches a soul, but it shall profit by it. I have done with the Reasons, we
come in the next place to the Uses.

teach thee in the way thou shall go, Psalm. 32.8. He teaches and instructs
his people in the right way; Thy ears shall hear a voice behind thee, saying,
This is the way, Isai. 30.21. and therefore the condition of the Church must
needs be happy, they shall be taught the right way.



difference in judgment; some are of one opinion, and some of another, some
are fallen into strange and corrupt opinions, but this comes not to pass,
because God teaches his people several ways; but first, because they do not
learn of God, for God is not the Author of the errors that abound amongst
professors, but the Author of truth, and that he teaches the soul is truth,
and nothing but the truth, nothing but that which is agreeable to his will, and
therefore it is not because God teaches them corrupt opinions, but because
they do not learn of God. Secondly, it comes to pass that amongst professors
they hold strange opinions, because as God teaches the truth and nothing but
the truth to his people, so the Devil sows the seeds of division amongst
people, where God sows wheat, the Devil sowes tares; where God makes known
his truth, there the Devil seeks to infect people with errors. Thirdly, it
comes to pass by permittance, God is pleased to permit it, he permits it for
two causes; first, for the good of his people, the Lord lets his own people
many times run into strange opinions for a time, that he might bring them back
again, and establish them the more firmly in the truth, and there are none to
such Christians as these when the Lord has brought them back again, then they
will acknowledge their weakness, and how subject they are to be misled. Ah,
says the poor soul, I had like to have miscarried, and been carried away with
such and such corrupt opinions, had not the Lord in mercy brought me back
again; now they will walk more humbly, and now they will stand up for the
truth, and defend it more boldly then they did formerly, they will advise their
friends, and bid them take heed of being seduced; they will try the spirits for
the time to come, whether they be of God or no, they will be more earnest with
God for the time to come, to establish them in the truth. And thus the Lord
does it for the good of his people. Secondly, the Lord permits it out of a just
judgment to others, who though they be glorious professors, yet because their
hearts are not sound, he will discover them by this means, when they come to
forsake the ways and truths of Jesus Christ, and run into this and that error,
and then from one thing to another, till at the length they come to deny the
Scriptures, and live profanely. Thus many come to be discovered in these
times. And secondly, he gives them up to their corrupt opinions, and this is a
great judgment, when the Lord says to them as to Ephraim, He is joined to
Idols, let him alone, Hosea 4.17. So when the Lord says to them, they are
joined to their corrupt opinions, let them alone, let them hold Atheism if
they will, let them hold Arminianisme, Arianisme, Marcellianisme,
Nicolaitanisme, Mahometisme, Anabaptisme, Antinomianisme if they will, let them
hold that the soul is mortal, and dies with the body, and that the Word of
God is written traditions, and when they have received the Spirit, the letter
should cease, let them alone, I will give them over to these opinions, because
they refuse to be guided by the rule of truth, I will give them up to strong
delusions, 2 These. 2.11, 12. Because they received not the truth that they
might be saved, therefore God shall send them strong delusions that they should
believe lies, that they might be damned which believe not the truth, but had
pleasure in unrighteousness. But how is it possible you will say, that they
should fall from one corrupt opinion to another, do not their own consciences
check them? I answer, the conscience of an heretic is a seared conscience,
their conscience is seared with an hot iron, 1 Timothy 4.2. Who does the Apostle
mean there, you may see in the first verse, such as give heed unto spirits of
errors, and doctrines of devils, their consciences are past feeling: When God
has once given a man or woman over, conscience very seldom troubles them,
though they fall into horrible blasphemies, yet seldom or never their
consciences trouble them; why so? because God has given them over, and this
makes the condition of a man or woman miserable; the Apostle says, Heb. 10.31.
It is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living God; but it is a
more fearful thing to fall out of the hands of God, and therefore their
condition is very fearful.

Chorazin, Bethsaida, and Caper^^um, they might as well as thou bless
themselves, they ^e in a good condition; why so? because they might say, Christ
has preached and wrought many miracles amongst (...), and walked up and down
in our streets, we have had (...) company, surely we are a happy people; but
see what our Savior Christ says of them, they repented not: and what follows?
Woe to thee Chorazin, woe to thee Bethsaida, and thou Capernaum that art lifted
up to heaven, shall be thrown down to bell, Mat. 11.21, 22, 23. And it shall
be more easy for them of the land of Sodom at the day of Judgment then for
you. So a people may be lifted up to heaven with means, and brought down to
hell for not profiting by it, and their condemnation will be the greater; This
is the condemnation, that light is come into the world, and men love darkness,
Joh. 3.19. This is the grand damning sin, this damnes people with a witness,
to live under the means of grace unprofitable and unfruitful.

Secondly, It likewise reproves them that take all their Religion upon trust,
never with the men of Berea, search the Scriptures, Acts 17.11. But if one come
with one Doctrine and another with another, he knows not but that they may all
speak truth. And some again tie their Religion to some particular man's
sleeve, all that such a man or such a man speaks is truth, as if they were
infallible, and contemn others in comparison of them; what is this but to have
men's persons in admiration, as Jude speaks? Now if God be the best instructor
of his people, then we should try the spirits whether they be of God; and
though Paul, or an Angel from heaven should come and preach contrary to Gods
Word, let them be accursed, Gal. 1.8.

Depart from us, for we desire not the knowledge of thy ways, Job 21.14. And
when his Messengers call upon them to ask for the old way, which is the good
way, and walk therein; they say, we will not walk therein; the condition of
such is very miserable. See two places of Scripture for it, which might
terrify the heart of any wicked wretch, that despises the means of grace;
the one is in Heb. 12.25. See that ye despise not him that speaks; for if
they escaped not that refused him that spoke on earth, much more shall we not
escape if we turn from him that speaks from heaven. Those that slight
Christ, and make a light account of him, refuse him and his doctrine, there is
no escaping for such, how much more shall we not escape? The Lord Jesus Christ
is the great Prophet of his Church, and all that will not hear this Prophet,
shall be destroyed, Acts 3.23. Here is the misery of such poor souls, they
shall be destroyed. And how might this terrify a poor soul, that contemnes
the means of grace, if I turn from Christ, if I hear not Christ, I shall not
escape, I shall be destroyed.

Secondly, It may serve to terrify such persons as delight in hearing lies as
well as truth, and delight in corrupt doctrine as well as the truth, that say
to the Prophets, Prophecy smooth things to us, and flatter us in our sins.
Consider but one place of Scripture, Jer. 5. last verse, The Prophets prophecy
lies, and the Priests receive gifts, and my people delight therein, but what
will ye then do in the end thereof? As much as if he should say, there will
come an end, there will come a time when the Lord will call Minister and people
to an account; but what will ye do in the end thereof? It implies the end
will be a sad end, such an end as they shall not know what to do when they
come to give account unto God, how they have spoken and heard the Word.

leads his people by the paths of righteousness for his Names sake, Psalm. 23.
He knows thy condition, and can proportion matter suitable to thy condition. But
now the soul will object; But what shall I do that I may be taught of God?
For answer to this great Question, would thou be taught of God, observe
these directions, and the Lord make them profitable.

First, Would thou have God teach thee? then attend the means of grace, the
preaching of the Word: I told you God teaches the soul outwardly by the Word
as well as inwardly by the Spirit, and that man or woman may question whether
God teaches them that do neglect the outward Ministry of the Word, they are
counted blessed that wait at wisdoms gates, Pro. 8.33. And says the Apostle,
Despise not prophesying, try all things, and keep that which is good, so that
that soul that would be taught of God, must attend the means, the preaching of
the word is the outward means God has appointed to convert a soul, and as to
convert, so to build up the soul by; for by the same means that he converts,
he builds up, and therefore it is a strange opinion, that when a man is
converted by the Ministry of the Word and Spirit, that he should separate and
run into a corner to build up himself; he that would be taught of God, must
attend the outward means by which the Lord teaches the soul.

Secondly, Would thou have God teach thee? then be much in prayer, seek
unto God to teach thee; David knew much of God, was able to teach his teachers,
and yet he is earnest with God to teach him; show me, thy way, O Lord, Psalm.
25.4. Lord teach me to do thy will, Psalm. 143.11. And thou art my God, let thy
good Spirit lead me into the land of uprightness; As much as if the Prophet
should have said, Lord, I have a perverse spirit, thy Spirit is good, let thy
good Spirit lead me, so go to God, and challenge his promise, and say, Lord,
thou have promised that the ears of thy People shall hear a voice behind
them, saying, This is the way, walk in it, and ye shall find rest. Lord, I am
an ignorant wretch, subject to err and miscarry, Lord accomplish thy promise,
show me the way thou would have me walk in, Lord suffer me not to
miscarry. And this is the second means.

Thirdly, Acknowledge thy ignorance, if thou would have God to teach thee;
there are many take up opinions with a resolution to hold them, be they right
or wrong, and are as confident it is truth they hold, as if they were
infallible in this life, in so much as no argument will convince them, they
know enough, and scorn to be better instructed then they are. Now it is not
such God will teach; but as our Savior Christ says, The whole need not the
Physician, but those that are sick; so God says to these, you know enough
already, you shall not need that I teach you; the knowing need not to be
taught, but those that are ignorant, that is, those that see their ignorance,
and acknowledge it. The way to have God teach us, is to acknowledge our
ignorance; David in praying to God to teach him, acknowledges his ignorance,
and his need of Gods teaching; the way to become wise, is to become a soole, to
acknowledge our ignorance and folly; for he that thinks he knows any thing,
knows nothing as he ought to know, 1 Cor. 8.2.

Fourthly, Would thou have God teach thee? then eye him in all thy ways;
Prove. 3.6. In all thy ways acknowledge him, and he shall direct thy paths.
Surely that soul that thinks most upon God, and eyes him at all times, places,
and companies, and seeks direction from God about every employment, it is that
soul that God will teach.

Fifthly, Would thou be taught of God? then be humble, and fear to offend
him; Who so among you fears the Lord, him will he teach, Psalm. 25.12. And he
will teach the humble his way, verse. 9. That soul that truly fears him, with
a filial fear, and lies humble and low before the Lord, the Lord will teach;
but it is not so with the proud, he beholds them afar off, he resists them;
show a man that has a proud spirit, he will stand upon it, and he knows more
then all the Ministers can tell him, and it is not for any to direct him, but
he thinks that he is better able to direct them, he is ready to condemn all
that join not with him in opinion; and do but observe him, and see if he run
not from one thing to another, from one corrupt opinion unto another, until at
length he be fallen quite from true Christianity; Why so? he is proud, and God
does not teach him, or if he belong to God, you shall see God will lay him as
low on the other side, before ever he will comfort him; but the humble soul
that lies low at the throne of grace, crying, Lord, I am a vile wretched
ignorant creature; thou art heaven, but I am hell, it is these God will teach;
then would thou have God teach thee? be humble.

Sixthly, Would thou have God teach thee? then live in the practice of that
which he has already taught thee, and this is the way to know more, Joh. 7.17.
If any man do my will, be shall know my doctrine. The way to know more, is to
practice what we know already. And these are the means thou should use if
thou would have God teach thee.



Deuteronomy. 13.1. If there arise a Prophet, saying, Let us go after other Gods,
hearken not to him, for the Lord your God proves you. Is there any arise
amongst you that say, let us go after new truths, new light? the Lord proves
you by them, to see whether you will forsake him or no, and therefore he gives
no present answer; but know thus much, that if thou constantly seek him in the
use of the means, though he give not a present answer, yet in his due time he
will give an answer, and clear up the truth to thee.



not to be of the judgment of an hypocrite, because he lives a holy life; the
devil will allow an heretic to live a holy life, because it is advantageous
to his Kingdom, and Satan for his own ends transformes himself into an Angel
of light, and therefore no marvel if his Ministers do so: it is said of
heretics, They are deceitful workers, transforming themselves into Angels of
light, yea, into the Apostles of Jesus Christ, 2 Cor. 11.13. And in the 15.
verse, they transform themselves as though they were the Ministers of
righteousness. So likewise it is said of heretics, They come in
sheeps-cloathing, but inwardly are ravening Wolves; and therefore says Christ,
beware of them, Mat. 7.15. And whereas thou say that they bring Scripture for
that they speak. I answer, so do the Papists to prove, that the bread and
wine in the Sacrament is the very body and blood of Christ, how many Scriptures
do they allege in the four Evangelists? And the Arminians allege many
Scriptures for to prove a child of God may fall totally and finally from
grace; and yet both very corrupt opinions; Try the spirits, whether they be of
God or no, says the Apostle; now the Apostle should not need to bid us try the
spirits, were there not a lying spirit that imitates the true Spirit; for if
the lying spirit did seduce in a way contrary to the true Spirit, there would
never be so much mischief done, but the lying spirit imitates the true Spirit.
It is said of seducers, They come in the Name of Christ, and deceive many, Mat.
24.5. they could never do so much mischiese, did they not come in the Name of
Christ. Wicked people want not holy pretenses, to cover their wicked actions.
Those in Isai. 66. that cast out the people of God say, Let the Lord be
glorified; and they that kill the people of God think they do God good service,
Joh. 16.2. They would cover these wicked actions with a cloak of Religion,
saying, Let the Lord be glorified: This is the way, Beloved, to make the
Scriptures mose of wax, to grant every heretic their interpretation of
Scripture, so that their alleging Scripture can be no sufficient ground for
thee to yield to their corrupt opinions, but they coming under this notion, the
greater is thy trial, and God does prove thee, to see whether thou will defend
the truth or no.



Balaam did, you know he was hired to curse the people of Israel in Numb. 22.
and 23. chap. and he was very willing withal, he liked the motion well enough,
but he would have God approve of it, and therefore he builds Altars, and offers
Sacrifice, and would feign have Gods approbation in it. Now when we seek thus,
God may answer according to the Idol in the heart; and this you may see in
Ezekiel. 14.4. Every man that sets up his Idols in his heart, and comes to a
Prophet to inquire of (...), I will answer him according to the Idols in his
heart. When a man sets up Idols in his heart, this corrupt opinion, and that
corrupt opinion, and then come to inquire of God, God may out of a just
judgment answer them according to the Idols in their hearts. And this may be
one Reason why though people seek God and use the means, yet they may
miscarry, the fault is in their seeking.

Secondly, It may come to pass amongst such as are godly, that they may seek
God, and use the means, and yet miscarry for a time, that they might be the
better established in the truth, when the Lord brings them back again.

Thirdly, Some though they seek God and use the means, yet they may miscarry,
because they have not true grace, such as may be compared to the Stony ground,
they want root, and these, though they do seek God, yet they may miscarry;
for being hypocritical professors, God will not regard their prayer; as Job
27.8, 9. What hope has the hypocrite when God takes away his souls? Will he
hear his cry? God will not regard their prayer; and secondly, being but
hypocrites, they are not under a promise of perseverance in the truth, the
godly are under a promise of perseverance in the truth, and therefore though
they should miscarry for a time, yet the Lord will bring them back again; but
another that has no true grace, when he miscarries, it may be, for any thing
we know, a final miscarriage, he though he make a glorious profession, yet is
not under the promise, the other is; every graft the Father plants into Christ,
he prunes and dresses, and makes fruitful, Joh. 15.2. Yea he sends his Spirit,
and that leads them into all truth, Joh. 14.26. Now this may be another ground,
why people may seek God, and use the means, and yet miscarry, because the
persons that seek are not truly godly.





Secondly, If thou be taught of God, thou art in Covenant with him, it is one
part of the Covenant of grace, they shall be all taught and drawn of God,
therefore examine whether thou be in Covenant with God, yea or no, if thou be
not in Covenant with God, thou art not under the promise of Gods teaching of
thee.

Thirdly, If thou be taught of God, then he teaches thee to know thy self
aright, he shows thee thy self in the glass of his Word, and to know him
aright, and then the more thou know, the more humble thou art; Do thou
lie humbly under gifts, and parts, and knowledge, and say, All is free mercy,
and we have nothing but what we have received from God? Thus it is with that
soul that God teaches. Job 42.2. When he looked upon God, then he abhorred
himself in dust and ashes; and Jer. 32.19. After I was instructed, I smote
upon my thigh, I was ashamed and confounded. Thus it is with the soul, when
God teaches it, the more God teaches it, the more humble it (...); art thou
puffed up with thy knowledge, does it make ^^ee esteem of thy self above
others? then thou may ^^estion, if thou have knowledge, whether thou have
any ^^ing else; for if thou had grace, thou would be humble and low in
thine own eyes.

Fourthly, If God teaches thee, then thou do live a pious godly life; for
the grace of God which brings salvetion, teaches us to deny ungodliness,
and worldly lusts, and to live holily, righteously, and soberly in this present
World, Tit. 2.11, 12. Those that out of pretense of new light, live loosly, say
the Scriptures are written traditions, and they pray not in the family, they
crave not a blessing upon their meat; ask them, why so, they answer, they
know their liberty by Christ, and they contemn the Ordinances of God, censure
all that are not of the same opinion to be in Babylon, and Idolaters; it is
evident they are not taught of God; for those that God teaches, he teaches
them to deny ungodliness, and worldly lusts, and to live holily, righteously,
and soberly in this present world.

Fifthly, If God teach thee, thou art a growing and a persevering Christian,
thou do grow in grace; for he causes his Scholars to profit by his
instructions; it is not with those that God teaches, as it is with those that
get no good by going to School seven years, but those God teaches, he
teaches to profit; Unto you that fear my Name, shall the Sun of
righteousness arise with healing under his wings, and they shall go forth and
grow as the calves of the stall; Those that God teaches, they are a people
growing in grace, and knowledge, and as they shall grow, so they shall
persevere. Isai. 40. verse. the last, They shall run and not be weary, they
shall walk and not faint: it shall not be said of them, They are young Saints,
and old Devils, but they shall bring forth fruit in old age, Psalm. 92.13. And
they shall be selfe-denying Christians, that is one instruction that Jesus
Christ, the great Prophet of his Church, teaches his people, Mar. 8.34. Now
examine thy self, art thou taught of God? then thou art a growing Christian?
Art thou a growing selfe-denying persevering Christian? then it is a sign that
God teaches thee, and thou art a persevering Christian.

Sixthly, If God teach thee, thou do seek him in the use of those means
which thou have found him in; have thou found him in the preaching of the Word?
the day of his power has come upon thee: and have thou found him in prayer?
thou will seek him in the use of these means still; the way is not to
separate from the Ordinances thou have found God in, and to neglect holy
duties, for then thou may want of Gods teaching of thee, and thou will not
thrive then in grace, but thou must attend those means thou have found God in,
and not such means as thou know not whether thou shall find God in, or no.



First, Consider the necessity of Gods teaching thee, as our Savior Christ
says to Peter, If I wash thee not, thou have no part in me; so, if God teach
thee not, thou have no interest in him, for all his people are taught and
drawn of him; there is a necessity of Gods teaching of thee, in respect of
thy need, thou art a nothing-creature, an ignorant creature, subject to err,
and to be misled, thou do stand in need of Gods teaching.

Secondly, Consider God is the best instructor, let this move thee to go to
him, he is able to resolve thy doubts, he can clear up truths to thee, he can
propound matter suitable to thy condition; and as he is able to teach thee, so
it is his promise to teach those he enters into Covenant with, Jer. 31.34. seek
him in the promise.

Thirdly, Let the lessons God teaches his people move thee to go to him, and
beseech him to teach thee, they are soule-ravishing lessous being once learned,
they bring in soule-ravishing comfort unto the soul, the matter in them is
soule-ravishing matter; transcendent matter, scholars that affect their
studies, many times they are taken up with the eloquence of the matter, the
lessons that God teaches the soul, are such transcendent matter, such great
mysteries, as from eternity to eternity, is time little enough for men and
Angels to admire at, for the very Angels admire it, and desire to pry into it;
then let the excellency of the matter move thee to go to God, and beseech him
to teach thee.

One motive more; Consider if God teach thee, and thou learn of him, then he
will teach thee the way, truth, and life, which is Christ Jesus, and then to be
sure thou shall not miscarry. Oh, Brethren, be exhorted to go to God, and
beseech him to teach you; and as at all times, so especially now in these
distracted times, when there is abundance of counterfeit coin abroad, every
one will view his money well when he takes it, for fear he should be cheated.
Oh, Beloved, there is but one way, one truth, and life, and therefore abundance
of counterfeit Religion abroad; how many plead for a toleration of all
Religions, that every man might use his conscience? how many proclaim open
war against the Scriptures? how many vent out blasphemies against the persons
in the Trinity? how many cry down the Moral Law for a rule, though it be one
part of the Covenant of grace? I will write my Laws in your hearts, and cause
you to walk in my ways; how many run up and down the Country, seducing and
drawing Disciples after them, some into one corrupt opinion, and some into
another; and it stands every one that desires to know the truth in hand, to
look what coin they take, then do it not I pray, seeing Gods Word does know
of but one way, truth, and life, that is safe, there is but one true Religion,
and therefore many are seduced in these times; and the devil never had such a
string to harp upon, as he has now, new light, and new truth, and coming out
of Babylon, many thousands will dash their brains out upon this rock, if the
Lord be not merciful unto them; and this will terrify them when death comes,
and the day of Judgment, when many will cry out, Oh, I did think such a one,
and such an one, would not have misled me, I took them to be holy men, such as
knew much of God, such as were more eminent then others, but now I see they are
mistaken, and I am mistaken, I am an undone man, and I am an undone woman, I
have forsaken God, and his truth, and now God will forsake me for ever. Lay
these things to heart, Brethren, I tell you, the Church never had such a trial
as now it has, now are the times come that was spoken of, in the last days
shall come perilous times, 2 Timothy 3.1. in which men will not endure sound
doctrine, but are turned from the truth to fables, 2 Timothy 4.4. They come in the
Name of Christ, and deceive many, and the Lord only knows who may be seduced
by them, the Lord knows but it may be my husband may be seduced, may the wife
say; or the Lord knows but it may be my wife may be seduced, may the husband
say; the Lord knows, may parents say, but it may be our children may be seduced
and drawn from the ways and truths of Christ, into dangerous and damnable
errors, and what shall become of our children then? Consider these things, and
let them move you to go to God, and beseech him to teach you and direct you;
and you that are husbands, carry your wives to God, and beseech him to teach
them, and to keep them from miscarrying; and you that are wives, carry your
husbands to God, and entreat him to teach your husbands; and you parents, carry
your children and servants to God, and say, Oh, Lord, we live in sad times,
miscarrying times, little did we think ever to have lived in such times, Lord
keep us close to thy self, and establish us in the truth; Lord keep my
husband, keep my wife, keep our children and servants, and carry your
neighbors to God, and beseech him to look upon them, and stablish them in the
truth. And this is a notable means to keep us from miscarrying.

And lastly, when God has answered your prayers, and settled you in the truth,
thy self, or thy husband, or wife, or children, or neighbors, then give him
the praise and glory of it: O Lord, such a one had like to have miscarried, but
thou have settled him in the truth, blessed be thy Name for it. The Lord make
these things profitable and effectual by the inward operation of his Spirit,
who is the best teacher of his people.

FINIS.

