A Second Relation from HERTFORD; CONTAINING The unjust Proceedings of some
called Justices there at the General Quarter Sessions, upon the Trial of one
and twenty innocent Persons called QUAKERS, for a pretended breach of the late
Act, with an account of the most Material Passages between the Prisoners: and
the Court, the 3d 4th. and 5th. days of the 8th. Month, 1664. Whereby it
appears, that Meeting to Worship God in Spirit and truth is the great crime for
which they are under so grievous a sentence: and that whatever is pretended by
those that love the title of Justice, yet in very deed they hate Justice it
self, as by their proceedings appears.

By W. S.

Woe to them that devise iniquity, and work evil upon their beds, when the
morning is light they practice it, because it is in the power of their hands,

Micha 2.1. Judgment is turned away backward, and justice stands afar off,
for truth is fallen in the street, and equity cannot enter,

Isa, 59.14. Printed in the Year, 1664.

THe Court set in the usual place, Henry Chancy being Judge, together with
these who are styled as follows, Thomas Vicount Fanshaw, with his Son Thomas
Fanshaw, Knight of the Bath; Brocket Spencer, Baronet; Richard Atkins, Knight
and Baronet, John Gore, and Richard Lucy, Knights; Thomas Stanley, Esquire, and
James Wilmot, Commissioners for the Peace of the said County, his Assistants,
with several others, who did not manifest themselves so far from moderation and
tenderness, as most of the persons aforementioned. The first day of the
Sessions (being the third day of the 8th. Month) passed with little concerning
the people called Quakers, save that the grand Jury was empanelled of persons,
picked out of many, who were warned to attend that service, care being taken,
that such should be left out and laid aside, that were more moderate, and only
such made use of as were eminently disaffected to the persons that were to be
tried, and so far engaged by prejudice, as resolved to find the Bills
beforehand; which thing was so much the easier, in that their way was ready
thereunto, by a precedent made by Judge Bridgeman in the like Cases, at the
late Assizes, holden for the said County of Hertford.

ON the 4th. day in the Morning, four of the Prisoners called Quakers, were
brought to the Bar, viz. Lewis Laundy, Thomas Moss, William Burre, and Thomas
Bur of Baldock in the said County. Their Indictment being read by Thomas
Burges, Clerk of the Peace there, which was to this effect, * That the
aforesaid persons being assembled at an unlawful Meeting (or Conventicle) at
the House of Thomas Baldock, of Baldock aforesaid, under color and pretense of
Religious Exercise, contrary to the Liturgy, or use of the Church of England,
with diverse other Malefactors, contrary to the form of the late Statute, to the
disturbing of the Peace, and endangering the Kings Crown and Dignity.

Lewis Laundy was called to the Bar.

Cl. Lewis Laundy, are you guilty of these offenses for which you stand
indicted, or not guilty?


L. L. I am an innocent man, and have wronged no man, neither have I
transgressed any just Law (that I know of) neither have I done any thing for
which I deserve here to stand indicted, or words to that effect.


Hen Chancy. This is not an answer sufficient, you must plead guilty, or not
guilty?


L. L. I am not guilty of the Breach of this Law.


Then Thomas Moss was called to the Bar.

Cl. Are you guilty of this Indictment, or not guilty?


T. M. That in the Indictment which is true (as my Meeting at Thomas Baldocks
House) I am guilty of; but as for meeting there with Malefactors to the breach
of the Peace, I am not guilty of.


The next called to the Bar was William Burre.

Cl. What say you William Burre, are you guilty or not guilty?


W. B. As to the substance of the Indictment that I am charged with (as meeting
with Malefactors, and disturbers of the Peace) I am not guilty.


The last of the four aforesaid, Thomas Burre, was called to the Bar.

Cl. Are you guilty, or not guilty, of this Indictment?


T. B. Not guilty of unlawful Assembling, unless it can be proved to be
unlawful to meet in the name of the Lord.


Cl. You must plead guilty, or not guilty?


T. B. Not guilty.


Cl. How will you be tried?


Prisoners. By the Witness of God in our Countreymens Consciences.


Court. Well, well, that is well enough.


Then a Jury was called, sworn, and charged in the usual way, form, and manner,
well and truly to try betwixt the King and the Prisoners at the Bar, and to
make true deliverance, and bring in their verdict according to evidence, etc.
Their names are, John Tailor, Henry Castle, George White, Edmond Ralph, Ralph
Thorn, George Ward, John Watty, John Bessex, Francis Genne, William Joyce,
Edmund Noads, Edward Hammond. Then the Indictment was read again, and the
Witnesses called and sworn.

H. Chancy. Stephen Young, what can you say against the Prisoners at the Bar:


S. Young. May it please your Worship, I took them at Thomas Baldocks house,
met together.


H. Chancy. How many was there?


S. Young. About sixteen men and women.


H. C. What did you see them do there?


S. Y. Nothing, they were sitting still, and did say nothing, nor do nothing as
I saw.


H. C. Was it the place they usually met at?


S. Y. Yes.


The other Witnesses being called, spoke to the same purpose, and no more.

H. C. Lewis Laundy, What say you for your self?


L. L. We are no Malefactors, neither are our Meetings unlawful, nor under
color and pretense of Religion, but really to Worship the Lord; neither are we
Contrivers of Plots, nor Disturbers of the Peace; nor have we made
Insurrections therein, neither are our Meetings contrary to the Liturgy of the
Church of England; for that says we must worship God in spirit, without any
limit to time or place.

-- Interrupted.
H. C. What say you Thomas Moss, what did you at Thomas Baldocks? what was the
end of your Meeting?


T. M. It was to wait upon the Lord, to receive refreshment from his presence,
which is more to me then all the worship in world, where the presence of the
Lord is not felt.


Cl. William Burre, what say you for your self?


W. B. I have frequented those Meetings these seven years, at Baldock, and if
there be any that can accuse me of those things charged against me, let them
speak.


H. C. But wherefore did you meet there?


W. B. Because the Lord God of heaven and earth required me, and my eternal
salvation was upon it, if I disobeyed the Lord, and therefore if I suffer, I
suffer for obeying the Lord.


Tho Vic Fansh. Where does the Lord command or require you?


W. B. In my Heart and Conscience.


Tho. Vic. Fansh. That is the light within you, but your light is darkness, and
a melancholy vapor of the brain, and leads you to one thing to day, and
another thing to morrow, and I know not what the third day; so you change every
day.


Tho. Bur. Thou have not found us so changeable hitherto, neither will thou.


W. B. I desire the light may not be villified, (for it is the Grace of God
that brings salvation) and I will gladly tell you what it has done for me; it
has redeemed me from a vain conversation, and taught me to live soberly in
this world,

-- Interrupted by
Tho. Vic. Fan. You have broken this Luw (meaning the late Act) which is not to
hinder you from your Religion, but to hinder you from your Meetings; and you
are not to meet.


W. B. If men, or Laws command one thing, and the Lord requires another, which
should I obey. Unto which the Court returned no answer.


H. Chancy. Thomas Burre, were you at Thomas Burdocks House?


T. B. Yes.


H. C. What was your end of being there?


T. B. To answer the end for which I was born into the world, and for which I
have my life continued to me unto this day, viz. To worship the Lord in spirit
and truth, who ought to be worshipped at all times, and in all places, and for
that end we shall meet there or in other places, as we have freedom. --
Interrupted.


Then H. Chancy spoke to the Jury, and said, Gentlemen, I think the evidence is
sufficient, and they themselves confess that they were there; one says that he
was there to worship the Lord: another says, that he was there to wait upon
the Lord, and the other to worship God in spirit and truth, which is in effect
all one; and they have been twice convicted already upon record. So he caused
the Records to be read to the Jury. The Prisoners would have spoken further to
the Jury, but were not permitted, but commanded to be set by, and the Jury
commanded to go forth, who quickly returned, agreed upon their verdict, that
the foresaid four prisoners were all guilty.

Prisoners. It is little to be condemned by men, when the Lord justifies.


H. C. Look to them Goalers and make room for the other Prisoners.


Then were set to the Bar, Robert Crook, Thomas Crawley, Samuel Wollaston,
Robert Faireman, Richard Thomas, Francis Haddon, William Brown. Then the
several Indictments were read, which for matter and form were the same with the
former, except only that these were met at an house adjoining to the dwelling
house of Nicholas Lucas, in the Parish of All Saints in Hertford. And Robert
Crook aforesaid being by himself set to the Bar, Thomas Burge, Clerk as
aforesaid, asked him, If he were guilty of this Indictment, or not guilty?

R. C. Where was it that I was taken?


Cl. In the house belonging to N. Lucas.


R. C. Is not that within the Corporation?


Cl. Yes.


R. C. It was read in the Indictment, that I was a Subject to the King?


Cl. Are you not?


R. C. Yea, I am, and being a Subject, whether I have not a due right to by
tried by the Court of the Corporation wherein I was taken?


Tho. Vic. Fan. You were committed to the County Goal, and so you ought to be
tried by us, or words to that effect.


Cl. You are to plead guilty or not guilty now, and may be heard concerning
that afterward.


R. C. I am ignorant of your Laws, and do not know my time or place for that.


Cl. Are you guilty, or not guilty? you must plead.


R. C. I have no guilt upon me, as for what I am accused and apprehended.


Cl Set Thomas Crawley to the Bar, Are you guilty; or not guilty?


T. C. Not guilty.


Cl. Set Samuel Wolleston to the Bar. Are you guilty of those Crimes whereof
you stand indicted, or not guilty?


S. W. Not guilty.


Cl. Set Robert Faireman to the Bar; Are you guilty of the Crimes whereof you
here stand indicted, or not guilty?


R. F. I am not guilty of the breach of any just Law.


Cl. Set R. Thomas, and Fr. Haddon to the Bar; You stand here indicted fer
being at an unlawful Assembly, in an house adjoining to the dwelling house of
Nicholas Lucas, with several other Malefactors: What say you, are you guilty,
or not guilty?


R^chard Thomas. This pretended offense was committed within the Borough of
Hertford, which Corporation has power, by virtue of their Charter to try any
matter of Fact within it self (Treason and Felony excepted:) and therefore I
conceive, that I ought to be tried at the Corporation Sessions, not at this
Court; for by the Magistrates of this Corporation we were committed, and some
of us are Members of it, and therefore by them ought to be tried.


H. C. I must tell you, That the Justices of the Corporation have turned you
over to us, and it is according to the Act that we should try you; therefore
you must plead guilty, or not guilty?


R. T. I think not so, for the Act says of such pretended offenses, that they
are to be tried within the Limit, Liberty, or Division wherein they were
committed.


Tho Vic. Fan. You must plead to this Court, for there have some of this
Corporation been tried in the like case, before the Lord Chief Justice
Bridgeman ( one of the gravest, and most learned Judges that ever sat upon
this Bench) at the last Assizes here, they coming first, which is according to
the Act.


R. T. That might be done there, for that Court sat by a Commission of Oyer
and Terminer, and in some sense comprehended the Corporation, but you are the
ordinary Quarter Sessions, and have no such special Commission. -- Interrupted.


Tho. Vic. Fan. We have a special Commission, and have power to try you here.


R. T. We were committed twice for that you call the first and second offense,
by the Magistrates of the Corporation to their Prison, and for the third
offense by some of the same Magistrates were sent to the County Goal, who are
no Justices of the Peace for the County, (meaning the Mayor, and Robert Deane.)
And further I would ask this question, Whether if the Corporation Sessions had
come first, should such as had been taken in the County, and committed to the
County Prison been brought from thence and tried by the Corporation Sessions.


One of the Justices upon the Bench J K. stood up and answered Yes; by which it
appears, that the young man has more authority then knowledge of the Laws and
Customs of the Corporation, although he be a Member of Parliament, as one of
the Burgesses for that Corporation.

T. Vic. Fansh. You shall not be permitted thus to stand pleading here, to over
rise the Court.


R. T. It is not like that I shall overruled the Court, but the Court may
overruled me, although by Law they cannot.


Cl. You must answer, whether you are guilty, or not guilty?


R. T. Not guilty, according to manner and form of the Indictment.


Cl. Francis Haddon, what say you, are you guilty, or not guilty?


F. H. Inasmuch as I had no evil intent in meeting, I am not guilty.


Cl. William Brown what say you, are you guilty or not guilty?


W. B. I am not guilty of evil doing.


Proclamation being then made, That if any person had any thing to inform
against the Prisoners at the Bar, they should come into the Court; and they
should be heard.

Then the Clerk being about to swear the Jury, and John Tailor, Foreman thereof
aforesaid, R^chard Thomas, one of the Prisoners at the Bar, called to the
Cour^, saying, He claimed his privilege by Law, viz. To challenge such of the
Jury as he thought meet before they were sworn, saying,

R. T. I except against the foreman, called, Captain Tailor, and desire he
might not be sworn.


H. C. What is the reason you except against him? you must show some cause why
you challenge him, or else it shall not be allowed you?


R. T. I think I need not give any reason why, conceiving it my privilege to
challenge more then one, without showing any cause; but however I have
something against him, He is a Military man, and has been active in that
party, against which I have been charged, to be engaged in opposition; and that
therefore I may expect to have no justice from him; and also that he was one of
that Jury that had already brought in four of my innocent Friends guilty, with
some other reason; but he being a person chosen on purpose for that work, it
would not be admitted he should be put by.


A. C. You must show greater reasons yet for your challenge, or else it will
not be admitted.


Tho. Fansh. This person has been a very loyal Subject to his Majesty, and
done him very good se^vice; and therefore it should not be suffered, that so
worthy a person should be so much dishonored, as to be laid by, unless greater
cause could be showed; as that he was a perjured person, or one convicted, etc.
So that unless you have any weightier exceptions the Court will overruled you.


R. T. The Court may overruled me in this thing, as they have already
overruled me in a greater matter, as not to let me have my right, as a Member
of this Corporation; but by Law I am sure you cannot do it. -- Interrupted.
The said Tho. Fansh. You were committed to the County Goal, and by-Law we are
to try you; Swear the Jury.


Then the Jury was sworn, and the Witnesses called and sworn, viz. Edward
Laurence, Edward Tufnail, Robert Stoddar, Robert Tyte, John Lavender, who gave
in evidence to this effect. That the Prisoners at the Bar were taken at such a
time and place, met together, above the number of five; but they said they
heard them speak no words, nor do any thing but sit still: and to this they all
agreed.

H. Chancy. Was there forms in this house belonging to N. Lucas where they were
met?


Edw. Laurence. Yes, there were forms.


H. Chancy. Is it their usual Meeting Place?


Witnesses. Yes.


H. Chancy. You hear what the Witnesses say (speaking to the Prisoners) were
you not at N. Lucas his house?


R. Crook. I have met at this house often, and have been there in the fear of
God (and in obedience to him) in which I stand before you, and in which I am
preserved here: and although I might be aware of what ye were minded to do, if
my life and liberty lay at stake, I could not but in obedience to God meet
there: But if any can say that I was there under color and pretense of
Religion, or to meet with Malefactors to disturb the Peace, or do any evil, let
them appear, and bear witnesses of it, and let matter of Fact be proved against
us. The Witnesses, prove nothing against us, but that we were met together,
which is not the Crime expressed in that Law, on which our Indictment is
grounded: Did we do any evil there?


Tho. Vic, Fan. That is not the thing, what you did there; the thing is
meeting.


R. Thomas. I think not, for the Act has relation to the end of Meeting.


Prisoners. If our Meetings are not seditious, they are not contrary to the Act


H. Chancy. I must tell you all such Meetings are seditious.


Prisoners. Our Meetings are not seditious, neither have they been so proved.


H. Chancy. Have you any thing else to say?


Pris. We are innocent.


Henry Chancy. You were found met together above five in number.


Pris. Many meet together upon many occasions, above such a number: that is not
the breach of the Law, to meet only, except some evil be done, or contrived at
the Meeting.


H. Chancy. What did you do at the Meeting?


Pris. Wait upon the Lord, to be refreshed by him, and for no evil design;
neither can evil be proved against us.


Tho. Vic. Fansh. Do you think that the Law makers could expect that any should
be able to prove what you did at your Meetings, except you should have a false
Brother amongst you (which I believe you have not; * For I must needs say, that
you are true to one another: but this is the notorious evidence of the Fact,
that ye were met together above five at that house.


R. T. I think that is not the notorious evidence of the Fact, merely to be met
together, unless something were acted, or done, which the scope of the Law
provides against; and therefore the preamble of the Act, which was a key or
inlet into the intent and meaning of the Law makers, says, * For providing
therefore of further and more speedy remedies against the growing and dangerous
practices of seditious Sectaries, and other disloyal persons, who under
pretense of tender Consciences, do at their Meettngs contrive Insurrections, as
late experience has showed. And now if any thing of this can be laid to our
charge, let our Accusers appear: and further, let Witnesses prove that we at
our Meeting were practicing something contrary to the Liturgy of the Church of
England, or else we cannot be found guilty, according to the Act. And I think
thy self (meaning Tho. Vicount Fanshaw aforesaid) should understand the
intent of the Act, in regard thou were one of the principal promoters of it in
the House of Commons.


Tho. Vic. Fansh. That Is more then you know.


R. T. It Is credibly so reported.


Tho. Vic. Fansh. Come, to the point, you have met there at other times for
Religious Exercise, and therefore for that end you met there then.


R. T. That does not follow, you sometimes meet at the Bell in Hertford, to
proportion Assessments; do you always therefore meet there for that end?


Tho. Vic. Fansh. When we meet at Church (which you call the Steeple-House) we
always meet to worship God.


R. T. Not always so, for sometimes there are Visitations kept there, etc. But
however, I am upon my trial, and the matter of Fact done there, should be
proved by Witnesses against me, and not supposed and imagined. -- Then
interrupted.


H. Chancy. Set him by.


R. T. Jurymen, the Indictment should be grounded upon the late Act, and the
matter of fact should be proved against us, or else you ought to acquit us, for
you are Judges of Law, and Fact.


-- Interrupted again, and Henry Chancy said, They are of Fact, but not of Law.

R. T. Yes, they are of Law as well as of Fact, and that may be proved. 1 part
Cooks Inst. Sect. 366. fol. 226, 227, 228.



R. T. Jury men, all that has been proved against us is, that we were met
together above the number of five.


-- Interrupted again, and Henry Chancy spoke to the Jury.

H. Chancy. The wise, judicious, and worthy Judge Bridgeman was of this
opinion, That if any person shall meet with others, above five in number, at
such Houses which are their common houses of meeting, and can give no good
account what they did there, that is a presumption in Law, and not only a
presumption, but a violent presumption; and they say they meet in the fear of
the Lord, to worship him in Spirit. This they confess.


Then were the Records commanded to be read, to prove the first and second
Convictions: and he told the Jury That if they did believe the Witnesses, that
they were met together, they must find them guilty.

The Prisoners would have spoken further to the Jury, but were not suffered,
only some few words were spoken by Rich. Thomas, as they were going out of the
Court; as to warn them of being overawed by the fear of men, but judge
righteously, as they would answer it to the Lord; and that the matter was very
weighty, and of great concernment; and if but one of them would stand out in
opposition to the rest, they could not find the Bill against us: for there were
some in the Court that thirsted after our Blood; but they could not drink it,
except you of the Jury give it them. But the Jury was hastened away, who in as
must have returned in the space of a quarter of an hour.

Cl. Set them all to the Bar.


Set Robert Crook, Thomas Grawly, Samuel Wollaston, Robert Fairman, Richard
Thomas, Francis Haddon, and William Brown to the Bar, which was done.

Cl. Gentlemen of the Jury, are you agreed of your verdict?


Jury. Yes.


Cl. Who shall speak for you?


Jury. Our Foreman.


Cl. Is Robert Crook guilty of that unlawful Assembly, or not guilty!


Jury. Yes, he is guilty, and so they answered concerning all the other six
above named.


Cl. Look to them Jailer.


Pr^s. Well, we are justified in the sight of the Lord, and we believe you will
not be found clear, nor justified in the sight of God nor men, for this days
work.


Then the Court adjourned till three in the afternoon, and about four they met
again: and Proclamation being made, the Jailer was commanded to bring seven
more of the Quakers Indicted as aforesaid to the Bar.

The Goalers bringing them to the Bar, they were called as follows, first
Michael Day; whose Indictment being read, agreeing much with the former, save
only as to place of Meeting (being in the Parish of Great Amwel in the Liberty
of Ware, in an house adjoining to the outhouses of Robert Dawsor.) It was
asked of him, Whether he was guilty of the Indictment, or not guilty?

M. D. Answered, Not guilty.


Then John Thurgood was set to the Bar, and his Indictment also read in form as
aforesaid; and being asked whether guilty, or not not guilty? answered,

J. T. I am not guilty.


After him, the rest of the number of Prisoners called for; were set to the Bar
successively, viz. John Presbon, John Reynolds, John Witham, William Adams,
Robert Heart: Their Indictments read, and their answers returned in the
negative, Not guilty, as aforesaid; Only this was added by some of them, That
they were not guilty of those Crimes expressed in their Indictments, but were
innocent peaceable men, and had transgressed no righteous Law.

Then was a second Jury empanelled, whose names are as follows, Edmond
Hassel, Benjamin Jones, Edward Bache, Jonas Hunsdon, John How, John Flower,
John Hall, Thomas Jermin, (...) Broughten, John Ford, Thomas Jordan, Charles
Noads; and Henry Chancy stood up and spoke to the Prisoners as follows, and
told them the Court had a mind to show them favor, and that favor was this,
If they would promise to meet no more together, above the number of five, the
Court would discharge them; what say you, have you any mind to accept of this
favor of the Court?

John Bresbon. We have no mind to purchase the favor of the Court with such
promises; our Meetings are peaceable and lawful, and our Consciences are tender
toward God, and we can promise no such thing, to gain more then our liberty.


Hen. Chancy. Then swear the Jury.


The Jury being sworn and charged (as before) well and truly to try betwixt the
King and the Prisoners at the Bar, and true deliverance make, and to bring in
their verdict, according to evidence. The Witnesses were called and sworn,
whose evidence reached thus far (and no further) That they were taken at such a
time and place, met together, above the number of five; but that they heard
them speak no word, nor saw nothing, but that they sat together in silence.

Then the Prisoners called upon the Jury, to take notice, that no matter of
fact was witnessed against them by those Witnesses: but the Jury seemed to give
more heed to the mind of the Court, and what they would have them to do, then
either to the Prisoners, or Witnesses.

H. C. There are two Records against the Prisoners already, for two former
offenses (which were read) and as for this third offense, of which they stand
indicted, the evidence is sufficient.


His Memorandums (or Breviates) were also read, viz. what the Witnesses had
said, and what the Prisoners had confessed, That they were met there in the
fear of the Lord, to wo^ship him in spirit and truth; and withal he told them,
that if they did believe they were met, they must find them guilty: And though
all this while no matter of Fact was by the Witnesses proved, nor by the
Prisoners confessed; but only meeting above five, in obedience to God, to wait
upon, and worship him in spirit and truth. The Jury was commanded to go forth,
who did so, and quickly returned, agreed upon their verdict, that they were all
guilty.

Court. Look to them G^aler.


Then Henry Sweeting, Henry Stout, and J^remiah Dean, were brought to the Bar,
and their Indictments read, which agreed in form; and being required to plead
guilty, or not guilty: some of them insisted upon their liberty and privilege,
as freemen of the Borough of Hertford; and Henry Stout alleged, That they
ought to be tried by the Mayor, and other Magistrates of the Corporation,
according to their Charter, and their Oaths.

H. C. The Court has a particular kindeness for you, if you will accept of it
(viz.) To H. Sweet.
If you will engage to come at no such tumultuous Meetings any more, but only
stay at home with your own Families, you may be discharged; and set it liberty.


Hen. Sweeting. If I were sure that my life were to answer for the thing, I
could rather offer up my life, as a sacrifice, then to engage to any such
thing. And the other answered in like manner, that their Meetings being no
unlawful Assemblies, nor seditious Conventicles, and that they neither acted
nor contrived any thing of evil against the King, or any other person: If they
suffered it was for their Consciences toward God, and for worshipping of him.


Tho. Vic. Fan. I would not have you cheat your selves, it is not for Worship,
for Conscience, or Religion, that you suffer; but the matter of Fact is for
Meeting; the evil is to meet together, above the number of five.


H. C. Said also something to the same effect, quoting Judge Bridgman his
opinion therein, and his practice as a president the last Assizes, and a
sufficient warrant for their proceedings,

Then the Jury was called, sworn, and charged, in the usual form. as is before
expressed (being the same that brought in the former seven guilty) the
Witnesses also were called and sworn, whose testimony agreed in this only,
That they were taken at such times, and places, met together, above the number
of five.

H. Chapter What say you, what did you meet there for?


Prisoners We met there in the fear of God, for no evil end, but to worship him
in spirit and truth, and not under color and pretense.


This answer H. Chancy noted down, together with the depositions of the
Witnesses, and then spoke to the Jury, saying,

H. Chapter We have two records against the Prisoners at the Bar already (which
were read) and they are sufficient for the first and second offenses: and as
concerning the third offense, you hear what the Witnesses say, That they were
at such an house, met together, above five: And they acknowledge and confess,
that they met there in the fear of God, to worship, etc. I think the evidence
is sufficient, go forth.


But before they went forth H. Stout was called again to the Bar (who stood for
a trial by the Corporation) and his Indictment was read, and it was said to him
as to the rest, You stand Indicted, etc. Are you guilty, or not guilty?

H. S. I conceive I am not to answer at this Court, for any pretended offense,
which is done within the Corporation; but am accountable to that Court, within
whose jurisdiction I live.


Court. You must be tried here, and cannot be tried elsewhere.


H. S. If I should plead here, then should I make a breach of the privilege of
the Corporation, which the Freemen and Magistrates of the Corporation are
sworn to maintain; and I being a Freeman, and an Inhabitant of this
Corporation, it is my just right and privilege to be tried by the Corporation
and neighborhood that knows me.


Tho. Vic. Fan. Harry Stout will you plead?


H. S. I do not deny pleading, so I may plead where I ought to plead.


H Chapter You ought to plead here, I will give it so for Law.


H. S. The Law says, It shall not be lawful for any Justices of the County to
intermeddle in a Town Corporate, where there is a Justice of the same. And
further the Law says, We will grant to all Cities and Towns Corporate, that
they shall have their liberties and free Customs.


Clerk. Will you plead or not, if not you must be taken pro confesso.


H. S. I am willing to plead, provided I may not be debarred of that which is
my right, that is, that I may be tried by the Corporation.


Cl. The Corporation has turned you over to us, and you must be tried here.


H. S. I desire the Court would be pleased to satisfy me, By what power the
Mayor committed me to the County Prison, seeing by his Charter he has no such
power; and without his Charter he is no more then one of us, or another man.


To this they returned no answer, but bid the Clerk read the IndictMent, which
he did, and then it was demanded of him, Whether he was guilty, or not guilty?

H. S. If the Court would be pleased to satisfy me in this one thing; I know
not but that I may plead, that is, By what power the Mayor committed me to the
County Goal, or where he had it, seeing the Charter does not give him it: for
the Mayor has the same power in the Corporation, to try all things that are to
be enquired of, as the Justices in the County; for the Corporation has power
by their Charter to try all persons, Trespasses, and all offenses whatsoever,
except Treason, Murder, or Felony, or the taking away of Life or Limb; so he
has no power to commit to the County Prison in this case, but to his own
prison, which is allowed by the Charter. If the Court please I will read the
Copy of the Charter:


so they bad him read it; and as he began to read, they asked him if it were in
Latin, he said no; then they would not let him read it.

Court. Will you plead or not? if not, sentence will be passed upon you as
mute, and you will lose the privilege of a Jury.


H. S. I desire the Court would give me an understanding of the Act; for as I
understand it, I do not conceive it does at all concern us; for by it, Meetings
are allowed, so they are not above such a number; and certainly a number cannot
be hurtful of it self, provided the intent be not evil: So I conceive the Act
is against such as do intend evil at their Meetings, as to plot and contrive
against the Government: we are no such, but our intent is really to worship
God, and nothing else.


Cl. That's your mistake, The Act is made against all Meetings, under pretense
of Religion of above five persons in number.


H. S. It would be an absurd thing to think that the Act is against worshipping
God; so understanding of it, it would violate the Kings promises, which in
three Declarations (that are public to the world) say, That no man should be
disturbed in matter of Conscience, provided they lived peaceably: And I dare
presume to say, That if the King were asked, whether any breach should be made
of his promises, he would say no, not for abundance. For in his Speech to the
Parliament, he says, No man shall have power to charge us with the breach of
our promises; so that the Act cannot be so understood, but as it self says,
against such as shall at their Meetings contrive insurrections.


Court. We do not deny you your Religion, but you may meet, so you meet not
above the number of five, that you may not have any opportunity to contrive
insurrections.


H. S. Some have had a suspicion of us, but God knows we have no such design;
but our design is to promote righteousness and holiness, and to reprove evil
where ever we see it (although it be in the great ones of the world) and that
we may live a godly life, in all honesty; and this is our design.


Court. We permit you to plead, and you make a speech; will you plead to your
Indictment?


H. S. I do not deny pleading, neither do I contemn the Court, but do expect my
privilege, to be tried by the Corporation; and if it be not granted me, I do
take it as a great injustice done unto me.


Court. If you will not plead you shall be recorded, and sentenced as a mute.


H. S. I do not deny pleading.


Court. Record him.


H. S. I thank God you have nothing of evil against me (now nor formerly) to
condemn me for; but it is purely for Conscience sake, for worshipping God. One
of the Jury, as he stood at the Bar told him, That if he did plead they should
find him guilty. So it seems it was determined beforehand what to do; and that
all their show of a legal Trial was but under color and pretense, having
fore-judged them, and before hand concluded to condemn them.


So the Jury went forth, and about the space of a quarter of an hour, returned
agreed upon their verdict. And being asked, if they were agreed answered, Yes;
and who should speak for them, answered, their Foreman: who being asked if
Henry Sweeting were guilty of the Crimes: he stood- indicted of, or not guilty;
he answered, guilty, and so of all the rest.

Court. Look to them Jailer.


Then was Henry Stout set again to the Bar, and his Indictment read the third
time; and he still desiring to be tried by the Court, that ought to try him,
viz. The Court of the Corporation. The Clerk recorded him again for a Mute the
third time. This done the Jailer was commanded to fetch the rest of the
Prisoners to the Bar, being one and twenty persons, which also was done; and
proclamation being made, that all persons should keep silence while Judgment
was given. The Prisoners were called over severally (one after another) to whom
Henry Chancy directed his speech particularly as follows, viz. What say you
Lewis Laundy, why judgment of transportation should not be passed upon you?

L. L. I am innocent in this matter, and have not transgressed this Law, for
our Meetings are not contrary to the Liturgy, but your practice is contrary to
it; for that says, Cursed is he that parts man and wife, which thing you are
doing this day; and assuredly the Lord will reward you according to your deeds.


Then Henry Chancy being about to pass sentence, Richard Thomas called to the
Court, and said, hold, there is something to be said first before the Sentence
is passed: whereupon Henry Chancy said, Richard Thomas, what have you to say
why judgment of transportation should not be passed upon you.

R. T. I have much to say, First, nothing has been proved against me, as
matter of Fact, which should deserve such Sentence. And again, I ought to have
been tried by the Corporation for the pretended offense; and therefore there
ought to be an arrest of Judgment.


H. Chancy. As to that you have had a fair trial, and the Court does overruled
you in that thing, and you have been answered.


Then John Reynolds was asked what he had to say, why sentence should not be
passed upon him. And Tho. Vic. Fansh. stood up and said, He had done very much
for him at the Assizes. To which J. R. answered, That the light in his
Conscience would convince him of the evil he had done to him; whereupon Tho.
Vic Fansh. retorted in a rage, That the light you hold is one thing to day, and
another thing to morrow. Before sentence, several others of the Prisoners said,
They were innocent, and had not deserved any such sentence. But H. C. said,
Your plea of innocence will not now avail you. The Jury has found you guilty;
therefore you must hearken to your Sentence. So the Prisoners were set to the
Bar, and sentence was pronounced by him as follows, Richard Thomas, John
Bresbon, Robert Fairman, William Brown, Francis Haddon, Samuel Wollaston,
Thomas Crawley, John Reynolds, John Witham, Robert Crook. It is awarded, and
the Court does award, That you, and every of you shall be transported beyond
the Seas, to the Island of Barbados, being one of his Majesty's Plantations,
there to remain seven years. Then It was observed in his speech, countenance,
and deportment, by the spectators, that while he was passing sentence, he was
as smitten of the Lord, and ready to faint away under the sense of his stroke
for the wicked works he was about.
Sentence was also pronounced upon the rest thus, viz. Lewis Laundy, William
Burre, Thomas Burre, Thomas Moss, Michael Day, Robert Heart, William Adams, John
Throughgood, Henry Sweeting, Jeremiah Dean, Henry Stout, It is awarded, and the
Court does award, that you, and every of you shall be transported beyond the
Seas, to the Island of Jamaica, one of his Majesty's Plantations, Foreign,
there to remain seven years. But before the Prisoners went from the Bar, diverse
of them expressed themselves to this purpose, viz. Richard Thomas said, The
Lord justifies though you condemn and sentence us. And be it known unto you,
that I account it great honor, and much mercy from the Lord that I have been
preserved unto this time, to hear a testimony for Gods eternal truth, against
such a generation of men as you are: And as Sentence was pronouncing, Lewis
Laundy (one of the Prisoners directed these words to Henry Chancy, Alas for
thee poor Chancy, (observing a great change in his speech and countenance) it
had been well for thee if thou had not done this days work, etc.

After a little space the said Henry Chancy recovering himself, spoke to the
Prisoners as follows, viz. If you, on every of you will pay one hundred pound
into the Court, you may be discharged from this sentence, and the Court shall
not be discharged till the morning.

It was now after the 9th. hour at night, and the Court adjourned till eight
the next morning, the Prisoners being remanded back to Prison.

On the morrow about the 7th. hour the Court met again (being the third day of
the Sessions) and the Jailer being ordered to bring the forenamed twenty one
persons, or whom sentence was passed: they were brought accordingly, and set to
the Bar, and called over.

Court. Then the Court demanded of every several person respectively, whether
they would pay down their several hundred pounds to redeem them from the
sentence of transportation that was passed upon them.

Pris. To which they returned, their several answers, some whereof are as
follows.

Lewis Laundy. It is for the testimony of my Conscience toward God, that I am
sentenced, and if I had an hundred lives, and could redeem them all with an
hundred pence, I should not give them in this case.


Rich. Thomas. Be it known unto you, that the service we are called unto, is
more honorable then to be purchased off, with money; and therefore if the
tenth part of a farthing would do it, I should not give it you: and further he
also said, the Religion we profess, we are neither afraid, nor ashamed to
suffer for; it is the Truth, and shall stand over the heads of all such
transgressing wretches as you are.


Tho Moss. I am in the service of God, and I do not intend to hire my self out
of it; but you had more need to hire your selves out of the service that you
are in


R. Crook. Whether shall I be free, if I should pay an hundred pounds.


Court. Yes.


R. C. Then I may go meet again with those you call Malefactors, to the
disturbing of the Kings Peace.


Court. Yes, paying an hundred pound he might, for the Law said so. Will you
pay an hundred pound that you may not be transported.


R. C. No, I have not so much money to spare.


Others H. S. R. F. T. B said they were satisfied in their hearts and
consciences, that they had done no evil, and therefore could not consent to
give one farthing, or words to that effect: and Henry Stout (being included in
their unjust sentence, notwithstanding his just Plea to the contrary) delivered
himself in these words; Before I give an answer to your demand, I do expect a
legal Trial; and further desiring to be heard to speak a few more words, said,
I remember I heard some upon the Bench speak very contemptuously of the Light.
Now they chat despise the light despise Christ, for the light is Christ, and
was made manifest, to destroy the deeds of darkness, and to condemn sin in all
its appearances; for he that is of God walks in the light, as God is light;
whereupon they cried, That is true, that is true, but would not endure to hear
any further of that truth, but cried Take him away, take him away; and so he
had liberty to speak no more.

Friend, whoever thou art that read the precedent passages, may observe,
That though Henry Chancy (the Judge of this Court of pretended Justice) did
oftentimes urge the Prisoners to confess what they met for, and what they did
at their Meetings; yet when some of them did confess that they met upon no
other account, but to worship God, and to wait upon God in the Spirit: when he
came to speak to the Jury, he made that confession to be the chief ground for
the Jury to proceed, to find the Bills; whereupon they are sentenced;
notwithstanding one that was chief among them said (more then once) that they
had their Religion free, and they meddled not with Worship, Conscience, and
Religion; so that any people that have any Religion in true simplicity (be it
of what form it will) that have not sold all honesty in that profession (on
purpose to please and serve the present times) may see that the main ground of
this grand persecution is for worshipping God in Spirit: and as it is said that
one of the eminentest among them that sit in the seat of Cruelty and Violence
in this day, has said, that this Act was made against worshipping God in
spirit: and if ever any person in this Nation read or heard of any people or
nation, that has so directly in plain words and open deeds manifested such
defiance and opposition to the worshipping of God in spirit and truth;
notwithstanding the Scripture speaks expressly, That God is a spirit, and will
be worshipped in spir^t and truth, and that these men do own the Scriptures in
word) let him come forth and endeavor to justify this generation of Men. And
further observe, that nothing is here punctually proved (as to the breach of
the late Act) but only meeting above the number of five, which (without the
proof of Sedition, or breach of the Peace) can be no violation of the Act: so
that people may see the unjust proceeding of these unrighteous Judges, who
pretend Law for their rule, in this matter, but practice none of it, as was
clearly observed by them that were spectators; for no clear evidence they had
for what they did: the Witnesses deposing only their meeting together, but
nothing that they spoke or did; and this was the great pretended Crime they
sentenced them for.

O generation of Vipers, do you think to escape the damnation of Hell for your
illegal proceedings? who are not content to do wickedly your selves, but either
fright or flatter other; to do the same. (As one of the Jury said at the Bar,
besides what others were overheard to say in a threatening way) what numbers
were warned to attend your wicked service, that you might have your choice of
fit instrumments to do your abominable work. O height of impudence and
hard-heartedness, that you should dare do such things, and yet before the
people, cover your wickedness with smooth words, saying, we do not deny you
your Religion, and yet condemn them for it. God takes notice of these things,
and if such great woes were pronounced against such as did not fit, when he was
in prison, and did not feed him when he was an hungry, and cloth him when he
was naked, what will be their portion, who when he was at liberty cast him into
prison? and when he had food took it away from him? and when he had clothes
stripped him naked. Inasmuch, says Christ, as ye do it unto the least of them
that fear my name, ye do it unto me. But it was the portion of the people of
God in days past to be so dealt withal by an hard hearted generation, as may
be seen, Mat. 10.17, 18, 19. But beware of men, for they will deliver you up to
councels, and ye shall be brought before Governors and Rulers for my name
sake, for a testimony against them, etc.

The End.

