Carmen Triumphale: OR, ENGLANDS TRIUMPH FOR Her Restored LIBERTY. WITH
WHITE-HALLS SPEECH to her Royal Master, CHARLES the Second KING of Great
BRITAIN, FRANCE and IRELAND, Also her sad Complaint against the pretended
Committee of Safety, Rumpers, and the rest of those Cruel Tyrants, and unjust
Judges, who not only defaced and spoiled Her Stately Buildings, but also
unjustly condemned her to be sold. With two short Panagyricks to the Right
Honorable the City of LONDON, and the University of CAMBRIDGE.

-- Nunquam LIBERTAS gratior extat Quam sub REGE pio. --

Claudianus. By WILLIAM SMITH, Gent.

LONDON, Printed for W. Jones, 1660.

Englands Triumph FOR, Her Restored Liberties.
THough the refulgent and Illustrious Light
Of this high Theme might blind my duller sight,
Though the more serious more acute Essays
Of able Pens might be just Remora's
To my attempts; this Long-expected Day
Commands that I these grateful lines should pay.
My active Muse this joyful Time inspires,
And warms my Soul with more then usual fires.
But stay (my Muse) what beastly Creature's this
This terrour-causing Goblin? Sure it is
Not that three shapt Cymera, we are told,
Of by the ancient Poets; For behold
It Is headless, wants both Body, Legs and Arms,
Good Dr. Faustus bring your strongest charms,
Your strongest, for your best will scarce prevail,
(I doubt) to conjure this deformed Tail,
This Tail composed of Haslerigs Charity,
Of Vains Religion, Martins Chastity,
Of Nevills Athiesm, with those mighty pair
Of Horns Lord Mounso^ on his Front does near,
Of Tom Scots Secretary-ship and Lechery,
Of Fleetwoods Tears for his late Excellency,
Of Whitlocks Justice, of that Mercy that
Lisle did extend to Hewit, when he sat
Grand Butcher in Nols Inquisition, with
That Fury, (far worse than the Public Faith)
The Good Old Cause. This long-lived Rump did dare
With an uncivil Civil War to tear
These Nations, and with damned Votes did make
The State to tremble and the Church to quake,
And did benight us in a wilderness
Of frantic Lights and newborn Herisies.
At last All-seeing Heaven compassion took
And on sad England cast a milder look,
Then with a tongue that never spoke in vain
You may imagine she used such a strain.
Monster (more monstrous then what Africa breeds)
" Devouring Hydra with his many Heads,
" Far more prodigious then that ugly Snake
" Alcides slew in the Lernaean Lake!
" Be gone to duskie shades of silent Night
" No more no more the pure Celestial Light,
" Contaminate with your sulphurious breath
" Be gone to th'unfrequented shades of Death;
" Upon the Stygian Banks a thousand years,
" (Possessed with horror, care-infusing fears)
" Wander, avaunt Fury with many heads!
" Vanish! it is all commanding Heaven that bids.
This said, these proud imperious Bassaes straight,
(Whose all-ore-breaking Rage the sollid weight
Of Englands Sacred Rights and Ancient Laws
Never could restrain) with their dissembling Cause
And spurious brood of base dissembling Jacks,
Of Jenizaries and of Sansiacks,
Wereby a cleansing, purging Northern wind
Swept clear away, and nothing left behind.
Then did Aurora (from her Rosy Bed
Rising) her Purple, blushing Mantle spread
Ore our Horizon, then the Day Star clear
Enlightened our long-shadowed Hemisphere;
And having shone a while resignes his Ray.
And re-enthrones our long desired Day.
But hold! what pleasing Musick's this, I hear?
O how it does entice my ravished ear!
Oh how the Thundering Drums and Trumpets sound
whose heart rejoicing notes do not confound
My mind with dreadful Taratantara's;
No angry (yet well-rankt) Batalia's
Amaze my wondering eyes; what need I fear?
These Londons peaceful Militia are.
This gallant Body to Hide-Park now goes,
Hide-Park, appointed for the Rendevouz,
Where Englands choicest The Right Hononrable the Earl of Winchelsey M.G.
Massey, and Ald. Bunce, etc. Trailed Pikes there Turkish Hist. of Solomon the
Mag.
Heroes graced the Field,
And in well practiced hands their Pikes then held.
Imperial Vienna's walls did not,
See better Horse or braver bands of Foot,
When Charles the Fifth that famous Army drew,
Against the great Solomon and his numerous crew
Now roaring volleys, now loud shouts do tear,
With Skies-ascending noise the Ambient Air:
With the shril sound Westminster Abbey rings;
The sacred Relics of our ancient Kings
This thundering Echo now awakes; yea then
Our third and greatest, Edward thought again,
Of Chresceys fearful field; that prosperous Fifth
(That valiant Hero) Henry then did lift
Up his blessed head, wondering to hear a sound,
That would, the noise of Agincourt have drowned.
An end draws nigh; the time conducting Sun
His thrice auspitious glorious course has run;
Now does the dark, incroaching might display.
Her sable curtains and excludes the Day,
Commanding all to leave the adjacent Plain,
And joyfully home to retire again,
Where we will leave them till the next great Day,
With brisk Lyaeus washing cares away.
Aurora rising in the Purple East,
The Humid Night, and Radiant Stars defaced.
When our great Senate do resolve to bring
Back and enthrone our lawful Royal King,
The discrpition of this days Solemnity is omited because described in (...)
her place by a worthy and learned Pen.
Prolaiming that his Majesty shall Reign
Of Britain, France and Ireland Soverign.
Now this long-wished joyful, joyful May 29
Day
Its heart reviving Splendor does display
The Sacred beams of Majesty draw near,
And Loyal hearts with their bright Influence cheer.
Now favoring Heaven does her assistance lend
The flying Clouds commanding to descend
In dust-allaying drops, more precious than
That shower on Danae's Lap Jove once did rain.
Wonder not Mortals why these drops fall now,
Th'obsequious Clouds but their Allegiance show.
Englands brave Gentry should in rank stand here,
As they in Order did this Day appear,
I would, thrice noble Cylly, here relate
Thy Regal Splendour and unusual State,
If time and want of room did not restrain
My now to this one sheet confined Pen.
When White Hall knew his Sacred Majesty
Within the enclosure of her Walls to be,
Raising her lofty Tower-environed Head
Imagine thus (although scarce heard) she said,
Welcome ( Great Master) Royal Charles, you are
Thrice welcome now; and you Illustrious Pair
Of Highborn Princes welcome are, when I
Behold you all, O how I leap for Joy!
My Turrets all, would bow a willing head
To Kiss the ground whereon your feet do tread.
How long ( Great Sir!) have I been desolate,
Wanting the luster of a Regal State,
Of a triumphant train and grand resort
Attending always on my Princes Court!
How long did Earth-born Villains me possess,
How long a Sultan and a Sultanesse!
How long did Red-Coats in my Chambers sleep!
How long did me the Safe Committie keep,
Alas! I was condemned to be sold,
And to be turned into good, red Gold;
For the all-searching Rumps an art did know
(Which the best Chemist never yet could do)
To Metamorphise houses [ Parkes and all]
Into their pockets and to make them fall.
But this Day clears all doubts: for this blessed Day.
Men, Women, Children, utmost joy display;
Yea I believe that harmless Infants are
Drunk with conceit of joy. Long may you here
Live, and with a peace-giving hand restore
That splendor to me, which I had before!
She said: when loud triumphant valleys tear,
With thundering Echoes the transparent Air,
The smoke of roaring Canons banish Light,
And flaming Bonefires do begin the Night.
To the City of LONDON, etc.
Pardon Illustrious City if I say
'Twas thou, which caused this their happy Day,
If thy life giving hand had not assayed
To lend a never-discontinued aid
To this desired change, this rising Light
Had scarce dispel'd our long-tempestuous Night
How high ( great City!) did thy glory rise
When valiant Walworth's hand did sacrifice
Those two pernicious Jack straw and Wat Tyler.
Rebels and their Cause
To Englands just (by them infringed) Laws!
Thy long-unequal'd deeds Eclipsed lie,
( Walworth!) now Londons worthies clear outvie
Thy same; thou saved the King and State (it is true)
But London gives a King to England new.
Londons best Patriots your immortal Fame,
Your glorious acts and never dying Name
Shall live, whilst Londons Bridge to the sea gives Laws.
And Neptunes time-observing Surges aws.
Whilst through reed-bearing Banks Thames gently slides
And in a series of Meanders glides
Toward Thetis kinder bosom; whilst his Rays
All-seeing Phoebus at his rise displays
On the once far renowned structure of
Old Paul [ its now become our greatest scoffe]
With grateful hands succeeding times shall rear
Up fame-preserving Statues to declare,
(If these our present times ungrateful prove)
To your immortal Names their ardent Love.
To the University of Cambridge, etc.
Now Alma Matter from the ashes raise
Thy head, adorned with Apollos Bays;
From thy Syderial Face wipe of those tears
Which furrowed have thy cheeks these twice ten years
Thy discomposed, long unordered Hair
And dangling locks dress as some time they were.
Thy Nectar-yielding Cup shall now oreflow,
And to it shall the Cornu-copia how;
Thy night dispelling Sun shall further shine.
Then the cold Arcticke or Antarctick Line;
By armed Rage and Ignorance no more
Shall thy best Sons from thy kind breast be tore.
Now, O thrice noble Clare Hall.
House, thy sacred wood
And polisht stones (once taken to make good
Defensive Rampers) great Apollo shall
With his well-tuned, melodious Harp recall*
Amphion like, and make them to repair
The rising walls of thy intended square.
FINIS.

