THE BAPTISTS SOPHISTRY DISCOVERED: In a Brief Answer to a late Pamphlet,
Entitled, The Quak(...) Subterfuge or Evasion Overturned.

Wherein all people may plainly see how Unjustly the Baptists deal with the
Quakers, and how Strongly they (...)d their Bow, and shoot their Arrows at them
without a Cause.

Published to give Satisfaction unto all who simply desire to know the Truth.

By William Smith.

He that devises to do Evil, shall be called, A Mischievous Pers^^

Prove. 248. If any man among you seem to be Religious, and bridleth not his
Tongue, but deceives his own heart, this man's Religion is vain,

Jam. 1. 86 Printed in the Year, 1672/3

THE Baptists Sophistry DISCOVERED, etc.
IF Necessity did not constrain me to enter upon this present Concernment, I
could willingly have been silent in the Matter: but as I see the Baptists so
violently prosecuting their Design (...) the People called Quakers, and so
furiously endeavoring (...)der them and their Principles the most obnoctious,
I feel a weight upon me to appear at this time on the behalf of those People
and their Principles; for I dearly own and love such as are called by that
Name, who are Faithful to that Light with which Christ Jesus does enlighten
them: And I certainly know (with many more) That whosoever are Faithful to the
Light of Christ Within, that they are Led and Guided by it out of Darkness, and
from under the Power of Satan; and so come to walk in him who is the Way to the
Father, and partake of the Grace and Truth that comes by him; and herein we can
stand with Boldness against all the Calumniations which you Baptists endeavor
to cast upon us: for we shall not own any of your oblique or crooked Envy,
though you would impose it unavoidably upon us in your account. But I shall not
be large by way of Introduction, but come to the Matter intended, which though
seemingly carried on by Ralph James only, yet believed, that he was not without
some assistance in mannaging his Work; but however, the Matter was composed
either by him, or others for him, we do not much regard it: for we certainly
know, That the Head of the Serpent must be broken by that Seed which is Blessed
forever; and though for a time the Serpent may bruise the Heel of that which is
to break his Head, yet his Head must be broken by it, and his Authority fall
before it; for the Seed must Reign according to Promise; yea, it does Reign,
and is glorified over the Serpent and his Enmity: Everlasting Praises be unto
him that lives forever.

And now, Ralph James, I shall come to thy Matter; and the Reason why I call it
thine is, because I do not find any other Name subscribed; and so I shall only
take notice of thee, as being the Subscriber: and as to what has been already
answered to thy Procacity, or what may by any other hand be replied to what I
have in Consideration, which may be termed thy Proclivity to thy first Matter,
I shall leave it to its own Method, and speak distinctly to the most
considerable Matters, as to thy last Portraiture. Come then, and duly observe
thy own Proceedings; and be more ready to hear, then to offer the Sacrifice of
Fools: For, how have thou endeavored to make the Nation believe, through what
thou have offered and sacrificed, That the Quakers are a Deluded People; and
that of (...) it must be so, from something that happened between Richard
A(...)son of Panton in Lincolnshire, and thy self, as thou assertest? and in
that particular Matter thou have concerned the whole Society of the People
called Quakers; and have endeavored to insinuate their Principles and
Practices to be the same with that which thou chargest upon R. A. to be
Erroneous: And have not thou appeared very insolent in this thy Folly? For,
what man of Prudence and Humility would have concerned a whole Society of
People with a particular Matter of a particular Person (supposing the thing to
be true) when he never was in Society or Fellowship with them at any time? But
I shall proceed to try thy own way of proving R. A. to be a Quaker; for that is
the most principal to be taken notice of, as being the very Basis upon which
thou and thy Brethren have raised your Structure; and if the Basis or
Foundation be Falsely and Deceitfully laid, then the Structure or Building will
fall of it self, to the Shame of the Builders; and therefore I shall examine the
most considerable Passages which thou have produced to prove R. A. a Quaker.
And First, To the Reader thou say, That R. A. did attempt the Propagation of
the Principles of the Quakers by denouncing a Curse upon thee in the Name of
the Lord, only because of that Testimony which upon just Occasion thou wast
ready to bear against their Errors.

Reply, It is not the Quakers Principles to denounce Curses in the Name of the
Lord, and therefore R. A. did not Propagate their Principles in doing so; if so
he did, and for thy Testimony against their Errors, it was like the Testimony
of the Unbelieving Jews against Christ and his Apostles, if thou did bear any
Testimony of that Nature: But thou have manifest nothing further to satisfy
any people, that R. A. did propagate the Quakers Principles, or of thy own
Testimony against their Errors, but thy bare word, who art neither a competent
Witness or Judge in the Case, and so no cause to believe that R. A. was a
Quaker.

2dly, Thou go on to query, What man of Reason will believe, that any man
should voluntarily accuse himself, and complain of the Hand of the Lord, and
what he could propose to himself, etc? And then concludest, saying, Surely in
vain do men go about to outface a thing so manifest.

Rep. Tho^ ^^^uld have queried these things, and been satisfied concerning
(...), before thou had endeavored to have made R. A. a Quaker, and to fall
upon the Quakers with such Violence from thy supposing him to be such a one;
this would have manifest more Wisdom and Peace, then to send thy Stories abroad
into the Nation with such Confidence as not to be disputed against; and now
forced to query, Why R. A. should do so? Surely in vain have thou wrought all
this, while in thy dark Imaginations, who art now querying after the Ground or
Cause of R. A's accusing himself, and of his proposals to himself: Is this the
thing thou countest so manifest, that it is in vain for any man to go about to
outface it? Is that manifest which lies obscure? and is not that obscure which
cannot be demonstrated? And here the Face of Truth can look upon thee, and
Shame may cover thy own; for thou have manifest thy Folly, as not knowing the
state of R. A. and yet would make him a Quaker.

3dly, Thou say, Seeing then that it cannot be denied, but R. A. was led by
the spirit of Falsehood, and Prophesied falsely in the Name of the Lord, etc.

Rep. How does the matter appear so undeniable, seeing it lies only betwixt R.
A. and thy self? may not a thing be justly denied til it can be proved by some
others then the Parties concerned; and thou have produced no such Proof, and
yet say, it cannot be denied; and so thou may maintain a thing upon any
terms, if that must be of necessity believed which thou say cannot be denied:
And if R. A. was led by the Spirit of Falsehood, what does that concern the
Quakers? Must he needs be a Quaker because he was led by such a spirit, as thou
say? Surely thou and thy Brethren had need put on more Charity, that you
might walk in Love; for the Quakers never used a shift to help R. A. though
falsely charged with it from your dark Conclusion.

4thly, Thou say, Thou have not wronged thy Conscience in all thou have said,
nor designed any Evil against the Persons of the Quakers; but only to make
Discovery of the False Ways they have chosen, that so they might escape from
thence, and be saved.

Rep. Thou have put on a large measure of (...)fidence, that dare justify
thy self in all thou have said, and a (...) sens(...) that thou have wronged
thy Conscience in any thing tho^ have said; this manner of boasting gives just
cause to suspect that thou castest the Reproof of Christ behind thy back; for
if it were not so, thou would meet with Convictions in thy Conscience for
what thou have said against the Quakers, and would be sensible that thou have
wronged thy Conscience in what thou have said: and for any Design of Evil
against the Quakers Persons, thou can not hide thy Design under such a
Covering, for as thou design'st against our Principles, we know thou do not
design any good to our Persons; and for thy discovery of our false ways, as
thou termest them, thou have only discovered thy own Polly; and therefore we
shall not forsake our Ways, in which we are saved, to come into thy ways to be
condemned: And so stop thy mouth for speaking of our Ways; for thou art a
Stranger to them, and can not make the least Discovery of them.

5thly, Thou say, Thou do not pretend to work Miracles; and that thou
know thou Sin'st not in what thou have published, but have more cause to
think thou should have Sinned in concealing it.

Rep. Thou have affirmed a Miracle wrought by the Prayers of thee and thy
Congregation, and now thou do not pretend to such a thing: If thou had
Faith that God would answer thy Prayers, thou must needs pretend to do the
thing according to thy Faith, or otherwise, thou had no Faith, and so no such
thing done by thee and thy Congregation, as thou have affirmed; for no such
thing was ever done without Faith; and if it was really done, what needst thou
be ashamed to pretend to it? But here thou would go retrogade to cover thy
self, where thou have moved too forwardly: but this Matter may fall to be
answered more fully afterward. And as for what thou know, in not sinning in
what thou have declared; thou can not take away the Guilt with thy words; for
as thou have concerned the Quakers and their Principles by declaring against
them, thou have sinned in a high degree, and the Lord will not hold thee
guiltless. And for sinning if thou had concealed it, thou can not clear thy
self from that Guilt (...)for t^^^ ^ast concealed it Eight or Nine Years, and
so have sinned all t^^t time by thy own Conclusion; and thou had need Repent,
before it be too late.

6thly, Thou say, The Quakers have a faculty to Accuse beyond their Ability
to Prove.

Rep. Take this to thy self, for the Quakers are not concerned in it; and have
not thou accused the Quakers beyond thy Ability to prove thy Accusations? prove
(if thou can) what thou have publicly accused them with; and if thou can
not do it, then is it not an Unmanly Faculty in thee, to slander them with thy
Accusations. Come Ralph, thou have made a Stage to play thy part, and thou have
appeared upon it to infest the Nation with thy Infidelity; but the Power of the
Lord God is ever thee, and thy stage and thee must fall together, and so I have
done with thy matter to the Reader.

I shall now go on as to what thou bringst for Proof, to make good thy
Affirmation of R. A's being a Quaker; and when I have done with that matter, as
it is scattered in thy Book, I shall take notice of thy Narrative, and some
other things, which are most considerable, wherein thou have concerned the
Quakers and their Principles: for neither thee, nor any that have assisted
thee, that can Discouraged the Quakers in their Innocence: and I shall come to
the matter I have premised.

Page 10. Thou say, But since the Quakers in their Lying-Wonder, do so boldly
deny, that he (viz.) R. A. was a Quaker; hear therefore what is attested in
that case, June 17. 1672. since the publication of the Quakers Lying-Wonder, in
the presence of credible Witnesses hereafter named; and (thou say) it was
demanded of R. A. whether he ever heard the Quakers? he answered, Yes, he heara
them at Lincoln, within the Prison, about the space of an Hour: And then thou
say, It is known by sad Experience, that many in as little time as that is,
have been so leavened with their Principles, as that they have not been
cleansed from the Corruption thereof to the day of their Death.

Rep. The Quakers might very boldly deny R. A. to be a quaker, and thou can
not prove that he was one; but thou say, Hear what is attested in that case,
in the presence of credible ^^^nesses* Well, we are willing to hear what is
attested; but we m^^^ ask thee, Who did attest it? did any other attest it
besides R. A.? No: And what did he attest? That he heard the Quakers at Lincoln
about the space of an hour: Well, and what then? must he therefore be a Quaker?
see what he has attested; he did not say, He was a Quaker by hearing them the
space of an hour: But thou say, It is known by sad Experience, etc. Come
Ralph, thou must not thus abuse us, by telling us of credible Witnesses, and
then make thy own Conclusions: and have thou been puttering all this while
about proving R. A. to be a Quakers, and art as far to seek in thy third
pamphlet as in thy first; for there was as good Proof to what R. A. said in thy
first, as there is in this; and we do not question the credit of the Witnesses
in what they might hear R. A. say or confess; but we question thy Conclusions,
That because he might hear the Quakers about an Hour, that therefore he must be
a Quaker, because many (as thou say) in as little time have been leavened
with their Principles, as they have not been cleansed from the Corruption to
the day of their Death. How absurd art thou in thy Conclusion? for if all that
have heard the Quakers one hour or two, must therefore be Quakers, because of
such time hearing them, then should we be many more in number then we are: but
there are several have heard the Quakers many hours, who are not Quakers from
such their hearing; and if some in less time have received the Truth by them
declared, Must it needs follow, that R. A. did so? Is this an Infallible
Conclusion, that R. A. was a Quaker? And whereas thou say, It is known by sad
Experience: I ask thee, Who ever came to thee to make known their Sad
Experience, after they had received the Truth of the Gospel, by the Quakers
declared? Instance any (if thou can) that we may know the Sad Experience of
such as have been exercised therein: But these are terms of thy own forming, to
lay a Stumbling block in the way of the Simple: and we know, that a little
Leaven leaveneth the whole Lump; and whosoever receive the Quakers Principles
to be leavened by them, they are cleansed from Corruption, and are not
corrupted, as thou concludest in thy vain mind: for, is the Light of Christ
Corruptible? or does it corrupt such as receive it, and live in it? But we
certainly know, the True Seed in thee (and many more of you) is in Bondage to
Corruption, and that the Lord of Life is crucified in spiritual Sodom and Egypt.

Thou say, That R. A. further showed, that before he was at the Meeting at
Lincoln, and after also, he had discourse with the People called Quakers Forty
times touching their Principles; and after he had been with the Quakers, he
went to the Meeting at North-Willingham many times, to Contend against the
Baptists more then for any thing else.

Rep. What do thou stand telling us what R. A. showed; for it is not hearing
the Quakers an Hour, or discoursing with them Forty or a Hundred times,
touching their Principles, that makes him a Quaker, no more then several Jews
hearing Christ and his Apostles, and discoursing with them touching their
Principles, made them Christians: and if he came to contend with thee and you
at your Meeting, what does that concern the Quakers? this is poor stuff to come
forth in Print from a pastor.

Thou say, That he R. A. declared, without any Inquiry, that the Reason why
he went to pronounce thee a Leper, arose from the Consideration of a Passage,
Number. 12. and that he looked upon the People called Quakers to be as eminently
owned of God as Moses; so he was persuaded, God would send the same Judgment
on thee for contending against the Quakers, as he sent on Miriam for contending
with Moses. Attested (say thou) by,

Christopher Foster, William Skine, John Walesby, Robert Trigg, Richard Horton.
Rep. Do thou infer from this Matter, that Richard Anderson was a Quaker?
Can thou, or any man, rationally draw such a Conclusion? For though he might,
without any Inquiry, declare all this thou speak of, yet it does not make
him a Quaker, according to the Blessed Truth in which they live. And for his
Persuasion concerning the Judgment coming upon thee for contending against the
Quakers, it was only to himself, and the Quakers cannot be charged with it, nor
he made a Quaker by it.

But still to strengthen thy own hands thou tell us, The last Passage
Richard Anderson did again relate almost word for word in the Presence of
Christopher Foster aforesaid, and three Strangers, which came out of
Oxfordshire to have Satisfaction concerning the Narrative; at which time also,
being asked by these Strangers concerning the Truth of the Narrative, he said.
As to the Substance of it, it was all Truth, and that he would own it before
any man. And this (thou say) is subscribed by,

The Oxfordshire Strangers.
William Greenwood, John Scuchbury, John Grammar, and by Christopher Foster, as
Ear-Witnesses.

Rep. What is there in all this to make R. A. a Quaker? Must his saying or
confessing, That the Substance of the Narrative was all Truth, make him a
Quaker? Truly the Oxfordshiro Strangers could not receive much Satisfaction
from what R. A. said or confessed, if they desired to know and be satisfied
whether he was a Quaker.

Thou say, The same general Testimony of the Truth of the Narrative, or the
Substance of it, he the said R. A. did deliver at another time, a few days
before the last-mentioned, in the Presence of,

Christopher Foster, William Skine, John Walesby, Robert Trigg, Richard Horton,
Rep. Thou bring'st the old Witnesses again to the general Testimony of R. A.
to the truth of the Narrative, or the Substance of it; but I perceive thou
dare not say, the whole Narrative; and what the Substance is, thou have not
mentioned: But however, he has not at any time testified before those
Witnesses, That he was a Quaker, or that the Narrative was all true, neither
have they testified any such thing from what thou say he declared to them, or
from their own Knowledge; and yet thou say, Thus it appears that R. A. was a
Quaker: but if this be all thou can make it appear by, there is no cause for
any to believe that he was a Quaker; and so thou have left thy self as a man
without Credit: for its now well perceived, that thou have none to stand by
thee, that is able to testify for thee from their own knowledge; and so R. A's
Sayings and Confessions are thy chief Pillar. And to make it good thou say,

Nor can we have a better Testimony then a man's own Confession in this case;
for he must needs know his own Opinion better then another man: nor is it
possible for us to prove (say thou) what Conversation (in all respects) he
had with them, because remote from him, and not concerned in the Quakers
Congregations. And then thou queriest, Whether a man's own Confession for matter
of Opinion, being attended with those Demonstrations of the matter of Fact,
thereby observed, be not a cogent Proof to satisfy indifferent men (thou
say) thou must leave the Sober Reader to judge for his own satisfaction.

Rep. Well Ralph, I perceive thou art come to an end of proving R. A. a Quaker;
and if this, which thou have brought, be all thy Evidence, as may well be
supposed, then R. A. must either stand by thee, or else thou must unavoidably
fall; for thou have laid the very stress of the matter upon his single
Evidence, and so have forgotten, or otherwise wilfully omitted the Testimony of
Scriptures; for the Scripture says, that In the Mouth of Two or Three
Witnesses every word shall be established; and thou wanting this sure Evidence
on thy part, there are not any of thy words can be established; for thou have
neither Three, Two, nor One Witness to evidence the Truth of thy matter; and so
all thy words are as Wind, and cannot be established. But thou say, Nor can
we have a better Testimony then a man's own Confession in this case, he knowing
his own Opinion better then another man: Have thou not much mistaken thy self
in thy Assertion? for there may be a better Testimony in this case then a man's
own Confession, because a man may make an Ignorant Confession of his own
Opinion in relation to the Principles of other People; whereas another, that
duly observes the course of his Life and Conversation, may be more able and fit
to testify how he answers their Principles; and such a Testimony is far beyond
the Party's own confessing his Opinion: and so it will unavoidably follow, That
whatsoever R. A. has confessed or said, in relation to the Quakers, according
to his own Opinion, does not make him a Quaker. And where thou speak of the
Impossibility for you to prove what Conversation (in all respects) he had with
us, because remote from him, and not concerned in our Congregations: we do
believe it; for how is it possible for you to prove a thing to be, that never
was? for he never had his Conversation with us at any time, in any respect,
neither did he frequent our Meetings or Congregations at all; and so it is not
possible for you to prove it. And thou ask'st this Question, Whether a man's
own Confession for matter of Opinion, being attended with th^se Demonstrations
of the Matter of Fact hereby observed, be not a cogent Proof to satisfy
indifferent men? and here thou ask'st a Question after thy Affirmation; for
thou first said, Nor can we have a better Testimony then a Man's own
Confession in this case: and now thou queriest, Whether a man's own Confession
be not a Cogent Proof? and so it may well and safely be concluded, that thou
affirmest a thing that lies doubtful in thy own Judgment; and that ever R. A.
confessed that he was a Quaker, is beyond thy skill to prove by Undeniable
Evidence; and therefore thy Folly is manifest, giving him a Name which no Man
or Woman did ever know him by before: for there is nothing more certain, but R.
A. would soon have been called a Quaker by several of his Neighbors, if he had
received their Principles, and been acted by their Spirit, as thou would
have it; and thou might have had the Evidence of several concerning his
Alteration from the Ways, Customs, and Fashions, and Traditions of the World,
and of his bearing a Testimony for God in the Quakers Spirit; but seeing it
never was so, nor by him confessed to be so, thou art left as a Naked Man,
without any Covering: And thus thy Subterfuge is overturned, and thou art
without a Hiding Place, and thy own Lie is turned upon thee in calling R. A. a
Quaker, who never was known to have Fellowship with them, or they with him; and
so the Quakers not at all concerned in R. A's Errors (if he did err) as thou
would fabulously impose upon them.

I shall now take notice of some Passages in thy Narrative, which seem to
reflect upon the Truth, and to justify Error; and thereby thou may see how
darkly and ignorantly thou have manifest thy Judgment, and how vainly thou have
endeavored to make R. A. a Quaker.

1st, Thou say, That R. A. came to your Meeting, and was convinced; and said,
He did believe that Baptism in Water was an Ordinance of God.

Rep. It seems he was convinced at your Meeting, and confessed his Belief to
your way of Water Baptism; and did you own him as a Baptist because he
confessed his Belief of that which you hold and maintain to be of such absolute
Necessity? Now here are two things more considerable to make him a Baptist, at
that time, then any you have brought, in all that he has confessed, can make
him a Quaker; and yet it may be supposed, that you did not at that time own him
as a Baptist, notwithstanding his Convincement, and confessing his Belief to
your Water Baptism as an Ordinance of God.

2dly, Thou say, That before he came again, he met with the People called
Quakers, who told him (as himself confessed) That he must not look upon those
outward Ordinances, for they were low; but that he must mind the Light Within,
and be guided by it; and not by the Scriptures, for they were a Dead Letter.

Rep. It is to be observed, that thou did not know whether he met with any of
the Quakers or no, but as he confessed, and yet he must be a Quaker in Print:
Would ever any man, that had the right use of his Wits, have spread such
Stories abroad, as thou have done, and have no certain knowledge of what thou
writest? And your outward Ordinances, as you call them, are Temporal, and may
be seen, and the Apostle would not have such things looked at; and they that
will not be guided by the Light, and follow it, they disobey the Doctrine of
Christ, and abide in Darkness; and they that abide in Darkness do not know the
Scriptures, nor the Power of God: and this is testified upon Truth's account,
whatever R. A. might say unto thee.

3dly, Thou say, That when R. A. came again to the Meeting, he much
contended against the Baptism of Water; and said, That now they were to be
Baptized with the Baptism of the Spirit, and not with Water.

Rep. As for R. A's Contention (if he did so) it does not concern the matter in
hand: and you Baptists do not so well agree in all Points of your Belief, but
you can sometimes contend one with another, and if thee and R. A. could not
agree, it does not follow, that he was a Quaker: and if you be not Baptized
with the Baptism of the Spirit, how are you One Body? for it was by one Spirit
that the Saints were Baptized into One Body, whether Jews or Gentiles: And if
you can you may demonstrate, which of you all have a Commission from God to be
an Administrator of Water, in order to Baptize any.

4thly, Thou say, that R. A. said, The Spirit was to try the Scriptures, and
not the Scriptures the Spirit. And then says, that thou said, Thou
believed'st, the Scriptures were to try the Spirit, and not the Spirit to try
the Scriptures. Thus in thy first Narrative.

Rep. If you discoursed on this manner, you were both at work in your
Imaginations; for the Spirit and Scriptures agree, and do not Try each other:
and thou have sufficiently manifested thy Ignorance both of the Spirit and of
the Scriptures, who would have the Scriptures to try the Spirit; Can thou
produce a Scripture to make good thy Belief? but in thy last Narrative thou
seem to state the matter otherwise, and so would alter the case to cover
thy self, where thou have over-shot thy self, and some other Alterations, which
thou have made in thy last, which I shall wave at present; And why have thou
altered this matter, and put thy Meaning to it? For thou say in thy last,
That thou believe, the Scriptures were to Try the Spirits, and not the
Spirits to Try the Scriptures; meaning (say thou) as before is said, That the
Holy Spirit, as he speaks in the Scriptures, is to Try and Judge the Spirits
of men, and particularly the Quakers Spirit, which they call the Light within:
And here thou have plainly manifested Deceit unto all who have Eyes to see, and
thy Meaning will not cover thee; And who have any cause to believe thee, that
can twist thy words from one thing to another? But how do the Scriptures try
and judge the spirits of men, according to thy Meaning? I would understand thy
mind more plainly, as to this thy Evasion: And why must the Quakers Spirit
(which thou say they call the Light Within) be particularly tried and judged
by the Scriptures? Must the Letter try and judge the Light? Would thou make
the Greater subordinate to the Lesser? for that which is the Original of a
thing must needs be greater then that which is manifest from it, and the Letter
was manifest from the Light; for the holy Men of God spoke as they were moved
by it, and it was within them when it moved them to speak: and so the Holy Men's
Spirit was the Light with which the Quakers have Unity, and their words do not
try and judge the Quakers Spirit, but their words are fulfilled and witnessed
by the same Spirit: and here the Quakers are before you all, who are only in
the words, as they were once spoken, and not in the Spirit by which they were
spoken; and so you want the Key of Knowledge, which opens the Mysteries of the
Kingdom: and when John bid the Saints try the Spirits, whether they were of
God, he said, There were many False Prophets gone out into the World; and the
False Prophets were in a False spirit, which the Saints were to try in the True
Spirit; and so the True Spirit was the Tryer of all false spirits and false
Prophets, and the same Spirit is the Tryer of all spirits now; and they that
live in it hold fast that which is good, and know it to be Good though false
spirits may call it Evil.

5thly, Thou say, Thou said to R. A. that thou wast afraid that the Quakers
were deceived, and guided by a spirit of Delusion; and that it was thy
Judgment, That all the Sons and Daughters of men ought to be guided by the
Scriptures.

Rep. It seems thou had no certain Ground to believe that the Quakers were
Deceived and Deluded, but only wast afraid; and so it is manifest thou could
not try them, either by the Spirit or Scriptures: surely Wise Men will be
ashamed of thy Ignorance and Folly: And for the removing thy vain Fear, we are
willing to tell thee and thy Brethren, That we live in the Blessed Truth, where
Righteousness and Peace embrace and kiss each other. And as for thy Judgment,
That all the Sons and Daughters of men ought to be guided by the Scriptures;
thou have given thy Judgment inconsiderately; for thou have not demonstrated
any thing as a Ground why it ought to be so, but only stated it from thy own
Judgment; and if thy Judgment be sufficient to bring others to be of the same
Judgment, then the Judgment of the Pope may plead Authority, and so people may
as soon be Papists as Baptists; and if there be no other Guide, but the
Scriptures, for the Sons and Daughters of men to be guided by; then what Guide
have such as never heard nor read the Scriptures? have such no Guide to lead
them to fear God, and work Righteousness, to be accepted of him? or must they
of necessity perish for want of the Scriptures to be their Guide? or whether
can such a People be saved? thou art here concerned to give thy Judgment again;
for there is not yet such a Decision of the great Controversy, as thou vainly
boasts.

6thly, Thou now come to speak of R. A' s coming to reprove thee, and
pronounce thee a Leper; and that a little time after he confessed, he was
deceived, and was a false Prophet; and that the same Judgment was come upon one
of his Children, and himself, Wife and other Children taken with a Restless
Pain in their Bodies: and that he desired thee to Pray for him, and thou and
thy Congregation did pray for the removing of that Distemper and Affliction;
and they were restored to their former Health again, which (thou say) R. A.
confessed when he came to the Meeting again.

Ans. It is to be observed, That the very Ground of all the Buzzle and Noise,
which thou have made against the Quakers, is only from the bare and single
Confession of R. A. and thy own Consequences and Conclusion from what he has
confessed and said, but thy groundless Conclusions do not prove so effectual
for thy purpose; as thou might vainly suppose when thou begun'st thy work:
for though thou have made such a Noise against the Light Within, and against
the Quakers, because R. A. might tell thee, The Quakers did tell him, he was to
mind the Light, to be guided by it; yet the Light is not to be charged with R.
A's Miscarrying, if he did Miscarry in any thing wherein he concerned the
Light: for if he did concern the Light in giving Judgment against thee, and
then afterward confessed, that he was Deceived, and was a False Prophet; this
does not make the Light to be a False Principle, nor those that are faithful to
it, to be guided by it, a Deluded People: and if he did confess, that he was
Deceived, it does not follow, that the Light deceived him; for there were never
any false Prophets in the True Light, nor never any True Prophets out of it;
and so it is very clear, that R. A. was not guided by the True Light when he
was deceived, and was a false Prophet; neither does it appear by all thou have
said, that he was guided by the Light, and yet he must be called a Quaker,
because he might sometimes have something to say of the Light, and against
Water Baptism: and suppose this was granted, yet it does not make him any more
a Quaker, then for a man to speak of Water Baptism and against the Pope would
make him a Baptist; and if such a man should do or say something that is a
manifest Error, would you Baptists take it well, that his Error should be
charged upon your whole Society, and you counted a Deluded People because of
such a Miscarriage by that man, when he was never taken notice of to be owned
by you? it may well be concluded, That you would be ready to clear your selves,
both from the man, and his Miscarriage; and to blame such as should lay his
Miscarriage upon you: And if you would not be willing to bear such a thing your
selves, if cast upon you from such a Ground, why then do you so much busy your
selves to do it unto us? Are you doing in this as you would be done by? let the
Juditious judge: For you neither manifest Justice, Equity or Mercy toward us
in this matter; but rather vent your Envy and Malice against us, as the
Sober-minded well perceive. And as for the Judgment of R. A. against thee R. J.
if such a thing was, and the thing coming upon himself and Family, it does not
concern the Quakers at all, or the Light of Christ within, which is their
Principle; and had thou been so wise, as to have let the Quakers alone, and
not concerned them, its possible the Story of thy Prayers for removing such a
Judgment might have made thee and you famous in the Eyes of some who delight in
Novelties: but thou have taken a wrong course to advance thy own glory; and in
time, both thee, and those that have assisted thee in thy work, will fall under
your own Shame: for the True Light is not to be charged with that which by a
False spirit may be done, no more then an Innocent Man is to be charged with
the Offense of an Offender; for, all that live in the true Light receive true
Commands, and no Error is to be charged upon the Commander, nor such accounted
Deluded that keep his Commands; for the true Light leads all those that
faithfully follow it out of all Error, into all Truth; but where Imaginations
have liberty to work, they conceive a false thing, and bring forth a false
birth, and in that work the Light may be pretended though not at all concerned:
and by this thou may see where R. A. was when he was deceived, and was a
false Prophet, as thou say he confessed. And so it is not what any may speak
of the Light Within that makes the Light guilty of any thing that may be done
amiss by such as speak of it; for it stands a Witness against them in their
Consciences, when transgress it. And as for R. A. and his Family being restored
to their former health, by the Prayers of thee and thy Congregation, it is
still to prove, though thou have gotten several Subscribers to what R. A.
confessed concerning it; and in such a manner thou may write one Book after
another with reiteration; for thou brought Evidence to what R. A. confessed
in thy first, and thou art gotten no further yet, only have gotten new
Witnesses to R. A's old Confession; and so all thou have done by thy last
Subscribers is but a further manifestation of thy Folly, and it is not worth
taking notice of in particulars, neither shall I trouble my self or the Reader
with such Impertinencies: and thou do as much as confess, that as to thy own
knowledge, thou wast ignorant of any Affliction upon R A. and his Family, or of
their Recovery; for thou say, Had thou foreseen this Peevishness in the
Incredulous Quakers, thou might perhaps have deprived them of this their
foolish Advantage; and then thou bring Christ and the Apostle Paul, whom
(thou say) did not go to visit all for whose* Health* they prayed: and so
thou would parralel thy self with those Unparralel'd Workers; and thou
would bring thy self off again by saying, But what am I, O Lord! I confess
unto thee, I am not worthy to be mentioned here; and so thou first seem to
include thy self with Christ and the Apostle, and then would exclude thy self
again, as not worthy to be mentioned: And for thy Foreseeing the Peevishness
of the Quakers (as thou term'st it) thou have shamed thy self with that
Expression; for it seems thou had nothing in it to have satisfied thy self of
the truth of the matter, but only to have deprived the Quakers of that which
thou call their Foolish Advantage; and so thou could not pray either in
Faith or Hope, who did not know whether there was any Affliction upon those
thou prayd'st for or no; and so thou and thy Congregation prayed at an
adventure, and R. A. confessed to the Restoration of Health again; and this is
the Great Wonder which thou have spread abroad in the Nation, to make people
believe, that you prevailed with God by your Prayers: but the most Juditious do
rather believe that it was a mere Fiction, and thou art not able from thy own
knowledge to demonstrate it otherwise. And thus I have done with thy Narrative.

I shall now take notice of some particular Passages, which thou have stated to
make good R. A's Affliction and Restoration.

Thou speak of some that asked him (meaning R. A.) Whether he himself had
not a Child presently after that was Leprous? and he said, he had a Child then
that did break out into Sores, p. 13.

Rep. Mark this Confessor; he did not directly answer the Question of the
Enquirers, as to confess his Child had a Leprosy; but that he had a Child
broke out into Sores: and it is well known to all that have their Senses, that
there may be a breaking out into Sores, and yet no Leprosy: and this is all
that R. A. confessed upon inquiry. How has the poor man been drawn out and
squeezed by Inquirers, to answer the End which thou Unjustly have begun?

Thou say in the same page, That the Title Page of the Narrative was not of
thy composing.

Rep. It seems you Baptists can shuffle to make out your own matter; and thou
can subscribe to that which is not of thy own composing: and to help the
matter as well as thou can, thou say, It is not without Truth; but whether
this appears like the Truth, I shall leave to all Unbyast Judgments to
determine.

Thou endeavourest pa. 10. to make R. A. a Quaker without any Contradiction,
saying, That R. A. was a Quaker in Principles, and owned that People above all
others, and was acted by their spirit, is palpable enough from what is said in
the Narrative.

Ans. Thou now seemst to leave thy Subscribers to R. A's Confession, and take
the Matter upon thy self, as if thy own word should carry the matter more
clearly then all that R. A. has confessed, and by several subscribed: and must
we take thy bare word that R. A. was a Quaker in Principles, and owned us above
all others, and was acted by our Spirit? would tho^ impose these things upon
us from thy vain Conclusions? but as thou have referred this Matter to the
Narrative, as such a palpable thing, I shall not run into Tautology; but desire
the Reader to peruse what is answered to the Narrative, which, I doubt not,
will fully satisfy any Juditious Person touching this matter.

I shall take a little notice of three Heads, which thou statest to make good
this false Assertion.

First, Thou say, In that he contributes his Testimony to that which they
call the Light Within, at as high a rate as the most of that Way; which (say
thou) if they have any Principles at all, is the chief of their Principles.

Answ. What Testimony (as thou callst it) R. A. did contribute to the Light
Within, or at what rate, we have only thy bare word, and our Belief not being
in thee, we cannot credit thy Stories, and therefore thy words are but as Wind
unto us. But thou say, if we have any Principles at all, the Light is the
chief: and here thou questionest, whether we have any Principles at all; and
yet, even now affirmed, that R. A. was a Quaker in Principles: who would take
thy word, that know not what thou say, or whereof thou affirmest? and if
the Light be the chief (as thou put'st the case) we have no cause to be ashamed
of it: but thou shall not at this time be made wiser by me, in demonstrating
what our Principles are, or what is the chief; but thou may grope in the
Dark, where thou art, seeing thou do not love the Light.

Secondly, Thou say, In that he took upon him to appear as a Prophet for the
Quakers; condemning such as opposed them, and Proclaiming them to be the People
of God.

Answ. Thou once said, The Light commanded him; and now say, He took upon
him: mark thy Contradiction, and condemn thy Folly; for he did not appear as a
Prophet for the Quakers, though he might rebuke thee for speaking against them;
for that he might do in Civility, as a man, seeing thy Incivility in speaking
against them behind their Backs, and yet no more a Quaker for rebuking thy
Folly, then thou in thy Folly: And where did he proclaim them to be the People
of God? do thou count that to be his Proclamation, when he said, He was come
to reprove thee for speaking against the People of God called Quakers; this is
all the Proclamation that can be found in all thou have expressed, and whether
this was true or no, we have no Evidence besides thy own; and we have no cause
to believe thee, who art the very Author of such unheard of and incredulous
Stories.

Thou make a Rabble about the Evidence, that the Quakers bring to invalidate
the Narrative, as if they were either abused, or most unworthily forged: but
this is such a piece of Foppery as not worth taking any notice of, except one
did intend to follow thee in thy Humors; and being so inconsiderable, as not to
carry any thing of weight to make any thing good on thy part, or to make any
thing good against the Quakers, either for abusing, or unworthily forging any
thing, I shall wholly wave it; only take notice of one Passage, p. 16.
concerning something that thou say Katherine Hall should say of the Quakers
calling for much Ale, and brought it into the Street, bid the People Drink what
they would, and if they mould have more they should have it; and then thou
draw'st thy own Conclusion, saying, Probably to move the People to befriend
them, with the more liberal Testimony.

Answ. Can thou tell us the Longitude or Latitude of this Story? for I do not
know who can find out either: and was it unbecoming Christianity or Civility,
to bid the People drink, who came thither upon their account? But this matter
needs no answering; for all that know the Quakers, do very well know their
Moderation, Temporance and Sobriety, and that they (...) not inclined to the
Excess of Strong Drink, or any way to Encourage others in such a Practice: but
one may plainly see, that thou would creep under any thing for thy
Subterfuge, and thy Wickedness in this matter appears in a very high degree.

Thirdly, Thou say, By his acting after the manner of diverse Quakers in these
days, going on Unsent Errands, only moved by the Conceits of their own hearts.

Answ. His acting was not after the manner of any Quakers according to thy
Conclusion; for the Quakers know who sends them on their Errands, and know
their Errand, though thou know neither; and he that sends them is True, and
Truth is their Errand; and being moved by him, who is the Fountain of Life, and
Wellspring of Mercies, to Labor and Travel in his Work, they are upheld by
his Power to do his Will; and this is more then the Conceits of their own
Hearts: though the Goo Heart may conceive Good Things, and indict Good Matters;
but thy Motions lie in the Conceits of thy own Brain, which is a Habitation of
Notions. And seeing thou affirm'st, the Quakers go on Unsent Errands, I ask
thee, or any Baptist, Who sends you on your Errand, seeing you pretend to
have an Errand? Have you heard the Voice of God and Christ to tell you your
Errand, and to send you forth with it? give us a plain Answer.

And thus I have Answered the most considerable Passages in the Pamphlet to
maintain R. A. a Quaker; and I may well hope, that the Juditious and
Sober-minded, who only desire to know the truth, will be fully satisfied that
R. A. was never a Quaker in Principle, Judgment or Practice; and so the
Baptists are plainly Discovered in their Sophistry.

And as to the rest of thy Book, concerning Christ the Light in every man, and
about Ordinances, etc. thou and the Reader art referred to (...) which is coming
forth, in Answer to Tho. Hicks, called (...)ich does treat fully concerning
these things; in which (...)hy Brethren's Objections and Cavils are fully
Answered.

W. S.

THE END.

