A True, Short, Impartial RELATION Containing the Substance of the PROCEEDINGS
At the Assize held the 12th and 13th day of the Month called August, 1664. at
the Town of Hertford, (Orlando Bridgman being Judge) Chiefly with and against
Nine Prisoners called Quakers; as it was then Noted and Observed first in
short-writing:

And now made public; Partly to prevent various Reports; And partly to Inform
People of the Illegal Proceedings of the said Court against the Prisoners
aforesaid: Eight of which were Sentenced to be Transported beyond the Seas,
there to Remain for Seven Years. W. S.

And Judgment is turned away backward, and Justice stands afar off; for Truth
is fallen in the street, and Equity cannot enter,

Isa. 59. 14, 15. And see Chap. 10. 1, 2. And Micah 7. 4. Printed in the Year
1664.

Hertford, August, 12, 13.
ON the 12th day those Nine Prisoners, and many others who are called Quakers,
were called over; The others had the Oath of Allegiance read to them, and
because they would not kiss the Bible and swear, were Returned to Prison again,
where some of them have been Prisoners some years.

Then an Indictment being framed against those Nine Prisoners, for being at an
unlawful Meeting, under color and pretense of Religion, the Witnesses were
examined, who agreed in their Evidence, That they were took at such times, at
such places, met together above the number of five; and that they heard them
say nor speak no words, nor saw them do any thing it their Meeting, but sit
still. The Indictment was delivered to the Grand Jury, who did not agree in
their Verdict that day, but on the thirteenth day in the morning early, they
came into the Court, and brought in their Verdict Ignoramus.

Judge Bridgeman standing up, seemed to be angry with them, and spoke to them
after this manner: My Masters what do you mean to do? will you make a nose of
wax of the Law, and suffer the Law to be bafled? those that think to deceive
the Law, the Law will deceive them: One of the Jurymen said to him, (when he
asked them how it could be they did not find the Bill) that it concerned them
to beware, and be well satisfied in what they did, for they were upon men's
lives, for what they knew: No said the Judge I desire not their lives, but
their Reformation; then one of the Justices reflected upon, and upbraided the
Jury-man, as not being purged from his old dregs: so the Judge giving them some
Directions (drawn as he said from the meaning and intent of the Law) how to
find the Bill; his Instructions and Directions to this Grand Jury, was like his
Instructions to the Petty Jury, which follows at large, therefore may be
omitted here; Then he caused them to go forth again, who returned soon, and
found the Bill; At which the Court seemed to be well pleased: Then were four of
those Nine Prisoners called to the Bar, and their Indictment read, and the
Prisoners being asked whether they were Guilty, or not Guilty? they answered,
Not Guilty, but Innocent, and that they had transgressed no just Law.

J. B. spoke and said, but you have Transgressed this Law, (having the late Act
in his hand) and you have been twice Convicted Not of any evil done, nor yet
according to the plain words or letter of the Law, the fact which it reaches
being never yet proved against them, as might be made appear if either reason
or truth might be heard in the case.
already upon Record, and if you are found Guilty by the Jury this time, I must
pass the Sentence of Transportation upon you: Now therefore you shall see that
we do not desire to strain the Law to the highest severity, neither do I
believe that was the aim of the Lawmakers, to be severe; but for Conformity:
If you will promise that you will not go, or be at, any more such Meetings, I
will show you this favor, as to acquit you for what is past; How then does he
say this Law is not against Conscience, if other Laws be, which enjoin coming
to the Church, as he says afterward?
this favor you may receive before the Jury is Charged with you, but
afterward I cannot do it: And know also, if the Jury for want of punctual
Evidence, should not find you guilty, yet if you are taken again, you will be
in the same case you now are in; what say you, Will you promise to meet no more?

Pris. We can promise no such thing?


J. B. Call a Jury.


So a Jury was called, sworn, and charged to bring in their Verdict according
to Mark, But when the Evidence would not serve his turn, he would prepossess
them with his own suppositions against the Prisoners, as after appears.
Evidence; And then the Indictment was read the second time, the substance of
which was, for being at an Unlawful Meeting at such a time and place, the
first, second and third time. The Witnesses were called and sworn, whose
Testimony agreed in this only, That they took the Prisoners (at the Bar) at
such times, at such places, met together above the number of Five, but that
they saw any thing they What Law of any Nation punishes any man if he speak no
evil, nor do no evil.
did, or heard any thing they said or spoke at the Meetings, they did not nor
could not witness.

Then J. B. spoke to the Jury after this manner, My Masters the Jury, You hear
what Evidence the Witnesses give; how they took them at such times at such
places, which are places they use to meet in; And that they were above the
number of Five besides the persons of the Family where they met And what evil
have they ever done, or their Meetings produced? it is neither place nor number
that in reason can make a Meeting unlawful, where no evil is done, or intended.
; And that they are twice Convicted upon Record already; And this is the third
Offense, which incurs the Sentence of Transportation, if you find them Guilty.

Now I have this to say to you (first reading that clause in the Act which
says, That if any after the first day of July shall be present at any
Conventicles, Assembly or Meeting, etc.) My Masters, you are not to expect a
Note, though they were sworn and charged to bring in their Verdict according to
Evidence, yet the Judge bids them not expect any plain Evidence against the
Prisoners for any matter of fact they did, but strongly possesses the Jury
with suppositions and imaginations of what they might do, though they did it
not.
plain punctual Evidence against them for any thing they said or did at their
Meeting; for they may speak to one another though not with or by Auriculer
sound, but by a Cast of the Eye, or a Motion of the Head or Foot, or Gesture of
the Body; for dumb men may speak to one another so as they may understand each
other by signs; In that they speak the truth as the Scripture witnesses that
God is a Spirit, and is worshipped in the Spirit; the Christians did, and do
know one another in spirit, and discern Spirits: Is this now become so high a
crime to profess, to deserve the sentence of Transportation, even for
worshipping God indeed and in truth; and for denying all hypocrisy, colors,
and pretense whatsoever?
And they themselves say, that the Worship of God is inward, in the Spirit, and
that they can discern Spirits, and know one another in Spirit: So that if you
find, or believe in your hearts that they were in the Meeting, under color of
Religion in their way, though they say still only and looked upon each other,
seeing they cannot say what they did there: It was an Unlawful Meeting, and
their use and practice not according to the Lyturgie of the Church of England,
for it allows and commands when people meet together in the Church, That They
that meet to read and speak, and hear divine words, And do and practice the
Devil's works, their worship is indeed under color and pretense: and does not
the Lyturgy allow of the Worship of God in the Spirit?
Divine Service shall be read, etc. A cruel Imposition.
And you must find the Bill, for you must have Respect to the How many
thousands have the Priests and Lawyers destroyed by their meanings?
meaning and intent of the Law, which the King and Parliament have in wisdom
and policy made, not only against Conventicles, but the words Assembly and
Meeting was added, for we have had late No experience of any evil contrived by
those called Quakers, therefore unjustly urged upon the Jury against them.
experience of the danger of such Meetings under color of Religion; And it is
an easy matter at such Meetings to conspire and consult mischief; Therefore
the Wisdom and Policy of the King and Parliament, lest they should be
undermined, have made this Law, which is not a Law against Conscience; for it
does not touch If that Law is not against practices performed in a
conscientious duty to God, then is it highly perverted by the Executors of it.
Conscience at all, as I confess some other Laws do, which enjoins coming to
Church, and some other things; Why are these Laws then prosecuted against many
innocent men's consciences?
but this Law leaves men's Consciences free, How does this Law leave men's
Consciences free, when it is their Consciences, to meet apart from those places
called Churches, where Drunkards, Swearers, etc. meet? and how are his former
words contradicted herein?
(so they do not meet.) Something more, like as above, he spoke to the Jury,
forcing, the intent and meaning of the Law, and their own persuasion or belief,
above and beyond the express Reason of the Law it self, or Evidence of the
Witnesses; telling them that he was Judge of the Law, as to tell them what it
meant and intended; And that they were Judges of the Fact only: How can they
then bring in any Verdict upon an Indictment which has relation both to Law
and Fact.
Then he commanded the Jury to go forth, and they went forth, the Foreman
taking the Act with him: within the space of an hour the Jury returned, and
being asked whether they were agreed? they said, Yes, and that their Foreman
should speak for them, who said, that Nicholas Lucas and the other three were
guilty.

J. B. reading their names, said to the Prisoners, What can you say for your
selves that Judgment of Transportation should not pass or be given against you?

Pris. We are innocent, and have transgressed no just Law: if we must have that
sentence, we give up our Bodies freely into the hands of the Lord, the will of
the Lord be done.


Judge. B. Have you nothing more to say?


Pris. Nothing but that we are Innocent.


J. B. Hearken to your Sentence, the execution of which admits of no long time
(reading the words of the late Act, which says, That the Justices shall
forthwith make their Warrant to the Sheriffs of the County, That they shall
convey them to the next convenient Port for Transportation.) Have you nothing
more to say?


Pris. We are innocent, and have wronged no man.


J. B. Hear your Sentence, You shall be Transported beyond the Seas to the
Island of Barbados, there to remain seven years.


Then Jeremiah Herne and Thomas Wood were called to the Bar, their Indictment
read, to which they pleaded Not Guilty, but Innocent; and Jeremiah Herne said
he was no such person as the Act mentions, for plotting and contriving
Insurrections, Note, that this their Plea of Innocence might not be accepted
of, though nothing contrary thereto could be proved against them, according to
the Reason of the Law here pleaded by the Prisoners, though altogether
perverted and waved by their Persecutors.
etc. Then J. B. interrupted him, saying, You are a forward man, you have an
estate, and caused him to be set by; but J. B. said, Thomas VVood I hear a good
report of you, consider what you do; I am sorry, seeing you have a good report
among your neighbors, that you should be found Guilty, which I fear you will
if you put your self upon Trial; I am willing to show you favor, and it may be
one man may fare the better for another [meaning that J. H. who was included in
the same Indictment, but had been basely and falsely represented to the Judge,
by a wicked man, on John King of great Haddum, who was Witness against Jeremiah
Herne, and excepted against in point of Testimony, as a person of a false
tongue and malicious spirit, as was manifested and made appear by the said J.
H. to the Magistrates formerly, and was then offered again to the Court, if he
might have been heard.] But though there was great enmity against the said Jer.
Herne, the Judge said they should both partake of this his favor if they would
but desire it; which was, that he would wave the proceedings of the Court, and
give them till the next Assizes to consider better with themselves, which he
said he could not show them after the Jury was charged with them; What say you,
will you have it deferred till the next Assizes? For if the Jury find the Bill,
Could he expect any other but that the Jury would find the Bill, when before he
put them upon it?
you will be sent to Jamaico, you must not go all to one place.

Pris. We have transgressed no Law of God, nor wronged any man, we leave it to
the Court, we desire it not.


J. B. If you will not desire it, I cannot, nor will not do it; [but he often
urged that they would desire it.]


Then were Three more brought to the Bar; one was taken coming out or from the
Meeting, viz. John Reynolds, the Witnesses said within a yard of the door, with
his face from-wards the Meeting Place, the other in the Meeting: Their
Indictment was all of one form; the Jury was called, sworn and charged, as
before, to bring in their Verdict according to Evidence; the Indictment read;
the Witnesses gave in their Evidence, That they only took them at such times,
and at such places, saying nothing, nor doing nothing, but sitting still. The
Judge took occasion when one of the Prisoners was at the Bar, to speak on this
wise, God forbid that I should do any thing that is not right and just, against
my Conscience, there is that which is written upon the Wall before me, which
puts me in mind that I should not judge for man, but for God, Mark that, And
where then does God command him so severely to sentence innocent persons for
meeting peaceably together? Nay, has he not plainly judged for man, and
against God in this matter, whenas the persons he sentenced, did meet in the
Worship of God to wait upon him? and if he judged for God, why did he not show
some Law of God for what he did?
and I. H. afterward put him in mind thereof, saying, If I have transgressed
any just Law, let me suffer; and if not, he that judges for God will not
condemn me (or words to that purpose.) But the Judge gave him a slight Answer,
saying, You do well to put me in mind of my duty, pray think of your own. Then
in his direction to the Jury concerning the five Prisoners at the Bar, he made
a long speech to the same purpose, and in like manner as before. And concerning
him that was taken, but not in the Meeting, he endeavored much to persuade the
Jury that he might very probably be guilty, giving them this instance; Suppose,
said he, a man be killed in a house, and no body saw him killed, but a man is
met coming out of the house with a bloody knife in his hand, it is a very
probable Evidence that he is guilty of the Murder. Could this be either Justice
or Reasonable, thus to go about to prepossess the Jury against an innocent man,
beyond their Evidence, and with such an unfit instance? or could this be a fit
parallel in a matter of Conscience or Worship, wherein they were concerned, let
all that be but rational judge?
So though the Witnesses do not say that they saw and took him in the Meeting,
yet they swore he was within a yard of the door with his face from-wards the
place where they usually met; and he has been taken twice already, and
Convicted upon Record: my Masters I leave it to you, go forth. A Bailiff was
called, sworn, and charged to provide the Jury a Room, and to let none speak
with them, nor to let them have either Bread, Drink, or Candle, till they
brought in their Verdict.

In the space of about half an hour the Jury returned, and being asked for
their Verdict, they said four of the five Prisoners abovementioned were
Guilty, and that the other which was taken in the yard was Not Guilty, so he
was acquitted.

J. B. Put Thomas Wood, Jeremiah Herne, and the other two to the Bar; so
reading their names, he asked them what they could say why Judgment of
Transportation should not be given against them?


Pris. We are Innocent, and have not offended any just Law of God or man to
deserve that sentence; we leave it to the Witness of God in thy and your
Consciences.


I. B. You have offended against this Law (having the late Act before him)
which is made by the King and Parliament, and executed by us their subordinate
Ministers: if it be not Righteous and Just we must answer for that. Have you
any more to say?


Pris. Nothing but that we are Innocent.


I. B. Hear your Sentence; You shall be Transported beyond the Seas to the
Island of Iamaico, being one of his Majesty's Plantations Foreign, there to
remain seven years. Now Judge Bridgman thou have discovered thy Spirit, and
what was in the bottom, and all sober people may take notice of thy proceedings.



I. B. Now I have this one thing to acquaint you with, That if you and either
of you will pay down here into the Court an hundred pounds before the Court
rises, you and every of you shall be discharged and clearly acquitted for what
is past: And I will show you this favor, as not to discharge the Court at this
present, but shall adjourn it till two in the afternoon.


[It being then within one quarter of an hour of two] The Crier made
Proclamation, the Court was adjourned and met again about three, and the Judge
sent to the Prisoners condemned, to know if they would pay down the hundreds of
pounds, but answering Nay, the Court was soon discharged.

The Names of the Prisoners under their Sentence are

Francis Pryor, Nicholas Lucas, Henry Feast, Henry Marshall, Jeremiah Herne,
Thomas Wood, John Blindale, Samuel Traherne.

Now let all People weigh and consider the manner and intent of these
proceedings, and to what purpose Law and Justice is pretended in their
proceedings against these Innocent Persons, who have been carried as Lambs dumb
before the Shearers; having Innocence on their sides, and nothing contrary
thereunto proved against them, who when their plea of Innocence might not be
received, have committed their Cause to the Lord, and so far acquiesced in
their Spirits as not to say much for themselves, seeing the Judges intent
against them, both by his evading the Reason of the Law, and proceeding in his
own will, contrary to the very words and form of the Law pretended against
them, concerning the color or pretense of Religious Exercise, etc. which
plainly implies some evil intended, as Sedition, Plotting, or Contriving
Insurrections, according to the very plain words of the Preamble of the Act,
which could not at all be proved against them; as also by his endeavoring to
instigate and prejudice the Jury against the Prisoners, by going about to
prepossess them with his own suppositions or imaginations of Gestures, which
there was no proof of, which had either Christianity, Law or Justice, or his
Oath enjoining thereto, or Reason or Equity; or if so much as Humanity had but
any place in his heart, there would not have been such proceedings against an
innocent and harmless People, for waiting together in silence upon the Lord God
in his Spiritual Worship, as it is well known for no other end we meet; And
there has been long experience of us in that Case, and had you of the Jury
that brought them in Guilty, had any regard to your Oaths, or to the help of
God, or your own Salvation, or the good of the Country, you would not have been
so biased and prejudiced merely upon a man's own suppositions against such your
Innocent Neigbours and Countrymen, for which assuredly God will call both you
and him to Judgment, for your proceedings, who have showed your selves so silly
as to please men more than God; and to gratify man's perverse will, and the
Covert Design of the Court, more than to regard the Countries good: And what do
Jurors signify if a Judge must be both Judge, Accuser, and Jury in effect also?

And now let all Sober and Moderate people consider such proceedings and the
end of them, and where ever there was such a President, especially among
professed Christians, as that Innocent People or Persons should be sentenced
for Transportation or Banishment for innocently sitting together in silence
(waiting upon the Lord) when no evil or injury against any man's person, nor any
unlawful Act could in the least be evidenced against them, so as they are
Sufferers for Worshipping of God without any color or pretense for any evil
design whatsoever: In which Case we must only appeal to the LORD GOD of Heaven
and Earth (by whom men's actions are weighed) for Justice and Right which we
cannot have from man.

G. VV.

POSTSCRIPT.
In the second Page the Judge says the Prisoners had transgressed the late
Act. At the third Page he affirms the Meetting at which the Prisoners were
taken, to be that which they call their Worship. And at the fourth Page he
says the Law (meaning the said Act) is not a Law against Conscience, nor
touches Conscience at all; by which it may be seen how this Judge is
acquainted either with Worship or Conscience: for in what is Conscience
concerned, if not about Worship, yea though mistaken? else Bp. Gauden said not
true in saying, Conscientia errans obligat. But no marvel if this Judge mistake
in Divinity, while he misseth the Law in an approved Maxim, A verbo legis in
criminibus and paenis non est recedendum, (i. e.) In criminal Cases the letter
of the Law is to be kept unto, as in Dr. Bonams Case, speaking of the Law,
says, It shall be taken strictly because against the Liberty of the Subject:
But this Judge enforces an intent and meaning of the Law upon the Jury, not
keeping to the Letter, which in a case of this nature, as Transporting men out
of their Native Country (only for sitting still) without any overt Act by them,
either of word or deed, let the Wise judge: for it has been said, that Penal
Laws can admit of no construction or inferences, for Penalties are to persuade
the keeping of known Laws; not Laws conjectural, ambiguous and by consequence;
for Judges and Justices are Ministers, not Makers of Laws.

THE END.

