A Sober and Seasonable Commemoration OF The Thirtieth Day of January, 1648.
Being the Day of the Martyrdom of King CHARLES the first, And fit to be
Considered upon the Anniversary FAST for the same.
By the same Hand as Wrote Vox Populi; Or, ENGLANDS Lamentation.
IF we look back, and seriously consider the many Calamities of our late Wars,
and Retrospect into the Causes both Evident and Remote, which brought that
Deluge of Misery upon three (then almost Ruined) Kingdoms, and the Bloody
Sequel of all those troubles, the Beheading of that Virtuous and pious King
Charles the First, in the Memory of which we yearly keep a Fast for the same,
that God will be pleased never more to visit us in h^s Wrath, nor give us the
like Dreadful occasion of Sackcloth and Ashes: I say, if we did most seriously
consider, as we ought, from the greatest to the least, we should not tread the
same paths leading to Destruction, nor run in the ways of Iniquities.

They who yet well remember the Transactions of those Times, before we were
rent and torn with Civil Wars, and now seriously weigh in the Balance of
Judgment, the posture and Actions of Affairs at this present, may see too much
Similitude, if not to fear as bad and fatal Consequences. It would therefore be
well for every man at this day, to consider and say with himself, if I have
committed Iniquity, I will commit it no more. It will be seasonable now as much
as ever, for King and People, both great and small, to Commemorate and think
upon the sadness of that day, when all faces looked pale, and when the Land
mourned, when they beheld with bleeding hearts, the sad Effects of Divisions,
War, and Rebellion, falling upon the head of their Sovereign, and Bondage and
Slavery flung upon the necks of the people.

Prorogative on the one side, and Privilege on the other, first began, then
Religion which should be all peace, increased the Trouble: Factions were made,
parties assembled, Councels were taken, Cabals were formed, Fears were
hightned, Jealousies increased, Heart-burnings fomented, and at last War was
raised, but the sad and fatal Consequence of all was, the violent Death of
Sacred Majesty, and for a time the Seclusion of Monarchy. And now how far we
are running in the same paths, and treading the like Mazes, till we shall be
lost in a Labyrinth of Woe and Confusion, every one sees, who can remember, or
read the Tansactions of former times. Several of late have loudly cried out,
How like is this to 41. and His Majesty's ears have been blown into, with the
remembrances of the evil Actions of evil men, whereby fears and Jealousies may
justly be raised in his Royal Breast, against his good Subjects and have still
apprehesions of the fatal effects of 48. But however like these beginnings seem
to those troublesome times, there is yet this difference plainly appears, that
now it is not Episcopacy and Presbitery that contend, but Protestantism and
Popery: The Church of England is as much concerned as the Presbyters, and both
now justly full of fears and apprehensions, seek to secure their Religion,
their Lives, and their Fortunes.

But let us not push on too violently our Evil Fate, which by Gods permission,
is like to rush upon us, for the Sins of the People: Let us I say, remember
this Dreadful day, wherein Monarchy was laid in the Dust, and the most pious
and virtuous Prince that ever sat on our Throne, brought as a Lamb to the
slaughter: Think of this both King and People, and let this Anniversary be
effectually considered, that it may put some stop to the Violences which seem
to be preparing by several Factions. God has given us a time of Peace and
plenty, and every man has sat quietly under his Vine and his Fig Tree; our
Temples have been Crowned, and good things have flowed in upon us, our King
has been restored to us, and he has received miraculous and strange
Deliverances, and Seated at last on the Throne of his Ancestors; but what have
we returned for such Signal Mercies, may we not cry out with Daniel, and say,
We have sinned and have committed Iniquity, and have done Wickedly, and have
Rebelled, even by departing from thy Precepts, and from thy Judgments, O God.
O Lord, to us belongs Confusion of Faces, to our Kings, to our Princes, and to
our Fathers, because we have sinned against thee.

Let us I say, remember this Fatal Day, and the more like these Times look to
those preceding our late troubles, let us the more think of their fatal
Effects, and let all men from the greatest to the lowest, from the Cedar to the
Shrub, endeavor to reform themselves, and pray God to avert his impending
Judgments, for we doubt it was Sin that before brought on Judgment, and it is
now our many Sins, and open Iniquites, that are like to call down Gods Wrath
and Vengeance upon us, to be a scourge to this Nation, unless we seriously
Repent, and turn from our evil ways: Otherwise, I fear we shall see the
Prophecy of Jeremiah fulfilled upon us: The Whirlwind of the Lord is gone
forth in Fury, even as a grievous Whirlwind, it shall fall grievously upon the
head of the Wicked: The Anger of the Lord shall not return, until he have
Executed, and till he have performed the thoughts of his Heart.

But we know, that God is Merciful and Gracious, long Suffering, and abundant
in Goodness and Truth, keeping mercy for thousands, forgiving Iniquity, and
Transgression, and Sin: Therefore, let us all I say, remember the sad Effects
of our late Divisions, and from the highest to the lowest, let us humble our
selves before the Lord, that he may turn from us all those Evils which now seem
to threaten us, that we may have peace in our days. For as at the Preaching of
Jonas, the Ninivites Repented, and mourned in Sackcloth and Ashes, whereby
they pacified the Wrath of God, so who knows, how much our hearty Prayers and
true Repentance, forsaking our evil ways, may prevail upon the Almighty, to
take pity upon us, and pacify his Wrath, and cause his Countenance to shine
upon us. He turns the hearts of Kings, as the Rivers of Waters, and he
stops the Rage of the Multitude: He Creates and destroys as he pleases; By
him Kings Reign, and by him we all Live, move, and have our being, and
therefore, Blessed be the Name of the Lord.

As the Thirtieth of January is my Text, so I would press it home at this time,
on the hearts of all people, who seem to be full of Trouble and Anxiety. We
need not run to profane Histories, which give us sufficient Examples of the
sad miseries and fatal Consequences, of Breaches between King and people: and
our own Chronicles furnish us with sad precidents, too like our times to be
pointed at: All that read and consider, may see the sad Effects of desire of
Arbitrary Government, under the Notion of Prerogative; and also Rebellion,
under that of Privileges and Liberty of Conscience, both being made the Stale
of Evil men, to push on both King and people to ruin and destruction. But
methinks the remembrance of this Fatal day, and the Condition of the slavery,
Tyranny, and Arbitrary Government, this Nation and its two Sisters were brought
to, should make us afraid to run in the same ways, and take the same courses.
But let us consult the Sacred History; on the one hand what got Absalon and his
evil Counselor Architophel, by their Rebellion, but loss of Life? and what
became of Sheba, who blew the Trumpet of Rebellion in Israel? on the other
side, what was the Sequel of the rash and evil Counselors of Rehoboam, who
sought to oppress the people with Arbitrary Government, but the loss of Ten
Tribes, and the greatest part of his Kingdom for ever? It is said, that David
upon the Rebellion of Sheba the Son Bichri, went no more into his Concubines,
but shut them up to the day of their Death, 2 Samuel Chap. 20. David was a pious
Prince, and did as he said; I will call on the Lord, who is worthy to be
praised, so shall I be saved from mine Enemies; for he spoke it out of
experience: Thou have delivered me from the Strivings of my people.

Let every one therefore at this time, strive to reform their Lives, leave
their Evil courses, and to humble themselves before the Lord, that the Blood of
this day may be appeased, and that it may not leave such a Guilt upon the
Nation, as may yet require the Vengeance of the Almighty to wipe it off, by
permitting us to act over the like Tragedies, and to run into the like Civil
Wars and Rebellion, and suffer our former Calamities, though our sins and
Iniquities may have deserved it; for it is sin that brings War and
Destruction upon a Land, for God says, Levit. 26. If ye will not hearken unto
me, but walk contrary unto me, I will bring a Sword upon you, and I will send
the Pestilence among you, and you shall be delivered into the Hands of your
Enemies. But I hope the Remembrance of the Evil of this day, will stir us up to
Repentance, and that repentance will prevent Judgments, which seem to threaten
us, both by Signs in the Heavens, and on the earth. Follow therefore the
Counsel of S. Peter, Act. 3.19. Repent ye therefore and be Converted, that your
Sins may be blotted out, and the times of Refreshing shall come from the
presence of the Lord. And then let us wait to see the Lords Salvation; Let us
put our chiefest trust in God, and in the next place, let us with patience,
expect the healing of our Breaches, by the Wisdom and Prudence of the
approaching Parliament, which all Loyal hearts desire, may justly enjoy the
Title of an Healing Parliament.

Deceit is in the Heart of them that imagine Evil; but to the Counselors of
Peace is Joy, Prove. 12.
FINIS.
LONDON, Printed for Thomas Benskin, in Greens's-Rents near Fleet-Bridge. 1681.


