VI. We shall also according to our places and callings in this common cause of
Religion, Liberty and Peace of the Kingdoms, assist and defend all those that
enter into this League ^^d Covenant, in the maintaining and pursuing thereof,
and shall not suffer our selves directly or indirectly by whatsoever
combination, persuasion, or terror, to be divided and withdrawn from ^^is
blessed Union and conjunction, whether to make defection to the contrary part,
or to give our selves to a detestable indifferency or neutrality in this cause,
which so much concerns the glory of God, the good of the Kingdoms, and the
honor of the King; but shall all the days of our lives, zealously and
constantly continue therein against all opposition, and promote the same
according to our power, against all lets and impediments whatsoever; and what
we are not able our selves to suppress or overcome, we shall reveal and make
known, that it may be timely prevented or removed; All which we shall do as
in the sight of God.

And because these Kingdoms are guilty of many sins and provocations against
God, and his Son Jesus Christ, as is too manifest by our present distresses and
dangers, the fruits thereof: We profess and declare before God and the world
our unfeigned defire to be humbled for our own sins, and for the sins of these
Kingdoms, especially that we have not as we ought, valued the inestimable
benefit of the Gospel, that we have not labored for the purity and power
thereof, and that we have not endeavored to receive Christ in our hearts, nor
to walk worthy of him in our lives, which are the causes of our sins and
transgressions so much abounding amongst us; and our true and unfeigned purpose,
desire, and endeavor for our selves, and all others under our power and
charge, both in public and in private, in all duties we owe to God and Man,
to amend our lives, and each one to go before another in the example of a
real Reformation, that the Lord may turn away his wrath and heavy
indignation, and establish these Churches and Kingdoms in truth and peace. And
this Covenant we make in the presence of Almighty God the Searcher of all
hearts, with a tru^^ intention to perform the same, as we shall answer at the
great day, when the secrets of all hearts shall be disclosed: Most humbly
beseeching the Lord to strengthen us by his Holy Spirit for this end, and to
bless our desires and proceedings with such success, as may be deliverance
and safety to his people, and encouragement to other Christian Churches
groaning under, or in danger of the yoke of Antichristian tyranny, to join in
the same or like Association and Covenant, to the glory of God, the enlargement
of the Kingdom of Jesus Christ, and the peace and tranquillity of Christian
Kingdoms and Commonwealths.

Will. Lenthal, Speaker Beuchamp St. John Gilbert Gerrard Walter Earl James
Cambell Thomas Cheek Robert Nicholas Benjamin Rudyard John Gurdon Robert
Harley Francis Knollys Edward Master John White Anthony Stapley Dennis Bond
Laurence Whitaker Michael Noble Pere. Hoby Richard Barwis Edward Baynton
William Cawley John Moyle John Pyne George Searle Henry Vane senior Nevill
Poole John Young Henry Herbert Thomas Sandys William Iesson Philip L. Herbert
Thomas Barrington Martin Lumley John Trevor Francis Godolphin Thomas Arundell
Edward Stephens Gilbert Pickering John Greve Oliver Cromwell Henry Vane junior
William Cage Richard Erisey Philip L. Lisle Will. Heveninghaw Isaac Pennington
Richard Cresheld Thomas Pelham Thomas Parker John Leigh Joh. Harris Augustine
Skinner John Venn William Strickland John Franklin Samuel Brown Robert Scawen
Roger Hill John Button John Meyrick Ambrose Brown Richard Winn Edward Owner
Charles Pym Charles L. Cranborn Ben. Weston Dudley North John Nut Jo. Corbet
Roger Burgoyne Peter Temple Benjamin Valentine Thom. Walsingham Oliver Luke
William Alenson Humphrey Salwey Richard Moore William Ashurst Thomas Moore
Thomas Fountain William Else Henry Shelley Rich. Shuttleworth Henry Ludlow
George Gallop Robert Wallop Arthur Hesilrige Oliver Saint-Iohn Thomas Grantham
Francis Barnham Will. L. Fitzwilliams Edmund Dunch Henry Mildmay Hugh Rogers
Thomas Hatcher John Wray Simonds D'Ewes Anthony Bedingfield John Ash William
L. Munson Martin Lister Robert Goodwyn Edward Thomas Henry Lucas Miles Corbet
Philip Smith Cornelius Holland William Spurstowe John Lowry Peter Wentworth
Henry Chomley Philip Stapleton William Pierrepoint Roger North Alexander
Popham Thomas Hodges John Maynard Samuel Vassal Anthony Irby John Clotworthy
John Broxolme Richard Iervoyse John Blakiston Walter Long John Roll Robert
Iennor John VVaddon William Masham John Lisle Edmund Fowell Edward Ash Thomas
Pury Richard Whithead Richard Ienyns Humphry Tufton Thomas Dacres Thomas Earl
John Downs John Goodwyn Francis Drake William Waller Samuel Luke Francis
Buller Richard Harman George Buller Arthur Onslowe Richard VVynwood Robert Pie
H. L. Gray of Ruthin Richard Knightley John Pym Christop. Yelverton Anthony
Nicoll Peter Wroth Robert Reynolds Not. Barnardiston Henry Heyman William
Purefoy Valentine Walton Michael Oldesworth William VVheler Hall Ravenscroft
T. L. Gray of Groby Thomas Middleton Edw. Hungerford Christopher VVrey Richard
Lee Herbert Morley Thomas Lane Robert Cecill William Bell Thomas Some Herbot.
Grimstone Simon Snow John Nash Herbot. Grimstone Ralph Asheton Edward
Ayshcoghe John VVylde John Trenchard Thomas Iervoyse Richard Brown William
Playters Nathaniel Stephens Richard Rose Francis Rous Gilbert Millington
Walter Young John Brown John Hippisley Edward Poole Henry Pelham William Hay
John Driden Nathaniel Fyennes William Lewis Giles Grene William Lytton John
Harvey Edward Dowce William Strode Edmond Prideaux Thomas Hoyle Edward Exton
Francis Popham Zouch Tate John Curson Alexander Bence Squire Bence John Seldom
John Glyn Richard Onslow John Coke Tho. L. Wenman Bulstrode Whitelock George
Mountague Edward Partheriche Henry Campion William Whitaker Denzel Holles
Edward Wingate James Fenys Poynings Moore Edward Bisse, Junior William Jephson
Edward Mountague Norton Knatchboll Thomas Eden. Edward Baynton Jo. Evelyn Jo.
Potts Sam. Rolls Ralph Asheton William Drake Pereg. Pelham William Brereton
Thomas Widrington Natha. Hallowes Joh. Bampfield Symond Thelwall Hen. Worsley
Phil. Parker Edw. Boys John Alford.
FINIS.
Die Veneris, 29 Januar. 1644.
ORdered by the Commons assembled in Parliament, That the solemn League and
Covenant be on every day of Fast and Public Humiliation publicly read in
every Church and Congregation within the Kingdom: And that every Congregation
be enjoined to have one of the said Covenants fairly Printed in a fair
Letter, in a Table fitted to hang up in some public place of the Church to be
read.

Hen. Elsynge Cler. Parl. Dom. Com.

LONDON, Printed for Edward Husbands, 1645.


