Deo Ecclesiae and Conscientiae Ergo: OR, A PLEA For Abatement in Matters of
CONFORMITY, To several Injunctions and Orders of the Church of England.

To which are added some Considerations of the Hypothesis of a King de Jure and
de facto, proving that King WILLIAM is King of England, etc. as well of Right
as Fact, and not by a bare Actual Possession of the Throne.

By IRAENEVS Junior, a Conforming Member of the Church of England.

(...).

Acts 15.20. Scripsi deo test quod verum esse existimavi, non gratiam hominum,
vel utilitatem propriam, sed Dei gloriam, and Ecclesiae commodum respiciens.

Bell. Recog. LONDON: Printed for Richard Baldwin near the Oxford-Arms in
Warwick Lane. 1693.

THE CONTENTS.
OF the Surplice and Habits. Page 11 Of the Cross in Baptism. Page 13 Of
Kneeling at the Sacrament of the Lords Supper. Page 15 Of the Liturgy or
Church Service. Page 18 Of the Lords Prayer and Doxology. Page 26 Of Christ's
descent into Hell. Page 28 Of the Athanasian Creed. Page 31 Of Regeneration by
the Spirit. Page 34 Of the Office of Burial of the Dead. Page 36 Of the
Collects for the King, etc. Page 39 Of Confirmation by the Bishop. Page 40 Of
Ecclesiastical Discipline. Page 42 By whom the Seeds of Arbitrary Government
have been sown. Page 62 Of the Reformation of Manners. Page 80 Advice to
Dissenters. Page 92
These Papers having for sometime been laid aside, their publication being
(perhaps in a more proper-season) accidentally prevented, are yet at last come
to light, and born though out of due time. By reason of which some few passages
may occurr more pertinent to the time of their conception, than of their birth,
which the Reader is desired to observe, and, allow for; as also with his Pen to
correct the following

ERRATA.

IN the Preface, page 6. in the last line, for facis read [facile] p. 7. l. 41.
r. [shack] p. 11. l. 10. add [malum] before the last est. p. 9 l. 20. r. [far]
37. r. [Governours] p. 10. l. 33. for led, r. [misled] p. 11. l. 29. r.
[Lictors] l. 34. [(...)] p. 16. l. 39. r. [your tranquillity]

P. 1. l. 23. before evil add [a greater] p. 4. l. 33. r. [suddenly] p. 5. l.
27. before gain blot out [the] p. 6. l. 24. r. [very] p. 11. l. 18. r.
[nusance.] l. 24. r. [string] p. 12. l. 13. r. [nusances] p. 14. l. 34. blot
out [Cer] and add it in the beginning of line 36. p. 16. last line r,
[transubstantiation] p. 17. l. 1. r. [Hooker] l. 10. r. [Protest] p. 20. margin
r. [(...)] p. 21. l. 2. r. [organs] l. 27. add [was] after up. p. 23. r. [scta]
in the margin. p. 26. l. 19. r. [Wire] 24. r. [offices] p. 28. l. 22. r.
[tertium] p. 31. marg. r. [(...)] l. 32. add [(...)] p. 32. l. 8. r.
[convinced.] l. 32. r. [Wire] p. 33. l. 7. r. [(...)] l. 30. r. [(...)] p. 38.
l. 26. r. [paradise] p. 40. l. 33. r. [that] p. 42. marg. r. [ecclesiae] p. 46.
l. 24. r. [valorous] p. 47. l. 38. r. [Tiping] p. 49. l. 1. r. [Nusance] l. 31.
r. [balance] l. 40. r. [Counsel] p. 53. l. 14. r. [lopping] l. 25. r. [another]
p. 59. l. 7. r. [Wire] p. 67. l. 6. r. [sense] p. 68. the Citation out of Aene
Sylv must be read at the bottom of the 67. page after 1684 p. 69. l. 26. after
digression ad^ [in^^] p. 71. marg. r. [asserit] p. 79. l. 27. r. [(...)] p. 80.
l. 3. r. [Nusanc^] l. 31. r. [Cummin] p. 81. at the end of the 28. l. add [And]
p. 90. l. 4. r. [Paradise] p. 88. last l. r. [Pretensed] p. 93. l. 31. r.
[Opining] p. 9^ l. 22. r. [loth] p. 95. l. 24. r. [Anicetus] l. 27. blot out
[it] p. 96. l. 6. r. [Counsel].

Some few other Escapes there are, but not so material, as to take any other
notice of them.

THE PREFACE.
AS Truth is a most pleasing Object, and grateful to the Understanding of Man,
so he must have a vitiated and depraved Palate, who cannot taste and see how
good the Churches peace is, nor relish those means and measures which are
conducive to so great and eminent an end. For the attainment of which we may be
encouraged to believe the ensuing Plea to be no unfit expedient; upon the
consideration of those Powers and Faculties which since the Late Revolution His
present Majesty (whom God preserve) has granted to so many Wise and Worthy
Members of our Church, to revise its Liturgy, to inspect our Ecclesiastical
Polity, and to report such Alterations and Amendments as they should judge
necessary for the Healing of our Breaches, and uniting of Dissenting
Protestants. A project becoming the forecast of so Wise and Great a Prince, who
had so much good will toward Men, as to design Settlement and Peace of Earth:
But we have winkt too hard to see the things which concern them; yea, many
there be of that intemperate Zeal, and fiery Indignation, wherewith they would
devour their Adversaries; as to tell us, That tho our pretenses be faced with
Conscience, yet they are lined with Schism and Sedition; as true, and yet
deceivers; these, say they, are such who set up for Peace, whilst they mediate
and forecast War in their Hearts; talking of Union whilst they themselves break
the Bond of Peace, dissolve the Unity of the Spirit, and deface the Uniformity
of the Church Could these Men have procured Fire from Heaven, the World by this
time had been in a Flame: Nor could our Doom have been any thing better than
that, to which the angry Disciples would have sentenced the Samaritanes, yea,
executed upon them, had not our Savior restrained their Zeal, and rebuked
their Passion.

As to our secret Reservations, or Hypocrisy, we only desire our liberty till
they can disprove our sincerity, and to condemn us before, is an hard Censure.
The advice St. Paul gives, I think, is worth the taking, 1 Cor. 4.5. Judge
nothing before the time, till the Lord come, who both will bring to light the
hidden things of darkness, and will make manifest the Counsels of the hearts;
and then shall every man have praise of God.

As for the usual Raillery wherewith those who were weary and heavy laden have
been treated, we refer to him who will judge the false and slanderous Tongue.

That Ignorance and Malice are the Spirits by which our Wheels are acted, is
the frequent charge of Uncharitable and Conceited men, who take their Tongues
to be their own, using both them, and others with them, at their pleasure. But
what are we better than our Father, who met with no less despite, nor ought we
to make any worse returns than they? [ We are fools for Christ (says St. Paul)
but ye are wise in Christ; we are weak, but ye are strong; ye are honorable,
but we are despised; -- being reviled we bless, 1 Cor. 4.13.
being persecuted we suffer it, being defamed we entreat.] But how wonderful
must the retaliating Providence of God be, that no small number of those who
have bantred, and bespattred us for our pretense of Conscience, are now driven
to the same Plea for their dissent from our present Constitution and
Government: This is the Lord's doing, and it is mavelous in our eyes: Which
justifies the Truth and Reason of our Argument, which a late Reverend Dr.
Tailor.
Bishop urged in the like case. It is, says he, such a doctrine, that if there
be variety in Human Affairs, if the event of things be not settled in a durable
consistence, but is changeable, every one of us all may have need of it. Behold
this day are these words fulfilled in our Ears.

Those whose Nest seemed to be built upon a Rock, yea, placed among the Stars,
too high to be reached; too strong like Mount Sion ever to be removed, have
lived to see their honor levelled with the dust. [How are they fallen from
heaven? how are they cast down to the ground that did weaken the nations.] Nor
is the wisdom and love of God less conspicuous in that part of our Revolution,
which gave so happy a reverse of Fortune to our Dissenting, and not long since
Afflicted Brethren, turning all their sorrow into joy, and mourning into a good
day?

In which the conduct and method of Divine Providence is very admirable, by
breaking off the Yoke with those Vnaeademque manus vulnus op^^^; tulit.
hands which imposed it. The Act of Liberty, or Indemnity, from the penalty of
the Laws for Uniformity, etc. being passed by the same Authority, viz. King and
Parliament, by Persons whose addictions and practices as to the same Form of
worship no way differed from theirs, who so strictly obliged us to one general
and uniform (but scrupled) Scheme of Religion. Yet have been so kind and
considerate of those who are weak in the Faith, as not to tie them to matters
of doubtful Disputation, but have given a yieldance, and pardoned them in those
things whereof their Consciences were afraid. Should they who had been so long
trampled under foot have got into the Saddle, wither would they have rode? How
would they have triumphed over those that oppressed them? Root and Branch,
Branch and Rush, ere this might have been the word, and nothing to have given
satisfaction, but an utter extirpation, or excision of those that troubled them.

But the Judge of all the Earth took a better course of doing right, than to
put the injured Parties. into a capacity of revenging the wrongs they had
suffered. Such was the wisdom of him, who is a Physician of the greatest value,
and knew best how to work the Cure, not by shedding the Patients Blood, but by
alteration; allaying the Acrimony of the Humors, changing the disposition and
temper of our Superiors, into a more kind and compassionate regard of an
harassed and afflicted people. These wisely considering, that force was no
proper Topic for persuasive Arguments; that their raking Medicines did but
torment the Patient, and inrage the Distemper, contrived a more gentle method,
and have learnt suaviter curare; I mean, to care the hurt of the Daughter of
our People more softly and substantially, binding up the brokenhearted, and
proclaiming liberty to the Captive.

Compulsion is a Quiver which affords many a sharp Arrow, but such as seldom
hits the mark, Arguments which prove very little of the Question, whilst they
too plainly demonstrate the Zeal and Passion of the Disputant.

These worthy Patriots standing upon the Shoulders of their Predec^ssors,
learnt better, and saw further into the nature of Religion; That it is a Plant
which never thrives in an hot Bed. A thing which must be professed Si princeps
subditos opinion^m varietate and multitudine ^ectarum distractos, in suam
[soil. Religionem] pertrabere volet, vim amovere opportet, nam quo graviora
supplicia irrogabis, to minus proficies, c^m ea sit in hominibus vis ac natura,
ut ad aliquid assentiendum sponte duci velit, coginolit.
freely and without force. Religio sponte non vi debet suscipi says
Tertullian. For indeed how can the La volonte est nec pour suivre ^
entendement; comme son guide, son flambeau: Chorr. de Sagess. It Is the nature
of the Will to follow the Understanding as its guide and direction It Is a Light
to its Feet, and Lanthorn to its Paths. It Is a thing no way pleasing to God to
put a force upon the Consciences of Men. Services or Sacrifices which are
offered by constraint, and not of a willing mind, are never acceptable to God,
seldom, if ever, serviceable to Men. Emanuel King of Portugal was condemned by
the 4th Council of Tollet. for taking the Children of the Jews by force from
their Parents, and Baptizing them.
will embrace any thing as good, which the understanding does not represent as
Truths? And for a Man to assent to what he knows not, is to invert the order of
Nature, and to act contrary to the Rules of his Constitution; which is as hard
to do, as for Water to ascend high than the Fountain, or original from whence
it flows.

If a Person doubts of the Truth of a Proposition, constraint or threatening can
never clear the scruples, or resolve the doubts he labors under. And though he
may be frighted into a compliance, yet his assent is the effect of Force. not
Faith. Such a Proselyte is a direct Hypocrite; who like a broken bow is ready
upon all occasions to start aside, and will stand bent no longer than the Cord
holds which strains it, or the force lasts which is upon it. So that it seems
no way conducive to the Interest of Ecclesiastical Polities to use Engines to
screw Members into their Communion, who will prove no better than false
Brethren, that will be apt to undermine their Liberties, and turn Renegades so
soon as they have opportunity to desert the Tents of the Church.

Carnal Weapons are an improper Artillery for a Spiritual Warfare; fiery Darts
belong to the wicked one, and like the Author of them are false, yea,
inconclusive Arguments of the truth, and no way sufficient to decide any
questionable part of it.

Had the Jacobine and Franciscan Friars been burnt who proffered themselves to
the Stake, to prove pro and con, The Protestants of France pleaded with their
Ring for Indulgence, because it was not the Will of God that the Consciences of
Men should be forced. Parce cause, demand des hommes une Sacrifice voluntaire,
and qu'il neveut pas qu'on force les consciences. Dr. Burn. Collect. Letters.
P. 218.
that Savanarola was an Heretic, their fiery Zeal might have argued much heat,
but would have afforded no light to their Cause.

Besides, the Victory we gained over our Dissenting Brethren in causing some of
them to conform, could never answer our ends, or refund for those Breaches we
have made of Charity, in prosecuting them for their dissent, we did magno
conatu nibil agere. The distance was as great, and Schism as inveterate as
ever. It Is true the Scourges (which we made of no small Cords) drove some of
them into the Temple, or public Assemblies, but could never drive out the
Spirit of Inconformity; when the Curb was in their Mouths they bit the Bridle,
and kicked at those who held the Whip over them, but never became more flexible
to the Reign. The French King has Dragoon'd several of his Protestant Subjects
into an outward compliance with the Popish Religion, but is so insecure of the
reality of the effect, that he thinks himself obliged to keep a strict band
over them, and watchful Eye upon them.

Lib. de republ. 4to. p. 75 7/^.
Bodin observes That though Princes exercised great Cruelties toward their
Subjects, yet till the days of Antiochus there was no Tyrannizing over the
Minds and Consciences of Men. Nunquam tamen bominum mentibus ante regem
Antiochum imperandum sibi fas esse putaverunt. Nay, so favorable was he
himself in the Case of Religion, (whatever he was afterward) that in the Siege
of Jerusalem he granted Eight days Truce to the Jews to Celebrate the Feast of
the Passover.

Theodorick thought it impracticable to put a force upon the will of Man in the
Matters of Religion, and therefore wrote to the Senate to leave it at liberty,
and for a good reason too, viz. Because none could be compelled to believe
against his will. page 758.
Religionem inquit imperare non possumus, quia nemo cogitur ut credat invitus.
Cujus rei cum multa sunt argunenta, tum vero nullum ad hanc rem iccommodatius
quam de Theodosio majore qui ineunte imperio provincias Arrianorum plenas
reperit. etc. Voluit imperator Arrianos (quos tamen capitaliter oderat) ullis
suppliciis coerceri, sed utrisque Arrianis in ^uam and Catholicis, sua templa
concessit, and in singulis oppidis duos utriusque religionis pontifices
permissit. Ac tam etsi Ca^^^licorum Pontisicum rogationibus, edicta quad am
adversus Arrianos promulgari jussisit, facis tamen irrita esse passus est, ut
ipsius ad Ambrosium literae demonstrant. Lib. 4 de repub.
Theodosius Major, though an utter Enemy to the Arrians, yet allowed them the
free exercise of their Religion, permitting them to have their public Temples
and Ministers to officiate in every City. And though by the earnest
solicitations of some Churchmen he was prevailed upon to publish some Edicts
against them, yet he easily permitted them to be superseded; for in his Letter
to St. Ambrose, he commanded him to deliver the principal Church to the
Arrians, for says he, All are at my dispose. Trade inquit Arrianis basilicam;
mei namque sunt omnia juris.

But suppose he had been exceedingly mad upon his Subjects, and had vexed them
out of their Religion, or at least the profession of it; yet he could not vex
them out of their understanding also; for tho force be a powerful Argument, yet
it has always been too weak to beget Faith, or any true Sons of the Church.
Which in all her accounts has but a small reckoning to make of any
considerable perquisite gained by the strictest exercise of her Discipline and
authority, over the Consciences of scrupulous, but good Men.

Nay, the very Civil Interests of States and Princes have shrunk and
shrivelled, yea, dried up from the very Roots, which have been planted in those
hot and scorching Climates, I mean, where Persecution for Religion and
Conscience sake, has prevailed. How Bloody a War did the cruel and despiteful
dealing with the Hugonots upon these accounts produce in France, until the very
Spirit of the Nation failed in the midst of it?

So Zealous was the Duke d'Alva to maintain the Romish Faith in the
Netherlands, that he cruelly oppressed the people, and mightily convinced them by
the pressing Arguments of Fire and Faggot.

Yea, wherever Scripture and Reason proved scant, the Inquisition was urged
as the strongest persuasive they had for their Religion, which caused those
Flames, that not only made the Daughter of Sion to fit in Ashes, but fired
their Religion and Prince too out of the Country.

I am not willing to Sacrifice to this Net for the Commotions and Troubles in
Scotland. The Civil Wars of England, in the days of King Charles, which not
only overthrew the Government of the Church, but rased the very Foundation of
our Politic Constitution. Yet after a long and Bloody War, which for the space
of Seven Years had turned our Land into an Aceldama, broaching that Bloody
Issue which the best Physicians of the State knew not how to Cure, till it had
wasted the very Vitals of our Land. After a Twelve Years Inter-regnum, when Men
did that which was right in their own Eyes, it pleased God to restore our
Judges as at the first, and Counselors as in the beginning. The wild Asses (to
be sure) which had so long snuft up the Wind, kicked up the Heel, enjoying a
free and unbounded shock, a liberty to feed where, and what they pleased,
thought nothing more grievous than a confinement. The untamed Heifers having
been so long unaccustomed to the Yoke, knew not how to submit to it, or suffer
it to pass over their fair Necks; especially those, who as they had been
instrumental in restoring the King, so desired an indulgence only upon terms
easy to be granted, and some small Abatements of Conformity. Instead of which
the burden was made heavier, and bound with Rop^s that were never before
occupied, I mean, new Laws and stricter Ties to oblige them to obedience, which
could not but be entertained with a regret not only proportionable to their
late, and long possessed freedom, but to the many specious Promises they had
obtained, and great hopes they had thence conceived, of some kind and
favorable Dispensations in some controverted and scrupled Parts, or Ceremonies
of Religion. But notwithstanding all, they were more narrowly watched, more
nicely observed, and more strictly punished, than ever before.

All Tears of Complaint were but like Waters spilt upon the ground, the returns
which were made being often rough and unkind. By the life of Pharaoh ye are no
true men, but to spy out our Liberty are ye come, and to betray the Church; our
Fathers made your Yoke heavy, but we will add to it. But may we not apply the
words of the Psalmist in this case? This their way was their folly, but their
posterity has not approved their saying, Psalm 49.13. Such have been the
Wisdom and Compassion of our Superiors as to speak kindly, and deal gently
with our Dissenting Brethren, who in two succeeding Parliaments have settled and
recognized their Liberties, or indemnified them from the penalties of those
Laws, to which they stood obnoxious, raising up a Gourd which have secured them
from those scorching Beams which lay too hot, too heavy upon them. They
answered their desires kindly, and spoke good words to them, by which they have
obliged them to be their On the contrary, the ^rench Pro^erb proves ^ften true.
viz. ^ubant d'eni^is que d^s^aves; as if ^nmity were ^e certain ^roduct of
^lavery.
Votaries and Friends for ever. They have taken care that there be no decay not
leading into Captivity; no complaining in our Streets, nor oppression in our
Gates for Conscience sake. Isa. 21.6, 8, 9.
Now the Wolf may dwell with the Lamb, the Leopard may lie down with the Kid,
etc. the sucking Child may play on the hole of the Asp, and the weaned Child
shall put his hand on the Cockatrice den. They shall no more burt nor destroy
in all our holy mountain.

But yet we cannot go to the House of God in Company, not there take sweet
Counsel together. How happy were it if the Partition Wall were broken down, or
so wide a Door made in it, that we might go in and out, and find rest to our
Souls; that every thing were cut off which troubles the Church, and which are
as Goads in the Side, and Thorns in the Eye of Conscience?

Qui vult decipi decipiatur.

Heb. 10.26.
there remains no more Sacrifice, or Atonement for sin,] the highest
Resentments both of God and Man, are very just Retributions for so unpardonable
a guilt. But as the stain is deep, so as to the nature of it, it is so recluse
and Crimes which make a Man an Heretic in questions not simply Fundamental,
are Actions so Internal and Spiritual that cognizance can seldom be taken of
them. Lib. of Prophe. 286. p.
cryptical, that many times God only knows whether those we accuse be guilty or
not. And to condemn a Man for that which is scarce to be understood, but by the
Confession of the Party, upon some slight or presumptive Evidence, is to
conclude more than the premises will prove; which is both Illegal and Illogical.

Besides Arguments may in themselves be convincing and powerful, yet through
the weakness of our Faculties we may not discover the Evidence they carry along
with them. Shall we blame the Person for his mistake, who tells us, That he
sees Men walk like Trees, because the Object is in a due position, the medium
well disposed, and fully enlightened, when the indisposition of the Organs, and
weakness of the visive Faculty, is the true cause of the misrepresentation.
This is a Parable, but the design of it lies so fleet, that we need not dive
for to understand it. Perhaps some will say, In this thou reproachest us also.
But I hope I have said nothing to give offense to any just or good Man, and for
others, jacta mihi est alea. But if any thing have dropped from my Pen in any
part of this Discourse which had better have been forborne, I shall not despise
a Reproof; Let the righteous smite me, it shall be a kindness, an excellent
Oil, which shall not break my head. In the mean time I can satisfy my self with
the integrity of my aim, as having spoke what I esteem to be Truth, intending
nothing but forbearance of those who are weak, binding up the Brokenhearted,
promoting the Peace, Union, and Interest of the Church of Christ, I beseech you
forgive me these wrongs.



Cyprian Quod sacerdoti Dei non obtemperatur. Cyp. Epist. CorFor. and Faeli.
And in the ensuing, Tract you will find with what Zeal St. Ignatius presses the
people to be obedient to their Bishops and Presbyters.
ascribes the Schisms of the Church to a disrespect of their Governments. We
have been too ready to say to those whom God has set over us, (who have curam
and regimen Ecclesiae) ye take too much upon you, seeing all the Congregation
are holy, every one of them. Yet Man is not like a Bruit Beast which has no
understanding. I am not of Quand il S'agit de la religion, and que la seule
regle infallible ^ laquelle on doit S attacher est P autorite de P Eglise pour
laquelle on doit une obeisance aveugle and sans restriction.
his Mind who says, That the only infallible Rule to which we must adhere, is
the Authority of the Church to which we ought to pay a blind Obedience without
reserve. but if we wink so hard, and shut our Eyes so close, it will be hard to
see or know how to choose a Guide, or when we have chosen him to follow him.
Must we give up the Care and Conduct of our Souls to we know not who, Ne
disputer jamais de mysteres and poincts de la religion, mais simplement croire,
recevoir and observer, ceque l' Eglise enseigne and ordonne. Char. de Sagesse.
We must no dispute the Mysteries and ^oints of Religion, but must simply
believe, receive and observe that which the Church Declares and Ordains.
or may we look before we leap? If so, then we must first examine the Doctrine
which is taught us before we can own, or follow the guidance of that Church, or
the Ministers of it, tho they pretend to have a rule and dominion over us. St.
Paul commended the Bareans for examining the Doctrines taught by him and Silas,
and for seeing whether they were so or not. And counseled none to follow him
any further, than he followed Christ; and that if be or an Angel from heaven
taught any other Doctrine than what they had received they should be accursed.
Should we take every thing for granted, which they who pretend to be the only
true and Catholic Church, and to have the greatest Power and Authority upon
Earth, have delivered to the Saints as matter of Faith, there must be some
other Gospel than what we have received, somewhere immured or shut up in some
Wall, in some secret place, like the Law in Josiah's time, not yet come to
light. In the mean time let us follow the light of that Gospel we have
received, and by a judgment of discretion try whatever is enjoined us, For as
many as walk by this Rule, Peace shall be upon them.

A Man's own private Reason and Judgment is that Bar and Balance in which he
must weigh, and at which he must examine his Actions; the last Dictate of the
Understanding is the most extreme and natural Guide of the Will, be the Dictate
true or false. Vniuscujusque Christiani (says Polanus) est spiritus ille ad
privatam doctrinae probationem and dijudicationem, in conscientia ipsius. And
to follow that, is the best and safest way, tho sometimes I may be led by it.
We have not to do with an hard Master, who will punish us because we act not by
higher Principles of Wisdom and Knowledge, than he has given us.

Bishop Davenant says, That all our Divines affirm, that every Christian who
has any regard of his Soul, ought to reduce the Decrees of Faith to the Rule
of Faith, [ viz. the Scripture] and so far to admit them as they understand
they agree with that Atque tatious admittere q^atenus ad tandem [scil. normam
fidei] conve^ire int^liguntur. Dave. de jud. and norm, fidei.
Rule. He does not say, so far as they agree, but so far as they apprehend or
understand them to agree. So that we owe obedience to them who have the rule
over us, yet not exclusive of, much less contrary to the light of our own
Reason and Discretion. Let us hear B. Taylor's opinion in our case. [Every Man,
says he; is Bound to follow his Guide, unless where he believes his Guide to
mislead him, yet when he sees Reason against his Guide, it is best to follow his
Reason against his Guide, for tho in this he may fall into an Error, yet he
will escape sin, he may do violence to the Truth, but never to his Conscience,
and an honest Error is better than a violent luxation to his Understanding.]

Aquinas says, That Will is bad which disagreeth with Reason, be that Reason
true or false. And the Reason which he has given, is because that which is
good has the form of evil, and that which is evil has the form of good.
Volunt as discordans a ratione sive recta sive errante est mala. Id enim quod
bonum est potest accipere rationem mali, 2. q. 19. ar. 5.
and id quod est potest accipere rationem boni.

What Hobs says is truth, though it may be received with prejudice, as coming
out of his Mouth, That a Man may offend in doing good, Homo potest ^inlare
legemactu legi consentaneo vir so homo putet si facere contrarium legi. D^
cive. P. 58.
if at the same time he apprehends it as evil; on the contrary he may be
accepted, or at least pardoned in doing a bad thing, if he apprehends it to be
good and innocent. And why may I not put the Opinion of the Philosopher into
this Scale, who I think had well weighed it himself? Incontinens est qui non
sequitur rationem rectam, per accidens autem qui non sequitur rationem falsam.

Mr. Chillingworth says, If the Church commands things. and judge them fit to
be done, yet every Man is to judge for himself with the Judgment of discretion.
Otherwise we may do with our Reason and discursive Faculties as the Priest did
with the Sword of Goliath, wind them up, and lay them by as useless things. For
a Dog is as capable of a Law as a Man, if there be no choice in his obedience,
nor discourse in his choice, nor reason to satisfy his discourse. And it is as
unreasonable as it is unnatural, that Sempronius should force Caius to be of his
Opinion, because Sempronius is Consul this Year, and commands the Lectors; Lib.
of Prop^
as if he that can kill a Man, cannot but be infallible, if he be not, why
should he do violence to my Conscience because he can do violence to my Person?
But what need we any further Witnesses, tho a Cloud of them might be produced
to clear this Truth? Let the Authority of the Apostle serve for all, who
injoins us (...), to try all things, and to hold fast that which is right. 1
These. 5.21
But if the Doctrine of Blind obedience were true, it would supersede all this
trouble, we need not weary our selves with searching the Scriptures, and
digging for Knowledge and Understanding. We might live at a great deal more
ease, if God required of us only to do this and live; that is to obey the
commands of our Superiors without any examination how they are agreeable to his
own; then the Magistrates Lips should preserve Knowledge, give Laws, and the
people must seek them at their Mouths, Then we should! have nothing to do but
to give an unfeigned assent and consent to all and every thing which is
injoined, were the Laws of Conformity ten times more than they are. And like
Pills might be swallowed without tasting whether they be sweet or bitter. But
till these things can be proved, or our scruples satisfied, we hope our
Superiors will not be offended, though our ensuing Plea be urged, and Address
continued.

We know well that we are bound to be obedient to our Governors, not only for
wrath but Conscience sake. And that we owe a Duty to our Civil as well as
Natural Parents; That we must pay an observance to their Commands, lest we
receive to our selves Damnation.

But must we pay this Respect and Duty to our Civil Parents or Princes
wherever our Lot falls, or we happen to be Born, either Turkey, Italy,
Jerusalem, or Geneva? If this were true we might safely be Jew or Turk, Papist
or Protestant, we might cast Lots for our Religion, or change it with our
Clime. Et Coelum, ac animum mutet qui transmare currit. I know none so wild as
to pretend to assert this, for then the Laws of God must give place to the
Customs or Constitutions of every Place or Country in which we live. But if
otherwise, then I may try the Spirits, and examine their Commands, that I may
see whether they agree or not with that Law, which is Superior to all humane
Sanctions, and an absolute Rule of Truth. To do which, I know no better
expedients than reading, reasoning, advising, conferring with Persons of great
Wisdom and Understanding, and especially, praying to be led by that Spirit of
Truth, which leads into all Truth. But to give a blind obedience to every
Command of the Magistrate, is a Doctrine fitted more for Brutes than Rational
Creatures, for we may as easily believe that every thing he touches is Gold, as
that every thing which is required by him is just, and ought to be believed as
Truth. This is I confess somewhat contrary to the advice which Acts. and Monum
1st. Vol. p. 613. Edit. 1684.
Arundel Archbishop of Canterbury gave to William Thorp, That he ought not to
suppose a Prelate would command an unlawful thing -- But if it were unlawful,
yet he obeying him should not answer for it before God. But this good Man durst
not rely upon the Bishops Warranty, nor any other wise Man Whatever, so long as
he is able to judge whether God or Man is first to be obeyed.

It would be a very weak Plea for a Subject to plead the Command of an Inferior
Officer in the Commonwealth, in excuse of a Treasonable or Seditious Action,
before the Supreme Magistrate in bar of his Sentence; and shall we give that to
the King of Heaven, which we think unreasonable to offer to our Prince, and
venture to make more bold with God than Man?

and Decency, which are the real Properties of the Rites and Ceremonies, etc.
commanded by our Church.

Paul recommended to the Brethren, nay, which our own Church has propounded to
be observed in some parts of Conformity, our Work were ended, and the ensuing
Plea rendered useless and superseded. I mean that of the Convocation held in the
Year 1640. speaking of the Custom of Bowing in Token of Reverence of God The
like Liberty is left as to Bowing at the Name of Jesus.
when we come in the Place of Public Worship, says thus. [In the practice or
admission of this Rite, we desire that the Rule of Charity prescribed by the
Apostle may be observed, which is, that they who use this Rite, despise not
those who use it not; and they who use it not, condemn not them who use. it.]
And I cannot understand why the same Latitude or Charity might not be granted
in the other scrupled parts of Conformity.

Let Us hear what that Excellent and Learned Man Mr. Chillingworth has spoken
to our purpose, viz. [Thanksgiving, reading of Scriptures, Prayer, Confession
in the plainest and simplest manner, were matter enough to furnish out a
Lyturgy, though nothing either of private Opinion, or of Church Pomp, Garments,
or prescribed Gestures, of Imagery, of Music, of Matter concerning the Dead,
of many Superfluities, which creep into the Church, under the Name of Order and
Decency, did interpose it self.]

Now tho we should admit that many may be overborn by too great prejudices,
against things of this nature, yet I wish it might by our Superiors be
considered, how far notwithstanding they may be indulged and favored whilst
they own the Doctrine of the Church, and are very unwilling to make a breach in
its Communion.

[In all the Controversies of Protestants (says the last-named Author) there
is a seeming Conflict of Reason with Reason, Scripture with Scripture,
Authority with Authority, which how it can consist with a manifest revealing of
the Truth of either side, I cannot well understand. Besides, tho we grant, that
Scripture, Reason and Authority were all on one side, and the appearances on
the other side all answerable, yet if we consider the strange power that
Education and Prejudices instilled by it, have over excellent Understandings,
we may well imagine that many Truths, which in themselves, are revealed plain
enough, are yet to such or such a Man prepossest with contrary Opinions not
revealed plainly. Neither doubt I but God who knows whereof we are made, and
what Passions we are subject to, will Compassionate such Infirmities, and not
enter into Judgment with us, for those things, which (all things considered)
are unavoidable] May our Mother the Church, imitate our Father which is in
Heaven in the like Charitable Consideration and Allowance.

I thank God I never had any Addiction or Inclination to the Romish Faith or
Religion, yet have had so much Charity for the Professors of it, as not to
think they have generally sinned wilfully against their Knowledge, and Belief
of the Truth. Yet it is hardly possible to have plainer Scripture, or clearer
Reason, than are pleadable against many Propositions and Parts of it.

For instance, how contrary to Divine Institution (on which the Sacraments are
founded) practice of the Apostles, and usage of the Primitive Church is their
half Communion, and denial of the Cup to the Laity. Our Savior giving command
to the Disciples not only to eat, but to drink also of the Cup of Blessing.



ministri non conficientes, and so according to their own practice were not to
have received the Communion but in one kind; for were here never so many of the
Clergy present at that Sacrament, he only that Consecrates receives in both
kinds, all the rest but in one.

What need I instance in St. Paul's Celebration of it in the Church of Corinth,
who delivering of the same according as he had received it from our Savior,
advised them not only to eat of that Bread, but also to drink of that Cup.
Otherwise the unworthy Receivers, tho they might have eat, yet could not have
drunk Damnation to themselves, which he cautions them against.

What need I instance in their Celebration of the Public Service in a Tongue
the People don't understand, a thing beyond the compass of the Churches
Authority and Power, which is only given them for Edification, and not for
Destruction?

Whether it was revealed to the Apostle what Errors would creep into the Church
in the succeeding Ages of it, I know not, yet I am sure if they were, he could
not have spoke 1 Cor. 14.
more pertinently, argued more closely, or disputed more rationally against
that unaccountable practice, and rule of their Church. And yet so strong and
strange are those prepossessions and prejudices, with which their early, and
constant Education in that Communion has tinctured them, that they know not
how to receive the plain meaning, and unavoidable sense (as we would think) of
that Divine portion of Scripture.

But how vastly different is their Case and ours? Since the Scene of our
Dispute lies only in the Suburbs, or Outworks of Religion? The Question not
being concerning the Ark or the Altar, the Tabernacle or the Temple; but
rather, whether the Snuffers and the Snuffing-dishes, the Forks and the Spoons,
be of pure Gold or not? Which not only renders our mistakes (if they be such)
in themselves more venial, but with our Superiors more pardonable, yet
notwithstanding we are obliged to observance in the smallest things, under the
greatest and most severe penalties the Church can inflict, viz. Suspension,
Deprivation, Excommunication, interdicting the Fellowship and Communion of the
Saints, and denying the Evangelical Passover to all that esteem the Herbs sour
which are appointed to be eaten with it. In which case we may use the words of
the Poet.

Nimium seritatis in illo est,
Est aliud levius fulmen, etc.
St. Austin thought it an unworthy thing to Censure or Condemn one another for
those things which no way recommend us to God. Indignum est, ut propter ea,
quae nos Deo neque digniores neque indigniores possunt facere alii alios vel
condemnemus, vel judicemus.

It Is very well observed by a Conforming Member of our Church, [That our
Differences are not so great, as to exclude the opposite Parties from being
made Members of one Dr. Potter asserts that no Man who believes the Creed, and
all the evident consequences of it sincerely and heartily, cannot possibly (if
he also believes the Scripture) be in any Error of simple Belief, which is
offensive to God, nor therefore deserves to be deprived of his Life, or to be
cu^ off from the Churches Communion, or Hope of Salvation.
Church Militant, and Joint-heirs of Glory in the Church Triumphant.]



to whom Fear, Honor to whom Honor, Tribute to whom Tribute is due, nor can
there be any occasion found against us, unless it be concerning the Law of our
God; and if we do not pay an actual obedience to some of those Injunctions,
which we fear are Intrenching upon the Divine Sanctions; we are not guilty of
Contumacy or Disobedience to Magistracy, unless by accident, it being a thing
which is neither designed, nor without injury to weak Consciences to be
avoided; whilst we continue in the Communion of the Church, not daring to make
any Schism in it, or separation from it. As to the design of this undertaking,
I shall add nothing more, but stand to the Mercy of every Man's Opinion. To be
sure it could not be Interest, or Secular Advantage, for I believe too many
will think, if it be Pro laborum meorum proemio vix impetravi ve^iam.
pardoned, 'twill be beyond its desert rewarded. Tho the Church (I am of
Opinion) may thank her Preferments for the extreme Zeal of many of her Votaries
in the Case of Conformity. The Roman Clergy had never stickled so earnestly to
have advanced their Bishop above the Council, if the latter could have given
Dignities as well as the former. The Whore of Babylon never wanted Pledgers,
whenever she drank to them out of her Golden Cup, whatever Abominations 'twas
filled with.

But I am afraid I have transgressed the Rules of proportion in framing so wide
a Gate to so straight a Fabric, spinning the Preface too much beyond the
Staple. Yea perhaps, may have forestalled the Reader, and in some things
anticipated the ensuing Argument. Yet cannot conclude till I have recommended
it to those in Authority; that they would consider such as are still pressed
down under the same Burdens, and forced to draw In an uneasy Yoke. That they
would put the Tears of their Complaint into their bottles, and that they may be
no longer like Water spilt upon the ground, nor always driven to eat our
Passover with bitter Herbs.

God delights not in grieving the Children of Men, but makes his ways
pleasantness, and his paths peace. Let us beseech you (who have wisdom to judge
of, and power to redress our grievances) by the Mercies of God in general, and
our late unparalled Deliverance in particular, by which he has saved us out
of the hands of our Enemies, that we might serve him without fear. That you
would imitate the Divine Providence in breaking every Yoke, loosing every
Burden, and letting the oppressed go free. Permit me to speak with the words
of the Prophet in his advice to the King. Dan. 4.27.
[Wherefore let my counsel be acceptable to you, break off your sins by
repentance, and your iniquities by showing mercy to the poor, if it may be a
lengthning out of the tranquillity;] which is my Heart's Desire and Prayer to
God, both for Church and State.

A PLEA for Abatement in Matters of Conformity to several Injunctions and
Orders of the Church of ENGLAND, etc.
IF the many earnest and repeated Promises of Persons in extremity can lay an
Obligation of Performance upon them, to pay their Vows whenever they become
solvend; How many are there of no small Figure and Interest in our Church,
under no mean tie to find out an expedient and temper to heal those Breaches,
cement those Schisms, which several bandied and controverted Rites and
Ceremonies of the Church have unhappily occasioned? How many Families in this
Quarrel have been ruined? How many Garments rolled in Blood (not excepting his
who sat upon the Throne?) What Blood and Treasure have been spilt and spent in
their defense, can be easier lamented than counted? Nor is the Nature of them
grown less prolifick or productive of Distractions amongst us, they being
almost the only bones which makes us snarle at, yea bite and devour one another.

So zealous are we to maintain the Fence that is made about them, that we
neglect the main Bank which keeps out the most raging Waves of the Sea of Rome.
I mean Popery and Arbitrary Power (the Cup we so lately drank of) which at this
time swells high and bears hard against us, not only from Foreign Inundations
of open Enemies, but private overflowings of the Gall of some over-jealous Men
amongst us. As if it were evil to unite Dissenting protestants upon those just
equitable and safe Principles, which many Wise and Pious Bishops, and other
Conforming Members of the Church of England, have propounded as fit Terms and
Expedients for Union and Peace, than to cause the Reformed Religion to run a
most dangerous Risque and Adventure.

Suppose some of our Tackling should be rent, and Sprucery sullied, yet it were
a Misfortune no way comparable to that of dashing the Ship against the rock.
And what Shipwreck the Storms which some Zealots among us, are ever upon the
least alteration of that Rigging (though upon the justest Reasons) raising, may
occasion, God only knows, if he that stills the Raging of the Sea, does not
quiet the Madness of the People?

Suppose the Decency and Order of our most exact and innocent Rituals to be ten
times more than what really they are, yet they can never commute for the
hundredth part of that Blood and Treasure which have been expended in their
Quarrel. But shall we not at least in this our day see the things that concern
the Peace and Welfare of our Church and State?

It Is not possible for any who is a true living Member or either Body to be so
past feeling, as to find no regret or simpathy, when he sees either of them
reel and stagger to and fro like a drunken Man: What Member of the B^dy can be
in health, when the whole Head is sick and Heart faint? But thanks be to God we
have made one step in order to a Cure, that we can see the Rock of Offense from
whence these Distempers are hewn, and the Hole of the Pit from whence they are
dug. We can tell what those Briars and Thorns are, and who has planted
them, which have not only rent our Garments, but rolled them in Blood too. And
that for no other cause, than that they were not all of a col^ur. But is there
no Balm in our Gilead? Is there no Physician of that value there, that can bind
up our Wounds and mollify them with Ointment? 22 Rev. 2.
Undoubtedly we have, viz. a Prince who has made Propositions like to the
Leaves of the Tree of Life which are for the healing of the Nations. Who that
he might complete our deliverance, having saved us from the Hand of our
Enemies, that we might serve God without fear; is designing to reconcile us to
our selves, that having abolisht the Enmity, 2 Ephesians. 15.
even the Law of Commandments, contained in (Ecclesiastical) Ordinances we
might have Peace. We have Bishops now not like those Egyptian Taskmasters,
that when the People cried to them for ease, were sent back with a Reproach,
viz. Te are idle, ye are idle, away to your Burdens: But such as are kind and
compassionate Fathers and Pastors of the Flock, who considering its weakness
will not over drive it. Yea like the wisdom from above, they are gentle, and
easy to be entreated to lose every Burden, and to let the oppressed go free.
Binding up the brokenhearted, knocking off those Shackles which have so long
gauled the Consciences, Declaration from Breda. Declaration concerning
Ecclesiastical Affairs. Another in the 1 Year, 1672. etc.
and hold Captive the Souls of Men. For which purposes how often have Promises
been made, Tempers found, Projects offered and proposed; which by the
prevailing Interest of Men highly addicted to the Form of our Worship, have
been stifled and suppressed. And who are always in so high a stickle and stifle
to disappoint and cassate all the fairest Purposes and Propositions whenever
they are made, in order to a firm Settlement and lasting Peace. Nor will
consent to part with one Hair, though the whole Head be sick, etc. and though
we should admit it to be true, that nothing has been injoined in the Worship
of God, but what might be lawfully submitted to, yet it has been a very unruly
Truth, and which we have found so hard to manage, that like a restiffe Jade, it
has cast the Riders, and dangerously struck them when they were out of the
Saddle. It was a Reverend Bishop's Opinion in this case, That better is a quiet
Error, Bishop Hall's Peacemaker.
than an unruly Truth. And Erasmus was so great a Lover of Peace, that he could
not fancy a troublesome and tumultuous Truth. Mihi (says he) adeo invisa est
discordia, ut veritas etiam displiceat seditiosa. Which may admit a more
favorable Construction, when it respects only the Outworks of Religion, Our
Controversies, says Dr. Potter, are none of them in the Substance of Faith,
but only in disputable opinions not clearly defined in Scripture. Charity
mistaken, p 185. Why then should such things be made Terms of Communion.
and mere Circumstances of Divine Worship, which may, or may not be observed,
and yet the Ordinances of God duly administered. For instance, in the case of
Private Baptism, the Child may be (I think I may say according to the Rubric
ought to be) baptized without Sponsors, and not to be signed with the sign of
the Cross, and yet the Child is declared by the Rubric to be sufficiently
baptized without either, and requires none to make any doubt of it. And
therefore King James's Project which he sent to Cardinal Perroon might highly
conduce to an accommodation were we but so happy as to apply it, viz. That we
should sever Istam distinctionem serenissimus Rex tanti putat esse momenti
adminuendas Controversi^is que hodie Ecclesiam dei tantopere Exercent.
necessary from unnecessary things. That as to the first (which he says are
not many) we should agree, and leave the rest to liberty. In non necessariis
libertati Christianae detur locus. This he thought was the shortest Nullam
breviorem ad incundam concordiam viam fore, etc.
cut to Peace, as may be seen more at large in the Epistle wrote by Causabon to
the Cardinal at the King's Command upon this Subject. Yet so great and mistaken
too has the Zeal of Men been concerning the Rites of Religion that we have
herd, that whole Churches have bandied at, and censured one and other for
things of no great moment, such were the Saturday-Fast, and Celebration of
Easter. Erasmus in his Epistle before Irenaeus his works, commends that Father
for his earnest Desire, and Love of Peace, and for blaming the Bishop of Rome
for his Non de catholico dogmate sid de ritu, vel ritus potius tempore. Not for
any Catholic Doctrine but for Ceremony, etc. So Petavius.
cutting off many Churches from his Communion, because they did not agree with
the Western Church in the Celebration of Easter, and Observation of Fasts.
Ecclesiasticae Concordiae tam fuit studiosus ut cum Victor Romanus Pontifex
multas Ecclesias amputasset a Communione, quod in Celebratione diei Paschalis,
and in Observatione jejuniorum morem obtinerent a Romana consuetudine diversum
Magna liberate Victorem reprehenderit.

Now that things of this nature are the Scene in which our present Disputes
lie, there is no Man ignorant. To moderate which his Majesty has interposed his
Wisdom and Authority.

But though he has charmed wisely, yet our Adders have too much Sting, and too
little Ear to listen to those things which concern the Peace and Welfare of our
Church. From whence have sprung our great Zeal and Stickle in Parliamentary
Elections to pick up Men of those tenacious Principles, that would sooner part
with an Article out of their Creed, Eras. Epi^. od ^ernbard Trid. Epis^.
than the least Rite or Ceremony out of the Rubric.

The Answer which the Archbishop with the rest of the Bishops presented to the
late King was, That it was no want of Tenderness to Dissenters that they could
not comply with the Declaration for Liberty, but that they only waited till it
should be considered in Parliament and Convocation. The first has very kindly,
and with Justice to former Promises granted them their Liberty. To the latter
it being propounded to consider how the Partition Wall might be broken down,
the Bones of Contention (which have made us so often snarle at one and other)
thrown out of the way; every thing became so Sacred and Apostolical, that they
can part with nothing. The Forks and the Shovels, the Snuffers and the
Snuffing-Dishes were all of pure Gold.

It Is true, in the height of the Storm they promised a Candle as tall as their
Mainmast, but that being allayed, one burnt into the Socket, is too costly a
Sacrifice to offer up for the Peace and Unity of the Church.

Oh! If they would not join issue with their Enemies against them, how
deliciously should they fare every day? But now they cannot spare a Crum for
those scabby Lazarus's under the Table. When they were in trouble, and the Hand
of god was upon them, when they were spoken roughly to, and no Apology or Plea
they could allege in their defense would be heard or admitted, then like
Joseph 's Brethren methinks we hard them complain to each other; and say verily
we are guilty concerning our Brethren; In that we saw the Anguish of their
Souls when they besought us, but we would not bear them, therefore is this
distress come upon us. Did we not speak unto you, saying, Sin ot against them,
for they are our Brethren, but ye would not bear, therefore is their Blood
required as our Hands. But no sooner did our Moses deliver them from their
Taskmasters, and brought them again into their Kingdom, but like Pharaoh's
chief-Butler, they did not remember them, but Genesis 40.23. Obj.
forgot them. But to this it will be replied, Are not those Promises fulfilled?
Has not the last and this present Parliament settled that Liberty by a Law,
which the two last Princes straining their Prerogative gave by Proclamation?

France. Though the departure of the greatest part of Dissenting Protestants
here, was far less from the Church of England, than theirs from the Church of
Rome.

But why might not things be so tempered, that this Partition Wall might become
less needful? And the Church of England by harkening to some Terms of
Accommodation, and making a Rebatement of disputable Things, and (all along)
offensive Rites and Ceremonies become more enlarged, and settled upon a firmer
Basis and more tried Foundation. For though the late Indulgence has prevented
Ephraim from vexing Judah, yet it is scarce provided for, that Judah should not
envy Ephraim. Although I have some good reason to know and believe (and
therefore do I speak) that many of our Dissenting Brethren be of Mephibosheth's
Mind, that if the Protestant Religion may be secured, against our restless and
implacable Enemies of Rome, the King and Kingdom settled in Peace, poor Ireland
saved out of the Hands of those, whose tender Mercies are Cruelty; they are
contented the Ziba's should take all; they grudge not at their Preferments and
Dignities, being satisfied with a slender Fare and Provision. And of the Mind
with that contented Man described by the Poet, Vivitur parvo been cui paternum
Splendet in mensa tenui Salinum,
Nec leves Somnos timor aut Cupido,
Sordidus aufert.
Esteeming the Liberty of Conscience, and mean Diet, a continual Feast. But why
should we envy our Brethrens sitting at the same Table, when we have all the
same Faith, the same Father, the same Baptism, the same Hope of our Calling?



1st. We hope better things of them, and such as accompany the Peace and Union
of the Church.

2dly, Suppose it should gain but a few, yet that is Ground enough for our
Argument, an Enforcement of our Plea. Would our Governors please to imitate
St. Paul, they would become all things to all Men that they might gain some,
though not all Dissenters, 1 Cor. 9.19. For though I be free from all Men, yet
have I made my self a Servant, etc. 20. To the Jews I became a Jew, that I
might the gain the Jews, etc. 22. To the weak became I as weak, that I might
gain the weak: I am made all things to all Men that I might gain some.

That St. Paul might not offend the Jews he condescended, and circumcised
Timothy The Pharisees were very strict for Circumcision, 16 Acts 3.
and though it needful to observe the Law. 15 Acts 5.
But the Apostles assembled at Jerusalem thought not fit to trouble the
Conversed Gentiles (which were turned to God) with those Rites, which the
Converted Jews were zealous for. Why might not the same Rule be observed among
us? He that is ambitious to have his Child signed with the Sign of the Cross in
Baptism, let him have the Liberty to procure his Child to be so baptized. He
that desires to be excused the Ceremony of the Surplice in his public
Ministration, may he be left to his own freedom: and so on the contrary being
obliged only to those things which are necessary, especially where such
Indulgence may gain some Pious and Conscientious Ministers, into the Communion
of our church, and give ease to such who are actually engaged in its Ministry,
and pressed down with such Burdens. Which is the second Reply to the
Objection, and Plea for Abatement.

3dly, Suppose our Concessions should not call many over into our Tents at
present, yet it might prevent those who are not yet admitted into our Communion
from fleeing to separate Congregations for ease and refuge as to their
Consciences; who if some rough places were made plain, would never think of
departing from our Assemblies.

Would we Cedere a jure, and rebate those things which are Goads in the Sides,
and Thorns in the Eyes of many good and Tender-conscienced Men, whose Necks
have been gauled with the Ceremonial Yoke: It would happen to the Church from
so benevolent an Aspect as it does to the Earth, from the happy Conjunctions
and Configurations of the Stars, whose effects though they be not immediately
felt, yet cast a future kind and benign influence upon it.

And is it not more than probable, that Persons who hereafter shall be at
liberty of their choice of two several Communions, will choose that which they
judge safest, and in which their Consciences may be most at ease? If in one of
these the Word is soundly preached, as it is in the Assemblies of many of the
Dissenters (for they have owned and subscribed the Articles of our Religion so
far as they respect the Doctrine of the Church) where also the Sacraments
according to Divine Institution, are duly administered, pure and separate from
those Rites and Ceremonies which are by them accounted to be (at best) of
doubtful Disputation, and have been the Causes (accidentally at least) of ^very
great Contest and Confusions amongst us: For this Reason good Mr. Acts and
Monuments, Vol. 3.
Fox prayed that God would ease us of them, viz. because they have been the
Cause, says he, of much Blindness and Strife.

In the other, Men of Scruple know they cannot enjoy God's Ordinances of
hearing the Word, Praying, Communicating in the Holy Sacrament of the Lord's
Supper, nor their Children baptized, but these Divine Institutions must be
levened with those Ceremonies which to them are doubtful, they fear unlawful;
which makes them abstain from celebrating the Evangelical Passover, because
these sour Herbs must be its Sauce. Which though it be affirmed by the
Imposers to be insipid, and to have no taste, either good or bad, but of an
indifferent nature, yet when they taste they see, and (according to the best of
their Understandings) find the contrary, they feel a Flavor of Superstition
upon their Palats, and the more intently they look, the greater Eye of Red they
espy in them. And upon the closest Application of their Judgments find a Fust
of Popery, or else they mistake. They like the Meat well, but the Cookery is
too much of the Garlic strain. Is it not then likely that the best and wisest
Men will choose that part, which has least of hazard? Now according to the
Opinions on both sides the controverted Rites may be omitted, and yet the
Sacraments duly administered; otherwise surely the Bishops and Clergy in
Scotland, would not have received the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper sitting;
as their Practice was before the late Abolition of Episcopacy: Nor would our
Rubric declare, that in private Baptism, where it is to be administered without
Godfathers, and Sign of the Cross, the Child is sufficiently baptized,
forbidding any to question it. Whence we may conclude, that the most wary Men,
will be apt to forsake the Communion of the Church of England as the most
unsafe of the two. Which by the Expedient propounded, might be easily prevented
for the future; and seems no faint Argument for an act of Comprehension, though
it should not bring over those who are actually engaged as Pastors and
Ministers of indulged Congregations.

So that the Act of Indulgence seems by a necessary Consequence to draw after
it, another of Comprehension as large and powerful as the Inveteracy of our
Schism shall require, and Wisdom of our Lawgivers shall think fit to grant;
least those Riots which the former Act has suffered to grow up, should so far
exhaust the Sap, that the Tree of the Church should shrink and dwindle into a
degenerate Plant. But if it would submit to have some of its Luxuriances (which
have been esteemed as Right-hands) to be cut off, it might become a more
thriving, yea and pleasanter Plant than ever. So far superseding the Act of
Indulgence, as to take away the subject Matter of it, that in process of time
it might become useless, there remaining few or none that would flee to it for
succor; yea, and all the Penal Laws too, whilst all could cheerfully submit to
its equitable Orders and inoffensive Rules and Canons: For when the
Controverted things are once removed, the rest of her Commands would not be
grievous.

4thly, Suppose the Dissenters should not be ga^n'd; Yet is there not regard to
be had to the tender Consciences of Conformists, who rather than violate the
Peace, or break the Unity of the Church, have a long time labored under an
heavy Burden? Suppose these make their Wants known and Desires open, Is there
no Mercy, no Pity to be extended to them, nor Consideration to be had of them?
Must their Jaws be ever bored through with these Thorns, and their Faces ground
without any remorse? Thanks be to God we have a Prince now whose design and
endeavor is to lose every Burden, and to let the oppressed to free. Nay, the
Fathers of the Church have put on Bowels of Compassion too. If any be
inexorable they are our Brethren with whom such Complainants have been
accounted no better than Traitors to the State, betrayers of the Church; and if
they perish in the Pit, become Slaves and Vassals to the Caldaeans; nay,
whatever becomes of them, it moves them not. Pray God this Sin be not laid to
their charge, which can be esteemed no less, if we may take the Judgment of one
dignified among them: Who thus expresses himself.

I am persuaded this is one of the provoking Sins of the Conformists, That they
have been so backward of doing what they were convinced they See the Preface to
the Common Prayer, etc. 34 Article of Religion. Every particular or national
Church has Authority to ordain, change and abolish Ceremonies or Rites of the
Church.
might have done with a good Conscience, when they were earnestly pressed to it
by their Dissenting Brethren, and had Authority to do it; but they refused it.

They have the same Price now put into their Hands. The King invites them, the
necessity of uniting Protestants against the common and implacable Enemy cries
aloud to them, the Groans of burdened and oppressed Consciences of their
Brethren plead with them. But I am afraid they do but surdis canere. We may
seek them earnestly, but they will not be found of us. Nay, I wish there may
not be the same reason to believe now, what a Reverend Doctor and Dignitary of
the Church has some years since declared to the World, viz. That they seem
rather resolved to break all in pieces, and hazard our Religion, and let these
sad Effects, our Divisions, still continue, than to abate their Rigor in
imposing what they may lawfully alter or abolish.

Nay, that which puts so keen an edge upon our Complaints, as to cut every good
Man to the Heart, is, That this Judgment which has laid so heavy upon us, has
begun at the Church. Those whom God designed to be Fishers of Men, have spent
their time and pains in gathering up these Shells and Pebbles upon the Shore;
and (as one well observes) have wrangled about them too. But such is the
present and remarkable Providence of god, that many of the Bishops and Clergy
are pleading for that now as to themselves, they too much slighted, and decry'd
as Humor and Faction in others. Now they plead Conscience, and urge it in
excuse for not swearing Allegiance and Fidelity to the Government; to whom I
wish as large Dispensations as be consistent with the Nature of Government and
present Constitution of the Kingdom. But we ever understood those things which
are destructive to the State, to be out of the Question, and beyond the Bounds
of it, yea and Modesty too. It might be said as it was in another case, If they
ask this, let them ask the Kingdom also. For as it has been ever thought, that
a Liberty in such things would be unreasonable for any Persons to ask; so
neither could it be thought in common Prudence fit for Superiors to grant,
especially in our case, unless they can dispense with a new Revolution of our
former Miseries.

But in the mean time, why might not the Yoke of Conformity be lined, and that
Burden eased, which has so long gauled the Necks, and grieved the Consciences
of many in the Communion of the Church? Who like Issachar have rather chewed
the Cud, than divided the Hoof, bit the Bridle, rather than snarled at the
Governors of it?

Israel than these Quietists, whose Malice and Mistakes have produced the
greatest Miseries and Misfortunes that have befallen us.

Aut fabrum forceps aut ars ignara fefellit.
(...) voluit cudere, cudit (...).
There Is some mistake, for Bread they give a Knife,
Who hammering of Peace do fashion Strife.
Aris interdicent avari sacerdotes, pulpito lacessent larvati cuculliones,
contumeliosique hypocritae. Peccata reservabunt aeternis ignibus plenipotentes
pontifices. Gallicam Scabiems commina buntur salaces meretriculae. Praes. ad
vani. scien. Facile tamen hos insultus evadendi spes est. Si modo veritatis
patiens posito liv^re candido animo adhaec legenda accesseris. Habeo praeterea
verbum dei pro clypeo, etc. Ibid.
Cornelius Agrippa complains of, or reckons upon, when he wrote his Book de
Vanita^e Scientiarum. Yet I can, I dare say, I am no more a false Brother, than
I take the Church of England to be a false Mother, who rather chose to have the
Infant butchered than her revengeful Humor left ungratified. We only beg an
Indulgence in those things which are no way essential to its Constitution, but
like accidents to natural Bodies, Possunt and ad esse, and ab esse sine
Subjecti interitu. And that in things of this nature, the Strings may not be
screwed up by an Arbitrary Power to that pitch, as will strain and stretch the
tender Consciences of her willing and obedient Children till all be disjointed;
and especially considering, that the Voice of God in his late and stupendous
Providence, is to loose every Burden, and to let the oppressed go free.

We had a Prince who to expedite his way, and facilitate his Restoration to
the Throne, gave all assurances his Royal Word could afford, that no Man should
suffer for his Conscience in Matters of Religion, Witness the Declaration from
Breda.
who should not disturb the Government and Peace of the Nation: And that he
might satisfy, or gratify rather the Presbyterians, whose effectual fervent
Endeavors, availed much toward his restitution to all things, he was very
liberal in his Promises; 1660.
and the better to water those hopes which he had so planted, issues his
Declaration concerning Ecclesiastical Affairs (in which he recognizes that from
Breda) wherein he laid down that Project, by which he had wisely forecasted the
Peace and Settlement both of Church and State, as is not obscurely hinted in
its Preface. And indeed, many to this day think, that the Leaves of that Plant
might have conduced much to the healing of the Nation in both respects, had our
Royal Physician applied his Prescription: But instead thereof, that Corrosive
was provided, which envenomed, but never healed the hurt of the Daughter of our
People; instead of binding up their Wounds, and mollifying them with Ointment,
there was that Vinegar and Gall poured into them, which enraged and rancled
them beyond a Cure. His Majesty soon after this interim, or gracious
Proposition (which was but like Lightning before a Thunderbolt) enacted a Law,
which deprived above 2000 of the Dissenting Clergy (as has been computed) of
their Benefices and Offices, leaving them the Benevolence of their own Party,
and Charity of their Friends to provide Bread for themselves, and ruined
Families: By which act was required a Subscription to the Book of Common
Prayer, and to give an unfeigned Assent and Consent to all, and every thing
contained in it (which was Revised and Reprinted with diverse Alterations) and
to be done too by such a day, upon pain of Deprivation: Which time was so
limited, that the new Copies could not be distributed, or what was to be
subscribed to consulted; which has often caused some to think that the Persons
then evicted by that Law, were not legally ejected; for it is impossible for me
to give an unfeigned assent and consent to the Truth of a Proposition which I
know not; and the Ignorance in that case was invincible, the Copies not being
to be procured in time; so that the several Alterations could not be
considered, or compared with the Rule of Scripture, which all concerned were
obliged to acknowledge they did not contradict. To assent to a thing I know not
is impossible, and to know a thing where the necessary Medium of Knowledge is
denied is no way practicable. How then a Man can be disseized of his Freehold
for not doing a thing which is impossible and impracticable, I leave to Men of
Law and Reason to determine.

But I shall return to the former modest and earnest Request, made to our
Superiors of such a Latitude or Relaxation in point of Conformity, as might
render the Churches Yoke easy and burthen-light, as to those that are in it;
giving so fair Invitations and Proposals to those that are without, that though
they be not compelled by force, they may be a kind and generous Condescension
be constrained to come in: Whilst the former Methods of reducing the People of
this Nation to an uniform Practice in the Modes of Worship, have proved as
unsuccessful as they were uncharitable, and rather (in many cases) the Effects
of Spleen than Discipline. To prevent these Mischiefs, How happy were it, if
the Bones which have made us snarle at, yea bite and devour one and other,
might be taken out of the way?

1st, The first Net to which we may sacrifice for those Factions and Divisions
which are amongst us, or which we rather may wish were sacrificed, and offered
up by our Superiors to the Peace and Welfare of that Church, of which God has
made them Overseers, are those Ceremonies which have pestered the Communion of
it, masked and entangled the Consciencies of many worthy (whatever they have
been accounted) Members of its Fellowship.

First, The first of these is the Surplice and Habits, whose whiteness is
simbolically significant of that Purity and spotless Innocence, which ought to
be inseparable Proprieties of those who wait upon the Heg^sippus in his
relation of the Life of St. James says, that he only was admitted into the
Sanctuary, because he was clad in Linen, but this Work is falsely ascribed to
that Author.
Altar. This is one of those Hairs, which is run through the Sieve of the
Reformation, which Let us hear the Opinion of that reverend and worthy Man Mr.
Fox, in our present case, who gives us an account of one Blomfeild, an
Informer, who threatened a good Man and Minister, for not wearing a Surplice in
his public Ministration; and that he would put him forth, or deliver him up to
the Officers, as is there said. Wherefore, says he, it is pity such Baits of
Popery are left to the Enemies to take Christians in. God take them away, or
ease us from them: for God knows they be the Cause of much Blindness and
Strife amongst Men: So that this Rite has been accounted an ancient Nuisance
in the Church: Acts and Monuments, Vol. 3. p. 764. Edit. 1684.
has choakt some, and made others keck and strain in drinking down the sincere
Milk.

The Reformers of our Church, those Evangelical Fishermen, or rather Fishers
of Men, being not so stanch as other Churches who reformed from Popery, though
fit to knit their Net of somewhat a wider shale than they; insomuch, that
several of the Fry spawned in Tiber, have run through the Masks of it; which
Roman Lampreys several wise and good Men have thought to have a poisonous Sting
of Superstition run through the Back of them. Jewel, Bishop of Salisbury had as
judicious a Palate as another, yet professed he found the same Flavor, who in a
Letter, dated Febr. 8. 1566. wishes that the Vestments, together with all the
Remnants of Popery might be thrown out of their Churches, and of the Minds of
the People, and laments the Queen's fixedness to them. Bishop Hooper, that
constant Martyr refused to be consecrated Bishop, unless he might be dispensed
with as to the Attire, viz. The white Rocket, etc. (as Mr. Fox styles it)
beseeching the King either to discharge him of his Bishopric, or else to
dispense with him for such Ceremonial Orders: Which the King did, and wrote to
the Archbishop, Acts and Monuments, p. 120 2d. Vol. 3d. Vol.
and indemnified him for omitting (and Licensed him to let pass) certain Rites
and Ceremonies offensive to his Conscience.

Sands, Archbishop of York, gives them no better Character than what the
aforesaid Bishop of Salisbury had Engraven upon them. Contenditur de Vestibus
Papisticis utendis vel non utendis s^d deus dabit his quoque finem.
Disputes concerning the Popish Vestments are on Foot, whether they shall be
used or not; but God (says he) will put an end to those things. Zanchy also in
his Epistle to Queen Elizabeth, tell her, That most of the Bishops had rather
leave their Offices than admit of such Garments. Horn, Bishop of Winchester,
in his Letter dated 16. July, 1565. writes of the Act concerning the Habits
with great regret, and expresses some hopes, that it might be repealed next
Session of Parliament, if the Popish Party did not hinder it: And seems to be
in a doubt, See Burnet's Letters, containing an Account of his Observations in
Switzerland, etc.
whether he should conform himself to it or not: Upon which he desires the
Advice of Bullinger. And in many Letters wrote on that subject, it is asserted
that both Cranmer and Ridley intended to procure an Act for abolishing the
Habits. Grindal in a Letter, dated 27. August, 1566. writes, that all Bishops
which had been beyond Sea, dealt with the Queen; to let the Matter of the
Habits fall. And must they still stand to grieve the Consciences of good Men,
scandalize those that are without, drive out those that are within? Especially
considering we have a Prince that is willing to compassionate the Infirmities
of the Weak, and Bishops who are ready to remove the Nuisances of the Church;
could we but be so happy as to be delivered from the Strivings of some
over-formal People, who are as obstreperous for these things as the Ephesians
for their Diana: Whereas these Garments no more than Meats commend us to God,
for neither if we wear them are we the better, neither if we near them not, are
we the worse. Some stumble at these Rites of wearing Linen Garments; as
supposing them originally derived and borrowed from the Customs of the
Heathens, Suetonius.
whose Priests used such a kind of Dress when they appeared before their Gods.
In lintea relligiosa vest Sacra Isidis propalam celebrate.

-- Non discolor ulli
Ante aras cultus velantur Corporaline. Sil. Ital.

Alba decent Cererem. Ovid.

Evolvam busto jam numen gentibus Isin,
Et^ tectam lino spargam per vulgus Osirin.
Juvenal calls the Priests, Grex liniger. And though every thing is not to be
rejected which the Heathens used, for then perhaps we must wear no Garments at
all: Yet God commanded the Jews, 12 Deuteronomy. 31. Not to do so to the Lord their
God; that is as the Heathens did. And Cajetane from thence observes, that God
plainly forbid them to Worship him with such Rites and Ceremonies, as the
Heathens worshipped their Deities. His Words are, Praecipitur ad literam ne
colant deum similibus ritibus and Ceremoniis quos servarunt Ethnici Colentes
Elohe suos.

Others are scandalized at them, because these Rites and Habits are used by the
Papists, or rather abused. Nec cum haereticis Commune quicquam habere
voluerunt, Magd. Cent. 4. Cas. 6. Col.

As to these Arguments, I shall only say, Valiant in quantum valere possunt.
Yet sure they may have Tincture enough to color the Requests we make to our
Imposers, that they would consider how they put a Stumbling Block to those that
are weak, that they would not use the Sword of their Authority to the wounding
the Consciences of their Brethren, for this is a Sin against Christ, which may
supersede all other Arguments that might be alleged, and pleaded in redress of
this Grievance, hoping our Superiors are of the same Mind with St. Paul, that
if the Injunction of this Rite (as to Habit) make our Brethren to offend, they
would never injoin it whilst the World stands. And that for the future the
Righteousness of the Saints may be a sufficient Qualification for the
Ministerial Office, though they should appear in no other clean Linen to
worship in; 19 Rev. 8. For the fine Linen is the Righteousness of the Saints.

Of the Cross in Baptism.
II. THE Sign of the Cross in Baptism: This is a Stone of Stumbling and Rock of
Offense; A retained Rite in our Reformation from Rome, which other Protestant
Churches thought fit to reject, as a Superstitious Ceremony and Popish
unnecessary addition to the Holy Sacrament of Baptism; nor were they to be
blamed when the end for which the Primitive Christians in several Cases made
use of it was ceased. They living among those Heathens who despised a Crucified
Savior, and in a literal Sense, were Enemies to the Cross of Christ, in
opposition to which Gainsayers they by the frequent use of it let them see,
that they were not ashamed of the Gospel, and that God forbad, that they should
glory in any thing save in the Cross of Christ. But this Practice did not long
preserve it self from a Superstitious Taint, the Primitive Christians thinking
nothing well done without it; such was their Opinion of it, yea into a direct
Idolatry did this Superstition degenerate, that in succeeding Generations it
came to be adored and worshipped, Prayers being by the Church directed to it,
as to God himself, which Aquinas alleges cantat enim Ecclesia O crux ave spes
unica, etc. 3. q. 25.4.
in Justification of the Conclusion he makes concerning its Adoration in the
highest degree. Crux Christi (says he) in qua Christus Crucifixus est, tum
propter representationem, tum propter Christi Contactum, latria adoranda est,
Crucis vero Effigies in alia quavis materia, priori tantum ratione adoranda
est. That is, the Cross of Christ upon which he was crucified, in respect of
its Representation, as also because it And might not the Lips of Judas by the
same reason be adored with Divine Honor.
touched the Body of Christ is to be worshipped by the highest Worship: But the
Effigies or Figure of the Cross of what Matter or Metal soever it is made of,
in the first respect only ( viz. its Representation) is in the same manner to
be worshipped.

Nor is this the Freak or Fancy of this single Doctor only, but the stated
Judgment of the Roman Church, otherwise she would never allow it to be solemnly
prayed to in her public Offices. In domi^ica de passione domini in hymn.
Cantat enim Ecclesia O crux ave spes unica hoc passionis tempore, ^^ge piis
justitiam, reisque dona veniam. That is hail holy Cross, our only hope in this
time of Passion give an increase of Righteousness to holy Men, and to the
guilty Pardon of Sin. Can those Churches be blamed which already have, or ours
if now it should, lay aside such Rites as have been, and yet are so
unreasonably abused to Superstition and Idolatry.

The Conclusion which the Canon Law has made in the like Case seems very
rational, viz. Supposing our Ancestors have done some things, which might at
that time be blameless, Did 6. Cap. 3. Quia.
and afterward be turned to Superstition and Error, we are taught by Hezekiah's
breaking the brazen Serpent, that Posterity may destroy them without any delay,
and with great Authority: And that which makes us hope, that our Lawgivers may
in due time give ear to the Requests so often made, both by those which are
within, and without the Communion of the church of England, and fulfill the
repeated Promises which have been made of taking away, the Occasions or Causes
of its Schism, is that our Church it self lays no great As we have had more
than once occasion to take notice of.
stress upon this Rite. For in the Rubric of private Baptism it allows that
Sacrament to be complete, and sufficiently administered without it, where the
essential parts, viz. the Matter and Form as by Christ prescribed be observed,
though this Humane addition should be omitted.

Seeing then our Forefathers have had so moderate an Opinion concerning it:
Besides the modesty of our Desires which are not to have the Breast Plate of
Righteousness or [Holiness to the Lord] in the least defaced or expunged, but
only that a Bell may be taken off the Ephod which has rung Awk in the Ears of
many weak; yet very true Sons of the Church. We hope therefore, etc.

Which are the Words of B. Sparrow in his Rationale, if I mistake not, for I
have not the Book to consult, and I have not lately read it.
Pomp and Ceremony is to be observed as in public Baptism.

viz. Yet nevertheless, if the Child which after this sort is baptized does
afterward live, it is expedient that it be brought into the Church, to the
intent, that if the Minister cerof the same Parish did himself baptize that
Child, the Congregation may be tified of the true Form of Baptism by him
privately before used. And nothing more than a bare Certificate, according to
the Rule is needful, where Baptism has been administered by the Minister of the
Parish: Whatever the Author of the Rationale has affirmed to the contrary. But
suppose it baptized by a Stranger, it is not in that case positively commanded,
that the Child be brought into the Congregation: But the Judgment of the Church
declared, that it is a thing expedient or fit. Seeing then it is not a Ceremony
of that use now, as it was among the Primitive Christians, who too soon caused
it, to degenerate into Superstition; besides that many of our Brethren are by
it driven from our Assemblies, suffering their Children to die unbaptized, as
of mine own knowledge I can testify, or at best forced into separate
Communions to avoid that Rite, by which means the Breach is widened, and the
Schism made more inveterate: And seeing our Church has that moderate Opinion
of it, that the Omission of it is no prejudice either to the Sufficiency or
Lawfulness of the Act. Why should it be thought by any unreasonable for us to
entreat our Superiors for an The Rubric of the first Book of Edw. the Sixth,
commands that the Child be signed by the Minister on the Breast, as well as on
the Forehead: Now seeing this is omitted, Why may not that on the Forehead be
left indifferent?
Abatement in this respect?

Of Kneeling at the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper.
III. A Third thing which has caused several to stumble and fall from us, is
the Posture of Kneeling at the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper. We all agree in
this, that the utmost Humility, Reverence and Thankfulness that we can pay to
the Almighty for his ineffable Love to Mankind, commemorated in that holy
Office, is not the half that is due, the way of payment is only questioned. The
Tribute of Honor is not denied, though it be doubted by such as dissent from
us, whether the Coin we are prescribed to pay it in be current. If we agree the
substantial part of our Duty, is it an insuperable difficulty to find a Temper
by which we might accord no greater difference? Is it not a spot which will
scarce ever be taken out of the Ancient Church, that the different Calculation
of Easter should breed such irreconcilable Feuds and Factions, as to proceed
with the greatest Censures and Severities one against another?

For which St. Irenaeus went up to Rome, and sharply rebuked Victor for the
Rigor of his Proceedings against the Eastern Churches as is already observed.
And how sharp a Thorn this retained Ceremony has been among the rest; the
Tears and Complaints of our Brethren which have been poured out as a Flood,
have been sufficient Proofs. And though it is true, the Mercy and compassion of the
King, and two succeeding Parliaments have wiped those Eyes dry, which for many
Years together scarce ever ceased: Yet it cannot but press hard upon the Hearts
and Consciences of many faithful Ministers of the Church, upon the highest
Pains and Penalties it can inflict, to be forced to deny Children their Bread,
to expel and drive them away from the Lord's Table, be their Conversations
never so much agreeable to the Gospel, merely for their Nonconformity to a
Rite which Imposers themselves (abstracted from their Authority) allow to be
indifferent: Besides is there no regard to be had to many Conscientious Members
in its Communion, who being loath to make a rent in it, have submitted to an
uneasy Yoke? And will you not gratify your obedient Children, who have lived
uneasy to themselves, rather than disoblige or disobey you, whom God has set
over them? Hark, how a Beam out of our Timber, and Stone out of our own Wall
Council us.

Have Patience with your weak Brother, require no more of him than Christ
required of his Disciples; surely Christ would not have allowed any unfitting
Posture; condemned not that which Christ allowed. Admit we be weak, Naked
Truth, p^g. 19.
yet we are not wilful, when you command us to go we go; But why should our way
be paved any longer with Thorns, which is in your Power to strew with Roses?
Suppose we be weak, yet you that are strong ought to bear the Infirmities of
the Weak, and not to offend those by your Authoritative Power, for whom Christ
died. Was it not truly alleged in the second Paper, presented to King Charles
II. by the Divines then authorized to review and amend the Liturgy, that
kneeling in any Adoration at all in any Worship on any Lord's Day in the Year,
or on any Weekday, between Easter and Penticost was not only disused but
forbidden by General Councils? Con. Nicen. 1. Can. 20. Con. Trull. etc.
Why should you our Fathers provoke your willing Children to wrath? Violating
the Rules of Charity by your Decrees for Conformity: We are weak, it is true,
but many strong, I mean wise and learned Men are of the same Mind and Meaning
with us. Nay several of the Reformed Churches have abolished this Rite, for
that they thought it did Olere Papismum, smelling too rank of their Idolatrous
Worship: And least this Fly should affect, or infect their whole Box of
Ointment, have cast it out. Besides, though in process of time this Ceremony
has been admitted, yet from the beginning it was not so. Christ and his
Apostles used not this Posture, but that which was usual at their common Meals,
and yet no doubt, he gave this Holy Sacrament, and they received it in a most
reverend and decent way. It Is not probable that the Church of Corinth, and
other Socrates observes, that the Egyptians adjoining to Alexandria and
Inhabitants of Thebais, after they had banqueted and filled themselves with
sundry Delicacies, in the Evening after Service did use to Communicate.
Primitive Christians, who celebrated this Sacrament together with their
Love Feasts did alter their Posture, no more than our Savior and his Apostles,
who while they did eat took Bread.

Didoclavius in his Altar Damascenum, Page 784. maintains, that no Testimony
can be produced to prove, that Kneeling was before the time of Honorius 3d. And
some others have observed, that bowing the Knees before the Host, came not into
the Church before Transubstantation, Bish. Hall tells us of a dispute he had
with a Sorbonist, who took occasion by our kneeling at the Receipt of the
Eucharist, to persuade the Company that we owned Transubstantiation.
Mr. Hopper I may be allowed to say of Mr. Hooker, as Mr. Chillingworth speaks
of him, viz. Though he was an excellent Man, yet he was but a Man, p. 309. The
Religion of Botest.
in his Ecclesiastical Polity speaks little upon this Argument; and yet that
little is by some thought too much, as too much reflecting upon our Savior's
Administration of the Holy Sacrament to his Disciples, not in a kneeling
Posture. This Bellarmine acknowledges in his Answer to Calvin's Objection, Lib.
de Eucharist. 4to. Cap. 30. Non poterant semper prostraticum Christo agere
praesertim in Caena domini, quando recumbere cum illis necesse erat.

Stella says also; Distribuit panem discumbentibus, mundi Salvator. If I
mistake the Author of the Ecclesiastical Polity, let the Reader judge. His
Word; are these, [If we did there present our selves to make some show, or dumb
resemblance of a Spiritual Feast, it may be that sitting were the better
Ceremony.] Our Savior did not, nor his Apostles present themselves only to
make some show, or dumb resemblance of a Spiritual Feast, yet undoubtedly they
adjudged the Posture they used at Meals the fittest, and not kneeling, for sure
they chose that, they judged to be most decent and fit. [Our Lord says, the
same Author did that which custom and long usage had made fit; We that which
fitness and great decency had made usual.] I should have thought our Savior's
Practice might have as well prescribed to fitness and great decency, as to
custom and long usage; especially considering it was an Ordinance not so old as
yesterday, but at that very time instituted: But to let all this pass, kneeling
was a Rite dispensed with by the Interim of Charles II. who for the
Establishing of the Churches Peace, and composing the Minds of Men, gave a
Determination of several Matters in difference; this Ceremony being one among
the rest. Which Dispensation (though styled an Interim) might have continued
for ever had me King pleased; that is, till such a time as he in his
Declaration mentions, viz. [Vntil such a Synod be called, as might without
Passion or Prejudice give a further Assistance toward a perfect Union of
Affections, as well as Submission to Authority;] Providing that none be denied
the Sacrament for not using the Posture of Kneeling. To desire then what has
been so largely promised by the Supreme Magistrate, with great Advice, and for
wise Ends, argues us neither sturdy Beggars, nor unreasonable in our Requests.
And though I have, and do without scruple submit to the Order of our Church in
this respect; yet for the sake of those that cannot, I heartily wish an
Indulgence might be granted, or Temper found, to extinguish those Flames, which
so small a Spark has enkindled, causing the Daughter of our Sion so often to
be clad in Sackcloth, and to sit in Ashes. In a word, as to our
Church-Ceremonies in the Bulk, I may conclude in the Words of that Reverend and
Learned Person, the Author of the Naked Truth, viz. That if they be things
indifferent in themselves, let them be indifferently used, not urged upon all.
[ Naked Truth, p. 20.
Let it be indifferent, says he, whether this or that, or no Ceremony, whether
Kneel or not Kneel, Bow or not Bow, Surplice or no Surplice, Cross or no Cross,
Ring or no Ring, let us give Glory to God in all, and no Offense to our
Brethren in any thing.]

Concerning the Liturgy or Church Service.
AS to our Church Service, there be two Things in the general we could wish
might be considered.

1st. The first is the Form and Method of it; being by our first Reformres
wisely framed, so as all things which they esteemed necessary to be altered,
might be expunged; yet they retained so much of the Form and Shape of it, that
it seems in some respects to symbolize with the Roman Service: And though other
Reformed Churches went through stitch, and wholly abolisht it, yet the Divines
of our Nation understanding the Genius and Temper of the People saw our Polity,
could no more than Nature, endure violent Alterations. And that Rome, which was
not built, so neither could it be destroyed in a Day. Hence perhaps it was
that, the Terms of Altar, Priest, etc. were retained, and that in all his
Attire and Dress he must go up to read the second Service at the Altar, etc.
But sure these were Physicians of greater value than to oblige others never to
perfect the Cure. The old Leven could not be purged out all at once; and
therefore several of the greatest Prelates in Queen Elizabeth's Days
endeavored to proceed in that Work, but Satan hindered them. And he that has
let, still lets, yea that Mystery of Iniquity, will work till it be taken out
of the way. 2 Thessalonians. 2.7.
But as our first Reformers had sufficient reason to vouch them in doing so
much, so enough to say that they then did no more.

1st. As first, That the King might with more ease be delivered from the
Strivings of the People.

Who upon the first Essay of the Reformation were cast into Heaps,
Insurrections and Mutinies. To pacify whom, he in a Message to the Rebels of
Devonshire and Cornwall, told them, Acts and Monuments. Lib. 9. p. 15. Col. 2.
That though perchance it seemed to them a new Service, yet indeed was no other
than the old, the self-same Words in English which were in Latin, saving a few
things taken out, etc. If the general Zeal of English Men for the Mass hindered
their Progress then, the universal Prejudice of our Nation against it now, may
justify a further Procedure in the Reformation: For if it were Wisdom and
Reason in our Ancestors to observe the Temper of the People, and conform to the
times then; Why should not our Governors so much honor them as to make it the
Rule of Practice now, so far as may stand with a good Conscience, and the
Church's Peace?

2dly, A retaining much of the Form, and symbolizing then with the Ancient
Service, seemed a very good Expedient to draw the People into a more easy
Compliance and Communion with the Church, though it had cast out many of its
usages, as tainted with the Leven of Idolatry and Superstition: Whereas by our
Experience we have found, that no Condescentions can prevail with them to own
our Church, or prevent their Designs and Conspiracies to ruin it. So
successful and prosperous were their late Attempts, that the Cup was at their
Lip, who had well nigh swallowed us up, and in a moment we must have gone down
into the Belly of Hell. The Altar was built, the Wood was prepared, the
Sacrifice was bound, the Hand stretched out against us; the weight of which we
had ere now felt, if the Lord had not sent his Angel and delivered us. Shall we
then disoblige our Friends and Brethren, of the same Reformed Protestant
Religion with our selves; who own the same Faith, the same Hope of our Calling,
the same Lord, the same Baptism; Shall we any longer keep our Friends out, to
bring our implacable Enemies in? Whom by Experience we have found to be rather
hardened in the Error of their way, than softened by Compliance (in any thing)
with them, or Indulgence of them. When we nurse and brood them (as the
Countryman did the Snake) till they do but sting and hiss at us for our pains.
Why then should we retain that form of Service which so much regrates upon the
Minds of our Friends, and is altogether ineffectual to soften, or oblige our
Enemies?

3dly, They did no more by way of Reformation then, because it pleased God to
shorten the Edward 6.
King's Life, and put an end to his days, before the great Work was finished,
and Reformation perfected. After which it pleased him to suffer the Church,
again to settle upon the old Lees of Popery: All the Relics and Remainders of
which we have found hard to get rid of. But now God has blessed us with a
Prince, who is willing that the Rulers of our Church should take their Fan into
their Hand, and thoroughly purge the Floor. Let him not now have occasion to say
concerning us, I would have purged you, but you would not be purged, till the
Lord causes his fury to rest upon you.

England, as if it were tainted with the old Leven of Popery? When it so lately
appeared in open defiance against it, standing in the gap to defend us from the
Ravage which the old Boards of the Roman Forest would have made in our
Vineyard? Was it not from hence that our Bank has been maintained against the
proud and rampant Waves of Tiber, I mean Popery which was coming upon us like a
Flood?

Gilboa. And therefore we ought not to curse those who freely offered
themselves, and came out to the help of the Lord, to the help of the Lord
against the mighty: But yet, if I might without offense, I would desire a Query
or too to be resolved.

England, with those of the Dissenters? I must profess that of the latter I
know none: though both of the Clergy and Laity there might be brought in too
large a list, or Catalogue (to our shame be it spoken) of the former.

Justine Martyr thought it a Childish thing to have more than simple Singing,
or to have Musical Instruments used in the CHURCH. (...) etc.
Whether there be not several who would freely consent, that the Caps and
Copes, Surplice and Hood, Crossing and Bowing, alternate Readings, Versicles
and Responds, Chanting and Music in our Church Assemblies might be laid aside,
and a more simple Evangelical, inoffensive, and less symbolizing form of Divine
Service, might be established among us? I am as little averse to Harmony as any,
yet could not sometimes but with regret observe, how the Congregation has in
its solemn Worship been interrupted, and Minister stopped from proceeding in his
Ministration, till the Musick-Master has delivered his Fancy; Paraphrasing
upon some Ground, showing his skill by some fuge or descant upon that Text,
continuing the Voluntary till he could make his Cadence artificially upon the
Key. In all which being assisted perhaps with a Noise of common Fiddlers, his
tickling the Ears of the Auditory, goes for an Elation of Mind, and Heavenly
Rapture. But I believe Tindal's Opinion do not much differ from the Angelical
Doctor's Organs (says he) Music and diversity of Songs are nothing to the
Spirit, but is rather extinct through these wanton trifles. Acts and Monuments,
2d. Vol. p. 505. 2 Col. Impress. 1684.
Aquinas's Opinion in this case does very well agree with our Experience.
Hujusmodi enim Musica Instrumenta (says he) magis animum movent ad
delectationem, quam per ea formetur interius bona Dispositio, Aquinas 22d. Qu.
91. Art. 24. M.

Arundel, Acts and Monuments Vol. 1 p. 610. Col. 2.
Archbishop of Canterbury preferred a Lesson upon the Organs, before the
Preaching of the Gospel. Orgains, says he, and good delectable Songs sharpen
more Men's Wits better than any Sermons.

David speak of Praising God with Cymbals, yea loud Sounding Cymbals; 150 Psalm.
3, 4, 5, Verse. Praise him in the sound of the Trumpet: Praise him upon the Lute
and Harp, Praise him in the Cymbals and Dances: Praise him upon the Strings and
Pipe.

Moses for the hardness of the Jews Hearts, suffered a Writing of Divorce to be
given, and the Wife to be put away, but from the beginning it was not so. The
Jews were a very perverse and carnal People, and therefore God dealt with them,
as an indulgent Parent with a froward Child, who will Cedere a Jure, sometimes
indulging it in things not so agreeable to the exactest Rules of Prudence,
rather than too much to thwart and regrate upon its Temper. The Prophet says,
God gave them Statutes that were not good, 20 Ezekiel. 25.
and Judgments whereby they should not live.

The Jews were very much acquainted with, and addicted to the Heathen Rites,
they had an emulation to be like other Nations, and for that reason desired a
King, which God was pleased to comply with them in; though Samuel had ruled
over them as one that was just, fearing God. Nay, the Lord said in desiring a
King, they had not so much rejected the Prophet, as himself, yet he gratified
them in their requests. The Heathens in their Worship made use of Altars,
Sacrifices, Priests, and they ministering too in Linen Garments; as Tertullian
observes, Linteam propriam Osiridis Vestem appellat; yea and Music too. Thus
Nebuchadnezzar had the Cornet, Harp, Sackbut, Psaltery, and all sorts of
Music, to sound when the great Image which he sat up to be Clemens of
Alexandria observed, that Orpheus and those ancient Musicians drew in Men by
their Singing and the sweetness of their Music, to render them miserable
Slaves to Idols.
worshipped. Homer says, that the Greeks worshipped the Heathen Gods with the
Harp; Bacchus had his (...). Sacerdotes Cybelis, quae tympanorum pulsu and
cornuum cantu Jovis vagitum celabant Saturnum. Notae in Horat.
Drummers: With the same Instrument the Phrygians performed their Service to
Cybele. And the Egyptians celebrated their Divine Rights to Isis with a
Timbrel. That the Jews had spent much time among the Egyptians, and had a
fondness of their, and other Heathen Rites, is the Opinion of Learned Men. And
if God dispensed with the use of some of their Ceremonies, to be used in the
Worship of himself the true God, which they used in the Service of their Idols,
we may conclude from thence, that he was an indulgent Father toward froward
Children, rather than that it is a lawful and laudable Custom in the Christian
Church, because it was sometimes used in the Jewish, and indulged by God to
them as a carnal and teachy Generation.

This very reason Aquinas gives; In veteri instrumento usus erat talium
Instrumentorum [Scil. Musicae.] Quia populus erat durus and Carnalis. Aqu 22 d.
q. 91.
That is, God indulged them the use of Music under the Law, because they were
a carnal and perverse People. And may we not then conclude with Solomon, who
had got him Men-singers and Women-singers, and Musical Instruments of all
sorts, that they were no better than Vanity. But supposing it an innocent Rite
in it self; yet if accidentally it be evil, scandalizing our weak Brethren, and
causing them to separate from us as too much symbolizing with Rome, shall we
not give a yieldance so far as we lawfully may to gain a weak Brother? Nec cum
haereticis commune quicquam habuerant, Cent. Magd. 4.
The reason why Gregory advised Leander to lay aside the Ceremony of dipping
the Child thrice in Baptism, was because Heretics did so. Quia nunc ac
Haereticis infans in Baptismate tertio mergebatur fiendum apud vos esse non
censeo.





Would our Superiors grant this, the Psalms of David might then be read in the
New Translation, which certainly must be accounted the best, because the other
parts of Scripture are ordered to be read in the Church according to the last
Version. Why then should the Psalms of David (which are the very Cream of the
sincere Milk of the Word) be read or sung in the Old Translation, but because
by their punctation they are measured out for the Quire; which Custom is a
certain hindrance to Edification, whilst a great part of the Congregation may
go along with the Sound, but cannot carry along with them the Sense of so
considerable and excellent a part of Holy Writ. Aliqui sunt (says Aquinas) qui
non intelligunt quid cantatur. 22 d. Q. 91.
But suppose them read and not sung; yet when they are read alternately, one
Verse by the Minister, the other by the People, the latter Verse will be no
better than an inarticulate sound, and confused noise to those who are
unlearned, and cannot read, or to them who have not their Books at hand to go
along with the Congregation; as may be easily experimented in our London
Congregations, where this Form of Reading is commonly, if not universally
observed.

Another Custom or Manner of performing Divine Service which must not be
omitted (at least in Cathedrals) is reading the second Service at the Altar. A
thing which to some seems out of the Churches Power to injoin, which can only
use it in commanding things proper to Edification. For whilst the People sit in
the lower part of the Quire they may hear the noise of the Minister's Voice,
who is reading the Service at the Altar, but no distinction of sound, as has
been often experimented. And I Would fain know whether the Practice of the Roman
Church by performing their Service in an unknown Tongue, or secret Whispers of
a Priest can less tend to Edification or Instruction, then to render it
unintelligible by removing beyond the Ken or Compass of the Ear, or by causing
it to be uttered by the confused noise of a mixed Multitude? Which I leave to
those who are of highest esteem in the Church to judge of: As also to take into
their Consideration how far a Reformation of our Public Service may be
advisable and necessary, in regard to the Form of it, in this and some other
respects.

2dly, The next thing I have to offer is as to the Length and Burden of it, a
Task which neither we nor our Forefathers were ever able to bear: Were this
grievance redrest, that occasion of Scandal cast upon the Rulers and
Dignitaries of the Church might be removed, the Complaints of the weary and
heavy laden Ministers of the Church silenced, who may in the mean time be
tempted perhaps to speak unadvisedly with their Lips, and say; Must we still
like Issachar couch down under this heavy Burden, whilst such as impose it,
will scarce touch it with a tip of their own Fingers, to ease others, or to
perform it for themselves. Dicit enim Greg. and habetur in decretis distinc.
92. Can. insecta Romana Ecclesia constituo ut in sede hac, scil. Romana
Ecclesia sacri altaris ministri, cantare non debeant.
Aquinus tells us, that Gregory would have none who were ordained to Preach the
Gospel, to be employed in the Office of Singing; being as that Angelical Doctor
observes, a Work beneath them.

When we see the Masters of our Assemblies engage the meanest among (...)
Priests in the Celebration of the Divine Service of the Church, by Reading or
Singing of it, we may conclude they think it either too mean, or too hard for
themselves.

As to the first, there is none of us have reason to think any Work of the Lord
beneath them. We can labor as in the Fire, work in the Furnaces and
Brick-kilns with great delight, if we may thereby prepare for building the
Lord's Temple. (...) Supra modum, supra vires gravati sumus, 2. Cor. 1.8.
But our Taskmasters have doubled the Tale of our Brick to that degree, that
though we work hard, yet unless our Strength were the Strength of Stones we
never can accomplish our Task; and whoever shall fall short, the Law has
provided it shall be made up with Stripes, which will make deep furrows upon
the Backs of those, that shall happen to fall under the dintor Lash of it. This
Grievance in some Cities and Corporations, by the Wealth and Kindness of the
People has been much provided against, clubbing their Purses, and providing
Readers to discharge their Ministers of the Burden of the Desk: As knowing
that they on whom necessity is laid, and Woes denounced against them, if they
Preach not the Gospel, will find work enough in the Pulpit. But this were an
unreasonable expectancy in Country Villages, where the number of the People is
small, and their substance less. Where, in many places two or three Cures will
scarce do more than afford Necessaries for an ordinary Subsistence or
Livelihood; nor provide larger Supplies, than could answer the reasonable
Desires of that contented Man, viz. Sit mihi mensa tripes, and concha puri
salis, and toga quae defenderit frigus licet crassa queat.

Yet so vast and opulent are the Revenues of the Church, that as there needs no
other Arguments to prove the incomparable Charity and Bounty of our Ancestors:
So also a Sufficiency, yea a Redundancy for the Support of the Office and Work
of the Ministry: But so disproportionate has the distribution of them been,
that whilst some have lived delicately, and fared deliciously every day; others
can scarce find a Competency to furnish their Tables with daily Bread: And is
it not a Grievance, that the most difficult and constant Labor should meet
with the least Encouragement?

It Is scarce credible to relate to what Sums the Acruments and Perquisites of
the Bishoprics in England did amount to, upon their Restoration with Charles
II. Had not immense Treasures descended into their Coffers the many extravagant
Works of State and Magnificence (Vainglory some think) Acts of Piety and
Charity could never have exhausted such unaccountable Sums (as are by Dr. C.
computed) out of them: He tells us that Dr. Juxon, Archbishop of Canterbury,
gave or expended in Building, Repairing, Redemption of Captives, etc. 48000 l.
Sterling, besides 16000 l. abated to the Tenants. Gilbert Sheldon, Bishop of
London, afterward Archbishop of Canterbury, gave and bestowed in such like
expenses, besides his common Disbursements and what he left to his Heirs and
Executors 40000 l. Brian Duppa, late Bishop of Winchester, in such like
Charges, together with the Abatements of Fines to his Tenants 46000 l. Dr.
Fruen, Archbishop of York 15000 l. Dr. Cousins, Bishop of Durham 44000 l. Dr.
Warner, Bishop of Rochester 30000 l. Besides the Building of a College for
poor Clergy-mens Widows which cost 7200 l. which was besides endowed by him
with ample Provisions, besides 50 l. per Annum Rentcharge, for maintaining of
a Chaplain: Nor were the Deans and Chapters less liberal in proportion;
Insomuch that the several Sums when put together amount to no less than 443000
l. besides the Moneys they spent in their Splendid way of living, together with
their Equipage and Retinue, not to mention their personal and real Estates they
left behind them to agrandize their Posterities, and to make their Names great:
But whilst the Prelates wallowed in their overgrown Wealth, how many laborious
Ministers, lay swelkt and macerated with the Heat and Burden imposed upon them
in the Worship of God? Their Task being over proportioned to their Strength,
and their Work to their Wages. But our hope is that our Taskmasters are
neither of the Egyptian Race, nor Temper, but will either lessen our tale of
Brick, or allow so much Straw, such additional Augmentations to those Churches
which lack, that assistants may be procured and paid, for the Support and Aid
of such as labor in the Word and Doctrine; or else that such liberty may be
granted them on whom necessity is laid to Preach the Gospel, that they may not
like Issachar be pressed above measure, and be forced to sink down under two
heavy Burdens of the Desk and Pulpit. Such Indulgence will make the Yoke of
the Church like that of the Gospel, easy and its burden light.

The Commands of God are not grievous, shall not the Churches be so too? If
not, we may be a willing, but scarce in all points can we be an obedient People
in the day of our Humane weakness. This would tend to stop those Mouths which
have been opened wide with Reflections upon the Imposers, charging them with a
Design, by this means to supersede and discharge the other part of Divine
Worship (if it will be allowed to be a part) viz. Preaching the Gospel,
Spinning the Thread of the Common Prayer to that length, as must necessitate
the cutting very short, or wholly cutting off the Thread of their other
Discourses, which they conceive as due to the Command of God, and just
expectation of the People: Enlarging the Desk to such dimensions, as either
wholly to justle the Pulpit out of doors, or else crowd it up into so narrow a
corner, as if it were a needless Utensil in the House of God, and piece of
Lumber that might very well be spared, as the warm Discourses of some
hotheaded Men have too plainly intimated, which has caused many to flee from
our Tents, and do desert our Communion, as too much resembling the Church of
Rome, who would possess the People, that a great deal of Mass is too little,
and a little Preaching too much for Edification.

Such unhappy Wedges have some high-flown Men been to split and divide us,
though we have been always apt to Sacrifice to other Nets for our Schisms,
being very quick to discover the Motes in our Brethrens Eyes, but very slow of
Heart to believe or discern the Beam in our own.

Common Prudence, and ordinary Kindness are sufficient Arguments, to induce and
oblige our Rulers to proportion the Work, to the Ability and Strength of the
Workman, otherwise he must sink under the Weight, and languish under the
Fatigue of his Employment. A good Man is merciful to his Beast, he will not set
too long Stages, nor over drive his Flock lest it dies; And whether the
Metaphor be proper in the Case, I Will appeal no further than the Wisdom and
Consideration of our Superiors: Let them judge, whether the first and second
Service in the Morning, the Evening Office and Catechizing, besides twice
Preaching, and Praying in the Pulpit, (for he that has a double cure cannot do
less) though we should not insist upon the frequent Additionals of one, or
sometimes several other Offices, viz. the Administration of both the
Sacraments, Burial of the Dead, Thanksgiving after Childbearing; Letters
directed from the King, Orders from the Bishops, several Canons and
Statute-Laws, etc. appointed, and which must be read? Whether all these,
considered as they be enumerated, be a reasonable Task for a single and mere
Man, whose Strength is not the strength of Stones, nor Flesh of Brass? If any
part of the Liturgy (as the case stands) be omitted, the Law is violated, the
Penalty incurred, our Superiors offended, and the Person rendered obnoxious to
the Malice, or Mercy; that is, cruelty of every Informer.

But we hope better things of you, our most Reverend Fathers and Brethren, and
such as do accompany a Spirit of Moderation, and Compassion toward those who
have hitherto labored as in an Iron Furnace; pressed down out of measure, and
sinking under an intolerable Burden: Our humble and earnest address therefore
is, that though our Forefathers made our Yoke grievous; yet now you will make
the grievous Service of our Fathers, and their Yoke which they put upon us
lighter: If you will answer us, 1 Kings 12.4, 7.
and speak good Words to us, we will be your Servants for ever.

Of the Lord's Prayer and Doxology.
BUT if whilst we are pleading to have the Common Prayers shortened, we do not
Wyar-draw our own beyond the Staple, and spin them to too great a length: I
would in the next place descend to Particulars.

The first thing which I would, In the fourth Council of Tolet, Can. 9. It is
but once a day that the Lord's Prayer is injoined against them that used it on
the Lord's Day only; and by the 17th. Can. It appears it was used but once that
day, Grand debate, p. 121.
if (I might not give offense) instance in, is the Lord's Prayer, to which I
may join the Doxology, which are so often at the same time repeated, as if we
thought to be accepted for our much speaking, and that the Effect and Virtue of
those parts of our Liturgy, like the Papists Rosary, do depend upon the tale
and number of our Repetitions.

The Doxology in the constant Office every Sunday Morning (as the Psalms happen
to be read) is according to the Rubric to be repeated eight or ten times, The
Gloria Patri is appointed to be said six times ordinarily in every Morning and
Evening Services, frequently eight times, in a Morning sometimes ten, Grand.
debate, p. 13.
besides the use of it in Additional Offices: And the Lord's Prayer in the
Forenoon four times in the Desk, and once in the Pulpit; besides the additional
use of it in other Officers which frequently occur: So that whilst Titius
blames Sempronius for his Tautologies, Sempronius reflects upon Titius for his
Pharisaical and Vain Repetitions. It Is true, our Service in this respect is of
the same shape into which our first Reformers lickt it;

Pudet haec opprobia: I know no wise Man that can pretend to blame them for
doing no more, but rather rise up, and bless them, or rather God for them, who
enabled them to do so much.

They stopped the Ferment of Popery in the highest Ebullition of it; but by
reason of the short Reign of King Edward, they wanted time, not will to perfect
the Cure, as may appear by the ingenuous Confessions of Cranmer, Archbishop of
Canterbury, and diverse other Doctors and Fathers of the Church, that many
superfluous things remained, yet to be taken away, which they earnestly desired
and longed for. Multi graves viri inter alios Cranmerus fatebantur ingenue
multa detracta oportere superflua, and ardentibus votu cupiebant ea in melius
correcta, fuitque hoc Cranmeri votum ad Calvinum scribentis, etc. Epist. ad
Verd.
They had abolisht the Mass, changed the Service or Celebration of it in an
unknown Tongue; they had extinguished Purgatory, the Doctrine of
Supererrogation, Praying to Saints, Adoration of Images, and many other things
they had to say, but the People could not bear them then: But now God invites,
the King (next under God our Redeemer from an almost Irrecoverable Relapse into
Popery) invites, many of the faithful Fathers and Ministers of the Church
invite, and plead to perfect our Reformation, and to unite the Protestant
Interest: We have now a Price put into our Hands, and have we yet no Heart to
improve it? Shall we still sell our selves to work Iniquity, and to sow the
Seeds of Strife, those Tares in the Field of our Church? Shall we never see the
things which concern our Peace? Shall we still sacrifice our Interests to our
Revenge, and reck our Malice upon one another? Why should we any longer strive,
and do wrong to each other, for we are Brethren? And though perhaps this may be
but a techy Argument to treat upon, provoking Men to say or think at least,
that we grutch or envy the Glory that is paid to God, or undervalue that
absolute Form of Prayer, which Christ taught his Disciples; which is so far
from may design (my Conscience bearing me witness) if I mistake not my self,
that I think it needless to spend the least either of my time, or Ink to wipe
off the Imputation. The main Reason why an alteration in this respect is
desired, being, that the Form of our Public Worship might be so modelled, that
we may all unanimously, and without offense concur in the Celebration of it.

Concerning Christ's descent into Hell.
THat the Articles of Faith and subject Matter of Prayer should be clear and
perspicuous, sure no Man question? When they are dark and disputable, it will
be impossible, or very difficult to observe St. Paul's Rule, 1 Timothy 2.8.
of lifting up clean hands without wrath and doubting: Now that Christ
descended into Hell is not only daily to be confessed and generally owned by the
Congregation as an undoubted Article of their Faith, 3 Art.
but particularly subscribed by every Minister of the Church before his
admission to any public Employment in the Church as one of the Articles of
Religion: In these words.

[As Christ died and was buried, so also it is to be believed that he went down
into Hell.] A Subject very much controverted, and has afforded Matter of great
dispute; the terms of the Proposition being variously interpreted, and taken in
a different Sense; some expounding descent for a Personal, some for a vertual
going down into Hell, acting as the Sun does in inferiora per calorem and
influxum. Some will have it for continuing in the Hic mortis status, non locus
aliquis infernalis aperte intelligitur. Sic Eusebius. Caesare, etc. Vid. Sanford.
Lib. de descens^ ad inferos tertiam.
State of the Dead: Mr. Broughten has a peculiar Notion of the Phrase, viz.
That Christ's descending into Hell signifies his going into a Place of
Happiness, which his Soul took possession of, so soon as it was parted from his
Body, which I may have occasion further to take notice of hereafter.

As to the place of Descent some think it to be the Grave, others the place of
the Damned, if the former then dead and buried is the same with the ensuing
Phrase, He descended into Hell; for as Ruffinus observes this Article was left
out of the more ancient Consule Sanford, a Parkero continual. lib. 4. de
descensu ad inferos, page 38.
Copies of the Creed. Vis tamen Verbi eadem videtur esse, quod sepultus
dicitur: This was made an Article of Religion in the time of Edward the Sixth,
and required to be subscribed to, but then they explained the Sense of it, and
the manner how our Savior descended, viz. That the Body of Christ laid in the
Grave till the Resurrection, but his Spirit which he gave up, was with the
Spirits which were detained in Prison or in Hell, and preached to them: But
since that, the Article is continued, and in a Synod held in the Reign of Queen
Elizabeth is recognized, but simply without any Explication. In the ancient
Creeds this Article is not to be found; so Ruffinus observes in Expositione
Symboli. Sciendum est (says he) in Ecclesiae Romanae Symbolo non habetur
additum Descendit ad inferna. Sed neque in Orientis Ecclesiis habetur hic
sermo. In the ancient Copies of Creeds delivered to the Church of Jerusalem
both larger and lesser there is no mention of this Article; the Words being
thus expressed, (...). That is, being Crucified and Buried, he rose again from
the Dead.

In that of Alexandria and presented to Constantine by Feigning himself at that
time Orthodox.
Arrius, Presbyter of that Church, we read thus; (...) Sozom (...)
(...). That is, he came, was made Flesh, suffered, and rose again.

In a Copy drawn up and delivered to the Nicene Fathers, thus, (...). He dwelt
among us, suffered, and the third day rose again. In another Copy received by
Constantine, and all the Arrian Fathers drawn up (as Bishop Usher observes) for
a more clear Condemnation of the Arrian Heresy it runs thus, viz. (...). He
was made Man, suffered, and rose again: In another larger Copy of the Creed
mentioned by Epiphanius, as the same Bishop observes: The Words are, (...).
That is, he was Crucified for us under Pontius Pilate, suffered and was buried,
and rose again the Third day, etc.

In the larger Symbol of Anathasius we find it thus; (...). That is, he was
buried, he rose again, and was received up into Heaven. In an ancient Copy
written in a Welsh Character, which the aforesaid Bishop found in the Library
at Oxford, this Article is not mentioned, but only crucified, dead and buried,
be rose again the third day. But about four hundred Years after Christ, it was
brought into the Roman Creed, who received it from Aquileia. But what need we
retail this truth, when (as Mr. Perkins observes) that in above threescore
Creeds of the most ancient Councils and Fathers, these words of his descent
into Hell are not to be found; some think they crept in by negligence. Erasmus
says, N^c in Symbolo Orientalium Eccl^siarum nec in Romano hanc particulam.
[Scil. Descendisse ad inferos] ^uisse additam testis Cyprianus, nec recensetur
apud Tertullianum vetustissimum Scriptorum. Colloq. Inquis. de fide. --
Sciendum sane est quod in Eccl^siae Romanae Symbolo non habetur additum
Descendit ad inferna sed neque in Orientis Ecclesiis habetur hic sermo, vis
tamen verbi eadem videtur quod s^pultus Cypr. exposit. in Symbolum. Si sit Opus
Cypriani. Page 372.
It Is true, in the Apostles Creed we find it thus expressed, (...), descendit ad
inferna: He descended into the lower parts of the Earth. In some later Copies
we read it (...); which word (...) is diversely interpretred. Mr. Broughton in
his Treatise upon this Article of the Creed which he wrote in Greek to the
Geneveans induces a Cloud of Testimonies to prove that the word (...) did not
only signify a Place for bad Men; but also a Paradise for the Just, (...).
That is, the wisest Heathens held that Happiness consisted in those things,
which by God were laid up for good Men in Hades, and torment which betides evil
Men in Tartarus: And therefore would have the Phrase (...), with relation to
our Savior, to signify his going into Paradise, and entering into the Joy of
his Lord; because it could not be supposed that the Soul of so just a Person
should after Death go to any other place than Paradise, where the Thief was to
meet him the very day of his Crucifixion, (...). When the Soul of our Savior
left his Body it forsook this World, and straight way went to the Saints, which
slept from the beginning: But though I confess the Argument of this very
Learned Man does not convince me, that our Savior did not descend into Hell;
(because, supposing Christ had no inherent guilt, yet imputatively he was a
great Sinner, and so was to bear that burden, to suffer that Punishment which
was due to Sinners; Besides Saint Paul opposes the one to the other, 4 Ephesians. 9.
now that he ascended, what is it, but that he descended first into the lower
parts of the Earth. Now whatever is meant by the lower parts of the Earth, yet
it will be hard to force the same sense upon (...) and (...).
and for that reason, as also that he might make a full Conquest of the Powers
of Hell; and as our Sampson take the Gates of Death and Hell off the Hinges,
that they might not prevail against us, he descended into Hell:) Yet I confess
when there are so many Questions and Disputes concerning the Terms, and Sense
of the Proposition, and that for so many Centuries the Article was not inserted
into the Creed; it is hard that in terminis we must be obliged to subscribe it,
or be deprived of the Exercise of our Ministry. In the Zurick Confession
allowed both by King Edward and Queen Elizabeth, it is affirmed, that by (...)
or inferi, the Place of Punishment is not to be understood: Their Words are per
inferos non intelligimus locum supplicii designatum impiis, etc. -- Proinde
anima Christi descendit ad inferos, id est delata est in sinum Abrahae in quo
collecti fuere omnes defuncti fideles. The Soul of Christ went down to the
lower parts; that is, it was carried into Abraham's Bosom, where all that have
departed in the Faith are gathered together: From the disputable Sense of the
Terms and Meaning of the Proposition; as also the total Omission, or not
inserting of the Article in the Apostles Creed for so many Centuries as is
abovesaid, it may put Christians to a very great loss to know where their Faith
in this respect shall fix the sole of its Foot. But if this Article must be
expressed, why might it not be inserted in the very Words of Scripture? 4 Ephesians. 9.
(...); Now that he ascended, what is it but that he descended first into the
lower parts of the Earth? The Words of the Creed made at Sirmium bear this
Sense, viz (...). Were the Words the same with Scripture none could scruple
either to confess or subscribe them. This was the Opinion of Acontius, who
tells us, that the Articles of Faith, should not only be necessary true and
certain, but as much as may be should be comprised in the express Words of
Andradius desendit descensum Christi in infernum meram esse traditionem, e
Scripturis probari non posse. Augustinus de descensu Christi infinum Abrahae
verba faciens nulla hic Expressa profertur Scripturae authoritas. Henricus
Vi^us ita habet ipsa verba testantur (inquit) eum ab Apostolis esse traditum
quando ea nusquam extant in Scriptura. Sanford. de descensu, etc. lib. 4.
Reginaldus Episcopus Cicestrensis non dubitavit affirmare non esse de fide.
descensum scil. Christi ad inferos, Ibid.
Scripture, or in the Words which that holy Spirit (which by our Lord was
promised to teach us all things) was pleased to make use of.

Concerning the But it is much doubted whether it was ever the Contrivance of
St. Athanasius. Quesnel says it was Composed by Vigili^s Tapsensis, for which
he gives several probable Conjectures; the best is that he framed several
Confessions of Faith under the Name of St. Athanasius, and perhaps this was
one. A late and great Author says that it is certainly the Work of a Latin
Author translated into Greek; and likewise avers, that all the World agrees it
was none of his. But let this pass, being not so pertinent to our present
design.
Athanasian Creed.
NOR has our Faith a more sure footing whilst we are obliged to walk upon the
ridge of the Athanasian Creed; especially seeing we are bound to go tip-toes
too, and at the highest stretch: For by the Preface of it, we are obliged to
believe it in terminis, as there laid down upon pain of Damnation. Whosoever
will be saved, it is necessary above all things that he holds the Catholic
Faith, which Faith is, etc. yet give me leave to premise before I proceed, that
I am neither Arrian nor Socinian; I deny not the Worship St. Ignatius in his
Epistle to the Philadelphians says, that he who conceives Christ to be a mere
Man [his Words are (...)] is a Serpent, a Deceiver and Destroyer of Men by his
Doctrine, p. 181. He takes notice of such also in his Epistle to the Trallians,
(...), p. 160. Edit. Voss.
nor Divinity of our Savior; and because I am commanded to pay him the former,
I think my self obliged to acknowledge the latter; for I hope I am not awed, or
cowed into the Belief by the mere Authority and Command of the Church, but by
the invincible Authority of Scripture and Reason: The Scripture speaks so
expressly, that he who runs may read it: If we had said as they to our Savior,
If thou be the Christ hold us not in doubt, tell us plainly. Had we said if
Christ be God, the Holy Ghost be God, tell us plainly; if there be three
Persons and one God hold us not in doubt: To which methinks the Scripture
replies. There be three that bear Record in Heaven, the Father, the Word, and
the Holy Ghost; and these three are one (...), which cannot be interpreted for
a bare Unity of Consent; because it seems contradistinguished from it; and
which is mentioned in the following words, there be three that bear Record upon
Earth, the Spirit, the Water and the Blood, and these three agree in one,
(...). Besides that I may not be suspected guilty of Socinianism: I will beg
the Reader's Patience to dispense with a small Digression, in giving some
little account of that Faith which is in me, and reason of it.

He that is to be worshipped with Divine Honor is God, but Christ is so to be
worshipped; and therefore I believe him to be God. The major Proposition is built
upon the tried Foundation of a Divine Law, viz. Thou shall worship the Lord thy
God, and him only shall thou serve. Besides when St. John fell down to worship
the Angel he forbad it; and the reason was because he was his fellow 10 Acts
25. and as Peter was coming in, Cornelius met him; and fell down at his feet,
and worshipped him. But Peter took him up, saying, stand up I my self also am a
Man.
Creature: Now this reason which the Angel gave was good, or it was not; if it
was good then a Quatetenus ad omne valet consequentia: If it had not been good
(which I suppose none will be so bold as to assert) then St. John might have
replied, Though you be a Creature, yet you may be worshipped for Christ was so,
and yet he is not only allowed, but commanded to be worshipped; And let all the
Angels worship him, 1 Heb. 6. which words so convince Socinus, that in his
disputation with some Arrians in the Hall of Paulicovius, he cried out, Tam
certus sum Christum esse adorandum, quam me pileum in manu habere.

But that which is a further Ground and Pillar to this Faith which is in me, is
the Parity and Likeness of that Honor which is given to the Father and the
Son: And for this purpose it was, that all Judgment was committed to the Son,
namely that all Men might honor the Son as they honor the Father. From whence
I argue thus; that betwixt a Creature and the great Creator, there is an
infinite disproportion, for one is finite and the other infinite; but there is
no such disproportion betwixt God the Father and his Son Ergo. The Minor is
proved thus, where Objects are infinitely disproportionate and beneath one and
other, there the same Honor and Worship is not to be paid and performed: But
the same Honor and Worship is to be given to the Son which is paid to the
Father; therefore they are not so different and disproportionate, for shall we
offer that to God that we will not offer to our Prince? Shall we pay the same
Reverence to him that grindeth at the Mill, which is due to him that sits upon
the Throne? Shall we worship the Creature with the same Worship, which we give
to the Creator? Wherefore if God command us to worship the Son as we honor the
Father, we may account it no robbery to esteem him coequal to him and
co-essential with him; which would be impossible where there is an infinite
distance, as there is betwixt God, and the most exalted Creature in Heaven or
Earth.

Yet to have this Article of Faith spun out and wyar-drawn into too many, and
nice Propositions by a single Doctor of the Church, and then imposed upon it,
to all Generations upon pain of Damnation, seems too strict an Imposition upon
the Faith of Christians. 22. q. 1. art. 10. R. ad 3. an.
Aquinas says it was not composed per modum Symboli, sed per modum Doctrinae;
not with a purpose to impose it upon others, but to declare his own Belief. Dr.
Taylour says, Lib. of Proph. p. 46.
that many of the ancient Bishops who did believe this thing, yet did not like
the Nicety and Curiosity of expressing it; yea, many wise Personages think the
Church had been more happy if she had not been in some sense constrained to
alter the simplicity of her Faith, and make it more curious and articulate;
insomuch that he had need be a very subtle Man to understand the very Words of
the new Determinations.

When we stand upon the brink of this great Mystery (for without Controversy
it is no less) it cannot but make us cry out, Oh, the height, depth, length and
breadth of it: How unsearchable is this Divine Essence, this Being which is past
finding out. And though with that ancient Tertullian.
Father I have so far given up my Faith to the Conduct of Divine Writ, as to
say, Propose me any thing out of this Book, and require whether I will believe
it or no, and seem it never so incomprehensible to humane Reason, I will
subscribe it with Hand and Heart, as knowing no demonstration can be stronger
than this, Chilling p. 376. The Relig. of Protestants.
Credo quia impossible: To believe what the Scripture says, though I cannot
untie every knot, and solve by my feeble Reason every (...) that is in it: Yet
I think such things ought to be stated with Modesty, and urged with Candor upon
the Consciences of Men. I believe that he which serves God with his whole
Heart, that honors the divine Being in whom he is sensible he lives, moves,
and has his Being, that out of a Principle of Love and Duty observes his Laws,
both of the first and second Table so far as he is able, he that fears God and
works Righteousness shall be accepted of him, though he should not have so
clear and distinct a Notion of the Trinity in Unity, and Unity in Trinity; or
have a settled Faith and Belief of every Proposition expressed in the Systeme
composed by If he was the Author of it.
Athanasius (but not designed, as some affirm to be the Standard of the
Churches Faith) viz. That there are not three Lords but one Lord, that the Son
is of the Father alone; the Holy Ghost of the Father and of the Son, that none
of the Persons are before or after each other: These are nice Speculations and
intricate Propositions. And that every single and well-meaning Christian must
perish everlastingly that believes them not, is a Censure too uncharitable to
offer to the Church, or to be used by the Church. And that whoever will be
saved must thus think of the Trinity. Hosius, the Bishop of Corduba, speaking
of this subject says, That it is a Matter so nice, so obscure and intricate,
that it was neither to be explicated by the Clergy, or understood by the People.

Besides there be several difficult Propositions concerning that great this
Mystery of Godliness, Is not this (...)?
Christ manifest in the Flesh, and Incarnation of our Savior, viz. [That
Christ is one not by Conversion of the Codhead into Flesh, but by taking the
Manhood into God, one altogether, not by confusion of Substance, It ought to be
considered concerning Athanasius's Creed how many People understand it not,
Lib. of Proph. p. 54. I confess, says that Author, I cannot see the moderate
Sentence and gentleness of Charity in this Preface and Conclusion as then was
in the Nicene Creed; nothing there but damnation and perishing everlastingly,
unless the Article of the Trinity be believed, as it is there with Curiosity
and minute Particulars explained. Ibid. page 54.
but by unity of Person: And that this, etc. is the Catholic Faith, which
except a Man believe he cannot be saved.] Which Propositions should they be
repeated to many a simple, and yet sincere Christian, they would seem little
less to them than Sampson's Ridle, and shall we deny Salvation to those who
have not an explicit Faith, of those things they understand not? If Water
ascends higher than the Fountain from whence it springs, the Motion must be
ascribed to force: If Faith should ascend beyond Knowledge (if such may be
called Faith) it is no better than force, or fancy to compel that to be
confessed with the Mouth which is not believed with the Heart, because it never
entered into the Head. Does it not therefore concern the Fathers of the Church
to consider (now that they have a Price put into their Hands) whether this be
not to make the Gate of Heaven narrower than God has made it, which is already
so straight, that alas! there be too few that find it.

Of Regeneration by the Spirit.
ANother thing which might justly deserve the Notice of our Reverend Brethren
and Fathers of the Church, is the Doctrine of Regeneration by the Spirit, which
I take to be an act of Grace upon the Heart Unto whom now I send thee, to open
their Eyes, and to turn them from Darkness to Light, and from the Power of
Satan unto God, etc. Acts 26.17.
renewing that Image which was drawn in Righteousness and true Holiness; But
alas! How have we effaced it, and sought out many Inventions, in the Crowd of
which we lost our Integrity? God had at first imbarkt our Innocence in a Vessel
sufficiently built to have secured the Cargo, and finally to have brought the
Soul safe to its desirable Port: I mean Heaven, he having put on board with it,
that which might with due watchfulness and care have secured it, viz. A posse
non peccandi. But happening where two Seas met: I mean Satan's Policy, and Man's
Frailty, or facile Disposition, being too gentle and easy to be entreated by
his Temptations, he suffered Shipwreck of a good Conscience, losing that which
the whole World was not competent to redeem; For alas! What can be given in
exchange for the Soul? But God would not suffer the Sea to swallow such a
Prize; and therefore when he saw Man laboring for Life, in the midst of those
mighty Waves, those Waters of Iniquity he cast out a Plank, Post naufragium
tabulam, by which he came safe to Land, he set up this Bankrupt again with a
fresh Stock, putting him into a Capacity and State of Salvation by a redeemer;
but upon such Terms and Conditions as he thought fit to appoint and prescribe,
viz. That unless we believe, we should not be saved, except we be regenerate
and born again, we should not enter into the Kingdom of God; But as the Wind
blows where it lists, so the Spirit works these Graces when and where it
pleases, observing the Rule and Method he has pleased to prescribe to
himself, viz. As he has chosen us in Christ Jesus; And therefore we cannot
affirm that wherever the Means is used, that the End ex opere operato is
certainly attained, especially in such subjects as are altogether incapable of
it; as I take Infants to be of Regeneration upon the Administration of Baptism;
3 Q. 71.2.
Unless it be said of Regeneration, as Aquinas says concerning the Infant's
being Catechized before it be Baptized, Accommodat eis Ecclesia aliorum cor ut
credant, aliorum aures ut audiant, and intellectum ut per alios instruantur:
But he that is regenerated by a Proxy will be saved so too. But suppose they be
renewed, yet this Operation or Work of the Spirit is much in the dark, there
are no visible Footsteps or Impressions left behind it, by which we can trace
the Goings of the Almighty, no more than that of a Serpent upon a Rock, a Bird
in the Air, or Ship in the Sea; if there be any Work of God upon the Soul of
the Infant, it is very cryptical, it is hid from our Eyes: We may say as the Lord
said to Job, He has made a Cloud the garment of it, 38 Job 9.
and thick darkness a swaddling Band for it.

If any shall say, that though the Child in such tender Age be not a capable
subject of the Act, yet it may be of the Habit: Thus it is accounted a Rational
Creature, though it cannot for the present exert and show forth the Faculties
which are potentially in it: But no sooner does the Child grow up toward Years
of Maturity, but those Seminal and Radical Powers of their own accord pullulate
and spring up into Act; the Rose which seminally or potentially laid dormant in
the Root of the Plant, of its own accord buds and blossoms, upon the
approaching Heat and Influence of the Sun. If the Habit of Regeneration were
sown in Baptism, would it not in the Spring of Youth, begin to bud and blossom,
and bring forth Almonds: I mean Acts suitable to the Nature of it; Whereas we
experimentally find, no more averseness or reprobacy to that which is good, in
an unbaptized Person who never was baptismally regenerated, nor received for
God's own Child by Adoption; than in one baptized according to the Ordinance of
God, and Appointment of the Church: But supposing the Subject capable of this
Divine Impression, yet we do not see that God does let his Seal, or that they
are sealed up to the Day of Redemption ex opere operato, or actual
Administration of Baptism: For wherever the Work of Regeneration is wrought,
the Soul is renewed in all its Faculties; such were some of you, But ye are
washed, but ye are sanctified in the Name of the Lord Jesus, and by the Spirit
of our God. But all that are Baptismally washed are not sanctified and
regenerate; for we find in adult Persons, that those who were filthy before,
continue to be so still: Nay, as to those very Persons who in the Judgment of
Charity do not ponere obicem, yet we cannot see any immediate Cause to return
Thanks for its actual Regeneration by the Holy Spirit, till we find some
Demonstration or Evidence more than the bare opus operatum, or Administration
of the Baptismal Rite, that the Person is entered into the Womb of the Morning,
and become a Child of Light: I mean till it becomes a second time ingrafted
into the true Vine, being made an actual Partaker of the Benefits of the new
Covenant, having the Understanding, Will and Affections renewed and sanctified
by the Spirit. The same Stone of stumbling we find in the Prayer before
Confirmation, where it is thus expressed; [ Who have vouchsafed to regenerate
these thy Servants, by Water and the Holy Ghost, and have given unto them
Forgiveness of all their Sins, etc.] Must our Charity like the Rain from Heaven
fall upon all sorts of Persons good and bad? I have with these Eyes beheld many
grown up to Man's Estate come to be Confirmed, of whom it was hard
promiscuously to affirm, That they were in a regenerate Estate, and all their
Sins pardoned.





Unless by Regeneration is meant no more in this place, than a bare Inrolment
in the Church-Register, and being reckoned among Christians, or being listed
among those who are Soldiers or Members of the Church Militant, who have
engaged to fight the good Fight of Faith under him that is the Captain of our
Salvation. If by Regeneration, and being received for God's own Child by
Adoption is meant no more than being put into a salvable Estate, and being
rendered a Subject capable to receive the Benefits of the new Covenant; We might
have expected somewhere an Explication of the Church's Sense (as we have to
prevent scruple in some other Cases) or else have found in Scripture (which
would have given greater satisfaction) that the Notion of Regeneration is
sometimes capable of no higher Sense: But missing of both, especially the
latter, we would earnestly desire, that things of doubtful Disputation, might
rather have their Seat in the Schools than in the Congregation of Christ's
Flock: That we may pray in Faith, and not be obliged to return thanks for that,
of which we have no certain knowledge. But that upon the Administration of
Baptism, we may give thanks for the Persons admission into the external
Communion of the Saints, and Fellowship of the Christian Religion, beseeching
the Almighty so far to concur with, and to give a Blessing to his own
Institution, that all the Purposes for which it was designed, may be
effectually attained.

Concerning the Office of Burial of the Dead.
NOR does our Charity hang upon a more easy tenter whilst we are obliged to
celebrate the Office for burying the Dead. It Is true, its Charity to hope all
things, to believe all things; Is all the Congregation Holy every one of them?
16 Numb. 3.
But must we make no separation of the Precious from the Vile? Must we hope
against hope, nay contrary to it? And those express Revelations of the Will of
God against wicked and sinful Men. 3 Isa. 11. Woe to the wicked, it shall go
ill with him; for the reward of his Hands shall be given him. 11 Prove. 7. When
the wicked Man dies, his expectation shall perish. Can we believe without a
Promise, nay contrary to the Plain meaning of Scripture? Why then is this
charitable part of our Liturgy calculated for every Meridian, and made like the
Sun in the Firmament, to shine upon the good and the bad, or as the Rain and
Snow which come down from Heaven, that fall upon the just and unjust? 9 Eccles.
2.
As if all things came alike to all Men, or as if the same event was to the
righteous, and to the wicked, to him that is clean, and to him that is unclean,
to him that sacrifices, and to him that sacrifices not, to the good, and to
the sinner, to him that swears, as to him that fears an Oath. As to natural
Death, and temporary Rewards and Punishments, all things may happen alike to
all Men (though the promise of this Life as well as that which is to come is
sometimes fulfilled unto Godliness) yet these temporary Blessings are no
Characteristical Notes of the Favor of God. It Is an hard Matter to know Love
or Hatred by the things of this Life: But as to the Blessings of eternal Life,
they are Pearls of too great value to be hung upon those Swines Snouts whose
delight is to wallow in the Mire. It Is an easy matter to know what becomes of
the hope of the Hypocrite when God takes away his Soul; How then can we extend
the same Charity to Persons of all sorts and sizes? Will a Shoe made upon one
Last fit every Foot? Altogether as well, as to bless God for all Men's departure
out of this Life, as a deliverance out of the Miseries of this sinful World;
whereas perhaps the light Afflictions which here they suffer are but for a
moment, and not to be named or compared with that exceeding, that eternal
weight of Punishment, which will be revealed against those who by the hardness
of their Hearts, and impenitency of their Life's, have treasured up to
themselves Wrath against the Day of Wrath, and the Revelation of the Righteous
Judgment of God. Why should we then be thought unreasonable, if we scruple to
declare, that the Person who has lived a dissolute and profane Life,
departing hence without any demonstration or evidence of his Faith in Christ,
and Repentance to Salvation: To declare, I say, that we have a sure and certain
hope that such an one should be raised unto eternal Life? There being far
greater Reasons to fear, that the Resurrection will be to damnation; according
to what St. John says, 5 Joh. 29. They that have done good unto the
Resurrection of Life, and those that have done evil to the Resurrection of
Damnation.



Encouragement to the bad.
how many from hence flatter themselves into a Fool's Paradise, where they
expect to eat of the Tree of Life though they have sed never so foul upon
forbidden Fruit; Crying, Peace, Peace, though they have walked according to the
imagination of their own Hearts, adding drunkenness to thirst.

For let a Person live in the Communion of the Church, though he be as bad as
ever was Caesar Borgia, yet he shall have the same Charity extended toward
him, as if he had walked before God in Truth, and with a perfect Heart, giving
God thanks for his deliverance out of the Miseries of this Life, as if he went
immediately to Paradise, to make an addition to the Spirits of just Men made
perfect, begging that God would accomplish the number of his Elect, and hasten
his Kingdom: All which pro subjecta materia are applicable to the Person of the
defunct. May it not be a just discouragement to Holiness of Life whilst the
same Expectancies and Hopes by the public Judgment of the church are declared
concerning the worst, Discouragement to the good.
as well as the best of Men? Who from hence might infer, and say, What is the
Almighty that we should serve him, or what profit should we have if we pray
unto him? 21 Job 15.
For the same end is to them both, to the Good and to the Sinner, so that I
have cleansed my self in vain, and washed mine Hands in Innocence; when he that
wallows in the Mire, and that has defiled his Garments shall yet sit down with
Abraham, Isaac and Jacob in the Kingdom of Heaven, which is but consequential,
or the same to a rest in Christ, and a Resurrection to eternal Life; seeing
then the same Office is to be applied to Persons of all sorts and
circumstances, we earnestly desire, it may be so far reformed, and modelled,
that the bad be not flattered, the good offended, nor the Consciences of such
as minister justly scandalized.

And seeing that Mercy is a most acceptable Sacrifice to the Almighty, why
might not this whole Office (excepting some decent Expression upon committing
the Body to the Ground) be performed within the Church, where the Minister and
People are secured from the Wind and Wet, and other extremities of Weather, to
which they (especially, who are to attend bare headed) are exposed, whilst they
continue sub Dio, and remain in the Open Air.



1st, And is not the dead Corpse a Spectacle within doors as powerful and
convincing as that without?

2dly, If the Priest's Lips will not preserve the Knowledge, and maintain the
Sense of our Estate and Circumstances 'twill be in vain to seek it at the
Grave's Mouth. We have Moses and the Prophets, if we will not hear them;
neither will we be convinced, though one should arise out of the Grave from the
Dead; so that the reason of our request yet remains unshaken.

Of the Collects for the King, the those in Authority.
NOR is our flattering of the living (in the next place) any whit a less Stone
of stumbling, or rock of offense than our fawning upon the Dead. To prevent
which, how necessary is it for the Reverend Father of our Church into whose
Hands the King has now put a Fan thoroughly to purge our Floor: I mean those
Prayers and Collects appointed to be used for the King, and those in Authority:
by the which, be a Prince never so debaucht and profligate, profane and
dissolute, abandoning himself to all the Vices of the Age, sublimating Evil to
the highest pitch, violating all the Laws of God, and casting those Cords
behind him; yet as if the Majesty of his Person were an Elixir which turns all
into God, changing the nature of Vice into Virtue, we are bound to acknowledge
him that is greatest, to be the best too: nay as if the most idolatrous and
false Religion could by the touch of a Scepter be legitimated or changed into
an Evangelical Worship, and reasonable Service. We are bound (as the Case
stands) whatever Religion the Prince professes, be it roman, or Mohammedan, yet
to pray that God would keep and strengthen him in the true way of worshipping
him, when at that very time we believe and are persuaded it is false. A Staff,
which ^n the late Reign was made use of to bastinado those that prayed by the
Liturgy. Our Enemies urging that either their way of worship was true, or else
our Service false and hypocritical. If Princes were like Mi^as changing the
Nature of every thing they touch, or had the same Power which Bellarmine avers
to be in the Pope, viz. of making Virtue to be Vice, and Vice Virtue, Evil to
be Good, and Darkness to be Light, than we might account Slavery to be Liberty,
and that tender Mercy, which is Cruelty. We need not scruple to call him
Gracious, and most Religious Sovereign, though he has abandoned the Sense and
Practice of Religion and Virtue; nor scruple to call him Rex Christianissimus,
who is vix Christianus: But till these Paradoxes can be proved and justified;
it is desired by such as be true Sons of the Church, that the Liturgy may in
this respect be altered, and such of its Collects as oblige us to give
flattering Titles unto Man, may be so revised and amended, that if we lived
under a Julian or Domitian they might not upon the least account be scrupled;
nor can we ever expect a fitter Juncture to work this Reformation in, than when
we are under the Conduct of such Sovereign Princes, who are not only willing to
condescend to all things which can with any color of Reason and Conscience be
desired of them; but also no pretense or conciousness of guilt that is upon
them, or scruple in us, do in the least enforce or influence our request, of
having such Expressions taken out of our Liturgy, as should hinder us in
lifting up our Hands without wrath or doubting, such as should render us
Sychophants toward Men, or Hypocrites toward God, in our most divine and
solemn Approaches unto the Throne of Grace.

Of Confirmation by the Bishop.
BUT these are not the last Tears of our complaint, whilst that excellent Rite
of Confirmation labors or languishes under such apparent disadvantages. And
though I see no reason to sublime it into a Sacrament: So is there as little to
put the Administration of it under such hatches of restraint, that there is
scarce one of five, but for want of conveniences is necessitated to live and
die without it. This Office being so narrowly circumscribed, h^at And that
merely in honorem ordinis; But is not the Honor of God and good of Souls to be
preferred to that?
one single Person in a Diocese only must be allowed to administer it; to whom
many either through Poverty or Infirmity are not able to travel for it, which
if it were thought fit might be brought nigher even to the Door, for why should
such Ministers as have the care of Souls committed to them be deprived of any
expedient by which they might build them up in their most holy Faith, or the
People deprived of any means which may conduce to their Spiritual nourishment,
and In confirmatione augmentum praestat. [scil. sp. 3tus.] ad gratiam in
baptism^ abl^imur, post ^aptis^^m roboramur inquit Papa M^l^biades.
growth in Grace.

The Office cannot be pretended to be above those Ministers, or they beneath
it, to whom is committed the Dispensation of the Oracles of God, and holy
Sacraments: And though Bellarmine says, that the Grace which is initiated in
Baptism, is perfected in Confirmation, and so ought to be dispensed by the
chief Ministers of the Church, yet allows that Presbyters may be Licensed to
dispense it: According to the daily Practice of our own Church, which gives
Licenses to Deacons to administer the Sacrament of Baptism.

Gregory granted Licenses for this purpose, which Aquinas mentions and approves
of, 3. q. 72. viz. of Presbyters executing the Office of Confirmation.

Yea, Richardus Armochanus, though a Romish Catholic, confesses, That the
Office of Confirmation belongs to the Presbyters, as well as Bishops. This
Bonaventure Durandus and Adrianus do deny, but that they may do it by
Dispensation all agree.

Lib de Sacrament. 2. Cap. 12.
Bellarmine acknowledges it to be not only the Opinion of Aquinas, but of all
his Disciples, and many other Divines, as Richardus Paludanus, Marsilins and
others, The Waldenses in their Confession of Faith own that this Rite may be
performed either by the Bishop, or by the Presbyter. Talis ad Episcopum aut
sacerdotem duci statuique debet, qui interrogatus de fidei veritatibus, etc.
Manus postremo impositione ad firmanda Promissa dei. Profess. fidei fratr.
Waldens. in Artic. de Confirmatione.
together with all the Canonists. And shall we be so stanch and reserved as to
confine the execution of this Office to the Person of the Bishop, who by reason
of the extent of the Diocese, (In which many times the Cure of more than a
thousand Parishes is incumbent upon him;) as also Avocations by secular
Concernments is incompetent to discharge: And this done too for no other end
than to aggrandize the Order of Episcopacy, which will scarce refund, or answer
for the Omission of so useful a Rite, and Ordinance in the Church, For would it
not very much conduce to the Honor of god, Edification and building up of the
People in their most holy Faith, if every Person baptized into the Christian
Faith, should be obliged, when he comes to Years of discretion, to appear in
the Public Congregation, there to make a Confession of his Faith, to recognize
his Primitive Engagement, to avow that in his own Person, which was done for
him by proxy: And that the Minister of the Congregation, should by imposition
of Hands (where it is not scrupuled) recommend the Person to the Grace of God,
that he might be strengthened, settled, stablished in the Christian Faith; That
he might persevere in the steadfast Profession, and Practice of it, and continue
his for ever: And let the Honor of the Bishop give a yieldance to the Honor
of God, and good of the People; although it will be hard to prove that it is a
more honorable act of the Ministry to confirm than to baptize, Yet the
Cardinal of A^les owns it as due to Presbyters; His words are, At
s^^^^r^sbyteri debent Ecciesia^^ in com^uni regere, satis not^m est quod ad eos
quoque decide e ^es spectat Ecclesie dubias. And that they have a governing
Power he proves from St. Austine, and he from Scripture, Aen. Sylv. de g^st.
Con. Basil. p. 25.
or administer the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper; though St. Jerome says, that
for this Cause, viz. The Honor of the Priesthood, Bishops were only to lay on
Hands, but the Law did not injoin it. Hieronimus in dialog^ contra Luciferianos
dicit ob honorem Sacerdotii fieri ut soli Episcopi manus imponant non oblegis
necessitatem? which our Church is not so stanch in, the Bishop having always
the Concurrence of Presbyters who lay on hands with him in conferring the
Orders of Priesthood.

Concerning Ecclesiastical Discipline.
AS to the Matter of Discipline and Jurisdiction, I shall say little, lest it
should be interpreted an itching desire after Rule, and share of the Government
of the Church. Sir Edward Dering, that great and learned Man, in the first long
Parliament (where he labored much to prevent the Extirpation of Episcopacy)
Sir Edw. Der. Collect Speeches, p. 32.
did declare that they could never be able absolutely and utterly to root out
Popery, unless they took away the Soleship of Episcopacy. I believe good
Reasons might be given why the Minister of the Parish, should be empowered to
assist the Bishop when any of his Flock are called or convented as Criminals.
Forbs, the Bishop of Edinburgh, concludes against the Power of the keys being
solely in the Bishop, Post institutos Episcopos i^ud Preshyterium quod habet
Episcopum, Jurisdictionem non exerceat sine Episcopo suo, neque Episcopo eam
potestatem exercere fas est seorsim absque Presbyterio. Bishop Hall says, that
it is universally agreed upon by all Antiquity, that in the Primitive Government
all things were ordered and transacted by the Consent of the Presbytery,
moderated by one constant President thereof. The Primary and perpetual
Peacemaker, page 48, 49. Hanc formam commendatunt patres. observavit
antiquissima Ecclesia, i^o quod est totius rei caput instituisse videtur ipse
Christus per Apostolos, Theol. Gall. de Discipl. Eccles. Anno. 1622. Cap. de
Episcop. St. Austine upon these words of St. Matt. [Tibi dabo claves] says,
that Jurisdiction was given to Presbyters as well as Bishops. Dicit per illa
verba datam esse Judiciariam potestatem toti Ecclesiam Episcopis and
Presbyteris.
Practice, whereof no Man can doubt of that has but seen the Writings of
Clemens and Ignatius. St. Ignatius in his Epistle to the Magness. seems to
advise the fame thing, (...). Let all things be done, the Bishop presiding as
God's Vicegerent, and the Presbyters sitting in Council representing the
Apostles; which seems to be much like the Wish of a more modern Divine, whose
Words are these, Sane ^aec Ecclesiae; administrandae; ratio, quam dixi in qua
Episcoporum porestas certos limiter habeat, a syn^do and Coetu Presbyterorum
circumscriptos est res magis optanda quam speranda, Epist. ad Verdae. St.
Ignatius in several of his Epis^les frequently mentions a Subjection and
Submission due to the Presbyters, as well as to the Bishops (...) etc. the
Teams he uses, being sufficiently expressive of Jurisdicton and Authority. I
will give you a few Instances for the Proof of what I have assumed. (...),
Epist. ad Smyr.

(...). Let all follow the Bishop as Christ his Father, and the Presbyters as
the Apostles; which as Vossius observes, was the Opinion of Polycarpe: His
Words are, (...). That is, be subject to the Presbyters and Deacons, as unto
God and Christ. Notae Voss. 261. Ignatius in his Epistle to the Magnesians,
written from Smyrna, speaking of Zotion, whom he had kindly entertained;
commends him, (...). Because he was subject to the Bishop and Presbytery in the
Grace of God, and Law of Jesus Christ: And in his Epistle to the Trallians,
though he faith they ought to take the Bishop along with them, so they should
also be subject to the Presbyters as to the Apostles of Christ. (...), Ad.
Trall. p. 156. (...), etc. (...). Ibid. But what need we hear more Evidences
out of this ancient Father a for the time, and I believe the Reader's Patience
would fail, should I particularly recite what he has said to this purpose, in
his other Epistles, to the Brethren of Tarsus, Antioch, etc. (...). Let the
People be subject to the Presbyters and Deacons. The same Advice he gives to
the Philippi^ns in his Letter to them; as also in his Epistle to the Ephesians,
(...). Ad. Smyr. If the Bishops and Presbyters are to be observed and followed,
as Christ obeyed his Father, and as the Church was bound to be obedient to the
Apostles, then sure the sole Jurisdiction was not in the single Person of the
Bishop. It was strongly argued in the Council of Basil against Panormitane, by
Ludovicus, Cardinal Arlotensis, that there were most evident Testimonies for
the Defense of Inferiors: For the chief and principal of all Divines, st.
Austine upon the Words of St. Matthew. where Christ faith, I will give thee the
keys of the Kingdom of Heaven; affirms, that by those words the Judicial
Power was not only given to Peter, But also to the other Apostles, and to the
whole Church, the Bishops and Priests. The famous Dr. St. Jerome does also
agree with St. Austine, whose Words are these upon the Epistle of Paul to
Titus, Before that difference was made in Religion by the Instigation of the
Devil, or that it was spoken among the People, I bold of Paul, I of Apollo, and
I of Cephas, the Churches were governed by the common Consent and Council of
the Priests, for the Priest is the very same that a Bishop is. And further he
says, That Priests are of lesser Authority than Bishops, rather by Custom,
than by the Dispensation of the Truth of God, and that they ought to rule the
Church together. Mr. Lambert, that learned man, and constant Martyr, in his
Defense averred the same thing; and that Priests were called Bishops being all
one, and no other but Bishops. The Bishop; of London and Duresme, in their
Letter to Cardinal Pool acknowledge the same thing, urging the Authority of St.
Jerome, in his Epistle to Evagrius, and in his Commentary upon Titus. Sciant
ergo Episcopi se magis ex Consuetudine, quam dispensationis dominicae veritate
Presbyteris esse majores: And in both places prove that the Government of the
Churches; yea, the Patriarchal Churches was by the common Consent and Agreement
of the Clergy; Acts and Monuments, Vol. 2. p. 290. Impress. 1684.

But I shall refer my Reader, and my self as to this Matter, unto the Proposal
made by Charles II. in his Declaration concerning Ecclesiastical Affairs, 1660.
p. 15 In short, I think that excellent Project concerning Church Government,
might very well deserve the Consideration of out Superiors; especially if
Presbyters might have Power granted not only to assist by their Advice, but Si
judiciariam habent potestatem in Ecclesia Presbyteri quid eos prohibet vocem in
conciliis habere terminativam, Card. Arelat. Aen. Sylv. p. 24. de gest. Con.
Basil.
Vote too, which was strenuously pleaded for, and learnedly defended to be the
Right of Presbyters, in the Council of Basil; Acts and Monuments. But if as to
some doubtful Matters in Doctrine, some scrupled Rites and Ceremonies in the
Church, which have occasioned not only many hot Disputations, bitter Contests,
and the rolling many Garments in Blood our Consciences may be indulged, let
them take such to govern, as they esteem best of in the Church, may we but stow
out Cargo right, secure our Lading, and avoid Shipwreck of Faith and a good
Conscience, let who will carry the Flag. Only give me leave to say verily there
has been a Fault amongst us, that whilst our Discipline has been very
quick-sighted in Matters of Conformity, as to the smallest We were once
complained of in Parliament by a great Member of that Assembly in these Words,
The Vines have both Grapes and Leaves; And Religious Acts both substance and
Circumstance; but the Gardener is much to blame who gives more charge to the
Workmen of the Leaves than of the Fruit, Sir Edward Dering, Collect. Speech. p.
33.
Ceremonies, it has been comparatively dull in hearing, and slow in espying
the greatest Immoralities. We have been ready to discern the More, but have
overlookt the Beam: Tender of the Rubric, but less concerned for the
Decalogue; And so long as our Whoredoms do remain, it is impossible out Church
should have Peace: Let us be never so zealous for Conformity to the Canons and
Rules of it; for if God has a Controversy with us, the best Disputant will
find the Contest hard, and Victory impossible. We may blame the Dissenters for
our Schisms, but I am sure we may thank our selves for them nay with grief and
shame may we confess it, that to such a pitch has Profaneness risen among us,
that it has been a Scandal to be good, and a Crime to be Religious: Tea Truth
fails, and he that departs from Evil makes himself a Prey; or is accounted
mad, as the Margent reads it. 59 Isa. 15.


Loyalty and Conformity were the whole Cry, upon which Cardinal-Vertues (for
they have been deemed no less) have all Preferments (when time was) turned: For
could the Church and State but lay their Foundation here, they concluded their
Nest to be built upon a Rock: But if Grace be not writ upon the Walls of it,
the Beam out of its own Timber, the Stone out of its own Wall will cry down
with it, down with it even to the Ground; without this we shall but daub with
untempered Mortar, and may cry Peace Peace, when Destruction is at hand.

St. Austine observed, that the Romans built their Temple of Concord, where the
Seditions of the Gracchi had been acted: Tiberius and Caius.
Which Temple afterward was so far from restraining, Decivitate de^ lib. 3.
cap. 25.
that it became a Promoter of the highest, and most bloody Outrages. For
Formality-sake we may carry the Ark into the Camp of our Church, but the Glory
will depart from us, so long as the Sins of the young Men be great, but their
Reproofs small: so that hitherto we have mistaken our Enemies, and like the
Andaba^ae have fought with our Eyes shut, contending de lana Caprina, we scarce
know what we have fallen out for, or with whom. Alas! it has been our Brethren
of the same Faith and Religion; whereas our Contests should have been with
Spiritual wickednesses in high places; yea such have been the Policy and Envy
of those who rejoiced in our Divisions (hoping to make their own Market of
them) as first to persuade that they were no Friends to Caesar, and then to
engage the Civil Magistrate to treat them as Enemies, making them ^riples, and
then beating them with their Crutches, who to get the Staff into their Hand,
would frequently suggest to the Prince (whose Ear they could command) that
there was a People whose Laws were contrary to the King's Laws; and therefore
desired him to write that they might be destroyed; which (contrary to often and
open Promises of an undisturbed and free Exercise of their Religion) he was
frequently prevailed with to do; Signing diverse Acts for their Prosecution:
Which by a ravenous sort of Informers were so managed, as by Bonds and
imprisonments, Confiscations and Banishments, the protestant Dissenters were
ravaged and ruined: But such have been the Wisdom of our late Senates to see
and discover by whom, and for what ends they were thus pusht on and acted. The
Tide of our Councils seems very much turned, SERMON preached at ^ublin before
the Lord's Justices of Ireland, by the Dean of St. Patricks, Printed, 1691.
since we have with more cheerfulness levied such considerable Sums of Money,
to reimburse our Neighbors the Charge of our deliverance, than what was
unaccountably raised and expended^, Vt delenda esset Carthago. It certainly
argued (says the Dea^ of St. Patricks) a very passive and submissive Temper in
them to give Money so liberally, and to fight so fiercely, as they did to
destroy themselves, and their fellow Protestants; to make sport for their
common Adversaries, and to serve the Interest of their most dangerous Enemies.
This was (says he) part of the Project laid down at large in a Paper found in
the Earl of Tyr^onnel's House, then Colonel Talbo^^ dated July, 1671. supposed
to be drawn up by his Brother then Titular Archbishop of Dublin, viz. in these
Words; That the Toleration of the Roman Catholic Religion in England be
granted, and the Insolency of the Hollanders be taken down, a Confederacy with
France, Dean of St. Patrick's Sermon.
etc. the Ashes of Amboina must be raked for Embers to put us in a Flame
against them, and the Affront urged that was given us, when their Fleet refused
to make Obeisance, and strike Sail to the King's Yatcht sent among them. The
first of which some thought was not always to be remembered, nor the latter a
sufficient Ansa for a National Quarrel, or which might have been attoned at a
far less rate than it stood this unhappy Nation in, both of Blood and Treasure.
But how then should the great design of extirpating the Northern Heresy (which
was then the Catholic Project) have been managed; which many Protestants were
inconsiderately easily, and with too much Zeal engaged in, being great Enemies
to their Ecclesiastical, as well as Civil Constitutions; taking all Suggestions
of the fear of Popery to be nothing but the old Puritanical Cant revived, and
ungrounded Scandal cast upon the King, as if he had other designs, than to
maintain the Honor and Grandeur of the Nation; which made many of our own
Religion very zealous and valourous in carrying on the War against them: But
the Parliament taking Scent of this deep-laid Project addressed the King to
proceed to a Treaty of a speedy Peace (as I remember the Words were) esteeming
a further Prosecution of the War, nothing less than a pulling down those Banks
and Barriers which were erected against the Sea of Rome, though too many were
too great Infidels to believe it, till they felt themselves wet-shod in
Holy Water, and that Tiber so powerfully brake in upon us, that the whole Land
looked bright with Popery: When alas! all the Remedy the Non-resistance Men
could afford us was; Who a Devil could have thought it? but we hope such care
will be taken, that there shall be no occasion for them to make us such a
second amends, or be so far heeded, that they should again involve us in the
same Circumstances, and once more give us another flap with their Tails. Non
licet his peccare. Indeed it is believed they will never boil Prerogative to its
former height: the all Charters must be arbitrary; Officers of State, but
Judges especially, ad placitum, the only way to sell Justice, and to buy the
needy for a Pair of Shoes. Then Non-Resistance and Passive-Obedience (very
true and wholesome Doctrines if rightly stated) were the universal Cry, and
squeezed till the Blood came; But the Mischief was, when they had nursed the
Prerogative till it had stung some of them, and hill as all the rest, they
presently let the World see they never brewed this Doctrine for their own
drinking. Let a co^^^^ed Child be but once s^ibbed, and it fl^es in the Face of
the most indulgent Parent: They never expected that non-Resistance would ever
have fallen to their share, unless when Preferments and Dignities were offered
to their acceptance: But when they came to experiment (with Perillus) the Bull
they had framed for others; What Outcries did they make? Then they
acknowledged, we indeed suffer justly, But what have our Brethren done, whom we
pursued with such Revenge and Rage? Then they confessed that they sacrificed the
Interest of the Church to their Malice: But if the Dissenters would forbear to
comply with the common Enemy, they would do great things for them, whenever
they came again into their Kingdom. But alas, there is too too much reason (as
to such kind of promises) to apply that of the poet. viz.

AEgrotat demon monaobus tune esse voleba^,
Convaluit demon, demon ut ante suit.
In stress of Weather Mountains want too much,
That being past a Molehill now they grutch.
Witness that great regret some of them have express against that Kindness and
Favor which they King, and two succeeding Parliaments have beyond denial
evideneed to our Dissenting Protestant Brethren; who with Fury bite the Chain
which restrains them from falling foul upon their former Prey: Besides their
unreasonable stickle to prevent, the least Abatement in Matters, which respect
the Ceremonial part of our Worship. A Conformity to which, goes with them for
the whole Duty of a Minister, Obedience to Government (a very good and Gospel
Doctrine) was the constant Theme of the Pulpit; but our high men have done with
it, as the Priest did with the Sword of Goliath, wound it up in the Ephod, and
laid it behind the Altar. Though when time was our whole Duty was placed in a
wild Notion, and extravagant Pretense to Loyalty: No Man being esteemed Loyal
or a Lover of his Prince, who did not so far dote, as to follow the Measures,
and promote the Designs of turning the best tempered Government in the World
into a Despotick and Arbitrary Rule. These wife Master Builders, had raised the
Fabric of Sovereign Power to that ^mmense Height and extravagant Projecture,
as no way agreed with the just Methods of any civil Architecture; putting in
the mean time the Mischief of the Project far from themselves: Supposing that
if it did fall, it might perhaps grind their Enemies to Powder, but never
dreamt of its tipping upon their own Heads, as we have before observed,
Insomuch, that whatever they heard which might awaken them to prevent their
impending Ruin, went for nothing but the ever-jealous Notions, and mu^^nous
Suggestions of disloyal and dissaffected Men. But when they began to feel the
Massy weight of an overgrown Monarch, with what Zeal did they stickle to put a
Bridle into the Mouth, and Hook into the Nostrils of that Leviathan, whose
Tusks had ripped up the Belly of our Laws and Liberties, upon whose Neck they had
so lately thrown the Reigns of Government which the Prince whom God now has
blessed us with, has delivered back again to the People? Esteeming the
Prerogative never better asserted, than when the Rights and Properties of the
Subject (the great end of Government) are kept inviolate, and that Caesar can
never have his due, if the People be denied what is theirs: Being so great an
Artist in governing, as to carry a steady: Hand, and keep the Balance even,
for if too much weight be put into one Scale, the other will kick up, as our
late King by a costly Experiment found true.

But as it pleased the Almighty to raise up a Moses to deliver us from the
Brick-kilns, and to break the Yoke from off the neck of our civil Liberties, so
we trust he will rescue us from the iron Furnaces too, loosing every Burden,
and letting our Consciences go free; which have not been so much gauled with
Points of Doctrine, and Articles of Faith and Religion, as with the rites and
Ceremonies of it: We so generally agree as to Matters of Faith, that Dissenters
in respect of that, are so few as to their Number, and as to their Quality so
inconsiderable, that they are not able to make any Schism, or cause any
disturbance amongst us. Could we but find a Temper to accommodate these lesser
things (which by a Spirit of Meekness and Moderation, Christian Charity and
Forbearance might easily be effected) we should have an end of Controversy,
Heats would cool, Animosities would cease; they would want Fuel to feed them, and
Matter to work upon: The making Sides and Parties to elect Members for
Parliament would be at an end, which have so frequently fermented the Humors
of the Body politic into lasting and dangerous Factions and Distempers. Were
but our Contests, about the Form and Rites of Religion, by some wise and
prudent Concordate framed by our Governors, determined and moderated; we need
not fear we should fall out about Matters of State; being all agreed to bear
out share in the Charge necessary for its Grandeur and Defense: We should all
sit under our Vines and Fig-tress, leading a peaceable and quiet Life, when
once these Bones of Contention were taken out of the way; and Apples of Strife
(which they say grow upon a Tree that is neither good nor evil) become forbidden
Fruit. Besides we are not sturdy Beggars, we ask not Talents but Shekels, we
only desire to wash and be clean from those additions to Divine Worship, which
we are afraid may defile our Consciences, and not be so well pleasing to God:
Things which the Imposers tell us are Matters indifferent when abstracted from
their Authority: But suppose it should be an inconvenience to take them away;
yet sure so great a good as an universal Quiet would be sufficient to commute
for no greater Nuisance: But we are persuaded of the contrary from the Reasons
we have alleged, besides the Authorities of some of the greatest Prelates and
Members of the Church of England, viz. Hooper, Bishop of Worcester, Jewel,
Bishop of Salisbury, Sands, Archbishop of York, Horn, Bishop of Winchester:
Why should I again name Cranmer, Ridley, Grindal upon this subject, who
endeavored to have the Habits of the Clergy as a Popish Relic cast out. The
Archbishop of St. Andrews speaking in his Sermon at the Assembly of Perth, did
acknowledge, [That the Convenience of them was doubted by many, but not without
Cause, etc. Novations in a Church, even in the smallest things are dangerous,
had it been in our Power to have dissuaded or declined them most certainly we
would, etc.] Mr. Sprint also (though a Conformist) yet says, [It may be
granted that offense, and hinderance to Edification do arise from these our
Ceremonies.] He confesses also, That the best Divines wished them to be
abolished: Which by her own Confession is in the Power of the Church to grant:
Which speaking in the Preface of the Common Prayer, See 34. Art. of Religion.
says that the Ceremonies which remain may be for just Causes taken away,
altered or changed (and gives good reason for it) because they are in their own
nature indifferent, and so alterable. The Words be these, [ The particular
Forms of Divine Worship, and the Rites and Ceremonies appointed to be used
therein being things in their own nature indifferent, and alterable, and so
acknowledged: It is but reasonable upon weighty and important Considerations,
according to the various Exigency of times and occasions such Changes and
Alterations should be made therein, as to those that are in place of Authority
should from time to time seem either necessary or expedient; accordingly we
find that in the Reigns of several Princes of Blessed Memory since the
Reformation, the Church upon just and weighty Considerations her thereunto
moving, has yielded to make such alterations in such Particulars, as in their
respective times were thought convenient, etc.] As for weighty Causes sure we
never had any more ponderous to incline the Balance then what may now be put
into it: Will not the desire and design of our Prince to loose every Burden,
and break every Yoke from the Neck of Men's Consciences move? Will not the pious
Zeal for Unity and Peace together with a just Regard and Compassion toward
tender Consciences of the best and greatest, of all (I think I may say) the
Prelates and Governors of the Church move? Will not the most desirable
Compliance, and Harmony with our Brethren of the Reformed Churches abroad, an
happy Concord and Communion with our Brethren at home move? That we may be no
longer at strife one with another, that we may take sweet Council together, and
go to the House of God in company, that all Bitterness and Wrath being laid
aside, the Lion may eat Straw with the Ox, and lie down with the Lamb: That it
may be said of us owning the Christian Faith and Doctrine of the Church, who
were not a People in time past, 1 Pet. 2.20.
but now are become a People, which had not obtained Mercy, but now have
obtained Mercy; this would enlarge the Borders of the Church; And why should we
not admit those, whom God does not reject? Who does not make such small things
(as we suspend and deprive for) terms of Why should Men be more rigid than God?
Why should any Error exclude any Man from the Church's Communion which will not
deprive him of eternal Salvation? -- When I say in one Communion I mean in a
common Profession of those Articles of Faith, wherein all consent. Chilling.
the Relig. of Protest. p. 210.
Communion with himself; and yet in the mean time, can without scruple hold
Communion with Persons of vicious Habits and profane Life's: If a Man dissent
from us, as to the Form of Religion, we account it scandalous to converse with
him; whereas the Apostle's Rule is; If a Man that is called a Brother, be a
Fornicator, or Coveteous, or an Idolater, or a Railer, or a Drunkard, or an
Extortioner, with such an one no not to eat. We cannot wholly abstain from
converse with such Persons, for then we must go out of the World, but whether I
should shun the Company of an honest and good Man though a Dissenter, or of a
wicked and profane Person, Epist. dedic. to the Liberty of Prophesying.
though a strict Conformist to the Rites of the Church, he that is of least
esteem may be able enough to judge. I would fain know says a late Tailor.
Bishop, why a vicious Habit is not as bad or worse than a false Opinion. Why
are we so zealous against those we call Heretics, and yet great Friends with
Drunkards, Fornicators and Swearers, intemperate and idle Persons? Besides (as
that worthy Person speaks) Drunkenness, says he, I am certain is a most
damnable Sin, etc. But Sects are made, and Opinions are called Heresies upon
Interest: Why should we then strain at a Gnat and swallow a Camel? If a Man
swears by the Temple it is nothing, but if he swears by the Gold of the Temple
he is a Doctor. If a Man commits Fornication or Adultery it is nothing, we can
hear, pray with, hug and converse with such an one, though he defiles the
Temple of the Lord: But if he conforms not to the Ceremonial part of Divine
Worship, he dinges the Gold of the Temple, he is a Debtor to the Law, and he
shall pay for it: To these we say stand by, for I am more holy (that is more
conformable) than you; boasting as St. Paul once did, that they have profited
in their Religion above their Equals in their own Nation, 1 Gal. 14.
being exceedingly zealous of the Tradition of their Fathers. And thus whilst
we plant our Canon, rifle our Arsenals, to beat down a shaken Leaf, we make
little or no assaults upon the strong holds of Sin: These things we should have
done; and if we leave the other undone, the Church will be further extended,
better se^led, and our Zeal more profitably employed. And will not these things
move us? In our Reformation many things were retained by the Wisdom of our
Reformers, that offense might not be given to the Roman Church. We retained the
three Creeds many of their Feasts, Fasts, several of their Rites and
Ceremonies, Cross, Surplice, Kneeling at the Sacrament, Form of their Worship;
insomuch, that Edward the Sixth told his rebellious Subjects, That the
difference of their Service was; that before it was performed in an unknown
Tongue, but now in a Language they understood. Had the outward manner of
Celebration, been much different from the former, the King would never have
used such an Argument to appease them, it would indeed have been to little
purpose: And what good has all this Compliance wrought, to what end has all
this waste of Charity been? It has hardened them in their Superstition, and
given them hopes that those who so far complied and symbolized with them, might
be prevailed with in time to return, seeing they dressed still their Service,
with some of the Garlic and Onions they brought from thence. Whatsoever then
we have retained not to scandalize them, let us now part with to gratify our
Protestant Dissenting Brethren, which will not only oblige them, and render
their Separation indefensible, but will justify us before all the World; and
will prove an excellent Balm to cure the hurt of the Daughter of our People
substantially; And will not this move us? I cannot forbear to mention what a
late Author (no Nonconformist) has pertinently alleged to this purpose, his
Words are these, [ Becoming a Papist to the Papists, that by all means they
might gain some of the Papists: For this reason in her Liturgy she has kept
her best Collects, whatever was justifiable in her Litany, and all their
Creeds, in her Rubric many of her Feasts, most of their Fasts, and some other
of their Ceremonies: But since that time (viz. the Bull from Rome) we have
gained none, lost some, whose narrower Souls could not swallow such things. Now
more than an hundred Years experience calls upon the same Charity to tack
about, and steera contrary course. Its a general Rule, and practiced by all
good Physicians to observe whether their Prescriptions do more good or hurt,
nor could he be faithful either to his Patient or Profession, that should
obstinately stick to his first Orders in contradiction to Experience: It has
pleased our gracious King to Authorize the Prelates and Representatives of our
Church, to practice the same Charity toward our distempered Church and State.]
Would to God this Author had never wrote any thing more disagreeable to sound
Doctrine, and the things which belong to the Church's Peace than he has in
this.

But were your Souls in my Soul's stead I could heap up many more Arguments;
But all that I shall add is an earnest Reinforcement of our Request, to you
that have Power committed to you to heal the Breaches and redress the
Grievances of the Church; that the Flames which have been so industriously
blown up, may now be blown out, and for ever extinguished, that virulent and
peevish Men may never be entrusted, either in Church or State: But that a
Spirit of Meekness and Moderation may act our Wheels, yea the Wheels within the
Wheels, viz. The Privy-Councils and most secret Transactions, that a Spirit of
Peace and Love may preside in all our Civil Assemblies. And (as the
Philosophers fancied the Angels were to the Heavens) be the great Intelligence
to move them.

As for him, whom the King of Heaven and Earth has by his miraculous
Providence set over us, and raised up to rescue us from all those Miseries that
were come, and coming upon us. May all the Blessings which ever made Princes
good, Hic vir non invidet mihi gratiam.
and great light upon him; and as for the ease which his Protestant Subjects
enjoy in the free Exercise of their Religion we are so far from envying it that
we bless God, the King and Parliament for it: Might but an act of Comprehension
be joined to that of Indulgence, might the Church Doors be set so wide, that
all True and Orthodox Ministers and People too might go in and out, and find
rest to their Souls; might but that Project and Platform of Accommodation which
his Predecessor Charles II. in his Declaration concerning Ecclesiastical
Affairs, formerly published and propounded be once enacted, and settled as a
Law, we might live to see Schism baned, Truth and Peace settled: It has pleased
God to deliver us out of the Hands of our Enemies to serve him without fear,
might there but be a Temper to appease our angry Friends (and why should we
fall out, for we are Brethren) we might sing our Conclamatum est; the Work of
God would be finished.

But when all is said we recommend this great Work to the Providence of God,
and Wisdom of our Prince; Pleading as the Estates of Germany did with
Ferdinand, in much the same case. Te quidem summum and a deo nobis datum
Magistrum agnoscimus, and libentissime quidem, ac nihil est omnium rerum, quod
non possis, aut debeas a nobis expectare, sed in hac una re propitium te nobis
esse flagitemus. That is, we freely acknowledge you to be our Supreme Lord, and
given to us by God himself, nor is there any thing, of what we possess, which
you cannot, or may not justly expect from us. In this thing only [which was
Liberty in Matters of Religion] we most earnestly entreat your Majesty to be
kind and propitious to us.

1st. But if this be admitted the Church can never appoint any thing, but upon
pretense of Scandal to tender Consciences, it must be presently cassated and
rescinded, so that there can be no Establishments of the Church made, or Order
maintained.

1st. These Establishments and Orders have cost the Church dear, it once sunk
in the Defense of them, and with it one of the best of Kings, that ever
ascended the Throne since the Reformation. This was foretold long since by a
true Prophet: I mean the Learned Zanchy in a Letter to Queen Elizabeth, 1571.
[Your Majesty says he being persuaded by some, otherwise great Men, and
carried with a Zeal, but not according to Knowledge to retain Unity in
Religion, has now more than ever resolved and decreed, yea does, Will and
Command, that all Bishops, and Ministers of Churches shall in Divine Service
put on the white Linen Garments, which the Popish Priests use now in Popery;
yea it is to be feared that the Fire is so kindled, and cast its Flames so far
and wide, that all the Churches of that most large and mighty Kingdom, to the
perpetual Disgrace of your most renowned Majesty will be set on a flaming
Fire.] And are there not many yet alive to justify the fulfilling of that
fatal Prophecy. Had it not been better then if the Church had not been so
tenacious of these Rites, to have dispensed with some of its pretended Beauty
and Uniformity, to have cast something of its Ceremonial Cargo overboard, and
to have somewhat lightened the Vessel, than to have endangered the bottom, and
suffered (as it did) Shipwreck of the whole.

When the Disease grew inveterate, and Humors of the Populacy into an extreme
ferment, our Physicians could have been content to have applied the Remedy, but
it was too late.

Sero Medicina paratur,
Cum mala sinceras penetrat gangrena medullas.
Time was when the loping off some Luxuriances might have saved the whole, but
no Temper could be found, nor Expedient listened to, to prevent a Rupture; till
at last nothing but Root and Branch, Branch and Rush as in one day could
satisfy the Victors.

2dly, If this Objection be admitted, are not all the Designs of indulging
tender Consciences superseded? St. Paul the Apostle directs those which are
strong, to bear the Infirmities of the Weak: To become all things to all Men
that we might gain some, not to cause our Brother to offend: That there be some
who prefer one day before another, others esteem every day alike; some believe
they may eat all things, another who is weak eats Herbs: What Is to be done in
this case? We must not despise one and other, but forbear one and other in
Love, not giving any Scandal to our Brethren; for he that offends his Brother
sins against Christ: Which Rules of forbearance are as obliging to the Church
in general, as to private Christians in particular: But if this Objection carry
any force with it, it might be replied, how can this yieldance be; for then, no
sooner shall the Church have appointed by its Decree any thing to be observed,
but upon the pretense that some nice and scrupulous Conscience is offended, all
must be given up.

3dly, Notwithstanding this Objection, wise and worthy Men have judged a
Latitude and Liberty fit to be used, and practiced in these things. The Reply
of King James to Cardinal Perroon (returned him by Causabon) was to this
purpose, That the Church should do well, to sever necessary things which are
not many from unnecessary, and that the latter be left to Christian Liberty.
This was that which the Council of Jerusalem had regard to, when they declared
that it seemed good to the Holy Ghost, and to them to lay nothing upon them but
what was necessary, viz. to abstain from Fornication, from things strangled,
and from Blood.

Doctor Potter observes, that as the ancient Worthies and Fathers of the Church
were most zealous to defend even with their Blood, to the least Jot or Title,
the Rule of Faith or Creed of Christians; or as the Scripture calls it, the
form of sound Words, the Principles of the Oracles of God; so again they were
most charitable to allow in other things a great Latitude, and Liberty: Would
to God the Fathers and Worthies of our Church would do so, and our Work were
done.

4thly, Decency and Order may be had and maintained, though these scrupled
Rites should be omitted; unless we condemn all our Brethren of the Reformed
Churches, who have thought fit to lay aside the Practice of those Ceremonies,
which among us have ever since the Reformation been a Stone of stumbling, and
Rock of offense; and that not only to some of our weaker Brethren; but also to
many of the greatest Bishops and Prelates of the Church, as I have already
hinted; Insomuch that Zanchy in his aforesaid Epistle, told the Queen that most
part of the Bishops, Men greatly renouned for all kind of Learning and
Godliness, had rather leave their Office and place in the Church, than against
their own Consciences admit of such Garments which are at the least signs of
Idolatry and Popish Superstition, and so defile themselves with them, and give
offense to the Weak by their Example.

5thly, An Abolition of these Rites does not oblige the Church to be subject to
every querulous and teachy Complainant; suppose a Prince grants the Petition of
a Criminal, and gives him his Life for a Prey, will it therefore follow that he
shall never know when he has done and that Justice shall never be executed,
because it has upon some earnest Applications given place to Mercy and yielded
to Clemency. The King has thought fit to annul the Act for Chimney-money, will
it therefore follow no branch of his Revenue must stand unrepealed? Suppose the
Church should repeal and cassate the Laws for the Ceremonies, for the Reasons
that have been alleged, will it therefore follow, that nothing must ever be
settled for the maintaining of Order and Decency: For though it may grant some
things with Reason, will it follow therefore, it must yield up every thing
without Reason?

6thly, If nothing must be granted by way of Relaxation in point of Conformity,
upon the Reason objected, then the Church's Peace can never be secured. For
more than an hundred Years, viz. over since the Reformation the Church has had
and suffered many a bitter Pang for the sake of these offensive Rites and
Ceremonies, she has had a constant struggle in her Womb by reason of them:
They once fretted out her Bowels, and they are again, and have been ever since
their Restoration with Charles II. as Moths fretting her Garments. They have
been the constant Troublers of our Israel; And I am afraid if with Jonas they
be not cast overboard, they will at one time or another sink our Ship: Though I
earnestly wish (whatever be the event of this Essay) there may never be any
occasion to lament the fulfilling of this Prophecy among us; as with bitter
cries we have lived to bewail the Fate of Zanchy's: And shall we ever retain
that Leven that is so apt to sour the whole lump, shall it never be purged
out? Oh, that it might once be. Augustus Caesar caused all the Glasses to be
broken, lest the use of them should occasion Blame and Terror to the Servants,
and create Strife in the Family, the thing applies it self, etc. It Is true, we
are Brethren, we have the same Father, the same Faith, the same Baptism, the
same Religion as to all the Substantial parts of it. Why should we have a
Partition Wall built betwixt us? Whilst we are two Flocks, differences will be
apt to arise and cause the Herds-men to fall out; and what Flames such Sparks
may kindle among us, our former Ashes, and Experience are sufficient to make us
dread the Incendiaries, and Boutefeus. Let us then no longer shut our Eyes that
we should not see the things which concern our Peace.

Let us now be one Sheepfold under one Shepherd: An Act of Comprehension would
effect this: Were the Declaration of Charles II. concerning Ecclesiastical
Affairs cast into the Form of a Law, I believe our Schism would in a great
measure presently, in process of time be totally extinguished: And the hurt of
the Daughter of our People, by the Balm which distills from it, effectually
cured: Which was formerly the Opinion of an excellent and reverend Divine of
our Church: I shall give it you in his own Words, [ If ever, says he, a Divine
Sentence was in the Mouth of a King, and his Mouth erred not in judgment, I
verily believe it was thus with our present Majesty when he composed that
admirable Declaration, which next to Holy Scripture I adore, and think that the
united Judgment of the whole Nation cannot frame a better, or a more
unexceptionable Expedient for a firm and lasting Concord of these distracted
Churches.] Solomon says a Man of Understanding is of an excellent Spirit, and
the worst wish I have for our Mother the Church is, that all her Sons were of
no worse Temper: Then we should have our wish, viz. one Sheepfold; nay what is
better, the Unity of the Spirit in the Bond of Peace. Sir Matthew Hale, Lord
Chief Justice of the King's Bench, Sir Matthew Hale.
was of Opinion, That the only means to heal us was a new Act of Uniformity
which should neither leave all at liberty, not impose any thing but necessary.
In the mean time it were to be wished, that public Authority for Peace and
Union sake would strictly prohibit and restrain the Pulpit, from uttering
Invectives against our Dissenting Brethren, and that the Mouths of such as
speak high-swelling Words against them may be stopped. This would be a very good
Preludium to Union and Peace, if this Rallery might be curbed, and such as
cause Divisions in the Church might be marked.

viz. The deprived Bishops and Clergy, who for Conscience sake dare not submit
to swear Allegiance to our present Sovereigns: And are not their Consciences as
tender to them as other? Or do not they who when time was stood against the
pressing Inundations of Popery, and extravagant Exercise of Royal Power, as
much deserve Indulgence, as those that on this account desire it?

1st, To put a Curb into the Chap of Tyranny, or Hook into the Nostrils of
Popery, are Actions becoming true English Men and Protestants. Nor is the
Defense which was made against both, by the censured Prelates ever to be
forgot, and how they Jeoparded themselves in the high Places, in the Defense of
our Christian and Civil Liberties. ^ Ezekiel. 20.
But if a righteous Man shall forsake his Righteousness and do that which is
evil, all the Righteousness which he has done shall not be remembered.

2dly, Supposing their refusal to comply is Matter of Conscience; I most
heartily wish, and in my Place and Station would so far as I am able, make it
my endeavor (as I desire Liberty for my self and others) that they may be
treated with all the Indulgence and Compassion which the Powers in being can
extend toward them, and that they may never meet with such measure, as have
been meeted out to our Dissenting Brethren from the fatal Bartholomew, till the
first or second Year of the late King James.

But methinks whilst I am engaged in this Argument I am furnished with a new
one to plead with our Reverend Fathers and Brethren, to a just and charitable
Condescension, and Consideration of our Complaint, viz. That there is no such
infallibility or fixedness of any Condition here, that will supersede that
charitable Resolve of doing as we would be done by: An Argument urged by a
Reverend Bishop to the same purpose. [ If there be variety (says he) in humane
Affairs, if the event of things be not settled in a durable Consistance, but is
changeable, every one of us all may have need of it.] Dr. Taylor's Preface to
the Liberty of Prophesying.
There was a time when our Reverend Fathers being upon the very Pinnacle of
Preferment and Power, I believe little expected that the Indulgence to tender
Consciences, which they would by no means (for several Years) lissen to, should
now be the great thing they want and desire: God is my witness whom I serve in
my Spirit, that I speak not to insult over them in their Affliction, or grate
upon the Misfortunes of others; I thank God that I have not so learned Christ:
But only that they would but consider, whether their inexorableness toward
others, may not have been a just Provocation unto the Almighty to deal with
them as they have dealt with their Brethren in Matters of Conscience; and
whether their case be altogether unlike that of Joseph's Brethren. 42 Genesis 21.
And they said one to another, we verily guilty concerning our Brother, in that
we saw the anguish of his Soul, when he besought us, and we would not hear,
therefore is this distress come upon us.

Let me then plead with you most Reverend Fathers, to engage your Interest and
Endeavors, with the Members of the Convocation, or any other who shall have
Opportunity, or Power to give ease to such Consciences which are weary and
heavy laden, by reason of a Conformity to all and every thing comprised in the
Liturgy. Put on Bowels of Mercy toward those that want it: It may be a means
and way for your selves to find it. Why should not our Church imitate our
Savior in making her Yoke easy, and Burden light? Especially to such who in
regard to the Peace and Unity of the Church, and to avoid Schism thought it
their Duty to submit to things of doubtful disputation, till it pleased God to
find out fit and proper Expedients to redress our Grievances.

3dly, But suppose the worst, that the Dissenting Clergy who refuse to swear
Allegiance, should not meet with such dispensations and allowance as they
desire, yet it can be no colorable Argument to reject our present Plea; there
being a vast Gulf betwixt their Case and ours. For as the Sovereign Powers
never promised any Toleration or Indulgence in the Affairs of the Church, but
to such as should plight their Faith to be good Subjects to the State, so
neither had they ever the Brow to expect it, or Face to ask it upon any other
terms whatever.



in foro Conscientiae, both of Perjury and Treason, which the greatest Good nor
Evil can never be sufficient Arguments to oblige us to commit. But th^se things
very much outdo the Matter in hand. Did we believe our Conformity unlawful,
and contrary to the Divine Law, we then have a plain Rule to direct us to obey
God, rather than Man: But yet they have been accounted as inexpedient by
several Reformed Churches, and therefore they thought fit to reject them: They
have been always scrupled, and often offensive to Persons of great Wisdom and
Abilities, a Yoke which gauled the Neck of many good Men's Consciences, who yet
rather than It would be our Sin to u^ it of choice, viz. the Liturgy, while we
may prefer a more convenient way, whatever we ought t^ do in case of necessity
when we must worship God inconveniently or not at all, Grand Debate at t^^
Savoy, p. 35.
desert their Stations, or lay down their Offices to which they were called
have unwillingly submitted. As we have observed already.
As Horn, Bishop of Winchester, who scrupled to accept his Bishopric unless
he might be dispensed with as to the Habits, and wrote to Bullinger on that
subject, who rather advised him to submit than refuse to serve God in that
Station. Hooper, Bishop Elect of Worcester refused to be consecrated till the
King granted him a Dispensation in point of the Habits: Yet such was the Zeal
of some about the King for those Rites, that when he was to preach before him,
he was fore'd to put on that Attire; which that good Man and Martyr I believe
would not have done, had he judged the thing unlawful, and yet no little
disturbance to him its like, if we consider how earnest he was to be dispensed
with by the King (which was granted him) before he was admitted to his
Bishopric. What case of shame (says Mr. Fox) [The strangeness hereof was that
day to that good Preacher every Man may easily judge: But this private
Contumely and Reproach in respect of the public Profit of the Church, which he
only sought, he bare and suffered patiently: And I would to God in like manner
they which took upon them the other part of that Tragedy, had yielded their
private Cause, whatever it was to the public Concord and edifying of the
Church;] Acts and Monuments, 3 Vol. 1 Col. p. 121.
And so do I in this and the like cases now, and to which I hope all the true
Sons of the Church and Enemies to Schism will say, Amen.





But does this Rule admit of no restriction? For sometimes Matters commanded by
the Church Praeter legem, as well as those which are enjoined Contra legem may
be questioned. Though from hence Forbs, Bishop of Edinburgh concludes, That the
Church may command us to pray for the Dead, because there is no Divine Command,
to the contrary. And why then also may she not injoin Caelibacy or single Life,
as she shall esteem it convenient, for there is no command to the contrary; as
Aquinas observes, Nemo ex praecepto tenetur nubere; and I believe he spoke
truth; for unless it be in some particular Cases, no Man is obliged to Marry,
for then St. Paul would not have said, He that marries does well, but he that
abstains does better.

And now whatever I have spoken upon this Argument, I have done it in the Truth
and Integrity of my Heart, out of no design to embroil, but rather to promote
the Welfare and Peace of the Church, as well as of the Consciences of private
Men, and thereby to extinguish those Flames which the Sparks of these
controverted Rites have enkindled, for Solomon says, If we take away the Wood,
the Fire will go out.

Nor have I Wyar-drawn the Truth or warpt the Rule of it to make it agree with
Peace. Non studendum est paci (says the Father) in detrimentum verae
Doctrinae; But have endeavored to take Measures from Scripture, Reason and
Charity: But if now I should be mistaken, and should have taken my mark amiss,
I am the more convinced of the necessity of Toleration, and compliance in
Matters which are of no greater Figure in Religion than what we have mentioned:
Because as Dr. Tailor says, Even then when a Man thinks he has most reason to
be confident, he may easily be deceived: But I shall leave all to the Judgment
and Censure of those reverend and worthy Persons whom the King has
Commissioned to sit on such Matters, and to review the Liturgy. This was writ
during their Authority.
Let the Righteous smite me and it shall be a kindness: Though to those
Ralleries with which Tracts of this nature are commonly entertained; (according
to the direction of Mr. Hooker in his Ecclesiastical Polity) I shall reply
nothing, because as the wise Man says, Fool's rage, and are confident.

But suppose the Matters alleged be not contrary to any Divine Precept; yet
they may be, and are offensive and scandalous to good Christians, though
perhaps but weak in the Faith, and is there not as much Charity, and
Forbearance to be showed to such, especially living, peaceably (though uneasy
to themselves) submitting to the Ordinances of Men for Conscience sake rather
than make any Schism in the Church; as has been extended to some, who have not
only differed from it in Doctrine, but wholly abandoned its Communion. I shall
instance in several Rasures which have been made in the Common Prayer by
Archbishop Land, least Matter of Scandal or Offense should be given to the
Arminians, and our dear Friends the Papists. Hence we find that those Words
used in the Morning Prayers for the King, viz. [ Who art the Father of thine
Elect and of their Seed] were expunged, which the Archbishop in his Speech in
the Star Chamber excuses as being done in his Predecessors time by the King's
Command: But this alters not the case in hand, but as some have more than
guessed, that because the Words seemed too much to favor the Opinion of a
particular assurance of Election, and personal Adoption or Salvation, which
gave offense to some in the Church who had other Sentiments, they were
commanded to be rased; Others also both within and without the Church, who
would not allow the Pope to be Antichrist were much offended with these Words
in our Liturgy, viz. [ Root out that Babilonish and Antichristian Sect,] which
are changed into these Words, viz, [Root out the Romish and Babilonish Sect;]
Which the Archbishop says he did by the King's Order, that he might not
offend, but remove scandal from the Papists: And do we not owe as much to the
Members of our own Church? Shall we show such forbearance toward our most
implacable Enemies? Whilst we hang a Millstone about the Necks of our Brethren
and Friends, even when we are invited to remove the Stones of stumbling, and
Rocks of offense out of the way?

The same Archbishop declaring, That it was of dangerous Consequence to avow
that the Popish Religion was Rebellion, though this Clause passed (says he) in
King James' time, yet he made an Alteration by the King's Command, and saw it
Printed; see the Star Chamber Speech, p. 34. So that the Liturgy it self has
not been a Noli me tangere in former days, but have passed an expurgatory
Index, and forced to part with such Expressions and Clauses, as have been
adjudged scandalizing of, and reflecting upon the Roman Party: Nor ought we to
be uncharitable to any, yet shall we do good to all, but those of our own
Household of Faith and Religion?

Besides, what does the late unpararelled deliverance of our Church from that
Ruin it was so lately at the brink of, require of us: But to do justly, to
walk humbly, and to show mercy; to redeem its former Disciplinary Cruelties,
and severe Usages, by which our Brethren of the same Faith, and Reformed
Religion have been formerly harassed and treated with? My design is not to
rifle the two last Reigns or Proceedings, against the Non-Conformists for
Instances or Arguments, to prove our Assumption. The Author of the Plea for the
Non-Conformists has given us a taste of that Cup which was bitterly wrung out
among us: Yet I hope I may look a little further back and show you, that the
later Severities acted upon our Brethren, was by a Transmigration of that
ancient Spirit of Cruelty which heretofore informed, and ruled in the great
Abettors of Conformity: By which we shall not only see clearly the Wisdom and
Love of God in putting it into the Hearts of our Governors, to proclaim
Liberty to the Captive, and to let the Oppressed go free: But also to nominate
and appoint Persons of Understanding, and consequently of an excellent Spirit,
to find out such a Temper, that those Boutefeus, which have formerly put us in
a flame, may be never able to officiate as Incendiaries amongst us for the
future.

So extremely Arbitrary were the Censures of the high Commission-Court and
Star Chamber, that some have weighed them in the same Balance against the With
the Papists there is a severe Inquisition, and with us (as it is used) a bitter
high Commission, Sir Edw. Dering. Col. Speech.
Inquisition. This I am sure that the Wisdom and Justice of our Nation, thought
fit to make a Law to abrogate them, and remove them as the great Nuisances
which pestered both our Church and State.

When Ecclesiastical Persons were brisk in inflicting corporal Punishments and
pecuniary Mulcts, and Amercements, Persons of the most liberal Professions and
Education, have been treated like Rogues and Villains, for no other Reasons
than their writing and speaking against the most Arbitrary Proceedings and
Innovations in Religion and Divine Worship: Which were adjudged so enormous and
flagitious, that they were used kindly if they came off with their Ears cropped,
their Noses slit, their Cheeks burnt, and stigmatized with an hot Iron: As
appears by the Epistle to the King from the Arch bishop of Cant. on whom all
their Severities were fathered. [ I shall rather (says he) magnify your
Clemency that proceeded with those Offenders, Burton, Bastwick and Prin in a
Court of Mercy as well as Justice.] It being the Opinion of some of their
Judges, that their Lives might have been exacted for their Offenses: And the
Reason the Archbishop gave was, because their malignant Principles were
introductive of a Parity in the Church and State. Heylin also would be thought
to make it appear, that they deserved Death. Moderat. Answ. p. 187. which is
agreeable to a Passage I have met with in a nameless Author, or Tract, though
revised and published by public Authority in Scotland. Sundry of our prime
Lords and Earls did present a Supplication to our King after his Coronation (in
Scotland I suppose) wherein the Matter of the greatest Complaint, was so far as
ever we heard, their challenging the Bishops with what they had done, or were
likely to do. The Copy of this privy Supplication being privily conveyed by an
unfriend some two or three Years after out of my Lord of Balmarinoch's Study or
Chamber, was a Ditty, for which he was condemned to die for an Example to all
other Noblemen to beware of the like rashness, especially his fellow
Supplicants, who are all declared to have deserved by that fault the same
Sentence of Death: And the Sense the King had of it, is expressed in the King's
large Declarat. p. 13. viz. We were graciously pleased that the Fear and
Example might teach all by the Punishment only of one of them to pass by many,
who undoubtedly had been included and involved by our Laws in the same Sentence
if we had proceeded against them. Large Declarat. p. 13.
Such was the Power and Influence they had with a Prince who was so great a
Votary to the Innovators in Religion, as to venture his Crown, yea and lose it
too in their quarrel.

But Death had been a favor to some of those Punishments which were inflicted
upon this score; as may be seen in the Relation of one single Instance among
others, of which Mr. Huntly in his Breviat gives us an account (if true) viz.
[Of a poor Devonshire Minister, Mr. John Heyden, who in a Sermon preached at
Norwich let fall some Passages against setting up of Images, and bowing at the
Name of Jesus, was apprehended like a Traitor, with the Constables Bills and
Halberts, and brought before Dr. Harsnet then Bishop, manacled like a Felon,
and committed by him close Prisoner to the common Goal above thirteen Weeks,
where he was like to starve, the Bishop having taken from him his Horse,
Papers, etc. from whence by a Pursuivant he was conveyed to London, and kept
two full Terms: At last by the high Commission he was deprived of his Orders.
Thereafter the high Commissioners imprisoned him in the Gate House common
Dungeon, and Canterbury sent him to be whipped in the common Bridewel, and then
kept him all the long extreme cold Winter, in a dark cold Dungeon, without Fire
or Candle, chained to a Post in the midst of the Room, with heavy Irons on his
Hands and Feet, allowing him only Bread and Water, with a Pad of Straw to lie
upon; and since on his relief has caused him to take an Oath, and give Bond to
Preach no more, and to depart the Kingdom in three Weeks, without returning;
which latter part of his Punishment being for Preaching after his first
deprivation, though no exception was taken at his Doctrine.] If these things be
true as they stand related in a Book Revised and Published by an Ordinance of a
general Assembly in Scotland. It is high time to break off our past Sins by a
speedy Repentance, and to redeem our former Severities by acts of Kindness and
Compassion toward our oppressed and complaining Brethren.

By whom the Seeds of Arbitrary Government have been sown.
NOR has the Zeal and Bigottry for the controverted Ceremonies been only a
Nuisance in the Church, and pestred the Consciences of Men; but have also
occasioned very great Mischiefs and Distractions in the State. For when Men of
this Stamp had once gained the Prince on their side, and to espouse their
Interest, they have endeavored to requite him, by ascribing to him an absolute
Power, and illimited Authority over the Subject; (Though in the late Reign,
none winched sooner nor kicked higher at it, when they themselves began to feel
the dint of it) overthrowing our Politic Constitution, and best tempered
Government under Heaven, that they might erect the Throne to an immensurable
height. Hence it was, that the Original of Sovereign Dominion was taught not to
be ex Pacto, but jure Divino. That Non Resistance and Passive-Obedience were
the only Orthodox and Catholic Doctrines, so long as they imagined it would
never come to their own turn to practice them: Sing^lis adempta est adversus
principem quae naturalis dicitur juris defensio seu injuriae dipulsio. Johan
Wemius, p. 21.
That the very Law of Nature, and of Self-preservation is a Crime in that case:
Dr. Sherlock in his Case of Resistance of the Supreme Powers, etc. Determines
thus, That as well Inferior Magistrates as others employed by a Popish or
Tyrannical Prince in the most illegal and outrageous Acts of Violence, such as
cutting Throats or the like, are as irresistible as the Prince himself
supposing they act by his Authority, and must be submitted to under pain of
eternal Damnation, etc.
But perhaps as one lately was convinced by the sight of Bishop Overal's Book,
so they might be by Bilson's of subjection, p. 520. His Words are these; [
Neither will I rashly pronounce all that resist to be Rebels; Cases may fall
out even in Christian Kingdoms, where People may plead their Right against the
Prince, and not be charged with Rebellion: As for Example, If a Prince should
go about to subject his Kingdom to a Foreign Realm, or change the Form of the
Commonwealth from Impery to Tyranny, or neglect the Laws established by common
Consent of Prince and People, to execute his own Pleasure; in those and other
Cases which might be named, if the Nobles and Commons join together to defend
their ancient and accustomed Liberty, Regiment and Laws, they may not well be
accounted Rebels. Ibid. By Supreme Powers ordained of God, we do not mean the
Prince's private Will against his Laws, but his Precepts derived from his Laws,
and agreeing with his Laws, which though it be wicked, yet may not be resisted
by any Subject with Violence armed: But when Princes offer no Justice to their
Subjects but violence, and despise all Laws to practice their Lusts, not any
private Man may take the Sword to redress the Prince; but if the Laws of the
Land appoint the Nobles as next to the King to assist him in doing right, and
withold him from doing wrong; then be they Licensed by Man's Law, and not
prohibited by God's Law, for to interpose themselves for the Safeguard of
Equity and Innocence.] Much more I could transcribe if it were necessary: Only
this he further says, That he never denied, that the People might preserve the
Foundation, Freedom and Form of their Commonwealth, which they fore-prized when
they first consented to have a King.

This Book was Printed, 1585. perused and allowed by public Authority: But
such have been the Spirits and Tempers of some Men, that if a Prince would
suffer his Power and Authority to be used by them to work their own Wills and
impose (what they think fit to injoin) upon their fellow Brethren, they will give
him more than ever he could expect, or dream of: And no wonder whilst they take
it for granted, that what they give him, is as good as their own, and to be
managed by them to make themselves arbitrary and great. Was it not an hard case
for those Earls and Noblemen abovesaid to be accounted guilty of a capital
Crime, for presenting their Petition for a redress of Grievances? Nor was it
much better with us when the late Abhorrences were in fashion, by which they
had so far decried, that reasonable and undoubted liberty of the Subject; which
the late King believing, and that the Sauce for a Goose might serve for a
Gander too, took the advantage of imprisoning and impeaching the Seven Bishops
for a modest and humble Representation of their Grievances, which by the Law of
the Land they were sufficiently vouched to do. But Laws it seems are Fetters
which no Princes must be entangled with, if our Hyperconformists Divinity be
good.

[ What Spirit leads you, says Heylin, that you are grieved with illimited
Power, Mother. Answ. p. 28, 32.
which Men of better Understanding than you have given to Princes? Princes are
God's Deputies of whom should they be limited? If you say by the Laws of the
Land, those themselves have made. A Prince in abstract is above the Laws,
though in Concreto, a just Prince will not break the Laws which himself has
promised to observe, otherwise we say of Princes, Principi lex non est posita.
That they do not only govern by the Law, but are above it, that he is sure and
has an absolute Authority.] Which the late King in his Declarations sent into
Scotland so frequently mentions. The same Heylin.
Author avers that as its a kind of Atheism to dispute, Pro and Con what God
can do, and what he cannot; so it is a kind of Disobedience, and Disloyalty to
determine what a King can, and what he cannot. Supposed to be Dr. Lesly, Bishop
of Do^n and Conor.
Lysimmachus, p. 3. says, That Princes being God's Legislators are Thomas de
Corsellis was of another mind in his Argument against the Supremacy of the Pope
in the Council of Basil, Neque hic (inquit ille) ^os audis qui tam latam
regibus attribuunt potestatem, ut eos teneri legibus nul^a tenus velint,
Aeneas, Sylv. de gest. Con. Basil.
above their Laws, and dispense with them as they think expedient. A Prince is
not bound to his own Laws because no Man can impose a Law upon himself. Out of
which kind of State Divinity our late Dispensing Power did arise and spring.
Wemius de primatu regis, p. 39. is of the same Mind. Audemus dicere reges supra
leges esse iisque solutos nemo enim sibi legislator. And the better to justify
this, they exclude Parliaments from having any decisive Voice, or legislative
Power, though they may have a deliberative, when the King thinks fit to call
them. Legum latio (says the same Author) praecipuum est supremae dominationis
and Majestatis caput and legum Ecclesiasticarum Principes latores sunt, nec
differant a civilibus Ecclesiastica, ratione causae efficientis. p. 59. That
is, Princes are makers of Ecclesiastical Laws, which are the same with civil
Sanctions in respect of the efficient Cause. Potestatem in Ecclesiasticis (...)
posse a Principibus jure suo extra concilia exerceri. But when they are called
he allows them only a consultive Voice, Consultivam habent vocem, tanquam juris
divini consulti, definitivam Princeps, p. 89. Nor are Parliaments more
necessary to the making Laws in the State, than Synods in Matters of the
Church, according to the same Author's Opinion; who account the Prince's
calling them only a piece of Modesty, to advise with them and hear their
Opinions, not that their Consent or Authority were necessary to the making
Laws. Neque vero putandum est quia s^let rex ex modesta and prudenti virium
suacum diffidentia non nisi de ordinum consensu leges far, absolutam ei
imp^ni ejusque successoribus necessitatem illorum obtinendi consensus, ac si
nullo modo its liceret per se sine eorundem suffragiis bonas edere
constitutiones. De jure in omnes leges feren ^o sine omnium consensu stature
potest, p. 17. Heylin's Antid. p. 6.
In Heylin's Antid. we read to the same purpose, p. 66. Quodcunque imperator
per Epistolam constituit, vel Cognoscens decrevit legem esse constat. That
whatever the King by Proclamation or Letters shall appoint, that is Law. Cum
Imperatore Justiniano dicendum videtur explosis ridiculosis ambiguitatibus,
verum conditorem, and interpretem legum esse solum Principem. Et legem
Legislatoris non consiliarii esse, non ex vi consensus and consilii habiti, sed
ex regia legislatoris vi obligantem. Wemius, page 19. That is, the obliging
Power of the Law is not from any Counsel or Consent given, viz. [by his
Parliament] but by the Royal Power or Virtue of the Law giver. Whence he
concludes, that the King is the only Maker and Interpreter of Laws, and that
the Obligation arises from the Legislative Authority of the Prince, and not
the Consultive Power of his Parliament. In In an absolute Monarchy this
Proposition may be true; but in a Monarchical Government, viz. (in England)
where the Constitution and Contract is otherwise, it is very false.
Monarchia, regis sola voluntas de substantia legis est. Praevia populi
consultatio est utilis immo utilissima, necessaria tamen non est. To consult
the People in making Laws may be useful, but it is not necessary.

But supposing the Parliament had any Legislative Power, or that to the
enacting of Laws the Consent of Lords and Commons were requisite; the same
King's Man does declare him to have Power to nominate, whom the People shall
choose, and by a Congio d' Elire name whom they shall send, and appoint whom he
shall judge most fit for the Members of that great Assembly, p. 23. Baronum and
civiam ad Comitia delegatos, non ita absolute a Baronum and civium delectu
pendere volumus, ut non possit rex, quos ille maxim Idoneos censuerit
delegendos nominare, presertim cum pro legibus ferendis, iisque quae
administrationis sunt publicae statuendis Comitia indicia sunt. That is, when
the King has new Laws to enact, and Matters of public concern to be treated
on, he may (that is the King) name the Persons whom he shall judge most fit to
sit in Parliament: But when they are convened, the King has no need of their
Consent according to these State Divines to levy Taxes, or raise Subsidies,
seeing the King has a sufficient Right and Power in himself to dispose of the
Subjects Goods, as he shall judge fit, so Weems affirms, Omnia (says he) quae
in regno sunt fatemur regis esse, id est qua paternus regni dominus, adeoque
quae postulat ipsius qua rex est, aut publica regni conditio posse regem de
singulorum bonis disponere, p. 19. Bishop Montague also was of the same Mind as
we observe, Orig. p. 320. O. lg. p. 320.
Omni lege divina naturali vel Politica licite semper reges and Principes suis
subditis tributa imposuerunt and licite Coegerunt, tum ad Patriae and
reipublicae defensionem, tum ad ipsorum and bonestam familiae pr^curationem,
hanc doctrinam accurate tuetur Ecclesia Anglicana, etc. But that the King could
levy Money of the Subjects without the consent of Lord's and Commons, and
Authority of the same, is not the Judgment of the present Church of England:
Although though this has been the cry of some former high Churchmen, who to
tickle the King's Ear, and fawn themselves into Preferment have preached up the
same Doctrine upon the strickest Penalties. Thus Dr. Manwarring out of the
Pulpit, for the Edification of the Court, I suppose, more than the People,
L'Estrang's Annals, p. 84.
did declare, That the King without common consent in Parliament could by his
Command, so far bind the Subject in Conscience to pay Taxes and Loans, that
they cannot refuse payment of them without peril of eternal Damnation. And that
the Authority of Parliament was not necessary to raise Aids and Subsidies.

But how mischievous such extravagant Insinuations and Councels proved both to
Church and State, the ensuing Miseries were too evident and undeniable
Arguments: Nor did the Authors and contrivers of them succeed any thing better
than others who fell under the dint of them. Malum enim Consilium consultori
pessimum: For whilst they thought to oblige and espouse the Sovereign Power to
their Interest, viz. To press and push on those Innovations in Religion, which
they had advised his Majesty were orderly and decent in the Church, and to urge
the established Conformity (very offensive to tender Consciences) with the
utmost Rigor; nay in two several Reigns they Councelled and procured Edicts, to
legitimate the Violation of the Sabbath Day by Sports and Pastimes, several of
them fell under the Dint and Censures of the Civil Power, feeling the Effects,
and unhappy Influence of those Convulsions, they had occasioned in the Bodies
Ecclesiastic and Politic, by regrating too far upon the Humors: I mean the
Liberties of the Subject, both as Christians and Men. Have we not reason then
to plead for an allay, and temper of such Matters as are apt to occasion so
dangerous a Ferment both in Church and State?

But I cannot conclude here, seeing by these wild and extravagant Notions
concerning Royal Power, I have been led aside, and my Pen dipped in this
Argument; especially considering those vile and virulent Reflections made upon
our late Revolution, counting all no better than Rebels and Traitors who
willingly offered themselves to rescue our Liberties and Religion from Popery
and Arbitrary Government: Nay the most that can be allowed our King (by such as
pretend upon second thoughts to be proselyted to his Service) is, that he must
be acknowledged so rather of fact, than right. But if what has been already
said be not sufficient to vouch the Endeavors of the People in preserving the
Fundamental Constitutions of the Commonwealth, their Lives and Religion; when
they are in eminent and apparent hazard, I shall fetch an Argument from a Royal
Topic, which I think may serve much to vindicate our late Transactions. Had
Queen Elizabeth, King James, King Charles judged the Defense which the
Protestants made in France, Flanders, Germany etc. of their Lives, Religion and
Liberties against the Kings of France, Spain and Emperor, an unjustifiable
Rebellion, they would never have assisted them, with Men and Money, Arms and
Ammunition for their redress, and rescue from those who by their Sovereign (but
ill managed) Power had so far rent and ravished them out of their Hands. By
which Assistances and Supports, they though Princes themselves did not only
approve their Undertakings in particular; but allow and vindicate the like
Practices in parallel Cases in general.

But if the Doctrine of Non-Resistance be true in the Sense it has been
preached: Neither Peers nor People, Lords nor Commons must wag an Hand, move a
Foot, but stand still and see the Salvation of God. Let the Pillars of the
Church be rifled, the Foundations of Civil and Ecclesiastical Polity raced, and
destroyed, the original Contract of Government dissolved, nothing is to be done
but to depend upon Providence, expecting a Miracle to be wrought for our
deliverance. Every act of our own in order to that end being adjudged
Rebellion. Were the Knife at our Throat according to the Rules of
Passive-Obedience, we must not put it by, if an Angel from Heaven appears not
to our rescue. But never did Men make worse use of a Doctrine they had so
stiffly maintained, when it came to their own turn to practice it.

They proved indeed Passive in their Obedience to the Commands of the late
King, few or none of them being very active to obey him in the time of his
distress; or to make use of the Doctrine of Non-Resistance, but with respect to
the Design of the P. of O. so that if we may be guided by what they did, and
not what they said, we have enough to justify not only our present
Constitution, but late Revolution also. But I think we have much better
Authority than this to allege. Quarto ait idem Barclaius amitti regnum si rex
vere hostili animo in totius populi exitium feratur, quo concedo, says
Grotius, Lib. 2. Cass. 4to. do jure belli and poc.
Hear what Barclay says, to which Grotius assents. Scharphius, Symph. Prophet.
and Ap^^^. tells us, Vel is de quo agitur talis est, qui Monarchiam ^^idem
Supremam habet, sed certis Conditionibus limitatam in quas jurarit; Est penes
status ordines aut primores regni tyrannidem grassantem coercere, sunt enim
subditorum officia duplicia alia ordinaria pro ratione loci temporis vocationis
in republ. Alia extra-ordinaria secundum circumstantias varias, quae nulla
certa lege possunt definiri. Hac excepta quod saluti reipub. semper studendum
sit. Quaest. 45. Cicero says it is certain that there was a time when the
People had no Kings, but afterward when Lands Possessions came to be divided
there were Kings ordained for no other case but only to exercise Justice, etc.
Not only the People but also the King to be subject to the Laws, etc. If a King
contemn and despise the Laws, violently rob and spoil his Subjects, deflower
Virgins, dishonest Matrons, and do all things licentiously and temerariously,
do not the Nobles of the Kingdom assemble together deposing him from his
Kingdom, set up another in his place which shall swear to govern uprightly and
be obedient to the Laws. Fox, Acts and Monuments, p. 762. Ed. 1684.


The Substance of which is, that he who has Sovereign Power or Authority, but
limited by certain Rules or Conditions, which he has sworn to observe; If such
an one shall become a Tyrant, it is in the Power of the States and Peers of the
Realm to restrain him; for, says he, the Office of the Subject is twofold,
ordinary in respect to Time, Place, and Employment they have in the
Commonwealth, the other extraordinary, which is to be exercised according to
the Circumstances of Affairs, which can be bound by no certain Rule, except
that of the public Safety, which must ever be consulted for, and which Lib. de
repub. Quo fit ut leges non solum populum sed reges etiam obligare sciamus at
si regem contemnere leges Raperebona subditorum, violare Virgins, stuprare
matronas, omniaque suae libidini and temeritati committere vidiamus, numquid
Congregatis regni proceribus illo summot^ alius sublimabitur, qui and been
gubernare juret, and legibus obtemperare Aen. Sylv. de gestis Con. Basili.
Bodin calls Suprema lex. But if Monarchy be absolute and under no
Restrictions, we must then patiently suffer the most unjust Exercise of Power,
there being no other appeal but only to the Divine Tribunal. Thus Daniel paid
Allegiance to Nebuchadnezzar, and our Savior to the Roman Emperor. Pareus de
potestate civili. Propos. Prima says, Episcopi and pastores, magistratibus
suis impiis aut injustis possunt ac debent resistere, non vi ant gladio sed
verbo dei. That is, Bishops and Pastors must not resist evil Magistrates by
force, or by the Sword, but by the Word; in which he speaks honestly, for the
Weapons of our Warfare are not carnal but spiritual.

In his second Proposition, he says. Subditi non privati sed in magistratu
inferiori constituti, adversus Superiorem magistratum, se and rempub. and
Ecclesiam seu veram Religionem etiam armis defendere jure possunt, etc. That
is, not private Subjects, but such as are placed in an inferior Order of
Magistracy, may by force of Arms defend themselves and the Commonwealth, the
Church, or the true Religion, without the Breach of any Law. Supposing the
Supreme Magistrate be degenerated into a Tyrant, an Idolater, and is become
highly oppressing of the People, provided they act sincerely, and for the
public good; because he says Princes are bound by their own Laws. Imperator
testatur incodice se contra jus nolle, ut sua decreta injudiciis locum habeant,
sed debere Irrita fieri, si fortasse cognoscantur a justitia discedere, etc.
Lib. 4. Cod. de leg. Prin. Adeo digna est vox Majestate regnantis, legibus
alligatum se Principem profiteri. That all his Commands contrary to Law were
void, and that it was a Saying becoming the Majesty of a Governor, that a
Prince is bound by Law.

Trajan was commended by Dion, who giving the Sword to the Praetor, used these
words, (...). That is, take this Sword if I rule well, use it for me, if ill,
against me.

But as to private Persons he says, Moriendum potius quam resistendum: Yet for
several Reasons I cannot take his Words in the Sense which that excellent and
learned Person D. Fabritius would put upon them, restraining his Meaning to the
Princes of the Empire, who are Sovereign Princes, and invested with Royal
Power: It never being a question whether such had Authority for the
Preservation of their Rights, and redress of Injuries to levy War against
another Prince, though in some respects greater than themselves. But if in no
case the Nobility and Commonalty of a Nation may interpose to prevent the
imminent Ruin of the Church and State, it would be very difficult to vindicate
the late Revolution (as is already hinted) from those severe Imputations by
such as have very little good will to our Sion cast upon it.

I shall not in so great a case interpose mine own Judgment, it being easy to
prick our Fingers in such a Thorny question: Yet I may say, if any for the
breaking of their Yoke have ascribed too much to the Though the Bishop of
Burgen to prove the Church above the Pope, argued from an unexpected Topic,
endeavoring to prove the Body of the Kingdom to be above the King: To which
Tho. Corsellis agreed, Adductoque intestem summo omnium Philosophorum
Aristotele, dicebat in omni regno been instituto, illud in primis desiderari ut
plus regnum posset quam rex: Si contra reperiretur, id non regnum, sed
tyrannidem dici debere. Aen. Sylv. degest. Con. Basil.
People, granting them too great a Liberty of contesting their Rights with
their Sovereigns; others in hopes to espouse Princes to their Interest in
grieving and oppressing their Dissenting Brethren, have beyond measure fawned
upon and flattered them, till they nursed up the best tempered Monarchy upon
Earth, into an intolerable and tyrannick Exercise of Regal Power.

But this is a digression which by pursuing the Extravagancies of some Men's
Opinions I have been led: In which if I proceed a little further (being once
out of the way) I must beg the Readers Patience and Pardon.

For having perused the Case of Allegiance due to Sovereign Princes (by W. S.)
I could not but with very much regret observe, that in the whole drift of that
Discourse we can find little, or none other Argument to enforce our Allegiance
to King William, etc. than what would bespeak it, for the greatest Usurper, and
Intruder who has had the good Fortune to gain an actual Possession of the
Crown; which looks (to say no worse) very ungratefully upon him, whom the Lords
Spiritual and Temporal invited over, and who by the universal Consent, and
applause of the People, declared by their Representatives in Parliament, was
invested with the Royal Government, and to whom we owe next to the Divine
Providence, all that is dear to us. To reflect then so unworthily upon him, as
if he were no better than one who usurps the Government, and that has no
further Right to the Kingdom then what Power, Possession and Success can convey
to him; seems no way reconcilable to Duty, or good Manners.

This Author in his Preface tells us, that he never did any thing to cause the
World to take him for dishonest, or a Fool: As to the first, I am very loath to
call a Man a Knave without great Grounds for it, especially a Minister, upon
whose Personal Reputation much of the Success of his Ministry depends.
Conscience I know is a tender thing, and more especially ought so to be in the
case of an Oath. I will suppose that he acted sincerely in his Refusal, and out
of tenderness to the Faith he had plighted to his former Sovereign, and I hope
he has not acted upon any worse Principle in swearing Allegiance to the
present Powers, and that he has not the Person of his Prince in admiration
because of advantage: For many considering the nature of his Argument do think
it may justly defeat his expectation of a Bishopric if he had any such. (...).


As for the latter, I mean his Wisdom, something is to be said for that too;
for he who upon the Matter challenges an whole Party of Men to try their Skill
with him, had need have his Wits about him. I find his Wit was once commended
for refusing to give an Answer to Antisozzo, and the Reason which himself gave
for it was, because he would not make the Dispute a trial of Wit: But he has
given a fresher Argument still than this, viz. That he wrote his Case of
Allegiance under a just and moderate Prince, who notwithstanding the smartest
Reflections upon him, being satisfied with the Testimony of a good Conscience
and sincerity of his Designs; did as Saul when they said this Man shall not
reign over us, and brought him no presents, yet he held his peace. Had he lived
in a Reign when Men suffered by Innuendo's, he might have found it much harder
to have defended himself against an Impeachment, for his Crime against the
State; than his too late Submission to the present Government.

The Crowns of Princes are heavy enough of themselves without the exceeding
weight and guilt of Usurpation, or Intrusion into another's Right being added
to them. King William would pay dear for his Kingdom to purchase it at the
price of a good Conscience, and loss of a far better Inheritance; and the
Providence of God placing him upon the Throne will prove no very good Plea for
holding the Possession of it, against the just Claim and civil Right of
another: For though the Providence of God may, make use of the unjust Actions
of one to punish justly the Sin of another; yet the Injustice and Violence of
such dealings can no way be excused by the disposal of an overruling
Providence, directing bad Actions to work a good End. If a Person stronger than
I by virtue of his Power or Interest take away my Goods, God by such means may
punish me perhaps for my Sins, yet it will be a very insufficient Plea on his
part, before God, or hi^ own Conscience: For those whom the Lord has made use
of, as the Rods of his Anger, he has afterward cast into the Fire,
notwithstanding they have effected his Will upon others who have sinned against
him, and whom he has justly punished by such means for their offenses: And
therefore it will be worth the inquiry whether our King be so only de facto or
de jure; for if he wants a civil Right, his Possession will not make his Chair
of State easy be it never so august or great, nor quiet his Conscience, and
Kings have Consciences as well as other Men: For though he accounted not his
Life dear to him, nor too much to hazard for the rescuing our Life's and
Properties; yet to purchase them with the loss of that which is of more worth
than the whole World, and all the Kingdoms of it, and to live and die in mortal
Sin for our sakes, would be too costly a Ransom.

That one Sovereign Prince may levy War against another, Quot actionum
forensium sunt fontes totidem sunt belli.
where Matters in Controversy can be no other ways determined is I am sure
(though I be no Lawyer) agreeable to the Law of Jure gentium (inquit Livius)
ita comparatum est ut arma armis propulsentur. Et Florentinus jus esse gentium
ait, ut vim atque injuriam propulsemus. Vim vi repellere licere Cassius
scribit. Apud Vlpianum idque natura comparatum esse viserit. See Grotius de
jure Bell. and pac. Lib. 1. Cap. 2.
Nations, and Nature too: That being the last Appeal to him who is the Judge of
all the Earth, imploring him to determine the Question, and to give Victory and
Success according to the Merits of the Cause: That the Prince of Orange was a
Sovereign Prince is no question, who by the pretended Birth of a Prince of
Wales was barred of his right of Succession, an Heir apparent being set up in
room of the Presumptive. This it is well known was the subject Matter of various
Discourses, and the common Entertainment wherever we came, the usual Question
that was started being De foetu formato; Which in every corner of the Nation
was lampooned and ridiculed as a Court-stratagem for ever to extirpate Heresy,
and to settle the Romish Faith in these Kingdoms to all Generations: As this
made many Infidels at home, so it created Unbelievers abroad.

The Queen when the days were accomplished that she should bring forth, was
delivered, or pretended to be delivered of a Son; by which all the Expectations
of the P. of O. to succeed in the Government must consequentially miscarry, as
also the Peoples hopes of securing their Religion in the next Reign became
wholly abortive. The Prince judging the Crown of England worth a Trial, who
being encouraged by the Equity of his Cause, and Invitation of the Lords
Spiritual and Temporal made a Descent upon England, not with any design of
Conquest (witness the small Numbers he had levied to attend him) but that a
Parliament might be called, and the Matters in question (without any Blood
shed) not only relating to himself, but the People too, who at one Heat were by
the Dispensing Power despoiled of their ancient Liberties, and reduced to the
greatest Slavery, yea the best, and most equitable Constitution under Heaven
sunk into an Arbitrary and mere Despotick Rule and Government: But to forestal
the Prince, and foreclose him as to any Examination in Parliament, Witnesses
were called, Affidavits were made to prove the Birth of the P. of Wales: But
what were the Witnesses? But either Court-Officers and Dependants, professed
Papists, feigned Protestants, whose Evidences filled a Paper with such stuff as
would sooner turn a Man's Stomach that his Faith: For many think that if fair
dealing had been designed, Proxies would have been allowed at the choice of the
two next Princesses of the Blood, and Heirs to the Crown to have been present
at the Labor, who might (if what is pretended were true) have averred upon
Oath, that they saw the Queen delivered of this Son, by which that long and
fulsom Affidavit might have been spared, the Nation satisfied in the Belief of
the Truth, all future Claims and Pretenses to the Crown annulled and quasht,
which their own Interest if no other Argument might have prevailed with the
Court to have condescended to: And when this be answered, I Will believe as the
then Rampant Roman Faction would have me believe. But things of so great
concern being every where questioned and disputed, one would have thought, that
if the P. of O. had asked a greater thing then to have a Parliament freely
called to have sit upon, and considered these weighty Affairs, it would not
have been denied by the late King as a thing unreasonable; who at last
condescending, Writs were issued, some Members chosen: Vbi judicia deficiunt
ibi incipit bellum. Grot. de jure Bell. and pac. Lib. 2. Cap. 1.
But all of a sudden those which were not yet issued were suppressed, those sent
abroad superseded, and the Parliament in its birth annulled and stifled; the
Broad-Seal of England he vilely cast away into the Thames, and at last betaking
himself to Si rex aut alius quis imperium abdicavit, ant ma ifeste habet pro
derelicto in ^um post id tempus omnia licent que in privatum. Id^m. Lib. 1.
Cap. 4.
flight turned his Back upon the Nation, leaving it without any Provision for
its Government to shift as well as it could for it self.



O. to come to London, and the King himself had invited him to St. James's, it
could not be thought safe for the King to continue at Whitehall, lest any
justle betwixt the Guards might occasion Bloodshed, and hazard his Person;
wherefore he was desired to withdraw to Ham-house, or any other place he should
choose: But finding the Fire he had kindled had made the Nation too hot for
him, he deserted and fled into France: But he that has raised a Storm, cut off
the chief The Parliament.
Anchor which should secure the Vessel has as little reason to allege his
hazard in defense of his sliting the Vessel, and abdicating his trust to the
Mercy of the Sea, as to blame the Ship's Crew for electing a new Pilot (in the
absence of the former) to manage it in it is danger, and steer it into the
Harbor.

In this great and eminent Conjuncture and Emergency the States of the Realm
assemble to consult Methods, and concert Measures for the public Safety; which
High-Court, beyond which we have no appeal, did upon mature deliberation, great
Debate and weighty Arguments declare, resolve and decree. For this reason the
Crown was settled upon the Prince and Princess of Orange. The Words mentioned in
the Instrument of Setlement are these, viz. [ And whereas the late King James
II. having abdicated the Government, and the Throne being thereby vacant, etc.
Act. 1st. William and Mary.
That the King's leaving of the Realm in such a manner, was an Abdication of
the Kingdom, whereby the Throne was vacated; and consequently the Government
was dissolved: Which Resolution and Judgment was by this present Parliament
confirmed, ratified and recognized in these Words, viz. [ We do recognize and
acknowledge your Majesty's were, are, and of right ought to be, by the Laws of
this Realm, our Sovereign liege Lord and Lady King and Queen of England, etc.]

By Virtue of which repeated Judgment and Decree he is King not only de facto,
but de jure, according to the Laws of our own Country; which Judgment is either
according to Truth or mistaken; if the first, by all Men's Opinions it ought to
be obeyed; but if mistaken, yet we are bound to observe it, and I think may do
it with a good Conscience, because we are no Judges of Law, especially in so
intricate and difficult a Case.

Suppose an Estate be decreed in Chancery to A. when perhaps according to right
it belongs to B. as afterward may appear by a Reverse of that Judgment given
in Parliament upon an Appeal made thither; yet [A.] may lawfully hold the
Possession of the Estate against [B.] till the Decree be reversed; for though
the Decree was not made according to Law, yet according to Law it binds, till
it be corrected by another Judge, or annulled by a Superior Court. Now this
Judgment of Parliament concerning the Abdication of the Realm and Vacancy of
the Throne, though we should suppose it mistaken, yet that Court being Judge of
the Law, we are bound by the Judgment they give, because they and not we are
Judges of such Matters.

Now the Author of the Case of Allegiance does grant, Page 54. That what Prince
we must obey, and to what particular Person we must pay our Allegiance the Law
of God does not tell us, but this we learn from the Laws of the Land: Now the
Law of our Land says, we must pay our Allegiance to King William: So that
according to this Rule he is King of right, as well as of fact. Now his
Question is whether if a King de jure be dispossessed of his Throne, and a King
de facto be possessed of it without a legal Right; to which of these two the
Subjects are bound to pay their Allegiance. But I take this not to be our
present case, for according to the Judgment and Decree of the highest Court of
Judicature the late King Obj. But King James was King de jure. Res. So was
Charles II. but both their Rights are extinct, one being naturally, the other
dead in Law, as is decreed by the highest Court in England. And he that sits
upon the Throne declared by the same to have as good right to the Crown he
wears as his Predecessor, before he gave up the Ghost, I mean his Kingdom to
provide for it self.


is not the King de jure, for this Act of Abdication is declared by our Law not
to be a bare Dispossession of the Throne, but a total Extinguishment of his
Right. And that if he should be ever restored to these Kingdoms again, he must
receive a new Investiture, or else he cannot be King. And whereas he seems to
suppose our King William only to be King de facto, and without legal right
possessed of the Throne, which he has no great reason to thank him for, nor we
to admit, when the Court of Parliament have declared, That the Three Kingdoms,
and all the Dominions thereunto belonging, that the Royal State, Crown and
Dignity of the said Realms, with all Honors, Styles, Titles, Regalities,
Prerogatives, etc. to the same belonging, are most fully, rightfully, and
entirely invested, incorporated, united and annexed in, and to his Princely
Person: So that according to our Laws he is rightful King of England, as well
as de facto, and by Virtue of his Possession and providential Promotion to the
Crown; nay they, See the Act of Recognition.
viz. The Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament did recognize and
acknowledge, that their Majesty's were, are, and of right ought to be by the
Laws of this Realm our Sovereign liege Lord and Lady King and Queen of England,
etc. Now W. S. p. 54. Case of Allegiance makes this demand, viz Is it not,
says he, most reasonable to think that to be the Sense of the Law which
learned Judges and Lawyers have agreed to be the Sense of it? Is it not
reasonable to take that to be the Sense of the Law which has been the Sense of
Westmins^^^-Hall? Let him give me also leave to a^k one Qu^stion; and that is,
Whether that be not the Sense of the Law, which the Judges and Lawyers learned
in the Law have declared in Parliament, nay which in that High Court of
Parliament have been declared to be The Law of Man that is not contrary to the
Law of Reason, nor the Law of God, but that is super-added unto them for better
ordering the Commonwealth, shall rule the Conscience; and he that despises
this Law of Man, despises the Law of God. See Dr. and Stud. Cap. 4. Cap. 19.
Cap. 26. To fill up a vacant Throne is not contrary to the Law of God or
Reason; that our Throne was vacated is declared to be Law, by our highest Court
that we have in England, That a King may abdicate the Realm* Grotius says is
not to be doubted; and Barclay says (cited by Grotius) that if a King shall
aliene his Kingdom, and subject it to a Foreigner, or leave it, or act as an
Enemy to the Destruction of the Community, he loses his Kingdom, di jure
Bell. Lib. 1. Cap. 4.
Law? And that I am sure it was as we have already heard, viz. That King
William is King de jure, and according to the Laws of this Realm, whose
Declaration and Decree will bind the Subject in f^ro Conscientiae, where it is
not contrary to any moral Precept, though they should be mistaken in their
Judgment; which is not to be supposed till a Court of equal Authority (for
there is none Superior) repeal their Act, or reverse their Decree.

J. because they have interposed in that which is no way within the compass or
purview of their Jurisdiction.

England, which though it be convened by the King's Writ, yet needs no special
Commission to empower them to act, that being a Right inherent in them, and by
the original Compact or Custom immemorial inseparable from them.

But suppose there be no King in our Israel, the Master of the Ship fled, the
Waves run high, must the Vessel sink, all that are on board perish lest they
should entrench upon the Prerogative of their Master? Must they not consult
their own safety for fear they should meddle with, or consider the Actions of
their Governor, as being above their Cognizance? Must the Community perish,
and Nation sink in Compliment, to him that has fled from them, and left none
to exercise his Authority over them? Is not the universal Safety the Supreme
Law?

But my last Reply to this Objection is, that the Parliament of England has
not adjudged the Royal Succession, or Title of the Crown a Matter above their
Authority, nor is it beyond the Sphere of their activity. Let us hear what my
Lord Cook says in the 4th. Part of his Institutes, Cap. 1. Of the Powers and
Jurisdiction of Parliament for making Laws, in proceeding by Bill, it is so
transcendant and absolute as it cannot be confined either for Causes or Persons
within any bounds. Of this Court it is truly said, Si antiquitatem spectes est
vetusatissima, si dignitatem est honoratissima, si jurisdictionem est
capacissima. Huic ego nec metas rerum nec tempora pono. Virg. of which we have
diverse eminent Instances to induce. In the 8th. of Hen. 4. as my Lord Cook
has it, Instit. Part. 4. Cap. 1. But I find it rather in the 7th. of Hen. 4.
Cap. 2. the Succession of the Crown was intailed to Hen. 4. Was not the Crown
settled upon Hen. 7. by Act of Parliament, and upon his Heirs before his
Marriage with Elizabeth, eldest Daughter and Heir of Edw. 4. of the House of
York, notwithstanding the Judgment formerly given in Parliament (as we are
about to take notice of) for establishing the Title of the Crown in that
Family, Cook's Institutes, Part 4. Cap. 1. Many more Examples may be given to
prove, that the Title and Succession of the Crown is not a thing beyond the
Notice and Authority of Parliament to intermeddle with: But he who desires a
more particular Information, let him consult these Statutes, 25 Hen. 8.22. 28
Hen. 8.7. 35 Hen. 8.1. 1 Eliz. 3. 1 Jac. 1. Yet give me leave to mention one
Case which happened in the Reign of Hen. 6. whose Crown whilst it was upon his
Head was challenged by Richard, Duke of York, whose Claim was received and Plea
heard in Parliament: The Council alleged many and great Arguments in defense
of the King's Title; too many here to be inserted, but that high Court, upon a
full Hearing on both sides, gave Judgment for the Duke of York against the
King, though in actual Possession of the Government, in these Words, [ That
Hen. 6. should reign during his Life, the remainder to rest in Richard, Duke of
York, and the lawful Heirs of his Body in general Tail, King Henry 's Heirs to
be excluded.] By which Judgment the King's Title was condemned, and the Crown
translated from the House of Lancaster to York; in which Line it continued till
The best Title says my Lord Cook of Hen. 7. to the Crown was by Elizabeth his
Wife, eldest Daughter of Edw. 4 yet before his Marriage the Crown was by Act of
Parliament intailed to Hen. 7 and to the Heirs of his Body, the Right of the
Crown then being in the said Elizabeth, eldest Daughter of Edw. 4. Instit. 4.
Part, page 37.
Hen. 7. who marrying the Heir of that House, the Families were united, and
that fatal Controversy effectually ended.

But all this may perhaps be thought not only too great a D^scent, and
Deviation from our first Undertaking, but also too un^haritable a Reflection
upon a Person, who (it may be) not only acted sincerely, and according to the
Dictates of his Conscience in refusing, but likewise has observed the same
Measures in submitting, to swear Allegiance to K. William: As to the first, I
know that Church and State are like the Body and the Soul, very distinct and
different in the Nature of them; yet do very much affect and influence the
Affairs, and Concerns of each other. That an absolute and illimited Power in
the State have been planted and watered by the Principles and Practices of our
great Sticklers for Hyper-conformity, and Innovations in Religion, has been
already proved, by what they have transmitted to the World from the Press and
Pulpit. For whilst the Wind of Law has been too scant for them to maintain
their course in Ecclesiastical Matters, they have endeavored to tide it up by
the Fluxes of Prerogative, giving the same Advice that was once the Opinion of
the Flatterers of Cyrus. That though what he did was not justifiable by Law,
yet the Kings of Persia might to what they pleased.

As for the latter, I thank God, I was never troubled with the overflowing of
the Gall: It being a thing always contrary to my Inclination, to have any Man
exposed to the Censure of the Civil or Ecclesiastical Magistrate, when any
other Measures can be taken to prevent the Mischief of his Error: And if our
Consciences do not accuse us, then may we have confidence toward God, and
toward Man too: Though I could have wished the Author's Justification had been
maintained from some other Medium, than that its lawful to swear Allegiance or
Fidelity to a King de facto, though he may want a civil Right to the
Establishment of his Throne: And for such who out of mere Conscience to their
former Oath, cannot do so much, I wish them (Salvo juri regni) as much
Indulgence as I could desire for those whose Consciences are gauled (though the
Cases be vastly different) by the Yoke of Conformity in Matters of Religion. To
persuade which I can urge no better Arguments than what Charles II. alleges to
this purpose, and with which I shall conclude, viz. [We do conjure all our
loving Subjects to acquiesce and submit to this our Declaration concerning
those Differences which have so much disquieted the Nation at home, and have
given so much offense to the Protestant Churches abroad, and brought so much
Reproach upon the Protestant Religion in general from the Enemies thereof.]

Which are very great Truths, witness the Complaints that have been made by
those of the Reformed Churches without us, viz. Of Calvin, Zanchy, etc. And the
Judgment of the Divines of Transylvania, who have concluded concerning things
of this nature thus, viz. [That if the Observation of indifferent Ceremonies
cannot be maintained without the loss of Christian Charity, those Ceremonies
rather should be laid aside, than Charity violated by maintaining them.] Nor
have the Mischiess which have been occasioned by Differences about these Rites
at home, been a less Evidence of the Truth averred in that Royal Declaration: I
mean the Ruin of many poor Families, Disgrace, Poverty, Enmity and
irreconcilable Hatred, which have been bred and brought forth, by the late
vigorous Prosecution of Dissenters for Conscience sake; stretching the Laws,
straining, nay perverting the Design and Intent of them, that they might be the
better furnished with Weapons of despite. A Spirit which has long since been
complained of to actuate malicious and ill-disposed Men, as may appear by a
Letter, which I have seen as copied out of the Register, written by the Lords
of the Council in the Reign of Q. Eliz. upon the like Subject in these Words;

AFter our hearty Commendations; Whereas we are informed, that heretofore, at
your Assizes in your Circuits diverse good Preachers, and others Godly disposed
have been indicted (by color of Law) for things not so much against the Matter
and Meaning of the Law, as in some show, swerving from the Letter thereof;
namely for not using the Surplice, resorting to Sermons in other places for
want at home, leaving out same Collects on Days of Preaching, for using private
Par^er in their Houses, and such like, all which we suppose came to pass by the
Practice of some Informers not so well disposed in Religion; as also Men
returned upon the great Inquest. Many times such as be still in Ignorance
cannot brook the Gospel, and being in ^eve with the License of former times,
cannot so well endure the present plain Teachers, who by laying open their
Faults would draw to a more precise and Gospel-like Life.

These are therefore to require you, and heartily to pray you, that in every
sitting of your Circuit, you sift and examine the Affection of such Informers
touching Religion, and thereafter give ear to them: As also to have a special
regard, that the Inquest at large may be Religious wise and honest: And if
(notwithstanding) our diligence in such behalf) such Jurors nevertheless creep
in (as by like Information molest good Men) that yet your Speech and whole
Proceedings against them at Bar (or elsewhere before you) may be according to
their Quality, not Matching rather.
watching them at Bar, or in the Indictment with Rogues, Felons or Papists, but
rather giving apparent Note (in the Face of the Country) what difference you
hold betwixt Papists (dissenting from us in the Substance of Faith to God, and
Loyalty to our Prince) and these other Men, which making some Conscience of
these Ceremonies, do yet diligently and soundly Preach true Religion, and
Obedience to her Majesty, maintaining the common Peace in themselves and their
Auditory, so shall the Country thereby learn (at the Assizes) better to
reverence the Gospel, and love the Ministers and Professors thereof. Thus
promising our selves thus much at your Hands, we bid you heartily farewell,

From, etc.

To prevent such Mischiefs, or rather effectually to cure such Distempers for
the time to come. I know no better Remedy then what has been prescribed by
that Physician of very great value: I mean the Project or Proposition of that
incomparable and pious Man Sir Matthew Hale, Lord Chief Justice of the King's
Bench, viz. An Act of Comprehension to enlarge the Communion of the Church, and
make Conformity easy to those that are, or shall come into it, with a limited
and meet Indulgence to those without it; which thing he much labored to
effect, in concurrence with that worthy and honorable Person Sir Orlando
Bridgman, Lord Keeper of the Great Seal: Which he put into the Form of a Bill
to be presented to the Parliament, containing a Comprehension of the moderate
Dissenters; and a limited Indulgence toward such as could not be brought
within the compass of it. The one is done, we'd hope the other shall not be
left undone; sharper Medicines may rake the Patient, seldom cure the Distemper.
The Ancient Fathers thought nothing more against Religion than to force it.
Violence is no good Argument to beget Faith; and is therefore fit for nothing
but to breed Form without, and Atheism within, says Mr. Chilling. He that
bunts his Brother with a Net, (as the Prophet speaks) may catch him, but never
convince him.



Charity is not easily provoked, thinks no evil, bears all things,
believes all things, hops all things, endures all things, 1 Cor. 13.5, 7.

Of the Reformation of Manners.
BUT this is not the only Scene our Reformers have to act in, whilst the
Oportet sacerdotes and Ministros qui altari and sacrificiis deserviunt integros
atque immaculatos esse, Cypr. Epist.
Manners of the Clergy call for a strict Inspection, being by far the greatest
Nuisance in the Church. It Is true, our earnest wish is, that the Grievances of
Conformity might be redrest, that many whose desire it is to worship God in
Spirit and in Truth, may with greater cheerfulness Labor in his Vineyard: Nor
can we with less importunity plead that the grand Mischief of Debauchery,
especially in the Clergy, may be provided against: We may clamber high to pluck
off some withered Branches; but if a Root of Bitterness yet remains, our Church
will be accounted but a degenerate Plant.

There Is Nitre enough in our Discipline, were it duly executed to cleanse our
Garments, and to take out the Spots in our Feasts.

The Church stands in need of sweeping, and its Floor of a through purging, 14
Levit. 39, 41.
but the Walls most eminently want scraping too, to free it from that fretting
Leprosy, which as it has been the blemish, so it will (if not effectually
cured) prove the bane of it. To prevent which, I believe a strict Reformation
of the Universities might do much, for the Sin of those young Men is great: And
had we no better Argument than that of supplanting the Design and Project of
our Romish Enemies (who thought upon this Anvile to hammer out our Ruin) it
were strong enough to recommend the Prescription; were Salt cast into those
Fountains, they would send forth more wholesome Streams, and such as would make
glad the City of our God, giving less trouble to our Governors to correct the
Errors of the first Concoction, for it is hard to take out a Fust which a Vessel
has contracted from so early a Taint. If these Grafts get a Surfeit in the
Nursery, they seldom thrive, when they are planted out into the Church, or
bring forth any Fruit unto Holiness.

These Societies have been very circumspect as to the Mint and Communion of
Religion, minute and nice in the Form of their Devotion; the Men of Athens
being in all things very Ceremonious, whilst their Discipline has been too lax
and loose in punishing Debauchery, or promoting the Practice of Sobriety, and
Power of Religion: But will that Coin be current from the exactness of the
Stamp which is made of embased Metal, and reprobate Silver? How far this
Infection has spread, and from this (though not only) quarter crept into the
Church, especially the Leaders of it, our daily Experience is an Argument which
supersedes all other Proofs, to the Scandal of our Communion, the maintaining
of our Schism, opening the Mouths wide of those which gape for advantage
against us. And though too many of the Dissenters have been unjustly clamorous,
and turned their Backs upon us, where they might have communicated with us; yet
I am confident but Immoralities have been the great drag to which we may
Sacrifice for our Schism, for had we separated the Precious from the Vile, our
Mouth would have been as the Lord's Mouth to them, nor would so many have
separated from us, had we divided from them: Who to atone their
Extravagancies, stickled high for Conformity, and zealously stifled against all
that dissented, fulfilling the Words of the Prophet, 7 Mich. 2, 3.
viz. They bunt every Man his Brother with a Net, that they may do Evil with
both Hands earnestly. It is time then for Judgment to begin at the House of God
(as St. Peter says) for then where shall the Wicked and Ungodly appear? Which
Words struck so deeply that excellent Man Qua non sicut caeteras parts
epistolae in transcursu pervolavi, sed lectionis impetu aliquantulum remorato,
concussam horrore quodam quasi repent suborto mentem in his meam harare coegi,
atque in se altius verba illa tenaciusque defigere, etc. Eccl. Pont. Spec.
Nicholas Clemangis by his occasional reading them, that he forthwith took the
hint, and wrote his Book, De Corrupto Ecclesiae statu. May they so far affect
our Superiors, that they effectually set upon its Reformation.

For let may Right Hand forget its Cunning, if I wish not Prosperity to the
Church of England: My Heart's Desire and Prayer to God for it, is, that it may
be saved from those unreasonable Men on the one hand, whose Designs and
Principles are destructive to Order and Decency: As also from those on the
other, who clamor high for the Form, whilst they deny the Practice and Power
of Godliness, who can defile the Altar, think they commute by an Adoration of
the Gold of it. May Learning and Religion flourish in the Clergy, Holiness in
the Laity, and Reformation from that Formality, Atheism and Debauchery, wherein
it is so dangerously and deeply sunk: May those Rites be laid aside which are
in themselves disputable and doubtful, offensive to the Weak, indifferent to
the Strong, so mischievous and pernicious to the Church, as to be the Hole of
the Pit from whence its Ruin and Destruction were formerly dug. How
bitterly from this Quarter it has been assailed in the most august and
National Assemblies of England, a Cloud of Instances might be induced to prove.
Sir Edward Collection of Speeches.
Dering in the first long Parliament, made use of this Argument against it: His
Words were these; The Character of a Cathedral Corporation is still the same it
was. -- viz. A School for Compliments in Religion, but a Scourge upon the Life
and Practice of it. They have been the Asylum of Superstition, but Scalae
gemoniae for true Piety, etc. This was a very smart Reflection upon those
Societies; but I hope our Superiors will so far take this into their
Consideration, as to render these Orders of Men such as they may become more
servic^able to the Church, less scandalous and offensive to those, who seek
occasion to cast Reproach upon them for the future, and that the Glory of our
Church may not shine forth (...), with outward Pomp and Ostentation, Multa
Ostentatione.
but in a modest, decent, but especially devout Celebration of Divine Worship.
But this is too reachy and nice an Argument to insist much upon, lest in the
Prosecution of it, I incur the Censure of being an Enemy to those regular
Foundations: Though I am persuaded there can be no surer way to ascertain their
Funds than a Reformation of their pompous Service into a more Simple and
Evangelical Form of Religion: As also by subliming them to higher purposes, and
improving them to a far better account, than they ever yet turned to in the
Church. It being hard to take off the ancient Grudge against them, whilst so
deep Revenues run waste, whose Streams might refresh the City of God; nor can I
rationally fall under the Displeasure of any other of the Brethren, seeing the
design of this Plea is only to smooth the ways of Conformity, and to make those
Paths straight, that the Church's Yoke may become more easy, and
burthen-light: And can truly protest in the Words of a great Person, Bellar,
recog.
as to the whole of this Discourse, viz. Scripsi deo test quod verum esse
existimavi non gratiam hominum, vel propriam utilitatem sed dei gloriam and
ecclesiae commodum respiciens. That is, I call God to witness, that what I have
wrote, I account to be truth, not respecting the Favor of Man, or mine own
Advantage, but the Glory of God, and Benefit of the Church.

But if after all, I must receive Evil for Good, I shall not think any new
thing has befallen me; nor will my Case differ from that courteous Man's, who
helping his lame Dog over the Style, was for his kindness bit by the Fingers.
But from what Quarter can we expect the Reformation of a wicked and sinful
World? This no more than Promotion comes from the East, nor from the West, nor
from the South, it is God that pulls down one with his proud and high Looks,
and sets up, or exalts the humble and meek. It Is he that puts a Bridle into the
Mouth, an Hook into the Nostrils of the greatest Leviathans, and bores their
Jaws through with a Thorn: Nay he can change the most ungovernable Tempers,
and unruly Dispositions of Men. He it is that makes the Lion to lie down with
the Lamb, eat Straw like the Ox: He can say to the most proud and rampant Waves
of Wickedness, hitherto shall ye go and no further.

But why then does not Righteousness cover the Land as the Waters cover the
Sea? Righteous art thou, Oh Lord, says the Prophet, yet let me argue with thee
concerning thy Judgments; Why does the way of the Wicked prosper? Were it not
more for God's Honor to have Religion flourish over the Face of the whole
Earth, and profaneness to have no place to flee to, or fix the Sole of its
Foot upon?

This indeed is a thing too deep for us, a Phenomenon we scarce know how to
solve. Were it not better that the false and lying Tongue were destroyed, and
Perjury plucked up by the Roots, by which Justice and Truth have been perverted,
guiltless Persons murdered, and innocent Blood spilt like Water upon the
Ground? Is it not strange to observe in the Reformation of Religion, there
should be so great a Sally out of Darkness into mavelous Light, upon the
first dwaning of that day; and that notwithstanding the Prayers and Tears of
such as have oppressed tender Consciences, the utmost Endeavors of many wise
and learned Fathers of the Church, it could not for more than this hundred
Years be carried on one step further toward Perfection?

This has been the Lord's doing we know, and it is mavelous in our Eyes: His
Ways are unsearchable, and his Paths are past finding out: Not that we design
to prescribe Methods to the Providence of God, or Rules and Measures to his
Wisdom in the Government of the Church; yet we may pray that all things may be
disposed, so as they may best conduce to his own Glory, the Purity, Peace and
Union of that Communion: That having recovered its Light, when it was so nigh a
total and perpetual Eclipse, it may shine forth with greater Glory, and display
brighter Beams of Light, and Love than ever. We may pray that God would bless
his Majesty with perfect Victory and Success, that he may set his Foot upon the
Necks of his Enemies abroad, as well as at home: And that when he is settled
with Peace round about, he may then think of God's House, how he may heal the
Breaches and repair the Decays which Sin and Schism have made in the midst of
it. That he would please to renew the Powers and Faculties to such reverend
Fathers of the Church (if expired) as are best qualified to sew up the rent in
the Spouses Vail, and so promote the Peace and Glory of our Church. That he
would please so far to interpose his Authority, as (in a legal way) to procure
such Ease and Liberty in the scrupled part of Conformity, that the weary within
the Church may be at rest: As also so wide a Door to those who are without,
that if they will not enter, it may be truly said, that their exclusion is of
themselves.

Jerusalem; Why do we not then endeavor to promote it, by a quiet Submission
to its Orders and Decrees?

1st. They are indeed little things, comparative to the Power and Authority of
the Church to redress the Grievances of those who are weary and heavy laden.

2dly, Admit they be small, yet it is a very great Flame those little Sparks
have kindled in the Breasts, and Minds of many Pious and Conscientious Men: A
Mote is but a little thing ('it is true) but if got into the Eye of Conscience,
it causes Rivers of Tears to run down by reason of it, nor can the Apple of it
ever cease.

As to our Duty of preventing Disturbance, and preserving Peace and Union in
the Church. May our Indulgence be measured by our constant Endeavors to avoid
the one and maintain the other: We have with Patience submitted, not for Wrath,
but Conscience sake, to the Commands of our Superiors: We have bowed the Neck
to an uneasy Yoke, earnestly supplicating the Divine Majesty to send a Moses
to deliver us from those Burdens, which we have received so many Solemn and
Royal Promises should never oppress nor grieve us, whilst we behaved our selves
peaceably under the Civil Government and Constitutions of the Land.

But here I thought to have made a stand, and have eased both the Reader and my
self of any further trouble and fatigue in the Prosecution and Pursuit of this
unpleasing Argument, were I not pressed with the Reason of another most just Plea
for a Relaxation and Abatement in the Matters aforesaid, which I had thought to
have omitted, lest it should appear too invidious as to others, and too
opiniative of our selves: I mean our Fidelity to the Interest, and Constancy in
the Communion of the Church, in the late Times of Defection and Apostasy, when
both by Threatenings and Flatteries we were so strongly tempted to make a Breach
in it. When the Declaration for Indulgence was commanded to be published by us
in our Churches, we did not, we durst not submit, though we thereby forfeited
the Favor, and eminently incurred the Displeasure of a Potent Monarch bigoted
to the Romish Religion, in whose Hands we were, and to be used by him at his
Pleasure.

We could have very much rejoiced in a due Enlargement, but we rather kept
within our Enclosure, than brake the Hedges and lay the Fences waste to obtain
it: I mean a general Violation of the Canons and Rubricks of the Church, the
enacted Laws and Statutes of the Commonwealth: Relying in the mean time upon
the Goodness and Providence of God, wholly submitting our selves to his Will,
hoping that he would so far move the Hearts of our Rulers in due time, and in a
regular way to hear our Complaints, and redress our Grievances: And that which
puts weight into this Balance is that too many of those who clamoured high,
and made Who were fierce Despisers of those that were good heady high minded
Traitors, having a Form of Godliness, but denying the Power of it, 2 Timothy 3.3.5.
a great noise for Conformity to the Rituals of the Church, baiting and
bantring any whom they supposed guilty of the least defect, and omission of
their Duty in that respect, accounting themselves the white Boys, and only Sons
of the Church, yet were the first that turned color, and became Red-letter'd
Men (diverse of which both of the Clergy and Laity I could name, but I spare
them) and are at this day living and looking for a day to retrieve their lost
Cause: They still retaining those Spots, and Crimson Tincture they received
from the Scarlet whore, which they resolve no Nirre either of Scripture or
Reason shall ever take out: Whilst such as they accounted, and traduced as
Betrayers of our Church, stuck close, maintained their Posts, and in the day of
Trial proved faithful and true to its Interest.

We continued constant in the Exercise of our Ministry, fortifying our People
committed to our Care, using the best Arguments we could (joined with our own
Examples) to continue in the Communion of our Church, and to stand fast in the
open and zealous Professions and Defense of the Faith once delivered to the
Saints; comforting, and (to the best of our skill) building them up in it,
notwithstanding the Threats and Menaces we met with, from the professed and
rampant Enemies of our Church and Religion.

But lest this should look like boasting, I shall say no more, but leave the
Argument to be considered by our Superiors according to the Merits of it.

As for those who in the Day of Temptation went out from us, because they were
not of us, we heartily pity and pray for them, and for their reduction to the
Communion from whence they departed, that they would be zealous and repent,
considering from whence they are fallen and return: For which Reason we should
be willing to use all the Weapons of our Spiritual Warfare: And they are so
happy as to fall into an Age, and Hands which design no other, we being
sufficiently convinced, that a Club may sooner dash a Man's Brains out, than
beat Understanding into his Head.

Only first give me leave to enquire who were the best Sons of the Church of
England, and deserve most at her hands: Whether those who when time was were
great Sticklers for Conformity in the strictest manner to all and every of its
Rites: Great Amorists, and much in love with our Church and Religion, whilst it
looked plump, and fair to the Eye: But when the Hand of the Lord had touched it,
and was become black by reason of Affliction, shrunk and shrievell'd upon the
account of its Sorrow, forsook their first Love. Then their Language was, What
is thy Beloved more than another Beloved? What Is the Church of England more
than that of Rome? Whether I say were these better Sons of the Church than
those, who though perhaps not so exactly satisfied with all and every thing
that is injoined, yet brake not the Communion of it? But buckling on the Helmet,
and being girt about with Truth, were steady and valiant in her most dangerous
Conflict.

The other are fit to be Members of that Church, whereof outward Prosperity is
the Mark and Character; who so long as ours was triumphant, it had no greater
pretended Votaries and Zealots than themselves: But these Dive-dopping
Plant-Animals, dropping from the Tree upon which they grew, and falling into
the Waters of Tiber, or Sea of Rome, presently set up for Solon-geese, mightily
gagling for their espoused Religion: Who having learnt the Romish Cant from
their new Dictators, we are ridiculed and lampooned by them in every Tavern and
Coffee-house, the bottom of whose Dishes and Glasses they better understood
than the Reason of their Change, and new-fashioned Religion. Then they had the
Face and Brow to tell us, that the Church they once so much clamored for, was
till an Age or two past a Duck under water: By whom the first (and trite)
question we were usually interrogated upon was, Where was your Religion before
Luther? To which we have answered a thousand times, and can truly say again,
that the Platform of it is contained in the Holy Scriptures, which is the only
Rule of Faith, and tried Foundation upon which our Religion is built: 'Twas
instituted by Christ, practiced in the Primitive Church, though Tares grew up
in the Field; I mean Corruptions in the Bosom of it; and what could not be
amended, or endured were necessary to be avoided: For we can find (whatever
these Antiquaries may boast of) no Foundation for Purgatory, Prayers for the
Dead, or in a Tongue the People understand not, no Warrant to direct them to
Saints as the Object, no Exemption of the Blessed Virgin from original Sin, or
Communion celebrated by halfs, or in one kind, etc. in all that which must be
the Rule of our Faith and Worship: From the beginning these things were not so.
Now if our Religion agree with the Primitive Rule of Faith, and Practice of the
most ancient Church, it is I am sure before theirs; which has been often made
appear by the best records of Antiquity, and Evidences of Scripture: So that we
are at no loss to tell them, where our Church was before Luther, and Religion
we profess, though it was sometimes Subterranea, and fore'd to hide it self in
the Clefts of the Rocks; our Duck (if they will have it so) was sometimes fain
to dive, being often hunted and pursued by the Romish Spaniels, those
insatiable Bloodhounds. We can very well tell where our Religion was of old
(which is that which Christ planted and delivered to the Saints:) But alas,
like the Spouse fallen into ill hands, which wounded her, and took her Vail
from her, yea deflowred and defiled her: But it has pleased God to deliver
her, and save her, and us too out of the hands of our Enemies, that we might
serve him more purely. In short, Christ was both the Author and Finisher of our
Faith, not Luther not Calvin, though we are very much obliged to them for
putting us in a way to cleanse the Vessels of our Sanctuary, and scowre off the
Rust they had contracted.

But if Antiquity be necessary to legitimate the Doctrine of Faith, what was
the Romish Faith; I mean their new framed Articles in their first Edition?
Particularly that main Point of it, viz. The Pope's Supremacy, which the Later.
Coun. Sess. 11. Dat. Romans 1516. 14 Call. Jan. cum de necessitate salutis existat
omnes Christi fideles Romano Pontifici subesse Scult. Ann. 1516.
Council of Lateran first cast and molded into an Article of Faith making the
Belief of it necessary to Salvation: This was decreed in the very same Year,
that Luther began to assault Rome, as Scultetus observes, I chose to instance
in this (though diverse other of their Doctrines have no great Plea to
Antiquity;) because several of our late Converts have (when time was) laughed us
to scorn, and thought us extremely at their Mercy if they did not hiss us out
of our place, for placing a Supremacy in the Chief Magistrate. What say they,
Must the Son be Head of the Mother, the Child Superintendant to the Parent?
According to this Divinity they make the Blessed Virgin to have a Command over
her Son. As thou art a Jure matris* impera redemptori.
Mother command thy Son: But this is a piece of Popery which seems destructive
of it self, for Christ to be sure was the undoubted Head of the Church, and to
have one higher than the highest, and Power to command him, is neither good
Sense nor Divinity: But I never designed to have entered upon any thing of this
nature, if the Clamours of such as turned Renegado's to our Church; (the
Pinacles of whose Temples they were once over-zealous for had not occasioned
it) whom I am apt to believe could they have foreseen, that their Temptations
to have deserted the Church of England would have been so great; and that their
Reign after their Conversion to Rome would have proved so short, would not have
been such Zealots against those who in some things dissented from the first;
nor so dogmatical and pert in asserting the Supremacy of the latter: Which
Gregory the Great, though Bishop of that See, was so far from pretending to,
that he declared it was a Sign of Antichrist for any other to claim it. When
Boniface, Sozimus and Celestine sent to the Council of At which Synod St.
Austine was present and subscribed with his own hand.
Carthage to make challenge of it, alleging the Sixth Canon of the general
Council of Nice, the Fathers of that Synod sent him word, that they having only
a Latin Copy by them, in which they found no such Canon, took the pains to send
to Antioch, Alexandria and Constantinople to procure and consult the Greek
Copies: But found nothing in the least favoring their demands, and therefore
wrote to Celestine, that seeing no such thing was to be found in the Acts of
Nice, they desired him for the time to come to acquiesce, denouncing to him
that they would not suffer any cause either great or small to be carried out of
their Country by way of The Milevitan Synod decreed the same thing.
appeal, for which they had better Authority from the Council of Nice, than the
Bishops of Rome for their Supremacy, which defined that all Matters should be
determinable in the Province, and decreed the Patriarchs should be chief within
their Precincts, viz. The Bishop of Antioch in the East, the Bishop of
Alexandria in Egypt, and the Bishop of Rome, about Rome. He that reads the
Epistles of Cyprian will find him no way favoring the Supremacy, or universal
Superintendency of the Roman Bishop; nay in that ad Quintinum he argues
expressly against it: His Words are, Nam nec Petrus quem primum dominus elegit,
and super quem aedificavit Ecclesiam suam, cum secum Paulus de circumcisione
post modum discepsi aret, vendicavit sebi aliquid insolenter aut arroganter
assumpsit, ut diceret se Primatum tenere, and obtemperari a novellis, and
posteris sibi potius opportere, Cypr. ad Quint. St. Peter did not (says he)
defend himself against St. Paul, when he contended with him, by alleging his
Supremacy, and that all succeeding Bishops were to bow before him, and obey
him. St. Austine and St. Jerome affirmed, that the Rock of the Church was
Christ, or St. Peter's Confession. But Stapleton says, they were mistaken.
Ferus the Monk did not think so, who says, that fides Christiana and veritas
Evangelica firma and in concussa est petra illa. In Matthew. Cardinal Cusanus
makes all the Apostles equal in Power and Dignity.
But what need we any further Proof or Witnesses against our Adversaries,
whilst they are (...), and may be condemned out of their own Mouths, Fatentes
habemus reos. Did not Stephen Gardener, Bishop of Winchester, forswear and deny
with an Oath the Supremacy of Rome, and declare ex animo, or ex mero motu,
freely and frankly that that Bishop had no Jurisdiction nor Power over the
Church and Realm of England. In pursuance and proof whereof he wrote his Book
de Vera Obedientia, in which he defended the Supreme Power of Kings, and his
own Practice, instancing in Solomon, who according to his Father's appointment
ordained the Offices of the Priests in their Ministries, and Levites in their
Orders: To this he adds the Example of Hezekias, 2 Chronicles. 29.5, 6, etc. Aron
(he says) obeyed Moses, and Solomon gave Sentence against Abiathar the High
Priest: To this Book Edm. Bonner, Bishop of London wrote an Epistle,
recommending the Work to the perusal of all that loved the Truth; where he
calls the Supremacy of the Bishop of Rome in England, falsely pretenced, and
that it was most justly abrogated by the King, Fas est and ab host doceri.
that all other Bishops were in their Function equal to him, and in their
Provinces, in many things above him. More of this may be seen, and the
Supremacy of Rome learnedly, and rationally disproved in a Letter writ to
Cardinal Pool by Cuthert Tonstal, Bishop of Duresme, and John Stoksly, Bishop
of London. Acts and Monuments, Vol. 2. page 289. Edit. 1684. Which Doctrine was
so generally owned, that it was subscribed by one and twenty Bishops, eight
Archdeacons, seventeen Doctors of Divinity, and of both Laws.



viz. to preserve their Bishoprics, but the Scriptures they cited, the Reasons
they urged, the Judgment and Sense of the Fathers they alleged, are still the
same in all Ages and Reigns, whatever the Persons be that used them; And why
may we not as well believe these Men to speak truth, when they did it to please
their Prince and save their Livings, as when they recanted it to recover them?
especially when we consider the Reason of their Arguments, more than the design
of them. What they said, and not why they spoke it, for though Men, Camelion
like, may turn color, yet the Truth is of a better Stain than to fade at any
time, or upon any account. The like Instance we have in the Case of the Pope's
Supremacy above a general Council. Aeneas Sylvius was once zealous to assert
the Superiority to be in the latter, and wrote the History of the Council of
Basil, in which he frequently proves the same: But being promoted to the
Papacy, and changing his Name to Pius 2dus. he changed his Opinion also,
recanting his former Positions, and caused his Retractationumque bullam edid
it, quam ad rectorem and Scholam Coloniensem misit and invulguri jussit toto
orb terrarum inquit Gasper Card. indisput. adversus Protest.
Bull of Retractations, to be published to the whole World. Thus when the Gale
of Preferment blew stiff, this Weathercock soon turned head: So zealous was he
once for the Peace and Unity of the Church, that he wrote to See Acts and
Monuments, vol. 1. p. 807. Edit. 1684.
Gasper Schilck, Chancellor of the Emperor, that Princes might send their
Orators, and make Conventions whether the Pope approve of them or not: But when
he was Pope himself he quarrelled with Diotherus, Archbishop of Mentz and
Prince Elector, because he would call the Electors together without his
License. Good God! if Truth be as shifting, as these who highly pretend to it,
we may be at a greater loss than Pilate, to know what it is, or where to find
it. But whither have we run after these Dive-doppers? who have the Confidence
to expose, and ridicule the Church which they pretended once to adore; and that
till Luther's days 'twas a Duck under water: But thank God we have lived to see
them dived too, and hope we shall never live to see them lift their Heads above
water with the former Insult and Insolence, like Spaniels to hunt and bark at
that Duck, which was once the only Phoenix with them, and Bird of Paradise. But
I shall concern my self no further with them, only give me leave to tell these
Philosophers that it is a known Experiment, that if you cut a Leg or Limb from a
Duck it in a little time corrupts into a Toad. Mutato nomine de vobis fabula
narratur. You were once Limbs and Members of that Body, under the Shadow of
whose Wings you shrewded and sheltred your selves, till by turning Apostates
and Renegado's, your decrying the Faith, which once you professed you
sufficiently evidenced what Poison of Asps was under your Lips, and made it
easy to guess from whence you were fallen, and into what you were transformed.

Time was when the Church of England was all their cry, a Dove whose Voice was
sweet and Countenance was comely; ready to pick and joll at every one who
admired not her gay Feathers and gilded Plumes: Then her Wings were covered
with ^ilver, and her Feathers with yellow Gold: But so soon as her Wings were
clipped, and Feathers grew sick, and was hunted like a Partridge in the
Wilderness, this glorious Bird was accounted no better than an Owl in the
Desert, at which they hist, and hooted: Now they renounce its Orders, despise
its Sacraments, turn up their Noses at its Worship, whilst those who were
traduced by them for false Brethren, and spurious Sons of the Church (when all
these things were in vogue with them) did in the time of its peril and distress
preach up and defend its Doctrine, were frequent in the Administration of its
Sacraments, kept close to its Communion, and steadfast to its Interest. We hope
therefore it being (by the good Providence of God) come again into its Kingdom,
and restored to all its Powers and Authority, that they shall be remembered (and
not forgotten, as Joseph was by the chief Buttler after his Restoration, 40
Genesis 23.) That their Yoke may be made more easy, and burthen-light: Nay they
have not been only faithful to the Church, but are true to the State too: Time
was when they were represented at Court, as no Friends to Caesar, and that it
was not for the King's profit to suffer them: But now their Crime is, they are
of excessive Loyalty, and too fond of their Prince. But can we love him too
well, who seeing the Nation sinking, or in a violent Storm, laboring for Life,
cast himself into those mighty Waters, resolving either to sink with it, or
save it? which he effectually did: Who when the Breach was made in our Bank,
and the Sea of Rome (I mean Popery) breaking in a man upon us, like Moses stood
in the Gap, stopped the Torrent, drained the Church, and has made it once again
terra firma. Time was when Judgment ran down as Waters, but they were very
bitter, and and Righteousness as a mighty Stream, but like an overflowing
Scourge bore down Justice, and common Right before it; for Judgment was turned
into Gall, and the Fruit of Righteousness into Wormwood; which occasioned many
bitter Cries and Complaints among us: But now our Sion is redeemed with
Judgment, and her Converts with Righteousness. Now we have no Youths from Doway
or St. Omers to confront the Truth, or support a Lie: No awing of Judges,
packing of Juries, or forcing of Verdicts. We have found a Prince that seeks
Judgment and relieves the oppressed, and can we then be too fond, can we love
him too well? Who by the Council and Consent of Parliament has eased our
Protestant Brethren without the Church, yea has framed a Project to remove the
Grievances of those which are within too, having granted Powers and
Commissions, to many wise and worthy Members of it to review our Liturgy, to
inspect our Ecclesiastical Polity, to remove the Stumbling Blocks, and to take
away the Rocks of offense, to the uniting both in the same Communion, and
common Interest (which it is highly probable it might in time effect;) and may
he never give over till he has perfected the Work, and cut it short in
Righteousness. How then can we but love him, yea and most earnestly pray for
him? that God would bless him at home and abroad, by Sea and Land, in Peace and
War, that his Head may be covered in the Day of Battle, that no Weapon formed
against him may prosper, that he may put an Hook into the Nostrils, and Bridle
into the Mouth of that great Oppressor, who would lay House to House, Field to
Field, till there be no room left upon the Earth; That he may return home with
triumph, when he shall have restored Liberty, and procured Right to be done to
the distressed Princes and States of Europe; as he has already done for the
People of England, to which all honest Men, and true English Men will say. Amen.

ADVICE TO THE DISSENTERS.
BUT before I lay my Pen down, may I assume the liberty a little, to argue and
expostulate with you our Dissenting Brethren and Friends; I bear you record you
have a Zeal of God, which I wish may never want the just Measures of Sincerity,
Truth and Knowledge: But when I observe in you a total Separation and universal
Departure from our Communion; and yet not only to allow our Communion but
further it in others; yea in Matters of greatest scruple in some urgent cases
practice it your selves, it is a thing too hard for me. I have known some who
have suffered themselves to be deprived both of their Offices and Benefices by
the Bartholomew Act, yet have sent their Children to our Universities, where
the strictest Conformity is used, and enjoined the Members of those Societies,
yea have afterward put them into the Priest's Office, which for Conscience
sake they could not submit to execute themselves. Many have been elected into
places of Magistracy, and other Employments, and how stanch soever they have
been before and after: Yet to avoid the Dint and Penalty of the Law, have given
a yieldance to the Commands, and Authority of the Church, submitting to those
Rites, which at other times they scruple, yea renounce. But why do you condemn
your selves in the things you can upon occasion admit? Can you dispense with
your Consciences to serve a turn? Does not this justify the Practice of our
Romish Adversaries, who can license themselves to take Oaths, to hold a
Conformity with the Church, or dissemble a Compliance to cheat their Rulers,
and avoid the Dint and Penalty of the Law? If you can conform, and hold
Communion with the Church in Praying, Heating and Receiving the Holy Sacrament,
etc. for the Preservation of your selves? Why not then for the Preservation of
Peace, and Unity in the Church? I need not tell you how mischievous a thing
Schism is, or how deep a Stain, and guilt it leaves behind it upon the
Conscience. Is it not a positive and plain Command to be subject to the higher
Powers, to submit to every Ordinance of Man for the Lord's sake? Vir bonus est
quis? Qui consulta patrum qui leges juraque servat.



viz. That your dissent is nothing but Faction and Humor, a Spirit of
Disobedience and Contradiction, but nothing of Conscience, whatever may be
pretended, as is by you sufficiently proved, when you come to the pinch. I do
not speak this to reflect upon you, but as my beloved Friends, to warn you; if
God be God then follow him, if Baal be God follow him. The Case of Conscience
and Matter before us will not turn color with the Circumstances of your
Condition: Your Streights and Extremities do not make that lawful, which your
Liberty and Freedom make sinful: I do not take the Case in hand, to alter with
our State, or like a Dove's Neck to change color according to its Site and
Position: The various Reflection of Light may cause different Colors, but Truth
never varies its hue; it is ubique eadem, and is it not an inexcusable thing to
commit a deliberate sinful act, merely to secure our Stake, and to preserve our
worldly Interest: We may hereby perhaps avoid Punishment from Men, but how
shall we escape God's righteous Judgments?





But I find some to have put a more favorable Gloss and Sense upon your
occasional Conformity, viz. that you do it not in opposition to your Judgments,
nor Dictates of your Consciences, thereby to indemnifie your selves from the
Penalty of the Law, but that you could hold a more frequent (perhaps constant)
Communion with the Church in her Holy Offices, had you not an eminent Addiction
to one sort, and Aversness to a^^ther sort, or party of Men, which seems to
have as great an antipathy (...) each other, as Naturalists tells us, there is
in the Blood of a Bat and Swallow, which will not mix though they be put into the
same Vessel together; were the inveterate Spleen and Animosities upon all
accounts (vented against Persons) allaid, I am confident there would be such
Abatements on the one side, and Compliances on the other, that the Protestant
Communion and Interest would be all of a piece, and Schism no longer find a
room to fix the Sole of her Foot upon.

But for this we must earnestly direct our Prayers to him who has the hearts
of all Men in his Hand, and that turns them like the Rivers of Water; to him
that makes Men to be of one mind in an House. It was the Observation of the
Protestant Reconciler, that it was the great Sin of the Conformists, that they
did not do what they might have done when they had a Power for Composing the
Differences amongst us. And is it not the Sin of such as dissent, not to do
what they may, and have done occasionally pro hic and nunc, to serve themselves
and secure their Interest, for the attaining an higher End, and more eminent
Purposes? viz. healing the Breaches, and curing that inveterate Distemper, I
mean the Schism which has so often disturbed the Peace, and raised Confusions
in the Church.

Charles the Il's time, that it was to be feared that the Act of Uniformity
would be drawn up so strict, that not many of the Presbyterians would conform,
his answer was, He was afraid they would.

Besides the Treatment of those who have submitted to it have been such, as
affords little invitation to others to come over into the Tents of the Church
of England, whilst they have been accounted, and used by the Conformists as
false Brethren, who came in merely to spy out their Liberty, and betray their
Church; upon which account they are disrespected and slited, nay many times
despitefully used; they watching for their halting, and glad when they stumble,
that they may fall into their hands, and be used by them at their pleasure: But
not one Hair from their Heads would they part with to render the Yoke of
Conformity easy, or gratify those that have been tender of the Peace and
Unity of the Church.

Athens to Thebes, as it is from Thebes to Athens. If we love only those that
love us, what reward have we? Let us heap Coals of Fire upon their Heads, it is
the onl^ way to melt them, and force them to say, as Saul to David, You are
more Righteous than we: As for such who for Conscience sake have made no
breach, but have held Communion with the Church, and yet have notwithstanding
been looked a squint upon, that ought not to discourage you, nor turn away their
Faces, or make them to despair of some reasonable Relaxation in Matters of
Comformity; For the righteous Lord loves Righteousness, his Countenance does
behold the upright: But perhaps the appointed time of our Vision is not yet
come; and therefore we will wait for it, for it will come and not tarry: In the
mean time lets go on and build God's House with as much care, and diligence as
we can, whatever Discouragements we may meet with from the Tobiases and
Sanballats that may rise up against us. Let us bear the Indignation of the
Lord, because we have sinned against him, for he will plead our Cause and
execute Judgment for us. Let us pray, that he would turn the Faces of our
Brethren toward us, that we may live in Peace and Love together, and the God
of Love and Peace shall be with us.

But this is a Lamentation, 19 Ezekiel. 14.
and must be for a Lamentation that Fire is gone out of our Branches, that we
still quarrel and fall out by the way for Matters of no higher value, and
greater figure in Religion than some appendant Rites and retained Ceremonies of
Worship; nor can we without regret observe how wide a Cleft those smaller
Wedges have occasioned (when they have been fiercely driven) in the Beams of
our own Timber.

The Dispute and Conference which was betwixt Arcicetus, Bishop of Rome, and
Polycarpe, concerning diverse Usages and Customs of their Churches; particularly
that great-make Bate, the time of celebrating Easter, it was so managed as not
to make any distance betwixt them: But though it was concluded each Church
should retain and practice their own Rites, and observe their own Customs, yet
they did not break off their Fellowship, but received the Sacrament together,
and held a friendly Communion one with the other. Whilst Pope Victor, (as
Irenaeus relates) more stiffly insisting on, and urging the Practices of the
Roman See upon other Churches, they became as remote and distant from each
other, as the East is from the West in affection, as well as Situation.

There was also in Cyprian's time a great Question which much exercised the
Primitive Church, viz. Whether Heretics ought to be rebaptized before they
were admitted to Church Fellowship; to determine which St. Cyprian calls a
Council at Carthage, who together with the rest of his Sententiae Episcoporum
de haereticis baptizandis. Opera Cypr. 339. Impress. Basil. 1521.
Brethren gave their Opinions, that they ought not to be admitted into the
Church without being rebaptized; yet with so much indulgence and allowance to
others, as not to judge or censure them, but to hold Communion with such as
were otherwise minded; Super est ut de hac re quid singuli sentiamus
proferamus, nemirem judicantes, aut a jure Communionis aliquem si diversum
senserit amoven^es. And could we but once come to be guilty of that Error which
the Primitive Christians were charged with, viz. of loving one and other
Minutius Felix's Dialogue betwixt Octavius and Cecilius.
too well, we might yet maintain an holy Correspondence and Fellowship each
with other, taking sweet Council together, and going to (...) House of God in
Company, notwithstanding any Religious Rites in debate amongst us.

FINIS.

