The Solemn Mock Procession of the POPE, Cardinals, Jesuits, Friars, etc.
through ye. City of London, November ye. 17th.1679.
Remember Justice Godfrey


Bulls Pardons and Indulgences


This for 15. thousand pounds


depiction of procession

The EXPLANATION.

Such is the Just and Generous Detestation and Hatred of the English Nation
against the Tyranny and Superstition of the Popish Religion (if it be lawful to
call such a Mass ot Cruelty and Nonsense by so Sacred a Name) that they have
taken all occasions to express their Abhorrence thereof; but more especiailly
since the Discovery of that Horrid and Traiterous Conspiracy against His
Majesty's Person, the Protestant Religion and Government Established, which
they sufficiently Testified upon the 17th. of November; That being the Day
wherein the Unfortunate Queen Mary Died, and that Glorious Sun, Queen ELIZABETH
of Happy Memory, arose in the English Horizon, and thereby dispelled those
thick Fogs and Mists of Romish Blindness, and restored to these Kingdoms their
just Rights both as Men and Christians. In Commemoration of this great
Blessing, some Honorable and Worthy Gentlemen, both, in London, and at the
Temple (remembering the Burning of London, and the Temple, by Popish Hands) were
pleased to be at the Charge of an extraordinary Triumph upon the Day aforesaid,
to Confront the Insolence of the Romish Faction, who after all the Miraculous
Discoveries of their Cursed Contrivances, have still the Impudence yet to hope
of Succeeding in their Traitorous Designs for Enslaving these Nations.

Upon the said 17th. of November, 1679. the Bells began generally to Ring at
Three of the Clock in the Morning: About Five a Clock in the Evening, all
things being in readiness, the Solemn Procession began, setting forth from
More-Gate, and of proceeded to Bishops-Gate, and down Hownsditch to Aid-Gate,
and from thenee through London-Hall-Street, the Royal Exchange, Cheapside, and
so to Temple Bar, in the following Order;

I. Marched six whifflers to clear the way, in Pioneers Caps and lied
Wastcoats. II. A Bell-man Ringing, who with a Loud and Dolesom Voice Cried all
the way, Remember Justice Godfrey. III. A Dead Body Representing Sir Edmundbury
Godfrey, in the Habit he usually Wore, the Cravat wherewith he was Murdered,
about his Neck, with spots or Blood on his Wrists, Shirt, and white Gloves that
were on his Hands, his Face Pale and Wan, Riding on a White Horse, and one of
his Murderers behind him to keep him from falling, Representing the manner how
he was carried from Somerset-Horse to Primrose-Hill. IV. A Priest in a
Surplice, with a Cope Embroidred with Dead Men's Bones, Skeletons, Skuls, etc.
giving Pardons very freely to those who would Murder Protestents, and
Proclaiming it Meritorious. V. A Priest alone, in Black, with a large Silver
Cross. VI. Four Carmelite Friars in White and Black Habits. VII. Four Gray
Friars in their proper Habits. VIII. Six Jesuits with Bloody Daggers. IX. A
Confort of Wind-Musick, called the waits. X. Four Popish Bishops in Purple and
Lawn Sleeves, with Golden Crosses on their Breasts. XI. Four other Popish
Bishops in their Pontificalibus, with Surplices, Rich Embroydered Copes, and
Golden Miters on their Heads. XII. Six Cardinals in Scarlet Robes and Red Caps.
XIII. The Popes Chief Physician with Jesuits Powder in one hand, and an Urinal
in the other. XIV. Two Priests in Surplices, with two Golden Crosses. Lastly,
The Pope in a Lofty Glorious Pageant, Representing a Chair of State, covered
with Scarlet, the Chair Richly Embroydered, Fringed, and bedeckt with Golden
Balls and Crosses; at his Feet a Cushion of State, two Boys in Surplices, with
white Silk Banners and Red Crosses, and bloody Daggers for Murdering Heretical
Kings and Princes, painted on them, with an Incence -- Pot before them, fate on
each side censing his Holiness, who was arrayed in a rich Scarlet Gown, Lined
through with Ermin, and adorned with Gold and Silver Lace; on his Head a
Tripple Crown of Gold, and a Glorious Collor of Gold and precious Stones, St.
Peter's Keys, a number of Beads, Agnus Det's and other Catholic Trumpery; at
his Back stood his Holiness's Privy Councellor, the Devil, frequently
Caressing, Hugging and Whispering, and oft-times Instructing him aloud, to
destroy His Majesty, to forge a Protestant-Plot, and to Fire the City again; to
which purpose he held an Infernal Torch in his hand. The whole Procession was
attended with 150. Flambeaus and Torches by Order; but so many more came in
Volunteers as made them up some Thousands. Never were the Balconies, Windows
and Houses more numerously filled, nor the Streets closer thronged with
Multitudes of People, all expressing their Abhorrence of Popery, with continual
Shouts and Acclamations; so that by a modest Computation it is judged there
could not be fewer than Two Hundred Thousand Spectators: Thus with a slow and
solemn State they proceeded to Temple Bar, where with the innumerable swarms,
the Houses seemed converted into Heaps of Men, Women and Children; for whose
diversion there were provided great Variety of excellent Fireworks. Temple Bar
being since its Rebuilding, Adorned with four stately Statues, those of Queen
Elizabeth and King James fronting the City, and of K. Charles the First of
Blessed Memory, and our present Gracious Sovereign, on the other side toward
westminster. The Statue of Q. Elizabeth in respect to the Day, was Adorned with
a Crown of Gilded Laurel, in Her hand a Golden Shield, with this Motto
inscribed, THE PROTESTANT RELIGION, MAGNA CHARTA, and Flambeaus placed before
it: The Pope being brought near thereunto, the Song following was sung in
Parts, between one who Represented the English Cardinal Howard, and another,
the People of England.

Cardinal Howard. From York to London Town we come
To talk of Popish Ire;
To reconcile you all to Rome,
And prevent Smithfield Fire,

The People Answer. Cease, Cease, thou Norfolk Cardinal,
See yonder stands Queen Bess,
Who saved your souls from Popish thrale
O Queen Bess, Queen Bess, Qu. Bess.
Your popish Plot, and Smithfield Threat
We do not fear at all
For lo! before Queen Besses Feet
You fall, you fall, you fall.
Now God preserve Great Charles our King,
And eke all honest Men;
And Traitors all to Justice bring,
Amen, Amen, Amen.

Thus having Entertained the thronging Spectators for some time with Ingenious
Fireworks, and a vast Bonefire being prepared just over against the
Inner-Templt-Gate, his Holiness, after some Complement and Reluctance, was
decently tumbled from all his Grandeur into the Impartial Flames; the Crafty
Devil, his Chief Minister, leaving his Infallibilityship in the Lurch in his
Extremity. This Justice was attended with a prodigious Shout, that might be
heard far beyond Somerset House; and the same Evening there were large
Bonefires generally in the Streets, with universal Acclamations, Long Live King
CHARLES, Let POPERY perish, and PAPISTS with their PLOTS and COUNTER-PLOTS as
hitherto, be Confounded: To which every honest Englishman will readily say,
Amen.

London, Printed for Jonathan Wilkins, at the Star in Cheapside next Mercers
Chapel, 16^0.


