A SOLEMN League and Covenant, FOR Reformation, and Defense of Religion, the
Honor and Happiness of the KING, and the Peace and Safety of the three
Kingdoms of England, Scotland, and Ireland.

Also, Two special ORDERS: VIZ. I. Concerning the taking of the League and
Covenant in all Churches and Chapels in London and Westminster, upon the next
Lord's Day in the afternoon. II. Concerning diverse Lords, Knights, Gentlemen,
Colonels, Officers, Soldiers, and others, that are desirous to meet this
present Friday in the forenoon at Margarets-Westminster, and to take the said
League and Covenant.


Jer. 50.5. Come, let us join our selves to the Lord in a perpetual Covenant
that shall not be forgotten.

Prove. 25.5. Take away the wicked from before the King, and his Throne shall be
established in righteousness.

2 Chronicles. 15.15. And all Judah rejoiced at the Oath, for they had sworn with
all their heart, and sought him with their whole desire, and he was found of
them; and the Lord gave them rest round about.

DIe Sabbathi,30. Sept. 1643.
It is this day Ordered by the Commons in Parl. That this Covenant and Orders
be forthwith Printed and published:

H. Elsynge, Cl. Parl. D. Com.



London, Printed for Edw. Husbands, October. 2. 1643.

Die Lunae 25. September. 1643.
IT is this day Ordered by the Commons now assembled in Parliament, that the
Ministers in all the Parish-Churches and Chappells of London, Westminster,
Suburbs and Liberties, and in all the Parishes within the Bills of Mortality,
do read the solemn League and Covenant on Wednesday next, being the Day of
Public Humiliation; And do explain it, and urge the ground and necessity of
it, and exhort the People to the cheerful taking of it, and that the several
Inhabitants and Parishioners of the several and respective Parishes aforesaid,
and Students of the Innes of Court, do take the said League and Covenant on the
Lord's Day next in the afternoon: And that notice hereof be given to my Lord
Mayor, and his Lordship desired to give timely notice hereof to the places
aforesaid: The Ministers are likewise to give notice, that the Commissioners of
Scotland now here, do take it here.

H: Elsynge, Cler: Parl: D: Com.

Die Sabbathi, 30 Septem. 1643.
WHereas diverse Lords, Knights, Gentlemen, and diverse Colonells, Officers and
Soldiers, and others now residing in the Cities of London and Westminster, and
within the Line of Communication, are desirous to meet at Saint Margarets
Church at Westminster on Friday next, to take the solemn League and Covenant
for Reformation, and Defense of Religion, the Honor and Happiness of the
King, and the Peace and Safety of the three Kingdoms of England, Scotland, and
Ireland. And whereas diverse of the Scotish-Nation are desirous likewise to meet
at the same time and place; And diverse Ministers who have no charge within the
said limits, to take the said Covenant;

It is this day Ordered by the Commons assembled in Parliament, That Mr.
Carrill of Lincolns-Inne be desired to Preach on Friday next in the forenoon,
to those that shall so meet, for the taking of the said Covenant; And a
Parchment-Roll, with the said Covenant written therein, shall be prepared for
every one that takes the said Covenant, to subscribe his Name* And Colonel
Long and Master John Brown, Members of the said House, are to see the Names
subscribed accordingly: And this Order is appointed to be printed and published
forthwith.

H: Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com.

A Solemn League and Covenant, for Reformation, and defense of RELIGON, the
Honor and Happiness of the KING, and the Peace and safety of the three
Kingdoms of England, Scotland, and Ireland.
WE Noblemen, Barons, Knights, Gentlemen, Citizens, Burgesses, Ministers of the
Gospel, and Commons of all sorts in the Kingdoms of England, Scotland, and
Ireland, by the Providence of God living under one King, and being of one
Reformed Religion, having before our eyes the glory of God, and the advancement
of the Kingdom of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, the honor and happiness
of the Kings Majesty and His Posterity, and the true public Liberty, Safety,
and Peace of the Kingdoms, wherein every ones private condition is included,
and calling to mind the treacherous and bloody Plots, Conspiracies, Attempts,
and Practices of the Enemies of God, against the true Religion, and professors
thereof in all places, especially in these three Kingdoms ever since the
Reformatian of Religion, and how much their rage, power and presumption, are of
late, and at this time increased and exercised; whereof the deplorable state of
the Church and Kingdom of Ireland, the distressed estate of the Church and
Kingdom of England; and the dangerous estate of the Church and Kingdom of
Scotland, are present and public Testimonies; We have now at last, (after
other means of Supplication, Remonstrance, Protestations, and Sufferings) for
the preservation of our selves and our Religion, from utter Ruin and
Destruction, according to the commendable practice of these Kingdoms in former
times, and the Example of Gods people in other Nations; after mature
deliberation, resolved and determined to enter into a mutual and solemn League
and Covenant, wherein we all subscribe, and each one of us for himself, with
our hands lifted up to the most high God, do swear:

I. THat we shall sincerely, really and constantly, through the Grace of God,
endeavor in our several places and callings, the preservation of the Reformed
Religion in the Church of Scotland, in Doctrine, Worship, Discipline and
Government, against our common Enemies the reformation of Religion in the
Kingdoms of England and Ireland, in Doctrine, Worship, Discipline and
Government, according to the Word of God, and the Example of the best Reformed
Churches, And shall endeavor to bring the Churches of God in the three
Kingdoms, to the nearest conjunction and Uniformity in Religion, Confession of
Faith, Form of Church Government, Directory for Worship and Catechizing; That
we and our Posterity after us, may as Brethren, live in Faith and Love, and the
Lord may delight to dwell in the midst of us.

II. That we shall in like manner, without respect of persons, endeavor the
Extirpation of Popery, Prelacie, (that is, Church Government, by Archbishops,
Bishops, their Chancellors and Commissaries, Deans, Deans and Chapters,
Archdeacons, and all other Ecclesiastical Officers depending on that
Hierarchy) Superstition, Heresy, Schism, Profaneness, and whatsoever shall
be found to be contrary to sound Doctrine, and the power of Godliness; lest we
partake in other men's sins, and thereby be in danger to receive of their
plagues, and that the Lord may be one, and his Name one in the three Kingdoms.

III. We shall with the same sincerity, reallity and constancy, in our several
Vocations, endeavor with our estates and lives, mutually to preserve the
Rights and Privileges of the Parliaments, and the Liberties of the Kingdoms,
and to preserve and defend the Kings Majesty's person and authority, in the
preservation and defense of the true Religion, and Liberties of the Kingdoms,
that the world may bear witness with our consciences of our Loyalty, and
that we have no thoughts or intentions to diminish His Majesty's just power and
greatness.

IV. We shall also with all faithfulness endeavor the discovery of all such
as have been, or shall be Incendiaries, Malignants, or evil Instruments, by
hindering the Reformation of Religion, dividing the King from his people, or
one of the Kingdoms from another, or making any Faction or parties amongst the
people, contrary to this League and Covenant, that they may be brought to
public trial, and receive condign punishment, as the degree of their
offenses shall require or deserve, or the supreme Judicatories of both Kingdoms
respectively, or others having power from them for that effect, shall judge
convenient.

V. And whereas the happiness of a blessed Peace between these Kingdoms,
denied in former times to our Progenitors, is by the good Providence of GOD
granted unto us, and has been lately concluded, and settled by both
Parliaments, we shall each one of us, according to our place and interest,
endeavor that they may remain conjoined in a firm Peace and Union to all
Posterity; And that Justice may be done upon the wilful Opposers thereof, in
manner expressed in the precedent Article.

VI. We shall also according to our places and callings in this common cause of
Religion, Liberty, and Peace of the Kingdoms, assist and defend all those that
enter into this League and Covenant, in the maintaining and pursuing thereof,
and shall not suffer our selves directly or indirectly by whatsoever
combination, persuasion or terror, to be divided and withdrawn from this
blessed Union and conjunction, whether to make defection to the contrary part,
or to give our selves to a detestable indifferency or neutrality in this cause
which so much concerns the glory of God, the good of the Kingdoms, and honor
of the King; but shall all the days of our lives zealously and constantly
continue therein, against all opposition, and promote the same according to our
power, against all Lets and Impediments whatsoever; and what we are not able
our selves to suppress or overcome, we shall reveal and make known, that it
may be timely prevented or removed; All which we shall do as in the sight of
God.

And because these Kingdoms are guilty of many sins and provocations against
God, and his Son Jesus Christ as is too manifest by, our present distresses and
dangers, the fruits thereof; We profess and declare before God and the world,
our unfayned desire to be humbled for our own sins, and for the sins of these
Kingdoms, especially, that we have not as we ought, valued the inestimable
benefit of the Gospel, that we have not labored for the purity and power
thereof, and that we have not endeavored to receive Christ in our hearts, nor
to walk worthy of him in our lives, which are the causes of other sins and
Transgressions, so much abounding amongst us; And our true and unfayned
purpose, desire, and endeavor for our selves, and all others under our power
and charge, both in public and in private, in all duties we owe to God and
man, to amend our lives, and each one to go before another in the example of a
real Reformation, that the Lord may turn away his wrath, and heavy
indignation, and establish these Churches and Kingdoms in truth and peace. And
this Covenant we make in the presence of almighty God, the Searcher of all
hearts, with a true intention to perform the same, as we shall answer at that
great day when the secrets of all hearts shall be di^^los^^, Most humbly
beseeching the Lord to strengthen us by his Holy Spirit for this end, and to
bless our desires and proceedings with such success, as may be deliverance
and safety to his people, and encouragement to other christian Churches
groaning under, or in danger of the yoke of Antichristian Tyranny; to join
in the same, or like Association and Covenant, to the glory of God, the
enlargement of the Kingome of Jesus Christ, and the peace and Tranquillity of
Christian Kingdoms and Commonwealths.

FINIS.

