SOME FEW OBSERVATIONS BY THE COMMITTEE of ESTATES OF PARLIAMENT, UPON THE
DECLARATION OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY Of the last of July.

EDINBVRGH, Printed by Evan Tyler, Printer to the Kings most Excellent
Majesty. 1648.

EDINBURGH, 10. August, 1648.
THE Committee of Estates Ordains and Commands this Paper of their Observations
upon the Declaration of the General Assembly to be printed and published: And
do seriously recommend to, and require the Committees of War in the several
Shires, and the Magistrates within Burgh to take exact course, that with all
diligence, after it come to their hands, it may be read upon the Lords Day at
the Parish Kirk doors, in the hearing of the Parishoners: And that some of each
Committee and Magistrates be appointed to see it done: And published at all
other places needful, within their several Bounds and Jurisdictions.

ARCH. PRIMEROSE.

Some few OBSERVATIONS made by the Committee of Estates of Parliament: Upon the
DECLARATION of the General Assembly of the last of June, 1648.
ALbeit the Offers of the Commmittee of Estates, for securing of Religion, has
not been accepted by the General Assembly (at the suggestion of some
disaffected Persons) Yet the Committee Resolves never to leave Persuing of
their Duties, for Preserving the same according to the Solemn League and
Covenant. But least by their filence they should seem to be satisfied with the
Papers presented to them by the Assembly the last day of July, Entitled, A
DECLARATION, etc. of the 21. of July. They thought fit to return for the
present a very few short OBSERVATIONS thereupon, Intending to emit a large
Narrative of the Reasons and necessities of the present Engagement of this
Kingdom in a War against the Sectaries in England, wherein, as they will
Vindicate themselves from encroaching in any sort upon the Liberties of the
Kirk, So they resolve to assert and maintain the just power of the Civil
Magistrate against all usurpation whatsoever: All the Arguments brought to
prove the Sinfulness and Unlawfulness of this Engagement, are reduced in the
Assemblies Declaration to four Classes. 1. From these places of holy Scripture,
wherein the Wars of Gods people are called Wars of the Lord, and that all
things should be done to the Glory of God. 2. From these places, which
discharge Association with the Canaanites, Idolaters, and wicked men. 3. From
these places, wherein we have the example of the people of God seeking
reparation by Treaty, before they engaged in a War. 4. From these places
wherein Breach of Covenant is condemned for a great Sin procuring National
Judgments.

To the first we Answer, by acknowledging and believing that all the Wars of
the People of God, should be the Wars of God, undertaken at the Command of
these who have lawful authority under God, as were the Wars by the command of
Moses, Joshua, the Judges and Kings of Judah, And as undertaken by warrant from
Gods Vicegerents, So for an honest Cause, for the glory of God; But where as it
is assumed that this Engagement is not such, we deny it, Because it has the
warrant of lawful Authority, The Estates of Parliament, And the Cause being
honest to do a Duty commanded of God to our Prince, God is glorified by doing
that Duty, The releeving of our King out of Prison, is a duty, John 18, 36. If
my Kingdom, says our Lord, were of this World, then would my Servants fight
that I should not be delivered to the Jews. Our Lord suppones it was a common
Duty, that Subjects should fight to preveen the captivity of their King, And
if a War be lawful to preveen captivity, Is it not lawful to deliver him
from that base captivity, are we less obliged in duty to our Native Prince,
then Abraham to his kinsman Lot? who engaged in a War for rescuing him,
notwithstanding Lot had associated himself in War with wicked men, The
Sodomites, Genesis 14.? Are we less obliged then David and his associates to
their captive wives, who engaged in War for their freedom, 1. Sam. 30.?

As for the duty of honor, for performance whereof we have engaged our selves;
We believe it is a duty commanded by God himself in the fifth Command, Pro.
24.22.1. Ep. Pet. 2.16.17. We are forbidden to use our Christian liberty as a
Clock to maliciousness, for withholding or withdrawing Duty. Yea Pagans by
the light of Nature, reading the law of Nature, which is from the God of
Nature, do use all honor to their Kings, Yea, holy Samuel undoubtedly zealous
of Gods Honor, notwithstanding he knew certainly by Divine Revelation, that
God had rejected Saul, yet honored him before the People, 1, Sam. 15.30.31.

To the second Class of Arguments; against associations with Malignants, We
answer, 1. These places wherein association with the Canaanites is forbidden,
proves not the point, for they were destinated to destruction, Deuteronomy. 7.2. that
Gods People, might have that Country promised of old for their peculiar
habitation: We hope none pretend such a warrant, for destroying all who differ
in Religion from them, That they alone may dwell in the Land, or if any be of
that judgment, Let him speak it out in time. 2. It would be considered, that
confidence and trust in these worldly helps are forbidden; Did not the
Generally Assembly in the year 1585. supplicate King James of happy Memory (as
is mentioned in the Assembly 1642) to command his Ambassador, then going to
England, to deal with the Queen, that there might be a bond of Union betwixt
them and other Christian Princes professing the true Religion, for the defense
thereof, against the persecution of Papists joined in League, by the bloody
Decree of Trent? And who doubts but many of these protestant Princes were
Lutherians: Did our fathers wrong in taking help from England then under
Prelates; and using the Service Book, To withstand the French Persecution? 3.
There is a great difference in joining with Strangers, idolaters, as the Kings
of Judah sometimes did, And Subjects obliged in a common Duty living under one
King. 4. We declare (as may be seen in our Declaration To this Kingdom, and in
our Answer to the Petitions of Presbyteries and Synods) that we will associate
with none, but such as will engage themselves, to be faithful in the Ends of
the Covenant, and who do so cannot be reputed Malignants, that is, Popish and
Prelaticall, unless they be false Hypocrites: And if at any time they manifest
their falsehood by their works, in obstructing or opposing the Ends of the
Covenant, we have declared that through Gods assistance we shall do our
uttermost endeavors to suppress them.

To the third, because there has been no Treaty, That is denied, Because our
Commissioners did for a long time represent wrongs, and seek reparation, as is
mentioned in their Papers given into the Parliament of England; and approven in
this Parliament, also a Messenger with our just and necessary Demands, was sent
to the Houses in April last; yet, by the prevalency of Sectaries, no
satisfaction is returned thereunto.

To the fourth Class of Arguments, taken from the Breach of Covenant; We grant
that breach of Covenant is a great sin; and pains needs not be taken for
proving that which none denies; But that by this Engagement, as it is
represented in our Declaration, The Covenant is broken in all the Articles
thereof, Is more then can be well proven: The breach of the first Article, is
instanced by an induction of three particulars, quarrelling the doctrine of
Ministers, the disorders committed by the Soldiery in time of Divine Worship,
and the not answering the Petitions of Presbyteries and Synods; Therefore we
maintain, not the Doctrine, Worship and Government of the Church.

To the 1. Instance, we answer, neither Parliament nor Committee of Estates
has quarrelled any Ministers doctrine, and though they should quarrel any in
an orderly way for seditious doctrine, were it any breach of Covenant? for we
are not bound to maintain any such doctrine, but rather to censure according to
several Laws of this Kingdom the Abetters thereof, as disturbers of the
public peace? Some Ministers have been conveened before us, and challenged
for seditious practices; if any quarrel this, we conceive they break Covenant,
which binds them to maintain, and not to quarrel the undoubted Privileges of
Parliament, to judge by themselves or their Deputies, all persons in causes
Civil, or Criminal: To that, we say no more, but it is, and shall be, our
hearts desire, that all the Ministers of the Land may be always able to say as
Paul, Act. 24 12. They found me not raising up the people, neither in the
Synagogue, nor in the City.

To the second instance, We answer, Disorders in time of Divine worship, are
not owned by us: When they are represented to us, and duly instructed to have
been such, we shall, according to justice censure them. Disorders committed by
some in England, and lately in this Kingdom, were never used as an Argument to
prove the unlawfulness of these engagements: And we wish, there had been the
like search in former times, who knows, but it might have preveened
insolences and disorders at this time?

To the third, we answer, We did take pains, and used all lawful means, to
give satisfaction to their Desires: It seems strange to us, they should be both
Petitioners, and Judges of their own Petitions; Yea, suppose, That For an
uncontroverted Truth, which is in question, to wit, That all your desires were
just: If our not granting all your desires, infer We maintain not the
Government of the Church: May not we with as much reason, in our sense,
conclude, That the refusing of the just desire of the Committee of Estates,
given in by the Earl of Glencairn, for granting us the space but of two or
three days, to propone our just exceptions, against the proceedings of the
late Commission of the Kirk, before that the Assembly should approve their
proceedings; As also the refusing of that pious and lawful desire of the Army
for Ministers: May we not conclude, That this is not a course to maintain the
just Authority of our Civil Government?

We wonder, how any can carp at the limitation to maintain Doctrine, etc. as
it is established by Law, unless some would have us to maintain some
innovations in Doctrine, Worship or Government, though not yet established by
Law: It appears also not to consist with ordinary charity, to carpe at our
harmless acknowledgement of the Kings goodness in establishing the Work of
Reformation here; yet we say far less then has been acknowledged by the
Assembly 1639 in their Letter of thanks to the Kings Majesty.

To the instances of breach in their second Article of the Covenant: We answer
to the first: That the desire of the Queens return can be no breach of the
Covenant, unless the Covenant obliged us to remove the Queen, and our Covenant
dissolves not the Covenant of Marriage: Withal We wish, there may be no
greater encouragements given to Sectaries to expect their long labored for
Toleration then We have, or ever shall give either to the Popish or Prelatical
party to hope for favor or connivence from us to their Idolatry and
Superstition.

To the second Instance for breach of the second Article: We desire our Answer
to the 1. Argument may be repeated. 2. Doing of a necessary and timeous duty to
our King, is a duty acceptable to God who commands it, and will be a mean
blessed of God for enclining the Kings heart (from the sense of our loyal
Endeavors) to his duty for securing Religion; These were our old Principles
according to Gods Word from the which by his Grace, We shall not depart; To
wit, That as evil may not be done that good may come of it, So must we not omit
necessary duties for fear of bad consequents, This is in Gods hand and the
other is required at our hands: As it is president presumption to do evil that
good may come of it; So it argues both disobedience to, and distrust of God, to
omit duties for fear of consequents. The General Assembly knows, there is a
difference betwixt a consequent in respect of Order of time and of causalitie,
The Honor and Freedom given by God to our first Parent in the State of
Innocence: As it was not the Cause of his abuse of both which followed in
time; So the giving of both was Tree of all blame; Besides we have declared, we
will not put in his hands any such Power whereby Religion or the Covenant may
be endangered, 13. page Declaration.

To the branch of the third Article in the first instance, We answer, That
breach of Privilege of Parliament, and prejudice to the liberty of the
Subject, should be best known to Us, who are both Parliament men, and Subjects
sensible of our own Liberty: We desire it to be considered, if the Kings
Majesty should give his consent to an Ordinance for Toleration of Errors,
would not this greatly prejudice Religion? in such a case were it not good He
had a negative voice? It is well known That Ordinance had been past into a Law,
if his Majesty had not refused it.

To the second Instance, we grant the Civil power is subordinate to the good
of Religion, and it is a great sin in Kings to do otherwise, but if Kings fail
in Religion, and in all things obey not Christ's Ordinance, that therefore their
Subjects are not tied to obedience in things lawful, Is against Scripture, The
practice of the Jewish Church, and the Confessions of Faith of all Reformed
Churches.

To the breach of the fourth Article, We desire our Answer to the second
Argument be repeated.

To the breach of the fifth Article in taking the Frontier Towns in England; We
Answer, there being a necessity of engagement in War, as we have shown, and
having certainly understood, that a party of Sectaries, declared Enemies to
Religion, King and Kingdoms, were to seize upon these Towns, the very law of
Nature, that in necessity teaches self-preservation, by laying hold on these
weapons, whereof Enemies would make use for our destruction, allows it in such
an exigent: As the Kingdom of England has experience of our Fidelity in
rendering up to them the Town of Newcastle, wherein we secured our selves for a
time, in our first Expedition: So we intend and declare, that after Religion,
King, and Kingdoms are secured from that prevalent party of Sectaries, we shall
with the same fidelity, render up these Frontier Towns; what we have done
consists well with the large Treaty betwixt the Kingdoms, which we intend to
keep inviolable on our Parts; That Treaty was with the Kingdom of England, but
not with Sectaries.

Whereas it is insinuated, the Parliament of England has offered a Treaty, We
answer, The Parliament and We who are authorized by them are only Judges, If
their Answer be satisfactory, And the truth is, neither first nor last have
they nor We received any satisfaction to the necessary demands of this
Kingdom. Nor so much as a Treaty offered to Us thereupon.

To the Breach of the 6th, Article. In our assisting or defending these that
are not in the Covenant, And that we will by this Engagement set our selves
against faithful Covenanters in that Kingdom, who will never Consent that the
King be brought to or near London with Honor, Freedom, and Safety before he
secure Religion. To the 1. We Answer as before to the second Argument. And with
all desire it be considered, That although we be quarrelled for assisting those
that have not taken the Covenant; yet no notice is taken so far as we know, in
any Church Judicatory of these perfidious Countrymen, who have gone to that
Army of Sectaries under the Command of Lambert. To the second We answer, We
expect better things of the faithful Covenanters in England, seeing the
Parliament there in 1647. did invite the King to come to London with Honor,
Freedom and Safety, which had been performed had they not been overawed by the
Army.

To the second instance, for Breach of the 6. Article We answer, We divide not
from our first Principles, but prosecute the same Ends of the Covenant, Bare
human Assertions prove little or nothing, We have not withdrawn from any that
adhere to public Principles, But if any walking upon private principles have
separate from us, They themselves know best, they went from us because they
were not of us.

Whereas much is spoken anent the probability of light and judgment in the
greatest part of the Ministers' condemning this Engagement as sinful and
unlawful, We Answer, the Argument is but humane and Popular, and not from
Scripture, unless your infallibility could be demonstrated from the Word of
God, Such an Argument, if admitted, will prove Implicit Faith, which if we
should give to the word of man, were indeed a Breach of our Covenant.

Let us also offer to your considerations our thought anent breach of Covenant
if we had not Engaged.

I. Are We not bound by the 1. Article To endeavor the Reformation in
Religion in the Kingdoms of England and Ireland? If we should sit still and
behold Sectaries defacing Religion that were far from endeavoring a
Reformation there.

II. Are we not obliged by the 2d. Article To endeavor the extirpation of
Schism and Heresy? But to fold our hands, and sleep in security, while the
Evil One sowes the Tares, Is this to endeavor the extirpation? No, it is to
give way to the rooting and spreading of Error.

III. In the 3d. Artile we are obliged to maintain the Privileges of
Parliament and Liberties of the Subjects, as also the Kings Person, and just
power in the preservation, etc. If we sit still, Is not the Parliament overawed
by an Army of Sectaries? And to do nothing, is a virtuall complying with
Sectaries, and strengthening of their hands; Are we not bound according to the
explanation in the Assembly 1639. to assist and maintain in every case, which
may concern His Honor If we do nothing for His Honor, and Relief from that
base and disgraceful Imprisonment, Are we not guilty of Breach of Covenant,
and of that Duty we owe to our King by our Allegience, which is not weakened
but strengthened by the Covenant, as is many times professed in our
Declarations?

IIII. In the 4th. Article we are obliged to discover, and bring to trial and
punishment Incendiaries, Malignants, etc. As Malignants have been punished, So,
are we not bound to bring Sectaries great hinderers of the work to condign
punishment? Our Covenant binds us to endeavor for this.

V. In the 5th. We are bound to preserve the Peace betwixt the Kingdoms, and to
set our selves against the wilful opposers thereof, either it must be avowed
that the Army of Sectaries is no Enemy to the Peace of these United Kingdoms,
(which we think none will profess) or it cannot be denied, but we fail, if we
oppose them not by an Engagement in War, As the Church does oppose them in
their Ecclesiastic way.

VI. In the 6th. We are bound to defend all that enter into this Covenant, In
the pursuing thereof, but if we should lie by, and suffer the faithful
Covenanters in England to be still borne down by that Army of Sectaties, Were
not this a Breach of Covenant? We desire these things to be considered
impartially, without prejudice of Self-opinions in judgment, of Self-interest
in Association, which are the two moates that hinder the understanding, to
discern Truth in the simplicity thereof.

FINIS.

