SOME Abuses of the Law Detected, In a Seasonable DISCOURSE Thereupon: Between
a Parliament Man and a Lawyer, Now Recomended to the Consideration of the
PARLIAMENT.
SIR,
Lawyer, I Am glad I have met with you, for I long to have some serious
discourse with you: I understand that some hotheaded people, that never think
themselves well but when they are Reforming forsooth, have a Months mind to be
Reforming the Law too.

Member, Why truly Sir, since the discourse has been on foot, I have taken some
Pains to inspect the Law, and I find a great many things in it that serve only
to perplex Causes, and are of no other use in the World: Now truly I am for
paring off all this; and many other things there are, that need abundance of
Redress.

Law. Pray Sir let us know what these things are, for I think we have nothing
that is superfluous.

Mem. Why, I my self had an occasion to Outlaw a Fugitive fellow, the other day,
and before I could get one Writ to the purpose, I was fain to have three or
four, that are wholly useless; I think you call them Capias, Alias and Plures,
and there must be fifteen days between the Date and Return of every one of
these useless Writs, besides the danger of having any error in them: Another
thing that is as impertinent is, notwithstanding the use of almost all Original
Writs is laid aside, for now you do not Summon the Defendant, but proceed to
Capias, and take Bail thereon: Yet, forsooth, those Originals must be
continued, and the want of them or the disagreeing of them, with the rest of
the proceedings, shall vitiate the whole Cause. An industrious Tenant of mine
the other day, that had got a fair Judgment by Confession for a Hundred Pounds,
had his Judgment Reversed, and he is without remedy, because a careless or a
knavish Attorney filed no Original; and yet these Originals are of no use in
the World: And I can tell you another thing that is as strange, not long since a
Neighbor of mine, and one of the Freeholders whom I represent, had an occasion
to bring two Actions, the one of Trespass, and the other of Debt, and
notwithstanding the merits of the Causes were fairly tried, and he had Verdicts
in both, and it cost him a great deal of Money and pains too; for he neglected
his other business, and came to Town to attend it: Yet for all this, because in
the Action of Trespass on the Record, 'twas Quod Cum in the Declaration, the
Judgment was set aside because the word (Cum) was too much (and it is as
dangerous to omit it in other Actions) And in the Action of Debt, tho his
Counsel tells him there is not the least error in the Judgment, the Defendant
(who has the longest purse) has brought a Writ of Error, which is granted of
course, which will stave it off three Terms more, and truly I fear before that
time is out, the poor Fellow must run away; I told these Stories the other day to
an Ingeniout Dutchman, who was curious to be informed of our Laws, and he was
amazed to hear them; he told me that in Holland, in many Cases they could
Arrest, have a Trial and Execution in two or three days time, without any of
these Encumbrances; and I hope to see it so here too; for what need is there I
pray of your common useless imparlances, as you call them? only to protract
Time, enrich the Lawyer, and beggar the Clyent.

Law. Sir, It has been thus these many Years, and why should we think our
selves wiser then our Ancestors; besides Sir, I perceive you are perfectly for
destroying the Grandeur and Dignity of the Law; which I hope the Lawyers in the
House (and in spite of your Teeth we shall always have some there) will be
careful to preserve. As to Originals, they are a great Revenue to the
Chancellor, and the taking them away would Ruin the Cursiters almost, that
have all bought their places (tho of right I confess they ought not) and
besides Originals were of great use formerly; and I don't see why they should
be laid aside.

Mem. Formerly all Men were obliged to keep Bows and Arrows, but now they are
useless, and Guns are in request, it would be Nonsense still to enjoin people
to have them, least the Bow and Arrow Trade should be spoiled: Now the new
great Lights are in fashion, there is no need of Candles at the same doors too;
and as to your Antiquity, if that were sufficient to justify Error; Popery
with all its fopperies must have continued; and the Heathen will never be
converted at that rate; and as to its being a Dignity to the Law, I take it to
be the greatest Indignity, and it is much like a Story I have heard of an old
Dotard, that would leave his Sword off, but would wear his Scabbard for the
Dignity of the thing.

Law. But I hope these are all your Objections.

Mem. No Sir, I could cram a Volume with them, had I time to recount them, I
have been seriously considering of Fines and Recoveries, and truly I think,
that either no Entails or Remainders ought to be defeated by any way whatever,
or that all such Entails and Remainders, as may be defeated by Fines or
Recoveries, should be wholly void and of none effect, without such troublesome,
chargeable, impertinent, and dangerous Ceremonies; for if you will allow them to
be defeated, why not without this charge and danger to the Clyent. Not long
since a Kinsman of mine that had purchased an Estate entailed, had a Fine and
Recovery passed for his security; and he is now like to loose it, the Fine its
feared will be Reversed, because there are not fifteen days between the Test
and Return of the Writ of Covenant; as to the Recovery either the Writ of Entry
or (...) is lost, all which Writs are wholly useless in themselves; and further,
as to the Recovery; in a feigned Judgment between the Demandant Tenant, and
John Wheeler, there is a fatal mistake in the sham Story forsooth; now is it
not a deplorable thing that a Man should loose an Estate on these Accounts,
that he has honestly paid for? Not but that I am for public Registers (in
their room) for all Deeds whatever, that affect Inheritance, to prevent fraud:

Law. Surely you think your self wiser then all that went before you; you are
for turning the World upside down, this would impoverish one quarter of the
Families that are supported by the Law, and pray remember you are breeding your
own Son up to it too; the King would loose part of his Revenue, if the
Alienations by Fines and Recoveries should be destroyed, and a Thousand other
mischiefs would happen; What would you have the Law as plain that every Cobbler
should understand it; you talk thus Sir, because you don't apprehend the Nature
of these things.

Mem. Truly there is a mystery of Iniquity in it, for my part, I think, the Law
that concerns every body, ought to be as easy as possible; as to my Son, I had
rather he got a little honestly, then a great deal by oppression, which never
wears well; the King you see by his Renouncing Chimney-Money, is not fond of
Taxes that oppress the People; and I am sure Chimney-Money has not ruined more
Families then this has done and may do; and as to your other Argument, I have
heard a Soldier use the same against Disbanding an Army, when all trouble was
over, and there was no further occasion of them, Why says he, several Officers
and Soldiers have no other Livelihood, and if you Disband us we must either
Beg, Rob, or Starve, and yet I think 'twould be a madness for any Nation to
continue them to the oppression of all, for fear they should reduce some
particular Men to their Shifts. Another horrid oppression is this, I have known
a Countryman bring an Action but for Ten Pounds, and I have seen an Atturnies
Bill of Fifteen Pounds for the getting it; and if he endeavors any redress
against this Knave, the Remedy is worse than the Desease.

Law. Truly I have thought of that with shame, and I can think but of this one
remedy for it, that is, if any Attorney should make an oppressive Bill, and it
shall be found and declared to be so before a Judge, that such Atturnies shall
forfeit all that is due to him on that Bill, and such Bill certified by a Judge
or Prothonotor to be extortive, shall be an absolute acquittance and discharge
of the sum total, Volenti non fit injuria, this will be a speedy way of
redress, and after this it will be a hard matter to persuade an Attorney to make
a Roguish Bill.

Mem. Truly I believe you have hit the Mark; set a Thief to catch a Thief, as
the saying is; but another great oppression I have seen in the Law, is the
dangerous and useless Niceties in Pleadings; and I think the late Parliaments
have done very well in most of their Acts about penalties, to order the general
Issue to be Pleaded, and that the special matter be given in evidence, as you
generally do in feigned Issues directed out of Chancery; and in all Ejectments,
which (...) of as great moment as any Action whatsoever; and why may not this
be as well done in all Cases, I Will warrant Thousands of Judgments (after fair
Trial and Verdicts) have been set aside merely on this account; and I don't see
the advantage of the nice Pleadings to any but the Lawyers.

Law. Why; if you should strip us at this rate, you would leave us nothing,

Mem. Nothing, that is dangerous, chargable, and impertinent, but all that is
really requisite: Another thing is this, I think it a very hard case that all
Law (like the Ladies Clothes) must come from London, forsooth, all the Records
must be made up, and kept here, and Writs must be sent from hence only; even
for us that live at the remotest Parts, why may not we make up and keep our
Records in the Country that they relate to, and have our process upon the
spot, without all this trouble for it.

Law. Pray Sir no more on it, you have distracted me already?

Mem. There is but one thing more; and then I have done with you for the
present, and that is this; the Law of late is Swelled to that bulk, and there are
so many Books on it, and such variety of opinions in them, that there is not one
disputable point, but a crafty Lawyer will Cite five or six Cases to justify
the affirmative and negative too; now it is impossible we should be at any
certainty in our properties, till this be remedied: And therefore I intend to
move the House that five or six of the ablest and most public spirited Lawyers
(if there are so many) may be appointed (and paid well for their pains) to
determine what Books are of Authority, and what not; and even of those Books
that are of Authority to geld out all the opinions that are not Law; and when
they have thus determined what is Law and what is not, we'll put a sacred stamp
on it by Act of Parliament, that this only shall be taken for Law for the
future; and then, and not till then, the Student will find some pleasure in his
now perplexed Studies, and we shall find some certainty in the Law, which is
now a mere Lottery, and the Judges themselves often can not tell what rule to
go by; and I Will undertake, Men had better turn Cross and Pile between
themselves, which way the Cause shall go, than imbark in a Suite as uncertain.

Law. But I hope the Parliament will be Dissolved before this comes to pass; in
the mean time i will set all the Lawyers in Town to expose you, and ridicule the
Project, and you know that is their Masterpiece, so Farewell for this bout.

Licensed, James Fraser.

London, Printed by Andrew Soul at the Sign of the Crooked-Billet in
Holloway-Lane in Shoreditch: And at the Three Kyes in Nags-Head-Court in
Grace Church Street.


