SOME ARGUMENTS Against filling up the PARLIAMENT WITH NEW MEMBERS Under any
Previous OATH or ENGAGEMENT.
I.IT will introduce the Cavalier and Sectarian Interests and exclude the
conscientious Interest.

II. It does enforce the Nation to subject themselves to a form of Government,
set up by a hand which they cannot own as a Full and Free Parliament, and
obliges their Representors not to alter it whatsoever mischiefs and
inconveniences they suffer by it, which is a high violation of the just
Freedom and due liberty of all Supreme Authority in the Nations
Representatives.

III. This Engagement is not made to the Nation, being against their sense and
desires, expressed in their Declarations and Remonstrances to his Excellency;
and if to the Imposers, then it sets up their Personal Interest only, and
excludes the National.

IV. It is against the Fidelity of a Trustee to submit to any Oath on
Engagement that shall restrain him from speaking the Sense of the People whom
he represents, and from endeavoring that which in his conscience he shall judge
best and most conducible to their safety and welfare, and hereby he is disabled
to act as a public Person, so as to discharge his trust.

V. There will be a necessity of continuing a force upon the House, which
hitherto has kept out the Major part, first secluded in 1648. without any
legal proceedings against them, or just Cause declared for their Seclusion, and
must now be employed to keep out those that shall be newly elected by the
People, if their consciences cannot submit to the Engagement that shall be
imposed; and hereby the Nation are kept under an impossibility of being fully
represented in Parliament, which must continue our distempers and grievances
without remedy.

VI. Experience has showed us the insufficiency of such kind of Engagements to
answer the expected end; for that Engagement imposed in 1649. and other Oaths
since, were so far from securing the Interests of the Imposers that they
produced quite contrary effects, and have successively occasioned many new and
dangerous distempers in the Nation,

FINIS.
LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1660.


