SOME CONSIDERATIONS ^umbly offered to the Honorable the House of COMMONS, by
the Governor and Company of Merchants of England, Trading into the Levant
Seas, touching the Bill, Entitled, A Bill for the further encouragement of the
Woollen Manufactures of this Kingdom.
I. THat the Consumption of Broad Clothes in Turkey has been of late years
increased, from 14 or 15 Thousand, to 25 or 30 Thousand Clothes per Annum; and
that this increase has been chiefly effected by taking Raw-Silk and
Mohair-Yarn in exchange for them: And if the consumption of Silk and Yarn be
lesned in England, the consumption of English Cloth will be proportionably
lesned in Turkey; for that Turkey does not afford Commodities proper for England
to be brought in returns, to a fourth part of the value of the Cloth sent
thither, other then the aforesaid Commodities of Raw Silk, and Mohair-Yarn, of
which two Commodities about three fourth parts of the value is in Silk, and one
fourth part in Mohair-Yarn.

II. That if we do not exchange our coarse Clothes for Silk and Mohair-Yarn,
the Dutch will thereby have an opportunity (which they will certainly make use
of, not only to introduce a Manufacture of coarse Cloth of their own; but also
extremely to depresse ours; and in a great measure gain the Manufacturing of
Silk and Yarn, and supply England therewith.

III. That it may be feared, the Grand Signior, taking notice of any restraint
of the expense of his Native Commodities in England, may by way of Retaliation,
prohibit the use of our Cloth in Turkey, which would be of very great damage to
this Nation, Turkey being now the place of its greatest Consumption: And if
coarse Clothes be not vended there, the Clothiers must decline the making them,
and consequently coarse Wool lie on hand, and be of little use or value.

IV. That many Thousands of Families in this Kingdom do wholly subsist upon the
Manufacturing of Silk and Mohair-yarn, who will be thereby thrown out of their
Livelyhoods, and constrained to remove themselves into other Countries, and
particularly into France, whether they are already invited by Promises of great
Rewards. Whereas the Manufacturing of Silk and Mohair-yarn in England, does
daily bring over great numbers of Manufacturers from Foreign parts (who are
generally Protestants) to the great benefit of the Kingdom both in People and
Wealth.

V. That the forbidding the wearing Silks in the Winter Season, does in a great
measure exclude the Manufacturing of Silk in England, because most of the
English Fabrics being thick and substantial are fittest for the Winter Season:
Whereas the thinner and slighter Silks that are worn in the Summer time, are
brought in fully Manufactured from the East Indies, and other Foreign Parts.

VI. That if this Bill shall pass into a Law, the Consumption of Spanish Wool,
may be augmented; but in no proportion to recompense the loss which the English
Wool will sustain thereby; because the Wearers of Silks and Chamblets being
generally persons of better Quality, will probably only wear Garments made of
Spanish Cloth:


