Sol in opposition to Saturn. OR A a short return to a late Tragedy called The
Duke of Guise.
HAil Royal Prince! our happy Morning Star;
The Genius of our peace, the Soul of War:
High by descent, by virtue higher yet,
Which make the people crovvd to kiss thy Feet.
Fame blow thy Trumpet! and let the mighty sound,
Of Monmouth, from the Antartick Pole rebound.
Fame blow again! until the blast be heard,
As far as Noble James, is loved or feared.
Blow! till the Universe does answer give,
Till Monmouth is the bravest Prince alive.
Oh that I could proportionate my Rhyme,
Unto the praise of Virtue so Sublime:
But were I never so skilful, such desert,
Does even Anticipate the Poets Art.
Hyperbolies in such exalted Theams,
But low, inferior, sickly Whimsies seems.
His Name does higher Elogies contain,
Then can be reached by all Apollo's train.
The highest Tune that ever Poet sung,
Would such an Elevated Subject wrong.
If so my Muse forbear, lay by thy Lyre,
The worth thou can not reach learn to admire.
Brave Noble Prince! such worth can never be,
Designed for everlasting Obloquy.
Though from black Mouths, Malignant Vapors rise;
And for the present hide thee from our Eyes.
Yet thou shall shine, and all those Clouds disperse:
Thy rays again, shall glad the Universe:
Infer no wretched thought from frowning Fate,
Though Virtuous men may be Unfortunate:
The Sun is often Eclipst, through little Stars,
And As unenvied, no Misfortune Fears.
While Envy lives, true worth will be defamed,
She Will bark, although she be for barking damned.
Brave Generous Prince! has Virtue learned to Sing,
Under the lash of every Libels Sting.
Be not offended with the silly Stage,
Nor the Effects of a blind Horses Rage.
Let Pegasus alone, her Race she will run,
And spite of thee, attain Damnation.
Yet let his anger thy compassion move,
Methinks his Passion has the looks of Love.
True Adversaries seldom warning give,
Like that which in this Play, thou do receive.
Not that I Will wrong him in this Patrons sense,
Nor spoil his Fortune, by his small pretense.
We Will rather say, to make amends for that,
His Plot does Item what sport he would be at.
Rejoice Great Prince! and may thy wretched Foes,
Proceed their worst intentions to disclose.
Fear not their malice, nor their threats despise,
But let apparent folly, make thee wise.
Finish the Virtuous Race thou have begun,
And future toils, with former Vigor run
To keep those Laurels, thou'st already won.
It Is true they have brought forth only Thorns as yet,
But thereby Fate runs more and more in debt.
Who knows what is for such desert prepared?
Did virtue ever go without reward?
Despair not James, for every Virtue is,
A Pledge of Temporal, or Eternal bliss.
Virtue is Earnest of some good to come,
Though often that good be bought with Martyrdom:
Though Providence be slow it cannot be rude
It never was guilty of Ingratitude.
Thou know not what'by Heaven is designed,
For the Exercise of thy heroic mind.
Who knows but Monmouth yet may the Victory have,
Ore Papists, who would his Native Land inslave.
Who knows for what thou art preserved, for we
Heavens Love perceive in thy delivery,
From the Italians Savage cruelty.
Who knows what Honors thou may yet regain?
The Sun must in the Morning rise again,
Who knows what Storms thy Luster may dispell,
What mischief stop, and what heart burnings quell,
Amongst Romish Tory's earnest to rebel?
Such Virtues ought not to be buried quick,
To gratify the Catholic Shismatick.
Such Talents ought not to be hid, but spread,
Virtue like Faith is fruitful if not dead.
Thy Countries Peace, and Liberty they Claim,
Thy Lords renown, the Center of thy Fame:
Were thou ambitious, thou had yet been high,
But this thy fall does prove thy Loyalty.
Disdain those Mungrels that would run thee down,
True Courage in adversity is shovvn.
As in a Storm the Sun does light some parts,
So does thy presence cheer all Loyal Hearts.
But as for them who envy deart thy life,
May they live cursed and die without relief.
May they die beggars and an offspring leave,
To whom Eternal infamy may cleave.
May all their hopes to desparation turn,
Live their own shame, and die the peoples scorn:
On one another, vent your swelling Gall,
And may intestine Malice eat you all.
May every Viper die by its own sting,
And Tory Poets their own Dirges sing.
But Heaven preserve great Monmouth from their rage,
Let him live safe though Murdered on the Stage.
Let Poets club their spleen, and Fops their pence,
May Heaven patronise his innocence.
LONDON Printed for H. Jones, 1683.


