portrait of William Salmon GVILIELMVS SALMON MEDICINAE PROFESSOR. AETATIS SVAE
20 ANN: 1670
You see his form and year but if you would
View his just Soul, (which envy cannot behold
In to his work, ye following tractate look
The lovely picture of his mind ye book
W Sherwin ad vitam Sculpt


title page Polygraphice or The ARTS of Drawing Limning Painting etc

London Printed for R: Jones in Little. Brittane 1672

Zeuxis.
Apellis.


W Sherwin sc


POLYGRAPHICE; OR The Arts of Drawing, Engraving, Etching, Limning, Painting,
Washing, Varnishing, Gilding, Coloring, Dying, Beautifying and Perfuming.

IN FOUR BOOKS.

Exemplifyed, in the Drawing of Men, Women, Landskips, Countries, and Figures
of various forms; The way of Engraving, Etching and Limning, with all their
Requisites and Ornaments; The Depicting of the most eminent Pieces of
Antiquities; The Paintings of the Ancients; Washing of Maps, Globes, or
Pictures; The Dying of Cloth, Silk, Horns, Bones, Wood, Glass, Stones, and
Metals; The Varnishing, Coloring and Gilding thereof, according to any purpose
or intent; The Painting, Coloring and Beautifying of the Face, Skin and Hair;
The whole Doctrine of Perfumes (never published till now) together with the
Original, Advancement and Perfection of the Art of Painting.

The Second Edition, with many large Additions. Adorned with Sculptures: The
like never yet extant.

By WILLIAM SALMON (...).

Marcel. Palin. lib. 8. Genus est absque ordine nullum.

London, Printed by E. T. and R. H. for R. Jones, at the Sign of the Golden
Lion in Little Britain. 1673.

To the Right Honorable HENRY Lord HOWARD, Earl OF NORWICH, EARL Marshal of
ENGLAND.
My LORD,
THe Art of Painting was a thing which of old Princes admired, Kings did
affect, Emperors and Noble men of almost all Ages did love and make use of. Not
to mention Juba Rex Mauritaniae, Perseus King of Macedonia, King Demetrius,
Cyrus King of Persia, Alexander the Great, Caesar, and others: How was Tiberius
the Emperor taken with the Archigallus of Parrhasius, and the statue which
Lysippus made? How highly did Mnason the Tyrant of the Eleatenses prize the
pictures of the Thebean battle done by Aristides? How did King Nicomedes, who
proffered an unknown sum of money to the Gnidians, for the Venus which
Praxiteles made, admire it? What estimation had Marcus. Agrippa for it, who
offered vast sums to the inhabitants of Cyzicus for the two pictures of Ajax
and Venus? Besides many others too tedious here to be recited, and sufficiently
enough known to your Lordship, of which to make any repetition might be
accounted presumption, especially to your Honor, whose Skill in Art is large,
and whose Knowledge of Universal Learning is not small, especially in that of
History. It is Honor, as Cicero says, which gives Being, Life and Nourishment
to Arts, and where can that be found more than in your Noble Self? Presuming
therefore of your Lordships Affection, and that Unparalled Virtue, and
Heroic Spirit, which not only lodges in your Honors Breast, but is also
Hereditary to your Noble Family, I have made bold to shelter this work under
your Lordships Patronage; expecting either to see it live in your Honors
Estimation, or perish in your dislike. Now if these Lucubrations of mine,
obtain but so much as your Honors least Approbation, I shall think my self
Happy; and hope, that with your Name and Memory, this work may be consecrated
to Eternity. May your Lordship daily increase in Honor and Glory, be
replenished with all earthly Blessings, and for ever enjoy the full fruition of
all Happiness both in this World, and that which is to come, is the Prayer of

MY LORD, Your Honors most Humble and Affectionate Servant, William Salmon.

THE PREFACE TO THE READER.
THe Subject of the ensueing work is the Art of Painting: a name not only too
singular; but also too short or narrow, to express what is here intended
thereby: For we do not only express that Art, (as it is generally received) but
also Drawing, Engraving, Etching, Limning, Washing, Coloring and Dying; all
which being considered in their peoper extent, infinitely exceed that curtailed
name of Painting; which that we might join all in one proper and comprehensive
word, we made choice of that Greek Compound POLYGRAPHICE.

To persuade any one to the study or practice of this Art, would be a great
folly; since Ignorance (which is always blind) can never be able to judge
aright: For to him that already understands it, the labor would be useless and
unprofitable; to him which is already delighted therein, it would be needless
and superflu^us; and to the Averse and Ignorant, it would be the putting a
Jewel into a Swines snout: the exquisite knowledge of which is impossible ever
to be attained or understood, by such prejudicate and cloudy Souls, although it
is sufficiently known to many already; and its usefulness as apparent as it is
excellent: To enumerate the one, or rehearse the other, is but to persuade the
world, that it is daylight when the Sun is upon the Meridian; or at least to
inculcate, an ignorance of those things, which have been manifestly known even
a long time since.

The Method of this work is wholly new, wherein we have united and made one,
such various subjects, as have been the uncertain, obscure and tedious
discourse of a great number of various and large Volumes. What shall we say?
things far asunder, we have laid together: things uncertain, are here limited
and reduced: things obscure, we have made plain: things tedious, we have made
short: things erroneous, we have rectified and corrected: things hard, we have
made facil and easy: things various, we have collected: things (in appearance)
heterogene, we have made homogene: And in in a word, the whole Art we have
reduced to certain heads; brought under a certain method; limited to practical
rules; and made it perspicuous, even to a very mean understanding.

In the Composure of this work (besides our own Observations) we have made use
of the best Authors now Extant, that we could possibly procure, or get into our
hands; wherein our labor was not small; what in Reading, Comparing,
Transcribing, Choosing, Correcting, Disposing, and Revising every thing, in
respect of Matter, Form, and Order. The which had we any President to have
followed; any Path to have traced; any Example to have imitated; any Help to
have consulted; or any Subject entire: Or otherwise, had the Number of our
Authors been small; their Maxims, truths; their Rules, certain; their Meanings
not obscure; or their Precepts been reduced to Method and Order: We might not
only, with much more ease, pleasure, and certainty; less labor, trouble, and
pains; greater perspicuity, plainness and singularity; better order, method,
and language; but also in shorter time have brought to perfection, what we here
present you withal.

In this second Edition we have not only inserted several Copper Cuts, with
more than two hundred several additions of singular use, through the three
first books; but there is also a whole fourth book, containing above threescore
Chapters of such necessary matter, that the work without them may really be
accounted defective. It Is true, some things are not only immethodically
disposed (by reason this latter part was not intended at the reprinting hereof
till afterward, upon more mature and deliberate consideration) but also much
out of Order; yet we thought better to have them out of Order, than out of the
Book. There is not only several necessary things added (which were omitted in
the three first books;) as also the various depicturings of the Ancients,
according to the custom of every nation, drawn from the best, most experienced
and faithfullest Authors now extant, (whether English, Italian or Latin) but
also the various ways of Painting, Beautifying and Adorning the Face and Skin,
so artificially, as it shall be imperceptible to the scrutiny of the most
curious and piercing eye: to which we have added (as a necessary Appendice) the
whole doctrine of Persumes, never written on (to our knowledge) in this order
before; together with the Original, Advancement and Perfection of these Arts.

Lostly, the Reader is desired to take notice, that in this following work,
there are many excellent secrets, not vulgarly known, which fell into our hands
from several special friends, (whose exquisite knowledge in these kinds of
Mysteries does truly declare them to be absolute Masters thereof) which for the
public good are freely communicated to the world.

William Salmon.

POLYGRAPHICES LIBER PRIMUS. OF DRAWING.
CHAP. I. Of Polygraphice in General.
I. POlygraphice is an Art, so much imitating Nature, as that by proportional
lines with answerable Colors, it teaches to represent to the life (and that
in plano) the forms of all corporeal things, with their respective passions.

II. It is called, in general, in Greek (...), in Latin Pictura, and in English
the Art of Painting.

III. It is sevenfold (to wit) in Drawing, Engraving, Etching, Limning,
Painting, Washing and Coloring.

IV. Drawing is, that whereby we represent the shape and form of any corporeal
substance in rude lines only.

V. It consists in proportion and passion, as it has relation to motion and
situation, in respect of Light and Vision.

VI. Sanderson says, This Admirable Art, is the Imitation of the surface of
Nature in Color and Proportion, 1. By Mathematical demonstration, 2. By
Chorographical description, 3. By shapes of Living creatures, 4. And by the
forms of Vegetables; in all which it prefers Likeness to the life, conserves it
after death, and this altogether by the Sense of Seeing.

VII. The proportion shows the true length, breadth or bigness of any part (in
Known measures) in respect of the whole, and how they bear one to another: The
passion represents the Visual Quality, in respect of love or hatred, sorrow or
joy, magnanimity or cowardice, majesty or humility; of all which things we
shall speak in order.

CHAP. II. Of the Instruments of Drawing.
I. THe Instruments of Drawing are sevenfold, viz. Charcoals, feathers of a
Ducks-wing, black and red Lead pencils, pens made of Ravens quils, Rulers,
Compasses, and Pastils.

II. Charcoals are to be chosen of Sallow-wood split into the form of pencils,
and sharpened to a point, being chiefly known by their pith in the middle.

Their use is to draw lightly the draught over at first, that if any thing he
drawn amiss it may be wiped out and amended.

III. The feathers ought to be of a Ducks-wing, (though others may serve well
enough) with which you may wipe out any stroke of the Charcoal where it is
drawn amiss, lest variety of Lines breed confusion.

IV. Black andred Lead pencils, are to go over your draught the second time
more exactly, because this will not wipe out with your hand, when you come to
draw it over with the pen.

V. Pens made of Ravens quills (but others may serve) are to finish the work:
but herein you must be very careful and exact, for what is now done amiss there
is no altering of.

VI. The Rulers, which are of use to draw straight or perpendicular lines,
triangles, squares or polygons, the which you are to use in the beginning, till
practice and experience may render them needless.

VII. Compasses made of fine Brass with Steel points, to take in and out, that
you may use black or red Lead at pleasure.

Their use is first to measure (by help of a curious scale of equal parts upon
the edge of your Ruler) your proportions, and whether your work is exact which
is done with the Charcoal. Secondly, to draw Circles, Ovals, and Arches withal.

VIII. Pastils are made of several Colors to draw withal, upon colored paper
or parchment, Thus,

Take Plaster of Paris or Alabaster calcined, of the color of which you
intend to make your pastils with, ana q. s. grind them first asunder, then
together, and with a little water make them into paste, then with your hands
roll them into long pieces like black-lead pencils, then dry them moderately
in the Air: being dried, when you use them, scrape them to a point like an
ordinary pencil.

And thus may you make pastils of what color you please, fitting them for the
faces of Men or Women, Land-skips, Clouds, Sunbeams, Buildings and shadows.

IX. To the former add good Copies, Patterns, and Examples of good Pictures,
and other draughts, without which it is almost impossible, that the young
Artist should ever attain to any perfection in this Art.

Those that desire to be furnished with any excellent Patterns, Copies or
Prints, may have of all sorts, whether of Humane shape, Perspective design,
Landscape, Fowls, Beasts, Fishes, Insects, Plants, Countries, or any other
Artificial figures, exquisitely drawn, at very reasonable rates, where this
Book is to be sold.

CHAP. III. Of the precepts of Drawing in General.
I. BE sure to have all the necessaries aforesaid in readiness, but it will be
good to practice as much as may be without the help of your Rule and Compasses;
it is your eye and fancy must judge without artificial measurings.

II. Then first begin with plain Geometrical figures, as Lines, Angles,
Triangles, Quadrangles, Polygons, Arches, Circles, Ovals, Cones, Cylinders and
the like. For these are the foundations of all other proportions.

III. The Circle helps in all orbicular forms, as in the Sun, Moon, etc. the
Oval in giving a just proportion to the face and mouth; the mouth of a Pot or
Well, the foot of a Glass, etc. the Square confines the Picture you are to
Copy, etc. the Triangle in the half-face; the Polygone in Ground-plats,
Fortifications, and the like; Angles and Arches in Perspective; the Cone in
Spires-tops of Towers and Steeples: the Cylinder in Columns, Pillars,
Pilasters, and their Ornaments.

IV. Having made your hand fit and ready in General proportions, then learn to
give every object its due shade according to its convexity or concavity, and to
elevate or depress the same, as the object appears either nearer or farther off
the light, the which is indeed the life of the work.

V. The second practice of drawing consists in forming fruits, as Apples,
Pears, Cherries, Peaches, Grapes, Strawberries, Peascods, etc. with their
leaves: the imitation of flowers, as Roses, Tulips, Carnations, etc. Herbs, as
Rosemary, Time, Hysop, etc. Trees, as the Oak Fir, Ash, Wallnut, etc.

VI. The third practice of Drawing imitates, 1. Beasts, as the Lamb, Elephant,
Lion, Bear, Leopard, Dog, Cat, Buck, Unicorn, Horse, etc. 2. Fowls, as the
Eagle, Swan, Parrot, Partridge, Dove, Raven, etc. 3. Fishes, as the Whale,
Herring, Pike, Carp, Thornback, Lobster, Crab, etc. of which, variety of Prints
may be bought at reasonable rates.

VII. The fourth praxis imitates the body of Man with all its Lineaments, the
Head, Nose, Eyes, Ears, Cheeks, hands, Arms, and shadows all exactly
proportional both to the whole, and one to another, as well to situation as
Magnitude.

VIII. The fifth praxis is in Drapery, imitating Clothing, and Artificially
setting off the outward Coverings, Habit and Ornaments of the Body, as Cloth,
Stuff, Silk and Linen, their natural and proper folds; which although it may
seem something hard to do, yet by much exercise and imitation of the choicest
Prints, will become facil and easy.

IX. In drawing of all the aforegoing forms, or what ever else, you must be
perfect, first in the exact proportions: secondly in the general or outward
lines, before you fall to shadowing or trimming your work within.

X. In mixed and uncertain forms, where Circle and Square will do no good (but
only the Idea thereof in your own fancy) as in Lions, Horses, and the like;
you must work by reason in your own judgment, and so obtain the true proportion
by daily practice. Thus;

Having the shape of the thing in your mind, first draw it rudely with your
coal, then more exactly with your lead or pencil; then peruse it well, and
consider where you have erred, and mend it, according to that Idea, which you
carry in your mind; this done, view it again, correcting by degrees the other
parts, even to the least Jota, so far as your judgment will inform you; and
this you may do with twenty, thirty, forty or more papers of several things at
once: having done what you can, confer it with some excellent pattern or print
of like kind, using no rule or compass at all, but your own reason, in mending
every fault, giving every thing its due place, and just proportion; by this
means you may rectify all your errors, and step an Incredible way on to
perfection.

CHAP. IV. Of Drawing the Face of a Man.
I. IN drawing of the face you are first to observe its motion whether upwards,
downwards, forwards, or sideways; whether it be long or round, fat or lean,
great or little.

For if it be fat, the cheeks will seem to swell: if lean, the jaw-bones will
stick out, and the cheeks fall in; but if neither too fat nor too lean, it will
be for the most part round.

II. Touch lightly the features where the eyes, mouth, nose, and chin should
stand, (having first drawn the circle or oval of the face) then make a stroke
down from that place of the forehead which is eaven with the Chin, coming down
where you should place the middle or tip of the nose, and middle of the mouth,
which stroke must be made straight down in a full right face, but arched or
oval in an oblique face, leaning that way toward which the face does turn:
then cross the stroke about the middle of the Eyes, either with a straight line
in a right face, or with a Curved either upwards or downwards according to the
present action or posture of the face: then make another answerable to that,
where the end of the nose should come; and another for the mouth, that it be
not made crooked.

how to draw the human head W Sherwin sc


III. Then if the face look upwards toward heaven, or downwards toward the
earth, let the Eyes, Nose, Mouth, and Brows look accordingly with it; and now
proceed to the placing of the features.

IV. In a just proportioned face, the distances, 1. between the top of the
forehead and the eyebrows, 2. between the eyebrows and the bottom of the
nose, 3. between the bottom of the nose and the bottom of the Chin, are equal.

V. In drawing the utmost Circumference of a face, take in the head and all
with it, lest you be deceived in drawing the true bigness.

how to draw facial features W Sherwin sc


VI. Then consider all those chief touches which give life to a face, adding
grace thereto, and something discovering the disposition of the mind.

So the mouth extended and the corners a little turning up, shows a smiling
countenance: the eye-brow bending, and the forehead and top of the nose between
the eyebrows wrinkled, shows one frowning: the upper eyelid coming something
over the ball of the eye, shows one sober and stayed: with many other touches
which give life and spirit to a face, which in good paints, by little and
little, and diligent observation you will at last find out.

VII. The distances between the eyes, is the length of one eye in a full face,
but in a three-quarted or half-face, it is lessened proportionably: and exactly
underneath the corners of the eyes, place the nostrils.

VIII. Having given touches where the eyes, nose, mouth and chin should be
placed, begin to draw them more exactly, and so proceed till the face be
finished; and then make the hair, beard, shadows, and other things about it.

sample drawings of heads W Sherwin sc


IX. Be sure to make the shadows rightly, and be sure not to make them too
dark, where they should be faint; for that can never be made light again, and
so the whole face is marred.

The shadows are fainter and lighter in a fair face than in a swarthy.

X. When you have finished the face, give here and there some hard touches with
your pen where the shadows are darkest; then come the ears and hair, wherein,
having drawn the out-line, draw the principal curls, or master strokes in the
hair, which will be a guide to you in the lesser curls, whose dependence are on
them: always make the curls to bend exactly according to the pattern, that they
may lie loose, or carelessly, and not as if they were stiff and forced; the
curls being rightly drawn, in the last place strike in the loose hairs which
hang scatteringly out of the Circles.

XI. In forming the Ear, describe an Oval as it were, and proceeding lightly,
join stroke to stroke, in such manner as you see in the Figures; so that the
ear may be entirely formed, without digressing from the bounds of Nature or Art.

XII. Lastly, having practiced a little by rule, and brought your hand in; in
drawing of any thing, first strike the out-stroaks, principal veins, and
muscles lightly, and afterward shadow them, ever following exquisite patterns
and prints, which will both increase your judgment, and bring command to your
hand.

sample drawings of heads W Sherwin sc


CHAP. V. Of the Extremeparts.
I. IN drawing the hands, draw not all the joints, veins or other things to
appear plainly, but only lightly and faintly, and strike out the bigness of the
hand, and the manner of its turning with faint touches, and not with hard
strokes; then that being done right, part the fingers according to the pattern
with like faint strokes; then mark that place where any of the fingers do stand
out from the others, with a faint resemblance: this done, proceed to draw it
more perfectly, making the bending of the joints, the wrists and other
principal things more exactly; and lastly, go over with it again, drawing every
small bending or swelling of the fingers, nails, knuckles and veins, so many as
do appear.

II. Learn by good prints the just proportions of the hands, with their equal
distances; observing this rule, that according as it turns one way or another,
to shorten proportionally as they appear to the eye.

For so much as it turns away from our eye, so much it loses in proportion, yea
sometimes a whole finger, two or three or more is lost to our sight, which you
must accordingly answer in your draught.

III. In drawing of the feet, the same rules which we even now enumerated, at
the first and second Section of this Chapter, are to be understood here.

sample drawings of hands, feet, and legs W Sherwin sc


sample drawings of hands, feet, and legs W Sherwin sc


CHAP. VI. Of Drawing the whole Body.
I. FIrst begin with the head, and be sure to give it its just proportion,
answerable to what you intend the whole body shall be; then draw the shoulders
in their exact breadth; after them, the trunk of the body: beginning at the
Armpits, and so drawing down to the Hips on both sides, observing withal the
exact breadth of the Waste; Lastly, draw the legs, arms and hands, exactly to
your pattern.

II. But first draw with a coal, and that very lightly and faintly, drawing
nothing perfect (that you may the easier mend it if it be amiss) and then
afterward finish one thing after another as curiously as you can.

III. Let the parallel sinews, muscles, veins and joints, be placed opposite
one to another in a straight line (as shoulder to shoulder, hip to hip, knee to
knee, etc.) for which purpose draw straight cross lines to guide you therein;
observing that which way soever the body turns or bows, these lines may answer
accordingly.

sample drawings of cherubs W Sherwin sc


IV. Let all perpendicular joints, and parts also, be placed in a right line
one under another (as they are in your pattern) for which end, draw a straight
line (if the body be straight) from the throat through the middle of the breast
and privities, to the feet, to which line draw all those particular points
parallels, that the body may not appear crooked or awry.

V. In bowings and bendings of the body, let the extuberance of the outward
part be just equal to the compression of the inward part: making all things of
an equal proportion; that as opposite parts may be equal (as the arm to the
arm, leg to leg, etc.) so every part may be proportionable to each other, (as
the hand not too big for the arm, nor the arm for the body, nor the body for
the legs, etc.) only with this difference, that (as the one part may appear
fully to the eye, or the other may turn away either in part, or in whole, or be
seen side-way) it be made so much less than the other, by so much as it turns
away from the sight.

VI. As you observe a just proportion in bigness, so also in length, that as
every opposite part be of equal length, so that each part may not be too long
one for another, but according to the proposed magnitude: And in this case that
if the body be a wry, or any ways hid, those parts may shorten accordingly, to
what is out of sight.

VII. Lastly, Observe the just distance of one thing from another, for by that
means you will be more exact in your draught; and, in short time, perfectly
imitate your pattern or nature.

CHAP. VII. Of Drawing a Naked Body.
I. IN drawing after the life, as there are variety of faces, so no certain
Rules can be delivered for the same; yet the following precautions may be
useful.

II. Draw out the head in an Oval, one fourth part for the hair; one fourth
part for the forehead and brows; one fourth for the nose; and the last for the
mouth and chin.

III. Having drawn out the head, measure out eight times the length of the head
(the head making one of the eight parts) and draw a straight line from the top
of the head to the sole of the foot.

IV. One heads length from the chin is for the breast; the next eighth part
reaches to the navel; the fourth part to the privities; the fifth part to the
middle of the thigh; the sixth part to the lower part of the knee; the seventh
to the small of the leg; and the eighth part to the heel.

V. The muscles you must observe to draw exactly as they are in the life: the
breadth of the shoulders, is about two measures of the head: the breadth of the
hips, two measures of the face: the arms stretched out, are just the length of
the whole figure, the breasts also accounted; but without the breasts they are
but six.

VI. The arms hanging straight down reach within a span of the knee: the length
of the hand is the just length of the face. See the two figures following.

VII. Observe first to draw the head exactly, and next, the shoulders in their
just breadth: then draw the trunk of the Body, and the rest as at the first
Section of the sixth Chapter.

VIII. Be sure to place the joints, sinews, and muscles in their natural
places, and also proportionally, in respect of Magnitude, Similitude, and
Parts: lest it seem crooked and deformed.

IX. See that every parallel joint bend moderately, so as to answer in nature
its opposite.

sample drawings of male figures W Sherwin sc


sample drawings of female figures W Sherwin (...)


CHAP. VIII. Of Shadowing a Naked Body.
I. THe shadows of the neck, in a child or young woman, are very fine, rare,
and hard to be seen: In a man, the sinews and veins are expressed by shadowing
of the rest of the neck, and leaving them white: the shoulder is shadowed
underneath: the brawn of the arm must appear full and white, shadowed on one
side.

II. The veins of the back of the hand, and the knuckles are made with two or
three hair strokes with a fine touch of the pen.

III. The paps of a man are showed by two or three strokes given underneath: in
a woman with an orbicular shade, somewhat deep; the ribs retain no shadow,
except you represent one lean or starved.

IV. The belly is made eminent by shadowing underneath the breast bone and the
flank: The brawn of the thigh is shadowed by drawing small hair strokes from
the hip to the knee, and crossed again overthwartly.

V. The knee is to be finely shadowed underneath the joint; the shin-bone
appears by shadowing one half of the leg with a single shadow.

VI. The ankle-bone appears by shadowing a little underneath (as in the knees)
and the sinews thereof must seem to take beginning from the midst of the foot;
and to wax bigger as they grow nearer to the toes.

VII. Lastly, the shadows of the foot must take place according as reason and
occasion requires, for which (as also in all the former precepts) the having of
good prints will be no small advantage unto you.

CHAP. IX. The way and manner of Shadowing.
I. IF it be a surface only it is best shadowed by drawing lines (either
straight or oblique, according as the superficies is) through the better half
thereof.

II. If it be in a body, it is a double shadow, and is used when a superficies
begins to forsake your sight, as in Columns and Pillars, where it is double
darkened, and represents to the eye, as it were the backside, leaving that
unshadowed to the light.

III. The treble shadow is made by crossing over again the double shadow, and
is used for the inward parts of things, as in clefts of the earth, wells,
caves, the insides of pots, cups and dishes.

IV. In shadowing, let the shadow always fall one way, that is, on the same
side of the body; leaving the other to the light.

So in drawing a man, if I begin to shadow his right cheek, I must shadow the
right part of his neck, arm, side, thigh, leg, etc.

V. But if the light side of the body be darkened by the opposition of some
other body standing between the light and it, it must receive a contrary shadow
according as the light is obfuscated.

So if threepillars stand together, that in the midst must receive a shadow on
both sides.

VI. All circular bodies must have a circular shadow (by the first Section of
this Chapter) according to their form or appearance, and the orbicular shadow
of the object which casts it.

VII. Let your shadow grow fainter and fainter, according to the greatness of
the distance from the opacous Body shadowing.

And the reason is, because all shadows are pyramidal, in which case, space of
place prevails with the light against the shadow.

VIII Where contrary shadows concur, let the meanest and most solid body be
first served; and in double and treble shadows, let the first lines be very dry
for fear of blotting, before you cross them.

IX. All perfect lights receive no shadow at all; but being manifest, are only
to be made apparent by that body which receives them; whose shadow must be
according to the efflux of light: but the color of the light ought to agree
with the medium which receives it, whether it be Air, Crystal, Water, Amber,
Glass, Transparentwine, or the like.

CHAP. X. Of Expressing Passions in the Countenance.
I. LOve is expressed by a clear, fair and pleasant Countenance, without
clouds, wrinkles, or unpleasant bendings: giving the forehead an ample height
and breadth with majestic grace; a full eye with a fine shadow at the bottom
of the eyelid, and a little at the corner: a proportionable nose; nostrils not
too wide: a clear cheek made by shadowing of it on one side: and a smiling
mouth made by a thin upper lip, and shadowing the mouth-line at the corners.

II. Fear is expressed by making the eyes look hollow, heavy and downward,
thin fallen cheeks, close mouth, and staring careless hair about the ears.

III. Envy is best decyphred by the only hanging of the cheeks, and a pale
countenance; and sometimes by grinning of the teeth.

IV. Let every passion be represented according to the outward appearance
thereof, as it is in those persons in whom it reigns; observing the rules at
the sixth Section of the fourth Chapter.

CHAP. XI. Of Humane proportion.
I. THE length of an upright body is equal to eight times the length of the
face or head: The arm hanging straight down, reaches within a span of the
sample drawing of naked warrior Guil: Vaughan sculp:
Knee: The length of the hand must be the length of the face: The arms extended
must be the just length of the body.

II. Those parts of the body near to the Eye must be made greater and longer
than those farther off, (because the eye judges so of them) and according to
the distance from the eye, so must you vary from that which is otherwise the
real true proportion of those parts.

III. In foreshortning you must take things as they appear to the eye, and not
to draw the full proportion of each part, but to shorten all, according to the
rate or reason which is obfuscated.

So if you would draw a ship foreright, there can appear but only her forepart
(for the rest being hid cannot be expressed:) the like of an horse looking full
in my face, or a man lying along; I must here of necessity foreshorten, to
express the Visual property: And in this case your eye and reason must be your
chief guide to give the true reason and measure of these appearances, whether
in Drawing, Limning or Painting.

IV. The use of this foreshortning is to express all manner of actions in man
or beast; to represent many things in a little room; to show at one view to the
eye and mind, the whole body of a temple, with all its arches and pillars
whether the inside or outside, as also the sundry sides of Cities, Castles and
Forts, and such like.

Lastly, That in every case you make Nature the pattern of all draughts, so
that nothing be expressed, but what does agree and accord with nature; and that
nothing be either forced beyond nature, nor yet any thing to come short of
nature.

As if in drawing the picture of a man, be sure you draw not such a posturt as
is impossible for him to imitate with his natural body.

CHAP. XII. Of Drapery.
I. DRaw the out-lines of the Garment lightly, and herein be careful, for the
whole grace of the picture lies there; then draw the greatest folds first, and
stroke those into lesser, and be sure they cross one another.

II. Suite your garments to the body, and make them bend with the body,
according as it stands in or out, straight or crooked, or turns one way or
another: the closer the garment sits to the body, the narrower and smaller must
the folds be.

III. All your folds must consist of two lines and no more, which you may turn
with the garment at pleasure, shadowing the innermost deeper, the outermost
more light; and if the folds be never so curiously contrived, spare not to
shadow them (if they fall inward from the light) with a double or treble
shadow, as the occasion requires.

sample drawing of draped male figure W Sherwin sc


sample drawing of draped female figure W Sherwin sc


IV. The greater folds must be continued through the whole garment, the lesser
you may break off and shorten as you please.

V. The shades of silk and fine linen, are very thick and small, which require
little folds and a light and rare shadow, commonly but double at most; and so
also fine Drapery requires more and sharper folds than course.

VI. That part of a garment which sits close to the body, must not be folded at
all, but only sweetly shaded, to represent the part of the body which lies
under it.

CAROLVS II DEI GRATIA ANGLIAE SCOTIAE FRANCIAE ET HIBERNIAE REX
portrait of King Charles II

CATHARINA DEI GRATIA ANGLIAE SCOTIAE FRANCIAE ET HIBERNIAE REGINA etc
portrait of Catherine of Braganza, Queen Consort

VII. Observe the motion of the wind and air, for driving loose apparel all one
way, drawing that part of the garment first which lies highest and closest upon
the body, before you draw the looser part that flies off from the body, lest by
drawing the loose part of the garment first you should be out, and so place the
body crooked or awry.

CHAP. XIII. Of Mixed and Uncertain Forms.
I. FOr the drawing the form of any beast, begin with your lead or coal at the
forehead, drawing downward the nose, mouth, upper and nether chop, ending your
line at the throat; then viewing it again where you begun, from the forehead,
over the head, ears and neck, continuing till you have given the full compass
of the buttock, then mark out the legs and feet: Viewing it again, touch out
the breast with the eminency thereof; Lastly, finish the tail, paws, tongue,
teeth, beard, and several shadows.

II. In drawing beasts you must be well acquainted with their shape and action,
without which you shall never perform any thing excellent in that kind: and
here if you draw it in an Emblem or the like, you ought to show the Landscape of
the Country natural to that beast.

III. In birds begin also the draught at the head, (and beware of making it too
big) then bring from under the throat the breast line down to the legs, there
stay, and begin at the pinion to make the wing, which (...) joined to the ^^ck
line will be presently finished: the eye, legs and train must be at last,
letting always (in birds as in beasts) the farthest leg be shortest; their
feathers (as the hair in beasts) must take their beginning at the head very
small, and fall in one way backwards in five ranks, greater and greater to the
conclusion.

IV. Insects, as flies, bees, wasps, grasshoppers, worms, and such like, are
easy to be drawn and not hard to be laid in Colors; in doing these, it will
at first be absolutely necessary to have the living pattern before your eyes.

V. To draw a flower, begin from the boss, tufft or wart in the middle; as in a
Rose or Marigold, with the yellow tufft, which being made, draw lines equally
divided, from thence to the greatest compass or extent of your flower: you may
draw them either fully open or in the bud, and laden with dew, wet, and worms,
and then you may draw rudely with the coal or lead the leaves afterward,
giving them their veins or jaggedness,

VI. To take the natural and lively shape of the leaf of any herb or tree.

First, take the leaf that you would have, and gently bruise the ribs and veins
on the backside of it: afterward wet the side with linseed oil, and then
press it hard upon a piece of clean white paper, and so you shall have the
perfect figure of the said leaf, with every vein thereof so exactly expressed, as
being lively colored it will seem to be truly natural.

CHAP. XIV. Of Landscape.
I. Landscape is that which expresses in lines the perfect vision of the earth,
and all things thereupon, placed above the horizon, as towns, villages,
castles, promontaries, mountains, rocks, valleys, ruins, rivers, woods,
forests, chases, trees, houses and all other buildings, both beautiful and
ruinous.

II. First, Always express a fair horizon, showing the heavens, cloudy or
clear, more or less according to the occasion; and if you express the Sun, let
it be either as rising or setting, and as it were behind or over some hill or
mountain.

The Moon and Stars are seldom or never depicted, unless it be in
representation of twilight; because all things are supposed to be seen by day.

III. Secondly, If you express the Sun, make his light to reflect upon all the
trees, hills, mountains, rocks, or buildings; shading the contrary side; after
which manner also shadow clouds, mists, and the like: making the shadows to
fall all one way.

sample landscape drawing

IV. Thirdly, be very careful to augment or lessen every thing proportionably
to their distance from the eye, making them either bigger or lesser.

V. In expressing things at large distances, as ten, twenty or thirty miles
off; where the object is hard to be discerned, as whether it be Temple, Castle,
House or the like; show no particular signs thereof, or any eminent
distinction; but rather as weakly, faintly, and confusedly as the eye judges
of it.

VI. If Landskips be laid in Colors, the farther you go, the more you must
lighten it with a thin and airy blew, to make it seem as it were afar off,
beginning at first with a dark green, so driving it by degrees into a blew,
according to the distance.

VII. Make your Landscape to shoot (as it were) away, one part lower than
another, making the nearest hill or place highest, and those that are farther
off, to shoot away under that, that the Landscape may appear to be taken from
the top of an hill.

VIII. Let every thing have its proper motion, as in trees when they are shaken
with the wind, making the smaller boughs yielding; the stiffer less bending: in
clouds that they follow the winds: in rivers, the general current, and flashing
of the water against the boat sides: in the Sea, the waves and other proper
agitations; and lastly, let every thing which moves whether essentially or
accidentally, have its proper representation.

IX. Let your work imitate the season you intend it for.

As if you intend it for a winter piece, represent felling of wood; sl^ding
upon the Ice; fowling by night; hunting of bears or foxes in the snow; making
the trees every where naked or laden with the hoar frost; the earth bare
without greenness, flowers or catiel; the air thick; water frozen, with carts
passing over it and boys upon it, etc.

X. Lastly, let every site have its proper parergra, adjuncts, or additional
graces, as the Farm house, Windmill, Water-mill, Woods, Flocks of sheep, Herds
of cattle, Pilgrims, ruins of Temples, Castles, and Monuments; with a thousand
such other only proper to particular subjects.

CHAP. XV. Of Diapering and Antique.
I. DIapering, is a tracing or running over your work again when you have, as
it were, quite done, with damask branches, and such like.

It is used to counterfeit cloth of gold, silver, damask, velvet, chamlet and
the like, with what branch and in what fashion you please: it is derived from
the Greek word (...), transeo, to pass over, and only signifies a light passing
over the same again.

II. If you Diaper upon folds, let your work be broken off accordingly, and
taken as it were by the half.

For reason shows that the fold covers something which cannot be seen by
reason of it, which if it was drawn out at length would all appear plain.

III. Let the whole work be homogene; that is, let the same work be continued
throughout the whole garment, setting the fairest branch in the most eminent
and perspicuous place, causing it to run upwards, for else your work would be
ridiculous.

IV. You may either shadow the ground and leave your work white; or shadow your
work and leave the ground white; and as you shall please in this kind, your
filling may be with small pricks, which will show very fair.

V. Antique (ab antes) are butteresses whereon the building is stayed, as also
the outwardmost ranges, used in fore-fronts of houses, in all manner of
Compartments, curious Architecture, Armours, Jewels, and Columns.

VI. The form of it is (only for delights sake) a general or irregular
composition of men, beasts, birds, fishes and flowers and such like, without
either rule or reason.

VII. Lastly, observe the continuation of one and the same work, through the
whole piece, without the least change or alteration.

As if it be naked boys, playing, lying, sitting, or riding upon goats, eagles,
dolphins and the like; strings of pearl, Satyrs, Tritons, apes, dogs, oxen,
bearing or drawing fruits, branches, or any wild fancy after your own
invention, with a thousand such other idle toys; be sure you observe the
continuation.

CHAP. XVI. To take the perfect draught of any Picture.
I. TAke a sheet of fine Venice paper, wet it all over with linseed oil on one
side thereof, which then wipe off as clean as you can; let the paper dry, and
lay it on any printed or painted picture; then with a black-lead pen you may
draw it over with ease: put this oyled paper upon a sheet of clean white paper,
and with a little pointed stick or feather out of a swallows wing, draw over
the strokes which you drew upon the oyled paper; so shall you have the exact
form upon the white paper, which may be set out with colors at pleasure.

II. Or thus, The picture being drawn as before in the oyled paper, put it upon
a sheet of white paper, and prick over the drawing with a pen: then take some
small coal, powder it fine, and wrap it in a piece of some fine linen, and
bind it up therein loosely, and clap it lightly, all over the pricked line by
little and little, and afterward draw it over again once or twice, with pen or
pencil.

III. Or thus, Rub a sheet of white paper all over on one side with black lead,
or else with vermilion mixed with fresh butter; lay the colored side upon a
sheet of white paper, then lay the picture you would copy out upon the other
side of the colored paper, and with a small pointed stick or swallows quill,
go over all the strokes of your picture, and it will be exact on the white
paper.

IV. Or thus, Lay a piece of Lanthorn horn upon the picture, then draw the
strokes of your picture with a hard nibbed pen upon the horn; and when it is
dry, breath upon the horn twice or thrice, and press it hard upon white paper a
little moistened.

V. Or thus, Take an oyled sheet (as at the first Section of this Chapter) rub
one side of it with lamb black or lake; lay it upon a sheet of fair paper with
the colored side downwards, and upon it lay the picture you would copy out,
and trace it over with a swallows feather.

VI. Or thus, Take fine lake mixed with linseed oil, and draw wit^^i, instead
of Ink, all the outstroaks of any picture, and other material parts; then were
the contrary side of the picture and press it hard upon a sheet of paper, and,
it will leave behind it all that which you drew over.

VII. Or thus, Grind Printers black fine, and temper it with water, and with a
pen dipped in it, draw over the out-lines and master strokes: were then some white
paper with a sponge or the like, and press it hard thereupon; and you shall
have the strokes you drew upon the white paper.

VIII. Or thus, Lay the print (the backside of it) upon a clear glass, or
oyled paper, then lay a clean paper upon the print; hold it up against the
light, so will you see all the strokes which you may draw out, and shadow also
if you please.

CHAP XVII. To extend or contract a Picture keeping the proportion.
I. ENcompass your picture with one great square, which divide into as many
little ones as you please: this done, according as you would have your picture
either greater or less, make another square greater or less, which divide into
as many equal squares, which be drawn with a black lead plummet.

Take your black lead pen, and draw the picture by little and little, passing
from square unto square (by the example of the pattern) until you have gone all
ever with it: observing, that in what part of the square the picture lies, you
draw the like part in the square answerable thereto, till you have fin shed the
whole.

III. Then draw it over with a pen, in which second drawing of it you may
easily mend any fault, and shadow it at pleasure.

IV. Lastly, When it is thoroughly dry, rub it over with the crum of
white-bread, and it will take off all the black lead-stroaks, so will your
draught remain fair upon the paper.

CHAP. XVIII. To express the Powers.
I. ETernity, It is expressed in the form of a fair Lady, having three heads,
signifying time past, present, and to come; in her left hand a circle, pointing
with the forefinger of her right hand up to Heaven: the circle signifies she
has neither beginning nor end.

In the Medals of Trajan she was figured red, sitting upon a Sphere, with the
Sun in one hand, the Moon in the other (by her sitting is signified perpetual
constancy.) In the Medals of Faustina, she is drawn with a vail; and in her
right hand the Globe of the World. Boccace writing of the progeny of the Gods,
says that the Ancients derived it from Demogorgon, as the principal and first
of them all, who inhabited in the middle or center of the earth, encircled
round about and circumvested with a dark and obfuscate cloud, breathing from
his mouth a certain liquid humidity. But however what eternity is, the name
does clearly discover, containing in it self all worlds and ages, and not
limited or measured by any space of time. Claudius describes it by a serpent
that compasses round with her body the Cave or Den wherein it lies, so as
making a circle, she holds in her mouth the end of her tail, which with the
Egyptians was the emblem of a year.

All in a circle thus she sits involved,
Whose firm tenacity is never dissolved:
She sends forth times, and them recalls again.
Ages to come, and past she does retain.
But according to Boccace, as Eternity has an absolute command over all times,
so she lives far hence in some remote and unknown vale, where humane steps
never approached, but is even unfound out of the caelestial inhabitants, those
happy souls, who stand before the presence of the greatest, that only knows all
things.

II. Time, It is drawn standing upon an old ruin, winged, and with Iron teeth.
Or thus, An old man in a garment of stars; upon his head a garland of roses,
ears of corn, and dry sticks, standing upon the Zodiaque, with a looking glass
in his hand; two children at his feet, the one fat, the other lean, writing
both in one book; upon the head of one, the Sun, upon the other the Moon. Or
thus, An old man, bald behind, winged, with a sith and an hour glass, having a
lock of hair on his forehead.

III. Fate, A man in a fair, long, flaxen robe, looking upwards to bright stars
encompassed with thick clouds, from whence hangs a golden chain.

IV. Fortune, A naked Lady having an Insign or Sail overshadowing her, standing
upon a globe or ball.

Lactantius says that Fortune is a vain, idle and senseless name, showing
forth man's weakness in attributing any thing thereto: which Marcus Tullius
confirms, where he says that this name of Fortune, was first brought in to
cover the ignorance of man. Alexander Neopolitanus says that at Prenestes in a
temple she was depicted in the shape and form of two sisters, both conjoined in
one and the same statue. Pausamus says that her most ancient statue was that
which Bupalus made in Greece in shape of a woman, upon whose head was a round
ball, and in one of her hands a Cornucopia. She is called the blind Goddess,
and partial Lady, by reason of the bestowing of her unconstant and mutable
favors.

Imperious ruler of the worlds designs,
Lady of solace, pleasure and of pains:
Like Tennis balls thou beat'st us to and sro,
From favors to disgrace, from joy to woe;
From wars to peace, from rule to be commanded:
But with unconstancy thou now art branded.
Macrobius says she was set forth with wings on her shoulders, (to show that
she was always at hand among men) had by her side the rudder of a Ship (to show
that she does rule and command) her self placed upon a wheel, holding in her
right hand a golden ball, and in the other a whip; showing where she smiled,
wealth and honor, and where she frowned, crosses and misery should follow.

In Egypt Fortune was depicted like a lady turning a great glass wheel, on
whose top was many men playing, others a climbing up; and others having
attained it, precipitating themselves and falling down back again.

V. Equality, A Lady lighting two torches at once.

VI. Victory, Is expressed by a Lady clad all in Gold, in one hand a helmet, in
the other a pomegranate: by the helmet is meant force; by the pomegranate unity
of wit and counsel.

Augustus drew her with wings ready to fly standing upon a globe, with a
garland of Bays in one hand, in the other a Coronet of the Emperor, with these
words Imperator Caesar. In the Medals of Octavius, she is drawn with wings,
standing on a base, in one hand a palm, in the other a crown of gold.

VII. Peace, Is drawn like a Lady, holding in her right hand a wand or rod
downwards toward the earth, over a hideous Serpent of sundry colors; and with
her other hand covering her face with a veil, as loath to behold strife or war.

Trajan gave a Lady, in her right hand an Olive branch, in her left a
Cornucopia. In the Medals of Titus, a Lady having in one hand an olive branch,
the other leading a Lamb and Wolf coupled by the necks in one yoke. The Olive
is always the emblem of peace.

VIII. Providence, A Lady lifting up both her hands to Heaven with these words
Providentia Deorum. Or thus, A Lady in a robe, in her right hand a Scepter, in
her left a Cornucopia, with a globe at her feet.

IX. Concord, A Lady sitting, in her right hand a charger for sacrifice, in her
left a Cornucopia, with the word Concordia. Or thus, A fair Virgin, holding in
one hand a Pomegranate; in the other a Myrtle bunch.

The nature of these trees are such, that if planted though a good space one
from another, they will meet and with twining embrace one another.

X. Fame, A Lady clad in a thin and light garment, open to the middle thigh,
that she might run the faster; two exceeding large wings; ^^^ments embroidered
with eyes and ears, and blowing of a Trumpet.

XI. Destiny, A Lady, who with great fury, and exceeding celerity holds in her
hand in Iron bow ready bent, aiming to strike fortune even at the very heart.

Destiny and fortune can never agree; and therefore as fortune flies from
destiny, so destiny pursues fortune; for where destiny sets her foot, there
fortune is as it were enchanted and conjured, as having no power, efficacy or
virtue.

CHAP. XIX. Of Virtues and Vices.
I. Virtue is represented by Hercules, naked, with his Lions skin, and knotted
club, performing some one of his Labors; as offering to strike a dragon
keeping an Apple Tree; or holding in his hand three golden Apples.

Hercules is nothing else but Virtue, his name in the Greek tongue is (...),
quasi (...), Junonis gloria: vel quia (...), celebrat aut commemorat Heroas,
which is the property of Virtue: he is drawn naked to demonstrate her
simplicity: by the dragon is set forth all manner of vices: by the Lions skin,
magnanimity and greatness: by his Oaken Club, Reason and Policy: by its
knottiness, the difficulty, pains and labor in seeking after virtue: by the
three golden Apples, the three Heroical Virtues, Moderation, Content and Labor.

II. Piety is drawn like a Lady, with a sober countenance; in her right hand
she holds a sword stretched over an Altar; in her left hand a Stork; and by
her side is placed an Elephant and a Child.

The Stork is so called of (...), the reciprocal or mutual love of parent and
child, of which this bird was ever an Emblem, for the love and care she has of
her parents being old. The Elephant worships toward the rising of the Sun.

III. Hope is drawn like a beautiful child in a long robe hanging loose,
standing upon tiptoes, and a trefoyl or three leaved grass in its right hand,
in its lest an Anchor.

The loose vestment shows, she never pincheth or binds truth; standing on
tiptoes, shows she always stands dangeronsly; the branch of trefoyl shows
knowledge (the ground of faith) faith (the ground of hope) and hope it self.

IV. Mercy, a Lady sitting upon a Lion, holding in one hand a Spear, in the
other an Arrow; which she seems to cast away.

In the Medals of Vitellius she sits with a branch of Bays in her hand, and a
staff lying by her.

V. Justice, a fair young Virgin, drawing after her, with her left hand, a
black, hard, ill-favored Woman, haling her by main force, and striking her
over the face in a severe manner.

The young Virgin was Justice, the other Injuria: she is drawn young and a
Virgin, to show, that Judges and administrators of Law ought to be incorrupt
and free from bribes, partiality or flattery, but just, constant and sincere.

VI. Felicity, a Lady sitting in an Imperial throne, in the one hand she
holds a Caduceus or Rod, in the other hand a Cornucopia.

VII. Fruitfulness, a Lady sitting upon a bed, and two little Infants hanging
about her neck.

VIII. Dissimulation, a Lady wearing a vizard of two faces, in a long robe of
changeable color; and in her right hand a Magpye.

IX. Security, a Lady leaning against a pillar, before an Altar, with a Scepter
in her hand.

X. Calumnia, a beautiful, rich and young woman, approaching toward a Judge,
gorgeous in her habit, with an angry, scornful and discontented look, and red
and fiery eyes; she holds in her left hand a flaming torch: and with her right
she by force draws a young man by the hair of the head.

XI. Envy, a wonderful lean old man, with a pale and meagre face, in whose
withered cheeks Age has wrought deep surrows and wrinkles.

XII. Penitence, a Woman in vile, ragged and base attire, infinitely deploring
her being: and bemoaning her self in passionate fits above all measure,
continually weeping.

CHAP. XX. Of Rivers.
I. HErein you ought to observe the Adjuncts and Properties of the same; which
consists in some notable Accident done near them; some famous City, trees,
fruits, or reeds situate upon their banks; some fish only proper to their
streams; or recourse of shipping from all parts of the world.

II. Therefore you had best place the City upon their heads; their fruits in a
Cornucopia; reeds, flowers, and branches of trees in their Garlands, and the
like.

III. The River Tyber. It is expressed (in the Vatican in Rome) in a goodly
Statue of Marble lying along (for so you must draw them) holding under his
right arm a she Wolf, with two little infants sucking at her teats, leaning
upon an Urne or Pitcher, out of which issues its stream: in his left a
Cornucopia of delicate fruits, with a grave Countenance and long beard; a
garland of flowers upon his head; and resting his right leg upon an Oar.

IV. The River Nilus. It is seen (in the Vatican) cut out in white Marble, with
a garland of sundry fruits and flowers, leaning with his left arm upon a
Sphynx; from under his body issues its stream; in his left arm a Cornucopia
full of fruits and flowers on one side, with sixteen little children, smiling
and pointing to the flood.

The Sphynx was sometimes a monster which remained by Nilus: the Crocodile
(...), from his hatred of Saffron, the most famous monster of Egypt: the the
sixteen children, the sixteen cubits of height, unermost of the flowing of
Nilus: their smiling looks, the profit of it, which glads the hearts of the
Sunburned inhabitants.

V. The River Tigris. It was drawn like an old man (as the rest) and by his
fide a Tiger.

This beast was given it as well for its fierce streams, as for the store of
Tigers which are there.

VI. The River Ganges. It bears the shape of a rude and barbarous savage, with
bended brows, of a fierce and cruel Countenance, crowned with a palm, having,
as other floods, his pitcher, and by his sides a Rhinoceros.

This River runs through India, and has its head from a fountain in
Paradise.

VII. The River Indus. It is drawn with a grave and jovial aspect, with a
garland of its country flowers, by its side a Camel (from (...):) it is
represented pleasantly; grave, as an Emblem of the Indian policy.

This is the greatest River in the world, receiving into its channel threescore
other great and famous Rivers, and above an hundred lesser.

VIII. The River Thamesis. In the house of an honorable friend, I saw the
Thames thus drawn: A Captain or Soldier lying along, holding in his right hand
a Sword, and under his arm the August tower: in the other a Cornucopia of all
fragrancies, with a Golden chain which held four Crowns; and with this he
encompassed the streams, from under which bending of his left arm they seemed
to flow: his temples were adorned with Bays, the River was empaled on one side
with Anchors, and on the other stood Caesar's Augusta.

IX. The River Arnus. It is a famous River in Italy, drawn like an old man
leaning upon his pitcher, pouring out water: upon his head a garland of Beech,
by his right side a Lion, holding forth in his dexterp^w a red Lilly or
Flower-de-luce, the ancient Arms of the chief City of Tuscany.

By the garland of Beech is set forth the great abundance of Beech-trees
growing about Fasterona in the Appennines where Arnus bath his head.

X. The River Po or Padus. It is depicted with an Ox's face, having a garland
of Reeds or Poplar on his head.

It is so called from the Sister of Phaeton, whom the Poets feign destroyed
with lightning, and drowned here: the head of the Ox, is from its horrid noise
and roaring, whose crooked banks resemble the horns thereof; by the sides
whereof grows much Reed and many Poplars.

XI. The River Danubius. In the ancient Medals of the Emperor Trajan it is
depicted with its head covered with a veil.

It is so drawn because its head or first spring is unknown. Ausonius says,
Danubius periit caput occultatus in ore.

XII. The River Achelous. Ovid describes it with a garland of Reeds, Willow,
and the like: having two Urns or Earthen Pitchers, the one empty, the other
casting out water; and upon its head two horns, the one whole the other broken.

This River as it is the most famous of all Greece, so it divides Aetolia from
Arcadia, and then falls into the Sea. This is fetched from the fable of
Hercules who combated him in the likeness of a Bull, and broke one of his
horns, for Deianiras sake, there turning both its streams into one, whereupon
one of the Vrns is empty.

XIII. The River Niger. It is drawn like a black Moore, with Glory, or a
Coronet of Sunbeams falling upon his Urne, having by its side a Lion.

By the Sunbeams and black, is showed the clime, lying under the torrid Zone,
whose inhabitants are Blacks or Moors; the Lion is that which the Country
Mauritania and Barbary breed, being the fiercest in the World.

CHAP. XXI. Of Nymphs.
I. NPH, Nympha, a Bride ( from (...) as it were a fresh or new creature: or as
some will have it from Nympha quasi Lympha, by changing L. into N. after the
Dorick dialect:) it is nothing else but an Allegory, from the Vegetative
humidity, which gives life to trees, herbs, plants, and flowers, by which they
grow and increase.

II. They are feigned to be the daughters of the Ocean, the mother of floods,
the nurses of Bacchus, and goddesses of fields, who have the protection and
charge of mountains, herbs, woods, meadows, rivers, trees, and generally of the
whole life of man.

III. First, Napaeae, Nymphs of the Mountains.

Let them be drawn of a sweet and gracious aspect, in green mantles, girded
about in the middle; and upon their heads garlands of honey-suckles, wildroses,
time and the like; their actions, dancing in a ring, making garlands or
gathering flowers.

They are so called from (...), the top of an hill, or woody valley.

IV. Secondly, Dryades, Nymphs of the woods.

Draw these less fair than the former, of a brown or tawny complexion, hair
thick like moss, and their attire of a dark green.

They are so so called from (...) an Oak, having their beginning with trees,
and dying again with them.

V. Thirdly, Naiades, Nymphs of the floods.

Draw them beautiful, with arms and legs naked, their hair clear as Crystal;
upon their heads garlands of watercresses, with red leaves: their actions,
pouring out water.

They are so called from (...) to flow, or bubble as water does.

VI. Thet is, a Lady of a brown complexion, her hair scattered about her
shoulders, crowned with a coronet of Periwincle and Escallop shells, in a
mantle of Seagreen, with chains and bracelets of Amber about her Neck and Arms,
and a branch of red Coral in her hand.

VII. Galatea, a most beautiful young Virgin, her hair carelessly falling about
her shoulders like silver threads, and at each ear a fair pearl with a double
string of them (sometimes) about her Neck and left Arm, a mantle of pure thin
and fine white, waving as it were by the gentle breathing of the air, viewing
in her hand a sponge made of Sea-froth, she is so called from (...), lac, milk.

VIII. Iris, a Nymph with large wings, extended like to a semicircle, the
plumes set in rows of diverse colors, as yellow, green, red, blew or purple;
her hair hanging before her eyes, her breasts like clouds, drops of water
falling from her body, and in her hand Iris, or the Flower-de-luce.

Virgil makes her the messenger of Juno (where she is taken for the air) when
he says, Irin de Coelo misit Saturnia Juno.

IX. Nymphae Dianae; Let them be clothed in white linen to denote their
Virginity, and their garments girt about them; their Arms and Shoulders naked;
bows in their hands, and arrows by their sides.

X. Aurora, the Morning. A young Virgin with carnation wings and a yellow
mantle; in her forehead a star, and Golden Sunbeams from the Crown of her
head, riding upon Pegasus, with a viol of dew in one hand, and various flowers
in the other, which she scatters upon the earth.

CHAP. XXII. Of the Nine Muses.
I. CLio. She is drawn with a Coronet of Bays; in her right hand a Trumpet; in
her left a Book, upon which may be written Historia; her name is from praise or
glory.

II. Euterpe, Is crowned with a garland of flowers, holding in each hand sundry
wind instruments; her name is from giving delight.

III. Thalia. Draw her with a smiling look, and upon her Temples a Coronet of
Ivy, a Mantle of Carnation embroidered with silver twist and gold spangles, and
in her left hand a vizard; her Ivy shows she is mistress of Comical Poesy.

IV. Melpomene. Draw her like a virago, with a majestic and grave countenance,
adorn her head with Pearls, Diamonds and Rubies; holding in her left hand
Scepters with Crowns upon them, other Crowns and Scepters lying at her feet;
and in her right hand a naked poniard, in a Mantle of changeable Crimson. Her
gravity befits Tragic Poesy.

V. Polybymnia. Draw her acting a Speech with her forefinger, all in white, her
hair hanging loose about her shoulders of an orient yellow, upon her head a
garland of the choicest jewels intermixed with flowers, and in her left hand a
book, upon which let it be written Suadere; her name imports memory, to whom
the Rhetorician is beholden.

VI. Erato. She has her name from (...), Amor, Love: draw her with a sweet and
comely visage, her temples girt with Myrtles and Roses, bearing an heart with
an Ivory Key; by her side Cupid, winged, with a lighted torch; at his back, his
bow and quivers.

VII. Terpsichore; a cheerful visage playing upon some Instrument; upon her
head a Coronet of Feathers of sundry Colors, but chiefly green; in token of
the victory which the Muses got of the Syrenes, etc. by ^^nging.

VIII. Urania, A beautiful Lady in an azure robe; upon her head a Coronet of
bright stars; in her right hand the Celestial globe, and in her left the
Terrestrial. Her name imports as much as heavenly; Urania coeli motus serutatur
and Astra.

IX. Calliope. Upon her head draw a Coronet of Gold; upon her left Arm Garlands
of Bays in store, for the reward of Poets; and in her right hand three books,
upon which write Homerus, Virgilius, Ovidius.

The Muses had their names, as Eusebius says, (...), which is to instruct,
because they teach the m^st bonest and laudable disciplines.

CHAP. XIII. Of the four Winds.
I. EVrus, the East Wind. Draw a youth with puffed and blown cheeks (as all the
other winds must be) wings upon his shoulders, his body like a Tauny Moor, upon
his head a Red Sun.

II. Zephyrus, the West-wind. Draw a youth with a merry look, holding in his
hand a Swan, with wings displayed as about to sing, on his head a garland of
all sorts of-flowers.

It Is called Zephyrus quasi (...), bringing life, because it cherishes and
quickneth.

III. Boreas, the North Wind. Draw it like an old man, with a horrid, terrible
look; his hair and beard covered with snow, or the hoar-frost; with the feet
and tail of a Serpent.

IV. Auster, the South Wind, is drawn with head and wings wet, a pot or urn
pouring forth water, with which descend frogs, grasshoppers, and the like
creatures which are bred by moisture.

CHAP. XXIV. Of the Months of the Year.
I. JAnuary must be drawn all in white, like snow or hoar froast, blowing his
fingers; in his left arm a billet, and Aquarius standing by his side.

II. February is drawn in a dark sky color, carrying in his right hand
Pisces, or Fishes.

III. March is drawn tawny with a fierce look, a helmet upon his head, leaning
upon a Spade: in his right hand Aries; in his left Almond Blossoms and Scions;
and upon his arm a basket of Garden-seeds.

IV. April is drawn like a young man in green, with a garland of Myrtle and
Hawthorn-buds, winged; in the one hand Primroses and Violets; in the other
Taurus.

V. May is drawn with a sweet and lovely aspect, in a robe of white and green,
embroidered with Daffadils, Haw-thorn and Blew-bottles; on his head a garland
of white, red, Damask-roses; in the one hand a Lute; upon the forefinger of the
other a Nightingal.

VI. June is drawn in a mantle of dark grass-green; upon his head a Coronet of
Bents, King-cobs, and Maidenhair; in his left hand an Angle; in his right
Cancer; and upon his Arm a basket of Summer fruits.

VII. July is drawn in a Jacket of a light yellow, eating Cherries, with his
face and bosom Sunburned; on his head a garland of Centaury and Time, on his
shoulder a Sith; with a bottle at his girldle, carrying a Lion.

VIII. August is like a young man of a fierce look, in a flame-coloured robe;
upon his head a garland of wheat; upon his arm a basket of Summer fruits; at
his belt a Sickle, bearing a Virgin.

IX. September is drawn in a purple robe, with a cheerful look; and on his head
a Coronet, of white and purple grapes; in his left hand a handful of Oats, with
a Cornucopia of Pomegranates and other Summer fruits; and in his right hand a
balance.

X. October is drawn in a garment of the color of decaying flowers and leaves;
upon his head a garland of Oak-leaves with the Acorns; in his right hand a
Scorpion; in his left, a basket of Services, Medlars, and Chestnuts.

XI. November in a robe of changeable green and black: upon his head, a garland
of Olives with the fruit; in his right hand Sagittarius: and in his left
bunches of Parsneps and Turnips.

XII. December is drawn with a horrid aspect, clad in Irish rug, or course
Freeze, girt about him: upon his head three or four night-caps, and over them a
Turkish Turbant; his nose red; beard hung with Iceickle; at his back a bundle
of Holly and Ivy; holding in Furred Mittens a Goat.

Where note it will be good to give every month its natural and proper
Landscape, not making blossoms and fruits upon trees in December; nor a barren
face of the earth and trees in June.

CHAP XXV. Of Perspective in general.
PTIKH in Greek, Perspectiva in Latin, the Art of seeing in English; is that by
which we behold, contemplate, and draw the likeness of all magnitudes, just in
form and manner as they appear to the Eye.

II. The matter to be seen or speculated is a magnitude: the manner of the
speculation is by radiations of Light, either direct, reflected or broken.

III. A magnitude is that which has form; and it is either lineal,
superficial, or solid; that is, either a complication of points, a complication
of lines; or a complication of superficies.

IV. A line is a complication of points; that is (according to Euclid) a length
only without either breadth or thickness.

V. A superficies is a complication of lines; that is a length having breadth
without thickness.

For as the continuation of points makes a line: so the couching of lines makes
a superficies: which is only the laying of points cross wise.

A solid is a complication of superficies; that is, a length and breadth,
having depth or thickness.

And inde^d it is nothing but the continuation of points upon a superficies
either perpendicularly or bending.

VII. The Contemplation of the Object, represents the matter to the mind, in
the same manner as its outward appearance does to the Eye.

And from hence comes Judgment whereby the Artist is enabled to describe the
same in lines; and delineate it, according to its apparent or visual
proportions.

VIII. To draw or describe the Appearance in lines is the Active part of this
Art, whereby the Idaea conceived in the mind (by sight and contemplation) is
brought to light.

IX. A radiation is a beam of light, conveighing the likeness of the thing, to
the Eyes, or sight; and the Knowledge thereof to the mind or understanding.

And this radiation is twofold, either external from the external light; or
intellectual from its being and power.

X. Direct radiations, are those which consider the direct or straight beams,
which pass between the Eye and the object.

And this is the first kind of Perspective; and is many times (alone) called
the Optics.

XII. Reflected Radiations, are those which consider the reflection of beams,
and their shape upon any polished body, as on a Globe, Cone, Cylinder, Pyramid,
or any regular solid.

And this is the second kind of Perspective, which is called the Art Catoptrica.

XII. Broken Radiations are those which consider the breaking of beams, as they
are to be seen through a glass or Crystal cut into several plains or
superficies.

And this is the third and last kind of Perspective which is called the Art
Dioptrica.

CHAP. XXVI. Of the Active part of Perspective.
I. THe Active part of Perspective is either Ichnographical, Orthographical, or
S^^nographical.

II. Ichnographia, is the description of the plain, base or bottom of any body
or building.

III. And it is twofold, to wit, either Geometrical or Scenographical.

IV. Ichnographia Geometrical, is that which gives the sight of the bottom or
base of any body or building.

So a Circle is the base of a Column; and a square is the base of a Pedestal;
and the like; but this Geometrical Ichnography is not seen in Section, or
through a Glass, unless it lies parallel to the base; and so it makes no
Section with it.

V. Ichnographia Scenographical is the Appearance of the same base in Section,
or through a Glass, erected upright on the same plain, on which the base stands.

And by this the said base is extended in length but contracted in breadth, for
so it appears to the Eye.

VI. Orthographia, is the Vision of the foreright side of any plain; to wit, of
that plain or superficies which lies Equidistant to a right line, passing
through the outward or unequal centers of both Eyes, continued to a due length.

And therefore Perspective Orthographia, is the delineation of the apparent
right plain.

Scenographia is the description of a plain or other figure, that declines from
the apparent or foreright plain; that is, of that plain which makes Angles with
the said foreright plain.

The Scenographick vision of any form, body, or building is, of that side which
declines from, or constitutes an Angle, with the right line, passing from the
unequal centers of both Eyes aforesaid: this Artists call the return of the
foreright side. Now the difference between the Orthographick and Scenographick
vision is this; the Orthographick shows the side of a body or building as it is
beheld when the plain of the Glass is placed equidistant to that side: but the
Scenographick shows the side of a body or edifice as it appears through a glass
raised obliquely to the said side, or making an angle therewith.

CHAP. XXVII. Of the Subject to be seen.
I. THe Base of any thing, is the plain, flat, or floor upon which any solid
body, or object is placed, or raised.

II. The Altitude or height is the perpendicular space of place, between the
base and Eye, or height of the visual point above the base.

III. The Visual point, is a point in the Horizontal line, wherein all the
beams of the Eyes unite.

Exempli gratia. If you look on a long straight river, the sides of which run
parallel, yet by reason of the distance both sides of the riven (although it be
very broad) will seem to incline, touch, and unite with each other in one
common point or center: and so if you look on a long straight brick-wall, the
several lays of brick, and courses of mortar* will (at a great distance) seem
to incline each to other in one common point or center; this point reflected on
a glass, raised upright on the base, is called the Visual point.

IV. The Horizontal line is a line proceeding from the center of the Eye to the
visual point, parallel to the Horizon of the Earth.

And this is, in men of ordinary height or stature, commonly about five foot
from the ground or base.

V. The Distance is the space on the base, between the Glass and point in the
base which lies directly under the Eyes.

VI. The Section is a plain of transparent or perlucid matter (as of Glass)
raised upright on the plain of the base standing before you, parallel to a
straight line, passing through the unequal centers of both Eyes.

Without the knowledge of this Section or Glass, it is utterly impossible to
understand perspective, or know what it means: Or be able to give a reason for
the difference between the Orthographick and Scenographick figure.

VII. If the Glass is placed near the visual point, and far from the object,
the figure which is seen will be very small: and the reason is, because all
rays comprehending the Orthographical and Scenographical figures (though more
remote from the object) fall into the visual point, as their common center.

VIII. If the Visual point be more elevated (though at the same distance) the
Scenographick figure or form will appear of a much larger magnitude: because
the Visual radiations being higher, the various perpendiculars raised on the
Section or Glass, cut them in wider distances, because more remote from the
Glass.

IX. If the Glass incline to the Visual point, the Scenographick vision will be
long-wise between the visual point and the object.

And the reason is, because the plain of the Glass heaps in more of the Visual
Radiations.

X. If the Glass recline from the Visual point, the Scenographick figure will
appear rounder, and begin to resemble the Orthographick.

XI. But if the Glass is fixed Equidistant to the bafe, or plain the object
stands upon; the Scenographick and Orthographick resemblance will be one and
the same.

And the reason is, because the form of the figure is lost, or not visible in
the Section.

XII. The Visual Rays, are those lines which proceed from the Visual point,
through the Glass, to any point higher or lower than the plain of the Horizon.

XIII, Diagonals or lines of distance, are such as are drawn from the point of
distance to any other point, higher or lower than the Horizon.

XIV. The Object is that form, figure, body or edifice intended to be expressed
in Perspective proportions.

CHAP. XXVIII. The General Practice of Perspective.
I. LEt every line which in the Object or Geometrical figure is straight,
perpendicular, or parallel to its base, be so also in its Scenographick
delineation.

II. Let the lines which in the object return at right Angles from the
fore-right-side, be drawn Scenographically from the Visual point.

III. Let all straight lines, which in the object return from the fore-right
side, run in a Scenographick figure into the Horizontal line.

IV. Let the object you intend to delineate standing on your right hand, be
placed also on the right hand of the Visual point: and that on the left hand,
on the left hand of the same point: and that which is just before, in the
middle of it.

V. Let those lines which are (in the object) Equidistant to the returning
line, be drawn in the Scenographick figure, from that point found in the
Horizon.

VI. In setting off the altitude of Columns, Pedestals and the like, measure
the height from the base line upwards in the front or fore-right side; and a
visual ray drawn, that point in the front shall limit the altitude of the
Column or pillar, all the way behind the fore-right side or Orthographick
appearance, even to the visual point.

This rule you must observe in all figures, as well where there is a front or
fore-right side, as where there is none.

VII. In delineating Ovals, Circles, Arches, Crosses, Spirals and Cross-arches,
or any other figure, in the roof of any room; first draw Ichnographically, and
so with perpendiculars, from the most Eminent points thereof, carry it up unto
the Ceiling, from which several points carry on the figure.

VIII. The center in any Scenographick regular figure is found by drawing
cross-lines from opposite angles: for the point where the Diagonals cross is
the Center.

IX. A ground plain of squares is alike, both above and below the Horizontal
line; only the more it is distant above or beneath the Horizon, the squares
will be so much the larger or wider.

X. In drawing a perspective figure, where many lines come together, you may
for the directing of your eye, draw the Diagonals in Red; the Visual lines in
black; the Perpendiculars in Green, or other different color from that which
you intend the figure shall be of.

XI. Having considered the height, distance and position of the figure, and
drawn it accordingly, with side or angle against the base; raise perpendiculars
from the several angles or designed points in the figure, to the base, and
transfer the length of each perpendicular, from the place where it touches the
base, to the base on the side opposite to the point of distance; so will the
diametrals drawn to the perpendiculars in the base, by intersection with the
Diagonals drawn to the several transferred distances, give the Angles of the
figure: and so lines drawn from point to point will circumscribe the
Scenographick figure.

XII. If in Landscape there be any standing waters, as rivers, ponds, and the
like; place the horizontal line level with the farthest sight or appearance of
it.

XIII. If there be any houses or the like in the picture, consider their
position, that you may find from what point in the Horizontal line to draw the
fronts and sides thereof.

XIV. In describing things at a great distance, observe the proportion (both in
magnitude and distance) in draught, which appears from the object to the eye.

XV. In coloring and shadowing of every thing; you must do the same in your
picture which you observe with your Eye, especially in objects lying near; but
according as the distance grows greater and greater, so the Colors must be
fainter and fainter, till at last they lose themselves in a darkish sky color.

XVI. The Catoptricks are best seen in a common looking glass or other polished
matter, where if the glass be exactly flat, the object is exactly like its
original: but if the glass be not flat, the resemblance alters from the
original, and that more or less, according as the glass differs from an exact
plain.

XVII. In drawing Catoptrick figures, the furface of the Glass is to be
considered, upon which you mean to have the reflection, for which you must make
a particular Ichnographical draught or projection; which on the glass must
appear to be a plain full of squares; on which projection transfer what shall
be drawn, on a plain divided into the same number of like squares: where though
the draught may appear very confused, yet the reflection thereof on the Glass,
will be very regular, proportional and really composed.

XVIII. The Dioptrick or broken beam may be seen in a tub; through a Crystal,
or Glass, which has its surface cut into many others, whereby the rays of the
object are broken.

For, to the flat of the Crystal or water, the rays run straight; but then
they break and make an Angle; the which also by the refracted beams is made and
continued on the other side of the same flat.

XIX. When these faces on a Crystal are turned toward a plain, placed directly
before it, they separate themselves at a good distance on the plain; because
they are all directed to various far distant places of the same.

XX. But for the assigning to each of them a place on the same plain, no
Geometrick rule is yet invented.

CHAP. XXIX. A Rational Demonstration of Chiromantical Signatures; Added by way
of Appendix to Chap. V. of this Book.
I. THe soundation of Chiromancie depends upon the true appropriation of the
several mounts, fingers, or places in the hand, to their proper stars or
Planets.

II. The Ancients have assigned the root of the middle finger to Saturn; of the
forefinger to Jupiter: the hollow of the hand to Mars: the root of the
ringfinger to Sol: of the thumb to Venus: of the little finger to Mercury: and
lastly, the brawn of the hand near the wrist to Luna.

III. That line which comes round the ball of the thumb toward the root or
mount of Jupiter is called Linea Jovialis, or the life-line: that from the
wrist to the root or mount of Saturn, Linea Saturnialis: but if it points to
the root or mount of Sol, Linea Solaris: if to Mercury, Linea Mercurealis: that
which goes from Linea Jovialis to the mount of Luna, Linea Lunaris, or the
natural line: the other great line above it is called Linea Stellata, or the
line of fortune, because it limits the mounts of the planets, and is impressed
with various virtues in those places according to the nature of the planet
whose mount it runs under or sets a boundary unto: Lastly, the space between
the natural line and the line of fortune is called mensa, the Table.

IV. All other lines shall either proceed out of the sides of the former, or
else from some proper mount.

V. Every line great or small, long or short, has a certain beginning or root,
from which it rises; and a certain end or point to which it tends.

VI. The distance between both ends, is the way of its passage; in which way,
it either crosses some other line, or else is crossed: if it do neither, its
signification is continual, and ought so much the more to be taken notice of.

VII. Every mount has a proper signification, which it receives from the
significations of its proper planet, being abstractly considered: the same
understand of all the principal lines aforesaid.

VIII. Saturn is the Author of Age, Inheritances, Melancholy, Malice, Sorrow,
Misery, Calamities, Enemies, Imprisonment, Sickness, Diseases, Perplexities,
Cares, Poverty, Crosses, Death, and whatsoever evil can befall humane life: he
signifies Fathers, Old Men, Laborers, Dyers, Smiths and Jesuits.

IX. Jupiter is the Author of Health, Strength, Moderation, Sobriety, Mercy,
Riches, Substance, Goodness, Liberty, Religion, Honesty, Justice, Modesty, and
all other things which may make a man happy; he signifies Churches, Churchmen,
Lawyers, Scholars, Cloathiers, and the like.

X. Mars is the Author of Strife, Contention, Pride, Presumption, Tyranny,
Thefts, Murders, Victory, Conquest, Infortunacy, Boldness, and Dangers: he
signifies Physicians, Chirurgians, Apothecaries, the Camp, all Military men and
Preferments, Edge-tools, Butchers, Carpenters, Gunners, Bailiffs and the like.

XI. Sol is the Author of Honor, Glory, Renown, Preferment, Life, Generosity,
Magnanimity, Sovereignty, Dominion, Power, Treasures, Gold, Silver, and
whatsoever may make the life of man splendid; he signifies Kings, Princes,
Rulers, and all men in power, Minters, Goldsmiths, long Life and Wisdom.

XII. Venus is the Author of Joy, Pleasure Mirth, Solace, Lust, Uncleanness and
Idleness: she signifies Women-kind, Sisters, Ladies, Whores, Curiosities,
Lapidaries, Silkmen, Tailors, Mercers, Upholsters, Pictures, Picture-drawers,
the Pox, and diseases proceeding from uncleanness.

XIII. Mercury is the Author of Craft, Subtilty, Policy, Deceit, Perjury,
Study, Hearing, and Merchandising: he signifies Merchants, Clerks, Scholars,
Secretaries, Ambassadors, Pages, Messengers, Poets, Orators, Stationers,
Cheaters, Thieves, Petty-lawers, Philosophers, Mathematicians, Astrologers.

XIV. Luna is the Author of popular Fame both Good and Evil, Joy and Sorrow,
Mutability and Inconstancy; Affection and Disaffection; Moisture and every
affect which may be said to be common: she signifies Waters, Ships, Seamen of
all sorts, Queens, Ladies, a Governess, the Common people in general,
Neighbors, Mothers, Kindred, Fishmongers, Vintners, Tapsters, Midwives, Nurses
and Travelers.

This being known, understand,

XV. First, That the lines take their signification from the mount of that
planet from whence they rise.

XVI. Secondly, That the place from whence any line rises shows the ground,
cause, or original of the things fignified by that line: the line or mount to
which it points, shows the issue, to what the thing tends, and what may be the
end of the matter signified.

XVII. Thirdly, That whether the line signifies good or evil, if it be cut or
crossed by any other line, that line so cutting it, will at a certain time not
only abate the good, but also take away the evil, if it so signified.

XVIII. Fourthly, That the nature and quality of that line thus: destroying the
signification of the former, is known by considering from what place it rises,
and to what place it tends.

XIX. Fifthly, That a double judgment arises from every line, by accounting its
rise, first from the one end; secondly, from the other.

XX. Sixthly, That little lines rising out of the sides of any other line, both
augment the things signified by that line; and also signify new matter arising
by things signified by the line from whence they rise; and the place to which
they point, show to what they tend.

XXI. Seventhly, That the mounts or lines adorned with stars, or small lines,
not crossed, or pointing to evil places, show great good and happiness to the
person, by things signified by the same mount or line: and on the contrary,
vitiated with crosses, spots, or knots, show much evil and perplexity.

XXII. Lastly, the beginning of the lines, shows in the beginning or fore part
of Life; the middle, in the middle part of Life; and the ends of them, the
latterpart, or end of Life; so that if any evil or good be signified by any
line, you must hint the time according to the aforesaid reason.

It Is true, here we ought to enquire into the denominated times when the things
signified should come to pass; but because that matter is something long and
abstruse (being more fit to be handled in a particular tract, wherein all its
curiosities may be examined) this our present work being a a subject of another
nature, and these things not essential to our purpose, but only added by way of
appendix, we shall at this time forbear. Notwithstanding, although we have not
here delineated every thing in particular, yet we have laid (as it were) the
ground and foundation of the Art; out of which, as out of a fountain, the
industrious student may at his own leisure and pleasure, rear a stately
fabric.

POLYGRAPHICES LIBER SECUNDUS.
Of ENGRAVING, ETCHING, and LIMNING.
Showing the Instruments belonging to the Work; the Matter of the Work, the way
and manner of performing the same; togewith all other Requisites and Ornaments.
CHAP. I. Of Graving, and the Instruments thereof.
I. GRaving is an Art which teachet how to trans fer any design upon Copper
Brass, or Wood, by help of sharp pointed and cutting Instruments.

II. The chief Instruments are four, 1. Gravers, 2. An Oil stone, 3. A Cushion,
4. A Burnisher.

III. Gravers are of three sorts, round pointed, square pointed, and Lozenge
pointed. The round is best to scratch withal: the square Graver is to make the
largest strokes: the Lozenge is to make strokes more fine and delicate; but a
Graver of a middle size betwixt the square and Lozenge pointed, will make the
strokes or hatches show with more life and vigor, according as you manage it
in working.

IV. The Oyl-stone is to whet the Gravers upon, which must be very smooth, not
too soft, nor too hard, and without pinholes.

The use is thus: put a few drops of oil Olive upon the stone, and laying that
side of it, which you intend shall cut the Copper, flat upon the stone, whet it
very flat and eavens and therefore be sure to carry your hand steadfast with an
equal strength, placing the forefinger firmly, upon the opposite side of the
graver. Then turn the next side of your graver, and whet that in like manner,
that you may have a very sharp edge for an Inch or more. Lastly, turning
uppermost that edge which you have so whetied, and setting the end of the
graver obliquely upon the stone, whet it very flat and sliping in form of a
Lozenge (with an exact and eaven hand) making to the edge thereof a sharp
point. It is impossible that the work should be with the neatness and curiosity
desired, if the graver be not, not only very good, but also exactly and
carefully whetted.

V. The Cushion is a leather bag filled with fine sand, to lay the plate upon,
on which you may turn it every way at ease.

You must turn your plate with your left hand, according as the strokes which
you grave do turn, which must be attained with diligent care and practice.

VI. The burnishing Iron is of use to rub out scratches and specks or other
things which may fault your work in the plate; as also if any strokes be graved
too deep or gross to make them appear less and fainter by rubbing them
therewith.

VII. To make your Gravers.

Provide some Cross-bow stell, and cause it to be beaten out into small rods,
and softened, then with a good file you may shape them at pleasure: when you
have done, heat them red-hot, and straight dip it into Soap, and by so doing it
will be very hard: where note, that in dipping them into the Soap, if you turn
your hand never so little awry, the graver will be crooked. If your graver be
too hard, take a red-hot Charcoal and lay the end of your graver upon it till
it begins to wax yellowish, and then dip it into t^llow (some say water) and it
will be tougher.

VIII. Have by you a piece of box or hard wood, that after you have sharpened
your graver, by striking the point of it into the said box or hard wood, you
may take off all the roughness about the points, which was caused by whetting
it upon the oyl-stone.

IX. Lastly, take a file and touch the edge of the graver therewith; if the
file cut it, it is too soft, and will do no good: but if it will not touch it,
it is fit for your work.

If it should break on the point, it is a sign it is tempered too hard; which
of tentimes after a little use by whetting will come into a good condition.

CHAP. II. Of Polishing the Copper Plates.
I. TAke a plate of Brass or Copper of what bigness you please, and of a
reasonable thickness, taking heed that it be free from fire flaws.

II. Beat it as smooth as you can with a hammer, and then rub it as smooth as
you can, with a pumice stone void of Gravel (lest it scratch it and so cause as
much labor to get them out) and a little water.

III. Then drop a few drops of oil Olive upon the plate, and burnish it with
your burnishing Iron; and then rub it with Charcoal made of Beech wood quenched
in Urine.

IV. Lastly, with a roll made of a piece of a black felt, castor, or Beaver,
dipped in oil Olive, rub it well for an hour, so shall your plate be exactly
polished.

CHAP. III. Of Holding the Graver.
I. IT will be necessary to cut off that part of the knob of the handle of the
graver which is upon the same line with the edge of the graver; thereby making
that lower side next to the plate flat, that it may be no hinderance in graving.

For working upon a large plate, that part of the handle (if not cut away) will
so rest upon the Copper, that it will hinder the smooth and eaven carriage of
your hand in making your strokes, and will cause your graver to run into your
Copper deeper than it should do. This done,

II. Place the knob at the end of the handle of the Graver in the hollow of
your hand, and having extended your forefinger toward the point of the Graver,
laying it a top, or opposite to the edge which should cut the plate, place your
thumb on the one side of the Graver, and your other fingers on the other side,
so as that you may guide the graver flat and parallel with the plate.

III. Be wary that your fingers interpose not between the plate and the Graver,
for they will hinder you in carrying your graver level with the plate, and
cause your lines to be more deep, gross and rugged, than otherwise they would
be.

CHAP. IV. Of the way and manner of Engraving.
I. HAving a Cushion filled with sand about nine inches long and six broad, and
three or four thick, and a plate well polished; lay the plate upon the Cushion,
which place upon a firm Table.

II. Holding the Graver (as aforesaid) according to art, in making straight
strokes be sure to hold your plate firm upon the Cushion, moving your hand,
leaning lightly where the stroke should be fine; and harder where you would
have the stroke broader.

III. But in making circular or crooked strokes, hold your hand and Graver
steadfast, your arm and elbow resting upon the table, and move the plate against
the Graver; for otherwise it is impossible to make those crooked or winding
strokes with that neatness and command that you ought to do.

IV. Learn to carry your hand with such a slight, that you may end your stroke
as finely as you began it; and if you have occasion to make one part deeper or
blacker than another, do it by degrees; and that you may do it the more
exactly, observe that your strokes be not too close, nor too wide.

For your more exact observation, practice by such prints which are more loosly
shadowed, lest by imitating the more dark, you should not know where to begin
or end.

V. After you have graved part of your work, it will be needful to scrape it
with the sharp edge of a burnisher or other graver, carrying it along eaven
with the plate, to take off the roughness of the strokes; but in doing it
beware of making scratches.

VI. And that you may the better see that which is engraven, with the piece of
Felt or Castor (at the fourth Section of the second Chapter) dipped in oil rub
the places graven.

VII. Lastly, whatsoever appears to be amiss, you may rub out with the
burnisher, and very exactly polish it with your piece of Felt or Castor and
oil; which done, to cleanse the plate you may boil it a little in wine vinegar,
and rub it gently with a brush of small brass wire or hogs bristles.

CHAP. V. Of the Imitation of Copies or Prints.
I. HAving a piece of Bees wax tied up in a fine holland rag, heat the plate
over the fire, till it may be hot enough to melt the wax; then rub the plate
with the wax tied up in the rag, till you see it covered all over with wax,
(which let be very thin:) if it be not eaven, heat it again by the fire, and
wipe it over gently with a feather.

II. If you would copy a printed picture, to have it print off the same way;
then clap the print which you would imitate with the printed side next to the
plate; and having placed it very exactly, rub the backside of the print with a
burnisher, or any thing that is hard, smooth and round, which will cause it to
stick to the wax upon the plate: then take off the print (beginning at one
corner) gently and with care, lest you tear it (which may be caused also by
putting too much wax upon the plate) and it will leave upon the wax the perfect
proportion in every part.

Where note, if it be an old picture, before you place it upon the wax, it will
be good to track it over in every limb with a black-lead pensil.

III. But if you would have it print the contrary way; take the dust of
black-lead, and rub the backside of the print all over therewith, which black
side put upon the waxed plate; and with your needle or drawing point, draw all
the out-lines of the design or print, all which you will find upon the wax.
This done,

IV. Take a long graver either Lozenge or round (which is better) very sharp,
and with the point thereof scratch over every particular limb in the outstroke;
which done, it will not be difficult to mark out all the shadows as you
engrave, having the proportion before you.

V. Lastly, for Coppies or Letters, go over every letter with black-lead, or
write them with ungumm'd Ink, and clap the paper over the waxed plate as before.

CHAP. VI. Of Engraving in Wood.
THe figures that are to be carved or geaven in wood must first be drawn,
traced, or pasted upon the wood; and afterward all the other standing of the
wood (except the figure) must be cut away with little narrow pointed knives
made for that purpose.

This graving in wood is far more tedious and difficult than that in Brass or
Copper; because you must cut twice or thrice to take out one stroke; and having
cut it, to be careful in picking it out, lest you should break any part of the
work, which would deface it.

II. For the kind of the wood let it be hard and tough: the best for this
purpose is Beech and Box: let it be plained inch thick, which you may have cut
into pieces according to the bigness of the figure you grave.

III. To draw the figures upon the wood.

Grind white Lead very fine, and temper it with fair water; dip a cloth
therein, and rub over one side of the wood, and let it dry thoroughly: This
keeps the Ink (if you draw therewith) that it run not about, nor sink: and if
you draw with Pastils, it makes the strokes appear more plain and bright.

IV. Having whited the wood as before (if it is a figure you would copy) black
or red the blankside of the print or copy, and with a little stick or swallows
quill, trace or draw over the strokes of the figure.

V. But if you paste the figure upon the wood, you must not then white it over
(for then the figure will pill off) but only see the wood be well plained: then
wipe over the printed side of the figure with Gum Tragacanth dissolved in fair
water, and clap it smooth upon the wood, which let dry thoroughly: then wet it a
little all over, and fret off the paper gently, till you can see perfectly
every strock of the figure: dry it again, and fall to cutting or carving it.

CHAP. VII. Of Etching, and the Materials thereof.
I. ETching is an artificial Engraving of Brass or Copper plates with Aqua
fortis.

II. The Instruments of Etching (besides the plate) are these nine. 1. Hard
Varnish. 2. Soft Varnish. 3. Prepared Oil. 4. Aqua fortis. 5. Needles. 6.
Oylstone. 7. Brush-pensil. 8. Burnisher. 9. The Frame and Trough.

III. To polish the Plate.

Although in chap. 2. of this Book, we have sufficiently taught how to polish
the Plate, yet nevertheless we think it convenient to subjoyn these following
words. First, the Plate being well planished or forged, chose the smoothest
side to polish; then fix it upon a board a little declining, and rub it firmly
and eavenly all over with a piece of Grindstone, throwing water often on it, so
long till there be no dints, flaws or marks of the hammer: wash it clean, and
with a piece of good Pumice stone, rub it so long till there be no rough
strokes or marks of the Grindstone: wash it clean again, and rub it with a fine
Hoan and water, till the marks of the pumice stone are rubbed out: wash it
again, and with a piece of Charcoal without knots (being heat red hot and
quenched in water, the outside being pared off) rub the plate with water till
all the small strokes of the Hoan be vanished; lastly, if yet there remain any
small strokes or scratches, rub them out with the end of the burnishing Iron,
so shall the Plate be fitted for work.

IV. To make the hard Varnish for Etching.

Take Greek or Burgundy Pitch, Colophonium or Rozin, of each five ounces,
Nut-oyl four ounces; melt the Pitch and Rozin in an earthen pot upon a gentle
fire; then put in the Oil, and let them boil for the space of half an hour:
Cool it a little upon a softer fire till it appear like a Glewy syrrup: cool it
a little more, strain it, and being almost cold, put it into a Glass bottle for
use. Being thus made it will keep at least twenty years.

V. To make the soft Varnish for Etching.

Take Virgin-wax three ounces, Mastich in drops two ounces, Asphaltum one
ounce: grind the Mastich and Asphaltum severally very fine; then in an Earthen
pot melt the Wax, and strew in the Mastich and Asphaltum, stirring all upon the
fire till they be well dissolved and mixed, which will be in about half a
quarter of an hour; then cooling it a little, pouring it into a basin of fair
water (all except the dregs) and with your hands wet (before it is cold) form
it into rouls.

VI. To make the prepared Oil.

Take Oil Olive, make it hot in an Earthen pot, and put into it a sufficient
quantity of tried sheeps suet (so much as being dropped upon a cold thing, the
oil may be a little hardened and firm) boil them together for an hour, till
they be of a reddish color, lest they should separate when you use them. This
mixture is to make the fat more liquid, and not cool so fast, for the fat alone
would be no sooner on the pencil, but it would grow cold; and be sure to put in
more oil in Winter than in Summer.

VII. To make the Aqua fortis.

Take distilled White Wind Vinegar three pints; Sal Armoniack, Bay-falt, of
each six ounces; Vertegriese four ounces. Put all together into a large well
glazed earthen pot (that they may not bo^ over) cover the pot close, and put it
on a quick fire, and let it speedily boil two or three great walms and no more;
when it is ready to boil, uncover the pot, and stir it sometimes with a stick,
taking heed that it boil not over: having boiled, take it from the fire, and
let it cool being close covered, and when it is cold, put it into a glass
bottle with a glass stopple: If it be too strong in Etching, weaken it with a
glass or two of the same Vinegar you made it of. There is another sort of Aqua
fortis, which is called Common, which is exhibited in Synopsis Medicinae, lib.
3. cap. 7. sect. 4. page 656. But because that Book may not be in every man's
hand, we will here insert it; it is thus: Take dried Vitriol two pound,
Saltpeter one pound; mix them and distill by a Retort, in open fire by degrees.

VIII. To make the Etching Needles.

Chose Needles of several sizes, such as will break without bending, and of a
fine grain; then take good round sticks of firm wood (not apt to split) about
six inches long, and as thick as a large Goose quill, at the ends of which fix
your Needles, so that they may stand out of the sticks about a quarter of an
inch or something more.

IX. To whet the points of the Needles with the Oylstone.

If you would have them whetted round, you must whet their points short upon
the oil stone, (not as sowing Needls are) turning them round whilst you whet
them, as Turners do. If you whet them sloping, first make them blunt upon the
oil stone, then holding them firm and steady, whet them sloping upon one side
only, till they come to a short and roundish oval.

X. The Brush pencil is to cleanse the work, wipe off dust, and to strike the
Colors eaven over the ground or varnish, when laid upon the Plate.

XI. The burnisher is a well hardened piece of steel somewhat roundish at the
end. Its uses are what we have spoken at the sixth Section of the first
Chapter, and the third Section of the second Chapter.

XII. To make the Frame and Trough.

The Frame is an entire board, about whose top and sides is fastened a ledge two
Inches broad, to keep the Aqua fortis from running off from the sides when you
pour it on: the lower end of this board must be placed in the Trough, leaning
sloping against a wall or some other thing, wherein you must fix several pegs
of wood to rest the plate upon. The Trough is made of a firm piece of Elm or
Oak set upon four legs, whose hollow is four Inches wide; and so long as may
best fit your use: the hollow must be something deeper in the middle, that the
water running thither may fall through a hole (there made for that purpose)
into an earthen pan well leaded. The inside of this board and trough must be
covered over with a thick oil color, to hinder the Aqua fortis from eating or
rotting the board.

CHAP. VIII. The way and manner of using the hard Varnish.
I. HAving well heat the polished Plate over a chafing dish of coals, take some
of the first varnish with a little stick, and put a drop of it on the top of
your finger, with which lightly touch the Plate at equal distances, laying on
the varnish equally, and heating the plate again as it grows cold, keeping it
carefully from dust or filth; then with the ball of your thumb tap it upon the
plate; still wiping your hand over all, to make it more smooth and equal.

And here beware that neither the varnish be too thick upon the plate, nor your
hand sweaty.

II. Then take a great lighted candle burning clear, with a short snuff,
(placing the corner of the plate against a wall) hold the varnished side
downward over the candle, as close as you can, so it touch not the Varnish,
guiding the flame all over, till it is all perfectly black; which you must keep
from dust or filth till it is dry.

III. Over a fire of Charcoals hang the varnished plate to dry with the varnish
upwards, which will smoke; when the smoke abates, take away the plate, and with
a pointed stick scratch near the side thereof, and if the varnish easily comes
off, hang it over the fire again a little, so long till the Varnish will not
too easily come off; then take it from the fire and let it cool.

If the varnish should be too hard, cast cold water on the backside of the
plate to cool it, that the heat may not make it too hard and brittle. This done,

IV. Place it upon a low desk, or some such like thing, and cover that part
which you do not work on, with a sheet of fine white paper, and over that a
sheet of brown paper, on which may rest your hand, to keep it from the varnish.

V. If you use a ruler, lay some part of it upon the paper, that it may not rub
off the varnish; and have an especial care, that no dust or filth get in
between the paper and the varnish, for that will hurt it.

CHAP. IX. The way and manner of Etching.
I. IN making lines or hatches, some bigger, some lesser, straight or crooked,
you must use several sorts of needles, bigger or lesser as the work requires.

II. The great lines are made by leaning hard on the needle; its point being
short and thick, (but a round point will not cut the varnish clear:) or, by
making diverse lines or hatches, one very close to another, and then by passing
over them again with a thicker needle; or, by making them with an indifferent
large needle, and letting the Aqua fortis lie the longer thereon.

The best needles for this work are such as are whet sloping with an oval,
because their sides will cut that which the round ones will not.

III. If your lines or hatches ought to be of an equal thickness from end to
end, lean on the needle with an equal force; leaning lightly where you would
have the lines or strokes fine or small; and more heavy where you would have
the line appear deep or large; thereby the needle may have some Impression in
the Copper.

IV. If your lines or hatches be too small, pass over them again with a short
round point, of such a bigness as you would have the line of, leaning strongly
where you would have the line deep.

V. The manner of holding the needle with Oval points (which are most proper to
make large and deep strokes) is much like that of a pen, only the flat side
whetted is usually held toward the thumb: but they may be used with the face
of the Oval turned toward the middle finger.

VI. If you would end with a fine stroke, you ought to do that with a very fine
needle.

VII. In using the Oval points, hold them as upright and straight in your hand
as you can, striking your strokes firmly and freely, for that will add much to
their beauty and clearness.

VIII. In Landskips, in places farthest from the sight, as also nearest the
light, use a very stender point, leaning so lightly with your hand as to make a
small faint stroke.

IX. In working be careful to brush off all the dust which you work off with
the needles.

CHAP X. Of using the Aqua fortis.
I. IF there be any strokes which you would not have the Aqua fortis eat into;
or any places where the varnish is rubbed off, melt some prepared Oil, and with
a pencil, cover those places pretty thick.

II. Then take a brush, pencil, or rag, and dip it in the prepared oil, and rub
the back side of the plate all over, that the Aqua fortis may not hurt it, if
by chance any should fall thereon.

III. Before you put the Aqua fortis to the plate, gently warm or dry the plate
by a fire to dry up the humidity, which it might contract by reason of the Air;
and to prevent the breaking up the Varnish upon the first pouring the Aqua
fortis thereon.

IV. Place the plate by the 12th. Section of the 7th. Chapter of this book, and
with the Aqua fortis in an Earthen pot pour upon the plate, begiming at the
top, so moving your hand that it may run all over the plate, which do for eight
or ten times: then turn it cornerwise, and pour the Aqua fortis on it that way
ten or twelve times; and then turn it again corner-wise the other way, pouring
on the Aqua fortis eight or ten times as before; doing thus several times for
the space of half a quarter of an hour or more, according to the strength of
the water, and nature of the Copper.

For there must be less time allowed to hard and brittle Copper for pouring on
the Aqua fortis, but more to the soft.

V. But you must have special regard to cast on the Aqua fortis as occasion
shall require, and work is; casting it on at several times, and on several
places; where you would have it very deep, often; where less deep fewer times:
where light, less yet; where lighter, lesser yet: and where so light as it can
scarcely be seen, once or twice: wash it with water, and cover it where you
would have it lighter.

VI. Having thus covered your plates as occasion requires; for the second time,
place the plate on the frame as aforesaid, and pour on it your Aqua fortis for
a full half hour.

VII. Then wash it with water and dry it, covering the places which require
lightness or faintness (that they may be proportionable to the design) then
pour on the Aqua fortis for the last time more or less according to the nature
of your work, and the deepnses that it requires.

VIII. You may rub off the varnish or ground, as occasion in your work requires
with a Charcoal, to see whether the water has eaten deep enough; by which you
may judge of the space of time, that you are after to employ in pouring on the
Aqua fortis, in the works you will have to do, which if the shadows require
much depth, or ought to be very black, the water ought to be poured on (at the
least time) for an hour or better; yet know no certain rule of time can be
limited for this.

CHAP. XI. Of Finishing the Work.
I. ALL the former operations being done, wash the Plate with fair water; and
put it wet upon the fire, till the mixture be well melted, and then wipe it
very clean on both sides with a linen cloth, till you have cleansed it of all
the mixture.

II. Take Charcoal of Willow, take off the rind of it, and putting fair water
on the plate, rub it with the Charcoal, as if you were to polish it, and it
will take off the varnish.

Where note, that the Coal must be free from all knots and roughness, and that
no sand or filth fall upon the plate.

III. Take ordinary Aqua fortis, to which add two third parts of water, and
with some linen rags dipped therein, rub the Plate all over, so will you take
away its discoloring, and recover its former beauty.

IV. Then take dry linen rags, and wipe the plate so as to take off all the
aforesaid water, and then holding it a little to the fire, put upon it a little
oil olive, and with a piece of an old Beaver rolled up rub the plate well all
over, and lastly wipe it well with a dry cloth.

V. Then if any places need touching with the Graver, as sometimes it happens,
especially where it is to be very deep or black, perfect them with care; which
done, the plate is ready for the Rolling Press.

CHAP. XII. The way of using the soft Varnish.
THE Plate being prepared by cleansing it with a Charcoal and clean water, wash
it well and dry it, then with fine white Chalk scraped and a fine rag, rub it
well over, not touching it with your fingers.

II. Lay down your plate over a Chafing Dish of small coal, yet so as the fire
may have air; then take the Ground or soft Varnish (it being tied up in a fine
rag) and rub it up and down the Copper, so as it may sufficiently cover it,
(not too thin nor too thick:) then take a feather and smooth it as well as
possibly you can all one way, and then cross it, till it lie very well.

But you must take heed that the Plate be not too hot, for if it lie till the
Ground smoke, the moisture will be dried up, and that will spoil the work, and
make the Ground break or fly up.

III. Then grind some white Lead with Gum water, so that it may be of a
convenient thickness to spread on the Copper; and with a large pencil, or small
brush, strike the Plate cross over, twice or thrice till it is smooth; and then
with a larger brush (made of Squirrels tails) gently smooth the white, and then
let it lie till it is dry.

IV. Or you may black the Varnish with a candle, as we taught at the second
Section of the eighth Chapter, and then warm it over the fire, till the varnish
begin to melt.

CHAP. XIII. The way of Etching upon the soft Varnish.
I. THE way of Etching is the same with that in the hard Varnish; only you must
be careful not to hurt your varnish, which you may do by placing on the sides
of your plate two little boards, and laying cross over them another thin one,
so as that it may not touch the plate, on which you must rest your hand whilst
you work.

II. Then place the plate on a Desk (if you so please) for by that means the
superfluous matter will fall away of it self.

III. But if you have any design to transfer upon the plate from any Copy or
Print, scrape on the backside thereof some red Chalk all over; then go over
that, by scraping some soft Charcoal, till it mingle with the Chalk; and with a
large stiff pencil rub it all over till it be fine and eaven, and so lay down
the design upon the plate: with a blunt Needle draw over the out strokes: and
as you work, you need not scratch hard into the Copper, only so as you may see
the Needle go through the Varnish to the Copper.

IV. Always be sure when you leave the work, to wrap the Plate up in Paper, to
keep it from hurt, and corrupting in the air, which may dry the varnish: and
in Winter time wrap the Plate up in a piece of woollen, as well as paper; for if
the frost get to it, it will cause the Varnish to rise from the Copper in the
eating.

An inconveniency also will accrue, by letting the Varnish lie too long upon
the Plate before the work is finished; for three or four months will consume
the moisture and so spoil all.

V. The marking of the design upon the soft varnish, is best done with black
Lead or Chalk, if the ground is white; but with red Chalk, if the ground is
black.

VI. Having graved what you intend upon the varnish, take some fair water, a
little warm, and cast it upon the plate; and then with a soft clean Sponge, rub
upon the white Lead to moisten it all over; and then wash the plate to take
away the whiting, and dry it.

VII. Or lastly, with Aqua fortis mixed with fair water, wash it all over, and
by this means you may take away the whiting, which then wash with common water
and dry it; and thus have you the plate prepared for the Aquafortis.

CHAP. XIV. Of using the Aqua fortis, and finishing the work.
I. PUt soft Wax (red or green) round the brims of the Plate, and let it be
raised above the varnish about half a Barley corns length; so that placing the
plate level, the water being poured upon the Plate may by this means be
retained. This done,

II. Take common Aqua fortis six ounces, Common water two ounces; mix them, and
pour it gently upon the plate, so that it may cover it fully all over; so will
the stronger hatchings be full of bubbles, while the fainter will appear clear
for a while, not making any sudden operations to the view.

III. When you perceive the water to operate a small time, pour it off into a
glazed carthen dish, and throw fair water upon the Plate, to wash away the Aqua
fortis, then dry the plate: and where you would have the Cut to be faint,
tender or sweet, cover it with the prepared Oil, and then cover the Plate again
with Aqua fortis as before, leaving it on for eight or ten minutes, or longer:
then put off the Aqua fortis as before, washing and drying the Plate, and
covering with the prepared Oil other places which you would not have so deep as
the rest: Lastly, put on the Aqua fortis again, for the space of half an hour
(more or less) and then pour it off, washing the plate with fair water as
before.

As you would have your lines or strokes to be deeper and deeper, so cover the
sweeter or fainter parts by degrees with the prepared oil, that the Aqua fortis
may lie the longer on the deep strokes. Then

IV. Take off the border of Wax, and heat the plate, so that the oil and
varnish may thoroughly melt; which wipe away well with a linen cloth: then rub
the plate over with oil Olive and a piece of an old beaver rolled up, which
done, touch it with the Graver where need is.

V. But if any thing be (at last) forgotten; then rub the plate aforesaid with
crumbs of bread, so well that no filth or oil remain upon the Plate.

VI. Then heat the plate upon a Charcoal fire, and spread the soft varnish with
a feather upon it (as before) so that the hatchings may be filled with varnish;
black it, and then touch it over again, or add what you intend.

VII. Let your hatchings be made by means of the Needles, according as the
manner of the work shall require, being careful before you put on the Aqua
fortis, to cover the first graving on the Plate with the prepared Oil (lest the
Varnish should not have covered all over:) then cause the Aqua fortis to eat
into the work; and lastly cleanse the Plate as before.

CHAP. XV. Of Limning, and the Materials thereof.
I. LImming is an Art whereby in water Colors, we strive to resemble Nature in
every thing to the life.

II. The Instruments and Materials thereof are chiefly these. 1. Gums. 2.
Colors. 3. Liquid Gold and Silver. 4. The Grindstone and Muller. 5. Pencils.
6. Tables to Limn in. 7. Little glass or China dishes.

III. The Gums are chiefly these four, Gum Arabic, Gum Lake, Gum Hedera, Gum
Armoniack.

IV. The principal Colors are these seven, White, Black, Red, Green, Yellow,
Blew, Brown: out of which are made mixed or compound Colors.

V. The Liquid Gold and Silver is either natural or artificial.

The natural is that which is produced of the Metals themselves: the Artificial
is that which is formed of other colors.

VI. The Grinding stone, Muller, Pencils, Tables, and Shells, or little China
dishes are only the necessary instruments and attendants, which belong to the
practice of Limning.

CHAP. XVI. Of the Gumms and their Use.
I. THe chief of all is Gum-Arabick, that which is white, clear and brittle;
the Gum-water of it is made thus:

Take Gum-Arabick, bruise it and tie it up in a fine clean linen cloth, and
put it into a convenient quantity of pure spring water, in a glass or earthen
vessel; letting the Gum remain there till it is dissolved; which done, if the
water is not stiff enough, put more Gum into the cloth; but if too stiff, add
more water: of which Gum-water have two sorts by you, the one strong, the other
weak, of which you may make a third at pleasure.

But if you be where Gum-Arabick is not to be got, you may instead of that use
the preparation of sheeps leather or parchment following.

Take of the shreds of white sheepskins (which are to be bad plentifully at
Glovers) or else of parchments, one pound; Conduit or running-water two quarts,
boil it to a thin gelly, then strain it whilst bot through a fine strainen, and
so use it.

II. Gum-lake; it is made of whites of Eggs beaten and strained, a pint, Honey,
Gum-hedera of each two Drachms, strong wort four spoonfuls, mix them, and
strain them with a piece of sponge till they run like a clear oil, which keep
in a clean vessel till it grows hard.

This Gum will dissolve in water like Gum-Arabick, of which Gum-water is made
in like manner; it is a good ordinary Varnish for Pictures.

III. Gum-Hedera, or Gum of Ivy; it is gotten out of Ivy, by cutting with an
Axe a great branch thereof, climbing upon an Oak-tree, and bruising the ends of
it with the head of the Axe; at a Months end, or thereabouts, you may take from
it a very clear, and pure fine Gum, like oil.

It is good to put into gold size and other colors, for these three reasons:
1. It abates the ill scent of the size: 2. It will prevent bubbles in gold size
and other colors: 3. Lastly, it takes the fat and clamminess off colors:
besides which it is of use in making Pomanders.

IV. Gum Armoniacum, It is a Foreign Gum, and ought to be brought strained.
Grind it very fine with juice of Garlic and a little Gum-Arabick water, so
that it may not be too thick, but that you may write with it what you will:

When you use it, draw what you will with it, and let it dry; and when you gild
upon it, cut your Gold or Silver, to the fashion which you drew with the size
or gum; then breath upon the size, and lay the Gold upon it gently taken up,
which press down hard with a piece of wool; and then let it well dry; being
dried, with a fine linen cloth strike off the loose gold; so will what was
drawn be fairly gilded if it was as fine as a hair: it is called Gold
Armoniack.

CHAP. XVII. Of the seven Colors in General.
I. THe chief Whites are these, Spodium, Ceruse, White-lead, Spanish-white,
Egg-shels burnt. This Color is called in Greek (...) of (...), video, to see,
because (...), whiteness ( as Aristotle said) is the object of sight, in Latin
Albus, from whence the Alps had their name, by reason of their continual
whiteness with Snow. The Spanish-white is thus made. Take fine Chalk three
Ounces, Alom one Ounce, grind them together with fair water, till it be like
pap; roll it up into balls, which dry leisurely: then put them into the fire
till they are red hot; take them out, and let them cool: it is the best white
of all, to garnish with, being ground with weak gum-water.

II. The chief Blacks are these, Hartshorn burnt, Ivory burnt, Cherry-stones
burnt, Lamp-black, Charcoal.

Black, in Latin Niger is so called from the Greek word (...), which signifies
dead, because putrified and dead things are generally of that color.
Lamp-black is the smoke of a Link, Torch or Lamp gathered together.

III. The chief Reds are these; Vermilion, Redlead, Indian-lake, Red-oker. It
is called in Latin Ruber (...) a corticibus vel granis mali punic^^; from the
Rinds or Seeds of Pomegranates, as Scaliger says.

IV. The chief Greens are these; Green Bice, Verdegriese, Verditure, Sapgreen.
This color is called in Latin Viridis from Vires: in Greek (...), Grass or
Green berb, which is of this Color.

V. The chief Yellows are these; Orpiment, Masticot, Saffron, Pink yellow, Oker
de luce. This color is called in Latin Flavus, Luteus; in Greek (...), which
is Homer 's Epithete for Menelaus, where he calls him (...).

VI. The chief Blews are Ultramarine, Indico, Smalt, Blew bice. This color is
called in Latin Caeruleus, in Greek (...) a (...), the name of a stone, which
yields Ultramarine.

VII. The chiefest Browns are Umber, Spanish-brown, Colens Earth. It is called
in Latin Fuscus, quasi (...), from darkening the Light, in Greek (...).

CHAP. XVIII. Of Colors in Particular.
I. CEruse, Grind it with glair of Eggs, and it will make a most perfect white.

II. White-lead, Grind it with a weak water of Gumlake, and let it stand three
or four days, after which if you mix with it Roset and Vermilion, it makes a
fair Carnation.

III. Spanish-white, It is the best white of all, to garnish with, ground with
weak Gum-water.

IV. Lamp black, ground with Gum-water, it makes a good black.

V. Vermilion, Grind it with the glair of an Egg, and in the grinding put a
little clarified honey, to make its color bright and perfect.

VI. Sinaper-lake, it makes a deep and beautiful red, or rather purple, almost
like unto a Red-rose. Grind it with Gum-lake and Turnsole water: if you will
have it light, add a little Ceruse, and it will make it a bright Crimson; if to
Diaper, add only Turnsole water.

VII. Red-lead, Grind it with some Saffron, and stiff Gum-lake; for the Saffron
makes it orient, and of a Marigold color.

VIII. Turnsole, Lay it in a Sawcer of Vinegar, and set it over a chafing dish
of coals; let it boil, then take it off, and wring it into a Shell, adding a
little Gum-Arabick, let it stand till it is dissolved: It is good to shadow
Carnation, and all Yellows.

IX. Roset, Grind it with Brazil-water, and it will make a deep purple: put
Ceruse to it, and it will be lighter; grind it with Litmose, and it will make a
fair Violet.

X. Spanish brown, Grind it with Brazil-water: mingle it with Ceruse and it
makes a horseflesh Color.

XI. Bole Armoniack, It is a faint Color; its chief use is, in making size for
burnished gold.

XII. Greenbice, Order it as you do blew bice; when it is moist, and not
through dry, you may diaper upon it with the water of deep green.

XIII. Verdegriese, Grind it with juice of Rue, and a little weak gum-water,
and you will have a most pure green: if you will diaper with it, grind it with
Lie of Rue (or else the decoction thereof) and there will be a hoary green:
Diaper upon Verdegriese green with sap-green: also Verdegriese ground with
white Tartar, and then tempered with gum-water, gives a most perfect green.

XIV. Verditure, grind it with a weak Gum-Arabick water: it is the faintest
green that is, but is good to lay upon black, in any kind of drapery.

XV. Sap-green, lay it in sharp vinegar all night; put it into a little Alom to
raise its color, and you will have a good green to diaper upon other greens.

XVI. Orpiment, Arsenicum or Auripigmentum, grind it with a stiff water of
Gum-lake, because it is the best color of it self; it will lie upon no green,
for all greens, white and red lead, and Ceruse stain it: wherefore you must
deepen your colors so that the Orpiment may be highest, and so it may agree
with all Colors.

XVII. Masticot, Grind it with a small quantity of Saffron in gum-water, and
never make it lighter than it is: it will endure to lie upon all colors and
metals.

XVIII. Saffron, Steep it in Glair: it may be ground with Vermilion.

XIX. Pink-yellow, If you would have it sad colored, grind it with Saffron; if
light, with Ceruse: mix it with weak gum-water, and so use it.

XX. Oker de Luce, Grind it with pure Brazil-water: it makes a passing hair
color; and is a natural shadow for gold.

XXI. Vmber, It is a more sad color. Grind it with gum-water, or gum-lake; and
lighten it (if you please) with a little Ceruse and a blade of Saffron.

XXII. Vltramarine, If you would have it deep, grind it with Litmose-water; but
if light, with fine Ceruse, and a weak Gum-Arabick water.

XXIII. Indico, Grind it with water of Gum-Arabick, as Ultramarine.

XXIV. Blew bice, Grind it with clean water, as small as you can, then put it
into a shell, and wash it thus: put as much water to it as will fill up the
vessel or shell, and stir it well, let it stand an hour, and the filth and
dirty water cast away; then put in more clean water, do thus four or five
times; and at last put in Gum-Arabick water somewhat weak, that the Bice may
fall to the bottom; pour off the gum-water, and put more to it, wash it again,
dry it, and mix it with weak gumwater (if you would have it rise of the same
color) but with a stiff water of Gum-lake, if you would have a most perfect
blew; if a light blew, grind it with a little Ceruse; but if a most deep blew,
add water of Litmose.

XXV. Smalt, Grind it with a little fine Roset, and it will make a deep Violet:
and by putting in a quantity of Ceruse, it will make a light Violet.

XXVI. Litmose blew, Grind it with Ceruse: with too much Litmose it makes a
deep blew; with too much Ceruse, a light blew: grind it with the weak water of
Gum-Arabick.

Take fine Litmose, cut it in pieces, lay it in weak water of Gum-lake for
twenty four hours, and you shall have a water of a most perfect Azure; with
which water you may Diaper and Damask, upon all other blews, to make them show
more fair and beautiful.

XXVII. Orchal, Grind it with unslak'd Lime and Urine, it makes a pure Violet:
by putting to more or less Lime, you may make the Violet light or deep as you
please.

CHAP. XIX. Of Mixed and Compound Colors.
I. MVrry, It is a wonderful beautiful color, composed of purple and white: it
is made thus. Take Sinaper-lake two ounces; white Lead one ounce; grind them
together. See the 24 Section.

II. A Glass gray, Mingle Ceruse with a little Azure.

III. A Bay color, Mingle Vermilion with a little Spanish brown and black.

IV. A deep Purple, It is made of Indico, Spanish brown and white.

It is called in Latin Purpureus, in Greek (...) from (...), a kind of shell
fish that yields a liquour of that color.

V. An Ash color, or Gray, It is made by mixing white and Lamp-black; or white
with Sinaper, Indico and black make an Ash color.

It is called in Latin Caesius, and color Cinerius; in Greek (...) and (...).

VI. Light Green, It is made of Pink and Smalt; with white to make it lighter
if need require.

VII. Saffron color, It is made of Saffron alone by infusion.

VIII. Flame color, It is made of Vermilion and Orpiment, mixed deep or light
at pleasure: or thus. Take red Lead and mix it with Masticote, which heighten
with white.

IX. A Violet Color, Indico, white and Sinaper Lake make a good Violet. So
also Ceruse and Litmose, of each equal parts.

X. Lead color, It is made of White mixed with Indico.

XI. Scarlet color, It is made of Red Lead, Lake, Vermilion: yet Vermilion in
this case is not very useful.

XII. To make Vermilion.

Take Brimstone in powder one ounce, mix it with Quicksilver a pound, put it
into a Crucible well luted, and upon a Charcoal fire heat it till it is red
hot; then take it off and let it cool.

XIII. To make a bright Crimson.

Mix tincture of Brazil with a little Ceruse ground with fair water.

XIV. To make a sad Crimson.

Mix the aforesaid light Crimson with a little Indico ground with fair water.

XV. To make a pure Lake.

Take Urine twenty pound, boil it in a Kettle and scum it with an Iron Scummer
till it comes to sixteen pound; to which add gum Lake one pound, Alom five
ounces; boil all till it is well colored, which you may try by dipping therein
a piece of linen cloth; then add sweet Alom in powder a sufficient quantity,
strain it and let it stand; strain it again through a dry cloth till the liquor
be clear: that which remains in the cloth or bag is the pure Lake.

XVI. To make a Crimson Lake.

It is usually made of the flocks shorn off from Crimson cloth by a Lie made of
Salt - peter, which extracts the color; which precipitate, edulcorate, and dry
in the Sun or a Stove.

XVII. A pure Green.

Take white Tartar and Verdegriese, temper them with strong white Wine Vinegar,
in which a little gum Arabic has been dissolved.

XVIII. A pure Violet.

Take a little Indico and tincture of Brazil, grind them with a little Ceruse.

XIX. A pure Purple color.

Take fine Brimstone an ounce and an half, Quicksilver, Sal Armoniack, Jupiter,
of each one ounce; beat the Brimstone and Salt into powder, and make an
Amalgamie with the Quicksilver and Tinn, mix all together, which put into a
great glass Goard; make under it an ordinary fire, and keep it in a constant
heat for the space of six hours.

XX. To make a Yellow Color.

Take the yellow chives in white Lilies, steep them in gum water, and it will
make a perfect yellow; the same from Saffron and Tartar tempered with gum water.

XXI. To make a Red color.

Take the roots of the lesser Bugloss, and beat them, and strain out the juice,
and mix it with Alom water.

XXII. To make excellent good Greens.

The Liver of a Lamprey makes an excellent and durable grass green: and yellow
laid upon blew will change into green: so likewise the juice of a blew
Flower-de-luce, mixed with gum water, will be a perfect and durable green or
blew, according as it is used.

XXIII. To make a Purple color.

Take the juice of Bilberries and mix it with Alom and Galls, and so paint with
it.

XXIV. To make a good Murry.

Temper Rosset with a little Rose water, in which a little gum has been
dissolved, and it will be good; but not exceeding that at the first Section of
this Chapter.

XXV To make Azure or Blew.

Mix the Azure with glue water, and not with gum water.

XXVI. To make a Yellow, Green, or Purple.

Buckthorn Berries gathered green and steeped in Alom water yield a good
yellow: but being through ripe and black (by the eighteenth Section of the
twenty first Chapter of the third Book) they yield a good green: and lastly,
being gathered when they are ready to drop off, which is about the middle or
end of November, their juice mixed with Alom water yields a good purple color.

CHAP. XX. Of Colors for Drapery.
I. FOR Yellow garments. Take Masticot deepned with brown Oker and red Lead.

II. For Scarlet. Take Vermilion deepned with Sinaper lake, and heightened with
touches of Masticot.

III. For Crimson. Lay on Lake very thin, and deepen with the same.

IV. For Purple. Grind Lake and Smalt together: or take blew Bice, and mix it
with red and white Lead.

V. For an Orient Violet. Grind Litmose, blew Smalt, and Ceruse; but in mixture
let the blew have the upper hand.

VI. For Blew. Take Azure deepned with Indie blew; or Lake heightened with white.

VII. For black Velvet. Lay the garment first over with Ivory black, then
heighten it with Cherrystone black, and a little white.

VIII. For black Satin. Take Cherrystone black; then white deepned with
Cherrystone black; and then lastly, Ivory black.

IX. For a pure Green. Take Verdegriese, bruise it, and steep it in Muscadine
for twelve hours, then strain it into a shell, to which add a little Sap green:
(but put no gum thereto.)

X. For a Carnation. Grind Ceruse, well washed, with red Lead; or Ceruse and
Vermilion.

XI. For Cloth of Gold. Take brown Oker, and liquid Gold water, and heighten
upon the same with small strokes of Gold.

XII. For white Satin. Take first fine Ceruse, which deepen with Cherrystone
black, then heighten again with Ceruse, and fine touches where the light
falls.

XIII. For a russet Satin. Take Indy blew and Lake, first thin, and then
deepned with Indy again.

XIV. For a hair Color. It is made out of Masticot, Umber, yellow Oker,
Ceruse, Oker de Rous, and Sea-coal.

XV. For a Popinjay green. Take a perfect green mingled with Masticot.

XVI. For changeable Silk. Take water of Masticot and red Lead; which deepen
with Sap green.

XVII. For a light Blew. Take blew Bice, heightened with Ceruse or Spodium.

XVIII. For to shadow Russet. Take Cherrystone black, and white; lay a light
russet, then shadow it with white.

XIX. For a Sky color. Take blew Bice and Venice Ceruse: but if you would
have it dark, take some blew and white.

XX. For a Straw color. Take Masticot; then white heightened with Masticot,
and deepned with Pink. Or thus. Take red Lead deepned with Lake.

XXI. For Yellowish. Thin Pink deepned with pink and green: Orpiment burned
makes a Marigold color.

XXII. For a Peach color. Take Brazil water, Log water and Ceruse.

XXIII. For a light Purple. Mingle Ceruse with Logwood water: or take Turnsole
mingled with a little Lake, Smalt and Bice.

XXIV. For a Walnut color. Red Lead thinly laid, and shadowed with Spanish
brown.

XXV. For a Fire color. Take Masticot, and deepen it with Masticot for the
flame.

XXVI. For a Tree. Take Umber and white, wrought with Umber, deepned with black.

XXVII. For the Leaves. Take Sap green and green Bice, heighten it with
Verditure and white.

XXVIII. For Water. Blew and white, deepned with blew, and heightened with white.

XXIX. For Banks. Thin Umber, deepned with Umber and black.

XXX. For Feathers. Take Lake frizled with red Lead.

CHAP. XXI. Of Liquid Gold and Silver.
I. LIquid Gold or Silver.

Take five or six leaves of Gold or Silver, which grind (with a stiff gum Lake
water, and a good quantity of salt) as small as you can; then put it into a
vial or glazed vessel; add so much fair water as may dissolve the stiff gum
water; then let it stand four hours, that the gold may settle: decant the
water, and put in more, till the gold is clean washed: to the gold put more
fair water, a little sal Armoniack and common salt, digesting it close for four
days; then put all into a piece of thin Glovers leather (whose grain is peeled
off) and hang it up, so will the sal Armoniack fret away, and the gold remain
behind, which keep.

Or thus. Grind fine leaf Gold with strong or thick gum water very fine; and as
you grind add more thick gum water; being very fine, wash it in a great shell,
as you do bice: then temper it with a little quantity of Mercury sublimate, and
a little dissolved gum to bind it in the shall; shake it, and spread the Gold
about the sides thereof, that it may be all of one color and fineness, which
use with fair waters, as you do other Colors. The same observe in liquid
Silver; with this observation, That if your Silver, by length of time, or
humidity of the air becomes rusty; then cover the place with juice of Garlic
before you lay on the Silver, which will preserve it.

When you use it, temper it with glair of eggs, and so use it with pen or
pencil. Glair of Eggs is thus made. Take the whites and beat them with a spoon,
till that rise all in a foam; then let them stand all night, and by morning
they will be turned into clear water, which is good glair.

II. Argentum Musicum.

Take one ounce of tin, melt it, and put thereto of Tartar and Quicksilver of
each one ounce, stir them well together until they be cold, then beat it in a
mortar and grind it on a stone; mix it with gum water, write therewith, and
afterward polish it.

III. Burnished Gold or Silver.

Take gum-lake and dissolve it into a stiff water; then grind a blade or two of
Saffron therewith, and you shall have a fair gold: when you have set it, being
thoroughly dry, burnish it with a dogs tooth. Or thus, having writ with your pen
or pencil what you please, cut the Leaf Gold or Silver into pieces, according
to the draught, which take up with a feather and lay it upon the drawing, which
press down with a piece of wool; and being dry, burnish it.

IV. Gold Armoniack.

This is nothing but that which we have taught at the fourth Section of the
sixteenth Chapter of this Book.

V. Size for burnished Gold.

Take Bole Armoniack three drachms, fine Chalk one dram; grind them as small
as you can together with fair water, three or four times, letting it dry after
every time: then take glair and strain it as short as water, with which grind
the Bole and Chalk, adding a little gum Hedera, and a few blades of Saffron:
grind all as small as possible, and put them into an Ox horn (I judge a glass
vessel better) and set it to rot in horse dung for six weeks; then take it up,
and let it have air, and keep it for use.

Its use is for gilding parchments, book covers, and leather, thus; lay this
size first upon the parchment, then with a feather lay the Gold or Silver upon
it, which when dry, burnish it.

VI. To diaper on Gold or Silver.

You must diaper on Gold with Lake and yellow Oker: but upon Silver with Ceruse.

VII. Aurum Musicum.

Take fine Crystal, Orpiment, of each one ounce, beat each severally into a
fine powder, then grind them together well with glair.

You may write with it, with pen or pencil, and your letters or draught will be
of a good gold color.

CHAP. XXII. Of Preparing the Colors.
I. Colors, according to their natures, have each a particular way of
preparation: to wit, by grinding, washing or steeping.

II. The chief Colors to be ground are these; White Lead, Ceruse, Sinaper
Lake, Oker, Pink, Indico, Umber, Colens Earth, Spanish Brown, Ivory Black,
Cherrystone Black.

III. The chief Colors to be washed are Red Lead, Masticot, green Bice, Cedar
green, Ultramarine, blew Bice, Smalt, Verditure.

IV. The chief Colors to be steeped, are Sap-green, Saffron, Turnsole, Stone
blew, Venice berries.

V. To Grind Colors.

Take the color you would grind, and scrape off from it all the filth, then
lay it upon the stone, and with the muller bruise it a little; then put thereto
a little spring water, and grind all together very well, till the color is
very fine; which done, pour it out into certain hollows or furrows cut in
chalk-stone, and there let it lie till it is dry, which reserve in papers or
glasses.

VI. To Wash colors.

Put the color into a glazed vessel, and put thereto fair water plentifully,
wash it well, and decant (after a while) the water; do this six or seven times;
at last put the water (being just troubled) into another glazed vessel, leaving
the dregs at bottom: then into this second vessel put more fair water, washing
it as before, till the water (being settled) be clear, and the color remain
fine at bottom: we have taught another way at the twenty fourth Section of the
eighteenth Chapter of this Book.

VII. To steep Colors.

Take a quantity thereof, and put it into a shell, and fill the shell with fair
water, to which add some fine powder of Alom, to raise the Color; let it thus
steep a day and night, and you will have a good color.

Where note; Saffron steeped in vinegar gives a good color; and the Venice
berries in fair water and a little Alom, or a drop or two of oil of Vitriol
makes a fair yellow.

VIII. To temper the colors.

Take a little of any color, and put it into a clean shell, and add thereto a
few drops of gum water, and with your fingers work it about the shell, then let
it dry; when dry, touch it with your fingers, if any color comes off, you must
add stronger gum water: but being dry, if the color glister or shine, it is a
sign there is too much gum in it, which you may remedy by putting in fair water.

IX. To help the defects.

Some colors as Lake, Umber, and others which are hard, will crack when they
are dry; in this case, in tempering them add a little white Sugar candy in very
fine powder, which mix with the color and fair water in the shell, till the
Sugar candy is dissolved.

X. These colors, Umber, Spanish brown, Colen earth, Cherrystone, and Ivory
black, are to be burnt before they be ground or washed.

XI. To burn or calcine Colors.

This is done in a crucible, covering the mouth thereof with clay, and setting
it in a hot fire, till you are sure it is red hot through: which done, being
cold, wash or grind it as aforesaid.

XII. To prepare shadows for Colors.

White is shaded with black, and contrariwise: yellow with Umber, and the
Okers: Vermilion with Lake: blew Bice with Indie: Black coal with Roset, etc.

CHAP. XXIII. Of the Manual Instruments.
I. THe manual Instruments are four (by the second Section of the fifteenth
Chapter of this Book) to wit, The Grinding stone and Muller; Pencils; Tables to
Limn on; and shells or little glasses or China dishes.

II. The Grinding stone may be of Porphury, Serpentine or Marble, but rather a
Pebble, for that is the best of all others: the Muller only of pebble, which
keep very clean.

These may be easily got of Marblers or Stone-cutters in London.

III. Choose your pencils thus: by their fastness in the quills, and their
sharp points after you have drawn or wetted them in your mouth two or three
times; so that although larger yet their points will come to as small as a
hair, which then are good; but if they spread or have any extravagant hairs
they are naught.

To wash your Pencils.

After using them, rub the ends of them well with soap, then lay them a while
in warm water to steep, then take them out and wash them well in other fair
water.

V. To prepare the Table.

It must be made of pure fine paste-board, such as Cards are made of (of what
thickness you please) very finely slick'd and glazed. Take a piece of this
paste-board of the bigness you intend the picture, and a piece of the finest
and whitest parchment you can get (virgin parchment) which cut of equal bigness
with the paste board; with thin, white, new made starch, paste the parchment to
the paste-board, with the outside of the skin outwardmost: lay on the starch
very thin and eaven; then the grinding stone being clean, lay the card thereon
with the parchment side downwards, and as hard as you can, rub the other side
of the paste-board with a Boars tooth set in a stick; then let it be through
dry, and it will be fit to work or limn any curious thing upon.

VI. The shells holding or containing your colors, ought to be Horse-muscle
shells, which may be got in July about Rivers sides; but the next to these are
small muscle shells, or in stead thereof little China or glass vessels.

CHAP. XXIV. Of Preparations for Limning.
I. HAve two small glass or China dishes, in either of which must be pure clean
water, the one to wash the pencils in being foul; the other to temper the
colors with, when there is occasion.

II. Besides the pencils you Limn with; a large, clean, and dry pencil, to
cleanse the work from any kind of dust, that may fall upon it, which one called
Fitch-Pencils.

III. A sharp Penknife to take off hairs that may come from your pencil,
either among the colors or upon the work; or to take out spots that may fall
upon the card or table.

IV. A Paper with a hole cut therein, to lay over the Card, to keep it from
dust and filth, to rest your hand upon, and to keep the soil and sweat of your
hand from sullying the parchment, as also to try your pencils on before you use
them.

Let the small glasses, waters, pencils and penknife lie all on the right
hand.

V. Have ready a quantity of light carnation or flesh color tempered up in a
shell by it self with a weak gum water; If it be a fair complexion, mix white
and red Lead together; if a brown or swarthy, add to the former, Masticot, or
English Oker, or both: but be sure the flesh color be always lighter than the
complexion you would limn; for by working on it you may bring it to its true
color.

VI. In a large Horse-muscle shell place your several shadows (for the flesh
color) in little places one distinct from another.

VII. In all shadowings have ready some white, and lay a good quantity of it by
it self, besides what the shadows are first mixed with: for red for the cheeks
and lips, temper Lake and red Lead together: for blew shadows (as under the
eyes and in veins) Indico or Ultrarine and white: for gray faint shadows,
white, English Oker, sometimes Masticot: for deep shadows, white, English Oker,
Umber: for dark shadows, Lake and Pink, which make a good fleshy shadow.

VIII. To make choice of the light.

Let it be fair and large and free from shadows of trees or houses, but all
clear Sky light, and let it be direct from above, and not transverse; let it
be northerly and not southerly; and let the room be close and clean, and free
from the Sunbeams.

IX. Of the manner of sitting.

Let your desk on which you work be so situate, that sitting before it, your
left arm may be toward the light, that the light may strike sidling upon your
work: Let the party that is to be Limned, be in what posture themselves will
design, but not above two yards off you at most, and level with you; wherein
observe their motion, if nover so small, for the least motion, if not recalled,
may in short time bring on you many errors: Lastly, the face being finished,
let the party stand (not sit) at a farther distance (four or five yards off) to
draw the posture of his clothes.

CHAP. XXV. Of the Practice of Limning in Miniture, or Drawing of a Face in
Colors.
I. TO begin the work.

Have all things in a readiness (as before) then on the Card lay the prepared
color (answerable to the complexion presented) eaven and thin, free from hairs
and spots, over the place where the picture is to be: the ground thus laid,
begin the work, the party being set, which must be done at three sittings: at
the first sitting the face is only dead colored, which takes up about two
hours time: at the second sitting, go over the work more curiously, adding its
particular graces or deformities, sweetly couching the colors, which will take
up about five hours time: at the third sitting finish the face, in which you
must perfect all that is imperfect and rough, putting the deep shadows in the
face, as in the eyes, eyebrows, and ears, which are the last of the work, and
not to be done till the hair curtain, or backside of the picture, and the
drapery be wholly finished.

II. The operation or work at first sitting.

The ground for the complexion being laid, draw the out-lines of the face,
which do with Lake and white mingled; draw faintly, that if you miss in
proportion or color you may alter it: this done, add to the former color red
Lead, for the cheeks and lips; let it be but faint (for you cannot lighten a
deep color) and make the shadows in their due places, as in the checks, lips,
tip of the chin and ears, the eyes and roots of the hair: shadow not with a
flat pencil, but by small touches (as in hatching) and so go over the face. In
this dead covering rather than to be curious, strive as near as may be to
imitate nature. The red shadows being put in their due places; shadow with a
faint blew, about the corners and balls of the eyes; and with a grayish blew
under the eyes and about the temples, heightning the shadows as the light
falls, as also the harder shadows in the dark side of the face, under the
eyebrows, chin and neck. Bring all the work to an equality, but add perfection
to no particular part at this time; but imitate the life in likeness,
roundness, boldness, posture, color, and the like. Lastly, touch at the hair
with a suitable color in such curls, folds and form, as may either agree with
the life, or grace the picture; fill the empty places with color, and deepen
it more strongly, than in the deepest shadowed before.

III. The operation or work at second sitting.

As before rudely, so now you must sweeten those varieties which Nature
affords, with the same colors and in the same places, driving them one into
another, yet so as that no lump or spot of color, or rough edge may appear in
the whole work; and this must be done with a pencil sharper than that which was
used before. This done, go to the backside of the picture, which may be
Landscape, or a curtain of blew or red Satin: if of blew, temper as much Bice
as will cover a Card, and let it be well mixed with gum; with a pencil draw the
out-line of the Curtain; as also of the whole picture; then with a large pencil
lay thinly or airily over the whole ground, on which you mean to lay the blew;
and then with a large pencil, lay over the same a substantial body of color;
in doing of which, be nimble, keeping the color moist, letting no part thereof
be dry till the whole be covered. If the Curtain be crimson, trace it out with
lake; lay the ground with a thin color; and lay the light with a thin and
waterish color, where they fall; and while the ground is yet wet, with a
strong dark color tempered something thick, lay the strong and hard shadows
close by the other lights. Then lay the linen with faint white, and the
drapery flat, of the color you intend it. In the face, see what shadows are
too light or too deep, for the Curtain behind, and drapery, and reduce each to
their due perfection; draw the lines of the eyelids, and shadow the entrance
into the ear, deepness of the eyebrows, and eminent marks in the face, with a
very sharp pencil: lastly, go over the hair, coloring it as it appears in the
life, casting over the ground some loose hairs, which will make the picture
stand as it were at a distance from the curtain: Shadow the linen with white,
black, and a little yellow and blew; and deepen your black with Ivory black,
mixed with a little Lake and Indieo.

IV. The operation or work at third sitting.

This third work is wholly spent in giving strong touches where you see cause;
in rounding, smoothing and coloring the face, which you may better see to do,
now the curtain and drapery is limned than before. And now observe whatsoever
may conduce to the perfection of your work, as gesture, skars or moles, casts
of the eyes, windings of the mouth, and the like.

CHAP. XXVI. Of Limning Drapery.
I. A Full and substantial ground being laid all over where you intend the
drapery; as if blew, with Bice smoothly laid, deepen it with Lake and Indico;
lightning it with a fine faint white, in the extreme light places, the which
understand of other colors.

II. If the body you draw be in Armor, lay liquid silver all over for a
ground, well dried and burnished; shadow it with Silver, Indico and Umber,
according as the life directs you.

III. For Gold Armor, lay liquid gold as you did the silver, and shadow upon
it with Lake, English Oker, and a little gold.

IV. For Pearls, your ground must be Indico and white; the shadows black and
pink.

V. For Diamonds, lay a ground of liquid silver, and deepen it with Cherrystone
black and Ivory black.

VI. For Rubies, lay a silver ground, which burnish to the bigness of a Rubie:
then with pure Turpentine tempered with Indian Lake, from a small wire heated
in a Candle, drop upon the burnished place, fashioning it as you please with
your Instruments, which let lie a day or two to dry.

VII. For Emeraulds, or any green stone, temper Turpentine with Verdigriese,
and a little Turmerick root, first scraped, with Vinegar, drying it, grind it
to fine powder and mix it.

VIII. For Sapphires, mix or temper Ultramarine with pure Turpentine, which lay
upon a ground of liquid Silver polisht.

To make liquid Gold or Siver, see the first Section of the twenty first
Chapter of this Book.

CHAP. XXVII. Of Limning Landscape.
ALL the variable expressions of Landscape are innumerable, they being as many
as there are men and fancies; the general rules follow.

I. Always begin with the Sky, Sunbeams, or lightest parts first; next the
yellowish beams (which make of Masticot and white) next the blewness of the
Sky, (which make of Smalt only.)

II. At first coloring, leave no part of the ground uncovered, but lay the
colors smooth all over.

III. Work the Sky downwards: toward the Horizon fainter and fainter, as it
draws nearer and nearer the earth: the tops of mountains far remote, work so
faint that they may appear as lost in the air.

IV. Let places low, and near the ground be of the color of the earth, of a
dark yellowish, or brown green; the next lighter green; and so successively as
they lose in distance, let them abate in color.

V. Make nothing which you see at a distance perfect, by expressing any
particular sign which it has, but express it in colors, as weakly and faintly
as the eye judges of it.

VI. Always place light against darkness and darkness against light, by which
means you may extend the prospect as a very far off.

VII. Let all shadows lose their force as they remove from the eye; always
letting the strongest shadow be nearest hand.

VIII. Lastly, Take Isinglass in small pieces half an ounce, fair Conduit water
two quarts, boil it till the glass is dissolved, which save for use: with which
mix spirit or oil of Cloves, Roses, Cinnamon or Ambergriese, and lay it on and
about the Picture where it is not colored (lest it should change the Colors:
but upon the Colors use it without the perfumes) so it will varnish your
Pictures, and give them a gloss, retaining the glory of their colors, and take
from them any ill scent which they might otherwise retain.

Horat. Epod. 16.
Vos, quibus est virtus, mulicbrem tollite luctum,
Etrusca praeter and volate littora.
Nos manet Oceanus circumvagus; arva, beata
Petamus arva, divites and insulas:
Reddit ubi Cererem tellus inarata quotannis,
Et imputata floret usque vinea.
Germinet and nunquam fallentis terms olivae,
Suamque pulla ficus ornat arborem.
Illis injussae veniunt ad mulctra capellae:
Refertque tenta grex amicus ubera.
Nec Vespertinus circumgemit ursus ovile,
Nec intumescit alta viperis humus:
Pluraque felices mirabimur: ut neque largis
Aquosus Eurus arva radat imbribus,
Pinguia nec siccis urantur semina glebis:
Utrumque rege temperante Coelitum.
Non huc Argoo contendit remige pinus,
Neque impudica Colchis intulit pedem:
Non huc Sidonii torserunt cornua nautae,
Laboriosa nec cohors Ulyssei.
Nulla nocent pecori contagia, nullius astri
Gregem aeftuosa torret impotentia.
Jupiter illa piae secrevit littora genti,
Ut inquinavit aere tempus aureum.
You nobler spirits, hence with women's tears,
Sail from Etruscan confines free from fears.
The Earth encircling Ocean us invites,
Rich Islands, Fields, Fields blessed with all delights.
Where Lands untilled are yearly fruitful seen,
And the unpruned vine perpetual green.
Still, Olives by the faithful branch are born,
And mellow Figgs their native trees adorn.
There milchy goats come freely to the pail,
Nor do glad flocks with dugs distended fail.
The mighty Bear roars not about the fold,
Nor hollow earth does poisonous Vipers hold.
Add to this happiness, the humid East
Does not with frequent showers the fields infest.
Nor the fat seeds are parcht in barren land,
The powers above both temp'ring with command.
No Bark came hither with Argoan oar,
Ner landed wanton Colchis on this shore:
Cadmus with filled sails turned not this way,
Nor painful troops that with Ulysses stray.
Here amongst cattle no Contagions are,
Nor feel flocks droughty power of any star.
When brass did on the golden Age intrude,
Jove for the pious did this place seclude.
Libri Polygraphices secundi FINIS.
POLYGRAPHICES LIBER TERTIUS.
Of Painting, Washing, Coloring, Dying, Varnishing and Gilding.
Containing the description and use of all the chief Instruments and Materials;
the way and manner of working, together with the beginning, progress and end
thereof.
Exemplified in the Painting of the Ancients: the washing of Maps, Globes or
Pictures: Dying of Cloth, Silks, Horns, Bones, Woods, Glass, Stones and
Metals: Together with the Gilding and Varnishing thereof, according to any
purpose or intent.
CHAP. I. Of Painting in Oil, and the Materials thereof.
I. PAinting in Oil is nothing but the work or Art of Limning performed with
colors made up or mixed with oil.

II. The Materials of Painting are chiefly seven, 1. The Easel, 2. The Pallet,
3. The Straining frame, 4. The Primed cloth, 5. Pencils, 6. The Stay, 7.
Colors.

III. The Easel is a Frame made of wood (much like a ladder) with sides flat,
and full of holes, to put in two pins to set your work upon higher or lower at
pleasure; something broader at bottom than at the top; on the backside whereof
is a stay, by which you may set the Easel more upright or sloping.

IV. The Pallet is a thin piece of wood, (Peartree or Walnut) a foot long, and
about ten inches broad, almost like an Egg, at the narrowest end of which is
made an hole, to put in the thumb of the left hand, near to which is cut a
notch, that so you may hold the pallet in your hand. Its use is to hold and
temper the Colors upon.

V. The Streining frame is made of wood, to which with nails is fastened the
primed cloth, which is to be painted upon.

These ought to be of several sizes according to the bigness of the cloth.

VI. The Primed cloth is that which is to be painted upon; and is thus
prepared.

Take good Canvase and smooth it over with a slick-stone, size it over with
size, and a little honey, and let it dry; then white it over once with whiting
and size mixed with a little honey, so is the cloth prepared, on which you may
draw the picture with a coal, and lastly lay on the Colors.

Where note, honey keeps it from cracking, peeling or breaking out.

VII. Pencils are of all bignesses, from a pin to the bigness of a finger,
called by several names, as Ducks quill fitched and pointed; Goose quill
fitched and pointed; Swans quill fitched and pointed; Jewelling pencils, and
bristle pencils: some in quills, some in tinn cases, and some in sticks.

VIII. The Stay or Mol-stick, is a Brazil stick (or the like) of a yard long;
having at the one end thereof, a little ball of Cotton, fixed hard in a piece
of leather, of the bigness of a chestnut; which when you are at work you must
hold in your left hand; and laying the end which has the leather ball upon the
cloth or frame, you may rest your right arm upon it, whilst you are at work.

IX. The Colors are in number seven (ut supra) to wit, White, Black, Red,
Green, Yellow, Blew, and Brown.

Of which some may be tempered on the pallet at first; some must be ground, and
then tempered; and other some must be burnt, ground, and lastly tempered.

X. To make the size for the primed cloth at the fifth Section of this Chapter.

Take glue, and boil it well in fair water, till it be dissolved, and it is
done.

XI. To make the whiting for the fifth Section of this Chapter.

Take of the aforesaid size, mix it with whiting ground, and so white your
boards or cloth (being made smooth) dry them, and white them a second or third
time; lastly, scrape them smooth and draw it over with white Lead tempered with
oil.

XII. To keep the Colors from skinning.

Oil colors (if not presently used) will have a skin grow over them, to
prevent which, put them into a glass, and put the glass three or four inches
under water, so will they neither skin nor dry.

XIII. To cleanse the Grinding stone and Pencils.

If the grinding stone be foul, grind Curriers shavings upon it, and then
crumbs of bread, so will the filth come off: if the pencils be foul, dip the
end of them in oil of Turpentine, and squeeze them between your fingers, and
they will be very clean.

CHAP. II. Of the Colors in General, and their significations.
I. THe chief Whites for painting in oil are, white Lead, Ceruse and Spodium.

II. The chief Blacks are, Lamp black, Seacoal black, Ivory black, Charcoal,
and earth of Colen.

III. The chief Reds are, Vermilion, Sinaper lake, red Lead, Indian Red,
Ornotto.

IV. The chief Greens are, Verdigriese, Terra vert, Verditer.

V. The chief Yellows are, Pink, Masticot, English Oker, Spruse Oker, Orpiment.

VI. The chief Blews are, blew Bice, Indico, Ultramarine, Smalt.

VII. The chief Browns are, Spanish brown, burnt Spruce, Umber.

VIII. These Colors, Lamp black, Verditer, Vermilion, Bice, Smalt, Masticot,
Orpiment, Ultramarine, are not to be ground at all, but only tempered with oil
upon the Pallet.

IX. These colors, Ivory, Ceruse, Oker and Umber are to be burnt, and then
ground with oil.

X. All the rest are to be ground upon the Grinding stone with Linseed oil
(except white Lead, when it is to be used for Linen, which then is to be
ground with oil of Walnuts, for Linseed oil will make it turn yellow.)

And now since we are engaged to treat of colors, it may neither be
unnecessary, nor unuseful for the young Artist to know their natural
significations; which take as follows.

XI. Blew signifies truth, faith, and continued affections; Azure, Constancy;
Violet, a religious mind.

XII. Orange tawny, signifies Pride, also integrity; Tawny, forsaken; Limmon,
jealousy.

XIII. Green signifies hope: grass-green, youth, youthfulness, and rejoicing:
Sea green, Inconstancy.

XIV. Red signifies Justice, Virtue and Defense: Flame-colour, Beauty and
desire: Maidens-blush, envy.

XV. Yellow signifies Jealousy: perfect yellow, Joy, Honor, and greatness of
Spirit: Gold-colour, Avarice,

XVI. Flesh-colors signifies lasciviousness: Carnation, Craft, Subtilty and
Deceit: Purple, Fortitude and Strength.

XVII. Willow-colour signifies forsaken: Popingjaygreen, Wantoness:
Peach-colour, Love.

XVIII. White signifies Death: Milk-white, Innocence, Purity, Truth,
Integrity: Black, Wisdom, Sobriety, and Mourning.

XIX. Straw-colour signifies plenty: Rust of Iron, Witheredness: Ermine,
Religion and Holiness.

XX. The White, Black, Red and green, are colors held sacred in the Church of
Rome: White is worn in the festivals of Virgins, Saints, Confessors and Angels,
to show their Innocence: Red in the solemnities of the Apostles and Martyrs of
Jesus: Black in Lent and other fasting days: Green is worn between the Epiphany
and Sepiuagesima: and between Pentecost and Advent.

CHAP. III. Of the fitting of Colors for Painting.
I. UPon the Pallet dispose the several colors, at a convenient distance, that
they may not intermix; first lay on the Vermilion, then the Lake, then the
burnt Oker, then the India Red, Pink, Umber, Black and Smalt, each in their
order, and lay the white next to your thumb, because it is oftnest used, for
with it all shadows are to be lightened; and next the white a stiff sort of
Lake; thus is the Pallet furnished with single colors for a face.

Now to temper them for shadowing various complexions do thus.

II. For a fair complexion.

Take White one Dram; Vermilion, Lake of each two Drachms; temper them, and
lay them aside for the deepest Carnation of the face: to part of the aforesaid
mixture put a little more white, for a light carnation: and to part of that put
more white (which temper on the Pallet) for the lightest color of the face.

III. The faint shadows for the fair complexion.

Take Smalt, and a little White, for the eyes: to part of that add a little
pink, and temper by it self for faint greenish shadows in the face.

IV. The deep shadows for the same.

Take Sinaper Lake, Pink, and black of each, which temper together; if the
shadows ought to be redder than what is tempered, add more Lake: if yellower,
add more pink: if blewer or grayer, add more black; thus shall the Pallet be
fitted with colors.

V. For a brown or swarthy complexion.

The fingle color being laid on the Pallet as before, and tempered; to the
White, Lake, and Vermilion, put a little burnt Oker for a Tawney: and for
heightning add some Yellow Oker, so much as may just change the colors. The
faint and deep shadows are the same at the third and fourth Section of this
Chapter.

VI. For a tawny Complexion.

The colors are the same with the former, but the shadows are different; which
must be made of burnt Oker and Vmber, (which will fit well:) if the shadow be
not yellow enough, add a little pink to it.

VII. For a black Complexion.

The dark shadows are the same with the former: but for heightening take White,
Black, Lake and burnt Oker; in tempering of which put in the white by degrees,
till you come to the lightest of all. Where note, that the single colors at
first laid upon the Pallet and tempered, serve for shadows for all complexions;
and that all deepnings ought to be with black, Lake and pink tempered together.

CHAP. IV. Of Colors for Velvet.
I. FOR black Velvet. Take Lamp black and Verdigriese for the first ground;
that being dry, take Ivory black, and Verdigriese; shadow it with white Lead
mixed with Lamp black.

II. For Green. Take Lamp black and white Lead, and work it like a russet
Velvet, and let it dry; then draw it over with Verdigriese tempered with a
little pink.

III. For Sea Green. Take only Verdigriese and lay it over Russet: If a
Grass-green, put a little Masticot to it: shadow these greens with Russet;
which lay according to the deepness of the green.

IV. For Red. Take Vermilion, and shadow it with Spanish brown: and where you
would have it darkest, shadow with Seacoal black and Spanish brown with the
aforesaid colors; dry it, and then gloss it over with Lake.

V. For Crimson or Carnation. Take Vermilion, to which add white Lead at
pleasure.

VI. For Blew. Take Smalt tempered alone.

VII. For Yellow. Take Masticot and yellow Oker; and where you would have it
darkest, shadow it with Umber.

VIII. For Tawney. Take Spanish brown, white Lead, and Lamp Black, with a
little Verdigriese, to shadow where need is: when dry, gloss it over with Lake
and a little red Lead.

IX. For hair color. Take Umber ground alone; and where it should be
brightest, mix some white Lead about the folds, lighten or darken with white
Lead and Umber.

X. For Ash color. Take Charcoal, black and white Lead: lighten with white
Lead: a color like to a dark russet will be an Ash color.

XI. For purple. Take Smalt and Lake, of each alike, temper them (light or deep
as you please) with white Lead.

XII. Lastly note, that in painting Velvet you must at first work it somewhat
sad, and then give it a sudden brightness.

CHAP. V. Of colors for Sattins.
I. FOR Black. Take Lamp-black ground with oil and tempered with white Lead;
and where you would have it shine most, mix Lake with the white Lead.

II. For Green. Take Verdigriese ground alone and mixed with white Lead; adding
Pink where you would have it brightest: to the deepest, shadows add more
Verdigriese.

III. For Yellow. Take Masticot, yellow Oker and Umber (ground each by
themselves) where it should be brightest, use Masticot alone; where a light
shadow, use Oker; where darkest, use Umber.

IV. For Purple. Take Smalt alone, and where it should be brightest, use white
Lead.

V. For Red. Take Spanish brown (ground alone) mix it with Vermilion, and where
it should be brightest, mix white Lead with the Vermilion.

VI. For White. Take white Lead (ground alone) and Ivory black, which temper
light or dark.

VII. For Blew. Temper Smalt and white Lead; where it should be saddest, use
Smalt; where lightest, white Lead.

VIII. For Orange color. Take red Lead and Lake; where brightest, red Lead;
where saddest, Lake.

IX. For Hair color. Temper Umber and white Lead; where it should be
brightest, put more white Lead; and where the greatest shadow, use seacoal
Black mixed with Umber.

CHAP. VI. Of Colors for Taffatie, Cloth and Leather.
TAffaties are painted much as Sattins, thus: Take such colors as are fit for
the purpose, and lay them one by another upon the work, and shadow them with
others.

II. Cloth is the same work with Satin, save, you must not give to cloth so
sudden a shining gloss.

III. Cloth of Gold is made of brown Oker and liquid Gold; water and heighten
upon the same with small gold strokes.

IV. For Buff, mix yellow Oker and White lead; and where it should be dark by
degrees, mix it with a little Umber; when you have done, size it over with
Umber and seacoal Black.

V. For yellow Leather, take Masticot and yellow Oker: shadow it with Umber.

VI. For black Leather, take Lamp black, and shadow it with white Lead.

VII. For white Leather, take white Lead, and shadow it with Ivory black.

CHAP. VII. Of Colors for Garments in general.
I. FOR Black. Let the dead color be Lamp black and Verdigriese: being dry, go
over with Ivory black and Verdigriese: but before the second going over,
heighten it with white.

II. For Hair color. Take Umber and White for the ground; umber and black for
the deeper shadows; Umber and English Oker for the meaner shadows; white and
English Oker for heightning.

III. For Blew. Take Indico and White: first lay the White, then the Indico and
White mixed; then deepen it with Indico; and when dry, glaze it with
Ultramarine which will never fade.

Smalt will turn black, and Biee will turn green.

IV. For Purple. Take Smalt tempered with Lake and white Lead; then heighten
with white Lead.

V. For a sad Red. Take Indian Red heightened with White.

VI. For a light Red. Take Vermilion; glaze it over with Lake, and heighten it
with White.

VII. For a Searlet. Take Vermilion, and deepen it with Lake or Indian red.

VIII. For Green. Take Bice and Pink, heighten it with Masticot, and deepen
with Indico and Pink.

IX. For Yellow. Take Masticot, yellow Oker, Umber; lay Masticot and White in
the lightest places; Oker and White in the mean places; and Umber in the
darkest; glaze it with Pink.

X. For Orange color. Lay the lightest parts with red Lead and White, the mean
parts with red Lead alone; the deeper parts with Lake; and if need is, heighten
it with white.

XI. For a sad Green. Mix Indico with Pink: for a light Green mix Pink and
Masticot: for a Gras^ green mix Verdigriese and Pink.

XII. Remember always to lay yellows, blews, reds and greens, upon a white
ground, for that only gives them life.

CHAP. VIII. Colors for Metals and precious stones.
I. FOR Iron. Take Lamp black and white Lead; if you would have it rusty, take
seacoal black, and mix it with a little white.

II. For Silver. Take Charcoal black and white Lead: where you would have it
darkest, use more Charcoal; work silver somewhat rustish, and give it a sudden
^^^ss with white Lead only.

III. For Gold. Take Lake, Umber, red Lead, Masticot: lay the ground with red
Lead, and a little dry Pink: where you would have it darkest, shadow it most
with Umber; where lightest with Masticot.

Note, in grinding the red Lead for the gold size, put in a little Verdigriese
to make it dry sooner.

IV. For Pearls. Temper Charcoal black with white Lead, till it be a perfect
russet; then make the Pearl with it, and give it a speck of white Lead only to
make it shine.

Where note, that Ceruse tempered with oil of white Poppy is excellent to
heighten up Pearls.

V. For precious stones. For Rubies, etc. lay their counterfeit grounds with
transparent colors; and Lake, Vedigriese and Verditer give them a shining
color.

CHAP. IX. Of Colors for Landscape.
I. FOR a light Green, use pink and Masticot heightened with white: for a sad
green, Indico and Pink heightened with masticot.

II. For some Trees, take Lake, Umber and white: for others charcoal and white:
for others Umber, black and white, with some green: adding sometimes Lake or
Vermilion, with other colors.

III. For wood, take lake, umber and white, mixing sometimes a little green
withal.

IV. For Fire, lay red Lead and Vermilion tempered together where it is
reddest: where it is blew, lay oil, smalt, and white lead: where it is yellow,
take masticot, and work it over in certain places: where you would have it
shine most, with Vermilion.

V. For an Azure sky, which seems afar off, take oil, smalt, or bice, and
temper them with Linseed oil. But grind them not: for smalt or bice utterly
lose their color in grinding.

VI. For a red sky, take Lake and White; and for Sun beams, or yellow clouds
at Sunrising or setting, take masticot and white.

VII. For a Night sky, or clouds in a storm, take Indico deepned with black,
and heightened with white.

VIII. For wood colors. They are compounded either of Umber and white;
Char-coal and white, Sea-coal and white; Umber black and white; or with some
green added; to which you may adjoin sometimes, as in barks of trees, a little
Lake or Vermilion.

IX. Lastly, for the practical performing of the work have recourse to the
rules delivered in chap. 13. lib 1. and chap. 27. lib. 2.

CHAP. X. Of the Painting of the Face.
I. HAve your necessary pencils in readiness, as two pencils ducks quill
fitched; and two ducks quill pointed; two goose quill fitched; and two pointed:
two bristles both alike: one Swans quill fitched, and one pointed: one larger
pencil in a tin case fitched; and a bristle of the same bigness; every one
having a stick of about nine inches long put into the quill thereof, the
farther end of which stick must be cut to a point.

II. The Pencils in a readiness in your left hand, with the pallet upon your
thumb, prepared with fit colors; and your molstick to rest upon; you must work
according to the directions following.

III. The cloth being pinned, and strained upon the frame, take a knife, and
with the edge thereof scrape over the cloth, lest knots or the like should
trouble it.

IV. Then set the frame and cloth upon the Easel, at a convenient height, that
sitting on a stool (^eaven with the party you draw) you may have the face of
the picture equal, or something higher than your own: set the Easel to the
light (as in Limning we have taught) letting it come in upon your left hand,
casting the light toward the right.

V. Let the person to be drawn, sit before you in the posture he intends to be
painted in, about two yards distant from you.

VI. Then with a piece of painted chalk draw the proportion of the face upon
the cloth, with the place of the eyes, nose, mouth, ears, hair, and other
postures.

Here is no difficulty in this, if you miss much, the colors will bring all to
rights again.

VII. Then take a pencil Swans quill pointed, and begin to paint some of the
lightest parts of the face with the lightest color, (as the heightning of the
forehead, nose, cheek-bone, of the lightest side:) the mean parts next (as the
cheek-bone of the darkside, chin, and over the upper lip:) proceeding gradually
till you come to the reddest parts of all.

VIII. Lay faint greenish shadows in convenient places; and where it is
necessary to soften harsher shadows; but take heed of putting green where red
should be.

IX. The faint or light parts thus done, take one of the Goose quill pointed,
or Ducks quill fitched, and begin at the eyes to shadow with Lake, going over
the nose, mouth, compass of the ear, etc. before you lay on any color, wiping
it lightly over with a linen rag, to prevent the overcoming of the other
colors.

X. The colors both light and dark being put in, take a great fitch pencil,
and sweeten the colors therewith; by going over the shadows with a clean soft
pencil, which being well handled will drive and intermix the colors one into
another, that they will look as if they were all laid on at once, and not at
diverse times.

Where note that the bigger pencils you use, the sweeter and better your work
will lie.

XI. At the second sitting, begin again with clean pencils, of such bigness as
the work requires, and observe well the person, and see what defects you find
in your work at first sitting, and amend them; then heighten or deepen the
shadows as occasion requires.

XII. Lastly, take a Goose quill bristle, and put in the hair about the face
(if there must be any) and rub in the greater hair, with the greater bristle;
heightning it up with the Goose quill pencil.

CHAP. XI. Of the cleansing of any old Painting.
I. TAke good Wood ashes, and searce them; or else some Smalt or powder blew,
and with a Sponge and fair water gently wash the picture you would cleanse
(taking great care of the shadows) which done, dry it very well with a clean
cloth.

II. Then varnish it over again with some good varnish, but such as may be
washed off again with water if need be.

We shall hereafter show the way of making varnish of several sorts; mean
season this following may serve.

III. Take either common varnish (made with Gumsandrack dissolved in Linseed
oil by boiling) or Glair of Eggs, and with your pencil go over the picture
once, twice, or more therewith as need requires.

CHAP. XII. The painting of the Ancients exemplified first in some of their
Heathen gods.
I. JVpiter, (their chief god) paint with long black curled hair, in a purple
robe, trimmed with gold, and sitting on a golden throne, with bright yellow
clouds dispersed about him.

II. Apollo or Sol (the god of Physic) with long, curled, yellow hair, crowned
with a Laurel, in a purple robe, a silver bow, golden hair, and the throne of
Emeralds.

III. Mercury, with long, yellow, curled hair, in a coat of flame color, with
a mantle purely white, trimmed with gold and silver; his beaver white with
white feathers, his shoes golden, his rod silver.

IV. Neptune, with long, hoary hair, in a blew or sea green mantle, trimmed
with silver, riding in a blew chariot, or on a Dolphin, of a brown black
color, with a silver trident in his right hand.

V. Pluto, with long, curled, black hair, in a robe of cloth of gold.

VI. Bacchus, with short, brown, curled hair, with a Leopards skin spotted, or
in a green mantle; a tawny face, with a wreath of Vine branches.

VII. Hymen, with long yellow hair, in a purple or saffron colored mantle.

VIII. Vulcan, paint in a scarlet robe.

IX. Triton (Neptune's Trumpeter) with a blew skin, and in a purple mantle.

X. Cupid was painted by Zeuxis ( that famous Painter of Greece) in a green
robe.

XI. Minos (one of the Judges of Hell) with hair long, brown, and curled;
crowned with a golden crown; his robe blew and silver, his buskins of gold.

XII. Momus (the carping god) with a darkish robe, his beard and hair
party-colored.

CHAP. XIII. Of the painting of some of the Heathen goddesses.
I. JVno, Queen of the goddesses, with black hair and eyes, adorned with a
sky-colored mantle, or pied; wrought with gold and peacocks eyes; like the
orient circles in the peacocks trains.

II. Diana, the goddess of chastity, with yellow hair; a grass green mantle,
trimmed with silver; buskins silver; bow golden; quiver painted colors.

III. Pallas, the goddess of wisdom, with a blew mantle imbroidered with silver.

IV. Venus, the goddess of love and beauty, with gold yellow hair, attired with
black; a scarlet (or else duncoloured) robe.

V. Ceres, the goddess of Corn and plenty, with yellow hair, and a
straw-coloured mantle trimmed with silver.

VI. Tellus, the goddess of the earth, in a green mantle.

VII. Urania, in a mantle of azure, filled with Lamps.

VIII. Aurora, in a purple robe, in a blew mantle fringed with silver.

IX. Proserpine, Queen of Hell, in a black mantle trimmed with gold flames.

X. Vesta, the daughter of Saturn, in white garments filled with flames.

XI. Astrea, the goddess of justice, in a crimson mantle, trimmed with silver.

XII. Flora, the goddess of flowers, in a mantle of diverse colors.

XIII. Night, in a black mantle spotted with stars of gold.

XIV. The Graces were always alike in silver robes, like sisters.

Eccbo, the goddess of the air, and daughter of speech, the entirely beloved of
Pan, is an invisible goddess.

Ausonius Gallus reports that she has oftentimes dissuaded and reprehended
such who would undertake to depaint her, and repeats the fame in an Epigram,
whose sense in English is this.

Surcease thox meddling Artist thy endeavor,
Who for thy skill have reaped such long lived fame:
Strive not to paint my bodies shape, for never
Did any humane-eyes behold the same.
In concave caverns of the earth I dwell,
Daughter of the air, and of each tatling voice,
In woods and hollow dales I build my Cell,
Joying to re-report the least heard noise,
To grief-opprest, and men disconsolate,
That tell each grove their Souls vexation,
Their dying agonies I aggravate
By their dele accents iteration.
And he that will describe my form aright,
Must shape a formless sound, or airy sprite.
CHAP. XIV. The Painting of Lawgivers, Emperors and Kings, and Queens.
I. MOses, the Hebrew Lawgiver, with bright hair; a very beautiful visage,
with radiant scintillations about his head, in form of hoariness, which in
painting is called Glory.

II. Numa Pompilius, with white hair, crowned with a silver bend or Diadem; his
robe Crimson trimmed with Gold; his mantle yellow trimmed with Silver; his
buskins watchet and Silver.

III. Aeneas, the Trojane Prince, in a purple mantle trimmed with Gold.

IV. David, the King of Israel, with brown hair and a ruddy complexion.

V. Alexander Magnus, with brown hair and a ruddy complexion.

VI. Roman Emperors, with yellow Carussers embroidered with silver; the labels
of their sleeves, and short bases of watchet; the under sleeves and long
stockings, white; a Laurel wreath, with a silver jewel before, and rays of
gold issueing from the wreath.

VII. German Emperors, with a violet colored robe, watchet or light colored.

VIII. Mahomet; the Turks great Prophet, in garments all of green.

IX. Gustavus Adolphus, King of Sweden, with yellow hair.

X. Dido, Queen of Carthage, in a purple or Scarlet mantle; her under garments
Purple; a Golden quiver; her hair yellow, tied up with Spangs and Knots of Gold.

XI. Elizabeth, Queen of England, pale faced, light brown hair, and gray-eyed.

CHAP. XV. The Painting of Philosophers, and the Sybills.
I. PYthagoras, in white garments with a Crown of Gold.

Empedocles, in Violet, Murry, or Purple, and so the rest of the Grecian
Philosophers.

III. Erasmus Roterdamus, yellow haired, gray-eyed, and somewhat pale.

IV. Beza is painted with white hair.

V. Sibilla Agrippa, a woman in years in a roseal garment.

VI. Sibilla Libica an elderly woman, crowned with a garland of flowers, in
purple garments.

VII. Sibilla Delphica, with a black garment, a young woman with a horn in her
hand.

VIII. Sibilla Phrygia, in red garments, having an old Saturnian hard favored
face.

IX. Sibilla Herophila, a young woman very fair in a purple garment, and head
covered with a vail of Lawn.

Sibilla Europea, a comely young woman, having a high, red-coloured face, a
fine vail on her head, and clad in a garment of Gold work.

XI. Sibilla Persica, with a white vail, and a golden garment.

XII. Sibilla Samia, a middle aged woman, clothed in Willow weeds, having a
palm in her hand.

XIII. Sibilla Hellespontica, a young woman in green garments, with a round,
lovely, fresh colored face; holding in her left hand a Book; and in her right
hand a Pen.

XIV. Sibilla Tibur^ina, an old woman in purple garments, of a hard visage,
holding in her Apron the books of the Sibills.

These Sibills for their Prophecies of Christ are in high esteem: they are ten
in number as Varro says; yet others make twelve, of which we are not
satisfied; Boyfardus in his Treatise of divination, besides these ten adds
two others, Epirotica and Aegyptia. Some, as Martianus, will have but two;
Pliny and Solinus, but three; Aelian four; and Salmasius but the first seven.
They are generally described as young women, yet some were old, as she that
sold the books unto Tarquin, from whence we conclude the Licentia pictoria is
very large.

CHAP. XVI. The Painting of Arts, Virtues, and Passions:
I. Arithmetic is painted in cloth of Gold: Geometry, sallow faced, a green
mantle fringed with silver, and a silver wand in her right hand: Aft^^nomy with
a silver Cressant on her forehead, an azure mantle, a watchet Scarf, with
golden Stars.

II. Faith is painted in white garments, with a cup of Gold: Hope in blew, with
a silver Anchor: Charity in yellow robes; on her head attire of Gold with
precious stones; her chair Ivory.

III. Religion in a silver vail, with a mantle or garment of white: Justice in
a white robe, and a white mantle; with a Coronet of silver and white buskins:
Innocence in White wholly.

IV. Concord in a sky colored robe, and a yellow mantle; Peace in white,
scattered with stars, or a carnation mantle fringed with Gold, a vail of
silver, green buskins, and a palm in her hand in black: Unanimity in a blew
robe, mantle and buskins, with a chaplet of blew Lillies.

V. Wisdom in a white robe, blew mantle, seeded with stars: Law in purple
robes, seeded with gold stars, a mantle of Carnation fringed with gold; purple
and yellow buskins: Government in Amor.

VI. Watchfulness in a yellow robe; a Sable mantle fringed with silver, and
seeded with waking eyes; a chaplet of turnsole; in her right hand a lamp; in
her left a bell: Confidence in a party colored garment: Modesty in blew.

VII. Eternity in blew, seeded with Golden stars: The Soul in white garments,
branched with gold and pearl, and crowned with a garland of Roses: Felicity in
purple trimmed with silver.

VIII. Love, in Crimson fringed with gold, a flame colored Mantle, a chaplet
of red and white Roses: Natural affection in Citron color: Envy in a
discolored green garment full of eyes.

IX. Joy in a green robe, and a mantle of diverse colors, embroidered with
flowers; a garland of Myrtle; in her right hand a Crystal Cruise; in her left,
a golden Cup: Pleasure in light garments, trimmed with silver and gold:
Laughter in several Colors.

X. Wit, in a discolored mantle: Jollity, in flame color: Pastime, in purple
trimmed with gold.

XI. Opinion, in black Velvet, black cap, with a white fall: Impudence in a
party colored garment: Audacity in blush color.

XII. Honor in a purple robe wrought with gold: Liberty in white: Safety in
Carnation

CHAP. XVII. Of Colors for Painting Glass.
I. YEllow. Take a very thin piece of pure fine silver, and dip it into melted
brimstone; take it out with a pair of plyers, and light it in the fire, holding
it, till it leaves burning; then beat it to powder in a brazen mortar; then
grind it with Gum Arabic water, and a little yellow Oker.

II. Yellow. Take fine silver one Dram, Antimony in powder two drachms, put
them in a hot fire, in a crucible for half an hour, and then cast it into a
brassmortar, and beat it into powder, to which add yellow Oker six Drachms, old
earth of rusty Iron seven Drachms, grind all well together.

This is fairer than the former.

III. White This is the color of the glass it self: you may diaper upon it
with other glass or Crystal ground to powder.

IV. Black. Take Jet and Scales of Iron, and with a wet feather take up the
Scales that fly from the Iron, after the Smith has taken his heat, grind them
with gum water.

V. Black. Take Iron scales, Copper scales of each one Dram, heat them red
hot in a clean fire shovel; then take Jet half a Dram, first grind them small
and temper them with gum water.

VI. Red. Take Sanguis Draconis in powder, put to it rectified spirit of wine;
cover it close a little while, and it will grow tender; wring it out into a
pot, that the dross may remain in the cloth; the clear preserve for use. This
is a fair red.

VII. Carnation. Take tin glass one ounce: jet three ounces: red oker five
ounces: gum two drachms, grind: them together. It is a fair Carnation.

VIII. Carnation. Take jet four Drachms: tin glass or litharge of silver two
Drachms: gum, and scales of Iron of each one Dram, red chalk one ounce, grind
them.

IX. Green. Take Verdigriese and grind it well with Turpentine; and put it into
a pot; warming it at the fire, when you use it.

X. Blew. Provide the clearest leads you can get of that color, beat them to
powder in a brazen mortar, take Goldsmiths Amel of the same color, clear and
transparent, grind each by it self, take two parts of lead, and one of Amel,
grind them together as you did the silver. The same understand of Red and Green.

CHAP. XVIII. Of the way of Painting upon Glass.
I. THere are two manner of ways of painting upon glass; the one is for oil
color, the other for such colors, as are afterward to be annealed or burnt
on.

II. To lay oil colors upon glass, you must first grind them with Gum water
once, and afterward temper it with Spanish Turpentine, lay it on and let it
dry by the fire, and it is smished.

III. To anneal or burn your glass, to make the colors abide, you must make a
four square brick furnace, eighteen inches broad and deep; lay five or six
cross Iron bars on the top of it, and raise the furnace eighteen inches above
the bars: then laying a plate of Iron over the bars, sift (through a five) a
lay of slack'd lime over the plate, upon which lay a row of glass; upon that a
bed of lime, and upon that lime, another row of glass; thus continue stratum
super stratum, till the furnace is full.

IV. Lay also with every bed of glass a piece of glass, which you may wipe over
with any Color (these are called watches;) and when you think your glass is
burnt enough, with a pair of plyers take out the first and lowest watch, and
lay it on a board, and being cold, try if you can scrape off the Color, if it
hold fast on, take out that row; always letting it abide the fire till the
color will not scrape off.

CHAP. XIX. Of Washing, and the Materials thereof.
I. BY washing, here we intend nothing else, but either to set out Maps or
Printed Pictures in proper Colors, or else to varnish them.

II. The Instruments and materials of washing are chiefly six, to wit, I.
Alom-water, 2. Size, 3. Liquid Gold, 4. Pencils, 5. Colors, 6. Varnish.

III. To make Alom water. Take Alom eight ounces, sair water a quart, boil them
till the Alom is dissolved.

IV. To make size. Take glue, which steep all night in water, then melt it over
the fire, to see that it be neither too strong nor too weak: then let a little
of it cool; if it be too stiff when it is cold, put more water to it, if too
weak more glue, using it lukewarm.

V. Liquid Gold. It is exactly made by the first Section of the 21 Chapter of
the second Book.

VI. Pencils are to be of all sorts both fitch'd and pointed; as also a large
pencil brush to past Maps upon Cloth; another to wet the paper with Alom water;
a third to starch the face of the picture withal before it be colored; and a
fourth to varnish withal.

VII. The colors are the same with those which we mentioned in Chap. 17. lib.
2. to which add, 1. Of Black, Printers black, Franckford black, 2. Of Red,
Vermilion, Rosset, 3. Of Blew, Verditure, Litmos, Flory, 4. Of Yellow,
Cambogia, Yellow berries, Orpiment, 5. Brazil, Logwood (ground) and Turnsole,
Cochenele, Madder.

CHAP. XX. Of Colors simple for Washing.
I. PRinters black. Vermilion, Rosset, Verditure, and Orpiment are to be
ground, as we have taught at the fifth Section of the 22 Chapter of the fecond
Book.

II. Brazil. To some ground Brazil put small Beer and Vinegar, of each a
sufficient quantity, let it boil gently a good while, then put therein Alom in
powder to heighten the Color, and some gum Arabic to bind it; boil it till it
taste strong on the tongue, and make a good red.

III. Logwood, Ground Logwood boiled as Brazil, makes a very fair transparent
Purple Color.

IV. Cochenele. Steeped as Brazil was boiled, makes a fair transparent purple:
as thus, take Cochenele and put it into the strongest Soap lees to steep, and
it will be a fair purple, which you may lighten or deepen at pleasure.

V. Madder. Take Madder four drachms, ground Brazil one ounce, Rain water a
quart; boil away a third part: then add Alom half an ounce, boil it to a pint;
then gum Arabic one ounce, which boil till it is dissolved, cool it stirring
it often, and strain it for use. It is a good scarlet die for Leather.

VI. Verdigriese. Take Verdigriese ground finely one ounce, put to it a good
quantity of common varnish, and so much oil of Turpentine, as will make it thin
enough to work withal; it is a good green. And Verdigriese, Alom, of each one
Dram, Logwood three Drachms, boiled in Vinegar, make a good Murry.

VII. Gambogia. Dissolve it in fair spring water, and it will make a beautiful
and transparent yellow: if you would have it stronger, dissolve some Alom
therein: it is good for Silk, Linen, white Leather, Parchment, Vellom, Paper,
Quills, etc.

VIII. To make Verdigriefe and Ceruse according to Glauber.

These colors are made with Vinegar in earthen pots set into hot horse dung:
but if you dissolve your Venus or Saturn with spirit of Nitre, and precipitate
your Venus with a lie made of Salt of Tartar, and your Saturn with Salt water,
edulcorating and drying them; the Venus will yield an excellent Verdigriese,
which will not corrode other colors as the common Verdigriese does; and the
Saturn yields a Ceruse whiter and purer than the ordinary: much better for
Painting or Surgery.

IX. Yellow Fustick benry. Boil it in water or sleep them in Alom water, it
makes a good yellow for the same purpose.

X. Turnsole. Put it into sharp. Vinegar over a gentle fire, till the Vinegar
boil, and is colored; then take out the Turnsole and squeeze it into the
Vinegar, in which dissolve a little gum Arabic; it shadows very well on a
Carnation or yellow.

XI. Litmos. Cut it into small pieces, and steep it a day or two in weak gum
Lake water, and you will have a pure blew water to wash with.

XII. Flory Blew. Grind it with Glair of Eggs, if then you add a little Rosset
it makes a light Violet Blew; mixed with White and Red Lead, it makes a Crane
feather Color.

XIII. Saffron Steeped in Vinegar and mixed with gum water is a good Yellow.

CHAP. XXI. Of Compounded Colors for Washing.
ORange Color. Red Lead and Yellow berries make a good Orange Color: or thus,
take Arnotto half an ounce, Pot ashes one Dram, water one pound, boil it half
away, then strain it, and use it hot.

It is good for white leather, paper, vellom, quills, parchment, etc.

II. Green. Take distilled vinegar, filings of Copper, digest till the vinegar
is blew, which let stand in the Sun ora slow fire till it is thick enough, and
it will be a good green.

Or thus. Take Cedar green (which is best of all) or instead thereof green
Bice, steep it in Vinegar, and strain it; then grind it well with fair water,
and put to it a little honey, and dry it well; when you use it, mix it with gum
water.

III. To make fine Indico.

Take the blossoms of Wode three ounces, Amylum one ounce, grind them with
Urine and strong vinegar, of which make a Cake, then dry it in the Sun and so
keep it for use.

IV. A Blew to wash upon paper.

Take of the best azure an ounce, Kermes two ounces, mix them, which temper
with clear gum water, and it will be a glorious Color.

V. To make a Venice Blew.

Take quick lime, make it into past with strong vinegar, half an hour after put
thereto more vinegar to soften it; then add Indico in fine powder one ounce,
mix them and digest it in horse dung for thirty or forty days.

VI. Another excellent Blew.

Mix fine white Chalk with juice of elder berries full ripe, to which put a
little Alom water.

VII. To make blew Smalt.

Take fluxible sand, Sal Nitre and Cobalt, mix them together.

VIII. A lively yellow.

Dissolve orpiment in gum water, to which put a little ground Vermilion; grind
them together and you shall have a very lively color.

IX. A light green. Take Juice of Rue, Verdigriese, and Saffron, grand them
well together and use them with gum water.

Or thus; Take sap green, flower de bice, or tawny green, which steep in water:
Verditure and Ceruse mix with a little copper green, make a good light color.

X. Blew. Ultramine, blew bice, smalt, and Verditure, ground singly with gum
water, or together, make a good blew.

XI. Brown. Ceruse, red lead, English Oker, and pink, make a good brown.

XII. Spanish Brown. To color any horse, dog, or the like, you must not
calcine it; (yet not calcined it is a dirty color:) but to shadow Vermilion,
or lay upon any dark ground, behind a picture, to shade berries in the darkest
places, or to color wooden posts, wainscot, bodies of trees and the like, it
is very good (being burnt.)

XIII. Flesh color. Mix white, Indian lake, and red lead (according as you
would have it light or deep;) and to distinguish a man's flesh from a woman's,
mingle with it a little Oker.

XIV. Colors of Stones. Verdigriese with Varnish makes an Emerald: with
Florence lake a Ruby: with Ultramanine a Saphyr.

XV. A never fading green.

Take juice of flowers of Flowerdeluce, put it into Gum water and dry it in the
Sun.

CHAP. XXII. Of mixing Colors and shadowing.
I. IN mixing be careful not to make the color too sad, nor take the pencils
out of one color and put them into another.

II. In mixing colors, stir them well about the water severally till they are
well mixed; then put them together, making the color sadder or lighter at
pleasure.

III. Green is shadowed with Indico and yellow berries.

IV. Blew is shadowed with Indico, Litmose and flory; or any of them being
steeped in lees of Soap ashes, and used with gum water.

V. Garments are shadowed with their own proper colors: or you may mingle the
color with white (for the light) and shadow it with the same color unmingled:
or you may take the thinnest of the color for the light, and shadow with the
thickest or bottom of the same.

VI. Sap green is only used to shadow other greens with, and not to be laid for
a ground in any garment.

VII. Lake ought not to be shaded with any color, for it is a dark red; but
for variety you may shadow it with Bice, or blew Verditure, which will make it
like changeable Taffata.

VIII. The shadow for Yellow Berries is Umber; but for beauties sake with red
Lead, and the darkest touches with Spanish brown; and for variety with Copper
green, blew Bice or Verditure.

IX. White sets off blews and blacks very well: Red sets off well with yellows:
Yellow with reds, sad blews, browns, greens, and purples.

X. Blew sets off well with yellows, reds, whites, browns, and blacks: and
Green sets off well with purples, and reds.

CHAP. XXIII. Of Colors for Landskips.
I. GReen mixed with white, pink, bice, masticot, smalt, indico, or ceruse; or
blew verditure mixed with a few yellow berries makes a good green for Landskips.

II. For the saddest hills use umber burnt; for the lightest places, put yellow
to the burnt umber: for other hills lay copper green thickened on the fire, or
in the Sun: for the next hills further off, mix yellow berries with copper
green; let the fourth part be done with green verditure; and the farthest and
faintest places with blew bice; or blew verditure mingled with white, and
shadowed with blew verditure, in the shadows indifferent thick.

III. Let the highways be done with red and white lead, and for variety yellow
oker; shadow it with burnt umber, which you may use for sandy rocks and hills.

IV. Rocks may be done with several colors, in some places black and white, in
other places red and white, and in others blew and white, and the like, as you
see convenient.

V. The water must be black verditure and white, shadowed with green and blew
verditure: when the banks cast a green shadow upon the water, and the water is
dark shadowed, then shade it with indico, green thickened, and blew verditure.

VI. Color buildings with as much variety of pleasant colors as may be
imaginable, yet let reason be your rule in mixing your colors: you may
sometimes use white and black for the wall, conduits or other things: for
Brick-houses and the like, red lead and white: if many houses stand together,
set them off with variety of colors, as umber and white; lake and white; red
lead and white, and the like.

VII. Lastly, for the sky, use masticot or yellow berries, and white for the
lowest and lightest places; red rosset and white for the next degree; blew bice
and white for the other; blew bice, or blew verditure for the highest.

These degrees and colors must be so wrought together, that the edge of each
color may not receive any sharpness; that is, so as that you cannot perceive
where you began to lay them, being so drowned one in another.

CHAP. XXIV. Of the practice of Washing.
I. WIth the Alom-water wet over the pictures to be colored, for that keeps
the colors from sinking into the paper, and will add a luster unto them, make
them show fairer, and keep them from fading.

II. Then let the paper dry of it self (being washed with Alom-water) before
you lay on the colors; or before you wet it again, for some paper will need
wetting four or five times.

III. The washing of the paper with the Alomwater must be done with a large
pencil brush, such as we have advised to at the sixth Section of the nineteenth
Chapter of this Book.

IV. But if you intend to varnish your pictures after you have colored them;
instead of washing them with Alom water, first size them with new size, made of
good white starch, with a very fine brush; and this you must be sure to do all
over, for else the varnish will sink through.

V. Having thus prepared your work, go to laying on your Colors according to
the former directions, suiting them, as near as may be, to the life of
everything.

VI. The picture being painted, you may with size (at the fourth Section of the
nineteenth Chapter of this Book) paste your maps or pictures upon cloth, thus:
wet the sheet of cloth therein, wring it out, and strain it upon a frame, or
nail it upon a wall or board, and so paste your maps or pictures thereon.

VII. Lastly, if the picture be to be varnished, having thus fixed it into its
proper frame, then varnish it with a proper varnish (by the following rules)
and the work will be fully finished.

CHAP. XXV. Of the making of Varnishes.
I. VArnish for painting in Oil.

Take Mastich two ounces, Oil of Turpentine one ounce; put the Mastich in
powder into the Oil, and melt it over the fire, letting it boil little or
nothing (lest it be clammy;) when it is enough, you may know by putting in a
hens feather, for then it will burn it.

II. Varnish for painted pictures.

Take white Rozin one pound, Plumb-tree gum (or gum Arabic) Venice Turpentine,
Linseed oil, of each two ounces; first melt the Rozin and strain it very hot;
steep the Gum in oil Olive (oil ben is better) till it is dissolved, and strain
it, to which put the Turpentine and Rozin, and over a slow fire mingle them
till they are well dissolved. When you use it, use it hot.

III. Another for the same.

Take Olibanum and gum Sandrack in powder, which mingle with Venice Turpentine,
melting and incorporating them still over a gentle fire; then strain it hot.

When you use it let it be hot, and your Varnish will shine well; it dries
immediately.

IV. Another for the same.

Take oil of Linseed, which distill in a glass Retort, one ounce, fair Amber
dissolved three ounces, mix them over a flow fire, and it is done.

V. A very good Varnish for Gold, Silver, Brass, Iron Stone, Wood, Vedom or
Paper.

Take Benjamin (made into fine powder between two papers) put it into a vial,
and cover it with Spirit of Wine four fingers above it, and let it stand three
or four days, then strain it, and it will be bright and shining, drying
immediately, and retaining its brightness many years.

If you varnish Gold, or any thing gilded, before the straining you should put
in a few blades of Saffron for color sake: but if Silver or any thing white,
you ought to use the white part of the Benjamin only.

VI. A varnish particularly for Gold, Silver, Tin, or Copper.

Take Linseed oil six ounces, Mastich, Aloes Epatick of each one ounce; put the
gums in powder into the Oil, into a glazed earthen pot, which cover with
another, luting them together, in the bottom of which, let be a hole, whereinto
put a small stick with a broad end to stir withal; cover them all over with
clay, (except the hole) set it over the fire, and stir it as often as it
seetheth for a little while, then strain it for use. First let the metal be
polished, then strike it over with this varnish.

VII. A Varnish for Wood and Leather.

Take Tincture of Saffron or Turmerick in Spirit of Wine a pint, prepared gum
Lake a sufficient quantity, dissolve the gum in the tincture and it is done.

This is a Varnish of great use to lay over Gold and Silver or any thing which
is exposed to the Air.

VIII. To make the Common Varnish.

Take spirit of Wine a quart, Rozin one ounce, Gum Lake a sufficient quantity,
dissolve the gums in a gentle heat (being close covered) and let them settle:
then gently decant off the clear, which keep in a close glass Bottle for use.

The thick which remains, you may strain through a cloth, and keep for other
purposes.

IX. To make a red Varnish.

Take spirit of Wine a quart, gum Lake four ounces, Sanguis Draconis in fine
powder eight ounces, Cochenele one ounce, digest a week over a gentle heat,
then strain it for use.

X. To make a yellow Varnish.

Take spirit of Wine a pint, in which infuse (three or four days) Saffron half
an ounce, then strain it, and add Aloes Succotrina one ounce, Sanguis Draconis
two ounces, which digest a week over a gentle heat close covered, then strain
it for use.

XI. An Universal Varnish, the best of all others.

Take good gum Sandrick (but gum Anime is better) dissolve it in the highest
rectified spirit of Wine (an ounce and a half more or less to a pint) and it is
done.

Where note 1. That unless the Spirits be highly rectified, the Varnish connot
be good. 2. That some put into it Linseed oil (which is naught; oil of ben is
better) and mix them together. 3. Some mix boiled Turpentine with it; others
Chemical oils of deep colors (as of Cloves, Mace, Nutmegs, Caraways, Cinnamon)
according to the intent. 4. That it ought to be kept in a glass bottle close
stopped, lest it curdle, and the gums separate.

CHAP. XXVI. Of the manner of Varnishing.
I. THe intent of Varnishing is either to preserve the gloss of paintings or
pictures, or else to represent and imitate the forms of shining and perlucid
bodies.

II. To varnish paintings and pictures, it is no more but with a pencil dipped in
the Varnish to go over the same, then letting it dry; and so going over it so
often as in reason you shall see convenient.

III. If you are to imitate any thing, as Marble, Tortoise shell, Amber, Lapis
Lazuli or the like; you must first make the imitation of them, upon that which
you would Varnish, with their proper colors, as in Limning or Painting with
oil; which must be thoroughly dry: then by the second Section go over all with
the Varnish, so often till you see it thick enough; letting it dry every time
leisurely. For example sake;

IV. To imitate Marble.

Take of the Universal Varnish at the eleventh Section of the five and
twentieth Chapter, with which mingle Lamp black (or other black) and white Lead
finely beaten, and with a brush pencil, marble the thing you would Varnish
according to your fancy; lastly, being dry strike it again two or three times
over with the clear varnish alone, and it will be perfect.

V. To imitate Tortoise shell.

First lay a white ground, then with convenient colors (as Vermilion with
Auripigment) duly mixed with Common Varnish, streak and shadow the white ground
with any wild fancy (as nearly imitating Tortoise shell as you can) which being
dry, strike it here and there with the red Varnish (mixed with a little Sinaper
or Indian Lake) then up and down the work as nature requires touch it with
varnish mixed with any good black; then stroke it over with Universal Varnish
four or five times, letting it dry every time; lastly, let it dry well a week,
and with Pumice stone (in fine powder) and a wet cloth polish it by rubbing;
then go over it again three or four times with the Universal Varnish, and (if
need require) polish it again with fine putty as before; after which you may
once again strike it over with the said Varnish, and it will be done.

VI. To imitate Tortoise shell upon silver or gold.

A white ground being laid, and smeared over with Vermilion or the like; lay
over the same leaves of silver or gold (as we have taught in other places)
either with gum Ammoniacum, Lake, common varnish or glair; this done, and being
dried, shadow it according to reason; striking it over here and there with
yellow varnish, and with the yellow varnish mixed with a little red varnish;
(all things being done in imitation of the shell) strike it several times over
with the Universal Varnish, and polish it (in all respects) as before.

VII. To imitate Lapis Lazuli.

Upon a ground of white Lead, Spodium or the like in common Varnish (being
first dry) lay Vltramarine or some other pure blew well mixed with the
Uni^^^sal Varnish, so as that the ground may not appear: then with wild,
irregular streaks (in resemblance of Nature) with liquid or shell gold, run
straglingly all over the blew, adding very small specks upon the blew part, of
such various colors, as are usually to be seen upon the stone.

CHAP. XXVII. Experimental Observations of Vegetable Colors in General.
I. A Strong infusion of galls filtred; mixed with a strong and clear solution
of Vitriol, makes a mixture as black as Ink: which with a little strong oil of
Vitriol is made transparent again: after which the black color is regained
again, by the affusion of a little quantity of a strong solution of salt of
Tartar.

The first black (although pale in writing, yet) being dry, appears to be good
Ink.

II. Decoction of dried red roses, in fair water, mixed with a little filtrated
solution of blew vitriol made a black color: this mixed with a little Aqua
fortis, turned it from a black, to a deep red; which by affusion of a little
spirit of Urine, may be reduced straight to a thick and black color.

III. Yellow wax is whitened by dissolving it over the fire in spirit of wine,
letting it boil a little, and then exhaling the spirit of wine; or else whilst
it is hot, sep^rating it by filtration.

IV. Fair water mixed with a blood red Tincture of Benjamin drawn with spirit
of wine, immediately makes it of a milk white color.

V. Blackness may be taken away with oil of Vitriol; so black pieces of silk or
hair I have turned to a kind of yellow.

VI. A handful of Lignum Nephitrioum rasped, infused in four pound of spring
water, yields between the light and the eye an almost golden color (unless the
Infusion be too strong) but with the eye between the light and it (in a clear
vial) a lovely blew as indeed it is: this with spirit of Vinegar may be made to
vanish (still keeping its golden color) and after with oil of Tartar per
deliquium may be restored again.

VII. Cloths died with blew and Woad, is by the yellow decoction of Luteola
died into a green.

VIII. Syrup of Violets mixed with a high solution of Gold in Aqua regia,
produces a reddish mixture; and with a high solution of filings of Copper in
spirit of Urine, a lovely fair green.

IX. Syrup of Violets mixed with a little juice of Lemons, spirit of Salt,
vinegar, or the like acid salt, will be immediately red; but mixed with oil of
Tartar, or a solution of pot ashes, it will in a moment be perfect green: the
like in juice of blew bottles.

X. A good quantity of oil of Tartar, put into a strong solution of
Verdigriese, gives a delightful blew; which may be variously changed by adding
spirit of Urine, or hartshorn.

XI. Although red roses hung over the fume of Sulphur, lose all their redness,
and become white: yet oil of Sulphur (which is nothing but the fumes condensed)
does wonderfully heighten the tincture of the same.

XII. Cochenele will have its color far more heightened by Spirit of Urine,
than by rectified spirit of wine: And one grain of Cochenele in a good quantity
of spirit of Urine, being put into one hundred twenty six ounces of water,
tinged it (although but faintly:) which amounts to above one hundred twenty
five thous and times its own weight.

XIII. Twenty grains of Cochenele being mixed with an ounce of Saecharum
Saturni, makes a most glorious purple color: and so accordingly as the
quantity is either diminished or increased, so the purple color shall be
either lighter or deeper.

XIV. A few Grains of Cochenele being mixed with the Lixivium of Quicklime in a
due proportion, makes a fading purple color, of the greatest glory imaginable
in the world.

XV. The juice of privet berries with spirit of salt, is turned into a lovely
red: but with a strong solution of pot ashes into a delightful green.

XVI. Upon things red by nature, as syrup of Clovegilliflowers, juice of
Buckthorn berries infusion, of red roses, Brazil, etc. Spirit of Salt makes no
considerable change, but rather a lighter red: but other salts turn them into a
greenish; especially juice of buckthorn berries.

XVII. Juice of Jasmin and snow drops, by a strong alcalizate solution, was
(although of no color) turned into a deep greenish yellow.

XVIII. Buckthorn berries being gathered green and dried, are called
sap-berries, which being infused in Alom water gives a fair yellow (which is
used by Bookbinders for the edges of their books, and to color leather also:)
being gathered when they are black, they are called sap green, and make a green
color being put into a brass or copper vessel for three or four days; or a
little heated upon the fire, and mixed with Alom in powder, and pressed forth;
so put into bladders, hanging it up till it is dry: And being gathered about
the end of November, (when they are ready to drop) they yield a purplish color.

XIX. Tincture of Cochenele, diluted never so much with fair water, will never
yield a yellow color: a single drop of a deep solution in spirit of Urine,
diluted in an ounce of fair water, makes a fair pink, or carnation.

XX. Oil or spirit of Turpentine, digested with pure white Sugar of lead,
yields in a short time a high red tincture, which Chemists call Balsamum
Saturni.

XXI. Spirit of Salt dropped into a strong infusion of Cochenele or juice of
black cherries, makes immediately a fair red: but dropped into the Infusion of
Brazil, a kind of yellow: so the filtrated tincture of Balaustins mixed with
good spirit of Urine, or the like, turns of a darkish green; but with spirit of
salt, a high redness, like rich Claret wine; which glorious color may in a
moment be destroyed, and turned into a dirty green, by spirit of Urine.

XXII. A high Infusion of Lignum Nephriticum, mixed with spirit of Urine, gives
so deep a blew, as to make the liquor opacous: which after a day or two
vanishes, and leaves the liquor of a bright amber color.

Where note that instead of Spirit of Urine you may use oil of Tartar, or a
strong solution of pot ashes.

XXIII. Infusion of Logwood in fair water (mixed with spirit of Sal Armoniack)
straight turns into a deep, rich, lovely purple; two or three drops to a
spoonsul is enough, lest the color be so deep, as to be opacous.

XXIV. Spirit of Sal Armoniack will turn syrup of Violets to a lovely green.

XXV. Infusion of Litmoss in fair water, gives in a clear glass a purple
color: but by addition of spirit of Salt, it will be wholly changed into a
glorious yellow.

XXVI. The Infusions and juices of several plants, will be much altered by a
solution of Lead in spirit of Vinegar: it will turn infusion of red rose leaves
into a sad green.

XXVII. So Tincture of red roses in fair water, would be turned into a thick
green, with the solution of Minium in spirit of Vinegar; and then with the
addition of oil of Vitriol the resolved Lead would precipitate white, leaving
the liquor of a clear, high red color again.

XXVIII. We have not yet found, that to exhibit strong variety of colors,
there need be employed any more than these five, White, Black, Red, Blew,
Yellow: for these being variously compounded and decompounded exhibit a variety
and number of colors; such as those who are strangers to painting can hardly
imagine.

XXIX. So Black and White variously mixed, make a vast company of light and
deep Grays: Blew and Yellow, many Greens: Red and Yellow, Orange-tawnies: Red
and White, Carnations: Red and Blew, Purples, etc. producing many colors for
which we want names.

XXX. Acid salts destroy a blew Color: Sulphurous, Urinous or fixed restore it.

XXXI. Acid and Alcalizate salts, with many bodies that abound with Sulphurous
or oily parts will produce a red, as is manifest in the Tincture of Sulphur,
made with Lixioiums of Calcined Tartar or pot ashes.

XXXII. Lastly, it may be worth trial (since it has succeeded in some
experiments) so to take away the color of a Liquor, as that it may be
colorless: which in what we have tried, was thus: first by putting into the
Tincture, Liquor, or juice, a quantity of the solution of pot ashes or oil of
Tartar per deliquium; and then affusing a good or strong solution of Alom,
which in our observations precipitated the tinging matter, or gathered it into
one body (like as it were curds) and so left the Liquor transparent and clear
as Crystal.

CHAP. XXII. General Experimental observations of Mineral Colors.
I. SVblimate dissolved in fair water, and mixed with a little spirit of Urine,
makes a milk white mixture in a moment: which by addition of Aqua Fortis,
immediately again becomes transparent.

II. If Sublimate two ounces, and Tin-glass one ounce be sublimed together, you
will have a sublimate not inferior to the best orient Pearls in the world.

III. Silver dissolved in Aqua fortis, and evaporated to dryness, and fair
water poured two or three times thereon, and evaporated, till the calx is dry,
leaves it of a Snow whiteness: which rubbed upon the skin, (wetted with
spittle, water or the like) produces a deep blackness, not to be obliterated in
some days.

With this, Ivory, hair, and horns may be dyed in fair water of a lasting
black.

IV. Coral dissolved by oil of vitriol, Sulphur, or spirit of Vinegar, and
precipitated by oil of Tartar, yields a Snow whiteness. The same of crude Lead
and Quicksilver dissolved in Aqua Fortis: So butter of Antimony rectified by
bare affusion in much fair water, will (though Unctuous) be precipitated into
the Sn^w white powder which (being washed from its corrosive salts) is called
Mercurius Vitae: the like of which may be made without the addition of any
Mercury at all.

V. Mercury Sublimate and precipitate yields (with the spirit of Urine, Hearts
horn, or the like) a white precipitate: but with the solution of Pot ashes, or
other Lixiviate salts an Orange tawny. And if on a filtrated solution of
Vitriol, you put the solution of a fixed salt, there will subside a copious
substance far from whiteness, which Chemists call the Sulphur of Vitriol.

VI. If Copper two ounces be mixed with Tin one ounce, the reddishness will
vanish: and if Arsenick (calcined with Nitre) in a just proportion be mixed
with melted Copper, it will be blanched both within and without.

VII. Fine powders of blew Bice, and yellow Orpiment, slightly mixed, give a
good green: and a high yellow solution of good Gold in Aqua regia, mixed with a
due quantity of a deep blew solution of crude Copper in strong spirit of Urine,
produces a transparent green: And so blew and yellow Amel fused together in the
flame of a Lamp, being strongly blowed on without ceasing, produces at length a
green color.

VIII. An urinous salt, largely put into the dissolution of blew Vitriol in
fair water, turned the liquor and corpuscles (which resided) into a yellowish
color like yellow Oker.

IX. Verdigriese ground with salt Armoniack and the like (digested for a while
in a dunghill) makes a glorious blew.

X. The true glass of Antimony extracted with acid spirits (with or without
Wine) yields a red tincture.

XI. Balsam of Sulphur (of a deep red in the glass) shaked about, or dropped on
paper give a yellow stain.

XII. If Brimstone and Sal Armoniack in powder of each five ounces, be mixed
with quicklime in powder six ounces, and distilled in a Retort in sand by
degrees; you will have a volatile spirit of Sulphur of excellent redness, though
none of the ingredients be so.

So also oil of Anniseeds mixed with oil of Vi^riol, gives in a trice a blood
red color, which soon decays.

XIII. Fine silver dissolved in Aqua fortis, and precipitated with spirit of
Salt; upon the first decanting the liquor, the remaining matter will be purely
white; but lying uncovered, what is subject to the ambient air will lose its
whiteness.

XIV. Sublimate dissolved in a quantity of water and filtred, till it is as
clear as Crystal, mixed (in a Venice glass) with good oil of Tartar per
deliquium filtred, (three or four drops to a spoonful) yields an opacous liquor
of a deep Orange color; after which if four or five drops of Oil of Vitriol be
dropped in, and the glass straight way be strongly shaked, the whole liquor will
(to admiration) be colorless without sediment. And if the filtred solution of
sublimed Sal-armoniack and Sublimate of each alike be mixed with the solution of
an Alcaly, it will be white.

XV. Spirit of Sal Armoniack makes the solution of Verdigriese an excellent
Azure; but it makes the solution of Sublimate yield a white precipitate.

XVI. So the solution of filings of Copper in spirit of Urine (made by
fermentation) gives a lovely Azure color: which with oil of Vitriol (a few
drops to a spoonful) is deprived in a trice of the same, and makes it like fair
water. And so a solution of Verdigriese in fair water, mixed with strong Spirit
of Salt, or dephlegmed Aqua fortis, makes the greenness almost totally to
disappear.

XVII. Quick-filver mixed with three or four times its weight of good oil of
Vitriol, and the oil drawn off in sand, through a glass Retort, leaves a snow
white precipitate; which by affusion of fair water, becomes one of the
loveliest light yellows in the world, and a durable color.

XVIII. Tin calcined per se by fire, affords a very white calx called putty:
Lead, a red powder called Minium: Copper, a dark or blackish powder: Iron, a
dirty yellowish color, called Crocus Martis: and Mercury, a red powder.

XIX. Gold dissolved in Aqua Regia ennobles the Menstruum with its own color:
Silver Coin dissolved in Aqua fortis yields a tincture like that of Copper; but
fine silver a kind of faint blewishness: Copper dissolved in spirit of Sugar
(drawn off in a glass Retort) or in oil or spirit of Turpentine, affords a
green tincture; but in Aqua fortis, a blew.

XX. Vermilion is made of Mercury and Brimstone sublimed together in a due
proportion.

XXI. Glass may have given to it a lovely golden color with Quick silver; but
it is now colored yellow generally with Calx of silver: yet shell silver,
(such as is used with pen or pencil) mixed with a convenient proportion of
powdered glass, in three or four hours fusion, gave a lovely Saferine blew.

XXII. Glass is tinged Green (by the Glass-men) with the Calx of Venus: which
Calx mixed with an hundred times its weight of fair glass, gave in fusion a
blew colored mass.

XXIII. Putty (which is Tin calcined) as it is white of it self, so it turns
the purer sort of glass metal into a white mass, which when opacous enough,
serves for white Amel.

XXIV. This White Amel is as it were the Basis of all those fine Concretes,
that Goldsmiths, and several Artificers use, in the curious art of Enamcling;
for this white and fuseable substance, will receive into it self, without
spoiling them, the colors of diverse other Mineral substances, which like it
will endure the fire.

XXV. Glass is also tinged blew with the dark mineral called Zaffora; and with
Manganess or Magnessia in a certain proportion, which will tinge glass of a red
Color; and also of a Purplish or Murry; and with a greater quantity, into that
deep color which passes for black.

XXVI. Yellow Orpiment sublimed with Sea Salt, yields a white and Crystalline
Arsenick; which Arsenick colored with pure Nitre being duly added to Copper
when it is in fusion, gives it a whiteness both within and without.

XXVII. So Lapis Calaminaris turns Copper into Brass.

XXVIII. And Zink duly mixed with Copper when it is in fusion, gives it the
noblest golden color that was ever seen in the best gold.

XXIX. Copper dissolved in Aqua fortis will imbuc several bodies of the color
of the solution.

XXX. Lastly, Gold dissolved in Aqua Regia will (though not commonly known) dye
Horns, Ivories and other bones of a durable purple color: And the Crystals of
Silver made with Aqua fortis, (though they appear white) will presently dye the
Skin, Nails, Hair, Horn, and Bones, with a Black not to be washed off.

CHAP. XXIX. Of Metals.
I. TO barden Quicksilver.

Cast your Lead separated from its dross into a vessel, and when it begins to
cool, thrust in the point of a stick, which take out again and cast in the
Argent Vive, and it will congeal: then beat it in a mortar, and do so often;
when it is hard, melt it often, and put it into fair water, doing it so long
till it is hard enough, and may be hammered.

II. To tinge Quicksilver of the color of gold.

Break it into small pieces (being hardened) which put into a crucible, with the
powder of Cadmia, stratum super stratum, mixed with pomegranate peels,
Turmerick (beaten fine) and Raisons; cover the crucible and lute it well, dry
it well; and then set it on a fire for six or seven hours, that it may be red
hot; then blow it with bellows till it run, which then let cool whilst covered
with coals, and it will have the color of gold.

III. To fix Quicksilver being hardened.

This is done with fine powder of Crystal glass, laid with the metal stratum
super stratum in a crucible covered and luted; heating it all over red hot, and
then melting of it.

IV. To make Quicksilver malleable.

First harden it by the first Section, then break the metal into small pieces,
and boil it a quarter of an hour in sharp vinegar: then add a little Sal
Armoniack, and digest all together for ten or twelve days; then boil all
together in a luted crucible, till it is red hot, and by degrees crack: lastly,
hang the Mercury in a pot with brimstone at bottom to cover it; lute it and set
it into the fire, that it may grow hot by degrees, and receive the fume of the
Sulphur; do thus for a month once a day, and the Mercury will run and be
hammered.

V. Another way of tinging Mercury.

Take purified Mercury one ounce, Sulphur two ounces, Aqua fortis three ounces,
let them all stand till the water grow clear; distill this with its sediment,
and at bottom of the Limbeck: you shall find the Mercury hard, and of an exact
color.

VI. To color and soften Gold.

Dissolve Verdigriese in Vinegar, and strain it through a felt, then congeal,
and when it begins to wax thick, put to it some Sal armoniack, and let it
harden a good while, then melt gold with it, and it will heighten the color
and make it soft.

VII. To make Gold and Silver softer.

Take Mercury Sublimate, Sal armoniack, of each alike, powder them, melt the
gold, and put to it a little of this powder, and it will be soft.

VIII. Another way to do the same.

Take Vitriol, Verdet, Sal Armoniack, burnt brass of each half an ounce, mix
them with Aqua fortis, let it so repose in the heat two days, then let it
harden, do thus three times with Aqua fortis, and let it dry, make it into
powder, to one dram put one ounce of gold three times and it will be softer.

IX. Another way to do the same in silver.

Take Saltpeter, Tartar, Salt, Verdet, boil all together, till the water is
consumed, then put to it Urine, and let it so consume, and you shall have an
oil, which put into melted silver will do the same.

Or thus, Take as many wedges as you have melted, put them one night into a
crucible in a furnace, but so as they melt not, and they will be soft and fair.

Or thus, Take honey, oil, of each alike, in which quench the Gold or Silver
three or four times, and it will be softer.

Or thus, Take Mastich, Frankincense, Myrrh, Borax, Vernix, of each alike, all
in powder.

Or thus, Quench the Gold or silver in water of Sal armoniack, and it will be
soft.

X. To tinge silver of a golden color.

Take fine gold, fine silver, good brass, and brass or copper calcined with
Sulphur vive, of each alike, melt them down together, and it shall appear to be
gold of eighteen carets fine.

XI. Another way to tinge silver.

Take Quicksilver purged three ounces, leaf gold one ounce, mix them and put
them into a glass Retort well luted, put it on the fire till it grow hot; then
take it off, and add to it Quicksilver purged two ounces, Sal Armoniack one
ounce, Sal Ellebrot half an ounce, Borax two drachms; then seal up the glass
hermetically, and put it into a continuual fire for three days; then take it
out, let it cool, open the retort, take out the matter, and powder it very
fine: of which powder mix one ounce with silver five ounces, and it will tinge
it into a good gold color.

Note, Sal Ellebrot is thus made. Take pure common Salt, Sal Gem, Sal alcaly in
powder, of each one ounce, juice of mints four ounces, spring water four pound,
mingle them, and evaporate. And Quicksilver is purged by washing it in sharp
vinegar three or four times and straining it; or by subliming it which is
better.

XII. To bring silver into a calx.

This is done by amalgamating of it with Quicksilver, and then subliming of
it; or by dissolving it in Aqua fortis, and precipitating it with the solution
of salt in fair water, and then washing it with warm water often to free it
from the salts: or else by mingling the fillings with sublimed Mercury, and in
a retort causing the Mercury to ascend, which will leave at bottom the Calx of
silver, fit for jewels, etc.

XIII. To blanch Silver.

Take Salarmoniack, Roch alom, Alom plumosum, Sal gem, Argal, Roman Vitriol, of
each alike; powder and mix them, and dissolve them in fair water, in which boil
the silver so long, till you see it wonderful white.

XIV. To color silver of a Gold color.

Take Saltpeter two pound, Roch Alom five pound, mingle, and distill them,
keeping the water for use. When you use it, melt the Silver, and quench it in
the said water.

XV. To tinge Brass of a Gold Color.

Dissolve burnt brass in Aqua fortis (made of Vitriol, Saltpeter, Alom,
Verdigriese, and Vermilion) and then reduce it again, and it will be much of a
gold color.

XVI. To make Brass through white.

Heat Brass red hot, and quench it in water distilled from Sal Armoniack, and
Egg-shells ground together, and it will be very white.

XVII. To make Brass white otherwise.

Take egg-shells and calcine them in a crucible, and temper them with the
whites of eggs, let it stand so three weeks; heat the brass red hot, and put
this upon it.

XVIII. To make Brass.

Take Copper three pounds, Lapis Calaminaris one pound in powder, melt them
together the space of an hour, then put it out.

XIX. The way to color Brass white.

Dissolve a penny weight of Silver in Aqua fortis, putting it to the fire in a
vessel, till the Silver turn to water; to which add as much powder of white
Tartar as may drink up all the water, make it into Balls, with which rub any
Brass, and it will be white as silver.

XX. To tinge Copper of a gold Color.

Take Copper, Lapis Calaminaris, of each four drachms, Tutty two drachms; heat
the Copper red hot twice, quenching it in piss; doing the like by the Lapis and
Tutty: take of the dissolved Copper half an ounce, adding to it Honey one
ounce, boil them till the Honey look black and is dry that it may be powdered,
which then beat with the Lapis and Tutty: boil them again, till the Copper is
melted and it is done.

XXI. Another way to make Copper of a gold Color.

Take the Gall of a Goat, Arsnick, of each a sufficient quantity, and distill
them; then the Copper being bright being washed in this water, will turn into
the Color of gold.

XXII. Another way to do the same.

Melt Coppper, to which put a little Zink in filings, and the Copper will have
a glorious golden color.

XXIII. To make Copper of a white color.

Take Sublimate, Sal Armoniack, of each alike; boil them in Vinegar, in which
quench the Copper being made red hot, and it will be like Silver.

XXIV. Another way to whiten Copper.

Heat it red hot diverse times, and quench it in oil of Tartar per deliquium,
and it will be white.

XXV. Another way to whiten Copper.

Take Arsnick three ounces, Mercury Sublimate two ounces, Azure one ounce, mix
them with good and pure grease like an ointment, with which anoint any Copper
vessel, then put that vessel into another, and set it into a digestive heat for
two months, after which cleanse it with a brush and water and it is done.

XXVI. Another way to whiten Copper.

Take Arsnick calcined with Saltpeter, and Mercury Sublimate, which cast upon
melted Copper, and it will be white like Silver.

XXVII. To soften Copper.

Melt burnt Brass with Borax in a crucible, quench it in Linseed oil, and then
beat it gently on an Anvil; boil it again and quench it in oil as before, doing
thus five or six times, till it is soft enough; and this will neatly unite with
Gold, of which you may put in more by half than you can of other Brass.

XXVIII. To tinge with Iron a gold color.

Lay in a crucible plates of Iron and Brimstone, stratum super stratum, cover
and Lute it well, and calcine in a furnace, then take them out and they will be
brittle: put them into a pot with a large mouth, and put in sharp distilled
Vinegar, digesting till they wax red over a gentle heat: then decant the
Vinegar, and add new, thus doing till all the Iron be dissolved; evaporate the
moisture in a glass Retort or Vesica, and cast the remaining powder on Silver,
or other white Metal, and it will look like Gold.

XXIX. To make Iron or Silver of a Brass Color.

Take Flowers of Brass, Vitriol, Sal armoniack, of each alike in fine powder;
boil it half an hour in strong Vinegar, take it from the fire, and put in Iron
or Silver, covering the vessel till it be cold, and the metal will be like to
Brass, and sit to be gilded: or rub polished Iron with Aqua fortis in which
filings of Brass is dissolved.

XXX. To tinge Iron into a Brass color.

Melt the Iron in a crucible casting upon it Sulphur vive, then cast it into
small rods, and beat it into pieces (for it is very brittle) then in Aqua
fortis dissolve it, and evaporate the menstruum, reducing the powder by a
strong fire into a body again, and it will be good Brass.

XXXI. To whiten Iron.

First purge it, by heating it red hot and quenching it in a water made of Ly
and Vinegar, boiled with Salt and Alom, doing this so often till it is somewhat
whitened. The fragments of the Iron beat in a mortar till the Salt is quite
changed, and no blackness is left in the Liquor of it, and till the Iron is
cleansed from its dross: then Amalgamate Lead and Quicksilver together, and
reduce them into a powder; lay the prepared plates of Iron and this powder
stratum super stratum in a Crucible, cover it, and lute it all over very
strongly, that the least fume may not come forth, and put it into the fire for
a day; at length increase the fire, so as it may melt the Iron (which will
quickly be) and repeat this work till it is white enough: It is whitened also
by melting with Lead, the Marchasit or fire-stone and Arsnick. If you mix a
little silver (with which it willingly unites) with it, it gives a wonderful
whiteness, scarcely ever to be changed any more, by any art whatsoever.

XXXII. To keep Iron from Rusting.

Rub it over with Vinegar mixed with Ceruse; or with the marrow of a Heart: if it
be rusty, oil of Tartar per deliquium will presently take it away and cleanse
it.

XXXIII. To cleanse Brass.

Take Aqua fortis and water of each alike; shake them together, and with a
woolen rag dipped therein rub it over: then presently rub it with an oily cloth;
lastly with a dry woolen cloth dipped in powder of Lapis Calaminaris, it will be
clear and bright as when new.

XXXIV. To soften Iron.

Take Alom, Sal armoniack, Tartar, of each alike, put them into good Vinegar,
and set them on the fire, heat the Iron, and quench it therein: or quench it
four or five times in oil, in which melted Lead has been put six or seven
times.

XXXV. To make Iron of a Gold color.

Take Alom of Melancy in powder, Sea water; mix them: then heat the Iron red
hot, and quench it in the same.

XXXVI. To make Iron of a Silver Color.

Take powder of Sal armoniack, unslak'd lime, mix and put them into cold water,
then heat the Iron red hot, quench it therein, and it will be as white as
silver.

XXXVII. To soften Steel to grave upon.

This is done with a Lixivium of Oak ashes and unslak'd Lime, by casting the
Steel into it and letting it remain there fourteen days. Or thus. Take the Gall
of an Ox, Man's Urine, Verjuice, and juice of Nettles of each alike, mix them;
then quench steel red hot therein four or five times together, and it will
become very soft.

XXXVIII. To barden Iron or Steel.

Quench it six or seven times in Hogs blood mixed with Goose grease, at each
time drying it at the fire before you dip it again, and it will become very
hard and not brittle.

XXXIX. To solder on Iron.

Set the joints of Iron as close as you can, lay them in a glowing fire, and
take of Venice glass in powder, and the Iron being red hot, cast the powder
thereon, and it will solder of it self.

XL. To counterfeit Silver.

Take Crystal Arsnick eight ounces, Tartar six ounces, Saltpeter two ounces,
Glass one ounce and an half, Sublimate half an ounce: make them severally into
fine powder and mix them: then take three pound of Copper in thin plates which
put into a Crucible (with the former powder stratum super statum) to calcine,
covering it and luting it strongly; let it stand in the furnace for about eight
or ten hours: then take it out, and (being cold) break the pot, and take out
all the matter, and melt it with a violent fire, casting it into some mold.
Then take purged Brass two pound, of the former metal one pound; melt them
together, casting in, now and then, some of the aforesaid powder, after which
add half as much of fine silver, melting them together, and you have that which
is desired: lastly to make it as white as Silver, boil it in Tartar.

XLI. Another way to counterfeit Silver.

Take purified tin eight ounces, Quicksilver half an ounce, and when it begins
to rise in the first heat, take powder of Cantharides, and cast into it, with a
lock of hair, that it may burn in it; being melted put into it the powder
aforesaid, then take it suddenly from the fire, and let it cool.

XLII. To purge the Brass.

It is cleansed or purged, by casting into it when it is melted, broken glass,
Tartar, Sal armoniack, and Saltpeter, each of them by turns, by little and
little.

XLIII. To tinge Lead of a golden color.

Take purged Lead one pound, Sal Armoniack in powder one ounce, Saltpeter half
an ounce, Sal Elebrot two drachms; put all into a crucible for two days and it
will be thoroughly tinged.

XLIV. To purge Lead.

Melt it at the fire, then quench it in the sharpest Vinegar; melt it again and
quench it in the juice of Celandine: melt it again and quench it in salt water:
then in Vinegar mixed with Sal armoniack: and lastly melt it, and put it into
ashes, and it will be well cleansed.

XIV. To make Lead of a golden color.

Put Quicksilver one ounce into a Crucible, set it over the fire till it is
hot, then add to it of the best Leafgold one ounce, and take it from the fire,
and mingle it with purified Lead melted one pound; mingle all well together
with an Iron rod, to which put of the filterated solution of Vitriol in fair
water one ounce; then let it cool, and it will be of a good color. Dissolve
the Vitriol in its equal weight of water.

XLVI. To take away the ringing and softness of Tin.

Melt the Tin, and cast in some Quicksilver, remove it from the fire, and put
it into a glass Retort, with a large round belly, and a very long neck, heat it
red hot in the fire, till the Mercury sublimes and the Tin remains at bottom;
do thus three or four times. The same may be done by calcining of it three or
four times, by which means it will sooner be red hot than melt.

XLVII. To take away the softness and creaking noise of Tin.

This is done by granulating of it often, and then reducing it again, and
quenching it often in Vinegar and a Lixivium of Salt of Tartar. The creaking
noise is taken away by melting it seven or eight several times and quenching it
in Boys Urine, or else oil of Walnuts.

XLVIII. To take away the deaf sound of Tin.

This is done by dissolving it in Aqua fortis over a gentle fire, till the
water fly away: doing thus so long till it is all turned to a calx; which mixed
with calx of silver, and reduced, performs the work.

XLIX. To make that Tin crack not.

Take Salt, Honey, of each alike, and mix them: melt your Tin and put it twelve
or more times into it, then strain out the Tin, and it will purge and leave
cracking; put it into a crucible, which lute, and calcine it four and twenty
hours, and it will be like calx of gold.

L. To take away the brittleness of any Metal.

First calcine it and put it under dung; then do thus; when it is red hot at
the fire, or melted, quench it often in Aqua vitae often distilled; or use
about them Rosin or Turpentine, or the oil of it, or wax, suet, Euphorbium,
Myrrh, artificial Borax: for if a metal be not malleable, unctuous bodies will
oftentimes make them softer, if all these, or some of these be made up with
some moisture into little Cakes: and when the metal yields to the fire, by
blowing with the bellows, we cast in some of them and make them thick like mud,
or clear, thenset the Metal to the fire, that it may be red hot in burning
coals, take it forth and quench it in them, and so let it remain half an hour
to drink in. Or anoint the Metal with dogs grease, and melt it with it, for
that will take away much of the brittleness of it, and make it so that it may
be hammered and wrought.

LI. To color Metal like gold.

Take Sal armoniack, White Vitriol, Stone Salt, Verdigriese, of each alike, in
fine powder; lay it upon the Metal, then put it into the fire for an hour, take
it out and quench it in Urine, and the Metal will have the color of gold.

LII. To make a kind of Counterfeited Silver of Tin.

This is done by mingling Silver with Tin melted with Quicksilver, continuing
it long in the fire, then being brittle, it is made tough, by keeping it in a
gentle fire or under hot Embers (in a Crucible) for about twenty four hours.

LIII. To Solder upon Silver, Brass or Iron.

Take Silver five penny weight, Brass four penny weight, melt them together for
soft Solder, which runs soonest.

Take Silver five penny weight, Copper three penny weight, melt them together for
hard Solder.

Beat the Solder thin and lay it over the place to be Soldred, which must be
first fitted, and bound together with Wire as occasion requires: then take
Borax in powder, and temper it like pap, and lay it upon the Solder, letting it
dry, then cover it with quick coals and blow, and it will run immediately; then
take it presently out of the fire, and it is done.

Note 1. If a thing is to be Soldred in two places, (which cannot be well done
at one time) you must first Solder with the hard Solder, and then with the
soft; for if it be first done with the soft, it will unsolder again before the
other be soldred. 2. That if you would not have your Solder run about the piece
to be Soldred, rub those places over with Chalk.

LIVE. To make the Silver tree of the Philosophers.

Take Aqua fortis four ounces, fine Silver one ounce, which dissolve in it:
then take Aqua fortis two ounces, in which dissolve Quicksilver: mix these two
Liquors together in a clear glass, with a pint of pure water; stop the glass
close, and after a day, you shall see a Tree to grow by little and little,
which is wonderful and pleasant to behold.

LV. To make the Golden tree of the Philosophers.

Take oil of Sand or Flints, oil of Tartar per deliquium, of each alike, mix
them well together, then dissolve Sol in Aqua Regis, and evaporate the
menstruum, dry the Calx by the fire, but make it not too hot (for then it will
lose its growing quality) break it into little bits (not into powder) which
bits put into the aforesaid liquor, a fingers breadth one from another in a
very clear glass, keep the liquor from the Air, and let the Calx stand still,
and the bits of Calx will presently begin to grow: first swell; then put forth
one or two stems; then diverse branches and twigs, so exactly, as you cannot but
wonder to see.

Where note that this growing is not imaginary but real.

LVI. To make the Steel tree of the Philosophers.

Dissolve Steel in rectified spirit or oil of Salt, so shall you have a green
and sweet solution, swelling like brimstone; filter it, and abstract all the
moisture with a gentle heat, and there will distill over a liquor, as sweet as
rain water (for steel by reason of its dryness detains the Corrosiveness of the
spirit of Salt, which remains in the bottom, like a blood red mass, and it is
as hot on the tongue as fire:) dissolve this blood red mass in oil of Flints or
Sand, and you shall see it grow up in two or three hours like a tree with stem
and branches.

If you prove this tree at the test, it will yield good gold, which it draws
from the oil of Sand or Flints; the said oil being full of a pure golden
Sulphur.

LVII. To make oil of Flints or Sand.

Take of most pure Salt of Tartar in fine powder twenty ounces; small Sand,
Flints, pebbles, or Crystals in fine powder five ounces, mix them; put as much
of this as will fill an Egg-shell into a crucible, set it in a furnace, and
make it red hot, and presently there will come over a thick and white spirit;
take out the crucible whilst it is hot, and that which is in it, like
transparent glass, keep from the air; after beat it to powder, and lay in a
moist place, and it will dissolve into a thick, fat oil, which is the oil of
Flints, Sand, pebbles or Crystals. This oil precipitateth metals, and makes the
Calx there more heavy than oil of Tartar does; it is of a golden nature, and
extracts colors from all Minerals; it is fixed in all fires, makes fine
Crystals, and Borax, and maturateth imperfect metals into Gold.

LVIII. To melt Metals quickly.

Take a Crucible, and make in it a lay or course of the powder of any metal,
then lay upon it a lay of Sulphur, Saltpeter and Saw-dust of each alike mixed
the other, put a coal of fire to it, and the Metal will immediately be in a mass.

LIX. Lastly, He that shall observe the work and reason of the silver, golden
and steel trees, may in like manner produce the like out of the Calx of other
Metals.

CHAP. XXX. Of the Instruments and Materials of Casting.
I. HE that would learn to cast, must be provided of all the chief Tools
thereto belonging; which are 1. A Trough, 2. Sand, 3. A Flask, 4. Skrew, 5.
Tripoli, 6. The Medal or form, 7. A Furnace, 8. Crucibles, 9. A Pipe. 10.
Tongs, 11. Two Oak plates, 12. Plegets of wool, 13. Oil and Turpentine, 14. A
Hares foot, 15. Brushes.

II. The Trough is a apiece thing about half a foot deep or something
more; and its use is to hold the Sand.

III. Of Sand there is various sorts, the chief are Higate Sand, and Tripoll;
the which to make fit for the work you must order thus.

If it is Higate Sand, you must finely sift it; if Tripoli, you must first beat
it fine, then-sift it through a fine s^ve: to either of these fine sands you
must put of pure fine Bole (an ounce to nine ounces) well beaten, dissolved in
water, and lastly reduced into fine powder; which powders you must moderately
moisten with this Magisterial water, viz. filterated Brine made of decripitated
common Salt: or the same, mixed with Glair of Eggs.

IV. The Flask is a pair of Oval Irons, containing only sides to hold the Sand,
which must be pressed hard thereinto: and a passage or mouth for the metal to
run in at.

V. The Skrew is an Iron Press, between which the flask is put and pressed, after
that it is filled with Sand, and has received the form or impression to be
cast.

VI. Tripoli is that of which the second sort of Sand is made, which here ought
to be calcined and beaten into impalpable powder, to strew over the sandy
moulds; first that the sides of the flask may not cleave together when they are
full; secondly that the thing cast may have the perfect form and impression,
without the least scratch or blemish imaginable.

The Medal or form, is that which is to be impressed upon the Sand, whose
likeness we would imitate.

VIII. The Furnace is that which contains the fire, where the Crucible is put,
for the Metal to melt in which is generally melted with Charcoal.

IX. The Crucibles are calcining or melting pots, (commonly three-square) made
so as they may endure the fire all over, in which the metal is to be melted.

X. The Pipe is a hollow Reed, or piece of Tin, to blow coals and filth out of
the Crucible.

XI. The Tongs are a crooked Instrument to take coals out of the crucible with,
as also to stir and repair the fire; and to take the pot out of the furnace
when you go to Cast.

XII. The two Oak plates are to be smooth, and to be put between the flask and
the sides of the skrew, on each side.

XIII. Pledgets of wool are to be put between the Oak plates and the sand to
fill up empty spaces if there be any.

XIV. The Oil and Turpentine is to wet some paper or cotton threads, which must
be set on fire, to smoke the Impression or Mould (being dry) that the metal may
run the better.

XV. The Hares foot is to wipe the hollow places in the Mould, if they should
be too much filled with smoke.

XVI. The Brushes ought to be two, to wit one with thick bar Wire strings;
another with Hogs Bristles, wherewith the work (both before and after casting)
ought to be rubbed and cleansed.

CHAP. XXXI. The Way and Manner of Casting.
I. WAsh the Medal in Vinegar, in which put some Salt and Straw ashes; and rub
it well with the aforesaid hair brush, then wash it with water, and dry it well.

II. Place the female part of the flask upon one of the Oak plates; so that the
middle part, viz. that which is joined to the other, may lie downwards.

III. Then put the cleansed Medal in the flask upon the Oak plate, in a right
line to the mouth of the flask: and if there be two, let them be placed so,
that there may be a place left in the middle for the melted metal to run in as.

IV. Then take of the aforesaid earth or sand prepared, (that is, so much
moistened with the Magisterial water, that being crushed between the hands or
fingers, it will not stick but like dry flower, and will stand with the print
of the hand closed together) and press it on well in the flask upon the Medal
with the fleshy part of your fingers or hand; then with a rule strike off all
the superfluous sand that sticks about the flask.

V. This done, the plegets of wool, or a woolen cloth, must be laid upon it,
and then the other Oak plate, and then turned up with both hands, the plates
being both held close.

VI. Then taking off the upper plate; put upon it the male part of the flask,
which fill with sand in like manner (the Medal being now between) pressing it
down as before, and then with a ruler striking away the superfluous sand.

VII. Upon which lay a woolen cloth, and gently lift off the top, or upper part
of the flask, so that the medal may be taken forth.

VIII. All things being thus done with a knife (or some such like) cut the
passage for the metal, which let be a little dried: then,

IX. Either strew over the side of the impression (now taken off) with a
calcined Tripoli ground impalpable; applying it upon the female flask again;
turn the female flask uppermost, which take off, and strew it in like manner,
with the calcined Tripoli, and putting them together again, press them so hard,
as that the fine Tripoli may receive the most perfect impression of the Medal,
which then take out, by separating the sides of the flask, and gently shaking
that part which holds it, till it falls out:

X. Or with Cotton wet in Oil and Turpentine and set on fire let the Impression
be smoaked; and if any superfluous fume be taken, wipe it off with a Hares foot.

XI. Then join the sides of the flask together, putting them with the woolen
clothes between the Oaken plates, which put into the Press, and skrew them a
little.

XII. Then the Metal being melted, put it into the mould being hot, which if it
be Silver, or blanched Brass, or Copper, it will run well enough.

XIII. But if it runs not well, you may cast in about the hundred part of
Mercury sublimate, and an eighth part of Antimony; for so it will not only run
well, but also be a harder metal.

XIV. Lastly, the Medal being cooled, take it neatly out and keep it.

Where note 1. That so long as the Impression or mould is not spoiled, you may
still cast more Medals therein; but when it decays, you must perfectly renew
the whole work as at first. 2. That you may blanch them with a pure whiteness
by the ninth Section of the nine and twentieth Chapter of this Book; or thus,
if they be of whitened Brass, Take Sal armoniack one ounce and an half,
Saltpeter two ounces and a half, Leaf silver twenty four grains; mix them and
evaporate them in a Luted crucible, having a hole in the cover, till all the
moisture is gone; being cold beat all into fine powder; of which take one
ounce, Salt, Alom, Tartar, of each one handful, fair water a sufficient
quantity; mix and boil all in a glazed vessel, in which put the Medals boiling
them till they are purely white: then rub them with the Tartar in the bottom
very well, wash them in fair water and dry them. 3. That if the Medals be of
Gold, or of a golden color, you may heighten it with Verdigriese and Urine.

CHAP. XXXII. Of Glass and Precious Stones.
I. TO melt Crystal.

Beat Crystal to bits, and put them into an Iron spoon, cover it and lute it
well, and heat it in the fire till it is red hot, which quench in oil of
Tartar: this do so often, till they will easily beat to powder in a mortar,
which will then easily melt.

This is of use to counterfeit Jewels with.

II. To make a Cement for broken Glasses.

Glair of Eggs mixed with Quicklime will join broken pieces of Glass together,
and all earthen pots, so as that they shall never be broken in the same place
again.

Or thus, Take old liquid Varnish, and join the pieces with; bind them together
and dry them well in the Sun or in an Oven, and they will never unglew again:
but put no hot liquor into them then.

Or thus, Take White-lead, Red-lead, Quicklime, Gum sandrack of each one
ounce, mix all with glair of eight eggs.

Or thus, Take White-lead, bole, liquid varnish as much as suffices.

Or thus, Take White-lead, Lime, glair of Eggs, as much as suffices.

Or thus, Take fine powder of glass, Quicklime, Liquid varnish, of each a
sufficient quantity.

Or thus, Take Quicklime powdered, liquid varnish, glair of Eggs, of each
alike: grind them upon a stone: this is a strong glue even for stones.

Or thus, Take Calcined flints and egg-shells of each alike, and with whites of
Eggs and gum tragacanth or dissolution of Gum Sandrack make glue, this in few
days will be as hard as stone.

Or thus, Take calcined flints two pound, Quicklime four pound, Linseed oil so
much as may temper the mixture, this is wonderful strong: but with liquid
varnish it would be stronger.

Or thus, Take fish glue, and beat it thin, then soak it in water till it is
like paste, make rouls thereof which draw out thin: when you use it, dissolve
it in fair water over the fire, letting it sees a while and scumming of it,
and whilst it is hot use it. This not only cements glass, but Tortoise shell
and all other things.

III. To wake Glass green.

Green glass is made of fern ashes, because it has much of an alkaly salt.
Crystal or Venice Glass is tinged green with Ore of Copper; or with the Calx of
Copper five or six grains to an ounce.

IV. To counterfeit a Diamond.

Take a Saphyre of a faint color, put into the middle of a crucible in quick
Lime, and put it into a gentle fire, and heat it by degrees till it is red hot,
keep it so for six or seven hours; let it stand in the crucible till it is
cold, (lest taking it out hot it should break) so will it lose all its color,
and be perfectly like a Diamond, so that no file will touch it: if the color
is not all vanished at the first heating, you must heat it again till it is
perfect.

V. To prepare the Salts for counterfeit Gems.

The Salts used in making counterfeit Gems, are chiefly two, the first is made
of the herb Kali; the second of Tartar; their preparations are according to the
usual way (but in Glass vessels.)

VI. To prepare the matter of which Gems are made.

The matter is either Crystal or flint that is clear and white: put them into a
crucible in a reverberatory heat (the crucible being covered) then take them
out and cast them into cold water, so will they crack and easily reduce to
powder: of which powder take an equal quantity with Salt of Tartar (or Sal
Alkali) to which mixture add what Color you please, which must be either
Metalline or Mineral: put them into a very strong Crucible (filling it about
half full) cover it close, and melt all in a strong fire till it become like
glass.

Where note, in melting you must put an Iron red into it, and take up some of
it, and if it is free from bubbles, grains, or specks, it is fused enough: if
not, you must fuse it till it is free.

VII. To make a counterfeit Diamond of Crystal.

Put Crystal in a crucible and set it in a glass furnace all night, and then
bring it to fine powder, mix it with equal parts of Sal Tartari, digest all
night in a vehement heat, but yet not to melt, then take them out, and put them
into another vessel which will stoutly endure the fire; let them stand melted
two days and take out the mass.

VIII. To make a Chalcedon.

Mingle with the powder of Crystal, a little calcined silver, and let it stand
in fusion twenty four hours.

IX. To make counterfeit Pearls.

Mix Calx of Luna and Egg-shells with leaf silver ground with our best varnish,
of which make paste, and having bored them with a hogs bristle, dry them in the
Sun, or an Oven.

X. To counterfeit a Ruby.

Take Sal Alkaly four ounces, Crystal three ounces, Scales of Brass half an
ounce, leaf gold six grains, mix all, and melt them in a reverberatory.

XI. To counterfeit a Carbuncle.

Mix Crystal with a little red Lead, putting it into a furance for twenty four
hours, then take it out, powder and searce it, to which add a little Calcined
brass; melt all again, and add a small quantity of leaf gold, stirring it well
three or four hours, and in a day and night it will be done.

XII. An Artificial Amethyst.

Take Crystal one pound, Manganess one dram, mix and melt them.

Or thus, Take Sal Alkaly three ounces, powder of Crystal four ounces, filings
of Brass half an ounce, melt all in a strong fire.

XIII. An Artificial Jacynth.

Put Lead into a strong crucible, and set it into a furnace, let it stand there
about six weeks till it is like glass, and it will have the natural color of a
Jacynth not easily to be discerned.

XIV. An Artificial Chrysolite.

Mix with melted Crystal a sixth part of scales of Iron, letting it stand in a
vehement fire for three days. Or thus, to the mixture of the Topaze add a
little Copper.

XV. An Artificial Topaze.

To Crystal one pound, add Crocus Martis two Drachms, Red Lead three ounces,
first putting in the Lead, then the Crocus.

XVI. Artificial Corals.

Take the scrapings of Goats horns, beat them together, and infuse them in a
strong Lixivium made of Sal fraxini for five days: then take it out and mingle
it with Cinnaber dissolved in water; set it to a gentle fire that it may grow
thick; make it into what form you please, dry, and polish it. Or thus, Take
Minii one ounce, Vermilion ground fine half an ounce, Quicklime, and powder of
Calcined flints, of each six ounces, a Lixivium of Quicklime and Wine, enough
to make it thick: add a little Salt, then make it into what form you please,
and boil it in Linseed oil.

XVII. An Artificial Emerald.

Take Brass (three days) Calcined in powder, which put again into the furnace
with oil and a weaker fire; let it stay there four days, adding a double
quantity of fine sand or powder of Crystal: after it is something hard, keep it
at a more gentle fire for twelve hours, and it will be a lovely, pleasant and
glorious green. Or thus, Take fine Crystal two ounces and an half, Sal Alkali
two ounces, flas aeris infused in Vinegar and strained one ounce, Sal Tartari
one ounce and half; mix and lute them into a crucible, and put all into a
glass-makers furnace for twenty four hours, and it will be glorious indeed. Or
thus, Take Crystal ten ounces, Crocus Martis, and Brass twice calcined, of each
one pound, mix and melt them, stirring them well with an Iron Rod.

XVIII. An Artificial Sapbyre.

To melt Crystal put a little Zaphora (two Drachms to a pound of Crystal) then
stir it continually from top to bottom with an Iron hook, till it is well
mixed, keep it in the furnace three days and it is done: yet when it is well
colored, unless it be presently removed from the fire, it will lose its
tincture again.

XIX. Artificial Amber.

Boil Turpentine in an earthen pot, with a little cotton (some add a little
oil) stirring it till it is as thick as paste, then put it into what you will,
and set it in the Sun eight days, and it will be clear and hard, of which you
may make beads, hasts for knives, and the like.

XX. Another way to counterfeit Amber.

Take sixteen yolks of Eggs, beat them well with a spoon; Gum Arabic two
ounces, Cherry-tree Gum an ounce, make the Gums into powder, and mix them well
with the yolks of Eggs; let the Gums melt well, and put them into a pot well
leaded, then set them six days in the Sun, and they will be hard, and shine
like glass; and when you rub them, they will take up a wheat straw, as other
Amber does.

XXI. To make yellow Amber soft.

Put yellow Amber into hot melted wax well scum'd and it will be soft, so that
you may make things thereof in what form and fashion you please.

XXII. Another Artificial Amber.

Take whites of eggs well beaten, put them into a vessel with strong white wine
Vinegar, stop it close, let it fland fourteen days, then dry it in the shade,
and it will be like to Amber.

XXXIII. Another Artificial Amber.

Break whites of eggs with a sponge, take off the froth, to the rest put
Saffron, put all into a glass close stopped, or into a Copper or brazen vessel,
let it boil in a kettle of water, till it be hard; then take it out and shape
it to your liking, lay it in the Sun and anoint it often with Linseed oil mixed
with a little Saffron; or else being taken out of the Kettle, boil it in
Linseedoyl.

XXIV. To make white Enamel.

Take Calx of Lead two ounces, Calx of Tin four ounces, make it into a body
with Crystal twelve ounces, role it into round balls, and set it on a gentle
fire for a night, stirring it about with an Iron rod, till it is melted, and it
is done.

XXV. The general preparations and proportions of Mineral Colors.

Plates of Copper must be made red hot, and then quenched in cold water; of
which five or six grains mixed with Crystal and Sal Tartari of each half an
ounce, and melted, will color a Seagreen. Iron must be made into a Crocus in
a reverberatory fire; of which eight or ten grains will tinge the said ounce of
mixture into a yellow or hyacinth color. Silver is to be dissolved in Aqua
fortis and precipitated with oil of flints, then dulcifyed with water and
dried; of this five or six grains to an ounce, gives a mixed color. Gold must
be dissolved in Aqua Regis, and precipitated with liquor of flints, then
sweetened and dried; of which five or six grains to one ounce gives a glorious
Sapherine color. Gold melted with Regulus Martis nitrosus five or six grains
to one ounce, gives an incomparable Rubine color. Magnesia in powder only ten
or twelve grains to one ounce, makes an Amethyst Color. Granata in powder only
ten or fifteen grains to one ounce, will tinge the mass into a glorious
Smaragdine Color, not unlike to the natural.

XXVI. Lastly, Common Copper makes a Seagreen: Copper of Iron a Grass-green:
Granats, a Smaragdine: Iron, Yellow or Hyacinth: Silver, White, yellow, green
and granat: Gold, a fair sky color: Wismut, a common Blew: Magnesia, an
Amethyst color: Copper and Silver, an Amethyst color: Copper and Iron, a pale
green: Wismut and Magnesia, a purple color: Silver and Magnesia, an Opal; and
the like.

XXVII. To make Azure.

Take Sal armoniack three ounces, Verdigriefe six ounces, make them into
powder, and put them into a glass with water of Tartar, so that it may be
somewhat thick, stop the glass and digest in Sand in Horse-dung for eight or
ten days and it will be good azure.

XXVIII. Another way to make good beyond sea Azure.

Beat common azure with Vinegar, and anoint therewith thin plates of Silver,
and put the same over a vessel full of Urine, which set over hot ashes and
coals, moving and stirring it till it looks like good azure.

CHAP. XXXIII. The Ways and Manner of Gilding.
I. To lay Gold on any thing.

Take red Lead ground fine, temper it with Linseed oil: write with it and lay
Leaf gold on it, let it dry, then polish it.

II. To lay Gold on Glass.

Take Chalk and red Lead of each alike, grind them together, and temper them
with Linseed oil: lay it on, and when it is almost dry, lay leaf gold on it;
let it dry, then polish it.

III. To gild Iron with a water.

Take Spring water three pound, Roch Alom three ounces, Roman Vitriol,
Orpiment, one ounce, Verdigriese twenty four grains, Sal gem three ounces, boil
all together, and when it begins to boil, put in Tartar and Bay salt of each
half an ounce; continue the boiling a good while, then take it from the fire,
strike the Iron over therewith, dry it against the fire and burnish it.

IV. To lay Gold on Iron or other Metals.

Take liquid Varnish one pound, oil of Linseed and Turpentine, of each one
ounce; mix them well together: strike this over any metal, and afterward lay
on the gold or silver, and when it is dry polish it.

V. To Gild Silver or Brass with Gold water.

Take Quicksilver two ounces, put it on the fire in a Crucible, and when it
begins to smoke, put into it an Angel of fine Gold; then take it off
immediately, for the Gold will be presently dissolved: then if it be too thin,
strain a part of the Quicksilver from it, through a piece of Fustian: this
done, rub the Gold and Quicksilver upon Brass or Silver, and it will cleave
unto it, then put the said Brass or Silver upon quick coals till it begin to
smoke, then take it from the fire, and scratch it with a hair brush; this do so
long till all the Mercury is rubbed as clean off as may be, and the gold appear
of a faint yellow: which color heighten with Sal Armoniack, Bole and
Verdigriese ground together and tempered with water.

Where note, that before you gild your Metal, you must boil it with Tartar in
Beer or water, then scratch it with a wire Brush.

VI. Another water to gild Iron, Steel, Knives, Swords and Armor with.

Take Fire-stone in powder, put it into strong red wine vinegar for twenty four
hours, boil it in a glazed pot, adding more Vinegar as it evaporates, or boils
away: into this water dip your Iron, Steel, etc. and it will be black; dry it,
then polish it, and you will have a gold color underneath.

VII. Another water to gild Iron with.

Take Salt peter, Roch-alom burnt of each half an ounce; Sal-armoniack an
ounce, all being in fine powder, boil with strong Vinegar in a Copper vessel;
with which wet the Iron, etc. then lay on leaf Gold.

VIII. Another water to gild Iron with.

Take Roch-alom, and grind it with boys Urine, till it is well dissolved, with
which anoint the Iron, heat it red hot in a fire of wood coals, and it will be
like Gold.

IX. To gild Books.

Take Bole Armoniack four peny-weight, Sugar Candy one peny-weight, mix and
grind them with glair of Eggs; then on a bound Book, (while in the press, after
it has been smeared with glair of Eggs, and is dried) smear the said
composition, let it dry, then rub it well and polish it: then with fair water
wet the edges of the Book, and suddenly lay on the gold, pressing it down with
Cotton gently, this done let it dry, and then polish it exactly with a tooth.

X. Another way of Gilding Iron.

Take water three pound, Alom two ounces, Sal gem three ounces, Vitriol Roman,
Orpiment of each one ounce, flos Aeris twenty four grains; boil all with Tartar
and Salt as at the third Section.

XI. To make Iron of the color of Gold.

Take Linseed oil three ounces, Tartar two ounces, yolks of Eggs boiled hard
and beaten two ounces, Aloes half an ounce, Saffron five grains, Turmerick two
grains: boil all in an Earthen vessel, and with the oil anoint Iron, and it
will look like Gold. If there be not Linseed oil enough, you may put in more.

XII. A Golden liquor to color Iron, Wood, Glass, or bones with.

Take a new laid Egg, through a hole at one end take out the white, and fill up
the Egg with Quicksilver two parts, Sal-armoniack finely powdered one part; mix
them all together with a Wire or little stick: stop the hole with melted Wax,
over which put an half Egg-shell: digest in horse dung for a month, and it will
be a fine golden colored Liquor.

XIII. To gild Silk and Linen.

Take Glue made of parchment, lay it on the Linen, or Silk, etc. gently, that
it may not sink: then take Ceruse, Bole and Verdigriese of each alike, mix and
grind them upon a Stone: then in a glazed vessel mix it with varnish, which let
simper over a small fire, then keep it for use.

XIV. Another of a pure gold color.

Take juice of fresh Saffron, or (for want of it) Saffron ground, the best
clear Orpiment of each alike: grind them with Goats gall or gall of a Pike
(which is better) digest twenty eight days in horse dung, and it is done.

XV. To gild on Wood or Stone.

Take Bole Armoniack, Oil Ben, of each a sufficient quantity; beat and grind
them together: with this smear the wood or stone, and when it is almost dry,
lay on the Leaf-gold, let it dry, then polish it.

XVI. To gild with Leaf-gold.

Take leaves of gold, and grind them with a few drops of honey, to which add a
little gum-water, and it will be excellent to write or paint with.

XVII. To gild Iron or Steel.

Take Tartar one ounce, Vermilion three ounces, Bole armoniack, Aqua Vitae of
each two ounces, grind them together with Linseed oil, and put thereto Lapis
Calaminaris the quantity of a hasle nut; and grind therewith in the end a few
drops of Varnish; take it off the Stone, strain it through a linen cloth (for
it must be as thick as honey) then strike it over Iron or Steel, and let it
dry; then lay on your Silver or Gold, and burnish it.

XVIII. To color Tin or Copper of a golden Color.

Take Linseed oil, set it on the fire, scum it; then put in Amber, Aloes
hepatick, of each alike, stir them well together till it wax thick; then take
it off, cover it close, and set it in the earth three days: when you use it,
strike the Metal all over with it, with a pencil, let it dry, and it will be of
a golden color.

XIX. To gild any Metal.

Take strong Aqua fortis, in which dissolve fine Silver, to which put so much
Tartar in fine powder, as will make it into paste, with which rub any metal,
and it will look like fine Silver.

XX. To gild so as it shall not out with any water.

Take Oker calcined, pumice stone of each alike, Tartar a little, beat them
with Linseed oil, and five or six drops of Varnish, strain all through a Linen
cloth, with which you may Gild.

CHAP. XXXIV. Of Paper, Parchment, and Leather.
I. TO make paper waved like Marble.

Take diverse oyled colors, put them severaly in drops upon water, and stir the
water lightly: then wet the Paper (being of some thickness) with it, and it
will be waved like Marble; dry it in the Sun.

II. To write golden letters on Paper or Parchment.

This may be done by the ninth, tenth, and twelvth Sections of the three and
thirtieth Chapter of this Book: or write with Vermilion ground with Gum
Armoniack, ground with glair of Eggs, and it will be like gold.

III. To take out blots, or make black Letters vanish, in Paper or Parchment.

This may be done with Alom water; or with Aqua fortis mixed with common water.

IV. To make Silver letters in Paper or Parchment.

Take Tin one ounce, Quicksilver two ounces, mix and melt them, and grind them
with Gum water.

V. To write with green Ink.

Take Verdigriese, Litharge, Quicksilver, of each a sufficient quantity, grind
and mingle them with Urine; and it will be a glorious green like an Emerald to
write or paint with:

Or thus, Grind juice of Rue and Verdigriese with a little Saffron together;
and when you would write with it mix it with Gum water: Or thus, Dissolve
Verdigriese in Vinegar, strain it, then grind it with common water, and a
little honey; dry it; then grind it again with gum water, and it is done.

VI. To write on Paper or Parchment with blew Ink.

Grind blew with honey, then temper it with Glair of Eggs or gum water made of
Isinglass.

VII. To Dye Skins Blew.

Take berries of Elder or Dwarf-elder, first boil them, then smear and wash the
Skins therewith, and wring them forth: then boil the berries as before, in the
dissolution of Alom water, and wet the Skins in the same water once or twice,
dry them and they will be very Blew.

VIII. To dye Skins into a reddish Color.

First wash the Skin in water and wring it well: then wet it with the solution
of Tartar and Bay salt in fair water, and wring it again: to the former
dissolution add ashes of Crab shells and rub the Skin very well therewith, then
wash with common water and wring them out: then wash them with tincture of
Madder, in the solution of Tartar, Alom, and the aforesaid Ashes; and after (if
not red enough) with the Tincture of Brazil.

IX. Another way to Dye them red.

Wash the Skins, and lay them in galls for two hours; wring them out, and dip
them into a color made with Ligustrum, Alom and Verdigriese in water: Lastly,
twice dye them with Brazil boiled with lie.

X. Another way to Dye them Blew.

Take the best Indico and steep it in Urine a day, then boil it with Alom, and
it will be good. Or, temper the Indice with red Wine, and wash the Skins
therewith.

XI. To dye Skins Purple.

Take Roch Alom, dissolve it in warm water, wet the Skins therewith drying them
again; then take rasped Brazil, boil it in water well, then let it cool; do
thus thrice: this done rub the dye over the skins with your hand, which being
dry polish.

XII. To dye Skins of a sad green.

Take the filings of Iron and Sal armoniack of each, steep them in Urine till
they be soft, with which besmear the skin, being stretched out, drying it in
the shade: the color will penetrate and be green on both sides.

XIII. To dye Skins of a pure sky color.

For each skin take Indico an ounce, put it into boiling water, let it stand
one night, then warm it a little, and with a brush pencil besmear the skin
twice over.

XIV. To dye skins of a pure yellow.

Take fine Aloes one ounce, Linseed oil two pound, dissolve or melt them, then
strain it; besmearing the skins therewith, being dry, varnish them over.

XV. To dye Skins green.

Take Sap green, Alom water, of each a sufficient quantity, mix and boil them a
little: If you would have the color darker, add a little Indico.

XVI. To dye Skins Yellow.

Infuse Woold in Vinegar, in which boil a little Alom: Or thus, having dyed
them Green by the fifteenth Section, dip them in decoction of Privit berries
and Saffron and Alom water.

XVII. To dye them of an Orange Color.

Boil Fustick berries in Alom water: but for a deep Orange, use Turmerick root.

XVIII. A Liquor to gild Skins, Metals, or Glass.

Take Linseed Oil three pound, boil it in a glazed vessel till it burns a
feather being put into it; then put to it Pitch, Rozin, dry Varnish, or Gum
Sandrach, of each eight ounces, Aloes Hepatica four ounces; put all in powder
into the oil, and stir them with a stick, the fire being a little increased: if
the Liquor is too clear or bright, you may add ounce or two more of Aloes
Socratine, and diminish the Varnish, so the Liquor will be darker and more like
Gold. Being boiled, take it, and strain it, and keep it in a Glass for use:
which use with a pencil.

CHAP. XXXV. Of Wood, Horns, and Bones.
I. TO Dye Elder, Box, Mulberry-tree, Pear Tree, Nuttree of the color of Ebony.

Steep the wood in Alom water three or four days, then boil it in Common Oil,
with a little Roman Vitriol and Sulphur.

Where note, the longer you boil the wood, the blacker it will be, but too long
makes them brittle.

II. To Dye Bones green.

Boil the Bones in Alom water, then take them out, dry them and scrape them,
then boil them in Lime water with a little Verdigriese.

III. To Dye Wood like Ebony, according to Glauber.

Distill an Aqua fortis of Saltpeter and Vitriol.

IV. To make Horns black.

Vitriol dissolved in Vinegar and spirit of Wine will make Horns black: so the
Snow white Calx of Silver in fair water.

V. To make Bones white.

They are strangely made white by boiling with water and Lime; continually
scumming of it.

VI. To dye Bones green.

Take white Wine-vinegar a quart, filings of Copper, Verdigriese, of each three
ounces, Rue bruised one handful; mix them, and put the Bones therein for
fifteen days.

VII. To Dye Wood, Horn, or Bones red.

First boil them in Alom water, then put them into tincture of Brazil in Alom
water for two or three weeks: or into Tincture of Brazil in Milk.

VIII. To Dye them Blew.

Having first boiled them in Alom water, then put them into the Dissolution of
Indico in Urine.

To Dye them Green like Emeralds.

Take Aqua fortis. and put as much filings of Copper into it, as it will
dissolve; then put the Wood, Horns or Bones therein for a night.

X. To Dye Bristles and Feathers.

Boil them in Alom water, and after, while they are warm, put them into
Tincture of Saffron, if you would have them yellow: or juice of Elder berries,
if blew: or in Tincture of Verdigriese, if green.

XI. To Dye an Azure Color.

Take Roch Alom, filings of Brass, of each two ounces, Fish glue half an ounce,
Vinegar, or Fair water a pint, boil it to the Consumption of the half.

XII. To soften Ivory and Bones.

Lay them twelve hours in Aqua fortis, then three days in the juice of Beets,
and they will be tender, and you may make of them what you will: To barden them
again, lay them in strong White Wind Vinegar.

XIII. To make Horns soft.

Take Urine a Month old, Quicklime one pound, calcined Tartar half a pound,
Tartar crude, Salt, of each four ounces, mix and boil all together, then strain
it twice or thrice, in which put the horns for eight days, and they will be
soft.

XIV. Another way to make them soft.

Take ashes of which glass is made, Quicklime of each a pound, water a
sufficient quantity, boil them till one third part is consumed, then put a
feather into it, if the feather peel it is sodden enough, if not, boil it
longer, then clarify it, and put it out, into which put filings of Horn for two
days; anoint your hand with oil, and work the horns as it were paste, then make
it into what fashion you please.

XV. Another way to soften Horns.

Take juices of Marubium, Alexanders, Yarrow, Celandine and Radish roots, with
strong Vinegar, mix them, into which put Horns and digest seven days in
horse-dung, then work them as before.

XVI. To cast Horns in a mould, like as Lead.

Make a Lixivium of Calcined Tartar and Quicklime, into which put filings or
scrapings of Horn, boil them well together, and they will be as it were pap,
tinge it of the color you would have it, and then you may cast it in a mould,
and make thereof what fashioned things you please.

XVII. To make Ivory white.

If Ivory be yellow, spotted or colored, lay it in Quicklime, pour a little
water over it, letting it lie twenty four hours, and it will be fair and white.

CHAP. XXXVI. Of Dying Yarn, Linen Cloth, and the like.
I. TO Dye a sad Brown.

First infuse the matter to be dyed in a strong tincture of Hermodacts: then in
a bag put Saffron and ashes, stratum super stratum, upon which put water two
parts mixed with Vinegar one part; strain the water and Vinegar through hot,
fifteen or sixteen times: in this Lixiviate Tincture of Saffron put what you
would dye, letting it lie a night, then take it out, and hang it up to dry
without wringing, which do in like manner the second and third times.

II. To Dye a Blew Color.

Take Ebulus berries ripe and well dried, steep them in Vinegar twelve hours,
then with your hands rub them, and strain through a linen cloth, putting
thereto some bruised Verditer and Alom.

Note, if the Blew is to be clear, put more Verditer to it.

III. Another excellent Blew Dye.

Take Copper scales one ounce, Vinegar three ounces, Salt one Dram; put all
into a Copper vessel; and when you would dye, put the said matter into the
tincture of Brazil.

IV. Another excellent Blew Dye.

Take calcined Tartar three pugils, unslak'd Lime one pugil, make a Lixivium,
and filtrate it; to twelve or fifteen quarts of the same water put Flanders
blew one pound, and mix them well: set it to the fire, till you can scarcely
endure your hand in it: then first boil what you would dye in Alom water, then
dry it; afterward dip it in hot Lie twice or thrice; then put it into the Dye.

V. A good red Dye.

Take Brazil in powder, fine Vermilion, of each half an ounce, boil them in
Rain water, with Alom one dram, boil it till it is half consumed.

VI. Another excellent good Red Dye.

Take of the Lixivium of unslak'd Lime one pint, Brazil in powder one ounce,
boil to the half; then put to it Alom half an ounce, keep it warm, but not to
boil: then dip what you would dye, first in a Lixivium of Red wine Tartar, let
it dry; then put it into the Dye.

VII. Another very good Red.

Take Rosset with gum Arabic, boil them a quarter of an hour, strain it: then
first boil what you would dye, in Alom water two hours; after put it into the
Dye.

VIII. To make a fair Russet Dye.

Take two quarts of water, Brazil one ounce, boil it to a quart; put to it a
sufficient quantity of Granie and two drachms of Gum Arabic.

IX. A good Purple Color.

Take Myrtle berries two pound, Alom, calcined Brass of each one ounce, water
two quarts, mix them in a Brass kettle, and boil half an hour, then strain it.

X. A Yellow Color.

Take berries of purging Thorn, gathered about Lammas day, bruise them, adding
a little Alom in powder; then keep all in a Brass vessel.

XI. Another good Yellow.

Put Alom in powder to the Tincture of Saffron in Vinegar.

XII. A very good Green Color.

Take Sap green, bruise it, put water to it, then add a little Alom, mix and
infuse for two or three days.

XIII. To take out Spots.

Wash the spots with oil of Tartar per Deliquium, two or three times and they
will vanish, then wash with water. Spirit of Wine to wash with is excellent in
this case. If they be Ink spots, juice of Lemmons or Spirit of Salt is
incomparable, washing often and drying it: so also Castle Soap and Vinegar.

CHAP. XXXVII. Of the Dying of Stuffs, Clothes and Silks.
I. TO make a substantial blew Dye.

Take Woad, one pound, and mix it with four pound of boiling water: Infuse it
twenty four hours; then die with it all white colors.

II. To make a firm black Dye.

First Wad it with the former Blew: then take of Galls one pound; water sixty
pound; Vitriol three pounds: first boil the Galls and water with the Stuff or
Cloth, two hours: then put in the Coperas at a cooler heat for one hour: then
take out the Cloth or Stuff and cool it, and put it in for another hour,
boiling it: Lastly take it out again, cool it, and put in once more.

III. To make an excellent Yellow Dye.

Take liquor or decoction of Wheat-bran (being very clear) sixty pound: in
which dissolve three pound of Alom: then boil the stuff or cloth in it for two
hours: after which take Would two pounds, and boil it till you see the color
good.

IV. To make a very good Green Dye.

First Dye the Cloth or Stuff Yellow by the third Section, then put it into the
Blew Dye, in the first Section of this Chapter.

V. To make a pure clear Red Dye.

Take Liquor or Infusion of Wheat-bran (being strained and made very clear,)
sixty pounds, Alom two pounds, Tartar one pound; mix and dissolve them, with
which boil the Stuff or Cloth for two hours: take it then out, and boil it in
fresh Wheatbran liquor, sixty pounds; to which put Madder three pounds; perfect
the color at a moderate heat, without boiling:

VI. To make a very pleasant Purple Dye.

First Dye it Blew, by the first rule of this Chapter: then boil it in the
former Red at the fifth rule hereof; Lastly finish it with a decoction of
Brazil.

VII. To Dye Crimson in Grain.

First boil it in the Red at the fifth rule of this Chapter: then finish it in
a strong tincture of Cochenele made in the Wheat-bran Liquor aforefaid.

VIII. To make a Bow-dye or Scarlet Color.

Take water an hundred pounds; Cremor Tartari and Aqua fortis of each half a
pound; parched pease in powder an hundred: boil all together with the stuff for
two hours; this done, take new water an hundred pound weight; Cremor Tartari
and Aqua fortis of each two ounces, in which boil the Stuff or Cloth for a
quarter of an hour; then put in the Cochenele, and boil all for about half an
hour, and it is done. Where note that the vessels in which the Stuff and
Liquors are boiled must be lined with Tin, else the Color will be defective.
The same observe in Dying of Silks (in each color) with this Caution, that you
give them a much milder heat, and a longer time.

IX. The Bow-dyers know that dissolved Lime (that is the solution of Jupiter)
being put into a kettle to the Alom and Tartar-makes the Cloth attract the
Color into it, so that none of the Cochenele is left; but is all drawn out of
the water into the Cloth.

The Spirit of Nitre being used with Alom and Tartar, in the first boiling
makes a firm ground, so that they shall not spot nor lose their color by the
Sun, Fire, Air, Vinegar, Wine, Urine or Salt Water.

To enumerate all the great variety of Dies, or Colors; or offer at an essay
to reduce them to a certain method, as it is a labor needless, so it is as
altogether impossible, there being infinite Colors to be produced, for which
(as yet) we have no certain, known or real name: And out of what we have
already enumerated in this Chapter, the ingenious (if they please) shall find
(by little practice and Experience) such great variety to be apparent, that
should we express the number though but in a very low or mean degree, we could
not but be exposed in censure to an Hyperbole even of the highest: Every of the
aforegoing colors, will alone or singly, produce a great number of others, the
first more deep or high; the latter, all of them paler than each other: And
according to the variety of colors the matter is of, before it is put into the
Dye, such new variety also shall you have again when it comes out; not
according to what the Color naturally gives, but another clean contrary to
what you (although an Artist) may expect. For if strange colors be dipped into
dies not natural to them, they produce a forced color of a new texture, such
as cannot possibly be preconceived by the mind of man, although long and
continued experience might much help in that case. And if such variety may be
produced by any one of those single Colors; what number in reason might be the
ultimate of any two or three or more of them being complicate or compounded?
Now if such great numbers or varieties may be produced 1. by any one single
color; 2. by being complicate; how should we (without a certain and
determinate limitation by denomination or name) ever order such confused,
unknown, various, and undeterminate species of things, in any pleasant,
intelligible method? Since therefore that the matter (as yet) appears not only
hard, but also impossible, we shall commend what we have done to the Ingenuity
of the Industrious; and desire that Candor or favor from the experienced, with
love to correct our Errors; which act or kindness will not only be a future
obligation to the Author, but also enforce Posterity to acknowledge the same.

FINIS Libri Tertii.
POLYGRAPHICES LIBER QUARTUS.
Containing the Original, Advancement and Perfection of the Art of Painting.
CHAP. I. Of the Original of these Arts.
I. THe Original of the Art of Painting was taken from the forms of the things
which appear; expressing the same (as Isidorus Pelusiota says) with colors,
either hollow or swelling; dark or light; hard or soft; rough or smooth; new or
old.

II. Among all other visible things, Flowers yield the greatest variety of
Colors; which Painters (as the famous Pausias) have attempted to express; who
was the first that assayed to bring this Art to something of Perfection in that
kind.

III. Amongst things invisible, as Thunder, Lightning, and the like; Apelles
was the first undertaker: the consideration of these almost impossibilities
made Theophylactus Simocatus in his seven and thirtieth Epistle say; that
Painters undertake to express such things, as nature is not able to do.

For as Maximus Tyrius says, you shall not find in have a body so accurately
exact, as to compare it with the beauty of a Statue. And Proclus says, if you
take a man brought forth by nature, and another made by the Art of Carving;
that by nature shall not wholly seem statelier; because Art does many things
more exactly: to which Ovid assents, when be says, that Pygmalion did carve
the snow white Image of Ivory with such a happy dexterity, that it was
altogether impossible that such a woman should be born.

IV. Now whereas Nature scarcely ever presents any one thing perfect in beauty
(in all its parts) lest it should be said that she had nothing more to
distribute to others; so Artists of old chose out many patterns of beauty,
which were absolutely perfect in some of their parts, that by designing each
part after that pattern, which was perfect therein, they might at last present
something perfect in the whole.

Wherefore when Zeuxis intended an exquisite pattern of a most beautiful woman
he sought not for this perfection in one particular body; but chose five of the
most well-favoured-virgius; that be might find in them that perfect beauty,
which ( as Lucian says) must of necessity be but one.

V. And from this manner of Imitation arises the skill of designing; from
whence spring the Arts of Painting, Limning, Washing, Casting, and all others
of that kind.

VI. This matter of Imitation was prosecuted in the chief things only;

For who should learn to imitate all things in nature? the greater being
attained, the less will fellow of themselves; if any shall attempt so great a
burden, two inconveniences, says Quintilian, will necessarily follow, to wit,
always to say too much, and yet never to say all.

VII. The former Imitation is of things seen with the eye: there is another,
which is the Idea of things conceived in the mind, from the continual motion of
the Imagination.

Wherefore as Quintilian says (in the third Chapter of the tenth Book of his
Institutions of Oratory) We shall do well to accustom our mind to such a
steadfast constancy of Conceiving, as to overcome all other impediments, by the
earnestness of our intention: for if we do altogether bend this same intention
upon things conceived, our mind shall never take notice of any thing which the
eyes see, or the ears hear.

VIII. Those therefore which would profit much, must take care and pains, to
furnish their minds with all sorts of useful Images and Idea's.

This treasury of the mind, says Cassiodorus, (Cap. 12. de Anima) is not
over-loaden in have. If it be once furnished, the Artist shall find upon any
sudden occasion all things necessary, ready at hand; whereas those which are
unprovided, shall be to seek: it is like to the Analytical furniture in
Algebra, without the knowledge of which no notable thing can be performed.

IX. Although the imagination may be easily moved, yet this same excellency is
not attained in an instant: without the ability of expressing the conceived
Images, all the exercise of the Fancy is worth nothing.

X. The Art of Painting in its Infancy was so mean, that the first Artist was
forced (as Aelianus says in the tenth Chapter of the tenth Book of his
History) in Painting to write, This is an Ox, this is a Horse, this a dog.

But as Tully says (in libro de claris oratoribus) there is nothing both
invented and finished at a time. And Arnobius (in libro secundo adversus
Gentes) says, the Arts are not together with our minds brought forth out of
the heavenly places; but are all found out here on earth, and in process of
time, softened, forged, and beautified by a continual meditation: Our poor and
needy life perceiving some casual things to fall out prosperously, whilst it
does imitate, attempt, try, slip, reform and change, has out of the same
assiduous reprehension, made up some small sciences of Arts, the which it has
afterward by study brought to some perfection.

XI. The bare learning to imitate is not enough; it is requisite, that since we
are not first in invention, we should rather study to out-goe, than to follow.

If it were altogether unlawful to add any thing to things formerly invented,
or to find out better things, our continual labor (says Quintilian) would be
good for nothing. It is certain that Phydias and Apelles have brought many
things to light, which their predecessors knew nothing of.

XII. It is not enough to do all things with the Compleatness of Apelles; but
there is requisite also, the inestimable grace of Zeuxis; the indefatigable
diligence of Protogenes; the witty subtlety of Timanthes; and the stately
magnificence of Nicophanes.

It is a very good way to have recourse to the excellency of variety of great
masters, that something out of the one, and something out of the other, may be
as so many Ornaments to adorn our works, and so many steps to lead us on to the
door of perfection.

XIII. Without doubt then there is some perfection of Art to be attained to;
and that it is as possible that we, or thou, or he, may as well attain it, as any
body else; if we resolve to strive and take pains, without fainting, or fear of
despair.

XIV. The Art of Painting (says Soerates) is the resemblance of visible
things; and theref ore the Artist is to beware that he abuses not the liberty
of his imagination in the shapes of monstrous and prodigious Images of things
not known in nature; but as a true lover of Art, prefer a plain and honest work
agreeing with nature, before any fantastical and conceited device.

XV. Art is but one only thing: yet there may be incomparable Artists,
excellent in one and the same Art, which may almost infinitely differ one from
another; yet all alike praise worthy.

There is but one Art of Casting, in which Myron, Polycletus, Lysippus, have
been excellent, yet did one very much differ from an other: and in Painting
although Zeuxis, Apelles, Aglaophon, differ very much, yet none of them seems
to lack any thing of Art. Zeuxis did surpass all other Artizans, in painting of
women's bodies: Apelles had a certain invention and Grace, proper unto himself
alone, to which never any other Artificer attained: Lysippus is most excellent
in fine and subtle workmanship: Polycletus made excellent statues upon one Leg:
Samius did excel in conceiving of Visions and Fantasies: Dionysius in
painting of men only: Polygnotus most rarely expressed the affections and
passions of man: Antimachus made noble women: Nicias excellent in painting
of-women, but most excellent in four-footed creatures, chiefly dogs: Calamis
made Chariots drawn with two or four horses; the horses were so exact, that
there was no place left for emulation: Euphranor the first and most excellent
in expressing the dignity and marks of Heroical persons: Arestodemus painted
wrestlers: Serapion was most excellent in Scenes: Pyreicus (inferior in the
Art of Painting to none) painted nothing but Cobblers and Barbers: Ludi^ the
first and most excellent in painting Landskips: Apollodorus, Aselepiodorus,
Androbulus, Alevas, were the only Painters of Philosophers, etc.

XVI. Simonides comparing Painting with Poesy says, that Picture is a silent
Poesy; and Poesy is a speaking Picture.

Upon the occasion of those words, Plutarch says, The things represented by
Painters as if they were as yet doing, are propounded by Orators as done
already: Painters express in colors and lines, what Poets do in words; the one
does that with the Pencil, which the other does with the Pen. When Latinus
Pacatus had made a full description of the miserable end of wicked Maximus, he
calls upon all the Painters to assist him. Bring hither, bring hither, you
pious Poets (says he) the whole care and study of your tedious nights; ye
Artificers also despise the vulgar Arguments of ancient fables; these, these
things deserve better to be drawn by your cunning hands: let the market places
and Temples be filled with such spectacles; work them out in Ivory; let them
live in colors; let them stand in Brass; let them exceed the price of precious
stones. It does concern the security of all ages, that such things might seem
to have been done; if by chance any one filled with wicked desires or purposes,
might drink in Innocence by his eyes, when he shall see (the horrid and
deplorable) monuments of these our times. And Gregory Nyssen, upon the
sacrificing of Isaac, says, I often saw in a picture the Image of this fact,
upon which I could not look without tears, so lively did Art put the history
before my eyes.

XVII. It is reported that the Grecians were the first Painters, and that their
colors were (in the infancy thereof) only black and white: But it appears more
with reason and truth, that the invention thereof should be ascribed to the
Egyptians, who (before the invent on of Letters) signified their Conceptions
by Hieroglyphics of Figures, Ciphers, Characters, and Pictures of diverse
things, as birds, beasts, insects, fishes, trees, plants, etc. And by tradition
transferred the same to their children.

So they made the Falcon, to signify diligence and swiftness: the Be, a King:
its honey, mildness: its sting, justice: a Serpent (tail in mouth) the
revolution of the year: the Eagle, envy: the earth, a laboring beast, as an
Ox: a Hare, hearing, etc.

XVIII. It appears then, that as the Egyptians were the first inventors
thereof; so the Greeks brought it (out of its rudeness) to proportion, and the
Romans at last adorned it with Colors: the Germans following them, made their
works more durable by painting in Oil; of whom the English, Dutch, and French
are become mitators.

XIX. About the time of Philip King of Macedon, this Art began to flourish;
growing into great estimation in the days of Alexander and his successors: from
thence, through all the series of times, even to this day, it has received by
degrees, such wonderful advancements, that it may now be said, it is arrived at
perfection.

XX. Lastly, that from Time, Form, Magnitude, Number, Proportion, Motion, Rest,
Situation, Imagination, Similitude, Distance and Light, in a single and
complicate consideration, this Art has its offense, or being; and at last had,
by the help of industrious and unwearied minds, its Original production and
manifestation.

Light is that only thing, without which, all those other things from which
this Art springs, would be useless; without which the Art it self cannot be. It
is (as Sanderson says) the Heavens Offspring; the eldest daughter of God;
fiat lux, the first days creation: it twinkles in a Star; blazes in a Comet;
dawns in a Jewel; dissembles in a Glowworm; contracts it self in a spark;
rages in a flame; is pale in a candle; and dies in a coal. By it the sight has
being, and the imagination life, which comprehends the universality of all
things without space of place; the whole Heavens in their vast and full extent,
enter at once through the Apple of the eye, without any straitness of passage:
the Sight is a sense, which comprehends that, which no other sense is capable
of: it judges and distinguishes between two contraries in an instant; it
considers the excellency and beauty of every object; the spangled Canopy of
Heaven by night; the wandering cloud by day; the wonderful form of the rainbow;
the glorious matutine appearance of Phoebus; his meridional exaltation; the
golden rays which surround him; the mutability of his shadows; his Vespertine
setting; the lofty tops of mountains; unaccessible and ridgy rocks; profound
valleys; large plains, which seem to meet Heaven; green trees and pleasant
groves; delightful hills; sweet and flowery meadows; pleasant streams;
springing fountains; flowing rivers; stately Cities; famous Towers; large
bridges; magnificent buildings; fruitful Orchards and Gardens; shapes of living
Creatures, from the Elephant to the Ant, from the Eagle to the Wren, and from
the Whale to the Shrimp; the wonderful form of Insects; the marching of Armies;
the besieging and storming of Garrisons; the insolences of rude people; the
flight of the distressed; the desolations and depopulations of Kingdoms and
Countries; the sailing of Ships; terrible Sea Fights; great beauty of Colors,
together with thousands of other things; all which it digests, and marshals in
ample order, that when occasion may be, it may exert its store, for the
benefit, advantage, advancement, and perfection of Art.

CHAP. II. Of a Picture in general.
I. IN every Picture there are always four principal considerations: to wit, 1.
Invension, 2. Proportion, 3. Color, and 4. Life.

II. Invention must be free, and flow from a general knowledge of Antiquities,
History, Poetical fictions, Geometrical conclusions, and Optical
considerations; according to its Situation or Aspect, either near or far off.

III. And this Invention must express proper and fit things, agreeing to the
Circumstances of Time, Place, Matter, and Person; and having respect to the
modes of habits belonging to the Country or People whether Ancient or Modern.

IV. Proportion, Analogy, or Symmetry (which you please) in that which limits
each part to its proper bigness, in respect to the whole:

Whatsoever differs from this recedes from beauty, and may be called Deformity.

V. This Proportion is called by Artists the designing lines; which are first
drawn before the whole is painted.

These proportions or lineal designs, draughts, and scotches, may be called
Picture, which being well done, show not only the shape, but also the intent:
In lines only, we may draw the Proportion of a Black More, and such as shall be
like him; Now this Skill proceeds from the very highest principles of Art.

VI. Color is that which makes the Picture resemble what we desire to imitate;
by mixing of various Colors together.

VII. In making any thing apparent, it is necessary to express its opposite or
contrary.

So light and shadows forward, set forth Paintings outward, as if you might
take hold of them with your hand: blackness makes things seem farther off, and
is used in things hollow, as Caves, Wells, etc. the more deep, the more black.

VIII. Brightness exceeds light, sparkling in splendour.

It is used in the Glory of Angels; twinkling of Gems, Armory, Gold and Silver
vessels, fires and flames.

IX. In Painting of a man, grace each limb with its proper and lively Color;
the black make sincerely black; the white, pure, with redness intermixed. But to
paint purely the exquisite beauty of a woman, is never to be well done (except
it be by a very ingenious Artist indeed) her rare complexion being scarcely
possible to be imitated with Colors: There is none really knows the exact
mixture for such a Countenance.

X. Life or Motion is that from whence action or passion does result, which in
colored pictures is seen with a lively force of Gesture and spirit.

To do this it is necessary that the Artist be well acquainted with the nature,
manners, and behavior of men and women, as in anger, sadness, joy,
earnestness, idleness, love, envy, fear, hope, despair, etc. Every disturbance
of the mind alters the Countenance into several postures.

XI. The head cast down shows humility; cast back, arrogance or scorn; hanging
on the neck, languishing; stiff and sturdy, morosity of mind: the various
postures of the head show the passions; the Countenance the same; the eyes the
like: and in a word, all the other parts of the body contribute something to
the expression of the said passions of the mind, as is easily to be observed in
the life.

In excellent pieces you may at a view read the mind of the Artist in the
formality of the Story.

XII. Lastly, Be always sure first to conceive that in your thoughts, which you
would express in your work; that your endeavors being assisted by an
intellectual energie, or power of operation, may at length render your
productions perfect.

CHAP. III. Of the Choice of Copies, or Patterns.
I. HE that chooses a Pattern, ought to see 1. that it be well designed: 2.
that it be well colored.

II. In the well designing, be sure that it be true in every part; and that the
proportion of the figure be just and correspond to the life.

III. If the picture be a fiction, see that it be done boldly, not only to
exceed the work (but also the possibility) of nature, as in Centaurs, Satyrs,
Sirens, Flying-horses, Sea-horses, Tritons, Nereides, etc.

Alexander ab Alexandria says that Theodore Gaza caught one of these Nereides
in Greece, and that in Zealand, another was taught to spin: these Tritons and
Nereides are these which are called Maremaids, the M^le and the Female.

IV. Natural figures show property, and are required to agree with the life:
forced Figures express novelty, and are to be beautified by exorbitancies
according to the fancy of the Painter without limitation: novelty causes
admiration, and admiration curiosity, a kind of delight and satisfaction to the
mind.

These things are not the products of stupid brains, nor are they contained
within the perimitre of clouded and dull Conceptions.

V. In the well coloring, know that in obscurity or darkness there is a kind
of deepness; the sight being sweetly deceived gradatim in breaking the Colors,
by insensible change from the more high to the more dull.

In the Rainbow this mixture is perfect; the variety of Colors are thoroughly
dispersed (like Atoms in the Sunbeams) among one another, to create its just
appearance.

VI. See that the swellings of the work agree with the exactness of nature, and
as the parts thereof require, without sharpness in out-lines, or flatness
within the body of the piece; as also that each hollowness exactly correspond
in due proportions.

VII. Lastly, View precisely the passions, as Joy, Sorrow, Love, Hatred, Fear,
Hope, etc. and see that they correspond with their proper postures: for a touch
of the pencil may strangely alter a passion to its just opposite or contrary,
as from Mirth to Mourning, etc.

CHAP. IV. Of the Disposing of Pictures and Paintings.
I. ANtique works, or Grotesco, may become a wall, the borders and freezes of
other works; but if there be any draughts in figures of men and women to the
life upon the wall, they will be best of black and white; or of one color
heightened: if they be naked, let them be as large as the place will afford; if
of Marbles, Columns, Aquaeducts, Arches, Ruins, Cataracts, let them be bold,
high, and of large proportion.

II. Let the best pieces be placed to be seen with single lights, for so the
shadows fall natural, being always fitted to answer one light; and the more
under or below the light the better, especially in men's faces and large pieces.

III. Let the Porch or entrance into the house, be set out with Rustic
figures, and things rural.

IV. Let the Hall be adorned with Shepherds, Peasants, Milk-maids, Neat-heards,
Flocks of Sheep and the like, in their respective places and proper attendants;
as also Fouls, Fish, and the like.

V. Let the Staircase be set off with some admirable monument or building,
either new or ruinous, to be seen and observed at a view passing up: and let
the Ceiling over the top-stair be put with figures fore-shortened looking
downwards out of Clouds, with Garlands and Cornucopia's.

VI. Let Landskips, Hunting, Fishing, Fouling, Histories and Antiquities be put
in the Great Chamber.

VII. In the Dining Room let be placed the pictures of the King and Queen; or
their Coat of Arms; forbearing to put any other Pictures of the life, as not
being worthy to be their Companions; unless at the lower end, two or three of
the chief nobility, as attendants of their Royal persons: for want hereof you
may put in place, some few of the nearest blood.

VIII. In the inward or withdrawing chambers, put other draughts of the life,
of persons of Honor, intimate or special friends, and acquaintance, or of
Artists only.

IX. In Banqueting-rooms, put cheerful and merry Paintings, as of Bacchus,
Centaures, Satyrs, Sirens, and the like, but forbearing all obscene Pictures.

X. Histories, grave stories, and the best works become Galleries; where any
one may walk, and exercise their senses, in viewing, examining, delighting,
judging and censuring.

XI. In Summer-houses and Stone-walks, put Castles, Churches, or some fair
building: In Tarraces, put Boscage, and wild works: Upon Chimney-pieces, put
only Landskips, for they chiefly adorn.

XII. And in the Bedchamber, put your own, your wives and childrens pictures;
as only becoming the most private Room, and your Modesty: lest (if your wife be
a beauty) some wanton and libidinous guest should gaze too long on them, and
commend the work for her sake.

XIII. In hanging of your Pictures; if they hang high above reach, let them
bend somewhat forward at the top; because otherwise it is observed that the
visual beams of the Eye, extending to the top of the Picture, appear further
off, than those at the foot.

CHAP. V. Of Painting in General.
I. THe Art of Painting (which is the imitation of nature) consists in three
things, to wit, Design, Proportion and Color: all which are expressed in three
sorts of Painting, viz. Landscape, History, and Life.

II. Landscape or perspective, wonderfully respects freedom and liberty, to draw
even what you please. History respects proportion and figure: Life respects
color: In each of which there is a necessary dependency of all the other.

III. The work of the Painter is to express the exact imitation of natural
things; wherein you are to observe the excellencies and beauties of the piece,
but to refuse its vices.

For a piece of Painting may in some part want Dililigence, Boldness, Subilety,
Grace, Magnificence, etc. while it is sufficiently in other parts excellent;
and therefore you are not so much to imitate Ornaments, as to express the
inward power and strength.

IV. In Imitation, always be sure to follow the examples and patterns of the
best masters; lest evil presidents beget in you an evil habit.

V. The force of Imitation resides in the fancy or imagination, where we
conceive (what we have seen) the form or Idaea of that, or those things which
we would represent in lines and colors.

VI. This Fancy or Imagination is strengthened, by lodging therein all variety
of visible rarities; as 1. forms made by light and darkness; such as are to be
seen in Summer in the clouds, near Sunsetting (which vanish before they can be
imitated:) 2. Forms made by proximity or distance of place, such as are Trees,
Woods, Buildings, appearing perfect being near, or confused in their parts
being far off: 3. Forms of dreams, of which (whether sleeping or waking) the
fancy must be fully possessed.

VII. Where Design is required; you must fancy every circumstance of the matter
in hand, that in an instant, with a nimble hand, you may depict the same with
liveliness and Grace.

Slow performance causes a perturbation in the fancy, cooling of the mind, and
destruction of that passion which should carry the work on: but quickness and
diligence brings forth things even excellent indeed: Care, Industry and
Exercise are the props, supporters and upholders of Art.

VIII. Be sure you dwell not too long upon designing: alter not what is well,
left for want of exquisite judgment you make it worse: and if in designing you
want that ability to follow the quickness of fancy, submit to a willing
negligence; a careless operation adds sometimes such a singular grace, as by
too much curiosity would have been totally lost; then by reviewing what is
done, make a regular connection of all the Idaea's conceived in your mind.

IX. With Apelles amend those things which others justly find fault with; the
reprehensions of an Artist are as demonstrative rules of experience; and weigh
every ones opinion for the advancement of Art.

X. Lastly, be sure your Piece be of a good Design, History, or Life; that the
parts be well disposed; the Characters of Persons, proper; the form
magnificent; the color lively; and the spirit bold: that it may appear to be
the work of a nimble fancy, ready memory, clear judgment, and large experience.

CHAP. VI. Of Colors.
I. OKer is a good color, and much in use for shadows, in pictures of the
life, both for hair and drapery: In Landskips it is used for Rocks and high
ways.

II. Pink the fairest, with blew, makes the fastest greens for Landscape and
Drapery.

Sap green and green bise are good in their kind; but the first is so
transparent and thin, the other of so course and gross body, that in many
things they will be useless, especially where a beautiful green (made of Pink
and bise mixed with Indico) is required.

III. Vmber is a greasy foul color; but being calcined and ground, it works
sharp and neat.

IV. Spanish Brown is exceeding course and full of gravel; being prepared, it
is used for a mixture made of red lead mixed with a little Umber, which makes
the same color.

V. Collens earth or Terra Lemnia, it is used to close up the last and deepest
touches, in the shadows of pictures of the life, and in Landskips; use it when
new ground.

VI. Cherry-stone black, is very good for drapery and black apparel: mixed with
Indico, it is excellent for Satin; it appears more beautiful or shining if
mixed with a little white: if deepened with Ivory black, in hard reflections,
and strong deep touches, it is wonderful fair.

VII. Ivory black, it serves for a deep black, but is not easy to work without
it be well tempered with Sugarcandy, to prevent peeling.

VIII. Red lead well washed, is a glorious color, for those pieces which
require an exquisite redness.

IX. Indian Lake, is the dearest and most beautiful of all reds; it is to be
ground as white lead, and mixed with a little white Sugar Candy and fair water,
till the Color and Sugar Candy be thoroughly dissolved, which being dry will
lie very fast, without danger of cracking or peeling.

CHAP. VII. Of making Original Colors.
I. TO make White Lead.

Put into an earthen pot several plates of fine lead, cover them with
white wind vinegar, covering the top of the pot close with clay, bury it in a
Cellar for seven or eight weeks, and you will have good white lead upon the
plates, which wipe of.

II. To make Verdigriese.

This is made by hanging plates of Copper over the fumes of Aqua fortis or
spirit of Nitre: or by dipping them in the same, or in Vinegar.

III. To make an Emerald Color.

Take Verdigriese in fine powder, which temper with Varnish, and lay it upon a
ground of liquid silver burnished, and you have a fair Emerald.

IV. To make a Ruby Color.

Mix the same with Florence lake, and you shall have a very fair Ruby color.

V. To make a Saphyre Color.

The same, viz. Verdigriese mixed with Vltramarin^, makes a glorious Saphyre.

VI. To make a Crimson Velvet.

Take Turnsoil and mix it with Indico lake (well ground with Gum and
Sugar Candy) lay it full, and when it is wet, wipe away the color with a dry
pensil, where you would have the heightening of the Crimson velvet appear, and
the stronger reflections will be well expressed.

VII. To make a silver black.

Take fine Silver filings or plates, which dissolve in spirit of Nitre or Aqua
fortis, and evaporate to dryness, or precipitate with Oleo Sulphuris or Salt
water, and you shall have a snow white precipitate, which mixed with water makes
the best black in the world, to dye all manner of Hair, Horns, Bones, Wood,
Metals, etc.

VIII. To make a Murry or Amethyst.

It is make of Indian Lake ground with Gum Arabic water only.

IX. To make a Red or Ruby for Limning.

It is made of Indian lake (which breaks off a scarlet color) ground with Gum
water and Sugar Candy.

X. To make Azure blew, or Saphyre.

It is made of Vltramarine of Venice (which is best) the best blew smalt, or
blew bise, ground with Gum water only: you may make good shadowing blews of
Indico, Flory and Litmoss, all which need no washing, nor Litmoss no grinding,
but only infused in a Lixivium of Soap-ashes.

XI. To make a green or Emerald.

It is made of Cedar green: in place whereof, take tripal to draw with: Pink is
good also for Landskips, mixed with Bise ashes; as also with Masticot and
Ceruse.

XII. To make a yellow or Topaz.

It is made of Masticot which is the best, of which there is diverse sorts, viz.
deeper and paler: yellow Oker also for want of better may do. Shadow Masticot
with yellow oker; deepen it with Oker de rouse.

XIII. To make Vltramarine.

Take the deepest colored Lapis Lazuli (having few veins of Gold upon it) heat
it red hot in a Crucible close covered, then quench it in Urine, Vinegar or
water, in a leaded earthen pot dry it well, then with a pair of pinsers nip off
the hard, gray, and whitish part from it, and grind the remainder with honied
water as fine as may be, then dry it for use. The honied water is made of water
a quart, boiled with honey two spoonfuls.

CHAP. VIII. Of Limning to the life in general.
I. LEt the table be prepared very exact by the fifth rule of the twenty third
Chapter of the second Book.

II. Let the ground be of flesh color, tempering it according to the
complexion to be painted.

III. If it be a fair complexion, mix a good quantity of red and white Lead
together somewhat thick.

IV. If swarthy or brown, mix with the former a little fine Masticot or English
Oker, or both, always observing that your ground be fairer than the complexion
painted.

For fairness may be shadowed or darkened at pleasure; but if it be sad or
dark, you can never heighten it, for in Limning the picture is always wrought
down to its exact color.

V. Lay the ground upon the card or tablet, with a larger pencil than ordinary,
free from spots, scratches of the pencil, or dust, and as even as possible may
be; and let the color be rather thin and waterish than too thick, doing it
very quick and nimbly with two or three dashes of the pencil.

VI. This done prepare your shadows in order, by the seventh rule of the four
and twentieth Chapter of the second Book.

VII. Then draw the out-lines of the face with lake and white mingled together
very fine; so that if you should mistake in your first draught, you may with a
strong stroke draw it true, the other line by reason of its faintness being no
hinderance.

These lines must be truly drawn, sharp and neat, with the greatest exactness
imaginable.

VIII. Observe the most remarkable and deep shadows, to keep in memory when you
go over them with more exactness; drawing out also (if you so please) the shape
of that part of the body next adjoining to the face, viz. a little beneath the
shoulders, with a strong and dark color, which in case of mistake in
proportion may easily be altered.

IX. The first fitting is to dead color the face: the second sitting is the
exact coloring and observation of the several shadows, graces, beauties or
deformities, as they are in nature: the third sitting is in making smooth what
was before rough and rude; clothing what was naked, and giving strong and
deepning touches to every respective shadow.

X. The dead color is thus made.

Take of the aforesaid ground (at the third or fourth Section of this Chapter)
and mix it with fine red lead, tempering it exactly to a dead color of the
cheeks and lips, having a great care, that you make it not too deep; which if
light, you may do at pleasure.

XI. The face is first begun to be colored in the reds of the cheeks and lips,
and somewhat strongly in the bottom of the chin (if beardless) also over,
under, and about the eyes with a faint redness.

XII. The ear is most commonly reddish, as also sometimes the roots of the hair.

XIII. The ground being washed over with this reddish or dead color, let the
shadows be as well bold and strong, as exact and curious.

A good picture, if but dead colored only, and seeming near hand very rough,
uneven and unpleasant, yet being boldly and strongly done and shadowed, will
appear very smooth, delicate, and neat if but viewed at a distance from the
eye. Therefore curiosity and neatness of Color, is not so much to be regarded,
as bold, lofty, and strong expressing what is seen in the life.

XIV. The next thing to be done is the use of the faint blews, about the
corners and balls of the eyes and temples, which you must work out exceeding
sweetly, and faint by degrees.

XV. Always be sure to make the hard shadows fall in the dark side of the
face, under the nose, chin, and eyebrows, as the light falls, with somewhat
strong touches.

XVI. The light shadows being done and smoothed, work the hair into such forms,
curlings, and dispositions as best adorn the piece.

First draw it with colors, neatly and to the life; then wash it roughly as
the rest; and the next time perfect it: filling up the empty places with
color, and the partings thereof with blew.

XVII. And ever remember, when you would have your colors or shadows deep,
strong, and bold; that you do them by degrees, beginning faintly, and then
increasing the same.

XVIII. First, use the former colors in the same places again, driving and
sweetning them into one another, that no part may look uneven, or with an edge,
or patch of color, but altogether equally mixed and dispersed, lying soft and
smooth, like smoke or vapors.

XIX. Secondly, This work being done for an hour or two, lay the ground for
behind the picture of blew, or crimson, like to a satin or velvet curtain.

XX. If blew, let it be done with Bise well tempered in a shell: First draw the
out lines with the same color, with a small pencil: then with a thin and
waterish blew wash over the whole ground with a larger pencil: lastly, with
thicker color cover the same which you before washed, swiftly, that it dry not
before all be covered, so will it lie smooth and even.

XXI. If Crimson, work with Indian lake, in those places where the strong
lights, and high reflections fall: let the light be done with thin and waterish
lake; the deepning and strong shadows, close by the light with thicker color:
this done, the picture will be much changed; the beauty of these grounds will
much darken and dead it.

XXII. Let the apparel with suitable colors be done only flat with heightning
or deepning; and then go over the face again, reducing the shadows to
smoothness and neatness with a sharp and curious pencil: drawing the eyes; the
lines of the eyelids; redness of the nostrils; shadow of the ears; deepness of
the eyebrows, and those other more remarkable marks of the face: so sweetning
the out-lines of the face (by darkning the ground, above from the light side,
and below on the dark side) that when the work is done, the ground may stand as
it were at a distance from the face behind; and the face may seem to stand off
forward from the ground.

XXIII. Then go over the hair, making it light or deep by the life: and in
Apparel make the several folds and shadows, and what else is to be imitated, as
it is in the life it self; lightning the lines with the purest white, a little
yellow, and some blew; and deepning with Ivory black; and heightning with black
mixed with a little lake or Indico.

XXIV. This done, and the person gone, your work being yet rough, by your self
polish it, and strive to make it smooth and pleasant, filling up the empty
places, and sweetning the shadows, which yet lie uneven and hard.

XXV. The Apparel, hair, and ground being finished, now give strong touches for
the rounding of the face; and observe whatsoever may conduce to likeness and
resemblance, as moles, smilings, or glancings of the eyes, motion of the mouth,
etc. for which purpose, you may find an occasion of discourse, or cause the
person to be in action, and to look merrily and cheerfully.

XXVI. Lastly conclude, that the eye gives the life; the nose the favor; the
mouth the likeness; and the chin the grace.

XXVII. In fair colored drapery, if the lightning be done with fine shell
gold, it will add a most wonderful luster, and be a singular ornament to your
work; and if this gold be mixed with the very ground it self, the apparel will
appear much the fairer.

CHAP. IX. Of Limning Landscape.
I. TO make the Tablet for Landscape.

Take a piece of Vellom, and share it thin upon a frame, fastening it with past
or glue, and pasting it upon a board; and this manner of tablets are altogether
used in Italy for Landscape, and History.

II. If you draw a Land-skip from the life, take your station from the rise of
ground, or top of an hill, where you shall have a large Horizon, marking your
tablet into three divisions downwards, from the top to the bottom: then your
face being directly opposed to the midst of the finitor, keeping your body
fixed, depict what is directly before your eyes, upon your tablet, on your
middle division, then turning your head (not your body) to the right hand,
depict what is there to be seen: adjoining it to the former. In like manner
doing by that which is to be seen on the left hand, your Landscape will be
completed.

III. Make every thing exact, not only in respect of distance, proportion and
color; but also in respect of form, as if there be Hills, Dales, Rocks,
Mountains, Cataracts, Ruins, Aquaeducts, Towns, Cities, Castles,
Fortifications, or whatsoever else may present it self to view; making always a
fair sky, to be seen afar off; letting your light always descend from the left
hand to the right.

IV. In beginning your work, first begin with a large sky; and if there be any
shining or reflection of the Sun, beware you mix no red lead in the purple of
the sky, or clouds, but only with lake and white: the yellow and whitish beams
of Sol work with Masticot and white.

V. Then with a fresh or clean pencil finish the bluish sky, and clouds, with
smalt only: at the first working, dead all the work over, with colors suitable
to the Air, green meadows, trees, and ground, laying them somewhat smooth, not
very curiously, but slightly and hastily; make a large sky, which work down in
the Horizon, faintly, but fair; and drawing nearer to the earth, let the remote
mountains appear sweet and misty, almost indistinguishable, joining with the
clouds, and as it were lost in the Air.

VI. The next ground color downwards must increase in magnitude of reason, as
nearer the eyes, somewhat bluish or Seagreen: but drawing toward the first
ground, let them decline into a reddish or popinjay green: the last ground
color, must be nearest the color of the earth, viz. a dark yellow, brown and
green; with which, or some color near it, you must make your first trees;
making them, as they come near in distance, to increase proportionably in
color and magnitude, with great judgment: the leaves flowing and falling one
with another, some apparent, others lost in shadow.

VII. Let your Landscape lie low, and as it were under the eye (which is most
graceful and natural) with a large and full sky not rising high, and lifting
it self into the top of the piece, as some have done.

VIII. Be sure to make your shadows fall all one way, viz. to make light
against darkness, and darkness against light; thereby extending the prospect,
and making it to show as afar off; by losing its force and vigor, by the
remoteness from the eye.

IX. In touching the trees, boughs, and branches, put all the dark shadows
first, raising the lighter leaves above the darker, by adding Masticot to the
dark green, which may be made with Bise, Pink and Indico: the uppermost of all,
expressed last of all, by lightly touching the exterior edges of some of the
former leaves, with a little green, Masticot, and white: the darkest shadows
you may set off with sap green and Indico.

X. Trees and their leaves, Rivers, and Mountains far distant, you must strive
to express with a certain real softness and delicateness: in making Cataracts,
great falls of water, and rocks, you must first lay a full ground near the
color, then with a stronger in the dark places, and slight heightning in the
light; remarking all disproportions, cracks, ruptures and various
representations of infinitely differing matters; the manner whereof is
abundantly expressed, in almost every Land-skip.

CHAP. X. Of the various Forms or Degrees of Coloring.
I. THere are four various forms or degrees of coloring, viz. 1. Of Infants,
or Children: 2. Of Virgins or fair Women: 3. Naked bodies: 5. Old or aged
bodies.

II. Infants or young children are to be painted of a soft and delicate
complexion; the skin and ears of a ruddy and pleasant color, almost
transparent; which may be done with white lead, lake, and a little red lead;
shadowing it thin, faint, and soft; letting the Cheeks, Lips, Chin, Fingers,
Knees and Toes be more ruddy than other parts; making all their Linen very
fine, thin, and transparent, or perspicuous, with strong touches in the
thickest folds.

III. Virgins and fair Women are as curiously to be expressed as the former,
but their Muscles are to be more apparent, their shape more perfect; and their
shadows to be of a whitish yellow, bluish, and in some places almost purple;
but the most perfect and exquisite direction is the life, which ought rather to
be followed than any thing delivered by rule.

IV. Naked bodies are to be painted strong, lively, and accurate; exactly
matching the respective pairs of Muscles and Nerves, fixing each Artery in its
due and proper place, giving each limb its proper motion form and situation,
with its true and natural color; all which to do well may be the study and
practice of almost ones whole life.

V. Old or aged Bodies ought to be eminent for exact and curious shadows, which
may be made of Pink, lake, and Ivory black, which make notable shadows, in
appearance like the wrinkles and furrows of the face and hand in extreme old
age: let the eyes be dark, the aspect melancholy, the hair white (or else the
pate bald) and all the remarks of Antiquity or age be very apparent and
formidable.

VI. But notwithstanding all the aforegoing rules, the posture or form of
standing, and being either of the whole body, or any of its parts, ought
diligently to be observed, that the life may be imitated, in which, it only
lies in the breast and judgment of the Painter to set it off with such various
colors, as may best bent the respective complexion and accidental shadows of
each accidental position or posture, which are sometimes more pale, sometimes
more ruddy; sometimes more faint, sometimes more lively.

CHAP. XI. Of Frescoe, or Painting of Walls.
I. IN Painting upon Walls, to make it endure the weather, you must grind your
colors with Lime water, Milk, or Whey, mixed in size coloring pots.

II. The paste or plaster must be made of well washed lime, mixed with fine
powder of old rubbish stones: the lime must be so often washed, till all its
salt is obstracted; and all your work must be done, in clear and dry weather.

III. To make the work endure, strike into the wall stumps of headed nails,
about five or six inches asunder, and by this means you may preserve the
plaster from peeling.

IV. Then with this paste, plaster the wall, a pretty thickness, letting it
dry: being dry, plaster it over again, about the thickness of half a barley
corn, very fine and smooth, then your colors being ready prepared, work this
last plaistering over, whilst it is wet, so will your Painting unite and join
fast to the plaster, and dry together as a perfect compost.

V. In painting be nimble and free, let your work be bold and strong, but be
sure to be exact, for there can be no alteration after the first painting; and
therefore heighten your paint enough at first, you may deepen at pleasure.

VI. All earthy colors are best, as the Okers, Spanish white, Spanish brown,
Terrae Vert, and the like; mineral colors are naught.

VII. Lastly, let your pencils and brushes be long and soft, otherwise your
work will not be smooth; let your colors be full, and flow freely from the
pencil or brush; and let your design be perfect at first; for in this, there is
no after alteration to be made.

CHAP. XII. How the Ancients depicted their Gods, and first of Saturn.
IN Chap. 18. and 19. lib. 1. and chap. 12. and 13. lib. 3: we have something
concisely handled this matter; but because we have been there exceeding brief,
and that what we have there delivered is too strict for ordinary use or
practice, being indeed only the preparative or foundation for a larger work; we
intend here in this fourth part to prosecute the same, in such sort, as to
comprehend the various ways of the ancients in depicting their Idols, according
to the customs of those several nations, where they were adored and worshipped,
and that from most of the ancient, chiefest and best approved Authors now
extant.

I. The ancient Romans figured Saturn like an old man, with a Sithe or hook in
his hand, by some signifying time, as his name Chronos also intimates.

II. They also figured him in the shape of a very aged man, as one who began
with the beginning of the world, holding in his hand a child, which by piece
meals he seems greedily to devour.

By this is signified the revenge he took, for being expulsed Heaven by his own
children; of which those which escaped his fury, were only four, Jupiter, Juno,
Plute, and Neptune; by which is shadowed forth the four Elements, Fire, Air,
Earth, and Water, which are not perishable by the all cutting sickle of
devouring time.

III. Martianus Capella depicts him an old man, holding in his right hand a
Serpent, with the end of its tail in its mouth, turning round with a very flow
pace, his temples girt with a green wreath, and the hair of his head and beard
milk white.

The wreath on his head shows the Spring time; his snowy hair and beard, the
approach of churlish winter; the flowness of the Serpents motion, the sluggish
revolution of that Planet.

IV. Macrobius describes him with a Lions head, a Dogs head, and a Wolfs head.

By the Lions head is signified the time present, (which is always strongest,
for that which is, must needs be more powerful than that which is not:) by the
dogs head, the time to come, (which always fawns on us, and by whose alluring
delights we are drawn on to vain and uncertain hopes:) and by the wolfs head,
time past, (which greedily devoureth what ever it finds, leaving no memory
thereof behind.

V. Maerobius also says that among the rest of his descriptions, his feet are
tied together with threads of Wool.

By which is showed, that God does nothing in haste, nor speedily castigates
the iniquities of man, but proceeds slowly and unwillingly, to give them time
and leisure to amend.

VI. Eusebius says, that Astarte (the daughter of Coelum, wife and sister of
Saturn) did place also upon his head two wings, demonstrating by the one, the
excellency and perfection of the mind; by the other, the force of sense and
understanding.

The Platonicks understand by Saturn the mind, and its inward contemplation of
things celestial, and therefore called the time in which he lived, the golden
Age, it being replete with quietness, concord, and true content.

CHAP. XIII. How the Ancients depicted Jupiter.
I. ORpheus describes him with golden locks, having on his temples peeping
forth, two golden horns, his eyes shining, his breast large and fair, having on
his shoulders, wings.

By the golden locks is signified the Firmament, and its glorious army of
tralucent Stars: by his two horns, the East and West: by his eyes, the Sun and
Moon: by his breast, the spacious ambulation of the air; and by his wings the
fury of the winds.

II. Porphyrius and Suida depicture the Image of Jupiter sitting upon a firm
and immovable seat; the upper parts naked and uncloathed, the lower parts
covered and invested; in his left hand a Scepter; in his right hand a great
Eagle, joined with the figure of Victoria.

This Image was erected in Piraeus, a stately and magnificent gate of Athens:
by the seat is showed the permanency of Gods power: the naked parts show that
the compassion of the Divine power is always manifest to those of an
understanding Spirit: the lower parts covered, show that while we wallow in the
world, and as it were rocked asleep with the illecebrous blandishments thereof,
that the divine knowledge is hid and obscured from us: by the Scepter is
signified his rule over all things: by the Eagle and Victoria how all things
stand in vassalage and subjection to the all commanding power.

III. Martianus depictures him with a regal crown, adorned with most precious
and glittering stones; over his shoulders, a thin vail (made by Pallas own
hands) all white, in which is inserted diverse small pieces of glass
representing the most resplendent Stars; in his right hand he holds two
balls, the one all of gold, the other half gold, half Silver; in the other hand
an Ivory Harp with nine strings, sitting on a foot-cloth, wrought with strange
works, and Peacocks feathers; and near his side lies a tridental gold embossed
mass.

IV. Plutarch says that in Crete, he had wholly humane shape and proportion,
but without ears.

By that was signified that Superiors and Judges ought not to be carried away
by prejudice nor persuasion, but stand firm, steadfast and upright to all
without partiality.

V. Contrariwise the Lacedaemonians framed his picture with four ears.

By that they signified that God hears and understands all things; and that
Princes and Judges ought to hear all informations, before they deliver
definitive sentence or judgment.

VI. Pausanias says that in the temple of Minerva (among the Argives) the
statue of Jupiter was made with three eyes; two of them in their right places;
the other in the middle of his forehead.

By which is signified his three Kingdoms, the one Heaven; the other earth; the
last Sea.

VII. With the Eleans (a people of Greece) the Statue of Jove was compacted of
Gold and Ivory, empaled with a Coronet of Olive leaves; in his right hand the
Image of Victoria; in his left a Scepter, on the top of which was mounted the
portraicture of an Eagle, upon a seat of Gold, enchased with the forms of many
unknown birds and fishes, upheld and supported by four Images of Victoria.

VIII. In Caria (a place of the lesser Asia) the Statue of Jupiter was made
holding in one of his hands a pole axe.

The reason of this was, as Plutarch says, from Hercules, who overthrowing
Hippolyta the Amazonian Queen, took it from her, and gave it to Omphale his
wife a Lydian. The Platonists understand by Jupiter, the soul of the world; and
that divine spirit, through whose Almighty Power, every thing receives its
being and preservation.

CHAP. XIV. How the Ancients depicted Mars.
I. MAcrobius says that the Pictures of Mars were adorned and beautified with
the Sunbeams, in as lively a manner as could be devised; with an Aspect
fierce, terrible, and wrathful, hollow red eyes, quick in their motion, face
all hairy with long curled locks on his head, depending even to his shoulders
of a coal black color, standing with a spear in the one hand, and a whip in
the other.

II. He is also sometimes depicted on horseback and sometimes in a Chariot,
drawn with horses called Fear and Horror: some say the Chariot was drawn with
two men, which were called Fury and Violence.

III. Statius says he wore on his head a helmet most bright and shining, so
fiery as it seemed, there issued flashes of lightning; a breast plate of Gold,
insculp'd with fierce and ugly Monsters; his shield depainted all over with
blood, enchased with deformed beasts, with a spear and whip in his hands, drawn
in a Chariot with two horses, Fury and Violence, driven with two churlish
coach-men, Wrath and Destruction.

IV. Isidorus says that the Picture of Mars was depainted with a naked breast.

By which is signified that men ought not to be timorous in war, but valiantly
and boldly expose themselves to hazards and dangers.

V. Statius says that the house of Mars was built in an obscure corner of
Thracia, made of rusty, black Iron; the Porters which kept the gates were
Horror and Madness; within the house inhabited Fury, Wrath, Impiety, Fear,
Treason and Violence, whose governess was Discord, seated in a regal throne,
holding in one hand a bright sword, in the other a basin full of humane blood.

VI. Ariosto, describing the Court of Mars says, that in every part and corner
of the same were heard most strange Echoes, fearful shrieks, threatenings, and
dismal cries; in the midst of this palace was the Image of Virtue, looking sad
and pensive, full of sorrow, discontent and melancholy, leaning her head on her
arm: hard by her was seated in a chair Fury in triumph: not far from her sat
Death, with a bloody stern countenance, offering upon an Altar in men's skulls,
humane blood, consecrated with coals of fire, fetched from many Cities and
Towns, burnt and ruinated by the tyranny of War.

CHAP. XV. How the Ancients depicted Phoebus or Sol.
I. MAcrobius says that in Assyria was found the Statue of Apollo, Phoebus or
Sol, the father of AEsculapius, in the form of a young man, and beardless,
polished with Gold, who stretching out his Arms, held in his right hand a
Coachmans whip; and in his left a thunderbolt with some ears of Corn.

The Tyrant of Syracuse, Dionysius, with fury pulled off the beard from the
figure of Aesculapius, saying it was very incongruous that the father should be
beardless, and the son have one so exceeding long.

II. Eusebius says that in Egypt the Image of Sol was set in a ship, carried
up, and supported by a Crocodile: and that they (before letters were invented)
framed the shape of the Sun, by a Scepter, in the top of which was dexterously
engraven an eye.

The Scepter signified Government: the eye, the power which over-sees and
beholds all things.

III. The Lacedaemonians depicted Apollo with four ears, and as many hands.

By which was signified the judgment and prudence of God, being swift and ready
to hear, but slow to speak, and from thence grew that proverb among the
Grecians.

IV. Herod^tus reports that the Phoenicians had the Statue of the Sun made in
black stone, large and spacious at bottom, but sharp and narrow at top, which
they boasted to have had from Heaven.

V. Lactantius says that in Persia, Phoebus or Apollo was their chiefest God,
and was thus described; he had the head of a Lion habited according to the
Persian custom, wearing on his head such ornaments as the women of Persia used,
holding by main force a white Cow by the horns.

The head of the Lion shows the Suns Dominion in the sign Leo; the Cow shows
the Moon, whose exaitation is Taurus: and his forceable holding, the Moons
Eclipse which she cannot avoid.

VI. Pausanias tells that in Patra a City of Achaia, a metalline Statue of
Apollo was found in the proportion of an Ox or Cow.

VII. Lucianus says that the Assyrians shaped him with a long beard (showing
his perfection;) upon his breast a shield; in his right hand a spear, in the
top of which was Victoria; in his left hand Anthos, or the Sun flower: this
body was covered with a vestment, upon which was painted the head of Medusa,
from which dangled downwards many swarms of snakes; on the one side of him
Eagles flying, on the other side a lively Nymph.

VIII. The Egyptians composed the statue of the Sun in the shape of a man, with
his head half shaven.

By the head half shaven, is signified that though his beauty or shining may be
clouded for a time, yet that he will return and beautify the same with his
pristin brightness; as the growing of the hairs (which signify his beams) to
their full extent and perfection again may denote.

IX. Martianus thus describes him; upon his head (says he) he wears a royal
and gorgeous Crown, inchased with multitudes of precious Gems; three of which
beautify his forehead; six his temples; and three other the hindermost part
of the Crown: his hair hanging down in tresses, looks like refined Gold, and
his Countenance wholly like flame: his vestment is thin, subtle, and wrought
with fine purple and gold; in his right hand he holds a bright shield; and in
his left a flaming firebrand: on his feet he has two wings, beset with fiery
Carbuncles.

X. Eusibius writes that in Elephantinopolis (a City in Egypt) the Image of
Apollo was framed to the due likeness of a man throughout the body, save only,
that he had the head of a Ram, with young and small horns, and his aspect of a
Cerulean and bluish green, not unlike to that of the Sea.

The head of the Ram signifies the Sun's exaltation in the sign Aries; and the
young horns the change or New of the Moon, made by her conjunction with the
Sun, in which she looks bluish.

There might you see with greatest skill intexed,
The portraicture of Phoebus lively drawn;
And his fair Sisters shape thereto annexed,
Whose shining parts seemed shadowed over with lawn.
And though with equal art both were explained,
And workmens care gave each of them their due,
Yet to the view great difference remained,
In habit, shape, aspect, and in their hue.
For one of them must give the day his light:
And the other reign Commandress of the night.
CHAP. XVI. How the Ancients depicted Venus.
I. HEr Statue is framed in the shape of a most beautiful and young woman,
standing upright in a huge shell of fish, drawn by two other most ugly and
strange Fishes, as Ovid at large notes.

II. Pausanias says she is drawn in a Coach, through the airy passages, with
two white Doves (as Apuleius also affirms) which are called the birds of
Venus.

III. Horace and Virgil affirm that the Chariot of Venus is drawn by two white
Swans, of which Statius also makes mention, who says that those birds are
most mild, innocent, and harmless, and therefore given unto Venus.

IV. Praxitiles an excellent engraver in the Island of Guidos, made her Image
naked, and without clothes, as also did the Grecians.

By which was signified that all luxurious and licentious people, were by their
inordinate lusts, like beasts deprived of sense, and left as it were naked and
despoyled of reason, and understanding; and oftentimes also stripped thereby of
their riches, goods and estates.

V. Lactantius says that the Lacedaemonians framed and composed the Image of
Venus all armed like a Warrior, holding in one hand a spear, in the other a
shield or target.

And this was by reason of a certain Victory which the women of that place got
over their enemies, the people of Messenia, which success they supposed to have
proceeded from the power and assistance of Venus, as inspiring these women's
hearts with courage, stoutness and resolution.

CHAP. XVII. How the Ancients depicted Mercury.
I. THe Ancients described him in the shape of a young man without a beard,
with two small wings fixed behind his shoulders and ears, his body almost all
naked, save that from his shoulders depended a thin vail, which winded and
compassed about all his body; in his right hand he held a golden purse, and in
his left a Caduceus, or snaky staff, to wit, a slender white wand, about which
two Serpents do annodate and entwine themselves, whose heads meet together just
at the top, as their tails do at the lower end.

This resemblance was called Concordia or Signum Pacis; upon which it came to
pass, that Ambassadors, and great men in matters of State, carried always in
their hand such a like staff, and were called Caduceators.

II. Apuleius writes that Mercury was a very youth, having very short hair on
his head of an Amber color, and curled, having for a vestment only a subtle
and thin vail made of Purple Silk.

III. Martianus Capella describes him young, yet of a strong and well composed
body, with certain young hairs of a yellowish color sprouting out of his chin.

IV. Pausanias says that in a Province of Corinth, he was depicted like a
young man carrying a ram upon his shoulders: and that a Statue (brought from
Arcadia unto Rome) erected in the temple of Jupiter Olympicus, had on its head
a helmet of engraven steel; and over his shoulder, a coat, who held under his
arm the Image of a ram.

V. Among some of the Egyptians his Image was framed with a head like a dogs,
holding in his right hand a Caduceus or snaky wand; shaking with his left a
green bough of a Palm.

By the head of the dog was understood subtilty and craftiness (no beast being
so subtle as a dog;) by the snaky wand the power of wisdom and Eloquence in
producing of peace, signified by the green palm.

VI. By some he was depicted in the similitude of a very aged man, his head
almost bald, saving that on the sides there remained some few hairs, short and
curled; his look grim, severe and sour; his complexion of a tawny, ancient hue;
his upper garment, of a Lions skin; in his right hand a huge pole-ax, in his
left hand an Irow b^w; at his back hanging a Quiver of steel-headed arrows: to
the end of his tongue were fastened many small chains of Gold, at whose ends
were tied multitudes of all sorts of men, which he seemed to draw unto him;
looking always backward, to behold the innumerable troops of people following
him.

By this description is signified the all-powerful and attractive virtue of
Eloquence; which by his age is understood to be found only in old, wise and
experienced men, as being in them more mature and perfect, than in those of
younger years, of which Homer speaks at large in his Commendation and Praise of
Nestor: from whose mouth (says he) plentifully rolled forth most pleasant and
dulcid streams; whose pen distilled crystalline drops of delicious sweetness;
whose works and fruits so completely adorned with golden sentences, asswageth
the malice of time, and mitigateth and allayeth the spite of forgetfulness,
that his perpetuity is engraven in the brass leaved books of eternal memory,
never to be blotted out.

CHAP. XVIII. How the Ancients depicted Diana or Luna.
I. DIana, Cynthia, Lucina, or Luna was according to Propertius depicted, in
the likeness of a young beautiful virgin; having on either side of her forehead
two small glistering horns, newly putting forth, drawn through the air in a
purple colored Coach, by two swift paced horses, the one of a sad Color, the
other of a white.

These two differing horses Boccace says, show that she has power both in the
day and night.

II. Claudianus says that her Chariot (...) drawn by two white Bullocks,
(which Image the Egyptians worshipped with great zeal and reverence) having one
of their flanks bespotted with diverse stars, and on their heads two such sharp
horns, as the Moon has in her chiefest wain.

III. Cicero describes her statue (which he brought out of a temple in Cicilia)
of a wonderful height, and large dimension, the whole body covered with a thin
vail, of a youthful aspect, holding in her right hand a lively burning torch,
and in her left an Ivory bow, with a Quiver of Silver headed arrows hanging at
her back.

IV. The Poets (who call her the goddess of hunting and imperial governess of
Woods and Groves) describe her in the habit of a young Nymph, with her bow
ready bent in her hand, and a Quiver of arrows hanging by her left side; a
swift paced Greyhound fast tied to her right side, with a collar about his
neck; and after her following troops of Sylvan Virgins, which are chaste, and
are called the Nymphs of Diana.

V. These Virgins and Votresses of the Goddess, we thus describe.

Scarce mounted Sol upon his glorious Car,
When over the lofty hills, and lowly plain,
Running apace, you might perceive afar
A Troop of Amazons to post amain.
But when they nearer came unto your view,
You might discern Diana and her Crew.
A careless crew of lively Nymphs, despising
The joyous pleasures and delights of love;
Wasting their days in rural sports devising:
Which know no other, nor will other prove.
Winged with desire to overtake the chase,
Away they flung with unresisted pace.
Their necks and purple veined arms are bare,
And from their Ivory shoulders to their knee,
A Silken vestment over their skin they wear,
Through which a piercing eye might chance to see.
Close to their bodies is the same engineed,
Bedecked with pleasing flowers their inserted.
Each in her hand a Silver bow does hold,
With well stored quivers hanging at their backs:
Whose arrows being spent they may be bold
To borrow freely of each others packs.
Thus are these nimble skipping Nymphs displayed,
That do attend that Goddess, Queen and Maid.
VI. In Arcadia says Pausanias was a statue of Diana, covered over with the
skin of a Hind, and from her shoulders hung a Quiver of Arrows; in the one hand
a burning Lamp, the other leaning upon the heads of two serpents, and before
her feet a hound.

VII. The Egyptians worshipped her under the name of Isis; and depictured her
covered with a black and sable vestment, in token that she her self gives no
light; holding in one hand a Cymbal, in the other an earthen vessel of water,
upon which a Servius says, many thought her to be the Genius of Egypt.

By the Cymbal is showed the murmurings, and roarings of Nilus, when it
overflows Egypt; and by the other vessel the nature of the Country, which is
moist and full of lakes, pools and rivers.

CHAP. XIX. How the Ancients depicted Janus.
I. JAnus is depicted with two faces; in the one of his hands is a long rod or
wand; in the other a Key.

The two faces of Janus signify time; the one being withered and hoary, shows
time past; the other youthful and beardless, time to come.

II. Pliny says that Numa King of the Romans, caused the statue of Janus to be
hewed out in such sort, that the fingers of his hands appeared to be three
hundred sixty five, to show that he was God of the year, whereupon they called
the first month of the year Januarius, from Janus their God.

Under the feet of Janus is oftentimes placed twelve Altars, showing thereby
the months of the year, or signs of the Zodiac, through which Sol makes his
revolution.

III. The Phoenicians, as Cicero and Macrobius report, framed his Image in the
form of a serpent, holding her tail in her mouth, and continually turning round.

IV. Some depicted Janus with four faces, (as were those statues which were
found in diverse places of Tuscany.

By the four faces was signified the four seasons of the year, Spring, Summer,
Autumn and Winter: which some think to be Venus, Ceres, Bacchus and Vulcan; and
sometimes the winds with Aeolus their Commander.

CHAP. XX. How the Ancients depicted Aurora.
I. HOmer describes her like a young Virgin, having her hair disheveled, and
hanging loose about her shoulders, being of the color of the purest gold,
sitting in a golden chair, with all her vestments of that hue and color.

II. Virgil says, that upon the instant time of the sable nights departure,
she comes with one of her hands full of Roses, Gilliflowers and Lillies, taken
out of a basket which she carries in the other hand, which she besprinkles on
the marble pavement of the lower Heavens, adorning the Sun with unspeakable
beauty.

III. Others describe her, holding in one hand a flaming torch, and drawn in a
gorgeous and star bespotted Chariot, by winged Pegasus; which favor she
obtained of Jupiter by many importunate requests, presently after the downfall
of Bellerophon.

IV. She is as it were the Herald and Messenger of Phoebus, who receives her
being from the virtue of his beams; and is no other but that rubicund and
Vermilion blush in Heaven, which Sol's first appearande works in the Orient,
and from thence descending beautifies our Hemisphere with such a resplendency.
See the tenth Section of the one and twentieth Chapter of the first Book.

CHAP. XXI. How the Ancients depicted Juno.
I. SHe was set forth by the Ancients like a middle aged woman, holding in one
hand a silver vessel, in the other a sharp Spear: and Homer says she was drawn
in a Chariot glistering with precious stones; whose wheels were Ebony, and
their nails fine silver, mounted upon a silver seat; and drawn with horses,
which were fastened with chains of gold.

II. She is oftentimes depicted with a Scepter in her hand, to show that she
has the bestowing of Governments, Authorities and Kingdoms.

III. Martianus depicts her (sitting in a chair under Jupiter) with a thin veil
over her head, with a Coronet upon it, inchased and adorned with many precious
Jewels; her inward vestment fine and glittering; over which depended a mantle
of a sad and darkish color, yet with a secret shining beauty; her shoes of an
obscure and sable color; in her right hand a thunderbolt; and in her other a
loud noised Cymbal.

IV. Pausanias says that in a temple in Corinth, her statue (made of Gold and
Ivory) was adorned with a glorious Crown, on which was insculped the pictures
of the Graces; with a Pomegranate in the one hand, with a Scepter (on the top
of which a Cuckoo) in the other: for that Jupiter, when he was first enamoured
of Juno, transformed himself into that bird.

Touching this story (and others of like kind) Pausanias says, that although
he did not believe such things to be true, nor any others, which are so written
of the Gods; yet says he, they are not altogether to be rejected, in that
there were no such things reported but that they were impleated and filled with
mysteries, and carried in themselves an inward meaning, and secret
understanding, the which no doubt some might by their writings have unshadowed,
if the tyranny of fore passed times had not destroyed and obliterated the same.

V. Tertullian writes that in Argos a City in Grecce, the statue of Juno was
covered all over with the boughs of a Vine, and underneath her feet lay the
skin of a Lion, which discovered the hatred and disdain she bare toward
Baccbus and Hercules, to whom (as the Poets say) she was stepmother.

VI. Some have painted her a middle aged woman, holding in one hand a poppey
flower or head; with a yoke or pair of fetters lying at her feet.

By the yoke was meant the band of marriage, which tyeth man and wife together;
and by the Poppey, fruitfulness or the innumerable issue of children, which are
brought forth into the world (signified by the roundness of the Poppey head,
and its numberless seeds therein contained.) From hence many suppose her to be
the goddess of marriage.

CHAP. XXII. How the Ancients depicted Ops or Tellus.
I. MArtianus says, that Ops (the wife of Saturn) is an old woman, of great
bigness, continually bringing forth children, with whom she is encompassed and
set round, going in a green vestment, with a veil over her body, spotted with
diverse colors, wrought with infinite curious knots, and set with all sorts of
Gems and Metals.

II. Varro (out of Boccace) thus describes her: she is crowned (says he) with
a Crown insculp'd with Castles and Towers; her apparel green, overshaded with
boughs; in the one hand a Scepter, in the other a Ball or Globe; and near to
her a Chariot of four wheels, drawn by four Lions.

By the Crown is signified the habitationsof the earth; by the greenness and
boughs, the increase thereof, by the Scepter, the Kingdoms and Governments of
the world; by the ball, the roundness thereof; by the Chariot, the continual
motion, change and alteration of things; by the Lions, the wisdom and strength
of mankind, by which things are carried on and managed.

III. Isidorus says that this Goddess was painted holding a key in one of her
hands: which shows that in the winter the bowels of the earth are locked up by
reason of cold; which at the approach of Spring and Summer is unlocked again.

IV. She was sometimes depicted in the form of an ancient woman, having her
head circumcinct with ears of corn, holding in her hand a poppey-head: drawn in
a Chariot (as Orpheus says) with two fierce, and untamed Dragons.

V. The earth is also called Ceres, which many have depicted with torches,
lights and firebrarnds in her hands; as Praxiteles in a temple, seated upon a
promontory of Attica.

CHAP. XXIII. How the Anitents depicted Neptune and the Sea Gods.
I. NEptune among the Ancients is depainted with several countenances,
sometimes with mild and pleasant looks, sometimes with lowering and sad, and at
other times with a mad, furious, and angry aspect; naked, holding in his hand a
silver trident or forked mace, standing upright in the concavity of a great Sea
shell, forcibly drawn by two monstrous horses, which from the middle downwards
have the proportion and shape of fishes, as Statius says.

That variety of Aspect (according to Virgil and Homer) is given him from the
Sea, in that it at sundry times shows it self so: and the trident, the three
Gulfs of the Mediterranean Sea.

II. Sometimes he is depainted with a thin veil hanging over one of his
shoulders, of a Cerulean or bluish color.

III. Lucianus sets him down with marrvellous long hair hanging down over
his shoulders, of a very sad and darkish color.

Yet Servius and others affirm that all the Gods of the Sea were for the most
part in the shape of old men with white and hoary hairs, proceeding from the
froth or spume of the Sea.

IV. Plato describes him in a sumptuous Chariot, holding in one hand the reins
of a bridle: in the other a whip, drawn by Sea-horses galloping.

V. Martianus describes him of a greenish complexion, wearing a white Crown:
signifying thereby the spume and froth of the Sea.

VI. Glaucus (another Sea God) says Philostratus, has a long white beard and
hair, soft and dropping about his shoulders; his eyes green and glistering; his
brows full of wrinkles, and green spots; his breast all overgrown with
greenish Sea weed or moss, his belly and from thence downwards fish like, full
of fins and scales.

VII. Galatea (a Sea Goddess) is described (by the said Philostratus) to be
drawn in a strange framed Chariot, by two mighty Dolphins, which were guided by
two silver reins held in the hands of old Triton's daughters; over her head, a
Canopy made of Purple silk and silver, with her hair hanging carelessly over her
shoulders.

See another description of her at the seventh Section of the one and twentieth
Chapter of the first Book.

VIII. Oceanus (the father of all the Sea Gods) says Thales Milesius, is
depainted, drawn on a glorious Chariot, accompanied and attended with a mighty
company of N^mphs; with the face of an old man, and a long white beard.

IX. Aeolus is depainted with swollen blub cheeks, like one that with mainforce
strives to blow a blast; two small wings upon his shoulders, and a fiery high
countenance.

He is called the God and Ruler of the winds, whose descriptions are in the
three and twentieth Chapter of the first Book.

X. Thetis (another Sea Goddess) is depicted by the sixth Section of the one
and twentieth Chapter of the first Book.

CHAP. XXIV. How the Ancients depicted Nemesis.
I. SHe was by Macrobius described with wings on her shoulders; hard by her
side the rudder of a ship, she her self standing upright upon a round wheel;
holding in her right hand a golden ball, in the other a a whip.

II. She is often depicted, holding the bridle of an horse in one hand, and in
the other a staff.

III. Chrysippus (as Aulus Gellius says) described her like a young Virgin,
beautiful and modest, with an eye prying round about her, for which cause the
ancients called her the all-discerning Lady.

This Nemesis, as Pausanias and Amianus Marcellinus say, was held to be the
Goddess of Punishments, who castigates the offenses of Malefactors, with pains
and torments, according to their sins and demerits; and rewarding the virtuous
with honor and dignities: she was the daughter of Justitia (who dwells and
inhabits very secretly, within the house of Eternity, recording the offenses of
the wicked) and a most severe and cruel punisher of arrogance and vain glory.
Macrobius says, that this Nemesis was adored among the Egyptians (by them
called also Rhammusia) as the revenger and chief enemy of Pride, Insolency, and
Haughtiness; and that she had erect and dedicated unto her, a most stately and
magnifique statue of Marble.

CHAP. XXV. How the Ancients depicted Pan.
I. PAn (the God of Flocks and Sheep) is from the middle upwards in proportion
like a man, with his face ruddy and sanguine, being very hairy; his skin and
breast covered with the skin of a spotted Do or Leopard; in the one hand a
shepherds hook, in the other a whistle: from the middle downwards the perfect
shape of a goat, in thighs, legs and feet.

II. Justine says, that Pan's Statue was made in a temple in Rome, near the
hill Palatine, appearing to the view all naked, saving that it was slightly
enshadowed and covered with a Goats skin.

Thereby is signified that (as it was reputed in those days) Pan kept his
habitation among Hills, Woods and Groves, who was indeed most of any adored and
worshipped by Shepherds, as he that had the peculiar care and Government of
their flocks.

Goat-eared Pan, his small tipped, new grown horns
Advance themselves, about whose either side
A flowery Garland twines, and there adorns
His curled Temples with a wondrous Pride.
His face is of a high and reddish blush,
From which hangs down a stiff rough beard or bush.
And for his bodies vesture he does wear
The finest skin of the most spotted Do,
That ever any in those woods did bear,
Which from his shoulder loose hangs to his toe.
And when he walks, he carries in his hand
A Shepherds book, made of a knotless wand.
Servius says, by the horns is signified either the Beams of the Sun, or New
of the Moon, at what time she is horned: his red face signifies the element of
fire: his long beard, the Air: his spotted garment, the starry firmament: his
Shepherds hook, the rule and Government of nature.

IV. After the form of Pan were the Fauns, Sylvans, Satyrs and Fairies set
forth, having little short horns growing on their heads, with small ears, and
short tails.

These are held among some people in very great regard and observance, being of
a wonderful speed in running. Plutarch writes, that there was one of these
brought and presented for a rare gift unto Sylla, as he returned from the wars
against Mithridates.

V. Plato understands by Pan, Reason and Knowledge; which is twofold; the one
of a man, the other of a beast: by the upper part of Pan, he signifies truth,
accompanied with Reason, which being Divine, lifts man up toward Heaven: by
the lower parts of him is signified the falseness, beastliness and rudeness of
those, which living here in the World, are only delighted with the pleasures
and foolish vanities thereof.

CHAP. XXVI. How the Ancients depicted Pluto.
I. MArtianus says that Pluto sits (in the lower region) majestically in a
chair, holding in one of his hands a black imperial Scepter, and on his head a
stately Crown; at whose left hand sits his wife Proserpina, attended with
many Furies, and evil Spirits, and at whose feet lies chained the Dog Cerberus.

II. The ancients also have painted him drawn in a Chariot, drawn with four
furious black horses, from out whose fiery nostrils proceeds thick and
ill-savoured smoke, as Claudianus says.

III. Some say that his head is encircled with a garland of Cypress leaves;
others with Narcissus leaves.

The first show sadness and horror, used in burials, and about the dead: the
other are more grateful, and are used in memory of the untimely death of that
youth.

IV. Charon ( Pluto's Ferriman, which carries souls over the three rivers of
Hell, Acheron, Cocytus and Styx) is described old, yet exceeding strong, with a
black mantle hanging loosely over his shoulders, as Boccace and Servius say.

By Charon is understood time; and whereas he is supposed to have the
transportation of souls from the one side of those rivers to the other; thereby
is signified, that time, so soon as we are born and brought forth into the
world, does carry us along by little and little unto our deaths; and so sets
us over those rivers, whose names by interpretation signify sorrowfulness, for
that we pass this life with misery and adversity.

CHAP. XXVII. How the Ancients depicted the Parcae, or Sisters.
I. THe Sisters which are called Parcae, are said to attend upon Pluto, which
are three, and are called Clotho, Lachesis and Atropos.

II. Clotho takes the charge of the Births and nativities of mortals: Lachesis
of all the rest of their life: and Atropos of their death, or departure out of
this world.

III. They are all three depicted sitting on a row, very busily employed in
their several offices; the youngest Sister drawing out of a Distaff a
reasonable big thread: the second winding it about a wheel, and turning the
same, till it becomes little and slender: the eldest (which is aged and
decrepit) stood ready with her knife, when it should be spun to cut it off.

IV. And they are described to be invested with white veils, and little
Coronets on their heads, wreathed about with garlands, made of the flowers of
Narcissus.

CHAP. XXVIII. How the Ancients depicted Minerva, or Pallas.
I. MInerva (as taken for Bellona) Licophrones says was depicted with a
flaming firebrand in her hand by the Ancients.

II. Most writers have described Minerva in the shape of a young woman, of a
lively and fresh countenance, yet of an angry look, fixed steadfast eye of a
bluish green color, completely armed at all weapons, with a long Spear in the
one hand, and in the other a Crystal shield, or target: upon her helmet a
garland of Olive branches, and two children, Fear and Horror, by her side with
naked knives in their hands, seeming to threaten one another.

III. Pausanias says that in Greece, the statue of Minerva was made with an
helmet, on the top of which was the shape of a Sphynx; and on the sides
thereof, two carved Griffins.

IV. Phidias making her statue in Greece, placed on the top of her Helmet the
form of a Cock.

V. She was also painted in Greece, sitting on a stool, and drawing forth
little small threads from a distaff; for that the Ancients supposed her to be
the inventress of spinning and the like.

CHAP. XXIX. How the Ancients depicted Vulcan.
I. VVlcan is depicted, standing, working and hammering in a Smiths forge, on
the hill Aetna, framing Thunderbolts for Jupiter, and fashioning Arrows for the
God of love. The opinions which the Ancients had of Vulcan were various, in
which respect he is shaped sometimes in one form, sometimes in another.

II. Some make him lame of one leg, of a very black and swarthy complexion, as
it were all smoaky; of a general ill shaped proportion in all his Lineaments;
and because that he is the husband of Venus, often depicture her with him.

III. Alexander Neapolitanus relates that in one place of Egypt, was erected
the statue of Vulcan, which held in one of its hands, the true and lively
proportion of a mole, and in his other hand a Thunderbolt.

The mole was so placed, because they thought he sent unspeakable numbers of
moles among them, as a plague to them, which did eat, gnaw, and destroy every
thing which was good.

CHAP. XXX. How the Ancients depicted Bacchus.
I. PHilostratus says that his statue was framed in the likeness of a young
man without a beard, of a corpulent and gross body, his face of an high color
and big; about his head a garland of Ivy leaves; upon his temples two small
horns; and close by his side a certain beast, called a Leopard or Pauther.

This description is drawn from the nature of wine, (of which as the Poets
feign, Bacchus is the God) whose inventer and finder out was certainly Noah,
which not only Moses, but also Josephus and Lactautius specially affirm;
wherefore some suppose him to be this God Bacchus.

II. Claudianus says, that his Image or Statue is made all naked; thereby
showing the nakedness of those which abuse themselves with wine, by which they
reveal and open those things which ought to be concealed and kept hid.

III. Diodorus Siculus says, that Bacchus among the Grecians was depicted in
two several forms, the one of a very aged man, with a long beard, stiff and
thick; the other of youthful years, of a pleasant and amorous aspect.

By the first is showed the effects of the intemperate use of wine, which
overcomes nature and brings with it old age: by the other, how it cherishes and
revives the heart, used moderately.

IV. Mocrobius says that Bacchus was framed sometimes in the likeness of a
young child, sometimes of a youth, sometimes of a man; and sometimes in the
likeness of decrepit old age.

By these was signified the four seasons of the year, the vine being dedicated
to Sol, in whom they all exist.

V. This Picture was made in the likeness of a Bull (among the Cirenians, a
people inhabiting the farther part of Persia.)

The reason hereof was because Proserpina (the daughter of Jove) brought him
forth in that form.

VI. Philostratus says that Bacchus was oftentimes drawn clothed in women's
garments, and in a long purple robe; wearing upon his head a Coronet of Roses,
with companions and followers, all in like loose and wanton garments,
fashioning themselves, some like rural Nymphs, as the Dryades, Oreades, etc.
some like Sea Nymphs, as Nereides, Sirens, etc. some like Satyrs, Fauns, and
Sylvans, etc.

The women's garments show that wine makes a man faint, feeble, and unconstant
like to a woman.

VI. Pousanias says that among the Eleans, the picture of Bacchus was made
with a long beard, and clothed with a long gown hanging to the feet; in one
hand a sharp hook, and in the other a boul of wine, and round about him many
Vine-trees and other fruitful plants.

VII. The Statue of Bacchus also, was sometimes set forth and adorned with
Coronets made of fig tree leaves, in memory of a Nymph (as some say) called
Syca, which was by the Gods metamorphosed into that plant.

In like manner, the Nymph Staphilis (on whom Bacehus was in like manner
enamoured) was transformed into the Vine, from whence it is that those plants
are so exceeding grateful and pleasant unto this God.

CHAP. XXXI. How the Ancients depicted Fortune.
I. FOrtune was depicted by some with two faces, the one white and
well-favoured; the other black, and ugly.

And this was because it was held, that there were two Fortunes, the one good,
from whom came riches, happiness, quiet, content and pleasure: the other bad,
from whom came wars, afflictions, crosses, disasters, calamities, and all other
miseries whatsoever.

II. The Thebeans made her in the shape of a woman; in one of her hands a young
child, to wit, Pluto or Riches.

So that in the hands of Fortune, they put the disposing of Wealth, Honor,
Glory and all Happinesses.

III. Martianus describes her a young woman, always moving, covered with a
garment of the thinnest silk; her steps uncertain, never resting long in a
place; carrying in her spacious lap the universal fullness of the treasures,
riches, honor and glory of this world; which in hasty manner (with her hand)
she offers; which offer, if not instantly received, was utterly lost; in her
right hand a white wand, with which she smites such as offend her, slight her
kindness, or are not nimble enough to receive them.

Oh cruel Fortune, stepdame to all joys,
That disinherits us from sweet content,
Plunging our hopes in troubled Sea's annoyes;
Depriving us of that which nature lent!
When will thy proudinsulting humor cease,
TO assuage the sorrows of an only one?
That free from cares, its soul may live in peace,
And not be metamorphos'd into stone.
But why entreat I thy unstable beart,
Knowing thy greatest pleasure, thy delight
Consists in aggravating mortals smart
Poisoned with woes, by venom of thy spite?
It Is what thou will, must stand, the rest must fall,
All humane Kings pay tribute to thy might:
And this must rise, when pleases thee to call,
The other perish in a woeful plight.
And this is it, that chokes true virtues breath,
Making it dye, though she immortal be:
Fruitless it makes it; subject unto death,
To fatal darkness, where no eye can see.
Oh come you wounded Souls, conjoin with me;
In some adumbrate thicket let us dwell,
Some place which yet the Heavens never did see,
There let us build some despicable Cell.
Strength, Beauty, perish: Honors fly away:
And with Estates, Friends vanish and decay.
IV. In a temple in Greece, Fortune was made in the form of a grave Matron,
clothed in a garment agreeable to such years, whose countenance seemed very
sad; before her was placed the Image of a young Virgin of a beauteous and
pleasant aspect, holding out her hand to another; behind these, the Image of a
young child, leaning with one of its arms upon the Matron.

The Matron is that Fortune, which is already past; the young Virgin, that
which now is: and the young child beyond them both, is that which is to come.

Quintus Curtius says, that among the people of Scythia, Fortune was depicted
in the form of a woman without feet, having round about her at her right hand a
number of little wings.

Being without feet, shows that she never stands firm; and the many wings show,
that her gifts and favors are no sooner given, but are presently lost, and do
as it were fly away again, before they be fully possessed.

VI. Alexander Neapolitanus relates that in Greece, her Image was made wholly
of Glass; to show that her favors are brittle, and subject to sudden decays.

VII. Cebes the Philosopher resembled Fortune unto a Comedy; in which many
Actors appear often as Kings and great Monarchs; and presently after become
poor fishermen, slaves, bondmen, and the like.

VIII. Socrates compared her to a Theater, or common meeting place, where
without all order or observance men take their places and seats, without
respect to the dignity of any.

Hereby is showed that she (without respect of birth, worth, merit or state,)
blindly, unadvisedly, and without any order or reason, bestows felicities,
riches and favors.

IX. In Egira, a City of Achaia, Fortune was drawn in the shape of a beautiful
woman, who held in one of her hands a Cornucopia; in the other, the boy Cupid.

By which is signified (as Pausanias says) that beauty without riches avails
nothing: and indeed I may say he is doubly fortunate, who in his love enjoys
the fruition of both beauty and riches: but he is happy in the superlative
degree, who with the other two meets with virtue also.

X. Giraldus says that Fortune was with some depicted riding on a horse
galloping; with which swiftness she seems to pass invisible; after whom
follows Destiny with great wrath and fury, holding in her hand an Iron bow,
and aiming to strike Fortune at the heart.

By her swift galloping, is signified her mutability. See the fourth Section of
the eighteenth Chapter of the first Book.

CHAP. XXXII. How Virtue, Truth, Peace, Honor, Fame and Opinion were depicted.
I. Virtue in Greece was made in the form of a Pilgrim, like a grave and
austere woman; sitting alone upon a four squared stone, melancholy, and leaning
her head upon her knees.

Being a Pilgrim, shows she has no resting place, secure abode, or certain
habitation upon the earth: the form of her sitting, shows her life to be full
of troubles, dangers, crosses, and miseries. See the first Section of the
nineteenth Chapter of the first Book.

Haec angusta via horrendis scatet undique monstris,
Et vita innumeris est interclusa periclis.
Sed tamen incolumes hac virtus ducit alumnos
Extrema ut vitent, ne pes hinc inde vacillet.
Proclamat long spes, hic sunt digna laboris
Praemia, et excipient mordaces gaudia curas.
Pax, sincera quies nullo temerand a dolor,
Laetitia hic habitant longum, sine fine, per aevum.
Fierce Monsters do this narrow passage bound,
And deadly dangers it encompass round.
Yet virtue does her Followers safely guide,
Lest they should go astray on either side.
And Hope proclaims afar; lo here you shall
Have joy for Sorrow; honey for your gall.
Here Peace and joyful rest for ever dwell,
Which neither cross nor time shall ever quell.
II. Truth, says Hippocrates, was framed in the similitude and likeness of a
beautiful woman, attired with gravity and modesty: Philostratus says that she
remains in the cave of Amphiarus, clothed all in white garments of a
beautiful hue: Lucianus says that her statue was made in the form of a young
woman, habited in rags, and base attire, with a superscription over her head,
how she was wronged and abused by Fortune.

III. Peace, says Aristophanes, was framed in the shape of a young woman,
holding between her arms the Infant Pluto, the God of Riches, and Ruler of the
lower Regions.

She is also called Concordia, and is a special friend to the Goddess Ceres,
from whom comes the increase of Fruits, Corn, and other nutriments. See the
seventh Section of the eighteenth Chapter of the first Book.

IV. Honor is depicted with two wings on its shoulders; which as Alciatus
says, was made in the form of a little child, clothed in a purple garment,
having a Coronet or wreath of Laurel about his head; holding hand in hand the
God Cupid, who leads the child to the Goddess Virtue, which is depainted right
over against it.

V. Fame is painted like a Lady, with great wings, and seeming to proffer a
flight, and to mount from the Earth, and rove abroad: having her face full of
eyes; and all over her garments an infinite number of ears and tongues. See the
tenth Section of the eighteenth Chapter of the first Book.

VI. Opinion, says Hippocrates, resembles a young woman, not altogether so
fair and lovely as Truth, yet not deformed, or ill proportioned; being rather
impudent than modestly bold in her demeanure, with her hand stretched forth to
take whatsoever is offered and presented to her.

CHAP. XXXIII. How Night, Sleep, Silence, Pleasure and Fear were depicted.
I. NIght (the mother of Sleep and Death) was depicted by the Ancients in form
of an old woman, having two great wings growing on her shoulders, all cole
black, and spread abroad, as if she seemed to offer a flight; and that she is
drawn in a Chariot, whose wheels are made of Ebony: having a sad countenance,
and an upper garment of a deep black, spotted all over with silver spots like
stars, as Boccace says. See the thirteenth Section of the thirteenth Chapter
of the third Book.

II. Sleep (the brother of Death) says Hesiod, was painted of a most sour,
lowering, and sad aspect; aged, and holding in her left hand a young child very
beautiful; and in her right, another child, of a most swarthy, black and dull
complexion, with legs and arms very crooked. Philostratus in a Tablet (which he
made for Amphiarus) makes her like an aged woman, slothful and sluggish,
clothed with several garments, the under black, the upper white; holding in
one of her hands, a horn pouring forth seed.

By the garments is signified night and day; by the seed, rest, ease and quiet.

III. Harpoerates (the God of Silence) called in Greek Sigaleon, was made, as
Martianus and Apuleius say, in likeness of a young child, who close to his lips
held one of his fingers as a sign of secrecy. Some portraict him without any
face at all; all covered with the skin of a wolf; painted full of eyes and ears:

Showing it to be good to see and hear much, but to speak little.

IV. Voluptia or pleasure, was depainted a Lady, having a pale and lean
countenance, sitting in a pontifical and majestic chair, embroidred and
embossed with stars of gold, treading and trampling upon Virtue.

V. Fear, says Pausanias, was shaped in several forms by the Antents;
sometimes with the head of a Lion among the Grecians (as on the shield of
Agamemnon:) and sometimes with the deformed face and body of a woman.

The Corinthians dedicated this Picture so made unto the sons of Medea; which
were slain for bringing such fatal gifts to the daughter of old Creon, whereby
she, and all that regal family perished, and were for ever extinct.

CHAP. XXXIV. How the Ancients depicted several wise men and Philosophers.
I. SIdonius Apollinarius in the ninth Epistle of his ninth Book, says that
the Philosopher Zeusippus was painted with a crooked neck: Aratus with a neck
bowed downwards: Zeno with a wrinkled forehead.

II. Epicurns was painted with a smooth skin: Diogenes with a hairy rough
beard: Socrates with whitish bright hair.

III. Aristotle was painted with a stretched out arm: Xenocrates with a leg
somewhat gathered up: Hieraclitus with his eyes shut for crying.

IV. Democritus with his lips open, as laughing: Chrysippus with his fingers
close pressed together, for numbering: Euclid with his fingers put asunder, for
the space of measures.

V. In some ancient Bibles and many Pictures, Moses is described with horns.

The ground of this absurdity was a mistake of the Hebrew Text, in that of
Moses descending from the Mount, upon the nearness of the words, (...) Keren,
Cornu, an horn; and (...) Karan, Luceo, to shine. The vulgar translation (of
Exodus 34.29.35.) agrees with the former, to wit; Ignorabat quod cornuta esset
facies ejus. Qui videbant faciem Mosis esse cornutam. The translation of Paulus
Fagius is otherwise, viz. Moses nesciebat quod multus esset splendour gloriae
vulius ejus. Et viderunt filii Israel quod multa esset claritas gloriae faciei
Mosis. Tremelius and Junius have it thus, ut ignoraret Mosche splendidam esse
factam cutem faciei suae. Quod splendida facta esset c^tis faciei Moschis.
Agreeing with the Septuagint (...), glorificatus est aspecius cutis seu coloris
faciei.

V. Alexander the great is described by some, riding upon an Elephant.

The reason thereof is hard to be discerned; for as much as I find not in
history, that ever he used that beast in his Armies, much less in his own
person: except it were for that remarkable battle, which he fought with Porus
King of India; wherein were many Elephants: In which himself (as Curtius
Arianus and Plutarch relate) was on horseback; the name of which beast yet
lives, and is famous in history to this day.

CHAP. XXXV. Of the farther Progress of these Arts.
I. AS God Almighty (who is the Author of all wisdom) was the first institutor
hereof, so also was he the promulgator, by whom these Arts have made
progression in the world.

Certainly, says Philostratus, Picture is an invention of the Gods; as well
for the painted faces of the meadows adorned with flowers, according to the
several seasons of the year; as for those things, which appear in the sky. What
wonderful eloquence is this! that in so few words, this Philosopher should
clear so great a point. But what says Gregorius Nyssenus? Man, says he, is an
earthen statue: and Suidas in Oratione prima de Beatitudinibus, speaking of
Adam, says, This was the first statue, the Image named by God, after which all
the art of Carving used by men receives directions: Lot's wife was another,
turned into a durable pillar of Salt, of whom Prudentius (in Harmartigenia)
says, she waxed stiff, being changed into a more brittle substance, she
stands metamorphosed into stone, apt to be melted, keeping her old posture in
that Salt-stone Image; her comeliness, her ornaments, her forehead, her eyes,
her hair, her face also (looking backward) with her chin gently turned, do
retain the unchangeable monuments of her ancient offense: and though she
melts away continually in salt sweat; yet does the compleatness of her shape
suffer no loss by that fluidity; whole droves of beasts cannot impare that
savoury stone so much, but still there is liquor enough to lick, by which
perpetual loss, the wasted skin is ever renewed. To these let us add the
pattern of the Tabernacle showed unto Moses upon mount Sinai: The Brazen
Serpent made by the express command of God: the Pattern of the Temple (which
David gave unto Solomon) after the form which God made with his own hand:
Ezekiel's portraict of Jerusalem with its formal Siege upon a tile by express
command from God also: the brazen statue of our Lord Jesus Christ erected by
the woman healed of the bloody Issue, as is mentioned by Photius, and Asterius
Bishop of Amasa, and other Ecclesiastic writers: the Picture also of our Lord
made without hands, as it is related by Damascenus Cedrenus and others: the
Picture of Christ in a napkin or towel, sent by our Lord himself, unto Augarus
King of Edessa; together with many more too tedious here to relate.

II. By virtue of this divine hand it was that many Artists of old attained to
a certain kind of perfection in these Arts.

We will only refer the proof of this to the examples in the 31 of Exodus of
Benaleel and Aholiab; of whom God himself witnesses, that he called them by
name to make the Tabernacle; and filled them with his spirit, not only to
devise curious works in Gold, in Silver, in Brass, and in Silk; but also gave
them skill to teach others the same.

III. Nature also bath not been idle, but has acted a master piece herein.

To pass by the glory of flowers, the excellent comeliness of beasts (as in the
spots of Leopards, tails of Peacocks and the like) I will only remark the same
of a Gem, which Pyrrbus (who made war with the Romant) had; of which Pliny in
lib. 37. cap. 1. of his natural history, reports, that it being an Agath, had
the nine Muses and Apollo holding of a Lute depicted therein; the spots not by
Art, but by nature, being so spread over the stone, that each Muse had her
peculiar mark. See Gaffaret cap. 5.

IV. The care of Parents in the education of their children, was another reason
of the progress hereof.

The Grecians, says Aristotle in cap. 3. lib. 8. of his Politics, did teach
their children the Art of Painting; and Plutarch says, that Paulus AEmilius
had Sculptors and Painters amongst the masters of his children, as well as
Philosophers and Rhetoricians: and Pliny says, that by the Authority of
Pamphilus, this Art has been ranked among the liberal sciences, and that only
freeborn children should learn it. And Galen enumerating several arts as
Physic, Rhetoric, Music, Geometry, Arithmetic, Logic, Grammar and
knowledge of Law; add unto these, says he, Carving and Painting. And as the
Grecians were the first, that taught their children these Arts, so also they
provided betimes for them choice masters.

V. These masters by their carefulness and vigilance, not deceiving those that
put their trust in them, became main pillars of these Arts, and propagated them
to posterity; which by the addition of considerable gifts and rewards had an
honorable esteem in the world.

Their care was manifest in laying down solid principles of Art; of which
Quintilian in cap. 2. lib. 12. of his Institutions of Oratory faith, though
virtue may borrow some forward fits of nature, yet she must attain to
perfection by doctrine. Their vigilance was seen in watching, to apprehend
their scholars capacities, that they might suit themselves accordingly; as in
Tully's instance of Isocrates, a singular good teacher, who was wont to apply
the spur to Ephorus, but the bridle to Theopompus: And their reward was
eminent, as Pliny notes in Pamphilus his School, out of which Apelles and many
other excellent Painters came, who taught no body under a talent (which is
about 175 pound sterling) thereby the better to maintain the Authority of Art.

VI. Their practice exactly agreed with their precepts.

As with Seneca, that labor is not lost, whose experiments agree with
Precepts; so with Quintilian, those examples may stand for testimonies: And it
was the practice of Painters of old, as Galen witnesses concerning Polycletus,
who has not only set down in writing the accurate precepts of Art; but also
that he made a Statue according to the rules of Art contained in those precepts.

VII. Those precepts which they taught their Scholars, they delivered in
writing, that they might ever accompany them wheresoever they went.

Apelles gave the precepts of this Art to his disciple Perseus in writing, as
Polycletus did to his; besides an innumerable others now in being too tedious
here to recite. The like did these following, Adaeus Mitylenaeus, Alcetas,
Alexis the Poet, Anasimenes, Antigonus, Aristodemus Carius, Artimon,
Callixenus, Christodorus, Democritus Ephesius, Duris, Eupherion, Euphranor
Isthmius, Hegesander Delpbicus, Hippias Eleus, Hypsicrates, Iamblichus, Juba
Rex Mauritaniae, Malchus Bizantius, Melanthius, Menaechmus, Menetor, Pamphilus,
Polemon, Porphyrius, Praxiteles, Protogenes, Theophanes, Xenocrates, and many
others, the chief of whose works are now lost.

VIII. As Arts came now into estimation, so at length Laws were established for
their preservation; and punishments for their prevarication.

The beginning of these Laws was first at Argos, Ephesus, Thebes and Athens, as
also in Egypt, where a workman (says Diodorus Siculus) is fearfully punished,
if he undertake any charge in the Common wealth, or meddle with any trade but
his own: the which Law says Herodotus, the Lacedaemonians did also approve of.
By means of which Laws it was, that the Artists of those nations attained to
such a perfection of Art, as we shall hereafter relate.

IX. The fervent desire, and love of emulation to excel others; the commendable
simplicity of Art; together with the content and satisfaction of doing
something well, gave a large progress toward the advance of Art.

It was nobly said of Scipio Africanns, that every magnanimous spirit compares
himself, not only with them that are now alive; but also with the famous men of
all ages; whereby it appears that great wits are always by the sting of
emulation, driven forwards to great matters; but he that by too much love of
his own works, compares himself with no body, must needs attribute much to his
own conceits. Do thou desire the glory of swiftness? says Martial ( in
Epigr. 36. lib. 12. strive to out go the Tiger, and the light Ostrich; it is no
glory at all to outrun Asses. This emulation is the source of great wits,
whereby our imitation is provoked sometimes by envy, and sometimes by
admiration, whereby it falls out, that the thing we earnestly seek after, is
soon brought to some height of perfection; which perfection consists in exact
imitation, according to the simplicity of Art, and not in gaudy appearances,
which adorns the shadows much more than ever nature adorned the substance. This
imitation of the life gave the Artizan fame; which fame quickened his aspiring
thoughts, adding more fuel to the flames, till such time, as he brought forth a
most absolute work, whereby he conceived a joy, content and satisfaction, as
durable as the work it self, upon which he now conceives himself a happy man,
and through a just affiance of his virtues knows himself to be lifted up above
the reach of envy, where he stands secure of his fame, enjoying in this life
(as if he were now consecrated unto Eternity) the veneration that is like to
follow him after his death; thus an honest emulation and confidence, bringing
forth works of general applause, procures unto its author an everlasting
Glory. Now what a comfortable thing is this, to have a fore-feeling of what we
hope to attain to?

X. Another reason of the Augmentation of these Arts, was the manifold uses
thereof among men, either for good or evil purposes.

As in natural Sciences, where words come short, a little picture gives us the
knowledge of beasts, birds, fishes and other forms, as well inanimate as
animate; In the Tacticks, how should a General know how to set his men in
array, unless he try the case by design or delineation? so in Architecture to
pourtray platforms after any fashion, and to work out the patterns of high and
mighty buildings in a ltitle wax, keeping in so small an example the exact
proportion of the greater structure: In Geometry the exactness of Lines,
Angles, Surfaces and solids: In Botonalogia, the exact shapes of herbs, plants
and trees: In Zoologia, the shapes of all living creatures: In Anthropologia,
the exact description of all the parts of man's body both inward and outward: In
Chymia, the forms of all chemical vessels and operations: In the lives of
illustrions men and Princes, to express their forms and shapes to the life,
that age might not prevail against them, deserving thereby (as Varro says) the
envy of the Gods themselves: In Geography, to describe in small maps Kingdoms,
Countries and Cities, yea the whole world: In Policy, as Michal in saving her
husband David; Ptolomaeus in the Image of Alexander, which he willingly let
Perdiceas catch from him, supposing it to have been the body it self, thereby
avoiding much bloodshed; Cyrus his wooden Persians in the Seige of Sardis, by
which the townsmen being ^^ghted, yielded the City; Epaminondas at Thebes by
the Image of Pallas did wonders; Amasis King of Egypt, his golden Image made of
the Basin, in which his feet used to be washed, which the Egyptians religiously
worshipped, whereby he brought them to affect him being now a King, who was of
an ignoble and base parentage; the wooden Elephants of Perseus King of
Macedonia, with which he wonted his horses, that they might not be frighted in
time of Battle. The Ornaments of Temples, Market places and Galleries, places
both public and private: Julius Caesar's Image in wax, hideous to look too,
for twenty three gaping wounds he received, did mightily stir up the Romans to
revenge his death. Worthy men which had desserved well of the world, had their
memories conserved with their Images; by which all those that aspire to
goodness, and to follow their steps, are likewise filled with hope. The
Athenians have erected unto AEsop of most goodly statue, says Phaedrus, and
have set a contemptible slave upon an everlasting base, that all might unde
rstand, bow the way of honor lies open to every one, and that glory does not
so much follow the condition of our birth, as the virtues of our life. Berosus
excelled in Astrology, wherefore the Athenians for his divine prognostications,
erected him a Statue with a golden tongue, set up in their public Schools, as
Pliny says, lib. 7. cap. 37. Public Libraries were surnished also with
golden, silver and brass Images of such, whose immortal fouls did speak in
those places. The provocations of vices have also augmented the Art; it has
been pleasing to engrave wanten lusts upon their cups; and to drink in
Ribauldry and Abominations, as Pliny says in the Proem of this 33 Book.

XI. The use therefore of these Arts extending it self so universally to all
intents both in war and peace, it came to pass that Artificers were honored by
all sorts of men; which themselves perceiving, did still endeavor to increase
this enjoyed favor by a daily advance of their skill.

By Kings they were honored; for Demetrius, whilst at the Siege of Rhodes,
came to Protogenes, leaving the hope of his Victory to behold an Artificer.
Alexander the Great came also to Apelles his shop, often accompanied with many
Princes. It was his will that none but Polycletus alone, should cast his Statue
in Brass, that none but Apelles alone should paint him in colors, that none
but Pyrgoteles alone should engrave him. The estimation of the Artists were
also understood from the esteem and high rates their works were prized at; a
picture of Bularchus, a Painter, was valued at its weight in gold by Candaules
King of Lydia: Aristides was so singular in his Art, that it is reported of
King Attalus that he gave an hundred Talents (which is about seventeen thousand
and five hundred pounds sterling) for one of his Pictures. As much had
Polycletus for one of his. Apelles had for painting the picture of Alexander
the Great, three thousand and five hundred pounds given him in golden coin.
Cafar paid to Timomachus eighty Talents; (about fourteen thousand pounds
sterling,) for the Pictures of Ajax and Medea. Many more examples we might
produce, but these may suffice; at length no price was thought equal to their
worth; so Nicias rather than he would sell his picture called Necyia to King
Attalus, who proffered him sixty Talents, (worth near eleven thousand pound
sterling,) bestowed it as a present upon his Country.

XII. Art meeting with such Successes, created a boldness in Artificers, to
aixempt even the greatest matters.

The great Colosses of the ancients may serve here for an example; Zeuxis above
all the rest, has been admired for his boldness: Euphranor also excelled
Parrhasius in this kind, in that the Thesens of the one so infinitely excelled
the Theseus of the other. So great an excellency of Spirit arose in the old
Artificers, as not to be daunted by the authority of those who were like to
censure their works it was agreat mark they aimed at, to avoid a preposterous
shame or fear. And this they accomplished by taking care, not only to give them
content, who must of necessity be contented with the work, but also that they
might seem admirable unto them which may judge freely without control. So they
heeded to do well in the opinion of accurate and judicious spectators, rather
than to do that which liked themselves. And therefore whatsoever is dedicated
unto posterity, and to remain as an example for others, had need be well done,
neat, polished, and made according to the true rule and law of Art, for as much
as it is likely to come into the hands of skilful Artificers, judicious
censurers, and such as make a narrow scrutiny into every defect. But as it is
impossible to attain to an excellency, or height of any thing without a
beginning, so do the first things in going on of the work seem to be the least;
the height of Arts, as of trees, delights us very much, so do not the roots;
yet can there be no height without the roots. And therefore we shall find that
a frequent and continual exercise, as it is most laborious, so it is most
profitable; seeing nature does begin, hope of profit does advance, and exercise
does accomplish the thing sought after. In sum; by doing quickly, we shall
never learn to do well: but by doing well, it is very likely we may learn to do
quickly. To this speedy and well doing there belongs three things, viz. to
add, to detract, and to change. To add or detract, requires less labor and
judgment; but to depress those things that swell, to raise those things that
fink, to tie close those things which are scattered, to digest things that are
without order, to compose things that are different, to restrain things that
are insolent, requires double pains: for those things may be condemned, which
once did please, to make way for inventions not yet thought of. Now without
doubt, the best way for emendation is to lay by the design for a time, till it
seem unto us as new, or another invention; lest our own, like new births,
please us too much.

XIII. Lastly, That which gave the greatest and as it were the last step
toward the Augmentation of Art, was that free liberty which Artizans gave
every one, to censure, to find fault with their works, and to mark their
defects.

It was the opinion of Seneca, that many would have attained unto wisdom, if
they had not conceived themselves to be wise already. When Phidias made Jupiter
for the Eleans, and showed it, he stood behind the door, listening what was
commended, and what discommended in his work: one found fault with the
grossness of his nose, another with the length of his face, a third had
something else to say: now when all the spectators were gone, he retired
himself again to mend the work, according to what was liked of the greater
part; for he did not think the ad^ice of such a multitude to be a small matter,
judging that so many saw many things better than he alone, though he could not
but remember himself to be Phidias. But yet Artificers did not from hence admit
their judgments generally in every thing, but they followed their directions
only in such things as did belong to their Pr^fession. As when Apelks made a
work, he exposed it in a place where all that passed by might see it; hiding
himself in the meantime behind the Picture, to hear what faults were maked in
his works, preferring the common people, before his own judgment. And he is
reported to have mended his work, upon the censure of a Shoemaker, who
blaming him for having made fewer latchets in the inside of one of the
Pantoffles, then of the other: the Shoot maker finding the work the next day
mended according to his advice, grew proud, and began to find fault with the
leg also; whereupon Apelles could not contain himself any longer, but looking
forth from behind the Picture, bid the Shoemaker not go beyond his lost; from
whence at last came that Proverb. He is the best man that can advise himself
what is fit to be done; and he is next in goodness, that is content to receive
good advice: but he that can neither advise himself, nor will be directed by
the advice of others, is of a very ill nature.

CHAP. XXXVI. Of Painting the Face and Skin.
I. TWo ways there be of adorning the Face and Skin, the first is, by
Painting: the second is, by application of excellent Cosmeticks, which gives a
most natural, absolute and lasting beauty.

The first way, which is that of Painting, is the subject matter of this
Chapter.

Some may wonder, that we should meddle with such a subject as this, in this
place; but let such know, the painting of a deformed face, and the licking over
of an old, withered, wrinkled and weather-beaten skin, are as proper appendices
to a Painter, as the rectification of his errors in a piece of Canvase: nor is
there any reason but that the Artist should show his care in the one, as well
as his skill in the other, since a single deformity in the body begets a
complication of miseries in the mind, and an unity of defects, a multiplication
of evils. And though some think the Poets did not much amiss, to fancy the
Creature to be hacht in Hell, by reason it brings with it such a torrent of
dejections; yet let those darkened Souls (who are so much affrighted at its
cloudy adumbrations) understand, that if it was conceived in hell, that hell
was in the center of their conceptions: yet we confess, it seeks darkness, and
only solaces it self in obscurity, and duskie solitudes. For such whose bodies
have passed the stamp with some faults, and have missed the impressions or
reflections of beauty, which might make them delectable in humane society, ever
make choice of darkness as their chief companion. Deformity is a disease
esteemed the most pernicious, and its issue is a matter of dangerous
consequence, chiefly obstructions to Ladies Preferment. Now to prevent this
danger, to take away these obstructions, and to deliver you from the embraces
of so hideous a monster (which some esteem as a Fury of Hell) these Cosmeticks
we have offered upon the Altar of your defects; protesting that the use of
these beautifiers, will make you as fit for the entertainment of Courtiers, as
ever you were before for the courtship of Grooms or Hostlers, and make your
rusty skins and ill-look'd faces, to outshine with a radiant luster, the most
splendid of all the Nymphs of Diana. Though you may look so much like the Image
of death, as that your skins might be taken for your winding sheets, yet by our
directions you may attain such a rosid color, and such a lively cheerfulness,
as shall not only make you look like natures workmanship, but also put
admiration into the beholders, and fix them in a belief, that you are the
first fruits of the resurrection. Thus we teach you lippid mortals to retrace
the steps of youthfulness, and to transform the wrinkled hide of Hecuba, into
the tender skin of the Greatest of beauties; which then you will dull by the
advance of your features, and make all conceited shadows of glory, to vanish in
your presence. When once your artificial heat shall appear, others shall seem
pale with envy for your perfections; and their natural ruddiness shall only
serve them to blush, to see their features clouded by your splendour, who will
seem like brown bread compared with Manchet, or rather like wooden dishes upon
a shelf of China ware, or as another once said, like blubberd jugs in a
cupboard of Venice glasses, or as earthen piss-pots in a Goldsmiths shop. By
this means, your sparkling Glories shall fire Platonic Lovers, so that none
though as cold as Saturn, shall be able to resist your actuating flames, but
shall force the stoutest heart, to be a Sacrifice to love. If any remain
unscorched, it must be only those leaden hearted Cowards, who dare not approach
your flames, for fear of melting; or those undeserving soldiers of Venus (of a
frigid constitution) who dare not so much as look upon your youthful fire, for
fear of being burnt to ashes. But it may chance that some Saint or another, may
condemn your hearts for evil, because you strive to make your faces good, and
may like your inside the worse because your outside may look so well; yet
with Benjamin refuse not the many messes of Pottage, nor yet the many change of
Raiment (although one might well enough serve your turn) but receive them from
the hands of Joseph, though all the rest of the Brethren be angry. Avoid not
company for want of beauty, when art affords an innocent supply, but with
confidence crucify that evil conscience, which forbids the use of a little oil
to make a cheerful countenance, and the drinking of a little wine to make a
merry heart. Borrow our Artificial beautifiers, and become splendid, that you
may be fit to be gathered by the hand of some metamorphosed Hero; lest in the
garden of Deformities, growing green with sickness, you should be taken for
thistles, and so crop'd by Asses.

II. To cleanse the face and skin.

Before any thing be used to paint, or make the skin beautiful, it must be made
very clean thus: first wash with warm water, and sweet scented wash-balls very
well; then rub the face with a cloth, and wash well with water in which
Wheat-bran is boiled; so is the skin prepared.

Or thus, Take Sublimate one ounce, glair of six eggs, boil them in a glass
vessel, till they grow thick; then press out the water, with which wash the
skin.

III. To make a white Fucus or Paint.

Take Talk and powder it, by beating of it in a hot mortar, to the powdered Talk
add distilled Vinegar, boil it at a gentle fire in a wide glass, let the fat
froth that swims at top, be taken off with a spoon; then evaporate the vinegar,
and mix the remaining cream with phlegm of common Salt, or a little Pomatum,
with which wash or anoint the face, and it will beautify it much.

IV. Another very excellent.

Take Crude Talk in powder one ounce, oil of Camphire two ounces, digest till
the oil is white; it is a noble Fucus for Ladies faces.

V. To make the aforesaid oil of Camphire.

Take Camphire four ounces, Bole twelve ounces, make them into balls and dry
them in the Sun, then distill them in sand in a glass retort, into a receiver
that has distilled rain water therein: first there will come forth a white
matter, which melts in the Alembick, and falls into the receiver, then a
clearer water; and at last with a stronger fire, the oil we speak of, sweet
scented, which rectified with spirit of wine will be yellow as Gold.

VI. Another excellent Fucus made of Pearl.

Dissolve Pearl in distilled Vinegar; precipitate with oil of Sulphur per
Campanum; then sweeten and digest with spirit of wine; abstract the spirit, and
you have a magisterial Fucus will melt like butter.

VII. To make the best Fucus or Paint as yet known.

Take Venetian Talk, cleave it into slices, digest it in the heat of the Sun,
or of a horse-dunghil for a month, with distilled vinegar, made of Spanish
wine, adding every day new distilled Vinegar to the former, till the Vinegar be
mucilaginous; which then distill by a luted retort and a large receiver with a
naked fire. First there comes forth the Vinegar; then a white oil, which
separate. After you have cleansed the skin by the second Section, then first
wash with the vinegar, after anoint with the oil: if the face be first well
washed from all impurity, this one anointing may hold for a month without
fading. This Cosmetick if rightly prepared, is worth about five pound an ounce.

VIII. An excellent Fucus made of a Bulls gall.

Take Bulls galls dried in the Sun, whose tincture extract with spirit of wine,
with which besmear the face, (being cleansed by the second Section) leaving it
on for three or four days, without going abroad, or exposing the skin to the
air: at the end of the time cleanse the face by the second Section: so almost
to a miracle, the skin of the face and neck is rendered most gratefully white,
soft, delicate and amiable. This is the Spanish Fucus which several Ladies now
use.

IX. To make an excellent red Fucus.

Make a decoction of red Sanders in double distilled vinegar, adding a little
Alom, with a few grains of Musk, Amber-griese, or of some sweet Spices, and you
will have a perfect red Fucus for the face.

X. Another very excellent.

Take juice of Clove-gilliflowers, with which mix a little juice of Limons:
with this paint your face, and you shall have a pleasing red color.

XI. To do the same another away.

Make a strong infusion of Clove-gilliflowers in rectified spirit of wine,
adding a few drops of oil of Vitriol; or instead thereof a little Alom, and the
juice of a Citron or Limon; so shall you have an excellent color to beautify
the face with.

XII. A Fueus or Paint not easy to be discovered.

Take seeds of Cardamoms or grains of Paradise, Cubebs, Cloves, and raspings of
Brazil, which infuse in rectified spirit of wine for ten days, over a gentle
heat; then separate the spirit: this is so perfect a Fucus, that it may deceive
any man, for this clear water gives a fresh, red, and lovely color which will
last long.

XIII. A Fucus or Cosmetick of river Crabs.

Takes of the flesh which remains in the extremities of the great claws of
river Crabs (being boiled) a sufficient quantity, which dry gently, and then
extract a deep tincture with rectified spirit of wine; evaporate part of the
menstruum, till the tincture have a good thickness or body; with which (the
skin being cleansed) anoint the cheeks first, applying over it some other
albifying Cosmetick.

XIV. Spanish wool, wherewith women paint their faces red.

Boil shearings of Scarlet in water of quicklime half an hour, of which take
two pound, to which put Brazil two ounces (rasped) Roch Alom, Verdigriese, of
each one ounce, Gum Arabic two drcahms, boil all for half an hour, which keep
for use.

XV. To do the same another way.

Take Spirit of wine one pound, Cochenele half an ounce, rasped Brazil one
ounce, Gum Armoniack three drachms, mix and digest till the Gum is dissolved;
then boil it gently, and strain it for use, into which you may put old linen
rags, or Spanish wool at pleasure.

CHAP. XXXVII. Of Cosmeticks which beautify without any thing of Paint.
I. AN excellent Cosmetick or Liquor of Talk.

Take powder of Talk (made by rubbing it with pumice stones; or beating it in a
very hot mortar; or filing it with a Goldsmiths smoothing file) eight ounces,
Salis Tartari sixteen ounces, calcine it twelve hours in a wind furnace, and
set it in a Cellar, separating that which melts, from that which does not: then
calcine this dry Calx added to four times its weight of Salnitre, with a strong
fire, so the Talk will be melted into a clear white mass which being set in a
Cellar will turn to a clammy liquor.

This wonderfully whitens and beautifies the skin, and takes away spots and
freckles from the face: but you must not leave the liquor long on, but wash it
off with decoction of wheat bran, that it corrode not the skin.

II. To make the skin soft and smooth.

The face being very clean by the second Section of the six and thirtieth
Chapter, wash it very well with a Lixivium of Salt of Tartar, and after that
anoint it with Pomatum; or which is better, oil of sweet Almonds, doing this
every night going to bed. The Pomatum we have taught the way to make in our
Synopsis Medicinae, lib. 3. cap. 58. Sect. 2.

III. A water to cleanse the face from Scurfe and Morphew.

Take distilled rain water six ounces, juice of Limons twelve ounces, mix them,
and wash with it morning and evening, anointing after it at night going to bed
with the oil or Pomatum aforesaid.

IV. An Unguent which brings the skin to an exquisite beauty.

Take of our Pomatum one ounce, Salt of Tartar one dram, Musk twenty grains,
mix them well, and (the face or skin being very clean) anoint morning and
evening.

V. A wonderful Cosmetick of great worth.

Take white Tartar twenty ounces, Talk, Salt, of each ten ounces, calcine them
in a potters furnace very well; then grinding the matter upon a marble, put it
into Hippocrates his sleeve, and set it in a Cellar or other moist place for
twenty or thirty days, and there will drop from it a precious oil; which being
rubbed upon the skin softly with a linen cloth (the skin being duly cleansed
first) takes away all kind of spots, and makes the skin soft and delicate.

VI. A cheap, yet excellent Cosmetick.

Take Alom in fine powder, and shake it with whites of new laid eggs, being a
little heated, till such time as they grow thick to an ointment, with which
anoint the face morning and evening three or four days; and it will take away
spots and wrinkles, and make the skin grow clear and fair.

VII. An excellent Mercurial Cosmetick prevalent against most deformities of
the skin.

Take Mercury purified from all blackness half a pound, Mercury Sublimate in
powder as much, mix them in a stone or marble mortar; put them into an Alembick
of a straight Orifice, put on distilled Vinegar, till all be covered three or
four fingers, letting it stand four days, daily stirring the same at certain
times, then it extracts a whitish powder; the whitish Vinegar by inclination
separate, rejecting it, and put on other Vinegar: the powder at bottom keep so
for some days: which labor you must so often reiterate, till you have
abundance of that white powder, which dry, and keep for use: anoint with it, by
mixing with it a little distilled rain water, and it will take away all
blemishes of the skin, as also Tetters. Use it not too often, and beware you
touch neither eyes nor teeth with it.

VIII. Another of great estimation.

Take Mercury Sublimate, Saccharum Saturni of each two drachms, Rose water,
juice of Limons of each two ounces, mix them like to an ointment, with which
anoint gently at night, and the next morning with the Pomatum aforesaid.

IX. To make a kind of Lac Virginis, an excellent Cosmetick.

Take distilled rain water a quart, Saccharum Saturni crystallized one ounce,
mix them, and then wash with the water, being settled: the fine white powder at
bottom, is also an excellent fucus or paint, which may be laid upon the skin if
very clear: note, some use Vinegar instead of the rain water.

X. To make Oleum Tartari per deliquium.

Take Salt of Tartar, which put into a bag with a corner in a moist Cellar, and
the oil will distill therefrom in drops: with this oil you may mix a little fair
water, and wash your face at night going to bed; and the next morning, the face
being very clean, you may wash with the aforesaid Lac Virginis; thus continuing
for some days, you may create an exquisite and lasting beauty.

XI. A compound Cosmetick esteemed by some of great force.

Take of the aforesaid Lac Virginis one ounce, oil of Tartar aforesaid half an
ounce, mix them, with which wash morning and night for about a week or more, as
you shall see occasion; then anoint with the following ointment.

XII. To make the Cosmetick Ointment aforesaid.

Take Musk three drachms, Ambergriese two drachms, Civit one dram, grind them
upon a porphyre or marble stone, with oil of Ben and Rhodium of each three
ounces, with which anoint as aforesaid: note, some instead of the oil of Ben,
use oil of sweet Almonds.

XIII. A vegetable Cosmetick.

Besmear your face or skin at night going to bed, with the juice of Wake Robin;
it is excellent.

XVI. An incomparable Cosmetick of Pearl.

Dissolve Pearls in juice of Limons or distilled Vinegar, which digest in
Horse-dung, till they send forth a clear oil, which will swim on the top: this
is one of the most excellent Cosmeticks or Beautifiers in the world: this oil
if well prepared is richly worth seven pound an ounce.

XV. A Cosmetick ointment of great worth.

Take of our Pomatum aforesaid six ounces, Saccharum Saturni two ounces, mix
them, and anoint morning and evening.

XVI. Another very good for the skin.

Mix Saccharum Saturni one dram, in Vinegar half an ounce, which mingle with
the glair of eggs, and anoint with it.

XVII. A Cosmetick wonderful to make a pleasing ruddy complexion.

Take oil of Tartar four ounces, Alom, Sal Gem, of each one ounce, Borax,
Camphire of each half an ounce, beat them well together, to which add of Briony
water a pint, distill them in balneo, and you will have your desire.

XVIII. Another for the same.

Take Madder, Myrrh, Saffron, Frankincense, of each a like, bruise and steep
all in White Wind, with which anoint the face going to bed, and in the morning
wash it off, and the skin will have a gallant pleasing blush.

XIX. To make the Cosmetick of Myrrh, very excellent.

Boil eggs till they are hard, slit them and take out the yolks, fill them up
with powdered myrrh, close them together, and lay them in a moist Cellar, and
the myrrh will dissolve into oil.

XX. To make a very good Wash to whiten the skin, and give a good complexion.

Take Limons, hens eggs boiled, of each twelve, Turpentine eight ounces, distill
all in Balneo Mariae, with which wash: when you wash, you may drop into it a
drop, two or three of oil of Oranges or Cinnamon, for fragrancy sake.

XXI. A Cosmetick to make a rough skin smooth.

Take sweet Almonds blanched four pound, moisten them with spirit of wine and
rose water mixed together, of each two ounces, beat them together and try them;
and when they begin to smoke, put them into a bag, and press them (in a press
made for that purpose) and there will come forth a very clear oil; which put
into rain water, and beat it till it is exceeding white.

CHAP. XXXVIII. Of Cosmeticks, which remedy the various Vices of the skin.
I. TO take away Sun-burnings.

To glair of ten eggs put Sugar Candy one ounce and anoint with it going to
bed: or anoint with the juice of Sow-bread at night going to bed; and in the
morning with oil Omphacine. The like effects has our Lac Virginis at the ninth
Section of the seven and thirtieth Chapter, as also Oleum Tartari, and other
things of like nature.

II. To take away redness and Pimples.

First prepare the skin by bathing it often with the decoction of wheat-bran,
and applying pultisses of bread, milk and oil thereto: when the skin is thus
suppled and rarefied, you may cure them either by our liquor of Talk at the
first Section of the seven and thirtieth Chapter, or mercurial Cosmetick at the
seventh Section of the seven and thirtieth Chapter, or our Lac Virginis and oil
of Tartar at the ninth and tenth Section of the seven and thirtieth Chapter, or
by often washing with juice of Limons.

III. To take away Freckles.

Take juice of Limons, put it into a glass bottle, to which put fine Sugar and
borax in powder, digest it eight days in Sand, then use it; or mix Sal Tartari
with whites of eggs, and apply it; or often use our compound Cosmetick at the
eleventh Section of the seven and thirtieth Chapter, or oil of Tartar alone,
for some weeks; but if all fail, you must have recourse to our Liquor of Talk
at the first Section of the seven and thirtieth Chapter, or Mercurial Cosmetick
at the seventh Section of the seven and thirtieth Chapter.

IV. To take away Spots from the face or skin.

This is done by anointing with oil of Tartar for ten days; and after all that
to wash it with a Lixivium of Quicklime in which Sal armoniack has been
dissolved for a long time: or you may use the Cosmetick at the third Section of
the seven and thirtieth Chapter camphorated.

V. To cleanse a scurffy Skin.

If the creature be fat, foment first with a Lixivium of Salt of Tartar; but if
lean, make a fomentation of Borrage, Bugloss and Mallow leaves, which use for
some days: this being done, bath the place where the scurff is, with Spiritus
Nicotianae made by fermentation, which being dried in, anoint first with oil of
Tartar, then with oil of Almonds; repeating the three last works, so often till
the scurff goes away.

If all these fail, you must have recourse to our liquor of Talk, or Mercurial
Cosmetick; or those at the fifth and eighth Section of the seven and thirtieth
Chapter, which without doubt will peform your desire.

VI. To free the Skin from Tetters and Ring-worms.

Dissolve Sublimate one ounce in a glass of Red-wine by boiling, with which
wash the place morning and evening, letting it dry of it self, for three or
four days together, and it will certainly cure: if they be not inveterate, our
liquor of Talk at the first Section of the seven and thirtieth Chapter, or
Mercurial Cosmetick may sufficiently do; or you may anoint with this ointment.
Take Sal Tartari two drachms, burnt Alom three drachms, powder and incorporate
with whites of eggs: or this, take Sulphur vive three drachms, Camphire one
dram, Hogs-griese two ounces, mix and make an ointment.

VII. To take away wrinkles from the Skin.

Take oil of Almonds, lees of oil Olive, and make them into an ointment with
wax, powder of Camphire and Mastich, with which anoint. Oil of Myrrh to anoint
with, is eminent in this case: or wash with a decoction of Briony roots and
figs of each alike: or dissolve Gum Tragacanth in Lac Virginis, and wash with
that. Excellent good is a strong decoction of Pomegranate pills in White Wind,
to wash often with.

VIII. To take away Warts.

The juice of the greater Spurge with Salt anointed, takes them away, so also a
continual washing with a Lixivium of Quicklime and Salt of Tartar. The juice of
Verrucaria performs the same. A plaster of Cantharides with a defensative is
very good in this case: so also this following wash: take Saccharum Saturni
three ounces, Sal Armoniack one ounce, Vitriol common six drachms, Quicklime
eight ounces, boil all in water four pound to the consumption of the half, with
which often bath the warts, and then wash with our Mercurial water. Black Soap
has often been found very good; but especially a plaster of Turpentine.

IX. To heal Chaps in the Skin.

Our Pomatum in this case is most excellent: yet this following is commendable.
Take Capons griess mixed well with Camphire, and anoint with. Oil of Turpentine
two drachms, mixed with Vnguentum Populeon two ounces, is very good. So also
oil of Roses mixed with Sheep Suet and wax to an ointment.

X. To heal Burnings and Scaldings.

Excellent good is the Vnguentum Rubrum in our Synopsis Medicinae lib. 3. cap.
58. Sect 1. both to draw out the fire, and to heal. To draw out the fire also,
glair of eggs mixed with Rose water, is very prevalent: so also is Salt, raw
Onions, Soap, Yest, Oil of Tartar and the like. To hinder the rising of the
blisters, Hens dung three ounces, mixed with hogs griese four ounces, and Salt
of Tartar one ounce is very good; so also a cataplasme of Honey and crumbs of
bread; but best of all a plaster of strained Opium, which performs all the
intentions to admiration. If the blister break, it may be presently skinned by
anointing with oil of eggs, and washing often with Lac Virginis, strewing upon
the sore, powder of Bole, Tutty, Ceruse or the like.

XI. To take away scars and marks of the Small Pox.

Take of oil of Tartar one ounce and half, Ceruse dissolved in oil of Roses one
ounce, Borax and Sal Gem of each one dram, mix and make an ointment, with
which anoint. Oil of Tartar alone performs this work well: so Salt of Tartar,
mixed with powder of Mirrh and oil of Roses.

XII. To beautify the Hands.

To make them soft, often anoint with the oil of Almonds or our Pomatum at
night going to bed, washing them the next norning with decoction of wheat-bran:
after a while wash them with Salt of Tartar, dissolved in fair water, perfumed
with oil of Cloves, Oranges, Rhodium or Cinnamon. Or this, take Venice Soap
dissolved in juice of Limons one pound, Virgin-honey four ounces, Sublimate,
Orice root, Sugar, Salt of Tartar, Alom, Borax of each one ounce, Balsom of
Peru two drachms, oil of Cloves one dram, oil of Rhodium and Cinnamon of each
half a dram, make a mixture to wash the hands withal: Or this, take powder of
Venice Soap one pound, Orice root eight ounces, A mylum six ounces, mix them
and make an ointment with liquid Storax and oil of Benjamin a sufficient
quantity; it wonderfully whitens, smooths and sweetens the hands. To anoint
also with a Bulls gall is very good.

XIII. To help hands which are swollen, and look red or blew with cold.

What we even now said (in the last Section) may be said again here: to which
we add, that a long bathing of them in a larther of Castle Soap, is very good
if it be done: or if a repercussive plaster be applied made of barley meal,
Saccharum Saturni, and oil of Myrtles; washing (after the coming off of the
Cataplasme) with juice of Limons or white wine Vinegar: a plaster of
Turpentine mixed with Salt is good. Often to anoint the hands with oil of
Roses, Almonds, or Pomatum at night, and the next morning with the Lac Virginis
prevails much. Oil of Anniseeds, Caraways and Fennel prepared chymically, as
also Cloves and Oranges, mixed with oil of Almonds and often used, are eminent
above all other things.

CHAP. XXXIX. Of making a Sweet Breath.
I. ASthinking Breath comes from one of these four causes, viz. putrified
Lungs, defective Teeth, a distemper of the Head, or obstruction of the Stomach.

II. To remedy a Stinking Breath coming from putrified Lungs.

Take Vnguentum Nicotianae one ounce, Oleum Succini two drachms, mix them and
anoint the breast outwardly; inwardly give cleansers, (as oil of Sulphur
allayed with Rose water) morning and evening; as also Antimonium Diophoreticum
ten grains five times a day for several days together; then heal by giving oil
of Almonds mixed with a few drops of oil of Cinnamon, or Pills of Turpentine:
Lastly, morning, noon and night let this bolus be adhibited; take Nutmegs,
Mace, Ginger, of each fifteen grains, honey two drachms, oil of Cinnamon ten
drops, mix them, and continue it for some weeks.

III. To help the defects of the teeth.

1. If the teeth be furred over, rub them every morning with cremor Tartari in
powder, and wash them with White Wind. 2. If the teeth be black; allay oil of
Sulphur or Vitriol in Rose water, and scowr them well therewith, with the end
of a stick and a rag, till all the blackness be gone; then rub them with oil of
Almonds perfumed with oil of Cinnamon. 3. If the teeth be loose, first rub them
with this powder, take Galls, Pomgranate flowers, Sumach, Cyperus, of each one
ounce, Roch Alom half a pound, powder them all for use: then use this
Gargarisme. Take Galls one ounce, Myrrh, Pomgranate peels of each half an
ounce, boil them in white wine vinegar for a Gargarism. Lastly, morning, noon
and night wash the gums with good red Wine; by this means the teeth will be
fastened and the gums restored. 4. If they be in danger of rotting; take ashes
of Hartshorn, magistery of Corral of each one ounce, musk, or instead thereof
oil of Cinnamon, ten grains, mix for a dentifrice to rub the teeth withal, it
will keep them white and sound. 5. If they he rotten and hollow; make little
pellets of strained Opium, Myrrh and oil of Cinnamon, and put them into the
hollow tooth. 6. If they ach; use the aforesaid pellets, or make little ones of
Laudanum Paracelsi, and put them into the hollowness: or if they be not hollow,
tie a little pill of the same up in a fine thin rag, and hold it between the
aching teeth. 7. If they stink; often wash them with wine or spirit of wine, in
which a few drops of oil of Cinnamon and adeps Rosarum is dissolved.

IV. To rectify a Stinking Breath arising from distemper of the head.

Consider the cause of the distemper, whether it arises from the Pox,
Imposthumes, or the like, and follow the method instituted in the Cure of those
diseases, and then the cause being taken away, the effects you will find will
soon cease; yet nevertheless these following pills are excellent: take Calx of
refined Silver made by spirit of Nitre, and well dulcified by washing in warm
rain water one ounce, Resinae Scammonii one ounce and half, mix them for a mass
of pills, of which take eight or ten grains at night going to bed every third,
fourth or fifth day.

V. To rectify a Stinking Breath arising from the obstruction of the Stomach.

This is done by opening and cleansing the Stomach thus. Take every morning
going to bed half a dram of Pil. Ruffi for ten or twelve days together: or
thus, first vomit with Vinum Benedictum one ounce or more, according as
Strength requires, twice or thrice; then take Pilulae Rudii half a dram at a
time, in the morning fasting, drinking after it some warm broth or posset
drink, which repeat every third or fourth day four or five times.

VI. To rectify the Breath, when it smells of any thing that is eaten.

Chew Coriander seed or Zedoary in the mouth, drinking a good draught of wine
after; the scent of the wine is taken away by eating four apples or Quinces, or
by chewing troches of Gum Tragacanth perfumed with oil of Cinnamon.

CHAP. XL. Of beautifying the Hair.
I. TO Dye the Hair black.

This is done with the Calx of Lime (made by Spirit of Nitre) mixed with fair
water, and the hair washed therewith, with a Sponge: it is the most excellent
thing of that kind that is yet known.

II. To keep the hair foom falling off.

Take Myrtle berries, Galls, Emblick Myrobalans of each alike, boil them in oil
Omphacine, with which anoint: it is an excellent Medicine, yet as old as Galen.

III. To remedy Baldness.

This is a hard thing to cure, yet the following things are very good. Rub the
head or bald places every morning very hard with a course cloth, 'till it be
red, anointing immediately after with Bears grief: when ten or fifteen days
are past, rub every morning and evening with a bruised Onion, till the bald
places be red, then anoint with honey well mixed with Mustard seed, applying
over all a plaster of Labdanum mixed with mice dung, and powder of Bees: do
this for thirty days. If all the former fail, bath with a decoction of Bur-dock
roots, made with a Lixivium (of Salt of Tartar) two parts, and muskadel one
part; immediately applying this Unguent: take Thapsi or Turbeth one dram (in
powder) bears griese one ounce, mix them, which use for sixty days; if this
make not the hair come, the defect is incurable.

IV. To take away hair from places where it should not grow.

Take Quicklime four ounces, Auripigmentum one ounce and a half, Sulphur vive,
Nitre, of each half an ounce, Lixivium of Salt of Tartar a quart, mix and boil
all so long in a glazed earthen pot, till putting a quill therein, all the
feathers peel off, and it is done. First soment the place with warm water a
little before you use the aforesaid medicine; a quarter of an hour after wash
with very hot water; then anoint with the aforesaid Unguent, and in a quarter
of an hour it will do the work: when the hairs are fallen away, remember to
anoint with oil of Roses; now to keep them from ever growing again, anoint for
some days with an ointment made of the juices of Henbane and Nightshade, Opium
and Hogs griese.

V. To make the hair curl.

Wash the hair very well with a Lixivium of Quicklime, then dry it very well,
that done anoint it with oil of Myrtles, or oil Omphacine, and powder it well
with sweet powder, putting it up every night under a cap: if the party be
naturally of a cold and moist constitution, the washing, anointing and powdring
must be perpetually used once or twice a week during life, the hair being put
up every night.

VI. To make hair lank and flag that curls too much.

Anoint the hair thoroughly twice or thrice a week with oil of Lillies, Roses,
or Marsh mallows, combing it after it very well.

VII. To make the hair grow long and seft.

Distill Hogs griese or oil Olive in an Alembick; with the oil that comes
therefrom anoint the hair, and it will make it grow long and soft: use it
often.

VIII. To preserve the hair from splitting at ends.

Anoint the ends thereof, with oil Omphacine, or oil of Myrtles, they are
eminent in this case to preserve the hair from splitting, so also an ointment
made of Honey, Bees wax and oil Omphacine or Bears griese.

CHAP. XLI. Of the Art of Perfuming in general.
I. IN this Art two things are to be considered, viz. 1. The way and manner of
making of Perfumes. 2. The way and manner of Perfuming.

II. The Perfume it self is considered, 1. In respect of its Form. 2. In
respect of its Composition.

III. The Form of the Perfume is either Water, Oil, Essence, Unguent, Powder,
or Tablets.

IV. The Making and Composition is taken from the Form and matter.

V. The Matter is either Vegetable, Animal or Mineral.

VI. The way of Perfuming is according to the matter to be perfumed.

VII. The matter to be perfumed is either natural, as Hairs, Skins, Clothes,
Air, etc. or Artificial, as Pomanders, Powders, Wash-balls, Soaps, Candles, and
other things of like nature.

CHAP. XLII. Of the Matter of which Perfumes are made.
I. THe ground of Vegetable Perfumes, is taken from Flowers, Seeds, Herbs,
Roots, Woods, Barks and Gums.

II. The chief Flowers for this use, are of Clove-Gilliflowers, Roses, Jasemin,
Lavender, Oranges and Saffron.

III. The chief Seeds or fruits are Nutmets, Cloves, Carrawaies, Grains, Seeds
of Geranium Moschatum, and the Nut Ben.

IV. The chief Herbs are Geranium Moschatum, Basil, sweet Majoram, Time,
Angelica, Rosemary, Lavender, Hysop, sweet Trefoyl, Mint and Bay Tree leaves.

V. The chief Roots are of Calamus Aromaticus, Ginger, China, Caryophyllata,
Indian Spicknard and sweet Orrice or Iris.

VI. The chief Woods are of yellow Sanders, Xylobalsamum, Lignum Aloes, and
Rhodium.

VII. The Barks and Peels are of Cinnamon, Mace, Oranges, Limons and Citrons.

VIII. The chief Gums are Frankincense, Olibanum, Labdanum, Styrax, liquid
Styrax. Balsamum Verum, Ambergriese. Styrax Calamita, Benjamin, Amber, Camphire.

IX. The chief matters of Perfumes taken from Animals, are Musk, Zibet,
Cow Dung and other turds.

X. Of Minerals there is one only, which yields a Perfume, and that is Antimony.

CHAP. XLIII. Of the Oil of Ben.
I. THe little Nut which the Arabians call Ben, is the same which the Latins
call Nux Vnguentaria; and the Greeks Balanos Myrepsta; out of which is taken an
Oil, of great use in the Art of Perfuming.

II. To make the Oil of Ben. Blanch the Nuts, and beat them very carefully in a
mortar, and sprinkle them with wine, put them into an earthen or Iron Pan, and
heat them hot, then put them into a linen cloth, and press them in an Almond
press; this work repeat, till all the Oil is extracted, so have you Oil of Ben
by expression.

III. In like manner you may express the Oil out of Citron seeds, incomparable
for this purpose, to extract the scent out of Musk, Civit, Amber and the like,
because it will not quickly grow rank, yet Oil of the Nut Ben is much better.

IV. This Oil of Ben has two properties; the one is, that having no scent or
odor of it self, it alters, changes or diminishes the scent of any Perfume put
into it: the other is that it is of a long continuance, so that it scarcely
ever changes, corrupts or putrifies, as other Oils do.

V. To make a Perfume thereof, put the Musk, Amber, etc. in fine powder
thereinto, which keep in a glass bottle very close stopped, for a month or
more, then use it.

VI. Or thus, Blanch your Nuts, and bruise them, (Almonds may do though not so
good) and lay them between two rows of Flowers, suppose Roses, Jasemin, etc. or
other Perfumes; when the Flowers have lost their scent and fade, remove them,
adding fresh ones; which repeat so long as the Flowers are in season; then
squeez out the oil, and it will be most odoriferous.

VII. Lastly, by this last you may draw a sweet scent out of those Flowers, out
of which you cannot distill any sweet water.

CHAP. XLI. Of sweet Waters.
I. THe first sweet Water.

Take Cloves in powder two drachms, yellow Sanders, Calamus Aromaticus of each
one scruple, Aquae Rosarum Damascenarum fifteen pound, digest four days, then
distill in an Alembick; to this new distilled water put in powder Cloves,
Cinnamon, Benjamin, Storax Calamita of each one dram, distill again in Balneo;
lastly put the water into a glass bottle with Musk and Ambergriese of each ten
granis, keep it close stopped for use.

II. The second sweet Water.

Take Damask Roses exungulated three pound, Flowers of Lavender and Spike of
each four ounces, Clove-gilliflowers, and Flowers of Jasemin, of each two
pound, Orange-flowers one pound, Citron peels four drachms, Cloves two drachms,
Cinnamon, Storax Calamita, Benjamin, Nutmegs, of each two scruples all in
powder, Aquae Rosarum six pound, digest ten days, then distill in Balneo: to the
distilled water add of Musk and Ambergriese of each thirty grains.

III. The third sweet water.

Take Roses, Clove-gilliflowers of each one pound, Flowers of Rosemary,
Lavender, Jasemin, Majoram, Savory, Time, of each three ounces, dry Citron
peels one ounce, Cinnamon, Benjamin, Storax Calamita, of each two drachms,
Nutmegs, Mace, of each one dram, bruise the Herbs and Spices well, digest in
the Sun two days, then distill in Balneo: to the distilled water add Musk in
powder one scruple.

IV. The fourth sweet Water.

Take Cloves, Cinnamon of each one dram, Mace, Grains, Musk, Ambergriese,
Citron peels of each half a scruple, Benjamin, Storax Calamita of each one
scruple, Aqua Resarum twelve pound, digest fifteen days, then distill in Balneo.

V. The fifth sweet Water.

Take Rosemary-flower water, Orange-flower water of each five pound,
Ambergriese one scruple, digest ten days, then distill in Balneo.

VI. The sixth sweet Water.

Take Roses two pound, Macaleb half a dram, Ambergriese ten grains, bruise
what is to be bruised, digest in sand three days, then distill in Balneo.

VII. The seventh sweet Water.

Take green peels of Oranges and Citrons of each four drachms; Cloves half a
dram, flowers of Spike six ounces, Aquae Rosarum Damascenarum six pound,
digest ten days, then distill in Balneo.

VIII. The eighth sweet Water.

Take of the water at the fifth Section six pound, Musk ten grains, mix and
digest them for use.

IX. The ninth sweet Water.

Take Aquae Rosarum, Aquae Florum de J^semin of each four pound, Musk one
scruple, digest ten days, then distill in sand.

X. The tenth sweet Water.

Take Dam^sk-rose, Musk-roses, Orange-flowers of each four pound, Cloves two
ounces, Nutmegs one ounce, distill in an Alembick, in the nose of which hang
Musk three scruples, Amber two scruples, Civet one scruple, tied up in a rag
dipped in bran, and the white of an egg mixed.

XI. The eleventh sweet Water, called Aqua Nanfa or Naphe.

Take Aqua Rosarum four pound, Orange-flower water two pound, waters of sweet
Trefoyl, Lavender, Sweet Majoram of each eight ounces, Benjamin two ounces,
storax one ounce, Labdanum half an ounce, Mace, Cloves, Cinnamon, Sanders,
Lignum Aloes of each one ounce, Spikenard one ounce; all being grossly beaten,
digest a month, then in a glass retort distill in Balneo.

XII. The twelfth sweet water, called Aqua Moschata.

Take spirit of Wine two pound, Musk three scruples, Amber two scruples, Civet
one scruple, digest in the Sun twenty days close stopped in a glass vessel; a
drop of this water put into any other liquor, will very perfume it.

So may you extract the scent out of sweet Flowers, with this difference, that
they lie but a little while, because their earthy substance will make the
spirit ill-favored.

CHAP. XLV. Of Perfuming Oils.
I. TO make Perfuming Oils by infusion.

II. This is taught fully at the fifth Section of the three and fortieth
Chapter aforegoing.

II. To make Oleum Imperiale.

Take Ambergriese four drachms, Storax Calamita, eight ounces, Rose Water,
Oleum Rosatum of each two pound, Oil of Cinnamon and Cloves of each half a
dram, put all into a glass, and digest in horse dung twenty days: this done
gently boil all for a quarter of an hour, which then let cool; with a spoon
take off the Oil which swims a top, to which put of Musk and Zibet of each two
drachms, digest all in a gentle heat for twenty days, and keep it for use.
Where note the Amber and Storax at bottom will serve to make sweet balls of, to
lay among clothes; or beads to carry in ones hands; or for a perfume to burn.

III. To make Oil of Cinnamon.

Digest Cinnamon grossy bruised in spirit of Wine, sharpened with oil of Salt,
in a glass vessel, with a blind head closely luted, in a gentle heat for ten
days, then distill in an Alembick as we have more at large taught in our
Synopsis Medicinae lib. 3. cap. 47. Sect. 1. it is a wonderful Perfume, the
most fragrant and pleasant of all Oils, as well in taste as smell: the use of it
will certainly take away a stinking Breath.

IV. To make Oil of Roses, called adeps Rosarum.

Take Damask Roses, pickle them with Bay salt, and after three months, with a
large quantity of water distill in ashes with a gentle fire, so have you Oil,
and Spirit or water, which keep for other distillations.

Weckerus has it thus.

Rosarum folia in umbra aliquandiu asservata, in matula vitrea magna ponuntur,
cujus sit fundus latus, and ad dimidium vas impletur: inde affunditur ipsis
Rosarum foliis tantum aquae rosaceae stillatitiae, quantum satis fuerit, ut
optime madeant: appositoque pileo vitreo caeco, stipatisque optime rimis cera
gummata, quindecim diebus equino fimo macerantur: sic tamen, ut mutato, cum
frigescere coeperit, fimo, calor aequalis servetur. Apposito mox matulae
rostrato pileo, igne moderato cinerum, aqua omnis elicitur: quae rursus in
eadem matula, optime prius a foecibus mundata, ablutaque ponitur, and calentis
aquae balneo lentissimo igne elicitur, dum tota in vas recipiens abeat. Nam in
fundo matulae remanebit oleum rosarum, color rubrum, perspicuum, and Moschi
odore suaviter fragrans.

This is the greatest of all vegetable perfumes, and of an inestimable value.

V. To make Oil of Calamus Aromaticus.

It is made as oil of Cinnamon: it is a very great perfume, helps a stinking
breath, vomiting, weak memory, etc.

VI. To make Oil of Rhodium.

It is made as oil of Cinnamon; is a very excellent perfume, good for the head,
breath and the senses.

VII. To make Oil of Indian Spicknard.

By infusion it is made by the first Section; by distillation, as oil of
Cinnamon. It is an eminent Perfume.

VIII. To make Oil of Benjamin.

Take Benjamin six ounces in powder, which dissolve in oil of Tartar and Aqua
Rosarum of each one pound, which distill with a close pipe in an Alembick. So is
made oil of Storax and Labdanum.

IX. To make oil of Storax compound.

Take oil of Ben, or sweet Almonds one pound, Storax grossly beaten four ounces,
Benjamin, Cloves of each two ounces, digest (till the Gums are melted) over hot
coals; then press out the oil diligently.

CHAP. XLVI. Of Perfuming Essences.
I. THe way to extract Essences is somewhat difficult, viz: by Distillation,
Calcination, Digestion or Menstruum.

II. If by Menstruum, use not a watery one for a watery essence; nor an oily one
for an oily essence; because being of like natures, they are not easily
separated; but on the contrary, choose an oily Menstruum for a watery essence,
and a watery Menstruum for an oily essence.

III. If the essence of any metal be to be extracted by a corrosive menstruum,
after the work is done, separate the salts from the waters, and use only those
salts which will be easily taken out again; Vitriol and Alom are very difficult
to be separated by reason of their earthy substance.

IV. To extract the essence out of Musk, Ambergriese Civet, and other Spices or
Aromaticks.

Mix the perfume with oil of Ben, which in a glass bottle set in the Sun or
Sand for ten days, then strain it from the dregs, and the essence will be
imbibed in the oil. Then take spirit of Wine, and distilled fountain water,
which mix with the said oil, and digest for six days: then distill in sand; so
will the essence and water ascend, (the oil remaining at bottom without any
scent) that essence and water distill in Balnce in a glass vessel, till the
water be come off, and leave the essence in the bottom in the form of oil.

V. Another way to do the same.

Infuse the matter in spirit of Wine a sufficient quantity, digest and ferment
for ten days, then distill in sand, as long as any water will come over (but
have a care of buring) which distilled Liquor draw off in Balneo, with a very
gentle heat, and the quintessence will be left in the bottom, of a liquid form.

VI. To extract the essence our of Herbs and Flowers, as of Sweet Majoram,
Basil, Orange-flowers, Jasemin, etc.

Bruise the matter, and put it into a glass vessel to ferment in Horse-dung for
a month; then distill in Balneo; set it in dung for a week again, and distill in
Balneo again; which reiterate so long as it will yield any liquor; put the
distilled matter upon the Caput mortuum, distilling thus for six days: draw off
the water in Balneo; and the essence remaining express in a press: which being
a week fermented in dung, will yield the perfect scent, color and virtues of
the matter desired.

VII. To extract the essence out of Salts.

Calcine the Salt, and grind it very small, then lay it upon a marble in a
moist Cellar, setting under it a pan to receive the dissolution; therein let it
ferment for a month, then with a gentle fire distill in Balneo: cast away the
insipid water, which comes from it; and set that which remains in the bottom,
to ferment another month, then distill out the insipid water as before;
repeating this work so long as any insipid water may be drawn: then evaporate
away all the moisture, and what remains is the quintessence of Salt.

Where note 1. That these Saline quintessences as they may be used, will draw
forth the perfect and complete essence of any vegetable whatsoever. 2. That the
essence of Salts thus drawn will scarcely come to two ounces in a pound.

CHAP. XLVII. Of Perfuming Unguents.
I. TO make Unguentum Pomatum, or Ointment of Apples.

Take Hogs Lard three pound, Sheeps Suet nine ounces, bruised Cloves one
dram, Aqua Rosarum two ounce, Romwaters pared and sliced one pound, boil all
to the Consumption of the Rose water; then strain without pressing, to every
pound of which add oil of Rhodium and Cinnamon of each thirty drops.

II. To make a compound Pomatum.

Take of the Pomatum aforesaid, (without the oils) four pound, Spikenard,
Cloves of each two ounces, Cinnamon, Storax, Benjamin of each one ounce (the
Spices and Gums bruised and tied up in a thin rag) Rose water eight ounces;
boil to the Consumption of the Rose water, then add white wax eight ounces,
which mix well by melting, strain it again being hot; and when it is almost
cold, mix therewith oil of Musk (made by the first Section of the five and
fortieth Chapter) then put it out, and keep it for use.

III. Another excellent Ointment.

Take hogs griese one pound, Saccharum Saturni two ounces, mix them well by
gently melting them; to which add oils of Musk and Ambergriese of each half an
ounce, let them all cool, and beat the Unguent well in a mortar, and keep it
for use.

IV. To make Vnguentum Moschatum.

Take hogs griese one pound, Ambergriese, Mosch of each one dram and a half,
(ground with oil of Jasemin upon a marble) adeps Rosarum half an ounce (ground
with Civet one dram) mix all together into an ointment which keep for use

CHAP. XLVIII. Of Perfuming Powders.
I. TO make Powder of Ox dung.

Take red Ox dung in the month of May and dry it well, make it into an
impalpable Powder by grinding: it is an excellent Perfume without any other
addition; yet if you add to one pound of the former, Musk, and Ambergriese of
each one dram it will be beyond comparison.

II. To make Cyprian Powder.

Gather Musk moss of the Oak in December, January or February, wash it very
clean in Rose water, then dry it, steep it in Rose water for two days, then dry
it again, which do oftentimes; then bring it into fine Powder and sierce it; of
which take one pound, Musk one ounce, Ambergriese half an ounce, Civet two
drachms, yellow Sanders in powder two ounces, mix all well together in a marble
mortar.

III. Another way to make the same.

Take of the aforesaid powder of Oak moss one pound, Benjamin, Storax of each
two ounces in fine Powder; Musk, Ambergriese and Civet of each three drachms,
mix them well in a mortar.

IV. A Sweet Powder to lay among clothes.

Take Damask-rose leaves dried one pound, Musk half a dram, Violet leaves
three ounces, mix them and put them in a bag.

V. Another for the same or to wear about one.

Take Rose leaves dried one pound, Cloves in powder half an ounce, Spicknard
two drachms, Storax, Cinnamon of each three drachms, Musk half a dram, mix
them and put them into bags for use.

VI. Powder of sweet Orrice, the first way.

Take Florentine Orrice root in powder one pound, Benjamin, Cloves of each four
ounces in powder, mix them.

VII. Powder of Florentine Orrice, the Second Way.

Take of Orrice root six ounces, Rose leaves in powder four ounces, Majoram,
Cloves, Storax in powder of each one ounce, Benjamin, yellow Sanders of each
half an ounce, Violets four ounces, Musk one dram, Cyperus half a dram, mix
them: being grossly powdered, put them into bags to lay amongst linen: but being
fine they will serve for other uses, as we shall show.

VIII. Powder of Orrice roots, the third way, excellent for linen, in bags.

Take roots of Iris one pound, sweet Majoram twelve ounces, flowers of Rosemary
and Roman Camomil, leaves of Time, Geranium Moschatum, Savory of each four
ounces, Cyperus roots, Benjamin, yellow Sanders, Lignum Rhodium, Citron peel,
Storax, Labdanum, Cloves, Cinnamon of each one ounce, Musk two drachms, Civet
one dram and a half, Ambergriese one dram, powder and mix them for bags.
This composition will retain its strength near twenty years.

IX. Powder of Orrice, the fourth Way.

Take Orrice roots in powder one pound, Calamus Aromaticus, Cloves, dried Rose
leaves, Coriander seed, Geranium Moschatum of each three ounces, Lignum Aloes,
Majoram, Orange peels of each one ounce, Storax one ounce and a half, Labdanum
half an ounce, Lavender Spicknard of each four ounces, powder all and mix them,
to which add Musk, Ambergriese of each two scruples.

X. Pulvis Calami Aromatici composuus.

Take Calamus Aromaticus, yellow Sanders of each one ounce, Majoram, Geranium
Moschatum of each one ounce, Rose leaves, Violets, of each two drachms,
Nutmegs, Cloves of each one dram, Musk half a dram, make all into powder,
which put in bags for Linen.

XI. Another of the same.

Take Calamus Aromaticus, Florentine Iris roots of each two ounces, Violet
flowers dried one ounce, round Cyperus roots two drachms, adeps Rosarum one
dram and a half, reduce all into a very fine powder: it is excellent to lay
among Linen, or to strew in the hair.

XII. An excellent perfuming Powder for the hair.

Take Iris roots in fine powder one ounce and a half, Benjamin, Storax, Cloves,
Musk of each two drachms; being all in fine powder, mix them for a Persume for
hair Powder. Take of this Perfume one dram, Rice flower impalpable one pound,
mix them for a powder for the hair. Note, some use white starch, flower of
French Beans and the like.

CHAP. XLIX. Of Perfuming Balsams.
I. NAtural Balsam perfumed.

Take Balsamum verum one ounce, Musk, Ambergriese, Civet of each two scruples,
mix them, for a Persume: it is the most fragrant and durable of all Persumes.

II. An odoriferous compound Balsam.

Take of the aforesaid Balsam perfumed one ounce, oils of Rhodium and Cinnamon
of each two drachms, mix them: this is an incomparable Perfume, and better than
the other for such as are not affected so much with musk.

III. Balsamum Moschatum.

Take oil of Musk one dram, oil of Cinnamon half a scruple, Virgin wax one
dram and a half, melt the wax, and mix them according to Art.

IV. Another very good.

Take Cloves, Cinnamon, Lavender, Nutmegs of each two drachms, oils of Cloves
and Rhodium of each half a dram, Wax three drachms, Musk and Ambergriese of
each ten grains, mix them into a Balsam.

V. Another very excellent for those that love not the scent of Musk and the
like.

Take oil of Geranium Moschatum (made as adeps Rosarum by the fourth Section of
the five and fortieth Chapter) adeps Rosarum, oil of Cinnamon of each one
dram, Virgin wax six drachms, melt the wax, and mix the oils for a Perfume.

CHAP. L. Of Perfuming Tablets.
I. TO make red Muskardines or Tablets.

Dissolve gum Tragacanth in Rose water, so that it may be as thick as Gelly:
which make into paste with the following composition. Take Amylum one pound,
fine Sugar half a pound, Cochenele two ounces, Musk three drachms, all being in
fine powder, mix them, and make tablets with the aforesaid Mucilage of
Tragacanth, square, long, round, or of what form you please, which dry in an
Oven, out of which bread has been lately drawn: but be sure you dry them till
they be as hard as horns.

II. Another fort of Red Tablets.

Take of the aforesaid composition one pound, Cloves, Cinnamon, Nutmegs, Ginger
of each two ounces, Cochenele one ounce, all being in fine powder, make into
tablets, with the aforesaid Mucilage, and dry as aforesaid.

III. To make yellow Tablets.

Take Amylum one pound, fine Sugar half a pound, yellow Sanders four ounces,
Saffron two ounces, (or you may dip the Amylum in strong tincture of Saffron,
and then dry it again) Musk four drachms, all being in fine powder, make the
mass into tablets with the aforesaid Mucilage, adding oil of Cinnamon in drops
two drachms, dry them carefully in the shade.

IV. Another sort of yellow Tablets.

Take Amylum dyed with tincture of Saffron I pound, Sugar half a pound, Saffron
two ounces, Nutmegs, Cinnamon, Ginger of each one ounce, Carroways half an
ounce, Musk three drachms, Ambergriese one dram, all in fine powder make into
tablets, as aforesaid, adding oil of Cinnamon two drachms; which dry in the
shade, till they be as hard as Horns.

V. To make Muscardines or Tablets of any other color.

You must make them after the same manner, only adding the color you do
intend; and in this case we think that it is better that the Amylum be dipped in
the tincture; and dried first before you use it. Where note, that these Tablets
when used are to be held in the mouth, in which they will dissolve, there by
cheering the heart, reviving the senses, comforting the spirits, strengthening
nature, restoring the body, and indeed nobly perfuming the breath. For them
that do not love Musk, you may make them without, using instead thereof so much
the more oil of Roses or Cinnamon.

CHAP. LI. Of making Pomanders for Bracelets.
I. THe first sort. Take Orrice powder, Cloves, Mace, Cinnamon of each half an
ounce, yellow Sanders, Styrax, sweet Assa of each two drachms, Ambergriese,
Musk of each one dram, Balsam of Peru, oil of Rhodium of each one scruple,
Civet two drachms, all being in fine powder (except the Balsam and Oil) mix
together, and make into paste with mucilage aforesaid, of which form Beads,
drying them in the shade for use.

II. The second sort. Take Storax Labdanum one dram and a half, Benjamin one
dram, Cloves, Mace, Spicknard, Geranium Moschatum of each ten grains, Musk,
Ambergriese of each six grains; with mucilage make a Pomander for Bracelets.

III. The third sort. Take Damask Rose leaves exungulated two ounces, beat them
impalpable: Musk, Ambergriese of each two scruples, Civet one scruple, Labdanum
one dram, with mucilage of gum Tragacanth, in Rose Water aforesaid, make a
Pomander for Bracelets.

IV. The fourth sort. Take Storax, Benjamin of each an ounce and a half, Musk
two drachms, oil of Cinnamon one dram, with Mucilage aforesaid make a paste
of Pomander, very excellent.

CHAP. LII. Of Perfuming Wash-balls.
I. TO make Barbers Wash-balls.

Take purified Venetian Soap six ounces, Macaleb four ounces, Ireos, Amylum of
each seven ounces, Cloves two ounces, Labdanum, Anniseeds of each one ounce,
Nutmegs, Majoram, Cypress powder, Geranium Moschatum, Camphire of each half an
ounce, Storax liquida half a dram, Musk ten grains, all being in fine powder,
with a little fine Sugar, beat all in a mortar, and make them up into
Wash-balls.

II. To do the same another way.

Take of the said Soap two pound, juice of Macaleb two ounces, Cloves, Orrice
of each three ounces, Labdanum two ounces, Storax one ounce, all being in fine
powder, mix with the Soap, of which make balls, drying them in the shadow.

III. To make Balls of white Soap.

Take of white Soap five pound, Iris four ounces, Amylum, white Sanders of each
three ounces, Storax one ounce, all in powder, steep in Musk water, of which
make paste for Wash-balls.

IV. Another sort very good.

Take of white Soap four pound, Orrice six ounces, Macaleb three ounces, Cloves
two ounces, all in powder mix with the Soap, with a little oil of Spike,
Rhodium or the like, of which make Balls.

V. Another way to make them of Goats fat.

Make a strong Lixivium of Potashes, as that a new laid egg will swim
thereupon, which boil with Citron peels: take of this Lie twenty pound, Goats
fat two pound, boil it for an hour, then strain it through a linen cloth into
broad platters of fair water, exposing it to the Sun, mix it often every day,
till it begins to grow hard, of which you may form balls, which you may perfume
with Musk half a dram, Civet one scruple, oil of Cinnamon ten grains.

VI. To purify Venetian Soap.

Cut it small, to which put some Rose water, or other perfuming water, boil
them a while, then strain it and it will be sweet and good, then take off the
Soap which swims a top with a spoon, and lay it upon a tyle, and it will
presently be dry, being white, free from filth and unctuosity.

VII. Another way to do the same.

Grate the Soap, and dry it in the Sun, or an Oven, powder and sierce it, then
moisten it with some sweet water or oil of Spike, which dry again (in the
shadow) and keep it for use.

CHAP. LIII. Of Perfuming Soaps.
I. TO make white musked Soap.

Take white Soap purified as aforesaid three pound, Milk of Macaleb one ounce,
Musk, Civet of each ten grains, mix them and make all into thick Cakes or rouls.

II. Another kind of sweet Soap.

Take of the oldest Venice Soap, which scrape and dry three days in the Sun
(purifying it as aforesaid) two pound, Ireos, Amylum of each six ounces,
Storaxliquida two ounces, mix them well whilst hot; which put into pans to
form Cakes.

III. To make soft Soap of Naples.

Take of Lixivium of Potashes (so strong as to bear an egg) sixteen pound,
Deers Suet two pound, set them upon the fire to simper; put all into a glased
vessel with a large bottom, set it in the Sun for a while, stirring it five or
six times a day with a stick, till it wax hard like paste. Then take of this
paste, to which put Musked Rose water; keep it eight days in the Sun, stirring
it as aforesaid, so long as it may be neither too hard nor too soft; then put
it up in boxes or pots.

IV. To make the same Soap musked.

Put to the said Soap, Rose water two pound, fine musk in powder half a dram,
then mix the said water as before.

V. Another exquisite Soap.

Take of the aforesaid Lixivium or oil of Tartar per deliquium twelve pound,
oil Olive three pound, mix them, Amylum two pound, Roman Vitriol one ounce in
powder, Glair of eggs two ounces, put all together, and stir continually for
four hours time, then let it stand the space of a day and it is done. You may
perfume it as before; this makes the hair fair.

VI. Another exceeding the former.

Take Crown-soap, Vine-ashes of each one pound, make it into Cakes with powder
of Roch Alom and Tartar of each alike, which you may perfume at pleasure.

VII. To get the juice or milk of Macaleb.

Take the sweet and odoriferous grains of Macaleb, which beat in a mortar (with
Rose water, or some perfuming water) till it becomes like pap, then press out
the juice or milk; which use within two or three days lest it spoil.

CHAP. LIVE. Of Burning Perfumes.
I. TO make perfumed lights.

Take Olibanum two ounces, Camphire one ounce, beat them into powder, of which
make, with wax, balls or rouls, which put into a glass lamp with Rose water and
lighted with a candle, will give a fair light, and a very good scent.

II. Another for a Lamp.

Take sweet oil Olive one pound, Benjamin, Storax in powder one ounce, Musk,
Ambergriese of each one scruple, mix all with the oil, which put into a lamp to
burn: and the oil will yield a fragrant odor.

III. To make perfumed Candles.

Take Labdanum, Myrrh, Xyloaloes, Styrax calamita of each one ounce and a half,
Willow Charcoal one ounce, Ambergriese, Musk of each ten grains, make them into
paste with mucilage of Gum Tragacamb in Rose water, which make into rouls like
Candles, and dry for use.

IV. A perfume to smoke and burn.

Take Labdanum two ounces, Storax one ounce, Benjamin, Cloves, Mace of each
half an ounce, Musk, Civet of each ten grains, all in fine powder, make up into
cakes with mucilage of gum Tragacanth in Rose water, which dry; and keep among
your clothes; which when occasion requires you may burn in a chafing dish of
coals.

V. Another smoking perfume to burn.

Take Labdanum two drachms, Storax one dram, Benjamin, Frankincense, white
Amber, Xylo-aloes of each two scruples, Ambergriese, Musk of each five grains,
make all into Cakes as aforesaid.

VI. Another very excellent.

Take Storax, Benjamin of each one ounce, wood of Aloes half an ounce,
Ambergriese, Musk, Civet, Balsam of Peru, oil of Rhodium of each two scruples,
Ivory burnt black a sufficient quantity, powder what is to be powdered, and mix
all together; which make into a paste, with the Ivory black and the mucilage
aforesaid; make little cakes and dry them, which keep in glasses close stopped
for use.

VII. Another very good, but of less cost.

Take Olibanum one pound, Storax Calamita and Liquida of each eight ounces,
Labdanum six ounces, Willow charcoal a sufficient quantity, with mucilage of
Tragacanth, make a paste as aforesaid.

CHAP. LV. Of Animal and Mineral Perfumes.
I. THe Animal Perfume of Paracelsus.

Take Cow Dung in the month of May or June, and distill it in Balneo; and the
water thereof will be an excellent perfume, and have the scent of Ambergriese.
See our Synopsis Medicinae lib. 3. cap. 75. Sect. 5.

II. Lard muskified, a great perfume.

Take hogs lard very pure one dram, Musk, Civet, of each half a dram, mix
them well for boxes.

III. The Mineral Perfume of Antimony.

Dissolve Antimony in oil of Flints, Crystal or Sand, coagulate the solution
into a red mass, put thereon Spirit of Wine, and digest till the Spirit is
tinged; pour it off, and put on more, till all the tincture is extracted; put
all the tinctures together, and evaporate the Spirit of Urine in Balneo; and
there will remain a blood-red liquor at bottom; upon which put Spirit of Wine,
and you shall extract a very pure tincture, smelling like Garlic: digest it a
month, and it will smell like Balm; digest it a while longer, and it will smell
like Musk or Ambergriese.

Besides being a perfume, it is an excellent sudorifick, and cures the Plague,
Fevers, Lues Venerea, etc.

IV. After the same manner you may make as substantial a perfume of Sulphur or
Brimstone. The making of the oil of Flints we have taught at the seven and
fiftieth Section of the nine and twentieth Chapter of the third Book.

CHAP. LVI. Of the Adulteration of Musk, Civet and Ambergriese.
BY reason that these choice Perfumes are often adulterated or counterfeited,
we shall do our endeavor to discover the cheat, lest any being deceived
thereby should suffer loss.

I. Musk is often adulterated by mixing Nutmegs, Mace, Cinnamon, Cloves,
Spicknard of each alike in a fine or impalpable powder with warm blood of
Pigeons, and then dried in the Sun, then beaten again, and moistened with Musk
water drying and repeating the same work eight or ten times; adding at last a
quarter part of pure Musk by moistening and mixing with Musk water; then
dividing the mass into several parts, and rouling them in the hair of a goat,
which grows under his tail.

II. Others adulterate it thus: By filling the Musk cods with Goats blood, and
a little toasted bread, mixed with a quarter part of Musk, well beaten
together. The cheat is discerned by the brightness of the Goats blood.

III. Or thus, Take Storax, Labdanum, powder of Xylo-aloes, of each four
ounces, Musk and Civet of each half an ounce, mix all together with Rose water.
The cheat is discerned, by its easy dissolving in water, and its different
color and scent.

IV. Or thus, Take Goats blood, powder of Angelica roots, Musk of each alike,
make a mixture.

V. To adulterate Civet: Mix with it the Gall of an Ox, and Storax liquefied
and washed: or you may adulterate it by the addition of Honey of Crete.

VI. To restore the lost scent to Musk, or Ambergriese.

This is done, by hanging it some time in a Jakes or house of Office; for by
these ill scents, its innate virtue and odor is excited and revived.

CHAP. LVII. Of the way of Perfuming Cloth, Skins, Gloves and the like.
I. TO Perfume Skins or Gloves.

Put a little Civet thereon here and there, (if Gloves, along the seams) then
wash in Rose or musked water four or five times, or so long as that they savor
no more of the leather, pressing them hard every time; then lay them in a
platter, covered with the said water, mixed with powder of Cypress, a day or
two; take them out, press them, and dry them in the shadow: being half dry,
besmear them a little with Civet mixed with oil of Jasemin or Ben, on the
inward side, chafing them with your hands before a fire, till you think that
the Civet has pierced or gone through the leather; leaving them so a day or
more; then rub with a Cloth that the Gloves or Leather may grow soft; leaving
them so till they are almost dry, being drawn and stretched out; then hold them
over some burning Perfume to dry, and wetting them again with Musk water, do
thus twenty times; lastly, take Musk and Ambergriese a sufficient quantity,
which mix with oil of Jasemin, Benjamin or Ben, dissolve at the fire with a
little perfumed water, with which (with a pencil) strike the Gloves or Leather
over on the outside, besmearing the seams with Civet; lasty lay them for six or
eight days; between two mattresses, so will the Skins or Gloves ^e excellently
perfumed.

II. Another way very excellent.

Take three pints of Wine, Sheeps suet or fat one pound, boil them together in
a vessel close covered; this done, wash the Griese six or seven times well with
fair water, then boil it again in White Wind and Rose water of each one pound
and a half, with a small fire, till the half be consumed: then take the said
griese, to which put pulp of sweet Navews roasted half a pound, boil all in
Rose water half an hour, then strain it, and beat it in a mortar, with a little
oil of Jas^min and Musk, with which besmear your Gloves (after due washing as
aforesaid) rubbing it well in by the fire.

III. Another way for Gloves.

Wash new Corduban Gloves, wash them well three or four days (once a day) in
good White Wind, pressing and smoothing them well; lastly, wash them in musked
water, letting them lie therein for a day, then dry them with care. This done,
steep Musk, Amber, Bazil of each one dram in a quart of sweet water, in which
dissolve gum Tragacanth three drachms, boil all gently together, and in the
boiling add Zibet one scruple, with which besmear the Gloves, rubbing and
chafing it in, then drying them according to Art.

IV. Or thus, First wash the Gloves or Skins in whitewine, then dry them in the
shade; then wash them in sweet water, mixed with oil of Cloves, and Labdanum of
each alike: lastly, take Musk, Civet, Ambergriese of each the quantity of six
grains, oil of Musk half a dram, mucilage of gum Tragacanth fifteen grains,
mix them well together in a mortar, which chafe into the washed Gloves before
the fire.

V. Cloths, Linen or Woolen, Coffers, Trunks and the like, are best perfumed
(with little cost) with the ^^oak of burning Perfumes.

CHAP. LVIII. Of making various sorts of Ink.
I. TO make good black writing Ink.

Take ponderous galls three ounces in powder, White Wind, or in place thereof
rain water, which is better, three pound, infuse them in the Sun or in a gentle
heat two days: then take Roman Vitriol well colored and powdered, which put
therein, and set all in the Sun for two days more; shake all together, to which
add of good gum Arabic in little bits one ounce, with a little white Sugar,
which dissolve over a gentle fire.

II. To make red writing Ink.

Take Raspins of Brazil one ounce, white lead, Alom of each two drachms, grind
and mingle them, infuse them in Urine one pound, with gum Arabic eight
scruples.

III. Another way to make red Ink.

Take Wine-vinegar two pound, Raspings of Brazil two ounces, Alom half an
ounce, infuse all ten days; then gently boil, to which add gum Arabic five
drachms, dissolve the Gum, strain, and keep it for use.

IV. To make green Ink to write with.

Make fine Verdigriese into paste with strong Vinegar, and infusion of green
galls, in which a little gum Arabic has been dissolved; let it dry, and when
you would write with it, temper it with infusion of green Galls aforesaid.

V. Another way to make green Ink to write with.

Dissolve Verdigriese in Vinegar, then strain it, and grind it with a little
honey and mucilage of gum Tragacanth, upon a porphyry stone.

VI. To make blew Ink to write with.

Grind Indico with honey mixed with glair of eggs or glue water, made of Ising
lass dissolved in water, and strained.

VII. To make red writing Ink of Vermilion.

Grind Vermilion well upon a porphyry stone, with common water; dry it and put
it into a glass vessel, to which put Urine, shake all together, let it settle,
then pour off the Urine; and putting on more Urine, repeat this work eight or
ten times, so will the Vermilion be well cleansed; to which put glair of Eggs,
to swim on it above a fingers breadth, stir them together, and settling abstract
the glair: then put on more glair of eggs, repeating the same work eight or ten
times also, to take away the scent of the Urine: lastly, mix it with fresh
glair, and keep it in a glass vessel close stopped for use. When you use it, mix
it with water or vinegar.

VIII. To make Printers black.

This is made by mingling Lamp black with liquid Varnish, and boiling it a
little, which you may make thick at pleasure. You must make it moister in
winter, than in Summer; and note that the thicker Ink makes the fairer letter.

If it be too thick, you must put in more Linseed oil, or oil of Walnuts, so
may you make it thicker or thinner at pleasure.

IX. To make red Printing Ink.

Grind Vermilion very well with the aforesaid liquid Varnish or Linseed oil.

X. To make green Printing Ink.

Grind Spanish green with the said Varnish or Linseed oil as aforesaid: And
after the same manner, may you make Printers blew, by grinding Azure with the
said Linseed oil.

CHAP. LIX. Of making Sealing Wax.
I. To make red Sealing Wax.

Take white Bees wax one pound, Turpentine three ounces, Vermilion in powder
well ground, oil Olive of each one ounce, melt the wax and Turpentine; let it
cool a little, then add the rest, beating them well together.

II. To do the same otherwise.

This is done by taking away the Vermilion, and adding instead thereof red Lead
three ounces, to the former things.

III. To make green Wax.

Take Wax one pound, Turpentine three ounces, Verdigriese ground, Oil Olive of
each one ounce, complete the work by the first Section.

IV. To make black Wax.

Take Bees Wax one pound, Turpentine three ounces, black earth, Oil Olive of
each one ounce, mix and make Wax as aforesaid.

V. To make Wax perfumed.

This is done by mixing with the Oil Olive aforesaid, Musk, Ambergriese, or any
other eminent Perfume, as oil of Cinnamon, adeps Rosarum, or the like one
dram, more or less, according as you intend to have its scent extended.

VI. After the same manner you may make Scaling wax of all colors, having what
scent you please; by mixing the scent intended, with the Oil Olive, and putting
the color in, in place of the Vermilion.

CHAP. LX. Of the various ways of making Artificial Pearls.
I. THe first Way. Dissolve mother of Pearl in spirit of Vinegar, then
precipitate it with oil of Sulphur per Campanum (not with Oleum Tartari, for
that takes away the splendour) which adds a luster to it; dry the precipitate,
and mix it with whites of eggs; of which mass you may make Pearls, of what
largeness you please, which before they be dry, bore through with a silver
Wire, so will you have pearls scarcely to be discerned from those which are
truly natural.

II. The second way. Take Chalk, put it into the fire, letting it lie till it
breaks; grind it impalpable, and mix it with whites of eggs, of which form
pearls, boring them as aforesaid; dry them, then wet and cover them with leaf
silver.

III. The third way. Take prepared Crabs eyes, ground into impalpable powder,
and with glair make Pearls; which bore, as aforesaid; dry them, and boil them
in Cows milk; then in the shade (free from dust) dry them well; they will
please.

IV. The fourth Way. Take potters earth, and make them of what form you please;
dry them in the Sun, or in the gentle heat of a furnace; then wet them with
glair of eggs, lightly colored with Bole armoniack, and cover them with leaves
of filver, being first wet with water: when they are dry, polish them with a
tooth, and they will be Oriental. Then take bits of Parchment, and wash them in
warm water, till the water grows somewhat thick, boil and strain it, and use it
warm: then fasten each pearl through its hole upon a fine piece of wire, and
plunge them into the water of Parchment, taking them out again; then turn them
round, that the glewy liquor may equally cover them: thus the silver whiteness
will the better shine through, so that the pearls will seem to be truly
natural, and being compared, will rather exceed.

V. The fifth Way. Calcine Muscle and snail shells in a Crucible, till they are
very white, even as snow; with glair make Pearls, which bore by the first
Section; dry them in the Sun; dip them in red wine, dry them again, and they
will be fair.

VI. The sixth Way. Take Sublimate two ounces, Tinglass one ounce, mix them,
and sublime them together, and you will have a sublimate not inferior to the
best orient Pearls in the world, of which with glair, you may form what you
please.

VII. The seventh Way. Take any of the aforesaid particulars, and mix them
(instead of glair) with ground Varnish, (made of gum Animae, and the Alcool of
wine) of which make pearls; these will in all respects be like the natural; for
these will no more dissolve in water, than the truly natural; which all those
that are made of glair of eggs are unavoidably subject to.

VIII. The eighth Way. After dissolution, precipitation, edulcoration,
siccation and formation, put the pearls into a loaf of bread, and bake it in
the Oven with other bread, so long till the loaf is much burnt, then take them
out, and wash them, first in good juice of Limons, then in clear Spring water;
and they will be as fair as the truly natural. Or after baking, give them to
pigeons to eat, keeping them close up, and in the dung you will find the pearl
exceeding fair: where note, you must give the pigeons nothing to eat in three
days time.

IX. The ninth Way. After dissolution of small oriental pearls in juice of
Limons, make the form thereof with clarified honey, moistning your hand with
Aqua Mellis; this done, perfect them as before.

X. The tenth Way. Take filtrated juice of Limons, powder of pearl of each six
ounces, Talk one ounce, put them into a glass, and stop it close, set it
fifteen days in horse-dung, and it will be a white paste; of which form pearl,
bore them, and dry them in the Sun; at last in paste of barley meal ( viz. a
barley loaf) four fingers thick, stick the pearl, so that they may not touch,
stop the holes, and cover them with paste; set it into an Oven, and bake it
with bread, and you will find them hard and clear.

XI. The eleventh Way. Having formed them of the matter intended, bored and
dried them, put them into to Quicksilver, set over a glowing heat, stirring
them well about, that the Quicksilver may stick to them; then dip them into
glair of eggs, upon a glowing heat, and they are done: or being dry, boil them
in Linseed oil, and wash them in warm water.

XII. The twelfth Way. Take pearl three ounces, prepared Salt one ounce,
filtrated juice of Limons, so much as will cover them four fingers breadth: let
it stand so long till it be a paste; the glass being very close stopped, shake
all together five or six times a day; and when it comes to a paste put it into
a glass with strong spirit of Vinegar, lute another glass over it; digest it
three weeks in a cool place under the earth, so long till all be dissolved,
then mix it with a little oil of eggs, or snail water, till it be like pearl in
color; then put this paste into silver moulds, and close them up for eight
days; after which take them out, and bore them by the first Section, and put
them again into the mould for eight days; this done, boil them in a silver
porringer with milk; lastly, dry them upon a plate, in a warm place, where
neither wind nor dust may come, and they will be much fairer than any oriental
pearl.

XIII. The thirteenth Way. After the preparation of the matter in juice of
Limons, or Aqua fortis, with clean hands make them into paste, and wash them in
distilled water, which put into edulcorate calx of silver, and digest in
Horse-dung for a month, so will they be fair and very oriental.

XIV. The fourteenth Way. Dissolve the matter in Aqua fortis (which let
overtop it a fingers breadth) in a glass gourd, till all be incorporated into
one body, which put into silver moulds, which have holes through them, and
having stood one day, bore them through the holes, as they lie in the mould
with a silver needle: being quite dry, take them out, put them into a glass
close covered in the Sun, till they be quite dry; then put them upon a silver
wire; and let them lie covered in their own fat (that is, that fatty substance
which swims on the top of the menstruum in their dissolution) so long till they
are very fair, then being strung, put them into a glass egg, and let them stand
nine days in digestion, and they will be as fair as the natural.

XV. The fifteenth Way. Take Tobacco-pipe clay, of which form little beads (by
the fourteenth Section) dry them in the Sun, and burn them in a potters
surnace; then cover them with Bole armoniack, tempered with whites of eggs;
being dry, dip them in water, lay on leaf silver, which dry again, and polish
them with a tooth: then take clean shavings of parchment, cut small, and washed
well with warm water; boil them in a new pot, with a slow fire, till they
become somewhat thick, strain it, and being warm put in the pearl upon a needle
or fine wire, that the hole may not be stopped, take them out, turn them round,
that the water or glue may not settle in one place, dipping them so often
(drying them every time) till they be thick enough, and they will appear full
as fair as the truly natural.

CHAP. LXI. Of the Consummation or Perfection of the Art of Painting.
I. AS Invention gave way to the advancement of Art; so the advancement of the
same made way for its Perfection.

The invention arose from the appearance of things natural, conceived in
Idea's, as we have abundantly signified (in the first Chapter of this Book) the
Advance from the bringing of those Idea's to light through practice ( by Chap.
35.) from when arose things very excellent for greatness, very good for their
usefulness; choice for their novelty, and singular for their kind.

II. Ease of Invention, Plenty of Matter, and Neatness of Work, were steps by
which Art was consummated. For ease of Invention gave Encouragement, Plenty of
Matter gave Formation, and Neatness gave Delight, all which so conspired
together, to put so much of emulation into the Artificer, to undertake, or
endeavor to do those things, which in their kind might never after be
exceeded: this indeed was their aim of old, which although the ancients of this
Art could never attain unto, yet did they make such way, that some of their
followers have done those things, which never any after them could ever mend,
nor themselves scarcely come near. Easy invention springs out of a great and
well rooted fullness of learning; by being conversant in all sorts of studies,
having Familiarity with Antiqutities; the knowledge of innumerable historical
and poetical narrations, together with a through acquaintance with all such
motions and Idea's of the mind, as are naturally incident unto men: for the
whole force of this Art does principally consist in these things, nothing
bearing a greater sway in the manifold varieties of Painting.

III. It was the opinion of Pamphilus ( the master of Apelles) that without the
knowledge of Arishmetick, Geometry and the Optics, this Art could not be
brought to Perfection.

The examples of Phidias and Alcamenes is pertinently brought here; The
Athenians intending to set up the Image of Minerva upon a high pillar, employed
those two workmen, purposing to choose the better of the two; Alcam^nes (having
no skill in Geometry nor the Optics) made her wonderful fair to the eye of
them that saw her near. Phidias contrariwise (being skilful in all Arts,
chiefly the Optics) considering that the whole shape would change according to
the height of the place, made her lips wide open, her nose somewhat out of
order, and all the rest accordingly, by a kind of resupination: the two Images
being brought to view, Phidias was in great danger to have been stoned by the
multitude, until at length the Statues were set up; where the sweet and
excellent strokes of Alcamenes were drowned; and the disfigured, distorted
hard-favouredness of Phidias his work vanished (and all this by the height of
the place;) by which means Alcamenes was laughed at, and Phidias much more
esteemed. Of like perfection is Amulius his Minerva; the Image of June in the
temple of the Syrian goddess; the head of Diana exalted at Chios, made by
Bupalus and Anthermus; Hercules in the temple of Antoma, etc. An Artificer,
says Philostratus in Proaemio Iconum, must understand the nature of a man
thoroughly, to express all his manners, guise, behavior, etc. he must discern
the force in the constitution of his cheeks, in the turning of his eyes, in the
casting of his eyebrows; in short, he must observe all things which may help
the judgment; and whosoever is thus furnished will doubtless excel, and bring
things to perfection; he then may easily paint a mad man, an angry man, a
pensive man, a joyful man, an earnest man, a lover, etc. in a word, the
perfection of whatsoever may possibly be conceived in the mind.

IV. Continual observation of exquisite pieces (whether Artificial or Natural)
nimble conceptions, and tranquillity of mind, are great means to bring Art to
Perfection.

The works of the Ancients could never have been so exquisite in the expression
of Passions, but by these means. How perfectly did Zeuxis paint the modest and
chaste behavior of Penelope; Timomachus the raging mad fit of Ajax; Silanion
the frowardness of Apollodorus; Protogenes the deep pensiveness of Philiscus;
Praxiteles the rejoycings of Phryne; Parrhasius a boy running in Armor; and
Aristides his Anapauomenos dying for love of his brother. Bodius his Image of
Hercules is of the same nature; Themistius shows us the true Image of feigned
friendship; Agellius a most lively Image of Justice; Apelles an admirable
picture of Slander; thousands of examples more might be drawn out of ancient
Authors to approve these things, if these may be thought not sufficient.

V. This Perfection also lies in the truth of the matter, the occasion
thereof, and discretion to use it.

The most ancient and famous Painters did make much account of Truth, and had
rather lose the neatness and glory of their pieces, than to endanger the truth
of their story; which indeed is the great commendation of a Picture, for as
much as Lucian says, that nothing can be profitable but what proceeds from
truth. Occasion also is a great matter; the Picture of Bacchus may here serve
for an excellent example, whose passion of love was so clearly expressed
therein; casting aside his brave apparel, Flowers, Leaves, Grapes, etc. Now in
representing things truly according to the occasion, discretion ought to be
your guide; for as in Tragedies, so also in Pictures all things ought not to be
represented; let not Medea (says Horace in libro de Art) murder her own
children in the pesence of all the people; let not the wicked Atreus boil
humane flesh openly; there are doubtless many things, which had better be left
out, though with some loss of the story, than with the loss of modesty; wanton,
unlawful and filthy lusts (though they may gain the vain title of wit, yet)
they diminish not only the estimation of the workman, but also the excellency
of the work, debarring it of perfection. Precepts help Art much, in propounding
unto us the right way; but where they fail, our wits must supply, by warily
considering what is decent and convenient; for this Art requires studious
endeavors, assiduous exercitations, great experience, deep wisdom, ready
counsel, veracity of mind, diligent observations, and great discretion.

VI. To the former add Magnificence, which gives authority to things excellent.

Great minded men are most of all given to entertain stately conceits;
therefore an Artizan ought to be of a magnanimous nature; if not, yet that at
least he ought with a determined resolution to aim at magnificent things. So it
seems that nature did dispose Nicophanes to a high strain of invention;
Nicophanes (says Pliny, lib. 35. cap. 10.) was gallant and neat, so that he
did paint Antiquities for Eternity, whereby he was commended for the
magnificence of his work, and gravity of his Art. Such Artificers therefore as
do bring any thing to perfection, must be of an exceeding great spirit, and
entertain upon every occasion great thoughts, and lofty imaginations; by this
means they shall gain an everlasting fame; but this is impossible (says
Longinus) for any who busy the thoughts and studies of their life about vile
and slavish matters, to bring forth any thing which might deserve the
admiration of succeeding ages. If any Artizan be not naturally of so great a
spirit, let him help himself by the reading of History and Poesy; History
cannot but inspire a magnanimous Spirit, when she represents to us so many rare
exploits, and the examples of so many great, noble and valiant souls, who
throughout all ages, in the midst of most eminent dangers, have demonstrated
their virtues and spirits not only to those present, but all succeeding times.
Poesy also being of a haughty and lofty style, does much enlarge the mind, and
from thence many excellent things are brought: The much admired Elean Jupiter
which Phidias made, himself confessed to be formed after the Image of Jupiter
described in Homer. From the same Poet did Apelles paint the Image of Diana
among the sacrificing Virgins. It is not the present age, but the sacred memory
of all posterity, which gives unto us a weighty and durable crown of Glory.

VII. Exact Analogy or proportion, not only advanced Art, but also brought it a
degree nearer Perfection.

Philostratus calls it Symmetrie, some Analogy, others Harmony; this is the
appellation of the Greeks; what the Latins called it scarcely appears (as Pliny
says lib. 34. cap. 8.) yet words equivalent in power thereto are found, as
Congruence, equality, and Tully (libro prima de Officiis) calls it Agreement
and apt composition; Vitruvius, Commodulation; Agellius calls it a natural
competence; Quintilian approves the word Proportion; by which says Plutarch
beautiful things are perfected: it is one of those things which the most High
used in the fabrication of the world ( Wisd. 11.20.) He has disposed all
things in measure and number and weight. The first giver of Symmetrie or
Analogy was Parrhasius, Polycletus, who was a diligent observer thereof;
Asclepiodorus, an exact practiser thereof, whose admirer was Apelles, who
esteemed it to proceed out of some perfections in an Artificer surpassing in
Art, and which is most apparent in naked and undisguised bodies. Strabo says,
that Phidias exactly observed this proportion in the Image of Jupiter Olympicus
sitting. The same Phidias, as Lucian reports, could exactly tell upon the first
fight of a Lions claw, how big a Lion he was to make in proportion to the same
claw. Lineal Picture is the foundation of all imitation, which if it be done
after the true rules of proportion, will lively represent the thing delineated:
this is a perfection in kind, which yet cannot be compared to the perfection of
a colored Picture.

VIII. This point of Perfection was further advanced by the exquisiteness of
Coloring.

The perfection of Coloring arises from a certain right understanding of each
color severally, without which it is impossible to mix any thing rightly, as
Hermogenes says. The Greeks (as Porphyrius) call this mixtion of colors,
corruption, which word Plutarch also used when he said that Apollodorus (who
first found out the corruption or way of shadowing in colors) was an Athenian.
Lucian calls it confusion, where he says that by the Art of Painting, Images
were made by a moderate confusion of Colors, as white, black, yellow, red,
etc. by which, as Philostratus says in Proaemio Iconum, we know how to imitate
the diversities of looks in a mad man, in a sad or cheerful countenance; the
color of the eye, as brown, gray or black; of the hair, as golden, ruddy,
bright, or flaxen; of the clothes, as cloth, leather, or armor; of places, as
chambers, houses, forests, mountains, rivers, fountains, etc. this is done by
the accurate mixtion, due application, and convenient shadowing, as Lucian
says in Zeuxide; through the observation of light, shadow, obscurity and
brightness, as Plutarch will have it. For this cause, says Johannes
Glammaticus, is a white or golden Picture made upon a black ground. Light is
altogether necessary, seeing there can be no shade without it: light and shadow
cannot subsist asunder, because by the one, the other is apparent; for those
things which are enlightened seem to stick out more, and to meet the eyes of the
beholder; those which are shaded to be depressed. This same of light and
shadow, Nicias the Athenian did most accurately observe; as also Zeuxis,
Polygnotus, and Euphranor, as Philostratus says in libro secundo de vita
Apllonii, cap. 9. Apelles painted Alexander as if he held lightning in his
hand; Philostratus observed the same in the picture of an Ivory Venus, so that
one would think it an easy matter to take hold of her; Pansias arrived to such
an excellency in this, as scarcely any after could attain unto, as in the
painted Ox, says Pliny, which he made inimitable. Obscurity or Darkness is
only the duskiness of a deeper shadow, as brightness is the exaltation of
light: if white and black be put upon the same superficies, the white will seem
nearest, the black farther off: this being known, to make a thing seem hollow,
as a ditch, cave, cistern, well, etc. it is colored with black or brown; and
so much the blacker, so much the deeper it seems; extreme black representing a
bottomless depth; but to make it rise, as the breasts of a maid, a stretched
our hand, etc. there is laid round or on each side so much black or brown, as
may make the parts seem to stick out by reason of the adjacent hollowness;
brightness is sometimes used for necessity, but generally for ornament, (as in
the pictures of Angels, Gems, Armor, Flame, Flowers, Gold, and the like) the
which is made always with a mixture of light; which mixtion Painters call
Harmoge, but is nothing else save an undiscernible piece of Art, by which the
Artizan stealingly passes from one color into another, with an insensible
distinction; this Harmoge is most perfect in the Rainbow, which containing
evident variety of Colors, yet leaves them so indistinguishable, as that we
can neither see where they begin, nor yet where they end, as Boethius observes
in libri quinti de art musica capite quarto. The last and chief perfection of
coloring lies in the out-lines, or extremities of the work, being cut off
with such a wonderful subtilty and sweetness, as to present unto us things we
do not see, but that we should believe that behind the pictures, there is
something more to be seen, than can easily be discerned; thereby setting forth,
as it were, those things which are really concealed; this was Parrhafius his
chief glory; but herein Apelles exceeded all others whatsoever, as Petronius in
Satyrico seems to affirm.

IX. Action and Passion is next to be considered, in which consists life and
motion.

There is not any thing that can add a more lively grace to the work, than the
extreme likeness of motion, proceeding from the inward Action or Passion of the
mind. It is therefore a great point of Art, which leads unto Perfection, the
which we are to learn by casting our eyes upon nature, and tracing her steps.
Consider all the gestures of the body, as the head, by which is expressed the
affections of the mind. The casting down of the head, shows dejection of
mind; being cast back, arrogance, hanging on either side, languishing; being
stiff or sturdy, churlishness, by it we grant, refuse, affirm, threaten; or
passively are bashful, doubtful, sullen, envious, etc. by the motions of the
Countenance appears sorrow, joy, love, hatred, courtesy, courage, dejection,
etc. by the motions of the countenance, are expressed the qualities of the mind,
as modesty and shamefastness, or boldness and impudence; but of all the parts
of the countenance, the eyes are most powerful, for they, whether we move or
move not, show forth our joy or sorrow; this is excellently expressed by the
Prophet, in Lam. 3.48. (...) palge majimterad gneni, gual sheber bat gnammi,
which Tremellius renders, Rivis aquarum perfluit oculus meus, propter
contritionem filiae populi mei^ and again (...) gneni niggerah velo tidma, i.
e. ^culus men's deflxit nec desistit. For the same purpose it is that nature
has furnished them with tears; but their motion does more especially express
the intention, as meekness, pride, spitefulness, and the like; all which are to
be imitated, according as the nature of the action shall require, as staring,
closed, dull, wanton, glancing, asking or promising something. The eyebrows
also have some actions, for they chiefly command the forehead by contracting,
dilating, raising and depressing it; wrinkled brows show sadness and anger;
displayed, cheerfulness; hanging, shame, elation, consent; depression, dissent,
etc. The Lips show mocking, scorning, loathing, etc. The Arm gently cast forth,
is graceful in familiar speech; but the arm spread forth toward one side,
shows one speaking of some notable matter; without the motion of the bands all
motion is maimed: The hands as it were call, dismiss, threaten, request, abbor,
fear, ask, demand, promise, deny, doubt, confess, repent, number, measure,
rejoice, encourage; beseech, hinder, reprove, admire, relate, commend, etc. In
admiration we hold the hand up, bent somewhat backward, with all the fingers
closed: In relating we join the top of the forefinger to the thumb-nail: In
promising we move it softly: In exhorting or commending, more quick: In
penitence and anger, we lay our closed hand to the breast: We close the fingers
ends, and lay them to our mouth when we consider, etc. It is not yet enough
that the Picture or Image resembles the proportion and color of the life,
unless it likewise resembles it in the demeanor of the whole body; therefore
Callistratus calls this Art, the art of counterfeiting manners. Ulysses is
evidently, says Philostratus, discerned by his austerity and vigilance;
Menelaus by his gentle mildness; Agamemnon by a kind of Divine Majesty; Ajax
Telamonius, by his grim look; Locrus by his readyness and forwardness. The best
Artists ever change their hands, in expressing of Gods, Kings, Priests,
Senators, Orators, Musicians, Lawyers, etc. Zeuxis painted the modesty of
Penelope: Echion made a new married but shamefaced woman: Aristides painted a
running Chariot drawn with four horses: Antiphilus made a boy blowing the fire:
Philoxenus Ere^^ius depicted the Picture of Wantonness: Parrhasius made the
Hoplisides or Pictures of two armed men, as may be seen in Pliny lib. 35. cap.
9. 10, and 11. Boethius made a babe strangling a goose: Praxiteles made a
weeping woman, and a rejoicing whore: Euphranor drew the picture of Paris as a
Judge, a wooer and a soldier: See Pliny lib. 34. cap. 8. where you may have
many other examples. It is worth our pains to see in Callistratus these
descriptions at large, whereby we may see it is a singular Perfection of Art.

X. The last step of Perfection is the right ordering and disposing of things.

This order or disposition must be observed as well in a picture consisting of
one figure, as in a picture of many figures. The nature of man, says Xenophon
in Oeconomice, cannot nameany thing so useful and fair, as order; a confused
piece of work cannot deserve admiration; those things only affect us, wherein
every part is not only perfect in it self, but also well disposed by a natural
connection. It is not enough in a building to bring hair, lime, sand, wood,
stones, and other materials, unless we take care that all this confused stuff
be orderly disposed to the intent. Nature it self seems to be upholden by
Order, and so are all things else which are subjugated to the same Law. Now the
way to attain to this true order of disposition, is first to conceive the Idea
of the history in the imagination, that the presence of the things in the mind
may suggest the order of disposing each thing in its proper place, yet with
that subtilty that the whole may represent one entire body. Secondly, that the
frame of the whole structure of this disposition, may be analogous to the
things themselves; so that we may at once represent things which are already
done, things which are doing, and things which are yet to be done; perfecting,
as Philostratus says, in every one of these things, what is most proper, as if
we were busied about one only thing. Thirdly, an historical Picture must
represent the series of the history, which although the Picture be silent, yet
that the connection might (as it were) speak, putting the principal figures in
the principal places. Fourthly, the parts must be connected easily rolling on,
gently flowing or following one another, hand in hand, seeming both to hold and
be upheld, free from all abruption, well grounded, finely framed, and strongly
tied up together; that the whole may be delightsome for its equality, grave for
its simplicity, and graceful for its universal analogical composure. Fifthly,
that most excellent pieces (if the history will suffer it) be shadowed about
with rude thickets, and craggy rocks, that by the horridness of such things,
there may accrue a more excellent grace to the principal; (just as discords in
Music make sometimes concords) from whence results a singular delight.
Sixthly, that to these things be added perspicuity; which, as Lucian says,
through the mutual connection of things, will make the whole complete and
perfect. Seventhly and lastly, that the disposition of the preportion be
observed, in the due distance of each figure, and the position of their parts,
of which we have said something, Section seventh; but in general Pliny ( lib.
35. cap. 10.) says, that in this general disposition of proportional
distances, we have no rules; our eye must teach us what to do; to which
Quintilian assents, where he says, that these things admit no other Judgment,
but the judgment of our eyes.

XI. Lastly, For the absolute Consummation or Perfection of the Art, excellency
of Invention, Proportion, Color, Life and Disposition, must universally
concur, and conspire, to bring forth that comely gracefulness, which is the very
life and soul of the work, the entire and joint Sum of all perfections.

It is not enough, that a Picture is excellent in one or more of the aforesaid
perfections, but the consummation is, that they all concur; for if but one be
wanting, the whole work is defective. A good invention affects the mind; true
proportion draws the eyes; lively motion moves the soul; exquisite colors
beguile the fantasy; and an orderly disposition, wonderfully charms all the
senses; if all these unite, and center in one piece, how great an excellence
and perfection will appear? What a comely Grace? this Grace it is, which in
beautiful bodies is the life of beauty, and without which, its greatest
accomplishments cannot please the beholder. For it is not so much the
perfection of Invention, Proportion, Colors, Motion and Disposition apart,
which affect the senses; but all those perfections absolutely united, which
brings forth that comely Grace, and highest Perfection, which Art aims at, and
the Artizan strives after. This Grace proceeds not from any rules of Art, but
from the excellent spirit of the Artificer; it is easier attained by
observation and a good judgment, than learned by Precepts, as Quintilian in his
Institutions lib. 11. cap. 1. learnedly observes. And this Grace is most
graceful, when it flows with facility, out of a free Spirit, and is not forced
or strained out with labor and toil, which quite spoils and kills the life of
the work: Now this facility springs from Learning, Study and exercitation. Art
and Nature must concur to the Constitution of this Grace; Art must be applied
discreetly to those things which we naturally affect, and not to things which
we loath; lest we miss of that Glory which we seek after.

Errata sic emendanda.
Page 11. l. 10. read prints: p. 29. l. 29. r.V: p. 43. l. 25. r. 11: p. 57. l.
1. r. Chap. XXIII: p. 60. l. 5. r. VI: p. 60. l. 29. r. XI: p. 61. l. 32. r.
VII: p. 110. l. 30. r. IV: p. 119. l. 29. read, the nightly bear: p. 139. l. 7.
r. XV: p. 141. l. 10. r. II: p. 141. l. 26. r. X: p. 156. between l. 8. and 9.
r. IV. Another for the same: p. 165. l. r. r. Chap. XVIII: p. 184. l. 22. r.
VII: p. 203. l. 16. r. IX: p. 162. between l. 18. and 19. r. III. By some he is
thus described: p. 268. 126. r. VII: p. 268. l. 32. r. VIII: p. 271, l. 6: r.
V: p. 277. l. 5. r. VI: p. 279. l. 16. ^. Gaffarel: p. 292. l. 27. and 28. are
transposed: p. 296. l. 31. r. XIV: p. 309. l. 1. 1. are two only: l. 2. and
they are Antimony and Sulphur: p. 312. l. 25. well Perfume: p. 329. l. 3.
Spirit of Urine.

INDEX.
A.
ANgles and Arches 5, 65 Antique 40, 223 Arnus a river 51 Achelous, a river 52
Aurora 55, 138 Auster, a wind 57 April 58 August 58 Appearances to describe 60
Active part perspect. 61 Altitude 62 Aqua fortis 81, 82 Aqua fortis to use 86,
91 Arsenick 98 Ash Color 100, 128 Azure 103, 133 Argentum musicum 106 Aurum
musicum 107 Armor 116 Apollo 136 Astrea 138 Aeneas 140 Alexander 140, 277 Arts
to paint 142 Arithmetic 142 Astronomy 142 Audacity 144 Amel what 166, 168, 193
Amethysts artificial 191 Amber artificial 192, 193 Azure to make 194 Azure
color to dye 203 Apelles 211, 214, 215, 280, 287, 346 Analogy 219, 344
Amethyst color 229 Azure color 229 Astarte 241 Apollo to depict 247 Aurora to
depict 255 Aeolus to depict 260 Atropos 265 Aratus to depict 276 Aristotle 276
Adeps rosarum 330 Aqua Nansa 312 Aqua Moschata 312 Animal Perfume 328
Antimonial Perfume 329 Adulteration of Musk 329 Artificial pearl 335 Alcamenes
340 Action 347
B.
BRows 9, 11 Body to draw 18 Body naked 21 Breast 25 Birds to draw 35 Beasts to
draw 35 Boreas, a wind 57 Broken radiations 60 Burnishing Iron 73 Brush pencil
82 Burnisher 82 Blacks 96, 124, 129, 131, 165 Blews 96, 103, 124, 128, 129 Bole
armonlack 98 Blew bice 99 Bay color 100 Blew azure 102 Black satin 104
Burnished gold and silver 106 Browns 124, 151 Black complexion 127 Buff color
130 Bacchus 137, 267 Beza 141 Brazil 147 Buildings 153 Blackness to take away
160 Buckthorn berries 162 Brass to make 169, 173 Brass to tinge 173 Brass to
whiten 173 Brass to cleanse 176, 178 Brushes 185 Brass to gild 196 Books to
gild 197 Bones to dye 165, 169, 202 Bones to soften 203 Brown dye 205 Blew dye
205, 206, 207 Bow-dye 208 Banqueting rooms 224 Bed-chambers 224 Bacchus to
depict 267 Bulls gall 292 Beautifyers which paint not 293 Berosus 284 Burning
and scalding 301 Preath stinking 303, 304 Baldness 305 Balsam odoriferous 321
Balsamum Moschatum 321 Bracelets 323 Burning Perfumes 327 Black Ink 332 Black
Sealing wax 335
C.
Comatice 1 Charcoals 2 Compasses 3 Circle 4, 65 Cone and Cylinder 5 Concord 47
Calumnia 49 Cllo, one of the Muses 55 Calliope 56 Catoptrica, what 60, 67
Center 65 Croset to delineate 65 Chiromantical Signatures 68 Cushion 73 Copper
plates to polish 74, 80 Copoies to imitate 77 Coloring 345 Colors 93, 95, 97,
100, 124 Ceruse 97 Crimson 101, 128 Crimson lake 101 Colors for Drapery 103
Carnation 104, 128 Cloth of gold 104 Colors to prepare 108 Colors to grind
108 Colors to steen 109 Colors to temper 109, 151 Colors to calcine 109
Colors their signification 125 Colors to fit for Painting 126 Complexions 126
Colors for Velvet 127 Colors for Sattins 129 Colors for Taffatie 130 Colors
for Cloth 130 Colors for Leather 130 Colors for garments 130 Colors for
Metals and Stones 132 Colors for Landscape 133, 153 Cupid 137 Ceres 138 Charity
142 Concord 143 Confidence 143 Colors for glass 144 Colors for washing 147
Cochenele 148, 161, 162, 163 Color to take away 164, 167 Coral 165 Copper 166,
167 Copper to tinge 174 Copper to whiten 174, 175 Copper to soften 175 Casting,
the way 185 Casting Trough 183 Crucibles 184 Crystal to melt 188 Cement for
glasses 188 Calcydon artificial 190 Carbuncle artificial 191 Chrysolite
artificial 191 Corals artificial 191 Cloths to dye 207 Crimson dye 208 Choice
of copies 221 Chambers 223, 224 Colens earth 227 Cherry-stone black 227
Caduceus, what 250 Charon to depict 264 Cloth^ 265 Chrysippus 276 Cosmetick of
crabs 293 Cosmeticks 293 Cosmetick of pearl 296 Cosmetick of Myrrh 297 Chops to
heal 301 Cyprian powder 318 Candles perfumed 327 Civet to adulterate 330 Cloth
to perfume 330 Consummation of these Arts 339
D.
Drawing, what 1 Drawing in general 4 Drawing of the face 7 Distance of its
parts 9 Drapery 30 Diapering 40 Draught of a Picture 41 Demogorgon 44 Destiny
47 Dissimulation 49 Danubius, a river 52 Dryades 54 December 59 Direct
radiation 60 Dioptrica, what 61, 67 Distance in perspect. 63 Diagonals 64 Deep
purple 109 Diapering on gold or silver 107 Defects to help 109 Drapery to Limn
116 Diamonds to Limn 116 Diana 138, 252 David 140 Dido 140 Diamonds artificial
189, 190 Disposing of Pictures 223, 349 Dining rooms 224 Design 226 Dead color
231 Diana to depict 252 Diana's Nymphs 253 Diogenes 276 Democritus 276 Darkness
343
E.
Eyes 9, 11 Ear 13 Extreme parts to draw 15 Envy to express 23, 49, 142
Eternity 44, 142 Equality 46 Euterpe, one of the Muses 55 Erato, one of the
Muses 56 Eurus, a wind 57 Engraving 76 Engraving wood 78 Etching 80, 85 90
Etching Varnish 80 Etching needles 82 Emeralds to Limn 117 Easle 181 Echo 193
Emperors 140 Elizabeth Regina Angliae 141 Empedocles 141 Erasmus 141
Experimental observations 160 Emerald artificial 192 Emerald color 228, 229
Epicurus 276 Euclid to depict 276 Essences perfumed 315 Essence of Musk 315
Essence of herbs, salts 316
F.
Feathers 2 Fourth praxis of Drawing 5 Fifth praxis of Drawing ib. Feet 25 Fear
to express 28, 275 Flowers to draw 36 Fate 45 Fortune 45, 269 Fame 47, 274
Felicity 49, 142 Fruitfulness 49 February 57 Foundation of Chiromancy 68
Figures upon wood Frane for etching 83 Flame color 100 Feathers 105 Fire
color 105 Fair complexion 126 Face to paint 134 Flora 133 Faith 142 Fustick
berry 149 Flory blew 149 Flesh color 151 Flask what 184 Furnace 184 Frescoe
239 Faunes and Fairies 263 Fucus to paint the Face 29^ Freckle^ 299
G.
Ganges a river 51 Galatea a Nymph 54 Glass 63 Graving 72 Gravers 72 Gravers to
make 74 Graver to hold 75 Gums 93, 94 Green colors 96, 129, 131 Green bice 98
Glass gray 100 Gray 100 Green 102, 103, 104, 124, 133, 149, 150 Gold cloth 104
Gold liquid 105, 147 Gold armoniack 107 Grinding stone 110, 123 Gold armor 116
Gold color 132 Graces 138 Gustavus rex Sueciae 140 Geometry 142 Government 142
Glass to paint 144, 145, 168 Gambogia 148 Glass of Antimony 166 Gold 168, 169
Gold to soften 171 Golden tree 181 Glass to make 189 Gilding 195 Glass to gild
195, 197 Green dye 206, 207 Galleries 224 Glaucus to depict 260 Galatea to
depict 260 God the Author of these Arts 277 Gloves to perfume 331 Green Ink 333
Gracefulness 351
H.
Hair 13 Hands 15 Humane proportion 28 Hercules 48 Ho^e 48 Horizontal line 63
Holding the Graver 75 Hard etching varnish 80 Hair color 104, 128, 129, 131
Hymen 137 Hope 142 Honor 144, 173 High ways 153 Hills 153 Horns to dye 165,
169, 204 Horns to soften and cast 203, 204 Hall 223 Honor to depict 273
Harpocrates to depict 275 Hieraclitus to depict 276 Hands swollen 302 Hair to
beautify 305 Hair to take away 306 Hair to curl 306 Hair powder 320 Harmoge 346
I.
Instruments of Drawing 2 Insects to draw 36 Justice 49, 143 Injury 49 Indus a
river 51 Iris a Nymph 54 January 57 June 58 July 58 Judgment whence 60
Ichnographia 61 Jupiters signification 69 Instruments of Graving 72 Imitation
of prints 77 Instruments of Etching 80 Instruments of Limning 93, 110 Indico
99, 150 Iron color 132 Jupiter 136 Juno 138, 256, 257 Innocence 143 Jollity
143 Impudence 144 Joy 143 Iron to tinge 175, 177 Iron to whiten 176 Iron to
keep from rust 176 Iron to soften 176 Iron to solder 177 Instruments of Casting
183 Jacynth artificial 191 Iron to gild 195, 198 Ivory to soften 203 Ivory to
whiten 204 Invention 219 Imitation 225 Ivory black 227 Indian lake 228 Infants
to paint 237 Jupiter to depict 242 Janus to depict 254 Juice of Macaleb 326 Ink
to make 331
K.
Kali an herb 189 Knives to gild 196 King Amasis 283 King Perseus 283 King
Attalus 284
L.
Love to express 28 Leaves of trees to express 36 Landscape 37, 66, 223, 225
Line, what 59 Linea Jovialis 68 Linea Saturnalis 68 Linea Solaris 68 Linea
Mercurialis 68 Linea Lunaris 68 Linea Stellata 68 Luna her signification 70
Letters 78 Limning 93, 113, 230 Liquid gold and silver 93, 105, 147 Lamp black
97 Litmoss blew 99 Light green 100 Lead color 101 Lake to make 101 Light blew
104 Leaves of trees to color 105 Limning instruments 110 Light to chose 113
Limning drapery 116 Limning Landscape 117, 235 Leather color 130 Landscape
colors 135, 153 Law 143 Love 143 Laughter 143 Liberty 144 Logwood 147, 163
Litmoss 149, 163 Lapis Lazuli 159 Lignum Nephriticum 161, 163 Liquor to make
colorless 164, 167 Lapis Calaminaris 169 Lead to purge 178 Lead to tinge 178,
179 Linen to gild 107 Leather 199 Letters silver 199 Linen to dye Brown,
Blew, Red, Russet, Purple, Yellow, Green 205 Luna to depict 252 Lachesis 265
Liquor of Talk 293 Lac Virginis 296 Lamp perfumed 327 Life 347
M.
Mouth 9, 11 Mixed forms 35 Meray 49 Mountain Nymphs 53 Melpomene 55 Months 57
March 57 May 58 Magnitude, what 59 Mensa 68 Mars's signification 69 Mercury's
signification 70 Materials of Etching 80 Masticot 98 Mixed colors 100 Murry
100, 102 Molstick 122 Metal colors 132 Mercury 136 Minos, Momus 137 Moses 140,
276 Mahomet 140 Modesty 143 Madder 148 Mixing of colors 151 Marble to imitate
158 Mineral experiments 165 Mercurius Vitae 165 Metals 170 Metals to color 180
Metals to melt 183 Medals 184 Matter of Gems 189 Metals to gild 198 Maremaids
221 Murus color 229 Mars to depict 244 Mars his court and house 245 Mercury to
depict 250 Minerva to depict 265 Magistery of Pearl 291 Morphew to cleanse 294
Mercurial Cosmetick 295 Marks and Scars 301 Matter of Perfumes 308 Muscardines
red 321 Musked Soap 326 Macaleb juice 326 Mineral perfume 329 Musk to
adulterate 329 Magnificence 343 Motion 347
N.
Nose 9, 11 Naked body 21, 238 Nilus, a river 50 Niger, a river 53 Nymphs 53
Napae 53 Naiades, Nymphs 54 November 58 Needles to etch with 82 Needles to whet
82 Neptune 237 Night 138, 274 Numa 140 Natural affection 243 Nereides 221
Nymphs of Diana 253 Neptune to depict 259 Nemesis to depict 261
O.
Oval 4 Outstrokes 13 October 38 Optice 59, 60 Orthographia 61 Object 64 Oil
stone 73 Oil prepared 81 Orpiment 98 Oker de luce 99, 2^7 Orchal 100 Orange
color 129, 131, 149 Old paints to cleanse 136 O^thion 143, 274 O^^ of flints
182 Original of Painting 211 Original colors 228 Old bodies to paint 238 Ops
to depict 258 Occanus to depict 260 Oil of Camphire 291 Oleum Tartari 296
Ointment Cosmetick 296, 297 Oil of Ben 309 Oleum Imperiale 313 Oil of Cinnamon
313 Oil of Roses 313 Oil of Calamus Aromaticus 314 Oil of Rhodium 314 Oil of
Benjamin, Storax 314 Ointments perfumed 317 Orrice powder 319 Odoriferous
Balsam 321
P.
Polygraphice, what 1 Pictura 1, 219 Pencils 3, 110, 122, 147 Pens 3 Pastils to
make 3 Precepts of Drawing 4 Polygon 5 Paps 25 Passions to express 28, 347
Picture to extend or contract 43 Powers to express 44 Peace 47, 273 Providence
47 Piety 48 Penitence 49 Poor Padus, a river 52 Polyhymnia 56 Perspective 59
Practice thereof 64 Perspective figure 66 Plates to polish 74, 80 Prepared oil
81 Pink yellow 98, 227 Purple 100, 102, 103, 128, 129, 131, 169 Popinjay green
104 Peach color 105 Preparation of colors 108 Preparations for Limning 111
Practice of Limning 113 Pearls to Limn 116 Pictures to Varnish 118 Painting in
Oil 121, 225 Pallet 122 Primed cloth 122 Pear color 132 Painting the Face in
oil 134 Painting of the Ancients 136 Pluto 137 Pallas 138 Proserpine 138
Pythagoras 141 Philosophers to paint 141 Passions to paint 142 Peace 143
Pleasure 143 Pastime 143 Printers black 147 Practice of Washing 154 Putty what
168 Pipe for casting 184 Precious stones to counterfeit 188 Pearls artificial
190, 335 Preparat. and proport. of mineral colors 193, 194 Paper, Parchment,
199 Purple dye 206, 208 Proportion 219, 344 Porch 223 Phoebus to depict 246 Pan
to depict 262 Pluto to depict 263 Parcae to depict 265 Pallas to depict 265
Peace to depict 273 Progress of these Arts 277 Phidias 286, 287, 340, 344
Painting the Face 288 Pimples 298 Perfuming in general 307 Perfuming waters 310
Perfuming oils 313 Perfuming essences 315 Perfuming unguents 317 Pomatum 317
Perfuming powders 318 Pulvis Calami Aromatici 320 Perfuming Balsams 320
Perfuming tablets 321 Pomanders 323 Perfuming Wash-balls 324 Perfuming soaps
225 Perfumes burning 327 Perfumes animal 328 Perfume of Sulphur 329 Printers
Ink 334 Perfection of Painting 339
Q.
Quicklime 162 Quicksilver 167 Quicksilver to harden 170 Quicksilver to tinge
171 Quintilian 213, 214, 344
R.
Rulers 9 Rivers 50 Radiation, what 60 Radiation reflected 60 Red colors 96
Red lead 97, 228 Rosset 97 Russet Satin 104 Russet to shadow 104 Rubies to
Limn 117 Religion 143 Rocks 153 Red Varnish 157 Ruby artificial 190 Red dies
206, 208 Busset dye 206 Ruby color 228 Red fucus 292, 293 Redness and Pimples
298 Ring worms 300 Red tablets 321 Red Ink 323 Right ordering 349
S.
S^nare 4 Second practice of Drawing 5 Shadowing the face 13 Shadowing a naked
body 25 Shadowing, the rules 26 Sun to express 37 Security 49 Superficies, what
59 Solid what 60 Stenographia 61, 62 Subject to be seen 62 Section, what 63
Saturns signification 69 Sols signification 69 Soft Varnish to etch with 81
Soft Varnish to use 89 Spanish white 97 Sinaper lake 97 Spanish brown 98, 227
Sap green 98 Saffron 98 Smalt 99 Saffron color 100 Scarlet color 101, 103
Satin black 104 Satin white 104 Silk 104 Sky color 104, 133 Straw color 105
Silver liquid 105, 186 Size for burnishing gold 107 Shadows for colors 110,
151 Shells 111 Sitting 113 Sapphire to Limn 117 Straining frame 122 Size for
primed cloth 123 Shadows in colors 126, 127 Swarthy complex. 126 Satin colors
129 Silver color 132 Sibyls to paint 141 Soul ^^^ Safety 1^^ Saffron 14^ Stone
colors 1^^ Sublimate 165, 167 Silver 165, 167, 168 Silver to soften 171 Silver
to tinge 172 Silver to blanch 173 Silver to calcine 173 Steel to soften 177
Silver to counterfeit 177, 178, 180 Solder for silver, brass, or Iron 180
Silver tree 181 Steel tree 182 Sand 183 Skrew to cast with 184 Sapphire
artificial 192 Silver to gild 196 Steel to gild 196, 198 Silk to gild 197 Skins
to dye 200, 201 Spots to take out 207 Stuffs to dye 207 Silks to dye 207
Scariet dye 208 Staircase 223 Sommer-houses 224 Saturn to depict 140 Sol to
depict 246 Signum pacis 250 Sylvans and Satyrs 263 S^^philis 269 Sleep to
depict 274 Specates 276 Skin to paint 288 Scurf to take away 284 Sun-burnings
298 Spots, Scurff 299 Sweet breath 303, 304 Sweet waters 310, 311 Soap 325 Soap
musked 326 Skins to perfume 330 Sealing wax 334 Symmetrie 344 Sum of all
Perfect. 351
T.
Triangle 5 Third pract. of Draw. 5 Time 45 Tyber, a river 50 Tygris, a river
51 Thamesis, a river 51 Thetis, a Sea Nymph 54 Thalia one of the M. 55
Terpsichore 56 Trough 1 83 Turnsole 97, 147 Table to prepare 111, 235 Tawny
compl. 127, 128 Taffaty color 130 Triton 137, 221 Tellu^ 138, 258 Tortoise
shell 158, 159 Tin 167 Tin to harden 179 Tripoli 184 Tongs 184 Topas artificial
191 Tin to gild 198 Terra Lemnia 217 Topas a yellow col. 230 Truth to depict
213 T^tters 300 Teeth defective 303 Tablets red, yellow 321 Truth of the matter
342
V.
Uncertain forms 6, 35 Victory 46 Virtues and Vices 48 Urania one of the M. 56
Visual point 62 Visual Kayes 64 Venus significat. 70 Use of the Oil-stone 73
Varnish hard to etch with 80 Varnish soft 81 Using the hard Varn. 83 Varnish
soft to use 89 Vermilion 97, 101, 168 Verdigriese 98, 148, 228 Verditure 98
Umber 99, 227 Ultramine 99 Violet color 100, 102 Velvet 103, 127 Vulcan 137
Venus 138 Urania 138 Vesta 138 Virtues to paint 142 Unanimity 143 Varnish to
make 155, 156 Varnish for Metals 156 Varnish common 157 Universal Varnish 157
Vegetable colors 160 Velvet Crimson 229 Ultramat. to make 230 Various forms of
Coloring 237 Virgins to paint 238 Venus to depict 246 Virgins of Diana 253
Vulcan to depict 266 Virtue to depict 272 Voluptia to depict 275 Uses of
Painting 282 Value of Pictures 284 Unguentum Mosch. 317 Venetian Soap to purify
325
W.
Whole-body 13 Wood Nymphs 54 Winds 57 Way to engrave 76 Wood to engrave 78 Way
of etching 85, 90 Work to finish 88, 91 Whites 95, 124, 129 White lead 97, 228
Walnut color 105 Washed colors 108 Whiting to make 123 Wood colors 133
Wisdom 143 Watchfulness 143 Wit 143 Washing 146 Water 153 Way of Varnishing 158
White Arsnick 169 Way to gild 195 Woods to gild 197 Woods to dye 165, 169 Women
to paint 238 Walls to paint 239 Wrinkles 300 Warts 300 Wash-balls 224 Wax to
make 334
X.
Xenocrates to dep. 276 Xylobalsamum 308 Xyloaloes 327
Y.
Yellow colors 96, 124 Yellow pink 98 Yellow Velvet 128 Yellow Satin 129
Yellow garments 131 Yellow Varnish 157 Yellow wax to whiten 160 Yellow Orpiment
169 Yarn to dye 205 Yellow dye 205, 207
Z.
Zephyrus, a wind 57 Zaphora to tinge glass 168 Zink to mix with Copper 169
Zeuxis 211, 214, 215 285, 342 Zeusippus to depict 276 Zeno to depict 276
Zoologia 282 Zeodoary to chew 305 Zibeth 308
FINIS.

