Some Considerations TOUCHING The present Debate between OWNERS, etc. And
FISHERMEN, relating TO The New Foundland Trade; WHEREIN The present Project of
obstructing Passengers, BY-BOATS, etc. is proved to be an unjust, sinister,
envious, and unreasonable design.

Humbly Presented to Supreme Consideration BY The Impartial Pen of an
eyewitness both of the Designs at Home, and the Trade abroad.

Qui statuit aliquid part inaudita altera,
Aequum licet statuerit, haud aequus fuit.
Sen. Med. OXFORD, Printed by A. and L. LICHFIELD, Printers to the University,
1671.

Some Considerations touching the present Debate concerning Passengers, etc. to
NEWFOVND-LAND.
THAT man (says incomparable Bacon, Es. 9.) That has no virtue in himself,
envieth it in others. It is but to alter the terms, and say, A man that does
not prosper himself, envieth the prosperity of others. Too apparent will the
truth of this be in the present Case, to any who shall impartially scan, and
seriously enquire into the ground of the present project, which has bin of
late years on foot against a sort of Industrious, Laborious men, carried on by
a few sinister persons, who have practically and interpretatively told the
world, that they design and contrive to ingross to themselves the bulk of that
vast Trade (not unfitly reckoned among the most profitable ones of the Nations)
that of New Foundland Fishery: and this contention is blown into a flame by
the groundless breath of misled ignorance. and the senseless clamours of some
unreasonable spirits, which like Dogs bark for company, and are content to
speak as their Incendiaries do, and without inquiring into the justness, or
reasonableness of the point, proceed like unjust Judges to condemn without
hearing any thing from Defendant, or Adverse party; who in this case to (speak
strictly) pass under an inevitable condemnation, for whatever is alleged
against them, by being incapable either with Money, Opportunity, Friends above,
etc. to countermine, anticipate, or meet with the designs of those (who are
too potent in all these) against them. Which too truly verifieth that of the
Poet Petronius.

Quis quis habet Nummos, secura naviget aura, Fortunamque suo temperet arbitrio,
Vxorem ducat Danaen, ipsumque licebit Acrisium jubeat credere quod Danaen,
Carmina componat, declamet, concrepet, omnes Et peragat cause as, sitque Catone
prior,
Juris consultus, paret, non paret, habeto, Atque esto quiequid Servius aut
Labeo.
Multa loquor: quidvis nummis praesentibus opta, Et veniet, --
Before I enter into the bulk of the discourse, give me leave to assure you,
that I am altogether unconcerned on either side; nor do I stand in that
relation to the one or other, as might bias my judgment, or betray my reason to
be partial, or prevaricate for either party: I have received no Fee from either
to make me write Sophistically, but having for four years been an eyewitness
of the transactions at Home, as well as of the manner of Fishing Abroad in that
Country, have thereby had opportunity to discern, the unreasonableness of those
grounds proposed to hinder the Defendants from following their labor, in the
way of Fishing in those parts. Which I have here published very concisely,
couching my Reasons and discourse in as few words, and narrow lines as possibly
I could.

The Case Is thus, A few honest Fishermen acquainted with the New Foundland,
join stocks together, hire men, provide themselves with all necessary
Provisions for that Voyage; and not able to act in the method of a Merchant,
keep some, One Boat, others two, three, etc. It may be, One Boat among two, or
three men: A number of these Boat-keepers join and freight a Ship for the
transportation of themselves and provisions: Some take passage at three pounds
per man. These (as others set forth by Merchants) Fish and labor very
industriously, and run the same hazard in all respects that Merchants do, and
thereby do frequently gain to themselves some what more then by the wages
usually given by the Merchants, did they act in their employ. These men in
every respect act as Masters, Merchants, etc. do. They employ Seamen on the
same terms, They breed up Seamen, Freight Ships, Fish, etc. every way
proportionable to any that use that Country: whereby they advance Trade,
Increase the Kings Custom, etc. as much or more per Rato than other owners of
Fishing voyages: many of which improperly call themselves Merchants.

These men being generally of a more thriving and industrious nature than some
others, and thereby succeeding better in their voyage then others, are
therefore become of late the very objects of Merchants envy at home, and of
Masters (employed on the same Trade) abroad, who wanting the like industry, and
coming short thereby of the like success, do not seldom excuse it with laying
the subsequent charge against By-Boats: Evidently making good the words of that
great Statesman, the Lord Verulam, Es. 9. That man which cannot act in the
virtue (of which Diligence is a part) of another, will seek to come at even
hand with him, by seeking to depress the others fortune. And if it savor not
too much of Censoriousness and Barbarism. Act. Apost. c. 28. v. 4. I would
observe, That the Voyages immediately suceeding the time, when the Spleens of
these poor men's Enemies had been moved most (whereby very few of them and those
by surreptition and stealth have bin able to obtain Transportation) have proved
the worst that ever were in that Country, witness Anno D. 1664. What a Muddy
stir was there made at Dartmouth, and the circumjacent Country against the poor
By-Boats. What allegations were put into the Council, and Parliament (if I
mistake not) which being unanswered by the Defendants, there was a supersedeas
clapped upon their intentions for New Foundland, and that year the Merchants
made the worst Voyages that were ever known before: And the year after the
Dutch War coming in, de Rutter the Belgian Admiral went and burnt the Ships in
that Country, in which none suffered more than those that had bin most
pertinacious against By-boats. I need not name any, and am unwilling to measure
the length of any man's just proceedings by his prosperity, or to censure him of
an evil heart by any adversity, for time and chance hapeneth to all, and those
on whom the Tower in Siloam fell were not sinners above all them in Jerusalem,
and do believe goodness and greatness are not always concomitant.

But to proceed, The Dutch War happily ended, Merchants and By-boats,
promiscuously provide for the Fishing without distinction or grudge, as if all
former animosity had been forgotten, and that year (1668) making great Voyages
they are on all hands satisfied, and nothing at all objected against the
By-boats: but in the year (1669) the Ships make poor, and the By-boats
generally great Voyages. Upon return to England, the feud is again fomented,
and Merchants Petition again to the Privy Council, urging vehement complaints
against the By-boats; that they ruined the Trade, by engrossing the best
Fishermen to themselves, by giving greater wages then others can. Those of
Dartmouth, Plymouth, etc. meet at Modbury about that affair, (facetiously
called the Modbury Juncto) but the issue came to late, for the Ships for Terra
Nova were almost all gone before that came down into the West: only some few
had the unhappiness to be behind, and were stopped.

Here let me not forget to observe, That at the very time the West-Country
Owners were acting, and contriving the Premises at Modbury, Mr. Boughton their
Factor in London played least in sight, with Five or Six Thousand pounds of
their Money, in which the Actors were mostly concerned, and the By-boats not
Eighty pounds upon my certain knowledge. And to second that misfortune, This
year there were made such Voyages by the ships in general as the like was never
known before, by any man; for though in the beginning of the Fishing, we have
great hopes, yet the whole School (as it is there termed) suddenly left them,
as if Heaven would punish them with the torment of Tantalus: whereby the
Merchants made not half as formerly, and yet the diligent, and painful By-boats
came off indifferently well. And now they are accosted with more violence then
before, and new methods proposed for their eradication; New errors are
alleged, though they had complied with the Articles of the Patent of
New Foundland enlarged by his present Majesty; yet a new Project is set on
foot, and that is to propose for an Act, That all the men in one Ship must be
under one Master, and make one share. What shall then the Planters do? They
must be encouraged and supplied, otherwise must leave the Country, which being
not inhabited is free for any other Nation; Possession being the only
inheritance thereof. But if this be complied withal by them, if they thrive
that way, then I am confident there will be new Errors found out. I remember I
have read, that the Emperor Frederick's Physicians being asked what did most
sharpen the sight, it was variously answered, Herba Euphrasia, Foeniculi,
Celendinae, Tutiae calam, Optic Glasses, etc. A by-stander replied, nothing
would do it better then Envy. It is clearly manifest that the complainers
designs are wholly to Extirpate the Defendants, not to rectify the
miscarriages, and hindrances of the Trade, pretended to be created by them.

But I cannot but wonder how that assembly at Modbury could escape being noted
as a Seditious Confederacy, Many had the Sagacity to avoid it who were yet
enemies to By-boats: Surely they had come within the Mulct of the Act against
Seditious Conventicles, had it been then in force, it being evident (according
to the incomparable Lord Bacon, ut supra) that Invidia, the Latin word for
Envy, goes in the Modern Languages for Coffeehouse, and Sedition is the
Effect of Discontent, etc. Now that that act of the Plaintiffs was Envious is
apparent to any, Inasmuch as (according to my own most certain knowledge) those
that do most stickle at it, do themselves not only take Passengers to freight
on their own Ships, but have bin concerned in the Voyage with Boat-keepers.
There remains now that I accumulate the general Objections urged by
Merchants, and answering them I shall add something in defense of By-boats.

Objection 1. The First, and most seemingly formidable of all their Arguments,
or Objections is, That they ingross to themselves the most able Fishermen in
the Country: inducing them by large wages, and greater privileges then can
possibly be granted to such as properly belong to Ships: Hereby the choice
being taken off, none are left for the Merchants employ but the inferior, and
less capable sort, by which the Ships are manned only with such as may be said
to be the refuse of the others.

Ans. This is so notoriously false, that any man using the Country cannot but
be acquainted, how that those who one season served By-boats, another serve on
Ships; and most do by a kind of Vicissitude or circulation, serve in either
successively, And indeed that which makes those in By-boats appear so able, is
their extreme diligence, and indefatigable labor, beyond those of Ships; I
mean in fishing, though God knows the Twelve labors of Hercules, had they
bin really acted, were scarce able to endure competition with the general toil
of men in this Country, which is so great as no tongue is able to express it.
Now that which prompts and incourageth them to this more then common diligence
and pains; is occasioned by the policy of their Masters, who concern the
Boats-masters in some small part of the voyage beyond their shares of the
Thirds: A notable way and a spur to those Horses (in labor) which is not to be
found in Ships crewes. Now I would fain know, If the world can produce a man,
that will so much act beyond (were it possible) his own strength to serve
another, as to serve himself. I will instance one notorious Example. There was
one John Beard in 1668 that belonged to a Ship of fourteen Boats, upon account
of one Mr. Martyn their Owner of Plymouth, who proved so Lazy, Careless, and
Unable, that at the return for England he was denied his wages, and it was
given to the Poor of the Parish he lived in: This same man, to my knowledge,
the year after, becoming interested and part Owner of two Boats kept in St.
John's by one Robert Martyn, went himself Master of one of them, where night and
day he so plied his work, that they made 320 and odd Kentals for each, when the
common Voyages in the same Harbors were about 160 kentals per Boat: Several
not 120 kent. This famous act of his industry made him reputed an able man
again, and therefore was hired by a Planter in the same Harbor for 24 l. to be
a Master of one single Boat the poor Planter kept the following year: When
being uninterested, and having good wages, he fell to his old tricks, and
caught less Fish for his Boat then any among two hundred that were then in the
Harbor; and was trebly exceeded by many. I have known the like complained of
by others.

Object. 2. That the By-boats give greater wages, which has raised men to that
height, that Masters cannot live to give it, nor Owners to allow it.

Ans. But this is so weak and trivial, that it hardly merits answer, when it
shall be considered, whether Merchants, which set out for that design at
cheaper rates then By-boats can do, who pay the dearest rate for freight, etc.
Every thing cannot live to give as good and as great encouragement to men by
wages as the others. Moreover, I have examined the Case, and found, that
generally By-boats give far less then others. The Nonesuch of Dartmouth having
15 Boats-crew on private account, had not one Boats-master (1670) that had
above one share and six pounds, whereas I know several in Ships had one share
and eight pounds. If any to salve this allege, it is because the men are
mostly willing and affected to the Boat-keepers, then the Objection is answered
by themselves, and their giving great wages is not that which injureth the
Merchant, or inclines the men from Ships accounts.

Object. 3. That By-boats breed not up green men, viz carry Youths to Sea as
Ships do, to nourish them in the way of Trade, and for service of his Majesty
on occasion at Sea.

Ans. Which is altogether untrue, for according to Rate they carry as many
Youths as commonly are belonging to the Ships. This is evident to any one who
shall but rightly examine it by an inquiry at home, or in the Country.

Object. 4. New England Fishery being decayed, is urged as an Argument against
By-boats for Terra Nova, upon consequence supposing the same fate to
New Foundland, if they are permitted, as they have been in New England.

Ans. This is purely Sophistical, and not liable to any proof; For who can
affirm, that By-boats have bin the cause of that: Indeed the Cultivation of the
ground ashore, the Amendment of the Air, and the Population of that Country may
with good reason be urged in the case: For without doubt, there remains a kind
of an Antipathy in those Animals, as in all others, against whatever is humane,
which is the effect of that awe God gave them to their Superior Creature Man,
as is evident in all Animals of the Land, Sea, or Amphibious* And it is very
probable to be occasioned, as above, because of the proximate Countries of Nova
Scotiae, Terra Nova, etc. where the land is uncultivated, and almost not
inhabited, the Fish continues almost as formerly, What abatement there is, may
by any that own a Remunerative Justice and Providence, be attributed in part to
the Justice of Heaven, for our Ingratitude, Envy, etc. and subordinately to the
frequent Fires in the Woods, whereby the Firr and Spruss trees being burnt, the
Turpentine and Tarr runs on the ground, which when Rain comes is washed into
the Rivers, whereby the Sea is also become imbittered, which destroys the
Bait, and chaseth off the Fish: It having been observed to be true upon the
great Fires, which often happen in the Woods, which though green is very
combustible. But as to that of New England, the Fishing beginning to fail,
Merchants were forced to forsake the Trade, upon which only (such as are in
New Foundland) By-boats enter into the Trade, and by their diligence (beyond
Ships companies) they being but few, do live well upon the Trade, and do find
Fish fourteen, sixteen leagues from the land to be very plenty: which makes
for the truth of our supposition in the beginning of this Answer, viz. That the
gust of the waters are altered, which puts the Fish from the shore.

Object. 5. That this being a matter of Trade properly belongs to Merchants,
for their Privileges and way being incroacht upon, Trading by degrees will
fail.

Ans. But how properly catching of Fish may be called the work of a Merchant
any more then Planting Tobacco, Sugar, Indico, I know not, If so, there are
more Merchants in Barking, Tarrkey, Bobicom, Looe, Mountsbay, and Sorlings,
then in London. Moreover, the most of those pretending injury by the By-boats
in New Foundland, are no more Merchants then my self, who am none, they being
so only in Title, and impropriation; and so deserve oppugnation as much as
By-boats. Men of diverse Trades at home, adventuring under the way and notion of
Merchants, only to catch Fish, and sell it there, to others, not hazarding it
abroad themselves, which is that which only merits the name of Trade: And these
forsooth must subscribe to the Petition against By-boats, under the name of We
the Merchants, etc.

I know not what more can be Objected, or has bin urged by the sharpest
enemies against By-boats, as the present case stands; and I verily believe
were those Articles ever so strictly observed, which have been made against
those men, yet they thriving that way, will questionless be reproached again of
being other ways inconvenient to the way of Fishery.

We come now to our last work, the sum and conclusion of the present Task, and
that is to lay down some Arguments in behalf of those envied men, in whose
defense I have taken up the Gauntlet, and undertook to answer the Challenge,
and certainly I have that Charity for the Reasons to be urged in their behalf,
as to think they will satisfy any person, not altogether bent against
Information, and whose pertinacity is not Reason-proof.

First, That the violence of the oppositions used against these men has but
set them in a more absolute, and convenient way then they formerly acted in,
for from being Passengers they drove them to freight Ships, and some of them to
be Owners. Under which way they cannot prevent or deny them to follow the
Fishery, except they deny the Merchants also: And do they still proceed by
their indirect opposition they will in fine rather advance, then any way
suppress them, by compelling them to ascend to be perfect Owners of Ships
themselves, and then they will be a greater Eyesore then now: Even as the
Christians thrived wonderfully under the most Barbarous Persecution: and as by
Antiperistasis, (some believe) Heat is fortified by the inviron of Cold, and
contra: So do these thrive and strengthen under the evil eye of their Opposers;
like Antaeus, and as Ovid de Arto Amandi said of Love, Adverso tempore, crevit
amor; so I say of these Oppositions, Difficultas acuit conatum.

2. That these By-boats are more advantageous in the Fishing then Ships crews,
for their exceeding industry and success, do catch more Fish generally
according to proportion then the others, and at no greater charge of Men or
Provisions, (excepting Salt) then those that possibly do not catch half so
much: and my self have known Masters of Voyages acting for Merchants, (though
professed enemies to By-boats) have desired to have had their Stages nearest to
those of the By-boats, that the interested industry of the one, might be a
spurr to the other, and most Masters Fishing in any Harbor upon account of
Merchants, will rail and rebuke their Fishermen, for not bringing in as much
Fish as those of By-boats: Now if (as has bin alleged) the By-boats men are
the most able, how can the Masters expect their men to equal them? or what
pertinence, or ground of complaint can be upon the comparison of their own men
with the others; when they bring not home the like quantity of Fish as others
do, whom they confess to be far abler men, and make their difference to be the
greatest ground of their complaint at home?

3. That men and Ships are employed, Provisions expended, Fish caught, etc.
every way proportionably by By-boats, as by the others, so that the King in his
Custom, or the Nation in the employment of the people, etc. have no cause of
complaint.

4. That many of the Complainers against By-boats, do tacitly accuse
themselves, they deserving no other name and appellation, although they assume
the Title of Merchants, when, de facto, they are of all Trades, and some the
most inferior Mechanics.

5. That it is the Fishermens being interested in the Voyage (as I have said)
is the alone cause of their exceeding others, sufficiently proved in the
example above quoted.

6. It is sufficient profit for the Merchant to have the Sale and
Transportation to the Market of all the fist caught in the Land, and not to be
also Fishermen: as has been already spoken to.

7. That were the whole Trade ingrost into the hands of such as go not to the
Country themselves, both Masters and Men would be constrained to labor upon
Merchants terms, which with the bad Voyages has driven many to become
By-boats, as themselves have confessed: and were Men and Masters brought to
such low wages as Merchants would give, they could not possibly live by the
employment; Now if those that keep Boats can allow themselves and men good
wages etc. why cannot Merchants do the same?

8. The real Merchants gain by those men, who with the Planters are only
Merchants to buy the Wine, Brandy, Malt, Salt, Bread, Provisions, etc. which is
yearly Transported, by which the Merchants are often considerable gainers. Now
if all were Ships crewes they would each bring his own Provisions, and so
nothing would be vendible to encourage the Merchant to send thither to buy off
the Fish.

9. That a Merchant in Dartmouth, who has all along appeared the most bitter
and violent against By-boats, and in Anno 1664 furiously acted against them,
did, to my knowledge, in 1669 send two Boats crew passengers on a Ship wherein
he was part concerned, and in a Ship of his at the same time permitted six men
belonging to Thomas Bickford a By-boat-keeper to have passage, and the same
Bickford had four men more passengers upon a Ship wherein Mr. E. S. of London
was concerned: The first Merchant hinted in this Article is Mr. A. M. the Ship
called the Unity of Dartmouth, and Fished that Voyage in St. Jones.

10. That the one quarter part of the pretenders to suffer by By-boats, and of
those that complain against them are altogether ignorant wherein the cause of
that injury lies, and do no more understand the reasons of those things they
proceed upon, then they do to build Castles in the Air; but being fed with the
fancy of others, yelp out the same Logic, and draw Conclusions without any
other Premises then such as they cannot make good (if denied) but by quoting
them as the opinion or dictates of another, without Reason or Demonstration;
and yet I observe none more active and vehement then those. Nay further, I have
observed many pretending to the Title of Merchants, and altogether unconcerned
in the New Foundland Trade, have with such ignorance declaimed against
By-boats, when upon examination they know not what By-boats were, and wherein
the discrepancy between them and Merchants stood. So peremptory is the
ignorance of Medlers, that they will give answer to questions they never heard
stated: A gift I never met with, or heard of in any mere Man, except Daniel,
who indeed Interpreted the King of Babylons Dream when it was not told him. Now
let any judge of the validity of such men's appearing in the Case, and what a
grand abuse is offered to the Honor of the Supreme Powers by thus
prevaricating in Petitions.

I will Conclude with one Observation I made lately: Being at the Post House in
-- where Merchants meet to look for News and Letters, there came in a servant
of a Merchant of the City (chiefly active against By-boats) and brought a Blank
Sheet of Paper, and got above Forty subscriptions to nothing; Now my self being
called to subscribe, I demanded for what? The man answered it was to be put to
a Petition against Passengers to the New Foundland, I refused, but saw several
subscribe for company sake, who were neither Merchants, nor understood the
matter: all that came for Letters put their hands to it, except my self, and
yet no Petition to be seen; so that they put their Names to they knew not what.

We hope these things will be considered, and the Laborious encouraged, and
find the truth of those Verses of Claudian

Fallitur, egregio quis qu is sub principe credit
Servitium: nunquam libertas gratior Extat
Quam sub Roge pio --
He knows no bondage whom a good King swayes,
For freedom never shines with clearer rays
Then when brave Princes Reign --
That which has so vehemently Incensed Merchants at home against By-boats, Is
the bad Voyages which of late have been made in that Country, the cause of
which has been falsely laid on By-boats, when indeed the multitude of Ships and
Boats there, and the unreasonable pressing of Ships full of men, and the
untimely and early departure of one before another is partly the cause, this
year 1670 several departed 30 days before the main body of the Fleet, and only
to anticipate and forestal others of places, whereby they were at a vaster
expense, and moreover did by the early intolerable cold almost kill the men,
before the Fish came on the Coast; when those that came last fared as well, and
with less charge to themselves, and damage to their men, and so could better
endure a bad Voyage then others. It would be better if all Ships were bound not
to sail until March, and that the proportion of one man to two Tons were
commanded, and that some abuses in the Country were rectified, but of that let
those endeavor the emendation, who are the sufferers thereby.

I have no more to add, only crave the Readers candor to wink at the faults of
the Printer, or Author. I mean those that are Literal: It was penned at first
Raptive, and in have, and has not had a due Revision: The reason inducing me
to be Anonymus, in this, relates to my self. I am as unwilling to have the
Smile of the one party, as to Insence the Spleen of the other: I hope the not
nameing the Author, will no way Invalidate, or prejudice the Discourse.

FINIS.

