The Solemn Mock Procession of the POPE Cardinals Jesuits Friars etc: through
the City of London November the 17th: 1680


The EXPLANATION.
YOu must first know the occasion of this Mock-Procession to have been, that
the Pope, Friars, and their Abetters here in England, contrived the Lamentable
Burning of London; some Protestant Gentlemen, partly in a thankful
Commemoration of their Deliverance, and partly to raise a just Abhorrency of
such Popish practices, do now bring these Incendiaries in Effigy to the Fire
they have better deserved; and that rather on Queen Eliz. Coronation Day, for
that in her Reign, the Protestant Religion, and the true English Interest, were
more conspicuously and heartily minded, with admixture of crooked Ends, or
Foreign Policies.

But not to prolong your expectation, this Popish Cavalcade or Procession, did
march out of George's Yard without White-Chappel Bars, and so gravely came on
thorough Algate, Leaden Hall Street, and straight along to Fleetstreet, and the
Temple Gate. 1. Was a Leader on Horseback; after him marched Whisflers, clad
like Pioneers, to clear the way. 2. A Bell-man ringing, and with a dolesome
voice saying, Remember Justice Godfrey. 3. A Dead Body, representing Sir Edm.
B. Godfrey Strangled and Bloody, and one of his Murderers holding him up on
Horseback, after the manner he was carried from Somerset House to Green-Berry
Hill. 4. A large Banner is born by four, where on the painted Cloth are expressed
the Wild-House Consulters, viz. the Popish Clergy Plotters, all hanging on a
Gallows; among 'em are some other pretended Protestants, Betrayers of the Laws
and Liberties; on the Reverse is painted Dame Celliers, and other Plotmakers,
Popish Ingeneers under the Mask of Protestants.

First Pageant. On the foremost Angle of it is one in Black, playing on a
Fiddle, with Pen, Ink, and Papers under his Girdle; on the opposite side is the
Popish Midwife, leaning on a Meal-Tub; on the hinder part stand some
Protestants in Masquerade, in pye-bald Habits: Then comes one born on an Ass,
with his Face to the Tail, and in a black ghastful Hue, representing an
Abhorrer of Petitions and Parliaments: After him one bears a Banner with this
Motto, We Protestants in Masquerade Usher in Popery.

Second Page Here are born four Gray Friars, some Franciscans, strictly so
called; others Minimes, a diminutive sort of that Order.

Third Page This carries two Benedictines, or other black Friars, and two
Dominicans.

Fourth Page Bears forty Jesuits, a sore burden to the whole World, Corrupters
of all Morality, Christianity, and Government, Opulent as Civitates, ubi sunt
commoditates semper quarunt isti Patres, Clar^s aedes, bonum vinum, bonum
panem, bonum linum, tanquam Sancti venerantur, tanquam Reges dominantur,
tanquam fures depradantur, Martem norunt an imare, and Tumultus suscitare,
Inter Reges and sedare: But hang 'em now on the --

Fifth Page Do stand two Popish Bishops, and two Arch bishops, who have not a
Rag, but what they are beholding to the Pope for in their Pomp and Courts of
Judicature, etc.

Sixth Page Here ride two Patriarchs, and two Cardinals; for as about Gods
Throne, so about the Popes, and the Devils; these are the four Animals, or
Beasts, with Eyes all before and behind; the Eyes of Pride and Covetousness.
After this Pageant comes an Officer of the Popes, distributing of Pardons, and
saying, Lo here you may have Heaven for Money.

Seventh Page Here is the Man of Sin himself on a Throne, with his Counselor
the Devil inspiring of him, what new Artifice of cruelty must come next: He
holds two Keys, and two Swords, representing the Civil and Spiritual Dominion
over all, and a Page on one side holds this Inscription, This is the King of
Kings; and one on the other has a Streamer, and this Motto, Thou art our God
the Pope: Abundance of Crowns and Scepters are strowed before his feet, to be
distributed to those poor slavish Princes that will hold their Kingdoms in
Villenage from him.

Eighth Page Carries Donna Olympia, and poor deluded Nuns, as Whores by
Dispensation or necessity, following the Popes Camp.

Ninth Page In the foregoing ones you have seen the Charming Voice, Fineries of
the Popish Circe and her Syrenes, now you have her Cruelties in this Pageant,
representing the Fathers of the Inquisition, condemning a Martyr to the Stake
for reading the Scripture, or judging by that Word of their new Forgeries.

Thus the whole Procession went along, and was attended by hundreds of Flamboes
and Torches. Never were the Streets, Windows, and Balconies more thronged with
Spectators, who with Acclamations expressed their abhorrence of Popery; and that
they would with their Lives and Fortunes strive to keep out that cruel foolish
Religion. When it came to Temple Bar, the Statue of Queen Eliz. in respect to
the day was adorned with a Crown of Laurel, and a Shield, on which was
inscribed the Protestant Religion, and Magna Charta; before which the Pope and
his Crew having received the Sentence to be burned by the like Flames they have
kindled in the City, and the Temple, they were all tumbled down from their
Grandeur into the impartial Element; abundance of Fuzes, like falling Stars,
and Artificial Fires, in the mean time recreated the Spectators; a great store
of Wine, and other Liquors, were profusely poured out to the Multitude, who
unanimously of their own accord cried, No Popery; God bless the King,
Protestant Religion, the Church, and Dissenting Protestants, both whom God
Unite. Amen.

The Pope, etc. being burnt, the Protestant (by them called Heretic) is
discharged from the Inquisition; and then immediately repeats these Verses,
looking up to the Statue of Queen Elizabeth on Temple Bar, which was adorned
with a Shield, with this Inscription, Magna Charta, and Religio Protestantium;
with several Flambo's about it.

1
BEhold the Genius of our Land!
Englands Paladium! may this shrine
Be honored still, and ever stand,
Than Palas Statue more Divine.
2
Whilst we thy Praise in Songs repeat,
Whose Maiden Virtues fixed the State;
Made us unite, and made us great,
From whence all happiness we date.
3
Thou to the Root the Axe did lay,
Both Popish Successor, and Plots;
At one brave stroke thou took'st away,
In spite of Rome, France, Spain, and Scots.
4
A course of glad and peaceful years
That did so happily ensue,
Shows us how we may ease our cares,
And the Conspirators subdue.
5
Nor need the English Senate dread
The Forts, the Fleet, the Scottish Host,
The Irish Friends, and Popish Head,
Apostate H -- does boast.
6
The Fox, the Lion, and the Goat,
Have labored to defame thy days;
But still thou have our Senates Vote,
In London still thy Statue stays.
7
Fixed in our hearts thy Fame shall live,
And maugre all the Popish spite;
To honor thee our Youth shall strive,
And Yearly Celebrate this Night.
London, Printed for Nathaniel Ponder, at the Peacock near the Stocks Mark^t;
Jonathan Wilkins, at the Star in Cheapside, next Mercers Chapel; and Samuel
Lee, at the Feathers in Lumbard-Street, near the Post Office.

There will be no other true Representation of this Procession but this.


