THE SOLDIER's Religious Exercise IN THE TIME of WAR. BEING Some Proper Texts,
Portions of Holy-Scripture, and Prayers, useful for those OFFICERS and
SOLDIERS, who are engaged abroad in Their Majesty's Service.

Published by a late Chaplain to the Army.

JOSH. 1. 8, 9. This book of the law shall not depart out of thy mouth, but
thou shall meditate therein day and night, that thou may observe to do
according to all that is written therein: for then thou shall make thy way
prosperous, and then thou shall have good success.

Have not I commanded thee? Be strong and of a good courage, be not afraid,
neither be thou dismayed; for the Lord thy God is with thee, whithersoever thou
go.

LONDON, Printed for Ric. Chiswell, at the Rose and Crown in St. Paul's
Churchyard. MDCXC.

Imprimatur.

Jan. 4. 1689.
To the Honorable the Colonels, and others the chief Officers of Their
Majesty's Army.
HAving been some time since engaged in the Service of the Army, I considered
with my self, what course would be most proper and expedient, to discharge the
Obligations of the Chaplain's Duty; And (I am of Opinion) That there is no way
more useful, to his purpose, in order to promote the Practical Exercise of
Religion, among the ordinary and private Soldiers, (who are generally very
ignorant of the common Rudiments and Principles of Christianity) than to advise
the frequent reading of the Holy Scriptures; which indeed, I found by sad
experience, was shamefully neglected by some of them, to the great scandal and
abuse of Religion. And this I chiefly impute to the want of Bibles among them:
for I dare say, were a strict search and enquiry made in every Regiment of the
Army, we should not find many possessed of this Holy Treasure, which does so
nearly concern the necessary good and Salvation of their Precious and Immortal
Souls. And therefore, to supply that defect, or rather the want of Holy
Instruction from those sacred Oracles of God's inspired Word, give me leave, I
pray you, to dedicate to your use this small Bible, or Summary of Devotional
Scripture, which being of a lesser size, is more fitly accommodated for the
Soldier's carriage, and may be in some sense, as useful, as it contains a brief
Collection of all those necessary and pertinent T^xts, which are adapted for a
Soldier's Christian Duty and Service, in the time of War. And which, as it may
serve to instruct the more ignorant and unlearned in the common rules and ways
of Salvation; so (I hope) it will not altogether prove useless or insufficient
to remember those who are more knowing of their Christian Duty and Calling,
that so both may become more sincerely virtuous and Religions toward God, and
honestly faithful and serviceable to the Interest of Their Majesty's present
Government, as they desire to serve the common Rights and Liberties of the
Church and Nation. And now I humbly desire all the chief Officers and
Commanders of Their Majesty's Army, (to whose fa^our I present this small
Treati^e, or Religious Exercise of Devotional Scripture) that they will be
pleased to give in strict charge or command to all their subalterns, both
Officers and Soldiers, that this may be read by them, as they have leisure and
opportunity, either in the Camp or Garrison; and especially to those who are
engaged in Their Majesty's Service both in Holland and Ireland, for whom I have
fitted those Holy Collects, or Offices of Morning and Evening Prayer, in the
Close of this Book, which will not be improper to be used by every particular
Officer or Soldier, who keeps constant to the Exercise of daily Devotion; and
besides, it is necessary that he do reflect upon some of those Holy Passages of
Scripture, which I have here reduced under so many several Heads, which I
judged to be most proper for the Soldier's Christian Duty, during his Service
in the Wars.

And now, because among the private Men, the Education of some is so
Illiterate, that they cannot Read; I have thought of this expedient to help the
ignorant, which is, That his fellow Soldier or Comrade do by frequent reading
inculcate unto his Memory, some few of those chief Texts or Portions of Holy
Scripture.

And if these Orders and Rules of Religion be strictly observed and put in
Execution by you, who are the chief Officers, you will soon find the benefit of
this Holy Discipline to be not only serviceable to your seives, in keeping your
Men orderly and sober in their Beh^viour; and so no less quietly submissive and
obedient to the Words of your Command. But then, what is more happy, this will
be in some measure greatly instrumental for the public. Service of Religion,
in reforming those Scandalous Vices and Immoralities of Drunkenness and
Swearing, which are so generally risen among the more Ignoble and Plebeian
sort. And thus you will come to gain not only the credit of esteem and
Reputation to your selves, but you will do no less real honor and service to
Their Majesty's by your diligence and fidelity in this present juncture,
wherein we must expect either the lasting happiness or entire Ruin of the
Peace and Prosperity of this Church and Nation; as God is pleased to give
success to Their Majesty's Arms, which (we all know) are now chiefly engaged to
maintain the free Exercise of our Religion, which is so happily modelled
according to the excellent Doctrine and Precepts of the Holy Bible; And of
which this being a small Epitome, or Part, I hope it will come the more
acceptable for that public Good and Practical Exercise of Holiness, for which
it is chiefly intended, for the use of those Officers and Soldiers, who are now
employed abroad in Their Majesty's Service, for the common safety and defense
of our Religion and Country, and to which I pray God give a Blessing, that we
may all fight the good fight of faith, to lay hold of eternal life, through
Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

THE SOLDIER's Religious Exercise IN THE TIME of WAR.
EXERCISE I. A Christian Soldier must be strictly Virtuous and Religious in his
Life and Conversation.
WHEN the Host goes forth against thine Enemies, then keep thee from every
wicked thing, Deuteronomy. 23. v. 9.

For the Lord thy God walks in the midst of thy Camp, to deliver thee, and to
give up thine Enemies before thee; therefore shall thy Camp be Holy, that he
see no unclean thing in thee, and turn away from thee, Deuteronomy. 23. ver. 14.

If ye forsake the Lord, and serve strange gods, then he will turn, and do you
hurt, and consume you, after that he has done you good, Josh. 24. ver. 20.

Be ye therefore very courageous, to keep and do all that is written in the
Book of the Law of Moses, that ye turn not aside therefrom, to the right hand,
or to the left, Josh. 23. v. 6.

But cleave unto the Lord your God, as ye have done unto this day, Josh. 23. v.
8.

-- If thou will not hearken unto the voice of the Lord thy God, to observe, to
do all his commandments, and his statutes, which I command thee this day Deuteronomy.
28. v. 15.

The Lord shall cause thee to be smitten before thine enemies; thou shall go
out one way against them, and flee seven ways before them, and shall be removed
into all the kingdoms of the earth, Deuteronomy. 28. v. 25.

And now, Israel, what does the Lord thy God require of thee, but to fear the
Lord thy God, to walk in his ways, and to love him, and to serve the Lord thy
God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, Deuteronomy. 10. v. 12.

Up, sanctify the people, and say, Sanctify your selves against to morrow:
for thus says the Lord God of Israel, There is an accursed thing in the midst
of thee, O Israel: thou can not stand before thine enemies, until ye take
away the accursed thing from among you, Josh. 7. v. 13.

And you, in any wise, keep your selves from the accursed thing, lest ye make
your selves accursed, when ye take of the accursed thing, and make the camp of
Israel a curse, and trouble it, Josh 6. v. 18.

Take good heed therefore unto your selves, that ye love the Lord your God,
Josh. 23. v. 11.

Let us hear the conclusion of the whole matter; Fear God, and keep his
commandments, for this is the whole duty of man, Eccles. 12. v. 13.

And the soldiers likewise demanded of him, saying, And what shall we do? And
he said unto them, Do violence to no man, neither accuse any falsely, and be
content with your wages, Luke. 3. v. 14.

Besides this, giving all diligence, add to your faith, virtue; and to virtue,
knowledge; and to knowledge, temperance; and to temperance, patience; and to
patience, godliness; and to godliness, brotherly kindness; and to brotherly
kindness, charity: for if these things be in you, and abound, they make you
that ye shall be neither barren, nor unfruitful in the knowledge of our Lord
Jesus Christ, 2 Pet. 1. v. 5, 6, 7, 8, 9.

Wherefore the rather, brethren, give diligence to make your calling and
election sure: for if ye do these things, ye shall never fall, 2 Pet. 1.10.

The works of the flesh are manifest, which are these, adultery, fornication,
uncleanness, lasciviousness, idolatry, witchcraft, hatred, variance,
emulations, wrath, strife, seditions, heresies, envyings, murders, drunkenness,
revilings, and such like: they which do such things, shall not inherit the
kingdom of God, Gal. 5.19, 20, 21, 22.

But as he which has called you is holy, so be ye holy in all manner of
conversation, 1 Pet. 1. v. 15.

EXERCISE II. A Christian Soldier must exercise the Acts of daily Repentance,
by hearty Contrition, sorrow full Confession, and the sincere Resolution of Holy
amendment for the time to come.
HAve mercy upon me, O God, according to thy loving kindness, according unto
the multitude of thy mercies, blot out my transgressions, Ps. 51. v. 1.

Wash me thoroughly from my iniquity, and cleanse me from my sin, Ps. 51. v. 2,
etc.

For I acknowledge my transgressions, and my sin is ever before me.

Hide thy face from my sins, and blot out all mine iniquities, Ps. 51. v. 9.

Create in me a clean heart, O God, and renew a right spirit within me, Ps. 51
v. 10.

The sacrifices of God are a broken spirit, a broken and a contrite heart, O
God, thou will not despise, Ps. 51.17.

Deliver me then, O God, from blood guiltiness, from the sins of malice and
uncharitableness, of whoredom and drunkenness, of murmuring and disobedience,
of swearing and profanation of thy name, etc. Here recollect the sins you are
guilty of.
thou God of my salvation, Ps. 51. v. 14.

I have sinned, what shall I do unto thee, O thou preserver of men? Job 7. v.
20.

-- I said, I will confess my transgressions unto the Lord, and thou forgavest
the iniquity of my sin

For this shall every one, that is godly, pay unto thee, in a time, when thou
may be found, Psalm. 36.5, 6.

If we confess our sins, he is faithful and just to forgive us our sins, and to
cleanse us from all unrighteousness, 1 John 1.9.

Bring forth therefore fruits meet for repentance, -- Luke 3. v. 8.

Repent and be converted, that your sins may be blotted out, when the times of
refreshing shall come from the presence of the Lord, Act. 3.19.

Sin no more, lest a worse thing come unto thee, Joh. 5.14.

God having raised up his son Jesus, sent him to bless you, in turning away
every one of you from his iniquities, Act. 3.26.

I beseech you therefore, brethren, by the mercies of God, that ye present your
bodies a living sacrifice, holy, acceptable unto God, which is your reasonable
service.

And be not conformed to this world, but be ye transformed by the renewing of
your mind, that ye may prove what is that good, and acceptable, and perfect
will of God, Romans 12. v. 1, 2.

EXERCISE III. A Christian Soldier must meditate upon the infinite love and
goodness of God, in giving his Son to be the Savior of the World.
THis is a faithful saying, and worthy of all acceptance, That Christ Jesus
came into the world to save sinners, 1 Timothy 1.15.

So God loved the world, that he gave his only begotten son: that whosoever
believes in him, should not perish, but have everlasting life, St. Joh. 3.16.

John sees Jesus coming unto him, and says, Behold the lamb of God, which
takes away the sins of the world, Joh. 1.29.

He was wounded for our transgressions, he was bruised for our iniquities; the
chastisement of our peace was upon him, and with his stripes we are healed, Is.
53.5.

To him give all the prophets witness, that through his name whosoever
believes in him, shall receive remission of sins, Act. 10.43.

God commends his love toward us, in that while we were yet sinners, Christ
died for us.

Much more then being now justified by his blood, we shall be saved from wrath
through him, Romans 5. v. 8, 9.

And if any man sin, we have an advocate with the Father Jesus Christ the
righteous; and he is the propitiation for our sins, and not for ours only, but
also for the sins of the whole world, 1 John 2. v. 1, 2.

EXERCISE IV. A Christian Soldier must exercise himself in a constant and
babitual Preparation for Death, considering the many fatal Accidents and
Dangers, to which his life is exposed in the time of War.
O That they were wise, that they understood this, that they would consider
their latter end, Deuteronomy. 32. v. 20.

Whereas ye know not what shall be on the morrow: for what is your life? it is
even a vapor that appears for a little time, and then vanishes away, Jam.
4.14.

Surely men of low degree are vanity, and men of high degree are alike, to be
laid in the balance, they are altogether lighter than vanity, Ps. 62.9.

Seeing his days are determined, the number of his months are with thee, thou
have appointed his bounds that he cannot pass, Job 14.5.

So teach us to number our days, that we may apply our hearts unto wisdom, Ps
90.12.

-- All the days of my appointed time will I wait, till my change come.

For now thou numberest my steps, do thou not watch over my sin? Job 14.14,
16.

God will not cast away a perfect man -- Job 8.20.

Mark the perfect man, and behold the upright: for the end of that man is
peace, Ps. 37.37.

Rejoice not against me, O mine enemy: when I fall, I shall arise; when I sit
in darkness, the Lord shall be a light unto me, Mich. 7.8.

Why art thou cast down, O my soul, and why art thou disquieted in me? Psalm.
42.5.

I have set the Lord always before me; because he is at my right hand, I shall
not be moved.

Thou will show me the path of life: in thy presence is fullness of joy, at thy
right hand there are pleasures for evermore, Psalm. 16. v. 8, 11.

For which cause we faint not, but though our outward man perish, yet the
inward man is renewed day by day.

While we look not at the things which are seen, but at the things which are
not seen: for the things which are seen are temporal, but the things which are
not seen are eternal, 2 Cor. 4.16, 18.

Therefore being justified by faith, we have peace with God through our Lord
Jesus Christ.

By whom also we have access by faith into this grace, wherein we stand, and
rejoice in hope of the glory of God, Romans 5. v. 1, 2.

I have fought a good fight, I have finished my course, I have kept the Faith.

Henceforth there is laid up for me a crown of righteousness, which the Lord
the righteous Judge shall give me at that day; and not to me only, but unto
them also which love his appearing, 2 Timothy 4.7, 8.

-- Blessed are the dead which die in the Lord, from henceforth, yea, says the
spirit, that they may rest from their labors. and their works do follow them,
Rev 14.13.

Blessed is that servant, whom his lord when he comes, shall find so doing,
Matthew. 24.46.

EXERCISE V. A Christian Soldier must give all due submission and obedience to
the Commands of his chief Officer or Leader, and the Officer must be no less
faithful and diligent in his Trust.
AND Moses said unto them, If ye will do this thing, if ye will go armed before
the Lord to war, Numb. 32.20.

And will go all of you armed over Jordan before the Lord, until he has driven
out his enemies from before him, Numb. 32. v. 20.

And the land be subdued before the Lord: then afterward ye shall return, and
be guiltless before the Lord, and before Israel, and this land shall be your
possession before the Lord, Numb. 32.22.

But if ye will not do so, behold ye have sinned against the Lord, and be sure
your sin will find you out, Numb 32.23.

And the children of Gad, and the children of Reuben spoke unto Moses, saying,
Thy servants will do as my Lord commands, Numb. 32.^5.

Thy servants will pass over, every man armed for war, before the Lord, to
battle, as my lord says. Numb. 32. v. 27.

And they answered Joshua, saying, All that thou command us, we will do, and
whithersoever thou sendest us, we will go, Josh. 1. v 16.

According as we hearkened unto Moses in all things, so will we hearken unto
thee, only the Lord thy God be with thee, as he was with Moses, Josh. 1. v. 17.

Whosoever he be that does rebel against thy commandment, and will not hearken
unto thy words, in all that thou command him, he shall be put to death; only
be strong and of good courage, Josh. 1. v. 18.

And the officers which were over thousands of the host, the captains of
thousands, and cap^ains of hundreds, came near unto Moses, Numb. 31.48.

And they said unto Moses, Thy servants have taken the sum of the men of war,
which are under our charge, and there lacks not one man of us, Numb. 31.49.

And there came of the children of Benjamin and Judah to the Hold unto David, 1 Chronicles. 12.16.

And David went out to meet them, and answered and said unto them, If ye be
come peaceably unto me, to help me, mine heart shall be kind unto you; but if
ye be come to betray me to mine enemies, seeing there is no wrong in mine
hands, the God of our fathers look thereon, and rebuke it, 1 Chronicles. 12.17.

Then the spirit came upon Amasai, who was chief of the captains, and he said,
Thine are we, David, and on thy side, thou son of Jesse; peace, peace be unto
thee, and peace be to thine helpers, for thy God helps thee. Then David
received them, and made them captains of the band, 1 Chronicles. 12.18.

And they helped David against the band of the rovers, for they were all mighty
men of valor, and were captains in the host, 1 Chronicles. 12.21.

All these men of war, that could keep rank, came with a perfect heart to
Hebron, to make David king over all Israel: and all the rest also of Israel
were of one heart to make David king, 1 Chronicles. 12.38.

For I also am a man, set under authority, having under me soldiers; and I say
unto one, Go, and he goes; and to another, Come, and he comes; and to my
servant, Do this, and he does it, Luke 7.8.

Exhort servants to be obedient unto their own masters, and to please them well
in all things, not answering again, Tit. 2.9.

Not purloyning, but showing all good fidelity, that they may adorn the
doctrine of God our savior in all things, Tit. 2.10.

EXERCISE VI. A Soldier must exercise his Valor and Courage for the Cause of
God, and fight for the Defense of his Religion and Country.
-- BE thou valiant, and fight the Lord's battles, 1 Samuel 18.17.

Be of good courage, and let us play the men for our people, and for the cities
of our God; and the Lord do that which seems him good, 2 Samuel 10.12.

And Joab drew nigh, and the people that were with him, unto the battle against
the Syrians; and they fled before him, 2 Samuel 10.13.

-- For the battle is the Lord's, and he will give you into our hands, 1 Samuel
17.47.

For the Lord your God is he, that goes with you, to fight for you against
your enemies to save you, Deuteronomy. 20. v. 4

When thou go out to battle against thine enemies, and see horses, and
chariots, and a people more than thou, be not afraid of them: for the Lord thy
God is with thee -- Deuteronomy. 20.1.

Through God we shall do valiantly: for he it is that shall tread down our
enemies, Ps. 60.12.

The right hand of the Lord is exalted, the right hand of the Lord does
valiantly, Ps. 118.16.

Finally, my brethren, be strong in the Lord, and in the power of his might,
Ephesians. 6. v. 10.

Wherefore take unto you the whole armor of God, that ye may be able to
withstand in the evil day -- Ephesians. 6.13.

Fight the good fight of faith, lay hold on eternal life -- 1 Timothy 6.12.

Thou therefore endure hardness, as a good soldier of Jesus Christ, 2 Timothy 2.3.

-- For the time would fail me to tell of Gedeon, and of Barack, and of Samson,
and of Jephtha, of David also, and of Samuel the prophets, Heb. 11.32.

Who through faith subdued kingdoms, wrought righteousness, obtained promises,
stopped the mouths of lions, Heb. 11.33.

Quenched the violence of fire, escaped the edge of the sword, out of weakness
were made strong, waxed valiant in fight, turned to flight the armies of
aliens, Heb. 1^.34.

Fear none of those things which thou shall suffer -- be thou faithful unto
death, and I will give thee a crown of life, Rev. 2.10.

EXERCISE VII. A good Soldier must exercise his Christian hope and confidence
in the strength and power of God, and not trust in the Arm of Flesh.
THE Lord is my light and my salvation, whom shall I fear? The Lord is the
strength of my life, of whom shall I be afraid? Psalm. 27.1.

When the wicked, even mine enemies and my foes came upon me to eat up my
flesh, they stumbled and fell, Psalm. 27.2.

Though an host should encamp against me, my heart shall not fear; though war
should rise against me, in this will I be confident, Psalm. 27.3.

-- The God of Israel is he, that gives strength and power unto his people:
blessed be God, Psalm. 68.35.

Be strong and courageous, be not afraid nor dismayed for the king of Assyria;
nor for all the multitude that is with him: for there be mo with us, than with
him, 2 Chronicles. 32. v. 7.

With him is an arm of flesh, but with us is the Lord our God, to help us, and
to fight our battles -- 2 Chronicles. 32. v. 8.

There is no king saved by the multitude of an host, a mighty man is not
delivered by much strength, Psalm. 33.16.

An horse is a vain thing for safety; neither shall he deliver any by his great
strength, Psalm. 33. v. 17.

For I will not trust in my bow; neither shall my sword save me, Psalm. 44.6.

But thou have saved us from our enemies, and have put them to shame that hated
us, Psalm. 44.7.

Then said David to the Philistin, Thou come to me with a sword, and with a
spear, and with a shield: but I come to thee in the name of the Lord of hosts
the God of the armies of Israel -- 1 Samuel 17.45.

Blessed be the Lord my strength, which teaches my hands to war, and my
fingers to fight, Psalm. 144. v. 1.

My goodness and my fortress, my high tower and my deliverer, my shield, and he
in whom I trust, who subdueth my people under me, Psalm. 144. v. 2.

Behold, God is my salvation, I will trust, and not be afraid, for the Lord
Jehovah is my strength, and my song, he also is become my salvation, Isai. 12.
v. 2.

Therefore thus says the Lord, Cursed be man that trusts in man, and makes
flesh his arm, and whose heart departs from the Lord, Jer. 17.5.

Blessed is the man that trusts in the Lord, and whose hope the Lord is, Jer.
17. v. 7.

-- Be strong in the Lord, and in the power of his might, Ephesians 6.10.

Be of good courage, and he shall strengthen your heart, all ye that hope in
the Lord, Psalm. 31.24.

He has showed strength with his arm, he has scatterred the proud in the
im^gination of their hearts, Luke 1.51.

Let thy mercy (O Lord) be upon us; according as we hope in thee, Psalm. 33.22.

EXERCISE VIII. The Christian Soldier must then firmly depend upon the Promises
of God's help, when he is to engage the Enemy in Battle.
AND Moses said unto the people, Fear ye not, stand still, and see the
salvation of the Lord, which he will show you to day -- Exodus 14.13.

The Lord shall fight for you, and ye shall hold your peace, Exodus 14.14.

-- Hear, O Israel, you approach this day unto battle against your enemies: let
not your hearts faint, fear not, and do not tremble, neither be ye terrified
because of them, Deuteronomy. 20.3.

For the Lord your God is he, that goes with you, to fight for you against
your enemies to save you; ye shall not need to fight in this battle; set your
selves, stand ye still, and see the salvation of the Lord with you, O Judah and
Jerusalem, fear not, nor be dismayed, to morrow go out against them, for the
Lord will be with you -- 2 Chronicles. 20. v. 17.

And they rose early in the morning, and went forth into the wilderness of
Tekoa: and as they went forth, Jehosaphat stood, and said, Hear me, O Judah,
and ye inhabitants of Jerusalem: Believe in the Lord your God, so shall ye be
established: believe his prophets, so shall ye prosper, 2 Chronicles. 20. v. 20.

Were not the Ethiopians, and the Lubims a huge host, with very many chariots
and horsemen? yet because thou did rely on the Lord, he delivered them into
thine hand, 2 Chronicles. 16. v. 8.

For the eyes of the Lord run to and fro through the whole earth, to show
himself strong in the behalf of them, whose heart is perfect toward him -- 2 Chronicles. 16. v. 9.

I will lift up mine eyes unto the hills: from whence comes my help, Psalm.
121.1.

My help comes from the Lord, which made heaven and earth, Psalm. 121.2.

Fear thou not, for I am with thee: be not dismayed, for I am thy God: I will
strengthen thee, yea, I will help thee; yea, I will uphold thee with the right
hand of my righteousness, Isa. 41.10.

Behold, all they that were incensed against thee, shall be ashamed and
confounded: they shall be as nothing, and they that strive with thee shall
perish, Isa. 41.11.

And it shall come to pass, that whosoever shall call on the name of the Lord,
shall be delivered: for in mount Zion, and in Jerusalem shall be deliverance,
as the Lord has said, -- Joel 2.32.

-- And they shall never perish, neither shall any pluck them out of my hand,
John 10.28.

Nevertheless, the foundation of God stands sure, having this seal, The Lord
knows them that are his -- 2 Timothy 2.19.

Wherein God willing more abundantly to show unto the heirs of promise, the
immutability of his counsel, confirmed it by an oath, Heb. 6.17.

That by two immutable things, in which it was impossible for God to lie, we
might have a strong consolation, who have fled for refuge to lay hold upon the
hope set before us, Heb. 6.18.

EXERCISE IX. A devout Soldier must exercise the duty of Prayer before he goes
upon Action, or attempt to fight his Enemies in Battle.
AND the children of Israel said unto the Lord, We have sinned, do thou unto us
whatsoever seems good unto thee, deliver us only, we pray thee, this day,
Judge. 10.15.

And Sampson called unto the Lord, and said, O Lord God, remember me, I pray
thee, and strengthen me, I pray thee, only this once, O God -- Judge. 16. v. 28.

I will call on the Lord, who is worthy to be praised: so shall I be saved from
mine enemies, 2 Samuel 22. v. 4.

And Asa cried unto the Lord his God, and said, Lord, it is nothing with thee
to help, whether with many, or with them that have no power: help us, O Lord
our God, for we rest on thee, and in thy name we go against this multitude: O
Lord, thou art our God, let not man prevail against thee, 2 Chronicles. 14. v. 11.

So the Lord smote the Ethiopians before Asa, and before Judah, and the
Ethiopians fled, 2 Chronicles. 14. v. 12.

And when Judah looked back, behold, the battle was before and behind; and they
cried unto the Lord, 2 Chronicles. 13.14.

Then the men of Judah gave a shout, and as the men of Judah shouted, it came
to pass, that God smote Jeroboam, and all Israel before Abijah and Judah, 2 Chronicles. 13. v. 15.

And the Children of Israel fled before Judah: and God delivered them into
their hand, 2 Chronicles. 13. v. 16.

Plead my cause (O Lord) with them that strive with me: fight against them that
fight against me, Psalm. 35. v. 1.

Take hold of shield and buckler, and stand up for mine help, Psalm. 35. v. 2.

Draw out also the spear, and stop the way against them that persecute me: say
unto my soul, I am thy salvation, Psalm. 35. v. 3.

As for me, I will call upon God; and the Lord shall save me, Psalm. 55. v. 16.

Evening, and morning, and at noon day, will I pray, and cry aloud, and he
shall hear my voice, Psalm. 55. v. 17.

He has delivered my soul in peace, from the battle that was against me --
Psalm. 55. v. 18.

The Lord is nigh unto all them that call upon him; to all that call upon him
in truth, Psalm. 145.18.

He will fulfill the desire of them that fear him: he also will hear their cry,
and will save them, Psalm. 145. v. 19.

But it came to pass, that when Sanballat, and Tobiah, and the Arabians, and
the Ammonites, and the Ashdo dites heard that the walls of Jerusa em were made
up and that the breaches began to be stopped, then they were very wroth, Neh.
4. v. 7.

And conspired all of them together, to come and to fight against Jerusalem,
and to hinder it, Neh. 4. v. 8.

Nevertheless, we made our prayer unto our God, and set a watch against them
day and night, because of them, Neh. 4. v. 9.

And he spoke a parable unto them, to this end, that men ought always to pray,
and not to faint, Luke 18. v. 1.

-- Verily, verily, I say unto you, Whatsoever ye shall ask the Father in my
name, he will give it you, Joh. 16. v. 23.

Be careful for nothing; but in every thing by prayer and supplication with
thanksgiving, let your requests be made known unto God, Phil. 4.6.

-- The effectual fervent prayer of a righteous man avails much, Jam. 5.16.

EXERCISE X. A Christian Soldier must not fear his Enemies, but pray for happy
Deliverance and Victory.
AND Moses said unto the people, Fear ye not, stand still, and see the
salvation of the Lord, which he will show you to day, Exodus 14.13.

Be strong and of a good courage, fear not, nor be afraid of them: for the Lord
thy God, he it is that does go with thee, he will not fail thee, nor forsake
thee, Deuteronomy. 31. v. 6.

And the Lord said unto Joshua, Fear them not: for I have delivered them into
thine hand; there shall not a man of them stand before thee, Josh. 10. ver. 8.

And Joshua said unto them, Fear not, nor be dismayed, be strong; and of good
courage: for thus shall the Lord do to all your enemies against whom ye fight,
Josh. 10. v. 25.

O our God, wilt not thou judge them? for we have no might against this great
company that comes against us; neither know we what to do, but our eyes are
upon thee, 2 Chronicles. 20. v. 12.

And he said, Hearken ye, all Judah, and ye inhabitants of Jerusalem, and thou
king Jehosaphat, Thus says the Lord unto you, be not afraid, nor dismayed by
reason of this great multitude, for the battle is not yours, but Gods, 2 Chronicles.
20. v. 15.

To morrow go ye down against them -- 2 Chronicles. 20. v. 16.

Ye shall not need to fight in this battle: set your selves, stand ye still,
and see the salvation of the Lord with you, O Judah and Jerusalem: fear not,
nor be dismayed; to morrow go out against them, for the Lord will be with you,
2 Chronicles. 20.17.

And they rose early in the morning, and went forth into the wilderness of
Tekoa: and as they went forth, Jehoshaphat stood, and said, Hear me, O Judah,
and ye inhabitants of Jerusalem, believe in the Lord your God, so shall ye be
established, believe his prophets, so shall ye prosper, 2 Chronicles. 20. v. 20.

My times are in thy hand: deliver me from the hand of mine enemies, and from
them that persecute me, Psalm. 31.15.

Deliver me from mine enemies, O my God: defend me from them that rise up
against me, Psalm. 59. v. 1.

Deliver me from the workers of iniquity, and save me from bloody men, Psalm.
59. v. 2.

Thou art my king, O God: command deliverances for Jacob, Psalm. 44. v. 4.

Through thee will we push down our enemies; through thy name will we tread
them under that rise up against us, Psalm. 44. v. 5.

Be not afraid of their faces: for I am with thee, to deliver thee, says the
Lord, Jer. 1. v. 8.

And fear not them which kill the body -- Matthew. 10. v. 28.

Brethren, my hearts desire and prayer to God for Israel, is, that they might
be saved, Romans 10.1.

-- For he has said, I will never leave thee nor forsake thee, Heb. 13.5.

So that we may boldly say, The Lord is my helper, and I will not fear what man
shall do unto me, Heb. 13. v. 6.

EXERCISE XI. If our Forces become weakened, and the Enemy grows strong and
powerful, we must humble our Souls, and pray more earnestly, that God may avert
the Judgment of the Sword which is sent to punish the sins of the Nation.
EVen all Nations shall say, Wherefore has the Lord done thus unto this land?
what means the heat of this great anger? Deuteronomy. 29.24.

Then men shall say, Because they have forsaken the covenant of the Lord God of
their fathers -- Deuteronomy 29. v. 25.

Up, sanctify the people, and say, Sanctify your selves against to morrow:
for thus says the Lord God of Israel, There is an accursed thing in the midst
of thee, O Israel: thou can not stand before thine enemies, until ye take
away the accursed thing from among you, Josh. 7.13.

If my people which are called by my name, shall humble themselves, and pray,
and seek my face, and turn from their wicked ways: then will I hear from
heaven, and will forgive their sin, and heal their land, 2 Chronicles. 7.14.

O remember not against us former iniquities; let thy tender mercies speedily
prevent us: for we are brought very low, Psalm. 79. v. 8.

Help us, O God of our salvation, for the glory of thy name, and deliver us,
and purge away our sins for thy names sake, Psalm. 79. v. 9.

O Lord God of Israel, thou art righteous, for we remain yet escaped, as it is
this day: behold, we are before thee in our trespasses: for we cannot stand
before thee, because of this, Ezra 9. v. 15.

I looked on my right hand, and beheld, but there was no man that would know
me, refuge failed me: no man cared for my soul, Psalm. 142. v. 4.

Attend unto my cry, for I am brought very low, deliver me from my persecutors:
for they are stronger than I, Psalm. 142. v. 6.

Howbeit, thou art just in all that is brought upon us: for thou have done
right, but we have done wickedly, Neh. 9. v. 33.

Neither have our kings, our princes, our priests, nor our fathers kept thy
law, nor hearkened unto thy commandments, and thy testimonies, wherewith thou
did testify against them. Neh. 9. v. 34.

For they have not served thee in their kingdom, and in thy great goodness that
thou gave them, and in the large and far land which thou gave before them,
neither turned they from their wicked works, Neh. 9. v. 35.

Help us, O God of our salvation, for the glory of thy name Psalm. 79. v. 9.

O Lord, be gracious unto us, we have waited for thee: be thou their arm every
morning, our salvation also in the time of trouble, Isal. 33. v. 2.

Be not far from me, for trouble is near; for there is none to help, Psalm. 22.
v. 11.

Deliver my soul from the sword -- Psalm. 22. v. 20.

O our God, will thou not judge them? for we have no might against this great
company that comes against us: neither know we what to do, but our eyes are
upon thee, 2 Chronicles. 20. v. 12.

Humble your selves therefore under the mighty hand of God, that he may exalt
you in due time, 1 Pet. 5.6.

The God of all grace, who has called us unto his eternal glory by Christ
Jesus, after that ye have suffered a while, make you perfect, stablish,
strengthen, settle you, 1 Pet. 5. v. 10.

And after all that is come upon us for our evil deeds, and for our great
trespass, seeing that thou our God have punished us less than our iniquities
deserve, and have given us such deliverance as this, Ezza 9. v. 13.

Should we again break thy commandments, and join in affinity with the people
of these abominations? would thou not be angry with us, till thou have
consumed us, so that there should be no remnant, nor escaping? Err. 9. v. 14.

EXERCISE XII. But if it please God to bless our Forces with happy Victory and
Success; then let all the Officers and Soldiers of the Army, and all the People
of the Land, ascribe the Power and Glory to the Lord, and devoutly say,
HAppy art thou, O Israel: who is like unto thee, O people: saved by the Lord
the shield of thy help, and who is the sword of thine excellency! and thine
enemies shall be found liers unto thee, and thou shall tread upon their high
places, Deuteronomy. 33. v. 29.

Thy right hand is become glorious in power, thy right hand has dashed in
pieces the enemy, Exodus 15. v. 6.

And in the greatness of thine excellency, thou have overthrown them that rose
up against thee -- Exodus 15. v. 7.

Who is like unto thee, O Lord, amongst the Gods? who is like thee, glorious in
holiness, fearful in praises, doing wonders? Exodus 15. v. 11.

Not unto us, O Lord, not unto us, but unto thy name give glory: for thy mercy,
and for thy truths sake, Psalm. 115.1.

He arose, and smote the Philistines until his hand was weary, and his hand
clave unto the sword: and the Lord wrought a great victory that day -- 2 Samuel
23. v. 10.

Rejoice, O ye nations, with his people, for he will avenge the blood of his
servants, and will render vengeance to his adversaries, and will be merciful to
his land, and to his people, Deuteronomy. 32.43.

The eternal God is thy refuge, and underneath are the everlasting arms: and he
shall thrust out the enemy from before thee, and shall say, Destroy them, Deuteronomy.
32. v. 27.

Thanks be to God which gives us the victory through our Lord Jesus Christ, 1
Cor. 15.57.

O sing unto the Lord a new song, for he has done mavelous things: his right
hand, and his holy arm has gotten him the victory, Psalm. 98. v. 1.

Wherefore David blessed the Lord before all the congregation: and David said,
Blessed be thou, Lord God of Israel, our father, for ever and ever, 1 Chronicles.
29. v. 10.

Thine, O Lord, is the greatness, and the power, and the glory, and the
victory, and the majesty; for all that is in the heaven and in the earth, is
thine: thine is the kingdom, O Lord, and thou art exalted as head above all, 1 Chronicles. 29. v. 11.

Both riches and honor come of thee, and thou reignest over all, and in thine
hand is power and might, and in thine hand it is to make great, and to give
strength unto all, 1 Chronicles. 29. v. 12.

Now therefore our God, we thank thee and praise thy glorious name, 1 Chronicles.
29.13.

-- For thine is the kingdom, and the power, and the glory for ever. Amen.
Matthew. 6.13.

Some COLLECTS proper for the Exercise of the Soldier's Morning and Evening
Service, of Private Devotion, in the Camp or Garrison.
COLLECT I. For God's assistance in Prayer.
LET thy merciful ears, O Lord, be open to the Prayers of thy humble servant;
and that I may obtain my Petitions, make me to ask such things as shall please
thee, through Jesus Christ my Lord. Amen.

COLLECT II. Of Contrition and Confession.
ALmighty and Everlasting God, who hate nothing that thou have made, and
do forgive the sins of all them that are truly penitent; create and make in
me a new and contrite heart, that I worthily lamenting my sins, and
acknowledging my wretchedness, may obtain of thee, the God of all mercy,
perfect remission and forgiveness, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

COLLECT III. For God's free Pardon and Absolution.
ALmighty God our heavenly Father, who of thy great goodness have promised
forgiveness of sins to all them that with hearty repentance and true Faith turn
unto thee; have mercy upon me, pardon and deliver me from all my sins, confirm
and strengthen me in all grace and holiness, and bring me unto everlasting
life, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

Another for the same.
ALmighty and everlasting God, I beseech thee to absolve me from all mine
offenses, that through thy mercy in Christ Jesus, I may be delivered from the
bonds of those sins, which by my frailty I have committed; Grant this, O
heavenly Father, for Jesus Christ his sake, our blessed Lord and Savior. Amen.

COLLECT IV. For Grace.
[Note, That this Collect is for the Morning.]

O Lord our heavenly Father, Almighty and everlasting God, who have safely
brought me to the beginning of this day, defend me in the same with thy mighty
power, and grant that I may fall into no sin, neither run into any kind of
danger; but that all my thoughts, words and actions may be ordered by thy
governance, to do always that is righteous in thy fight, through Jesus Christ
our Lord. Amen.

COLLECT V. For aid against Perils.
[Note, That this Collect is to be said at Night.]

LIghten mine eyes, O Lord, that I sleep not in darkness, nor in the shadow of
death; but by thy great mercy defend me from all perils and dangers this night,
that the Enemy may have no advantage over me, nor yet the wicked approach to
hurt me; but preserve me both in body and soul, through Jesus Christ my Lord
and Savior. Amen.

COLLECT VI. For a Blessing upon the Church and State.
O Lord look down from Heaven, behold and visit us with thy Salvation, have
mercy upon these sinful and distracted Kingdoms, pardon our great and crying
sins, divert thy Judgments; and give us all grace thankfully to accept thy
mercies: defend this Church with thy continual help and government: Bless and
preserve Their Majesty's King WILLIAM and Queen MARY, prosper Their Forces with
all happiness, both by Sea and Land, and make them eminent Instruments of doing
good for the furtherance of thy glory; and do thou at last bring Them to thy
everlasting Kingdom, through Jesus Christ our Lord and Savior. Amen.

COLLECT V. For Victory over our Enemies.
O God the protector of all them that trust in thee, the Lord of all power and
might, be ready, I beseech thee, to save and deliver me, and all my Superior
Officers and fellow Soldiers of this This to be used as necessary.
Camp or Garrison from the hands of our Enemies, that we may be preserved and
comforted in all the dangers and Calamities of War: do thou strengthen the
hands of our General, and go along with our Officers and Soldiers, and stand by
us all in the day of Battle, that we being armed by the power of thy Divine
Providence, may do great and valiant Acts, and so magnify thy honor and glory
in giving us Victory and deliverance, through Jesus Christ our Blessed Lord and
Savior. Amen.

COLLECT VI. For the Peace of the Christian World.
GRant, I beseech thee, O merciful Lord, to all thy faithful People pardon and
peace, that they being cleansed from all their sins, may walk in brotherly love
and agreement of Mind, and serve thee with a quiet Mind, through Jesus Christ
our Lord. Amen.

COLLECT VII. For heavenly Hope and Confidence.
O God, who never failest to help and govern them, whom thou do bring up in
thy steadfast fear and love; grant, I beseech thee, that I may lean only upon
the hope of thy heavenly grace, and in all my troubles put my whole trust and
confidence in thy mercy, that thou being my Ruler and Guide, I may so pass
through things temporal, that I lose not the things Eternal, but may obtain thy
gracious Promises, through Jesus Christ our Lord and Savior. Amen.

COLLECT VIII. To Conclude.
ALmighty God, who have promised to hear the Petitions of them that ask in thy
Son's name; I beseech thee mercifully to incline thine ears, now that in his
name, I have made my Prayers and Supplications unto thee, and grant that those
things which I have faithfully asked according to thy will, may be effectually
obtained to the relief of my necessity, and to the setting forth of thy Glory,
through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

COLLECT IX. For a Blessing.
THE Lord fulfill the desires and Prayers of thy humble Servant, as may be most
expedient for me. The Lord bless and keep me in the day of Battle, in the hour
of death, and in the time of Judgment: The Lord lift up the light of his
Countenance upon me, and give me Peace both now and evermore.

A COLLECT in case the Soldier be visited with Sickness, or lie dangerously ill
of his Wounds.
O Lord look down from Heaven, visit and relieve me thy As the case requires.
afflicted or wounded Servant, whom thou have made the object of thy heavy
wrath and displeasure for the punishment of my sins, sanctify, I beseech thee,
this thy fatherly correction to me, that the sense of my weakness may add
strength to my Faith, and seriousness to my repentance; that if it shall be thy
good pleasure to restore me to my former health, I may lead the residue of my
life, in thy fear and to thy glory; or else give me grace so to take thy
visitation, that after this painful life ended, I may dwell with thee in life
everlasting, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

A Private Prayer for the Morning.
O Lord God of Hosts, who rulest over all the Kingdoms of the Earth, in whose
Hands there is power and might, so that none is able to withstand thee, look
down from Heaven, and behold from the Habitation of thy Holiness and Glory,
upon me, and all the Camp of our Israel, who lie before thee dead in Trespasses
and Sins; be thou pleased to quicken us all by thy heavenly grace and power,
that we may arise from the Death of sin, unto the Life of righteousness;
particularly be merciful unto me, (the unworthiest of all thy Servants) give
ear unto my Prayer, O God, and hide not thy self from my supplication, who come
unto thee with all humility and devotion of Soul and Body, imploring thy
fatherly mercy and forgiveness of all those grievous sins and transgressions,
which I do now confess before thee. Here recollect your particular sins.
O cleanse thou me from all my faults, wash me in the Blood of that Immaculate
Lamb, who offered up himself a Sacrifice for the sins of the whole World, look
upon the intercession of the Blessed Jesus, and let his saving power and
efficacy plead pardon for my sins; hear, O Lord, and forgive; give grace and
strength to thy Servant, that he may reform all the errors and miscarriages of
his former Life, and be renewed in the Spirit of a sober Mind, to think, and do
always those things, that be righteous in thy sight; Show thy Pity and
Compassion to this sinful and divided Nation, wherein we live; pardon our great
and crying sins, prevent the wrath of thy terrible Judgments, and give us not
over a prey unto the will of our Enemies; for thou art the hope of our Israel,
and the Savior thereof in the time of trouble; and therefore, that we may
enjoy security and rest, from all our Enemies round about us, be thou pleased
to bless and defend, with thy peculiar favor and providence, Their Sacred
Majesty's, King William and Queen Mary; make Them the saving Instruments of
this Church and Nation; and to this end, do thou prosper Their Forces, both by
Land and Sea, with happy Success and Victory. Be thou, O Lord, the God of our
defense and Salvation, in the Day of Battle, and strengthen the Hands of our
General, and bless all our Officers and Soldiers, that we may be strong in the
Lord, and in the Power of his might, to fight valiantly for the cause of God.

And now, O Lord, lest any unthankfulness for former mercies, may make me
incapable of thy future favors: I desire to praise and glorify thy holy name
for all thy Temporal and Spiritual Blessings, for the particular preservations
of thy good Providence, that thou have defended my life hitherto from the
violence of the Enemy; and be thou pleased to continue still watchful over me;
help me. O God of my Salvation, for the glory of thy name; and let me not be
delivered over into the Hands of merciless and cruel Men: and since I know not
what sudden dangers may encompass me, give me serious thoughts to prepare for
the Hour of Death, and the Day of Judgment, that I may not be surprised at any
sudden change or accident of mortality, but may patiently submit to thy Holy
Will, and whether I live or die, cheerfully resign both my Soul and Body into
the Protection of thy good Providence, for the sake of Christ Jesus, who is the
God of my hope and Salvation, and in whom I will trust for my deliverance from
the Enemy; and therefore devoutly pray, as he has taught me in his Holy
Gospel, saying, Our Father, etc.

A Private Prayer for the Evening.
O Lord God, merciful and gracious Father, who bear the most tender love and
compassion to the Children of Men; who has no pleasure in the death of the
wicked, but rather that he should turn from his way and live: Be graciously
pleased to accept of the hearty Contrition and repentance of thy humble
Servant, who meekly confess my sins, and acknowledge my vileness, Hear mention
the sins of the day.
I have sinned against thee; O what shall I do unto thee? O thou preserver of
Men! I have indeed sinned against thy Mercies and thy Judgments, against the
checks of my own Conscience, and the deliberate Vows and Purposes of Holy
amendment; But now, O Father, I come unto thee, in the mercies of the Holy
Jesus, and pray thee, That thou will accept of the Sacrifice of his Blood to be
a Propitiation for my sins; O let the sprinkling of that everlasting Covenant
wash and purify my Soul clean and undefiled from all the Pollutions of Vice
and Wickedness, and do thou fill me with such a Measure and Portion of thy
Grace, that I may resist all future Temptations, and diligently apply my heart
to fulfill all thy Commandments, by serving thee in true Holiness and
Righteousness all the days of my life; remember with me, the sorrowful State
and Condition of Mankind; show thy mercy and compassion to the manifold fins
and Provocations of this Land and Nation, and punish us not according to our
iniquities: for then how shall we escape, O God, if thou be extreme to mark
what we have done amiss? O remember not against us our former iniquities; but
let thy tender mercies speedily help and prevent us, heal all our Divisions and
Differences in Opinion, and unite us all by the bands of Brotherly Love and
Charity, that we may become a chosen Generation, and a peculiar People zealous
of Good Works. Let us not continue unthankful for thy late Mercies, but let us
all, O Lord, consider thy Work, and the power of thy Providence, and so repent
of this our backsliding wickedness, that iniquity may not be out Ruin. And
that Truth and Peace may flourish in our days, bless the Supreme Power and
Government of Their Majesty's, King William and Queen Mary; prosper thou the
Great Work of Their Hands, O prosper thou Their handywork, that They may become
Victorious over all Their Enemies; And to this end, give a blessing of strength
and courage to Their Forces, both by Land and Sea: particularly, I pray for the
chief Commanders, the Officers and Soldiers of this As occasion requires.
Camp or Garrison; Give us all the Spirit of Christian Fortitude and Resolution,
that we may be strong, and of good courage, to stand before the Enemy in the
day of Battle; O preserve thou the Life of thy Servant who now calls upon thee,
let the Enemy have no advantage over me, nor the wicked approach to hurt me;
but let me be continually guarded by the Protection of thy good Providence
until these Calamities be over-past. And as thou have been pleased to defend me
this day, and all the days of my Life; (for which my Soul does praise and
magnify thy Holy Name, for this and all other thy mercies) so let no evil
happen unto me this Night, nor any Destruction come nigh my Tent or Dwelling;
but, O blessed Lord, the keeper of Israel, who never slumberest nor sleep,
watch over me, and all the Camp of our Israel, that we may be secure from all
dangers both of Soul and Body; Give me serious Apprehensions of Death, that I
may consider the few and uncertain days of my Pilgrimage here: and since I know
not how short my time is to live, make me sensible of all the sudden accidents
and dangers of War, that I may never live in such a state, as I shall be afraid
to die, but may be always ready with cheerfulness and joy to resign my self
into the Hands of my merciful Redeemer; and grant, O Lord, that whether I sleep
or wake, live or die, I may always continue thy faithful Servant, even unto the
end of my life; for the sake of Jesus Christ my only Lord and Savior, in whose
Name I further call upon thee, saying,

Our Father, which art in heaven, Hallowed be thy Name. Thy kingdom come. Thy
will be done in earth, As it is in heaven. Give us this day our daily bread.
And forgive us our trespasses, As we forgive them that trespass against us. And
lead us not into temptation; But deliver us from evil. Amen.

Repeat the Apostles Creed, which is the right Confession of your Christian
Faith.
I Believe in God the Father Almighty, Maker of Heaven and Earth:

And in Jesus Christ his only Son our Lord, Who was conceived by the Holy
Ghost, Born of the Virgin Mary, Suffered under Pontius Pilate, Was crucified,
dead, and buried: He descended into Hell; The third day he rose again from the
dead. He ascended into Heaven, And sits on the right hand of God the Father
Almighty; From thence he shall come to judge the quick and the dead.

I believe in the holy Ghost; The holy Catholic Church; The Communion of
saints; The forgiveness of sins; The resurrection of the body, And the life
everlasting. Amen.

-- And this is the victory that overcomes the world, even our faith, 1 John
5.4. That is the word of faith which we preach, that if thou shall confess with
thy mouth the Lord Jesus, and believe in thy heart, that God hat raised him
from the dead, thou shall be saved, Romans 10.8, 9. Repeat often the Decalogue,
or the Ten Commandments, which is the Rule of your Obedience.
GOD spoke these words and said, I am the Lord thy God: Thou shall have none
other Gods but me.

Lord, have mercy upon me, and incline my heart to keep this law.

Thou shall not make to thy self any graven image, nor the likeness of any
thing that is in heaven above, or in the earth beneath, or in the water under
the earth. Thou shall not bow down to them, nor worship them: for I the Lord
thy God am a jealous God, and visit the sins of the fathers upon the children,
unto the third and fourth generation of them that hate me; and show mercy unto
thousands in them that love me, and keep my commandments.

Lord, have mercy upon me, and incline my heart to keep this law.

Thou shall not take the Name of the Lord thy God in vain: for the Lord will
not hold him guiltless that takes his Name in vain.

Lord, have mercy upon me, and incline my heart to keep this law.

Remember that thou keep holy the Sabbath day. Six days shall thou labor, and
do all that thou have to do; but the seventh day is the Sabbath of the Lord thy
God. In it thou shall do no manner of work, thou, and thy son, and thy
daughter, thy manservant, and thy maidservant, thy cattle, and the stranger
that is within thy gates. For in six days the Lord made heaven and earth, the
sea, and all that in them is, and rested the seventh day: wherefore the Lord
blessed the seventh day, and hallowed it.

Lord, have mercy upon me, and incline my heart to keep this law.

Honor thy father and thy mother, that thy days may be long in the land which
the Lord thy God gives thee.

Lord, have mercy upon me, and incline my heart to keep this law.

Thou shall do no murder.

Lord, have mercy upon me, and incline my heart to keep this law.

Thou shall not commit adultery.

Lord, have mercy upon me, and incline my heart to keep this law.

Thou shall not steal.

Lord, have mercy upon me, and incline my heart to keep this law.

Thou shall not bear false witness against thy neighbor.

Lord, have mercy upon me, and incline my heart to keep this law.

Thou shall not covet thy neighbors house, thou shall not covet thy neighbors
wife, nor his servant, nor his maid, nor his ox, nor his ass, nor any thing
that is his.

Lord, have mercy upon me, and write all these thy laws in my heart, I beseech
thee.

-- Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul,
and with all thy mind. This is the first and great commandment. And the second
is like unto it, Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self. On these two
commandments hang all the law and the prophets. Matthew. 22. v. 37, 38, 39, 40.
The Lord's Prayer the best form of your Christian Devotion, either for the
beginning or end of your Prayers.
OUR Father which art in Heaven; Hallowed be thy Name. Thy Kingdom come. Thy
will be done in earth, as it is in heaven. Give us this day our daily bread.
And forgive us our trespasses, As we forgive them that trespass against us. And
lead us not into temptation: But deliver us from evil. For thine is the
kingdom, The power and the glory, for ever and ever. Amen.

After this manner therefore pray ye, Our Father, etc. Matthew. 6. v. 9. When the
Soldier stands Sentinel.
Take ye heed, watch and pray; for ye know not when the time is, Mark. 13.33.

When he goes out to mount or dismount the Guard.
The Lord preserve my going out and my coming in, from this time forth and for
evermore, Psalm. 121. v. 8.

When he goes to fight the Enemy.
Plead thou my cause, O Lord, with them that strive with me: and fight thou
against them, that fight against thee. Take hold of shield and buckler, and
stand up for mine help, Psalm. 35. v. 1, 2.

God be with you in your life, and at your death, and make your Soul and Body
precious in the sight of the Lord; with whom, I pray, that you may live for
evermore. Amen.

FINIS.

