Sodom Fair: OR, THE MARKET OF THE MAN of SIN. CONTAINING, A true Account of
the Prices of the Pope's Pardons and Dispensations; being a Treatise very
Useful and Necessary for all Young English Papists, who intend to take Holy
Orders, or Travel through Italy; and all such as intend to be cheated both out
of their Souls and Money. To which is added, The History of ADULTERY, as it is
now at Rome by Law Established; with the Life of Clement the Sixth, and
Blasphamous BULL which he Published for the Year of Iubele, 1350.

Isa. 5. 22. Woe unto them which justify the wicked for Reward.

Rev. 16. 10. And the fifth Angel poured out his Vial upon the Seat of the
Beast, and his Kingdom was full of Darkness.

Mantuan Calamit, Lib. 3. -- Venalia nobis
Templa Sacerdotes, altaria, sacra, Coronae,
Ignis, Thura, preces, Coelum est Venale Deusque
Petrarch. Multo aeqanimius ferunt millium animarum jacturam, quam december
solidorum.

Printed in the Year, 1688.

Math. Par. in Hen. 3. EOdem tempore permittente, vel procurante Papa Gregorio
adeo invaluit Romanae Ecclesiae, insatiabilis Cupiditas confundens fas nefasque
quod deposito rubore, velut Meretrix vulgaris and effrons omnibus venalis and
exposita, usuram pro parvo, symoniam pro nullo inconvenienti reputavit.

Sodom Fair: OR THE MARKET OF THE MAN of SIN.
Prove. 9. 16. Who so is Simple, let him turn in hither.
POPE Julius the Second, was a Genoway Born; and though at first a Wherry, or
Water-man, (as Erasmus, Writing on the Proverb, A remo ad Tribunal, Reports)
yet by the help of his Oar, did he pull up to the Popedom, and became Admiral
of the Red See of Rome, and those many Waters mentioned Rev. 17. 15. whereon
The Scarlet Whore of Babylon sits. John Functius in his Commentaries Writes
thus of him:

Pope Julius being born of a base Stock, rising by Degrees, through good
Fortune, and crafty Wit, attained to the highest; he being a Fellow of a subtle
and compassing Head* and most given by Nature to play the Warrior, did like
Nimrod, enlarge his Portion by the Dint of the Sword: So that by his
procurement within the space of 7 Years, were slain and destroyed to the Number
of 200000 Christians. To this purpose Wrote one Hulricus Huttenus an Epigram in
Latin; Englished thus, by a Gentleman several Years ago: Why goes Julius in
Steel,
And in his Coat of Plate?
With grisly Beard, and ugly Looks,
Upon his Bushy Pate.
Whose frounced Forehead hides deep,
His loathsome streaming Eyes;
From whence (with Hell Hounds threatening looks)*
The Sparks of Wildfire flies.
He Is Terror unto Western men,
By Sea and eke by Land;
With bitter Bows, and bloody Bills,
And shaking Sword in hand;
That unto all the Kings on Earth
Has wrought such Warlike harms;
And is a Scourge to the World, which he
Has raised up in Arms.
The Author of such manglings made, etc.


To the same purpose Wrote one Dulcherius, thus: Whilst Julius (to Mischief
framed)
Did Bloody War prepare,
He marched forth in armed Hand,
His Weapon thus he bare.
A Sword hung by his Side, which out
Courageously he drew,
And Peter's Keys into the deep
Of Tyber Flood he threw;
With Blustering thus; Since Peter' s Keys
In War cannot prevail,
Then with the Sword of Paul we will
Our Enemies assail.


This Julius was a Man (or rather a Beast) not only given excessively to the
Desire of Women, but to that unnatural Lust, which (tho in his Holiness was no
Sin, or at most, venial) in a Layman might be reputed deadly. For (as the
Masters of Paris in a Commentary report) he did usually commit the abominable
Sin of Sodomy, with Two Young Noble Men, whom Ann Queen of France had sent to
one Cardinal Robert Nevetensis to be educat. The same is reported of him by
several other Authors, whereupon Conradus Gabriel, wrote these Two Verses.
Venit in Italiam spectabilis indole rara,
Germanus, redit de puero Mulier.


It were intolerable to write down all the Abominations and Filthy ways, how
this Monster of Men defiled his Body: And the inferior Clergy (in Imitation of
their infallible Father like wandering Stars of Apostasy) borrowed the Egyptian
Darkness of his wicked Deeds; conforming themselves to his Godless Life and
Conversation, in all manner of Filthiness, impudently working such Villainies,
as ought not to be named among Christians, starting gross and irreverent
Questions, concerning the Incarnation of Christ, and the Conception of the B.
Virgin. Of this Tribe was one Ptolomeus Lucersis a Monk, who ar Mantua preached
such Doctrine, that the Mid-Wives in Church could hardly be detained from
pulling him to pieces.

Now this Pope (at great Expense) keeping a Court to Venus, and a Camp to Mars,
with an Army, the number whereof was as the Sand of the Sea, his Revenues (tho
incredible great) were not sufficient to bear out his Pomp, and make good his
Quarrels, against the greatest part of the Christian World, without improving
the Market of his Ecclesiastic Trade: Therefore reduced to good (or rather
damnable) order, the Rates of his Carnal, yet Spiritual Pardons, exposing to
public view, the true Price of every particular Dispensation, for the Profit
(as he pretended) or rather ruin of the World, whom he had blinded, deceived,
brought to Subjection, and led Captive, in Delusion and Ignorance, with great
Wonder and Admiration.

A true and real Account of the Pope's Pardons and Dispensations, with their
Prices, as they are sold in his Holynesse's Spiritual Court.
Dispensations for Drunkards.
IF a Drunkard will have a Congregation in his own House, he must pay for his
License 30 Turons, or Pounds of Towrs, 7 Ducats and 6 Carlines.

For a License to erect a new Public Synagogue, he must pay 60 Turons, 15
Ducats.

For a License to heal with assistance, 6 Turons.

Dispensations for such as have been, or are to be promoted, being under Age.
If a Boy of Six years Old, will take that step to Priesthood called Prima
Tonsura, the first Clip, he must pay 9 Turons, 2 Ducats, 9 Carlines.

If one at Sixteen years, or as soon as he comes to be Sixteen, will be
Subdeacon, his Fee is 12 Turons, 3 Ducats, 8 Carlines. At Seventeen, 6 Turons,
2 Ducats.

To be Deacon at Eighteen years, 12 Turons. At Nineteen, 6 Turons.

To be a Priest at Twenty Two years of Age, 12 Turons, 2 Ducats, 10 Carlines.
At Twenty Four, 6 Turons.

For Lieenses to take Orders.
He that takes the first Clip, and the four lesser Orders, (not of his
Ordinary) pays 4 Turons, 1 Ducate, 9 Carlines.

To take all Holy Orders, or but two, or only one; the Fee is 12 Turons, 2
Ducats, 10 Carlines.

To take Orders without the time, either one, or more, or all; 10 Turons, 2
Ducats.

If any come to receive Benediction, for the use of an Abbot, he pays 24
Turons, 6 Ducats. For the Use of a Bishop 24 Turons.

Dispensations for such as are dismembered, or want some of their Limbs, to
take Orders.
If any wanting some Member be admitted to Clark-ship, in any of the lesser
Orders, he pays 6 Turons, 2 Ducats.

If any such be admitted to Orders, or to execute Function, he pays 16 Turons,
4 Ducats.

If any that lacks Fingers be admitted to a single Benefice, his Fee is 12
Turons, 3 Ducats, 6 Carlines.

He that is blind of the Right Eye, pays 16 Turons, 12 Ducats.

He that is blind of the Left Eye, so as he may hold the Book in the middle of
the Altar, and the blemish be not great 30 Turons, 17 Ducats, 6 Carlines.

He that has but one Stone, or none, and will be a Priest pays 6 Turons, 2
Ducats.

He that has gelded himself 12 Turons, 3 Ducats, 6 Carlines.

Dispensations for Wilful Murder.
He that is a Wilful Murderer may have a Dispensation, to enjoy one Benefice;
but if that suffice him not, then for the Second; if that serve not, then for
the Third, and together with the Absolution, he pays 12 Turons, 3 Ducats, 6
Carlines.

And that he may enjoy the Privileges of the Clergy, 18 Turons, 4 Ducats, 9
Carlines.

And if he require three Benefices, 18 Turons, 4 Ducats, 9 Carlines.

A Bishop or Abbot, or the head of any Order, or one of St. John's Knights,
pays to be absolved from wilful Murder 50 Turons, 12 Ducats, 6 Carlines.

That a Willful Murderer may be secretly admitted into Holy Orders, and to
minister at the Altar by Dispensation, or to any Ecclesiastical Living, in the
Court of Conscience, he pays 36 Turons, 9 Ducats.

If one Man be guilty of many Murders, at one fray and one time, he pays 36
Turons, 9 Ducats: But for two Murders in diverse frays, 50 Turons, 12 Ducats,
6 Carlines.

He that kills his Father, Mother, Brother or Sister, pays for his Pardon,
for any one of them 4 Turons, 1 Ducate, 8 Carlines. And so he that kills his
Wife; and for a License to marry another, 8 Turons, 2 Ducates 9 Carlines. And
to all that assist a Man to Murder his Wife the Pardon is dearer by 2 Turons.

For Murdering of Priests.
If a Layman kill a Priest, he pays 6 Turons, 2 Ducates.

For killing a single Clark, or a Priest in Holy Orders, that is prohibited to
execute his Office 6 Turons, 2 Ducats.

For killing many Priests at one time, and in one fray 6 Turons, if diverse at
several times, for the first, the whole, Fine, and for every one of the rest
half.

For a Priest-killer, that he may obtain Ecclesiastical Livings, the
Dispensation is 2 Turons, 2 Ducats.

For killing a Layman.
For one Layman only, 3 Turons, 1 Ducate, 4 Carlines; And if one kill diverse
in one Conflict, he Fines but for One.

For Murdering of Children.
If a Father, Mother, or Kinsman murder a Child, he pays 4 Turons, 1 Ducat, 8
Carlines. If a stranger 3 Turons, 1 Ducate, 4 Carlines.

If the Father and Mother with mutual concent, murder their Child; they pay 6
Turons. 2 Ducates.

If a Woman take a potion to kill the Fruit of her Womb; or if the Father give
it to the Mother; the price of their Indulgence is 4 Turons. 1 Ducate. 8
Carlines. If a stranger give it her, he pays 4 Turons. 1 Ducat. 5 Carlines.

For Charming and Witchcraft.
A Witch or Enchantress, after she has renounced her Sorceries, must pay 6
Turons. 2 Ducats.

For Heretics.
For absolution from Heresy, before a Man has renounced it by Oath, so as he
may be received again to enjoy all privileges as before, in ample manner; the
price is 36 Turons. 9 Ducats.

For Sacrilege, Theft, Fireing Houses, Rapes, Perjury, and suchlike Sins.
Absolution, with restoring in ample manner, the person Guilty in every one of
these cases; is 36 Turons. 9 Ducats.

For Frailty of the Flesh.
Absolution for Fleshly Frailty in any Venerous Act, committed by one of the
Clargy; if with a Nun, within and without the Abbey Walls, or with Women of
their Kindred, or Affinity, or their Ghostly Daughters, etc. With Dispensation
for retaining his orders, is 36 Turons. 3 Ducats. But if with them he sue also
for absolution of Sins against Nature and Bestiality, the price is 90 Turons.
12 Ducats. 6 Carlins. But if he sue for Absolution only of Sin against Nature,
etc. the price is 36 Turons. 9 Ducats.

The price of a Pardon for a Nun that has lain with diverse men, within or
without the Abbey Walls, and a Restitution to her former state in the Nunrey,
or to be Lady-Abbess; is 36 Turons. 9 Ducats.

Absolution for him that has kept a Concubine, with Dispensation for Orders
and a spiritual living; is 21 Turons. 5 Ducats. 6 Carlins.

For a Layman offending in any Carnal Lust the Court of Conscience; the
Dispensation is 6 Turons. 2 Ducats.

For Incest 4 Turons.

For Adultery and Incest both 6 Turons.

Of Diverse Transgressions.
For Burying an Excommunicated person in Church soil, the Dispensation is 6
Turons. 2 Ducats.

For him that has concealed the Carcass of a dead Priest, thereby to obtain
his Benefice 6 Turons. 2. Ducats.

For a Priest that says Mass ignorantly, in an interdicted place, 6 Turons. 2
Ducats.

For a Priest that blesses Man and Wife, at the second Marriage, which were
blessed in the first; 6 Turons 2 Ducats.

The Absolution of a Merchant that transporteth Artillery to Jnfidels, and
returns without gain; is 12 Turons. 3 Ducats. 6 Carlines.

If he return with gain, the fee is all one, but he must agree with the Pope's
Datary.

These are the abounding delicacies of the Roman Harlot, wherewith the
Spiritual Merchant of the Earth are waxed rich; this is the bewitching Wine of
her Fornications; whereof all Nations have drank and are mad; and whereby the
Kings and Great Ones of the Earth are entized to commit spiritual Uncleanness
and Abominations. Who so is simple let him turn in hither; and such as are
destitute of understanding; Stolen Waters are Sweet, and Bread eaten in Secret
is pleasant; but know [Reader] that the dead are there, and her Guests are in
the depths of Hell.

In consideration of these Paltry stuff, and the Pope's Leger-de-main dealings
Huldericus Huttenus made a Latin Epigram on Julius the Second's Perdons, which
one in Queen Elizabeth's time translated thus. By craft Pope JULY all the World,
Thou Merchant do intwine:
Thou sellest Heaven; and yet no part
Thereof by right is thine.
Sell me the thing thou have: great shame
Will else thereof proceed.
When thou do sell the thing which thou
Thy self do want and need.
O Salvage soil! Why bidst thou not
An Hundred Giants fell;
To JULIUS? To beat out JOVE;
That he the Heavens may sell.
For till another God get Heaven,
And Thunder from the Skies;
Friend JULY I Will not buy of thee,
Such weighty Merchandise.


I do not write this spitefully, for the disgrace and shame of the Papists of
this Age; For the ten Horns of the Beast, have made the Whore so desolate and
naked; that now she begineth to be ashamed of what she has before openly
professed, and would gladly cover her Nakedness, by disowning that whereing
formerly she gloried. My design is to speak the truth freely, without
dissimulation; that none may justify themselves: But that all Flesh from his
pretended Holiness the great Pope, to his reputed Wickedness; the poor Beggar
may be sensible of their own unworthiness; that every Mouth may be stopped, and
all the World may become Guilty before God; and that these who have escaped the
Poison, Snares and Contradictions of Popery, may not be entangled again with
the Pollutions of the Romish Harlot; nor with the Dog turn again to their own
Vomit, lest (being given over to their own obstinacy and delusion) their latter
end be worse than their first.

The History of Fornication and Adultery.
NEver was any Ordinance recommended to Man, with more absolute and ample
commendation, and less occasi* of mistake or error, than the Ordinance of
Marriage. GOD himself recommended it to Adam in Paradise, as a thing so
necessary that he could not well live without it; Genesis 2. 18. and so Holy, that
it could consist with Innocence it self; Christ countenanced it, and the
Apostle in praise of it Heb. 13. 3. said Marriage is honorable among ALL men,
without exception.

Now if it be Honorable among all MEN; What Creatures are the Romish Clargy?
to whom it is an unlawful, dihonorable, and an unclean thing.

But in short he that calls it an unclean thing in any respect, exalts his
own folly above the wisdom of God, and may as well prove the lawfulness of
Adultery and Murder, from the Sixth and Seventh Commandments, as bring any
thing like an Argument, from Scripture, Reason or Convenience for the Doctrine
of the Clargy's single Life. He that denies the Doctrine of the Father and the
Son, denies both the Father and the Son, and he is ANTICHRIST (says John)
that denies the Father and the Son. God appointed marriage as a Remedy for our
corrupt Nature, and an Antidote against Uncleanness. But the Roman Baud (to
enhauce her spiritual Trade of Fornications) tells us that the Remedy is
worse than the Disease, and gives the God of truth the Lie: For many Romish
Clargy-men have been deposed being under suspision of marriage, but restored
again to their Benefices when they have proved their escape only the venial Sin
of Fornication. Yet was there never any error or Doctrine of Devils (as the
Apostle who by the Spirit of God foretold of it 1 Timothy 4. 1, 2, 3. terms it)
established by the Pope of Rome, with greater opposition, crossing, thwarting,
contest and contradiction than this Act of Uncleanness, or the Clargy's single
Life; one Council making, another marring; one Pope doing, another undoing; the
Clargy threatening the Pope, and the Pope Cur^ing the Clargy, who would not be
separate from their Wiv^^; and Children, nor heartily give over their Benefices.

Indeed this Mystery of Iniquity is of an old date; it began to work about the
year 583. For Pelagius then Bisho^ of Rome, commanded all the Subdeacons,
either to (...) away their Wives, or give over their Ecclesiastical Funct^ons.
But before he could accomplish his wicked desig^ God sent forth such Floods
(occasioned by violent storms Rain) that a great part of Italy was drowned, and
a Pest^lence called Pestis inguinaria, whereof Pelagius* with man thousands
died, to the great joy and rejoicing of the Clargy.

But his Successor Gregory, commonly Surnamed the Gre^^ (being a Superstitious
Monk; who over burdened the Church with a heavier Yoke of Ceremonies, than the
Jew were ever able to bear) pursued the Doctrine of Adulter, with greater
violence; commanding the Priests to live single, or turn out off all they here
poslessed. Now the Monk among many doting Decrees ordained it lawful for man to
eat small, but not great Fishes; as says Mantua Fast. 2. Yet was it not
against the Law,
To feed on Fishes small:
For GREGORY forbade the great,
But time misorder'd all.
And stately Tables combred are,
With Fish of larger sort:
So GREGORY's Laws are kept; where need
Does bear a simple port.
That in the shallow Brooks, and Floods, etc.


But on a certain time (as Huldericus Bishop of August a wri^eth in a letter to
Nicolas the first) Gregory sent a Woman catch little Fishes in a Pond, where
she found six thousan^ Heads of Infants, which had been therein drowned. Which
Gregory perceiving to be the effect of the Clargy's forced singl^ Life, with
sighing and sorrowing, he revoked the Canon saying, It is better to Marry than
to give occasion to Murder* or as Huldericus writes, They accompanied not only
with Maids, Married Women, and their own Kindred, but with Mankind, and the
very Bruit Beasts in the Fields.

This Gregory dyed Anno 604. and the Decree of Adultery was Buried with him,
till Nicolas the First, about the year ^66 raised it out off it is Grave and set
it on Foot to chase ^he World to Destruction. He no sooner came to the Pope^om,
than he deposed John Archbishop of Ravenna, for ^antaining the Ancient
Liberties of his Bishopric, and ^rought that church in perpetual bondage, to
the Romish ^yranny. Amongst many Acts of Pride, Error, Ignorance and
Superstition, he excluded all secular Princes from his Council, commanded the
Laity not to judge the Clargy, though of never so Debauched a Life, nor dispute
the Pope's Power and Aothority; and ordained that no Christian Magistrate
should have power over a Prelate, or bring any Clargy-man to Judgment, because
(said he) The Pope is called GOD: He ^ikewise ordained that Divine Service
should be said in La^ine, but granted (by dispensation) to the Sclavonians and
Polonians, to have it in their own Tongue; he allowed the Sactaments to be
received of wicked Ministers, and bound the Clargy to a single life. This last
decree of Adultery was much opposed by the Clargy; and especially the foresaid
Huldericus Bishop of Augusta, who in the fore mentioned Letter gave him an
Account of the six thousand Heads: Another told him a Dilemma, which I propose
now to the Romish Clargy: The Marriage of the Clargy whether is it of God or of
Man? Now if he had said of God; then it might have been answered, Why then do
you abrogate God's Ordinance. If he had said of Men; Then he had been in danger
to be knocked in the Head, both by the Rabble and Clargy; for all men looked
upon Marriage as Honorable, save the Pope and some of his Creatures. But
whilst these things were in ^gitation, His Holiness no sooner had brought forth
this Brat of Filthiness, than he died Anno 867. from which time till Pope Leo
the Ninth (who came to the Popedom Anno 1049.) ^his Decree of Adultery lay
betwixt hot and cold. This Leo was the old Serpent, that by the Advice of
Cardinal Hildebrand, whom some term Hell-Brand, hatched the Coca trice to
Perfection, or rather Defection. For calling a Council at Maguntia, he utterly
condemned the Marriage of the Clargy. But immediately after this Council,
Brazutus the Famous Poisoner (who is reported to have poisoned Seven Popes, in
13 Years space, by the Advice of Hildebrand and Theophilactes) by a deadly doze
sent him to another World in the Fifth Year of his Popedom.

No sooner began this CANON of Uncleaness to wear old and Men groan under the
burden of a single Life, than Stephen the Ninth called another Council at
Florence, Anno 1058 where he condemned the lawful Marriage of the Clargy; bu
immediately after, Brazatus (by the advice of Hildebrand the Cardinal) sent him
to another World, as he had several of his Brethren before.

Now the Church of Rome, or rather the Bawd of Abominations, finding that her
Clargy and scarlet colored Beast kicked at her Commands, resolved to daunt and
spurn him to a more sober Course, and with the Rods of cursing and Exercration
(like a loving old Mother) to whip or rather lash him, to a filial Subjection.
Therefore Pope Nicholas the Second, who came to the Popedom Anno 1058. clothed
himself with Imprecations, and took the Thunderbolt of Damnation in his Mouth,
and with the Hobgoblings of Excommunication, frightened the hoodwinked World out
of their Wits. For (as Barnes Distinct 23 testifies) this cruel Curse by way
of Proclamation) was after the making of several impious Decrees, published at
his Command.

IN THE NAME OF GOD AMEN. If any man break this our sacred Decretal Sentence,
and presumptuously attempt to hurt or disquiet (against this Statute) the
Church of ROME. Let him be accursed for ever; and damned by Excommunication.
Let him be reputed among the wicked, that shall not rise again to Judgment: Let
him feel the Wrath of the Almighty against him: Let him feel the Rage of PETER
and PAUL upon him in the Life to come, that spurneth against their Church in
this Life: Let his dwelling be in the Wilderness, and let his House be left
Desolate for none to dwell in; let his Children be Orphans, and his Wife a
Widow: In his Troubles let him be troubled; let his Children beg their bread,
and be cast out, and be Vagabonds, driven out of their own Houses; Let the
Userer Rifle all his Goods, and let Strangers spoil the Labor of his Hands;
let the whole World fight against him, and let all the Elements be contrary
unto him; let the Merits of all Saints confound him; let him spend this Life
Prisoner fettered in Chains; and let the Saints pour their open Vengeance upon
him. But our Grace defend them that keep this.

This with several Cups of Cursing and Abominations, were no sooner presented
to the bewitched World, than all Christians were struck with Wonder and
Astonishment, and followed the Beast in all his proceedings; leaving of their
Faith and Obedience, both to God and their law^ul Princes,

But before Pope Nicolas had brought all his project to a period; the famous
Brazutus (at the request of Hildebrand ^o make way for him to the Popedom)
Poisoned him Anno 1061.

Now although Hilderand had a sufficient gap to pass to the Popedom, he was
afraid of the Dignity, seeing several Clouds of Inconvenience hanging over his
Head, but screwed one Alexander into Peter's Chair, a Cipher and Simple man,
under whom he acted all things, in as full power as if he had been Pope
himself. But Pope Alexander perceiving that he was but a Sconce to Hildebrand,
who used him as a Smith does his Tongues, and that he was put in to spite the
Emperor, who had Elected one Otho an Antipope (whom Hildebrand had opposed) he
publicly acknowledged in a Sermon, that he would no longer be Pope over the
Emperor's Belly, but would both by Letters and a legate Solicit for his Favor
and Assistance. Now Hildebrand hearing this sell a mumbling Cursing and Damning
His Holiness; so that he could scarce forbear boxing of him till Mass was done.
No sooner was Divine Service over, but Hildebrand with several Companies of his
Soldiers conveyed the Pope home to his Chamber, where he railed scolded and
beat the poor Man at such a rate that he was ashamed to show his Face for ^
Week space. After this Hildebrand allowed Alexander only five Shillings a day
to spend; and finding at last all stumbling Blocks removed, he set forwards for
the Popedom; and first by false Accusations Imprisoned Alexander, who within a
few days ended his Life (without witness) by the help of Hildebrand, who by his
own Army of Soldiers was vi and Armis* Elected Pope, before Alexander was put
in his Grave. When the Abbot of Cassia inquired how he came to be Pope, his
Answer was, I am in, Who can put me out again? The Abbot after a timorous
manner, began to mumble something concerning the Emperor, to whom Pope
Hilderand, or rather Gregory the Seventh, answered, Flocci ego Roman
Germaniamque Pendo.

Now this Pope Gregory (being a man of unsatiable Covetousness) considering
with himself, that he could not pinch the Clergy to fill his own Pockets so
well, whilst they had Wives and Children, as when they had none to provide for
but themselves; he Prosecuted the married Priests, with all manner of Curses
and Excommunications, forcing all Clergymen, without exception, to live
single, or lose their Benifices. Whilst he himself lived in Uncleanness with
Mathilda, Lady to the Marquess of Esta, whom he termed his Daughter. Whence
arose the Proverb, St. Peter's Heir, commits Incest with St. Peter's Daughter.

Now the Description of this Pope, or Blasheamous Necromancer, is beyond the
reach of my Pen, only take this of Beno the Cardinal; How he lived; how he
drove the Cardinals from him; how he tormented them miserably; how he Poisoned
the World with Heresies; how he committed Perjury; how great and many
Conspiracies he raised; it is hard for many to utter: But most of all, the
Blood of many Christians (which by him, and his means, has been miserably
shed) does cry out for Vengeance on him.

But Pardon me, to hold out this Gregory in some Pranks which he committed; the
Parallels whereof, can hardly be found in Writing.

This Pope was the greatest Sorcerer and Necromancer of his Age; and (as Beno
the Cardinal writes) could when he listed, cast off his Sleeves, and skip and
dance in the form of Flames and Sparkles of Fire, in the sight of men; by these
Miracles deluding the simple to confide in his Holiness: And going out to
Battle against the Emperor (as the King of Israel sent to the God of Eckron)
went to his Domestic God, that dwelt in a Brazen Head, in his Closet; and
Inquired what should be his Success in the War: But the Spirit giving him an
Ambiguous Answer, whereof he could make but little Sense, and wherein he could
put no Confidence; he took the Sacrament of the Lords Supper (his Imaginary
Transubstantiate Deity, which he thought was a God of his own making, and
therefore bound to serve him) and set it on a Table, conjuring it for a
response as he had Baalzebub a little before. But the Bread making no Answer,
his furious Holiness pulled it up in Passion, and (in presence and spite of his
Cardinals) threw it in the the Fire, with these Words: There is a God indeed,
could the Idol Gods of the Heathens give them Answer, in there Success, and
can thou give me none, etc. The Romish Clergy grumbled much at the Affront,
and that he should have burned the God which they made, and ordained to be
Eaten; therefore John, Bishop of Portua, (as Beno reports) who was of
Hildebrand's Privy Counsel, for an Apology before the People and Clergy, in St.
Peter's Church, in a Sermon, spoke thus; What mean^^ Hildebrand and we to do
this thing? for which we should be burned alive, etc.

This Hildebrand was the Sworn Enemy of the Emperor Henry (who at first was not
submissive enough, but strove to stop the current of His Holiness' s Pride, and
reputed himself almost equal with the Pope) therefore Invented and Contrived
many Unlawful means, as Poisoning, Conspiracy, Murdering, etc. to put him to an
End. And to this purpose Writes Beno the Cardinal, thus; The Emperor used to
go to Prayers, to St. Marys Church, in Aventine Hill: Hildebrand therefore, by
his false Spies, caused the place to be well noted, where the Emperor used to
Kneel, or Sit im the Church, all Service time, and hired one to lay great
Stones secretly in the roof of the Church, right over the same place; in such
manner as he could cunningly throw them down upon the Emperors Head, and so
Slay him: But as this Fellow was busy with a great Stone, the Weight thereof
overturned him, so that he fell down to the Pavement, with the Stone upon him,
and died by that Mischief which he had contrived to Slay the Emperor. This
Treason being discovered to the Romans, they bound his Heels to a Rope, and
drew his dead Carcass through Rome, three days togeteer for an Examlpe.

This Gregory Condemned to Death three Men, before they were Convicted, or
Confessed their Crime, and caused them to be hanged up, without the Consent or
Sentence of any Secular Judge: He put Centius, a Senator's Son, and his own
Special Friend in Prison, without any cause, but Jealousy and Suspicion, and
caused him to be Tormented and Rolled, in a Barrel of sharp Nails, till he was
almost Dead: But Centius (making his escape) surprised and apprehended
Hlldebrand, and might have been revenged on him, but that His Holiness Swore
deep and bloody Oaths, that he would not only Pardon him, with all his
Assistants and Followers, but likewise pay him a Ransom: Which the credulous
Young Man believing, set him at Liberty. But immediately his forsworn Holiness,
not mindful of his Oath, caused Centiues, and nine of his Tribe, to be hanged
up, and all the rest to be Banished; and among them the Son of a poor Widow,
who after the Year of his Banishment was expired, did return home, and to
expiate the Pope's Imprecations, and vindictive Passion, was led by his poor
mourning Mother to Gregory, with a Halter about his Neck, in Token of
Repentance, Sorrow, and Submission, earnestly desiring Hildebrand, cordially to
take and Pardon him, and restore him again to her, a new purged Man. But his
Implacable Holiness (who had no Grace to forgive) commanded him to be hanged up
before his Mother. But the Justices denying to put this second Penance in
Execution, and telling him obscurely, that his Holiness was destitute both of
Mercy and Justice; Gregory caused his right Foot to be chopp'd off, whereby
within five days he dyed, to the great grief and sorrow of his poor old Mother.
On these, and many such charitable Deeds of this Hildebrand, an old English
Rhymer, Wrote this Rhyme.

Gregory heads by the Foot,
And Hildebrand hangs by the Heel;
He Is a damnable Wit,
That came from the Pit,
And Flies in a Fire to the De'l*
The Emperor to the Church went,
To our Lady thinking to Pray:
But he that brunt's God,
(And was not that odd?)
With Rome's Rock chased him away, etc.
This is one of the great Pillars of Popery, whereon the Church of Rome, and
Doctrine of the Clergy's single Life lean. But the unhappy Wretch (being at
last Beat and Banished by the Emperor) dyed in great horror at Salerne, Anno
1086.

The next opposer of Gods Ordinance, was Calixtus the Second, who violently
took Possession of the Holy Chair, whilst Gregory the Eighth was yet alive,
whom the Emperor had chosen Pope, and whom this Calixtus caught at Sturium, and
caused to Ride to Rome on a Camel, with his Face toward the Tail; his Head to
be shaven, and sent to a Monastry. This Pope Calixtus held a General Council in
France; wherein he Ordained, That all Clargy-men who would not put away their
Wives, should be deposed from their Benifices, and deprived of the Holy
Communion: whereupon an Englishman, wrote this Epigram.

O bone Calixte nunc omnis Clerus odit te,
Quondam Presbyteri poterant uxoribus uti*
Hoc Destruxisti postquam tu Papa fuisti*
Ergo tuum merito nomen habent odio.
This Pope died Anno 1125. and left his Quarrel against the Clargy, to his
Successor Honorius the Second; who sent a Riotous Cardinal, one John Cremensis,
into England, Anno 1125. who held a Synod in London, and Condemned all the
Married Clargy of Adultery; yet the Holy Lord Legate himself was that Night
taken in the very Act of Adultery; and yet Pope Honorius wrote on his behalf,
to the Clargy of England, thus:

We Desire, Charge and Command you, to receive this JOHN, as the Vicar of Saint
PETER, with Reverence; hear him with Humility, and at his Commandment be
Assistant at his Synods, etc.

There is a certain Statute made in this Synod, held at London, by this John,
the Holy Vicar of Saint Peter, to this effect: We by our Apostolical Authority,
Command, that Priests, Deacons, Sub Deacons, Cannonists, shall not come in
Company with their Wives, Concubines, or any other Women, except their Mother,
Sister, or Aunt, or such Women as may altogether give no Suspicion: and who
shall break this shall forfeit his Orders. We also Command, that no Marriage
shall be made, between Kindred or Affinity, to the Seventh Degree. This Pope
Honorius, died Anno 1130. and his Successors being busied in Crowning, Cursing,
Excommunicating, and Deposing Emperors and Kings, of their Empires, Kingdoms,
and Estates, in raising Armies, denouncing War, and shedding Christian Blood,
etc. several of the Clargy had received the Unlawful Sacrament of Matrimony,
and lived quietly with their Wives and Children; the Pope only now and then
giving them an Item of their Obstinacy and Error: till Pope Innocentius the
Third came to the Popedom, Anno 1198. This is that mischievous Innocent, who
(for an old spite) Deposed the Emperor Philip, and gave his Empire to Otho,
whom (without just cause) he Cursed, Excommunicated, and Deposed, discharged
all his Subjects of their Allegiance, and gave his Crown and Empire to
Frederick King of Sivil. This is that hurtful Innocent, that (by the Assistance
of Cardinal Stephen Langtone) Cursed, Condemned, and Excommunicated John King
of England, and gave both his Crown and Kingdom to Lewis, the French King's Son.

Anno 1215 he called a Council at Lateran; where (after he had Excommunicated
and Deposed the Emperor, for suing for some of his own Cities, which the Pope
had purloyn'd to the Holy Chair) he Condemned one Almericus, a Learned Man, for
an Heretic, and commanded his Bones to be burned, with the rest of his Sect at
Paris; because (as says Dominicus Soto) he had Preached against Images: And
thus (says one) Pope Innocent was Judge both of the quick and the dead;
contrary to Romans 7. 12. he wrested out Auricular Confession, and deprived the
Laity of the Communion-Cup: He commanded the Quarrels of Princes to be brought
before him, and by him to be decided: He Commanded that the Communion-Cake
should be kept in a Box in the Church; and that when the Priest should visit
the Sick, he should go with a burning Taper, and a Bell before him: He ordained
the Canon of the Mass, to be reputed equal in Authority with the Holy
Scriptures; and that the Pope should have power to correct and control
Princes; and that none should be Emperor, but he that were Crowned by the
Universal Bishop of Rome. Among many other Ambitious and Nonsensical Decrees,
he Condemned and Anulled the Marriage of the Clargy for ever. It is observed
that this Innocent, Anno 1212. went about to accomplish three great Designs,
viz. The Deposing of Otho, a Voyage to Jerusalem, and the holding of a General
Council. Also the same Year (says Vlricus Mutius) certain Noblemen of Alsatia
did condemn this Pope of Impiety; because be would not suffer the Clargy to
keep their Wives; and the Bishops burned an Hundred Clargy-man in one day;
because they taught, That Christians might lawfully eat Flesh, and Marry at any
time.

Peter King of Arragon (who it seems had been a great sinner) was enveigled by
the Romish Clargy, to give up his Kingdom and all his Dominions to the Sea of
Rome, before he could purchase his Salvation from Pope Innocent: Yet for all
this his Holiness died Anno 1216.

A certain Nobleman in England, hearing that this Pope had again condemned the
Marriage of Priests, in Lateran Council; did on his Decree of Adultery, make
this following Rhyme, Anno 1216.

I.
PRisciani regula penitus cass atur,
Sacerdos per hic et haec olim declinatur:
Sed per hic solummodo nunc articulatur;
Cum per nostrum praesulem haec amoveatur.
II.
Ita quidem Presbyter cepit Allegare,
Peccat capitaliter qui vult separare
Quod, Deus conjunxer at foeminam amare;
Tales dignum duximus fures appellare.
III.
O quam Dolor anxius! quam tormentum grave!
Nobis est dimittere quoniam suave.
O Roman Pontifex Statuisti prave:
Ne in tanto crimine moriar is cave.
IV.
Non est INNOCENTIUS imo nocens Vere,
Qui quod facto ducuit verbo vult delere:
Et quod olim Iuvenis voluit habere,
Modo vetus Pontifex studet prohibere.
V.
Gignere nos praecipit vetus Testamentum:
Novum quod non retinet, nusquam est inventum:
Praesul qui contrarium donat Documentum,
Nullum necessarium his dat Argumentum.
VI.
Dedit enim Dominus maledictionem
Viro qui non fecerit Generationem.
Ergo tibi consulo, per hanc rationem,
Gignere; ut habeas benedictionem.
VII.
Nonne de militibus milites procedunt?
Et Reges a regibus, qui sibi succedunt?
Per locum a simili omnes jura laedunt,
Clericos qui gignere crimen esse credunt.
VIII.
Zacharias habuit prolem and uxorem;
Per virum quem genuit adeptus honorem:
Baptizavit etenim Mundi Salvatorem.
Pereat qui teneat novum hunc errorem.
IX.
Paulus rapitur ad Coelos superiores,
Vbi multas didicit res Secretores.
Ad nos tandem rediens instruensque mores,
Suas (inquit) habeat quilibet Vxores.
X.
Propter haec and alia dogmata Doctorum,
Reor esse melius and magis decorum,
Quisque suam habeat, and non proximorum;
Ne incurrat odium and iram dorum.
XI.
Proximorum foeminas, silias, and neptes,
Violare nefas est; quare nil deceptes.
Vere tuam habeas, in qua delectes,
Diem ut sic ultimam tutius expectes.
XII.
Ecce jam pro Clericis multum allegavi,
Nec non pro Presbyteris plura comprohavi.
Pater Noster nunc pro me (quoniam peccavi)
Dicar quisque Presbyter cum sua suavi.
This is the Pedigree of Adultery, this is the Line of Spiritual Fornication,
as it is now by Law at Rome established, in his Holyness's Spiritual Court; the
monster of the Man of Sin, and By-blow of the Son of Perdition, that imposes a
necessity of Sinning on the Household of Antichrist, to commit Fornication and
Uncleanness, without Shame or Limitation. Neither have I here affirmed any
thing against our Adversaries the Papists, but what is undoubtedly true, our
Enemies themselves (the Pope's own Secretarys, and best Popish Writers) being
Witnesses: Yea, next to their Imaginary Transubstantiation (wherein they
pretend to make and eat an Immortal Deity) this is the great wonder of their
Faith; for my own part, I am struck with Admiration and Astonishment, when I
think that men endued with reason, pretending to do nothing against Gods known
Will, should call that ordinance unclean, which the holy God has termed clean
and honorable, and recommended to ALL men; and pereist in celibacy when they
know it neither lawful nor convenient; as Malum qua malum potuit ap^eti: For
proof of which I shall bring only one Testimony of Stanislaus Ruthenus, who of
Pope Paul the second speaks thus:

When Pope PAUL had seen certain Latin Verses, written against him and his
Daughter; it is reported that he wept, and cried out against the hardness of
the Law of single Life, among his Friends; because that he who ought to have
been not only the Head of the Church, but also of Chaste Life, should see his
Daughter live in the Face and Countenance of the City, with great shame and
disdain, who although she was very Beautiful, yet it grieved his Heart, that it
should be said that he begat her in Whoredom, because he knew that there was a
Law of God, whereby she might have been Born in Wedlock, unless the Law of
single Life had disanull'd it. They say therefore that he took Counsel how he
might restore again the Marriage of the Clargy; but being prevented by Death he
could not attain to his purpose.

Tell me then you Romanists had it not been better for Pope John the 13th to
have married and lived honest, than to have had it proved against him before
the Emperor, in open Council, that he had lain with his own Sisters, ravished
Virgins and strange women; with Rainera and Ann two Widows, with their Neices,
and Stephana his Father's Concubine? and that he made the Palace of Lateran a
Stews and open Brothel-house.

Had it not been more decent and Religious both before God and Man, for Pope
Innocent the 8th. to have taken a Wife, then to have had this Epitaph written
by Marullus, on him after his Death? Quid quaeris testes, sit mas aut faemina,
CYBO?
Respice Natorum pignora certa gregem.
Octo Nocens pueros genuit totidemque puellas:
Hunc merito poterit dicere Roma Patrem.
Spurcities, gula, avaritia, atque ignavia deses,
Hoc, Octave jacent, quo tegeris tumulo.


Englished thus. Why did they feel Pope Cybo's stones?
Whether he was Man or Woman:
Behold a Herd of Babel's Brats!
Brought forth by Whores that is common.
Eight Boys this Brutish Bull begot,
As many Girls small.
Whence Rome this Hurtful Innocent,
May Fleshly Father call.
A filthy avaritious Dunce,
That bathed himself in Sin;
A Glutton, and what else is bad,
Does ly this Tomb within.


Had it not been better for Pope Alexander the Sixth, to have married, than
lain with his own Bastard Daughter Lucretia, Duchess of Ferraria? of whom John
Iovianus Pontanus, wrote this Epitaph.

Hic jacet in tumulo Lucretia nomine; sed ^e
Thais: Alexandri filia, sponsa, Nurus.
Here lies Lucretia chaste by name;
But Thais lewd by life,
Who was to Alexander Pope,
Both Daughter and a Wife.
Had it not been better for Pope Paul the Third to have taken a Wife, than to
have in disguise and under promise of Marriage lain with young Ladies, and
several of his own near kindred? with his own Daughter Constantia, whilst his
Bastard Son Peter Aloysius (expecting, a General Pardon from his Father) made
bold to commit Incest with her, in imitation of his Holiness.

This Pope for Conscience sake, and the Benefit of the Clargy (as he pretended)
prostituted Forty five thousand Harlets, who (for the Liberty of their stews,)
paid him a monthly Tribute. These Dames (says EVSEBIVS CAPTIVVS) are had in
great honor by the Pope, These kiss his Feet, These have Familiar
Communication with him, These are his Companions both day and night.

This is the Crab-Fruit of a constrained Celibacy, the cursed consequence which
of necessity must follow the Atheistical Antecedent of a forced single Life,
which (as I have said) imposes a necessity of sinning on all those who have
not the gift of Chastity. It is reported by Roger of Chester, that Anselm
Archbishop of Canterbury, did forbid and condemn the lawful Marriage of
Priests, in one Synod; but in the next was forced to make Laws against Sodomy;
whereof eight Abbots, with a great crew of inferior Priests and Friars were
found Guilty. Huldericus Bishop of Augusta, in the foresaid Letter to Pope
Nicolas the first writes, that whilst under a false show of continency, the
Church of Rome refused the ordinance of Marriage; their Clargy COMMITTED INCEST,
AND ABOMINABLE SODOMITICAL VILLAINIES WITH MEN AND BEASTS. Sub falsa
continentiae specie placere volentes, graviora vides committere (says he)
patrum scilicet uxores subagitare, masculorum ac pecudum amplexus non
reformidare^ PETRARCH calls ROME the Slave of Gluttony and Leachery: And in
his nineteenth Epistle, charge the Court of Rome, with all manner of
unbridled Lusts and impieties, thus; Quicquid uspiam perfidiae and doli,
quicquid inclementiae, superbiaeque quicquid impudicitiae effrenataeque
libidinis audisti, aut legisti, quicquid denique impietatis and morum
pessimorum sparsim habet, aut habuit orbis terrque totum istic cumulatim
videas, acervatimque reperias.

Now in this Series and line of Adultery, I have observed that no Popes but
(for the most part) impious Wretches, were the owners and setters forward of
this Act of Abominations and decree of single life; and to speak Generally, tho
the Bishop of Rome be a select person, chosen out off the whole Romish Clargy
(as a man most eminent for Learning, Knowledge and Piety) yet commonly is his
Life so evil, that he rather deserves the Title of his Wickedness than his
Holiness and his Character so evidently abominable, that he that runeth may
read him THE BEAST: and God has suffered it to be so, that all those who
wonder and follow him, may be inexcusable, Tho it is to be feared, that as the
Harlot her self is cast in a bed, the Hearts, Eyes and Ears of her Children are
darkened, blinded and deafned, till the day of their Mother's Visitation come,
and the Word of God be fulfilled, and Tu nihil invito dices faciesve IEHOVA.
And since she is drunk with the Blood of the Saints and Martyrs of Jesus, and
having ^^st her way, is now asleep in a Dream in the Wilderness of Error,
Ignorance, Vanity, and Superstition, Rev. 17. 3. 6. it is as great folly to
think to convince and persuade her to that which is rational, good and true, as
to think to persuade a drunken man to his right Senses, or to walk home, whilst
he cannot stand on his Legs. And, as the Proverb runeth, Nihil est in
Intellectu quod non fuit prius in sensu; She that shuteth her Senses, the Gates
of her understanding, and will not know one thing from another, must first be
persuaded to her right senses, and to open her eyes to know light from
darkness; before she can be capable of any Spiritual knowledge: Let her alone
then, yet cry over her and lament her miserable condition, and with the Prophet
Jeremy, 51. 8. Howl for her, and say we would have healed Babylon but she is
not healed: forsake her, and let us go every one into his own Country: For her
Judgment reaches unto Heaven, and is lifted up even to the Skies.

Sed tua praecipue non intret limina quisquam,
Frater vel Monachus, vel quavis lege Sacerdos.
Hos fuge; Pestis enim nulla immanior. Hi sunt
Faex hominum, fons stultitiae, sentina maelorum,
Agnorum sub pelle lupi, mercede colentes,
Non pietate Deum, falsa sub imagine recti
Decipiunt Stolidos, ac religionis in umbra
Mill actus ve^itos, and mill piacula condunt,
Raptores, Maechi, puerorum corruptores,
Luxuriae atque gulae famuli, etc.
Palingenius. The Life of Pope Clement the Sixth, with a Limb of his Bull of
Blasphemies; which he Published for the year of Iubele, 1350.
PEter Rogers, Born in Lemonia, a Monk of the Order of St. Benedict, and Abbot
of Phisca, succeeded Pope Benedict the Twelfth; and changed his Name to Clement
the Sixth, who no sooner came to the Popedom, that he began to trouble the
World, with his Pride and Supremacy: For (as Naucler Writes) he first
Excommunicated (...) the Electoral Princes, because they would not rebel
against the Emperor Lewis, for affirming that he held his Empire of God,
without dependence on the Pope. And to deface the Emperor, he created Vicounts,
and made them Vicats of the Empire. But at last having brought him so low, that
he was content to condescend to such disgraceful Articles of Agreement, as
tended to the Subversion of the Empire, and the Princes were ashamed to own;
they with several Kings and other Princes, Petitioned His Holiness on the
Emperor's behalf, not to exact the performance of so rigid and shameful
Conditions. But Clement, void of all Clemency, persuading himself that this was
long of the Emperor, blamed him for all, Cursed him even at the Consecration of
the Sacrament; Deposed him from the Empire, Pronouncing him an Heretic,
Schismatic, and Rebellious Son, who kicked at his Holy Mother, the Church of
Rome: and commanded the Electoral Princes to ^huse another Emperor in his
stead. But the Bishop of Mentz, having Written a Letter in Vindication of the
Emperor, entreating his Holiness to consider his Innocence, and that there was
a righteous Judge in Heaven, who would not suffer that to be plucked up, which
he himself had planted, etc. was Deposed from his Bishopric: And the rest of
the Princes, partly being afraid of the Pope's Curse, Excommunication, and
Deposition; and partly being Bribed by John King of Bohemia, chose his Son
Charles King of the Romans; the Pope confirming the Election in open
Consistory; and for further Approbation, caused privately to Poison the
Emperor: Who (being daunted with Cursing, Hell and Damnation) lay Neutral, and
did not meddle with the Empire, nor any public Affairs. But who is able (says
Marius) to express the cruel War and Bloodshed that followed in the Empire, by
means of this mischief wrought by Clement: For King Edward the Third of England
(by the Assistance of his Son the black Prince) Slew 20000 Frenchmen, with
John King of Bohemia, the Father of the Emperor Charles, with many more Princes
and Nobles.

Now Charles (whom the Pope by Cursing, and Excommunicating had made Emperor)
to secure the Empi^^ to his Son, did so corrupt the Electoral Princes, with
B^^es and fair Promises, that at last, he was forced to m^^gage to them, the
common Revenues of the Empire. And being once in Possession, they would secure
nothing (...) him, unless he would bind himself, both by Oath and ^^, that the
Pledges which they had should never be redeemed. And thus his Holiness the
Pope, the Father of the Mother Church, has by Degrees so weakened the Wall of
Christendom, that if it had not been for an Invisible Wall of Fire, the great
Turk had before this time, fixed his Standard at Vienna, and Sh -- in St.
Peter's Chair.

Now this Pope (for his greater advantage) caused the Iubele to be Celebrated
at Rome, Anno 1350. And Premonstratensis affirms that there were Five
Thousand Strangers coming in and going out, at the Gates of Rome, every day the
whole year over.

He made at several times 12 Cardinals; whereof some were Monks, others his own
young Nephews and Kinsmen.

He gave License to the Bishop of Bamberge to absolve all those Spiritual
Traitors that had not rebelled against the Emperor Lewis; but on Condition,
first, That they should Swear Fealty to him, as to the Vicar of Christ,
Secondly, That they should believe that the Emperor had no power to Make or
Mar the Pope. And Thirdly, That they should acknowledge none to be Emperor, but
whom the Pope had confirmed.

This Pope (says Morius) took upon him so Prodigally in his Popedom, that he
gave to his Cardinals in Rome, Bishoprics, and Benefices which were then void
in England; wherewith the King was offended, and undid all the Provisions of
the Pope, within his Realm, commanding upon Pain of Imprisonment and Death,
That no man should be so bold as to bring in any such Provisions, within his
Dominions any more, and (under the same punishment) charged two Cardinals
forthwith to avoid his Realm, Anno 1343. This Pope one a certain occasion being
in a great passion, suddenly fell down and died of an Imposthume; whilst none
but his Chamberla^^ was present, Anno, 1352.

A Limb of the Blaspheamous Bull of Pope Clement the Sixth, which he Published
for the Year O^ Jubilee 1350.

WHosoever purposes for Travel sake to come to Rome, may choose that day
wherein he sets forward, a Confessor, or Confessors; or else in his Journey
by the way, or in any other place: Unto the which Confessors or Ghostly
Fathers, we give full power to give Absolution in all cases that concern the
Popes own Prerogative, in as ample manner as if our own Person were present.
Item, We grant that if any (being Confessed) die by the way, that he shall be
freed and discharged from all his Sins. And furthermore, We Command the Angels
of Paradise, (that his Soul being fully delivered from Purgatory) they receive
him into Paradise, etc.

In another Bull he wrote thus.

We will not that any man be tormented in himself, with the pains of Hell: And
also we grant to all those that wear the Cross, three or four Souls, at their
own pleasure, whomsoever they will to deliver out of Purgatory, etc.

With this Heretical Blaspheamous Nonsense, the University of Paris was much
displeased. But to Avenio that Year 100000 poor men, out of all Countries
resorted, to obtain Pardons and be hired Confessors.

FINIS.
Iudicium varium subiture Libelle valeto,
Sort tui Domini non tua pejor erit.
Farewell small Book, to undergo
Both Criticisms and hate:
A Fortune worse thou scarce can know,
Than's been thy Master's Fate.
Page 5. line 13. read rediit, p. 22. Romans 7, 1, 2. p. 23. l. 22. r docuit, p.
24. l. 18. r. secretiores. l. ult. r. eorum.


