Some Considerations Relating to the Duties of SUBSIDY and AULNAGE.
THE Ancient Duties of Subsidy and Aulnage have been in the Possession of the
Crown almost Three Hundred and Forty Years; and all that time Collected without
Intermission, and Confirmed by Statutes in every King and Queens Reign, since
they were first given.

These Duties are two distinct Duties, and were Collected by distinct Officers
for many Years.

First, THE Aulnager was an Ancient Officer of the Crown long before the
Subsidy was Granted; and his Business was to Measure Clothes betwixt the Buyer
and Seller.

Secondly, ^. Sceccar. Ed. 3. R^t. 1* 3. Pars Inst. fo. 60.
THE Subsidy (for which the King appointed a Collector) was given him in lieu
of Ancient Customs the Kings of England had on Wool Transported, (such
Transportation being Prohibited) as appears by the Records; but never as a
Recompense for Searching of Clothes.

Note, THE Subsidy on a Broad Cloth is Four Pence, the Aulnagers Fee is but an
half Penny.

THE Office of Aulnager as to Measuring, ^6 Ed. cap. 6. ^5 Phil. and Mar. 5
Eliz. 10 Eliz. 20 Eliz. 10 Jac. 2 Jac. 18 Car. 25 Car. 2. 32
is taken away by 5 and 6 Edw. 6. and many subsequent Statutes; and 21 Jacobi,
Cap. 18. lays a Penalty on the Aulnager if he offers to Search any Clothes. YET
by these Statutes the Aulnagers Fee is reterved, and made part of the said
Revenue; insomuch that now the Business of the Aulnager, is only to Collect his
own Fee and the Subsidy.

WHICH obviates the Clamorous suggestion of Selling Seals, and not Executing
the Duty of the Office of Aulnager, for indeed the Seals are now no more than
as Coquets of the Customs, given on Payment of the said Customs, and is the
greatest Accommodation imaginable to the Makers: For, whereas the Law obliges
them to bring their Clothes to a certain place to be Sealed, they are, if they
define it, (to save the expense and trouble of so bringing them) furnished with
Seals, to be put on by themselves.

AND forasmuch as there is another Complaint of Compounding Seizures for small
Sums, It is Humbly hoped (if such things have been done, and are Errors) that
they are Errors on the Right hand, they being wholly for the Ease and at the
Request of the Clothiers; for the Cloth being Forfeited, the Value might as
well have been Exacted.

The Complaints against these Duties are not, That they are Grievous in
themselves, but in the Collecting of them.

TO which the Persons Concerned in Management of the said Duties, Answer:

THAT since their being Concerned, all Persons have been Accomodated with
Seals, with as much or more ease than the Law provides.

THAT all Searches have been made at Seasonable and Proper Times; That no
Remnants have been Seized but where the Head-end remained, being the place
where the Seal is to be affixed and remain.

THAT they have not suffered any Wagons or Pack-Horses to be Searched on the
Road, nor received Shop-Rents from Drapers, Mercers, or Sales-men.

THAT they have not received any other or more Duty than they are Legally
Entitled unto; nor were there ever so few Lawsuits touching the Aulnage, as
in their time, which is for Eight Years last past.

THAT in all the Complaints made the last Parliament, the Farmers produced good
Authorities of Law for what they had done, and hope they are still able to
Justify their Proceedings by Law.

THAT in the said Complaints such Matters as were Clamorous, (viz.) the Abuses
of Searching Goods on the Road, etc. were proved to be before these Farmers
times, as appears by the Committees Reports.

IN fine, That Clothiers, Merchants, and other Traders in the Woollen
Manufactures, have never been so well Treated as by the present Farmers; which
is ready to be made appear, (it this Honorable House shall think fit to
Enquire thereinto) notwithstanding the many False and Noisy Papers, daily
dispersed by Persons, who make it their Livelihood in the Interval of
Parliaments, to go and send round the Kingdom, and raise Money by
Contributions, (as the Manager of the Bill now brought into this House, has
done) upon promise, That these Duties shall be destroyed: Which is the True,
and no other, Just Reason of these Clamours.

Their Majesty's have a Settled Inheritance in these Duties, and are Empowered
by 17 Edw. 4. cap. 5. and other Statutes, to let the same to Farm on such Rent
as can be Agreed on: Accordingly the said Duties have been from time to time
Let to Farm, and Farmed to the Family of Richmond and Lenox, ever since the 3d.
of King James the First, pursuant to the Directions of the said Statutes, upon
several Considerations, and reserved Rents; the last Patents being for 60
Years, from December, 1664.

THE Duke of Richmond upon his Marriage with the present Duchess, 1667
Settles 2000 l. per Annum for her Jointure, out of the said Duties.

THE Duchess for 7600 l. paid the Dukes Executors toward Payment of his
Debts, 1681
Purchases the Dukes Interest in the Remaining term of the said Lease.

THE Duchess and her Trustees for 9000 l. Fine, 1682
Demise the said Subsidy and Aulnage for 21 Years, at the Yearly Rent of 3138
l. 10 s. unto the present Farmers.

SO that the Bill being a Project to destroy the King's Inheritance as well as
the Legal Right, Interest and Property of particular Persons, derived under the
best Title, and upon Valuable Considerations, upon a pretense, That the
Collection of these Duties, according to Law, are Grievances.

Whether this Honorable House will thereupon Deprive Purchasers of their
Estates, is Humbly Submitted to their Considerations.


