A Burghers delin. et sculp.



A TREATISE Of the ROMAN Ports and Forts in KENT.

BY WILLIAM SOMNER.

Published by JAMES BROM, M.A. Rector of CHERITON, and Chaplain to the
CINQUE PORTS.

To which is prefixed the Life of Mr. SOMNER.



OXFORD, Printed at the THEATER, 1693.

Imprimatur.

H. ALDRICH Vice-Can. Oxon.
Febr. 18. 1693.
TO HIS Excellency The Right HONORABLE HENRY Ld. Viscount SYDNEY of SHEPEY,
Baron of MILTON, Lord Lieutenant of their Majesty's Kingdom of IRELAND, Lord
Lieutenant of the County of KENT, Constable of DOVER-CASTLE, Lord Warden of the
CINQUE PORTS, One of the Principal Secretaries of State, and One of their
Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council.
My LORD,
SInce I have had the honor to serve your Lordship in the Cinque Ports, I have
been frequently considering, what seasonable return of gratitude I might make,
for the favors I have received from your Honor.

But fearing, no production of my own might be worthy of Your acceptance; I am
inclined to borrow something out of the common treasury of learning, wherewith
to pay my firstfruits of duty and obedience.

What I presume to lay before Your Lordship, may not prove perhaps
unacceptable, since it is a small, but excellent Treatise, of very great esteem
amongst the learned and judicious; and does now justly implore Your Lordship's
Protection whether we consider the subject matter it treats of, or the places
to which it relates; in both which Your Lordship is at this time very nearly
and happily concerned.

It Is an Historical discourse of the Roman Ports and Forts in Kent, wrote some
years ago, by a very eminent Antiquary of Canterbury, but never before
published; and therefore humbly desires to be ushered into the world under the
gracious Patronage of Your Lordship; as being well assured, that the same
auspicious effects, which daily attend both the Cinque Ports, and County, from
your great Wisdom and Sagacity, will as certainly here ensue, from Your
Countenance and Authority.

Their Sacred Majesty's, who know best how to value what is really to be
esteemed, and to place those persons in the highest trust, whose merits, and
great accomplishments, deservedly entitle them to such honorable employments,
have advanced Your Lordship (of whose faithful service they have had so large
experience) to that noble Station of Government, in which you happily preside
in Ireland; which never stood in greater need of such an able Patriot and
Protector.

Our Annals inform us, how infinitely Ireland stood once before indebted to the
matchless Wisdom and Courage of one of Your Renowned Progenitors, The
Honorable Sir Henry Sydney, Lord Deputy under Queen Elizabeth; who, for the
space of eleven years, gave admirable proofs of dexterity and Conduct, in the
managing of that untractable people; though he had little else to encounter
with, but obstinacy and Rebellion. And, my Lord, whoever considers those Great
and Noble Endowments of mind, with which Heaven has enriched You, for the
general good and benefit of the world, may from hence easily conjecture how
extremely happy at this juncture the Irish nation must needs be, under Your
Lordship's present Lieutenancy; who seem in all respects, both born and formed
on purpose, to be the Tutelary Guardian of that distracted Island.

To render this Tract, if possible, a little more grateful and inviting; I have
subjoyned a Catalogue, from the most Authentic Historians, of those Noble
Personages who have been Your Lordship's Predecessors in the Constableship of
Dover-Castle, and Wardenship of the Cinque Ports, which are both indeed Offices
of as great Antiquity as Renown.

The learned Mr. Camden has observed, that our Warden of the Ports, did
resemble the Officer, whom the Romans established for the defense of our
Coasts, called by them, Littoris Saxonici, or Tractus Maritimi Comes; who had
then the charge of nine Ports, as the Lord Warden has now of five: and
allthough there is no doubt, but during the Saxon Heptarchy, the Ports were
under the Regency of some such sort of extraordinary Officer, as this was; yet
if the famous Antiquary Mr. Lambard may have any credit, he tells us, that
William the Conqueror was the first, that imposed upon the Limenarcha the name
of Warden, out of his own Norman language: and Mr. Darell, in his account of
these matters, says, that William the Conqueror created John Fynes Constable
of Dover-Castle, which title of honor he settled, by Deed of Gift, upon him
and his heirs; which may occasion a conjecture, not altogether improbable,
that under the reign of that Prince, those honorable offices began first to be
united, in the person of one man: however, it is certain, they have never since
been separated; but whatever great and eminent Persons have been thus nobly
Dignified, by the grace and favor of their Prince, their names stand now upon
this signal Roll of honor, in a successive series to this present generation.

But, my Lord, I consider that your minutes are sacred.

May your Lordship's great Merits, and honorable Achievements, both for their
Majesty's and their Kingdoms, make you still the Favorite of Your Prince, the
Glory of your Age, the delight of your Country, and the Honor of the
Cinque Ports: may You live long and flourish, in an enjoyment of every thing,
that may conduce to your Happiness; that so by the favor of Heaven, I may the
longer enjoy an opportunity to pay my constant duty to Your Lordship, and be
more and more capable to give a repeated testimony, how much I am,

My Lord, Your Lordships most obliged Chaplain, and faithful Servant, JAMES
BROM.

THE LIFE OF Mr. SOMNER.
To the Revd. Mr. JAMES BROM.
Sir,
I HAVE received the Transcript you sent me of Mr. Somner's discourse of the
Roman Ports and Forts in Kent: and I agree with you in the opinion, that the
publication of it would do honor to our County, and service to the learned
world. And since you have obtained leave of that Venerable Body, to whom the
Original belongs; I am willing to assist in the Edition. You judge right, that
the life of the Author is much wanting; and that some notes should be affixt to
this Treatise, to explain what otherwise might stop the Reader. From which task
I wish you had not excused your self by a retired life, and want of access to
books, and other notices of this kind. But since you devolve those cares on me,
I will take up one half of the burden; and commit the other to our Friend Mr.
Edmund. Gibson of Queens College, a Person well verst in the subject of
Antiquities, and therefore most fit to illustrate a discourse of this nature
with such cursory remarks, as may adorn and improve the work. As to the
Author's Life, since you have furnished me with so many faithful materials; I am
content to tell the world, how great a Man lies buried, and how much his memory
deserves to be revived.

In doing this, I shall treat him not as a Courtier or a Patron, whose
reputation must be raised by lines of flattery, and artificial disguise; but as
an Historian and Antiquary, who is best represented in the same truth and
plainness, with which he lived and wrote. There is this religion due to the
ashes of an honest man, to let the Memoirs of him be simple and unaffected, to
lay by all unnecessary shades and colors, and only draw him like himself.

William Somner, son of William Somner and Ann his wife, was born on the 30.
day of March 1606. within the Parish of St. Margatet's in the City of
Canterbury. A fit birthplace for an Antiquary; this being one of the most
ancient Cities in England Pref. Antiq. Canterb. 4^o. 1640.
. And like a true Patriot, he proved his natural affection, and repaid his
nativity by giving it a new birth. He restored the perished ruins, and brought
back all its pristine glories. For his thoughts and affections having ever much
inclined him to the search and study of Antiquities, he did more particularly,
as bound in duty and thankfulness, apply himself to the Antiquities of
Canterbury. He hoped the better acceptance of the work from the Author's
thankful intentions toward the place of his birth, judging this a sufficient
motive why he should of all other places desire to know the Antiquities and
former stars thereof ib.
.

He was so well pleased with his lot of breathing first in this fair ground,
that neither mind nor body could be moved to any distance from it: he took
pleasure to call it the place of his Birth, Education, and abode ib.
. Like the good old Citizen of Veron^, within the walls, or in sight of them,
he lived, grew up, and died.

Fashions he despised abroad, and learning he would have at home. So that here
in studious content, he took up his cradle, his mansion, and his grave.

He was descended of an honest and sufficient family Casaub. de Ling. Saxon. p.
141.
. His father was Registrary, of the Court of Canterbury under Sir Nathanael
Brent Commissary. This name had been eminent in other ages, and in other
Counties. John Somenour of Multon near Croyland was a Commoner of some figure
in the reign of Henry the fifth Hist. Croyland. contin. p. 502.
. There was a public Hall or Inn within this University, that was called from
the first owner of it Hospitium Somneri, or, Somenor shyn Hist and Antiq Oxon.
p. 158. b.
. And there is now a gentile branch of this ancient name in the County of
Bucks. But let me observe this for the honor of our modest Author; that though
the knowledge of Podigrees was one of his proper talents, yet in all his works
he gives no one hint of his own Parentage or name.

When his forward years made him capable of literature, he was committed to the
Free School of that City, then governed by Mr. Ludd, which he after gratefully
remembers as the place of his Education Antiq. Canterb. Pref.
. What his improvements here were, I know none living who can attest, and it
shall not be my vanity to conjecture. Tho perhaps he here imbibed the
inclinations to Antiquity from the fresh memory of the late Master John Twine
LL.B. who dying 1581. had been very inquisitive into former ages, had left a
public monument of such knowledge De rebus Albionicis, etc. Land. 1590. 8vo.
, and had made particular collections of the Antiquities of this City Somner
Antiq. Cant. Pref.
: whose fame in this part of learning might well incite an emulous youth, and
raise that spirit, which carried him at last beyond this great example.
However, here was our Author initiated in the elements of Rome and Greece,
among many rival wits, of whom let me mention only Peter Gunning son of a
Clergyman born at How in Kent, An. 1613. and bred at this School to the age of
fifteen, when being remarkably ripe for the University, he was sent to
Clare-Hall in Cambridge Wood Athen. Oxon. Tom. 2. page 577.
, and left his school-fellow behind. Their acquaintance here contracted,
settled after into a sacred friendship, and there happened good opportunities to
confirm it, by Mr. Gunning's frequent visits to this City, and by his
Preferment to a Prebend in this Church, An. 1660. But let the School be proud
of this honor, that at the same time it instructed two of the greatest Men of
their age and nation, one of the best of Divines, and one of the best of
Antiquaries.

When our young Scholar had made such progress in years, and in his studies, as
qualified him for admission to either of the two greater Schools of Learning;
then, either by the persuasion of his friends, who in tenderness would keep him
near themselves, or by his own inclination to deal with ancient Records, he was
placed as Clerk to his Father in the Ecclesiastical Courts of that Diocese. And
when the usual time of apprehending was expired, he was soon preferred to a
creditable office in those Courts by that true Judge of men, Archbishop Laud,
to whom he after dedicated his first labors for the public, and gratefully
declares, that the chief inducement whereby he was animated to appear in that
kind, was his Grace's interest in the Author, as subsisting in his place and
profession, under God, chiefly by his Grace's favor and goodness Antiq. Cant.
Ep. Ded.
. What made that great Patron of letters to prefer him, was no doubt a sense of
his happy Genius, comprehensive of past ages. For that wise disposer of
stations in the Church, made it his care and his glory to select such persons,
whose abilities might best suit their respective employs. And being therefore
to entrust the many ancient Records of his Metropolitical Church, he would
provide a Man of that spirit, who should with integrity preserve them, and with
industry apply them to the service of the Public; as seems modestly
acknowledged by our Author, when he commemorates his Grace's extraordinary care
and cost for the collection of Antiquities of all sorts from all parts, crowned
by singular piety and nobleness in disposing them to the good and service of
the Public Antiq. Cant. Ep. Ded.
. Believe me (friend) however some narrow envious souls would detract from the
merits of this glorious Prelate, and represent him so, as if even his memory
were to be martyred: yet no one Governor of the Church ever did greater
things, or promoted greater men. Where shall we find that spirit to serve the
Public? where that noble zeal for Books and Scholars? Forgive me these
expressions. We of this place had in him the most effectual Patron of our
studies. He endowed us with many admirable Manuscripts, and encouraged those
that would search them. Not that we now want an accession of such treasure to
our Bodley Archieves. You will be pleased, I know, to hear that in one year
elapsed, we have expended sixteen hundred pounds in the truest riches of the
East, in the purchase of such Manuscripts as had been imported from those parts
by two learned and judicious Men. Yet of these, the greatest part were in
effect owing to the same Prelate; who supported the travels of Dr. Pocock, and
enabled him to make that Return we now enjoy.

But I have to Mr. Somner, who prosecuted the duties of his office with
prudence and integrity. An office (as he calls it) laudable, and enough
honorable Pref. Diet. Saxon.
. And when he had any hours relieved from the business of his called ib.
, those he devoted to his beloved search into the mysteries of time: to which
by the nature of his profession, he seemed the more determined; he himself
observing, that to the study of Antiquities his particular calling did in some
manner lead him Antiq. Cant. Pref.
He loved much, and much frequented the Cathedral service; where after his
devotions were paid, he had a new zeal for the honor of the House, walking
often in the Nave, and in the more recluse parts, not in that idle and
inadvertent posture, nor with that common and trivial discourse, with which
those open Temples are vulgarly profaned: but with a curious and observant eye,
to distinguish the age of the buildings, to sift the ashes of the dead; and, in
a word, to eternize the memory of things and Men. His visits within the City
were to find out the Ancestors, rather than the present inhabitants; and to
know the genealogy of houses, and walls, and dust. When he had leisure to
refresh himself in the Suburbs and the fields, it was not merely for digestion,
and for air; but to survey the British bricks Antiq. Canter. page 6.
, the Roman ways ib. p. 22.
, the Danish hills and works, the Saxon Ib. page 144.
Monasteries Ib. page 46
and the Norman Churches Ib page 156 etc.
At the digging up foundations, and other descents into the bowels of the
earth, he came often to survey the Workmen; and to purchase from them the
treasure of Coins, Medals, and other buried relics, of which he informs us,
that many were found in almost all parts of the City, some of which came to his
hands Ib. page 3.
Whenever he relaxt his mind to any other recreation, it was to that of
shooting with the long bow, which no doubt he loved as much for the antiquity,
as for the health and pleasure of that manly sport. He forgets not to give a
worthy commendation of it, to confess himself grounded in a good opinion of
Archery; and not unwilling to vindicate the undervaluing of it with other Men.
He recommends to the Reader a judicious Elogie on this England's ancient glory,
by Mr. John Bingham in his Notes upon Aelian's Tacticks, which because the Book
was dear and scarce, he presents a true copy of that whole passage Append. and
Antiq. Canterb. page 476.


This was his diversion: but his more constant delight was in classic
Historians, in old Manuscripts, Leiger-books, Rolls and Records. Which made him
so quickly known to be a man of use and service to his Country, that upon the
great questions in descent of families, tenure of estates, dedication of
Churches, right of tithes, and all the history of use and custom, he was
consulted as a Druid or a Bard. While appeal to his judgment and deference to
it satisfied contending parties, and stopped litigious suits. This honor and
trouble done to him he modestly owns in the Epilogue to his Countrymen, where
he mentions the recourse which some of them had to him for satisfaction and
information, rejoicing to give content to them and others Ib page 510
And truly I know no one part of humane learning, that can render any Man a
more agreeable Companion, and a more beneficial friend, than this knowledge of
places, times, and people. Whoever is thus accomplished, can never want
information to strangers, instruction to neighbors, and a turn of diversion
and profit to all society. If he have prudence and good nature, he may be as
Mr. Somner was, the Oracle of his Country.

But the soul of our Author thought it too narrow a Province to resolve the
doubts of private Men, and therefore would satisfy the whole inquisitive
world. Hence when he had digested his elaborate collections made for the honor
of that ancient Metropolis, and his good Affection to Antiquities, he dedicates
them in a humble unaffected style to the Archbishop of Canterbury, had them
licensed by his Chaplain Guil. Bray, October. 23. 1639. and the next year
published under this title. The Antiquities of Canterbury, or a survey of that
ancient City, with the Suburbs and Cathedral, containing principally matters of
Antiquity in them all, etc. Sought out and published by the industry and good
will of William Somner; London 1640. 4^. In his Preface with wit and learning
he celebrates the knowledge of ancient things, confesses his own thoughts and
affections to lie that way, and owns the encouragement of worthy Friends, of
whom he names Dr. Casaubon, one of the Prebendaries of the Church, and Thomas
Den Esquire.

This accurate performance is the more laudable, because he could find no way,
but what he made. There had indeed been two discourses of the like nature,
Spot's History of Canterbury, mentioned by Bale, and Collections of the
Antiquities of Canterbury, by John Twine, to which he refers in his Comment de
rebus Albionicis; but both these were lost to the use of our Author, Pref. to
Antiq. Cant.
and we do not hear they are yet recovered. So as he had no one writer to
transcribe or imitate, but all the labor and glory were his own. And indeed
this difficult honor is the reward of true Antiquaries, they tread in steps
unknown, and bring to light the hidden things of past ages. While most other
Authors write over again in new words: and do not discover, but only represent.

In this useful book, he forgets not to justify his own profession. He
enquires into the institution of Notaries ib. p. 287.
proves Ecclesiastical Courts to be Courts of Record, etc. ib. p. 288.
He often shows his duty and zeal to his Mother, the Church of England; defends
her discipline, and justifies her constitution in his learned remarks on Church
government ib. p. 225.
, on Archbishops ib. p. 223.
, on privilege of the Clergy Ib. p. 250.
, on dedication of holy places ib. p. 5. 10.
, mischief of Impropriations, ib. p. 5^.
and such other subjects, on which, by the best of arguments, reason and
authority, he vindicates the establishment which then began to shake. And truly
this justice must be done to Antiquities and the Church of England. None have
been perfect Masters of the one, but what have been true Sons and servants to
the other. It was eminently so in those great names, Camde^, Spelman, Twisden,
Marsham, Dugdals. And might I mention the living, I know many who by
improvement in these studies, have in the same way settled their judgment, and
improved their zeal. For indeed there is a natural reason for this effects a
good cause must appear best to those who look farthest back upon it. Our Church
cannot have more genuine Sons than those, who by research into the primitive
state of things, can refute the impudence of those abroad, who pretend to
Antiquity; and can expose the ignorance of those at home, who affect
Innovation. These Men can stand in the ways, and see the old paths, and are fit
guides to those who are but of yesterday, and know nothing.

But of one providence which attended this work, I must remind you. It was done
in such a juncture as preserved the memorial of many Epitaphs, Inscriptions,
and proper observations which otherwise had soon been lost to all succeeding
ages. For immediately began that Rebellion and Sacrilege, which plundered and
defaced most of the Cathedral Churches; and among other sad examples of popular
phanatic fury, by the instigation of Richard Culm^r called in contempt Blew
Dick (the same I think, who procured an Order from the House of Lords to
Archbishop L^ud in the Tower Feb. 4. 1642. to have the Rectory of Chartham
conferred on him, void by the death of Dr. Isaa^ Bargrave Dean of Canterbury,
to which his Majesty by Letters, recommended that Loyal sufferer Mr. John
Reading^ Breviat of Archbishop Laud. p. ^7.
) this stately Cathedral was stormed and pillaged, the beautified windows were
broke, the Tombs of Princes *and Prelates were ravaged, and every graceful
ornament despoiled. So that ha^^ no^ Mr. Somner took a faithful transcript
before the originals were thus eras'd, all had been lost in ignorance and
oblivion. The like providence has often watched over and preserved many
monuments of Antiquity, just before the fatal ruin of them. The days of
defolation were coming on, when that excellent Antiquary, Mr. John Leland
obtained a commission from Henry 8: An. Dom. 1533. to authorize him to have
access to all the Libraries of Cathedrals, Abbles, Priories, and all other
places wherein Records and ancient writings were reposed, for collecting and
transcribing whatever pertain'd to the history of the Nation Woods Athen. Oxon.
vol. 1. p. 67.
By virtue of this power he transmitted the knowledge of many Manuscripts, and
other evidences which might have been dissperst by the dissolutions which
followed in the years. 1536. and 1537. Thus the indefatigable Mr. Roger
Dodsworth, just before the late destructive wars, transcribed most of the
Charters and other Manuscripts, then lying in St. Marie's tower in York, which
tower was soon after blown up, and all those sacred remains were mingled with
the common dust and ashes. Thus again the worthy Mr. William Dugdale, (after
honored and preferred for his perfection in these studies) searched over all
the Manuscript Books, original Charters, old Rolls, and other evidences
relating to the Cathedral of St. Paul in London, copied out the monumental
Inscriptions, and procured Sculptures of the whole Fabric, and all the parts of
it, about the year 1656. when that Mother Church was converted into a stable,
and ten years after to a heap of rubbish. So that had not that Antiquary drawn
the image, as it were, before the loss of the original, all had been forgot,
but what tradition had most imperfectly conveyed to us. Thus are Antiquaries,
if not inspired, yet guided by the counsel of Providence, to remit to posterity
the memorial of things past, before their final period. It was thus our Author
recorded that flourishing beauty of holiness in that critical season; which had
it been omitted, the Church had soon been lost within it is own walls.

I cannot forbear to recommend to you that ingenious Poem, which on this
occasion was wrote by Mr. Charles Fotherby, Grandson of a worthy Dean of that
Church. It is inscribed

I^d^reptionem Metr^politicae Eccles^e Christi
Cantuariensis, ad fidissimum and antique
probitatis virum, deque Clero Anglicano optime
meritum, Gulielmum Somnerum.
He^ lapidum vener anda strues! sic corruis! Aedes
S^^rilegae has audent sic temerare manus?
(...) fene strarum fracta est (...)
Amplius and vitreos nec pia turba stupet.
Caeruleo quoties me pictus demon amictu
Terruit? Huic rabies Culmeriana favet.
Hinc quantum nostro Somnero Ecclesia debet
Hic raptas nulla lege recenset opes.
Hic priscum templi^ instaurat honorem,
Integra sunt scriptis and monumenta suis.
Pro veris hic molitur chartacea temp^a,
Et solidum marmor picta columna refert.
Vel templum pinxisse pium est Exempla nepotes
Quae seri plorent, quaeque imitentur, habent,
Urbs satis antiqua haec non te, Somnere, silebit,
Ingrata ob librum ni velit esse tuum.
Nomine tu portas urbis signasque plateas,
Per te distinctas novimus ire vias.
This is but a part; I refer you to the whole Poem, as inserted in the
Monasticon Monast. Ang. Tom. 1. inter p. 18. and 19.
, out of pure respect to Mr. Somner. There were not wanting other pens to
celebrate this first performance of our Author. It has a just character given
by a proper judge, the learned Dr. Meric Casaubon, a pious and laborious work,
and highly useful, not only to those who desired to know the state of that once
flourishing City, but to all that were curious in the ancient English history
Casaub. de ling. Saxon. p. 141.
The best Topographer since Camden, when he comes to the Roman station at
Canterbury, does for its modern splendour and glory, refer us to courteous Mr.
Somner's description of it Burton on Anton. Iti. p. 175, 176.
, a very rational Gentleman, etc. Mr. Kilburne in his survey of Kent does only
briefly touch upon the City of Canterbury, because Mr. William Somner had so
elaborately, judiciously and fully wrote of the same, that there was left but
little (if any thing observable) which he had not there set down Survey of Kent
4^^. p. 300.
. And Mr. Philpot who had reason to envy him, breaks into this acknowledgement:
Canterbury has so exactly in all the parts and limbs of it been described and
surveyed by Mr. Somner, that I should exceedingly eclipse the labors of so
industrious a Pen, if I should go about to pourtray that in any contracted
landscape, which has been before represented to the public, pencilled out in
so large and exquisite a volume Villare Cantian. p. 93.
.

As this was the most ancient royal City, and the first Episcopal Church of the
Saxon Christians: so had they both, a new precedence in this honor: they were
the first whose Antiquities were published to the world. And how few have been
since conformed to their example? The history of St. Paul's Cathedral in London
from its foundation, etc. is an absolute performance Will Dugd. history of St.
Paul's London, 1658. fol.
And the history of the Church of Peterburg will be it is everlasting monument
History of the Church of Peterb. by Simon Gunton, published by Simon Patrick D.
D. Land. 1686 fol.
But beside these two, I know of none but mean attempts. The historical account
of the original, increase, and present state of St. Peter's or the Abbey Church
of Westminster, is little more than a bundle of Epitaphs and Inscriptions
Monument. Westmon. by Henry Keep, Land. 1683. Svo.
The remarkable Antiquities of the City of Exeter By Richard Izaac Esquire Land.
1681. 8vo.
, are a dry collection, full of mistakes. The history of the Bishops and
Bishopric of Winchester, with a description of that City, By John Trussel, MS.
Athen. Oxon. Tom. 1. p. 380.
, I presume to be an imperfect work, and therefore not published. The brief
account of the Monuments of the Cathedral of Norwich By Sir Tho. Brown.
was wrote for private use, and seems more to fear, than to deserve an Edition
Tenison's Preface to Brown's Miscellan.
The ancient rites and Monuments of the Monastical and Cathedral Church of
Durham Published by I. Davis of Kidwelly, London 1672. 120.
, is an ignorant and pitiful Legend. The history of St. Cuthbert with the
Antiquities of the (same) Church of Durham, was drawn by a much better hand By
Robert Hegge Fellow of C.C.C. Oxon.
, but the Edition of it that has crept abroad is false and spurious London
1663. 8vo.
. We expect the Author's own exact and neat original to be published, with fit
notes and illustrations, by an ingenious person of singular industry, and great
progress in these studies T. Tanner of Queens Coll. Oxon.
. I hear of some others, who are now designing the Antiquities of York,
Worcester, and Carlisle: all of character and abilities for such performance.
How happily would it spread the glory of the English Church and Nation, if
among Divines addicted to these studies, some one were preferred to a dignity in
every Collegiate Church, on condition to employ his talent in the History and
Antiquities of that Body, of which he was a grateful and an useful Member?

Thus far Mr. Somner had searched only into the Latin writers, and such National
Records, as had been penned since the Norman conquest. But there is a sacred
ambition in the spirit of Learning, that will not let a man rest without new
conquests, and enlarged dominions. Especially in Antiquities, every acquest
heightens the desire, and the wishes are those of the Eastern Monarch, to have
more than one old world to bring into subjection. This generous emulation
invited our Author to proceed, and attain the British and the Saxon tongues. To
acquire the first, there were rules of Grammar, explication of words, and other
sufficient Memoirs, beside the living Dialect, to guide a man of industry and
resolution. But the Saxon language was extinct, and the monuments of it so few
and so latent, that it required infinite courage and patience, to attempt and
prosecute the knowledge of it. To this trial he was encouraged by the advice of
his constant friend Dr. Meric Casaubon, who gives this account of it: that
while he was lamenting the obscure remains of that tongue, it happily fell out,
that he grew acquainted with Mr. Somner, born of a creditable family, one of
primitive probity and simplicity. Being extremely taken with his sagacious wit,
and observing his wonderful industry in searching for the Antiquities of his
Country; and much approving his sharp and solid judgment, tempered with the
greatest modesty; he began earnestly to persuade and excite him to the study of
the Saxon tongue, as a labor worthy his patient and ingenious spirit,
promising his own assistance if he were able to give any, and to furnish him
with any materials, that might aid and promote those studies Tractat. de Ling.
Saxon. p. 140.
. Mr. Somner, whose humility of mind made him obsequious to the counsel of his
friends, and tractable to any motion of doing good, complied with the advice of
that Reverend Person, confirmed by his own judicious thoughts, being sensible
of the truth of what Sir Henry Spelman had found by his own experience, that
the knowledge of the Saxon language was so far necessary, as without it the
Antiquities of England be either not discovered, or at least imperfectly known
Somneri Diction. Saxon. Ep. Ded.
.

When Mr. Somner began this task, give me leave to represent the difficulties
he labored under. When the Saxons had made the Britains strangers in their own
land, then the language which the Conquerors brought with them, soon grew into
contempt among themselves. Even so early as the year 652. Many out of this
Island were sent to the Monasteries of France for Education, and to bring back
the manners and language of those parts Mon. Angl. Tom. 1. p. 89.
. In the reign of Edward the Confessor, by the great resort of Normans to his
Court, the whole Island began to lose their English rites, and to imitate the
manners of the Franks; especially it was esteemed a piece of breeding for all
the lesser sort to speak the Gallic Idiom, and to despise the language and
customs of their own Country Histor. Ingulphi p. 62. sub an. 1043.
. This inglorious affectation is confessed by an Historian who lived in that
age. It looked like an omen of being to be shortly conquered by that nation, of
whose tongue and fashions they were so industriously fond. The event was so.
Three and twenty years after came in the Norman Lords, who threatened an
extirpation to that language of which the Natives began to be ashamed. For
these new Masters hated the English, and so much abburr'd their Idiom, that the
Laws were all administered in the French tongue, the very children in Schools
were kept from learning to read their Mother language, and were instructed only
in the Norman; the English manner of writing was omitted Ib. p. 71. sub. an.
1066.
The ignominious marks of a conquered people. The same Author from his own
experience does again lament, that the Saxon hand which had been used in all
writings grew into disgrace, and the French hand, because it was more legible
and more pleasing to the eyes, did every where obtain ib. p. 85.
, so as in the very next reign, the Saxon letters were so obsolete and so
unknown, that but few of the elder people were able to read them ib. p. 98. sub
an. 1091.
. Nay in the year 1095. Wulstan Bishop of Worcester was deposed, when scarce
any other thing was objected against him, but that he was an old English Idiot,
who did not understand the French tongue Mat. Par. sub an.
It is true, the next successor Henry the first, gave a Charter to William
Archbishop of Canterbury, confirming to him the possessions of his See, in the
Saxon language and characters H. Wharton Auctar. Histor. Dogmat. p. 388.
This was but a single instance, and perhaps done to oblige his Queen of the
Saxon line, and to ingratiate himself with the English subjects, who might hope
by this marriage they had a better title in him. And therefore it is a mistake
in the learned Mabillon De re diplomat. p. 52.
, and some other Authors, who assert the Saxon way of writing was lost from the
very time of the Norman Conquest. It was with the Saxon characters as with
signs of the Cross in public Deeds, which were for the most part changed into
the Norman way of seals and subscriptions, yet some Charters were with the old
form of Crosses. The Saxon Dialect obtained no doubt in Country Vills, with
some borrowed variation from the French, and some remains of it did intermix
with the Court language. But the Barons and Knights who were most of them
Norman, were so afraid of their children's talking the old English, that in the
reign of Henry the second, They sent them over into France for education, to
wear off the barbarousness of the native tongue Gervas. Tilbur. de otiis Imper.
MS. in Bib. Bod.
At the beginning of the reign of Edward the third, Robert Holcot a Dominican,
confess^^, there was no institution of children in the old English, but they
first learned the French, and from the French the Latin tongue, which he
observes to have been a practice introduced by William the Conqueror, and to
have ever since obtained Rob. Holcot Lect. 2. super sapient.
. Tho from the first decline of the Barons, and advance of the Commons who were
more of English blood, the Country language grew more into request, till at
last the Commons in Parliament at Westminster the 36. of Edw. the third, showed
so much of the English spirit, as to represent to the King the great mischiefs
which would happen to diverse of the Realm, if that the Laws were pleaded,
showed, and judged in the French tongue, which is much unknown in the said
Realm, etc. Upon which it was ordained and stablished, that all Plees, etc.
should be pleaded, showed and defended, answered, debated, and judged in the
English tongue, etc Pulton Stat. 36. Edward 3* p. 119.
. Yet this law did by no means restore the Saxon, either in the Alphabet or in
the prime Dialect: It only redeemed the kingdom from an old token of
subjection, and did honor to the then compound language, much vitiated by
imported words and phrases. And still there seemed a dash of the Norman spirit,
which by the same law provided that all such Pleas should be entered and
enrolled in the Latin.

If there were any conveyance of the true Saxon tongue, it was in the
Monasteries; but in those only which were founded before the Norman Conquest;
for in such, interest did oblige them to understand the language of their
original Charters. It was for this reason, that in the Abbey of Croyland, a
Tutor was appointed to teach Saxon to some of the younger brethren, that in
their old age they might be more fit to allege the Records of their Monastery
against their adversaries Ingulphi Histor. p. 98.
. And it was no doubt for the like reason, that in the Abbey of Tavistoke, which
had a Saxon Founder about 691. there were solemn Lectures in the Saxon tongue,
even to the time of our Fathers, that the knowledge of that language might not
fail, as it has since well nigh done Camden Britan. in Danmon.
.

So that had Mr. Somner lived before, or in the age of reformation, the way of
attainment had been less difficult. Or had he been reserved to these lower
times, he had met with more of help and conduct. For we have since had a good
part of the Scriptures more correctly published, with excellent notes Evangel.
Goth. and Saxon. 1665.
. We have had histories most correct Chron. Saxon. ab Edm. Gibson, Oxon.
, But what above all facilitates the progress and perfection of learners; We
have had methodical and accurate Institutions of Grammar by the Learned Dr.
George Hicks, incomparably skilled in the Antiquities of our Church and Nation.
So that now to be ignorant of that tongue is not the misfortune of a Scholar,
but his fault. Common industry, and an easy application serves.

But Mr. Somner had a much harder province; he was in a manner to invent the
language, as well as to restore it. For upon his first essays that way, he had
but two poor Manuscripts, and one of them on so obscure a subject, as might
have exercised a Critic, sooner than instructed a Novice. But he had an active
soul that would feel no impediment. This made him his own guide, to be not only
the discoverer of a new world, but the Master of it. His success in those
studies he himself congratulated in his own modest way* When by the advice and
perswas^on of Dr. Meri^ Casaubon, I began to apply my mind to the Saxon tongue,
in no long space of time I seemed to reap some tolerable fruits of my
endeavors, which did abundantly compensate my labors, etc Diction. Saxon. Praef.
. And that first moving friend does applaud the event of his counsel in these
words. To be short, when he had approved my advice, he prosecuted the business
with that (...) industry, and such equal happi^^^ of wit, that within few years
he may be compared (to speak modestly) with the most eminent in that knowledge
Casaub. de Ling. Saxon. p. 140.
. Nor did he only surpass most of his Predecessors, but exceeded some that
followed after: and is numbered among the few complete Critics by the best of
Judges; who has rightly observed, that since the erection of Monasteries, where
Saxon Books lay unknown to those that kept them, unto our own times, only two
foreigners, and about twenty Natives, had by their own industry attained the
faculty of this tongue. Of which small number few arrived to an accurate and
critical knowledge; Jocelin^, Somner, Mareshall, and Junius, published all their
Saxon purely and correctly: but from almost all others, it came with fault and
imperfection* namely from those greatest men J. Seldom, and Sir Henry Spelman,
and even from the very Professor, Mr. A. Wheelock Hickesii Gram. Saxon. Praef.
. I would not cite the approbation of lesser Writers after the testimony of so
great a man. I would only add that his very enemies (if he had any) admired
this accomplishment in him. He who was the only man that opposed any thing our
Author wrote, does him this justice. His labors, says he, as they are pleasant
to such who are delighted in the knowledge and observation of the manners and
language of our forefathers; so have they been and ever will be, very
profitable to all that are studious and inquisitive into Antiquity. For his
success in the restoration of that our ancient speech, which had been almost
lost, and in a manner so long huried in oblivion, is very eminently known and
admired* and shall by me be always gratefully acknowledged Silas Tailor history
of Gavelkind. Pref. 4^0. 1663.
.

Mr. Somner by his absolute faculty in the Saxon tongue, was now enabled to
make the more intimate search into all remote Antiquities. His next merit was
on this occasion: his honored friend and Countryman Sir Roger Twisden had
published the laws of Henry the first, An. 1644. fol. to which was prefixed an
old Glossary, which Mr. Somner observed to be faulty in very many places.
Somner^ Glossarium ad X. Script. passim.
. On this Edition he wrote notes and observations large and learned, with a
very useful Glossary. Casaub. de Ling. Sax. p. 141.
. To which he himself refers in his other Glossary on the ten Historians, on
the words Gravatio, Mancusa, etc. of which he had treated more largely in his
former, not then, nor alas yet published. If those papers are in your hands,
you have an opportunity to serve and oblige the world.

From his time of engaging in the memorials of Canterbury, he laid the
foundation of a larger design, to collect all the remains of the state of the
whole County, for a just and perfect History of the Antiquities of Kent. This
projected labor he owns to have taken on him, in the kind Epilogue to his
Countrymen. If by your good acceptance of these my labors for the City, I may
receive ^^^couragement to proceed in my end^avours ^ it is in my thoughts, by
God's assistance, int convenient time, to do somewhat in like ki^^ for you in
the Country. Antiq. Canterb. Append. p. 105.
. And to confirm the truth and honesty of these intentions, An account of what
Saints had the dedication of Parochial Churches within that Diocese he leaves
with them in pawn, and as a pledge of those his future endeavors, for their
farther content hereafter, if God (...) He omitted no time, and spared no
pain^, to prepare this work without, and to make it fit in the field, that he
might afterward build the house: a house that was not to be built in a day,
but the foundations to be dug deep, and the materials to be fectht from afar,
with great contrivance, great patience, and great expense. But he made a
gradual progress, and in the Preface to his Tract of Gavelkind, which he wrote
twelve years before the publication, i. e. An. 1648. He confesses it was
now^full eighteen (I think it should be eight) years, since by solemn promise
he became indebted to his Countrymen, upon their good acceptance of certain of
his labors in behalf of their City, to proceed to the same or some other such
like undertaking for the County: a thing which as he then really intended, so
had he not since wanted that encouragement for it from the better sort, which
he could expect. But (says he) being soon after (pro^ dolor!) overtaken by that
impetuous storm of civil war, not yet quite blown over; I was necessitated to
betake my self to other thoughts. This was a just excuse, and he had the same
reason to beg their longer patience. For ^he resolved the conception should be
an Elephant before its birth, therefore he was still increasing his plentiful
store, and still digesting and disposing the order of it. In the mean time* he
hoped not only to be ex^us'd of his Countrymen for (what had not else been
hitherto delayed) his County-undertaking, but also to obtain of them yet
farther respite, in hope of a better opportunity to discharge that debt. In the
year 1659. the time of publishing his Saxon Dictionary; he again renewed his
promise, that when that work was finished, he would adorn and complete the
Antiquities of Kent Saxon. Diction. sub voce ^bban^une.
. In the following year 1660. he was so taken up with the joys of a returning
Church and King; and so particularly involved in the cares of retrieving the
scattered Records, and raising the Memoirs of the dead: above all so immerst in
providing that all might justly refund their stolen portion of Churchlands, and
in stating the accounts of Fines, Leases, and other emoluments o^ the Dean and
Chapter, who trusted all to his entire integrity and art: that he could not
possibly attend to the finishing that long promised work. Though the generous
design was still breathing, and expired only with himself.

But let not the world lament it is being deprived of those labors. For the
Discourse here given of the Roman Ports and Forts in Kent, was no doubt an
apartment of that spacious Fabric, and was to have been joined to the rest of
that Model. As is evident by this: in his Sax^n Dictionary on the names of
Racul^ Reculver, Limene mu^, mouth of the river or haven of Limne, Luu^^n-pi^
or Sandwich, etc. he promises a better and more large account in his Kentish
Antiquities; all which are largely dicuss'd in this Tract, which must argue it
a part of the same work, to which he then referred. Besides, among all the
intimations of his other performances, he never cites this by the title, under
which he left it, Roman Ports, etc. which proves it was included under the
general design of the Antiquities of Kent. There be some other loose papers on
that subject, which are now, Sir, in your hands, and I know your spirit for the
public interest, will embrace any fair opportunity to do good and to
communicate. I doubt he set his last hand to that part of the argument only
which you now publish, which really is a learned and judicious discourse; there
runs through the whole such a vein of reason, and such a force of authority, as
is not easy to find in any Authors, that write for a party, or for any thing
but truth. He is singularly happy in fixing Limene or the mouth of the river
Limene, or Rother, at Romney, since turned another way: which is much confirmed
by some old Manuscript Annals that I have lately seen Annals Saxonum MS. sub
an. 892.
. And in placing the Lapis Tituls of Nennius not at Stonar, but at Folkstone,
wherein he has the honor to be followed by a most learned Prelate. Stilling
fleet Orig. Britan. chapter 5. p. 322.
Had he lived to supply and methodize the whole, how would he have corrected
the remarks of all that went before, and superseded the endeavors of most that
could follow after. For I believe, it is your opinion, Sir, as well as mine,
that what Lambard and Camden did before, might admit of emendations, and
considerable additions. And what Mr. Kilburn and Mr. Philpot did since, was all
modern and superficial. I wonder these two last who were cotemporary with our
Author, should seem to have had no recourse to him, nor any knowledge of his
more complete design; which could be only owing to their own pride, or want of
address to an easy and communicative man. Mr. Philpot did engage to write
another discourse of the Ports in Kent, speaking less of the Cinque Ports,
because he intended to publish a particular Treatise relating solely to their
immunities, and their just right to take cognizance of the fishery at Yarmouth
Villare Cantianum. p. 14. fol. An. 1664.
. This faith the writer might have kept, for he lived to the year 1684. but
there is no dependence on a man who could afford to rob his own Father of the
credit of that book. For the Villare Cantianum, or Kent surveyed and
Illustrated republisht, London, 1659. and 1664. fol. under the name of Thomas
Philpot, is said to have been done by John Philpot the Father, born at
Folkstone, Somerset Herald at Arms, who died 1645 Athen. Oxon. Vol. 1. p. 102.
and Vol. 2 p. 719.
. Let this only be observed for the honor of Kent, that while other Counties
(and but few of them) have met with single pens to give the History and
description of them; ours of Kent has had no less than four Writers to
celebrate the glories of it, Lambard, Somner, Kilburn, Philpot. Let me observe
farther in respect and duty to my native Town, that what Mr. Somner asserts of
Dover, being the place where Julius Caesar intended and attempted to arrive, is
from Astronomical computation, fully demonstrated by the very ingenious Mr. E.
Halley, who proves the year, the day, the time of day, and place, the Downs,
where he made his first descent Philosoph. Transact. for March, etc. 1691.
.

Let not posterity censure Mr. Somner for this abortive design on the
Antiquities of Kent, nor impute it to slothfulness, or change of mind, that he
did not complete the model he had so long framed. It is a common infirmity of
those who write nothing, to reflect on the delay of any one expected work: As
if it were no more to do, than to talk of being done. Of the fatigues in a
great performance, none are sensible but those who are engaged in them. Thought
and reflections, searches and reviews, remarks and collations, method and
style, and ten thousand cares, all multiplied on the men of greater fidelity
and caution, retard the Author, and protract his work: especially in matters of
Antiquity, to be in haste does make the blinder birth. For those writers cannot
at one prospect get a view of their design. Like the new improvement of
Perspective, the scene opens wider by longer looking on: that is, the business
multiplies on the undertaker's hand, and the burden increases on the weary
Bearer. It is this has made more Antiquaries fail of their proposed attempts,
than any other sort of writers. Mr. John Leland the first restorer of English
Antiquities after the age of printing, undertook so immense a task, that the
very thoughts of completing, did (as it is said, distract him Wood Athen. Oxon.
Vol. 1. p. 67.
. So as after the publishing some short and trivial essays, he left his four
Volumes of collections, fol. his five Volumes of Itinerary, 4^. and some other
monuments of industry in Manuscript, for the most part indigested without
leisure, or without patience to complete them. The next Antiquary Mr. Robert
Talbot, had a great genius and an equal diligence, to gather and preserve the
fragments of time: but designing Annotations on the Itinerary of Antonine; and
a Collection of ancient Charters, etc. he died with his thoughts and his papers
in confusion. With what tedious application and gradual advances, did the great
Camden conceive and nourish his famed Britannia? Had his life and strength
endured, no doubt he had still been altering and augmenting the glorious work.
But he fell, and left unfinisht this and some other of his own, and the world's
disappointed hopes Gul. Camd. Vita a T. Smith. STP. p. 45.
. Mr. Roger Dodsworth filled above sixty Volumes with the most elaborate
collections; but was still hunting for more, without the content of disposing
what he had. And therefore excepting the Charters inserted in the two Volumes
of Monasticon, which cost him little other pains than finding, and remitting to
the press; he left nothing but infinite materials for those who would apply
them better. Sir Simonds D'ewes, a great valuer of History and Coins, had laid
a scheme for the Antiquities and state of Britain, wherein he pretends he would
discover errors in every page of Camden Epist. of Archbishop Usher. p. 496.
; but by death he fell from his great and vain attempt. Mr. T. Allen, Mr. B.
Twine, Mr. W. Fulman, and many other Antiquaries of this place, had the same
ambition to collect, and the same misfortune never to methodize or publish. But
beside these instances of general designs, the particular efforts on a History
of single Counties, (like Mr. Somner's on Kent) have dropped into the graves of
their intended Authors. Mr. Thomas Risdon drew up a Survey or Chorographical
description of Devonshire; but had not time to make the Edition of it Athen.
Oxon. Vol. 1. p. 516.
. Sir Simonds D'ewes attempted the Topography of Suffolk R. Dodsworth MS Vol.
38. fol. 39.
. Sir Edward Byshe promised the Antiquities of the County of Surry Woods Athen.
Oxon. Vol. 2. p. 484.
. Sir Matthew Hale made great collections relating to the County of Gloucester,
but would not frame them into any disposition for the press Life of Sir. M.
Hale by Dr. Burnet.
. Captain Silas Tailor spent some years in picking up various remarks on the
County of Hereford, but cast them into no just discourse Athen. Oxon. Vol. 2.
p. 465.
. Mr. Sampson Erdeswick wrote a short view of Staffordshire, containing the
Antiquities of the said County; but could carry it no farther than MS. notes
Ib. Vol. 1. p. 275.
. And Mr. Randal Catheral, got voluminous collections that respected this
County of Oxford Ib. Vol. 1. p. 731.
; but never could cast them into a regular History, and took so little care to
reposite his MSS. that to all my enquiries, they are now lost. Not to mention
the reported designs of later men, Dr. Not. Iohnston on the west riding of
Yorkshire. John Aubrey Esquire on Wiltshire. Walter Chetwind Esquire on Staffordshire;
to whose labors, if still depending, I wish resolution and success.

Forgive me this digression, and think it less impertinent; because it serves
to justify the memory of our Author, when so many others have fallen short of
the like intentions: and the nature of such attempts is more apt to absorb and
discourage the aggressors. In the mean time, we should better accept and esteem
this remnant that is saved of the Antiquities of Kent, and hang up the little
plank, as more sacred than the whole ship.

But it is a more just Apology for Mr. Somner, that he did not devote his whole
time to this ineffectual labor; but was all along employed in some other
duties to the public.

He found it necessary, not only to know the places and persons, but the
customs and tenures of his Country; of which none so eminent, and so peculiar,
as that of Gavelkind. This the Lawyers informed him to be the local custom of
Kent, whereby if the Antecessor died intestate, all the Heirs male did equally
share in the inheritance of lands, which had not been held in capite, nor
disgavelld by special Act of Parliament. But this account would not satisfy so
inquisitive a mind as that of Mr. Somner, for his aim was always to understand
properties and nature, more than names: according to that end propounded by
himself in all his researches, which was to know things, not so much in their
present as primitive state, more in their causes than effects Treatise of
Gavelkind, Pref.
. And to this enquiry he was the more induced, that he might satisfy his
Countrymen, and gain excuse for delay of his County-undertaking. For the more
easy purohasing whereof, that they and others might perceive he had not been
altogether idle, he pitched in his thoughts upon the Kentish custom of
Gavelkind, and to some more than vulgar discourse thereof, as a specimen and
earnest of his farther intentions for the County. This discourse he divided
into five heads. 1. The true Etymologis and derivation of the name, where he
refutes the continued fancy of Lambard, Coke, Camden, Verstegan, Cowell,
Spelman, Dodderidge, and many other Lawyers and Antiquaries, who would derive
it from the Saxon gipe^eal cyn give to all kindred, or to all alike. Whereas he
proves the name is by no means borrowed from the partible nature of the land;
but from gapol or gavel a tribute or customary rent, and gecynoe nature, sort
or kind; implying it to be land not held in fee, as Knights service; but
chargeable with such rents as made it socage tenure. 2. He enquires into the
nature of Gavelkind-land in point of partition, and proves it was neither from
the name, nor bare nature of the land; but partly from the nature of the land,
and partly from a general custom extended through the whole County in such censual
land. 3. He searches into the Antiquity of Gavelkind-custom (in point
especially of partition) and why more general in Kent than elsewhere. 4.
Whether Gavelkind be properly a tenure or custom? where he treats with
incomparable learning of all feudatory right, and all menial service. 5.
Whether before the statute of Wills (32, and 34, Henry 8.) Gavelkind-land in
Kent were devisable or not? which he resolves in the negative, and answers all
arguments of those who hold the contrary. All these points are discust with
that variety of knowledge, and that ingenuity of spirit, as will make the
Author and the book valued, while learning and Law are valued. At the end is an
Appendix of such Muniments, Charters, and other Escripts, as were quoted in the
precedent discourse. This subject led him through a long course of Common Law, and
through the sense of very many Statutes: for which he was afraid he might be
thought too bold with the men of that robe, too much meddling with matters of
their peculiar science; but hopes they would excuse him, being one that
honored their profession, and had an intent only in his way to do them
service, and their profession right, by holding forth to public view some
Antiquities, tending at once to the satisfaction of the one, and illustration
of the other. What esteem this treatise bears among men of that honorable
faculty, I might suggest by this familiar hint. I sought in vain for the book
among many Libraries, till it was lent me by a worthy friend eminent in that
profession. I hope in a short time a new Edition may spread it into more hands.
But let me give you a farther history of it. When Mr. Somner had drawn all his
thoughts and authorities into a just discourse, he sent his papers to his
judicious friend Archbishop Usher, who returned them with this testimony: I
have perused this learned treatise of Gavelkind, and judge it very fit to be
published. Ja. Armachanus. Apr. 7. 1647 Treat. of Gavelkind, Append. p. 216.
. This approbation of so great and good a man, was the best License that could
be asked, or given to the book. But there were two reasons that hindered the
publication. First, the distress and persecution of the writer, which might
take from him the appetite and ability of printing. Secondly, the ignorance and
affectation of those times, that hated all Antiquity Ecclesiastical and Civil;
and doted on a new Gospel, and new Laws: so that till the nation was dispossessed
of this spirit, it was not fit to cast the pearl before them. The Author laid
it up in his own Archives, and imparted it only to the perusal of some peculiar
friends. Dr. M. Casaubon had seen and read it, and in the year 1650. told the
world, that his friend had write a just Treatise in English, upon that most
famous and most ancient custom in Kent, called Gavelkind, etc Casaub. de Ling.
Sax. p. 142.
. The Author himself upon occasion owned the hidden treasure, and pointed to it
once or more in his notes to the words of Lipsius, An. 1650 Not a adverb. Lips.
App^nd. ad Casaub. de Ling. Sax. p. 16.
. and very often in his Glossary, An. 1652 Gloss. ad X. Script. in vocibus
Feodum, Allodium, etc.
. But when Monarchy, Episcopacy, and learning were restored, then the Author
brought forth the things new and old, when the eyes of men were opened. Yet
still his own modesty would have longer concealed the talent, if the
importunity of friends had not prevailed. For he confesses An. 1660. That the
Preface and Treatise had been written more than twelve years agon, and had lain
by the Author ever since, and they had not now come forth but upon the
encouragement of some worthy and judicious friends. At their request it
appeared abroad with this title. Atreatise of Gavelkind, both name and thing,
showing the true Etymology and derivation of the one, the nature, antiquity,
and original of the other; With sundry emergent observations, both pleasant and
profitable to be known of Kentish men and others, especially such as are
studious either of the ancient custom, or the Common Law of this kingdom, by a
Wellwisher to both, William Somner. London, 1660. 4to.

In this elaborate work, the Author is most happy in the Etymology and
description of Gavelkind, and Socage, of the Norman's Fief de Haubert, and Fief
de Roturier; of the Saxon's Boclan^ and Folclan^; of the Feudists Allodium and
Feudum, etc. wherein he is singular and dissenting from all precedent writers,
with such a vein of modesty, and such a strength of reason and authority, as
has yet satisfied all Readers, and silenced all Critics. He has farther
explained all the different tenures In capite; Knights-service; Fee-farm;
Frank-almoign; Divine-service; Escuage certain; Burgage; Villenage, etc. with
all lands denominated from their service, as Work-land; Boc-land; Aver-land;
Drof-land; Swilling-land; Mol-land; Ber-land; Ware-land; Terra-susanna;
For-land; Bord-land; Scrud-land; Over-land; Mondy-land, etc. Wherein he
supplies and corrects Littleton, and his oraculous Commentator: He fills up the
defects of Spelman, and prevents the industry of Glossographers, that should
follow after. And therefore the diligent Du-Fresne, in explication of most of
these terms, barely translates the English of this book, and faithfully refers
to it Du-Fresne Gloss. Lat. in vocibus Gavelkind, Gavelman, etc.
.

By this one performance he has indeed showed himself an absolute Civilian, and
a complete Common Lawyer; stating all tenures and methods of conveyance with
exquisite judgment; and examming the Writ de rationabili part bonorum, with
that nice hand, as proved him Master of more than he professed. And in many of
these disputes he could have been a more final Arbiter; but that his habitual
modesty restrained him; So that when many other points of Common Law did offer
themselves to his discourse, yet being out of his profession, he would not wade
or engage any farther in the argument; lest he should be censured of a mind to
thrust his sickle into another man's harvest. Treatise of Gavelkind, p. 170.


To obtain this knowledge in the Laws of his Country, he had traced all the
streams of justice to their fountain head; he had searched back into all the
Institutions of the Norman and the Saxon ages. And having first diligently
inquired into the Laws of Henry the first, and adorned them with Notes, and a
Glossary, as was before observed; he went back farther, and reviewed all the
policy of the Saxon Kings; a copy of whose Laws had been first gathered up by
Mr. Alexander Nowell, (whom Mr. Camden Britan. in Danmoniis.
calls the Reviver of the Saxon language) in the year 1567. who going then
beyond the seas committed them to his pupil in those studies, Mr. William
Lambard, desiring him to translate them into Latin, and to make them public,
Lambardi Epistola ad Archaionom.
. Which was done the following year under the title of APXAIONOMIA, sive de
pris^is Anglorum Legibus, etc. Lond^ni, 1568. 4to. reprinted fol. at Cambridge,
1644. In the perusal of this work, our judicious Author found, that in the
latin version there was a polite and elaborate style, too much affected, that
gave little or no help to the Reader in understanding the original Saxon
Somneri Pr^fat. ad Saxon. Dict.
. Which opinion was after confirmed by that stupendous Master of the Northern
tongues, Fr. Iunius, who speaking of Mr. Lambard's publishing the Laws of the
English Saxon Kings, translated by himself, tells us that he better approves
the ancient version by Jo. Brompton, and advises all that love the genuine
Monuments of Antiquity, rather to embrace the old interpretation of a rough and
impolite age, than rashly adhere to the modern and more refined Translators.
Iunii Catal. Lib ad Evang Goth.
. The same censure was continued by the Annotators on the Life of Alfred,
Aelfredi vita p. 66.
, and by the last Editor of the Saxon Chronicle. E. Gibson Praef.
. Upon this principle Mr. Somner did believe, that such an elegant and
paraphrastic way of rendering old Records, was too much like paint on the face
of a wrinkled matron, or a cap and feather upon gray hairs. He resolved to take
off the disguise, and represent the true venerable aspect; by a new version
plain and nigh to literal, for the benefit of all who were studious of the
Saxon tongue; to which he added some Laws that were omitted in that collection
by Mr. Lambard. Casaub. de (...) Saxon. p. 142.
. And designing farther; that such Gentlemen who would read only their mother
tongue, might not be ignorant of these fundamental constitutions, he turned
them all to modern English, and has left the Transcript thus entitled, The
ancient Saxon Laws translated into English. Neither of these versions has yet
seen the light, tho^ most worthy of it. The first of them especially, will be
of great use to the next Editor of the Saxon Laws. For Mr. Lambard's collection
might be now greatly improved, as one, who best knows, assures the world, that
beside the Laws first published by Lambard, and revised by Wheelock, it was
probable that many others lie concealed in the Bennet and Cottonian Libraries,
which it would be good service to send abroad into the world. And (says the
same great man) I have by me a Transcript of the Laws of King Aethelbert,
Hlothare, and Edric, from the Textus Roffensis, which Lambard, however diligent
in searching out these Laws, had not seen before his Edition of Archaionomia.
Hickesii Praesat. ad Gram. Saxon.
. Let us not despair of a revisal and augmentation of this Codex of English
Laws. Our Friend who has done so much honor to the Saxon Chronicle, is of
abilities, and a genius fit for this other performance.

In the mean time, let me observe, that nothing would more facilitate and
perfect the study of our Common Law, than an application to Antiquities of
this kind. It is pity the young Gentlemen of that profession should be content
to learn only the present practice of the Courts, and look no farther into the
original of judicial methods: which alone can admit them to the depth of
reason, and the bottom of a cause. There is indeed little hope of this progress
in those new measures, of first learning the practic forms in subservience to
Attorneys, and bare entering of names for a title to the bar. But where men of
parts are honored with the more liberal education of spending some years in
one of the two national Schools of learning, and thence transfer themselves to
the Seminaries of the Law, to prosecute the Histories of use and custom: from
such we might expect those degrees of knowledge, that would accomplish the
Advocate, the Judge, and the Statesman; such would be truest Patriots of their
Country, and would be the more unwilling to have the Laws of England changed,
when they understood what they were from the beginning. I dare not speak more
of my own sense; but I humbly refer to the words of a wise man, who when he has
recommended ancient Histories and original Laws, concludes thus. This I thought
good to say for the sake of our young Gentry, who adorn the Inns of Court, if
possibly by my advice they would not spare their pains to attain the Saxon
tongue, and run over the many monuments of venerable Antiquity in that language
and Character, the peculiar treasure of their nation. Hick^^^ Praefat. ad. Gra^
Saxon.
. Possibly Estates and some titles may have been obtained by lighter means; but
the good name, and the abilities to serve a Kingdom, have been acquired only by
these industrious studies. This keeps up the memory of Coke, Dodderidge, Noy,
Seldom, Hale, and many other oracles, whom no authority nor time can silence.

But I proceed to tell you the next labor of Mr. Somner: which was a
dissertation de Portu Iccio. For examining the expedition of Caesar into
Britain, he found by his own account, C^^s. Comment. l. 4
, that his first voyage began from a Port of the Morini, from whence was the
shortest passage into Britain. And where he took ship the second time, (which
by description appears to be the same place) he expressly called Portus Iccius,
Men of learning were not agreed in the site of this haven. Mr. Camden and
Ortelius thought it to be Witsan. Raimundus Marlian, and Adrian Iunius,
believed it the same with Calais. Iac. Chifletius for the honor of his Master
the King of Spain, would have it Mardike in Flanders. But Mr. Somner fixes it at
Gessoriacum, now Bologne; wherein he was followed by Sanson, etc. Of later
writers, Adrian Valesius Notitia Galliarum in v^c. Iccius Portus.
concludes it to be Estaples nigh Bologne. The noble Du-Fresne Dissertatio 28.
in not is ad vitam L. Ludovici.
and M. Baudrand Lex. Geog.
restore it to Witsan or Witsant. And Mr. Halley Philosoph. Transact. March
1691.
conjectures it was near Calais-clifts, either Ambleteuse on the one side, or
Calais on the other. Other Critics may suspend their judgment, till they see
this discourse of Mr. Somner, which deserves to be fairly published. The MS
bears this title, A discourse of Portus Iccius, wherein the late conceits of
Chifletius, in his Topographical discourse, are examined and refuted: the
judgment of Cluverius concerning the same Port asserted and embraced, and the
true site thereof more clearly demonstrated, by William Somner.

Our Author's skill in the Saxon tongue, obliged him to enquire into most of
the European languages ancient and modern. For there is a connection in all
learning, especially in the knowledge of tongues, which draws the student from
one link to another, till he has past over the whole chain of dependence. This
made him run through the old Gallic, Irish, Scotch, and Danish dialects;
especially the Gothic, Sclavonian and German. Of his perfection in the latter,
he gave the world a public specimen on this occasion. While his Reverend friend
Dr. Meric Casaubon was employed in an essay on the Saxon tongue, he happened upon
an Epistle of Iustus Lipsuis to Henry Schottius, which contained a large
catalogue of old German words, in use with that nation, about eight or nine
hundred years before. The Dr. thought many of them had a great affinity to the
Saxon; and therefore being then at London, sent down the Catalogue to Mr.
Somner at Canterbury, and desired his opinion of them. Who within few days
returned his Animadversions, and showed the relation of the German with the
Saxon tongue. But because they were too long to be inserted by Dr. Casaubon, in
the body of his discourse; he placed them as an Appendix under this title,
Gulielmi Somneri Cantuariens^s ad verba vetera Germanica a V. Cl. Iusto Lipsio
Epist. Cent. III. ad Belgas Epist. XLIV. collecta, Notae. This first part of
Dr. Casaubon's Comment on four tongues, Hebrew and Saxon, (the other two Greek
and Latin, the Dr. did not finish) was published at London, 1650. 8vo. Ou the
mention of it, I will put you in mind of one mistake of a learned man, Du
Fresne Ld. du Gange, who in the preface to his admirable Latin Glossary,
reflects on those Critics, who would derive the modern languages from Greek
originals: Ioachimus Perio^^us and Hen. Stephanus for the French; Monosmius for
the Italian; Matutius and Aldretus for the Spanish, and Stephen Skynner for the
English. When this last must be a lapse of memory: for Dr. M^ri^ Casaubon, who
in this Comment on the Saxon tongue, does industriously refer it to the Greek,
and gives a long Catalogue of Saxon words so deduced. Whereas Dr. Skynner does
indeed fetch the Saxon from the Northern dialects, and reflects on Dr. Casaubon
for being so fond of that other conceit.

These were the public services done by Mr. Somner, till the year 1650. at
which time Dr. Casaubon reports, that he would have printed all his useful
labors, and would have wrote much more: if that fatal catastrophe had not
interposed, which brought no less desolation upon letters, than upon the Land.
M. Casaub. de Ling. Saxon. p. 141.
. And he himself had about three years before declared, that he had by him some
other things in a readiness for the public, which should not, God willing, be
much longer retarded, if the times permitted by the continuance of our
Countie's peace, peace that Mother of Arts Pref. to Treat. of Gavelkind.
.

His next opportunity of doing public good was this. It was an observation of
the learned, that no one nation had so many various Histories of their own
affairs, as that of England: wrote by Britains, Saxons, and Normans; but most
of them in a manner dissolved with the Monasteries, wherein they laid and
slept. Some of them had been raised from the dust by Ioceline, Howard, Parker,
Camden, Savile; but many were yet in chains of darkness; which it would be
justice and mercy to redeem, and expose to view. The proposal was made by that
industrious Bookseller Cornelius Be, who about 1641. had importuned Sir Roger
Twisden to supply him with materials of this kind for the press Twisdenus
Lectori X. Script.
. That worthy Baronet called in the assistance of Archbishop Usher and John
Seldom Esquire Amanuensis Lectori X. Script.
: by whose industry and good affection to learning, ten writers of the English
history were transcribed from the originals in the Bennet and Cottonian
Libraries, and faithfully collated with all different copies, by an expert
Amanuensis Mr. Ralph Iennings. For the more elegant Edition, a new fund of
letters was neatly cast, and a provision made of fine paper. To adorn the work,
Sir Roger Twisden was to acquaint the Reader with the occasion of the book, and
the conveyance of those MSS from which it was compiled. Mr. Seldom was in a
larger preface to give account of the ten Historians, and their writings. And
Mr. Iennings to subjoyn the various lections. But still the Editors were
sensible that to complete the glory of the work, there wanted a Glossary, or
explication of the more obscure and obsolete words, which often occurred in
those primaeve writers. For this province, they knew none so well qualified as
Mr. Somner: to him they commit the office, and he discharged it with infinite
integrity and honor. So that when in 1652. this best collection of Historians
came forth under this title, Historiae Anglicanae scriptores X. etc. ex
vetustis Manuscriptis nunc primum in lucem editi, etc. The Appendix was Mr.
Somner's labor, thus inscribed, Glossarium, in quo obscuriora quaeque
vocabula, quae toto hoc opere continentur, copiose explicantur, and ad origines
suas pleraque revocantur, Gulielmo Somnero Cantuar^ensi Auctore. Of this
performance Sir Roger Twisden gives the Reader this character. One word of the
Glossary, without which this work had been imperfect and little useful.
Understand Reader, it was compiled for your sake by William Somner, a man of
primitive probity and candor, a most sagacious searcher into the Antiquities of
his Country, and most expert in the Saxon tongue. If some words are here glost
upon, not found in these writers; know, this was not done out of ostentation,
or the affected glory to appear learned; but it was granted at the importunate
request of his friends, by a man of the greatest modesty and ingenuity; that if
such terms occur in other Historians of our nation, and by none that I know of
explained; you may from hence discover the sense of them: our design being not
to give trouble to him, but satisfaction to you; such are Culvertagium,
Witerden, Tenmantale, ( the understanding of which I owe purely to him) and
others of that kind.

This key to recluse and antiquated words, improved whatever of this nature had
been done before: it amends and supplies the old Gallic Glossary of Pontanus;
the signification of words by Skon^us; the explanation of terms prefixed by Mr.
Lambard to his Saxon Laws; the Onomasticon of Clement Reiner, in his Apost.
Bened. in Anglia; the Glossography to the works of Chaucer; the Etymologicon of
Io. Ger. Vossius; the Glossary of Dr. Watts, adjoin'd to his noble Edition of
Mat. Paris; and above all the excellent Glossary of Sir Henry Spelman, then
only published to the letter N. Nor has Mr. Somner like the former
Glossographers, confined himself to the antiquated names of things; but with
happy learning has commented on the names of this Island and several parts of
it; to which he has affixt such new and apposite derivations, as delight and
satisfy all judicious Readers. It is indeed a work of that extent, as may
serve for a cla^is to all other Historians, and to all Records. Therefore when
the learned Sir John Marsham wrote an Introduction to the Monasticon
Anglicanum, he refers the Reader to this Glossary of Mr. Somner's, where a
barbarous word creates him any trouble. And that living Author, (whom I often
mention, but cannot enough commend) observes, That the Laws of the Saxon Kings
may be read with some profit, as turned into Latin by Jo. Brompton, if the
incomparable Glossary of Mr. Somner be consulted, wherein the more obscure
words are fully explained Hickesii praefat. ad Gram. Saxon.
. And after calls it, a truly golden work, without which, as Sir Roger Twisden
writes, the ten historians had been imperfect, and little useful.

How complete might this Glossary be made from our Author's several exercises
of this nature, which now remain in the Archives of Canterbury? His marginal
notes on Bracton de Legibus Anglia; on the collection of English and Latin
Statutes, printed 1556. 8vo. on Mr. Selden's Spicilegium ad Eadmerum; on
Verstegan's restitution of decayed intelligence: especially from his Glossari^^
rerum and verborum difficilium in Legibus H^^rici 1. And his Adversaria in
Spelm^^^i Glossarium, in Wat^ii Glossarium Mat. Par. additum: and in Tractatum
Ger. Io. Vossii de vitio sermonis. Had the inquisitive du Fresne been informed
of all these papers, how much would he have augmented his immense work? How
much will the knowledge of all our Laws and usages improve, when these mighty
materials come at last to be digested by an able and patient hand?

The Author himself intended to publish more of this kind. For in his Addenda
ad Gloss. X. Script. he does advertise the Reader, that if any other difficult
words occur, which he had not there explained, (as omissions might be easy in
so long a work) and read over as it were extempore, he would be glad to be
informed of them, and would not fail with thanks to explicate them in the best
manner that he could: at least in another Tome of Historians, shortly to be
published. Sir Roger Twisden in his Preface gives the world the same
encouragement, to hope for a second Tome, if this first were well accepted. But
it was not allowed to Scholars to be so happy. The association of those Editors
was dissolved by the death of Seldom and Usher within few years. Tho possibly
the greatest impediment was the ignorance and distraction of the times, that
could not enough encourage the great expenses of the Bookseller Mr. Cornelius
Be, to whom Mr. Somner gives this just character, that he was a man who had
deserved very well of the republic of letters, by publishing, at his own care
and cost, many books of better note, wherein he was so industrious, as
literally to answer his own name Praef. ad Dict. Saxon.
. He had indeed with great charge and pains, collected sufficient copies to
have made up a second Tome; which lay dead in the hands of his Executors, till
for a considerable sum they were purchased from them, by that generous promoter
of learning, the right Reverend Father in God John Fell Bishop of Oxford; by
whose encouragement some were published; and by whose never enough lamented
death, others remain in private hands. I have seen the following copies, 1.
Willielmus Malmsburiensis de Antiquitate Glastoniensis Ecclesiae ejusque
Abbatibus. Ex Libro Roberti Cotton, quem ipsi dono dedit Tho. Allen, Aug. 12.
1672. exam. and collat. cum alio Manuscripto libro, quem Richardus Tychburn
eques and Baronettus dedit Paulo Robinsono, qui eandem inscripsit Bibliothecae
S. Gregorianae, Duaci, Iul. 15. 1651. 2. Invictissimi Anglorum Franciaeque
Regis Henrici quinti, ad ejus filium Christianissimum Regem Henricum sextum,
vita per Titum Livium de Frulovisiis Ferrariensem edita. Ex Libro Cottoniano,
collat. cum alio Libro Manuscripto in Bibl. Bened. Cantab. 3. Historia de
tempore primaevae inchoationis sedis Episcopalis Wellensis, and ejusdem
Episcopis, and de Episcopis in sede Bathoniensi. 4. Fragmentum Annalium Saxonum
ab An. 726. ad An. 1055. 5. Fragmentum Annalium de rebus ad Hiberniam
spectantibus ab An. 994. ad An. 1177. To most of these copies is a Postscript
by the Amanuensis, Mr. Ralph Iennings, wherein he acknowledges the receipt of
several sums of money, for his reward in transcribing and collating the said
copies, and promises to compare them with the original, when desired. What
honor to the nation had it been, if these and many other copies had been
published, in the same method with the former Volumes. I am sure, we have since
had no one Edition of Historians with that exactness, and that grandeur. Nor
can we hope for any so correct and so august, till the same measures be taken,
of several hands joining in the same work. For any one undertaker has either
not opportunity to discover all copies, or not leisure to collate them; or not
the advantage of attending the press for correction; or not patience to draw up
(what is the main benefit of a large book) a full and faithful Index. So that
we have lame and inac^^rate Editions, for want of the wisdom of our forefathers
to assist one another. It is by this mutual help, that the Societies in France
give us such absolute Impressions. And could we resume that practice here at
home, we should infinitely advance the good of letters, and the glory of
Britain. I detract not from the public services of Mr. Fulman, Dr. Gale, and
Mr. Wharton, who seem to have done as much, as private men can do.

Mr. Somner's reputation was now so well established, that no Monuments of
Antiquity could be farther published, without his advice and helping hand.
Therefore when the noble Sir Henry Spelman had encouraged Mr. Dugdale to join
with Mr. Dodsworth, to collect and publish the Charters and Monuments of
Religious houses, and had communicated to them his own originals and
transcripts, of the foundations in Norfolk and Suffolk: when Mr. Dugdale in
Oxford had got many materials from the Bodleian and College Libraries: and in
France had gathered from the papers of Du-Chesne, several memorials of our
Priories Alien. When Mr. Dodsworth had preserved all that related to Yorkshire,
and most Northern Counties; when they had both searched the Tower of London, the
Cotton Library, and other Archives; they invited Mr. Somner to assist in that
immense labor, who returned them the Charters of Christchurch, and St.
Augustin's in Canterbury, with the ichnography of the Cathedral, the draught of
the Monastery, and other Sculptures: furnished them with the original Charter of
King Stephen to the Abbey of Feversham, then in his hands; and informed them in
many other queries relating to the City and County: and then accepted the
office imposed upon him, of bearing a peculiar part of the burden, by
translating all the Saxon originals, and all the English transcripts from the
Itinerary of Leland, and other Records, into plain and proper Latin: a
necessary and useful ornament to those admirable volumes. Which service Sir
John Marsham commemorates in his learned Propylaeum; There assisted in this
work a man of the greatest knowledge in our Antiquities, William Somner of
Canterbury, who has rendered into latin all the Saxon, and the English of
Leland. To whose Glossary, lately published with the English Historians, the
Reader is referred, if any barbarous word creates him trouble. The same person
is now preparing for the press a curious Saxon Dictionary. The first Volume of
this Monasticon was published, London, 1655. The book which now stands in the
Library of the Church of Canterbury, has inserted after the Propylaeum a
printed leaf in folio, containing six copies of verses made by Kentish men, in
commendation of Mr. Dodsworth, Mr. Dugdale, and Mr. Somner, who are there said
to be the joint collectors of that glorious work. The second Volume was
deferred (as a punishment to the ungrateful world) to the year 1661. A third
Volume of Cathedral and Collegiate Churches, with Additaments to the two
former, was published An. 1673. In these books are promiscuously comprised the
most Authentic, because most genuine and inartificial, History of England.
There be materials enough dispersed in several hands to complete a fourth
Volume. Dr. Hicks recites the title of many Charters, in the Archives of the
Church of Worcester, of which, he says, none are inserted in the Monasticon
Append. ad Sax Gram. p. 171.
. I have seen many originals and Transcripts of omitted Charters and Monastic
Annals, in the hands of men of curiosity and public spirit; who would
contribute their additions to such a work, when ever men of industry and
courage dare to undertake it.

Mr. Somner's friends knew, how farther to employ a useful man. They observed
it impossible to cultivate any language, or recommend it to the industry of
learners, without the help of some Dictionary for a standing oracle in obscure
and dubious words. This was yet wanting to the Saxon language, and was the
reason why so few were masters of it. For men care not to travel without a
guide in lands unknown. This was a burden that wanted heart and shoulders equal
to it; but they could impose it on none more able than Mr. Somner: on him they
lay the mighty task, and adjure him to perform it. Above all, the Counselor of
his studies Dr. M. Casaubon, used all his interest of friendship to press him
to this labor; as he thus informs us: When Mr. Somner by several essays on the
Saxon tongue, had sufficiently proved himself a master of it; I ceased not then
to importune him, that he would think of compiling a Saxon Dictionary; by which
work I did assure him, he would best merit of that language, and would receive
infinite thanks from all that were studious of it. But in such unhappy times,
what can the Reader promise to himself, or what can I promise for the Author? I
leave all to his own discretion. M. Casaub. de Ling. S^x p. 142.
. Upon this hint given to the public, many other of Mr. Somner's friends, who
knew his course of studies, did themselves hope, and made others expect, to see
such a labor done by him. Especially when by his Glossary and Version of Saxon
Charters, he had farther served the world: from that time he was incited by the
daily request and importunity of many persons, to undertake and finish that
work; many of his judicious and affectionate friends, considering his slender
fortune, and offering to contribute in the charges of the impression: with
assurance that the book would be very acceptable both at home and abroad,
especially to all that were studious of the Teutonic Antiquities, which
language was originally the same with the Saxon Praef. ad Lector. Sax. Dict.
. But for a work that required so much time, and so great expense, his friends
were to contrive some more competent support and reward: to which Providence
(that seldom fails industrious men) ordained an opportunity. The great Sir
Henry Spelman, while he was at Cambridge with Mr. Jeremy Stephens, to search
those Libraries, and collect materials for his designed Volumes of British
Councils, finding very many Saxon Manuscripts, and very few that understood
them; resolved to found a Lecture in that language, to restore and improve the
study of it. This generous act was soon done by him, and he first conferred
that office on Mr. Abraham Wheelock, one that had assisted him in some
Transcripts of that tongue; and for endowment settled on him and his successors
a sufficient yearly stipend, with presentation to the benefice of Midleton,
nigh Lin-Regis in Norfolk Abr. Wheelock praef. ad ector. edit Bedae.
. By the death of Mr. Wheelock An. 1657. the disposal of that Lecture fell to
Roger Spelman Esquire son of Sir John, son of the founder, who designed to bestow
it on Mr. Samuel Foster, a learned and worthy Divine. But Archbishop Usher, a
friend to Antiquities and Mr. Somner, recommended him to the Patron, that he
would confer on him the pecuniary stipend, to enable him to prosecute a Saxon
Dictionary, which would more improve that tongue than bare Academic Lectures
Somneri Epist. Ded. ad Saxon. Diction.
. And herein that Prelate was like himself, judicious. For the endowment of
public Lectures has often met with this till success, to make the Readers
neglect, and the hearers despise them. Whereas if the same rewards were given,
on condition of printing those Lectures, or publishing some other remains of
that Art or Science: men's industry would be greater, and the Republic of
Letters much better served. This seemed the intention of the wise and pious
founder Sir Henry Spelman, in establishing this Lecture. The words of his
foundation being to promote the Saxon tongue, either by reading it publicly, or
by the edition of Saxon Manuscripts, and other books Wheeloci Praefat. Edit.
Bedae.
. Which last design Mr. Wheelock had most answered, by publishing the
Ecclesiastical History of Bid, with the Saxon Paraphrase of King Alfred. The
Saxon Chronology with his own latin version, and Mr. Lambard's Saxon Laws, with
some additions. Cambridge 1644. fol.

This reason of the thing, and this Will of his Grandfather, inclined Mr.
Spelman to comply with the advice of Bishop Usher, and to present Mr. Somner to
the annual salary of that Lecture. Which this man of tenderness and modesty
would not accept, without the free consent of Mr. Foster, before nominated to
the place: who preferred the public before his own interest, and Mr. Somner
before himself. Therefore content with the Ecclesiastical benefice, he left the
annual portion of money to Mr. Somner, who receiving this reward, would not omit
the duty for it.

He was enough sensible, that to make a Lexicon in any tongue, was one of the
hardest and most servile labors. Especially if no foundations were before
laid; there to find materials, and to build the whole structure, was more
tedious and expensive, than barely to augment, or adorn. On reflection he found
those difficulties to press upon him: some faint endeavors, and forgotten
promises, but no one public performance of this nature.

The first example was given by Aelfric the Grammarian and Archbishop, either
of Canterbury Cave Histor. Literar. p. 588.
, or rather of York Whartoni dissertatio de duobus Aelfricis.
. who flourisht about the year 1004. and made two distinct Glossaries on this
tongue; one of which F. Iunius transcribed from a very ancient copy in the
Library of Peter Paul Rubenius of Brussels, and communicated to Mr. Somner
Praef ad Sax. Dict. sect. 17.
, who published it with the Latin Grammar in Saxon, by the same Author. This
could be no great assistance to Mr. Somner, because short and imperfect, and
indeed erroneous, and a little barbarous, as the Editor himself complains Ib.
: and another expert in these studies does affirm, when Aelfric expounds the
words in Latin, he is very often mistaken Skynner Etymol* in voce Bleak.
. There is another Glossary Latin-Saxon, by the same Prelate, (distinct from
the former) which he wrote as a Comment on his Grammar; and is found at the end
of those copies of the Grammar which are now in the Cotton Library, and in that
of St. John's Oxon: which seems to have escaped the knowledge of Mr. Somner.
This latter may be the same with that Diction. Latin-Saxon: which Dr. Cave
recounts among the Manuscripts of Aelfric Histor Literar. p. 588, 590.
. And therefore a worthy Author is injurious to Dr. Cave, in taxing him with an
error, for reciting this work among the Manuscripts of AElfric, when it was
published by Mr. Somner Auctar. Hist. Dogmat. ^ Usher p. 377.
. No, that work is still in MS. and what was published by Mr. Somner is a
different Tract, which the Dr. had before mentioned, as printed at Oxon. 1659.
One writer should be tender of another writer's reputation, and not impute
mistakes, but where he is very certain of them.

There were two other ancient Saxon Glossaries by unknown hands, in the Cotton
Library, the one a thin folio, the other a more thick octavo; what help Mr.
Somner had from these, he freely owns, by referring to them. Since the
Reformation, Mr. Laurence Nowell spent time in drawing up a Saxon vocabulary,
which he designed to complete, and publish. But he dying in 1576. left the
imperfect Manuscript, which Mr. Seldom procured, and lent to Mr. Somner; who
seems not to have received it, till he had in great part digested his own
collections; and implies it to be a deficient work. F. Iunius after took a
transcript of it, the original and copy are both with us. Next to him, Mr. I.
Ioceline Secretary to Archbishop Parker, by advice of that learned Prelate,
made some larger collections to the same intent, which were transcribed by Sir
Symonds D'ewes Baronet, and remitted to Mr. Somner: who farther mentions a
report that John de Laet of Antwerp, a man learned in Saxon letters, had
projected a work of this nature; but no performance. After all, Mr. Abraham
Wheelock, Spelman-Professor, did promise the world that he would compile a
Saxon Dictionary; but he either forgot the promise, or death absolved him from
it. It has been the infirmity of great men, when their first thoughts have laid
the scheme of any work, to take occasion of proclaiming their design; to raise
and deceive the expectation of the world. Prudence should temper this vain
desire of glory. An imprinted promise is a very sacred thing: and men should
not engage their faith to the public, unless they are sure to discharge it. How
often are men weary of a warm resolution? How often do second thoughts correct
the former: and when the scene is laid, it must be took away? How often do men's
labors increase upon their hands, till the undertaking prove above their
strength? How many accidents of business, sickness, and mortality may
intervene? So as what wise man would enter into obligation, when it is such a
hazard whether he shall be able to pay?

But this mention of the few Saxon Glossographers, is only to do justice to the
memory of Mr. Somner, by inferring what small assistance he had in so large a
work. He had not that easy task of adding to things invented, or improving an
old book; but was to compose all, and be properly an Author. We have been
taught at School to honor the Lexicon of I. Scapula, and yet Vogler has called
him the Epitomator of Henry Stephens Vogleri Introduct. Univers. p. 68.
: and another eminent writer says, he cannot be absolved from the crime of
Plagiarism and concealment Morhofii Polyhist. p. 83.
. We admire the laborious Volumes of I. I. Hoffman: and yet it is observed with
great indignation, that he has arrogated to himself the interpolated and
depraved works of other men, suppressing the names of the true Authors.
Baudrand praef. ad Geog. Au. 1682.
. And a great Critic animadverts on him, for transposing the whole Lexicon of
Baudrand into the first Tome of his work. Io. Alb. Fabri decas decadum, number. 78.
. Nay Baudrand himself is by Sanson accused of theft from his own Father,
without any dutiful mention of him. Gul. Samsonius Disquis. Geog. Epist. Ded.
and Praef. 1683.
. Nothing has been more familiar, than to hear Holyoak borrowed most from
Rider, and he from Eliot, and so on. But I will give you one instance, which I
have more lately observed. Tho. Cooper's Thesaurus Linguae Romanae, etc. first
published London, 1565. greatly raised the reputation of that writer, and is
said to have preferred him to his great station in the Church. Yet this mighty
work is very little more, than a pure Transcript of the Dictionarium Latino
Gallicum, by Charles Stephens at Paris, 1553. I have collated them in most
parts, and find them literally the same in almost all words, and the direct
order of them, and in every classic phrase; with this only difference, that
those phrases are rendered in French by Stephens, and in English by Cooper:
whose disingenuity is much the greater, because in his preface and Dedication,
he mentions the Bibliothece of Sir Tho. Eliot, and the Thesaurus of Rob.
Stephens; but speaks not a word of this other Dictionary of Charles Stephens,
which was the copy (I assure you) that he transcribed verbatim.

When Mr. Somner had made an immense collection of materials, in order to
compile his Dictionary, and had methodiz'd them in two large Volumes, now
remaining in the Canterbury Archives; he sent up his papers to Oxford, and the
Impression was here made for the Author, Apr. 1659. with an elegant inscription
to all Students in the Saxon tongue; a grateful dedication to his Patron Roger
Spelman Esquire, and a proper useful Preface. The Author and his work recommended
by the ingenious verses English and Latin, of John de Bosco; Henry Hugford;
Joshua Childrey; and Will. Jacob Physician; with an Appendix of the Grammar and
Glossary of Aelfric. And at the end of all, is a Catalogue of those worthy
persons who contributed to the great charge of the Impression, whose names and
example he commends to the present age, and to posterity; for the perpetual
honor of Philologers* and as a testimony of the Author's grateful mind.

Let none be offended, that so excellent a work was forced to be thrown upon
the public stock, and brought up on common charity. Till the men on curiosity
increase their number, this must be the fate of the best books, that they shall
not bear the charges of their own Impression. It is this has stifled the
conception of many glorious designs, to see exquisite Volumes thrown back upon
an Author's empty hands; while Plays and Pamphlets reward the trifling writers.
What else was the reason that most of our old Historians were first printed
beyond the seas; but only, that cheaper methods, and quicker sale, made the
Editors to gain abroad, what they must have lost at home? What induced Sir
Walter Raleigh to burn the second part of his admirable History; but only a
fordid complaint, that the first five books were a burden to the printer Life
of the Author, Pref. Genesis Hist. of the world.
? What inclined Sir Henry Spelman so long to suppress the second part of his
incomparable Glossary, but this only; that when he offered the copy of the
first part to Bill the Kings Printer, for five pounds in books; that light
proposal was rejected, and he was forced to make the Impression at his own
great charge? Editoris Praef. ad Glossarium. 1687.
? How could Dr. Brian Walton have carried on those six stupendous volumes of
the Biblia Polyglotta, An. 1657. if there had not been a public fund, and
Treasurer appointed to collect and dispose the contributions of worthy men?
Wood. Athen. Oxon. vol. 2. Fasti.
? In a word, it was a credit to this work of Mr. Somners, that it appeared so
little the interest of the writer, and deserved so much the charity of public
benefactors. Especially at a time, when the oppressed Royalists were more
tempted to write for bread, than for glory; and were drove upon a double
necessity, to beg for the support of themselves, and the Edition of their books.

For this indeed is a farther honor to the work, and the Author of it; that it
was done in the days of Anarchy and Confusion, of Ignorance and Tyranny; when
all the Professors of true Religion and good literature were silenced and
oppressed. And yet Providence so ordered, that the loyal suffering party did all
that was then done, for the improvement of letters, and the honor of the
nation. Those that intruded into the places of power and profit, did nothing
but defile the press with lying news, and Fast-Sermons* while the poor ejected
Churchmen, did works, of which the world was not worthy. I appeal to the
Manas^icon, the December Scrip^ores, the Polyglot Bible, and the Saxon Dictionary.

I need not tell of the good reception this labor met with among men of
judgment; nor how the great progress in the knowledge of this tongue, was owing
most to this one work. I would only remind you, that our eminent Linguist Dr.
Tho. Mareshall, in the Preface to his Saxon Gospels, refers the Reader upon all
doubtful words, to this complete Dictionary, which Mr. Somner composed with
great diligence. And our first excellent Grammarian does gratefully
acknowledge, that he collected many critical observations, which lay dispersed
in this work Hickesit Praef. ad Gram. Sax.
.

It is true, this first public essay on the construction of the Saxon tongue,
was not so full and absolute, but that it is now capable of additions, and
great improvement. For how indeed can any works, but those of creation, be
perfect, when they are first produced? Especially in a performance of this
nature, that depends on the variety of words, and Author's various acceptance
of them: here the prime birth can give no more than infancy: it is age and
education must increase the stature, and mature the strength. Besides, our
Author had this peculiar disadvantage, that while the abundant sense of words
can be gathered only from a multitude of writers in all different times, and
all different professions; he could procure but few books, and those of a short
and ignorant age. This Apology I can better represent in the words of an
ingenious Etymologist. How small a portion of our ancient tongue, like a few
planks from a fatal shipwreck, has come into our hands? What a slender stock of
words can be drawn out of three or four small Tracts? If of Roman Authors, none
had been left to us but the Offices of Tully, and the Histories of Salust and
Tacitus. If of the Grecian, none but Herodotus, Thucidides, and Zenophon, how
could Calepine and Stephanus have swelled their volumes to so great a bulk? If
you compare our Somner to those giant Authors, tho in diligence not inferior
to either of them, you would see there a Hercules and a Cyclops; here a Hylas
and a Pigmy Skinneri Etymol. praef. ad Lectorem.
. Tho certainly, if we look back on the first attempts of this kind, in all the
ancient and modern tongues, we shall find no one Nomenclature, in it is pure
beginning so copious, and so exact, as this of Mr. Somner.

He himself was most conscious, what was wanting to it, and therefore was always
improving the stock, and soliciting all Scholars, whom he thought could be
beneficial to him. Among others, Mr. George Davenport, a great proficient in
that language, sent him many Notes and Observations. I have now before me an
original letter of Mr. Somner to Dr. Casaubon, Canterbury. 12. October. 1664. of
which part runs thus. I return many thanks for those papers of Mr. Davenport,
which you were pleased to impart unto me. I have more than once perused them,
and am so well pleased with them, and instructed by them, that I shall improve
them to a good degree; in point of correction to some, enlargement and
illustration in other parts of my Lexicon; not without the ingen^ous
acknowledgement of my Author. Mean time, in order to such a use, I keep them by
me, etc. But Mr. Somner lived not to execute the good design; nor has any yet
resumed it; tho materials ly ready gathered. For among the printed Authors,
left corrected and illustrated by the hand of Iunius, there is this Lexicon of
Mr. Somner, with other loose sheets, and the Grammar of Aelfric collated with
some Manuscripts. Another of these printed volumes was in possession of Mr.
George Davenport, much noted and enlarged by the curious owner; and is now in
other hands, interleav'd, and much farther improved. The want of a new Edition
would indeed be superseded, could the world at last enjoy the Etymologicon
Anglicanum, completed by F. F. Iunius in two volumes, and that Author's
incomparable Lexicon of five Northern languages, which that most worthy Prelate
Bishop Fell, took care to have transcribed in eleven volumes: and some few
years since, we were encouraged with the hopes of a speedy publication.
Hickesi^ Catal. Lib. append. Gram. Sax. p. 147.
. But chance and change have employed men's thoughts another way. Whenever the
impression is resolved upon, it must pass through many hands, which will never
join, if they must return empty. It wants and deserves a public spirit, and a
public fund.

The last service of our Author was to publish his Treatise of Gavelkind, etc.
An. 1660. which I have already mentioned; and need only add, that some
reflections were made on this discourse by Silas Tailor Gentleman, in his
History of Gavelkind, with the Etymology thereof, etc. London, 1663. 4to. who,
in his Preface, does inform the Reader, that he took occasion to publish his
notes of this Tenure, from the late printed Treatise of that industrious
Gentleman, Mr. William Somner of Canterbury, that he has intermingled those
first observations with these Animadversions on his learned discourses: that he
entered not on this undertaking to quarrel with him, or with a design to carp at
any thing, which he has laboriously written, etc. This less accurate writer
has only attempted to carry the original of the name and of the custom from the
Saxons to the Britains; and to prove it not proper to Kent, but of an ancient
use in other parts of the Kingdom, etc. In all material points he confirms the
opinion of Mr. Somner, who in other exceptions has made his own defense in
marginal Notes, on Mr. Silas Taylor's Gavelkind History, correcting his
mistakes, etc. And his own printed treatise, when he was after conscious of any
omissions, or lighter errors, he supplied and amended with his own hand. Both
the books so annotated are now in the Canterbury Archives, and will be of great
use to the next Editor of this very excellent Treatise of Gavelkind.

Though our Author published nothing more in his own name; yet he was a
fellow laborer in many other works. Particularly in the second Tome of
Councils, of which the first had been publish by Sir Henry Spelman London,
1639. who had projected two other volumes. After the Restoration, Archbishop
Sheldon, and Chancellor Hido, importuned Mr. Dugdal^ to perfect a second Tome,
who is said to have added as many Transcripts as now fill 143. of the 200.
printed sheets; of which he had several communicated to him by his old faithful
Correspondent Mr. Somner, from the Registers of Canterbury. It was published
London, 1664. full of mistakes. Mr. Somner with great pains and accuracy,
collated the printed copy with many of the original Records, and in the margin
amended the infinite defects. He had before done the same justice to the first
Tome; of which he publicly complained, that the version of the Saxon was
faulty, and occasionally gave a more correct interpretation. Saxon. Diction. in
vo^e (...).
. Both these volumes so emended are now in your Canterbury Archives; and will
lend a very great assistance to any learned man, who has spirit to undertake a
second Edition of those Monuments of the Church; for which the world will
praise him, and may God reward him. I have now done with the works and more
public services of Mr. Somner, as an Antiquary and an Author. I would only
invite you to look back upon his Loyalty to the King, his affection to the
Church, and his integrity to all the world.

His Loyalty was firm and constant, not depending on interest, which might
change; but upon a judgment, which could not alter. He adhered to his Royal
Master, and dared to suffer with him. A man of his parts and acquaintance,
might have chosen his office from the usurping state, and his portion of lands
from the dissolved Church. But he would accept of nothing from those who had no
right to give; choosing rather to suffer affliction. He could influence his
whole family to the same principles. Both his brothers were true and zealous in
the same cause. John who was afterward Wood-Reve to the Archbishop of
Canterbury, and George a Major in the Militia of Kent; who appearing at the
head of a party in the last effort, which was made by the Royalists in that
County, 1648. engaged the rebels at Wye with very unequal force: and though he
might have safely retired, or secured his life by asking, he fought on, and
fell with honor. Our Author's profession and genius had less adapted him for
arms; but he was no less zealous to assert the rights of the Crown, and the
Laws of the land, by all the means which his capacity could use. When no
endeavors could stop the madness of the people, nor save the effusion of Royal
blood; he could no longer contain himself, but broke into a passionate Elegy,
The insecurity of Princes, considered in an occasional meditation upon the
King's late sufferings and Death. Printed in the year, 1648. 4^^. And soon
after he published another affectionate Poem, to which is prefixed the
Pourtraicture of Charles the first, before his (...), and this title, The
Frontispice of the King's book opened, with a Poem annexed, The insecurity of
Princes, etc. 4to. He waited all opportunities to serve his banished Prince; but
it was the fate of the honest Gentry to be disappointed in all attempts, and
draw down the greater persecution upon their own heads. Mr. Somner had his
share of sufferings from the jealous powers, and, among other hardships, was
imprisoned in the Castle of Deal for endeavoring to get hands to petition for
a Free Parliament; which he foresaw would restore the Church and King. Within a
month or two, this method, blesst by providence, gave liberty to him and all
the Nation.

If we next consider his zeal and affection to the Church of England, we shall
find them arising from a sense of conscience, that no threats or flatteries
could move. His own primitive spirit, inclined him to the Doctrine and
discipline of true Antiquity; and made him naturally averse to change and
innovation. He helped to sustain the old foundations, as far as his strength and
art could do: and when he found they must be overthrown, he was content to be
involved in the common ruins. He murmured not, but made a soft complaint, that
he was overtaken by the impetuous storm, and necessitated to betake himself to
other thoughts; chiefly how he might secure himself against the fury, in
warding off the danger, etc. Yet his cares were more for the public interest,
than for his own fortunes: as Keeper of the Archives, he had been allway
faithful in the trust committed to him: But sacrilege and rapine, when they had
devoured the holy things, would have embezled or destroyed all the Deeds and
Records, that conveyed and confirmed them. This was the practice of those blessed
Reformers. At Peterburgh in April 1643. a Regiment of horse under Colonel
Cromwell, forced open the Church doors, tore in pieces the Common Prayer books,
took away the Leiger-book of the Church, broke into the Chapter House, ransackt
the Records, broke the seals, tore the writings, and left the floor covered
over with torn papers, parchments, and seals Supplem. to Hist. of Cls. of
Peterb. p. 334, 337.
. About the same time a party under command of the Lord Brooks, stormed and
took the Cathedral Church of Lichfield, broke and shot down all the ornaments
of it, and cast into flames all the Registers, Charters, Books, and Vestments
H. Whattoni praefat. ad. Aug. Sat. Tom. 1. p. 35.
. At Worcester September. 24. 1643. the Army under command of the Earl of Essex,
profaned the Cathedral, rifled the Library, with the Records and Evidences of
the Church Dugd. View of troub. p. 557.
. The like outrages were committed in the Cathedral of Canterbury, Aug. 26.
1642. by the countenance of Colonel Edwyn Sandys, and the madness of Culmer;
and much greater spoil had been done to the Muniments and Histories of the
Church, if the courage and prudence of Mr. Somner had not diverted the thieves,
and concealed the treasure. Some he reposited in unsuspected hands, and kept
others in his own custody; and redeemed others from the needy soldiers, who
(like the old woman with Tarquin) would have burnt them, if the price had not
been given. Soon after professing, That his great care should now be to secure
and rescue old. Records from that scorn, neglect and contempt cast upon them,
in the days of so much novelty Pref. Treat. Gavel-kind.
. Nor did he only preserve the writings, but other ornaments of the desolated
Church. Particularly, when the beautiful Font in the nave of that Cathedral
(built by the right Reverend John Warner Bishop of Rochester, late Prebendary
of Canterbury, and consecrated by John Lord Bishop of Oxon. 1636.) was pulled
down, and the materials carried away by the rabble, he inquired with great
diligence for all the scattered pieces, bought them up at his own charge, kept
them safe till the King's return, and then delivered them to that worthy
Bishop; who reedified his Font, and made it a greater beauty of holiness;
giving to Mr. Somner the just honor, to have a daughter of his own first
baptized in it.

This Prelate was he, whom the Fanatics of that age condemned for a covetous
man. His memory needs no vindication; but give me leave to mention this certain
relation of him. When in the days of usurpation, an honest friend paid a visit
to him, and upon his Lordship's importunity, told him freely the censures of
the world upon him, as of a close and too thrifty. temper: the Bishop produced
a Roll of distressed Clergy, whom in their ejectments he had relieved with no
less than eight thousand pounds: and inquired of the same friend, whether he
knew of any other the like objects of charity. Upon which motion the Gentleman
soon after by letter, recommended a sequestr^d Divine, so whom at first address
he gave one hundred pounds. Let me go on, and tell you; that by his last Will
An. 1666. he left a personal estate to build an Hospital, for the maintenance
of twenty Widows, the Relicts of Orthodox and loyal Clergymen, to each an
exhibition of twenty pounds annual, and fifty for a Chaplain to attend upon
them. He gave one thousand pounds to increase the Library of Magdalan College
Oxon. five hundred pounds to the Library at Rochester: eight hundred to his
Cathedral Church, in addition to two hundred, which he had before given: one
thousand and fifty pounds to the repair of St. Paul's in London: two thousand
to the buying in of Impropriations within the Dioc^^^ of R^chester* twenty
pounds to the Church of St. Clement ^^nes: twenty to Br^^^ly and a yearly
pension to St. ^^onyse B^ckchurch; and four score pounds! yearly for the
maintenance of fo^^ Scholars of the Scotch Nation, in Baliol C^ll-Oxon. All
this was the charity of one single Prelate, who was deprived of his
Ecclesiastic revenues, for more years than he enjoyed them. He was a peculiar
friend to Mr. Somner, and the chief contributor to the Impression of his Saxon
Dictionary, his name standing in the front of those encouragers of learning
Ca^al. Append. Sax Dict.
.

Let us lastly reflect on Mr. Somner's integrity to all the world or This alone
can prove Loyalty and Orthodoxy, not to be the affectation of a (...), but the
conscience of a Christian. Men may profess any faith, or adopt any cause; but
it is innocence and honesty alone, that can prove it a belief, and not a
pretension. This proof was given by Mr. Somner, who in all his writings had
been so plain and sincere that he would not dissemble a truth, nor suggest a
false invention. His profession was, That he loved truth (the end of all
science) for itself; and was all together anbiast with any by respects, whether
of vainglory, singularity, or the like: making it his constant endeavor, that
truth alone might triumph ever falsehood, Antiquity over novelty Pref. to
Gavel-kind.
. How do most Historians betray a partial regard to their Nation, or their
party? How many pretenders to Antiquity, have concealed the notice of whatever
opposed their own fancy: and raised the apparition of Records, to justify the
cause for which they wrote? Especially, how do most describers of their native
soil, take pains to flourish and disguise; and (like Sir Henry Wotton's
Ambassador) think it even a merit to lie for the honor of their Country? Mr.
Somner had a probity and excellence of spirit, that made him abhor all such
artifice and guile. Let one short instance serve. There were two specious
traditions, that seemed much to illustrate the credit of our County. 1. That
the Kentish-men were the only English who maintained their privileges against
William the Conqueror, and under the conduct of Stigand Archbishop, and
Aegelfina Abbot of St. Augustaines, marched with boughs, and made their
composition at Swansco^^^. 2. That, of all Counties, Kent alone enjoyed an
immunity from the tenure of villenage, a privilege continued to them by the
said Conqueror. Tho for the honor of his mother County, he might have been
glad to defend these titles; yet having found them false, he scorned to appear
an Advocate for them; but refutes them as Monkish figments, and politicly
devised Treat. of Gavelkind. p. 63, etc.
.

Mr. Somner's whole life was like his writings, void of prejudice and passion:
he had that civility, which Caesar observed to have been peculiar to the
inhabitants of Kent Caesar's Comment. 1. 6.
; and that firm resolution, which made our Countrymen claim an ancient
privilege, of being placed in the front of a battle Lambards Perambulat. p. 11.
. He was courteous, without design; was wise, without a trick: and faithful,
without a reward. Humble, and compassionate: moderate, and equal: never fretted
by his afflictions: nor elated by the favors of Heaven, and good men. It was
his charity, and purity of heart, that preferred him to the Mastership of St.
John's Hospital, in the suburbs of Canterbury, An. 1660. In which station he
did not substract from the pietance of the poor, nor use any arts to rob the
spittle; but was tender of their persons, and zealous of their rights. By his
interest and courage, he recovered some parts of their endowment, of which by
the Commissioners on the Stat. 37. of Henry 8. it had been fleeced, at other
like places, by the sacrilegious pilferies of those ravenous and wretched times
1. Antiq. Cant. p. 94.
* It was for the same plain and open honesty, that at the Restoration, he was
appointed Auditor of Christchurch Canterbury, by the Dean and Chapter, to whom
he was a Father and friend, more than an honorary servant. He entertained them
in his own house, till their own were cleared from the Fanatic intruders, and
made convenient for them. He delivered back all their preserved writings,
informed them of all their late alienated lands: received all their Fines, and
digested all accounts to universal satisfaction. This settled him such an
interest in that Body, and all the members of it; that no private man had an
equal influence and authority: which he never employed, but to promote some act
of charity and justice. He was frequently entrusted by the Dean and
Prebendaries, to supervise the public School, to examine Lads, that should be
elected King's Scholar's; and, upon the like trial, to judge who were most fit
for removal to the Universities: in which, his enquiries were exact; and his
favors were impartial. His endeavors were to advance the interest and honor
of the School, to as high a pitch, as while he was himself a member of it: when
his master Mr. John Ludd, some years before he died, affirmed, he had thirty
seven Masters of Arts of his own bringing up England described by Edw. Leigh.
p. 108.
. Dr. Tho. Turner the worthy Dean, had a most peculiar esteem for him, and paid
him the frequent visits of a most familiar friend. All the neighboring Clergy,
whom he knew to be of good principles, and honest conversation, he assisted
with his knowledge, his interest, and his free advice. I remember to have often
heard my Honored Father dwell much upon the fair character of Mr. Somner, and
represent him as a Patron and protector of all the regular Clergy. Of his
resolute and incorrupted honesty, there can be no greater argument than this.
Among all his temptations, in several offices, to high and arbitrary fees:
among the easy advantages to be bribed: and the just expectances to be
rewarded: among the many opportunities of sharing in the Churches treasure: and
taking leases of their land: among the most ready and effectual means to raise
an estate, and advance a family: He left but a small competence, which if not
frugally managed, could never have answered the support of his Widow, and the
education of his Children.

By his last Will he gave several Legacies to the poor, and a kind remembrance
to Mr. Stockar then Minister of St. Aelphege. Canterbury. In the beginning of
his last illness, he took an opportunity to tell his Wife, that through his
whole life, he had never been let blood, nor taken any phisic, which is a just
argument, not only of his happy constitution; but of his exact temperance and
sobriety. The day of his birth was the day of his death, March 30. 1669. aged
63. years; according to the account given by his Wife and Son, who report it
from tradition, and some better grounds. But a Certificate from the
Register-book of St. Margaret's Canterbury; under the hand of of Mr. Tho.
Johnson, represents him to be baptized November. 5th. 1598. by which, his age
must reach to seventy years, five months, etc. Which length of days had almost
made him (as Queen Christina, said lately of her self and Rome) one of the
Antiquities of the City. He was buried Apr. the 2. within the Church of St.
Margaret's, where many of his Ancestors lay interred. His grave is distinguished
by no stone, or inscription on it. An omission, that, I presume, was more owing
to his own modesty, than any disrepect of his surviving friends. Yet I cannot
but admire and lament, that such learned ashes should lie without a letter on
them: that he who raised the memory of so many great names, should himself
sleep in a place forgotten: and after all his labors, to eternize the tombs
and epitaphs of others, should have no such decent ceremony paid to his own
dust. Sure the time will come, when some grateful monument shall be erected for
him, either by some one of his family, whom providence shall enable to pay that
duty: or by some one generous lover of Antiquities: or by that Capitular body,
to whom he did such great service, and such great honor.

He was twice married. His first wife was Mrs. Elisabeth Thurgar, born of a
good family in Cambridgeshire, with whom he lived in love and peace about
thirty years: and had by her four children, three daughters, and one son, all
dead. His second wife was Barbara daughter of Mr. John Dawson, a Kentish
Gentleman, (a great sufferer in the long Rebellion) by whom he had one
daughter, that died unmarried, and three sons, of which two are now living:
William Somner M. A. late of Merton Coll. Oxon. now Vicar of Liminge in Kent,
our worthy friend: and John, who practices Surgery with good repute in those
parts. His last wife is now the mourning Relict of Mr. Henry H^nnington, late
Vicar of Elham.

His many well selected books, and choice Manuscripts, were purchased by the
Dean and Chapter, who knew the great value of them, and what a noble addition
they would make to the public Library of that Church: where they now remain an
inestimable treasure. The catalogue of his Manuscripts, I will subjoin to his
life, in the same order and words, wherein you have transmitted the account,
not doubting your care and exactness in it.

Many of his notes, and looser papers were carried from his study to the
Audit-house, within the precincts of Christ-Church; where they were
unfortunately burnt, by a fire which happened in that place soon after his death.
By this and other accidents, his letters and many memorials of his life are
lost. Had they continued to us, we should have better traced his friendship and
correspondence, with most of the men of honor and learning in that age. From
the obscure hints, that now remain, I shall mention some of them.

First. Archbishop Laud, by whose favor and goodness, he subsisted in his
place and profession 1. Ep. Ded. Antiq. Canterb.
; who made great use of him in his Articles and Injunctions, sent to the French
and Dutch congregations in those parts, An. 1634. and in many regulations of
the Diocese and Cathedral, An. 1636. For which dutiful assistance, Mr. Somner
was publicly charged by those foreigners, as accessory to their troubles
Troubles of the foreign Churches in Kent. 4to.
: and he bore from all Schisfmatic parties, a greater share of calumny and
persecution, for being (in the brethren's language) one of Laud's creatures.
The great esteem that Prelate had for him, was not so much for his faithfulness
and dexterity in discharge of his office, as for his profound knowledge of
Antiquities. For as no one part of learning was unrewarded by that Great Soul:
so he had a most particular respect to Historians, and Antiquaries. Sir Henry
Spelman does gratefully report him, a great encourager of his Edition of the
Saxon Councils Pref. Council. Tom. 1.
. Mr. Ier. Stephens, by the Archbishop's favor was made Prebendary of
Bigleswade in the Church of Linc. as a reward of assisting Sir Henry Spelman in
that labor Athen. Oxon. Tom. 2. p. 230.
. Fr. Iunius, that oracle of the Northern tongues, at his first coming into
England, was recommended to the Earl of Arundel, and retained in his family by
the interest of Dr. Laud, the^ Bishop of St. David's F. Jun. de Pictura Veterum,
Praef. 4to.
. John, son of Sir Henry Spelman, dedicates to the Archbishop his Latin Saxon
Psalter, and celebrates him for a Preserver of ancient Manuscripts, and a
Patron of the Saxon tungue Ep. Ded. Psalter. Lat. Sax. 4to.
. The same excellent Prelate countenanced the like studies of Mr. Somner, and
made use of his assistance in collecting many of those various Manuscripts,
which he sent hither to adorn our Bodley Archives, of which eighty at least are
purely on the subject of National Antiquities. And it is probable, our Author
was employed further in compiling or digesting that large book in vellam,
fairly written, containing the Records which are in the Tower, and concern the
Clergy, ab anno 20. Edw. 1. ad an. 14. Edw. 4. which book the Archbishop got
done at his own charge, and left it in his study at Lambeth for posterity, June
10. 1643. This was the prudence and honor of that Governor, to consider
useful and beneficial men; and should indeed be the spirit of all Patrons, to
respect such as can serve them, and the public. For this dependence, and these
favors, Mr. Somner was humbly grateful. Of whom, (says he) to speak, is not a
task for my pen, I leave it to posterity hereafter, and to better abilities, to
set forth his constant piety, great wisdom, and spotless justice. Horobert,
what all men take unto themselves a liberty to speak of him, I shall be hold to
commemorate, -- that never to be forgotten gift of his to the University
Library of Oxford, of an innumerable multitude of choice and rare Manuscripts,
with his great care and cost, gathered from all parts, not only of this
kingdom, but also of the whole world Antiq. of Cant. p. 274, 275.
.

Archbishop Usher may be justly esteemed the next friend and Patron of Mr.
Somner. How infinite the learning, and how large the goodness of this Prelate,
is not to be here observed. It is only proper to remark his great zeal in
restoring the old Northern Antiquities, buried in the Gothic and AngloSaxon
tongues. He first moved Sir Henry Spelman to found a Saxon Lecture at
Cambridge; he made the proposal in Sidney College 1640 Abr. Wheeloci Epist. Ded
Bedae, 1644.
; he recommeded Mr. Abr. Wheelock to that office ib.
; he advised him the method of reading the Saxon Gospels ib.
; he gave him direction and encouragement to publish his Saxon volume; and
informed him that the Doxology in the Lords Prayer, was to be found in the old
translation of the Gospels into Gothic Versio and notae ad Evang. Pers. 1652.
. He furnished Fr. Iunius with a MS copy of Caedm^n's Paraphrase on Genesis: and
promoted the Edition of that work Somneri praef. Sax. Dict.
: which very ancient Manuscript, the Bishop first communicated to Mr. Somner,
for an account and more legible transcript of it ib.
. On which occasion, his Lordship was so well convinced of the abilities of our
Author, that he gave a public approbation to his Treatise of Gavelkind; he
encouraged his attempts upon a Saxon Dictionary; he recommended him to Roger
Spelman. Esquire for enjoyment of the salary settled by his Grandfather on a Saxon
Lecture Somneri Epist. Ded. Sax. Dict.
: and did him all the other true offices of friendship.

Sir Thomas Cotton of Connington Com. Huntin. Baronet, by an hereditary love of
Scholars, was a great Benefactor to Mr. Somner, and his studies. He maintained
an Epistolary correspondence with him, gave him free access to his immense
Library; lent him Glossaries, and other remains of ancient letters Sax. Dict.
Praef.
; entertained him in his house at Westminster some months, to collect and
digest his Saxon Dictionary; and contributed to the expense of its publication
ib. Append.
.

That great Master of History and Law, Sir Roger Twisden of West-Peckham in
Kent Baronet, exchanged many kind letters, and intimate visits, with our
Author; received from him notes, and corrections, to his edition of the Laws of
Henry the first; furnished him with the chartulary of St. Augustin's Abbey in
Canterbury, and other curiosities Treat. of Gavelkind p. 171.
; prevailed with him to adorn the X. Scriptores, with an incomparable Glossary;
bore a generous share in the costly edition of his Saxon Dictionary; Sax. Dict.
Append.
; and gave him the just character of a man of primitive probity and candor, a
most sagacious searcher into the Antiquities of his Country, and most expert in
the Saxon tongue, etc Twisdeni Epist. ad Lect. X. Script.
. For which service and civilities, Mr. Somner does more than once acknowledge
him his very noble and learned friend, the prime encourager of his studies.
Treat. of Gavelkind. p. 171. and Sax. Dict in (...) enajcian.


That great example of industry Sir W. Dugdale, by his genius and parity of
studies, was directed to the acquaintance of Mr. Somner, and contracted a fast
friendship with him. He called in his assistance to the magnificent volumes of
Monast. Anglican. 1655. and 1661. appealed to him for the etymology of names of
places, to illustrate his Antiquities of Warwickshire, 1656. received from his
hands very many of the materials, that filled up the second volume of
Provincial Councils, 1664. depended upon his judgment and information, to
complete the Glossary of Sir Henry Spelman. He seems to have attempted nothing
without his advice, and to have published nothing without his approbation:
giving among others, this testimony of his respect and love. In etymologizing
the names of Towns and Places, I have not been over bold, etc. Nor should I
have adventured thus far, had I not received much light from that learned
Gentleman Mr. William Somner of Canterbury, my singular friend, unto whom I
cannot attribute enough for his great knowledge in Antiquities, and those
commendable works which he has already, and is now taking pains in. Dugdales
Pref. to Warwickshire illustrated.
By this last, he meant the Saxon Dictionary, to which Mr. Dugdale contributed
his knowledge and his money; and had this grateful acknowledgement made of it,
The great retriever of our English Antiquities, my noble friend, Mr. William
Dugdale, one (to do him right) without whose active and effectual assistance,
in the publication of it, this work had never seen the light. Sax. Dict. in
voce (...).


The treasurer of Antiquities Mr. Roger Dodsworth, knew the person, and the
worth of Mr. Somner. He borrowed from him the chartulary of Hortonmonachorum in
Kent Roger Dodsworth collect. vol. 55. f. 86.
, and many other evidences of old devotion. He received from him farther
satisfaction in the catalogue of Archdeacons of Canterbury, which he had
transcribed from his Antiquities of that City ^b. vol. 59. f. 161.
: and from his kindness had a copy of many Wills, out of the Registers of that
See. ib. vol. 17. f. 81.


Sir Simonds D'ewes Baronet, of StomHall in Suffolk, a zealous assertor of
Antiquities, was not so happy in the use of his own learning, as in his
interest with Mr. Somner; who instructed him in the notice of many things; and
made the better use of his inestimable records; taking occasion to tell the
world, of a very rare Deed (...) Ch^rter, taken from an ancient Manuscript
chartulary, thee remaining with Sir Thomas Cotton, which he must confess to owe
to the courtesy of his late learned friend, Sir Simonds D'ewes.

That excellent Philologer and Antiquary Mr. William Burton, had a knowledge
and esteem of Mr. Somner; when he mentions Canterbury for one of the Roman
stages, for its modern splendour and glory, he refers his Reader to co^^^tious
Mr. Somner's description thereof, and approves the derivation of its name,
given by that learned Antiquary Burton comment. ^n An^on I^^m. p. 185.
: and in fixing other of these ancient stations, he rejects the opinions of
Talbot, Harrison, Camden, etc. and adheres to Mr. Somner, as a very rational
Gentleman, who places Noviomagus or Noviod^num at C^^yford in Kent, very
judici^^sly, as he does other things. Ib. p. 176.
And for the situation of Durolenum, he follows the same knowing Gentleman,
whom (says he) for his (...), and love to ancient studi^s, I singularly
resp^^t: who (...) it to have been (...) f^r from Newington, a village on the
road from Rochester to Canterbury. In this particular, not a little
strengthened in his conjecture, by the multitude of Roman (...), found in
digging there, as is already discovered, and discoursed of by the learned
Meric Casau^on, his ever (...) friend. Ib. p. 180.
This new designation of the Roman ways and stages, so happily determined by
Mr. Somner, is allowed and confirmed by a Prelate of incomparable knowledge.
Stillingf. Orig. Britan. chap. 2. p. 63.
.

Sir John M^rsham of Whornplace in Kent, valued at home, and admired abroad for
his profound learning, had a just esteem of our Author: and gave him the public
character of a man most expert in our national Antiquities, the Author of (...)
most useful Glossary, and the Projector of a C^pious Saxon Dictionary Jo.
Marshami (...) To^^. 1.
; the Edition of which he encouraged by a liberal contribution. Sa^. Dict.
(...).
.

Sir (...) By^she, (...) King of Arms, had the counsel and assistance of Mr.
Somner, to improve him in his own profession of Heraldry: kept an Epistolary
correspondence with him: and kindly advanced the impression of his Saxon
Dictionary. Ib.
.

Another accurate Herald and Antiquary, Elias Ashmole Esquire, exhibited to the
same work of Mr. Somner ib.
: furnished him with many select papers and tracts Sax. Dict. in voce Tima, etc.
: and received from him the notice of many books and things, to carry on his
complete History of the Order of the Garter, and to fill up his many volumes of
elaborate Collections, which are now reposited in this place In Mus^o
Ashmol^ano.
, by the last Will of that generous Benefactor.

Dr. Thomas Fuller, who labored for the reputation of an Historian and
Antiquary, courted the friendship of our Author: and, had he been more guided
by him, would never have defiled his writings with puns and tales. He closes
his discourse of Canterbury with these words, For the rest, I refer the Reader
to the pains of my worthy friend, Mr. William Somner, who has written justum
volumen of the antiquities of this City. I am sorry to see him subject bound
(betrayed thereto by his own modesty) seeing otherwise, not the City, but the
Diocese of Canterbury, had been more adequate to his abilities. Fuller's
worthies of England, p. 100.
.

Dr. William Watts, the learned and noble Editor of Matthew Paris, 1640. in the
useful Glossary affixt to that work, was assisted by Mr. Somner, who conveyed
to him many other informations, and at last laments him as his deceased friend.
Treat. of Gavelkind.
.

Mr. George Davenport, an absolute Critic in the Saxon tongue, was a true and
useful friend to Mr. Somner, and after publication of the Saxon Dictionary,
contracted a more firm acquaintance with him: recommended to him some few
emendations, and several additions to that work: for which our Author gave him
the respectful language of his approved friend, of whose communicative
goodness, he had formerly tasted, MS. Letter of Mr. Somner, 12. October 1664.
, etc.

But in recounting Mr. Somner's friends, it would be injustice to omit his most
intimate guide and companion, Dr. Meris Casaubon, whose affection to his
person, and influence on his studies, have appeared in many instan^^s before
related. Mr. Somner very often express his grateful sense of obligation:
confesses, that to the study of the Saxon tongue, he was encouraged by his
precious friend, and ever honored Mecenas, Dr. Casaubon, Pref. to Treat. of
Gavel-kind. and Sax. Dict. ad Lecter.
who had admitted him is an entire friendship, and familiar daily conversation,
whose good learning and good nature, he could never enough celebrate ib.
the only Patron of his studies; and one who deserved greatly from all that
were ambitious of the Saxon tongue. Sax. Dict. in initio.
.

Many other worthy names rewarded the public spirit of Mr. Somner, and
contributed to the service he did the world: Sir Orlando Bridgman, Sir Simon
Archer, Sir Richard Leveson, Walter Chetwind, Thomas Stanley, Thomas Henshaw,
Ralph Sheldon, etc. Esquires; of Divines, Bishop Warner, Dr. Langbain, Mr.
Barlow, etc. of Physicians, Dr. Fern, Dr. Pugh, Dr. Currer, Dr. Rogers, etc.
and of our own County, all those Gentlemen who had an affection to virtue and
good letters: The Honorable John Finch, Baron of Fordwich, Sir Edward Monins
of Waldershire, Sir Norton Knatchbull of Mersham, Sir Richard Hardres of
Hardres, Sir Henry Palmer of Wingham, Baronets, Sir Cristopher Harflete of
Hackington, Sir Anthony Arch^r of Bishopshourn, Sir Thomas Godfrey of
Nackington, Sir William Man of Can^erbury, Sir John Boys of Bonington, Knights,
John Boys of Fredfield, John Boys of Hede-court, John Boys of Betheshanger,
Edward Scot of Scots-hall, Richard Master of West-Langdon, Thomas Engeham of
Goodnestone, James Brockman of Bitchborough, Arnold Brames of Bridge, Thomas
Courthope of Stodmersh, Thomas Peke of Ash, Laurence Rooke of MonksHorton,
Esquires. Edward Master of Canterbury, Herbert Randolph of Canterbury, William
Randolph of Biddenden, Joseph Roberts of Canterbury, John Lynch of Staple,
Gentlemen, etc. These all did honor to their Country, and to their Families,
by serving the interest of Mr. Somner, and the public.

Pray, Sir, accept this plain account of the life of Mr. Somner: and my hearty
thanks for your affection to the memory of this good man: and for your care in
publishing this excellent part of his works. It is true, to send forth every
postumous tract of learned men, from loose and indigested papers, is an affront
to the world: and often seems a libel to the Author, and Editor of them; but
where the remains of an accurate writer are left complete and absolute, and
argue a design of being wrote for public notice: there, to convey such relics
to the press, is an office of justice to the Author, and of charity to all the
world.

Your Obliged Faithful Friend, White Kennett.
Edm. Hall. Oxon. Feb. 15. 1693.
Mr. SOMNER'S Postumous Manuscripts, now in the Library of Christ's-Church
Canterbury.
Collections out of ancient MSS and Records, relating to the City and Church of
Canterbury, and to other Towns and Churches in Kent.

Large Extracts out of the Chronicle of William Thorn, with other extracts out
of the Obituary of Christ-church, Canterbury; and out of the Registers of the
Churches of Canterbury and Rochester, with Collections out of the Saxon Annals.

Observations upon the Commissary of Canterbury's Patent; being a large
discourse concerning the original Jurisdiction, Priveleges, Laws, etc. of the
Spiritual Court.

A discourse of Portus Iccius.

A transcript of a large Saxon Theological Treatise.

A large Collection, in order to the compiling his Saxon Dictionary, in two
Volumes.

Scholia and Animadversiones in Leges Henrici pr^mi, Regis Angliae, subnectitur
Glossarium rerum and verborum difficilium in dictis Legibus. Dedicated to Sir
Roger Twisden.

Collections out of Transcripts of several ancient Saxon MSS. in two volumes.

His Antiquities of Canterbury interleaved, with very large additions.

Lamberti Leges Saxonicae. Where he has amended the translation.

His emendations upon Spelman's two volumes, where he has Collated the text
with MSS; and amended the Saxon Translation, and has gone through the whole
work.

His large notes upon Spebnan's Glossary.

Some marginal notes upon the Grand custom of Normandy.

Some emendations upon his Treatise of Gavel kind.

Another Copy of (...), full of Emendations and Annotations throughout.

Marginal notes upon Mr. Silas Taylor's Gavel-kind. History, correcting his
mistakes.

Marginal notes upon Bracton de Legibus Angliae.

Marginal notes upon the old Collection of English and Latin Statutes, printed
1556.

Marginal notes upon Horn's Mirror of Justice.

Marginal notes upon Mr. Selden's Spicilegium ad Eadmerum; especially an
emendation of Selden's translation of the Laws of William the Conqueror,
published by him. p. 173. etc.

Some marginal emendations on Spel^nan's Saxon Psalter.

Marginal emendations on Fox's Saxon Gospels.

Marginal emendations on Liste's Saxon monuments.

Large marginal notes upon Meric Cafaubon's book, De quatuor Linguis.

Large marginal notes upon Verstegan.

Adversaria in Spel^nanni Glo^farium, in Watfli Glossarium, Matth^^o Paris
additum; In tractatum Gerardi Vossii de vitio sermonis. In one volume.

Leges Anglo-Saxonicae, a V. C. Guil. Lambar do olim Editae, exintegro Latin
datae.

Some Collections toward his intended History of Kent.

THE HISTORY Of the ROMAN PORTS AND FORTS in KENT.
FOR our discovery both of one and the other, the Itinerary vulgarly ascribed
to Antoninus ( Vossius de Historicis Latinis, in the Life of Livy, mentioning
the Itinerary, says sen Antonii, for Anto^^ii, seu Aethici; and afterward
speaking of that which Anuius ^iterbiensis published, he calls it (...), and
Antoninus supposititius. Vide de hac re Philippi Cluverii Italiam. Andreae
Schotti Praefationem ad Itinerarii Editionem Colonicnsem, As^. 1609. Burton
upon the Itinerary, p. 5.
about which there is some dispute amongst the Learned) and that Notitia
Imperii published by Pancirollus, must be our chiefest guides. To begin with
the Ports: the Itinerary mentions only three, Rutupia, Dubris, and Lemanis:
unde colligo hos tantum tres portus apud Cantios antiquitus fuisse celebres. So
Leland (to whom I subscribe) in Doris.

As to the first; Rutupium.
Ptolomy calls it Vrbem Rutupiae; Antoninus Rutupae, portum Ritupium, also
portum Rutupai; the Notitia Rutupis, placing there the Provost or Prefect of
the Legionis secundae Augustae: the First published by Marcus Velserus; and so
called, because they were found out in the Library of Conrade Peutinger, a
noble man of Auspurg.
Peutingerian Tables Ravipis; Ammianus Marcellinus Rutupias; Cornelius Tacitus
rightly reads portum Rutupensem; Beda Ruthubi portum, quiportus (so he Hist.
Eccl. l. 1. c. 1.
adds) a gente Anglorum nunc corrupt Reptacester vocatus, etc. The Saxon word
po^^ does not only signify portus, but also urbs, oppidum. So (...) is used in
the Saxon-Annals, An. 1010. to signify the Town of Northamton: and Porthund,
near Shrewsbury, where Althelm was treacherously slain, is interpreted by
Floren^ius Wigorniensis oppidum canis.
Thus we see what some call urbem a City or walled Town, others call portum, a
Port, Haven or Harbor. The same Marcellinus, as he calls it also Rutupias, so
by way of character he terms it stationem Britanniae tranquillam, a quiet or
calm station or bay for ships. In Orosius we read it called Rhutubi portum and
civitatem, the Port and City Rhutubi.

Before we offer at the Etymology of the name, The situation of Rutupium.
let us enquire out the place's situation. Twyne will have Dover hereby
understood: but that conjecture of his is not only questioned, but rejected of
Mr. Lambard; and that very justly, as I conceive, in regard that Rutupia and
Dubris, as distinct, are under several names mentioned in the Itinerary: to say
nothing here of the distance (which continues and holds good to this day)
between Gessoriacum and it. Mean time Mr. Lambard disliking the He is commonly
called Matthew Westminster, and Florilegus, the writer of the Flores
Historiarum.
Monk of Westminster's applying the name to Sandwich, and consequently his
referring whatsoever he finds storied of the one to the other, with Of the
same opinion is Burton, in his Comment upon the Itinerary p. 20. which makes me
wonder why he should say afterward p. 94. that the Iter secundum began near
upon the mouth of Ituna, and had it is ending in the east of the Island at
Ru^upiae, or Richburrow, now called Sandwich in Kent. I cannot tell why he
should confound Richburrow and Sandwich, unless it be upon an opinion he and
Caniden had, that the old Haven at Richburrow being stopped up with Sand, opened
a new one at Sandwich; which made the first call it the old Haven, and Sandwich
the new Town, risen out of the ruins of Rutupiae: the second, the Rutupiae of
the Romans, prolem suam paulo inferius ostendit, quam a sabulo (...) dixerunt
Saxones, nos vero Sandwich. So that Richburrow and Sandwich, (if that opinion
of their's be true) may seem to be the same Port, which had only a little
changed it is place.
Leland and Camden, restrains it to that place half a mile distant from
Sandwich northward, which Alfred of Beverly calls Richberge, and is at this day
vulgarly called Richborough or Richborough Castle.

For my part, Sandwich formerly called Rutupium.
with Florilegus of old, and Pancirollus of late, I persuade my self that
Sandwich Town and Haven is the place intended under those aforerecited various
names and titles; not the whilst excluding Richborough as the proper seat of
that Legion, lying in garrison in a Castle there purposely erected, as in
respect of the ascent or high rising ground whereon it stands, of singular
advantage both as a specula for prospect and espial of enemies and invaders,
and as a Pharus or high tower, to set up night lights for the sea-mens better
and safer guidance into the harbor. For that Richborough-Castle was ever
other, or of other use in the Romans time I cannot believe. Gildae Historia p.
12. Sect. 16. Edit. Oxon.
Gildas tells us of the Romans erecting on this coast, at convenient distances,
Watch-towers for such uses as I have intimated, that of espial and discovery.
In litore quoque Oceani ad meridiem, quo naves eorum habebantur, quia and inde
Barbarorum irruptio timebatur, turres per intervalla ad prospectum maris
collocant, etc. So he; and with him Hist. Eccl. l. 1. c. 12.
Venerable Bede. And of these Watch-towers, our County had (I take it) five in
number, one at Reculver, a second here at Richborough, a third at Dover, a
fourth at Folkstone, and a fifth at Limne or Limhill, of all which hereafter in
due place.

Leland, Camden, Burton, and Lambard, are all of that mind; grounding no doubt
upon Venerable Bede's words, Civitas quae dicitur Ruthubi portus^ Hist. Eccl.
l. 1. c. 1.) For first certainly concluding that this was no other but our
present Richborough, they might very well on course settle there an ancient
City. So that if Bede's Ruthubi should be at Sandwich, their City must
necessarily be removed. Beda civitatis nomine insignivit, says Camden. And; In
dejectu collis urbs exporrecta videbatur. What he offers (besides Bede's
authority) as a confirmation of this, namely, the platearum tractus cum seges
succreverit se intersecantes, I think Mr. Somner (who veiw'd the place very
curiously) sufficiently answers.
Some will tell you (what others take up more upon fancy and fabulous
traditions than good authority) that Never a City at Richborough.
Richborough was a City, the streets whereof (say they) are as yet visible and
traceable, at least in the spring and summer time, by the thinness of the corn
on those dry and barren tracts and places of the ancient streets, which they
call St. Augustin's Cross. But would you truly be informed of the cause of
that? Why then know, that there was sometime indeed a Cross there; a parcel, I
mean, of the Castle ground, about the middle or center of it laid out
crosswise, and set apart for the building of a Church or Chapel there: and
such a structure at that place really there was, and it was called Richborough
Church or Chapel. One Sir John Saunder, Richborough Chapel.
a Prebendary of John Peckham changed the Pa^i^h-Church of Wingham into a
Collegiate Church, about the Year of our Lord, 1282.
Wingham, (then a College of Secular Canons) Parson of Dimchuroh, and Vicar of
Ash, in his Will dated Anno 1509. thus makes mention of it: Item I bequeath to
the Chapel of Richborough one Portuys printed, with a Mass Book which was Sir
Thomas the old Priest's. Item, to the use of the said Chapel 205. to make them
a new window, in the body of the Church. A Chapel then we see there was, When
demolished.
and intended it was, and whilst it stood, which no doubt it did till the
Reformation, (when many such Chapels and some Churches, by reason of the
cessation of Offerings, Obits, The Trentals was one of the offices for the
dead, so called because it consisted of thirty Masses; fetched from the Italick
trenta, i.e. triginta. ^ee Sir Henry Spelman's glossary upon the the word.
Trentals, Anniversaries, almesses, and the like Sacerdotal advantages were
deserted) was used for a Chapel of ease to some few, inhabiting at or near the
Castle, and with those of Fleet and Overland depended upon the head or Mother
Church of Ash, as that on Wingham. The rubbish whereof, occasioned either by
the demolition or decay of the building; has rendered the soil whereon it stood
of that more barren and less Fruitful nature and quality, than the adjacent
parts.

And this (I take it) and no other was the estate of Richborough, until these
later times, whilst Sandwich doubtless was the Town and Port by Ritupia or
Rhutupia, and the like. So that what Florilegus ascribes and applies unto
Sandwich under that name, I am very confident does rightly appertain unto it;
as Matt. Westminster. Cap. 28. In Rutupi portu, qui modo Sandwicum dicitur, cum
prosperitate applicuit.
that of Julius Cesar's hereabouts landing, and of The Historian does not here
expressly refer this attempt of landing to Sandwich, but barely says, that as
Vespasian came into the haven ( in Rutipi portu, without any mention of
Sanwich) Arviragus surprised him and obliged him to retire.
Vespasian's attempt for landing here Anno gratiae 52. Advisedly then enough
(as I conceive) are the Friars Carmelites at Sandwich by Hist. p. 634.
Harpsfield called Rutupini sive Sanduichiani.

And considerable it is, (...) proved to be Sandwich from the distance between
that and Gessoriacum.
that as between this place Rutupium and Gessoriacum i. e. Bolen, more
anciently called Portus Iccius ( Meric. Causabou, in his Treatise de vetere
Lingua Saxonica, tells us that Mr. Somner writ an accurate Tract de portu
Iccio; which is still in Manuscript.
as I have elsewhere at large asserted) it was that in those elder (the Roman)
times, the ordinary and usual passage lay between France and England ( In the
Saxon (...). So William Rusus coming from France into England, is said to have
took shipping at (...), and landed at Dover. Chron. Sax. An. 1095.
as afterward between Witsand or Whitsand and Dover, and in latter times
between Calais and Dover) so the distance between them, according to the
Itinerary was 450. stadia or furlongs, or (as Pliny has it) 50. miles, which is
all one. And a distance it is by modern proof and observation still continuing
to this very day. Hither (I say) made those who taking ship at Bolen were bound
for Britain, especially if London-bound. Adulta hyeme, dux antedictus Bononiam
venit, quaesitisque navigiis and omni imposito milite, observato flatu secundo
ventorum, ad Rutupias ex adverso sit as defertur, petitque Londinum. So Lib. 20.
Ammianus Marcellinus, speaking of Lupicinus, sent Deputy into Britain. And
from hence happily this place losing and letting go its former British name of
Ritupium or Rutupium, And yet in the Saxon Chronicle ad An. 604. it is expressly
said that Aethelbert made Mellitus Bishop of (...) which is certainly London
and not Sandwich; and this reading is confirmed by all the 5 MSS saving that
Cotton's reads it (...).
became of the Saxons called (...); Rutupium called by the Saxons (...)
i.e. the port of London; as in likelihood the place where those that traded
either to London from foreign parts, or from London into foreign parts, made
and had their prime resort and rendevouz. Milthredae vero Abbatissae de
Menstre, in Insula Thaneti, dedit libertatem thelonii ac totam exactionem
navigiorum, sibi and antecessoribus suis jure publico in Londinensi portu
primitus competentem, cartaque sua confirmavit; as it is in a Book of St.
Augustin's Abbey at Canterbury, making mention of Athelbald and Offa, the
Mercian Kings and Saxon Monarchs, whose grant and Charter is afterward vouched
and confirmed by Aldbert or Ethelbert (one of the Kentish Kings, in the line of
the Saxon Heptarchy) in his Charter to Minster-Abby.

Now that Kentish Sandwich, and not London City, is here intended and to be
understood, is plain by this passage in the laws of Lothaire and Eadric, mere
Kentish Kings, recorded in that famous ancient monument called Textus
Roffensis, concerning Commerce at that place. (...) etc. i. e. If any Kentish
Man shall buy any thing in Lunden-wic, let him take unto him two or three
honest men, or the Kings The same term frequently occurrs in the old Laws. And
not only the term, but also a Law much of the same nature with this, we meet
with in the Laws of Edward, son to K. Alfred, whereby it is ordered ut nemo
barganniet extra portum, sed habeat Portireve testimonium, vel alterius non
mendacis hominis cut possit credi And of K. Athelstan: Ne quis aliquid emat
extra portum supra xx. d. sed in eo barganniet sub testimonio Portireve, etc.
The word signifies the Supervisor of a Port, for the Saxon (...) (from which
the termination reve is melted) signifies Praefectus, Praeses, Praepositus. Of
this word, see Spelman's Glossary in the word Grafio; and the general rules at
the end of the Saxon Chronicle, under the termination grave.
Portreeve to witness, etc. I think this does not necessarily follow from the
form of the Law. For though Sandwich was, no doubt, a very eminent Port, yet the
forecited Laws of Edward and Athelstan plainly show that the same Law was made
for all Ports in general; and therefore the words of this cannot give it any
peculiar preeminence.
as if indeed this were not only a Market Town, but the prime and most
frequented Emporium, or Marttown in Kent, in those days.

Somewhat elder yet is the place's mention under that name; to wit, in the days
of Archbishop Brightwold, or (as some call him) From (...) cla^us and (...)
gubernar^. See the general rules for the names of Men at the end of the Saxon
Chronicle.
Berhtwold (i. e. Illustrious Ruler) to whom by Ina, the West Saxon King, with
the advice of his Clergy, Boniface, afterward the first Archbishop of Mentz in
Germany (an English man born, and first named Winfrid) was sent into Kent upon
an Embassy. This Boniface shortly after, with that Archbishop's consent, not
easily at first obtained, quitting his father's house and, native soil, and out
of a pious and Christian desire and design to propagate the Gospel, and both by
life and doctrine to convert Heathens to the Faith of Christ, determining to
travel into Fresia or Friesland, immensis peragratis terrae partibus, i.e.
journying from the Western to the Eastern parts of England, he repairs to this
place Lunden-wich, from whence taking ship, he sets sail and arrives at
Dorstat, now Dieerstede, a town of Holland, and so makes forward into Fresia;
whereof Willibald in the Life of Boniface, at the end of his Epistles thus:
Willibaldus de vita S. Bonifacii, p. 354. Edit. Ingolstad. cum aliis quibusdam
Tract. An. 1603.
Hic etiam dum spirituali confortatus armatura, and seculari sublimatus
sumptura, utriusque vitae stipendiis minime careret; adhibitis secum duobus aut
tribus fratribus, quorum corporali spiritualique indigebat sustentaculo,
profectus est: ac sic immensis peragratis terrae pantibus, prospero ovans
fratrum comitatu, pervenit ad locum, ubi erat forum rerum venalium, and usque
hodie antiquo Anglorum Saxonumque vocabulo appellatur Luidewinc (in the margin
more correctly Lundenwich.) The same holy man afterward returning home, and
after some stay here resolving a visit to Rome, betakes himself again to the
same Port; whence setting sail he arrives at Cuentawic, a Sea Town in France,
now called Estaples in Picardy; whereof the same Vita Bonifacii p. 358. Edit.
Ingolstad.
Willibaldus: Qui protinus quidem valedicens fratribus, profectus est, locumque
per longa terrarum spatia, qui jam praedictus dicitur Lundenwich (I follow the
margin) voti compos adiit, and celocis celeriter marginem scandens, caepit
ignotas maris tentare vias, tripudiantibusque nautis immensa, Coro flante,
carbasa consurgebant, and pleno vento prosperoque cursu ostia fluminis citius
quod dicitur Cuent, omni jam expertes periculi naufragio aspiciunt, and ad
aridam sospites terram perveniunt, sed and castra metati in Cuentavic, donec
superveniens se collegarum multitudo congregasset.

Clear enough then I suppose it is that by Lundenwich, Sandwich why called
Lundenwic.
Sandwich Town and Haven was intended and is to be understood; but whether so
called from the same ground with that o^ London City, He there derives it from
the British Llawn, plenus, frequens, and din, homo, of din (the same with
dinas) urbs, civitas; either of which joined with Llawn will signify a
populous place, as London has always been.
whereof in my Glossary at the end of the Historiae Anglicanae scriptores
antiqui, and in my Saxon Dictionary; or from the trade and traffic there
exercised by merchants trading to and from London, as the next Port to the
river of Thames, and so most commodious for that purpose; or lastly, from some
more special and peculiar interest of the Londoners in that above other of the
Ports, I cannot say.

Only this is certain, Particular interest of the Londoners in Stonor.
that some such interest was challenged by the Londoners Falsely written for
Estanore, as Mr. Somner in this discourse plainly shows, under the title
Folkstone.
in Stonor lying in Thanet, on the other side of the channel, but subject unto
Sandwich, as a limb or member of that Port. For in the year 1090. (as it is in
Thorn, the Chronicler of St. Augustin's Abbey at Canterbury; quoted by Mr.
Lambard) there happened a great dispute betwixt the Londoners and the Abbof of
St. Augustin's, and his men and homagers of Stonor. The Londoners challenged
the Lordship or Seignory of Stonor, as a seaport subject to their City: but
the King ( William Rufus) taking the Abbot's part, it was adjudg'd by the
Justices upon that place, that none from thenceforth should claim any thing
here, but that Wido the Abbot and his Covent, should freely and quietly without
any question have the land, and the whole share, as far as to the middle of the
water; and that the Abbot of St. Augustin's should freely enjoy all rights and
customs to the same village appertaining.

All this while we hear nothing of the name of Sandwich. The first mention of
Sandwich.
Indeed that name (for ought I find) occurs not in any coetaneous writer or
writing until the year 979. when (as it is in the Chartularies of the Church of
Canterbury) King Egelred granted it by name unto the Monks there, for their
supply and maintenance in clothing. Thorn's Evidenti^ Ecclesi^ Christi Cant.
inter X s^^iptore^ p. 2^25. l. 21.
King Cnute afterward coming in by Conquest, and consequently having all parts
and places of the Kingdom at his disposal, he with some regard (no doubt) to
the Monks former right and title to the place (being the same, where coming to
subdue the Saxons, and make a Conquest of the country, he first landed) gave,
or rather restored, the place (the Port of Sandwich by name) to the same Monks
for their sustenance in victuals, with the addition of his golden Crown, and
(what perhaps was of equal value in the estimation of the times) St.
Bartholomew's arm.

The further tracing and producing of what in story concerns this place, I
refer and leave to Mr. Lambard, and such as are willing to be their own
informers from our Chronicles; saving that I think it not amiss to observe that
signal mention of it in His name is not known; but he is supposed to have been
some Monk, that lived about that time. The tract is called Emmae Reginae
encomium, edit. Paris. 1619.
the Writer of the life of Queen Em, where he tells of Cnute's landing there,
and calls Sandwich the most famous of all the Ports of England: Expectabili
itaque ordine, flatu secundo, Sandwich, qui est omnium Anglorum portuum
famosissimus, appulsi, etc. So he.

But to to return to the old obsolete name Rutupium, The Etymon of Rutupium.
or Ritupium: for the etymologizing of it, wherein the most learned and
Judicious Camden, (as his manner is) has been so exceeding happy, that waving
all other conjectures that either are or may be started, and embracing his, ^ut
Burton in his Comment upon the Itinerary, p 24. dislikes it: But that anciently
(says he) Rutupiae should be from thence (that is, from the st^re of sands cast
up from the Goodwyn upon this shore) so called, when it was an harbor for the
Roman Navies, I would fain have some body to satisfy me therein how it might
be; except they then had some foresight of what in after ages would come to
pass. So he. However (by his leave) I do not see that Camden's conjecture is so
absurd as he would make it. or all that Camden urges the Saxon (...) for, is to
show that the sands upon that coast were as old at least as the Saxons, and
infers from thence, that it is not improbable but the state of those parts under
the Britains might be the same, and consequently give occasion to the name
Rutupiae.
I shall not stick with him to fetch it from the old British Rhyd tufith, i. e.
vadum sabulosum: and the rather because of that subsequent and succeeding name
of Sandwich, which plainly betokens a sandy reach or creek; for so it is, being
a place notable indeed for abundance of sand of each side of the Channel, whose
banks s^us-like are of a winding, curving, and imbowed form and figure; (which
to this day we call a reach) especially about Richborough, I should rather
derive it from the Saxon (...) and the Islandick hriggur dorsum, to denote the
high situation; so that Richborough may signify a burrow or castle upon a hill.
thence happily denominated as being a Berg i. e. a hill, or a Burg i. e. a
castle (like the termination cester If it is name refers to Richborough (as I
cannot see what else it should relate to) our Author seems to be incoherent
with himself. For a little before he is angry with Leland, Lambard, etc. for
placing Rutupium at Richborough; and yet if Richborough was otherwise called
Reptacester (as he here intimates) Rutupium must be there too* forbid puts
them at the same place; Ruthubi portus, qui portus a gente Anglorum nunc
corrupt Reptacester vocatur, Hist. Eccl. 1. 1. c. 1.
in its name of Reptacester) a castle at or near the reach or creek. Rutupium a
famous port in the Romans time.
But to keep up to Rutupium, so famous (it seems) in those elder i. e. Roman
times was the place for the Romans often landing there, and the frequent
passage thence out of Britain into the continent, that the whole Eastern and
Southern maritime tract, coast, or shore of Britain was thence denominated,
being usually, termed Rutupinum littus, i. e. the Rutupine or Rutupian shore,
whereof instances enough are collected and exhibited by the same Mr. Camden.
Their going off was about the year 418. 3 page 9.
The Romans at length deserting the Island, and the Saxons shortly after being
possessed of it, as they (Conquerour-like) changed the language, introducing
their own; so rejecting the wonted name of this place Rutupium, When it changed
it is name.
they new-named it (^, as was showed above with the reasons for it) (...) which
name it afterward retained until their supplanting by the Danes; of whom or
about whose time, from the sandy soil there and thereabouts extending from
thence so many miles, even as far as about Walmercastle, casting off the former
name of (...) called it was Sandwich, which it retains to this day, having
formerly given name to a family of Knights for several descents called de
Sandwico, or of Sandwich; one of which, Sir Simon of Sandwich, So Mr. Kilburn
(says Somner) but I am otherwise informed by a^ Historian of Edw. 2's time, who
says it was founded at the common charge of the Townsmen.
was the Founder of St. Bartholomew's Hospital there. But of that Roman Port
hitherto. Only let me here add the account given or taken of it in the
Conquerours Survey, called Doomsday-Book in these words.

Sanduic est Manerium Sanctae Trinitatis, and The land allotted for the
clothing of Monks is called in the ancient records scrud-land, from the Saxon
(...), vestis; as that for maintenance in victuals is called foster-land.
de vestitu Monachorum, and est The leth or lath is a larger sort of divisions
in Counties, containing so many Hundreds. I think there is no doubt but it
comes from the Saxon (...), congregare, convocare, from convening the
inhabitants within such a jurisdiction. The leta (the court) seems to have the
same original; though Spelman doubts of it. Vide Glossar. ejus in voce Leta.
Leth and Hundredus in seipso, and reddit Regi servitium in mare, sicut Dovera:
and homines illius villae, antequam Rex dedit eis suas consuetudines, reddebant
XV libras; quando Episcopus recuperavit reddebat XL libras, and XL millia de
alecibus, and in praeterito anno reddidit L libras, and alecia sicut prius. Et
in isto anno debet reddere LX and X lib. and alecia sicut prius. In i. e.
Tempore Edwardi Regis. This is generally observed in Doomsday-book; in the
description of e^ch place, to set down the state of it, number of inhabitants,
etc. as it stood in the days of Edward the Confessor.
T. E. R. erant ibi CCC and VII mansurae, nunc autem LX and XVI plus.

To gratify the curiosity of such as may be studious either of the genius and
temper of that age, or of their mode and way of framing and phrasing their
Grants and Conveyances; This grant is not extant either in Saxon or Latin in
Somner's original MS.
I shall here, from the original subjoyn that of Sandwich Town and Haven by the
King Cnute, to the Monks of Christchurch Canterbury, as I find it there extant
both in Saxon and Latin.

THE common opinion much countenanced Goodwyn- sands.
and confirmed by our countrymen Comment. de rebus Albionicis p. 27.
Twine, Perambulation p. 105.
Lambard and some others, (late writers only whilst all the elder sort are
silent in the point) is that this being before and Island of some called Lomea,
very fertile and abounding with pastures, etc. was by an hideous tempest of
winds and rains, and an unusual rage and inundation of the sea, happening Lambard
adds, or the beginning of Henry the first.
in the reign of William Rufus, in the year 1097. overwhelmed; and has been
ever since a quicksands, Charybdis-like, dangerous to Navigators. This I say
is the common opinion.

Notwithstanding which, Never an Island.
that it ever was other than what it is at present; that at least it was till
that inundation such a piece of firm and fertile ground as Comment. de re^us
Albionicis p. 27.
Twine in his description of it avoucheth, or that ever it was As Lambard lays
down for an undoubted truth, and without more ado derives thence the name of
the place. And Twine; Lomea vero, quae aliquando fuit Godwini Comitis ditio,
ejus nominis hodie arenae vel syrtes dicuntur. Antiquit. Albion. p. 24.
Earl Goodwyn's patrimony, and took name from him, I dare confidently deny; and
that with warrant enough I trow from hence alone, that in the Commonly called
Dooms-day-Book; a specimen whereof the eminent Dr. Gal^ has given us in his
first Volume of Historians, p. 759. as also a differtation upon it, p. 795.
Conquerour's Survey (that famous and most authentic Record and Repertory of
all lands whatsoever throughout the whole English Empire) wherein (amongst the
rest, and in the first place) Kent, with all the lands in it, whether of the
King, the Archbishop, the Earl, or whatsoever person high or low is amply and
accurately described, surveyed, and recorded; in this universal Terrier (I say)
there is not any mention made, or the least notice taken of such an Island. And
as not there, so not elsewhere (in any Author whether foreign or domestic, of
any antiquity, that ever I could meet with) does it occur: whereas both of
Sheapy, Thanet, etc. (other Kentish Islands) there is frequent mention both in
Dooms-day-Book, and in many of our English Historians, as well elder as later,
to say nothing of several Charters both of Christchurch and St. Augustine's in
Canterbury, where they are very obvious.

And as for that argument (much insisted on Twine, Lambard, and others.
by the most) drawn from the name of Goodwyn-sands, Original of the name of
Goodwyn-sands.
it may (as I conceive) receive this answer, that probably it is not the true,
genuine, ancient, and original name, but rather a corruption of the right name
contracted and caused by that grand corruption as well of names as things,
time. Yet what the true and right original name was, I cannot possibly say, nor
am scarce willing to conjecture, least I seem to some too bold. But when I
consider the condition, nature, and quality of the place in hand; the soil or
rather the sand, which is both lentum and tenax, soft and pliant, and yet
tenacious, and retentive withal; I am almost persuaded it might take the name
from the British Gwydn so signifying, which in tract of time much the easier,
and rather corrupted into Goodwyn, because of a Kentish Earl of that name a
little before the Norman-Conquest. A conjecture in my judgment much favored by
the name De Lomea vero, vel (ut nunc est) Godwinianis syrtibus. Twine Comment.
de rebus Albion. etc. p. 27.
given it by Twine, (from what authority it appears not) Lomea, which (though
not in sound yet in sense) seems in some sort to answer the British Gwydn, as
coming probably of the The Saxon lam signifies limus, dirt, clay.
Saxon lam, whence our modern English lome, as that I conceive of the Latin
limus, slime, mudd, etc. and that as some derive it of the Greek (...) i. e.
terra madida, locus humidus. These sands (happily) being so called for
distinction's sake from those many other thereabouts, as the Brakes, the
Fower-foots, the White-ditch, etc. as consisting of a more soft, fluid, porous,
spongious, and yet withal tenacious matter than the neighboring sands, and
consequently of a more voracious and ingurgitating property than the rest,
which were more hard, solid, rugged, and rocky.

But in regard of that altum silentium, Why it cannot be of a British original.
the pretermission of it in utter silence by ancient Authors, and the no other
than a very late notice taken, and mention made of it by any writer, it will
hardly pass with judicious men for a thing of such antiquity as to owe its name
to the Britains. Indeed were it a thing of that great antiquity (a place I mean
of that strange and stupendous nature for such a standing) so very remarkable
it is, as we cannot easily believe it should have quite escaped the many elder
writers both at home and abroad, or not indeed be reckoned amongst the wonders
of our Britain. And therefore with several men of judgment it is looked on as
a piece of Earl Goodwyn died in the year of our Lord 1053. Chron. Sax.
later emergency than Earl Goodwyn, much more than the British age. What in
this case to reply I scarcely know; that it is a most notable and wonderful
thing as to the nature and quality of it, I cannot but acknowledge, and yet
that it has escaped the pens of all ancient writers both foreign and
domestic, I neither can deny. Upon a melius inquirendum therefore resuming and
reviewing the matter, I cannot but refer to consideration as their conjecture
who are for the late emergency of it, so withal what is said in favor of it.

Instead then of the overwhelming this place (formerly supposed an Island,
Cause of Goodwyn-sands.
and a part of Earl Goodwyn's possessions) by that inundation of the sea in or
about William the second or Henry the first's time, whereunto the loss of it is
of some (as we have seen) ascribed; more probable it seems to others, that (on
the contrary) this inundation being so violent and great, as to drown a great
part of Flanders and the Low Countries, was and gave the occasion of the
place's first emergency, by laying and leaving that, which formerly was always
wett and under water, for the most part dry and above water. Or if happily that
one inundation did it not alone, yet might it give such a good essay to it, and
lay so fair a beginning of it, as was afterward perfected and completed by
following irruptions of that kind; especially that upon the parts of Zealand,
which consisting of old of fifteen Islands, eight of them have been quite
swallowed by the sea and utterly lost. Inundations in the time of King Henry 1.
Whence that of a late Heylin Cosmogr. p. 231.
Geographer of our own concerning both inundations. The Country Belgium lies
exceeding low upon the seas, insomuch that it is much subject to inundations.
In the time of Henry the second (it should be the first) Flanders was so
overflown, that many thousands of people, whose dwellings the sea had devoured,
came into England to beg new seats, and were by the King first placed Lambard
says about Carlisle.
in Yorshire, and then removed to Pembrokeshire. Since that it has in Zealand
swallowed eight of the Islands, and in them 300 Towns and Villages: many of
whose Churches and strong buildings are at a dead low water to be seen; and as
Ovid has it of Helice and Buris Cities of Achaia, Invenies sub aquis, and adhuc
ostendere nautae
Inclinata solent cum moenibus oppida versis.
The water hides them, and the shipmen show,
The ruined walls and steeples, as they row.


To the same purpose the Laet, descriptio Belgii p. 124.
Belgic Geographer thus: Zelandia multis insulis, distinguitur: tametsi enim
superiori seculo Oceanus magnam huic regioni cladem intulit, and aliquot
insulas, perruptis aggeribus, penitus hausit, alias mirum in modum arrosit,
etc. And what says Comment de rebus memorabilibus in Europa, in Belgio maxim.
Guicciardine speaking of Flanders? Usque ad annum salutis 1340 etc. Until the
year 1340. ( says he) as often as any bargain was made for the sale of any
lands along the maritime tract, provision was expressly made, that if within ten
years space next ensuing, the land should be drowned, then the bargain to be
void and of none effect.

That this (the emergency of what we call the Goodwyn) was the product and
consequence of those inundations, These inundations the cause of Goodwyn-sands.
that at least a probable conjecture may hence be grounded of its emergency by
this means, they thus make out. This shelf (the Goodwyn) although it were a
kind of shallow lying between the English and the Flemish coast, yet until so
much of the water sound a vent and outlet into the neighboring parts of
Flanders and the Low Countries, was allways so far under water, as it never lay
dry, but had such a high sea running over it, as it no way endangered the
Navigator; the sea or channel being as safely passable and navigable there as
elsewhere. But so much of the water betwixt us and them having forsaken its
wonted and ordinary current and confines, and gained so much more elbow-room
and evacuation into those drowned parts on the other side, (the sea usually
losing in one place what it gains in another) this shelf (the Goodwyn) from
thenceforth, for want of that store of water which formerly overlayd it, became
(what it is) a kind of arida, a sand-plott, deserted of that water's surface in
which it was formerly immersed.

This (for ought I perceive) is probable enough, and has nothing that I can
see, to oppose or control it, but the name (the Goodwyn) which indeed cannot
consist with so late an emergency, whether by the Goodwyn we understand the
Earl sometime so called, or the British word or Epithet for soil or ground of
that tenacious sort and temper. Not knowing therefore what further to reply, I
shall leave it in medio, not daring to determine either way, as being a
research of so much difficulty, as I foresee, when all is done, must be left to
conjecture, which may prove as various as the Readers.

Now to Dubris, Dubris. It Is derivation.
another of the Kentish Roman Ports, and of them so called; Dover (says
Lambard) called diversely in Latin Doris, Durus, Doveria and Dubris; in, Saxon
(...)* all seem to be drawn from the British word dufir water, or dufirrha high
or steep, the situation being upon a high rock ove the water, which serves to
either.
but whether from the British Dyffrin signifying a vale or valley (whence that
famous vale or valley of Cluyd in Denbigh-shire is called Dyffrin Cluyd, as one
would say, the enclosed vale or valley; for so it is, being on all quarters but
the North environed with hills or mountains:) or from their Dufr or Dur or
Dyfr, betokening: water; running water, or a river, (whence Dowerdwy is of
Girald Cambrensis in his Itinerary of Wales in Latin rendered Fluvius Devae
i.e. the river of Dee) is somewhat disputable. Both derivations are enough
probable, the former in regard of the place's situation in a valley, between
two very high hills or rocks: nor is the latter less probable in respect of the
water, the fresh or river running through it, and presently emptying it self
into the sea, and by the way serving to scour the haven, and keep it open. So
that leaving the Reader to his liberty of choice, I shall have done with the
name when I shall have told him, that after the Romans* it was of their
immediate successors, the Saxons, called (...) As also (...).
(...), (...); and of after times Doomsday-Book calls it Dovere, Huntingdon
Donere and Doure. Sim. Dunelm. Dovere. Hovd: Dowere:
Dovor and Dover.

Speed, Holi^sheed and Milton, (out of a mistake either of the Saxon (...), or
else led into it by those who translated it out of the Saxon) place tho scene
of this action at Canterbury.
Some have called it by what is the proper name of Canterbury, Dorobernia,
Dover falsely called Dorobernia.
others Dorvernia; but very erroneously both; and upon that mistake, what,
tumult or hurly-burly happened in the year 1051. or as some have it. 1052. at
Dover by the means of Eustave, Earl of Bolen and his men, likely to have ended
in a sore and bloody civil war, (the King taking part with his brother in law,
and Earl Good^yn siding with the Doverians as his Clients and Vassals) the
scene, I say, of that commotion is of some laid at Canterbury: whereas it is
What makes it yet more clear, are the circumstances of that expedition
delivered by the Saxon Chronicle, ad As. 104^. It tells us that after he had
delivered his message to the King, he came Eastward to (...), i.e. Canterbury;
where he with his men, dining, afterward (...), i.e. went forwards to Dover.
hence clear enough that Dover was the place, inasmucn as Marianus and Hoveden,
who (as Malmsbury speaks of a Castle there which Knighton calls Castellum
Dovoriense) make express mention of a Castle on the cliff or by the cliffside,
which must needs be Dover-castle; Canterbury being an inland-town and standing
(both City and Castle) in a level or valley. But for more certainty, the Saxon
relation of the matter (in which language I take it the story was originally
penned) as I find it in a small Saxon MS sometime belonging to Mr. Lambard, and
procured for me by my late deceased friend Thomas Godfrey of Hodiford Esquire, lays
the scene at Dover. (...) (1052) (...) (...) etc. The same year (1052)
Eustatius came on shore at Dover, When Dover came to be a haven.
etc. So that what of that tumult is recorded in our Chronicles as happening at
Dorobernia belongs to Dover, not Canterbury. What also is spoken by Non multo
post deinde intersticio temporis, Doroberniam venit Aluredus, transvectus ex
portu Iccio, etc. Gesta Guil. Ducis, in initio.
Pictaviensis of Alfred's landing place, or place of arrival, under the same
name, relates thither, and is to be understood not of Canterbury but Dover. But
to keep us to the Port; a Roman Port it was, and continued afterward a Port
through the Saxon, Danish, and Norman ages unto this present. But as after the
Roman times Bolen decayed and grew into some disuse on the French coast, so
Rutupium or Sandwich in tract of time did the like on the British, that being
supplanted and put by of Witsand, this of Dover, as of most advantage to the
passenger by reason of the greater shortness of the cut between.

Yet late was it e're Witsand came into request, Witsand when first a Port.
no mention in story being found of it in the notion of a Port, I believe the
first mention of it is Auno 1095. where (as was before observed) William Rufus
is said to have taken shipping there. Chron. Sax.
until between 5. or 600. years ago. But from about that time indeed it became
much frequented, and no notice scarce taken of any other thereabouts. Whence
that of Lewis the French King, who in the year 1180. coming in pilgrimage to
visit Thomas of Canterbury, besought that Saint, by way of humble intercession,
that no passenger might miscarry by shipwreck between Witsand and Dover. Yet
neither was this Port Witsand very long lived; for not many years after
Calice-Port coming into request, Witsand gives it place, which it retains to
this day. And indeed it is matter of more wonder, that it held up so long, than
that it decayed no sooner, in regard of the danger of the passage between,
through the greater narrowness and straitness of the British Channel or Frith
at that place, rendering it apter to a more impetuous motion than where, as
somewhat further off, on either hand more sea room may be had.

Here without all doubt it was that Julius Caesar, Dover the place where Caesar
intended to la^d.
in that famous expedition of his for the Conquest of Britain, first intended
and attempted to arrive: a matter evident enough by the description of the
place, Comment. Lib. iv. c. 5.
in his Commentary terming it locum ad egrediendum nequaquam idoneum, a place
very unfit for landing; which he further thus describes; Loci haec erat natura,
atque ita montibus angustis mare continebatur, ut ex locis superioribus in
litus telum adjici posset. From whence without any violence we may conclude
that the sea in those days more in^inuated it self into the valley here than
afterward and at this day (being somewhat excluded and fell further off by the
ingulfed beach) it did and does, flowing up even as high, if not higher into
the land, as where the Town it self is now seated: whereof also the Anchors and
planks or boards of ships there ( Mr. Camden says of Dover; Oppidum quod inter
cautes considet, ubi portus ipse olim fuit, cum mate se insinuaret, ut ex
anchoris and navium tabulis colligitur.
as Mr. Camden has it) sometimes dug up, are indications sufficient of
themselves to evince this truth.

And more have I not to say of this Port neither; only to represent what
description thereof is recorded in Doomsday-book, in these very syllabes, There
is no more extant in the original MS of Mr. Somner, but I suppose it is the
same account that Dr. Gale (Hist. Vol. 1. p. 759.) has given us of Dover out of
Dooms-day-book; to whom I refer the Reader.
Dovere tempore Regis Edwardi reddebat, etc. Hereunto let me add a
Topographical account hereof given by Guliel. Pictavensis, who (as he was the
Conquerour's Chaplain, and one that attended him in the expedition, and shared
with others of his train in the division of the land) has written his Life and
Acts. His words are these. Situm est id castellum (Dovera) in rupe mari
contigud The original quotes Pictaviensis no further; but because what follows
is very material to this account of Dover, take the whole together: Situm est
id castellum [Dovera] in rupe mari contigua, quae naturaliter acvta undique ad
hoc ferramentis incisa, in speciem mari directissima altitudine, qu^ntum
sagittae joctus permetiri potest, consurgit, quo in latere ^ndamarina alluitur.
.

From this description it appears, that what fortification the place had in
those days to the sea-ward at least, was not so much from art as nature; indeed
rather mixed, the rock or clift'stop with tools and instruments of iron being
cut into such notches and indentures, as it both resembled and served in the
stead of walls with battlements: which it seems afterward decaying (as the
clift there consisting more of chalkstone is apt to crumble away, drop down,
and fall) such walls as now the Town has to the sea-ward were erected for
supply to those natural Bulwarks, which that edax rerum, all devouring time,
had so consumed.

PASSING from hence (reserving the Lemanis it is names and situation.
Castle to my future discourse of the Roman-Forts) I come in order to the third
and last of their Kentish Ports, Lemanis In Antoni^us some read Limenis, as
well as Lemanis, says Burton in his Comment upon the Itinerary, p. 193.
as called of Antoninus, of the Notitia Lemannis, in the Peutingerian Tables
Lemavius. Concerning the situation hereof various are the conjectures of our
English Chorographers; I think Lime or Limne is the place generally pitched
upon by our English writers, grounding, no doubt, principally upon the
agreement in sound between the old and the new name. What they say of Hithe and
West-hithe is, that the former began to flourish upon the stopping up of the
latter, and the first rise of West-hithe, was the decay of Limne or Lime, which
they suppose to have been the ancient Haven. So Leland; who is followed by
Camden and Lambard.
some placing it at If Hythe were of greater antiquity than is generally
supposed, it might probably be the ancient Roman Port; for the present name
being derived from the Saxon (...) portus, would exactly answer the Greek
(...), from whence Lemanis is supposed to be deduced.
Hyth, others at West-Hyth, a third sort at or under Lim-Hill; to none of all
which the distance between it and Durovernum (i.e. Canterbury) in the Itinerary
(to omit other arguments) will very well suit being sixteen miles, which is
more by two than that between Durovernum and Dubris, which is full out as great
as this. But as there is not much heed to be given to the distances there,
being (as some have observed) often mistaken, so am I apt to suspect a mistake
here, of XVI I mean for XXI, the second of those numeral letters in the
Itinerary by an easy mistake of an V for an X being miswritten; which supposed,
the Port (as to the distance) is easily found, and that ineeed is Romney, or as
we now call it New-Romney, New-Romney the Lemanis of the ancients.
distanced much about so many Italian miles (21) from Durovernum or Canterbury;
and so called happily to answer and suit with the Greek Camden and Burton are
of opinion that the (...) is no part of the ancient name, but foisted in by the
Librarians: Quod (...) cum apud Graecos significativum sit, Librarii ut
viderentur desectum supplere (...) scripserunt, Latinique interpretes novum
portum inepte converterunt, etc. So Camden; and much to the same purpose Burton
in his Itinerary p. 193.
(...), or the Latin novus portus, as some have termed it: although I rather
deem that Epithet given it more of late to distinguish it from the other
Romney, called Old Romney, which distinction I find used near 500 years ago.
But be that as it will, Romney either the Old or the New seems to be the Port
of the Romans so termed, and that either from the Greek (...) a Port, according
to that of Leland, Refert hoc nomen originem Graecam, quod pleno diffluens
alveo portum efficiat: est enim Portus, litus, sinus maris Graecis (...); or
else from their (...) palus a moore or fennish place, as the soil hereabouts
for many miles far and wide is none other; which Ethelwerd's Limneus portus,
and the old and yet continued writings of the Parish and Deanries name of Lime
or Limpne seems more to favor. Romney, I say, as I conceive was that Roman
Port Lemanis, which although at present, and for Ever since the time of Edw 1.
when by the violent rage of the sea, the Rother changed his course, and so the
harbor was stopped up. See Som^er hereafter in his third Proposition.
some hundred of years lying dry, and unbestead of any channel of fresh water
to serve it, yet had of old a fair and commodious river running along by it,
and unlading or emptying it self into the sea, in those days nothing so
remotely from the Town as (by the sands and beach in process of time cast up
and inbeaten by the Sea, and for want of the fresh to repel and keep it back
stopping up the Harbor) since and now it is.

This River It riset^ (says Lelend, and after him Lambard) at Argas bill in
Sussex, near to Waterdown-forest, and falls to Rotherfield, etc.
rising and issuing or breaking forth about what for the right name
Ritheramfield we call now Rotherfield, Limeneriver.
(a place in Sussex) and so passing under Rother-bridge (corruptly termed
Roberts-bridge is from thence called the Rother: but afterward running and
keeping on it is course to Appledore, and from thence to Romney called (as we
said) Lemanis, and serving the Haven there, becomes from thence termed Limena,
as the mouth thereof where it falls into the sea, Limenemouth. And thus may
those be reconciled that are at odds about this River's right name, some
calling the whole River Rother, others Limene; which former name occurreth not
to me in any ancient record, whereas the An: 5. Edw. 1. (says Somner) in an
extent of the Lord Archbishop's manor of Terning in Sussex, under the title of
Borgade maghefeud: Martinus le Webb-tenet quar^^^ (...) unius radae apud la
Limene, and debet quad. ad (...) Mick.
latter does, and that as high up as whereabout it first rises. It was
afterward (from the Port so called, to and along by which it had it is course
and current) named Romney, as shall be showed anon. Mean time for better
method's sake, I shall endeavor to assert three things. First, that there was
such a river; one, I mean, of that name of Limene, and Romney. Secondly, that
this river had it is mouth at or by Romney-Town. Thirdly, about what time, and
by what occasion it ceased running hither, and forsook it is wonted channel.

Now as to the first, I Proposition. That a river there was called Limene and
Romney.
express mention is found made of it by that name of Limene, in a Charter or
Grant of Ethelbert the son of the Kentish King I think the right name is
Wihtred. He is always called so in our Saxon Annals, and most of our English
Historians.
Withred, about the year 721. whereby he grants to Mildred, the then Abbess of
Minster in Thanet, terram unius aratri circa flumen Limenae i.e. a plough-land
lying by or about the river Limene. It next occurs to me in a Charter of King
Eadbright dated in the year 741. granting to the Church of Canterbury capturam
piscium quae habetur in hostio fluminis cujus nomen est In the ancient
Church-record (as set down by Mr. Somner in his Antiquities of (...) I find it
thus: Eadbriht Re^edit Ecclesiae Christi in Darobernia ^^pturam piscium in
Lamhethe, and alia quaedam Ecclesiae de Liminge, tempore Cuthberhti
Archiepiscopi.
Limeueia etc. i.e. the taking or catching of fish to be had in the mouth of
the river, which is named Limene etc. In a Charter or Grant of Egbert, the
West Saxon King, and first English Saxon Monarch, and Athulf or Ethelwulf his
son to one Goding in the year 820. it thus again occurs: Duo ar atra in loco
qui dicitur Anglicis Werehornas, in paludosis locis; and empta est pro M
solidis nummorum. Et haec sunt territoria: On (...), i. e. Ex Orientali part
porrigit Austrum versus, ultra Limenae fluvium usque ad Australium Saxonum
limitem, i.e. Two plough-lands in a place in English called Werehorns, amongst
the fenns, and cost M. shillings or 50l. of money: and these are the
boundaries; on the Eastpart it extends Southward over the river Limen, unto
the South-Saxon limits. In a Deed or Grant (of one In an original Charter he is
written Werhardus.
Warhard or Warnard a Priest) to the Monks of Canterbury, dated Anno 830. thus
again we meet with it: unum jugum qued jacet in australi part Limene, and ab
incolis nominatur Lambeham, pertinet autem ad Burnham, etc. i.e. One yoke of
land lying on the South Side of Limene, and of the inhabitants is called
Lambeham, but belongs to Burnham, etc.

To pass over the mention of it in our English Where the Danish army is said to
have come on Limene (...) ( Canterbury copy reads it Limenan (...)) (...)CCL.
(...). i. e. in Limeni ostium, cum CCL. navibus.
Saxon Annals Anno 893. not long after it was ( Anno sc. 895) that the same
river (that part of it at or near Romney Town) in a Grant of Plegmund the
Archbishop of Canterbury under the name of Romney occurs thus. Terram quae
vocatur Wefingmersc juxta flumen quod vocatur Rumeneia, etc. i. e. The land
called Wefingmersh, beside the river called Romney. In an old Deed sans date of
Thomas and James, sons of Kennet of Blakeburn and others, it comes into mention
thus: Totum nostrum imbrocum de Blakeburn, sive praedictus brocus sit major
sive minor, cujus broci longitudo ex australi part incipit ad pontem de
Oxenal, and ducit super aquam de Limenal usque ad piscarium de Blakeburn, and
de eadem piscaria incipit longitudo ex part Aquilonis, and ducit per wallam de
Piggbroke, i. e. All our im-brook of Blakeburn, whether the said brook be
greater or less, the length whereof on the South-part begins at Oxney-bridge
and leads over the water of Limene, unto the fishing place of Blakeburn; and
from thence begins the length of it on the north-part, and leads by the wall of
Piggbrook, etc. So much, and enough of the first.

Passing from which to the second research or Proposition, 2 Proposition. That
Limene and Romney- river ran out at Romney.
that the river or water so called, Limene and Romney, or (as more of late)
Rother ran to Romney, and there by its mouth or outlet called (as in that old
Charter of King Eadbriht) Limen- mouth, emptying it self into the sea, gave
beginning and occasion to the Port or Haven there. For this, if Verum regnante
Edw. 1. cum Oceanus ventorum violentia exasperatus, hunc tractum operuisset,
lateque hominum, pecorum, adificiordmque stragem dedisser; and Promhil viculo
frequenti possundato, etiam Rother, qui hic prius se in Oceanum exe^eravit
alveo em^vit, ostiumque obstruxit, novo in more ^ditu compendio per Rhiam
aperto. Camd. Britain.
Mr. Camden's testimony, chiefly grounded (I suppose) on the inhabitants
tradition of his time, be not full satisfaction, who says, that About the year
1287.
in the reign of Edward the first, the sea raging with violence of winds,
overflowed this tract and made pitiful waste of people, of cattle, and of
houses in every place, as having quite drowned Promhill, a pretty Town well
frequented, and made the Rother forsake his own channel, which here beforetime
emptied himself into the sea, and stopped his mouth, opening a new and nearer
may to pass into the sea by Rhie; so as by little and little he forsook this
Town, etc. If this (I say) be not sufficient, let me add, that as New-Romney is
to this day a Port, and one of those five, which lying on the East and South
seacoast of England, are called the Cinque Ports, so doubtless has it been
from the first. It was sometime ( Mr. Lambard speaks all this of Old Romney,
and expressly tells the reader in the beginning: as touching the latter (
New-Romney) I mind not to speak, having not hitherto found either in record or
history any thing pertaining thereunto.
says Mr. Lambard) a good sure and commodious Haven, where many vessels used
to lie at road. For This account of Goodwy^ is very distinctly delivered in the
Saxon Ann^ls, from whence Ho^y of Huntingdon transcribed.
Henry the Archdeacon of Huntingdon, makes report, that at such time as
Goodwyn Earl of Kent and his sons were exiled the Realm, they armed vessels to
the sea, and sought by disturbing the quiet of the people to compel the King to
their revocation. And therefore, among A full account whereof see in the
Saxon-Annals, ad An. 1052.
sundry other harms that they did on the coast of this shire, they entered the
Haven at Romney, and led away all such ships as they found in the Harbor there.

In the Conquerour's expedition for the Conquest of England, some of his
company by mistake it seems landed, or were put a shore at Romney, and were
rudely and barbarously treated by the inhabitants hereof; and of the revenge
upon them taken by the Conqueror after his victory, and settling his affairs
at Hasting, his Chaplain Gesta Guil. Ducis, p. 204.
Pictaviensis, and after him Hist. Eccl. Lib. 3. An. 1066.
Ordericus Vitalis, gives us this account. Humatis autem suis, dispositaque
custodia, Hastingas cum strenuo Praefecto Romanarium (says the former, for
Romaneium, as it is in the latter) accedens, quam placuit paenam exegit pro
clade suorum, quos illuc errore appulsos fera gens adorta praelio cum utriusque
partis maximo detrimento fuderat.

This I take it is the Port in Dooms-day-book called Lamport, Romney in
dooms-day-book called Lamport.
and the hundred wherein it lay, the hundred of Lamport. In Lamport, hundred (
so that book) Robertus de Romenel tenet de Archiepisc. Lamport: pro 1 solino
and dimid. se defendit. Ad hoc manerium pertinent 21 Burgenses qui sunt in
Romenel, de quibus habet Archiep. 3 forisfacturas, latrocinia, pacem fractam,
foristellum. Rex vero habet omne servitium ab eis, and ipsi habent omnes
consuetudines, and alias forisfacturas pro servitio maris, ^ sunt in manu
Regis. Thus in the account of the lands and possessions of the Archbishops
Knights: afterward in that of the Bishop of Bayon thus. In Lamport hund.
Robertus de Romenel tenet de Episcopo al. Offetane, says Somner in the margin
of the original MS.
Affetane, pro I solino se defendit. Idem Robertus habet 50 Burgenses in burgo
de Romenel, and de eis habet Rex omne servitium, and sunt quieti pro servitio
maris ab omni consuetudine praeter latrocinium, pacem infractam, and Otherwise
written faristel; as also forstall, for stallatio. The meaning and definition
of it is given us by the history published under the name of Brompton, amongst
the X Scriptores, p. 957. Forstal est coactio vel obsistentia in regia strata
facta. It Is of a Saxon original, from (...) ante, or (...) contra, and (...) or
(...) (...), status; an intercepting such things as were designed for the
market, before they came to public sale, with an intent to gain by them. And
such a person (as we learn from a law of Edw. 1.) was looked upon as patria
publicus inimicus ^ pauperum depressor. Vide Spelman. Glossar. in voce (...)
(...).
foristel. It was since, and is at this day altered into Langport, and
containing the Towns of St. Nicholas, ctc. And as there was and is a double
Romney, the old and the new; so in the 14th. year of Edward the 2d, I read of
an old and a new Langport. By the way, What Mr. Lambard quotes out of
Dooms-day-book concerning Romney, is this: I^ was of the possession of one
Robert Rumney, and (...) of Odo ( then Bishop of Baleux, Earl of Kent, and
brother to K. William the Conqueror) i^ the which time the same Robert had
thirteen Burgesses, who for their service at the sea were acquitted of all
actions and customs of charge, except felony, breach of the peace and
forestalling. Which account differs from Dooms-day-book, 1 In the name of the
possessor, which is in Doomsday Rome^el. 2 The number of Burgesses, in
Doomsday 21. 3 The actions and customs of charge; besides these three, is
reckoned in Doomsday Forisfactura, some heinous crimes for which a man
forfeited his estate, liberty, life, etc. Some will have it derived from foris,
and so extend it to nothing but the loss of liberty, or estate, which (as
Spelman observes) by such a crime sibi extra^eum facit. But Somner in his
Glossary derives it from the Saxon (...) and facio; which is in effect
confirmed by the Learned Dr. Hickes, when he lays down this rule in his
Saxon-Grammar, p. 85. (...) (...) dat composito significationem, quae simplicis
significationem pessundat, and in malum sensum vertit. o that forisfacere is
nothing but male, prave facere. Vide Spelmanni. and Somneri Glossar. in hanc
vocem.
Mr. Lambard in his Perambulation represents the state of this place otherwise
than Dooms-day-book does, whom the Reader may please hereby to correct
accordingly. The river Limene turned from Romney another way.


Now as all Seaports or Havens have, at least first had (what since sometime,
as here, is discontinued and diverted) a river, stream, or course of fresh
water falling into them for their better keeping open, and to prevent their
obstruction and choking by sands, beach, slime, or other like suffocating
matter, without which it cannot be, or be properly called a Port: so doubtless
did this Port or Haven sometime participate of this commodity and property, and
had a river, a fresh, a current running to it, and there discharging or
shedding it self into the sea; and the same so called (from the several places
by which it had it is passage) Rother, Limen, and Romney. For albeit the Rother
(for that only is the now remaining name, though some call it Appledore-water)
cuts or falls many miles short of Romney-Port, (after it is once gotten to
Appledore, wheeling about and running into that arm of the sea or aestuary
insinuating into the land by, what from that or some other current became so
called, Rye yet had it heretofore a direct and foreright continued current and
passage as to Appledore, so from thence to Romney, the old and new: on the
West Side whereof meeting with the aestuary, it presently disembogued and fell
into the sea, The river Limene had a wide mouth.
which in elder times with so large and wide a mouth flowed up within the land
there, that in the year 774. Lyd, both to the Northern and Eastern bounds
thereof, is said to border on the sea. Witness the Charter of K. Offa of that
Manor, given to Otherwise called in our English Histories Iea^bryht, Ianberht,
Eanbriht, Ianbyrht, Lanberht, Lanbyrht. He was made Archbishop in 763 and died
in 790.
Ianibert the then Archbishop, of this tenor. In nomine Jesus salvatoris
mundi, etc. Ego Offa Rex totius Anglorum patriae, dabo and concedo Janibert
Archiepiscopo ad Ecclesiam Christi, aliquam partem terrae, trium aratrorum,
quod Cantianite dicitur three From the Saxon rulh aratrum, a plough.
sulinge, in occidentali part regionis quae dicitur Mersware ubi nominatur ad
Lyden: and hujus terrae sunt haec territoria: Mare in Orient, in Aquilone, and
ab Austro terra Regis Edwy -- nominant Deugemere usque This Lapis appositus in
ultimo terrae, is at this day called Stone-end in the south part of Kent.
ad lapidem appositum in ultimo terrae, and in Occidente and Aquilone confinia
regni ad Bleechinge. Et hoc praedictum donum,etc.

From whence clear enough it is that the sea with a large and spacious inlet,
arm, and aestuary, in those days flowed in between Lyd and Romney, and was
there met with the river Limen, which of necessity must have a very large
capacious mouth, or bosom to receive, as it did, See an account of this in the
Saxon Chronicle, An. 893.
a Fleet of 250 sail, the number of those Danish pirates being no less, who in
the year 893 put in here, and towing up their vessels four miles within the
land, even as far as to the Weald (which The Saxon Annals tell us, it was longa
ab Orient ad Occidentem centum and vigin^i milliaria ad minimum, and triginta
milliaria lata.
then extended Eastward unto Appledore) there cast anchor, and destroying a
fort or castle, as old and imperfect as ill defended, built a new one and kept
their rendezvous there.

For I can easily believe that however Appledore be distanced from Romney about
six miles, yet so large a bosom had that arm or aestuary, and so high up into
the land the sea then flowed, (happily so high as that place in Romney-Custumal
written about Edw. 3d's. time, called Readhill, whither the Franchise from the
entrance of the haven is said to reach) that Appledore was not above four miles
from the river's mouth: some vestigia and remains whereof, that trench of large
extent both for length and breadth between Appledore and Romney along the wall,
(from thence called the Ree-wall) by the diversion of the current at this day
lying dry and converted to pasturage, (if it be not all one with that hereunder
mentioned, passed over by the King to the Archbishop and others) may seem to
be: over which (I take it) there sometime was a passage between Romney-marsh
and Walland-marsh, by that bridge which in these latter days is (as the hundred
wherein it lay) called Allowesbridge, for what of old was called Alolvesbridge,
so named happily from some Lord or great person, who (whether he or some other
that gave name to that Bocton called Aloof for Alolfe an Earl so called, whence
the place of old is otherwise termed Earl Bocton, I cannot say) was known by
the Christian name Alolfe, or the like.

Observable here it is to our purpose, Romney the place of Limene-mouth, from
Ead^rojt's Charter.
that amongst the places mentioned in that Grant or Charter of K. Eadbriht to
the Church of Canterbury, (without which the Archbishop of old had had no
interest in Romney) some if not all agree and suit to Romney for the place of
Limen-mouth, as that of the situation of St. Martin's Oratory, the Fishermen's
houses, the Ripe, Bishop's-wike, etc. The first of which, as it was in our
forefather's days to be found in Romney-Town, being one of the Parish Churches
there, (St. Nicholas being the other;) so those houses or some of them might
probably enough be the same which in Dooms-day-book are said to be 21 Burgenses
belonging to Lamport; which Port in those days belonged to the Archbishop, and
as his of right, was (with other things) by him recovered from some
Norman-usurpers in or by that Placitum or pleading at I think it is generally
called Pinenden; it was held An. 1072.
Pinedene, published by the most learned Seldom. Upon this account it was (the
Archbishop's peculiar interest there) that Archbishop Becket in the year 1164.
intending a The cause whereof see in Lambard's Perambulation, p. 209.
secret escape and departure out of England, made choice of this Port to put to
sea. But to proceed to the other places mentioned in that most ancient Charter:
not far from hence (I take it) lay the Marsh called (from the Archbishop as
the owner) i. e. Episcopi vicus; a pic vicus, sinus, castellum.
Bishop's-wike; whilst the Ripe (though cleared of the wood, if ever it were
wood) yet remains by that name at Lyd. In an old Accompt-Roll of the
Archbishop's Mannours sans date, the Accomptant of Oxency craves this
allowance. Oxenal. In conducendis batellis ad ducendum 105 Summa est mensura
contineus 8 modios Londonienses, says Spelman. It Is primarily derived from the
Greek (...), onus jumen^i sarcinarii; thence sauma and summa signify a horse
load of any thing, and summarius, saumarius, or somarius denote the
carriage-horse, or (what we now call him) a Sumpter-horse. Vide Spelmanni
Glossarium. Somneri Glossar* ac Vossium in voce Saginarius.
summas avenae usque Rumenal missas ad Liminge, 5s. 9d. Whence it appears that
there was then a channel leading down to Romney from Oxeney: not to urge any
thing from what we find in that Ordinance of John Lovetot and Henry of
Apuldrefeild made Anno 16 Edw. 1. and extant in that little Treatise called the
Charter of Romney-marsh, where order being taken for the security and defense
of that Western part of the Marsh, at this day called Walland-marsh, lying
westward of Romney-channel (the Eastern part, or that on the other part of the
channel, called Romney-marsh, and no more, being formerly provided for by the
Ordinance of Henry of Bath and his associates, Nicholas of Handly, and Alured
of Dew, in the 24th. year of Henry the third) we have that part of the
Ordinance ushered in with this Preamble, Et quia etc. i. e. And because before
that time in this Marsh of Romenal beyond the course of the water of that Port
running from the Snergate toward Romenhal, on the west-part of the same Port
as far as to the County of Sussex, there had not been any certain law of the
Marsh ordained, nor used otherwise than at the will of those who had lands in
the same, etc. Not (I say) to insist on this, because it brings the
watercourse but from Snergate not from Appledore; let us now in the third and
last place, having brought the Channel to Romney, show (if we can) when it
forsook it, when and how it came to be diverted; and whither; which is the
third Proposition.

For forsaken it has, ^ Proposition. When and how Romney^river ceased, and
came to be diverted; and whither.
insomuch as there is neither Haven, Harbor or Channel, neither inlet nor
outlet near it, but left quite dry it is and destitute both of salt and fresh
water. And indeed so long it has been thus, that without some difficulty the
certain time is not retrievable: nor may we think it came to pass all at once,
but at times and by degrees, which we shall track and trace out as well as we
can.

Gaufridus, the Prior of Christ-church Canterb. in Henry the first's time with
his Covent, made and passed many grants of Land at Appledore Of Grants in
Gavelkind, see Somner's Treatise upon that subject, published 1660. p. 38.
in Gavelkind, with this covenant and tie upon the Tenants; Et debent wallas
custodire and defendere contra friscam and salsam, and, quoties opus fuerit,
eas reparare and firmas facere secundum legem and consuetudinem marisci, etc.
setting them but at small rents in respect hereof. But I shall not insist on
this and many such like any further, than to note that the sea did much infest
and endanger those parts with its aestuations and irruptions, in those days.
Witness this demand in our Accompt-Roll of the Archbishop's Manor of
Aldington, about the year 1236. In expensa Iohannis de Watton and Persona de
Aldington per tres dies apud Rumenal and Winchelse and Apelder, una cum
seneschallo, ad vidend. salvationem patriae and marisci contra inundationem
maris, 41s. 4d. This inundation was the same (I take it) with that mentioned of
both the Matthew Paris thus describes it: In crastino vero beati Martini, and
per octavas ipsius, vento validissimo, associato tumultu, quasi tonitruo,
inundaverurt fluctus maris, metas solitas transeuntes, ita, quod in confinio
ipsius maris, and in marisco, ut pote apud Wisebiche and locis consimilibus,
naviculae, pecora, nec non and hominum maxima periit multitudo. The like
account Matthew Westminster gives of the great devastations caused by the
overflowings of the sea and rivers this year.
Matthews (Paris and Westminster) in that year. The same Matthew Paris relating
the hideous, uncouth, violent rage and aestuation of the sea in the year 1250.
and the inundations consequent, reports thus. Apud Winchelsey etc. At
Winchelsey, above 300. houses with some Churches, by the seas violence were
overturned. In an ancient French Chronicle, sometime belonging to the Church of
Canterbury, and written by a Monk of the place in Edw. 2d's days, which I light
on in Sir Simon Dews his Library, I read thus. And the same year (1286) on the
second of the nones of February, the sea in the Isle of Thanet rose or swelled
so high, and in the marsh of Romenal, that it brake all the walls, and drowned
all the grounds: so that from the great wall of Appledore as far as Winchelsey,
toward the South and the West, all the land lay under water lost. Mr. Camden
See Mr. Camder's own words, as quoted in the notes, p. 44. per.
(I suppose) intends the same inundation when he says, that in the reign of
Edw. 1. the sea raging with the violence of winds, overflowed this tract, and
made pitiful waste of people, cattle, and of houses, in every place, as having
quite drowned Promhill, a pretty Town well frequented: and that it also made
the Rother forsake his old Channel, which here beforetime emptied himself into
the sea, and stopped his mouth, opening a new and nearer way for him to pass
into the sea by Rhie. Hence followed that Ordinance of John of Lovetot and his
associates the very next year, 16. Edw. 1. (whereof before) by the King's writ,
to whom sent and premised, they are assigned ad supervidendum Wallas, etc. i.
e. to view the walls and ditches upon the seacoasts and places adjacent within
the County of Kent, in diverse places then broken through, by the violence of
the sea, etc. To proceed, Perambulation of Kent, p. 209.
Mr. Lambard tells us of a strange tempest that threw down many steeples and
trees, and above 300 mills, and housings there, in the 8th year of Edw. 3d.
about the year of Christ 1334. Now lay to all these what occurs in a Grant or
Letters Patents from K. Edw. 3d. in the 11th. year of his reign, passing over
to the then Archbishop, the Prior, and Covent of Christ-church, and Margaret
de Basings, an old trench lying betwixt Appledore and Romney, with license at
their pleasure to obstruct, dam, and stop it up, as by reason of the sands, and
other imbelched, obstructive matter, made and become useless and unserviceable,
and so having then continued for 30 years past and upwards: lay all this, I
say, together, and then it will be credible enough that the old trench was lost
and disused upon that inundation about the year 1287. and the new one made and
begotten by that other about the year 1334. being the same that is mentioned in
the same Ordinance of Io. de Lovetot, and his Associates.

Before we proceed, take here the Grant it self in it is own words as I met with
it in the Archives of that Church of Canterbury, and thus there entitled.
Licentia Dni. Regis super quadam antiqua trenchea apud Apulder habenda Dno.
Archiepiscopo, Priori, and Conventui Ecclesiae Christi Cantuar. ac Dnae.
Margaretae de Passele, prout eisdem melius visum fuerit esse expediens, Anno
regni ejus 11. Edwardus Dei gratia, The Grant is transcribed no farther in Mr.
Somner's original MS.
etc.

Here we find that by the seas impetuosity and rage, the old ^rench was lost,
and a new one made and succeeded in the room; both the old when in being, and
the new afterward from Appledore to Romney; the time we have also both of the
one and the other's beginning. And now as on the one hand some violent
irruptions of the sea by the parts of Rye and Winchelsea, had made way for the
Rother's mingling her waters with that aestuary, and the breaking off it is
wonted course by Appledore and Romney, so the inlet, creek, or haven at
Romney, wanting the river's wonted help to scour and keep it open, what with
that and the working of the sea still casting up and closing it with sands and
beach, became in time obstructed, and for many ages has been so quite dammed
up, that the sea now lies off at a great distance and remoteness from the Town.
And thus far of those three Propositions.

To return now to our Port Lemanis, The various names of the inhabitants of the
Marshes.
whereof I have not more to say than that as the inhabitants of this Marish
Country, were of the English Saxons called (...) i. e. viri palustres,
marsh-men or fen-men, I think our Historians are generally mistaken in this and
such like passages. For translating from the Saxon, which they did not well
understand, and finding there on (...), etc. presently concluded that these
were certainly the names of the Countries, whereas no doubt they are the
inhabitants of such places. Which as it holds in all, so especially in such as
end in (...), since the Saxon (...) signifies incolae, habitatores, etc. But
when the Saxons mention the name of any Country, they express it generally by
the genitive case plural of the possessive, and (...) Merciorum terra; (...)
Northymbrorum terra.
and the Region it self (...) as in Ethelwerd, Anno 795. and Mersware as in
King Offa's Page 50.
fore-recited Charter or Grant of Lyd to the Archbishop, and Merseware as
Hoveden, It Is certainly a mistake of the press for Merscware.
if rightly printed, Anno 838. so were the same inhabitants also called
Limware, and the whole Lath (since and to this day called Shipway) as in
Doomsday-book often, Limwarebest, and Limeware-leth, and the like; which if
derivative from the Greek word (...), Limware is of the same sense and
signification As (...) in the Greek, so (...) in the Saxon signifies palus.
with that other Merscware. It (the Port) was also called Romeney, Rumeney, and
sometime Rumenal, by the same misrule that Oxney, Graveney, Pevensey, etc. are
of old called Oxenel, Gravenel, Pevensel, etc. The eldest mention that I find
of Romney, is in Vid. supra p. 43.
that Grant or Charter of Plegmund the Archbishop, in the year 895.

Whence that name might come various also are the conjectures. The Etymon of
Romney.
Quis quaeso hodie credat, magnam partem illius prati seu planiciei, nobis nunc
Rumnesis marshii, id est, Romani maris, nomine dictae, fuisse quondam altum
pelagus and mare velivolum. Twini Comment. de rebus Albion. p. 31.
Some latin it Romanum mare, as if it were sea in the Romans time. Indeed much
more of it formerly than at present has been under water as overflowed by the
sea; whence I read of Archbishop Becket's, Baldwin's, Boniface's, and Peckham's
Innings; to which I may add what bears the name to this day of Elderton's
Innings. Wibort a Prior, and his Covent of Christ-church Canterbury, near upon
500. years since, grant to Baldwyn Scadewey and his heirs, as much lands at
Mistelham in the Marish (about Ebeny I take it) as he could inn at his own
cost against the sea, gratis for the two first years, and at 4d. the acre per
annum afterward. Amongst whom is Mr. Lambard, Perambulat. p. 208.
Others perhaps fetch it from the Saxon Rumen-ea the large water or watery
place; to which I subscribe: though some perhaps meeting with the Tyber's
ancient name of Rumon (whereof Marlianus in his Topography of Rome) and the
etymology of it from rumino, quasi ripas ruminans and exedens, may fancy the
same etymology for this of Romney, especially considering how, if not the
river, yet the sea, impatient of restraint within the channel of our narrow
seas, all along this coast, has been and is very apt to eat away the shore,
and either breaking through, or swelling over the banks and walls, to overwhelm
and drown much of the level, as the inhabitants and owners of land there find
by woeful and costly experience.

HAVING had so much occasion to mention Appledore, First mention of Appledore.
I may not part from hence without giving some further account both of place
and name. The first mention I find of it is in the year 893. when (as in that
forecited place of our Saxon Annals) it is called (...), Ethelwerd likewise
calls it Apoldore, Florence of Worcester Apultrea, and King Aethelred's Charter
to the Church of Canterbury, published by Spelman. Council. T. 1. p. 505. (...).
Ethelwerd recounting the same story calls it (if not mis-printed) a Poldre,
for Atpoldre or Apledore, according as it is also named in a Charter or Grant
of it to Christ-church by one Aedsi a Priest becoming a Monk there, with the
consent of his Master King Cnute and his Queen, in the year 1032. where also it
is written Apeldre, and the like before in the Charter or privilege of K.
Ethelred about the year 1006. and in Doomsday-book, where said it is to lie in
Limewareleth or the Lath of the men of Limene or Lime, the same which is since
( Page 62.
as was said) called Shipway. Since which time undoubtedly there has been some
alteration of the Laths, and other divisions of our County; for as there
Niwenden also is said to be in the same Lath, so both it and Appledore, both in
that elder record of Knight's-fees of Henry 3d. or Edw. 1's. time, and in that
latter of the 13. of Queen Elizabeth, exemplified by Mr. Lambard, are said to
be in the Lath of Scray or Sherwinhope (as called at this day) but of old, as
in Doomsday-book Wimare-lest, i.e. the Lath of the men of Wye, and are
accordingly placed by Mr. Kilburne in his Alphabetical Kentish tables, and his
Survey.

The place, the soil is moorish, boggy, and fenny, Derivation of Appledore.
such as our Ancestors here at home, with some of their neighbors abroad, have
usually called Polder; (we have a place near Canterbury lying by the river's
side of that name, and another of a moorish situation at Herbaldown) a word of
Kilianus in his Teutonick Dictionary, turned palus marina, pratum littorale,
ager qui e fluvio out mare eductus, aggeribus obsepitur, i.e. a marish fenn, a
meadow by the shore side, a field drained or gained from a river or the sea,
and enclosed with banks. To all which qualities and properties, our Appledore
fully answers, being a kind of mere bogg or quagmire, bordering on the water,
and often overlaid of it. Witness the great innings, securing, and improving of
it at several times, by the care and at the charge of the Church of Canterbury,
whereof in their accounts and other records. Whilst therefore Appledore,
corruptly, from the Saxon Apul^neo; in Latin maelus, that is, an Appletree,
says Lambard, Perambulat. p. 205. It Is probable Florence of Worcester was of
the same opinion, because he writes it Apultr^a.
others fetch it (without all probability in my apprehension) from the Saxon
(...) malus, pomus, an Appletree, (a plant for which the soil is nothing
proper, nor scarce for any other) I rather would derive it from that other name
Polder to which (...) being ( The general way of naming places in the Saxon
times was prefixing the (...), apud to the name of some thing remarkable in the
place. But the succeeding Monks, who translated their records, or else those
who published their translations, have bred some confusion in them by joining
the two words, and very often for the easier pronuntiation, leaving out the
(...)* For I believe those who writ Annals, did not set down the names of
places exactly as they found them in the Author from whence they took their
matter; but as they were commonly called by the age wherein they lived. An
argument whereof is this, that the nearer our own age they come, the more we
find them melted and contracted.
as in the names of most places) prefixed by the Saxons, it was originally
called (...), and in process of time (wearing out the (...)) (...), as since
and at present more corruptly Appledore; from their seat or abode at or about
which place the families name of Ap^ldorfield.

Some perhaps may fancy a Latin derivation of the name from appello, Appledore
never a Haven.
to arrive or land, and hence probably it is that some do hold the place to
have been sometime a Haven or sea-town, or Port, and consequently a landing
place, or a place of ships arrival. But to this I first answer, that the name
is not found until the Saxon times, and they never used to borrow or be
beholding to the Latin for any, whether local or other name. Next, although now
and of latter years, that arm or aestuary of the sea flowing in by Winchelsea
and Rye, reach up as high as Appledore-town, yet questionless of old it did not
so; so long ago at least, as there is mention made of Appledore, which
out-dates the first institution and original of the Ports, referred at the
furthest no higher up than Edward the Confessor's time, at what time had it
been since and at this present a maritime place, and used as an Harbor or
Haven-town, it could not in all probability have escaped the being taken in as
a limb or member at least, either as Winchelsey and Rye of Hastings, or as Lyd
and Promhill of Romney, or some other of the Ports. But no marvel that it is
not, it being more than likely, that till some such great flood or inundation
Page 45.
as that spoken of before, happening in the year 1287. or some other about the
same time, that aestuary, although beginning somewhat early to put fair for it,
(witness that Charter of Prior Wibert in Henry the first's time, providing for
defense against the sea's encroachment) was not of so far and large extent into
the land: but then or about that time, by the violence of that inundation
rolling and reaching up as far as Appledore, it not only kept its ground, but
laying hands on the Rother in her wonted course by those parts to Romney, and
without regard to poor Romney's detriment and damage, by the loss of so
advantageous a friend both to Town and Haven (by no better title than that of a
plain rape) keeps possession of her, enforcing her along in the same channel
(or torrent rather) with her by Gilford (so called from the gill, gulel,
Derivation of G^lford and Winchelsey.
or rivulet there of old easily fordable) to (what in all likelihood ows it is
name to that Ree or channel) Rye, and so to ( Twine in his Comment de rebus
Albion. p. 25. orroneously imagines that the true name of it is Windchelseum;
olim (so he adds) vento, frigori, and ponto obnoxium, unde ei nomen obvenit.
what by its name betokens a waterish place seated in a corner, as old
Winchelsey was, lying at the corner of Kent and Sussex) Winchelsea: making ever
now and then bracks and breaches by the way, to the prejudice of the level or
low grounds near adjacent. Whence (besides what we have in that little Treatise
called Ordinalia Marisci, or (for so it is entitled in English) the Charter of
Romney-marsh, Page 55.
before remembered, providing against such inundations and the damages
consequent) that Charter or The originals whereof (as Somner tells us) are
among the records of Christ-church Canterbury.
Letters Patents granted and directed to certain Knights, and other persons of
quality in the 2d. year of Henry the 5th. to empower them for the repairing
breaches past, and preventing the like for the time to come, in the parts
betwixt Rye and Odiam-bridge, whereof many other of like nature concerning
other parts of the level in Page 87.
Mr. Dugdale's History of Imbanking, etc.

But to return to Appledore; Doomsday-book showing it to be a Manor belonging
to Christ-church, and (as that which the Saxons called (...)) allotted ad cibum
monachorum, i. e. toward feeding of the Monks, or toward their provision of
sustenance, thus speaks of it. In Let^^de Limware, etc. as Page 435.
in my Antiquities. Would you see the first grant of it, with some other places
to the Church? I shall here for a close of my discourse concerning this place,
present you with a true copy of it for a There was before a specimen of this
nature hinted to, Page 20. but neither of them are set down in the original MS.
However, least the reader should be altogether disappointed, I thought fit to
give him here out of Somner's Gavelkind, p. 214. the grant of Appledore to
Christ-church, in Saxon and English, which I am confident is the same as he
refers to in this place.
second taste and specimen of the mode and manner of the donations of that age;
and the rather, that hereby you may see the vast difference between the candid
simplicity and plainness of those elder times (when conscience was accounted
the best evidence) and the serpentine subtilty of these, (justly taxed by that
eminent Lawyer and Antiquary Lib. 2. Iani Anglorum p. 70. Quam facilis and
apicibus juris soluta, videre est, domini^ fuit translatio, simul and a
perplexantium captios^ malitia, turgescentibusque membranarum fascibus and
polyptychis libera.
Mr. Seldom;) when no conveyance but in folio, when an acre of land cannot pass
without almost an acre of writing, such a voluminous deal as would in a manner,
if not serve to cover, yet if cut in thongs (as that Bull's hide wherewith the
circuit of what was hence to be called Thong or Thoang-Castle was said to be
laid out) would go near to compass it; their honest meaning of old going
further in point of security than our much writing now, whilst their plain
dealing supplied and made up what was wanting either in in matter of form or
multitude of words.

(...) (...).

Here appears in this writing how Cnut King and Aelfgife his Lady gave to
Eadsy their Priest when he turned Monk, that he might convey that land at
Apuldore as to himself most pleasing were. Then gave he it to Christ-church to
God's servants for his soul, and he it bought that of the Covent for his days
and Aedwine's with four pounds, on that contract that men deliver every year to
Christ-church three weights of cheese from that land, and three What the (...)
is, Sir Henry Spelman has told us out of the Stat. Composit. Ponderum and
mensurarum: Bind anguillarum constat ex 10. sticks, and quaelibet stick ex 25.
anguillis.
bundles of Eeles, and after his days and Aedwine's go that land into
Christ-church, with meat and with men, even as it then enriched is, for
Eadsie's soul, and he bought that land at Werhorne of the Covent for his days
and Eadwine's also with four pounds; then goes that land forth with the other
after his days and Edwine's to Christ-church with the crop that there then on
is, and that land for his days at Berwick which he obtained of his Lord Cnute
King; and he gives also those lands at Orpinton in his days for his soul to
Christ-church to God's servants for garment-land, which he bought with eighty
marks of white silver Somner in his Glossary says of the Hustingi pondus, that
it was statutum pondus commercio inserviens, ipsum scil. Standardum (ut vocaut)
Regis, (quod pondus signat originale and Canonicum, ad quod alia pondera
ejusdem speciei debent examinari, and cum eo concordare. Vide Somneri Glossar.
in voce Hustingum.
by Hustings weight, and he gives also those lands at Palstre and at Wittresham
after his days and Edwine's forth with the other to God's servants for
foster-land for his soul. This bequest he gives to the Covent on this contract
that they ever him well observe, and to him faithful be in life and after life,
and if they with any unadvisedness with him this contract shall break, then
stands it in his own power how he afterward his own dispose will. Of this is
for witness Cnute King, and Aelfgife his Lady, and Aethelnoth Archb. and
Aelfstan Abb. and the Covent at S. Austine's, and Brihtric young, and Aetheric
husbandman, and Thorth Thurkille's nephew, and Tofi, and Aelfwine priest, and
Eadwold priest, and all the King's Counselors; and this writing is threefold,
one is at Christ-church, and one at S. Augustine's, and one has Eadsy with
himself.

THE HISTORY OF THE Roman Forts in KENT.
THAT the Romans having once the supreme command in Britain, The Romans had
their Forts in Kent.
had their Forts as well as Ports in Kent, is evident enough by that Notitia
Imperii Occidentalis, that Roman Office-Book set out by Pancirollus, where we
find the names of Dubris, Lemanis, Anderida, Rutupis, and Regulbium, under that
notion. All which our* Antiquaries generally agree to be Kentish Roman
garrisons or stations. Gildas, followed by Venerable Bede, has respect hither
in that passage of his The passage here cited is not in the Epistle, but in the
Treatise entitled Historia Gildae, p. 13. Edit. Oxon.
Epistle, where giving an account of the Roman's care to provide against the
invasions and infestations of such Barbarians and Saxons, as annoyed this
maritime tract, he says, See the whole passage quoted before, p. 5.
In littore quoque Oceani ad meridiem, etc. i. e. On the Southern coast of
Britain, where the ships were, because they feared from thence the Barbarians
would make their in-rodes, they placed Towers, (watch-towers) at convenient
distances, to take from them a prospect of the Ocean.

I SHALL begin with the last, Regulbium.
Twine calls it erroneously Reculsum.
Regulbium. Hereof in that Book of Notices, where the Leiutenant of the Saxon
shore (whose office it was with those garrisons to repress the in-rodes and
depredations of the Rovers) with such as are under his command, is spoken of,
we read, that the Tribunus cohortis, etc. The Captain of the Primier band of
the Vetasians lay here in garrison. Now to prove that by this name Regulbium,
Regulbium the same with Reculver.
what we now call Reculver is intended and to be understood, will be no hard
task. For first, that so it was is the common and received opinion and verdict
of the whole College of our English Antiquaries; and that reason of Et hanc
sane suam antiquitat^m effossis Imper^i Romani nummis adhuc testatur. Camd.
Britan.
Mr. Camden rendered for his conjecture, is very plausible and satisfactory; the
often digging and turning up there of Roman Coins; which of my certain
knowledge is to this day very true and usual, who have been owner of many, as I
am still of some, pieces of old Roman coin had from hence.

The Roman tile or brick here also found, some in buildings, others by the
clift-side, where the sea has washed and eaten away the earth (as it daily
does, to the manifest endangering of the Church by it is violent encroachments)
give like evidence of the place's Roman Antiquity; whereof some are remaining
in and about that little stone cottage without the Churchyard, (of some holden
to be the remains of an old Chapel or Oratory) and others not far off. If this
give not satisfaction, let me here add that observation of the learned
Antiquary Comment upon the Itinerary, p. 41.
Mr. Burton: It is to be observed (says he) that all places ending in Chester,
fashioned in the Saxon times, arise from the ruins of the old Roman castra;
and therefore the ancient stations about the wall, the carcasses of many of
which at this day appear, are called Chesters by the country people. Very good;
(to bring this observation home) Reculver was of old in the Saxon's time, as
That Monastery was founded about the year 669. Hinc Raculf-minster etiam a
monasterin dictum fuit, cum Edredus, Edmundi senioris frater, Ecclesia Christi
Cantuaria ^onaret. Camd.
sometimes (from the Monastery there) called Raculf-minster, so likewise other
while (from that Roman castle or garrison there in former time no doubt)
Raculf-cester. As for instance, in a Charter or Grant of Eadmund, a Kentish
King, in the year 784. running thus: Ego Eadmundus, Rex Cantiae, do tibi
Wihtrede, honorabili Abb^ti, tuaeque familiae degenti in loco qui dicitur.
Raculfcester, terram 12. aratrorum, quae dicitur Sildunk, cum universis ad eum
rite pertinentibus, liberam ab omni seculari servitio, and omni regali tributo,
exceptis The Expeditio was an obligation upon the tenant to serve the Lord with
so many men, horses, etc. in war.
expeditione, etc. Nor is that parcel of evidence resulting from and couched in
the present and forepast name of the place to be slighted, especially that more
ancient name of it in the Saxon times Racul^, altered since into Raculfre and
Reculvre, and (which it now bears) Reculver; none of which but do retain a
grand smack and quantity of that Roman name Which (as Lambard thinks) is
derived from the British word Racor, signifying forward, for so (says he) it
stands toward the sea
Regulbium.

Whereabouts at Regulbium this Castrum stood, Whereabouts at Reculver the Fort
was placed.
where the place of this Roman garrison or station was, is not at this day so
clear and certain. but Burton's Comment upon the Itinerary page 41.
as it is well observed that all the Roman Colonies, Towns, Stations, or Forts
generally were set upon hills, so I suppose this might be placed on that ascent
or rising ground whereon the Monastery afterward stood, and the Church now
stands erected, within (I mean) that fair square plot of ground converted to
the Churchyard, and environing the Minster or Church, enclosed and
circumscribed with a wall of stone. The Minster, I say; for of a Royal Palace
(to which after the Roman time this Fort or station Lambard 's Perambulation,
Page 279.
is said to have received a conversion by King Ethelbert upon his withdrawing
thither from Canterbury, in favor of Augustine and his company) it became e're
long a Monastery or Abbey of the Benedictine Order, of whose founder with the
time of the foundation, thus in the English Saxon Annals, Anno DCLXIX. (...) i.
e. This year (669) King Egbert gave to Bassa Priest, Raculf, whereon to build a
Monastery.

From thenceforth the place became called Raculf-minster, Regulbium why called
Raculf-minster.
and was at first governed by an Abbot, Brightwald the 8th. Archbishop of
Canterbury, from being Abbot there (as Venerable Bede has told us) was He was
made Archbishop, An 696. Died, An. 731.
preferred to the Archbishopric. This Abbey or Minster, with its whole
revenue, was afterward, anno 949. by King Eadred made and granted over to
Christ-church, as Page 216.
in my Antiquities, and in the first part of the Monasticon, p. 86. where the
Grant or Deed it self is at large recited, with the bounds and extent of the
sight and circuit, reaching over the water into Thanet, and laying claim to
four The plough-yard, I take for granted, is the same with plough-land, (for
(...) in Saxon is terra,) and in many ancient Charters, especially belonging to
Kent, is termed Sulinga, from (...), aratrum. It may be desin'd in general, a
quantity of ground that one plough could till yearly, but the compass,
according to the nature of the ground, and custom of the place, seems to have
been different.
plough-yards there. The Monastery nevertheless (it seems) continued, but with
an alteration in the Governor's title from that of Abbot to Dean, as will also
appear by Page 424* where is an original Grant of Agelnoth's (made Archbishop
about the year 1020) giving to Alfwold and Aedred L. agros, belonging to
Raculf-minster, by the consent Givehardi, Decani ejusdem Ecclesi^.
my Antiquities from a Charter not many years antedating the Norman Conquest;
by what time (it seems) it is Monastic condition ceased, being changed into
that of a Manor (as it still is) of the Archbishop's, in which state and
notion we meet with it thus described in Doomsday-Book: Raculf est manerium
Archiepiscopi, and in T. R. E. se defendebat pro. VIII. sull. and est
appretiatum XL. and II. Lib. and V. sol. tres minutes minus. I shall close
concerning Reculver with that account given of the place by Leland, in Mr.
Philpott's Villare Cantianum. The account is not set down in the original, but
in Philpott, p. 278. I find this description of the place.
The old buildings of the Abbey Church continues, (says he) having two goodly
spiring steeples. In the entering into the Quire is one of the fairest and most
ancient Crosses that ever I saw, nine foot in height; it stands like a fair
column. The basis is a great stone, it is not wrought: the second stone being
round, has curiously wrought and painted the image of our Savior Christ,
Peter, Paul, John and James: Christ says, Ego sum Alpha and Omega. Peter says
Tu es Christus filius Dei vivi. The sayings of the other three were painted
majusculis literis Romany, but now obliterated. The second stone is of the
Passion. The third stone contains the twelve Apostles. The fourth has the
image of our Savior hanging and fastened with four nails, and sub pedibus
sustentaculum: the highest part of the Pillar has the figure of a Cross. In
the Church is a very ancient Book of the Evangelies, in majusculis literis
Romany; and in the borders thereof is a Crystal stone thus inscribed, Claudia
Alepiccus. In the North-side of the Church is the figure of a Bishop painted
under an arch. In digging about the Church they find old buckles and rings. The
whole print of the Monastery appears by the old wall; and the Vicarage was made
of the ruins of the Monastery. There is a neglected Chapel out of the
Churchyard, where some say was a Parish Church before the Abbey was suppressed
and given to the Archbishop of Canterbury.

And yet to do the place right, Dignity of the Church and Rector of Reculver.
for antiquitie's sake, I cannot leave Reculver, until I have given some
further account of the dignity of the Church there, the Parson or Rector
whereof, when in being, and when petit Ecclesiastical jurisdictions under
foreign Commissaries (as they called them) was in fashion, now 300. years ago
and upwards; had the same jurisdiction within his own Parish and Chappelries
annexed, as afterward and at this day the Commissary of Canterbury exercises
there. I have seen Commissions to this purpose to the Rector there for the time
being, both from the Archbishop sede plena, and from the Prior and Covent sede
vacant. And it was indeed a common practice with it and such other exempt
Churches, as (like it) were Mother-Churches in the Diocese in those days. When,
why, and how this course and custom ceased, may be found Page 354. He there
sets down an original paper, entitled Revocatio Iurisdictionis Ecclesiarum
exemptarum, da^ed An. 1317. The cause of this revocation, was to advance the
dignity of the Commissaryship, then erected.
in my Antiquities. So much for the Rector.

Now for his Church; it was and is a Mother Church, upon which of old depended
four Chapels of ease, Hoth, Hearn, and in Thanet, St. Nicholas and All Saints.
Upon the three last of which, for the Mother-Churche is greater honor and
dignity, or in signum subjectionis, (as the instrument runs) an annual pension
to the Vicar of Reculver, upon the founding of that, with those other Vicarages
of Hearn and St. Nicholas, was imposed; the Vicar of of St. Nicholas and
All Saints being charged with 3l. 3s. 4d. per annum, and the other of Hearn
with 40s. per annum. And as the Vicars of these dependant or annexed Chapels
were under this charge and burden to him of the superior or Mother Church, so
the Parishioners and people of those Chappelries, however gratified and
accommodated with Chapels of ease for lessening their trouble, by shortning
their way to Church, whether for divine service in their life time, or
interment after death; yet (as the law in that case requires, where no
privilege or discharge from it is indulged at or by the first foundation or
following prescription) where it seems left as liable and subject to the repair
of the Mother Church of Reculver, as the peculiar and proper inhabitants of the
place, and themselves, before the Chapels erected by laws, were: a thing
controverted between them of Hearn and Reculver, in Archbishop Stratford's
days, who after ^cognizance taken of the cause and audience of all parties,
passed a decree in the year 1 335. (which I have seen under seal, whereof I
have a copy by me) in behalf of the Reculverians, condemning and adjudging
those of Hearn to the repair of the Mother Church. Much contest and dispute
hereabouts have happened afterward between the succeeding inhabitants, until by
a decree (which as I remember I have seen) of Archbishop Warham, in Henry the
eighth's days, the difference was, by and with the consent of all parties, thus
finally composed: That the people of each Chapel (Hearn and St. Nicholas)
should redeem the burden of repairs with the payment of a certain moderate
annual stipend or pension in money, payable at a certain set day in the year,
but with this Proviso, that if they kept not their day, but overslipt it, they
were then laid open, and exposed to the law, and must fall under as full an
obligation to the repairs of the Mother Church, as if that decree had never
been. At which pass (I take it) the matter now stands, and so is like to do,
unless any default of payment chance to alter it.

PASSING now from Reculver; Rutupium.
the next to this of all the Kentish Roman Forts, Stations, or Garrisons, was
Rutupium; whereof Vide supra page 2. and qu^ sequuntur.
before so largely and fully in my discourse of the Roman Port so called, that
I scarce know what to add, except (in observance of Comment upon the Itinerary,
page 41.
Mr. Burton's double direction, to enquire in such cases for a hilly situation,
and for that note and badge of what had been a Roman fortress, Chester) to note
first, that Richborough (where I have placed this Fort) has an high an eminent
situation, i. e. upon an hill, whereof the present name from good antiquity
enjoyed, takes notice, Richberge, Ratisburge and Richborough; the latter part
whereof betokens an hill, whether natural, or cast up by hand, as probably
this was; all the ground on each hand of the place for a good distance, being
low, plain, and part of a great level, void of all advantage for a Specula or
Watchtower, a place of prospect. Next, (or what is secondly observable) that
it participated with Reculver in the composition of the name, as ending
heretofore in Chester, being (as Venerable Bede acquaints us) vulgarly called,
(and not corruptly, by his favor, if we apply it to the Fort, not to the Port)
Reptacester. This is all I thought to have spoken of this Fort; but since I
wrote this, meeting with a The description is not quoted in the original MS.
but in Mr. Philpoit's Villare Cantianum, Page 53. it is set down as here you
see it.
relation of Leland's concerning the face and state of the place in the 30th.
year of Henry the eighth, I cannot but impart it; and the rather because I find
some confirmation from it concerning the quondam existence of a Parish Church
within the walls of it, as I have Vide supra, page 6.
hinted in my discourse of the Port. The site of the old Town or Castle (says
Leland) is wonderful fair upon a hill, the walls which remain there yet be in
compass about almost as much as the Tower of London; they have been very high,
thick, strong, and well embattled; the matter of them is flint, mavelous and
long bricks, both whole and red, of the British fashion: the cement was made of
the sea and small pebble. There is great likelihood that the goodly hill about
the Castle and especially toward Sandwich, has been well inhabited, corn grows
there in mavelous plenty; and in going to plough, there has been time out of
mind, and now is, found more Antiquities of Roman money, than in any place else
of England.

HAVING taken leave of Rutupium, Dubris.
Richborough; our next remove is to Dubris or Dover: where although we find a
Castle, and such a Castle too as That it was looked upon as a place of very
considerable importance, is plain from that passage in Knyghton, concerning
Lewis the 8th. of France. It seems he came over to assist the Barons against K.
John, and sending back an account of his progress, his Father demanded of the
messengers, Ubi filius ejus esset in Anglia? Responderunt, (so the Historian
goes on) Apud Stanfordiam. Et ille; Nunquid habet castrum Doverni^; At illi,
Non. Et intulit Rex, Per brachium sancti Iacobi non habet filius men's unum
terr^ pedem in Anglia, As if all the d^vastations they had made in other parts
signified nothing, unless they were possessed of that Castle.
of old was called, and both at home and abroad accounted the lock and key, the
bar and sparr of all England; yet I cannot believe it (the present Castle I
mean) either of Julius Caesar's building, whose time of stay in Britain was too
short for so vast an undertaking, or to be that wherein about the time of
Theodosius the younger, the Praepositus militum Tungricanorum, that band or
company of the Tungricans, in the Western Empire's Book of Notices, is said to
lie in garrison. And yet I doubt not but such a company lay there ingarrison'd,
and that the place was then fortified, and had within it a specula or
watchtower also, from whence to All the Roman towers in those parts were built
for the espial of enemies, ad prospectum maris, says Gildas; least they should
be surprised by foreign invaders.
epsy out and descry Invaders. And where else to seek or place it than within
the confines of that large and spacious round of the present Castlewall, I know
not. Wherefore being upon the place, and casting a diligent eye about me,
whilst I give the go by to that Castle within the Castle, that noble and goodly
pile there called the Kings-keep, with the wall or fore-fence surrounding it; I
rather choose to think, that which at present is, and for many ages past has
been the Church or Chapel to the Castle, either to have risen out of the
ruins of that Roman fortress, or that at least the square tower in the middle
thereof, between the Body and the Chancel, fitted with holes on all parts for
speculation, to have been the very Roman specula or watchtower: at the same
time with Twine, conceiving that which at this day they call the Divel's drop,
a mouldring ruinous heap of masonry, on the opposite hill, on the other side of
the Town, to be the remains of a Roman Pharos, a structure of their's intended
for the placing of night-lights to secure their passage (otherwise very
perilous) who should put into Port by night.

Why I choose to single out the Church or Chapel, The keep or Dungeon not the
Roman Specula.
and balk the Keep or Dungeon, my reasons are first, that whilst I can discover
no jot of Roman or British tile or brick about the Keep or main Castle, I can
discern a great abundance of it about that tower shooting up in the middle of
that Church or Chapel; and that after the Romans were gone, the Christians of
succeeding times, projecting and designing the accommodation of the garrison
with a Church or Chapel, did make use of and take the advantage of that
specula, and added to it those parts, whereof the rest of the Chapel now
consists. Next (and that others may not wonder at my questioning the Roman
antiquity of the Castle in general) they may take notice with me, that (as I
have it from In a short historical account of the Foundation of Dover^
monastery, set down in the Monasticon Anglicanum, Part 2. p. 2. we find this
passage: L'an de grace mil cens cinquant^ tiers, regna en Engle terre Henry le
fitz Maud l' Emperice, c^sti fit le haut touren le chastel, and enclost le
dongon de nouelx meurs, i.e. In the year of our Lord one thousand a hundred and
fifty three, reigned in England Henry the son of Maud the Emperess; he built
the high tower in the Castle, and enclosed the Dongeon with a new wall.
very good authority) King Henry the 2d. it was, that about the year of Christ
1153. first erected that pile, the Kings-keep, or (as the French men term a
strong Tower or Platform, as this is, on the middle of a Castle or Fort,
wherein the besieged make their last efforts of defense when the rest is
forced) Dungeon, and gave it that enclosure of a wall, bulwarks, and towers,
wherewith we now find it fortified, and hence happily it is called the
King's-keep.

I HAVE no more to say of Dubris or Dover, Folkstone.
as to the garrison. Our next flight therefore is to Folkstone, a place to
which, how eminently soever situate, none of the Roman forts or garrisons
remembered in the Book of Notices is, or (for ought I know) ought to be
referred. Yet what says Oli^ floruisse, Romanorum Numismata quotidie invent a
persuadent -- Ex illis turribus fuisse probabile est, quas Romani ad Saxones
arcendos (Theodosio juniore regnante) per intervalla (ut inquit Gildas) ad
meridianam Britanniae plagam in littore colloc^arunt.
Mr. Camden of it, It was a flourishing place in times past, as may appear by
the pieces of Roman coin and British bricks daily there found. Probable it is
(so he adds) that it was one of those Towns and holds, which, in the reign of
Theodosius the younger, the Romans placed to keep off the Saxons, etc. And if
so, Castle-hill a place in Folkflone, whereof notice taken by Mr. Lambard and
others, might probably be the place of that Turret's situation.

The name Folkstone (I confess) can pretend to no such Antiquity, being purely
of a Saxon extraction and composure, signifying (as Mr. Lambard, He falsely
imagines that it might be anciently written Flor^ane, which (says he) signifies
a rock, coaffe, or flaw of stone, which begins here; for otherwise (so he
goes on) the cliffe from Dover till you come almost hither is of chalk.
among other conjectures at the etymology, has it) lapis populi in latin. The
mention whereof calls to my remembrance that place's name in Cap. 46. Tertium
bellum in campo juxta lapidem tituli, qui est super ripam Gallici maris,
statutum. -- And a little after, Ante mortem suam ad familiam suam
animadvertit, vt illius sepulchrum in portu ponerent, a quo exirent [hostes]
super maris ripam.
Ninius (so famous both for Vortimer's designed monument, Ninius's Lapis tituli
not Stonar in Thanet.
and for the last of his notable encounters with the Saxons, and their defeat)
lapis tituli, which by the common consent of our both Antiquaries and
Historians, can no where else be found but at Stonar in Thanet: a lapide illo
Stonar nomen retinet, in Thanato Insula non procul a Rhutupino portu, ^ishop
Usher, Primordia Ecclesiae Britannicae, Cap 12. p. 413.
says one; an Author (I confess) of very high regard, and with none more than
my self; but in this (I perceive) led as the rest, chiefly by the allusion and
seeming agreement or resemblance of one place^ name with the other, that of
lapis tituli in the latin and Stonar in the English sounding not much unlike.
But Ninius, the Author of that story, however he makes mention of lapis tituli
as the place of Vortimer's last battle with the invading Saxons, and their
overthrow there, yet he lays it not in Thanet, nor gives it other description
than this, that it lies by or upon the shore of the French sea; in campo juxta
lapidem tituli qui est super ripam Gallici maris, etc. those are his words.
Probably had this fight been in Thanet, Nimnius, Cap 45. tells us there were
three battles before this, in Thanet: Eos [Saxonas] usque ad Insulam qu^
dicitur Thaneth, [Gourtemir] expulit, ^llosque illi^ tribus vicibus conclusit,
percuss^^, objedit, comm(...), terruit.
as some of his former were, and Stonar in Thanet the place where the battle
was fought, the Author, who mentions those former like encounters in Thanet,
would not have gone to a new description of the place in this unwonted new
expression, without mention made of Thanet at all.

I confess likewise that Vortimer might give commandment for his burial, and
monument to be erected for him at that place of the battle, upon such an
account, (like to that of Quemadmodum Scipio Africanus, (says Camden in the
description of this place) qui it a sibi sepul^hrum stat^^ praecepit, ut
Scipio Africanus) as our stories deliver, namely, to repress hereby the
furious outrages of the Saxons, and for their further terror; that in
beholding this his trophy, their spirits might be daunted at the remembrance of
their ^reat overthrow: this (I say) he might, and happily did command to be
done at lapis tituli. But stay we here, for the text goes no further, no
Stonar, no entrance into Thanet mentioned of Ninius; that is of a much later
stamp, nothing but the conjectural comment of some (...) prospectaret, ratus
vel hoc etiam Paenis terrori futur. ^ In the margin of the original MS. Mr.
Somner has added at this place, Like that put down by the transcribers, whereof
Mr. Camden, page 803. I cannot certainly tell what edition of Camden he had,
but he seems to refer to that passage about Portus Lemanis, which Camden says
Ptolemy calls (...) quod cum (...) Graecos sig(...) sit (so he adds) Librarii
ut viderentur defectum supplere, (...) scripserunt.
afterScholiast.

Besides, Stonar being a low and flat level apt to inundations, how unfit a
place is it for erecting of an eminent and conspicuous monument, visible at a
remote distance; a design that required the advantage of a lofty situation.
Such indeed there are many upon this coast; but as in this respect Folkstone
seated by high rising hills overlooking the sea, (and thence no doubt of the
Romans chosen out (as we see) as a fitting place for a Watchtower to ken and
keep off the invading Saxons) is a far more likely place than Stonar; so in
another regard some resemblance, I mean between the names of Lapis tituli and
Lapis populi (as Folkstone you see is turned by Mr. Lambard) and as withal in
respect of it is A very good argument, if we reflect upon what Gildas says about
the situation of these Castles; In littore quoque Oceani ad meridiem, etc.
situation by the shore of the Gallic Ocean, I should pitch upon Folkstone
before any place I know upon this our Kentish seacoast, for the very place of
Ninius his Lapis tituli; but that I am loath to be This opinion is confirmed by
the learned Bishop Stilling fleet, in his Origines Britannica, p. 322.
the first, who but by supposition only, much less suspicion, should charge
upon the Historian such a mistake as that of Lapis tituli for Lapis populi.

However, Why Stonar cannot be the Lapis tituli.
to refute and refell that argument drawn from the name of Stonar, as
derivative from a stone, I am to acquaint you, that in the first and most
ancient Deeds that I have met with concerning Stonar, it is written thus,
Estanore, and sometimes Estanores. So for instance in a Charter of the
Conqueror's to St. Augustine's Abbey, whereto it belonged. Ego Willemus Rex
Anglor. etc. Sciatis quod ego volo and praecipio, ut sanctus Augustinus and
Abbas Wido firmiter and honorifice teneat omnes rectitudines suas and
consuetudines ad Estanores tam in aqua quam in terra, etc. So again in a
following Charter of his son and immediate successor, William Rufus; wherein it
twice occurs by the name of Estanores, and the like; and not otherwise in many
subsequent Charters, as of Henry the first, King Stephen, and King John, which
I have ready by me (if occasion be) to produce.

Stonar then is but a contraction of Estanore, Derivation of Stonar.
and that in sense and signification, what but the Eastern border, shore, or
coast? (whence that double shore famous, the one for Cymene, the other for
Cerdice's. landing there, are in our elder Historians, Ethelwerd and Florence
of Worcester, written Cerdices Oran and Cymenes Oran.) Which derivation of
Estanore is so proper, natural, and suitable to the situation, as none that
either know or shall enquire after the place, can make the least question of.

If any man now (desirous to abound in his own sense) acknowledging the ground
of this derivation to be sound and good, but not reconciled to the latitude of
it, shall incline rather to think, that the place came first to be called
Estanore, for distinction's sake from another in this Country, hard by
Feversham Town, upon the seacoast, simply called Ore, the conjecture is so
plausible and reasonable, and withal so consistent with the former derivation,
that I shall not contend; contented rather to concur in the same opinion with
him, as to conceive, that that indeed might partly be the cause of the first
imposition of the name; especially since this Ore also belonged to St.
Austin's. But of this enough.

ADVANCE we now to Lim or L^mhill, Lim.
where, although we find nothing at this day of a Port or Haven, (which, Page
39, 40, etc. where he proves the mouth of the river Limene, and the ancient
Port Lemanis, to have been at NewRomney.
as I have showed, lay elsewhere) yet want we not sufficient vestigia and
remains of a Roman Fort or Garrison.

Castrum, quod in dejectu collis, december quasi jugera inclusit, moeniumque
reliquiae supersunt Britannicis lateribus, silicibus, calceque cum arena and
gr^mis intrita, sic compact^, ut nec dum vetustati cesserint. C^md. Britan.
Witness Stutfall-castle, Stutfallcastle.
that large circuit and plat of about ten acres of ground on the side, brow, or
descent of the hill, of old enclosed and fortified on all parts with a wall of
the Roman mode and make, full of British bricks, lying by lanes at set and
certain distances, but by the edacity of time at this day here and there quite
wasted and gone, elsewhere full of gaps and breaches; not so much (it may be)
to be imputed to time and age, as to a seizure of it is materials in after times
(when become useless as to the primitive institution and design) for building
what, with There are moreover Britain bricks in the walls of the Church and the
Arch-deacon's house. Lambard Perambul^t. p. 194.
Mr. Lambard I take it, arose out of the ruins of that Fort, Lim-Church, and
that vast and sturdy structure by it, the Arch-deacon's castellated mansion.
Stationem hic sub Comite litoris Saxonici Praepositus numeri T^rnacensium
habuit. Camd.
Here (within I mean that Roman fortress) the band or company of Turnacenses
(so called of Tornacum now Turnoy in France) kept their station under the Count
or Lieutenant of the Saxon shore, and by the advantage of that ascent on which
it stood, very commodious it was The same argument that he elsewhere uses,
built upon Gildas's expression about the design of those towers; in prospectum
maris.
in point of prospect.

But from a Castle, a Garrison, a receptacle, and harbor for men, placed there
for the safeguard and defense of the place and the country about it, it at
length became a receptacle, a fold for cattle, a horse-fold, a place enclosed
and set apart for keeping of steeds or stallions, horses and mares for breed,
and from thence was and to this day is called (instead of Stodfold as
heretofore) Stutfall-Castle, Derivation of Stutfall.
a compounded name from the Saxon (...) sometimes written (...)-ho^^, in
barbarous latin, Stotarius a steed or stallion, (as a mare for breed was
called (...)-myna) and (...), septum, a fold, close, or enclosure; as in (...)
i. e. a park, or enclosure for Deer. The name of Stod-mersh in this County has
thence (no doubt) in part it is origin, being in the signification of it, a
marsh set apart and noted for that use.

Having Page 39.
formerly given you the derivation of Lim (the place of this quondam Roman
Garrison) as to the name of it; Lym otherwise called Shipwey.
I shall stay you here no longer, than while I observe that the place is
likewise called Shipwey, as the whole Lath (formerly and of old called Limware
leth) is also now altered in the name of it, and called the Lath of Shipwey; a
name, I find, of good antiquity and continuance; witness the mention made of it
in Bracton, Lib. iii. c. 2. and also in Fleta Lib. ii. c. 55. but with a
mistake of Shepey there for Shipwey. The name Talbot and Lambard are both of
the same opinion.
seems to be of a mere English original, Derivation of Shipwey.
betokening from the Saxon ^cip navis, and p^^ via.
the way of the ships, the rather perhaps fastened on this place, as by the
great advantage of the lofty situation, remarkable for prospect and discovery
of naval vessels (whether inward bound or out) in their passage through the
Channel. However for the almost equal distance sake, I take it, which the place
bears to the farthest of the Cinque Ports on either hand, (as lying much about
midway between both) it was pitched upon of old, as for the place of holding
pleas relating to the Ports, Guardianus Portuum hic solemn iniit jusjurandum,
ubi prim^m Magistratum iniit, and hic de causis inter Portuum incolas, statis
diebus cognoscit. Camd.
so for the Limenarcha, the Lord Warden's taking of his oath at the entrance
into his Office.

WE are at length arrived at the last of the Kentish Forts or Garrisons,
Anderida, where situated.
Anderida or Anderidos, where they placed the band of the Abulae with their
Captain; which I should not unreasonably, methinks, have sought for, as all the
rest, (being designed for espial of searovers at or by the seacoast) so many
miles within the land, and at that great distance from the sea, as where by the
direction of our Mr. Lambard; with Camden and Seldom, the famous and learned
lights and guides, as Mr. Somner afterward terms them.
best Antiquaries, we are sent to seek it, namely at or about Newenden, upon
the banks of the river Rother. Indeed, if we consider Gildas's words, In
littore quoque Ocea^i ad meridiem, etc. where in reason are we to exspect the
Garrison in question, Anderida probably either at Pemsey, or Hastings.
but by the seaside to the southward? Among the British Cities reckoned up by
their Historians (whereof from thence a catalogue in the Britan. Eccles.
Primordia Cap. 5.) Cair P^rsauel^ott is one; by which the Archbishop Usher,
after he has in that place expressed his dislike of Camden 's opinion, who
places it at Ivelc^ester, adds; Mi^i tamen Ninii ^ensauelcoit, Guilielmi
Pictaviensis, Orderici Vitalis, and Guilielmi Gemeticensis Penvessellum potius
fuisse videatur* q^ae Pemseia hodie dicta, primo Guilielmi Normauni in Angliam
appulsu celebris est. Cui and B^itannici vocabuli coit adjectio non male
convenit: quum sylvestribus sepibus de^sa fuerit, in qud hac sita est,
Sussexiensis regio.
Learned Author there, understands Pemsey in Sussex, of old written Penvessell
and Pevensell, to which (says he) the addition of the British word Coit, i. e.
wood, does not ill suit, because (as he adds) the County of Sussex, in which it
lies, is a woody Country. True it is that immanis sylva, that immense and vast
wood Andred, was not confined to Kent, but extended it self from the south-part
thereof quite through Sussex into Hampshire. Add to this what we have from
These are not Mr. Camden's words, but Mr. Holland's, who translating Camden
into English, did (as that curious Antiquary Mr. Wood has observed) scatter
several of his own additions in many places. And this I the rather believe,
because I find Mr. Somner's Quotations word for word in Holland's English,
whereas it is not to be found in any latin Edition of Camden, especially that
in 1607. which I take to be the last that was published in his life time.
Mr. Camden himself concerning Pemsey. It has had (says he) a fair large
Castle, in the ruinous walls whereof remain great bricks, such as the Britains
used, which is some argument of the Antiquity thereof. So he. All this put
together (a maritime wea^dish situation, with the remains of a Castle partly
built of British or Roman brick) can it seem unreasonable, that Pemsey should
be thought the place of the garrison, we have in chafe Anderid^? But if any one
do more fancy Hastings than Pemsey, since it has the badge of a quondam Roman
Fort or fortress in that addition of Chester given it by the Saxons, and can
(as This, as that in p. 104. is not Camden's, but Holland's interpolation.
Mr. Camden affirms) show the ruins of a great Castle upon the hill, besides
light-houses to direct sailers in the night time, and was thought fit to be
made one of the five Ports, I shall not dispute the probability of their
conjecture, and choice of Hastngs.

But if rejecting both these, and all but Newenden, the Reader cannot think of
any other place, the authority of such famous and learned lights and guides as
Mr. Camden and Mr. Seldom especially, (who have pitched upon Newenden for the
place) is, I confess, so weighty, that I shall not be unwilling to excuse him
from refusing me his company in my travails to that double place in Sussex, to
seek out this Fort.

No more then of the place. The several names of Anderida.
Somewhat now of the name Anderida, which still in good part survives in
Andred, did at least for and through many Centuries of years after the Romans
exit. The Britains called it C^id Andred, the Saxons sometimes simply Andred,
other while Andreds^erg, and Andredswald, which latter is now the only syllable
left surviving in the place's present name, The Weald.
the Weald. In latin it is found of old sometimes called saltus Andred,
otherwise sylva Andred: here saltus communis, there sylva regalis, and the
like. Perambulat. p. 224.
Mr. Lambard discoursing of the place, tells of an opinion which some have
maintained, that this Weald was a great while together in a manner nothing else
but a desert and waste wilderness, not planted with Towns, or peopled with men,
as the outsides of the shire were; but stored and stuffed with herds of deer,
and droves of hoggs only. And he seems to be of the same opinion himself. For (
^erambulat. p. 224.
says he) besides that a man shall read in the Histories of Canterbury and
Rochester sundry donations, of which there is mention only of What Pannage was
see hereafter among the Catalogue of Quit-rents paid out of the Weald.
Pannage for hoggs in Andred, and of no other thing: I think verily that it
cannot be showed out of ancient Chronicles, that there is remaining in the
Weald of Kent or Sussex any one monument of great Antiquity. Thus he. For my
part, as I embrace the opinion, so I approve of the reasons, especially the
former, the mention only in those ancient donations of What Pannage was see
hereafter among the Catalogue of Quit-rents paid out of the Weald.
Pannage for hoggs in Andred. For numbers of such are found in the evidences
and Chartularies both at Christ-church and elsewhere.

Doubtless, Donations of tho Weald.
as in those days the whole Weald appertained to none but the King,
acknowledging no private Lord or Proprietor, and thence was usually called Syla
Regalis, so in Royal Lan^bocs or donations, (for I find it in no other of that
age) wherein this or that praedium or possession, this or that farm, seat, or
mansion out of the Weald was given by the King to any person or place, in the
nature of what since is termed a Manor or Lordship; it was the usual custom
(for the better completing of the feat) to accommodate it by an additional
grant in the Deed with a Common of Pannage, a liberty for hogg-keeping or
hogg-feeding in the Weald, yet not at large, but with a limitation usually, and
with reference to such and such a part of it, one or more Den or Dens, In the
Weald so many distinct Dens.
in their term, i. e. a woody valley, or place yiedling both covert and feeding
for cattle, especially swine. And fearce any ancient Grant is there in either
the Church of Canterbury's St. Augustine's, or Rochester's Registers of any
considerable portion of land from the King out of the Weald, without the
addition and attendance of such a liberty; for example in those of Aldington,
Charing, Liminge, Westgate, Reculver, Ickham, Chartham, Godmersham, Brook,
Mersham, Westwell, Great and Little Chart, Hollingbourn, Eastry, Newington by
Sittingbourn, Trottesclyve, Bromley, Darent. And Denbera for the most part,
sometime Wealdbera, was the usual word and expression, by which such a liberty
did pass and was conveyed. For an instance or two. In King Offa's Grant of
Ickham to Christchurch, Anno. 971. -- Et in saltu qui dicitur Andred pascua
porcorum in his locis, Dunwalingden, Sandhyrst, etc. In another like Grant of
his of Brasfield to St. Austin's -- Et ad pascendum porcos and pecora and
jumenta in sylva Regali, etc. In the gift of Lenham to the same place by
Kenewilf King of Mercia, and Cuthred King of Kent, Anno 804. -- ^ XIII
Denbe^enbe on Anoneb, So the Saxon, which Thorn, inter X. scriptores, p. 1776.
the Chronicler of the place turns XIII. Dennas glandes portantes. In a grant
of land about the river Limen to Minster-Abby in Thanet by Ethelbert the son of
King Withred, with his father's consent. -- Pascua porcorum in Limen-weraweald
and in Wy-wera-weald, etc. These were parcels it seems, (like as Burg-weraweald
elsewhere occurring also was) of the Weald, where the men of these three Laths,
since called Shipwey, Scray, and St. Austine, were more peculiarly accommodated
with the liberty of Pannage. In the Grant of Mersham to Christ-church by King
Ethelred -- haec sunt pascua porcorum quae nostra lingua Saxonica Denbera
nominamus, h. e. Elfrethingden, Herbedingden, Pafringden, Wirheringden,
Bleccingden, etc. In the Grant of Bromley by King Ethelred to the Church of
Rochester, -- and utilitatem sylvarum ad ^andem terram pertinentem in Andred,
etc. In that of Trottesclyve to the same Church by King Offa -- Ad hanc quoque
terram pertinent in diversis locis porcorum pastus, i. e. Wealdbera, ubi
dicitur Hobenspyc, etc. In another of his of Deorwent, now called Darent, to
the same Church -- adjectis Denberis in communi saltu, etc. In an old custom of
Newington-Mannor by Sittingbourn, -- septem Dennas in sylva quae vocatur Wald.

From hence (I take it) there results much support to that opinion of the
Weald's quondam desart-like unpeopled condition, The Weald formerly unpeopled
quoted by Mr. Lambard: and hence I likewise gather that in those days it was
not parcelled, carved, or cantoned out into Mannois; nor indeed was it so, as I
believe, a long time after; Doomsday-book, I take it, giving no account of any
one entire independent Manor there. Yet can I not agree with Mr. Lambard
grounds his opinion very rationally upon this foundation, that among the
accounts of the Reditus de Walda, he had never seen any sort of services
expressed, for which they paid their rents; whereas in the accounts of all the
Tenants without the Weald, there is express mention made for what special,
cause the same rent grew payable. From whence he infers that those payments
(differing from others both in quantity and quality) could not be quit-rents
for any service, as the rest were.
Mr. Lambard in his opinion, Quit-rents paid out of the Weald.
that the Weald of old yielded no quit-rents, customs, or services, as other
places; in regard I find the contrary very often. And no marvel; for albeit
there were of old no Manors in the Weald, yet the lands lying there (when once
cultivated and manured) being appendant to and depending on Manors elsewhere,
the Tenants in respect of and proportion to their holdings and tenancies* might
be and were liable to the Lord of the Manor, whereof they held for services
and customs, as other Tenants elsewhere. For besides fealty, suit of Court,
reliefs, etc. these (among other local customs and services heretofore
obtaining there) do frequently occur.

Of Gavel-swine see more in Somner's Gavelkind, p. 23.
Gavelswine* which was a custom so called when paid in kind, but if redeemed
with money, then called swine-mony, swine-peny, and was for the Lord's leave
and sufferance of his Tenant to keep and feed swine of his own, or to take in
other men's to feed within his land.

It was otherwise called Bere-gaefel and Drin^-elan. See Somner's Gavelkind, p.
29.
Scot-ale; which was a shot or contribution from the Tenants for a provision of
Ale to entertain the Lord, or his Bailiff or Beadle, holding a Parock or
meeting on the place, to take an account of his Pannage, (what it yielded) at
the proper season for it. In the extent of the Manor of Terring in Sussex,
Anno 5. Edw. the first, under the title of Jews: Memor, quod praedicti
tenentes debent de consuetudine inter ^os, facere Scotalium de 16d. ob. ita
quod de singulis 6d. detur 1d. ^b. ad potandum cum Bedello Dni. Archiepiscopi;
super praedictum feodum.

Pannage; Pessona, (as they latin'd it) and it was the emolument arising from
the Pannage of hoggs, there feeding and fatting with the mast of the place,
whereof tithe was in those days usually paid; many old accounts, as of
Aldington, Chari^^, and other Manors taking notice of so much money received
by the Accomptant for Pannage in Waldis, deducta decima Particularly, one, at
Charing sans date, thus expresses it: Et de LXXI^. 1d. de pannagio de la Rye
Hirst, and 7. Dennarum vendito, deducta decima. Et pr^terea Rector habet XI
porcos in pessona 7 dennarum, quietas de pannagio.

Gate-peny; it was a tribute for the Gates for the Tenants ingress and egress
to and from his own, by the Lord's land.

Sumer-^us-silver: whereof in the old Newington by Sittingbourn, -- homines
quoque de Walda debent unam domum ^estival^m quod Anglice dicitur Sumerhus, aut
XX solidos dare. If seems it was the custom of such as were Lords or
Proprietors of these dens or parcels of the Weald, to repair thither in
Summertime to take care and dispose of their Pannage, (in such years at least
as it had taken) and for their reception and accommodation some kind of house
or habitation was to be provided for them by their Tenants, or a recompense
made them in money for it.

Corredy: it was (like that of our Dean and Chapter's entertainment at this
day) a provision of diet for the Lord's coming upon that occasion; whereof in
the old Custumal of I^kham-Mannor thus, in reference to one or more of those
dens. -- Et in quolibet anno debet invenire Corredium and omnia necessaria
Domino, cum venerit videre Pessonam, vel famulo ejus.

Danger: An accompt-roll of Charing-Mannor, Anno 1230. thus^explains it. -- Et
de XXVIs. VIIId. de Waldis, ut possint arare and seminare tempore pessonis sin^
dampno Archiepiscopi. By this and the like passages it appears, that the
Wealdish Tenant might not plough or sow his land in Pannage-time without the
Lord's leave (whence it was otherwise termed The custom is confirmed and
explained by an old Custumal of Tenham- Manor (quoted by Mr. Somner, Gavelkynd
page 27.) which calls it Lyef-yeld: Tenentes in Waldis non possunt arare ^erras
suas ab equinoctio autumpnali usque festum beati Martini ^ine licenti^* Et ideo
reddunt ann^^atim dimidiam marca^ ad sestum S. Martini, sive fuerit Pessona,
sive nou and vocatur Lyef-yeld.
Lef-silver) for fear of endamaging the Lord in his Pannage; or if he did, he
was liable to recompense.

Add hereunto, that the Auditors of the Prior and Covent of Christ-church's
Accounts of their Manors in the Articles by which of old their Accounts were
taken, were charged with the two last and the third of these services under
these heads: De Courediis in Waldis.
De Dangeriis in Waldis.
De Pannagio in Drovedennis in Waldis.


The dens it seems, set out for the agistment and feeding of hoggs and other
droves of cattle, being thence called Drove-denns, as he that had the custody
and driving of them to and fro (as there was occasion) the Hog-heard, or
Neat-heard, Drof-mannus.

The Weald then ('it is plain) like as other places yielded customs and services,
The wood of the Weald made over to the Tenant.
(as at present) from good antiquity, whereof if these particulars be not
evidence enough, I shall in a way of supplement offer what I suppose will put
it out of all dispute. In Edw. the third and Richard the second's time the then
Archbishop of Canterbury, and the Prior and Covent of Christ-church
respectively, amongst (I suppose) other like Lords and Owners of the Wealdish
dens, finding themselves agrieved by their Tenants there, and others in the
wasting and making havoc of their woods, which in and by former feoffments
they had expressly reserved from their Tenants to themselves, (over and besides
fealty, suit of Court, and certain other services and customs) to quit and rid
themselves of further care and trouble in that matter of the wood, entered into
composition with their Tenants, and for a new annual rent of Assise (generally
equal to what money was paid before) made the wood over to them by indenture
of feoffment in perpetuity, either to be cut down or left standing at the
Tenant's choice; reserving still their old or wonted rent, and all their former
services, except (what upon parting with the wood was unreasonable to require)
Pannage and Danger. Ever since which time (I conceive) the interest of the Lord
so compounding has been taken off, as to the wood it self, and nothing left
remaining but so much rent of Assise, the new and the old, with the former
services. Many of these compositions relating to the Archbishop and Monks
aforesaid I have seen, and for satisfaction's sake of others, who would be
willing to know more than vulgarly of the Weald, I shall for a close of all
present them with a There is not a copy of these Compositions in Mr. Somner's
Manuscript; and where the Originals are, I know not.
copy of one of each sort.

A CATALOGUE Of the LORD-WARDENS Of the Cinque Ports.
1 GOdwinus. Mentioned by Thynn, but omitted by Lambard and Philpot.
Edw. Conf. 2 Haroldus. Mentioned by Thynn, but omitted by Lambard and Philpot.
Edw. Conf. 3 Bertram Ashburnham Mentioned by Thynn, but omitted by Lambard and
Philpot.
K. Harold. 4 Odo Mentioned by Thynn, but omitted by Lambard and Philpot.
Will. 1. 5 John de Fiennes Will. 1. 6 James de Fiennes 7 John de Fiennes 8
Walkelinus de Magninot Steph. 9 Richard Earl of Ewe Mentioned by Thynn, but
omitted by Lambard and Philpot.
Steph. 10 Eustace, Earl of Bollougne Mentioned by Thynn, but omitted by
Lambard and Philpot.
Steph. 11 Allen de Fiennes Mentioned by Thynn, but omitted by Lambard and
Philpot.
Henr. 2. 12 James de Fiennes Omitted by Thynn, and supplied out of Lambard and
Philpot.
Henr. 2. 13 Hugh de Essex Mentioned by Thynn, but omitted by Lambard and
Philpot.
Henr. 2. 14 Matthew de Clear Rich. 1. 15 William de Wrotham John 16 Hubert de
Burgo John 17 Peter de Rivallis Mentioned by Thynn, but omitted by Lambard and
Philpot.
18 Richard le Greie Henry 3. 19 Bertram de Criol Henry 3. 20 Hugh Bigot Henry
3. 21 Henry de Braybrook Henry 3. 22 Prince Edward, afterward Edward the
first. Henry 3. 23 Henry de Montefort Omitted by Thynn, and supplied out of
Lambard and Philpot.
Edw. 1. 24 Roger Leyborn Edw. 1. 25 Stephen de Penchester Edw. 1. 26 Sir
Robert A^hton Omitted by Thynn, and supplied out of Lambard and Philpot.
Edw. 1. 27 Simon de Crey Omitted by Thynn, and supplied out of Lambard and
Philpot.
Edw. 1. 28 Robert de Burghersh Mentioned by Thynn, but omitted by Lambard and
Philpot.
Edw. 1. 29 Henry Cobham Mentioned by Thynn, but omitted by Lambard and Philpot.
Edw. 2. 30 Robert de Kendal Mentioned by Thynn, but omitted by Lambard and
Philpot.
Edw. 2. 31 Bartholomew Badlesmer Mentioned by Thynn, but omitted by Lambard
and Philpot.
Edw. 2. 32 Edmund de Woodstock Edw. 2. 33 Hugh le Spencer Edw. 2. 34 William
Clinton Mentioned by Thynn, but omitted by Lambard and Philpot.
Edw. 2. 35 Reginald Cobham Omitted by Thynn, and supplied out of Lambard and
Philpot.
Edw. 3. 36 Bartholomew Ld. Burghersh Edw. 3. 37 Roger de Mortimer Mentioned by
Thynn, but omitted by Lambard and Philpot.
Edw. 3. 38 John le Beauchamp Edw. 3. 39 Robert Herle Edw. 3. 40 Sir Ralph
Spigornel Edw. 3. 41 Richard de Penbrig Mentioned by Thynn, but omitted by
Lambard and Philpot.
Edw. 3. 42 William Ld. Latimer Mentioned by Thynn, but omitted by Lambard and
Philpot.
Edw. 3. 43 Edmund Plantagenet Mentioned by Thynn, but omitted by Lambard and
Philpot.
Edw. 3. 44 Edm. Earl of Cambrige Edw. 3. 45 Sir Robert Ashton Mentioned by
Thynn, but omitted by Lambard and Philpot.
Rich. 2. 46 Simon Burleigh Rich. 2. 47 Henry le Cobham Omitted by Thynn, and
supplied out of Lambard and Philpot.
Rich. 2. 48 Sir John Denros, (alias Devereux, de Euros, and de Evers) Rich. 2.
49 Lambard has it Sir Thomas.
John de Beaumont Rich. 2. 50 Philpot and Lambard call him Edward.
Edmund Duke of Aumerle and York Rich. 2. 51 Sir Tho. Erpingham Henry 4. 52
Henry, afterward Henry 5. Henry 4. 53 John Beaufort Mentioned by Thynn, but
omitted by Lambard and Philpot.
Henry 4. 54 Tho. Earl of Arundel Henry 5. 55 Hump. Duke of Gloucester Henry 6.
56 Sir James Fiennes Ld. Say Henry 6. 57 Edm. Duke of Somerset Omitted by
Thynn, and supplied out of Lambard and Philpot.
Henry 6. 58 Humphrey Stafford Duke of Buckingham Henry 6. 59 Simon Montfort
Omitted by Thynn, and supplied out of Lambard and Philpot.
60 Richard Nevill Edw. 4. 61 Will. Earl of Arundel Edw. 4. 62 Richard Duke of
Gloucester, afterward Rich. the third Edw. 5. 63 Henry D. of Buckingham
Mentioned by Thynn, but omitted by Lambard and Philpot.
Rich. 3. 64 Will. Earl of Arundel Mentioned by Thynn, but omitted by Lambard
and Philpot.
Henry 7. 65 Sir William Scot Omitted by Thynn, and supplied out of Lambard and
Philpot.
Henry 7. 66 Sir James Fiennes Lord Say Henr. 7. 67 Henry, afterward Henry 8.
Henr. 7. 68 Arthur Plantagenet Henry 8. 69 Sir Edward Poynings Henry 8. 70
Henry Earl of Richmond Henry 8. 71 Sir Edward Guildford Henry 8. 72 George
Boleyn, Viscount Rochfort Henry 8. 73 Sir Thomas Cheyney Edw. 6. 74 Sir William
Brook Eliz. 75 Henry Brook, Lord Cobham Eliz. 76 Henry Howard, Earl of
Northhampton James 1. 77 Edw. Zouch, Lord Haringworth James 1. 78 George
Villiers, Duke of Buckingham James 1. 79 Theophilus Howard, Earl of Suffolk
Car. 1. 80 James Duke of Lenox and Richmond Car. 1. 81 James D. of York,
afterward King James the second Car. 2. 82 Henry Ld Sydney, Viscount Shepey,
the present Lord-Warden. Will. 3.
THE INDEX Of things Remarkable.
A
ABulae, where placed. Page 103 Allowesbridge falsely so called for
Alolvesbridge. 52 All^Saints in Thanet, a Chapel of ease under Reculver. p.
85. upon what account exempted from the repairs of the Mother Church. 86
Alolvesbridge from whence derived. 52 Anderida not at Newenden p. 103. Its
several names. 106 Andred, of what extent. 104 Appledore, how far distant from
the mouth of Limene, p. 52. first mention of it, p. 64. it is several names.
Ibid. derivation 65. never a haven. 67
B
Bartholomew's Hospital at Sandwich by whom founded. 19 Becket (Archbishop) why
in his escape took shipping at Romney. 54 Bishop's-wike, the situation of it.
54 from whence derived. 54 Bolen the Portus Iccius of the ancients, 8 distance
between that and Rutupi^in. Ibid. B rightwald made Archbishop. 81
C
Calice begun to be a Port. 34 Canterbury and not Dover, the old Dorobernia. 31
Cerdices-ora, why so called. 99 A Channel formerly between Romney and Oxney. 54
Chester, what it signifies in names of places. 78 Chesters, what. 79 Corredy,
what. 114 Cymenes-ora, why so called. 99
D
Danger, what. 114 Dens in the Weald, what. 108 the form of Grants made of
them. Ibid. Dorobernia falsely put to signify Dover. 31 Dowerdwy in Wales, what
it signifies. 30 Drove-dens, what. 115 Drof-mannus, what. Ibid. Dungeon, what
it signifies among the French. 92 Dubris, Dover. it is derivation. 30 how called
by the Saxons. 31 falsely called Dorobernia. Ibid. when came to be a Port. 33
Pictaviensis's description of it. 30 the Castle there of what great importance.
90 not built by Julius Caesar. Ibid. whereabouts the place of the Garrison was.
Ibid.
Dyffrin-cluyd in Denbigshire, why so called. 30
E
Emma's (Queen) Life written by an unknown Author. 16 Expeditio what. 79
F
Folkstone, probably noue of the Roman Garrisons. 93 from whence derived. 94
the likest place for Ninius's Lapis tituli. 97 Forstallatio, what. 47
Fosterland, what. 19 Forts, the number of the Roman ones in Kent. 76 with what
design built. 77
G
Gate-peny, what. 113 Gavelswine, what. 112 Gebind aeles, what. 73 Gilford,
from whence derived. 69 Goodwyn-sands. What commonly thought to have been. 21
The common opinion of an Island, and Earl Goodwyn's possession confuted. Ibid.
derivation of the name. 23 the name not British. 24 cause of Goodwyn-sands.
Ibid. Grants formerly much shorter than at present. 71
H
Hamtun-port, signified formerly Northampton. 2 Hastings possibly the Roman
Anderida. 105 Hearn, a Chapel of ease under Reculver. 85 Hoth, a Chapel of
ease under Reculver. 85 Hustingi Pondus, what. 74 Hythe, not the Lemanis of the
Romans. 37 what seems to make that a probable conjecture. 37
I
Iccius, V. Portus Iccius. Inundations, 26, 45, 57, 58, 59, 68. Itinerary, it is
Author uncertain. 1 distances in it not regular. 38 Julius Caesar's attempt for
landing. 34
K
King's keep at Dover, not the old Roman garrison. 91
L
Limenarcha, where he took his Oath. 103 Lamport, the same with the Roman
Lemanis. 47 two Lang ports formerly. 48 Lamport belonged to the Archbishop. 53
Lapis appositus in ultimo terrae, what called at this day. 51 A Lath, what. 19
Laths in Kent altered. 65 Lemanis; it is several names. 37 situation. Ibid.
derivation. 39 the same with Doomsday-book's Lamport. 47 falsely called (...).
38 Leta, from whence derived. 20 Limene-river. 40, 41 otherwise called Rother.
Ibid. and Romney. 43 emptyed it self at Romney. 44 when turned another way. 48,
and 56 had a wide mouth. 50 Lim-hill not the Lemanis of the Romans. 37 a Roman
garrison. 100 Limware, who the people formerly so called. 62 Limware-leth and
Limware-b^st, what called now. 62, 65, 102 Lomea, Goodwyn-sands so called by
Twine. 21, 23 London-city never called Lunden-wic. 10 so called in the Saxon
Chr^nicle. 9 it is derivation. 13 Londoners privilege in Stonar or Estanore. 14
Lunden-wic another name for Sandwich. 9 Lyd formerly bordered on the sea. 50
M
S. Martin's Oratory formerly a Parish Church in Romney. 53 Merse-ware in Kent,
who. 61 called likewise Limware. 62
N
Newenden not the place of Anderida. 103 New-Romney V. Romney. why so called 38
S. Nicholas in Thanet, a Chapel of ease under Reculver. 85 upon what account
exempted from the repairs of the Mother Church. 86 Northampton called anciently
Hamtun-port. 2
O
Old Romney V. Romney. Oxney falsely called Oxenel. 62
P
Pannage, what. 112 Pevensey falsely called Pevensel. 62 probably the place of
the Roman Anderida. 104 formerly called Caer Pensauelcoit. Ibid. Peutingerian
tables. 2 Places how named in the Saxon times. 66 Plough-yards, what. 82
Polder, what. 65 Port in Saxon what it signifies. 2 Ports (Roman) three in
Kent. 2 Porthund in Shropshire, it is derivation. 2 Portus Iccius at Bolen. 8
distance between that and Rutupium. Ibid. A treatise concerning it in
Manuscript, written by Somner. 8 Portreve, what. 10 Promhill drowned. 45
R
Ree-wall, why so called. 52 Reculver by what names called. 79 whence derived.
80 when made a Monastery. 81 when granted to Christ-Church. Ibid. Leland's
description of it. 82 Dignity of the Church and Rector. 84 Regulbium, called at
this day Reculver. 77 whereabouts the Fort was placed. 80 falsely called by
Twine Reculsum. 77 from what derived. 80 Richborough not Rutupium the Port. 4
the seat of a Roman Garrison. Ibid. never a City. 5, 87. for what reason some
believed there had been a City. 5 it once had a Chapel. 6 from whence derived.
17 it is more ancient names. 87 Leland's description of it. 89 Robertsbridge
falsely so called. 40 Romans, when went out of Britain. 18 Romney (new) the
Lemanis of the Romans. 38 how stopped up. 39 when deprived of the River. 48, 56
falsely called Rumenal. 62 first mention of the name. Ibid. derivation. Ibid.
Romney-river. 43 where emptyed it self. 44 Rother otherwise called Limene. 40
formerly ran to New-Romney. 44 when changed it is course. 45 by some called
Appledore-water. 48 what way it ran afterward. 69 Rotherfield in Sussex falsely
so called. 40 Rutupium, it is various names. 2 the same with Sandwich. 4 why,
and when called Lunden-wic. 9, 18 when begun to be called Sandwich. 15, 19 from
whence derived. 16 when the Port decayed. 33 Rye, why so called. 50, 69
S
Sandwich the Rutupium of the ancients. 4 afterward called Lunden-wic. 9 why
so called. 13 when this name of Sandwich began. 15 the most famous of all the
Ports. 16, 18 from whence derived. 17 account of it in Doomsday-book. 19
Scot-ale, what. 112 Scrud-land, what. 19 Shipway from whence derived. 102
Shipway-lath, formerly called Limewarebest and Limwareleth. 62, 65, 102 Stick
anguillarum what. 73 Stillingfleet's confirmation of Somners opinion about
Stonar. 97 Stodmersh, from whence derived. 102 Stone-end in Kent, what called
formerly. 57 Stonar in Thanet not Ninius's Lapis tituli. 94 place where
Vortimer probably gave orders for his burial. 96 from whence derived. 98
Stutfal-castle, a garrison in the Roman times. 100 Sulinge what, 50, 82 from
whence derived. 101 Summa, what. 54 Sumerhus-silver, what.
T
T. E R. what they signify in Doomsday-book. 20 Thong-castle, why so called.
71 Trentals, what. 7 Turnacensian band, where they kept their station. 101
W
Watchtowers (Roman) five in Kent. 5, 76. with what design built. 77 Weald in
Kent, what called formerly. 106 not inhabited formerly. 107 belonged
immediately to the King. Ibid. not cut out into distinct Manors. 110 paid
Quit-rents. 111 when and how the wood of it was made over to the Tenant.
West-hythe, not the Lemanis of the Romans. 37 Winchelsey, why so called. 69
falsely called by Twine Windchelseum. 69 Wingham, once a College of secular
Monks. 6 by whom made so. Ibid. Witsand, when first a Port. 33 when disused. 34
how called in the Saxon. 8 first mention of it. 33
Z
Zealand, part of it drowned. 26
The Index of Authors quoted or amended.
AEThelstani Leges. p. 10. Alfredus Beverlacensis. p. 4. Ammianus Marcellinus.
p. 2, 9, 43. Annals Saxonici, edit. Oxon. citat. p. 2, 8, 9, 11, 25, 31, 33,
41, 45, 46, 51, 64, 81. Antonini Itinerarium. p. 1, 2, 3, 8, 37. Emendat. p.
38.
B
Beda p. 2, 5, 18, 76, 81. Emendat. p. 88. Bracton p. 102. Brompton p. 47.
Burton p. 1, 37, 38, 78, 80, 87. Emendat. p. 3, 5, 17.
C
Caesaris Comment. p. 34. Camdenus p. 4, 16, 18, 35, 38, 44, 58, 78, 79, 93,
96, 100, 101. Emendat. p. 8, 5, 37. Cantuariensis Ecclesiae Chartae Originales
passin. p. Casaubonus ( Meric) p. 8. Cluverii Italia p. 1. Charter of
Romney-marsh. p. 69.
D
Doomsday-book p. 19, 22, 37, 47, 62, 63, 65, 82. Dugdale's History of
Imbanking. p. 70. Monasticon Anglicanum p. 81, 92.
E
Edwardi filii Alfredi, Leges. p. 10. S. Emmae vita p. 16. Ethelwerdus p. 64,
99. Emendat. p. 61.
F
Fleta emendat. p. 102. Florentius Wigorniensis p. 2, 64, 66, 99.
G
Gildas p. 5, 76, 90, 97, 101. Giraldus Cambrensis, p. 30. Guicciardini
Comment. de rebus memorabilibus p. 82.
H
Harpsfield p. 8. Heylin's Cosmography p. 26. Hickesii Grammatica Saxonica p.
49. Holinshead p. 31. Hovedenus p. 31. 63. Huntingdon p. 45, 31.
I
Ingulphus p. 22, 35.
K
Kilburn's History of Kent. p* 19, 65. Kiliani Lexicon p. 65. Knighton p. 32,
89.
L
Laeti descriptio Belgii p. 27. Lambard's Perambulation p. 3, 16, 21, 23, 30,
40, 45, 54, 59, 65, 80, 93, 94, 100, 103, 106. Emendat. p. 3, 5, 21, 37, 48,
66, 94, 111. Leland p. 3, 40, 82, 88. Emendat. p. 3. 5. 37.
M
Malmsburiensis ( Willelm.) p. 31. Marianus Scotus p. 31. Marliani Topographia
p. 63. Matthew. Paris p. 57. Matthew. Westmonast. p. 3, 4, 7, 57. Milton emendat.
p. 31.
N
Notitia Imperii p. 1, 2, 37, 76, 77. Nennius p. 94, 95, 96.
O
Ordinalia Marisci p. 69. Ordericus Vitalis p. 46. Orosius p. 2.
P
Pancirollus V. Notitia Imperii p. Paris V. Matthew. Paris. Peutingerianae Tab.
p. 2. 37. Philpot's Villare Cantianum p. 82. 88. Pictaviensis p. 32, 35, 46.
Emendat. p. 32, 46.
S
Seldeni Ianus Anglorum p. 71. Schotti Itinerarium p. 1. Simeon Dunelmensis p.
30. Somneri Glossarium p. 13, 49, 74. Dictionarium Saxonicum p. 14. Antiquities
of Canterbury p. 41. Gavel-kind p. 96. 112. Speed p. 31. Spelmanni Glossarium
p. 7, 11, 20, 54, 55, 73. Concilia p. 64.
T
Talbot p. 102. Tacitus p. 2. Textus Roffensis p. 10. Thorn p. 14, 15, 109.
Twine p. 3, 21, 23, 91. Emendat. 3, 21, 62, 60, 77.
V
Vossius de Historicis Graecis and Latinis p 1. Usserii Primordia p. 104.
Emendat. p. 94.
W
Willibaldus p. 12. 13.
FINIS.

