SOME REASONS Humbly offered for the EXPORTATION of COPPER.
ABout 150 Years since, it was thought necessary to prohibit the Exportation
of it, by reason of the scarcity at that time; since which, the great plenty
abroad, and the increase of our Foreign Trade, has for these many years
supplied us with quantities sufficient for our own Consumption, and to spare,
and therefore necessary to have liberty to Export the Overplus.

But Copper being now become a Manufacture of this Kingdom; and greater
quantities being made here than can be Vented, (there being now above 50 Tunns
lying unsold, for want of Buyers,) a License for Exportation is become yet more
necessary.

The want of Exportation will wholly discourage the making of Copper here;
which will be a loss to their Majesty's in their Customs, a great damage to the
Owners of the Copper-works and Mines, prevent farther Discoveries and
Improvements of this kind, take from many Thousand poor People their
livelihood, make the late Act about Royal Mines in a great measure useless to
the Subject, and deprive the Nation of the benefit of what is like to be one of
its best Manufactures.

So long as the liberty of Importation is allowed, it is most reasonable the
Nation should Export the Surplus of its own Product; for what we buy is gain to
other Nations, but what we sell is all profit to our own, and if Foreign
Copper may be brought to our Markets 'twill be a great discouragement and loss
to us, not to be permitted to send ours to Foreign Markets.

It Is well known, That for many Years before the present Copper-works were set
up, there was no want of Copper in England; and why then should any oppose the
Exportation of what is here made, unless it be that they may have it at such
price as none in England can afford to make it, and little more than half what
any can import it for; which is prefering a private Interest before a public
Good.

The Pewterers and Plummers, may as well complain at the Exportation of Tin and
Lead, as the Braziers and Founders at Exporting Copper.

There is however no reason to fear that any will be Exported, whilst it can be
sold here at home, fince the price of Copper abroad is in no place greater, but
in many less than it is here. Beside the duties of Exportation and other
incident Charges, will be at least 16 per Ct. added to the price here, which
makes it very improbable that 'twill besent abroad until it happens (as it
shortly will, if the Act for Exportation of it passes) that much greater
quantities be made here than will supply our own necessities, and the owners of
the Copper-Works here, offer to supply the Complainants at all times with
English Copper, at cheaper rates than they can buy that which is Imported from
Torreign Parts.

Note, That for these two years last past, there has been in all but 97 Tons of
Copper Imported into the Port of London, as appears by the Custom House books.

And above 100 Tons have been made here in England out of English Oars, within
these eight Months last past.


