SOME TESTIMONIES Concerning the Life and Death OF HUGH TICKELL; AS ALSO His
Convincement, Travels, Sufferings and Service for the Lord, and his Eternal
Truth.

Which is a Testimony, I. To the Name of the Righteous, that shall be had in
Everlasting Remembrance. II. For encouraging and strengthening the Babes in the
Truth, to follow the Example of their faithful Elders. III. For Information and
Exhortation of those that desire to know the Truth, and the way to Zion, that
they may die the Death of the Righteous, and their latter End be like his.


For, mark the End of the Upright Man, for the End of that Man is Peace.

LONDON, Printed for Thomas Northcott, in George-Yard, in Lombard Street, MDCXC.

The Testimony of Dorothy Tickell, Concerning her Dear Husband Hugh Tickell.
I Being his Wife about twenty six years, do give forth my Testimony to all
People, what I saw, and did believe of him in the uprightness of my heart,
desiring to keep my Peace with my God in what I do, knowing I must give an
Account of words, and deeds done in the Body.

First, I believe he loved the Lord his God with all his heart, who made him a
partaker of that Love which is Universal; wherein he had good Will to all, and
a true Love to them, in whose hearts he saw the fear of the Lord, observing
that blessed Rule, As you would that Men should do to you, even so do you to
them. -- He let his yea, be yea, and his nay, nay. -- And I often observed his
Love to Enemies, he loving the Lord Jesus Christ, kept his sayings, and did his
Commandments with Joy. -- And though his Sufferings were many, and that of
diverse sorts, yet he kept the Word of God's Patience, which kept him in the
Hour of Temptation, and carried him more easily through them: The Yoke of his
Lord, that he had taken up, did become more easy, and his Burden light.

As to his Imprisonment, about the Year 1664. He, with four Friends more, was
cast into Prison in Carlisle Goal, by Henry Marshall Priest of Crostwhait: And
though he did detain his Body in Prison, he took Tithes of his Land, and kept
him Prisoner nigh three Years. -- This said Henry Marshall Priest, afterward
falling down a Pair of Stairs, broke his Scull, upon which he died.

And again, in my dear Husband's Old Age, when he was about Threescore and
Eight, he was imprisoned by Richard Lowry, another Priest of the said
Crostwhait, who kept him Prisoner about nine Months; a part of it being cold
Winter, and a cold nasty Place, not fit for such honest Men; besides a weak
Prisoner did lie by the Fire, that my Husband and the rest of the Prisoners
could scarce come at it; -- And this said Priest Richard Lowry was suddenly
stricken, and had the Use of one side of his Tongue, and Understanding much
taken from him, and has so continued a long Time, and yet continues a
remarkable Judgment.

This my dear Husband suffered, besides much spoiling of Goods for the
Testimony of Truth. -- And before he came last out of Prison, his Distemper of
Body began, that increased upon him till he died. And after he came home,
feeling his Body begin to weaken, he set his House in order; And though his
Distemper lay much in his Head, that it might have weakened his Memory; yet I
believe none ever saw any appearance of frowardness, but the Lamb's Nature,
which is Innocence and Love, did always appear in him, this gave me Comfort in
heaviness. -- And when I told him of his Continuance still in patience; he told
me, he had laid those Exercises in the Balance, and felt the Love of God in
them.

Before his Death, he was in much Brokenness of Spirit, tenderly taking leave
of Friends, and Neighbors, as having a sense that his Departure drew near; And
upon his dying Bed, his Deportment was so sweet, that several were affected
therewith. -- And I have a certain Evidence sealed upon my Spirit, Concerning
my dear Husband, who is gone to Rest,
He dyed in the Lord, and is for ever blessed:
He being as a Lamb so innocent,
In every Remembrance I have Content.
And though the Mortal, that be laid in Grave,
Yet the Immortal, certainly I have;
Desiring when this Body is laid down,
I may partake of that Eternal Crown.
What shall I say? God's Favor does exceed
To his Hand maid, even as she stands in need.
What have I now more to do here,
But my God to love and fear?
And do nothing, that may grieve his Spirit,
That Eternal Life, I may inherit.
For what is all the World to me,
In Comparison of Eternity?


And now the Day of the Lord has been great, and the Work of it, which has
dained to many, that sat in Darkness and in the shadow of Death; The Lord has
caused Light to spring up. -- And now the true Light shines in many, which
has given us the Knowledge of God, in the Face of Jesus Christ; And he has
made his People willing in the Day of his Power; he has caused the Trumpet to
be sounded in Zion, and an Alarm to be beat in his Holy Mountain, and there
were Earthquakes in diverse Places, and many Faces gathered Paleness, for the
Day was great to a Remnant, it was like the Day of Jacob's Trouble. -- But
after those things many did flow together, to the Goodness of the Lord, saying,
Let us go up to the House of the God of Jacob, and there will he teach us of
his ways, and we will walk in his paths. -- And now the Mountain of the Lord's
House is a top of all the Mountains, and high Hills, Glory to the Lord for
ever, and ever more, who has taken to himself his great Power, and is come to
reign amongst his People.

And now the way of the Lord is become delightful, and all his paths are
pleasant, and the wayfaring Man, though a Fool, may walk therein, and not err;
-- Go on O Lord and prosper, ride on, because of thy Strength, and Holiness,
conquering and to conquer; bring yet more Sons from far, and Daughters from the
Ends of the Earth; that they may sit down together with Abraham, Isaac, and
Jacob, in that Rest which thou have prepared for them.

And now dear Friends, receive my Mite into your Treasury; strive not so much
for earthly Possessions, for your Children, as to instruct them in the right
way of the Lord. -- What Father so unnatural, but he would have his Children
wise? because a wise Son makes a glad Father: So teach them the fear of the
Lord, that is, the beginning of Wisdom; teach them to depart from Iniquity,
that is, the good Understanding, still having your Eyes Sion-ward; forget her
not, she is the City of our Solemnity. -- Forget not the day, when we were
seeking the Lord, and that from Mountain to Hill; inquiring of the Watchmen of
the Night, each one in particular, saying, Saw ye not him whom my Soul loves?
But they had not seen him, nor known him, neither could they tell us any thing
of him; we passed but a little from them, until we found him whom our Souls
loved: O then, how we held him and would not let him go! how willing were we to
part with all other things for him!

O then indeed was he become the Chiefest of ten Thousand to us: And now to
thee, thou Ancient of days, be Hallelujah, and Thanksgiving, Honor, and Glory,
and Praise; and again Hallelujah, for the Lord God Omnipotent Reigns.

Dorothy Tickell.

Something by way of Testimony concerning our dear Friend Hugh Tickell of
Portinscal, near Keswick in Cumberland, Deceased.
HE was convinced of the Lord's blessed Truth, toward the latter End of the
Year, 1653. -- And after that he was convinced, and had his Understanding
opened, he became very serviceable in his place, and was freely, and willingly
given up to do, or suffer for the Lord's blessed Truth, which the Lord was
pleased to make him a Partaker of with many more: And as he grew up in the
Truth, he became more and more diligent, in meeting with, and amongst the
People of God called Quakers; And not only so, but freely and willingly offered
up his House for a Meeting House, for all that sought after the Lord, and his
Truth, for many Years. -- And the Lord was also pleased to endue him with a
Spirit of discerning, insomuch that he became serviceable to the Lord, and his
People, and a help and strength to those that were weak, and ready to give a
word of Advice, and Counsel, both publicly and privately, when at any time in
the Wisdom of God, he saw it a Service.

Likewise he was drawn forth to travel to visit some Friends, both in the West
of England, and in Scotland. -- And as to his sufferings when called thereunto;
He was a Man that did bear a faithful Testimony, both in suffering the spoiling
of his Goods, and Imprisonment of his Body, (as witness) he was committed to
Prison by one Henry Marshall Priest of Crostwhait; because for Conscience Sake,
he could not pay him Tithes, where he remained about three Years in Carlisle
Goal. And being freed, he was afterward again committed to the said Prison by
Richard Lowrey, another Priest of the said Crostwhait, because he could not pay
him Tithes, where he remained some time, until Providence ordered his
enlargement: All which suffering he patiently did bear, and willingly endured
for the Testimony of Jesus, and of a good Conscience. And thus he continued
bearing his Testimony in faithfulness, in doing and suffering, until weakness
of Body came upon him, which in the Lord's appointed time, comes upon all men,
and so finished his Course, and laid down his Body in the Year, 1680.

From our Men's Meeting, to which the said Hugh Tickell did belong, the 25th.
Day of the 12th. Month, 1689/90. Subscribed, by John Tiffin, Thomas Laythes,
Peter Head, Thomas Scott, Thomas Fell, George Peel.


The Testimony of Thomas Laythes, Concerning Hugh Tickell.
AS for our dear deceased Friend Hugh Tickell, he was one that I had a
knowledge of, and acquaintance with, all-most from my Childhood. -- For when I
was a Boy at School, we were both tabled in one House, and for several Years;
and in all that time, I never heard nor knew, as I remember, but that he lived
and walked as an honest Man amongst Men. And for the time of his Convincement
of God's Eternal Truth, he was some Years before me convinced; so that other
Ancient Friends can give a more timely Testimony herein than I can do, being
conversant with him; yet this I know, and have to say for him, that he was one
that did endeavor my Convincement, as much, if not more than any other, both
by word and writing. -- But as I have sometime said, it was the Lord alone that
did persuade my heart; to him be the Praise and Glory for ever, Amen.

And after I came to own the way, and Truth of God, I had a clear Sense of his
Spirit, we being both of one Meeting for above twenty and six Years time, and
this is my Testimony for my Friend: He was of a deep weighty solid Spirit, and
had a good Understanding, and discerning in the things of God: And when he
spoke thereof in our little Meeting, (to which he was a great Strength,) it was
much in the awe, dread, and fear of the Lord; and often in much Brokenness, and
tenderness of Spirit, as I am a living Witness of.

He was also a great sufferer in his day, for bearing a faithful Testimony to
the Truth, and against Tithes. -- And such was his Love to God, and his Truth,
that I do believe, he could have laid down his Life, and sealed his Testimony
with his Blood, if he had been called thereunto.

And toward the latter part of his time, and in his old Age being above 70
Years, he grew weak, and infirm of Body; -- and near the time of his departure
out of the Body, for I was much with him then both day and night, and when he
could but utter few words, yet he named me, and I felt a near tender Sense upon
him of that Love, and Unity we often had together in the Spirit of Truth.

Thomas Laythes.

The Testimony of Thomas Dockrey, Concerning our dear Friend Hugh Tickell of
Portinscal, who was born in Thorntwhait, in the Parish of Crostwhait, and
County of Cumberland, -- who in his younger Years, for Religion, had desires to
be of the best way, and about the fortieth Year of his Age, and the latter End
of the Year, 1653. was convinced of God's Everlasting Truth, and way, which is
cast up, and now made known to many People in this Day of God's glorious Power,
Light, and Life, that is dawned and broken forth in this Nation, and many other
Nations. Glory and Praise to God for evermore.
FOR in the Year, 1653. G. F. a Minister in the Spirit, and Power of God, and
of the Everlasting Gospel, coming into Cumberland; and Hugh Tickell going to
some Meetings where G. F. was; he was convinced and satisfied of our Religion,
Way, Truth, Faith, and Worship, etc. and so joined with the People of God, who
in scorn were first called Quakers in Darbyshire, about the Year, 1650. and
continued with them till his Decease, which was above thirty Years, being Aged
above Seventy.

So he owned the Truth above 30 Years, and never did shrink, faint, nor fly the
Cross of Christ, but stood noble and valiant for God and his Eternal Truth, and
did bear a good and faithful Testimony to the same, in the place where God had
set him. -- For I had a true and certain Knowledge of him above thirty Years;
and I lived with him above seven Years; who after he owned the Truth, had a
good Measure of the Spirit of the Lord poured forth upon him, and a true
knowledge, and feeling of the Power of God, and of his Love, and Presence;
wherein he had large openings, and a deep discerning of the things of God, and
was of a grave, sober Deportment toward all, and of an honest Life, and
Conversation, which adorned his Profession of the ever blessed Truth: Also, he
was of a sound Mind, and Judgment, steadfast in the Faith, endued with spiritual
Knowledge and Wisdom; -- And could have given good Advice, and Counsel, and
Exhortation in Divine things; he was faithful, and loved Faithfulness in all
that professed the Truth, and both loved and sought the Peace and Unity and
Prosperity of the Church. He was a Man that God blessed both in Spirituals, and
Temporals, and as the Apostle says, Be not forgetful to entertain Strangers;
for some have entertained Angels unawares, and do good unto all, but especially
unto the Household of Faith; so he was ready to entertain and to do good, and to
have Meetings at his House, when there were but few in that part. -- And was a
patient Sufferer both in Body and Goods, for Truth and Righteousness sake; he
was zealous and fervent in Spirit, and Mind, holding his Integrity; I had dear
Unity with him, and loved him in that which will never change, nor die, but
was, and is the Joy, Life, and Strength of God's People throughout all
Generations, towit, the Life and Power. Holy, glorious Praises to the glorious
God: For he had the Gift of found Judgment and Knowledge in Divine Spiritual
things, and I could have opened my heart to him the rein.

And likewise he did bear a living faithful Testimony, both against the Priests
at Steeple Houses, and in the Markets to the People, and had a tender
encouraging Testimony in Meetings. -- And about the Year, 1696. was moved of
the Lord to go into Scotland, to Duglas, Heads, Hambleton, Glascow, and
Edinburgh, etc. And had a good Service for the Lord, and his Truth, as I truly
understood when I went amongst them there afterward.

And as a Testimony of his Love to God, his Truth, and People, he manifested it
both in his Life, and toward his latter End; -- and now he being gone the way
of all the Earth, I believe it is well with him, as to his Eternal Estate, and
that his Soul is at rest, and blessedness with the Eternal God; For blessed are
the Dead which dye in the Lord, they rest from their Labor and their Works
follow them; -- And I pray God, that we who yet remain in the Body, may so
finish our Course in the Truth, and keep the Faith, that we may end our days in
Peace with God, and have an Eternal Inheritance amongst the sanctified. -- For
the Eternal Righteous God is just, to whom all must give an Account, and be
rewarded according to their Deeds done in the Body, be they good, or evil; --
And, O that many People would consider this, and turn to God's Grace and Truth,
that comes by Jesus Christ, and to the Spirit of God, that never deceived any
People, nor never will, that thereby they may be lead, instructed, and taught
to forsake their evil Way, and turn to Righteousness, that they might live, and
that God might be glorified, through Jesus Christ, to whom with God the Father,
be Honor, and Praise, forever.

Thomas Dockrey.

The Testimony of M. Fox, Concerning Hugh Tickell.
THIS I can testify for Hugh Tickell, he was a dear and faithful Servant of
the Lord from the beginning, and one that the Truth had a great Work and
Operation upon; so that he was brought very low and tender, and zealous for the
Lord and his Truth; so that he bore a true and faithful Testimony against the
Priests, and the Spirit of the World, and was very active both in speaking and
writing for the Testimony of Truth to my knowledge; he has come many times to
Swarthmoore in true Tenderness and Openness of Spirit, and he was a true Liver
unto God, unto his latter End, though he was convinced at the first Appearance
of Truth in those parts, and bore a faithful Testimony for the Lord in his Day,
in serving and in suffering; he was many times cast into Prison, where he
remained years together, so that he was wanting in no part of the Truths
Service; he was a true and faithful Man to God and his Truth all his Days, and
lived in the fear of the Lord, in Tenderness and in Humility, and in Brokenness
of Spirit, and in great Love and Unity with his Wife and Family, and was a good
Example to all, and in his latter End testified his Love and Faithfulness to
the Lord and his Truth, and left the Evidence of his Love to Friends, and the
Truth, and has now left this Transitory World, and is entered into his
Everlasting Inheritance, where he lives in Eternal Love; Praises to the Lord to
all Eternity.

London, the 6th. the 4th. Month, 90.
G. F's Testimony concerning Hugh Tickell.
AFter Hugh Tickell our dear Friend, and Brother in the Lord, had believed in
the Light, the Life in Christ, and so became a Child of Light, and of the Day
of Christ; he came both to know and hear Christ the great Prophet, that God had
raised up in the New Testament, like unto Moses in the Old Testament, etc. and
to follow Christ his Shepherd, and hear his Voice, and to be one of the Sheep
of his Pasture, which he had laid down his Life for, and then could follow the
Hirelings no longer, nor put in their Mouths, and would not let Balaam's Priest
ride upon him, as Old Balaam did upon his Ass for his Wages of Unrighteousness,
and would not follow him in his Errors, but followed Christ, who said, freely
you have received, freely give, and followed his Ministers who kept the Gospel
without Charge, and God opened the Mouth of this Hugh Tickell to reprove
Balaam's Priests for their Errors; and for his not giving them their Wages of
Unrighteousness, you may see in this Book, how they persecuted and imprisoned
him, and what became of his Persecutors, and what was their End. But he being
settled upon Christ the heavenly Rock and Foundation, all the Storms and
Tempests, and the Heat of the persecuting Sun could not move him, he being of a
meek, quiet, peaceable, gentle Spirit, and of a good Life, and Conversation; I
had known him long, and do believe, that he died in the Lord, and is blessed,
and is at rest from his Labors.

London, the 6th. the 4th. Month, 90. G. F.

FINIS.

