Some Queries concerning Liberty of Conscience, directed to William Penn and
Henry Care.
1. FRiends, Is this Liberty of Conscience, for which you so much contend,
designed only for Christians, and perhaps Jews; or must it also be extended to
Mahometans and Pagans?

2. Must not the Indians, who worship the Devil, to keep him from doing them
mischief, come under the Wings of this your Christian Liberty?

3. The Indians under the Spaniard, who complained, that they were not suffered
to worship their Pagods once a year, when the Spaniards worshipped their Pagods
every day: Had they not just Reason for their Complaint, as being debarred the
Exercise of their Religion? And was it not strange, that the Christian
Idolaters should be to the Pagan Idolaters so harsh and rigorous, and should
thus disturb and molest them in their way of Worship, being so like their own?

4. Are not the Laws of Carolina too strait-laced in your Opinion, which
tolerate only those that believe a God: For perhaps you may think, that even
professed Atheists may he useful Subjects, and fit to be employed by Princes?

5. Is not that which you call Liberty of Conscience, in reality a general
License for Blasphemy and Idolatry? Or in words more at length, Do not you
intend, that the grossest Idolatries, and the most horrid Blasphemies, shall
have their free and full swing, without the least Punishment or Restraint?

6. The Kings of Judah that beat down Idolatrous Worship, and who are vulgarly
reputed good Kings, were they not in your judgment, inhumane Persecutors for
Matters of mere Religion, and Usurpers of Gods Empire over the Conscience?

7. Friend Penn, Do thou believe in the Council of Lateran? If thou do not,
thou art not so good a Catholic as some take thee to be?

8. Does not a Decree of that Council oblige all good Catholics to Extirpate
Heresy?

9. Is not then the Northern Heresy to be Extirpated?

10. And is not all this pains taken for its Extirpation?

11. Can any thing free good Catholics from the Obligation of that Decree,
save only their want of Power to perform it?

12. When ever they get that Power, does not the Obligation return?

13. Can you, with all your Skill, tie up a future Popish Parliament? I mean,
King and Parliament?

14. Is not an immutable humane Law, a Monster in Nature? And do not you dream,
or would make us believe, that your Magna Charta shall be such a Monster?

15. Will not your Magna Charta be void from the beginning, if it want the
Pope's Confirmation?

16. Does not Contzen the Jesuit, (a famous Writer of Church-Politicks)
recommend Liberty of Conscience, for a proper and effectual means, (as the Case
may be) to propagate the Roman Catholic Faith? And can there be any Case more
fit for it, than where the Papists are inferior in Strength and Number, and
Superior in Favor?

17. Does not Coleman in his Trial deny that he ever designed to bring in
Popery by force, or any other way save only by a Toleration?

18. If all Sects have full Liberty, and one Sect have all the Favor and
Preferment, will not that Sect soon out-grow and overtop the rest? And will
not all that are in Office, and all that expect or desire to be, (that is,
almost all the Men of Parts and Industry in the Nation) have a strong
temptation to be of that Sect?

19. Can you inform us of any Government, either past or present, wherein there
are not some Qualifications required by Law, for those that take Public
Offices and Employments? Which thing You call Tramelling and Cramping the
Government?

20. If a Kingdom should be in danger of being over run with Mahometanism, and
to prevent it a Law were made, obliging all Public Officers to make open
profession of the Christian Faith, and solemnly to renounce the Alcoran, or
some of the muddest Points of it; is not even this, in your Opinion, a Cramping
and putting Tramells upon the Government; And were not such a Law null and
void, think you; as debarring the Prince that Liberty of Employing whom he
pleases, and Mahometans among the rest, which by the Law of Nature is inherent
in his Person? And might you not farther say, That Mohammedan or Turkish
Subjects may be very useful to a Prince, and that it were very unreasonable by
such pernicious Religious Tests to deprive him of their Service? And if he be
minded to have Turks in his Household, either in part or wholly, and Turkish
Magistrates, Turkish Ministers and Counselors, Turkish Officers and Soldiers;
and even whole Turkish Regiments, whole Turkish Garrisons, whole Turkish
Armies; why should any Laws hinder him? And why may he not fill the Church
Dignities with Turkish Priests, what ever the Laws say to the contrary? And
though these things tend plainly to the Destruction of the Kingdom, what matter
is it?

21. Which ought to be esteemed of greater Authority? The Opinion of Four men
in Red Gowns (purged and garbled for the purpose, and having the Rod still over
their Backs) which asserts the Dispensing Power; or the declared Judgment of
two Parliaments at least, which denies it and damns it?

22. Were not those four Men like the Speaking Head; and only seemed to give a
sound to those words, which were spoken in another Room? And were they not
plainly at this Lock, Say as you are bid, or out you go, as others have gone
before you?

23. Was not the Martyr a sneaking Novice in the Art of Ranny-ty, when he
labored the Judges underhand, and in the Case of Ship money? Whereas now
things are carried openly and bravely?

24. Friends, Do you intend to have the Oath of Supremacy taken away among the
other Tests?

25. Is not this Oath a Civil Test, though it may seem in some sort Religious?
Since it is only a Renouncing of a Foreign Usurped Power. And though this Power
be Spiritual, yet it draws Temporals with it, and our Civil Liberties are
concerned; for we cannot pretend to Civil Liberty, if we are under Spiritual
Bondage?

26. Is not the designing and endeavoring to enslave Ones Country to a Foreign
Usurped Power, High Treason in its own Nature, though there were no positive Law
against it?

27. Is it not just and necessary, that persons who are openly carrying on a
Design so Destructive, should be excluded from all Public Command and
Authority; thereby to keep them from having power to accomplish their wicked
Intentions?

28. Should not a Promissory Clause be added to this Oath, whereby they that
take it must solemnly Swear, That they will never promote the setting up, or
restoring the Popes Authority in this Kingdom, or give their consent to it, but
that they will oppose it by all Lawful ways and means to the utmost of their
power?

29. Is it not the same thing in effect, to set up the Popes power and to put
those in Office and Authority that will? And is it not the same thing, to put
Papists in Office and to make them capable? For if they be once made capable,
will they not have all the Offices Commands and Dignities both in Church and
State?

30. Must not your Divine Magna Charta have a standing Army of Mercenaries to
support it? And will not this Mercenary Army be essential to our Religious, as
well as to our Civil Liberties? And must there not be in it good store of
Dragoons?

31. Why are not our Civil Liberties a little in your thoughts, as well as the
Liberties of Religion? Seeing without the former, the latter will not be
long-lived? And why are you not likewise hammering a Magna Charta for the
Corporations, to restore them to their ancient Freedom? For will not our Trade
in a short time decay, and at last be totally ruined, if our Corporations (that
manage it) be enslaved?

32. Does not their Condition affect the whole Kingdom, since four parts of
five of those that Represent us in Parliament, are by them chosen?

33. What Shadow of Liberty have we left, if our Representatives be not free?
And how can these be free, if those that choose them be at Will and Pleasure,
and in downright Servitude?

34. Are they not like to be brave Champions for the Peoples Interest, when
they cannot come to be chosen but by the Kings appointment, and both They and
their Electors depend upon the Crown?

35. Is not a Prince that makes Laws with a Parliament of his own Nomination,
as absolute as He whose Edicts are Laws? And are not the Peoples Estates, their
Liberties, and their Lives, wholly in his power?

36. Is not our Constitution, and the frame of our Government, quite altered by
this Hellish Contivance? And are not the foundations of our Liberty totally
subverted and destroyed? And has not our Striving against Popery brought in
Slavery into the bargain? And what ever becomes of our Religion, is not our
Liberty lost for ever?

37. Friends, is not your Magna Charta concerned in these Matters? For(...)

38. Will not the Parliament now coming, when they have taken away the Tests
and Penal Laws, be dissolved soon after?

39. And will not the next Parliament after that, of at least the Major part of
it, (as Corporations now stand) be certainly Roman Catholics?

40. What avails it to provide against undue Returns (which You, Friends, or
some of your party have been weekly offering at) if we shall be certainly
ruined in the Elections, they being in the hands of the Papists?

41. Do they not deserve to be Hanged for Fools, that cannot govern Elections,
when they may put in and put out the Electors at their pleasure?

42. Will it not therefore be a thing of no difficulty to establish Popery by a
Law? And then, will not your Magna Charta be damned much easier than it was
made?

43. Though it be made unalterable by a Clause as strong as can be devised,
will they not first repeal that Clause, and then down goes Magna Charta?

44. Is it not the opinion of good Catholics that no Faith is to be kept with
Heretics?

45. How can we rely upon that Man's Promises, who will be told by those whom he
must believe, that it is meritorious to break them, and damnation to keep them?

46. Were not He a rare Catholic indeed, who by sparing and indulging
Heretics, whom he hates, would damn his own Soul?

47. Is it not also the opinion of good Catholics, that Heretics ought not to
have common Justice? Which was the way in France, before they fell to
Dragooning.

48. Will it not in a while be found expedient to revive the Writ de Haeretico
comburendo? The poor Heretics thought themselves very cunning in taking away
that Writ; as if the Catholics could not restore it, when they have got the
power.

49. Will not the Writ de Excommunicato capiendo do pretty well in the mean
time? Since, they may with ease excommunicate all the Heretics, and then lay
them in Jayl, Which is a most as good as Hanging or Burning them. And now we
talk of Jayls,

50. Is not the Habeas Corpus Act a Cramping and Tramelling of the Government,
and therefore fit to be graciously dispensed with? Or to save that labor, will
not the Parliament that repeals the Tests, repeal that Act likewise, with all
other Acts of the like nature?

51. Would it not be a brave Exchange, if they that set up the new Magna
Charta, should give up the Old one?

52. Can it in good sadness be reasonably expected, that a religious and
devoted Prince, should draw the guilt of Sacrilege upon his own Head, by not
restoring Abbey Lands when it shall be in his power to do it? And will not the
Directors of his Conscience be sure to mind him of it, and put it home to him?

53. Will not the thing in a very short time be clearly in his power: and be
easily accomplished by the same Methods, by which the Penal Laws were repealed?
That is, by a prudent directing and managing the Elections, and framing (we
must not say packing) a Parliament for the purpose?

54. Must we not therefore have three Parliaments yet, to complete our
Happiness? One to repeal the Tests and Penal Laws, another to establish Popery,
and the third to restore Church Lands. And has not the last Parliament, which
gave the money, thereby in effect done all the rest.

55. When these things are finished, will there be any further need of
Parliaments? Will not a Standing Army supply their place? And may we not hope
for the felicities of a French Government?

56. Since this French Government is already set up in New England, why should
we not have it here? And is it not a good sign that in due time we may have it?

57. Had not all these good Works been finished long since, if a certain late
Indian King had not been a great sluggard and Coward: And suffered himself to
be so basely baffled out of his Declarations of Indulgence? For which his Soul
might have roared in Purgatory to this day, if his Holiness had not stood his
Friend.

Here I thought to have ended: but another Question crowds in, and I cannot
keep it back.

58. If other means prove ineffectual, will it not be convenient (for the
quicker dispatch of Heretics) to dispense with the Penal Laws against Murder,
that so they may be taken off, without the dull formalities of Law?

FINIS.

