

THE Frontispice of the Kings Book opened. WITH A Poem annexed: The In-security
of Princes. Considered in an occasional Meditation upon the King's late
Sufferings and Death.

HORAT: Saepius ^ ventis agitatur ingens
Pinus: and celsae graviore casu
Decidunt Turres: feriuntque summos
Fulmina Montes.
The Frontispice of the Kings Book Opened.
BEFORE three Kingdoms-Monarch three Crowns lie;
Of Gold; of Thorn; of Glory; bright, but vain;
Sharp, yet but light; eternal to remain:
O'th World; of Christ; of Heaven: At's Foot; Hand; Eye*
He spurns; accepts; expects. Kneeles; yet does Reign.
A Sun; a Rock; a Palm Tree* (Emblems fit)
The Sun in Clouds: the Rock in waves o'th Sea:
The Palm Trees boughs depres't with weights: Yet see,
The Sun shines out more bright; the Rock's unsplit,
Unmoved: the Palm Tree flourishes. So He.
Another more at large.
WHAT have we here? a Worldling? Surely no.
What is he then? a Papist? Neither so.
Then happily some Enthusiast? Nothing less.
Is he an Atheist then? or what? Express.
To prove him not a Worldling, look below,
His action with his Foot proclaims him so.
That he is no Papist neither, look before him,
God's-Word, no Missal there, does so declare him.
Wherein professing that his Hope does rest,
We may conclude he is no Enthusiast.
That likewise he is no Atheist, mark his Ey
To Heaven lift up admits a Deity.
If then, no Worldling, nor a Papist he,
An Atheist neither, nor Enthusiast be;
What is he then? Why, questionless a KING.
A King? that is common, yet no common thing.
(What Is here presented to our view) to see
A King to Heaven devoted on his knee.
Kings, though the greatest, yet not still the best:
Too often than Heaven the World in more request
With such. Then sure this is some Christian King;
So Christian like his garb in every thing.
For mark! his Body to devotion framed;
His Soul the whilst with heavenly fire enflamed:
Whose operation makes him spurn away
His worldly Crown, as Burdensome though Gay.
Giving all earthly Kings to understand,
That Vanity does still their Crown attend:
Which underfoote are fitter to be trod,
Then touched with hand, or taken on the Head:
This therefore with his foot thus turned away,
His hand he does upon his Saviors lay.
The which Though Sharp, yet Light, and which by Grace
Being attended, may be borne with ease.
And now, the former Crown contemned, and
This latter taken up with cheerful hand;
Gods word withal proposed for the scope,
The Rule, the Square, the Anchor of his Hope;
(Who promises that those with Christ shall reign
Who waving Crowns, his Cross shall entertain:)
No marvel, if that He with steadfast Eye
Of lively Faith, advanced to the Sky,
Does there behold a Crown, which the other two*
As much as Heaven the Earth, beyond does go:
Heaven's Blessed diadem, Eternal, and
The which, as proper, Glory does attend.
In this condition, what though Winds do blow?
And storms on all sides threaten overthrow?
Though Troubles rise, and Waves lift up their voice,
Like Billows beating with a hideous noise
Upon (that emblem of a constant mind)
A Rock, that bassler both of Waves and Wind.
Yet still He stands Unmoved, maintains His ground,
Over all assaults Triumphing, safe and sound.
Whilst through Black Clouds breaks forth a Heavenly Ray,
By Darkness so set off, it Shines like Day,
Which, streaming down upon this constant Head,
So quits the same of Care, his Heart of Dread,
That, though oppressed, as the Palm by Weight,
( Virtues true Emblem) yet t'a greater height
He still arises of divine perfection
Under the Burden of the worst affliction.
And, thus is shadowed forth of British Pearls
(So famous heretofore in foreign Worlds)
The most illustrious, orient, precious one,
That ever yet adorned the English Throne:
The best of Kings, set over the Subjects worst;
The Father of the Second, Charles the first.
Did thou not know him, Reader? then look hence:
Here' that at hand will cure thy ignorance:
His Picture by his own rare Pencill taken;
None ever by Apelles better drawn:
His Golden Manual, so divine, so rare,
As, save God's book, admits of no compare.
The Book of Books, so choice (one word for all)
As e're the Chri^^ian world was blessed withal.
This Front is but the Sign, go, enter then;
Thy Soul nere lodged in a braver Inn:
Which to put down, though Earth and Hell combine,
Though Men and Devils all their forces join;
Whilst Clu^s is Trumpe, yet unto all be it known
By Heaven it is Licensed, and may not go down.
Though, as a Book it wants men's Imprimatur.
It glories yet in his who is men's Creator.
Then Bles'd his Providence! thrice bles'd his Pleasure!
That has good Subjects blessed with such a Treasure.
Mean time, accursed, and thrice accursed all such
As, like damned Rebels, at this blessing grutch!
Whilst by this Book the former grow much better,
May Heaven convert, or else confound the latter.
But Reader! on, leave Strawes and gather Pearls;
Leave these, and to the Lines of brave King CHARLES:
Of whom, besides this admirable EIKON
We have another in our CHARLES the SECOND:
One, of the virtues as apparent Heir,
As of the Crown of his illustrious Sire:
In referrence to whom, let us pray, say, sing,
May Rebels perish: But
GOD SAVE THE KING.
The In-security of Princes.
O How does sad experience verify
His perilous estate that sits on high!
Would thou far off from thunder-stroke remove,
Then keep thy distance, come not near to Jove:
Whilst high-pitch'd Towers ly open to wind and weather;
The low-thatch'd Bowre's insensible of either.
The lowly Shrubbe stands ever firm and fast,
Whilst lofty Cedars shake with every blast.
No stormy-winds disturb the humble Vale,
Whilst the proud Mountain feels the smallest gale.
Safety but seldom at the Court resides:
It flies the Prince, and with the Pesant bides.
From Palaces contentment keeps aloof:
(A Cottage-guest) it loves the low-set-Roofe.
Votum Authoris.
WERE I then of the twain my choice to make
I Would leave the Palace, and the Cottage take.
A Prince or Pesant might I choose to be,
The Pesant rather then the Prince for me!
Were I by option, high, or low to dwell,
I Would choose the Valley and refuse the Hill.
Might I, or Tower, or Bower, at will elect,
I Would take the Bower, and the Tower reject.
Ever preferring safe obscurity
To envied in-secure sublimity.
And choosing rather to abide below,
Then hazard, from the Hill, an overthrow.
"Who Is down already, of up-standers all
"Has this advantage: That he fears no fall.
Another.
O To what dangers, to what cares and fears,
Is he exposed that the Scepter bears!
What though a golden Crown his brows adornes?
It Is little better than a Crown of thorns.
Such cares his head molest, his heart such fears,
Whose head the Crown, whose hand the Scepter bears.
The saying's old, but true: Were it but known
To him that in the Streets should find a Crown
What Cares attend the same, he would not stoop
(As hardly worth the pains) to take it up.
No Crown without a cross: the Crown and care,
Like sin and sorrow, undivi^ed are.
'Twixt Crown and care as great affinity,
As 'twixt Effect and Cause; 'twixt Fruit and Tree.
For worldly Crowns how fond is th^n the strife!
No Crown for me, except the Crown of Life!
Those, like to worldly glory, post away;
This immarcessible, and lasts for ay.
Though robbed of the former, yet the head
Of brave King Charles with this is garnished:
And He triumphant sits aloft, and sings
Continual praises to the King of Kings:
Above the reach of those malignant ones;
Rebellious Corah's, worst of Belials sons;
Whom as he here with patience, so there
Beholds with pity, and with smiling cheer
Laughs at their Malice, disappointed so,
That making him a mortal Crown forgo,
A Crown immortal he has gained. Fond men!
'Ti^ you, not he, that are the losers then.
For you have lost a Prince, of whom fame swore,
There never was the like; nor should be more.
For Intellectualls, t'admiration rare;
And for his Morals beyond all compare.
For his Religion, past example sound;
And for devotion never enough renowned.
Whether as Husband, Parent, Master, He
A Mirror fit for all posterity.
In short, say malice whatsoever she Can,
The Sun never shone upon a braver man:
And of his Country such a tender father;
That, than wrong it, he Martyrdom Chose rather.
And thus unto some few men's lawless pleasure
Was sacrificed three Kingdoms Choicest treasure.
Whilst Villainy with Villani's upheld,
And Murder for Rebellion made the shield.
Thus bad beginnings to worse ends are tied:
A Rebel first and then a Regicide.
No other Plea, that ever I could see,
For that their so much urged Necessity.
Necessity? o Heavens! Cursed be that need,
Which makes a sinner in his sin proceed!
Was 't not enough they should so ill begin?
But they must needs be adding sin to sin?
Is this their thorough Reformation? this
IN the fear of God to perfect holiness?
Thus keep they Covenant, when away they take
His Life, whom Glorious here they vowed to make?
If these be Saints, if this their Doctrine be,
A sinner rather then a Saint for me!
If such as these the fruits of Sanctity,
Then Machiavel himself a Saint may be,
If Saints are understood in this large sense,
'Twixt Saints and Devils what is the difference?
This sounds more like the voice of Hell or Rome,
Into whose secrets let not my Soul come!
Nor yet of theirs; a sort of brain sick youths,
Pretenders to new Lights, and to new Truths:
Old Errors these; darke-Lanthorns those, the which
Betray their followers into Hell's black ditch,
But see what by fair words they promised,
By their foul deeds is now accomplished,
Though in a better sense; good out of ill
Heavens midwifry producing, spite of Hell.
For maugre Men and Devils, he is become
So glorious as no Prince in Christendom,
And is by so much more exalted now
As lately (Rebels) trampled on by you.
Experience thus confirms the Adagy:
"That he that suffers gets the Victory.
Votum Authoris.
IS Suffering then to Heaven the Kings highway?
Goes the Voluptuous Worldling clean astray?
Then Mammonists I sing requiems to your souls!
Let Bacchus boys Carowse their wine in bowls:
Let Gluttons of their Bellies make their God:
Let Gallants glory to be richly clad:
Let Sluggards stretch themselves on beds of down:
Their heads with Rose-buds let the wanton crown:
Let the Ambitious live to tower on high:
Let the Malicious hug his evil Ey:
Let the Sacrilegist celebrate the day
That made Church Lands become his lawful prey:
Whilst the proud Rebel triumphs that he
Himself can raise by fall of Monarchy:
But thou my Soul! abhor such prostitutions!
Such sensual Epicurean base pollutions!
Mere bypath these, for Straglers; ways that tend,
Like that broad-Rode, unto some dismal end.
The Cross let be thy portion, sanctified!
Thy Sovereign, next thy Savior, be thy guide!
Went thy sweet Savior to the fatall-Tree,
Thy Sovereign to the Block, so willingly?
And will thou startle at a petty cross?
A light affliction? some slight temporal loss?
Such Captains, and a Coward! No; Thus led,
I Will scorn it should be said I slinch'd or fled.
Heavens say Amen, and grant I henceforth may
The broad declining, choose the narrow way!
Then, though hearts grief may by the way offend,
Yet such hearts-ease shall crown my journeyes end,
As never Eye has seen, Ear heard, nor can
Conceived be by heart of Mortall-man.
Then set a period here. Let contemplation
Make up the rest in silent admiration.
FINIS.

