CALIOPE'S Cabinet Opened.

WHEREIN Gentlemen may be informed how to adorn themselves for FUNERALS,
FEASTINGS, and other Heroic Meetings.

ALSO Here they may know their place and Worth; with all the Degrees and
D^stinctions of Honor in the Realm: showing how every one ought to take place,
with the Titles due to them; with other things of Antiquity very observeable.

By James Salter.

LONDON. Printed by G. M. for Will. Crook, at the three Bibles on
Fleet-Bridge, 1665.

To the Worshipful Thomas Clifford, Esquire, And to the Worshipful Henry Ford.
Esquire; Justices of the Peace, for the County of Devon.
Honored Sirs,
YE may not only admire at my Confidence, but smile at my Folly, that dare
recommend to your Protection, and publish under your Name this my rude and
unpollished Enchyridian: I must ingeniously confess they are subjects too low
for either of your high and learned Endowments (which require an advancement by
some acute Orator) but knowing true Generosity accepts what is zealously
offered, though not deservingly excellent. I am the more encouraged to presume
on your genarous dispositions, hoping it may find admittance from your worthy
selves; for as Cinthia's borrowed Beams do shine from Titans Glory; so I am
sensible this Book of mine will appear dark, and may justly be rejected without
the reflection of your propitious Countenances upon it: Therefore, good Sirs,
be pleased to own both it and your engaged Servant. Having found you Amicos
inter adversa, I could do no other then publicly to own your Favors to my
unworthy self; the acknowledgement of your Loves to me is my thanks, and to
thank you for your Loves must be my best acknowledgement; I can do no more, I
shall never do less, and what I want in power is supplied in will. Pardon my
boldness if I have soared too high in this enterprise, who is

Your Servant to be commanded, James Salter.

Books newly Printed for William Crook, at the three Bibles on Fleet-Bridge,
1665.
The History of St. George, showing his Miracles, Achievements, and all other
Actions during his Life, with his Martyrdom, etc. By T. Lowick, Gent. Never
Printed before.

Sixty nine Enigmatical Characters, all exactly drawn to the life; very full of
pleasure and delight: By R. F. Esquire

There is newly cut the Pictures to the Old Testament; never before cut in
England.

The Royal Stem, being a Relation to all the most principal Actions from
William the Conqueror to the end of the Year 1664. With the Pictures of King
Charles the Second; all in a broad sheet of Paper.

CALIOPE'S Cabinet Opened.
The Kings Crown with its Twelve Stones therein.
IN the King of England; Crown are these ensuing Precious Stones.

1. Topazion, it contains the color of most Precious Stones, and by which the
King is warned to exercise all virtues.

2. Smaragd or Emrdud, so green as it exceeds all Herbs. It represents
Justice in the King.

3. Sardique, it is in color like unto red Clay, which is in the top of the
Diadem; for the King to consider though he is the highest yet he is but Clay.

4. Cryselith, it shines like Gold, sending as it were, forth flames; this
exhorts the King to shine in Wisdom and Prudence.

5. Calcedon, being strong and hard by nature; shows that the King should be
of Fortitude and Courage of mind in the Regiment of his people.

6. Hyacinth; It shows like water the Sun shining upon it, it teaches
Temperance and Sobriety.

7. Jasper, it is like a dark or Grasse-green color; This teaches the King to
provide for the Diet and plenty of his people more then for his own.

8. Crisopalle, of the color of Gold somewhat mixed with green; the Gold
admonishes Wisdom; the green warns him to aspire Heavenly things.

9. Berill, green and pale; this persuades Heavenly Contemplation, and that he
ought not to be Corpulent by Epicurism.

10. A Sapphire is of a light blew; This instructs the King to Continency.

11. Amatist, it is decked with Purple and Violet; the Purple bids the King
to difcharge his Regal Function; the Violet to give a good Savor.

12. Sardonax, is black in the bottom, red in the midst, and white above; and
instructs the King to Humbleness, Charity, and Sincerity.

His Ensigns.
1. A Mound or Ball of Gold with a Cross on it shows to him that the Religion
of Christ ought to be reverenced through all his Dominions. 2. Scepter, shows
Justice. 3. Sword, denotes Vengeance. 4. Ring, noting Faithfulness. 5.
Bracelet, which is for good Works. 6. Purple Robe, is for Reverence. 7. Diadem,
which is for Triumph.
The Coronation of the King.
FIrst goes the Kings Messengers two and two. Gentlemen two and two. Trumpeerts
on both sides. Esquires of the Body. Knights Bachelors. Greater Chaplains.
Younger Sons of Noblemen. Mdermen of London. Clerks of the Counsel. Secretaries
to the King. Master of the Rolls. Knights of the Bath. Counselors to the
King. Knights Baronets and Bannorets. Knights of the Garter, no Barons. Sons of
Viscounts. Younger Sons of Earls and Marquesses. Barons. Earls eldest Sons.
Viscounts. Bishops. Marquesses eldest Sons. Dukes younger Sons. Earls. Dukes
eldest Sons. Marquesses. Dukes. Controuler of the House. Treasurer of the
House. Almoner. Secretary of State. Lord Admiral. Keeper of the Privy Seas.
Lord Great Master. Lord Chancellor. Two representing the Dukes of Normandy and
Aquitaine. Garter and the Lord Mayor with the Mace of his Majesty. Sergeants at
Arms and Heralds on both sides. The Constable of England, the great
Chamberlain and Marshall on each side of the King. The King under a Canope born
by six Knights. The Master of the Horse leading a Rich Horse. Nine Pages on
Horseback with their Captain following. Gentlemen Pentioners with their
Partisans. The Captain of the Guard with the Yeomen. Servants of Noblemen and
Gentlemen.
A Royal Feast, the King Fresent.
FIrst at the Head of the Table the King himself sits.

2. At the lower end of the same Table are placed Ambassadors of diverse
Princes.

3. Before him stand the Carver, Sewer, and Cupbearer, with a great number of
Gentlemen-waiters attending his Person; the Ushers making place to strangers
that come to behold his Person.

4. At a side Table on the right hand near adjoining to the King, are placed
the Lord Chancellor, Chamberlain, Steward, Treasurer, and Keeper of the Seal,
with Diverse Honorable Persons.

5. At another Table at the left hand are placed the Treasurer of the Household,
Secretaries, the Kings Serjants at Law, the Master of the Revels, the King at
Arms, the Dean of the Chapel, and diverse Gentlemen Pentioners to furnish the
same.

6. At the other Table at the other side are set the Master of the Game and his
chief Ranger, Masters of the Household, Clerks of the Green Cloth and Chequer,
with strangers to furnish the same.

7. At another Table over against them is placed the Lieutenant of the Tower,
accompanied with diverse Captains of foot.

8. At the lower end of the Hall begins the high Butler and Panther, Clerks of
the Kitchen furnished, throughout with the Kings Guard.

At every course the Trumpets with other Music are to sound.

Going to the Parliament in State.
FIrst the Messengers of the Court. Gentlemen of lesser note, Esquires.
Esquires of the Body. Clerks of the Chancery. Clerks of the Signet. Clerks of
the Privy Seal. Clerks of the Counsel. Masters of the Chancery. Knights
Bachelours. Knights Baronets and Bannorets. Sergeants at Law. The Kings
Sergeants. Two Heralds. Judges of the Exchequer. Judges of both Benches. Chief
Justice of the Pleas and chief Baron. Chief Justice of the Kings Bench and
Master of the Roll. Younger Sons of Noblemen. Treasurer of the Kings Chamber.
Knights of the Bath. Eldest Sons of Noblemen. Knights of the Privy Counsel.
Knights of the Garter. Principal Secretary. Treasurer and Comptroler of the
House. Two Heralds. Barons. Two Heralds. Bishops. The Bishop of Winchester,
Prelate of the Garter. Bishop of London, Durham, and Lord Chancellor to the
Archbishop of Canterbury, go next before the Archbishop by Act of Parliament.
Viscounts. Two Heralds. Earls. Herald King at Arms. Marquesses. Dukes. Lord
Chancelour. Archbishops. Clarenceaux King at Arms. Two Sergeants at Arms.
Garter with the chief Gentleman. Usher at his right hand. The Earl Marshal.
Great Chamberlain and Steward of the House. The King in a Chair carried. Four
Esquires and Footmen in rich Coats. Pentioners with Partisans ranked on each
side. Master of the Horse leading a spare Horse. Vice-Chamberlain.
Who are to be admitted Gentlemen.
In Ecclesiastical.
Vicars Generals. Guardians of Spirit. Deans of Cathedrals. Arch Deacons.
Chancellors. Treasurers. Chaunters. Doctors. Provosts. Deans. Governors of
Colleges.
In Military.
The high Constable. Lieutenant General Marshal. Admiral. Major General.
Quartermaster General. Treasurer. Guardians of Fronteers. Grand Esquires Mr. of
Artillery. Colonels. Sergeant Major. Captain and all that receive Commission.
In Civil State.
The Chancellor. President. Treasurer. Judges. Justices. Chief Officer of the
Palace Royal. Secretary of State. Mayors. Provosts. Bailiffs of incorporate
Towns and Cities.
Of Doctors.
The Doctor of Divinity is to be preferred next the Knight

The Doctor of Law next.

The Doctor of Physic next.

To these professions, is admitted the bearing of arms; but the Herald ought
to have a special care and regard in the designment Gentility obtained by
learning is honorable.

Professions not Gentlemen.
1. Viliny which is the Countreyman. 2. Shopkeepers commonly named Merchants,
whose condition of life is ungentlle, in regard of the doubleness of their
tongue, without which they cannot live. 3. Craftsmen. 4. Bondmen.
Seven more, but Laudable.
1. Agriculture. 2. Clothing. 3. Architecture. 4. Merchandising beyond Sea: 5.
Armatura, working of metal. 6. Arsvenatoria, the art of Hunting. 7. Theatoria,
the Arts of Plays.
These seven are correspondent to seven Sciences, which may be admitted
Gentlemen and bear arms, they are as follows.

Seven Sciences Gentile, with the Arms they may bear.
Doctor of Physic.
serpent and tree

MAy bear Argent, about a Laurel Tree a Serpent inwrapped.

The Orator.
three roses

May bear Azure on a chief gules three Roses Or

The Mathematician.
globe

May bear Azure a Globe Or

Geometrician.
carpenter's square

May bear Vert, a Carpenters Square Argent.

Astronomer.
ouroboros

May bare Azure a Serpent biting his Tail Or

Musician.
grasshopper

May have Vert a Grasshopper Or

Poet.
depiction of swan

May bear Azure, a Swan proper.

Precedencies of Kings and Kingdoms.
GReat debates have been concerning the preheminance of Kings and Kingdoms.

How their Ambassadors and Bishops were placed at the Council of Constance, is
as follows.

1. First was placed the German rank, to whom was united Bohemia, Hungaria,
Polonia, Dalmatia, Gretia, and Croatia.

2. The French had place alone as a Nation absolute.

3. Next was the English, to whom was united Scotland, Norway, Denmark Sweeden,
and Cyprus.

4. Then the Italians, who had all the Kingdoms subject to Rome, as Scicily,
Naples, etc.

5. Lastly, the Spaniards who were there hardly allowed a Nation, but in the
end to be the fifth and last, to whom were joined Castilia, Arragon, Majorca,
Navarra, Portugal, and Granado.

Officers of State how to take place.
THose of the Crown are to precede and take place of all other Nobility that
are not (except of the Blood Royal.

Of the Crown are
Lord Chancellor. Lord Treasurer. Lord President of the privy Council Lord Privy
Seal.
These six are next. If he be a Baron to sit above all Barons, or an Earl
above all Earls, as, 1. Lord great Chamberlain of England. 2. Lord high
Constable of England. 3. Lord Marshal of England. 4. Lord Admiral of England.
5. Lord great Master or Steward of the Kings House. 6. Lord Chamberlain of the
Kings House.


The principal Secretary, if a Baron, above all Barons.

How Gentlemen of a Civil or Military State are to take place.
DUkes, Marquesses, Earls, Viscounts, and Barons, are to take their places
according to the antiquity of their Title, and their Ancestors Creation, and
their Wives accordingly.

A Dukes eldest Son takes place as a Marquess, but beneath him his Wife,
beneath a Marchioness; if she be the Daughter and Heir of a Duke, she shall go
before all Dukes eldest Sons Wives, but beneath a Marchioness.

The youngest Sons of Dukes are in equal degree with an Earl, but to go
beneath him.

So the eldest Son of a Marqness, as an Earl, and the younger as Viscounts,
their Ladies and Sisters to take place accordingly.

An Earls eldest Son takes place as a younger Viscount, and a younger as a
Baron, their Wives and Sisters accordingly.

Viscounts eldest Sons, as Barons, and their youngest Sons to take place with
Barons eldest Sons, above all Knights.

Taking of place from a Slave to a Baron.
Romans 12. v. 10.
AS men here in England do and ought to precede and take place is as follows.

Workmen and Laborers of no substance are to precede a Bondsman.

Masons before Workmen.

Watermen and Ferrymen before Masons.

Fishermen before Watermen.

Mariners and Sea Soldiers before Fishermen.

Victuallers, Retailers of wares, and Chapmen, before them.

Artificors occupied in Arts either necessary or pleasing, before Victuallers,
etc.

Husbandmen, whose endeavors are employed about the fruits of the Earth before
Artificers.

A Gentleman is to precede a Husbandman, a Gentleman that has Title shall go
before others, as a Doctor, being a Gentle man, before others.

A Gentleman Graduate before a graduate tantum.

A Gentleman qualified with learning and virtue is before a Gentleman rich
only.

A Gentleman advanced for virtue shall be preferred before a Gentleman by
Office.

An Esquire by Office is to precede a Gentleman.

An Esquire by creation to precede him.

An Esquire by Birth him.

A Knight Bachelor is to go before an Esquire.

A Baronet before a Knight.

A Knight Bannorer before him.

A Baron before him.

If a man of wealth, as a Merchant, etc. purchase a Barony, he ought not to
have place amongst Barons.

A Father that has a Son that bears Office shall give place to his Son in
public meeting, except in private.

Between two equals, he that is in his own Jurisdiction shall precede.

A Citizen of a chief City is to take place of a Citizen of a meaner City in
any place indifferent, unless in their own precincts.

Inferior Justices, Colonels, Captains in the Field, are to precede Captains
of particular Castles, Judges in Towns Corporate, where no action is triable
above 15. l The first are right Worshipful, the second only Worshipful.

Judges, Governors, or Lieutenants Generals of Provinces, Cities, etc. are to
take place of inferior Justices, Colonels, etc. These are honorable.

Orders of Knighthood in England and the Christian World.
FOr the encouraging of virtuous minds and generous spirits, Princes and
Estates thought good to erect several orders of Knighthood; here in England are
only these, viz.

1. Knights of the Garter, or St. George, whose Ensign is Argent, a plain Cross
gules.

This Order was instituted by Edward the Third, after a return from the Wars
against the French and Scots with victory; but others affirm it was from the
Kings wearing the Countess of Satisburyes Garter, which caused jealousy in the
Queen: whereupon the Motto is risen, Honi soit qui male pense. But that fable
may probably be risen by the French to abate the honor of the Victory.

The Patron of this Order is St. George, the Sovereign, the King, the number 26.

The Officers, Bishop of Winchester, a Chancellor, Register, a King at Arms,
called Garter, and an Usher called the Black Rod.

Knight of the Bath.
The Creation of the Knight of the Bath is with much Ceremony, Sir William
Seager fully declares it in his Book.

The Title is very ancient, for Sir Albane a Britain was at Rome, by
Dioclesian the Emperor, made Knight of the Bath.

They are distinguished by wearing a red Ribband cross the left shoulder, as
the Knights of the Garter are by wearing a blue one.

Knights of the Round Table.
This Order was most noble in the world heretofore: it was erected here in
England by King Arthur: their place of convention was at Winchester, where they
had their round Table at the Feast of Pentecost: But others are of opinion it
was at Windsor, which wabuilt by King Arthur. They remain at Wind for.

Orders of Knighthood in Foreign Parts.
Knight, of the Toizon or Golden Fleece.
THis Order was instituted by Philip Duke of Burgundy, Anno 1429. Being moved
thereunto with a zeal he had to conquer the Holy Land. He elected for Patron
St. Andrew.

Knights of St. Michael.
This Order was erected by Lewis the 11th. French King, 1469. The reason that
moved him to this Order (as is reported) was the memory of an apparition of St.
Michael upon the Bridge of Orleance, when it was besieged by the English.

Knights of the Annuntiation.
This order was about the same time also begun by Amedo Count of Savoy, in
memory of Amedo the first Earl, who valourously defended the Island of the
Roads against the Turks, and won the Arms from them, which is now borne by the
Dukes of Savoy, viz. gu. a Cross Argent.

Knights of St. Elprit.
This Order was instituted by Henry the third, King of France and Poland, Anno
1578. Because on that day which is Penticost the Polands and Lutivanians
elected him for their King.

Knights Templers.
This Order was first set out on foot in the Year 1117. By nine Gentlemen who
happened to meet in the holy Land. Their first employment was to secure the way
for Pilgrims against Robbers, but afterward they grew potent all the world
over.

Knights of St. James.
It was erected in Spain, Anno 1030. By certain Spanish Gentlemen that fled to
the Mountains, when the Arabians had well near conquered that Nation, who not
enduring to live under that barbarous government associated, and in time
relieved their Nation.

Knights of St. John of Jerusalem, now called Knights of Malta.
It was erected first at Jerusalem somewhat before the Christians conquered
Jerusalem, they had leave of Sarazens to build them a house near the Sepulcher
of Christ, calling it St. John Baptist. The great Master Reynoldus commanded
all Knights of this Order wherever dispersed. Their first achievement was the
conquering of the Island of Roads, which afterward being lost, they since have
remained in the Island Malia.

Knights of Calatrava.
This Order was begun Anno 1130 in imitation of the Order of St. Jago: they
were so named of the Province where they were made and settled, where was the
Chief Church of the Templers, who being not of power sufficient to resist the
Sarazens, were forced to give place to these Knights. Their founder was Don
Santio King of Toledo.

Knights of the Band.
This Order was first erected by Alphouso. King of Spain, 1268. The reason that
moved the King to name them Knights of the Band, was, he commanded every man of
the Order to wear a red Scarf.

Knights of the Order of Alcantara.
These Knights lived in effect under the Order of Calatrava; they wear a green
Cross; near unto the City of Alcantara they have a Church of great beauty.

Knights of Montelio.
These Knights do wear a red Cross. Their Order began near about the time that
the Knights of Calatrava took beginning. They live in Valentia.

Knights of Redemption.
These Knights were erected in the Kingdom of Aragon, by King James who
conquered the Islands Mojorca in the year 1212. Their Office is to redeem
Prisoners. The chief Governor remains at Barcellona.

Knights Teutonici.
The beginner of this Knighthood was a certain Allmaine; who after the taking
of Jerusalem by the Christians; remained there, and kept a liberal house for
Pilgrims; at last they entered into association: they wore a black Cross voided
with a cross patonce. None were to be of the order but those of the Dutch
Nation. At length Jerusalem being taken by the Sarazens, they returned to
Germany, where their Order was confirmed by the Emperor.

Knights of St. Mary.
In Pope Urbane the 4th's time, certain Gentlemen of Bolognia and Modona
desired of the Pope leave to erect a new Order of Religious Knighthood, which
for money they obtained.

Knights of St. Lazero.
These Knights do plead great antiquity, as that they lived in the time of St.
Basil. The Emperor Barbarosa gave them great possessions: The Order was well
near extinct, till of late Pius Quartus the Pope did revive it, and made a
noble Gentleman of Millan their great Master. They wear a green Cross.

Knights of St. Stephano.
In the year 1561, Cosmo Duke of Florence, living in peaceable estate, erected
this order. They wear a red Cross bordered with Gold.

Degrees of Gentlemen.
THe Civil Law has formerly been so severe in preserving this distinction, that
the Gentile or Noble were prohibited to marry with the Ungentile or ignoble.

Who are Gentlemen.
1. He is a Gentleman which is one of Ancestry; for certainly the honor
achieved by the Ancestor lives in his Family as his, which ought to oblige
them with care to keep that tenderly which there predecessors got so
difficultly.

2. A Gentleman of Coat Armor and not of Blood, being made a Gentleman by a
Badge from the King of Coat Armor.

3. A Gentleman by achievement in lawful wars, proclaimed by the King in
matters of Religion, or for the Kingdoms good, which is the best.

A Gentleman.
In the Saxon language they were called Aedels, which signifies Elder, or
Chief; but we have since from the French Borrowed the Roman word Gentilehome,
which imports men of Nations.

The word Gentiles was given to the Northern people during the Government of
the Romans over them; they then taking it to be a glory to them, though
otherwise meant by the Romans.

The privileges that belongs to a Gentleman: Read Sir Will. Seager.

For the Helmets that belongs to each degree of Gentlemen: Look on Guillianus.

And for their Crowns: See Carter.

Their degrees in England are divided, viz.

1. An Esquire. 2. A Knight. 3. A Baron.
These three are esteemed noble; besides there are five which are excellent, to
whom belongs Crowns and Coronets: as

1. A Viscount. 2. An Earl. 3. A Marquess. 4. A Duke. 5. A Prince.
Our gracious King Charles the Second has allowed Crowns to Barons.

In Latin he is called Scutiger; of these each Knight in times past had two to
attend him in Wars, and to bear his Helmet and Shield before him: forasmuch as
they did hold certain Lands of him in Scutage, as the Knight did hold of the
King by Military service,

This title came not in honorary amongst us till the Reign of Richard the
Second; though the Title, as to the Office, is far more ancient. The ancient
Saxon word is Scyldknappa, which is a Shield Serviture.

Degrees of an Esquire.
1. There is an Esquire by Birth, as the eldest Son of a Knight, and his eldest
Son successively.

2. By Creation, to whom belongs the silver Spurs, whence they are called white
Spurs,

3. By Office; as Sergeants at Law, Sheriffs, etc. But to them the Title dies
with them.

A Knight Bachelor.
The word Knight comes from the Saxon word Cnight, which signifies puer, or
servus.

The French calls them Chaveleers, the German Rutter, both of riding or lusty
young men.

Since the Conquest, those that held Estates to serve on horseback in the
Wars, are by the Lawyers styled Milites.

Coming to be a reward and degree of Honor is thought to be in imitation of
the Equestres Order in Rome.

The first using of Ceremonies at the creating a Knight was done by King
Alfred, Knighting his Grandson Ethelston; after it grew more precise and
customary.

Knights Titles.
1. Knight Bannoret. 2. Knight Baronet.
A Knight Bannoret.
This was anciently an Order in France.

At his Creation he is led to the King or General, with his Penon of Arms in
his hand and there the Herald declares his merit, and the King or General
causes the point of his Penon to be rent off, and he returns with Trumpet
sounding.

Under the degree of a Knight Bannoret Supporters may not be born.

A Knight Barronet.
This Title was erected by King James, for the propagation of a Plantation in
Ulster in Ireland.

It is hereditary, they are to take place before all Knights Batchelors, or
Knight of the Bath.

Their Augmentation is on a Canton Argent a Senister ^and couped gules.

A Baron.
This word is variously interpreted, as from the word Baria, which signifies
grave authority; or Baro which in Latin is the same with Vir, which imports
force.

The Danes were the first which brought in the use of this word.

The Saxons called the next to the King Thane, as Thane of such a Castle, Town,
etc.

A Viscount.
The word in Latin is Vice Comes, which is interpreted from the Office of the
person: he is one to whom an Earl or his Lord commits his Towns, or
Government of a Castle.

The title is derived from the same Order in France, where they were only
substitutes to Earls, till getting in power, got also to have the power
honorary and hereditary.

It is the same word which is for our Sheriff, and began with us not till about
the 18. of Henry the Sixth, who then created John Lord Beamont Viscount by
Letter Patent.

An Earl.
An Earl or Count is called Comes: The reason for that denomination is
uncertain.

The word Earl we had from the Danes from the word Earlick, which signifies
honorable,

They were styled Ealdermen, till Cannius time the Dane.

Their Dignity and power heretofore was far more large then now. Seldom is of
opinion they are in Latin called Comes of the society the King has with them.

A Marquess.
This word was first used to Earls and Barons, that were Lord Marches, or
Lords of Fronteers, and came afterward into a Title of special Dignity above
an Earl.

The title began in the time of Richard the Second.

The French and Germans prefer an Earl before a Marquess, which is
preposterous.

A Duke.
The word at first was a title of Office, afterward honorary, and since
hereditary.

The word comes a Ducendo, from leading forch an Army Royal: The Saxons called
them, Hertshog.

The first we find in England was Edward the Black Prince.

A Prince.
In the Saxons time they were called Clitons, from Klutos in Greek, which is
illustrious.

The first that was created in England was Edward, the eldest Son of Henry the
3d.

There are degrees of Nobility, as of Nations, and Cities.

For the Ceremonies at the Creating of the aforesaid Gentlemen, read Sir
William Seager and Fern.

And for their privileges read likewise Seager and Seldom.

Ancient form of Government.
It Is upon good grounds concluded that the ancient Form of Government was, viz.
Under the King was substituted ten Dukes, under one Archbishop ten Bishops,
under one Duke ten Earls, under an Earl ten Barons, under a Baron ten
Chatellanes or Constables, unto whom was committed the keeping of some Castle,
or Fort; under every Constable fifty men.

Significations of Charges and Devises in Coats.
A Helmet, signifies Direction and Command.

A side-long Helmet denotes Attention and Obedience.

A Helmet full forward and open faced; betokens Authority, Direction, and
Command.

A Cross, it was first bestowed on such as had performed, or at least
undertaken some service for Christ or Christian profession.

A Chief, signifies a Senator, or honorable Man.

A Pale, denotes the first bearer to have deserved well by some Stratagem of
Mining.

A Bend, it signifies the bearer to have been one of the first which mounted
upon the enemies wall.

Escutcheon, it is ancient bearing. Burley in the time of Richard the Second
bore an Eschutcheon.

A Cheveron, it betokens to the bearer the atchieving of some business of
moment, or the finishing of some chargeable or memorable work.

Saltire, befits rich and covetous people, such as would not willingly go from
their substance.

A Bar, may be implied to him whose invention, industry, and labor has so
fenced or forfeited the Camp, City, or Fort, that the Enemies thereby receives
a damage.

A Mascle, In Armory it signifies the Bearer thereof in a Field Gules to have
been most prudent and politic in stratagems of War.

A Heart, denotes a man wise and politic, that foreseeth his time, and stands
to his own guard honestly, then annoy rashly or wrongfully.

A Lion. A Lion in a Field Sables in Armory betokens fortitude, a virtue that
signteth in defense of equity.

Salient is honorable for some egregious service done for his Country.

Charges and Devices, their significations in Armory.
An Adder. THe bearing of Serpents, Adders, or Snakes, denotes the bearer to be
very prudent and subtle, which he improves and makes use of to compass his own
ends, though never so base.

A Bore. He betokens in Herauldry a man of a bold spirit, skilful and
politic in War, and one of that resolution that he will dye valorously in the
Field, rather then secure himself by ignominous flight.

A Uniconn. He signifies strength and courage, and likewise denotes a valient
Soldier that contemns death, and rather then he will be compelled to undergo
any base servitude or bondage he will lose his life.

A Wolf. This befits them in Parliaments and places of great assembly, who are
accustomed to wrangle and show themselves comentious.

A Sphinx. It denotes a man of a cunning genius, full of inventions, but
tyrannical and monstrous in his actings.

Heads, etc. The bearing of the Head (next to the whole bearing) is most
honorable; it shows that the owner of such Coat Armor was not forced to stand
to the face of his enemy. It betokens likewise jurisdiction and justice.

A Goat. This shows that the bearer used more policy then valor in atchieving
a Victory, and got his honor by some such means.

A Hedge.-Hog. He denotes a man expert in gathering of substance, and one that
providently lays hold upon proffered opportunities.

A Toad. The bearing of Toads does signify a hasty chollerick man, that is
easily stirred up to anger, whereunto he is naturally prone, proceeding from
his Birth.

An Eagle. He signifies in Herauldry true Magnanimity, and fortitude of mind,
which never seeks to combat with small ones, but his equal.

Wings of Birds. In Armory betokens projection.

Swallow. Denotes one that is industrious, prompt, and ready to dispatch
business.

A Stork. Signifies one that is grateful and dutiful children.

An Owl. Denotes prudence, vigilance, and watchfulness; and it shows also a
melancholy temper, shunning company, and losing solitariness.

A Faulcon. Shows that he that bore him first was such a one as did eagerly
pursue, vex, and molest poor and silly creatures, and may likewise be taken for
speedy performance in any business.

A Cock. Signifies one that rejoices for his Victory.

Military Instruments. Any Military insteument either defensive, or offensive,
or other accidents of War is very honorable.

Escallop. It Is recorded in the Office of Arms, that the bearing of Escollops
signifies, the first bearer to have been a Commander, who by his virtues and
valor had so gained the hearts and love of his Soldiers, and companions in
Arms, that they desired much to follow him, even into dangers mouth.

A Moon decressant. This shows a man to do something, whereby he is advanced to
honor in his old age.

A Star. A Star denotes the inconstancy of high fortune, and unsure footing of
ambitious aspirers; which are famous for a time, but fall headlong from their
high hopes.

A Mulles. A Mullet in Herauldry has a noble signification; it denotes some
divine quality bestowed from above, whereby men do shine in virtue, learning,
and works of piety.

A Garb or Sheaf. It signifies plenty, or abundance, and that the first bearer
did deserve well for his hospitality.

A Cinquefoil. Denotes a man that masters his affections; and conquers his
senses, and one that has overcome his enemy, not only by valor but wisdom;
it is ancient bearing.

Shakblot. It signifies the detaining his Enemy prisoner which he took; also
it is given to such a brave spirit, who by his prowess can fetch off with
strength, or by his charity redeem his fellow Soldier from prison.

A Swan. Denotes a learned man, and one that knows best how to contemn this
life, and to dye with resolution and comfort.

A Horse. A Horse signifies one that vannteth after victory, and dejected if
conquered.

A Turnip. Denotes a man of a good disposition, whose virtuous demeanor
flourishes prosperously, even where envy most abounds.

Conies. The first bearer of this Beast seemed to be very skilful in pyoning,
and lucky in undermining and subverting of Cities, etc.

Castles and Towers. The bearing of Castles and Towers shows that the hearer
stood carefully upon his guard, though continually affailed with spiritual and
corporeal enemies, that ceased not to plot his destruction.

Observe that when the Architecture extends it self from one side of the
Field, then it must be named a Castle. If Turrited, name how many.

Bridges. The bearing of Bridges and Arches signifies the cares, and patient
stability of men in Magistracy, who must endure the taunts, assaults and envy
of the discontented vulgar.

Squirrel. The bearing of a Squirrel shows that the bearer of this was careful
in keeping the love and affection of his followers, and retainers, and is sure
they will stick to him in time of need.

Pelican. The Pelican denotes that the bearer was diligent in the education
and instructing his Children in learning.

A Peacock. The bearing of this Bird shows that the bearer admired himself,
though he was of a dirty condition.

Leopard. This Beast shows that the bearer was of a violent spirit, but subtle:
and to prevent one bearing of his Superiors for want of strength, used policy
for the compassing of his ends.

Reremouse. The bearing of this creature shows that the bearer having small
means, and weak power, either of nobility or fortune, or yet stored with
pregnancy of wit, has nevertheless stepped up so suddenly as he seems not to
be supported by the earth, but to be elevated above the same.

Panther. This denotes that the bearer was of that sweet disposition, as that
he drew all men to love him.

Dragon. This shows that the bearer was of that violent spirit, and so
imperious in his carriage, as that most men did fear him.

Elephant. The Elephant shows that the bearer was of great strength, but of
greater wit, and greatest ambition.

An Ass. The Ass shows that the bearer had, and ought to have much patience.

Camel. This Beast denotes that the bearer was obedient and swift in the
dispatch of his business.

A Bear. The Bear denotes that the bearer used no less policy then strength in
fighting.

A Dog. He shows that the bearer not only loved his pleasure abroad, but minded
his profit at home.

A Fox. Foxes become Lawyers, who when they have done, and well spunged their
Clients, laugh at them.

A Plough. The bearing of a Plough with their mechanical instruments of
husbandry shows that the bearer by his industry had been beneficial to the
Commonwealth.

A Pickax. This acquaints the bearer, though of noblest and ancient blood, has
little cause to be proud, if he looks unto the pit whence he was first dug.

A Square. This instrument shows that the bearer did nothing rashly, or at
adventure, but by moderation and rules in performance.

An Ape, The bearing of this Beast shows that the bearer took more delight in
ridiculous jeastings then serious actings.

A Rose. The bearing of the Rose shows that the bearer in joyed some good,
though environed on all sides with evil.

Observe if you see any Beast, Bird, Flower, etc. in its proper color, you
must blazon it by no color, but say proper.

Likewise observe, when you see any quick thing born in Arms, it is most
commendable to bear it, according to the most noblest and worthiest action of
the Creature; as a Lion passant, a Grayhound running, a Fish nayant, any Fowl
volant, etc.

The Names of the Parties and Nations that Invented Instruments Military and
Mechanical, etc. Mentioned in this Book.
Lacedaemonians. THey invented the Helmet, as Heroditus affirms.

Moses. Did first ordain Crowns, but Pliny ascribes it to Liber Bacchus.

Petrus and Acrisius. They did first devise Shields as they fought together.

Tuscans, Invented Mantles of Estate, Embroidered Gowns, etc. Tarquinus
superbus brought their use to Rome,

Tyrants against Christians. Invented, as Fern says, the Saltire, which they
used as an Engine to torture, to rend in pieces the Christians.

Dionisius. He invented first the tilling of ground; but Virgil says it was
Ceres.

Bellerophon. Found out the riding and reclaiming of Horses.

Dedalus. Was the first inventer of Squares.

Rome. They first used Rings on their fingers, and Male Coats.

A Nation in Thesaly. Found out the Barnacle, and other instruments for riding
and taming of Horses.

Dedalus. He first found out the Plummet.

Lamech. He first invented Tents.

Moses. Made use first of Lamps.

Aeolus. First found the Sails of Ships.

Epeus. He invented the Ram of Troy.

Copians. They first found out the Helm or Rudder of a Ship.

Funerals, and Rules to be observed therein.
SPecial heed is to be taken that no indignity be offered to a Mourner; they
are by the Herald to be marshalled according to their titles and worth.

If an Officer of Arms be present, he ought to wear the Kings Coat, to the
intent that the defunct may be known to have died honorable in the King,
Allegiance without spot or infamy.

His Heir (which is the Chief Mourner) is to receive in the presence of all the
Mourners the Coat, Armor. Helm, and Crest, etc. belonging to the defunct,
whereof the King at Arms of the Province is to make record, with the defuncts,
Match, Issue, and decease.

Earls must have their great Banner two Yards. If of the Garter, his Garter
instead of Compartments. Supporters, Crown, Sword, and Target, Gantler and
Spurs.

Earl Marshals orders commanded, Anno 1618. For Funerals and Fees, etc.
ALL Noblemen, Barronets, Knights, Esquires, and Gentlemen of eminent place,
birth, and quality that shall be either silently buried in the night, or by
day, without attendance of an Officer of Arms, shall nevertheless immediately
after the death and burial of such Defunct return a true certificate of the
Matches, issues, and times of their decease, with their Arms. For which they
are to pay into the Officers of Arms these Fees.

l. s. d. A Gentleman using Escutcheons 3 6 8 Using none 2 0 0 An Esquire of
Coat Armor 6 13 4 A Knight 10 0 0 A Bannoret and Baronet 13 6 8 A Baron or
Baroness that ought to have a great Banner and Bannerols 20 0 0 A Bishop 25 0 0
A Viscount and Viscountess 30 0 0 An Earl or Countess 35 0 0 A Marquess or
Marchoness 40 0 0 A Duke and Archbishop 45 0 0

Which faid sums are to be paid to the Officers at Arms, except it appears the
defunct was not worth a 1000 l Then to enter without Fee.

Funerals. The proceeding of the Funeral of a Gentleman.
FIrst Children of the Hospital. Two Conductors. Poor Men. Gentlemen's Servants
in Cloaks. Gentlemen in Cloaks. Gentlemen in Gowns. Aldermen in Black. The
Preacher. A Penon of his own Arms. Helm and Crest. The Coat of Arms. Chief
Mourner. Two Assistants. Aldermen not in Black. Master of the Company if, etc.
Master of the Hospital. Then all Gentlemen not in black. Neighboues and others.
Funerals. The proceedings to it, to a Duke from a Bannoret.
TWo Conductors with black Staves. Servants in Cloaks two and two. The great
Banner by. Gentlemen in Cloaks two and two. Two Banners by. Gentlemen in Cloaks
two and two. Steward Controuler, etc. Herald. Ministers. Gentlemen bareheaded
with the Escutcheon. The Chariot with four Banners carried about it by
Gentlemen of Kindred. Four Footmen bareheaded. Mourners next of Kindred two and
two. The Neighbors.
England when first Inhabited, by whom, how and why named; its Governments, etc.
BErosus says that Samothes (called also Mesech, brother to Gomer, the sixth
Son of Japhet the Son of Noah came into this Land about 252. years after the
Flood 3632 years past, and called it Samothea; in which name it continued until
Albion the Son of Neptune (who descended of Cham) entered the same; and named it
Albion. This Albion reigned about 562. years after the Flood, in the year of
the worlds creation, 2219. and 3370. years since. It continued in the name of
Albion 608 years, until Brutus Julius arrived, who conquered the same Anno
mundi, 2828. and 2764. years since he changed the name of it into Britain.

It is at this day called England, from the Angli, with which inhabited part of
Germany. Ptolomy calls them Angeli in the Heptarchy. They inhabited
Cambridgeshire, Isle of Ely, Norfolk, and Suffolk, long named East Anglia.

These Angles and Saxons, Anno Dom. 620. having driven the Brittons into Wales
and Cornwall, etc. In some time after Egbert having reduced the Heptarchy into a
Monarchy, and ruling absolute, called it England, from his own Country in
Germany

The former Heptarchy of seven Kingdoms, now a Monarchy, was divided into
Provinces, Shiercs, and Counties, by Aluredus, brother to Etheldred, who
reigned Anno Dom. 872. Wales was divided by Henry the 8th.

The Shires were divided into parts or hundreds, in every of which was
contained ten Tythings, containing ten men. The Officer of this Tything the
Saxons called Techingman, we Tythingman. In some places they are called
Headboroughs. Ten of these Tythings yielded a hundred men: the number now is
uncertain. Yorkshire is divided into Ridings. And in Kent they have
Wapentaches instead of Tythings, which took that name from viewing of Weapons.

The word Shiere comes of the Saxon word Scyran, which signifies to cut, or
divide. Every one of these Shieres in times past was governed per Comitem, whom
we call Earl, Quali praefectus regins; therefore it took the name of a County,
a Comite. Of latter time, and still is chosen yearly in every County, an
Officer by the King, which in Latin is named Ure comes, as one appointed in
the Earls stead: We call him Sheriff, the Saxons called him Scyregegrapa,
which is as much as an Officer to collect Rents and Revenues under, and for
another.

The Heralds Duty.
THe giving of Coats of Arms belongs to the Prince, or else licensed by his
Letters Pattents, the Herald only devises; in which Device he ought to have
these considerations to the party that is to have Arms, and to give such Coats
as suits with the parties qualifications, viz.

1. He is to enquire whether he that shall bear them desires it, and honors
Gentility, and will keep them from dishonor.

2. Whether he be able to declare his pedigree.

3. He much search for his pedigree, and see whether in right he may bear, and
whether his Ancestors were Gentlemen, and to give the same with augmentation,
which is a congruent difference.

4. His condition, whether clean of life, just in promise; whether cunning in
all, or any one of the liberal Sciences, or in Divinity, Philosophy, etc.

5. Of whom he had praise of good works done, or of acts performed, whether of
men of wit or women.

6. To whom he had done service, either to King, Prince, etc. And what service.

7. How he had served, whether in War, or as an Ambassador, or as a Counselor
at Carpet.

There are likewise several things belongs to the Herald, as to be ready in
his apparel, at all Coronations to be expert, in betrothing of Princes, and not
to disclose the secrets of Ladies. There are many secrets in Herauldry which
they ought not to disclose.

It is to be conceived, that in Charges the bearer has his own device, and
sometime Coats of Devices.

Coats of Arms were invented 1. To adorn and honor the Family. 2. To show him
more worthy then others. 3. To differ out the several Lines and Issues.


Heralds of Arms were first instituted by Ascanius, and renewed by King Numa;
they were called Feciales.

Sirnames agreeing with Charges in Coat Armor.
IT is objected, that when Arms are born consonant to the name, it does note
newness of Gentry, or else that the Herald knew no special desert in the
person, that he might thereof trick him something in Device to signify so
much, and therefore the Signs are set down as agree most aptly with the name.

It Is answered, That of the like Coats there be many in this Land of notable
antiquity; it extends the glory of his name.

Hugh the first Earl of Chester was named De Loupe, because he bore a Wolfes
head in his Shield.

So of Lord Roch. Lucy, and many others.

Sirnames ending in Fitz. were Normans.

They whose names end in Sone are either Saxons, Picts, or Scots originally.

Nine Precious Stones used in Blazoning for Nobility, and their virtues.
1 Topas, which is for Yellow.
THis Stone swageth wrath, sorrow, and evil thoughts, and helps the wearer
thereof of Frenzy, and sudden death.

2. Pearl. And is for Argent.
The Pearl has virtue confortative, and is restorative, and is food to man.
Josephus reports, that when Jerusalem was besieged by Titus, the Jews lived
long upon Pearl.

3. Ruby. For red.
It Is a St^^e of Dignity, and of the kind of Carbuncles. This stone neither
fire wastes, nor changes his color. This was one of the precious Stones that
was set in the breast lap of Aaron.

4. Sapphire. And is for Blue.
This Stone accords people in strife, and abates extreme heat of burning
Fevers, bound to the pulse it helps against melancholy, and stays
bleeding that comes of anguish, and is a remedy against venom, and preserves
the sight.

5. Diamond. And is for black.
This Stone will not be daunted, it warns the wearer thereof to eschew
venom; it withstandeth Witchcraft, and born on the left shoulder has virtue
against chiding, and strife of enemies.

6. Emraud. And is for Green.
This stone comfort the vital spirits, it comfort the sight, whereby the
heart receives joy: also it represseth motions of lust, and helps against
illusions; it increases riches, and prevails in play likewise; it cease
tempest, and stencheth Blood.

7. Amatist.
This Stone is an enemy to Drunkenness, and giddy brains, it causes a man to
have a good forecast and a quick mind, removes idle thoughts, and increases
good understanding.

8. Jacinth.
It puts away sorrow, and increases mirth; being bound next unto the skin
of either man or woman, puts away pestilent air, and gives strength to the
members.

9. Sardonax.
This stone puts away Letchery, and imbraceth chastity.

The price of Gold, Pearl, and Diamonds. etc.
l. s. d. Of Gold. BArbary Gold, as Chickens, etc. The ounce is 3 12 0 The
penny weight 0 3 7 The Kings Coin 3 6 8 The penny weight 0 3 4 French Crowns,
Flemish Crowns, Spanish Pistolets, and our own Coin is the same goodness.
Spanish Silver. Being Silver per ounce is worth per ounce 0 5 3 Saffron Gold
which is a baser coin, and little used in trading is worth the ounce 3 0 0
There is a little Coin about the bigness of a French Crown, worth by the ounce
but 2 0 0 Price of Pearl. One grain 0 0 6 Two Grains 0 1 0 Three Grains 0 2 0
Four Grains 0 4 0 Five Grains 0 6 0 Six Grains 0 8 0 Seven Grains 0 10 0 Eight
Grains 0 12 0 For Two Caracks 2 0 0 Three Caracks 5 0 0 Four Caracks 7 0 0 Five
Caracks 10 0 0 Six Caracks 20 0 0 Seven Caracks 40 0 0 Eight Caracks 50 0 0
It Is to be understood they must be fair and clear. For a Pearl of seven or
eight grains, if any of that bigness) is worth 500 0 0 Price of Diamonds. If
fair and clear without blemish, one Grain is worth 1 10 0 Two Grains 3 0 0
Three Grains 6 0 0 Four Grains 10 0 0 Five Grains 15 0 0 Six Grains 20 0 0
Eight Grains 40 0 0

An Explanation of difficult Words used in Herauldry.
A. ARgent. White Azure. Blue Annulet. A Ring of a Maile Coat
B. Blazoning. Expressing Bevile. Broken, or a Carpenters Square moving upon a
Joint Billet. A piece of paper folded like a Letter Battone.
C. Cheveron. A Barge couple. Cost. A Rib Canton. A Corner Cheque. Composition
Crenelle. Dented or notched Chaplet. A Garland Componed. Compounded Couped. Cut
off
D. Dance. Dented or notched more deep. Delf. A pit or den. Displayed. Wings
abroad.
E. Eschucheon. A Shield Erased. Rended, or torn Ean. Water.
F. Fesse. A Girdle Fillet. That which women wear in making up their hair,
Flasque. A Bow bent Files. Plaits of Garments Flanch. Flanck of a man. Fussils.
Skins of yarn on slippers Form. Broad Fitchee. Sharp to fasten Frinbrated.
Hemmed
G. Gules. Red Gerone. The Lap, or the space between the Thigh, which we call
Groine Gussets. Belonging to shifts Gabonated. Cut in morsels Gore. Belonging
to women's Smocks Gemmews. Twins Gutte. Drops
H. Humet. Guillianus calls it a Table. Foswel a Coffin
I. Invected. Carried in Ingrailed. Entered or gone in Indented. Full of Teeth.
L. Lambeaux. Plaits of a Garment L^rmes. Tears
M Mascle. A marsh of a net Mullet. A Meotor or Star
N. Nombrel. The Navel Nowed. Folded or knotted
O. Or. Yellow Orle. A pillow Ogresses. Pellets of Guns
P. Purpure. Much red and a little black Pile. A Wedge Purflu. A border of
Furrs Patonce. A Crutch Patte. Broad Po^x. Pitch
S. Sable. Black Sanguine. Of the color of blood Saltire. An instrument to
scale Walls Shaporne. A Hoad Scarpe. A Scarf.
T. Ten. Red and yellow Torteaux. A Cake
V. Vert. Green Verday. Of Flowers Voider. A Looking-glass Versied. Turned
up-side down

An account of several Cities, Castles, and other notable places, when they
were built, by whom, and in what Year, before and after Christ's Nativity;
besides things of Antiquity observable.
London.
BRute after a long and weary journey with his Trojans arrived in this Island;
and as the common received opinion is, builded London, and named it New Troy.
The first building lay joining to Thames, from the Tower to White Friars. It
was first begun to be built in the year before Christ, one thousand, one
hundred and eight.

York.
York nine hundred eighty seven years before Christ was builded by Ebrank, then
King of Britain, and was first named Kairbranck; he builded Edenborough.

Carlisle.
It was by King Leil, in the year before Christ nine hundred and seventeen,
builded.

Bath.
Bath was builded by King Bladud, eight hundred sixty three years before
Christ; the said King had long studied at Athens, and brought Philosophers to
keep School here in Britain.

Leicester.
That City was builded by King Laire eight hundred forty four years before
Christ.

Billingsgate in London.
King Belinus four hundred and one year before Christ made it a Haven, and
called it Billingsgate.

Grantham.
It was builded by King Gorbamanus, three hundred and three years before Christ.

Ludgate.
King Lud seventy years before Christ builded Ludgate, and builded much on the
west part of London.

Julius Caesar.
In the said King Luds reign, and fifty four years before Christ, he entered
this Island.

Jesus Christ Born.
Cunobelinus reigned here in Britain when Christ was born.

Southampton.
Was so named in respect of one Hamon a Roman, slain and thrown into the Sea
there by Aviragus, then King of the Brittans, forty four years after Christ's
Nativity.

Colchester.
Coilus one hundred twenty four years after Christ's Nativity builded it.

Lucius the first Christian King.
One hundrrd seventy nine years after Christ's Nativity Lucius King here in
Britain, became a Christian, and was the first Christian King in the world.

Stonehedge, being the great Stones erected on Salisbury Plairs.
Aurelius Ambrosius, King of the Brittans, four hundred sixty six years after
Christ erected that Monument over the bodies of the British Nobility there
slain (and buried) where they met in a treaty with the Saxons, and were
massacred traitorously by them.

University of Oxford.
Eight hundred seventy two years after Christ's Nativity, Alfred a Saxon King
here ordained common Schools of diverse Sciences at Oxford.

Hertford and Witham in Essex.
In the year nine hundred, Edward, surnamed Senior, King of the West Saxons
builded Hertford, and another Town at Witham in Essex.

Worcester.
By means of King Edgars erecting a Monanastery there it became a place of
note; it was nine hundred fifty nine years after Christ.

Leeds Castle.
Creneken, a noble man in King William the Conquerors Reign, builded that
Castle.

Oxford Castle.
In the year of Christ, one thousand seventy one, Robert de Olley a Nobleman,
that came in with William the Conqueror, builded it.

Durham Castle.
In the year of Christ one thousand seventy five, King William the Conqueror
caused that Castle to be built.

Carlisle Castle and Town.
The Town was re-builded by King William Rufus, after it was destroyed by the
Danes; he likewise builded the Castle there.

New Castle upon Tine.
Was likewise builded by King William Rufus, in the year of Christ one thousand
ninety one.

Westminster Hall.
It was builded by King William Rufus, in the year of Christ one thousand
ninety nine.

Bristol Castle and Cardiffe.
Was builded by Robert, Bastard Son to Henry the first, who likewise builded
Cardiffe.

The Temple in London.
Hereclius Patriarch of Jerusalem coming to King Henry the Second for aid
against the Turks, dedicated the Temple then new builded.

The first Mayor and Sheriffs in London.
In the year of Christ one thousand one hundred and ninety, the Citizens of
London obtained to be governed by two Bailiffs, or Sheriffs, and a Mayor.

Tower Ditch, and the outer Wall of the Tower of London.
In the Reign of Richard the first, William Bishop of Ely builded the said Wall
and made the said Ditch.

Mayors of London Yearly chosen.
In the Reign of King John, and in the year of Christ one thousand two hundred
and eight was granted to the Citizens of London by Letters Patents, that they
should yearly choose a Mayor.

London Bridge.
The same year London Bridge was finished of Stone, it was before of Timber.

Chartly and Besten Castles.
These Castles were builded by Ralph Earl of Chester, in King Henry the
Third's Reign, and in the year of Christ one thousand two hundred and twenty.

Flint Castle.
It was built by Edward the First in the year of Christ one thousand two
hundred seventy five.

Guild Hall in London.
Was built in the Reign of Henry the fourth, and in the year of Christ one
thousand four hundred and eleven. Sir Thomas Knowles, Mayor.

Newgate in London.
In the Reign of Henry the sixth, the Executors of William Whittington builded
Newgate.

First payment of Custom.
By a Parliament in the year of Christ one thousand four hundred twenty five,
and in the Reign of Henry the sixth, was granted to the King one shilling a
pound of all Merchandise brought in or carried out of England, and three
shillings of every tun of Wine, which was called Tunnage and Poundage.

Royal Exchange, London.
Was builded by Sir Thomas Gresham in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth.

University of Cambridge.
Cambridge as it is affirmed was first frequented with Philosophers and
Astronomers procured from Athens in the Reign of Gurguntius King of Britain,
and before the birth of Christ three hundred seventy five years.

Of other Cities, etc.
Other Cities and Towns now considerable in England not here mentioned, had
their beginning by means of some Cathedral Monastery or Abbey there built,
which moved and drew people to inhabit near to it; as Salisbury by reason of a
Cathedral there built, and a Bishopric there erected, came to the perfection
as now it is; and Exeter in regard of a Monckery anciently being there where
now the Cathedral stands; people after their being converted to the Christian
Religion endeavored to live and inhabit as near the said Monckery as they
could: It was walled round by King Athelstane. The Castle is of a great
antiquity.

An Alphebetical Table of the principal matters in this Book.
A. ANcient form of Government page 33 The signification of Charges and Devices
in Armory page 53
B. Of a Baron page 30
C. Of the Kings Goronation page 3 Of the Kings Crown with its twelve Stones
page 1 Significations of Charges and Devices in Coats page 33
D. Of Doctors page 10 Of a Duke page 32 Price of Diamonds page 54
E. Degrees of an Esquire page 28 Of an Earl page 31 England first inhabited,
by whom, how, and why named; its Government page 46 Of the Kings Ensigns page 3
F. A Royal Feast the King present page 5 Funerals, and rules to be observed
therein page 43 Earl^ Marshals Orders and Funeral Fees page 44 Proceedings of
the Funeral of a Gentleman page 45 Proceedings from a Baron to a Dukes Funeral
ib.
G. Going to the Parliament in State page 6 Who are to be admitted Gentlemen
page 8 How Gentlemen are to take place page 16 Of a Gentleman page 27 Who are
Gentlemen page 26 Prices of Gold page 53
H. The Heralds duty page 48 Explanation of difficult words in Herauldry page
54
K. Of Knights Batchelors page 29 Knights Titles ibid. Knights Bannorets ibid.
Knights Barronets page 36 Orders of Knighthood in England page 19 Orders of
Knighthood in Foreign parts page 21
M. Of a Marquess page 32
O. Officers of State how to take place page 15
P. Professions not Gentlemen page 10 Seven more laudable ibid. Precedence of
Kings and Kingdoms page 14 Taking of place from a slave to a Baron page 17 Of a
Prince page 32 The price of Pearls page 53
S. Seven Sciences Gentile, with the Arms they may bear page 11 Sirnames
agreeing with charges in Coat Armor page 50 Nine precious Stones used in
blazoning for Nobility, and their virtues page 51
V. Of a Viscount page 31 An account of several Cities, Castles, and other
noteable places, when they were built, and by whom; besides many things of
Antiquity observeable page 58

FINIS.

