AN ANSWER TO ROGER CRABS Printed paper to the QUAKERS. AND Likewise to his
Principles and Doctrines, Whose spirit is tried and found in the dark.

Which is to be directed again to Roger Crab and his followers, who cried up
his paper; that they may learn wisdom to preserve them in innocence, in the
power of God, in which there is no confusion.

By George Salter.

LONDON Printed for Thomas Simmons at the Bull and mouth near Aldersgate, 1659.

Friend Crab,
WE have viewed thy letter, which is not the word of the Lord, but much
confusion there is in it, and is not from the essence the eternal power; for
thou speak of a place where no Righteousness shall enter in, without
distinction; What, art not thou one of the foolish prophets that puts no
difference between the precious and the vile? Does not Christ the
righteousness of God enter in? Does not he that is Righteous as God is
righteous enter in, that sits on the Throne with clean hands? And thou say
again, all beloveds without distinction; must be taken away. What, is Christ
and God the beloved, the husband, does not he remain? What foolish Prophet is
this, with his foolish instrument, that uses the name of the Lord? And thou
say, Darkness Imagines two powers when there is but one. How now, Roger,
what have thou made here? What, darkness? The power is light, have thou not
judged thy self out of thy own mouth, and thy tongue outrun thy knowledge?
have thou not made two powers, who says Darkness Imagines? or else thou must
say Darkness is God, (in whom there is none) What streams are these that runs
a broad? what a vomit is this? Do think the children of Light can lick it up?
So Essence, word, that called out the Quakers, and the Cross in which they
live, Cause the sufferings and the persecutions which thou art ignorant of and
a Rod they are to thee, and to all the powers of darkness that be out of the
truth, which is the wickeds Rod, which bows before the gates of the righteous.
And what, have thou not made two powers thy self here? But, there is but one
power over all. And that power of darkness which went out of truth, (which is
the blind, called the God of the World) blindes the eyes of the people, and
such be they that are in the power that mars the workmanship of God; And so the
Quakers, who are the Royal seed of God, elect before the world began, that sees
and feels over the Earth and over self (which is thy midwife) who is turned
into the Earth, who have helped to bring forth the birth which is set up; the
propriety in the Earth; and Sarah, thou art ignorant of that bears the Seed,
The clean woman and she that kept and watered her Fathers sheep; for if self
had been the Quakers midwife she would have kept them from persecution; but
that's become thine; let not self be thy midwife; what, do thou make two
powers? do thou not confound thy self in thy own jugement? do thou not
condemn thy self in that thou do allow? Have thou the blessing? But the
Quakers be in that which was before self was, and knows it, who comes to
that power, who are manyfesting their Lord and King to the utmost parts of the
Earth, who is the supreme power; and there is none in the power of God that
confounds themselves and their own principles as thou do: For if there be
children of darkness (as thou speak of, thou have stopped thy own mouth)
which are to persecute the Quakers, So thou have set up two powers, though thou
say there is but one. But I must tell thee the children of light are in that,
that darkness is out of (and her children whose midwife is self) that has
the rod that strecheth over the Sea, whe^^ by the waters stands in heaps, that
the spiritual Jews can pass to the spiritual Land, and Christ goes before
them, as Moses did before the temporal Jews; and our flesh, if we should have
given it that comfort it would not have suffered; but thou should have
distinguished what that flesh is, and not have Jumbled them together; for there
is a flesh that s^es no corruption; And art not thou gone out of the form of
godliness, and out of the power, and the form both of sound words, and the
form of God in which we do stick, who are (...) to the Lambs marriage, and
knows the Lambs marriage? and it is that we should stick there, who knows our
maker our husband; But art not thou sunk down into the Earth, as thy old Father
Adam for transgressing and disobeying the righteous command, and now say in
the unbelief, neither righteousness nor unrighteousness shall inherit? does
not thy ancient of days speak it? and the Quakers be in that which comprehends
days, which are in the first and the last; which has such as thou art, and
all the world to war with, and all false spirits out of the truth; they are the
Saints that shall judge the world, and them that be in the truth they do not
judge, but them that be out of the truth; and therefore to judge them that be
below us in the truth, as thou say; does thou speak here like wisdom, or
self, which has taken up the beautiful beloveds place, which should have come
forth in thy self, who judges now in the carnal reason, understanding, wisdom
and knowledge? etc. with that which must be con^ounded and come to an end, and
come to nothing, to which birth limits and bounds are set, but not to the Son,
which sees far above thee who art in the first birth among the creaturs that
have several names given to them, according to their nature, and some are
called Lions, and some Bears Bulls, Heifers and ^ea^es, so there is a
destinction in these natures, which I perceive thou art a man not yet come into
the distinction of those things, these creatures and names according to their
natures, which is far off the sheep and Lambs state, which be in that which is
divine; for the others feeds upon grass or mortal and fading things; which the
sheep has a shepherd who is hi^ by whom the world was made: Neither I believe
have thou discerned the nature of Trees, who art far from the treasure of
wisdom, who in half a sheet of paper cannot write but much confusion, and
judge and condemn thy self with thine own pen and tongue, contradict thy self
and make thy own principles void, who speaks of one power, and makes two, yea,
a third beloved who art far off the Lilly; That which is thy beloved, the Lord
will rend, and the beloveds, and give it to the beasts of the field and the
dogs for to eat; what, ^end the beloved, and faithfully in the beloved? This is
confusion, Roger, is not the beloved Christ, who is the water of life, who
makes the waters of life run over, who is God and Christ, and shall the form
of God pass away and be brought to nothing? Thou say, all forms, how speaks
wisdom, how is all one when thou speak of Self, and powers of darkness,
and many beloveds, and that Midwife Self, How is it, all was good in the
beginning, and many since the fall, and beginning are all one again in Christ
the Image of God, that that destroys the devil and his works and self
propriety, which thou must come out of, the hole of the earth and thy nest, for
such Christ calls. Foxes and fowls, such as be in him reigns over thy head in
him again, out of the one, which is out of the truth, which makes many ways,
many Sects, many opinions, out of the divine nature, which makes one, who are
one in it, are in wisdoms steps, power and dominion, and sees and feels thee
in the Earth, and cannot eat sower things without setting their teeth an edge:
The devil must serve the Lord, and he must worship, and come behind the truth
and not before it, and the devil, the serpent, that is out of the truth is a
murderer, and out of the wisdom of God which is gentle and from above; but as
fallen out of the truth he is devilish, devouring, destroying, but all things
as they were in the beginning they were very good, standing in the truth and
power of God, and so the devil must be destroyed and his wisdom: Now does God
destroy his own wisdom? So thou art not in the wisdom that puts a difference,
but we are in that which puts a difference, and remains; and so that he did
not create the Devils work, which is out of the truth, which he does destroy;
for by wisdom all things were created and by wisdom they stand, out of this
is the Enmity, and the works set up in his wisdom, which by this wisdom must
be destroyed, by this wisdom, that is above, and so the beloved one is turned
into his beloved one, from the bed that is defiled, to the bed that is not
defiled; so mark each bed where each beloved lies, each marryage, the
honorable and the dishonorable, the defiled and the undefiled, and this
wisdom does see, and so here the Beloved that appears black and terrible to
you, all is known whose face is marred in whom there is no beauty, nor form
nor comeliness to the earthly, to the Nations, to the formal and literate
Earthly ones, nor to the Fowls nor to the Foxes that have holes, who be in the
defiled bed, set up since the fall: For from the Virgins state in whose mouth
is no gail, and his face is beloved which is beautyful to the pure eye, but
ma^red by such as thou art, who art yet in the lust of the flesh, and the pride
of life which is of the World) who lives within the City and knows the 12
gates above thy three, which are distinct from thee; wisdom has seen thy
invented gates, the gates thou have invented, who says, The second is that
that tries the heart, and the first that that tries the Spirit, the third is
that which none can enter that feeds of the tree of good and evil: Thou fool,
must not the heart be tried before the spirit be tried, and the tree of
knowledge tried when their hearts be tried, and does not that one trial that
tryes spirits, tries hearts, tries food, is not that one, and is not that the
gate? Have not thou confounded thy principles that makes many? does not good
enter? Nor no name distinct from other, does not? Christ's name who was called
the word of God, enter into the City, which thou say neither good nor
righteousness enters in, and is not the good and righteous both, and distinct
from others that makes one: So wisdom over all the wise men of the Earth does
foresee, that wisdom, that is to be confounded, and thou art seen, whose city
is the wicked City into which no righteousness must enter, who puts no
difference, and the black sheeps clothing, and pride which ^hou must be
deceived of, which signifies two in thy own, as I read I judge, which is
comprehended by the sheep, who has the wisdom of him by whom the world was
made, before twain was, when all things were good; And is this black sheeps
clothing invented by the Serpents wisdom, and artificial colors of God as
thou say? now do thou destroy thy own wisdom here, for wisdom does not
destroy true wisdom, but the Serpents wisdom which is out of the truth and its
works and does the Serpents wisdom which thou say, is the wisdom of God,
bring people to set up stately buildings, Idols, Images, Gold? and does, the
wisdom of God deceive the wisdom of God, and destroy those things; what, a
Kingdom divided? how now, Roger, what have thou set up two powers again and so
confounded thy own principles? what, but (...) power, yet envyings? What,
Roger, but one power, yet furious, and shattering to pieces it self till it
come to naught? then there is no power at all, Roger, and what is your evil to
him that does think it, and envy in the envyous one and but one power? how
comes this opposite, and how comes this think? Is not this all the wisdom of
God, as thou see, that is, the wisdom of the Serpent, and so if wisdom be
divided against its self it cannot stand. But wisdom it self, which is the
truth, sees all this, for envy and strife is that which are out of truth, and
turns against the truth; Alack poor brat! how do thou build and throw down,
who art dashing thy se se to pieces against the stones? If one look upon thy
flesh, it is loathsome and would make one sick, read this in secret Roger, in
patience, who art a corrupt bulk of Fog, ^ho art like a quagmire that sucks up
them that comes upon thee, that art not in the wisdom, which does force ^o
shun thy mire and clay, who walks in the wisdom of God misses thy paths and
way, where the streams of life flows, and under the vine s^ts, where the
showers comes: And so thy beastly garments are not to be touched, but such
there may be in the Earth, in the dark, in thy own power, out of truth, that
sees not to shun the way, and for an casefull life gathers together to make up
a hill a mountain, which in the end turns to a Quagmire, which they that comes
into, their feet does stick fast, which is made up of beastical lust, earth,
and of powerish air. And here is Sodom, which says I am not Egypt, but dwell in
a plain out of whom just Lot the Angel calls, whom to Abraham is revealed of
destroying, and the just that is out of it called, who sees it on fire, over it
reigns: So who are of Faith are of Abraham, of the flesh of Christ, far above
thy wisdom power and flesh.

If thou appears wrath, confusion and darkness, to them that be in darkness
to that (...), and yet thou say there is but one power, then there is but
one eye; and what, is the confusion in the power, and yet but one? and
darkness in the power, and it but one? how now Roger, how smells this? Have
thou in this set up two powers and two eyes; and yet thou say there is but
one power; now there is no confusion in the power of God, which goes over the
confusion, the evil, the darkness, and confounds it; but the confusion is in
the power of darkness, where people sees not one another, who are from the
light with which thou art comprehended and seen: And do thou appear, an
Adulterer to them that be in adultery? and a thief to them that live in theft,
and yet thou (...) ^^ere is but one power Roger; what, does not one power
appear against an other, then thief against thief, and Adulterer against
adulterer, terror against terror; have thou not set up a transgressor, or
transgressors here? now if there be but one power, how do they transgress
then? Now there is but one power which remain in which there is no theft, no
adultery, no terror no iclo^ds, for terror and thieves and adulterers are out
of it, for all that, ^s in the darkness: And thou say to him that lives in
two powers, thou appea^es, in two powers, here thou have confounded thy own
principles by thy own tongue, and thou say, thou appears in confusion to him
that is in confusion, and all ^ut of love to the pure seed that is in
captivity; how now Roger, is there captivity and but one power? and yet the
pure seed in captivity, what is that which captivates the pure seed? and if
there be but one power, there is but one love, and then there is no captivity,
yet thou say there are many lovers, who art out of the power of God in the
darkness, and so in confusion, and there thou art but the pure eye in the
power of God sees no confusion in it; for God is not the author of confusion
nor his power, but confusion is in that which abides not in the power of God,
nor in the truth: And we do not Imagine that thou art without the gate, (where
all names and distinctions are, and settings up and throwings down) but know
it: And here thou have set up an opposite to thy self, who says we Imagine, so
two powers thou have set up, and yet says there is but one, and thou say
this is a full answer for all gainsaying; hark, is there gainsaying, and yet
but one power? and is there a single eye that it appears too? so by thy own
words thou inferrs that there is a double eye; with the one power of God and
the single eye art thou and thy power comprehended that is out of the truth,
who says, the wisdom of the Serpent is the wisdom of God; is it in the
wisdom of God which is earthly, sensual and divelish? for that is out of the
truth, is not God, the God of all truth whose wisdom is distinct from the
Serpents, these things consider.

Again, Roger Crab, thou grants that as a body of flesh thou art guilty of the
whole Law, yet thou justifies thy self in that state of guilt, and here then
justifies the wicked which is abomination to the Lord. Again thou say that no
body of flesh on earth can accuse thee for any transgression, no more then thou
can accuse thy self.

Ans* What need any accuse thee more then to be in the transgression and guilt
of the whole Law, as thou accuses thy self, which he that is so, cannot enter
into Gods Kingdom.

Roger, thy wisdom has perverted thee, and thy own confusions may make thee
ashamed and keep silence, putting thy mouth in the dust, if so be that for thee
there may be hope.

Thy power and thy spirit cannot Correct, it is corrected with the power of the
Spirit of them who are called by thee and the world, Quakers, who are not found
in the Spirit of the world, whom the world is not worthy of, for had they been
worthy of them, their Gaols, houses of correction and Dungeons had not been
their place for them, but that is the provision of a backslider, and their
houses that they do prepare for the Lambs of Christ; And thy spirit is tried,
and thy shape and seed is seen, which is the seed of confusion, the Adulterer,
and the who^e* which made up the sorcerers, but it is gone over, with the power
of the Lord, and thy cloud is seen in which is no rain, and thy well is seen in
which is no water, and it has been tried to the bottom, and what a friend who
art to the Quakers, who are come through that, that can be shaken, and into
that which cannot be shaken, by which thou art tried, and all upon the earth,
by such as has the salt in themselves, That are the light of the world, and
are as a City that cannot be hid, for had they not had the salt in themselves,
they had been trod under men's feet before now; so thou art such a friend of
the Quakers, that hid his talent, whose hand and ^^ot must be bound, who art
with thy challengings, in the chief Priests nature, as Judas did with that
friend, with multitudes and slaves and s^ords, that would betray and ensnare
the just, and get them into the earthly liberty, where there is not its rest,
nor Sabbath, but in God the Creator of all things, and truth fears thee not, to
look thee in the face, for to it must thee and all unclean bow, in which we
stand and reign, which i^ the condemnation of all the unjust, which is the
answerer of all the just, which is the releaser of all the captives and
prisoners by the unjust, which power must have an end, but this power has no
end, which is unity and brings into oneness, which remains, and with the light
the Power of God, the body that thou have prepared, out of which comes all the
strife, and carnal weapons, which body is not the flesh of Christ, but it must
be put off before that appears which remain, and thou yet with thy body which
have set forth and prepared, out of which comes all the contention in the
world, aggrava^ion and strife, and it is but the body of flesh, upon which the
law was given, by thy own confession, in that number thou art a son of old
Adam, not of Christ who was made under the Law, and the bolts, and ^all and
locks, are seen and felt, and arts which preserves the Adulterer and prisons
the innocent, who would ravish and destroy the Virgins and mar their beauty,
and defile their Marriage bed which is honorable, the eyes of all that look up
to Christ, and beholds their help, cannot turn into thee, though thou lie in
every corner of the street, though it be in time o^ night, though it be in the
time that simple ones are traveling, though it be in the time that thou may
say the good man is gone from home, and gone a long journey, and taken a Bag of
money, come in thou have Loves, and all that be with us, we have one purse, and
we be brethren, But truth and life and power sees in what, for that is attained
to which the tempter has naught in, though he may find in the first Adam a
transgressor, and Evah his wife, but in the seed he finds none, (but the
Serpent,) that bruises his head, and in that is the Quakers life, and in that
body they are in, which is peace above thy body in which is contention and
strife, where men are surfetted with their aggravating spirits, who ^eels, who
sees over the body that burdens the just in the particular, in which I am one,
and do it visit, though a plague, a Hammer, a sword to thee; who stands in love
to all mankind in the Creation, and knows the peace of that Kingdom in which
is no end, thy jealousy burning, and thy flame is quenched with the power of
the Lord, and the hear of another love, thy motive is seen from what ground it
comes from, thee and the dark Priests, from that body out of which comes all
uncleanness in the world, envyes, fightings, Quarrellings, evil ^maginations,
false accus^^ions. The Lion is raised up that will rend and tear the beast, the
nature, and the beast himself, the Quakers power and spirit it seems you feel
that does torment you J.E. and Roger Crab; And as for the Ballat, and the
Ballad of J.B. you are not with them able to get a top of the Quakers hill to
sell your Ballats there; for the Kings throne is set, in which there comes no
dirt, nor no enchanter, and thou must not think to come before the Throne with
thy crooked body; and thine is the Kingdom that must come down with the Devils,
who creeps like vipers upon the earth, and there lives in your nasty holes, who
charms against them that amongst you makes not their dens; But the power and
Throne has compasled your home, that against the Lamb you cannot push; for
that which you at them do throw is but your dust, who with it cannot dazel the
eye of the ryders on, that tramples and treads, whose rest is in the corner
stone, who slings with a sling, and hits the uncircumcised in the head, and his
feet upon him stands, who is come to the flesh of Christ, which is not meat for
the Dog, swine, and viper, and wolves, and fowls, who this flesh out of their
mouth throws, and cannot swallow down, and the blood of Christ they cannot
drink, but lies in their sins, and corruptions, till they stink; for from that
filthy thing does it make clean, and they that drink must have the pure mouth,
and they that eat^ the flesh has his life, in which we reign, and remains, and
in which we have our being, let us see if thou can sing this song.

G.S.

THE END.

