A TESTIMONY OF LOVE AND GOOD WILL Unto all them who Desire to come to Enjoy
an Everlasting BEING with the Lord of Life, when Days in this World will have
an End. Given forth by one that desires the Good of all, and that none may
Perish in Sin, John Songhurst.

1 These. 5.12. Prove all Things, and hold fast that which is Good.

Printed in the Year 1680.

A few Words to all People, who desire to come to enjoy an Everlasting Being
with the Lord of Life, when Days in this World will have an End.
TIME in this World is very short, and it is very Uncertain when the End of it
will come, and yet nothing more Certain than the End of it to come; but the
World that is to come is for evermore, which is called, A Long Home, because it
will never have an End; Eccles. 12.5.
and it will be to all People either Joy or Torments forever and ever.

Now the World to come consists of two Inheritances, unto which all must go:
the Righteous to the Inheritance of Eternal Life, and Glory, and Endless
Felicity with God, and the Wicked into the Lake that burns, prepared for the
Devil and his Angels; the one an Endless Joy, the other an Endless Misery and
Disconsolation, with Weeping Wailling and Gnashing of Teeth: Though true it is,
That the God of Heaven never Created Man nor Woman, and left them without
Remedy, with intent, that they should go into the Place of Torment, of which
there is no End; No: But he Created them for a Purpose of his own Glory;
intending, that they should have continued with himself in Paradise, where they
should never have had Pain, Trouble or Sorrow, but Joy without End. This was
God's Love to Mankind in the Beginning, when he Created Man in his own Image,
in which Image man stood Single, Pure, Holy, without Sin, or Fault in the Sight
of God; and in that Condition the Lord made a Covenant with Man, and gave him
Liberty to eat of every Tree of the Garden, Genesis 2.9.
except one (to wit) The Tree of Knowledge of Good and Evil; but the Lord told
Adam, Genesis 3.3.
If he did eat of that Tree, he should surely Dye. Now here came in the Flood
of Misery upon all the World, that is, Man and Woman not keeping to God's
Command, nor believing what God had said to them; for if they had kept in the
Faith, then had they been preserved from him that ensnared them; for the Devil
had an Intent to Ensnare Adam and Eve, and came to them with a Lie, Genesis 3.6.
and told them, They should not Dye, if they did eat of the Fruit of the Tree
that God had told them they should not eat of, but That they should be as Gods,
which was another Lie: And believing more what the Serpent said, than what God
had said unto them, they ventured to brake Covenant with God; for if they had
not believed what the Serpent said more than what God had said, but had kept
the Faith of God, they had not been ensnared by the Serpent: and thus the
Serpent having disputed the Woman out of Faith in God, and destroyed that in
her, he created a false Faith of his own, which before could not have been
done: And here came in the first believing of Lies; and so to this day, woe be
to that Soul that does not believe that God Means as he Speaks.

Thus looking more at the Present Enjoyment of the Thing presented, than at the
sad Effect it would produce, and letting go the Belief of what God had said to
them, to believe a Lying Promise from the Serpent, they became not contented
with God's Allowance, but hearkened to the Serpent, Proudly hoping to come to an
Higher Attainment than the Lord had placed them in; so the Woman looking upon
the Fruit to be pleasant and beautiful to the Eye, and good for Food, did eat
of it; though the Lord had warned them beforehand, and told them, That in the
Day they did eat thereof, Genesis 3.3.
they should Dye, which the Woman did remember: Thus they let go the Faith,
closed with the Serpent, and broke Covenant with God; here they came to lose
that Glorious Image, in which they were Created, and that Liberty, Soul-peace,
Fellowship and Unity with God, and spiritual Blessings and Benefits which they
enjoyed before: And so by Disobedience to God Sin entered into Mankind, and Man
was taken Bond-slave by the Devil, and Captive to his Will: And so, according
to God's Unalterable Word, and Unchangeable Decree, who said unto Man, In the
Day thou eats thereof, Genesis 3.3.
thou shall surely Dye, Man dyed to Righteousness, which will be man's Misery
forever, if not deeply Repented of before he go hence, and through Repentance
come to dye to Sin, and live to God.

And God has also decreed, That in that Condition man fell into by that Act of
Disobedience, by which Sin entered, and man became separated from God his Maker,
and shut out of his Kingdom, that no Man nor Woman in that Sinful Estate shall
again ever enter into his Kingdom, till they come to know themselves Freed from
Sin again, and so to be separated from the Evil of the World: For inasmuch as
our first Parents, Adam and Eve, did commit Sin, and so Sin entered, and by Sin
they came to shame, and to be rejected of God; and from that day, to this day,
Sin reigned over all Men and Women by Corrupt Nature; and Death by Sin from
Adam to Moses, and from Moses to this Day; and so all by this Nature Children
of wrath, as the Apostle said, We, as well as others: So is it certain, that in
this State all are undone forever.

Now seeing it is concluded, That Sin has entered all men, and all have sinned,
and that all are at a loss, concerning the Knowledge of God, his Way, and the
Salvation of their Souls; and that none shall be Heirs of God's Kingdom, while
they remain in the Sinful Nature, because while men live in that Nature, there
is no Salvation; and if no Salvation, then Damnation: Then the Question that
remains is this:

Seeing these Things are so, how shall People be Freed from Sin, and from
Condemnation, and the Wrath to come, and be made Heirs of God's Kingdom, and
Injoyers of his Salvation, and Inheriters with them that are Sanctified?

The Lord seeing this has provided a Means (to wit, John 1.1.
Christ, the true Light) being much grieved for Man in that lost Condition he
was plunged into, for he was become a Bond-slave to the Devil, and an Enemy to
his own Soul, and no way capable of Salvation without God, though the Fault was
in Man; For God created him a Noble Vine, wholly of the right Seed; Jer. 2.21.
but he became a degenerate Plant of a strange Vine, and Rebelled against God
his Maker: Yet (I say) the Lord in the riches of Mercy, and great Pity toward
the Sons of Men, did bear with them, and did not cut them off in their Sin,
neither desired he their Death or Destruction, but rather that they should turn
from their Wickedness and live. And so, the Lord considering the Misery man was
fallen into, and what was become of man, looking down upon them with an Eye of
Pity and Compassion, remembered his former Love to man in the Beginning, when he
first created him, how that he had more regard to man than to all he had
created upon the Earth besides, insomuch that he made him in his own Likeness,
in pure Holiness, without any Spot of Sin, and set him above the Ox and the
Ass, and above all other Creatures in Wisdom, Power and Glory; but man losing
that Dominion God gave him, fell under the Ox and the Ass (that is) became more
degenerated than the Beast of the Field, and has not Power of himself over
Sin, that holy Nature being lost, which he was created in; that Wisdom, that
Glory, that Power, in which he was created, are also lost, and Man disabled to
glorify God; but the Beast of the Field kept their places, as they in the
first were created, and praise the Lord in their kind, and he finds no Fault
in them: And as man at the first was set above them, so now in God's Account he
is set above man in his Fallen State: for instance, If one have an Ox or an
Horse to a Pond to drink, and beat him, till one kill him, he will drink no
more but to do him good; but man is worse than a Beast in drinking to Excess,
and so drinks up Iniquity as an Ox drinks Water; and many times men destroy
their Bodies, as well as their Souls, in Excess of Drunkenness: and as we are
in this Condition, the Beasts of the Field are set before us; and herein
Complaint was taken up against Man: The Lord by the Mouth of his Prophet said,
Isaiah 1.2.
He had nourished, and brought up Children, and they had Rebelled against him,
and had for saken him Days without Number, (Him, the Fountain of living
Mercyes to their Souls) and had been seeking and inventing to themselves other
Fountains, which would stand them in no stead; Jer. 2.13.
broken Cisterns that would hold no water: And in this Condition the Beast of
the Field is set before man; and the Lord said, The Ox knows his Owner, Isaiah
1.3.
and the Ass his Masters Crib, but Israel does not know the Lord. Oh, the Sad
and Deplorable State of Man! Oh, the depth of Misery that men are fallen into!
whom God so highly honored, that now the poor Ox and Ass is set before them!
Oh! what Misery, Woe, Dread, Sorrow and perpetual Destruction (never to have
End) does attend Man and Woman in this Condition, and that without Remedy of
fallen man! had not the Lord in Mercy toward man provided a Remedy, we had
been all Undone, as on the account of Salvation, and that forever.

But the Lord of yearning Bowels and tender Mercy to our Souls, has prescribed
a way how Man may come again into favor with God, and to escape all those
forementioned Dangers, which by reason of Sin they are like to be plunged
into, and become more Miserable than any other Creature upon Earth; for there
is nothing else that God has Created upon the Earth but Man and Woman, that
has sinned; therefore in this Condition they are of all other Creatures most
miserable in the sight of God: And the Lord looking down upon People in this
Condition, and seeing them all gone astray, and that there was none in this
state did good, no, not one; but all were running Headlong to Hell, being gone
from the Wisdom of God, and the good Spirit of God in themselves; therefore
there was none found doing good: and then came they to be led by a bad Spirit:
And to this day the bad Spirit rules and bears sway, more or less in all People
that are not come to obey Christ's Spirit, and to be led and guided by it: For
all People upon the Earth are led and guided by one of these two Spirits:
Sinners by the Spirit that begets Sin in them, and carries it on in
Thoughts, in Words and in Actions; and Righteous men by the Spirit of
Righteousness, that begets Righteousness in them, and carries it on in them
in Thoughts, Words and Actions, and thus all men and Women come to be known,
that is, by their Words and Actions, what Spirit it is they are led by; Mat.
12.33.
For the Tree is known by his Fruit, as Christ said of old.

Now here was the Lord's Love wonderfully manisested again to Mankind, after he
had rebelled against God, and had lost that glorious Habitation which the Lord
had placed him in, in that the Lord was not willing to reject man forever, and
to take the Kingdom from him forever, but upon Terms the Lord offered it to man
again, and has sent his good Spirit into the Wilderness of deep Distress,
Nehem. 9.20.
whither Man and Woman was driven from the Presence of God, by reason of Sin,
to visit man in his fallen state, and bring him back again to God. Now this is
the Terms that God has proffered his Kingdom to man again upon; Luke 13.3.
Acts 3.19.
Repent ye, and Believe the Gospel: And this Jesus proclaimed in his Message
from the Father, when he sent him into the World to preach the Gladtidings of
the Kingdom. So all that turn again to God, believe him, and hear him, and obey
his Voice, as the true Shepherd, and Repent of the Evil they have done, Isa. 1
17.
and cease to do Evil, and turn from their Evil Ways, and learn to do well,
and lead a new Life, and keep God's holy Laws and Commands the residue of their
Lives.

Now to all, without Respect to Persons, Rich or Poor, Old or Young, High or
Low, Bond or Free, Master or Servant, White or Black, All that will receive
God's Kingdom upon these Terms, behold, it stands offered to them: and to help
man in this Work, seeing no man can do it of himself without God's help, God
has so loved the World, that he has sent his Son, Christ Jesus, the true
Light, John 3.16.
that Enlightens every man that comes into the World, to visit man, and has
given a Measure or Manifestation of his good Spirit to every Man, and to every
Woman to profit withal, 1 Cor. 12.7.
according to the Sayings of the Scriptures of Truth, which we that are called
Quakers do own to be A True Declaration of the Holy men of God, and of those
things that ought to be Believed and Practiced. And this profiting which they
are to profit by the Measure of his holy Spirit is upon the Account of
Salvation, which nothing else can do, but God's Light and Spirit; and therefore
he has freely given it to all People to awaken them out of Sin and Wickedness,
saying, Arise and go hence, for this is not your Rest. He also makes
Proclamation of Liberty to the Captives that are in Satan's Bands, That they may
all upon these forementioned Terms come to Enjoy Peace with God again, and a
Crown of Everlasting Life to their Souls when Days in this Life will have an
End, 2 Cor. 5.7.
when all Crowns of Glory here below will fade away, and never be enjoyed more;
Oh! then Happy will they be that have got an Habitation in God, and an
Inheritance that will never decay.

And God also by his holy Spirit makes Proclamation on the other hand, That
they that will not turn to him, and lead a New Life, but still Rebel against
the Manifestations of his Light, and the Strivings of his good Spirit in their
own Hearts and Consciences, till he leaves striving with them, and their Day
of Visitation be over, That unto all such, and upon all such shall pass the
Sentence of, Mat. 7.23. chapter 25.40.41.
Go you Cursed, Depart from me, I know you not: And thus the Wicked, and all
the Workers of Iniquity will be turned into Hell, and all that forget God,
where they must inherit Everlasting Punishment. And here is the Reprobation and
Damnation that God decreed in the Beginning; not that God would not have saved
them. But it is happened to them as to Jerusalem of old; Luke 13.34.
God has striven to gather them, and they would not be gathered; and so God's
Unalterable Decree in Justice is fulfilled upon them.

And this concerns all people upon the face of the Earth, that desire Peace
with God in this Life, and a Dwelling with him for their Souls when this Life
will have an End: I say, It concerns them to search and try how it is with
them, and how they stand in Relation to the Spirit of God in themselves, and to
consider by what they are led; for all are led by the good Spirit or the bad;
and the good Spirit leads Peoples Mind Heaven-wards, to mind heavenly things;
and the bad Spirit leads Peoples Minds Hellwards, to mind Ungodliness, and
Carnal Earthly things; and if not resisted, strived against and turned from, it
will lead into the Bottomless Pit, out of which there is no Redemption. And no
man in his own Will or Strength can stand against that Soul-betraying Spirit,
which has taken hold of all Mankind, so that without the help of God's Spirit
all are undone being no way able to Help themselves; but blessed be the Lord,
he has taken care of man, and has sent his good Spirit to that end to help us
against the Spirit of Unrighteousness.

Now here all People by this good Spirit of God may come to have their
Understandings opened, and to see how it is with them, as upon the account of
their Salvation, and how they stand in acceptance with God. Now Mark, here lies
the thing, if thou art led by the Spirit of God, then thou art at Peace with
the Spirit of God in thy self; Romans 8.16.
but if the Spirit of God be yet a Reprover and Condemner in thy Heart and
Conscience, John 16.7, 8. John 3.3, 20, 21, 22.
and check and trouble thee there, then thy Peace and thy Salvation is not
wrought with God, but thou stand far rejected in the sight of God, who is
the Searcher of all Hearts, and the Discerner of all Thoughts, although thou
may profess much of Religion, and may run into many Inventions and Forms,
thinking to please God, and to find Peace for thy Soul; and thou may Pray,
Preach, Read and Sing, and be an Observer of outward Ordinances, and
Family Duties too, as they are called, and yet be an Enemy to God and to thy
own Soul, if thou refusest to be led by the Spirit of God out of the Evil Ways
of the World, from a vain Conversation; Prove. 15.8. and 28.9.
For the Prayers of the Wicked are an Abomination to the Lord.

For so far came Saul when he was an Enemy to God and his People, and to his
own Soul, he made a great flourish about Religion, and was much in the outward
Observations: Acts 9. and chap. 22.
he said of himself, that he was blameless as concerning the outward Law; Romans
7.
and doubtless he had great Learning, and was very zealous for Religion (far
beyond Thousands now adays of those that are called Christians) yet all this
while he was an Enemy to the Spirit of God in his own Heart, and in his blind
Zeal kicked against the prickings of Gods Spirit in himself, as many high
Professors do now adays, and are rebelling against the strivings of Gods
Spirit in their own Consciences, while full of outward Duties, that make a fair
show in the Flesh: But it is hard for People to kick against the Pricks; for
consider, that if ever man come into the Way of God again, it must be by being
instructed by the Spirit of God; Prove. 6.23.
For the Reproofs of instruction are the Way of Life: and God has given his
good Spirit to that end, viz. to instruct People in the way of Everlasting Life.

And this is he that was in that Body of Flesh that suffered at Jerusalem by
the murdering Jews, who was the only begotten of the Father, John 1.12, 13, 14.
Chap. 3.16.
full of Grace and Truth, that whosoever would believe on him, should not
Perish, but have Everlasting Life.

He that said, Before Abraham was I am, this is that second Adam, John 8.59.
that quickening Spirit, who is that Savior and God manifested in Flesh, Romans
9.5. 1 Cor. 15. 1 John 2.5.
who is come to Redeem people out of Sin, and from a Vain Conversation, that he
might be the Savior of their Soul, Tit. 2.13, 14.
by inwardly washing and cleansing them from their Sin by his own Blood; and
not to save People in Sin, but from it: and this is that Rock that followed
Israel of Old, of which they drank; Which Rock, 1 Cor. 10.4.
says Paul, was Christ Jesus.

So here is the means of Salvation, and that of Gods preparing, for poor lost
man's recovery, to bring him back to be an Inheritor in that Kingdom that stands
in Righteousness, and Peace, and Joy forever; and the way to it, is to come to
be instructed by this holy Spirit of Truth, which leads into all Truth, and the
Reproofs of this instructing Spirit is the way to Life; as the Scriptures of
Truth say and bear Testimony.

Now that that Reproves people for sinning, is that which leads them that
adhere to it out of Sin, and Instructs and teaches people the Way to this
Kingdom of God, and till People come to own the Instructions, Teachings and
Leadings of this good Spirit of God, that leads into all Truth, and teaches all
Truth, and no Lie is in it; they shall never know the way to the Kingdom of
Heaven, nor have the Peace of it. (never any did) But by rejecting the
strivings of Gods Spirit, and striving against the prickings of it in the
Conscience comes Misery upon all People. This was the Overthrow and Ruin of
Israel of old ( Neh. 9.20.) That God had given unto them his good Spirit to
instruct them, but they rebelled against it, till their Day was over, and then
came in a Flood of Misery upon them, and then all the World could not help
them, but his Wrath broke out upon them, as it is written, Their Carcases fell
in the Wilderness, yea Twenty Three Thousand in one day, and were destreyed of
Serpents and of the Destroyer, 1 Cor. 10.8, 9, 10, 11, 12. and this happened to
them because they rebelled against God's good Spirit, that he gave to instruct
them, resisting it till their Day was over, and that the Lord ceased striving
with them, and swore in his Wrath They should not enter into his Rest; a dismal
Conclusion!

These things did not only happen to them in that time, but to all those in all
Ages that rebelled against God's Spirit, till he ceased striving with them,
they ever came to Misery, which never will have an End.

Rebellion (said one of old) is as the Sin of Witchcraft, 1 Samuel 15.23. and the
Law would not suffer a Witch to live: and as in the time of the Law God allowed
not Witches their natural Lives, neither will God give Eternal Life to those
Souls that go on in Rebellion against the Reproofs of his good Spirit now, but
sin out the Day of their Visitation, even the Day of his Long suffering and
Forbearance to them, who has said, My Spirit shall not always strive with
Man, Genesis 6.3. It was the Saying of a good Man in days past, speaking to
People in their Youth, one that was acquainted with the Dealings of the Lord
with Mankind; Remember thy Creator in the days of thy Youth, before the Evil
Day come (Eccles. 12.1.) that is the Evil Day, when God's Spirit has done
striving with Man, which will come upon all People that do not turn at the
Reproofs of God's Spirit in their Hearts in that time when he offers Merey to
them.

But in all Ages God raised up faithful men, that were faithful to the Spirit
of God in themselves, to bear a Testimony against Sin, and to warn People of
the Evil of their Doings, as well as by the strivings of his good Spirit in
them, because he would leave them without Excuse, that hated Knowledge, and did
not choose the Fear of the Lord, but set at naught all his Counsel, and would
not turn from their Evil Ways at the Reproof of his good Spirit in them. And
these good Men the Prophets, they spoke what God spoke to them, or in them, by
his Spirit, and not a Premeditated Matter, as the Priests do now adays (of all
sorts) that are not led by the Spirit of Christ.

In days past God spoke to the People by the Prophets, and they were moved to
speak as he pleased, sometimes little, and sometimes much, as he pleased, and
what hep eased; and in this manner God speaks by his Prophers in this our Age;
and these be the true Ministers, and none else, nor none else ever were; nor
can any inform men, and set them in the Way to Heaven, if they are not
themselves led, instructed, 1 Cor. 1. and Chap. 2.10. 1 John 1.1, 2.
taught and guided by the Spirit of God themselves; such can instruct others as
God does them; and such can speak their Experience to the People of the
Teachings, Leadings and inward Guidings of God's Spirit, and how the Soul comes
to be reached, converted and brought into Union, Communion and Fellowship, and
to converse with God, as they are moved by the Holy Ghost, and as the Spirit
gives them utterance; and these be the true Ministers of Christ and these
preach without Study or Natural Art or Invention of Man; and they that take
upon them to be Teachers of others, and are not come to be taught, led and
guided themselves by the Spirit of Truth, that leads [mark] into all Truth,
that so by this they may turn people (as Prophets and Apostles did of old) to
the Leadings and Guidings of God's Spirit in themselves, are False Prophets and
Deceivers; for that which may be known of God is manifest and to be manifested
in man; for there God shows it to man, as it is written, God has showed it
unto them, Romans 1.19. And all that take upon them to be Teachers, and would
seem to be something, and know not these things, are Deceivers, and will cheat
people of their Souls, and have done many Thousands already. Jerem.
14.14.23.28, 29, 30, 31, 32, 36.

And this I speak that all may take Warning, and be awakened to seek after God,
and come out from the False Prophets and Deceivers that are in the World, and
in wardly to wait upon God, to receive from him the Spirit of Wisdom and
Revelation in the Knowledge of himself in your inward parts; and this is the
saving Knowledge, as it is writterr; This is Life Eternal, to know thee the
only true God, and Jesus Christ whom thou have sent, John 17.3.

But now to return to the thing before in hand, which was, to take a View of
the Misery, Destruction and Ruin of those that in their Day did not turn from
the Evil of their Doings at the Reprooss of God's Spirit in their own Hearts
and inward parts, but provoked God from day to day, then God raised up his
Servants the Prophets, and sent them to warn Evildoers, as a Sign to them,
that the Long-suffering of God was drawing to an End, and that his Spirit
should cease striving with them, and that swift Destruction should come upon
them, except a speedy Repentance and Amendment of Life; as namely, Noah, that
just Man, who walked with God, and was perfect in his Generation, him did God
raise up to be a Witness against that Generation (a Minister, a Preacher of
Righteousness) to whom God revealed his Mind concerning that Generation,
saying, My Spirit shall not always strive with Man (that will take no Warning)
and God said to Noah, Make an Ark, for the End of all Flesh is come before me;
and behold I, even I (said God) bring a Flood of Water to destroy all Flesh,
wherein is the Breath of Life: but I will establish my Covenant with thee; for
thee have I seen Righteous before me in this Generation. And I suppose much
need not be spoken now to convince people, that God did destroy the old World
in the execution of his Wrath, and that because they sinned out the Day of
their Visitation, and did not Return at God's holy and just Reproofs, while his
Spirit strived with them.

Again, the Inhabitants of Sodom and Gomorrah, with their Cities and Substance,
for their Sins were brought into Ashes, who as the Figure of Eternal Vengeance
has God made to be an Example to all that afterward should live Ungodly here.

Also, there was the Overthrow of Pharaoh and his Host, who in the Pride of his
Heart said, Who is the Lord, that I should obey his Voice? I know not the Lord,
neither will I let Israel go. This Sturdy Oak did God visit with Judgment, by
pouring out of his Plagues upon him and his Land; and he brought down his Pride
in the Red Sea, and he Humbled him by a perpetual Overthrow in the Deep: but
this Israel whom Pharaoh would not let go, that they might hold a Feast unto
the Lord in the Wilderness, and Sacrifice unto their God, them did God deliver
out of his hand by a strong Arm, and led through the Red Sea, as upon dry Land,
making the Waters stand as Walls on the Right hand, and on the Left. And thus
God made Pharach an Example to all that after should be Hard-hearted, and
refuse to Obey the Lord.

And let it never be forgotten, that in all these Overthrows God took care for
the Righteous, for them that loved God, and obeyed his Voice, and rebelled not
against his good Spirit, but turned at the Reproofs thereof, who sinned not,
but stood in Awe, as Namely, Noah, that Righteous man, him God saved from the
Destruction of the old World, and delivered just Lot out of the Overthrow of
Sodom; and Israel his People he redeemed out of the Iron-Furnace, and delivered
them from Pharaoh that oppressed them, and pleaded their Cause with the Kings of
the Earth, and avenged their Wrongs upon them.

Yet here is one President more; that part of Israel, which sinned, and obeyed
not God's Voice, but day by day provoked him to Anger by their Rebellion and
Unbelief (even them for whom God had wrought such great Salvation) God
overthrew in the Wilderness, and cut them off in his Anger by the Sword, the
Plague, or other Destruction, and twenty three thousand fell in one day, and
God made their Children to wander in the Wilderness Forty Years, to bear the
Whoredoms of their Fathers, till the Carcases of their Fathers were consumed in
the Wilderness: These God was grieved and displeased with, because they
rebelled against his Good Spirit, which he gave them to instruct and lead them
in the Way they should go; and this was not all, but he swear in his Wrath,
They should not enter into his Rest: So may we well conclude with the Apostle,
That if God spared not the Angels that sinned, nor the Old World that sinned,
nor the Cities of Sodom and Gomorrah that sinned, nor Pharaoh and his Host that
sinned, nor that part of Israel that sinned, whom God so dearly loved, and
wrought so great Salvation for, but made them Examples for all that after
should live Ungodly; oh! what shall be the End of those that tread under foot
the Son of God, and count the Blood of the Covenant an Unholy Thing and do
despite to the Spirit of Grace, and daily crucify the Son of God afresh,
spiritually, by their Ungodly Lives, and Ungodly Conversations: For as Sin was
the Transgression of the Law, so whosoever sins, rebels against God and
Christ, and does do despite to the Spirit of Grace; and as he that despised
the Law that came by Moses dyed without Mercy, so God has reserved a greater
Punishment for him that sins wilfully, and turns not at God's Reproof, but
rebels against his Spirit, sets at naught his Counsel, and despises his
Reproof, and hates Knowledge, and does not choose the Fear of the Lord, nor that
Light and Grace that inwardly strives with men to turn them from Sin, by
inwardly checking and reproving them for sin in their Hearts and Consciences,
and inward Parts, and counsels them in their inward Parts to live soberly,
righteously and godly in this present World; such, I say, must inherit
everlasting Flames, and have their Portion in the Lake that burns, where shall
be weeping, and wailing, and Gnashing of Teeth, and that for evermore.

And let it be observed how God loved the Righteous, and preserved them in all
Ages, who feared God, and stood in his Counsel, and loved God above all, who
feared God because they loved him, and sinned not, but stood in Awe; oh, how
attentive was God's Ear to hear them! and how did God open their Hearts to
intercede for the Ungodly, for their Enemies, for them that hated them without
a Cause, and grudged them their natural Lives that God had given them! Oh, how
was the Lord entreated by them! insomuch that the Wicked speeded the better for
the Righteous; for in the Overthrow of Sodom, if there could have been Ten
Righteous found, God would have spared the whole City for the sakes of Ten
Righteous Persons: and Zoar was spared for Lot's sake, that Just Man.

It is good and blessed for all to be Righteous; for without Righteousness and
Holiness none shall see God; and without seeing of God, there is no enjoying
that Kingdom which is not of this World, wherein there is Joy and Peace
forever. Now there is no man of himself can come to be righteous and pure in
Heart, but Christ must cleanse and purge the Heart, and wash it by the inward
Washing of Regeneration, by sprinkling the Heart from an Evil Conscience by his
own Blood; and the Heart being thus made pure, the Saying of Christ in the
fifth of Matthew comes to be fulfilled to all such, viz. Blessed is the pure in
Heart, for they shall see God. And in order to bring to this Blessedness, God
has laid Help upon one that is mighty to save, to take off the Burden of Sin
from the Soul, and to give Rest to the Soul that is weary. Now most people will
confess to this, because it is Scripture; but it is one thing to confess to it,
and another thing to know it experimentally, and to come truly to Christ.

It may be an Objection may be in some concerning the Manner of Coming to
Christ.

Unto this I Answer; The Manner of coming to Christ, is to come to his Light
and Grace in the Heart, and so to be made new Creatures; man must leave Sin,
and come to a godly Sorrow, which works a true Repentance never to be
repented of, to come to know Sin to be a Burden, and to feel the weight of it
upon the Soul, if he will come aright to Christ; for these be they that Christ
called to come to him, saying, Come to me all you that are weary and heavy
laden, and I will give you Rest, I will ease you, Matt. 11.28. And as thou
come to him, he will make thee righteous and pure in Heart, that thou may
see God, and be blessed.

This is that a man cannot do for himself, nor no man for him, but Christ only:
So it is those that mourn and groan under the Burden of Sin, that are fit to
come to Christ; not them that take Pleasure in Sin, nor them that love Sin, and
plead they must live in it term of Life, that is, till they Dye. But them that
travail, as Paul did, to be delivered from the Body of Sin, etc. (Romans 7.24.)
this is the Way to become New Creatures; and these be they that hear the Voice
of the Son of God and live, as he said, My Sheep hear my Voice, and the Voice
of a Stranger they will not hear, John 10.27. (these were good Sheep.) Now to
come to hear Christ's Voice, is to obey his Spirit, that striveth in the Heart
to reclaim the Wicked; and the Willing and Obedient shall dwell in the Land (in
the Kingdom of God) and shall eat of the Good of the Land, the Bread of Life,
and their Souls shall partake of the Honey and the Milk that flows therein,
Isaeah 1.19.

Some may say, If I had been in the days of his Flesh, I would have heard him,
and have come to him; but he is asoended up on high, and sits at the Right
Hand of God; and how can I hear him now? Well it is true, he is ascended into
Heaven, and is with the Father; But mark this, he is not confined to one place,
but as thou may read in the Scriptures, Romans 9.5.
He is God over all blessed forever; and his Presence fills Heaven and Earth;
he is every where, and there is a measure or manifestation of his Light and
good Spirit given to thee, 1 Cor. 12.7.
and to every man and woman upon the Earth, that thou and they may profit by
it, upon the count of Salvation, and the knowledge of this is made known in
thee, or that which may be known of God is manifest in thee: and the Scripture
says, Romans 1.19.
The Word is near, even in the Heart and in the Mouth, etc. there thou may
hear it, and as thou obeyest the Voice of it, it will give thee Power to do
that which it does require of thee, and by doing this it is that thou may
hear his Voice, by keeping to that of God in thee, and thy mind exercised in it.

Here the Voice of the Spirit of Christ is known as well as in days past, and
in Generations gone. So let none deceive themselves, for the Spirit of Christ
is near to all, whether they will hear him or not; and true it is, that they
must one day give an account to him whether they will or no: therefore let none
deceive you with lying Vanities or unprofitable Words; for this is he that
searches the Heart, and tries the Reins, and shows unto man what his
Thoughts are, the Lord of Hosts is his Name: and he is not far from any: Acts
17.27, 28.
so that no man need say, Who shall ascend to fetch Christ? or who shall
descend to fetch Christ up? or who shall go beyond the Sea? For says the
Apostle, The Word of Faith which we Preach is nigh (but how nigh?) in the
Heart; Romans 10.6, 7, 8.
and that Christ was that Word of Faith which they preached; (and so we say)
that People may hear it and do it: And Christ said to John as may be read in
the third Chapter of the Revelations, Behold I stand at the Door and knock, if
any man hear my Voice and open the Door, I will come in to him, and sup with
him, and he with me, Rev. 3.20. It is at the Door of the Heart the Lord
knocks; and they that hear and obey the Spirit of Jesus, that there knocks,
such come to be born of the Spirit, and by this come to sup with the Lord,
which is not an outward Supper, but an inward enjoyment of spiritual Food, the
Bread of Life, that which came down from Heaven, which Christ said, He that
eats thereof should never dye (should live forever) John 6.33, 34, 35, 50,
52, 53, 63. and that Bread that a man eating of it never dies, Christ said, was
the true Bread, that his Father gave from Heaven (then the Priests did not give
it.) And when the People murmured because Christ said, Except ye eat the Flesh
of the Son of Man, and drink his Blood, ye have no Life in you; did not Christ
for their further satisfaction make them this Answer? The Words that I speak
unto you, they are Spirit, and they are Life; it is the Spirit that quickens,
the Flesh profitteth nothing. Now they that can believe Christ, let them, who
said, The Flesh profitteth nothing, but the quickening Spirit and Power of God,
that raises the Soul from Death to Life.

And this is that we labor to bring People to, that all might come to know
that they have a part in him who said, I am the Resurrection and the Life, John
5.25. and so to feed at the Table of the Lord, that they may never hunger more.

And for this we have been and yet are hated of the World, both of Professors
and Profane, but more especially of some angry and envious Professors; and no
marvel, for none hated Christ and the Apostles more than they that made
Profession of Religion (in those days) who were themselves out of the Life of
Righteousness, and in Hatred, Strife and Envy, as too many Professors are now
adays, who stick in the outward Observations and Ceremonies; one crying, Lo,
here is Christ; and another, Lo, there he is; and all in their own Inventions,
or in the Inventions of their Forefathers, or at least in the Imitation of
Elementary Things, often Persecuting and Destroying one another about Opinions.

And these are they that are led by a false spirit; for all people are led by
the true or false Spirit; for there is but two, the Good and the Bad, which all
People upon the Earth are led by; that is, the Spirit of God, or the Spirit of
the Devil; and to which of these a man gives his Mind to serve, his Servant he
is, and his Conversation is managed by that Spirit, and it may be that both
lead to profess Religion: for even the Devil in some sense is not against
Peoples making a Profession of Religion; but he makes them so blindly Zealous,
that they shall Hate, Persecuto or Murder those that will not believe what they
believe, and worship as they worship, and be of their Religion: The Devil cares
not how much People talk of God and Christ and Religion, provided they do not
deny him to lead them, and so become New Creatures; For they that are not led
by the Spirit of Christ, are none of his, Romans 8.9. And to be led by the Spirit
of Christ, is to become a New Creature; for all have been in the old Nature
Children of Wrath (as the Apostle said, Ephesians. 2.3.) we as well as others; till
we come to put off the Old Man with his Deeds, and to put on the New Man, which
is created after the Image of him that created him, in Righteousness and true
Holiness, (Ephesians. 4.24.) the image of Christ, who said, Behold I make all
things New.

And herein comes the New Birth to be known, by which People come to be Heirs
to God's Kingdom, which none ever come to, but they that are born again, which
is to live a Life answerable to the Truth; and to put off the old Man's Deeds
is to put off Sin, for all Sin and Wickedness is of the Devil, the old Man, and
this is the old Nature by which People are Children of Wrath; and it is the old
Leaven the Apostle commanded to be purged out, that in the room thereof
Righteousness may dwell, which is of the New Nature, and they that come to this
in all things, become New Men, and have New Thoughts, New Words and New Works,
being begotten and born again by the Spirit of God, all things become New, and
all Old Things be done away, to wit, Swearing, Cursing, Lying, Quarreling,
Fighting, Stealing, Whoreing, Drunkenness, Pride, Envy, Murder, Cozening,
Cheating, Covetousness and Idolatry, Dissimulation and Hypocrisy, all that is
Old; and all False Religions must be roled together, as a Scrole, John 4.
and a New Worship must be known, even in Spirit and Truth. And this was that
which John was showed in the time of his Banishment, by him that said to him;
Behold, I create all things New [Mark the end of the Old] John said, He saw a
New Heaven and a New Earth, in which dwelt Righteousness, and there was no Sea;
but the Old Heaven was roled together as a Scrole, with a great Noise, and the
Earth was burnt up with every green Tree; and every Island and every Bonds-man
and every Freeman fled away; and the Elements were melted with fervent Heat:
But these things are a Mystery hid from the Wisdom of this World; for the
Treasures of Wisdom and Knowledge are hid in Christ Jesus, who only and alone
opens and reveals the Mysteries and secrets of God's Kingdom, and also of the
Devil's Kingdom, and without this Revelation of Jesus none can know the Right
way from the Wrong, nor the True Worship from the False, because it is
spiritually discerned.

They therefore that are not led and guided by the Spirit of God, cannot know
these things; for the true Knowledge and the right Understanding of it is
foolishness to them; therefore they are putting Light for Darkness, and
Darkness for Light; and calling Good Evil, and Evil Good; and the Wrong Way the
Right, and the Right Way the Wrong: And in this Blindfold Condition are all the
Worshippers in the World, that are not led by the Spirit of God to Worship God
in Spirit and in Truth; for there is no Worship accepted of God but that which
People are led into by the Spirit of God; and for want of keeping to the Spirit
of Truth, that leads into all Truth, which in the Heart and Conscience Reproves
for Sin, and Justifies men in doing of Good, People run into all manner of
Errors, as well in Judgment, Discipline and Worship, as in the other things;
for though there be a Spirit in man, Yet it is the Inspiration of the Almighty
that gives a man Understanding how to Worship God, and of the Way to Heaven,
and what to believe, and what not to believe; and what to do, and what to leave
undone; and what will please God, and what will not please him.

But that there is such an immediate Inspiration, whereby God does teach and
reveal his Mind to his Children in this Age, is opposed, vilified and denied by
the Generality; and no marvel, for needs must it be so, while they are beside
the Truth, and will not come to the Spirit of Truth, to be led by it, but
oppose it that should lead into all Truth, and give a man to understand that
which no man can un derstand by the Wisdom of this World; 1 Cor. 1.12. chapter 2.14.
for the Scripture says, The World by Wisdom knew not God: but as People come
to be made wise by God, so they come to have an Experience of these fore
mentioned things: to know the old Heaven to be dissolved, and the Elements
melted with fervent heat; this is not an outward thing, but an inward Work of
God; and it was never done by any Power, but the Power of God: And blessed be
the Name of the Lord, he has begun this Work in many, which is to the
Salvation of them that are faithful, and use victoriously the spiritual Weapons
of their Warfare in Righteousness, against Sin and Wickedness in the Heart; and
as they of old said, so can many say now adays, The Weapons of our Warfare are
not Carnal, but Spiritual, and mighty through God, for the pulling down the
Strong Holds of Satan in man, Principalities and Powers of Darkness; and for
the bringing into the Obedience to Christ our Evil Thoughts (2 Cor. 10.4.) that
in the room of Sin Everlasting Righteousness may reign; then that Peace will be
known which passes all Understandings of this World.

And as People give way to the Spirit of God, it wars against the Devil, and
against his strong Holds, which is Sin in the Heart; for that is the chiefest
Place in Man, the Heart, therefore God expects the Heart: And the Wise Man
said, My Son, give me thy Heart, Prove. 23.26.

So when Christ comes to rule in the Heart, then all things become new, the
Old Nature by him comes to be purged out, and a New Nature comes to be known,
which is of the Nature of Christ; and here Man comes to be born again, by
putting off the Old World's Worships, Delights and Pleasures, which are the old
Heaven and Earth in the Heart; for Heaven is as False Worship, so Pleasures,
Delights, etc. for whatsoever a man sets his Heart, Mind and Affections upon,
more than upon Christ, that he makes his Heaven and his God too; some made
their Bellies their God, and some make Covetousness their Heaven, and some make
Pride their Heaven, whose chiefest Delight is to deck their Bodies up in
foolish Toys, and cannot tell what New Thing many times to invent to put on,
or spend their Money upon: Little do such remember what the Prophet cried, Isa.
40.6. All Flesh is but as Grass, and the Beauty of it but as the Flower of the
Field, the Grass withers, and the Flower fades away (in like manner does the
Bodies of Men and Women, with the Beauty thereof) but the Word of the Lord
endures for evermore: but this holy Word is little minded, little loved or
regarded by many, although it strive with People in them, to save them from the
Wrath to come, and will be with them forever, a Joy to those that are faithful
to it, and a torment to the Wicked.

But the God of this World has blinded the Eyes of many, and they are willing
to be blinded by him, always delighting themselves in the things of this Life,
till Death seizes upon them; and then their Delights here become their Burden;
then they begin to cry out, Lord, Lord! but what does the Scripture say of
such? Matt. 7.21, 22. [mark] Not every one that says, Lord, Lord! shall enter
the Kingdom of God; but he that does the will of God: and the Will of God is,
that people should cease to do Evil, and learn to do well (Isa. 1.16, 17.) and
cleanse their Hands and their Hearts, by putting away the Evil of their Doings,
whilst they are on this side the Grave: For the Scripture says, There is no
Unclean Thing shall enter the Kingdom of God; and all Sin and Wickedness is
unclean in the Sight of God; and this was that which John saw was done away,
which he called the Old Heaven and the Old Earth; and said, He saw a New Heaven
and a New Earth, wherein dwells Righteousness: which was a real Change in Man
and Woman, out of Sin and Wickedness, into Righteousness; and so Christ comes
to rule where the Devil ruled; and this is being born again; and without coming
to this, none can come to be saved, nor go to Heaven.

Therefore it is good for all to consider this, while there is time to do it,
before the Night come, wherein no man can work for God: for there are many
things that hinder man from being born again, as I was about to say concerning
them that make Visible Things their Heaven and their God, as some make
Covetousness and Pride their Heaven and their God; and othersome Drunkenness,
Swearing and Lying their Delight, so it is their Heaven and their God; some in
Envy, Malice, Hatred and Strife, Backbiting and Revenge; others delight in
Quarrelling, Fighting and Murdering about Religion; others in Hunting, Hawking
and Horse-Racing, in Cards and Dice, in Foolish Jesting, spending their
precious time in Idle Stories, which corrupt Youth, and are a Shame to Old Age.
These things and many more, while people live in them, they are not born again,
nor led by the Spirit of God; for all these things are brought forth in people
by the Prince of the Power of the Air, the Spirit which rules in the Hearts of
the Children of Disobedience' Ephesians. 2.2. But the worst is, that all these
things' or most of them, are brought forth by such and in such as do pretend to
worship and Religion; but all such Worshippers are out of the Fear of God.

God made Man Upright, but he falling from that Upright State, he came to
invent many Ways to find out that again which he by Disobedience had lost; but
none could find it, till they came to be led to it by the Spirit of God, the
Spirit of Truth, which leads and guides into all Truth; and none come to be
led by the Spirit of Truth till they deny themselves, and take up a Cross to
their own Wills, a Cross to their old Heaven and to their old Earth, which they
have lived and delighted in; not a Cross of Wood or Stone, and such outward
things as the Papists set up, but to the Perverse Nature, and the Selfish Will,
that the Will of God may be done in Earth as it is in Heaven, in thy Earthen
Vessel; but while the old Heaven, and the old Earth, and the old Beggarly
Elements are standing, these things cannot be till all that comes to be done
away by the Spirit and Power of God; for by him all things are to be made new
in Man and Woman. For when thy Delight comes to be set on the Law of the Lord,
and thy Mind to be set on God and Godliness above all other things, and to make
it thy chiefest Joy to serve and worship God in the Spirit and in the Truth,
and to seek after a Righteous Life here, thou will come to know that New Heaven
which John spoke of in the Revelations, wherein dwells Righteousness, so new
Pleasures and Joys; for while the Old Nature in thee bears rule, and the old
Pleasures of Sin yet stand in thy Mind and Heart, in that dwells
Unrighteousness, and that must be destroyed; and when these things by Christ
come to be destroyed, then thou will come to know Sanctification, and to be
redeemed from Sin by the Spirit of God, and to be sanctified (as the Scripture
says) throughout in Body, Soul and Spirit, and so come to know all things to
become new, to be changed by the Lord; and this is the New Birth, which is
begotten and brought forth by God, which is not of this World, but comes to be
changed by the little Leaven, which was hid in the three Measures of Meal,
Matthew. 13.33. and blessed be the Name of the Lord, this little Leaven has in
many brought the three Measures into one Lump, and has changed Body, Soul and
Spirit into its own Nature; and in such all things are become new; for the
Kingdom of Heaven and the Spirit of it is compared to a little Leaven, that was
hid in three Measures of Meal; for the Spirit of God seems to most people to
be of little and of low Esteem in their Eyes; and the Appearance of his Spirit
in them against Sin is more hated than any man's; and he is (as the Prophet
said, Amos 2.13.) pressed down as a Cart that is laden with Sheaves. It is Sin
and Wickedness that the Spirit of God is pressed down with in the Hearts and
Consciences of People; but Woe be to them one day, if by Faith and Repentance
they remove not these Weights and Burdens from the Lord's Spirit; this is that
which will sink them down to the Pit of Hell, where there is never any more
coming out, its without End, it is Torment forever.

Therefore it is good for all People to be faithful to the Spirit of Christ; it
is no less than the Power of God to Salvation in them that are faithful to it;
and by this People come to escape the Damnation of Hell, and by no other means
can ever any escape, but as they come to know Christ's Spirit to rule in the
Heart and Mind over all Impurity; for he is come to bear sway in the Heart; and
therefore Wisdom says, My Son, give me thy Heart: and if he rule in the Heart,
then that which abounds out of the Heart will be from the Good Motions of
Christ's Spirit: and as the Holy Man of God said in days past ( Acts 17.28.)
In Him we live, and in Him we move, and have our being; this will also be
witnessed by them in this day, that know Christ to rule in them; for such come
to live in him, and to move by him, and in him to have their being: he that
came to this state said, ( Gal. 2.20., The Life that I now live is by the Faith
of the Son of God. This was a Life out of Sin, in the New Birth, being chosen
out of this World, and come to walk in a new and living Way, which leads to
the Rest which never will have End: Christ is the Leader of such, and they are
no more their own, but his; as he is their Leader, so he is their Father,
Master and Keeper; when Temptation comes, he is a strong Tower; he is also in
the Righteous as a Refiner's Fire, and as a Fuller with Soap, and as a Purifier
of Silver; he makes them more pure than Gold, than the Golden Wedge of Ofer: he
is in all those that are led by him as a Consuming Fire against Sin and all
Deceit; and therefore it is said, Who can dwell with Everlasting Burnings?
(Isa. 33.14.) for by that Heat comes all the False Worships (which are but
Elementary) to be melted with fervent heat; the Zeal of God is kindled against
them, and the old Earth by this comes to be burnt up; then comes the New
Earth, which John saw, wherein dwells Righteousness; and in such there is
known no more Sea; for all people being from the Spirit of Truth, are in their
Minds as unstable as the Waters of the Sea, tossed to and fro with every Wind
of Doctrine, and with every Tempest of the Enemy, before they come to be settled
by the Power of God; but this stability being once known, then people come to
know a Stay to their Minds, and come (as the Scripture says, Isa. 26.3. Phil.
4.7.) to be kept in perfect Peace, and to know that Peace which passes the
Understanding of this World, which the Wisdom of this World comprehends not;
for they whose Minds are thus preserved, the Wicked One touches them not (1
John 5.18.) although he may come with many Snares and Temptations to ensnare
and draw aside, yet while people are kept by the Spirit of God, they are
delivered from them all; for it is no Sin to be tempted, but to enter into the
Temptation, that is sin, then People come to break their Peace with God; when
the Devil tempts them to do any Wickedness, and they give way to it, this is
making shipwreck of Faith and a Good Conscience, as by sad Experience some have
done; see the 1st Epistle to Timothy, the 1st Chapter and the 19th Verse.

But the way to prevent this, is to give way to Christ, that he may bear Rule
in thy Heart and Mind, and that he may order thy Affections and Conversation,
and bear sway in thee, then thou will come to know m that said, John 14.17.
He that is with you shall be in you. And they that he spoke to knew his words
fulfilled, and so spoke by experience that which they were Eyewitnesses of,
and said, that he wrought all their Works in them and for them: And I hope
there is none that are so misled in their Understandings, as to say that Work
was Sin, but altogether to work out Sin; for that is the Work which Christ came
to do, To put an end to Sin in People, Dan. 9.24.
and to finish Transgression in People, and in the room of Sin to bring in
Everlasting Righteousness in People; for Sin is in People, for there is none in
the Beasts of the Field but in mankind; for the Beasts of the Field keep their
places, as God created them, and do no way displease God, but mankind knows not
his Owner, as the poor Ox and Ass does, as the Prophet said, The Ox knows his
Owner, and the Ass his Masters Crib, but the People know not the Lord, Isa. 1.3.

In the old Nature no Man nor Woman ever knew God, but as they came to be
changed and Born again, and so to put on the New Man Christ Jesus; the Old man
being put off with his Deeds, which is Sin, then Christ is known as he said,
Lo, said he, 2 Cor. chapter 6. ver. 16.
I will dwell in man, and walk in man; I will be their God, and they shall be
my People. To know this is Eternal Life; but God dwells not in Sinners, but
in them that are pure in Heart; for it is the pure in Heart that see God, and so
come to be acquainted with God; here all People that are acquainted with God by
this acquaintance, come to know how its with them as to their inward condition,
and how it stands with their inward man in the sight of God, and by the guiding
of Gods Spirit all things in man and woman are kept in good order, and by this
come to have Power over Sin, and in such there is no need to cry out for want
of Power; for God gives Power to them that come to him by Jesus Christ, who
has all Power in Heaven and in Earth in his Hand, and God's love is Universal
to all People, and desires not the Destruction of any, but rather they would
turn from their Wickedness and live: Here you may see according to the
Scripture of Truth, that it is Sin and Wickedness that is the cause of Death to
the Soul; for you may read in the holy Scriptures, that God has promised, that
whosoever will turn from their Wickedness, and from their Abominations which
they had committed, and come to him, In quity shall not be their Ruin, such
shall not Perish, but have Life Everlasting; these are terms of Salvation that
God has promised the Kingdom of Heaven upon, that People may lay down their
Heads in Peace, when they are to go hence never to be seen more in this World:
And man must know Wickedness done away in this Life, For as the Tree falls to
the North or to the South, so it lies; and as Death leaves People, so
Judgment will find them, and there is no Repentance in the Grave; nor calling
the time once spent back again, nor no Remission of Sin after this Life; For no
unclean thing shall enter the Kingdom of God. And all Sin is Unclean in the
sight of God, and this is that which Christ is come to destroy, that People may
be Heirs to a Kingdom which is not of this World.

And this Paul witnessed, when he said, He had fought a good Fight, he had
finished his Course, and had kept the Faith, and henceforth there was laid up
for him a Crown of Glory; and not for him only, but for all them that feared
God and loved his Appearance, 2 Timothy 7.8. And this appearance was and is
against Sin in the Heart; and Paul's fighting was against Sin and Wickedness
with Spiritual Weapons, which was the Law of the Spirit of Life in Christ
Jesus, which was not with Carnal weapons, but Spiritual, and mighty through God
to the pulling down of the strong Holds of Sin: and this was not known only by
Paul, and of the Apostles, but by the Righteous in all Ages, and Righteous
Abel, and Enoch, and all the Righteous all along to this day, they that were
made Righteous, it was by that Power by which the Apostles witnessed
Righteousness, which was the Power and Spirit of God, and this is near to all,
that all may be led by it.

But some have said, that It is not now as it was in the Apostles days.

Why is it not now as it was in the Apostles days? what is changed that it is
not now as it was then?

O, say they, we cannot do as they did, and have Power as they had to live and
to stand against Sin, and to come to that Perfect State as they did.

To which I Query thus; What was it that made them Righteous, or gave them
Power over Sin and Death? And by what did they War against Sin? was it not God
that gave them Power over Sin and delivered them from the Evil of this World?
and what was it by which they did this, if not by the Spiritual Law of God that
is written in the Heart? and if so, then whether the Lords Power. Law and
Spirit be not the same as it was? and whether the Lords Love be not as it was?
and whether he has not the same Power to help man as he had? I hope all this
will be granted, and that it was only and alone by the Power and Spirit of God
they came to be Righteous, and to witness an Overcoming of Sin, and by no Self
righteousness, nor by any other Power, and that the Lord's Law, Power and
Spirit is the same as it was, and his Love the same as it was, and that God has
the same Power to help men as he had.

And if this be granted, that it is so, then it seems the Fault is not in God,
that it is not now as it was in the Apostles days; and if the Fault be not in
God, then it is in Man: But it is my Belief and Experienced Knowledge, that
there be some that are come to witness the same Power over Sin as the Apostles
witnessed in their day: and I believe that it is with Men and Women that are
faithful to God, as it was in the Apostles days, as concerning having Power
over Sin, and to come to a Perfect State in Christ Jesus.

But to them that are wallowing in Sin, as a Sow in the Mire, and to them that
are pleading for Sin for term of Life, although they may be got under a high
Notion of Religion, and out of the open Profaneness of the gross Abominations
which are practiced in the World, yet notwithstanding this, while they plead
for Sin, and live in Sin, herein they are striving to uphold the Devil's
Kingdom, and live in that which Pleases the Devil, and Displeases God; for
Sin is of the Devil's Kingdom, and they that plead for it (to wit, for Sin) are
pleading for the Devil's Kingdom; and with such I must needs confess it was
never with them as with the Apostles in their day, and them that followed
Christ in the Apostles days, nor in our days; and such there were in the
Apostles days, that would not believe and follow Christ; and they knew no
Power over Sin, because they came not to him that gives Power, and so came not
to be Sons of God, because they did not receive him that was come to give Power
to become the Sons of God, as the Scripture says, which we that are in Scorn
called Quakers do believe to be a true Declaration of those things that ought
to be believed, and have a reverent Esteem of them; and they say, Christ came
to his own, but his own received him not; but as many as did receive him, unto
them he gave Power to become the Sons of God, John 1.10, 11, 12.

Receiving of him is to yield to the Motions of his good Spirit in them, and
these be they which come to know that God is not changed, nor his Power
lessened, nor his Love abated; but he is the same to Mankind to day as
yesterday, and forever; and as there were some in the Apostles times, that
would not believe the Doctrine of Christ, nor the Apostles, so now in our days
there are many Professors and Profane that will not believe Christ nor his
Doctrine, because his Doctrine is against Sin, but they cannot abide it, and
are crying out, No Perfection Here, neither will they believe, that Christ is
able to do the Work that the Father sent him to do; for he came to put an End
to Sin, to finish Transgression, and to bring in Everlasting Righteousness.

This is that which they cannot believe, and especially they that are got under
a Color of Religion, as the Scribes and Pharisees were; they ever were the
worst against Christ and the Apostles, and so they are now adays. For all
Religions and Worships are False and Vain, except that which Christ set up
above Sixteen Hundred Years ago, which is in the Spirit and Truth, which is the
Light of Christ Jesus, and the Power of God to Salvation, made known to Mankind
in the Heart and Conscience, as the Scripture says, Romans 1.19. That which may
be known of God is manifest within, for God has showed it to man, that Sin by
this may be made known, and Righteousness made known, the Way of Life and the
Way of Death made known, that lost Man may not be to seek concerning Salvation;
this has the Lord done in Mercy for us, that none may miss of that Kingdom
which is not of this World; and if any miss that, it is because of Sin; and
this must be known to be taken away in this Life; if it could have been done
away after this Life, then Christ needed not have come and suffered for Sin, as
he did; nor the Apostles and Ministers of Christ have pressed People so much to
Perfection, as they did, and to make their Calling and Election sure in this
Life: But this is certain, If ever people come to be Heirs to God's Kingdom,
they must come to have Assurance of it before they go hence, else they will
miss of their Expectation, of having a Rest with God when this Life will End:
And to know Assurance, is to know Sin destroyed, and Righteousness set up in
the Heart.

Some may be ready to say, How is this possible to be, seeing our Mortal Bodies
are frail, and full of Infirmities, and Weakness does attend us; and when we
have done all, we are Unprofitable Servants?

It is true, all the Service that Man can do, it is unprofitable in the sight
of God, if God lead not unto it; all Worship, Service and Duty, that is done,
set up and offered to the Lord, it being done in Man's Will, this is all
unprofitable, and unaccepted of God, it being Man's Will, and not the Will of
God; for while People live in Sin, and plead for it, and while the Old Nature
is standing, their Preaching, Praying, Baptizing and Breaking of Bread, Singing
and Family Duties, it is all vain if Christ move not to it and lead into it;
the Scripture says, The Prayers of the Wicked are Abomination to the Lord; and
if their best Service be Abomination to the Lord, needs must the rest; for all
Sin is Abomination at the best; and therefore while people live in Sin, and
plead for the continuation of it, they must needs be Wicked; and herein, I say,
all is unprofitable as people live in this Condition. But there is a State and
Condition which is profitable and perfect, and that Job came to, and many more
of the People of God in all Ages and Generations, that knew the Spirit of God
to lead and guide them into all Truth; this is that Spirit which a
Manifestation of is given to every Man to profit withal, 1 Cor. 12.7. and they
that came to be led by that Spirit, their Prayers avail much, and their Works
are the Works of Righteousness, and this is that which God does accept of; and
I hope there is none that will dare to say, That the works of Christ are not
perfect, they that know Christ to work all their Works in them and for them,
which Works are perfect and profitable in all they that are pure in Heart; and
by this Sin comes to be destroyed, and by the Power of God Perfection is
known, and not by any thing of man's Righteousness, Service or Invention, which
is but Outward Lip Service, which Christ complained against, concerning them
that honored him with their Mouths, but their Hearts were far from him; it is
now just so with most sorts of People, Priests, Professors and Profane, that
are come no further than the Scribes and Pharisees were, and the Jews and High
Priests in Christ's days, when he in the Body of Flesh walked upon the Earth,
they then were much opposing Christ and the Apostles Doctrine, because they
preached up another Doctrine contrary to the Traditions, who were busy about
Outward Duties and Services, Praying, Preaching and Singing, and Eating.
Drinking, Washing, and making a great flourish with Outward Worship, and
boasting about Religion, which was but in Ceremonies, Types, Figures and
Shadows, altogether in Outward things, as people are now adays, that are not
come to the Spiritual Worship, which is in Christ Jesus; these were in Ages
past, and are in this our Age, all crying out against that inward Principle
which Christ and the Apostles exhorted People to, as you may read in the
Scriptures of Truth how Christ said, He was the true Light, that lights every
man that comes into the world, John 1.9. This Light shines in the Heart and
Conscience, there to show a man his Thoughts, and to set his Inward Condition
in view before him, because nothing else can do it; and this was that Light
that shone in Paul when he said, O wretched Man that I am! who shall deliver me
from the Body of this Death? Romans 7.24. It was the Light of Christ that showed
him his wretched state, and not only so, but gave him Power over it, and he
being faithful to it, through great Self-denial, he taking up the Cross to his
own Will, whereby he was crucified to the World, and the World to him, was made
able to travail through great Tribulations, Exercises and Persecutions, both by
Professors and Profane, and by his own Country Men; and all this Hatred and
Malice was raised up in them by the Devil against Paul, because he was turned
to the Spirit and Light of Christ Jesus in himself, and led a new Life, and
worshipped God in another manner than he did before (to wit) in the Spirit and
in the Truth, he being come to that which was out of their sight, to things
that Christ had revealed to him, and by this he preached, and turned People
from Darkness to the Light of Christ in themselves, and from Satan's Power to
the Power of God; for this thing was Paul enviously persecuted, and cryed-out
against, and accounted Mad, and ceased not their Pursuit till they had murdered
him at Rome; and for this very thing do Professors, Priests, Magistrates, and
many others hate us, now adays, for turning of People from Darkness to Light,
and from Satan's Power to the Power of the living God and many have been the
Inventions, Consultations, and Contrivances against us, both by Parliaments,
Councils, Magistrates, Bishops, Priests, Professors and Profane, that if the
Lord had not stood by us, we had been destroyed long ago; but the Righteous
God, that pleads the innocent Cause of his Children, has so kept us and
preserved us by his Living Power, that our Adversaries had never ought to prove
against us, but only the Law of our God, and this honest Daniel was accused
for, but consider what became of his Accusers, and the Accusers of the
Righteous in all Ages, and then read within what will become of the Persecutors
of God's People in this Age, and for the future; and who ever prospered that
fought against God? for the Hand of God is too strong for the whole World, and
it was ever turned upon them that used Violence, and Misery must be their
Portion, if they Repent not.

Therefore it is good for all people to look home, and to consider how it is
with them, as to their inward Condition; for it I am Wrong, thou shall not give
an Account for me, nor I for thee, but every one for themselves; therefore it
is good for every one to walk in the Light, while the Light shines, before
Darkness come upon thee, and there be no more Light, and thou left without
Remedy for Salvation; for it is the Light that brings Salvation, as you may
read in the Scriptures what the Holy Men say, 2 Cor. 4.6. That God who
commanded Light to shine out of Darkness, has shined in our Hearts, to give us
the Light of the Knowledge of the Glory of God in the Face of Jesus Christ;
that is, in the Appearance of Jesus Christ. Christ is the Light, and the Light
is Christ Within, the Hope of Glory; and this they spoke who were Witnesses of
his inward Appearance, of his revealing himself in their Hearts and Inward
Parts.

And further, the Scripture says, That this is the Condemnation, that Light is
come into the World, and men loved Darkness rather than Light because their
Deeds are Evil, John 3.19.

This is Salvation to them that are saved, and Damnation to them that are
damned (to wit) the Light; for you may see, that they that hated the Light were
condemned by it, and it was and is hated by all that love and plead for Sin,
which is Evil; for while people live in Darkness, which is Evil, they see not
the Evil Effect that Darkness will produce to them that love it, nor the Misery
that does attend them, and therefore they hate the Light; for the Light makes
Sin appear exceeding sinful, and dreadful to behold; and they that are not
willing to leave their Sins; get up into Disregard and Hatred against the Light
that shows them it, and shows to them their States; this is that which
troubles people in their Minds, and disquietteth them in their inward Parts
for following their Lusts and Pleasures, and therefore hated by them; for this
is oftentimes troubling of them for creeping under false Colors of Religions,
and false Security, and lets them have no true Peace under any invented
Religion, that is not set up by God and Christ; and also troubles the common
Priests for making a Trade of the Scriptures, and Merchandise of the people,
who with their Lies make People believe all is well with them, when it is no
such thing, and so cheat People both of their Souls and Money, and all this
they do for Money; but People are not willing to believe this, because it is an
easy Road, and pleasing to the Old Nature and old course of Life; and here
they can live and please the basest of men, and do according to the Traditions
and Doctrines of man, although it be never so contrary to God; and here the
Blind lead the Blind, and think all is well, till Death comes, and then they
come to see all is in vain, their spending of their Money for that which is not
Bread, and their Labor for that which satisfies not the immortal Soul; and
then begins to say, O that I had another day! I would not do as I have done;
and the Reason of this is, because they have been seeking the Living among the
Dead, and Life where no Life is; for there is no Life among the Priests in
their dead Professions, which will satisfy any man's hungering immortal Soul,
for that which satisfies peoples immortal Souls, Priests and Professors are
crying out against, because it troubles them in their Sin and False Worships,
and for making a Trade of the Scriptures, and Merchandise of the People; and
for this they are crying out against it almost in every Pulpit, and almost in
every Professors Meeting, crying and railing against the Light of Christ, Grace
and Truth in the inward parts; one calling it, A Diabolical Light; others
calling it, A Natural Light, and The Check of a Natural Conscience; and some in
their Ignorance are so impudent as in plain English to call the Light of
Christ, A Devilish Light; and some call it, The Quakers Light, and An
Insufficient Light, with many other Reproachful and Villifying Terms against
Christ and the Light, not only in their Pulpits, but also in their Lives and
Practices at other times; for they find, that when people once come to walk in
the Light of Christ, and to be led by the Spirit of God they will have no more
of their blind Teaching, then down goes their Trade and their great Gain of
Merchandise, with all their Gifts and Rewards, and Babylon with all her
Bravery, and the old Whore, which sat upon the Waters, and made many People
drunk with the Cup of her Fornication. When once People come to be led by the
Spirit of Jesus, which is revealed in mankind (to wit) the Spirit of Truth,
which leads into all Truth, and guides into all Righteousness; Then down
falls all Babylons Merchants, Kingdom of Hell, and altogether, and then
comes Christ's Kingdom to be set up and known, which is hid from the Wisdom of
this World.

But some may say. Revelation and Inspiration is now ceased; and how shall
People come to that State thou speak of now adays?

I Answer, If Revelation be ceased, then Salvation and the Knowledge of God is
ceased; and if this be true, then what have Priests to Preach now adays? for
Christ said, No man knows the Father but the Son, and him to whom the Son will
reveal him (Mat. 11.27.) and that none came to him but by the Father, whom
Christ the Son reveals: And Paul also said, That when it pleased God to
reveal his Son in him, he consulted not with Flesh and Blood (but with the Son,
whom the Father revealed.) So here its plain to the Eye that sees, which God
opened, that Revelation is not ceased, but the Son reveals the Father, and
the Father reveals the Son in People, as witnessed by the Apostle Paul, to show
to People their inward conditions, how it stands with them in the sight of God;
and this Paul did not see nor find out with all his Learning, nor with his
great Zeal, or great Religion, till Christ the Light was revealed in him;
neither shall any man upon the Earth come to know how it is with him as to his
inward condition, till he come to know Christ revealed in him, and to Inspire
him by his holy Spirit, as I have hinted before, that although there be a
Spirit in man, yet it is the Inspiration of the Almighty that gives a man an
Understanding: and if it be (as some say) that Inspiration is ceased, then all
true Understanding concerning Salvation and Spiritual matters is lost; then
what need any go after the Priests or any other Professors, if there be no
Knowledge of God or Christ to be attained to? Away with all their blind and
false Juggles which they bewitch People with, that they might not obey the
Truth, it is all Lies and Delusions.

Revelation or Inspiration is not ceased; Paul was since Christ, and he
witnessed Revelation and Inspiration, and many more since him; and I believe
Christ and Paul spoke true, and that the Scripture is true, and all that is
against it is Deceit; and the Scripture holds forth Revelation and Inspiration
is not ceased; although in the time of the Law the Priests Lips were appointed
to preserve the Peoples Knowledge, and the people were appointed to seek the
Law at their Mouths: Yet now it is not so, but every one that lacks Knowledge
is to ask of God, who gives Liberally and upbraideth not such as ask in Faith.

But say some, You Quakers do not Baptize your Children, nor receive the
Sacrament, as we do.

I Answer, If thou meanest Sprinkling of Infants, I do not believe that was
used by any of the People of God in many Ages since Christ and the Apostles
days, and therefore I do not know why any should use it, seeing there is not
any President in all the Scripture that it was ever used by any of the
Primitive Christians, neither in all the Scripture do I find any command of God
for it; and therefore why should we use it? besides, I look upon the thing as
it is now practiced, to be a great offense to God in the Actors of it, and for
this Reason which I shall render, for when the Priests and People meet together
to Christen or Baptize a Child, (as they so call it) most commonly the Parents
of the Child must get some other Persons, as they can, to stand for the Child,
and there they must Promise and Vow three things in the Child's Name; first,
That it shall forsake the Devil and all his Works, Pomps and Vanities of this
wicked world, all the sinful Lusts of the Flesh. Secondly, That the Child shall
believe all the Articles of the Christian Faith. Thirdly, That it shall keep
Gods holy Will and Commandments, and walk in the same all the days of its
Life. This is Confusion, and contrary to their Faith and Principle; for they do
not believe that any such thing can be, or such a state attained to: Now to
enjoin People to promise that the Child shall do that which they themselves do
believe is Unpossible, is Folly and Madness, Coufusion and a Snare to them, to
whom they make so to imagine: For if one should ask the Priest, or any of them,
if they could live such a Life as they Promise and Vow the Child shall do, they
will say, No it cannot be. And are crying out in almost every Pulpit, and
almost in every Professors Meeting, against such a Perfect Life as they promise
and vow the Child shall live, and saying, No Perfection here.

For to forsake the Devil and all his Works, and to keep Gods holy Will and
Commandments, is Perfection. Now consider the Distraction, Confusion, Madness
and Blindness of this People, this is one of the chief Articles of the Church,
to Promise and Vow that the Child shall forsake the Devil and all his Works,
and live so all its Life long; this is the first thing they enjoin a Member of
their Church, in the receiving a Member into their Church as part of their form
of Worship, and in their Pulpits Preach against it, that is, against the
principal part of their Articles of belief in Baptism, inasmuch as they say,
there is no Perfection here: O the Darkness and gross Darkness that is over
this people, the blindness and ignorance they are in concerning their
Salvation! it is hard to express how they are misled, the blind Leaders of the
Blind, till many a thousand fall into the Ditch: But blessed be the Name of the
Lord, who has drawn me and many more out of it, and has set our Feet upon a
Rock, as David said, Out of the Miery Clay. For all these Performances, and
their best Duties are but as Mire and Clay in the sight of God, and we that
were in it as well as others, has the Lord raised up to bear a Living
Testimony against this Idolatrous Worship, and false Imaginations, that others
may come to see where they are, and come out from amongst them, before they
fall together into the Pit of Hell, where there is never coming out more. For
the Priests and all other Sect-Masters are blind Leaders of the Blind; for do
but consider the manner of their proceeding in this matter of Sprinkling of
Children, and what it does produce; the Priest he sprinkleth Water in the Face
of the Child, and says, I Baptize thee in the Name of the Father, Son, and
holy Ghost. And that they reckon makes a Christian of the Child, (to wit) a
Child of God, a Member of Christ, and an Inheritor of the Kingdom of God (an
absolute Delusion) and then there they must have some other People, good or
bad, to stand bound for the Child, and these they call Godfathers and
Godmothers; as if the God of Heaven and Earth had Fathers and Mothers made of
wicked Men and Women: for do but mind, these people take the Work of God upon
them, inasmuch as they take upon them to Promise and Vow that the Child shall
forsake the Devil and all his Works, which is to live without Sin, and no less
then all the days of his Life, which is a thing all the World can never do;
for inasmuch as they promise that the Child shall forsake the Devil and all his
Works, this does include all Sin whatsoever; for there is no Sin, nor never
was, but is of the Devils work, and herein they take that upon them which none
can do but God and Christ: and therefore Christ is come to destroy Sin, to put
an End to Sin, to finish Transgression, and to bring in Everlasting
Righteousness; for all man's Righteousness is but as filthy Rags, and when he
has done all that he can, while he is in the old Nature, it is all
unprofitable.

And further consider both Priests and People, how the Priests Err in
compelling people to do that in this case which they are ignorant of, and
cannot give Answer for what they do; and here the Blind are Leaders of the
Blind: For neither Priests nor People know in this matter what they do, for if
they did, some of them would not do it; for when some in obedience to the Lord
have asked them, why they did do these things, which there is no Scripture for,
they could not well tell what to say; some have said, The Law of the Nation is
for it; Others in a blind manner will say, That if they should not do it, their
Children would be Damned, because they think that makes them Christians, when
few of them know what a Christian is; for a Christian is one that walks like
Christ, or as Christ would have him, and so to be United to Christ. Some will
Answer, and say, That it was used in our Forefathers days, and therefore we
will use it. It was said, In the time of Ignorance the Lord winked, but now he
has removed the Clouds of Ignorance, and made these things known, and has
cleared up the understandings of a Remnant more in this Age than in some Ages
past, and has manifested the emptiness, barrenness, unfruitfulness and
unprofitableness of the Traditions of the Ignorant, and is calling to
Repentance; and the People of this Age have as much need of Repenting of this
thing of Sprinkling as any one thing; for in the manner as it is now used, and
has been for some time past, it is very wicked and abominable in the sight of
God: and why may not people as well plead for their Forefathers Drunkenness,
Swearing, Lying and Whoreing as for this?

For note this one thing, when they go to make a Christian, as they suppose, do
but mark them in the Action, when they are met together, they behave themselves
more like People of making Heathens, than Christians; for it is common for them
(they take occasion at such times) to Feast, Play, Dance, Revel and be drunk at
the time when they practice such things. And this is their manner of making
Christians, who make use of those opportunities of their so meeting to commit
such Abominations: but I would leave to the serious consideration of any sober
People, whether these Actions and Practices be the way to make Christians?

O! the horrid Abominations and Pollutions that People do commit in this and
almost in all their Duties, when they meet together, as they say, to worship
God! the Lord is weary of bearing with it, and his Indignation is against them
that run into any thing, and call it Service and Duty to God, when God has not
commanded it, nor required it, nor his Spirit led them to do it: These things
are an Abomination to the Lord, and Christ is come to judge the World of Sin,
of Righteousness and of Judgment; for people that are got into any Judgment or
Righteousness, as to Religion and Worship, which they are not led and guided
into by the Spirit of God, although it were a likeness of the true Worship
which the People of God in Ages past did do in obedience to the Spirit of God,
and where things that were accepted of God being done and acted by the holy men
of God, as they were moved by his holy Spirit, were well-pleasing to God in
their Day and Time, they being but Shadows and Figures of the Substance Christ
Jesus, which is come, and has put an end to them outward things, and now is
calling of People to worship in the Spirit and in the Truth; for Christ said,
Such the Father seeks to worship him. So now though People may run into these
things, which were good in their Time and Day, as Circumcision was in its day;
so were other things in their day and time, as John's Baptism, breaking of
Bread, and many other things before, as the Passover, and the Brazen Serpent
which Moses set up, was good till it was Idolized; and in the time of the Law
there were many things used, as Sacrifice, and Burnt Offerings, Sin Offerings
and Peace Offerings, the Blood of Bulls and Goats, the Ashes of a Heifer, with
many outward things, (but as to the Sprinkling of Children we never read of)
which made not the comers thereunto Perfect, as to the cleansing of the
Conscience; for that was a Work always done by the Spirit and Power of God;
though it pleased God to condescend to man's low and weak Capacity in these
outward things, till the fullness of time was come, in which he would send
Christ the Substance of all those Types and Figures, and Shadowy outward
things, and the Substance being come (to wit) the Messiah, Christ Jesus; the
Shadows end in him, and the Righteousness thereof comes to be fulfilled in them
that believe and obey the Truth (to wit) the followers of Christ Jesus: and
John he spoke concerning his Commission or Ministration, that he was to
Decrease, but Christ was to Increase.

For if you observe, John was sent a forerunner of Christ, to prepare the Way
of the Lord, and make his Paths straight, and to Baptize in Water them that
did believe the Testimony of John concerning Christ; and this was in order to a
further Work which Christ would come to do, as John said, which was to Baptize
with Fire and with the holy Ghost: So them that are come to be baptized with
the holy Ghost, and with Fire, they are come to the Substance Christ Jesus, and
to them the Shadows are ended.

And as for the Word Sacrament, there is no such Word in the Scriptures, that I
know; but as concerning Christ breaking of Bread with his Disciples, that was
not spoken of as in relation for all men to use it, but to his Disciples alone;
for he thus spoke and said unto them, As often as ye do this, do it in
remembrance of me, and in so doing (said he to them, not to the World) you show
the Lord's Death till he come. For he had promised to them, He that was with
them; should be in them. So they were to stay at Jerusalem, till they were
endued with Power from on High, which was to know his Second Coming,
spiritually, without Sin, unto Salvation, which accordingly he performed to
them; and then there was no need for to do any thing without to bring them to
Remembrance of Christ, the Hope of Glory, within them; he was then come to
guide their Minds and Hearts into all Truth.

So when his Disciples were endewed with Power from on High, then in Authority
they went into all Nations, baptizing them into the Name of the Father, Son and
Holy Ghost: He does not say with Outward Water, but into the Name of the
Father, Son and Holy Ghost: And the Name of the Lord is a strong Tower, and the
Righteous flee to it, and are saved from the Devouring Adversary: we have cause
to praise the Lord for this; for this is known in our days, as it was in days
past. But now for People to run into the Imitation of these things, and not by
Motion from the Lord, because it has been used in times past by the People of
God; I say, for others to run into it, that never came to witness a being in
that state which the People of God were in, this is that Worship which is built
upon the Sand, which when the Storms come, and the Winds of Persecution blow,
then that Building falls, and great is the Fall of it; and this Righteousness
Christ is come to judge as well as Sin: So whatsoever is set up, although it
may be seemingly Righteous in the Eyes of People, which they have been seeking
to themselves, it must all down, as well as their Sins; for it is all alike in
the sight of God; for People have been seeking out easy Ways to serve God in;
for this worshipping of God in Spirit and Truth they do not like, the Gate that
leads to it is so strait, that they must so much deny themselves, that they
cannot get in at it with their Body of Sin; and this is such a Cross to their
own Wills, that they that delight in the Pleasures of Sin cannot abide to think
on it, but get up what they can against it, and would fain have an easier Way
than Christ, and reckon him an hard Master, because he would have them leave
the Pleasures of Sin, that they may be saved in the Day of Account, which will
suddenly come upon all the World, to give an Account of their Deeds done in the
Body, whether they are Good or Evil.

Therefore it is good for all People to see that their Deeds are Good, before it
be too late, and lay aside that which hinders, that they may enter in at the
strait Gate, before it be shut, never more to be opened; for it is God that
opens, and it is him that shuts; and if he shut again, all the World shall
never open more; and though they may then seek, they cannot find: and many
times when it pleases God to open the blind Eye, so that they come to see, they
see there is so much to deny and to do away, that they are willing to be blind
again, and so begin to hate that which showed it them, and even them also that
are obedient to it, for the sake of him who in Good Will would save them from
Hell: There are many things that hinder People from entering in at the strait
Gate; for strait is the Gate and narrow is the Way which leads unto eternal
Life, and few there be that find it, because they are seeking the Wrong Way;
most People are seeking every one his own Way, and the Way of the Lord is
neglected; for in that Way they cannot walk in their old course of Life; for I
will render many Instances why many are striving and cannot enter in at the
strait Gate. This is strait to the Carnal Man, but to the Spiritual Man it is
easy, or it is made easy to them by the Spirit of God; but to the Sinner it is
hard; the Drunkard, because of his Drunkenness cannot enter into the Kingdom of
God; the Swearer, because of his Swearing; the Liar, because of his Lying; the
Covetous Man, because of his Covetousness; the Cozening, Deceitful, Envious and
Malicious-minded Men cannot enter because of these things; the Proud and Lofty,
or them that spend their time in Playing and Sporting, in Vanity and Jesting,
cannot enter; these and all such things have and do hinder from coming into the
Kingdom of Heaven; the Whoremonger, Thief and Murderer, the Hypocrite or
Blasphemer, cannot enter; and they that be got under a Cover of Religion which
is not true, but false, cannot enter, though it make a great show, it being not
right, this hinders many from coming to God, and is one of the greatest Snares
the Devil has to deceive with among men, and does in this kind deceive
Millions of People; for here he makes them believe All is well, and so being
under a Profession they are willing to believe it; but he cannot so easily
persuade them that are in open Profaneness that it is well with them; for they
have no such Cover for their Sins; and therefore Christ said, Publicans and
Harlots should enter the Kingdom before such, Matthew. 21.31.

And for them that profess the Truth, and do not walk in it, they shall never
enter the Kingdom of God.

All these fore mentioned things, and many more that might be mentioned, do
hinder many from entering in at the Strait Gate; these be the Weights and
Burdens which were and are to be laid aside, which do easily beset People; and
it is not applying of Promises (as they call it) will do it, in that Way which
Carnal-minded Men do apply them; for there is no Promise of coming to the
Kingdom of God (which Kingdom is not of this World) but upon such terms of
being born again, and so becoming new Creatures; and then such come to know the
Inside cleansed of Sin by him that has regenerated them, which is the Lord
from Heaven, the Second Adam, the Quickening Spirit; for it is not making clean
the Outside will do, and still the Inside to be full of Sin; and here many
People have been cheated of their Souls, in believing of them that have
smoothed them up in Sin; for when it has pleased the Lord many times to awaken
people out of Sin, that have been asleep in Sin, and when they are a little
awakened, and by that Light which then shines in them come to see Sin appear
as it is exceeding sinful, and he that shows unto man his Thoughts, he it is
that sets all in order before them, and so people come to see, that it is not
as it should be with them, as concerning their Peace with God; and then not
knowing what it is that shows them how it is with them, and that God is so
near them, neither do they know that that which shows them their Sin, is able
to deliver out of it, and to give them Power over it, because it is so slighted
by their Teachers, therefore they slight it also; and under this Trouble of
Mind many a poor Creature is under great Distress, seeing his Sin is remaining
and that the Wages thereof is Death, finding no Helper on Earth, but wandering
in dry places, seeking Rest, but finding none, because they are still reasoning
with Flesh and Blood, not joining to that which shows them their Sin; here
they are at a Loss concerning Salvation; and in this State and Condition many
are going from one Profession to another, there inquiring of one Teacher or
another, What they must do to be eased of their Troubled Mind, and come to some
Satisfaction concerning their poor Souls; then these blind Teachers begin to
turn them to Wrong Ways, herein comes Destruction upon many a poor Soul,
being led by the blind Leaders of the Blind into many Crooked and By Ways,
which lead to Destruction; and here one he bids them apply the Promises;
another, he cries out, Go into the Water; another turning them to the Bread and
Wine; and another to worship Images, which can neither hear, speak or see. So
here they are turning People to Outward Things, when the chief cause lies
within, and cannot be purged out by these outward things, but only by the Power
of God: Man may make clean the Outside, but the In side must be cleansed by
God; and if the Inside be clean, then the Outside also will be clean; the
Outside may be clean and painted, and the Inside full of Rottenness; and in
this State and Condition the Dawbers with Untempered Mortar dawb over peoples
Wounds, but could never cure them: I am not speaking against those Outward
Means which the Lord calls any into; but for People to run into any thing
which they are not called to, though it may be in Pretense of Service and
Worship to God, this never did not will ease any of their Burden of Sin, which
they groan under, but it is Christ alone that must do it, it must be upon his
own Terms, and not as Man would have it; but there are many Lo Here Is, turning
people to Outward Things, and not to Christ's Appearance within; one crying, Lo
here is Christ, and another Lo there he is, in this or the other Outward
Observation: But what said Christ of such that spoke after this manner? Go not
after them (said he) that shall say, Lo here is Christ, or Lo there he is, go
not forth, believe them not; for that which may be known of God is near, which
is called the Word, which is in the Heart and in the Mouth; and this is that
which shows unto Man his Sin, and also able to take it away; for he is come to
put an End to Sin, and to finish Transgression, so to bring in Everlasting
Righteousness: this is the Work which he came to do, which all the blind Guides
can never do; and this is he which brings that Peace and Wisdom which passes
all Understandings of Men.

And further, Christ said to the Jews, The Kingdom of Heaven is within you. But
observe, instead of turning People to this inward Principle which Christ told
People of, the Blind Guides are altogether turning People unto outward things,
and so here setting them to make clean the Outside of the Cup and Platter, and
People are cheated of their Souls; for one is crying, The Mass Book is the Way
to come to Heaven, and Praying to dead Saints, and Worshipping of Images;
others crying, Dipping and Bread and Wine is the Way; and another crying, The
Church-Faith is the Way; another steps up, and says, His Directory is the Way;
and there is another saying, The Common Prayer Book is the Way; so here are
many Ways set up by the Invention of Man in the fallen state, so leading many
Thousands of poor People into these outward things, and not keeping to that or
being turned to that which searches the Heart and tries the Reins, and for
want of this come to lose their Souls Rest and Happiness with God; for it is not
the making clean the Outside will do, but them that are cleansed within, these
are them which God delights in; it is the Pure in Heart that see God; here
every one comes to know how it is with them; for God is with the Pure in
Heart, and by him people come to know the Way which leads to Everlasting
Life; and this is he that we say is the Way to come to that Kingdom which is
not of this World, where no Mortal Man ever came to; and the Scripture
directs people to him, and bears Testimony of him, which we whom the World in
Scorn calls Quakers do faithfully believe is true; and though we have been
belyed and falsely accused in that matter, we desire the Lord may forgive them
that have been guilty of that thing, in saying, we Deny the Scriptures; for
there are no People own the Scriptures more than we do; for it is not every one
that reads it that does own it, although it is good to read it; it is they that
answer and fulfill the Sayings of Scripture in Life and Conversation that truly
own them, and these come to know the Mysteries of them, and not every one that
can talk of them, as the Scribes and Pharisees could, and premeditate things in
their Brains, and talk of them in their Wills, but it is he only that does the
Sayings of them that comes to know the Comfort and Benefit of them.

For People are mistaken in this, thinking that by often reading the Scriptures
(little minding what they read) that this will do God Service; No, no, it is
they that read with Understanding, and come to Practice the same, who come to
know all false Worships from the true, and the true from the false.

For the Scripture does not direct people to it self, but to Christ Jesus; for
we say, he is the Way, the Truth and the Life; and we see where Christ takes
them off from having so much dependency on the Scriptures, and said thus,
Search the Scriptures, for in them you think to have Eternal Life, and they are
they which testify of me; but you will not come to me that you may have Life,
John 5.39. So we say that Christ is he that gives Life, and without him no man
can come to God. And this is our Principle, and that which we do faithfully
believe, and the Scriptures are on our side as a Cloud of Witnesses: And we do
not believe that any of these outward things will do, as Praying to them that
are dead, or Worshipping of Images, or Signing with a Cross, or any of these
things; but man must become a new Creature, all old things must be done away.

Neither do we believe that Water, Bread or Wine can do any thing toward
cleansing of the Conscience; Neither do we believe that the Church Faith, (as
they call it) nor their Directory; but he that said, Before Abraham was I am,
it is he that is man's true director alone, without all their made Faiths, and
framed Directories, or any such thing. And we do further believe, That it is not
the Common Prayer Book, nor the Sprinkling of Children, or any thing else that
they can invent that will make a Man or a Woman a new Creature, but Christ,
which is the true Bread which comes down from Heaven, they that eat thereof
shall never Hunger more; and Christ has promised this to them which hunger
after Righteousness; they that hunger after Righteousness Christ is feeding
with this Bread, and he is choosing of them out of the Vanities of this World.
But they that deny the leading and guiding of the Spirit of God, and say, That
Inspiration and Revelation is ceased, as the Priests and Professors do, and
say, There is no such thing now adays. Such never come to eat of that Bread,
which Christ said he would give to them that hungered after him; but them that
are Full and Rich he sends empty away, but the Needy and poor of Spirit he
Feeds and fills with good things.

But as to them that deny Revelation and the Light of Christ, which enlightneth
all, and the Righteous are guided by, them that oppose and deny this, I do
believe that they see no Revelation, neither do they see any Beauty or
Comeliness in the appearance of Christ, for he is grieved in them as a man of
Sorrows, and his Visage is more marred by them then any man's, because they are
always Warring, Writing, and enviously Opposing the Light and Spirit of God in
themselves and in others.

Therefore they must needs not know how it is with them, and must needs be
blind while they are in striving against that which would let them see; for the
Scripture says, There is none knows the things of God but by the Spirit of
God. And in this state and condition, rebelling against that which is the only
means of Salvation, and are mudling in the dark, and know not how it is with
them, because they are hearkening to the false Prophets and blind Guides; and
this is the reason that Condemnation is come upon them that are condemned,
because Christ is come, and they that will not believe on him must be
condemned; This being the Condemnation of the World, that Light is come into
the world and men love Darkness rather then Light because their Deeds are Evil.
For we may read that whilst Paul was opposing of the Light and Spirit in
himself, which often times pricked him in his Conscience for what he did, which
was not right, although it were in a blind Zeal, and under a cover of Religion,
yet being done in his own Will, and according to the Wisdom of the Flesh, this
was that which blinded his Eye that he could not see how it was with him, but
was as these be now adays, hating and persecuting of the Just, and yet talking
much of Religion, and very busy about the Letter, talking much of the Prophets
Words, but Persecuting the Just, and quenching the Spirit of Christ, as these
outside Professors do now adays: So we may see that Paul, till he came to know
Revelation in himself, and to walk by the Light of Christ which shone in him,
for all his Learning and his great Profession, yet he was ignorant of the Way
of the Lord; and as to his own Condition, he could not examine himself, nor
know how it was with him, till he turned to that which reproved him, and so to
have his mind guided by it, and his Conversation to be managed by that which
pricked his Conscience, and so he came to fear the Lord more then men; and
though men rose up against him for coming to that strange Doctrine, as they so
called it, which Doctrine the Wisdom of this World could never understand in
that Age, neither can they now, but always counted it strange, Madness and
Folly; and so they do now adays, and when Paul came to be led by another
Spirit then that he was led by, or then that they were led by, and by this he
came to be led beyond their wisdom, then they cried out he was a Mad Man; and
so they are crying now adays concerning us, because as Christ says, They know
not what they do, nor what Spirit they are of; and thus the Blind leads the
Blind.

And here lies the reason there is so much Confusion among men about Religion,
and why so few are chosen, because they go from the true Guide, and from him
that gives a right understanding concerning the true Worship, and things
relating to Salvation.

For there is no other Name given under Heaven, whereby any man comes to the
Kingdom of Heaven and is saved, but by Christ Jesus alone; for as Christ says,
I am the Way, the Truth and the Life, John 14.6. Now to this most People of all
sorts will confess, because it is Scripture, that Christ is the Way, the Truth
and the Life.

But now here is one thing to be considered, that I would have all People well
to mind, that is, Christ being the Way, the Truth and the Life, to know what
Way he is, and how he is the Truth and the Life: Now to confess to this is one
thing, and to come to be a Witness of it is another thing; for mind Christ, his
mind in this thing is, that he is man and woman's Way to Heaven, and the Truth
that they must come to and be guided by, and the Life that they must live in,
which is by Faith in the Son of God. Now here lies the matter to be
considered, whether or no thou art come to that state and condition, that is,
to come to know Christ to be thy Way? and whether thou art come to know the
Truth as it is in Jesus? and to live that Life which pleases God, yea or nay?
which Life is in Christ Jesus; this every one is to consider; for till People
come to be Witnesses of this in themselves, it is not a confessing to it or
talking of it will do or stand them in any stead in the Day of Account, when
God comes to reckon with them.

For this the holy men of God did witness, and said, The Life which we now live
is by the Faith of the Son of God, Gal. 2.20.

And John said (that came to witness the work of God begun, and carrying on in
himself) on this manner, That which was from the beginning, which we have
heard, which we have seen with our Eyes, which we have looked upon, and our
Hands have handled of the Word of Life, this declare we unto you, 1 John 1.1.
And further the Apostle says, Christ wrought all their Works in them and for
them; which work was to root out Sin.

Now this they came to know and witness in themselves, and not by report and
hearsay of others; this state the People of God came to in all Ages and
Generations, in a measure while they were here in this Life, and did not think
to have the work of Redemption done for them when they were dead, as some now
adays think to have, thinking to serve the Devil while they are here, and that
God will save them when they can sin no longer: but mark this, such as People
sow, such shall they reap, and they that sow Sin and Wickedness, must of the
same Wages reap Corruption, which Wages the Scripture says is Death, saying,
The Wages of Sin is Death, (and that to them for evermore) but the Gift of God
is Eternal Life, Romans 6.23. For this is a strange thing that a man should be a
Servant to one man many Years, and at last come to another for Wages for the
same time; this is Confusion and Madness, and with this Cheat a great part of
the World is cheated by both Priests and Professors, in telling People that
they cannot live without Sin, and so they serve the Devil all their days, and
that God would accept with the reward of Peace of them, when they can serve him
no longer: For inasmuch as they tell People, they cannot leave off Sinning, but
must sin as long as they live; it is the same thing as if they tell People,
they must serve the Devil all their days; for there is no sin committed or
brought forth in any, but it is of the Devil's begetting and bringing forth in
People; for he is the Father of all Sin in all people, wheresoever or in
whomsoever it is brought forth; and therefore this unavoidably must follow,
that they that live and dye in Sin, must live and dye Servants to the Devil;
and if so, every man must expect his Wages according to his Works: Therefore I
would have none deceive themselves, for if the Devil must be served all your
days, him you must go to at last unavoidably, whether you will believe it or
no.

And further, take notice of this; Christ is not the Way of the Wicked, nor of
Sinners, neither are Sinners, or they that plead for Sin, come to the Truth,
nor to know it, nor to live the Life of it, which Life is out of Sin, and not
in Sin, for that is a Life of the Devil; for he is the Founder of all Sin, and
the Wages of Sin is Death and Damnation to all that live and dye in Sin. These
things are worthy to be considered before it be too late, which will be when
God's Spirit has done striving with thee; for without coming to know the
Devil's Works destroyed in thee, or that work begun by the Lord, till thou
come to know this, thou shall never know the Truth making Free from Sin, and
that which makes Free from sin is Christ; and till People come to know this
Freedom from Sin begun, they can never know Righteousness; and without
Righteousness, none shall see God, and without coming to see God; none can go
to Heaven; till they come to be Freed from Sin, none can be fitted for Heaven.
And the Scripture says, The Truth makes Free; and the Truth is Christ Jesus;
and if this be to make Free, it is to make Free from something; and if it be
not from Sin, what is it that People must be Freed from? I would know; I do
believe it is from Sin; for I never heard of any thing that any was in Bondage
to but Sin, that hinders People of Salvation; and therefore Christ the Truth
is come to make an end of it, that Righteousness may reign in the room of Sin;
and these two things were never known to dwell together, but one must be known
to be pulling down before the other can be set up; therefore it was said, Light
has no fellowship with Darkness, nor a Believer with an Infidel. Here Christ
is meant the Light, and the Devil the Power of Darkness; and these two War one
against the other in People, striving which shall rule and bear sway in Peoples
Minds, Hearts and Affections: one of these two Spirits striveth to lead into
all manner of Sin and Evil; and the other striveth to lead into all manner of
Righteousness and true Holiness, both in things Spiritual and Temporal.

And here I will make a difference betwixt the manner of their working and
striving in People, and that in all People at one time or another, and that all
may be sensible of it, if they will; but if they will not in the day when God's
good Spirit striveth with them, they shall be brought one day to a Remembrance
of it, when they shall be unwilling, and before they are aware, when nothing
but Death and Sorrow shall meet together, and none to help them will be found.

Now to the matter and manner of these two Spirits striving: the bad Spirit, he
in all People strives to keep their Minds altogether in Carnal and in Earthly
things, which is Death to the Soul: The Scripture says, To be Carnally-minded
is Death, but to be Spiritually-minded is Life and Peace: and this I do believe
is true; I have found it so by good Experience.

And this is the Devils end to keep Peoples Minds upon Earthly things, that
they may never mind Heavenly things, but to spend away their precious time in
this world, till there be no more time, that thereby they may lose the Treasure
in Heaven, that is laid up in Heaven for all those that will come to God upon
his Terms, which Terms are for People to Repent, deny themselves, to take up a
Cross to their own Wills, to love and fear God, and to worship him in Spirit
and Truth; and I am sure that none can do this without the Spirit, if it must
be as the Scripture says, in the Spirit and in the Truth; and I believe the
Scripture is true, and that Christ spoke true when he spoke these words, and
all priests and Professors are in Error and Blindness that deny these things:
but all them that love the Appearance of the Spirit of Christ Jesus, which is
the chief Terms of Salvation, come to know Benefit thereby; the manner of his
appearing is in Peoples Minds against Sin; and they that love that which the
Spirit of God appears against, and judges in their Minds, they are yet
hating of God, let them profess what they will, it is in vain; but they that
love those things which the Spirit of God in themselves appears for, these be
they that love his Appearance.

But in all Ages, they that had got on a Covering, which was not of God's
Spirit, these were ever the work; for all Religions are false, except that in
Spirit and Truth; and all these false Colors of Religion were ever invented by
the Devil; and this is one way that he in all Generations did work, when he
could no longer keep People in open Profaneness, then he invents new ways for
them to walk in, and he will plead Scripture for it too, and speak much of the
holy men of God's Works too, That in Ages past they were commanded to do, which
were good in their Day and Time to them that were obedient to it, which were to
last till Christ the Substance came, or till the time of Reformation, being but
Shadows and Figures of the Substance, which blessed be the Lord he is come, and
has put an end to these things, and has set up a Worship in Spirit and Truth.
But the Spirit of the Devil he is always a keeping busied about outward things
and Lip-service, that he may keep the Heart upon some visible thing, and off
from the inward and spiritual Worship; and this is one way that he works in
the Mystery of Iniquity: always when he can keep People no longer in open
Profaneness, then to turn them into outward Duties, as he calls them, when God
required no such thing at their Hands; for it is first the Heart the Lord
requires, saying, My Son, Prove. 23.26.
give me thy Heart: that is, to set their Hearts on the Lord, and to be led by
his good Spirit in them, then Family Duties and other Duties are by God
accepted, they being done by the Guidance of Gods good Spirit; for thou may
read in the Scriptures of Truth (which we own, and have more esteem of them
than any other Book in the World) and they speak after this manner; saying, The
Prayers of the Wicked are Abomination to the Lord; but the Prayers of the
Righteous avail much.

But the Manner of the Spirit of the Devil is to keep People from being
Righteous, that their Prayers may not be accepted; and keeping in outward
things, that they may never know the inward Work of God, which is to work out
Sin, and to bring in Everlasting Righteousness. But he is keeping of them ever
hearing and ever learning, that they may never be able to come to the Knowledge
of the Truth; for he knows, while they are hear kening to the Teaching of the
blind Guides, they can never come to the Knowledge of the Truth; for the Devil
knows, till People come to be led and guided by the Spirit of Truth it is
impossible that they can ever come to the Knowledge of the Truth: here he keeps
People seeking of the Living amongst the Dead, and Life where no Life is: And
this is the manner of the working of the Enemy.

And this is the greatest Cheat that the Devil has to cheat People of their
Souls, to turn People into one Outside Painted Religion or another, and then
persuade them all is well; and most of them are willing to believe him, it
being in the Delightsome Tract of the World, only differing in some Geremonies;
but the Religion in Spirit and Truth, Light and Grace, this the Professors
cannot abide, because it calls into a Narrow Way, and to enter in at a strait
Gate.

For the Enemy had rather, or as lieve People got into some Tract or Form of
Religion, as not, for then he can persuade them it is well with them, and
persuades them that they need not seek after any thing else; and all this he
does, that he may keep them from the true Worship in Spirit and Truth. But
those that are in open Profaneness he cannot blind after this Manner; for they
know, whosoever is Right they are Wrong, and have no Cover for what they do;
therefore Christ said, Publicans and Harlots should enter the Kingdom of Heaven
before such as Profess Service to God, and serve him not acceptably; for no
Service is acceptable, but that in Spirit and Truth: We unto them that are
Covered, and not with the Spirit of the Lord. And many more Ways the Devil
has to keep People from answering the Requirings of God's Spirit, but no Snare
like to a False Cover of Religion.

Many there be that he has other Baits for, that matter nothing of any
Religion; some he keeps all their days their Minds and Hearts in Covetousness,
some in Pride, some in Drunkenness, some in Cozening and Cheating; and many
more Baits and Snares he has to betray People of their Happiness with the
Lord: some the Devil persuades, they shall never give an Account to God for
what they do, and so live like Ranters all their days: And he tells them,
There is neither God nor Devil, Hell nor Heaven, and many are willing to
believe it: But have a care of this Persuasion; for thou shall know these
things to be Lies one day, to the Sorrow of thy Soul, when it will be too late
for thee to consider, if thou do not Repent in time. Others the Devil
persuades, that God has created some to Salvation, others to Damnation, which
is as great an Untruth as the other, and a great many are willing to believe
it, supposing they are of those that are ordained to Salvation; some others
there be of that mind that are persuaded, that if it be so, they are of that
Number which are born to Damnation; and upon this Persuasion many grow Careless
in their Conversations, and run into all manner of Evil. This Persuasion is a
just Road to Destruction, and a Sink of Iniquity, and destroys many a poor
Soul.

All these things that I have mentioned, and many more which might be
mentioned, are the Ways and Inventions which the Devil has invented and set
up in and among People; and this is his manner of working by his Spirit in
People, and yet pleads Scripture for what he does, that thereby he might color
over his Deceit. And this has been his manner in all Ages to deceive the
Nations of the World; but Woe be to them that hearken to him: this is the
Strangers Voice, which Christ said, his Sheep would not hearken to; saying, My
Sheep here my Voice, and the Voice of a Stranger will they not hear. Here it it
does appear there were two Voices to be heard; here was the Voice of Christ,
and the Strangers Voice, which was the Voice of the Devil: These two Voices now
adays are heard, and are obeyed by all People, either the one or the other;
for none can serve two Masters, or obey two Voices; therefore People cannot
serve God and Mamon: And the manner of these two Spirits uttering their Voices
is in an Invisible and Spiritual manner.

And as I have before opened the Mysteries of Iniquity, and the manner of the
Working of the Spirit of the Enemy, so now I am come to relate how, and in what
manner does the Spirit of the Lord differ in the manner of working from the
Spirit of the Devil in all People, at one time or another; this is known
striving in them, though they will not obey it that is of this manner; it does
begin to work, to knock at the Door of Peoples Hearts, or secretly reprove for
Sin, trouble People for doing that which they ought not to do, and condemns
them when they do amiss; this is calledin the Scriptures, the Reproofs of
Instruction, and the Way of Life; and I do believe it is so, although many
Professors will not believe it; and if it be the Way of Life, I do believe it
is able to Redeem from that it calls out of, which is Sin and Wickedness, and
as People hearken to it, it opens their Understandings, and shows them how it
is with them, and not only so, but brings into a New Life and Conversation,
and keeps Peoples Minds always in that which is Good, and out of that which is
Bad; and this is as Spiritual Food for the Soul, and then People come to know
that Bread which comes down from Heaven, and to drink of that Water that never
fails; and brings that Peace upon People, which none can know, but them that
do enjoy it: This does the Light or Spirit of God do in the Righteous, and much
more which might be mentioned: This is he that the Scripture calls, The
Searcher of Hearts, and a Tryer of Reins; he is a Justifier of the Righteous,
and a Condemner of the Wicked; and to him must all give an Account one day.
After this manner does the Spirit of the Lord differ from the Spirit of the
Devil, in operating and working in People; and one of these leads to Heaven,
and the other to Hell.

Here is one thing more which comes in my Mind concerning the working of these
two Spirits; the Spirit of the Lord many times by often following and pursuing
of People with his Righteous Judgments, till he brings to a Consideration of
their Latter End, and then many times in that Condition people come to seek
after the right Way, and then the Lord opens the Mysteries of his Kingdom to
them, and then they begin to fee the Right Way from the Wrong, the Narrow Way
from the Wide, and begin to see the Gate to be strait, and the Way to be
narrow; then many begin to consult with the Reasoning Part in Man, which is the
Work of the Enemy; for he makes it his Business at all times to work out all
that is good; his manner is, when any come to be convinced of the Right Way,
then to set them into questioning, How they shall enter in at this strait Gate,
and to walk in that narrow Way, and so come to seek after some easier Way; and
the Devil he sets all manner of Dangers before people, and begins to tell them,
That the way is too hard for them to walk in; and tells them, There be many
easier and better Ways, wherein they may walk and do well; and tells them,
That is the Worst Way of all, any thing but that; for he knows well enough,
there is no other Way to Heaven: and says the Enemy, If thou ownest this
Worship in Spirit, thou will be hated of all people, and in Danger of losing
all, and of having the Displeasure of this or the other Relation, Neighbor or
Acquaintance; and says he, This is a new Upstart Religion, has been but
lately standing; and (says he) our Religion has been long standing, and our
Mother Church cannot Err; and says he, our Forefathers were in the Right, and
our Ministers, who have great Learning, must be in the Right, or else who can
be Right? and how can Tradesmen, Plowmen and such come to know the Way to
Heaven? These things and many more the Devil puts into peoples Minds, to set
them against that which would save their Souls, that when God has called
people by his Spirit to walk in the Narrow Way, which leads to Everlasting
Life, then the Devil he musters up all these forementioned things, and many
more which might be mentioned, and lays before people as Snares, and by this
many times turns people some one way and some another, any way so that they
might not come to walk in the Narrow Way, and to worship God in Spirit and
Truth; some he turns into Fears, how they shall live; some into the Mire and
Dirt of Sin and Wickedness again; some under False Colors of Religions; some
into Carelessness; some into Despair, and tells them, Their Day is over; others
he tells, There is time enough yet to Repent, and so lulls people asleep in Sin
till there is no more time; and others he upbraids with the Unfaithfulness of
some who profess the Truth; but Woe be to them that hearken to him in any kind,
mark this, Thou shall answer for what thou do, and so shall others for
themselves; and further, Whatsoever others do, that will be no Excuse for thee
in the Day of Account.

Therefore have a care of believing the lying Serpent, which with his Lies and
Deceit goes about to deceive the Nations, and most people are deceived by him;
and because people are hearkening to him more than to the Lord, this is the
Reason so few are chosen of the Number that are called; for many are Called,
but few are Chosen.

I would not have people think it strange as concerning this manner of
Reasoning that is put into people by the Devil, I would have none should think
hard of this; for I will tell thee plainly, that whatsoever is put into any Man
or Woman's Mind, that is not right, true or good, is put in by the spirit of
the Devil; and whatsoever is put into any Man or Woman's Mind that is good,
right and just, is done by the Spirit of the Lord; for take notice of this, all
peoples Minds and Affections are swayed by one or the other of these two
Spirits, one turning into Wickedness, the other into Righteousness; this is
true, whether thou will believe it or no, thou shall be made to know it when it
will be too late, if thou art not aware.

A few words in answer to the forementioned Reasonings and Objections against
the Truth and Spiritual Worship.

As to the Strait Gate and Narrow Way, it is strait to the Wicked, it is
pleasant to the Righteous; and as to the many Ways, there are not many Ways
to Heaven, but to Heaven there is but one Way, and that is to come to answer
God's Spirit in thee, and to worship God in Spirit and in Truth.

And as to the being hated of all people, this is no new thing; for Christ and
all the holy Men of God were ever Hated, as thou may read in the Scriptures;
and Moses said, He did esteem of the Repreaches that be under-went for Christ's
sake to be greater Riches to him than all the Treasures in Egypt: and though
they were hated of Men, yet they were beloved of God; and all this while it is
well enough.

And as to the Danger of Losing any thing for Christ's sake, this was counted
by the Righteous all Joy, that they were not counted only worthy to Rain with
Christ, but also to Suffer with him; and the Lord has promised, That
whatsoever any Suffer for him, they shall have Recompensed in this Life a
hundred fold, and in the World to come Life Everlasting, without End. And the
Scripture says, They that will live Godly in Christ Jesus, must suffer
Persecutions. And Christ told his Disciples, The Servant was not greater than
his Master; if they persecuted him, it was certain they would perseoute them.
And as to the Displeasing of Men, it is impossible that people can please God
and Ungodly Men; and Peter and John bad people judge whether they had best
Please God or Man. And as concerning a Livelihood, believe the Scripture, First
seek God's Kingdom, and the Righteousness thereof, and all other things shall
be added to thee, Matthew. 6.33.

And as for our Religion, which is in Spirit and in Truth, to be a New Upstart
Religion, this is a downright Slander; for it was set up by Christ above
sixteen hundred years ago; and there is no other Way to Heaven but this; though
some there be that do profess it, that do not walk in it, this does not alter
the Case, or make the thing not to be the same as it is professed; for Judas
did not alter the Case in that matter, neither do any Traitors to the Truth now
adays.

And as to the False Religion, it is true it has been long standing, the more
is the Pity; yet that does not make, because False Religions have been long
standing, that therefore it must ever remain; this will not hold. It is true,
ever since Wickedness has been covered under a Cloak of Religion, this has
been standing.

And as to the Church, which some say cannot Err: I answer, that there is no
Church or People but do Err, except them that are led and guided by the Spirit
of God, and such are the only true Church; and they that are led by this, are
led by that Spirit that never did nor can Err: and till people come to this,
all go astray, let them profess what they will.

And as to our Forefathers, how it was with them, that I will leave to the
Lord; I will not judge of them that I never knew: but this I do believe of
them, That some of them were Faithful to what they knew, and that is it the
Lord requires, and does accept of; and as to them, they are gone, and I do
believe some of them dyed in the true Faith, which we do believe in; and I do
believe, they are at Rest with the Lord, and were of our Mind and Belief,
though not called by this new Nickname, which the Devil in our Age has
invented for his Servants to put upon us, as in all Ages the Devil had New
Nicknames for to disguise and deride Christ and his Followers, and so he has
now.

And for your Ministers to know the Way, there are none that know the Truth,
nor no true Ministers, but them that come to be endewed with Power from on
High, which is known by Revelation and Inspiration, which your Priests and
Professors do deny; therefore they cannot know the Truth while they are denying
that which brings to the Knowledge of the Truth; for the Scripture says,
(and I do believe they are true, and they say) though there is a Spirit in Man,
yet it is the Inspiration of the Almighty that gives an Understanding.

And as concerning Great Learning, this is good in its place, as men come to
the true Understanding of it given to them by the Spirit of God; for the
Scripture is as a Mystery hid from the Wisdom of this World; and it was never
known that Outward Learning, or Education of Men, nor Great Learning, did ever
bring any man to the Knowledge of the Truth, nor never was able to unsold the
Mystery of Godliness to any man; as for Instance, there was Paul, he was a
great Learned Man, and had great Parts and Education, and counted himself
beyond many of the Jews, yet for all this he was ignorant of the true Knowledge
of God, till he came to it by the Revelation of the Son of God; for that was
and now is the thing alone that brought People to the Knowledge of that which
is hid from the Wisdom of this World.

And as concerning Tradesmen and Plowmen knowing the Way, read the Scriptures,
and there thou will find in all Ages it was such chiefly that came to the true
Knowledge of the right Way of God, for there were Peter and John that were
Unlearned Men, and many more beside them, which were able Ministers of the
Lord; and where are there any great Learned Men now adays that can compare
with them? but there are many now adays that are come to the Knowledge of the
Truth as they came to it by the Learning which they have learned of the Lord,
so do they preach, whether they have outward Learning or not, this makes not
much matter in the things of God, though Learning be very good in its place to
them that make good use of it; but if you observe the greatest Learned Men are
commonly most ignorant of Christ's Kingdom; therefore that is not the thing
that makes people Righteous; nor is it enough barely reading the Prophets Words
and Works, and Christ's Words, and what he did, and the Apostles Conditions,
how it was with them, it is not enough to read these things, unless people come
to live the same Life that they did, but it must be done by the Power of God;
and this is the Reason that there are so many ever reading and hearing, and
never able to come to the Knowledge of the Truth, thinking by running into
outward things they shall do well, and never come to Christ that they may know
Life Eternal, which is to know God, as the Scripture says) whom to know is
Life Eternal,

A Day and a Time has God given to all people, that if they will in that Day
and Time they may come to know God, and by him to be cleansed of Sin, which is
the Cause of Death to their Souls.

And in this Day Christ would gather all People to himself as a Hen gathers her
Chickens under her Wings; but if people will not come to him in that Day and
Time, when he calls to them, they shall never know Freedom from the Bondage
of Hell and Death.

A Lamentation may be taken up concerning all such, that sin out their Day, and
the Night comes on them at unawares, and there be none to help, as Christ took
up concerning Jerusalem, when their Day was over, he went and beheld it with
much Sorrow, and wept over it with much Pity, saying on this wise, O Jerusalem,
Jerusalem! thou that killest the Prophets, and stonest them that are sent to
thee; how often would I have gathered thee, even as a Hen would have gathered
her Chickens under her Wings, and ye would not! and further said he, O that
thou had known in this thy Day the things belonging to thy Peace! but now
they are hid from thine Eyes. So it is with all people that sin out their Day
as they did; for the Lord striveth with all People, as well as he strove with
them, to bring them to the Knowledge of the Things that belong to their Peace;
but still here they lie in Ignorance, not yielding to the Motions of the Spirit
of Christ, although there be things laid up in store for them, which do belong
to their Peace; yet in this Condition they are never worthy to know it, because
they believe not; and they that are not faithful in a little, never come to
know much.

Thus will it be with all those that sin out their Day, and will not answer God
in the Time when he striveth with them.

So it is good for all people to consider these things, before it be too late,
that they may get Assurance of that which will stand by them, and make choice
of that which Mary did, that Good Part which shall never be taken from them;
and herein people will come to finish their course with Joy, and lay down their
Heads in Peace when Days and Time shall be no more.

Thus far have I cleared my Conscience of that which lay upon me from the Lord
to write, in Love to all who desire to be in Favor with God, that they may
have Assurance of Acceptance with him for their Souls, when their Bodies must
be laid in their Graves.

So I rest, with Love and Good Will toward all People, desiring the Good and
Prosperity of all in that Way which leads to that Kingdom which is not of
this World, who am known to many to be of that Mind and of that Desire, by the
Name of John Songhurst.
West Chiltington in Sussex, in the 2d Month, 1680.
THE END.

