Love a la Mode.

A COMEDY.

As it was lately ACTED with great Applause at Middlesex-House.

WRITTEN By a Person of HONOR.

Ficta, voluptatis causa, sint proxima veris. Hor. de Art. Poet. LONDON,
Printed by J. C. for John Daniel, at the three Hearts in St. Paul's
Churchyard, near the West end 1663

Drammatis Personae.
GAMBVGIVM, a Doctor of Physic. VIRGINIO, Father to Coelia. Two Lovers A la
Mode.
TICKET, a Traveller, RANT his Friend,
PHILOSTRATVS, a Gentleman, and Lover of Coelia. GLISTERPIPE, The Doctors Man.
BLVNT, An old fellow turned Gallant for Coelia's love. A PORTER. Two LACQVEYS.
COELIA, Daughter to Virginio. CLITTOMESTRA, Wife to Gambugium. ACVTA, Her
Daughter. ASTVTIA, Sister to Ticket. MATRONA, Governess to Coelia,
Scene LONDON.

To the READER.
THis Comedy will (I hope) afford more variety both in humor and plot, then to
give just cause to any to believe it a Translation: although (I must confess)
there be a French Play which bears this Title; and in Title only they
resemble. The French are commonly content in their Comedies with one single
Humor, and Rhyme; but the Critics of this Island are scarce satisfied with
Reason. I expect as many Censurers as Readers; but hold my self as little bound
to believe them, as to court their approbation: for I shall neither live
concerned at their frowns, nor much exalted with their smiles. Yet am I not so
conceited of my Work, as some of my partial Friends, who have imposed upon me
the Penance to hear my Play extolled beyond its merit: for my Muse was never so
ambitious, to pretend equality with those unparalleled Poets they prefer her
before. However, their Verses express their friendship, and peculiar
approbation of what you may possibly condemn. But I desire to be tried by my
Peers, by legitimate Judges, of which I conceive two sorts; Poet's in actu, and
Poets in potentia, understanders of Poetry: under the last notion, I willingly
comprehend the generous and accomplished Gentry of this Nation; not every
Mechanic stripling that can spell his Psalter, and censure Wit over a dish of
Coffee: for a Comedy may loose half its worth by the ill reading, and all its
wit through the dull apprehension of the peruser: yet such Readers I may easily
forgive; for they suffer a kind of penance in the Reading, by spending so much
time to so little purpose, as the condemnation of what they understand not.

I only contend with the ignorant; to the judicious my Muse submits, making
only exceptions against those, who think a Play criminal which had a
Gentleman for its Composer; as if Wit and Blood were incompatible.

Although the year of his Majesty's happy Restoration gave birth to this
Poem, yet because it was not before published, many may wonder why we omit so
modern and Modish a Custom, as the introducing of Songs and Dances in every
Scoene. Truly, though I hold them decent Ornaments of the Stage, I love not to
make them the matter of my Play; nor do I believe them so absolutely necessary
to a good Comedy, as to intrude them by head and shoulders, when they don't
belong to my Plot. As near as I could, I endeavored to imitate Nature; for I
think no impossible accident is here presented. If to some (I mean Poetical
Cobblers, Vampers of Wit, who undertake to mend what they cannot make) the
language appear beyond the condition of the speaker: their own Reason might
instruct them, that Poets have in all times assumed to themselves a liberty of
bettering and exalting Nature; and that Love (of all Passions) is the greatest
improvement of Wit and Elocution. Nothing remains besides (as I conceive) to
carp at, unless because it was not Acted on a public Stage: This Play was
brought forth in the Shade, and Glories in a private reception; for she once
received the General Votes and Applause of her Auditors: You Will find by the
perusal what she deserves. Farewell.

T. S.

TO HIS HONORED BROTHER, THE AUTHOR OF Love a la Mode.
HAving well weighed your Scoenes, I needs must say,
Each Plot and Fancie's new within your Play.
You follow Nature justly; nothing here
Impossible, or Monstrous does appear:
No bumbast language, that so high does swell,
As if 't would conjure Devils from their Cell,
Or rack the ear, and, which is worse, the brain
Of every Auditor, ere he can gain
The sense: but every Scoene is so expressed,
As suits the matter, and the humor best.
Now Fletcher's gone, I fear there are but few,
For neat expressions that can vie with you;
And though you imitate his wanton strain,
Love well expressed as much applause may gain
As dull Mechanic humors, since your pen
Can hit the humor of wild Gentlemen.
R. Colbrand Baronet. On the Incomparable LOVE a la MODE.
Critics approach, view what a stream of Wit
Through this one Poem runs; examine it:
I dare engage, each Act, each Scoene, each line,
Of purest Wit and Mirth 's the richest mine
Ere'sprung from English Pen. But whither strayes
My muse? it is boldly done: do think thy praise
Exalts the Poets same? or can a Verse
Do more then Volumes justly can rehearse?
Are not the Wits free votes already past,
That who condemns it, his own judgment blasts?
Were Shakespeare, Fletcher, or renowned Ben
Alive, they would yield to this more happy pen
Those lawrells that bedeckt their brows; and say,
Love a la mode's the best-accomplish 'd Play.
J. Kelynge Esquire. On the Composure of LOVE a la MODE.
LOve a la mode does in it self contain
So much of worth, my praises would profane
It Is excellence: do but one Scoene rehearse,
You Will find it much beyond the praise of Verse.
Vulgar words here you will see placed with such art,
And so adapted unto every part;
A Comment would be useless to explain
His easy, fluent, and yet lofty strain:
Nor doth't in words consist (that were not fit)
But every word is ushered in with wit.
Thus Wit and Language does his Muse refine,
And them unto an active Plot does join
With such true art, that all just Wits agree
In commendation of this Comedy.
And for its worth, I thus far dare engage,
Since the revival of the English Stage;
No modern Muse has yet produced such:
Were Johnson living, he would swear as much.
W. K. The first PROLOGUE, to Love a la mode.
LOve a la mode! what does the Poet mean?
With Hoods and Scarfs for to be deck his Scoene?
Open a pack, and let each Lady choose
What best she fancies, or what is most in use?
This cannot be his meaning; it is not fit
That he should vent you Wares in stead of Wit:
Though Wit be hard to come by, and not doubt,
Though much pretended to, it is quite worn out:
And I believe, 'twill prove too great a pain
T'indeavour bringing of it up again.
Love a la mode! many a pretty wench
Has taught a man to snuffle out more French:
That I should be thus blockish! but I Will in,
And straight entreat the Actors to begin:
For I believe before this Play is ended,
Most here will know the Love that is here intended.
And if my judgment I do not abuse,
This Gallick-love is here too much in use.
But I Am too bold, and much your patience wrong:
Here come the Actors, I must hold my tongue.
A second PROLOGUE, To be spoken at the next acting of it.
A Jury of noble Wits already past
Upon this Play, when 'twas presented last;
And having tried it by Poetic Laws,
Doom it to live with general applause.
But not with standing this fair precedent,
If Writs of error come, we must consent
It stand a second trial, whilst you sit
Here round, the great Commissioners of Wit,
To canvase every Scoene; nay, we'll afford
You liberty to censure every word.
If some ambiguous are, or bear a sense
That on the Ladies have an influence,
To make them smile or blush; tell us, I pray,
Where lies the guilt? in them, or in the Play?
Words of themselves are innocent, it is your
Waggish conceits that makes the sense impure:
As once I stood behind a Ladies back
When she was reading a religious tract,
Wherein to occupy themselves 'twas said
In goodness did become a virtuous Maid:
She laughed aloud; the honest Friar he
Knew no bad sense in the word occupy.
No more our Author does; it is in your breast
To make a civil or immodest jest.
As for the Actors now, what faults they make
Are not premeditate, but by mistake;
Therefore with Reason for this mercy look,
To have (when out) the benefit of the Book.
LOVE A la mode.
ACTUS Primus.
Scoena secunda.
Rant and Ticket. Rant. WHen all is done, give me your English Madam;
She Will hold out a battery, a double
Voyage; and when she has served some thirty years
Or so, sprung twenty leaks, charitably
Maintained a Covie of younger Brothers;
In her age, when Beauty and Venery
Have both forsook her, makes all Flaws up,
And lives an honest Towns-mans wife.

Tick. The plump Venetian do I most affect:
Oh Sir, they are so far beyond what our
Dull Island breeds, both for discourse, then their
Behavior, wit, and cunning in managing
Their Loves, blinding their Husbands jealousies,
Which makes them up so absolute, as they
Likewise themselves, by th'help of Art, that you
Would swear our English women are mere fools,
And Gypsies compared to them.

Ran. Travelers, Sir, have liberty to speak
Without control: yet by your favor, Sir,
I have heard many, who have visited
Those parts, (of which some were Natives) to affirm
The World could not afford Beauties
That might compare with those our Climate breeds.

Tick. For natural Beauties, true: but they
Are only fit for Naturals,
Mere Simplicina's, that have no wit
To raise, or to allay an appetite;
Which is the cause all strangers do esteem
We are inconstant Lovers; when the defect
Is in our women only: for had they
The Art of the Venetian Courtizan,
To vary, and change themselves into diverse shapes,
Now like a Nymph, sometimes a Shepherdess,
And now and then a Madam of the Court;
Why then, there were variety: but to be
Always forced to take up the same fashioned
Peticoat -- Fie upon it.

Ran. But do you think, Sir, change of habit can
Work the same pleasure, as variety
Of Women?

Tick. Exceeding far. In Italy I Have seen
A She-Comoedian act four several parts,
And so by Art deceitful to the Eye,
That I have taken her for as many
Several persons; and so grew in love
With four Females in one woman.

Ran. It Is much, Sir, you deliver of that Nation,
Which may with ease excel in constancy,
Their women varying so their shapes,
According to their lovers appetites.
Yet I am sorry, Sir, your travels have
So prejudiced your fancy to our beauties.

Tick. Pish, not worthy of that name: some calves,
(She-ones I mean) born with white faces,
Green Sickness and Butter-milk, a Skin-deep
Vernish; but what have they besides to set
Them off? Nature's a Master-Taylor, Sir,
That cuts many handsome fashionable
Garments out (Beauties I mean) but Art's
Her fashioner, and indeed, does give the
Grace and Ornaments to Natures rough-casts:
This Art the Italian Dames are Mistress of,
Can change the color of their hair at pleasure;
If 't be too long, lop from it; if too short,
Make an addition: if their complexion
Be swarthy, create a new one; if pale,
Add to it a Tincture, that exceeds the Rose:
Their Eyebrows likewise they can mould, and color
Their Eyes according to their fancy; their Nose,
Their Cheeks, their Lips, their Teeth; then, for their Tongue,
Their Language gives it such an harmony,
That you would swear they by themselves made up,
Were Cherubins, sometimes Angels, and in
Their slightest dress the beautifull'st of women.

Ran. Either they are Paragons indeed, or much
Indebted to thy character, by which
Thou have so far enamoured me, that I
Could love them all in thy description:
In answer to which courtesy, I Will show
Thee an English Beauty, whose killing eyes
I know must wound thy heart, unless thou have
My Antidote against Love; she is
A Beauty to be seen on Festivals,
And by her Husband kept with as much care
As is his Sunday-Cloak.

Tick. Pish, I Will not believe there can be such a thing
As any Beauty here: when I returned
From travel, I did propose unto my eyes
A Lent, an abstinence from beauteous objects.

Rant. Signor, though I am seldom so ill bred,
To place my praise and commendation
On any thing our Country does produce,
(Though never so deserving) yet I can assure
This Lady worthy your acquaintance
And perusal; but yet so jealous kept.

Ticket. That Is it which moves me; for I love alife
To horn a man that is jealous of his wife.

Rant. And now thou talk of jealousy, a neat
Jest comes to my mind, a Friend of mine
Did lately put upon this Churl: he is old,
(That Is by the way) and cannot see's fingers
Without Spectacles; which my friend-perceiving,
Took an occasion handsomely to change them,
And in their place, put multiplying ones.
The Doctor still discoursing with my Friend,
Fancies a noise in's Ladies Chamber; promptly
Snatches these Spectacles, puts them on, and runs
To surprise a fantastic nothing; finds
His Wife tying her shoe, whereat he grew
Enraged, thinking he saw a thousand hands
About her Petticoate; call's my Friend in, a Witness
To his Wives lewdness: but he no sooner entered,
But the Doctor grew more enraged, swore he
Saw a thousand men to Cuckold him; with
Which he draws me out his two-hand Sword,
And kill's you valiantly some twenty shadows;
Whilst his Spectacles falling off, discovered what
An Ass he was.

Ticket. Ha, ha, ha, I long to see this Lady; I wonder what She thought.


Rant. Why, to make her Husband what he thought himself.


Ticket. And well he does deserve it; have thou been often with her?


Rant. No, by this light, but thrice; I never love
To tie my self to one, though in the way
Of Courtship, I have for every day
My several Mistress, for every week a fresh one.

Ticket. Then thou art right; continue there: by Jove
I did not think a mere untravell'd man
Could love so a la mode. But, do the Ladies
Well receive this love?

Rant. How can they choose, since with their nature it
So well agrees and sympathizes? they have learnt the trick
To entertain plurality of servants;
Some for their purse, and they maintain them
In all their riots and extravagant
Fancies; others for their ability
And strength of back, these are their Night-servants;
Some for their wit are likewise entertained,
And those they term Platonicks, that by the
Conveyance of the Soul, at a long run
Come to participate corporeal favors.

Ticket. These humors heighten me: prithee let us go,
That I may be a witness how much Ladies
Are improved during my Travels.

Rant. If miracles will work upon thy faith,
Come, follow me.
Exeunt.
Scoena Secunda.
Virginio. Coelia. Matrona. Virgi. THou art the joy and comfort of my age,
Nor can I be too careful in my love,
By placing over thee a Governess,
Whose aged experience may instruct thy youth,
And keep it from those bypath the beauties
Of our age wander, and loose themselves in.

Coelia. Sir, I hope
The breeding, and good education,
You liberally have inrich't my youth with,
Have made such deep impressions in my nature,
By figuring on it Virtues Characters,
You need not doubt, although you left me to
My self, my virtue, or ability
To guide my honor, and govern my own fortunes.

Vir. It is not doubted, my dearest Coelia,
Or of thy virtue or discretion
In managing, and governing thy self,
Thy Fortunes, or thy Reputation:
It is my care to see thee well bestowed,
Richly, as thou deserve: to which intent,
Out of my fatherly affection to thee,
I have provided thee a Husband, wealthy
And young enough. No blushing, Girl, but let
Thy wonted obedience meet with my commands.

Coelia. You cannot tax, I hope, in any thing
My disobedience, my ready duty
Having waited still on your commands.

Virg. I do confess it; nor can you deny
That my care has recompensed thy duty,
A continuance whereof, will more and more
Endear my love and thee, to my affection.

Coelia. If you loved me, Sir, as you do seem
To flatter my belief, you could not be
So ready and solicitous to part with me.

Virg. Nor am I, Girl; I do not part with thee,
I but prefer thee to a noble choice:
For when thou art married, thou shall live with me.
As now thou do, and I shall love thee more,
If my affections will admit increase:

Coelia. Say that you still should love me, how can I
Answer with duty, that paternall love,
When you have given up in me
Your interest, I in my self my own,
Unto a Husband; to whom I then must pay
The love and duty that is now due to you?

Virg. Thou plead'st so prettily that trust me I could
Almost let my Reason yield unto thy fond
Affection: but when thou art
Married, Girl, and know the sweetness of that
Happy state, thou wilt sing me a new song.

Coeli. I wish no richer knowledge then my Duty,
Nor better companions then my own
Chaste thoughts.

Virg. And for a while enjoy thy wish:
If you die an old maid, the worst is yours.
Go in, and send Matrona hither.
Exit Coelia. Not marry? it is somewhat strange for Girls
Of her sprightly humor, in the teens
So far advanced, to refuse so good offers:
But possibly she has some other love,
Some needy Rascal, whose wit out-weighs his wealth,
That will enjoynter her in Parnassus Hill:
By the Mass I Will none of that; but did I think
'Twere her chaste strictness to a Virgins life,
I would as yet dispense her being a wife.
Welcome Matrona.
Enter Matrona.
Matr. My charge made me believe your worship sent for me.


Virg. I did: for as I have unto thy care
Committed the only Jewel of my life;
So I would not have thee ignorant of
My intents in placing thee her Governess.

Matr. Your worship did very discreetly in it.


Virg. I know not that; it is as you discharge
The careful trust imposed upon you.
Now my design in placing of you here,
Is for to pry into her actions,
Her thoughts, if possible, to find
How her affections stand, and to whom.

Matr. You could not have chose an apter instrument: I am used to these
discoveries; in one half hour I can insinuate my self into her heart, there
know her secret sins, there see her smallest thoughts as plain as you do now
her face:


Virg. I do believe it; however, be it
Your care to put all this in practice;
Search to the depth, try her, and sound her heart,
Which in appearance seems all obedience.

Matr. And Maidens often dissemble, that I can tell you:
My charge is witty too, plaguey cunning.

Virg. It Is that I fear; yet did I make trial
Of her inclinations toward marriage,
By propounding to her a wealthy husband;
Handsome, and not far in years.

Matr. I marry Sir, those were baits to catch a maid, and cause her blood to
make an insurrection in her veins: did not your worship perceive at the mention
of a husband, a blush, a smile, or alteration in her countenance? Now by the
concupiscence of my flesh, I do believe it moved her much.


Virg. Not in the least, she continued cold
As a widows tears, I hope not so deceitful.

Matr. Trust her not, not half so far as you can see her: take it on my
experience, a maid of seventeen cannot relent so coldly the motion of a
husband, unless she were elsewhere provided.


Virg. I do believe the same; though she did strive
For to insinuate into my thoughts,
It was her love to me, and to a single life.

Matr. Pshaw, pshaw, mere dissembling: believe a Maid in love! believe an
Infidel, and turn Atheist sooner.


Virg. Well, I leave her to thy wise examination,
In which use all thy art, and utmost skill,
The while I will absent my self, and give
Thee way to work.

Matr. Your worship does discreetly; for in your absence, she will appear more
open.

Exeunt.
Enter Coelia from behind the Arras. Coelia. 'Twas well I overheard your
plots; for now
Being fore-warned, I know to be fore-arm'd;
What a deceitful creature this old
Woman is! how she improved my fathers
Jealousies! twenty to one, I should
Have trusted her with the secret of my love,
And so betrayed it to my fathers wrath,
Lost that affection which I hold so dear,
And what to me's more dear, Philostratus:
But I am safe, and all their plots are vain,
Being counterplotted by my woman's brain.
Exit.
Scoena Tertia.
Gambugium, Clittomestra, Aeuta, Glisterpipe. Gambug. MY blessing, Daughter,
and dear Wife; go in,
The air is humid, it will do thee harm:
Thou art but weak, my lamb; good honey, in.

Clittom. Do you think that I can cloister up my self,
Be kept coop't, like a Chicken in a Pen,
For you, or any man's pleasure? though you be
My Husband, you are not my Jailer.

Gambug. Nor do desire, chick, nor do desire;
It is pro sanitate tantum, that I speak it,
For thy health sake, merely out of love: alas,
What were to me, to let thee go abroad,
Expose thy tender body to the frigid
Vapors of the air, were not my love, my love,
Still to preserve thee mine?

Clittom. Rather your jealousy, that I
Should sometimes prove another.

Gambug. Fie, fie, thou art too waspish: IN faith it is
No jealousy in the world, but of thy health;
And that concerns all loving husbands to
Be jealous of.

Clittom. Well, since your jealousy is no other, I will obey you, Sir: but, I
hope, though you confine me to my chamber, because the Air is but just parboiled
by the Sun, and, as you term it, raw; good company are not against your rules
of health.

Exit.
Glister. But much against the rules of honesty.


Acut. And why so, good Monsieur Glisterpipe?


Glister. I said it to please my Master merely, sweet
Young Mistress: may I renew my suite?

Acut. It had need; for it is a threadbare one.


Glister. Sweet Mistress, you are too quick.


Acuta. If a dead one be for your diet, the Anatomy above will neither be too
quick, nor too sweet for you: I need none of your Glisters.


Glister. Many a better have been glad to dance after my Pipe.

Exit Acuta.
Gambug. Keep her chamber, to entertain Gallants!
Oh my head, my brains, my budding head! I were
Better have let her gone abroad, then thus
Have given her a private liberty
To be horrid; I dare not name it to my self:
A Chamber! a bed! oh my perplexed thoughts!
The deed is doing now, even now, and yet
I stay, just like a Wittal, to connive
At my own shame: why Glisterpipe!

Glister. Did your Worship call, Sir?


Gambug. Softly, you rogue; lay your ear close, closer
To this passage; hark, if you do not hear
The creaking of some Courtiers shoes.
A Jack wound up. Devil, the very bed-ropes crack.

Glister. No, Sir, it is only the winding of the Jack;
I hear it plain.

Gambug. It Is well it was no worse: good Glisterpipe,
I am sent for now to Court; in haste to Court:
Be in my absence watchful hereabout.
See thou observ'st who enters and goes out:
Here, take my Table Book, prick all down there.

Glister. Not what the Gallants prick down in my Mistress Chamber.


Gambug. Their names, you Rascal, their names; and when they are entered, be
sure thy eye keep faithful watch upon them, through that hole, that cranny,
do thou see? and all their actions faithfully set down, rendering me my books
at my return: will thou deal faithfully?


Glister. Indeed I will.


Gamb. And thou shall have such a reward,
If thou can make discovery.

Glister. Master, be confident, Argus with his hundred eyes, never watch't Io
with half the circumspection I will her.


Gambug. Dear, honest Glisterpipe, thou art my confidence.

Exit.
Glister. Now am I in Authority, and will be severe in my Office; for I can bid
stand to any man, and for his passage, stand high in my Mistress favor. But by
your favor then, good Master Glist erpipe, where is your fidelity? why, within
my Mistress purse-strings: Can it there abide? No, for my Mistress gold may
drive it thence. Therefore good fidelity return into my bosom, and guard the
little Infidel my Mistress, and witty Pagan her Daughter. See, they come; now
to my watch.


Scoena Quarta.
Glisterpipe, Clittomestra, Acuta. Clitto. DAughter, it is Courtly; must we live
Cloistred up,
Retired like Anchorites, persons merely borne
To converse with walls, or Courtiers in
The Arras? where is then content, our liberty,
That noble freedom women were born with?
Shall I, because I Am married, bar my self
Of noble friendship, and society;
Or you, to please a Fathers jealous humor,
Live a neglected and obscure Maid,
Nor seen nor spoken of, whilst other
Meaner beauties are admired, loved --?

Acuta. Yes, and Courted, hurried to the Park,
Treated at Mulberry, presented at
The Change: of all this, dear Mother,
Am I sensible, as of my Fathers
Peevish jealousy, which, if you please
Give way, shall no more chain our liberty,
Or circumscribe our pleasures, yet
All this be done, and he contented too;
For therein does consist the wit,
And management of the design.

Clitto. Thou take me strangely: but how should thy
Few years arrive at this rare knowledge,
Which my whole age could not enrich me with?

Acuta. You took another way, more suiting to
Your nature; that is, by the torrent
Of your will, and higher spirit, to bear all
Before you; but this augments my Fathers
Jealousy, excites betwixt you daily discontents:
My way's more sweet, and easy,
To appear a most obedient Wife, yet be
A sole Commandress of your will and pleasure.

Clitto. How greedily my ear drinks up thy voice!
Could thou but add performance to thy Speech,
We were both happy.

Acuta. Be so, dear Mother, change but your high strain,
Seeming obedient to my Fathers will,
And leave the rest to me; in the mean time,
Prepare your self to entertain the Courtiers.

Clitto. I fly, dear Daughter, leaving all to thee.

Exit.
Acut. You may rely, this fellow here is set
By my fathers jealousy (I know) to watch:
But I unto his honor still must prove
The faithful'st watch, however I keep times
With some small follies, to prevent great crimes.
Exit.
Glis. They Are gone: now must my observation make use of my Table Book: My
Mistress and her Daughter -- were in consultation -- upon a conspiracy -- a
quarter of an hour -- five minutes -- and a moment. --

Writes.
A Table covered. Enter Acuta with a mess of Cream, set's it on the Table.
Glis. But soft, what have we here? delicious Cream,
By the Mass; that is more then I know, before I
Taste it: it is well sweetened; Oh delicate Ambrosia!
I Will eat more, it will not be mist: I could even go to Noddy.
Oh! Oh! Oh!
Sleeps. Enter Acuta.
Acut. So, he is fast; the plot has taken, the Opium done its part. But soft,
what is here? A Table Book! let me see: My Mistress and her daughter were in
consultation -- hum -- upon a conspiracy -- hum -- a mess of Cream -- this
I Will blot out, and write thus -- No creature has been here since you went out:
My Mistress and her Daughter spent their time in prayer.

So into his pocket with it.
This happily is dispatched, and whilst you sleep,
A truer watch I Will on my Mother keep.
Exit.
Scoena Quinta.
Rant, Ticket, Glisterpipe, Clittomestra, Acuta. Ran. THis is the mansion, Lad,
a poor outside,
But richly lined with beauty, love, courtship,
And complaisance; what would thou more?

Tick. Why Rant, I Would see all this thou talk of, these
Miracles that thou delud'st my faith with. --

Rant. Peace, Infidel, thou shall, and be as soon
Converted; I Will enter thee into a rich
Acquaintance, into a society
Will steal thy heart through the portals of
Thy eyes, if thou not summon for a guard
What is most man within thee.

Tick. That at my peril, Rant: but we loose time.


Ran. Come, we'll enter further: but soft, here is her man,
I Will waken him: Oh, sirrah!

Tick. How fast he is! Is he not dead?


Ran. Your foot disturbed his slumber: hark how he snores! The other kick wakes
him.


Glis. Eay, ey, a mess of Cream.


Ran. Pox take you, Skim-milk: where is your Mistress?


Tick. Pish, he is fast: the noise of a Bear-garden would scarce move him.

Enter Clittomestra, Acuta.
Ran. There let him lie: Here comes the Ladies; we'll move them. Ladies, will
you pardon your servants boldness, in presenting a Traveller and Friend of mine
to your acquaintance?


Clit. No doubt he is a Gentleman of those choice parts, may challenge without
commendations, greater favors: but I shall take notice of him as your friend:
you are welcome Signor.


Tick. I am ambitious to be known by the title of your servant, Madam.

Salutes her.
Clit. Your travels, I suppose, Sir, have afforded you
Such excellent choice paterns of our Sex,
And such variety, that 'twere a sin
To undervalue you with any title
Meaner then a friend.

Tick. You Are too bountiful:
Call me your slave, your bondsman: no office (Madam)
Can be base, or mean, that has the least
Relation unto you, whose sole virtue
Is sufficient to ennoble it.

Clit. You Are a Courtier, Sir, as well as Traveller;
And where these two perfections meet in one,
They needs must overcome: I see it is
A vanity, either to argue your
Own noble worth, or my native meanness:
Since at once, you can exalt the one,
And at your pleasure render the other low.

Tick. We Will not fall out for titles; I Would be owned
By that would most indear me to your love.

Clit. Then be my friend.


Tick. I would your nearest, Madam, dearest and constantest.


Clit. Did ever man mean constantly?


Tick. Ask whether the Sun affords his light to all,
Whether the Sea be governed by the Moon
Man subject unto frailty, any thing,
That is more common, visible and plain,
Rather then question my integrity,
My constancy, and faithfulness in love.
Do Usurers love and dote upon their Gold?
With the same superstition I Will love you.
Do happy men desire and cherish life?
With the same care will I preserve your love;
Be as far from boasting of your favors,
As Religious men their charitable Alms.

Clit. Your nobleness confirms your constant mind;
But yet you are a stranger: although I must
Confess, your language is so powerful,
And bears such a similitude with truth,
That not to credit it were heresy.

Tick. Dear Madam, you may without danger place
The smallest accent falling from my tongue,
An article in your belief. -- Lady,
You Have found a man, whose Constancie's more firm
Then Fate, whose love's more fervent then Aetna's
Fiery bosom; more fruitful then the day,
Which cannot pass without some novelty,
Nor can my love without new services:
I breath and live, but to no other end;
I was made to serve you, you the fair shrine
To which I ought to dedicate my actions:
All that I am, or can be, 's in your power.
Should I prove false, your frown may strike me dead;
And being so, your smile renew my life.
Did you but know your absolute command,
Your power to make me happy, with your
Prerogative to inflict upon me
Punishments, to which Hells torments
Are mere pastimes, you would be merciful,
And not torment, by your suspicion, one
So firmly dedicated to your service.

Clitto. These are bewitching accents sure; I thought
To play but wantonly with Love, and like
A fly about a candles blaze, have sindged
My wings, and perished in the flame.

Ticket. I fear my discourse is tedious;
For I perceive a discomposure in your looks,
As if my speech and presence were unwelcome.

Clitto. You Have little skill, Sir, in Physiognomy:
For I have heard such excellent discourse,
That I could live and die upon the lips
From whence it flowed.

Ticket. Nothing, Madam, but what your beauty formed,
Which, should I speak unto its smallest worth,
I must speak wonders, and from your face
Make all succeeding Poets to derive
Their highest Epithites.
Dearest Lady, you, who only are
Worthy to be styled fair;
Whose virtue does enshrine,
And make your beauty more divine:
Bow down those Rosy Twins of bliss,
That I may surfeit of a kiss,
And of that surfeit die,
Engraving on your lips mine Elogie.

Clitto. Who can deny a favor begged like this?


Ticket. One, freely granted, makes a double kiss.


Rant. By Heaven, you are more fair and beautiful
Then the grey-ey'd morn, dressed in her clearest
Robes, such as adorn her in the spring.

Acut. Suppose it granted, what do you infer from this?


Rant. That all the world (fair Lady) are obliged
To admire, love, or rather reverence,
The divine seat of so much beauty.

Acuta. And amongst the rest, you would enter into bond.


Rant. Lady, I Would be your bond-slave, one of the meanest
Admirers and celebraters of your beauty.

Acuta. I Would rather cancel your obligation, and have my
Beauty celebrated at liberty, that is at your own
Discretion, Sir.

Rant. By Jove thou have an excellent wit too, and I love that.


Acuta. Nay, if you so soon diversifie in your affection, and
Make a digression from beauty to wit, I have
Done with you.

Rant. Excuse me, Lady, wit's an interior beauty; I hope
You Will give me leave in liveliest colors to set
Forth your excellence; and having given you
Reasons why you are lovely, I may the easier persuade
You that I love you.

Acut. I wish I could as easily believe: but since I afford
You the liberty of speaking, you cannot in justice
Deny me the like freedom in believing.

Rant. Well, Madam, I hope we shall not always differ thus: the better you
know me. --


Acut. The less I shall trust you: your friend is taking
Leave of my Mother, which makes me leave you
To your complement.

Ticket. Madam, I am your Creature: whither away, Little beauty?

Snatches Acuta by the hand.
Acuta. Not the right way, since I could not avoid yours.


Ticket. Did you know how much I love and honor
You, dear Lady, you would think your way were right;
I Am sure I do; direct my purpose so,
My honest faithful love: never till now
Did such a glorious constellation break,
And lay it self open to a mortal eye;
You Are by all the reverence I owe your name,
By my vowed love, by thy fair self, which is
The most of all; the only beauty that I ever saw.

Acut. Alas, poor Sir, how long since have you recovered your eyesight?


Ticket. Now I have lost it (Lady) never till now,
Blinded with the glorious beams of your
Beauty, by the ardor of my own true love.

Acuta. Alas! poor love, such an affection had need of a dog to lead it.


Ticket. No, I cannot miss my way to such a
Light: for all the paths of excellence and
Virtue do lead unto it. Would I behold
The Sun in its true glory? 't must then be
In that divine and glorious Firmament:
Would I obtain the knowledge of the Stars,
All their powerful influence upon me?
I Would have recourse unto those starry twins,
Your eyes; for they command my destiny,
Govern my fortunes.

Acut. Take breath, good Monsieur, take breath; you will want it for the next
Mistress you go to.


Ticket. You may well despise so mean a servant,
Lady; but if upon my love you please
To cast a favorable eye, you will find
It so faithful, fixed, and constant, that though
It be within the power of your frowns
To look me dead, your greatest scorns are not
Of force to set a period to my love.

Acut. I have no power left for scorns: what is this I feel? Oh! you think
you have don't to purpose now: how many of these fine speeches can you afford a
penny?


Ticket. They are not mercenary words; poor breath,
And yet ambitious by its constancy,
To win the greatest beauty the World has.

Acut. Oh! these word, do melt the Virgin-snow
About my heart: I dare no longer stay;
For if I do, I Am lost. Oh, it is pity
Nature contrived a tongue with so much art,
Then wedded it unto so false a heart.
Exit.
Clit. My Daughter gone?


Tick. Wearied, Madam, with the dullness of my discourse.


Clit. That would rather invite her stay,
It is so charming.

Tick. It Is much honored by your approbation, Madam:
Whilst I am, rest confident of a servant.

Rant. Lady, we'll cease to be at this time more importunate.


Ticket. Your humble servant: your directions shall be my guide.


Clit. Before the Sun takes Coach, you will hear from me.
Your Servant, Gentlemen.
Exeunt.
Enter Acuta with a Note. Acut. What, is he gone so soon, before my pen
Could figure forth the smallest of my thoughts?
Traitorous love, to steal upon my heart
Thus, like a thief, insensibly: poor maid!
To loose at first the glory of thy scorn,
To play, and jest away thy freedom thus;
And, to a man, that I believe more false,
Then a flattering dream, and more illusive!
Yet, why do I say false? his protestations
Were as firm as truth; his face
Too smooth, if well observed, for to conceal
A falsehood. How prettily my love does
Plead in his defense!
He wakes.
Glister. Oh, oh, hey, Madam Acuta, I had the prettiest dream!


Acut. Some means I Will work, to make him know I love;
Being first assured that he will constant prove.
Exit.
Glister. Oh the uncharitable wretch, to leave me all alone! now am I as
amorous as a dancing Ape, and as letcherous as an old lowzie beggar. Well, this
quarter parcel of Virginity will not out of my mind, and yet she will not
mind me: but I Will have a conceit shall tickle her yet, make her a bill of my
affection, and give her so many Items of my good parts.

If that don't win her, may all Lovers prove
Full of deceit, not conceit, in their love.
Exit.
ACTUS Secundus.
Scoena Prima.
Coelia, Matrona. Mat. SWeet Lady-bird, do not frown; you will mar the beauty of
your looks.


Coel. Why? if I do, I hope they are my own.


Mat. Though now they are, they must shortly be another: preserve them,
Mistress, for a husband.


Coel. Good Antiquity, sputter farther off; I have no time for trifles.


Mat. But you must listen to the experience of the old: age is honorable; and
my place requires some reverence.


Coel. What, Groom of my stool?


Mat. These are unreverent words to your Governess.


Coel. Governess? what proud fool dares hope that glorious title over me?
thou, I know, can not expect any thing beyond what Nature did intend thee
for, a Baud.


Mat. Minion, minion, you shall know, I am your Governess.


Coel. Again that word? thou prodigy of age, how dare thou tempt my patience?
Think not, whilst I know who I am, and where I am, my Fathers Daughter in my
Fathers house, there shall be any Governess but I.


Mat. I Will be your adviser then.


Coel. I Would advise you to be less saucy, woman, and know your distance: when I
need you, or your advice, I Will call for you; till when, it will become your
duty to be silent, and not abuse my Fathers charity. He take thee for a
Governess! alas, poor woman, how I pity thy wrong judgment! he took thee of
mere charity, good man, it is his usual course.


Mat. She Will persuade me I am a beggar straight, a right worshipful subject
for a Brokers charity. -- Lady, however you are pleased to abuse me in your
Fathers absence, I must tell you I was entertained on other conditions.


Coel. And I tell thee, thou doting Woman, thou have never a good condition to
be entertained for.


Mat. Well, I am patient, you see: we old folks are fools; my love makes me
bear all: I can take nothing ill from my sweet Mistress: Youth will make merry
with Age. Dear sweet Mistress, I Will be any thing to please you.


Coel. Be silent then, and hold thy prate; do think my fortunes can be
bettered by thy advice, or prejudiced without it? or has my Father placed you
here a Prologue to my Maidenhead, to tell each gallant, as he passes by, what is
to be had within?


Mat. I am sorry, Lady, you should thus misconster my love; bent only to your
service, my self your creature, who would be willingly employed in any thing,
that might be grateful to you. -- I know you are a Maid, a ripe one; and to
some one particular bear an affection: give me, sweet Ladybird, the secret, and
you shall see how suddenly I Will work your will; how secretly, with what
dexterity I Will manage your affection. If this, or all the endeavors of my life
can gain your good opinion, sweet Lady-bird, command me.


Coelia. Then I command thy absence; thy fight is a
Disease as killing as the Plague: how well
Did my Prophetic spirit guess, when I
Did call thee Baud, a promoter of base lust?
For now I find thee a most deceitful
And a treacherous one -- I Would have thee know,
It Is not within the magic of thy tongue
To pervert my chastity, though you hide
Beneath the heavenly name of love
Your Devil, lust. Do think, thou rottenness,
I am so much a fool, as to believe
Thou can be true to me, that to
My Fathers trust prov'st such a traitor? -- But
For blistering of my tongue, I now could
Curse thee, curse thee to Hell, to warm thy old
Decayed letcherous trunk.

Mat. You know I don't deserve this.


Coel. Away, dissembler, hypocrites; do weep,
And think to chain my weak belief with tears?

Mat. No; they are tears of love, caused by unkindness.


Coel. VVhatere they are, I hate both them and thee:
Avoid my fight, thou most corrupted shroud,
Lest that my rage enforce me set a mark
Upon thy lewdness. I command thee hence.

Mat. Well, well, I must obey: your Father will come home.

Exit Matrona.
Coel. I know he will, and that all this discourse
Flies swiftly to his ear; but I shall be
Prepared. -- I am glad I Have workt this Satan hence;
To whom I was obliged use this rough strain,
To keep her too insinuating notes
At a due distance from my heart: for had
I given her dissimulation way,
I had undone my self, who am too apt
By fair pretenses to be wrought upon:
But whilst I kept her at a distance thus,
She could not close; and I, as if I were
In an enchanted Circle, stood secure,
Upon the Center of my resolution.
But now I must prepare for a new onset,
A Fathers severe brow: assist me Wit,
And Love assist me too, to counterfeit
As many humors as Proteus shapes:
My Philostratus too, I must instruct,
That he may be as ready in his part
As I: for love has taught me mine by heart.
Exit.
Scoena Secunda.
Gambugium, Clittomestra, Acuta, Glisterpipe. Gam. STand aside a while; I Will
kiss thee anon:
Come hither, Glisterpipe; have thou set down?

Glist. Verbatim, Sir, as this Book shall specify.


Gam. It Is well, it is well: umh, um, um. At her Devotion:
That was somewhat like: No Gallant here. A
Good amendment still. Come hither, Wife:
And now I Will kiss thee, honey.

Clit. When you please, Sir: it is most fit
That I expect your appetite.

Gam. Oh sweet alteration! why now thou art my
Life, my heart, my soul; what shall I term
Thee, to express my love? my joy is now at
Full, and makes my blood to caper in my veins:
These dainties are not to be parted with.
Now tell me, Dear, how in my absence did
Employ thy time?

Clit. Oh Sir, it was exceeding tedious to me:
When you are out, me thinks I miss part of
My self within. I spent my time
As suited best my thoughts, in melancholy,
Until my Daughter came to comfort me,
By reading to me a Religious Tract,
A Treatise made against incontinence;
So excellent a piece, that credit me
It might convert the boldest Courtesan;
And yet it is useful to the chastest wife:
I found much comfort in it: believe me, Sir,
There is no happiness like contemplation.

Gam. Nor no felicity like such a Wife.


Clit. For contemplation elevates our joy,
And mitigates extremity of grief:
It sweetly passes over tedious time,
And sweetens all afflicting accidents.

Gam. It does, it does, sweet heart, and comforts me.
My thanks to thee, dear daughter, who found out
So good an entertainment for my Wife.

Acut. It is my duty, Sir, to study both your satisfactions.


Gam. And our happiness to have so blessed a child.
However virtue does reward her self,
Many are virtuous only for reward;
Therefore it is good for to encourage them,
And let them know they have done well:
Here, Daughter, take this, 'twill buy a handsome
Dressing for thy head: I love to see
Thee neat: and, dearest Wife, this brace of Angels
Shall henceforth be thy guard: they flew into
My purse this morning, next my heart.

Clit. I thank you, Sir; as many of these guardians as you please.


Gam. I Will out, and get thee more: be merry in my absence,
Lamb: nay, prithee look not sad; for then
Thy over-kindness will afflict me more,
Then my suspicion ever did before.
Here, take my Book; thou know thy task.
Exeunt.
Glister. Fear nothing, Sir.


Clit. Ha, ha, ha! be merry, Lamb; your counsel I will take:
Sadness never enters here, till you come back.

Acut. Dear Mother, tell me how you now approve
My counsel; how like you the success?
Is not this better then continual brawles,
Hourly jealousies and discontents?

Clit. Much better, Daughter; now we have his heart,
His purse, himself, and all, at our command.
I do applaud thy wit, and love thee for it:
But, dear Acuta, I have a new design.

Acut. Enrich my knowledge with it; and if it rest
Within the compass of a woman's brain,
Account it done.

Clitto. You make me happy, child;
For this requires more Secrecy then Wit:
I dare trust none but thee: this small Letter
Would I have speedily conveyed.

Acut. With secrecy?


Clitto. With all caution, into the hands of that Same stranger-Gentleman.


Acut. Think it done, and it is so: have you any Further service?


Clitto. Only this.


Acut. Account it done: in the mean time, good Mother,
Let Us give no nourishment to my Fathers
Jealousy, by a long conference.

Clitto. Fear nothing; he is at Court by this.


Acut. But his intelligencer is at home.


Clitto. How I love thy discreet caution!

Exit.
Acut. You would have cause, dear Mother, knew you all.
Now to my Letter; it bears direction,
To Her most bonour'd Friend Mr. Ticket;
That Is His name: this is a new discovery.
By your leave, Mother, I Will make bold and read it.

Dear Sir,
Your Courtship was so powerful, few or none could resist; it was not at least
in my power: but, whether the eloquence of your language, or excellence of your
Person won the victory upon me, is disputable: certainly both concurred to
complete your Merit. By promise I was to appoint the place of a second
interview: but since finding my self guilty of too much modesty, to undertake
so great a piece of confidence, I most humbly desire you so far to indulge my
bashfulness, and dispense with my promise, as to make the appointment your
self; where I may appear

Your most affectionate Friend and Servant, Clittomestra.


Acut. Where you may appear a wild licentious woman
But I Will divert your ill intents to good,
And keep you virtuous against your will:
Besides, I love the Gentleman my self,
Though he be much unworthy of my love;
For it should seem he courted my Mother
To the same height of ardencie in love,
As he did me. Inconstancy of man!
Oh men, what are you! and what fools are we,
To credit your false vows! henceforth I Will take
My heart a little nearer to my self:
Though I must love him still, I Will be so wise,
To credit no man's vows before my eyes:
Howe'r, this interview I can prevent,
Writing a Letter to a wrong intent:
But by this wrong, I do my Father right,
Besides a justice to my love; nor can
My Mother, when chaste thoughts take place, condemn
Me for it -- It is resolved, I will about it straight:
Delay's are dangerous in affairs of weight.
Exit.
Scoena Tertia.
Virgini, Matrona, Coelia. Mat. SHe is, saving your Worships reverence,
possessed; but with such a spirit, that all the Conjurers in Town Shall never lay.


Virg. Why, what said She to thee?


Mat. Nay, what did She not say? when I told Her, I was
To be Her Governess, She roared louder then a
Cannon, and had like to have destroyed me with
The artillery of Her high language: She scolded
Faster then a Billingsgate Oyster-wench, and railed
At me with as great a liberty, as an ignorant
Phanatick at a stand in his Text, ever did against
The Pope; baited me worse then his Bull could
Be at Geneva, and threatened, if I but
Urged the name of Governess, it should be my last.

Virg. Thou do belie Her now; I know thou do:
Her nature is more soft, then finest down;
Her behavior most sweet, and affable,
And never guilty of such a rudeness
As thou deliver'st. She is not half
So spleenitive as a Dove; a fish is scarce
So silent as she, when She Is admonish't.
She threaten thee! fie, it is impossible:
She Would scarce menace a Dog that bites Her.

Mat. I know not, but am sure I was afraid
Of my eyes: and then I did comply, told Her
I Would be her servant: She called me Baud, old
Rottenness, and such language as was beyond
The patience of a Stoic. I still bore, gave Her
Sweet language, offered to serve her in any secret
Of Her dearest love; but still was rated at.

Virg. It is beyond a miracle; I cannot credit it.


Mat. Stand but aside, and witness it: I hear Her coming.


Enter Coelia dressed like a Puritan. What, Lady, changed your dress?

Coel. You see, good Governess, the effects of your commands: your counsels
have opened my eyes, and made me see the vanities of youth.


Mat. You're deceived, dear Mistress; I Would have you brave, gallant, glittering
with Jewels, decked with ribbans, gaudier then the rainbow.


Coel. Good Mother, do not try me with too many and fierce temptations: I am
not fully strengthened in faith yet; the Snares of Satan may entrap me.


Mat. In The Devils name, how came She changed thus?


Coel. Holy Governess, will you conduct me, according to
Your promise, to the Conventicle of Religious Brethren?

Mat. I promise, sweet Creature, to get thee a Husband, a valiant man.


Coel. That were irreligious: get me a sanctified Husband,
A man of the purest reformation.

Virg. My Child's spoiled; the Trot has abused me, infused
Three long points and a half of Predestination into Her
Head, and made Her as mad as a French Tailor,
Whose brains are whimsied with an inundation
Of new fashions. -- But I Will hear more.

Coel. Whereabout stand all the meeting houses? how
Many Lectures are there a week?

Mat. Are you mad? what have you to do with Lectures
And Meeting Houses? how came you changed thus?
Did you not ere while abuse me in as imperious
A strain as a thrice-married Widow?

Coel. Goodness forbid! the vanity of my spirit rise in
Insurrection against the elder? that were surely
Reprobation; by yea and nay, damnation.

Mat. Out, dissembler! did you not call me Baud,
Trot, and other beastly names?

Coel. Verily you do scandalize the Righteous: but by revelation it was
revealed to me, that I should suffer; and by inspiration I received it in
spirit, that the beginning of my Reformation would be a Conflict of warfare and
temptation.


Virg I can contain no longer. -- How now, Daughter! No blessing?


Coel. The sanctified Sisters do not use it, trust me.
It is superstitious and abominable in the eyes
Of Reformation.

Virg. Oh my heart! I now begin to fear
She Is too far gone to be reclaimed in haste.
Daughter, I Have brought thee home a brave rich Gown,
Two scollopt Gorgets of the newest cut,
And Suites of several fashionable Ribbans:
I love to see thee gallant: Virgins still
Should be desirous of all novelties.

Coel. I Will have none, they are the very cobwebs of Satan.
Afflict not my memory with the errors of my
Youth; all these vanities are now abominations.
Therefore I Will go humble my self, that is, make
My self humble, and depress the spirit of
Vanity.
Exit.
Virg. Oh thou VVitch-hagg; either reduce Her from
This Phrenzy, or never see my face.

Mat. I Will use my endeavor, Sir.

Exit.
Virg. Oh curious fool, that sought to pry into
Thy Daughters thoughts! thy curiosity
Is now re-paid from a high hand. Heaven
Restore my Child unto Her former wits, --
Or else let me restore Her unto you. --
Give Her, or take Her: griefs, you are but weak,
That cannot make an old man's heart to break.

Scoena Quarta.
Blunt, Virginio, Coelia, Matrona. Blunt. HOw cheer you forsooth? my Mistress,
the Lady
Your Daughter, I hope She be in health.

Virg. Never worse, Sir, never worse, Mr. Blunt:
However, you show your love in asking after her.

Blunt. Truly forsooth it does afflict me much.


Virg. Passion will do no good, Mr. Blunt: I did intend
You for my Son-in-law; but some hypocritical
Varlet has spoiled my Daughter; she is not
What she was.

Blunt. Goodness sake, Sir, is she not a maid still?


Virg. For ought I know; but such a precise Sister
She Is grown, you will scarce know her: she has
Lost her wit too: you know she was full of
Jests, witty girds, for which I loved her; now
She Is the plainest thing!

Blunt. Trust me I shall like her the better; for her wit
Was a razor to my nature: if she be grown a plain
Dealer, let me alone, if downright dealing
Will do it.

Virg. I am glad it pleases you: I wish you had her: I Am
Sure it troubles me, afflicts me much, and so would
Any one that loves her think: she will talk you
Twelve hours of Predestination, Reformation,
Sanctification, Tribulation, Reprobation,
Damnation, and such a spawn of Phanatick
Words, that in plain English I think she is mad.

Blunt. That Is another good sign: if she be mad,
I shall speak sense enough to Court her; for I
Could never have the face, such is my foolish
Bashfulness, to speak to a woman in her wits.

Virg. Then my afflictions are your solace, Sir.


Blunt. I am of age, forsooth, to know my own inclinations.


Virg. Nay, understand me, Sir, I am glad she
Pleases you; I thought her a lost child, a castaway:
But your discretion may reform her.

Blunt. I warrant you, forsooth, if she will but conform:
For look you, I am a man of few words, forsooth; Plain
Dealing's a Jewel, that is my Motto: but if she expect
Fine finical Phrases, Meteors, and Folligismes. --

Virg. You mean Syllogismes, and Metaphors.


Blunt. I do profess I do, forsooth; my meaning's good; and if she will take me
by that, never a shoemaker in Christendom can fit her better for downright
dealing.


Virg. Peace, here she comes; let us observe her.


Enter Coelia, Matrona. Coel. Matrona, Fie, it is a scurrilous profane name:
thou
Shall be new dipped, and receive the sanctified name
Of Tabitha, and I will be called Rachel; yea, Rachel
Shall be My appellation. --

Virg. My Coelia, here is Mr. Blunt, your servant, to kiss
Your hands: what, no answer?

Mat. Not unless you call her Rachel: She Is new dipped.


Virg. Sir, go to her; may be she will be ashamed, before you,
To play the fool so.

Blunt. In the mean time, I am such a shamefaced fool, I cannot speak: in
sooth my heart is no bigger then a pins head. Before I saw her, I was as
courageous as Hercules; and now my heart's sunk into my belly. A Mouse when the
Trap falls is not in such a taking: yet methinks I might speak as many words as
Friar Bacons Head: Ma-ma-Madam.


Coel. Oh fie! abomination! what, do I see the plumes and wings of Gog-magog?
Oh the tempter in the shape of an old man, clothed in the vanities of youth! I
do defy thee, Satan, I do defy thee; that is, I bid defiance unto thee.


Blunt. Lord, what a Monster she makes me!


Coel. By yea and nay, the mark, the brand and flower
Of Antichrist are in his idolatrous looks; therefore
Will I fly, or, as we say, avoid; that is, shun the Serpent.
Exit.
Virg. Follow her, Matrona, and work her still:
If one means fail, another straight essay:
We too, the while, will seek some Doctor out:
And now I think on it, Gambugium is
For cure of madness very eminent:
Come, let us to him; we by experience find
It Is hard to cure a diseased mind.
Exeunt.
ACTUS Tertius.
Scoena Prima.
Enter Gambugium shaved and powdered, in equipage of a young Gallant;
Glisterpipe at a corner of the Stage. Gam. ALthough my Wives new strict
behavior please
Me very well, my thoughts are not at rest:
Though I have reason to be confident,
Yet not to trust, is not to be deceived:
No proofs more certain then what is ocular.
My Man may be corrupt, and negligent;
My Wife prove cunning; many women are
But well dissemblers of their wantonness.
Now in this Garb I shall discover all;
For I am far from knowledge: if I find
Her honest, resisting the several temptations
I have brought, as Gold, Jewels,
Sweetmeats, and sweet and richer promises;
Suspicion never more enters my breast:
But should I find her other, my just revenge
Upon her blood should satisfy her crime.
The thought disturbs me; I must think a while.

Glist. So, there is a Gallant, and he makes this way; perhaps
He wants a little Sassafras, or China-root; he crinkles
In the hams, as if the Frenchman had unknit his joints,
Or calcinated all his bones in the flames of Venery.

Gamb. Sirrah, is your Mistress within?


Glist. What if she be, Sir?


Gamb. Why my cautious knave that keeps the door, inform her that a
Gentleman, one Mr. Winal, craves the honor to kiss her hands, and vow himself
her servant.


Glis. Sir, I shall do your errand presently; but I have a small Item or two to
write here.


Gam. The Knave's exceeding punctual: a faithful servant and a virtuous wife
are treasures. I pray dispatch, Sir.


Glis. I go immediately. -- So, you are down; but, my spruce Baboon, you are too
like my Master to please my Mistress.

Exit.
Gam. If I can quit my phrases now of art,
And larding my discourse with Latin, I
Am made: for out of a most exquisite
Romance, I have stole language; if I can
But sort it to my purpose, that will do
The feat: see, they come before I Am perfect
In my complement.
Enter Clittomestra, Acuta.
Clit. Looks he so like a Jackanapes new shaved?


Glis. As ere you saw, Madam; see where he stands, a glittering outside, a
composition of youth and age beat by time in a Mortar together; or rather he is
times Hermaphrodite: for look you, one eye is gray, the other black, male and
female; one cheek like unto Luna, white; the other yellow, Phoebus bright: one
leg sull stuffed, the other thin, as if they neither were a kin.


Acut. You Are very full of your wit, and Poetry: but prithee keep it, till I
have leisure to hear it.


Glist. Well, I Will down with you in my black book for this.


Acut. Now summon all your wits: this is some trick. I see through the disguise.


Clit. Do you think we'll bite at all baits, Daughter?


Acut. Avoid this mainly; do you observe the wart upon his eye-brow?


Clit. It cannot be your Father; and yet there is some resemblance.


Acut. Peace, he turns, and advances toward us, as gingerly as a piece of
Clock-work new wound up; the wheels of the motion want oyling.


Gamb. Fairest of Ladies, grace the lips of a stranger with the odoriferous
balsom of a kiss.


Glist. An excellent Apothecaries complement! I Will prick that down.


Acut. Have you any more to say, Sir?


Clitt. Let it alone; an hour hence the Brazen-head will utter another sentence.


Acut. Peace, Mother, the mouth opens.


Gam. How they abuse me! but these abuses are
My solace. Ladies, I take your silence for
A consent, and make use of the sweet
Unguent of your lips.

Clit. Take that for your bold rudeness: next
Strikes him. Time you visit Ladies, learn your distance,
Or go into the suburbs; there is carrion for
Such crows.

Gam. Oh my teeth! yet had I rather have
The dolor there, then on my brow. This
Young beauty, I hope, will prove more
Merciful.

Acut. Time's past, Sir -- had you made to me your
First addresses, you might perhaps have gained
The favor of my hand, and that had been
An honor.

Gam. Excellent chaste both: but words are air.
I Will try whether their virtue be gold-proofe:
Madam, I know lovers must receive many
Repulses when they lay siege, especially to so
Fortified a Castle.

Acut. Have a care of the next battery: for if the
Cannons of our tongues begin to play, we shall
So shatter your decayed forces!

Gam. Peace, good nimble wit: Pox, she has put
Me out of my very undermining speech.
But gold is the best Orator. -- Lady, all this,
And more, is at your service.

Clit. Oh Sir, you are troubled with a pleurisy of
Gold: I wish my Husband here, to let you
Blood for it.

Gam. You understand me not; I Will be Plainer: I love
You, Lady; and so love you, I Would willingly part
With my whole estate for to enjoy you but
One night: Is it not pity that jealous fool
Gambuginm, who has no sense of the
Happiness he enjoys, nor in himself the least
Worth to deserve you, should slubber so much
Sweetness, deprive you of your lawful
Liberty, and rob you of the pleasures due
Unto a Marriage Bed?

Clit. Pray stay, Sir; if I should prove so great
A fool, as to forsake an old stinking Husband
For a rotten friend, how can I be sure you
Can supply the wants you tax in him?

Acut. Your only way (Mother) is to have him searched.


Gamb. Well said, spirit, you will deal upon sure ground.
But, Madam, I hope my presence promises more
Ability, then to permit you to question my
Performance.

Clitto. Sir, blame me not; the experience I have had
In larger promisers, nay, persons that look
More like performers, gives me just cause of doubt.

Gam. Happy disguise, thou will discover all!
Then you have traded, Madam.

Clit. That question, as a stranger, savours of impudence,
And deserves my frown: but when I look upon
You as a Lover, I term it Jealousy.

Gamb. You Are all courtefie: it is decreed: my head! my
Budding head! I am a Cuckold certain. But
I will urge her to the utmost proof. -- Madam,
To give you a larger evidence of my affection,
I am content to be searched, though my modesty
Would desire one of my sex might have this office.

Clit. Most willingly. Daughter, call Glisterpipe.


Gam. Oh torment! there is no room for doubt: a whore for certain.


Clit. Do you pause upon it?


Gam. My love allows me not so much reason: let
Your request be what it may, if within
My power, and it is granted.

Clit. How shall I love that man, that dares make
Good his promise!

Gam. Dare! what Hercules e're durst, conceive of me.


Acut. Madam, Glisterpipe waits your pleasure.


Clit. It Is well: Sirrah, hark hither. -- And when
You have found him a man at all points,
With this knife cut off his virulent faculties.

Gam. How! how! make me an Eunuch?


Clit. Only no man: when I married, Sir, I vowed to
Heaven, no man except my Husband should
Enjoy me: you see what pains I take, for you
To lie with me, without infringement of a
Former vow.

Gam. Excellently honest! joy makes me weep; Dear
Wife, pardon me.

Clit. What, my loving Husband turned Gallant?


Acut. My Father Courtier? --


Gam. Only to try thee; and I have found thee
Excellent: nay, if thou wilt let none but
Guelt persons lie with thee, I Will never fear
Cuckolding. --

Clitt. I wish that all the actions of my life
Could but convince you of my honesty.

Gam. I am, I am, dear wife, I am, and now with
Unknown Nations I dare trust thee.
Come, weep no more, but let us in and dine,
And drown all jealous thoughts with Florence-VVine.

Scoena Secunda.
Rant. Ticket, Glisterpipe. Rant. NO news from the Doctors Wife?


Ticket. Not a word, nor do I value it; it is a Spanish
Three pence to a Scottish two pence, I never more see her.

Rant. Yet when thou took'st thy leave, thou seem
To be in love deeply with both.

Ticket. True, I can court my self into an affection
At pleasure; and in their absence, out of a
Complement forget it.

Rant. Partly of my humor, as to the forgetful
Part; for it is not within my memory, that
I was ever guilty of speaking what I meant to
A woman.

Ticket. In that I am contrary: for whilst I court
An exquisite beauty, I am so transported, and
Heightened in my fancy, that for that moment
I intend, and really, what I then utter.

Rant. A certain humouring of your speech; as I have seen a Tragoedian really
weep, in acting a feigned story, when off the Stage he appeared as joviall as a
drunken Tinker: so thou, no Sooner parted from thy Mistress, but art as free
from the least touch of love, as Eunuchs of fourscore from lust.


Tick. Nay, love will be the death of neither, that is
Certain: for if thou have the faculty never to
Be in love, I have the grace to forget I ever was.

Rant. They are good properties, let us preserve them: thou art I hope
convinced, though, that there be some handsome Ladies.


Tick. Demonstration is a clear proof, Sir: but hang them,
They Are so phlegmatic, they will not do. Ah, in
Fiorenza la bella, Roma la santa, a Lady of their
Beauty would have pressed half a dozen courtesies
Upon a man, whilst we are saying Grace.

Rant. Or rather, permitted a man to have pressed as many, upon them: but do
take Ladies for Oysters, to fall upon them without ceremony? ha!


Tick. In Italy we have not time. Upon my conscience,
Tedious hollow-hearted courtship, and long
Hypocritical Graces, came up together.

Rant. Faith like enough: but when came your Italian locks?


Tick. Fie, a mere abuse; they have none but natures
Padlocks.
Believe it, Gunpowder new dried is not more
Disposed to take fire, then a Venetian Dame to
Cuckold her Husband.

Rant. London has as well-dispos'd free-hearted girls, that love the sport,
and will pay as much for their Husbands dubbing, as a Knighthood would cost at
Court.


Tick. This heightens me: but come they to it readily?


Rant. How do mean?


Tick. Without much circumstance, as thus: Lady, I love you; Sir, you honor
me: Madam, I Would lie with you,; You Are of years of discretion, pray use your
pleasure.


Rant. Not altogether, till you are well acquainted.


Ticket. That Is somewhat yet: there is relish in it: but faith what other
beauties art acquainted with? I have been a stranger to this Climate long; it is
friendly to impart.


Rant. You find me no niggard of my delicacies; there is another beauty within
my knowledge, no ways inferior to those you have seen.


Tick. Let Us thither straight.


Rant. Your patience, pray hear me out: she is so
Chargeable, I dare not look on her past once
A quarter, and that at the large
Expense of a twenty pound banquet; kiss
Her every six months, the price whereof is fifty
Pounds: marry when I shall be rich enough
To purchase her Maidenhead, unless twenty
Of us go sharers,
Is a question as irresolvable as the coming
Of doomsday.

Ticket. What an Atheist were thou to conceal this from thy friend; the very
miracle of the Land; the only thing, if true, worth observation? in all my
travels,

Though I have seen hundreds of women, heard of more,
Yet could I never find so politic a Whore.

Enter Glisterpipe with a Letter. Rant. That word will excommunicate you.


Tick. You shall instruct me by the way -- see, yonder is
The fellow we could not wake: sure he dreams yet.

Glist. Out of one office, and into another: but this
Is my little Mistresses office, who I love superlatively
Well, and she comparatively loves me: But mum,
Here Is the Gentleman; I will perform her commands,
And merit her -- Sir, though I am no common
Porter, yet for my Mistress sake, I am become
The particular bearer of her favors.

Ticket. To me, Sir?


Glist. The Letter to you, Sir, her favour's to my self.


Ticket. Present my service; say I most humbly kiss her hands, and that
suddenly I Will return her an answer.


Glist. Rest you merry, Gentlemen.

Exit.
Ran. Pox, what makes thee frown so?


Tick. Madness, to be deceived: the Devill's not
So great an hypocrite as women are:
I thought I had her sure, sure as this glove
Upon my hand; she promised to appoint
The time, and place; but see, the Devil of
Her courtesy was grounded on the hopes
Of my affection unto her Daughter;
To the obtaining of whose dearest love,
She promises assistance, that she will use
Her Motherly influence and authority:
Bids me withal, not flatter my belief
That she intended any thing of love
As to her self, but only to instruct
Me in the good opinion she held of me
For a Son-in-law. --

Rant. Is that all?


Tick. No, here she puts in Postscript, that I may
Continue to the forementioned intent.
My addresses to her, with this proviso,
That I her answer should receive, as from
Her Daughter, as she would my discourse
Directed to her.

Rant. Why these riddles are harder to be interpreted then an Oracle: but why
should it trouble thee, who car'st not for her?


Tick. Pox, who hates a handsome woman? I love the sport, though as to the
person it is indifferent.


Rant. If so, it is but making digression from the Mother to the Daughter: for
the sport sake we'll not loose the acquaintance.


Tick. I intend nothing less: but why court her for her Daughter, I understand
not.


Rant. Possibly she doubts her Daughters peevishness may spoil her fortune; or
they may be agreed between themselves.


Tick. I Will not dispute, but follow her directions; she may have a further
design in it, for my good.


Rant. Faith like enough: some women by their tricks,
Merit the Title of Loves Politics.
Exeunt.
Scoena Tertia.
Philostratus habited like a Precisian. Phil. JOve mist of this, amongst the
various shapes
He did assume, to court his Mistrisses:
Though it be not amorous, I hope 'twill prove
As fortunate to my designs, as I obedient
To my loves command;
Which work't on me this metamorphosis:
No love's so true, but needs some deceit;
For love is never without hypocrisy,
Or in it self, or in the means by which
We bring 't about to it is prefixed end.
But till this present, I am confident,
A garment so deceitful, could not shroud
Under its covering so true a heart.
Enter Coelia Matrona. See where my love appears, just like days star
New broken from the East; nor can that hell-
Contrived disgrace so great a beauty hide.
Sister Rachel, you show your pure zeal;
Verily you are praiseworthy, in thirsting
And hungering as it were after the edifying
Instructions of the elder.

Coel. It does behove me verily, to regaine the time that I have lost in
youthful vanity.


Phil. Your resolution is religious, and of the spirit;
But you are also worthy of reproof, nay verily
Of condemnation, for thus accompanying your
Self with lewdness, and antiquity.

Coel. Brother, your reproves are seasonable, and I do receive them with the
spirit of humbleness and meekness: but who can avoid the temptations, and lewd
deceits of the Tempter?


Phil. You ought to fly them, verily you ought, and
Take down the rankness of thy flesh by
Discipline, thus.
He beats Matrona.
Matr. Oh pray Sir: oh my bones!


Phil. Avoid me then; that is, shun me: for thou art the very spirit of
beastliness, and beam of iniquity, that keeps the light of the spirit from
me.


Matr. Oh, oh! I Am gone: oh, I vanish.

Exit.
Phil. View not this outward ornament of shame;
But look into my heart, that is not disguised;
There shall my Coelia see the seal of love
So deeply imprinted on my very soul,
That time nor absence, the two moths of love,
Can never disfigure, much less eat it out.

Coel. How you renew my joys, by confirming
What was sufficiently confirmed before,
Your constancy of love, which I can never
Doubt and live! for in thy love consists
All my life.

Phil. And in thy life, consists all my love:
For without thee, love and life are burdens.
It Is possible I shall die, and thousand
Accidents may cross our love; but that
I shall leave loving thee, so impossible,
I should not credit it from your lips,
Which I believe the Oracles of truth.

Coel. Enough, I do believe thee: it is easy
To persuade me to a faith that I
Would die in. --

Phil. Fair soul, it is a true one:
I Will breath't upon your lips, and thence receive
The happy seal of Confirmation.
kiss.
Coel. Then I must seal to you the counterpart,
And register them both within my heart.

Phil. What Paradise of pleasures do I taste!
I feel my soul evaporate at my lips;
My heart exalted in the sphere of love,
Shuns any meaner object then thy eyes,
Those two celestial lamps, beyond the which
There is no other light, nor Paradise
Beyond thy face.

Coel. How fancy does delude
The sense! The heaven's neither in thy face
Nor mine, though they appear the sensual
Objects of our love; But in our souls there is
Strict conjunction (dearest Philostratus)
The unity of hearts; there is the heaven,
The abstract of all joy, our Paradise.

Phil. I know not where it is, nor have I time
To spend in the search; surely it were needless,
When every part about you is divine.
If I but taste thy lips, I thence do drink
Nectar more choice then Ganimede ere filled:
If I but touch thy hand, thereon does dwell
A softness so divine, the finest down
Of Swans is harsh and foul to: If I gaze
Upon those heavenly eyes, I am worse dazzled
With the resplendent brightness of their light
Then bastard Eagles gazing against the Sun. --
What e're I see, touch, taste, or smell, is all
A divine lasting Monument of bliss.

Coel. And all, unworthy of my Philostratus.


Phil. Oh, I could dwell upon those words for ever!
Those sweet harmonious accents have power
To rob me of my very essence; yet
In your love leave me an ample being.
My joys are now at full. --

Coel. And therefore must decrease; for we must part.


Phil. Part, my dear Coelia! death never had
So harsh a sound; nor ever made so great
A separation.

Coel. Be not so passionate, but be ruled by me,
And I Will invent a way we often may meet.

Phil. You speak all happiness.


Coel. Tomorrow at St. Antlins I shall expect
To see you: now, farewell. Nay, no reply.

Phil. I do obey, though with a heavy heart.
Adieu, my dearest life.

Coel. And I, like Dido from her Turrets top,
View his departure:
So vanished Aeneas from her sight;
The winds blew him, and all her moanes away;
The storm of fortune would not let mine stay.
Exit.
Scoena Quarta.
Enter Virginio, Blunt, Gambugium meeting them. Virg. SAve you, Signior
Gambugium.


Gam. Good day, Sir; excuse me, I am in haste.


Virg. I can admit of no excuses: excuse me no excusing; my Daughter is mad,
and lunatic, my only Daughter.


Blunt. And my only Mistress, forsooth, Sir,


Gam. If she be, if she be, gentlemen, I cannot
Help it; they are not the only mad women
In the City, be that your comfort.

Virg. I assure you it is no comfort, nor I receive no comfort in it, nor no
comfort in your words, do you see?


Gam. Why, good neighbor, what makes you so hot?


Virg. Have I not reason, Sir, to have a Daughter
Whimsied with scruples and Fanatic frenzies,
And after I have lost my breath and legs
In seeking you out, Master Doctor, to be put off with
A flim-flam? truly I take it extremely ill.

Blunt. And how do you think, forsooth, I can take it well, when my Mistress is
so ill?


Gam. Your Daughter mad, Mr. Justice, this Gentleman's Mistress, and my patient
at Court dying; three places at a time? hurry here, and hurry there: can I
perform all at once? have I more then one pair of legs? answer me that,
answer me that.


Virg. Good Mr. Doctor, his Mistress and my Daughter are but one person: me
thinks Neighborhood should be preferred, besides my place of authority: my
poor Coelia is lost, mad, undone; think upon that, good Mr. Doctor, and
dispense with your Court-business: it may lie in my way to serve you.


Blunt. Indeed-law forsooth, Domine Doctor, I
May do you a good turn likewise. Father
Forsooth that must be, a double fee will bring it.

Virg. You say right, Mr. Blunt, money will bring any man: here Sir, a fee in
hand, another when you see my Daughter, and half my estate to cure her.


Gam. These are good Aurators: but it is your friendship
I value; you have won upon me.

Enter a Messenger running. Mess. Mr. Doctor, Mr. Doctor, what do you mean? my
Lord's a dying unless you come immediately: you were sent for two hours ago.


Gam. Have patience, I Will but look upon Mr. Justice his Daughter, and go with
you.


Enter a second Messenger running. 2 Mess. Why Jeremy, you rogue, no further
yet? my Lord's a departing, and my Ladies distracted, and she swears that she
would not for a thousand pound but my Lord should go out of the world
skilfully, and die under a Doctor.


1 Mess. But the Doctor will not come till he has viewed a Patient hard by: there
he stands; if you will persuade him, you may.


2 Mess. 'S death, stand disputing in a desperate occasion? lend's a hand.


Gam. Help, help! murder, rape, murder!


2 Mess. No, it is you would murder by delays.


Virg. Gentlemen, why Gentlemen! I command you in the Kings name, what do you
mean, a riot?

Carry him off the Stage.
Blunt. They mean, it should seem forsooth, to carry him bodily away.


Virg. Ha, carry him? has grief made me so tame a fool as to let Rogues run
away with him?


Blunt. I-feaking, forsooth, they were cowards by his running.


Virg. I must home, and see how affairs go: persuasions in the end may work
upon her; In the mean time, good Sir, inform your self of some skillful
Artist that is acquainted with these Lunacies.


Blunt. If London afford one, forsooth, nor penny nor pains will I spare. I am
downright honest, and Blunt to an inch.


Virg. I trust to you; pray let us see you often.


Blunt. I shall make bold to trouble you, forsooth, as they say.


Virg. You know you are welcome, Sir; be vigilant and careful, if you love
her, it concerns you.


Blunt. Fear not, forsooth: Sir, I will be as watchful as an Owl by
Moone-light.


Scoena Quinta.
Clittomestra, Acuta. Clit. I Wonder I have no answer; art sure my letter was
delivered?


Acut. Am I sure I live?


Clit. Then me thinks an answer.


Acut. So I think too, and should my self expect it
From any man that does pretend to love:
But he is a mere Court-butterfly, that buzzes
And flies about each warm beam of beauty
He encounters.

Clit. He courted me with such a vehemency of ardor, as if his heart were
loves furnace.


Acut. The like he did to me, to the same height
As if he had been to Court an Empress:
But it is a custom now, a common one,
For every gallant to be thus in love;
To court each female they encounter with,
Pretending love to all, truly to none:
A kind of breeding, mother, newly landed,
To exercise men's wits, and try women's
Credulity. --

Clit. But can thou think it possible (Acuta)
That Ticket should dissemble? I have known
Many, whose words held no Intelligence
With their heart, but never any yet
Could change their countenance unto their speech;
Expressing such an ardor in his eyes,
As if they were loves torches; and such a
Sensibility of feeling in his words,
As if his heart were pierced, or rather changed
With love into one substance.

Acut. Pish, this is nothing, Mother; for there are
Far greater Artists in this newfound love
Now most in fashion and most A la mode:
Ticket's but yet a Novice.

Clit. It is so incredible, I cannot believe't;
I thought my self a Mistress in this art,
But were this true, we must no more compare
With men for dissimulation --

Acut. It were too great a madness: for they are
As far, in that, beyond us, as in strength:
By them, it is thought a virtue to deceive,
Especially our Sex; they glory in it,
As in plurality of Mistresses,
A score, or so, from which, to ease their lust,
They this day select one, next another,
So for half a dozen; the rest are fed
With airy complements, and such flie-blown
Oaths and protestations as have been
Thrice pawned for sixpence, and twice forfeited.
Oh Mother, did you know but man's deceit,
You would not wonder why the Ancients
Pictured Faith and Truth like women.

Clit. That Is the least: but how you should reach
These mysteries, exacts my admiration;
One that I still bred underneath my wing,
That hardly e're conversed with Gentleman
Beyond Glisterpipe, or the Deputy
Of the Ward, at a Hall-feast.

Acut. Alas, good Mother, you do many things
My Father little dreams of; are not you
As liable to be deceived by me?
You know not how learned your Acuta's grown,
Deep read in the hearts of men.

Clit. I Will be thy Disciple; come, read me a lesson.


Acut. I will; hear then, and edify, Mother.
There be five sorts of lovers; only two
That can be trusted; the rest listn'd to,
But not believed: first, the inconstant lover;
He for a time does love entirely,
Until a fairer object he does meet
More pleasing to his eye: this man we style
A lover upon sight; for unto each
New face, he sacrifices his false heart.
Next, your vainglorious boasting lover;
He is dangerous: for when he cannot
Lie with your person, he will be sure to do it
With your reputation, and
Multiply the smallest atoms of your
Favors to mountains, by the glass of his
Discourse. The third, a Platonic lover,
One that pretends a spiritual mixtion,
To facilitate the incorporating of sense:
He Is a kind of Satan in a white robe,
That with a commandation of your soul,
Extracts the quintessence of your body.
The fourth is a simple jealous lover;
Him you may work unto what form you please:
His superfluity of love, makes him
Jealous; and his simplicity will not
Let him know of whom: He Is constant, and
As obedient as you would wish a man;
Created for such women as would wear
The breeches. The fifth's the constant lover;
But of them there are so few, and fewer
That can character them unto their worth,
That I may well spare mine.

Clit. But Daughter, where is your lover A la mode?


Acut. He Is not a perfect species, a mothy mungrell kind, composed of the
inconstant and Platonic; I treated of him before.


Clit. Thou did, and learnedly; prithee who is thy instructress?


Acut. A Lady here hand by, that has the art
To deal with all these several kinds of lovers
In their own humor.

Clit. I long for her acquaintance: let us thither.


Acut. You wo'n't repent the voyage.


Clit. I Will but fetch my hoods.

Exit.
Acut. So, I have almost put her off the sent
Of that musk'd Gallants persum'd love; could I
But keep them at a distance now, or my
Self near them when they shall discourse;
It will confirm my Mother woo's for me,
And hinder Ticket from discovery.
Exit.
ACTUS Quartus.
Scoena Prima.
Rant, Ticket, Austutia meeting them. Rant. THis is the house, dear Ticket;
and see where comes it is ornament and choicest furniture.


Ticket. A heavenly composed beauty: Prithee present me to her.


Rant. All in good time; she moves toward us. Lady, presuming upon the
greatness of your mercy, I take the boldness to present this friend of mine to
your acquaintance, a Gentleman and Traveller.


Ast. Two good qualities: but I want never a Groom,
Though you want much civility, to intrude into
My house upon so small acquaintance.

Tick. We have used too much respect, and I believe
More ceremony, then your common trade
Has been acquainted with: for otherwise
You Would better understand how to return
Civilities.

Ast. You Are a pretty Gentleman, your friend says,
And a Traveller; you had done well to have
Brought home more manners, and less impudence.

Rant. Madam, we came to love, honor, and serve you.


Tick. Prithee forbear; fawn not upon her, like
A Spaniel newly beaten: learn of me,
I Will show thee straight the way to handle such
Peevish dissimulation, that bears
A fine appearing gloss of sanctity;
But fret and try it thus, it falls to pieces.

Ast. Keep off, rude Companion.


Tick. So, this small parcel of hypocrisy
Whilst you stand at distance, shaking and
Quivering like an Anabaptist dipped
In January, appears chaste and virtuous:
But tumble her and touze her thus!

Ast. Out, shameless impudence!


Tick. You Will quickly find the brittle stuff she is made

on.

Ast. Sir, If you will not be civil, I shall call those shall make you so: do you
take this for a common receptacle?


Tick. The commonest thing in London, except
The Owner. Come, faith, be not so nice; to me
It Is needless; I am ver'st in the world, know
What belongs to it: no young heir, Lady,
To be caught with the bait of seeming modesty
In the nooze of wedlock; to me you may
Appear a woman without danger. Come,
Keep your niceness for some homebred Gallant,
Deny him the favor of your hand, whilst
Knowing men thus reap the Nectar of
Your lips, and crop the harvest of your choicest
Pleasures.

Rant. See, in four minutes he is arrived at more
Then four years could purchase me; he has the
Trick on it; for when she frowned, as if the anger
Of all her sex were contracted in her brows,
He charged her boldly, and upon the first
Assault he won her to more favor, then
All my large expense of time and treasure could
Purchase me. I never was so moved before:
Oh my heart! I thought thou had been of a
Tougher mould: love never could work upon
Thee, and shall jealousy make thee her triumph?
No, heart, thou shall break first. But I Will withdraw:
Half an hours consideration is to me so catholical
An antidote against the poison of love, as the
Whole College cannot prescribe a better.
Exit.
Tick. Madam, You ever oblige me yours; and now
I know the reason of your strict behavior, do
Approve it, nor shall you ever find me negligent,
In what may least concern your present service,
Or future fortunes. --

Ast. Your promises are noble, like your self;
And they no sooner shall be put in act,
Then I be ready to serve you, in such
Manner, as modesty will not allow
Me dress in words. --

Tick. Madam, I Will take your meaning for your words:
Both are so plain, I cannot miss the sense:
Nor you a Husband long, if I have wit,
Or the least art to compass your designs.

Ast. I dare not question either, yet it will
Require much of both, e're we can bring
Him to a sense of love, much more to think
Of that same Gobbling (as he terms it)
Matrimony. --

Tick. Leave that to me, though I think Monsieur Rant
A beaten soldier in the war of love:
One, that has as little faith in women,
As in Atheists; a deep-read scholar in
The deceits and subtilties of the sex:
Yet all these considerations cannot
Make me doubt or fear the enterprise;
Which cannot in difficulty equal
My desire to serve you, or will to oblige you.
But I waste time in words, whilst I should put
In actions my designs: let us first contrive
How we may bring our stratagem about:
He must be taken in the humor, Lady,
That I know; and his are commonly so
Short lived, they will hardly last
The Ceremony out.

Ast. Then it must be his drunken humor; that will
Last till he be sober.

Tick. Well remembered: for his loving humor always
Attends it; and two humors being of the plural
Number, will easier admit of the plurality of yours.
But how shall we bring him to this rare pass?
For he is very temperate.

Ast. Bring him you hither, then let me alone; we'll
Drink healths to all the obliging Ladies in Town.
I have good brains; his breeding will oblige him to
Pledge me. I must still help you out.

Tick. Most have need of helping in, Lady; but let that
Pass: expect within this half hour your Gallant,
And then with your assistance, (for without you
I am nothing) I do not doubt to get you a
Covering for your venial trespasses.

Ast. However, you will oblige me; I judge not services by
The event. The news?

Enter a Servant. Ser. Mistress Acuta with another Lady are come to wait upon
you. --


Ast. I attend them presently.


Tick. It Is time I were about your enterprise: your servant, Madam.


Ast. Your servant, Monsieur Ticket. -- Oh these men,
How many ways they strive to compass their
Base wills! sometimes they flatter us: with those
I can deal pretty well: for I believe
As seldom what they say, as they do speak
The true and sincere meaning of their heart:
Others do seek with Jewels, and rich gifts,
For to corrupt our chastity; and buy
With dross a Jewel beyond price; yet these
My poverty would seek, did not virtue
Supply my mean defect: yet I am forced
To play the hypocrite, though the wrong way;
Appearing far less virtuous then I am,
Remaining virtuous amidst incontinence.
For such a price I set upon the thing
Most men do aim at, as has frighted hence
All vulgar chapmen; others with scorns and niceness
I have daunted so, they dare not urge
A word of love beyond Matrimony.
Thus becoming Mistress of their hearts, their purse
Is still at my command; yet this contents
Not me; though I be honest, I am thought
A whore: besides, they may grow insolent,
Witness my own brother, though his travel
Has blotted from his memory my face,
His natural wildeness can admit no change;
For had I not compli'd with his loose thoughts,
The loosest strangers had seemed Saints to him:
But I Will find time to let him know his fault,
Which with much willingness I could forgive,
If he effect my wish in Rants chaste love.
I would be gladly Married, it is most true,
She Is hard put to it, that does begin to woo.
Exit.
Scoena Secunda.
Coelia, Matrona, Philostratus. Matr. SWeet Mistress, do not prosecute the
phrensies.


Coel. Why do disturb the spirit, wicked tempter? but tribulations must be
borne with patience and meekness.


Matr. I had rather bear a handsome young man, as old as I am; there is the
best tribulation in Christendom.


Coel. Do think we are not strayed in the way that leads to the
Meeting House?


Matr. What, to S. Antlins?


Coel. Antlin, thou reprobate! the word Saint is superstitious, and idolatrous;
verily I do abominate thy company,

for thou art possessed with the spirit of profaneness, yea, the very spirit of
superstition.

Matr. Poor woman! how she is altered, rather besotted to this Lunacy! could I
but take her a little off the spirit, and

give her a smack of the flesh, there were some hopes. See how she turns up
the eggs of her eyes, like the figure of
Abram in Sand's show!

Enter Philostratus. Phil. Save you, Sister; I profess I am glad, and rejoice
in sincerity, that the spirit has moved you thus early to the

convention of the godly.

Matr. Mercy on me! he come? now am I more timorous and fearful then a Hare
that the Hounds had newly caught by the

buttocks.

Phil. But Sister, oh that I should see this, that I should see you accompanied
with the wicked thus! oh! that I should see

you accompanied with the reprobate, with the very Publican: by yea and nay it
is not well.

Matr. How I tremble! he looks as if his zeal would transpierce me: there is
never a truer Quaker in Wapping, then I at this present.


Coel. Verily, brother, the Serpent will pursue me in the shape of vanity, though
I look upon her with the eyes of

Reformation.

Phil. My zeal does foame, yea and boil against her: I do abominate
antiquity, she looks like the very clay of the beast;

I profess, like a very tradition.

Mat. Now am I in a worse taking, then a Baily in an Inns of Court.


Coel. Good brother, pacify thy self.


Phil. My zeal's too strong; yea, I am transported with indignation against
that Monastickhood; and thus do I tread the I

doll under my feet.

Matr. Oh! good Sir, my hood, my hood!


Phil. Do thou speak in defense of abomination? assist me zeal to chastise
her vanity.

He beats Her off.
Coel. Never were Lovers put to such hard shifts
To gain a moment for entertainment
Of their lawful loves.

Phil. Never, my Coelia: but yet the pleasure
I enjoy by looking on that face,
The harmonious Music of thy voice, joined
With the melody of agreeing hearts,
So far exceed in bliss the pain sustained,
That like a Mother having born a son,
I straight forget, when I enjoy thee (sweet)
The anguish and affliction of thy absence.

Coel. And I, in absence nourish still a hope
Of seeing thee, and present fear to loose thee.
My love's so strictly wedded to my grief,
They know no separation: if that
At any time they relish joy, hope is
The parent to that happy child, which I
Can never foster in my breast, till it become
Your Pillow.

Phil. Oh that happy day (Coelia) that day
Of happiness, when will it come? is fate
So rigid to deny the knowledge? or Gods
Become so merciless, to divide two hearts
So much united? or is it their fear
Love should become on earth such an example
As heaven could not parallel?

Coel. Dear Sir, reclaim your passions; our time
Is short, not to be lost in complement.

Phil. Can time be lost, that is so well employed?
And in thy sweet society is mine.

Coel. Nor do I think it so; I could dwell here
An age to hear thee speak: but fate denies
That happiness as yet; therefore 'twere fit
Love found out some invention, by which
We might more frequently enjoy each others
Company, till time complete our happiness.

Phil. Your admonition's timely: I was lost
In fair affection's maze; so transported
With my present happiness, that I thought
It might be lasting to eternity. --
But wakened from this dream, I do perceive
The houre-glass of my happiness run out:
And how this base disguise can recruit it,
To me appears a riddle.

Coel. It Is thus far useful; for it disguises
Both our loves, and keeps my father from
Wedding me to Blunt, a man I hate, more
Then the worst disease the worst of women
Ever merited.

Phil. But we might choose some other: what thinks my love of seigning her self
sick, and having me sent for as your

Physician?

Coel. The cure would be too sudden, and my joy discover all.


Phil. With ease you might dissemble both. --


Coel. 'Twere easier far, to force a feigned joy,
Then stifle such a real one: however,
I Will try my utmost art.

Phil. Do so, my Coelia, for I Prophetize,
That this device may meet with good success.

Coel. Heavens grant it: you know I need not
Feign my self sick, distempered, ill at ease;
Thy absence still to me is a disease.

Phil. Which with my presence I Will often mitigate,
And from thy lips drink a preserving Balm,
That in thy absence like an Antidote,
Shall keep me from the infection of despair.

Coel. I think my love's already a Physician;
For he is perfect in their Dialect.
With earnest longings, I Will expect to hear
The issue of your project: don't abuse
My expectation with too long delays.

Phil. Life of my soul! assure your self I will not.


Coel. You Have played too long the Truant, it is time
You were about it. --

Phil. I cannot leave you to go home alone:
Nor dare I wait upon you: part of the way
I will accompany you, until we meet
Matrona; and then --

Coel. Then we must part; I understand thy look:
Sighs are sentences in loves Table Book.
Exeunt.
Scoena Tertia.
Matrona, Coelia, Philostratus. Matr. WHat, are they gone, or retired only
Into a Coupling house! These Familists
Are the hypocritical'st Letchers in
A Kingdom; their motives of the spirit
Always end in the flesh. Perhaps he has
Taken her in to catechize; but should
His zealous doctrine begin with an increase
And multiply, twenty to one but he will
See the fruit on it within nine months, or so.
Well, if these precize meeting houses be
Not the staples of Letchery, and the
Heralds office of Cuckoldry; there is not
A grain of lust in the composition
Of a woman of my years. It Is so; I begin
To smell a notorious Letcher under
That lenten cause: I would not be a Bawd
Without my fee. Well, Monsieur Purity,
If thou do infuse unwholesome doctrine
In thy new Proselyte, and make her swell,
Thou art the most hypocritical Villain,
That ever made Religion a Cloak
For lust and treason: But here they come.

Enter Philostratus and Coelia. Coel. Yonder Is my Governess.


Phil. I take my leave, though with as sad a heart
As vanquished Kings part with their ravished Scepter:
Yet midst our griefs, this feeble hope remains;
Joys are still sweetest, after greatest pains:
And every one this maxim will approve,
That expectation is the food of love.

Coel. Oh! but fruition is affections life;
A Maid's never happy till she be a Wife.

Phil. And Man's imperfect till he leads a Bride,
A halfe-fac'd Medall stamp't but on one side.
Why should we then through fear, defer this Match,
Which would to both such happiness afford,
Render us perfect in each others love,
Or rather with perfection crown our loves?
Let Us to the Temple: why should our body part,
When mutual vows have married our heart?

Coel. Oh Philostratus, yield not so much to passion,
Lest you give me occasion to believe you
An enemy to virtue and obedience.

Phil. I have done: but since love was cause of my offense, I cannot despair of
pardon.


Coel. I can afford you nothing with more willingness,
Except my self; which if you would soon obtain, straight
Put in act what lately we designed.

Phil. You Have put new heat into me, I fly to the performance.
Farewell, and pray for the success.

Coel. My prayers are never wanting. -- Come, Tabitha.

Exit.
Matr. Now to my discovery: good godly Sir, receive the prayers of one, that
has wandered long in the path of ignorance.


Phil. Good woman, your Mistress is gone.


Matr. And would be willingly instructed in the right way.


Phil. Pox, what shall I do with her? I have no time to loose in catechizing.


Matr. Oh listen to my Reformation, the humble desire I have to be instructed.


Phil. I have it -- Woman, before I can receive thee into the society of the
godly, thou must make a public

recantation of all thy errors, and set three Congregationall Meetings upon the
stool of repentance.

Matr. And please your worship.


Phil. Make not an Idol of me; no creature may be worshipped: but follow me, and
see you prove no hypocrite.

Exit.
Matr. I care not what I prove, so I discover
The secret subject of your close discourse,
Which I suspect already; but I Will after:
If it succeed, I shall grow fat with laughter.
Exit.
Scoena Quarta.
Rant, Ticket meeting. Rant. MOnsieur Ticket.


Tick. Your servant, Sir; you did bravely to give
Your friend the slip, when you had engaged him
In so perilous an adventure.

Rant. I faith I left you not, until the Fort
Was yielded, and you in full possession;
I stood but as a Cipher, vowing my own
Shame, after so many nice refusalls
And puts off, saw the Fort taken, upon
The first assault; she is a very woman,
And as such bestows her favors.

Tick. You Have spoken much in little, Sir; but I admire
You could be Master of so large a Faith,
As ever to believe her niceness more,
Then a fair vernish set upon her lust.

Rant. I did and do believe it real.


Tick. And that she merely stood upon the sum
By her excis'd upon her Maidenhead.

Rant. That Is part of my belief too; and how e're it was
Your fate so to reduce her, our first onset
Promised but little comfort. --

Tick. The fairest omen in the world: give me
A nice behavior, a rigid Damzell;
For they that do upon themselves impose
A strictness of beaviour, more then usual,
Would thereby seem, what really they are not,
Honest; and by their niceness in carriage
Attract the ignorant to their devotions --
Whilst to others expert, and knowing their
Hypocrisies, they appear as prodigal
Of their favors, as Politicians are
Of their promises they mean not to perform:
And more open, then Oysters at a full tide.

Rant. I must not yield to your opinion, Sir,
Experience plainly shows the contrary,
That women are by some hid sympathy
In nature, constrained to love and fancy
Some few particular persons, and shun
Others, though of far greater merit.

Tick. Flat heresy, there are inclined to all,
In their natures most insatiable;
And if to some they do appear more strict,
Their Politic rules of Government constrain it;
For they are a Commonwealth among themselves,
And square their actions out by policy:
Their Maxims teach them when to appear free,
When nice, when amorous, and when wanton:
Free unto such, whom they suppose too wise,
Or too much lovers of their liberty
To enter into bondage; and nice to those
They fancy masters of simplicity
Enough to take them for their Wives, binding
Themselves firmly to believe them honest,
Whilst they shall see no other; or if they do,
Their horns in time may make a circular
Compass (like the Rams) about their brows, so
Serve for spectacles to rectify their eyesight.

Rant. Ha, ha! this is a good raillerie.


Tic. You Are so incredulous! Pish, I can bring thee authentic proof that all
I say is Canonical.


Rant. It must be ocular, good Ticket; for less
Shall never alter my belief: Do I
Not know my self as meriting as thee,
Thy travells set aside? as full of courtship,
And no less Master of audacity?
Nor need my form, my strength, my stature, or
My breeding yield precedence to any;
Though I confess, you do in most of these excel:
And for my purse, it has been as open
To that woman as to my self: yet I
Could never from her yet obtain a kiss,
Not purchased at a double rate: and thou
Upon a small or no acquaintance, to
Be admitted as freely to her lips,
As to a Church, for ought I know, unto
Her bed, Pox it is a fate, a plaguey destiny.

Tick. Heat not your self so much; I hear you, man,
And cannot choose but laugh at your so fixed
Atheistical belief; from which, if you
Have any grace, I Will withdraw you: therefore
Know, this woman, this nice precise woman,
Has solicited me with earnestness
To procure thee to be her husband.

Rant. Thou do but jest?


Tick. Refuse me else: and upon this condition, I have
Her promise of a nights lodging in reversion.

Rant. And could thou conceal this, to betray thy friend?


Tick. No, I came with resolution to have told thee all, but that thy passion
cast upon me another argument.


Rant. Did she think me such an Afs?


Tick. She did: let me entreat thy patience.
I promised to effect her will; at which
She seemed transported with her joy: then straight
She laid the plot, that I should bring thee to her,
Where Wine should be prepared to make thee drunk;
And in that fit a Parson ready for
To Marry you: Now I have a device
To turn the plot wholly upon her self.
But here the Ladies come, hark in your ear.

Scoena Quinta.
Astutia, Clittomestra, Acuta, Rant, Ticket. Ast. I Wish the means of my
fortunes would have afforded you an entertainment equal unto your worths: but
what in that

was scant, your welcome must supply.

Clitt. There needs no apology, Madam, where the entertainment and entertainer
both appeared so excellent: for my part, I

pity my misfortune, in being so long ignorant of your worth, and barred your
rich acquaintance, and therein envy my
daughters happiness.

Acut. Good mother, let us leave complement, lest we become subjects of mirth
for those eaves dripping gallants.


Rant. So, 'twill be excellent: the Ladies spy us; we'll upon 'em.


Ticket. Your wishes upon you, Ladies.


Astu. Then you would not be so near me.


Rant. Not more near then welcome.


Astu. Who told you so, good Squire?


Rant. My self, good Madam; I need no Tutor.


Astu. I thought so, that made you in the wrong: for he that teaches himself,
has none of the wisest masters.


Rant. The fool thanks you, Madam. -- Lady, shall I hold fairer quarter here?


Acu. Nay, if you shift quarters so often, I fear you are hardly in a posture of
defense, much less to vanquish.


Rant. You mean not to assault me, Lady?


Acut. Nor be assaulted by you: fare ye well, Sir.


Rant. Quick and short.


Astu. This it is to change: seldom comes the better.


Rant. If the best be so bad, Love defend me from the worst.


Astu. Come, come, as bad as we are, you could make A shift with the worst of
us.


Rant. She Is pleasant and free: I like it rarely;
I Will follow the humor close:

Ticket. If that you doubt one syllable of what
My tongue so largely has expressed, you do
Me the most ignoble wrong that faithful
Lover ever yet sustained. Oh, Madam,
Were possible you could conceive my love,
The tortures and the pains I do sustain
For you (dear mistress) the continual sighs,
And floods of tears that trickle from my eyes,
Like to another deluge; drowning all
My joys at once, except the comfort of
Your name, your sacred name, which all amidst
My ecstasies of love, I call upon;
You could not be so cruel, so obdurate.
He weeps.
Clit. Alas, I pity him: can all this love be feigned? and yet I fear it is,
else he could not so far have slighted me, as not return an answer to my
Letter.


Acu. Remember that, and ben't deluded.


Tick. Cannot all these tears dissolve that marble heart,
Able to melt the Adamant it self,
And make it pliable as wax in the Sun,
Apt to take any form? oh that your heart
Were so, so fit for loves impression!

Clit. Pray no more; You disturb your self, and me.


Acu. A painted fire may delight the eye,
Or flutter afar off the deceived hopes
Of a cold frozen wretch; but when approach't,
Affords no heat, nor light: such is your love,
In first appearance fair, and passionate;
Your tongue seems full of heat: but Sir, your heart
Is like a frozen clod of ice, floating
Upon dissimulations sea, and fails
All such as tread upon that slippery pavement.

Tick. Madam, Your Daughters speech does add such Seas
Of grief unto my soul, that now I find
My self but in a bad condition
Farther to plead my love; pray think upon it;
Such love comes seldom, and ought not to be refused.

Clit. What were I best do?


Acu. If that you have a mind to loose your self,
And more then is your self, your honor, confide
In that inconstant man.

Clit. I Will never think on him.


Acu. Study to forget him: see, he is courting Astutia.


All. Ha, ha, ha!


Clit. They Are very merry; we'll mix company.


Tick. With me, Lady?


Acu. Yes, Sir: I understand you court me by Attorney,
And therefore out of pity I inform you, your
Love goes many miles about, nor does't become
A Gentleman to court the parents liking first,
And so impose a violence upon a Virgins love.

Tick. Madam, I must confess my love's to you;
And yet I hope I have not far transgressed
By courting you in the person of your
Mother; since it is according to her own
Directions; and I believed, with your approbation.

Acu. There Is no such matter, Sir; for I expect
Peculiar addresses to my self,
From any man that hopes to make me his.
You did begin that way.

Tick. All shall be mended, Lady.


Acu. That at your own discretion.


Rant. Three Ladies is too much odds. I was well matched before.


Tick. Take courage, man; I Am come for to relieve thee.


Astu. 'Twas well you did; for he was talking here,
To match his wit; and in good truth 'twas such
A tired Jade, that none could match it.

Tick. Then 'twas a matchless wit.


Acu. Or rather, there was no wit to be matched.


Rant. Good Ladies, let my wit alone, and make
Use of my body, that will match ye all.

All. Ha, ha, he!


Ast. If it were dipped in brimstone, it were a rare match.


Acu. To fire all the farthing-candles in Town.


Rant. Or what is of less value, Woman.


Astu. An excellent halfe-farthing jest!


Acu. Had it been less, it had been worth just nothing.


Astu. Not worth the wart upon his nose.


Rant. You Are very pleasant, Ladies, with me and my
Nose; but I have a better thing at your service.

Astu. But is it sound, Sir?


Acu. A question well urged.


Rant. I warrant you, Virgins; and in few months
'Twill brace your bellies so hard, that
They shall sound too.

Astu. Now ye speak a Language we understand not.


Rant. Come, I Will interpret.


Tick. Madam, you anew create me: I Will neither fail the time, nor place.


Clit. You see the power of your Courtship, Sir;
Therefore pray impute my yielding to
Your high merit, and not my levity.

Tick. All your actions are so bountiful, they
Can admit no bad construction.

Clit. I rely upon your nobleness, Daughter.


Acu. I attend your pleasure.


Tiek. Madam, my service.


Rant. It Is pity such beauties should go home unaccompanied.


Clit. We are almost there; I pray excuse us.


Rant. Lady, shall I lead you?


Acu. When I am blind I Will send for you:
A Dog were worth money then.
Aside.
Ast. Your servant, Madam.


Rant. I Will follow, though it be but for another jeer.


Astu. Nay Sir, I must crave your patience, for the exchanging of a word or two.


Tick. I am your creature, Madam, you may command me.


Ast. Do you perceive nothing in this face, that
May instruct your memory who I am?

Tick. Trust me, no; yet your beauty would
Challenge a remembrance, though I must style
My self so much unfortunate, as to
Acknowledge this the second day of our
Acquaintance. --

Astu. Nay, let us lay by complement, and now
Be serious: possibly as a stranger you may
Not deal so faithfully in my service, as
I could wish.

Tick. Madam, I do beseech you credit me
A Gentleman, and that it is not my
Profession to practice such deceit,
Especially unto a beauty of your excellence.

Astu. Trust me, I cannot be too cautious, Sir,
In what so much concerns me as this match,
The only hope, on which my fortunes have
Dependency: the esore I thought it good
To let you know, how well I was acquainted
With you once, and dear in your Fathers
Thoughts as you.

Tick. You will not confound me! with me acquainted?
Sure you mistake the man: for I have been
Absent from England more then seven years:
Besides, my Father, to whom you do pretend
You were so dear, is now some ten years dead;
And then you scarce could have the use of reason.

Astu. I must confess all your assertions truths,
Which needs must verify what I affirm.
You had a Sister, whom you did send,
Two years after your father died, beyond
The Seas for breeding, to a Nunnery,

Tick. I do remember well that fatal truth.
Madam, for charity do not renew
That losses grief. O poor Clariana!
She perished in the voyage by a wrack,
Which mournful tidings did so much afflict
My heart, I took no comfort in this land,
And thereupon I did resolve to travel.

Astu. Then for to ease you of that griese, let me
Assure you, that your Sister escaped the wrack,
Swimming upon a plank to Dovers Sands.

Tick. Oh happy news! But know you where she is?


Astu. Do you see this Casket?


Tick. It was my Sisters, Madam, left her by our
Mother on her deathbed.

Ast. Then know me for that Sister.


Tick. As such I lovingly embrace you,
And do believed. One confirmation more;
Let Us see your arm: it is so, the very mold.
My dearest Sister, welcome.

Astu. I Am glad to see you, Brother, and yet sorry
To see you still so wild, these courses in the end
Must ruin you.

Tick. No chiding, Sister; youth will have its swindge:
My wild Oats must be sown, then I Will appear
As grave as a new-shav'd Senator: prithee
Tell me the circumstance of thy escape,
And how thou have lived these seven years.

Astu. Honest, and still a Maid; let that suffice:
The rest you may know hereafter. But to
Our business now, concerning Rant.

Tick. I wish you had made this discovery sooner.


Astu. Why, what makes you look so pale? have
You discovered my design? if so, thou have
Eternally undone me: for without him,
However to him I have been severe,
I cannot live.

Tick. Now must I lie, or show my self a Rascal.
Fie, fie, wipe your eyes, be not so passionate.
As I am an honest man, I told him nothing:
But as I was a knave I told him all.
Aside. Yet in my opinion there were no great
Loss of him, considering his wild conditions.

Astu. I am not ignorant of them; yet do not doubt,
My love will teach me patience to reclaim him.

Tick. Why think him then thy own; go in, and
Get a Priest in readiness.

Astu. I shall obey you, Sir.


Tick. Now have I more business, then a Lawyer
In a Michaelmas Term, though much less time
To effect it; first to oblige the Doctors wise
With the manly courtesy of a nights lodging;
The which must recompense the hopes I loose
In this that proves my Sister; then little
Acuta, she would be nibling too:
The Rogue loves me, yet willingly would have
The cloak of Matrimony cast over her lust:
A foolish promise, or two, will satisfy.
Without a Priest, her scruples. Then my last,
To make a match between my sister and
Sweet Monsieur Rant, will prove my master piece:
But I loose time, which is too precious now,
Fate give my sisters love success, and then
Though I miss mine, they can find other men.

ACTUS Quintus.
Scoena Prima.
Blunt, Philostratus like a physician, Virginio. Blunt. YOur recommendation's
good, very good, from a good friend of mine.


Phil. Besides the friendship, Sir, it is charity
To be assistant to a stranger. All
I desire at present, is your good word:
And if you chance to know of any person
Infirm of any desperate disease,
Such as your London-Doctors have given over,
I doubt not but to cure them, at least
To give them ease.

Blunt. Excellent, a man sent by providence,
But Sir, such desperate diseases, on
Your first trial, should you miscarry,
Would quite discredit you.

Phil. From such hard asks,
Men gain opinion of what they are:
Upon my life, I Will not discredit you;
For I have such prophetic knowledge, Sir,
Of the malignity of each disease,
That viewing the patient only, I can ghess
To a hairs breadth, whether the disease be
Desperate, or cureable.

Blunt. Let me embrace you: I have occasion
To employ you straight; and if you prosper in it,
You make me yours for ever. I am plain,
Sir, Blunt as my name; but many that
Express more, may not perhaps reward
Your pains so well as I may do.

Phil. I am not mercenary; if I can do you any
Good, the service will requite it self.

Blunt. The honestest Physician I ere met with!
In sooth I Will bear you to your patient straight,
A fair one, I Will assure you, and my Mistress:
If you cure her, you may command two
Purses, her fathers and mine.

Phil. You speak nobly.


Enter Virginio. Blunt. And see, he comes as sent for: what cheer,
Forsoot? How does my Mistress, and your
Daughter? --

Virg. Never worse, Mr. Blunt, never worse.


Blunt. Does she continue her Fanatic vein?


Virg. No Sir, but worse, she is wheeled about to the
Antipodes, turned Princess in conceit,
And expects strange Ambassadors from the
King of Morocco, to fetch and Marry her
By Deputy.

Phil. Her distemper's high; but surely caused by love.


Virg. What Gentleman is that?


Blunt. A skillful Doctor, forsooth, new come from Padua, I had provided for
your Daughter.


Virg. You show your love; but she is past recovery.


Phil. Though I affect not to be a Trumpet of my skill,
Yet charity compells me to inform you, that
Your Daughter may be curable, if her distemper
Be no more then you deliver; nor will it prove
The most desperate cure I have effected.

Virg. Good Sir, I do believe you a great Artist;
But I Am old and passionate: use your best
Skill; and if you can restore her to her
Former senses, make you your own conditions,
My purse shall seal them.

Phil. Not for your Money, Sir; but for the Love
I bear this Gentleman, and's honored friend,
Who recommended me unto him, I Will do
My best, and that I hope will make you bless
Your Stars you ere employed me. I desire
I may have liberty, and all things else
Provided the cure may require --

Virg. Nothing shall be wanting. But we delay: come, Mr. Blunt, it is time we
were about it.


Blunt. Come, good Mr. Doctor.


Phil. Your servant, Sir. I follow.

Exeunt.
Scoena Secunda.
Acuta with a Letter, and Glisterpipe, Clittomestra. Acut. CArry this Letter to
my Mother, sirrah.


Glis. Fine, and familiar; good signs of affection!
I must be diligent; from whence comes it?

Acut. That I know not: a Porter left it here even now:
Dispatched, and give't my Mother; it may require
A hasty answer.

Glis. With expedition, forsooth.

Exit.
Acut. So, is it hit, I Am made: altho't hinder
My Fathers making, I mean a horned Beast,
It may make me a wife, preserve my mother
Honest; these are the virtuous ends to which
I framed that Letter as from Ticket. Virtue,
As thou do know my ends are just, so give
Success to my designs. See, here she comes,
Enter Clit. Hooded and mask't. So, so; my plot has hit.

Clit. Daughter, I am going a little way: if in my absence Your Father should
return, say I was sent for to a woman's labor.


Acut. Or rather, that you are gone unto a man's.
Aside. But you forget your promise.

Cilt. Pish, I find he is an inconstant man; I think
Not on him now.

Acut. In that you are wise; I told you so at first.


Clit. My business requires haste: farewell, Acuta.


Acut. Farewell, dear mother: if the empty Air
Be pleasant food to feed your longing with,
Your lustful appetite may surfeit on it:
I grudge it not. How slily cunning she
Appeared in hiding from me what my self
Designed, only to frustrate her wicked ends!
But I with Monsieur Ticket will keep touch,
And meet him at his own appointed place,
In the More-fields, the whilst my mother
At Islington does feast her self on hopes,
And eat Stew'd-Pruands for restoratives.
Ha, ha, he! the fancy how it pleases me
But I must to my task; she gains a prize
That picks a virtuous Husband out of vice.
Exit.
Scoena Tertia.
Ticket, Rant, Astutia. Tick. HOw do feel thy self?


Ran. This wench has given me a shrewd hearing; my brains begin to turn like
tumblers, and do the Summerset in my scull: I wonder she continues sober.


Tick. Custom has rendered it a second nature to her: but by my faith, friend,
you shall drink no more, since it does so disturb you.


Rant. Pish, it is nothing: a little heats me.


Tick. If 't be no more, you will do your work the better, a little wins the
soul of Venery, and makes a man all fancy. But did thou mark with what a
canonical countenance and ceremony the fellow seemed to marry you? he looked so
superciliously, I scarce knew him for my man.


Rant. Faith he would have deceived any: but to see
The wench, she stands upon it now, as
If she were some Votary: she will not go to bed
Forsooth at undecent hours, and brides it
As much as my Lady Mayoress at a Coronation.

Tick. But the jest will be, boy, after thou have
Enjoyed her, and I my promise (for we must
Not discover before) what a pickle she will
Be in! --

Rant. Ha, ha, he! the pretty faces she will make!


Ticket. When she finds her self deluded, by being our whore, in stead of
your wife, by my faith a great descent.


Rant. Certainly she will gaul her tongue with scolding,
And batter down the wall of her mouth,
I mean her teeth, with the thunderbolt
Of her exclaimes.

Tick. Nay, we must expect lightening too; for she is
A Serpent, and can spit fire.

Rant. Howere, I Will stand her boldly; I believe the
Breach is made to my hand. But now we
Talk of broken commodities, art not thou
To meet the Doctors wife to night?

Tick. I am; but I Will see thee incircled within Astutia's arms first, and then
I Am for her.


Rant. Faith Ticket I must have a reversion there; it is
Justice, Wench for Wench: besides, thou art to
Have a taste of my red Dear; and Venison is
A meat to pleasure friends with.

Tick. Marry here, I take pains for you, and my
Self too; in the other venture, for my self
Only: and could thou have the conscience
To reap the harvest of all my labors,
And never take pains to sow?

Rant. Dear Ticket, I only desire the gleanings, and those are allowed to
idle persons: then consider who entered you into that acquaintance: good turns
would be remembered.


Tick. And shall: if this wench cannot allay your heat, th'other's at your
service.


Rant. Why now thou speak nobly, like a worthy engrosser of Mutton: but
mum, here comes my mock-bride; oh she paces admirably well!


Tick. She Will trot and jolt anon: a through-pac'd wench, I warrant thee.

Enter Astutia.
Rant. Sweet, are you come to hasten me to bed?


Astu. The nights are long, Sir, and you may no doubt
Find time enough, before Aurora does
Unvaile her face, to make you weary of
Those sports your expectation flatters you
Withal: Marriage is a holy thing,
And all it is Rites, Sir, are to be performed
With ceremonious and due respect.

Rant. But Dear, the Ceremony now is over:
Since that the Priest has ti'd our hands, and love
Our hearts; what can remain, but that we taste
Those lawful sweets, which Hymen does allow
His votaries?

Tick. Madam, indeed it is late; for night begins
To spread her sable Canopy over the Earth.

Astu. Sir, I am all obedience: if it be
Your pleasure thus early to go to rest,
I am your servant now, and must obey:
All that before I said, I pray excuse:
A fond desire to retain a while
My Virgin-state, reprieve my Maidenhead,
Made me contend; no disobedience
To your will, which ever shall be mine
In all that is good, or but indifferent;
So strictly knit to yours, that none therein,
Though envy lent them eyes, shall ere discern
A difference.

Rant. What pity it is she is a whore!
Were she honest, and thus obedient,
She would grow up a President for wives,
And be a woman born to make men happy.
But she is light, and therefore shunned the light:
For whilst day peept, her deeds of darkness
Durst not show their face, nor show her lust.
Why do I term it so? to me it is not:
For she enjoyes a husband in her thoughts,
Whilst I do knowingly embrace a Whore;
Yet is her promise to my friend no ways
Excusable; see, she drives the bargain:
A man were well holp up with such a wife:
They toy: 'twas well the Marriage was in jest.
I like my arms, and would not change my crest.
Dear, let us not waste such precious time: to bed,
There let us loose our selves in one another,
And raise our pleasures up to such a height,
The gods themselves may envy at our bliss.
Come, is the Posset made?

Tick. To what purpose? here are no aged Matrons to mumble the curd between
their gumms, and read a baudy lecture to your bride, till laughter makes them
foame at mouth again. A Posset? none but an Antiquary would have ask't for such
an apocryphal meat, as ancient as Rebellion it self. Faith a Tub full of
grains will be as rich geere to make a Protectorian frollick, and liquor
Satin Gowns with.


Rant. Thou art such a modish Zealot, and such an
Enemy to old fashions and customs, I wonder
Thou love women so, a thing in fashion
In old Adam's days.

Tick. And so were Clothes; yet still their fashion
Changes; so nature varies beauties; sometimes
Long visages are a la mode, sometimes round, then
Broad, triangle, ovall; any form that is
In present use, and most esteem, fancy
Decrees for fairest.

Rant. Thy reasons are unanswerable: I submit,
And will steal as silently to bed as a Zealot
To his brothers wife when he is asleep.

Tick. Get you gone then and be naught together;
You loose much time. Had I so sweet a Bride,
I would prevent the morning, which within
Few hours will appear to chide your dullness.

Rant. Faith we are to blame: come, dear, let us in
To bed, for fear the God of Marriage grow
Incensed. -- Ticket, good rest, and pleasing dreams.
Exit.
Tick. You have the pleasing substance, Sir, make
Much on it. So, this happily is dispatched:
Now to my Doctors wife; I hope she will prove,
Though not a lawful, a sweet prize of love.
Exit.
Scoena Quarta.
Virginio, Philostratus, Blunt, Coelia. Phil. She Is extremely tainted, Sir,
that is certain;
And her distemper still grows higher.

Virg. I see it does, Sir, to my grief I see it.
Never was man like me unfortunate,
To Have but one child, one comfort in my age,
And to have her distracted, mad. Heavens,
How did my youth offend, that on my age
You do inflict so cruel and severe
A punishment?
Weeps.
Blunt. Have patience, forsooth: Mr. Doctor, speak some comfort to him.


Phil. I wish I could; and yet I don't despair
But that time and healing medicaments
May cure her distemper, and restore
The Lady to her pristine health.

Virg. Oh! never Sir, it is not within
The power of art, to render me so happy.

Blunt. Oh sweet Mistress Coelia!


Phil. Sir, be of cheer, I may have yet in store
Something may comfort her. Alas, I pity you,
And participate your grief: we must have time
To observe and mark her several distempers;
For each distraction has its several cause,
And every cause produces an effect,
By which it is known; and a disease once known,
You know's half cured.

Virg. Would hers were so: the little hope I Have left
Is in your art, pray use your utmost skill.
Command me and my purse for a reward.

Phil. Sir, if my life would cure her, I would not set a price on it; but let us
observe, she comes, and in her fit.


Enter Coelia, richly, but phantastically habited: Servants. Coelia. Set us our
Chair of State, and over our head erect a Crystal Canopy, all full of
Diamond-stars, whose luster may blind bleere-ey'd Astronomers to gaze upon.


Phil. In her Princely strain, we must observe her gestures and her speech,
and calculate by them the cause of her distemper.


Blunt. Let me alone to watch; I Will be as vigilant, as an Informer in Lent.


Coelia. Me thinks our Court's too mean, not rich enough
To entertain the love of such a Prince.

Phil. Love is one cause, mark that.


Coelia. But we will have most glorious ornaments;
Our walls and pavements all of beaten gold;
Love in a fiery chariot shall descend,
And with his flaming beams transpierce his heart,
Whilst I on gaudy Iris back ascend
The clouds, and gloriously eclipse the Sun.
How can my love be absent? -- hark, hark,
I hear him come in Charles VVaine, lumbring
Through the Clouds, before we are prepared.
Turrets and Galleries we must have built;
And Arches carved in one entire stone.

Phil. Mark the effects of pride; yet still relating to her love.


Virg. Poor Coelia!


Coel. Pillars of Pearl, and lofty Pyramids
Of Diamonds, upon whose spires shall be
Erected, with sacred and mysterious art,
A Sapphire prospect to orelook the world.
Next, will I have a heaven made of Crystal,
And women's hearts all adamant; the men's
Vulcan shall forge of his refined steel,
That they cleave in one and never part.
It Is well you know your distance. See my commands
Be executed all, you are my surveyor. --

Phil. She cooles, and grows more temperate.


Coel. Why should I not have him, him that I love?
Obedience, love, duty, affections;
Oh you discordant contrarieties!
What a confusion do you breed within
My fancy, and keep a struggling for the
Mastership!

Phil. Now she discourses somewhat sensibly;
Her rank distemper certainly is love,
My art much fails me else; which not enjoyed,
Worse frenzy follows, in the end her death,
Which Physics skill wants power to prevent.

Virg. It is too incredible to gain belief:
Yet with my heart I wish it were no worse,
Then might I hope a remedy, which now
Alas is desperate. She love! poor Girl,
Love knows not such an enemy as her:
She has with tears besought me on her knees,
When I Have presented Husbands to her choice,
That I Would dispense with her obedience,
And leave her to her Virgin-happiness.

Phil. I must confess it is strange.


Blunt. And when, forsooth, I offered my love, and service,
You would not think, forsooth, how she slighted it!

Phil. All that may be, Sir; you are inclined to age;
And possibly the lovers tendered by
This Gentleman unto his daughters choice
And liking, little agreeable unto
The Ladies fancy, which is the womb of love.
You may believe me Master of a confidence
That sorts not with true art, to build upon
Conjectural speculations: But when
You shall understand my chiefest skill lies
In Physiognomy, which is the Index
Of the Mind, that through observation
I have learnt the radical cause of such
Distempers, you cannot blame me if I desire
You would bethink your self, or have her asked
Concerning these particulars.

Virg. These three years I dare answer for her: indeed some four years since I
do remember a proper Gentleman, but much in his estate decayed, made tenders of
his love; I therefore thought him not a match for her, no more did she.


Phil. If it might not be too great boldness, I should crave his name.


Virg. He called himself Philostratus.


Coel. Philostratus! he is not here; why do
You mock me thus? yet he is too unkind
That will not come and see his Coelia die.
My soul is fleeting in an Airy Chariot.
Directly to Elyzium; but I Will
Soon return, and hant my Philostratus.

Phil. Now you will approve my art.


Virg. It Is more then humane!


Phil. Her infirmitie's plain: if you esteem her life at any rate, you may
preserve it.


Virg. Value her life! oh, Sir, don't question it:
Were Philostratus poorer then he is,
And that his marriage could but cure her;
I Would embrace his alliance with more joy
Then if Croesus store flowed in his Coffers.

Blunt. I hope you will not make an Ass of me,
Forsooth, I have your promise.

Virg. Always provided that you got her consent: which not obtained, my
promise, Sir, is void. Good Mr. Doctor, inquire out this man, this
philostratus; let us not neglect the means that may restore her.


Phil. Sir, I go:
But would be willingly assured before,
That you will ratify the match: for
Though he is a stranger to me, I Would be loath
To do a Gentleman such injury,
As to revive an almost-quencht affection.
With hopes, that would not prove realities.

Virg. Oh doubt it not! I love my child too well:
Yet to confirm your faith, list to my vow:
If that the Gods restore my child to health,
By means of Philostratus, or his love;
I swear by Styx, that oath of dreadful awe
Amongst the Gods, which they durst never break,
Philostratus shall have my full consent
To take her for his Wife: of which fixed vow
Heaven and you are witness.

Phil. I thank you, Sir, and now crave performance.


Virg. Are you Philostratus?


Phil. The same, Sir,; and for your Daughter,
With this kiss I cure her distemper.

Virg. I am all wonder!


Blunt. And I all fool, to bring a Doctor to wipe my nose.


Coel. Your pardon, gracious father; it was love
That made me counterfeit this Lunacie.
To gain your free consent, and yet preserve
My duty and obedience.

Virg. I am so glad to see thee thus recovered,
I want wards to express my joy:
But take him, Girl, thou have deserved him well.
Philostratus, I need not doubt thy love,
Which has continued so many years
(Almost without hope) constant: such love
Must prosper; take her, Philostratus.

Phil. Welcome, dear blessing: with far greater joy
Do I receive thee into my bosom,
Then malefactors at their deaths reprieves.

Coel. My joy's too great to be expressed in words;
My fancy and my love too high. The Gods
Affect not heaven more then I Philostratus:
For which rich gifts (dear Father) I do owe
You more, then for my birth.

Virg. And may the gift be worth it, and thou him:
The promises are fair on both sides. Let Us
To Church, and solemnize your loving Rites.
Mr. Blunt, come, cheer up, man; thou were
My choice, but none can war with fate:
However, be merry at the Wedding, man;
There be more wives in the world.

Phil. And here comes one of equal years to fit him.


Blunt. Sweet Coelia!


Coel. My Governess, and dripping! sure she has been new dipped.


Matr. For love of you: but I Will make no more discoveries: a precise Rascal,
like an unconscionable villain as he was, set me upon a tub of water for a
stool of repentance, upon which my devotion cooling, I fell asleep; and
^odding, tilted backwards into the water; up went my heels and so I made a
discovery.


Phil. Of the Netherlands.


All. Ha, ha, he!


Phil. If you be a charitable man, warm this piece of devotion; that is, marry
her; she would prove both a Wise and a Nurse: the last you want most.


Blunt. I would do much, I can tell you, to get even with you: I have been
fob'd of one wife already.


Coel. You may venture here with safety, with assurance: none will rob you of
her; and I am sure my Governess is kinde-hearted.


Matr. I would not forgo a good turn; but I am glad to see you come to so
well, Mistress.


Virg. Come, let it be a Match, and all to Church together.


Phil. I see he is well inclined: silence consents. You Will have (...) clean
Bride of her, she has been well washed.


Matr. Oh that Rascal! could I but light on him. --


Phil. Do not rail upon him; he has almost done you that good in satisfaction,
by procuring you a rich Churl for a Husband, as may make you bless him all
days of your life.


Matr. Was it you, Sir?


Phil. No matter; I, or one in my Coat: at dinner I Will relate all passages.


Virg. I do suspect mad prankes. Son, take your Bride.
May naught but death this union divide.

Blunt. Nay, Mistress, we'll make up the second couple; a Complete match, in
faith.


Virg. Why well said, Neighbor, now I like it; you go Roundly to the lousiness.


Blunt. I can do it home, I can tell you.
You will make an obedient wife?

Matr. Yes, and please your worship.


Phil. This is right Love, and Courtship A la mode.
Lady, will you Marry me? yes Sir, with all my
Heart: but for obedience, you should have left it
Till you came to Church, where she perhaps would have
Left it behind her.

Virg. We loose much time: come, Lovers let us away;
For Hymen's Ri^es admit of no delay.
Exeunt.
Scoena Quinta.
Enter Rant, Astutia. Rant. My Wife! I scorn't: thou common Wastecoateer,
And mercenary receipt for lust, do think
I had so little wit to marry thee?
Thou poor abused fool.

Astu. I thought you had more honesty, then to
Deny your Wife; at least more Manhood, then
To use her scurvily, unlike your self.
You know I am no whore; you had my Maidenhead.

Rant. Yes, the nineteenth reversion: do I
Not know your tricks to cosen men,
Your surphling water, and a thousand more,
Which I conceal for modesty?
Or be it granted that thou were a Maid,
Will that strengthen a Marriage made in sport,
By a poor silly serving-man?

Astu. I still am patient; but much I fear
You Will find it otherwise: and when you know
That I am Tickets Sister, a pure Virgin,
That never yet knew one dishonest thought,
Nor any crime, but too much love to you,
Sure you will repent my wrongs.

Rant. How, Ticket's Sister! how dare thou thus
Abuse me, abuse my friend, and know
Thou have a life within my power?
Oh impudence of women! did thou not
Promise him to make this match?
The nearest courtesy that woman e're
Afforded man.

Astu. I did, yet with no bad intent, knowing
I could at any time acquit my self,
By letting him know I was his Sister.

Rant. Still do persist in thy most damned untruths?
I would my friend were here, that we might take
A full revenge upon thy impudence.
How now? the news.
Enter. Porter.
Port. I have a Letter to your Worship.


Rant. From whence?


Port. The contents will notify.


Dear Brother (for so my Sister now has made you) I desire yours and her
company instantly at the Popes head in Morefields, where I shall largely
satisfy you of all particular stouching your Marriage: you have got a noble
Gentlewoman, use her as she deserves, nobly; use her as my sister, lovingly, as
you will preserve the good opinion of

Your affectionate Brother, Ticket.


Short, and sweet! I am Married, it seems;
Jugled into Matrimony without
My knowledge; a Wedding A la mode.
Brother Ticket, if you are not really
My brother, but have Married me to one
Of your Aunts; here is that shall do me reason:
And Lady Bride, your policy shall smart for it.
Astu. But if you find I really am so,
Sister to Ticket, and a wife to you;
What satisfaction ought you then to make
My innocence, for so abusing me,
Abusing her, that loved you, loved you
Beyond reason, beyond measure?

Rant. If thou prov'st all this, I will forgive thee,
And that is a favor, because thou married'st me
Without my own consent: 'twas plaguey neat,
A clean conveyance, carried on with wit:
I fancy it hugely, and I fear I shall love thee;
For I begin to have a good conceit
Of thy honesty: me thought my last
Nights lodging smick't and savored of the maidenhead.
Let Us to thy brother now, if he be so;
He shall be still my friend, if not, my foe.

Astu. He will confirm this truth, and that you are
My lawful husband, that I won you fair.
Exeunt.
Scoena Ultima.
Acuta, Ticket, Gambugium, Rant, Astutia. Tick. MEthinks it is a fine fresh air.


Acu. I am weary of air; I would have some reality.


Tick. Thou Would have thou know not what. Have I not vowed a thousand times
that I love thee? sworn Oaths that would induce an Atheist to belief? Nay, have
I not proffered to stamp my seal upon the virgin-wax? what would have more?


Acut. I Would have thee honest, that is, make good thy vows,
And marry me: thou see the hazards I
Have run, to save my mothers honor, and
Thy soul; hazarded my own dear fame
What think you Rumor will deliver of me?
What severe censures men will pass upon me,
And justly too, for meeting of you here?
It does, I must confess, exceed the bounds
Of modesty; but when the world shall know,
I came to save the honor of my house,
You in my mother sought to undermine,
To tell you, how base a dissembler you are,
In spite of love, here to renounce all love
That is not warranted both by the Laws
Of Church and State; then, Ticket, the world
Will know my innocence, and thy guilt.

Tick. They Will know your love too (Lady) that was the cause (however you
disguise it) of this visitation.


Acut. I value not who knows it, I confess it;
And therein glory, I can master it.
She never was virtuous, that was never tempted;
I have stood the shock of both, of love and of
Temptation; yet know, thou great dissembler,
My virtue's such, that had I not power to
Resist thy love, before I Would yield to any
Loose embrace, I Would show my self a Lucrece,
And die Virtues Martyr.

Tick. I do admire thee! fair virtuous soul,
If thou can pardon my past wandering love,
And think me worthy of thee, I am thine.

Acut. Add not unto my injuries; was it not
Enough to court me to affection first,
And then to work upon my weakness,
By tempting me to lust; but now when I
Have overcome thy lust and my affection,
Again to ensnare me, on pretense of marriage?

Tick. Let not my past errors beget obduracie
In your belief; if now I do not mean it
Really, let goodness in my greatest need
Forsake me: witness these tears.
Weeps.
Enter Gambugium. Gamb. Never was man so tormented as I; first to be caught up
in a Whirlewinde, and hurried I know not where; them coming home, to miss my
Wife, my Daughter, and my man: Oh my brains, my head, my horrid monstrous head!
I feel my temples sprout, they spread, they spread; give me patience, give me
patience.


Acut. I do believe you, Sir, you are to me
More welcome now in your return to love,
To faithful love I mean, then if
You had never erred.

Tick. You anew create my hopes, and see
Your father to complete the match.

Gamb. Oh my eyes! am I asleep, or do I wake?
My Daughter at an Alehouse window?
Plague of the Devil, my Wife's upon the
Bed: Oh my torments! my hellish torments;
They gnaw my heart strings. Strumpet,
What make you there?

Tick. Though you be her father, yet give me leave
To tell you you are foul-mouthed: she is so chaste,
She knows not what your language means:
She Is a Mine of Virtue; you may glory
In having the honor to call her daughter;
She has made me a convert, made
Clean a Leopard.

Gamb. May I believe her virtuous? a Virgin still!


Acut. Father, let my tears persuade you to
Believe it, not shed for any guilt,
But to soften your obdurate heart.
Kneels.
Tick. Rise, sweet; waste not in vain those pearly drops:
Let me alone to justify
Thy virtue against the world; first, Sir, to you,
Who are more jealous far then wise:
This Lady, though your daughter, is now my wife;
Nor can your jealous humor injure her,
But I participate the calumny,
Therefore bound to vindicate her virtue:
She never had won me for a Husband,
If by entreaties, protestations, oaths,
Gold, Jewels or other allurements
I could have entered her Virgin-fort.
In farther addition to her glory, know,
She was your chief preserver from abuse;
For I Will confess my crimes, because I mean
Amendment: I courted long your wife.

Gamb. I am a Cuckold irrecoverably, too sensibly
I feel it. Oho!

Ticket. You seem disturbed; in faith you have no cause,
Thanks to your daughter. After long courtship,
I obtained a trivial favor of your wife,
To give me here a meeting; which she would done
If not prevented by your daughter, who sent
Her Mother to wait at Islington my coming.

Gam. Oh how am I blessed in a virtuous Child!


Tick. You are indeed, and in a virtuous wife,
If that your jealousy do not corrupt her;
For none but she could have so long withstood
The various trains I laid to blow her
Virtue up.

Gam Well then, farewell it; I see it is a folly
To be jealous of what we cannot prevent.
Daughter, I cry thee mercy for my ill
Opinion of thee; nay, I Will buy it with
Five hundred pounds more then I meant
Thee. Son, thou appear'st a Gentleman;
Take my consent: I give thee my daughter
Willingly, provided thou will not feek
To cuckold the father.

Tick. I shall ever pay the love and duty of a Son.


Gam. Why well said Son; where shall we keep the wedding?


Acu. If it be your pleasure, I think at Islington, where my Mother expects us.


Tick. Come, sweet, let us thither; the Parson of the Village shall confirm the
bargain, and so to bed.


Enter Rant and Astutia. Rant. Brother Ticket, well met.


Tick. I wish you joy, Sir: nay, never frown; she is my sister, a Gentlewoman;
and though her portion's small, her love deserves you, and so I thought it a part
of friendship to bring you together. I dealt not worse by you then I have done
by my self.


Rant. What, married?


Tick. As you see, --
Going to be ti'd to the sweet Apple Tree.

Rant. Nay, I Will never spoil mirth: here is my hand, I thought to have raged
extremely, but it shall be like a loving brot(...) wish you joy.


Tick. Why God-a-mercy; the like to thee.


Gam. And I wish joy to both.


Tick. Thanks, worthy Father; now let us to Islington
To consummate my Vow, and after feast
There with our Mother: you shall be my guest.

Enter Phil. Coelia, Blunt, Matrona. Tick. But see how opportunely come new
friends, and from a wedding too! we are going to the place from whence you came.


Phil. Two VVeddings meet! why this is luck in faith.


Rant. And we make up the third Couple.


Blunt. Nay feakins, forsooth, we make up the mess.


Tick. Happy beyond our wish! let us in a measure celebrate our joys.


All. With all our hearts.

A Dance.
EPILOGUE.
Our Lovers Courtship, held no common road:
In France it was conceived, Love a la mode,
French novelties still use to please our Nation,
Better then any English homespun Fashion;
Which makes us hope, that this our Play will hit,
Being made to the Meridian of your wit:
Yet for all this, we have just cause to fear,
All are not fashion-mongers that are here:
And those that be, do change the Mode so fast,
We are afraid, our wit can never last
Above a Term; which did our Poet move,
To finish all in Matrimonial love;
That love is ancient, and must ever last;
I would your loves were knit to us as fast:
That of our Authors Muse you may beget
Never, and better offsprings of his wit.
FINIS.

