A JOURNEY TO LONDON, In the Year, School.

After the Ingenuous Method of that made by Dr. Martin Lyster to Paris, in the
same Year, etc.

Wittten Originally in French, By Monsieur Sorbiere, and Newly Translated into
English.

LONDON, Printed, and sold by A. Baldwin, in Warwick Lane, School.

A JOURNEY TO LONDON.

Monsieur Sorbeir TO THE READER.
I Am resolved to make no Apology for This short Account of the Magnificent,
and Noble City of London, where you will meet with nothing offensive, and I
think I have observed every thing that is Remarkable in it; It would have been
unpardonable in me, to have omitted any matters which the Curious might be
desirous to know, having an Inimitable Pattern from one of that Country lately,
who for the clearness of his Expression, the Elegancy of his Descriptions, as
well Ingenuous Choice of his Subjects, deserves a Particular Salutation from
all the Admirers of the Belles Lettres in the Universe.

I might here take an Opportunity to beg Pardon of the English, for my
misrepresentations Thirty Years ago, but it is to be hoped this Book will make
my Peace with that Nation. The following pages will show you the Considerable
heads I designed to Treat off, and now I have paid my Devoirs at the Entrance,
I will not Importune you any longer.

CONTENTS.
ASses Page 21 Auction 23 Beggars 9 Brick and Stone Houses 3 Bureaus 4 Boy in a
little Coach 5 Boats 8 Bartholomew Fair 27 Bread 29 Curiosity 1 Sir Charles
Cotterel and John Sharp Compared 2 Cellar Windows 4 Coaches 5 Commendation of
Linen Shirts 13 Calf with a Top-knot 18 Coins 20 Chivey Chase 20 Chocolate 25
Cabbage 30 Chine of Beef 33 Dust 11 Ducks 28 English no Lovers of stinking Meat
33 Flannel Shirts 13 Gray Pease Hot! 29 Inns, the white Horse, etc. 8 Kennels 5
Knightsbridge and Istington 5 Kitling in an Air Pump p. 16 Lettice 31 Menage 3
Monks (none) 9 Miller's Thumb 16 Mufflers 22 Mushroom 31 Naked Statues
Commended 12 Old Women Witches 14 Owl, 18 Port^ochers and Remises 3 Post
Chaises Roullions not in England 6 Public Cries 10 Play Things 21 Pox! 24 Pick
Pockets 27 Recreations and Walk, 7 A Rummer of two Quarts 15 Rosemary, etc. 26
Squares, St. James's, Bloomsbury, etc. 5 Signs in the street, Prodigious Large!
7 Streets Lighted, 10 -- Clean 11 Statues 12 Sticklebacks 16 Small coal Kettles
to Light a Pipe 27 Salt 29 Soups 31 Things wanting in England 5 Tennis Balls 22
Turnips 30
A JOURNEY TO LONDON. In the Year, School.
After the Ingenuous Method of that made by Dr. Martin Lyster to Paris, in the
same Year, etc.
THis Tract was written chiefly to Page 1.
satisfy my own Curiosity, and Curiosity
being in a place where I had little to do, I though fit to write a Book for
such People as had idle time enough upon their hands to read it. The English
Nation value themselves upon a plain Honesty, joined with Hospitality; these
make them Courteous to Strangers, but they are not very easy with their
Curiosity. For they do not build P. 5.
and dress mostly for Figure, as the French, P. 4.
who are certainly the most Polite Nation in the World, and can praise and
Court with a better grace than the rest of Mankind.

I did not intend to put on the Spectacles of the Present State of England,
Written by Dr. Chamberlain, nor any P. 2.
Survey of the same for trusting to my Eyes, I had a mind to see without 'em.

But to content you Reader, I promise not to trouble you with Ceremonies, P. 2.
either of State, or Church, or Politics; for though I met with an English
Gentleman who proffered to show me John Sharp and Sir Charles Cotterel compared.
the Princes of the Blood, the Prime Ministers of State, the Lord Mayor, and
other Officers belonging to a City of so immense a greatness as that of London,
yet I refused the Civility, and told him, that I took more pleasure to see
honest John Sharp of Hackney, in his White Frock, crying Turnips ho! P. 3.
four bunches a penny, than Sir Charles Cottrel, making room for an
Ambassador, and I found my self better disposed, and more apt to learn the
physiognomy of a hundred Weeds, than of five or six Princes.

I arrived at London, after a tedious P. 4.
Journey, in bad weather; for I fell sick upon the road, and lay dangerously
ill of the Toothache.

I believe I did not see the tithe of what P. 5.
deserves to be seen; because for many things I wanted a relish, particularly
for Painting and Building, though I confess the grandeur of a City chiefly
consists in Buildings; and I verily believe London to be one of the most
Beautiful and Magnificent in Europe.

It is also most certain, that the Menages.
common people of London, live dispersed in single Houses, whereas in Paris, P.
5.
there are from Four to Five, and to Ten menages or distinct Families in many
Houses, from whence I infer that as to the Commonalty Paris may be more
populous than London, although perhaps their dwelling may not be so wholesome and
cleanly.

I found the Houses some of hew'n stone Brick and Stone Houses.
entire, some of Brick with free Stone; as the Crown Tavern upon Ludgate Hill,
and the corner House of Birchin-Lane, and several others. P. 8. Portcochezs and
Remises.


Diverse of the Citizens Houses, have Port-cochezs to drive in a Coach, or a
Cart either, and Consequently have Courts within, and mostly Remises to set
them up, such persons as have no Portchochez, and consequently no Courts or
Remises, set up their Coaches at other places, and let their Horses stand at
Livery.

The Cellar Windows of most Houses P. 8. Cellar Windows.
are grated with strong bars of Iron, to keep thieves out, and Newgate is
grated up to the Top to keep them in. Which must be of vast expense!

As the Houses are magnificent without, P. 9. Bureaus.
so they furnish them within accordingly. But I could not find, that they had
any Bureaus of Ivory.

Upon viewing the Braziers and P. 9. Things wanting in England for want of
Commerce with France.
Turners Shops, I found it true, what my Country Man Monsieur Justell formerly
told me, that according to his Catalogue there were near threescore utensils,
and conveniences of Life more in England than in France. But then the English,
since the breach of their commerce with France, lie under great necessities of
several commodities fiting for the ease and support of Humane Life, as
Counterfeit Pearl Necklaces, P. 142.
Fans, Tooth Picks, and Tooth Pick Cases, and especially Prunes, the Calamity
of which has been so great for Ten Years last past, that they have not had
enough to lay round their Plum-porridge at Christmas.

I must to give a faithful account descend P. 10, Kennells.
even to the Kennels; the Gutters are deep, and lain with rough edges, which
make the Coaches not to glide easily over 'em, but occasion an employment for
an industrious sort of people called Kennel-Rakers.

The Squares in London are many P. 10. Squares. James' s Bloombury. P. 10.
and very beautiful, as St. James, Sohoe, Bloombury, Red-Lyon. Devonshire, none
of the largest, and Hogsdon not yet finished. But that which makes the dwelling
in this City very diverting, is the facility of going out into the fields, as
to Knightsbridge, where is an excellent Spring-Garden, to Marribone, where P.
11. Knightsbridge and Islington.
is a very good Bowling-Green, Islington as famous for Cakes, as Stepeny is for
Bunns.

But to descend to a more particular review P. 11.
of this great City, I think it not amiss to speak first of the Streets.

There are Coaches in the streets Coaches
which are very numerous, but the Fiacers are not hung with double springs, at
the four Corners, which springs would insensibly Break all Jolts. So that I
found the case altered in England; and I to had rather ride in a Fiacre at
Paris, than in the easiest Chariot of a Lord Ambassador; to my great
astonishment at London, found that in a Hackney Coach, there was not a jolt but
what affected a Man, from whence I drew these Surprising Conclusions.

First that a Hackney is a miserable, Voiture, and next, that a Man may be P.
13.
more tired in an hour in that, than in six hours riding in my Lord Ambassadors
casiest Chariot.

I saw a Boy that had Harnessed two Dogs, which drew a small Voiture P. 13.
Boy in a little Coach.
with a Burden in it, and I saw a little Master in a little Vinegrette, drawn
along by two Boys; much bigger then himself, and pushed behind by a Maid. These
I was willing to omit as thinking them at first sight scandalous, and a very
jest, they being wretched businesses in so magnificent a City.

Finding that neither Post chaises nor Rouillions were in use in London, I told
Post chaises Rouillions not in England.
them of 'em, how both Horses pull, but one only is in the Thilles, how the
Coachman mounts the Rouillion, but for the Chaise he only mounts the side
House, and that they might be introduced to good purpose. But I found the
English Curiosity so small that I did not see any Rouillion made during my six
months stay in London.

As for their Recreations and Walks, P. 14. Receations and Walks.
St. James Park is frequented by people of Quality, who if they have a mind to
have better and freer Air, drive to Hide Park, where is a Ring for the Coaches
to drive round, and hard by is Mrs. Price's, where are incomparable Sillabubs,
out of other parts of the Town, they go to Hamstead and Cane Wood, (an
admirable place for Nuts, as Mother Huffs for Bottle Ale) scarce any side
amiss. P. 14.
I had almost forgot that in St. James's Park are many Seats, for the
Entertainment of all People, the Lackqueys and Mob excepted, but of this more
hereafter.

It Is pretty to observe how the Magistrates P. 16. Signs in the streets.
indulge the Inhabitants of this Great City, by this small instanced, for
whereas in Paris the King has caused the Citizens to take down their signs, and
not to exceed a small measure of Square. In London they may be of what measure
they please, even to a Monstrous bigness, as my great Curiosity observed, in
the Sign of the Ship Tavern, and the Castle Tavern in Fleet Street, which has
almost Obscured the Sun; and Barbers hang out poles of a great huge length
almost as long as a Missen Mast.

There are a great may Public Inns P. 16. Inns The White Horse in Fleetstreet,
etc.
in London, where Lodging are to be Let, as the Bull Inn in Bishopgate-street,
the Saracens Head in Friday-street, the White Horse in Fleet Street, and
others. But besides these there are diverse other places so called; as Cliffords
Inn, Clements Inn, Lions Inn, etc. where several Gentlemen Practioners of the
Law Reside. This seems as it were to denote that heretofore Attorneys might
lodge in Public Inns as well as other Strangers.

In the River of Thames, both above P. 17. Boats.
Bridge and below, are a vast number of Boats of Wood, Hay, Charcool, Corn,
Wine, and other Commodities. When a Frost comes there are not so many. But when
a Thaw comes, they are often in danger of being Split and Crushed to piecss.
And upon my Word, there have been great losses to the Owners of such Boats and
goods, upon such occasions. The reason why there are more Boats below Bridge
than above, is because there is a Custom House, which brings into the King of
England, a Revenue able to defend the sovereignty of the Seas, against any
Enemy whatsoever; and the Reason why there lie so many Hundred Large Vessels of
all sorts and of all Nation; is because they cannot get through Bridge Heigh!
and there are a great many light boats laden with Brooms, Gingerbread,
Tobacco, and a Dram of the Bottle Ho! Above Bridge is a vast Boat, with a House
upon it, and a Garden in the Garret, and further up the River at Chelsey, is a
Land Ship very large built on purpose never to go to Sea.

There are Beggars in London, and P. 20. Beggar.
people whose necessities force them to ask relief from such as they think able
to afford it.

But there are no Monks who declare No Monks
against Marriage. And a Certain Learned Person told me that he did not like
starved Monks, but that he was for free marriage, and that the Flesheaters will
ever defend themselves if not beat the Lenten men.

Therefore he was entirly for Propagation, P. 21.
that men might be like the Stars in the Firmament, or the shells and sand upon
the Sea shore; and so notwithstanding any Circumstances of Life Age or Fortune,
should marry, and that it was as prudent in an old Man of threescore and ten,
as in a Youth of one and twenty.

There is a great deal of Noise in this City, of public Cries of things to be
sold, Public Cries. P. 22.
and great disturbance from Pamphlets and Hawkers. The Gazetts come out twice a
week, and a great many buy 'em. When a thing is lost, they do not as in Paris,
put a Printed Paper on the Wall, but if it be of small value, the Bell-man
Cries it, and if it be a thing of greater moment as for Example, a Lapdog, etc.
then they put it in the Advertisements.

The streets are lighted all the Winter, Streets Lighted. P. 23.
but there is an impertinent usage of the people at London, not to light 'em,
when the Moon shines. They ridiculously defend themselves by saying, they can
see by moonshine, and have no more reason to hold a Candle to the Moon than to
the Sun. There were three Young Gentlemen of good Families in a P. 24.
Frolic, went a scouring, broke the Lights, and were sent to the Counter, and
could not be released thence without diligent Application of Friends, and
paying Garnish to their fellow Prisoners.

The Avenues to the City, and all the Streets clean.
Streets are Paved with Pebbles, and Flints and Rag Stones, and there is great
care to keep them clean. In winter for Example, upon melting of the Ice, you
shall see all the Prentices and Porters up in Arms, with Brooms and Paring
Shovels; so that in a few hours time all parts of the Town are to admiration
clean, and neat again to walk on.

I could heartily wish, I had been at Dust. P. 25.
London in Summer, to have seen whether they have more Dust at London, than in
Paris. I have notwithstanding in my Curious Enquiries after Dust, found that
there are several dust Carts about the Town, and there are several Women that
take delight, and as I have heard pay money to ride in em. A fine Lady about
the Town, was taken thence, and upon her change of clean Linning took upon
herself the Title of Clinderaxa.

There are several Statues, both at Charing Cross, in the City, and at Statues.
the Exchange, but my Relish being not for Art but Nature, as I have before
declared, I think fit to meddle with 'em, as little as I can.

I happened to go with a Lady to Hide Park Corner, where in an open Naked
Statues Commended at Hide-Park Corner. P. 29. P. 30.
Area, we saw several Naked Statues, at which she out of a fond humor, or hoc
sit of Devotion, took some offense. I told her, Cicero somewhere says, that
some of the ancient wise men thought there was nothing naturally obscene, but
that every thing might be called by its own name; she told me I was making an
Apology for talking obscencely. I replied no, but added, Why should Nudity P.
30.
be so offensive since a very great part of the World yet defies Clothes, and
ever did so; and the parts they do most affect to cover, are from a certain
necessity P. 30. P. 31.
only: At which she blushed, and I for the sake of further Discourse begun a
long story about Roman Cloths, and told her, a Roman was as soon undressed P.
31.
as I can put of my Gloves and Shoes. For he had nothing to do but to loose
the Girdle of the Tunica, and to draw up both his Arms from under the Tunica,
and he was in Bed immediately, whereas I had a hundred fatigues to undergo, as
unbuttoning by Collar, untying my Kneestrings; and several other things that
would make a Man impatient to think of. I told her likewise it was after the
Flannel Shirts found out at Rome. P. 31. 32. No Steenkirks at Rome.
first Ages of the Commonwealth, that they found out the invention of putting a
Shirt next the Skin; that as for Ruffles and Steenkirks, they were never added
in the very Splendour and Luxury of the Empire. I continued my Discourse, that
I, much admire I could never meet with a Statue in London, but what was
Clothed with a Toga pura and no representation of a Bullated one. I told her,
that the Romans indeed wore Flannel Shirts, but in my mind a fair Linen P. 33.
Commendation of Linen Shirts.
Shirt every Day, is as great a preservative to Neatness and Cleanness of the
Skin, as going to the Bagnio, was to the Romans. The Lady smiled and told me,
Sir, I am glad you have Clothed the poor Creatures, that we found Naked. This
seeming to be spoke in a Ridiculous way, something provoked me, but spying a
little State of Mother Shipton, whose Face was deep within the Quoifure; says
I, Madam, this Woman looks as if she were ashamed of her Cheat: It was the
fancy of King Henry the 8th's time to make Old Women Prophetesses, but I think
to make them Sagae and Veneficae, (that is in plain English Sorceresses and
Poisoners) is reasonable enough, for Age makes all People Spiteful, but more
the weaker Sex. So Old Women Witches. P. 34.
we parted in chagrin, for I believe the Lady Modestly speaking, was upwards of
fifty.

I heard of several Persons that had great Collections of Rarities, Pictures,
and Statues. But I was resolved to Visit but a few, and those the most Curious;
and when I made any Observations, that they should be to the purpose.

So I visited Mr. Doncaster, He Entertained Mr. Doncaster. P. 36.
me very Civilly; He has a very fine Octogon Room, with a Dome. He has very
fine Pictures, though I must confess as before, I have no relish for Painting.
He showed me some Pictures of Rubens, in which the Allegoric Assistants in the
Tableaux are very airy and fancifully set out. He showed me, likewise, one of
Vandyke, but being Painted in Dishabile, it had a Foppish P. 39.
Nightgown and Old Quoifure. Which lead me into this Reflection, that the 40.
Modern Painters have hereby an opportunity to be idle. He has several other
Curiosities; among the rest was a Roman Glass, whose very bottom was smooth and
very little umbilicate. He P. 38.
showed me, likewise, a great Rummer of two Quarts, very proper for Rummer of
two Quarts.
Rhenish Wine, and Limon and Sugar in the midst of Summer; I found that the
foot of the latter was more Umbilicated than the former. He then diverted me
with a Copy of the Writing said to be the Devil's Writing, kept in Queen's
College in Oxford. Upon which I began the Discourse of these matters; I told
him, that the Chinese were very much Embarass'd in their Writing, as this
Writing P. 48.
seemed to be. But I was rather inclined, to think this the Boustrophedon way
mentioned by Suidas like the Racers about the Meta in the Cirque. But I P. 5^^
could not find that he had any apprehension of the matter. In this Collection,
I saw a Millers Thumb, which he told Miller's Thumb. P. 58.
me was taken by a Miller with his Thumb and fore finger. It is very like a
Hippocumpus as to the Thick belly and breast of it. With this I was extremely
pleased, and am infinitely obliged to this Mr. Doncaster, for he Sticklebacks.
showed me several sort of Tadpoles and Sticklebacks, which only for bigness
are not much unlike a Pope, or Ruff, and presented me with one of 'em, which I
design to give a draught of.

I was to visit Mr. Muddifond, I was Mr. Muddifond. P. 66. 67.
sorry to hear that he had some thoughts concerning the Hearts of a Hedghog,
which had made a very great breach betwixt Mr. Goodenough and himself. I could
have wished, I might have reconciled the Animosity. But it is to be Hoped there
may come good from an Honest Emulation. I had several discourses with Mr.
Muddifond, about an Old Cat and a Young Kitling in an air Pump, and how the Cat
died after 16 Pumps, but Kitling in an air Pump.
the Kitling survived 500 Pumps. Upon which we fell into a Learned Dicourse, of
the lives of Cats; and at last agreed upon this distinction, That it ought not
to be said that Cats, but that Kitlings have nine lives. And after the dispute
ended, P. 2.
he very obligingly procured me a Human Heart. But I must confess the
generosity of the English in this, for not many days after Mr. Baddington, P.
71.
procured me another, which was extremely Grateful.

I was recommended by a Friend to Mr. Brownsworth, a Person that belongs Mr.
Browns. worth.
to the Tower of London. He is a Civil Gentleman, but his genius lead him more
to Politics than Curiosity. He proffered to show me the new Armory, in which
are Arms, as he told me, for above a Hundred Thousand Men, all disposed in a
manner, most surprising and magnificent; as likewise another Armory, where are
Arms for Twenty Thousand Men more. He would likewise have showed me the Horse
Armory, a Royal Train of Artillery, and several Cannon taken out of the Trident
Prize. He would likewise have carried me to see the Crown Imperial, and other
Jewels belonging to it. I humbly thanked him, and told him, that my Curiosity
led me otherwise, and P. 2.
that my Observations inclined rather to Nature than Dominion. Upon which
smiling he said, he hoped he should gratify me, and immediately led me to a
place where we saw Lions, Tigers, and two very remarkable Catamountains. I took
more particular Notice of two Owls, of an immense greatness, but by their being
without Owls. P. 73. P. 2. P. 73. Calf with a Top-knot.
horns, I take 'em not to be a distinct Species from the European.

But that with which I was most delighted, was a Calf skin stuffed, 'twas
admirable to behold, a certain tumor or excrescence it had upon its forehead,
in all points resembling the Commodes or Top-knots now in Fashion. Upon this I
expressed my thanks to Mr. Brownsworth in the most Obliging Terms I could. He
then told me, the Royal Mint was not far off, upon which I said, I was a great
admirer of Coins, and desired him to give me an account of what Coins there
were in England He began to tell me, that about three Years ago the current
Coin of the Kingdom consisted of old Money, coined by several Kings; that those
Coins were Clipped and debased to a very great degree, but that the King with the
advice of his Parliament, in the very height of the War with France, had
established a Paper Credit (or if you please to call it Coin) of Bills, issued
out of the Exchequer and Notes from the Royal Bank of England, amounting to
prodigious sums; that at present all our Silver is in Mild Money, either of the
two last Kings, or his present Majesty, of which there is so great a Quantity,
that posterity will be apt to think, that there were scarce any Prince that
ever Coined before him. This Money, and Credit, have circulated so far, and are
in so great a plenty, that in a late subscription to a New East India Company,
Two Millions Sterling were subscribed in less than two days time, and as much
more excluded* I believe the Man would have run on till Evening, if I had not
thus interrupted him: Sir, said I, I beg you to consider, that I am a Virtuoso,
and that your present discourse is quite out of my Element: Sir, you would
oblige me much more, if you could find me any Coin from Palmira, more P. 97.
particularly of Zenobia, Odenatus, or Vabalathus, and that I preferred a
VABALATHUS UCRIMPR, or a VABALATHUS AUG. Coins of Vabalathus. P. 115.
before Twenty of the best pieces of Gold Coined in the Tower. The Gentleman
very Civilly replied, that he would endeavor to satisfy my Curiosity; that he
had at home two rusty Copper Pieces, with which he intended to present me,
(which he accordingly did the next day) that he had been told by a Person of
the Belles Lettres, that they were dug out of the Isle of Scilly, and that One
was of Catathumpton a Saxon Prince, the other of Coins of Catathumpton and
Goclenia. P. 121.
Goclenia his Daughter and Successor; they have both very odd Characters, (if
any) about 'em. I design to give the Reader a Cut of them. The Evening coming
on, and my thanks returned to him, we parted.

I was to see Mr. Shuttleworth, whose Friendship I greatly Value; He has many
P. 46. Moniment of Chivey-Chase.
Stones from Scotland; there is one the most Curious of all, Concerning which
he is ready to publish a Dissertation. It Is a Catalogue in three Columns, of
the Names of the most Principal Persons that were Killed at Chivey Chase.
Widdrington closes the Column, and after his Name there is a Noble Pindarick in
which he is Recorded, upon the Cuting off his Legs, to have fought upon his
Stumps. Of the Antiquity of this Stone, besides the known History and names
which justify the time of those Men, the figure of the Letters and the
Blackness of 'em, particularly of the word Stumps, are undoubted Arguments.

He showed me a Thousand other Rarities as the skin of a Cap-Ass, many Asses,
Snails, etc. P. 60. Ibid. Ibid. P. 61.
very excellent Land Snails, a Freshwater Mussel from Chatham; A thin Oyster, a
very large Wood Frog, with the extremity of the Toes Webbed.

He showed me some papers of Swammerdam, P. 73.
in which were some small Treatises, or rather some figures only of the P. 103.
Tadpole. Again figures relating to the natural History of a certain Day
Butterfly, and of some considerable number of Snails, as well naked as
fluviatile. He P. 43. Play things, Puppets, Rattles. P. 111.
showed me a vast number of great Cases in which were Play-things, or Puppets,
all of them brought from France, Except one Sistrum, or Egyptian Rattle, with
three loose, or running wires cross it. I proffered him my assistance to
Complete so useful a Collection as that of Play-things and Rattles.

I was infinitely pleased with this Gentleman's Company, especially when A
Differtation of Mufflers.
he showed me a Dissertation he had written out fair for the Press, about a
certain ancient Intaglia of Madaces of Ptolomaeus Auletes, or the player upon
the Flute: in this he said the thin Muffler was the most Remarkable. Upon this
I told him, that I had a dissertation concerning the Remarkable thickness and
thinness of Mufflers, with which I would present him.

One Toy I took notice of, which was a Collection of Tennis Balls; for three P.
93. Tennis Balls.
hundred years or more, some of them were sent by a French King, to King Henry
V. and there are patterns of all that the English have sent back, from the
bigness of the smallest bored musket, to the shells of the largest mortars.

I went to see an Old Woman (that shall be nameless) she was 91 Years of P. 95.
An Old Woman.
Age. I was surprised to find her Body in Ruins. It was a perfect mortification
to see the sad decays of Nature. To hear her talk with her Lips hanging about a
toothless Mouth, end her words flying abroad at Random; this put me in mind of
the Sybils uttering Oracles, and how other Old Women, called Witches, have been
since employed on this errand, and have at very unreasonable times of night
been forced to bestride their Broom-staff on such like occasions.

I would have seen a very Famous Library, near St. James's Park, but I was
told, that the Learned Library Keeper was so busy in answering a Book which had
been lately wrote against him, concerning Phalaris, that it would be rudeness
any ways to interrupt him; though I had heard of his singular Humanity, both in
France, and other places.

I was at an Auction of Books, at Tom's Auction.
Coffee-House, near Ludgate, where were above fifty people. Books were sold
with a great deal of Trifling and delay as with us, But very Cheap, those
Excellent Authors Mounsieur Maimbourg, Mounsieur Varillas, and Mounsieur le
Grand, though they were all guilt on the Back, and would have made a very
considerable Figure in a Gentleman's Study, yet after much tediousness, were
sold for such Trifling sums, that I am ashamed to name 'em.

The Pox here is the great business of the Pox. P. 236. P. 239.
Town. This secret service has introduced little contemptible Animals of all
sorts into business; and Quacks here, as with us, do thrive vastly into great
Riches.

It was very pleasant diversion to me to read upon the Walls, every where about
the Town, the Quacks Bills in great Uncial Letters.

As

Aqua Tetrachymagogon.

Another,

Read, Try, Judge, and Speak as You Find.

Another,

The Unborn Doctor, that Cures all Diseases. He is to be spoke with at a
Boiling Cooks, in Old Bedlam, from Ten till Two, and afterward at his Stage in
Moorfields.

Another,

At the Golden Ball, and Lillies Head, John Case lives, though Saffold's dead.

By these Bills it is Evident, there is yet a certain Modesty and decorum left
in Concealing this Disease, and people, though they may have failings in
private, don't care to expose themselves to the public. There are Women, P.
238.
that are seventh Daughters, that do admirable Cures, and there are people that
can pick Pockets, and afterward by Consulting the Stars, tell you who it was
that did it.

I met with a Gentleman, that told me a secret, That the old Romans in their
Luxury took their Tea, and Chocolate, Chocolate and Tea: P. 169.
after a full meal, and every man was his own Cook in that Case. Particularly
Caesar that most admirable and most accomplished Prince, being resolved to Eat
and Drink to excess before he lay down to Table, Emeticen agebat, prepared for
himself his Chocolate, and Tea. He presented me with a Roman Tea Dish, and a
Chocolate Pot, which I take to be about Augustus's time, because it is very
Rusty; my Maid very ignorantly was going to scour it, and had done me an
immense Damage

I saw several Gardens at K^ngsland; the Gardener was an Artist, and had some
P. 187. Rosemary and Marum Syricum.
plants in cases in good order, not to be seen elsewhere, as Marum Syriacum,
Rosemary-Bushes, etc.

I was at Chelsey, where I took particular P. 183.
notice of these plants in the Green House at that time; As,

Urtica male olens Japoniae, the stinking nettle of Japan.

Goosberia sterilis Armeniae, the Armenian Goosberry bush, that bears no Fruit,
this had been potted Thirty Years.

Cordis Quies Persia, which the English call Heartsease, or Love, and Idleness,
a very Curious Plant.

Brambelia Fructificans Laplandiae, or the Blooming Bramble of Lapland.

With a Hundred other Curious plants, as a particular Collection of Briars and
Thorns, which were some part of the Curse of the Creation.

The Winter was very rude and fierce. P. 229. Small-coal Kettles.
Multitudes had little Tin Kettle in their Houses, with Small-coal kindled, to
light their Pipes withal; though in some places they use Candles, in others
Salamanders.

I was at Bartholomew Fair. It consists P. 176. Bartholomew's Fair.
of most Toyshops; also Fiance and Pictures, Ribbon-shops, no Books; Many Shops
of Confectioners, where any Woman may commodiously be treated: Knavery is here
in perfection, dextrous Cut-Purses, and Pick pockets: I went to Pick Pockets.
see the Dancing on the Ropes, which was admirable. Coming out I met a man that
would have took off my Hat, but I secured it, and was going to draw my Sword,
Crying out, Begar! Damned Rogue! Morblew, etc. when on a sudden I had a hundred
People about me, Crying here, Monsieur, See Jephtha's Rash Vow, here, Monsieur,
see the Tall Dutch Woman; see the Tiger, says another; see the Horse and no
Horse, whose Tail, stands where his Head should do; see the German Artist,
Monsieur; see the Siege of Namur, Monsieur: So that betwixt Rudeness and
Civility, I was forced to get into a Fiacre, and with P. 10.
an air of Have, and a full Trot, got home to my Lodgings.

I was at St. James's Park; there were no Pavillions, nor decoration of Ducks.
P. 207.
Treilliage, and Flowers; but I saw there a vast number of Ducks; these were a
most surprising sight, I could not forbear to say, to Mr. Johnson, who was
pleased to Accompany me in this Walk, that sure all the Ponds in England had
contributed to this profusion of Ducks; which he took so well, that he ran
immediately to an Old Gentleman, that sat in a Chair, and was feeding of 'em,
he rose up very obligingly, embraced me, and Saluted me with a Kiss, and
invited me to Dinner; telling me, he was infinitely obliged to me for
flattering the King's Ducks.

Of the Food of the Londoners.
The Diet of the Londoners consists Bread. P. 146.
chiefly of Bread and Meat, which they use instead of Herbs. Bread is there as
in Paris, finer and courser, according as they take out the Bran. This I
observed, that whereas we have a great deal of Cabbage, and but a little bit of
Meat, they will have Monstrous pieces of Beef; I think they call 'em Rumps, and
Buttocks, with a few Carrets, that stand at a distance as if they were
fright'd; nay I have seen a thing they call a Sir-Loin, without any Herbs at
all, so immense, that a French Footman could scarce set it upon the Table.

They use very white Salt, notwithstanding, Salt. P. 147.
I told 'em, the Gray Salt of France is incomparably better, and more wholesome.

The Common people feed much upon Gray Pease, of which there are great Gray
Pease. P. 148.
Provisions made, and to be had ready Boiled. I believe they delight in 'em
most for Supper; for every Night there goes by a Woman crying, Hot Gray Pease,
and Bacon. Though I take Pease to be too windy for Supper meat, and am
inclinable to believe, that Hot Ox Cheek, and Baked Wardens, cried at the same
time may be wholesomer.

Their Roots differ much from ours, Turnips. P. 149.
there are no long Turnips, but round ones, Hackney near London it famous for
this most excellent Root, they are most excellent with boiled and stewed
Mutton, and sometimes with stewed Beef.

I sound more Cabbage in London Cabbage P. 150.
than I expected, and I saw a great many reserves of old stalks in their
public Gardens. I asked the Reason. I was told the English were Fantastic, as
to Herbs, and pulse; that one Trade, or Society of Men, fancied them and
Cowcumbers, and that a whole Country were as much admirers of Beans and Bacon;
and this they thought might be the reason of it.

Lettice is the great and Universal Lettice. P. 151.
Sallet; But I did not find much Roman Lettice, because about Ten Years ago, a
Gentleman sending his Footman to Market, he mistook, and asked for Papist
Lettice and the ill Name has hindered the vent of it ever since.

There are several others in the Herb P. 152. Ibid.
market, as Mints, Sorel, Parsley, very much used with Chickens, White Beets,
Red Beets, and Asparagus; these they ty up in Bundles, and impose so far, as
not to sell under a hundred at a time.

This City is well served with Carp, P. 151. P. 152.
Herrings, Cod, Sprats, Lobsters, and Maccarel; of which there are such
incredible quantities, that there is a public allowance for Maccarel, as well
as Milk, to be cried on Sundays.

Being desirous to see the Markets, P. 152. Mushrooms.
I had a Friend that one Morning, carried me to Leaden hall. I desired to know
what Mushrooms they had in the Market. I found but few at which I was
surprised, for I have all my Life been very Curious and inquisitive about this
kind of Plant, but I was absolutely P. 154.
astonished to find, as that for Champignons, and Moriglio's, they were as
great strangers to 'em as if they had been bred in Japan.

He promised to carry me to the Flesh Market, and there to make me P. 153.
amends, but when I came there alas, there was a Thousand times too much of it,
to be good, the sight of such a quantity was enough to surfeit one. I verily
believe in my Conscience there were more Oxen, than Cabbages, and more Legs of
Mutton, than Heads of Garlic in the Market. What Barbarous Soupes then must
these poor people Eat! Their Veal, has not that beautiful Soupes. P. 157.
Redness, which belongs to ours, and indeed their mutton seems more like it
only it is Fatter, and their Beef is large and Fat, to that degree, that it is
almost impossible to Roast it dry enough for to make it fit for any Christian
(that has the least of our Country indisposition about him) to Eat it with any
safety.

There were several Mountains of Chine of Beef.
this Beef, which they called Barons and Chines, which they told me were for
one of the Sheriffs. I Will undertake with one of these Chines, together with
Cabbage, Turnips, and other Roots, Herbs, and Onions Proportionable, to make
Soup enough for the Parliament of Paris.

The English People, by Custom, Covet P. 158. English no Lovers of stinking
Meat.
the freshest Meat, and cannot endure the least tendency to Putrefaction, which
gives it a higher and salter Taste; for as Meat rots, it becomes more Urinous
and Salt, which is all in all in the matter of Soups. I saw but one Fowl in the
Market that was fit to be Eaten, its smell was delicious, and its color of a
beautiful Green; I desired my Friend to ask the Price, but the Poulterer told
him it was sold to a French Merchant.

I have several other things that I P: 159. P. 148. P. 174. Ibid. P. 178. P.
180.
might discourse of, as Kentish Pippins, Pears, Kidney-Beans, and Lentils.
Preaching, Gaming, Coaching, Carting, Walking, Sitting, Standing, etc. I would
likewise have given the Reader the Cuts of the Nidus Trochili Anglicani, or
Weens Nest, a Stickleback, two Snails, two Grasshoppers, and those admirable
Coins of Catathumpton, and Goclenia; But that my Bookseller said the Graver was
out of the way. What may be wanting in this, some other Journeys, that I design
to, the two Universities, Norwich, Bristol, Exeter, Canterbury, and other
Trading Places, I hope will supply.

FINIS.
Upon Reviewing my Notes, I find the following Remarkable Things omitted in my
Treatise; which that the Public may not want, I have thrown into a Postscript.
The Wines follow, and Waters to Drink.
HAre-Court, has excellent Water, P. 160. Water.
some people use New-River, others Thames Water; I told them, that we had
several Liquors in France, P. 161.
as Vin de Bonne, Volne, Mulso, Chabre, Condrieu, and D' Arbris, Ratafia,
otherwise P. 164.
called Cherry-Brandy, Vattee, Fenoulliet de l'Isle de Ree. He answered me,
that he had a thousand such sort of Liquors, as Humtie Dumtie, Three Threads,
Humtie Dumtie, etc.
Four Threads, Old Pharaoh, Knockdown, Hugmatee, Shouldree, Clamber-Crown,
Hot-Pots at Newgate-Market, Fox-comb, Blind Pinneaux, Stiffle, etc.

I must not omit a famous sight in Drury Lane, a place remarkable for Modesty,
and Piety, there is a sign of Six Dogs, that Plough'd an Acre of Ground, which
I believe, may for want of Horses, be introduced into France, with good Effect.
They have very good Mastiffs that may serve for Dragoons, but they will scarce
fall upon Protestants.


