A SONG of the Light of the three Nations turned into DARKNESS Or Otes made
Freeman of Whitington's College, for Perjury, Scandalum Magnatum, and
something like Treason.
To an excellent old Tune called Cavalilly-man.
COme all our Caballers and Parliament Votes
That stickl'd for hanging and cuting of throats,
Lament the misfortune of perjured Otes.
Who first must be Pillor'd and after be Hanged.
What Devil suspected this, 5 years agon,
When I was in hopes to hang up half the Town,
I Swore against Miter and Cursed the Crown.
But now must be Pillor'd and after be Hanged.
I cursed the Bishops and hanged up the Priests,
I swore my self Doctor yet never could Preach,
But a Cant full of Blasphemy all I could reach.
I now must be Pillor'd, and after be Hanged.
Now Otes is in the Cubboard and Manger with Colt,
The Caldron may boil me for fear I should molt,
here I 've never a Bum for a VVheel-Barrow jolt.
Yet now must be Pillor'd and after be Hanged.
My forty Commissions and Spanish black Bills,
Invisible Armies lodged upon Hills,
Such old perjured Nonsense my Narrative fills.
That I now must be Pillor'd and after be Hanged.
My twelve pounds a Week I want to support
For stinking in the City and fouling the Court,
Like Devil in Dungeon I Am now hampered fort.
Yet first must be Pillor'd and after be Hanged
They hang us in order, the Devil knows how,
'Zounds all that e're put one paw to the Plow,
I never feared the Devil would fail me till now.
That I first must be Pillor'd and after be hanged
For Calling the Duke a Papist and Traitor,
I often have called the King little better,
I Am fast by the heels like a Beast in a Fetter.
I first must be Pillor'd and after be Hanged.
I swore that the Queen would Poison the King,
That VVakeman had monys the Poison to bring,
When I knew in my heart there was no such thing.
I now must be Pillor'd and after be Hanged.
I Am Resolved to be hanged dead drunk like Hugh Peter
If I can but have my Skin stuffed with good Liquor,
Then I shall limp to old Tapskie much quicker.
But I first must be Pillor'd and after be hanged
London Printed for J. Dean, Bookseller in Cranborn-street near Newport House
in Leicester-Fields 1684.


