Song at the LOYAL FEAST in Westminster Hall, August the 6th. 1685.
^ HAIL Sacred-Pile! the Ancient Seat of Loyalty and Law, the Source and the
Fountain whence Justice does flow. Tribunal of Action to humble the Factionand
keep the proud Rebel in Aw. The Gods now have sent thee, Peace, Conquest, and
Plenty Then in Feasting and Mirth our Al legience we'll show till our J^ys like
our O^^a^^es all measures o^^^flow. Down from their bright Sphere Boys,to Revel
it here Boys,(...)ing God their Council descended; Bright Ju no sat Crowned
here,Great Jove was ^^throan'd here(...) Goddesses round in a Consent attended
No Ceres was scanting (...) was wanting to fill up the Joys of that day; Then
the Glasses let fly there, till they mount to the Sky there, the Gods and Great
Caes;ar, the Gods and Great Cae-sar, Great Cae-sar have showed us the way.
Chorus. Then a Hea^^th to Great JAMES whom kind Heaven did Restore us, through
Battles, through Seas, and through Fire; The Angels that Guard Him, will join
in a Chorus, and Crown every Glass with a Quire. Then a Health, etc.

With Conquest Crowned, fresh Conquest Crowned,
[Great Caesar fills theThrone,
A Sword is His Scepter, and Laurels His Crown.
Rash Phaeton Firing,
The World with aspiring,
Too high with his Steeds over thrown;
The Caitif forsaken,
A Captive is taken,
See, their Catalin's Vanquished, the Plebeians are flown,
And the Faction's great Da(...) is now tumbl' d ^own;
See, their Catalin's Vanquished, etc.
Down falls the proud Babel,
The Head of the Rabble.
Great JOVE at His Feet has the Cyclop subjected,
And brought the Slaves under,
Struck dead with His Thunder.
Confirmed in His Throne by His Valor protected,
No more the proud Hogan,
On the Seas shall be Mogan;
Our JOVE does Monsieur desp^se,
What Foe dare upbraid Him?
What Power Invade Him?
Where Courage with Conduct, where Courage with Conduct,
With Conduct makes Conquest His prize.
Then a Health to Great JAMES, etc.
Sold by Nith. Thompson at the Entrance into Old Spring Garden near
Charing Cross, and by John Crouch at the Three Lutes over against the Dog
Tavern in Drury Lane. 1685.


