THE WIVES EXCUSE: OR, Cuckolds make Themselves. A COMEDY. As it is ACTED at
the Theater Royal, BY Their MAJESTY'S Servants.

Written by Tho. Southern.

Nihil est his, qui placere volunt, tam adversarium, quam expectatio. Cicero.
LONDON, Printed for W. Freeman, at the Bible in Fleet Street, near Temple-Barr,
1692.

TO Mr. Southern; ON HIS COMEDY, Called the WIVES EXCUSE.
SUre there is a Fate in Plays; and it is in vain
To write, while these malignant Planets Reign:
Some very foolish Influence rules the Pit,
Not always kind to Sense, or just to Wit.
And whilst it lasts, let Buffoonry succeed,
To make us laugh; for never was more need.
Farce, in it self, is of a nasty scent;
But the gain smells not of the Excrement.
The Spanish Nymph, a Wit and Beauty too,
With all her Charms bore but a single show:
But, let a Monster Muscovite appear,
He draws a crowded Audience round the Year.
May be thou have not pleased the Box and Pit,
Yet those who blame thy Tale, commend thy Wit;
So Terence Plotted; but so Terence Writ.
Like his thy Thoughts are true, thy Language clean,
Even Lewdness is made Moral, in thy Scene.
The Hearers may for want of Nokes repine,
But rest secure, the Readers will be thine.
Nor was thy Labored Drama, damned or hissed,
But with a kind Civility, dismissed:
With such good manners as the The Wife in the Play, Mrs. Friendall.
Wife did use,
Who, not accepting, did but just refuse.
There was a glance at parting; such a look
As bids thee not give over, for one rebuke.
But if thou would be seen, as well as read;
Copy one living Author, and one dead;
The Standard of thy Style, let Etherege be:
For Wit, the Immortal Spring of Wycherly.
Learn after both, to draw some just Design,
And the next Age will learn to Copy thine.
JOHN DRYDEN.

PROLOGUE
Spoken by Mr. Betterton.
GAllants, you're welcome to our homely cheer:
If you have brought your English Stomachs here;
We'll treat you, as the French say, Cherentine.
And what we want of Humor, or of Wit,
Make up with your She-Neighbours in the Pit;
For on the Stage whatever we do, or say,
The Vizard Masks can find you better play:
With all our pains, we can but bring 'em in;
It Is you must take the Damsels out again:
And when we have brought you kindly thus together,
It Is your fault if you're parted by foul weather.
We hope these natural Reasons may produce,
In every Whoremaster, a kind excuse
For all our Faults, the Poet's, and the Players,
You Will pardon us, if you can find out theirs. [To the Maskers.
But to the gentler Men, who love at sight,
And never care to come to closer fight,
We have provided work for them to night.
With safety they may draw their Cannon down,
And into a Surrender bomb the Town.
From both side-boxes play their Batteries;
And not a Bullet shot, but burning Eyes:
Those they discharge with such successful Arts,
They fire, three deep, into the Ladies hearts.
Since each Man here finds his Diversion,
Let not the damning of our Play be one.
But to the Ladies, who must sit it out,
To hear us prate, and see the Oglers shoot,
Begging their favor, we have this to say,
In hopes of their Protection for the Play,
Here is a Music meeting every day.
EPILOGUE,
Spoken by Mrs. Barry.
MY Character, not being much in Vogue,
Has drawn me in to speak the Epilogue:
But, pray conceive me right, not to disparage
That ancient, English Perquisite of Marriage;
Which, when the Priests first made all Pleasure Sin,
Faster than they could cheat us, drew us in
With Rites and Liberties of Cuckolding.
That used to be the Custom, and so common,
No Girl but wished her self a Married Woman.
Whether I Have done my Husband right, or no;
Most Women may be in the right, that do:
Our Author does not set up for reforming,
Or giving hints to Fools who will not take warning:
He Is pleased, that other People are pleased too,
To help to reap that Harvest which they sow:
For among all the Cuckolds of this Town,
Who show themselves, and are as daily shown,
Our Poets may make some of 'em their own.
You find in me what may excuse a Wife:
Compare at home the Picture with the Life,
And most of you may find a Friendal there;
And most of you more justly used than here:
Our Author has his ends, if he can show,
The Women never want cause for what they do:
For, Ladies, all his aim is pleasing you.
Some metled Sparks, whom nothing can withstand,
Your Velvet-Fortune-Hunters, may demand,
Why, when the means were in the Lady's hand,
The Husband civil, and the Lover near,
No more was made of the Wife's Charecter?
Damn me, cries one, had I been Betterton,
And struts, and cocks, I know what I had done;
She should not have got clear of me so soon.
You only fear such Plays may spoil your Game:
But Flesh and Frailty always are the same:
And we shall still proceed in our old way,
For all that you can do, or Poets say.
PERSONS Represented.
Lovemore. By Mr. Betterton. Wellvile. Mr. Kynnaston. Wilding. Mr. Williams.
Courtall. Mr. Bowman. Springame. Mr. Mich. Lee. Friendall. Mr. Mountford.
Ruffle. Mr. Bright. Musick-Master. Mr. Harris.
WOMEN.
Mrs. Friendall. By Mrs. Barry. Mrs. Sightly. Mrs. Bracegirdle. Mrs. Wittwoud.
Mrs. Mountford. Mrs. Teazall. Mrs. Cory. Fanny, her Niece. Betty, Witwoud's
Maid, Mrs. Richardson. Two Pages, Footmen, and Linkboys.


Scene London.

THE Wives EXCUSE, OR, Cuckolds Make themselves.
ACT I. SCENE I.
The outward Room to the Musick-Meeting. Several Footmen at Hazard, Some rising
from Play. 1 Foot. APox on these Music Meetings; there is no Fifth Act
Here, a free cost, as we have at the Play Houses,
To make Gentlemen of us, and keep us out of
Harms way: Nothing but Lice, and Link-Boys,
In this Antichamber; or a merry Main to divert us;
And that merry Main, as you call it, makes most of us
Sad all the Week after.

2 Foot. Why, what have thou done, Gill?

1 Foot. Undone my self, and a very good Friend of mine, my Belly,
For a Week forward: I am hungry already in the apprehension
Of wanting a Supper; for my Board-Wages
Is gone to the Devil with his Bones.

3 Foot. Six is the Main, Gentlemen.

4 Foot. That was my last Tester.

5 Foot. I Will play no more --
Both rising from Play.
3 Foot. Set out my hand, don't leave me so, Gentlemen.

6 Foot. Come, Sir, Seven to Six, I set you --

3 Foot. Briskly my Boy.

6 Foot. I Set you this.

3 Foot. How much?

6 Foot. Three halfperth of Farthings.

3 Foot. Three halfperth of Farthings?
[Rises from Play] I see thou retain'st the Spirit of thy Ancestors, and as
thou were born, and bred, w^lt live rnd dye a Footman.

Three halfpenny worth of Farthings!


(...) He ^^^s like a Small beer Butler, in a Widdow-Lady's Family.

(...) May thou starve under the tyranny of a Housekeeper,
And never know the comfort of Board-wages again.

(...). Well, well, I have my Money for all that.

1 Foot. Why, what a Pretty Fellow have we here debauched from us,
And our Society, by living in a Civil Family! But this comes
Of keeping good hours, and living orderly: Idleness
After Supper, in your private houses, is the Mother
Of many mischiefs among the Maids.

3 Foot. Ay, ay, want of Employment has thrown him upon some
Gentle Chambermaid, and now he sets up for good husbandry,
To Father her Failings, and get a Wet-Nurse for his Lady.

6 Foot. Better so, than to Father your Master's Bastards, as you do
Sometimes; or now and then cheat him of his Wench,
In the Convey, and steal his Clap from him.

4 Foot. Gad I mercy in faith, Lad.

3 Foot. That indeed is a Sin I often commit, and sometimes repent of:
But, the good with the bad, I have no reason
To complain of my Service.

6. Foot. Pray don't trouble your head about mine then.

2 Foot. Come, come, we have all good Places if we can keep 'em:
And for my part, I am too deep in my Master's affairs, to fear
The losing of mine: What think you of the Family of the Friendals,
My Lads? a public private Family, newly set up,
And of very fair Reception.

3 Foot. Ay, Dick. Thou have the time on it indeed.

2 Foot. The Master of it frank and free, to make an Invitation to the whole
Town; and the Mistress hospitable, and handsome,

To give 'em welcome, and content: For my Master knows
Every body, and contrives that every body shall know her.

3 Foot. Ay, marry Sir, there is a Family to breed up a Pimp in!
You may make a Fortune out of such a Mistress,
Before your Master can get her with Child.

2 Foot. My Master has been married not a quarter of a year,
And half the young men in Town, know his Wife already;
Nay, know that he has known enough of her,
Not to care for her already.

3 Foot. And that may be a very good argument for some of 'em,
To persuade her to know a little of some body else,
And care as little for him.

4 Foot. A very good argument, if she takes it by the right handle

2 Foot. Some of your Masters, I warrant you
Will put it into her hand.

3 Foot. I know my Master has a design upon her.

2 Foot. And upon all the Women in Town.

4 Foot. Mine is in love with her.

5 Foot. And mine has hopes of her.

3. Foot. Every man has hopes of a new married Woman
For she marries to like her Man; and if upon Trial
She finds she cannot like her Husband; she will find some body else
That she can like, in a very little time, I warrant her,
Or change her Men 'till she does.

2 Foot. Let her like as many as she pleases, and welcome:
As they thrive with her, I shall thrive by them:
I grind by her Mill, and some of 'em I hope will set it a going.
Besides, she has discovered some of my Master's Intrigues of late.
That may help to fill the Sails; but I say nothing,
I will take Fees a both sides, and betray neither.

3 Foot. If your Lady loves play, as they say she does, she will be
So far in your interest, that he that makes his Court to her,
Must have money to recommend him --

2 Foot. To me he must indeed, if he expects my assistance

5 Foot. Come, come, what do you think of my Master,
Mr. Lovemore, for the Lady?

3 Foot. I don't think of him.

2 Foot. Not so much as she does, I believe you; he is a generous Gentleman,
And deserves very well of her, and me.

1 Foot. My Master, Mr. Wellvile is often at your House.

3 Foot. He follows Mrs. Sightly, I can tell you.
But if your Lady, Mrs. Friendall, has a mind to be very well used;
Not to settle to it; but only by the way of a fashionable revenge,
Or so, to do her self justice upon her Husband; I look upon Mr. Wilding,
My Master, one or other, to be the cleverest Cuckold-Maker
In Covent Garden.

2 Foot. Not to settle to it indeed, for your Master is not over constant.

3 Foot. He does not stay in a Family, to be challenged into Westminster Hall,
By the Husband's Action of battery, for an assault upon his Wife;
He is not so constant.

4 Foot. Or if your Lady be disposed to the more refined part of an Amor,
Without the brutality, or design of enjoyment,
Only for the pleasure of being talked of, or so forth --

3 Foot. Your Master Courtall will fit her to a hair:
For he will be as fond of the appearances of an Entrigue,
As she can be; to see him in the chase, you would think
He had pleasure in the Sport; for he will be as sure
Always to follow her, as never to press her:
He will take as much pains, to put her undeservedly
Into a Lampoon, upon his account, as he would, to avoid
A handsome occasion, in private, to qualify her for the scandal.

2 Foot. In short, Mr. Courtall will do every thing,
But what he ought to do, with a Woman.

4 Foot. He has broke off with three Gentlewomen, upon my word,
Within these two Months, for coming on too fast upon that business.

2 Foot. Well, there are pretenders enough; so I have the profit,
Let my Lady take the pleasure of the choice:
I Am for the Fairest Bidder.

3 Foot. What, Harry, have thou nothing to say of thy Mistress, Mrs. Witwoud?

7 Foot. Nothing extraordinary, but that I 'mtir'd of her.

3 Foot. She lives, as she used to do, least at home; has no Business
Of her own, but a great deal of other Peoples.
All the Men in Town follow her, but it is for other Women;
For she has frightened every one from a Design upon her:
Then she is a general Confidant; and sometimes reports
No more than she knows; but that is a favor indeed,
From a Wit, as they say she is.

7 Foot. If she be a Wit, I Will be sworn, she does not take me for one;
For she sends me very often upon very ridiculous Errands.

3 Foot. I think you have a correspondent Porter, in every quarter
Of the Town, to disperce her scandalous Letters, which she is
Always bantering one Fool or other withal?

7 Foot. Four or Five always in pay with her.

3 Foot. But when Horn-Fair comes, that is sure to be a Holy Day,
And every married Man, that has a Wife handsomer than she is,
At her proper cost and charges, may expect a Fairing,
To put him in mind of his fortune.

7 Foot. I find you know her too well, to desire to live with her.

3 Foot. I had rather be Master of the Ceremonies to a Visiting Lady,
To Squire about her how-d's-you, and Usher in the formal Salutations
Of all the Fops in Town, upon her day;
Nay, though she kept two days a week, than live in a Family with her.

1 Foot. Will this damned Musick-Meeting never be done?
Would the Cats-guts were in the Fiddlers Bellies.
Two Pages meeting.
1 Page. My Lady Smirkit's Page.

2 Page. Who Is there? my Lady Woudmore!

1. Page. At your dear Service, Madam.

2. Page. O Lord! Madam, I am surpised to see your Ladyship here. --

2. Foot. What have we here?

3. Foot. The Monkies Apeing their Ladies, let 'em go on.

2. Page. How can your Ladyship descend into these little Diversions
Of the Town, the Plays and the Musick-meetings?

1. Page. Little Diversions indeed, Madam, to us, who have seen
So much better abroad, and still retain too much of the
Delicacy of the French, to be pleased with the Barbarous
Performances of these English.

3. Foot. That Is a touch for some of 'em.

1. Page. Yet there is no staying always at home, your Ladyship knows. --

2. Page. Nor being always seen in the Drawing Room, I vow, and swear: --

1. Page. So that, Madam, we are almost under a necessity
Of appearing in these public places. --

2. Page. An absolute necessity of showing our selves sometimes.

1. Page. Ay, but, Madam, then the men, they do so Ogle one. --

3. Foot. Ah! very well, Mr. Charles.

1. Page. Into all the little Confusions,
That a Woman is liable to upon those occasions.

2. Page. I swear my Lord Simperwel has an irrisistible way with him.

1. Page. He ogl'd me all the Music long, I believe every body
Took notice of it, so suriously, I could not bear it my self:
I vow and swear, he almost made me blush;
And I would rather do any thing to deserve blushing, in another place, than by
a Country modesty betray such an unpardonable want of breeding, to the censure
of so much good Company.


3 Foot. I dare swear for her Ladyship,
She had rather do it than blush for it.

1 Page. Why how now, Jack Sauce?
[to the Footman.] But did I blush, Madam?
[To the Page.]
2 Page. Only for your Friends, Madam, to see us so neglected.

1 Page. Fie, fie, Madam, you made your Conquest too.
I minded no body but my Lord; and I vow and swear,
I must own it, Madam, he ogles one more like a Man of Quality, than any body
about Town, that I know of, and I think I am pretty well acquainted with all
the soft looks in Town.


2 Page. One after another we have 'em all -- but Jesu, Madam --

1 Page. Ay, Madam.

2 Page. They say the French Fleet will be here next Summer,
With their Tourviles, and their things,
And, Jesu, Madam, Ravish us all.

1 Page. O Lord, Madam, Ravishing us is nothing,
But our dear Religion, Madam, what will they do to that?

2 Page. Ay, what indeed, Madam?

1 Page. I would not lose the gaping Galleries of our Churches, for the best
Religion in Christendom.


3. Foot. You are precious Pages indeed,
Betray your Ladies secrets, before you come in to 'em.
Within. Make way for my Lord there, bear back Gentlemen.

1 Foot. So, so, it is done at last,
Let Us get the Coaches to the door.
[Exeunt Omnes.]
The Curtain drawn up, shows the Company at the Musick-Meeting; after an
Italian Song, Lovemore, Wellvile, Wilding, Courtall, Springame, Friendall,
Raffle, Mrs. Friendall, Sightly, Wittwoud, Fanny advance to the Front of the
Stage.
Mr. Fr. Ladies and Gentlemen, how did you like the Music?

Sight. O very fine sure, Sir.

Wit. What say you to it, young Gentlemen?

Spring. I have something to say to you, I like a great deal better,
Provided you will not laugh at me.
[Going aside with her.] But the Musick's extremely sine --
[To the Company.]
Well. Especially the Vocal part.
For I did not understand a word on it.

Mr. Fr. Nor I, faith, Wellvile, out the words were Italian.
They sung well, and that is enough for the pleasure of the Ear.

Court. By which I find your sense is sound.

Mr. Fr. And sound sense is a very good thing, Courtall --
[Goes to Wild.]
Well. That thou wot never be the better for.

Mr. Fr. Wilding, thou have been so busy about that
Young Girl there, thou know nothing of the matter.

Wild. O, Sir, you're mistaken, I am a great Admirer --

Mr. Fr. Of every thing in Petticoats.

Wild. Of these Musical Entertainments; I am very Musical, and love any call,
that brings the Women together.


Court. Though it were a Cat-call.

Mr. Fr. Vocal, or Instrumental! which do you most approve of?
If you are for the Instrumental, there were the Sonata's to night, and the
Chacons, which you know --


Wild. The Sonata's and the Chacons which I know!
Not I, Sir, I don't know 'em: they may be two Italian Fidlrs of your
acquaintance, for any thing I know of 'em.


Mr. Fr. Fie, fie, Fiddlers! Masters, if you please, Wilding, Masters, excellent
in their Art, and Famous for many admirable Compositions.

[mingles with the Company.]
Court. So, he is fast in his own snare, with his Sonata's,
And Chacons: But how goes the World, Wilding?

Wild. The same Women every day, and in every public appearance.

Court. Here are some faces, I see, of your acquaintance.

Wild. Ay, Pox take 'em, I see 'em too often to forget 'em:
Would their Owners thought as ill of 'em as I do,
They would keep 'em at home: but they are for showing their Show still, though
no body cares for the sight.

[They mix with the Company.]
Wit. Methinks it is but good manners in Mr. Lovemore,
To be particular to your Sister, when her Husband
Is so Universal to the Company.

Spring. Prithee leave her to her Husband:
She has satisfied her Relations enough in marrying this Coxcomb; now let her
satisfy her self, if she pleases, with any body she likes better.


Wit. Fie, fie, there is no talking to you,
You carry my meaning further than I designed.

Spring. Faith I took it up but where you left it,
Very near the matter.

Spring. No, no, you grow scandalous; and I would not
Be thought to say a scandalous thing of a Friend.

Spring. Since my Brother in Law is to be a Cuckold,
As it must be mightily my Sister's fault, if he be not,
I think Lovemore as proper a Fellow to carry on
So charitable a work, as she could have lit upon:
And if he has her consent to the business,
She has mine, I assure you.

Wit. A very reasonable Brother!

Spring. Would you would be as reasonable a Friend,
And allow me as many Liberties as I do her.

Wit. Why, so I will: she has the Men, and you shall have the Women,
The whole Sex to pick and choose --

Spring. One Mistress out of --

Wit. As many as you please, and as often as you have occasion.

Spring. Why, faith, that pleases me very well; you hit
My constitution, as if you were familiar with it,
Or had a mind to be so.

Wit. Not I indeed, Sir.

Spring. And I have, as you were saying --

Wit. As I was saying!

Spring. Very often an occasion for a Mistress.

Wit. You say so your self, I know nothing of your occasions.

Spring. Shall I bring you acquainted with some of 'em?
I have great variety, and have, every day, a new occasion
For a new Mistress: If you have a mind to be satisfied in this point, let me
go along with you --


Wit. Home with me?

Spring. Or home with me, will do my business as well.

Wit. But it will not do mine, Sir.

Spring. Then let it be home with you,
Though my Lodging is very convenient.

Wit. Why, this is sudden indeed, upon so small an acquaintance:
But it is something too soon for you,
And a little too late for me.

Spring. Not to repent, I hope, Madam? better late than never,
You know: Come, come, I have known
A worse offer better received.

Wit. And this offer you will make to every Woman,
Till it be received, I dare answer for you.

Spring. That Is more than you can do for your self for refusing it.
But the folly fall upon your o^n head: I have done my part, and it is your
fault if you're idle --

[Goes away.]
Sight. You have been entertained, Cozen --
[Sightly to her.]
Wit. By a very pretty prating Fellow, Cozen;
And I could be contented to let him show his parts this way, as often as he
pleased.


Sight. What! like a man of Honor, he is for making good
What he says --

Wit. And comes so quick upon that business, he will not afford
A Woman a reasonable liking-time, to make a decent
Excuse to her self, if she should allowd (...) a favor.

Sight. The young Officer has heard enough of your Character,
I suppose, not to put it too much into your power
Of laughing at him.

Wit. I Am sorry fort: I would have a man know just enough
Of me, to make him a Lover; and then, in a little time,
I should know enough of him, to make him an Ass.

Sight. This will come home to you one day.

Wit. In any shape but a Husband, Cozen.
observing Lovemore with Mrs. Friendall. But methinks Lovemore, and Mrs.
Friendall
Are very seriously engaged --

Sight. I have had an Eye upon 'em.

Wit. For such a trisle as Cuckolding a Husband is in this Town.

Sight. The men will always design upon our Sex;
But I dare answer for her. --

Wit. And so will I. That if she should fall from the frailty of the Flesh,
into that folly, she will appear no Monster,

What ever her Husband may be.
What say you to a ramble after the Music?

Sight. I say nothing to it.

Wit. A Hackney jaunt, from one end of the Town to the other?

Sight. It Is too late.

Wit. I know two several Companies gone into the City,
One to Pontacks, and the other to the Rummer, to Supper:
I want to disturb, strangely; what say you, Coz?
Let Us put on our Masks, draw up the Glasses,
And send up for the Men, to make their Women uneasse:
There Is one of 'em to be married, it may do good upon her,
By showing what she must trust to, if she will have a Husband.

Sight. And can you be so mischievous?

Wit. Can you resist the Temptation?

Sight. I came with Mrs. Friendal, and must go home with her.
Look to your charge there.

Wit. I have an Eye that way.

Sight. We shall see you to morrow, Cousin?

Wit. At your Toylet, Cousin; you are always
My first Visit.
[Goes to Wilding and Fanny.
Mrs. Fr. Is this your Friendship to Mr. Friendal?
I must not hear it.

Love. You see he g^^es you leave.

Mrs. Fr. Therefore I cannot take it; the Confidence is so generous,
That even that would secure me to him.

Love. The Confidence is as generous on your side;
And do you think that will secure him to you?

Mrs. Fr. I Will ask him, if you please.

Love. You Will but disturb him.

Mrs. Fr. Mr. Friendal.
[Calling him.
Mr. Fr. Ha! what is the matter, Madam?

Mrs. Fr. There has happened her (...) scurvy Dispute between me
And one of your Friends, Sir, as you think fit to call 'em.

Mr. Fr. A Dispute! about what, prithee? but before I hear
A word on it, Lovemore, thou art certainly in the wrong,
In holding an Argument with a Woman.

Love. I begin to think so too, Sir, for contending with a Lady,
That will be tried by no body, but her Husband.

Mr. Fr. But what is the business?
Nothing extraordinary between you, I hope?

Mrs. Fr. Believe me, Sir, I think it very extraordinary. --

Lov. Very extraordinary indeed, Madam, to be so publicly
Exposed for a private Opinion.

Mrs. Fr. And you shall be the judge of the difference.

Mr. Fr. No, no, no difference among Friends, it must not come to that,
I Will make up all differences between you.

Love. You may do much indeed to set all straight.

Mr. Fr. And so I will, in faith Lovemore, I Will reconcile all
I warrant you; but come, what is this mighty matter between you?

Mrs. Fr. I think it a mighty matter, Mr. Friendall, to be so far
Suspected in my Conduct, that any one, under the Title
Of your Friend, should dare, in your absense,
To be so very Familiar with me --

Mr. Fr. How, Madam!

Love. All will out, I see.
[Aside.
Mr. Fr. In my absence, so very familiar with you.

Mrs. Fr. As to censure these innocent Liberties that the Women
Allow themselves in the Company of their Husbands.

Love. So, she has saved her Credit with me,
Mrs. Friendall joins Mrs. Sightly, and Witwoud. And mine with her Husband.

Mr. Fr. Why, Lovemore, thou art in the wrong of all this;
I desired you to sport off a little Gallantry with my Wife, to Entertain and
Divert her, from making her observations upon me, and thou do nothing but
play the Critic upon her.


Love. I find I was mistaken.
But how would you have me behave my self?

Mr. Fr. Why, I would have you very frequent in your Visits,
And very obliging to my Wife: Now and then, to carry on
Our other Pleasures the better: For an amusement, or so,
You may say a Civil thing to her, for every Woman, you know,
Loves to have a Civil thing said to her sometimes;
But then you must be very cautious in the expression;
If she should in the least apprehend that you had a design
Upon her, 'twou'd raise the Devil in one part of the Family,
And lay him in another, perhaps, where I had a mind to employ him:
Therefore I would have you keep in Favor with her --

Love. I Will do my best, I promise you.

Mr. Fr. She Is inclining, you must know, to speak very well of you;
And that she does of very few of the Men, I assure you:
She approves of the intimacy and Friendship between us,
And of your coming to the House; and that may
Stand you instead with the Lady, you wot off --

Love. I apprehend you -- so begging the Ladies Pardon
[To Mrs. Friendal. With a design of doing something to deserve it. --

Wit. That will never fail with the Women, Mr. Lovemore.

Love. I will make an Interest with the Masters,
To give you a Song at parting.
[Goes to the Masters.
Sight. An English Song, good Mr. Lovemore.

Mr. Fr. O by all means, an English Song.
[Goes the Masters too.
Welvile. Any Song, which will not oblige a Man.
To tell you, he has seen an Opera at Venice to understand.

Mr. Fr. Pray, let him sing the Ladies the Song I gave him.

Musick-Master. Which Song, Sir?

Mr. Fr. The last.

Musick-Master. It Is not set, Sir.

Mr. Fr. Not set, Sir!
[Turning from him, to the Ladies.
Love. That Is a Fault he will never forgive you.

Musick-Master. Why, really, Sir, I would serve any Gentleman to my power;
But the Words are so abominably out of the way of Music,
I don't know how to humor 'em: There Is no setting 'em,
Or singing 'em, to please any body, but himself.

Sight. O! but we lose by this.

Mr. Fr. Hang them, idle Rascals; they care not what Entertainment
We lose, so they have but our Money.

Sight. Is it your own Song, Mr. Friendall?

Mr. Fr. I must not rob your Ladyship of your Part in it.

Sight. My Part in your Song, Sir!

Mr. Fr. You were the Muse that inspired me;
I writ it upon your Ladyship.

Sight. Fie, fie; That Pride would ruin me:
But I know you say so to every Woman.
[She turns from him.
Mr. Fr. I gad, she is in the right on it;
I have told a Dozen so already at the Musick-meeting,
And most of 'em believe me.

Sight. Does Mr. Friendall often write Songs, Madam?

Mrs. Fr. He does many things, he should not do, Madam;
But I think he loves me, and that excuses him to me:
Though, you may be sure, it is with the tenderest Concern for my own
Reputation, that I see my Husband daily trifle away his
So notoriously, in one Folly or other of the Town.
[Goes to Mr. Friendall.
Wit. For his own Reputation, it must be;
For the World will believe, she turns such a Husband
To the right Use, whatever she says to the contrary.

Mrs. Fr. Mr. Friendall, pray be satisfied with a good Estate;
And not imagine, because you have that, you have every thing else.
The business of writing Songs should be over with a married Man.
And since I cannot be suspected to be the Phillis, or Cloris.
It Is an Affront to me, to have any other Woman thought so.

Mr. Fr. Indeed, Madam, so far you are right:
I never heard of any Man, that writ a Song upon his Wife.
SONG, By Major General Sackvile.
Ungrateful Love! Thus every Hour,
To punish me by her Disdain!
You tyrannise to show your Power;
And She, to triumph in my Pain.
You, who can laugh at Humane Woes,
And Victims to her Pride decree,
On me, your yielding Slave, impose
Your Chains; but leave the Rebel free.
How fatal are your poisoned Darts!
Her conquering Eyes the Trophies boast,
Whilst you ensnare poor wandering Hearts,
That in her Charms and Scorn are lost.
Impious, and Cruel: You deny
A Death, to ease me of my Care;
Which she delays, to make me try
The force of Beauty, and Despair.

Mr. Fr. Lovemore, We may thank you for this:
But when you keep your Promise to me, at Dinner, to Morrow,
And you, and you, and all of you, Gentlemen,
[Speaks to all the Men. I Will do you Reason to the good Company.
Some of my Servants there. --
[Goes to the Door.
Court. Madam, I am very luckily here to offer you my Service.

Mrs. Fr. No particular Woman must expect it from so general
A Follower of the Sex, as Mr. Courtall is.

Court. A general Follower of the Sex indeed, Madam,
In my Care of 'em.

Mrs. Fr. Besides, it is dangerous to be seen with a Man of your Character;
For if you don't make it an Intrigue, the Town makes it for you:
And that does most of your Business as well.

Court. There Is no knowing a Man by his Character in this Town;
The Partiality of Friends, and the Prejudice of Enemies, who divide it,
Always make him better or worse than he deserves.

Mrs. Fr. If you have no regard to my Reputation, pray be tender of your own.
It Is nowadays as scandalous in a Man, who would be thought to know
The Town (as I know you would) to wait upon a bare Face to her Coach,
As it used to be to lead out a Vizard-Mask:
But the Pit has got the better of the Boxes,
With most of you, in that point of Civility;
And I don't doubt, but it turns to better Account.

Spring. Indeed, Sister, it does turn to better Account;
And therefore we must provide for our selves. --
Takes Courtall with him. To Mrs. Witwoud. Why, here is a Woman, Courtall --
If she had a Vizard-Mask to encourage me --
[Lovemore goes to Mrs. Friendall. I could go to the World's end with her:
But, as she is, barefaced, and an honest Woman --

Wit. You Will do a foolish thing, for once; see her to her Coach,
I dare say for you, to make her otherwise.

Spring. Why, if it must be so --
[Addressing to her.
Wild. You own your Aunt is a-bed; and you see Mrs. Witwoud's
Too busy to mind your going away with me.

Fanny. I cannot to night, but I Will call upon you to morrow morning,
As I go to Six a Clock Prayers.

Love. I hope, Madam, I may without exception wait upon you.
[To Mrs. Friendall.
Welvile. And, Madam, I have the Title of an old Servant to your Ladyship,
To expect that favor from you --
[To Mrs. Sightly.
Sight. Mr. Friendall, having a handsome Wife in the Company,
May be jealous; and you will pardon me,
If I am unwilling to give him a suspicion of a Man,
Whom I would have every body think as well of, as I do my self.

Mrs. Fr. Mr. Friendall gives you more opportunities than I can approve of,
And I could wish you would not take the advantage of 'em,
They Will turn to no account.
[Leads Mrs. Sightly.
Mr. Fr. Come, Ladys, I am your Man I find --
[Mrs. Friendall following.
Ruffle. What think you of this occasion?

Love. You cannot have a better; follow him --
[Springam leads Witwoud, And be famous --
[Wilding leads Fanny out.
Well. What have you now in hand?
[Raffle after the Company.
Love. Why all my hopes of the Wife depending upon the
Senceless behavior of the Husband:
I have contrived, by this Fellow, before her face too, to expose
Him, a way, that must ruin him with her for ever;
Let Us follow, and expect the event --
[Exeunt.
SCENE Changes to the Street.
Several Link-Boys, and Footmen. Link-boy. Have a light Gentlemen, have a
light, Sir,
[Springam with Witwoud.
Spring. Light your selves to the Devil.
[Wilding with Fanny, and several others.
2 Link B. Bless you Master, we can find the way in the dark.
Shall I light your Worship there?

Spring. Then call a Coach, and thy Wit shall be thy reward.

5 Foot. Mr. Friendall's Coach there --
Mr. Friend. enters, leading Mrs. Sightly with his Wife, Ruffle enters after
'em. Lovemore and Wellvile in the rear. It Is at the door, Sir.

Mr. Fr. I must improve 'every opportunity
With your Ladyship, to convince you of the truths
I have been telling you to night, and in this
Billet, I give it under my Hand how very much
I am your Servant --
[Sightly throws it behind her.
Sight. Fie, fie, before your Wife --
[Ruffle takes it up.
Mrs. Fr. Sir, that Paper don't belong to you.
Friendall leads Mrs. Sightly off, and returns for his Wife.
Ruffle. Don't be jealous, Lady, I know no design
The Gentlewoman has as yet upon my Person
And I Will belong to you, if this Gentleman pleases.

Mr. Fr. You're pleased to be merry, Sir, but no touching her, I beseech you.

Mrs. Fr. What would the Fellow have?

Ruffl. Why, I would have this Fellow gone about his business.

Mr. Friend. My Business lies here at present, Sir.

Raffle. You lie there, Sir.
Hits Mr. Friendall a box on the ear, and draws, the Women shriek, Mrs.
Friendall pretends to hold her Husband, the Company come about 'em.
Mrs. Fr. Good Mr. Friendall, another time,
Consider where you are.
You are more a Man of honor, I know, than to draw your Sword
Among the Women; I am sorry this has happened in a place
Where you cannot right your self, without wronging the Company.
But you will find a time to do a justice to your self, and the Ladies,
Who have suffered in the apprehension of such a brutality.

Spring. I Will go along with you --
[All go off but Witwoud.
Wit. Would the Devil had 'em, for drawing their Swords here;
I have lost my little Captain in the fray:
My Charge is departed too, and for this night I suppose has left me
To make an excuse to the Family, for her lying abroad
With a Country Cozen, or so; that Rogue Wilding has carried
Her home with him, and it is as well now, as a week hence,
For when these young Wenches once set their hearts upon it,
Every thing gives them an opportunity to ruin themselves:
Her Aunt Teazall has made her rise to Six a Clock Prayers, to sine
Purpose, if this be the fruits of her Devotion: but since she must
Fall to some body, I Am glad Wilding has her, for he will use her ill enough
In a little time, to make her wiser for the future,
By the dear experience, and vexation of this Intrigue,
(Being disappointed of many things she expects)
She may make a virtue of necessity, repent because she cannot keep him to her
self,
And make an honest man a very good Wife yet.
[Exit.
Ruffle. I have done my part, and am satisfied
[Lovemore, Woolvile, Ruffle return. With the honor of the Achievement.

Love. It Is a reputation clear-gain'd.
Since there is no danger of accounting for it.

Ruffle. So thanking you, for this occasion of showing my self,
I am your humble Servant --
[Exit.
Wellvile. Who is this Hero, pray?

Love. Why this is a Spark, that has had the misfortune of being kicked very
lately, and I have helped him to this occasion of repairing his honor, upon our
very good friend, a greater Coward than himself:

He has served my ends, now let him serve the Towns.

Wellv. But did you observe how the Lady behaved her self
In the Quarrel, to conceal her Husband's Cowardice?

Love. What a handsome excuse she made in his favor, to the Company?
When she can never make any for him to her self.

Wellvile. This matter well managed, may turn to account; though you must not be
seen to expose him, you may take the advantage of his exposing himself.


Love. And let her say what she can, upon this subject, I believe no Woman can
be contented to have her Honor, much longer than her Fortune in the possession
of a Man, who has no fund of his own, to answer in security for either.

Thus, who a Married Woman's Love would win,
Should with the Husband's failings first begin;
Make him but in the fault, and you shall find
A Good Excuse will make most Women kind.
[Exeunt.
ACT the Second, SCENE I.
Witwou'd at a Table, with Betty, and a Footman waiting. Wit. NO News of my
Cozen Fanny this morning?

Betty. For God's sake, Madam, not a word of her lying out
To night, we shall have the Devil to do
With the Old Gentlewoman, if she knows it.

Wit. That Is a secret I can keep from her, for my own sake, Betty:
But how comes this about? I Am quite out of Gilt Paper;
Harry, you fetch me two or three Quire from Mr. Bentleys,
And call at Mrs. Da Robe's, my Mantoa-Womans,
As you come back, for Letters -- and do you hear?
Give this Note to Joe the Porter, he needs no instructions;
Let him leave it for Mr. Wilding --
[Footman and Maid go out. I find I must meddle in this business;
For her Visits at this rate, will not only be troublesome
To him (as I would have 'em) but in a little time,
Be public to the whole Town:
Now, though I am very well pleased with any matter
Of Scandal; I am so nearly related to the interest
Of this Girl, I would not have her the occasion of it.
They say the Understanding ought to be suited
To the Condition, to make any one happy:
Would she were in a Condition suitable
To her Understanding; she has wit enough
For a Wife, and nothing else that I know of.
Teazall Enters to her.
Teaz. O, Madam! you're welcome home.

Wit. Rather good morrow, Cozen.

Teaz. Rather good morrow indeed,
That Is the properer Salutation:
For you're never to be seen in your Lodging
At any other time of the day; and then too,
As soon as you're out a Bed in a morning,
You Summon a Congregation of your Fellows
Together, to hear you prate by the hour,
Flatter every body in the Company,
Speak ill of every one that is absent,
And scatter about the scandal of that day.

Wit. Why, Madam, you will not quarrel at that, I hope,
It Is one of the most fashionable, innocent
Diversions of the Town,
It makes a great deal of mirth, speaking ill of People,
And never does any body any harm.

Teaz. Not with any that know you, I believe.
How came you home last night?
The night before, you arrived like a Carted Bawd,
Justly punished for the Sins of the People.
You confessed you were forced to bilk your Coach,
To get rid of the Coxcombs, that dogged you
From the Playhouse, and being pursued
By the Coachman, and Footmen (for I don't doubt
But you gave the Gentlemen encouragement enough,
To come home with you) you looked as if
You belonged to a Cellar, in some of the Allies
You were hunted through, and had been
Caterwawling in all the kennels in Town.

Wit. That was an unfortunate night indeed.

Teaz. Well, deliver every good woman's Child, I say,
From such daggle-tail'd Courses as these are;
What will be the end of 'em, I beseech you?
You will make your self as odious in a little time,
As you endeavor to make every body else:
This is not the way to get a Husband;
The Men know too much of you already,
To desire any more of you.

Wit. I don't set up for a Husband.

Teaz. Marry come up here! You may have
An occasion for an Husband, when you cannot get one,
Husbands are not always to be had at a months
Warn'ng, to finish another work:
What, it is beneath the Character of a she Wit,
^ suppose, to be constant: or is a Husband
Out of fashion of you forsooth?
Another Woman's husband can go down with you,
To my knowledge, and as ugly a Rogue too,
With as hanging a Countenance, as I could wish
Any Villain I had a mind
To be rid of -- your diversion, as you call him.

Wit. O spare my shame, I own he is my curse,
Doomed for my plague, and pleasure.

Teaz. Spare your shame! I Will say that for you,
You have not been sparing of any endeavor,
That could bring a shame any way into the Family
Wherever you lived yet; if there was ever a Fool
Soft enough to throw it upon.
All your Relations know you, and are afraid
To have you in a House with 'em:
And I suppose you are very well pleased to be
From under their roof; to have your Fellows come
After you, to my House, as they do;
And as I am Fool enough to allow of.

Wit. For no harm, Cousin, I hope.

Teaz. Perhaps you think it no harm;
And, indeed, it cannot easily do you any harm:
But, I Am sure, I have one of my Nieces
Already undone, by your bringing her
Acquainted with some of 'em.
I was forced to marry her, you know,
Below her Rank (for the usual Reason
Of this End of the Town) into the City,
Where 'twas less scandalous, the Wives there
Having a Charter for what they do.
And now Fanny, a very Girl, when I have provided
A Husband, and all, for her, (for she must have a Husband,)
She takes after her Sister; (as a little thing
Will make a President for what we are
Inclined to;) she takes after her Sister, I say,
And is unfortunately engaged in a Passion
For Mr. Wilding: And how to prevent it --

Wit. Indeed, I must acknowledge I was, in a great
Measure, the unfortunate Cause of my Cousin
Biddy's Miscarriage; but for my Cousin Fanny,
Rely upon me; nothing shall come on it:
I am now going to Mr. Wilding
On that Account; and have sent a Note
To secure him at his Lodgings till I come.

Teaz. Well, Where Is this Girl?
[Betty Enters. Why does not she come, when I send for her?

Betty. Madam, she went to Six-a-Clock Prayers,
And is not come back yet.

Teaz. God's Bodykins! Has she got the trick on it?
Of abusing the Church into the place
Of Assignation already?
Wilding has carried her home with him.
That Is certain: Get you gone after her;
May be you may prevent his wicked
Design on her. Go, go, and redeem her,
Though you leave your self in her room.

Wit. I Am obliged to you, truly, Madam.

Teaz. I dare venture you,
You Will not be in Love with him;
You Will give him as good as he brings;
And, let the worst come to the worst,
You have lived too long in the Town,
To be uneasy for any Man;
Or be concerned beyond the Pleasure
And Convenience of the Intrigue.
Therefore I may venture you, a little time
Goes a great way in this business; deliver her,
And I will not find fault with you, these three days
You shall do what you please --
[Exeunt.
SCENE II.
Mr. Friendall's House. Mrs. Friendall following Mr. Friendall. Mrs. Fr. Nay,
Mr. Friendall, I know what you will object to me;
But you must hear me out.
The concern, and care of your reputation,
Is as dear to me, as it can be tender to you;
Since I must appear to the world, only in that rank of honor,
Which you are pleased to maintain.

Mr Fr. Why, Madam, you have as handsome an Equipage
As any Man's Wife in Town, that has a Father alive.

Mrs Fr. This must not put me off,
I see you make little of the matter, to hide it from my fears;
And there indeed you're kind: but it is in vain
To think of concealing from me, what you intend,
From what you ought to do, I know what you will do,
After so base a wrong.

Mr. Fr. A Drunken extravagance, the Fellow
Will be sorry for it, when he is sober --

Mrs. Fr. If you would stay till then.

Mr. Fr. And beg my pardon.

Mrs Fr. That he shall do, if that would satisfy you.

Mr. Fr. Satisfy me!

Mrs. Fr. And let it satisfy you,
It ought to satisfy you from such a one.
For, I believe he would not have quarreled any where else,
Nor there neither, but upon the prospect
Of being prevented, or parted, or secured over night,
In order to beg pardon in the morning.

Mr. Fr. Ay, Madam, but consider --

Mrs. Fr. Pray consider me, Mr. Friendall;
I must suffer every way, if you Proceed to a revenge;
In your danger, which must be mine;
In my honor, which ought to be more yours;
Than to expose it upon every little occasion --
Come, come, in other things you have a good
Opinion of my conduct, pray let me govern here:
You may be assured, I Will do nothing to lessen you,
The satisfaction shall be as public as the affront.
Leave it to me for once, I won not be denied --
He is not worth your danger.

Mr. Fr. Well, you shall govern me.

Mrs. Fr. What you are a married man;
And have a good Estate settled upon you;
And should not be accountable to every idle Rake-hell.
That has a mind to establish a Renown,
From being troublesome to public places.

Mr. Fr. What then would you propose?

Mrs. Fr. A small request; not to stir abroad,
Nor be at home to any body, 'till you hear from me.

Mr. Fr. I promise you I will not --
[Exit.
Mrs. Fr. I dare take your word:
His lameness last Night,
And backwardness this Morning,
In resenting that blow, satisfy me
That he is not in a Fever for Fighting:
I don't know that he is a Coward;
But having these reasons to suspect him,
I thought this was my best way to hinder him
From discovering himself.
For if he had betrayed that baseness to me,
I should despise him; and can I love the Man I most despise?
Brother, I sent for you --
[Springam to her.
Spr. To make up this quarrel I know, and I come to lend
A helping hand to the work,
I design to be a Second in the business.

Mrs. Fr. You must be my Second then,
For I have taken the Quarrel upon me.

Spr. With all my heart, I gad;
We, who live all the Summer for the Public,
Should live in the Winter for our selves --

Mrs. Fr. And the Women, good Captain --

Spr. That Is living for our selves,
For it is not living without 'em:
And a Duel now might but interrupt a Month
Of other Business perhaps, that would be more agreeable
To my constitution, I assure you:
Then we are to have no fighting it seems?

Mrs. Fr. For Reasons I Will tell you hereafter.

Spr. Nay there was no great danger of it;
I have found out the Gentleman's Lodgings, and Character.
We shall strike up a Peace before a Bottle's to an end.

Mrs. Fr. This Challenge must be delivered as from him;
I trust the management to you:
Only take this in advice, that Mr. Friendal
Wants your assistance within; you must stand by him,
And oblige the Gentleman to make him satisfaction,
Without bringing his Person in danger.
And he shall satisfy him, or me.

Spr. I understand you, and he shall satisfy him, or me.

Mrs. Fr. See him satisfied, and I Will satisfy you, with something
Shall be better to a younger Brother,
Than the false Musters of a Winters quarter.

Spring. I warrant you.
[Exit.
Mrs. Fr. Whatever I think of him, I must not let him fall
Into the Contempt of the Town: Every little Fellow,
I know, will be censoriously inquisitive,
And maliciously witty, upon another Man's Cowardice,
Out of the pleasure of finding as great a Rascal as himself.
How despicable a Condition must that Matrimony be,
When the Husband (whom we look upon as a Sanctuary for a
Woman's Honor) must be obliged to the Discretion
And Management of a Wife,
For the Security of his own!
Have a care of thinking that way;
For in a married State, as in the public,
We tie our selves up, indeed; but to be protected
In our Persons, Fortunes and Honors,
By those very Laces, that restrain us in other things;
For few will obey, but for the Benefit
They receive from the Government --
[Servant enters.
Serve. Madam, Mr. Lovemore --
[Goes out.
Mr. Fr. Lovemore here!
I know he comes to tempt me to rebel;
But I Am prepared for him. --
[Lovemore Enters. Good Morrow Mr. Lovemore.

Love. I could not expect to see your Ladyship so early:
I come to Mr. Friendall.

Mr. Fr. May I thank you for the Visit?

Love. I came as a Friend, you may be sure, Madam:
Where your Honor's concerned, I cannot be an Enemy.

Mrs. Fr. Not reasonably, indeed, to any Man that would injure it,
Since you are a professed Enemy.

Love. An Enemy!

Mrs. Fr. Unless you will allow no body to ruin it,
But your self.

Love. Indeed, I would allow no body to defend it, but my self,
If I had the keeping of it: But a happier Man
Has that Title, and I can only hope
To be a Second in your Service.

Mrs. Fr. I thank you for the Service you design me;
But that happier Man, as you call him,
Who has the Title, will maintain it, it seems;
For he, and my Brother Springam, I Am afraid,
Are gone about it already.

Love. Gone, Madam!

Mrs. Fr. An Hour ago, before I had notice to prevent 'em:
For Mr. Friendall, you may be sure,
Was impatient for an Occasion of righting himself.

Love. I might have thought so, indeed, Madam:
Would I had come sooner.

Mrs. Fr. You may yet be serviceable to me, Sir, though you are too late for Mr.
Fr.

Love. How, Madam, I beseech you?

Mrs. Fr. By endeavoring to prevent 'em: You are acquainted.
With the Ways of reconciling Matters of this
Honorable Nature. I am going to make an Interest with a Kinsman,
A Colonel of the Guards, my self, to secure 'em.
Let your good Nature in this, be a Proof of your Friendship;
And command me to my Power. --
[Exit.
Love. Prevent 'em! Yes, yes: That I must do for my own sake:
For if he should behave himself better than I imagined he would,
It may secure him in his Wife's Esteem, and only
Ruin me with her, who laid the Design.
[Exit.
SCENE III.
Wilding's Lodgings. Wilding, and his Man. Wild. Have you disposed of her?

Serve. Safe into a Chair, Sir; she is jogging homeward,
Lighter by a Maidenhead, I presume, than she came, Sir.

Wild. The Loss is not so light, but she may feel it.

Serve. Heavy enough, perhaps, nine Months hence, Sir.
But have you sent ever a Lie along with her?

Wild. How, Sirrah?

Serve. pardon me, Sir: Not that I believe your Honor
Was sparing of your Conscience, in saying any thing,
And swearing to it, that she had a mind to believe.

Wild. That you may swear, indeed.

Serve. But she is gone away so very well satisfied
With what you have said and done to her,
She Is above inventing a Lie for her self:
The first angry Word they give her at home,
I suppose, you may hear of her; a Hackney-Coach
Removes her, and her Commodes, upon very little warning;
And I expect when she will send in half a dozen
Band-boxes, to take possession of your Lodgings.
But, pray Sir, if I may be so bold --

Wild. Yes, yes; at this time you may be so bold:
The Service of your Wit secures you the Privilege of your Jest.

Serve. Then, pray Sir, why did you take so much pains
To persuade this young Creature to come away
From her Aunt, when I know you never design
To take care of her your self?

Wild. Why, 'Faith, I cannot make you a very good Answer:
But the best Reason I know of, is,
(Besides the Reputation of undoing her)
It looks kind, at the time, to talk of providing
For the Woman that does one the favor.
'Twas a very plausible Argument, to cozen her into a Consent;
Level to my Design of Lying with her,
And carried to the very Mark of Love.
Indeed, it costs nothing to promise,

Serve. When nothing can oblige you to pay:
And if she depends upon it, at her peril;
It Is she will be disappointed, not you;
Though Ten to One, poor little Rogue, from the Fondness
Of her own Inclinations, she guesses at yours:
And fancies, from the Courtesy she has done you,
You will be so civil a Gentleman, to marry her.

Wild. Not unlikely: There Is none of these young Girls,
(Let a Man's Character be never so loose among 'em,)
But, from one Vanity, or other, will be encouraged to design and venture upon
him: And though Fifty
Of their Acquaintance have fallen in the Experiment,
Each of them will still imagine, she has something,
Particular, in her Person, forsooth, to reclaim,
And engage him to her self. So most of 'em
Miscarry, upon the Project of getting Husbands,

Serve. Gad forgive me for Swearing; but, as I hope to be saved,
And that is a bold Word for a Footman (...) beg your Pardon;
There Is a Lady below, in a Vizard, to speak with you.
[Exit.
Wild. Get you gone, you Rascal; beg her Pardon, and Leave
To wait upon her: She would have been admitted, in less time,
To a Privy Counselors leave, though he had laid aside
The Business of the Nation, to manage hers.
This must be the Letter-Lady:
She comes a little unseasonable, if she knew all:
If she has Experience enough to allow for some Natural
Miscarriages, which may happen in the beginning
Of an Amor, I may pacify her that way:
It Is but swearing heartily, damming the Modesty
Of my Constitution, laying its Faults upon an Over-respect
To her, and promising better things for the future:
That used to be a current Excuse; but it is the Women's Fault,
If it pass too often upon 'em. --
If she prove an old Acquaintance, the Coldness of the
Entertainment will secure me from the Persecution of her Visits
Hereafter: But if it be a Face I never saw,
I may use her well enough yet, to encourage her
To another Appointment. So every way does my Business,
Whatever becomes of the Ladies. --
[Wittwood Enters Masked. O, Madam, I beg your Pardon. --

Wit. No Excuses, good Sir; Men of Employment are above
Good Breeding; and I see you have a great deal upon your hands,

Wild. I am a Man of Business, indeed, Madam;
And, as you were pleased to signify in your Letter,
My Practice lies among the Women:
What can I do for you?

Wit. Cannot you tell what, Sir? You are not the Man I took you for:
But you are like our Fortune Tellers,
Who come into our Secrets, more by our own Folly,
In betraying our selves, than by any Skill
Or Knowledge of their own.

Wild. Indeed I should have proceeded, as most of those Fellows do,
Set out impudently at first, taken several things
For granted (as that you were no Maid, and so forth)
Ventured briskly at every thing, and something
Might have happened to please you.

Wit. Did the Lady, just gone away from you, find it so?

Wild. She had what she came for: You would take it ill,
To lose your labor your self, Madam.

Wit. She ventured at every thing, as briskly
As you could, I suppose, Sir?

Wild. It Is a towardly Girl indeed, and comes on sinely;
I have no reason to complain of losing my labor
Upon her: She Is ready for running away
From her Relations already.
Are not you a little that way inclined? Come, come,
If you have any troubles upon your (...), Child --

Wit. You can remove 'em into the ^lesh, I warrant you.

Wild. If you have ever a Husband, that lies heavy
Upon your Conscience, I have a Cordial
Will drive the Distemper from your heart.

Wit. Why that is kind indeed, to make some room for the Lover:
But that is not my Distemper: I could resolve it my self,
If I had a Husband, whether I would make him a Cuckold, or no:
But I lie under a Difficulty of disposing of a Maiden head,

Wild. There I must resolve you, that case I often handle.

Wit. But hear if, I besee^h you, before you decide it.

Wild. That would do well in Westminster Hall, I grant you,
But in Proceedings of this nature, we are always
On the Plaintiffs side: Let the sober Party say what they can
To the reason of the thing.
You are certainly in the right, in pleasing your self.

Wit. 'Twill come to that, I believe: For you must know, Sir,
That being under the Discretion, and Tyranny of an old Aunt --

Wild. You will naturally run away from her.

Wit. And being considerable enough, to be followed for my Fortune --

Wild. You will certainly be betrayed, and Sold by her --

Wit. To some Booby of her own Breed, who paying too dear
For the Purchase, will undo himself, to undo me.

Wild. Come, come, you are now under my Care,
It Is my Fault, if you miscarry --

Wit. And mine too if I do.

Wild. Let me be your Trustee --

Wit. Indeed the Woman should cheat the Man, as much as she can,
Before Marriage, because, after it,
He has a Title of cheating her, as long as he lives.

Wild. If you can'^ make over your Money,
Make over your --

Wit. Common conveyances both in our Sex, Sir.

VVild. A Maiden-head's a Jewel of no value in Marriage --

Wit. It Is never set down indeed,
In the particular of a Woman's Estate.

VVild. And therefore least mist by a Husband,
Of any thing she brings along with her.

Wit. If indeed, by the articles of Marriage, a Man should convenant
For a Maidenhead, the Woman,
In a legal honesty, ought to satisfy the Bargain,
But the Men never mention that,
For fear of inflaming the Jointure.

Wild. And the Women never put 'em upon it,

Wit. Out of a Conscience in their dealings to be sure, for fear
They should not always be able to be as good as their words.

Wild. I see, Madam, we differ ^n^y in our Sexes;
And now, if you please, we will beg^^
A right understanding between them two.

Wit. How, Sir!

Wild. I Will show you how: have a care what you do, Madam,
It Is a very difficult matter, let me tell you,
To refuse a man handsomely,
Look you, Madam, I would have you make a decent resistance,
A little of it enhaunces the favor,
And keeps up the value of your Person,
But too much on it is an undervaluing of mine.
Nay, nay, when it once comes to fighting,
You often ruin what you would raise.
Struggling too long, is as much to your disadvantage,
As not struggling at all; and you know it is the same thing
To a Woman, a Man's being indifferent,
As his being incapable to oblige her --
Come, come, enough of this --

Wit. So I say too, Sir, the jest will go no further, I see.

VVild. Mrs. VVitwoud! I did not expect
[Unmasks, he declines into a respect to her. To see you here, indeed, Madam.

Wit. I came upon business, Mr. VVilding, but the temptation
Of a Vizard Mask, and the pleasure of prating
Upon such an occasion, has carried me a little beyond it,

VVild. I am obliged to you, for a great deal of wit,
Whatever else you design me by this visit.

Wit. Which now you hardly thank me for;
Since it is impossible for an old Acquaintance,
To answer your expectations of a new face.

VVild. To show how I value your visit, and the regard
I have for you, I will give some necessary Orders in the Family,
To prevent your being seen in my Lodgings,
And wait upon you again.
[Exit.
Wit. By this extraordinary care of my reputation,
I find he has no design upon it himself:
Not that I have any design upon Mr. VVilding;
But I am sorry to find, that every Man
Has not a design upon me; for since want is the rate of things,
I know no real value of Reputation,
But in regard of Common Women, who have none;
No extraordinary worth of a Maidenhead.
But as it is a temptation to the Man to take it away;
And the best commendation of Virtue is,
That every Man has a design to put it to the trial.
It vexes me though to think he should grow so tame,
Upon the sight of me; not that I believe,
I had any thing in my face, that altered him;
Something did, that is certain; by which I find
It Is not enough for a Woman to be handsome,
There must be a probability of making tha^ handsome Woman kind,
To make a Man in love with her,
For no Man is in love without some encouragement
To hope upon: Now from one of my Character,
Who have impertinently prated away so much of my time,
(In setting up for a Wit, to the ruin of other Peoples pleasure,
And loss of my own) what encouragement,
Or probability can there be, but that, as I have lived a fool,
I ought to dye repenting, unpitied, and a Maid:
If I had died a Maid, it is but what I deserved,
For laughing so many honest Gentlemen
Off their charitable design of making me otherwise.
Wilding enters to her.
Wild. Now, Madam, you command me.

Wit. It shall be to do your self a favor then, Mr. Wilding,
To rid you of an encumbrance, which lies as heavy
Upon your pleasures, as a Wife upon her Husband.

Wild. O defend me from a Wife.

Wit. And from a silly Mistress, Sir, the greater burden of the two:
A Wife you may lay aside, but a foolish fond Mistress,
Will hang about you, like your Conscience, to put you in mind
Of your Sins, before you are willing to repent of 'em:
You know whom I mean, Mr. Wilding, you may trust me
With the secret, because I know it already.

Wild. That Is one very good Reason truly, Madam.

Wit. My Cozen Fanny indeed is very well in her person --

Wild. I Am glad on it.

Wit. Very well to be liked I mean.

Wild. I mean so too, Madam:
Though I have known a Clap mistaken for a Maidenhead, before now.
[Aside.
Wit. But she is a Girl, and I can guess how very unfit
A Girl must be, to give you any desire beyond undoing her:
For I know your temper so well,
(Now you have satisfied the curiosity or vanity of your love)
You would not bear the punishment of her Company another day,
To have the pleasure of it another night,
Whatever you have said to persuade her to the contrary.

Wild. Fie, Madam, think better of me.

Wit. Better, nor worse, than I do of all the young men in Town: For I believe
you would now resign her to any body else, with as much satisfaction, as you
got her for your self: I know most of those matters end in the benefit of the
Public: and a little of your ill usage (which you will take care to supply her
withal) may make her one of the common goods of the Town: But that is a ruin I
would prevent if I could: Therefore, to save you the labor of getting rid of
her (for that is the only design you have now upon her, I Am sure) I came to
spare your good Nature the trouble, by making you a very fair Offer.


Wild. Let Us see how reasonable you can be, in another body's Bargain.

Wit. Very reasonable you shall find me, if you will but give over your
farther attempts upon her, (which now you may easily be persuaded to I suppose)
and contribute, by your assistance, to my design of marrying her: I will engage
my self and interest (which you know is very considerable in my own Sex) to
serve you in any other Woman of my acquaintance.


Wild. Faith, Madam, you bid like a Chapman

Wit. Any Woman, of any Family or Condition, the best Friend I have I Will
befriend you in, and thank you into the bargain.


Wild. Stay, Let me consider, Which --

Wit. But take this advice along with you; Raise the Scene of your affairs
above the conquest of a Girl. Some of you Sparks think, if you can but compass
a Maidenhead, though but your Taylor's Daughter's, you have settled a
reputation for ever. Why, Sir, there are Maiden-heads among the Women of
Quality, though not so many perhaps; but there are favors of all kinds to be
had among 'em; As easily brought about, and at the same price of pains that you
can purchase a Chamber-maids.


Wild. I Am glad you tell me so.

Wit. Why there is Mrs. New-love and her Cozen Tru-game, Mrs. Artist, Mrs.
Dancer, Lady Smirket, Lady Woudmore; and twenty more of your Acquaintance and
mine, all very fine Women to the Eye --


Wild. And of Reputation to the World.

Wit. Why those very Women of Reputation to the World have every one of 'em,
to my certain knowledge, an entrigue upon their hands, at this very time; for
I Am intimate with all of 'em.


Wild. I see you are.

Wit. But, as fine as they seem to the Eye, Mr. Wilding, what with the false
complexions of their Skins, their Hair and Eyebrows; with other defects about
them, which I must not discover of my friends, you know; with their stinking
breath in the morning, and other unsavory smells all the day after, they are
most of them intolerable to any Man that has the use of his Nose.


Wild. That I could not believe indeed, but that you tell me so.

Wit. Then there is Mrs. Faceall, a very fair Woman indeed, and a great
Fortune: as much in shape as you see her, I have been a God mother to two of
her Children, and she passes for a very good Maid still.


Wild. She past upon me I assure you; for I was very near marrying her my self
once.


Wit. Choose where you please, but I would not advise you to any I have named
yet.


Wild. Is there any hopes of Mrs. Friend-all?

Wit. Little, or none, yet a while, I believe: Mr. Love-more has at present
engaged her: But there is my Cozen Slightly! Lord, that I should forget her so
long! That I should be so backward in serving a friend! She is the fittest
Woman in the World for you; the most convenient for your purpose, in all the
Town; easy in her humor and fortune, and able to make her Lover so every way:
She shall be the Woman.


Wild. Would you would make her so.

Wit. I can and will make her so. We shall walk in the Mall this Morning, if
you think fit to be there, it may introduce the acquaintance.


Wild. I Will but but dress, and be with you.

Wit. I don't doubt, but in a little time, to give you an opportunity, and the
Lady an inclination of having it improved, but that must be your business; I Am
a going about mine, to make her a Visit. Remember our bargain, Sir.

[Exit.
Wild. I warrant you:
Let Whore-masters rejoice; the times must mend,
If every Woman has but such a friend.
[Exit.
ACT III. SCENE I.
Ruffle's Lodgings. Ruffle and Servant. Ruff. A Gentleman to speak with me!
I am gone to Banstead-downs, to the Horse-match.

Serve. There Is no Match there, Sir, this fortnight.

Ruff. Not this fortnight! I had forgot my se^^: But you may say, I went out by
five in the morning; and you don't know when I come back. Go, tell him so.


Serve. I have told him already, you were within, Sir.

Ruff. Pox on him, what manner of man is he? Does he look like a man of
business?


Serve. Not much like a man of business.

Ruff. No, I warrant you; some Coxcombly Companion or other, that visits in a
morning; and makes other People idle, not to be idle himself. But cannot you
tell what he would have with me?


Serve. I Will ask him, if you please.

Ruff. He may be a Messenger for ought I know.

Serve. I Will bring an account of him.
[Exit.
Ruff. Would he were a Messenger: I could be contented to pay the fees, to be
secured in the hands of the Government for a fortnight. Well, This guilt is
certainly very terrible. The Blow I gave Friendall was a very ill thing done of
me; It lies heavier upon my Conscience this morning, than it did upon his Face
last night.

[Servant reenters.
Serve. His name is Captain Springam: You know his business, he says.

Ruff. Yes, yes, I guess at it: I thought what it would come to.
Show him up to me.
[Exit Servant. I must do as well as I can.
[Strips into his Gown and Cap. There comes no good of being too forward upon
these occasions -- 'twill require some Time to dress again: it is Gaming-time at
least.

Springam Enters.
Spring. Good Morrow, Sir, I have a small Bill upon you here.

Ruff. A Challenge I suppose.

Spring. Payable at sight, as you will find it.

Ruff. You take me unprovided, you see, Sir, to answer you at sight.

Spring. I Will stay till you dress, Sir, if that be all, to have you along with
me.

Ruff. Ay, ay, Sir, I Will go along with you; never doubt it Sir; you shall not stay
long for me; I may dress time enuff for some Body, if that be your business:
I Will do the Gentleman reason, I warrant him.


Spr. We ask no more, Sir.

Ruff. You are his Friend I suppose?

Spring. At your Friends Service: I serve upon these occasions sometimes, by
way of second, or so, when I want employment of my own.


Ruff. Is fighting your Employment?

Spring. It Is a Soldiers Employment.

Ruff. Why really, Sir, I beg your pardon, I Am sorry I must disappoint you; I
never make use of a second; especially in such a Quarrel, as this is; where I
am so much in the wrong already, that I am almost unwilling to engage in it any
farther my self: Where is your Friend, pray?


Spring. Below, in a Coach, Sir.

Ruff. O dear, Sir, don't let him wait upon me, bring him up, I beseech you --
and do you hear Sir? I Am loath to justify an ill thing, if he is resolved to be
satisfied, why with all my heart, Sir, I Will give him the Satisfaction of a
Gentleman, I Will beg his pardon; pray tell him so.

[Exit Springam.
Ruff. If fighting be his Employment, would he were at it, any where else, and
I fairly rid of him: I could discover now that Lovemore set me on to affront
him; that would throw the Quarrel upon Lovemore: But then Lovemore knows me,
and I must expect to be scurvily used by him if I do: Hang baseness; it is but
begging pardon at last.


Spring. A very Civil Gentleman, Brother,
Springam Enters with Mr. Friendall. He is not the Man you took him for.

Ruff. No, indeed, Sir, the Captain's in the right; I never justify an ill
thing.

Mr. Fr. It Is very well you don't, Sir.

Ruff. I am more a Man of Honor, I assure you Sir.

Mr. Fr. I shall be glad to find you so.

Ruff. Sir you shall find me so; I scorn to do an ill thing, as much as any
Man: I was last Night in the wrong, as every Man is sometimes; and I Am sorry
for it: what would you have more Sir?


Mr. Fr. That is is not enough, Sir, I must have more.

Ruff. Why, I beg your Pardon, Sir.

Mr. Fr. What Is begging my Pardon, Sir, for such a Public Asfront?

Spr. So, now he grows upon him.
[Aside.
Mr. Fr. That will not do my business, begging my pardon: My Reputation's at
Stake, and that must be satisfied, before you and I part Sir.


Ruff. Lord, Sir, you are the strangest Man in the World; You will not oblige me
to justify an ill thing, would you?


Mr. Fr. Damme, Sir, what do you mean? Not to give me satisfaction?

Ruff. I mean, Sir, to give you any satisfaction, in reason; But I cannot fight
against my Conscience, if I were to be hanged, Sir, not I.


Spring. No, Brother, that is a little too hard upon the Gentleman: You see his
Conscience will not suffer him to fight with you.


Mr. Fr. Dam him and his Conscience; he made no Conscience of affronting me.

Spring. But his Conscience has flown in his Face since, it seems.

Mr. Fr. And now he finds it only in his fears.

Spring. Come, come, you may be satisfied without fighting.

Mr. Fr. If you think so Brother --
Lovemore enters. Joins with Friendall.
Love. Pox on it, they are here before me.

Ruff. Captain, I Will beg your Friends pard^n, in any public Place, at the
Music Meeting, if he pleases --


Spr. That Is staying too long for it.

Ruff. Or in full Mall, before the Beau's, or the Officers of the Guard; or at
Will's Coffee-House before the Wits, or in the Playhouse, in the Pit, before
the Vizard Masks, and Orange-Wenches; or behind the Scenes, he fore the
Women-Actors; or any where else, but upon the Stage; and you know, one would
not willingly be a Jest to the upper Galleries.


Mr. Fr. You hear what he says, Mr. Lovemore.

Love. I Will do you Justice. Sir.

Ruff. If none of these offers will serve his Turn, Sir, if your Friend will be
satisfied with nothing but Extremities; let him look to himself, let what will
be the Consequence; I must do as well as I can with him.

Seeing Lovemore he takes heart again.
Love. So, he has seen me, I find.
[Aside.
Spring. What the Devil he will not fight at last sure.
[Aside.
Ruff Sir, your most humble Servant You guess these Gentlemen's business I
suppose: I have offered 'em any satisfaction, in reason: But taking me, as you
see, Sir, at a Disadvantage, two to one, nothing would content 'em, without
exposing my self, as a Rascal, to all the Town, Sir; now Sir, you are more a
Gentleman I know, and they shall be damned, before I give 'em any other
satisfaction, now I have a Man of Honor to stand by me.


Love. Gentlemen I came to reconcile you, if I can: what say you?

Spring. He offered just now to beg my Brother's Pardon in the Playhouse.

Ruff. Make your best on it; I did so.

Mr. Fr. Then let it be to Night in the Side-box, before the Ladies. --

Ruff. With all my heart, Sir.

Mr. Fr. For they are the Part of the Town, that a Man of Pleasure should
secure a Reputation withal. Your Servant Sir. Lovemore, your humble Servant.

Friendall and Springam go out.
Love. And have thou begged his Pardon?

Ruff. And glad to come off so: I was never so put to it, to bring my self off a
Quarrel before, it had been impossible, if the Captain had not done a good
Office between us, but I bore up as soon as I saw you.


Love. But then 'twas too late. You had sneakingly begged his Pardon bebefore:
if you had sent to me at first, I would have brought you off cleverly: Suppose
he had carried you behind Southampton house, which he never intended, 'twas but
falling down, or dopping your Sword, when you came there, to have saved all:
but now you have ruined your own Reputation, and my Design upon him for ever.


Ruff. What could I do? he not only sent me a Challenge, but came himself to
carry me along with him.


Love. How? send you a Challenge, and come with it himself! That Is something
odd; pray, let us see the Challenge.


Ruff. There it is; make your best on it; the Paper will make admirable Crackers
for a Lord. Major's Show, every word in it is as hot as Gunpowder, I Am glad I Am
rid on it.

[Exit.
Love. If this be Friendall's Style, it is mightily mended of late: I have a
Note of his about me, upon Child, for money, won at play: I Will compare 'em. --
It Is not his hand neither -- Nay then there is more in it -- This may be a
Stratagem of his Wifes -- I Have seen her hand, and think this very near it: It
must be so: But then Friendall's coming for Satisfaction, is an Argument he
might send this Challenge: But coming at the same time, with it himself, is an
Argument against him, that he knew nothing of the matter. For though he delivers
his Love Letters, he would hardly deliver his Challenges himself: And for his
coming here, Springam might put him upon it, from a reasonable Probability, that
this Fellow was a Rascal. I don't know what to fix upon: This Challenge will be
of use to me, with the Lady: I Will take it for granted, that she writ it, and
proceed upon it accordingly.

[Exit.
[Scene changes to St. James's Park.] [Mr. Friendall, Springam, with Mrs.
Friendall, and Mrs. Teazall. Spring. Brother, if you have no farther Service
for me, I must think of employing my self, my Walk lies another way.

[Exit.
Mrs. Fr. I Am glad you are rid of this Business so handsomely, Mr. Friendall, and
that Mr. Lovemore was by, at his begging your pardon.


Mr. Fr. When I undertake things of this kind, I always go through with 'em.


Mrs. Fr. This is very well over, and I hope, you will take care to keep out of
'em for the future.


Mr. Fr. Every man has the misfortune of 'em sometimes, Madam.


Mrs. Fr. But it is a prudent Man's part, to keep out of the occasion of 'em:
And, in order to it, Mr. Friendall, I could wish, you would not make your House,
as you daily do, one of the public Places of the Town.


Teaz. She Is in the right on it indeed, Mr. Friendall, you are very happy in the
Discretion of a good Lady, if you know when you are well; there are very few
Women would quarrel with your good Nature, in this Point, Sir; But she has too
great a regard to her own, and your Reputation, you see, not to apprehend the
Malice of ill Tongues, upon the Liberties you allow in your Family, the graver
part of your Friends take notice of it already, and let me tell you, Sir, are
extremely concerned.


Mr. Fr. That they are past the pleasures of good Company themselves: Why
really, Madam, I believe it: But they may say what they will, I shall do what I
please: I live to my self, and not to the whimsical Humor of the graver part
of my friends, and so you may tell 'em, good Madam, from your humble Servant.

[going.
Mrs. Fr. You will not leave us, Mr. Friendall?

Mr. Fr. I Will go home with you, like a good Husband, Madam; but no man of
fashion, you know, walks with his Wife; besides, there is a Noble Lord I must
walk with.

[Exit.
Mrs. Fr. Any thing to be rid of my Company.

Teaz. Why, how have the men, at this rate, the impudence to think the Women
should not Cuckold 'em! if I had such a Husband, as old as I am, a'my
Conscience, I believe, I should use him as he deserved: But that is some
comfort, use him as you please, no Body will think you wrong him; and let me
tell you, it is a great thing to have the Town on ones side.


Mrs. Fr. I Will keep 'em so, if I can.

Teaz. Nay, Faith and Troth, you have given him fair warning; if he will not take
it, he must answer himself for all the miscarriages you can be guilty of, in
your Conduct hereafter.


Mrs. Fr. There Is something more in that Mrs. Teazall.
[Exeunt. Lovemore, Wellvile following 'em.
Well. There Is your Mrs. Friendall before us: I honor her Character as much as
I despise her Husbands.


Love. Though he has escaped the public discovery, if he knows him to be a
Coward, it does my business still as well.


Well. If I did not think him one, I would put him to a trial, he should not so
easily get clear off; for putting a Note into Mrs. Slightly's hand at the
Musick-meeting.


Love. How!

Well. But I owe him a good turn for it.

Love. It comes into my head, and you shall pay him the good turn: What if you
put Mrs. Sightly upon telling his Wife of it?


Well. Ha!

Love. You ought to do it.

Well. I think so too my self; and you may be satisfied I Will do it; more out of
a regard to the Women I value so much, than any design of promoting your
Cuckolding the Fool.


Love. Good grave Sir, the Plot is never the worse, I hope, for carrying your
Friends interest along with the Ladys.


Well. Make your best use on it, Lovemore; I Am contented you should thrive
together.

[Exeunt. Mrs. Sightly and Witwoud after 'em.
Wit. You are mightily injured indeed, Madam, to be persuaded to come abroad,
so much to your disadvantage, such a delicate Morning, as this is, so much
against your inclinations: But you will know your interest better, in a little
time, and me for your friend, I suppose, when you find the benefit of it.


Sight. Nay, Cozen, the Injury may be forgiven, for the pleasure of the walk,
at this time of the Year.


Wit. Why, the very walk is to be liked, though there were no Body in it to like
us: But there is a great deal of good Company in the Mall, and, I warrant you,
we'll have our share of the Commendation of the place, in spite of fresher
Faces: You are sure of your part of it already.


Sight. How so, good Mrs. Wittwoud?

Wit. Why, good Mrs. Sightly, there is Mr. Wellvile before you.

Sight. My Platonic Lover as you call him.

Wit. And as you find him.

Sight. I think him very much my Friend.

Wit. Very much your Friend! I grant you indeed, every Woman, that is not
wholly insensible, (and one would not be thought insensible you know,) every
Woman ought to have a Platonic Passion for one Man or other: But a Platonic
Lover in a Man! is --


Sight. What pray?

Wit. Why, he is a very unmannerly Fellow; he is not what he should be; that is
certain: As for the matter of Respect, which we keep such a clutter about, and
seem to value so much in the Men, all that I know of it, is, that if any Man
pretended to follow and like me, I should never believe what he said; if he did
not do something to convince me, I shoud think he affronted me extremely; if
upon the first handsome occasion, he did not offer me every thing in his power.


Sight. How Cozen!

Wit. I hate a Blockhead, that will never give a Woman a reputable occasion
of refusing him: It Is one of the best Complements a Lover can make his
Mistresses pride and I never knew any man, that did his business without it.


Sight. Why Wittwoud, thou art Mad sure.

Wit. And for your Mr. Wellvile, if I were in your place, I should have
something the better opinion of him, if he would have a little worse opinion of
me: But between you and me, I should not like him for a Lover.


Sight. He does not pretend to be one.

Wit. Who Is here? Wilding and Courtall behind us? That Wilding, Cozen, is a
very pretty Gentleman.


Sight. And Courtall too, very well.

Wit. I must bring you acquainted with Wilding.

Sight. No more acquaintance, good Wittwoud.

Wit. For his Discretion, and Conduct, his good Behavior, and all that,
Wellvile is his acquaintance, and will answer for: But his agreeable, easy
Wit, and good Humor, you may take upon my word: You Will thank me, when you know
him.

[Exeunt. Wilding and Courtall Enter.
Wild. She Is a Woman of her word: You see she has brought Mrs. Sightly along
with her.


Court. I never doubted it: She Will carry her to Supper in a Night or two: She Is
never the worse Bawd, I hope, for being a Gentlewoman.


Wild. A good Family indeed gives a countenance to the profession; and a
Reputation is necessary to carry on the Credit of a Trade.


Court. Here Is Wellvile just behind us.

Wild. Prithee stay with him: I Will tell you how I thrive.
[Exit. Wellvile Enters.
Well. Good Morrow Mr. Courtall.

Court. O Sir, yours.

Well. Was not that Wilding left you?

Court. He Is in his Employment, Sir, very busy.

Well. In pursuit of the Women I know: It hardly answers the Expense I doubt.


Court. You have no reason to say so: There Is a Lady before us, of your
acquaintance, Mrs. Sightly by Name, of another opinion: I suppose, she thinks
such an assurance, as his, in coming to the point, is more to the nature of the
thing, than all your Ceremony and Respect.


Well. Mrs. Sightly!

Court. She, Sir, the very same: I could tell you a Secret, Wellvile; but you
are one of those Fellows, that hate another Man should lie with a Woman, though
you never attempt her your self: I confess I am something of your mind: I think
the enjoyment the dull part of an Intrigue, and therefore I give it over, when
I see the Lady in earnest.


Well. But the Secret Courtall.

Court. Why Faith, Wellvile, if you have temper to manage it, the Secret may be
of use to you: Wilding, you know, never Debauches a Woman, only for himself;
where he visits, in a little time, every Man may be received in his turn. You
must know, 'twas Wittwoud put him upon Mrs. Sightly, she knew what she did I
suppose, and has promised him a good Office, in her way: make your advantage of
what I tell you; but not a Syllable to any one.

Springam Enters.
Spring. O Courtall! here are a Couple of Vizard-masks have set upon me in the
next Walk, and I wanted thee to take one of 'em off my hands.


Court. I Will stand by you, my Noble Captain.
[Exeunt.
Well. (solus) I Will think no more on it, it is impossible: what is impossible?
nothing's impossible to a Woman: we judge but on the outside of that Sex; and
know not what they can, nor what they do, more than they please to show us. I
have known Mrs. Sightly these seven years -- known her! I mean, I have seen
her, observed her, followed her: may be there is no knowing a Woman: but in all
that time, I never found a freedom, that allowed me any encouragement beyond a
friend -- May be I have been wanting to my self --. But then she would not
throw her self away upon a common Lover; that is not probable: If she had been
affectedly reserved, I would suspect, the Devil in her heart had stamped the
sign of Virtue in her looks, that she might cheat the world, and sin more
close. But she is open in her carriage, easy, clear of those arts that have
made Lust a Trade -- Perhaps that openness may be design -- It Is easy to raise
doubts -- And still she may be -- I will not think she can -- till I know more:
But Wittwoud is, I know her, every thing that is mischievous; abandoned and
undone; undone her self, she would undo the Sex: she is to bawd for VVilding: I
know her bad enough for any trade. But Bawds have some good Nature, and procure
pleasure for pay: VVittwoud has baser ends, A general ruin upon all her
friends.

Several pass over the Stage, Mr. Friendall slighted by 'em, one after another.
1. Lord, I have a little business at present; But I shall see you at the Play.

[Ex.
Mr. Fr. In the King's Box, my Lord. --
My Dear Lord, I Am your humble Servant
[to another.
2. Lord, Another time, Good Mr. Friendall; You see I Am engaged.

[Exit.
Mr. Fr. A Pox o'their Engagements: A Man cannot make one among 'em O my most
noble Lord.


3. Lord, I know you will upbraid me, Mr. Friendall; But I Will recover your
opinion, and come and dine with you. Let Us have Jack Dreyden and Will.
VVicherly, as you call'em: Some of these days, we'll be very witty together:
But now I am your Servant.

[Exit.
Mr. Fr. This is a very unfortunate Morning with me: I have not walked one turn
with a Lord, since I came in: I see I must take up with the men of wit to day
-- O Mr. VVellvile!


Well. Don't let me keep you from better Company.

Mr. Fr. Faith, Sir, I prefer a Man of Wit, to a Man of Quality at any time.


Well. If she thinks VVittwoud her friend, after this, it is a sign she is
pleased with with it, and there is an end on it.


Mr. Fr. Why, VVellvile, thou art cogitabund, as a man may say; thy head is
running upon thy Poetry.


Well. I beg your pardon. Sir, I did not mind you indeed.
Your Servant, Mr. VVilding -- -- --
[Wilding enters to 'em.
Mr. Fr. VVilding, Yours. But VVellvile, Prithee, what is it to be? A Song? a
Tribue to the whole Sex? or, a particular Sacrifice? or, is it a Libel upon the
Court, ha? (we'll keep your council;) or, a Lampoon upon the Town? What, I am a
great Honourer, and humble Servant of the Muses my self --


Well. A very Favorite of 'em, I hear Sir.

Mr. Fr. I sometimes scribble indeed, for my diversion --

Wild. And the diversion of the Ladys, Mr. Friend-all --

Well. And the diversion of all the Town, Mr. Friend-all.

Mr. Fr. Why, Faith Gentlemen, Poetry is a very pretty Amusement, and, in the
way of Intrigue, or so, among the better rank of people, I have known a Paper
of Verses go farther with a Lady in the purchase of a Favor, than a Present of
fifty pounds would have done.


Wild. O, Sir, it is the only way of purchasing a Woman that is not to be bought.


Mr. Fr. But, Wellvile, prithee communicate, Man.

Well. Why, if you will have it, I have a design upon a Play.

Mr. Fr. Gad so, let me write a Scene in it: I have a thousand times had it in
my head, but never could bring it about to write a Play yet.


Wild. No; no; You had it not in your head, Sir.

Mr. Fr. I vow to Gad, but I have then, twenty times, I Am confident; but one
thing or other always kicked it out again: But I promise you, I Will write a Scene
for you.


Wild. Before you know the Subject?

Mr. Fr. Prithee, what is it? But be what it will; Here Is my hand upon it; I Will
write it for you.


Well. You must know then, Sir, I am scandalized extremely to see the Women
upon the Stage make Cuckolds at that insatiable rate they do in all our modern
Comedies: without any other reason from the Poets, but, because a man is
married he must be a Cuckold: Now, Sir, I think, the Women are most
unconscionably injured by this general Scandal upon their Sex; therefore to do
'em what service I can in their vindication, I design to write a Play, and call
it --


Mr. Fr. Ay, what, I beseech you, I love to know the Name of a new Play.


Well. The Wives Excuse, or, Cuckolds make themselves.

Mr. Fr. A very pretty Name faith and troth; and very like to be popular among
the Women.


VVild. And true among the Men.

Mr. Fr. But what Characters have you?

Well. What Characters? Why I design to show a fine young Woman married to an
impertinent, nonsensical, silly, entrigueing, cowardly, good for-nothing
Coxcomb.


VVild. This Blockhead does not know his own Picture.
(Aside.)
Mr Fr. Well, and how? She must make him a Cuckold I suppose.

Well. 'Twas that I was thinking on when you came to me.

Mr. Fr. O, Yes, You must make him a Cuckold.

VVild. By all means a Cuckold.

Mr. Fr. For such a Character, Gentlemen, will vindicate a Wise in any thing
she can do to him. He must be a Cuckold.


Well. I am satisfied he ought to be a Cuckold; and indeed, if the Lady would
take my advice, she should make him a Cuckold.


Mr. Fr. She Will hear reason I warrant her.

Well. I have not yet determined how to dispose of her. But in regard to the
Ladies, I believe I shall make her honest at last.


Mr. Fr. I think the Ladies ought to take it very ill of you, if you do: But if
she proves honest to the last, that is certain, it is more than the fellow
deserves. A very pretty Character this, faith and troth.

[To Wilding.
Wild. And very well known in this Town.

Mr. Fr. Gad, I believe, I can help you to a great many hints, that may be very
serviceable to you.


Well. I design to make use of you: We, who write Plays, must sometimes be
beholden to our friends. But more of this at leisure.


Mr. Fr. Will you walk, Gentlemen, the Ladies are before us.

Well. I have a little business with VVilding. We Will follow you.
[Exit Friendall
VVild. Business with me, VVellvile?

Well. About a fair Lady, I Will tell you as we walk.
[Exeunt. Enter Lovemore with Mrs. Friendall, Mrs. Sightly, Mrs. VVittwoud, and
Mrs. Teazall.
Teaz. Nay, indeed, Mr. Lovemore, as matters are managed between the men and
women of the Town, it is no less a blessing for a Lady to have a Husband that
will but so much as offer to fight for her and her honor, than it is for a
Husband to have a Lady, that has any honor to defend: There Is such a depravity
in Matrimony, of both sides, nowadays.


Sight. Why, good Madam, is it such a business, for a Man to offer to fight
for his Wife?


Wit. All that I know is, the Man that would not fight for me, should do
nothing else for me.


Teaz. You Will have your wit, let who is will blush for it.

Love. As you say, Madam, (to Mrs. Teazall) A Man of honor is a great blessing
in a Husband; such as Mr. Friendall has shown himself to be. And here is a Lady
will value the blessing as it deserves.


Mrs. Fr. I must indeed, despise him in my thoughts.
(Aside.)
Wit. Fulsome and foolish! let us hear no more on it: They don't think this can
blind us:

[walking off with Sightly.]
Love. If you were not inclined to it before, Madam, this last behavior of his
would engage you to value such a blessing as you ought.


Mrs. Fr. My duty would engage me -- What does he mean by this?

Wit. Cozen Teazall, your opinion pray.

Love. I have something to tell you, Madam, if you would but allow me; this is
no place.


Mrs. Fr. You Will find a time I warrant you. Ladies the Mall begins to thin.

[Goes to 'em.
[VVelvile and VVilding coming forward.
VVild. Well, Sir, since you declare your self in love with the Lady, and I am
not, I promise you, and you may trust me, I Will never follow her more.


Well. I do trust, and thank you for the promise. Ladies your Servant.
[He addresses to Sightly.
Wit. O! he is come at last.
[VVilding to VVittwoud. There Is nothing to be done here; You Have outstay'd your
time; But we'll call at the Chocalate-house in St. Alban-street, as we go home;
You may meet us there by accident, you know.


Wild. If I were to be hanged now, I must meet 'em there; though I have given
my word to the contrary.


Teaz. Is that the filthy fellow?

Wit. That Is Wilding, Madam.

Teaz. I see there is no knowing a Whore master by his Face; He looks like a
modest, civil Gentleman.


Well. Your friend, Mrs. Wittwoud, Madam, may be of (to Sightly) that good
natured opinion that Lovemore is familiar with the Husband, only to be more
familar with the Wife. But you must be cautious of what you say; for fear we
turn the Scandal upon you.


Sight. Upon me, Mrs. Wellvile?

Well. Pardon me, Madam, I have the freedom of a friend: But Mr. Friendall
declares he is in love with you; And after that, the good natured Town
(whatever they believe) will go near to say, that your familiarity with his
Wife may be in order to the Husband.


Sight. Contemptible! Sure nobody would think so.

Well. It Is an ill natured Age to handsome women, Madam.

Sight. Must I suffer, because he is a Fool?

Well. You may suffer, because he is a Fool.

Sight. This is not only to be accountable for our own conduct, but to answer
for all the indiscretion of the Men's.


Well. You must, Madam, for those Men's you allow to be so near you.

Sight. It would be but an ungrateful piece of News to Mrs. Friendall, if I
should be serious enough to tell her of it.


Well. 'Twou'd be more ungrateful to her, if any body else did; and would go
near to make you serious, if another should tell her for you.


Sight. But who can tell? It may be the cause of a breach between 'em.

Well. Nay, Madam, if it be considerable enough to make a breach in Marriage;
You may be sure 'twill make a breach in Friendship: And how much that will be
to the advantage of your reputation upon such an occasion --


Sight. I am convinced you are my friend, Mr. Wellvile, And thank you for this
care of me.

They mingle with Lovemore, Mrs. Friendall, and the rest.
Wit. This is the Aunt would have been upon your bones, I assure you, if I had
not delivered you.


Wild. How shall I do to appease her?

Wit. There Is but one way now to please her. You must know she has been in her
time; like other women, in at most of the pleasures of this Town; But being too
passionate a Lover of the Sport, she has been, -- --, a Bubble at all Games:
And having now nothing to lose but her money, she declares for Lanterelow, and
is contented to be only cheated at Cards.


Mr. Friendall with Springam and Courtall.
Mr. Fr. Why, what do you think, Ladies? these Gentlemen here, in spite of the
temptation of so, much good Company, refuse to dine with me.


Spring. O Madam! Are you there?
[To Wittwoud.
Court. Your Brother has seduced me, Madam.
[To Mrs. Friendall.
Spring. We'll visit you at Night, Ladies, in Masquerade; when the privilege of
a Vizard will allow us a Conversation, out of your forms, and more to our
humor a great deal, Ladies.

[Exeunt Springam and Courtall.
Mr. Fr. Lovemore, Wellvile, Wilding, -- You Will follow us?

Love. We will not fail you, Sir.
[Mr. Friendall goes out with the Ladies.
Wit. St. Albans street -- --

Wild. We'll tell you more of this.

Well. Wilding, you will take another turn with us?

Wild. Faith no, I Am tired: we shall meet at Friendall's all.
[Exit.
Well. At Friendall's be it then;
Where the kind Husband wellcomes every Guest.

Love. He but invites, his Wife must make the Feast.
[Exeunt.
ACT IV. SCENE I.
Mr. Friendall's House. All the Company enters after Dinner. Love. MR.
Friendall, You have the best VVines, and the greatest choice of any man in Town.


Mr. Fr. There Is an elegance in Eating and Drinking, Gentlemen, as well as in
VVriting.


Well. Or your style would never go down.
(Aside.)
Mr. Fr. How did you like the Lucina I gave you, the Galicia, the
Mountain-Alicant? You taste the Sun in them perfectly, Gentlemen.


Wild. O, plainly, Sir!

Mr. Fr. Then the Aracina, the Ranchio, and the Peralta, the Carcavelis, the
Lacrymae, the Schiveas, the Zephalonia, the Montalchyno, with all the
Muschatellos, and to conclude, my single Bottle of Tockay.


Love. Admirable all, Sir.

Mr. Fr. A Friend of mine, that brought the Tockay from Buda, assures me, the
stones of all those Grapes are Gold.


Well. That makes the Wine so scarce.

Mr. Fr. Nay, not unlikely: But of all the VVines of all the Climates under the
Sun --


Wild. Give me the Greek.

Mr. Fr. O, I abominate --

Well. The Language, but not the Wines; you may relish them without it.

Mr. Fr. Ay, that may be: But of all the Wines, Pagan, or Christian, in the
World, I think the Borachio the Noblest.


Well. It Is of the roughest kind indeed of Beasts, would he were in the Skin of
one of 'em.


Wild. But your Vine de Congress, Mr. Friendall --

Mr. Fr. True; but it is a Dutch Wine, and grows in the Province of Zealand, I
have drank it upon the place.


Wild. But, Mr. Friendall, pray in all your variety and interest among your
Friends in the City, have you not sometimes met with such a Wine, as the Vine
de Short-Neck?


Mr. Fr. Vine de Short-Neck? Yes, I have drank of it at Thompson's, and was the
first that took notice of it; but it is a Prohibited French Wine, and I have too
great an Acquaintance with the Members of Parliament, not to Drink according to
Law.


Wild. Yours is very good Snuff, Mr. Friendall.

Mr. Fr. Yes, truly, I think it is pretty good Powder.

Wild. Pray your Opinion of mine, you are a Critic.

Mr. Fr. This is Havanna indeed; but then it is washed: Give me your dry
Powders, they never lose their Scent: Besides, yours is made of the Leaves of
the Tobacco --


Well. Why, what the Devil's yours?

Mr. Fr. Mine, Sir, is right Palillio, made of the Fibers, the Spirituous part
of the Plant; there is not a pinch of it out of my Box in England; 'twas made I
a^^ure you to the Pallat of His Most Catholic Majesty, and sent me by a great
Don of Spain, that is in his Prince's particular Pleasures.

[Goes to the Women.
Well. And his, it seems, lie in his Nose.

Mr. Fr. Ladies what say you to the Fresko of the Garden? we'll Drink our Tea
upon the Mount, and be the Envy of the Neighborhood.


Wittw. O delicately thought upon!

Mr. Fr. Madam, which Tea shall we have?

Mrs. Fr. Which the Company pleases, Mr. Friendall.

Mr. Fr. The plain Canton, the Nanquin, the Bohe, the Latheroon, the Sunloe, or
which? Ha!


Well. Have you any of the Non Amo Te?

Mr. Fr. Faith, No, Sir, there came but little of it over this Year; but I am
promised a whole Canister by a Friend of a considerable interest in the
Committee.


Love. Then the Bohe, Sir, the Bohe will do our business.

Mr. Fr. My Bohe, at the best hand too, Cost me Ten Pound a Pound, but I have a
Tea, with a damned Heathenish hard Name, that I think I was very much
befriended in, at an Indian House in the City, if you please, we'll have some
of that.


Mrs. Fr. It Is in my Cabinet, Mr. Friendall, I must order it my self for you.

[Goes out.
Mr. Fr. That Madam must make the Complement the greater to the Company:
Allons, you know the way, I wait upon you.

[^ll go out but Lovemore
Love. This way she must come, she cannot avoid me, thanks to the honest Husband.

[Mrs. Friendall returns.
Mrs. Fr. Are you one of the Gentlemen that love the Tea with a hard Name?


Love. Faith, Madam, I must love any thing that gives me an Opportunity --


Mrs. Fr. With any Woman that has a mind to improve it.

Love. Of Adoring you.

Mrs. Fr. Me, Mr. Lovemore! I was going before, but now you drive me.

Love. Stay, this Violence, if you can call it Violence on my Knees, excuses
you to all your Female Forms; nay, to your self, severer than your Forms, if
you should stay and hear me.


Mrs. Fr. Well, what is the matter?

Love. Every thing is matter of your Praise, the subject of fresh wonder: your
Beauty made to tire the Painter's Art, your Wit to strike the Poet's Envy dumb.


Mrs. Fr. Are you turned Poet too?

Love. Indeed you can inspire me --

Mrs. Fr. With the Spirit of Scandal I may, a small matter Conjures up a
Lampoon against the Women -- But to the purpose, Sir, you pretend business with
me, and have insinuated a great deal of pains all this Day to get an occasion
of speaking to me in private; which now, by Mr. Friendall's assistance, you
think you have ingeniously secured: Why, Sir, after all, I know no business
between us that is to be carried on, by my being alone with you.


Love. I Am sorry for that indeed, Madam.

Mrs. Fr. Suppose, Mr. Lovemore, a Man should hit you a Box on the Ear.

Love. Only suppose it, good Madam.

Mrs. Fr. Why, Sir, any man that is Brute enough may do it, though that Brute
should beg your Pardon never so publicly for the wrong, you would never
heartily forgive him, for pitching upon you.


Love. Not heartily I believe indeed.

Mrs. Fr. Why, very well: You keep me here against my Will, against all Rules
of Decency, to me, my Sex, and Character; the worst of Wrongs; yet you will
think it hard to be Condemned, or Hated for your Light Opinion of me, that
first encouraged you to this design.


Love. Hated for Loving you!

Mrs. Fr. Ay, there is the business: Who would not stay to see her Worshipper
upon his Knees, thus Praised, and thus Adored? Her Beauty made to tire the
Painter's Art, her Wit to strike the Poet's Envy dumb; and all delivered in
such a dying tone, no Lady can outlive it. Mr. Lovemore, you might have known
me better, than to imagine your fly Flattery, and softly Sing me into a Consent
to any thing my Virtue had abhorred. But how have I behaved my self? What have
I done to deserve this? What encouragement have I given you?


Love. A Lover makes his Hopes.

Mrs. Fr. Perhaps it is from the general encouragement of being a Married Woman,
supported on your side by that Honorable Opinion of our Sex, that, because
some Women Abuse their Husbands, every Woman may. I grant you indeed, the
Custom of England has been very prevailing in that point; and I must own to
you, an ill Husband is a great provocation to a Wife, when she has a mind to
believe as ill of him as she can


Love. How if the Wife believe too well of him?

Mrs. Fr. Why then the Folly's hers: For my part, I have known Mr. Friendall
too long, not to know justly what he deserves; I will not justify his Faults, but
because he does not take that care of me he should, must not I have that regard
to my self I ought? What I do is for my own sake: Nay what is past, which, by
your hints, I know you do suspect, I own I did it; not for the Commendation of
your Wit, nor as a Debt to him, but to my self, foreseeing a long Life of
Infamy, which in his Follies I was Married to; and therefore saved my self by
saving him.


Love. Your Conduct every where is excellent, but there it was a Masterpiece
indeed, and worthy Admiration.


Mrs. Fr. And would you have me lose that Character, so worthy Admiration,
which, even you, an Enemy, must praise, when you would ruin? No, what I Have done
to raise this Character, may be an Argument I will do more to heighten it, to
the last Act of Life.


Love. And all for the reward of being thought too good a Wife to such a
Husband.


Mrs. Fr. How! you know him then?

Love. You and I know him.

Mrs. Fr. Fit to bear a wrong? Is that the reason of your wronging him? I want
but that; O let me but believe you injure him, because you know you may; and
attempt me, because you think it safe; and I will scorn you low, as you do him:
You say you know him: Now, Sir, I know you, you, and your Practices, against us
both: You have encouraged all that has been done, exposing him, only to ruin
me. It Is necessary to believe as ill of you as I can: And for the future, till
you clear your self --


Love. I can clear my self.

Mrs. Fr. I le think you capable of every thing; of any baseness to advance
your ends; so leave you to your Triumph.

[going.
Love. Madam stay, I must be Justified: This Challenge here has taught me all I
know; made me suspect who writ it, and presume all I have said to you.


Mr. Fr. Where had you it?

Love. Russle gave it me. I hope you may forgive my knowing it, since by
resigning it into your hands, I give you up the only evidence, that can rise up
against him: Such a piece of News, Madam, would have been welcome enough to the
ill nature of the Town; and I might have had my ends in such a report, had I
encouraged the exposing him: But when I saw how near you were concerned, I had
no other pleasure, but the thought of serving you; if I have served you, I am
over-paid, if not, I must serve on. For I but live to serve you.


Mrs. Fr. My employment calls upon me; Are not you for Tea?

Two Footmen with a Service of Tea enter, and go out with Mrs. Friendall.
Love. I find I am restored, but I was reduced to the necessity of a lie to
come into favor again; but that is a Necessity that every man of honor must
submit to, sometimes, that has any thing to manage with the women: For a Lover,
that never speaks more than the truth, is never believed to be a Lover: and he
that will not lie to his Mistress, will hardly lie with her: So let his Honesty
reward him; the Lady will not, I dare say for her. There must be a cheat upon the
sense sometimes, to make a perfect pleasure to the soul: For if the women did
but always know what really we are; we should not so often know so much of them
as we do: But it is their own faults; they know we cannot live without 'em, and
therefore ask more of us than we have honestly to give for the purchase. So,
very often, they put us upon dissimulation, slattery and false love, to come up
to their price. Mrs. Friendall went away a little abruptly: I Am glad she did:
for that methinks confesses an obligation which she has not yet in her power to
return.

[VVellvile enters to him.
Well. Lovemore, your Plot begins to thrive: I left Mrs. Sightly telling Mrs.
Friendall every thing between her and Mr. Friendall: I thought fit to acquaint
you with it, that you might be prepared: You know best what use to turn it to:
my business is with Mrs. Sightly.


Lov. I thank you for the News: they are coming this way, I would not have 'em
see us: I must hover here.

[Exeunt Lov. and Wellv. Enter Mrs. Friendall and Mrs. Sightly.
Mrs. Fr. I could not have believed it.

Sight. I am sorry you have reason to believe it upon my account: indeed, I was
unwilling to believe it; I suffered it as long as I could; but finding no end
of this persecution --


Mrs. Fr. You have used me like a friend, and I thank you -- his Note since
Dinner, desires you would meet him at 7, at Rosamond's pond: You cannot be so
hard hearted to disappoint him?


Sight. If you have a mind to have a plainner proof of his treachery --

Mrs. Fr. The proof is plain enough: You say it: Besides, he has given it under
his hand here; And I believe the Gentleman, though you will not.


Sight. Or if you would, let him know you have discovered him, and upbraid him
with his baseness before me --


Mrs. Fr. That would but harden him, or make him vain, By showing a concern for
him.


Sight. If you have any curiosity to be satisfied, I Will go with you to the
place appointed.


Mrs. Fr. I would not have him know either of us.

Sight. Then we must have a man to secure us.

Mrs. Fr. We may trust your friend Mr. Wellvile.

Sight. Mr. Friendall, you must know, thinks him in love with me; So being a
Rival, may make him avoid us: But Mr. Lovemore will do as well.


Mrs. Fr. I would not have him know it.

Sight. He knows it already; I made no secret of it, and Mr. Wellvile told it
him.


Mrs. Fr. Then he, or any one --
[Lovemore enters to 'em.
Sight. O! here he comes: Mr. Lovemore, we must employ you this afternoon.

Love. To serve my self, in waiting upon you.
The rest of the Company enter to 'em.
Teaz. Well, here is such a Clutter to get you to Cards: You have drank your
Tea: what will you do next, I trow?


Wit. Why take a Napp, or smoke a Pipe, any body that has a mind to be private.


Teaz. Would I had one civilly in a Corner.

Mr. Fr. Get the Cards in the Drawing Room.
[To a Servant.
Wit. Not till we have the Song, Mr. Friendall, you promised us.

Mr. Fr. Why, faith, I was forced to set it my self: I don't know how you will
like it with my voice; but faith and troth, I believe the Masters of the
Musick-meeting, may set their own words, for any trouble I shall give 'em for
the future about mine.


Wild. Nay, then you ruin 'em.

Wit. The Song, the Song, Sir.
[Song written by a Man of Quality.] I.
Say, cruel Amoret, how long
In billet-dous, and humble Song,
Shall poor Alexis woo?
If neither writing, sighing, dying,
Reduce you to a soft complying:
O! when will you come to?
II.
Full thirteen Moons are now past over,
Since first those Stars I did adore,
That set my heart on fire:
The conscious Playhouse, Parks and Court,
Have seen my sufferings made your sport:
Yet am I never the nigher.
III.
A faithful Lover should deserve
A better fate, than thus to starve
In sight of such a Feast:
But Oh! if you will not think it fit,
Your hungry Slave should taste one bit;
Give some kind looks at least.

Wild. Admirable well --

Wit. Set and sung, Sir.

Love. A Gentleman does these things always best.

Well. When he has a Genius.

Mr. Fr. Ay, Sir, he must have a Genius: There Is no being a Master of any thing
without a Genius.


Mrs. Fr. Mrs. Teazall Pam wants you in the next room.
Scene draws, shows Tables and Cards.
Teaz. I Will make the more of him, when I get him into my hands.


Well. I have something to tell you, worth more than the Cards can win for you.

[To Mrs. Sightly
Mrs. Fr. Who Is for Comet?

Lov. I am your Man Madam

Mrs. Fr. You play too deep for me.

Wit. Cozen, you will make one of us?
They go in to play. The Scene shut's upon 'em, Wellvile and Sightly stay.
Sight. I go your halves, if you please, I don't care for playing my self.


Sight. Now, Mr. Wellvile, you have something extraordinary to say to me.


Well. I have, indeed, Madam, but I should prepare you for the Story, there are
some Friends in it, that you will be concerned to have an ill opinion of.


Sight. I have reason to think you my Friend.

Well. Then pray give me leave to ask, How long you have known Mr. Wilding.


Sight. I never spoke to him till this Morning, at the Chocolate-house, as we
came from the Park.


Well. I think he is Mrs. Wittwoud's particular acquaintance.

Sight. That, I suppose, gave him his Title of speaking to us.

Well. And she has a mind to bring him acquainted with you. I Am sorry I must
warn you of him: I was in hopes it would have died of it self: But his talking
to you, at the Chocolate house, after he had promised never to follow you more,
makes me apprehend, that he is still carrying on his design upon you.


Sight. A design upon me!

Well. He has a design upon you: And you have heard enough of his Character, to
suspect the honor of any design he has upon any woman: But such as it is, your
Cozen Wittwood, and very good friend, for ends of her own, which I can inform
you in, has undertaken to bring it about. I see you are surpised.


Sight. I pray, Sir, go on.

Well. I never pretended to be a friend of Mrs. Wittwoud's, but now I hate her:
and what I tell you, is not to ruin her with you; but of nearer consequence,
to save you from being undone by her: This is not a Secret; I Will tell her of it
my self; and my thoughts of her into the bargain: But, Madam, you know best,
how far she has solicited his cause to you; how far my Story is probable; and
whether you don't think, she persuaded you to walk this morning in the Mall, in
order to Mr. Wilding: That was the business of her visit to you, as he tells
me, whatever she pretended to the contrary.


Sight. You astonish me.

Well. I am astonished my self, indeed Madam, not to find her as I always
thought her, fit for any mischief: But to think she can pretend to be a Bawd,
and provide no better for a friend: to sacrifice you to a Man, who would tell
all the Town of it, as well as Courtall, and has consessed to me, that he never
was in love with you, nor had a thought that way, till she put it into his
head, and promised to assist him in it.


Sight. Unheard of Villainy!

Well. Faith, Madam, if I might advise you, it should be to a Man of honor at
least; that can be so tender of a reputation, not to lessen a Ladies favor so
far, to make it the common mirth of the Town: if you have any favors to
dispose of dispose of 'em your self: let not another run away with the benefit
of your good turns: I have been an old Admirer, Madam; and I hope stand as
fair, and have as good a Title to put in my Claim, as any Man of her providing.


Sight. So, Sir, then it seems you think I must be provided for, and therefore
these Advances must please me: I have some reason to believe what you say of my
Cozen VVittwoud, but I have no reason to think you very much my Friend; she has
betrayed me, and you are pleased to think I deserve it: I thank you for your
Caution; but it shall secure me for the future, against her and you: For as
much as I thought you my Friend; nay, though I languish'd for you, the
encouragement you are pleased to make, from other Peoples Base Opinion of me,
shall teach me to despise you.

[The Scene opens, the Company rises from play, and comes forward.
Teaz. Nay, nay, I have done with you: If this be your fair play, there is no
danger of your soul; why you make no Conscience of Cheating any Body out of
your own Gang.


Wit. Conscience at Cards Cozen! you are a better bred Lady than to expect it.


Mr. Fr. Conscience, Madam, is for serious Affairs, no Body minds it at play.


Teaz. Nay I Am even right enough served, I deserved it, that is the truth on it:
I must be playing with Company so much younger than my self, but I shall be
wiser for the future, and play the Fool in my own form, where I may Cheat in my
turn.


Mrs. Fr. If you speak of your Losings, Madam, I believe my Fortune has been
harder than yours; in Ten Sets running with Mr. Wilding, I never turned one,
nor had Comet in my hand.


Wit. Nay, if you win her Money, you may win every thing of her, if you know
how to manage your Game.

[Goes to Mrs. Sightly.
Wild. And Faith I Will play it as well as I can.

Wit. Cozen, I have won an Estate for you.

Sight. You have undone me.
[Exit Wittwoud.
Wild. I Will watch my time, and follow 'em.
[following.
Mr. Fr. Lovemore, prithee keep the Company together; I have an appointment
upon my hands, and must leave you: We must serve one another sometimes, you
know.

[Goes off. Servant Enters.
Serve. Madam, the Jew, newly turned Protestant, that my Master was Godfather
to, has brought the Essences and Sweet-waters he ordered him to rastle for.


Mrs. Fr. Shall we try, whether we like any of 'em.
[Going.
Well. We shall find him a Jew still in his dealings, I suppose.

Love. You would not have him lose by his Conversion, I hope.

Wild. Like other wise Men, he is for saving Soul and Body together, I warrant
him.

[They go in.
SCENE Changes to the Garden.
Wittwoud following Sightly. Sight. Never think of denying, or excusing it to
me, I am satisfied there is more in it than you ought to defend, there are so
many Circumstances to convince me, of your Treachery to me, I must believe it


Wit. I see Cozen, you will believe any thing against me: But as I hope to be
saved, upon the Faith of a Christian, and may I never rise off my Knees into
your good Opinion again, if I don't abhor the Villainy you lay to my Charge;
something I must confess to you, but I beg you to forgive me, 'twas unadvised
indeed, but innocent, and without a design upon you: Courtell's a Coxcomb, and
nothing but VVilding's Vanity, or VVellvile's Revenge, could be accessory to
the Ruin of me with you, the only Relation I love and value in the World.


Sight. O! I had forgot the pains you took to secure me, to Morrow Night at
Cards, at your Lodgings with Mr: VVilding: Cozen, let me tell you, a Bawd is
the worst part of an Intrigue, and the least to be said for it in excuse of the
Infamy. But you had something more than a Lover to provide for me, or you would
not have exposed me to a Man that would expose me to all the Town; is it
because I have been your best and last Friend, (for you will hardly find such
another in your Family) that thus you reward me for the Folly? Or is it because
I am a witness of your Shame, that you would be a Contriver of mine? I know,
(and I look upon it as a Judgment upon the former Follies of your Life,) that
you are notoriously abandoned to the Beastly Love of a Fellow, that no Body
else can look upon; and, may be, you are mischievously pleased to make me as
despicable as your self, there must be the Devil in the bottom on it, and I Will
fly from him in you.


Wit. O! don't leave me in this Passion, I am utterly ruined if you go; upon
my Knees I beg it of you.


Sight. Cozen, I forgive you; what is past shall be a Secret for both our sakes;
but I Am resolved never more to come into your power; so farewell, and find a
better Friend than I have been.

[Goes out.
Wit. She Is lost, and my design upon her, which is yet a greater misfortune to
me.

[Wilding to her. O! Sir, I am obliged to you -- and you are obliged to your
self for your success with Mrs. Sightly; so like a Boy, to discover the Secret,
before 'twas in your power to expose! Away, I Will have no more to say to you.

[Goes out.
Wild. So, Sir, you have made fine work on it with the Woman. I thought I had
satisfied you in the Mall this Morning.


Well. Sir I must be better satisfied than I was in the Morning, I find there is
no relying upon your word, since, after your promise, never to follow her more,
you could excuse your self to me in the Mall, to meet her at the Chocolate
House.


Wild. Nay then we have both our Grievances, and this must Answer 'em.

[Going to Fight, Courtall enters to part 'em.
Court. Fie, Fie, Friends, and Fighting! that must not be Gentlemen, Mrs.
Wittwoud has tole me the matter; and unless you had a Fourth Man to entertain
me, you had even as good put up again: We are all in fault, and all deserve to
be swing'd for it, that is certain: Wilding was a Fool for telling me of his
design, and I was a Fool for talking on it to VVellvile; and VVellvile no wiser
than either, for making such a Bustle about it: Therefore pray Gentlemen let us
agree in this Opinion, that by our own Prating, and prying into other Peoples
Affairs, we often discover and ruin one another designs;

For Women are by Nature well inclind:
Our Follies frighten 'em from being kind.
[Exeunt.
ACT V. SCENE I.
Wittwoud's Lodgings. Wilding following Wittwoud. Wit. NAy I don't wonder you
thrive no better with the Women, when you can part with such an Advantage over
Mrs. Friendall: You say you have won a Sum of her, which she would not be
known to lose: Why, another Man would take the privilege of a winning Gamester,
upon such an occasion to press her to a Promise, at least, of coming out of her
Debt.


Wild. I shall improve, I find, upon the advantage of your hints: But Mrs.
Sightly, Madam --


Wit. Ay, Mrs Sightly indeed: Was that a Woman to throw away upon the vanity
of being talked of for her? In the time you were bragging to other People, of
being in her Favor, you might have been every where you desired.


Wild. Nay, not unlikely.

Wit. I have made all the Excuse I could for you; some too, that in my
Conscience I thought very unreasonable my self; and could pass upon no Body but
a Woman, that was easily disposed to forgive you.


Wild. If she would but hear what I have to say for my self.

Wit. Nay, she is pretty well prepared, but you must not think of speaking to
her barefaced, that she cannot consent to for her own sake: You have made the
matter so public, she has Eyes upon her to be sure now: But it happens very
luckily, Friendall has a Masq'rade to Night at his House: There, if you please,
I can give you an opportunity of clearing your self to her.


Wild. I Ask no more of you.

Wit. Never think of defending your self, for what is past you were certainly
in the wrong; and she thinks you so: You know well enough what to say to a
Woman, that has a mind to believe you.


VVild. How shall I know her at the Masq'rade?

Wit. Go, you, and prepare for it: and depend upon me for your Intelligence.

[Wilding goes out. I find I am declining in my Reputation; and will bring
every Woman, of my Acquaintance, into my own condition, of being suspected, at
least: I have promised more than I can do with my Cozen Sightly; I have lost my
Credit with her too lately, to betray her in the way of friendship -- let me see
-- Betty --

[Betty Enters. You know where the Man lives, that made my Cozen Sightly's
Scarf, go to him from me, desire him to borrow it, that a Lady may see it, who
likes it, and desires to have one made of the same Pattern. --

[Exit. Betty. I despair of bringing her to the Masquerade: I must personate
her my self, and meet VVilding in her room: but what may be the Issue of that?
Let what will be the Issue: the farther he presses his Design upon me, the
further I carry my Design upon her: and for once, in Order to my revenge,
rather than not expose her, I Will venture to grant him the favor, that he may
tell on it; and she have the benefit of the Scandal --

[goes out.
SCENE II.
In St. James's Park. Lovemore, with Mrs. Friendall, and Mrs. Sightly. Love.
Yonder comes Mr. Friendall, Madam.

Mrs. Fr. Would I were at home again: I came upon a foolish discovery of his
Actions, to be surprised in a very unaccountable one of my own.


Sight. That is, walking Incognito on this side the Park with a Man of your
Character, Mr. Lovemore.


Mrs. Fr. I hope he will not know us.
[they put on their masks.
Sight. He Is too busy in his own affairs.

Love. He comes upon us. I must speak to him.
[Friendall enters.
Mr. Fr. You are provided for, I see: The Ladies, I suppose, wish I could say
as much for them too: very gentile women both, faith and troth: I warrant 'em
Women of Condition, if not Women of Quality, by their assignation at Rosomond's
Pond.


Love. You fancy that from the quality of your own Entrigue.

Mr. Fr. Why there is something in that too: and the truth on it is, my
assignation is with a Woman of Quality.


Love. Mrs. Sightly I fancy Friendall.

Mr. Fr. Fie, fie, why should you think so? But let her be who she will, if she
disappoint me, I Will own it to morrow to every body --


Love. That she disappointed you?

Mr. Fr. No; that 'twas Mrs. Sightly I had an intreigue with.

Sight. A small matter makes an intreigue of his side, I find.

Mr. Fr. Sure I have seen somebody very like this Lady?
[Viewing his Wife.
Mrs. Fr. I would not be known for the World.

Love. I Will bring you often, I warrant you.

Mr. Fr. She has the Air and Mein very much, of a Lady of my acquaintance.


Love. Not unlikely, faith: it may be she her self, for ought I know to the
contrary: but if you have a mind to be satisfied --


Mrs. Fr. Lord! what do you do?

Love. I have no occasion for her at present: This is my Woman:
To Mrs. Sightly. She Is but an ill-natured encumbrance, at this time; and
you will do me a favor to dispose of her.


Mr. Fr. Nay, if you are so free to dispose of her, I Am satisfied she is not
the Woman I took her for: For, to tell you the truth, Lovemore, I thought 'twas
my Wife: And, I gad, I began to be very uneasy; not so much, for finding her
in your Company; as that she should come so peevishly to disturb me, in an
affair, so very much above her.


Sight. Why, Sir, they say your Wife is a very fine Woman.

Mr. Fr. A Wife a fine Woman, Madam? I never knew a Husband that thought so in
my life.


Mrs. Fr. But some body else may, Sir, if you allow her to make these
Entertainments for the Town, that I hear you do.


Mr. Fr. Gad so, Lovemore, prithee bring the Ladies to my Masquerade to Night;
there is no body but People of Quality to be there, for pleasure is my Business,
you know; and I am very well pleased, to allow my Wife the Liberties she takes,
in favor of my own; for to tell you the Truth, the chief End of my marrying
her, (next to having the Estate settled upon me) was to carry on my Entrigues
more swimmingly with the Ladies.


Love. That Is a Convenience in Matrimony, I did not think of:

Mr. Fr. One of the greatest, upon my word, Sir. For being seen so often
abroad, and visiting with my Wife, I pass upon the formal part of the Town, for
a very good Husband; and upon the Privilege of that Character, I grow intimate
with all her Acquaintance, (and, by the way, there is hardly a Family in Town,
but I can contrive to come acquainted with, upon her account) there I pick and,
and choose in the very Face of their reverend Relations, and deliver my Billets
my self.


Mrs. Fr. You have 'em ready then?

Mr. Fr. Two, or three, always in my Pocket: --
[Shews 'em. I write half a Dozen in a Morning, for the Service of that Day.

Love. Hard service, I assure you.

Mr. Fr. Not at all: the Letters are but Copies one of another; and a
Love-letter should be a Love letter, you know, passionate, and tender, who-ever
it is designed for. Ha! yonder are two Women in Masks! I must not be seen with
you: Ladies, you know when you are well, I suppose, by the Choice of your Man;
make much of him, he is my Bosom-friend, and Confidant of my pleasures.


Mrs. Fr. And you of his, I suppose? There Is no pleasure without a Confidant.


Mr. Fr. Faith, Madam, I am of your mind: But Lovemore's a little too reserved,
it is, at present, his fault, from a want of knowing the Town; but he will mend of
it, I hope, when he comes to have a Woman, worth talking of. Lovemore, not a
word at home of seeing me here; as you value the Fortune of your Friend: Adieu.

[Goes out.
Mrs. Fr. Are you the Confidant of the Gentleman's pleasures?

Love. I have not betrayed 'em, Madam.

Mrs. Fr. Methinks a Friend should have warned me of 'em.

Love. I would not be thought to do ill Offices, especially in Marriage, Madam.


Mrs. Fr. I don't think you would; would Mr. Friendall were as tender of
wronging me, --

[Aside.
Sight. You have had a handsome Account of their Expedition: And we are both
obliged to Mr. Friendall.


Mr. Fr. I am very well paid for my Curiosity of coming here: I suppose we
shall have a Rendezvous of his Wenches, at the Masquerade; pray let us be ready
to receive 'em.

[Exeunt.
SCENE, Mr. Friendall's House.
Men and Women in Masquerading Habit. Wellvile, Wilding, Courtall, Springam,
Wittwood, and Betty. VVellw. VVilding has his Eye upon us I see: I have
something to say to him, in my own Person, and then I must change Scarfs with
you: Be sure you are in the way.


Well. I thought I had known you;
[To Betty. I beg your pardon, Madam, for the mistake.

Betty. You Are very welcome to it, Sir, I would have you mistaken; and that you
will always be, when you judge upon the Outsides of the Women.


Well. You are for a stricter Examination, I find: There are Conveniences for
a full Discovery, in the next room, some Body will show you the way.

[Leaves her.
Wild. That Is Sightly in the Scarf, and Wittwood with her, I suppose; I must
not be mistaken.


Court. I like the Freedom of a Masquerade, very well; but it confounds a Man's
Choice.


Spring. Why, faith, I have a mind to be particular, if I could but hitt upon
the Woman.


Wit. And that you shall presently, little Captain, I Will put my self in your
way.


Spring. Behind a Cloud my pretty Moon!
[To Betty. Shall I be the Man in you?

Betty. With the Bush at your Backside: You deserve to be whipped for your Wit,
Sir.

[Goes from him.
Spring. I stand corrected, Madam.

Wit. Does she beat thee, little Master? Come a' me, and I Will make much of
thee -- --


Spring. As much as you can of me, I dare say for you.

Wit. Come, come, I Will use you better -- --

Spring. To use me worse; is not that, your Design? She has given me my Answer
at once; you perhaps would linger me through a Winter's Expectation, and not do
my Business at last --


Wit. What Is your Business pray?

Spring. Why your Business, any VVomans Business, that has a mind to employ me
in it.


Wit. No touching me: I have an unfashionable Husband in the Company, that
will not thank you, for making him a Cuckold --


Spring. But you will, I Am sure, if it be but to teach him better manners.

Wit. I like your Company extremely; but I have a great deal of Business, and
would willingly be ridd of you, at this Time; but this Ring shall answer for
me, till I see you again.

[Going.
Spring. Pray redeem it, as soon as you can.

Wit. Sir, Sir, if you have any Interest in the Family, pray let us have a
Song, or a Dance, to divert us.


Spring. I Will see what I can do for you --
[Goes away.
Wit. You should be VVilding.

VVild. And you should be as good as your word.

Wit. The Lady is better than you can expect: That Is fly in the Embroidered
Scarf. You must not speak to her, before the Company, take her aside, by and
by, in a Corner; She Will thank you for your care of her.

Here Is more Company:
Lovemore Enters with Mrs. Friendall, and Mrs. Sightly. I will not be seen with
you --
Now Betty for the Change --
[VVittwood and Betty go out.
Well. Lovemore, I am in disgrace with Mrs. Sightly: And cannot find her, to
come into favor again.


Love. That Is she, that came in just now with Mrs Friendall: I Will direct you to
one, by going to the other.

[They go to em. A SONG, Written by Tho. Cheek Esquire
Corinna I excuse thy Face;
The erring Lines which Nature drew:
When I reflect, that every Grace
Thy Mind adorns is just, and true:
But oh! thy Wit what God has sent?
Surprising, airy, unconfined:
Some wonder sure Apollo meant,
And shot himself into thy Mind.
A SONG, In the First Scene of the Fourth Act.
Hang this whining way of wooing,
Loving was designed a Sport:
Sighing, talking, without doing,
Makes a silly, idle Court.
Don't believe that words can move her,
If she be not well inclined:
She her self must be the Lover,
To persuade her to be kind.
If, at last, she grants the favor,
And consents to be undone:
Never think her passion gave her,
To your VVishes, but her own.
After the Song, Wittwood and Betty, having changed Scarfs, Enter, to be ready
for the Dance, after which -- --
Love. Some cannot get Husbands, and others cannot get ridd of 'em.

Mrs. Fr. Every Woman carries her Cross in this World: A Husband happens to be
mine, and I must bear it, as well as I can.


Love. I would ease you of it.

Mrs. Fr. No more upon this subject, you have carried the Argument so far, It Is
allowing what you say, to listen any longer. But Mr. Lovemore, I will give you
what satisfaction I have in my power, and Praise is the reward of Virtue you
know; I think you have proceeded like a Man of experience in this business, and
taken the natural road to undermine most Women. I must do you this stice, that
nothing has been wanting on your side


Love. I would have nothing wanting on my side, Madam.

Mrs. Fr. And however you came by the knowledge of Mr. Friendall's weaknesses,
you have improved 'em as much as they could bear upon the Conduct of his Wife:
if they have not carried me as far as you designed; it is the fault of my
heaviness, perhaps, that cannot be transported into the Woman you would have me.


Love. There Is a fault somewhere.

Mrs. Fr. Mr. Lovemore, some Women will not speak so plain; but I will own to you,
I cannot think the worse of you for thinking well of me: Nay, I don't blame you
for designing upon me, custom has fashioned it into the way of living among
the men; and you may be in the right to all the Town: But let me be in the right
too to my Sex and to my self: thus far may be excused: You Have proved your
Passion and my Virtue tried; but all beyond that trial is my crime, and not to
be forgiven: therefore I entreat you, don't make it impossible to me for the
future, to receive you as a friend; for I must own, I would secure you always
for my Friend: Nay more, I will confess my heart to you: If I could make you
mine -- --


Love. For ever Yours.

Mrs. Fr. But I am married, only pity me --
[Goes from him.
Love. Pity her! She does not deserve it, that will not better her condition, when
she may: But she is married she says; why, that was the best of my reasons of
following her at first; and I like her so well, as she is another Man's wife, I
should hardly mend the matter by making her my own. I will not think yet my two
months thrown away upon her: One time or other, some way or other, I may be the
better for her; at least with some other Women: but I begin to believe that
every Man loses his labor this way sometimes.


Sight. Who can that Woman be?
[Observing, Wilding and Wittwoud.
Well. Wilding's the Man I know.

Sight. Then it may be my good Cozen Wittwoud.

Well. Presuming upon the Scarf, which is very like yours, I ventured, and
spoke to her. I should have known Mrs. Wittwoud I believe.


Sight. Pray try if you can learn who she is.
[They parl in a low voice.
Wit. This Place is too public for a Vindication of this Nature, if you
retire into the next room, I may accept of your excuses, upon your Promise of
good behavior, and better Conduct for the future.


Wild. I Will follow you --
[Wittwood retires, Wellvile to Wilding.
Well. You will be the Man I see, Wilding: The Lady's withdrawn; don't let her
stay for you.


Wild. Faith, Wellvile, it is a fortune thrown upon me; and since it came
without my seeking, methinks, you should hardly think it worth your courting:
She Will bring it about one way of other, you find.


Well. You speak as if I knew the Lady.

Wild. I would have you know so much, that she is not worth the honorable care
you have of her.


Well. Of whom.

Wild. As if you did not know her.

Well. Why, it is not Mrs. Sightly.

Wild. I have declined it as much as I could in regard to a Friend; but when
she follows me.


Well. Mrs Sightly follow you!
[Mr. Friendall enters and joins with Mr. Lovemi
Wild. No naming Names, good VVellvile.

Well. Nay, then I must convince you; I just lest Mrs. Sightly to come to you;
She Is now in the Company, and I Will carry you to hear me speak to her. -- -- --

[Carrys Wilding to Sightly.
Love. Why, this was a terrible disappointment.

Mr. Fr. There are Lampoons, Sir, I say no more; But I may do my self reason in
one of 'em, and disappoint her yet of her disappointment.

[Among the Women fastens upon Sightly
VVild. Why then VVittwood has put another Woman upon me; and abused Mrs.
Sightly and me: I am satisfied of the Cheat, and would be assisting to the
revenge of it if I could.


Well. You would not be the instrument, to make it public your self?

VVild. No, that I cannot consent to.

Well. Then leave it to me: Friendall's a property fit for our several
interests: But Lovemore must employ him.

[Wellvile to Lovemore
Mr. Fr. Faith, Madam, I am very fit for your purpose, at present, I have met
with a little ill usage from a Lady; by not meeting with her: but you may be
the better for it, if you please: You shall have the pleasure, and she shall
have the reputation of the entrigue.


Sight. I am for all or none.
[Lovemore comes to him.
Love. The rarest accident, Friendall; the reason that you were disappointed in
the Park, I can tell you, was, the Lady had appointed to meet Wilding here: She
is now withdrawn into the next room in expectation of him; which Wellvile, her
old Lover, suspecting, has taxt him of, and ruined the design. Now if you would
have me, I Will keep up the jealousy between 'em, and give you an opportunity to
go in to her.


Mr. Fr. By all means, Lovemore, this was unexpected, and done like a Friend; I
owe you a good turn for it, be sure you keep 'em here.

[Sneaks out after Wittwoud.
Sight. What are you designing upon Mr. Friendall?
[To Wellvile.
Well. There Is mischief in it; and you may all be the better for it.
Mrs. Teazall pressing in with a Footman upon the Company.
Mrs. Fr. What Is the noise there?

Footman, Madam, here is a rude, unmannerly Gentlewoman presses in upon me, and
refuses to pull off her Masque, as your Honor ordered.


Teaz. You saucy Rascal you, I show a better Face than thy Mother had, when she
laid thee to the Parish, you Rogue: Prate to me, you Varlet! and an honester
one, though I say it, than any of the Company: Here Is fine work indeed in a civil
Family! What, Are you ashamed of your doings, that you will not discover your
selves?


Spring. Mistress, you have the natural privilege of a Masque. And being
disguised in your own Face, you may say what you please.


Teaz. Marry, come up here; Will nothing but a good Face down with you? a Woman
has a fine time on it, with your finical fancy: but I want leisure to laugh at
you.

[Looking every where for her Niece.
Court. Do you know me?

Teaz. Ay, ay, I guess at you: learn to speak without a question, You Fool,
before you set up for a Wit.


Court. I know You.

Teaz. Why then you may be satisfied, I shall think you an Ass.

Spring. Nay, good Mother, you had even as good pull off your Masque. You see
you are discovered.


Teaz. Discovered you snotty-nos'd Jacanapes! Would I could discover your
Master; I would send him a Note of your Name: You are not yet clean from
School, and are setting up for the Women forsooth: You have been so used to be
turned up for a Blockhead, as you are, for peeping into every bodies backdoor,
to find as great a fool as your self: Sirrah, Sirrah, a good Burch Rod for your
Mistress; that would tickle your tail, as you deserve.


Spring, Nay, good your Reverence.

Mrs. Fr. What Is the Matter pray?

Teaz. Why the wicked ways of Living in this Town, are matter enough for the
vexation of any Woman, that has a Girl to look after: God's my life! Cannot you
keep up your Masquerades, in the primitive institution of making Cuckolds, as
it used to be, without bringing the young Wenches into the Mystery of Matrimony
before their time? Where Is my Niece among you? it is a burning shame to draw
away a poor young Girl into these deboist gallopping doings, as you do.


Mrs. Fr. Good Mrs. Teazall, not so censorious: Pray where is the harm of a
little innocent diversion?


Teaz. Innocent diversion, with a Pox to it! for that will be the end on it, at
last: very innocent diversion indeed; why, your Musick-meetings,
Dancing-meetings, Masquing-meetings, are all but pretenses to bring you
together: and when you meet, we know what you meet for well enough; it is to the
same purpose, in good troth: all ends in the innocent diversion.


Well. Nay, says, the Gentlewoman has reason for what she says.

Teaz. Well, make me thankful for it; there is one civil Gentleman among you:
and really there is a great deal of comfort in opening a poor Woman's case, to a
discreet good-natured Gentleman: Pray, Sir, hear me; and if you don't allow
that I have some cause for what I do, I will be contented never to see
Coat-card, nor have Pam in my Pocket again.


Mrs. Fr. But who are you looking for all this while?

Teaz. An untowardly Girl, to be sure, my Cozen Fanny, Madam: she has undone
her self, and my hopes of a Husband for her: Gad forgive me, I have no
Patience, when I think upon it: last night, VVittwoud forsooth, she carries her
to the Musick-meeting; then one VVilding, an impudent Whore-mastering fellow,
he carries her home with him, which I could forgive well enough too, if it
ended there: but now, when all things were agreed upon, and Mr. Buttybun was to
give us a Supper, and sign the Writings, in order to Marry her to morrow; when
the Baggage was called upon, to perform her part, whip, she had given us the
slip, tuckt up her tail, and run a rogueing after that fellow again: but I shall
light upon her.


Love. VVilding, what say you to this?

Teaz. O, Sir, are you there? if there be any Justice in England for the Women,
I Will have you bound to the Good behavior; I Will swear the Peace against you my
self; for there is nobody safe, young or old, at this rate, if such
Whore-masters as you are allowed to do as you do.


VVild. I am bound already to behave my self like a Gentleman: I do what good I
can, in my Generation; but injure nobody.


Teaz. Sirrah, sirrah, you shall find you have injured my Niece, and me, before
I have done with you.


VVild. You will not bring it to Westminster, I hope, to be decided, who has most
injured her; I, by being civil to her, or you, by telling it to all the Town


Teaz. Why that is true again.

VVild. And let the Company judge, who appears to be most her Enemy; I, in
teaching her a very good Trade; or you, in endeavoring to break her, before
she is well set up in it.


Court. Nay, now it goes against you.
[to Teazall.
VVild. I have put her in a very good way; if she manage it well, she will make
more on it, than her Mother made of her Matrimony.


Teaz. Nay, 'twas the ruin of her, that I grant you.

VVild. And let the worst come to the worst, if she fails in this calling: she
may begin in another, (as they do in the City sometimes) it is but setting up
for a Husband at last.


Teaz. But that you will not consent to, it seems.

VVild. Faith, Madam, I ha'nt seen your Niece since morning; and then Mrs.
VVittwoud obliged me to give over my pretensions to her, upon the promise of
procuring Mrs. Sightly for me.


Sight. Without my knowledge, Sir?

VVild. Indeed, Madam, you were not to know of the bargain.

Teaz. Then you don't know where Fanny is?

VVild. Not I faith, Madam.

Well. We were just complaining of Mrs. VVittwoud's unkindness to you, as you
came in.


Teaz. Ay, Sir, I am beholding to you.

Well. She has been very busy all this night in carrying on an intreigue,
between your Niece and somebody: They are retired into the next Room; they
went out at that door, if you have a mind to be satisfied.


Teaz. I Am sorry, Sir, I (...) time to thank you for this favor: I must make
haste, for I Am resolved to be satisfied.

[Scene draws, shows Friendall and Wittwoud upon a Couch. Very fine! here is a
sight indeed!

Wittw. Confusion!

Mr. Fr. What a pox! disturb a Gentleman's pleasures! and in his own House too!
ha! VVittwoud here! Nay then, would you had come sooner: Madam, I beg your
pardon for some Liberties I have taken with your Ladyship: But, says, I took
you for Mrs. Sightly.


Wit. I never was mistaken in you.

Wild. You see I had too great a respect for you, and therefore provided you a
more deserving --


Wit. Fool.

Well. And one that had as good-natured a design upon Mrs. Sightly, as you had
your self.


Teaz. Nay, now, Gentlewoman, I think it is come home to you, and I am glad
on it, with all my heart.


Sight. You have paid dear enough for that Scarf; you may keep it for a pattern
for your friends, as 'twas borrowed for: I will not insult over you, and am only
pleased, that I have escaped your snares.


Wit. That disappointment is my greatest Curse; and disappointments light upon
you all.

[Goes out.
Court. This is your Mistress, Captain.

Spring. And I gad she shall be mine now in spite of her teeth: For since I
find she can be civil upon occasion, I shall beat her into good manners, if she
refuses me.

[Goes after her.
Well. Every thing has fallen so much to your advantage, that sure the sault I
made may be forgiven: What amends I have in my power, I am ready to make you:
my liberty, of what I have to give, is what I value most; and that is yours,
when you consent to let me make you mine.


Sight. This is too sudden to be serious: when you're in earnest, you will not
need an answer.


Wild. They are striking up a Peace on all hands, Gentlemen; we shall be left
out of the Treaty.


Love. There Is yet a Lady to declare her self.

Mrs. Fr. Mr. Friendall, I Am sorry you thought it necessary to your pleasures,
to make me a witness of my ill usage: you know I can, and have past many
things, some Women would think wrongs, as such resent 'em, and return 'em too:
but you can tell how I Have behaved my self.


Mr. Fr. Like a Gentlewoman always, Madam, and my Wife.

Mrs. Fr. The unjust World, let what will be cause of our complaint (as there
is cause sufficient still at home:) condemn us to slavery for life: And if by
separation we get free, then all our Husband's faults are laid on us: This hard
Condition of a Woman's fate, I Have often weighed, therefore resolved to bear:
And I have born; O! what have I not born? But patience tires with such
oppressing wrongs, when they come home, to triumph over me; and tell the Town,
how much I am despised.


Mr. Fr. I see we are both disappointed in this affair of Matrimony; it is not
the condition you expected; nor has it the advantages I proposed. Now, Madam,
since it is impossible to make it happy between us, let us even resolve to make
it as easy as we can.


Mrs. Fr. That must be my business now.

Mr. Fr. And mine too, I assure you: look you, Madam, your own Relations shall
provide for you at pleasure, out of my Estate; I only article that I may have a
freedom of visiting you, in the round of my acquaintance.


Mrs. Fr. I must be still your Wife, and still unhappy.

Love. What alteration this may make in my Fortune with her, I don't know; but
I Am glad I have parted 'em.


Mr. Fr. Well, Gentlemen, I cannot be very much displeased at the recovery of
my liberty, I am only sorry Wittwoud was the occasion of it: For an old
blown-upon she-wit, is hardly an intreigue to justify the separation on my
side, or make a man very vain of his Fortune.


Love. This you must all expect, who marry Fools;
Unless you form 'em early in your Schools,
And make 'em, what they were designed for, Tools.

FINIS.
ADVERTISEMENT.
A Treatise of Jealousy; Or Means to preserve Peace in Marriage. Written
Originally in French by the Author of Rules of Civility. In Twelves, Price
bound One Shilling. Sold by W. Freeman at the Bible in Fleetstreet.


