To all the Christian Congregations of the peculiar People of God now
reproached and persecuted by the Name, and under the denomination of Quakers,
that Grace, Mercy and Peace of God the Father, and the Power of his Christ be
abundantly multiplied and increased among you all.
DEar Brethren and faithful Friends, unto whom it has pleased God to make
known the riches of the glory of the great Mystery that has been hid from the
wise and learned; whose faces are turned toward Sion; and whose faith stands
in the Power of God, who are come through great tribulations out of desolation,
and are turned to the chief Shepherd and Bishop of your souls, in singleness of
heart, in the form of a servant, and in the love of a brother do I humbly and
heartily salure and send greeting unto you all, and as a worker together with
you, I beseech you all to stand fast in the Liberty where Christ Jesus has
made you free; and let not so much as an inclination enter into your hearts of
being again entangled with the old oppressive, Antichristian yoke of Bondage
from which you are delivered; for what profit has you in those things whereof
ye are now ashamed? To what purpose did you worship God, when your fear toward
him was taught by the Precepts of men? Did you not then leave undone the things
which you ought to have done; and do the things which you ought not to have
done? And did you not then err in your hearts, and go astray like lost sheep?
How did the false Prophet then lead you, whose right eye is utterly darkened?
And how did the Merchants of the Earth make a prey upon you, whilst you were
all the day long accounted as sheep for the slaughter, in the streets of the
great City of Confusion, where you have been captives, mourning in desolation,
though you could not with delight participate in her sin? And therefore has
the Lord called you forth, and separated you from among them, and saved you
with a mighty salvation, and lifted up the light of his countenance upon you;
and now is the Spirit of Life from God entered into you, that laid as slain in
the streets of the great City, spiritually called Sodom and Egypt.

Wherefore arise, arise ye faithful and true Witnesses of the Most High, over
whom the Heathenish Inhabitants of the earth have made merry, and lift up your
voices like Trumpets, let the Word of God which is like fire, proceed out of
your mouths, and let the high Praises of God be in your hearts; March up to
Mount Sion in the sight of your Enemies, that you may see the Judgment of the
great Whore, the Beast and false Prophet taken alive, and destroyed together.

And dear Friends, whom God has sought out and purchased as his peculiar
Treasure, be faithful to that which is your professed, declared, known
principle, and approved practice in the external exercise of your Religion;
confess Christ before men, and contend earnestly and with confidence in the
day of trial, for the Faith once delivered to the Saints, that it may appear
and be manifestly declared to all the world, that you have respect to Gods
requirings, and love to his Law, and that you are not in rebellion, nor in
transgression against the Lord, nor unprofitable to the King, although you are
accused to be diverse in your Laws and Customs at this day; for godliness is
profitable unto all things: For this cause we pay tribute and pray for Kings
and Rulers, that under them we may live peaceably in this present World, in all
godliness and honesty, as becomes Saint^.

Is the Decree sealed against you, and the time prefixed, and Posts gone forth,
because Mordecai cannot bow in obedience to the King's command? Well. And is
there none to help nor to make supplication? Stand still and see the salvation
of God, the Enemy discomfited, and Isreal's offspring safely delivered? Is
there a Decree gone forth that none must meet, ^r make prayers and supplication
to God, but under great penalties? And will not Daniel conform and obey the
King's Laws? No, it is contrary to the Law of his God, and against the King has
he done nothing worthy of punishment. And is the way in which you worship the
God of Daniel at this day called Heresy? And must not five meet together to
make intercession and supplication to God for all men, according to the
practice of the primitive Christians, but it must be accounted a transgression
of Law? Well, it is better to obey God then man in this case, and to suffer
affliction for nonconformity, with the established, persecuted people of God,
then to make shipwreck of Faith and a good Conscience, and so to be cast out as
abominable branches amongst the workers of iniquity: Are you despised by
Sanballat because you are but a few in number, and feeble in appearance? Fear
not little Flock, for the Lord is with you, and no Enchantment nor formed
Weapon can prevail against you, for your Work is of God, and your Building will
stand in the stormy day. Are you now hated, reproached and persecuted for your
Religion and righteousness? Rejoice and be exceeding glad, for this was the
portion of your Predecessors the Prophets and holy Apostles, in the days of
their pilgrimage in this World. Does not the Fig Tree blossom? Is there no
appearance of fruit in the Vine? Rejoice ye in the Lord, and trust in the God
of your salvation. Is Truth fallen in the Streets? Can Equity have no entrance?
Are proud men accounted happy, and wickedness winked at? You that fear the
Lord, and tremble at his Word, meet often together, and speak comfortably one
unto another, that the Lord may number your names among his Jewels. I say,
neglect not the assembling of your selves together, after the manner of some,
whose day is turned into darkness, whose sun is gone down at noon, and who are
fallen among the uncircumcised. But dear friends, enter all into the Mountain of
the Lord's House and hide your selves within the munition of Rocks, until the
wrath of man be restrained, and let every soul be subject to the power of
Christ Jesus, and you that are strong, watch over the weak, comfort the
feeble-minded, bear one another burdens, say to them that are of a fearful
heart, Be strong: Consider them that are in bonds, as bound with them, and as
being members of the same body; build up one another in the most holy faith,
endure hardships, as seeing him that is invisible, with respect to the
recompense of reward, the durable riches which are appointed for the faithful.
Let not the glory of this Worlds Kingdom, external Liberty, the pleasures of
sin, nor the treasures of Egypt, enter into your hearts to alienate your
affections from your Head and Husband, the Bridegroom and Bishop of your souls;
let neither flattery nor fair speeches draw you away from your stedfastness;
fear not men's frowns, faint not in your minds, cast not away your confidence,
think it not strange concerning the fiery trial, as if some strange thing had
happened unto you, for the trial of your faith is precious.

Is the agreement made, That whosoever shall confess Christ to be come in the
flesh, either in practice, principle or declaration, shall be cast out of the
Synagogue, and into Dens and Prisons, Caves and nasty holes of the Earth; Fear
not little Flock, fear none of the things that you are called to suffer; for
God that made the World and all things in it, dwells not in Temples made with
hands, neither does he at this day require tithes and offerings, nor sacrifices
for sin, but a broken heart, and a contrite spirit is that in which he
delights: obedience to his commands is better than sacrifice; and to hear his
voice, and do his will, is more acceptable than the fat of Rams: And if you
suffer for Christ's sake as evildoers ^hen unto bonds, the Lord will comfort
you in all your tribulations, and bring you forth with joy and gladness of
veart, when your Testimony for him is faithfully finished.

Is the times so perilous now, that none must buy and sell but such as will
receive the mark of the Beast either in their foreheads, or in their right
hand? Oh let the one hundred forty and four thousand that are redeemed from
the Earth, and whose Names are written in Heaven, stand with the Lamb upon the
Mountain where the house of the Lord is established, that they may be
abundantly satisfied with the Fatness thereof, and that they may receive Milk
and Wine, Bread and Water, without money and without price; and let the seven
thousand Israelites that cannot bow to the likeness of any thing, be also
assembled together, that they may obtain joy and gladness, and receive the
garments of praife for the Spirit of heaviness, and that there may be one Lord,
and his name one, one sheepfold, and one Shepherd; for in every place they that
fear God and work righteousness are accepted of him; and now is the Lord
searching out his Flock that have wandered like lost sheep in the weary
Wilderness, and upon the barren Mountains, that he may feed them with knowledge
and understanding, and that they may go in, and forth by the door, and find
pasture, and may hear the voice of the good shepherd, who has loved them, and
whom God has exalted to be a Prince and a Savior, that in all things he as
Head of the Church may have the pre-eminence.

Have the Highpriests consulted together to charge this Shepherds Flock to go
follow him no more, nor to speak no more in his Name, and why will they not
obey Anthority? Because its better to obey God, and to keep his commandments,
and to suffer persecution with the people of God, when man's commands are
contrary to the Law of God, than to deny Christ before men for fear of their
wrath; for man's wrath works not God's righteousness.

And so all you that have been with Jesus, be bold to confess him, and to meet
and speak in his Name; for wherever two or three are gathered together in his
Name, it is so far from being an unlawful Meeting in Christ's account, as that he
has promised to be present; and he is not limited to time, number or place,
three, four, or five thousand; for its his will that men should pray every
where, lifting up holy hands, without wrath or doubting; and he that is
afflicted, let him pray, and he that loves the Lord Jesus, must keep his
commandments, and follow his example, for he prayed and spoke among the
multitude in the Mountains and in the Deserts, in Ships, and by the seaside,
and the Apostles spoke to the people that resorted to the Rivers side, where
prayers use to be made.

Is refusing to swear in any cause, accounted a transgression at this day? Who
then is the Author of this trespass? Is Christ the Author of sin? Or did he
come to destroy the Law? Nay, he came to fulfill it, and he is the end of the
Law for righteousness unto all believers; and as in old time it was said, Thou
shall not forswear thy self; so now faith Christ, A new Commandment give I unto
you, Swear not at all, which is as obligatory to Christians, and as exactly to
be observed, as Thou shall not steal, Thou shall not kill, Thou shall not
commit Adultery, or any other command going before; And such as are constrained
with love to God, must manifest it by their reverent respect to all his
commandments; and if in this cause you, or any of you be called in question,
let all men know that its for your obedience to Christ, and not out of contempt
to Government; and when you are hated of the Nations for his Name sake, and in
obedience to his commands. Lift up your heads, for your salvation is nearer
then when you first believed; and hitherto has the Lord been a present help in
the time of trouble, notwithstanding the great opposition of your adversaries,
that you being delivered from the hands of your oppressors, might serve him in
holiness all your life long, as a people saved by him for the same purpose. Oh
how has the Lord appeared in an acceptable time for your deliverance out of
desolation, when you wandered in the Wilderness in a dark and solitary way; and
how has he lifted up the light of his countenance upon you in the days of
your infancy! He has supported you, and his candle has shined upon your
heads, his secret was upon your Tabernacle, and his Word a light unto your
paths: when you had but a little strength he carried you in his arms, and led
you gently by the footsteps of the Flock when you were but young; and he has
planted you now as a noble vine, that your renown may go forth among the
Heathen round about; and you are the Salt of the Earth, and as a City set on a
Hill, that cannot be hid; and this is the day of your trial, so my dear
brethren and sisters, be faithful in it, and the Lord will make you a Family
like a Flock: His Name will be a strong Tower unto you, in which you may retire
with safety when he pours contempt upon professors and profane, that have
started aside like a broken bow in the day of their trial; you are the only
people known unto me among all the Families of the Earth, that are fully
persuaded in your own minds in matters of Worship and Ordinances, Principles
and Practices in spiritual things at this day; and therefore I love you and
honor you, and I believe the Lord will crown you with righteousness, and make
you an eternal excellency, even the joy of many generations, that the Gentiles
may come to your Light, and Kings of Nations to the brightness of your rising;
for the Lord is your everlasting Light, and the days of your mourning shall
shortly have an end.

These sayings were in my heart and mind, which I have now committed to Paper
to be copied and communicated among Friends, as a confirmation of my communion
with all the Saints, at liberty and in bonds for the Testimony of Jesus, and
the Word of God, and in the fellowship of the Saints in Light, and in the
fullness of the blessing of the Gospel, I rest with you, and am your real and
faithful friend, and fellow servants in the household of faith.

Cornwall the 24th day of the 8th. Month, 1662. Thomas Salthouse.

To the Brethren in the travel and perfect Liberty (in the holy acceptable
Faith) through the sufferings of the free born, unchangeable seed of Truth,
whether in bonds or otherwise beset, in London or elsewhere, throughout the
Land, Greetings of pure and perfect love, in the blessed savor of Grace, Peace
and Truth herewith is sent; that which is arisen up, and springs forth from one
and the same clear innocent Testimony of Jesus Christ our Lord, for whose Name
sake ye suffer; my soul that lives in the prosperity and suffering of your
life, bears record not only to your consolation, but for your faithfulness
to the right Way and pure Worship of the living invisible God of Eternity, over
all blessed for ever. Amen.
MY dear Friends, in the blessed unity and fellowship of the Eternal Gospel of
God, in the life of Immortality which is brought to light hereby, yea and in
the holy, lively, steadfast Faith, which stands in the same in every particular
of us, who have assuredly believed in it, for our comfort and edification in
the blessed love of the blessed truth, in which is no variableness, no not so
much as the shadow of turning: Verily in the same is the right dear salutation
of the kindness of my very heart and precious life, to you in the Fathers
bowels of tenderness and everlasting pity and compassion, the which I am well
persuaded reaches to, and among, and in every particular of you, more o^ less,
that live and dwell in the Fountain of the pure fear of the Lord, with your
pure minds girt up steadfast and entire to him, and of his Eternal Riches are
made partakers more or less in your own, day by day, morning by morning,
because his mercies and bountifulness endures for ever, in his own life and
goodness, in the hid treasures of his House that is immovably founded upon the
sure and steadfast foundation of blessedness, that is sure from generation to
generation, from everlasting to everlasting, even the pure Rock of Ages, the
perfect foundation of many generations; behold, this is our Rock and hiding
place of refuge, and consolation in all our distresses, even as it was our
Fathers of old.

Wherefore lift up the head ye blessed of the Lord, and open ye everlasting
Gates of praise; what though storms arise, and dark tempests wheel about, and
floods beat, and troubled Seas swell, and the proud Waves lift up their heads,
and rise with violence again and again against us, as our eyes has seen; well,
yet let us be still, be glad, and rejoice in the everlasting kindness and
tenderness of our God that lives for ever, who delights in them that fear
him, that sits upon the floods in the Ark of his Almightiness, and guides with
his eye and skilfulness of his hand, and opens his bowels of healing and
saving-health unto the upright in heart, that in any wise cannot be ashamed of
his blessed and manifold appearances; but confess him, and trust in him among,
and before the sons of men, and as so many pillars of eternal righteousness
holding forth the pure Testimony of innocence, and as an Ensign to the Nations,
the same in the blessed wisdom of the just, living Lord of Life from on high,
the same is displayed over the heads of the uncircumcised in heart, so that
many sweetly savor the heavenly distillings of the pure, clear breath of
immortality, eternal life, which is breathed forth, and so richly manifested
and brought to light, which flourishes in the midst of the House of Israel,
and dwells in the tents of little, small Jacob, who is arising in the eternal
strength of his mighty God, to possess the Gate of his Enemies, and to tread
upon the high places of the Earth; Oh feel his triumph in every particular, in
the ^aithfulness of the God of good old Abraham and his Seed, to which all the
exceeding great and precious promises pertain, against which no formed Weapon
can prosper, albeit the crafts-men and cunning Inventers be never so skilful
and artificial, the counsel of the Lord God over all shall stand, and his
living Word of Life and Salvation shall endure for ever the same, without any
variableness, as it was in the beginning with God blessed for ever, Amen.

And with you my dearly beloved brethren, ye Fathers, Elders and Pillars of
blessedness, my soul right dearly loves you, and cleaves unto you, in whom
the Word of Eternal Life has an abiding-place in the sanctifying power and
heavenly virtue of the same, is that which adorns the tabernacles of the just,
and fills the upright-hearted with gladness, and causes the little Babes of
Life to reign with unspeakable joy, in peace and quietness, and also renews
the blessed strength of young men to wax grave, temperate, bold and valiant in
the renowned Faith of the Worthies of old, so that both old and young, high and
low, babes and little ones, are on this wise blessed with the sweet savor of
the goodness of our God: Oh what shall I say! words are all insufficient to
demonstrate: Is it not even so, and much more? let the life of pure virtue and
lasting righteousness, bear me record concerning this salvation which is
unutterable, to declare the depth and riches of the same which has no end.
Well, the blessed day and season is so manifestly approached, and shining over
us, that many words are not to be multiplied to tell you of these things, who
are made partakers and lively Witnesses of the same; yet a little you may well
bear with me, because I perfectly love you, and in the same I greet you my dear
Friends, every particular of you in your own, without respect of persons,
whether in bonds or at liberty, my heart is one with you, your souls are as
mine; ye lively Saints in light, if you suffer, how can I rejoice? if you
lament and mourn because of oppression, so do I; and the Father's bowels of
kindness and tender pity hovereth over us to our consolation; and so however it
be, its well with us in the heavenly exercise of our pure minds, in the
unlimited Spirit of holiness, and sanctifying power of blessedness, in the fear
of the Lord God: So Grace and Life, Love and Peace, of eternal goodness be
increased and multiplied, and abound more and more in every particular (to be
witnessed) over all, Yea and Amen, by the pure hand of Immortal life and
virtue, to his glory that lives for ever in the everlasting Light, in which I
salute you all; as I began my voice, so in the same I finish to you-ward at
this time; only in the perfect love and unity I commend every of you to the
pure manifestation of the living Lords life, in the same that is invisible,
eternal and unchangeable, and fades not to be preserved unto the coming of our
Lord Jesus Christ in fullness and mighty power and glory: Blessed are all that
in uprightness love (and wait for) his appearance and Kingdom over all, Amen
and Amen.

Friends in this Country do well universally, and the love of the truth
prospers well in them: Meetings are quiet yet, only six at present Prisoners
for meeting. Truth increases with its good savor in the hearts of many here
away; Right dearly, friends are affected with your cruel sufferings and
faithfulness, and in our prayers, sighs and groans, we cannot forget you, as we
are well persuaded neither can you forget us likewise, as it becomes Saints.
Farewell:

Shrewsbury Town-Gaol for the blessed clear testimony of the right way and pure
worship of the Lord Jesus, a prisoner this 14. of the 9. Mon. 1662. In the
faith and long-suffering patience of the Saints in light, I am your companion
and brother, Daniel Baker.

A heavenly Voice to the Mourners in Sion, and to all that sigh and languish
within the borders of Jerusalem, is this tender Salutation.
O Jerusalem! Jerusalem! why art thou thus dismayed?
Thy King does live and reign in truth, thou needst not be afraid:
Behold a Cup of mourning's put in thy hand,
That all may mourn with thee within thy Land.
What though thou mourn a while, as in the darkest night,
Thy joy shall far surmount the same with triumph in the clear light.
Oppressed Sion, Sion, thy precious tears why do they thus run down,
As if the Comforter for thee could now be found?
My Soul for thee does make her moan in love,
Because thy travel's great thou harmless Dove.
Drink down thy mourning spirit, ablessing is herein
To heal thy bleeding wounds by men of sin.
Thy Comfortor is near, be not dismayed,
Thy mighty God is nigh to give thee aid.
His perfect Eye beholds his Enemies so st^ut,
They smite and wound thy Life, and cast thee out.
But how the Bowels of thy Fathers God does roll,
None know save they that feel the travel of thy soul.
(But why, how long, oh Lord?)
Oh Sion! Sion! thy God long suffering stands,
He also feels thy wounds even from thy Enemies hands.
But why, how long oh Lord? how can thou long for bear,
Whilst Bears, Wolves, Lions strong, spare not to tear
The outside Hedges of thy Vinyards choice?
Arise thou King of Life, and thunder forth thy voice:
With thy Eternal Word (thy Sword) smite on amain,
Let Sions Enemies (so stout) by thee be slain:
And let the Light of thy sweet Life flame forth,
Because thine Off-spring's blessed, whose rise was in the North.
Thou blessed seed of life, my soul does honor thee,
Because thy living God Eternal, so does he.
Thy Fame, thy Name, thy birth thy living Lord has blessed,
Thy habitation's glorious, in which my soul does rest.
D. B.

FINIS.

