INTEREST DEPOSED, AND TRUTH RESTORED. OR, A Word in Season, delivered in Two
SERMONS: The First at St. MARYES in OXFORD, on the 24th of July, 1659. being
the time of the Assizes: as also of the Fears and Groans of the Nation in the
threatened, and expected Ruin of the Laws, Ministry, and Vniversityes. The
other Preached lately before the Honorable Society of LINCOLN'S INN.

BY ROBERT SOVTH, Mr. of Arts, and Student of CHRIST-CHURCH.

OXFORD, Printed by A.L. for Tho. Robinson, 1660.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFUL EDWARD ATKINS, Sergeant at Law, and formerly one of
the Justices of the COMMON PLEAS.
Honored Sir,
THough at first it was free, and in my choice, whether or no I should publish
these Discourses, yet the Publication being once Resolved, the Dedication was
not so indifferent; the Nature of the Subject, no less than the Obligations of
the Author, styling them in a peculiar manner Yours: For since their drift is
to carry the most Endangered, and Endangering Truth, above the Safest, when
sinful, Interest; as a Practice upon grounds of Reason the most Generous, and
of Christianity the most Religious; to whom rather should this Assertion
repair as to a Patron, than to Him whom it has for an Instance? Who in a case
of eminent Competition choose Duty before Interest, and when the Judge grew
inconsistent with the Justice, preferred rather to be Constant to sure
Principles, than to an Unconstant Government: And to retreat to an Innocent,
and Honorable Privacy, than to sit and Act inquity by a Law; and make your Age
and Conscience, (the one Venerable, the other Sacred) Drudges to the Tyranny of
Fanatic, Perjured Usurpers. The next attempt of this Discourse, is a Defense
of the Minstery, and that at such a time when none owned them upon the Bench
(for then you had quitted it) but when on the contrary we lived to hear One in
the very face of the University, as it were in defiance of us and our
Profession, openly in his Charge defend the Quakers and Fanatics, persons not
fit to be named in such Courts, but in an Indictment. But, Sir, in the
Instructions I here presumed to give to others, concerning what they should
do, you may take a Narrative of what you have done: what respected their
Actions as a Rule or Admonition, applied to yours is only a Rehearsal. Whose
Zeal in asserting the Ministerial Cause is so generally known, so gratefully
acknowledged, that I dare affirm, that in what I deliver, you read the Words
indeed of One, but the Thanks of All. Which affectionate Concernment of yours
for them, seems to argue a Spiritual sense, and Experimental Taste of their
Works, and that you have reaped as much from their Labors, as others have
done from their Lands: For to me it seemed always strange, and next to
Impossible, that a man converted by the Word Preached, should ever hate and
persecute a Preacher. And since you have several times in discourse declared
your self for that Government in the Church, that is founded upon Scripture,
Reason, Apostolical Practice and Antiquity, and (we are sure) the only one
that can consist with the Present Government of State, I thought the latter
Discourse also might fitly address it self to you, in the which you may read
your Judgment, as in the other your Practice. And now since it has pleased
Providence, at length to turn our Captivity, and answer persecuted Patience
with the unexpected returns of Settlement; to remove our Rulers, and restore
our Ruler; and not only to make our Exactors righteousness, but, what is
better, to give us Righteousness instead of Exaction, and hopes of Religion to
a Church worried with Reformation; I believe upon due and impartial Reflection
on what is Past, you now find no cause to Repent, that you never dipped your
hands in the Bloody High Courts of Justice, properly so called only by
Antiphrasis; nor ever prostituted the Scarlet Robe to those Employments, in
which you must have worn the Color of your Sin in the Badge of your Office.
But notwithstanding all the Enticements of a Prosperous Villainy, abhorred the
Purchase, when the Price was Blood. So that now being privileged by an happy
Unconcernment in those Legal Murders, you may take a sweeter relish of your
own Innocence, by beholding the misery of others Guilt, who being Guilty before
God, and infamous before men, Obnoxious to Both, begin to find the first fruit
of their sin in the Universal scorn of all, their apparent Danger, and
unlikely Remedy: which beginnings being at length consummated by the hand of
Justice, the cry of Blood and Sacrilege will cease, men's doubts will be
Satisfied, and Providence Absolved.

And thus, Sir, having presumed to honor my first Essays in Divinity, by
prefixing to them a Name, to which Divines are so much obliged. I should here
in the close of this Address, contribute a Wish at least to your Happiness:
But since we desire it not yet in another World, and your Enjoyments in this
(according to the Standard of a Christian desire) are so complete, that they
require no Addition, I shall turn my VVishes into Gratulations, and
congratulating their Fullness, only wish their Continuance: Praying, that you
may still possess, what you possess; and Do what you Do; that is, reflect
upon a clear, unblotted, acquitting Conscience, and feed upon the ineffable
Comforts of the Memorial of a Conquered Temptation; without the danger of
returning to the Trial. And this (Sir) I account the greatest Felicity that
you can enjoy, and therefore the greatest that he can desire, who is

Yours in all Observance, TO. SOVTH.
Chapter Chapter the 25th. of May, 1660.
A Preface to the Reader.
THat being conscious to my self of having in Discourse so often condemned the
Scribbling of the present Age, I should yet now own it by my Practice;
especially in that sort of Writing in which several have gone before me, whom
it is no glory to come behind, I find a Necessity of bespeaking the Readers
acceptance with Excuse, which yet I trust I shall not manage so, as to make it
only matter for another, but present him with Reason, as well as Apology. And
first for the Publication of these two Discourses the one Preached in the time
of our Fears, the other of our Hopes, and now both coming forth in the
beginning of our Fruition, I shall not plead their having passed the Test and
Approbation of two of the most Judicious and Learned Auditories in the Nation,
as supposing that was rather for the seasonablenesse of the Truth, than any
Elegance of the Composure, and more for the Venture than the Performance: Yet
from whatsoever cause it came, I shall not vouch it as a reason of the
Publication, since the same persons may applaud the same thing from the Pulpit,
that they shall afterward hiss coming from the Press; as could be easily
instanced in the Forlorn Works of some Unfortunate Divines: But much less was
it the insolent, imprudent itch of appearing in Public, that induced me to
this, as being confident that these Discourses, had more Hearers than they are
like to find Readers; so that my present attempt may be rather termed an
Edition than a Publication. But least of all shall I plead the importunity of
Friends, that stale pretense for publishing so many scribles; such as being by
much importunity brought to the Press, need a greater to bring them to
perusal. But because a sordid, complying Spirit has been often charged upon
the University, and (we must confess) a spice of it has appeared in many
amongst us, who have fouled, as well as disturbed these Fountains; I thought
good to let our Detractors understand, that in the very depth of Sectarian
Barbarism, when the professed Enemies of the Church were the only Favorites
of the State, and the very Pillars of it, the Universities and Ministers were
falling, there has been some, who durst assert a Truth, though to the visible
danger of their present Enjoyments, and the utter extinction of their future
Hopes; and for so desperate a service the most inconsiderable person was the
fittest, whose success would have equally been an advantage, and whose ruin no
loss. Nor can I deny but that I was desirous to clear my self from the
underserved surmises, that some (whose good esteem I have cause to value) have
had of me; as if the injurious favors of some had not only courted, but won
me to a servile compliance, which I always abhorred: But such was my fate,
that some while they were in Power injured me by Persecution, when Declining,
by their Favor. The Vindication also of some things here delivered was no
small inducement to a Publication: For notwithstanding the forementioned
acceptance these Discourses found, yet the former was attached by some severe
Reprehenders, who according to the Canting Dialect of Wallingford house (which
forty years ago would not have been understood, neither will it forty years
hence) charged it as full of much Wrath and Darkness; but it seems it was
such darkness as the tyrannizing Egyptians began to feel; And I am sure no
more Wrath then was deserved, and therefore very well bestowed. However,
Providence has encouraged it to see the Light, while some of its Reprehenders
sit in Darkness. Yet since by Warrant from the Spirit it self, we may be
Angry, and sin not, the sharpness of a Reprehension is to be ascribed to the
Nature of the thing that merits, not to the Temper of him that delivers it. And
since it has pleased God to unshackle men from Engagements, Visitations, and
the Awe of Usurpers, it is not to be expected, that Perjury, Blood, and
Sacrilege, can be any longer Gospellized into Acts of Piety, or high strains
of Evangelicall Perfection, because indeed they go much beyond the Command.
Yet that Person, the late Oppressor of this Nation, and the known Father of
Enthusiasts, in whom those three Perfections eminently concurred, and who, we
confess is glanced upon in what follows, even him I have heard commended, as
one, who notwithstanding those forementioned Infirmities (so called I conceive,
because they were the matter of his daily Temptations) yet as to the main was
truly pious, and to use his Encomiasts very expression, had great Communion
with God. I suppose in the same sense, that the Faithful, Innocent, and Devout,
hold Communion with the Devil. Wherefore if by Wrath was meant a Free (though
at that time Dangerous) Animadversion upon such Spots of Christianity, We own
the Charge, and readily confess, that the ensuing Discourse was not Calculated
for the soothing of Galled Consciences, but really intended to Gall them more;
and professedly designed to reprove Avarice, Oppression, Pious Frauds,
Blasphemies, and Perjuries, ways not heretofore known of holding Communion
with God. And as for Personal Reflections, I know none such spoken, but made
such by being Applied: And if some proceeded to Application before I did, and
from their Consciousnesse inferred their Concernment, the Overruling sentence
of a Guilty Conscience placing them under the Dint of any of these Reproofs, I
am not he that either can, or would Absolve them: For, as I have often said,
either they are not Guilty, and so they are not concerned in them, or Guilty,
and so they deserve them. But whereas it has been further objected, that I
proposed many doubts, which I left unanswered; I am sorry, that it was a fault,
to think so honorably of my Auditory, as to esteem it Needless: But it is not
in my power to inform some men's Ignorance, nor my desire to gratify their
Humor: And whether this Plea proceeds from a tender Conscience, or a tender
head, I am not much concerned, but acquiesce fully in this, that for the
Objections, those that were Learned, could hear and answer them; those that
were not, could not apprehend them, both therefore equally without danger. And
whereas I do not now at least in the Printing them, add their Solutions; I
answer, that in regard I profess to publish the Sermon I then Preached, I
should not verify my Word, should I by such Additions make it Another. Having
given an account of my design in the former Discourse, and wiped off the
Censures that for some time have stuck upon it, I shall endeavor to prepare
the Reader for a fair understanding of the Second, which being Preached before
many of the most considerable Members of the House of Commons, had an Auditory
suitable to its Design. For in as much as an Erastian Antiministeriall Spirit
has for many years acted most of the Nation, who would command the Service,
without submitting to the Discipline of the Ministers; And since Arguments from
Piety or Scripture work little upon most of them, I thought it the best service
that could be done to the Ecclesiastical Cause, to make it appear that even a
Politic consideration would persuade that, which was commanded upon a
Spiritual: By showing how Religion is that alone that holds together the whole
frame of Government; it being upheld it self by the Encouragement, and Honor
of the Clergy. So that whereas I enforce it chiefly by Arguments drawn from
Civil Concernments, I would have none offended, since my intent is limited
here, only to this respect, it being an Argument ad hominem; not the only One
that the the Subject would afford, but that which was the most likely to reach
the Temper of the Times. And if I infer the necessity of Religion, and an
Honorable Clergy from the Exigence of the Civil Interest, I suppose the
necessity of it from Gods Command, and from the salvation of men's souls, is
unquestionable: Wherefore I shall take the boldness to entreat those who shall
think it worthy their Reading, before they Censure, to vouchsafe it at least an
attentive perusal, in as much as it presents to them some Truths, I think not
often observed, I am sure, not usually delivered. For my own part, I cannot
conceive how Religion can stand without a Ministry, nor the Ministry without
its two Essential Props, Jurisdiction and Respect. It is the old, sly, and
undermining Plea, that Ministers ought only to procure respect by their
Learning, and laborious, Upright life; other advantages belong not to them. But
to answer this; besides, that late Experience proves, that the most Pious, and
the most Learned, have been the most persecuted and contemned, it is
irrational to think, that men ever yet made their Duty the measure of their
Practice. And howsoever all ought, yet there are but very few who reverence
Ministers for those Qualifications; but still those that do not, must be
governed, or the Church ruined: therefore the Assistance of Secular supports
must be taken in. Most therefore will confess Church Government Necessary,
though they deny that Necessity to any determinate kind. But since Church
Government in General sequestered from its several kinds, is a mere Idea, I am
apt to think that the Determination of it was commanded together with the thing
it self. And since only Particular, not Universal Natures fall under Practice,
in as much as the Apostles did actually Govern the Church, it must needs be,
that it was by a certain determinate kind of Government: And then considering
the Infallible Apostolic Spirit by which they were acted, I conceive their
Practice and Example was a Virtual Command: especially when the reason and
grounds of it continue still the same. What that Practice was, though there are
many not obscure Traces of it in Scripture, yet I desire to gather it from the
general Practice of the Church successively continued from their times: the
most rational Guide where the Scripture is silent, and the best Comment where
it is Obscure. And upon this Rule and Ground, I hold it more reasonable to
Err, than upon Fanatic Principles to Stumble upon the Truth. Having thus
shown my intent in these Sermons, and also the Rule, to the guidance of which I
intend to resign my self, in whatsoever God shall hereafter call me either to
Speak or Act as a Minister, I shall venture these Meditations into the World.
What reception they may find I am ignorant, but not sollicitous. But sure, of
all persons, Ministers, Scholars, and especially those of the Universities,
have little cause to censure, or reprehend me, who have freely ventured the
Whole of my Small Advantages from them, in asserting them in a day of the
blackest danger and rebuke, that I trust will ever befall the Church. However,
I value not the taunts, the murmurs of any: I have learned by bearing, to
contemn them. Frequent Endurance has bred an Apathy. But whatsoever men shall
Mutter, Rail, or Declaim against these Writings, either out of a dislike of the
Subject here Treated of, or a personal hatred of my self; yet in this I rest
satisfied, and assured, that the Truth here spoken of, will stand, whatsoever
becomes of Him, that spoke it.

Math. 10.33. But whosoever shall deny me before men, him will I deny before my
Father which is in Heaven.


AS the great comprehensive Gospel duty is the denial of Self, so the grand
Gospel sin that confronts it, is the denial of Christ. These two are both the
Commanding and the Dividing Principles of all our Actions: For whosoever acts
in opposition to one, it is always in behalf of the other. None ever opposed
Christ, but it was to gratify Self: None ever renounced the Interest of Self,
but from a prevailing love to the Interest of Christ. The subject I have here
pitched upon, may seem improper in these times, and in this place, where the
number of Professors, and of men is the same; where the Cause and Interest of
Christ has been so cried up; and Christ's Personal Reign and Kingdom so called
for, and expected. But since it has been still Preached up, but Acted down; and
dealt with, as the Eagle in the Fable did with the Oyster, carrying it up on
high, that by letting it fall he might dash it in pieces: I say, since Christ
must Reign, but his Truths be made to serve. I suppose it is but Reason, to
distinguish between Profession and Pretense; and to conclude, that men's present
crying, Hail King, and bending the knee to Christ, are only in order to his
future Crucifixion.

For the discovery of the sense of the Words, I shall enquire into their
occasion. From the very beginning of the Chapter we have Christ consulting the
Propagation of the Gospel; and in order to it (being the only way that he knew
to effect it) sending forth a Ministry; and giving them a Commission, together
with Instructions for the Execution of it. He would have them fully acquainted
with the Nature and Extent of their Office; and so he joins Commission with
Instruction; by one he conveighs Power, by the other Knowledge. Supposing (I
conceive) that upon such an Undertaking, the more Learned his Ministers were,
they would prove never the less faithful. And thus having fitted them, and
stripped them of all manner of defense, v. 9. He sends them forth amongst Wolves:
A hard Expedition, you will say, to go amongst Wolves; but yet much harder to
convert them into Sheep; and no less hard even to discern some of them,
possibly being under Sheeps clothing; and so by the advantage of that dress,
sooner felt than discovered: and probably also such as had both the properties
of Wolves, that is, they could whine and howl, as well as bite and devour.
But that they might not go altogether naked amongst their Enemies, the only
Armor that Christ allows them, it is Prudence and Innocence; Be ye wise as
Serpents, but harmless as Doves, v. 16. Weapons not at all offensive, yet most
suitable to their Warfare, whose greatest Encounters were to be Exhortations,
and whose only Conquest, Escape. Innocence it is the best caution, and we may
unite the expression, to be wise as a Serpent, is to be harmless as a Dove.
Innocence, it is like polished Armor, it adorns, and it defends. In sum, he
tells them, that the opposition they should meet with, was the greatest
imaginable, from the 16. to the 26. v. but in the ensuing verses he promises
them an equal proportion of assistance; which if it was not Argument of force
enough to outweigh the forementioned discouragements, he casts into the
Balance, the promise of a Reward to such as should Execute, and of Punishment
to such as should Neglect their Commission: The Reward in the former verse,
Whosoever shall confess me before men, etc. the punishment in this, But
whosoever shall deny. etc. As if by way of preoccupation he should have said,
Well: here you see your Commission, this is your Duty, these are your
Discouragements: never seek for shifts and evasions from worldly afflictions;
this is your Reward if you perform it, this is your Doom if you decline it.

As for the Explication of the words they are clear and easy; and their
Originals in the Greek are of single signification, without any ambiguity; and
therefore I shall not trouble you, by proposing how they run in this, or in
that Edition: or straining for an interpretation where there is no difficulty,
or a distinction where there is no difference. The only Exposition that J
shall give of them, will be to compare them to other Parallel Scriptures, and
peculiarly that in the 8 Mark 38. Whosoever therefore shall be ashamed of me
and my words, in this adulterous and sinful generation, of him also shall the
Son of man be ashamed, when he comes in the glory of his Father, with the holy
Angels. These words are a Comment upon my Text.

1. What is here in the Text called a denying of Christ, is there termed a
being ashamed of him, that is, in those words the Cause is expressed, and here
the Effect: for therefore we deny a thing, because we are shamed of it, First
Peter is ashamed of Christ, then he denies him.

2. What is here termed a denying of Christ, is there called a being ashamed of
Christ and his Words: Christ's truths are his second Self. And he that offers
contempt to a Kings letters or edicts, virtually affronts the King; it strikes
his words, but it rebounds upon his Person.

3. What is here said before men, is there phrased, in this adulterous and
sinful generation. These words import the hindrances of the duty enjoined,
which therefore is here purposely enforced with a non obstante to all
opposition. The Term Adulterous I conceive may chiefly relate to the Jews who
being nationally espoused to God by Covenant, every sin of theirs was in a
peculiar manner spiritual Adultery.

4. What is here said I will deny him before my Father, is there expressed: I
will be ashamed of him before my Father and his holy Angels, that is when he
shall come to Judgment, when Revenging Justice shall come in pomp, attended
with the glorious Retinue of all the Host of Heaven. In short the sentence
pronounced declares the Judgment, the solemnity of it, the Terror.

From the words, we may deduce these Observations.

1. We shall find strong motives and temptations from men, to draw us to a
denial of Christ. 2. No Terrors, or Solicitations from men, though never so
great can Warrant or Excuse such a denial. 3. To deny Christ's Words, is to
deny Christ.
But since these Observ^tions are rather employed then expressed in the words, I
shall wave them, and instead of deducing a Doctrine, distinct from the words,
prosecute the words them selves under this Doctrinall Paraphrase.

Whosoever shall deny, dis-owne or be ashamed of either the Person or truths of
Jesus Christ for any fear or favor of man; shall with shame be disowned, and
Eternally rejected by him at the dreadful judgment of the great day, The
discussion of this shall lie in these things.

1. To show how many ways Christ and his truths may be denied, and what is the
denial here chiefly intended. 2. To show what are the causes that induce men
to a denial of Christ and his truths. 3. To show how far a man may consult
his safety in time of persecution, without denying Christ. 4. To show what is
imported in Christ's denying us before his Father in Heaven. 5. To apply all to
the present Occasion.
But before I enter upon these I must briefly premise this, that though the
Text and the Doctrine run peremptory and absolute, Whosoever denies Christ,
shall assuredly be denied by him: yet still there is a tacit condition in the
words supposed, unless repentance intervene. For this and many other
Scriptures, though as to their formal terms they are Absolute, yet as to
their sense they are Conditional. God in mercy has so framed, and tempered his
word, that we have for the most part, a Reserve of mercy wrapped up in a Curse.
And the very first judgment that was pronounced upon fallen man, it was with
the allay of a promise. Wheresoever we find a Curse to the Guilty Expressed, in
the same words mercy to the Penitent is still Understood.

This premised, I come now to discuss the first thing, viz. How many ways
Christ and his truths may be denied, etc. Here first in general I assert, that
we may deny him in all those acts that are capable of being morally good or
evil: those are the proper Scene in which we act our Confessions or denialls
of him. Accordingly therefore all ways of denying Christ, I shall comprise
under these three.

1. We may deny him and his truths by an Erroneous, Heretical judgment. I know
it is doubted whether a bare Error in judgment can condemn: but since truths
absolutely necessary to Salvation, are so clearly revealed, that we cannot err
in them, unless we be notoriously wanting to our selves; herein the fault of
the judgment is resolved into a precedent default in the will: and so the case
is put out of doubt. But here it may be replied, are not truths of absolute and
fundamental necessity, very disputable: as the Deity of Christ, the Trinity of
Persons? if they are not in themselves disputable, why are they so much
disputed? Indeed I believe if we trace these disputes to their original cause
we shall find, that they never sprung from a reluctance in Reason to embrace
them. For this reason it self dictates as most rational, to assent to any
thing though seemingly contrary to Reason, if it is revealed by God, and we are
certain of the Revelation. These two supposed, these disputes must needs arise
only from curiosity and singularity; and these are the faults of a diseased
will. But some will further demand in behalf of these men, whether such as
assent to every word in Scripture, for so will those that deny the natural
deity of Christ and the Spirit, can be yet said in Doctrinalls to deny Christ?
To this I answer, since words abstracted from their proper sense and
signification, loose the nature of words, and are only equivocally so called:
inasmuch as the persons we speak of, take them thus; and derive the Letter from
Christ, but the signification from themselves, they cannot be said properly to
assent so much as to the words of the Scripture. And so their case also is
clear. But yet more fully to state the matter, how far a denial of Christ in
belief and judgment is damnable: We will propose the question. Whether those
that hold the fundamentalls of faith, may deny Christ damnably, in respect of
those superstructures and consequences that arise from them? I answer in brief,
by fundamental truths are understood, 1. Either such without the belief of
which we cannot be saved, or, 2. such, the belief of which is sufficient to
save: If the question be proposed of fundamentalls in this latter sense, it
contains its own answer; for he that beleives those truths, the belief of
which is sufficient to save, the disbeleif or denial of their consequences
cannot damn. But what and how many these fundamentalls are, it will then be
agreed upon, when all Sects, Opinions and Persuasions do unite and consent.
2ly. If we speak of fundamentalls in the former sense, as they are only truths
without which we cannot be saved: it is manifest that we may believe them, and
yet be damned for denying their consequences: for that which is only a
Condition without which we cannot be saved, is not therefore a Cause sufficient
to save: much more is required to the latter, then to the former. I conclude
therefore, that to deny Christ in our judgment, will condemn, and this
concerns the learned: Christ demands the homage of your understandings: he will
have your Reason bend to him, you must put your Heads under his feet. And we
know that heretofore he who had the Leprosy in this part, was to be pronounced
utterly unclean. A poisoned reason, an infected judgment is Christ's greatest
enemy. And an Error in the judgment, it is like an impo^tume in the Head, which
is always noisome, and frequently mortal.

2. We may deny Christ verbally, and by orall expressions. Now our words they
are the interpreters of our hearts. The transcripts of the judgment with some
further addition of good or evil. He that interprets usually inlarges. What
our judgment whispers in secret, these proclaim upon the house top. To deny
Christ in the former imports enmity, but in these open Defiance. Christ's
passion is renewed in both: be that mis-judges of him, condemns him, but he
that blasphemes him spits in his face. Thus the Jews and the Pharisees denied
Christ. We know that this man is a sinner, Joh. 9.24. and a deceiver, Mat.
27.63. and he casts out devils, by the prince of the devils. 12. Mat. 24. And
thus Christ is daily denied, in many blasphemies printed and divulged, and many
horrid Opinions vented against the truth. The Schools dispute whether in
moralls the external Action superadds any thing of good or evil to the
internal elicit acts of the Will: but certainly the enmity of our judgments is
wrought up to an high pitch before it rages in an open denial. And it is a
sign that it is grown too big for the Heart, when it seeks for vent in our
words. Blasphemy uttered it is Error heightened with Impudence. It is sin
scorning a concealment, not only committed, but defended. He that denies Christ
in his judgment sins, but he that speaks his denial, vouches and ownes his
sin: and so by publishing it, does what in him lies to make it Universal:
and by writing it to establish it Eternal. There is another way of denying
Christ with our Mouths, which is Negative: that is when we do not acknowledge
and confess him: but of this I shall have occasion to treat under the
discussion of the Third general Head.

3. We may deny Christ in our Actions and Practice, and these speak much louder
then our tongues. To have an Orthodox belief, and a true Profession, concurring
with a bad life, it is only to deny Christ with a greater solemnity. Belief and
Profession will speak thee a Christian but very faintly, when thy conversation
proclaims thee an Infidel. Many while they have Preached Christ in their
Sermons, have read a lecture of Atheism in their Practice. We have many here
that speak of Godliness, Mortification and Self-denial: but if these are so,
what means the Bleating of the Sheep, and the lowing of the Oxen, the noise of
their ordinary sins, and the cry of their great ones? If Godly, why do they
wallow and sleep in all the Carnalities of the world, under pretense of
Christian liberty? Why do they make religion ridiculous by pretending to
Prophecy, and when their prophecies prove delusions, why do they Blaspheme? If
such self-denyers, what means the griping, the prejudice, the covetousness,
and the pluralities preached against, and retained, and the Arbitrary
Government of many? When such men Preach of self-denial and humility. I cannot
but think of Seneca, who praised Poverty, and that very safely, in the midst of
his great Riches and Gardens; and even exhorted the world to throw away their
Gold, perhaps (as one well conjectures) that he might gather it up; So these
desire men to be humble, that they may domineer without opposition. But it is
an easy matter to commend patience, when there is no d^nger of any trial, to
extol humility in the midst of honors, to begin a Fast after Dinner. But O
how Christ will deal with such persons when he shall draw forth all their
Actions bare and stripped from this deceiving veil of their heavenly speeches!
He will then say, it was not your sad Countenance, nor your Hypocritical
groaning, by which you did either confess or honor me: but your Worldliness,
your luxury, your sinister partial dealing; these have denied me, these have
wounded me, these have gone to my heart: these have caused the weak to stumble,
and the profane to blaspheme: these have offended the one, and hardened the
other. You have indeed spoke me fair, you have saluted me with your lips, but
even then you betrayed me. Depart from me therefore you professors of holiness,
but you workers of iniquity.

And thus having shown the three ways by which Christ may be denied, it may
now be demanded, which is the Denial here intended in the words.

Answer 1. I conceive if the words are taken as they were particularly and
personally directed to the Apostles upon the occasion of their mission to
preach the Gospel, so the denial of him, was the not acknowledgement of the
Deity or Godhead of Christ; and the reason to prove, that this was then
principally intended, is this. Because this was the truth in those days
chiefly opposed, and most disbeleived, as appears, because Christ and the
Apostles did most earnestly inculcate the belief of this, and accepted men upon
the bare acknowledgement of this, and Baptism was administered to such as did
but profess this, 8 Acts 37, 38. And indeed as this one Aphorism Jesus Christ
is the Son of God, is Vertually and eminently the whole Gospel, so to confess
or deny it is vertually to embrace or reject the whole round and series of
Gospel truths. For he that acknowledges Christ to be the son of God, by the
same does consequentially acknowledge that he is to be believed and obeyed in
whatsoever he does enjoyne and deliver to the sons of men: and therefore that
we are to repent and believe and rest upon him for salvation, and to deny our
selves: and within the compass of this is included whatsoever is called Gospel.

As for the manner of our denying the Deity of Christ here prohibited, I
conceive it was by words and orall expressions verbally to deny, and
dis-acknowledge it: This I ground upon these reasons.

1. Because it was such a denial as was before men, and therefore consisted in
open Profession, for a denial in judgment and practice, as such, is not
always before men. 2. Because it was such a denial or confession of him as
would appear in Preaching: but this is managed in words and verbal
profession.
But now 2ly. If we take the words as they are a general precept equally
relating to all times, and to all persons, though delivered only upon a
particular occasion to the Apostles (as I suppose they are to be understood) so
I think they comprehend all the Three ways mentioned of confessing or denying
Christ: but principally in respect of practice, and that 1. Because by this he
is most honored or dishonored. 2. Because without this the other two cannot
save. 3. Because those who are ready enough to confess him both in judgment and
profession, are for the most part very prone to deny him shamefully in their
doings.

Pass we now to a Second thing, to show

What are the Causes inducing men to deny Christ in his truths. I shall propose
Three.

1. The seeming supposed absurdity of many truths: Upon this foundation Heresy
always builds. The Heathens derided the Christians, that still they required
and pressed belief, and well they might (say they) since the Articles of their
Religion are so absurd, that upon Principles of Science they can never win
assent. It is easy to draw it forth and demonstrate, how upon this score the
chief Heresies that now are said to trouble the Church, do oppose and deny the
most important truths in Divinity. As first, hear the denyer of the Deity and
satisfaction of Christ. What (says he) can the same Person be God and man? the
Creature and the Creator? can we ascribe such attributes to the same thing,
whereof one implies a Negation and a Contradiction of the other? Can he be also
Finite and Infinite, when to be finite is not to be infinite, and to be
infinite not to be finite? And when we distinguish between the Person, and the
Nature, was not that distinction an invention of the Schools, favoring rather
of Metaphysics, then Divinity? If we say that he must have bin God, because he
was to mediate between us and God, by the same reason they will reply, we
should need a Mediator between us and Christ, who is equally God, equally
offended. Then for his satisfaction, they will demand to whom this satisfaction
is paid? If to God, then God pays a Price to himself: and what is it else to
require and need no satisfaction, then for one to satisfy himself? Next comes
in the Denyer of the Decrees and free grace of God. What (says he) shall we
exhort, admonish, and entreat the Saints to beware of falling away finally, and
at the same time assert that it is impossible for them so to fall? what shall
we erect two contradictory Wills in God, or place two contradictoryes in the
same Will, and make the Will of his Purpose and Intention run counter to the
Will of his Approbation? Hear another concerning the Scripture and
Justification. What (says the Romanist, rely in matters of faith upon a
private Spirit? How do you know this is the sense of such a Scripture? Why by
the Spirit. But how will you try that Spirit to be of God? Why by the
scripture: this he explodes as a circle, and so derides it. Then for
Justification. How are you Justified by an imputed Righteousness? Is it yours
before it is imputed, or not: if not (as we must say) is this to be Justified,
to have that accounted yours, that is not yours? Put again, did you ever hear
of any man made rich or wise by imputation? why then Righteous or Just? Now
these seeming Paradoxes, attending Gospel truths, cause men of weak and
prejudiced intellectualls to deny them, and in them Christ, being ashamed to
own faith so much (as they think) to the disparagement of their Reason.

2. The Second thing causing men to deny the truths of Christ, is their,
Vnprofitableness. And no wonder if here men forsake the truth and assert
interest. To be Pious is the way to be Poor. Truth still gives its followers
its own Badge and Livery, a despised nakedness. It is hard to maintain the
truth, but much harder to be maintained by it: could it ever yet feed, clothe,
or defend its assernors? Did ever any man quench his thirst, or satisfy his
hunger with a Notion? Did ever any one live upon Propositions? The Testimony of
Brutus concerning virtue, is the apprhension of most concerning truth: that it
is a Name, but lives and estates are things, and therefore not to be thrown
away upon Words. That we are neither to worship or cringe to any thing under
the Deity is a truth to strict for a Naaman: he can be content to worship the
true God, but then it must be in the house of Rimmon: the reason was employed in
his condition, he was Captain of the Host, and therefore he thought it reason
good to bow to Rimmon, rather then endanger his place: better Bow, then Break.
Indeed some times Providence casts things so, that truth and interest ly the
same way: and when it is wrapped up in this covering men can be content to follow
it, to press hard after it: but it is as we pursue some beasts only for their
skins: take of the covering, and though men obtain the truth, they would
lament the loss of that. As Jacob wept and mourned over the torn Coat, when
Joseph was alive. It is incredible to consider how interest outweighes truth.
If a thing in it self be doubtful, let it make for interest and it shall be
raised at least into a Probable; and if a truth be certain, and thwart
interest, it will quickly fetch it down to but a Probability; nay if it does
not carry with it an impregnable Evidence, it will go near to debase it to a
down right falsity. How much interest casts the Balance in cases dubious, I
could give sundry instances, let one suffice. And that concerning the
unlawfullness of Usury. Most of the Learned men in the world successively both
Heathen and Christian do assert the taking of Use to be utterly unlawful; yet
the Divines of the Reformed Church beyond the Seas though most severe and rigid
in other things, do generally affirm it to be lawful. That the case is
doubtful and may be disputed with plausible arguments on either side, we may
well grant: But what then is the reason that makes these Divines so unanimously
concur in this opinion? Indeed I shall not affirm this to be the reason, but
it may seem so to many: that they receive their Salaryes by way of pension, in
present ready money, and so have no other way to improve them; so that it may
be suspected, that the change of their salary, would be the strongest argument
to change their opinion. The truth is, Interest is the grand wheel, and spring
that moves the whole Universe. Let Christ and truth say what they will, if
interest will have it, gain must be Godliness: If Enthusiasme is in request,
learning must be inconsistent with Grace. If pay grows short, the University
Maintenance must be too great. Rather then Pilate will be counted Cesars enemy,
he will pronouce Christ innocent one hour, and condemn him the next. How
Christ is made to truckle under the world, and how his truths are denied and
shuffled with for profit and pelf, the clearest proof would be by Induction
and Example. Bus as it is the most clear, so here it would be the most
unpleasing: Wherefore I shall pass this over, since the world is now so
peccant uopn this account, that I am afraid Instances would be mistaken for
Invectives.

3. The Third Cause inducing men to deny Christ in his truths, is their
apparent danger. To confess Christ, is the ready way to be cast out of the
Synagogue. The Chuch, it is a place of Graves as well as of Worship and
profession. To be resolute in a Good cause is to bring upon our selves the
punishments due to a Bad. Truth indeed it is a possession of the highest value,
and therefore it must needs expose the owner to much danger. Christ is
sometimes pleased to make the profession of himself costly, and a man cannot
buy the truth but he must pay down his life and his dearest blood for it.
Christianity marks a man out for destruction: and Christ sometime chalks out
such a way to salvation, that shall verify his own saying, He that will save
his life shall loose it. The first ages of the Church had a more abundant
experience of this: Paul and the rest, what they planted by their Preaching,
they watered with their blood. We know their usage was such as Christ foretold,
he sent them to Wolves, and the common course then was Christianos ad Leones.
For a man to give his name to Christianity in those days, was to list himself
a Martyr, and to bid farewell not only to the pleasures but also to the hopes
of this life. Neither was it a single death only that then attended this
profession, but the Terror and sharpness of it redoubled was in the manner and
circumstance. They had Persecutors, whose Invention was as great as their
cruelty. Wit and malice conspired to find out such tortures, such deaths, and
those of such incredible anguish, that only the manner of dying was the
Punishment, Death it self the deliverance. To be a Martyr signifies only to
witness the truth of Christ, but the witnessing of the truth was then so
generally attended with this Event, that Martyrdom now signifies not only to
witness, but to witness by death. The word besides its own signification
importing their practice: And since Christians have been freed from Heathens,
Christians themselves have turned Persecutors. Since Rome from Heathen was
turned Christian, it has improved its persecution into an Inquisition. Now when
Christ and truth are upon these terms, that men cannot confess him, but upon
pain of death, the reason of their Apostasy and Denial is clear, men will be
Wise and leave Truth and misery to such as love it, they are resolved to be
Cunning, let others run the hazard of being Sincere. If they must be good at so
high a rate, they know they may be Safe at a cheaper. Si negare sufficiat, quis
erit Nocens? If to deny Christ will save them, the truth shall never make them
guilty. Let Christ and his flock lie open and exposed to all weather of
Persecution, Foxes will be sure to have holes. And if it comes to this that
they must either renounce Religion, deny and blaspheme Christ, or forfeit their
lives to the fire or the sword, it is but inverting Jobs wives advice, Curse
God and live.

3. We proceed now to the Third thing, which is to show, how far a man may
consult his safety, etc*

This he may do Two Ways.

1. By withdrawing his Person. Martyrdom is an Heroic act of faith. An
Atcheivement beyond an Ordinary pitch of it: to you says the Spirit it is
given to suffer, 1 Phil. 29. It is a peculiar additionall gift: it is a
distinguishing excellency of degree, not an essential consequent of its
Nature. Be ye harmless as Doves says Christ; and it is as Natural to them to
take flight upon danger, as to be Innocent: Let every man thoroughly consult the
temper of his faith, and weigh his courage with his fears, his Weakness and
his Resolutions together, and take the measure of both, and see which
preponderates, and if his spirit faints, if his heart misgives and melts at the
very thoughts of the fire, let him fly and secure his own soul, and Christ's
honor. Non negat Christum fugiendo qui ideo fugit ne neget: He does not deny
Christ by flying, who therefore flies that he may not deny him. Nay, he does
not so much decline, as rather change his Martyrdom: He flies from the Flame,
but repaires to a Desert; to poverty and hunger in a wilderness. Whereas if he
would dispense with his Conscience, and deny his Lord, or swallow down two or
three Contradictory oaths, he should neither fear the one, nor be forced to the
other.

2. By concealing his judgment. A man sometimes is no more bound to speak than
to destroy himself; and as Nature abhors this, so Religion does not command
that. In the times of the Primitive Church, when the Christians dwelt amongst
Heathens, it is reported of a certain Maid, how she came from her Fathers
house, to one of the Tribunals of the Gentiles, and declared her self a
Christian, spit in the Judges face, and so provoked him to cause her to be
executed. But will any say that this was to confess Christ, or dye a Martyr?
He that uncalled for, uncompelled, comes and proclaims a Persecuted Truth, for
which he is sure to dye, he only dies a Confessor of his own folly, and a
Sacrifice to his own rashness. Martyrdom is stamped such only by Gods command;
and he that ventures upon it without a Call, must endure it without a Reward:
Christ will say, who required this at your hands? His Gospel does not dictate
imprudence: No Evangelical Precept justles out that of a lawful
self-preservation. He therefore that thus throws himself upon the Sword, he
runs to Heaven before he is sent for: where though perhaps Christ may in mercy
receive the Man, yet he will be sure to disown the Martyr.

And thus much concerning those lawful ways of securing our selves in time of
Persecution; not as if these were always lawful: For sometimes a man is bound
to confess Christ openly, though he dies for it; and to conceal a Truth is to
deny it. But now to show when it is our duty, and when unlawful to take these
courses, by some general rule of a perpetual, never-failing truth, none ever
would yet presume: For, as Aristotle says, We are not to expect Demonstrations
in Ethics, or Politics; nor to build certain rules upon the contingency of
humane Actions: So, in as much as our flying from Persecution, our confessing,
or concealing persecuted Truths, vary and change their very nature, according
to different circumstances of time, place, and persons, we cannot limit their
Directions within any one universal Precept. You will say then, How shall we
know when to confess, when to conceal a Truth? when to wait for, when to
decline Persecution? Indeed the only way that I think can be prescribed in
this case, is to be earnest, and importunate with God in Prayer for special
direction: And it is not to be imagined, that he who is both faithful and
merciful, will leave a sincere soul in the dark upon such an occasion. But
this J shall add, that the Ministers of God are not to evade, or take refuge
in any of these two forementioned ways. They are public persons: and good
Shepherds must then chiefly stand close to the Flock when the Wolf comes. For
them to be silent in the Cause of Christ is to renounce it; and to fly, is to
desert it. As for that place urged in favor of the contrary, in 23. v. When
they persecute you in this City flee into another, it proves nothing; for the
Precept was particular, and concerned only the Apostles; and that but for that
time in which they were then sent to the Jews, at which time Christ kept them
as a reserve for the future: For when after his death they were indifferently
sent both to Jews and Gentiles, we find not this clause in their Commission,
but they were to sign the Truths they preached with their blood; as we know
they actually did. And moreover, when Christ bids them, being persecuted in one
City fly into another, it was not (as Grotius acutely observes) that they might
lie hid, or be secure in that City, but that there they might Preach the
Gospel: So that their flight here was not to secure their Persons, but to
continue their Business. I conclude therefore, that faithful Ministers are to
stand and endure the brunt. A common Soldier may dye, when it is the duty of
him that holds the Standard to dye upon the place. And we have abundant of
encouragements so to do. Christ has seconded and sweetened his command with his
promise: Yea the thing it self is not only our duty, but our glory. And he
that has done this work, has in the very work partly received his wages. And
were it put to my choice, J think I should choose rather with spitting and scorn
to be tumbled into the dust in blood, bearing witness to any known Truth of our
dear Lord, now opposed by the Enthusiasts of the present Age, than by a denial
of those Truths through Blood and Perjury wade to a Scepter, and Lord it in a
Throne. And we need not doubt, but Truth, however oppressed, will have some
followers, and at length prevail. A Christ, though Crucified, will arise: And
as it is in the 11 Revel. 3. The Witnesses will Prophecy, though it be in
Sackcloth.

Having thus dispatched the third thing, I proceed to the fourth, which is to
show, what it is for Christ to deny us before his Father in Heaven. Hitherto we
have treated of men's carriage to Christ in this world* now we will describe his
carriage to them in the other. These words clearly relate to the last
Judgment, and they are a Summary description of his proceeding with men at
that day.

And here we will consider: 1. The Action it self, He will deny them. 2. The
Circumstance of the Action, He will deny them before his Father, aad the holy
Angels.


1. Concerning the first; Christ's denying us, is otherwise expressed in the 13
Luke 27. I know you not. To Know in Scripture language is to Approve; and so
not to Know, is to Reject and Condemn. Now who knows how many Woes are crowded
into this one sentence, I will deny him? It is (to say no more) a compendious
expression of Hell, an Eternity of Torments comprised in a word: it is
Condemnation it self, and what is most of all, it is Condemnation from the
mouth of a Savior. O the inexpressible horror that will seize upon a poor
soul when he stands arraigned at the Bar of Divine Justice* When he shall
look about, and see his Accuser his Judge, the Witnesses all of them his
remorsless Adversaries: The Law impleading, Mercy and the Gospel upbraiding
him, the Devil, his grand Accuser, drawing his Indictment; numbering his sins
with the greater exactness, and aggravating them with the cruellest bitterness,
and Conscience, like a thousand Witnesses, attesting every Article, flying in
his face, and rending his very heart. And then after all, Christ, from whom
only Mercy could be expected, owning the Accusation. It will be Hell enough to
hear the Sentence; the very Promulgation of the Punishment will be part of the
Punishment, and anticipate the Execution. If Peter was so abashed when Christ
gave him a look after his denial; if there was so much dread in his looks when
he stood as Prisoner, how much greater will it be when he sits as a Judge? If
it was so fearful when he looked his Denyer into Repentance, what will it be
when he shall look him into Destruction? Believe it, when we shall hear an
Accusation from an Advocate, our Eternal doom from our Intercessour, it will
convince us that a Denial of Christ is something more than a few transitory
words: What trembling, what outcries, what astonishment will there be upon the
pronouncing this Sentence! Every word will come upon the sinner like an Arrow
striking through his reins; like Thunder that is heard, and consumes at the
same instant. Yea it will be a Denial with scorn, with taunting exprobrations;
and to be miserable without commiseration, is the height of misery. He that
falls below Pity, can fall no lower. Could I give you a lively representation
of guilt and horror on this hand, and paint out eternal wrath, decypher
eternal vengeance on the other, then might J show you the condition of a
sinner hearing himself denied by Christ: And for those whom Christ has denied,
it will be in vain to appeal to the Father, unless we can imagine, that
those whom Mercy has condemned, Justice will absolve.

2. For the Circumstance, He will deny us before his Father, and the holy
Angels. As much as God is more glorious than man, so much is it more glorious
to be confessed before him, than before men: And so much glory as there is in
being confessed, so much dishonor there is in being denied. If there could be
any room for comfort after the sentence of Damnation, it would be this, to be
executed in secret, to perish Unobserved. As it is some allay to the infamy of
him that dyed ignominiously, to be buried privately. But when a man's folly must
be spread open before Angels, and all his baseness ripped up before those pure
Spirits, this will be a double Hell: to be thrust into utter Darkness, only to
be punished by it, without the benefit of being concealed. When Christ shall
compare himself, who was denied, and the thing for which he was denied
together, and parallel his merits with a lust, and lay Eternity in the Balance
with a trisle, then the folly of the sinners choice shall be the greatest sting
of his destruction. For a man shall not have the advantage of his Former
Ignorance and Error, to approve his sin: Things that appeared amiable by the
light of this world, will appear of a different odious hue in the clear
discoveries of the Next: As that which appears to be of this color by a dimn
candle, will be found to be of another looked upon in the day. So when Christ
shall have cleared up men's apprehensions about the value of things; he will
propose that worthy Prize for which he was denied: He will hold it up to open
view, and call upon Men and Angels: Behold, look, here is the thing, here is
that piece of dirt, that windy applause, that poor transitory pleasure, that
contemptible danger, for which I was dishonored, my Truths disowned, and for
which life, eternity, and God himself was scorned and trampled upon by this
sinner: Judge all the world, whether what he so despised in the other life, he
deserves to enjoy in this? How will the condemned sinner then crawle forth, and
appear in his filth and shame before that undefiled, Tribunal, like a Toade or
a Snake in a Kings presence Chamber. Nothing so irksome as to have ones folly
displaied before the Prudent, ones impurity before the Pure: And all this
before that company surrounding him, from which he is neither able to look off,
nor yet to look upon. A disgrace put upon a man in company is unsupportable: it
is heightened according to the greatness, and multiplied according to the
number of the persons that hear it. And now as this circumstance [ before his
Father] fully speaks the shame, so also it speaks the danger of Christ's then
denying us. For when the accusation is heard, and the person stands convict,
God is immediately lifting up his hand to inflict the eternal blow; and when
Christ denies to exhibit a ransom, to step between the stroke then coming, and
the sinner, it must inevitably fall upon him, and sink his guilty soul into
that deep and bottomless gulf of endless perdition. This therefore is the
sum of Christ's denying us before his Father, viz. Unsupportable shame,
unavoydable destruction.

I proceed now to the Uses that may be drawn from the Truths delivered. And
here (Right Honorable) not only the present occasion, but even the words
themselves seem eminently to address an Exhortation to your Honors. As for
others not to deny Christ, is openly to profess him; so for you who are
invested with Authority, not to deny him, is to defend him. Know therefore,
that Christ does not only desire, but demand your defense, and that in a
double respect.

1. In respect of his Truth. 2. Of his Members.

1. He requires that you should defend and confess him in his Truth. Heresy it
is a Tare sometimes not to be pulled up but by the Civil Magistrate. The word
Liberty of Conscience, is much abused for the defense of it, because not well
understood. Every man may have Liberty of Conscience to think and judge as he
pleases, but not to vent what he please. The reason is, because Conscience
bounding it self within the thoughts, is of private concernment, and the
cognizance of these belong only to God: but when an opinion is published, it
concerns all that hear it, and the public is endamaged, and therefore becomes
punishable by the Magistrate, to whom the care of the public is entrusted.
But there is one truth that concerns both Ministry and Magistracy, and All:
which is opposed by those who affirm, that none ought to Govern upon the Earth
but Christ in person: Absurdly, as if the Powers that are, destroyed his; as if
a Deputy were not consistent with a King; as if there were any Opposition in
Subordination. They affirm also, that the Wicked have no right to their
Estates, but only the Faithful, that is, themselves, ought to possess the
Earth. And it is not to be questioned, but when they come to explain this
principle, by putting it into execution, there will be but few that have
estates at present, but would be either found, or made Wicked. I shall not be
so urgent to press you to confess Christ, by asserting and owning the Truth
contrary to this, since it does not only oppose Truth, but Propriety, and here
to deny Christ, would be to deny your Selves.

2. Christ requires you to own and defend him in his Members; and amongst
these, the chief of them, and such who most fall in your way, the Ministers; I
say, that despised, abject, oppressed sort of men, the Ministers; whom the
world would make Antichristian, and so deprive them of Heaven, and also strip
them of that poor remainder of their Maintenance, and so allow them no portion
upon the Earth. You may now spare that distinction of Scandalous Ministers,
when it is even made Scandalous to be a Minister. And as for their
discouragements in the Courts of the Law, I shall only note this, that for
these many years last past, it has been the constant observation of all, that
if a Minister had a Cause depending in the Court, it was ten to one but it went
against him. I cannot believe your Law justles out the Gospel; but if it be
thus used to undermine Christ in his Servants, beware that such Judgments
passed upon them, do not fetch down Gods Judgments upon the Land; and that
for such abuse of the Law, Christ does not in anger deprive both you and us of
its Use. (My Lords) I make no doubt, but you will meet with many Suites in your
Course, in which the persons we speak of are concerned, as it is easy to
Prognosticate from those many worthy Petitions preferred against them, for
which the well-affected Petitioners will one day receive but small Thanks from
the Court of Heaven. But however their Causes speed in your Tribunals, know
that Christ himself will recognize them in a greater. And then what a different
face will be put upon things! When the usurping, devouring Nimrods of the World
shall be cast with scorn on the left hand: And Christ himself in that great
Consistory shall daign to step down from his Throne, and single out a poor
despised Minister, and as it were taking him by the hand, present him to, and
openly thus confess him before his Father. Father, here is a poor servant of
mine, that for doing his duty impartially, for keeping a good conscience, and
testifying my truths in an Hypocritical pretending age, was wronged, trood
upon, stripped of all: Father, I will that there be now a distinction made,
between such as have owned and confessed me with the loss of the world, and
those that have denied, persecuted and insulted over me: It will be in vain
then to come and creep for mercy: and say, Lord, when did we insult over thee?
when did we see thee in our Courts, and despised or oppressed thee? Christ's
reply will be then quick and sharp: Verily in as much as you did it to one of
these little, poor, despised ones, ye did it unto Me.

2. Use is of information, to show us the danger as well as the baseness of a
dastardly Spirit; in asserting the interest and truth of Christ. Since Christ
has made a Christian course a Warfare, of all men living, a Coward is the most
unfit to make a Christian: whose infamy is not so great, but it is sometimes
less then his peril. A Coward does not always escape with disgrace, but
sometimes also he loses his life: wherefore let all such know, as can enlarge
their consciences like Hell, and call any sinful compliance submission, and
style a Cowardly silence in Christ's cause, discretion and prudence. I say let
them know, that Christ will one day scorn them, and spit them with their policy
and prudence into Hell; and then let them consult how politic they were for a
temporal Emolument, to throw away Eternity. All that causes men to deny
Christ, it is either the Enjoyments, or the miseries of this life: but alas at
the day of Judgment all these will be expired, and as One well Observes, what
are we the better for pleasure, or the worse for sorrow when it is past? but
then sin and guilt will be still fresh, and Heaven and Hell will be then yet
to Begin. If ever it was seasonable to preach Courage in the despised, abused
cause of Christ, it is now, when his truths are Reformed into nothing, when the
hands and hearts of his faithful Ministers are weakened, and even broke, and
his Worship extirpated in a mockery, that his honor may be advanced. Well, to
establish our hearts in duty, let us before hand propose to our selves the
worst that can happen. Should God in his judgment suffer England to be
transformed into a Munster. Should the faithful be every where Massacred.
Should the places of Learning be demolished, and our Colleges reduced (not
only as One in his Zeal would have it) to Three, but to none. Yet assuredly
Hell is worse then all this, and this is the Portion of such as deny Christ:
wherefore let our discouragements be what they will: loss of Places, loss of
Estates, loss of Life and Relations, yet still this sentence stands ratified in
Decretals of Heaven. Cursed be that man, that for any of these, shall desert
the truth, and deny his Lord.

ECCLESIASTICAL POLICY THE BEST POLICY: OR, RELIGION The best Reason of STATE:
In a SERMON delivered before the Honorable Society of LINCOLNES INN.

BY TO. SOVTH.

OXFORD, Printed by A. L. for Tho. Robinson, 1660.

1 King. 13. chapter 33, 34. v. After this thing Jeroboam returned not from his
evil way, but made again of the lowest of the people Priests of the High
places: whosoever would he consecrated him, and he became one of the Priests of
the High places.

And this thing became sin unto the house of Jeroboam, even to cut it off, and
to destroy it from off the face of the Earth.


Jeroboam (from the name of a person become the character of impiety) is
reported to Posterity as eminent, or rather notorious, for two things;
Usurpation of Government, and Innovation of Religion. It Is confessed, the
former is expressly said to have been from God; but since God may Order, and
Dispose, what he does not Approve; and Use the wickedness of men while he
forbids it; the design of the First cause does not excuse the malignity of the
second: And therefore the Advancement and Scepter of Jeroboam was in that Sense
only the work of God, in which it is said, 3 Amos 6. that there is no evil in
the City which the Lord has not done. But from his attempts upon the Civil
Power, he proceeds to Innovate Gods Worship; and from the subjection of men's
Bodies and Estates to enslave their Consciences, as knowing that true Religion
is no friend to an unjust Title. Such was afterward the way of Mahomet, to the
Tyrant to join the Impostor, and what he had got by the Sword to confirm by
the Alcoran; raising his Empire upon two Pillars, Conquest, and Inspiration.
Jeroboam being thus advanced, and thinking Policy the best Piety, though indeed
in nothing ever more befooled; the nature of sin being not only to defile, but
to infatuate. In the II. chap. and the 27. v. he thus argues; If this people
go up to do Sacrifice in the house of the Lord at Jerusalem, then shall the
heart of this people turn again unto their Lord, even unto Rehoboam King of
Judah, and they shall kill me, and go again unto Rehoboam King of Judah. As if
he should have said. The true Worship of God, and the converse of those that
use it, dispose men to a considerate, lawful subjection. And therefore I must
take another course: my Practice must not be better than my Title; what was won
by Force must be continued by Delusion. Thus sin is usually seconded with sin:
and a man seldom commits one sin to please, but he commits another to defend
himself. As it is frequent for the Adulterer to commit Murder, to conceal the
shame of his Adultery. But let us see Ieroboams politic procedure in the next
ver. Whereupon the King took counsel, and made two Calves of Gold, and said
unto them, it is too much for you to go up to Jerusalem, behold thy Gods O
Israel. As if he had made such an Edict: I Jeroboam, by the advice of my
Council, considering the great distance of the Temple, and the great charges
that poor people are put to in going thither; as also the intolerable burden
of paying the first fruit, and tithes to the Priest, have considered of a way
that may be more easy, and less burdensome to the people, as also more
comfortable to the Priests themselves; and therefore strictly enjoyne, that
none henceforth presume to repair to the Temple at Jerusalem, especially since
God is not tied to any place or form of Worship; as also because the Devotion
of men is apt to be clogged by such Ceremonies; therefore both for the ease of
the people, as also for the advancement of Religion, we require and command,
that all henceforth forth forbear going up to Jerusalem. Questionless these,
and such other Reasons the Impostor used to insinuate his devout Idolatry. And
thus the Calves were set up, to which Oxen must be sacrificed; the God and the
Sacrifice out of the same Herd. And because Israel was not to return to Egypt,
Egypt was brought back to them; that is, the Egyptian way of Worship, the Apis,
or Serapis, which was nothing but the Image of a Calfe, or Ox, as is clear
from most Historians. Thus Jeroboam having procured his people gods, the next
thing was to provide Priests. Hereupon to the Calves he adds a Commission, for
the approving, trying, and admitting the Rascality and lowest of the people to
minister in that service: such as kept Cattle, with a little change of their
Office, were admitted to make Oblations to them. And doubtless besides the
approbation of these, there was a Commission also, to eject such of the Priests
and Levites of God, as being too Ceremoniously addicted to the Temple, would
not serve Jeroboam before God, nor worship his Calves for their Gold, nor
approve those two glittering sins for any reason of State whatsoever. Having
now perfected Divine Worship, and prepared both Gods and Priests: In the next
place, that he might the better teach his false Priests the way of their new
Worship, he begins the Service himself, and so countenances by his example,
what he had enjoined by his command, in the 1. v. of this chapter, And Jeroboam
stood by the Altar to burn Incense. Burning of Incense was then the
Ministerial Office amongst them, as Preaching is now amongst us. So that to
represent you the nature of Ieroboams Action: It was, as if in a Christian
Nation the chief Governor should authorize and encourage all the scumme and
refuse of the people to Preach, and call them to the Ministry, by using to
Preach, and invading the Ministerial Function himself. But Jeroboam rested not
here, but while he was busy in his work, and a Prophet immediately sent by God
declares against his Idolatry, he endeavors to seize upon, and commit him, in
the 4. v. He held forth his hand from the Altar, and said, lay hold of him.
Thus we have him completing his sin, and by a strange Imposition of hands
persecuting the true Prophets as well as ordaining false. But it was a natural
transition, and no ways wonderful to see him that stood affronting God with
false Incense in the right hand, persecute with the left, and abet the Idolatry
of one Arm with the Violence of the other. Now if we lay all these things
together, and consider the parts, rise, and degrees of his sin, we shall
find, that it was not for nothing, that the Spirit of God, so frequently, and
bitterly in Scripture stigmatizes this person: For it represents him, first
incroaching upon the Civil Government, thence changing that of the Church,
debasing the Office that God had made sacred; introducing a false way of
Worship, destroying the right. And in this we have a full and fair description
of a foul thing; that is, of an Usurper, and an Impostor: or, to use one word
more comprehensive than both, of Jeroboam the son of Nebat who made Israel to
sin.

From the Story and Practice of Jeroboam we might gather these Observations.

1. That God sometimes punishes a Notorious sin, by suffering the sinner to
fall into a worse.

Thus God punished the Rebellion of the Israelites by permitting them to fall
into Idolatry.

2. There is nothing so absurd but may be obtruded upon the Vulgar under
pretense of Religion.

Certainly otherwise a Golden Calfe could never have been made either the
Object, or the means of Divine Worship.

3. Sin, especially that, of perverting Gods Worship, as it leaves a guilt upon
the Soul, so it perpetuates a blot upon the Name.

Hence nothing so frequent, as for the Spirit of God to express wicked,
irreligious Kings, by comparing them to Ahab or Jeroboam. It being usual to
make the first and most eminent in any kind, not only the Standard for
Comparison, but also the Rule of Expression.

But I shall insist only upon the words of the Text, and what shall be drawn
from thence. There are two things in the words that may seem to require
Explication.

1. What is meant by the High places. 2. By the Consecration of the Priests.
1. Concerning the High places. The use of these in the Divine Worship was
general and ancient. And as Dionysius Vossius observes in his Notes upon Moses
Maimonides, the first way that was used, long before Temples were either built,
or thought lawful. The reason of this seems to be, because those places did
not shut up, or confine the Immensity of God, as they thought an house did, and
withal gave his Worshippers a nearer approach to heaven by their Height. Hence
we read that the Samaritanes worshipped upon Mount Gerezim, 4 Ioh. 20. v. And
Samuel went up to the High place to sacrifice, 1 Samuel 9.14. And Solomon
sacrificed at the High place in Gibeon, 1 King. 3.4. Yea the Temple it self
was at length built upon a Mount or High place, 2 Chr. 3.1. You will say then,
Why are these places condemned? I answer, that the use of them was not
condemned, as absolutely and always unlawful in it self, but only after the
Temple was built, and that God had professed to put his Name in that place, and
no other: Therefore what was lawful in the practice of Samuel and Solomon
before the Temple was in being, was now detestable in Jeroboam, since it was
constituted by God the only place for his Worship. To bring this Consideration
to the times of Christianity. Because the Apostles and Primitive Christians
preached in houses, and had only private meetings, in regard they were under
Persecution, and had no Churches; this cannot warrant the practice of those now
adays, that prefer Houses before Churches, and a Conventicle before the
Congregation.

2. For the second thing, which is the Consecration of the Priests, it seems to
have been correspondent to Ordination in the Christian Church. Idolaters
themselves were not so far gone, as to venture upon the Priesthood without
Consecration and a Call. To show all the Solemnities of this would be tedious,
and here unnecessary: The Hebrew word which we render to Consecrate, signifies
to fill the hand, which indeed imports the manner of Consecration, which was
done by filling the hand: for the Priest cut a piece of the Sacrifice, and put
it into the hands of him that was to be consecrated; by which Ceremony he
received right to Sacrifice, and so became a Priest. As our Ordination in the
Christian Church, is said to have been heretofore transacted by the Bishops
delivering of the Bible into the hands of him that was to be ordained, whereby
he received power Ministerially to dispense the Mysteries contained in it, and
so was made a Presbyter. Thus much briefly concerning Consecration.

There remains nothing else to be explained in the words, I shall therefore now
draw forth the sense of them in these two Propositions, 1. The surest means to
strengthen, or the readiest to ruin the Civil Power, is either to establish,
or destroy the Worship of God in the right exercise of Religion. 2. The next,
and most effectual way to destroy Religion, is to Embase the Teachers and
Dispensers of it.


Of both these in their order.

For the prosecution of the former we are to show, 1. The truth of the
assertion, that it is so. 2. The reason of the assertion, why and whence it is
so.


1. For the truth of it, it is abundantly evinced from all Records both of
Divine and Profane History, in which he that runs may read he ruin of the
State in the Destruction of the Church, and that not only portended by it as
its Sign, but also inferred from it, as its Cause.

2. For the Reason of the point it may be drawn

1. From the Judicial proceeding of God, the Great King of Kings, and supreme
Ruler of the Universe; who for his commands is indeed careful, but for his
Worship Jealous. And therefore in States notoriously irreligious, by a secret
and irresistible power, countermands their deepest Projects, splits their
Counsels, and smites their most refined Policies with frustration and a curse:
being resolved that the Kingdoms of the world shall fall down before him,
either in his Adoration, or their own confusion.

2. The reason of the doctrine may be drawn from the necessary dependence of
the very Principles of government upon Religion. And this I shall pursue more
fully. The great Business of government is to procure obedience, and keep off
disobedience: and the great springs upon which those two move are Rewards and
Punishments answering the two ruling affections of man's mind, Hope and Fear.
For since there is a natural reluctance between the Judgment and the Appetite,
the former respecting what is honest, the latter what is pleasing, which two
qualifications seldom concur in the same thing, and withal man's design in
every Action is delight: therefore to render things honest also practicable,
they must be first represented desirable; which cannot be but by proposing
honesty clothed with pleasure; and since it presents no pleasure to the sense,
it must be fetched from the apprehension of a future Reward. For questionless
duty moves not so much upon command as promise. Now therefore that which
proposes the greatest, and most suitable rewards to obedience, and the greatest
terrors and punishments to Disobedience, doubtless is the most likely to
enforce one, and prevent the other. But it is Religion that does this, which to
happiness and misery joins Eternity. And these, supposing the Immortality of
the soul, which Philosophy indeed conjectures, but only Religion proves, or
(which is as good) persuades; I say these two things, eternal happiness and
eternal misery, meeting with a persuasion that the soul is immortal, are
without controversy of all others, the first the most desirable, and the
latter the most horrible to humane apprehension. Were it not for these, Civil
government were not able to stand before the prevailing swing of corrupt
nature, which would know no Honesty, but Advantage, no Duty but in Pleasure,
nor any Law, but its own Will. Were not these frequently thundered into the
understandings of men, the Magistrate might enact, order and proclaim,
Proclamations might be hung upon Walls and Posts, and there they might hang,
seen and despised, more like Malefactors, then Laws: But when Religion binds
the^ upon the Conscience, Conscience will either persuade or terrify men into
their practice. For put the case a man knew, and that upon sure grounds, that
he might do an advantageous murder or Robbery, and not be discovered, what
humane laws could hinder him, which he knows cannot inflict any penalty,
where they can make no discovery? But Religion assures him, that no sin, though
concealed from humane eyes, can either escape Gods sight in this world, or his
vengeance in the other. Put the case also, that men looked upon Death without
fear, in which sense it is nothing, or at most very little; ceasing while it is
endured, and probably without Pain, for it seazes upon the Vitalls and benumms
the senses, and where there is no sense, there can be no pain. I say, if while
a man is acting his will toward sin, he should also thus act his reason, to
despise death, where would be the terror of the Magistrate, who can neither
threaten or inflict any more? Hence an old Malefactor in his Execution, at the
Gallows made no other confession but this; that he had very jocundly passed
over his life in such courses, and he that would not, for fifty years
pleasure, endure half an hours pain, deserved to dye a worse death then
himself: questionless this man was not ignorant before, that there were such
things as laws, assizes, and Gallows, but had he considered, and believed the
Terrors of another world, he might probably have found a fairer passage out of
this. If there was not a Minister in every Parish, you would quickly find cause
to increase the number of Constables: And if the Churches were not employed to
be places to hear Gods Law, there would be need of them, to be Prisons for the
breakers of the Laws of men. Hence it is observable that the tribe of Levi, had
not one Place or Portion together like the rest of the Tribes: but because it
was their office to dispense Religion, they were diffused over all the Tribes,
that they might be continually preaching to the rest, their duty to God, which
is the most effectual way, to dispose them to Obedience to man: for he that
truly fears God cannot despise the Magistrate. Yea so near is the connection
between the Civil state, and the Religious, that heretofore, if you look upon
well regulated, civilized, heathen Nations, you will find the Government and the
Preisthood united in the same Person: Anius Rexidem hominum, Phaebique
Sacerdos. Virg. 3. Aen. If under the true worship of God. Melchisedech king of
Salem and Priest of the most high God, Heb. 7.1. And afterward Moses (whom as
we acknowledge a Pious, so Atheists themselves will confess to have been a Wise
Prince) he, when he took the Kingly Government upon himself, by his own choice,
seconded by Divine institution, vested the Preisthood in his brother Aaron,
both whose concernments were so coupled, that if Nature had not, yet their
Religious, nay their civil Interests, would have made them Brothers. And it
was once the design of the Emperor of Germany, Maximilian the first, to have
joined the Popedom and the Empire together, and to have got himself choose
Pope, and by that means derived the Papacy to his succeeding Emperors. Had he
effected it, doubtless there would not have been such scuffles between him and
the Bishop of Rome; the civil Interest of the State would not have been
undermined, by an Adverse Interest, managed by the specious and potent
pretenses of of Religion. And to see even amongst us, how these two are united,
how the former is upheld by the latter: the Magistrate sometimes cannot do his
own office dexterously, but by acting the Minister; hence it is, that Judges of
Assize find it necessary in their Charges, to use patheticall discourses of
Conscience, and if it were not for the sway of this, they would often lose the
best Evidence in the world against Malefactors, which is Confession: for no man
would confess and be Hanged here, but to avoid being Damned hereafter. Thus I
have in general shown the utter inability of the Magistrate to attain the End
of Government, without the Aid of Religion. But it may be here replied, that
many are not at all moved with arguments drawn from hence, or with the happy or
miserable state of the Soul after death, and therefore this availes little to
procute obedience, and consequently to advance Government. I answer by
concession: that this is true of Epicures, Atheists, and some pretended
Philosophers, who have stifled the Notions of a Deity, and the Souls
immortality; but the Unprepossessed on the one hand, and the Well disposed on
the other, who both together make much the major part of the world, are very
apt to be affected with a due fear of these things: and Religion accomodating
it self to the Generality, though not to every particular temper, sufficiently
secures Government, in as much as that stands or falls according to the
Behavior of the Multitude. And whatsoever Conscience makes the Generality
obey* to that Prudence will make the rest conform. Wherefore, having proved
the dependence of Government upon Religion, J shall now demonstrate, That the
safety of Government depends upon the Truth of Religion. False Religion is in
its nature the greatest bane and destruction to Religion in the world. The
reason is, because whatsoever is False, is also Weak. Ens and Verum in
Philosophy are the same: and so much as any Religion has of Falsity, it loses
of strength and existence. Falsity it gains Authority only from Ignorance, and
therefore is in danger to be known; for from Being false, the next immediate
step is to be Known to be such. And what prejudice this would be to the Civil
Government, is apparent, if men should be awed into Obedience, and affrighted
from sin by Rewards and Punishments, proposed to them in such a Religion, which
afterward should be detected, and found a mere Falsitie, and Cheat? For if
one part be but found to be false, it will make the whole suspicious. And men
will then not only cast off Obedience to the Civil Magistrate, but they will
do it with disdain and rage, that they have been deceived so long, and
brought to do that out of Conscience which was imposed upon them out of
Design: For though men are often willingly deceived, yet still it must be
under an Opinion of being instructed, though they love the Deception, yet they
mortally hate it under that appearance: Therefore it is no ways safe for a
Magistrate, who is to build his Dominion upon the Fears of men, to build those
fears upon a false Religion. It Is not to be doubted, but the absurdity of
Ieroboams Calves, made many Israelites turn subjects to Rehoboams Government,
that they might be Proselytes to his Religion. Herein the Weakness of the
Turkish Religion appears, that it urges Obedience upon the promise of such
absurd Rewards, as that after death they should have Palaces, Gardens,
Beautiful Women, with all the Luxury that could be: as if those things that
were the occasions, and incentives of sin in this world, could be the rewards
of Holiness in the Other. Pesides many other inventions, false, and absurd,
that are like so many chincks and holes to discover the rottenesse of the whole
Fabric, when God shall be pleased to give light to discover, and open their
reasons to discern them. But you will say, What Government more sure and
absolute than the Turkish, and yet what Religion more false? Therefore
certainly Government may stand sure and strong, be the Religion professed never
so absurd. I answer, that it may do so indeed by Accident, through the strange
peculiar temper, and gross ignorance of a people; as we see it happens in the
Turks, the best part of whose Policy, supposing the Absurdity of their
Religion, is this, that they prohibit schools of Learning; for this hinders
Knowledge, and Disputes, which such a Religion would not bear. But suppose we,
that the Learning of these Western Nations were as great there as here, and the
Alcoran as common to them as the Bible to us, that they might have free
recourse to search and examine the flawes and follies of it, and withal that
they were of as inquisitive a temper as we: And who knows, but as there are
vicissitudes in the Government, so there may happen the same also in the temper
of a Nation. If this should come to pass, where would be their Religion? And
then let every one judge, whether the Arcana imperii, and Religionis would not
fall together. They have begun to totter already; for, Mahomet, having promised
to come, and visit his Followers, and translate them to Paradise after a
thousand years, this being expired, many of the Persians began to doubt and
smell the cheat, till the Mufti or chief Priest told them, that it was a
mistake in the figure, and assured them, that upon more diligent survey of the
Records, he found it two thousand instead of one. When this is expired,
perhaps they will not be able to renew the Fallacy. I say therefore, that
though this Government continues firm in the Exercise of a false Religion, yet
this is by accident, through the present genius of the people, which may
change; but this does not prove, but that the Nature of such a Religion (of
which we only now speak) tends to subvert and betray the Civil Power. Hence
Machiavel himself, in his Animadversions upon Livy, makes it appear, that the
Weakness of Italy, which was once so strong, was caused by the corrupt
practices of the Papacy, in depraving, and misusing Religion to that purpose,
which he, though himself a Papist, says could not have happened, had the
Christian Religion been kept in its first, and native simplicity. Thus much may
suffice for the clearing of the first Proposition.

The Inferences from hence are two.

1. If Government depends upon Religion, then this shows the pestilential
design of those that attempt to disjoyn the Civil and Ecclesiastical Interests,
setting the latter wholly out of the Tuition of the former. But it is clear that
the Fanatics know no other step to the Magistracy but through the ruin of the
Ministry. There is a great Analogy between the Body Natural and Politic; in
whith the Ecclesiastical or Spiritual part, justly supplies the part of the
soul; and the violent separation of this from the other, does as certainly
infer death and dissolution, as the disjunction of the body and the soul in the
Natural; for when this once departs, it leaves the Body of the Commonwealth a
carcass, noysom, and exposed to be devoured by Birds of Prey. The Ministry
will be one day found according to Christ's word, the salt of the earth, the
only thing that keeps Societies of men from stench and corruption. These two
Interests are of that nature, that it is to be feared they cannot be divided,
but they will also prove opposite; and not resting in a bare diversity, quickly
rise into a Contrariety: These two are to the State, what the Elements of Fire
and Water to the Body, which united compose, separated destroy it. I am not of
the Papists Opinion, who would make the Spiritual above the Civil State in
power as well as dignity, but rather subject it to the Civil; yet thus much I
dare affirm, that the Civil, which is superior, is upheld and kept in being
by the Ecclesiastical and inferior; as it is in a Building, where the upper
part is supported by the lower; the Church resembling the Foundation, which
indeed is the lowest part, but the most considerable. The Magistracy cannot so
much protect the Ministry, but the Ministers may do more in serving the
Magistrate. A taste of which truth you may take from the Holy War, to which how
fast and eagerly did men go, when the Priests persuaded them, that whoever
dyed in that Expedition was a Martyr? Those that will not be convinced what a
help this is to the Magistracy, would find how considerable it is, if they
should chance to clash, this would certainly eat out the other. For the
Magistrate cannot urge obedience upon such potent grounds, as the Minister, if
so disposed, can urge disobedience. As for instance, if my Governor should
command me to do a thing, or I must dye, or forfeit my Estate; and the
Minister steps in, and tells me, that I offend God, and ruin my soul, if I
obey that command; it is easy to see a greater force in this persuasion from
the advantage of its ground. And if Divines once begin to curse Meros, we shall
see that Levi can use the Sword as well as Simeon; and although Ministers do
not handle, yet they can employ it. This shows the imprudence, as well as the
danger of the Civil Magistrates exasperating those that can fire men's
consciences against him, and arm his Enemies with Religion: For I have read
heretofore of some, that having conceived an irreconcilable hatred of the
Civil M^gistrate, prevailed with men so far, that they went to resist him
even out of conscience, and a full persuasion and dread upon their spirits,
that not to do it were to desert God, and consequently to incur damnation.
Now when men's rage is both heightened and sanctified by Conscience, the War will
be fierce; for what is done out of Conscience, is done with the utmost
Activity. And then Campanella's Speech to the King of Spain will be found
true, Religio semper vicit, praesertim Armata: Which sentence deserves
seriously to be considered by all Governors, and timely to be understood, lest
it comes to be Felt.

2. If the safety of Government is founded upon the truth of Religion, then
this shows the danger of any thing that may make even the true Religion
suspected to be false. To be false, and to be thought false, is all one in
respect of men, who act not according to Truth, but Apprehension. As on the
contrary, a false Religion, while apprehended true, has the force and efficacy
of truth. Now there is nothing more apt to induce men to a suspicion of any
Religion, than frequent innovation and change: For since the object of
Religion, God, the subject of it, the soul of man, and the business of it,
Truth, is always one and the same: Variety and Novelty is a just presumption
of Falsity: It argues sickness and distemper in the mind, as well as in the
body, when a man is continually turning and tossing from one side to the other.
The wise Romans ever dreaded the least Innovation in Religion: Hence we find
the advice of Mecanas to Augustus Caesar in Dion Cassius in the 52 Book. where
he counsels him to detest, and persecute all Innovators of divine Worship, not
only as contemners of the Gods, but as the most pernicious disturbers of the
State: For when men venture to make changes in things sacred, it argues great
boldness with God, and this naturally imports little belief of him: which if
the people once perceive, they will take their Creed also, not from the
Magistrates Law, but his example. Hence in England, where Religion has been
still Purifying, and hereupon almost always in the Fire and Furnace; Atheists,
and Irreligious persons have took no small advantage from our changes. For in
King Edward the sixts time, the Divine Worship was twice altered in two new
Liturgies. In the first of Queen Mary, the Protestant Religion was persecuted
with Fire and Faggot, by Law and public counsel, of the same persons, who had
so lately established it. Upon the coming in of Queen Elizabeth, Religion was
changed again, and within a few days the public Council of the Nation made it
death for a Priest to convert any man to that Religion, which before with so
much eagerness of Zeal had been restored. So that it is observed by an Author,
that in the space of twelve years there were four changes about Religion made
in England, and that by the public Council, and Authority of the Realm, which
were more than were made by any Christian state throughout the world in fifteen
hundred years before. Hence it is that the Enemies of God take occasion to
blaspheme, and call our Religion Statisme: and now adding to the former, those
many changes that have happened since, J am afraid we shall never be able to claw
off that name. Nor, though we may satisfy our own consciences in what we
profess, to repel and clear off the objections of the rational world about
us, which not being interested in our Changes as we are, will not judge of them
as we judge: but debate them by impartial Reason, by the Nature of the thing,
the general Practice of the Church; against which New Lights, sudden Impulses
of the Spirit, Extraordinary Calls, will be but weak arguments to prove any
thing but the madness of those that use them, and that the Church must needs
wither, being blasted with Inspiration. We see therefore how fatal and
ridiculous Innovations in the Church are: And indeed when Changes are so
frequent, it is not properly Religion, but Fashion. This J think we may build
upon as a sure ground, that where there is continual Change, there is
Uncertainty, and Uncertainty in Religion, is a sufficient reason, if not to
deny, yet to doubt of its Truth.

Thus much for the first Doctrine, J proceed now to the second, viz. That the
next, and most effectual way to destroy Religion, is to Embase the Teachers
and Dispencers of it. In the handling of this J shall show, 1. How the
Dispensers of Religion, the Ministers of the Word are embased or rendered vile.
2. How the Embasing or Vilifying them is a means to destroy Religion.


1. For the first of these, the Ministers and Dispencers of the Word are
rendered base or vile two ways.

1. By devesting them of all Temporal Privileges, and Advantages, as
inconsistent with their Calling. It is strange since the Priests Office
heretofore was always Splendid, and almost Regal, that it is now looked upon
as a piece of Religion, to make it low and sordid. So that the use of the word
Minister is brought down to the signification of it, a Servant: for now to
serve and to minister, servile and ministerial, are terms equivalent. But in
the Old Testament the same word signifies a Priest, and a Prince, or chief
Ruler: hence, though we translanslate it Priest of On, 41 Genesis 45. and Priest
of Midian, 3 Exodus 1. and, as it is with the People so with the Priest, 24 Isa.
2. Iunius and Tremellius render all these places not by Sacerdos, Priest, but
by Praeses, that is, a Prince, or at least a chief Counselor, or Minister of
State. And it is strange, that the Name should be the same, when the Nature of
the thing is so exceeding different. The like also may be observed in other
Languages, that the most Illustrious Titles are derived from things Sacred, and
belonging to the Worship of God. (...) it was the Title of the Christian
Caesar's, correspondent to the Latin Augustus, and it is derived from the same
word that (...), cultus, ^es sacra, or sacrificium. And it is usual in our
Language to make Sacred, an Epithete to Majesty: there was a certain Royalty
in things Sacred. Hence the Apostles, who I think was no Enemy to the
simplicity of the Gospel, speaks of a Royal Priesthood, 1 Pet. 2.9 which shows
at least, that there is no contradiction or impiety in those terms. In Old
time, before the placing this office only in the Line of Aaron, the Head of
the Family, and the Firstborn offered Sacrifice for the rest, that is, was
their Priest. And we know that such Rule and Dignity belonged at first to the
Masters of Families, that that they had Ius vitae and necis, jurisdiction and
power of Life and Death in their own Family, and from hence was derived the
Beginning of Kingly Government; a King being only a Civil Head, or Master of
a Politic Family, the whole People; so that we see the same was the Foundation
of the Royal and Sacerdotall Dignity. As for the Dignity of this Office among
the Jews, it is so pregnantly set forth in Holy Writ, that it is
Unquestionable. Kings and Priests are still mentioned together, in the 2 Lamen.
6. The Lord has despised in the indignation of his Anger, the King and the
Priest, 5 Hosea 2, Hear O Priests, and give ear O house of the King. 17 Deuteronomy.
12. And the man that does presumptuously, and will not hearken unto the Priest
that stands there to minister before the Lord thy God, or unto the Judge,
even that man shall dye. Hence Paul, together with a blow, received this
Reprehension, Act. 5.4. Revilest thou Gods High Priest? And Paul in the next
verse does not defend himself, by pleading an extraordinary Motion of the
Spirit, or that he was sent to Reform the Church, and might therefore
lawfully vilify the Priesthood, and all Sacred Orders; but in the 5. v. he
makes an excuse, and that from Ignorance, the only thing that could take away
the fault; namely, that he knew not that he was the High Priest, and subjoines
a reason which further advances the Truth here defended: For it is written thou
shall not speak evil of the Ruler of thy people. To Holy Writ we might add the
Testimony of Josephus of next Authority to it in things concerning the Jews,
who in sundry places of his History, sets forth the Dignity of the Priests, and
in his second Book against Appion the Grammarian, he has these words, (...),
the Priests were constituted Judges of all doubtful causes. Hence Iustire also
in his 36 Book has this, Semper apud Iudaeos mos fuit, ut Eosdem Reges and
Sacerdotes, haberent: though this is false, that they were always so, yet it
argues that they were so frequently, and that the distance between them was not
great. To the Jews we may join the Egyptians, the first Masters of Learning
and Philosophy. Synesius in his 57 Epist. having shown the general Practice
of Antiquity, (...), gives an instance in the Jews and Egyptians, who for a
many Ages, (...), had no other Kings but Priests. Next we may take a view of
the Practice of the Romans: Numa Pompilius, that civilized the fierce Romans,
is reported in the 1. Book of Livy, sometimes to have performed the Priests
Office himself. Tum Sacerdotibus creandis animum adjecit, quamquam ipse plurima
sacra obibat, but when he made Priests, he gave them a dignity almost the same
with himself. And this honor continued together with the Valor and Prudence
of that Nation. For the Success of the Romans did not extirpate their Religion.
The College of the Priests being in many things exempted even from the
Jurisdiction of the Senate, afterward the Supreme Power. Hence Iuvenal in his
2. Sat. mentions the Priesthood of Mars, as one of the most Honorable places
in Rome. And Iul. Caesar who was chose Priest in his minority, thought it not
below him to continue the same Office when he was Created absolute Governor of
Rome under the name of Perpetual Dictator. Add to these the Practice of the
Gauls mentioned by Caesar in his 6. Book de Bello Gallico, where he says of
the Druides, who were their Priests, that they did judge de omnibus fere
controversiis publicis privatisque. See also Homer in the 1. Book of his Iliads
representing Chryses the Priest of Apollo with his Golden Scepter, as well as
his Golden Censer. But why have I produced all these examples of the Heathens?
Is it to make these a ground of our Imitation? No, but to show, that the giving
honor to the Priesthood, was a custom Universal amongst all civilized
Nations: And whatsoever is Universal, is also Natural, as not being founded
upon compact, or the particular humors of men, but flowing from the Native
results of Reason: and that which is Natural, neither does nor can oppose
Religion. But you will say, this concerns not us, who have an express Rule
and Word revealed. Christ was himself poor and despised, and withal has
instituted such a Ministry. To the first part of this Plea I answer; That
Christ came to suffer, yet the sufferings and miseries of Christ, does not
oblige all Christians to undertake the like. For the second, That the Ministry
of Christ was low, and despised by his Institution, I utterly deny. It was so
indeed by the malice and persecution of the Heathen Princes, but what does this
argue or infer for a low, dejected Ministry in a flourishing State, which
professes to encourage Christianity? But to dash this cavil, read but the
practice of Christian Emperors and Kings all along down from the time of
Constantine, in what respect, what honor and splendor they treated the
Ministers, and then let our adversaries produce their puny, pitiful Arguments
for the contrary, against the general, clear, undoubted vogue and current of
all Antiquity. As for two or three little Countries about us, the Learned and
impartial will not value their practice; in one of which places the Minister
has been seen, for mere want to mend shoes on the Saturday, and been heard to
preach on the Sunday. In the other place, stating the several orders of the
Citizens, they place their Ministers after their Apothecaries: that is, the
Physician of the Soul after the Drugster of the Body: a fit practice for those,
who if they were to rank Things as well as Persons, would place their Religion
after their Trade.

And thus much concerning the first way of Debasing the Ministers and Ministry.

2. The second way is by admitting Ignorant, Sordid, Illiterate persons to this
Function. This is to give the Royal stamp to a piece of Lead. I confess, God
has no need of any man's Parts, or Learning; but certainly then, he has much
less need of his Ignorance, and ill Behavior. It is a sad thing when all
other Employments shall empty themselves into the Ministry: When men shall
repair to it, not for Preferment, but Refuge; like Malefactors, flying to the
Altar only to save their lives; or like those of Ely's Race, 1 Samuel 2.36. that
should come crouching, and seek to be put into the Priests Office, that they
might eat a piece of Bread. Heretofore there was required splendor of
Parentage to recommend any one to the Priesthood, as Josephus witnesses in a
Treatise that he wrote of his own Life; where he says, to have right to deal
in things Sacred, was amongst them accounted an argument of a Noble and
Illustrious Descent. God would not accept the Offals of other Professions.
Doubtless many rejected Christ, upon this thought, that he was the Carpenters
Son, who would have embraced him, had they known him to have been the Son
of David. The preferring undeserving persons to this great se^vice, was
eminently Ieroboams Sin; and how Ieroboams practice and offense has been
continued amongst us in another guise, is not unknown: For has not Learning
unqualified men for Approbation to the Ministry? Has not Parts and Abilities
been reputed Enemies to Grace, and Qualities no ways Ministerial? Whiles
Friends, Faction, Well-meaning, and little Understanding, have been
Accomplishments beyond Study and the University; and to falsify a story of
Conversion, beyond pertinent Answers and clear Resolutions to the hardest and
most concerning Questions. So that matters have been brought to this pass,
that if a man amongst his Sons had any blind, or disfigured, he laid him
aside for the Ministry, and such an one was presently approved, as having a
mortified Countenance. In short, it was a fiery Furnace, that often approved
Dross, and rejected Gold. But thanks be to God, those Spiritual Wickednesses
are now discharged from their high places. Hence it was, that many rushed into
the Ministry, as being the only Calling that they could profess, without
serving an Apprentiship. Hence also we have had those that could Preach
Sermons, but not Defend them. The reason of which is clear, because the Works
and Writings of Learned men might be borrowed, but not their Abilities. Had
indeed the Old Leviticall Hierarchy still continued, in which it was part of
the Ministerial Office to slay the Sacrifices, to cleanse the Vessels, to
scour the Flesh-forks, to sweep the Temple, and carry the filth and rubbish to
the Brook Kidron. no persons living had been sitter for the Ministry, and to
serve in this nature at the Altar. But since it is made a labor of the mind;
as to inform men's judgments, and move their affections, to resolve difficult
places of Scripture, to decide and clear off Controversies, I cannot see how to
be a Butcher, Scavinger, or any other such Trade, does at all qualify, or
prepare men for this work. But as unfit as they were, yet to clear a way for
such into the Ministry, we have had almost all Sermons full of gibes and
scoffs at Humane Learning. Away with vain Philosophy, with the disputer of this
world, and the enticing words of man's wisdom, and set up the foolishness of
Preaching, the simplicity of the Gospel: Thus Divinity has been brought in upon
the ruins of Humanity; by forcing the Words of the Scripture from the sense,
and then haling them to the worst of Drudgeries, to set a Ius Divinum upon
Ignorance and Imperfection, and recommend Natural Weakness for Supernatural
Grace. Hereupon the Ignorant have took heart to venture upon this great
Calling, and instead of cutting their way to it, according to the usual
course, through the Knowledge of the Tongues, the Study of Philosophy,
School Divinity, the Fathers and Councils, they have taken another, and a
shorter Cut, and having read perhaps a Treatise or two upon the heart, the
bruised Reed, the Crumbs of Comfort, Wollebius in English, and some such other
little Authors, the usual Furniture of Old Women's Closets, they have set forth
as accomplished Divines, and forthwith they present themselves to the Service;
and there has not been wanting Ieroboams, as willing to consecrate, and receive
them, as they to offer themselves. And this has been one of the most fatal,
and almost irrecoverable blows that has been given to the Ministry.

And this may susfice concerning the second way of Embasing Gods Ministers;
namely, by entrusting the Ministry with raw, unlearned, ill-bred Persons, so
that what Solomon speaks of a Proverb in the mouth of a Fool, the same may be
said of the Ministry vested in them, that it is like a Pearl in a swines
snout.

I proceed now to the second thing proposed in the Discussion of this Doctrine,
which is to show, how the Embasing of the Ministers tends to the destruction of
Religion.

This it does two ways.

1. Because it brings them under exceeding scorn and contempt; and then let
none think Religion it self secure: For the Vulgar have not such Logical heads
as to be able to Abstract; such subtle conceptions, as to separate the Man
from the Minister, or to consider the same person under a double capacity, and
so honor him as a Divine, while they despise him as a Poor But suppose they
could, yet Actions cannot distinguish as Conceptions do, and therefore every
Act of Contempt it strikes both, and unavoydably wounds the Ministry through
the sides of the Minister. And we must know, that the least degree of Contempt
weakens Religion, because it is absolutely contrary to the nature of it,
Religion properly consisting in a Reverentiall Esteem of things Sacred. Now
that which in any measure weakens Religion will at length destroy it: For the
weakening of a thing is only a partial destruction of it. Poverty and meanness
of condition is exposes the Wisest to scorn; it being natural for men to place
their esteem, rather upon things Great than Good; and the Poet observes that
this Infelix and Paupertas has nothing in it more intolerable than this, that
it renders men Ridiculous. And then how easy and natural it is for Contempt
to pass from the Person to the Office, from him that speaks, to the thing that
he speaks of, Experience proves. Counsel being seldom valued so much for the
Truth of the thing, as the Credit of him that gives it. Observe an excellent
passage to this purpose in the 9 Eccl. 14.15. We have an account of a little
City with few men in it, besieged by a Great and Potent King, and in the 15. v.
we read, that there was found in it a poor Wise man, and he by his Wisdom
delivered the City. A worthy service indeed, and certainly we may expect that
some honorable Recompense should follow it; a Deliverer of his Country, and
that in such distress, could not but be advanced: but we find a contrary
event in the next words of the same verse, Yet none remembered that same poor
man? Why? what should be the reason? Was he not a man of parts and Wisdom? and
is not Wisdom honorable? Yes, but he was poor: But was he not also succesfull
as well as wise? True; but still he was poor: And once grant this, and you
cannot keep off that un^voydable sequel in the next verse, The poor man's
wisdom is despised, and his wo^d^ are not heard. We may believe it upon
Solomon's word, who was Rich, as well as Wise, and therefore knew the force of
both: and probably had it not been for his Riches, the Queen of Sheba would
never have came so far only to have heard his Wisdom. Observe her behavior
when she came. Though upon the hearing of Solomon's Wisdom, and the resolution
of her hard Questions she expressed a just admiration, yet when Solomon
afterward show her his Palace, his Treasures, and the Temple which he had
built, 1 King. 10. c. 5. v. it is said, there was no more spirit in her. What
was the cause of this? certainly the magnificence, the pomp and splendor of
such a Structure: it struck her into an Ecstasy beyond his wise Answers. She
esteemed this as much above his Wisdom, as Astonishment is beyond bare
Admiration. She admired his Wisdom, but she adored his Magnificence. So apt is
the mind, even of Wise persons, to be surprised with the superficies, or
circumstance of things, and value, or undervalue Spirituals, according to the
manner of their External Appearance. When Circumstances fail, the substance
seldom long survives; Clothes are no part of the Body, yet take away
clothes, and the Body will dye. Livy observes of Romulus, that being to give
Laws to his new Romans, he found no better way to procure an esteem and
reverence to them, but by first procuring it to himself, by splendor of Habit
and Retinue, and other signs of Royalty. And the wise Numa, his successor took
the same course to enforce his Religious Laws, namely, by giving the same Pomp
to the Priest who was to dispense them. Sacerdo^em creavit, insignique eum
Vest, and Curuli Regia solla adornavit. That is, he adorned him with a rich
Robe, and a royal Chair of State. And in our Judicatures take away the
Trumpet, the Scarlet, the Attendance, and the Lordship, which would be to make
Justice Naked, as well as Blind, the Law would lose much of its Terror, and
consequently of its Authority. Let the Minister be abject and low, his interest
inconsiderable, the Word will suffer for his sake: The Message will still find
reception according to the Dignity of the Messenger. Imagine an Ambassador
presenting himself in a poor freeze Jerkin, and tattered clothes, certainly
he would have but small Audience, his Embasy would speed rather according to
the Meaness of him that brought, than the Majesty of him that sent it. It will
fare alike with the Ambassadors of Christ, the People will give them Audience
according to their Presence. A notable example of which we have in the
Behavior of some to Paul himself, 1 Cor. 10. c. 10. v. Hence in the Jewish
Church it was cautiously provided in the Law, that none that was blind or lame,
or had any remarkable defect in his body, was capable of the Priestly Office:
because these things naturally make a person contemned, and this presently
reflects upon the Function. This therefore is the first way by which the low,
despised condition of the Ministers, tends to the destruction of the Ministry
and Religion: namely, because it subjects their persons to scorn, and
consequently their Calling: and it is not imaginable that men will be brought
to Obey what they cannot Esteem.

2. The second way by which it tends to the ruin of the Ministry is, because
it discourages men of fit and raised Abilities from undertaking it. And
certain it is, that as the Calling dignifies the man, so the man much more
advances his Calling. As a Garment, though it warmes the Body, it has a return
with an advantage, being much more warmed by it. And how often a good cause may
miscarry without a wise mannager; and the Faith for want of a Defender, is, or
at least may be known. It Is not the Truth of an Assertion, but the Skill of the
Disputant that keeps off a baffle; not the Justness of a Cause, but the Valor
of the Soldiers that must win the Field. When a Learned Paul was converted,
and undertook the Ministry, it stopped the mouths of those that said, None
but poor, weak Fishermen Preached Christianity, and so his Learning silenced
the scandal, as well as strengthened the Church. Religion placed in a soul of
exquisite Knowledge and Abilities, as in a Castle, it finds not only Habitation
but Defense. And what a Learned Foreign Divine said of the English preaching,
may be said of all, Plus est in Artifice quam in Art. So much of moment is
there in the Professors of any thing, to depresse, or raise the Profession.
What is it that kept the Church of Rome strong, athletick, and flourishing for
so many Centuries, but the happy succession of the choicest Wits engaged to her
service by suitable preferments? And what strength do we think would that give
to the True Religion, that is able thus to establish a False? Religion in a
great measure stands or falls according to the abilities of those that assert
it: And if, as some observe, men's Desires are usually as large as their
Abilities, what course have we took to allure the sormer, that we might engage
the latter to our assistance. But we have took all ways to affright and
discourage Scholars from looking toward this sacred calling: For will men lay
out their Wit and Judgment, upon that employment, for the undertaking of which,
both will be questioned? Would men not long since have spent toylsome days and
watchful nights in the laborious quest of knowledge preparative to this work,
at length to come and dance attendance for approbation from a Iuncto of Petty
Tyrants, acted by Party and Prejudice, who denied Fitness from Learning, and
Grace from Morality? Will a man exhaust his livelihood upon Books, and his
Health, the best part of his life upon Study, to be at length thrust into a
poor Village, where he shall have his due precariously, and entreat for his
own, and when he has it, live poorly and contemptibly upon it, while the same
or less labor bestowed upon any other calling, would bring not only Comfort,
but Splendour, not only Maintenance but Abundance? It Is I confess the duty of
Ministers to endure this condition: but neither Religion nor Reason does oblige
either them to approve, or others to Choose it. Doubtless Parents will not
throw away the towardness of a child, and the expense of Education upon a
Profession whose labor is increased, and whose rewards vanished. To condemn
promising lively parts to contempt, and penury in a despised calling. What is
it elss but the casting of a Moses into the mud, or to offer a Son upon the
Altar: and instead of a Priest to make him a Sacrifice. Neither let any here
reply, that it becomes not a Ministerial spirit to undertake such a calling
for reward? for they must know, that it is one thing to undertake it for a
reward, and not to be willing to undertake it, without one: it is one thing to
perform good works only that we may receive the recompense of them in Heaven,
and another thing not to be willing to follow Christ and forsake the world if
there were no such recompense. But besides, suppose it were the duty of
Scholars to choose this calling in the midst of all its discouragements. Yet a
prudent governor, who knows it to be his wisdom as well as his duty, to take
the best course to advance Religion, will not consider men's duty, but their
practice: not what they ought to do, but what they use to do: and therefore
draw over the best qualified to this service, by such ways, as are most apt to
persuade and induce men. Solomon built his Temple with the Tallest Cedars: and
surely when God refused the defective, and the maimed for sacrifice, we cannot
think that he requires them for the Priesthood. When Learning, Abilities, and
what is excellent in the world forsake the Church, we may easily foretell its
ruin without the gift of Prophesy. And when ignorance succeeds in the place of
Learning, weakness in the room of Judgment, we may be sure, Heresye and
confusion will quickly come in the room of Religion. For undoubtedly there is
no way so effectual to betray the Truth, as to procure it a weak Defender.

Well: now instead of raising any particular Uses from the Point, that has been
delivered, let us make a brief Recapitulation of the whole. Government, we see
depends upon Religion, and Religion upon the Encouragement of those that are to
dispense, and assert it. For the further evidence of which truths we need not
travel beyond our own Borders* but leave it to every one impartially to Judge,
whether from the very first day that our Religion was unsettled, and Church
Government flung out of Doors, the Civil Government has ever been able to fix
upon a sure foundation. We have been changing even to a Proverb. The
indignation of Heaven has been rolling and turning us from one form to another,
till at length such a Giddiness seized upon Government, that it fell into the
very dreggs of Sectaryes, that threatened an equal ruin both to the Minister
and Magistrate. And how the State has Symphathized with the Church, is
apparent. For have not our Princes, as well as our Priests bin of the lowest of
the People? Have not Cobblers, Draymen, Mechanics Governed, as well as reached?
Nay have not they by Preaching come to Govern? Was ever that of Solomon more
verified, that Servants have Rid, while Princes, and Nobles have gone on Foot?
But God has bin pleased by a miracle of mercy to dissipate this confusion and
Chaos, and to give us some openings, some dawnings of Liberty and Settlement.
But now let not those that are to rebuild our Jerusalem, think that the Temple
must be built last. For if there be such a thing as a God, and as Religion, as,
whether men believe it or no, they will one day find and feel, assuredly he
will stop our Liberty, till we restore him his Worship. Besides, it is a
senceless thing in reason, to think that one of these Interests can stand
without the other, when in the very order of Natural Causes, Government is
preserved by Religion. But to return to Jeroboam with whom we first began. He
laid the foundation of his Government in destroying, though doubtless he
colored it with the Name of Reforming Gods worship: but see the issue.
Consider him Cursed by God; maintaining his usurped title, by continual
vexatious Wars against the Kings of Judah; smote in his posterity, which was
made like the dung upon the face of the Earth, as low and vile as those Priests
whom he had employed. Consider him branded, and made odious to all after ages.
And now when his Kingdom, and glory was at an End; and he and his Posterity
rotting under ground, and his Name stinking above it. Judge what a worthy prize
he made in getting of a Kingdom, by destroying the Church. Wherefore the sum
of all is this; to advise and desire those whom it may concern, to consider
Ieroboams punishment, and then they will have little heart to Ieroboams sin.

FINIS.

