THE TRIUMPHS OF THE Holy JESUS: OR, A DIVINE POEM OF The Birth, Life, Death,
and Resurrection, of our Savior.

By J. Salter formerly of St. Mary Magdalen's College in Oxon, now Vicar of St.
Mary's Church in Devon.

LICENSED,

Nov. 11, 1691.
LONDON, Printed for Samuel Smith, at the Prince's Arms in St. Paul's
Churchyard, 1692.

TO THE Honorable and Reverend Dr. RICHARD ANSLEY, Dean of Exon.
SIR,
THE Noble Favors and Encouragements you have vouchsafed me, Merit more than
the tender of this Poem; which craves Protection under the shadow of your Name;
and though (as to its style) it may seem much beneath your Judgment and
Acceptance, and I consequently judged Guilty of Presumption and Arrogance: yet
as I owe you a just Service, and would publish it: I less fear the Censure of
Vainglory and Conceitedness, than of Ingratitude. He that does but tacitly
resent the Candor of a true Friend, in a manner buries it: When he that
Proclaims it may in some measure seem to make some shadow of Requital, though not
Restitution. Were it not for this Consideration, I might have exposed these
Labors to the Criticism and Comment of an Age, in which are too many, who
undervalue most things, because they are common; and many things because they
are Sacred, and savor of Divine Virtue and Goodness: However, if I have your
kind Interpretation; I fear not the rigid one of the Times. They beg your
Courteous Aspect, which if afforded, you no less Crown and Honor them, than
him who in all Humility is,

Your obliged Servant, James Salter.

THE PREFACE TO THE READER.
THERE are some who zealously conclude it to be a kind of Sacrilege and
Profanation, to represent Mystical and Divine Matters in the Language of the
Muses; and to actuate Numbers in setting forth what is Infinite: Such may as
well condemn David for uttering his Holy and Transcendent Ecstasies upon the
Harp; Or Elisha, when he said, Bring me now a Minstrel; and it came to pass
whilst the Minstrel played the Hand of the Lord came upon him, and he said, Thus
says the Lord, 2 Kings, chapter 3. v. 15. Such Opinionists therefore should be
persuaded to permit the Spirit of God to Breath through what Pipe it please,
whether in a shrill or low Voice; and they ought to Confess, That all the Songs
Inspired by him, must needs bear the Tincture and Complexion of their Fountain.

But the most clamorous Objection, is, Who may compare with God, or what Meter
(be it never so August and Lofty) may correspond with the most High? True; And
yet as none may compare without Arrogance and Presumption, so all may strive to
Imitate, not without Encouragement and Approbation, so it be done with Modesty
and Submission.

If we may Credit Pindar and Hesiod, They affirm it is the Duty of the Muses to
sit under the Throne of Jupiter, and there to observe and celebrate His Majesty
and Goodness. So it is Reasonable, that Poetic Infusions should break forth
into loud Anthems of Praise and Honor, to the Glory of God, in regard they
could not have had their Conception, but by the Contemplation and Sense of His
Sweet Bounty and Munificence; Which made Nazianzen (a Star of more than
ordinary Magnitude and Luster in the Greek Church) write Poems of the
Genealogy, and Miracles of Christ, called by him, His (...), which when St.
Basil, his Chamber-Fellow, had seen and perused, he gave this Character, (...)
As if he had said, by Imitating the Singing Angels in Heaven, himself became an
Earthly One. St. Paul by the Example of his Master, (who went Singing to the
Mount Olivet with his Disciples) Exhorts Christians to awaken and cherish their
Souls and Spirits, with Hymns and Psalms and Spiritual Songs.

Thinking it therefore not worth while to Confute those that ignorantly
Impeach, I Commend these Effects of Retirement and Solitude, to those who
Heartily affect such Poets, viz. To good Scholars, but especially to good
Christians, who have overcome the Rudeness of Nature, by a well Disciplined and
Cultivated Reason, and Improved their Reasons by the Access and Advancements of
a Sound and well-Principled Religion; Of whom I may say, and conclude in the
Words of Horace.

-- Quibus haec sint qualiacunque
Arridere velim: Dolitura si placeant Spe
Deterius Nostra --
THE TRIUMPHS OF THE Holy Jesus, etc.
I Sing His Birth, Who no Beginning had,
Yet the Beginning of all things were Made.
How God and Man, together did Embrace,
And Heaven and Earth salute each others Face.
I Sing the Death of Him that could not dye,
That Mortals might gain Immortallity.
Became a Curse to make the Cursed blessed,
I Sing how He grew high, for being deprest,
How this Illustrious Planet of the Moon.
That Shot from Heaven, did back to Heaven Return.
O Holy Spirit, vouchsafe pure Fires to infuse
Into my Breast, and teach my thoughtful Muse.
Ye sacred Scriptures (never fading Scrowl)
Which do Heavens treasured Memory enroll,
Say, what is the Cause, that mercy should come down,
To have the Plea of Justice overthrown?
That the resenting Bowels of the Most High,
Should stoop to quicken sinful Dust and Clay?
Could so much ill be cause of so much good
That the Lamb God for Man should shed his Blood?
O say! how Mercy could arise for those
Who traitorously against their Master rose?
Must the Son dye to spare the Fathers foes?
There is a place above you Azure Plain,
Where Sun and Moon alternately do Reign,
A boundless Place, where saintly Heroes reap.
The Triumphs of their Fights, it is where They keep
Their everlasting Sabbath, whilst each wears
His Badge of Blood, all more than Conquerours,
They only Wish, for that They still enjoy,
It Is what cannot but feed, but cannot cloy:
Here, when that beauteous Frame that bore the Impress
Of Gods own Image fell from Happiness,
When that fair Frame which shined with every Star,
And did a Galaxy of Light appear,
Was Clouded, darkened, and deformed by Sin,
(Whose Womb with numerous Plagues and Deaths did teem)
Here 'twas, that Mercy meditated Peace,
How the sad War 'twixt God and Man did cease:
Least the created Universe should fall
Again to nothing (it is Original.)
Justice no sooner saw how Mercy strove
To quell her Father's rage with Charms of Love,
But up she starts; and interrupts her Prayer;
Like a dire Vapor gender'd in the Air,
Rising t'Encounter, the new rising sun
And stop his Course, when first it is begun,
She was a Virgin of severe demean, Justice

(Not blind and deaf, as foolishly We wean)
But like an Eagle which is not afraid
To have her piercing Eye, with Heavens tried,
She the Deep whispers of the Conscience hears,
(Such is the nimble sharpness of her Ears)
One hand the Sanctuary Scales does poise,
And not an Action, but she strictly weighs;
The other Brandishes a flaming Sword,
(The two-edged One of God's Almighty word)
That which the Cherub waved for Eden's fence
When the Transgressing Pair were driven thence:
Her Summons, and dread Messages are born
By winged Lightning, or the rapid Storm,
About her fierce tremendous Thunders sound,
Such as the Mountains shake, and rend the ground.
When she but frowns, Rocks into water roll,
Woods tremble, and wild Beasts affrighted howl.
Two stony Tables spread before her lay
On which her Bosom leaned more hard than they;
There written was the Score of Man's Account,
To what his Duties, and his Debts amount;
But when the Sum was read, what heart so great
That did not faint, and horribly retreat?
Witness the often repeated Claps which roared
A top of Sinai, when came down the Lord,
And from his Mouth, the Law in tumults poured:
When Israel betook themselves to flight,
Blinded with seeing so Divine a sight;
Nor could They hear; O 'twas a killing noise
'Twas more than Thunder, 'twas the Almighty's Voice.
Justice then bowed, and with Majestic sway
Silen'd the Heavenly Senate to hear her Cry;
Dread Lord of Spirits, and all ye splendid Quire,
Cherubs, and Seraphs Ministers of Fire,
Wise was your Counsel, which did so devise
That Man should live, so distant from the Skies,
(Man of the lower World, the Curse and Cross,
A lump of Vice, a worthless naughty Dross)
How swells this Clod? how often with desperate Pride
Has he confronted, and your Thrones defied?
So often I cannot hold, did I not speak,
The Pavement of your Court complaints would make;
These precious Stones would into Clamours break,
His Soul's your Image; traitorous 'twas (ye Powers)
To stain that Face, which was the Impress of yours.
How basely did they look, how filled with shame
When God into the blushing Garden came?
How suddenly did their new knowledge fade
When from his Voice they fled into the shade?
Though then bereft of sight, His fight they feared,
Their guilt more to their Eyes, than he appeared.
Alas, how could such monstrous Crimes behold
So pure a Being? How could they unfold
Their Eyelids in the Presence; they who gave
Themselves to Hell, scorned Life, and chose the Grave?
Slaves made to Satan, he the worst of Slaves,
Who in an endless Chain of Burnings raves.
Vain subterfuge to think, that Grots and Trees
Can hide from him, who hearts and all things sees!
They fell (and where then could they find defense?
At once from Wisdom, and from Innocence.
These Parents thus, by admiring the fair Fruit,
(Which did with Lust not with their Duty suit)
And trusting to the Covert of dark Groves,
(Where they repeated their polluted Loves)
Seemed to be fatal Prophets, and foreshew,
That their Posterity the same would do;
As since they have done, erected Gods of wood,
Which Crowned with Laurels, have in Temples stood,
And fed by Fathers with their Childrens Blood;
Those sparkling Shrines, that shine with Golden store
(Which Egypt now (as Mirrours does behold)
Are but as Dens, where Idol Serpents creep,
Under whose Forms, Satan his Seat does keep:
The Ibis, Rat, the Crocodile, the Fly,
Such are their Gods; such Gods they still obey.
Neither do other Nations more dissent,
Than this from Adam's Folly; but are bent
As much as he, against Heaven to Rebel,
And for less than an Apple conspire with Hell.
The Sun, the Moon, the Stars, the Winds, the Seas,
The Air, the Clouds are fancied Deities:
And worse than these Man, and of all mankind,
The worst are worshipped, and for Gods enshrined.
Jove, Bacchus, Mercury, and (least Delights
Should not attend their Ceremonial Rights)
Juno and Venus, who alive were said,
Spots of their Sex; now Goddesses are made.
Satan himself, because he is understood
Worse than the worst of Men; is thought a God;
All that he speaks (though all he speaks are Lies)
Thought Oracles; to him they Sacrifice:
It Is he (who wounded All) they think abounds
With Skill and Balsome, to heal all their Wounds;
From him (although 'twas he first struck 'em blind)
They dream, they all Illuminations find.
Banished from Earth, I here to Heaven appeal,
How can I not yours, and my Wrongs bewail?
Innumerable wrongs! whose vast Account,
Stars of all Climes, Sands of all Seas surmount,
Ye God and Angels, see how Justice falls,
Vengeance (too long deferred) for Vengeance calls.
Were not the Heavens (in whose Courts I sue)
Pure as they were created first by you;
The Judge (to whom I speak, and urge these Crimes)
Not to be bribed, or swayed by partial Aims,
The Cause Transgression, a Rebellious breach,
Justice the Plantiff, who does Man impeach,
Angels the Jury, (before whom he is tried)
The Saints my Witnesses, and on my side,
Then might my Supplication be denied,
And he continue wicked and secure,
And might escape, or Trial might endure,
The Judge might pity, and be over-sway'd,
His sin excused; or Punishment delayed.
What Advocate will now, his Cause assume?
When I accuse, there is for Defense no Room.
Unhappy Mortal! if he knew his Lot;
But more unhappy 'cause he knows it not.
How miserably would Earth be overgrown
With Thorns and Thistles; vainly tilled and sown:
Did not your Clouds, their Fatness down distill,
Upon her Furrows, and her Valleys fill.
Did you not too much condescend, and bow.
Your easy Ears, to the Plowmans selfish Vow;
Long might he wait, till Anguish fill his Heart;
Whilst he goes sighing with an empty Cart,
And his Fields, naught but thievish Cares impart.
The Sea enraged with boiling Billows roars,
Scurges and Buffets the infested shoars,
Yet dare Man's floating Woods with swelling Pride,
Defy the Storms, and Liquid Mountains ride.
How often have I seen th'audacious Pine,
Tossed on a boisterous Surge with foamy Brine,
Quench the Moons Lamp; and dash the starry Plain?
Her towering Masts, near Heavens Mansions soar,
Then in a trice down to the infernal Door:
And yet her Passengers from Vengeance fly,
Though whence it Springs, and where inflicted nigh.
Did not your sandy Girdle the Ocean bind,
Often would it drown the Earth, and Cursed mankind;
The Air would flow with noisome steems of Death,
Did not your Spirit medicinal Fannings breath.
Fountains and Rivers with an eager Course,
Would to the Ocean all their Floods imburse:
Did you not lead them wandering from their way,
And make them on the flowery Meadows play.
Was not base Man than Beasts more wild, more fierce
More hard than Rocks; (if Reason did not pierce
His savage Mind) yet Sense might him reprove,
And unto Shame, if not Repentance move:
To see all things, except himself obey;
And Senseless things, to have more Sense than he.
The ended, and Heavens Hierarchies swell,
With pious Rage, and sin-abhorring Zeal:
Like a great Army when the Enemies near,
Wakened at once by Valor and brave Fear;
To Arms, to Arms, they Cry; the Word, the Word.
And each or shakes his Spear, or draws his Sword.
God himself hastens to his Magazine,
Girds him with Thunder, and grasps fighting keen,
The Stars to fight were in their Courses set,
Snow, Hail, and Vapors in Battalia met.
So mighty was the Alarm Justice raised;
Justice that must be paid, or be appeased.
But as the Sun, the darker in the Night,
Returns with a more wished and grateful Light;
So Mercy vigorously her self displays, Mercy.

(Maugre what all her Sister did advise)
Broke through the Cloud, and as she passed, it fled,
Scattered with Rays, which to and fro she shed,
Rays which could Dim the Suns, although he shone
With Light of many days Contract in One.
How can a Worm crawl up so high to trace
Her Foosteeps, or not dazzled view her Face?
Why blush the Roses, why the Lillies pale?
Her beauteous Cheeks, are their Original.
Her gracious Aspect, it is alone does yield,
All the Embroidered Gaieties of the Field,
Whatever Odours, Plants, and Flowers produce
It is her Breath, that does them first diffuse.
All what Arabia, and the wealthy East,
(The rare perfumes, that make the Phoenix Nest)
All that in Paradise it self first grew,
Fell From her Mouth, as falls the gentle Dew;
On either hand (O venerable Sight?)
Ten thousand Graces, her Attendants wait,
Who at her Nod, to Earth from Heaven move,
And every minute convey her Acts of Love,
Of various colored Plumes their wings are made,
The Rain-bows to 'em are but Typick shade,
As Honey from the Comb, so from her Lips
(Her Lips which drops of mellowed Manna sips)
Drops such a stream of sweetest Eloquence,
As more affects the Heart, as well as Sense,
Than dying Swans, or Tunes of Sirens Voice,
Or Sphaeres, when in a Consort they rejoice.
As a dry Land parched with hot Calentures,
Opens her thirsty Jaws to catch the showers,
Which through her empty Veins, and Entrails sink,
Though much befresht, yet more she still would drink,
So Angels, when she speaks open wide their Ears,
And stop their Mouths, to hear the Charms of hers,
But the more they are Ravished with her Song:
The more they do, to have't repeated long.
Upon her Breasts, Delight takes calm Repose,
Those milky Fountains whence all Nurture flows;
On weary Travelers (when their way they miss,
And Boar in Deserts where no water is)
Rivers of Pleasure trickle down to allay,
Fevers at once of thirst, and of the Day.
She is the blind Man's eyes, the lame Man's feet,
The hungry's Food, the naked's Raiment meet,
The Bond-mans Liberty, the poor Man's Wealth,
The afflicted's Joy, the sickly Patients Health:
It Is she alone the last Supports does give,
And when Man dies, assures him he shall live.
So bright she is, so excellently Gay,
As not to be beheld by mortal Eye;
What can the Painter, or the Poet do?
What Pencil, or what Quill, such Art can show?
How can frail Colors Portrait out, or Verse
Infinite Beauty, endless Grace rehearse?
(Poor empty Liveless shadows to compare,)
And strive to Match with things that Matchless are!
Her upper Garment was of silken Lawn,
Richly beset with Works her self had drawn,
The various Scene of all the World was there,
So fresh, so Lively, so August and Fair:
As if a new created Mass it were,
So that the ravished Eye might be deceived,
And think indeed, the Embroidered Landscape lived;
The prostrated Earth her self cast low,
And at the Goddess feet her Head did bow,
Rejoiced to kiss them, and was justly proud,
To be by them (O Blessed burden) trod:
(The Earth (upon whose Face (stupendous show)
Crowds of mankind seemed to move to and fro,
Like numerous Ants they thronged; and like them toiled,
(All alike busy, sundry ways Embroiled.)
The Ocean (figured like a Rainbow's band)
Girded her sides; small Pearls were wrought for Sand,
The Silver-woven Waves so seemed to play,
As if on them did real Sunbeams lay.
Air was her Mantle, and about her head,
Heaven like a gorgeous Cawl was vastly spread,
In which was intermixed a luminous Sphere,
Of sparkling Constellations here and there;
From whence such clear and strong Reflections came,
As if the Azure Web were in a flame.
Over her hung a Canopy of State,
(It Was the third Heaven, under which she Sat)
Not made of Tissue, or of spangled Gold,
But of a substance Mortals cannot behold,
Only by Angels Tongues it is to be told;
The Gems of Monarchs Crowns, (such Gems as shore,
In the All-glorious Court of Solomon)
The Sparks which shoot from Rocks of Adamant,
The Rays which an unclouded Sun does vaunt,
The Souls of Virgins, when they take their flight
Along the milky way; shine not so bright.
Mercy attended thus, and thus arrayed,
To Justice rigid Censures thus replied;
Good God, whose Property it is to forgive,
And rather than destroy, to save alive;
Man was thy Offspring, though of nothing made,
Yet when created with thy Image clad:
He had not been so foolishly beguiled,
Had not the Serpents shape base Satan veiled;
In State of Innocence, he feared no ill,
His Sin was rather a Constraint, than Will.
Before his Eyes were opened, and he knew,
How to distinguish between false and true;
How could this Heaven-born Child suspect a Shaft,
Prepared and sharpened, with dire Guile and Craft,
Brought from as far as Hell, and at him shot?
Hell was a place he surely yet knew not.
Cannot the Hand, which made him first of naught,
Cure the repented Wounds, that Sin has wrought?
Oh! Let not Justice Iron Scepter break
His bruised heart, let her not Terrors speak.
He Is terrified enough by his own Guilt,
Judgments enough have fallen, and Blood been spilt.
Suffer in the Gap that I may stand;
And hinder the destroying Angel's hand.
Let me, O let me my Request obtain,
To stand between the Living and the Slain.
If all must Pay that which all cannot Pay;
O first begin with me, and mercy slay:
Or if my Sacrifice will not atone,
Send from thy Bosom thy beloved Son:
Vouchsafe him a Capacity to dye,
The work is done; O view his willing Eye;
Do but Command, he is joyful to obey;
What has Man done, that Man shall not undo?
Did his Foe slay him? He shall slay his Foe,
Has he lost all? He all again shall win.
Is Sin his Master? he shall Master Sin.
But how can my Urania undertake
To celebrate that Day the Lord did make?
The Time when Angels hovered through the Air,
And did glad Tidings down from Heaven bear?
When in loud Carolds Anthems they proclaimed,
Peace and Good Will from God, toward mankind?
None but their Tongues, and their's could scarce express
So great a Joy, so great an Happiness;
To you a Savior born, to you a Child,
But why, and how to say, their Voices failed,
That God immortal should not thus disdain
A Virgins Womb, be made a mortal Man,
The infinite, an infant of a Span;
That the eternal word (whose Voice could break,
Cedars and Rocks) should not be able speak.
That in her Arms, his Mother could him take,
Him who at once could Earth and Heaven shake;
What a small Room vouchsaft he to Lodge in,
Whom all the World before could not contain?
Mysterious thing! not an hour old he was;
And yet his years did the World's date surpass,
At once a Child, and Ancient of days.
O this unsearchable, this deep Abyss!
Who can Chaunt God's rich Mercy, and Man's Bliss?
Thus Mercy over Justice got the sway,
And forced her Sword of Vengeance drop away:
The Ministers of God's fierce Anger bowed,
And at her Feet their broken Weapons strow'd.
The End of the First Book.
The Second Book.
NOR yet did Satan's subtle Malice cease,
He saw how Mercy had confirmed the Peace
'Twixt God and Man; and the Messiah come,
His Shrines despised, and Oracles struck dumb;
His tempting Adam ineffectual grown,
His Kingdom upon Earth quite overthrown;
The Powers of Darkness in confusion slain,
And Hell it self in danger to be taken:
Grinning with Envy, made a hideous Cry,
Which witnessed his Affliction and dismay:
Around he fiercely throws his baleful Eyes,
Which glowed with a new Rage; then bellowing Cries,
With ghastly Shrieks, which fill the Vaults of Night,
Knawing his Snaky-twisted Tail for spite:
Struck with obdurate Pride, and steadfast Hate,
He calls his black Divan, and holds debate.
At last he thus his desperate thoughts expressed,
And belched a Hell of Curses from his Breast.
Am I not Lucifer the Heavens Firstborn,
Captain of all the Stars that gild the Morn?
When I set up my Standard in the Air,
And led Embattel'd Seraphims to War;
When against Thunder bravely we marched on,
Challenged Heavens King, and dared him from his Throne.
My Deeds are not forgotten, but beget
New Horrors still, and make him tremble yet.
And must his Son, who the frail Armor wears
Of Flesh, in whom no Comeliness appears,
Must David's Son be sent to oppose my Might,
As did his Father with Goliath fight?
And with less Weapons than a Sling or Stone,
Attempt to wound my Head, and strike me down?
He trusts an Arm of flesh, as if I came,
Trusting to that; not my immortal Name.
Since with Success the first I did assail,
Why, not him they the Second Adam call?
He whom I vanquished was more perfect framed
Than this, yet could not my Assaults withstand.
It is resolved! I Will try again my Skill,
And make the Man my Strength and Wisdom feel.
More than a trifling Apple I Will present,
(And yet with this the old Parents were content)
I Will bribe him with rich Gems, and pompous Sights,
With numerous Glories, and complete Delights;
Rather than fail, I Will make him entertain
Hopes that all Kingdoms of the Earth he will Gain:
And I his Subject, if he would be mine.
What though it cost a second Fall, I Will try
(He cannot sure resist my strong Decree)
Again my strength; and what that cannot do,
Fraud shall devise; I Will strike, and flatter too:
He cannot sure hold out, the work is done;
Methinks I see the wretch already won.
So spoke the grisly Fiend, with haughty Scorn,
And speaking so, grew ten-fold more deform;
Thrice with his Tail he lashed his sides, thrice howled,
And into frowns his ugly Forehead bowl'd;
Thrice grin'd, and bit his Adamantine Chains,
Whilst his Eyes darted Torrents of Red flames.
The infernal States started and made a pause,
At length a deadly murmur of Applause
Ran through the Court, with full Assent they vote,
They will with him the bold Design promote.
'Twas now the time, when thirty times the Sun,
Through the twelve Signs triumphantly had run:
Since the Birth of the incarnate Deity:
(A far more universal Light than he.)
The Blessed Jesus drawn by Heavenly Fate,
And his own Will, as a poor Desolate,
Having a long and weary Progress made,
In a waste Desert through a pathless shade:
He kneeled, and as he there to pray began,
The Beasts with open Throats toward him ran:
But when they saw their Lords bright Cognizance,
Some to him bow, and some about him dance,
The Lion charmed forgets his angry Mood,
And welcomes Judah's Lion to the Wood;
Bears, Tygres, Panthers, Wolves, themselves compose,
And kiss the flowery Grass whereon he goes.
If he stands still, amazedly they gaze,
Fixed like tame Pourtraitures before his Face:
If walk, they walk, and where he goes, they go,
And ever with obliging Looks pursue.
If Cares permit him gentle Slumbers snatch,
They stand around, and take their Turns to watch;
And lest himself should a rich Prey become,
They suffer hunger, and neglect their own.
Upon a Primrose Hillock he was laid,
Over his Head bright Olive Branches laid,
Whose leaves were here and there so finely spread,
As if they Ambitious were to Crown his Head;
(His sacred Head, who was the Prince of Peace,
The more he lay, the more she did increase)
His Hair was black, black as the Ravens wings,
Flowing down to his Shoulders in curled Rings:
Which as a shadow did his Beauty shroud;
For shelter there did all the Graces crowd.
O may my Soul be wounded evermore,
By his Sweet Eyes; I Will think the Wounds not fore,
Though I were Sick with Love, though with it slain,
I would embrace the Stroke and not repine:
To Languish thus in Health, it is Life to dye;
(Endless the Health, the Life Eternity.)
Beauty with State was on his Forehead fixed,
And on his Cheeks, Lillies with Roses mixed:
Never vain Laughter on his Face did rise;
Though all the Smiles of Joy, danced in his Eyes.
No Silk or Gold (the Fopperies of Pride)
Composed a Garment for his Royal side:
A Lamb he was, and what a Lamb does bear,
Wove with one Thread, he not disdained to wear.
The Silver Moon now twice had bent her bow,
And shot her Shafts upon the Earth below;
Since in the Wilderness the disguised God,
Retired from Man's view, had kept abode,
The Heavens his Roof, Arbours his Coverts were,
No Fruit to eat, to drink no Waters there,
The Ground his Bed, his Pillow was the Grass:
Whilst Angels soared aloft to guard the Place.
At length an Aged Sire far off he saw
Toward him slowly on two Crutches draw;
His Head with Snow of Age, was waxen hoar,
About his Shoulders a torn Mantle wore,
And all the way he went, he cast his Eyes,
With a devout Erection to the Skies:
Whilst from his mouth, Blessings and Prayers flowed,
Which with spread Hands, he on the Woods bestowed:
A good old Anchorite he seemed to be,
Traveling a Pilgrimage some Saint to see,
But when he nearer came, he bended low,
And at his Feet his Head did humbly throw;
Then rose, and thrice again obeisance paid;
And thus, with smooth and sawning Phrase he said,
Ah me! how many doleful years have been,
Since these dear Eyes you glistering Sun has seen?
But now a more illustrious one they ken.
Ah! may my homely Cell so Blessed be,
To be the Temple of thy Deity:
Lo how it seems to worship thee indeed,
Whilst under Ground it is at thy Presence hid;
There Honey, Milk and Chestnuts, shall thee feed.
Here in this Desert (Oh he deeply sighed)
Are all supports for Natures Cry denied,
The Heavens (alas) are here not to be won:
or Stones and Briars grow, where Corn was sown.
But thou can even these Stones convert to Bread,
And by thy own without God's power be fed:
What need we then his unjust Anger fear?
Let him still Envy, so we have thee here.
Ere long they came near to a baleful Cave, Despair.

Dark as the Bottom of the deepest Grave,
The Ground no Plants, but venomous did bear,
A Grove of ragged Truncks, and stumps were near,
From whence a Leaf, not sprouted all the Year:
About dry Bones, and stinking Skulls were spread,
Spewed from the squallid Mansions of the Dead;
Upon the top sat still the ghastly Owl,
And drove with baleful Notes all other Fowl,
Except the leather, sailed, and flut'ring Batt
Which sometimes blindly floated, sometimes sat.
A little distance on a Craggy stone,
Celeno hung, and made a dismal Moan;
Whilst murdered Ghosts about did shriek and groan.
Like Cloudy Moonshine in a shady Grove,
Such was the Light, in which Despair did move;
But she her self dark, as the Nights Abyss,
In which no Joy, no hope of Comfort is:
Her foul uncombed Locks, like parched Hay,
In clots along her Face dishevelled lay;
Her Eyes sunk in her Skull, did staring glow,
Whose glimpse did like the Cocatrices show;
Which deadly looked, and Sparks of horror throw,
Her Clothes were ragged Clowts, with Thorns pined fast;
A Shash of Shipwrecked Canvas round her waste,
Now she would dream from Heaven she headlong fell,
Deeper and deeper sinking down to Hell,
And then would snatch the Air, afraid to fall,
And then would grasp the Earth, then trembling crawl,
And ever as she crept, would squint aside,
Lest by the Furies, she should be espied,
And so in everlasting Chains abide;
Then would she fancy how she shrunk away,
Not daring breath for Terror all the way,
Till back she had retired to her Den;
Now she would wake, then sleep, and dream again.
Within the gloomy Hole of this pale-Wight,
Satan with Charms, our Savior did invite:
But under specious Baits a Fine-wrought Grin,
Was set to take him in the Jaws of Sin:
But he replied, That Gods immortal Word
Not Bread alone did Sustenance afford.
From thence the Tempter, by new Motives led,
Caught him aloft, and to the Temple fled:
And now upon the Pinacles they met,
(Fair Salems Walls, and Streets before 'em set)
Here fond Presumption (midst a flattering Throng Presumption.

Of Sirens, which conceited Anthems sung.)
Spread her Pavilion, Canopy'd with Stars:
Presumption which affronts, and Justice dares,
Depends on Merit, Mercy, Love and Grace;
Narcissus like, is Charmed with her own Face:
(A Face with Vermile Paint still over-laid
By hope, her busy foolish waiting Maid.)
She in one hand a gilded Anchor bore,
Placed not on Rocks, but on a sandy Shore,
And there not fixed, but waver'd on the brim,
She let it to and fro securely swim.
In The other hand Saints Merits, and her own,
Pardons, and gross Indulgences were shown;
Like Ships, which whilst the Waters slumber; ride
Without a Balance, or the Pilots guide:
Their swelling Streams loosly they let Play,
And 'long the Ocean cut their pompous Way:
But soon as Heaven with stormy Threats does frown,
Their giddy Flags are furled, and taken down;
Right so Presumption does her self behave,
Proud whilst the Stars a prosperous influence have
But sinks at every Storm, and adverse Wave;
She in white Lawn arrayed, and winged too,
(Winged like an Angel) to our Savior flew,
Boldly she came, but gently begged to know,
Whether he were the Son of God or no?
I find thou art, she to her self Replied,
Then to cast down thy self be not afraid:
Behold a Troop of trusty Angels wait
Along the Air to intercept thy Flight;
Lest to the Ground thou should be rudely thrown,
And dash thy tender Foot against a stone.
But when she found her Speech could naught prevail,
Thrust on with Rage, she her self Headlong fell;
But him the Angels on their Feathers caught,
And to an Airy Mountain nimbly brought;
Not the famed Ida might with this compare,
Not Hybla, Rhodope, so pleasant were,
Atlas, Olympus not so high and fair:
Adonis Garden was to this but vain,
Though Plato on it Floods of Praise did rain.
Here Nature had the ground bedamask'd over,
With all her Ornaments and Flowery store;
Here she had Lillies, Roses, Violets shed,
Whose Sight the yiedling Senses Captive led;
Here the rich Bower of vain Delight was built,
With Marigolds, and streaky Tulips gilt.
Upon this pompous Hill, Ambition sat, Ambition.

In a Majestic Chair of splendid State,
An hundred Kings about her were Enstal'd,
Whose Temples were with Diadems impaled;
Their Scepters with bright Pearls and Diamonds shone,
Each in his Robes sat on a Crystal Throne.
Hither when Satan came he tuned his Tongue,
And thus he softly woed, and thus he sung;
See hence both Indies, see hence all the Ore
That flows in Tagus or Pactolus Shore;
See how thick Corn Millions of Valleys fills,
Numberless Cattle on ten thousand Hills;
Every Grape of every choicest Vine,
Rejoices to be pressed to drop me Wine,
Princes and Potentates are proud to gain
The Leave and Honor to hold up my Train;
All this and more, I will devote to thee,
Only (my Jesus) bow and worship me.
The Grand Enchanter thought so vast a Scene
of Kingdoms Glories, Pleasures which were seen
Could not but fascinate the purest Eye:
And God (to quit his own for these) betray.
But thrice Repulst, away the cursed Spright,
Ashamed, and grieved, with fury took his Flight,
But to their Lord (musing with pious Thought)
The Angels Comfort, and a Banquet brought;
And as he fed the Ministering Quires combine,
To sing an Hymn of the Almighty Trine:
The joyful Birds attuned their warmbling Lays,
Attemper'd to the Angels sounding Praise,
And to the Birds, the Winds lift up their Voice,
To them the Waters call, and Floods rejoice:
The Mountains skipt like Rams, the Rocks did dance,
All joined their Masters Triumph to advance.
The End of the Second Book.
The Third Book.
AS in Eridanus clear Silver stream
( Eridanus the Muses grateful Theme)
The Swan when he his Death approaching sees,
Sings his own Dirge and funeral Obsequies:
So with an Hymn, Jesus his Entrance made
Into the Garden, where he was betrayed,
The Spheres stopped their's, to listen to his Song;
The Heavens came down, the Clouds and Tempest throng,
The Waves stood still, and the Dumb waters lay,
Stretched on their Banks to hear his Harmony,
The Stones were taught to melt at his soft Sheins,
Each Tree an awful Rapture entertains:
A real Orpheus (not such as the Mind,
Of dreaming superstitious Poets feigned.)
The dewy Night had with her gloomy Shade
Mantel'd the World, Mortals in slumbers laid;
Jesus the while a broad his Eyelids kept;
(The Master watched whilst the Disciples slept.)
Who can describe the Horrors of that Cup,
which was with Dregs of deadly Wine filled up?
The strong repeated Prayers, the fervent Cries,
The sad Affrightments, and fierce Agonies,
The torments which his wounded Soul oppressed,
Whilst Clods of purple Gore dropped from his Breast?
The Burden of God's Anger lay,
The Manhood wished the Cup might pass away,
But the Divinity, God's only Son,
Cried thine (O Father) not my Will be done.
See, see, my Soul, thy Eye of Faith cast back,
And a view of thy Savior's Sufferings take,
Behold the Traitor kisses and betrays,
(False Love's more hurtful than true Injuries)
(A kiss more deadly than the Breath which flows
From Basilisks, or Vipers hissing Jaws.)
Perfidious Peter, (he who boasting said
Should all deny, yet i will not be afraid
To own my Lord;) forsook him now, and fled;
The rest (like Sheep when Wolves pursue 'em,) ran,
No wonder since they saw their Keeper ta'n:
Instead of Oil (the Sanctuary Oil Divine)
To make his Head and Face with gladness shine:
The nasty Spittle of the Rascals throng,
Was on his Head and Face profanely flung.
For a Gold Scepter (Emblem of Command)
A Reed contemptuously put in his hand;
No other Crown than made of Spiny thorns,
His bleeding Temples, and gored Locks adorns,
For Angels Hymns, the Priests blasphemous scorns.
The headlong Rabble partial Pilate sway,
Man's Murderer save, Man's Savior slay;
It was but now their sounding Clamours sung
Hosannah's (neighboring Rocks Hosannah's rung)
The Anthem altered too, away, away,
And nothing can be heard but Crucify,
Before the Name of King they to him gave,
But now no King but Caesar they will have:
Before they gathered heaps of blooming May,
And strowed with Boughs and Blossoms all his way:
Now of a branchless Trunck a Cross they Frame,
(A Cross denoting torment Curse and Shame)
Lately they at his Feet had cast their Clothes,
But now they strip him, (his torments to expose;)
His tender Back the Lictors Whips had rent,
His Hands and Feet with piercing Nails were pent;
A barbarous Spear unlockt his precious Side,
Whence the rich Sacramental streams did glide:
The Anguish of his Thirst did so prevail,
He took down draughts of Vinegar and Gall,
And (as if they designed to dis-entrail,
His very Soul) his Enemies revile,
They shake their Heads, and with a Scoffing-nod
Cried come down Savior, come down Son of God:
He bowed his Head (as if he had obeyed
Their Challenge,) all was finished, and he dyed.
Whereat the Heavens were soon bereft of Light;
Lest it should see so Tragical a Sight,
As all the Stars could not well celebrate
His Birth, but God a new one did Create:
So now struck with Affrightments, old and new,
Under the shelter of thick Clouds withdrew,
The thickened Air hung all in horrid Black;
And Jerdan into Inundations brake,
The conscious Earth with sick Convulsions shook,
Rocks cleft in twain (such Griefs unused to brook)
Bodies of Saints roused up, their Graves forsook.
The sad Centurion and the rest allowed
(Smiting their Breasts) the Man was surely good:
O Blessed Virgin, what high Angels Art
Can count thy Tears, or sing thy secret smart?
When every Wound through him, went through thy Heart?
The Graceless Judas long had been pursued
By a fell Blood-hound, yelling after Blood:
His Conscience, which still ran and never staid,
Till the Betrayer justly it betrayed.
Often changed he place, but could not change his Mind,
He flys at once to lose himself, and find;
The Whips of Scorpions, and dire howls he hears,
Whilst Hell with all it is fiery Surge appears,
His wretched Soul seems wrapped in burning Bands,
Reckoning a thousand years, yet not there stands,
But tells to them the Stars, and heaps of Sands:
And now the Stars are told, and Sands are run,
And all those thousand thousand Myriads done,
His Punishment is still but now begun.
With that a fury with her nimble hand
Tossed round his thoughtful Heart, a sulphur'd Brand,
Which from his Breast all Joy and Comfort drove,
And all the hopes of Pardon quite removed;
Such hideous Gorgons pressed him, such dire Forms,
Not able to endure their Threats and Storms,
Fly, fly, he Cries, thy self, what ever thou art,
A monstrous Fiend become in every part,
Having the Price of innocent Blood restored,
He flys for ease unto the fatal Cord.
Thus without hopes of funeral Obsequies,
(His own Revenger) the grand Traitor dies:
Eternal wrath still following close his Feet,
Burnt after him to the infernal Pit.
Now the third Morn had glister'd from her Bower,
And the bright East with Roses seemed to Flower,
The early Sun came briskly dancing out,
Grown insolent with Joy, the Heavens shout;
The wanton Spring forgetful now to weep,
Starts forth as one awakned out of sleep;
The Bushes were with Violets purpled over,
The Woods and Fields cast off their Winter hoar,
And the gay Trees put on their green Attire,
Whilst amongst their infant Leaves, the Birds compere;
Such was the Triumph, such the mighty Cheer,
As if the World anew created were.
Say Earth, why art thou so with verdure spread;
(As if some new found Bridegroom thou would wed?)
Ye Trees, why on a sudden decked and Gay
Like gaudy Nymyhs on Flora's Holyday?
Answer me Jordan, why thy crooked Tide,
Over the Banks does from his Channel slide?
Why art thou driven back, and cut in two;
As when the Hebrews through thy depths did go?
The Egyptians saw, and trembled at the Sight,
(For wondrous was the way, and wondrous was the Flight)
And you sweet Birds that shaded from the Ray,
Sit Carolling and Chirping grief away!
Tell me sweet Birds, what is it you fain would say?
But ah! I need not Ask, it is surely so,
You to our Saviors Triumphs homage owe,
You all await, you all your Duties show,
To celebrate his Worth, and Praises due.
Hark, how the Floods clap their exalted hands,
The Valleys sing, each Field on Tiptoe stands,
The skipping Mountains in Choranto dance,
And their Heads higher than before advance;
Lift up your Heads ye everlasting Gates,
Display your Glories ye Syderial States,
May all your Crystal Doors be open seen;
And let the King of Glory enter in.
It Is done! the Patriarchs leap out with speed,
To see the Powers of Hell in Triumph led,
Soft Olive-leaves they bore to Crown his Head,
Which pricked with Thorns had purpled Rivers shed,
After them flew the Prophets brightly stol'd,
Playing on Harps, (on Harps whose strings were Gold;)
To which ten thousand Saints together sung,
And all the Heavens with Hallelujah's rung,
The Cherubims, and the Seraphick crowd,
Holy, holy, holy Cried aloud,
Down from their Thrones the Dominations flew,
And at his Feet their Crowns and Scepters threw,
Nor can the Martyrs wounds them stay behind;
Leaving their Heaven, their new-come Heaven to find,
Met and attended by this Company,
The Lamb was led into the Courts of Day.
FINIS.

