Musica Incantans: OR, The POWER of MUSIC.

A POEM.

Written Originally in Latin by Dr. SOUTH.

TRANSLATED: With a PREFACE concerning the Natural Effects of MUSIC upon the
Mind.

Semel insanivimus omnes. LONDON, Printed for William Turner, at the Angel at
Lincoln's Inn Back Gate, and are to be Sold by John Nutt, near Stationer's-Hall,
1700.

THE PREFACE.
THO the following POEM was at first Translated for my own Diversion, and has
lain by a great while, without any other Design, yet having consented to the
Publication of it, I thought it might deserve the Ceremony of a short Preface
to Introduce it.

The Original was Writ in Latin many Years ago, and having been always esteemed
an Extraordinary Poem. This Consideration, I presume, may be a sufficient Plea
for any One, whose Fancy might incline him to Translate it.

I must confess, that though the Fiction is very well Contrived, and contains
abundance of Wit, yet being designed in Praise of Music, it may be thought an
Unhappiness, that the very Foundation of the Story seems tacitly to oppose the
Reputation of that Noble Art: For here Music is represented as of dangerous
Consequence, in occasioning the Distraction and Death of a Young Man; whereas
it may be objected that this Art seems rather Adapted and designed, for quite
contrary Effects, viz. not only for Recreating and Refreshing the Spirits, when
depressed and languishing, but also by a Charming Efficacy composing and
restraining them from all Extravagant Excursions, and by this means, according
to the Opinion (if not Experience) of the Ancients, by degrees effecting a
Serious Conformation of the Mind to the right Notion of Things, and
consequently an Aptitude and Inclination to the Practice of Moral Virtues. All
this must certainly be granted, and yet that Music might by chance have as ill
Effect as is described in the following Poem, may be no ^reat Derogation from
the Excellence of the A^t; but only represents to us, that like a Good
Medicine, though it is of great efficacy, yet still it may be injudiciously
applied.

That different Sorts of Music may be contrived so as to have contrary
Effects, our own Experience may convince us; for as the Grave Air does by a
powerful Sympathy depress us to Sadness, so Quicker and more Sprightly Strains,
with a proper Rythmus do equally excite the Spirits to a cheerful and
delightful Temper. And in like manner Ancient Philosophers, particularly the
Platonists and Pythagoreans inform us, that it was in the Power of the Music,
used in their Time, to incline the Mind either to Virtue or Vice. And thus though
They greatly esteemed, and recommended this Art in General, yet still it was
with this Caution, that some sorts of Airs were dangerous to Morality. And thus
also we meet with some Instances recorded by Ancient Authors, that this Art has
been so managed, as both to Cause and Cure Madness.

The Story of Alexander and Timotheus is commonly known. Jamblicus in his Life
of Pythagoras, Chap. XXV. and Boethius, in Presat. Mus. both speak of a Young
Man, who by the Phrygian Kind of Music became Distracted, and afterward by
Doric Measures was reduced again to his Right Senses. And Galen from the
Testimony of Posidonius writes to the same Effect, that Damon of Miletus
happening to come where a Musician by Phrygian Airs had Incensed his Hearers to
Madness, directing the Artist to change his Hand and play a grave Doric Strain,
they were thereby charmed into a Tranquillity and Composedness of Mind.

Saxo Grammaticus, an Ancient Historian, Lib. XII. Historiae Danicae. tells us
of a certain Danish King, who by the Power of Music became Distracted. The
Story may seem more remarkable if we consider the Particulars, as they are
there related, which are to this Effect.

It happened, that among several Musicians that attended the King at Supper,
there was One most Eminent Artist, who, upon a Dispute about the Force of
Music, being asked whether it was in the Power of his Art to Provoke a Man to
Rage and Fury, affirmed it possible, and being afterward questioned, whether
he knew the Way or Method of such a Performance, confessed he did: Whereupon
the King, being curious to Try the Experiment, desired, and at last by Threats
compelled Him to use his utmost Endeavors to perform what he pretended to. The
Musician perceiving no way of Declining the Undertaking, ordered that all Arms
and dangerous Instruments should be removed out of the Room, and that several
Persons, placed out of the Sound of his Music, as soon as they heard any
extraordinary Noise, should break open the Doors, to prevent what Mischief
might happen. And this being accordingly done, he began so Grave a Strain, that
it presently filled the Hearers with Sadness, and lulled their Spirits into a
deep Supefaction: After he had thus played a convenient Time, by a Brisker and
more Sprightly sort of Music; he raised them from their. Dullness to a
cheerful Temper, so that being cured of their Melancholy they were now Dancing
for Joy: At last running over a confused Division with a most Violent
quickness, he made them so Impatient, that they filled the House with Clamours;
such an absolute Power had the Variety of Sounds over the Affections of their
Mind. When those therefore that were without, understood that the King, and
they that were with him, were grown Furious; they broke open the Doors, and
took hold of the King, to secure him from doing himself a Mischief. But He,
being incensed and strengthened with Passion, threw himself out of their Arms,
and having got a Sword, presently Killed Four of his Guards, that were next
him, and by a greater Number of Them, not without their great Danger, was at
last overpowered.

This strange Relation our Historian confirms by this memorable Instance, that
it occasioned a Revolution in the Government. For the King, when reduced to his
Senses, being very Sorry for the Ill he had done; for the Expiation of his
Crime, enjoined Himself a Religious Pilgrimage, designing to visit the
Holy Land: And accordingly having Committed the Administration of the Government
to his Son Haraldus; in his Travels he died, and was Buried in the Island of
Cyprus.

I must leave the Reader to his own Liberty, whether he will believe this to be
matter of Fact, or no; I shall not Vouch for the Historian. Though I might
Expostulate in his behalf, what Interest he could have to mention such an
Untruth, and to confirm it by such Remarkable Circumstances.

But, what is most to our present Purpose, I shall offer some Reasons for
supposing that the Music of the Ancients might possibly be so managed as to
cause Madness.

And first of all, it is not to be imagined how great Command of this Art they
might have arrived to, by long Practice, and those Improvements which so many
Learned Men, for several Ages, must successively have added; especially
considering the vast Scope of the Ancient Music, when compared to the Modern.
It Is probable, that the Art of Composing in Parts, may now be better Understood
and Practiced, than it was in their Time: But it must be supposed that while
they neglected this Part of Music; they might improve their Art to a greater
Influence over the Fancy by a long Study and Practice in the several Kinds of
Music: And this will appear more Probable, if we consider that the Chromatic
and Enharmonic Kinds, (which are not much used by Modern Musicians,) seem to be
adapted to affect the Imagination with greater Force and Efficacy, than the
Diatonic Genus, which is now chiefly practiced.

And Dr. Holder, in his Treatise concerning the Natural Grounds and Principles
of Harmony, confirms the same Opinion in these Words.

This way of theirs, seems to be more proper (by the Elaborate Curiosity, and
Nicety of Contrivance of Degrees, and by Measures, rather than by Harmonious
Consonancy; and by long studied Performance) to make great Impressions upon the
Fancy, and Operate accordingly, as some Histories relate: Ours more sedately
affects the Understanding and Judgment from the Judicious contrivance and happy
Composition of Melodius Consort. The One quietly but powerfully affects the
Intellect, by true Harmony: The Other chiefly by the Rythmus, violently attacks
and hurries the Imagination.

Having thus considered the Art of Music in General; if we inquire into the
Nature and Properties of Sounds, we may with greater Certainty guess their
Effects.

That they Cure the Sting of the Tarantula, is a Truth so generally received,
and confirmed, by several Persons, that have been Eyewitnesses of it in some
parts of Italy, That it may be no unworthy Employment of our Thoughts, to
enquire into the manner of this their Operation, And in the first place we may
reasonably suppose, that this Malady does partly proceed from a great
Effervescence of the Animal Spirits of the Insect, actuated by a Violent
Intention, as it is in Mad Dogs, and Communicated by the Sting to the Patient.
Secondly, by the Effects we may perceive, that the Poison received chiefly
affects the Spirits, the Symptom discovered being only a Frenzy. And lastly,
considering the Quantity of the Poisonous Matter compared to that of the whole
Mass of Blood, we may conclude that It is neither proportioned nor qualified to
Disorder, any thing but the Animal Spirits, and that this Disorder, as in all
other Fermentations, chiefly consists in a too Violent and Preternatural
Motion. Now if Music Cures this Distemper by Actuating the Spirits so as to
oppose the Incursion of the Poison, It may be, as it is in Women, in a longing
Condition, when the Imagination directs the Animal Spirits to collect and
compose out of the Blood of the Parent such Particles as come nearest to the
Thing longed for, in outward appearance; the Imagination always acting
according to the Sense that informs it; these Particles being thus mustered up
to supply the Foetus with what Nature seems to Want; they are fixed by the
Spirits and Mark the same Part of the Child's Body, as the Mother chances first
to think of, or touch of her own, this Accident determining and directing the
Operation of the Spirits, by the resemblance of the Parts to the Imagination.
And thus possibly Musical Sounds may strengthen and empower the Imagination to
employ the Spirits so as to gather out of the Blood such Principles as may
resist and oppose the Contagion.

But since we supposed that the Sting of the Tarantula only causes an
extraordinary commotion of the Animal Spirits, it seems most probable that
Music by such an Influence as that whereby it inclines us to Sadness, may be
adapted to allay or restrain that unnatural Effervescence, till Nature has
dispersed or wrought off the Fermentative Matter; and thus it seems most
reasonable to believe, that the Cure of the Bite of the Tarantula is effected.

Now from this Consideration of Musical Sounds, we may infer, that they may be
also capable of producing contrary Effects: For if They can thus allay and
moderate the Motion of the Spirits when in a high Frenzy, it is equally probable
that by contrary measures they may excite Them to as great a Distraction. Nay,
the Music of the Ancients, as we have before represented it, seems more
adapted to Cause than to Cure Madness, not only upon the Account of its
Variety, but even from our own Observation that the sprightly Air more
powerfully elevates the Spirits, than the Grave Composition depresses and
restrains Their Motion.

And it may appear an unreasonable Suspicion to distrust the Concurring
Testimony of Ancient Authors concerning the Wonderful Operation of Music upon
the Mind, if we reflect upon the Exquisiteness of the Sense, which it affects.
For the Objects of the Visive Faculty are so Imaginary and Intellectual, that
they produce in us rather a Perception than a Sensation; and on the other Hand,
the Inferior Senses are Gross and Material; whereas Harmonious Sounds Act with
greater and Nobler Force upon the Ear; for Insinuating themselves into the
Affections, by cooperating with the Motions of the Animal Spirits, they gain a
great Influence both over Soul and Body.

Thus we have taken a short and Transient View of the Natural Effects of Music
upon the Mind, as far as might be pertinent to our present Purpose, as well for
the Curiosity of the Subject, as to advance the following Poem, by making the
Fiction appear more Probable.

ERRATA.
PRef. p. 3. l. 23. read Stupefaction. Po. p. 2. l. 12. r. Loves. l. 19. r.
Night the Day. p. 7. l. 9. r. his Eyes.

Musica Incantans: OR, The POWER of MUSIC.
The ARGUMENT.
A Young Man having, at his own Request, heard a Performance in MUSIC, growing
thereby Distracted, drowns himself in the Sea: The Musician thereupon
Apprehended, and Accused of Homicide, undertakes to Plead, Defends himself, and
is Acquitted.

NO Royal Fight, No Hero's conquering Arms,
But nobler Vict'ries by Harmonious Charms
We Sing: Th(...)od, that animates the Lyre
Will our bold Song, in its just Praise, inspire.
But what nice Hand can Sounds pretend to paint,
And to our Eyes soft Ecchos represent.
On some great Themes did Ancient Poets wish
An Hundred Voices to inform; on This
As many Ears and Tongues we want, to express
A Song, like Music, justly various.
A Lyrist in Arcadia lived, so skilled,
His Fame and Music all the Country filled;
Him some great Neighbors Nuptial Feast invites,
With other Youth, to celebrate the Rites,
The mirthful Entertainments to partake,
And the Reward of Those his Art could make:
Such was their Custom: Thus the Nuptial Ioys
The Muse, tho still a Virgin, love to Solemnize:
And should she not assist* the Festival
Of Love and Wine would soon grow Dull and pall.
And who but Lyrists should those Rites attend.
Whose Art over Birds and Beasts has such Command,
That they the Treat not only can advance,
But the whole Feast supply by their Attractive Strains.
The Nuptials done, when Night (...) Day invades,
Returning homeward ore the Verdant Meads;
(Like Orpheus Walking in the Elysian Shades,)
He sees a Youth, who in a Neighboring Field,
Looked, as the Evening was, sedate and mild:
Walking toward him, ignorant of his Fate:
(Thus who does not Misfortunes sometimes meet)
Much pleased to See him, whose Harmonious Art
Could to his Ears such soft Delights impart:
Unconscious, that this Orpheus with his Lyre,
Could Life destroy, as well as Life Inspire.
They meet; and after Salutation past,
The Youth his love of Music strait expressed,
To hear its Charms employs his Eloquence;
And from the Lyrist for Rewards obtains
His future Damage in the Fatal Strains.
The Artist takes his Lyre, and strait begins
With broken Strokes, to Tune the trembling Strings,
Thus All he does with their just Sound supply
He tries, and knows when sweetly they agree,
Though different each, in universal Harmony.
Then with a careless Touch, his Fingers fly
Over the just Order of some tuneful Key,
And unawares he joins his Chanting Voice,
And thus unthinkingly his Art betrays.
Thus he at once explores his Lyre, and shows
That from most skilful Hands the Harmonious Prelude flows*
And while the Strings, and his own Nerves he strains,
Both for the future Song become intense.
By Artful Methods thus his Art he trys;
Then boldly strikes, and equally his Voice
Does, like the mounting Lark, with Singing rise.
No sooner thus the Strings began to move,
But the Youth's trembling Heart within him strove,
With tunelike Pulses to compose a Dance,
As if its Fibers felt the affecting Strains.
Such Power has MUSIC, that with slender Threads*
It thus the noblest Minds, as Captive* leads.
Over the Charmed Youth the Lyrist thus begins
At once his Conquest, and the Triumph Sings.
The speaking Strings confess the powerful Hand
That, making those soft Melodies ascend,
Did even the Tongue it self in Vocal Skill transcend.
Such Harmonies the Youth not only heard,
But they are to each altered Limb transferred:
He Blushes, then turns pale again, and thus
His Color, as the Sound, grows various:
His Feet would in Harmonious Measures move,
But that they more the attentive Station love:
His sparkling Blood within his glowing Vei^s
Strives to ferment into a Circ'lar Dance:
And though the Limbs cannot the Music hear,
Their Parts of Passion all in Consort bear:
Such universal Transports he received,
As if new Life he from that Harmony derived.
Thus, wondering at the strange and powerful Skill*
With trembling, like the Strings, he seems to feel
Each Stroke the Artist plays; and every Sound,
As by some Magic, seems to inflict a Wound:
And yet so pleasant all appear, that still
His soothed though suffering Mind, at once they wound and heal.
The Song was various, which, if told, might please:
In gentle Warblings first the Strings express
The sad Affecting Fate of Philomel,
More mournful than her Needle could reveal.
Then of the Gods the Rapes he sung, and Jove's
Innumerable and lascivious Loves:
But still unmoved, the Youth's Harmonious Breast
No Love, but that of the soft Lyre, possessed:
He feels its charming Violence within,
And thinks no other Rape can be Divine:
With the Artist's Hand, his Heart in Consort Beats,
And with a timely Pulse each Stroke repeats.
And thus the Eyrist does his Passion raise,
And through his Listening Ears his Soul decoys:
But when the Effects, his Art produced, he spied,
He raised his Voice, and bolder strains essayed,
Uniting Nature's Powers with those his Art supplied.
Over various Notes the Lyre and Lyrist run,
While in soft Groans the Youth strikes only One:
And when such Harmonies in Consort join,
To bear the powerful Sounds he strives invain:
While Vocal Skill conspires with Artful strains,
A quick Distraction over his Senses gains:
And with such Force the Artist raised his Breath,
That with soft Air it Wounds, and Speaks resistless Death:
As if within his Mouth there did ferment
Contagious Fury, such as Dogs in Madness vent,
And with such Artful Rage the Notes invade,
The Attentive Youth grows Emulously Mad;
While to his Brain his vanquished Sense transfers
Sounds that too much oppress his ravished Ears:
And such strong Charms attend the Powerful Lays,
As moved the Brain out of its proper place.
Now Madness in odd Freaks begins to play;
His Blushes, swimming Eyes, and Looks betray
Confusion in his Mind: his Senses quit,
In a disordered Flight, their tottering seat.
Sometimes he shakes his Head, as if his Brain
The Ideas of those lasting Sounds within
Labored to Echo out -- sometimes Eyes
To Heaven he lifts, and, in wild Blasphemies,
Those lofty Regions rashly he forswears,
Where MUSIC reigns in vast revolving Spheres.
Thus he in Passion -- starting then in haste
With furious Rage toward the Sea he past,
While all its Labors strive within his Breast:
Like Stormy Waves, his Thoughts tumultuous rise,
His Face with Foam grows White as raging Seas:
To the vast Main at length approaching near,
Which happened then in Ebbing to retire,
Thus, in its usual Course did Trembling seem,
As Careful to decline the future Crime.
Here stopping, in his looks his Madness lowrs,
(As Ajax frowned on the Sigean Shoars)
And since the Sounds invain he would forget,
Invain to Lethe's dormant Pool commit,
He in the spacious Main resolves to try
The pertinacious Notes to wash away,
And hopes eternal Peace amongst the Silent Fry.
He views the Waves, and to the troubled Seas
Compares his Mind -- Now for strange Voyages
He Would fain Embark, and give the Wind his Cares,
Nor any Danger of the Deep he fears,
Secure from Harmony -- Now his Disease
Ferments so high, he knows not where he is:
In Frenzy's Whirlpool hurried round he seems,
And his Head swims at sight of distant Streams --
Now Death he fears -- now wishes for; and thus
Like Waves, his doubtful Mind still ebbs and flows --
At length he on a sudden leaps away,
And plunged himself in the less raving Sea:
And thus the Waves now swell with double Rage,
While adverse Floods the striving Youth engage;
Who, though he tempted his untimely Death,
Now struggles to preserve his fleeting Breath:
But he invain resists the o'rewhelming Seas,
Then Farewell, Fatal, Charming Lyre, he cries:
Sinking the bubbling Waves his Ears drink in,
And in this Death his Eye Balls truly swim.
As famed Nancissus did from Echo fly,
And in the flattering Flood distracted Die,
This Youth more charmed an equal Fortnne had,
Striving those Softer Echoes to evade;
Like His, the Fate that did this Youth engage,
Equally strange was his destructive Rage:
And while he gazed on the Tempestuous Flood,
Narcissus never his juster Image viewed.
And thus he fell, whose Birth the Birds of Fate
With inauspicious Songs did celebrate.
Severely sweet the Muses tuned the Lyre,
And thus the Nine did all against One Youth conspire.
The Lyrist thus displayed his Siren Art,
Not only that he did such Sounds impart,
But that, by force of powerful Harmony,
He to the fatal Waves did the fond Youth decoy.
And thus the Artist did such Skill express
As equaled great Amphion's charming Lays,
And as He soothed wild Beasts, did fiercer Passions raise.
Ah Grief! to think that such sweet Strains as these
Should Mortal prove, and the Three Destinies
Should String with Fatal Threads the warbling Lyre!
But if such gentle Notes can Death inspire,
How Dreadful then is every Tuneful Sound,
That can with Softness pierce, and Trembling wound.
Then let Apollo quit his Shafts and Bow,
The String alone can all their force out do.
The Trumpet seems, while MUSIC thus Destroys,
It self to Conquer: And no wonder it is,
The Lion trembles at the Cock's shrill Voice.
O Cruel Breath! to Speak the Mortal Blow
Was more than Barbarous Nero e're could do:
He in such Tuneful Strains his Tyrannies
Might Celebrate: But this Destructive Voice
Even in the Fatal Act it self employs.
If e're Empedocles had heard those Strains,
He never had perished in the Etnean Flames;
But might reverse his Fate, escape the Fire,
And in the Watery Element expire.
Or had this Lyrist been a Rural Swain,
Thus over the Listening Herd his Notes would gain,
And they would be forced into the Waves to stray
By tuneful Charms, And Phrixus might survey
Whole Flocks of Sheep all swimming in the Sea.
If when the World was from the Flood retrieved,
This Lyrist had the Common Fate survived,
And for Deucalion had this Song prepared,
To sooth his Cares, when He those Sounds had heard*
He too would hasten to the Ebbing Sea,
And even in the expiring Deluge Dye.
Apollo thus, without Celestial Fire,
Bold Icarus, that did too high expire,
Might sooner plunge by his more powerful Lyre.
If Sounds can Kill, and Notes the Sword supply,
Achilles, when he ceased to war with Troy,
Consulting the sweet Force of Lyrick Charms*
Did only change, not truly quit his Arms.
But now Loquacious Fame the News had spread
Of the strange Fatal Notes, the Lyrist played,
As Echo would those Notes reiterate,
She did the aggravated Crimes repeat
Both of the Lyrist, and his Murderous Strains;
And to the Magistrate at length complains.
And now a Council does himself apply,
With Bawling, to condemn the Charms of Harmony:
And first he does for the great Cause prepare,
Then turns himself to the Tremendous Bar,
And thus against the Lyrist does Declare.
The Council against the Lyrist.
My Lord, I move, that a few things You Would hear,
Before the Criminal's Voice enchants your Ear,
Who here stands Charged with a strange Murdering Skill
In Music: It Is no more with him to Kill,
Than play a Tune; and thus on Land have we
A Syren-Monster greater than the Sea.
Music is sweet -- but Murder louder cries,
Nor with the Sounds their Crime can quickly cease.
And he himself by his own Words betrays,
While this Harmonious Art he durst profess,
For which we see Amphion justly feared,
And Orpheus was compelled with Brutes to herd.
If Birds were thus Harmonious, soon would they
Even to each other's Song become a Prey.
Now this Infernal Orpheus, with his Lyre,
Charmed an unhappy Youth even to admire
The Sea, as That some Venus did contain,
And now even sweet he thinks the Briny Main.
What should he do, whose Sense was thus engaged?
Even Daedalus, with such soft Notes enraged,
Had plunged, unless with Wax he would stopped his Ears:
But here with Land the Criminal Sea conspires,
And while the guilty Waves are stained with Blood,
They spread their Crime over all the weeping Flood:
Invain they strive to Sink the Fatal Deed,
Which in their Blushing Face too plain we read:
The Watery God begins to rage and Foam,
That no just Punishments the Crime atone,
Murmuring to see Vindictive Justice slow --
But if sweet sounds can Drown, I wonder how
Arion over the Sea so safely past:
And when the Lyrist plunged the Youth, at least
His Art might there for him a Dolphin Draw,
But now he no Defense can make, the Law
Proclaims him Guilty; Statutes all agree,
And that of Justice is the Legal Harmony.
He said. And all the Court, with silent Fear,
Did of the Criminal's Answer strait despair.
But 'twould be strange should MUSIC silent be
In its own Cause, should Echo never reply.
The Crier having Proclamation made,
The unharmonious Voice the Lyrist strait obeyed,
With fault'ring speech and trembling he begins;
And yet even Musical that Trembling seems,
For artfully he shook, as when he sung,
His charming Lyre over his Left Shoulder hung,
While for his Life he Speaks a good Defense,
Which he had almost lost by Vocal Strains.
As Learned Gracchus, when he was to plead,
Instructed by his Harp the Lyrist made
A Various Speech: The silent Court attends,
While thus he Answers, and himself Defends.
The Lyrist in his own Defense.
My Tuneful Voice, charged with another's Fate,
I beg, my self from Death may vindicate.
Invain I would the Fatal Strains recant,
Or if with Tears I should the Youth lament,
I should but add vain Waters to the Main:
The Fact I may defend, but would recall in vain.
With Songs the Dying Youth to celebrate,
Was to Bewail, but could not Cause his Fate.
And having seen the God of Harmony.
Each Evening safely plunge the willing Sea,
Where thus each Night the Lord of Song remained,
I thought, that this Harmonious Youth might find
Himself with equal Favor entertained.
Suppose he flung himself into the Seas,
Charmed by my Strains, there is no Great Crime in this:
Who e're for Hellebore to cure his Brain,
Could without ventring thus explore the Main:
Besides, since I Have often heard the Learned say,
Our Souls are all made up of Harmony,
If this Youth Died by the too charming Lyre,
'Twas with Excess of Life he did expire.
But how could the soft Notes of Music Kill?
Since Death with empty Sounds alone could never prevail.
The Criminal Seas their self-attoning Fault
With Lustral Water soon may expiate,
And thus the Waves, that caused, will purge from Guilt the Fate.
And let those Cruel overwhelming Seas
Now also drown my Crime in endless Peace.
But if I Dye, who shall my Death atone?
If my Charmed Trees should fatal Spears become,
Invain they would strive thus to revenge my Fate,
As Vengeance often o'ertakes the Crime too late.
Or shall the Stones, once softened by my Lyre,
Rudely involve me in a Sepulcher.
If MUSIC be the Crime for which I dye,
How well the Tuneful Swan resembles me,
Since thus I sung my own prophetic Elegy.
The Crime, that is charged, does still unprov'd remain:
For the Youth's Drowning must I plunge the Main?
Was I the Cause, that while I sung, he drowned?
If at that time a Star fell to the Ground,
Would You then think my Strains the Stars from Heaven drew down.
It Is Madness, thus to charge me with his Rage,
Or think the Muse could with blind Fate engage
Against the Youth, or that by Art he died;
No guiltless Blood my Voice did ever shed:
Lords of the Law! it is your Sententious Breath,
That can with Words alone speak certain Death.
Thus he -- Then justly grant a Wretch, he cried,
Your Pardon. Pardon Echo strait replied.
He said. The Judge to Favor much inclines,
And this the Criminal's Punishment enjoins,
That since in Skill thus Orpheus he exceeds,
He shall descend to the Elysian Shades,
And thence compel, by a like Artful Strain,
The Youth, he thither sent, back to return again.
If Any ask, what could my Thoughts engage
In this Mad Theme; 'Twas some Poetic Rage.
Forbidding me the Heliconian Spring,
That led me thus in Seas to Bath and Sing.
Poets an Artful Fury must inspire,
And thy True Sons, great Patron of the Lyre,
May pass like Orpheus to the Elysian Shades:
Thy glorious Flight the lofty Skies invades.
But I, without the Harmonious Quil and Voice
Of the Dircean Swan, cannot sing thy Praise;
And those, though famed, can only cantivate
The inferior Wood, but Laurels on Thee wait:
And justly thou do thy own Fate Survive,
Like Memnon's Vocal Status, still to give
Thy self that Praise thou only can make live.
And have inscribed, since thus thy Art was tried,
Soft MUSICK's lasting Praise even in the fluid Tide.
But while for thy just Praise, I thus prepare,
In the vast Main, I dread to venture far,
So large an Ocean does my thoughts engage,
I must strike Sail, and check my forward Rage*
FINIS.

