The Comical History OF FRANCION, WHEREIN The variety of Vices that abuse the
Ages are Satyrically limn'd in their Native Colors. Interwoven with many
pleasant Events, and Moral Lessons, as well fitted for the entertainment of the
Gravest Head, as the Lightest Heart.

By Monsieur De Moulines, Sieur DE PARC, a LORAIN Gentleman.

Horat. Sermon. Lib. 2. Omne vafer vitium ridenti tangit amico.
Done into English by a Person of Honor.

LONDON, Printed for Francis Leach, and are to be sold by Richard Lowndes at
the White Lion, near the little North door of Paul's, 1655.

TO FRANCION,
Dear Francion,
TO whom more fitly could I dedicate your History, than to your self? It would
be an Injury unto you, to present it to any other; for, if it be requisite that
it must be referred to one of Judgment, who is there that can be found more
able to do it than your self, who know all the rules that ought to be observed
in well Writing? I shall acknowledge my self more glorious to receive ^ur
approbation, than if I had the praises of all the People. I am afraid
nevertheless, if you are pleased to be a severe Judge, that I shall not be
altogeth^ exempted from Blame. I make no doubt, but, if you had been pleased as
well t^ take the pains to commit your own Adventures unto writing, as you were
so^etimes contented by your own voice to represent them to me, you would every
^y have far surpassed that which I have done; but I desire not to enter into
c^mparisons with you. It shall suffice me, if you will take notice, that in
this P^ce I have labored with as much Zeal and Care as was possible for me. If
I h^ve assumed the boldness to touch upon those things, which, peradventure,
may s^m not to pertain unto you, it is, because that you your self have given
me that ^erty, and because I was unwilling to let pass this occasion to
testify my love unto you, fearing that it would be made use of by some other.
It is true, that ^or a long time you have resisted my Design, being not
thoroughly adv^ed whether the actions of your Youth were to be published; but I
consider^d with it, that although sometimes you did suffer your self to be lead
asid^ unto egresse and pleasures, yet nevertheless you oftentimes have made an
h^nourable Halt, and being always accompanied with the excellent Prin^iples of
Virtue, you have performed many things, which have served to punish, and to
correct the Vices of others. Moreover, you have alw^es observed such a generous
Disposition, that it does dispell all the Bla^e and Censures that can befall
you; and it is well known, that your M^ners, and Conversation of Life, is now
so full of Gravity and M^esty, that you are to be the more commended for having
dis-intangled ^our self from so many Temptations and Charms, which on every
sid^ did surround you, and that you have now chosen the better way. This being
most certain, it did seem to me that your Reputation could not suffer, if I
should make a History of your passed Adventures, seeing I have disguised them
in such a manner, adding something ^o them of my own, and changing your Name
also, that he must be the Master of a most discerning eye, that can discover
who you are. L^ is suffice the People, to delight themselves with the reading
of so many ^greeable Subjects, and to derive unto themselves that profit from
them, ^as to learn in what manner they ought to live at this day in the World,
without being too curious to search any further. For my self, when you s^all
take the pains to read it, and perceive what are the Rocks you have avoided, I
shall be sufficiently satisfied, if this which I have done shall please none
but your self only; It shall be unto me Glory enough to understand that you do
esteem me to be

Your most affectionate Servant, DU PARC.

The Advice unto his Readers.
THis here is the work of Sieur du Parc, who has made himself famous enough by
the Adventures of Floris and Cleontia, and of those of Phinemenes and Chrysaura
in his Book of the Disagreeable Adventures of Love. It is true, that those
Histories have a Style very Poetical and Figurative, but such as was agreeable
to the Subject he undertook, and to the Mode of that Time, in which it was not
fashionable to speak of the Delights of Love in ordinary words. We may well
affirm, that he did deserve much praise in that manner of Writing, and that, by
his applications on every side, he plainly made it to appear, that he perfectly
understood both History and Mythology; and moreover, that he was thoroughly
instructed in the deepest Secrets of Philosophy. But, being of a flexible
Spirit, he did vary his Style according to the Arguments which he undertook,
and we have other Pieces of his, where he is enforced to make use of fewer
words, and of more matter. Amongst all the Works which he has composed, there
is none that equalleth this Comical History of Francion, which (being weary of
wriring Tragical Histories) he composed last of all, as he himself declares in
the beginning of this Book. We may observe, that it does much differ from his
other works, for he knew well enough, that in this Book he ought to write
familiarly, with out using the least affectation; and since he abandoned a sad
Subject, to employ himself upon a pleasant one, it must necessarily fall out,
that in this Book we must observe a great deal of difference from the others.
They who shall peruse this Book, and are inclined to it, will affirm, that his
other works are no ways to be compared to this, and that the Author here has
far otherwise, yet most happily, expressed himself: And this, indeed, does
wonderfully amuse the Readers; but they are to observe, that we never write
better, than when we follow the Inclinations of Nature, and our own Genius.
This Sieur du Parc was of a pleasant, and jovial Conversation, and he took more
delight to write of serious things in a flowing Language, than to constrain
himself to write according to the Fashion of the Times; as sometimes he has
done, to please some Ladies. We may truly affirm, that at the last he has
found his Talent. So long we do seek, that we do find at length what is proper
for us. His Diversities of Love were Printed in the Year One thousand six
hundred and fourteen; since which time he has made two or three Books, amongst
which there is one, Of Faithful Affections, where, by little and little, his
Style did begin to change; for, to speak the truth, there were diverse persons
who were weary of the ancient manner of writing, and did desire some Novelties.
At the last, he entertained his thoughts with no other Subject, but peculiarly
did addict himself unto Francion only; Nevertheless, it is probable, that he
was a long time preparing himself to the undertaking of this History; for in
his Book of Floris and Cleontia, and in other places, you shall find that even
there he makes mention of Francion: When he had wrote the Adventures of this
Cavallier, he did give unto them the Title of The Comical History, and this was
to the great displeasure of Du Souhait of Champaign, and as it were to
out-brave him; for he before had given the same Title to a Legend of Accounts
which he had compiled; There was a Contention betwixt these two Spirits, who
were both of the same time, but our Author has far surpassed him, as may
plainly appear by the good entertainment which is given to his work, when that
of Souhait has dwelled in obscurity, being never printed but once.
Nevertheless, there are many People, who, by reason of that Comical History
which Du Souhait did make, will not be persuaded, but that he composed this
also; But we ought not to fasten our belief to that opinion.

This Historical History of Francion was Printed the first time in the Year One
thousand six hundred and twenty two, but it contained then but Seven Books.
Some other of the following Books being come into the hands of the
Booksellers, after the Death of du Parc, they caused them suddenly to be
Printed, because that those which were already Extant were extraordinarily
received; but because there were a few breaches in that Original, it is said
there were some persons did love that work so well, as to take the pains to
repair those breaches, and to insert therein some Accounts of their own
Invention, as they thought most agreeable to the Nature of the Subject. And
because they made mention of some things that were but lately done, many
persons were abused in it, and conceived the whole Book to be altogether new,
and would not believe that Du Parc was any ways the Author of it. Moreover, as
the Language is every day more polished than other, it may be that the Original
Copy of the Author had not all those elegancies which are since arrived, and
that some amendment has been given to that, and those fashions of Speech have
been reformed, which were no longer in use; insomuch, that as a small thing in
such occasions is of great importance, this has served to deceive the world,
by attributing this Book unto those persons who have not contributed much unto
it. But so it is, that since that time it has the happiness to be by every one
desired, and it has been oftentimes Printed according to the second Addition,
without any change, and the History containing but Eleven Books, it is to be
believed that the Author had made Twelve, and every one demanded the Twelfth
Book, but no Man could produce it. This is that for which I would convince
those, who would attribute this History unto others; for what did hinder them
at they did not put an end unto it? We must expect that from the right Author,
and search out for that which the living did perform. At last there is one
arrived who was with Sieur du Parc at the hour of his Death, he is newly
returned from a long Voyage, and has acquainted a Friend of his, that he had
about him diverse Manuscripts, which ought to be examined, and set in order for
the Press.

There has been found amongst them, a Copy of the greatest part of the Comical
History of Francion, which, in some places was more large than that which we
have, and had an other beginning, and another ending; and, above all, the
Twelfth Book, so much desired. We have so far prevailed, that we have caused it
to be Printed as you now see it, and we have reformed that which ought to be
reformed; as for example, The Epistle to the Grandies, and the Narrative of the
Preface to the Book, which were of the body of the History, are inserted in
their due places, when all that before was put in the beginning of the Book,
for want of something else; Nay, and it is most perspicuous that it must be so,
for there is found another Dedicatory Epistle, which does address it self to
Francion, which ought to be in the beginning of the History, as it is now
placed. We do observe, that in the Eleventh Book Francion does affirm, that
he has made a Book, which he calls His Youthful Errors, which he says has
been published, and yet we cannot find that such a Book was ever printed; It is
only therefore but a Fiction, and Du Parc therein has taken pleasure to make
Francion so to speak, to amuse the Readers. It cannot be found that in any such
Book Du Parc did learn any of the Adventures of this Cavallier, for in his
Epistle he confesses, that Francion with his own Mouth did relate them to him.
Nevertheless, it is worth your observation, to discover if there be not yet
another Fiction, or if this Francion were indeed a Gentleman who was a Friend
to Du Parc, and had imparted some of his Memorials to him, he having undertaken
to compile a History of his Life; but we will let that pass, as being of no
great Importance to our present occasion. It may suffice, that we do
acknowledge the excellence of the Book. As for the mo^n Subjects which are here
inserted, because they are so handsomely inchased in the History, and they are
so well known that they are never to be forgotten, we have left them where we
found the^. They are all ranked in such order, that we may affirm, we have now
the true History of Francion, being corrected according to the Manuscript of
the Author. As for those passages which have relation unto Strangers, we will
not dispute whether they are better or worse than the Principal of the Book,
for all beauties do differ in their particulars; but we ought to consider, that
it is so little, in comparison of that which du Parc has wrote, and if it
should be left out, it would not blemish the History. Those Discourses may
continue where they are, to satisfy the Curious, who will lose nothing of that
which they have once seen. Moreover, it is a received Maxim, that Books of
pleasure are permitted to change, more freely than any other. It is most
certain howsoever, that if any thing be added to this History, it must be
according to the Level and Designs of the first Author, whom, of necessity the
others are obliged to follow, so that in whatsoever can be done, the honor of
it is due unto him. We ought on the other side to consider, that many persons
are to be found, who assure us, that it belongs all to one and the same Author,
and that those Passages which are suspected to be another, and not du Parcs,
were not of so late a date, but that du Parc might well arrive to the knowledge
of them, and might insert them in the last Books of his History; and it were
unjust, for two or three discourses, to suspect all the rest. We ought to
continue in that opinion, and not to believe that any other than du Parc was
the Author of the entire Comical History of Francion; for why shall we impu e
it to another, since there is no Man found to challenge it himself? He has
left us this delightful History, in such a Condition, that it can procure an
estimation to its self, without being beholding unto any, and the
embellishments that can be brought unto it, are not able to bereave it of the
just Honor it deserves. It must not be, that the Living may think to
attribute unto themselves the Glory of the Dead. We have many things yet to
allege in the Commendation of this Work; but to what purpose is it, when,
behold, you have it present before you, and you have no more to do, but by
perusing it, to consider of your selves how much it ought to be esteemed?

THE COMIQUE HISTORY OF FRANCION.
EAch Age produces Tragique Histories enough, which only serve to trouble and
discompose the harmony of Men's Souls; This is all Comique; and full of such
facetious Conceits, as may unknit the Brow of the severest Stoique; Yet you
shall find some things in it not unprofitable: All the Cheats and Gulleries
therein related are to instruct you how to avoid the like, and the Misfortunes,
befallen some ill-Livers, may teach you to abandon Vice. Mature Judgments will
receive no small Advantage here; for, among the Drolleries they will meet with
diverse serious things; and some Remonstrances, which (though short) may in apt
and well-disposed Souls make a profound impression. It Is grand Discretion to
be warned by others harms; And to be taught by one, whose Method's easy and
familiar, and his lessions rather Sport than Pain, is doubtless more
conducing to the Learner's benefit, than the obscure Dictates of a stern and
unpleasant Master. The Ancient Authors are observed in their Comedies to
instruct the People by giving them recreation; This Work revives their Practice
with some addition: For, what they only saw represented on the Theater, is
here exposed in writing to your view; and since it was composed chiefly to be
read, each Accident and Circumstance is particularly related; So, instead of a
mere Comedy, you shall see a Comique History.

ALready had the Night worn out near half her Sables, when an old man (named
Valentine) came out of a Castle in Burgundy, with a long Gown on his Back, a
red Cap on his Head, and a great Bundle under his Arm. If, contrary to his
custom, he had not then his Spectacles (which always used to bestride his
Nose or Girdle) it was, because in the exercise he went about, he desired as
much to see no body, as he was loath to be seen himself; Had the Moon afforded
any light, the shadow of his own Body would have been enough to distract his
Mind: So seeking nothing but Solitude, he commanded the servants, he left
within the Castle, to draw up their Bridge; wherein he was immediately obeyed,
as representing there the person of the Nobleman to whom it belonged. Having
discharged his arm of the burden, he began to walk about as gingerly as if he
had been condemned to tread upon eggs and not break them: And imagining all the
world (to the very frogs and toads) were at their rest, he crawled down gently
into the ditch, to execute in private some part of his injunctions. There he
caused to be placed, the night before, a Tub of a sufficient bigness for a man
to bathe in; Which as soon as he came near, he stripped off all his clothes
except his Doublet, and having trussed his Shirt round about him, he dipped
himself in the water above the Navell, then presently stepped out again, and
having struck fire with a Tinderbox he carried with him, he lighted a little
Wax-candle, with which he marched three or four times about the Tub, then
flung it into the water and quenched the flame. After that, he cast in a
quantity of a strange sort of powder he had brought, wrapped close up in a paper,
having in his mouth a multitude of odd barbarous words, which he pronounced
not clearly, but mumbled betwixt his teeth, like an old angry Ape, being
already almost starved with cold, though Summer alrady had begun to strew her
flowers.

This ceremony being ended, he began to bathe himself, and was very careful
that no part of his body should remain unwasht: This done, he dried and
clothed himself again, mean time his words and gestures discovered nothing but
tokens of contentment and joy. Then creeping up to the top of the bank, Now
(said he) I have gone through the hardest of my task, Heavens grant I may with
as much ease perform the Rights of Wedlock, I have but two or three
Conjurations yet to make to all the powers of the world, and then I shall have
perfectly accomplished all was ordered me: That done, I shall try if I can taste
those sweets, which most men else enjoy; Ha Lauretta (continued he, casting
some amorous glances toward the Castle) Thou shall have no cause hereafter to
reproach me of being fit for nothing but to sleep and snore by thy warm side;
My body shall lie no longer like a senseless block in bed with thee;
Henceforwards it will be so vigorous and youthful, that I shall weary thee, and
thou will be enforced to say, (pushing me gently back with thy soft hands) Oh
my Dear, Oh my Sweetheart, it is enough for this time. How joyful should I be
to hear such melting language from thy lips, instead of those harsh terms thou
do commonly use.

While he was thus discoursing to himself, his steps conducted him into a great
enclosure full of all sorts of trees, where he opened the bundle he had brought
from home. In it there was a long black Cassack which he put over his gown,
and a great riding hood with a Mask of the same piece, which muffled his head
and face all over. In this Antic dress, as if he had been to act a
jack-Pudding's part upon a stage, he began to practice the remaining part of
his Magic Ceremonies, believing that the only means to make him master of
his desires. First he drew a Circle upon the ground, then reduced it to a
triangular figure with a staff tipped with iron; but being ready to step into
the middle, a sudden shivering seized upon all his limbs, Fear suggesting to
his troubled thoughts that the Devils would presently leave their infernal
Mansions and appear to him. He would have signed himself with a Cross, had
not he, who instructed him in the practice of these superstitions, expressly
forbidden him to use it on this occasion, and instead thereof had taught him
certain words to protect him from any assaults, the evil spirits should dare
to make upon his person.

The passion that inflamed his desire to complete his enterprise, arming his
resolution against all sorts of consideration, constrained him at length to
prostrate himself upon his bare knees in the midst of the Circle with his face
toward the East, and pronounce these words: Oh you spirits that rule
Concupiscence, fill our hearts with Carnal desires at your will, and give us
ability to perform them, (this he spoke with an indifferent loud voice) By the
supreme power, on which you are dependant, I conjure you to assist me in all
incounters, support, my infirmities, strengthen my weakness, and especially I
beseech you render me as potent and valorous a Cambatant in Venus wars, as he
that scarce has reached the seventh Luster of his age: This is all I crave, and
if you will vouchsafe to grant it, I Will carve you out so large a recompense,
that you shall rest satisfied with my gratitude. This said, he addressed
several vows to Asmodeus, then remained a good while silent in expectation of
the event. At length a strange confused noise posted to his ear from a place
not far distant, and lending better attention he heard a fearful howling, and
a sound like that of stints when struck against each other, soon after a
horrible dinne and rustling, as if somebody had hasted toward him through the
Branches of the Trees. With this, fear took possession of his heart, and you
may swear he wished himself at home, and that he never had undertook so
perilous an enterprise: yet after a little recollection his fancy had recourse
to these foolish words, which he was taught to say for his defense, Oh
whatsoer'e thou be, great Mastiff, that runnest toward me with open mouth
and up-lifted tail, thinking to have found the Prey thou look for, return
to the place whence thou come, and content thy self to eat up thy great
grand-mothers old shoes. These words are very ridiculous; and those your
principal Magitians use are little less impertinent, so the simple old fellow
might easily be persuaded to give credit to them, He thought some grand
Mystery had layen concealed under these absurdities, and spitting in his hand
he put his little finger in his ear, with a multitude of other fopperies
belonging to the Ceremony, which punctually performed, he believed the most
malign spirits of the world were forced rather to comply with his desires,
than do him the least injury. Immediately after this he discovered something
in humane shape not many paces from him: This he took to be the Devil whom he
had invoked, and not daring to move neither legs nor tongue, his Soul had made
an escape out of its mortal prison, had its flight not been retarded by these
words: Valentine, I am thy friend, fear nothing, I will procure thee the
perfect enjoyment of those pleasures thou most desire, henceforwards only
cherish thy self, and take no farther care. This said, the Spirit vanished, and
with him all Valentine's fear, his Agony being much abated by this favorable
sallutation.

A Pilgrim (whose right name was Francion) had ordered him one trick more,
which returning to his then more settled thoughts, he presently repaired to a
convenient place he had designed for that experiment. Straight sprung a fancy
in his giddy brain, that he was already embracing his fair Lauretta, this fed
his imagination with such delight, that he could not forbear hugging and
tickling himself till he laughed, with a thousand other actions expressing an
excess of joy. Being at length come to a great Elm tree, he cast his Arms
about it, as the Pilgrim had advised him: in this posture he repeated diverse
prayers, which ended, he turned his body to embrace the other part of the tree,
muttering these words to himself: It will be as easy for me to content my
wife, (since heaven is so pleased) as to incompasse this Elm with my embraces.
But while he was humouring his fond desires with this amorous contemplation, he
felt on a sudden something take hold on both his hands, and notwithstanding he
struggled with all the strength Nature had lent him, he found no possibility of
releasement: They were instantly bound fast together with a strong cord, and he
stretching out his neck like the Cock of a Conduit, whose head is not sixth to
the body, but may be set higher or lower at pleasure, stood looking about to
see if he could discover who had put that abuse upon him.

Mean time fear had so multiplied the species of each object, that instead of
one Man (who (after he had thus made him prisoner) conveyed himself
immediately into the thickest of the Wood) he thought he had discerned at least
fifty, and (which more terrified his affrighted Soul) that they were so many
evil Spirits assembled there merely to rejoice at his torments, and make him
suffer all the perfecutions they could devise. To cry out he durst not, to
implore any succor he conceived in vain, for he believed it impossible for
him ever to be delivered thence without the divine assistance; besides, if he
should complain, for ought he knew those merciless Devils would redouble his
punishment, and deprive him of the use of speech, or transport him into some
inhabitable Desert. His Body enjoyed as little quiet as his Mind; for striving
to free himself of that captivity, he marched incessantly about the Elm, and so
traveled like a Mill-horse a great way in a little compass, being not able to
break nor pull it up by the roots, which he often in vain attempted.

Then he began to repent at leisure of his folly for using Magic Art,
remembering he had heard the Parson of his Parish say, No man ought to exercise
that damned profession, unless he had a mind to boil eternally in the Devils
Kettle.

Mean time the fair Lauretta, whom he left in the Castle, entertained as
little sleep as her distracted Husband; for the devout Pilgrim Francion had
promised to visit her that night by the help of a cord-ladder she had fastened
to the window; and she feasted her wanton thoughts with a confidence that he
would give her a real taste of those delights, whereof her Husband never had
the ability to show her the Idea.

You must note, that four Thieves having not long before received intelligence
of diverse very rich movables in the Castle (whereof Valentine was Keeper) had
combined to robb it, and the better to atchieve their enterprise, they
disguised the youngest of their Gang (being a handsome fellow) in Woman's
clothes, advising him to contrive some means to intrude himself into that
family, and as a Domestic to observe the places where the best Booty lay, and
secure the keys if possible, that they might take away what they pleased. This
Thief assuming a name suitable to his habit, comes a begging to the Castle,
possesses Valentine with a belief that she was a poor Orphan, her father having
been hanged for some falsely imposed Crimes, and that she had abandoned her
native Country, being too sensible of the infamy would reflect upon her for her
Fathers disgraceful death.

Valentine, moved with compassion at the recital of the misfortunes of this
counterfeit Katherine (so she called her self) and seeing she offered to serve
without contracting for wages, willingly gave her admittance into his house.
Her compliance and readiness to serve her Mistress, with the modest and
harmless countenance she had so cunningly composed, had soon purchased her so
large a portion of Lauretta's favor, that she entrusted the management of her
whole household to her care. And her credit grew by degrees to that height, that
she might freely take the keys of any Room and keep them long enough ere they
were re-demanded, or any body entertained the least suspicion of her fidelity.

One day going to fetch water at a spring without the Village, she met one of
her associates, who came to inform himself of her proceedings while the other
stayed at the next town, expecting a favorable opportunity to accomplish their
design. She assured him if they came privately thither the night following,
they might load themselves with diverse things of value she then had in her
power, promising withal to cast them out the cord-ladder one of them had
conveyed into her hands not above two days before.

The three Thieves failed not a minute of the time appointed, and being
descended to the bottom of the Castle ditch, they spied a hand guiding a
cord-ladder out at a window, on the side toward the great gate. One of them by
a gentle whistle gave notice of their approach, the like signal was returned
from above: This drew all their eyes immediately to the window, where they
perceived a woman, whom they supposed to be their Confederate, Katharine,
though that was not the place she had appointed them to scale. One of the three
(named Oliver) touhc'd, with I know not what remorse of Conscience, took a
serious review of all his past Extravagancies, and growing still more sensible
of the burden of his Soul, had a few days before made a solemn Vow to Heaven
within himself, to abandon that lewd Company and amend his life; But his
companions having need of his assistance (being of an active Body and notable
Courage) would not be persuaded, by all the entreaties he could make, to let
him quit their consortship, but sealed their threats with execrable oaths, if
he offered to desert them before they had robbed that Castle, wherever he
retired they nere would be at rest till they had found means to murder him.
Yet seeing them like greedy Wolves, ready to fasten upon the Prey, he again
told them, As he desired no part of the Booty they were going to make, so he
would have no share of the trouble and danger they might undergo. But after
much reviling language, being taxed with fear and cowardice for denying his
assistance, at length he was constrained to mount the ladder, first, to avoid
the fury of his enraged Camarades.

Stepping from the Window into the Chamber, he admired to see himself fall
into the amorous arms of a Woman, whom he found of another constitution than
Katherine. This was the Lady Lauretta, who took him for Francion, the darkness
of the Chamber deceiving her, for her candle had been long put out.

Oliver not insensible of this favor fortune had cast upon him, thought he
must speedily hinder his companions ascent, or they would interrupt his sport,
so, gently unlocking fair Lauretta's arms he hasted to the window, to take in
the ladder, as she desired; and perceiving one of his associates already fast
upon it, he ceased not drawing till he was at least half way up, then tying it
to an iron hinge, he shut the window close. The Thief thinking Oliver intended
to draw him in that manner to the top, at first was no way troubled; but
finding a stop in the middle of his course, he began to entertain some jealous
thoughts, and accuse those within of treachery. Nevertheless he climbed up the
ladder to Lauretta's window, but perceiving no possibilty of entrance, and not
daring to knock, lest some of the Castle should discover him, he fancied it
would be his best way to recover the ground again: In this opinion he slid
along the cord as low as it would reach (which was nothing near the bottom)
and falling thence by a window fenced with Iron Bars, one of the pointed ends
running through, made him so fast Prisoner by the breeches, that all the art he
had could not procure him the liberty to break his neck by tumbling any farther.

Francion in this interim not willing to neglect the assignment his Mistress
had given him, failed not to come to the Castle-wall, where seeing on the other
side, Katherine with a ladder at the window, he presumed it was Lauretta. In
this confidence he presently mounts to the top, and being entered the room, his
language was nothing but an iteration of kisses to his supposed Mistress. She
wondering at his fond familiarity, said, Oliver, What Is the matter? Is it thou,
or is it some other? What, art become a fool, to play such antic tricks when
we should rather be diligent in the expedition of our business? Leave, I must
help up thy fellows. Do think my change of habit has made me transform my
sex.

Francion's opinion that he had mistook his mark, was perfectly confirmed by
these words, which came not (as his ears quickly discovered) from the
agreeable mouth of his beloved Lauretta. However he stood not to examine what
the true meaning was, because he thought they concerned him not; only he told
Katherine (whom he then knew to be the maid) that her Mistress had promised to
dedicate that night to Venus in his company, and he was come to enjoy the
precious contentment of her sweet embraces. Katherine, who had as much cunning
as was requisite for any that exercised the trade she professed, searched among
all her subtilest projects for an invention to get clear of him, imagining his
presence would put a stop to their design. To conduct him to Lauretta's
chamber (as he desired) she deemed not convenient, because she thought perhaps
she might be commanded to stand Centinell, or be otherwise employed when her
companions came to execute their intention. So, to avoid all encumbrance, she
told him her Mistress was very sick, and had given her charge to plead her
excuse for deferring her appointed entertainment. Francion, cursing the
crosseness of his fate, was forced to repeat his way to the rope, and being
half way down, Katherine (whose treacherous soul delighted in wicked acts) to
revenge the accidental check she conceived his coming had given to their
contrivance, shook the cord with all the force her rage could lend her, on
purpose to send him to the ground headlong. Seeing himself thus treated, he
perceived there was no remedy but leaping, to save his limbs from being
shattered to pieces against the wall. This consideration made him presently
quit his hold, and commit his life to torture, who lending no favorable
assistance to his amorous stealths, but suffering him to tumble into the Tub
(where Valentine had made his Bath) he had like to have met with two deaths in
avoiding one; for, besides making a great wound in his head, that bereaved him
of both speech and sense, he wanted not much of drowning: Katherine hearing the
noise he made, falling foul upon the Tub, rejoiced within her self at his
disaster, and soon after drew in the ladder, believing her companions would not
come that night.

The Thief that stayed below, seeing Oliver (who had got into the Castle)
looked no more after him, and that his other Camarade was so hung in the Air,
that there was no possibility of relieving him, expected no good issue of their
Plot, concluding, if his fellow were found hanging next morning in that
posture, he should gain nothing by staying with him, but the ill fortune to be
condemned to bear him company on another Gallows. However, a certain blind
and groundless curiosity inviting him to walk round the Ditch, he advances to
Francion's Tub, and feeling a Man in it, he dragged him by the Arms out of the
Water; Then, his Necessity (with the natural inclination he had to pilfering)
reviving his desire of prey, made him presently dive into the strangers
pockets, where he found a Purse full of Carducu's and other money, with a Ring
that had so rich a luster, that maugre the Nights obscurity, you might perceive
its beauty. This happy encounter somewhat qualified his former discontents, and
without taking farther care, whether the Man he robbed were alive or dead, or
inquiring what accident had brought him thither, he presently left that place,
resolving to wander as his Stars should direct him.

Oliver, who had a jewel in possession of far greater value than his
fellow-Thief, resolved to enjoy it to the full, and drown his desires in
delight, having first shut the Chamber windows close, lest the injurious Light,
finding an entrance there, should too soon betray him: Lauretta with an
affected wantonness had carelessly thrown her self again upon her Bed,
expecting her Champion, who began his skirmish with so hot a charge of kisses,
as left no space for Words. After this first Assault, she, whom the excess of
Pleasure had before struck dumb, soon recovered the use of speech, and putting
her Arms about his Neck, and her moist Lips to his Cheeks, Eyes and Mouth,
broke silence with these acclamations: Oh! dear Francion, how much sweeter is
thy Conversation, than that old doting fellow's, whom I have been forced to
marry! O how winning are thy Charms! how great thy merit! How happy do
I'esteeme my self for having the wit to discern, and be taken with thy
perfections! I shall never desire to be loosed from that precious Chain. Thou
do not speak (my dear) continued she, with a kiss more ardent than the
former, Is it because my company seems not so agreeable to thee as thine to me?
Alas, if it were so, I should endure penalty enough by my imperfections. Then
after a short silence, she added; O! really I must accuse my self of folly for
putting out my Candle; for, what need I have feared? the old fellow's gone
forth (I think) to practice the remedies thou taughtst him for his incurable
diseases: I must call to Katherine for a light, I am not altogether of the
opinion of those, who hold the mysteries of Love are to be performed in the
dark, I Am certain, the sight of the beloved object contributes new fuel to
lovers fires; besides, to be plain with thee, (my dear heart) I would gladly
see the Emerald thou promisedst to bring me, I believe thou have so much care
to comply with thy own engagement and my fancy, that thou have not forgot it;
have thou? tell me really.

Nothing could excuse Oliver from discovering himself, being conjured so often
to speak, as if he had been Francion: But imagining Lauretta would be
exceedingly displeased when she found her self deceived, he determined to use
all possible means to pacify her. So he arose, and having a reasonable good
wit he prostrated himself upon his knees before her, with these words: Madam,
I am infinite sorry you are deceived, taking me for another; Truly, had not
your Caresses set an edge upon my appetite, I should not so easily have fallen
into the crime I have committed; How ever inflict upon me what punishment you
please, I am ready to receive your doom; knowing my life and death are both at
your disposal.

This voice differing much from Francions, made Lauretta presently perceive her
error. Then Shame and Anger took such possession of her Mind, that had she
not considered, what was done could not again be undone, she had probably been
transported to some extreme distemper. But the most pleasing remedy she could
apply to that sore, was to consider, that he, whom she took for Francion, had
given her a taste of such delicates as she could not repent the pleasure of
enjoying them, nor Francion himself, perchance, have furnished better. However
she feigned her self much displeased, asking Oliver, with an angry tone, who he
was. And seeing he answered her not immediately, Wicked Wretch, said she, art
not thou one of Francions Servants? have thou not murdered thy Master to come
hither in his place? Madam, (replied Oliver, remaining still upon his knees)
I Will assure you I know not that Francion you speak of: To give you an account
who I am, I shall do is freely, so you promise to believe what I shall tell
you, and let me suffer if I speak any thing but truth. Go on, said Lauretta, I
do promise it, but be brief in your relation.

You have a Maid (continued he) called Katherine, who has partly been the
cause of this adventure, and if your patience will permit, I shall acquaint you
how: You are deceived in believing her a Maid, She Is of the contrary sex,
only disguised in Woman's Clothes on purpose, to give Thieves entrance here to
rob you, and this night she promised to cast a Cord-ladder out of a Window, to
facilitate their ascent. The disorders of my youth invited me to leave my
Fathers house, and rank my self in company with these thieves, but I have
framed a resolution a few days since, to relinquish their abominable Course
of life. Nevertheless meeting with the ladder you had prepared for Francion,
and taking it to be Katharine 's, I was forced to come up first, yet Heaven in
my witness, I had no intent to assist them in the Robbery, but rather to
discover their plot to any I should chance to meet, and so prevent the
mischief. To confirm your belief, Madam, be pleased only to cast your eye
from the Window downwards, and you shall see one of the thieves hanging upon
the Cord, which I have half drawn up; This is a clear testimony, that had I
complied with their villanious intentions, I should not have used him in that
manner.

Lauretta moved with admiration at these words, went presently to satisfy her
natural curiosity, and peeping through a little Window, she perceived what
Oliver had told her was no lie, so she demanded no further proof of his
innocence, but longing to know how Katherine was employed, she called her to
bring a light, having first hid Oliver betwixt the Bed and Wall. Katherine by
the help of the Candle she brought lighted, having a full view of Lauretta's
naked Bosom, was tickled with desires much more fervent than such sights do
usually awake in persons of her habit. The absence of her Master, and the good
humor she thought her Mistrisse then was in, added Confidence to her Lust: for
Lauretta, hiding the hatred she conceived against her, under a smooth and
smiling Countenance, with, a pretty familiarity thus began; Whence come thou,
Katherine, what not unready yet, and it is so late? I protest (Madam answered
she) I cannot sleep, I am always afraid of Spirits or Thieves, lying in a
solitary corner far from all company, therefore I seldom put off my Clothes,
that in case any thing should happen, I may not be forced to come out of my
chamber naked to call for succor: but is it possible, Madam, you should be
here alone without any fear? Oh God! I beseech you let me stay here all night,
since my Master is not at home: I shall sleep better upon this stool, than in
my bed, and I shall be so far from disturbing you, that you will find much
convenience by my being so near and ready to give you immediately any thing
you shall demand. No, No, (replied Lauretta) return to thy own chamber, I have
no need of thee, and since I have a light I shall be no more afraid; Only in
the dark, if any thing breaks my sleep on a sudden, fear presents strange
apparitions to my fancy, sometimes in form of a Dog, sometimes like a man all
in black, and sometimes in shapes more deformed and terrible. Here Katherine,
fleering in her Mistress face, thus interrupted her, "Certainly Madam, your
husband is very unnatural, Ah Heavens! how could he resolve to leave your
company this night? Where is he? is he gone to catch Frogs with a quaile-pipe?
For my particular (though I am held but a silly Wench) I must confess to you,
I find my self more capable of loving you, than he appears to be. Get thee
gone, thou art an absurd fool, said Lauretta; how now? It seems when you came
hither first, you did but play the Hypocrite: whom shall we trust hereafter?
Don't you believe me then? (replied Katherine) well, but suppose I should show
you in effect that I am provided of the instrument you most want, and that
Valentine cannot render a better account of his abilities than I; Would you not
think it strange? This is handsome discourse indeed for a Maid, ( answered
Lauretta angerly) Go, Hussy, thou art the boldest queen in the World, where
have thou got tipple to make thy self drunk this night? Be gone, and see my
face no more. It Is a miserable thing to have to do with such people, as many
Servants, as many Enemies: But what remedy? they are necessary Evils.

Katherine, whose spirits were then raised, and would not be laid by the
frowns of a seeming unwillingnesse, not caring what opinion her Mistress
could have of her familiarity, sawcily advanced to kiss her, and give her a
perfect assurance, that she had boasted of nothing more than she was able and
ready to perform: for, she imagined, as soon as she had shown her evidence to
Lauretta, her anger would turn to kindness, and seek no farther then that
offered opportunity, with open arms to deliver up loves fortress. But
Lauretta apprehending what Discretion enjoined, was so far from being her own
Bawd in the advancement of her lustful designs, as she flew into a storm of
bitter language, which backed with three or four blows, drove her out of the
chamber.

Oliver who had heard all their discourse, came out of his Ambuscade behind
the Bed, and told Lauretta she might now easily understand by the words and
actions of Katherine, that she was not what she represented. Lauretta
confessing this apparent truth, answered, she would now so narrowly watch
Katherine's proceedings, as when she least suspected the prevention, her
fellow-thieves should not only be denied their expected entrance into the
Castle, but she receive a just punishment for her treachery. Consider, Madam,
what is fittest to be done (said Oliver) and I promise to shape my assistance
by the Pattern of your commands. I Will go seek out Katherine (replied
Lauretta) follow you only at a distance, and be ready to come up with these
cords when you hear me call, that we may bind her as I shall contrive it. This
said, Lauretta took the candle and went to her maids Chamber, here take the
light (said she) and come with me into the great hall. What to do? Madam, said
Katherine, take you no care for that replied Lauretta) you shall see when you
are there.

When they were come into the hall, Lauretta bade Katherine open the Window,
and get up to see what it was hung a top of the grate and made such frequent
bustling. This was the Thief whom accident had apprehended by the haunches.

Katherine, who was ignorant of her Complice's being there arrested, after she
had taken the liberty to fool with her Mistresse's breasts, set her foot upon
a low stool, and thence stepped into the window, to satisfy her own, as well
as Lauretta's curiosity. She had no sooner set her self into a posture to make
the discovery, but Lauretta mounting into a great Chair, laid hold on both her
hands, while Oliver (who waited for the signal at the door) pinioned her
arms behind, and bound her fast to the crosse-barre. This is not all (said
Lauretta, laughing, when she saw her person was secured) We must see if her
Commodities be so good as she boasted: With that, she hoisted up her
Petticoats, Smock and all, and tied it to her Bosom with a Point, exposing her
whole Packet to the public view. Then Oliver began to jeere and laugh so loud,
that his Companion and Katherine both knowing his voice, one cried, Ah! I
beseech thee help me to get off this Broach, for Day is almost ready to break,
and if I am found in this condition here, I give thee leave to judge what will
become of me. I can lend thee no assistance (answered Oliver) for here is a
great iron grate betwixt us; But thou do very well to wish thy self out of
the Air, for that is an Element very contrary to thy Constitution, and I am
confident 'twill be thy Destiny to die in it. Thou have betrayed us then (said
Katherine, interrupting him) Perfidious Villain, if I had hold of thy heart, I
would devour it presently. Talk no more of Holding (replied Oliver) for thou
have no use of thy hands. Let Us leave them there (said Lauretta) to complain
and rail their fills, no body shall come to relieve them but the Sergeant and
the Hangman.

This discourse ended, Lauretta invited Oliver back to her Chamber, where
having better opportunity to contemplate her perfections, he was ravished at
the delicacie of her complexion, which he little thought was so transcendent
when he enjoyed her in the dark. After admiring the attraction and murdering
power of her eyes, he ventured to taste the Cherries of her lips; which favor
was not refused him: for, Lauretta seeing his garb and Person not unhandsome,
was nothing unwilling to let him recommence the Game, wherein at their first
encounter he had so well played his part. And he (who was no novice in the art
of Love) reading the intentions of her yiedling heart in the wanton motion of
her craving eyes, neglected not the favorable opportunity was given him, to
please his appetite with a second taste of so delicious a Banquet.

The recreations of their bodies past, they began to give some liberty to their
tongues; Oliver's chief discourse was of the happiness Fortune had
unexpectedly thrown upon him, assuring Lauretta with the repetition of a
multitude of Oaths, that he esteemed nothing, the whole Universe contained,
comparable to the contentment he received in her company. You have good reason
to return thanks to the Heavens for one thing (said Lauretta And that is, for
being so propitious to your intents, that when I saw you at the middle of the
Ladder, coming up (taking you for a servant of mine) I retired, and set my
self in a Chair expecting till you were got through the Window; for, had I
stayed there, I should soon have perceived you were not the man I looked for,
and (not to conceal the truth) you had infallibly found a very bad reception,
whereas now your entertainment has been such as (I believe) you have little
cause to complain. I doubt not (answered Oliver) but you would have
ill-treated me, and I cannot blame you, if you had; for, what inclinations
could you have for a man unknown surprising you in that manner, instead of one
whose company you had frequented and affected? But I shall beg your belief of
this Protestation; If I am not equal in parts of Body or Mind to him, whom you
intended this night to honor with your embraces, I may compare with him, if
not exceed him, in affection and desires to serve you.

These demonstrations of a fervent Love opened the way to diverse other
discourses, which now and then were interrupted with some amorous Dalliances,
the delights whereof they repeated as often as the Spirit moved.

When Lauretta saw the over-early Sun dart in his prying rays through the
Crannies of her chamber Window, suspecting by that time her husband was ready
to return, she advised Oliver to hide himself among the Hay in the stable, and
when the Drawbridge was let down, take his opportunity to slip away. After
diverse sweet Adieu's, and an infinity of assurances to register her favors in
his memory, he consented to follow her directions, and made his Nest in the
Mow, while she returning to her Chamber locked her self within, expecting the
success of Katherine and her confederate's Adventure.

This being Sunday Morning, Three lusty Country ladds had got up betimes to
go to the first Mass, and afterward to a Village not far thence to
challenge at long Tennis the best gamesters of the place: But finding the
Church doors shut, and the Curate not yet stirring, they took occasion to
walk about the Castle, where they presently perceived the Thief holding the
Cord-ladder with one hand, and the Iron grate with the other; the next object
they discovered was Katherine stark naked from the waste downwards, and taking
her for an Hermaphrodite, they burst out into such loud laughters and shouting,
as made the whole Village ring with their rude noise. This waked the Curates
curiosity to descend, (buttoning his Doublet as he went) and see what Novelty
caused that wondrous merryment. But their emotion was so extravagant, that they
could hardly keep themselves upon their feet, and did nothing but clap their
hands, wrest their bodies into a hundred antic postures, and joult one
another, as if they had been little less than mad. The good Pastor casting
his eyes only upon them, perceived no cause of such excessive laughter, and
though he never ceased asking what the matter was, for a good while could draw
no other answer from them but a redoubling of their cries and laughter: At
length, taking one by the arm, "Come hither Peter (said he) prithee tell "me
what may be the reason of this transportment. All these words the fellow
(holding his sides with both his hands, and laughter often interrupting his
speech) bad him look at one of the Castle windows. The Curate directing his
sight that way, quickly discerned what had put them in that absurd humor, and
with a moderate smile, that no way discomposed his gravity, You are a company
of right Lobcocks (said he) to make such a monstrous clamor for so slight a
matter; It is a sign you have seen but little, since the meanest Object in the
world incites you to such boundless laughter and deportments, befitting none
but Bedlamites; I must confess I laugh too, but it is at your folly: What know
you but that you scoff so at, may rather require your compassion, We shall
hear anon by Mr. Valentine, what the meaning of this May Game is, perchance
there has been some tragedy acted within his house this Night.

As the Curate had ended his speech, he was accosted by a great number of his
townes-men, who wondering at this strange spectacle fell to examining the Thief
and Katherine, who had put them in that posture, but they not so ready, nor
willing to render them an account, were much perplexed within themselves, they
had so many witnesses of their shame. At length upon further instance, the
Thief promised, if they would procure his releasment, he would tell them every
particular: But the Curate charged them that accompanied him not to help him
off his tenters till the Castle gates were opened, and he had spoke with
Valentine; so some of the rout rounding the Castle to see if they could spy
any body at the windows, a mournful voice piercing their Ears, invited their
Eyes to the bottom of the Ditch, where at first sight they discerned a tub, and
more curiously surveying the circumjacent place, they saw Francion, who after
recovering of his swoun, felt himself so cold and feeble, that his legs not
retaining strength enough to support his bruised body, he had laid himself
down by it to repose. The Clowns seeing him in a sad condition, some of them
ran down to him, and one of them helping him up, and wiping the blood a little
off his face, much amazed cried out, Mercy Heavens! this is my Lodger, the
devout Pilgrim that came to my house a while since; dear friend (continued he,
looking still earnestly upon him) What treacherous Villains were those handled
you in this barbarous manner? Carry me hence (replied Francion) good friends
lend me your hands, I cannot now give you satisfaction in what you demand. This
said, the Countrymen lifted him out of the Ditch, and as they were carrying
him to his Inn, they met one of his Servants, who wondered to see his Master
in that equipage; the service he judged then most expedient for him, was to run
presently for a Surgeon, who came as he was undrest by the fireside and
ready to be put in bed. The wound searched was not found very dangerous, so
after the application of some vulnerary Salves proper in like occasions, the
Surgeon assured him it would be no long cure.

While great numbers of the Country people stood gazing before the Castle, and
wondering at the sudden Metamorphosis of a Maid into a Man; Some that had
glutted themselves with the pleasure of this Drollery, went to bid their
Neighbors hasten to the Castle-green, and they should see somewhat worth their
labor. The best was, the Women (who have naturally more curiosity than Men,
especially in matters of recreation) earnest beyond measure to know what their
husbands were gone to see, ran by troops (like Cowes when stung by Gad flies in
the heat of Summer) to the place where the Comedy was acted: But when they saw
the show Katherine made, they turned back with as much shame as haste; Some
that were of a joviall humor, by their incessant tittering seemed distracted
for the time; Others, whose austerer disposition made them peevish, and wrest
every thing to the worst sense, expressed no small distaste, and went muttering
away, as if all this had been prepared merely to abuse them. Could you choose
no other time to play your Apish Gambals but on a Sunday morning (said one of
these good Women to the Company) yet had you staid till after Service it had
been a little more tolerable, especially if it were now Carneval-time: Ha! the
World will perish without doubt, so many Men, so many Antichrists. Don't trudge
away so fast, (Gossip, (said a merry companion to her) come back and see
Valentine's Maid show all she has. The Devil take his part on it, answered she.
Come, come (replied the same fellow) for all you seem so scornful, you had
rather have a part on it your self than the Devil. Away fool, away (cried
another resolute Dame) Do think we will be contented with part of such a Bit?
we must have it all or nothing. I know that well enough (said he) The Fox would
eat no grapes because he could not reach them, so you run away and slight the
precious Stones are shown you here, because you cannot come nere them for the
ditch and iron grate that is between, but indeed you had rather be handling
such a tool than see it. I cry God mercy (quoth the woman with much disdain in
her countenance) if thou gratest my ears any more with thy ribble rabble
discourse of handling stones and tools, I Will handle thine in such manner, as
I Will tear them off and give them my Dog to dinner.

Diverse such jeers were cast upon the poor Women, but I Will assure you they were
not much behind hand with the Men, at least if their retorts were not
altogether so smart, they charged them with so many railing and injurious
Words, and set up such a Note, straining their throats all together to cry as
loud as ever they could, that the Men made dizzy with the noise were forced to
quit the field, as confessing themselves vanquished.

Some of this rout scattering from the rest of their troop; chanced to wander
into the Cops where Valentine was, and hearing a man cry out, they made toward
the place whence the voice seemed to come, little imagining 'twas he. With what
amazement they were seized seeing this scarecrow covered with such fantastic
garments, and bound about the tree, is not easy to express. With striving and
turmoiling himself in the Night, his hood was so fallen over his eyes, that he
could not see so much as to discern 'twas day: for want of his hands he often
tossed up his head to make it tumble backwards, but all his endeavors were to
little purpose. He could not see the Countrymen, and only hearing the noise
they made in scoffing at the antic dress and deportments of this Object (no
less pleasant than that they had seen at the Castle) the opinion he had all
night that the Devils were preparing to torment him, came afresh into his
thoughts, and with a stronger apprehension than before: So imagining those that
approached him were no other than Devils, he began to repeat the remedies
Francion had taught him to charm them.

The Countrymen knew him presently by his voice, but hearing the fopperies and
senseless words he spoke, and considering the place and postures they found him
in, they really believed he was beside himself; so laughing, till their girdles
cracked, at these adventures, they ran back to give their Curate an account of
their new discoveries. As he came with his guide into the Close, spying already
Valentine among the trees, "Is it you (Sir) my dear friend (said he) alas! who
is it has put you here?

Valentine hearing his Pastour's voice, began a little to moderate his fear, a
fancy then coming in his crown, that the most desperate of all the Devils in
Hell would not dare to come near him so long as a sacred person was with him;
and after a little pause, Ah! good Sir (answered he) they were Devils that
bound me here, and they have assailed me with more malice and fury than ever
they persecuted the holy ancient Hermites. But how (said the Curate) Did you
not lie in your own house this night? Did they bring you hither in such manner
as that you felt them not? Were they not rather some wicked men that put you in
this pickle? Valentine answered not a word, thinking he that spoke to him might
be a Devil himself, and had assumed a voice like his Curate's, purposely to
deceive him: for he had heard and read that evil Spirits sometimes transform
themselves into Angels of light. This made him begin his conjurations again,
and after all, say, I will not speak to thee, Prince of Darkness, I know thee
well enough, thou art not my Curate, thou only imitatest his Speech. But you
shall see I am (answered the Curate taking off his hood) Why how now (Mr.
Valentine) are you out of your wits, to believe all that speak to you are
Spirits? Why do you forge these imaginations? Must I put you in the number of
my lost sheep?

Valentine enjoying the benefit of the light, knew all those about him were his
neighbors and friends, and seeing they went about to set his hands at liberty,
he absolutely banished the ill opinion he had conceived of them.

When he was released of his imprisonment, the Curate importuned him so
earnestly to know how he came there, that he was constrained at length to
repeat all the enchantments Francion had taught him, and withal to relate the
reason that incited him to practice them. Some knavish Boys, that overheard
this story, went presently and published it all the town over to his disgrace,
insomuch that the memory of it is not yet extinct, and to this day, if there be
any cold cod-pieced fellow, they tell him in a jeering manner, He must go to
Valentines Bath.

After the zealous Curat had sufficiently rebuked his Parishioner for his
pernicious curiosity, they returned all together to behold the present
spectacles at the Gastle windoes, whereof Valentine, no less astonished than
the rest, could render no account. Hereupon a merry conceited fellow, that by
chance had mingled himself among them, replied, You are sorely troubled,
Gentlemen, to conjecture the cause of what you see, I Will expound you this Riddle
in three words; That Companion you see hanging by the Ladder, was some of
Katherine's Sweet-hearts, and without doubt he had a purpose to go see her;
But, to show him his courtship was Labor in vain, she has so cleared the
point, that his own eyes may certify him, she is not as he thought her: Se how
forlornly he looks, as if the loss of his Love had bereaved him of his Life.

This fancy took the company extremely, but they thought very suddenly they
should receive more certain informations, in regard Valentine's servants were
then opening the Castle gates; But they understood no more of all these
mysteries, than if they had not belonged to the House.

The Thief and Katherine were soon made loose and brought before the Curate and
Valentine, who failed not to ask them diverse questions concerning their present
condition, why and by whom they had been so exposed. But the fear of a deserved
punishment had made them resolve not to answer a syllable to any of their
Interrogatories, knowing their cause was so ticklish, that they were more like
to foil than free themselves by speaking. Katherine was asked by diverse,
"Since thou art a man, why do thou wear a Woman's clothes? But they might
have saved their breath, for all the threats and persuasions they did use,
could not draw one word from her mouth. Lauretta being come down seemed no less
amazed than the rest at the recital all of these passages, and cunningly
withdrawing her self by little and little into the Court (while every body else
were busy in the Hall) she hasted to re-visite the Author of her last nights
joys, and after some close embraces for a last farewell, she conveyed him
privately out of the Castle.

The Justice of the place (who lived by mischief and debates) not willing to
lose his Snip, was very earnest in persuading Valentine to let him draw up
informations against those offenders, urging the design of Katherine and her
Companion could not be honest, and that they had attempted to rob him of his
Goods or Honor. But Valentine, who not unacquainted with the malice of Law,
was loath to render his purse as a prey to such ravenous Harpyes, refused to
follow his advice, finding not any of his goods diminished. All he desired was
to know by what accident those Creatures came to be hung in that manner at his
windows. The Justice, seeing there was nothing to be gained, would proceed no
farther, for the Offenders could be drawn to no Confession, neither were the
Spectators able to charge them with any matter of fact. So, Morning Prayers
past, the poor Thieves had liberty to steal themselves out of the danger they
apprehended. But for two or three Leagues they were pursued by such multitudes
of people, crying and shouting after, as rendered the perplexity and shame they
endured no less insupportable than the severest punishment of the Gallows.

[ Thus they, whose perverse inclinations lead them to wicked actions, never
prosper in their undertakings, but receive a salary suitable to their Crimes,
as the several passages here related testify. Valentine, for the foolish
curiosity that transported him to the Diabolical practice of Necromancie,
became a scerne to all. The Thieves, whose covetous desire of enriching
themselves by others loss, made them attempt to reb the Castle, not only
failed of their intented purchase, but suffered public shame and pain:
Lauretta indeed, though she had strained courtesy with her conscience,
received no present punishment nor reproach, but what is deferred we seldom
find is lost. As for Francion, his vicious intention was recompensed with
harm enough, yet he resolved to bear his misfortunes with more patience than
the rest.]

While he was in bed, and his senses well recovered, his man, who had been
spectator of all the passages at the Castle, gave him an account of each
particular, at which he burst into so violent a laughter, as made him forget
his pain, yet his imagination could not penetrate the Thieves design, nor how
they came to be so handsomely hung, though he remembered well enough Katherine's
discourse to him in her Chamber; But when he came to the recital of
Valentine's conjurations, and in what equipage the Curate found him, his
rapture was beyond expression.

As his Dinner was serving in, the Surgeon came to visit him, and seeing Wine
brought up, he told him, he must drink none, because of the wound in his head.
This is a very rigorous sentence (replied Francion) good friend deprive me not
of that divine liquor, I prithee, It is the only sustenance of my body, all
the delicatest meats in the World are nothing comparable to it. Don't you know
the pitiful Pretenders to Physic are commonly called fresh-water-Doctors
because they can do nothing but prescribe us that to drink? I believe their
Prince Hippocrates was not of their opinion, for Hypocras (which is the most
excellent drink we have) has its name from him, either because he loved it, or
was the inventer of it. I knew a young Gentleman, who for some indisposition,
and a hurt in his leg, was forbidden Wine, as you do me, lest it should impair
his disease: But what do you think he did? He laid himself in bed contrary to
the ordinary use, and put his feet upon the pillow, that the fumes of the
Bacchicall liquor, he had plentiful exhausted, might descend to his head. And
for my part, since my wound is in the other extremity of my body, I think it
were my best way to rise and stand upright, to the end (seeing the Wine I shall
then drink will rather descend to my feet than offend my head) you may not be
so severe as to forbid it me. This said, Francion bade his man bring his
clothes that he might rise.

The Country-Chirurgion willing to show his skill, endeavored to dispossess
him of that humor, and confute his reasons, saying, They were grounded upon
the Maxims of a Tippling-house rather than the Axioms of Physic; Then he
began to discourse in terms of his own Art, which though barbarous and unknown,
he conceited himself at the highest pitch of Eloquence when he pronounced them,
being infected with the disease of diverse that believe their expressions are
then best when least understood, not considering language is only to make
conceptions known, and he that has not the art to declare his meaning to all
sorts of persons, is tainted with an ignorance not much less than brutall.

Francion having had the patience to hear him out, told him all his Aphorisms
should not hinder him from rising, but he he would drink no Wine,
notwithstanding (for mirth's sake) he had maintained such an Argument. These
are low poor spirited persons (continued he) as have not the power to curb
their passions, and subject their appetites to reason upon such an account. For
my particular, I must confess I am as great a lover of that liquor as any man,
yet I can easily deny my self the use of it, or any thing else I never so
dearly-fancy. Your temper is very remarkable (replied the Surgeon) the power
my soul has over my body, is nothing nere so absolute; for I assure you, had
Galen himself told me I should prejudice my health in drinking wine, I could
not refrain it, and without it, were I placed near a fountain of the most
curious water imaginable, I should perish with thirst. But Sir (persisted he)
Certainly you cannot choose but feel much pain by that fracture and contusion
in your head, and yet you cannot refrain jesting. If you were thoroughly
acquainted with me, and knew in what manner a man ought to live, you would not
wonder at my humor (answered Francion:) The faculties of my Soul are so
vigorous, that it easily repulses all sorts of discontents, and performs its
ordinary functions without interruption, amidst the grandest indispositions of
my body. The Surgeon interrupting him, said smiling, Sir, excuse me if I say
you oblige me now to credit the report is raised of you in this Village, which
is, that you are very skillful in matter of Magique; Otherwise you could never
support with so much patience the wounds you have received. Besides (but that I
cannot believe) it is said all that has passed this last night at Valentines
Castle has been done by your Art; That you metamorphosed the servant Maid into
a Man, deprived her of the use of Speech, and that you have not any real wound
in your head, but only you abuse our eyes: And every one inclines the rather
to this opinion, because no body can find out the cause of any of these strange
successes.

This pleasant imagination so tickled the fancy of our Patient, that he had
like to have split himself with laughing. At length being clothed and set at
Table with the Surgeon (who was glad of the opportunity to dine upon his
charge) But cannot you tell (began Francion) whether I am still in Valentine's
favor or not? in what terms does he speak of me? Not to conceal the truth
(replied the Surgeon) he speaks of you as of the wickedest Wizard in the
world: He says, whereas he expected your Receipts should have done him some
good, they have caused him an infinite deal of mischief. Though he has been
long assured of his own insufficiency, he would however make a trial now to
see if he could comport himself in Cupid's combat with his wife more
vigorously than before; but alas! poor feeble fellow, he has got no credit by
the attempt, his Standard falling when he should have entered the breach; So at
length he was constrained to contract a dishonorable Peace with Lauretta.
There is nothing but his Sally-port behind open; and that is so off the hooks,
as it cannot retain a liquid scurvy matter that escapes out every minute;
Insomuch as he has entreated me, being his Gossip, to furnish him with a drug
to stop those Overtures, and appease the sedition of those intestine Rebels,
who not observing the places ordered them, fly forth without asking leave.

Need I fear he will act any thing against me in revenge (answered Francion?)
Hitherto (said the Barber) I mentioned nothing to you of his intention, because
I thought you able by your Art to avoid all the Ambushes and Plots he can
contrive against you; but I Will assure you he is resolved to neglect no
opportunity to do you a mischief. I Will hold a wager he assembles the stoutest of
the Village to apprehend you in your lodging this night, and carry you prisoner
into his castle. That shall not hinder me (replied Francion) from drinking his
health in this glass of Water, which I am going to imprison in my Belly. This
said, they passed the rest of their dinnertime with other discourse.

They were no sooner risen from the Board, but diverse of the Inhabitants,
invited with a curiosity to see Francion, came to his Inn, and asked Where Is
the Pilgrim? Where Is the Pilgrim? with so loud a voice, that he could hear
distinctly what they said. Immediately he bolts his chamber door, and though
they thrust and knocked against it, saying sometimes they wanted a Coffer
within that room, sometimes they must speak with the Surgeon, they could
find no admittance. At length they swore there was a man in the Village so
desperately wounded, that he would die without the application of some present
remedy, and they would have the Surgeon out; But as they were ready to force
their entrance, Francion and his man presented themselves at the door with
Pistolls in each hand, protesting they would discharge against whomsoever
should dare to break in upon them.

The cowardly Clownes not accustomed to play upon such Pipes, were unwilling to
assault upon such terms, and going all away, gave the besieged time enough to
rebarricadoe their Avenues. A short while after advances another troop, more
numerous than the former, but returned with as little success as their
companions. Francion exceedingly displeased at the importunities of these
Churles, resolved to get clear of them as soon as he could. So, having
discharged the house, he communicates his intentions to his Host, desiring he
would spare him a little Cart he had discovered standing in his yard, to carry
him to some other town, where he might be less disquieted. His Host moved with
his entreaty, presently ties two Hoops to the top of his Cart, upon them
spreads a Coverled, and having laid all Francion's movables at the bottom, he
advertised him it was then time to depart. The Pilgrim without delay mounts
into the Cart, and places himself at his most ease upon a Bed of Straw,
prepared purposely for his journey, while they drew him out of his lodging at a
back gate into the open field, his Man followed immediately upon his Horse, and
in this Equipage they crossed the country without being discerned by any of
that Village.

Some of the silly Swains returning to the Inn as soon as they were gone, and
finding neither Francion nor his Man in his Chamber, nor any other part of the
house, concluded presently they were vanished, and had conveyed themselves out
of their sight by the art of Necromancy.

As they marched, Francion took occasion to discourse sometimes with a young
fellow that drove his Chariot, sometimes with his Man, to whom he thus began,
When I reflect upon the adventures befallen me this day, my fancy is so
delighted with the lively representation of the instability of things in this
world, that I can hardly forbear laughing; yet I am sure I am in for my twenty
Crowns and a Ring, which I have lost I know not how. Certainly those that
carried me this morning to my Inn, must have searched my Pockets: However
there is but one remedy for such diseases, and that is that Noble virtue
Patience, of which (Heavens be praised) I have a greater stock at present than
of Rose-nobles. But consider a little the pretty vicissitudes of Fortune; Not
long since I was clad with the sumptuous rayments of a gay Courtier, and now
have nothing to cover me but the Weeds of a poor Pilgrim; I used to lodge under
the golden roofes of stately Palaces, and now have no where to lie but in
ditches, without any other seeling than the Firmament: My Couch had wont to be
upon curious Satin Quilts, and this morning I found my self in a Tub of Water,
which proved not half so easy: Heretofore I rod in Coaches with my Velvet
Seats, and now I think it a happiness to meet with a Sorry Cart, where I
tumble in Straw like a Bedlam or Bridewell-Bird.

This discourse made his Man return all the consolative Arguments his invention
could suggest, and to express his sorrow for his Masters sad condition, Sir,
(continued he) it grieves me to see you in an estate so little suitable to your
quality, for when Criminals are conducted to the place of Execution, for their
greater ignominy they are commonly condemned to be carted, and if you would
have pleased to hearken to my advice, you should not have been carried in that
manner.

Nothing troubles me so much (replied Francion) as to hear people jeere me as I
pass, and find my self unable to sit my horse. At length perceiving Night
begin by little and little to draw her sable Curtains about the Hemisphere, he
bade the Carter hasten, lest losing their way in the dark, that nights lodging
might prove as little comfortable to him as the former, yet his Guide assuring
him they wanted not half a league to the town, he remained somewhat satisfied:
But they had not gone much further before a worse misfortune befell them,
something about one of the wheels being broken; so they could not reach the
end of their intended journey, but were forced to make a stand at a
Wheeleright's shop in a little Village close by, where the haste of the
advancing Night, and the slownesse of the Workman, made Francion quit his hopes
of recovering the great town before them, and resolve to take a lodging there.

They were directed to the best Inn of the place, which was but poorly
provided of every thing, and after they had eaten a supper, that did not
overcharge their stomachs, they asked where they should lie. I have but two
beds above (answered the Host) and they are both taken up already. The two men
that came with me (said Francion) shall sleep in the stable, or any where, but
I must have a bed for my self, though I pay double for it. Sir (replied the
Host) there is a Gentleman above that lies alone, I Will go ask him if he will
please to spare you a part of his. This said, he went into the chamber, and
presently returned Francion word, that when he pleased he might go take his
rest in a bed, which the Gentleman above was willing to divide with him.

Francion followed his Landlord into the room, and coming near the bed side,
Sir (said he to the Gentleman) If I felt not my self much indisposed by a wound
I have received in my head, necessity should not force me to be thus
troublesome to you, I would rather choose to lie all night upon a bed that
cannot shake nor stir, unless the whole Universe were tottering, and where I
should have no other Curtains nor Teaster than the Canopy of Heaven to cover
me. However, the cause that brought me hither will lose all the power it had to
persuade me to stay, if I perceive you unwilling to permit me. Sir (replied the
Gentleman) speak not of any incommodity, it is impossible your company should
bring me any inconvenience, yet were it so, I should willingly endure ^t to do
you any service: nay, I should rise and resign the possession of this bed to
your self alone, that you might the better take your rest, if I considered not
you might think I did it in disdain.

This courtesy of the Gentleman's was not ill requited by Francion, who
summoned the most courtly expressions he could invent to thank him as his
civility deserved.

As they were both laid, the Gentleman told his bedfellow, that his gallant
Garb and Countenance, wherein he perceived nothing of Vulgar, was the charm
that had won his affection, and invited him to make a tender of all the
services he was able to do him. Francion (whose name was rightly imposed upon
him for his Franc disposition) answered him without flattery, That he conceived
himself much obliged for those large expressions, but (though 'twas against his
interest) he would not advise him to ground his judgment upon such weak
appearances, which commonly are deceitful, but rather consider, how by
communication oftentimes we find a most deformed Soul cased in a curious Body,
whereby those, who look no farther than the outside, are deceived.

I know I am not mistaken (replied the Gentleman) the longer I frequent your
company, the better I shall understand the truth of those Characters I read in
your countenance seem to dictate to my imagination. I have an opinion the
rules of Physiognomie are not erroneous; and if they are to be credited, so
lovely a person cannot be destitute of qualities suitable to the appearance.
Besides, I have known a young Gentleman much resembling you, that is Master of
more estimable parts than any I ever frequented. All these considerations make
me big with curiosity to know who you are, from what Pilgrimage you come, and
what rude creatures have so ill treated you. To tell you who I am, and repeat
all the passages of my life, at this time is impossible (answered Francion) the
relation of so tedious a story will require more time than I am now willing to
spend, being more desirous to sleep than talk; yet I shall not stick to recount
you my last adventures, which I am confident will not be unpleasant to you. And
though it were more fit to conceal such things, I shall make no scruple to
discover each Particular to you, since your goodness lets me know I cannot
commit my secrets to a surer guard.

You may take notice then (continued he) my name is Francion, and being a few
months since at Paris, not in the poor weeds you saw me, but tricked up like a
spruce Courtier, walking on foot along the street, I met the most amiable
creature in Citizens habit my eyes had ever beheld. The fever of Love had
presently seized on me with such violence, that I knew not what I did or said,
My heart beat quicker measure within my bosom, than that little wheel that
tells Minutes in Watches. My eyes began to dart more sparkling flames than the
Evening-starre, and as if they had been fixed in the same sphere, as that
beautiful Planet I newly had discovered, they exactly followed her Motion; she
was my Pole, she the Lodestone that attracted my body as well as thoughts;
where ever she went I was not far behind her. At length she made a stand at a
Goldsmiths shop upon the Change-bridge, and eclipsed her self from my sight:
But being past as far as the Palace-clock, I felt my heart pricked with so
violent a passion, that my feet were forced to obey the desires of my mind,
and carry me back to gain a second view of this admired Object. I resolved to
go into the same shop and buy something, on purpose to find an occasion of
staying till she went, but not knowing what to demand, I stood long stammering
at this word, sh, sh, show me, at last I said, show me the fairest Diamond you
have. The Master of the shop, busy in showing a Neck-lace of Pearl to my
Goddess, could not presently come to give me an answer, which pleased me
better than if he had given me a Jewel for nothing; for by that means I had the
opportunity to contemplate with attention, Eyes that out-sparkled his
preciousest Stones, Hair more beautiful than his Gold, and a Skin more white
and s^ooth than his Oriental Pearls. After he had finished with her, he
brought me what I demanded, and understanding his price, I addressed my self to
the Lady, desiring she would be pleased to let me see her purchase, only to
create an occasion of accosting her. Another Woman in her company, that had the
Neck-lace in her hand, offered it me very willingly, and afterward returning
it again to her, said, Here Mrs. Bride, take the Spouses Present and let us make
have home again, for it is already late.

By these words I knew this young wanton (if not already married) was then upon
the point of sacrificing at Hymen's Altar, and therefore came to fit her self
with necessaries suitable for the solemnity. There was with her an old worn-out
fellow that disburs'd all the money, at first I took him for her Father; but I
wondered, after they were gone, when the Goldsmith said to me, Do you see that
old Blade Sir? He is to be married: Is not he a fit Bedfellow for such a
sprightly Girl? I answered only with a smile, and speaking softly to one of
my Lackies, I bade him follow those people, and watch where they housed.

The Goldsmith could give me no account of their names nor qualities at that
time, but promised me to inform himself of one of his neighbors that was
acquainted with them. After I had bought a Diamond of no great value, and
bespoke a Seal with my Arms, I returned to my ordinary lodging, where my
Lackie, who had been well instructed in such Love-Commissions, brought me a
perfect description of the form and situation of the lodging of the fair
Lauretta, whom I styled already my Mistress: Besides, he told me the name of
the old Man accompanied her, was Valentine, as he had learnt by chance, of a
man that saluted him aloud in the street. Next day I failed not to take my walk
before that house, where my joy was enclosed; after certain turns, I had the
happiness to see my Angel at the door, and saluted her with such speaking
looks, as she might easily perceive her eyes had made a conquest of my soul.

Thence, without further complement, I went to fetch my Seal at the Change
Bridge, where the Goldsmith confirmed what my Lackey said, and withal told me,
this Valentine was Steward or Baily to a great Noble man, named Alidan, and for
his Mistress, he assured me her name was Lauretta, but he could not as yet be
informed of her extraction. But such particulars ^ esteemed very frivolous for
me to know; all I desired, was only to accost the sweet Lauretta. But Fortune
was so little favorable to my designs, that though I feined twenty errands to
pass before her lodging, I scarce could see her once. At last, one Evening
finding her alone at the door, I seemed as if I had mistaken the house, and
with a complement full of respect, desired her to inform me if a Gentleman
(whose name I had invented) lived thereabouts. When she had answered me, She
knew no such person, I counterfeited much amazement, saying, He assured me his
lodging was in this street? yet I left not the real Object of my pains to seek
after the fictitious. She, who suspected somewhat by my stay, began immediately
to braoch another discourse, and asked me if I lived not in those parts my
self, in regard she had observed me pass often times that way? Encouraged with
this favorable overture, I presently answered, No, my habitation was far
distant thence, but her beauty was accompanied with such powerful attractions,
as drew me daily thither by a kind of sweet constraint, to pay the homage due
to such perfection. Pardon my unbelief Sir, (replied she with a pretty grace)
It must questionless be an Object of far higher merit than any I can own to
oblige a person of your quality to take so many steps; and so continued her
discourse a pretty while, in terms of a very ingenious humility. But not
suffering her to run too far in disparaging her own worth, I raised her again
by my praises to the Stars, concluding with this ordinary complemnnt, The
admirable qualities you possess (Madam) make my ambition nothing more, than
the honor of bearing the Character of your Slave.

This discourse pleasing her humor, she quickly made me understand how cunning
an Artist she was at this exercise, for seeing she had no Novice to deal with,
she displayed all the subtilest artifices, and used the smartest expressions
her ingenuity could dictate; Insomuch, I assure you to my shame, I was in a
manner foiled, and in no better condition than a poor Horse that is to march
upon ice, and wants frosting.

This pretty Confidence, and the Gentilesses she entertained me with,
(resenting nothing of Vulgar spirit) took me exceedingly, and were to my
Passion as Oil cast upon fire. Her wedding, which was soon after celebrated,
bred no disturbance in my thoughts, for I conceived I need not afflict my self
that such a decayed stump preceded me in the possession of her bed; for had his
aged Body been answerable in Vigor to her youthful mind, he could not have
violated her Virginity; She (if my judgment fail me not) having long before
eased her self of that Burden. In fine, Hope was my Panacea, the only balm
I applied to mitigate all the dolours of my wounded fancy. My Imagination
comforted me with a conceit, that infallibly Lauretta being as full of Youth as
Beauty, could be no less than glad to entertain correspondence with a friend,
who sometimes in her Husbands stead might do a work that must not be left
undone, and which in effect is the principal peacemaker in a Family. It would
require the strength of an Atlas back to stand to so hard a task as is the
satisfying the amorous Emotions of a lustful Woman. Feeble Valentine's Back
(in my opinion) was not able enough to support that weighty burden, nor
perform so expected a duty, without the courteous relief of some more vigorous
Assistant: And I though my fidelity would engage Lauretta to favor me with
that desired toil above all men breathing.

While I flattered my fancy with these thoughts, an Accident, I little
suspected, blasted all my hopes in the Budd; It was this, Valentine (his
Nuptial Solemnities past) takes an eternal leave of Paris, and carries his
young Spouse and Train to his own habitation in the Country: I inquired of
diverse the place of his retreat, and at length, learnt it was in this County,
at a Castle of his Masters, not above four leagues from hence. I fumed and
raged with despair for the loss of my Lauretta, without whose presence I
thought it impossible for me to live. After the contrivance of a multitude of
strange designs, my disturbed Mind leaned to the resolution of unpluming my
Ambition, and imping (...)

By all this you may easily see his Conditions were very crooked, his heart
perverse and mervailously propense to all illicite pleasures; yet he was
deceived by false charms, and enjoyed not the happiness he had promised his
lustful thoughts, but on the contrary, was reduced to a very pitiful
Equipage; which may serve as a Pattern and Instruction for those that delight
in such dissolute courses, and make them acknowledge they are in the Path of
Perdition.

The end of the first Book.
THE COMIQUE HISTORY OF FRANCION.
The second Book.
THe desire Francion had to repose his bruised bones, made him entreat the
Gentleman that lay by his side, to have patience till next morning, if he
desired any farther information of his proceedings, or would move any questions
concerning what he had recited: But when he was asleep, his Companion, ravished
with the pleasantry of the several passages he had heard, was diverse times
ready to wake him with bursting into a loud laughter, yet his courtesy and
civil respects to the stranger, contending with the violence of his Emotion,
made him become so much Master of himself, as not to give his Passion any other
vent than by an inward titillation. Reflecting upon the name of Francion, he
began to remember the personage he had frequented in his tender years: But his
Actions and the lively description of his humor gave better instructions to
his Memory, than the lineaments of his feature. However he resolved not to
discover so suddenly the particular familiarities had formerly passed between
them: At length wearied with variety of imaginations, he suffered his Spirits
to submit to the charms of overcomming sleep, which playing the gentle thief,
soon robbed him of both sense and motion.

In another Bed in the same chamber, lay a certain old Woman, who tired with
traveling on foot, had taken up her lodging there, before any other company
arrived: By this time her first sleep was ended, and she had lost the power,
as well as the desire of sleeping any more, when Francion approached the Period
of his Narration; so she perceived he was a servant to the fair Dame Lauretta,
of whom no body could give a better account than her self: and had not
weariness and sleep barricado'd up her ears when he began his story, she might
have learned his name, which would have given her no less cognizance of him:
For she had often heard him mentioned, and sometimes seen him at the Court.

So not knowing who he was, the desire of being informed, and the curiosity she
had to see his face, not only hindered her repose, but made her leave her Couch
and strike fire (with a little tinder-box she bore about her) to light a
candle, which directed her steps to that side of the bed she conceived (by the
sound of his voice) he lay. Had you seen her advance her trembling limbs with
the candle in her hand, and no other covert than her smock, you would have
fancied her a Skeleton that had borrowed motion from the power of enchantment.
Having softly opened the curtain, she turned down the cloth a little way, that
covered his face, and viewing him by the help of her light, her Doubt soon
turned into a Confidence, he was the same Francion she had known at Court.

The Beauties of Lauretta had gained so entire a possession of Francion's
heart, that though sleep had made a seizure of this body, his active Spirits
were agitated at this instant, with the thoughts of her in a dream so
turbulent, as after the proffer of three or four ill-ranged words, he started
out of the bed. The old Woman ready to sink down with fear, withdrew a little
aside, and rested her self upon a chair, setting her candle upon a coffer by
her. Francion, after several turnings to and fro, threw himself upon her, with
these words, Ah my sweet Lauretta, I have thee, I have thee, it is impossible
thou should escape me now.

The Gentleman (who waked at the noise the old Woman made to light her candle,
though he would not speak) fell into so violent a laughter, as made the bed
shake under him. As for the old Woman, she hugged Francion as amorously as he
embraced her, and to answer his Caresses, she glued her lips to his, glad she
had so happily incountred one that did her a better turn than had been offered
her since Venus lost her Maidenhead; before whose birth (I believe by her
furrowed face) the flower of her Beauty (if ever she had any) was faded.

But Francion's Bedfellow stopped the current of her contentment; for pulling
away her kind Kisser by the hinder part of his shirt, he replaced him in his
bed, and then, How Sir? (said he) your Lauretta. resembles Ugliness it self,
or else certainly you do not know her well, since you take this creature for
her. Ah Heavens (replied he, rubbing his eyes) let me sleep, what is it you talk
of? Lift up your head (continued the other) and see who you have been
embracing: How? Who have I embraced? (answered Francion.) Do you not remember
you held me locked a good while in your arms, said the old Woman laughing, and
showing two discolored teeth, that stood in her mouth like a weather-beaten
Battlement, or two remaining Pinacles of an old ruined Steeple; Yes, it is true,
you did embrace and kiss me too.

Francion, viewing her as well as his drowsy eyes would give him leave,
answered, Boast not of what I have done to thee; for know I took thy Mouth for
no better than a Sink, or Common shore, and being ready to disembogue, I
approached thee, that I might spoil nothing in this room, but cast my Ordures
in a place, whose filthiness and infectious stench admits of no increase; it is
possible after a little time I should have turned thee my Backside too, and
made thy Mouth my Privy: And if I did touch thy skin, it was because I took it
for a piece of old Parchment, fit for no other use than to wipe a hole thy Nose
is not good enough to smell to. Ah Sir (said he, turning toward the Gentleman)
Will you persuade me then I could show any kindness to this old Biggin'd ape?
Don't you see she has nothing in her but what is capable to strangle Love and
engender Hate? Her hairs are fitter instruments for the Devils to dragg
souls by into Pluto's Kingdom, than to make chains for Cupid to captive
Lovers hearts. If she continue much longer in this World, it is because they
will have none of her in Hell, and the Tyrants that govern there are afraid
she is the Fury of the Furies. Have patience (answered the Gentleman) you
receive no dishonor for embracing her; Her eyes, more ardent than those
wandering flames are often seen in Marshes and about Rivers sides, have drawn
you into this Precipice; the glutinous quality of that blearie humor
overflowes them may serve for a sufficient excuse of your desire, if you had
the mischance to be caught for a while their Prisoner.

This discouse drew the old Woman, with her candle in her hand, to the Bedside
and made her address these words to Francion, If you had considered I am your
good friend Agatha, who has been always ready to do you pleasures at Paris, you
would not have requited my Courtesy with such injurious language. Ah, ah, it
is you then (answered Francion, with much seeming amazement) I know you very
well; It Is not a month yet since I was cured of a clap you made me get at
little James: Admit you were peppered (replied Agatha) you ought not to impute
the fault to me; as true as this candle burns, the impudent little queen swore
to me, she was as pure as Pearl of Or^riant, you would say Orient (interrupted
the Gentleman.) It Is confessed replied Agatha) but it is no matter how I speak,
I understand my self well enough.

This said, Agatha put her candle out, and returned to her own Bed, leaving
them to rest till morning, which arrived, they all began to rise at once. The
Gentleman knowing Francion came but in a Cart, advised him to send it back, and
offered him a better convenience to continue his journey; this courtesy
accepted, he dismissed his Conductor, with charge to tell no body whither he
had brought him: And after they had breakfasted together, Agatha, to satisfy
the Genteleman, who asked her in private, whence she came, and whither she was
then going; told him she came from Paris, and had taken that journey purposely
to see Lauretta, and endeavor to purchase some graces from her for a young
Exchecquer-man infinitely enamored of her. It Is hope of profit makes thee do
this, said the Gentleman: Yes Sir, replied she; Then (continued he) suppose
another should promise thee a greater reward, would thou not rather procure
his contentment than the former's? This not denied, the Gentleman persisted,
Let me conjure thee to decline this other engagement, and endeavor to bring
Lauretta to my Castle, where she shall see her Francion, whom she values above
all, as thou will learn by her own expressions; If thou perform'st this
service, He give thee as large contentment as thy own heart can wish, and take
thou no further care, we^l dedicate that day to Bacchus, and the God of Love;
nor shall there ought be wanting that may contribute to the completing of our
joys, only be secret, and discover not who I am. Agatha promised to coin
false money for him, if it were needful; and then returning to Francion, she
fell into the discourse of his affections: You dote upon a malicious
ill-condition'd woman (said she) I am sure Lauretta would be no whit sorry to
see you drowned, so she had the clothes: she does nothing but for profit. That
I have some reason to believe (replied Francion) for hearing me speak of a
fair Emerald I had, she begged it of me, and after I promised to give it her,
she showed me a kinder countenance than before. In the story I heard you relate
last night, I observed (continued Agatha) you said a Maid made you fall from
the top of a ladder to the ground; questionless 'twas by her Mistress command,
she gave you so rude a treatment, and perchance she helped her too, she is base
enough to act as unworthy things: Don't you perceive the impossibility she
pretended for you to see her Mistress was an absolute lie? She could have
given you more easy entrance into the Castle than by the window, but only she
had a mind to set a greater price upon her favors by that imaginary
difficulty. The bridge was drawn up (said Francion) I could not get in any
other way. She might have received you in the Castle in the daytime, and hid
you in some private corner, replied Agatha. That could not be contrived without
danger, answered Francion. I perceive you love her so well (continued Agatha)
you cannot believe she has any harm in her; you think all the virtues desirable
in one of her sex, have so fortified themselves in her soul, as they defend
her integrity, and hinder the approach of any vice. Perhaps you conceive she is
as pure a Virgin as when her Mother brought her into the world, because you
know Valentine is no such valiant Combatant, as to force an entrance: But I Will
cure you of this disease, and recount you the perfect story of her life, that
you may understand her humor, and know what trade she drives. For, since the
weather is so foul, we cannot yet go forth, we must have some divertisement to
quicken the Pace of Time.

No sooner had she spoke these words, but the Gentleman bending his steps
toward her, acknowledged the courtesy of her offer, and assured her he would
be very glad to hear her stories, for they could not be disagreeable: So,
after a little pause, and saying she should give them an account of her own, as
well as Lauretta's actions, she thus prepared their attention.

I will not play the Hypocrite to you (Gallants) nor be nice in revealing my
youthful Amouretts, in regard I find you are not Dosser-headed like diverse
others, and I know it is a glory for me to have followed the instinct of Mother
Nature. You must take notice then, my Father, not being able to maintain me
always at home, by reason of his great charge, and small revenue, put me at
fifteen years of age, to serve a Gentlewoman in Paris, whose husband had some
office toward the Law: In faith she was the wicked'st woman I ever saw; oh
Heavens! how will you believe it? He that needed her, had been better he had be
wedged to a Gibbet, or chained to a seat in a Gallie, than linked to her in the
bonds of Matrimony, his sufferance would not have been half so great: As soon
as e're she could get ready in a morning, she presently went to play; and
frolickt with her neighbor Gossips. If my Master came in late from the Hall,
'twas to small purpose to complain of emptiness and hunger, she never took care
to provide any thing for his dinner; for, because her stomach was crammed with
junkets and good drink, she thought others were as full as she. Besides, if he
began to give his tongue the liberty to express his dislike, he was forced to
close his mouth again immediately, for fear of irritating her fury more; Else
she would stun's ears with such incessant railing, as he must have put on the
armor of Job's patience to endure it. Though 'twas the multiplicity of his
occasions often hindered him from coming home betimes, she would scould, and say
his drunken companions had made him stay bowzing in some scurvy Cabaret. This
would make him take his Cloak and go dine abroad, but that made his cause
still worse; for she used so to contrive the business, that some of her
Gossips should send some unsuspected messenger to watch whither he went, and
then she would begin to rante in these terms: You see my house is detestable
to him, he never cares to come in it, neither to Bed nor Board and so continued
her clamours till some of her friends reproved her.

I give you leave to judge, if I had not a pleasant time in her service; Heaven
knows how often she has made me sup by roat, when she had bin feasting all day
among her fellow-Bibbers, and how many thumps and pinches she has given me,
especially if I set but a pin awry in her dress; and many times with a needle
she used to hold in hand, she would goad my arms when I least suspected
danger. Once the Kitchin-maid being out of the way at dinnertime, I was
commanded to make an Aumelet, it being Friday, but because I had put in one bad
Eg, and some tallow fell by chance into the pan, my Mrs, clapped it like a mask
all over my face. If I had not pleased her at any time in my work, when any of
her Gossips came to visit her, I was the only subject of their discourse. My
maid (says she) does this, and she does that, as I am an honest woman she is
almost a perfect Devil, she wants nothing of it but the horns. Mine (answered
another of the Gossips) exceeds her in wickedness, I Will tell you some of her
tricks: Then she began to reckon up her Maids faults, among others, she said,
whereas a Vessel of wine used to last 3. Months, it would not hold out two
since that wench had the key of the Cellar; that having a shrewd suspicion she
used to drink out of the Pot every time she went to draw Wine, to be
ascertained of her doubt, she smeared the inner ring of the pot-lid with ink,
so the wench returned with a black cressant on her forehead, which discovered
what she had formerly denied: If she were sent of an errand, she was so full of
chat, as a whole days time was little enough for her to find the way home
again, especially if she met with any idle fellows that would hold her in
discourse of Love. This was our Mistresses conversation when they met.

But I Will assure you, when chance conducted me into the company of that Maid,
her Mistress had so blazoned, I wanted neither Tongue nor Memory to repeat her
every Particular. Then we took our turns to prattle, having the opportunity to
condole each other's misfortunes, and we ripped up our Madams faults as fast as
they had ours: Oh! it is a Sovereign Pleasure to speak ill of those have given
the offense; and you may think we were not sparing of our tongues.

Now I must tell you how, and wherefore I left that service: My Mistress was
very sumptuous in her raiment, and her greatest contentment consisted in being
gallanter than her Neighbors; so that if she saw any one with a new Gown, or
other toy alamode, she was mad to have the like; this reduced her to
comportments extremely contrary to her disposition; for she was forced to fawn
and caress her husband with extraordinary submissions to draw the Marrow out of
his Purse. Ah my Dear! my Minion (would she say, smothering him almost with
throngs of kisses) Will thou always endure that little Beggars brat at the
corner of our street, who was taken not long since lowsing under a hedge,
should out-brave and scoff at me every time she meets me, as if I were nothing
in comparison of her, because she has a finer Gown than I? Will thou always
suffer me to look but like a Dish-clout, or a Maukin, to her, and if Chance
brings me into her company, I should be taken for no better than her
Chambermaid? Do not thou know her Husband's Profession is not so honorable
as thine, and that she is not worth, at the utmost, twelve thousand Francs,
whereas thy Wife, if duly esteemed, is better than fifteen thousand? I have had
never a new Gown nor Petticoat since my Wedding day, I prithee give me money to
furnish my self now.

This was the discourse she made her Husband in her necessities, and having
learned the trick to sweeten him, and lull his mind asleep with pleasing
Daliances, promising to recompense his liberality with an obedient observance
for the future, sometimes she obtained what ever she desired of him.

One day, her vanity pressing her to desire a Neck-lace of bigger Pearls than
those she had, she resolved to make recourse to her ordinary flatteries; but
something had put my Master in so froward a humor, that he repulsed her with
such terms as she deserved: finding fair language would prevail nothing with
him, she flew into another extremity, and began to revile him in the basest and
bitterest manner her fury could invent: She reproached him with ingratitude,
telling him, had it not been for her, he might be glad to be received in a
Hospital, that the fortune she brought had raised him from the Dunghill, and
yet he refused to give her a petty sum of money to buy her necessarries: She
called him Son of a Peasant, and said he was fitter to work day-work in the
Vineyards (as he was bred to while he was young) than to be her Husband. This
touched him to the quick, and to revenge himself, somewhat he replied, The
plain Country people, without fraud and malice, were every whit as good as such
cheating Merchants as her Father was: Then he began to sum up the knaveries,
usuries and extortions of her Progenitors. Hereat her rage was so increased,
that, setting her arms a-kemboll, and darting fire from her eyes, How now
Villain (said she) art thou then so audacious, as to speak ill of him, who
took so much pains to purchase the estate thou now enjoyest? Ha! by S. Barbara,
Merchants are a thousand times more estimable than such rascally Proctors as
thou art. Thou make thy boasts among thy Pot-companions, that by thy
industry, thou have got the greatest part of the Estate thou now possessest;
but thou lie (false Traitor) all came from my dear Father, whose soul is
now in glory: Alas (continued he, with a shower of tears, and many
intermittent sobbs) he never committed so grand an error, as that of giving me
in marriage with such a Jew as thou art. Then having given her heart a little
ease by the vent of her eyes, she began to reproach his profession, telling him
if he had added any thing to the fortune she brought him, it was but by
cousening and screwing up his Clients; from these Generals she descended to
the repetition of his particular Crimes in such open terms, as had he been in
the humor to have gone presently to confession, he needed no better Directory,
than her tongue to instruct him what he had to accuse himself of before the
Priest.

This was a good conveniencie: and it was but beating her upon any great
Holydaies-Eve (if he desired to recall to his memory any past offenses) and it
would save him the labor of perusing the Miroic of Confession.

By chance a Country-fellow being in the Office with his Clerk, heard (among
other things) my Mistress charge her Husband with cheating that poor man not
long before, making him pay six Crowns for expedition of a business that was
not worth one. Interest adding Boldness to his Rusticity, the Swain stepped
chafing into the room where the dispute was held, and with much clamor, You
Master Proctor (said he) Restore me the five Crowns you took of me the other
day more than was your due, I Will appeal to your Wifes testimony if I have not
reason to demand it. My Master having his mind sufficiently perplexed already,
returned him no answer; This silence made the Clown cry louder; mean time my
Mistress held her peace, having almost rent her throat with brawling; and
leaving them to decide their own difference, she flung out of the house, with
so much fury in her face, as her looks would have frighted any that fixed their
eyes upon her. I, whose office it was to follow her like a shadow when ere she
went abroad, failed not of my duty at that time, but waited on her to a
Kinsmans house of hers, where she took full liberty to inveigh against the
baseness and avarice of her husband; and concluded her railing with a Vow she
would be divorced from him. This Kinsman, who understood the querks and malices
of Law, engaged to commence and prosecute the Suit. At length, because she was
a friend to him that sat at that time Judge in all such Causes, (of whom I Will
say no more, than that he was as honest a man as some others of his Cloth) she
obtained a Writ of Separation.

The Sentence passed thus in her favor, she continued still in the house where
she first retired, and received frequent Visits of several spruce young
Gallants: Among the rest, one of a very gentile and winning garb, (after
lending me certain amorous looks in my Mistresses chamber, that displeased me
not) as I waited on him down with a Candle, offered to kiss me upon the
stairs; but I thrust him so rudely back, as I perceived much dis-satisfaction
in his countenance at my coyness. A few days after he returned, and in
recompense of his former fault, he handsomely conveyed into my hand some
Quardecu's, which rendered me as pliant and supple as a Spanish Glove; not that
I was ready to accord him the least favor in the world; I mean only, I felt
something plead an interest for him in my inclinations.

I never could have thought he affected me so much, as afterward I perceived
he did, if a strange woman I met by chance at the Hall, had not assured me of
his love, telling me, I had then the opportunity of making my self the
happiest Woman breathing, if I would but leave my Mistress and go dwell with
him. This was enough to make me spread my Plumes, and conceit my self much
handsomer than my Mistress, since one of her own Pigeons left her Dovecoat to
come to mine. And in effect, I remember she was so jealous of me, while I lived
with her husband, that one time she refused to take her recreation in the
Country, lest in her absence he should have made me lie in the high Bed.

You laugh (Gentlemen to hear me talk thus; What? Cannot you believe I was
beautiful in my youth? Do you think in diverse parts of the earth, which now
appear all rugged, and full of furrows and Cart-ruts, it is impossible there
should heretofore have been most curious Gardens enriched with all sorts of
Plants, and enameled with diverse delicate Flowers? So may it not as well be
granted, that this face of mine, though laid all in plaits, and covered with a
dry discolored skin, has in my youth been plump, smooth, and of a pure
complexion? Are you yet ignorant of the power of Time, whose inexorable hand
spares nothing? Yes, yes Gallants, in those days (I can tell you) my eyes were
the Love-god^ Arsenall, there he stored up his keenest shafts, and their
lightning was the Artillery he used to quell and inflame Men's hearts: Had I
been then so wise I might have had my Picture drawn, It would have stood in
some stead now, to prove this Verity, which you will scarce believe from my
relation; But alas! if I had it now to show, it would make me shed more tears,
than my lovers ever did for me, there would be no end of my sorrow for the
loss of those attractions I then was Mistress of; yet my comfort is, what
graces soever by the indulgence of nature I then possessed, I employed them
well enough (Heavens be praised) I Am sure there is no body living in all France
can speak of my deportments but my self, all my acquaintance of those days are
gone to prick me out a lodging in the other world.

She whok new the most of my affair^ departed one of the first, that was Dame
Perretta, who accosted me at the Hall: She indeed fed me with as many splendid
hopes as any Wench of my condition could ever expect, and prayed me to come to
her house as soon as I could unfasten my self from my Mistress. This assurance
of a retiring place, made me resolve to leave my service, and the very same day
I took occasion to tell her I would be gone, having endured a loud Lecture of
an hour long, for buying some fish that stunk.

When I had packed up all my things, I trudged to find Perretta out, whose
golden promises made me expect no less than an Epitome of Paradise: See how
simple I was in that age of innocence. After some other discourse in her own
house, Mother (said I to her) What is the reason you do not accept of this
gallant condition your self, which you say you have procured for me? Why do not
you go serve this noble Gentleman, where you shall be maintained with good
Clothes, great Cheer, and never work but when you list? Because I love thee
better than my self (answered she, laughing) Ah! thou art an ignorant creature,
I see it is but need thou should come to be instructed at my School; Did not
I tell thee he loves thee? and do not thou see I am no Bait for such Fish, my
time is past for Gallants Palats? He must have a young tender Bit, that must
serve him as well in Bed as at Board. This said, she began an Oration, in her
School-terms, full of persuasive Arguments, to make me chase away those fond
Concomitants of the Female Sex, Fear and Shame, condemning the foolish
scruples and niceties of some Women; and in conclusion, she represented me the
Delights of Love so feelingly, as my attentive Ears sucking in all her Words,
convayed her Reasons to my Heart, whereby convinced, I resolved to follow her
Counsels, imagining she could not err, since Age and Experience had given her
a Knowledge in all things.

Monsieur de la Fontaine (so that gallant Gentleman fancied me, was called)
failed not to come that afternoon to Perretta's house, whence he resolved not
to stir, till she had executed the Commission he gave her to seduce me. As soon
as he was permitted to see me, he expressed an extreme satisfaction, and finding
me willing to do what he should please to command, after rewarding his
Procuress well, he made me be carried with some household stuff, to a
Country House he had not far from Paris.

All the while I stayed there in daytime, he used me as his servant, and at
night, to make me amends, he treated me as if I had been his wife. There I
learnt what it was to lie with Men, and was sorry for nothing I had not begun
to taste those sweets of copulation sooner: After a little time, I grew so
wonted to these delights, that I could want them no more than Meat or Drink.
The mischief was. Monsieur de la Fontaine falling sick, I was enforced to
suffer the rigor of a Fast, though I always lay in the same Bed with him;
For, he said he loved me so well, that if he only touched me a little, he
fancied he felt some abatement of his pains: But all this abated not the heat
of my Desires. At last, not able to contain my self any longer, I resolved to
lend an ear to the importunate pursuit of a Valet in the House, who was so
ambitious, as to envy his Masters privilege, and desire to be mounted on his
Saddle. We were not long a forging together the Bonds of an Amorous
familiarity, and I found by effects, the Bravery and high quality of a person
are not the things a woman ought to look upon, when only her heightened
appetite invites her to taste the sweets of Love; for, that fellow with his
course russet slops gave me the enjoyment of as much pleasure as his Master in
his Satin suites.

At length Monsieur de la Fontaine, recovering perfect health, paid me to the
full all his Arreares of Love, and his Man never failed to do his part, when I
could give him opportunity, so that my Field never lay fallow, and if it
produced no fruit, it was not for want of tillage.

I cannot tell what you mean, Francion, but by your gesture I conceive you
laugh at me: Do you wonder to hear me relate the naked truth? Is it possible
that silly Modesty, befit none but fools, should be esteemed by so brave and
knowing a Gentleman as you?

The Discomposure of my Countenance (answered Francion) proceeds from nothing,
but the exceeding satisfaction and delight that ravishes me to hear you
discourse with so much freedom; and there remains nothing to complete my
contentment, but that you will hasten to acquaint us with the story of Lauretta.

Every thing in its proper place (replied Agatha) you shall have no occasion to
be weary, nor think me over tedious: Monsieur de la Fontaine's Man having
entered into my favor by little and little, gained a greater share in my
affections than his Master, in regard the equality of our conditions permitted
me to speak more familiarly to him and in fine, I divided my heart no longer in
two parts, but gave him entire possession of the whole.

I had some inkling, that my Master, persuaded by his friends to leave that
course of life, was upon terms of Marriage. His deliberation made me contrive
a design for my own advantage, being in a manner sure, when he brought home
his Wife, she would make him turn me shamefully out of doors. To prevent this
disparagement, I resolved to play him a slippery trick by slight of hand, that
should more than pay me my wages, and steal away with my purchase in the
night. Marsault, my beloved fellow servants, acquainted with my intentions, was
easily persuaded to assist me in the attempt: so, as the Fates would have it,
our Master, a few days after, was solicited to take a thousand Livers in part
of a Mortgage of some Land he had then in his hand; This money I saw him tell
piece after piece, and discovered (his house being not very well furnished) he
was content to trust it in the drawer of a Court-cup-board.

Fortune continued her smiles as favorably as I could desire in this
Occurrence, for he was invited that night to supper at a Country-gentleman's
house, a long league from his own. As soon as we thought him sure, Marsault
turned the Cup-board, and having taken out a board behind, drew all the money
out, and afterward mended it again the best he could; And for my better
advantage, it was almost all Gold: so I could easily put the whole sum in a
little Box.

About Nine a clock at night, we went both into the Garden to escape out at the
back door, and Marsault was already forth, when I heard my Master knocking at
the fore-gate: the fear of being followed and surprised, made me shut the
Garden door, and run back into the house to let him in, and lest the Money
should be found about me, I stole down in the night and hid it in a Vineyard
within our enclosure, where seldom any body used to enter. Next morning my
Master feeling in his Cup-board, and not finding what he left there, he
thundered most terribly about the house, and at last understanding his Man had
been absent ever since the night before, he had no suspicion of any body else
but him: For my part I conceived Marsault, not daring to return home, stayed
somewhere thereabouts expecting my coming: But 'twas impossible for me to
follow him so quickly; for, then I had quitted the resolution of going away
without my Masters leave; However I endeavored to hasten my departure, and to
that purpose one day I told him, I heard he was upon the point of Marriage,
which effected I could not remain any longer in his house.

After a little faint denial he consented to my leaving him, and I believe he
was glad I made the first Motion. Both parties agreed, I went one night to digg
up my treasure, and next morning fairly took my leave. With what my Master
gave me, and I had purchased by my own industry, I thought my self exceeding
rich, and my Rendez-vous was at Perretta's house, where I was received with
much joy and courtesy. When she understood what money I had, she counseled me
to make use of that, as a bait to draw in more such Customers, and made me put
my self in the habit of a 'Damoiselle, which (she said) made me look like a
little Nymph of the Woods. Oh Heavens! how glad was I to see my self tricked up
in such gay rayments, and have always some young gallants addressing their
courtship to me, as if I had been some Lady of high quality: But the presents I
received were not of such Value as to defray our Charges, which were great as
well for Diet as House-rent; Besides Perretta would have the happiness (as
well as I) to play the Gentlewoman a little before her death: So that in short
time I saw the end of my Gold, and had nothing to live on but my bare industry.

One evening Perretta condoling with me the Calamities of the Times, we heard a
bustling in the street: Her curiosity carried her to the Door to see what the
matter was. But she admired, when a man running as fast as his legs could bear
him, put into her hands a Velvet Cloak lined through with a rich Plush, without
speaking a word to her; I thought it was because he knew her, for her fame was
sufficiently spread about the City, and in all the Academies of Love she was
the Lamp that gave light to all Women of her vocation.

The Pawn she had received thus by chance was extremely welcome, and we fell
presently to ripping it by Candlelight, lest it should be known when we
carried it to the Frippery: We hoped the money we should get for this purchase,
would, besides relieving our present necessities, furnish us with an
indifferent stock to maintain us till more came: But next day, as we sat
talking with an honest man, that often used to visit us, we heard one knock
below; the Maid had no sonner opened the door, but in rushed three sturdy
Soldiers, and asked for the Mistress of the house: She hearing them inquire
for her, went down to know their business; one of them presently stepping to
her, said, Pray restore me the Cloak I delivered you last night, as I passed by
this way. Perretta not willing to part with such a prey, denied she ever
received any Cloak of him, and said she knew him not so well to take any thing
from his hands to keep. This made them word it high, and raise such a
Tintamarre, as invited me to descend to know the cause of that disorder; but
coming into the entry, I presently knew one of the three demanded the Cloak,
was my former friend Marsault; startled, and in some confusion at the sight of
him, I retreated and hid my self, fearing to be discovered by him. Mean time,
the contestation grew so hot, as the chief Officer of that ward, receiving
notice of the difference, came thither with his guard, not so much to decide
the quarrel, as to get his share of the Booty. Observe but this passage a
little, and how just this Man of Justice was. Those that contended with
Perretta were Thieves, and he knew them to be no better, yet he stuck not to
affirm the Cloak, they had stolen, belonged to them, as if it had been a
Prize taken from an Enemy, and condemned Perretta to restore it them: So she
(knowing the power of that officer in those parts, and how much it concerned
her to gain his good opinion) would not provoke his indignation by appealing
from his sentence; but confessing she had, indeed, received a Cloak, she
declared (to avoid further dispute) she was willing to render such satisfaction
for it, as he should ordain, though of the Cloak it self it was impossible for
her to make restitution, having already sold it; and if he, and the three
Soldiers (who laid claim to it) would accept of an entertainment at her house,
they should be very welcome, and see the spending of all the money it yielded
her.

Small invitation served their turn, they consented to the first motion, and
were ready, without further delay, to accept the offer: The Maid was presently
sent to all places likely to furnish, in a moment, wherewith to cover a table:
Mean time, when I saw Marsault come into the Room where I was, I changed my
color in one instant, oftener than a Cameleon could do all his life, and for my
further mischief, he, that sat talking with me, went away, so I was enforced
to entertain those that staid.

Marsault regarded me with attentive eyes, and observed my actions and tone
with an astonishment not ordinary; For he began to harbor a conceit I was the
same Agatha, with whom he had formerly contracted so familiar an acquaintance;
but my change of habit made him distrust his judgment At our meal there was no
spare of Liquor, and our Guests, drunk into kinder humors, acknowledged
themselves fully satisfied of Perretta, and, because our Professions had need
of each others support, we tied our selves by mutual Oaths, to preserve an
inviolable amity, and favorable assistance to eternity. This done, they
retired to their own habitations, and next day Marsault failed not to return
with five of his companions, in better equipage than those I had seen the day
before: After some discourse of indifferent subjects, taking me a little aside,
It Is but in vain (said he) for you to endeavor to conceal your self, I know
you well enough. To which I presently replied, It never was my intent to keep
any thing secret from his knowledge, and he must excuse me, if the precedent
day I made him no adresses, nor discovered him my condition, in regard I
thought it not so convenient, because of the other persons then present.
Satisfied with this Reply, he began to examine me what I had done with our
Masters money: I suspecting he would urge that question whenever he found
opportunity, had prepared confidence enough to make him believe Monsieur de la
Fontaine, after much search, finding it in my Coffer, had taken it again from
me, and afterward turned me out of doors: As for my present condition, it
required no admiration, for he might easily guess how I put my self into that
gallant garb, and which way I maintained it.

Thus in an instant were we reconciled, and the knot of our friendship being
made faster now than ever, by the renewing of our mutual embraces, he took his
turn to speak; and giving me a particular account how he came to Paris, and
what manner of life he had chosen; He told me, being no longer able to stoop
and subject his spirit to the stern commands of severe Masters, he met with a
gallant man of his own Country (one of those I saw) who had instructed him to
seek (as he did himself) occasions of adventures night and day, and robb all
they could: and in further vindication of his profession, he assured me, there
were great numbers of Blades in Paris, that lived by no other trade, and had
several marks among themselves, that distinguished them from others: as to
wear all red Cloaks, low Collars, their Hats trussed up on one side, and a
plume of Feathers on the other, whence (and not improperly) the Vulgar imposed
upon that Fraternity the name of Plumers. Their exercise by daytime, was to
wander about the streets, and create quarrels upon nothing, purposely to try
if they could handsomely twich a Cloak among the confused multitude: In the
night they had other different ways of keeping their hands in practice Some of
them had the industry to insinuate themselves into company, enticing those they
met to engage in play with them, and then win their money by new invented
Cheats; and they had the Policy to keep so fair a Correspondence with the
Ministers of Justice, as they very seldom under-went any disgrace or
punishment, unless they encountered some powerful Adversary that had his Purse
better lined than theirs. In sum, after he had acquainted me with the
chiefest secrets of their consortship, I took the liberty to ask him if none of
them apprehended hanging: Scarce any of us (answered he) ever suffer such a
thought to harbor in our minds, we fear not to assist oft-times at the
execution of some of our own Camarades; for, nothing dazles our eyes, nothing
is capable of moving our hearts, so much as the sacred thirst of Gold, nor are
our considerations bent to any thing but seeking wherewithal to spend our days
in delight; If any of them chanced to be made dance in the rope, they thought him
happy to be so freed of the care and trouble attends the miserable indigent. We
are for the most part (continued he) Servants of all sorts of qualities, that
will serve no longer; And besides, among us there are diverse trades-mens Sons
of the City, who not willing to contein themselves within the narrow bounds of
their Father's mean conditions, have made themselves Brothers of the Blade,
thinking the repute and garb of Swordmen, would conduce much to their
Gentility; and after the expense of what they had in possession, and their
Parents denial of further subsistence, used means to be admitted into our
Society: Nay, I will tell you more (and what your Judgment perchance will
hardly give you leave to credit) there are some Noblemen of so high quality, as
(for respect to their dignities) I shall forbear to name them, who delighting
in our course of life, disdame not oft-times to keep us company, and use our
Nocturnall exercise, only with this difference, We dis-mantle all sorts of
People, Fortune directs into our hands, and they scorn to attaque any but
persons of quality, especially such as seem able to resist and bear the marks
of Courage in their countenance, purposely to make trial of their skill at Arms
and Valor. Yet they do take Cloaks too, and glory in having gotten such a
purchase at the point of their swords; for which gallantry, they are called
Silk-snatchers, whereas we (who lurk in Corners, and prey upon all Passengers
without distinction) have the general appellation of Cloak-twichers.

When Marsault had assured me of the truth of this Relation, I admired the
Brutality and Baseness of those Noble-mens souls (unworthy of the Dignity and
Rank they held at Court) who patronized that Vice, by clothing it with the
Livery of a remarkable Virtue. The Plumers and Filous, methinks, were not so
blameable, in regard their End was only to preserve themselves from Want; they
were not so vain nor foolish to cry up unwarrantable victory, gained over
persons assaulted unawares.

In sum, Perretta having gained their acquaintance, became their Receiver,
and concealed the Goods they stole, retaining a part to her self, which served
to maintain us. The Commissary of the quarter connived at this correspondence,
though the Neigbours importuned him without cease to unneast us, for, the share
we allowed him of our profits, was not so inconsiderable, but it contributed
much to the warming of h^s Kitchen.

During this intelligence, we played a number of admirable Cheats, still
squeezing one or others purse (maugre all resistance) to pay the excessive
expense of our continual disorders: I shall only trouble you with the
relation of one, which (I dare say) you will not grudge the time to hear. The
design had its source and conduct from the Invention of Marsault, whose
Practice had rendered him one of the subtilest and most exquisite Rogues, among
the Bands of Rougets and Grisens, so the Companies of his Profession, for
distinction, styled themselves. He continued making use of me as often as desire
invited him, and was not Jealous though others enjoyed the same Privilege, so
it brought him in Profit, and none the Promoter of their Pleasures but
himself. From all parts of Paris he procured me Customers, and none of the
meanest sort, he scorned to fasten his fancy upon common Preyes; His aim was
always at the fairest Marks, and to bring me into the most beneficial
Practice; as you shall see by the sequel of this Narration.

Chance conducting Marsault to take a lodging in the suburbs of St. Germain,
where a young English Gentleman had entered himself in Pension; after some
handsome insinuations as Prologues to their acquaintance, the stranger took
occasion to say, he saw no such beautiful Women in France as in his Country.
Marsault, desiring no better than to find his inclinations that way bent,
cunningly replied, They hide themselves at Paris in their own houses, like
Treasures of high value, that are not to be exposed to every vulgar view. This
answer giving the young Gentleman confidence enough to ask if he knew any of
those eminent Beauties: I Will show you the handsomest my eyes ever yet beheld
(continued Marsault) but she is maintained by one of the greatest Noblemen of
the Court. This said, he invited him to take a walk, telling him by the way, a
thousand Mervails of my Perfections, and at last bringing him through our
street, he showed him where I dwelt. The Plot was so contrived, that he was
forced to make at least ten or twelve several journeys before he could see me
at the window, (for I looked not often out) and when I did appear, I chose the
advantage of the Evening; so that the poor English man, already pre-possessed
with an opinion of transcendent Beauties, and not able, at that distance, to
discover by twy-light, the defects of my face (if it then had any) believed me
the perfectest of all Nature's handy-works. Marsault perceiving the Fish begin
to bite, as they returned home, This Lady and I (said he) are not so
unacquainted, but that she acknowledges me her kinsman, where ever I chance to
see her. This presently bred a curiosity in the Stranger, to ask him if he went
not sometimes to visit me, and if he might not have the favor to accompany him
to my lodging How Sir ( replied Marsault) I can scarce obtain that Privilege
for my self; for the Nobleman, whose Mistress she is, though he loves her as
his soul, is so exceeding jealous, as the least action she does, is observed
by the Spies he has over her, which hinder her from conversing with any body,
especially in private: Besides, if you harbor any hopes of purchasing a place
in her affections, I believe you will not find it so sensible as you imagine,
though your merit (I must confess) is infinite; for, she has already lodged
her heart too well, so suddenly to remove it.

This difficulty added fuel to the fire, and rendered my young Gallant more
importunate; No day passed but he went the Round about my house, as if he came
to view the Walls, and take it by assault. At last, after some instructions how
to play my game, as my new Amorist walked gazing toward my window. I still
would find some occasion to be peeping out, and answer his looks with such
languishing glances, as if I had been ready to resign my Life to Love. One day
Marsault staid on purpose to discourse with me at the door, knowing his
Camarade was not far off, and as he passed, Pray who is that Stanger? (said I
aloud) He is a very complete Gentleman.

This word (which he o're-heard conveyed its pleasing poison through his Ears
into his Heart; yet his passion was nothing in comparison of those flames he
felt torment his breast, when Marsault being returned to his lodging) told him
I inquired more particularly of him after he was gone by, that I expressed such
contentment in seeing him, as I always took occasion to stand at Window about
the hour I had observed him walk that way. This is a fair beginning for your
love (continued he) persist at all adventures, I Am confident I can contribute
something to the advancement of your Interests. My English man, drunk with
contentment, knew no other way to express his joy and thankfulness at
present, but by often iterating his embraces and caresses to Marsault; who, to
begin to feather his Nest, desired his Host to give out, he owed him fifty
Crowns for Diet and Lodging: This fellow (the Host) kept a Cabaret, and went a
share with the Filous, when they enticed their Gulls in there to drink, and be
cheated of their money at play, or forced to part with it upon harder terms; so
there needed no great entreaty to make him grant such a request to one of his
own Society. All thus agreed, as Marsault was conversing with the Englishman,
the Host, with a feigned severity, came and told him, he had present occasion
for the fifty crowns he owed him, and he must, and should pay him: Marsault
replied, he had money enough to discharge ten times such a debt, but could not
command it at present; with this the Host fell a vapouring and swearing, he
would be fooled no longer, he should pay him his money, or he would fetch those
should lay him fast enough. When he was gone out of the Room, Marsault
pretending to be afraid he should bring Sergeants to affront him, desired the
Englishman to assist him in that extremity, and without much difficulty,
obtained the full sum he demanded, promising in very short time to return it,
and threatening to be revenged of his Landlord for reducing him to such an
exigence: But, in consideration of the grand favor he acknowledged from his
courtesy (after contenting that uncivil fellow's greediness) he said he
would make a step to my house to sound me once again, if my heart might not be
rendered sensible of any other flames besides his, whom he knew I loved already.

At his return, he made the poor Fool believe, he had so prepared the way for
him to my mind, as he should find me entirely disposed to contract a perfect
Amity with him, assuring him I desired nothing more than the enjoyment of his
conversation. Then he told him, he would do himself much right, and advance the
achievement of his desires, if he sent me some pretty Present, as a Diamond
bodkin to put in my hair, which he had observed I wanted; for (said he) Women
in this country are of a craving disposition, and inclinable to love those best
that spend most, and charm them with the greatest gifts. This passionate
Stranger went presently to buy what Marsault bad him, and entrusted it in his
hands to bring me, with promise he should see me wear it, when he found
convenience to conduct him into my presence. Mean time, at night, my Gallant
thinking Music might help to mollify my heart, would needs entertain me with
a Se^enade, and having learned to scratch three or four sorry tunes upon the
Lute, he placed himself under my window, and to a strange pitiful Air croak d
out this ridiculous Ditty, in such an accent, as I never had more ado to
refrain laughing.

Fain would mi find a cure for pains mi feel,
but mi can none obtain,
For de fare shi posses de eart of mi
is all full of disdain.
I never had better sport than at the simple eagerness of this fond forrainer,
and receiving notice next day what time he was to visit me, I waited his
coming at the door, where he accosted me with such over-action in his
complements, as it was no easy task for me to keep my countenance. He
understood not French very well, not I his Fustian Language; so our discourse
was a perpetual Nonsense: When he made me tenders of his affection, I thought
he had reproached me the rich Present he had sent me, Yet I was not ready to
return it him: When I applauded his Merits, he answered me, if Paris had
afforded a fairer Diamond than that he sent me, it should have been at my
service.

At length Marsault taking upon him the office of Trucheman, saved us both a
labor, and made us better understand each others meaning, telling me in two
words, That gallant Gentleman I saw, was ready to die with Love for me: And
after I had replied, he told the Stranger, Above all vices in the world I
abhorred the sin of Ingratitude, and should be ready to answer his affection,
since it was accompanied with such incomparable ornaments of Nature, and inward
Perfections, as had rendered my Soul his Captive.

Just at the close of this Discourse, Perretta coming out of her Chamber, said
in an angry tone, as if she had been offended at my stay, Come hither, who do
you speak with there below? I am talking with my Cousin (answered I:) then in a
dejected manner, that betrayed some fear, I presently bade adieu to my real
Servant, and feined Kinsman, who (after their departure) failed not to tell
this Amorist, she whom he heard begin to chide, was an old Woman the Nobleman
had hired on purpose to guard me, and if he pretended ever to make a Conquest
of so precious a Treasure as my Beauty, he must endeavor to charm that
sleepless Dragon, which he thought not impossible, if he blinded her with some
Crowns of Gold. The Bands of his Affection were so firmly tied, that he easily
consented to loosen those of his purse: So the next day returning with
Marsault, and finding Perretta at the door, she had no sooner declared by way
of discourse, that she was much straightened for want of money, and knew not on a
sudden where to borrow any, but he offered to bring her presently as much as
her occasions did require; and in effect, returning instantly to his lodging,
fetch'h her an hundred Livres, which was about the sum she told Marsault she
wanted. After he had counted it to her in her Chamber, he whispered Marsault in
the ear, and bade him remember his business; and he having discoursed a while
in private with Perretta, returned him this pleasing answer, that overcome by
his courtesy, she was resolved to fail in the fidelity she had promised to a
great Nobleman to comply with his desires, and give him the opportunity of
enjoying me, if his passion could dispense but with so many hours delay as the
Sun required to complete his next days course.

The time for this amorous appointment being expired, my Lover came to our
house, attired (I think I might say tired) with a suit covered all over with
very rich Gold lace: For, though the King had forbid his subjects those
superfluities, he, who was a stranger took pleasure in such Gayes, on purpose
to be the more noted by wearing Clothes out of the Common Mode. All his body
was most curiously spunged and bathed in perfumed waters; for, imagining he was
to lie with the Mistress of a Grandee, accustomed to the sumptuous treats of
high persons, he thought he must not accost her in any meaner way, lest he
should be despised. When we were together in the Bed, I must confess I did not
observe the Precept Perretta and Marsault gave me, which was not to impart the
sift and last favor of Love, nor suffer my Amorist to exceed the Privilege of
these four Preparatives, Seeing, Speaking, Kissing and Feeling: For (why
should I dissemble?) I considered not so much the profit they assured me I
should reap, by counterfeiting a nice unwillingness, as the pleasure I then
felt, tickling and provoking my appetite to the free enjoyment of those
Delights the heat of Love communicates in such encounters. Beside, the
curiosity I had to try if there were more contentment with a Forreiner than a
Frenchman; this Gentleman was so fair, so sweet, and had so delicate a skin,
that (in faith) I must have been less humane than a Tygress, to refuse making
his Needle touch the Pole its point stood toward, with so much vigorous
sympathy.

Our Commissary, who had quickly notice of this new Purchase, came to have a
Gleaning of our Harvest, while we were in the closest embraces you can imagine;
Perretta opened him gently the door, with admonition to play his part
discreetly. At his arrival I rose, hastily conveying my self in my smock,
betwixt the bed and wall, and my Lover distracted at this surprise, hearing him
say, To Prison with her, ran presently to his sword, but was hindered from doing
any execution by a Sergeant and his Assistant, who furiously seized his Arm,
threatening to provide him a lodging at the Kings charge. After a multitude of
fruitless supplications he considered his best way was to make use of that
divine Metal the whole world is enchanted with, and lightening his pockets of
some Crowns of Gold, he stopped the mouths of those greedy Curres so well, as
they soon gave over barking, and left us in full liberty to renew our sports in
Bed.

This was the first Alarm, but not the last nor the most dangerous; for as
these Rascals spirits were revived, and the fear dispersed (which had almost
congealed their Blood, and rendered them as stupid, as if they had been stunned
with the sudden stroke of Death) being ready to make themselves merry with his
money, one knocked like a Person of Authority at the door; which presently
unbolted, up comes one of Marsault's Companions, clad like a Lord indeed, into
my Chamber, with three others at his heels, who by their respects and
distance, seemed to be his Servants: I, who was acquainted with their Mummerie,
made my Bed-felow believe this was the Nobleman maintained me, and desired him
to hide himself behind the Hangings. This vapouring Cloak-twicher, who
personated the Grandee to the life, proudly asked Perretta where I was: She Is
already in bed (answered she) for we expected not your coming this night;
besides, she has a pain in her head that indisposes her very much Came not my
little Page hither this Evening, to tell you I would not fail to visi^t her?
replied the Brave, We see him not, said Perretta. What a young Rogue's this
(continued he) I shall teach him to do what I command, He Is trifling away his
time at play somewhere among his companions: I thought to have bin here sooner,
but after waiting on the K. at supper, I was constrained by his Majesty's
particular command, to retire into the private closet with him, to receive the
honor he was pleased to do me, by the communication of some of his most
secret intentions: I came but immediately from thence, and because I would not
go home to my own house, I have commanded my servants to bring my supper
hither. This said, one of his Attendants covered the table, while the rest
brought in several dishes of meat.

My Lord was no sooner set, but fell to work with his Chops, and after drinking
a glass of wine, and wiping his Mustachoes with a notable affected gravity,
Agatha my pretty Mistress (said he to me aloud are you asleep? Shall we have no
Love-toys to night? At these words, as if I had awaked out of a sound sleep,
drawing the curtain a little aside (I answered, rubbing my eyes) I would do
what he pleased. You must rise then for a while, and eat a bit ( said Perretta
to me) I am sure you have not supped, and I believe your disease consists only
in opinion: It is no matter whether the Disease, indisposed me a while since,
were imaginary or not (replied I) since now I feel my self absolutely cured: So
putting on an under Petticoat, and my Mantle about my shoulders, I stepped out at
the farther side of the Bed, and came round about to pay my obeisance to this
brave Lord. After saluting me, You had somebody (said he) behind the Bed to
help dress you, or I am mistaken, yet I see no body come forth after you. Be
pleased to pardon me (answered I) there is no creature living; but I am sure I
heard a coughing not like yours, and really (continued he, rising from the
table) I must know who it is: Steward bring the candle here. This said, he
threw all the curtains open, and spied the English Gentleman shivering behind
in a corner. Then, with a countenance inflamed with a counterfeited fury, he
vented his rage on me in these terms, How now, you impudent Whore, Do you
abuse me thus? You could feign Chastity and Reservation to entrap me, and yet
make a beggarly Rascal here come lie with you, which is a favor I could not
obtain of your Jadeship, till you saw my Passion was grown to the height of
extremity. What an affront is this to a person of Honor? Ha! You Will repent it
at leisure: To morrow I Will send to fetch away all the Goods I had given you, and
you will find it no easy matter to meet with one will maintain you at that
height I did. While he walked vapouring in this manner to himself, Perretta and
I slunk both out of the room, as if the fear of his fury had bidden us seek our
own security by flight.

Then addressing his speech to the poor stranger, And you M. Villain (said he)
I shall teach you what it is to corrupt Women in this nature, lay hold on him
Steward, and secure him here till to morrow morning, and then I Will make him
stretch for his unworthiness. Mi by Shentelman (replied the frighted Forreiner
in his broken language) Mi com from de antique Kins ofe Cotes, de creat
fadergrand of it is person of mi hat putted his life in danger mor as feif
hunder tim for te servis of his Prins; and mi will do reason to dee. What
impudence is this? (answered my upstart Lord in great indignation) thou
challengest me, Rascal, do thou deserve to be wounded by my weapons? Go, if
thou were not destined to die upon a Gibbet, I would make thee fight with the
upper Scullion of my Kitchen. My distressed Amorist in the mean time, looked
all about to see where his clothes were laid, believing if the Lord saw him in
that sumptuous Apparel, he would judge more favorably of his quality, and set
a higher value upon the jewel of his honor by the costlinesse of the Case. But
before he had searched round the chamber, the swaggering Plumer was gone,
leaving the naked Lover locked in with him that represented the Lords Steward:
there was no likelihood he should find what he sought, for when Perretta and I
seemed to run away frighted out of his chamber, we cleared the room of all lay
near our hands, and carried them into the Garret, where we took Sanctuary.

The Plumelesse Pigeon, fancying his life was in extreme danger, addressed
multitudes of supplications to him that was entrusted as his guard to let him
go: But the stern Steward answered, if he should commit that fault, he never
must dare appear in his Lords presence more, and so all the hopes he had of
recompense for his former services would be lost. This made the Prisoner seek
his clothes with more diligence than before, to take some money out of his
Breeches and offer him: But finding none of his vestments, he stripped a
Bracelet of curious round Pearls from his Wrist, and said he would give him
that in acknowledgement of his favor, if he would restore him his liberty: Sir
(answered the false Steward, accepting his Present) It is not the value of your
Gift can move my heart to decline from my sworn obedience, but the high merits
I consider in your person, oblige me to the resolution of complying with your
desires; for I Will assure you, what I have received from your hand, will not
countervaile the Tithe of that I might expect from my Lords bounty, if I
betrayed him not, as I shall by releasing you; However I Will venture his
displeasure, and set you clear of this How, but to morrow you must not fail
to leave this City, and return with all possible speed into your own Country,
for if you linger any time in France, the authority of the person you have
offended is so great in every Province, that should you have the misfortune to
be apprehended, you will find nothing capable to expiate your crime but death.

So the poor Englishman contenting himself with a pair of pitiful ratter'd
breeches (that dragged in the dirt as he went) glad he was got into the open
streets, ran with as much have to his lodging, as if all the Hangmans
Hellhounds had been at his heels. Next morning Fear representing the Danger he
might incur by staying any longer in Paris, made him remove his Quarters, and
begin his march for England; where being arrived, I am confident he made his
braggs how he had enjoyed one of the World's rarest Beauties, Mistress to a
Principal Noble man of France: Me thinks I hear with what Emphasis he related
the adventures of his amorous stealths, esteeming his money well employed, and
desiring so remarkable a History should be eternized by the Pen of some famous
Author in a new Romance.

All those, who had assisted in the management of this Cheat, had their due
shares of the Cake, but I alone had the Bean; for my gain was greater than any
of the rest. By such tricks as this we got an indifferent honest livelihood,
neither was the Justice troubled with any complaints of us; for we carried on
our designs with too much secrecy, to be discovered: And so, I think, our
Vices were Virtues, in regard they were kept concealed.

Fortune weary of showing me her Fore-parts, while I exposed my own to any
Comer, turned me at last her Back side. The first crosse-blow I felt from her
(formerly indulgent) hand, was when Monsieur de la Fontaine (whom I have
already mentioned) met Marsault, and knowing him by his Gate or Garb, watched
him till he entered our house, where, by chance, his eye discovered me at the
window. Mervailing to see me transformed into the habit of a Damoiselle, he
inquired of some he knew in our street, how I lived, yet learned no more of my
deportments, than he before conjectured: But my neighbors understanding by his
relation, I was no better than a Chambermaid, cried me down more than
uncurrent Money, insomuch I could never set foot into the streets, without
receiving some affront. After this, la Fontaine meeting Marsault another time
at better advantage, accosted him, and charging him for having robbed his
house, raised a terrible hurly-burly in the streets, yet could not carry him to
prison; for some of his Associates arriving amidst these Broils, made their way
through the gazing multitude, and rescued him out of the Sergeants hands,
recompencing their valor at their retreat, with the purchase of two fair
Cloaks they twitched from a couple of gaping fools, that interessed themselves
in what concerned them not.

Marsault escaped narrowly that bout, but fifteen days after his luck was not
so good; for having robbed a principal Citizens house, the Watch apprehending
him, incaged him so close, there was no possibility of flight: so his Process
being ended in two days, he was sent to the place of Execution, where his neck
felt the weight of all the rest of his body.

This infamy reflecting upon Perretta and me, because he was every day in our
company, made us fear some disaster or calamity would befall us, for we began
already to feel our support but slender: One day the Commissary coming to our
house, with thoughts to receive the Tribute he used to levy, found what he
expected not: For, three Gentlemen, that had past the condition of calm
Novices, being at that time in my company, gave him so rude an entertainment,
that he was forced to make but one step from the top of the stairs to the
bottom. This bred a jealousy in his thoughts, Perretta had betrayed him,
therefore he endeavored to turn us presently out of that quarter: But before
we dislodged, we resolved to use some trick to be revenged of his malice: His
name was Lucrin, and his disposition was not unanswerable, being sordidly
griping, and of a base dull temper; But there was another of the same faculty,
called Morizet, who lived in a street somewhat more remote; a joviall merry
soul, and no enemy to persons of our profession: This Commissary using to
visit us sometimes, we acquainted Lucrin with his coming, who took it as a
great affront to him, and an encroaching upon his Prerogative, assuring us he
would suffer no other Officer to meddle in his jurisdiction: At length, to make
our accusation good against Morizet (who we affirmed had spoken much to the
prejudice and disparagement of the other) one night we sent for Morizet, as if
we had some earnest business to impart to him, having first hid Lucrin in a
little closet next my chamber: at his arrival he found four Gentlemen in my
company, whom he taking upon him to examine what they came to do with me, they
answered, they would give him no account, and I (to second them) said I was not
obliged to declare my actions to him; for, Lucrin had told me he had no power
to act as Commissary in our Quarter. Hereupon he replied, Lucrin lied like a
Sot, and so continued railing against Lucrin, in such vilifying terms, as made
him (like an enraged Lion) fly out of his Den upon him, and (for want of other
weapons) batter his face with his fists. Morizet to defend himself, and not
seem ungrateful, returned him as many blows with a sour cudgel he light
upon by chance; and the hotter the combat grew, the better were we pleased. At
last coming to cloze, they scratched, bit, and tumbled together upon the
ground, where they so pummeld each other, that their eyes looked like eggs
potch'd in black butter, and the rest of their faces, red, blew, and yellow,
like pieces of China Taffetas. There wanted a third Commissary to part these
two, who, instead of making others keep the Peace, were ready to tear out one
another throat. But the Gentlemen who accompanied us, at length thought good
to perform that office, one of them (as they went to separate em) saying with
an imperious tone, How now, Rascals, have you the impudence to quarrel in my
presence, What, will you raise a scandal upon such an honest house as this is?
If your impertinence provoke my fury any farther, I shall soon make Mince-meat
of you both: so let us have peace presently, embrace each other, I bid you, and
that quickly, nay let me see you kiss too, and shake hands.

Upon this command the Commissaries left fighting, both much ashamed for what
they had done, yet the animosity their hearts abounded with would not permit
them to be so easily agreed: However to confirm their seeming Amity, the
Gentleman commanded his Lacquay to get something for a Collation, and some wine
to make them drink together.

We thought it not convenient to send for any thing abroad, but made them be
contented with what we had in the house; so with some eggs that remained of our
Saturday night supper, and a few slices of bacon, a Froise was presently made,
and served in with great pomp and magnificence. Come (said the Gentleman to the
two Commissaries) you must eat with me, or I Will eat you. That said, he put his
hand to the dish first, and Morizet, without farther invitation, fell to
exercise his teeth, but Lucrin out of shame, or a sullen reservation, slighted
the courtesy, insomuch as the Gentleman seeming displeased, forced open his
mouth, and holding him by the chin with one hand, and taking a piece of the
Froise with the other, flung it in as a Mason does Mortar off his Trowel, into
a hole that wants stopping: his Eyes, Beard and Doublet, had each their share
of the spattering; so seeing there was no remedy, he reformed his
crosse-grain'd humor, and became more sociable. After this the Lacquay was
commanded to give Morizet a glass of Wine, and he bidden to drink a Health to
Lucrin: So without farther ceremony, taking the Glass, Here Mr. Commissary,
(said he) I Will drink to you, to let you see I harbor no malice in my heart: The
Wiseman says, We must forget injuries. The next Plot was to make Lucrin drink
to Morizet, which he did with such show of reluctancie, as his hand shaking
(through fear or disdain) above half the Wine was spilt before the Glass
reached his mouth: However seeing 'twas in vain to withstand their wills, I
will drink to you because I must (said he with a trembling voice.) And after
that he would neither eat nor drink more in their company, neither was he much
entreated; Morizet did that office for him, and stirred not till our Bottle was
sucked out.

After this refection, they desired to repair home, but seeing they had torn
their Ruffs to pieces in the conflict, loath to go through the streets in that
equipage, they entreated the Gentlemen to give their Lacquayes leave to go and
desire their wives to send them other Linne: The Gallants answered, they could
not spare their Servants to go so far, but there were Semsters nearer could
furnish them, if they would send for one, they were willing to do them that
courtesy. So one of our neighbors was fetched presently, who having the
watchword brought none but broad Bands with deep laces that were not for their
Wear, besides making her price, was four times more than they were worth; the
pitiful fellows (unwilling to part with so much money) were forced to sneak
home without, and hide their noses with their long Cloaks for fear of being
known; only Morizet's ingenuity furnished him with the invention to put his
handkerchief about his Neck, which served instead of a falling band.

Next day the Gentlemen went in a Coach to their houses (well attended with
stout lacquayes) and forced them to bear them company to our house, where
taking Perretta and me (as if they intended to carry us somewhere to be merry,
and make a perfect reconcilement) they brought us all together to the
playhouse, and the Comedians (already instructed by those Gallants of all the
Passages betwixt the two Commissaries) made their Scuffle the subject of all
their Drollerie, to the grand satisfaction of all the Spectators, except the
two Combatants; who sensible of that public affront, complotted how to be
revenged, and though they left us without any show of distaste, they fomented a
resolution to contrive our ruin, laying their private enmities aside to unite
their powers against us, as occasion should invite them to do us mischief* But
we, fearing the storm should break unawares upon us, to shelter our selves
from theirs as well as others malicious practices, forthwith forsook that
quarter, where I confess we had made an indifferent good harvest.

We retired into the Suburbs to a paultrie little house afar off, where we
remembered with regret the high cheer we used to have in our former dwelling,
for there it was very mean, having but a slender stock of money left after our
too extravagant expense. This miserable life (I believe) was a principal cause
of a great indisposition besieged Perretta, for Melancholy and discontent to
see her self fallen from a plentiful condition to calamity, gaining the
ascendance over her Spirit, the good woman felt her self drawing nearer
dissolution, and therefore, as most People use in like extremity, she would
impart some documents before her death. Considering me as her daughter, I
received from her dying mouth very apparent testimonies of a Cordial
affection; of all her secrets and Maxims she professed she concealed not any
from my knowledge, and besides gave me diverse wholesome Counsels, which I have
since made good use of. In sum no scruple nor superstition harbored in her
heart: She lived so roundly, that I imagine (if what is reported of the other
World be true) the rest of humane Souls now play at Bowls with here is. She
knew no more what belonged to remorse or Cases of conscience than those of
Topinambou; for (she said) if she ever had heard any discourse thereof in her
youth, she had lived long enough to forget it, as a thing that served for
nothing but to disturb the Mind's repose. She had often told me before the
riches of this World are so common, that they ought not to appertain more
peculiarly to one than another, and that it argued ingenuity and wisdom in any
one to take a share (though out of others hands) if fortune favored the
design with a convenient opportunity. For (said she) I came naked into this
World, and naked I will return, If I have got any of others goods, I shall not
carry them with me, let them go seek where they are and take them, it nere
shall trouble me. What! If I should be punished after my death for committing
that which they call Felony or Theft, might not I with reason answer my
accusers, that 'twere injustice to bring me into the World to live, and not
permit me to take those things requisite to maintain a Life?

After several such discourses her soul took leave of her Carcass, which I
buried without any Pomp, as she enjoined me, for she know there was nothing
more unnecessary.

Soon after her decease I procured some new acquaintance, that furnished me
with a little Belly-timber; But the loss of my good Mother was so sensible,
besides the ill hap I had to encounter now and then some persons, too well
acquainted with my former carriages, that I resolved to leave Paris, and to
remove my station to the City of Roan. My Beauty was yet powerful enough to
attract me many Visitants, but making no respect or distinction of Persons, in
effect being a stable for all Horses, among others I met with a running Nagg,
by whose virulency I was so paid, that in short time I found my body infected
with a foul disease: Cursed be those brought it into France; it disturbs the
pleasures of well disposed people, and it is favorable to none but
Chirurgions, who indeed owe Candles to one of our Kings, for leading his
Soldiers to Naples to get it there, and bring the seeds of it hither. The
only happiness in my misfortune was, that an honest and grateful Surgeon,
to whom I had done some courtesy before, physick'd me for much less than any
other of his profession would have taken. I will not entertain you any longer
with these Ordures, though I know you are none of those squeamish people; to
whom a foul relation savours as ill as the thing it self.

Let it suffice to tell you, I took a voyage (as they say in Bavaria) to see
the Emperor enthroned, and at my return, I found my face so changed, I was
enforced to make my recourse to Art; Painting, Waters and Perfumes, were the
daily remedies I used to repair the ruins my Body and Face sustained.
Besides, I began to consult my Looking-glass for new attractions, and
practiced a certain affected manner of speech, that infinitely enchanted those
I had a desire to entrap. At last, a man very rich, and without office, became
so vanquished by my charms, that he took me into his own house, to enjoy me
there with more liberty: I grant he might have found a handsomer Mistress than
I, and so he confessed himself; but there was something in my humor
sympathised so with his disposition, that he preferred me before all others of
my sex. The cause of our Separation proceeded from a little brangling betwixt
us, because I made more havoc of his goods, and spent his money more lavishly
than he was willing to permit.

The practice of my first profession, being yet fresh in my memory, that was my
present refuge; I applied my self eagerly to it a long time, refusing no body
that brought what would help to make the Pot boil. While I was in the height
of my trading, a certain Meacock (that was soon after to be married) desirous
to know beforehand in what parts to attaque his enemies in Cupids combats,
where he never yet had shown his valor, was addressed to me (by a Kinsman of
his) to receive instructions. Having been at my Lodging one Sunday after
dinner, and informed I was gone to the Sermon, thither came he to find me out;
At his arrival, the Preacher falling upon the relation of the first part of
Mary Magdalen's life, inveighed bitterly against Courtezans, and represented so
lively the pains prepared for them in the other World, that my Lover said to
himself, he might well enough go back again, or seek another Mistress to do him
that courtesy, imagining I should be touched with too much remorse by the end
of the Sermon, to continue that life any longer: But at the Sermons end, he
finding opportunity to accost me, after he had discovered me his thought of my
conversion, I returned him this answer (which, perchance, in your judgments,
will savor of much impiety; However it is no matter, I come not hither to make
you believe I repent of my past iniquities) Insooth (Friend) my soul must be
very weakly principled, to be startled at the stories this prating Monk has
told us; Don't I know well enough every one must follow his own trade? He
makes it his profession to amuse the simple people with his Prattle, dissuading
them from haunting debosh'd and lewd companies, where they idly consume their
time, persons and purses, or become engaged in some desperate and unnecessary
quarrel: And I exercise my part to quench the Concupiscense of men by Charity.
Thus was my Novice paid, and being a good silly soul, according to the stamp
of that old ignorant Age, when people wiped their Noses on their sleeves, he
wondered at my libertine humor, which he took to be very wicked and
inconsistent with his goodly Religion. To make my story short, we went together
from Church to my Chamber, where I read him a Love-Lecture, and taught him what
he desired to learn; but my instructions made so deep an impression, as upon
the Verge of the Axletree of his Microcosme, he was forced to bear a Cancer as
well as the Zodiac; and he was so thorougly peppered, that before he had
accompanied his tender Bride eight nights, she felt the malignity of its
influence dispesred through her whole body. Was he not a pretty Proficient, to
gain so much in so short an Apprentiship?

At length, Time and hard Labor so furrowed my forehead, and impaired the
Complexion of my Countenance, as Ceruse and Vermillion were not capable to
re-imbellish my face. By little and little the number of my Lovers decreased,
and none came to knock at my door but some rascally Roisters, less furnished
with Money than Mind to do any mischief to satisfy their desires: This
constrained me to screw my self into the acquaintance of innocent Virgins, and
get into the Order of those Matrons that procure Commodities for young
Customers. And that I might more handsomely perform this Office, I reformed my
habit into a holy Sisters, and there was no indulgence to be gained, or other
public Devotion, thorough all the City, but I went daggling among the throng:
I knew the high-spirited Sparks by their looks, and when I had crept into their
acquaintance, I conducted them into places where they received the contentment
they desired; If any Gentleman was entangled in Love's Labyrinth, I employed
all my Art and Industry to do him service, and cunningly conveyed his Letters
to his Mistress's hands.

Now Francion prepare your attention, and observe what I shall tell you
concerning Lauretta, for I shall presently enter into the relation of her story.

Being in the Countey with a certain Gossip of mine, one evening a fancy took
me to walk out alone, and passing through a private place, remote from any
houses, I descried a man carrying something under his Cloak, and as he came
within a matter of twenty paces of me, the noise of a Child crying, made me
send my eyes about, to discover where it might be; but the nearer we
approached, the more ascertained I was that he must have it under his arm:
Whither carry you that Child? (said I to him) Whose is it? At these words,
stopping his March, he told me, he was carrying it to a Village not far
thence, where he believed he should get a good Nurse for it. I conjured him so
much, that at length he confessed it was a secret sin of a young Gentleman in
that Country, who had been something too familiar with one of his Mothers
Maids, but he would not acquaint me with his Name. Though Night had already put
her Mask over the face of Heaven, my curiosity invited me to take the little
creature into my arms, to see if it were pretty; mean time he that delivered me
it showed me his heels, saying, he went to speak with one of his Camarades;
The Pledge he left in my hands, little pleasing me, I laid it gently upon the
grass, and ran after him, but to small purpose; for, he was so light footed,
that in short time I lost sight of him; besides, I heard a great Dog barking
near the child, as I conjectured, which made me have back, fearing it. might
receive some mischief. Compassion moved me to take it up, and carry it to the
house I so journ'd in, where, by the help of candlelight, I found it was a
Girl of a most exquisite feature and pure complexion, as commonly all the of
privae Amoretta's are, because in those stolen pleasures the Parents act with
more vigor and affection, and the Mothers are generally befriended by Nature
with more than ordinary beauties to heighten the desires of their Amorists.

I knew at Rouen, a Nurse that had such superfluity of Milk, as she was easily
persuaded to suckle another Child beside her own, provided I would make good a
small sum of money I promised her. After the Child was weaned I took her home
and called her always Lauretta, as he that left her with me told me she had
been baptized. She cost me little the keeping, for all the Ladies of pleasure
in the City, were so taken with those pretty Bloomings of Beauty in her Face,
that they would have her, by turns, whole Months together in their houses;
and indeed, her company was not altogether useless; for, going along the
streets with them, she made them be often taken not for what they were, but for
honest Women that had been married.

Her years advancing her to the use of Reason, there was a pretty Emulation
among them, who should render her Mistress of most Gentilesses, and teach her
the most witty and subtle Discourses, to serve her upon all occasions: By
the'e Instructions, and her own Observation, she learned a number of rare
pieces of Craft to entrap and amuse Lovers. When she was come to a growth that
might admit a Copulative, I took her again to my own tutorage, fearing she
might let that full-blown Flower of her Virginity be cropp'd, without receiving
any considerable valuation for so precious a Jewel. I did not account Rouen a
place worthy enough of her, whom the benign Heavens had imbelished with all
the attractive faculties and perfections desirable in our sex: So I resolved to
remove the Scene to Paris, where I presumed I should quickly gain enough to
countervail my charge and trouble in breeding her. I used no more the
Gentlewomans attire, those vanities I had long since laid aside; neither did I
suffer her to go in the Garb of a Damoiselle, but wear a neat white Dressing,
with a handsome Flanders Lace, which made her look so pretty, I Will assure you I
am not able to express it. As she followed me along the streets, we could hear
some say she had a face like an Angel, others commend the color and curling of
her curious Hair, or fall into admiration of her delicate Skin, with the
graceful rising of her lovely Breasts, which she wearing half discovered,
seemed like a Pair of pretty Promontories or Landmarks to direct Loves
Champions safe into the streights. When any one sent an earnest look after
her, my watchful eye presently met with his, and if he followed us home I
would make her stand at the door, that as he passed he might have a fuller
view, and become more entangled in the fetters of her Beauty.

My Judgment persuaded me it was then time to advance her to the highest
Class, and imbue her with the most learned lessons of our Science. Therefore I
governed her no longer as a Child, but began to teach her what was necessary to
make her Barque arrive at a happy Port in the Sea of this World.

After these instructions, she was no Niggard of her amorous glances, to those
seemed taken with her, and (believe me) she could arm her eyes with such a
commanding sweetness, as every Beam they shot, recompensed the loss of her Look
with the conquest of a Heart. Observe a little the Art I made her use, to the
end every one might esteem me one of those they call Women of Honor. If at any
time I turned toward her, she presently bent her looks downwards, as if she
durst not then speak to men with her Eyes, as she took the liberty to do, when
my Back was toward her.

Among the young Wooers she had charmed one named Valderan, was much gallanter
than the rest, and (as I conceived) richer. Dwelling within few doors of our
house, he soon met with opportunity to accost us, and asked me leave to give us
now and then a visit, which I granted, with thanks for the honor, I said, we
should receive in his company: But I enjoyed Lauretta to personate the
scornful Lady, and answer his Caresses with an invincible Rigor, until he
filled her hands with Crowns of Gold, which I told her were the Stars that
give the quality of Gods upon Earth, to those that have the disposal of them;
as the Planets which are in the Heavens do give the same honor to the
Intelligences that govern them. Nay, I am a learned Woman (Gentlemen) though
you believe it not: Well, but I shall let you see that I have read sometimes in
good Books, where I have learned to say Phoebus.

My Remonstrances were not neglected by Lauretta, she was so discreet and
punctual in observing them, that every time Valderan came to Visit her, she
would make her complaints to him alone, that her Aunt (meaning me) was the
hardest and most covetous woman in the world: My Father has sent me money
several times, to make me fine new Clothes (would the cunning Baggage say but
she will buy me nothing; nay, I believe in stead of furnishing me, she has
employed it to supply her own particular necessities, though (God knows) she
is well enough paid beside for my Pension. After she had prepared Valderan's
credulity by this lie, she minced it no longer but boldly asked him money to
buy her a new Coat or Gown, and when he told her he could hardly satisfy her
demands, she answered, Ha! how do you think to make me sensible of the
affection you profess, if you will not undergo some difficulty to express it?

By this, and other like subtilties, she skrewed at length a small sum of
Money out of her penurious Pretendant, for which he thought her obliged to give
him the entire Possession of her Heart, but he was forced to relinquish that
opinion, when he saw she slighted him more than formerly.

Mean time, a gallant spruce Exchecquer-man, named Chastel, insinuated himself
into our acquaintance, by means of a servant Maid we kept, who, according to my
instructions, had so handsomely represented him our necessities, that to procure
our good esteem, and endeavor to obtain a remedy for the affection be bare
Lauretta, he sent us several considerable Presents, which powerfully pleaded
his interests, and infinitely captived our thoughts. He was a perfect Drolle,
given to his pleasures enough, but never could be made guilty of entertaining
those fond transports of Love, some Fondlings are distempered with; He shunned
those Passions that might raise mutinies in his Mind, and could not endure one
thing should be refused him twice; understanding his disposition, I failed not
to show him the best countenance I could, and my Niece likewise paid his
respects with a demeanor no way disobliging.

One Evening, as he was newly gone out of our house, we came home, and met
Valderan at the door, who came to spend some idle hours with us; Lauretta,
after her custom, presently ran to the Looking-glass, to see if her Dressing
were not crumpled, or any of her Curls disordered: Our maid seeing her very
busy in gazing on her self, burst into such a sudden laughter as provoked her
to ask the reason. She, who was more wanton than witty, without disguising the
business answered, Monsieur Chastel was but newly gone out as you came, but you
little think what he did while he stayed here, your looking and Courtesying so
in the glass, recalls his Postures to my memory; he took the same Glass and
stood a while thus contemplating his -- you understand me well enough, I need
explain my self no further.

This said, she fell again into a fit of laughter, louder than before; but
Lauretta's ingenuity, presently prompted her to an action incomparably
opportune to possess Valderan (who heard all was said) with an opinion of
extraordinary modesty in her, and to repair the silly Servants indiscretion:
for, as if she had received the highest affront imaginable, with a completely
counterfeited choler, she snatched up a certain piece of Iron, and broke the
Glass into small bits, saying she would never see her face again where such
ugly things had been shown. Valderan, with a moderate smile, told her, she was
of too choleric a humor, there remained nothing on the glass of that object
Chastel had presented her; yet I know within himself he commended this action,
and was glad to have incounter'd so discreet and modest a Mistress, as all
Lauretta's carriage and discourse still spoke her: And in effect, this, with
some other reservations, made him not solicit her with so much importunity to
allay his flames, imagining he should never obtain any thing of her but by the
warrantable way of Wedlock. Yet having no great desire to bind himself so soon
in such strait Bands, he resolved to tempt Fortune again, and try to win his
Mistress by proofs of an extreme passion.

Chastel had so robbed the King to enrich us, that we should have been the
ingratefullest creatures living, had we not done something to acknowledge his
civilities. At last I promised to let him hit the Mark his inclinations aimed
at; and Lauretta (whose amorous Itch already required a remedy) needed no great
persuasion to contribute her consent.

The same night she was to sacrifice her Virginity to the Deities of Love,
being just ready to surrender the Fort (so long capitulated for before) to the
vigorous assailant; Valderan came with a Musician of his acquaintance before
our windows, and made him sing some very agreeable Airs, which with the sound
of the Lute, hindered me from taking my repose; So led by the ears with that
delightful harmony, I came down into the Hall, and my Maid with me, thinking
to hear it there more distinctly; but observe the vanity of our young Lover:
That we should take notice, he gave us that Serenade, he caused some of his
company to call him by his name aloud. But knowing it was not he that sung, and
considering to present his Lady with only bare Words and Music, was little
better than nothing; I bade my maid give him a hint of his backwardness: The
Song ended, she opened the lower window, and he thinking it had been Lauretta,
immediately left his company to come to her, but finding it was not she, he
eagerly asked where she was. Do you believe (answered the Maid) that she is
such a fool to break her sleep to come hear you claw 2. or 3. ill-favored
Cats-guts? What Is all your Airy hollow meat good for? You may play long enough
upon your Barn-doore, Gittern, Lantern, Cittern, and Virgin-holes, Lauretta
cares much for such entertainment; you think, because you spend your night
dreaming of her, she spends hers thinking on you, remove that folly from your
fancy; for now is she sleeping open legged in her bed, with a security that
admits of neither Care or Fear: If you love her health, bid your companion
forbear playing, lest you disturb her rest; neither is the present you give her
so considerable, but she may content her self well enough without it. Thou art
a jeering slut (said Valderan) I can present her nothing more suitable to her
quality than Music; for, Do not thou know that is the only thing we give
the greatest Deities to invite them to love us, and thank them for lending us
their succor? Marry you tell us fine stories indeed (replied the Maid) you
take Lauretta then for a Deity, Will you see what is in her Close stool, or eat
a Bit if your stomach serve? I Will assure you it is no Nictar, nor yet Master
Ambrose. Your song concluded with a pretty expression (methinks) That your
Sun began to appear at the Window of her Palace; and it was I doubtless you
took for that great Luminary, therefore I conjecture the Rays that stream from
these bright eyes of mine, are accompanied with as shining a luster as his
Beams, or little less: The Night's then past, away, away with your Lute, Mr.
Luterin, I advise you, it cannot be called a Serenade, you give us now, and
you will be thought an indiscreet Lover, making your addresses thus by Day. If my
Mistress were as cross as thou, said Valderan, I should be reduced to the
extremity of discontent, but I believe she has a better opinion of my Music.
It Is like one of your Countrymen indeed (answered the bold Wench) to conceit
if she heard your Song, she could not choose but be deeper in love with you;
but observe what a silly vanity you are possessed with; if the Song pleased her
ear, she should rather love him that sung it: As for you, what Miracle have
you ever done, that another cannot perform the like? The greatest Fool
breathing may bring the most excellent Musician can be found to sing before a
Window. It is not with the voice I ever imagined to acquire the favor of my
Mistress, replied Valderan, but with the extreme affection I was desirous to
declare her, though by another's singing. That Is handsome I faith (said my Maid
again) a man that never was sensible of the power of Love, may then (as well
as you) make another say, he suffers the Keenest torments that passion e're
inflicted upon poor Mortal.

Valderan, seeing there was nothing to be got but scorn and shame from this
scoffing Wench (most part of whose tart replies were framed out of the
instructions I had given her) marched home again with his music and I went to
see my Niece locked fast in Castel's arms (both breathless with delight, having
kept time in their recreative pleasures with the Lutenist's warbling notes.) I
told Lauretta, not before her Bedfellow, who had made that Serenade, fearing to
raise some umbrage in his thoughts; but next day I gave her a perfect account
of the whole story, and considering the Misery Women sometimes fall into, by
exercising the trade I made her undertake, I conceived it would be good to get
her a Husband as soon as possible, and if we could ensnare the passionate
Valderan in her Pit-fall, it would be a good advantage for us both: for, I
imagined him infinitely rich and made account to wear out the remainder of my
days quietly in his house, out of the danger of those Ship-wreeks I so much
apprehended Next time Lauretta had any private conference with him, she failed
not to let him understand how extremely she was taken with his perfections,
yet his credulous Vanity would deceive him, if it suggested him to think he
should ever obtain any favor of her without making her his wife.

Passion having at that time a greater predominance over him than ever, he
presently took a piece of paper and writ her a Promise of Marriage, thinking to
have enjoyed her after: But when he was gone, and she had shown me the writing,
not contented with that I said, he must resolve to marry her in Public, or
at least pass over a good part of his Estate to enjoy her in Private. As we
had almost brought him to agree to one of these propositions, we saw him one
day dragged shamefully to prison (where I believe he is yet) for having
affronted diverse Merchants and others. When we understood all his Gallantry was
maintained by borrowing, we made no more esteem of him than of the Kennell
dirt, and his Promise was flun'g into the fire as a thing not worthy to be
preserved.

By this time our Exchecquer-man began to surfeit with Delight, and enjoyment
had so cooled his Passion, that he neither came to see my Niece so often as he
used, nor sent such frequent tokens. This constrained me to admit into my house
several other Gallants, to whom I had the industry handsomely to make known our
necessities: Some of these assisted us a little, and others never awhit, but
they were treated accordingly by Lauretta, who sometimes paid their Complements
with cursed frowns, and sometimes derided them with such witty and smart jeeres,
as rendering them a scorn to the rest of the company, wounded them to the very
hearts. Many times playing at Cards with them, she would take the liberty, in a
jesting manner, to sweep up all their moneys, and never restore a penny; but
she did it with such a grace, and pretty dexterity, as they could not for shame
be offended at her frollique. Sometime there came forward fools would be
handling her bosom, as much to show the fine Rings they wore, and dazzle her
eyes with their luster, as for any other intent. Then catching the hand fast,
would she say, This hand is over-bold, it is too impudently rash, it strayes
into any place where lawless Desires guide it, and in time of War too it
makes incursions into the Enemies Country; But now I have caught the Traitor,
I Will not let him go till he has paid his Ransom. Then, slipping off the Ring,
she continued, Ha! look here, this will help to make us satisfaction.

Sometimes the Ninny would ask her for it when he went away, then would she
answer laughing, That must remain with me for ransom of your hand; Did you
not call me but even now your cruellest Enemy, recounting me the torments your
passion made you suffer? You cannot but remember since that time we have
neither made Peace nor Truce. If some days after he still importuned her to
restore what she had taken from him, and that it was of too considerable a
value to be so easily parted with, she would re-deliver it, upon condition he
would give her another Present at his own discretion. But in case she saw it
was of no very great price, she would either keep it, and pay the owner with a
jest, or say she had pawned it, and then he must redeem it with a sum of
money, if he would have it.

She played a multitude of such profitable pranks, never considering the beauty,
courtesy, or gentiless of any man to affect him more than others; for I had
forewarned her to give such fopperies any entertainment in her thoughts, but
only countenance those whose pockets were best provided, and her disposition
affecting variety of Men as well as of Clothes, made her inclinable enough to
follow my advice. Those that were most prodigal in expense and gifts, had
always the preference in her esteem, yet they must be very modest, and take the
oath of Secrecy, before she would admit them to the supreme degree of Love's
felicity, because she would still preserve the name of Chaste.

She seldom went abroad but upon Holy Days, and looked so gentile at home in
her Damoisel's habit, that the fairest Ladies of the Court might have been as
envious of her beauty, as the other Sex enamored. A certain Nobleman named
Alidan, seeing her in that equipage at the window, as he passed through our
street, and vanquished with her amiable looks, could not be satisfied till he
had informed himself who she was: But understanding she was the same Lauretta,
whose perfections had already spread her fame in the Court, he became more
inflamed at the remembrance of these proofs often averred to him of her
excellent Wit.

He presently framed a design to purchase the possession of her, but imagining
I would not part with her for what price soever, he conceived it necessary to
take her away by force. He set so many spies in every corner over us, that we
could stir no whither, but he had presently notice of our Motion; So, one
evening, when I was gone abroad, he sent a Gentleman of good fashion in a Coach
to our house, who, stepping in to Lauretta, made her believe he came from me,
and that instead of going where I told her when I went out, I was gone to a
gallant Gentleman's house where I expected her, and that Coach was sent
purposely to fetch her to me; By ill fortune Lauretta was in her best attire
ready to take a walk, so she needed not much entreaty to take the benefit of
the Coach, besides she knew I used to go often to that Gentleman's house where
she was told I was.

The Coach arriving at Alidan's house, she was received and treated by her new
Lover, as you may imagine: Though at first she seemed to resent this treachery
as a high affront, and would not suffer him that had cheated her in this
manner, to touch her by any means; yet at length, considering his eminent
quality, and the noble entertainment he made her, she became more tame, and
suffered her self to be overcome. Mean time, I was exceedingly perplexed for
her, and all my exercise was to trot from place to place, to see if she were
not in the houses of some of those Gentlemen had formerly made love to her.

The third day after I lost her, I met an honest man of my acquaintance, who
gave me direct instructions where to find her. Thither went I immediately, and
asked to speak with Alidan, whom I told, He was the man (as I was informed) had
given order to take away a certain Niece of mine that lived with me, and I
beseech'd him to excuse my boldness for coming to know of him if 'twere true.
After he had denied it, Sir, (said I) I will not trouble you with many Words,
you need not conceal the fact from me, for I don't intend to have her again,
she is in too good a hand, I come only to let you know, you need not have made
use of either Deceit or Violence to purchase her, had you but demanded her of
me, I should readily have resigned her to your will.

Hearing me speak with so much freedom and sincerity, he discovered me the
whole Plot, and having given me a reward that might content me, he led me to
see Lauretta in lodgings on the hinder part of his house. She made me diverse
excuses for not sending me word what was become of her, protesting she could
not by any means procure the liberty to do it. It was no small vexation to me
(you must think) to be thus robbed of her Company, but Necessity taught me to
be contented. Sometimes Alidan sent her into the Country, sometimes kept her
in the City, and most commonly in other lodgings, not at his own house. Then I
went more frequently and freely to visit her, and there we contrive our petty
designs, and no body e're the wiser. I would desire but as many thousand
Crowns as I have gone thither times with young Sparks that enjoyed her, while
he that was her Master and Servant both together, thought she could not open
the Lock whereof he carried the Key.

It is a Natural thing to grow weary and be cloyed, eating always of one sort
of Cates. Lauretta became at length less lovely in Alidan's eye, yet he would
not forsake her quite; but desiring to retaste his ordinary Dishes when he
listed, without scandal, he resolved to give her Valentine in Marriage, with
some advantages, as a recompense for his former services. Valentine and she are
since come to dwell in a Castle not far hence, whither I am going to present
her the commendations of a gallant Exchequer man, who shall obtain more in one
day, than Francion has done in three Months. In Faith and he deserves it too,
were it for no other reason than that he gave his affection birth, at a
remarkable time, and upon a charitable account. The first time he saw Lauretta,
was in the Church, when she was married, and considering her Husband looked not
like a man that could give her what she might desire, he proposed out of
brotherly kindness to lend him his assistance. Within short time you will see
him in this Country, for he is so confident I will acquit my self well of the
charge I have taken upon me, that I believe he is come out of Paris already.

Are you satisfied now Francion? there is all I can tell you of your Mistress:
Do you love her still as fervently as you did?

I am more her Servant than ever (replied Francion) and were not the memory of
certain follies committed in her Village, yet too fresh, among which I had my
share, I would return thither with you, and I am confident I should prevail
more by my submissions and testimonies of affection, than you and your brave
Exchecquerman with the large sums on which you build all your hopes. Shall
she love a Sot for the sight of his Gold, rather than his person, which I am
sure cannot challenge much esteem, being in a Word but an Exchecquer man? Ha!
Francion my friend (replied Agatha) I have told you sufficiently what power
Money has over the Spirit of Lauretta: I cannot deny that, but she is a Woman
(said Francion) and not insensible of the communicative pleasures with a person
whose merit is agreeable. It may be in hopes to finger good store of Ducats,
she may prostitute her Body to the desires of such a silly Coxcomb: but she
will never bend the inclinations of her mind to love him, and when she sees his
Purse empty, she will empty her thoughts of the affection she made him believe she
bare him. Do the worst you can (Agatha) as soon as I can get this crack in my
Crown cured, I Will go again secretly to see my Mistress, and receive of her as
much satisfaction as my passion can desire.

This discourse ended, Agatha took leave of the Company, and settling her self
again in the Cart, she advanced toward her Niece's dewlling place, with whom
she had no desire to treat in that manner as she had threatened Francion: for
she resolved to make his game sure with Lauretta, without letting him know it,
and give the Lawyer the Lurch.

This wretched sort of people are, and have always been greatest observers,
and only admirers of those that give them most, or entertain their boundless
thoughts with highest promises: yet we scarce ever find any of them arrive to
any competent Subsistence. Their life is interwoven with continual Miseries,
nevertheless their insensibility robbs them of Remords, and fills their vain
hearts with joy; yet it is but a false one, a mere shadow of delight, and far
different from that real hearts-ease attends those that live uprightly. We
have here seen Agatha's deportments, and heard her speak in terms very
dissolute; But the nature of the Comedy requires those expressions, rightly to
represent the part she was to personate, yet that is not capable to make us wrie
our Souls to the desire or practice of Vice; quite contrary it renders Vice
more hateful, to see it so lively pourtraid in its true color. Hereby we may
learn what diverse Persons account delight, is nothing but a debosh'd
Brutality, which all well tempered Spirits will ever abominate and shun.

The end of the second Book.
THE COMIQUE HISTORY OF FRANCION.
The third Book.
AS this pernicious old Hagg bade adieu, leaving those had heard her discourse
much satisfied with her facetious stories, into the Inn came a Coach, which
the Gentleman, who had lain with Francion, sent for to his own house in the
morning betimes: And after dinner, seeing the Rain was past, he ceased not
importuning the Pilgrim, till he consented to take place in the Coach, telling
him he was big with desire to be honored with his company at his house, where
he might be confident to find as good entertainment as he could expect in the
unknown Village whither he intended to go. I must acknowledge my self
exceedingly redevable to Fortunes kindness (continued he) for addressing me
into the company of a man whose acquaintance I shall be proud to purchase.
Coming last night (with no other attendant than my Lacquay from visiting a
handsome Widow in this Country, named Helina) after I had supped with her, as
I passed this way to shorten my Journey homewards, I was arrested here all
night by an ill favored Accident, which now I bless as the cause of my
greatest happiness: It was the breaking of my horses leg as he leaped a
Ditch, but I would not for fifty such Coursers have miss^d the encounter of so
deserving a Person.

In acknowledgement of these grand civilities Francion returned those
compliments he judged most requisite, and having said in the close of his
discourse, for recompense of such signal favors he would not stick to part
with his blood and life, or any thing else could be demanded of him, the
Gentleman replied, That for the present he expecte^ no further testimony of his
Gratitude, than that he would please to recount him the Dream had entertained
his fancy the night before. So, overcome with Courtesy, as the Coach trundled
along the pleasant Plains, Francion thus began:

Sir, Since your ingenuous spirit desires to be recreated with the Chimerical
fancies of a troubled Brain, I will tell you the most Extravagant you ever yet
have heard, imposing, on my own accord, this Law upon my Lips, that if any
impertinences they let fall, disrelish you, I shall close them with the Seal
of Silence, as soon as you please to discover your dislike. You should never
make an end (said the Bourgundian Gentleman, interrupting him) if you would
continue speaking till I bid you cease; for you can say nothing, but what is
extremely to the purpose, and will create singular satisfaction in the
hearers: And though what you dreamt, may be void of Reason, and without Order,
yet I will lend you my best attention, that I may the better track your fancy,
and pick out some signification. I shall hold you no longer in expectation of
the contentment you so much desire (replied the Pilgrim) though I am confident]
Artimidorus himself would want a thread to lead him out of this Labyrinth.

After I had ended my Story, and bid you goodnight, I suffered my fancy to
stray after an infinity of several thoughts; I fell a building rare Designs,
touching my Love and Fortune (the two Tyrants that prosecute my life) and being
thus busied, I was, unawares, surprised by sleep.

I first fancied my self in a solitary Plain, where I found an old man that had
large Ears, and his Mouth shut up with a Padlock, to open which, it was
impossible, till the Letters, that serve to compose these words, IT IS TIME,
were assembled at the keyhole.

Perceiving the use of Speech was forbidden him, I demanded the reason of his
Tongue's restraint, thinking he would have answered by Signs, but, placing
certain hollow Horns to his Ears, the better to receive my Voice, he pointed
with his hand to a little Wood, as if the dumb language of his gesture had sent
my Curiosiry thither for satisfaction.

When I had made my approaches something near, I heard a confused prattling
noise, that did but unpleasantly mend the old man's defect. In the midst of many
others, there were six Trees, which (instead of leaves) had slender Tongues
tied to their Branches, with so loose a thread, as every blast of wind (which
then was somewhat boystrous) still knocked them one against another: This
Concussion made them break into a Chat so loud, as I might over-hear them brawl
confusedly, and exchange their spite in most reproachful terms. The Contest
had not continued long, before a mighty Giant, that was laid under the shade,
suspecting they would reveal somewhat he desired to keep ever secret,
unsheathed his Cimiter, and gave his Arm no respite till he had beaten them
down, and cut them all in pieces; yet they retained still so much of life, as
made them often leap from the ground, and endeavor to continue their injurious
Prattle. But his Fury soon found a greater cause of increase; for passing
something farther, he spied me leaning against a Rock, where he knew I might
read an ample relation of his whole life's vicious behavior. This provoked his
hasty approach to hack that witness of his crimes, in pieces; but, perceiving
the obdurate Stone (without confessing the least Dint) at every blow, send his
jarring Blade back to his Head; his Rage was wound up to that height, as
immediately he killed himself with his own Weapon; and such an intolerable
stink proceeded from his body, that it forced me to retreat as far back as I
could to avoid it. After this (methought) I was in Heaven; how I came there I
know not, for you know how ill the Method of Reason is observed in Dreams: And
now you shall hear the most fantastic imaginations that ever crept into a
Brain, but I must desire you to forbear laughing, lest I should bear you
company, and then my Head (which I feel yet very fore) must suffer for it.

Forward (good Sir) said the Gentleman, I take too much pleasure in this
Relation to endure delay, and for Laughter, my Teeth shall imprison it: But
well, you were in Heaven (you say) and how contrived, was it handsome? A very
handsome question (said Francion) could it be otherwise, being the Seat of
Glory, and Fountain of the most Radiant Beauties?

Methought the Stars (the better to illuminate those Vaults) shined as well
under, as above me, and were all fastened to their Orbs with golden Buckles:
After I had pleased my eyes a while with the contemplation of these Mervailes,
I spied a company of beautiful Ladies (which I took for Goddesses) that came
and unbuckled every one her Star, and fastened it to the end of a Silver Wand,
to light them to the Sphere of the Moon; for the Sun's absence (he being then
in the other Hemisphere) had made the way very dark. This made me conjecture,
that the cause why the Stars sometime seemed to shift their station, came
from this Custom of displacing them.

I made these gossipping Goddesses my Guides, till one of them looking back,
spied me, and showed me to the rest of her Companions, who presently made all
toward me, and bade me welcome, with such excess of complement, that I
resented some shame to find my self so posed in Courtship; But the celestial
Shrewes soon set a Date to their kind entertainment, and fell to consider what
rigorous punishment they should inflict upon me: After a short consultation,
the least in the company began to swell to such a prodigious bigness, that her
Head saluted ths Roof of the next Heaven above her, and (to prove her Strength
suitable to her Shape) she gave me such a fierce kick with her foot, as made me
roll six times about the World in a moment,; for, the Plancher was so round and
smooth, I still glided away without ceasing, but (as I suppose you know) there
being neither Ascent nor Descent, when I came to the Region of our Antipodes, I
was no more reversed than here.

At last, lighting into the Concave of a struck made by the Wheel of the Sun's
Chariot, there my Course was stopped, and I might have lain long enough, had I
not been helped up by the fellow that looked to his Horses, who, after a little
conference, told me he had formerly been a Groom in the King's Stable, which
made me foster a conceit, that after Death Men followed the same Profession in
the other World, as they professed on Earth. Growing familiar with him, I
desired he would show me the most remarkable Singularities the place afforded:
Easily consenting to my demand, he led me immediately to a great Crystal
Basin, wherein discerning a kind of white Liquor, not much unlike Soapsuds, I
asked him what that signified? he answered, it was the matter whereof mine, and
all other Humane Souls were formed: This was continually haunted by a number of
little winged Boys, no bigger than a Finger, that hovered over till they had
dipped a straw into it, and then slew I know not whither. My Conductor (being
wiser than I suspected him) informed me, that they were the Genyes of Mankind,
who, with their little Pipes, gadded to and fro, to infuse Souls into the
Wombs of sleeping Women eighteen days after their Conception, and the more
they injected of that Matter, the better the Infant (whose Birth they took care
of) was furnished with Judgment and Generosity.

I demanded then why the Dispositions of Men were so various, since their Souls
were all made of the same Materials. You must know (replied he) this
Composition is the Excrement of the Gods, who are still wrangling among
themselves; and this Substance, which proceeds from their Bodies, imitates
their contentious inclinations, as appears by the continual agitation of the
Liquor, which perpetually fumes and foams into an angry Froath, as if some
seditious Wind within were fomenting the War: Besides, the Souls, when diffused
into humane Members, are still at discord, because the Organs, by which they
act, are of such different constitutions, one overflowes with Phlegm, another is
^opprest with Melancholy, in this Choler Tyrannizes, in that Blood
Predominates, and so from the opposition of humors, it is easy to collect
effects as contrary.

See what rare Reasons (said I) has this fellow found out for humane
dissentions; But, Sirrah, you say the Gods are quarrelsome; you lie, and take
that for your saucy Blasphemy; with that I reached him a good box on the ear,
but the stout Knave repaid me so rudely, that he felled me to the bottom of the
Basin, where, before I could recover my self, I swallowed (I believe) above
50000 Souls: Therefore now sure I ought to be taken for a Man of notable spirit
and courage. Methought this Drink had a kind of a sweet taste, like Asses Milk,
yet it could not properly be called a liquor, but rather a certain concreted
Mist or spiscious Froath; for being with no small pain got out again, I found
it had not so much as moistened my Clothes.

My curiosity not yet satisfied, I went on in quest of some more novelties, and
after a little wandering I perceived diverse persons, some drawing at a great
Cord, and some reposing themselves, being newly come from the same exercise,
which I judged was very toilesome by the large drops of sweat I saw trickling
from their foreheads: What are these? What is it they do? said I to a man clad
like an Hermit, that stood by looking on; These are the Gods (answered he very
civilly) that busy themselves in keeping the Sphere of the world in its
ordinary Motion, you shall presently see those others that now are resting
themselves, return to the relief of these that labor; But how do they turn
the Sphere? quoth I. Did you never see a Wall-nut (replied he) pierced through
and a stick put into it, which being drawn by a thread, turned a little Mill at
the end of it? Very often, said I, for when I was a Boy it was my ordinary
Pastime: You will easily then conceive this Mystery (answered he) if you do
but fancy the Earth (which is stable) to be such a Nut, for it is pierced
through with that long Travers called the Axletree that reaches from Pole to
Pole. To the middle of which, this Cord is fastened, in in such a manner, as by
drawing it the first Heaven is turned round, and having Pullyes in certain
Holes that directly answer one another, the next is likewise turned (but more
swiftly) and so the motion is derived to all the rest in order. But walk a
little further this way and I will show you another secret.

I presently turned my steps as he directed, and guiding my eyes to that part
of the Heavens his finger pointed at (which was very transparent,) I spied a
company of women that seemed to play with the Circles, and (striking them with
their hands) made them turn about like Whirligigs.

Then, me thought I had a desire to return to the Earth, and entreating the
Hermit to instruct me in the way, he bade me lay hold with both my hands on the
Cord the Gods were drawing at, by which I slipped without much trouble down,
till I came to the entrance of that wide Opening, where it passed through, and
then to escape the Precipice (I cannot relate the manner) but the Air (me
thought) bare me up, and I hovered in it, as if my Arms had been Wings; This
new fashioned Dance between Heaven and Earth much delighted me for a while, but
at last I grew weary of that exercise; and finding my self near two little
Ditches full of water, I perceived two naked young men bathing, and often
vaunting of the delicate pleasures all their Members tasted to the very Throat
in that liquid Crystal: This set me a longing to take my share in the
happiness they bragged of, so I nimbly stripped off all my Clothes, and spying
a Ditch, whose waters seemed of a cleerer complexion than the rest, I chose
that for my Bath; But as soon as I had stepped into it, I found my self fallen
down a Precipice, for it was only a broad piece of Glass, which breaking
with my weight almost flayed my legs with the broken edges.

Yet Fortune so kindly contrived the fall, that I was not bruised; The bottom
was all covered with the tender Breasts of young women, glew'd together two by
two, like pretty soft Foot-bals, upon which I gently rolled my self fancying
much delight in my misfortune: But at last tired with the continuance of the
sport, and lastly reposing my self on my back, a handsome Lady approaches me
with a Bottle in her hand, kneels down by me, and puts a Tunnel in my Mouth,
saying, She would give me a taste of the most delicious Liquor I had ever
drunk. This made me prepare to receive it with a wider throat than the
singing-man that swallowed a drowned mouse in his Mornings draught, when she
raising her self a little, in stead of making my Mouth water, made water in my
Month, to the quantity of at least a Pint, S. Dennis measure, and it was all
run down my Throat, before I could distinguish the taste of her Bounty. But
Desire to revenge this immodest injury, set me quickly upon my legs, and the
payment of a single box of the Ear for my Beverage, shattered her Body all to
pieces: Here lay her Head, there her Arms, a little farther her Thighs, in
short, all her Members were divided and scattered one from another; But, which
most amazed me, every part, notwithstanding the Dissolution, busied it self in
the sunction of its usual office, The Legs walked about the Cave, the Arms
struck at me, the Mouth grinn'd, and the Tongue reviled me.

The Fear I apprehended to incur Danger for this Woman's Death, made me
strain my invention to recover her; a strong conceit possessed me, that if all
the Parts were reunited, she would return to her former estate, since none had
yet forgot to exercise its proper function: and having thus put her together
again (like a Clock that had been taken in pieces) her Arms and Head only
excepted, methought her Belly looked so inticingly, that I began to be in the
humor to sport with it, and tender her an amorous Redress for satisfaction of
my former Rudeness, when her Tongue cried out, I had mistaken her Breasts, and
put others (which my have had gathered up in the Cave) in the room of hers.
This set me a seeking for the right ones, (which found) I had no sooner put
them in their places, but the Head and the Arms came of their own accords, to
recompleat the whole, and take their share in the delight with the rest of the
Members; the Mouth kissed, and the Arms hugged me with close embraces, till
wearied into a pleasing languishment, I changed the Recreation into Rest.

Then the Lady made me rise, and (through an Advenue that conveyed the light
into the Cavern) led me by the hand into a spacious Hall, the walls of which
were hvng about with wanton Pictures, that represented the soft sports of Love
in many varied postures. I had not long entertained my eyes with the
contemplation of these inanimate Pieces, but from the next Chamber, there
started out a score of handsome Lasses, with their hair dancing in loose curls
about their naked bodies, and came all frisking toward me, beating the
Switzers march upon their buttocks; and after some pretty freaks, surrounding
me, they fell to tabour mine to the same tune, till my patience giving way, I
tried to requite their Music upon their own Instruments: But at length feeling
my self too weak to maintain this sportive quarrel, I made a flat retreat
into a Closet I found open, the floor of which was strewed with Roses, half a
yard thick: Thither the wanton Conquerants pursued me, and there we rolled one
over another after a mad fashion, till, I believe, we were all alike willing to
give the Game over. At last, they buried me over head and ears in the flowers,
where wanting the benefit of Air, I strove as fast as I could to recover my
feet, but ere I could rise out of my fragrant Sepulcher, my joviall
fellow-tumblers were all vanished. And as I past out of the Rose-bed, through
the great Hall, in quest of my bonny Lasses, I met with an old Woman like
Agatha, who begged a kiss of me with this pretty invitation, that she was much
handsomer than those impudent queans I sought for: But I (that could find no
inticement in such a decrepit Deformity) gave her a rude repulse; and as I had
advanced a few steps from her, Well Francion, said she, You will repent this
Denial, and shortly sue in vain for what you now so uncivilly reject. These
words invited my straggling looks back again to her, and then to my grand
amazement, I perceived she was not an old Woman (as I first fancied) but the
fair Lauretta, that had cost me so many sighs. Pardon me, Dear Mistress,
cried I immediately, and let your sudden transformation bear the blame of my
dis^respect. This said, I offered to embrace her, but she presently vanished,
and left me nothing but an arm-full of Air: then the noise of a loud laughter
directed my eye to the place whence it came, where I spied all my naked Troop
of Play-fellowes mocking at the Adventure had befallen me, and among other
things they said, in stead of Lauretta I must make shift with one of them.
Content (cried I) let any one of you (that can entertain me with a
Maidenhead) come see what sport I Will show her upon the Rose-bed; at that they
fell a laughing ten times louder, and so confounded me with their Clatter, that
I was jeered quite out of countenance; At last the Youngest in the company
began to pity me, and coming nearer, told me, if I would go along with the
company, she would show me all their Maiden-heads.

I followed her, and ere we had gone far, She conducted me into a little
Temple, upon the Altar of which, I saw the Image of the God of Love environed
with abundance of small Viall-glasses, filled with a kind of substance that
could not properly be called Liquor; It was of a Vermilian color like blood,
only in some places there was a mixture of white streakes like milk. See,
(quoth she) these are Women's Maiden-heads, and those, we might once call ours,
are here among them; as soon as they are lost, they are brought to the Altar of
this Deity, who esteems them above all other Offerings: By the Scrowles upon
them, you may know their Names to whom they once belonged, and what the Men
were that got them. Pray show me Lauretta 's (said I to her) Look Francion
(answered she, bringing me one of the Glasses in her hand) this is here is, you
may know it by her name written on it: But I see not the Champions name (said
I) that had the first happiness to struggle for it. You must know (replied my
fair Directresse) when a Maidenhead is resigned before Marriage, the name of
him that had it is never recorded, nor is it fit such failings should be
revealed; For the uncontrouled force of Vigorous Nature does often provoke us to
surrender the Fort at the first assault, sometimes perhaps to an unworthy
Person, and then the discovery of his Name would shame us. From this you may
conclude, that so soon as your Lauretta perceived her Virgin-bud to disclose,
she suffered it very providently to be cropped, knowing Delay would but blow it
broader, and the longer she suffered it to grow, the more it hasted to a
fading, and the less the pleasure would be at the gathering. After this
wholesome Discourse, she led me into an adjoining Temple, where upon a high
Altar was raised the Statue of Vulcan, with a pair of goodly Horns on his
head, at least seven foot in height, and the Walls were all hung round with
Armory of the same kind. Sure this is some Hunter (said I to my Guide) that
has hung up these horned Trophies in memory of his sportive Conquest in the
Woods; No, no, quoth she, these are the badges of Cuckoldry, which men carry
invisibly about them; Presently from an obscure corner of the Temple comes out
Valentine, clad like a Chimney-Sweeper, and his Forehead branched with a pair
of Silver Horns. Thou art not indebted to me for these precious ornaments
(said I to my self) but thou should have been, could I as easily have done
it as desired it. Then some of the Lasses that followed us, took occasion to
make themselves merry with the fair Crop that grew upon his forehead, and
continued to deride him with such broad abuses as forced him to give way to
their Mirth, and so was hissed out of the company. When he had left the Room,
they told me his Argent Horns signified, that his wife helped him to a
profitable Infamy, and I might see some there decked with precious Stones, but
those that were simply of Wood, belonged to such blind Wretches as were
Cuckolds, but knew it not, and gained nothing by their Wives Levitie, besides
the bare Disgrace.

Having offered up a short Prayer to the God Vulcan, that he would permit I
might plant store of those Branches in others Soles, but never suffer them to
take Root in mine own, I returned to the Temple of Love, whom with meet
Devotion I besought, he would vouchsafe to indue me with the Art and Power to
crop as many Virgin-flowers, as would serve to cover his whole Altar. These
Ceremonies past, I returned very jocund to the Ladies Hall, but at the door I
was incounter'd by Valentine, who charged me with his Antlers so boysterously,
that he deeply wounded me in the Belly; This made me retire to the Rosy
Cabinet, where lying down, I began to survey my Bowels, and peruse all that
was most secret about them: I drew them out at full length, and had the
curiosity to measure them with my hand, but I cannot remember how many spannes
they were long: 'twere a hard task to relate the humor I was then in, for
(though I found my self deeply wounded) yet, methought, I was neither dismayed
at the Danger, nor very desi^ous to seek a Remedy. I had not lain long in this
Pickle, when the Woman that pissed in my mouth, came with a Needle and Thread,
and sewed up the Orifice so neatly, as there remained not the least appearance
of a Scarre: This done, she invited me to her Cavern, with a promise to show me
Lauretta: When we were come below, perceiving Lauretta stand up in a corner
without any motion, Passion made me run eagerly to embrace her, but (instead of
being entertained with delicate soft flesh) I felt nothing but a could Stone,
which made me imagine it was only her Statue, and not she: Yet I observed her
eyes roll to and fro, as if they had employed their own lively Glances; and
her Mouth, after the Prologue of a pleasing smile, gave me these words, My
dear Francion, welcome, my Anger is now overblowne, and I have here long
waited for your Coming. The woman that conducted me, perceiving me somewhat
perplexed, told me I did but cast away my embraces, for Lauretta was enclosed
in a case of Glass fitted to the proportion of her Body, which I might easily
discover, if I looked but a cross upon it. Then she fell to discourse of
Valentine, and would needs persuade me that I was as feeble and insufficient as
he to perform a charge in Love's combat, but withal, told me she would apply
Remedies to restore my vigor: (for you know in Dreams the fancy commonly is
most busied in repeating the passages of the precedent day.) In sum, she made
me lie down at my full length, and thrust a long slender stick so far into
my Fundament, that it appeared above the Crown of my head; yet I was so far
from feeling the least pain, that I was more ready to break out into laughter
than complaint; and all I suffered by its passing through me, was only a
tickling kind of delight it left in those parts it pierced: At length guiding
my hand to that part of the stick that came out at the top of my Head, I found
it began to put out with little Branches full of leaves, and a little after
appeared the Bud of an unknown Flower, which beginning to open, by degrees
spread it self wide enough to entertain my eye with the delight of its
delicate color. Curiosity made me long to know whether the smell was as
grateful to the Nose, as the beauty to the eye; but not being able to carry my
Nose to that, I resolved to bring it to my Nose: to satisfy my sense I nip'd
the stalk asunder, but was strangely amazed when I saw blood drop from the
parts my Nails had wounded. Presently after I began to be sensible of a little
pain, of which when I had acquainted my Chyrurgion, she came running to me,
and seeing what I had done cried out, your own rashness has ruined you, Alas!
the flower you have gathered was one one of the Members of your Body, you must
perish immediately; But I know (replied I) it is in your power to restore me,
for you have given a pregnant proof that nothing is too hard for your Skill.
Well (said she) He do my best to cure you, and since Lauretta is here too, I
despair not by her means to succeed well in my enterprise. This said, she
opened that part of the Glasse-case which was opposite to Lauretta's Mouth,
bidding her blow into a long hollow Cane, the further end of which she had put
into a little hole in the ground, made on purpose; then having pulled the stick
out of my body, she placed my back-part over a hollow passage, that directly
answeto the lower end of the Cane; Now blow ( said she to Lauretta) with all
your might, for it is your breathing this way must restore your dying Servants
spirits, though other Ladies use to apply, and receive such Cordials from their
Lovers, by fervent kisses at the other end.

Then, methought, I felt a sweet breath gently steal in at my posterne gate,
which gave me a most incredible delight; by degrees it increased, and at length
became so vehement, that it lifted me from the Earth to the Roof of the Vault:
afterward, by little and little, it began to moderate its violence, and in
conclusion, by a gentle kind of hovering descent, set me down again: then
turning my head toward Lauretta, I perceived she had broken her Glass prison
in two pieces, and looking very blithe, came dancing toward me; I being firm
upon my feet (for she had left blowing in the Pipe, that made me caper in the
Air) and forgetting the foregoing passages, an eager Love-fit made me open my
Arms with intent even to bruise her with my embraces: But at that instant you
waked me, and made me see what an Armfull of ugly Wrinkles I had got, instead
of my fair Mistress. When I consider what delicate sport you spoiled, which I
was tasting in Idea, I can give it no better title than an injury; but then
weighing again how you rescued my body from polution, with a thing I cannot
think on without horror, I find my Obligation too big for my Expression, the
Pleasure had only dissembled with my Fancy, but the Mischief would have
outlasted the Dream, therefore I conclude my self your deep Detor for the
Courtesy.

Indeed (replied the Gentleman) I could wish you were not so beholding to me;
for that which you are pleased to acknowledge so great a favor, I account an
injury to my self, and am now sorry I was so ready to wake you, else your Dream
had continued longer, and the Pleasure I receive in hearing you recount it,
been proportionable: My ears were never entertained with any thing more
delightful; What a happiness do you enjoy during the dull season of Night, to
have your spirits recreated with such gamesome entertainments! had I the like
favor from my Stars, I should desire to spend three quarters of my life in
sleeping; for by that means, at least, I should possess in imagination all
the advantages I were denied by Fortune. Ha^ happy Endymion, favor me with the
knowledge of your Diet, and what sorts of Drinks you use Bedwards, that furnish
you with such pleasant Dreams. I (said Francion) commonly drink the best Wines
I can find, and eat none of the meanest Meats; If the God Morpheus visits me
sometimes, he finds the way to my lodging on his own accord, I use no spell
to bring him; However, I find no such pleasure in my Dreams, as may invite
you to desire the like faculty; for, if you but balance the inquietudes my
Brain and whole Body have been tossed in, you will confess they far outweigh
any contentment I resented: One while I was beaten, another while kicked and
bruised with falls, on every hand I still met with something of Sinister. Of
all your Adventures (said the Gentleman) in my opinion, the most facetious was
your encounter with the Sun's Horse-keeper, when he sent you a fishing Souls
at the bottom of the great Basin: I have observed your Spittle all this day,
and methinks it looks as if it were of that same liquor you swallowed in your
Divinge. A rare imagination, in troth (replied Francion laughing) But Sir, will
you give me leave now to challenge your promised interpretation of my roving
Fancy? I find such an intricate mixture of various Riddles in it (answered the
Burgundian) that I need not blush to break my word, yet, lest I should too
far discredit my apprehension) I will adventure to bolt at as much
Mythologie, as the short Arms of my conquered Conceit can fathom.

And first, to begin with your old Man with the Padlock at his Mouth, methinks
he represented a wise Man, that is not lav^sh of his language, and yet can tell
how to break Silence, when Time invites him. The babbling Tongues were Emblems
of back biting Persons, that never think they have said enough, though every
Word has a detracting sting at the end of it. The Giant, that was so enraged at
the Satyricall unripping of his Vicious life, resembles a wicked Statesman,
that loves to act what he loathes to hear of. And if you would know the
meaning of your Heavenly Adventurers, they may serve to deride the sublime
folly of pretenders to Astrology, and mock at the repute, they would have the
World ascribe to their uncertain Science. The Glass that broke when you fell
into the Cave, shows the instability of Worldly pleasures. The Woman's pissing
in your Mouth signifies, that the dear delight we fancy in the wanton exploit
with Women, is but Excrement and Ordure; And the Blow that struck her into so
many Pieces may let you understand the sraile constitution of Women's Love,
which is so prone to be divided, and (upon every slight occasion) ready to
crack into inconstancy: That the Head and Arms would not lose their share in
the pleasure with the rest of the Members, shadows their Vain Pride, that
would not only be adored for what is handsome about them, but what their
partial Mistake apprehends to be so, though it be not. By the Wanton Wenches
that appeared to you stripped of their apparel, you may fancy terrestrial
joys that are poor and Naked, if compared with those that dwell above. The
Temples of Maidenhead and Cuckoldry their own Interpreters. And if Valentine
would needs wound you with his horns, it was because the Courtesy you
endeavored to do him, deserved no better requital: but you were cured
incontinent, and that showed the ill will the Cuckold bears you, is never like
to prove dangerous. As for Lauretta, whom you might see, but not touch, it may
possibly mean that you may be deceived in your pregnant hopes to enjoy her.
And for the Remedy was given you for your imaginary impotency, your cropping
the flower that sprouted above your head, and the ridiculous manner of saving
your life, shows that a broken head (as yours is now must have leave to dandle
extravagant conceits. If you will needs be so curious to inquire the meaning
of your fall upon the Women's breasts, with some other circumstances, pray play
your own Reason at them, for I am resolved to be fool no longer, nor trouble
my self with controuling or observing others follies. I cannot dislike your
Reasons (answered Francion) and because my Head is cracked, I fear my Brains
will fly out at the Chink.

What Discourse soever passed betwixt them hereupon, for my own part I
conclude with this opinion, that whosoever suffer themselves to be carried
down the stream of Mundane Vanities, their Thoughts must continually follow
the motion of their Hearts, and their sleep can never be quiet; Or I may rather
say, they sleep and dream always, for what e're they see is but Illusion and
Fallacy; in so much, though Francion seemed to distinguish the Nightwalkes of
his Fancy from the rest of his life's adventures, I esteem them parallel, and
believe his Actions were not much more regular: However (as the common error
of distempered People, is to believe they are not distempered* when he made the
recital of his Dream, he imagined himself awake, and his companion thought
no less: For they, whose Brains are diseased, and deluded with the Fantasies
of this World, are not capable of knowing the abuse.

Diverse ingenious and agreeable flourishes and conceits that took their rise
from some Passages of the Dream, were hadsomely interchang'd betwixt our
fellow-travellers, till at last they arrived at a fair Castle, that belonged
to the Burgundian Gentleman, the plaisance of whose Seat, with the stately
Structure, curious Contrivance, sumptuous furniture, and multitude of
Attendance that paid him great respect at his entrance, speak him of more
eminent quality than Francion formerly imagined.

After Supper the Gentleman conducted Francion into a goodly Chamber, pressing
him to go to Bed presently, because he had need of Rest, then commanding the
wound in his Head to be unbound, and the Plasters his Country Surgeon had
applied, to be taken off, he dressed it with a certain exquisite Balm was
brought out of Turkey, that had the virtue in very short space to cure all
sorts of Wounds. This done, You promised me last night in the Inn, (said he)
to undisguise your self, and give me a real account of your more particular
Adventures; Now Leisure and Opportunity invite me to challenge your Promise, and
I expect no less satisfaction from your Courtesy, than the discovery of your
Name, and relation of your Fortunes. Sir (answered Francion) the Ingratefullest
amongst men were too good a style for me, should I be so unworthy as to deny
any thing you shall please to demand of me; your Civilities have made an
absolate purchase of my services, and while Heaven lends me breath, I shall
ever acknowledge my self entirely yours; I must account it one of the greatest
blessings my Stars did e're vouchsafe me, that I so happily incounter'd a
Gentleman, whose Generosity expects nothing but a few Words in recompense of
such signal favors: And now Sir, to give you earnest of my Intention, to
comply always with your desires, I shall employ the best of my endeavors to
answer your present expectation. This said, the Gentleman seating himself in a
Chair by his Bedside, Francion entertained him with this following story.

Since you are pleased to be so lavish of your time, as to waste it in hearing
my Discourse, I think it not improper first to give you an account of my
Extraction; My Fathers name was La Porta, his Native Country Bretanit, hit
descent is sufficiently known to be from the noblest and most ancient Families
of that Province, his Virtues and Personal Valor were so signal, that
(though, by the negligence and faithful Tradition of the Penmen of that age,
he be not Chronicled in the History of France) it is not unknown who he was,
and his name lives yet fresh in the memories of the most considerable Persons,
for several generous exploits performed, as well in open Battles, for the
service of his Prince, as in private Incounters. After he had worn out the
best part of his Age, in expectation of Advancement, by the support of some
Grandees, finding Fortune partial in the dispensation of her Favors, and not
inclining to answer his Merit, he left the Court in a discontent, and retired
into his own Country, where he had a competent Estate in Lands, which then
fell entirely into his own hands by the decease of his Mother: But she, having
married her self to a second Husband after his Fathers Death, the surviving
Successor of her Bed, unwilling to relinquish the possession of so good a Pawn,
and being naturally inclined to Contention, detained a considerable part to
better his condition, and maintain a suite against my Father with his own
Money. In fine, the Plea was drawn up in forma, and ready to be brought to a
hearing before the Bailiff of one of the Principal towns in our Province;
Insomuch, my Father (who had rather have been commanded to force a Town by
assault, than constrained to fee a Lawyer; or make use of his sword in a single
Combat, than handle a Pen or Buckram Bag at the Hall) knew not of what Wood to
make his shaft, nor how to comport himself in this contest; At length,
considering the strange influence and Power Presents have over the Viler sort
of Souls (such as the Iniquity of these Times has seated in the highest places
of Judicature) he resolved to tempt Justice with something worth acceptance,
and knowing the Grand Bailiff's vanity, he conceived a Piece of rich Satin, to
new Robe him, might prove ponderous enough to weigh down the Scale: with this
Silken bait, he went to recommend his case to his Judge, who assured him he
should have Justice; But my Father, having left his Lacquay at the door, took
the Satin under his own Arm, which the Judge observing, What have you there
Sir? said he, is that a Bug of writings there under your Arm? Have you any
other piece to show me? Yes Sir answered my Father, It is a Piece of Satin was
given me by a Merchant, in lieu of a sum of Money due to me, and I take the
boldness to present it you, to refresh your memory, and make you more willing
to peruse the Pieces I have delivered you concerning my Process, and I beg
your pardon if it be not answerable to your Desert. The Bailiffe putting on a
severe Countenance, and gravely stroaking up his starched Mustachoes, How Sir,
(said he) who do you take me for? I that am a Judge Royal, whose Integrity is
irreprovable, do you think me a Man to be corrupted by a Bribe, or that your
Present (as you call it) can oblige me to be e're a whit more careful of your
Cause? Do not I know my own duty think you, without such Remembrancers? Go,
Go, I have nothing to say to you, nor your Satin neither, though the purchasing
my Office emptied my Coffers (I confess) I will not however replenish them
with Money so ill gotten, I shall content my self with Honor and Authority:
Learn henceforwards not to tempt those that are incorruptible, Did your Proctor
give you this advice? were I so assured he had no more discretion, I should
forbid him coming to the Bar this Twelvemonth, for he ought to understand
better than you what concerns my charge.

My Father seeming somewhat troubled at this check, and the personated choler,
that painted it self in the Judges face, presently put up the Satin again
under his Cloak, and with a low Cap-Complement, took leave without speaking
one Word. The Mistress of the House, who from an inner Chamber had heard all
the difference, not willing to let such Preyes escape her Chitches* stopped his
passage with a profound Courtesy accompanied with these Words, You see Sir, my
Husband is something Choleric, you took not the right course to make him a
friend to your cause, give me your Satin, I will pacify him well enough, and
he shall accept your Present. My Father had already resolved to convert it into
a Suit for his own wearing, though he seldom went in black, indeed hating it
as a Melancholy and undelightfull Color, which suited with none but People he
did not greatly affect, because contrary to his Martial disposition.

In sum, the Satin was delivered to Madam Baily-vesse; But her Husband not
knowing she had been so provident, in mean time stood watching at his Hall
window, and seeing his Client go through the Court, Do you hear, do you
hear, Monsieur de la Porta (cried he aloud to my Father) you shall be forgiven
this once, so I find you no more tardy; you may leave what you would have
given me even now, for I consider it would be too much trouble for you to carry
it home again. I have given't your Wife already (answered my Father) and so
went away directly to his Proctors, who was one of the best of the Cabal: After
he had heard the passages betwixt my Father and the Bailiffe, This is no wonder
you tell me, Sir, answered he, Alas! you know not the disposition of the Man so
well as I, He is no Catch-pole, but he will catch as many Pieces as he can,
nothing comes amiss to his hands, and his house is like Hell, what e're you
carry thither, you must not expect to bring it back again. He asked you if I
counsel d you to offer him that Present, because he knows there is none of Us
that are acquainted with his humor, will give our Clients any such Advice: You
should have given it his Wife at first, or rather employed some other to
present it her, the better to cover the corruption, and that he might still
preserve the repute of an Upright Man.

Notwithstanding this Silken Bait, my Father lost the Fish, and was not only
cast in his Cause, but adjudg'd to pay all Charges, besides the Judges Fees,
which amounted high, for Monsieur Baily cared not for playing at small games;
and the reason that incited him to pronounce that just sentence, was this, The
Adverse party having intelligence from the Mercer that sold the Satin, how it
had been bestowed, and fearing that fine present might prove prejudicial to his
interest, went likewise before the Day of Hearing, to solicit Mr. Bailiff: But
not daring to offer him any thing, knowing the custom and humor of the
Personage, he bethought himself of a gentile wile to obtain his own pretenses,
and cloak the others corruption: So, observing a handsome Picture, as he walked
in the Hall with his Judges Wife, he fell into high commendations of the rare
workmanship, and wished he knew where to purchase such another Piece; This is
at your service (said the Lady) if you are so taken with it, you may command
it. I am infinitely engaged to your courtesy, answered he, But pray tell me
what it cost, for I am resolved to give you to the full value. Truly Sir it
cost six Crowns. There Is six and thirty for you, replied he, putting a purse
of money in her hand, the pains you took to buy it, and the trouble you will
find in weaning your fancy from it, deserves a no less sum. The subtle Woman
easily conjecturing why he gave her so great a price for her Picture, pleaded
his Cause so close, that overcome by her solicitation, her Husband pronounced
sentence in his favor.

There Is no base Action committed, though never so secretly, but by one
Accident or other, is still brought to light. This was published by a
Servantmaid the Bailiff turned away, after he had paid her with many heavy
blows, which so exasperated the silly wenches rage, that wheresoever she came,
she related this story, and spoke his praises in such terms, as rendered him
odious and subject to all Peoples censure.

My Father distasted at his ill success, went to communicate his case to a
Counselor in the Court of Parliament of our Province, desiring to know if he
might not appeal from the sentence of that inferior Justice-seller. The
Lawyer, who was never accustomed to dissuade any Client from contention, failed
not to remember his own interests in this Occurrence, and encouraged my Father
by diverse reasons to sue out his Appeal. You that are a Gentleman (said he)
must show you have some Spirit, and not suffer your self to be overcome
easily: A Process is a kind of a Combat, where the Palm is given to him
that wins the Prize, as well as at the Olympic games. He that makes himself a
Sheep (according to the Proverb) the Wolf will eat him: you must live in the
Country among stubborn, churlish people, that will be apt to wrangle and deny
your due observance, or come off quit of their Rents, especially if they see
you once so tame as to suffer your self to be led by the Nose like a muzled Ox.
Besides, if you remove your Suit to our illustrious Court, you will find
incomparable Advantages; It will be a means to make you known to those that
never heard of you, and render your Name immortal: For our Registers and
Records are eternal Monuments, where your Memory shall be preserved to all
Posterity, and your successors that shall inherit the Estate you leave, seeing
these authentic proofs of your endeavors to preserve it, will magnify your
care, and solemnize continual Anniversaries to your Remembrance. These
considerations ought to sweeten your sorrow, and make you not so much repine at
a little transitory trouble, that perchance may disgust in the pursuance of
your just Claim: In fine, by my Advice you should not let your Adversary
rest, nor hearken to any composition, though he should offer it, you need
nothing but a definitive Sentence, and make you no doubt of obtaining one to
your own contentment, for your Cause has Reason and Equity to plead for it.

Hereupon he fell a turning over Bartolus and Cujas, from head to feet, and
cited Law-cases of all sorts, to prove my Fathers Right, who (good Man)
believed all he said, not considering he was then in a place where they
understood nothing better than supposing of false titles, and never remember
any reasons, but such as they know will please their Clients. To be short, he
was directed to a sucking Proctor lately sprung up, who, I am confident, had
paid money for his reception (I know to whom) for there was no likelihood his
practice or experience in affairs at the Courts of Judicature, could have
purchased him the permission to plead. Nevertheless, he was not so ignorant,
but he knew well enough how to increase his Talent, and indeed he was so good a
Proctor, that he procured still for himself, however his Clients fared; My
Father was like to succeed well in mean time. This Fellow, to make his profit
double, suffered himself to be gained by the Adverse party, so played his game
with both hands, and instead of advancing my Father's business, retarded it,
maugre all his earnest solicitations, making him believe all the needless
Demurres he made, were necessary, and not to be avoided. All his discourse was
still Money, Money, which he affirmed he must have for several fees, and other
charges, though there was no occasion of disbursing any thing: yet my Father
refused not to furnish him as often as he desired, on purpose to induce him to
make more Expedition in his Business.

On the other side, the Counselor drew up I know not how many Writings, with
two words in a line, that he might get the more: And to swell up the Number,
his Clerk used a certain kind of Cacographie, that admitted a multitude of
superfluous letters, you would have judged him a sworn Enemy to those that will
have men write as they speak, or fancy Du^gardismes, and spell com, have. etc.
without e, and detor, dout without b. Besides, he had such a full Character
eech'd out with long Cloak-bag-string dashes, as sometimes a whole Line will
scarce contain two Words: But the Words were more to be excepted against than
the Letters, for they signified no more than Ciphers, all was but frivolous
discourse, that had not the least reference to the business in agitation. This
Counselor had this pretty custom among other commendable qualities, that if
he had any thing to buy, he would be sure to get by the first Bill or
Replication came to his hands to be drawn, as much money as his occasions
required; for he did usually calculate beforehand how many sheets would amount
to such a sum, which computed, he presently resolved to fill them, though but
with old Ballades. My Father reflecting upon these Abuses, one day, as he was
paying for some such Writings, could not forbear saying, All he had done and
scribled to that instant, availed not him a tittle, that he could have done as
much himself, and perchance more, though he was not of the profession; that it
was but frivolous and unnecessary babbling, to quote so many Cases in Law,
whereas he was certain the Court never took notice of them. This reproach
awaked the Lawyers passion, and thinking his Honor highly interessed by this
accusation, he returned such unhandsome language, as fomented their dispute,
and of a private Complaint began an open Quarrel: But my Father, the less to
provoke his Counselor, by imputing all the knaveries of those Gown-men to one
particular person, made his Attaque general, and inveighed against the whole
Tribe of Practitioners, from the Pettifogger to the Bencher, with such
expressions, as spoke them little less Monsters than they are: What shame is
this (said he among other things) that these Villains should exercise their
Robberies thus publicly without punishment! They have found out a thousand
subtle tricks to cheat men of their Estates, they aggravate slight Trespasses
on purpose to foment Contention, and if any difference betwixt Party and
Party grow to a Lawsuit, they are all furnished with such malices and shifts
to protract the Cause, and cover their cunning Contrivances, that both Plantiff
and Defendant shall return home with loss, while they insensibly convey the
whole Profit into their own Pockets. Can men be such fools to be dreyned by
these Blood-suckers? Do they not plainly perceive all these bundles of Bill
and Answers are made merely to deceive them? To what purpose serve all these
unnecessarie Procedures, but to render Causes more obscure? Why do they not
proceed to sentence as soon as the Parties have produced their Evidence? But
the worst in all these Jurisdictions is, there are so many different forms and
manners of proceeding; I would gladly know a reason why they should not in all
places use the best and shortest way to decide differences: yet what need of
such a question? It Is palpable enough their Avarice invented these Demurres
merely to abuse, and more covertly cheat those who understand not their
Pettifogging tricks. You are angry for a slight matter (said the Counselor)
and I dare say you complain without a cause: Is there any thing the Universe
can boast of more admirable, than the manner of canvassing Causes in our
Courts? Is it not a mark of the Grandeur of Justice to be attended by such
several Formalities, which like as many secret Springs serve each in their due
Order to complete the Frame, and give motion to that great Machine, which you
Clients cannot observe without admiration and much contentment? As for the
difference of Procedures in distinct Jurisdictions, it is rather to be
commended than condemned; for do not you know every Country must have its
several Custom? I will grant all you say to please you (answered my Father)
but I am angry that after all your triflings, and our patience, Justice is not
rendered as it ought; if at length we could have but Right done us, there as no
Delays, no Formalities in your Proceedings, that we should think insupportable.

Hereupon the Counselor alleged diverse things in justification of his
honorable profession, yet was constrained at last to acknowledge, much might
be said against it; but in conclusion, he gave this Reason, That the Divinity
had sent this Scourge among Mortals to punish the enormities of their Crimes.
After several like Arguments, he was farther urged by my Father to confess it
was a general Vulgar Error, to call the perplexing of a Cause with Tricks, in
one word, Practice, without distinguishing of what it is a Practice, as if
there were no other kind of Practice, or that this had gained so great a
Prerogative over all others, as the only naming that term sufficed to make
any capacity comprehend what was meant.

But to return to the Process, It was referred to the most fantastical
Counselor of the whole pack. And it is remarkable, I know not by what
disfavour of the Stars, that sort of people became half fools by that time
they arrive to those grave years, as render other men more respected for their
sage Counsels and Deportments: All that ever hitherto frequented the supreme
Courts, are stumbled at this observation, and the most probable reason can be
given in my opinion, is, that for the most part they are fellows of low,
decrested Souls, descended from Parents of despicable extractions, and to keep
their absurd Gravity, they sequester themselves from all good Conversation,
passing their time only in such studies, as render them as much more stupid as
they are more vile and sordid than any other persons the whole world affords.

My Father's Reporter, through his constant solitude, was become at length a
perfect Misanthropos, no body could boast of having any ascendance over his
Spirit; he was so Chymicall, neither party need fear, his compliance or
partiality; the only danger was, lest he should misconstrue, or not comprehend
the Cause, for which he was more famous than for any other quality, except an
impertinent Confidence, that flattered his vain credulity, no man's apprehension
was so quick and solid as his own.

The first time my Father went to see him, at a distance he took him for a
Crier of Funerals, and finding him standing at his door without any Company or
Attendants, he was about to ask him, who was lately dead in that Quarter; But
a young Man handsomely clad accosting this ill-looking fellow with a low
Reverence, made him correct his thoughts, and consider he might be the Master
of the House, and before he made his Addresses, inquiring who that spruce
Yonker was, he learned 'twas his Worships Clerk, who from a Groom had raised
himself to that degree, where he omitted not to use his fingers to the best
advantage, and curry Clients purses, iustead of his Masters horses.

The Councellor received this visit without discovering any of the odd humors
diseased his brain, but at the next interview (my Father acquainting him with
some particulars concerning his own business) he bid him hold his peade like
an ignorant Pratler, that knew not what he said, and send his Attorney who had
more experience and Judgment to state his Case.

Not many days after, my Father returning to his house, the old Idiot spied
his sword, (I know not what foolish fancy fed his fears, but 'twas no less
criminal for any Gentleman to wear Weapons in his house than Spurs in the
Palace) and as if some danger had required his speedy opposition, he presently
ran to take down an old rustie Halberd that hung in his hall, and brandishing
it with his trembling hands, stood upon his guard at the top of the stone
steps, as if he meant to stop the passage into the house. My Father desiring to
know the reason of this Antique Posture, he answered, That seeing him come into
his court with Arms, he knew not but his design might be to take his house by
Assault; and therefore he resolved to stand upon his own defense.

This was only a laughing matter, but there succeeded other Passages that made
my Father curse the hour he ere began his Suit, and at length notwithstanding
all his Attorneyes persuasive arguments and advice, he went to visit his
Father-in-Law, offering to come to a comprimise, and the better to induce him
to consent, I beseech you Sir, said he, let us speedily withdraw from this
Gulf, whereinto we have imprudently cast our selves, otherwise we shall be
both swallowed up; for my own particular, I had rather have to do in Hell,
than at the Hall, rather endure any torture than the perplexities of Law and I
believe the greatest torment has been invented for the damned, is to sow
dissension among them, and make them receive injuries, for which they shall
never obtain reparation, notwithstanding all the pains and diligence can be
used. Be confident when we compute our charges, neither of us shall find much
advantage against his Adversary, nor any thing nearer the accomplishing his
design; The whole Estate we contend for, will become a prey to this execrable
Tribe of Villains, who live only upon others spoils, and desire no other
occasion of establishing and enriching their own families, than the Ruin and
impoverishing their Clients: Had not We better keep our Money, than sling it
away upon fellows that never return us thanks, but rather think us beholding
still to them, and for three lines of writing without Sense, reckon us a sum
beyond Reason? Let us divide betwixt us, what each coveted to preserve entire
for himself, or I protest (I am so harast and discouraged by the Malices of
these cheating Lawyers) rather than suffer my self any longer to be made a
Prey to their insatiable Avarice, I will resign my Interest, and give you
peaceable possession of the Whole.

This free proposition arguing a generous Candor in my Father, and promising
much advantage to the adverse Party, so won upon his humor, that (though
before he would hearken to no Proposalls of reconcilement) he relished these
Reasons, and only demanded some time for more serious deliberation. Mean
while happy chance presenting (with some advantages) to my Father's unprepared
eyes the Beauty of a Complete Virgin, Daughter to his Step-Father, by a former
Venture (who from her infancy had been bred at Pension in a Religious House) he
never was satisfied with seeing her, this frequent looking begat an amorous
liking, and liking soon grew up to such fervent love, as he presently resolved
to demand her in Marriage, which desire crowned with the Father's and her own
consent, made a perfect Pacification, and concluded all differences by this
Conjunction, to the sorrow and shame of all their lawyers, who expected no such
Issue.

Within one year after the solemnity of the Nuptials, the Nocturnall private
toiles were recompensed with a public joy by the Birth of a pretty Female, and
about the Expiration of the like term, succeeded a second Fruit of the same
kind; But five years were elapsed after their Marriage, before I had a Being;
my first entrance into this World was remarkable, upon the same day the three
Sage Kings followed the direction of the Star: For, my Mother, having been
Queen of the Bean that Night, sitting at the Tables end, and drinking to all
her Subjects, felt some Throes that forced her to quit the Company, and repose
upon a Bed, where she was soon after delivered of me, without any other
assistance than the Sage Matrons, Fortune had conducted thither, to divert
their duller thoughts, and quicken Time's slow pace with some joviall
recreation.

Thus I was borne Dolphin; but when I shall see the Royal Crown upon my head,
is beyond my knowledge; they drank so many full Carouses to my health, as
almost made all the Barrells in our Cellar empty: So, you must not think
strange if I am a deep Drinker now, for finding my self of a competent Age,
and Constitution, I am resolved now to answer proportionably all those, that
challenged me then to the Combat of the Cup, and I believe I shall bear away
the Palm.



To avoid prolixity, my Mother (as she conceived) being not so well resolved,
as to prove a Nurse, delivered me unto a Farmers Wife, of a neighboring
Village to be fostered; nor do I pretend to pass my verdict, whether or no
she did well to suffer me to suck any bodies milk save her own, for that in
the first place, I am not so unnatural a Son as to pry into her Actions, for
that I Will assure you, it concerns me not at all, since I never sucked from my
Nurse any humors which might be displeasing unto Men of Wit and Courage; True
it is, that I do remember I was taught, as other children are, a thousand
fopperies invented by the Vulgar, instead of being brought up by degrees even
from my youth, in high concernments, and being accustomed to speak nothing,
that might favor of lowness or Baseness; but since that time (to my comfort
be it spoken) I did accustom my self to that which was praiseworthy.

And I must needs tell you (by the by) a pretty passage which happened unto me
after I was weaned, and thus it was; I so excessively loved Pap, that it became
my daily food: Now as the Maid had set the Skillet over the Fire in my
Chamber, whilst that I was yet a bed, she was called upon from out the Yard,
and she leaving her Skillet on the Hearth, went to know what was the matter; in
the mean while a crafty Ape, which one of our neighbors had of late privately
kept, coming forth from under a Bed where be lay hid, and having observed (as
you may imagine) how formerly the children were used to be fed with Pap; he
seized upon the Skillet, and taking the Pap, all bespattered my face therewith;
after which, he brought me all my clothes, and taking me up, he did put them me
on after a new Mode, thrusting my Legs into my Coat sleeves, and my Arms into
my Stockins, nor can you believe but that I cried to some tune, the ugliness
of the Animal terrifying me not a little: But the Maid, who was otherwise
busied, came never the faster for all that, My Father and Mother being gone to
the Church; Finally, the Ape having thus perfected his Comedy, leaped out at
the Widow upon the next Tree, and thence gained his Masters house: The Maid
returning a while after, and finding me in such a Jack of Lent like posture,
wherein the Ape had left me, blessed her self a thousand times over and over,
skreeking and rouling her eyes too and fro, being much astonished; at length
appeasing me with blandishments, she asked me who had thus tricked me up, and
by reason I had formerly heard say that the Devil was some ugly thing, I told
her that it was a little boy as illfavoured as the Devil, for I took the Ape
who had a green Coat on, to be a boy. Nor was I so much mistaken therein, as a
Switzer, who meeting with an Ape at a Tavern door, gave him a six pence to
change, and perceiving that in stead of the change which he expected, the Ape
made mouths at him, he incessantly called on him, saying, speak little Boy,
will thou not return me the change of my Moneys? whence it may be the proverb
sprang, which says, making of Mouths, Friskings and Flouts, are the payment of
Apes: but this Switzer was not cousened alone, for a Coridon being sent with a
basket of Pears to a Lord, at his coming into the house met with two great
Apes on the top of the stairs, who immediately seizing on his basket, shared
best part of the Fruits; now by reason the Apes had fine Coats on of cloth of
Gold, and Daggers by their sides, which rendered them very Worshipful
Gentlemen to the Clownes thinking, he having never seen the like before, took
off his Hat and made them a formal Leg; the Apes having sufficiently stuffed
themselves, the Clown proceeded to make enquiry after the Lord, to whom making
his present, the Master of the house asked him why he had not brought the
basket full? the Coridon made answer, so it was Sir, but the little Gentlemen,
your Sons, took the half of the Pears: and the jest was so much the better,
for that the Lord was so ugly a Gentleman, as that a Coridon might well have
supposed the Apes to have been his Offspring: and whereby you may take notice,
that since aged persons did take such creatures to be children, its no wonder I
my self did so, being as then but a boy. But to return to our Maid, who was
in downright earnest, conceiting with her self, that no children were come
into our house, nor any strange person whatsoever, she really and firmly
believed that some malign spirits had played me this pranke, and after she had
unloosed and well washed me, she did cast above a Pint of holy Water about the
Room.

My Mother being returned from the Church, and finding the Maid thus busied,
she demanded of her the cause thereof; and the poor silly wench told all that
had past, and the pickle wherein she had found me, as also spending her
judgment on the whole, that assuredly it was a Devil that was come into the
chamber: Now my Mother, although she was not of S. Thomas his kin, yet she
related the story to my Father, who laughed at it, and said it was but a mere
whimsey, endeavoring to persuade the maid out of her Christian name, and
making her believe that there was no such thing as she had related; but one of
my Fathers men coming immediately after the maid into the chamber, and having
seen me in the said pickle, whereas she questioned me on the premises, did
change the suspicion which my Father harbored, that the maid might be deceived
by reason of her simplicity.

The knavish Ape came back again to our house the following night, and having
emptied a purse-full of Counters, which he had spread about the table in the
Hall, just as if he had been casting up of Accounts, and getting into the
Kitchen, he there having flung down several Platters and Dishes, before day,
made his retreat again betwixt the bars of a small window, which had never a
shut; and which was his accustomed passage. Now when the maids had discovered
the pranks which he had played, they told them unto my Father and Mother, who
were thereby almost induced to believe, that a Spirit did indeed haunt our
house: And the impression; which our Menservants did receive thereof, even
persuaded them also to conceive, that they had seen several Ghosts; and one of
them told for certain, how that he rising out of his bed about eleven of the
clock at night, to make water out of the window, having forgot to carry up his
chamber pot, had perceived something in the garden which did leap from tree to
tree; whereupon my Father swore, that all of them together (since they would
needs make him believe that Spirits did reign in and about the house) should by
turns watch at some one window, to see whether any thing did appear, and to
bring him word of it immediately.

And being a man that stuck to his resolves, what he had determined was
accomplished; and for eight nights together some one of our Servants had
always watched, or at least pretended to have done so (for that I believe they
easily gave way to, and suffered themselves to be overcome by sleep) when as he
that had the watch the ninth night, came and told my Father that he had seen
somebody in the garden; whereupon my Father took a Pistol and went as softly as
he could, together with his servant, to the supposed place, where he no sooner
arrived but he saw a man fly thence toward a part of the Wall, which was
broken down; and he running after him, shot off his Pistol in the air, which
so affrighted the party who fled, that together with his stumbling against a
stone, he could not any longer support himself, so that my Father overtook him
before that he had time to get up again; and by his voice, which he was
constrained to make known, by his begging to be forgiven, our servant
discovered that it was a Pesant, who lived in an adjacent Market Town, or
Borough, and by his having a Basket, wherein was two or three Bon-Chrettin
pears, my Father perceived that he was come thither to steal Fruit: However,
his courage was so far from taking revenge on so contemptible a rascal, as
that he satisfied himself with the giving of him three or four sound kicks in
the breech, and the menacing of him to deliver him up into the hands of the
Justice, in case he returned to commit the like misdemeanour; whereunto he
added a very pleasant and plausible act of Clemency; Go too insatiable
Gulliguts, said he, I protest I see its but lost labor to endeavor to hinder
thee from stealing of my fruit, for that I cannot keep watch every night, nor
will I be at the charges of heightning my Walls. But let us make an agreement,
how many Pears willest thou by the year, on the condition that you shall no
more come and steal them? Will thou be content with one hundred? Whereunto
this brute villain made answer, and by my Fay Sir, so I might be looser by the
bargain. Which answer seemed to be lively and natural unto my Father, that
instead of its making him angry, it begat a fit of laughter in him, and caused
him to dismiss the fellow, continuing only his former threats against him,
being very well pleased to have found out what a strange kind of Ghost it was,
which our Men had seen galloping on the top of the Trees, but as concerning the
Spirit, who had tormented me, and ravaged the House, he knew not what to deem
of him.

On the morrow my Father entering into the House, where the Ape was kept, he
found him fastened with an Iron chain in the House of Office, and asking a
Labourer who had his dwelling there, whose Beast that was? he answered that it
belonged unto a friend of his, who had left it in trust with him, adding
thereunto, that it was true, the said Ape had played many mad pranks; having
the day before been at a Barbers Shop, and returning home, took a dish-clout,
and wrapped it about the Cats neck, and having stolen a pair of Sissers, the Ape
essayed to trim the Cat, in imitation of what he had seen in the Barbers shop,
and cut off all the Cats Whiskers; however I should be glad to be rid of her,
for that she plagues me extremely, and I have been constrained to chain her up
in this manner, because that within two days after I had her, she got into
your House, and where (I apprehend) she would return to do some more
mischief, in case I should let her loose; whereupon my Father making a strict
enquiry of the prefixed day, wherein the Ape (according to the Clownes saying)
should have been at our House, discovered that she was the Devil, whereof
there had been so much noise made, of which they stood so much in fear.

Whereby you may observe, that poor spirited fellows do usually deceive
themselves, and conceive pannyck fears, in the same sort as our people did;
and as for your self who live near unto the Villages, you may best judge of
it; that there is not so little a Hamblet, where its not rumor'd, that Spirits
do haunt it; and in the mean while, in case the business were well enquired
into, it would appear, that the Inhabitants have grounded these their opinions
on ordinary accidents, and natural causes, the reason whereof is hidden from
their dull, and gross beetle-heads; and its a wonder to my self, that during
my Infancy, I never was subject to be frightened by such bugbears, for ever when
our Maids (thinking to correct me for some tricks, which were not pleasing unto
them) told me they would cause me to be eaten up by the Beast which came and
gave me a visit one Morning, when as I was yet a Bed; I heeded it as much, as
if they had just said nothing at all.

I must needs pass by several pretty waggeries, which I committed during this
my Nonage, that so I may ascend a little higher; for when I attained unto the
years of discretion, I had a Master appointed me, to teach me to write and
read, but I stayed not long with him, for I was put to School to the Parson,
who soon taught me that little Latin which he had.

And by I know not what secret instinct of Nature, I was incited to hate the
unworthy actions, the sottish talk, and the ridiculous ways of my
School-fellowes, who were all of them my Fathers Tenants Sons, brought up but
rudely according to the Country fashion; I instructed them how they were to
behave themselves, but if they followed not my precepts, I then laid on them to
some tune, so that we were always at daggers drawing; for these inferior
Souls, being not sensible of the good which I intended them, and not
conceiving, that he who loves well, also chastises well, did at every time
make opposition, and said unto me in this Gibbridge; How now? because you are a
Gentleman, you think you may domineere over us, with a thousand such like
rusticall impertinencies and fopperies; sometimes they complained to their
Parents of my severity, and so exasperated the business, that they came and
brought my Father to warn me from the beating of their children, who durst not
revenge themselves of me, but I did so cunningly plead mine own cause, that
they were constrained to avouch that I had all the reason in the world, to
correct those absurdities which they committed.

Oftentimes hearing my Father discourse of Universities, in which there were
Colleges to instruct youth, and where all kind of peoples children were
admitted of; I passionately desired to go thither, for to enjoy so good
company, whereas at home I only conversed with Country Louts, and brute
Coridons: My Father, perceiving that I was naturally inclined to Learning,
would not at all divert me from the same, in respect he full well knew, that it
was but a very ill Trade for me to follow the Wars as he had done. Now
whereas the Colleges of our parts, were not according to his Fantasy,
notwithstanding all my Mothers obstacles and moans, he himself having some
urgent affairs at Paris, took me along with him, and boorded me with the
Master of the College at Lysieux, unto whom was recommended by some of his
friends, and having given me in charge unto a certain Advocate of his old
acquaintance, whom he desired to furnish me with all necessaries; he returned
into Britain, leaving me to the mercy of Pedants, who having dived into my
small capacity, they declared me to be fit for the fifth Classis, though it was
by favor too.

But mark you what a sad alteration I met withal, and how far I was to
seek, being gotten quite beyond my byas; for I came very short of the enjoyment
of those pleasures, which I promised my self, and you may imagine that it was
very strange unto me, to be absent from my Father, who oftentimes took me along
with him unto several Lordships, which he had in Britain, and where I was
always called my young Master; and you may imagine how it angered me, to have
lost that sweet liberty which I enjoyed by galloping from place to place in the
Country, going a Nutting, and plucking of grapes in the Vineyard, without
fear of the Farmers; as also in following the Dogs and Hunts-men, for that as
now I was more cloystered up by these Friars, and was forced to keep hours, to
be assisting at the Divine service, at Meals, and at the Lectures, when as the
Bell told, by which all our Actions are regulated, and in lieu of my former
Master, the Parson, who never gave me so much as an ill word; I had now to do
with a Regent, who had a terrible aspect, and who walked always with a whip in
his hand, with which he could as well fence, as any one of his Calling. Nor do
I believe that Dionysius the Tyrant, (who after a strange change of his
Fortunes, became Scholemaster, to the end that he might still command) had a
more majesticall, haughty and terrible countenance than himself.

Now the most difficult task which I met withal, under this Man's dominion,
was that I was never to speak but in Latin, and I could as well have been
hanged as not to let slip some words of my Mother Tongue, insomuch that I ever
and anon incurred the penalty of receiving a blow with a Ferule; for my part I
once resolved to do as Pythagoras his Scholar did, to keep silence for seven
years together, in regard as soon as I opened my Mouth, I was accused and
reviled with as heinous words, as if I had been the greatest monster in the
world; but they might as well have cut out my Tongue, as have debarred me from
speaking truth; besides I inclined so much toward the property of my Mothers
sex, as that I would not let my Tongue grow moldy for want of using of it,
insomuch that to let it have its full scope and carriere, I was constrained to
make it pronounce the quaintest Latin words, that I could devise, or had
learned, unto which I added others in Pedlers French, to patch up my discourse
withal.

My Chamber-Pedant was as proud and impertinent an Ape, as possible could be,
he caused himself to be called Hortensius, out of a vainglory, as if he had
been descended from that famous Orator who lived at Rome in Cicero's time, or
that he were as elegant as he; I suppose his right name was Master Heurt eur,
but that he purposely altered it, to the end people might believe he had
something of a Roman in him, and that the Latin was as natural to him, as his
Mother Tongue: In like manner, diverse Authors of this our, Age, have more
ridiculously clad their names in a Roman disguise, and have them terminated in
an ius, that their books might have a better vent, and that the Vulgar and
Ignorant might believe that they were composed by ancient writers. Nor shall I
need to trouble my self to name them farther, you need but to repair to Paul's
Church yard, or to Ducke Lane, where you may know them by their works.

But notwithstanding that my Master committed the like folly, and that he was
endowed with an innumerable quantity of such like mock-vertues: All of us
Scholars were not a jot sorry for it, not so much I will promise you as to
find his inexpressable dogged and miserable covetous condition, which made him
pocket up the greatest part of our board Wages, to feed us only on Poor John,
or empty Platters: And as then to my great grief and regret I did learn, that
all the words which do express the disasters and misfortunes of Scholars, do
by a very remarkable fatality, begin with a P. as first of all, touching our
Masters themselves, they are Pedants, and Penurious fellows, we the Scholars
are pitiful, poor, painful, punished, pennilesse, and such like Epithets,
which are so numberless, that there would be three maine things wanting to
sum them up unto you, a good Dictionary, a great deal of Patience, and a
good deal of Leisure.

As for our Breakfast and after-noons Lunchins, we were even at the mercy of a
most accursed merciless person, who purposely to bereave us of our pittances,
took a walk by his Masters command, at the very instant that he should have
delivered them unto us, purposely to spare charges, and to make us fast out a
bad dinner, when as nothing was set before us, but what my Master had a mind
we should eat, nor could we ever crave so much favor at his hands, as to
obtain any Redishes, Sallat, Mustard or Vinegar, lest they might beget in us a
coming appetite, or a good stomach to our victuals: Master Hortensius, my
learned Tutor, was one of those who loved such like Sentences, as those which
were engraven on Apollo's Temple, and therefore he wrote Nequid nimis, over our
Kitchen door, that the world might take notice, that it stood not with his
good liking, that a Man should surfeit with the Banquets, and Quickshawes,
which were there to be made ready.

Good God! a most pitiful mess in comparison of that which the very
Swine-heards of our Village did daily feed on; and for all that, we were termed
to be Gluttons, and yet we were constrained to dip our hands in the dish one
after the other, by a Mathematical rule; our Pedant accounted those his
darlings, who were satisfied with such a small proportion, as was allotted
them, but you may imagine that they were Cockneyes, daintily Pompered up, and
who were soon glutted: but as for my self, it was otherwise with me, for I was
not brought up so delicately, however I had never a whit the better there,
although my Master would outface me, that I did eat more than four others,
when as God knows, I had but my just allowance; Finally, it was unpossible for
me to ingratiate my self with him, and at our Meals, he continually harped
upon a Lecture of abstinency, which was always meant to me; he alleged
Cicero, who says, That a Man must only Eat to Live, not Live to Eat: and
thereunto he annexed several Examples of the Sobriety of the Ancients; nor did
he forget the story of the Captain who was found a rooting of Turnipps for his
repast; moreover, he manifested unto us, how that when the body is
over-burdened with humors, the spirits could not exercise their necessary
functions, telling us, that we were put to him to study and not to glut our
selves with Meat, that therefore we should have a greater respect to the one,
than to the other: But if any Physician had been present, and had sided with
us, as having the better cause, he would have confuted our Pedant, and proved,
that there is nothing worse for children, than to make them Fast; Besides, do
you not think that he had a great deal of reason to preach Abstinency,
whilst eight of us were preying upon one poor leg of Mutton, he had a whole
Capon to himself, so that never was Tantalus more tempted in Hell by those
lovely Apples, which he could not obtain, than we were by those dainty
morsells which we durst not touch.

And whenever any of us chanced to commit an Error, he then enjoined him a
very profitable Penance as to himself, for he put them out of Commons for
some certain days, and kept them at Bread and Water, whereby he also kept
clean Sheets, and spared the Money he should have laid out in Rods. Now on
Holy days, a^ against Twelfetide, Shrovetide, Bartholmew-Faire and the like,
he never treated us a jot better, unless we contributed every one of us a
Crown extraordinary; nor was he, as then, any loser by the great Feasts which
he made us, by reason that having accustomed us to Fast all the year long, he
then contented us with little or nothing, for some few boiled Poultry, and
other small Foul, and a little wasted Cates, stood us instead of Lucullus and
Appicius their most sumptuous Banquets, and of which our Pedant never made
mention but by his branding of them with the title of Infamous Hogs, and
Churls; And by these, and such like means, he enriched himself, to the great
loss and grief of our poor bellyes, which cried out vengeance against him;
and really there was nothing I apprehended so much, as that the Spiders would
make their Cobwebs on my Jaws, by reason of my not stirring of them, and
keeping them in their due exercise, at the usual hours of repast; And its
best known unto God, what shifts I was forced to make, and how I was very
often constrained to conjure for a belly-full.

When the Principal of our College, who was a very brave spark, was monyed,
and gave entertainment to his Friends, we were present at the Feast, and at the
serving up of the last course, with the Fruit, we presented several Epigrams
unto the Guests, who in return of our Verses, gave such a parcel of Tarts,
Custards, Fruit, and such like quickshawes, and sometimes also some small
foul, which were not as yet taken from the board, as that we were feign to tip
the seams of our Gowns, to stuff them up therein, just like unto a Wallet.

And the best meals that ever I did eat at the greatest Princes Tables of the
world, never were so pleasing and delicious unto me, as those conquests which I
purchased by my Poetry; O you most pitiffull Verses, which I have since that
time made, which never as yet did produce me any salary, I prized so high as
those, which I preferred before an Empire.

Nor was I less pleased, when at the solemn Feast of our Lord, the Advocate
unto whom my Father had recommended me, sent and invited me to dinner, since
that for my sake the good people enlarged their ordinary, with some minced
Pyes, which I assaulted and fell aboard on, with as much resolution as a
courageous and magnanimous King would besiege a Rebellious City: But together
with my dinner, my mirth was at a stand; being straightway examined, concerning
my progress in Learning, and in case I gave not a punctual and ready account
thereof, I was threatened that my Father should be made acqainted therewith; It
is an unquestionable truth, that let a child be of what disposition soever he
will, he will be sure to be more addicted to play than to study, as I my self
was in those days; however (though I say it my self) I must needs tell you,
that I was one of the learned of all our Classis, whereby I lost nothing
neither, for the Advocate, perceiving my ingenuity, he always gave me some few
shillings, which he put upon the account of my Fathers Lawsuits, and with this
money, in stead of playing at Tennis, I bought certain books, which they call
Romances, containing the prowess of the Knights of old, and not long after one
of my companions lent me one to read called Morgant the Giant, which absolutely
bewitched me, having never before read any thing but Ciceroe's familiar
Epistles, and Terences Comedies; at length I was wished to a Book binder upon
the Pontneuf, who did sell such like fabulous Histories, and thither I carried
my whole stock of moneys, but my Trade I Will assure you, was a special one, for
I had such longing desire to possess that which I had a mind to buy, as that
I never stood to bargain with the Bookseller, but ever gave him his own
price, for fear I should miss of my purchase, so greedy was I after my prey,
and he full well knew whom he had to deal withal. I protest unto you Sir,
that at this time I desire to be as ignorant as I was then at that time, in
regard I should enjoy a great deal of pleasure, in perusing such like trifling
stories, whereas at present I am constrained to make-another guess
divertisement, for that I cannot light upon any one Author that pleases me,
unless I could pass by his extravagance; for to tell you the truth, though I
knew where all Books are to be found, yet know I not where to find a good one;
nay, I will hereafter prove unto you, that there is not one good book in all
the world, when as I shall treat of this paradoxe, and evidence unto you, how
that in all of them, there are very great defects which ought to be amended,
however take notice that I respect such books, as our Religion does honor and
allow of.

My greatest pastime as then was to read the feats of Chivaldry, and I must
needs confess that it edged on my courage and begot in me an unexpressible
longing to go and seek adventures abroad in the world, for I conceited it
would be as easy for me to cut a man in sunder, as an Apple in two, and it
pleased me beyond imagination, when as I read of a huge slaughter among the
Giants, who carbonaded one another as small as minced meat, and the blood,
which flowed from their bodies in rivulets, and violent streams, seemed to me
to be a River of Rosewater, in the which, I bathed my self most deliciously,
and at other times I imagined that I was the same Damosel, who kissed the
Infanta Gorgeose, who had green eyes like unto a Faulcon; you must give me
leave to speak to you in quaint terms, when I mention these true Chronicles.
To come home to you, I entertained no other thoughts, save of encounters,
enchanted Castles, delicate Bowers, delights to Lasses, and love-Sports, and
reflecting on them as pure fictions; I said those were too blame, who censured
the reading of them; and that it was a great deal of pity, in this Age,
people did not lead a life conformable to the descriptions of my Book, and
consequently I began to blame the sordid undertakings wherein Men do busy
themselves at present, and the which I do even at present hate from my very
Soul.

Thus I became an Arch wagge, and a very Rake-hell, nor retained I any thing of
our Country breeding, not so much as the very accent of our speech, for that I
boorded with Normands, Picards, Gascons, and rich Parisians, of whom I learned
new customs; and I had already gained the reputation of being a
Pestilent-fellow, from that in the night time, I haunted the Court yards with a
Bulls peezle in my breeches, to belabour those who (with reverence be it
spoken) went to the houses of Easement; my Cap was flat, my Doublet was
Buttenlesse, fastened with Pins or Points; my Gown was all betattared and
patcht, the Collar of my Doublet was black, and my Shoes were white; finally I
was in the right garb and Equipage of a reverend Scholar, and he who would
persuade me to neatness, was my professed Enemy; And when as formerly the sole
angry accent of my Masters voice did make me shake like an Aspin Tree, blown
with the wind, as then a Canon shot sturred me no more than a Crack backwards,
I feared no more the lash than a Flea-biting, as if my skin had been of Steel,
and my daily occupations consisted in a thousand waggeries, as in flinging
Squibs, Crakkers, Dirt, and sometimes stinking Surreverences, on the heads of
the passengers, as they came under the College windows in the Streets; one
time above the rest, I did let down out of the Window, a Basket tied to a
string for a pastry Man, unto whom I had thrown down six pence, to put me
some Cakes in it, and as I drew it up again, my Master, who contrary to my
knowledge was in the room just below me, drew in the Basket as it passed by his
Window, and never quitted it until he had quite emptyed it; my self running
down the stairs to discover, who had served me this sly trick, I met with the
Pedant, standing at the threshold of the house door, and perceiving that it
was he, I durst not so much as open my mouth to him, though I grinned most
hideously on him, being vexed to some tune, when as at the same instant, he
commanded me to go and invite another Master, his neighbor, to come and take
an after-noons collation with him; well, away I went with a heavy heart, and
brought his guest into the very chamber, where I saw no other Cakes on the
Table, but my own Cakes, and of which he never proffered me so much as the
least crum, so base a Cluster-fist was he: behold I pray how well he could
practice the Laws of pilfering, by sherking on his Disciples, to feast his
friends; but though I said little or nothing, yet I thought with my self I
will be even with you good Master Pinch-penny I Will warrant you, though I should
hang for it, for e're long I shall show you a trick of my skill.

Now an occasion to be revenged of my Master proffered it self shortly after,
as well as I could have wished it, for that the Father of one of our companions
had sent our Master a Hare Pie for a present, commending it highly; the very
first time that he tasted of it, was at our Table, for that he delighted it
seemed, to eat that which was good, and rare before us, purposely to set our
teeth on water, yet he did not so much as present the least part there of to
his Son, who had sent it him; I heard him give command, that it should be
carried back again into his Study, for that he valued it as much as his Books,
loving the nourishment of his Body, better than that of his Mind: the place
wherein it was locked up, was only enclosed with boords, and joynted and lined
on both sides with old rotten Mats, the which I ripped asunder at his being
absent; and whereas I as then was very slender, a Gascon, who was one of my
lustyest comrades, lifting up a thwart beam by maine strength, I at length
slipped into the famous Study, as sacred to Bacchus and Ceres, as to the Muses,
where prying into all holes and corners, peeping under the Shelves, and tossing
all the Books topsie turvy, truly I could find nothing at all, and relenting my
misfortune to my companion, who with a great deal of impatiency expected me
without; I had well nigh past both my legs under the beam to come out again
backwards, when as stooping my body very low, to croude my self through, I
perceived a great chest, wherein the year before there had been a Garden made,
and it came into mind by the inspiration of some little Devil (as I think)
that the Pie might happily be there, whither returning, I found it to be even
so, the crust thereof was very hard, and very ill savoured, and extremely
scanty of Butter, wherefore I concluding with my self, that it would be an
umannerly part to carry away all; I leaft the Coffin and only took the
Carcass, in lieu whereof, I put therein a pair of dirty Socks, which were
thrust into a hole thereby, and having covered the Case again, I packed up my
Venison in a brown paper, gave it to my comrade, and pursued it and him, as
fast as if I had been a hunting indeed, for that I longed to get out of the
Study again with a whole skin: Nor need I swear that it remained not long in
our clutches, nor were we much troubled to resolve where to hoord it up safe,
for we put it all up into our Natural chests before night, and we must of
necessity have had a window in our breasts, as Momus desired to have, in case
any one would have endeavored to discover our theft.

Hortensius our Pedant never thought of his Pie till the next day, when as it
coming into his mind, he commanded his Pastry-Man to go and invite another old
Pedant to breakfast with him, who was an old Fellow-Toper of his, and to tell
him that he would let him taste of a noble Hare Pie, in case he would bring a
quart of his best new Wine with him, for to allay the drought which the eating
of the Spices would beget in their throats. The old Pedant failed not to come
at the hour appointed, with as much Wine as Hortensius had sent for, and as
soon as he was entered the Chamber, the Pastry-Man went to reach the Pie out of
the Case, and set it upon the Table, where it was no sooner placed, but the
dotard Pedant took up a Knife, and running his Knife into the same hole where
the crum had formerly been cut up, which he thought had been whole, he rummaged
with his Knife round about the Pie, holding his other hand fast upon the crust,
and said, go too, go too, let us see what the belly of this Pie does
contain, whereunto he added, Good Master Hortensius, Lord what an admirable
knife have you here, verily it cuts as it were of it self, for I Will assure
you, I do not put any force at all to it; Hortensiu^ burst out with laughter,
to see the Dotard was such an Idiot, as to put his Knife in the same hole where
the Pie was cut up before, whereat the old Pedant slinging off the lid of the
Pie, asked what reason he had to laugh at him? and his eyes being not capable
to discern what was in the Pie, he drew forth his Spectacles, and putting them
on, finding the foul Socks in stead of the Hare, he supposed that Hortensius
had purposely put this trick upon him, and upon that score did flout and jeere
him, which affront the old fool being not willing to brook, he snatched up his
quart of Wine, and clapping it under his Gown, marched away in a great fury.
Hortensius, who was worse transported than he, let him depart without making
any excuse unto him, and did not know whom to suspect for stealing his Hare. As
to his Pastry-Mat^, by whom he sent it to his Study, his fidelity was so well
known unto him, as it was unquestionable, for this good Servant was a second
self to him, he was his Achates, his Pirithous and his Pylades, whose
goodness was so great, that it repaired the inequality which was betwixt their
conditions; he had the keeping and disposal of the Moneys, and yet shod not
his Mule at all: And as for my part, the greatest crime I believe he was guilty
of, was, that he somewhat courtailed our Commons, and for this reason we gave
him that nickname of being Hortensius his Sissors; but it was hardly credible
that he would be so ignoble as to employ himself in the clipping of his
Masters Coin, wherewith he had so ingenuously entrusted him: But it was more
likely that some of us Scholars had done the fact, and the Pedant likewise was
of the same opinion, knowing full well that there were some cunning Shavers
amongst us, who were well verst in the Art of picking Locks; however not
suspecting any one in particular, as to the fact committed, he would willingly
(had he durst, so far his passion transported him) have caused our bodies to
be opened to know the truth of the business, as Tamberlain did to the Soldier,
who had stolen Milk from a poor Country Woman. Finally he resolved to punish
us all, that so he might not fail to punish the guilty, which, by his leave,
was a gross piece of injustice; but what a piece of injustice did he impose on
us, even the same which I formerly mentioned unto you, and the which might
conduce the more to his disadvantage and profit; for he purposely dined before
we left School: and afterward locked himself up in his Study, and when we were
come from Morning prayer, our Pastry-Man was not to be found, so that we wanted
our half penny Cakes, after which we ran with more earnestness than we did
out of School, when we had got leave to play; and believe me at the very time
of the Bakers bringing these Cakes home, we were seized with a fit of joy,
although these Colledge-Cakes were as hollow-hearted as the Pedants our
Masters, for instead of Crum, they were filled with nothing but wind; for you
imagine we were devilish hungry by dinner time, and yet we were set down to a
Table, which was covered with nothing but a Cloth, as white as a Scullion-boyes
shirt, and as for Napkins, the use of them was forbidden us, because we wiping
our fingers on them, daubed them with such grease, as serves to feed such
slovens as lick them: But we hungry Souls as we were, having demanded our
Dinner, the Pastry-man brought up the Pie covered, and told us, It is my
Masters will that we all share of this; A famisht Norman took off the lid, and
finding naught therein save the foul Socks, fell into such a passion against
the Pastry-man, who sufficiently jeered us, that he flung all the Crust of the
Pie at his slouching Chops, and afterward took sanctuary in one of his friends
Chambers, where he remained a whole day, for fear of Hortensius: The Gascon
and my self, laughed in our sleeves, and had much ado to contain our selves,
though our bellies were as badly furnished as the rest, and all of us being
destitute of a dinner, which we could not obtain from our Master, we joined
our stocks and sent for something from the Cooks, and thus the innocent
suffered for the criminal, and our Pedant never knew it was I that stole his
Hare.

Much about that time I was in the third form, where I had not given any thing
for the Masters present or yearly gift, nor for Candles, although it drew nigh
unto the time of breaking up School, and the reason was, my Father had
forgotten to send it me with the rest of my allowance, whereupon our Regent
being very much displeased, exercised all the rigors he could against me, such
as were not imposed on any other Scholars, and when he could handsomely, he
took an occasion to revile and affront me upon that score, and was very well
pleased when my comrades called me Glisco, alluding to a rule in the
Dispauterius Grammar, where there is Glisco nihil dabit, whereby they meant I
would give him nothing, and by reason the Son of a rich Treasurer had paid the
Master in fair Quadruples, he was called Nic dator, by another rule of the
said Rudiments, and thus by this mingling of French and Latin together, their
drift was to make me sensible, that he had given our Regent good Gold, and here
you must hold me excused, if I cloy you with College Apothegms which I could
not tell how to avoid, since they lay so pat in my way.

And to the end, I might add a greater torment to my Pedants spite, finding
that he made use of all occasions whatsoever, to cloak those chastisements,
which he was resolved to inflict on me, I fell hard to my studyes, and quite
abstained from all kind of waggish knaveries, insomuch that my Master was
ready to run wild, and to lay some supposed crime to my charge, so strangely
was this ignoble and base Soul transported, when as his exorbitant avarice was
not satiated, and by his baseness and wiles I had like to have suffered
Shipwreck, had not my Money come in time; which I resolved to present unto him,
in the same manner as the Pedants had introduced it to satisfy their
ever-gaping purse, by presenting him a curious Cristall glass, full of
comfits, with a Lemmon in it, in the ryne whereof I had not stuck my Gold, as
it was the usual custom, but had thrust it into the Lemmon it self through
the hole which I had made therein; And presenting the same unto him, with a
Counterfeited melancholy visage, I told him, Sir, you know that I am far from
home, and the Messenger has not as yet brought me that which is requisite for
your yearly Present, in the mean while I do present you with this from my
self, as an earnest of ten Crowns in Gold, which you shall receive within
these fourteen days.

This fair Promise did even pierce through the hard rock which environed his
heart, and obstructed his being moved with the respectfull amity wherewith I
accosted him; He accepted the Glass, and thanking me with a smiling
countenance, poured the sweet Meats into my Cap, and gave the Citron to a
favorite of his, not knowing that it was as precious as any Apple in the
Hesperides Garden, and that I might have the more pleasure, I let him alone,
but when I saw that the Lessons were all given, and that the least boy was
ready to go forth of the School; I went to the favorite, and sked him if he
would change his Citron for my sweetmeats, which he agreed unto, loving the
sweetmeats better than the sower Lemmon, and at the same time we returned
toward our Domine, whom I pulled by his long fleeve, as he was correcting a
Theme, and asked him smiling, if he would see my Citron; at which words, I
opened it in the middle, and showed him the Gold between the clouds, telling
him, that he should not stay so long as I told him for his Gold; no, said he,
as he took the Gold, this is then for me, I will give you the Citron again;
and praising me not a little for my subtilty and wit, he blamed me for
hazarding the loss of my Gold; whilst he was talking there, the Scholars
applauded the jest with their Books, which they clapped against the Forms, as is
usual on such like occasions, and with eagerness had like to have broken
their Satchellstrings, Benches and all.

After which, that shye and untractable Animal, being now fully tamed, and
appeased, used me with as much civility, as he did the others; but it was not
my Fortune to enjoy these his Caresses long, because my Father sent Letters for
me to go into the Country, to assist at the wedding of two of my Sisters
which were to be married in one day, the one to a brave gallant Gentleman, and
the other to a Councellor of the Parliament of Britany, so thither I went along
with the Messenger, nor was I ever gladder in my life, for all my business
then was, to make good cheer and be merry; Nevertheless the great desire, I
had to learn the Arts and Sciences caused me to beg leave of my Father to
return against the Feast of Saint Ramy, when the Lectures do again commence,
at which time I was about thirteen years of age, and was exalted to the second
Class: and so consecutively in the ensuing years, I was preferred to the
rest, and thus finally I past the whole course of my Studies; But I shall not
trouble you any more with the several passages incident thereunto, and which
befell me during the said time, for I fear, it would but offend your ears,
and I have almost tired my self with relating such fopperies, since I may give
you a more pleasant entertainment, Good Lord Sir, said the Burgundian
gentleman, do you thus cruelly deprive me of the recital of your most pleasing
adventures? do you not know that these Actions of our youth, are extreme
pleasing, and that we delight our selves in hearing the adventures even of
beggars and base fellows; as of Gusman de Alfaracha and of Lazarillo de
Tormes; And how then should I not reap a great deal of satisfaction to have
the adventures of a Gentleman and a Scholar, who thereby gives an evidence of
the subtilty of his wit, and of his great cunning even during his youth? I but
Sir, said Francion, give me leave to tell you, that you will reap a far
greater satisfaction, when I shall tell you what befell me, in a riper age, for
these are more serious passages, and wherein you will find a far greater
contentment. Whereto the Burgundian answered, assuredly I can express nothing
but wonders at the rehearsal of your Courtiers life, for I have already heard
some incredible passages thereof, by certain persons who came from the Court.
Wherefore I could wish that you had already attained to the relation of it, and
that you had run through all your several Classes, although you should have
been whipped above ten times at each of them, less I would not willingly have
you skip over any, or anticipate time. Whereunto Francion made answer, Sir, you
do very graciously represent unto your self, things as if they were present,
and truly I am not a little obliged unto you for your favor, in desiring I
should be often whipped; where think you shall I meet with a breech that may
be able to resist so many assaults? and if you be in earnest, you shall do
well to have an Armor of proof forged for my Bum, which you must have painted
over in flesh colors, or else be pleased to lend me that skin of yours; Take
you no care of that said the Burgundian, we will provide for all.

And in this manner they entertained themselves, with these and such harmless
Discourses, which must not of necessity be forgotten, although they are not of
so high a strain as many others, for without them our History would not be
complete. Our drift herein is, to behold an Image of the life of Man, so that
it must be performed by several representations. The History of Francion's
Father, it is true, does demonstrate a Country Gentleman's life, who in his
Youth has seen something of the Wars, and who as yet has a Martial heart,
which despises all other conditions or qualities of Men: the sordid avarice of
some Lawyers, which is there very aptly described, as well as all the rest of
their Knaveries and dogged dispositions: After which the sottishness of some
persons, next the impertinency of some Pedants and Schoolmasters, and lastly
the waggishnesse of Scholars; which is the field wherein Francien intends to
expatiate his fancy in the sequel of this History, describing also the vanities
and errors of such persons, who think themselves to be wiser, richer, and
better borne, than really they are, as Master Hortensius did, and by the
demonstration of his rendering himself ridiculous to all the world, by whom he
was jeered and flouted, others may be warned as by a fair lesson which is laid
before them. Francion took a great deal of delight in telling of these
Stories, because he retained in his Breast the sentiments of very good nature,
which made him love all the Extravagances of other Men.

Nevertheless his discourse was not so attentive, but that now and then he did
cast an eye upon the things he did behold round about him, and just as he had
terminated the last Discourse aforementioned, he could no longer forbear, but
would totally satisfy his curiosity; and drawing open the Curtains of his
Bed, he put out his head to cast his eyes toward the farthest end of the
Chamber: whereat the Lord of the Castle asked him, what is it you look after
Sir? I was seeing, said Francion, whether I could spy any one of your
Servants, for I would desire them to reach that lively Picture, which is
fastened to the Tapstry hangings, being it is unpossible for me to discern from
hence, what it does represent; I will go and fetch it you, said the Lord, and
rising up from his place, he took down the Picture, which was made in the form
of an Ovall, and not much bigger than a Sundyall, to carry in ones Pockets, and
delivering it into Francion's own hands, he said unto the Lord, that he was
sorry he had mentioned it, because it had caused him so much trouble; After
which looking upon the Picture, and beholding the perfectest and most lovely
choice beauty in the world pourtraited therein, he cried out, Good Lord Sir,
do you use to place such bewitching charms in your guests Chamber, purposely
to make them dye insensibly, that so you may have these spoils, Oh! you have
killed me in the very showing of me this Picture: All the world is not so
sensible as you are, said the Lord, and if so be I were so, I had been dead
long since, for that I have oftentimes contemplated the features and
allurements of that face; When as Francion beholding the lid of the Picture,
for that it did lock, like unto a Box, he found Naiis to be written therein,
what signifies that said he? it is the fair ones name, said the Lord, and she
is an Italian Lady, as you may see by her dressing; an Italian Gentleman, by
Name Dorini, who passed this way not long since, did lend it me for eight days
only, to the end that I might consider it at full, and I had placed it in his
Chamber, which is the privatest of all my Castles, and which I reserve as the
Cabinet for my pleasures, Is this incomparable Lady still alive, said Francion?
I do not know answered the Lord, none save Dorini can resolve us that
question; Lord that you should be so negligent as not to have informed your
self thereof, said Francion; it seems that you are of a gallant free
disposition, who account all things indifferent; It is very true said the Lord,
and I protest unto you, that being with, Hellene, whom you went to see
yesterday, and who is but an ordinary beauty, I took as much delight in her
company as I could have done, in the enjoyment of the incomparable Naiis, do
but shut your eyes Sir, when as you are forced to kiss an object which has no
attractiveness at all, and yet Sir, your senses will nevertheless be tickled
with the pleasure of the most perfectest love, and thereby you shall quench the
ardent desires, which you harbored to join your self unto a body, in which
your eyes do find those subjects beget an extreme passion in you.

After which, Francion, having most attentively beheld the Picture, did fasten
it with a pin at his Beds head, and afterward continued his discourse, as you
see in the following Books, etc.

The end of the third Book.
THE FOURTH BOOK OF THE COMICAL HISTORY OF FRANCION.
TO morrow (said Francion) by the light of the Day I will look at leisure on
this picture, but for the present it is requisite that I acquit my self of that
which I owe you, and instead of my Courtly, that I give you now an account of
my Scholastical adventures. Suppose then you see Francion enter into the
School, his lynings hanging out of his Breeches down unto his shoes, his Gown
wrapped about him, his Book under his arm, undertaking to give a Fillip to one,
and a Bob unto an other. I kept privately always about me some fine History
which I did read, and did set my other Books before me, for fear my Master
should perceive me: My courage at that time much increasing, I sighed within my
self that I had not yet performed any exploit of War, when I was at that age
wherein the Knights Errant had defeated an infinite number of their Enemies,
and I know not how to express unto you the grief I entertained to see that my
Power did not answer to my Will.

Marvel not that I had rather read, than listen to my Regent, for he was the
greatest Ass that ever mounted into a chair. He did teach us nothing but
fopperies, and caused us to employ our time in studies altogether unprofitable,
commanding us to learn a thousand of the most pedantical tromperies in the
world. We disputed very stiftly for places, and demanded questions of one
another, but what questions think you? What is the Etymology of Luna? To which
you must answer, That it is so called quasi luce lucens aliena, as if in French
we should call a Shirt a Flesh-bagg, because it is a bagg we do put upon our
flesh. Is not this excellent doctrine wherewith to season a young spirit?
Nevertheless we did pass away our time in such ridiculous vanities, and he
who did answer best unto them, was in the reputation and quality of an Emperor.
Sometimes this foolish Pedant would give us Verses to make, and would allow
that we should take them word for word out of Virgil, the better to imitate
him, and that, to perfect us in some other Exercises, we should make use of the
stale Books of Parnassus and Textor. If he gave us Prose to make, we were to
assist our selves with Books of the same strain, from whence we took all manner
of pieces to make a gallimoffry after the pedantick fashion; And was not this a
most useful method, and proper to instruct our understandings, and inform our
judgments? What a shame it is to see, that even in our Universities they are
but a little better than Barbarians who reside there for the education of
Youth? ought they not in a good hour to consider that they should rather
instruct Children to invent something of themselves, and not send them to
Common-places and Collections, the continual poring whereon does serve but to
dull and rebate their apprehensions; for it is known, that in their Collections
there is seldom to be found purity of language or good Apothegmes, or
Sentences, or Histories well cited, or Similitudes well reported. Good God, how
much are Fathers deceived, thinking they have sent their Sons to Men filled
with good and profitable knowledge! These Schoolmasters are a Generation who
come almost from the Plough to the Chair, and are for a while Ushers, during
which time they steal some vacant hours which they owe to the service of their
Masters, to be peripatetical Students: As long as their Lenten Dinner is on the
fire they consult a little with their Books, and at last they proceed to be
Masters of Art. They only read Commentaries, and the Scholiasts of Authors, the
better to descant and to make their annotations on them. For the rest, they
know not what is civility, and a Child ought to have a good and a noble Nature,
who under their charge is not corrupted by them, for they will let them alone
in all manner of vicious habits without reproving them.

Our Regent, amongst others of his good qualities, was indefatigable
importunate to have us act some plays in French, accordingly as he had made
them, for he had much of a Poet in him. He had many Scholars that were to be
Actors, and the desire which transported me to see my self a Prince once in my
life, did cause me to act a part in his Play, for it was a Tragedy, and there
were to be none in the Scene but Monarchs and Grand Signiors, and so great was
my ambition, that I would be also the God Apollo, who was to speak in Latin in
the Chorus. There was never any thing so ill ordered as was our Stage. To
represent a Fountain they had taken the Cock out of the Kitchen, without
covering it either with Boughs or Buckrom, and they had tied up the Tops of the
Trees to the Sky, blushing for shame amongst the Clouds. Our Habits were very
ill sorted, for a Sacrificer of the Temple of the Pagans was clothed in the
Alb of a Priest, and had on his head the Cope in which they said Mass in our
Chapel. For the rest, the Disposure of the Acts were so admirable, and the
Verse so well composed, the Subject so high, and the carriage of it so
excellent, that two months since having found some fragments of the Verses
amonst my old Papers, I thought I should have disgorged all within me, so sick
they made me at the heart: Good God, said I, Is is possible that Franchion
should ever pronounce such foolish words as these, and incontinently did throw
into the Fire all those horrible pieces. But when I Acted my part, there was
nothing in the whole Play which seemed not to me to be extremely good, and when
I would make other Verses I did strive to imitate those of my Masters, Nay, I
was so blind, that although I found the greatest part of them in printed
Comedies in the plays of Pathelin, and the Romance of the Rose, and perceived
how wretchedly he had patched them together, yet I grudged nothing at the glory
which I had given to him. I cannot but here represent unto you one of the most
ridiculous impertinences which he committed in that piece, to show unto you as
well the absurdity of the plot as of his words. Jupiter complained that his
head did ache, and said that he would lie down on the bed, desiring that some
lenitive remedies might be applied to it; this had been good indeed, if at the
same time the Author had feigned that his head had been big with Minerva.

In another part of the Plot there was a great slander contrived, that in the
Tragedy I had been killed by mine Enemy, wherefore I was to act the part of a
Fury who came to torment the Murderer. When I was on the Stage with him whom I
pursued, there was a third Actor, who also being to change his habit knew not
where to leave those habiliments which he had on before, But because he was one
who was familiar with the Regent, he covered his bare head with his Turband,
and pulling off his coat he did throw it on his shoulders, although the Regent
had another on before, the weather being then very cold. At the same time he
whom I pursued in a wild posture, having a burning Torch in my hand, being as
it were surprised with horror to behold me, did begin to be out of his part,
and to stammer in his complaints, and repeated one verse six times over, being
unable to call into his memory that which was to follow, and conceiving that I
did remember it better than himself, because I had often heard him to repeat
it, he said unto me, What is that which is to follow? Prompt me Francion: But
without minding what he required, I looked up and down, on one side, and on the
other. Our Regent being extremely angry to behold that sottishness, did come
forth with his Book in his hand, without any reguard to the double habit he had
on, and striking him with his fist, said unto him, Get thee gone thou
Blockhead, I shall gain nothing but dishonor by thee, leave off thy acting;
whereupon he took the paper, and immediately withdrew himself behind the Arras,
thinking it was the pleasure of the Regent. I seeing my Master accoutred in the
same manner, (for our habits coming from a Mask that was danced before the
King, were almost all the same) did believe that he came in his place to act
that part which he could not perform, I took him therefore by the sleeve as he
himself had taught me, and causing him to turn, and run from one side to
another, I so whiffled him on the face with my Torch, that I burned off almost
all his beard. My Companion who had failed in his part, observing my Master not
to recite those verses in which he failed, did believe that he had forgot them
as well as himself, and did prompt him so loud that one might easily have heard
him to the lower end of the Hall, and thinking with himself that undoubtedly he
was struck deaf, he came forth upon the Stage, and spoke them aloud in his ear.
This confirmed me the more in my opinion that our Pedant would act the part of
the man that killed me, and being more strong than himself, I did so torment
him, that at the last he was constrained to fall down on the ground. I protest
unto you that the Pitch and Rozin which I burned did in such a manner afflict
his head, that what with it, and the thrusts and punches that I gave him, he
did fall into a swound, and his spirits were so lost, that he could not
distinctly bid me let him alone. I will not dissemble but that there was much
malice on my side, and that expressly I did it, to revenge my self of the
cruelty which he had exercised on me; For if my Companion had continued to act
his part, I would not have been so mischievous unto him: but I assure you,
never in any Mummery was there more contentment taken than at our play, where
the success did arrive so pleasingly. I had the glory given me, for having
played my part the best of all the Actors, who were some of them of the rudest
sort of the people of Paris, and according to the instructions of our Regent
(who had in him no more humanity than a Hoggard) had every one of them a fair
Handkerchief in his hand for want of a more graceful posture, and did
pronounce their verses as if they were singing them, and oftentimes with a far
shriller, and a more disagreeing tone than any of the rest. To do well I did
quite contrary to that which my Master taught me, and when I was to salute any
one, my reverence was after the manner of the Court, and not according to the
mode of the Children of the Holy Ghost, whom he constrained us to imitate; And
for other things I used no other gestures, nor made any traverses on the Stage,
but only at such time as reason did direct me: but I had leisure to repent that
I had so well personated the Fury; for my Regent observing that all the
College, and many personages of Honor in the City did laugh at him, did take
on me an exemplary revenge, and for the first fault which I afterward
committed he with his Rods did so pink my breech, that a barber Surgeon does
not mangle more the back of a sick person to whom he does apply his
Cupping-glasses.

At that time I lived with Hortensius as I was before accustomed, yet he did
entreat us more severely than in the years precedent, and the Winter being
extremely cold, finding that he would allow us no fire, we were constrained to
burn the boards of our Studies, the straw of our Beds, and afterward our
Theam-books, to procure us a little heat. One day he was pleased to take the
pains to visit my Library, and finding there many sabulous Histories in the
French tongue, he carried them all away with him, alleging, that they corrupted
my good Inclinations, and did pervert my spirit; for it must be as he said.
Amongst those Books he found some so amorous, that they served much to inflame
his heart with the love of the Daughter of the Advocate who paid my Pension.
Take notice by the way, that Love triumphs as much over the square Cap of the
Pedant, as over the Crowns of Kings. And that which did the more invite him to
follow the Command of that little God, was, that he did see his power to be
reverenced and esteemed almost amongst all the Books of the Philosophers. Being
overcome by so agreeable a Temptation, he began to seek out all means to please
his Lady, and did apparel and dress himself more richly and more curiously
than before he was accustomed to do; for whereas before he changed his linen
but once a month, he now changed it every fortnight. Every morning he turned up
his Mustachioes with the handle of a hot spoon, and the Botcher our Porter was
employed to make two days to put n^w sleeves to his old Cassock, and to mend
it every where, were it never so much torn in pieces. He never before did
behold his own face but in a bucket of water, but now he became so prodigal as
to buy a very large Looking-glass, in which he ceased not to observe if he
made his Reverences with a good grace, and with what a plausible carriage his
other ordinary Actions were attended: and sometimes he did put himself to too
much trouble, for he had a desire to see in how good a posture he did read, and
having cast his eyes down on Tully which he had in his hands, he would lift
them up to look on his glass; but he could not thus content his Desire,
because he found the Image which was there represented, did lift up its head as
well as himself, and at that instant did not look down upon the Book, insomuch
that at the same time he would have been very willing to turn his eyes into two
places at once. And although he was careful enough of his Body, yet he
purposed to gain the good will of his Mistress not by that means only; the
qualities of his Mind, which seemed to him to be far more eminent, were those
forces in which he most confided. Every day he turned over the leaves of the
Books of Love which he had taken from me, and from thence collected those
Discourses, which in his judgment seemed best to fill his mouth, and to
rectify his understanding. Amongst those Volumes, there was one full of
Metaphors, and barbarous Antitheses, and of such extraordinary Figures, that no
Name is to be given to them; it was a gallamoffry so continued and confused,
that the most apprehensive spirit in the world must be obliged to demand, What
is it? if he had a desire to understand it: Nevertheless he called this
Author, the French Cicero, and formed all his style according unto his, unless
that from some other of his time he took certain Phrases, which to him seemed
admirable, because they were not common, although there were so many faults in
them, that a Costard-monger who sells Fruit in the corner of a street, would
have discovered them, and reproved him, and his goodly Authors with him. I come
now to account unto you the Discourse which he held with his Mistress,
following therein those Books which he had read. One day going to visit her
Father, and finding her alone, Madamoisell (said he) I gain in losing, and I
lose in gaining, that at this time losing the company of Monsieur your Father,
I gain yours, which yet makes me to be a loser in another sense, for I do lose
my liberty in hearing your Discourse: The incomparable charms of your
incomparable perfections, which none can magnify enough, do so assail me, and
hold me captive under their feet, that he is deprived of Reason who believes
he is able to defend himself against them; wherefore this shall always be the
Cause for which I will make bold to style my self your incomparable Servant.
Fremond (for so the Damosel was called) had something to do to return an answer
to so extravagant a Salutation. In a short time she perceived the solly of the
Person which before she never saw so manifestly discovered. She could make her
marker well enough, and the young Sparks of the College who were my Companions
told me, they found by her deportment and complexion that she loved the trade,
and certainly they were not much mistaken; for in the fourth year of her age,
being deprived of her Mother, her jovial and frolic humor did afterward
transport her into an excess of love toward young Men who did court her in
the view of her Father himself, who took it not much to heart, because he was
but a poor man, and hoped that she might inveigle and circumvent some rich
Servant, who might happily espouse her. I remember very well, that when I was
but a very boy, counterseiting to take something out of my pocket, she came
unto me, and putting her hand therein, she did tickle me thereabouts all over;
O how often, thinking of it, have I said to my self, Would I had now that
favor which then I received, or had then that losty strength which now I have,
I had tickled then that wanton in that place where it itched, and it is likely
enough she would have been well contented with it; for it is to be believed,
that at that time she had no experience of the pleasures of Love, but only by
Imagination.

One day I addressed my self unto her when she was courted by a young Advocate,
who, after some discourse, demanded of me, If an Ancient did not affirm, that
the worst of wild beasts is a Detractor, and of those beasts who are domestic,
a Flatterer? I made answer, Yes, and that I had read it in Plutarch; but we
ought now to correct that Apothegm, and maintain, that the worst of domestic
beasts is a Pedant. The young Advocate having praised my Intention, told me,
That I had a most just reason so to speak, and that he had been exposed as well
as my self to the fury of those merciless Creatures. He afterward demanded of
me, if I knew the Definition of a Pedant? Yes Sir, said I, He is a Creature not
to be made clean. You have just reason so to speak, said he; And I have heard,
that the Rector of the University, with the Proctors, and other Deputies, going
on Candlemas Eve, according to their Custom, to present a Wax-candle to the
King since deceased, one came and said, Sir, Behold your Daughter the
University, who is come to do Reyerence unto you; O Lord! replied the King,
What a dirty Slut my Daughter is? Nevertheless they did not forbear to make
their approaches to him, and the Rector began his Oration, to which he was
attentive, but with much impatience; because it was so full of Similitudes
taken out of the propriety of Stones from Pliny, and of the Examples of
Illustrious Personages, taken out of Plutarch, insomuch that in the very
beginning of his Discourse, which promised to be long enough, having said, Sir,
Alexander the Great going to the Conquest of Asia; the King suddenly replied,
What do you mean to do, he had dined then, and I have eaten nothing all this
day? The Oration, which was to continue a long hour, was by this means made
shorter, and the poor Pedants returned into their own Kingdom, where with far
more patience their flowers of Oratory might be lismed to. The Courtiers who
were present did make a gloss upon their habit, they were amazed at the Hoods
of these disguised people, and compared the great Hood which the Rector had on,
to that in which Mr. Goning did put his Instruments to show his tricks of
activity. They were much troubled to give a reason, wherefore the Ancients had
invented those venerable ornaments, and if it were colder in their time than in
ours? But that which made them laugh most was the dirt which imbroydered the
robes of the Pedants, and besides that they brought so much along with them on
their feet, that it seemed, all the dirt on the other side of the bridge came
along with them, the Plancher of the Kings Chamber was so full of it, that they
were above two hours in making of it clean. And so Francion we may understand,
that although you are not yet a Logitian, you give as good a definition as
Aristotle himself could do, and that a Pedant is a Creature not to be made
clean. But let us discourse of Hortensius, ought not he to be excepted from
this rule? is he a sprucer man than the rest? of what humor is he? let me know
little of him.

On these words I began to vent forth whatsoever I understood of him, Apelles
did never paint a Man better than I did set forth my Master by the pensil of my
Eloquence, insomuch that I made Fremond to laugh most heartily. When I had
given them an account of all that I knew, she told the young Advocate the
discourse which the Pedant had with her some few days before, and they both
resolved to make good sport with him. I immediately did understand their
purpose, and said unto Fremond, I swear unto you Mademoisell, that he is become
very amorous of you, for he never sees me but he tells me that you are
incomparably perfect, and demands of me if I know nothing of your affairs.
Say you so Francion, said Fromond, do me the pleasure as to make him believe
that he is infinitely in my favor, and that I never heard any man so cloquent
as himself.

Since I could speak familiarly to him, I did not fail to acquit my self of
that charge, and better than Fremond hoped, for I so prevailed upon him, that
on the next day he came to visit her, and openly did make profession of his
Love. He laughed at many Pedants who understood nothing of the mystery of Love,
and amongst others at the Son of one of the Kings Professors of the Greek
Tongue, who being to visit his Sweetheart, according to the Commandment of his
Father, did use no Complement to her at all, but looked down with a bashful
countenance; The Professor being advertized of it, did demand of him why he did
not entertain her Amorously, he made answer, that he knew not how to do it;
Out you Ass you, said the Father to him, Nonne legisti Ovidum de Art Amand^?
but Hortensius was determined to deport himself otherwise, and had read the
Book entitled The Kisses of Johannes Secundus, to teach him how he ought to
kiss. The first time that ever he saw his Mistress he made unto her this
learned Oration: Although that your prodigious attractions have surprised my
Spirit which had before blasphemed against the feathered Arrows of Cupid, I
ought now not only to implore the Altar of your Sweetness, but endeavor to
transport that incomparable influence of Heaven where your Divinity so
journeth, into the frail Earth where my defects attach me; wherefore being not
able but unjustly to address my heart to any but to your self, since I have
been wonderfully amourous of so amorous a wonder as your self, I have resolved
to make my heart come out of its place, and to offer it self at your feet,
although that it has made such general rebellions in my Judgment and my
Reason, who nevertheless thought that at the last your attractions and my
liberty would so shake hands, that my liberty would be enforced to render it
self your Captive. And you have now made such strong, visible, and powerful
impressions on my Soul, that never Printer has printed any leaf better than
you have made an impression on my heart with an indelible Character, and my
Will receiving on it self the Idol of your monstrous beauties, does greatly
advance the Honor of your House. For this cause you shall always have the
Image of my affection before your eyes, and make nearer your approches to see
how innumerable they are. Pluck yours from your heart if you please to keep
company with mine, and afflict no more my quiet, as heretofore you have done.

This goodly Oration being ended, Fremond replied unto him in neat and quick
language, that she believed she had not the power to captivate so gallant a
Spirit as was his, but she believed that he counterfeited for the most part, to
find a Subject whereon to exercise his Eloquence. Ah Dearest Star (said he) you
know not that you are already mounted on high above the Horizon of
accomplished, and that the miracle of your perfections, and the perfection of
your miracles, with a soft violence have wounded my bleeding Soul. O Damoisell,
as fair as you are cruel, and as cruel as you are fair, you do much resemble
that treacherous Emperor Nero, who took pleasure to see the City of Rome on
fire, for from the Turret of your merits you with delight behold not only the
Suburbs, but even the City of my heart to burn, with all the Churches in it,
which I have dedicated to your Honor; Know you not Lady, that an Ancient did
speak this beautiful Sentence, Amoris vulnus idem qui facit sanat. Recover
then a poor dying man, I shall otherwise sing with the Poet Propertius, whom
you know to be a good Author, and without reproach, Solus Amor morbi non cupit
Artificem. In pursuance of this he did utter so many broken pieces of Latin,
that I believe he brought up all that which was within the sink of his Common
Places under the title of Love. Fremond without making appearance that she found
any impertinence in his discourse, did listen attentively to him, and withal
did answer him as favorably as he could desire, which was the reason that he
thus followed his Suit; Why then more fair than Venus, than Venus of Cyprus,
whatsoever Oration that miserable and passive I can make in the way of
Demonstration, and whatsoever Syllogism can flow from my mouth, you cannot but
thereby acknowledge that I am your Superlative Servant per omnes casus. You
were not born to serve Sir (said Fremond to him) there is no Maid so ambitious
whatsoever she be that will take upon her the quality to be your Mistress; for
my self I should be happy to assume that of Slave. On that, Hortensius made
Replies, which for pleasantness of conceit were beyond all comparison, and the
discourses of all the Pedants in the world are not to be valued with them, for
he powered forth at once all the best phrases in the Latin Tongue, and did
assist himself with no small number of Greek Proverbs, with which he
interlarded his discourse. I leave you to judge if Fremond did understand all
that which he did speak.

She who received all the offers of his service in deriding them according to
her custom, did not stick to assure him, that within few days she would come to
give him a visit, and would bring with her but two Neighbors that were
Citizens, and if it were possible the young Advocate (that made love unto her)
who she said, was her Cousin German. Hortensius having notice of the day when
the Queen of his heart would come unto his lodgings, did make great
preparations, Love having made him prodigal. He would willingly lay forth halt
of his yearly pension to make a sumptuous collation. I was of opinion that he
would not have my Company, and therefore to make sure work I resolved to make
use of the opportunity. A Bottle of Muscadell, and another of Hippocras were in
his Study, which did most strongly tempt me, but what means was there to obtain
them? Invention did assist me with a sudden Expedient, in which apprehension I
entered into the Chamber of Hortensius, where observing him to read in a Book of
a great bulk, I looked upon the Title to see what it contained. It was a large
Treatise of the State and power of the Turk; Behold here a good Book, said he,
I now have learned that which I did not know before. It is good to live, and to
observe all things. I do find that no man does ever turn his Posteriors to the
great Emperor who sits in the seat of Mahomet, and whosoever departs from him
he must go backwards, although he were the Ambassador of France; Do you
remember this, Truant, said he? Go and write it down presently in your Table
Book: It is excellent indeed said I, and smiled, for since I found that he was
amorous, I thought my self as great a Master as himself, and seeing his Study
open I made but one step into it. What do you within there, said he, unto me?
I replied, I would look one word Sir, in your Ovid; It is in the corner of the
little table, said he. I had nothing to do with Ovid, howsoever the better to
manage my design, I took it up, and finding the bottle of Hypocras, which was
too bigg to hide in my breeches, I tied it fast unto me with a point behind me,
and proceeding in my admirable Invention, I came forth, holding Ovid in my
hand, and going still backwards and backwards, I said to my Master, who at that
present had his eyes fixed on his Book; Sir, I have so great a desire to retain
in my Memory the Reverence which is showed to the great Turk, that at this time
I will go from you as if you were he; I then did go backwards to the door in
all the postures of a Mimick, which caused him to laugh; and having in this
manner stoll'n his bottle, I did open it in my study, where I took some hearty
draughts, but for fear that I should meet him when he should be in the height
of his Fury having discovered my theft, I presently returned to his Chamber,
and demanded leave of him to go forth, which being obtained with a loud Exeat,
I took my bottle along with me under my gown, and did empty it with a young
Scholar of the City who was my friend; After that, I did go to look out
Fremond, with whom I feared not to return into the College, because I knew she
was as able to appease the choler of Hortensius, as a glass of water is able
to qualify the heat of a glass of wine.

She had but two neighbors in her company as she had promised, with whom she
came unto Hortensius, not at the great Gate of the College, but at the B^k
door, which for that purpose be caused to be opened, although it bad before
been kept fast locked above six years together.

After some amorous entertainment, he took a pen in his hand, and wrote certain
verses on a Paper in the praise of his Mistress. One of the Citizens that were
the companions of Fremond did praise the Verses, but remembering that she had
seen the same lines amongst the Works of a Modern Poet, when she observed him
sometimes to stand in a great pause, sometimes to scratch his head, and bite
his nayls, and sometimes to ^amp on the ground, as if he had been in labor to
finish those Stanzaes, which he feigned to compose, she spoke unto him by way
of upbraiding, Sir, If you have forgot what does follow, I will dictate it unto
you; write it down, for I have it by heart, It is but yesterday since I did
read that piece in a Book which was presented to me. I believe not so (said
Hortensius) it came entirely from my Muse. I will rehearse unto you what
follows, said the Citizens Wife, and you shall find that it will answer to that
which you have already written. Having then repeated the Verses to him word for
word, she was not so contented, but entered into his study, and made so diligent
a search, that at length she found the Book, by the likeness it had unto her
own, where she showed to Hortensius the same Verses which he had written; but
he would not seem to understand her, but assured her that he was the Author,
and vainly would persuade her, that his Genius was like unto that of the Poets,
and did jump with him in the same thoughts and in the same words: And have you
not heard, said he, That there is nothing spoken, which has not been spoken
hertofore? And yet I find some difference here; for I have made Fremonda, and
he has wrote Clorinda; in one place I have wrote charms, and he has wrote
attractions; in the beginning of my third Stanza, you find, I do not see, and
in the same place in his you shall read, I see not. Thus did Hortensius employ
his head to excuse his theft, which was greater than mine who did steal his
bottle; but it did no more cover his fault, than the throwing on of a net does
cover a naked man; and although at that time they did forbear openly to deride
him, yet since in diverse companies it has made sport enough: But when I th nk
of the Citizens Wife, If after seeing his first Stanza, she had immediately
retired her self, and not looked upon the others, and when he had done writing,
if she had rehearsed the whole Poem, as she had it in her Memory, one
undoubtedly would believe that she was some great So^ceresse, thinking she had
divined that which Hortensius was come at the same time to compose.

This Invention being not then in her mind, she made use of that which I have
related to you, which was as good, and our Pedant, to cause her to forget it,
did begin immediately to take the dishes in his hand, and to charge the table
with an honest Collation. There was no more want of Confects dry or wet, than
there is want of water in a River, nevertheless the Bottle of Hypocras was
wanting, and because it could not be found, they must content themselves with
the Muscadel only. Hortensius would not make it apparent that the stealing away
of one of his bottles could put him into a distemper; because, you must th^nk,
he was afraid to have his Mistress see him in a passion. I being glad of i^,
did assume the boldness to come unto the chair where Fremond sat, wh^ did use
me with all the courtesy she could, giving me that which was left, having
filled her belly and her pockets. Hortensius had a custom when he Feasted any
(...), to eat more himself than all those who were at his table, to the end
that the greatest part of his expense might turn to his own profit, and he had
now performed his part pretty handsomely in emptying the plates, but best of all
in draining the bottles; insomuch, as he was well entered into a gallant humor.
(...) every ^urn he would give you an account of some petty History of Love;
but because he had a great Vice, in not pronouncing according to the points and
periods, a fault which many others do commit, who in telling their story will
be always saying, To make short, The Companion of her who did affront him in
his Poesy, did immediately observe him, and at the first time he said, To make
short, (having made some odd repetitions before) she took him up, and said unto
him, If you intend to please, you must not say, You will make short, for in
every thing that does please, we do love to have it long. This familiarity did
increase his mirth, and caused him to drink deeper, insomuch that he now
flagger'd in his feet, as before he had tripped in his tongue. They did ask
him, If he did learn to dance? whereupon he immediately danced some passages in
a Coranto. And being altogether unmindfull to conceal his malady, he said,
There is a certain Author, and who is anonymous, as I think, that affirm, B^l^
dol^s^ ^u^t^tor est, primum caput, deinde pedes tentat, at this time I do
acknowledge the truth thereof, for (the more at once to surprise me) he both
ass^ults (...) in the head, and trips up my heels.

As he continued this discourse, the young Advocate who loved Fremond did enter
into the Room, with two of his friends, and two female Citizens more, and those
the most pleasant ones in all the City. Sir, said the Advocate, having some
business with Mademoiselle Fremond, we have made bold to come into your house,
for which I do desire you that you would excuse us. Fremond interrupted him,
and said, I assure my self that Mr. Hortensius is very glad of your coming,
and is not sorry at all, unless it be that you are come too late to his
Collation; whereupon one of the Company said, there is yet a little of the
Muscadel left. Salva pace, said the Usher. Well, well, said Hortensius to him.
Go, and give order to my Friend the Victualler, to send me the best piece of
Roast-meat that he he has. He spoke these words, because he saw it was very
late, and that those who came last had brought a Fiddler with them: he therefore
imagined that in Civility he must give a Supper to them all, and the rather,
because that some of them had continued there a long time, nevertheless it did
not grieve him, because they appeared to him to be people of so good a Temper,
that he could do no less than buy their Company.

As the Usher was going out of doors, I desired him to take me along with him;
for having my liberty but seldom, I was glad to take the opportunity to go into
the City upon any occasion whatsoever. He was so pleasant at that time, that he
readily granted what I desired; for he was glad that all the world should take
notice of the power he had over me; we did therefore go together to the
Victualler, but we found nothing there that pleased us, and drank only a Glass
or two of wine. We were advised to go so far as the Cooks at the little
bridge. The Usher there did buy a Capon, and desiring to take along with him a
piece of roasted Beef, he did go amongst all the Cooks, and could find no piece
according to his mind. I observed a Cooks Wife who seemed to me to be a very
handsome Woman, and I addressed my self to her to make my Market, she was newly
married, and did not well understand what belonged to her trade. I demanded of
her the price of her roast beef, she said, Four and twenty Souse, which was
thrice as much as it was worth. An Asses pizzle, said I, and speaking that word
did go out of doors. Her Husband perceiving that she did drive her Customers
from his Shop by putting too high a price upon his meat, did say unto her, I
know not what you mean, to ask so dear for what is to be sold, if you use to do
in this manner I shall sell nothing at all; Call back the boy again; His wife
desiring to make amends for her fault, and believing that an Asses pizzle was
some new kind of coin which she never had heard of before, did call me back as
loud as she could, and said unto me, Honest Customer will you not give me an
Asses Pizzle and a half?

The caprichiousnesse of the conceit did make me laugh so heartily, that I
cannot remember I ever heard any thing that gave me more content. I returned to
her shop being overcome with the excess of laughter, and said unto him, I will
give her two Asses Pizzles if she will; but her Husband approaching to me did
speak in passion, Go too, Go too, you are a very wagg, that which she said
was not out of wantonness but misprision. Another time she will be even with
you; Give me twelve Souse. On those words the Usher came, who gave him ten
Souse with which he was contented, and we returned to the College with our
bargain.

After I had made the Company laugh at the Account which faithfully I
represented to them, they all sat down to the Table to Supper, but the Ladies
who assisted at the Collation would not eat, but Hortensius so laid about him
that his Teeth did rattle again in his head. O what a brave sight it was to see
how artificially he did gnaw the Leg of the Capon, turning his head on that
side where Fremond sat, and gogling with his eyes to give her an amorous
reguard; but it was a better sight to observe how I stood behind Fremond to
receive from her those morsels which did please me better than my ordinary
pension. Supper being ended they made the Fiddler to play all sorts of Dances,
and the young men that were present did show the disposition of their Bodies to
the sound of that agreeable instrument. At the last being weary with that
exercise, they presented some other sports with which the Ladies were much
delighted.

And after so many and so different pastimes that it is impossible to repeat
them all, I shall only acquaint you, that (in good earnest) they played topsy
turvy excellently well, for there was not a book in all the Study which in
derision they had not thrown on the ground, and they did not spare so much as
the foul Linen, which according to the custom of the College was in a corner
of the Chamber. Every one took a piece, and folding it hard up, they did throw
it at the head of Hortensius, who asked them what was the Game they played at,
and defended himself very untowardly. At last they told him there must be no
denial, for he must dance with Fremond to the music of the Violl. He did
readily accord unto it, howsoever he would not pull off his Cassock, not that
he was afraid it should be stolen from him, as a provident Gallant whom I
know, who danceth always with his long Coat on, for fear it should be stolen
from him, but because that he would not have it seen that his Doublet wanted
two or three Skirts, and was torn in several places, some of which were mended
with stuff of one color, and some of another. But what resistance soever he
did make it would not serve his turn; for he was enforced to put off that
reverend coverture of his poverty. It was no small pastime to observe the turn^
and the passes he made, and the Capers he did cut; I conceive they were the
same that Socrates practiced when he had a curiosity to learn to dance, a
little before his death. In the mean time one of the young men did put on his
Cassock, and covered his head with his square cap, which Hortensius seeing did
assure him, that in that habit he was very like the Principal of the College;
whereupon another demanded of him what a kind of man was the Principal? I will
tell you, said he, He is a man of merit, but that he makes me pay too much for
the rent of my Chambers, he spoke also something worse of him, as being of a
detracting spirit, especially against those who sucked the Marrow out of his
purse.

On those words he took a Base Violl from the testern of his Bed, and
persuading himself that he could play well thereon, he had a desire to charm
the ears of his Mistress. The Fiddler by chance knew the same Air which he
began to jarr upon, and Hortensius consorting with him of his own accord did
say unto the Company, You ought to dance some Mask to the tune which our
instruments do play. What personages shall we represent, said Fremond? Let the
Gentleman (said he) who has on my Cassock personate the Principal within, and
do you and the rest of the Company take the Gowns in the next chamber of those
whom I teach, and act the parts of Scholars; Mr. Principal do you take the
rods which are made fast to yonder matt, you shall scourge your Companions by
turns one after another. The Company being gone out of his Chamber into the
next to attire themselves, did find that it was very late, and determined all
of them to go home without bidding good night, giving him leave to scrape his
belly full on his Violl; I did go into the Chamber where Hortensius was
playing, to bring away the Cloaks of the Men, and the Muffs of the Women,
making him believe that they would conduce the better to disguise them, and
having brought them all unto them, I did let them forth at the back door, the
Usher who was employed another way having left me the Keys; Afterward I
returned to my Study, and made fast the door, as if I had not stirred out of it
all that Evening.

The Principal was by that time in the Court, and walked the round with a great
Lanthorn before him. He heard the Violl and the Fiddle that played together,
and could not imagine who they were that made the most untunable music in the
world, for the two instruments were not of the same found, and did not follow
one another, and our Master did often strike on those strings which he ought
not to touch, and almost at every stroke did mistake one for another, taking C
for B and D for C. The Principal standing close to the Wall did listen
attentively, and heard Hortensius who cried out as loud as he could, Why do you
stay so long? Enter Mr. Principal, make have and bring in your Mask with you.
The Principal believed that he did speak to him, and that he had seen him out
of his Window, wherefore he did go up the stairs, and his train with him, as
well to know what he had to say unto him, as to understand if there were any
marriage there or not; He was in the entry to his Chamber when Hortensius cried
out again, Festina Principal, you make me weary to attend you, I will make a
hard shift but I will dance the Mask my self, if you will not enter the sooner,
and striking the Fiddler on his fingers with his Fiddle stick, O good man (said
he) play me the dance which the Lacedaemonians danced at their Sacrifices, or
the Saraband which the Cretians of Saturn, for fear the great Glutton should
hear the cry of the little child, and devour him as he did the rest. The Fiddler
who did not understand his language did continue playing on as he did before,
wherefore Hortensius being in a great choler did strike him harder than he did
before, which made the Fiddler to cry out as loud as he could. The Principal
stood near unto the door, and listened to all this, but his Curiosity caused him
now to enter, and to demand of our Master, What Devils dance is it that you
would have me to dance? What is the sport that you are making here Master
Hortensius? Virtue of God, I think you are little better than drunk? O good
Sir, be not angry, said Hortensius, I have not drank so hard but I know the
Principal well enough; I have made a feast for some of my friends, with whom I
am a little merry: it was not to you to whom I did speak, it was to one of
those who was to enter with his Cymmerian Mummery, which he has undertaken to
bring in with the rest of his Society. But where are these people of whom you
speak? said the Principal. They are attiring themselves in my Scholars chamber,
said Hortensius. The Principal immediately entered into their chamber, and
finding not any one there, he returned and said unto him, I believe you are not
well in your wits, and that you imagine you have a great Company, when you are
alone by your self; Lord I what a disorder have you made in your chamber? here
is such a confusion, as if all the hoggs in the Town had been here: see here
good Seneca! and how other Authors of the Latin tongue do lie bedabled amongst
the ordures; and speaking those words, he did take up diverse Books which they
had thrown down in the height of their debauchment. And you Mr. Fiddler, for
your part, I shall enforce you with bastinadoes to tell me from whence you do
come, and what you have to do in my College? Peradventure it is your good
melody that has made this honest man to lose his understanding* who (before
having not his Equal in Eloquence) was indeed a Phoenix. O good Sir, pardon me,
said the Fiddler, I did not come but as I was led, my poor sight is lost: A man,
whom I know not, brought me hither, and has sent back my eyes to my house,
telling them, that I should have no need of them until to morrow morning, at
which time he would send them to me. What do you mean by your eyes, said the
Principal? I so call the poor Boy that leads me, said the Fiddler, He told me
once in the street that he saw me, and he being a poor Boy I received him into
my Imagination, as if I had seen him also. O good Jesus, I would he was here,
that I might lie somewhere else than in this place, where so much mischief is
done me. But even now I asked for a little drink, and they gave me a glass
whose foot was all bescumber'd, and although the ill savor did much displease
me, yet the great thirst I had did enforce me to lift it to my mouth, which
greedily opening it self to receive it, I swallowed a great deal of Urine which
was in it, before I could well taste whether it was wine or not. But that is not
all, This goodly Musician that plays with me has beaten me into plaster,
which (after a world of Latin he has spoken to me) did afflict as much my
soul, as his blows have done my Body. O you* whosoever you are that do speak
unto me* I do believe that you know me well, because you have made mention of
the Sign of the Tap-house where I lodge, which is the Phoenix; Lead me home, I
pray you, and I will give you half a Souze. Make no such offers nor entreaties
to me, said the Principal, I am only angry here with my Friend, you have not
eyes to see who I am, Look out some other Guide. During this discourse,
Hortensius did begin to put his House in order, and the Fiddler taking him by
the arm, said unto him, Hear you Sir, I have played all this Evening, and was
promised a Quardecue for my pains, Give it me Sir? Ah my Friend, said
Hortensius, Have not you taken as much contentment to hear me play on the
Violl, as I have done to hear you play on your Fiddle, and do I demand any
money of you for my recompense? Oh, But you have danced Sir, said the Fiddler,
and you cannot say that your dancing did give me any pleasure; and it is no
reason that I should pay for it; for I cannot see at all. Let those pay thee
then, that did employ thee, said Hortensius; Thou can show nothing of thy
work, it is all vanished into air, and yet thou would have some real and
sensible salary, and feel a Quardecue to fall with weight into thy pocket. See
here the misery of this Age, said the Fiddler. Alas, alas, Our Estate is not
esteemed as it has been, I have known the days when a dozen of them would
fall thicker into this powch, than two of them do now. I have played before
Kings in my days, and they have set me at the upper end of the Table. Comfort
your self my friend, said the Principal, I will pay you. But Mr. Hortensius,
Will you retain the Salary of this poor Man? Tell me, what Fancy moved you to
play with him? Have I not told you already, said Hortensius? I will see what is
become of my Company, and speaking those words, he took the Candle, and did
look over all his lodgings. The Principal knocking at our Studies, demanded of
us, If there had bin any with our Master? we made answer that we knew nothing,
to show unto him that we followed our Books with such eager diligence, that we
had no thought at all of those indifferent things which passed in his Lodging.
I know not what to think of it (said Hortensius) coming back from his inquest,
but I cannot meet with any one. Go to bed, and take your Rest, said the
Principal, you have need of it, for he believed he had lost his senses. I will
take the Fiddler along with me, who shall lie this night in my lodgings, for
fear you should make a new quarrel, or being at peace one with another, you
should begin your Music again. Having spoken those words, he took the poor Man
along with him, to whom he gave some moneys which he received from my Master.
They being departed, Hortensius came to me, and demanded of me, Whither Fremond
and her Companions were gone? I made him believe, that being advertised that
the Principal was come into our Lodgings, she desired me to open the back door
to return that way, fearing he should see her, and that all her company
followed her. He then demanded of me where was his Cassock? I told him, that he
who was to act the Principal had taken it along with him, and said, that he
would come in the morning to give a Breakfast to him, and all the Company that
were with him. Ah Jupiter thou God of Hospitality I said Hortensius, Thou have
seen how I have honored thy Deity, I have gallantly entertained my Guests, and
thereupon they will as gallantly entertain me.

In this humor he did go to bed, and early in the morning he was visited by all
the Pedants of the College, who came to see if he were restored to his senses,
which the Principal assured them he had lost. He had so well digested his Wine
in the night, that they found him in that sober temper in which he was
accustomed to be; nevertheless they did not forbear to make sport with him for
his Music. After dinner he gave me a charge to go to Fremond, to desire her
to send him back his Cassock. Fremond did resolve to write a Letter to him, in
which she acquainted him, that she acknowledged his affection, which was very
agreeable to her, but his condition did displease her; for although her Father
was but an Advocate, yet he was descended of a noble Family, and that she would
not espouse a Man who at least was not noble by his Virtues, and did not make
profession of Arms. Therefore the Cassock should not be restored to him,
because he must wear a sword if he would obtain that of her which he professed
that he so much desired.

Having read this Epistle, which was a definitive Sentence, he answered her
Letter with another, in which he represented, that his Design was always to
make himself an Advocate, thinking it would be agreeable to her to have a
Husband of the same Condition as was her Father; that she did ill to undervalue
Men of Learning, who, no doubt, were more noble than Men of Arms;
Nevertheless, since it was her pleasure, he would take to the Sword, although
the Profession which he had always followed, did no ways derogate from the
Nobility of her Ancestors, which by proofs he would make apparent to her. All
this was intermingled with Sentences, Proverbs, Examples, and Authorities, in a
more than a barbarous confusion, which was so uneasy to unintangle, that the
Advocate and four of his Friends who were all lettered Men, did employ a whole
afternoon about it, and yet could not make their explications, but by
Conjectures.

Hortensius was as much lost in love as a man could be, and to speak the truth
the cause of his passion did deserve it should be so. He resolved with himself
to perform what he had promised, and knowing that if he should arm his side
with a Sword, and be sudenly complete in the habit of a Soldier, it would seem
strange to those who were acquainted with the whole course of his education, he
thought it more expedient by little and little to accustom himself unto it. To
this purpose he did one day put on a pair of Boots, and walking into the City
he told all his friends he did meet with, that on the next morning he was to
take his journey into Normandy which was his native Country, he caused also the
same report to be noysed in the College; Nevertheless, he did not depart till
four days afterward, and left a Substitute to have a care of his Scholars in
his absence: Being returned he lodged abroad, and not in the College, and left
not off his Sword or his Boots, but made his long Cloak shorter, and
metamorphosed his Cassock into a Doublet cut upon his Shirt, he did wear every
day a Band with a Bonelace on it, and had nothing of a Pedant but the Discourse
only.

Fremond having seen him in this Equipage, did profess unto him that he
infinitely pleased her, but she could not be entirely contented, if he did not
show her the proofs of the antiquity of his Nobility, which he vaunted that he
could. Being brought to this extremity, he diligently sought after the means to
maintain so false a Title, and having understood that a good old man, a
Townsman of his was in Paris, he took the pains to look him out, and desired
him to witness that he knew hi^ Father, and that he lived always in his
Country in the reputation of a Gentleman. The old man being a very honest man
told him, that being so near as he was to render unto God an Account of his
Actions, he could not be induced to be a witness to an untruth for all the
recompense he did promise him, neither did he now desire any reward, for he
looked after a more sure possession than the goods of this world. Hortensius
replied, that on every demand that should be propounded to him, he would
provide him with such amphibological answers, that although they were nothing
but the truth, yet they should conduce much to prove that which he desired. The
Countryman said unto him, If it be so, he had met with a man from whom he
should receive all manner of contentment. Go too then, said Hortensius, My
Father was as good a Gentleman as thou art, and if thou shall affirm that he
was noble, thou shall nor lie at all, for thou have not the Spirit of a Clown,
and no more had he. I will show thee how. If the Rent of one hundred thousand
Crowns had been given to you both, you would not have addicted your selves to
Mechanic exercises to which poverty did compel your Spirits, you would have
eaten without doing any thing, and you would have lived the whole course of
your life without doing any thing, which is to be noble. The will which you
have ought to be reputed for the deed, and in affirming this you commit not the
fourth part of the least Venial Sin; And so much in speaking on the first
proposition. If the second be propounded to you, which is, if my Father has
served the King in his wars, you may assure him that he has; for truly I
remember that in Winter nights by the fire side, he has told my Mother that in
his youth he was something wild, during the troubles at that time in France,
and as a Soldiers boy he did serve a younger Brother, who commanded a Company
of Foot in the Kings Service, now since he did service to a man who fought for
the King, there is no man can deny but that he did it to his Majesty himself;
and what, though he was no Captain, nor General of the Army, men are not to be
blamed that they do not all of them arrive to that height of Honors, for we
are not all the Favorites of Fortune.

The Countryman accorded to serve Hortensius as a Witness in this affair,
being induced to it by his good reasons. The first time afterward that the
Pedant saw Fremond, he desired her that she would be pleased to assign a day to
give him a meeting in any house she would appoint, where he might fully declare
his mind unto her. On the day appointed he came with his Countryman, and the
Servant for additions, whom he commanded to keep himself all-ways behind him,
and when he numbered any acres or sums of money which he had, to step forth and
take the word with confidence out of his mouth, and make it twice as much, to
the end that on the one side they might judge extremely to his advantage, and
on the other, that he might be taken for a modest man, and without the least
shadow of vanity, who made his estate less than indeed it was.

Fremond was in the same house with her who was the Mistress of it, and did
accompany her unto the College. The young Advocate whom she called Cosen, was
also there, because she said that she would first communicate to him the Suit
of Hortensius before she would acquaint her Father with it. There were beside
two other brave Companions, and fit to be present at such a conference. Our
Pedant did first of all entertain his Mistress with the Discourse of Love,
according to his custom, and when he saw that she did put him in mind of his
promises, and desired to be assured if he had means enough to maintain her in
the condition of a Gentlewoman, he began to discover his estate with the
greatest impertinence in the world. Monsieur (said he) (addressing himself
particularly to her Cousin, who had thrust himself into their company) to the
end that you may not conceive me to be any contemptible fellow, understand that
in my Country I have the possession of a house worth two thousand Crowns. His
Servant for additions who stood behind him, stepped forth, and according to his
precepts with a great confidence said unto him, Nay Sir, it is well worth four
thousand Crowns. Ho, said Hortensius turning aside to him, must you take up
your Master? If I should make it less you ought not sirrah to gainsay me.
Moreover, said he, I have a Constitution of three thousand Liuvres due to a
Denier, and the person that ows it me is very able to pay it. Nay it is six
thousand Liuvres, said his Servant for additions, I have seen the Contract, and
the Bonds to confirm it. Will thou not yet hold thy peace thou beggarly fellow?
said Hortensius; His Servant for additions replied, Yes Sir, but it is
requisite that I do put you in mind of that which you forget.

On that the Gentlewoman of the house, who was a Companion of Fremonds, did
acquaint Hortensius, that there was a report that he had some infirmities and
if it were so she would not counsel Fremond to espouse him. He made answer,
they are Slanderers who do make this report unto you; I am here before one; to
whom I would no more appear a Liar, than before the Divinity it self, I
therefore swear that I have neither blain nor blemish in all my Body, but only
what a hot Iron made by an accident in my left Leg. His Servant for additions
believing that he was to multiply what his Master said, according to his
instructions, Sir, said he, you have one like unto it on you right Leg.
Hortensius being angry did rise from his Chair to strike his Groom, and to
punish him for his indiscretion, but they retained him, and his Servant for
additions believed that his passion was but counterfeited as before, and
therefore determined with himself to perform again his office on the first
opportunity.

Fremond then said unto Hortensius, we may collect as well by yours as by your
Servants words, that you are worth eighteen thousand Liuvres, but we understand
by some persons of credit that you owe ten thousand, part whereof you have
borrowed to assist you in the purchase of your house, and the other part to
supply your necessities. Those who told you so, replied Hortensius, did
mis-inform you. Pardon me (answered Fremond) If you please that we shall hold
you for a Frank man, you cannot deny a thing which is apparent to us. Being
then unwilling to dissemble with his Mistress, and imagining it was enough to
assure her that he was worth eight thousand Franks, he said unto her, Since it
is your pleasure, that I should say after you, I do confess that I am in debt
Ten thousand liuvers. His Servant for additions incontinently replied, Nay Sir,
to my knowledge you owe Twenty thousand. How? said Hortensius, rising up, Do
thou not see how thou go beyond thy Commission? and whispering him in the
ear, he told him, he did not speak now of Possessions, but of a Debt, and did
not I, said he, instruct thee to multiply the Possessions only? to those words
he added four or five blows with his fist, which had been followed with
others, if his choler were not restrained. When he was sat down again, Fremond
said unto him, Although you pretended to be rich, I do find you indigent, for
if you have Eighteen Thousand Franks, you do owe Twenty thousand; and I
perceive well enough you do not so much desire to marry a Wife, as to meet
with a good portion to relieve you in the necessities of your Age.

To speak the truth, he was worth three thousand Crowns, which he had gained by
paring our portions, in performing the office of a Regent in several Forms, and
by some other particular advantages; nevertheless he could never make Fremond
believe it, nor any of her Company, who were all inexorable, and would give no
credence, but to those words only which his Servant for additions had
delivered. Howsoever Fremond said, that if he were of a good Family, as he
pretended to be, peradventure she would not so much regard his poverty. Oh
Madamoisell, I have here a witness of it, said he, and causing the Countryman
to approach, he proceeded, Behold here an honest and a substantial Man, to whom
I do referr my self. Hear you then my Friend (said the Kinsman of Fremond) We
desire to know, if the Father of Master Hortensius was noble, or no; What say
you? I know very well that he was, said the Countryman. And his Grandfather
also, said the Advocate? He was so, said the Countryman. Sir, Have you any
Patents to show for it, said the Advocate to Hortensius? No, said he; for since
my Ancestors have advanced themselves by their Virtues, we need not any Patents
from the King. The generous actions of my Progenitors, which without
discontinuance have declared themselves to all the world, have made themselves
known even unto Envy, and if in those days they had been recorded in Letters,
they had before this time been defaced by age, or consumed by Rats. I do
believe you, said the Advocate. But you honest Man (said he) speaking to the
Countryman, Tell me if the Father of Monsieur was ever in the Wars during his
life? Yes Sir, (said he) I dare assure you. The Advocate replied, Being
returned to his House from the wars, did he always wear a sword, as the badge
of his Condition? The Countryman found himself to be here surprised; for
Hortensius had not instructed him how be should answer to such a Proposition,
without speaking an untruth; in the end he told him, that he had always seen
him wear a great Whittle, and of a good length at his girdle, and said
moreover, that he did never go out of doors without one Iron Instrument or
other; What Iron Instrument, said the Advocat, it possibly might be a Spade?
No, Sir, said the Countryman, it was a Gleave, being unwilling to use the name
of Sword or Whittle. Did he live like a Man of quality, said the Advocate? How
many dogs did he keep? None but one, answered the other. What dog was that? A
great Mastiff, replied the Countryman. He did not go a hunting then, said the
Advocate? Once, replied the Countryman, I saw him hunt the Wolf who devoured
his sheep, and to show his valor, at one blow he killed him with his
Sheep-hook. This last is the most remarkable of all, said the Advocate, and
smiled; he made use of his Sheep-hook, when he should have employed his
Harquebuze, and yet this Man had been a Soldier; But what did his Mastiff do?
He served to keep his flock when sometimes he absented himself from them, being
employed in the making of small Crucifixes of wood, and other little Figures;
as well to avoid Idleness, as to gain something for the sustenance of his
life. At that they began to laugh outright, which had been louder, had
Hortensius not been present, they all desiring to use him respectfully, that
they might receive more pleasure from him. As far then as we can learn, honest
Friend, by your Discourse (said the Advocate) the Father of Hortensius did keep
sheep, and was constrained to work with his hands for his daily bread; but he
need not to be ashamed at it, said the Advocate, and smiled to himself: for
having read so much, he is not ignorant, that Princes sometimes were Shepherds,
and the Innocence and Tranquillity of that Condition is yet highly esteemed.
Hortensius observing that the Error which the Countryman committed was
unpardonable, was contented to affirm, that this Father was not the less to be
esteemed, because he kept a flock of Sheep: for being discharged of the tumults
of the War, he believed he could not better relish the sweetness of peace in
any other condition. But Fremond, drawing her mouth an inch and a half wider
than ordinary, and mopping at him, assured him, that he might look him out a
Wife somewhere else, and that she would not have a Husband whose Father was of
so base a quality, and that she was afraid (for possibly Hortensius had kept a
herd of Swine in his youth) that in speaking to her, he might believe that he
was yet speaking to his hoggs, and would use her, as he did use them; and that
all the world, pointing at her with their finger, might say, Behold there where
goes the young Sow Madamoisell!

The disdain hereof did put Hortensius into such a fury, that it proved a
saving Antidote against the poison of his love, which immediately he turned
into hate, and without saying Adieu to any one, he flung out of the Chamber,
and made fast the Door after him, for fear they should fetch him back again. He
came directly to the College to acquaint his Usher with his misfortune. In the
mean time the Countryman, and the Servant for additions, who stayed behind,
were examined upon certain Interrogatories, and they found that this glorious
Pedant did come almost stark naked to Paris, and was constrained to beg, until
he had found a livelihood. His Servant for additions did think to return to
him, but he dismissed him when ever he saw him, as the folly he committed did
deserve, and the Countryman did go from him without a recompense, since he had
destroyed all his Hopes.

In the height of his Rage he did write a Letter to Fremond, in which he
inveighed against her with a thousand pedantick names; he called her Medea,
Megera, 1^ siphone. He told her, that since she would not be a Rose, and be
gathered by a Noursling of the Muses, who had drank more than one Bucket full of
the Fountain of Aganippe, he desired Phoebus to metamorphose her into a
Thistle, that she might serve to feed Asses; that he saw well enough by the
example of Jupiter, who was transformed into a Swan, a Satyr, and a Bull, to
delight himself with his Mistresses, that he must be a Beast who obtains any
thing from a Woman, and especially from her whom he esteemed to be the only
Woman in the world, that is to say, who had the greatest part of that
inconstant and brutish humor which pertained to her Sex. Afterward he came to
reproaches, and to show the greatest baseness in the world, he reckoned the
expenses he had been at to entertain her and her Company, and assured her, that
he would have saved that money, but that he was in hope to have espoused her,
and told her in the conclusion, That since he was frustrated of his
expectation, his Expectation was, that she, and all those whom he entertained,
should by turns give him the like feast one after another.

I was the Mercury of this Missive; but I carried not the Charming Rod, which
is a sign of Peace, for I came to denounce War. Fremond would civilly have
answered his outrages, to have always enjoyed the extraordinary mirth of his
Company. She did write unto him, that she minded not the Injuries with which he
defamed her, because she knew that he was prepossessed with passion, and that
she always highly did esteem him, by reason of his knowledge, but she said,
she could not make him her Husband, because he was not of that quality which
the present custom of the age did require, which she was enforced to follow,
nevertheless she would always bear an honest affection to him to recompense
his own; And for his Banquet there were none that should be in his debt for it,
for her Cousin should feast him first, and afterward all the rest should follow
by turns.

Hortensius having read this Answer did throw it into the fire, affirming that
he would have nothing to do with the affections or the Feasts of Fremond, and
being more wise for the time to come, he did swear that he would indear himself
no more to any Girls but the Muses, who also do allure us because they are of
that deceitful Sex. Although the Message his old Mistress did send unto him
was full of flatteries, yet he would never endure the frequentation of her
Company any more, nevertheless he discontinued not to wear a Sword, and has
ever since lived on his Revenues, and what he has gained by translating some
Books out of Latin into French, or by being a Corrector of the Press. I
finished all the course of my studies in the same College, paying my pension to
the Usher, where nothing arrived worthy of recital, but what already I have
related to you, and the Vacations of the year of my Philosophy being come, I
was commanded by my Father to take my leave of the College, and to return to
Brittany.

When I was in my own Country I saw the end of all my happiness, I was
perpetually vexed by being demanded in what Calling I would employ my self, my
ears were furred with the importunate clamors and counsels of my friends, who
would have me study Humanity, and the tedious Volumes of the Law, to be one of
the Counselors in Parliament; but opinions do change when age comes on, and my
Father afterward hated no men more than those of the long Robe, as since he
has made it appear by one who married my Sister. And my Mother desirous to
comply with him in all things, did seem to desire as well as himself to have me
a Counselor of the Law.

This did relish so ill with me, that it is impossible to represent it to you.
At that time I declamed within my self against the wickedness of the Age,
where the natural Laws are corrupted, and the most generous Spirits are
constrained to take upon them a great charge to trouble their repose, and
cannot live in Quiet, which is a blessing that is not denied unto Beasts. From
day to day I delayed to learn that dangerous knowledge which I have always
hated more than the plague, it being the cause of the greatest part of our
Vexations. Being on the point to forsake my Fathers house he did fall extremely
sick; In vain the Physicians round about him did their endeavor to recover
him, so it was that he dyed, and left his Wife and Children much afflicted for
so great a loss.

After his death, my Mother who accorded with me in all things which I desired,
did leave off the Resolution she had taken to force me to take the long Robe,
and because I was a stranger in Brittany, being accustomed to the Air of Paris,
I besought her that she would permit me to return thither; she demanded of me
what I would do there; I replied to her, that I would pass away some time in
learning honest exercises, and that I would endeavor to put my self in the
service of some Prince. My Brothers in Law did give their advice upon it, and
represented to me that Fortune reigned most imperiously at the Court, and
showed there the greatest effects of her inconstancy; And briefly, when I
presumed to be in the highest degree of all her favors, she would throw me
down into the bottom of despair. All this did not detere me, I had nothing in
my head but the greatness of the world. In the end they gave me leave to put
in practice my intention. I returned to Paris, and lodged in the University
which I could not forget. I was afterward acquainted with a Man who had
Chambers ready furnished, and took Pensioners, and I daily repaired to a Player
on the Lute, a Fencer, and a Dancer, to learn their art, so that one hour was
to exercise my self in one faculty, and the other in another; I employed all
the remainder of my time to read indifferently all manner of Books, and I
learned more in three months than I did before in seven years in the College,
when I heard those Pedantick absurdities which did so corrupt my judgment,
that I believed all the Fables of the Poets to be true stories, and did
conceive to my self that there were Sylvans and Dryades in the Forests, Nayades
in the Fountains, and Nereides in the Sea: Moreover I believed that whatsoever
was spoken of transformations was true; and I never saw a Nightin gall but I
believed it was the Kings Daughter of Thracia. Neither was I alone abused in
this conceit; for I know a great many more, and some Masters themselves, who
were of the same opinion.

As these old Errors were chased out of my understanding, I filled it with
better knowledge, and setting my self to review my notes of Philosophy which
our Regent had dictated unto me, I did confer them with the best Authors I
could find, so that by my industry I was sufficiently instructed in every
Science, for a man that would not make a particular profession of them.

In the midst of these various entertainments, I lived about a year in the
greatest solitude in the world, and very seldom did go out of doors, and
walked then no further than on the old Banks which were near unto my lodging. I
was only visited by two or three young Gentlemen with whom I was acquainted. I
remember that one day there came with them one of this Country, whose name was
Raymond, who some few days afterward returned without any one in his company.
Looking in my Coffer, after he was gone, I found my little Box empty, in which
I had put at least threescore Crowns, I remembered that I left him alone in my
Chamber, not suspecting him to be so light fingered as he was. When ever I saw
him, I spoke openly unto him what I though, and we came to very sharp words,
which I followed with threats; In the end I demanded of him if our
controversies on the next morning should be decided by the Sword, in some place
out of the City? He answered me, that he could not then meet me, because he was
very early to go out of Town according to his promise to some of his
Companions, with whom he was to travel into Flanders: The next day I sought
all over Paris for him, but could not find him, and since I never saw him, and
do not know what is become of him.

O how great was my grief of heart to have lost my money, with which I intended
to have appareld my self, being about to leave off my mourning habit! to write
unto my Mother for more would be more hurtful than profitable, for she would
not be persuaded but that I had lost it at play, and would have sent me nothing
but Reproofs. I received a Letter from her wherein she represented that I was
poorer than I thought my self to be, and that my Father had left many debts to
pay; She accused me also of negligence, that I had not looked out some place
for my self as? promised her at my departure. I was constrained therefore to
wear an old gray Suit which I had, and a Cloak of color de roy, which had a
long time lain by me. I was so ill accommodated, that there was none of any
judgment but would have taken me for the Son of the brave Captain of the Port.
Nevertheless I did go abroad more often than before, such a desire had I at
that time to understand how all things were governed in the City, which was a
thought that never troubled me when I was in the College.

On the day before St. Martins, I did repair to the Palace, where I was never
but thrice before to buy Gloves. Being upon the stairs I saw a young man of my
age coming down, of whom I had some knowledge when I was in the College, he was
in a red Gown, I remembered that he had a good voice, and I believed that he was
one of the Choristers of the Chapel, and he passing by, I had no more thought
of him in that Relation.

Howsoever, if the throng of the people had not removed me from him, I would
have saluted him with the Nickname that was given him in the College, and
brought those ralleries unto his mind with which he was ordinarily upraided
concerning his Father, who was one of the basest Usurers and. Extortioners in
the world. Some days afterward I had again the curiosity to return to that
abominable place, and walking along the Gallery of the Mercers, I did see again
this Sot in a gown faced with Velvet, and a Satin Cassock, he was speaking to
a handsome young Girl that did sell perfumes, and making as though he whispered
in her ear, he did kiss her cheek, and played with her Breasts. I was resolved
then to understand what was the worth of my Companion, but seeing how he was
employed, I did at that time excuse him, and passing forward, I resolved to
come more early the next day; And finding him not in that place, I walked from
one side to another, and resolved to wander up and down in the several
turnings, where immediately I happened on some Chambers very obscure, and ill
built, where I saw an infinite number of Scribes, some whereof searched the
Rolls, others were writing, and from time to time did tell great sums of money,
which did infinitely possess me. I was amazed to observe with what speed they
counted it; at the last I beheld my young Gallant to come out of the next
Chamber, in the same equipage in which he was the day before. He was followed
by a disconsolate Damoisel who held a Paper in her hand, and by an old Man of a
good Countenance in a long Robe, who did speak unto him bareheaded, and with
great Respect, although the Damoisel did not so much as turn her head aside to
look upon him, but did sing to her self some part of a melancholy Ditty, which
began thus, Alas! who shall hasten the time where I attend.

But because he did go with great have, and I could not follow him, I advised
with my self to call him by that Name which the Scholars gave him, conceiving
that I who had such familiarity with him, might speak more freely to him than
those who followed him. You, you, Tocaret, said I, whither do you run with so
much have? whereupon one of the tellers of the money taking notice to whom I
spoke, did come out of his place, and striking me with his fist, Impudent (said
he) I will make you quiet enough; if I knew (Diminutive Clerk) to what Proctor
you do belong, I would cause you to be soundly punished: If there were not many
about him, who seemed to be all of them against me, I had undoubtedly revenged
my self; but all that I could then do, was to answer his words, and to tell
him in my passion, that I was no Proctors Clerk, but a Gentleman. This made
that wretched fellow to laugh with an open mouth, and say unto those who were
about him, Observe but what a countenance of a Gentleman he bath, with his
elbows out, and his Cloak that laughs at us, and all the world, in showing its
teeth. How! you infamous Wretch (said I) Do you reckon of Nobility but only by
the habit? I had said more unto him, but that an honest young Man who carried a
good quantity of Velvet under his arm, taking me by the hand did conduct me
through the next Gallery, and said unto me, Have a care what you speak, you
ought to respect the place where you are, and the persons to whom you speak. He
is one of the Registers, whom you have abused. What is a Register? (said I) one
who like a Griffon is always scraping together with his Talons, he with his
Talons scrapes every day Silver enough, which is laid forth upon the Table for
him. He made answer to me, you are too scandalous. You have also, I know not by
what Name, miscalled one of the Counselors within. What? that young Man (said
I) who passed by? I would fain have spoken with him; for the last time that I
was in the College, where I received my education with him, be did steal from
me my pens, my penknife, and my Note Book. I have certain proof of it, and I
have a desire to reprove him for it. He who did speak to me, and was a
Solicitor, did advertise me to have a care of my self, in regard of the
quality of the person. I made answer to him, What, do you say he is a
Counselor? Undoubtedly he has more folly in his head than Counsel. The
Solicitor replied, the Court would not have conferred that dignity on him, if
it did not find him capable to receive it. I made answer, So it is most
commonly observed, that he who is advanced to the greatest honors in the
University, is commonly the greatest Ass, and every new office that he has,
does serve but so much the more to declare his imperfections. Be not so vain,
said the Solicitor. I am not vain at all, said I; for by my birth I am one of
the most noble in France, and he is but the Son of a base Merchant. His Place
and Office do ennoble him, said the Solicitor. And how did he come by that
place? said I. By his good Purse, said the Solicitor. I made answer. And even
the basest Abject in the world may have such a quality, and cause himself to be
as much respected, as long as he has money to command. O good God! said I, what
a shame is this? Where shall Virtue be now acknowledged? Having spoke those
words, I did forsake the Solicitor, and did go into a great Hall full of a
world of people, who trotted up and down on this side, and on that, like pease
boiling in a pot. For my self, if I had been carried into such a place when I
was asleep, I should verily believe when I waked, That I was in Hell. One cried
out, others domineered, some did run, some with great violence did carry others
to prison. On no side could be seen the least shadow of content.

Having observed these sad examples of the brutishness of men, I returned to
my own Lodging, but so full of Indignation that I cannot express it. After
Dinner, being at my Window, I descryed my young Coxcomb the Counselor, passing
through the Street, but in what Equipage think you? in the Equipage of a
Signior. I was never more astonished. He had a Cloak of three-piled Velvet of a
Carnation color, his Breeches were of Velvet of the same color, and his
Doublet of White Satin, his thigh was armed with a Sword of Miramont, and he
was mounted on a barbed Steed, and followed by three lusty Lackeys. I enquired
of my Host, if at Paris Men of the long Robe were also Men of the Sword. He
made answer to me, that young Gentlemen, as was that Counselor whom I beheld,
did not take upon them the formality of the Gown, but only for a quality to
gain them the more respect, and to procure them Wives with greater Dowries, and
that their age leading them to the civilities of the Court, when they are once
out of it, they are permitted to take the sword and the habit of a Cavalier.

Perceiving in what misery I was, I did wish I had been of the Profession to
which my Father did persuade me, but I conceived it would be a dishonor to be
in the company of such vile people. At that time I did feel to the quick, the
pricking thorns of my mi^fortune; for being clothed with such poor habit,
there was not any one who did esteem me, and in this forlorn condition, I durst
not wear a Sword; for instead of serving to be a witness of my generous
extraction, it would make me to be taken by the most sotish people of all the
Cities in the Earth, for a lazy Vagabond. In the mean time, every day I
suffered a thousand Indignities, I dare not say patiently, for I dare assure
you, if Power had answered to my Will, I had thoroughly punished those stupid
fellows that offended me.

One morning I entered into the Court of the Louvre, thinking it had been a
place of Respect, where I should receive pleasure from the Variety of several
Objects, and not be baffled, as I had been at other places. As I did regard
that pompous Edifice, looking sometimes on one side, and sometimes on the
other, a Page, who observed by my action that I was not accustomed to come
thither, supposing me to be a simple Novice, did take my hat by the Brim, and
gave it such a twirl, that it turned eight times quite round my head; I had
showed him effectually who it was he had abused, but that behind him I observed
ten or twelve Lackeys, who seemed to be there present to defend him. I told him
that he did me wrong to touch me, since I never offended him; At that he and
his Companions opened their mouths altogether, and called me Citizen, for it is
a word of derision which that Kennell does give to those whom they esteem to be
simple Fellows, in which number they comprehended all those who do not follow
the Court. It is the infamy of this age, that those people who are so
despicable and so abject that it is impossible to express them, should abuse a
Name which has been and is in so many Cities so passionately desired.
Nevertheless understanding the malice of their mistake, I took the boldness
to entreat them to look more earnestly on him to whom they did address their
words, assuring them they would find I am not the Man whom they did take me to
be. And turning from them to be gone, they followed me with absurd laughter,
and impertinent language, and demanded of me what I was, If I was not a
Citizen. I made answer, I am that which you will never be, and which it is
impossible that you can desire to be, because you have neither the courage nor
the apprehension to be as I am. To speak in that manner to those ignorants was
to speak Greek unto them, and I did repent my self that I took such Brutish
things into my consideration, at whom I ought not to be angry although they
should have spurned me with their feet because they are Creatures deprived of
Reason, and have not the sense when they are chastised to understand, that it
is because they should return no more unto their follies.

This consideration working in my Spirit, I retreated from them; but this
cursed crew taking offense at the last words which I spoke, did run after me to
torment me. The Page making a semblance as if he would strike his staff upon
the ground, did hit me so violently upon the Feet, that at every blow I leaped
up as if I were cutting so many Capers. The Lackeys also being prepossessed
with the simplicity of my deportment did assault me all at once, and there was
one of them who affirmed that they must toss me in a Blanket. Being
excessively provoked at that word, I suffered my self to be transported to the
first motions of choler, and retiring a little from them I did swear like a
Waggoner wet quite thorough, and covered with Dirt; Come forth and you dare
unto me, and giving me but a Sword, Do you fall upon me all at once, You shall
see if I fear you, or not, you vile puddle; you have no valor at all, but when
altogether you assault one Man who has no Arms to defend himself. If you have
not the desire to gratify me in letting me die valiantly in my own defense, do
one of you kill me, for I shall no longer live but to my grief, and on the
other side I have misfortunes enough, which do cause me to desire Death.

Their blind and stupid Rage was inflamed by these words, when a great lump of
flesh covered with blew Satin and gold lace did approach unto them. I know not
on my faith whether it were a man or not, but I discovered the form of a Body,
as for his Soul it was all brutish. He was a Baron, (as afterward I
understood) and was the Master of the little Page that did prosecute me; He
said to the three buffles who stood with their hats in their hands, Tell me you
Waggs, Is not my Page a gallant Boy? mark but the pleasant sport he makes, he
is a Boy of Wit and Spirit. The Page hearing the praise which his Master gave
him, did determine with himself to make that Virtue yet more manifest for which
he did esteem him, and came unto me to give me a tweak on the Nose, but I
thrust him back so violently that I thought I had thrown him on his back. The
Baron who carried an eye over him was angry, and twirling his Mustachioes with
one hand, and threatening me with the other, he said unto me, You Sirrah look to
your self, if you abuse my Page, I shall strap you as long as I can stand over
you. I hearing him speak to me, as to those wretched and sordid Varlets, from
whose condition I was as far removed as Heaven from Earth, did resolve with my
self to show him the error of his Judgment, and addressing my self unto his
ignorant and most senseless Honor, I showed unto him that I was not offended
at what he said, for it had no reference at all to me. There are none of
quality who by your words will apprehend the little estimation you make of
them. For my self, being in a condition more advanced than is theirs, and
peradventure as eminent as your own, I find my self no ways concerned. In this
case the poor habit which covers me, and which has caused you to entertain a
bad opinion of me, might hold it self injured, let that therefore decide the
controversy by its self, I will have no part in it.

These words being pronounced (which without vanity give me leave to say were
delivered with an extaordinary grace) they were heard by a Gentleman who walked
near unto us, and perceived that such Reasons could not proceed from a vulgar
Spirit, although the Baron the greatest Ass in the Court had not the
apprehension to conceive what the least of my words did mean. The Gentleman
therefore by little and little conjecturing that I had good parentage and
education, did take pity of me, and to draw me from the fury of those
merciless Barbarians, did advise me not to go forth at that Gate, at which I
entered. I followed his Counsel, condemning a thousand times the Nobility of
this age, who are followed by such unworthy Creatures, whose petulant rudeness
is so connived at by them, that it does excite them to commit outrages against
all manner of Persons.

But, alas, it was not by these people alone that I was so undervalued, and so
ungently entreated, I was in the same manner abused by those who make
profession even of Honor and of Modesty. In whatsoever place I was there was
no Citizen would permit I should have so eminent a regard as himself. In the
streets they would sometimes thrust me from the wall with their Elbows, to have
me go on the other side, and would call me Beggar, if I testified my
resentment by any sharp language to them. Nay which is more (observe but the
extreme unhappiness of poverty, which is always believed to be the Companion
of Vice) a man one time having lost his purse in the Crowd, it was suspected
that I had picked it, if by some words and actions I had not immediately caused
every one of them to entertain a better opinion of me.

You will tell me that I cannot fall into those inconveniences, but only among
some vain Worldlings, who pass their judgments according to the least
apparences; but understand, that even those who had renounced the pomp and
vanity of the world, did by a strange unhappiness entertain the same opinion
of me. A Friar, not knowing who they were, did suffer ten or twelve dissolute
persons with plush Cloaks on their backs to enter into the Chapel, and also did
not refuse admission to their Grooms, but as for my self who would have
followed them, he immediately did shut the door upon me. I cried out at the
Grate, My Father, let me speak one word unto you; When he came nearer to me I
thus proceeded, I am not come hither to admonish you, neither am I in a
capacity so to do; nevertheless I assume the boldness to speak unto you what
I know, which is, that your Church ought to be the Image of the celestial house
of our great God, and that you ought to permit the poor to take the best place,
as it is in that happy mansion. Well, well, said I and smiling did proceed, I
see when I would come into your Chapel, the better in that place to entertain
my Devotion, I must buy me a Cloak lined with plush, or take one up at the
Brokers. The Friar was ashamed, and because he made have to leave me he heard
not my last words, whereupon at the last I raised my voice higher, which
redounded more unto his shame, for many who were round about me did perfectly
hear, and I found by their smiles that they did approve my words, and mocked at
him who so ill observed the rules of his Order in not cherishing the poor. The
Friar nevertheless had committed a Sin which he could not expiate but by a
severe Repentance.

Consider yet a misfortune greater than the former, Those who even knew of what
Family I was descended, did not entreat me more respectfully. The little Youths
the Children of Citizens, who^ I knew in the College, and had the^ there at my
own Law, meeting me in the streets, would look upon me as if they never saw me
before; and although in a great humility I did salute them, to renew my ancient
acquaintance, they would only put their hand unto their Hat, and the proud
resalutation did come with an ill will from them, so presumptuous they were to
see themselves covered with Silk, and to have their Grooms better clothed than
my self. I did go to visit some of them, who seemed to be the most courteous,
and with whom I had been most familiar; To speak the truth, they entertained me
well in their Lodgings, being constrained to it by the Rules of Courtesy, but
they would none of them take the pains to see me themselves, to recompense my
visit with their own, conceiving that they should debase themselves too much to
visit a man so ill appointed as my self, and that it would be a dishonor to
them, if I were seen in their Company.

If by chance I did meet with any who discoursed on some subject where I had
the means to make the fruits of my studies more apparent, I therein was still
unfortunate, for I durst not open my mouth, knowing that the ill opinion which
already was conceived of me, would cause all which I should speak to be
misprised, and when I began any discourse, I was not listened unto, and one or
other would constantly interrupt me.

In the mean time my habit every day did grow worse and worse, and I found so
often such new Rents, that I knew not which way to redress them. I had laid
forth all my stock to pay my Pension to my Landlord, I had owed it him a long
time, and the remainder was not enough to buy Stuff to piece my Doublet and my
Breeches, I made fast my skirts that were unsowed with pins, and my Buttons
being for the most part fallen off, I made use of some broken points to perform
their office. The rest I covered with my cloak in the best manner that I could,
to the end that the other defects about me might not be perceived. At the last
I was enforced to wear again my mourning Doublet, because it was better than my
gray one.

I was infinitely sensible of the affronts which I received in that condition,
and to avoid them, I was enforced to stay within doors all the Winter, although
it were a grievous punishment unto me; for after some weeks, I had seen a young
and a most beautiful Wonder at her Fathers Door in that Street that joyneth to
St. James, and her attractions with such advantage had triumphed over my
liberty, that I did nothing else but sigh after her. But what should I do to
have come out of my bondage? Love is a mortal Enemy to Poverty. I durst not
show my self to Diana, (for that was the Name of the Queen of m^ heart) I must
be accommodated in another fashion, for she had received some Impressions in
relation to me, which were not favorable. In my Solitude I had no other
employment, but to think of her, and that was the Cause that my passion did
inflame it self the more; I was such a fool, that I took some pleasure to pass
every Evening by her door, although it was to me the most unprofitablest
trouble in the world.

In that time I could have joined in the same Trade with some deboist Scholars
of the City, by whom I found it was an easy thing in a short time to supply my
self with new habiliments, for every night they did nothing else but steal
Cloaks in a street in the Suburbs where were some scattered houses, but I could
never condescend to make my Spirit to stoop to such an infamous action; I
therefore entertained the Acquaintance of certain Philosophers who promised me
Mountains of Gold, by a way lawful and honorable; nevertheless at the last I
abandoned their conversation, because I found they were but sellers of smoke,
who were unwilling to communicate themselves unto me, because having nothing to
lose, their trompery would be of no use in my behalf. In the beginning I was at
least as subtle as themselves, and making them believe that I had a round Sum
of money coming out of the Country, with which I would assist them in buying
that which was necessary for the perfecting of their great work, I did invite
them to teach me many of the Secrets of their Natural Magic, which in several
occasions I have since made use of: And this was some profit that I received in
frequenting their Company,

Afterward I addicted my self to another study, which was Poetry, in our
Tongue, with which I was so much taken, that I shall for ever be enchanted with
it; my ordinary employment was to make verses on the hatred which I did bear to
the iniquity of the times, and on my love to gentle Diana; But. Good God, what
works were they in comparison of those which I am now able to perform! All I
did was after the mode of the College, and there appeared in it neither
neatness nor judgment; I might safely swear that at that time I had never
read a good piece in verse, and the Authors from whom I might learn any thing
were unknown unto me, as well by my own negligence, as my Regents, so that all
which I could do, was to admire what was sung by the old Poets of Greece, in
whose works we do find so many remarkable faults, because that all proceeded
from their invention, and they had nothing to lay before them as a Pattern, and
one thing at the same time cannot be invented and made perfect.

Take notice in no place better than in this, that the Muses are pleased to
dwell with Poverty, you shall seldom see a rich man to delight in making
verses, And the great possessions of the Goods of Fortune, are the cause that
men delude themselves, and neglect to possess the endouments of the mind;
Nevertheless, for Poesy there is nothing more pleasing to the Spirit, or more
useful for Men, in putting a great distinction betwixt our selves, and Beasts.

It was in that time, alas, that I beheld my self frustrated of all Hopes which
I had a long time nourished in my Soul. I traced my adventures over and over,
to see if I could there meet with any that might parallel with those great
personages whose History I had read, and I imagined that undoubtedly I should
find an issue equal unto theirs, trusting in my courage and the inclination
which I had to follow whatsoever was virtuous: Oh how blind I was as not to fee
the infinite obstacles which did oppose my good fortune, although I had a
valor more admirable than any of the ancient Knights. If I had not laid down
on Paper the transportations of my choler, I had inevitably fallen into the
most violent Despair of the world. Was it not wonderful, and did it not cure
me against the rules of Nature? After I had described my evil, I did find it
no more so violent upon me, although I perceived the effects thereof most
lively represented. Will any Man of Reason now deny that Apollo was esteemed
the God of Physic, as well for the remedy which his verses do give unto the
desperate wounds of the Soul, as for what his herbs do give to the diseases of
the Body, which he causes to grow when he takes upon him the quality of the
Sun to make the earth fruitful?

So much had Francion spoke, when his courteous Host locking his hand in his,
did say unto him, It is enough for this time, I perceive it grows late, I am
afraid you afflict your self with too much speaking, and with those words be
caused him to cease; but before he would take his leave of him he did entertain
him yet a little longer, and said unto him, that truly he had been injurious to
himself, by endeavoring to hinder himself from the further knowledge of his
Pedantick adventurrs; but Sir, said he, I believe you endured torment enough
for the loss of your Silver, if I remember it aright you told me that his name
was Raymond who took it from you, would you make him suffer for it, if you
could find him out? I profess unto you (said Francion) that as often as I
remember the miseries which he made me to endure, my rage does kindle as red
against him as ever, for his fact was extremely odious, and the more, because
he was descended of an honorable Family, and of the richest in France. The
Signior of the Castle having a Custom with him not usual, of which few can find
out the Cause, did say unto him, That it was possible that this Raymond had
taken his money in a wanton humor, and not for necessity, intending to conceal
himself from his Parents, and to lead a deboyst life in Flanders, and therefore
if Francion would look after him, he would endeavor to inform him if he were
in Burgundy, or not, that so he might call him to a strict account for it; but
Francion made answer, That it would be the most ridiculous thing in the world,
if he should witness that he carried about him the Remembrance of such ancient
offenses; his Host nevertheless promised him that he would inquire, If in
Burgundy, or thereabouts, there were any Gentleman, who is, or has been known
by the Name of Raymond, that he might understand at least what was become of
him who robbed him. Speaking those words, he did bid him Good Night, and did
entreat him to dispose himself to give him on the next Morning an Account of
the residue of his life. After that he did betake himself to his Rest, having
received great satisfaction to hear such a variety of subjects where
Instructions were contained for several sorts of people; for though that all
the world is not a Pedant, yet the Actions of the Pedant Hortensius are not
particular to himself. Francion also did lively represent the sottishness of
those People, who do esteem of none but of those only who are richly habited,
and especially the Impertinence of the Courtiers, who generally do disesteem of
Citizens, although oftentimes they are better Men than themselves. We may see
also the errors of Youth ill trained up, and removed from the observation of
their Parents: And wheresoever we cast our eyes, we may observe the generosity
of the spirit of Francion, which never did abandon him. He whom he entertained
with his brave adventures, had in his bed the leisure to think of it, and did
receive from thence an absolute Contentment. And we may take no less our
selves, if we will be industrious to make use of it: In pursuit whereof, in the
next Book we shall observe the Vanity of Poets, and of the Authors of the
present Time, lively represented. The Extravagances which Love causes in
Youth, shall also have their place in it, and in all that, as in the Acts of a
good Comedy, we may see how Pleasure and Instruction go hand in hand together.

The End of the Fourth Book.
THE FIFTH BOOK OF THE COMICAL HISTORY OF FRANCION.
WHen the Sun had restored again the Day, The Signior of the Castle being
already attired, failed not to see if Francion had taken good rest that night,
to the end he might know if he were able to finish the rehearsal of his several
Fortunes. Being willng to improve their time, their salutations were the
shorter. Francion, although he found the pain of his head to be much assuaged,
yet he determined to keep his Bed for that day, the better to recollect his
strength, and, having no desire to rise, he continued the course of his History
as I shall represent unto you.

Sir, We left off yesterday at the pleasure which I did take in Poetry, It is
requisite, that returning to that Subject, I should inform you, that they did
put into my hands certain works which were terse and elaborate enough,
according to which I fashioned those Poems which afterward I composed; I was
told of a Book newly come forth, the Author whereof was very famous, which I
determined with my self to buy, to learn by that how I ought to write according
to the Times, for ingenuously I do confess, I did not understand what I had to
do. Having learned that the Stationer who sold that Book did live in Saint
James his Street, I repaired thither, and my curiosity being declared, he took
the pains to show me an infinite number of French Books, the names of which I
had never heard of before; I had not money enough to purchase so much
Merchandise, wherefore I bargained only for that Book which at first I had a
desire to buy, having borrowed money for that purpose. Nevertheless I did not
forbear to turn over all those books which were upon the Counter; when behold
there name into the Shop a very young Man with a pale and lean Countenance,
staring with his eyes in a very strange posture, he was apparelled in such a
wretched habit that I had no fear at all that he should laugh at mine, so that
before him I did speak very freely to the Stationer, without caring who did
hear me. Tell me (said I) if there be any one in this age who has the
reputation of a good Poet, I have always believed that there are none who
excel therein, because they do addict themselves but to the cadence of the
words, and unto mere riming only. In what an error are you? (said the
Bookseller unto me) Have I not showed you some admirable pieces composed by
Authors now living? but it may be that you do not esteem the new manner of
these Writers, and do like of nothing but what is ancient, and solid; I know
not (said I) if they write better now than heretofore, and cannot discern when
I make Verses, whether they be of the new fashion or of the old. The young Man
turning his head unto me, and showing the greatest part of his teeth in an
undecent laughter, I understand then (Sir) said he, that you make Verses. I
made answer, I add words unto words on the subjects which present themselves
unto my Fant'sy, but they are so ill ordered, that I know not whether I may
call the Work a piece of Poetry, or no. He replied, That I did speak that out
of the humility of my modesty, and entreated me to show him some of my
Composures. I made answer, That I durst not give him a sight of any of those
pieces, which peradventure were not according to the Rules which I ought to
follow, and of which I had not the least knowledge. Well, Sir, said he, I will
tell you as a Friend what I think of them, and possibly you may be glad that
you have had conference with me; for there are not above three in Paris who can
boast they have more judgment in Verse than my self. Those words could not
persuade me to comply with his desires; whereupon he departed, having taken two
or three Books with him under his Cloak, and gave no money to the Stationer for
them: I asked him how he could thrive, if be parted with his books in that
manner? I do lend him them (said he) and am constrained so to do to a number
of such Writers as himself, who meet every day in my shop to communicate and
compare their Poems with one another, and here they have such great assemblies,
that there is not in all France again any place, which more justly deserves to
bear the name of Parnassus. What profit (said I) do you receive by their
Conferences? The Merchant laughing, did reply, The loss of my Books which they
borrow, and never return again. I made answer, If I were as you, I would drive
away such Customers. I care not much, (said he) for there is always one or
other amongst them that is giving me some Copy to print, by which means my shop
is made famous.

After this Discourse, I informed my self of all the Poets of the Time, whose
Names I learned, and found moreover that he who made the Work which I came to
buy, was in good earnest the most renowned of them all. The Stationer then
being willing to oblige me, did promise me, that if I would give him one of my
Poems, he would show it to them, (without naming the Author) to know what
faults they could find in them. The desire I had to do well, to the approbation
of the whole world, did cause me to accept his Profer, and on the next Morning
I brought him that piece, which of all that ever I did write, did please me
best. It was showed to the whole Assembly of Poets, who found as many faults in
it as there were words. The Stationer did me the pleasure to give me an account
of them; I seriously considered of it, and finding they had good reason for
what they had done, I resolved with my self to fall no more into such gross
mistakes.

To speak the truth, their Rules did tend only to make Poetry more sweet, more
flowing, and more filled with judgment. Who is he that would refuse to see her
in this Perfection? It will be objected, That great is the travel and the
difficulty to compose Verses after their Laws, but if they should not be
observed, every one would be tampering in that Art, which thereby would suffer
in its excellence.

Some time afterward I had a perfect knowledge of these things, for I was
often in the shop of this Bookseller, where I came acquainted with all the
Poets. After that my Cloak had rubbed on theirs, I knew immediately after that
manner I ought to compose my Verses. They never reproved me for above two or
three faults, and in correcting them, I abstained from those which were more
gross. I would not too much oblige my self unto them, although the little
which they said unto me was not enough to inform the judgment of a Learner. I
must here acquaint you what a Generation of people they are; There were some of
them who had been Pedants in the College; Others came I know not from whence,
being clothed like Ushers; and not long afterward they found the means to be
habited like Gentlemen, but immediately they returned to their first ragged
condition, whether their Garments were borrowed, or whether they had sold them
to provide for their daily bread; Some of them did never rise higher, nor fall
lower, but did keep at a stay, and made no greater a show on one day than on
another; Others lived on what was given them for their Copies, and others did
expend the little wealth they had, in expectation to meet with some Signior who
might take him into his service, or procure him a Pension from the King. There
was not one of them who was the Master of a great and of a clear Fant'sy; Their
Inventions were all but Imitations, or were so weak that they needed a
Supporter. They had nothing in them besides the smoothness of Language,
neither was any one of them absolute in that, for if the most experienced
amongst them did eschew one error, he did chop into an other. Many of them did
nothing else but translate Books, and when they composed any thing of
themselves, they would commit ridiculous absurdities. It is remarkable, that
most of them became Poets by infection, having altogether haunted the Companies
of those men who did exercise themselves in that faculty; for there is no
Disease that is more catching, than is that of Poetry. I could not but lament
these miserable Creatures, they did write upon the imagination and confidence
of their own abilities, and delightfully did deceive themselves; Nevertheless
there are many Books of their writing which at this day are most highly
esteemed, but I will tell you, It is for want of better. We must look on that
which is presented to our eyes, and for my self, I have sometimes been enforced
to read them, finding nothing else to divert me. There are two or three
Romances which are counted good pieces, and are highly esteemed, but let me
lose my life, if I cannot show in every one of them faults worthy of the Lash.

It is true, that although I used all my endeavors to be claborate, yet some
of these common Scriblers were oftentimes more esteemed than my self; but these
Men, to cry up their Reputation, did make use of some subtilties to which I
scorned to debase my self. As they are a long time in performing what they are
about, so they have the leisure to spread abroad the Report thereof, and to
cause their Works to be desired, by the praises which are given to them,
without the least sight of them, and afterward bringing them forth into the
light, they render themselves agreeable to some great Personage, who ^ries them
up at the Court. Moreover, they have for the most part some Poetaster at their
Devotion, to maintain that they have the Empire over all the wits in the world,
and that they are confident they are not deceived in it, for there are some at
Court who seem to make it their business to employ all the Authors of the
Time. Their Names are read in every Book, and without them their Works would
never be printed, for otherwise they would bankrupt the Stationer who
undertakes to print them; so that by this they do like the Wren, who to mount
unto the clouds does hide himself under the wings of the Eagle. Nay, which is
more, our Authors are so vain, that they themselves do make Prefaces, and
letters of Commendation, in which so excessively they do praise themselves,
that, beyond those praise, we know not what to give unto a Deity, and this they
cause to be printed under the Names of some of their Friends, who although he
be eloquent enough, can never sufficiently declare his merits. If they desire
any to make Commendatory verses on their Works, they may well answer them, What
need is there that I should take the pains to praise you, you praise your self
a hundred times better than I know how to do? There is no greater Presumption
in the world, than what is practiced amongst these people, and I my self have
been informed, that one amongst them aspiring to be the Tyrant, and desiring
that all the rest should pay Homage to him, did say, There are abroad some poor
rebellious Spirits who are not yet come in to do their Reverence, but those
are but petty Country Palatines who will not acknowledge their Emperor, I
shall make them to submit whether they will or no; When this was related to me,
I was in the full assembly of these miserable Scriblers, where I had a mock for
every one of them, and moreover said unto them. He amongst you may esteem
himself to be the King of Wits who has an ambition thereunto, but let him know
that it is I who am the great Cham, the Prester John, the Sultan, the Sophy,
and the great Mogull of all the wits not only of Europe, but of all the world
to boot.

This pleasant vaunt did make them all to laugh, nevertheless they, had so
base a Spirit, that they ceased not to respect him who still would domineer
over them and all the world. We were then in the Stationers Shop in Saint James
his Street, where they began to make a great mystery to write a poor Letter,
for I must tell you, that being not able to exercise their wits on any other
Subject, they contrived to make Epistles, propounding to themselves to become
glorious by that means, and they so much suspected their own invention, or else
did need the invention of others, that they caused the most particular things
to be printed which passed between their friends and themselves, insomuch that
I did speak unto them in an upbraiding mirth, that I would advise one of them
to travel into Italy, another into Germany, and the third into Turkey, that
they might find matter enough to transcribe great volumes of Letters for the
Press; And as I observed in one of their Books, that the beginning and the end
of every Epistle was full of long repetitions, I said unto the Bookseller, to
render things more true, and not to omit any thing, the Author should have put
down the directions to every particular street, and the names of the streets,
and the signs of every house, and whatsoever was to be paid for the carriage
of the Letters, because he had made a collection of several small sums, and
having thus put them all into one, he might have paid himself both for the
price of his Book, and for the portage of the Letters altogether. This
invention seemed very gainful unto him, and I profess unto you, that he was
not unwilling to put it in practice. But to return to my Story you must
understand that as his Shop was the place where all the Letters were read of
these new Epistlers, who believed they had picked open the lock of the treasury
of well speaking; all those who were present were transported to see this new
Packet of which I have spoken.

In the end, after diverse conventions of these Scriblers, those Letters, nay
rather those wonders were read, which were the most extravagant and the most
impertinent ones that were ever heard. He who did read them did pronounce the
words after the tone of a Comedy, and he seemed to act as he did speak. The
Auditors stood round about him, who one after another did stretch forth their
necks like so many Cranes, and at every clause with an amazement, and an inward
transportation, they rouled their eyes in their heads like a Bell-weather when
he is angerd. The most apparent of them at every period in a tone of admiration
did cry out Acute and Excellent, and immediately the next unto him did repear
the same words and so they did all one after another until they came to my
turn, who as well for mockery as for complacence was constrained to do the
like, so that nothing almost was to be heard but the repetition of these words
Acute and Excellent. I conceived to my self that I was at the Echo of
Charenton, which repeateth seven times that which is spoken.

After that there was a Poet who recited his verses, and I took much pleasure
to behold his countenance, for at the end of every Stanza he constantly turned
his eyes to his audience to observe by their countenance what was their
Judgment on his verses; And observe this (which peradventure is more than ever
you marked before) All Poets do the same when they read to any their own works.
After this, they had great disputations amongst themselves for very trivial
things, omitting allogether those which were of importance. Their contentions
were, if we ought to speak, It were better; or, It had been better, or which
was best to say, knowing Men, or, Men of knowledge; Or if, in verse, hand ought
to rhyme in close with mend, or Realm with seam; And those in the mean time who
maintained that they were but so many faults, did comm^more gross ones
themselves, for they made perishable to rhyme with fable, and ^ew with virtue.
All their opinions were taken from the Tenants of some old Dotard, whom they
followed altogether, and especially they pleased themselves in discoursing of
some barbarous forms of speech which were very common with them. Afterward
they came to speak of some ancient words, which to them seemed to be very good,
and to be of great use in our language, but they durst not make use of them
themselves, because that he amongst them who was their Coriphaeus had expressly
forbid them. Sometimes they would discourse of things very commendable, which
they would refer to their Master Ignoramus, whose approbation they did take to
be their Warrant, both in this and on any other fant'sy which was to be
authorized. At the last there was one amongst them more hardy than the rest,
who affirmed that we ought to take a particular account of all the old words
which were made new, and of the new ones which were invented, and make use of
them accordingly as they should be found expedient, and that also we should cut
off from the Orthography all the Letters that were superfluous, and in certain
places out in others more convenient, of which there may use be made in the
pronunciation, for he said, It is certain that Men did speak before they did
write, and by consequence did form their writing according to their words, and
invented Letters which being joined together had the sound of words, I am
therefore of opinion that we ought to do so, and not to insert any Letters that
are unprofitable, For to what end do we do it? You will tell me it is because
that most of our words are derived from the Latin, I shall answer, that it is
one of the reasons that may induce us not to follow it. We ought to show the
richness and native beauty of our own language, and that it has nothing of a
stranger in it. If one should make you a pair of Gloves with six Fingers, you
could not wear them without trouble, and besides it would seem ridiculous to
you, and to all that do behold them; for Nature must either make you a new
Finger to your Hand, Or the Glover must take away his supernumerary Finger.
Observe therefore, that if in our pronunciations we do that which is most
natural, because it is not so easy to pronounce the words according to the
Letters, and the Letters themselves are unprofitable, it is therefore found
expedient to cut them off. In any other Tongue you shall not find that same
exuberance of Letters, but if there were, evil examples are not so much to be
followed, as is Reason. Consider that the Latin Tongue it self (from whence to
speak the truth the greatest part of ours is derived) has not one Letter but
what is useful.

By the Death of Destiny (said I) this is a good Speech indeed, and tends to
the ease and advantage of the public; I allow your reasons and commend them,
but where are the Instructions that shall direct us to follow them, far to cut
off ill customs which are superfluous in our manners, and not dream at all to
cut off Letters which are poor and innocent, and do no man any hurt. As for the
new words which you speak of, we shall no sooner introduce them, but the People
and such as they are observing their novelty, and that they are extraordinary,
will laugh at us for them: But for the old words, I give my voice, that you
shall be made choice of on the part of the French Authors, and that a new
Chamber be erected, to represent to others the usefulness of your opinions,
and to persuade the King that he ought to cause it to be put in practice by all
his Subjects.

After I had spoken these words, and administered to every one a Subject of
Laughter, one who was the most gallant Man of them all, did conclude, that all
which had been spoken did not any thing conduce to the preservation of our
Bodies, and taking us from our Books, he did bring us to the glasses and pots
in one of the best Taverns of Paris, where he entertained us to the last penny
of all his stock. To speak the truth, there is not a generation of Men iesse
covetous than Poets, so great a desire they have to enter into the Kingdom of
Heaven, where it is as difficult for a Rich Man to enter, as it is for a Cable
to pass through the eye of a Needle; They therefore swallow their wealth all
at once, like a pill, to make have thither with the greater ease. You ought not
to enquire how deep we did drink, nor what were the Jests that did pass
amongst us. But because I did swear once or twice. By the Death of Destiny, as
I did before in St. James his Street, they demanded of me, wherefore I was so
bold; for they said, I did but mock them with it, who could not compose one
Stanza wherein they made not mention of Fate or Destiny, the better to
accommodate their Verse. By the Head of Fate, (said I) you are great Ignorants,
and do not understand your own Profession. Belly of the three Sisters! Do you
not observe that I swear like a Poet. You your selves, who do no more believe
in God than Diagoras, or Vaninius, do yet swear by him at every word, as if you
were such Devout Christians that you would always have his Name in your
mouths. Observe that I did speak this unto them, because the greatest part of
them were Libertines; but their free and gallant humor (and which in this
particular is no doubt to be commended) did not take the least offense at my
reproaches. Certainly they have in them many better things than are to be found
in the Vulgar, and more especially in this, that they did not the less esteem
me to see me so ill accommodated. But to balance this, they had Vices again as
insupportable. They were the most fantastical and inconstant people in the
world. Nothing is more frail than their Friendship; for less than nothing they
will melt away, like the Ice of one night. Nothing again is so uncertain as
their judgment, it changed at every turn of Discourse, and on Occasions most
unreasonable. Their Communication would be often so extravagant, as if they had
been hardly endued with natural sense. When I recited my Verses to them, they
would tell me to my face they were the best in the world, but I being gone,
they would speak ill of them to the first Man they met with, and in the same
manner they would serve one another, so that by their own means the Reputation
of every one of them miscarried. Moreover, they did all addict themselves to
write with too much affectation, and fant'sied nothing more. Walking in the
streets, they always muttered to themselves between their teeth, and had some
Song or other by the end. All their Entertainments were only on that Subject.
Being to describe the Heroic Actions of some great personages, they would not
inflame their own Spirits with the least Generosity, and not so much as one
Action that was commendable would dignify their own persons. Besides, they were
the most presumptuous people in the world, as I already have affirmed. Every
one of them did believe he did better than all the rest, and would be most
impatient if they did not follow his opinion. I perceived by that, how much
reason the Vulgar had to misprize them, and oftentimes I said within my self,
that they made profession of a great Art, of which they were unworthy, and on
which they did pull the hatred of the people by their ill practicing it. They
became afterward so odious to me, that I endeavored to avoid them with as
much diligence as a Pilot does the Quicksands

I had only the desire to preserve the acquaintance of one named Musidorus, who
was he who first of all did meet me in the Booksellers shop, because I
conceived I might truly say that he was of a good disposition, and me-thought
he had something in his Extravagance which rendered his Company agreeable to
mine, who nevertheless would not frequent it, but to raise delight by it.
Having met him in the street, he acquainted me where his lodging was, and I
promised to give him a Visit. He would never tell me before where he lay, and
without all doubt the Cause was, because he lay in a Garret, and had no Bed but
the cold Floor, nor Pillow but a Stone, for which he was beholding to a Mason.
His Equipage was so miserable, and so extremely poor, that I took compassion on
him. It was an Axiom not to be disputed, that when he did wear a Sword, he did
on that day wear no Garters, for his Garters were his Scarf, in which he
carried his Sword. There was but one Month in the year in which he lived not
in extreme poverty, and then it was, when to gain him some sustenance he sold
fish-books, if he had money to buy them. I remember in that time that one of his
Acquaintance who would be sure to have him to run himself out of breath, did
bring unto him the Practice of the Chanters at the Newbridge, and with all told
him, That if he would make Songs for them, he should be sure to be well paid,
and no M^n should know any thing of it. Musidorus seeing the profit to be sure
enough, did not refuse the profer, but received a piece of six Souse in Earnest
of one of the Wives of the Musicians, and sat up all that Night to make his
Verses, and in the Morning very early did give them to her. Immediately a Tune
was set unto them, and they were sung at the Bridge Foot, but no body would buy
them. Those who sold Hooks did understand nothing of them, they were not
according to their style, insomuch that the Woman did bring them back again,
and demanded her money: But he refusing to deliver it, you may imagine with how
many, and with how loud Injuries he was assaulted. She told him, she would be
even with him, and that he should hear further from her, and did rail against
him, calling him all to naught, alleging that none would buy his Songs, they
were full of Conjuration and of the Names of Devils, And she had reason so to
do, for neither she, nor the Courtiers of the Brazen Horse could understand his
Madrigals, nor what he meant by Bacchus the thigh-born Infant, or by the three
Fatal Spinsters. Nevertheless Musidorus did go on muttering to himself.

Apollo with his Violl in his hand,
On his high Hill with forked Thunder cleaven,
Did play unto the Burgesses of Heaven,
And where the Thespian waves themselves advance,
Before the Gods he did a Pavin dance.
The rest of his Verse was incomparable, and I would fain call it to mind, to
give you a greater contentment. Nevertheless I must enlarge my Account upon
his Poverty. It was reported, that he was constrained to seek out some old
pieces of rotten Timber to warm him, and having bought an old logge, he was in
the way homewards overtaken by two Men of his own acquaintance, to whom he
said, That he had met with some dissolute persons who would have beaten him,
and was therefore enforced to buy that piece of Wood to make his party good
against them; And having covered it with his Cloak, be passed through the
Street, and incountring with three Lackeys that assaulted him, he said, I
believe these unhappy boys have a desire to break my Lute; whereupon it was
told me, that they did beat him in good earnest, and that his cloak falling off
his shoulders, they discovered the burden which he carried, and made use of it
to beat him the more soundly with it.

When I met him (calling to mind his former poverty, and the manifold affronts,
which by reason of his poverty he had received) I was amazed to see him, for he
was become quite another man than heretofore he had been. I could not imagine
what secret he had used to change the Physiogmony of his Fortune. He was most
brave in his apparel, and I began much to envy his good Fortune: I believed
that he had found out the Philosophers Stone, and that by his means I might
become rich, if I would but court him with my service, insomuch that one
morning I arose before the Sun, only to wait upon him, and not to fail to give
him a salutation before he was gone forth. I found him in bed, for you are to
understand that the greatest part of these Gentlemen do seldom rise until it be
eleven of the Clock, and that most of their verses are composed when they are
in bed. When I was in his Chamber, and demanded pardon for my early visit, he
testified unto me, that I did him much honor, and opened all the Casements to
let in the day light, whereby he might receive the better advantage to dress
himself. I observed then, that instead of a Night Cap he had winded the Linings
of his Breeches about his head, and that all the movables of his Chamber were
reduced to a little stool of three Feet, and to a Coffer of Wood which served
for a Table, Cupbord, and Stool: The Teek of his Bed was of Stuff, but so old
and used, that it was impossible to discern of what color it had been, and was
gnawed by more Rats and Mice than were in that great fight described by Homer.
All this caused me to judge that the riches of Musidorus were not so great as I
conceived, and that the little which he had he had put upon his back to make
the fairer outside.

As I was on that thought he took me off from my meditation, by an extravagant
cry which he made in calling out unto his Servant, Ho Calcaret, I am about to
rise, Bring me my Silk stockings of the Correction and amplification of the
Inamout'd Nymph, Give me my Breeches of great Olympus, and my Doublet of the
Marygold, I doubt not but my Cloak of the Laurels of Triumph will come after
them in good time. These appellations did so amaze me that I could not find out
the explication, For neither the Nymphs, nor the Heaven, nor the plants, were
either Doublet or Breeches, nor yet Stuff to make them. My only conceit was
that he had some Fashion, or Color, or Stuff, which were new and unknown, and
so called by him; Afterward having called for his Garters of Celadon, and his
Roses of Parthenice, I was so curious that I demanded of him the signification
of those words, when he, making a faint smile which did not pass so far as his
Mustachioes, did reply unto me, Why Sir, Do not you understand what I speak?
Know then, that my honest labor does oftentimes procure me some small sum of
Silver, which I do employ to cloth my self, and the better to know and enjoy
my habiliments, I do call them by the names of the Books which I have written,
and sometimes of the Silver which I have paid for them. If you please to take
the pains to travel to the Palace, you shall hear those Books cried which I
have named, and for which, not long since, I have been paid. They are at this
present the entertainments of the most beautiful part of the world, and there
is no waiting Gentlewoman so low to so high in understanding, who desires not
to read them to learn to complement by them. But what? Do you not think well
that the Booksellers should give us some recompense for our labor; Are not we
so well bottomed as the Advocats who will be paid for what they write?
Understand, that if ever there was any restraint of shame in that
consideration, it is now all taken away, since a Marquis has discovered the
way unto us, and although the money was given to the Grooms of his Chamber, as
a recompense of the Courtesy, yet it turned to the profit of the Master; it
did exempt him from paying for that time any more wages to his Servants. As for
that Author which you know, who imagines that he sleeps in the Arms of
Eloquence, and that his works are Children who will provide for their own
marriage. Do you believe although he is a rich man that he gave away his Book
for nothing* No, no, he sold it at a good rate, and I could name unto you many
others who have done the like: For my self I am of that number, and do believe
that I shall merit praise by it, for if my Books were worth nothing there is
not any one would buy them.

I could answer nothing to those words, and began seriously to consider with my
self the misery of that poor Scholar, who only made Books to procure him a
lively hood. I then began to sweat that we ought not to wonder at all, that
Books for the most part were worth so little, for making them as big as they
can, according to the sum of money they desire to have, they chop in many
things which are unworthy to be printed, and moreover they do write with so
much have that they commit an infinite number of faults for want of
consideration.

His little Lackey having at the last brought him his Clothes, he did rise,
when behold at the same time a Poet one of his Friends did enter into the
Chamber, to whom he said that he would show him a Copy of verses which he had
made the day before* On those words he pulled out of his Pocket a Paper which
was as greasy as the Leaves of an old Mass Book, but reading the first Stanza
he said unto us, Gentlemen, I beseech you excuse me, for I must do that which
neither Kings nor Emperors can do by their Ambassadors. I use unto you no
Ceremony at all, you know the honest liberty which is now in fashion at the
Court. And, on those words having left us, he was about one quarter of an hour
at the Privy, where, his Spirits wandering amongst the flowers of his poetry, he
had quite forgot us. But returning at last he said unto us, Gentlemen, Let us
go on with my verses, and speaking those words he presented us with a nasty
Paper eaten round about, and in the middle of it a soft and a thich spot of
yellow, which did so surprise us that we knew not whether to laugh, or to be
angry. But he having recovered his Spirits which his imagination had
preoccupyed, did acknowledge that it was only a wast and a foul paper which he
had brought unto us instead of his Verses, and said unto us, Gentlemen, Excuse
my oversights, you are both of my profession, you know that the strength of our
imagination does sometimes so violently possess us, that we know not what we
do our selves. I have brought hither another Paper than that which I did
promise, I will go look out that in which my verses were written.

Speaking those words he returned from whence he came, but he found not the
Paper which he looked for, by a mistake he had wiped his Posteriors with it. In
the mean time I could not but laugh excessively, and his friend being
discontented at it, did say unto me. What ayl you Sir? we have seen nothing
extraordinary. It is not long since (I remember) that Musidorus did commit the
like merry mistake. He came from the Privy with the defiled Paper in his hand,
and in the multiplicity of other thoughts, conceiving, it to be his Hand
kerchief he did wipe his beard with it. He is very subject to such
transportations of Spirit, and oftentimes takes one thing for another: Being
one day at the Table of a Grand Signior, thinking to spit on the ground, and to
put a piece of meat that was commended to him on his Trencher, he did spit on
his Trencher, and did let the meat fall, to the ground. As the Poet did speak
these words Musidorus returned and not finding the Paper, was constrained to
repeat his verses by heart. After that, we disputed of a Mask that was to be
danced at the Court, on which subject he told us that he had undertake to write
something, although he was not yet paid for it. I conceived with my self it
was very requisite that I should attempt to write something on that Subject the
better to be acquainted with the fashions of the Court, and without making
semblance of any thing, I enquired who was the Lady that was to represent the
Queen, determining to make some Verses for her.

Some days afterward having composed them, it was my Fortune to encounter
with a Gentleman that had a part in the charge of the Mask, who much approved
my Design. I caused then certain Copies which I had composed to be printed, and
the day in which the Mask was to be danced, being come, I repaired to the
Louvre with my Verses under my Arm, having at least three hundred Copies of
them well printed, and set forth in the best manner that possibly I could, so
that I was at a great charge in the performance; but the honor which I hoped
to receive for the composing of so brave a Work, did cause me to make no
reckoning of my cost or labor. You are to understand, that I was so glorious
in my own conceit, that I seemed to be a person very necessary to the State,
and that to serve the Kings, as I did in the Mask, was to serve him in a
business of the greatest importance. I acquainted all whom I knew of it, and
some whom I did not know, but more especially an Advocate of my Country, who
being turned out of his place of a Lieutenant im the Election of a City, for
some folly which he had committed, was now come to dwell in Paris, hoping that
a Proctor of the Court who was his Kinsman, would get some practice for him. He
had so great a desire to see this brave Mask, of which I had told him so many
wonders, that he was resolved he would venture hard, but he would find
admission to it. He believed that he might enter as easily as into the Shows
at the Fair of St. Germans, which he had seen not long before for a Souse.
Moreover he determined to take with him his Wife and Children, with their
Nurse, because that courtesy is common amongst the Nobility toward Ladies; he
also remembered, that when the Comedians played in the City from whence he came,
he always entered for nothing, any, and had a place kept for him. He therefore
did put on his best Cassock, and his Holiday Cloak, and I know not how, he
forgot his Robe of the Court, to render him more venerable, and gain him better
respect. As for his Wife, she was clothed in her Nuptial habit, which was not
much worn, for she did put it on but four times in a year, and that was at some
extraordinary meeting, to show her self in all her pomp. I was much amazed when
I beheld them, as I was waiting with many others at the little Gate which
through the long Galleries does lead to Burbon Hall, The Advocate marched in
magnificent array, with a Senatorical countenance. His Cassock was of Damask,
and, if I hear the truth, it had been sometimes the Curtains of an old bed, and
had been dyed from Red into Black. The pieces which were sowed together with
great Symmetry were so large, that there were but three from his girdle to his
collar, two on one side, and one on the other. His Cloak was lined, at least to
appearance, with Plush unshorn, yet the Detractors did affirm, It was only a
Preface that made a little show in the forepart of it, but in the body of it
there was no lining at all; but howsoever it was, I know well enough that it
was the same Cloak which served him in all seasons, and that in Summer he
caused all the Plush to be ripped out, but what was on the Cape, and caused it
to be put in again when the leaves began to fall from the Trees, having learned
that secret from Monsieur Alaric in the abridgement of his long Studies. As for
Madamoisell his Wife, she had a Jump on of yellow Satin, greasy all over, and
a Petticoat of another color, but all before it in the same Condition as was
the Jump, and a Collar so well mounted, that I know not to what better to
compare her, than to St. George his Virgin in our Churches, or to those Puppies
which are wriggling their tails at the doors of our Chambermaids. Her Nurse was
more odly attired in a Coyf that had two flapps, like two ears, falling down on
her shoulders, she carried a child in her arms, and had another a little bigger
that walked by her, and I have often laughed to my self, when since I have see
in Contemplation the strange Garbs, and postures of this Family, and methinks
at this present I have them in my eye, but especially the Advocat, who in great
state stalked before them, and at every other step almost would turn to his
Wife, and said unto her, Sweetheart, Take fast hold by my Cloak, and Nurse, Be
you sure that you do not lose the sight of us, and above all things have a
care that when we are entering in the Child does not cry.

This was spoken with so graceful an Action, that all the Courtiers who were
present took notice of the simplicity of the person, and being willing to make
some sport, they did withdraw themselves a little, to give him leave to make
his approaches to the Gate. It is true, that diverse who were present did
conceive him to be the Advocate of some Grand Signior; for otherwise he would
have never had that Assurance as to have presumed to have entered. He arived
just as Geropole, who was then Captain of the Guard, did open the Gate to let
some of the Dancers in. The Advocate did put forwards, and approaching to him,
did speak this studied Speech, Sir, Having understood by the Renown of high
sounding tongues, that at this day there is a great Feast within, full of all
maskfull Recreations, Curiosity, which ordinarily does spur all noble hearts,
has brought me hither, to behold these gallant sports of the King and the
Queens; May it please you therefore to introduce me to them with my little
Family, who will always inculcate it in our memories, as the benefit of your
affability.

You must imagine, that he did speak these words with a demure countenance, and
with the same accent, as if he had made an Oration before the Rector of an
University, and you may judge withal what contentment this did give to
Geropole, who was one of the most conceited Men of all the Court. And as he was
full always of witty replies, so on this occasion he did not forget himself.
Imagine then, that you do see him without a Hat, and a Satin Cap on his head,
a Bunch of Keys in one hand, and every one as bigg as the Keepers key of the
Common Jayl; In his other hand a handkerchief, with which he is always wiping
the sweat from his face. In this Posture he was, and having a little rested
himself, he took his staff which was close by him, and fetching breath at every
word, he said unto the Advocate, By my troth Sir, You will hardly believe how
weary I am with beating Men away, I have done nothing else all this day, and I
admire how you can have the Conscience to put me to this trouble again; but I
see I must recollect my strength, and I swear unto you, if you will but stay
one half quarter of an hour longer, I will beat you your belly full.

Geropole did speak these words so pleasantly, that all those who were present
did begin to laugh, and seeing the small account he made of the Advocate, there
came a throng much like unto the waves of the Sea when the Sea is angry, and
carried the Advocate a great way off with all his Family. He in vain complained
of the great discourtesy that was offered to him; I was hurried up and down
amongst the rest, and took no care to approach to his assistance, being
unwilling to skreen betwixt him and the abuse, and afraid that the Courtiers
seeing me to be of his acquaintance, would make a mock of me; I conceived that
he having received that affront, the Pages and the Lackeys would have recourse
unto him, and play upon him by turns, which accordingly they did, and thrusting
him from one side to another, at the last he fell down in the dirt, and it was
told me, that the Plush of his Cloak was as dirty as the hairs of a
Water-Spaniel who had been 15 days seeking his Master. As for the Mistress and
the Nurse, they saved themselves with their Children; for in those days
Barbarousnesse and Cruelty were not so great at Court, as to injure Women and
little Children, and there was not any who had a desire to meddle with them;
for they were so foul, that there were none in all the Press who would deal in
such vile merchandise. But howsoever it was, neither the Husband nor the Wife
had ever afterward a desire to see a Mask at the Court.

But how came it about that they could let this poor Lawyer alone with his
Damask Cassock, without affronting him with all manner of farther Persecutions,
seeing all those whom the Pages did encounter (who were in the habit of
Citizens) did suffer a thousand Indignities? I knew one Gentleman my self very
well qualified, who being in mourning apparel, and therefore not known, was
taken for a Citizen, and handled rudely enough before the Scoundrels would let
him go: For my self I thrust my self forward among the rest, and so prevailed
that I came up close to Geropole, to whom having showed the verses for the
Mask, he without any difficulty gave me admittance. In the same manner many
others were admitted who were acquainted with the Dancers, some carrying in
their hands one property for the Mask, and some another, and it was not
troublesome unto them to perform the office of a Groom, because upon that
account the Door freely was opened to them.

When I was entered with this Company, my troubles ended not, I was to pass
through so many Gates, and to traverse so many Chambers, that I thought I never
should have done. I found a great difficulty in all, and that my passeport in
my hand was very necessary for me. The Throng besides was so great that it
denied me entrance as well as the Guard. At the last I came into the long
Gallery of Burbon which butts forth upon the River where of necessity I must
stay.

Many Courtiers were there who desired to know what I had in my hand, and
beholding the papers made up in length as if it were Linen, they were some of
them so ignorant as to demand of me, Is the King going to Supper? Are not those
Napkins which you carry? I made answer, They are Verses for the Mask, whereupon
one of them who seemed to understand me, drew more near, and said, They are
Grants of Pardons, and ever as I walked up and down seeking some place to
repose my self, One or other of them thinking to speak wisely would cry out
Papers, papers; There is one who carries Papers. Those words were accompanied
with a contempt, which made me understand, that whatsoever things these Beasts
did see, were they never so well done, they took them all for Libells, and that
Sciences were such a horror to them, that they were sick at heart when they saw
but a Paper, from whence they would take a Subject for their mockeries. But
howsoever it was, my papers served me in good stead, for there being nothing in
the room but bare walls, I sat upon them, and saw many great Signiors, who
being quite weary of walking up and down, were constrained at last like so many
Apes to sit on their Tails.

After I had been there a little time, the door was opened, at which I was to
go to Burbon hall. The throng was so great to enter in there, that I thought
we had been all put into a Press to have our quintessence extracted.
Nevertheless we came all at last safe and sound into the Hall where the Mask
was to be danced, where I found all the places taken up, and knew not on which
side to turn me; I endeavored to make room for all the world, but no body for
me. One did toss me on the one side, and another on the other, so that I
believed my Body was made a Baloon, I was so bandyed up and down amongst them.
One of the Guard who was my friend did deliver me from that persecution, and
setting me on the Scaffold where the Musicians for the Mask were to play, he
told me that I should have a place there whether they would or no, until such
time as the Mask began. Being there I looked for no other seat but my papers
that were my faithful Companions, and no sooner had I sat down upon them, but
the Musicians came. They had all of them their Lessons pricked in loose papers,
and having no desk on which to place them, they believed that I was set there
on purpose to servet them. One of them took a Pin from his Ruff, another from
his sleeve, and pinned their papers on my cloak, and I had some of them fastened
to my back, and some under my Arms; One of them did fasten his paper to my
Hatband, but that had been nothing, were not another of them so impudent as to
go about to pin also some of them upon my Breast. I told him, I could not
endure the indignity, and that it would be very prejudicial to me, but he gave
me good words, and represented to me, that in that place we must be helpful to
one another, I was so afraid that they would force me thence, or beat me, that
I was brought to that point as to tell them, that they might fasten their
papers where they would. One of them therefore did put his paper to my mouth to
have me hold it there, and I kept close my teeth and my lips to retain what was
given me, like a Spaniel that fetches and carries whatsoever is thrown him.
The Musicians round about me were tuning of their Instruments, when Geropole
perceiving me, did remember that I was one of the Poets of the Mask, and called
me to deliver my verses as well as the others. Ah Monsieur, said I, How would
you have me to come unto you? Do you not see how I am hung round with Music?
Opening my mouth to speak those words the Paper fell down, which made Geropole
laugh, and continue his mirth he said unto me, Come away, and make all the have
you can, The Queen does stay for you, she would see the verses which you have
made for her. When I heard those words, I was so earnest to be gone, that
without considering I had more Verses fastened on me, than on the Corner of a
wall, I began lightly to come down the Scaffold; you might have then beheld all
the Musicians to take fast hold of me, some with their hands, and some with the
Bows of their Viols to have their Music again. To represent unto you their
several postures, imagine that you saw those who in the last years Almanac
would take the Moon, some of them with Ladders, which they could make either
long or short, as they pleased themselves, others with hooks, and some with
pincers. At the last those Disciples of Bocan did recover all their papers,
some parts of them being torn, and under the conduct of Geropole I did go to
offer my verses to the Queen. I believe that those who were paid for making
theirs, did look upon me with a very evil eye, but they could not fear that
their pension should be taken from them to be given to me, for I was not
clothed well enough to make them believe there were any good parts in me.

I will not undertake to describe unto you the inventions of the Mask, I will
only say, that I saw there the Representations of those wonders which I took so
much pleasure to read in the Romances. I saw Rocks move, I saw the Heavens, the
Sun, and all the Stars to appear in one Hall, and Chariots flying in the Air; I
heard Music as sweet as that of the Elysian Fields, and in effect I believed
that Arganda again had brought her Enchantments to the world. That was all the
benefit I received for sitting up so many nights in making my verses, for in
that way I hoped neither for profit nor honor. Nevertheless my Books did run
in my head, and I conceived than if I should dedicate a History which I had in
the Press to a Noble man, it would conduce to my advancement. Amongst all those
of the Court I made choice of one from whom I hoped for much favor, to which
purpose I sought the acquaintance of the Gentleman who did govern him; I
expected all assistance from him, and counted to him in brief the services I
was capable to do for Philemon, for so was the Signior called, whom I desired
to serve, I told him I could play on the Lute, and that I had extraordinary
Songs, and moreover could tell the merryest Tales in the world, and such as
would make Heraclitus to laughed. He found proofs enough of all what I said, but
it became a^inderance to me in my advancement to Philemons service: He believed
that if I should possess his ear, he should be quickly dis^esteemed himself.
And indeed qualities such as mine had a just caust to be suspected by him. He
was so far from assisting me to speak unto his Lord, that one morning when I
waited at his Gate to present my Book unto him, he came to demand it of me, and
told me that he would dispose Philemon to the acceptance of it, and some
Gentlemen who were with him being gone, he would call me up to him to salute
him my self; I who was without deceit, and unacquainted with the dissimulation
of the Court, did forthwith give him my Book, and he did carry it into
Philemons Chamber, where I cannot learn what he did with it, for I never spoke
with any one who at that time was with him. Not long after Philemon coming
forth with a great Retinue, he attended on him, but the last of all, and told me
that he had not the opportunity to commend me to his Master on that day, that
it was enough that he had received the Present of my Book, which could not have
been better if I had put it into his own hand my sell;f Having spoke those
words, he turned his head another way, to speak to some one e^se, and minded me
no more. On the next Morning I addressed my self again unto him, to importune
him to bring me to Philemon, but to no purpose at all. He seeing me stand at
the Gate did come unto me, and said, What do you stay here for, you do but get
cold in your Feet? Having heard those words which testified the small desire he
had that I should see Philemon, as soon as he did turn his back I did go away
without bidding him Farewell.

I did not only think he was afraid it would be a disadvantage to him if I
should serve Philemon, but withal, that he did hinder me from delivering my
Book unto him, because he had a bad opinion, as well of the Courtesy as of the
understanding of his Master, for he gave me a subject to believe, that the
reason why he did not present me to him, was the fear he had I should know he
had not the spirit to speak three words of course to thank me for my love, and
it was possible that he could not read my Book, and did no more understand what
was in the Epistle, than if it were in the language of the Indians; I will not
say, howsoever, that he was so ignorant, for Plutarch in his Works does truly
affirm, that Detraction is one of the greatest Vices. Returning from him, I bad
the Devil take both the Book and the Lord Philemon also, and did protest that I
would commit no more such follies, to dedicate Books to such stupid persons,
who do believe they do much oblige you, if they only but receive them, and will
not see you, but as seldom as possibly they can, fearing you will importune
them for one favor or another.

Nevertheless I addressed my self to a Gentleman of Philemons acquaintance, to
whom I complained of my misfortune, I satisfied him that I was not so mercenary
as to desire any Present, but only, his countenance, and that he would be
pleased to procure me a pension from the King; for although I was but young, I
had some desings so advantageous to the State, that they ought to be
acknowledged. How (answered he) Are you so little acquainted with the affairs
of the world, that you do expect a pension? I have expended above three hundred
thousand liuvres in the service of the King, and yet receive not so much as one
Souse from hi^ (...) could not choose but smile at those words, for he never
had performed any service for q^ Majesty, and I could not but say unto him,
Sir, I make no question (...) th^ave spent above three hundred thousand
liuvers, since you came first (...) Court, but whether it were in the Kings
service or not, is that which remains to be proved. Every one knows the
superfluous expenses you have been at. Would you have the King to pay for the
gorgeous apparel which every work you change? and must he be at (...) expenses
which your Wenches do put you to? Must your Debauch^ (...) put into the number
of the services due to the Crown? You may a^ were me with the same confidence,
as a certain Switzer made his com^or no, public Minister of the State; Being
come to Paris to enter himse^ at but Kings service amongst others of his
Nation, by the temptation of the go^wn of his nature, he did give a visit to
the Ladies, amongst whom he had not (...) conversed but he had got the Pox, for
the cure whereof he addressed him (...) to one of the most famous Chirurgions
in Paris: He demanded of hun a roun^ sum of Silver to perform the Cure,
insomuch, that to provide the Sum he cansed an Ordnance to be drawn up, and
carried it to the Secretary of State to have it signed. I leave unto you to
judge how he mocked at him for it, and dismissed him, not without many checks,
but he persisted in his Demand, and affirmed, that it was Reason the King
should pay his Chirurgiou, because he had got the Pox in his Service* He
deserved, as he thought, to be as well recompensed for it, as if he had
received some remarkable wourds in a battle, and persuading himself that he was
dealt with very unjustly, he would not serve the King any longer. For ought
that I can perceive, you are one of his humor, and have no reason to be
discontented at the King.

I expressed this with such a confidence, and* freedom of an ingenuous Spirit,
that he unto whom I spoke durst not seem openly to be offended at it, and was
enforced to turn all into a pardonable Mirth. Nevertheless he would have me to
believe it to be as he said, and for my ^elf, I protested to meddle no more
with such Barbarians. Observing all my hopes lost, and repr^senting to my self
what a shame it was unto me, to see that in my Book there was an Epistle so
advantageous to Philemon, of which I could get no better an account, and to
whom I never spoke, I repaired to the Bookseller to alter all the first leaves.
My Courage was too great to suffer any affront, and were he a Prince that was
descended from the highest Blood, I should be sensible of the Injury.
Nevertheless having considered of it, I did permit that the Book should be
sold as it was, persuading my self, That the people understanding the little
profit I had gained, would be the more exa^perated against Philemon, and would
withal believe that all the praises I had given him were but mockeries.

After that, I determined with my self to write no more Books, but for my self
only, without traveling to get any thing but Rheumes by attending at the Gates
of the Courtiers: And Fortune at that time being desirous to gratify me, my
Mo^id send me a considerable sum of money, with which I apparelled my self in a
fashion that infinitely pleased me. It was in the time of Summer, my suit was
of Dove-coloured Taffata, with an eye of blew in it; I did put my self to a
lower Pension, and shorter Commons than before, and the money which thereby was
saved, I employed to s^e my Cloak with another blew Taffata. You are by the way
to observe the goodly Customs which Vanity has introduced, and which the
people do delight to follow. A Man who has a cloak but of single Taffata, is
less esteem^d than he who has his cloak lined through with the same, and he
is not so highly reputed who bath a Serge cloak lined through with Serge, as he
who does wear a thin cloak but of Silk only. Amonst Women also there is the
same Vanity of b^istinction, especially amongst the Wives of Citize^ They who
have the^ hair bushing forth, and do wear a chain of gold hanging d^wn upon
the^ breasts, are far more esteemed than those who are not so attired.

When I contemplate of the Va^lty of Men, I cannot wonder enough how their
Spirits, which no doubt are capable of the greatest things, should so confine
themselves to the most abject considerations in the world. A thousand idle
fellows who walked up and down the Streets, did turn back to look upon me, and
I, who am endued with that (...) from Heaven, as to underst nd their (...) told
^s, did perceive well enough that some of them were puffed up with a Premore^on,
because their clothes we^ peradventure beter than mine, Herac^ ^ers, who were
not so brave, did envy my happiness to see me came ^attired.

ved (...) that time there passed not a day but I walked constantly five or six
times (...) fore Dianaes gate, to make her understand, by my glances, the
extreme affection which I did bear unto her. But that was uneffectual, for
being full of attractions, she had others besides my self, who courted her, and
I believe she could not persuade her self that I was more amorous than the
rest. I resolved therefore to write a Letter to her, to discover my affection,
which I did draw up in such modest terms, that the gravest apprehensions could
not be offended at it. You know in what a strain we do do proceed on that
subject. Therefore I will speak nothing to you concerning that Love-letter, but
you are to understand, that I had made also a Copy of Verses, which I had sent
with it, I remember it was a Sonnet on her fair Paps, which since I was amorous
of her, I observed did every day more visibly than other advance their soft
Rounds, and did increase by degrees. And because I have it in my Memory, I will
repeat it to you; not to demonstrate that I make good Verse, for I dare assure
you I can recite a far better piece, but only that I will not in silence pass
by this private particularity.

ON those fair swelling Breasts do I
Every day to grow epsy,
Two such Nipples that they make
The World them for Loves Throne to take.
My Heart does love that Mansion fair
Better than Heaven, or Earth, or Air,
And fond, its flames it multiplies,
As they more high and round do rise.
Grant you above that I may be
There safe possessed, when I see
Them come to full Maturitie.
And that no checks or Spies ensue,
Permit that, without much ad^,
I may both kiss, and feel them too.
But peradventure it will be objected, these Lines are too vain to commend to a
young Virgin, and of a good Family; I believed that she could not take
exceptions at them, and because the Letter assumed not so much liberty, I used
a clean invention to have both delivered into her hands. Understanding that her
Father was gone abroad into the fields, and that she was at home alone with a
Maid Servant (for her Mother was dead) I sent a Lackey of my friends with some
papers in his hand to demand if her Father were within or not. It being assured
no, he presented the papers to her, and entreated her on his return to put them
into his hand, saying they concerned his Master whom her Father knew very well,
for her Father was his Advocate. The Papers being delivered, he made have away,
and Diana suspected nothing, for it is the custom of Lackeys to be always
running: Diana knowing that her Father would not sudenly return had the
curiosity to open that paper which was too handsomely folded up to be a Bill of
Law, and by this means that which I did hope for was accomplished, and she (as
since I have understood) finding that both the papers did address themselves
unto her self, did believe that they came from the Lackeys Master, who
oftentimes had made profession of his Love unto her.

As soon as she did see him, she blushing said unto him, Sir, you have a Lackey
who does not well perform the offices committed to his trust; I presume that
you did give him Papers to be delivered to my Father and my self, those which
were to be presented unto me I received, but I am afraid that he has committed
some mistake in those which were to be communicated to my Father. The young man
not knowing what answer to return did believe she had a desire to put a trick
upon him, and denied that he had ever sent any Letters by his Lackye to be
delivered to her or any else: But Diana confirming that she had received them,
and acquainting him with the Lackye who did present them, he presently
collected that they came from some Gentleman who unknown unto her was enamoured
of her, and observing she confidently did believe that he was the Author of
them, he first demanded of her, if the Letter and the Verses were acceptable to
her, and finding by her words that there was nothing in them which procured the
least shadow of discontent from her, he said unto her, that he could no longer
conceal that it was indeed himself who had sent those papers to her, because he
did conceive it necessary that she should understand the great desire he had to
serve her; Moreover, he had understanding enough to assure her, that if she had
refused to receive that present, he had ready the invention to chide his Lackey
for his miscarriage, and to tell him that the papers were of great importance,
which contained matters of Law, and needed the assistance of her Father.
Howsoever, to keep all things with greater secrecy, he advised her for her
part to persist to speak unto his Lackey as before, and to inform him, how much
he was deceived in the execution of his charge, being to deliver those Letters
to some other young Gentlewoman, and not unto her self. He afterward
understood by his Groom the Commission which I had given to him; Nevertheless
he so continued to persuade Diana that it was he who composed those verses,
that she was constrained to make protestations to him, that she believed what
he said; and because ingenious Spirits were very pleasing to her, believing
that he was the Master of an excellent understanding, she did begin to give
more respect unto him than to all the rest of those who courted her.

After this I made many more verses for her, and meeting one day Diana's
Servant in the Street, I said unto him, Honest friend, give this Song to
Mademoiselle Diana, The other day I did promise it unto her. The Servant made
no difficulty at all to take the paper and carry it to Diana, who could not but
believe it came from the same party as before, because the Gentleman who had
spoken to her on the day before, might well have given them unto him, because
he would trust no more his own Groom with the carriage of such papers.

But to make Diana understand that the verses did entirely proceed from my
self, on the next Evening, as she sat at the Gate, after Supper, I passing by
did sing aloud one of those Stanzaes which I had sent unto her. She, who had a
good Memory, did remember where she had seen them, and immediately did fasten
her eye upon me.

But that was not sufficient, I did write another Letter to her, and did
contrive a way how it might arrive to her own hand. I did thrust it therefore
between the two lids of her Coffer which was on the Bench which she had at St:
Severins, and the next day being Sunday, as she opened her Coffer, to take from
thence her Muff, and a little Book of Devotion which she had put therein, she
found my Letter. This Letter contained many extreme assurances of affection,
and withal informed her, that if she had a desire to understand who it was did
write it, she should observe him, who for the time to come would seat himself
in the Church directly over against her, being clothed in a Suite of Grass
green, which I had made on purpose to be the more agreeable unto her; And
because she had found my Letter in the morning, as she was preparing to go to
Mass, she had the opportunity to read it before she came to Vespers. When she
was there, she might easily discover that I was her Lover, for on the beginning
of the Sermon I placed my self close to her seat, so great a care I had not to
fail in my enterprise. I but slowly moved my eyes, and as it were by a
compass, as an ingenious Artist does make his motions to turn, and my little
murderesse had such an assurance, that although she had wounded my Soul, yet
she looked steadfastly upon me, and peradventure not with so much shamefastness
as I looked upon her: But by reason that her Seat was low, and that there were
so many men directly opposite to it, she, during all the time of the Divine
service, did sit at the lower end of it, that I more fully might behold her. I
knew not well, whether I might call it a cruelty or a courtesy, for in one
Consideration she obliged me, because I loved nothing more passionatly than her
self; but on the other she did me as great an injury, for every one of her
looks did seem to me as an Arrow shot into my heart, which when I returned
home, I found to be wounded all over.

Some days afterward I did meet her in a spacious street, she was on the one
side thereof, and I on the other, and both sides very full of Houses.
Nevertheless, as if attracted by a Loadstone, we came so near to one another,
that when she crossed the way, our heads did almost touch, so much did they
incline to the languishment of our Souls; for this lovely fair one had already
some affection to me. Nevertheless I durst not have accosted her, if it had not
been by the mediation of another, in which Fortune most advantagiously did
favor me; for a Kinsman of this fair Diana, who had been my Companion in the
College, did at that time come to live in the same house with her. I discoursed
with him one day, to understand how her affections were inclined, and repeating
my Verses to him, he assured me that his Cousin had showed them unto him, and
commended the piece to be incomparable. Understanding the good will which this
young Man did bear unto me, I determined with my self to conc^l nothing from
him, and having related to him the story of my Love, I desired him to make
known unto Diana the true Author of those Pieces which she had lying by her. He
failed not to do it, and by the Impulsion of an excessive Love, he did assure
me of all the courtesies which the bravest Personage in the Earth could
express. I did not forget to represent unto him that I was descended from one
of the most noble Families in France. This being discovered to her, the
Gentleman who attributed my Works unto himself, was known to be but a baffler,
and lost her love, and his own reputation at once. Diana desired nothing more
than that I should discourse with her, but she had an old Man to her Father,
who would not with patience endure that she should be seen in the Company of
any who was not of his own Acquaintance, finding his Daughter to be of a
flexible Disposition, and easy to be suborned: Our enterview therefore could
not so suddenly be procured.

In the mean time I ceased not to court her with my eyes, and to be constantly
at the Church as often as she was present. One day I repaired thither with a
Gentleman of my Acquaintance, but she was not yet arrived. I walked up and down
all that afternoon, and being desirous to ease my self, I sat upon a planck
which was fastened to the forepart of her Seat, and I failed not to do my
obeisance to her and to her Sister with her, (who was already married) when
ever they came into their Seat; And because he who was with me should not
discover my affection, I endeavored to conceal the trouble of my Spirit, and
to hold some discourse with him.

This Gentleman was a Courtier, and I did speak something loud unto him, and
sometimes he laughed, and so did I also, not dreaming that I troubled my
Mistress or her Sister. We did rise up sometimes from our Seats, yet pursued
our Discourse, when, behold they did rise from their own places, and did take
the possession of our Seat; I who was as jealous in those affairs as possibly
any One could be, did infallibly believe that they and it on purpose to remove
me, and enforce me to seek out a place to sit farther from them, because they
would not be tormented with the extravagance of our Discourse; Immediately I
withdrew my self, to testify unto them I did so much Reverence them, that I
was touched with much sorrow I had displeased them: Nevertheless I will
confess unto you, I was most extremely passionate; for I was so sensible of
the affront which in my opinion Diana had showed unto me in displacing me, that
in the excess of my Rage, I was even ready to express, that she need not be
so scornful, for I was at the least as good as her self, it being some honor
to her to have a place in my affection, who ought to fix my eyes on Ladies of a
far greater Family than her self.

All the night following I did nothing but ruminate on this affront, and could
take no rest, until I had conferred with the Kinsman of Diana* to whom I
complained of the Injury which I had received, having even tears in my eyes;
whereupon he did begin to laugh so heartily, that it did increase my
affliction, for I believed that he did mock me with it; but observe how he
appeased me. My dear Friend (said he) and in that appellation did embrace me,
You are too blame to be so jealous, as to conceive that Diana both undervalue
you, which is an Incivility far from her Nature: you would laugh your self, if
you knew the Cause of your Mistake; I remember that yesterday in the Evening
when she returned from Church, she complained to her Servant of some Beggar, or
some other nasty Fellow, who finding her Pue open, had loathsomly defiled it,
and that was the Reason which made her to come out of it; but the Cyprian
powder with which you were covered, did happily hinder you from partaking in so
bad a savor.

This Account did much content me, and I had the curiosity to return to the
Church, to prove whether his excuse was true, or not: I found there the ordure
still in the Pue, which was not yet made clean, and the sight of that
filthiness did more please me, than if I had seen the sweetest and the fairest
flowers in the world, because it delivered me from the extremity of my passion.
When Diana understood my suspicion, you may believe that she did not refrain
from laughter; nevertheless it turned all to my advantage, because by that she
might perceive the passion which I had to preserve my self in her good opinion.

It is ordinarily spoken, That the price of things is valued by the difficulty
in the procuring them, and that we undervalue those things which are easy to
be obtained, I never understood that truth better than on this occasion; for
when I found several obstructions in gaining the familiarity of Diana, I most
violently did love her. And now since her Cousin promised me to bring me into
the House, when her Father was gone abroad, and to help me not only to the
Speech of her, but also so far to persuade her, that I should obtain a good
place in her affection, I did perceive my passion to languish by degrees. The
principal Cause was, that although her favors were most considerable, yet I
should never enjoy her, unless I were married to her, and I had too high a
Courage, to stoop so low as to take to Wife the Daughter of a simple Advocate.
And knowing moreover, that every Man of Judgment does affirm, That he is most
happy who can avoid such heavy chains as those of Marriage, they were
altogether a horror to me. Nevertheless, being unwilling it should be said,
that I loved a Maid, and yet did never speak unto her, I did give a visit to
the Kinsman of Diana, and by that means did find the opportunity to confer with
her. She gave me so many proofs of her gentle Spirit, that I reassumed my
former passions, and afterward did seek after, and desire nothing else, but to
see her at her door, at the Church, and at the place where she was accustomed
to walk. She used me with all respects, knowing from what Family I was
descended; And as often as I came to wait upon her, she abandoned all other
Employments to give entertainment to me. But it so fell out, that toward the
end of Summer her favors did end with it, and when I came to her Fathers house
to ask for her, she was constantly denied. This estrangement of her Company,
and affections, I observed every day more and more to continue, and having
heard her speak heretofore of a certain Man whom I knew, who was called
Melibeus, I doubted she had taken an Inclination unto him. He was a Player on
the Lute, and had a Pension from the King, and was one, who putting on his back
all that he could get, was accounted amongst the bravest fellows about the
Court. He was always on Horseback, and I on foor, and it was this which gained
him the heart of inconstant Diana. I understood a^wards by one of my Friends
(who had notice of it) of the familiarity (...) he had with her. I was very
sorry for her particular, for Melibeus could no^ be a Suter to her for any good
Intention, and if I had been her Father, I should never have given way unto it;
for it is known sufficiently, that such libertines as himself do never Court
young Gentlewomen to marry them, there being nothing more certain, than that
Court-Humourists, Poets, and Musicians (whom I rank under one Categorical
notion) do never advance themselves at Court but by playing the Pander. It was
therefore to be feared that Melibeus did endeavor only to gain Diana to
prostitute her to some young Lord, who might afterward be a supporter to him,
and this suspicion did carry with it a great probability of Truth. I was amazed
at the error of Diana to undervalue me for one who had nothing to commend him
but only that he could play on the Lute, neither was he one of the Masters in
that faculty, for I who made no profession of it could play altogether as well
as himself. That which advanced him was his impudence, and has since found
another way that has much enriched him, but the most dishonest one in the
world.

One day he was so bold as to speak unto the King, Sir, I do acknowledge that I
am not worthy to serve you, but I have an extreme desire to be found worthy,
and I hope I shall be able to arrive unto it, if you will be pleased to assist
me. May it please your Majesty to command that some moneys may be assigned to
me to provide me with Instruments that I may be heard to play in the Consort,
there will not be a Lord in the Court that will not follow your exapmle. The
King out of the bounty of his Royal Nature did accord to that which he
demanded, and he did afterward Petition to all the Lords of the Court. To one
he Petitioned for a Violl, to another for a Lute, to this Man for an Orfarian,
and to that Man for a Harp, and unto some for a pair of Virginalls: And after
he had been with two or three who had answered his Petition, the rest were all
constrained to follow their Examples, for it would reflect to their disgrace if
they should be found less liberal than others; Nay there were not so much as
any one of their Grooms, who did not contribute something to him, for if he
would be esteemed a Man of ingenuity, he must adorn the Cabanet of Melibeus. At
the last he had not room enough in which to put all those Instruments that were
given him, he must therefore provide himself with a Magazine. For my part, if
he had demanded any thing of me, I should have been so prodigal as to have
bestowed upon him a Iews-Tromp. He had sent his Lute-maker to a Lord, who had
promised to pay for a Lute for him; The Lord paid a great deal more than it
was worth, and the profit thereof returned to Melibeus, and afterward the
Lute-maker carried the same Lute to another, and it was observed that the same
Lute was paid for by eleven several Lords. This indeed did tend enough to his
advantage, and he persuaded Men to be cheated by example; but Melibeus is not
the first that did undertake to beg with Honor. Nevertheless he did dutifully
oblige himself even to the least of those who had bestowed gifts upon him, and
if they had commanded him to play unto them, he did not fail to obey them. For
all this he pursued his design, and did amasse together such a multitude of
several Instruments, that if he would have sold them, as I believe he now has,
he might be the Master of a very considerable estate.

Those things were enough to render him odious to Diana, but she was overcome
with vain apparences. You are not ignorant that Maids for the most part do love
those Men best who speak most, not regarding whether they speak good sense or
not. The Tongue of Melibeus was a perpetual motion, and he had got in the Court
a certain liberty which I could not be Master of, for I made love with so much
modesty that I durst not take Diana the hand to kiss it. But as I have since
understood by one, who has often seen him with her, he was not so respectfull.
Moreover, when he was in her Company, he would show himself to be very
passionate, and would roll his eyes in his head, as those little Figures under
a Clock, who with their Hammers knocking on the Bell, do give an account of
every hour of the day. He spoke the Romance of a transported Phoebus, and would
thus Court her, Let me kiss your fait Hands my Fair, but O! How prodigious is
the effect, they are of Snow, and therefore they do burn me. If I kiss those
sweet Roses of your Cheeks shall I not be pricked, seeing that Roses are not
without prickles. Much more he would express to the same sense, which he had
all by heart, his humor being always exercised in extravagant passions. When
he was before the great Ladies of the Court, he would seem as if he were struck
with admiration, and would say unto them, Ah Madam, I lose my sigh in seeing
too much of Beauty, and I advenrure to lose my language with it, which in this
ravishment of my Spirit can no longer entertain you; He had spoken more truly,
if he had complained of the loss of his understanding, but all was taken in
good part whatsoever he did utter, and those things were suffered in him, which
would have given just offense if they had proceeded from another.

I do believe there was not any one but Diana that did esteem him, although to
speak the truth I do believe he was not much inamoured of her. The Vanity of
the Courtier was more agreeable to her than was my modesty, and she gave him
all the occasions that she could to speak unto her. She would be sure to be at
the Gate at those hours in which he was accustomed to ride that way, and
oftentimes she would invite him into the house. I was possessed with a violent
desire to understand in what degree of favor I was with her, but she returned
answer she was indisposed in her health, and could not see any one on that day,
whereupon I determined to borrow a Lackey of my friend, for I kept not one my
self, and he supplied me according to my own desire. I did send him to Diana as
if she came from Melibeus, to understand if she were at leisure, that he might
wait upon her, she returned answer, yes, and that she should be glad to see
him. This being reported to me, I knew for certain that Melibeus did altogether
possess her heart, and that he had also gained the affections of her Kinsman.
It much grieved me, I confess, but I protest unto you I entertained rather
thoughts of Indignation than of Jealousy; For it seemed to me, that Diana
forsaking me, and chosing Melibeus was sufficiently punished for her own
blindness, and why should I be grieved at that for which she ought herself to
lament; I did comfort my self with this, that to Court her any more was to
employ time to loss; she will have a Courtier, let her therefore pursue and
enjoy her own Fancy. I believe that if she married accordingly as she
propounded to her self she would have the leisure to repent it, For my self, I
assure you, I was resolved to have her Epithalamy sung by the Musicians of the
New bridge, after I had composed the Verses.

Intending to prosecute this humor, one Night I took with me five or six of my
friends, and we did all go to give a Frolic to Melibeus with Hammers, Drumms
of Biscay, and Jews Tromps. For my part I did sing a prepared Song, in which I
made mention that our instruments were as good as his, and might as much assist
him to captivate the affections of his Mistress. Much more was spoken to his
disgrace, which I believe he understood, but he durst not appear before us. I
had a resolution besides to have given him a hundred Bastinadoes before the
face of his Mistress, there was nothing more easy if he had been worthy to
have put me to that trouble. But I conceived it was possible that for all that
Diana would not think the worse of him, and as it stood that she might possibly
change him for another, as she had changed me for him. For besides the
imperfections of his Mind he had many great ones of his Body. I have heard that
Diana ofentimes would say; What a delicate Gentleman is this Melibeus? How
sweet He always smells? It is true, and, a Man might justify that he therefore
smelt ill, because he smelt well: He had a savor that was able to bring the
Plague into the most temperate Air, and for all the persumes that were under
his Armpits, the places where he had been did retain so corrupt a favor that
an hour after he was gone the noysomnesse of the smell might easily be
perceived. I believe that the extreme and violent heats were returned, and that
the strength of his Sweat did overcome the Persumes. When he would kiss Diana,
he would put sweet Confects into his mouth, to correct the rottenness of his
teeth; And the best words that could be spoken must be always bad in his
mouth, he had so corrupt a Breath. But without any further amplification, Diana
herself did at last forsake him, and not long afterward her Father married her
to an Advocate, a rich and an honest Man, in whose arms I had rather see her,
than in those of Melibeus.

I was s conscientious that I would not attempt to violate the Marriage bands,
and I found my affections to her nothing so passionate as before, so that if I
did speak one word or two unto her, that was all* Love nevertheless did
preserve the Empire he had got on me, and caused me to adore another Beauty,
the access to whom was far more difficult, but the enjoyment was more easy.
After her, I loved many more, of whom I will not speak, the Story will too much
trouble you; It may suffice, that for the greatest part of them our affections
were reciprocal, and there was not any of them but gave me the testimony of a
vehement passion, in granting me their dearest favors. There do not shine so
many Stars in the skies, as I was enlightened with the eyes of several
beauties. My Soul was inflamed with the first object that appeared, and of
fifty beauties which I had often in my fancy, I could not discern which was
most agreeable to me. I courted them all at once, and if sometimes I received
from any one the least disgust, it did so afflict me, as if my Love had been
most entire, and but to her alone. Peradventure I anon shall give you an
account of some part of my affections, accordingly as in order they shall
present themselves in the following History.

The End of the Fifth Book.
THE SIXTH BOOK OF THE COMICAL HISTORY OF FRANCION.
AFter that I was seen to be well clothed (said Francion) I became infinitely
acquainted with young Men of all Conditions and Estates, as the Sons of
Noblemen, the Sons of Justices, the Sons of the Kings Receivers, and of
Merchants. We every day did meet at the Ordinary, and my Authority was so great
amongst them, that I pursed up more than I expended. I propounded to five or
six of the most noble of the Number, to make as great a Company as we could of
generous and gallant Personages, Enemies to Ignorance and Folly, that so we
might converse together, and show innumerable proofs of our noble Resolution.
My advice did please so well, that immediately putting their hand unto the Work,
they did draw a great number of their friends together, who also did bring in
others with them of their particular Acquaintance. We made Laws which were
inviolably to be observed, as to show all honor unto one, who from fifteen
days to fifteen days should be chosen the Chief of the Company; to assist one
another in Dangers, and Loves, and in other affairs; to despise all fordid
thoughts, and the vile Rabble in Paris, who believe there is a great necessity
of their ridiculous Offices; all those who would observe these Ordinances, and
others of the same strain, were received into the number of brave and generous,
for so we styled our selves, and it was no matter if any one amongst us were
the Son of a Merchant, or an Exchequer man; for the abuse of Traffic only, and
of the Exchequer Men were to be blamed. We looked not on Descent, but Merit; We
made Feasts by turns; for my self I was exempted from that charge, because I
was the Founder of the Fraternity; and being the first who was made Chief, I
had the charge to receive the Fines in which they were condemned, who had
fallen into some error which they were forbidden to commit. The money was to be
employed for Collations in the Afternoons, but God knows how just a Treasurer I
was, and how I saved the money to supply my own necessities: My Companions were
so prodigal, and so full of money, that they freely emptied their purses, and
demanded not an Account of my Receipt. I was as brave as the bravest of them
all, and braver too; It pertained to me only to see Justice done on the
peremptory persons of the City, whose scourge I was, as if for that purpose I
had been sent down from Heaven.

The Son of a Merchant, but the most ignorant and presumptuous one in the
world, did one day come into the Company where I was, he was most richly
cloathd with a Silk Stuff that could not be paralleld in France, I believe that
he caused it to be made in Italy, on purpose because he thought no man in
France ought to be equal to him; I observed how loftily this young Merchant did
deport himself, and that although he was saluted with much reverence, yet his
own Hat would stir no more than if it were some piece of unwieldy timber on his
Head. Being always an Enemy to such humors, I could not endure this sight, and
spoke aloud to those who were next unto me, pointing to him with my singer: See
there (my Companions) the principal shop of Monsieur Huistachius (for so
according to his name I did call his Father) so God shall save me, see if he
has not laid forth his very best Stuff on his Stall: He is like to gain well
by it; for we need not go home to his House to fee the richest Merchandise, His
Son there is a Shop errant, and does go up and down to show it to all the
World. Coming up unto me, he said, with an angry and threatening countenance,
Speak you of me? I, laughing at him, said to my Companions, Gentlemen be not
offended at any thing he says, He did verily believe that there is some one
amongst you who is like unto him, and does deserve that he should be spoken
unto as I have spoke unto him. Finding himself to be hit home, he did swear
Blood and Death, and said, that although he did not wear a Sword as I did, and
that it was not his Profession, yet he would -- And there he stopped without
speaking more.

For my self, I made use of his Rage to improve my laughter, and intending to
make more sport with him, Certainly (said I) it is good discretion, the more
infectious and more foul the thing is, to take so much the more care to cover
it, nevertheless the evil savor will come still unto us. Because you will
needs appear in such rich Habiliments, it is a sure testimony that you have
nothing else that can purchase respect unto you. You would fain seem to be
something transcendent, and to surpass all gallant Men, but understand, that
if your Body be above theirs, their Souls will rise aloft and will mount above
yours. One of my Companions came then unto me, and desired me to let him go.
So I will (said I) I have little reason to dispute against a Suit of Clothes,
for I can see here nothing else against which I should quarrel. The Sword is
not worth so much as the Scabbard, and to speak the truth, It is reason that so
fair a Cloak should be seen in some more eminent place than where it is
disgraced to be worn; I will pardon him, but upon promise that he shall enter
no more into contestation with things that are above his capacity, nor meddle
but with such Clothes as are fit for his condition.

My Simplician fearing after I had afflicted his wretched Spirit with my
invective Mirth, I should persecute his Body with my Bastinadoes, dis fly away
as swiftly as does a guilty person who is pursued with Sergeants.

And as fair examples do follow one another, the next morning being at a
Counselors Gate with his Daughters, and some other good company, a young Man
of the City who was very spruce passed by: He had a Doublet on of white Satin,
and Stockings of Crimson Silk, in brief, he was in all tings accommodated like
a Gentleman, save only that he had no Sword, and yet he had one, but he caused
his Lackey to follow behind him with it. Behold (said I) the custom of the
young Gallants of Paris, they will be all after the garb of the Nobility, and
renounce the Vocation of their Fathers, which is the principal cause of their
Riches; but certainly yonder fine thing has no extraordinary desire to appear
a Gentleman, he does so little love arms, that he will not own them, unless
they are carried behind him; and moreover, I perceive that he would have it
known, that his Lackey is more honorable than himself, for he makes him to
carry the Sword. There was not one among my Companions who did not applaud the
conceit, it was shot home so handsomely; And because we had good Laws as well as
words, and our remarkable actions ought to be recompensed, it was ordered by
them all, that out of the money I received I should reserve so much as would buy
me a Beaver Hat, which they thought I had well deserved by reason of the many
Gallantries which I had put in execution.

We did sharply correct Vice, with the edge not only of our Tongues, but
sometimes with our Swords, and without Mercy we did charge on those who had
offended us; It was no easy adventure to oppose us; for the most part we did
go six and six together, and sometimes all in one Company, as when we did go a
hunting out of the City as far as Bois de Vincennes. It is true I had no Horse,
but one of my Companions who was the Treasurers Son did always lend me one when
it was our pleasure to be on Horseback.

Many times in the night we would bestow Music on the Ladies, and oftentimes
we made Masks, and danced them in the best Houses of the City, where in
emulation we contended for the improvement of our new virtue which could not be
paralleled. The Citizens condemned our practice, Men of courage did approve it,
every one did speak diversely of it according to his Fancy. Our exploits were
the ordinary discourses at the Lovure, at the Palace, and all public meetings.
He who would show himself to be of a generous Spirit, would rank himself in our
Company, or desire our assistance. The greatest Lords were glad of our
Friendship, when of themselves they would punish some who had offended them,
and they entreated us to chastise Vice accordingly as we declared.
Nevertheless in process of time this society of ours did lose is Luster, and
the greatest part being forced to withdraw, either to provide some Office to
maintain them, or to be married, and being afterward to be settled in some
course of life they could no longer continue with us.

It is true, the number was again completed by the access of new Gallants,
but they were such a fraternity as displeased me. Their Souls panted after
nothing but vanity and beastly debauchment. I did admonish and instruct them,
when I was with them, and by little and little I did refrain their Company,
counterfeiting my self to be indisposed in my health, for the which purpose, I,
for the most part, confined my self to my Chamber. I did there addict my self
to my Study, and after the newest, but the best fashion of all, I did
altogether play the Philosopher, and did contemplate on the condition of men,
and what they ought to do to live in quiet, and more delightfully than now they
do, concerning which I had drawn the beginning of a Treatise, which I will
communicate unto you. I leave you to judge if that be not the cause wherefore I
do so much detest the conversation of Men, for by this Study I found the means
to make them live like little Gods, if they would but practice my Counsels.

But because we must first assay to satisfy the desire with those things which
are cross to sensuality, I only did endeavor to procure contentment to my
self. Afterward extravagantly determining to follow in appearance the track of
others, I made use of a deceipfull Art to obtain the good Will of every one. I
endeavored to make my mouth speak contrary to what my heart thought, and would
give complements and praises where I thought most necessary for my own ends,
receiving that liberty to my self to speak to those only who were worthy of
them. I had a desire to address my self to some great Signior, who might give
me a condition that might render my Fortunes more assured, but I had never the
desire to serve those persons who were not worthy to command, for I was well
enough acquainted with the evil conditions of the Court.

One of my Friends did bring me one. Afternoon to the House of a Damoisel
called Luci, assuring me that she was a Woman of the best discourse that could
be, and that I should not fail to find in her Company the bravest Spirits in
the World, amongst whom I should have the Honor to illustrate, and the
happiness to advance my self. She had understood of him who I was, and that I
came on purpose to visit her, wherefore she gave me good entertainment, and
placed me next unto her; there were present diverse persons clad most gallantly,
who I conceived were not the least of the Court; I listened to understand the
good discourse which I conceived they did maintain: On all sides I heard
nothing but Vantings, Extravagancies, and a confused Gallimaffry of Accounts
ill reported, and a pronuntiation so bad, that it cannot be represented. Is is
not a strange thing, Madamoisell, (said one of them) twirling his Mustachio,
that good Fortune and I should be always at War, she will never lodge in my
Company; If I had all the Silver which the Treasurers of Spain have in their
Coffers, I should lose it all at play in one morning. It is a sign (said Lucy)
that the Stars will suddenly shoot down a more happy Influence, and entreat
Love to metamorphose your ill Fortune in play, into a good Fortune by a rich
Wife. I know not, said the first, what Edict Heaven will issue forth concerning
that, but I will send a challenge to you as my Enemy, if you open not the
portal of your Soul to this Belief, that if I am favored by Destiny in my
Marriage, I must be married to a Lady such as you are: You do mock me sure,
said Lucy, taking him by the hand in hers, and smiling at what he said; He
replied, I will give you marks more visible than the Sun, that I do cherish you
with a most real Love; My heart is always tossed in a Sea of Two hundred
millions of Thoughts to the gluttonous appetite of the West, and Southwest of
my Desires, until (most delicate Beauty) I shall make known unto you that I do
adore you with so fervent a devotion, that -- He there made a stop, being at a
halt in his Conceptions. These words he did speak in Lucies ear, to show they
were very secret, but by an admirable Vanity he did pronounce them so loud,
that every one did hear them, for he conceived to himself that they were most
exactly ranked.

Not long afterward, changing his Discourse, he said, My Soul was lately so
bigg with desire to have a piece of Land which pleased me, that I gave for it
Three hundred thousand Liuvers, although it was worth no more than Two hundred
and fifty thousand, and ever since I have a great Desire to be called by the
Name of that goodly Heritage. Good God! said I to my self, What is this? A Man
who thinks himself one of the bravest in the world, is ambitious to carry the
Name of a few Acres of Land, when the Land should be known by the Name of the
Master of it. How ridiculous is this absurdity? Why does he not rather purchase
some gallant Title by his atchievments? Turning my self to the other side, I
observed two in a serious Discourse, which made me the more attentive. What is
your judgment (said one of them) on my Suit of Clothes? Is it not of an
excellent stuff, and as good as ever was made at Lions? Is not my Tailor well
versed in the Fashion? He is a Man of Understanding, and I will advance him if
I can; There is a Citizen has a good Office in the Exchequer, who is not to be
compared to him. But what think you of my Hat? Does the Fashion of it please
you? Alas Sir, (answered the other) I find all things you wear to be extremely
complete, that the more I do contemplate you, the more I am ravished with
admiration; I am of opinion that the Angels are not better clothed in Heaven,
than you are on Earth, although they have every one of them six Else of Stuff
of a sky-colour, embroydered with Stars, to make them a Suit. Good God! You
are Adonis himself, What deep sighs does Venus fetch for you? What a charm do
those Roses carry on your cheek? The two even Ranks of your white teeth have
power in them enough to murder a heart. Nevertheless, Excuse me if I tell you,
Sir, that your Hat does flap a little on the one side thereof, The Brims are
with the largest, Cause them to be cut more narrow, Let me be your Counselor
of Estate in this affair, I speak unto you as a Friend; Far be it from me to
disparage you, I see well enough that you are accoutred with other rare
Virtues, for you have a pair of Boots the best made in the world, and (above
all) your hair is so well curled, that I believe the Souls therewith
entangled, and made prisoners, do wander up and down as in a Labyrinth of
Pleasure. The other kissing his cheek did reply, Dearest of my Friends, You
better deserve those praises which you give me, than my self, It is known to
the world that your brave Qualities do cause you to be cherished, even by
Majesty it self; You are the Loadstone who attracteth all, both Male and
Female, to you at the Court: The Ladies, for all their inexorableness, are
wounded with the Arrows of your Eyes, and acknowledge they feel no sires, but
what are lighted from your beauties. The other made answer to him with a
strange boasting, It was true enough there were some Ladies who did love him,
and to give him a proof of what he said, he did pull out of his pocket a
Love-letter, which, it is possible, he did write himself, although he said, It
came from his Mistress.

This Discourse was nothing pleasing to me, I therefore turned aside to the
Conference of some others, which was not much better. They judged of the
affairs of State, as a blind man does of Colors: And he who spoke of his Acres
of Land, thinking himself to be the most judicious in the Company, did affirm,
That since the King dismissed him of a Lieutenant ship which he had, there has
been nothing but Disorder in France, and that he was the Man who for so long a
time did maintain the Kingdom in peace. Afterward they came to speak of War,
and every one of them did make a relation of the Imaginary exploits he had
performed. There were some of them who said, That their Pages were called
Squires, to show only in what reputation their Masters were, and if they
committed any Employment to their charge, it was to show that they were most
deeply engaged themselves.

I was so weary to see and understand their a pish follies, that I would have
given any thing to be gone; At the last, they all standing up to salute a
Signior called Clerantes, who was newly entered, I found the opportunity to
escape away in the Confusion, having made a short reverence to the Company, who
I thought had taken no great notice of me.

At my departure having met with him who caused me to go in, I told him, That
the Gentlemen whom I had seen, had no doubt a great deal of Eloquence with
them, but it was according to the condition of this Age, in which, to speak
much is to speak well but there was nothing so sottish or vain as their
Spirits, and that if the Court had not more generous Personages, I was well
contented not to trouble it; and, that I abstained from talking, not the better
to understand them, or to gain from their language or experience, but because I
would not administer an occasion to be troubled to discourse with them, which
would have proved more tedious to me, if particularly they had addressed
themselves unto me. I related to him how I observed their Vanity, using seven
or eight affected words at the beginning, middle, and the end of every clause,
which they thought to be courtly, and very graceful, when it was most
ridiculous, as, Sir, Most undoubtedly you have the whole Property of it. You
are acute in Love and Music. You have all the habitudes with the Ministers of
the affairs of State. You are in a very good Posture with Monsieur the
Treasurer. You are here in the great Commerce of the world. You are intricate,
and not to be fathomed; and such other terms newly invented. The Answer which
my Friend did make unto me, was, That by the train of the Lackeys at the Gate,
be knew what persons were in the House, and that they were Lords and Gentlemen
who were esteemed to be the best wits in France, to which I made Reply, That in
the Country of the Blind, he who has but one eye is King there.

But as since I have understood, Clerantes knowing me, because elsewhere I had
been shown unto him, demanded of Lucy, If she received not much pleasure in my
Company; for, said he, I am informed that this Gentleman makes very good verse,
and has the clearest fancy, and the smothest language, and the livelyest
accents in the world. I have heard it so spoken, said Lucy, but nothing less
appeared to me, I believe it was his Statue sent hither by Art Magic rather
than himself. I saw, I must confess, a dumb motion which made no answer to
what I demanded of him, but only by nodding of its head, and in the same manner
departed without the least complement. You shall find (said Clerantes) that
something discontented him; who was it that gave you the knowledge of him? Lucy
made answer it was the Gentleman who did bring him to her house. Some few days
afterward Clerantes spoke unto him, and according to his directions I repaired
unto Clerantes with an intention to make it appear unto him who I was. I did
accost him with Complements suitable to his quality, and entertained him above
two hours with diverse Subjects without appearance of being tedious to him. At
the last I showed him my verses, which he told me did please him better than
ever any that he saw at the Court. After that, speaking to me of Lucy, he told
me, she complained exceedingly, that taking the pains to visit her, I would not
vouchsafe to open my mouth to feed her ears with the sweetness of my
discourse. The generous disposition of this Signior did invite me to conceal
nothing from him, I told him, that if I were Master of those rare qualities
which were imputed to me, yet I could not be persuaded to speak at that time,
because there were some Gallants with Lucy, to whom good and solid discourse
would be as the Sun amongst the blind. He confirmed what I said, and vowed to
me, that they were a generation of men vain and ignorant, nevertheless I might
have discovered my self to Lucy without being interrupted by them, for I should
have found in her another Genius. Not long afterward having taken me along
with him, I perceived that the praises given to her were answerable to her
deserts, also she confessed again and again, that by my discourse she found me
to be such as my friends had represented me unto her.

Much about that time there was a Libel brought to the hands of Clerantes,
playing with much freedom on almost all the great Personages of the Court,
Clerantes himself was also comprehended in it, but all it could say of him,
was, That being married to a handsome Lady he desisted not to seek his fortune
elsewhere. I paused a little to examine that piece in his presence, and
marvelously did pass my Judgment on it. I will venture my life, said I, it
was Alcidamore that caused this to be made. Wherefore think you it was rather he
than any other? said Clerantes. I will tell you, said I, you will not deny that
he it the most vicious in all the Court, and yesterday I heard you to affirm as
much. Now those who are not named in this Satyr are exempted by their
remarkable Virtue, but as for him, I know not for what reason the Poet left him
out, but only for this, that by his persuasion he did write it. My conjecture
was very probable, and Clerantes was of opinion that I did speak the truth: On
that he took other Verses out of his Pocket, which he found lying at his feet
in the Louvre, and had not yet read them all over. Whiles he was speaking to
one of his friends I did run them over with a cursory eye, and perceived that
they were made directly on himself, and reproached Clerantes, as being stupid,
ignorant, and a mortal Enemy to Scholars. Sir, said I, I do beseech you to give
me leave to burn this paper; I will not, said he, until I thoroughly have
perused what it does contain. I replied, they are the most notorious lies in
the world. I will see them howsoever, said Clerantes. They will exasperate you
most extremely, said I; Not at all, replied Clerantes, if they justly accuse me
I shall receive an advantage by it, and shall hereafter endeavor to render my
self so virtuous, that I shall make Envy mad, that she has no more an occasion
to turn her arms against me. But on the contrary, if I am condemned without a
cause, I shall no more regard the slander, than a generous Lion does fear the
barking of little Dogs, they may draw near unto me, but they dare not bite me.
Having spoke those words I took him aside, and observing the greatness of his
courage, I made no demur to give him the Pasquill. Having read it, he smiled
upon me, and said, A^ what Liars are these to make the World believe that I
love not Letterd men, either they know not the learning which you have, or are
ignorant how highly I esteem you. I thanked him for the favor which he
testified unto me, and demanded of him, if there were not a Poet lately who
demanded something of him to which he could not accord? He paused a little
while, and then said unto me, It is not above three months since a certain man
did present me with a Copy of Verses in my praise, for which I promised him
fifty Crowns, but some of my People have restrained my liberality. Be you sure
then (said I) that it was he who made those verses in indignation thereupon, I
do partly suspect the man, and now I remember my self, I can assure you that at
this time he is a Servant of Alcidamors, and that it is he no doubt who did
compose the other piece. That may well be (said Clerantes) when he came hither
he did sing me no other Song but that he would render me immortal if I should
crown his endeavors with some honest recompense. I cried out, Allas poor
seller of immortality! your Merchandise is not of an allay good enough. The
Verses which you made but six years ago are already in their graves. It it
true, he vaunted there was not any but himself alone who had talons sharp
enough to take hold of the Rock, and to climb up unto the top of Parnassus.
Sir, said I, when we do feed upon a hard crust of bread we do think to our
selves that we do make a great noise, when none who sit by us do hear any thing
at all: so it is with this poor Rimer, his works make no noise but in his own
ears. Let us examine the piece without regarding the Subject on which it
treats. We have already condemned him for that.

After that, I showed to Clerantes all the faults of the Satyr, and promised
him that I would answer it to take away the evil impressions which the
Courtiers might have received of him. On the other side Clerantes enforced
himself to prove all those Liars who for the time to come should accuse him of
ignorance, and he reserved two hours every day to be in his Cabanet with me to
learn how to discourse in company, on all variety of Subjects, and in another
manner than the greatest part of Courtiers do, whose discourse is without
Order, Judgment, or Politeness. Not to dissemble, he before in some degrees
did hate good literature, nay, and he blamed some persons who did addict
themselves unto it, thinking that it ought not to be the exercise of a noble
Spirit; But I took from him that imagination, demonstrating unto him with much
respect, that those who would command others ought to have more strength of
Spirit than of Body, as it is seen amongst brute Beasts. And to revenge himself
of the Poet who contumeliously had abused him, be caused him to be soundly
bastinadoed.

His good will increasing day after day toward me, he was curious to enquire
after my Fortunes; I made my self more poor unto him than in effect I was, to
induce him with a more speedy and open hand to assist me, and I desired of him
that I might have my residence with him. He offered an honest exhibition, which
I accepted, because I had my liberty entire; and although I did him services,
and such peradventure that he could not expect from any other, yet I was not in
the quality of a Servant. He promised that he would always esteem me as a
friend, wherefore I did put my self into his house, where I received infinite
proofs of his liberality, and was accoutred with most gorgeous habiliments. I
was ordinarily mounted on a Horse worth one Hundred Pistols, and when I did
ride, the earth did seem almost to tremble under me; I was always followed with
three or four Lackeys: My Mother was filled with contentment at the news of my
good fortune with which I had acquainted her in my Letters. I took vengeance on
those who heretofore had upbraided me, by deriding them in the same nature. Of
my old Camrades there was but two or three left of whom I made any reckoning,
For the rest, I did pretend to cherish them, by reason of the profit I received
from them, (which is an Invention that sometimes we ought to practice, without
the fear to incur any just blame.) I deported my self no more with any
familiarity toward them, to make them understand they were nothing in
comparison of me, and that they rendered themselves distastful to me by their
Imperfections. This generous Society did not long after disperse themselves,
wanting one of Understanding and Courage to maintain them in their flourishing
estate. The Girls also who before undervalued me, would now be proud of my
favor, but I answered their hypocrisy with reproaches.

My ordinary Custom was to chastise Folly, to suppress Vanity, and to mock at
the wilful Ignorance of Men. The Lawyers, the Receivers, and the Merchants,
passed daily under my hands and lash, and you cannot imagine what pleasure I
took to strike home at the black Satin. Those who said they were Noble, and
degenerated from it, were not exempted from the just effects of my choler; I
did instruct them, that to be Noble was not to ride a Horse well, or to handle
a Sword, to man a Hawk, or to make a Dog, nor to jut it in the streets with
rich accoutrements, but to be the Master of a Soul which resists all the
Assaults and Buffets of Fortune, and to have nothing seen that is base in any
of his Actions. It seemed to me, that, like Hercules. I was born to chase those
Monsters from the Earth: Nevertheless, to speak the truth, there was no hope
for the performance of it; for I must then destroy all those Men, who now have
nothing of a Man in them, but the figure only. I resembled also, methought, the
other Hercules of France, who drew Men unto him by the ears with the chains
that proceeded from his mouth; I speak it without Vanity, that those who have
heard me discourse with that modesty which I always observed, have sometimes
been gently drawn to entertain my Counsels.

If Clerantes had done any thing for which I did fear he ought to be reproved,
my Reproof was so gentle, that it gave no occasion of offense and it was also
spoke in private. It is said, that when Diogenes was to be sold amongst the
other Slaves, he caused the Crier to Cry, Is there any one who would buy a
Master? whereupon he who bought him, suffered himself to be governed by him,
receiving those Instructions of Philosophy which he gave him. In the same
manner was I in the service of a Master, who nourished me, and gave me a good
allowance, and I did exercise authority over him, and commanded him to abstain
from many things, and I deported my self in a way that was nothing disagreeable
to him, and no man else could possibly give him more thriving Counsel.

As I was one Morning in the Court, there came in a Man clothed modestly
enough, who desired to speak with him. His Servants, who understood that I
possessed Clerantes altogether, did send him to me, to know, If he might have
free access unto him. This man being about five and thirty years of age, and
very grave in his words and gesture, was taken by me to be one of some Quality,
I brought him all along the Entry to the door of Clerantes Chamber, and bidding
him go boldly in, I returned to my own affairs. In a most humble posture he
stooped to Clerantes, and said unto him, Sir, The extreme Desire which I have
to do you service, joined with that to see my self delivered from the
persecutions of some of my Kindred, does cause me to come hither, to beseech you
to receive me under the wings of your Protection, in ranking me in the number
of your Servants. I demand neither gage nor recompense, if I have but my life
it is sufficient; I can promise you I shall be able to perform those good
Offices which you cannot expect from others. Sir, I am licensed in the Laws,
and one of the Kings Advocats, and I understand good Letters so well, as to
serve my turn on all occasions. Moreover, I have Courage enough, and if
necessity shall require me to take the Sword into my hand, I will acquit my
self as well as any Gentleman in your service. Clerantes replied, I have not
the leisure to speak unto you now, but I thank you for the good will you have
to serve me; if my Family had not its full number and charge of Officers, I
should employ you in the best way I could. The man hearing this refusal, with
staring eyes made answer to him, If you knew my Virtue, you would be so far
from making a difficulty to entertain me, that you would entreat me your self
to be one of the number of your Family, but I perceive you deserve not to be
attended by such a Man as I am. Those out ragious words provoking Clerantes, he
commanded those who were about him to take him away by force. They took him by
the Arm to turn him out of doors, but they could not get him thither; so that
Clerantes commanded them to let him alone. Being at liberty, he sat down in a
chair, and having a little while kept silenc, and used some extravagant
gestures, he thus madly expressed himself To thee it is that I would declare my
self, magnificent Signior, and speak unto thee three words, as long as the way
from Orleans to Paris: Thou know well enough that the Fire which in a Dew
mounteth on high, does environ the head of the Antiperistasis of thy Renown,
and that the Serpent Python, who covered all the Earth, insomuch that the
Masons had no room to build any more houses, was slain by quiverbearing Apollo.
O the great and fatal blow! The Crows for joy did dance to the Sound of the
Hoboyes, and the three Halberdiers who were their Leaders, did play on the
Cymbal, to please the Hares of the Hills. As for thee, my Illustrious, the
Anthropophagi do thee great wrong, and the Elementary fire shall never quench
thy thirst, although thy Physician with a nose as red as a Lobster does
perscribe thee to flea an Eel by the tail, and to roast it against the Wind with
the end of a great Log that shall go directly into Germany to protest unto the
Protestants that Chitterlings do fly like a Tortoise, and that on the year
passed we shall see the Water of Seine sold more cheap than the blood of a
Bullock. Having ended this goodly Speech, he did begin to laugh as loud as
possibly he could, and you may believe that those who heard him did not forget
to do the like, but Clerantes Chamberlain did laugh more loud than any, which
the Advocate perceived, and having given him two or three sound blows with his
fist, he said unto him, Can thou not hold thy Peace thou ignorant? Do thou
think I came hither to make thee laugh? Hold your peace all of you, said
Clerantes, I observe he has some business of importance to declare unto me. I
will relate unto you a little Fable, said he, which steals into my Fancy from
the backward shop of my Brain. The Cacochymick Aesop has nothing of it. The
Eagle more mindful of Prey than Honor, did one day mootch from the Thunder
which lame Vulcan had made, as crooked as himself, for Almighty Jupiter. A very
fool the Eagle was to commit so great an oversight, for every one did honor
him before as the bearer of those Arms with which that great God does punish
all offenses, but be took more pleasure to be at freedom, and plunder the
Inhabitants of the Air. Jupiter being angry took two Pigeons, and did prefer
them to the same Office in which the Eagle was. This is enough Gentlemen to
inform you, that the Court shall know if it pleases, that my cause is right
enough, it being grounded upon an Hypothesis. It was Saturn himself who played
his part on my side when he was a Sergeant; There came a great Thunderbolt
which troubled all things. The Sun fell into the Sea with fifty Stars who were
his Pages. They drank so deep, that in the twinkling of an eye you might see
them lie all dry upon the Sands, which is the place from whence ever since we
have received their light. After that I threw my hat amongst the Stones, and I
know not what is become of it, or any thing else.

In the pursuce of this humor he did speak a thousand times without reason, by
which it was perceived that he had a troubled brain. Clerantes conceiving that
I was he who brought him to his Chamber, did imagine I had done it to give
content unto him; having called me, he understood that I knew nothing of the
distraction of the Man. But to put the Advocate in a good humout, I caused all
those idle fellows to depart the room, who did too much incense him with their
petulancies; I did speak friendly and pleasantly unto him, and giving him
respect, I did seem to a dmire his words, which did invite him to return as
pleasing words to me, and I did put on so discreet a Restraint that I did not
seem to laugh at all.

On the same day there came certain men to demand him, his Servants brought
them to Clerantes, to whom they declared that he was their Kinsman, and had a
troubled Spirit for the grief he received in the loss of all his estate, being
overthrown by his Adversary in a Suit of Law, and that in charity they would
provide for him in their own houses, although he had done them great mischief
in the violent fits of his distempers. I will ease you of that trouble, said
Clerantes, he is come to offer himself to me, I have a desire to retain him,
and give him good use. His Kinsmen being glad to be discharged of him, did
leave him with Clerantes, who immediately did give him the name of Collinet, and
commanded that he should be apparalled like a Gentleman.

There passed away some Weeks before he fell into his excess of madness, and
during that time he would deliver himself very acutely, and sometimes very
eloquently, although to speak the truth he was always extravagant in his
Discourse. The prohibition which was given to all the Servants not to incense
him by their provoking words, was the cause that he did not leap into his
rages, nor become to mischievous, as he, and others of his distemper are
accustomed to be: One could not but receive coutentment in his Company, and
there was not any man of quality who came unto the house, but would be glad
sometimes to listen to him, and to see him perform some pleasant actions.

I was his only Governor, he called me good Master, and Clerantes good Lord.
When I would touch any one to the quick, I would by one artifice or other
discover his vices to him, of which he would afterward upon any occasion give
so lively a Character, that many who heard him discourse so to the purpose,
would believe that he was not out of his wits, but counterfeited.

In his youth he had so clear a Spirit, that the marks thereof did still
remain. Sometimes he would give admirable answers without any instructions of
mine. Having heard us to speak of a Signior who was baffled in his reputation,
and yet was accounted by some to be an affable and a courteous man, he
mantained, that he was the most discourteous man in the World, the reason being
demanded, he said, that the day before he observed him to be so incivil, that
he would not go out of the way to give his Brother the upper hand, who, to his
knowledge, was more aged, and more deserving than himself. It being told him
that he mistook, for that Signior had no Brother at all. He made answer, I do
know he has many Brothers, and he that passed by him was one of them, he was
one of the gallantest Asses that ever I saw. Another time as we were making a
motion to play at dice, he said he would not play against the Signior, because
he always carried an Ace under his Doublet. Having met him one day in the
Louvre he approached to him, and gave him hay out of his Pocket. The Signior
turning to him, and asking him what he did mean by it, Make much of that which
I give you, said Collinet, it will prove good food for thee in time of
necessity. The Signior was so full of Honor that he would not be angry, but
did turn it into laughter: But not long afterward intending to be revenged of
him, he called him to him, and did command him to hold his Fauchion for him a
little while. Collinet having drawn it, The Signior took it out of his hand,
and did put his foot upon the blade, as if he would have broken it, Whereupon
Collinet cried out, Behold Gentlemen the great miracle which is done to my
Sword, I brought it hither without any Hilts, or defend five guard at all, and
now, see, they have put the greatest Ass unto it in the world. Diverse
Gentlemen at that cry did run thither, which was the cause that the Gentleman
who took the Sword from him, did leave it with him, and departed in a great
confusion, being resolved to assault him no more, because his replies were so
sharp and poynant.

As we were speaking one day of a Woman, who every day did enlarge her Husbands
horns, he made a thousand conceits upon it. He said, that she ought to be
afraid lest he should gore her with the Arms of his Head when he was offended
at her: And as for himself, he might have business enough to find Hats that
would fit his Head; and that he ought to make his doors higher to enter therein
with ease, and without stooping. And but observe his subtilty, he said that
Astaeon had Horns, not because he saw Diana naked, but they came to that
Cuckold because he had not the curiosity oftentimes to behold his own Wife
naked. He understood that a light Huswife had a Child, for which no Father
could be found: You are to consider, said he, that she has been in the Army,
and her Champions having all drawn in her defense, she knows not in the scuffle
who it was that gave her the blow. He compared her also to one who had pricked
his hand by touching thorns, and could not tell in the whole bush which was the
thorn did hurt him. Having heard of another Girl who was great with Child, and
no Man could tell who was the Father of it, You may be sure, said he, that she
is Helena, and she is great with child by Paris.

Hearing us to speak of nocturnal pollutions, He said, we were punished by the
night, for lying on our backs. Clerantes running at the ring, at the Royal
Palace, some who were present did say he did run with so much speed, that he
did leave the wind behind him. That may be true enough, if I may give the
explication of it, said Collinet, Without all doubt my Masters Horse did break
wind when he was running in the List. Sometimes he would undertake to make
verses, as you know that Poetry and madness are near of kin: He recited his
Verses to a Gentleman who came often to Clerantes house, and understanding that
he was to marry, he offered to make the Epithalamy. The Gentleman meeting him
not long afterward, said unto him, Oh Master Collinet, How does your Muse, you
told me you would pipe something at my Wedding; Pipe, said he, Upon my Faith,
you and I can both of us make one good instrument; You shall provide the Horn,
and I the Pipe, and of that you may make a Hornpipe. The Gentleman who had
hardly been married three days, was very angry to hear himself so soon called
Cuckold, and was much abashed at it. Not long before I made mention to you of
Melibeus who loved gentle Diana. He came often to Clerantes, and although he
would fain be in favor with me, I could not endure him, when I remembered how
he traversd me in my first Loves, which came often into my mind, with an
infinite number of other pleasing thoughts; for you know the first impressions
will never be forgotten. I often spoke to Collinet of him, so that he did abuse
him more than any other, whereat Clerantes took great pleasure, for Melibeus
was accounted but a Buffon at the Court, and he must speak to our Madman
whether he would or no, or otherwise he would have played upon him. Their
discourses were filled with Injuries and extravagant reproaches, according to
their several subjects; It will be too difficult to give you an account of them
in particular, I shall only relate unto you the most lively and pleasing
passage which happened between these two, who were one of them almost as wise
as the other: Melibeus sitting one day at Clerantes Table, they caused Collinet
to sit by him, that they might dispute together. Collinet spoke whatsoever he
could to Melibeus, to which Melibeus did answer very coldly, being then in a
more melancholy humor than ordinary. Dinner being ended, Collinet observing
that he would give him no answer did quit the Company, and retired himself into
his own Chamber, where all the day afterward he was constrained to do Penance,
because he was not permitted to come down into the Hall, as long as his Master
was there present, having not 2 days before come down into the Kitchen, and
beaten there a little Page whom his Master loved very dearly. Melibeus being
advised of it, would call him to an account for some affronts which he had
given him, and thought now was the time to put his Revenge into execution, he
therefore coming up the stairs over the Hall, where his Chamber was, did pinch
him on the arms, and tweak'd him by the nose, and did speak unto him such
opprobrious words, that he took a good Cudgel in his hand, and began to charge
him home with it. Melibeus, who had nothing to defend himself, did conceive
that his surest Course was to take his Farewell of the Chamber, and to run
away: Therefore to testify his speed, he leaped down the Stairs three by
three, but Collinet pursued him, and at every leap did overtake him with a
sound blow, either on his head or on his shoulders. When he was almost at the
Bottom of the stairs he made a little pause, and with his hat in his hand,
making a most humble Reverence, he said unto him, Sir, I do beseech you to
excuse me, that I do not wayt upon you to the Foot of the Stairs, because I am
forbidden to pass any further; otherwise you may assure your self, I would
express my self most diligent in my attendance on you. Having spoke those
words, he returned into his Chamber, and Melibeus did make as much have down as
before, without the least regard unto the Complement of Collinet. It grieved me
not at all to see Melibeus so entreated: and because he appeared to be in a
good humor, Collinet his Enemy being gone, I desired him to repeat by heart
those Complements which heretofore he had used to Diana. He had not forgot one
of them; and because he would act them with the greater grace, he caused
Clerantes Page to sit down, to personate the part of Diana, and did court him
in the very same Complements: And if at any time he failed, or extravagantly
did proceed, following the Caprichiousnesse of his own Fancy, I did demonstrate
to him how he ought to speak it, and did act his part for him. Melibeus did
swell with despite, to see how I did play upon him for his old Love, but he
durst not return a word, because he observed it was agreeable to Clerantes. At
the last, being able no more to endure our Scoffs, he by little and little did
withdraw himself from our Company, and came no more unto us.

Behold how Collinet here had assisted me to take vengeance of a Man, who, to
speak the truth, had offended me in the most sensible part of my Soul. This
Fool, who had so many Rational Intervalls, was profitable to me in many other
things. He sometimes would discourse of things which would serve us as good
Counsel in our most important affairs, accordingly as it is said, That Wise men
learn oftentimes more of Fools, than Fools can know to learn of Wise men; Who
will deny but that his words were Oracles, when he shall understand what I am
now about to account unto you?

One day being in the Chamber of Clerantes, having observed a stattering
Courtier who importuned his Master with humble Entreaties, to do a Courtesy
for him which lay in his power to perform, He took a Biscuit out of his Pocket,
and did show it to a little Dog that was in the Chamber; The Dog did leap
upon him, did lick him, and did shake his tail, and seemed to demand the bread
of him. But he did lift up his Arm as high as he could, and with an extravagant
Voice, cried out, What! You would have me give it you, would you? You shall not
have it. Give it him Collinet, said Clerantes, who looked on them, for he has
deserved it by his obsequiousness. I imitate you Sir, Signior Clerantes I
imitate you, said Collinet. In what do you imitate me, said Clerantes? In this,
replied Collinet, that you must be entreated and flattered, before you will
grant that Man what he would have, who now speaks to you. It is a great
pleasure that you take to see your self importuned; I am of advise that you
ought not too soon to be deprived of that pleasure. The Means we must use to
maintain it, is not to give that which is demanded of us, or at least to hold
off the Petitioners as long as civilly we can; After we have once granted them
their desire, they will court us no longer, as I will show unto you by Example.
Having spoke those words, he threw the Biscuit to the Dog, who did run under
the Bed to eat it, which being done, he came back again to Collinet to demand
more. He returns, said Clerantes, to make much of you again, you do wrong to
accuse him of Ingratitude. After he knows that I have no more to give him, he
will leave me I will warrant you, said Collinet; And speaking those words, he
kicked him with his foot, which made him run away, and he returned no more to
make much of him again, although he often called him to him. Observe now, said
Collinet, all those petitioning people who come to wait upon you, they are all
of the humor of your Dog, therefore take heed of them. Thus Collinet was the
Cause that his Master, understanding that Fools do ordinarily Prophecy, did
make much of his advertisement, and became afterward an extraordinary Husband.

At that time the Troubles began again in France. Clerantes was amongst the
Principals of one Party, which caused many to be much discontented at it.
Collinet was not well pleased neither with the War to which Clerantes was
enforced to go; He therefore discovered to Clerantes what he thought of it, as
he came out of a Chamber, being called thithet to Counsel by some Personages of
eminent Quality. My good Lord (said he) These Counselors are all Men of the
Long Robe, they never saw any battles, but in Pictures, or in Books; If they
were worth any thing, they would never persuade you as they do, to eschew
Peace. Do they know the Desolations which do follow the events of a Battle? one
has his Arm shot off, another has his Head cloven assunder, others are
trampled under the Feet of the Horses, and many die, being mad with Rage. I
represent this unto you, because I believe you are no more experienced than
themselves in the affairs of War. You are not to be blamed, if you refuse to
assist in this Service of the War; for what Glory is there in it? The bravest
Man in the world is oftentimes laid on the Ground by a Bullet from a Musket,
which peradventure some Coward did shoot to begin his Apprentiship in the War.
If Caesar, Alexander, Amadis de Gaul, or Charlemain did live in these days,
they would not engage themselves so wilfully as heretofore they did. Their
subjects also having need of their persons, would dissuade them from
adventuring themselves in such desperate encounters. For my self, I delight not
in Murder, and had rather be present at the Death of Pullets than of Men: Let
us therefore return to Paris, and make good cheer: It is better to see Broaches
than Pikes, and Pots than Drums, and the Utensils of a Kitchen, than the
Utensils of War. Your Employment must be, to see if the Canons be well
mounted. If the Troops of Horse be well quartered; but in Paris your March is
only to see handsome Ladies with whom delightfully you may pass away your time.

Although that Clerantes did turn all his Discourse into Laughter at that
present; yet afterward he made profit of it, as of a secret advertisement
which Heaven did send unto him by a Man in the midst of his Madness, and
approved of what he did allege, as if they had been the pregnantest Reasons of
the profoundest Philosophers in the world.

Peace being made we returned to Paris, where Clerantes addressing himself to
the fair, and the fair-spoken Lucy, he did find in her more powerful charms
than ever, and was so strongly enamored of her, that he never departed
departed out of her house. One day he took with him Collinet, having put him
into a frolic humor, by the means of two or three glasses of Wine which he
had caused him to drink more than ordinary.

Collinet did sometimes behold her beauty, which infinitely did please him, and
sometimes he would look upon his Master who still did constantly gaze upon her:
At the last he observed that his Master did cast down his eyes on Lucies
Breasts, to see her Paps between the small openings of her Handkerchief, which
did inflame him with a vehement desire. Collinet taking more notice of it, did
take a pair of Cizers from the Chambermaid that waited on her, and gently
approaching unto Lucy did cut the strings with which the Handkerchief was made
fast, and took it from her. She turned to him to reprove him for his impudence,
but he immediately did prevent here, and said, You do much wrong to my Master,
to conceal that from him which he has so great a desire to behold, let him
look his fill; and if you will be persuaded by me, you may permit him also to
touch your Breasts. You see, said Clerantes, I cannot fail for an Advocate, my
cause is so good, that it is even able to defend it self, nevertheless I am
not assured to gain it, because you are both the Judge and the party that is
interested also. I know not what to think of it, said Lucy, for your Advocat
does use a rude violence with his Hands, and no smooth persuasion with his
Tongue. Clerantes observing that Lucy was not contented with that action, did
whisper her in the ear, and acquainted her with his humor, which greatest
Princes do pardon in such persons, without taking exception at what is done. In
a moment she was appeased, and seemed glad to have the Company of Collinet, of
whom from diverse persons she had heard much before. Clerantes desiring to make
her merry with him, did command him to begin some discourse to entertain the
Company. Having seated himself in a Chair he immediately began in this manner,
with admirable action and rouling of his eyes. Lady, your Merit which shines
like the Lantern of forgetfulness, is so able to obscure the Eclipse of the
morning, which begins to appear in the Hemispere of the Lycanthropy, that there
is not a Gentleman in all the Court, who will not be content to be curld by the
Northern wind to please you. Your Complexion does surpass the Onions in
redness. Your Hair is as yellow as the excrement of a young Infant. Your Teeth
which are not one of them taken out of the Carmelins shop, do seem to be made
of the Shoeing Horn of some great Prince. Your Mouth does open and shut like a
Trunk. To be short, Phoebus being at Supper at Coifles, and to pay six Pistols
for his Ordinary, does not eat better Pasties made of Chitterlings than those
which I do taste of. And as Achilles did draw the Son of Priam about the walls
of Troy, so does the Court drag me to be installed in her favor: but I will
beat her soundly for it with the Brims of my Hat, although she better does
deserve to be strappadoed.

I know not what you make account to do, said Clerantes, Tell me Collinet, Did
not you assay to discourse upon the perfections of Madamoifelle? why do you not
perfect what you undertook? I am going about it, said he, Go too then. Fair
Nymph, since I must praise you, I will tell you that you have captived me; it
is sufficient: for you shall never captive me again, although you had as many
attractions about you as be Oranges in Kormandy. Alas I must confess all, or
my heart will break. The Devil take you to advance his patrimony, if (Lady) I
am not more amorous of you than a Beggar of his Wallet; when I see you I am
ravished as a Hog that is pissing in a Stye. If you please, in spite of Rowland
and Sacripant you shall be my Angelica, and I will be your Medor, for there is
no doubt but the greatest part of the Courtiers are more beasts than the beasts
that carry them. They do not employ themselves at all, not so much as in one
exercise of virtue, they do nothing else but throw three or four square bones
upon a Table; and I have not yet spoke all. The other day with a pair of
spectacles of Amsterdam I discovered as far as the Isle where all the Souls of
those dissolute fellows go which are metamorphosed into horrible Monsters. As
for the Ladies, they cause themselves to be tickled and tickled again, without
dreaming of Repentance, they are laid on their backs in the inner Chambers, and
the outward Chambers, and in the Garrets, and never think how hard the Plancher
is; and they thrust in something, I know not what it is, under their Coats, It
is their Busk that I do mean.

This goodly Panegyric was concluded with this Song, So long you go sweet
Guilmott, and with that, you spoil me there with Pimpalo, which he sung with so
loud a throat, and made so dismal a noise, that he made Clerantes deaf, who
commanded him to entertain the Company with a more civil respect; Whereupon he
began to talk again at random, and intermingled his discourse with some truths
that had relation to the Court, which made all the Company to laugh outright.
In the mean time there came in a man clothed in black Satin, who was not well
pleased at the affronts which Collinet had put upon him, for he told Lucy that
he had a Face which represented some ancient Medal of a Cuckold, and that his
Nose was made like a Tray, wherefore he took Collinet aside by himself, and
whispered him in his ear that Clerantes might not hear him. Master Madman, you
counterseit your self to be out of your wits, but if you meddle with me I will
have you soundly whipped into your Senses again. It was well for him that
having spoken those words he immediately departed the Room, for otherwise
Collinet who began to grow into a great choler would have done him a shrewd
turn. On his return he did give me a faithful account of his adventures, which
I suddenly apprehended, and making mention of the Gentleman in black, I found
that he was full of bitterness and libell, I promised him upon my faith that I
would take his Cause into my protection, and be fully revenged of his Enemy,
although I did not then know who it was. And just as I could wish it, walking
one Evening in the Street with my Train about me, whereof Collinet was one, I
perceived a far off one of the Treasurers who not long before had detained from
me the moiety of a Sum which I was to receive, and to requite him according to
his deserts, I did show him to Collinet, and told him that undoubtedly he was
the Man who had affronted him in Lucies house. He who did believe me, did
suddenly arm himself, taking two Eggs from a Chandler at the next door, which
he did thou at his face, and spoiled his worshipful Pickadilly, which was set
forth like a Peacocks tail. Moreover, he gave him six or seven sound blows on
the Nose, which made him bleed like a Bullock. I passed directly on without so
much as looking behind me, that no man might conceive I had any hand in the
Tumult. My Lackeys did not then follow me so close as they were accustomed,
they all employed themselves to assist Collinet, against whom the Treasurer
took the resolution to revenge the indignity he had received, they assaulted
him with their Batoons, whiles our Madman resting himselself did look upon
them, and said, you will not threaten to whip one any more? Do you remember it
Master Villain. The Citizens who knew the Treasurer did assemble themselves to
rescue him from the Lackeys, who (to avoid their fury which had armed them with
rusty Halberds) did say unto them, Gentlemen, that dishonest man did abuse one
of Clerantes Gentlemen, It is he whom you see yonder; yes forsooth, said
Collinet, I am a Gentleman belonging to Clerantes; At the name of Clerantes
they all made a stop, and my little youths one after another did escape away,
leaving their Enemy covered with blood.

I made use also of Collinet to punish many other unworthy fellows who in vain
addressed themselves afterward to Clerantes to make their Complaints of him,
who gave them no other answer, but that they must not regard the actions of a
Madman. There was one who told him once in a reproving way of admonishment,
that he ought to keep him locked up in his house, that he might no more affront
those whom he met in the street. I at that time was present, and observing that
Clerantes did not like that Counsel, and made a pause to consider what answer
to return unto it, I said unto him, Sir, Whatsoever they allege, Shut not up
your Madman until the People are become wiser, he is of mavelous use to tame
the pride of so many vile Spirits as are now in France, whom he knows by a
certain Instinct which Nature has imprinted in him. Clerantes approving my
Reasons, neglected the advice which was given him, and Collinet more than ever
did jut it in the streets, being so richly apparrelled, that he was taken for
some Baron, but the people were never more amazed to see him, than when
sometimes he ravingly would fall into the Center of his Follies.

At that time the Allurements of Lucy had more and more inthralled the heart of
Clerantes, and enforced him to seek out a Remedy; and because he understood
that I was well practiced in the Art of Love, he was willing to discover his
passion unto me, which I did perceive before. He told me that he had a Desire
to employ me in that affair, and did more esteem of my particular Merit, than
of all the Men in the World; And that he would not imitate the greatest part of
the Court, who were accustomed to put such affairs into the hands of the most
Ignorant and abject persons: for he knew that it was necessary to be provided
with a Man of an extraordinary understanding for the carrying on of such an
enterprise, and that Lovers ought to esteem those as their tutelar Gods, who do
procure them to arrive at the happiness they do so much desire.

This Discourse which tended to my advantage, did invite me to promise to be
assistant to him in all things, for my heart panted after nothing more than
those sweet Pleasures, with which I was glad to see him so much possessed: But
Lucy had a Gentlewoman that followed her, called Florence, who was
superlatively beautiful, whom I most passionately loved, which caused me to
take a great delight to go oftentimes unto her Mistresses house with an
intention only to look on her. In my judgment she had far more temptations
than her Mistress, who was but black in Comparison of her. I know not what
Lucy did think of it, unless she trusted altogether on the charms and the
enticements of her own Spirit, which indeed were capable enough to cause her as
highly to be esteemed by those who did speak unto them both together.

I counseled Clerantes to go no more to Lucy, until she was willing to grant
unto him the favor he desired, because to preserve his Reputation in the eye
of the world, he ought to discover as little as possibly he could of the
Imperfection of his Love, seeing the sottishness of Men is so great, that they
all run on that Bias which they ought not to do, and believe that the visible
marks of a gallant Spirit, are those of a deformed One.

He did not contradict what I said, for I was his only Oracle, and mauger all
the Men of the World, he was determined always to follow my Counsels. Having
therefore resolved to deprive himself for a certain time of the frequentation
of Lucies Company, the Question was to find Expedients to manifest his passion
unto her, which as yet he had not done. He though it requisite to send a Letter
of Love unto her, which he gave me Commission to dictate for him; for (not to
flatter him) his discourse was not polished enough for Lucy, whose Spirit was
Politenesse it self; I told him that I would draw up his Letter in such a
fashion, that in addressing himself to his Mistress, his greatness should
receive no blemish, for he should show a Spirit more frolic than serious, it
being not expedient that he should descend so low, as to make apparent the
transportations which are commonly found in the expressions of true Lovers. I
come now to tell you the Contents of the Letter.

If your beauties were not extremely absolute, you should never have the power
to have surprised me, because I have made a vow to preserve my liberty entire.
Understand (Rare Mervail) the advantage you have purchased, and give thanks to
your merit for it. Consider that the Gods have not given you the Prerogative to
inflame all hearts with love, without feeling the least spark of fire in your
own. I dare say they should be unjust in so doing. To what intent should they
bestow upon you so many perfections, if they should not teach you how to make
use of them? It would be only to torment Mortals, in showing them the chief
work of their hands, and taking from them the hope to possess it, after it
has filled them with a world of desires. Be not cruel to your self, in losing
that time which you may employ to your greatest advantage. You have made no
love as yet, but in words only, begin it now in effects with me, who breath
after the happiness that you should take that resolution; you will taste of new
delights, which it is possible you have not yet thought of, because as yet you
have not had the experience of them, We will pass away the days in embraces
and kisses, you shall receive from me those hommages which shall fill you with
glory and pleasure; I will show my self so ready, and so able to render you the
greatest services which a Lover possibly can promise, that you shall receive
more content than your imagination can propound unto your self. Follow my
counsel dear Lucy, the light of my eyes, Resolve to do as I advise you, and
make an assay of the pleasures of Love, and set a guard no more unprofitably on
the presents of Nature. If you had but the least knowledge of the affection
which I do bear unto you, I doubt not but you would make choice of me to make
you sensible what are those pleasures of which I do speak unto you.

With this Letter I sent also a Copy of Verses to her, which so lively did
represent the delights of Love, that the devoutest Woman in the World would
have been moved, when she did read them, with the titillations of the flesh. I
leave it to you to judge if this gallant young Lady were not touched with them;
she did bite her Lips in pronouncing the words softly to herself, sometimes she
would smile, and her eyes would sparkle with a sudden transportation. I who
observed all her actions, took great pleasure to behold her, believing she
would return some favorable answer to Clerantes; but instead of doing it she
turned it all to sport, and took not the Pen in her hand to write back an
answer unto her Lover. Nevertheless she greatly esteemed what he had sent her,
and did commend it for a very good piece, and knowing by the style that it was
none of his own, she strongly conjectured that I was the Author, and loved me
instead of loving him who breathed forth so many sighs for her, and said unto
her self, Since Clerantes has not the wit to represent unto me himself the
pleasure, of Love, it is a true sign that he cannot make me to taste of them. As
for Francion, whose strain has traced them out unto me, I believe he
understands better what is to be done. The proofs which I see of his Civility
do infinitely attract me. By those things which happened afterward, I presume
that she thus disputed within her self.

Her Intention was afterward discovered to me, when speaking to her of
Clerantes, Why Francion (said she) and laughed, Have you made a vow to Heaven
to speak never for your self, but to procure good to others altogether? No,
Lady, I assure you (I made answer) It were a great folly for me to look on the
fair Mark which my imperfections tell me I must never look to hit. There is no
place so high, or so retired (replied she) in which you may not be made most
welcome, if you have a desire unto it. If I have a desire to be entertained in
your favor (said I) shall I hope to arrive to the Butt of my design? Oh God
(she answered) do not speak of me, I must not put my self for an example, I am
none of those mavelous beauties which have that worth in them to attract your
affections.

Although she dissembled her desires, I perceived well enough whither they did
tend, and so gallantly I did assault her, that at the last she rendered her
self, and confessed to me, that she reserved for me that good will, which I
desired for another. Although I was not so passionate for her as for Florence,
yet finding an occasion to enjoy a precious and a ripe contentment, I did
tickle my self, and persuading my self to believe that she was more beautiful
by far than ever before she seemed unto me to be, I with my own hand did wound
my own heart for her.

I followed her so close, that one Evening finding my self all alone with her
in her Chamber, she gave me free permission that I should kiss her, and kiss
her again, and show unto her how judicious was the election which she had made
of me to be her Servant, and having the opportunity to begin that sweet
exercise, we greedily did make use of it.

If some severe Censurer should now hear me, he would say that I was perfidious
to play the wanton with her, having promised Clerantes to gain her good will
for him: but what a sottishness were this; for if I should let slip so rare an
occasion, I should have deserved to have been mocked by all the world. My own
pleasure ought to be more near unto me, and I am to be more sensible of it,
than of the pleasures of another.

You do believe (I do assure my self) that the familiarity which I had with
Lucy did take me off from courting any more her beautiful Servant, but you are
infinitely deceived, for I loved her still more passionately than I am able to
express, and in whatsoever place I did meet her, I did not fail to testify as
much unto her. Her gentle heart was at last overcome by my submissions, and by
the Presents which in secret I gave unto her; Nevertheless we could neither of
us find the opportunity to solace our selves, because she never stirred from
her Mistress.

Heaven one day so ordained it for my happiness, that Lucy entertained some of
her Kindred in her chamber, who continued with her many hours. I was just come
within her doors, when beholding Florence upon the Stairs, she called me up to
her Wardrop, where I kissed her at my own leisure; I threw her on the Bed, and
prevailed so far, that I proceeded further. But chance did turn, and the
Destinies immediately did show themselves to be unpleased with me; Lucy having a
desire to withdraw her self a little upon some private occasions, did go out of
her Chamber, and came into the Wardrop, where we were, having opened the door
which was double locked, she saw her Maid putting down her Petticoats, and
coming off from the Bed. A Natutal Vermilion did cloth her cheeks, as well by
the vehemence of our action, as for the shame she had to be thus discovered,
and besides that her hair was disordered and hanging down beneath her
shoulders. Lucy looking on her, demanded of her if she came from sleep, and
proceeding in her discourse she drew open one of the Curtains of the Bed to
seek out the Chamber pot, and perceived me pulling up my Breeches on the
farther side of the Bed; She demanded of me what I did there, I made answer to
her without any stammering at all, that I came to her Maid to have her mend the
pleats of my Breeches that were ungathered. She made answer, you should have
gone more into the light, and to those who make profession of such work. Do you
think to delude me? On the other side she observed that her waiting Gentlewoman
had her Breasts all open, and her Gorget unpinned, because I had a desire to
kiss her Breasts, which made her more fully to take notice of our trespass.
How now, you little piece of impudence, said she, do you bring in young men
hither to take your delights with them? you do dishonor my house, It were a
good deed to beat you. If I must be punished for such a sin (said Florence very
confidently) being in that extremity, You do deserve as great a punishmenc as
my self; and if the houses were dishonored where such things are committed,
you have dishonored your own house as well as my self; I will not tell you
how, for it belongs not to me, nor is it for me to take notice, or inform how
things go within. I have done nothing which you have not given me an example
for, and for more also; all that you can allege, is, that being not of so great
a quality as your self, peradventure it is not lawful for me to assume unto my
self that liberty which you enjoy.

This bold answer made Lucy more ashamed, because it proceeded from her whom
she intended to have reproved, and casting a discontented eye on me she did go
out of the Wardrop, and violently clapped the door together. For all her
jealousy I ceased not to make good use of my time, and did not leave the
Company of Florence until one hour afterward: I did demonstrate unto her, that
we must finish the work which we had begun, and if we had done nothing at all,
yet as great a suspicion would lie upon us, as if we had done whatsoever could
he imagined. Her Mistress howsoever did not dare speak unto her of any thing
for fear she should discover that she was guilty of the same Crime, of which
she accused another.

Clerantes who still importuned me to solicit her by any manner whatsoever to
grant him a remedy for his Love, did constrain me to write unto her a Letter
more passionate than the former, but daring not to deliver it my self, I did
send it to her by another hand. She thinking thoroughly to be revenged of me,
did write unto Clerantes, that by singular proofs she did take a full knowledge
of his affection to her; And not many days afterward Clerantes coming to her,
he obtained his desires of her, of which I was more glad than Lucy did conceive.

I could never entirely settle my affection on one Lady, because I could not
find any who deserved to be perfectly loved, and nevertheless all those almost
whom but casually I incountred, did powerfully captivate my affections,
although in the judgment of all the world they were not guilty of much beauty.
If any of my friends seeing me to look upon a Girl, did say unto me, You are
amorous of her, I immediately became so, although before I never so much as
thought whether her beauties carried any charms with them or not; my
affections were all of them of no long continuance, and one object did make me
to forget another. I arrived at last to the knowledge of a certain Woman of an
excellent complexion, to whom I did participate all my desires, she was a
Citizens Wife of Tours, and was come to Paris to follow a Suit in Law; She was
a gallant Woman, and of so great an understanding, that her Husband being
troubled with the Gout, did employ her to solicit his affairs for him; One of
my friends bringing me to the acquaintance of her, I found her fit for my
purpose; and to oblige her to me, I made use of all my friends to follow her
Suit, and to dispatch it according to her desires. This Courtesy accompanied
with my Courtship did easily gain her, and I had my pleasure at very little or
no expense. To speak the Truth, she was a delicate Woman, but when I found that
she was not contented with one Servant, and began to affect others as well as
my self, I made no more esteem of her, but by little and little retired my self
from her conversation, without demanding of her if her law business were
almost brought to an end, or not, or if she were ready to return to her own
Country.

Three Months passed away without receiving the least tidings of her, when
being in bed one morning, I saw her enter into my Chamber attended by two
Citizens Wives, who seemed to be two ancient Votaresses in the Temple of Venus.
I was lodged in an out part of Clerantes house, and there was an ascent from
the Street but of one pair of Stairs to my Chamber, so that without any
hinderance, or the least examination, they came confidently up to my Chamber
door. I entertained them very civilly, and caused chairs to be brought for them
to sit down near unto my Bed. I demanded of them what important affair had
obliged them to come so early to me, since they had commanded me no service to
perform for them? My old Sweetheart using her cusomed familiarity did speak
for them all, and said, Sir, The occasion that has brought me hither, is, that
being enforced to return to Tours, I was loath to depart without taking my
leave of you, having received so many testimonies of affection from you. I am
constrained to come to see you, because you will not take the pains to visit
me, and it does seem to me that you are pleased to forget her whom sometimes
you have professed to have loved most entirely. I have brought with me two
honest Gentlewomen of my acquaintance, because I would have my access unto you
more assured, being but a Stranger, and coming unto so great a house as this,
where there are so many people. I did thank her in the best manner that I could
for the good will she did bear me, and did beseech her to excuse me that I had
so long discontinued her Company, which I imputed to a sickness which for a
long time had confined me to my Chamber. But presently she changed her course
of speech, and taking me off from my Complements, she said unto me, Sir, That I
may languish no longer under the unquietness that I feel, permit me to speak
one word unto you which I have upon my heart. You know that on my first arrival
to this City, you came acquainted with me, and I granted you all the favors
which a Man can desire, and if any thing beyond that could be imagined, you
might easily have obtained it; Nevertheless you have never done any thing for
me, but only employed some few steps and good words for the procuring of my
Process, which is yet but half effected; Do you think, Sir, that you can
delight your self with Women at so cheap a rate? Nay which is more, instead of
gaining any thing from you, I have expended my estate upon you, you never came
to visit me, but I made a Collation for you, and if I have been at great
charges to cloth my self according unto every fashion, it has been only to
please you. This has put me upon this resolution to address my self unto you,
to entreat you in some measure to recompense my losses, being now on my
departure to Tours. My Husband knows what a round sum of silver he did give
me, and the moderate expense I ought to be at: What will he say when he shall
find a great deal more laid forth than I had need to have done, and that I am
here indebted on all sides. He will suspect that have ll governed both his money
and my self, and I shall live no longer a good hour with him. You for whom I
have falsified the faith which I have made unto another, and are the only cause
that I have so ill employed my money, are not you in Conscience obliged to
discharge my Creditors? and moreover that I may not put you to any disgrace or
trouble by Arrests, ought you not to give me some honest recompense for having
so much favored you, as I have done? If you had trafficked with ordinary
Baggages, they would have made you pay, before you had gone from them, for
every kiss they had given you; Will you complain of that which you shall given
unto a Woman, who has devoted her self to none but unto you, and whom you
cannot reproach for any Vice of which you are not the cause? I will refer my
self to these Gentlewomen what they shall think fitting to be done herein, they
are so wise that they will determine nothing but what will be reasonable.

This cunning Woman had no sooner ended her Oration, but she who was the most
ancient of the two Citizens did say unto me, The Gentlewoman has laid open her
Case with great understanding; you ought not to refuse or deny any thing which
she demands of you. Remember the pleasures she has done you, and if that
will not oblige you, let the compassion of her necessities prevail upon you,
she must pay her debts before she can go out of the City. For six months
together you have been every day with her, what is it that such a length of
time does not deserve? Give her only but three thousand Franks and I believe
she will be contented.

When I observed that these unworthy women were come so boldly to entrap me, I
resolved to make sport with them; Nevertheless putting on a serious
countenance, I said unto them, I confess I am much obliged to Mademoiselle,
howsoever I might have received many more favors from her than as yet I have,
I have not seen her these three Months, and it is possible that she has got
other acquaintance, with whom she has been as familiar as with my self, but
that is nothing, it was not her fault that I did not see her oftener, and I am
not exempted to recompense her for that which she has done for me, I am ready
to content her, if that you please to cut off some part of the great sum which
you demand of me. Sir you speak like a Gentleman said the youngest of the
Citizens wives, I know she will not tyrannize over you, she will not open her
mouth to discover unto any what is the recompense you will give her. She will
be satisfied if you bestow upon her but two thousand Franks. Two thousand
Franks? (said I) for what think you. Do you think I can get money as do the
Treasurers, with the dash of a Pen? you must consider that I am but a poor
Gentleman, who have nothing but a Sword and a Cloak, and if Mademoiselle will
be governed by reason, let her moderate the Tax a little. Well then (said the
elder Citizens Wife) give her a thousand Franks, but on my troth she cannot
discharge you for altogether on the receipt of so poor a sum. Good God (said I)
it will utterly ruin me, I will appeal unto her my self. My ancient Mistress
said unto me, because you do make your sell so poor, I see I must content my
self with five hundred Livers, but I will have them presently, before we give
you leave to go out of your Chamber. You have money enough by you to pay a
greater Sum.

When I perceived they would proceed so violently with me, I determined to rid
my hands of them, and finding they were resolved to abate nothing of the five
hundred Livers, I said unto them, well then, I will pay you presently, and
calling my Boy unto me, Biscayn, said I, come hither immediately, and make up
your Accounts with me. Tell me your receipt, and your expenses. How much money
was it that I did give you the other day? You gave me, Sir, a Pistol, said my
Boy, out of which I paid four Quardecues to your Landress, I gave eight Souse
to your Lute-maker for half a dozen of strings for your Lute, and I must give
ten Souse to the Cobbler for soling my Shoes, and three Souse I am to pay to the
Woman that starche your Bands. Well Sirrah (said I) what remains? give me a
just account. The Boy taking the money out of his Pocket, made answer to me,
Sir, there does remain a piece of five Souse, half a Teston, a piece of Three
Blanks, a Carolus, and some Doubles. See Ladies here, (said I) all the money
that I and my Lackey have, It is at your Service with all my heart, if you will
content your selves with it, otherwise I know not what good I can be able to
do unto you. My Gallants seeing themselves so mocked, did begin to upbraid me,
and call me Beggar, and Paultry Fellow, and all the opprobrious words they
could deliver, whereupon calling them Sluts and Baggages, I was about to rise
from my Bed to drive them down the Stairs, but of themselves they made all the
have they could, fearing that worse would befall them. They returned not so
peaceably as they came, for my Boy pursued them with Clerantes Lackeys who in
their way did assault them at every turn, and I never since have received the
least news of them, but to divert my self I had the choice of many Mistresses,
and did make Love on the one side, and on the other.

That which above all things I desired was the Company of those Women who were
seen but by few men, for fear I should get the disease As for Bawdy houses I
always hated them, and to speak the truth, it is the brutish appetite of a Dog
to take his pleasure with the first he meets with, being one whom he never saw
before, and peradventure whom he shall never see again. Yet sometimes I did go
unto them to keep my friends company, and sometimes by my self to see the
fashion of such places, and to recreate my self with a diversity of
contentments. One Evening not knowing what to do, I did go unto a Bawd, who
perpetually demanded of me what I would have, although she had never a Girl in
the House: At the last she did send her Servant to fetch one, who she said was
the Pearl of France. It was then extremely cold, and yet this good woman had
neither Fire nor Candle. She warmed her self in the meditation of the Fire of
her first Loves. For my self I called for a fire, and gave my Boy money to buy
me some Billets and a Faggot; In the mean time the Mistress of the House did
entertain me with a thousand discourses, and the most pleasing ones in the
world; She did protest unto me, that since the beginning of Lent she gained but
little, or nothing at all; she demanded of me, if I would appoint a day to come
unto her, I should see one of the handsomest Citizens Wives of Paris; I made
answer, with all my heart, and would fain know of her on what day it should be.
On my faith (said she) I shall have much to do to perform what I have promised,
but because you appear to be a gallant young Man, I will content you. The
Gentlewoman of whom I spoke has a Husband who is very jealous of her, and will
not permit her to go abroad, but only on Holydays, and Sundays, I will acquaint
her with it, and God forgive me for my procuring, it is likely that one day
when she is to go abroad either to hear Mass or Vespers, she will come hither
privately to give you a meeting I was amazed at the discourse of this Woman, who
would appear to be devout and sinful at the same instant, and it left such an
impression upon my Soul, that I told her I had no mind to see her. I dare
assure you that as there is nothing which sooner does reform the vicious man
than the distaste which sometimes does possess him against his own Vice, so in
such places we shall often see such spectacles that they will even make us to
hate those Sins we are about to commit, and since even in this place I was
touched with some Devotion, I can hardly be induced to repent that I was there.
I would proceed further in these discourses, were it not that I must here give
a period to this Story, which is none of the worst. My Lackey being returned
with the Wood, I would not have it lighted until she was come who was sent for,
that so she might partake of my joy. I attended her coming two hours with great
impatience. The Mistress of the House knew not any more what new account to
deliver to me to pass away the time. At the last, seeing it was night, I would
not stay any longer for so vain a trifle, and being sorry for nothing but the
loss of my money which was laid forth in Wood, I said that the beggarly
Baggage who made me stay so long should not warm her self by my fire when she
came, and commanding my Lackey to carry the Wood away, I caused him to lay it
down at the first convenient Corner we did come to, and to give fire to it with
a Torch which he had lighted at a Tavern, and there I warmed my self, having
none in my Company but my Lackey, and another who stood by him.

This Account I thought requisite to give unto you; and because that many more
stories of the same Nature are come into my Memory, I will give you a
particular Account of them, where you shall observe the like gallantries which
I have put in execution, to enjoy the pleasure only to boast that I have
performed them, and it has been not always in infamous places, that I have
pursued such fancies, for I dare assure you, that I have never afterward
returned to these Academies of Love, for elsewhere we may find occasions enough
to pass away our time in vanity and pleasure.

The End of the Sixth Book.
THE SEVENTH BOOK OF THE COMICAL HISTORY OF FRANCION.
AS Francion made then a stop, The Master of the House caused Breakfast to be
brought in; for he would not have him to finish his History, until he had
recovered his strength by the advantage of food, and in the mean time they had
the leisure betwixt themselves to consider of the variety of the humors of
Men; how some of them do only study to be apparent by their Habits, and others
by their affected language, and that the Grandees of the world do oftentimes
take more delight to speak unto Fools, than unto Wisemen, and that those who do
seem to be most modest, have often had within their Breasts the most unruly
passions, and inordinate Loves. We have heard the narration which might
instruct us to hate Vice; for whatsoever Countenance Francion did put upon it,
he understood well enough that all the pleasures which he took with Lucy and
her Maid were not comparable to a virtuous and a chaste life. And because he
then frequented the Company of Women abandoned to their own pleasures, he has
since confessed (as we have been informed) that there is nothing more
abominable than such polluted Creatures, and he himself has affirmed, that
nothing does render the Sex more odious, than sometimes to reflect upon them in
those infamous places where they are to be found. We will in the same manner
affirm, that it cannot be impertinent in this place to discourse of their
wicked life, because it will conduce to render them more odious, and that those
who follow them thither, may avoid them more than ever Francion did. After he
had made a short Breakfast, he did speak as you shall find in this following
Discourse.

Although the heats of my youth did enforce me to debauchments, as I have
represented to you, yet even then I entertained thoughts of preferment. I had
been to see my Mother in Britany, where she did give me many excellent
instructions. I considered with my self it was my only course to obtain the
countenance of one of the Kings Favorites, who would prefer me far better than
Clerantes: I therefore gained the acquaintance of three or four of his nearest
Kinsmen, and did testify unto them the desire which I had to do service to any
of the Royal Race. At the beginning (to recompense me for the trouble I was at
to court them) they promised me that undoubtedly I should obtain a certain
place that I desired, which was in the power of Praxiteles (you know well
enough that he was in great favor with the King) but afterward when I did put
these Signiors in mind of their promises, I never found any thing so cold as
they were; I thought their Souls had been furred over with a Leprosy, and that
if they were not continually spurred on with entreaties and demonstrances they
were not capable of any sense at all. I will tell you the truth; Their good
fortune, I believe, has made them half stupid, or else they counterfeit
themselves to be so. If I did discourse to them on one Subject, they would put
me upon another, and if they were constrained to answer me upon any business,
their answer was so extravagant, and so difficult, that I could not understand
them.

I had made a Treatise in which I assayed to prove, that the Merit of
Praxiteles was as great as his Prosperity; but they would not permit that it
should be Extant; for they said, It came about by a policy of State, fearing it
would make the Envy increase, which was born unto their Fortune. Who will not
judge but that in this they acknowledged their Kinsman was not worthy of the
many praises that I had given him, and that my Flatteries being too gross,
they would rather have incited the People to have mocked, than respected him? I
have since repented my self, that I had done him so much honor as to write for
him, and I believed, that if Heaven did not favor me in what I undertook, it
was for praising so unworthy a person. The place which I desired, was given to
another, who peradventure never sued for it, but I will tell you, the Loss was
as much on their side, as one mine; for losing me, they lost a Friend, and a
Faithful Servant, who was prepared and resolved to assist them in the affairs
of greatest Importance, and they took a Fool to manage the place, who had
neither Understanding nor Fidelity. I besought Clerantes to speak unto them for
me, but he would do nothing therein, alleging, that his Authority was of no
strength in those affairs, and that there were some Underlings at Court, who,
arising unto Dignities from some poor place, did ^ake delight to undervalue
Signiors of Quality; and moreover, he would not so much debase himself as to
supplicate to them for any thing. Finding this, I had recourse to those
Consolations which the Ancient Philosophers do prescribe unto unto us against
Adversities: and although I could not rejoice in any prosperity, as many
others, yet I had this to comfort me in my adversity, That I was not a slave as
they were. I observed then plainly enough, that to obtain Preferment in the
world, there was nothing less profitable than to deserve it; and I found it
remarkable, that (to gain esteem and reputation in the Court) it were better
far to make profession of Buffonry than of Wisdom. I knew not how to
dissemble, nor to make legs and faces, parts very necessary in a Courtier, and
if I had known how to have made them, I had not so vile a Soul as by such Arts
to advance my self: I loved always the acuteness and flourish of Wit, and
prompt words, which do testify a good understanding, but not those words which
are more fit for a Juggler, or a Corn-cutter, than a Scholar, such as the
foolish Courtiers do admire; and moreover, when I would speak any thing
agreeable to Sense, it must be either particularly, to content my self, or some
others who were of my Complexion and Condition, and not to content those who
did conceive themselves to be far above me.

Because, therefore, I could not procure their Favor who were the greatest Men
at the Court, I consorted my self with those who make it their business only
to laugh, and to make love; in whose Company, although there was less Profit,
yet there was more Contentment: Nevertheless, it was impossible for me not to
reflect upon my self without much grief, for the loss that I made of my Youth,
which I should have employed for the comfort and advantage of those to whom I
was obliged to tender all service, and for my own advantage in particular,
which was the occasion, that when sometimes I was in company, and did deliver
my self amongst them, I immediately became as one that was dumb, and suffering
my self to be carried away by the violence of the fit, I seemed not the same
Man which I was accustomed to be, but as One endued with another Constitution,
and had changed my Nature with my Mirth. I was extremely afflicted with this
Metamorphosis, and as much as possibly I could, I constrained my self to the
contrary; but because the Cause of my Grief could not so easily be taken away,
seeing Objects every day that did increase my Malady, I had need in this
particular of some extraordinary Remedy, or of a voluntary Banishment.

Clerantes, who understood my Disease, and the Original of it, did with all his
power endeavor to comfort me, and did take me along with him to a fair house
which he had in the Country, and there said unto me, What have you done with
your frolic humor? I shall take off some of the Estimation which your merit
until now has obliged me to conceive of it, if you do not endeavor your self
to be merry. You afflict your self with the disorder of the world, Take no more
thought of it, for it cannot be redressed. In despite of all men, let us live
contrary to them. Let us not follow any of their sottish Customs; For my self,
I will for ever abandon the Court, where I never received the least Content. If
here in the Country we will pass away our time in the Delights of Love, we
shall find lusty young Beauties, and far surpassing those of the Court, who
are covered over with Painting, proceeding from a thousand Inventions, to make
plump their lank and exhausted flesh. I remember I have lain with some of them
so lean, that I had rather almost be put upon the Rack. When I was last with
Lucy, I perceived that her Beauty proceeded more from Art than Nature. Her body
was composed of nothing but Skin, and Bones.

The free Humor of this Lord did please me, and I readily consented to him in
whatsoever he desired. He had abandoned his Greatness at the Court, without
retaining so much as the Memory of it, and stooped so low, that on Sundays he
would dance under the Elms with the old Blades of the Parish, Peter and Lucrin.
He would play at Bowls with them for a Supper, and took delight to see them
drink deep, and to hear them relate the Wonders of their Times. When he was in
the most serious humor, he would send for the Antiquity of his Tenants, and
would entreat them to give an account unto him of whatsoever they did remember
was done in the days of their Youth. O what a delight did he receive to hear
them discourse of the affairs of State, of which they expressed themselves
according to their own opinions, and the opinion of their Grandfathers, laying
always all the blame on those Lords who were most near unto the person of the
King. For my self, of my own Nature I did nothing approve the communication of
such ignorant and misguided People; nevertheless to be responsible to him, I
did so enforce my self to be merry, that I might safely assure him I did take
some pleasure, when it was nothing else but to see him merry, because my
principal design was to enjoy the honor of his Company in some pleasant
condition of life.

In this manner I did deport my self, until a gallant design did invade me
which few other men would undertake; It was told me, that about three miles
from thence there lived in a Farm one of the most handsome Women in the World.
I resolved to put my self into the habit of a Peasant, and to carry with me
Viol, on which I could play with dexterity enough, that by that means I might
be admitted the more near unto her company. That which did beget this
resolution in me, was, that I understood this delicate Creature did love to
laugh very heartily, and to entertain her friends with the most pleasant
discourses, I hoped therefore to give her such facetious language, that it
should be the greatest of pleasures to hear our Salutations. And it fell out so
happily, that on that day in which I was resolved to go, there was a wedding
in the Village; Clerantes having a mind to ramble with me, did furnish himself
with a Cymbal to accompany me, because it is an Instrument which is not
difficult to play upon, for you must only strike upon the strings within it
with a wire on the cadence of every Song.

In the morning we departed out of the House with our accustomed habiliments,
causing it to be noised abroad, that we were to travail twelve leagues; we took
not any one with us but the Groom only of my Chamber, a close and a cunning
Wagg. Being about four miles from Clerantes house, we entered into a thick wood,
where we did cloth our selves with rags; Clerantes did cover his face half
over with a napkin, and made his beard black, which was naturally of a flaxen
color, because he would not be known by any: As for my self, I only did put a
plaster on one of my eyes, and did put an old hat on my head, the brims
whereof I could at my pleasure either lift up or pull down, because it was
cloven in the middle, as if it were the Umbrier of some Troopers old Headpiece.

In this Equipage we marched to the Village where the Nuptials were to be
solemnized. My Groom had set our Horses into a Stable, and attended at the Inn
until such time as we should have need of his service; We did steer the direct
way to the Father of the young Maid who was to be married, whom we found to be
a good honest Country Fellow: I demanded of him, if he had not need of my
service, he told me, that he had already entertained a Minstrell, and given him
six souse in earnest, and promised him a Crown more for his pains; I replied, I
demand of you but only one half Crown, both for me and my Companion; We can
also do you good service in the Kitchen, in which we are most sufficient to
discharge our selves, having been both of us under Cooks in one of the most
hospitable Kitchins of France. The Country man finding us to be more useful
and cheaper than any other, following the advice of his Wife, who would not be
at more charge than needs she must, did entertain us. The other Fiddler came
immediately afterward, so there was no little dispute betwixt him and me; he
alleged that he had contracted with him two days before, and that he came two
miles on purpose to serve at the Wedding. I affirmed that I had notice of it as
well as himself, and came eight miles, being hired by a certain man who fifteen
days ago did give me earnest as he passed that way, and enjoined me not to
fail to be at the Wedding. My cause was found, by all who were present, to be
better than his, wherefore, having kept his earnest, he did go away
discomforted.

We did set our selves to work in the Kitchen, and Clerantes who would
oftentimes enquire of his people how his meat was dressed, and be present with
them in the Kitchen, had made very good sauce, if he had been allowed materials
wherewith to do it. We did content our selves to make all things ready after
the grossest manner, according to the Counsel of our Supervisers, who ever and
anon would come to see us. Every one being returned from Mass, the Table was
covered, and they did sit down to dinner. The Citizens Wife did sit down first
of all, for it was the Daughter of the Keeper of her Vineyards that was
married; I had the opportunity to gaze a long time upon them all, and must
confess, that I have seldom seen more handsome Women. Dinner being ended, the
Bridegroom and his Bride did sit down at the upper end of a Table, on which was
placed a great Brazen Basin, and at every gift which was brought unto them for
an Offering, they stooped down their heads, and made a great reverence in the
way of thankfulness. Those who gave two pieces of silver were so covetous of
glory, that the better to be heard, they did let them fall down into the Basin
one after the other; The Citizens Wife did make them a present of two silver
Forks, another woman of the Parish did give them an Iron Fork to take Flesh out
of the Pot, and at the other end thereof there was a little Ladle; some gave
them Pincers, and some Hammers, which at the farthest end were made to open,
and a little to divide the head the better to book out nails, In whatsoever was
given I did observe some figure of the Fork, which was a bad presage for poor
sobelin. After the offering was ended, he stayed with his Wife at the I ables
end almost hal^ an hour, to see if any more pieces of silver would drop into
the Basin, after which time they retired themselves, and counted what they had
laid forth, and perceiving they were at great loss in their Wedding Dinner
they did both fall a weeping so abundantly, that I who was next unto them, was
constrained to comfort them. The Father of the Bride did then come unto them,
no told them that the Lord of the Town had consented to him, that ad the
Company should come thither and dance in his Castle, and that they themselves
were to go foremost with the Violl. I made ready my Instrument, and playing the
first fancy that came into my mind, I was the Conductor of all the Troop. The
sound of the Cimball did not please any of them, Clerantes therefore was
constrained to leave off his unprofitable music; and going directly before me
he had the garb and every posture of a Iuggler so directly, that had I not
known him, I should have taken him for the greatest Hocus Pocus in the world.
Being in the Court of the Castle, I played the Canaries, which almost all the
company danced; After that I played Galliards and Currantoes, which the Clowns
did dance in such a manner that I received great pleasure by it, which hindered
me from entertaining any grief to see my self so prodigiously metamorphosed. On
the other side I was infinitely taken with the discourse of some old women, who
late next unto me. They said that the parents of the Bride and Bridegroom were
niggardly and bas^, that they had no more than one Violl, and for making them
no better cheer, Paramand^ who was one of them, said, that when she married ber
eldest daughter ^oan, there was left so much provision, that the next day being
Thursday, they were glad to send to their Curat to come and help them to eat
with them, for fear the meat should be spoiled, if she should have kept it
until ^unday, and yet for all that she gave Alms in the Evening to all the
poor in the Parish, and at that Wedding she had Violls and Gitterns, and all
manner of wind Instruments. Others of them had the like discourse, and did not
much mind the dancing. But that which was most pleasant to me to understand,
was the Complement of a young Clown with one of the maid Servants of the Lord
of the Castle, he did accost her with such a smile, that it did draw his mouth
unto his ears, and in his reverence to her he did shake and wriggle his tail,
and folding up the brims of his hat he did say unto her, And how goes it with
you Rabina? you look melancholy on it, I am afraid you are not well. You are
pleased to say so, said the Servant. Ha Rabina, have you seen the Bride? said
the Villager, And will not you be taken as well as others? There has been a
hard Frost this Winter, Well, God mend all. The Maid Servant made answer, Take
heed that no flouting Fellow over-hear us. It is true, said she they are taken,
if they do not fly away. The Bridegroom has a greater Cackle with him than my
Aunts Hens. He shall not have my good word, ^anan his Bride looks sweetly on it
because he loves her so, the girdle she does wear, half of silver and half of
silk, was a powerful chain to attract his heart to her service, for you ought
to understand, that since a Servant does carry such an Ornament on her reins,
there is neither Groom nor poor Artisan that will not give her more greedy
glances than a man pining for hunger does on the butchers meat in the Shambles.
Whereupon the Villager began to speak, but in so strange a tone, that I know
not whether be wept or laughed. Zoookers, my mother has told me of you, and
seeing she would not answer him, be repeated the same words five or six times,
and pulled her by the hand to make her understand him, believing that she
either slept, or had some other thoughts in her head. I am not deaf. said she,
I understand you well enough. It is for your sake (replied the Villager that I
do wear this Seagreen point in my Hat, for a friend of mine told me, that you
love that color so well, that you have at least three Perticoats of it. The
other day going to the Vines I looked a hundred times if I could see you, but
missing of you, all the night afterward I dreamed of you, I am so much your
Servant; A hundred times and more by Gis I would have laid Pyebald against the
best Mare in my Brother-in-Laws teem, that there is not a Maid of such a
smiling Brow in the whole Country as your self, who are the pearl of humidity
and generous entertainment. Do you mock me? said the Servant Maid, or is it
your pleasure to say so. Ho, said the Villager, it is not so. Ho, replied
Rabina, it is so. Ho, said he again, my Mother coming from her sheep (Ho my
Mother) has spoken to me of you; If you have a mind to marry you have no more
to do but to speak the word. He did not express his intentions more clearly
to her, but to show the greatest infection (as he called it) which he did bear
unto her, he did lead her forth to dance a Galliard, where he did so fling up
his Legs, and hold down his Arms, and carried his whole body so ill-favour'dly,
that he seemed to be either frantic or possessed with the Devil, I observed
many other wild postures of rusticity, which are too long in this place to
recite. It may suffice that I saw a new Art of Love practiced, quite contrary
to that which gentle Ovid did describe.

All this while Clerantes with a heedfull eye did observe whatsoever was done,
and a great many of the Gentry of that Country arriving, he minded the Wedding
no more, but did go into the Hall where the Citizens Wife was gone before him.
The Signior of the Castle observing how he had bound up his head, did say unto
him. How now honest fellow, who was it that has broke open the Coffer of your
Understanding? It is one who will not cure it, (said Clerantes) counterseiting
with his voice as much as possibly he could, I have so wicked a Woman to my
Wife said he, that I believe she has in her Body a little Devil. Oh Gentlemen,
my heart is ready to break, so great is the anguish she does put me to. God is
my witness how often I have endeavored to make her virtuous, by beating her
back, and thumping her belly, but I could never do any good on her, although I
have heard that those of her Sex, are of the disposition of Asses, and
Nut-trees, from which no profit can be had, unless they are often and soundly
beaten. I am a Cooper by my Profession, and do not play on the Cymball but only
upon Holydays. The other day being not able to make her desist from abusing me,
with the help of my Servant, I did put her into one of the largest Tubs, and
afterward closed up the Tub with the Head-pieces of it, so that she had no air
at all, but only at the Bung hole. I took my Pully, and let the Vessel fall
down into my Celler, and by and by I would pluck it up again with all the
strength I had, and immediately I would let it fall down again into the Cellar,
and in this hot exercise I continued as long as possibly I could, and she
within was so tormented, that I thought she had repented her self that she ever
had offended me, but clean contrary to what I propounded to my self, she
putting forth her mouth as well as she could out of the little window of her
lodging, did call me a thousand Rogues, and spoke many other reproachful words
not to be endured. In the end I was constrained to let her alone to pass away
her choler by her self. In the Evening a cursed desire did possess me to take
of her my ordinary pleasure, to which I am so accustomed that I cannot live
without it so much as one night, unless I should suffer so much torture as if
I were burning at some fire. Nevertheless I resolved with my self not to take
her out of the Tub, fearing otherwise that she would have committed some
outrage upon me, as oftentimes she had done before on a far less occasion.
Sweetheart, said I, Kiss me here at the Bunghole, and afterward we will live
in peace. No, No, said she, I had rather have in Hell the friendship of the
Devil, than thine. Upon my faith, said I unto her, I will do so no more, that
is to say I will beat thee no more, but will always endeavor to please thee,
and be always doing the best I can, Therefore before thou come forth give me
six kisses, and that being done I promise that I will relieve thee from thy
Prison. That offer overcame her obstinacy, and she accorded to what I did
desire, and bringing her mouth as near as possibly she could to the Bunghole, I
did put forth my lips as far as ever I could to reach her mouth, but do what I
could I could not come at it. In the end I was enforced to take her from the
place where she was, so much my desire did transport me. After we had
sufficiently sported our selves, she began again to quarrel with me, and to
tell me that she knew well enough that I had been playing the knave with a
young Woman that was her neighbor, I know not how she came to understand it,
for I was so valiant at that time, that I did her as good service as ever in my
life, but neither good words nor good deeds would serve her turn, for she was
angry beyond all measure. The Sun rising did see our contention, and was
witness that she threw a charged Pissepot at my head, with the edge whereof
she hurt me as you see, and I dare assure you (as far as I can perceive) that I
deserved no blame at all.

This Story of Clerantes did make all the Company to laugh outright, but
especially the Citizens Wife, who propounded many petulant questions to him.
One of the Gentlemen of the Company did command him to sing him a Song.
Immediately he played upon the Cymball, and did sing one of the best Songs he
had. Being invited to sing more, and having no more to sing, he told them that
they must call me, for I had all the variety of the bravest Songs in the world,
The wedding stayed without a Violl or any other Music to content the Lord of
the Castle, to whom with all speed I addressed my self. My voice accorded with
my Instrument, and I did sing all the modest Songs that were ever made by
others, or which I had composed my self in the height of my debauchment, when I
had the Glass in my hand; I made such faces, and used such strange postures
when I was singing them, that all the Buffons of Europe would be glad of my
picture (as then I did deport my self) to gain a livelihood thereby.

In the mean time Clerantes did draw near unto two old men who did not addict
their minds to listen to my Music. They seriously discoursed on a subject
which touched his particular, not as he was now in the quality of a Minstrell,
but as he was the Lord Clerantes. He dissembled not to hear them, that they
might still continue to speak aloud, and would no so much as look toward them,
because he would not possess them with a suspicion that he did give ear to
their communication, and they conceiving him to be some idle silly fellow did
not Judge him to have a capacity to comprehend their reasons, wherefore one of
them proceeded in his discourse, Clerantes (said he) has been some days in
this Country, as I am informed, but this morning he is gone away from us, and I
am very glad of it, for I had rather hear that he was in Turkey than in this
place, I always hated him since I knew him. He is extremely vicious, and
addicted to Wine and Woman, and does many things which do greatly derogate
from his quality. I do esteem my Son who is but a Farmer better, who is an
honest and a loyal Peasant (as Heaven in his birth has ordained him) than I
like Clerantes who does not live like a great Lord, although by his Fortune and
his birth he is one. He will not displease you long replied the other, I tell
you as a friend, and desire you to keep it secret, there are some people who at
this present are of great power in the State, who are determined to make away
with him without any more a do or noise, now he is absent from the Court. They
have sent a man hither to put the design in execution, who although he has
missed of him this morning, may peradventure find the means thoroughly to
perform it, if he shall find him on the way as he returns.

Although he did speak these last words lower than the rest, yet Clerantes did
understand them well enough, and to drive away the grief that did invade him,
on the knowledge of this so wicked an enterprise to take away his life, he did
go to one of the Servants, and desired him to give him some wine, for he had
made himself so dry with singing, that he was but a dead man if he had not
something given him to satisfy his thirst. Wherefore they did give him as much
as he would drink, and he retiring himself to a Corner, did take out of a
Wallet which he had, some of the relics of the wedding, and I greedily
snatched from him many good morsels of it.

Going to eat it at the Window, I saw in the Court one of the most pleasant
things to me in the World. Dressing the pottage, and the yellow Rice for
Dinner, I had put into the pot a certain laxative composition which I had
brought with me. This Drug making at this time its operation, all those who
were at the wedding dinner were constrained to go as fast as they could to
discharge themselves of a burden, which being thin, and weighing not very
heavy, was therefore the more difficult to bear. There were some who did go
into the stables, and made use of straw to terge their posteriors, others had
not leisure to go so far, and did empty their bellies on the Dunghill, or any
other convenient place they could find. In my absence young men and women did
dance to tunes only that were sung. The greatest part of the Dancers were gone
away in obedience to the nasty Tyrant that commanded them, and the poor Bride
who suffered more violent pangs in her belly than any of the rest, because she
had eaten more of the Rice, was inforc^d to an uncontrolled necessity. She
believed that it was unbeseeming her who made the Feast to forsake those who in
the dance did hold her by the hand, there did therefore a certain liquor run
down from her to the ground, the evil smell whereof did ascend into the Noses
of all who danced, and in the dance having often trod upon it, it caused them
to look down upon the ground, whereupon a great dispute did arise on that
intricate business, to understand which of them it was, who at so solemn a
meeting, and in the Company of the Bride, had so disgraced themselves. The Men
did all withdraw from the Women, alleging that their Breeches were large enough
to contain their Excrements for a whole Fortnight, without being constrained to
throw it on the ground amongst so many honest persons. But every one feeling
the same malady, and being ashamed to leave their ordures behind them in the
Signiors Castle, (whom I had called to the Window with all the Company to
behold that pleasant adventure) all those who came in with the Wedding returned
to their own houses one after another, not without much laughter of those who
did behold them to dance other Currantoes than those which I played with my
Rebeck. Every on did pass his judgment on it, and almost all of them
concluded that the occasion of this so universal a looseness was that they were
not any of them accustomed to seed on so much Rice before.

The Citizens wife herself was not exempted from this malady, which did take
her on the sudden, as she was mocking those whom she saw so much tormented* and
fearing to commit the like fault she did go out of the Hall, and not knowing
where to discharge her burden, she travailed from one side of the Base Court
to the other. At the last she did meet with a Lackey, of whom (as if she was
half besides herself) she demanded where were the Privies, he pointed to them
with his Finger, but as she plucked up her clothes to sit down. a young wench
who had as great need as her self, would place her self in the seat before her.
They were in contestation who should sit down first, In the mean time the
Mother of the Bride, who was a big Country woman did come in, and by her age
did claim precedence, so that those two were constrained to let all run from
them as they stood.

The Citizens Wife being returned, was constrained not long afterward by a
second necessity as great as the former to return to the same place, where she
did her business with more ease than at the first, which when I beheld, I said
unto the Gentlemen, that I conceived their company was not agreeable to her,
because she did nothing else but withdraw herself from them, and did retire
into some other place. She perceiving that I made sport with her, did endeavor
to requite the courtesy, and to apprehend the subtilty of my Spirit, She laid
unto me, Tell me honest Minstrel which of all thy strings is the hardest to
tune? Is it not the Treble? I replied, No indeed forsooth, It is that which is
the biggest and most nervous of all, I am sometime two hours before I can wind
it up to its full hight, nevertheless I assure my self if you will but touch
it with your finger, it will be in tune immediately, as it ought to be; when you
please you shall see the experience of it, for it will make such a harmony that
it will ravish and entrance your Spirit. The laughter which hereupon was raised
did more and more invite the Citizens Wife to make use of some invention to be
revenged of him, but Clerantes rising from his place, rouling his eyes in his
head, and holding a glass of wine in his hand, did begin to counterfeit a
Drunkard, and so to the life, that I should have believed he had been drunk in
good earnest, did not I know how well he could carry wine, and that he had not
drunk half so much as he must have done to have an intoxicated brain. He
staggerd at every step, and stammerd with his tongue, and began to rave like a
Madman. To have a taste of the wine he did put his little Finger in the Glass,
and instead thereof he sucked his Thumb; when he drank he spilt half of the wine
upon himself and pulled his shirt out of his Codpiece to wipe his mouth, and
spreading his thighs he showed to the Citizens wife all that he had; But she
the better to play the Hippocrite, cried out, and covered her eyes with her
hand, and cunningly opened her Fingers, that unperceived she might behold him.
Clerantes continuing his extravagancies, and seeing her in the middle Hall, did
approach unto her to make water, as if she had been some Statue, or a Wall.
Holding his hand in his Breeches, he stooped his head to lean it upon her, and
she drew back from him. I was advised at last to have him to bed, and I so
prevailed that I conducted him to the House of the Citizens Wife which was next
to the Castle, wbere those who were new married were to lie that night. When
she her self came home, she caused him to be lodged in a little Chamber hard by
the Gate, and demanded of me if I thought that suddenly he would return to his
sense again; she did speak to me of this in such a manner, that it gave me to
understand she was nothing glad to see him in that excess of Wine, and that
she did like his company when he was frolic and in a good humor. I made
answer to her that in an hours respite it would not appear that he had drank at
all. She had seen the most desired part of his Body in the Hall, and having
entered into the Room where he lay, she had now seen it again, and she ceased
not to express unto me what a handsome Man he was, and of a good countenance,
which she plainly observed, although he had his face half covered with a
Napkin. These words did suggest unto me that she did bear him a great deal of
good will, which I acquainted Clerantes with, who was glad to understand it:
And in truth I was nothing deceived, for she was possessed with such violent
temptations, that after all the House were dispatched to their beds, and she
had lodged me in a Chamber a great way from him, she came privately without a
Candle into the Chamber where Clerantes was, and did lie in the same bed with
him, conceiving that most privately she should enjoy her pleasure with him,
because he himself could not discover without light who it was that was his
Bedfellow, and having at that time his understanding oppressed with the vapor
of the Wine, he in the morning might possibly believe that all was but a dream
that had happened to him.

She had no sooner touched him, but he knew well enough who it was, and without
speaking any word did endeavor to satisfy her with those pleasures, after
which her heart so panted. At eleven of the Clock at night, one knocked at the
Gate, she immediately did rise, and demanded who it was that would come in. He
made answer, it was her Husband, and desired her to open the Door immediately,
because he was very weary, being come all upon the Gallop from his house in the
Country. She made answer, Good God, there is a Gentleman but just now gone from
hence, who has been every where to look you out, I satisfied him that you were
gone to your other house in the Country, he has business of great importance
with you, did you not meet him on the way? No, said her Husband, for I came by
the Meadows and enclosures: Go back I pray you then, said she, and keep the
Highway, and you undoubtedly will meet him.

Her Husband being much troubled to conceive what the business should be that
carried such a consequence in the Forehead of it, did put spur unto his Horse,
and rode back unto the Village. His Wife being glad that her invention took
such effect, did return to Clerantes, with whom she stayed as long as possibly
she could, but the day appearing her husband did arrive, who assured her that
he could hear no news of the Gentleman who asked for him, although he enquired
of every one on the way, and in the streets of the Village, where to his great
trouble, he continued in the quest of him all the best part of the night.

Having taken our leave of the Citizens Wise we departed cheerful and frolic,
and arrived at the Inn where the Groom of my Chamber did attend us. Having
perceived us, he immediately did lead forth our Horses, and followed us at a
distance. We called back into our memories all the particular passages of the
day before, and Clerantes declared to me what he had understood of the two old
men, which made me to conjecture that it was his good Genius who had took upon
him that disguise to discover so great a treachery. I very much rejoiced at it,
and at his good fortune to enjoy that beauty, for which I would have gone a
hundred miles on my bare feet, and transformed my self into any shape, if it
had been necessary.

Let those (who will impute this voyage of Clerantes to a madness in him)
consider; that he could not make love to a Citizens wife in his ordinary
habiliments, because thereby he should have left a blemish on his reputation,
It were far better for him to do as he did; He made use of a cunning invention
in rehersing the counterfeit History of his Wife, for you must know when he
said that from the arms of his neighbors wife he returned as lusty as ever,
and in a gallant posture to embrace his own, he made the Citizens Wifes mouth
to water, and administered new fuel to her desires; In this, as in all other
things he carried himself most discreetly.

Moreover there was nothing that could have conveyed so much pleasure to him,
as his being thus disguised; first, because he could not otherwise so
perfectly, unless with great difficulties, have seen the vulgar errors; and
secondly, because he took a provident delight for a short time to change the
course of his life, and to observe how he should have been used if he had been
a player on the Cymball or the Viol. When great personages are pleased to act a
part in some Comedy, they always choose to represent those persons who are of
the lowest conditions. They receive great content, at least in imagination, to
make trial of a condition of life so far removed from their own. What will it
advantage us so to bind up our selves to the Majesty of great estates, as never
to assume the liberty to descend a little to observe the inferior employments
of the World? Fortune oftentimes does enforce Prince, whether they will or no,
from the royal Pomp which did inviron them, and does throw them into the
extremest poverty, and to have their habitations in Cabans of turf. There is
nothing lost to be sometimes in the society of a ragged Companion. Let the
vulgar speak what they please, it was a gallantry in Nero, to employ himself to
play on the Cittern, that he might earn his bread, if at any time he should be
dispossessed of his Throne. On the other side, it is no ill Lesson for great
Signiors to understand how poor men are enforced to live, for it makes them to
take compassion on them, and this compassion does testify an humanity in them,
which does render them more commendable.

It is true, that amongst these things (which might all of them have been done
with a good intention, and without any mixture of impurity) this Lord did let
loose the bridle to Intemperance; but there is no man so perfect who has not
his defects. Let us study and practice the best, and abandon the worst. We may
call to mind that Clerantes did many things in this disguise, which might prove
much to his advantage.

These considerations, and such as these are, did entertain us in the way, and
when we came to the Wood, where the day before we did put on our ragged
habiliments, we did there put them off, and did attire our selves in our own
clothes, which the Groom of my Chamber did bring unto us. Clerantes being come
home, did acquaint a Counselor (who was a friend of his) that he heard from an
old Gentleman of the Country, that there was a man who haunted his Castle, who
had entertained a resolution to kill him. The Counselor immediately addressed
himself to the old Man whom he named, and assured him that of necessity he must
tell him whatsoever he knew concerning that affair, and that already he had
been heard to speak of it, and therefore could pretend no Ignorance. All that
he could draw from him, was, that whatsoever he had spoken was grounded upon
common report. He was examined again as strictly as may be, and at the last he
did learn of him the place where it was likely this fellow might be found, who
had determined to commit this murder. Moreover he described his Complexion,
Age, Stature and the Color of his Clothes. Some were sent to find him out,
and apprehend him, but in vain, for not finding the opportunity to put his
bloody design, he was gone away full of Despair.

The Counselor advised Clerantes to be revenged of the old man, who was so
wicked as not to come unto him, to discover the enterprise that was contrived
against him; but he would do nothing in it, and doubted that both he and his
Companion, who did bear so mortal a hatred to him, had received some injury on
his behalf, in which he was nothing deceived; for as he understood by his
Secretary, the Receivers under his authority had deceived them, of a certain
sum of money that was due unto them, of which they were infinitely sensible,
because they were extremly poor; wherefore from his own Coffers he caused the
said sum of money to be taken, and did send it to them, desiring them for the
time to come to be his friends. This courtesy did entirely gain their good
wills, as since they have made apparent by their service and affection to him.

Clerantes thus delivered from that danger, did determine to renew his
acquaintance with fair Amye; This was the name of the Citizens wife, whom once
more he desired to have in his Arms. Love exercizing on him a violent
authority, he was constrained to obey it, he resolved therefore to give a visit
to his Sweetheart, in whatsoever manner it was. He thought it inconvenient to
disguise himself as before, nevertheless we did go forth with a very
inconsiderable train, who most of them carrying Hawks on their fists, they did
let fly, as we directed, and perceived the Game, and we came to the very house
where Clerantes chief delight was lodged. He commanded one of his Servants to
alight, and knock at the Garden door, to acquaint them that one of his Hawks
was fled into the Garden, which he desired to have. They no sooner heard of
Clerantes name, but courteously they did open the door, assuring him that it
was more than they knew of any hawk that fled that way; The Faulconer
nevertheless never ceased hallowing and luring the Hawk. At the last Clerantes
and my self alighted, and entering into the Garden where the Faulconer was, we
demanded if they had not taken up a Hawk which we had lost. The Citizens wife
seeing the Lord Clerantes, did courteously address her self unto him, and
entreated him that he would be pleased to rest himself a little in her house,
until his Servants had found the Hawk.

To make use of the occasion which so fairly offered it self, Clerantes
answered, that he would not refuse her civility, because he was very weary. Our
voices differed much from those which we had counterfeited at the Wedding,
neither were our Countenances to be known, for when we had disguised our selves
to personate two Minstrels, she took us not to be those men whom now she
beheld, so much her judgment had deceived her eyes, and indeed, who could be
so cunning, as to discern the truth of such a mystery? We being sat, and she
likewise, Clerantes said, that the humor of his Faulcon which had strayed away
was extremly unpleasing to him, it being the most unconstant, and the most
unfaithful Bird that ever he found; I made answer that if she was fled quite
away, it was no great loss, because there were better every day to be found.
In this manner we did maintain a long discourse upon Falconry, not without some
reflections upon Ladies, which gave the Citizens wife to undersand that we were
good fellows. She returned us but very sparing answers, although we did
provoke her to speak as much as we could. Madam, said Clerantes, to give you
without dissembling an account of my coming hither, it was rather to see you,
than to have my Faulcon again. She made answer, that he must pardon her, if she
could not believe that he would take so much pains for to see so unworthy a
creature as her self. Do you think then (he replied) that I do esteem more of
my Falcon than of you? you do ex^r^ly abuse your self, for I have more reason
to make much of you than of it; for it is credible you will not be so unkind,
as to disappoint your Falconer of the pleasure of that Game which always you
keep about you. I interrupted him, and said, Sir, There is a remarkable
difference between Falcons and Ladies, which peradventure you do not observe.
What is that? said Clerantes: It is, said I, that Faulcons stooping with great
violence do seize upon the prey, and Ladies only do attend it; Amye finding her
self to be touched to the quick, did, to defend her self, allege, that the
reputation of her Sex could not be so highly esteemed as it did deserve, and
that which hindered that they could not give such remarkable demonstrations of
their worth, was the weakness of their Enemies, whose virtues it was no great
glory to surmount. And what appearance have you for it Madam, said I, Have you
all enchanted Armor, such as Viganda gave to the Knights Errants whom she
favored? We have no Arms at all but such as you can bend and make plyant at
your pleasure, and whenever we assault you, we do not offend you, but are
sure to lose our own strength. These, said Amye, are the ordinary excuses of
the vanquished, who are always of a belief that the Conquerors do practice
some deceit to obtain the Conquest, By such Arts you think to conceal your
Cowardice, but you take unprofitable pains. Alas poor Warriers, what would you
do if we should use arms offensive as well as defensive, with the last of
which we do only content our selves, to abate the hight and stiffness of your
Pride? Peradventure, said Clerantes, that we should then be always Conquerors;
for endeavoring to offend us on the one side, you would take no care to defend
your selves on the other, so that you would never gain the battle: The affairs
then standing in this condition, we our selves may have the Victory, if we will
desire it; for the presumption you do nourish that you can tame your mutinous
Enemy when you please, does cry up your power more than any generous courage
that you have. At this instant we may behold the proof thereof, in that you are
so obstinate, as with your Tongue to hold combat with two Champions at once,
who easily can surmount you in the Justice of their Cause, although you add
more color to your eloquence than they. For my self, I love not to fight with
words, I had rather strike home with good Arms, and demonstrate my valor by
effects. If you please, I will throw down my Glove, according to the ancient
custom of Chivalry, to give you an assurance that I will come on such a day as
you shall appoint, to make proof of my valor against yours: I will make choice
of Francion to be Judge of the Field. Knight errant of Love, said Amye, you
show your self to be but a novice, and unworthy of your profession, because you
observe not the true rules of Knighthood, you ought to be chastised by your
King who has dubbed you knight! Have you not learned that there ought not any
one to be Judge in the combats you desire to fight, which are to be managed in
private. On these words, I interrupted her and said, You are infinitely
reasonable. Fight with one another as long as you please, I will not interpose
to be your Judge in the Conflict. The hour is propitious to you both to join in
battle; Farewell for a while, I will go see if your Hawk be yet heard of
again. Begin when you shall think good your selves, and the Devil take him that
shall part you.

Speaking those words, in a garb of fleering humility, I did reverence to them,
and shutting the door after me, I returned to Clerantes Servants, with whom I
discoursed of Falconry, and of a covey of Partridges which the Spaniels had
newly sprung: In the mean time Clerantes following the good counsel which I
had given him, did employ himself to combat with his fair Warrier, and demanded
of her, if she were in the resolution that the prize should immediately begin to
be played. She who had maintained the former discourse but only in a gallantry,
was surprised in amazement to see that she should be assaulted in good earnest;
No, no, said she, I will not have the honor to overcome you at this present,
you have not had time enough to arm and provide you self. You shall pardon me,
answered Clerantes, I would not have spoken of the Combat if I had not found my
self provided for it.

On those words he did lead her into the next Chamber, and prepared himself to
give her a restimony of his valor, but she told him that if he touched her she
would cry out, and would call to her Husband, He made answer, Why, Madam* do
you not remember but that even now you said, That there ought not any to be
judge in our Combat? she replied, I thought not of the evil which you had then
in your heart. Let us talk no more of that, said Clerantes, consider with your
self that they that shall come in hither, and find me shut up with you, will
believe that by a remarkable cunning, you do cry out after the business is
done, only to grow upon their good opinion to have them think well of it, when
there is no occosion for it, and by that means you will be the more defamed,
and accused of Hypocrisy, and you will receive thereby much shame and sorrow,
without tasting any pleasure at all. As for the rest of your allegation, I am
confident that your Husband is not within, and so I was informed when I came
into your House. Woe is me, said she, you are too subtle for me, I thought to
have spoken in mirth only to pass away the time, and you turn it into treason
against me. Well, well, said Clerantes, the Ordinances which you lately
mentioned are of no value, for I find it most necessary to have a Judge in
whatsoever Combat it be, for if I have one, he shall be an eye witness that I
will use no treachery in this Combat, nor will show any foul play in it, No,
no, Sweetheart, he so proceeding said, and did put his hand upon her Breasts,
It is no treason to assault you before, and to begin here. For all these words
she did continue to make resistance, which did enforce him to demonstrate that
she did him wrong to refuse that to him, which but a few days before she had
vouchsafed to a player on the Cymball; You cannot deny it, said he, it was a
good Angel who told me the tidings of it. He also informed me that the reason
which most induced you to it, was because you conceived the affair should be
carried so extremely secret, you were then pleased to admit him, and without
doubt did think it not ill done, because it was so well managed by you, that
even he who was the party did not know himself who it was he embraced. But this
cannot be done now, content your self therefore with the assurance which I do
make unto you, that what shall pass betwixt us shall never be discovered unto
any.

Amye was amazed to understand that Clerantes knew of her loves, and
undoubtedly believed that he had a familiar spirit, and deliberating a little
with her self what a handsome Man he was, and of how great a quality, and what
benefits for her part she might receive from him, she resolved with her self
not to be too rigorous, nevertheless she said unto him, You do accuse me of a
fault which I never did commit, neither will commit at this time; for that
which you demand belongs to my husband, and I have promised to preserve it
for him. You shall receive more from me, said Clerantes, than I sh^l^ take from
you, we ought not to be angry when another shall sow our ground with his own
seed. But my Husband, said Amye, is conscientious, and will not keep the fruits
that shall in that nature be produced. Say you so (sweet Friend) said
Clerantes, Send them home to me, they shall be in a good and a safe hand.

After these words he found no more resistance. In this manner they passed away
two long hours and as one of our Hawks made a flight into the adjacent meadow,
I beheld the Garden door to open, and galloping toward it, I arrived just as
they were bidding one another Farewell. O Madam, said I, Tell me now, Is not
the Lord Clerantes of approved valor? Yes certainly, said she, The Victory
betwixt us will always evenly be balanced, and accordingly as we regain new
strength, sometimes the one, sometimes the other will have the advantage.

In this gentle conclusion we did take our leaves of her, and all along the way
we did not cease to admire her spirit, of which Clerantes did give me so many
proofs, rehearsing to me all the discourse which she had with him in my
absence. I gave thanks unto Love for the good fortune he received.

Some time afterward Letters were directed to him to return unto the Court, to
which (for all his oaths to the contray) he was constraito go, and propounding
to my self what was the necessity that did enforce him to it, I did what I
could to render the journey agreeable unto him.

By nature he was very ambitious, and the design which he had to lead a private
life, did only proceed from his inability to employ himself in the affairs of
States. But having obtained the favor of the King as much as any other, at the
last he desired it more particularly, and to have his Countenance altogether,
and aspiring to places of great Authority, he did now more loye the Court than
before he hated it, so that at the last I was delivered from the trouble, by
studying any more, by my praises, to make the Court to appear pleasant to him.

He solicited my advancement as much as possibly he could, and at the last he
procured that I had the countenance of the King, who a long time had known me
before. I did assist him my self in my preferment, and ordinarily did hold
discourse with the King, in which he observed a certain acuteness of Spirit
that did much delight him. Do you conceive that I became more glorious in my
own conceit, and that I more esteemed my self, because that every day I made
freely my addresses to the King? I protest unto you No; It was a thing but
indifferent to me. I am not of the humor of that honest Frenchman, who boasted
that he made his approaches so near unto the King in a certain ceremony, that
the chafe of his Scabbard did touch his clothes; Neither will I resemble my
self to another, who with great glory did show to all the world the spittle
which from his Majesty's mouth did casually light upon his Cloak as he passed
in the street by him: Such a simplicity is not graceful to me; I should rather
commend the rudeness of the Country man, who, his his Companion desiring him
to leave off his labor to come to look upon the King, who was riding through
their Town, did make answer, that he would not take so much as one step out of
doors to see him, for the King was but a man no more than himself.

I received the favors which his Majesty vouchsafed me, with a spirit that
always preserved it self in the same temper, and which never would suffer it
self to be transported into any disdainful motion. In his presence I
oftentimes would bitterly inveigh against some Gentlemen, who, I conceived, did
deserve it. Nevertheless their Ignorance was so abominable, that the greatest
part of them did believe it nothing did concern them, or else would fall a
laughing as others did believing (such fools they were) that what I did speak
was not to have them to retire from their follies, but only to feed them with
new pleasure. True it is, there was one amongst them called Baiamond, who had
more apprehension, but not more wisdom than the rest. He was a glorious Fool,
neither would he turn into sport the jeers of other men, nor abstain from
committing those faults for which he was reprehended. All the Satyrs that were
composed at the Court had no other subject but himself, he was a Theme of scope
enough for all the Poets of the Town to exercise their wits on, which caused
him to swear that the first that made mention of him in mockery should be
grievously punished if he could but arrive to the knowledge of him.

One day when I was in the L^uvre I discoursed of diverse things with some of
my friends, and we came to talk at last of the great plumes of Feathers then in
fashion; some commended the use of them, others who were more precise did
condemn them: For my self I did much extol them, as diverse other
accoutrements which pertain to the ornament of Gentlemen, howsoever I could not
approve I said) the humor of some senseless Courtiers, who glorify that they
have feathers as great as the Mules of the Kings stable, which they would have
to serve them as a shade, and when the Sun shines they continually do look down
upon their shadows to observe how gracefully they become them, and with these
Feathers they hope to charm the resolutions of the most obdurare Ladies.

I have lately (said I) heard the history of an amorous young Gentleman, who
did lay forth as much money on feathers only, as on all the other habiliments
he did wear, and yet, for all that, could never mollify the hard heart of his
Mistress.

As soon as I had spoken those words all the Company entertaining a confidence
that I would not recite any stale History, did entreat me with one accord to
rehearse it to them, and I did thus begin.

I must then, Gentlemen, begin my Account with a Count of whom I make no
account. Immediately Baiamond, who was behind us, and did always wear a great
plum of feathers in his Hat, and who also was a Count himself, did imagine that
I had an intent to bring him upon the Stage. He drew therefore more near unto
us to understand the subject of my Discourse. He (said I) of whom I am to
speak, did fall in love with the Daughter of a Physician of this Town, for he
had never the courage to carry his Desires to a more eminent place. He for the
most part did frequent the Church, to which she repaired to hear Mass in the
Morning and Vespers in the Evening, and oftentimes he would walk by the Door of
her Fathers House, to enjoy the opportunity to behold her; At the last, he
advised with himself to lodge in a Chamber ready furnished, that was directly
over against her house, hoping that the proximity of the place would bring some
contentment to him, for the present, and be a happy means for the manifestation
of his love for the time to come. One of his Lackeys was commanded to court her
Servant, pretending to be amorous of her; He was obedient to the command, and
in a short time he gained the favor of the Maid, so that his Master did
discover unto him the affection which he did bear to the Daughter of the
Physician, and desired his endeavor to assist him. This affair of his did meet
with mavelous success. At last the Maid Servant being very familiar with her
young Mistress, who governed all things in the house after her Mothers
decease, did acquaint her with the great love which her Neighbor over the way
did bear unto her, for which she was extremely checked, her young Mistress
being highly incensed, because she favored the suit of such a man, who by the
greatness of his birth and fortunes, did make love unto her to violate her
honor, any not to espouse her, and was forbidden for the time to come to bring
any such Messages unto her. The poor serving Maid was excessively sorry that
she could perform nothing for him. who had promised her such extraordinary
rewards, Nevertheless to draw some profit from him, she made him believe that
he was passionately beloved by her Mistress. She needed not to make many
protestations to induce him to entertain this belief, for he had more vanity
than any other in this age. When he passed through the streets, he would turn
him on every side to see if any did observe him, and if any one peradventure
did fasten his eye upon him, being amazed at his prodigious pride, he would
imagine that he entered into admiration, either at the symmetry and proportion
of his Body, or at the richness of his habit. If a word were spoken on some
other subject as he passed by, he did take it as spoken on himself, and
expounded all to his own advantage; If a young Girl had but looked upon him, he
steadfastly did believe that she was amorous o^ him It was told me, that coming
one day to a Gentlewomans house, and seeing there one of his friends who was a
servant to her, he immediately departed; the other meeting him accidently some
few days afterward, demanded of him, what offense he had done him, that he
would not stay in the place where he was; The Count made answer to him, You are
a bad Interpreter of my actions, I abruptly departed from your Mistresses house
to do you a pleasure, having understood by the praises she did give to the
curle^ of my Perivigge, that she did bear a greater affection to me than to
your self, I was afraid that my presence would make her refrain from bestowing
those favors on you which you may desire, and do deserve. Those who did
acquaint me with the story of this vain person, whom they knew very well, did
give me an account of a thousand such follies he committed. The Daughter of the
Physician, without making any experimental practice of him, did in a short time
perceive of what humor he was. The Windows of his Chamber were always open
when he did put on any new suit of Apparel, or did any other thing in which his
magnificence did appear, and at dinner always, or at supper, the dishes for a
little time were placed in the window, that the good cheer he made might be
beheld.

This was the cause that she did rather hate than love him, and related all his
vanities to some of her choicest friends, who one Evening came into her chamber
to take some pleasure at the apish tricks of her Servant, who when ever as she
came to her window, would be sure always to be putting out his head at his own
It so came to pass that there was a Gentleman with him who played very well
upon the Lute, he entreated him to give him a Lesson or two, and that he might
not be seen, he did conceal him in a convenient place hard by the window; In
the mean time he did take another Lute into his own hand, and standing at the
window he so fingerd it, that it might be believed by those who stood in the
window over against him, that it was he who played, hoping that his Mistress
would be the more inamoured on him, having made it apparent to her that he was
endued with so Gentleman-like a quality; but as it fell out most unfortunately
for him, one of the Companions of the Daughter of the Physician, who could play
well on that Instrument, perceiving by his stops, and his unskilful touching
of the strings, that it was not he who made the harmony, did go into a Room
which was a pair of stairs higher, where they plainly discovered who it was
that played. To make sport therefore with the Count, sometimes they told him
that his Lute was out of Tune, sometimes that he did touch the strings too
rudely, sometimes that he had broke his Trebble; Nevertheless for all that the
Music continued a long time. The Physicians Daughter continuing at the window,
he remembering that he had read in the Romances, that some Lovers did even swoun
away in beholding their Mistresses, he, to show the like excess of passion,
standing at the Window, did counterfeit himself to be in a great feebleness,
and closing his eyes, and opening his mouth, as if he labored for a little
breath, he fell gently down into the Chair behind him, and his window
immediately was commanded to be shut* The young Gentlewoman suspecting what it
was, did send one of her Servants to his lodging to understand what was the
malady that with so sudden a violence had surprised him, seeing that but a
little before he seemed to be very well, when he played on his Lute at the
Window. The Messenger being brought into his Chamber; Friend, said he with a
feeble voice, Acquaint your Mistress, that what sickness I have, she only is
the occasion of it. This answer being returned, it did administer to her a new
and a greater subject of laughter. Her Maid Servant being still willing to
perform some service for our Count, did assure him by his Lackey, that within
few days she would procure him the means to discourse wi h her Mistress, and
to proceed further peradventure, if the Doctor her Father, who did keep her so
short, could be employed for a while in the Country. It being represented to
the Count, that peradventure this Doctor would continue always in the City, if
some invention were not practiced to send him in the Country, he resolved with
himself to take some Beggar who was sick out of Paris, and having sent him to
his Signiory in the Country, to entreat the Doctor his Neighbor to take the
pains to see him, and administer Physic to him, making him believe that he was
one of the Grooms of his Chamber whom he much tendered.

Being determined to put this in practice, he ^ound Beggars enough, who were
willing to be sent any where to be cured of their maladies, and amongst them
all, he made choice of one who s^emed the fittest for his turn. The affair did
successively advance it self according to the design, for the hope of gain, and
the good occasion to take the Country air, did tempt the Physician for some
days to forsake his own house. Now was the time for the Maid servant to act her
part. She said unto her Mistress, you are too blame forsooth to make no more
esteem of this brave Monsieur, who every day does by his look too much accuse
you of your cruelty; who knows but that it is his resolution to marry you,
although he is more rich than your self? Permit him to have access unto you in
the absence of your Father, by which means you may examine all his intentions,
and find whatsoever he has in his belly, H^ Mistress desiring to make some
mirth with the Count, did not reprove her Maid at that time, but assured her
she was not much unwilling to enjoy the conversation of her Lover. She
immediately did acquaint the Lackey with it, and in the twinkling of an eye,
behold my young Count was arrived at the House of the young Gentlewoman, who
had those in her company who not long before had seen him in his own window to
swoun away. After some words of courtesy, they came by course to others which
did not so much please him, because that ever and anon they gave him some touch
or other, to which he could return no answer. You are to observe, that when he
was to address himself to any company, he did learn some complements by heart,
which he did take out of the Academy of Love, and these complements he would
repeat over and over, although the discourse was not on that subject, which did
render him troublesome and tedious unto all that heard him; I leave to you to
judge, if at this present he had not turned over all the Books of Love, to
collect from thence some Flowers of Oratory, and if that by his language it
might not easily be understood that he had read Nerveza, and yet for all this
he would oftentimes fall short, or be extremely out, especially if he was put
upon a subject on which he had not read that Morning. As for his passionate
Love he had not the opportunity to speak much unto his Mistress thereupon, and
he received nothing but cold and unsatisfying answers from her; insomuch that
he began to repent that he had abused her Father in a needless journey so far
out of the City. Not long afterward the Doctor being returned, did carry his
Daughter to a little house which he had bought, about a mile from Paris, and
his business not permitting him to stay long there, he almost every day did
come back into the City. His Daughters servant having a greater desire than
ever to assist the Count, demanded of her Mistress, if she could not be well
contented, being all alone to, give a little entertainment to her Servant. She
made answer, yes, thinking she had spoken of a young Gentleman one of her own
degree, who made Love unto her, but her Maid Servant did not move according to
that Bias, but advertised the Count that her Mistress, whose love had overcome
him, did passionately desire his presence. On that Evening he did not fail to
retire unto the Village, and the Maid Servant causing him to enter at the
Garden door, did bring him to the Granary, where she entreated him to hide
himself, for fear of being seen, under some old and ragged Coverlets, promising
him as soon as it was night, that she would come and conduct him to her
Mistress; afterward she repaired to her, and smiling said, The Gentleman is
come, I have caused him to conceal himself above under the Coverlets which are
there. Her Mistress suspecting of whom she spoke, determined with her self to
take vengeance on him for his boldness to hide himself in her house, as if he
had a design to ravish her of her honor; and because her servant should not
hinder her determination, she only nodded with her head to her, and sent her in
an errand to the further end of the Town; she was no sooner departed, but she
called the Keeper of her Vineyard, and his Son, and causing each of them to
take a good staff in their hands, she did bring them both to the Granary. The
Count the better to take air, did keep his head without the Coverlets, but
hearing the noise which coming up the stairs they made, he did hide himself
under them again.

Being entered into the Granary, the Daugher of the Physician did command them
to beat the Coverlets as hard as they could to make the Dust fly out. The
Keeper of the Vineyard told her that her best course was to take take them down
into the Court, and to have them beaten and shaken there, but she made a round
answer, and told them plainly, she would not have them touched but only with
their Cudgets. Having spoke these words she returned to her Chamber, in the
mean time the two Peasants began to lay about them, and to beat the Coverlets
with all the force they had, which were not thick enough to defend the Count
from feeling the Blows, which did fall like hail upon him.

This exercise being nothing agreeable to his ease, he resolved to put an end
unto it, and suddenly arising up, he laid the Son of the Vine-keeper on the
ground with one blow of his fist, and running down the stairs, he took his
course more swift than a pursued Stag, directly to his Lackey. He knew not well
afterward, whom to be angry with, either the Mistress or the Servant, and
perceiving himself affronted in the highest nature, he turned all his love into
disdain, and took his lodging that night in a place far from his ungrateful
Mistress, and ever since he has avoided that street, as the way unto the
Gibbet. Following the King the other day, who passed by that place, It was told
me, that he took his leave of a great Peer of the Realm, who of his own accord
did offer to accompany him to the Rendezvous of the Court, which was
interpreted to be a great incivility, because the true reason of it was not
fully understood.

But this was not his Masterpiece, for you are to take notice that he had a
relish as well of the exercises of Mars, as of Venus. He had not been long in
the University, but he was possessed almost with an obstinate desire to make
experience of his valor. He observed that no Gentleman was respected unless
he had fought a Duel or two, therefore when he was high in wine he had a great
desire to quarrel, and to raise his discontent to such a height of insolence,
that it might seem worthy of a challenge. But he was no sooner fresh and in
good sense, but he considered with himself that he might as well be overcome,
and mortally wounded, as be a Conqueror. He had no mind to that sport. He would
only be beaten as Belleroze was in the Comedy; He would have the thing done,
which was yet to be done, and if possibly it could be effected, he endeavored
that some Man of Credit, troubled by a false vision, should publish to the
world that he had seen him in many dangerous incounters, although he never was
really in any.

At that time there was at the Court a Baron of a fantastical humor, who
being one of the Counts acquaintance, did comply with him in all things. Having
a long time discoursed of Duels, and of the valor of the Age, they concluded
on a project for Honor, which shall be memorable through all posterity. Since
all the Worl^ did beat on another, they had a desire to beat themselves,
without exposing themselves to that danger as so many other young Fools are
accustomed to do, They were expressly resolved to make a tall quarrel in some
eminent company, and immediately afterward having severd themselves, they
plotted to be found in some place out of Town with their swords drawn (swords
that had no more metal in them than their Masters) with which they should make
a flourish, and traverse their ground, and keep a clashing, until some should
clap in to part them, it mattered not, whether they were Travailers, or some of
their own Grooms, who must know nothing of their counterfeit valor, because
they might speak afterward of their Combat to the greater advantage. The
Count, flattering himself with a belief that this was the only way to procure
him Reputation, did say, And what evil is there in it? Shall we sin against the
laws of Virtue? Is it rashly done to enter into those rages in which we observe
many of the Nobility to be daily engaged? Why should not we make a gallant
venture of our lives as well as they? And because in these times Men are only
esteemed by the number of the Duels they have fought, we must, although
dissemblingly, practice the same Arts, because there is not other way to gain
us reputation. Let us put the Case, that sometimes a kingdom may be given to a
Man for committing some evil act, he who has not committed the act, but has
dissembled he has done it, to gain the Crown, will still find comfort in
himself, how cruelly soever other men judge of him. Let us accomodate our
selves to the Age, and make an advantage of our misfortunes, if we cannot
remove them. The other approving his reasons and resolutions, they concluded
upon some fantastical subject to quarrel in the Tilyeard in the presence of
diverse Gentlemen. The Count affirmed, it imported not if the occasion of the
quarrel was never so small, for they who fight Duels on the least occasions,
are the only men, who are now esteemed, because they make such little reckoning
of their lives, which on all occasions they do hazard. In this resolution, the
Baron and the Count taking horse, they parted from their Company by several
ways, and passing over Newbridge toward the Evening they came to Cherks Field,
where alighting from their horses, they took their swords in hand. They made
choice of a place where they might be seen of all, so that they no sooner made
a clashing with their swords, but the Citizens and the Soldiers did make have
to part them. One who stood near unto them did swear unto me, that the Count
even then said unto the Baron, Be not so violent in your motion: Make but
gentle thrusts, and such as easily I may put by. Moreover it was observed, that
they did fight in the same posture as if they were dancing the Pyrrhique dance,
observing a tune and method in clashing their swords one against the other.
This nevertheless was not taken notice of, and they were entreated to be
reconciled. To this counsel they were very obedient, and they did put their
Swords into their scabbards again, contenting themselves to allege, that it
stood neither with reason nor honor to make their passadoes before so many
people.

Ascer this, their friends arrived, having followed them upon an imagination
that they were gone to fight with one another. They came back together into the
City, where they were made good friends, and their desperate Duel was every
where published, to the advantage as well of the one as of the other. Tell me,
was not this an Heroical resolution? and if in their in Infancy they had taken
any fall by which they were hurt, could they not make the people believe that
they were scars which they had received in some former Duel? Me thinks when
they fought they might have clapped to their sides a hoggs bladder full of
blood, by which they might have counterfeited themselves to be wounded.
Nevertheless, for all this Artifice, their glory has been since renowned over
all the Court, as has been the glory of many others, who are no more valiant
than themselves. I had not known their deceit, were it not for one of their
Grooms, who did conceal himself in the Chamber of the Count when they made the
plot, and since has published it. The Count did find himself so highly and
generally esteemed for having hazarded his life in this single fight, that he
has been ever since dazzled with the overcoming splendour of his own glory. The
other day he would have challenged one of the Kings Receivers, because he saw
him too often in the house of a Gentlewoman whom he loved, but he was confident
before hand that he would never answer him, although according to the colors
he did wear he was habited like a man of the sword. He did write a challenge to
him, the form whereof he did take out of Amadis, and sent it by the Groom of
his chamber. The Receiver, having read it, did return this Answer, Tell your
Master, that I am not at this present in a disposition to fight. I am a Man of
peace, and will satisfy him in whatsoever shall be requisite: Let him imagine
that he sees me in the field with my sword in my hand, and fighting against
him; Let him imagine that he has laid me on the ground; Let him publish it
throughout the City, I will acknowledge it. For the present, I do confess my
self overcome, and without any fighting I demand of him that he would grant me
my life. It is my best course, I do find, so to do, and to prevent the Evil
rather than attend it. Would it be discretion think you to implore the mercy of
my Enemy after he has given me my deadly wound? Whether the Receiver did speak
this in Earnest or in Jest is not much material; but howsoever it was, the
Count was effectually contented, and did boast to every one whom he did meet,
how gallantly he had overcome this Man, who did every day so out-brave him,
insomuch that for his imaginary conquest, he believed he deserved almost as
magnificent triumphs as the Romans heretofore for their greatest Archivement.

This was the Story I did account unto them, which was no sooner ended, but all
those who heard it, did entreat me to give them the name of the Count, which
was more than I could do, for I swear unto you, that those who did rehearse it
to me did conceal his Name.

Count Baiamond having heard some part of my discourse, looking with a
discontented Eye upon me (for which I could not imagine the cause) did retire
himself from our company. One of our Number having observed it, and knowing
withal the vanity of his humor, did laughing at him declare, that he believed
the subject of my discourse did reflect upon him. For my self, I had at the
least the same belief, although I did not divulge it. And surely we did not
deceive our selves; for he was a great part of that which I had spoken, as
afterward he made it appear by the vengeance he would take of me, believing
that I had done him an unpardonable wrong, by rehearsing a Story which belonged
to himself.

One Evening, returning late from a Ladies house with whom I long discoursed, I
was incountred by the way with the Groom of his Chamber, whom at that time I
did not know, who told me that at the corner of the next Street there was a
Gentleman, one of my friends, who desired to speak with me! Behold how well a
treacherous heart does know how to make use of his own time. I was on Foot, and
had none to follow me but my little Biscayn who was unarmed, because I came
from a place, to which, the better to conceal my self from public observation,
I would not go with any great Equipage.

I had no mistrust of him, and talking of many things I did go along with him,
receiving by the way many testimonies of a good disposition: Crossing the way
where was a Lanthern with a Candle in it, according to the custom of the City,
he did cast his eyes upon my Sword, and said unto me, Sir, you have there, I
see, an excellent hilt, Is the Blade answerable to it? let me see I pray you.
He had no sooner spoke the word but I did put the sword into his Hand: He
immediately unsheathed it to see if it were well poised, And as he was giving me
his Judgment of it, we came into a close lane, where, as dark as it was, I
discovered some Men who did hide themselves in the porches of some of the
buildings, to whom he said, Sirs, see where he is; Be of good courage my
Companions. Immediately they did all draw their swords to assault me, and I
having not then my own to assist me, I took a Pistol out of my Pocket, which
being discharged at random, I had not the leisure to charge it again, therefore
I did commend unto my feet the charge of my safety. I did run with so much
speed, that it was impossible for them to overtake me, and I protected my self
in the shop of a pastry Cook which I found open. As for my Lackey, he sled
directly to the house of Clerantes, who caused all his Gentlemen, the Grooms of
his Chamber, and his Lackeys, to come forth to my assistance, but they could
neither find me nor those who assaulted me. Fearing to be discovered by my
Enemies, I took upon me to be one of them, and did pass along the streets
crying, where is he? It was my fortune to pass by a house, which a long time I
had known to be a Bawdy house, and being called unto out of the window, six or
seven men came forth into the streets, and constrained me to enter in to play
at Dice with them, I staked a teston to every one of them, and in the way of
courtesy emptyed all my Fobb upon the Table, and although I had not won much of
them, they did swear unto me, that I must sing them a Song for their Silver; I
did sing one of the best that I had, which they never heard before. After that,
one of them demanded of me, If I would play again that they might win back
their money? I made answer, With all my heart. As we were throwing the Dice, I
heard a young Fellow say to one of the Maid servants, We have done nothing this
Evening on the Enterprise which we were to perform for Count Baiamond, against
one whom we knew not, he most unfortunatly is escaped out of our hands, being
brought unto us by that gallant young Blade, who did go along out of this
house with us.

By those words I understood that I was amongst my Assassinates, who were such
Villains, that for a little money they would kill a man in cold blood.
Howsoever I was glad to understand that it was he who would have caused me to
be killed by a treachery so disagreable to a Man who carried the title of
Nobility. Having lost all my silver, because I did not mind my play in listening
to what was spoken, I had free leave to depart the House, and took my way
toward Clerantes house, whom I hoped to have made merry, in appearing before
him in that Equipage in which I then was, and in accounting to him the dangers
from which I was miraculously delivered. I knocked as loud as I could at the
Gate which was shut against me, because that those who were sent forth to
assist me were all retired. A Switzer who was half asleep and half drunk, did
come unto the Gate, and demanded, who was there? I made no answer to him, but
only by the repeated knocks of the Hammer; He said, that his Lady had forbid
that any noise should be made, being indisposed in her health, and moreover
thus proceeded in his discourse, Fool, if you will not hold your hand, I shall
give you that which shall stick by you. In the name of God, what is it you
would have? My Lady cannot sleep, and do you come to make Music to her. Are
you a Chanter? If you are a Chanter show me your Tablature?

Having propounded these goodly questions, he opened the Gate, and I said unto
him, Let me come, in I am Francion, but he not knowing me, and thinking that I
asked for Francion, told me, Francion has nothing to do with you, nor with any
that belongs unto you, He is not within. Speaking those words he immediately did
shut the gate upon me, and departed without giving any ear to what I said, so
that being unwilling to make any more noise, because the Lady was not well, I
did put out my Candle, and did resolve to walk again in the streets,
considering with my self into what house I might best retire, for there were
many men yet up, before whom I would not willingly appear, knowing well enough
they would conceive that I had disguised my self for some dissolute ends, and
thereupon they would raise upon me a thousand scandals, which they would
publish at the Court.

I was profoundly possessed with this thought, when I was stayed by the watch,
who demanded of me whether I was going, and who I was? you may see who I am,
said I, by my empty Fobb, I am going home having lost all my money at play. We
were then very near to one of the Lanterns of the street, which caused them to
observe ruy countenance, in which they discerned I know not what that I did not
look like such a Gamester. They therefore did suspect me to be some guilty
person, and the rather because I had no Candle lighted, they therefore examined
my Pockets, where they found a Pistol, which confirmed them in their had
opinion of me. You are a knave said they, and have thus disguised your self to
commit some murder; we are commanded to have a strict eye on such people who
take the same course as you do; you shall go along with us to prison. Having
spoke those words they all took hold of me, and caused me to go along with them
to the great Castle. I durst not tell them that I was Francion, although I knew
well enough that they would let me go as soon as I had but told them my name.
I chose rather at this present to come out of their hands by some other way. I
had hid my Purse betwixt my shirt and my skin, which was the cause they could
not find it, although it was the first thing which they did search for, I
desired them to unhand me that I might take it out, and I did give them all
that was in it. They did thank me for my liberallity, and without any more
enquiring after my affairs, they did all consent that I should go where I
pleased.

I conceived with my self it was not amiss to return to the Cooks house, where
having undisguised my self, and believing that my enemies who watched for me
were all retired, I did go again to Clerantes house, where I no sooner knocked
at the Gate, but by good fortune the Switzer was awake, and rapping out many
oaths he opened the Gate for me, and the fumes of the wine he drank being
dissipated, he knew me better than he did before, He did let me in, and as I
demanded of him what a clock it was, because he seemed so unwilling to open the
Gate, he told me it was too morrow, which made me heartily to laugh, for he
should have said it was a little past midnight: I did go directly to my
lodging, where I found that my servants, who understood of my bad fortune could
not sleep, such an affection they did bear unto me, and were very diligent to
have me to bed, where I needed not to be rocked to cause me to sleep.

When day appeared I addressed my self to Clerantes, and declared to him the
adventures which on the night before had befallen me. And this procured his
hatred to Count Baiamond, insomuch that he asked of me if he should acquaint
the King with it, to demand justice of him. I much thanked him for his good
will, which I beseeched him not to employ on that subject, being unwilling that
his Majesty should trouble himself with our quarrels. Nevertheless I resolved
with my self to stand on my Guard, and to go abroad no more but with a good
train, since I was assaulted at once, by Baiamond with so many people.

I was sorry that I had so deeply engaged my self in this quarrel by assuming
too great a liberty of speech, for there is no man so weak or impotent, who
cannot be hurtful enough, if he be armed with wicked and treacherous
resolutions; and I now at last perceived that to live at rest, we must not
endeavor to disoblige any whomsoever, but to carry our selves toward all with
a gentle and a complying mind, especially at the Court, where there are such
mutinous Spirits, that they cannot endure that the Truth should be represented
to them; Nevertheless I had a desire to satisfy my honor concerning that
affair; and having accidently met with Count Baiamond, I said unto him; Count,
Have you forgot the Virtues which such a Monsieur as you, who make profession
of Nobility ought to practice? How comes it about, that on the other night you
would assault your Enemy by Highway Rogues? Do not you know well enough who I
am, and that I ought not to be dealt withal in such a Nature? If I were the
most infamous man in the world, you ought not for your own honor to have done
it. If we have any quarrel, we may decide it by our selves without the
assistance of any Seconds. Baiamond being touched to the quick, because I
reproached him for what he had done, and withal being desirous to witness to
me that he was endued with a generous spirit, did make answer to me, that when
I pleased a thorough account should be given for the wrong I had done him at
that present, and for my accusing him for what was passed, I replied to him
that it should be to morrow in some private place out of the City, which I
would acquaint him with. It troubled me I must confess to combat with such a
treacherous man, who had given such marks of so base and so cowardly a spirit,
and I perceived that I should gain no great honor to overcome him.
Nevertheless, after dinner, I did ride forth at Saint Anthonies Gate, having a
great desire to be dispatched of this business. At the last he arrived with a
Gentleman who was as much my friend as his own, and who would not employ
himself to reconcile us, because he was of a martial resolution, and was glad
to see us in the present resolution to fight with one another, hoping that he
suddenly should discover which of us two had the braver spirit. Baiamond took
him along with him, believing that I had one to second me, but perceiving that
I was alone, he desired him that he would be pleased only to be a Spectactor of
the Combat. We were on our way to Charenton, where, as we were looking out for
some place of retirement, wherein to execute our design, Lerontes passed by in
his Caroach. He was all alone, as was the custom of that Lord, who was pleased
in private to recreate and entertain himself in private, being removed from all
the noise and distempers of the Court.

Civility did oblige us to salute him, and to speak unto him, who observing
that we were both armed with Rapiers, did suspect the affair, and to hinder us
from enterprizing any thing, he desired us to make a little stay, without
speaking any more words. He then represented to us that the day being sultry
hot, it were better for us to sit in the shade in his Caroach, than to be on
horseback. We fearing that he would take offense, if we should be so uncivil as
to deny him our Company (and the rather, because we could find no excuse to
travel any further) did accept of his Love, and our Lackeys held our horses. He
casting his eye on my Horse he did like him exceedingly well, and said, I will
try if I can practice on Horseback my old Rudiments, for all the heat of the
Sun. Gentlemen, Do not stir, I pray you.

Speaking those words, he planted himself in my saddle, and performed all the
feats that belonged to a good Horseman. In the mean time the Caroach was
hurrying on toward Paris, and Baiamond affecting an undanted generosity, would
often say unto me, Was it possible that this should fall out so? For my self I
burned with impatience, and would have fought presently, if it had been
possible for us to fight in the Caroach. Lerontes, seeing that we were near
unto Conflans, had a desire to walk thither on foot: We alighted from the
Caroach, and did go along with him to the fair Gardens, where I entertained
him all the while with such discourse, as did not testify the least trouble of
Spirit. When he beheld that it grew toward the Evening, he demanded of us, if
we would return to Paris with him? and desired us openly to acknowledge to him
what was the design we had. I replied, our design was amorous, we were going
this Evening to visit a Lady in those parts. I am sorry then, said he, that I
have hindered your journey. And on those words we took our leaves of him. He
was no sooner gone, but Baiamond demanded if I would fight presently? but his
friend made answer that now it was unseasonable, because that night approached;
at those words he seemed more eager, and alleged that we had time enough, to
which I readily did agree. Nevertheless we did nothing, at all, but resolved
to defer the encounter until the next day, and for the present, we did return
unto the City. Baiamond was then in his extravancies, and would take boat,
alleging it was more cool and pleasant to return by Water than by Land. We
entered into the same Boat with him, having commanded our Lackeys to lead our
horses unto Paris, When we were half the way, he began to rise up, and to stand
upright in the Boat, and cried out, O what a grief do I feel within me to
attend so long for satisfaction for the injuries you have done me! I will delay
my revenge no longer; let us fight in this Boat, here is room enough. He of us
two who shall be killed shall have his Body thrown into the River that the
affair may be concealed. There can no better course be found to avoid the
proceedings of justice. Speaking those words, he drew his Sword, believing that
I would have done the like, but Montespin (for so he was called who did
accompany us) taking hold of him by the Arm, did say unto him, What do you make
account to do my friend? were there ever seen such proceedings? If it should be
known to any what a motion you have made, they would condemn you for the
extremest folly in the world. Have patience a little, we are not now in a place
to fight Duels. These words made him quiet, and yet for all that he ceased no
to testify the great desire he had to begin the Duel, but upon my faith I
plainly did perceive that he had not so great a desire as he pretended; He was
just of the humor of the Duellists of this age, who have altogether an
extravagant Fury in their discourse, and no resolution at all in their Souls. I
assure my self, that amongst a hundred who within these two years have been
slain in duels, there were hardly four, who according to the Rules of true
Generosity have been carried out of the Field. I can number unto you a great
many of them who have danced, sung, and showed a thousand vanities as they were
going to the Duel, which was only to divert themselves that they might not
think of the danger that was so near them. Baiamond was of the same
disposition, and when we came to Paris, finding our Horses near the unto
Arsenac, he was importunate that we should all go to supper to Montespins
house; he committed there a thousand follies, he drank unto me, and did sing a
Song, but certainly he in that did resemble little Children, who in the night
time passing through a dark place, do sing but only to charm their fear. At the
last to witness his valor all over, and to show that in one day he would
perform more than all the Gallants of the Court did ever imagine could be done,
he returned to his former extravagancies, and taking his Sword, he said unto
me, If you have any courage at all show it now, for now is the time to decide
our quarrel. Let us go down into the Court of this house, it is spacious
enough for our Duel. I made answer, I will do as you will have me, for I would
have you know, that I refuse not at any time to enter into the Combat with you,
be it night, or be it day, it will be no more advantageous for the one than for
the other. Give order therefore that the Torches may be lighted.

This being understood, Montospin came unto us, and said, God forbid he should
permit us to fight at such an unseasonable hour, for the valiant always ought
to have the Sun to be the witness of their glorious Acts, and none but Thieves
and guilty men do in the night time use their Swords; and besides that, the
Torches could not give light enough to serve us in our enterprise. Baiamond
made answer, that one Evening he was in the Company of two Gentlemen, who had
agreed to play a game at Tennis, and that they had Torches lighted about the
Tennis Court that they might see to play, if these were so impatient to play a
game at Tennis, how much more ought we to be who were to fight a Duel?
Montespin did represent unto him, that although we were in his own house, we
ought either of us to fear a treachery, and that the Lackeys who held the
lights might put them out, or carry them all on one side to give light only to
that party whom they would favor, and moreover when we thought least of them,
they might assault and wound us in our backs. These reasons did suddenly cool
the fiery spirit of Baiamond, for it was all but counterfeit, and if he knew
that Montespin would have given way that we should have fought by Torch-light,
he would never have made mention of it. He made these Rodomantadoes out of a
vain custom he had used ever since he had been a learner in the Fencing School,
and when he did express himself most highest, his heart did always at that
time beat most. In effect, he did speak only of the Duel, because he was
constrained to it, and did endeavor to amuze me by his connterfeit resolution.

At the fast Montespin did cause us to lie in two beds which he had prepared
for us, and in the morning he did endeavor himself to make us friends,
alleging that it would redound to our dishonor, if we should kill one another
for nothing. I had no desire that our difference should be so taken up, so that
I did leave Montespin, and said unto Baiamond, Let us go then to look out him
whom you worcester of, to put an end unto our controversy. He followed me, not
knowing what I would say, and I then propounded to him to return unto the place
where yesterday we were, and to fight our Duel there.

I charged my Enemy as violently as possibly I could, and gave him so many
blows that he was hardly able to sustain them. As I was striking one blow with
all the force I had, his horse curvetting received it upon his eyes, which were
immediately covered with blood, and did put him in such a rage that he would be
governed no more by the Bridle or the Spur. His Master had enough to do to save
himself with all the art and industry he had, nevertheless he carried him into
a place full of dirt, where I followed him so close that I might have killed
him if I would, but I had no desire to wound him in his back. I cried out unto
him to return. At the last he got so much power over his Horse, that
approaching to me he did give me a wound in my left Arm. Immediately after he
had hurt me, his Horse did shake himself with such a sudden violence, that he
did throw him into a Ditch full of dirt, where to be revenged of my wound I
might have given him a hundred mortal ones if I had a desire thereunto. I was
contented to put the point of my sword to his throat, and to assure him, if he
would not confess that he owed his life unto me, I would take it from him. He
who could not rise from the place where he was, was constrained to submit unto
me in all things, and afterward I did the best I could to assist him. I told
him, if he had got such an advantage over me, he would hardly have used me with
that humanity, and because, I said, you shall not impute your misfortune to the
disadvantage that I was on Horseback, and you on foot, and that our quarrel may
at this present be decided, Let us begin (if you please) the Combat again,
because I observe that nothing but you clothes have received any prejudice by
your fall. As I spoke those words, Montespin, who followed us close enough, did
press in upon us, and said, No No, you have given both of you sufficient
proofs of your valor, you must not proceed so far as to have your controversy
determined by Death. It is sufficient (Francion) what you have demonstrated,
and I am the Witness of it, that it was in your power to have killed Baiamond.

Although the Count had confessed this himself, necessity forcing him
thereunto, yet he was much perplexed to behold that Montespin was present, who
was as a judge of the fight, and were it not for the incommodity he rereceived,
that his clothes were so full of Mudd that he was hardly able to stir in them,
I do believe he would have begun the fight again.

His Friend did lead him to a Village hard by, where he caused him to disvest
himself, and for my self I returned to Paris to take care of my wound. I
declared what had befallen me to Clerantes, who did publish it to the
disadvantage of Baiamond, and withal insisted much on the Justice of my Cause,
seeing the Count would have assaulted me by the greatest treachery in the
world, for a subject of no moment: It was brought also to the ears of the King,
who very much reproved Batamond; And there was not so much as Collinet our Fool
who did not highly exclaim against him for the Injury he would have done me.

On the other side, I was by every one extolled (I do speak it without
presumption) and my courtesy was much commended which I exercised toward my
Enemy, in that I would not kill him when it was in my power to do it, and when
the many indignities I received from him did provoke me to it. It undoubtedly
did manifest that I had a great command over my Soul, that I would not suffer
it to be misgoverned by the importunity and impetuousnesse of my Choler. By
this occasion I procured to my self the favor of Protogenes, who was one of
the bravest Princes in Europe. There was nothing in me which he esteemed not.
He much approved my discourse, and the reasons I did give for whatsoever I did
speak, and gave me liberty to express my self freely before him, whether the
subject were good or evil, knowing well enough, that I would not reproach any
one but those only who did well deserve it. One time I published a Satyr which
I had made against a certain Lord, of whose degree I made no mention, nor of
his name. There was at the same time another Lord in the Court, who believed
the Satyr was made on himself, and complained of it to Protogenes, who with
smiles told me what he had heard to be reported. I made answer to him, My Lord,
It is easy to conclude, that he who made this complaint unto you is extremly
vicious, for were he not, he would never imagine that these lashing verses did
strike at him. When I made the Satyr I knew not if there were such a man in
the world or not, and yet because he has all the Vices of other men, I have
not whipped that Vice which is not in his Soul. Behold the Subject of his
affliction, he should have been more careful of his honor, and not of himself
made the world to understand what is the life which he does lead at the Court.
But grant that I had composed the Satyr on himself, if he were a wise man, he
would not make the least appearance to be moved at all. I remember that another
Lord of the Court not long since did cause a poor Poet to be beaten for having
defamed him in his verses; But what think you was the Event of it? It reflected
worse on my Lord than it did before; for although the poor Rimer received
blows on his back, in as vast measure and cadence as were the verses which he
made, yet the people were unsatisfied until they knew what was the offense he
had committed; the occasion being known and divulged, it was presently
concluded that the Lord confessed himself guilty, for what is the Sun the worse
if he should be called dark by any man? Hereupon all the streets in the City
had no other discouse but of my Lord and the Poet, and those who had never
heard of the Satyr before, had now an extreme curiosity to see it. These
reasons were so well approved by Prince Protogenes, that he acknowledged the
Lord had done himself the wrong in making a compliance against me, and the
first time that Protogenes saw him afterward, he acquainted him with some part
of the answer which I made him, with which he was entirely satisfied, and
received me afterward into his closest friendship.

I made an answer another time to Protogenes which did infinitely please him.
We discoursed in his presence of Gentleness, Courtesy, and Humility. He
demanded who it was whom we conceived to be the most humble in all the Court; A
Poetaster, who at that time was near unto him, did name a certain Lord, who (he
said) had incomparable Courtesy and Complements, with which he did so well
defend himself, that he was never overcome in Humility. You have reason so to
affirm, said Protogenes, I have oftentimes observed him my self, What do you
think of him Francion? What man is there so bold (said I) as to differ in
Judgment from you, whose Spirit is as great as your authority. I do well
perceive, (said the Prince) that you have not the same thoughts as I have, I
do give you free permission to speak your mind. Well then, said I. Take
knowledge that I esteem that man whom you call humble, to be one of the
proudest men in the world, and observe my reason for it. The Complements which
he does give to those who do accost him, do not proceed from any knowledge of
his own imperfections, but from an ardent desire to appear to be a well-spoken
man. He has a Soul within him that is proud beyond measure, his Presumption
being enforced to descend, does render it self more humble than otherwise it
would, when by complement he is constrained to express himself. If we could
read his heart within him, we might plainly discover how he does but mock those
to whom he does please to humble himself, and by whose praises he does persuade
himself that he ought to be honored for his Eloquence. For the rest of him we
may discover that he makes no value of those to whom he does communicate
himself, and yet he does not seem to despite them, to the end he might invite
them to interchange discourse with him, and to advance him to the Skies, which
does transport him with an unbounded excess of joy. Who is he that can
describe unto us what Pride is, if this be not?

There were some who were ready to make a reply unto me, but the Prince stopped
their mouths, and alleged that they did speak unprofitably against a thing
which did carry in it such an appearence of Truth, doing me the honor to
prefer my reasons above those of other men.

In this manner I passed away many months very happily, receiving daily from
him some favors or other, and for a long time I did not estrange my self from
his presence, as I have done since I fell in love with Loretta. Behold, Sir, I
have here given you an account of the greatest part of my adventurs, If
possibly I could be so happy I would learn yours, without putting you to the
trouble to rehearse them, which is the reason that I dare not importune you to
acquaint me with them. Signior Bourgignon did make answer, It is a Maxim, that
great Personages are the Masters only of great adventures, who either by their
valor or their understanding do find an admirable success in whatsoever they
do undertake, but vulgar spirits, and such as mine, are not in that capacity.
There has never any fortune arrived to me which is worthy of your ear. You may
be confident of it, and do not believe that I speak this to exempt my self
from any trouble, for there is nothing so difficult which I would not perform
to please you. I do believe then, said Francion that nothing extraordinary did
ever disturb your fortunes, and I am of opinion that it is a token of the
felicity which Heaven has imparted to you, not to send any such troubles or
dangers to you as to my self; and it is a testimony also of your prudence,
which has kept you from the undertaking of things dangerous and uncommendable.
If I had so much understanding as I ought to have, I should not peradventure
have committed so many extravagancies as I have repeated to you, but should
have demeaned my self with greater circumspection, I should never have
disguised my self into a Minstrel nor have put my self to the trouble to repeat
and upbraid the vanities of others, which might have cost me my life, and
lastly I should have enjoyed far better fortune than now I do, which might
serve for an excellent example for all men in the World.

The Signior of the Castle said unto Francion that he ought not to complain of
any thing that was passed, and that with a mavelous dexterity he had
withdrawn himself from all manner of misfortunes. After this discourse he
briefly examined all that at several times Francion had related to him,
reflecting most on the History of his youth, and having remembered that he had
made mention of Raymond who had taken his silver from him, he told him that he
understood by one of his Servants where he was, and that he dwelt not far from
that Castle, so that at any time when he pleased he would go alon^ with him,
it being but a journey of recreation. Talk not to me of him, said Francion, I
have no desire to behold that man. He who from his youth did learn to play the
thief, must needs be now of notorious experience, I will have nothing to do
with him, nor any of his Company. I would have you know that my name is
Raymond, said the Signior, and on those words he did begin to swear himself
into an extravagant Choler, I will make you repent, said he, whatsoever you
contumeliously have spoken of Raymond.

Having spoke those words he departed out of the Chamber, and violently did
shut the door. Francion who had quite forgot his countenance, was very sorry to
hear these words to proceed from him, and was much astonished that he should be
amazed for so small a Trifle.

The Stuart of the house came not until many hours afterward unto him to bring
him his Dinner, and then told him that his Master was so extremly incensed
against him, that considering the severity of his Nature, he ought to fear,
seeing he had him in his own Castle locked up from the sight and knowledge of
the world, that he would take some great vengeance for the offenses committed
against him.

Francion all that day ceased not to entertain an infinite number of various
thoughts concerning that subject, and with a great impatience attended to
understand the resolution what Raymond would do with him. The Steward assured
him that on the next day he would bring him certain intelligence of it; and he
failed not to come unto him according to his promise, and assured him, that his
Master had conceived so extreme a displeasure against him ever since he had
spoken something to him on the day forgoing, that he believed he was resolved
to put him to death. Francion a long time deliberated with himself what offense
he had committed against Raymond, and being not able to find it out, he was the
most amazed man in the world. He was thoroughly recovered of the pain which he
had in his head, and now he had no malady but in his Soul only. He would fain
have put on his Clo^ths to address himself to Raymond, to understand what was
the wrong which he had done him, and to assure him, that if he would demand
satisfaction of him in the way of Knighthood, he was ready to fight with him in
the field. ^ut his clothes were not in his chamber, and it was told him that a
great charge was given that he should not rise. He was therefore constrained to
keep his bed until the day following, at what time the Steward early in the
morning came unto him with one of the Grooms of Raymonds Chamber, who told him
they came to assist to make him ready. Francion made answer, that they should
not take so much pains, for he desired that not any but his own Man might come
unto him, but answer was returned, that Raymond would not give way that he
should speak unto him.

The End of the Seventh Book.
THE EIGHTH BOOK OF THE COMICAL HISTORY OF FRANCION.
THe Adventures which Francion incountred in his minority have been already
rehearsed in the forgoing Books, where, I have always brought him in, speaking
in his own person what were the fortunes that did attend him. It is now time
that his Historian should speak for him, and deliver the rest of his Adventures
in the same strain and method. And I am resolved to do it without taking care
what it is, because I have undertaken it, and it may suffice that I do give
upon it this particular advertisement, that I have not found a more easy or
more pleasing remedy against the affliction which a long time has possessed
me, than to write a History which should be as delighfull as it is serious,
seeing a sad cause does oftentimes produce a joyful effect. Neither shall I
regard the reproofs of some foolish persons, who will blame me for this work,
seeing the most ingenious Spirits that were ever known have vouchsafed to
follow these studies, and that our present life would appear too full of
affliction, and too tedious, if we did nor take off the unpleasing severity of
it with some delightful interposure. It is to be too desperately melancholy,
to imagine that he who makes a profession of Virtue, ought not to take any
recreation at all. Let him act Heraclitus who has a mind to it, and weep at
the follies of the world; for my part I had rather personate Democritus, the
most important affairs of this world being but as an Interlude unto me. And
seeing that laughter amongst all living Creatures is only proper unto man, I
believe it is not given him without great reason, and that he is not only
allowed to laugh himself, but to make others to laugh also. It is true that my
first design was not to make this contentment vulgar, nor to please a number of
people whom I do not know, who may read this Comical History being printed, My
intention was only in particular to please my friends; for I considered with my
self, that all the world esteemed not this liberty of jeering mirth, not
knowing that there is nothing more difficult than to be happy in it. Moreover,
it did much trouble me to observe, that as serious things were only read by
learned men, so vanities and follies were the proper studies of the vain and
ignorant, and that there is not so poor a Groom who does not make it his
business to be taken with them. Nevertheless, men of sound Judgment have
advised me to publish this Book, and have so prevailed upon me, that at the
last I have obeyed their persuasions, and I am of a belief that my Book may
please as well the wise men in the world, as the simple, although they differ
much in judgment. And because it has been approved by some who are the
professed lovers of wisdom, I will confess with them, that I have mingled
pleasure with profit, and that in deriding the vicious, I have so handsomely
reproved their Vices, that there is some hope left that it will administer a
good desire unto them to correct themselves, being ashamed of their passionate
actions. But it may so fall out, that I do but flatter and deceive my self,
and I do entertain too high an opinion of my work, and of the disposition of
Men. I know there are a generation of people so stupid, that they will not
profit by it, and will believe that all my discourse is for no other purpose,
but to give them pleasure only, and not to correct their humors. It therefore
will be objected to me, that to meet with all sorts of men, it were my easiest
and readyest course seriously to reprove all sorts of Vices, so that I might
persuade the wicked rather to repentance than to laughter; but there was one
reason which hindered me from taking that way, which is, that I must use a
certain artifice to draw and allure all the world. It is necessary that I
should imitate the Apothecaries, who with sugar cover their bitter potions to
cause them to go down the better. A Satyr whose appearance had been fierce and
wild would have diswaded men from the reading of it by its title only. I shall
only say, that by similitude I do show a fair Palace, which on the outside has
the appearance to be filled with liberty and delights, but within there is
nothing to be seen but severe Censures, unreprovable Accusers, and rigorous
Judges. Here are Fables and Inventions to be seen, which without all doubt will
appear to the Ignorant to be full of simplicity, who have not the capacity to
dive into the depth of them; Nevertheless, these Fables do contain such
Truths, that no man yet had ever the boldness to represent them. I include
also in this book the evil actions of persons of authority, because in these
days we do not love to behold Truth stark naked, and I do take it for a maxim,
That sometimes we ought to hold our peace, that we might speak more freely for
a longer time, that is to say, it is good to moderate our passionate language,
and to confine our selves to certain times, for fear that the great ones should
unresistably apprehend us, and condemn us to a perpetual silence. I had rather
lose my good words than my good friends, and although I am a Satyrist I would
carry it with so good a grace, that those men whom I do reprove may not be
offended at me. But when I reflect more maturely upon my work, that what if
after all this, it shall lose in its estimation; for I have already concluded,
that it will be of no great use to reform the vicious, and that withal it will
bring but little contentment to some of the severest Readers. Of all the
Spirits which I know there are but a very few who are sound enough to judge,
for the greatest part do amuze themselves on nothing else but to reprove those
things whose beauties they are not capable to discover. When a Book is
published, we ought to have the Switzers in the Stationers shop to defend it
with their Halberds; for there are a race of idle people who make it all their
employment to censure whatsoever is printed, and believe it is enough to
confirm them to be gallant men, if they can but say, It is not worth any thing,
although they can give no reason for it. Every man in these times will appear
to be a man of an excellent understanding, although there was never known a
more heavy and a more predominant ignorance. A Schoolboy who is hardly out of
the danger of the lash, having read but three or four French Books, will be
ready to make as many himself, and believe himself able to surpass all others.
But this would be nothing at all, if he did not undervalue another to cry up
his own reputation; but all respect and modesty is abandoned, and men will
enforce themselves to look out defects where none are to be found. For my self,
if I should be so unfortunate as to trespass against the laws of Art in
writing, yet I would have the world know that I do not the less esteem of my
self, for I am not the Master of so base a Soul as to employ all my abilities
on an Art, in which one cannot exercise himself without flatery or subjection.
Having done nothing but only testified my hatred which I bear against the
vicious, in a negligent and mirthfull discourse, I do believe that I have done
enough. But I may speak without presumption, that I have not committed any
fault so great that may make me blush, if any one therefore shall make it his
business to reprehend me, he shall but lose his time to play the Critic on
me, who am the Critic of other men, and it may be of himself; he shall but
grate his Teeth on the Anvill. Let therefore this male-contented humor be
abandoned by all men, and let me return to the agreeable subject of my
discourse.

You ought to understand, that Francion was constrained to permit the Groom of
Raymonds Chamber to apparel him in a rich habiliment, according to the fashion
of the ancients, which by order from his Master he had brought unto him. He
enquired of him, wherefore he did not apparel him in his own clothes, or any
other that were fashionable, but he could receive no other answer, but only
that he was obedient to the commandment of his Master, The Steward having
afterward acquainted him that Raymond had assuredly a resolution to take him
out of the world, Francion made answer, that he believed that in that habit of
the Theater which he had sent him, he would make him act his own Tragedy, in
which he should represent the part of some great person, who in times passed
had been so put to death. The Steward replied, I know not what he will do, for
with much difficulty have I learned that little which I have faithfully
declared to you, out of a charitable compassion that you may the better prepare
your self to depart this world; And I would advise you, Sir, not to be so
frolic as you are, for you are nearer your end than you do think for. Francion
made answer, I cannot leave my ordinary humor, whatsoever misfortune can
arrive unto me, and I can assure you, that he helps me only but to make a
shorter cut in my way to death, in which we every one do travel; for either
sooner or later we must all arrive at that Inn; Nothing afflicts me more than
that I shall not dye like a Gentleman. If my King by Divine permission should
have the news brought unto him of this cruelty, he would not suffer my death to
be unpunished.

As he did speak these words, they did put about his Neck a chain of Diamonds,
and a Hat on his head, the band whereof was heavy with precious stones of a
great value. I think, said he, he will observe the custom of the ancient
Romans, who crowned the Victims they were to sacrifice with the most beautiful
Garlands. You put upon me these rich ornaments to conduct me to my death; what
need have I of this gorgeous attire? Being made ready, they told him he must
go whither they would lead him. He did consent unto it, resolving with himself
to take hold in the way of the first Instrument of defense he could find,
therewith to resist those who should oppose him, for he had no desire to be put
to death without giving before hand some demonstrations of his incomparable
valor.

In this resolution he came out of his Chamber, wirh a countenance no more
troubled than if he had been going to a Banquet. I do believe that Socrates
being in the same condition would not have so unaltered and so constant a
Spirit. He passed with his conductors tbrough the Galleries and the Chambers,
and in the way he listened to an Air that he had hererofore himself composed,
which was sung in a room that was not far from him. The Ditty was this.

The Fair Beliza has a Face,
So full of sweet attractive grace,
That whensoere he sees it I
Believe that Francion will not die.
This was some good presage unto him, and conceiting with himself that his
death could not be so near, he listened again to the voice which he heard, and
collected to himself that he had heard the same voice some where else, but he
could not tell where. At the last, behold where Collinet Clerantes Fool did
come singing in before him, and embraced his thighs with incredible
demonstrations of affection. My good Master, said he, where have you been all
this while, I have been looking you out a long time, Now I have found you let
us be merry together. Francion being much amazed to see Collinet there, did
modestly cause him to withdraw himself, without laughing at any of his
vanities, and told him that he would speak more freely with him, when he was at
leisure. Being come to the door of the great Hall, he beheld a larg Square hung
round about with Garlands of Flowers, and did there read these words which were
written in Letters of Gold. Let none assume the boldness to enter here, if he
has not a Soul that is truly generous, and renounceth not the opinions of the
vulgar, and if he loves not the pleasures of Love.

Francion entered, being assured that it was permitted to him so to do, he found
there four Gentlemen and five Gentlewomen, sitting in chairs in a Corner, and
moving no more than so many Statues. At the last one of the Ladies began to
speak, and gravely commanded him to repose himself on a chair which was brought
unto him. My good Friend, said she* you have offended Raymond, we are here
present to arraign you. I desire (said Francion, who much was amazed at these
strange proceedings) to understand what Crime I have committed against him. You
do pretend to be ignorant, said one of the Gentlemen, you shall by and by hear
your charge.

After that these nine Judges had discoursed amonst themselves to advise what
sentence they should pronounce against him, the Lady who did speak first of
all, being seated in her chair again, did deliver her self to this effect.

Having considered the offenses which Francion the most ungrateful and most
perfidious Knight that ever sought after perilous adventures, has committed
against Raymond, who did entreat him as courteously as was possible. We do
ordain that he shall be put into the hands of the most rigorous Lady of the
World, to be punished according to his merits.

This judgment being pronounced Lorretta came forth, and Francion was
surrendered to her mercy. Never man was more amazed, he knew not whether he
ought to rejoice, or be sad. Raymond immediately entered, and embracing him did
take all amazement from him. He said unto him, My dear Friend, This is the time
that I will give you the testimony of the affection which I do bear unto you,
having prepared for you all the delights that I possibly can devise. I have
sent to seek out your Loretta, that if you do still love her, her presence may
convey some secret joy unto you, and which is more, I have caused five Ladies
to come hither, one whereof is my Helena, if you please you may make choice of
her.

These four Gentlemen are the bravest personages in this Country, and the most
worthy of your Company. One of them is Signor Dorini the Italian, of whom I
have already spoken unto you, and for the others you will have sufficient
experience of their worth. All that we have to do is to deport our selves in
the height of all Debauchments. The hatred which I pretended to bear unto you,
was only to render now more grateful the fruits of my love. I have so great an
opinion of the constancy of your Soul, that I knew well enough the assurances
that were made unto you, that undoubtedly you should die, would cause no
disturbance in it. For the rest I was constrained to exempt my self from seeing
you, and to make you keep your Bed, that I might have the greater advantage to
provide what I conceived to be necessary, and to endeavor to make you pass
away this day in the excess of pleasure and delight. Francion made answer to
him, that he could not believe he did bear that ill will unto him which was
reported, and speaking those words they entered into an obligation of an
inviolable and a perpetual love to one another.

This was that which passed betwixt Raymond and Francion, and in effect
Raymond, to gratify him, did promise to make him such cheer, that the like was
never seen, and their debauchment was yet greater than can be imagined.
Wherefore O you young men and maids, who have not yet lost the flower of your
Virginity, I do here in a good time advertise you to read no further, but to
skip over this Book, which does make a rehearsal of those things which you do
not understand, It will be told me that I may leave it out, but know, that the
History would be imperfect without it, for in books of Satyrs as this, it is
the same, as in the bodies of Men, who when they are guelded are the Subjects
of all mockery and hatred. I have already declared, that having undertaken to
inveigh against all the vices of men, and to deride their follies, I ought to
represent many things in their native color, to make them the more ridiculous.
There is nothing so unknown but sensual Men can speak far more of it, which is
the reason that we will adventure through all, and you are to consider that it
is done without the least evil design, and merrily, only to pass away an hour
or two.

We will in this place declare, that Francion was not afterward much amazed to
see himself so apparalled as he was, because he beheld that Raymond, and the
other Gentlemen were attired almost in the same fashion. The Ladies themselves
who were clothed according to the ordinary fashion, were conveyed into a
Chamber, where habiliments were brought unto them according to the fashion in
which we see Ladies many hundred years ago represented, and indeed there is
nothing that does make Ladies to appear more beautiful or majestical. At that
time Agatha came to Francion, to do reverence unto him, to whom she related,
that she had been in the Castle of Valentine, and pretending that she would
take his Niece along with her, to go some ten leagues off in pilgrimage, she by
that means had brought her to Raymonds Castle, according to the plot that was
made betwixt them.

It was there represented to her, that she must go and attire her self as the
rest of the Ladies, she demanding not the reason, being glad that once in her
life she should see her self gallant, did depart from Francion: Not long
afterward she returned, being as it were transported with a sudden joy, to
acquaint the men that they should follow her, and she would show them a
pleasant spectacle. One of the Ladies being gone out of the chamber where all
the rest were, did retire her self into one of the fore-chambers, that she
might there accommodate her self with the greater liberty. She had nothing on
but her smock only, which she had then taken off to shake the Fleas from it,
and being stark naked she began to rub her thighs, and to pare the nails of her
feet: Agatha immediately opened the door, of which she had the key, and the poor
Lady hearing the voice of Men at the door, did look out some place to hide
herself, but Agatha had taken all her habiliments from her. She was seated upon
a Bed to which there was neither Testor nor Curtains, there was nothing left
but the Mat and the Bolster, which she thought good to cover her head with,
that none might know who she was. Being on the further side of the bed, she did
trusse up her self in such a posture, that nothing could be seen of her but her
Posteriors only. Every one did begin to laugh at the sight of that goodly
Object, and demanded of Agatha who that Lady was. She made answer she would say
nothing, seeing she knew so well to conceal her self. Whereupon Raymond
alleged, she only hides her self after the manner of some Birds, who believe
that if they hide their heads, no other part of their body can be seen. But it
is not with her, as it is with those Birds, said Dorini, for we may discern and
know them; howsoever by their feathers, which always show themselves, but in
this posture we cannot know this Lady, although we had seen her stark naked
before. Francion did approach unto her, and taking as full a sight of her as
possibly he could, he embraced her about her middle, striving to pluck her from
the Post of the Bed at which she held fast, that so having made her forsake her
hold, he might turn her toward him to know who she was by her face. But he
could not force her from her hold. And as in that posture she showed a pair or
the plumpest Buttocks in the world, there was one present who cried out by way
of admiraration, Oh Gentlemen, what a sight is this which I see! Raymond, who
heard him, did immediately reply, What is it that you do startle at, and have in
so much wonder? one of the most amiable parts of the whole Body. That which in
your judgment does seem to be filthy, and ought not to be exposed to the sight
of the world, It is nothing else but the extreme superficies of the thighs
joined together, I take as much delight to behold them as any other part of the
Body. It is nothing but the opinion of the vulgar that does render it
disagreeable, and they are not able to give a reason for it. I refer my self to
Charron, he speaks so himself of them in his Book of Wisdom. On my faith you
are too nice, we will all do homage to them, the others replied; Will you be
the first that will begin?

The scandalous Chronicle here does add, that Raymond having spoke these words
determined to put them into effect, and that Francion who commended his design
did make an Oration to those goodly Demy-globes, which incited every one that
was present to approach and kiss them, and that the Lord Dorini going last of
all did find most plainly a certain Northern wind to proceed from her
sally-port, which gave an ungrateful visitation to his Nose. I will not here
amuze my self to describe all the particulars, which peradventure will not be
pleasing unto every one, nor assure you that what I heard concerning this, is
altogether true, which is, that Raymond proceeding in his debauchments, would
second the gallantry of those men, who in the ordinary tippling-houses drinking
in an old shoe, do mingle with their wine Cheese, and grease of Candles, and
other honest ingredients, and that he sending for wine, did pour it all along
the back of that fair and naked body, and commanded all the rest to come and
drink it up at it was running down her cleft. Let us remove our observations
from so slovenly an entertainment, and not to blemish the reputation of our
Cavalliers, Let us imagine that they only contented themselves to speak some
words in praise of those goodly Buttocks, and that one did call them the Queens
and Princesses of all other Buttocks, and that another wished that they might
never sit on Nettles, but always on Cushions. To reserve our modesty, we will
in some sort decline from the censure of scrupulous Spirits; and I believe the
frolic humors which are here contained ought not to give occasion of affront
to any, for the greatest part of this book is only made to laugh. We may take
unto us the liberty to rehearse some of the pleasant adventures which are
arrived to men of an evil life, for it is permitted us to laugh at their
expense. For the rest, all these debauchment are very true, and I do give you
them for such, and do so express them, that I may not be blamed for reciting
them; Even those whose particular design it is, to condemn them in a serious
style, must, to set them forth, repeat them also, as well as my self, and I am
confident that I deliver them in those words, that are more capable to make men
to hate them than to love them, for I protest I approve of no actions which are
contrary to Virtue, I will therefore proceed on with our History without fear.

Let us say then that after our Gallants had finished their pastime with this
Lady, who would not show her face, they would have entered into the Chamber
where the other Ladies were, but they would not open the doors unto them, and
the reason why they would not suffer themselves to be seen, was because they
should not know who of them it was whom they beheld in that naked posture in
the other Chamber. Therefore they all departed without knowing any thing of her
at all. Francion coming down the stairs among the rest, seeing Collinet,
demanded of Raymond by what means he came into his Castle. Raymond made answer,
Some of your people did bring him along with them from the vilage where you
left him. He came not out of Paris in my company, said Francion. His Servants
then that came to wait upon him, did acquaint him, that Collinet being deprived
of His company which he loved better than Clerantes, would never leave
enquiring until he had found the way which he took when he came out of Paris,
and by little journeys followed him till he had found him out. I will tell you,
said Raymond, what a pranck he played this morning. Seeing Helena to alight
from her Caroach, he began to walk up and down the Hall in a Majestic garb, as
if he were a man of some great authority in the House, and Helena being entered,
he only putting his hand to the brim of his hat, said unto her, Good Morrow,
Good Morrow Madam, who is it you would speak withal? She made a civil answer,
that she would speak with me, and going a little further she sat down in a
chair not far from him; Their discourse was on ordinary subjects, in which
Collinet did show no defect of Judgment. He enquired from what place Helena
came, of what Country she was, if she were married or not, and what Revenue
yearly belonged to her house, and deported himself with so great a gravity,
that Helena beholding him to be well apparalled, did take him for some
personage of Honor, and although she is constantly discreet and deliberate
enough, she durst not lift up her eyes to behold him. But he could not long
contain himself in these terms of modesty and reason, he must show his
disposition. And do you come to see Raimond then? said he, I am very glad of
it. He is one of my best Cosens, He gave me a good Supper last night when ever
I came within his doors, and made me feed on the best green Pease that I ever
did eat in my life. Sir, said Helena, you are too generous, to love your kindred
only for the poor courtesy of a Supper. Let us talk then Madam of something
else, said he, Do you love to be tumbled and laid on your Back, for on the
faith of an honest man, you shall presently be so, we do all proceed from
Generation, and propagation, although we look as old as Cato himself: You begin
to be uncivil Sir, she replied, who would have thought you would have these
words? Will you contest then? will you be obdurate to me? said he. Speaking
those words he would have taken hold of her, to put his design in execution,
but she cried out so loud, that I was enforced to come down from my Chamber to
hasten to her relief. She demanded of me, if I had sent for her to be used as
one of the most debauched Women in the world? I suddenly appeased her, having
told her what a distracted man Signior Collinet was. But my dear heart, said
Raymond unto Francion, Take you no care, for she will not be so cruel to your
Indearments, and the Loves you shall make unto her, no more will any of her
Companions, we shall find them to be of a flowing disposition; Let me alone to
give you content, I will recompense you a hundred fold for the silver which
heretofore I did take from you.

Francion, having thanked him for his courtesy, did go to Collinet, and said
unto him, that he did esteem more highly of him, than of those men who
conceiving themselves to be wise did glorify themselves, and yet had more
vanity and folly in their Spirits than he had in his. For that, said he, which
is ordinarily taken for the greatest wisdom in the world, is nothing else but
folly, error, and defect of Judgment, as I can make it to appear if it were
needful: And we ourselves who sometimes do believe that we do well to employ
our time in Love, and Feasts, and Mummeries, shall find at last that we do but
deceive our selves, and that we are but very Fools. Sickness will afflict us,
the debility of our Members will surprise us, before we can arrive to fifty
years of age. Leave off that Discourse, let me beseech you (said Raymond,) I am
not now in the humor to give ear unto these Preachments; neither do I well know
if you are in the humor to make them. Having spoken these words, he departed
from him, to entertain a gallant number of Gentlemen and Burgesses who lived
thereabouts, whom he had invited unto Dinner, with some brave Ladies, who were
a little more chaste than those that were there already, who came down into the
Hall most richly attired, and Francion having whispered and demanded of them,
Which of them it was who had showed her Buttocks? did mark them all very
curiously, to see which of them did blush, that he might discover her by it;
but there was not one of them who had a Countenance more shamefaced than
another, neither did they give any answer at all; for she of whom he did speak,
entreated her Companions not to discover her, so that for the present it was
concealed from him.

Not long afterward there was covered a long Table, which immediately was
charged with such a diversity of Victuals, that it seemed they had taken almost
all the Creatures of the Earth, to devour them at one Dinner. When they had
satisfied their greatest hunger, Raymond told every one of them, that He must
observe the Laws which were inscribed on the portal of the Door, to chase from
them all shame, and resolve to make the greatest Debauchment that was ever
heard of. Immediately all the Casements of the windows were shut, and the
Curtains being drawn Candles were lighted; for they would not have taken so
much pleasure in that Course of life, if they had seen the day. Every one sung
his Song with a glass in his hand, and they told so many merry Stories, that
they would make a Volume by themselves, if they were all particularly related.
The Women having lost their shame, did rehearse also the most wanton tales that
possibly they could remember.

A Gentleman upon some Discourse told them, That he would recite unto them one
of the most notable stories in the world, and thus began, There was a Curate in
our Village, who loved as well the Company of a Woman, as of his Prayer Book. I
beseech you Sir, (said Raymond) that you will forbear to repeat it, We must not
speak of those People, although they do offend, It belongs to their Bishop, and
not to us to reprove them. If you detract them, you are to be excommunicated,
and to be numbered amongst the Libertins of this Age, against whom so much War
is waged; Be not so rash as to fall on that Subject. The Gentleman held his
peace, and all the Company having approved his opinion, not to speak against
those, of whom already so much has been said, that no more can be added, they
determined with themselves not so much as to think that there was a Priest
living in the world. They found, that there were enough of other Conditions of
Men to be condemned, from whom the depravations of this Age did receive their
Original. It is true, that in the beginning of Heresies all the World made the
people of the Church the subject of their Discourse; There was no Account
conceived to be witty, that had not a Priest in it. Erasmus, Rablais, the Queen
of Navarr, Marot, and diverse others, delighted themselves in this Conceit, and
before them many Italians. Nevertheless we must avow, That all this has not
the power to divert a religious Soul from the Pathway of Faith, and at that
time when it was showed us that our Priests were very wicked, it was not to
conclude that our Religion was evil: So Boccace, who in his Novels did show
himself to be the Master of an excellent spirit, does tacitly accuse all those
who speak of the People of the Church, which but few Men do take notice of. He
informs us, that a Jew at Rome having observed the wicked life of the Priests
and Monks, did not for all that forbear to make himself a Christian, affirming,
That he plainly perceived that our Religion was the best, because it subsisted,
and every day did fortify it self, in spite of the exorbitances of the
Churchmen, and necessarily it must be, That God had a particular Care of the
Church. Raymond had these considerations, and moreover he alleged, That weak
spirits do believe all which they apprehend, without diving into the depth of
Causes, and that to avoid Scandal, it is always Good not to meddle at all with
the Dispencers of holy things; I have been my self of the same Opinion; and you
shall observe, that in all this History I do not so much as touch on the
Priests at all. The Gentleman's story being thus interrupted, they discoursed
afterward on several other Subjects.

A certain Lord, who sat near to Francion, did show him Agatha, who was placed
at the upper end of all the Table, and whispering him in the ear, did say unto
him, Sir, Know you not the reason wherefore Raymond has in that place seated
that old Woman, who seems to be rather a piece of some old Cabanet, than a Lady
of Pleasure? He would that we should give our selves to all manner of
Voluptuousness, and yet he seems thereby to withdraw us rather from Love, than
to invite us to it; for he puts that terrifying Object before all our eyes,
which cannot but beget a horror and a trembling in our Spirits. It is certain,
that here are other Ladies who are incomparably beautiful, and are able to
give us pleasures in abundance, yet nevertheless he ought not to have mingled
that Cumaean Sybill amongst them. Know Sir (said Francion) that Raymond has
too noble a Spirit to do any thing that is incongruous. He does invite us by
that Object to addict our selves to all the pleasures of the World. Have you
not heard that the Egyptians in their greatest Feasts did place the skull of a
dead Man on their Table, to the end, that thinking that peradventure they
should not be to morrow amongst the living, they should endeavor themselves to
employ their present time to their best advantage. By this Object Raymond does
wisely advertise us of the self-same thing, that our selves and these young
Ladies may take our full Carrier of Pleasure, before we shall arrive unto that
age, in which there shall be nothing but Complaints and Griefs. I know not what
carcass of Death it is that Raymond there present us with, said the Gentleman,
but she eats and drinks more than four living Creatures: If it be so with
all the rest of the dead, Pluto has something to do to feed them. If it be so
(said Francion) You may observe the reason which makes so many living unwilling
to die, It is because they are afraid to retire into a place where Famine
reigns.

Many other Discourses there were at the Table, and after all was taken away,
Francion who had not yet the leisure to entertain Loretta, did now take the
opportunity to court her, and to assure her what was the trouble of his Soul
which he endured, being not able to make use of the opportunity which she had
permitted him to take. And because he was not curious to enquire of her what
was the obstacle that interrupted their designs, she forsook that Discourse,
having assured him that she would make him recompense for the time he had lost,
and for the disgraces he had sustained, which assurance brought much comfort to
him.

Raymond interposing himself, did take him aside, and asked him, If he were not
at that present in the highest degree of Contentment, having her with him whom
so entirely he affected? That I may conceal nothing from you (said he) I have
more Desires than there are Sands in the Sea, which makes me afraid that I
never shall have rest. I love Loretta well, and am glad that I have her with
me; but I would delight my self in the loves also of an infinite number of
other Ladies, whom I affect as well as her self. Every hour the fair Diana, the
accomplished Flora, the attractive Beliza, the lovely Iantha, the incomparable
Marphiza, and an infinite number of other beauties, do represent themselves to
my Fancy, with all the delights they have, and with those also which
peradventure they have not. If one should lock you up in a Chamber with all
these Ladies (said Raymond,) all that possible you could do, would be but
enough to content but one of them. I vow unto you (said Francion,) you speak
the Truth, but this day I would sport my self with one, and too morrow with
another, and if they found themselves not satisfied with what I did, I would
permit them (if they thought good of it) to seek out some one else who may be
an assistant to them in the full fruition of their desires.

Agatha being behind him did listen to this Discourse, and interrupting him,
she said, Ah Brave young Man! You are of a good and commendable disposition; I
perceive well enough that if all the World were of your temper, we should not
know what Marriage is, and should never be obliged to observe that Law. You say
true (said Francion,) There is nothing that does bring more bondage to us than
that Injurious Knot, and Honor the cruel Tyrant to our Desires. If we have a
handsome Wife she will be courted by all the World, and who can hinder it? The
Common People, who are infinitely suspicious, and will take hold on the least
apparences, will report me to be a Cuckold, and will affront me with a thousand
Injuries, although my Wife be a virtuous Woman; for if they behold any to talk
with her in the Street, they will believe that she will take a greater liberty
when she is in her own House: On the contrary, if to eschew this Evil, I should
marry an ill-favored Wife, thinking to avoid one Gulf, I do fall into another
that is more dangerous, I should never have any rest, or joy. He is driven to
despair who has always a Fury for his Companion in his Bed, and at his Table.
It is far beter that we were all free. Without joining in Marriage we should
join our selves with those whom we like best; and when we are weary of one, it
should be permitted to us to go unto another. If a Woman stood affected to me,
she should for all that, if she had a mind thereunto, prostitute her self to
another, and although peradventure it was brought unto my knowledge, yet I
should not be offended at it; for the Chimera's of Honor should not be lodged
in our Brains; and it should not be forbidden us to go and to Court the
Mistresses of others. There would be none but Bastards in the world, and by
consequence we should see none but most gallant Men. All those who have
performed extraordinary atchievments, and transcended the Vulgar, all those
whom Antiquity has called Heroes, were Bastards. In this number was Hercules,
Theseus, Romulus, Alexander, and diverse others. You will represent unto me,
that if all Women were common, as in Cato's Commonwealth, one could not tell to
whom the Children did belong which were begotten; But of what Importance is
that? Lauretta who does not know who was her Father, nor who was her Mother,
and who troubles not her head to enquire after them, Is she any thing the worse
for it, if she be not the same, as a vain Curiosity may persuade her that she
is not? Now in this Case this Curiosity would be to no purpose, and none but
unreasonable persons would desire the knowledge of that which is either
impossible, or of no Importance: Nay, this would be a Cause of a transcendent
Good; for thereby we should be enforced to abolish all Pre-eminence, and all
Nobility; Every one should be equal to another, and the Fruits of the Earth
should be common to us all. The Laws of Nature should be had only in reverence,
and every one should live as in the golden Age. There are many other things to
be spoken on this Argument, but I reserve them to another time.

After that Francion had spoke these words, whether in earnest or in jest it is
uncertain, yet sure it is, that Raymond and Agatha did approve his Reasons; and
told him, That for this time he must he contented to delight himself only with
the Pleasures of Loretta. He made answer, That accordingly he would endeavor
to content himself. In this Discourse they were when the Music entered into the
Hall, who played all manner of Dances. All the fair Women of the Cities and
Villages thereabouts were come then into the Castle, with some young
Gentlewomen who were accomplished with all perfections, and there were some
Gentlemen with them who could Dance very well. The Cadences, the Galliards, the
Currantoes and Lavoltoes, did warm the wanton appetites of them all. On every
side there was nothing seen but kisses and embraces, and when Night was come,
the Table was covered with a magnificent Collation, more grateful than a
Supper; For in the first Course there were served in most exquisite Viands,
with which those that were hungry might replenish themselves. There were such
an abundance of Confects of all sorts, that every one having filled both their
Bellies and their Pockets, there still remained a great quantity, with which
they made a sweet War, throwing them at one another on every side. The Drums,
the Trumpets, and the Hoboys did then begin to sound aloud in the Court, and
the Viols played in a place near unto the Hall, and with the Voices of the
Assistants made an Incomparable Music. The Confusion was so great and
pleasant, that I know not how to represent it to you. It were a hard task to
number the Virgins who that night lost their Maidenheads, or the Husbands that
were made Cuckolds. In the tumult of so great an Assembly (which hindered that
those who did go away could not be seen) many escaped with their Mistresses to
content their desires in some more private place. There were some Women who had
appointed their Sweethearts to meet in that very place, it being the most
convenient they could choose, and where they could not be in those dangers which
they feared in their own houses. Raymond, who desired that his House might be
entirely consecrated to Love, did give command that the greatest part of the
Chambers should be ready furnished, and left open to serve as a Refuge to the
Lovers. They were well prepared to entertain them. The four Knights and their
Ladies did for their parts never stir out of the Hall, having leisure enough
in another hour to take their delights by themselves. The others made use of
every place, and took their adventures with their Loves on one side and on the
other, exercising themselves in an infinite number of Pleasures. Francion
handled all the Women he did meet with as he pleased himself. He took one of
the six Ladies of the Castle, who was called Teresia, and having laid her all
along on the Form, on the end whereof there was a great Candle burning, he
trussed up her Petticoat behind, and kissed her Buttocks, on which there was a
little black Mole, which he no sooner perceived, but he laughing said, Ha, ha,
ha Teresia, You have carried it very cunningly. It is you whom this morning we
saw naked. The Mark which you have does cause me to know you. Immediately he did
go to proclaim it to all the world, in what manner he had found out the
Buttocks to which that Morning they did homage, and every one laughed heartily
at it. Peresia, who seemed not to be much startled at it (in a bold humor, and
such a one as belonged to the place wherein she was) did say unto all the Men
there present, And what of all this? You have seen my Posteriors? Have you a
mind to see them again? I shall not be so bard-hearted as to deny you the sight
of them. Who deserves most worthily to be laughed at, either you, or I? I only
showed them by force, but you kissed them of your own accord.

Having left off this Discourse, Raymond, who loved a life to fight with the
glass, did cause the most lusty Wines to be drawn and brought forth, to
entertain some good Companions, who did defy the strength thereof. There is
nothing (said he) that is comparable to this Drink, it fills those with a
certain Divinity who drink deeply of it. It does drive away all fearful
Impressions which Error and Ignorance had brought upon us. It is by this power
that the Orator in his Orations fears not to speak home to his Auditory, and
that a Lover with boldness discovers his Malady to her who is the Cause
thereof. Victory is ordinarily purchased by those Soldiers whom this Wine
does render valiant. Drink then, Drink deeply, and let us wish to die as George
Duke of Clarence, who by the sentence of the King of England being constrained
to lose his life, did cause himself to be put into a Pipe of wine, of which he
did drink so much that he did burst again. Come to it, Francion, and take thy
fill, said Raymond. Francion made answer, I am but a bungler at Drinking, I had
rather employ my strength in sporting with Loretta than with Bacchus. If I
drink too much, any whole Body will be so brutishly besotted, that I can take
only but a faint pleasure with Women, I had almost said a dolorous one. Well,
well, said Raymond, Every man is free here to drink what he pleases; Follow
that pleasure which is most agreeable unto you.

The Musicians then did sing many new Aires, joining the sound of their Lutes
and Viols to that of their voices. Ah, said Francion, leaning his head on the
breast of Loretta. after the view of an excellent beauty, there is no other
pleasure can so much inchant me, as that of Music, my heart leaps at every
accent, and me thinks I am no more my self. The tremblings of the voice do
make my Soul deliciously to tremble also; for my Nature is constantly inclined
in motion, I am always in a pleasing agitation. My spirit and my Body do always
tremble at every little shaking, you may easily behold the proof of it, for
with some difficulty I do now hold this glass in my hand, I have such a
trembling all over me. That which I can play best upon the Lute are but
tremblings. I touch not your fair breast but with a kind of trembling;* My
Sovereign pleasure is the wanton motion, yet me thinks, I am all Divine, I
would be always in motion like the Heavens. Having spoke those words, he took a
Lute from one of the Musicians, and the Ladies desiring him to show his skill
thereon, he began to touch it, and at the same time did sing an Air, the ditty
whereof I care not if I do here insert. And I am so true an Historian, that I
know not what should withold me from giving you the Note also, that so I may
forget no circumstance, and the Reader may have a thorough knowledge of it.
This will not be difficult unto me to do, for I have inserted no verses in
this Book, which have not some Air or other to attend them; and I do not
herein as those men, who instead of Sonnets do give you Songs, without knowing
whether they ought to be sung or not; you may assure your self, if men would
put the prick Song, and the tablature of the Lute in their Romances with the
Songs which there they find, it would be an invention to make them sell as
well, as the Pictures do the Books, with which the Stationers now a days do
imbellish their Title-pages, to render them the more merchandable. But without
examining what Fancy has possessed me to give a Rule to others, content your
selves at this present with the words only of Francions Song, and guess by the
cadence at the Air thereof.

LEarn brave Souls, and be so wise,
As the humors to despise
Of those Men are out of measure
Enemies to love and pleasure;
To be Vices, they declare
Acts that most delicious are,
And so much themselves inthrall,
That living they not live all.
Then abhor their nicer folly,
Which proceeds from melancholy,
And do all your thoughts employ
Love to seek, and love to enjoy.
Soft embraces, sportfull fancies,
Kisses, smiles, inviting glances,
All variety of delight
Keep you active day and night.
Hands are here but idle guests,
If not on their Mistress Breasts,
Breasts that be on purpose bare,
Love t'inflame, and banish Care.
Here no Girls hard-hearted be,
They had rather far be free,
By their language to entreat you,
Than deny you, or to threat you.
Board them, board them, never fear
Checks or dangers can appear,
They will all your cares and pains
Recompense with double gains.
When that equal comforts do
Equal sufferings ensue,
Hearts of pleasure have such store,
That they can desire no more.
Here soft Murmurs, mutual heats,
Pantings thick, intransing sweats,
And Heart-beatings sweet as they,
Reason do to Sense betray.
How gallant is his end, who dies
In The height of this brave exercise!
So should I think my own, if I
Might in this sweet encounter die.
This Song which the Musicians played upon their Lutes, after that Francion had
recited one couplet of the verses, did ravish the Spirits of all the standers
by, the cadence was so taking, and so softly wanton, that with the words to
which it was set, it invited all the world to the pleasures of Love. All who
were in the Hall breathed forth their Souls after the charms of pleasure. The
lights also at that time being moved, I know not by what wanton Air, did seem
to breath like the men, and to be possessed with some passionate desire. A
sweet Fury having seized upon their Souls they played the Sarabands, which the
greatest part danced confusedly, intermingling diverse wanton and provoking
postures.

Some Ladies who hitherto had preserved their honor, did now abandon it,
conforming themselves to others who were examples to them; Raymond having left
off drinking, which held him some hours, did now address himself to the Women,
and in his entertainment of them he used such coarse words, that I cannot
otherwise express them, but according to the vulgar, that is in down right
language. Francion observing it, said unto him, Sir, Upon my Faith I must blame
you, and all those who have such words in their mouths; Wherefore so, my dear
Friend, said Raymond, Is there any hurt to assume the boldness to speak of
those things which we are so bold to act? Do you conceive that thing to be so
reverend and venerable, that we ought not so much as to speak of it? That is
not it, said Francion, you may talk of it freely enough, and name it without
scandal, but I would have it in more cleanly terms than those which you
express. It is manifest that brave men when they would testify their
gallantry, do make choice of the most excellent words they can collect, and
use not such which are the proper expressions of Porters, Lackeys, and all the
Offalls of the world, who have no other words at Command; For my self, It does
much incense me, when sometimes I do perceive a Poet does believe he has made
a good Copy of Verses, when it is made odious with such filthy words. The
greatest part of those Men who have published the new Collection of the French
Poets, are much to be condemned for it; and moreover they have in that Book
printed such foolish Songs, that they are fit for none but ^apsters in Tippling
houses, and the black-Guard in the Louvre. They show to all the world the
infamous Verses which they have composed; wherein there is nothing remarkable,
but that they bluntly name those natural acts and parts of our Body, which
Ingenuity would have clothed with cleaner Language; Nevertheless, the Spirits
of the Ignorant are most moved to laughter at such broad expressions; And are
these, do you think, fit Ornaments for Poesy? I do desire that such Men as we
are should speak in another manner, to render our selves different from the
Vulgar, and that we should invent some decent words for those things, of which
we do delight so often to Discourse. On my Faith, and good reason have you for
it (said Raymond) but tell me, Do not we make love in the same manner as the
poorest Peasants? Why then shall we use Expressions that are different from
theirs? You deceive your self, (said Francion) we make love in another manner,
we use a nobler familiarity than those who have only a desire to glut their
stupid appetit, in which they do not differ at all from Beasts; for they make
love but with their Bodies only, but we make love with our Souls and Bodies
both together. Observe how I play the Philosopher on this subject. You will
tell me, that all our Courtly Postures and Indearments are to no purpose, and
that they all tend to the same end. I will acknowledge it, there is nothing
more true. You will then reply, I have my Desire; for by consequence we ought
then to speak in the same words as they, of that thing. Observe what I shall
say more, Although they have the same Parts of Body, and the same Organs of
Speech as we have; for in their Discourse they do move their tongues, they open
their mouths, and unlock their teeth as we do; yet they have not those
attractions, and transportations of Spirit: For in the Sport of Love, although
our bodies have the same action with theirs, yet our Spirits are far above
theirs, and carry with them that inward love and sweetness, of which they are
not capable; we should therefore use other terms than they do; for the
distinction is, and ought to be, That in our loves we have something divine and
celestial; but their Love is altogether terrestrial and sensual.

Every one admired at this subtle argument of Francion, which (no disparagement
to the Logicians) has not its Second in the world. The Women did principally
approve his Reasons, because they would have been very glad to have new words
to express those things which they loved best, to the end, that leaving the
old words, which sound not civilly in their mouths, they might speak freely of
all, without fear of being blamed, because the iniquity and corruption of the
world could not so soon make this New Language odious.

Francion was then entreated to give names of his own Invention, to all those
things which he should find not well named; and the better to invite him to it,
they told him, It would make his Name to fly over all France, and render him
more famous than already he was; for every one would be studious to enquire
after the Author of these Novelties, of which they would never speak without
making mention of him. Francion for the present did excuse himself, and said,
That ere it were long he would advise with some of his most knowing Friends
about it, to be thoroughly resolved of it. Moreover he did swear, that when
ever he had leisure he would compose a Book of the Practice of the most
pleasant Sports of Love.

This Entertainment being ended, many Gentlemen and Ladies who desired not to
lie that Night in Raymonds Castle, did take their leave of him, and returned to
their own houses: Those who stayed behind, retired not long afterward two by
two into the Chambers that were left open for them. Francion was with Lauretta,
and Raymond with Helena, and the others with those who did best please them; I
will not undertake to give you an account in this place of their infinite
pleasures, It is a task beyond my ability.

The next day, and six days following, they employed themselves in all the
delights that could be imagined. But Francion having considered with himself,
that if he were deprived of the Company of Lauretta, the Pourtraict of Nays
which Raymond had showed him, would throw his restless Spirit into a new
unquietness, he resolved with himself to enquire of Dorini after her; and
whether that most accomplished piece were a Fancy of the Painter, or an
Imitation of some other work of Nature? Dorini did satisfy him that it was the
Pourtraict of one of the most beautiful Ladies of all Italy, who was yet
living; and thus he pursued his Discourse.

In the Confines of Romania there is a young Lady called Nays, the Relict of a
brave Marquess, to whom she was married but six months, she has lived a
Widdowed life a year, and more. You may imagine that her perfections and riches
have procured her Servants enough. She has so great a number of them, that it
may be said, she can both sell, lend, and give, and yet not one of all those
who court her, can obtain of her any remarkable favor. Amongst all the
Italians, there is not any, but only her deceased Husband, whom she could love.
Her Inclination does lead her to love the French, insomuch that having seen the
Picture of a young Gentleman of this Country named Floriander, a Man of an
excellent Feature and Complexion, she was so passionately in love with it, as
if she had seen not his Picture, but him himself, because she had often heard a
large rehearsal of his Virtue. To find a remedy for her grief, she freely
discovered her self to me, as to her Kinsman, and assured Friend. I did comfort
her the best I could, and did put her into good hopes, and she following my
Counsel, caused that Picture to be drawn which you have seen, that it might be
sent to Floriander, to invite him to take the pains to come unto her, and court
her in the way of Marriage. I had a long time a desire to see this Kingdom of
France, which was the reason that I freely offered my self to serve her in this
affair, where no man could better assist her than my self. After my arrival to
the Court, I attained to the knowledge of this Gentleman, whom I found to be of
a sweet disposition, and most inclinable to Love, which assured me that I
should easily gain his good will for Nays. I was once determined to acquaint
him with her Riches, and the Nobility of her Birth, having first showed him her
Beauty, and to assure him of the great affection she did bear unto him, for all
her great distance from him; But I altered a little that Resolution, seeing
that he began to be indisposed in his health, for which the Physicians
counseled him to drink of certain Waters which are in a Village not far from
our Country. I did write word to my Kinswoman that she should take some
occasion to come thither, and not lose that opportunity to draw him into her
Nets. I do not well know if she were there in expectation of him, or not, but
if she were, she has lost her labor; for Floriander is since dead. I have
wrote her word of it, but cannot tell whether she has received the Letter or
not, or whether she is come from her own House to give him a Meeting at the
Waters. I will return unto her with all the speed I can, to comfort her in her
afflictions. Ah! said Francion, I dare assure you Sir, I will wait upon her in
any place wheresoever she may be found: so rare a Beauty does deserve a journey
of many months, to obtain but a sight of her. I have always been in love with
beautiful Ladies wheresoever I have seen them; nay, I have been in love with
those also whom only I have heard reported to be lovely; I will not now
derogate from my commendable custom. Moreover, I for a long time have had a
desire to see Italy, that fair Garden of the world, I shall now find a happy
occasion to invite me to it. In the first place I will have recourse unto the
waters to meet with Nays there, and will not you Dorini be pleased to take the
pains to go along with me? If you desire, said Dorini, to encounter with Nays
at the Bathes, you must be gone in the morning betimes, and use all possible
diligence; For my own part, I have a desire to stay a month or two with Count
Raymond, for the accomplishing of some design I have in hand, you must
therefore excuse me that I cannot keep you Company, but I doubt not but that on
my return I shall find you at Rome with Nays, who cannot but be surprised with
your merits and your person, as soon as ever she shall behold you; And were it
not that she still keeps by her the pourtract of her deceased Lover, I would
advise you for a few days at your first accosting of her, to take his name upon
you. Francion replied, I cannot suddenly resolve upon that; for it seems to me,
that should I take upon my self the name of another person, it were to confess
that I had nothing commendable in my self at all.

Raymond hearing his resolution, said, that he would travel also into Italy,
being weary of France, and of the perpetual troubles of the Court, but some
occasions for certain days retaining him, he determined to take Dorini with him
as an associate in his Journey.

The Journey being in this manner resolved upon, Francion immediately gave
charge to one of Raymonds Servants to carry back Collinet to Clerantes, and by
his letter to acquaint him, that he was determined for a little while to solace
himself in other Countries, according to those desires which Clerantes had
often heard him to express. He did write also to his Mother to possess her
with the resolution he had taken.

Some who were with him demanded of him, if it were no grief unto him to be
deprived of the Company of Lauretta? to which he made answer, that the prey was
now at his own mercy, and that he had sported himself with her as much as
possibly he desired, and therefore he must look after some new game. As they
were in this discourse, they beheld from one of the Chamber windows an old man
to enter into the Court of the Castle, being mounted on a lean mare, and
unserviceable for that labor to which in the vigor of her youth she was
accustomed. He who was mounted on her was clothed in a black Cloak, which with
a point was fastened about his Collar, he had an old sword by his side. This
honorable personage was Valentine, who observing that his wife stayed so long
in her pilgrimage, did not well know what to think of it, and had been in
several places to look for her, until one who belonged unto Raymond had
informed him that he had seen her in his Castle.

He no sooner entered into the Court, but he saw Lauretta, who sat in the
portall of the Door with Teresia; Immediately he alighted from his horse, but it
was not without much difficulty and trouble to him; His wife perceiving him,
took her Companion by the hand, and going up the stairs did lock her self up in
one of the Chambers. He being overcome with fury, did pursue her to the bottom
of the stairs, and espying in the way the effigies of a Lady made in wood, he
began thus to vomit forth his choler against it. What a Devil do thou mean?
Is this the pilgrimage thou have made? Bitch as thou art, I have been told of
the good life which here thou leadest; I shall catch thee at home again, I
shall; I will tie thee up then, and punish thee as thou deservest; Here thou
have the filthy fill of thy pleasures with men, I do persuade my self that
there is not a Horse-keeper in all this house, who has not made it his
business to have played at passage on the Belly. Hereafter, for all thy
abundance now, I shall make thee starve for it, and thou shall not receive of
my self so much as thy ordinary pittance. Marry come up, Thou art the only
cause that I am no more respected; I am every where called Fo^l and Coxcomb,
and told I have not spirit enough to bridle thy appetites; To be short, I am
altogether dishonored by thee; O good God! what an injustice is it that the
honor of a husband should depend upon that which is under the Apron of his
wife, but thou shall pay for that broken vessail of thine, I dare assure thee.

Raymond and others who heard him make such a noise, did approach unto him, and
observing that Lauretta had wisely withdrawn her self, and that no answer at
all was returned unto his choleric complaints, they did assure him that she
was not in the Castle, and that he was deluded by an apparition. Afterward
they prevailed so far upon him, that they brought him to the furthest part of
the Garden, to make themselves more merry with him, and then drowned his
melancholy in many glasses of Wine. You are to observe, that all the while he
was the subject of their sport in the garden, and when he was drinking in the
Cellar, he did put off neither his Cloak nor his Sword. He conceived he ought
not to disarm himself, but was to retain a greater show of state and gravity
before the Nobility that was present. It was a most pleasant spectacle to
behold him in this equipage, for he had put on his scarf in which he carried
his Sword, as if it had been a Collar of SS. and had forgot to pass it under
his left arm, insomuch that his Sword would be playing always before him, and
did much disease him* He did nothing else but put by his Sword on the one side,
and his Cloak on the other, which did as much incumber him.

Having ended his large draught, his spurs interfering and striking against one
another, he stumbled at every step, and it was a hazard that he was not beheld
every moment to fall on the ground. It was the courtesy of Raymond to bring
him back to the Castle, but he returned not with so much ease as he did set
forward, because he had drunk too deep. When he came to the door he could go
no further, his Sword which did hang at random about his neck, did hit against
both the posts of the Entry, so that he was stopped, as it had been with a Bar,
sometimes he would draw backwards, and sometimes thrust forward with all the
strength he had, but all that he could do was but to make his sword to yield
and bend a little; O, said he, I believe there is some Enchantment here, I
cannot move one foot further. The Gentlemen who heard him, received an
incomparable pleasure, and did let him alone, but his Sword at last falling off
to one side, the passage was open for him, and he followed those that did go in
before him; To excuse himself, he said unto them, Gentlemen, You see that I am
no great Warrier, I mean no harm by carrying this cold Iron about me; when I
came out of Doors my Maid did help me to put it on, she knew how to do it
better than my self. These Spurs which you see, were in my Corn-loft quite
covered with rust and chaff, instead of buckling them to my heels, I had
fastened them to my toes, which seemed to me to be far more proper, although my
Maid told me, It was not the fashion so to wear them; Why so? replied I, When I
give you or any one else a kick, Do I not spurn at you forward with my foot?
They are Horses who do kick backward; For my own part I have no strength at all
in my heel, Can I not spurr my horse better having my ^eet armed rather than my
heel? For all these Reasons, or what ever other I could allege, my Maid has
put them on in the same manner as you behold; if she has done well in it, I
refer my self to you: For the rest of my habiliments, I did put them on my
self, as it pleased Fortune.

The honest Gaul having made this pleasant Discourse, was conducted into the
Hall, where he was yet a little longer entertained; because that Francion being
to give his Farewell to Lauretta, had in the mean time commanded the Coachman
to harness six horses, and to bring them to the Caroach with all speed, to
carry back Lauretta to her own house with Agatha, that her Husband might find
her at home on his Return. Valentin having taken his leave of the Company, did
take horse, and did not meet with the Caroach on the way; because either his
Employment, or the excess of Wine he had taken, did steer him in another
course. On his return he found his fair Wise in bed, who counterfeited her self
to be sick. He having told her, That he had been abroad three days to enquire
what was become of her, She assured him, that it was above two days since she
returned; so that by this excuse she appeased his choler, and he verily
believed that he did not see her at all in the Castle of Raymond.

All this while Francion made preparations for his departure, having testified
the great grief he entertained, being for some time to be deprived of the
Company of Raymond. On the next morning he took his leave of him very early,
and departed with all his train, which by the assistance of his good Friend he
had increased, by the addition of one Groom of his Chamber, three Lackeys, and
a Horse-keeper.

When he came to the Innes wherein he was to lodge, he entertained himself with
no other thought, but only with the contemplation of her who was the Cause of
his voyage. Being oftentimes in the way, he would take her Picture out of his
Pocket, and could not forbear to look upon it as he did ride. Every hour he
rendered homage to it, and offered the sacrifice of an infinite number of sighs
and tears. On the first day of his travel there arived no Adventure at all; but
on the second there did fall out one which deserves to be recorded.

About Midday he came into a Village where he determined to alight, and to
refresh himself, to which purpose he made choice of the best Tavern, and whiles
they were walking his Horses, and putting them into the Stable, he did go into
the Kitchen himself, to enquire what there was ready to eat; he found the House
sufficiently provided with all things that might satisfy hunger, but he could
not find any one to give any answer to him; only he heard a great noise in the
Chamber above the Kitchen, and to understand what the business was, he did
immediately go up the stairs. The Door being open, he beheld a Man upon the Bed,
who was covered only with one sheet, and uttered himself in a thousand
coutumelious words to a Woman who did not sit far off upon a Coffer His Choler
was so great, that at that instant he was rising up stark naked to beat his
Wife with a staff which was hard by him. Francion, who did not understand if
the occasion of his Rage were just, or not, did stop him, and caused him to
return unto his Bed. Oh Mounsieur (said the Man unto him) Be pleased to assist
me against my Enemies! I have a Wife worse than any Dragon, she is so wicked,
that she dares to commit her whoredoms before my own eyes. Sir, (said the Wife)
making a courtesy to Francion, Let us depart from this place I beseech you,
with all the speed we can, I am possessed with so great a fear, that I dare not
stay any longer. It is not my Husband that speaks now, but an evil Spirit
that is entered into his Body, and usurpeth there the place of his Soul, which
is departed above 6 hours ago. Ah! (said the Husband) Was the like Villainy ever
known? She would make me to believe that I am dead, to the end that she might
enjoy my Goods, and the Company of that Man, with whom she leads a wicked and a
wanton life. At that instant there came out of the next Chamber a handsome young
Fellow, and an ancient Woman, who both of them very resolutely declared, That
the Taverner was dead, and that they ought to see him buried. How now Sirrah,
(said he) to the Young Man; Sirrah, you are as much dead as I am, Get you out
of sight, I shall live long enough, I hope, to see you hanged; Sirrah, Thou
shall be punished I dare assure thee; Thou have committed a greater fault than
if thou had attempted with a knife to cut my throat; for thou would have me
buried me alive: Moreover thou art an Adulterer, and have polluted my Bed with
yonder She wolf.

This Dispute seeming very strange to Francion, he desired to understand the
Original and Ground of the Complaint, and causing them to hold their peace, who
began to cry out and make a great noise, he desired the Taverner to give him a
full account of the whole Story; whereupon he thus spoke unto him.

Sir, It is now three years since I have been married to that She Devil whom
you see, It had been far better for me to have been put into a Sack, and
thrown into the River; for ever since I have lived with her, I have not enjoyed
one Minute of Rest. She will ordinarily make quarrels with me for things of no
moment, and will scold so loud, that not long since being unwilling to to go
out of Doors, by reason of the great Rain that fell, I was constrained to stop
my ears with black wool, and I know not well what Napkin I did wind about my
head, to the end, that at the least I might not hear her, because I was
resolved not to go forth. As soon as she perceived my Intention, she determined
with her self that I should hear every word she spoke, and throwing her self
upon my Bed, she ceased not until she had pulled off my Biggin, and then
putting her mouth to my ear she cried out so loud, that eight days afterward I
was quite deaf. But all this is nothing. Observe how brazen-faced she is! She
saw me once speak to a young Maid of this Town, immediately she gave a bad
apprehension to it, and taking a knife in her hand, when she was going to Bed,
she said, That by the grace of God she would geld me, to hinder me from going
to any other but her self. I was at that time in a patient and a pleasant
humor, and smiling, said unto her, Do nothing (Sweetheart) in the first heat
of your choler; the Time may come that you dearly will repent it. She made
answer to me, Villain, Do you take no care for that, I will have nothing any
more to do with you, I can have Men enough, and those that are far more lusty
than your self. Tell me (Sir) If you did ever hear of the like Impudence?
Nevertheless I did forbear to strike her at that time; and I do verily
believe, that if her Choler had not been appeased, I had suffered the disgrace
to have been gelded by her. Her threatenings (which oftentimes she made unto me,
to provide her self with a Sweetheart) were put in Execution, She made choice
of this young Fellow to serve her in a Corner. But, good God! Was there ever
misery like to mine? My wife is the most precious Fool in the world, when other
Lovers are accustomed to give something to their Sweet-hearts, this fellow is
so beggarly, that my Wife makes many presents to him; to pay him for the
pleasure which he receives of her, She gives him wherewith to feed him, and to
cloth him; I often have observed my clothes on his back, and if there be in my
Kitchen any thing better than other, which I reserve for my Guests, this
Gallant will hang a nose after it; and I must allow him wages for stopping my
Wifes Gap, I must pay him as if he were one of the Laborers, who comes hither,
either by the day, or by the week, to perform some necessary employment about
my house; After I had harbored a suspicion that he looked too familiarly on my
wife, I endeavored to make my felf sure of it; and counterfeiting that I was
to travel many miles into the Country, I secretly returned at my back door, and
understanding that they were both together in the next room, I privately
conveyed my self into the House of office that joins unto it. I heard very well
the greatest part of their discourse, which by little and little did render it
self more amorous, and I must confess did grievously displease me; I would
most willingly have heard it all, to be more fully satisfied, but there arrived
to me a great misfortune, for a Defluction which fell upon my Lungs did make me
very rheumatick, and I coughed so extremely, as if I had swallowed a bag full
of feathers, Howsoever so great was my desire to listen to them, that I knew
not how to dispose of my self, but only to hold my Breath as long as possibly I
could; At the last I concluded that my best course was to put my head down into
the Privy to cough within the hole, that so I might not be perceived, which
when accordingly I had done, I coughed above eight times from the bottom of my
stomach, which did me much good, and I enforced my self to cough as much again,
to bring forth my phlegm all at once, for I was extremely phlegmatic; And I must
tell you by the way, that I took much pleasure in it, for my voice resounded in
that subterranean place, and although my phlegm did fall soft enough, yet my
voice made an Echo, which might be heard as plain as is the Echo near the
mountain a quarter of a league from this place; But (O unhappy accident) when I
thought to have drawn my head out of the hole, It was impossible, I did thrust
it in with all the force I had* and I had not the way to get it out, as I had
to put it in, for my chin as a hook did hinder the coming forth of it, and I
was as it were in the Pillory. Ha, if any one had then come in, he might have
done me mischief enough, before I had been able to have defended my self. It
would be a good invention in such a place to put resisting malefactors, when
they are to endure the whip. I did use all the force I had, but instead of
drawing forth my head, my endeavors were so great, that I plucked the seat out
of its place, for the board was old and half broken before. In this manner I
became half Master of my liberty, and was no longer constrained to be obliged
unto one place; nevertheless I carried my prison about with me; I endeavored
with my hands to pluck the plank from my neck, but I was not able to effect it,
and I could not but laugh to see my self thus attired in the new fashion, with
a Spanish Ruff about my Neck. Howsoever I was afraid, that if my Wife had found
me in this condition, she would have made some sport with me. Seeing therefore
that I could not deliver my self, my desire was as privately as I could to have
recourse unto my old Companion the Sawyer, who lived at the upper end of our
street, to request him to saw it off; but it so fortuned, that in the Street I
met with many, both young and old, who did run after me as after a Fool, and
would not forsake me until I came to the place whither I was to go. There it
was that I was delivered of my unsavory yoke, but it was noysed over all the
Country, for the Sawyer my Companion could not hold his peace, and the Boys in
the street do yet laugh at me wheresoever I go; But that which most afflicted
me, was, that I did not thoroughly understand the end of the discourse of the
young Ribauld in my house, and I could not know whether he had made me a
Cuckold or no. But not long afterward I was too sensibly assured of it, for
returning from the fields, I found him with his unsatisfied Companion in the
act of their uncleanesse. God knows, what a broken heart I had, I stayed my
Ruffian as he was going forth, and said unto him, Tell me thou Villain, what
were thou a doing within? Have a care that I take thee so no more, for if I
do, I will mince thee into less pieces than meat is for the Pie. I know well
enough that thou came to see my Wife; Do thou think that thou can content
her better than my self? Well, well, let us make trial upon this seat who is
better provided by Nature to please a Woman, thou or my self; Speaking those
words, I produced, and showed him what were the gifts of Nature which I had,
but he durst not do the like, knowing that the right was not on his side. He
departed from my house much ashamed, nevertheless, he has since oftentimes
returned, and not so much in private, but I have always notice of it. One day I
found him lying with my wife in the same Bed which here you see. I only
contented my self to chide him for it, and did let him go away safe and sound.
Oh what a grief it is unto me when I do think of it; I ought to have flung his
Hat out of the Window, or have torn his doublet from his back; But I was not my
self at the sight of that Accident.

All these things did so afflict me, that I did swear to that Whore, that
undoubtedly within the compass of a year, I should kill my self to be
delivered of those torments which she caused me to endure, yet for all that,
she became every day more wicked than other, desiring nothing more than to see
me carried forth with my heels foremost. We have never quarrelled since; but she
has said unto me, Robin, What do you make account to do? Why do thou not
perform thy Oath, wretched Fool, which thou have taken? Why do thou not die?
The Vines will flourish never the less for thy absence; Thou only servest to
consume the fruits of the Earth.

She began lately more to respect me than she has been accustomed to do, to
make a trial (as it is to be presumed) if I would be so very a Fool as to make
my self away for her; I knew her Intention, and to prove how great was the
affection she did bear unto me, and what she would do and say, if I were out
of the world, I did counterfeit my self to be dead.

In this contrivement a Cousin of mine did much assist me, at whose House I was
yesterday very late in the Evening, who came unto my Wife to acquaint her, that
having drank something, He knew not what, that was mingled in a glass with
White wine, I did throw my self upon the Bed, where I was drawing to an end.
This News did not soften her heart at all; She made answer, That she had so
great a desire to sleep, that she could not rise to come unto me without the
most apparent danger in the world. Finding that, we attended till this Morning
to put an end unto our Enterprise; He brought me hither, having one of his
Servants to assist him, and put me upon this Bed, where ever since I have lain
like a dead Man; and addressing himself to my Wife, he said unto her, Behold
your dead Husband! I am sorry that you were not present when he surrendered his
Soul to God, you might then have known his last Will, and seen with what
diligence I have assisted him. She made answer in groans unto him, O God! Is my
good Man dead? I shall never find another that will equal him in the goodness
of his Disposition; Tell me what he said unto you being near unto his end; Keep
not one word from me, it will serve for a great consolation to me. He replied,
You do much deceive your self, it will serve unto you for Remorse of Conscience
all you life, if you have a relenting Soul, and careful of its own Salvation.
My Cousin assured me, that you were the Cause of his Death, and that he came to
my house as to a Refuge, to protect him from the afflictions which he endured
in your Company. Alas! (said she) How unhappy am I? What discourtesies have I
done him, that he died with so much rancor against me? He will not then pray to
God for me in the other world? Saint Mary! Our Neighbors can all witness the
good Entertainment that he always has received from me; It is above a month
ago since the least noise was heard in our house. Son of David! I was so ready
to obey all his Commandments, that but yesterday I though I should have broke
my neck in running down the stairs to fetch his Wine for him; Alas poor Man! He
never drank since in my Company, and never now shall drink in it again.

My Cousin gave her leave to make an end of her doleful Complaints, and
departed from her, to understand whether her griefs were counterfeit or not; He
was no sooner gone, but she sent for that Woman whom you see, who is no better
than her self, and for her Adulterer also; She said unto them, Companions, My
Husband is dead, Have not I a good Cause to weep? The old Woman replied unto
her, Are you a Fool? Do you forget the Wishes that so often you have made? She
made answer, No my good Friend; But what will the Neighbors say, if I shall
not weep? And since it is the Custom to weep, let me alone, I will have tears
in abundance, although I have occasion enough to laugh, I will have Onions
always in my Handkerchief, and wipe my eyes with them; Speaking those words,
her tears ceased, Her eyes have learned the trick to make her tears to run, and
cease when she pleases. She afterward proceeded in her Discourse, Upon my
Faith he has done well to die, and I wondered what he meant so long to deferr
it, I therefore resolved with my self to assist him in it; for having long ago
made so many deep protestations to me, to dislodge from this world, I conceived
with my self, that if he tarried any longer in it, he must needs be damned for
not keeping his word, if he should have upright Judges: Am I not now a happy
Woman? all that is in this House is mine. He has given me it all, at the
Contract of his Marriage. I have now gained by St. John, for the evil life
which I did lead with him. All the Night long he lay be me as unmovable as a
Block. He had one Member of his Body, which long ago, for ought that I do know,
was as entirely dead, as if it had been touched with Thunder. Her Companion
replied unto her, Comfort your self then, Behold where your Friend is! who will
give you the best Content in the world. Hereupon, because all the Curtains
about the Bed were drawn, that I could not be discovered, I lifted up my head a
little, and peeping through a little place where the Curtains lay open at the
foot of the Bed, I beheld this gallant, embracing, and kissing my Wife. The
pains which I took to raise my head, were such, that it gave an unexpected
passage to a furious wind which proceeded from me, and did much amaze them all.
O Lord! (said my Wife) He is not dead, Hark how he farteth? You will be a Fool
still (said her Companion) Do you think that dead Bodies do not break wind?
Why, things that have no life at all do fart. Be you where you will, you shall
in every place hear something or other that will make such a noise, be it never
so little. As for him, It may be that some of his Eones made a crack at the
dis-joynting of them: or rather, it was some wind which remained yet in his
Body, and finding not the passage open, could not but with violence break
forth. Besides, we ought to believe, that his Body (being heavy as it is) did
cause the Bed to crack, which is made but of the thinnest wood. Ah Villain!
(said my Wife) It was all his delight to break wind backward when he was alive,
and now he does practice it being dead. He had the wind at Command, and high or
low, would make it so to blow at his pleasure, that I wonder the State did not
send for him, to make him their Mariner. He would oftentimes lay wagers to let
such a number of Farts at once, which should all come rattling from him like a
peal of Ordnance, and in two or three hundred at a clap the would not miss you
one of his number. It was his ordinary sport amongst his Companions, and he did
get a great deal of money by it; But (my good Friend) that we may be sure to be
troubled with him no more, It were better for us to bury him too soon, then too
late; Let us therefore put our hands to the work, and give me a needle and
thread.

Having spoke those words, she did draw the Curtain, and as she stooped to look
upon me, (it being high time for me to act out my part, having known the small
Esteem she had of me) I lifted up my Arm* and applied my hand fast unto her
cheek, which did put her into an excess of fear. I said unto her, I am not yet
dead, you Slut, and (if it shall please God) I one day shall lay thee in the
Earth; and since, without just Cause, thou so maliciously do desire that I
should depart out of this world, Heaven, the more to enrage and punish thee,
will permit that I shall continue here a long time. Then they all three fell
upon me, and being unwilling to believe that I was alive, because they desired
I were dead, they did their best endeavor to shroud me, and bury me in this
Linen sheet. I made resistance as long as possibly I could, crying out Help,
Help, Murder, Murder, and telling them that I was not dead. I do believe they
had a desire to have strangled me, and no doubt they had put it in Execution,
if out of your goodness you had not come to my succor, being (as I believe)
invited to it by my Cries. Now Sir, I do beseech you, that you will vouchsafe
to assist me, having understood the Justice of my Cause. Procure that they
persecute me no more, as they did before your Coming, and be pleased to be a
Protector of the miserable.

When he had thus ended his Speech, Francion, who understood the Justice of his
cause, desired to make peace amongst them, and the young Ruffian, and the old
woman who accompanied him, departed, fearing they should be apprehended. The
woman of the house perceiving that the Gentleman desired to dine there, did go
down into the Kitchen, confused, and ashamed, to make preparations for his
Dinner. All that time her Husband was putting on his Clothes, and kept close
to Francion, with whom he discoursed on diverse Subjects. After dinner,
Francion caused his wife to appear, and said unto them both, that they must
both of them before him, make a long, and a durable friendship. The Husband,
who desired nothing but Love and Honesty, did easily consent unto it, and the
Wife did the same, being constrained by necessity. I will then, said Francion,
that Robin immediately do show me, if he be not sufficiently valiant of himself
to give his wife content, without making her to run to the Court for help.

Fair Ladies, you that without blushing cannot endure to hear those things
spoken of which best of all you do love, I know well enough, that if you cast
your eyes on this passage, and on many other places of this Book, you will
presently lay it by, and peradventure will hate me, or at least will so
dissemble to do, to show your selves chaste and retired; Nevertheless I love
the truth so much, that for all the coyness of your humor, I will conceal
nothing, especially of that, which does profit more by being divulged, than by
having it buried in silence.

Robin, after some unwillingnesse, did accord to the desire of Francion, being
very glad to have the eyes of so great a personage to be the unreproachable
Witnesses of the proofs of his valor, but his Wife seemed to be much ashamed,
and affirmed, that she had rather die than endure that such a thing should be
seen before the eyes of the world. And why so, said Francion, Do not all men
know that which you two do being both together? Do you desire to conceal it?
To what purpose will that serve you? When I have seen you to have done it, were
I the greatest babbler in the world, all that I could say would be but that I
have seen you to have done it. And what news would that be? I may say as much
now, for it is but the Truth. Moreover, do you think I am not as able to judge
of this business as well as the Chirurgians? and that I cannot make as true a
judgment as they, whereby you shall not be troubled to run to the Spiritual
Court, where it will cost you as much money as attendance? For all these
reasons, the Hostess remained in her first obstinate Resolution, and Francion
pursuing his intentions, told her, that if she would not do it, he would
command all his servants, to hold her by her Arms, until Robin had accomplished
his Desire; And without any more ado he took her himself, and threw her on the
Bed, and commanded Robin to begin what he had to do; who, after that the
Cavallier had commanded his servants to depart, and stayed alone himself in the
Chamber, did show himself ready to obey him. But it is said, that whenever his
Servants were gone, Francion caused him to wave the encounter, for he would
first see if he were well provided with all things that were necessary for him.
Moreover, the Detractors do affirm, that he made them afterward to begin the
fight again, and did furnish them with new precepts of Love; you may believe
which you please. It may suffice to understand, that he judged they had no
cause to be discontented at one another, without making any mention unto you,
either of erection or intromission, or ejaculation, which are words that
relish more of the Court of the Church, than of the Court at the Louvre. The
Hostess had a Sister to marry, and some there were that did go singing up and
down the village, That she must take a Husband upon proof, because that her
Sister was deceived. But no great heed ought to be taken to that slander.

Behold this is all that we have to speak like a Libertine in this Book; Are
you ashamed to look upon it Gentlemen and Ladies who are the Readers? The
stories which are here to be read, are not so guilty that they were made on
purpose to prompt you unto Vice; Our design is, to make you expressly to hate
it, by setting before your eyes the bad success of enormous enterprises.
Whatsoever it be, it may easily be discerned that it was not made for the
meditation of religious Votaresses, but to instruct those how to live that are
in the world, where every day they are enforced to understand many other things
of this Nature; for what offenses be there that are not daily brought to the
knowledge of the Courts of Justice, and how can it be remedied, but that they
will administer a Subject of discourse in all Companies?

But if my excuses are of no validity, and you can find nothing in this Book to
please you, Readers, whosoever you are, do not read it the second time, I did
not make it for yours, but for my own particular pleasure. Do not buy it, if
you have no mind to it, there is no man will enforce you to it. But if you have
it, and that altogether it does displease you, cast it into the fire, and if
there be but one part only which is disagreeable to you, either tear it, or
blot it out, and make your profit of the rest. But if some words only be
against your heart, I give you the fair liberty to insert others which you
shall better approve. I believe there are very few Authors who will say as
much, and less that will grant it, but they are all too stubborn, and do tie
themselves to impertinent vanities; For my part, I will take my own Swing, and
delight my self, without reflecting on any other. Do you afterward, if you
can, follow my Counsels, and allow of my intentions. But let us now pursue our
more agreeable discourse.

After that Francion had made his Host and his Hostess perfect friends, he
came down, being followed by them to have the reckoning paid, which was no
sooner cast up, but it was immediately discharged. Moreover he gave unto them
three Pistols of gold, to invite them to remember him when he was gone, and in
the remembrance of him to appease all their old differences, and he promised
them that he would give them a greater Donation, if he were advertised that
they continued in the obligation of their love; But if he heard to the
contrary, he threatened rigorously to punish their new dissentions. It is said,
that his Remonstrances were of great efficacy, and that ever since they lived
in peace, and have had Children.

A certain man who came to dine at the Tavern, observing the bounty and great
gifts of Francion, did bear a great respect unto him, and seeing him to take
horse, did take horse also, and understanding that he traveled the same way,
he did desire to accompany him. The first discourse with him, was, the praising
of his Liberality, from which he fell to the dispraise of Avarice, of which he
told him he could furnish him with a most remarkable example, of a Gentleman
who lived in a Village, where the next night they were to lodge, He is the most
wretched man, said he, that the Earth did ever bear; his Tenants are most
unhappy to have such a Landlord, he does exact upon them in a thousand ways.
The last year he made them believe, that he had a great desire to go to the
war for the service of the King, and that his poor Tenants must be at the
charge to give him two light Horses, nevertheless he did not go at all, but
only made a journey to the Court, where he stayed about a month.

He sent afterward to them a company of the Gen-darmes, which belonged to one
of his friends, to satisfy his malicious Avarice, who had plundered them to
some purpose, but that reflecting on his own profit, he thought it was more
discretion for him to pillage them himself, and he was sorry that by his daily
extorsion, he had made them so poor, that they could contibute no more unto
him. You will hardly believe how he has caused them to be puninished, both in
their bodies and their purses, when they have gathered up but some small sticks
which they have found about his woods. When he hireth d^y-labourers, he at his
pleasure puts back the clock, and makes them to work two hours longer than
they are accustomed to labor in other places. He keeps all his Servants in
the most penurious way that possibly can be imagined; When he puts Pease, or
Lentils into the Pot to be boiled, he does count them one by one, and has
learned Geometry, on purpose that his Compass may serve him to measure the
bread, to know how much they have eaten. Never any man could make his boast
that he has Feasted with him. When his friends (if he has any) do come in,
and enter at the fore-door of his house to see him, he, for fear to entertain
them, does go out at the Backdoor, and takes his walk in unfrequented places,
where it is impossible to find him. In his house there is no difference at all
in their Diet; and for his Grooms he takes none but those who are of a
melancholic, or a Phlegmatic complexion, because that those who are of a
choleric humor are commonly too great Eaters. One time he entertained a Cook,
but he soon afterward desired leave to be gone, professing to him, That if he
stayed any longer in his house, he should forget his Trade.

This Covetous wretch, observing his Children to grow up, did one day complain
of it, contrary to all other men, who are very glad to see their Children to
increase in years, hoping thereby to receive a sudden and absolute contentment,
by seeing them either well married, or to be endued with some eminent quality
or signal virtue, for their advancement. His reason was, That for himself, he
never makes himself ready, but on Sundays only, and on Holydays, when he goes
to show himself in his Parish Church; and he then he puts on a Linsywoolsy
frock upon his Clothes when ever he comes home, and he will not adventure to
stir from his feat on that day, so great a fear he has to indamage his apparel
by wearing. It is reported, that the best habiliments he has, are those of his
great Grandfathers, by which he is sometimes pleased to be known, and which most
carefully he preserves; intending to bequeath and intayl them with his
Benediction to his Posterity. On working-dayes he is covered altogether with
rags.

As I remember (said Francion) you called this person, Gentleman; Do you
believe, in good earnest, that he deserves that title, living a life so fordid?
One of the most principal Ornaments of Nobility, is Liberality.

Sir (said he who did accompany him) I must acknowledge that I have failed in
calling him Gentleman, although he has many Lordships; for by descent he is no
Gentleman at all: His Father was one of the greatest Usurers in France, and
made it all his business to give pernicious advice to others, to heap up
money, and to sow dissension. Nevertheless his Son, and his Daughter, who are
one of them at the Age of Twenty, and the other of Eighteen, do nothing partake
at all of the humors of his race; They are both of them endued with generaous
Souls, It is pity that they have a Father who will do nothing to advance them.
His Daughter is very beautiful, and wants for no attractions to procure her
Sweet-hearts; but what is she the better for it? A man can never find the
opportunity to court her, she is always at her Mothers elbow; a woman as
miserable as her Husband, who will not permit her to go into any Company, for
fear it will cost him too much to put her into good habiliments, Nay, which is
more, Signior Buisson, who is her Father, is so fearful to disburse his money,
that he will not hear of any Husband for her. His Son is at this present a
Prisoner, partly by his own will, and partly by force; for he desires not to
be seen abroad, and accompany other Gentlemen of his rank, having neither
apparel to grace, nor train to attend, or silver to assist him, either at play
or at revellings. Not long since he was even with his Father, who being fallen
sick, and not able to travel to the City to pay a round sum of Silver which he
owed to a Merchant, he was constrained, to his great grief, to commit the
charge thereof unto his Son; for he was so miserable, that he would hardly
trust himself with his own Goods. His Son being tempted with that profitable
metal, which he seldom carried about him, did determine to keep it for himself;
And instead of carrying it where he was commanded, he did bury it in the middle
of a Field, and having sold his Horse and Cloak, he returned in a most
melancholy disguise unto his Father, and acquainted him, That he had been
assaulted by Thieves, who had dismounted him, and not only deprived him of his
Horse, but had taken from him by force his Money, and his Cloak. You may imagine
in what a passion old Buisson was, he knew not on whom to exercise his Revenge;
at the last he imputed all the fault unto his Son, he called him Knave, and did
beat him soundly, because he made no more have out of doors, and did not keep
the ordinary Highway, where he might possibly have found one honest Traveller
or other, who would have relieved him. He gave a charge to the Provost of the
Marshalseys to make enquiry after the persons who did steal the money. One of
the Officers knowing the color of the hair, and the height of the Horse, was
so diligent, that at last he found him in an adjacent Village, as with a halter
he was led forth from the Stable unto water. On his Return, he did go to the
dwelling house to which the Stable did belong, and demanded of the Master, Who
it was that sold that Horse unto him? He made answer, he was a young Man, but
his Name and Quality he could not tell; but if it were his chance to see him,
he should know him again very well. By ill fortune, young Buisson at that time
passed by, and the Master of the House said immediately to the Officer, Look,
yonder he is without all doubt, lay hands on him. The Officer replied, Take
heed you deceive not your self; for he who goes there, is the Son of that Man
who has lost the Horse. The other replied, It is most assuredly the same young
Man who sold the Horse to me. The Officer being contented with this assurance,
returned to the old Signior, who confronted his Son with it: his Son was
immediately convinced, and fearing the fury of his Father, did secretly depart
out of the Castle, belike, to find out his buried money, by the help of which
he has conveyed himself away so far, that he has never since been seen. At
the last he will be enforced to come back again, although it be for nothing
else but to claim his share in the Inheritance; knowing that the loss of this
money will be the only way to break his Fathers heart. That which comes by the
Music of the Cornet, returns back at the Sound of the Trumpet. Goods ill
got, will infallibly be one day ill expended: When the young Man has them once
in his possession, we need not ask what Riot he will make.

By this may be understood, what pleasure men take to cramm their Purses with
Crowns, which they shall be then enforced to leave, when they think least of
it. For my self, I know not which of them to blame most, either the Father, or
the Son: Both of them have failed in their duty, but I cannot deny but that all
the world may see, that the fault first of all did proceed from the Father, who
by his miserableness has, in a manner, provoked his Son to take that from him
by force, which he would not give him of good will. Without doubt God is
pleased that the Son, who proceeded from his own bowels, should be his scourge,
to punish him for his avarice. That may well be (said Francion) and I believe
that Heaven has sent me also upon earth to punish the same sin: I protest unto
you, I will not spare him at all, or my Spirit shall be barren in Invention.
Tell me only, If you have any Interest in him? Yes Sir, replied the other; for
I live in a Farm which is but a League from his Castle, and have learned all
his Genealogy and manner of life of a certain Boy who served him, who comes
oftentimes to my house. Give me then an Account of it (said Francion) without
omitting any thing; whereupon he who did accompany him, did declare whatsoever
he had heard of him; I will measure him then (said Francion) by the length of
his own Ell, That will do it. Is he not extremely ambitious, to fill up the
number of all his other Vices? Is he not easy to be persuaded, that he is one
of the most noble, and most apparent of all that Province? You hit the nail on
the head, replied the other; If you had eaten a whole bushel of Salt with him,
you could not have known him better. It is the height and force of all his
desire to be esteemed a Gentleman, and oftentimes he has bastinadoed some, who
have said he was no Gentleman, and that he ought to come behind them. So, so,
said Francion, I will go to him howsoever, I will make him as noble as my
self, whether he will, or not, for I know that otherwise at the beginning he
will not approve of that which I shall perform, to arrive to my intent.

As they were in this discourse, they approached unto a little Wood, near unto
which they heard a noise, as if some men were offering violence to one another.
Our Adventurer who would know all things, and punish all the forfeits which he
saw committed, did put spurs to his horse, being followed by his people, he
perceived four sturdy fellows holding a young Gentleman by his Collar, having
first dismounted him. Although he made his approaches near unto them, yet they
would not abandon him, and because the young Gentleman would not go with them,
as they would have him, they dragged him along with all their force. You
Villains, what will you do to that gallant young man, said Francion? One of
them made answer, It does not belong to you at all, let it suffice you to
understand that our proceedings are approved by Justice; Justice, said
Francion, What virtuous Lady is that whom you call Justice, who causes honest
men to be so rudely entreated? Let the Gentleman go, or I profess unto you you
shall dearly repent it. Sir, said another of them, you will give us leave to
execute our charge, we are the Kings Officers, we are carrying this Man to
prison for his debts. And is it only for that? said Francion, I swear unto you,
he shall not go. Having spoke those words, he drew his Sword, and all those
who were with him did the like, and did charge upon the Sergeants with so much
resolution, that they enforced them to show their heels to their Enemies. The
Neighbor of old Buisson approaching, said unto Francion, Sir, This Gentleman
whom you have rescued, is young Buisson. In a good hour, said Francion, I am
glad at my heart that I have thus met with him. On that the young Gentleman did
approach unto him, to thank him, with such words as expressed the generosity of
his Spirit, which invited Francion to use him with all humanity of respect. He
then demanded of him, if it were for debt that they would have carried him to
prisor? Buisson made answer, yes, and that his Father allowing him no means, he
was enforced to borrow some moneys of the Usurer, who, having need of it, did
thus rudely pursue him to surrender it. In this entertainment of discourse they
arrived at the Town where they intended to sup and lodge that night. There were
two men drinking in the Inn as they entered into the Court, one of them had a
Nose as red as a Lobster, who espying young Buisson, made a sign to his
Comrade; After that they did both fall to their cups harder than before, having
some slices of a Gammon of Bacon brought unto them, the more to excite their
thirst. Here (said one of them) holding the glass in his hand, Keeper of the
Jayl of my Stomach, Make ready the Writ for this valiant Champion whom I am
going to put into the hole. See yet, said he, another glass of wine, which
has chosen to take its lodging in the ward of my Belly, and speaking those
words he drank it off. Companion (replied the other) having first drank a
glass of wine, I give you the assignation, before the throne of the Deity of
Bacchus, to inform me for what cause you do not drink in time and place? I
will not make appearance, said the other, and if you shall levy upon the
default, whereby I shall be constrained to pay the expense, and be condemned
afterward for contumacy, I will appeal from you, as from an incompetent Judge,
and demand to be brought before my Judge natural, and domiciliar, as in an
Action purely personal. It is no matter for the appearance, said the first, I
will have a Deed signed and delivered by the Drawer within, by which it shall
be certified that I have drunk more than thou have. See here a Pint pot, said
the other, which seems to me not to be compared to this which is the Original,
and has the mark of the City on it, It is a great deal too little, and the
Wine is not good, I will obtain therefore Letters Patents sealed with the great
Seal to relieve my self, because I have consented to give six Souses for that
which is worth but four. But to the purpose my Camerade, Thou eatest up all the
bread which I do cut. I will form a Complaint for this abuse, and cause thee
to appeal in a Case of Seisin, and Trespass.

They had much other discourse to this purpose, which Francion understood, and
did swear he did conceive them to be Sergeants, not only by reason of their
Countenance, but by the terms of practice which at every word incongruosly
enough proceeded from them, and moreover he suspected, that they were in the
number of those who would have dragged Du Buisson unto prison. To prove if it
were true, he left him aloue in the next room, and did go out of the gate
himself with all his train, pretending that he had a great desire to see some
of the singularities in the City. Immediately the Sergeants, who had all this
while a design to carry Buisson to prison, did go to look him out, and having
showed him their Authority, they did begin to exercise their office: but
Francion and his people immediately returning, did hinder them from proceeding
any further; and having shut the gate of the Inn upon them, he told them that
they were at his mercy, and that were it not for him they had both been killed.

These poor Gigots of Justice cried for mercy to Francion, and Buisson, and
assured them that they would not have undertaken it, but that they were
commanded to it. You are a couple of Fools, said Francion, who do not
understand your own Trade, I will teach it you. Will any Sergeant that has
discretion with him use such words of Art as you have done before the friends
of him whom you desire to arrest? Do you not consider that it is more than
sufficient to discover who you are? It was for this reason only that you failed
in your enterprise on this gallant Gentleman, for which I am very glad; But go
too, tell me at my request, whose Prisoner should he be? Sir, said one of them,
he should be prisoner to such a Merchant of this City. I know him very well,
said Buisson, he is one of the most deceitful dealers that is in it. He sold
unto me bad stuffs at a very high price, and helped me himself to find out a
Man who would buy them of me at a low rate with his own money, so that his ware
returned again to his own shop. For my self I did not care, because I had got
some silver, of which I was in need, and never minded the danger to come. He
was always importunate with me to come unto his shop, and assured me I should
have what stuffs I would, trusting to the great riches of my Father. Francion
having whispered Buisson in the ear, commanded one of the Drawers to go to the
Merchants house, and acquaint him on the behalf of the Sergeants, that the
young Gentleman who was indebted to him was there ready to pay him, and that he
should come with all the speed he could. The Merchant being come, Supper was
served in, and the payment being deferred till after Supper, the Merchant was
placed amongst the Sergeants to eat with them. He and his Camerades did drink
so deeply, that the fumes did begin to ascend into their brains. Francion did
give unto one of his Lackeys a certain powder that he had taken with him
amongst his other curiosities, which being mingled in the wine they drank of,
did render them so stupid, that they seemed to have rather the Souls of brute
beasts than of men. There was no longer any reason in their words, and one
might do with them what he pleased; for they were as insensible Creatures.
Francion seeing them in that condition, did examine their pockets, and took
from them the Bills and Bonds which the Merchant had brought, and the Writs and
Capiasses of the Sergeants, and burned them all before Buisson, who gave him a
thousand thanks for the favors he received.

Francion afterward called for the Vintner, and complained to him that he had
sent up Wine so heavily dashed, that those poor men of the City who were not so
much accustomed to drink as those of his Retinue, were extremely intoxicated,
although they had not drunk so much as his Servants had done. The Vintner
replied, These gallants, Sir, at least the two Sergeants whom there you see,
were more than half drunk before they came to Supper to your Table. Did you not
see them carousing together as you came into the Inn? I will send unto their
Wives to fetch them home. For this Man (pointing to the Merchant) I will take
the pains, said he, to lead him home my self.

Having spoke those words, he commanded one of his Servants to look out the
Sergeants wives, who gave them a thousand evil words, as they did lead them
home, and that which did incense them, was, that they could not get one word of
sense from them. When the Merchant was come to his own house, his Wife
demanding of him if he had received the money which was due unto him? He being
not so stupefied as the other, had the understanding to make answer to her,
That she had a great desire to be brave; and taking a good Cudgel, he did fall
upon her, as if the Devil had been in him; Nevertheless he had not the least
consideration, whether he had received the money or not, and perceived not the
stealing away of his Papers.

The next Morning, understanding the loss of them, he did run in a great rage
unto the Tavern; but the guests were gone very early in the Morning, wisely
foreseeing what was like to ensue: so that the Merchant learned to his own
Cost, not to cozen young Gentlemen any more, nor trust them with commodities to
be exchanged into ready money, and employed in unprofitable expenses. Francion
nevertheless advised the young Man to give him something when he was able to
spare it, accordingly as his Conscience should direct him.

When he was on the way, he asked him to what place he had a desire to go. Not
that way as you steer your course, replied the young Man; because that you are
traveling toward my Fathers Castle, before whom I dare not present my self. I
have taken some money from him, which I will employ to the best advantage I
can, and I am now going to find out a Lord in this Country, who being my near
Kinsman, will freely entertain me in his House. Well, said Francion, because
you are disposed to ramble, find out the means to come to Rome, where some
months hence undoubtedly you will find me, and you may there pass away your
time better, than in any other place of the world; Your humor pleases me so
much, that I desire to enjoy your Company longer. Having spoke those words, he
friendly embraced him, and left him to his own liberty to take which way he
pleased.

He who did speak unto him of old Buisson, was yet in his Company, and did not
forsake him, till he had brought him within sight of the Castle: Francion
taking his leave of him, assured him that within few days he should receive the
News of what he had done, and so he departed; putting the best face he could on
his well-grounded Resolution, and commanded the Groom of his Chamber to take
out of his Sumpter the richest Cloak he had, because he had a desire to pass
for some great Signior.

We shall in the next Book see what War he does make with Avarice, which is one
of the most enormous Vices in the world; and in that we may understand that
this Comical History contains in it many things Satirical, to render it the
more profitable; for it is not sufficient to lay forth Vices in all their
colors to the eye, unless we shall undertake also effectually to reprove them.

The End of the Eighth Book.
THE NINTH BOOK OF THE COMICAL HISTORY OF FRANCION.
THis brave Cavallier whose Adventures we have traced, did at last arrive at
the gates of the Castle of the Covetous Signior; he would have sent in one of
his Servants before hand as a Harbinger, to advertise him of his Coming, were
it not for fear that he would have stolen away, that he might he not see him.
He came into the Hall, where he found the venerable personage sitting, and
reading in a Book of Husbandry, to discover that which he might yet put in
practice to increase the profit of his Lands; Monsieur, said Francion to him,
the extreme desire I have to see you, and to witness unto you how affectionate
I am to do you Service, has constrained me to leave the way which my affairs
obliged me to keep, boldly to make my approach to your Castle. Signior Buisson
replied, I beseech you, Sir, to tell me who you are, for I know you not? I know
you as well as my self, said Francion, your Renown is spread in all places; For
my self, I am called Francion, Marquis de la Part; I am nearly allied to you,
I will tell you by what extraction; thereupon he ravell'd out the whole
Genealogy, following that which was described to him: and although another
might observe the falsities therein, the old Signior did persuade himself it
was true, so over-joyd he was, that a Marquis who had so honorable a train,
did call him Cousin of his own motion, hoping it would be sufficient to prove
his Nobility against all contradiction. Having by his language testified unto
Francion, what honor and contentment this acknowledgement did bring unto him,
the first Courtesy which he used, was to say unto him, I believe you were never
in this Country before, nor any of your Secvants, and therefore they cannot
tell where good Lodgings may be had for them, and Stables for your Horses, I
will direct them to a good Tavern, to which they and their Horses may retire
themselves; my Man shall go along with them to conduct them. Francion observing
that Du Buisson had a desire to show him a proof of his ordinary
miserableness, resolved not to give way unto it, and said unto him, Cousin, I
have always occasion for my Servants, and desire that they may not be removed
from me; And as for my horses, I am loath they should be left in an Inn, where
none of my Servants are present to have a Care of them; Besides, I dare assure
you they are so weary, that they are hardly able to go so far.

Thus Francion did defend himself at the first Encounter. Buisson perceiving
that he could not deny him, did immediately command that Supper should be served
in, which was only a Shoulder of Mutton, with some Sallets, and said unto
Francion, Sir, You must be contented with a very poor Supper, It is no more
than what I have ordinarily for my self; I had no knowledge of your Coming (as
I ought to have) to provide your better cheer, and which is worse, my Wife is
sick in Bed, and there is not any one within to attend the Kitchen, and to put
their helping hand to the Work. Make not so much have (said Francion) we will
lose nothing for want of attendance, I will give you all the leisure that can
be desired to make ready what you please, and if you have any Viands that are
more delicate than other, I pray serve them in, for on such only I am
accustomed to feed. I observed your store of Fowl as I passed by them, I have
not seen any place in France that is better provided; if I did not know that
you were extraordinarily furnished with all things, I would not be so
importunate with you to content my appetite: And now I do better remember it, A
man of this Country whom I met with in the way, told me, that there is one in
this Town who goes every day a hunting, and sells what he takes to those who
will buy it: You may do well, Cousin, to send unto him for some Venison and
Partridges. The Covetous old Man was constrained to do those things to which
Francion did invite him, promising to himself, that he should be only for that
evening at that excessive charge, and that his Guest on the next Morning would
pursue his intended Journey. But he was amazed to see himself so overrun beyond
his account; Francion observing it, said unto him, My dear Cousin, Do not so
much torment your Spirit, as it appears to me you do; It may be that I cannot
this Night be entertained according to your desire; All the days that I stay
with you, we will make every day better cheer than other. You shall have more
opportunity to provide your self with all the delicates that can be had. I love
your conversation so well, that it will be a great grief unto me to depart from
your house. How! (said Buisson to himself) Must I be so long enforced to keep
this Man here, with all his train? Ah, Here is Thrift and Providence indeed!
Does he hope that I shall yet make him better cheer? How is it possible? Has
he a desire to undo me? One of his Servants who has employed himself in my
Kitchen, has demanded so much Spice, and Butter, and other Ingredients to
season the Viands, that in one Supper all my provisions are made use of.

In this apprehension he spoke unto Francion, and advised him, that on the next
Morning as soon as possibly he could he would proceed in his Journey; beca^se
the Time was not to be he lost, since the weather was fair, and well-disposed;
and if he should stay another week, there would fall out many Inconveniences,
by reason of the great rains to come, for, he said, he followed the Predictions
in the Almanac of the Curate of Milmonts, who lied not. My dear Cousin, said
Francion, If the next week there be such bad weather, I will not depart, but
will stay till the next week following. But Cousin, replied Buisson, There will
be also after that week fifteen days of most tempestuous weather. Well then,
said Francion, I must have patience till the whole month be over; But one word
more, dear Cousin, When I go away you must lend me four Horses, as well to draw
a little Wagon, which to morrow I will cause to be made here, to put my
Carriages in it, which is too heavy for my Sumpter-horse, as also to ease my
Lackeys, who are already almost weary with traveling on foot. You shall also
do me the favor to lend me three or four hundred Liuvres, of which I have
great need; for when I set forth from my own House, I did not think to have
traveled so far, and therefore took not so much money with me as was
convenient.

These words did so prick the heart of Buisson, as if they had been the points
of so many Swords. As often as Francion did propound any thing unto him, he
would turn himself toward one of the most faithful of all his Grooms, and
would say unto him, Guerin, Guerin, Surely this Man is a Familiar. Supper being
ended, he conducted Francion to his Chamber, and provided good Beds for all his
Servants; afterward he did go to visit his Wife, whom he would not let
Francion see, because he pretended she had been a long time asleep. Finding her
awake, he declared to her the new Kinted he had found, and how dear it had cost
him. Ah! (my Love) said he, pursuing his Discourse, I know not what a Devil
this Marquess is; but if he be a man, he is the boldest that ever I saw; Why he
is more familiar with me, than if he were my own Brother, and through all his
life had made it all his business to frequent my Company. He tells me of his
appetites, and commands they should be satisfied. He reformeth all within my
house that is not pleasing to him. He constrains me to make superfluous
expenses, and domineers over all my Servants, as if I had given him Authority
so to do. If he stays here any long time, I am afraid that he will become
Master of all, and at the last will drive us out of doors. What profit (replied
his Wife) will such acquaintance bring you? Wherefore did you suffer him to
come into your house? I do believe that he is some notorious High-way-man;
without all doubt he is come to rob us. If you saw but his Countenance and his
Carriage, said the Covetous Man, you would not be of this opinion; he has
Gentlemen following him, and Lackey* apparelled after the fashion of the Court.
His Retinue is not made up in have, as are the train of those Personages who
all on the sudden would be taken for Lords, to put some bad enterprise in
execution. Howsoever, I am resolved to lodge him no longer than this night,
were he more near unto me than my Cousin German. I shall not be much the better,
though all the World should know that he has lodged here a long time, and that
he is, indeed, my kinsman; but on the concrary, the greatest part of my
provision would be spent, and my Goods dispersed: More of Profit, and less of
Honor, was the Motto of my Father. To be of the blood of a Marquess is not at
his discretion; although I should make him never so good cheer, I shall be no
more his Cousin than I am now, and I shall be as much, if I use him never so
coarsely. To speak the truth, I dare not thrust him out of doors by the head
and shoulders, but I will use some gentle means or other to cause him to
depart, without giving him any open discontent. I will pretend to morrow that I
have a great process, which I must go to the City to solicit; you shall make
your self to be more sick than you are, and when they shall demand of you for
that which shall be necessary to entertain him, you shall counterfe it your
self to be in some raving fit, and without Sense; so that when he finds me gone
for many days, and my return to be very uncertain, and that he can enjoy
neither yours, nor my Company, he will undoubtedly be enforced to depart; But I
will forbid my People to permit him to take my Horses along with him, as he
says he has a desire to do. Mademoiselle Buisson did approve the reasons, and
resolutions of her Husband, who leaving her in her Chamber, did retire himself
to lie in another.

In the mean time her Daughter, who a long time had been courted by a handsome
young Gentleman, did advertise him by a Letter, that a fair opportunity did
(...) it self to accomplish their desires, because her Mother was sick; and
that they could not observe her actions so narrowly, as before, in reg^ that a
great Lord lodged there that Night, who had put all things in disorder. The
Lover was already come, and so favorably, that a Servant belonging to the
Castle meeting him, took him to be one of the followers of Francion, because he
was so fashionable. His fair Sweetheart was with him in a Chamber, between
that of the pretended Marquisses, and the Chamber of her Father. The amorous
War was so pleasing to them, that they began it as soon as possibly they
could; They made the Bed to shake in such a manner, that her Father in the next
room did easily perceive it, and all the Night afterward he did not put his
eye lids together, so much of unquietness did perplex his Spirit. He could not
but think of that which his Wife had said unto him, and sometimes he so
suffered himself to be carried away by distrust, that he took Francion to be
some grand pillager, who had enterprised to rob him of whatsoever he had in his
house; in this violence of suspicion he said unto himself, As soon as day
appears, I will not fail to send to the Provost Marshal, and all the Marshals
men, to apprehend this Companion. He shall be taken in a snare. But, good God,
do (...) think to be more cunning than himself, who is the Master of all
inventions? He peradventure has done his work already, and is fled away; Ah
miserable man that I am, to be so desperately ruined, that I know not which way
in the world to redress my self. As he was in these perplexities, his Daughter
and her Sweetheart coming to re-imbrace each other, did shake the bed again
with so much violence, that he heard it plainly. He knew not that it was his
own Daughter who lay there, for he gave express Order that the Groom of
Francions Chamber who served him as a Gentleman, should be lodged in it; And
because there was a Coffer in that room in which were his richest habiliments,
he conceived that the noise which he heard did proceed from his guests, who
were breaking open the Coffer to empty it. He listened again attentively, and
hearing no noise at all, I know not what new revolution of thoughts did
surprise his Fancy, and he began to accuse himself of too much suspicion, and
to believe that he had heard nothing at all, but in imagination only, and said
within himself, that he was a vain man to take a person so qualified for a
thief; Nevertheless he could not take the least rest, and going softly out of
his chamber, he did see if all his Gates were fast locked, and if every one
were asleep in their lodgings. Being come down into the Court, he was invaded
by a thousand fears; It seemed to him, that he saw men coming down the window
on a Ladder, and ever and anon he would look behind him, to see if any one was
there ready with a prepared knife to cut his throat. Perceiving at the last the
error of his judgment, and that it was overcome by vain Illusions, he returned
to his Chamber, where he was no sooner entered, but he heard the same noise as
before. He knew then that he was not deceived, but did draw more near unto the
wall, and most attentively listened to that which they were doing in the other
Chamber. The young Lover who was not able to conceal his own joys, did say at
that instant unto his Sweetheart, I see now that there is not any thing which
per severance is not able to bring to effect. I have found the artifice to open
that which was most close locked, all must give way unto it.

Now, as Men filled with presumption, when they hear any doubtful words
reported, they turn them all unto their own glory; and as those who believe
they are hated by every one, do turn all to their own prejudice: so the fancier
of all men do accommodate themselves to their own passions, and ordinarily do
cause those things to appear unto them, which they do either fear, or hope.
This most particularly does appear by covetous persons, who never see two men
speaking together, but they believe they discourse of the means how to pillage
them of their goods. This old Buisson, the grand Horesleech of the world, was
of the same humor, and hearing these words from the Lover of his Daughter, he
did give an interpretation to them according to his own suspicion; He
immediately believed that some one endeavored to open his chests, and the
strong suggestion did grow upon his Soul, when the young Gentleman did thus
pursue his discourse, I hereafter shall have no more cause to a^ict my self,
for I am possessor of the choicest treasure that is here: But we do not
consider that the Day by degrees is coming on, I am afraid I shall be
discovered if I go not immediately away, but as I go out of the window, can I
cleave like Ivy to the Wall? I know not, but I will make a trial what I can do.
Upon my credit thou speak the truth, said old Buisson, Thou art possessor
indeed of the choicest treasure in my house, since thou have taken that which I
had locked up in my Coffer, but thou shall not carry it away as thou think,
I shall obstruct the passage.

Assuming then unto himself a generous resolution, he took his Sword, and came
to the door of the Chamber which he thought to have broke open with his Feet.
Francion, who that night slept soundly, and heard not the shaking of the bed at
all, did awake at this new noise, and did arise to see what the business was,
and knowing old Buisson by his Tongue, he demanded of him for what cause he did
grow into so great a choler; What cause, said he, Have I not good reason? There
is in the next room one of your Servants who has broken open one of my
Coffers. Francion replied, I cannot believe it, I entertain no Servants but
such as I conceive to be very faithful. Nevertheless let me see if that be
true which you represent, if it shall appear so unto me, I will afflict upon
him the severest punishment my self.

As he was speaking these words, Buisson called one of his Grooms, who brought
him a Candle, and his Daughter having in the mean time caused her Lover to hide
himself under her Bed, did put on her Petticoat, and came to open the door,
rubbing her eyes, as if she were but newly awake. Her Father was much amazed to
see her, and demanded of her, if she heard no noise in (...) Chamber? She made
answer, No forsooth, nevertheless he searched up and down, and came at last to
look under the Bed, where he perceived her Companion, whom he knew to be one of
his Neighbors. He thought that some one had been there to steal rather the
treasure of his Coffer, than the treasure of his Daughters Honor, conceiving,
that necessity, and not love had brought him thither; The young Gentleman said
unto him, Sir, I beseech you to pardon the fault which Love has caused me to
commit; you know I am not descended of so base a Family that it will be any
dishonor to you to have me to be your Son-in-Law; Mademoiselle your Daughter
does not disdain me, make me then so happy that I may have your consent as well
as hers. Monsieur Buisson would not attend till he had ended his speech, but
was in so prodigious a choler, that if Francion had not held him by the Arm, he
had run his Sword through his body. Sirrah, said he, are you so impudently
wicked, as to come to dishonor my house, I protest unto you, I will make you
to repent it; And turning unto Francion he said unto him, I pray, Sir, unhand
me, and grant me a little liberty, If you will express unto me any testimony
of your love, permit that I take vengeance on this wretch, who ought to dye by
no other hand than by my own. I ought also in the like manner to put to death
that ungratious offspring of mine, whom I am ashamed to own for my child. Dear
Cousin, said Francion, as long as I am here, you shall not do them any hurt, I
my self will be the Advocate of so just a cause as theirs; And having forced
the sword from the hand of Buisson, who was not so strong as himself, he did
demonstrate to him, that there was no redress for what had been done, but only
to authorize it, and if he should do otherwise, there would be reason enough
that the dishonor which he so much feared should fall upon his own house. Du
Buisson, in some manner approving of his reasons, did appease the first motions
of his choler, and sat down in a chair near unto Francion, who taking him by
the hand (in the earnest of friendship) did speak unto him in this manner, My
dear Cosen, I love you so well, that I will make use of all occasions to give
you the proofs thereof. The greatest which at this present I can make apparent
to you, is, not to flatter you in any thing, although for the most part, men
are accustomed so to do, following the corruption of the age. I will acquaint
you with the defects which you have, not to reproach you with them through
enmity, or to increase your choler, but for the time to come to render you
agreeable to those men of worth whom you do displease. I will not dissemble
with you, you are too miserable, and a hard man does render himself odious to
all the world, because he does hide and lock up those goods, which every one
stands in need of, and which every one does desire. He makes no other use of
them, but only to put them to use. It is impossible to gain any thing by him,
for he does buy as little as possibly he can, and never imployeth any workmen,
but when he is in such a condition, as mere Necessity does enforce him to it.
He gives no recompense to those who have faithfully served him. His Friends are
never well-come to his house, he gives them such pitiful entertainment, that
he shows them the desire which he has to see them no more. You are the Master
of all these vices, I will not conceal it from you, Consider, and examine your
own heart, with as great a severity as that man ought to do, who is to judge
himself. You do know that I do not unjustly accuse you. Represent now to your
self, if you are not miserably deprived of the greatest comfort of your life,
which ought to be the society of your friends. Do you not extremely injure
your self? for you are oftentimes even ready to perish with hunger amongst all
your riches, and are so afraid to lay forth your money, that you dare not buy
that which is most necessary for life. Nay which is worse than that, you
constrain those to disobey you, who do owe you all respect, and whose wills
are bound to depend on yours. I dare maintain what I speak, that you enforce
even your own Children to tread in dishonorable paths; You have a Son of age
to know and see the world, and you will not allow him what according to his
condition he ought to enjoy. You have a Daughter as capable to give love as to
receive it, and yet you never think of marrying her, insomuch that she has
been enforced to look abroad to provide for her self. Du Buisson here
interrupted him, and said, I know not who told you that, for it is certain I
have had always a desire to marry her to the Son of a rich Merchant whom I
know. Do you not see, said Francion, your mistake herein? you look after
nothing but wealth, and never enquire if he to whom you will give her be
agreeable to her or not; but let us talk no more of that, she has found her
self a Mate already. I do now conjure you, that you will altogether abandon
your sordid humor, and I assure you I am come hither for that only purpose. I
made you believe that I would stay here a long time, and put you to great
expenses, but my ^ntion is, and was, to depart this Morning, and all that I
have spoken does end only to prove if your avatice be as great as it has been
presented to me,

After this, Francion did yet most lively demonstrate to him the foulness of
his Vice, insomuch that the old Signior did begin to abhor it, and did resolve
with himself to abandon it, and embrace the contrary Virtue, from whence he
hoped, that all the happiness in the world would redound unto him, but above
all, that he should see himself honored and cherished by diverse Personages,
whom he intended to oblige unto him by his Bounty. H^ promised therefore that
for the time to come he would be truly noble, and that he would marry his
Daughter to him whom she had chosen for her Servant: so that not long
afterward the day appearing, Francion departed from h^ (...) in great
friendship, to repair unto the place where he so much desired (...) ^nt. He did
the best he could to make his Journey profitable for many things at one and the
same time; and as we have seen through all the Course of his. History, he till
this instant resembled those Knights errant of whom we have so many Histories,
who traveled from Province to Province to repair disorder^ to do Justice to
all the world, and to correct Enormities. It is true, that his Adventures are
not attended with so much Blood; they are therefore the more honorable.
Nevertheless his life has something of mixture in it, and those who are
precise, will find that it was not alwa^ exemplar to withdraw other men from
Vice, but whosoever can live better (...) let him; Our History shall rather
encourage, than hinder such a person. We ought to know both Good, and Evil, to
choose the one, and to avoid the other; Nevertheless we shall give you an
account of those things here, which the nicest Spirits will not condemn, and
will judge them only to be but indifferent trifles.

It was about Noon, when passing by a spacious Forest, he had a desire to
repose himself in the shade, near unto a Fountain which was in the middle of
the Plain. He sent away all his People into the neighboring Village to take
order for his Dinner, and reserved only one with him, who was the Gentleman of
his Chamber, in the mean time he did lie down upon the grass, and contemplated
on the Picture of Nays. Some will say, that following the Imaginations of Poets
he made this Complaint, which indeed is not much unlike to their air in the
Romances. Ah dearest Picture! How many Miracles do thou contain? And in how
little a room? How can it be that the mixture of so few colors can have such
wonderful attractions? Alas! thou art nothing else but a Resemblance, and yet
thou causest in me a real passion? I take delight indeed to touch thee, and to
kiss thee, and I must confess I touch nothing but Wood, and yet the sight of
thee does cause in me unparalleld transportations. What would become of me, if
I might be one day so happy as to have her in my Arms, whose beauties thou
representest, the excess of Love and Joy would be so great, that I should lose
at least my life, since that but looking on thee I have already lost my
liberty? But fair Nays, I would I were now dying, so that I were but near unto
your person. There was a Gentleman of that Country in the same Forest who
understood his complaints, being hid behind a tree near unto him, and being
desirous to know who he was, did approach unto him from his place of
concealment, and demanded of him, Whose Picture he had in his hands, to which
he made such sad complaints? Sir (replied Francion) I am sorry that you have
heard what I have said; for if you have never proved the force of Love, You
will conceive it to be the most egregious folly in the World. The other making
answer, that he was too well acquainted with the violence which that passion
does exercise upon humane Spirits, desired to see the picture of Nays, and knew
so well to dive into the heart of Francion, that he got the truth out of it,
and understood the whole design of his journey to see. Nays, and said unto him,
Be of a glad heart, she is already arrived at the place to which you are
addressing your self. I do protest unto you, I have seen her, and do believe
her to be the most beautiful Lady in the world; Francion enquired further of
the Gentleman what train she had; he made answer; she has such a train, as a
person of her quality ought to have, she has moreover in her company a young
Signior called Valerius, who in my opinion is as much devoted to her service as
your self. They pretend both to be sick, and to take for the present those
waters for their recovery, but I do believe they do not drink the waters
which are brought unto them, but do privately throw them away, for that is not
the water which is expedient for them; you say true, said Francion, For Nays
needs no other water, than to drink of the River of the Paradise of Love, which
I will give unto her, if she pleases; and as for Valerius, he must needs take
full draughts of the water of the River of Forgetfulness, to cause him to lose
the remembrance of that incomparable beauty, which does not shine for the
improvement of his fortunes, but will procure his death, if always he will
adventure to approach it, as he has done heretofore.

Having had some other discourses on this Subject, Francion did thank the
Gentleman for the intelligence he had given him, and departed to the Inn where
Dinner stayed for him, and after that, he gave himself no rest until he came to
the Village where the fountain was, to which so many sick men did address
themselves. When he came thither in the closing of the evening, he understood
that Nays was there with Valerius, accordingly as he was informed. He enquired
for the house where she lodged, and passed by it in a good equipage, as she did
stand at the window to take the fresh air. He there beheld the beauty which
seemed to him more wonderful than that of her picture, for he observed there
many excellent lineaments, which the Painter had forgotten. Nays perceiving
him, was as sollicitous to enquire who he was, for she had never seen any
Signior, who in such a journey had people to attend him so richly habited.
Those that stood near unto her, being ignorant of him, she was constrained to
send one of her menial Servants to inform her self who he was, and what was his
name. He addressed himself to one of his Lackeys, who (as all the rest of them)
was commanded to say that his name was Floriander; for Francion, contrary to
his first intention, was determined through all hazards to follow the Counsel
of Dorini, by that pretense first of all to make trial of his fortune. At the
name of Floriander the heart of Nays did leap for joy, conceiving that he, for
whom she fetched so many sighs, was arrived in that Country, according to her
desires.

She could not, as he passed by, observe Francion so precisely, to know whether
or not he was like to that picture of Floriander which she had. She now did
burn with a desire to see him, and knew not what to do to make her self so
happy. The worst of all was, as she thought, that Dorcini was not with her. It
did much afflict her, that she had not any whom she thought capable to be
employed in this great affair, and she knew not how to manage it her self,
because she was a stranger, and did not well understand the customs of France.
Nevertheless, at the last she resolved to accomplish her desires, and her
Lover having so far prevailed, according to the ordinary custom, to give her a
visit, she did lead Valerius in a ring, and did believe, that although he had
taken the pains to wait upon her, yet she might use the liberty allowed to
women, and freely give that place to another, which he hoped to enjoy in her
affections.

As she was in these apprehensions, a Post brought her a Letter, which she
unsealed, and found that it came from Dorini; Madam, said the Post, Before she
had the leisure to peruse it, wonder not that a Letter is sent unto you here
from Italy, which came from France, for I was informed, that there was
something in it which did much concern you, and that I must make no delay, but
bring it to you with all the speed that possibly I could, fearing you were not
advertised that you are more near to Dorini here, than in your own Country;
When he had spoken those words, she did let her eye fall on the Letter, where
she did read, that her dear Lover was dead. It undoubtedly must needs be, that
the faculties of her Soul were of an admirable temper, that at the suddenesse
of this unexpected and most melancholy news, she did not seem to change her
complexion, or to swoun away.

That which at that instant much conduced to make her pass away her
affliction, was, that a second Messenger belonging to Francion did represent
unto her, that Floriander having notice that she was in that Village, desired
to have the happiness to behold her, and desired to understand at what hour he
should not be too unmannerly importunate to wait upon her. Her answer was, that
at what hour soever he would please to come, his presence would bring an
absolute contentment to her. This being made known to Francion, he made his
address unto her, as her Soul was riddling in these strange uncertainties,
seeing on the one side she understood that Floriander was dead, and on the
other that he was coming to wait upon her. Her Recourse was to her picture,
which she so well contemplated, that she perceived that Francion was not the
same Floriander, who caused her so much to languish in the fevers of love.
Nevertheless she received him according to his quality, and with a countenance
less sorrowful, than it ought to be for the occasion which she had to afflict
her self. The first words of complement being ceased, she said unto him, Sir,
You can give me certain Intelligence concerning what I am about to speak; There
is in France another Floriander besides your self, Tell me, I pray, if he be
dead, as I am advertised he is? Francion perceiving then that it was
unprofitable for him to personate any other but himself, did inform her, that
without all doubt Floriander was dead; but he did not know the reason, he said,
wherefore she should think that his own Name was Floriander. Nays made answer,
That his own Servant did give him that Name; at which Francion being nothing
amazed, did say unto her, Truly I understand now the occasion of it, It is
because he was a Servant to Floriander, and he has not been long with me; so
that by custom the Name of his first Master does come more often into his
mouth, than does my own.

After this Nays demanded of him, if he had any Indisposition in his Body,
which did enforce him to come and drink the waters of that place? He being not
able to conceal his Martyrdom before her who only could redress it, did speak
in these words, Madam, You do me wrong to believe that any other Subject, but
the Desire only to see you, did possess me with the Resolution to come hither;
Take not from my affection the most sensible part thereof, and believe that I
have no other Grief, but that only which your perfections have caused in me.
But alas, it is a disease that has no parallel in the rigor of it, and which
would indeed be insupportable without the hope that does attend it. Fair
Goddess! what miracles have you produced? There are some who see the Sun that
are not warmed with the Beams thereof. Those who behold nothing but the form of
it in a picture, do feel no heat at all; but I have been inflamed even to
excess, in beholding but your picture only. What happy Destiny is it which
hinders, that in beholding you now face to face, I am not altogether reduced
into ashes! Was Heaven not so favorable unto me, to preserve me in my first
Estate, to make me suffer eternally. Be it so, or be it not, you, in the spite
of the Ordinances of Fate, can restore me unto my health, and extinguish the
most violent flames which I do suffer. To this purpose I come hither, not to
drink the waters of the Fountain, which give a remedy to many incommodities of
the Body, but to endeavor to have other waters far more precious, which
exercise their functions upon Souls. It is your good will and your favors
which are capable to assuage my passions, if their streams do please to run
down upon them. You shall pardon me, said Nays, if I tell you (whatsoever to
the contrary you please to allege) that I believe you come not hither for any
other thing than to make apparent the wonders of your Merit, which as in all
other things, so it is visible in this, that at every word you do show the
flourish and acuteness of your eloquence.

This entertainment of their Discourse had continued longer, if Valerius, who
lodged in another house, was not come at the same instant to wait upon his
Mistress. Francion then did take his leave of her, having not the opportunity
freely to court her. Valerius, who was ignorant that her Journey to these Waters
was to procure her a Servant, did pursue those submissions which he was
accustomed to render to her; But although he was dead who held he heart in
subjection, she would not throw away her affection upon Valerius, the
Inclination which she had to the French was not lost. She found attractions in
Francion, which were no less able to overcome her, than were those of the
Picture of Floriander, and of the Story of his Virtues. She said within her
self, What a Fool was I until this present to fall in love with a Picture?
peradventure I might have found that he whom I adored, without seeing him in
effect, had less perfections by far than were imputed to him. But how on this
choice I cannot be deceived, I see most clearly before my eyes an object worthy
of admiration. A Signior of Eminence, of a brave port, and a gallant Spirit,
and which is more, enamored and hot on me, being filled, as I conceive, with
an excessive affection, so that I shall not gain him with that difficulty and
trouble, as I might have done Floriander.

Whilst Nays entertained her self with these thoughts, Francion was possessed
with the like, which tended to love her eternally, as the most excellent Lady
that ever he beheld. The next day he took an occasion to walk with her, and did
lead her under her arm into a pleasant and spacious garden, and Valerius in the
same posture, and into the same place, did lead a French Lady, who was there at
that present.

Francion resolved to assist himself with the knowledge he had of Dorini, and
acquainted Nays with the gift which Dorini had presented him after the Death of
Floriander, which was her own Picture, thinking there was no man to whom more
justly he could give it, than to himself, who was one of the entirest Lovers in
the world; afterward with words well ordered, according to the politenesse of
the Court, he demanded of her, If she would not at the last, of her own accord,
condescend to grant him a more precious present, which was, the assurance of
her affection? Sir, said Nays, very spiritfully unto him, I plainly perceive
that you are of so unbounded a Spirit, that it is a hard task to content you.
Wherefore did you not content your self with my Picture which was given you? I
believe it was because you would possess the Original; Be not so covetous, if
you desire to live in quiet. I am not so bold as yet, said Francion, as to
demand to possess you, my Desire only is, that you will vouchsafe to
acknowledge that you do possess me; and following his Discourse, he did take
the Picture out of his pocket, and did show it her. It is the same, said she,
which I gave unto Dorini, but only that it looks a little more dark and
discolored. Think not strange thereat, said Francion, It is the tears only
which I have powered upon it in the strength of my passion, which has taken
away the life and beauty of its complexion. Your tears I said Nays, I durst lay
a wager then that you did kiss it both night and day. Francion made answer, It
is true. For my part, said Nays, I am not contented at it. Wherefore so, (said
Francion, and smiled) Are you more pleased that I should kiss your self? She
repyed, I would not that you should kiss either the one or the other; For
first of all, if you should be seen to kiss me, it would be divulged, that in
secret I did permit you something else; If in my absence you should be seen to
kiss my Picture, it would be divulged, that when you are with me, you do
kiss me; and from thence there would proceed a more dangerous conjecture. But
if I kiss your Picture, far from any Witnesses, said Francion, no
Inconvenience will arive thereby. I think not, said Nays. And if I should kiss
your self, not any being present, said Francion, we must also necessarily
conclude, that there can be but little danger in it. I will proceed no further,
said Nays, on this subject, let us talk of things more important; However I
will leave it to you to judge, if such kisses (though they be never so secret)
do not carry some Inconvenience with them: but I will abandon this Discourse,
your Arguments are too subtle for me.

As they had finished this, and began some other Discourse, they beheld a
goodly Troop of Men on Horseback, in the head whereof Nays discovered one of
them to be Ergastus, a Venetian Signior, who had made love unto her. He had
heard of her departure out of Italy, and fearing that his Rival Valerius would
carry her in his absence, and marry her in a strange Country, he advanced with
all the speed he could to take the beautiful prey from him. Nays did give him
better entertainment, than the hatred which in her Soul she did bear unto him
did seem to permit. Her disposition was so courteous, and she was so discreet
in all her actions, that she made a Conscience to disrespect him, who only to
wait on her had traveled so long a Journey.

There were so few commodious houses of entertainment in that Town, that Nays,
Francion, and Valerius, with their Train, did take up all the Lodgings,
Ergastus therefore could not find such rooms as were necessary for him, and was
enforced to withdraw to the next Town, which was a league from thence. The two
Lovers who were always with Nays, were glad to see their Rival so far
removed, who in his Suit was the most importunate, and the proudest and most
supercilious of them all, because he had riches and possessions equal to those
of his Mistress, and did believe that for that respect she was obliged to
choose him for her Husband.

Francion (to pass away the melancholy which possessed him, conceiving there
were not a few obstacles in the progress of his Love) did one day walk toward
the Fountain where they did drink their medicinal waters. He observed diverse
who for a time had a free relaxation of Spirit, without the least trouble in
the world. One one side he perceived some Men who drank off deep great glasses
from one quarter of an hour to another. On the other, he beheld others who did
nothing else but make water. There were Ladies also who ever and anon, after
some short respite of time, were constrained to empty their bladders: Amongst
them all, there were very few who had any great or visible malady upon them;
the greatest part came only either for curiosity or for delicacy. There were
also some Women who came thither on purpose to find the opportunity to make
their Husbands Cuckolds. Nevertheless Francion said, We are too blame to take
up the rooms of so many afflicted persons, who know not where to lodge, because
that we have possessed our selves of all the chief houses of Entertainment. It
is good reason that we should give place unto them: What have we to do here?
If it were but observed that we make no use of the Medicinal water, it would be
presently suspected that we have some extravagant design. If Nays would be
persuaded by me, she would immediately return, since she knows there is no
Floriander to be expected here; and as soon as she were gone we would not fail
to follow her.

Having thus discoursed with himself, he addressed himself to Nays, whom he
found well disposed to remove from that Country, where she could find nothing
that might any longer detain her. She demanded of him, what way he was resolved
to take? He made answer, She might as well enquire of the Marigold to what side
it would turn; for, said he, It is well known that it is the Nature of that
Flower to turn toward the Sun, and it is not to be doubtted but that I will
follow your fair eyes, the Suns of my Soul, in what part of the world soever
they shall give day unto them. If you go into Italy, I will go with you; If you
stay any longer in France, I will stay also there. Nays was very glad to
understand the determination of that gentle Knight, whose Company was far more
grateful to her, than that of Ergastus or Valerius.

The next morning she resolved to set forth toward her own Country, and these
three Lovers being advertised of it, did prepare themselves to attend her;
insomuch that being seen to travel with so brave a train, she was taken for no
less than some great Queen. In this journey great was the jealousy betwixt
the Italians and the French; for she highly preferred Francion in her favors,
and made but little account of the two others: Oftentimes she would invite him
to come into her Caroach, and discourse with her on different things, where he
always perceived the quickness of her apprehension, and the vivacity of her
Spirit, which by the reading of good Books she had redeemed from the darkness
of Ignorance. It was an incredible contentment to him, that beholding the
beauty of his Prison, he could never repent him of the loss of his Liberty. In
the mean time, his Rivals being vexed at the favor which he received, did ride
sometimes before, and sometimes behind, to testify in some sort their
reciprocal disdain; nevertheless in the Towns through which they passed, they
did give her that observance, as to take up their Lodgings as close unto hers
as possibly they could. Francion passionately desired to give them some
Camisade, to punish them for their apparent rashness, in lodging their
affections in the same place with himself.

He communicated his Design to one of the Grooms of Nays, whose love he had
purchased by his liberality, and he entreated him to assist him in the
Invention. This Servant being obliged to him, did promise him to perform
whatsoever was in the compass of his power; and, according to his directions,
he did repair to Valerius, and told him, That Nays was overcome with the pains
he had taken to wait upon her, and desired nothing more than to delight her
self in his Company; but she could not entertain him as she would, because she
had two other Lovers, who were so importunate with her, and especially the
Frenchman, whom they ought to stand in fear of, because as yet they were upon
the Lands of his Country, where he had both Friends and Power: Notwithstanding
she was resolved to grant him some hours of Entertainment, and desired him to
come in the dusk of the Evening, in a habit like to that of her own Servants.

Having acquainted Valerius with this, he addressed himself to Ergastus, to
give him the same Invitation, so that they both apparelled themselves
accordingly as they were prescribed, believing that it was highly necessary to
keep them from being discovered. Valerius came first to Nays House, and as he
was knocking at the door, Ergastus arrived, who taking Valerius for one of the
Ladies Servants, demanded of him, if his Mistress were in Bed or not? Valerius
answered something stubbornly, That he could not tell; Ergastus could not
endure his arrogance, and being transported into choler, did give him some
injurious language, whereupon they fell to blows with their fists: In this
Commotion one came to the Gate with a Candle, by the light whereof knowing one
another, they were two of the most amazed Creatures in the world, and being
confounded with shame, they returned by several ways to their own lodgings.

Meeting again on the next morning, they had the curiosity to demand of one
another wherefore they were so disguised; And because they could not conceal
that they were infinitely amorous of Naeys, and did whatsoever lay in their
power to procure her good will, they accounted one unto the other the message
they received, and perceived that there was some one who had a design upon
them. They did send to seek out the Groom, who did bring the message to them,
and conjured him to tell them, for what cause he had delivered to them both the
same errand?

Seeing they could draw from him no other answers, but what carried no
probability of truth with it, they promised him a great recompense; so that
being tempted partly with that, and partly with the love which he did bear to
those of his own Country, he declared to them, that he had done nothing, but by
the Counsel of Francion.

At these tidings they were resolved to be revenged, and as soon as an occasion
should offer it self, to pay the Frenchman in his own metal. Hereupon they did
shake hands, and became entire friends, to have the better opportunity to hurt
their common and dangerous Enemy, and propounded to themselves not to prosecute
their loves, until they could be acquitted of his Company.

Nays understanding the ill will they did bear unto him whom she loved, and
fearing that some mischief might ensue; would not look upon him with the least
favor, and did forbear to speak unto him, but when necessity did oblige her to
it. This much perplexed Francion, who propounding to himself that she disdained
him, it caused him to send many Letters of Love unto her by her Servants, who
at the last assured him, that their Mistress did charge them to acquaint him
that she desired not that he should send any more such letters to her. One day,
as privately as he could, he accosted a female servant of Nays, who did wish
him well, and conjured her by all manner of Imprecations, to acquaint him with
the cause of her Ladies displeasure. She consented to discover it unto him,
provided that he would promise to keep it secret. He having made all the
protestations that she could desire, she informed him, that her Lady suspecting
the dangerous enterprise of his Rivalls, would not make manifest the affection
which she did bear unto him, until she was got forth from those unknown places,
and saw him in her own lands, where she could interpose her authority,
whatsoever accident might befall. This grateful news did bring him as great
contentment as he possibly could imagine, and for his consolation he began to
nourish in his Soul a great hope at the policy of his Mistress, who would make
him to languish a little in despair, to render afterward her favors the more
precious. When they were come into Italy, Valerius and Ergastus thought they
should easily find the means to entrap him, as indeed they well might do. They
did prosecute him with extraordinary respect, and did not speak unto him, but
in the most civil Complements of the world. If his Spirit were not at that time
entirely possessed with the agonies of Love, which caused him to think on
nothing else, he might well conceive that this extraordinary entertainment of
his Rivals, proceeded only out of a desire which they had, to draw him into
their ambuscadoes. Being therefore become a stranger to his accustomed
prudence, he took no care of them, and fondly believed that they did bear unto
him no less good will in their hearts, than they expressed by their words. To
recreate himself, he was seen altogether in their company, because he durst not
speak unto Nays, and he did go to seek them out himself in the places where
they lodged.

One morning he did meet them just before the Gate of the house where Nays was
lodged, where he beheld a Gentleman with great joy to salute Ergastus, as if he
had not seen him a long time before, afterward he whispered some words in his
ear, to which Ergastus only answered by the shaking of his head. Gentlemen,
said Ergastus, turning himself afterward to Valerius and Francion, Behold here
a fair occasion which offers it self to content your curiosities. The Master of
this Gentleman is Governor of a strong Castle two leagues from this place, he
has heard of my arrival, and has sent unto me, to invite me with my company
to his Castle, you shall go along with me, if you please, according to his
desire. Valerius made answer, that he had never the happiness to know that
Signior, and therefore he could not believe that he desired his Company, and
for his own part, he was not so ill advised, as to be importunate with any man,
to be obliged to him for a courtesy. Francion with greater reason made an
answer, much to the same sense. But Ergastus seeming discontented thereat, did
say unto them, Lose not the opportunity you have to behold many excellent
things. There are great rarities in this place to which you are invited to go.
There are the true Bones of a man of a prodigious greatness. There are to be
seen all sorts of Arms, and ancient medals, The most exquisite things in all
the world are there in one abridgement to be seen. Go along with me, I beseech
you, for I have no desire to go thither without you. I am unwilling to lose
the good opinion of my friend, who may be angry with me for having failed to
bring those persons to him, whose Merit he infinitely does esteem. Francion,
who was not of the jealous humor of that Country, did believe the words of
Ergaesius, and that there were many rarities in that place to which he would
conduct him, and seeing that at the last Valerius did consent to go along with
him, he was willing to be their Companion, without conceiving that all this was
but a plot laid before hand to take away his life. He was on Horseback as well
as the rest, and had his Gentleman to attend him, whom he would have had to
have followed him, with all his train, but Ergastus said unto him, that he must
not be allowed to take any one with him, for they could not be permitted with
any great company to enter into the Castle. I take none of my people with me,
said Ergastus, no more does Valerius, it is requisite that we do leave them
all behind us at Nays Court, After dinner we shall easily overtake them; We
will have none to go along with us, but only a Groom of the Marchionesses,
whom I do esteem above all the rest. Having expressed these words, he caused
the Gentleman of whom he spoke to come unto him, who was the same person that
heretofore was so much affectioned to the service of Francion.

In a short time they arrived at the Castle, where they were honorably
received by him who was the Captain. Francion observing that they held one
another in entertainments, which prolonged the time, was extremely sorry, for
he burned with impatience to behold the marvails that were related to him. He
softly acquainted Valerius with it, who moved the Company concerning that
Subject. The Captain who had the watchword given him, no sooner heard of it,
but immediately he took a great bunch of keys, and having led them a long way,
he caused them to enter into a strong Tower, where, he said, the greatest
rarities of that place were locked up. He showed them a great round chair very
ancient, which had truckles under it to move withal. He assured them, that on
whatsoever hour one should sit down in it, he should hear a certain harmonious
noise which came, as is thought, from under the ground, but the cause thereof
could never be found; It was therefore imputed to some Spirits who inhabit the
place. Ergastus laughed at it, and said it was a fantastical imagination, and
that he could give no faith to a thing so extraordinary; all that stood by were
of the same opinion with himself. Make trial of it, said the Captain, and you
shall understand the Truth, they then begun one after another to sit down in
the chair, and rising in a wonder they affirmed that they heard the sweetest
Music in the World. Francion who stayed last of all, and did laugh at the
ridiculous affirmation of his Companions, did, to comply with them, sit down
himself, And the Captain standing near unto him, did in an instant turn a
little cord, whereupon the springs flying open that held fast the chair, it did
run down with him that was in it into a deep Cave, where he continued for a
certain time so amazed, that he stirred not either hand or foot. Ergastus and
Valerius seeing him so well surprised, did thank the Captain for the good
assistance he had given them, and entreated him to continue it, by putting his
prisoner to death, when he should see convenient, From thence they departed
toward Nays, whom they found in a little Town at dinner. She enquired of them
what was become of Francion, because it was told her that he was not in that
place where all his people were lodged. Her Groom, of whom we have spoken, did
approach unto her, and said, Madam, He is privately returned to France, and
meeting with me accidentally before his departure, he did give me a charge to
acquaint you, that in whatsoever place he should be, he would always assume the
quality of your servant; And Madam, Do not wonder that he is gone without his
train, It is because he would not make apparent the desire which he has to
depart from you, fearing, that if any longer he should stay, it would redound
to the prejudice of his affairs; And there is a great appearance that it is so,
for he has commanded me to charge his people to return all of them into
France, and, without making any noise, to overtake him in the way. Having told
this lie to Nays, he repaired to the Gentleman who waited upon Francion in his
Chamber, and caused him to depart with all the other Servants to overtake their
Master.

Nays had all the afflictions in the world for the sudden removal of him whom
so entirely she affected. Oh, How often did she repent that she had been of
late so averse unto him, for she believed that she was the cause of his
departure, Accursed men, said she, speaking of Valerius and Ergastus, If you
had not persecuted me with your importunities, I had not been constrained to
use him so cruelly, whose least action does merit infinite favors. May you be
punished with the Evil which you have caused me to suffer. Never hope that I
will look upon you with a pleasing countenance again. I will for the time to
come be more cruel to you than ever yet I have been, or peradventure you do
believe that I can be. And as she said, so accordingly she did deport her self;
but had she known the treason of those two Signiors, she would undoubtedly have
been enforced to have used them more cruelly. At the last she arrived at her
own house, where more and more she did testify her indignation, and commanded
her unfaithful Groom to seek out Francion in all places, and to give him a
Letter from her, in which she did demonstrate for what occasion she did not
give him that respect which his Virtues did deserve, and covertly did entreat
him to come to that place where heretofore he had a great desire to arrive.
This Post did depart to put his charge in execution, and took his way toward
France, in which he knew well enough that he should not find Francion. Having
travailed not far, he returned, and before he saw his Mistress, he passed by
the House where Ergastus lodged, of whom he demanded what expedient he should
use in that affair? Ergastus believing that Nays had never seen any thing
written by Francion's own hand, did cause a Letter to be written as if it came
drectly from him, in which, amongst other things, he did represent unto her,
that the pleasures in France had caused him to forget the delights of Italy,
and that she must never expect to see him again, seeing there was nothing that
could call him back into Italy. Nays, having received that Letter, did call
Francion a thousand times ungrateful and uncivil to write such a Letter to
her; But being out of the heat of that passion, she could not choose but love
him as well as before, and was angry with Nature, because she had not given her
beauty enough to captivate him who did disdain her. Her transportation was so
violent, that she resolved with her self to live always a Widow, rather than
to marry any other but him only whom she desired, so that both Ergastus and
Valerius did unprofitably continue to render those submissions to her, which
might have mollified the heart of any other.

The people of Francion travailed many miles to seek out their Master, of whom
they would receive no intelligence. In the mean time he remained in the deep
Cave, where he was visited in the Evening by a Man, who opened the Wicket of
the Gate, to give him wherewith to eat. He enquired for what cause he was
detained Prisoner, and greatly complained of the Treachery that was committed
against him.

The Jailer made answer, You are not the first whom I have seen deceived in
this manner, for during the late wars, the chair wherein you sat has served
to entrap many gallant personages, who by several subtilties have been betrayed
into this Castle. Francion having answered, That this advertisement was
uncomfortable, he was left there until the next day, when he was visited again
by the same Man, who for eight days together failed not twice a day to bring
him meat and drink. He had within him diverse considerations, wherewith he did
assist himself to mitigate his afflictions. He represented to himself, that it
was as well for him to be locked up where he was, than to be at liberty in the
world, where it is a folly to look for any true contentment; At the least he
was now delivered from the sight of the enormities of this age, and had the
leisure to nourish his Spirit with several instructions of the profoundest
Philosophy.

The Captain, having not cruelty enough to suffer him to dye by languishment,
nor to cause poison to be given to him, which would have a more sudden effect,
did determine to grant him his liberty, and seeing that Ergastus was now a
great way from him, he did not much mind to put what he promised in execution.
He one night did send some men into the prison where he was, who with all their
force did take his clothes from him, and delivered him to some Countrymen that
were present, and having blinded his eyes, and tide his hands and his feet, they
carried him to a small River which passed by the side of the Castle; there was
a little Boat on the Bank, into which they did put him, and they did permit him
to be carried away by the current of the stream, the drift whereof did bear him
a great way. He could never imagine in what place he was; but by turning
himself up and down, he conjectured that he was in some Beer.

After that it was morning he was a long time beaten up and down by the wind,
because there was no body upon the River; at the last some men who were coming
up the River in a Bark, did meet with this Boat. They immediately stopped the
Boat, and having brought it to the Bank, they did take the Man out of it, and
having unblinded him, they demanded of him, who did put him there? He did
answer them the best he could, making not the least mention of his quality, so
that he was taken by them to be some poor man. Hunger enforcing him, he was
constrained to take his Repast with those people who belonged to the
Neighboring Village. He had no money about him, and knew not whither to go to
borrow any. His clothes were so ragged, and so unsightly, that he could hardly
be taken for what he was, if he had discovered himself. He knew not where his
train of Servants were, and it was impossible for him to go to look them out,
because he had no Pass to travel, neither was he minded to demand one, because
he was not assured in what place to find any of his people, and he was afraid
to go into the Towns, for fear he should meet with some who did know him, and
seeing him in such an equipage, should entertain some bad opinion of him; He
concluded, that it was his surest course to attend a little, until Raymond and
Dorini were come into Italy, according to their promises: He assured himself of
all assistance from them that he could desire, and believed that he might
impart his Misfortunes in his Letters to them, in whatsoever place they were;
For the rest, he was well content for a few days to keep himself in a place
where he was unknown, and where he might have the leisure to digest into order
an infinite number of excellent meditations which he had in the time of his
Imprisonment.

He who had given him his Dinner, seeing him of a good countenance, demanded of
him, If he would stay with him to keep his sheep, his Shepherd being dead not
long before? to which Francion did readily agree. And let none think strange of
it, that he accepted of that Condition; there was nothing in it which was not
worthy of his gallantry. The greatest men in the world have been sometimes
addicted to the like Condition, to live with the more tranquillity of Spirit.
The Charge of the Flock being given to him, he did lead them forth into the
fields every day, and in the way he studied on diverse things he had to write.
He composed many Verses in the praise of Nays, and on the passion which he had
for her. He always did contemplate on her beauties in whatsoever place he was;
and although at the first he was much afflicted, because that with his clothes
they had taken her Pourtraict from him, he did patiently endure that loss,
because he had her Picture engraven in his heart; which did better represent
her, and showed it self more lively far unto him in darkness, than by day.

He did one day repair to the house of a Gentleman, where he saw a little Lute,
on which there was not any one who could play. He did demand it of him,
assuring him, that he knew a little how to finger that Instrument; and having
it given to him, he found the means to accouter it with good strings, and
became afterward the Orpheus of the Village. The Gentleman whom he overcame by
his Importunities was nothing sorry of his gift, after he had heard him to play
so well thereon. To the Music of the Lute he had also such good Songs, that
his company began to be in great request. On Sundays and Holydays he was always
at Feasts, sometimes at one, and sometimes at another, where he did eat and
drink with as much appetite as at the Court, and did laugh as heartily. That
which most of all did please him, was, that he did not fear any envious eye to
be such an observe of his actions, as to make a gloss upon them, and to defame
him by back biting him. There was no person offended, that he did not give unto
him due honor, and that he exchanged not with him Complement for Complement. He
enjoyed an absolute liberty in whatsoever place he was, insomuch that he
confessed in himself, that he never did lead so happy a life; and he had always
kept himself in that Condition, were it not that sometimes he had most violent
fits of his amorous Fever, which did inflame him with a desire to see his
Nays; Nevertheless, when occasion did sometimes present it self to taste a
little of the sweet pleasures of Nature, he was not so scrupulous as to believe
he offended his Mistress therein. He oftentimes did take his Lute with him
into the fields, and the hand somest and most lovely maids of that place would
forsake their sheep to hear him play under the shade of some Copse, or in some
Cavern; Wehn he was alone with any one of them, he did not forget to use his
best endeavors to gain her.

There was a brown Less amongst them that did infinitely please him, but he
could not arrive to the end of his desires, which was to enjoy her, if one day
in private he had not advised her, after he had done playing with the Lute,
that he could play also on another Instrument so well, that she would be even
ravished with the harmony thereof, howsoever he would not have that Music to be
made known to all the World. She, who took great delight to hear him sing, did
most incessantly beseech him, That he would make her so happy, as one day to
partake of that rare Music. I will, said he, provided you acquaint no body
therewith; for I desire not to manifest to the world what I can do. Come to me
to morrow to the Wantons Cave, you, without all doubt, shall find me there with
my Instrument, which I will not forget to bring along with me.

The Brown Less, being as glad as if some great Treasure had been offered to
her, did not fail on the next day to come to the place that was appointed,
which was unfrequented by the Country people. Well, said she, I see you keep
your promise. He made answer, Yes, I am ready to do you service. She thereupon
did sit down close by him, and entreating him, to show her his Instrument, and
to play therewith. He said unto her, Sweetheart, You never saw so miraculous a
thing as I do use to produce my melody. To conceal nothing from you, I have not
my Instrument made either of Wood or of Horn, the Harmony proceeds from the
Members of my body, which does produce it altogether. The Maid then imagined,
that in using certain gestures, and some strange motion of his Body, he had the
art to make his bones so to crackle, as to make some other kind of an agreeable
sound; Or else he had some melodious knack with his fingers; Or with his hands
did so strike on the other members of his body, that there was a certain
concent of Music in the noise which it produced. But soon afterward she
perceived that there was something else to be done; for he said unto her,
Sweetheart, Since you will have pleasure, you must take some pains your self;
I cannot exercise my artifice alone, you must join with me in it, and help me
if you please. Show me then, (said the brown Last) that which I must do.
Immediately Francion did embrace her, and kissed her at his pleasure; afterward
he endeavored to accomplish the rest. Oh God (said she) you do me wrong! Let
me alone. Patience (said Francion) the Event will be better than the Beginning.
Immediately she was ready to swoun away with pleasure, finding I know not what
extraordinary sweetness: And observing that Francion began to retire from her,
she said unto him, What! Have you done already? you have but just now begun. Oh
my Sweet heart, said Francion, I did truly prophecy that it would not hurt you,
and you would desire that the Melody lasted longer. Truly so I do, said the
Girl, your Music is so sweet that it makes no noise at all, one cannot hear
it; but one may feel it with delight enough. Is there no way for us to begin
again? Dear Sweetheart, said he, All good things are rare, and hard to be
obtained, This is of the same Nature; But tell me, and speak truly, Have you
not found a great deal of pleasure in that which I have done? I should have
lost my senses, said she, if I should not confess as much. Some time after
that pleasant entertainment, they had the means to begin again their
incomparable Music, which was no less agreeable at that time, than it was
before.

After this, the brown Less did go every day to find out her Minstrel, as soon
as ever she could get away from her Fathers house; but she was so full of
tongue, that she revealed her secret to one of her Companions, who desiring to
participat in the Contentment, did come along with her to give a visit to our
Shepherd in the Melodious Cave. This brown less did make a request to the
Shepherd for her, but at the first he seemed to stand off, and to make strange
thereat; and checked her much for having discovered that which she had promised
to conceal. Nevertheless he gave them both smooth words afterward, and said,
that he would content her Companion, because she should not vex him with her
daily importunities, to have her to taste of the same pleasures.

The brown Less did deliberate with her self to be gone for a while, to give
him the opportunity to play with the other, and thereby she did the Musitan a
great Courtesy, who in one time could not render them both entirely contented.
Her Companion stayed with him, and making some resistance at first, as if she
was unwilling to endure that which he had a desire to perform, she proved at
the last the sweetness of his harmony. The brown Maid being returned, demanded
of her Companion how she found her self? and if it were possible to imagine any
thing that was more delicious? Truly (said she) I am beholding to you; but in
this I find nothing at all which is new unto me: for a Groom of my Fathers did
cause me to understand as much as this many years ago. This Shepherd does no
more than all other men do, nor is he more cunning in his art than they are.
Say that it be so, (replied the brown girl) yet I had rather that he should
give me this Contentment than any other whom I know, for he is a handsome Man,
and I will never endure that those foul Clowns, whom I see every day, should
approach me as he does, by putting their bodies and their mouths to mine. If
you take him for that, said the other, I must excuse you; for you have the best
reason for it in the world, and the handsomest Musician amongst them all: But
have a Care that his Music prove not dangerous to you; for, it may be Nine
months hence, to your amazement, another young Musician may come forth from
your Belly, with Music far differing from his; It will be a young Child, who
will do nothing else but cry, until you shall give him that breast to suck
which your Shepherd has so often kissed; and this is the reason why I counsel
you as much as I can to refrain for the time to come from going to the
melodious Cavern.

The Brown Less followed the advice of her Companion; but Francion, for all
that, did want for no Game to sport himself withal: He had many other female
practitioners, as well as her self, insomuch that he seemed to be the Town-bull
of that, and all the other places thereabouts. If he found any Girl that was
more coy than the rest, be had recourse to his old artifices to overcome her. I
am of an opinion (said he to himself) that it is of no great Importance what
course of life it is we live, if so be have contentment with it. We ought not
to take any care at all from whence this Contentment does proceed, if it comes
according to our wish: What occasion then of sorrow have I, although of a
Gentleman I am become a Shepherd, since I enjoy all the sweetest delights in
the world? Ought I to afflict my self to observe the means I must use to arrive
to the end of my intentions, since I so happily do accomplish them?

Thus did he argue and reason on his own fortune, and many voluptuous persons
have the same thoughts, without dreaming of the punishments that do follow so
licentious a life. Some having defloured Maids, and got them with child, are by
Justice constrained to marry them, or to suffer imprisonment, or to give a
round sum of money to marry them to others; Sometimes also the Parents
themselves, being resolved to be revenged on those who do dishonor their
Children, do cause those perfidious Lovers to fall under the hands of
Assassinates. Amongst those poor people with whom he did converse, Francion was
in some reputation, and because he had no desire to continue long amongst them,
it made him the more hardy; howsoever, for all that, he should not have
endangered himself; and as for the Country Wenches that suffered themselves so
easily to be abused, they made their weakness and their simplicity the more
apparent. It is true, that Francion had a more generous countenance and
deportment than all the peasants in the Country, but this should render him to
be the more suspected amongst them, especially because he was a stranger.
Nevertheless, we must confess that Love comes to be Master of all manner of
Spirits. There was not a Wench in the whole Country but was charmed by the
gallantry of this brave Shepherd, and acknowledged that perfectly they did
learn by him the whole method, and the art of Love, for all the sloth, and the
clownish simplicity of their apprehensions. The Wife of the Labourer with whom
he lived, was as much enamoured on him, and endeavored to discover it to him
by all the means she could invent. She would let him go in the morning to the
fields, without giving him wherewith to put into his Satchel, because she might
take the occasion to go her self unto him to carry him his dinner. She took a
great pleasure to pull a morsel from his hands, of which he had bit some part,
to eat it after him. She would do nothing but play the wanton when she was
with him, and with the leer of smiling invitation, she would turn her eye aside
upon him, as who would say, I even dye for the love of thee. Francion did
observe it well enough, but he made as though he had not the least thought of
it in the world; for this woman did so displease him for some imperfections
which he had observed in her, that he could not but abhor to kiss her.

One day, to dive into the bottom of his heart, she smiling said unto him, Thou
know not, on my faith, what a report is brought unto me of thee, which is
noised over all the Country, it is, that thou are in love with me, and that
thou have knowledge enough to take upon thee another condition of life than
that of a Shepherd, but that thou art glad to take upon thee that profession,
to have the means to stay with me. You must take no notice, said Francion, of
such Informers, they are but Mockers and Detractors; I know well enough that
they speak not the truth. Say you so, replied the Wife, why! Is it a thing
impossible? No, said Francion, but that which depends on our will, is not
always put into act, although it lies in our power. By this defense he set her
farther off from the mark at which she aimed than she thought he would have
done, and he seemed not to regard the rolling motion of her eyes which sparkled
with lust in propounding to her self the sudden fruition of incomparable
delights. The next morning her Husband being gone many miles from home, she
determined with her self to make use of the opportunity, and whiles the
Shepherd was in the fields, she took away his Bed, Sheets, and Coverlet, and
hid them from him, so that when he was going to take his rest, finding all
things removed out of his Chamber, he came unto her to demand where she
intended he should lodge that night. O God, said she, I have carried up all
your bedding into the Garret to have it aired, where it must continue two or
three days; In the mean time, if you will promise to lie quietly, and do
nothing to me, I will permit that you take some part of my bed. Francion,
understanding well enough what it was that she would have, refused that offer,
and said, for two or three nights he would be content to lie upon the grass in
the Grange. She finding that she was frustrated of her hopes in her first
attempt, did resolve her self upon a second, and brought all the Shepherds
bedding down again. About the middle of the night, she did sit up in a chair
stark naked, and did begin to complain, and to call the Shepherd to her. He lay
in a Chamber hard by, where distinctly he could hear her, and came quickly to
her with a Candle lighted in his hand, to demand of her what she would have.
Woe is me, said she, I came now from doing my easement, and such a feebleness
has taken me, that I am not able to return to my Bed, so that I am enforced to
sit down here, I pray you to take me into your arms, and to carry me to bed,
for it is impossible for me to put one foot before another. She prononnced her
words faintly, and made many stops as she did speak them, and hanged down her
head, so that Francion believed that she was sick in good earnest; He therefore
did take her up so cleanly, that she touched not the ground with her toes, and
carrying her to the Bed, He turned his face quite another way from hers,
because, as he conceived, there came an ill smell from every part of her body.
But she embracing him with all the strength she had, and stretching forth her
neck as far as ever she could, did prevail so far that she kissed his cheek.
This Love-trick not pleasing him, he left her in her smock upon her Bed, and
said unto her, lie down, and cover your self if you will, I have such a desire
to sleep, that I cannot stay any longer. Go not from the prithee yet, she
replied, I will hire one too morrow to keep thy sheep for thee, and thou shall
take thy full rest for the time which this night thou have watched with me.
What would you have me to do? said he. Alas, said she, nothing but to keep me
Company. How cruel you are! Come near unto me. He then advanced three steeps
toward her, and she coming out of her bed did meet him, and did again embrace
him; but his flesh having an antipathy unto hers, he did thrust her from him,
and smiling, said unto her, You are not so sick as you pretend your self to be,
if you have any malady, it proceeds only from your fancy, and so let it go for
me. In the absence of your Husband you should desire no other company but only
that of your Pillow. She did grow into a rage to hear those words, yet her
disdain was not of force enough to turn into hatred the affection which she did
bear unto him. She continued the good entertainment which she was accustomed to
give him, and endeavored as much as lay in her power to procure his favor. At
the last, having a desire to deliver himself from her importunities, he
dissembled that he did bear more good will unto her than heretofore he had
done, and because his Master was returned, he acquainted her that she must take
the resolution her self to come unto him one night when her Husband was asleep,
to pass away some time in her Company. The Bargain being made, she was the
most contented woman in the World, and propounded to her self that undoubtedly
he would accomplish her desires.

But Francion, being not of the same mind as was her self, desired the
Swine-heard, and the Herds-man, who lay over the Stables, to come and pass
away one night in his Chamber, to see a Spirit, who failed not every night to
come unto him to torment him. They made answer to him, that they would not
come, for they had reason to be afraid of such beasts. Come boldly to me said
Francion, you shall not receive the least prejudice. I believe it is the same
Maid Servant which we had the other day, who comes to affright me. Do you only
provide your selves with good Rods to whip her soundly, that she may have a
desire to return no more unto me. The two Drolls apprehending that news, were
as glad as if they had been invited to a Wedding. They stayed in his Chamber,
without making the least noise, having in their hands those arms which were
necessary for the execution of the design. The poor inamoured Wife observing
that her Husband according to his old custom was fast asleep, did softly rise
from him, and going forth of her Chamber, she did doublelock the door, that, if
peradventure he should wake, she might have the leisure to come away from
Francion, and not be taken in the Deed, but might persuade him that she had
been at the Privy.

Francion, who heard her coming, gave order to his Companions to make ready
their forces, for the pretended Spirit was approaching. They were not deaf to
his advertisements, for their Mistress was no sooner entered into the Chamber,
but they took up her smock, and did give her so many, and such cruel lashes,
that the rudest hangman in the World did never so whip a Cutpurse, that would
not promise him money to be more gently entreated by him. Perceiving that they
were more than one who did prosecute her in this manner, she durst not cry out,
nor speak the least word, for fear of being discovered, and for the shame she
had to be taken out of her Bed. At the last (because that without any respite
they so continued in their hot exercise, and all her body was pitifully torn)
she could not forbear from crying out Help and Murder. Her Husband being
awakened at that noise, and in amazement, not knowing from whence the voice did
proceed, did go out at another door of the Chamber, and not at that which his
Wife had double locked, and came down into the Court to see what the business
was. At the last Francion, having pity of his Wife, did take the Swine heard
by the Arm, to make him-understand that he had done enough. Thereupon he did
leave off, and his Companion also; She stealing away, did open the door of her
Chamber, and did lie down in her Bed as before. Her Husband perceiving that
there was not any in the Court, did come back into the House, and advising with
himself that, possibly, the noise which he heard might arise from the Shepherds
Chamber, he softly did go thither to know if he were asleep. The two
Companions who held still their rods in their hands, did conceive that it was
another Spirit, and having taken him by the Arm, they began to lay about him,
as heretofore upon his Wife. He, feeling the smart, became suddenly outrageous,
and delivering himself from their hands, did strike them with his Fist with all
the strength he had. They imagining to themselves that such heavy blows could
not proceed from the hand of a mortal man, did believe that it was truly a
Hobgoblin, so that they did assay to avoid his encounter, and did hide
themselves on the other side of the Bed, where they might easily have been
found, if they had been indeed pursued by a Spirit. Where are you? said the
Labourer to Francion. He answered from his pallet, O my God, make all the have
you can away, Here are Spirits that do nothing else but torment me. Immediately
in a great fear he departed, and did believe what he Shepherd had told him, and
having both locked and bolted his door, he did go to bed to his Wife, who
counterfeited her self to be very drousie, and did say, for her own part she
did hear nothing at all. He made a short account, and declared only unto her,
that he had been whipped by Spirits, who vanished away in a moment. She was
glad to understand it, because he had a share in the punishment as well as her
self, and this was some kind of comfort to her. The Labourer did much lament
his poor Shepherd; who was exposed to the fury of those evil Spirits, and the
next morning he enquired more particularly of him what were the torments he had
endured. He invented such a number of them, that they drew tears from the eyes
of all the family. But as for his enamoured Mistress she was in a great doubt
whether they were Spirits or living Creatures who had whipped her by his
instigation. At the last she believed that all proceeded from his invention,
because she observed in him a great change of the good humor in which he was
at the last time when she spoke unto him, when he consented to give her all
content. He preached now nothing but Honor and Chastity, and did admonish her
to be more faithful to her Husband than hitherto she had been. She was
enforced to obey his Instructions, although she failed not in her will to
transgress them.

After that time (observe but the ordinary opinion which men have constantly of
Shepherds) Francion was believed to be a Magician, and that he held a
communication with Spirits; Many times the peasants observed that he did talk
to himself (as he was making his Verses) and because he had Poetic phrases
which they could not undecstand, they imagined that he discoursed with some
invisible Spirit. He had but little conference with those brutish people,
unless when he had a desire to laugh, insomuch that all of them did impute his
solitude to the custom of his damnable profession. He was observed to be
experienced in diverse things which are beyond the apprehensions of Villagers.
One day having heard some high discourse concerning Priests, he so expressed
himself, that he caused admiration in the standers by, which made them believe
that the Devil was his Schoolmaster.

By natural Magic he did many gallant things, and cured those that were sick,
so miraculously, that almost every one did conceive that there was sorcery in
it. Moreover, they did believe he had the knowledge to foretell what was to
come, and could divine on all things. One time being in the Compaof some
Citizens Daughers, and some Country wenches, after some devices of
unprofitable, but inviting mirth (to gain himself authority) he said unto them,
I will lay you a wager, that I will find out her amongst you all who is not a
Maid. One of them immediately made answer, Your knowledge will be here employed
in vain, for you may well say that there is not one amongst us all in this
place who has lost her honor. Speaking these words her countenance did
something change, which was observed by Francion. Besides that, her readiness
to persuade him not to attempt to discover her who was unchaste, did make him to
believe that she her self was that person. This did the more encourage him to
persecute his design, but for fear of giving offense, he would not point her
out to all the world, who had lost her Maidenhead, and he would disclose it
only to one of her Companions who was present. He therefore did speak it in her
friends ear. I have found by my Art, that she who amongst all these Maids has
sinned by fornication, is the very same who did speak last of all unto me. I
think not so, said the other. Francion replied, There are none but she her
self, and he who committed the fault with her that can give an assurance of it;
but if you please, you may believe me as well as them. The rest of the company
knew not that which was declared by him until eight days afterward, at what
time the said Girl was married to a Gardner of the Village. As she was in bed,
not long afterward her childing throws did begin to grow upon her, and she was
delivered of a goodly Boy. At the same hour the same Maid who did know the
prophecy of Francion, did publish it as a miracle, which did highly advance his
reputation. It may be well believed that they did all admire his knowledge, but
that which made the matter not so bad, as otherwise it would have been, was,
that the Husband vowed that the Child was his own, and that his Wife would not
take a Husband, without having first made trial of him, for having seen a
pattern of the cloth, she might try whether it were good or not, and if it did
not please her, she might freely leave it to other Customers. It was added to
this consideration, that it was a long time since she was of age to make love,
and that a Maid is like a Tree which must be shaken before the fruits be ripe.
The next morning Francion who something doubted of the truth of what he had
spoken, did sing, So well the Gardner watered had his Ground.

There were some who did speak pleasantly that the Bridgroom was a good workman
to have a child the first week, but those who expressed themselves more
seriously, were amazed how his Wife could carry her great belly so well that it
could not be discovered, but no doubt she used some artifice to conceal it.

The next morning one of the most stupid fellows in the Village believing there
was nothing unknown to Francion did send unto him, to know who was he amongst
all his servants who had stolen from him a piece of Pork which he had
preserved in his Cellar? for sure enough he was, that it was not stolen by
strangers. Francion had at this time lost the reputation he had gained, if he
had not assisted himself with a subtle invention. He did therefore pull out of
his Pocket a piece of a Torch, and said, that in the composure of it he had
mingled druggs of that Virtue with the wax, that when it was lighted there was
none could blow it out, but the thief only who had stolen the thing concerning
which the disputation did arise. You must come (said be, speaking to the
servants) one after another into this Chamber where I will be alone. I will
bring you all to your trial. Immediately he entered into the room, and the first
who followed him being innocent, did not counterfeit, but did blow as strongly
as he could, thinking to justify himself, and not relying on that which
Francion had spoken, he did blow the Torch out; at which Francion was
infinitely amazed, and in a confusion replied unto him, My Friend, you see what
my Torch does make me to believe, I will say no more, do you go your way and
make not the appearance of any thing, and bid your Companions to make have in,
one after the other. He being gone Francion did light his torch again by the
means of a Flint, that by conterition sparkled out fire. After the first,
another of the servants came, to whom arrived the self same fortune, as to the
former, and so it happened to the others, for the Torch had no Ingredient at all
in it, that could make it resist the force of their breath. Nevertheless those
who came forth, were put all to their interrogatories concerning what passed,
but they would not speak the least word in the world, but attended the end of
the trial, and did not so much as communicate what was done to one another.

Those who were in the House would fain have seen all the ceremony of Francion,
but he gave an express charge that no persons should enter into the place
where he was, but those only whom he was to examine, because, he said, he could
not prosecute his enterprise but very privately. The last whom he was to
examine was not so hardy as the others, for he had not so clean a Conscience,
he did blow so softly. that he made the flame of the Torch hardly to tremble.
Francion perceiving by it, that he undoubtedly was the guilty person, did go
to look out the Master of the House, and told him that he had nothing to do to
acquaint him whether his Torch were blown out or not, but only did assure him
that he who came last to blow was the thief that had stolen away his Pork. The
Labourer sent to the house where his Servants Wife did lodge, and found that
she was then putting into the Pot a piece of that Pork which her Husband had
stolen. He was convinced of the crime, and Francion highly commeded for his
knowledge, and recompensed with some money, which at that time was very
welcome to him.

He afterward was so believed by every one to be one of the greatest Diviners
in the World, that being to travel, and the way very difficult to find out, he
very civilly demanded of a Man (who knew every turn on the rode thereabout)
which was his readiest way, he could receive no other answer from him, but Ha,
Ha, you do well to mock at such poor Ignorant Men as my self, Do you ask the
way of me, who know the whole World your self, and all that is done in it?
Having spoke those words, he left him, and Francion meeting with no man else of
whom he might learn the right way, did wander so far out of it, that he was
enforced to take up his lodging in a Wood for that Night.

We have made mention before, that when he made Verses, he would speak so
punctually, that those who heard him did believe that he held Discourse with
some familiar Spirit. His Mistress at the same time had the same belief:
Oftentimes she would say unto her self, This young fellow is of a jovial
complexion, and inclined to love, I do not well know how it comes to pass that
he does refuse the Courtesy which I have offered him. If I were one of the
foulest Slutts in the world, yet such a fellow as he is, should be glad,
methinks, sometimes to have me to abate the beat of his concupiscence. What
mystery is there in it, that he should so much undervalue me? It necessarily
must fall out, that he has some other Mistress on whom he does discharge the
extravagancies of his fourth Concoction, which does trouble the repose of his
Spirits, and his Blood.

Thus did she argue with her self; but she could not discover so much as one
Nest amongst all those Birds to which he was accustomed to retire himself; for
he carried his affairs the most privately in the world. One evening she came
softly to him, as he was lying on the grass, and in a frolic humor, making a
Sonnet which began thus,

How laden am I now with bliss,
My Chloris that I shall thee kiss.
He oftentimes repeated that couplet aloud, being not able to finish the
Stanza. His Mistress thinking that he did speak to some Girl whom he had in
his Arms, shot forth her discontented eye as far as ever she could, to find who
was that Maid that was so happy; but perceiving not any one near unto him, and
that he stretched forth his arms in the remembrance of some passed pleasures,
she reflected on a thought which deserves to be recorded in this Story. On the
Sunday before, she had heard the Curat affirm in his Pulpit, That there were
Magitians who did lie with Devils transformed into Women, that were called
Succubae; She immediately believed that Francion had then with him one of those
gallant Mistresses, because he pronounced words more amorous than the former,
and lively expressed all that which can be spoken in the full enjoying of a
Beauty.

After that time, she did take no more thought to understand with what Woman he
assuaged the desires of his youth, and looked not upon him, but with a horror
only, thinking that he had always a Devil at his tail. And she then believed
her self, That it was his Succubae that did so last her, because she had so
great a desire to lie with him.

To reflect a little on these last gallantries, They were contrived on purpole
to punish Vice. It was well done to whippe this inconstant Country Wife, who
forgot the Faith which she had promised to another, and would have her Servant
to commit Adultery. It is true enough, that she was disagreeable, and that her
Beauties had not attractions enough for the curious eye of Francion; but let us
not look so ^uch upon the Cause, the Effect is always good.

As for the contrivances which remarkably express themselves, they may serve
to instruct those who have failed, to make them acknowledge their errors: Such
was the transgression of the Maid who forfeited her honor; and of the Servant
who stole that from his Master, the theft whereof Francion did discover. In
this the greatest Critics will be enforced to approve his Actions.

As for the rest which is here contained, I do not much lay to my heart their
choler or their complaints; for I describe only those Vices which are commonly
practiced, and make mention of no act which has not been committed; and we may
see how Ingenious Spirits are deluded, and circumvented with fond Inventions,
when only Ignorants and Idiots are condemned to be surprised by them.

The End of the Ninth Book.
THE TENTH BOOK OF THE COMICAL HISTORY OF FRANCION.
IT is true that the styles Comical and Satirical, are as profitable as they
are delightful. For your Example, you may here see all things represented to
the life. All actions do appear without dissimulation, when in Books more
serious, there are certain respects which do hinder the Authors from
expressing themselves with so much liberty, and this is the Reason that
Histories are so imperfect, and filled more with Fables than with Truth. If we
will be curious, as in effect we ought to be, where can it better be expressed
than here? I am of opinion, that in this Book you may find the French Tongue
most entire; and that I have not omitted those words which the vulgar do use,
which nevertheless is not to be seen throughout the whole Book, for in those
passages which are more immodest, we are not allowed the liberty to make use of
them; nevertheless oftentimes the wantonness of those humble conceits are more
delightful than those which are more high. Nay, which is more, I have
represented to the life, as much as possibly may be, all the humors and
actions of those great personages whom mystically I have here inserted, and my
adventures can be no less agreeable than many others which are highly
esteemed. I make freely this confession, for being supported by many proofs, it
will pass with the more authority. There are many who will read this Book, who
understand not what it means, believing that to make a Book complete, we are
only to heap words on words, without regarding any other thing, but only
clapping in of some odd adventures to delight the Idiots. Nevertheless I have
received sufficient advertisements from several persons, who say that they
apply themselves to understand whatsoever is good herein. Some do dislike one
passage, and some another, so that there is nothing in the whole book which
has not both been praised and blamed. If I would I might have done like the
Painter who hid himself behind his Picture, and having heard the different
Judgments of the People, did correct it according to their directions, and
instead of an accomplished Picture, did make it at least a ridiculous Monster.
It is better to leave things as they were at first, and expose them at
adventure to please whom they may, seeing amongst such a diversity of
narrations, it cannot be but some parcels of them will please one or other. How
is it possible universally to please all men? For a letterd man who has been
bred up in the University does love to read the Histories of a Scholar, a
mongrell Gentleman who has had his education only amongst Dogs and Horses
will not be taken with the same story, and will delight themselves only with
those subject which have a reference to his humor and condition. If he who
has an amorous inclination, delights to look upon a sort of intrigues and
delicate devices which are practiced by passionate Lovers, another who only
minds war and the battle, or a pompous, or a grave discourse will believe
all those things to be frivolous; but let us not perplex our selves among the
fantasies of other men, but take pleasure where we find it, and pursue the
order of our History.

Let us now represent that Francion is become amorous of the Daughter of a rich
Merchant, who came to live for a short time in his Country House with all his
Family; And although he desired to sport himself sometimes with one, and
sometimes with another, he professed it was without prejudice to the Love which
he did bear to Nays, and that he might easily be pardoned those faults, seeing
in the calamity into which he was reduced, he had need of some diversion to
solace his Spirits.

Fortune so pleased that the Father of Jocunda (who was she whom now in his
affections he served) did send for him to make him in his Garden some delicate
borders, in which he was very expert, for he had read sometimes in the books of
gardening, and to tell you the truth his Spirit was like a Merchant of every
sort, and at his leisure was provided with all manner of drugs. He was busy in
the Garden when the Daughter of the Merchant came to him to content her
curiosity in seeing his workmanship. A thousand times he blessed the hour in
which he did put on the habit of a Peasant, because he had delighted himself
with many Maids, whom otherwise he should never have approached, and which was
more over gave him the opportunity to be so near to his Jocunda, who had a Book
in her hand, on which sometimes she would look, and sometimes on the young
Labourer. What good book is that, Madam, said he, finding no other ocrasion to
accost her? She made answer, when I shall tell it you, what good will it do
you, you will only hear a Name unknown, which will seem strange unto you, for
you and other Peasants who seldom, or never read in all your lives, do believe
that there is no other Book in the world but your Manuels only, I am not, said
Francion, of that belief with others, I know there are many sorts of Books, and
there are many good ones which I have read. This is a miracle, said Jocunda,
But, well, to satisfy your curiosity, I will inform you that this is a Book
which treats of the loves of Shepherds, and Shepherdesses, Did you ever see
any such Book? Yes, replied Francion, I assure you the perusal of them is very
delightful, especially to those who are in the Country, as you are, for you
are infinitely glad to see those delights in effect which are there represented
to you by discourse only. Oh how much, said she, are you deceived to believe
that, for if the patience of my curiosity did not lead me to see the end of the
adventures which are here described. I should not have the leisure to read it
all over, for I delight altogether in reality, which I cannot find in any of
the Histories in this Book, although peradventure there may be some apparences
for it. Shepherds are here as Philosophers, and make love in the same manner as
do the most accomplished Courtiers in the world. But to what purpose is this?
Why does not the Author give to these personages the quality of Knights well
educated? He makes them the miracles of eloquence and prudence, which in men of
their condition is prodigious. A History true or sabulous ought to represent
things as near to Nature as possibly may be, otherwise it serves but as a tale
only to entertain Children in a Chimney Corner, and not ingenious spirits whose
apprehension pierces through all things. We may see here the method and order
of the world turned topsie turvy. I could wish that one or other would make a
Book of the loves of Knights, and cause them to speak like Clowns, and to
deport themselves in that simple manner as they do in the Country. It will
appear no more strange than this does, which is directly opposite unto it.

Francion, perceiving by her Discourse that she was one of those brave Spirits
which he had been accustomed most passionatly to court, was the most contented
Man in the world to lodge his affections in so worthy a Subject, and not to
lose the occasion to entertain her, he did speak unto her in these words, That
he was much defective in his judgment, who would not approve the reasons which
she did allege. And I do confess, said he, that you can take no pleasure in
reading of that Book. Howsoever, I can assure you, that in these Villages there
can sometimes be found some as able to make love, with as much civillity,
prudence and discretion, as those who do live in the most flourishing Courts
of the World. The example (said Jocunda) is so rarely seen, that it will never
make up a number sufficient to authorize my Book of Shepherds. Well, said
Francion, and smiled, I my self can assure you that you shall find here in this
Country, Shepherds who are accomplished Lovers; and for my self, who am a
Shepherd, (I will speak it without vanity) if I should be numbered in the same
rank with them, I would deport my self without the least distaste. I make no
doubt of it (answered Jocunda) but it would then be very difficult for you to
find a Country Maid of your temper; there are none here but very coarse and
homely Creatures. You speak of the Country Girls, said Feancion, For my self, I
throw not my eyes upon them; but here are others who are not only worthy to be
beloved by an accomplished Shepherd, but also by a most accomplished Courtier.
And I am well able to maintain this Discourse, because I have the happiness to
see you. Oh God! said Iocunda, Truly I have been much deceived until this
present; for I thought that flatterers were no where to be found, but at the
Court only: but you can flatter here as much as they do there. Francion
replied, Truth is spoken by all. Iocunda did then leave him, to keep her Mother
Company, who walked alone. She was astonished to hear a Shepherd to discourse
so well, and many times believed that it was a Dream; but her Admiration did
far more increase, when she heard him about ten of the clock in the Evening, to
sing and play on his Lute under her window. She knew who it was by some words
in his Song, where he did beseech her not to despise the Shepherd to whom she
had spoken. It was a thing which did appear unto her to be truly wonderful,
that a Man of his Condition should make so good Verses as were those which he
rehearsed; and moreover, that he did sing and play on the Lute, as well as the
Masters that made profession of it.

The dull Peasants to whom these perfections had been shown, did not so much
admire him, as she did, whose excellent Spirit was known in all things. But all
this was nothing to the worth of the Letter of Love which the next morning she
received from him; where she found all the richest Flowers of Eloquence. He
used no other artifice to have it conveyed to her hand, but to put it in a
little basket made of Rushes, which a young Girl did present unto her, as it
were, in the minority of her Duty.

Her Spirit was in great unquietness what she should do in the pursuit of her
new Lover, whose Condition was no ways pleasing to her. If his Merit had not
qualified her discontent, she would not have been pleased at his boldness to
send a Letter of Love unto her. She had a great desire to understand where he
had been brought up to so many qualities of a Gentleman. And this was the Cause
that she did go forth alone at the backdoor into the adjacent fields, and
permitted him the liberty to speak unto her, having met her in a place not
far from her Fathers house, where he did feed his flock.

After that he had given her the time of the day, and witnessed the joy he
received to have so happily incountred her, she said unto him, Gentle Shepherd,
I do believe, that to please me you will now give me the proofs of that which
you have told me, that you are as accomplished a Lover, as any who have their
being in the City or the Court. Francion replied, It is not any delight I take
to be a Shepherd, but a Necessity that does constrain me to this Condition of
life. I cannot believe that, said Iocunda. Francion replied, There is nothing
more true, than that your Beauties have the power to transform me into any
thing, I should be sorry that any other Subject than the most beautiful one in
the world, should cause me to disgrace my self into the liberty to do what I
have done. I know well enough that the baseness of my Condition does much
hinder me in the obtaining of your favor. I do therefore use my utmost
endeavor to repair that defect by mine excessive affection, with which I hope
well to deserve it. Iocunda smiling at this discourse, as in some disdain of
him, did immediately change the compliment, and demanded of him, where he had
been bred up. He promised her, that on the next day, if she pleased to take the
pains to come to the same place, where he then was, he would declare unto her
all along that which she desired to know, having at that present no desire to
speak unto her concerning any thing of which he had not before deliberated with
himself according to the Rules of exactest judgment.

Staying a little longer with him, she informed her self of diverse particulars.
She told him in what a wild fame he lived over all the Country, and that the
Peasants bad almost caused her to believe, that he had gained by the Magic art
those perfections which he had.

The day following they came both to the appointed place; Iocunda challenged
Francion of his promise, which he readily accomplished, speaking to her in this
manner, If you should not have entreated me to relate unto you who I am, it
were necessary that of my self I should inform you, if that I do desire that
you should regard the affection which I do bear unto you, I therefore do
declare unto you, That I am a Gentleman of one of the most Noble Families in
France, and having some times since seen you in the City where you are
accustomed to live, your attractions did so vanquish me, that I resolved with
my self to take the habit of a Villager, knowing that you were coming hither,
that so I might made my self known unto you without giving suspicion unto any.
Having recited this Fiction to her, to oblige her the more to respect him, he
enchanted her with a thousand proofs of an extreme love; And she not doubting
but that he was of great quality, did not fail to assure him, that the pains
he had taken should be well recompensed, and although he was in that rustic
habit, yet he had the appearance of a gallant young Man, insomuch that she did
bear almost as much affection to him, as if he had been covered with the
richest apparel that the greatest Courtiers do wear.

The assurances of reciprocal love being given on one side and the other, they
discoursed afterward on diverse particulars. Iocunda related to Francion many
bold stories, by which the Country people would have persuaded her that he did
practice the black art, but Francion who would not deceive her, as he had done
the ignorant Peasants, did make known to her the greatest part of the Causes
for which these Rumors were dispersed amongst the multitude, and she received
much contentment at the pleasant relation of them.

The hour of their departure being come, before they did bid Farewell to one
another, they deliberated with what Inventions for the time to come they should
assist themselves, because that Iocunda could not come every day out of her
Fathers house to speak with Francion, but one or other would be apt to suspect
and discover their affairs. She determined therefore to counterfeit her self
sick, to give an occasion to her Lover to come unto her, who (according to the
Vulgar opinion) could give a sudden Remedy for all manner of maladies. This
being resolved upon, they took leave of one another, and returned to their
habitations.

Jocunda on the same day did begin to put her design in execution, and
complained to her Mother that she began to be grieved with the cholick. Her
Mother no sooner heard of it, but she pitied her with her heart, she flattered
her with her Tongue, she stroaked her with her hand, and caused her to lie down
upon the bed. If there had been any Physicians near unto her, they had
immediately been sent for. Before any thought was had of Francion, the Tenant
who farmed the house of her Husband, said unto her, that it was expedient for
him to send for him to give her Physic; The Father of Iocunda did reply, that
he would not trust the life of his only child to such a Mountebanck. Why say
you so, said the Farmer, do you fear that he cannot as well recover your
Daughter, as he has cured all other persons, to whomsoever he has given
Physic? Believe me he is a Devil incarnate, I know not that thing which he is
not able to perform; He knows more than the Curate himself of our Parish, and
at his pleasure can decline Victus over him. The Father of Iocunda giving
credit at last to the assurances of many persons concerning the knowledge of
Francion, did consent that he should be sent for. After he had seen the sick
person, and felt her pulse, he took a little Viol out of his Pocket, in which
he had a certain O^l which he warmed, and dipped a linen cloth in it, to put
it upon her stomach. The hour was so favorable to him, that at that time there
were not any nere unto the bed, so that pretending to apply his remedy unto
her, he took the boldness to feel her breasts, And that it might be believed
that he had extraordinary experience in all things, she not long afterward
told her Mother that she found her self in much ease, and seemed to have a
great mind to be merry. Turning therefore to the Shepherd, she said unto him,
Shepherd, I have heard it reported that you do play well upon the Lute, shall I
have that power over you, as to entreat you to give me a lesson, or two.
Francion replied, you have an absolute command over me, although I know I am
not able to give you any pleasure by playing on my Lute, howsoever I will use
the best Art I have, rather than fall into a disobedience to your commands. He
would have gone for his Lute himself, but they would not put him to so much
trouble, and sent one of their Grooms to his lodging for that purpose, when he
began to touch his Lute, all the world were ravished at the harmony of it, and
especially Iocunda. Her Father and Mother desiring nothing more with greater
passion than her health and contentment, observing that she took delight in the
Music of the Shepherd, did invite him to come the next day to pass away the
time with her. They were then abroad to take care for the affairs of their
Husbandry, and this was the time in which Francion had the leisure to testify
his Love unto his Mistress, and she was so much overcome, that she made a
promise to him to satisfy his desires.

They found in the fields invitations enough wherewith to delight and detain
themselves, but that Evening Iocunda returned with her Father and Mother into
the City. All things there did seem to be quite contrary unto her design, for
the house had high Walls on both sides, and the gates were always locked, She
did write to Francion who stayed in the Village, in what a strait prison she
was locked up, and assured him that nevertheless, if he could by any means come
secretly to her with the Wagoner of their Village, he should for his part
receive the best entertainment that he possibly could expect. Francion studdied
a while what he had to do, and at the last concluded on this invention. The
Waggoner of the place some few days afterward was to carry Hay to the
Merchants house, he resolved to hide himself in the Wagon, and in the mean
time, he in a Letter acquainted Iocunda with the design he had. The Waggoner
was of a simple and dull disposition, and Francion made him believe what he
pleased. My honest Friend (said he unto him) you know that I am very curious. I
have heard often a report of the beauty of the house in which your Master
dwells in the City, I have a great desire to see it, but I know not which way
in the world to give my self that contentment, but only by your means, you must
carry me thither in your Wagon; I will, said the Waggoner, with all my heart,
for Francion was one of his best friends, because he often would make him drink
at his Masters house, and in other places; Do you come to me, said he, when I
am to go, you are known so well, that I believe they will not shut the Gates
against you. I am known too well, said Francion, and that is the reason why I
will not go in that manner as you do speak. I would so go that not any one
might see me, for I have a great desire to observe the platform of the house,
and to take from thence a model, which in some other way may be beneficial to
me; but your Master must know nothing at all of it, I am advised to hide my
self in the Hay, which you are to carry thither, it will be a happy means to
accomplish my intention; I like well of it, said the Waggoner, and it shall not
be my fault if you put it not in practice. For the rest, when we are to come
back, I will pluck the leaves from the Vines, that you may the better pass
undiscovered. It will be well done, said Francion, provided that you do keep
your promise. The Waggoner assured him of his fidelity, and the hour being come
to carry his Hay, he advertised him that he was ready to drive away. Francion
having delivered his Flock to some other to keep, and being accommodated with
the best habiliments which the place could afford him, did go to meet the
Waggoner, and found him according to his wish in a Lane, where he had the
leisure to hide himself in the Wagon, that no man might perceive him. In the
Evening he arrived at the house of Iocunda. The Waggoner taking out all the Hay
himself, did cause Francion to hide himself in a private place, where he did
lock him up, which was unadvisedly done both by the one and the other, For if
they had been perceived, it would have been reported that they had a design to
have robbed the house, and it might so have fallen out that they might have
suffered for it by the hand of Justice. But Francion was resolved to make trial
how far his good Fortue would extend.

In the mean time Iocunda was in the greatest inquietudes in the world, not
knowing whether he was come, or not, She could not find any means to be
satisfied in the truth thereof, for it was not discretion she thought to
enquire of the Waggoner for him, fearing thereby to give him any cause of
suspicion, and she her self was in doubt if her Lover had hid himself in the
Hay, or not, without his knowledge. At the last, all the world being retired,
she did repair to the place where he was, knowing that he could no where else
so privately conceal himself. He was already gone forth from his place of
retirement, to become his own Scout, when she came into the room with a Candle
in her hand, and knew him, We need not to demand if they did kiss at their
first salutations. They embraced each other above half an hour, with so
excessive a Joy, that it took from them the use of their Tongues. Being come
out of this ecstasy, they deliberated with themselves where they should pass
away that night. Iocunda was unwilling to bring Francion to her own Chamber,
fearing he might be perceived to go up the stairs, or that some other
misfortune might arrive. They continued therefore in the same place where they
were, and Francion did spread abroad the cloth that covered the Mule upon the
Bottles of Hay, that no dust or other inconvenience might annoy his Mistress
that lay on them. We may easily believe that they took as much pleasure on that
hard lodging, as if they had been lying on a Bed of Down. During one of the
truces which they made in their amorous war, Francion related to her the fine
invention with which he had abused the Waggoner, who was gone to sleep in
another part of the house, believing that he intended to pass away that night
in the Court, in beholding the beauty of the buildings by the light of the
Stars. Iocunda on the other side acquainted him, that (not to lie that night in
her Mothers Chamber as her custom was) she pretended the immoderate heat of
that season, to the end that she might be permitted to lie alone in a little
Chamber which had a door that opened into the Court, by which she might come
unto him, without traversing the length of it. Taking care for the time to
come, they propounded diverse ways to themselves, how afterward they might see
one another, as the Spirits of Lovers are subtle to apprehend that which may
render their pleasures more durable.

The best Invention which they found, and that which they determined to follow,
was, That Francion should put himself into some Merchants service, who,
understanding his merit, would be glad to make choice of him, and to employ him
for his Factor sooner than any other: Iocunda consented that it should be so,
attending the time that he should discover himself who he was, and he accorded
to retire himself from the Village, where he began to distaste those dull, yet
uncertain Spirits; howsoever, he desired not to continue in the Condition of a
Merchants Factor, but for a time only. He acquainted his Mistress that he had
need of money, and she gave him all that she had, being not able to deny him any
thing. He partaked with her in all the delights that could be imagined, when
not long afterward, behold a little Star, the Van-Currier of the Day, did give
unto them a sign to retreat. At that instant, as they were taking leaves one of
another, there was a man who knocked very violently at the great Gate, and
immediately one of the Porters who was awakened at the noise, did come to open
it. The man being in arms, did say arrogantly unto him, Friend, Go and
advertise thy Master that there is a great Tumult in the City, and demand of
him, If it be not his pleasure to send forth a man with a Musket into the
Marketplace, according to the Commandment which I give you from my Captain?
Make have unto thy Master; Run I say, I will attend his answer, Fear not that
any shall enter in, I will guard the house my self.

The Porter immediately did go up to his Masters Chamber, and knocked at the
door as loud as he could; but because he was fast asleep, the door could not be
opened. In the mean time the Corporal at the gate, who was one of the Citizens,
and in his own conceit more glorious than Caesar, to see himself equipped with
other arms than his own, which were a pair of Cizzers and a goose, did begin to
kindle red with Impatience to attend so long at the Merchants gate, because he
had business in other places. He did grow into a rage, and alleging that they
did not give him that respect which was due unto him, he did begin to swear
like a Nobleman; and perceiving that although he called never so loud, no
answer would be given to him, he did go away full of spite and indignation;
protesting that the Master of the House should soundly pay for it.

Iocunda durst not as yet return unto her Chamber, for fear the Porter, or some
one else should meet her in the way. She conceived there was a fair opportunity
for Francion to be gone, because the gate was open; for whatsoever design he had
otherwise, it would be a hard task for him to convey himself so secretly into
the Wagon that no body could perceive him. He did approve her counsel, and at
that instant he did set forward to traverse the Court: when he was on the great
Causey which did lead unto the gate he had so violent a fear, that the Groom
coming down the stairs should descry him, that he began to run with all the
force he had, to be the sooner out of the house; But not observing that the
threshold at the gate was very high, he lifted not up his legs as he was to
pass over it, wherefore he fell all along, and thought that at once he had
broken both his legs and his arms. Iocunda who saw him fall, was very sorry
for it; nevertheless she durst not approach to his relief, but did repair to
her own Chamber, where she did go to bed, and the next Noon complained of her
excessive Sloth, as if she had slept away a whole night, and half a day
together.

Francion did rise, but not without much pain, and being hardly able to uphold
himself, he leaned against the Wall as he passed by it. He did well to be gone;
for the Groom, having received a charge from his Master to go with his arms to
the Marketplace, did come forth immediately after him. He did walk as well as
he could, but it was so faintly, that at every step he was ready to fall down
on the ground, when at last casting his eyes toward the street, he perceived a
Chair with Elbows, from whence he saw a Man to rise, who, although he appeared
as lame as himself, yet he did make have to be gone with all the speed that
possibly he could. Truly (said he) I shall not be so disdainful, nor so proud
as you are, I willingly will sit down and rest my self in that chair, if once I
can come to it. Having spoke those words, he did enforce himself to approach
unto it, and so much prevailed, that he came to it, and sat down on a soft
Cushion, which at that time was not unwelcome to him.

While Francion is there resting himself, I must account unto you who he was
whose place he possessed. He was an old Man, full of the Gout, and the most
wicked one in the whole City, or peradventure the Country, although it swarmed
with such Companions. It was his design to plant division amongst all, and, if
he could, amongst the greatest Personages. He had a plot at that time upon the
Signior, who not long before was invested with the government of that place,
who^ he had more reason to reverence, seeing that not one in the whole City
complained of him; But the only Cause was, that he had always a wretched
disposition to speak evil of Magistrates. It was known well enough, that he
only did detract him, to follow his old and vicious Custom; For he had never so
much as once seen him, and had never heard of any of his actions, whether they
were good or evil. The faults which he imputed to him, were those which he had
observed in other Governors: He conceived, that being of the same quality, he
must partake also of the same Imperfections. It is true, he had great
familiarity with a Personage whose Authority was not to be disputed of; And to
beget in him an enmity against the Governor, he one day informed him, that he
knew this Governor to be one of the most treacherous persons in the world; he
coundesign to deliver up the City to a Stranger. This accusation of the gouty
Old man was believed as an Oracle, because he did know so well to disguise his
wickedness, that one would take him to be a Man filled with all prudence. He
moreover affirmed, that he had heard by diverse Citizens of some pernicious
design that was on foot.

It so happened, that the Governor, for some particular and good design, had that
evening been in all the Streets of the City with his Guard. He who received the
advertisement of his malicious person, did observe it, and infallibly believed
that he had a desire to accomplish some bad Intention; Wherefore, having
assembled the greatest part of the City, and declared to them what he heard, he
took counsel with them to exhort the rest of the Citizens to be armed, and to
stand upon their guard to prevent the Mischief that was to come. In the several
quarters of the City they were commanded to repair to the Corpse de Guard, so
that all was in a tumult. The Governor hearing this, was come forth more strong
and better accompanied than before, to understand for what cause they did so
riotously assemble themselves, without his particular Instructions. If the fury
of the People had not been restrained by the wisdom of some amongst whom the
false Report of this Treachery was spread, they undoubtedly had thrown
themselves upon the Governor, and cut him in pieces. The gouty old man, to
excite them thereunto, did stand at his Window, and cried out, Liberty,
Liberty, Gentlemen hang up that Wicked man, who would sell your Fortunes and
your Lives at once: But the voice of the wisest Magistrates having more power
than his own, did tie up the hands of the most mutinous personages The Governor
had notice of it, who testified nothing but his entire affection to the
public; Nevertheless some of the Inferior Officers, who troubled every
quarter, did still persist to advertise the Citizens to stand upon their guard,
desiring that every one might partake in the Combustion. One of these men was
come to the house of the Merchant, as before I have mentioned.

The Governor at last, who understood of the Seditious exhortations of the
gouty man, and was fully advertised that it was he who had kindled the fire
amongst all the people, was resolved to send for him, to chastise him according
to his desert. This Commission was given to two of his people, who had been at
his house, to acquaint him that their Master understanding that he was a man of
a pregnant apprehension, and mature Counsel, desired that he would come to him,
to assist him in giving some restraint unto the Commotion of the People. He
would believe nothing at the beginning, but they made so many serious
protestations to him, that at last, conceiving to himself that the Governor
knew nothing of those words which he had spoke against him, he flattered
himself with a belief, that possibly it might be that he would be glad to
assist himself with his advise. Propounding then unto himself the welfare and
the honor which thereupon would redound unto him, he resolved with himself not
to refuse his Invitation. He thereupon permitted that the two men should put
him in an Elbow chair, which they had brought for that purpose, and willingly
he suffered himself to be carried to that place, whither they could never have
brought him but by force. They had carried him a great way, when a Citizen by
chance did meet with those who carried him, and spoke softly in the ear of one
of them, The Governor is not now in the place where you left him, he is gone
to the Castle, conduct the old Knave thither: He, who had better ears than they
conceived, did readily understand those words, which caused him to conjecture
some sinister event did attend him. Before they did carry him respectfully as a
man of State and Quality, but they now conceived that he should not be so well
entreated when he was to come to the Castle of the City; Nevertheless he sat
very quiet in the Chair, and knowing that all the words in the world were
unprofitable in his misfortune, he pretended to fall fast asleep, and began to
snore. His bearers being not accustomed to carry so heavy a burden, had their
arms extremely wearied, and in great drops their sweat did abundantly fall from
their faces; so that being at the corner of the street where Iocundaes Father
lived, it being an unfrequented place, they had a desire to repose themselves,
and being gone into a house of Resort to quench their thirst, they drank a
draught or two extraordinarily, imagining that the man would not so suddenly
awake, and if he should awake, he would never have the desire to run away; or
if he had the desire, yet he had not the power to put it in performance, his
legs being swollen with the Dropsy, and his feet and toes tied into knots by
the Gout; but they were deceived, for they no sooner were departed from him,
but he knew well enough how to use his limbs, fearing the anger of the
Governor, and left that place empty, which Francion filled.

The two Conductors having drank sufficiently, did return to their Office, and
did not consider whether it were the right man or no who was in the Chair,
because there was a Curtain about it, by the means whereof Francion was
concealed; for they could see nothing of him but the tops of his toes. They
undertook their charge again, and brought him away cheerfully, the Wine having
given new forces to them. Francion said not a word, fearing to stop them, and
being very glad to be carried into any place whatsoever, because he could not
travel on foot by reason of his late bruises. He said within himself, These
Fellows, no doubt, will carry me to the Hospital, instead of the sick man that
is run away, It is no great matter, I shall do better there than in the
streets, where my feebleness would constrain me to continue. If my fall has
done me any harm, I shall have there the advice of the Surgeon. The men
carried him all the while without speaking one word to him, taking him for the
gouty old man, whom they would not waken. When they were in the Castle, they
did carry him up into a Chamber, without looking on him, desiring with all
speed to impart unto their Master that they had fullfilled his Commandment, for
fear they should be checked for their delay.

The Governor having spoken to them, did take the pains to come to see him
with one of his Gentlemen, and because he never saw the gouty old Man, and
never heard whether he were old or young, he mistook Francion for him. Taking
him then by the arm, and shaking him very strongly, he said unto him, There is
but little respect in you, Sir, and less honesty; Why do you not rise to do
your reverence to those who are in authority over you. Francion being not able
to stand on his Legs, did salute him no otherwise, but with a nod only of his
head. The Governor said unto him, How! Does your Gout hold you so obstinately?
I shall quickly rid you of it, I warrant you. I have not only the Gout, said
Francion, but Rivers of afflictions, I am afraid you will not so quickly make
them to glide away, say what you will, for the springs from whence they are
derived will be never dry. The Governor interrupted him, and said, For bear
that discourse, I sent not for thee to pass away the time in such unprofitable
complaints. Tell me, Art not thou a perfidious, and a wicked disturber of the
public peace? The people have lived in much quiet under my protection, which
was so agreeable to them, that they could not complain of any of my actions,
but thou, who desire to set the whole City on a flame to satisfy thy
inordinate desire, have raised a dangerous tumult. What willt thou allege for
thy own defense? willt thou yet affirm that thou had not a design to trouble
the repose of the Inhabitants, to cause me to be either killed or driven away
from this place? Come hither, and declare unto me who it was that did induce
thee to it. Have thou found any ill carriage during the time of my Government?
Is it for any particular offense which I have done thee? I do not remember
that I ever gave thee any cause to be offended at me. Francion hearing all this
discourse, and being not able to apprehend the reason of it, did at the last
imagine that they did but make sport with him, for the Governor spoke not with
the countenance of an angry man. His mind was not so sick as his body, and the
good adventure which he did meet with that night, did render him very joyful,
he therefore determined with himself to make as good pastime with the
Governor, as the Governor did with him. To answer to all your points, said
he, I tell you, that I would have set all this City in a Tumult, because
nothing is more agreeable to me than to see it in such on estate. The He
Neighbor now enters into the house of his Female Neighbor, and she goes into
the house of her next Neighbor; Lovers enter into those places, the doors
whereof they before durst not look upon. In this confusion, those who are
gallant spirits have the opportunity to play boldly, and at all adventure. Do
not believe that I do bear unto you any hatred at all, I never knew what hatred
was, although, not to dissemble, I have subject enough to be angry with you,
because you do not here establish one Ordinance which is necessary: What
Ordinance is that? said the Governor; The best and the most just one in the
world, replied Francion, It is for the time to come, that Women should once a
year go stark naked quite through the City, that so the Inhabitants may feed
their eyes with the sight of a desirable object, for what reason have they to
cover and hide themselves with so much care? Is there not as great an absurdity
in it, as possible can be imagined? They do show themselves naked in
particular to every one, one after another, And what danger can there be, so to
show themselves, when we shall be all together? I assure my self that you will
allege unto me that we all looking on them, we shall better mark those
imperfections which they have, for two eyes see more than one, and this will be
to their prejudice. But it may be you have a desire to affirm, that we ought
not to look upon their naked bodies, but only one by one, that so we may all
think we are the particular enjoyers of that happiness. You can allege no
other reasons but these, and these are imperfect one^ enough, for it is well
known what it is that we so much do desire to see in Women, and the fine
inventions of graver men, are to no effect. For the Women, you ought not to
take their part so much, as any ways to procure the disadvantage of Men, who
have more resemblance unto you. The Governor knew not whether he had best to
laugh, or to be angry at this delicate Oration, and made so much to the
purpose, in relation to that which he had spoken. Nevertheless he did speak to
Francion in this manner, Observe what I say, and do not think to escape by
playing the Fool, for I will speedily cause you to be apprehended, I speak in
good earnest to you.

On those words there entered some of the Counselors of the City, who demanded
of the Governor if he had sent for the Gouty Delinquent. He made answer to
them, See where he is, but I conceive him to be either a Fool, or a
Counterfeit, I cannot get an answer from him that has any reason in it. One of
the company demanded of him, Who is he that brought that Man unto you? Do you
take him for that Gouty person whom we come to demand? he is as much that Man,
as I am the King of Spain. The Governor said, that he was then abused, and
that he was brought unto him for that Man. Wherefore he called those men to him
who did conduct him thither, and demanded of them wherefore they had deceived
him, for he was not the same person of whom he had spoken to them. They turning
their eyes toward him, did assure him, that they did not bring that Man to
him, but another, who was very lame, and ancient. The Devil then, said the
Governor, has carried him away, and put this Fellow in his place. Every one
did exercise his Judgment on the mistake, and told him all with one voice,
that he alone could satisfy him from whence the error did proceed. What need
you to be so perplexed? said Francion, He who was set in the chair is fled
away, and the desire which I had to rest my self, did make me to take his place.

The Porters were then checked for their negligence, and they were commanded to
go forth again to look out the old Incendiary, who not long afterward was
apprehended, and put into the hands of Justice, and condemned to be hanged,
which accordingly was put in execution; and from that day he was cured of his
Gout, and all his other maladies.

As for Francion, they did let him go whither he pleased, without any
disturbance. He considered with himself a long time, i^ it were his best course
to return to the Village, or not, and at the last he resolved not to go thither
any more, and all his thoughts reflecting upon Nays, he did not regard to
perform that which he had promised to Iocunda, because the enjoyment of her had
taken away that little passion which he had for her. By this means that Maid
was justly punished for abandoning her self to a Man, of whom she had no more
knowledge, and who did go away from her, without bidding her Farewell, or
taking the least care for her. She ought for the time to come, to be
circumspect how she contracted such uncertain loves. As for Francion, we cannot
find that any misfortune did befall him, out of which he was not released, for
although he committed some faults, yet he never desisted to have an inclination
unto virtue, and God will not lose or destroy those, who one day will become
virtuous.

Having no more affection to the pleasures of the Country, Francion resolved to
repair to Lions, to borrow some moneys there, to put himself into an equipage
to follow his former adventures. The first man whom in the way he did meet
with, was a Soldier very empty of money; he was clothed with an old pair of
Red breeches, and with a leather doublet, which was very greasy. He demanded
of him, If he would change clothes with him? and promised him some money over
and above in advantage. The Soldier agreed with him, and for a little money he
did renounce his Nobility, to take upon him the habit of a Peasant. Francion
began to admire himself in this goodly attire, which did please him more than
any other; and having bought the Sword also of this gallant Warrier, he was
much troubled how to wear it, because the Soldier would not sell his Belt;
for, he said, he would reserve that, to serve him always as a Witness that he
came from the Wars; there being abroad in the world many such Companions, who
having sold their Muskets, do content themselves to carry their Rests with them.

Francion at the last remembering that he had about him a great leather thong
with which he did tie and lead his dog, when heretofore he performed the
Office of a Shepherd, did think good to make use of it, and did carry his sword
in that, as in a scarf. He had a Hat with a narrow brim, and picked at the top,
made after an antic fashion, which pleased him very highly. His journey was
long, he therefore traveled sometimes on horseback, and sometimes on foot,
according to the occasions which he found, but his diligence made all the
dispatch that possibly it could, and he expended not any money, but with great
wisdom and moderation. I will not tell you whether in his way he traveled over
Rivers, or over Mountains, or passed through Cities or Towns, I am not in the
humor to busy my self with those particulars. You may observe that I have not
represented to you in what place Nays was at the Waters, whether it were at
Pougues, or any other place; neither have I given you the Name of the Fortress
where Francion was a Prisoner, nor of the Village where he was a Shepherd, or
of the City where Iocunda lived. It is a sign I have no desire you should know
it; because I do not name it to you. Let us content our selves that Francion,
after the travel of certain days, did lodge at a Village not far from Lions,
and the next day being Sunday, he came early in the morning to a Town more near
unto it. Every one was then at Church to hear Mass said. Finding none at the
Inn to give him wherewith to refresh himself, he determined with himself to
sit under the great Elm in the Churchyard, which did grant him a favorable
shade, and to stay there until they did come out of the Church. One of the Town
having some business to perform more than the rest, or being more hasty to eat
his Dinner, did first of all come forth, and passing by Francion, did take him
for one of those Trumpets, who after the Wars are ended do go up and down the
Villages to sell Druggs, and show juggling tricks by the virtue of Hocus Pocus.
You Trumpeter, said he, What have you to sell there? The most excellent druggs
in the World, said Francion, who immediately apprehended what he was taken to
be; they cure all manner of Diseases: I make knowing those who are ignorant, I
make rich, in a short time, the poorest men in the World. Where have you put
them, said the Peasant, I see neither Cloak-bagg nor Portmantua? Thou art a
Clown, replied Francion, Think thou that my Merchandise is like to that of
other men? No, no, It is not made of the same Ingredients, It has nothing
visible in it, I do carry it in my head Pronouncing these words in a grave and
serious manner, the Peasant believed that he did speak the truth, and
forgetting all his other Employments, he would have the honor in the first
place to acquaint all those of the Town with the News of this so rare
Mountebank, who did know, and could do all things. Every one of them had the
Curiosity to see him, and the Mass was no sooner ended, but he was encompassed
round about with persons of all ages.

Being obliged to act the Mountebank, when he saw himself environed with such a
multitude, he resolved to make a pleasant use of the opportunity which was
offered, and putting himself into a good humor, he began to utter a thousand
merry conceits to entertain them with. When he observed that his Auditors did
give him a favorable attention to understand whither his Discourse would tend,
he made this Oration to them.

My good People, Take notice that I am none of those Impostors who run up and
down the Country, and sell you Oils and Balsoms that will take away all Evils,
and nevertheless help not one. I will furnish you with diverse. I am more full
of knowledge than the illustrious Tabarin, whom who is there almost who has
not seen in these flourishing Cities of France? I call my self a Physician, and
am rather a Professor, than a maker of Medicines; According to the Diseases
which I find, I do either prescribe Physic, or I do make it my self. Moreover,
(my dear friends) There is another kind of Merchandise which I do bear in my
brain, I have so much Understanding and Spirit, that I can sell some of it to
others. I distribute to all men apprehension, subtilty, and wisdom. Mark me
well, he that looks upon me, let him know, that I am descended of a Race, where
all the male Children are constantly Prophets; So were my Father, and my
Grandfather: but alas they understood nothing at all in comparison of me, I
have my own knowledge by Nature, besides that which they have taught me. If I
would my self, I should always be at the elbows of Kings, but I prefer
liberty above riches; It is more meritorious for me, and I serve God better by
going from Town to Town charitably to assist all manner of Persons, than to
continue still in one Court or City. I will not trouble my self to relate some
odd Story to you, according to the ancient Custom, to stir up your Attention
by Laughter, It becomes not a man of my Learning to be so great a Buffian. Let
those who have need of my Counsel in their affairs repair unto me one by one,
to my own Lodging. I can inform young Lovers if their Mistresses be Maids, or
not, I can inform Husbands if their Wives have made them Cuckolds, or not. For
the ordinary Diseases of your Bodies, I will discourse further of them too
morrow, when I shall come upon this place again.

As he spoke those words, the Peasants did so throng about him, that a Levret
could not pass between their legs. They leer'd upon him with glances of
highest approbation, and made gestures of admiration, listening most attentively
to what he said; and because they did believe him, they did not dare to enquire
any thing of him. Every one imagined that if he should make it appear before
others that he suspected his Wife had made him a Cuckold, they would
undoubtedly believe that he was one, and would ever afterward laugh at him.
Those who desired to be satisfied in that particular, did determine with
themselves to ask him in private some other time concerning it, and the Lovers
were of the same advise to understand the chastity of their Mistresses: But to
make trial of the knowledge of the Mountebank in other particulars, diverse
questions were openly propounded to him. Master (said a Waggoner) Tell me some
Invention, by the practice of which I never may want money. Travel perpetually,
(replied Francion) for those who will pay thee well. Lend nothing to those who
have not a desire to restore it, and every day in a hole which thou shall make
in the ground, bury one Sous, and thou shall find there at the end of the year
Three hundred sixty and five; But the Waggoner (who had an acute desire to show
himself to be as witty and frolic as the Mountebank) said unto him, Master,
Since a few seeds of Corn sown in my ground, do bring me so many ears full
laden, will you advise me to sow as many Crowns? If I should sow them, tell me,
I pray. What would they produce? They would produce Thieves (said Francion) who
would come to digg them up.

There was at the same time a Peasant who said unto him, I have been lately
married to a young Woman who does nothing else but follow me, I would fain know
for what it is? It is because thou go before, said Francion. To all such
foolish demands, he suddenly returned the like answers, which made the Peasants
laugh; for such entertainment was proper for such persons. But Hunger
prevailing on him, he desired the Company to give him leave to go to Dinner,
and advised them to come afterward to the Tavern, where he would endeavor to
satisfy them all concerning that which they desired of him.

The Taverner, who was present, did conduct him to his House, and leaving the
Company of his Wife, did come to take his repast with him. When they were both
together, and no other with them, he said unto him, I have a Wife which is fair
enough, as you your self behold, I have had always in my mind an Imagination
that she has made me a Cuckold, Deliver me, I beseech you, from this
unquietness of Spirit. I will, said Francion, you appear to me to be a brave
man, and it is most fit that you should know how the affair does stand in that
particular; This Evening, going to Bed, tell her you have understood from me,
that before too morrow morning all Cuckolds should be turned into Dogs;
Observe what she does say, and moreover what she does thereupon, and you and I
will advise together of the rest.

The Taverner did content himself with this Counsel, and did speak no more unto
him, when immediately there entered into the room a Company of Peasants, to be
resolved of Francion in some doubfull points concerning their affairs. There
were young Men who came unto him to demand if their Mistresses had their
Maidenheads. He enquired after their Names, and the Names of the Maids, and
having made a little pause thereupon, he told to some that their Mistresses had
lost their Maidenheads, and to others, that they had still preserved the flower
of their Virginity, accordingly as it came to his Fancy. As soon as they were
gone, there entered a good old Farmer, who did take him aside, and said unto
him, Sir, I am very much perplexed, My Daughter has acquainted her Mother that
she is great with child, and she does not know by whom; If we knew who it were,
we would cause him to marry her if he were a rich man; and if he were not, we
would cause him to be punished: My Wife and I were for a certain time abroad in
a Pilgrimage, In the mean time, she did ly alone in our Chamber, and she cannot
tell who it was that came to ravish her Maidenhead from her, He that did force
it from her would not speak a word. Francion made answer, It is very likely it
was one of your Servants; I do conceive so too, said the Peasant, but there are
six of them, two Ploughmen, two Tilemakers, a Shepherd, and a Swineherd, to
whom of these shall I address my self? tell me Sir, I beseech you, what I
shall do in this Case. Francion replied unto him, Do you and your Wife lie this
Night out of your Lodging, and let your Daughter sleep in the same Bed in which
she lost her Maidenhead, and let the door be no more locked than it was at that
time. He who already has been familiar with her, will come again to visit her
without doubt; and if he will not yet speak, she shall mark him on the forhead
with a certain mixture which I shall give her: the mark will not so suddenly go
out, but the next morning you may discover it very plainly, and by this means
you may discover who it was.

After that Francion had spoke those words, he entreated the Peasant to leave
him for a little time, that he might prepare his drug. He took Lamb-black,
which he mingled with Oil, and afterward brought to him, saying, that his
Daughter with that ought to mark the forhead of the man who came to lie with
her. The Peasant returned home, and communicated the affair to his Wife, who
did agree to all that which he desired. After that, he departed with his Wife
from his own house, and repaired to a Friends house in the Neighboring
Village, where he resolved to sup, and to lodge there that night. Night being
come, his Daughter did go to Bed in her own Chamber, and did not make fast the
door with the bolt. Her Fathers six servants were in the Chamber directly over
against it. They were all asleep but the Shepherd, the Chamber directly over
against it. They were all asleep but the Shepherd, who was he that had before
been too familiar with her; He was inamoured on her, and seeing an occasion as
inviting and propitious as ever to lie with her, he determined with himself to
go unto her, and rising from his own bed, he softly opened the door, and came
to the Bed of his Mistress.

The expectation and design which she had, did hinder her from sleep, so that
hearing him to approach, she prepared her self to perform that which she was
commanded; As he endeavored to kiss her and embrace her, she did thrust him
back with one hand, and with one of the fingers of her other hand, which she
had dipped in the oil, she touched his Forehead, and afterward was not so
careful to defend her self, thinking that she had done enough. In the first
respite after their embraces, having her judgment more free than in the time
of pleasure, she desired him to confess unto her who he was, and assured him
that he could get nothing by concealing himself, for the Mountebanck who is now
in the Town, and knows every thing that is done, would on the next morning
discover him unto her. She said unto him, wherefore do you not speak unto me?
How would you have me to love you, when I cannot know who you are? He then
confessed to her that he was the Shepherd, and did represent unto her how
entirely he did love her. O Lord, said she, I would you had spoken to me a
little sooner, I would not have marked you as I now have done, you have a mark
on your Forehead which will not suddenly be wiped away, and too morrow my
Father will know by it, that you have lain with me, you know that he does not
love you, and will never give way that we shall be married together, he will
cause you to be punished by Justice for which I shall be extremely sorry, for I
always loved you above any other, although I never did express as much unto
you. I thank you for your good will, said the Shepherd, and I must beseech you
to continue it; But give me that drug I pray, with which you have rubbed my
Forehead, and I will so order it, that your Father shall not know who it was
that lay with you. The Girl thereupon did put into his hand a little pot, where
the Black wa^, and he anointed one of his Fingers with it, and going into the
Chamber of his Companions, who were all asleep, he marked the Forehead of every
one of them. Having done that, he came again to bed to his Mistress, with whom
he passed away that Night.

The day no sooner appeared, but the Master of the lodging arrived, who
desiring to know if he could discover him who had lain with his Daughter, be
caused all his Servants to come before him, and having looked upon them all, he
was amazed to see all their Foreheads marked with black, whereupon in a great
choler he did go unto his Daughter, and said unto her, If all those who have
their Foreheads colored with Black have lain with thee this Night, there was
never the Daughter of a Husbandman that has been more soundly occupied than
thy self. She did protest unto him, that there came but one unto her, against
whom she could have well defended her self, but then she could never have
discovered him, and she knew not how the rest came to be so marked. All the
remedy which the honest Peasant had, was to have recourse again unto the
Mountebanck, and to acquaint him with that which had arrived, and to know of
him in this Case what Expedient he had to use. Francion having a little while
consulted on it, did say unto him, Return home with all the speed you can, and
cause all your Servants again to come before him, and observe if without doubt
who has lain with your Daughter. He made all the have he could to his own
house, and having looked on all their-hands, he found that there was not any
one of them that had a black finger but the Shepherd only. Ha, said he, It is
thou then who have dishonored my house, I will cause thee to be apprehended,
and, being condemned by justice, to be hanged. What a most impudent knave art
thou, when she was asleep, to violate the Daughter of thy Master. Speaking
those words, he did take the Shepherd by the Collar, and commanded that the
rest of his Servants should lay hold on him to carry him to prison, but the
Shepherd said unto him, Ah good Master, It is true that I have lain with your
Daughter, I cannot deny it, It is as true also that the first time that I did
come unto her, she was asleep, but immediately afterward she did awake, and
permitted me quietly to accomplish what I was about to do, so that you cannot
affirm that I did force her, for those of her age, and of such a patience too,
cannot properly be said to be ravished.

As he did speak this, The Mother, the Uncle, and the Aunt of the Daughter
arrived, who being advertised of the fact, did persuade the furious Father to
be pacified, representing to him that Marriages were made in heaven before they
were celebrated upon Earth, and that without doubt Heaven had ordained that
this Shepherd should marry his Daughter; they declared that be was a thriving
young Man, and that of necessity he must marry them together to redress the
fault, if it were any fault at all. The business was so well disputed, that on
the very same day the accord was made, to the great contentment of both
parties, and the Father declaring the admirable inventions which the
Mountebanck had taught him, to discover him who had defloured his Daughter, did
determine with himself to give him many thanks, and a round reward.

While these things did so happily fall out, the knowledge and the Fortune of
Francion had yet another effect. His Host, who would prove the chastity of his
Wife, did seek after that which he desired not to know, and going to Bed, he
failed not to put his counsel into practice. He said unto his Wife,
Sweetheart, you do not know what strange news I have heard. Why! what is it,
said she, Is it not possible for me to be partaker of it? No, No, replied he,
you are too great a Pratler. Upon my Faith, said she, I will not speak a word,
will you not tell me? will you not? well I see now you do not love me, you know
I can conceal any Secret. Say you so? replied he, and that is very strange.
Well! I will tell you, but be you assured that you speak not of it. The
Mountebanck has assured me, that all the Cuckolds in the Town shall before Day
break be metamorphosed into Dogs. Is that all? said she, why what need you
care, you are not one. The Host muttered to her between his Teeth, I know it
well enough, nevertheless we ought to have a fellow feeling with those who are
our Neighbors. His Wife pursuing the discourse, did say unto him, Howsoever it
be, we ought not to believe such an ungifted Prophet as he is; He never does
foretell Holydays unto us, but when they are already come; do not you sleep the
worse for him; for my self, I cannot yet have the leisure to go to Bed so soon,
I must go down and heat the Oven, your Servant being but newly come knows not
well how to do it. She did speak these words to take an occasion to go out of
doors, and instead of going to heat the Oven, she did go to the Churchyard,
where all her female Neighbors were assembled: It was impossible for her to
hold her Tongue, she therefore discovered to them what her Husband had imparted
to her. They were all amazed at the tidings, and immediately every one of them
made have to declare it to all those Women who were of their acquaintance, so
that in a Moment the whole Town was full of the news.

The Taverners wife going afterward to Bed to her Husband, did with much
impatience attend the break of day, to perceive what would arrive unto him; As
soon as it was light, she did rise, and taking the Coverlet from his Face, she
observed if he had his accustomed shape. When she beheld that he was still a
Man, she let him alone, being unwilling to wake him, and did make her self
ready to go down to follow her Employment. But presently afterward her Husband
awaking, and remembering the counsel which on the night before the Mountebank
had given him, he resolved with himself to make trial of it, and did
counterfeit the voice of a Dog. His Wife, who (to speak the truth) did at that
time most entirely love him, hearing him to bark like a Mastiff, being
affrighted to hear that noise, did fall down at the feet of the Bed, and with
her hands listed up, did begin to cry out, Oh good God! For two poor faults
only must my poor Husband be turned into a Dog? He immediately did arise, and
(although the manner of her Complaint was enough to soften any heart) he did
beat her soundly, saying to her, No, No, It is not I who shall be turned into a
Dog, God does not punish Husbands for the offenses of their Wives, It is you
who shall be transformed into a Bitch, or a She-wolf, or into any other Beast,
if there be any more ravenous and sensual than that. Have you twice indeed made
a forfeit of your Honor? Tell me how, in what place, and with whom? Dear
Husband, said she, If you will promise to pardon me, I will conceal nothing
from you. Yes, replied he, I do pardon thee; but tell me all, and have a care
that you commit not the same fault any more, She said unto him, About eight
days after we were married, you may remember that there was a young Lord who
llved in this Village, who was a brave Companion, and did come to court me; he
declared to me that Women of the City were not so stupid as those in the
Country, and that they refuse nothing which was demanded of them, and that I
being young and handsome ought to do the same, to gain favor and estimation
amongst Gentlemen of fashion. He thereupon did come to kiss me, and did
proceed further, without any resistance; for I had a desire to represent unto
him, that I had profited by his Instructions, and I believed it was a
discourteous part to deny him any thing. So with him I passed the first pass;
but not long afterward the Groom of his Chamber having incountred me in a Dark
Entry, when he would have made much of me, I showed not my self so easy to
him. He thought that it was opportunity which made a Thief, and that being both
where none could see us, I would permit my self to be abused by him; but I knew
well enough how to say unto him, Go, get you gone, you are not your Master, Do
you think that any one will give that liberty unto you, as unto him? Since I
have understood sufficiently, that I should give no admission at all, either
unto Master, or to Man, and my Innocence was the Companion of my Youth.
Nevertheless there being Soldiers here one day who ransacked the house when
you were in the City, there was one of them who said unto me, Of two things I
must needs have one, I must either take away all your Hens, or lie with you. I
had rather that he should lie with me, because I would not incurr your
displeasure; for if he had taken away the Poultry, you would have perceived it,
but you could never perceive if he did lie with me or not: for in that Theft
nothing is taken away, nor is there any thing put out of its place. You see
here (my Husband) how I have failed twice, but in my own judgment, it is not
worthy of your punishment. It is a common saying, that the first fault
deserves admonition, and the second ought to be pardoned; and that the third
only, and those which follow afterward, are to pay for all. You do well to
pardon, because I have not offended thrice. In good time (said her Husband) but
Mistress, I would have you know, that twice is enough to make a Man a Cuckold;
he indeed who has on his forehead but one point of the Horn, cannot properly
be said to be Cornuted; for he must have there both ends thereof who is a
Cuckold of the right stamp. But Husband (said the Wife) you must understand,
that he is no Cuckold, who does not think himself to be one; and since I was so
simple when I offended against the Laws of Marriage, that I did not conceive to
make you a Cuckold, you are not one in effect. There is another thing of which
I have heard wise men to speak, When a Woman has a desire to make her Husband
a Cuckold, although it should never come to effect, yet is he still to be
ranked amongst the number of Cuckolds; but on the contrary, if she should lose
that desire, and love none but only her Husband, he is no longer to be reputed
to be one; Otherwise, Why should that blemish still continue, when the
Occasions, and all Inducements thereunto, are happily vanished? Shall an old
Man be still a Cuckold when his Wife is full of age, and witherd as himself?
Her Husband did approve her reasons, and for the time to come did resolve with
himself to live in peace and love with so wise a Woman.

The other Women, who by the common report had been advertised that all
Cuckolds should be metamorphosed into Dogs, did much perplex themselves about
it, especially those who had too carelessly forfeited their honor. They could
not sleep all that night, and ceased not to feel if the hair were come all over
their Husbands, (...) if their ears were not longer, and more pendent than
before; There were some who were not so secret, but acquainted their Husbands
with what they heard; who observing that they feared they should be
metamorphosed, did from thence conjecture, that their Wives were not so chaste
as they ought to have been, and did beat them so soundly, that they had not
afterward a desire to be circumvented by the fair Language of their Wanton
Lovers; Nevertheless, they knew not what well to believe concerning the prophecy
of the Mountebank; for they all took him to be a Man of great knowledge and
experience, and it being Holyday, every one with impatience attended the hour
to see him come upon the place. Fran^ to content himself, had employed all that
night in making Unguents with Butter and Beeswax, and Oil, and the juice of
some herbs, with other Ingredients, and resolved with himself to distribute
them, and to take good money for them, of which at that time he was in great
Necessity. He had learned how to compose Druggs by the books which he had read
only for curiosity; and to speak the truth, his Medicaments did conduce rather
unto Good than to Evil; for he would not perscribe any thing, but with
deliberation and judgment. It was quite cross to his desires, that this
frolic adventure of his should procure damage unto any one, but he endeavored
rather to render himself profitable to all, as in effect whatsoever we have
seen him do in this Village, did afford more pleasure than prejudice.

The Hour being come in which he was to appear in public, he caused all his
Merchandise to be carried in a great box on the place by a little boy. He would
have been glad to have been acco^modated with a Gittern to delight his
spectators, and to counterfeit a Mountebank in the best manner that he could;
but there being not a Gittern in the Town, he entertained them with a Discourse
which pleased them better than Music. He made no mention at all of the
Cuckolds that should have been transformed into Dogs; for the Women who were
jealous of the event, and ^ound the error of it, did now laugh that report into
scorn. The Oration which he made to commend the excellence of his Druggs was
hardly begun, but behold there came into that place a Man on Horseback, who
having listened to him a little time, and well observed him, did alight, and
cleaving through the Press he did approach unto him, and kissing his Thigh, he
said unto him, Ah my good Master! In what an equipage are you here? How glad am
I that I have found you again? Francion knew well enough, when ever he
discerned him, that it was the Groom of his Chamber, but he was not yet pleased
to speak unto him; and having saluted him with a little Ceremony, he only said
unto him* Withdraw your self, We by and by will discourse together. Give me
leave a little to content these honest people. Immediately he did fall again on
the Commendation of his Druggs, and to distribute them to those who did desire
them. Some of them he sold for one Sous, and some for two. He took as much as
was needful for every Drugg, which with a knife he did put upon a Paper; and
to make it apparent to them that his Druggs were good, he took some part
thereof upon the point of a knife, and giving it to his Boy, he would say unto
him, Go too, Sirrah, you are a good Boy, you shall have this licourish bit, and
this, and this, and this; Nay, and this also. That which is most excellent is
in the bottom of all the Budge^, the best is always there, when you are a
married Man, ask your Wife if it be not so. He had many other terms which the
Mountebanks do use to allure and circumvent their Merchants, and the
complacence of his gesture did add much grace to his Discourse insomuch that
Petronius, who was the Groom of his Chamber, was never more astonished; and
having considered with himself the Repulse he gave him, could not well be
persuaded that it was his Masters voice: But at last, all the Confections being
sold, he abandoned the Company, and entertained Petronius with the testimonies
of an Incomparable Joy. The Assembly of the Peasants being dispersed, they
repaired to their Inn to repose themselves. Francion demanded of Petronius in
the first place, where were all his Servants? He made answer, that after the
loss of their Master, they were all departed to seek their fortunes, believing
that he had been dead, and as for himself he ceased not to seek after him, as
well in France, as in Italy, and if he had not now met with him, he would have
gone again to Rome to see if he could there find him out.

Francion did briefly declare unto him all his adventures, which did
wonderfully astonish him, and assuring him that he languished with a desire to
be at Rome to see again his Nays, he resolved presently to take horse for
Lions, to supply himself with moneys to satisfy the expenses of his Journey.
Petronius said unto him, That having lost him, and not knowing what to do with
his Horses and his Baggage, he had sold all, excepting one Horse, and that he
had still about him the greatest part of the money. Francion was very glad to
hear that, and having received the moneys of him, he bought a little Nagg for
Petronius in the same Village, and mounted himself on the other, and
immediately departed, leaving all the Townsmen very highly satisfied. It was
late before they could arrive at Lions, so that Francion was not seen with that
goodly habit on his back.

The next morning very early he did send for a Tailor, who did apparel him
Cap-a-pea, he addressed himself also to a Money-merchant of his Acquaintance,
who promised to lend him as much money as he desired, knowing well enough, that
he should lose nothing by him. He demanded of him Letters of Change to receive
money at Rome, and gave him others to send unto his Mother for the
re-disbursement of the money which he was to borrow. Having thus put his
affairs in order, he traveled the direct way toward Italy, being attended by
Petronius only, to whom he promised great Rewards for his Fidelity. He made
such a Dispatch, that he minded not to take notice of what rare things were to
be seen in the Towns which he passed thorough. He desired to see nothing but
Nays, whose sight he preferred above all that which is esteemed most precious
in this world.

There fell not throughout the whole Course of his travels, any thing worthy to
be recorded; For he had not the leisure to regard the Towns as he traveled,
nor to sport himself with those Men whom he did meet with in the way. It may be
sufficient to understand, that after the Journeys of many days he arrived at
Rome, and took up his Lodgings in that place where the French have ordinarily
their Residence; and six days were not fully passed, before he was advertised
of the arrival of Raymond and Dorini. He immediately repaired to salute them,
and it may be well affirmed, that never in any Interview of Friends there was
manifested so much true Joy, as at the meeting of these; When Francion declared
to them his adventures of a Shepherd, and of being a Mountebank, he did ravish
them all with admiration. O Lord! (said Dorini) How sorry am I that we came no
sooner into Italy? We might possibly have received the news of your disaster,
and we would not have left you in such a bad condition. You deceive your self,
said Francion. I should be sorry replied Raymond, to have taken Francion from
that estate of life wherein he was; He would not then have performed such
gallant things; They are so rare, that I assure my self he would always most
freely renounce the greatest dignities to atchieve the like; you would have
done him (...) injury as but in the imagination to have thought to have
relieved him. You have reason so to say, said Francion, and truly I would not
have lived otherwise than I have done, Nevertheless, I will assure you, that
even this course of life is at the best but a meerfolly and trifling vexation.
It is true, said Raymond, but these follies are oftentimes of more worth than
the most serious employments of those who govern Nations. If they should fall
into the same disasters as you have done, they would have enough to do to
endure them with the same constancy of Spirit, to rejoice and make sport at the
calamities which Fortune had prepared for you.

Let us abandon this discourse, said Francion, It is not to me to whom such
praise does belong. We are now in a Country where there is nothing of true
merit but Nays only; Tell me Dorini, Have you received no intelligence of her?
She is undouhtedly in this City, said Dorini, I will by and by address my self
unto her, for the love which I bear to you. Dorini's deed did jump, and
overtake his words, and immediately he departed to give a visitation to his
Kinswoman, who had a house in Rome in which she was more often than in her
Manors in the Country. After their first Complements, he did speak unto her of
Floriander, and demanded of her, if she had not received the news of his death?
She made answer, Yes, and he pursuing, his discourse did ask her, If she had
not seen him whom he sent unto her in exchange of him, who was a Gentleman of
no less desert? She made answer, that she understood very well of whom he did
intend to speak, but he was, she said, a most inconstant, and an ungrateful
man, seeing, having received from her the most courteous entertainment in the
world, he did forsake her without so much as bidding her Farewell, and had
since sent her a harsh and an uncivil Letter. Dorini desired to see the Letter,
and having perused it, he assured her that it never came from Francion, for
besides he was too civil to have written such rude lines, it was not his hand;
I have Verses, said he, in my Pocket which are of his writing, you shall be
witness your self if the hand be like unto it. But all this is nothing, from
whence was it that he wrote this Letter to you? It is only an invention of his
Rivals, who are jealous and revengefull; you do believe that he has forsaken
you, when those two wicked men did keep him prisoner. He has been reduced for
your sake to extreme misery, and has been thrown down into the most sordid
condition in the world, you shall hear the relation of it from his own mouth.
He is now in this City with a resolution to wait upon you, if you will give him
permission. Nays giving belief to the words of Dorini, and detesting in her
heart the malice of Ergastus and Valerius, did throw the Letter into the fire
which they had sent unto her in the name of Francion. She declared to Dorini
that she should be very glad to see him. Dorini returned with this well-come
news, which did render unto Francion an entire contentment: They made have to
dinner* to give a visit to her in the afternoon, and did afterward with
Raymond go altogether to wait upon her. Raymond, who before had never seen
her, did much admire her, and found her to be far more beautiful than in her
picture she was represented to be, and the others who had seen her before, did
acknowledge that her perfections increased with her years. Dorini said unto
her, Madam, behold here the bravest Cavalliers of France, who have forsaken
their own Countries to pay homage to your beauties. Thereupon Raymond and
Francion did begin their Complements, which the fair Marchioness did answer
according to the terms of her ordinary courtesy. Francion had a great desire
to take her aside, to declare unto her the miseries which love had made him
suffer for her* in his absence, but he thought it unmannerly to deprive his
friends of the sight of that beautiful Lady. Dorini immediately did recite unto
her the Adventures which he passed in his Imprisonment, and after wards (...)
seeing himself obliged to second the narration, his Mistress being p^sen (...)
who (...) the principal occasion thereof, did repeat them himself, he did (...)
deser^ (...) the ^ser^ of his Prison, and the poverty in which he wa^ (...) but
he had a care not to speak at all of his several loves at that time (...) it
should bed^easing unto Nays. He disguised some things as much as possibly he
could, and added to the confirmation of others, which made the whole story the
more agreeable; But above all he triumphed when he was to speak how he did
personate the Mountebanck, for he represented that person in the same words,
and the same gestures, as he did act it on the Stage himself, which was so
pleasing unto Nays, that she professed she never did hear any thing that
conveyed a more absolute content unto her, so that in some sort she could not
be angry at the treachery of Ergastus and Valerius, which was the cause of so
many successful adventures. It is in this sense that the Philosopher do give
thanks to ^ortune for the miseries she has sent unto them, because she gives
them thereby an occasion to illustrate their merit, and make Poverty the
Instrument of their Virtues.

Dorini was advertised that Francion would be revenged of the two Rivalls, but
he assured ^im^ were better not to waken an Injury, which had already slept so
long, and that Brgastus being returned to Venice, and Valerius to his Country
house, because they were weary in the pursuit of a beauty which they could not
obtain, it was better to leave them with that remorse of Conscience, which the
guilty do endure. He could not make them submit unto him without engaging all
the world concerning that which was passed, and Francion desired not to have it
known that he was in prison, or that he was afterward constrained to live like
a Peasant.

Although these things were taken for gallantries, and agreeable adventures,
yet he forgot not most passionately to declare himself, and to insist most of
all on the unquietness of his Soul being separated from Nays, but his
protestation was so well understood, that at this time it passed only for an
indifferency. After diverse intertainments these brave Cavalliers did take
their leave of her, and returned to take their rests in the house where they
were lodged.

On the next morning, as they were at Breakfast, it was told them, that two
French Gentlemen were at the Gate, who desired to speak with Francion; He did
give order to let them in, and was amazed to see young Buisson, and one named
Audebert, who was of his own Country; he did courteously salute them, and
having told Buisson that he was a Man of his promise, he would know of Audebert
how they met together; Audebert made answer to him, that being both at Lions,
they did there meet, and ever since did not part from one another, and that it
was above a Month since they came to Rome. But there is one thing more, said
Buisson, It seems to me that Heaven ordained to cause all you best friends to
come hither to be the witnesses of all your gallant achievements. Audebert
has not yet told you, that I have brought along with me a brave man, who
boasts to have been sometimes your Schoolmaster, He is one of the Oracles of
these times, and does at every word vomit his Greek and Latin: Who is that?
said Francion; who? said Audebert, Have you not heard of the incomparable
Hortensius? Hortensius! said Francion, and cried out, O God, how well might I
say as Philip of Macedon, when in one instant he received the news of two
Victories, O Fortune, send me but a little sorrow to qualify the excess of so
much happiness. Was it not enough that I must understand of the coming of
Audebert whom I have known from my Youth, and of Buisson whose humor does
infinitely please me, but I must be informed that Hortensius is also here? That
Hortensius I do mean, who is King of all the brave Spirits in the University of
Paris. O most happy Adventure! But my dear Friends, tell me, How comes it about
that he is now in Rome? He was not well pleased to continue any longer in
Paris, said Audebert. He believed that his elaborate Vigillations were not well
recompensed; so that hearing I was determined to go into Italy, he was
resolved to accompany me. But why (said Francion) came not he along with you to
see me? Does he think to do here, as when he was in France? At Paris he would
always obscure himself from me; and if by chance he did meet me in the Streets,
he would give me but a slight salutation, without speaking to me at all. He
must not do so here. It is the Custom of the French to visit one another. It is
requisite that we should wait upon him. He has always (said Audebert) been
something afraid of you, and I believe it is, because he conceives that you
are of a lively, and a frolic humor, and do make sport with him; but I have so
prevailed upon him, that he has almost lost that conceit and the reason why he
came not along with us at this present, is, because you know he is very
ceremonious, and withal, he is but poorly apparelled; and besides all this, he
must study some new Complements to salute you, for, having not seen you a long
time, this first Interview must needs be remarkable. You do him wrong (replied
Francion) he has a Spirit prompt enough to speak to me without any
preparation. But tell me, By what means gained you the acquaintance of so
illustrious a personage? That indeed deserves to be accounted to you, (said
Audebert) and if you have the leisure to hear it, I will declare it to you.
Francion having then assured him that he was ready to lend an ear to whatsoever
he should say, (knowing that he would speak nothing that would appear either
tedious or disagreeable) he caused him to sit down, and all those who were
present did the like.

As I was at Paris (said Audebert) to pass away my time in all sorts of
company, I did see almost every day two Poets of the Court, one of them was
called Salust, and the other Escluses, they were both of them good Companions.
Salust one day had a desire to translate into French the fourth Eclogue of
Virgil; but because he did not perfectly understand the Latin tongue, and could
not perform the work, but only by conferring it with some old Translations, he
determined with himself to communicate it to some learned Man. A Printer, one
of his friends, did make mention to him of Hortensius, and told him moreover,
that he was very skillfull in the Greek and Latin Tongues, and that oftentimes
he did write very well in French, and had many Translations extant, and did
himself compose very good Verses. Salust had a desire to see him, although he
had no acquaintance with him, and declared to Escluses with what Complements he
would accost him. Escluses did so much esteem whatsoever Salust wrote, that he
did keep the Copies of all his works. He had the Eclogue already written, and
he came to me, and desired me also to transcribe it, assuring me, that it would
be a happy Prologue for a gallant Scene of Mirth to come. He informed me, that
Salust was resolved to communicate that piece unto Hortensius, and that
beforehand we two should go both of us in his place, one after the other, and
affirm that our Names were both called Salust. It was easy enough to
counterfeit his person; for as Nature does seldom make men perfect, but gives
one imperfection or other to their bodies, who have an acomplished Spirit; so
she had made him to stammer, and he did write a great deal better than he did
speak: So Homer was blind, and R^nsard deaf, and the defects of these great
Personages were repaired by the excellence of their Understandings. Escluses
having notice on what Day Salust intended to give a Visit to Hortensius, did
address himself unto him a little before, and in a better hour; and having
found this Man of knowledge in his Chamber, he made an humble reverence unto
him. Sir, (said he) I am come hither to have the happiness to make a tender to
you of my service. I would no longer be deprived of the conversation of so
excellent a Spirit, by which I may benefit my self, and having taken some pains
of late in the composure of some verses, I should be very glad to have your
approbation. I am called Salust, I shall be always ready to serve you, I know
not if ever you have heard of me, or not. Hortensius who had seen many Poems
printed in that name, but had never known the Author by his face, and knew
nothing else of him but only that he stammerd, did verily persuade himself that
it was he, and with much courtesy caused him to sit down, giving him many
thanks for the honor he had done him. The pretended Salust did then take the
Eclogue out of his Pocket, and did read it to him. Hortensius did attempt to
find one fault or other almost with every verse, that so he might make known
unto him the acuteness of his apprehension and judgment, nevertheless he
affirmed at the last, that the beginnings of the verses were very good, and the
fancy of the Author was suitable to the present time. Escluses thanked him for
his patience to hear him, and having taken his leave of him, he came to find
out me, to acquaint me that it was time for me to go to act the same person,
and that we should receive a great deal of contentment by it. He taught me the
same Oration which he had spoken to Hortensius, and I making my address unto
him, did counterfeit to stammer so extremely, that I was almost half a quarter
of an hour in bringing forth every Syllable, and I also told him that I was
called Salust. He heard all this with a frowning silence, and said but little,
seeing that in so great a City as Paris, it was possible enough that there
might be two Poets of the same name, and that one of them might stammer as well
as the other; but when I began to read the Eclogue to him, which was the very
same that he heard before, he could not contain himself, but said unto me, Sir,
There departed hence a Gentleman but even now, who calls himself Salust as well
as your self, he showed me also the very same Poem, who was it of you two that
made it? Is it possible that you should both have the same Genius, as well as
the same name, and that you should both write on the same subject, and which is
more, have the self same words? Upon my faith a Man may give but a bad
interpretation of it; I know not who is he that is deceived in this particular,
but will you be pleased to take the pains to go some where else, to look out
one to pass his censure on your verses, I have been tormented with them too
much already. Go ask the other Salust what I already have said unto him.

Speaking those words, I perceived that he was in a great choler, so that
without any great Ceremony I did take my leave of him. Not long afterward the
true Salust arrived, and made him a Complement like unto ours, at the least in
the substance of it, for in the grace of speaking he did far excel us, and did
stammer a great deal handsomer. He did imitate himself better than we could
imitate him. Nevertheless, when be began to tell Hortensius that his name was
Salust, and that he would show him an Eclogue, he did thrust him out of the
Chamber with all the force he had, and if he had not shifted from him, he had
thrown him headlong down the stairs. How now (said he) Why this last is a
veryer knave than the other two, and speaks a great deal worse, Will they not
leave coming to me till it be night? Ah these are close lurching Companions.
These are the Nimmers who would rob me of all my movables. Who ever hereafter
shall come to see me, I will not open the door till he has told me his name,
and if he stammers, or calls himself Salust, he shall not enter within my
doors. Hortensius having spoke this, had a strong desire to have set the
Sergeant upon Salust, to have him apprehended as a Thief, but he could find no
body in his house to employ on that errand.

In the mean time Salust made all the have away that possibly he could, and we
repaired directly to his house, to know of him, if he had seen Hortensius? He
told us that he was with him, but the Fool was so furious, that he had not the
patience to hear what he would say unto him, and that he would have beaten him
without any ground at all, so that he though himself happy to have escaped his
hands. Escluses could not contain himself from discovering the trick which we
had put upon him, which gave him so much content, that he said, It was very
expedient that all the three Salusts should go all together to see Monsieur
Hortensius. That advice did please us well, we returned to his Lodging. but he
being not within, we did all go to the Printers house, where we did find him
correcting Proofs. We desired him that he would not be angry at our
proceedings, for we were brethren, and that we all three made Verses, but to
speak the truth, it was the eldest only who made the Eclogue. He made answer, I
have since thought upon it, and am not now in so much choler; It seems to me
that all you three might well make that Eclogue, and that the eldest did make
the beginning, the second the middle, and the younger Brother the end of it. So
it was, said I, but we durst not acquaint you with it. He at that time did
believe us, but afterward our deceit was discovered to him; whereupon he did
bear us no more good will, but would rail at us in whatsoever place he did see
us. We resolved to take of him a pleasant vengeance, and having observed, that,
because he would be taken for a Gentleman, he was always booted and spurred,
as was heretofore Amadis de Gaul, without ever being on horseback, we desired
to make sport with him concerning that particular. His Boots were so old, that
they seemed to be those which Archbishop Turpin did wear, when he marched with
good King Charlem^in against the Saracens; full often had they been mended, and
soled, and soled, and mended again; I believe that all the Cobblers in Paris
were well acquainted with them, and that there was not one amongst them all who
had not at least set a piece or two on them. The legs of the Boots had been
mended and pieced in so many places, that with truth enough it may be affirmed,
they were not the same which they had been at first, they looked like the Boat
of Theseus, which was kept for a Monument in the Haven of Athens. Whenever
that any new hole appeared, Hortensius would thrust into it a little piece of
colored Taffaty, which it seems he would do on purpose, to make it show more
gallant.

One day, as thus booted he walked along the Streets, we were drinking with
some Sergeants of our acquaintance, who being half drunk, did by our
persuasions take him by the Collar in a little lane that did lead unto the
Counter; They told him that he must go to Prison for the great Trespass he
committed, having hurt a child of one of the Burgesses of the City. He made
answer, he knew not what they would have; nevertheless they halled him to the
Court Levesque, as the Judge was then upon the Bench. He was brought before
him, and a certain Man whom we had feed for that purpose, did put into the
Court a Declaration against him, alleging, that Hortensius on that morning,
making his Horse to prance and corvet in the streets, had a design to kill a
young child of his, and had thrown him on the ground, and much bruised his
head. He desired that provision might be made for the cure, and satisfaction
given for all expenses and damages, and that he might be bound to the good
behavior for the time to come.

The Judge demanded of Hortensius if this were true? He slatly did deny it, but
durst not at the first plead that he was never on horseback because he was
always booted; but at the last he was constrained thus to declare for himself,
Alas Sir, How is it possible that I being on horseback should hurt any child,
since I will prove unto you, that I was never on horseback all my life? and
when I did travel to my own Country, I went always in a Coach; I was once
being a little Boy mounted on an Ass, Sir, He was so saucy that he did throw
me on the ground, and displaced a bone in my shoulder, since which time, I
would never have any thing to do with Beasts. The Judge told him, that he must
produce Witnesses that he was never on horseback. He demanded a certain respite
of time, which was granted him; at the last his own Oath was taken, and he was
released from the Sergeants, paying no charges at all, but only some small
thing which he gave them to drink.

Being enlarged, he was almost angry with himself that he was not esteemed to
be so generous, ^s to be guilty of the fact for which he was accused, that he
might make the world believe that he was not so despicable a person, but that
sometimes he had been on horseback. We did imagine what he thought, and
afterward we began to make sport with him on the brave adventure which arrived
to him. He, seeing himself so laughed at, had so much judgment as to know,
that the only means to avoid it, was not to seem incensed, but to laugh with
us; So that finding us one day in a Booksellers shop, as we were entering upon
a discourse concerning Boots, he told us, That he would make us a Speech in the
praise of them: and to show himself pleasant in earnest, he did thus begin, O
how much are those Authors to be accused of Negligence, who having searched
into the Invention of things, have not left in writing who was he who first
found out the use of the Boots? What a heavy and a stupid Spirit did possess
our Predecessors, as not to accommodate themselves with so warm an
accoutrement, but only when they were to ride abroad, contenting themselves to
walk in the Streets with Stockings and Shoes! We, who are more advised, do use
them daily, not only when we ride, but on foot also; for there is nothing more
profitable, especially to save Silk stockings, against whom the Dust and the
Dirt in the Streets do make continual war, and above all places in this City
of Paris, which from Lutum, that is, Dirt, is called Lutetia. Is there not a
Proverb which affirms, that the Pox of Roan, and the Dirt of Paris, are near
of kin to one another? Is it not a great advantage of Honor when you walk
abroad, to appear (by being booted only) to be a Cavallier, although you have
no Horse at all, because those, whosoever they are that see you, will suddenly
be apt to imagine, that a Lackey not far off is waiting with your Horse for
you? Those of Foreign Nations who live amongst us, are amazed how so much Hay
and Oats should increase in France, to nourish the Horses of so many Men who do
wear Boots in Paris only; but we cannot but laugh, and laugh again at their
Ignorance, for we may demonstrate to them, that the Horses of those Gentlemen
whom they see to wear Boots, do not cost much money to keep them. All the brave
Men who are at this day booted, do declare unto us, that a Boot is an essential
part of a Gentleman; and in this we follow the Noble Romans, who did wear a
Buskin, called in their Language Cothurnus, and left to the inferior rabble
the little property called Soccus, which came no higher than the ankle, in the
same manner as we leave shoes to Men only of base Condition. But the Romans
indeed had no true Boots, but something like to Boots; for had they Boots, and
known their convenience, and their profit, they had erected a Temple to the
honor of them, as well as to all other things which they esteemed, and on the
Altar they would have placed a God desse booted and spurred, who for her
Priests and Sacrificers should have had Curriers and Shoo-makers, and her
Victims should have been Cows and Bullocks, whose skins had been flead off to
make Boots withal. But what need we prepare a Temple for them, since every one
does carry them about him in his heart, and on his feet; and there are some who
have gone above three years together in one pair of Boots only, to the end only
that they might appear the most brave, and the most fashionable Men in this
City? The Knights of the Round Table were always so armed, that it seemed
their arms were not buckled, but did grow upon their bodies. The Centaures were
always on horseback, and did sit so fast in the Saddle, that it seemed the
Horse and they were but one piece; and for that Cause the Poets feigned they
were half Men and half Horses: so, not to forget the Boots, It seems to me that
it ought to be one of our Members, and when any one is killed in war, we should
only say that he has left off his Boots, as if they were the only residence of
his Soul, and the essential part of a Cavallier, which did choose rather to
inhabit there than in the Body; And to speak the truth, it is from thence we
should take the courage to manage the Horse on all occasions, to which practice
of Horsemanship we do often owe the safety of our lives.

It will be here objected, that a Baron having found a Shepherdess in the
Fields, was so inamoured of her, that he did give his Horse to his Lackey, and
did take her into a private place along with him to gather a Rose, but the Girl
desiring him that he would permit her first to pluck off his Boots, for fear
that he might spoil her Coats and Stockings with the dirt of them, did only
pull his Boots but half off, and fled away, leaving him so entangled, that on
the first step he made to follow her, he fell down amongst the thorns, which
lamentably and revengfully did scratch and tear his face. Behold here a sad
accident* but it is to be imputed only to his own folly, who suffered himself
to be so much abused. Boots are not to be thought the worse of for that
misfortune; It is with those the Curate does gallop to a benefice, with those
the Merchant does adventure to his Traffic, with those the Lovers do ride to
see their Mistresses. There is a necessity for gallant men to wear them, if
they will appear to be that which they are, and for other men to wear them
also, if they will appear to be that which they are not. If a man be clothed
in black, he is taken for a Citizen, if he be in colors, he is taken for a
Player on the Viol, or peradventure for some Judggler, specially if he wears
silk stockings of a color different from his clothes, but if he has Boots on,
it does enrich and ennoble all manner of habiliments. Let no man blame me
therefore for being Booted, if he will not appear to be of a Spirit
Heteroclital.

This was the substance of the demonstrative Oration which Hortensius made for
Boots, and I would I could remember the Latin passages which he intermingled
with it. We pretended that we did like it excellently well, and the first time
afterward that Escluses saw him, he presented him with these verses on the
same subject.

Boots in such reputation are,
As Hortensius does declare,
And warm, as well as they adorn,
That by our Minions they are worn
OF the Gods, who by that fashion rise
Amongst the Gentry of the Skies.
The Destintes for grief look thin.
Because they want a Ruffia skin;
Their Shoes are old, and out of date,
And time in Pantofles of Matt
Believes he should not move so slow,
If he could once but booted go.
And to pursue this thriving strain,
I have a whimsey in my Brain
Tells me how needful it is and meet
To put in Boots my Verses Feet,
That they may prove as swift as terse,
And gallop through the Universe.
O how these Verses were pleasing to Hortensius, who believed that Escluses did
highly esteem him! he loved him after that better than other men, and my fine
Poet continuing to dissemble, obtained of him whatsoever he desired. They never
stirred from one another, and it seemed to me that they two were but one.
Nevertheless their friendship at last began to diminish. Ecluses having
communicated some verses to Hortensius, the Pedant did not approve them, and
the other maintained they were good. Hortensius told him that he did not
understand any thing at all, and that he ought not to speak any more to him,
for you must understand that he thought himself knowing and able enough to read
a Lesson to us all, and believed that he was our King. Ecluses also who at
other times was pleased to allow him that title, or whatsoever other that he
would arrogate to himself, could not at that time contain himself within the
bounds, of silence or of complacence, but told Hortensius that he was as able
every way as himself, which did put him into such a choler, that with violence
he caused him to go out of his Chamber, and threatened to beat him, if he should
persist any longer against him. Escluses addressed himself to me, to acquaint
me with the quarrel that was betwixt them; I told him, that it was not well
done of him, seeing Hortensius had lent him money, and done him many other
courtesies, and that he must not fall out with him, if he would not have it to
be believed, that one of them was of as bad a humor as the other, and that it
belonged to his discretion to dissemble and pass by offenses. This did prevail
so much upon him, that on the next morning he very early repaired to Hortensius
to make his peace with him. He was then in bed, but his Servitor opened the
door for him, and Escluses being entered into the Chamber did speak thus unto
him, I must sincerely profess (Monsieur Hortensius) that in your works you are
more than a Man, but in your choler you are worse than a Beast.

Hortensius, feeling himself touched, did rise out of the Bed in a red Cap, and
a red Wastcoat, and made answer to him, If I am a Beast, I am that Beast of the
Paradise of Mahomet, who has Eyes of Saphyre, and Feet of Emeraulds, his Body
of burnished Gold, and on his Breast twelve precious stones, that is to say, the
Sardoix, the Yopase, the Emerauld, the Carbunclc, the Diamond, the Agatt, the
Saphyre, the Jasper, the Amethyst, the Chrysolite, the Onix, and the Beriil. If
you have all those precious stones (said Esclnses) I do vow unto you, you are
the bravest, and the richest Beast in the world. I tell you moreover (said
Hortensius) If I am a Beast, I am one of those Beasts of Heaven, who give light
unto the Earth, as the Bear, the Dragon, the Swan, the Pegasus the Crab, the
Scorpion, the Capricorn, the Whale, the Centaure, and the Hydra. He made such a
sound with those words, and smiled as he pronounced them, as if he had spoken
some excellent thing. Escluses made answer, I doubt not of the truth of that
which you speak, but which of those Beasts do you most resemble? Do you crawl
backwards as a Crab, or have you horns in your Forehead as the Capricorn?
Hortensius replied, that he compared himself to the Swan, and Escluses
endeavoring to turn all into an upbraiding mirth, Hortensius did grow again
into a great choler. At the same instant I arrived, and made them both friends;
Nevertheless I could not produce a right understanding betwixt them, and
Hortensius hating Escluses, would hate also all those who did keep him company,
insomuch that I was in the number of his Enemies, which was the occasion that I
contrived a way to make my self merry with him.

One day walking on the New-bridge, I saw a man on Horseback toward the
Augustines, who had on him a furred Coat, a Taffety Cloak, a Sword hanging on
his right side, and a Hatband made of Teeth, which were filled all to one
evennesse; His garb was as antic as his Habit, so that I stood still a while
to look upon him: He stayed at the foot of the Bridge, and although there were
not any one near unto him, he began to speak in this manner, and to ask
questions of his Horse for want of better company, Come hither my Horse, and
tell me, Wherefore is it that we are come into this place? If thou knew how
to speak, thou would make answer, To do service to all honest people. But
some one will say unto me, Gentleman of Italy, in what is it that you can be
serviceable to us? To draw your teeth (Gentlemen) without putting you to any
pain at all, and to put others in their places, with which you may eat as well
as with teeth naturally your own. And with what do thou pluck them out? With
the point of a Sword? No Gentlemen, That way is too old. It it with this which
I hold in my hand And what is it which thou hold in thy hand, Signior of
Italy? My horses bridle, Gentlemen. This Tooth-drawer had no sooner begun this
goodly Oration, but a Porter, a Lacky, a Woman that cried Cherries, three that
cried Mackarel, two Apprentices, a Ragg-man and a seller of Almanacks, did all
stand still to hear him. For my self (pretending as though I looked upon some
of those old Books which the Booksellers do there commonly lay forth upon their
Stalls) I did listen to him as well as the rest. Having so many venerable
Auditors he reinforced his eloquence, and did continue in these words, Who is
he that draws out the teeth of Kings and Princes? Is it the Carmelite? Or the
English man in the yellow Ruff? Is it Master Arnault? who to make the world
believe that he is a Tooth drawer for Potentates, has painted about his own
Picture the Pope and all the Consistory of Cardinals, every one of them with a
black plaster above his temple, representing thereby, that none of them are
exempted from the Tooth ache; No, No, It is not he. Who is it then that draws
out the teeth of those great Princes? It is the Italian Gentleman whom you see.
It is my self (Gentlemen.) It is I. I it is who am the Man. He did speak that
showing himself in a full body to them all, and laying his hand upon his Breast.
Many other fopperies he represented, and asked all the questions of himself,
and undertook to deliver himself in pure Italian, when he was by his birth no
other than a Norman. To hear him speak, it you could but believe him, as well
as hear him, there is not any one who would have a tooth any longer in his
head. He presented a Beggar to them from whom he had taken six teeth, he had
put them in but a little before, and holding something in his mouth which was
moist, and of a red complexion, he seemed always to be spitting of blood.
Gentlemen (said the Mountebank) I cure the Soldiers for courtesy, the Poor
for the honor of God, and the rich Merchants for money. You may see what it is
to have a tooth vitiated, rotten, or corrupted. You will go to a Senator to
recommend your Suit unto him, you begin to open your Cause, he turns aside from
you, and cries out, Oh the putrefaction! Withdraw my Friend, your breath is
very noisome, he will not endure to come near to hear you, and so your Cause is
lost. But you will say unto me, Have you any Remedy for it? Yes, Gentlemen, I
have, and for many other Inconveniences: I have a Pommada to make fair the
skin, It is white as Snow, and odoriferous as Balm or Musk. See here my Boxes,
This great one will cost you eight Souses, the little one with the writing,
five; I have an excellent Ointment for all wounds, If any one be hurt, I can
cure him; I am neither Physician, Doctor, nor Philosopher, but my Ointment is
as sovereign, and can do as much, as all the Philosophers, Doctors, and
Physicians in the world; Experience is better than bare knowledge and the
Practick than the Theory.

Whiles the Mountebank did thus extol his own Art, many honest people gathered
about him, and amongst others, Hortensius, whom I well observed. I immediately
entertained an Invention to make him the Ladder on which my mirth should climb,
I stayed there not long after; for the Toothdrawer was constrained to retire.
There came another Mountebank on horseback who laughed him to scorn, and did
strike at him with the flat of his Sword. Since they were both so cunning, and
so prompt in the drawing of Teeth, I knew not why in a revengefull emulation,
they might not draw one another off their Horses, I hoped they would have done
it, but our Italian fled, and would appear no more, giving place unto the other.

One Morning I repaired to him with Escluses, and said unto him, Sir, there is
a Kinsman of ours who is much troubled with the pain of his Teeth, we have
advised him to have them drawn, but he is so extremely fearful, that we cannot
prevail upon him to resolve upon it; He says, that you will put him to
torment, although that very lately he has seen you to take our many Teeth
without any pain at all, a little beneath the Bridge. Alas, Sir, said the
Mountebanck, I will not put him to any pain, If you please that I shall
presently take out one of your Teeth, you shall perceive how swift and easy is
my hand. No (said I) I will believe you rather, But our Kinsman is afraid that
having no teeth, he cannot chew his meat for the time to come, nor pronounce
his words so pleasingly as now he does. If you provide for that inconvenience
by artificial teeth, you will do him a greater pleasure than he is yet sensible
of, in delivering him from so great a torment; I know the man very well, and he
would with all his heart that it were done, therefore we do desire you to go to
him, and whether he will or no, to take out those teeth that are so painful to
him. You are so excellent at it, that when he but opens his mouth to speak unto
you, you may draw them out, and he never so much as think of what you are
doing. That being done, he will pay you very thankfully, if not, we will see
you satisfied our selves. The Mountebanck believing our words, we acquainted
him with the house in which Hortensius lodged, and the Mountebanck foreseeing
the difficulties that might ensue, did take with him two Volunteers to
accompany him, and, if need were, to aid him in his enterprise. Hortensius, who
would take any pains for a livelihood, had with him four Scholars who were
Pensioners and were then going to the College of Bon Court. He caused them to
repeat their Lesson when these people entered in. Sir, said the Mountebanck,
your Kinsmen have told me that you have teeth which do put you to great
torment, Is it your pleasure that I should draw them? Who I (said Hortensius) I
have better teeth Sirrah than thy self, thou mistakest me for another. No (said
the Mountebanck) It was told me that you would conceal the pain you endure,
that I might not draw them out, but I am commanded to ease you for ever of that
torment, I must perform it. Boys, hold him fast, and open his mouth as wide as
you can, I will put you, Sir, to such little pain, that you shall not feel it
at all. The two Volunteers whom he brought along with him, did begin to take
him by the arms, according to their instructions, but he did beat them back,
and did strike at them with all the force he had whereupon the Mountebanck said
unto the Scholars, Gentlemen, Assist us, I beseech you, I must pluck out your
Masters teeth, I have a command laid on me so to do, It ought to be done, and
he would be very glad of it himself, but he fears that I should hurt him, and I
will not put him to the least pain in the world; The Scholars believing it, did
begin to take hold of their Master, and he had much to do to clear himself from
so many hands. At the last he said unto them, What! Be you also against me? Do
you not see what bold Impostors these are who affront me? If you will not
defend me, I will complain to your Fathers of you. Speaking those words, they
did let him alone, and all turned upon the Mountebanck, and his two Companions,
and not without some difficulty they did beat them away; Hortensius took a good
Cudgel, with which he struck the Mountebanck, and forced him to go out of doors
with his retinue, who durst not defend him against a man who was stronger than
themselves, being in his own house, and upon his own defense. The Volunteers
being in the street demanded of the Mountebanck their hire for their good
service they had done. He told them, that he had received no money at all, and
contested so much with them that they did fall upon him to beat him, and had
broken his head if the Neighbors had not interposed and parted them. I know
not well how it was with the Tooth-drawer, but Hortensius afterward took great
pleasure when any mention was made of this adventure.

He knew not that I had any hand in this affair, so that one day meeting me in
Paris, he did accost me, and made his complaint that he did not see me oftener.
I made answer to him, that I had made a little journey out of the City, and was
ready to make a greater, for I was determined to go into Italy.

This Journey pleased him so well, that he would go along with me, disclaiming
all the interests which he had in France. He believed that this Country, and
especially this City, being full of Prelates, that good Letters would be more
acceptable, and that he should be more esteemed in Rome, than when he was at
Paris. For my self, who am not so moving and so hasty as Escluses, I have
traveled all the whole journey in great peace with him, and have not laughed
openly at his extravagancies, but on the contrary have modestly reproved him
for some faults, and above all, have endeavored to make him abandon his
pedantick humors, and those scattered Latin Rubricks, with which he always
intermingles his discourse.

Audebert having in this manner finished his History of Hortensius, Francion
entreated him to give him an assurance when he should see him; he affirmed,
that he did highly esteem of him, to the end that he might come more freely to
give him a visit, and to have some pastime with him. Raymond also and Dorini
had a great desire to see so rare a personage, insomuch that Audebert made a
promise to them to bring him with him as soon as possibly he could. They had
all a design to make him the subject of their pleasure, as heretofore they had
done, in which there was nothing for which they might be condemned. All that we
shall collect serves only to laugh at the impertinence of some foolish and
presumptuous persons, and there shall nothing be contained in this story that
shall give the least offense to the most scrupulous apprehensions; you shall
find no more conceits but only of innocent mirth in all the following History,
where the most cunning having deceived many others, shall at the last be met
with and paid in their own Coin, which may instruct us to undervalue none, and
to live our selves a more governed life.

The End of the Tenth Book.
THE ELEVENTH BOOK OF THE COMICAL HISTORY OF FRANCION.
HOrtensius was so well persuaded by Audebert, that on the next morning he came
to give a visit to Francion, who received him with many testimonies of joy.
This brave Master thought yet to have found him his Scholar, to whom he might
have taught many important Lessons, insomuch that to show him he was
incomparably able to perform it, he affected certain Phrases which he had
learned by heart, to serve him on all occasions. How my brave Francion! (thus
he begun) I believed that you could no more easily remove from Paris, than
could the Arsenac or the Palace, and that we should see you as constantly at
the Louvre, as the Stones of the great Stairs, or the Hall of the Switzers.
Francion, to give him an exchange by a Complement like unto it, did reply unto
him, I conceived, grave Hortensius, that we should have found you to continue
as long in the University of Paris, as the Well Certain, or as the Schools of
the Decrees, or the Kitchen of the Carmelites, or Monsieur Royer, the Diogenes
of the Age. You see (replied Hortensius) I am come hither to rank my self near
unto those who apparel themselves in the color of Roses, and to whom the
objects most grateful to the eyes are not distastefull; But Sir, I am informed
you only are come hither to make love, and to renounce that Liberty which was
as dear unto you as the Republic of Venice. Have you suffered your self to
lose a thing, for which the Hollanders fifty years together have made War with
the King of Spain? You love some Beauty, who in the height of the Combat will
let the arms fall down from the hands even of Monsieur du Mayn himself. I must
confess unto you (said Francion) the truth in some part of that which you have
spoken; but not that I am like to the Venetians, or to the Hollanders: Those
Comparisons are too far removed; but, I beseech you, let us go up unto the
Chamber of Count Raymond, who will be very glad to see you, We will there
discourse more fully of our affairs.

Thereupon Buisson and Audebert, who were with Hortensius, did go up the stairs
without any Entreaty; but Hortensius could not be persuaded to go up before
Francion, so courteous and so humble he was. Monsieur, (said Hortensius) Be
pleased to go before, you need to have a greater Virtue than patience to follow
after me. I have been sick during the time of my travel. I have no legs left
me, but only by the way of civil deportment to make my reverence to my Betters.
My Body is as diseased as if it were the Popes; and at six and thirty years, I
am no less ruined than is the Castle of Ostend, I am more old than my
Grandmother, and as much used as a Vessel which thrice has made a Voyage to
the Indies. Francion smiling, said unto him, Sir, If you had said that you had
beed used as much as the great Cauldron of the Friars, would not the similitude
be better? Mock not, I beseech you (said Hortensius) for on my faith, neither
in the Deserts of Africa, nor at the Fair of Saint Germans, is there so cruel a
Monster to be seen, as has been my sickness; But for your part, Sir, you have
so strong a Body, and so impregnable against all Diseases, that nothing is
capable to alter it, unless the fall of some Mountain should overthrow you.
You are able of your self to people Colonies. All this is nothing (said
Francion) your Excuses are not valuable; If you will not go up the stairs of
your own accord, I protest unto you I must help you as I come up after you. I
must beseech you put me not to that Trouble. I would have you know, that there
is no Honor which I do not owe unto your merit. Hortensius replied, Sir, you
but teach me that which I should speak my self, Will you not give me leave to
know my self, and that I should forget my own Name, as if I were some Pope?
Sir, I must profess unto you, that you are more filled with Complements and
Ceremonies, than the Old Testament, or the Court of Rome. Let me stay upon
these Stairs till the end of the World, I shall defend my self from that Enemy
well enough, who throws nothing but Roses on my head, and beats me not, but
with a Foxes tail. Let us not discourse then of the Pope, or of his Court (said
Francion) we are now at Rome, where we must be wise whether we will or no. Are
you not afraid of the Inquisition? Not I, said (Hortensius) I fear it not. Let
them make never so many terrible Pictures, and Figures full of Tigers and
Serpents, my Innocence shall outlive them.

Raymond, who from his Chamber understood that these Gentlemen were in their
long Ceremonies, did come down the Stairs, and made Hortensius to go up first,
whether he would or not. Francion said unto him, Sir, We ought to give
extraordinary entertainment to this rare personage, who is the only honor of
France. Ah Sir (said Hortensius!) turning toward him, I beseech you to have a
just regard to whom you attribute these terms of only, rare, and extraordinary,
for they are proper to the Sun, the Comets, or some Creatures of stupendous
excellence. I shut my ears to these praises, as I do my doors to Enemies and
Thieves. Let us rather dispute of your merit, I must profess that you are more
eloquent than all the Parlaments, Presidentiaries, and Seneschals, or the
subalternate Courts of Justice in France. When you lodged in Saint James his
Street, you were the most able man that lived there, no dispraise to the
Iacobins, or the Iesuists. Francion replied, you flatter me too much. Speak no
more of me, Let us talk of Raymond and Buisson. What shall I say of them
(replied Hortensius) but that they are the two rare workmanships of Nature? If
all the world were like unto them, the Universities would be the most
unprofitable part of the Commonwealth, and Latin (as the Entertainment at
Milan) would be rather a witness of our Luxury, than an effect of our
Necessity. Francion made answer, You do not give them now that Honor which is
due unto them, to imply that they understand not Latin; but suppose they should
not know it, and should undervalue it, as the greatest part of the Court do at
this day, must we therefore say that Latin is improfitable? Think better of
your ancient Livelihood, I beseech you, and consider, that Latin ought not to
have the least mixture with any riotous entertainment. When Francion spoke
this, he so smiled withal, that Hortensius was not offended, who still
continued to set forth his Eloquence, the new style whereof astonished all the
world.

He came at last to speak of the pleasures at Rome, concerning which he had
many extravagant expressions. He said, that the Servants sprinkled so much
Sweet-water in his Chamber, that he was even glad to swim to save his own life;
that the Muscats he did eat were so great, that only one grain of them was
enough to make all England to be perpetually drunk; And speaking of the
Mistress of Francion, he said, that he esteemed her to be most happy to have
captivated him, and preferred that Victory of hers, above all those of the
Prince of Orange, or of Henry the Great. But he said he nourished an infectious
fear, that in often seeing of Francion, he should at the last become amorous,
as Fr ncion was, and that he should not be able to look upon a handsome Beggar,
without some secret desires; and moreover he was highly afraid that he should
fall in love at last with some disdainful Creature, who having flattered him
to his destruction, and thrown him down the Precipice, would say unto him in
the end of all, God save thee.

After that, they came to discourse of Books, and he affirmed they were the
greatest part of them so ill made, that after the ordinary Ballads, and the
Bills of Quacksalvers, he found nothing so ill. For his own part, he had sought
out all the Remedies that could be imagined against the Ignorance of the Age,
and perfectly had found out an elaborate Idea of Eloquence. He used moreover so
many extraordinary terms, that Francion could not with any patience have
endured him, if he had continued to speak as he had begun; for there was
nothing in the whole composition of his style, but strange Hyperboles, and
Comparisons drawn from far, that they much resembled the ravings of a Man in a
Fever, or the Language of the Emperor of the Corn-cutters. What, said
Hortensius, Do you find defects and blemishes in the face of the Sun? It is a
long time (you know) since I have excelled all others, and have found out that,
which they in vain have sought for. They who will not believe me, let them err
amongst the Turks and Infidels, who are the greatest part of the World. Take
heed what you speak (said Buisson,) one may prove by the same Consequence, that
if the Pope and the Capuchins do not praise your works, they shall be taken to
be as very Turks as Amurath, or Bajazet; which is very dangerous to allege. Do
you make it an Article of Faith to believe that you write well? Hortensius,
with a forced laughter, did reply, Be silent, vulgar Spirit, and know, that my
Works are worthy to be laid on the fairest Beds of France; but take heed (said
Buisson) that it be not on the beds of those who have taken Physic, and will
take your Books along with them to their Stool of Office.

Raymond, observing they began to grow into words, did take off their choler,
by putting them on another Subject, and demanded of Hortensius, If he had not
wherewith to make them to pass their time away with pleasure; whereupon he
showed them a Book of his, in which he derided whatsoever the Ancients had
written. Francion did importunately entreat him that homight see it, so that
being no longer able to resist him, he said unto them, Gentlemen, To give you a
sight of small pieces, as Letters, or Sonnets, I will not do it at this
present, I will speak unto you of a Romance, which is better than all
Histories; for even my distempers are of more worth than the meditations of the
Philosophers. I will do that which has yet never entered into the thought of
mortal man. You know that some Wise men have affirmed, that there are many
worlds, which some have placed in the Planets, and others in the fixed Stars;
For my part, I believe that there is a world in the Moon. Those spots which we
see in the face thereof when she is full, I do conceive to be the Earth, and
that there are Caves, and Forests, and Isles, and other things which are not
fully represented; but the places which are resplendent are the Seas, which
being clear, do receive the light of the Sun, as does the brightness of a
Mirror. Take heed (said Francion) what it is which you affirm; The Earth which
you speak of, is the same Earth wherein we are, and he who speaks of things
done here, will appear too vulgar. Hortensius made answer, I will describe the
things only which are in the body of the Moon; I will describe the Cities which
are there, and the manners of the Inhabitants, and the horrible enchantments.

There will be a Prince as ambitious as Alexander, who shall come to conquer
this world; He shall make great provision of Engines, either to descend, or to
ascend (for to speak the truth, I do not yet know whether we are above that
world, or beneath) He shall bring with him another Archimides, who shall make
him all manner of structures, and ladders, by the means whereof he shall enter
into the Epycicle of the Moon excentrick to our Earth, and there it shall be
where he shall sind some place habitable, where shall be Nations unknown, whom
he shall overcome. From thence he shall transport himself into the great Orb,
sloping to the part Epicycle, where he shall find vast fields which shall be
peopled only by Monsters; And pursuing his adventures, he shall tilt with the
Cavalliers along the Eccliptick line. After that he shall visit the two Coluri,
and the Meridian Circle, where he shall meet with many gallant metamorphoses,
but approaching too near the Sun, he and his people shall gain a malady, for
which God has provided no remedy but poison, and precipices. He shall have a
fever upon him which shall burn so violently, that if the ancient Tyrants and
Pagan Princes had heard of it, they would have tormented the Martyrs with it,
and never exposed them to the bitings of venomous beasts.

This is the end which I will put unto this work, which shall last as long as
Nature her self, in spite of the envious and malicious spirits that shall
condemn it. Consider now with your self if these are not the strains of a
transcendent understanding. All the Company were surprised with amazement to
hear such grand extravancies, and to receive yet greater pleasure from
Hortensius, Raymond seeming to admire him, did say unto him, Certainly I never
heard any thing so divine, as is this which you relate unto us; I would to God,
that as you have given us now, but as it were the first draughts of it, you
would be pleased another time, to give us the more full sight thereof in all
its particulars. It is enough for this present (said Hortensius) I will now
deliver some other observations of Importance to you. Know then, that if the
world does seem unto us to be great. our bodies do appear in comparison of it
to be no bigger than an Apple, or a Ball. Now there is no body so little which
cannot be divided into innumerable parts, so that it may be, that within such,
or such a little Body, there may be yet less Creatures, and so little, that
they may live there, as in a spacious world, and possibly they may be little
men, to whom some good fortunes answerable to the proportion of their bodies do
accrue. In this consideration there is not so little nor so despicable a part
of the Universe where we may not imagine but there are little worlds. I will
make a Romance of the adventures of their people; I will sing of their loves,
and of their wars, and the revolution of their Empires; and above all, I will
study to represent the Estate where people may be which inhabit the body of
Man, and I will demonstrate, that not without great reason the Body of Man is
called a Microcosm. I will have another treatise by it self, where all the
Members of the Body shall show their disagreement or compliance with one
another. The Arms and the Hands shall make war against the Feet, and the Thighs
and Eyes shall make love to the Privy Members, the Veins to the Arteries, and
the Bones unto the Marrow. This is not all, I have yet an admirable design in
my Fancy which shall take away the glory from Argenis and Charic^ea. I will
make a Romance upon the waters, where I will build Cities, more stately and
more magnificent than any we have on the Coasts of the Mediteranean Seas, or in
the Rivers which pay tribute to it, where the Tritons and the Nereids have
their residence. All their houses shall be builded with the most precious
stones and pearls. There shall be also Parks and Forests of Coral, where they
shall go to hunt the green Cod, the Herring, and other Fishes. The Trees for
the most part shall be of Rushes, and plants, of the most tender growth, and if
there shall chance to be any battle or Tournaments, the Lances shall be of the
prickles of Roses.

As Hortensius was speaking these words, Francion, desiring to witness that he
was rapt with admiration, did begin to cry out, O my God! what rich inventions
are these? How unfortunate were the Ancients not to have been born in these
times, to hear such excellent things? and how sorry will our Nephews be, that
they came into the world too late to have seen you, and to have been acquainted
with you? But it is true howsoever, that the best part of you, that is your
divine writings, shall still live, and shall flourish amongst them. O Paris, an
unfortunate City to have lost such an incomparable wit, and happy art thou, O
City of Rome, to have procured it. You understand not all (said Hortensius) I
have other designs wherewith to ravish the world. Know, that I have so many
Romances to compose, that I am even distracted in the imagination of them:
Contemplating of them in my Chamber, me thinks they be always about me in
visible forms, like so many little Devils, and that one of them pulls me by the
Ear, another by the Nose, a third by the Breeches, and the fourth by the
Garters, and that every one says unto me, Monsieur Hortensius, make me first, I
am the fairest, and do promise best, Begin with me, and having begun, go
through with it, leave not me for another. Upon my faith (said Francion) me
thinks I now understand the Fable of these Fairies. It is said that when they
go to the stool they do do nothing but Musk, and when they do render their
Urine, they make the water of Angels, if they spit or blow their Noses, from
their Mouths, and from their Noses there does proceed Emeraulds and Pearls, and
when they wash their hands, instead of foul water, there does fall down into
the Basin precious stones. I believe the same in every action which Hortensius
does, he does drop books unto us when he does go to ease the burden of Nature,
They are his Translations, if he but blows his Nose, there comes a History
from it, and if he spetteth, he spetteth nothing but Romances. I will avow all
to be true which you speak (said Hontensius) for you speak only by a Figure,
and to express my facility of writing: You are still in your old skin, and
full of upbraiding mirth, But to demonstrate to you that all that which I speak
is not mockery, I will give you a sight of the first draught which I have made
of my Romances of the Epicycle, and of that of the parts of the Body, for I
travail at one time with two or three things as well as Caesar.

Having spoken this, he did put his hand into his pocket, and did take out a
Key, a discolored and sweaty pair of Gloves, a soul Handkerchief, and some
papers as greasy as the Bill of the long expenses of a Cook. He turned the
leaves over, but could not find that which he looked for, so that he did begin
to put it all up again, affirming that he would show them that rich piece some
other time. In putting them up, he did let fall some few of his Papers, but he
was so transported with the joy he received to hear himself so excessively
praised, that he did not mind it. Francion took them up with his own hands,
without speaking any word, with an intention to read them at his leisure; And
the better to divert him, he asked him who were the best writers who at that
time had the Vogue in Paris. Do not you know them as well as I my self? said
Hortensius, there are too many commended who are more worthy to be reproved:
You have at the Court three or four young fellows, who make verses more fit for
a Ballad, or some ordinary song, than for a Courtiers ear; They have never read
any other Books, but the Delights of the French Poesy, and are so extremely
ignorant, that it is impossible to be more. Moreover, there are 5 or 6 silly
knaves, who gain a livelihood by writing Romances, there are no other as I know
of but an Usher of mine who following me has served the Jesuists, and does
delight himself by dabling in the Ink to defile white paper, His chief Essay
has been the Collection of Tabarins forced Speeches, which so long time did
charm the ears of the brazen Horse, a Book that did find so quick a Market,
that Twenty thousand of them have been sold, when the Impression of a good
Book, although there are but six hundred of them, will hardly be vented; but
there are more people you know who buy Herring, than fresh Salmon, and Buckrom,
than Satin. Fools are in a greater number than Wise men.

This Usher of mine calls himself Guilliaum, and in the first Romance that
ever he printed, you shall find that he was well contented with that Surname;
but a year afterward, having composed another Book, which he dedicated to the
Queen of England, he would appear amongst the Nobility, and therefore in the
Title he says, Composed by Seiur de Guilliaum, to the end that the syllable de
might persuade us to believe that he is a Gentleman; but the ignorant Ass does
not perceive, that it is not so much grace to put this Preposition De before
the Name of a Saint, as before the Name of a Signiory, and is not afraid that
the Saints should take offense, and punish him for it, because they never did
affect the vanity of the Honors of the world. Besides that, my fine Usher did
play another prank as ridiculous as the former, He took up a Satin Suit at the
Brokers, to present his Book, to the end that at the Court he might be taken
for a Gentleman, and if the Queen had not given him his Reward presently, he
durst not, by reason of his ill habit, have returned any more to the Louvre to
prosecute his Suit. But he ought not to make any difficulty at it, or to be
ashamed at all; for the sight of his ragged clothes would have moved pity, and
something indeed would have been rather contributed to him by the way of Alms.
He has caused other things to be printed, for he has taken old books and
changed 3 or 4 lines at the beginning, and caused them to be afterward printed
with new titles, to abuse the people; but I swear unto you, if I were one of
the Judges, I would punish as grievously such falsifiers of books, as those who
coin false money, or do counterfeit Obligations and Contracts. To conclude, my
Servant has written already more than my self; but his Books be all good for
nothing else, but to wrap up butter in them; and it is said, that the last
winter the Butter-women had a desire to go all together to him, to give him
thanks that he made provision for them, when the Leaves of the Vines failed.
The Parliament nevertheless, who regard not their particular profit, should,
for their greater honor, have condemned him to drink as much Ink as he has
ill employed, and I would have him to take a full Cup of it from the hands of
the Hangman. There are others worthy of the same punishment, but for their own
defense they will all say, as he who was to be bastinadoed for having stolen
away a Romance from Queen Margaret of Navarre, and afterward caused it to be
printed, Woe is me! Pardon me I beseech you, that which I have done was only to
procure me bread. I had no Intention of my self to do evil. But let us have
Pence amongst our selves, and discourse no more of this. I would not that my
Eloquence should be as pernicious as the Beauty of Helena, I understand well
enough the visages of the Hebrides, and cachochimichal humors, and erroneous
pretenses, and Varlets clothed in the skins of Lions, for they never change
their habits, who entertain the people with their distempers to procure
themselves a little bread, and nevertheless do cause themselves to be painted
with a Crown of Laurel on their heads, as if they were those illustrious
personages whose life's are recorded by Plutarch, or as if they had gotten the
prise in the Olympic games. Another time I will speak more unto them, I will
then thunder against them, and condemn them to the Galleys, because they are so
unprofitable to the world; An Oar would do better in their hands than a Pen.

This Discourse of Hortensius was ^arre more agreeable to the Company than all
the other which he made; but this would not prevail to cause his Auditors to
entertain a good opinion of him, and Francion, with impatience desiring to
peruse those papers which he had taken from him, did begin to look upon them,
and found they were leaves which he had torn out of other looks. Hertensius
observing him to read, and by the fashion of the leaves conjecturing what they
were, said unto him, Ah Monsieur, I beseech you to restore those Papers unto
me. I will by and by, said Francion, but I will first read them over. No,
replied Hortensius, I will give you whatsoever you will desire of me, provided
that you will not read those papers. And I, said Francion, will give you
whatsoever you shall desire of me, if you will but give me leave to read them
over. Speaking those words, he locked up himself in a Wardrobe with Raymond,
and having perused those loose and printed sheets, he found the greatest part
of those Phrases in them, which Hortensius had that day spoken. He came
afterward to restore them to him, and instantly did request him to tell him
out of what Authors those pieces did proceed. Hortensius made answer, That the
sheets came from an Author, who was the first man that had taught the world
Eloquence; but he would shortly make it appear that he was not the only Wonder.
Say you so, replied Francion, I do believe I understand your design: I do
remember when I was in the College with you, you did endeavor so much to
imitate Maleherb, and Coiffeteau, (as Raymond may perceive by your Discourse,
of which I have given him an account) that on my faith it did render you
ridiculous; you would do the same again with this new Author upon all
occasions, as you make it apparent by all the Discourses which you have had
with us. But take heed how you imitate any Author in that which is defective or
impertinent. To imitate such, is to imitate a man who is always coughing, or
breaking wind backwards. I remember, that when I was at Paris, I had a Lackey
who was extremely enamored on a Maidservant in the next house. Having found
in my Study the Loves of Nerveza and Desescuteaux, which I kept to make me
laugh, he did tear out all the leaves where the Complements were, and learned
them by heart, to repeat them to his Mistress, and carried them always in his
pocket to study on them, for fear he should forget them. I believe that you
tread in the same path as he has done, my dear Master.

Having spoken those words, he began to use such Mimick gestures about
Hortensius, and observing that he looked steadfastly on the ground, without
turning to any side, and that his hat did hang down over his eyes, he plucked
off his Hat to see what he had within it, and found in the bottom of the crown
a Book of some bulk, in which he had written, A Salute at the first Entrance,
The Serious Entertainment, The Jovial Interlocution, and The Farewell, or
Complement at the Departure. And in the purfute of these Titles, he had in the
end of every one of them elegant Phrases, which were all new. What? said
Francion, Are these the things which you have to show unto us? You may be even
jogging now, we shall be all of us well satisfied by that time as we shall have
read them over.

The ill adventure of Hortensius, accompanied with those scoffs, did so incense
him, that he had gone away, were it not, that having lost his Book, he had
forgotten his Complement of Departure. Francion being unwilling to provoke him
any further, did say unto him with a most pleasant sweetness of voice, You
observe, Sir, that as the natural whiteness of the complexion, is more
agreeable by far, than that which does proceed from Painting, so the proper
Subjects we discourse on, and which we invent of our selves, are better than
those which we take out of Common places. I should more extol the language of
the College, than that which you affect. Hortensius was so ashamed, that he
knew not what answer to return, and Francion changing the Subject of his
Discourse, did entreat him to leave with him what he had of the works his new
Author. Hortensius did readily consent unto it, and to put him again in a good
humor, they did speak no more of what was passed, but did fall on praising the
incomparable Inventions of his fabulous Histories, so that he departed
well-contented with his Disciple.

After his departure, Francion did turn over the leaves which he had lent him,
and perceived they were Letters addressed to several persons. His judgment
thereon was, there was many good things in the Author, and to balance that,
there were also as many bad, so that if some of them deserve crowns, others did
merit the lash; Besides, he descryed, that what was good in them was all stolen
out of ancient books, and that which was impertinent did proceed from the
Author himself: Nevertheless, it might well be that the ignorant might approve
them well enough, they being the only men that did esteem them, who took no
heed to discover the thefts, because they never did read any good book. There
was nothing within them to observe, but certain fancies, which had much of the
Air of those of Turlupin, and were untowardly mingled among things of Gravity
and State. The Author did write unto Cardinals, and other grave personages, as
if he had been speaking to some voluptuous people, who had taken delight to
hear their vanities repeated and reputed. Francion observed also some other
particularities, at which he laughed with Raymond, both of them wondering at the
high estimation which was given to such works, and how that he who made them
could have that presumption which he testified in his writings; Another book
ought to be made in that, to mark the faults of it all over. But let us leave
these follies of the time, and let them be praised by those who have a mind
unto it, it is of no consequence at all, since there is no man does constrain
us to extol them. I do believe it will never be, for Kings have something else
to do than to make Edicts to that effect.

Francion being retired from reading that book, the extravagancies whereof did
afford him much pleasure, he did bring it back himself to Hortensius, saying
nothing to him of it either good or bad. He had no more a desire to make
himself merry at any subject which arrived, Love did too much prosecute him,
and he did go to wait upon Nays, who, were he alone, or were he accompanied,
did content her self to testify the courtesy to him, and would not have it to
proceed as far as love.

He at that time had received money in Rome from the hands of a Money-Merchant,
so that he increased his train, and began to be wonderfully gallant. He lived
at a great rate with Raymond, who called him brother, so that one of them was
every where esteemed for a Count, as indeed he was, and the other for a
Marquess. He oftentimes gave visitation to his Mistress, and in the close of
the Evening would always sing after the Musicians, to make himself and his love
more apparent. What Lady could not be overcome by his merit? He had a good
garb, He did sing well, He did play on many Instruments of Music, He was of a
sweet disposition, and of the most complacent in the world; a Gentleman of a
great knowledge, and who discoursed excellently well, and did write far better,
and not on one subject only, but on all; He composed both in Verse and in
Prose, and was admirable in both. When he discoursed on a serious subject there
proceeded nothing but wonders from him, and when he would exercise his fancy in
a Satyrick mirth, he would have made the severest Stoic to laugh outright.
There are many to be seen who have some one of these perfections, but how rare
are they who have them all, and especially in so eminent a degree as he was
master of them? He was the Subject of all the discourse at Rome. There was not
any one who durst openly appear to be his Rival, and those who did know that he
had settled his affections on Nays, did esteem her to be most happy in so
accomplished a Servant; Moreover, he was found to be of honorable parentage,
and to have in France such large possessions, that he deserved to have her for
his Wife. She had a good and a great opinion of him, but her fear was that he
would not espouse an Italian, and that having passed away some time in courting
her, he would return into his own Country. She communicated this her fear to
Dorini, who did discover it to Raymond, and both of them did go to Francion to
acquaint him with it. Brother, you see, said Raymond, It is now time to
conclude, and to be no longer passionate for Nays; you profess that you love
her above all things, Consider, if you can resolve with your self to pass away
your life with her; She is fair and rich, and which is more, she loves you;
Delay her no longer, if you will not marry her, and intend to leave her, you do
but hinder some one else, who would be a servant to her; you will gain nothing
by her but by marriage, she is too wise to part with her honor; If you love
her so entirely as you profess, take her to your Wife. Francion embracing him
did reply, My dear Brother, If I conceived my self to be worthy of that which
you propound unto me, I should arrive to the height of all my joys. Dorini
interrupting him, did promise that he had spoken as much for him as was
possible, and he believed that his Cousin would not disdain him. He failed not
the same day to pursue his accustomed solicitations, and in the prosecution of
it, Francion himself in the Afternoon did make his addresses to her, where so
fully he declared his service, that they both made a promise to love one
another eternally, and to accomplish their marriage as soon as their affairs
could permit.

Francion the next morning dispatched a Post with Letters to his Mother, to
advise her of his good fortune, and entertaining no more any care that might
feed upon his spirit, his only employment was to pass away his time in
delight, and to make his Mistress to be partaker of it. He would every morning
breath himself, and his Horse, in running at the Ring; After Dinner he often
danced in Masks, and made sumptuous Feasts, and in every thing he did show
himself so magnificent, that he charmed the hearts of all the Italians. The
gallant Spirits of Rome made it their ambition to be acquainted with him. There
were no Verses composed but in the praises only of him, and of his Mistress,
but they were not comparable to those which he did make himself. Hortensius
made Verses also, and did infinitely extol him. Amongst other things he made
Achrosticks, and Anagrams, as being most proper to his Pedantick Genius. He
made also other Verses, where in many places he did equivocate upon his Name,
and the letters of it. He informed him that his name was Francion because he
was so Frank and free, and because he was the bravest man among all the French,
and that if any one should undertake to write his History, he must call it
Franciade, and that it would be in as great esteem as that of Ronsard, and if
Francion the Son of Hector was the common Father of the French, this Francion
of our Age must be the Protector of the French, and capable to furnish them
with most excellent Counsel. Francion demanded of him if he would do him the
honor as to digest his Adventures into order, and make them memorable to
Posterity, but Hortensius made answer, that he did leave that charge to
himself, and that there was not any one who more lively than himself could
represent those fortunes to which himself arrived. Some few days afterward
being alone with Raymond, he recited to him the answer of Hortensius, Raymond
did very well approve of it, and demanded of him if he would not one day take
the pains to compile his own History, which was so worthy to be known, and if
he had not a desire to see in public under his own name so many brave works
which he had composed. He replied, I have not wrote so much as you believe, and
some things may be shown to you, as proceeding from me, which are but mere
Impostures. Besides, what pleasure shall I receive to see a Book printed in my
Name, seeing there are abroad so many Ignorant and ridiculous Pamphlets which
every day do disgrace the Press. I leave it to you to judge, since Hortensius
and his Usher are of the same Trade, that the people that shall hear of them,
looking on other Books, will believe that they do proceed from persons of the
same Complexion. All which I have done as yet, has been as private as has been
possible for me to do, and to solace my self when I was constrained to be a
Shepherd, I made a Book, which I believe will be passable enough, but it is not
my desire that every one should see it. I can now be too hard for you, said
Raymond, I have the Key of the Cabanet where all your papers are, which I will
not restore unto you, till I have perused that Piece. You will have much to do
to find it, replied Francion, for it is in a sure place; for know, it is not
written, but in my Memory, only but allow me some Penmen, and in eight days I
will dictate the whole work entirely to them. Your Memory, said Raymond, is
admirable, and your Judgment is no less. But tell me, By what Name do you
call those Books which you have composed? Francion made answer, There is one
Book of Love, which I have dedicated, or had rather a desire to dedicate, to
Ph^lemon, I have heretofore made mention of it to you, and since that time I
have wrote another Book of Field Recreations, with some Plays and Comedies,
and other Inventions. There is also another Book in which I have pleasantly
described some of my adventures, which I call The Errors of Youth. If any one
shall impose any other Book upon me, I shall disavow it. It is true, that not
long since a Friend told me, You have composed several Books, for you have made
this, and that, and another Book, and named a number of Books. On my Faith
(said I unto him) you have not yet the perfect number of them; If you will be
exact, to mark all that is done amiss, I will show you some pieces which I did
write at eighteen years of age, and will you put those also into the number of
my Books? That Answer stopped his mouth; and I must assure you, if you will
oblige me to you, you must forget those petty follies of my Youth, and not
reproach me with them. I was then but of a tender age, and therefore I ought to
be excused. Would you believe, that even that Book made in my Nonage, has
found some to commend it? Not long since I did go to give a visit to one of my
Friends, whom I had the happiness to find in his Chamber. There was a
Gentleman who was well acquainted with us both, and one of his Kinsmen, who did
not know me; who falling into Discourse of that Book, the other demanded of
him, If there were not good things in it? He made answer, They were very rare
things. I asked of him, what he found well in it? and talked a long time of it,
as of an indifferent thing. He did the like, and freely told me, That, in his
opinion the Author did too much amuse himself in Scholastic meditations. I
coldly replied to him, and without altering my Countenance, That it was that
which pleased me, and which, I believed, would please also all Ingenious
people, since there are no Men of Quality who have not had their Education in
the University. He was surprised with amazement to find that I was the Author
of the Book which he undervalued; and afterward, to cover his fault, he told
me, that he did like it very well himself. I protest unto you, (said Raymond
then to Francion) This is one of the most generous actions that I have ever
heard of; and moreover this ingenious way to discover your self was truly
excellent. A Fool would have leaped into a Rage, and called all the World to
witness; but for you, there is nothing here to be found, that could trouble the
tranquillity of your Soul. You acquaint me with some Apothegms, which are worth
all those that are recorded to have been spoken by illustrious personages, and
although I do remember that you call them, The Essays of your Youth, yet they
may be read with singular delight, since we take pleasure to hear the
Adventures of Beggars and Thieves, and Shepherds. It is most true, said
Francion, and I assure you, that although there are some who affirm there are
things in that Book which are not worthy to be recorded, yet, before they judge
of them, it is requisite that the Readers should thoroughly understand them; I
know as well as they what ought to be inserted, and what to be omitted, but I
was pleased to write of some things that concerned my self, which being true,
do need no other Ornaments, than their own liveliness. For all that I will not
debase my self, and I will not be ashamed to say, that I know not if those
Writers (which at this day are so glorious, being so young as I was when I
composed that Book of which I speak unto you, being (as I have said) but of
eighteen years of age) would have given such demonstrations of their
understanding. I will not travel far for any Example, I should be glad if
these makers of Romances by the dozen, and those who expressly do compose
Letters to have them printed, could perform any thing better, in so short a
time, and with such little Study as I did take in that Book. I composed in one
day no less than two and thirty pages for the Press, and it was moreover with
a Spirit incessantly perplexed with other thoughts, and I could not entirely
addict my self unto it. Sometimes I was heavy, and half asleep, and knew no
other motion, but that only of my right hand; so that if I did write at that
time any thing which was good, it was only by Fortune. Moreover, it was a pain
unto me to take the pains to read over my own Writings, and to correct them;
for by what Encouragement should I persist on this Sloth of Study? I should
gain no glory at all if I had made a good Book, and should I have received it,
it was too vain by far to have charmed me: It is easy therefore to collect by
this neglect, (which according to the sincerity of my Conscience I do
acknowledge) that those works (in which I have exercised all the faculties of
my Spirit) will be of another price; but it is not certain that I can so
entirely addict my self to any particulars, for I do much hate those
unprofitable observations to which our Writers do devote themselves. It was
never my Intention to follow them, and being, as I am, altogether of another
temper, I ought not to be put in the same rank with them, unless they will
give me a quality which I am not in a capacity to receive. They incessantly
trouble their Imaginations, to furnish them with some new subjects to content
the desire they have to write, which goes before the consideration of their
ability, and I write not, but only to put into order those Conceptions which a
long time I have entertained. If any one shall think that in this manner I do
defy them, I will not take the pains to remove that opinion from him; for I am
confident, that in making profession religiously to observe the rules of a
Gentleman, or Nobility, I may challenge my adversaries, if I please my self, as
well to the combat of the Pen, as of the Sword. I shall not testify a greater
vanity in one than in the other, in promising my self the Victory.
Nevertheless I will not vex my self at so poor a thing, and having always
made a greater account of actions than of words, I had rather exercise my self
in Virtue, than in Eloquence; and those shall deceive themselves, who observing
that which above I have mentioned, shall conclude me to be arrogant: They will
object unto me, that to praise my own Works, is to follow the Custom of the
Mountebanks at New-bridge, who extol their Balsoms, and of the Comedians, who
in their papers which they stick up in every Corner of the street, do give
their Plays the titles of admirable, and incomparable; But it is to be
considered, that if any one deserves to be blamed for that, they are those
only who having endeavored to persuade us that they have made a good Book,
would persuade us withal, that their persons are endued with excellent
qualities; not weighing with themselves, that even loose and lewd Men do
sometimes accomplish a good Piece. Let the World then take notice, that I take
things at another turn of the Scale than these Men do, and being attended with
more Innocence than Vanity, I cannot but with some reluctation affirm, That if
I confess I write well, it is because I find it to be so poor a perfection,
that it is no great glory to become Master of it, if I find not my self withal
to be Master of other perfections with it. What is it for a Man to boast that
he has overcome, and surmounted all Misfortunes, and that he knows how to
govern Nations, but only to demonstrate that he is the Master of an insolent
Spirit? If there are any who will not be contented with this reason, and will
take distaste at what I have said, I do let him alone to believe what he
pleases, and that my Book being petulant all over, all may be taken for
railery which I have spoken. That which makes most for me, and which clearly
shows, that I do not mind the reputation of a great Writer, is, That having
not put my Name unto my Book, the glory which I do give my self can convey unto
me no profit at all. I am a mere stranger to this Impertinence, against which
an Ancient Writer has so much cried out, who having made a Book, upbraiding
the vanity of those, who by their Writings would purchase renown unto
themselves, did not forbear from naming himself the Author of it. I have not
been so vain as to commit the like fault, after I have so much misprized that
glory. I am not ignorant of the subtilty of Phydias, who being forbidden to
write his Name at the foot of the Statue of Minerva which he had made, did draw
his own Pourtraict in a little corner of the Buckler of the said Goddess, that
there it might be always seen, but if I should find room to set forth my self
in some part of my Book, where it might be discovered who I am, I do believe
that I should not do it; At the least, I am most confident that I should never
suffer to have my name printed in the Frontispiece, or first Leaf of the Book,
much less to have it pasted on the Walls of the City: for it is not my humor
to take pride, that on every Sunday my Name should afflict the Doors of the
Churches, and the Pillars in the corners of the Streets; Nor should I glory to
have it seen amongst the Titles of the Comedians, or to see it on the Walls,
keeping Company with those who profess they cure the Pox, and broken Bellies.
I doubt not but many, seeing my resolution to conceal my self, will have as
great a resolution themselves to enquire after me, and will importunately
desire the Booksellers to acquaint them who I am; I will therefore send them
back with that brisk answer of the Lacedemonian, who being demanded by a Friend
whom he did meet with, what he carried under his Cloak, replied to him, The
question which you propound unto me, is in vain; for, if I had a Desire that
you should know what it is, I would not cover it. With the same money I must pay
those, who have too much Curiosity concerning this Book, and I am content that
they should take it to be as some Infant ^ound in the Streets, who has either
made up himself, or who has no Father that can be found to take care for him.
Do the Readers believe that I am obliged to acquaint them with my Name, when I
can never learn their Names, and when an infinite number of Men, who are never
to be of my Acquaintance, shall read it in my Book? If there be any to whom I
shall be obliged to discover my Name, it shall be to my intimate Friends, who
will take my pains in good part; when those who do not know it, will,
peradventure blame me, finding that I did addict my self to such petulant and
idle Subjects, when I had so many serious Thoughts to deliver.

As Francion was speaking this, Raymond was very attentive to him, and said
unto him, I must confess that you have the most noble, and the most generous
apprehensions in the world. I should be never a weary to listen to you. You
exquisitely do express your self on a variety of Subjects, which do all
deserve to be recorded; and it seems to me, that the Readers of your books
should be glad to find there the like advertisements which you now declare. You
do too much oblige me (said Francion) but I dare assure you, That it is most
necessary oftentimes to make an Advertisement, or a Preface to the Reader; for
many particulars are there oftentimes contained, which conduce unto the
advancement of our Understanding; nevertheless most men are so careless, that
they seldom, or never, read the Preface, not knowing, That oftentimes there is
more there than in all the rest of the Book, and the Author there makes
manifest with what spirit he is endued. One day I demanded of a Gentleman of
that humor, wherefore he did not read the Prefaces. He made answer, because he
believed they were all of one making, and having read one of them in his life,
he conceived it was enough; he conjectured also that the Contents and the Title
resembled one another. But let not those do so, who shall have my Books within
their hands, if they will oblige me to have any esteem of them. Let them be
careful to read all my Prefaces; for I am most elabourate in them, and insert
not any thing which is not useful. I will be none of those Readers (said
Raymond) that shall fail in that particular; But tell me, I pray you, what is
the Book which you composed last? It is a pleasant History (said Francion) It
is already made, and yet not one word written of it; It is a sharp and a
pointed Satyr on the minds and manners of some men, of whom I assume the
liberty to speak most freely; and because the style is not ordinary, and I
cannot give such a Title to the Book as is able to express what it does
contain, I will call it The Book without a Title. That shall be the Title of
the Book, and if that shall not be the Title of it, howsoever it will agree
well enough with such a fantastical piece. The Subject on which I will express
my self, shall be to decipher the life and the vices of many persons of
quality, who p^etend to be grave and serious, and have nothing but Hypocrisy
in their hearts. And as the Book does bear a Title, and yet is without a Title,
so I h^ve thought upon another thing which is very agreeable to it, It is, to
insert an Epistle Dedicatory, which shall be no Epistle Dedicatory, or at least
to dedicate it, without having of it dedicated at all. This is my Invention,
you shall find these words printed in the beginning of the second leaf, in
great Letters TO THE GRANDIES, as if it were the address of a Dedicatory, and
under it shall follow this Epistle.

It is not to dedicate this Book to you that I make this Epistle; but it is,
that you may understand that I do not dedicate it unto you. You will,
peradventure, object, It is no such great Present, and but a Packet only of
idle and foolish actions, which I have as idly observed, and collected, but you
will say, Why do you not give unto us an account of virtuous Deeds? Why shall I
not have the liberty to speak of those things which great men dare do? I have
too free a Spirit to conceal the Truth, and if I had the leisure, I had
enlarged this Volume with the lives of infinite persons, who do seem to
challenge place in my History, by their continual enormities. But if those, of
whom in my Satirical entertainments I have already made mention, do not
consider that I appear first of all in the rank, and are not contented to speak
unto me, because I have spoke of them, Do you know what they will gain to find
themselves offended? It Is this, They will discover to all the world, that it is
of them whom I do speak, which was not known before; and moreover, they will
procure, that for the time to come (...) shall not feign to name them, because
they have begun to do it themselves. Do you conceive that a man of such a
temper does perplex himself about the Dedication of Books? and that I who can
adore no perfections but what are divine, ought to humble my self before
multitudes who are obliged to give thanks to Fortune, that she has granted
them riches to cover their defects? You are to understand, that I look not on
the world but as a Comedy, and esteem of men no more, but only as they do act
well the part which is given to them. He who is a Peasant, and lives according
to the Rules of honesty in that condition, does seem to me more commendable,
than he who is born a Gentleman, and performs not the actions of a Gentleman.
So that prizing every one according as he is, and not according to that which
he has, I do equally esteem those who have the charge of the greatest affairs,
with those who have only but a charge of rags upon their baggs, if Virtue does
not make the difference. Nevertheless, I have not so little a consideration to
the truth, but that I do believe there may be found a Generation as illustrious
for their Merit, as their Birth and Fortunes, and that this age is not so
barbarous, but that there are some of you who love honorable actions, let but
those who are of the number cause themselves to be known better than
heretofore, and I promise them that then I will not only dedicate Books unto
them, but shall be ready to live and dye in their service.

This is the Epistle which I have addressed to the Grandies, which is for all
that not an Epistle, or at least is not dedicative, but it is rather a negative
Epistle. Raymond replied, It is bold, and gallant, and no man can be offended
at it, for it is not to men of Virtue to whom you speak, they are exempted, but
when will it be that in earnest you will set your self in work about it? I hope
(said Francion) that within a few days I shall put Pen to Paper, to write my
last work, but I will not publish it no more than I will the entire History in
which I will labor when I shall attain unto the Haven whereof I do desire to
arrive. For my self, I do not affect to torment my sp^rits, I do not write but
only to divert my self, and before I do take my Pen into my hand, I do take my
Lute from the Case, and after I have wrote a leaf, I do walk, and play, which
is to me as the respite of Music betwixt the acts of a Comedy. Observe what
are the pains which I take, I bite not my Nails in meditation of what I am to
write; Would it be fit, do you think, to make posterity partake in things no
better studied? I should have repented to have been elaborate, for I desire
that none but my familiar Friends may peruse those works which I shall compose.
It will be some comfort to me (said Raymond) that I am one of that number, and
also I do persuade my self that, your History being finished, you will not
forget me. My brave friend (said Francion) upon my faith you speak too
seriously concerning that which is nothing worth; I will not leave you in this
error; you must understand I am no such great Scholar, as, since our first
acquaintance in France, I have made you, for pleasure to believe. There is more
of me in appearance than in effect; I have by heart some pieces of my friends,
of which I debate oftentimes with my self, and when I have presented any thing
to personages of Honor, I in the like manner do assist my self with the
labors of other men, or do add something to it of my self which is of no
value. How can it be, that so poor a Cavallier as my self should have learned
so much? It is for those to be learned who are Gentlemen of that profession,
and have slept upon Parnassus Hill. See here a pleasing Dissimulation, Do you
think (said Raymond) to excuse your self from showing me your works? Because
you will have it so (replied Francion) I will show unto you all that which I
have composed, although it be not worthy of your eye. It was well known that
Francion had not so narrow a capacity; In a short time he was able to
accomplish whatsoever he undertook, but it was true, that this was the season,
in which he had rather give a Subject to others to write upon, than to write
himself. He was now busy on other thoughts, and seeing that Hortensius, who
was always the same man, was endued with an incomparable presumption, he
determined to put some pleasant design in practice to make himself merry with
him. He communicated this design to Raymond, Du Buisson, and Audebert, without
whom he could do nothing at all, and the more to advance the plot, he made
partakers of it four Alman Gentlemen, with whom he was acquainted, Men of a
gallant Conversation, and whom Hortensius as yet had never seen. One day as he
was with him, Audebert entered into the Chamber, and said? There are lately some
Polonians come to Rome, Know you not what business they have to do? It is said
that their King is dead, but I have not yet heard who is he whom they have
chosen to succeed him, It must be some Prince of Italy who is now in this City.

All who were present said, it was the first news they had heard of it, and
discoursing with themselves who should be King of Polonia, One named one
Prince, and another another. This passed in this manner, and Du Buisson
departed from them on purpose to walk up and down the City; and returning
afterward to Raymond, as Francion, Dorini, and Hortensius, whom he had left
with them, were sitting down to Supper, he did speak with a serious
Countenance, Hardly, on my faith, will you believe that which I have learned
abroad; it is true, there are Polonians in this City, who are come to find out
him whom they have chosen for their King. I have enquired who it is; It was
represented to me that they have elected a French Gentleman, who, being endued
with singular Learning, will establish Justice amongst them in her primitive
splendour, and by his good Counsel will make them successful in their Wars.
I did speak to one Man, who told me, that he who is to be their King, is called
Hortensius, and that the Polonians did much rejoice to have a King, who in a
direct line proceeded from an ancient Consul of Rome, and turning to
Hortensius, he proceeded, Sir, It must needs be you. But is that true which you
speak said Hortensius? Buisson replied, Let me not live if it be not so; You
speedily will find sufficient assurances of it. Thereupon every one did begin
to speak seriously of it, rejoicing at so good a Fortune, insomuch that
Hortensius was quite besides himself.

They had not half supped, but a Caroach and some Horses were heard to arrive
at the Gate of the House, and there was one who twice or thrice knocked at the
Door; Petronius, a Gentleman who belonged to Francion, was sent down to
understand who it was. He brought word they were Polonians, who said they would
speak with a Signior named Hortensius. It is you (said Francion) they would
speak with; there is no doubt to be made of it. Good God! Why did we Sup so
late? How rudely does this Chamber show? They will find all things out of
order. Hortensius had then a glass of Wine in his hand, which he was conveying
to his mouth; but as the Proverb does affirm, That many things do happen
betwixt the cup and the mouth, this News did so ravish him with an exilience of
joy, that his hand failed, and both glass and Wine did fall down together; It
is spilt and broken, but it is no great matter, said transported Hortensius;
But what a Fool was I to put on such disgraceful Clothes, this day? What will
the Ambassadors say, to see me so ill appointed? I would that I had been
advertised of their coming but a little sooner, I would have taken care to
have accommodated my self better, and Raymond would have lent me his richest
Cloak. You must be something (said Raymond) in the fashion of their Country, I
will tell you what you shall do; whereupon they all rising from the Table, the
Groom did take away, and put all things in Raymonds Chamber in as good order as
possibly he could. Raymond sent into his Wardrobe for a short Coat lined with
Furr, the outside being of Rose-colour Satin, which he was accustomed to wear
when he was not well. He said unto Hortensius, Throw that upon your shoulders.
The Polonians will give you the more respect, seeing that you are already
habited according to the fashion of their Country; for there they make use of
Furrs altogether, because it is more cold in their Country than in this.
Hortensius was possessed with so extreme a Joy, that he believed all manner of
Counsels. He put on the Coat very readily, and being set in a high Chair,
according to the advice of Francion, they did all stand bare-headed on both
sides of him, to give an opinion to the Polonians that he was some grand
Signior. Raymond whispered him in the ear, Be sure you have your Latin Tongue
in a readiness, for, no doubt, their Oration will be in that Language, it is
as familiar with them as their Mother Tongue; and I assure my self, that one of
the reasons for which they elected you to be their King, is, because they are
advertized you are an extraordinary Latin Scholar.

As he spoke those words, the four Almans, who were apparelled according to the
Polonian fashion, did enter into the Chamber with six Torches burning before
them. The most apparent of the Troup, who represented the Ambassador, did make
a profound reverence to Hortensius, and those who attended on him, afterward
he made this Speech, having first methodically coughed, and stroaked and wiped
both his Mustachioes one after the other.

Mortuo Ladislao R^ge nostro, Princeps invictissme, (he did pronounce those
words in a loud and most graceful accent,) Poloni divino numine afflati te
Regem suffragiis suis elegerunt, cum te Justitia and Prudentia adeo similem
Defuncto credant, ut ex cineribus illius quasi Phoenix alter videaris
surrexisse. Nunc ergo nos tibi submittimus, ut habenas Regni nostri suscipere
digneris. In pursuance of this, the Ambassador made a long Panegyric to
Hortensius, in which, to speak the truth, he had many elegant expressions; for
he was a very learned man. Amongst other things, he declared, That the Reason
which most particularly moved the Polonians to elect Hortensius for their King,
(besides the renown which he had gained by his Writings* which were spread
through all Countries) was, That he was the Man of whom the ancient Sages of
that Country were believed to speak in their Prophecies of a learned King which
should make Polonia the happiest Country on the Earth. When the Orator had
ended, Hortensius ^lucing him with a nod of his head, which showed his gravity,
did make answer in these few words, Per me re^ibit aurea aetas, Sit n i^
populus b^nus, bonus to Rex. He would speak no more at that present, believing,
that Princes ought not to be too prodigal of their words, seeing that one
accent of theirs is worth five hundred of their Subjects. The Polonians made
unto him many humble Reverences, and taking their leaves of him, did use such
strange gestures, as if they had been ravished with admiration. One of them
could not forbear from saying, O miraculum Mundi! O Rex Chrystome, qualis
Pactolus ex ore tuo emanet? Another cried out, O alter Amphion! quot urbes
sonus tuae vocis aedificaturus est? And so they departed, accumulating him with
all praises, and Presages, as the future glory of Polonia, and Francion did
conduct them down with an extreme joy, to see them act their parts unto the
life.

Upon his return, Buisson being newly come out of his ecstasy, in which he
feigned himself to be, did cast himself down before the knees of Hortensius,
and said unto him with a voice weak and faint, Great Prince, Have a care of
your faithful Servant, now your Virtues have added one spoke more to the wheel
of your Fortune; Make me your Creature, and give me some place in which I may
live with Honor. Francion plucking him from him, reproved him for his
impudence, so suddenly to importune the King, and said unto him, Cannot you
have the patience to attend until he be arrived to his Dominions? If Du Buisson
do not deport himself more wisely (said Hortensius) I shall tell him, That he
deserves to be rejected when he demands any thing; and that Francion
deserves to have any thing granted to him when he demands it not.

As this passed, there did arise a question, whether Hortensius should stay
where he was, or return to his ordinary Lodging? Raymond was of opinion that he
should not go, because the place was too little, and that it were expedient be
should stay there, where he should be as Master of them all; and because that
all the French Nation would think themselves honored by the Kingdom of
Polonia, who had made choice of him, there was scarce a French man in Rome, he
said, but would come to attend upon his person, as if they were his followers,
and do him honor before the Polonians. Raymond having spoken these words, did
resign the possession of his Chamber to him, and leaving him a Groom to help
him off with his clothes, he retired into another room with the rest of the
Company.

They were no sooner departed, but Hortensius called for Audebert, being
already ready desirous to use the authority of a King: when he was come, he
told him that he must sit up the greatest part of that night by his Bedside,
because the cares which did possess him did hinder him from sleeping. Audebert
was very glad of it, for being of a pregnant understanding, he hoped, by his
long waking, and extravagant discourses, Hortensius would become a Fool, and
that so they should receive the more pleasure from him. Audebert my friend
(said Hortensius) Did not thou remember that the Polonians said, rhat they
had Prophecies concerning me, they are not deceived in it; If we shall but
consult with the Ephemerides, we shall discover very rare consequences; Did
not thou read when we were at Paris the Almanac of John Petit of Paris, and
that of Larivay the young Troyen, I am persuaded that they did prognosticate of
my adventures. One of them says, that on this time there shall be a change of
the affairs toward the North, and that the humble shall be exalted. Is it not
a great change, when they come so far to look for a King? and have I not always
walked humbly before God? It is to be imagined that you have (said Audebert) I
would that we had the Oracles of the Sibylls, the Book of Abbot Ioachim, the
Revelation of Saint Bridget, the Prophecies of Merlin, or the Centuries of
Nostradamus, we should there, no doubt, find something which has been spoken
of you, and to tell you the truth, all those books are very gentile, and very
useful; Things are not to be marked there, but when they are come to pass;
But whether they have made mention or not of your Royalty, what need you to
care, since it is arrived to you? O (replied Hortensius) It would be of great
use unto me, for I may possibly find that also which may befall me all the
remainder of my life, and by that means I may withdraw my self from the dangers
which do threaten me. Wherefore, if you will gain my favor, make it now appear
unto me by your expedition, and seek out for me the Revelations of Saint
Bridget, our Host has some part of them. Audebert, who to please himself did
endeavor to please him, did inquire for the Book, and at last obtained it,
Hortensius caused him to read the Prophecies, to which he listened with great
attention, and when he heard any thing which seemed to square with his own
adventures, he did read it himself nine or ten times over, and did m^k the Page
with his Nail, and having made extravagant explications thereon, he did dictate
them to Audebert, who did wrire them down for him. In this manner they passed
away the greatest part of that night, and at the last their heads nodding to
one another, as if they would both fall from their shoulders on the Book, they
resolved to give some hours of Indulgence to sleep and rest. Hortensius being
in bed, did speak to Audebert to come to Bed to him, but he was very
ceremonious, and alleged that it was too much honor for him to lie with a
Prince, and therefore he would not commit so great an oversight, but Hortensius
assured him that he should lie with him for once, and that he would not permit
him to refuse that happiness, so long as the Scepter was not yet in his hand.
Audebert in obedience to his command, coming into the Bed to him, they both of
them immediately did fall asleep, and so soundly, as if they had laid a wager
which of them should have their senses most beclowded. As for the Groom of the
Chamber, he did go to bed long before, being weary of waiting on such a Master.

The next morning Audebert awaked very early, and having put on his clothes, he
called to the Groom of the Chamber, to come and assist Hortensius to make
himself ready (for he would have him to be observed with all respect) and he
had the honor himself to bring him a clean shirt: In taking of the foul one,
so rank a smell did surprise his Nostril, that he could not forhear from
speaking to him; Woe is me how strongly do you smell? And how do I smell?
replied Hontensius, Do not you consider that I begin to appear to be a King in
all things? Do you not perceive how much already I savor of Alexander? If your
Armpits, said Audebert, do savor of Alexander, I am afraid your feet have the
favor of Darius, who before he was a King, was sometimes a Messenger. What!
Are you become a Mocker (replied Hortensius?) But it is no matter, I take all
in good part, I know that Kings have those always near unto them who assume the
liberty to speak freely unto them, to solace and divert their spirits,
otherwise they should enjoy no pleasure in this world. Just as he spoke this,
Behold where Raymond, Francion, Du Buisson, and Dorini did come altogether to
salute him, and demanded of him how he slept that night. He made answer, that
he passed away the best part of it, in reading the book of St. Bridget, and
showed them the Prophecies which he had expounded to his advantage, by which
they perceived that the greatest part of this new King was Fool, and that their
Plato was crowned with extraordinary success. He who had wrote so many
Romances found it not strange at all, that from a poor Writer, he was become a
King, seeing that he had often wrote of the like adventures, in which he could
find nothing so truly resembling the condition of a King, as he perceived in
his own, and he was so accustomed to these things, that he found nothing
extraordinary.

As Francion, Raymond, and Hortensius, did seriously entertain themselves on
these Prophecies, Du Buisson did interrupt them, and said to Hortensius, Be
pleased to inform my Ignorance, I know not yet by what Title to call you,
whether by the Title of Monsieur, or Monsigneur, or of Sire. Hortensius made
answer, When I have the Crown upon my head, it will be good to call me Sire.
For the present, I will content my self with the Title of Monse^gneur. Pardon
us (said Raymond) if when you shall be pleased to command us, we in this shall
disobey you. There is no question of it to be made, but you at this present are
to bs entitled Sire; for you a long time have been King by merit, although not
by condition. Do as you please then (replied Hortensius,) But you Du Buisson,
what is it that you would say unto me? Sir, I demand of you (said Du Buisson)
If being in Polonia you would not equally distribute Justice? And, as you
recompense Virtue, whether you would not also punish Vice? And remembering those
who have heretofore offended you, whether you would not by some fair pretenses
draw them to your Court, to put them there to death? I have heard mention made
of Escluses, of Salust, the Toothdrawer, and some Sergeants, who have not
entreated you as they ought, Will you not call them to an account for it?
Hortensius having a little meditated with himself, did make answer, Understand
me, It is not requisite that the King of Polonia should take care to revenge
himself of the Injuries which were done to the Poet Hortensius. I compose this
Apothegm, having that of a King of of France for my Example, who after he was
King, would not revenge himself of the Injuries done unto him when he was but
Duke of Orleance. My readings in this Nature shall profit me much for the time
to come, and I will write unto my Hostess of Paris to send me my Books of
Commonplaces, which I have left in pawn with her for five and thirty Sous which
I do owe her; When I have those Books, no Subject shall be propounded to me,
but I will have an answer ready, from those of the ancient Monarchs whose lives
I have solded down. But until those Books come, I will make use of Plutarch,
and the Collections of Erasmus; And you, my dear Friends, who do now assist me,
I will teach you, and I will give you all that I have, in the Imitation of
Alexander, and reserve to my self only the Hope. Do you see what an
application) make of things, and I will so continue them, that the Book which
hereafter shall be made of my History, shall be the most excellent one in the
world. You Audebert, it seems to me that your Humor is apprehensive, and
curious enough, it shall be your employment to collect all my Apothegms. In the
morning you shall come unto me, and it shall be late at night before you depart
from me, and sometimes you shall lie all night in my Chamber; for in the
Nightime, if I awake, and speak any thing at all, it will be sure to be an
Apothegm. Buisson interrupted him, and said, What? If you ask for the
Chamber Pot to make water, or what if you are married, will you entertain Madam
the Queen with Apothegms only? Hold your peace (said Hortensius) it is not to
you I speak, it is to you my Audebert, who shall keep a Register of that which
every day I shall speak of. It is an excellent invention, and which will cost
nothing. They keep a Register of expenses in every house, be it never so
little; The Receivers and Treasurers of Princes are employed all the year in
keeping of Accounts; And shall there not be a Man appointed punctually to set
down whatsoever word the King does speak? I will not fall into that fault, and
you shall be my Historiographer. What pension will you allow me (Sir) said
Audebert? The King of Polonia made answer, You do precipitate too much to
demand that question. Be patient till I can see what acres I can spare, I
cannot dispose of places of Preferment to you, according to your expectation,
until I am first acquainted with the Course of my Affairs.

As he spoke that, Raymond told him, That he should suddenly have the
opportunity to inform himself of the Estate in which his Kingdom was, and that
the Polonians were invited to come to dinner to him. This news was very wellcom
to him, being desirous to know their humor. He was apparalleld as on the day
before, in a Suit of Spanish cloth, of color de Roy. They caused him to throw
over his shoulder his little furred Coat, and they made fast a great Brooch to
his Hat, that he might the better appear in the Polonian garb.

After that he came down into the Hall, where not long afterward the Germans
came disguised in Polonian habits; They did salute him with infinite respects,
and made a great difficulty to be so bold as to dine with their Master at his
own Table. To reconcile all, Hortensius sat at the upper end, leaving three or
four places empty, and the company observing that distance, did sit down on
either side of the Table, which was a very long one. During the time of Dinner,
all the discourse was to his praise; Every action was admired, and he spoke not
a word, but it was cried up for an Oracle, so that his presumption did blind
him more and more, and made him believe that all which he heard was true. When
the cloth was taken away, there arrived many French Gentlemen, to whom Raymond
had imparted the drollery, who came to establish a Court for Hortensius, as if
he had been a Prince of their own Nation; In the mean time Dorini addressed
himself to Nays, to acquaint her with this Comedy, and to know if she pleased
to entertain this delightful Company. He no sooner understood that she would
be most glad to see this new King, but immediately he returned to acquaint
Francion with it, who demanded of Hortensius if he would pass away that
Afternoon with the most beautiful Lady in Italy; He made answer, he should be
glad to solace himself with that divertisement, and immediately three Caroaches
were prepared for all the Company. He refused to go abroad with his Coat lined
with Furr, because the Polonians had no such attire themselves, but it was
represented to him, that they did not accustom themselves to wear Furrs in that
Country, because it was a warm Climat, and although it was not unfashionable to
have a Cloak unlined as was theirs, yet it would not become him to show himself
so moveable or uncertain, as to leave off that fashion and habiliment which he
had taken. In this manner they contented him, and he took his Caroach, the
Polonians being with him in it, and Audebert, who was always to be with him, to
write down whatsoever he said. The other two Caroaches were filled with French
Gentlemen, and they followed the former which was much looked upon by all the
People. Some believed they were Maskers, and that they were to dance some Mask,
but they were much amazed to see Mummeries at that season of the year, which w
^s off from Shrovetide, Nays entertained them honorably, and at that time many
invited Ladies did arrive to see the new King of Polonia. He showed himself so
courteous, that he would not sit down unless that they were seated also. For
the Gentlemen to testify their respect unto the Prince, were contented to be
bareheaded, and to lean some against one place, and some against another. The
first Complement which Nays spoke, was, that she was excessively glad of the
happiness which was arrived to the most excellent personage in the world, and
she had now a reason to believe that God would destroy Mankind no more, because
he was pleased that the Scepter should be given to such a one, who would
restore the Universe to its Primitive Beauty. That which (Madam) you ought more
to admire (said Buisson) is, that of a small thing he has vouchsafed to make a
great one, as if a Pyramid should stand on its own spire; and so indeed all
things do increase, the smallest Rivers do swell into a Sea, an Acorn grows
into an Oak, and our King who was almost nothing, is now advanced into a
Potentate. His life is governed by a Destiny, contrary to that of Dionysius the
Tyrant, who from a King descended into a Pedant, but he from a Pedant is
promoted to a King. Learn to speak more modestly (said Hortensius) How foolish
and inconsiderate is your youth! I deny not (said Hortensius) that I arise but
from small beginnings, but what need this be spoken? We ought to forget all
which is passed, as if it had never been, and we ought to believe that Fortune
is drunk, and does not know what she has done her self, when she sends
calamities unto Kings. How many Kings have been known to come from a sordid
pedigree, that have not been esteemed the less for that? Tamberlan was a
Swineherd, Agathocles was the Son of a Potter, and to put him in remembrance of
his Parentage, he commanded that they should mingle Vessels of Earth with those
of Gold and Silver. It is well known that Ausonius who was a good Author
Composed this Verse. Fama est Fictilibus coenasse Agathoclea regem, etc. But
without going so far, One of the Kings, even of our Polonia, was a Labourer,
and yet in memory of him, they laid up his Sandals in the Treasury. It is an
observation of no use, Besides it is well known, I am not of so base a
Pedigree, and if peradventure I were* I ought not to be esteemed the less. Look
in the Romances all over, and you shall find what a cognizance there is.
Chariclea was believed to be the Daughter of a Priest, but she was proved
afterward to be the Daughter of a King. Daphnis and Chloe were conceived to be
the Children of a poor Shepherd, and it was afterward discovered that great
Signiors were their Fathers; and I believe that the passages of my life being
interwoven with so many wonders, I shall be acknowledged at last to be the Son
of some great Prince. They will bring me my Cradle, my Muckinder, and my
Hobbyhorse garnished with precious stones, which will add faith to the Nobility
of my Race. My Heart tells me so, and I am confident it is not in vain that I
make this presage, for the celestial inspirations are never found to be Liars.
It is easy to be seen that I am of the Royal Progeny, for never any Man had so
great a desire to be King, as I have.

All this which you represent unto us is true (said Francion) and moreover take
notice that the year of Jubilee approaches, and we ought not to doubt but that
many Princes who have made clandestine marriages will then discover them to
receive absolution for their offenses. I have heard it reported, that on the
last Jubilee there were some Potentates who acknowledged in this manner their
own Children. Hortensius did still hold some discourse in consideration of this
Subject, and observing that Audebert did for bear to be attentive to him, being
busy in communication with Du Buisson, insomuch, that although he had taken
his Table Book, to write down all that which the King should say, yet he had
not of late written any thing at all, he made a sign to him with his eyes, and
then said unto him, Audebert, write down all, Do you not observe that this is
remarkable? I have put down all already, saving the Latin only (said Audebert)
Whereupon Hortensius all along did dictate to him the Epigrame of Ausonius,
believing it was something of great consequence to his life, which convayed an
incredible pleasure to the standers by; But Du Buisson who could not hold his
peace, did say unto him, Sir, I know but one word of Latin, and it is, Simia
semper Simia. Heretofore you have spoken it your self, and now you prove it.
Observe but this Wagg (said Hortensius) yesterday when the Gentlemen of Polonia
had told me that their Compatriots had given unto me the Scepter of that
Nation, I believed that I should want nothing but Jeasters about me to be a
King, but now I see I shall not fail of them. All these Answers of Hortensius
seemed admirable to the standers by, and at every word the Ambassadors would
lift up their hands to Heaven, speaking with admiration in the Latin Tongue. O
how great is this his wisdom! He is as full of sweetness as of clemency! how
contented shall our Polonia be to have him! Plato says, That to make
Commonwealths flourish, Philosophers must reign, or that Kings must be
Philosophers. Behold here one of those Kings which he desires; Since we are
informed that he has been a Regent Master in the Universities, he must of
necessity teach Logic, which is the first part of Philosophy, and he must have
it also at his singers ends. Because that Nays did not understand the Latin
Tongue, Francion stood near unto her, and expounded every word what they said.
For the French Tongue she did speak it perfectly her self.

At the last, to put Hortensius upon some agreeable discourse, she of her own
accord did say unto him, that she had heard he had a desire to compose five or
six excellent Romances, some part whereof he had begun, she demanded of him if
he would now take the pains to continue them. He made answer, that he now had
other things to do, and that he might have Scholars enough to accomplish them
for him. As for himself, he was so resolved, that words should give place to
actions, for he had an extreme desire utterly to extirpate the race of the
Ottomans, and advance his own person to conquer the Idumaen palms, so that he
was determined to put all into Arms, as soon as he should come into Polonia.
Remember me then I beseech you (said Du Buisson) and give me a company of
Carabins upon the Sea. Go too then (said Hortensius) you shall have a Company,
but I believe that you merit rather the place of the Kings Fool, than any other.

Francion fearing that the King of Polonia would grow into a choler, and that
Du Buisson would not be able to contain himself, did alter the scene of the
discourse, and said unto Hortensius, But what are the Laws and Ordinances which
you will establish to make your people happy? I would willingly speak of this,
replied Hortensius, that the Polonish Gentlemen who are here present may
understand me, I will therefore that my Estate be made famous, as much for
Letters as for Arms, and the rather, to soften the stubborn humor of the
Cosacks, who are a Martial people, I will cause a whole dozen of Poets to come
from Paris, who shall establish an Academy, and give Laws for Poesy and
Romances. My desire is, that all the world shall make Books in my Kingdom, and
on all Subjects. The Romances shall be no more of Love and War only, but they
shall contain as well subjects of Law, of Merchandise, and of Receipts of the
Exchequer, In this course of Affairs there shall be daily brave and new
adventures. No man before me had ever the least imagination of this; I am the
Master of the Invention. In this manner the Draper shall make Romances on his
traffic, and the Advocate on his practice. All the world shall be good
Company, and Men shall speak nothing but Romances, and Verses shall be in such
reputation, that a certain price shall be set upon them. He who has no Money,
and presents a Stanza to a Taverner, shall receive for his pains a quarter of
a pint, half a pint for a Sonnet, a pint for an Ode, and a quart of Wine for a
Poem, and so higher for other pieces. This will provide well for the
necessities of the people; For Bread, Meat, Wood, Candie, Cloth and Silks,
shall be bought according to the price which shall be set upon Verse, whose
subject shall be the praise of Merchants, and their Merchandises. This Comfort
shall poor Poets have, when they have no money. This will I establish for
Commerce. For that which belongs to Justice, it shall be upright as brief. If
the cause be full of perplexity, it shall be unraveli'd and expounded at the
charge of him who shall gain it, or he shall have the Law to pass on his side
who shall be the most learned Man. As for the Laws of War, No man shall be
entertained into the place of a Captain, who has not by heart Amadis de Gaul,
and the Knight of the Sun; for without those Books a Man cannot be
courageous. For other things, I have many Stratagems to rout the Turks, I will
cause Men to be mounted on Chariots which shall appear all in Fire, there shall
be javelins and Lances of Fire, Grenades and Petarbs, and many Blazing
Stars, and Dragons flaming in the air, that the Barbarians beholding how I
imitate the Thunderer, the Comets and the Stars, shall believe that I am
something greater than Mahomet himself. I will have great Circles of Crystal,
on the back whereof I will cause certain lights to be placed, which shall make
them shine as the Bow in Heaven; so will I counterfeit the party-colored I^is,
that brave nothing which is all things, that divine Arbalest, that rich Arch,
which is not to be seen at the Bridge of the Exchange at Paris, but at the
Bridge of the Angels in Paradise, glittering all over with celestial Goldsmiths
shops. How will these Visions trouble my Enemies? How shall they be possessed
with the affrighting noise which my people shall make, who overcome, and they
themselves who shall be overcome?

These Inventions of Hortensius were found to be excellent, but Audebert did
not forbear to acquaint him, that he was amazed to see him resolved on so many
and so great Combats; for sometimes he had heard him say, that he would never
go to War, but when the Muskets should be charged with Cyprian powder, and
laden with pellets of Sugar, and the powder in the pan should be the powder of
Orras. He made answer, That he feared not the Alarms of war, because he had the
Right on his side, and that neither force or Stratagem should be ever seen to
be wanting in him.

Whiles he spoke this, the Ambassadors consulted together, and Francion, who
was their Interpreter, made known unto him, that they could not approve what
their King said, for they were afraid, that the Grandies of their Country would
not give way to have their ancient Laws to be exchanged into new; but
Hortensius said, That they should then see what would be done, when he should
prove unto them that his Propositions were just.

One of the Ladies in the Company of Nays being very curious, desired to know
if the King of Polonia had not a resolution to marry, and Francion propounded
the question to him. He replied, That he perceived well enough that there was
some Italian Baggage who desired to be a Queen; but she was mistaken, for he
would have none but either some Daughter of the Royal blood of England, or of
Denmark, who above all things, should bring her chastity for her Dowry. The
Polonians acquainted Francion with what they conceived fit to be done; and he
spoke aloud unto the Company, That the Ambassadors were afraid their King would
but deceive himself, if he thought ever to have a Wife who had yet the Rose of
her Virginity, because it was the custom of their Country, to put their Queen,
the first day of her Marriage, into a great chamber, where all the Grandies of
the Realm did lie with her one after another.

This did put Hortensius into a great choler, who protested he would never
endure that Villainy, and that he had read the Chapter of Polonia all over in
the Book of Estates and Empires, but it made not the least mention of so
execrable a Custom. The Ambassadors maintained that it had always been
observed; and that to know if a Man has a crooked nose, he must not look upon
his Picture, but he must look upon himself, and if his Book were a liar, or a
flatterer, he must not give so much credit to it, as to any thing which
properly did belong unto him, and that for their own parts they had no mind to
abolish the good Custom of their Country, to lie with their Queen; for being
the prime and first of the Estate, they were to taste first of all of the Wife
of their King. The Ladies were all for them in that behalf; and although that
Du Buisson affirmed, that he should take heed how he married in that year of
disgrace, for, without all doubt, by the disordered and too hasty revolution of
the Sphere, when his Wife should be in the sign of Gemini, he would be in that
of Capricorn, yet they counseled him not to lead a single life, assuring him,
that he should never be deceived in his Queen.

After there several Entertainments, all the Company, saving Francion, took
their leave of Nays, and they brought back the King of Polonia to his Lodging:
There was a great Press of People to see him pass by. The report of his folly
was spread over all Rome. Some laughed, and others were amazed at it. For
himself, he believed that the Multitude was only to admire him, and being well
satisfied in his own particular; he locked himself up in his Chamber as soon as
possibly he could, with his Historiographer, to cause him to read over to him
whatsoever he had writ of his Discourse at the House of Nays, to correct them
in several places where they failed.

In the mean time Francion entertained his Mistress with the pleasant
extravagances of this new King; and, to make amends for the time in which they
kept a serious Countenance before him, they now both of them laughed their
fill. But because this was not that which did most nearly concern them, they
soon did alter the subject of their discourse. Francion did acquaint her with
the violence of his passion, and Nays was so touched with a transportation of
Love, that she did take out of a little Box the Picture of Floriander, which
she had yet reserved, and did give it to him to do what he would with it,
representing to him, That she would not regard any thing whatsoever, that
should make her think of any other but himself. He made some difficulty to take
it, alleging, That he doubted not of her Fidelity, and that he was not of so
outrageous a temper, as to enter into a jealousy. Nevertheless he did take it
along with him, and on his return he did present it unto Baymond. Nays being a
Widow, although she was the Mistress of her actions, yet she demanded the
Counsel of her Kindred concerning her Marriage, who although they were not
altogether satisfied that she should marry a stranger, yet they pretended to
like well of it, because they did know her to be entire in her resolutions, and
that she would not forsake them for any Remonstrances of theirs. Francion had
already made a visit to some of them with Dorini, and showed many excellent
proofs of his abilities; but their Disposition was not so tractable, as to be
taken with him the first or second time. Nevertheless the affair did so far
advance it self, that the Marriage was to be solemnized within six days. Our
Lover thought the time long, and did languish during this delay, so that he had
reason to seek some recreation to divert himself amongst the extravagances of
Hortensius.

Being returned to him, he caused him to sup with him, in the same Ceremony as
at Dinner, and Night being come, he did sleep in the same bed as he did the
Night before. The Ambassadors demanded of him, when he would be pleased to
depart, and take upon him the Government of Polonia, which longed for his
presence? He made answer, It should be when they pleased; but Francion
interposed, and told him, that suddenly he was to be married, and that he must
do him the honor as to assist at his Marriage, which being celebrated, they
would joyfully go all together, with all the French Gentlemen in Rome, and that
other Nations would follow him also, of which he might compose an Army, which
would make him formidable in all the places he should come. The Polonian
Gentlemen did allege, that they had a Command to make no delay at all in their
journey; but their Monark did swear unto them, That on this fair occasion which
offered it self, he would stay, although he should lose all his Provinces and
his Royalties to boot. At this the Ambassadors seemed to be discontented, and,
in a garb which showed themselves to be much unsatisfied, departed from him
with very few Complements. He cause them to be called back, and did appease
them, demanding of them, What was the reason they were not satisfied? They made
answer, That their desire was, that they may be lodged in the same House with
him; for it was the Custom of their Princes to allow Chambers in their Palaces
to all those of their quality. Hortensius made answer, He would do that, and
more also, and that he would come and take up his Lodgings with them; whereupon
he did rise, and made himself ready to go unto their House with them: and
although themselves did not well like of it, yet they did conduct him thither,
alleging they should receive a great Contentment by it, because for the time to
come they should always have their King with them, and observe his Disposition
to be conformable unto theirs. They did prepare for him the best Bed they had,
but on the next Morning, having very early put on their riding clothes to
travel to Naples, they dislodged without Trumpets, and paying their Host but
half of the account that was due unto him, they did assure him, that their
Companion, whom they had left behind them, would discharge the rest.

When he was thoroughly awake, the Host entered into his Chamber, and demanded
of him, If he would have the expenses of his Companions put in the same Bill of
Affair with his own? He made answer, That he was not yet to depart his House;
But the Host replied, The rest are all gone. Hortensius demanded, If there was
never a Polonian left in his House? To whom the Host replied, There was never
any Polonian lodged here, I only do desire to know, If you will be responsible
for the four Almans which are gone, seeing they honored you as their Master.

They were in this Discourse, when the first Host, in whose House Hortensius
lodged, having heard at Raymonds Lodgings where to find him, did enter also
into his Chamber, and making a great complaint against him, he demanded of him
the Rent for his Chamber, and other moneys due for other expenses, and called
him Impostor, for going away without bidding him Adieu, because he had not an
Intent to pay him. Audebert, who at Raymonds Lodgings had directed the Host
where to find Hortensius, and suspected the quarrel that would be betwixt them,
did follow him afar off, and found Hortensius in a hot disputation with the
two Italians. Hortensius seeing him, was surprised with joy, and cried out, Ah
Audebert! You are come in a good time, these two Brothers in Oppression and
Deceit do tyrannize over me, without respect unto my quality. Declare unto them
that I shall be a King, and shall have Means enough to discharge them.
Audebert, having taken pleasure enough by their Contestation, did appease the
two Hosts, promising them that Hortensius should pay them very honestly, and
that he would pass his word for him, so that they returned him his clothes
again on which, they had laid their hands, and principally on the little Coat
lined with Furr, having a resolution to have sold them all, and to pay
themselves what he owed them; for they would not entreat him more respectfully,
seeing he seemed to them to be but a very Fool.

Hortensius, having quickly put on his clothes, did depart with Aud-bert,
covering himself with an ordinary Cloak; for he would wear that which was lined
with Furr no longer, because he had none of the Polonians to follow him. He
repaired to Raymond and Franc^on, and all the way as he did go along be was in
a great distemper; when he was come to them he made his complaints that the
Polonians were gone without bidding him Farewell, which was the true sign of a
great incivility in them, for which he could not conjecture any cause. You see
(said Francion) that they are discontented at you. Yesterday you propounded new
Laws, which, being King, you would observe in their Country, to the prejudice
of their ancient government, I do believe it did much displease them, and
moreover you did not entreat them with that Honor and Courtesy which they
expected; As soon as ever you had heard of their arrival, you ought to have
accomodated them with a fair house, and rich movables, and to have entertained
them at your expense, and after that you had given them audience, you ought to
have showed your self liberal, and have given to the principal of them a Seal
heavy with Diamonds, and to every one of the rest a great Chain of Gold. These
are the gifts which Princes at this day do bestow on the Ambassadors sent to
them, and sometimes they do give things which are more precious. It may be so
(said Hortensius) but I never observed it in any Book. Francion replied, The
chiefest Book which you can read, is the Experience of the world. The present
mode of these times it but a folly to me (said Hortensius) I do govern my self
according to the Ancients, and having nothing to bestow upon them, I did
reserve my bounty to a better opportunity.

But tell me, What think you of it? Did not they say yesterday, that they could
not attend any long time for me, having a charge to return with all speed.
This, no doubt, was the ground of their sudden departure. For our parts we will
follow them as soon as your Marriage shall be solemnized. Francion replied,
Betwixt this and that we will take further Counsel; I am afaid they will not
have you for their King, and that they are gone to speak evil of you in their
own Country.

These last words did leave a deep impression in the heart of Hortensius. He
considered with himself, that possibly he had lost the Kingdom of Polonia by
his own fault, and that he should have borrowed round sums of money, and put
himself into a garb to have received and honored the Ambassadors. But
Raymond, to comfort him, said unto him, For what do you afflict your self? If
you shall not be King, you shall not be less at the worst than you were ten
days ago. What pleasure could you have to command a barbarous and an unknown
people? It is better by far to be a Peer at home, than a King abroad, and to be
a Companion, as you always are, with men of gallant and ingenious spirits. A
King is nothing else but an honorable Servant; The people are merry or asleep,
when he is awake, and has his head full of cares for them. When the Diadem was
brought to Seleucus, did not he say, that he who knew the griefs and cares
which it covered, would not deign to take it up from the Earth? and have you
not read in Plutark many other excellent Examples concerning this subject?

This Discourse touched the very Soul of Hortensius, who immediately, to
overcome his affliction, caused a Book to be brought unto him, the subject
whereof was, The contempt of Worldly Creatures, on which he did amuze his
Spirit, whilst the others did solace themselves with all varieties of
entertainments.

Francion, observing that this Pedant did fall into a humor which brought no
pleasure to them, did pass away the greatest part of that day in discourse
with his Mistress, and the day following, considering that Hortensius could
furnish them no more with accustomed entertainments of delight, instead of his
natural Comedy, had recourse to the Italian Comedians, who came to play at Nays
house. He found them to be a gallant Company, and after a few days he
acquainted them with all the pleasant stories of this brave Master of his, when
he was in the College under him, This was the only plot of their play, and at
that time Signior Do^tor acted the part of the Pedant. Hortensius was present
at this Comedy but he thought it was not concerning himself of whom they spoke,
he had too good an opinion of himself, to think would make plays of his actions.

The next morning the Comedians acted another play at Raymonds House. The Plot
was a new invention, and composed of diverse languages, which were but as a
Medley, so that those who understood the Ita^ia^ Tongue might easily apprehend
them all. But on the day following there was a more famous company of
Comedians, who had a Stage to act on. Francion, Raymond, Audebert, Du Buisson,
and two other French Gentlemen, had not long before, given them a Comedy, in
which they had all a hand; It was acted at Nays house: They had made it
speedily, and very familiarly. It was altogether of Verses, which they had
taken out of Roasard, Belleau, Buif, Desportes, Garnier, and other modern
Poets: They made use of nothing but what they had already by heart, so that
they had accommodated their Comedy according to that which was in their own
Spirits, when others do captivate their Spirits to the rules and discourses of
Comedy. Nevertheless these pieces being hansomly brought together did suit
very well, although it was fantastical enough. There were only some Melancholy
Italians who took no pleasure in it, because they could not but with difficulty
comprehend the French Poesy. Francion did endeavor to content these men with
another device. The next day he caused a Comedy to be acted, which all manner
of Nations could understand, for it was acted only by signs. He had caused it
to be played in France once before; The signs and gestures were so familiar,
that in a short time the Spectators might easily understand it.

Although he exercised himself in all these Fancies and Inventions, as we have
said, yet they were not so long or tedious, but he had some time remaining to
intertain his Mistress. The day following was altogether dedicated to these
affairs. The Company whom they had invited supped that Evening with Nays.
Signior Hortensius was not forgotten, who, seeing all the world disposed unto
mirth, was constrained to the same himself, although he was not now taken for a
King, and had no more such great honor done unto him. And although some
amongst them did begin to be serious, yet he would be now a little frolic, and
having in his hand a Venice glass made in the fashion of a Gondalo, he said,
that those Philosophers were of all the most certain, who affirmed, that there
were ships on the land, and that mean it by such a Vessel as that; and seeing
Audebert about to drink, he said unto him, Take heed how you put good wine into
a bad Vessel: What! Do you think (said Audebert) I will pour this wine down
your throat? Hortensius finding himself to be hit so home, did change the
discourse, and seeing two Partridges in one dish, he told Audebert that there
were three Partridges, and did attempt to persuade him to it, saying oftentimes
unto him. One and Two are Three. Audebert, to put an end to his Sophistical
disputation, did give one of the Partridges to Buisson, and took the other
himself, and said unto Hortensius, the third is for you, Do you take it.
Hortensius observing himself so mocked, was desirous to be revenged, and the
better to show the subtilty of his Spirit, there were directly before him four
Pigeons in another dish, by which he conceived he should be able to prove his
former manner of argument to be of some value. He pretented one of them to two
strange Gentlemen, who laughed at him, and said, One and Two are Three, and
afterward he presented another to Audebert and Du Buisson, and repeated the
former words; which having done, he took the other two, and did put them on his
own Trencher, saying, One and Two are Three. This Device did please so well,
that even those who were deceived did approve it; But Francion, and the other
Gallants who sat above, could not take notice of it, because the Table was
long, and there were many who sat between them; but it was soon published, and
Francion commending it, said, He remembered that Hortensius once before did play
his part as handsomely: For when I was (said he) in the College under him, a
Gentleman who was my Kinsman, did come to Paris with his Family, and invited us
to a Supper. Amongst other things, there was a Pheasant on the Table, Monsieur
the Pedagogue was entreated to cut it up, and to distribute it; He gave the
Head to the Master of the Feast, saying, that it belonged to him, being Chief
at the table; He gave the Neck to his Wife, because she was joined to the Head,
as was that; To the two Daughters he gave the two Legs, because (he said) they
loved Dancing; And to his Son, and to my self, he gave the two Wings, making us
believe that it was our part, because, being young Gentlemen, we ought to love
the Hawk on his Wing; For himself, he reserved the Body, saying, He ought to
have it, as representing the Body of the University of Paris.

In the pursuit of this Account they entered by degrees, and as were insensibly
upon others, where Francion made so apparent his Wit, that all the Italians who
were present, had afterward for his own particular, the whole people of France
in greater Estimation. As for Hortensius, He would also set forth himself, and
that knowledge which he had; And as the Musicians were playing and singing, he
did exercise his Eloquence in the Praises of Music, and assured them, That the
passions and affections of Men, did represent the several parts of Music;
Humility (he said) did bear the Base, and Ambition the Trebble; Choler did bear
the Tenor, and Revenge the Counter-Tenor; Prudence did keep Time; Nature did
sing the plain Song, Artifice did quaver, Grief made the stops, sighs, and
Dissimulation the feignings; And for the Instruments of Music, Avarice played
on the Harp, Prodigality on the Cornet, but not on the Melodious Cornet, but
out of that Horn out of which the Gamester does throw his Dice; Love plays on
the Violl, because it does violate the Girls; Treason plays on the
lewes-Trump, for it trumpeth all the World; and Justice plays on the
Hault-boyes, because she raises up that Gibbet, on which the Malefactors are
executed.

These new applications gave much pleasure to all the Company, and they
entreated the Doctor to make a more particular explication of whatsoever he had
spoken in reference of the passions to Music, which he did very willingly,
believing that all the world admired him. After that, observing that Raymond
did sometimes join with the Musicians in the Song, he did praise him to the
Skies, and told him, That he should acknowledge himself most happy, if he could
always hear him. You are too full of Complement (said Raymond) Must I hold my
peace then, (said Hortensius) when I behold an accomplished personage? You do
equivocate now, (said Raymond.) I will make it appear (said Hortensius) it is
no Equivocation; for I will show you from whence the word Complementer is
derived, Menteur in French, is a Liar, and a Complementer is no more than an
accomplished Menteur, that is to say, an accomplished Liar. To please
Hortensius, they made him believe that he had spoken far better than Raymond.

When the Guests were all departed, and Hortensius stayed only behind with
these brave Gentlemen of France, Francion demanded of him, what ^e thought of
Nays? and if he did not believe that he was happy to have so fair a Mistress?
Hortensius, who had not wisdom enough to conceal what he thought, made answer,
That those who marry Widows, had no better Viands than Meat twice heated, and
at the least discontent which these Wives should receive from their second
Husbands, they would upbraid them with their former. But Raymond arriving when
these words were speaking, did affirm, That it was not to be feared, but that
Nays would find such qualities in the person of Francion, that it would make
her to forget her first affections. For my self (said Francion) I cannot
perceive that it will be any ways disadvantagious to me to espouse a Widow;
She knows best what it is to love; I must of necessity have one; and if she
has had an Interest in another Man besides my self, what of that? How many
Women have I known for that one Man? They had other Discourse on this Subject,
after Hortensius was retired, and Francion declared, That nothing could
dissuade him from his choice of Nays, but that most highly he did esteem his
Fortune; for all the Reasons that could be alleged, were not able to divert him
from his Love, and his Design of Marriage. He did begin to look on all things
with another eye than he had done heretofore, and did believe it was now high
time to make an honest retreat.

The End of the Eleventh Book.
THE TWELFTH BOOK OF THE COMICAL HISTORY OF FRANCION.
AS these two perfect Lovers did discourse together of their Affairs, there
unexpectedly arrived a certain Gentleman, who was called Signior Bergamin, with
whom Francion had before some little acquaintance, he did conceive very well of
him, because he was of a most pleasant conversation. He gave him good
Entertainment, and told him, that be wondered wherefore he so long had absented
himself, and that he had lost much Mirth, because he had not been in their
Company, having had much variety of delightful Intertainment, and Comedies
acted of all sorts, as well true, as feigned; Thereupon he made a short account
of all that had passed concerning Hortensius, and of their other recreations
that followed afterward: But Bergamin had such little Intelligence, that he
had not the least knowledge of it. He said, He was sorry his affairs had
hindered him from having the honor to delight himself in their Company.
Francion replied. That he must now make them amends for the time which they had
spent without him, by a long enjoyment of his agreeable Company. He did not
speak this without Cause; for, to speak the truth, he could not find in all
Italy so pleasant a Man as Bergamin, or more proper for those Recreations which
they invented. In his Youth he had been a Comedian himself, and was esteemed
the chief of that profession. Having left it off, it was all his Employment to
wait upon Courtiers, and to visit sometimes one, and sometimes another, and to
play a thousand tricks before them. It was reported also, that it was no longer
expedient that he should continue in the Company of the Actors, because he was
able to act a whole Comedy himself. And to speak the truth, they were not
deceived who made that Report; for there were some Parts which were made on
purpose for him, which he oftentimes would act without having need of a Second;
and having a Curtain drawn in the upper Corner of the Hall, he would oftentimes
come forth, changing his habit according to the conditions of the persons whom
he represented, and he would so disguise his Voice and Action, that he was not
to be known; so that one would think there were diverse other actors with him.
This indeed might serve for those Scenes, in which but one Man was to be upon
the Stage; but where there were to be two or more, he used some other artifice,
in which he was not to seek. As for example, He would sometimes act the person
of a Lover, speaking unto his Mistress, whom he counterfeited to be locked up
in Prison by her angry Father, or her jealous Husband, he would turn toward
the wall to entertain her, and when it came to her turn to speak, he would
counterfeit a woman's Voice, and so different from the former, that one would
verily believe, there were some Woman speaking behind the Arras; for he would
turn his back on purpose, that no man might see his lips to move. Sometimes
alone by himself he would represent a pleasant Mummery, and would show his art
very delightfully, acting three or four persons as they were speaking to one
another upon the Theater. He had a supply of Gowns, Cloaks, Hats and Bonnets,
which he suddenly would change in the Presence of the Spectators, without going
behind the Arras. When he acted the part of a King, he would sit in a chair,
and speak gravely to some Courtier, and immediately afterward he would put off
his royal habiliments, and his Crown, and rising up from the chair, he would
put himself into the posture of a Knight; and being afterward to represent the
part of a Country Clown, he would pass cheerfully to it, and being clad in
rags, he would act his part so much unto the life, that there could nothing be
beheld more delightful. Afterward he would take to the Chair of State again,
and be in the quality of a Prince, and would change his Place, his Habit, and
his Voice so often, that it was truly wonderful.

This could he do as a Comedian, so that, without dissimulation, he might have
been of great use in the gallantries of Francion, who had reason to be sorry
for his absence. For the rest, he had so extraordinary an understanding, that
his familiar Discourses were always filled with remarkable Observations, and
none in pleasance did exceed him. By reason of this, he was welcome to all great
personages; Nevertheless he was but very poor, for not applying himself to any
one of them in particular, he had no constant Pension to entertain himself.
They were glad to have his Company at Dinner; but they who received him at
their Table, did as great Men are accustomed to do, who imagine they do those
Men much honor and pleasure, whom they permit to eat with them. And yet he
must be a jocular, and a frolic Companion with them; for if he had been
melancholy, or silent,, he should not have been welcome another time.

He was in the number of those Men who had ordinarily a good Dinner, but seldom
a Supper; for Suppers are rare in great Men's houses, and the entertainment of
the Kitchen is but cold. He was very glad to have obtained the acquaintance of
Francion, who lived splendidly, after the manner of the French; but of late,
upon some occasions, he had discontinued his Company. He seemed now to be much
changed, and to put on a serious Countenance, as if he had something on his
Spirit that did much perplex it, and after his first Complement, he testified,
that he would impart a Secret of great Importance to him.

And this he did without speaking any word, for he would not that his design
should be discovered; he did therefore take him aside into a retired place of
the Parlor, where they might not be understood. Raymond conjectured that it was
done on purpose, and being a discreet Man, he kept himself at a distance, and
would not hear what his Friends had no desire to communicate unto him. Bergamin
demanded of Francion, How long it was since he had seen the fair Emilia, who
was an Italian Lady, with whom he was acquainted since he came to Rome?
Francion, seeming to give no great ear unto the Question, did ask him, If he
did not yet hear what the whole City talked of, That he should marry Nays? and
told him moreover, That being contracted to her, he could no longer attend to
visit other Ladies. I know, said Bergamin, that your promise made to Nays is
the public Discourse of this City; but it is not more strong and more
obligatory, than your promise made unto Emilia, which was before so many
Witnesses: Moreover, the first promises do oblige us, and do render us
incapable to make any other. Francion replied, You do much amaze me to speak
unto me in this manner; But you more amaze me, said Bergamin, to pretend to be
surprised with amazement. Francion made answer, I am no ways obliged to
Emilia. But she allegeth, that you are (said Bergamin) so that you cannot marry
with Nays, as you propound unto your self.

Bergamin spoke this with a most sober countenance; But Francion conceived it
to be but a device, and that Bergamin did but play with him, so that the more
^he did speak, the more did Francion remain without belief, and said unto him,
I perceive well enough that you are in Jest; But whom do you play with? It is
with me who have given Lessons unto others; you, possibly do believe, that I
know not so much as your self, It may be so, yet at least I know well enough
how to defend my self from your artifices; let my deer Raymond partake of this
contentment with us.

Thereupon he called Raymond, who of himself was very glad to come unto them,
for by the manner of their Discourse he conceived that there was something of
extraordinary importance; when he was approached, Francion told him, that
Bergamin was one of the most delightful Companions in the world, and that he
would make him to believe that he had promised marriage to Emilia. Raymond, who
had heard some Discourse concerning that Lady, did begin to give ear to what
was spoken; but Bergamin redoubling his assurances, did speak in this manner; I
am glad that you have called hither a witness, for you shall both perceive
that I speak nothing, but what is to the purpose, and most credible. Take heed
Francion that you are not deceived your self; I protest unto you, that Emilia
has assured me that you have promised to marry her upon the faith of a
Gentlemen, and that you ought not to conclude any thing with Nays to the
prejudice of your Word and Honor; Her Mother has requested me to come unto
you, and to advise you not to be so disloyal as to proceed further in that
marriage. To this Bergamin did join a long Discourse against the
unfaithfullnesse of Lovers, where he showed the excellence of his memory in
reciting several Authors which he had read, and he made apparent also the
vivacity of his Spirit, in appropriating several choice things of his own
invention. Sometimes he encouraged himself, and gave more grace unto his words
by the gesture of an Orator, and kept his Countenance so well, that he seemed
to be as excellent an Orator, as he was a Comedian. Francion knew not well how
he should deport himself, whether he should laugh, or whether he should be
angry, Nevertheless he said unto Bergamin, that by how much the better he did
speak, by so much he did testify, that he knew the better how to dissemble.
Bergamin made answer, that, in truth, Francion had seen some mimick fictions
proceed from him, but they were appropriated to such persons as deserved to be
abused, and not to Francion, who ought to be entreated in another manner, and
that he was resolved to speak no more unto him, for suddenly he would hear of
other assurances, which would be more forcible than any which he had spoken of
as yet: Speaking those words he departed in a great passion, to observe, that
because heretofore he was accustomed to prevaricate with Fables, they did now
believe, that he neither was, or ever could be able to speak one word of Truth.

By this manner of his abrupt departure, it was collected, That what he did
speak was in earnest, for had it been in jest, he would have at last turned
into laughter all that he had said, knowing well enough that he had not novices
to deal with. When he was departed, Raymond said to Francion, I am consident
that your Conscience is clear of the Crime which is imposed on you. Yes
(replied Francion) I dare assure you that there is no such thing, and howsoever
it be carried, it must needs be some scandalous invention; but it moves not me
at all, for I am above all these assaults.

They had some other Discourse on this subject, and afterward they parted to
go to their repose: The next morning Francion would wait upon Nays to give her
a good morrow, but thinking to enter into her House with that liberty which he
thought did belong unto him, one of the Servants came to acquaint him, that
Nays was not yet ready. He stayed therefore some time below, of his own accord,
but believed, whatsoever the Customs of the Italians were, that he might be
permitted to come unto her, if she were but half ready, considering the
Condition in which he was; and having a little time continued in this Patience,
he attempted to go up the Stairs again; but it was told him, That on that day
Nays was not disposed to see any one. Francion replied, I believe you do not
know me, honest Friend, or at least you pretend that you do not know me. If
Nays should give order that no Man should have access unto her, I believe I
ought to be excepted. Tell her therefore It is I who am here, and ask her, If
she cannot make a distinction betwixt me and others. The Messenger made have to
perform the Command, and there came one of her Pages from her, to acquaint him
from his Mistress, That on that day she would neither speak with him, nor any
one else, but for the days following, it might be she would admit some others
to speak unto her, but not himself.

Francion was so moved to understand this answer, that he could willingly with
his Cane have corrected the young Man for his sauciness, were it not for the
respect which he did bear to the Livery, and the Colors of his Mistress. At
the first he persuaded himself that this Answer proceeded from the Invention of
this malicious Servant, but afterward he concluded that he would never have
been so unadvised as to bring such an answer to him, if he had not received a
Commandment expressly for it. Believing therefore that this Answer came from
Nays, he could not find the Cause of this so sudden an alteration. He asked
those who were with him, What they conceived should be the reason of this
denial; but they could not render him any satisfaction to his demands.
Sometimes he represented to himself, that it was altogether impossible that
Nays should so undervalue him, and that all this was but a Device to solace her
self a little; and he thus discoursed with himself thereon, If it were a
Camisade which my Mistress is pleased to give me, I shall give her a greater
occasion to laugh at me, if I should return without seeing her, as having too
great an apprehension to displease her; so that it would be better to use
violence, and enter with confidence into the place where she is, for all the
advertisements of her Servants; for although she should be a little angry, I
know how to appease her, and the contract for our Marriage being already
passed, I am confident I may be well allowed to assume that liberty But on the
contrary, if it be true that she does disdain me, and that she already
repents what but yesterday she did, to what purpose should I go unto her?
would it not cause her choler to increase against me? And were it not better to
proceed more gently on this affair?

The Spirit of Francion was hereupon in a great Incertainty, and sometimes he
would conclude with himself, that it was no easy thing to put up this affront,
and if shame had not diswaded him, he would have forced his way to the sight of
Nays, but he considered with himself, that if he could not then see her for all
the violence he should use, she would but laugh at him the more: so that, at
the last he concluded, that it was better to use some artifice, and to
dissemble that the Message sent unto him did not much displease him, and to
return without the least noise. Having better thought upon it, he said unto
some of the Servants who were then about him, I must profess unto you (honest
Friends) that I have but a Treacherous Memory, I had quite forgot that Nays
yesterday did tell me, that she desired I should not this day take the pains to
come unto her; but the Impatience of my affection is the Cause thereof. Having
spoke that, he did go away cheerfully to outward appearance, but so inwardly
afflicted, that he hardly could express unto Raymond the Indignity he
received. He said, It made but ill for him on whatsoever side it was, for if it
were true that Nays did undervalue him, the shame thereof would redound unto
himself more than unto her, but if she were pleased to make some mirth thereat,
it was also very disadvantagious to him, having deserved to be used more
honorably; And if the affairs had not been passed so far in the way of
marriage, it were not so difficult to provide a remedy, but they had so far
advanced themselves, that he could not now disingage with honor. Raymond did
remonstrate to him, that he ought not to trouble his Spirit with so many
suppositions, without knowing what was the true cause which gave this distaste
to Nays, for the effecting whereof, he ought, he said, to have recourse to
Dorini, or some other of the Kindred of Nay. Francion replied thereunto, that it
did most of all afflict him, to see that his Fortune was so suddenly changed,
when he thought it was the most established, and he believed that for the time
to come every one would laugh at him, and by turns make him the Ladder for
their mirth to climb upon, as Bergamin already had begun to do. Raymond
considering this adventure, and comparing it with that which before arrived to
him, he conceived that the one might well have relation to the other; wherefore
he desired him freely to declare unto him how Bergamin came to enter into such
a familiarity with him, as to know the course of his most private affairs, and
what was the ground thereof, when he said, that he had made a promise to marry
Emilia.

It is true (said Francion) that amongst friends, such as we are, there is
nothing to be concealed, and how can you give me Counsel in my affairs, if you
are not entirely acquainted with them? A Physician can prescribe no Receipt
unto his Patient, without first he be acquainted with his Disease. I committed
a fault yesterday to speak thereof too sparingly unto you. It was a Trespass, I
must confess, against the laws of my Duty, but you will hold me excusable, if
you will consider that it proceeded rather from a shame, which did detain my
words, than from any defect in my affection. I of a truth therefore do declare
unto you, that having received the assurances of the good will which Nays did
bear unto me, and having made many oaths and protestations to her, that I did
know not any one more beautiful, and found nothing in the world more agreeable
than herself, I had no longer the curiosity to look after other beauties which
before I esteemed; But wherefore should this Lady exercise over me so
tyrannical a power, as to have my eyes blinded from beholding any other
objects? Has not Nature ordained sight and Judgment unto men, to contemplate,
and to admire all the beauties in the world? Being arrived at Rome, which is
the Queen of all other Cities, I should show my self to have but little Spirit,
If I should not observe if the Ladies are not more beautiful here than in any
other place. As for the Courtisans, we may see them easily enough, but for
civil and virtuous women it is very difficult, and this difficulty does augment
the desire, and renders the pleasure more great when we arrive to the height of
our design. I have used my utmost endeavor to see some of them, both in their
Churches, and in the places where they are accustomed to walk, and sometimes
they have not been so well veiled, but I have contemplated their beauties; but
amongst all those whom I have seen, there is none so beautiful as Emilia.

Since my first coming unto Rome I have conversed with some French Gentlemen,
amongst whom I always found this Bergamin, who was most familiar with those of
them who were most debauched, and given to the greatest expenses. His
gallantries did so much please me, that I desired him, That we might often see
one another, and he himself, according to his promise, did not fail to give me
many visits. One morning he made his addresses to me, as I was coming out of
the Church, and he did me the favor to conduct me to another, where I beheld
two Ladies, one of them seemed to stoop under the burden of Age, and the other,
whom I conceived to be her Daughter, was one of the best featured, and the most
beautiful that possibly could be seen. I supposed with my self, That Bergamin
had such Acquaintance in Rome, that he could tell me who they were; but at that
time he was unable to inform me; for this City is so peopled, that hardly one
Neighbor knows another, howsoever he assured me, that in a very short time
he would satisfy my Desires. I requested him to have me in his remembrance;
and because these Ladies were going from the Church toward their own Lodgings,
he counseled me to stand still a while, and he would follow them, to see into
what House they entered. He stayed three quarters of an hour, which seemed very
tedious to me, and I was even about to be gone, believing that he had lost his
way. At the last he returned, and assured me, That those two Ladies had their
Lodgings close unto that Church, and showed me the House; but the reason, he
said, wherefore he staid so long, was, because that hard by he had met with a
Gentleman whose company was of great consequence for the knowing of that which
I so much desired. He told me, that he was the Man who was employed in the
managing of all their affairs, and that at that present they were intricately
molested in a great Suit at Law, having been enforced to forsake Venice, their
Native Country, to come to Rome to follow their Cause. He told me, that the
Husband of Lucinda, who was the Mother of Emilia, had commenced a Process
against a Gentleman of Rome, who despairing of his Cause, had recourse to
Violence, and treacherously killed him; whereupon the Widow and her Daughter
were come to Rome to demand Justice on the Offender. When I understood this, I
demanded, If the Solicitor were not of power to bring me to the sight of the
Ladies? Bergamin replied, It would be unnecessary, I do conceive, at this time
to propound that question to him. When I understood that the Name of the old
Lady was Lucinda, I immediately changed the Scene of my Discourse, and did bias
it another way; I assured him, That when I demanded of him who those Ladies
were, it was out of a curiosity of Indifferency, and not out of any vehemence
of affection. We Italians (said Bergamin) are prone to jealousy, and far from
that Liberty which you Frenchmen do profess; But because the Solicitor, whose
Name is Salviati, is of a sociable disposition, I promise you I will take the
opportunity to be more familiar with him.

Having spoke this, Bergamin did withdraw himself, to go to Dinner to a Signior
who had that morning invited him. The next morning he came to me again, and
told me, That he had another conference with Salviati, and that he had spoken
to him of me, and assured him, that although I was a Stranger, yet my Condition
and Deserts did render me most esteemed amongst the Great Ones, insomuch that I
was very capable to assist those who were in Distress; and that having heard
of the Disaster which had befallen the House of Lucinda, I had pity of her, and
wished that it might lie in my power to do her any service. He therefore
advised him to address himself to me, and to give me a particular account of
the whole business; for he said I was thoroughly experienced in the affairs of
Law: But as for the manner of the Death of Fabius, the Husband of Lucinda, he
said, It were better if I would be pleased to take the pains to speak with her
my self. I promised him (said Bergamin) to acquaint you with it, and behold how
all things do succeed according to your Desire? Hereupon I did embrace
Bergamin, being transported with a great joy, that I had found the means to be
acquainted with Lucinda. Bergamin said unto me, But stay a little, we must be
wise, and use precautions in this business; I can speak to Salviati of
Lucinda, because she is ancient, and therefore not to be suspected, but I know
not how to make mention to him of her Daughter. With much difficulty I have
learned that her Name is Emilia. I replied to him, Let me alone with it, I will
deport my self according to the Italian humor; and because you have given such
a good report to Salviati of me, I will be careful that you shall not therein
be found a Liar. Bergamin, having continued with me a little while after this
Discourse, did repair into the City, and assured me that he would bring
Salviati along with him; I was unwilling that he should come unto my own
Lodging, because of the great numbers of French Gentlemen who constantly came
to visit me. I was at that time, brave Raymond, lodged in the same House with
you, and, I will not dissemble with you, it was from you from whom most
precisely I would conceal my self. I thought, if you had understood of my
dealings and practices with the Italians, you would have suspected something,
and hindered my Design. Oh no, said Raymond, To believe that, were to doubt of
my affection. You knew, replied Francion, It was at the same time when I was
courting of Nays, and that was one of the Reasons why I did conceal it from
you. What? said Raymond, Do you take me to be an Enemy unto Nature? Since you
are not yet possessed of Nays, Why shall it not be permitted to you to court
another? Nay, Suppose that you had been married to her, you would not be the
first to whom Love has given passions to inthrall your self to another Beauty.
Let us live together as we have been accustomed; there is nothing that should
dissuade you from declaring your Secrets unto me. So, said Francion, We should
be guilty of one another Debauchments; Give me leave to tell you, There are
some things which even Shame does forbid us to declare unto our Friends, and
they ought not to be offended if they do not reveal them; for, if they be but
Indifferences proceeding from Female causes, it will no ways diminish
Friendship to conceal them. But to perfect my adventure, I must acquaint you,
That I desired Bergamin to bring Salviati with him to a Church where I would be
walking. Bergamin did applaud the counsel, for that, said he, would be as if by
accident we did meet with you, and I will not acquaint him, that you are
waiting there in the expectation of him. In this manner it was carried; and
although I perceived that Salviati did put on a grave and a reserved
Countenance, I with many Complements did invite them both to Dine with me.
Salviati seemed to be very unwilling, and ceremonious; but Bergamin overcame
his resistances, and we did go together into an Ordinary where we might be
accommodated at what rate we pleased. There we did enter into a perfect
acquaintance, and Bergamin taking an occasion to speak of Lucinda, did openly
profess that I might be very helpful to her. Sir, you shall then perform a
great work of Charity (said Salviati) she is a Widow, without Friends, and
without protection. She knows not any one in Rome, except my self, who have a
long time dwelled in Venice; but all that I can do is but to follow the Law for
her, having no countenance at all from the great Officers of Justice. I could
wish that she might be so happy as to find one that may assist her, not only
for the good will I do bear unto her, but also for my own consideration; for
the compassion which I have had on her Misfortunes, has engaged me in certain
round Sums of moneys unto diverse Merchants, which I know not how to return, if
her Suit in Law does not find a happy event. I replied to him, That I was
acquainted with some Cardinals of the greatest power, with whom I had been
familiar at Paris, before they arrived to that height of Dignity; and having
saluted them since my coming to Rome, they so nobly entertained me, that I
believe they will not deny any civil courtesy which I shall demand of them. He
made answer, That in truth it is daily observed, that those great Personages do
render themselves more easy and favorable to Strangers, than to those of
their own Nation; for they undervalue those whom they see every day, and in
obliging those who are Foreiners, they do hope, it will render their courtesy,
and their renown, more glorious. Those words were not acceptable unto me, for
they tended not to cause me to understand, that if I were high in the favor of
the Great Ones, it was for some eminent Deserts with which they saw me to be
endued. I looked on him as a blunt Fellow, who knew not what did belong to the
Civilities of a Courtier, and because they should not entertain a base opinion
of me, I gave them to understand, That it was not my Custom to Dine in such
places as where I then was, but only at that time I did enforce my self unto
it, that more freely I might enjoy their Company. Speaking those words, they
both stooped, and made many Reverences unto me, and having both expressed their
thankful obligations, Salviati said unto me, That if I would take the pains to
give a visit to Lucinda that afternoon, she would take it for a great honor,
and receiving the particulars of her Cause from her own mouth, I should be the
better able to inform them to whom the greatest places in the Seats of Justice
did belong. I was ravished to hear this Proposition, hoping that I should have
the happiness to see Emilia also, although he made not the least mention of
her. Bergamin knowing that his presence was unnecessary, did willingly leave
us, and accompanied with Salviati, I came to the House of Lucinda; It was but a
little one, but commodious enough for a Widdow-woman, who lived alone in it.
Salviati entered into it as freely as if it had been his own, and we found
Lucinda in the Hall, and her Daughter Emilia with her. I must protest unto you,
that I never did behold a more delicat creature; I fastened my eyes upon her,
but as soon as she perceived it, she did retire her self into the Parlor.
Salviati represented to Lucinda, that I was the Man of whom in the morning he
had made mention to her, and that he hoped I should be very profitable for the
advancement of her Affairs. She received me with very civil complements; for
she was a Woman of a gallant Spirit and Behavior, and was lovely enough, being
not so old as the weeds of her Widdowhood did make her to appear. Having
related to me all along the proceedings of her Husband against one called
Tostat, who detained a great part of his Estate from him, she told me also how
he was killed as he was traveling from Venice unto Padua, and that the said
Tostat being apprehenhended, she came to Rome to follow the Law against him,
and hoped, that being condemned to Death, she should have great Damages and
Interests awarded her. I repeated to her the promises which I had made to her
Sollicicitor; but I protest unto you, I had much to do to remember the words
she spoke, so much was my Spirit diverted by the Beauties of Emilia, I could
not but curse the Custom of the Italians, which do not allow us the civil
liberty to look on their Wives or Daughters. At the last it so happily did fall
out, that Lucinda did begin to talk of her, which was a great comfort to me.
She said, That she did not much care for any great Damages the Law should give
her, for she had enough already to content her during her life, having but one
Daughter, who was shortly to enter into a Religious House, and to have no more
to do with the goods of Fortune. I assumed the freedom to demand of her, If it
were she whom I saw when I first came into her House? She told me Yes; and as I
did represene unto her that there were some Men who would think themselves most
happy to have such a Wife, She replied, she was descended of Honorable
Parentage, but having not means enough to marry her according to her Birth, the
safest way she could take with her, was to put her into a Nunnery. We
maintained other Discourse on this subject, and after that I conceived that I
had stayed long enough, I took my leave of her: Being gone, I demanded of
Salviati if in good earnest Emilia was resolved to confine her self unto a
Cloister? He told me, Yes; and that she only stayed for money to give unto the
Prioress, which her Mother hoped to receive from the charity of well-affected
people. For my self, said I, I shall be ready to assist her; but I should be
more glad my money should serve to marry her, than to retire her from the
world. He laughed at those words, and we discoursed afterward of her Beauty,
and her Merit. I must confess unto you, that having seen her, I was the more
incited to do something for her Mother, and I endeavored what lay in my power
that she might gain her Process, to the end that she might have wherewith to
marry her Daughter according to her Condition and Degree.

I took my leave of Salviati, and visited all those one after another whom I
conceived to be capable to assist Lucinda. After the end of two days I returned
to her, to give her an account of what I had done. She thanked me most
heartily, and told me, That she should confess her self to be much obliged to
me all the days of her life. We were then alone in the Hall, when behold
Emilia came in. She seemed to be something abashed to behold me, and made as
though she would return from whence she came; but her Mother did command her to
stay, which was indeed a very acceptable recompense for the pains I had taken.
I parlyed to her with that discretion which is practiced in that Country, and I
did not praise her but very modestly. Nevertheless I made it appear, that she
had touched me within my heart, and that I much desired to have such a
Mistress. I stayed with her as long as possibly I could, and taking my leave,
I promised her Mother that I would visit some other Lords on her behalf, which
I performed with extraordinary care. I must confess that Nays is beautiful,
but Emilia has such attractions, that when I see not Nays, I cannot but
contemplate on Emilia. I no longer did content my self with my ancient
delights, I had rather have perpetually entertained my self with this, if it
had been possible for me; but I found I could not arrive unto it but by
marriage only. To marry Emilia was not pleasing to me, she having no other
riches but what were grounded on a Process, which might be as well lost as
gained. Nevertheless I deliberated with my self, that if I would receive any
Pleasure from her, it must be by the pretense of Marriage; so that oftentimes I
discoursed with Salviati concerning her, and told him, that he must not give
way unto her to enter into a Relligious house; that it was no true Devotion
that did persuade her to it, but her Mothers, and her own Ambition, because for
the present she had not wealth enough to Marry her according to her Condition:
She was endued, I said, with such perfections, that diverse persons of quality
would take her freely, without demanding any Dowry but her Virtue. I in that
manner did so discover my self unto him, that he perceived. I did speak of my
self, of which he was very glad, and I believe did advertise Lucinda of it. But
because I could not see her every time I did go to her Mothers house, and could
not speak aloud unto her before her Mother, it did much afflict me, being
accustomed to speak freely to young Gentlewomen, after the Manner of the
French. I could not express my Love unto her, nothing did speak but my eyes
only; but in this Country of Italy, but one glance, or little action, will
oftentimes speak more to purpose, than all the long entertainments of other
Nations. I could not be satisfied with that, and was therefore resolved to
write unto her, and to desire Salviati to deliver my Letters. To write unto her
a Letter of Love seemed to be too bold, and too difficult an enterprise for the
first time, I only composed a Discourse, where I introduced a Shepherd
complaining, that he could not discover his passion to his Shepherdess; This
was as a thing indifferent, which did not address it self unto any one in
particular, and having showed it to Salviati, he promised me to find out a way
that Emilia should have a sight of it, although she had taken an Oath not to
peruse any thing at all which did not speak of Devotion; for in things which
are excellent to the world, we look not so much on the Subject as the Beauty of
the Piece. I used all my Art and Industry, and did write it in Italian, with
the help of a Poet of this City, who corrected the faults which I made; for
having been resident here but a short time, I have not yet the propriety of the
language. My Solicitor of Love, rather than of Law, did on the next morning
inform me, that my Letter was very pleasing to Emilia, so that I took the
confidence to write unto her two or three Letters of Love one after the other,
which this man did very willingly deliver for me; We now called one another
Cosins, and Bergamin had spoken so well of me, that with what he himself
observed in me, he was wonderfully incited to serve me; Nay, he did more, he
procured me an answer from Emilia: It was a short one indeed, but very
favorable, and such a one as I my self could have wished. The fair Emilia did
permit that on that Evening I should give her a Visit, her Mother being in Bed,
by reason of the Indisposition of her Body. I failed not to wait upon her,
according to her direction, without fearing what might arrive; I found the Door
of the House only put to, and not latched, I therefore entered into the Hall,
where Emilia did attend my coming, having with her no light but that of the
Moon, who darted her beams into a little window, the Casement whereof was open.
I thereupon had light enough to discover that I was not deceived, and that I
had before me that wonderful Beauty; I would have thanked her for the favor
she had done me, in the fairest words I could express; but she assured me,
that I must be thankful only to my own importunity, which had overcome her to
permit me to come unto her, to understand what was the Subject of my Complaint.
I made answer to her, That the greatest happiness that possibly could arrive
unto me, was to see her, by what means soever it could be effected, but she
ought not therefore to reject the Obligation which I pretended to her Beauties.
By little and little I entered into Discourse with her, and made her more
sensible of my passion by my Tongue, than I had done before by my Pen. I
discoursed with her of the Design she had to enter into a Religious House. She
told me, That the same desire continued with her, for she believed that no Man
would be so desperate, as to marry a Maid so unfortunate as her self. I will
deny nothing to you, brave Raymond, I made answer to her, That she a Thousand
times surpassed a number of those Ladies who had a more prosperous Fortune; and
if she would vouchsafe to love me, I would undertake to put a Period to her
Misfortunes, and to render her the happiest, and most contented Creature in the
World. I did speak unto her in these very terms, and added not one syllable
more unto them; and she conceiving to her self that I had made a promise of
Marriage to her, did swear unto me faithfully to recompense my affection. I
kissed her hands, and her naked arms, as often as I pleased, but I touched not
her lip but only once. I had a desire to have used all my force in some other
place; for we who are true Warriers do understand well enough, that some Forts
are more easy to be taken in one corner than another; I did attempt to feel
her Breasts, and three or four times I obtained what I desired. I had a violent
desire to pass further, and at that instant to have enjoyed all that I could
hope for; for in Love we must take all that we can while Fortune smileth upon
us. It is Discretion to take, and to make use of that to day, which we do not
know whether we may have to morrow or not: But I perceived that I fell far
short of my Account. She assured me, That she would never see me more, if I
would not demean my self more civilly toward her; and that I ought to content
my self with the hazard, into which for my sake she had put her self, which, if
it were known, would be enough to dishonor her for ever. I would not force her;
for I believed it would be unprofitable; and when she made me to understand
that it was time for her to retire, I departed as contentedly as I came unto
her; and of Necessity it must be, that they were all fast asleep within, or
that the Men and Maidservants were of the Plot with her; for I heard not the
least noise at all. I would not discover unto Salviati that I had been with
her; It was sufficient for me to be happy, without making others acquainted
with it. He did conceive that I was beloved by Emilia, having delivered into my
hand a Letter from her; but I did not open it before him, because I would not
show him the Contents thereof. Nevertheless he freely declared himself, that
he doubted not but that the most beautiful Maid had a desire to witness to me
all sort of affections, in the recompense of my own, because she was
extraordinary glad to have found a Person of Honor that would marry her, and
maintain her in the world, having no mind unto the Cloister, but only in case
of necessity. I made no answer to him, but only in obscure terms; to the end
that he might interpret them as he himself pleased. Howsoever I hoped that by
this means at last I should be able to satisfy my love. I did write again unto
Emilia, and I received an answer which did permit me to give her a Second
Visit, but I did no more than at the first time. She seemed to be much incensed
against my violence, and told me, That I did use her far more uncivilly than I
ought; and, if my affection were so impatient, I should demand her in marriage
of her Mother. I did demonstrate to her, that I was a Strange, and although I
had large possessions, I could not be so well accommodated, as is a Man in his
own Country; That before I thought of Marriage, I ought to put my self into a
condition to support the Charges of it, it being a business of that
consequence, that I should acquaint my Kindred with it. She replied to me, That
if I had loved accordingly as I said, I would ask no counsel, but of Love only;
and as for Wealth, I had enough where I was to content her. I believe she did
perceive that I had an Intent to have deceived her; for after that time she
entertained me with no more favorable Language, so that abruptly I did depart
from her. I afterward did write three Letters unto her, to which she returned
but one Answer, in which she accused me of treachery and ingratitude. For all
that, I continued to come unto her Mothers House, but I did see her Daughter
but seldom, or if I had seen her, it was without speaking to her. I only
conferred with her Mother, to be informed of the time in which I was to make my
most powerful Solicitations on her behalf; but Salviati did represent unto
us, That by reason of the crafty proceedings of the opposite Party, a Demurre
was made in the hearing of her Canse. When I perceived there was no hope to
gain what I desired of Emilia, I did not with such heat follow the Suit; and
because at that time also I courted Nays, who daily did increase her affections
toward me, I only served her, and doubled my attendance on her. At that time
the learned Hortensius, by his gallantries, did cause us to pass away our time
in laughter, which brought some ease to the impatiency of my Spirit. Salviati
once or twice demanded of me, How I thrived in my Loves? And what was the
reason that I was so rare a Guest at Lucindaes house? But I coldly replied,
That I was afraid to appear too importunate. I believe he perceived well enough
that I had a thorough change wrought upon me; but because he did speak no more
unto me, I also did endeavor to eschew his Company, as much as possibly I
could: and some time it is since I heard any mention made of Emilia, until
Signior Bergamin did now speak of her. I made nothing of it, as you perceived;
for what reason had I to yield unto that which he alleged. It may suffice that
I have told you the truth of all, without augmentation or diminution, and you
may now understand if Emilia has a just Cause to desire any thing of me.

Francion having thus finished his Discourse, Raymond said unto him, That if
this in truth were all, Emilia could not constrain him to any thing; but since
she had discovered her most secret affairs, which were made known to Bergamin,
he ought to have a care of that Bergamin, who by his flouting Arts might make
him ridiculous to the World. I know not what he will do, said Francion, for
Lucindaes and Emilias sake, but I conceeive he came to the intelligence of it
from Salviati. I believe they gave him this commission to come unto me, being a
man of a more apprehensive Spirit, and of a more courtly presence, than his
friend. But howsoever it be, neither one nor the other of them have any cause
at all to laugh at me. I have taken much pleasure at the entertainment of
Emilia, and can tell you something else which is more than that, but that was
not able to recompense my service, for at that time I desired nothing more than
her presence, and esteemed it to be equal to the greatest happiness which the
world could afford. It may be alleged, it has cost me something, it may be so,
but it is so little, that it is not considerable. Salviati taking notice one
time that I was buying so many yards of Genoa Satin as would make me a
complete suit, did tell me, that he would also buy some of the same piece, to
make him a Doublet, which he would wear with a pair of Breeches of Spanish
cloth. He took some of the same, and suffered me to pay for his Satin with my
own. In the same manner he sometimes also solicited my liberality, and his
Camrade was not wanting in the same invention, but because they had done some
courtesies for me, I did not refuse to be assisting to them. To what end do
riches serve but for honorable expenses? You have reason so to say, replied
Raymond, we must have pity on those honest fellows, whose employment it is to
make us merry. Men are made to be helpful one to another; and for such Drols
as these, they could not live if it were not for such persons as our selves.
But if Bergamin shall come again, I would advise you not to despise his
Remonstrances; It were better to gain him by mildness (which I believe is an
easy thing to do) that so you may me be assured of him, and the management of
your loves may be concealed.

As they were in this communication, Dorini came to see them, and turning to
Francion, he told him, that all was spoiled, and that Nays was in such a
passion against him, that she could not be appeased. Her love, he said, was
turned into hatred, and she would break whatsoever had passed betwixt them, and
had sworn to the performance of it. Are you in good earnest, said Francion, and
is it by her express commandment that I must come no more unto her? It is a
resolution unworthy of her, and I deserve not to be so rejected. Dorini made
answer, But observe the reasons of my Kinswoman, I will dedeclare unto you what
most unfortunately has happened. Yesterday late in the Evening there came two
Ladies to her house, who desired to speak with her, one of them was called
Lucinda, and the other was her Daughter Emilia, they are both of Venice, and
are come to Rome to follow a suit of Law. Nays believed that they addressed
themselves unto her to solicit some friends of hers on their behalf, as she
has some Kinsmen who sit in the chief seats of Justice, she therefore
commanded that they should come in, being extremely charitable to all of her
sex; But she heard another business, quite contrary to that which she
expected. Francions heart began to pant at this word of Emilia, and already did
suspect his misfortune; which when Dorini perceived, he thus continued his
discourse. Lucinda having taken Nays aside, did represent unto her, that she
was very sorry that she no sooner understood what had passed betwixt you and
her, but at the first intelligence she made all the have she could to forbid
the Banes, and to declare unto her, that you had promised marriage to her
Daughter. Howsoever she hoped that the affair was not so far advanced, but that
a remedy might be yet appled, and that Nays had understanding enough not to be
married to such a man, who having contracted himself to another Lady, had so
manifestly abused both of them. Nays had a good opinion of these two Ladies,
who were accounted to be honest and honorable, and she made no doubt but that
their allegations were true. At the last Emilia produced a Letter which you had
wrote unto her, by which Nays most apparently did perceive, that you were most
passionately inamoured on her. Lucinda moreover did acquaint her, that you had
seen her Daughter alone, and that you then had promised to espouse her. This
did wonderfully possess Nays, and did exasperate her against you, which at
that time she did not make apparent, for she is a Woman of an admirable
discretion, although she cannot but with great impatience endure an affront.
Emilia said but little, but she wept abundantly, as well for her own fault as
for yours, being ashamed that she had so much obliged an ungrateful person to
her; but her Mother did speak for her, and related to Nays the good
Entertainment which oftentimes she had given you, in hope to have you her
Son-in-Law, in which she forgot the Custom of her Country, where Men are not so
freely entertained by Ladies, as in your own.

Nays seemed to be satisfied at the testimonies which she had seen, and without
the least sign of passion, assured Lucinda, that she for her own part would no
ways hinder your return to Emilia; and being convinced of your inconstancy, she
was resolved no more to esteem of you, and not so much as once again to see
you. With this assurance Lucinda and Emilia departed, and Nays bringing them to
her door, did thank them for the favor they had done her, in delivering her
from the danger in which she was ready to have involved her self, by marrying a
Man so perfidious as your self. I believe she did take but little rest that
night; for the day no sooner appeared, but the unquietness of her Spirit was
so great, that she sent for me to come unto her, to acquaint me with these
ungrateful tidings. I could not go so soon as I desired, because I was
employed in affairs of great importance; but coming to her at the last, she
related this unto me in a mavelous choler, and transportation of Spirit, and
commanded me to desire you to come no more unto her; for she believed she
should be guilty of a great crime, if she should permit you to come within her
Doors. When she makes any mention of you, it is with these Epithets of
Perfidious, and Ungrateful, and with the appellations of Traitor, and Monster;
and she has resolved with her self to make void whatsoever she has contracted
with you. For my part, I know not what to say unto her, she is very angry with
me, and tells me that I am the cause of her Misfortune, having spoken better of
you than you deserved. I must confess, to my own shame, that she has just
reason to complain, Emilia has left with her one of her Letters, which she
has showed unto me; and never take me to be the Man as I am, but to be without
Eyes and Judgment, if I do not believe that you did write that Letter.

Francion, having listened to him very attentively, said, That he would never
deny but that he had wrote Letters to Emilia, and that he had often seen her;
But (my brave Dorini) said he, Do not you understand me better? Do you think
that I cease to be what I have been, or that you are changed from what you
were? Do you not know that we have always lived in that liberty, which until
this hour you never did complain of? I know not for what cause you do speak
unto me with so much animosity. Dorini did reply unto him, When I saw you first
of all in France at Raymonds Castle, I was not moved at your irregular and
unconstant affections, for you were then in the height of your Youth; but now
you are to put on a more austere, and reserved garb. I do profess unto you,
said Francion, That now I am obliged so to do, since yesterday I was contracted
unto Nays, and if hereafter I shall commit any wanton Act contrary to that
obligation, I shall adjudge my self to be extremely guilty; but at that time
when I courted Emilia, I was not contracted unto Nays. But why, replied Dorini,
Did you Court her with so much Passion, having professed so much Service to my
Kinswoman? You had otherwise been excusable, and we do believe that Emilia, in
some Letters of yours, can show your promise of Marriage under your own hand.
Did she show any such Letter unto Nays, said Francion? No, replied Dorini, but
she believes she has reserved that Letter with an intent to show it to the
Judge before whom you will be brought, which will make much against you. I
protest unto you (said Francion) she has no such Letter. But for all that,
replied Dorini, We do imagine that you had your pleasure with her. You know
(said Francion) that I always have been addicted to the pleasures of Love; You
may therefore believe I should not have been sorry to have enjoyed her, neither
would I conceal it if I had done it; for sometimes it is one part of the
contentments of a Conqueror to sing the glories of his Triumph. And, if it were
so, I do believe she could have no great Action against me; for the Judges
observing her lightness to be so soon surprised by a Stranger, would be prone
to take my part, and to apptebend that she had been before of a loose
Conversation: And Nays ought in reason to reject me for that, for we see no Man
so senseless as to refuse his good Fortune; but all this is but nothing, I am
confident that I have not failed in any thing, and do not deserve that rough
usage I have received. I will conceal nothing from you, but give you a full
account of all that has passed betwixt Emilia and my self.

Hereupon Francion repeated the History almost in the very same words as he
told it before to Raymond, and Dorini professed to him, that if there were
nothing else, he in truth was not so faulty; but he should find a very hard
task to persuade his Cousin to believe it, who was a Woman entire in her
resolutions, and would absolutely make all void that she had contracted:
Nevertheless he promised Francion, that for his own part he would act nothing
against him. Raymond, who had a great power over, did entreat him not to fail
in this promise to his Friend, and he would demand no other recompense for the
great affection which he had always born unto him. He assured him, that he
would be favorable to him, and so took his leave of them both, being amazed at
so sudden, and so great a change.

This did render Francion very melancholy, for he knew he could no where meet
with a better Fortune than Nays; it did torment him to lose her, and it did
more torment him that he must lose her with dishonor; but Raymond did the best
he could to draw him out of his amazement and affliction. He told him that he
must put on a generous resolution, and if he married not Nays, he might find
every where Women enough, They, he said, were a Common Merchandise, and it
would not be for his advantage to abandon his Fortunes in France, to dwell in
Italy. Raymond spoke this on his own behalf, for it grieved him to lose his
Company, and to be enforced to return to France without him; so that,
whatsoever he had spoke to the contrary, he had rather his Marriage should be
broken off, than accomplished. Francion seemed in some measure to approve of
what he said, and they both consented to go abroad, the better to pass away
their Discontents, for it was not yet Dinner time, and they had a desire to
hear Mass.

They repaired to the next Church, where there were but few people, yet
nevertheless as they walked in the Cloisters they were so pressed with the
Crowd, that they were amazed at it. At the last, as they entered into an obscure
Chapel, Francion felt a hand sumbling in his Pocket. He was always subtle and
diligent, and immediately did put his hand down to take hold of his who was
tampering with his Pocket; but the Pick-pocket withdrew it so suddenly, that
Francion missed of his intention. He immediately cried out, a Cutpurse, a
Cutpurse, and commanded his Lackeys to pursue him; but he conveyed himself away
so cunningly, that they could not find him. Francion, having put his hand into
his Pocket, did perceive that his money was still there, insomuch that he said,
That the slippery Companion had not the leisure to finish his work; and that he
ought to comfort himself; for if he had lost his money, as he had lost his
Love, he had reason to say, that all the Misfortune in the world had happened
to him on that day. After that, he heard Mass with Raymond, and as they came
out the Church, they resolved with themselves to walk into the City. Francion,
as he passed by them, found himself much importuned by the Tradesmen, who
perpetually demanded of him, What do you lack? What do you lack? which did
begin to displease him, and he always found some of those men crossing him in
his way, whom he had observed at Mass, who were people but of a mean
condition, and presaged no good unto him. In the end he stayed at a perfumers
shop, having a desire to buy some Cyprian powder, and pulling his money out of
his Pocket (for he never used a Purse) be was much astonished to find three
times as much money in his Pocket as he had put into it, and that they were
pieces of more value; he showed them to Raymond, and said unto him, that he
believed that the money did grow and multiply in his pocket, or else he must
acknowledge, that at Rome were the bravest Cut-purses in the world, who instead
of taking away men's moneys, do give them a great deal more than they had
before; And if that this did so fall out on every day, he would let them dive
into his Pocket as often as they pleased. The Cut-purses of Paris were but
knaves and bunglers, he said, to the Cutpurses of Rome, and had no such Art
that was so profitable to the people. Raymond made answer to him, That the
Cut-purses did politickly in it, to put in more money, for it was to charm
those Pockets they did intend to pick, that so having helped to fill them at
first, they might empty them at last for altogether. You speak with good
reason, said Francion, I believe this Pilferer would have done the same, or
peradventure he conveyed in my Pocket the money which he stole from others,
that I should keep it for a time for him. See here his Quadruples which I never
touched before; If this money be not presently employed, it will peradventure
be of no profit to me, for it may be it was not well got, I will therefore find
one speedy way or other to lay it forth. As he spoke that, there approached to
him four men, and one of the said unto him, that he must give him an account
where he had that money, and that was not all, for he told him that he had
other things to lay unto his charge, whereupon he commanded the other three to
apprehend him, and carry him away to prison. Francion told him, that he had
committed no fault at all, and Raymond with the Lackeys would have rescued him,
but there came in half a dozen Sergeants to secure the prisoner. There were
also many Citizens, who walking up and down the streets, would have been ready
to have assisted them, and moreover, a man ought to be most careful in that
well-governed City, for if he had affronted a Sergeant or his Yeoman, or any
other officer, he should be most severely punished, Raymond, having done what
he could for his friend, without using any violence, was contented to go along
with him, but the Officers would not give way unto it, and he himself on
maturer deliberation did believe, that being at liberty he should be more ready
to assist his friend in his necessities, and to draw him out of the calamity
into which he was fallen. He knew not whether it was Nays that caused him to be
arrested. or Emilia, and he could not believe that either of them could be so
cruel to him. In the mean time Francion was with the Sergeants, who made it
their first work to seize upon all his money. He entreated them not to disgrace
him, nor take hold of him as they lead him, which they would hardly condescend
unto, for they were afrald that he being nimble of body would make an escape,
although they had on every side encompassed him. They were a great way from any
prison, therefore fearing that in so long a way he might possibly find some
friends to rescue him, they brought him into the house of one of the Officers,
who was commanded to have a special eye over him. They put all his money upon
the Table, and having looked upon the Quadruples, they said, that most
assuredly they were counterfeit, and that he was one of those who were the
Coyners of false money. The ludge, having looked upon them, and made trial of
them, said, they were stark naught, nevertheless, for his further
satisfaction, it was necessary to send for the Goldsmith to make trial of them.
When he came, he said, he needed not to try them upon the Touchstone, for they
were of so base an alloy, that they were worth nothing at all. Howsoever, to
observe the equal form of the proceedings in that nature, they enforced him to
put practice the proofs of his art, whereupon he did cut one of the Quadruples
in two pieces, and found it to be but slightly covered with gold on the
outside, and to be brass, and some other sophisticated metal within. Francion
was glad that he was accused of a thing, of which he was most entirely
innocent, for at the first he feared that it was Emilia who had caused him to
be arrested, pretending that he had promised marriage to her, and that he had
frequented her Company; for although the affair had not so far advanced it self
as it might have been, yet she might have given a sinister interpretation of it
to the Magistrates, and so far to have prevailed upon their compassion, as to
have caused him to be taken Prisoner. But no mention of that was made at all,
and because he was only charged with the false pieces which were found in his
hands, he told the Judge, there needed not so great an examination about it,
nor so many witnesses, that if he had but steadfastly looked upon them himself,
he should have judged that they had not been worth any thing; he alleged they
were none of his, and he knew not by what means they came into his Pocket, if
some cheator or other had not cunningly put them in. O what an excuse is this,
said the Sergeants, when was it seen that ever one man did steal his money into
the Pockets of another? And why not so? replied Francion, you see that all my
money is not false, and that there is some of a good alloy. And so it may be,
said one of the company, the good serves to make the bad to pass, and it is
likely you have received the good money in exchange of the bad, from some
Merchant whom you have deceived.

Hereupon his false accuser did advance himself, and standing up, he said unto
the Judge, You are to understand, that this man having coined a great number of
false pieces, did distribute them to many, to whom he was engaged, who bought
many commodities with them up and down the City. One informed me of it, who is
an associate of some persons who do lend forth money, and did put even those
false pieces into the Bank, to make their deceitful merchandise the more
current. Francion hereupon did take the word out of his mouth, and told him
that he was a Knave, and an Impostor, and that he could not prove one word of
what he spoke; but his accuser replied to him, that when time should serve he
would show the truth of his accusation. This is not the first time said he,
that this man has made it his trade to deceive all others; I shall declare
unto you one of his deceipts, and one of the greatest ones in the world; It is
not long since he was in the City of Genoa, where he acted the part both of a
Gentleman, and a Merchant, and took upon him also diverse other Trades. Being
there, he pretended that he had received great sums of money from diverse
persons who were indebted to him, and he borrowed from several Merchants above
twenty pair of scales, and from all those weights which were to weigh Pistols,
he clipped away a certain quantity; He then having gathered together many good
Pistols, did clip them according to the proportion of the weights which he had
clipped. He kept the scales but a little time with him, but returned them, that
the Merchants might entertain no suspicion of him. Not long afterward he did
go to the same Merchants, and with the clipped Pistols did buy of them a great
quantity of stuff; The Pistols being weighed were found equal to the weight in
the scales, which weight he before had clipped. The Merchants believing the
Pistols to be good weight, were well contented, and he departed to sell his
stuffs elsewhere, having gained all the Gold which he had clipped off the
Pistols, whereby he had made great profit, selling some part of it, and keeping
the other to mingle it with his bad alloy, when he coined false pieces, such as
were these which he had about him when he was apprehended, Some of the
Merchants having afterward good Pistols to weigh, were amazed to see them much
heavier than the weights of their ordinary scales, and as they compared them
with other weights, they perceived that the light weights were the same which
came from that man. They communicated what had befallen them one unto another,
and all of them remembering that their scales passed through the hands of this
man, they perceived the cheat, and were resolved to cause him to be punished,
if they could apprehend him. They could never since hear of him, for he does
nothing else but run from place to place, and change his name and habit; but
now, since we have him in custody, and I do perfectly remember that it is the
same man, for I do call to mind that I have seen him in many other places, I
doubt not but they will join with us in prosecuting the Law against him.
Consider with your selves if there was ever a greater cheat, and if the French
men be not more subtle than we can imagine. I know many other prancks that he
has played, which in due time and place I will discover to you.

Francion was much astonished at the impudence of this man, who did impute unto
him things which he never thought of. He exclaimed against him, and protested
that he was never at Genoa in his life, and that he would prove his life quite
contrary to that which he alleged. He said, he was a Gentleman of honorable
parentage, and that he lived always in the Court of France near unto Princes
and the greatest Signiors, that there was not a French man in Rome but knew
him, and could testify the great esteem in which he always lived. It is
probable, said his Accuser, that the French men who are now in Rome will take
his part, whether it be to preserve the honor of their Nation, or that a great
part of them have received much profit by him. It is sufficiently known, that
there are many young Gentlemen of great Families, who receive not so much money
from their own Countries as they desire. insomuch that they are enforced to
have recourse to this Impostor, and to make him their last refuge, who lends
them counterfeit moneys, hoping that one day when they are teturned into their
own Country they will pay him back good for it, with interest, for he is not
afraid to add usury to the number of his other vices. Not long ago he seemed to
take pleasure to express-himself very liberally to those whom he perceived to
be in want. He invited one night unto Supper all the brave Blades of this City,
who had ruined themselves and their Estates upon the Courtisans; He entertained
them with a magnificent Feast, in which was such variety, that no less than
six Courses one after the other were served in upon the Table. In the first
Course were meats to prepare, as well so full of all manner of variety, that it
seemed to surfeit as much the eye as the appetite. In the third Course were
Tarts, Custards, and Florentines. In the fourth, all manner of raw fruits. In
the fifth, Confects and Suckets. But for the sixth, it was extraordinary and
wonderful. He would be the Steward himself, and did set a great Basin full of
Money on the Table; They believed at first that the Basin was only full of
water to wash their hands, but they perceived it to be full of pieces of Gold,
and looked one on another with admiration. He desired every one of the Company
to take as much thereof as he pleased. It is said, my young Gallants were so
modest, that he was fain to entreat them again; at the last every one took a
handful of the Gold. He desired them, that they would be pleased to fall to it
again, and to empty the Basin; but he could not persuade them to it; for they
were ashamed to show themselves so insatiable, to a Man that was so prodigal. I
have heard it spoken indeed, that these Gentlemen desired, every one of them,
to borrow money of him, and he being uncertain what answer to give them, did at
last resolve upon this gallantry; When the Table-cloath was taken off, every
one of them did put his Money upon the Table, and counting it there, they did
all promise to pay it back to him again, with Interest. He desired them not to
take care for that, and assured them, that he desired no other profit of his
money; but only the contentment to be styled their Friend. It sufficed him, he
said, if at any time without Interest they would return the Money again; for he
knew well enough that he must stay long for it; and besides he was in great
danger to lose it all, and it was to no purpose to demand Bonds of such young
gallants, who had such Parents, that they would never be induced to pay for
their Childrens Debauchment. In this he acted the part of a magnificent
Signior, and I know not if that great Pretender Bragad in, who has been so
famous in Venice, did ever perform so noble an act, although he vaunteth that
he has found the Philosophers stone, and can produce out of other metals so
much Gold as he pleases, by his Powder of Perfection. This Man also who stands
there, would persuade us to a belief, that to authorize his Prodigality he is
the Master of the same Secret; but let him make it if he can, he may be sure he
shall have my good word no more than Bragadin had, who being condemned for a
Sorcerer, and an Impostor, was put to death in Germany, and, for ought that I
know, this Man does deserve the same punishment. We are moreover to consider,
that the French who are in this City ought not to be accepted as Witnesses in
the behalf of this Offender; for the greatest part of them are obliged to him,
and have received from him remarkable courtesies. There are many things worthy
your observation in that which I have spoken: for first of all, to lend, and
give away so much money to such a multitude of Men, and to live at so high a
rate as he does, (which may suffice a Princes Court) does prove, that of
Necessity he must drive some unlawful Trade, which gives him the means still
to hold out, and to supply himself with so vast a bank of moneys. You ought
also to consider his Cheats, and how he does impose sometimes on one, and
sometimes on another, and the great disgrace and loss he brings to Italy, by
making current those pieces, which are either not weight, or altogether
counterfeit. We may do well to look out some Novice lately come from France,
who is not yet guilty of his Liberality, who freely may inform us, if ever he
heard of him in France, and if he be not a Counterfeit himself, and one who
ought not to abuse the name of a Gentleman, and we shall then perceive that it
is an easy matter to be Liberal by false Merchandise. We ought also to
apprehend some of his Servants, and strictly to examine them, that we may be
better informed in the secret of their Masters affairs.

The Judge, who heard all this, commanded the Accuser to be silent, and taking
him aside, told him, That he had done very ill so manifestly to discover these
proceedings of Justice. He did well to enjoin him silence, for he labored with
such a flux of words, that he did speak all that which he did know, and all
that which he did not know; and he could hardly be restrained, but would still
have accumulated more calumniations on him, which were all far from the truth;
for he imputed to Francion alone whatsoever he had heard spoken before of all
the Mountebanks and Impostors that were ever seen in Italy. Francion, who found
that this Information had not the least appearance, and observed the affected
passion in which his Accuser did express himself, and the strange postures and
ill-favored faces which he made, could hardly, in the despite, and midst of
his Misfortune, forbear from laughter. The Magistrate that was then present,
and was a Man of some understanding, did give no great respect unto that
Informer, but commanded him the second time to hold his peace, and it being
much about the time of Dinner, he said he would have this business examined
again at some other time, and so dismissed the Company. The charge of Francions
person was committed to one who kept him Prisoner in his own house, until his
Process could be better drawn up; for he told his Accuser, that he must put
his Bill into a better form, and not make such deviations in it, nor allege
such things against him which he could not prove. After that, he provided a
Chamber for Francion, and brought him wherewith to eat. As for Francion
himself, he was wonderfully amazed, that he was fallen into this Misfortune.
Sometimes he believed that he was taken for some other who was called by his
Name, or did resemble him in Countenance, and had been guilty of such
Impostures; but the counterfeit pieces which were put into his Pocket did check
that supposition, and assured him, that it could not be any such mistake, but a
design contrived on purpose unjustly to accuse him to take away his Life.
Nevertheless he trusted in his Innocence, which he knew would be then
undisputably apparent, when his Cause should be more maturely examined. He had
also an assured confidence of the Assistance of all of his own Nation that were
then at Rome, by whom he was wonderfully beloved and respected.

He was not deceived in that belief, for as soon as Raymond had made it known
that Francion was a Prisoner, they all assembled themselves to understand the
reason of it, and to procure his deliverance if it were possible. The Lackyes
of Raymond had followed the Sergeants, and took notice of the House into which
Francion was carried. As for his own Lackyes, they had a design to play the
Waggs, and had left him in the Perfumers shop. It was some content unto them to
know in what place he was; Nevertheless, they placed Spies up and down that
Street, to give notice, if peradventure he should be conveyed to some other
place. They did sufficiently understand the cause of his Imprisonmen, but
alleged, it was not ground enough to cause him to be apprehended; All his
Friends did jointly endeavor themselves to solicit all the Great Ones whom
they knew, for his enlargement, by demonstrating unto them, that he was of an
unblamed Conversation, and one who abhorred to commit any fraudulent act; but
on the contrary, that he was endued with so much Merit, that all persons of
Honor and Virtue were obliged to defend him. There were many Signiors of Italy
who promised to use all the Authority of their Friends, and their own power,
for his liberty. Nevertheless it would not be permitted that at present he
should have his liberty entirely; for they alleged, he must first justify
himself, and that he might be well content to continue in that House, in which
he could receive no infamy, since it was no ordinary prison for guilty persons.
This was all they could do, and those who were of his ordinary acquaintance,
did address themselves to Raymond to take counsel what expedients on the next
day they should put in practice for his liberty. They found with Raymond,
Audebert and Du Buisson, and two or three more, Hortensius was also there, who
was struck into a deep despair at the misfortune of his dear Francion. He said,
that the modern Policy was not well stated, to suffer so much counterfeit and
clipped money to pass, and not examine from whence it came, for when any one
was abused with it, instead of carrying it to the changers established by the
Prince, he did attempt to make it current, and did abuse his neighbor with it,
as he had been abused himself. He said, there was no conscience in it, and it
was the cause that the Coyners of false money, and Clippers of Pistols, found
always one or other to whom to deliver their counterfeit pieces, who did
distribute them afterward unto others. That the moneys for which Francion was
apprehended, came from some bad place, and was given him in payment, when he
could not well discover what they were. Raymond told him, he must not think so,
for Francion could not be so overseen in taking of money, but those false
pieces were cunningly conveyed into his Pocket, as he was coming from Church,
which he could make apparent to all the world. Every one was amazed at this
villainy, and the Pedant Hortensius began to make invectives against the
Impostors of this age, in which his discourse was so extravagant, that they
could not refrain from laughter, and wished that Francion were present, to
divert him from his melancholy. This gave an occasion to some to exercise their
fancies on the subject which did present it self, although they were much
afflicted for the captivity of their Friend. Hortensius said, That those who
were Clippers of Money, were a generation of devout people, for they did go in
Procession round about the Cross. This was but a common fancy, and worthy of
the Spirit of such a Man, who on every occasion would assist himself with that
which he had heard from others. But Audebert taking the word from him, said
unto him. You speak something my brave Doctor, but that is not all, It is
rather that they do follow the fashion of the world at this day, by
undervaluing good Letters, of which you justly do complain, and tax the
Ignorance of this Age; for you shall seldom now meet with any pieces of silver,
but the Letters are almost quite clipped away: for the truth whereof, I do
refer my self to our Kardecues of France.

Every one commended Audebert, in which he made apparent the clearness of his
Spirit, and Raymond, desirous to express himself on the same Subject, did say,
That Francion was not like unto a certain Man of his Country, who being accused
for coining of false money, was found so guilty, that no man would take his
part, except one Gentleman, who being of a nimble apprehension, assured those
who were present, that it was unjust to condemn that Man for coining false
money, Because, said he, he has done no more than what he ought to do. The
reason being demanded, he made answer, That the condemned Man did owe money to
all the world, and that he could not but do well to pay his Creditors, because
in that he did no more than he ought. This Conceit pleased well, but Hortensius
would comment on it, to have it the better understood; affirming, that the money
which that Man owed was not counterfeit money, but good; so that he did not
that which he ought to have done, and did not pay well his Creditors; Nay, said
Hortensius, suppose that to pay his Debts he had coined good Kardecues, as good
as such as come out of the Mint at Paris, yet he was worthy of reproof, it
being not permitted to any to coin money, but for the Prince only, and by his
Authority; for the coining of Money is a right of Sovereignty which belongs
not unto the Subject. Hereupon he cited the Laws and the Customs, and some
fragments of ancient Authors, to add more reputation to his words; But it was
told him, he began to be too serious, when what they spoke was only but in
mirth: nevertheless they commended his observation, being unwilling to
discontent him. Hereupon he fell again upon the abuse which was committed, in
coining of counterfeit money, with so much choler, that Audebert, perceiving
his passion, told him, That if ever he should, as he hoped, be King of Polonia,
he would publish a Declaration throughout his Kingdom, against that abuse. Mock
not, said Hortensius, undoubtedly I will, if God shall give me the grace to
arrive unto that Dignity, I will make an Ordinance, that those who shall be
evidently convinced to have altered, or falsified the current money of my
Kingdom, shall be not only plunged into a Cauldron of burning Oil, as in some
Countries that punishment has been inflicted, but I will find out another
Invention, which shall testify my Knowledge, and my Reading, I will have
melted Gold powered into the mouths of those false Coyners, as the Parthians
served Marcus Crassus, as I have read in the History, or Epitomy of Lucius
Florus, and in my Historical Dictionary, printed at Lions, and also in many
other Authors, and then would I say, Glut thy self with that which thou have so
much loved; so spoke Thomiris, the Queen of the Scithians, to Cyrus, causing
his head to swim, and sink in humane blood. A most learned punishment, I
promise you, said Audebert! Then what will you say to Crassus, who was not
accused of counterfeiting money, but it may suffice that he was extremely
avaricious; but what punishment will you ordain for those who falsely do accuse
the Innocent as our Friend. Fancion has been accused, I will ordain them the
same punishment, said Hortensius, for they are worthy to suffer the same
torment, which they would procure unto others. That is well thought upon, said
Audebert, and I would to God that the same punishment might overtake these
false Accusers.

The Discourse had continued longer, but the immediate danger of their Friend
did draw their thoughts into another, and a more serious consideration; When
behold Dorini did arrive, to be more fully informed of the News which he heard
in the City, which was, That a French Gentleman was apprehended as a great
Malefactor, not imagining that it had been Francion, although he had heard him
named. He professed, that in the Morning he was angry with him, by reason of
the Inconstancy of his Loves, and the amorous deceit whereby he thought to have
circumvented his Kinswoman Nays; but now, he said, he pityed his Misfortune,
and would employ himself and all his Friends, to release him from his
Captivity; and because it was now Supper time, the rest of the Company returned
to their Lodgings, Audebert only and Hortensius did remain with Raymond. As for
Dorini, he repaired to Nays, and related to her the Misfortune into which
Francion was fallen, for which she seemed not to express the least sign of
Remorse; but on the contrary did affirm, that it was some satisfaction to her,
and that no doubt but it was a just, and a manifest punishment from Heaven; for
although he had not falsified any moneys, yet he had falsified his affections,
and corrupted his Love, which is the sweetest bond in the society of Mankind.
Her Cousin at that time would speak no more, because he perceived her anger did
still grow upon her; he had spoken with her not long before, and related to her
what he had heard word for word from Francions own mouth, but it was altogether
unprofitable.

In the mean time as Raymond was at Supper with Audebert and Hortensius, the
Officers came unto his Lodging, having a Commission to examine the Trunks and
Coffers of Francion, to see if there were any more false money to be found, or
any tools to coin it with, that they might serve as so many proofs against him.
They had also a design to examine his Servants whether they did assist him or
not; and as they made a great noise at the door, being many of them in number,
Raymond began to stand upon his guard, and suspected the affair. Their number
served only to be the more prejudicial to them, and to make their design the
more known, and the more difficult to accomplish Raymond did swear that he
would hinder them from coming in, as much as lay in his Power, and immediately
he barricadoed the Chamber Door against them, for they were become Masters of
the Lower Door already. The reason why had they not taken the full possession
of the whole House, was, because they were possessed with so nice a fear, that
they could not agree amongst themselves who should be the first man that should
force his entrance. It was a pleasant spectacle to behold, that although on
other occasions they would not give the least honor to one another, yet now
they stood upon the Ceremonies of their Age, and Qualities, and on the order of
their places. At the last, perceiving that the Door would not be opened, they
were advertised that there was a back Door in a little lane behind the House:
Thither they did run with all the speed they could, and those who were most
hindmost thrusting on those who were before, they enforced them to enter
whether they would or not. They found two of Francions Lackies, whom immediately
they seized on, and carried to the Judge. Raymond, who thought not to be
surprised by them, did now fear that they would apprehend him also, as one who
did drive the same Trade with Francion, because he lodged in the same House
with him; he therefore retired himself into an inward Chamber with Audebert and
Hortensius, the better to secure himself, and the Pedant Hortensius never left
swearing, Virtue of Jove, O that I had now the strength of Hercules to
encounter with this Kennel of hounds, I would cut off all their heads at once,
had they as many heads as Hydra; He made many more such exclamations, which
would have made them all to laugh, had not some more serious thoughts possessed
their spirits.

In the mean time the Sergeants being entered into Francion's Chamber, which the
Master of the house was constrained to open unto them, did make there a
horrible havoc, turning upside down all the movables, and searching the very
Matt of the Bed; but finding nothing of importance, they took only a box, and
two portmantles, with all that was in them, and were about to carry them away:
Raymond in the mean time observing that they did not look after him, was
resolved to go to them, and being a man of a good courage, he demanded of them
what they did there, and seeing they were entered into a consultation to take
away the Coffers and all, and were putting their debate into execution, he
began to resist them, and to tell them that they belonged to himself, and
therefore had no commission to search what was within them. One of them replied
to him, that, if he were a wise man, he would not resist the authority of the
Judge; yet for all that he continued firm in his resolution, and Audebert also
and Hortensius with furious looks came up to his assistance. The Officers, who
for the most part of them were addicted to peace and ease, and not to be
Warriers, were contented to have done as they were commanded, without fighting
with those men, who if they had slashed them soundly with their Swords, they
were uncertain how to have relieved themselves, for they were strangers, who
might immediately afterward fly away, and never be heard of again. Some of them
therefore did begin to persuade them with soft words, whiles the other, with
all the speed they could, did begin to carry away the Coffers. Raymond having
with violence forced those back who did pa^ly with him, he advanced toward the
others who were carrying away the booty; they, observing his resolution, began
to withdraw, and leaving the Coffers behind them, they took their ready way to
the stairs head, with so much have, that they tumbled down upon one another,
and when they were at the door, they stood not upon those ceremonies at their
going out as they did at their coming in. The Master of the house said to
Raymond, that he knew very well that Francion had nothing in his Coffers that
might be prejudicial to him, for he had seen them often opened, he needed not
therefore to have troubled himself to have detained them. Raymond nevertheless
pursued the Sergeants to the street, and observing them to make have away, he
made fast all the doors, to be in the greater assurance. As he was going into
his Chamber, he observed a man to cross the Court, and to run sometimes on the
one side of it, and sometimes on the other, to find his way out. It began to
grow dark, nevertheless he perceived that he was not any of the house, and
conceiving him to be one of the Sergeants Yeomen who had lost his way; he took
him by the Collar, and did drag him to his own Chamber. The Italian seeing
himself surprised, did incessantly entreat him to give him leave to be gone,
because he came not thither with the least intent to do any harm. What, replied
Raymond? And is it possible for you, or any other Sergeants in the world, to do
any good? Are you not one of that Company who are but now gone? he could not
deny it, whereupon Raymond told him that he should pay for all the rest, and as
long as Francion was under custody, he should be a prisoner also; he told him,
that he should not go off neither at so cheap a rate, unless (for he assured
him he should be put to a most cruel death) he would declare the Author of the
Plots which were contrived against Francion, and who was the man that did
employ them on that affair. Raymond perceived by his Physiognomy that he had a
wicked and a treacherous Soul, and his own Genius did presage unto him, that he
might understand by this Man something of the Conspiracy against the life and
the honor of Francions. This man was possessed with so great a fear to hear
Raymond to speak in this manner to him, that one might read his guilt in his
face, for he verily believed, that if he made not a free confession, Raymond
would kill him without Compassion; he told him therefore that he would confess
unto him all that he did know, if he would pardon him his faults, whereupon
Raymond commanded him to declare unto him readily what he kept concealed in his
heart. The apprehension of death and torment had left such and impression in
his sensible parts, that he trembled in every joint, and was not able to speak:
At the last, he desired to have some respite given him, but Raymond would allow
him no time at all, whereupon he began to cry for mercy. The Master of the
house did well perceive that Raymond had stayed that man, for which he was
extremely sorry, for he desired that no violence might be offered to any one in
his house; for he was afraid that he himself might have been accused to have
taken part with the French, and troubled for it. He therefore besought Raymond
that he would dismiss him, but Raymond was in a wonderful choler, and swore
that he would kill him himself, if he might not be suffered to do with him as
he would. Hortensius also, who at that time was more than a Fool, did begin to
speak for him, but he did thrust him back so rudely, that he thought he should
have been hurled up the Mountains toward Polonia, sooner than he desired, so
that, poor man, he was constrained to retire himself into his own lodging, not
daring to make the least complaint. Not long afterward he returned into
Raymonds Chamber, where was Audebert and diverse servants, who did secure the
prisoner; Raymond continued his threatenings to him, and assured him that he
should be a dead man before the next morning, if he would not confess all the
circumstances of his guilt, and told him, that before he killed him, he was
resolved to wrack him. He first of all demanded of him who he was, he told him
that his name was Corsegua, and that he was an ancient servant to the house of
Valerius a Gentleman of Rome. Raymond suddenly conceived that it was that
Valerius of whom Francion sometimes had spoke unto him, who was his great
enemy. Observing that this man having confessed this did forbear to speak any
more, he commanded him to proceed in his confession, but he besought him to
have a little patience till he had reovered his Spirits. Audebert told him that
he employed more time and words making in his supplication, than in making his
confession, and that he must answer to what was demanded, and not pass away
the time unprofitably; whereupon he said, that he could confess nothing else,
but only that he did assist the Sergeants; who came to search the lodgings of a
man accused for coining false money, and although he was no Sergeant himself,
yet he did oftentimes go with them as an Assistant, and as for that which they
had done in that house, they had received Orders for it from the Court of
Justice. Raymond told him, that there was more than that in the business, for
being no Officer of Justice, he had some ill design of his own that brought him
along with them. He would not confess any thing, but said, there were many
more besides him who lived altogether on the same employments as he did. By
little and little he began to reassume his Spirits, and was resolved to conceal
this secret as long as possibly he could; but Raymond, perceiving his
obstinacy, caused a fire to be kindled, and an Iron to be put into it, to burn
the foales of his Feet. He began also to think upon some other torment to rack
him, and did propound them all to the wicked Corsegua, the more to affright
him, But, he said, he could not be persuaded that men could be so unmercifull,
as so cruelly to use those who were after their own Image, and so like unto
themselves, whereupon he took upon him the part of a conscientious and a
religious man, and said, It were better to dye, than to wrong a poor neighbor;
For his part, his course of life was only honestly to gain his livelihood, in
soliciting the causes of poor men, or by executing the commandment of the
Judges with the Officers of Justice; But for all that, Raymond could not be
persuaded that he was an innocent Man. Hortensius pronounced aloud, that if he
was guilty of the Injury done unto Francion, there were no punishment in the
World that could be too grievous for him. It was not enough, he said, to tie
him to a dead Body, as Mezentius tied those who had offended him; nor to put
him into the brazen Bull, where Phalaris did put him who made it; nor to cut
off his ey-brows, and rubbing them over with honey, to expose him to the heat
of the burning Sun, and afterward to shut him up in a long Tub stuck full of
nails, the sharp points all inwards, and then tumble it down from the top of a
steep and a high Mountain, as the Carthaginians served Regulus; for whatsoever
the expertest Tyrants in this nature invented, were but pleasures to the
torments which he deserved. Then turning unto Raymond, he said unto him, If you
please, I will search the Books of Antiquity to find out the most horrible
punishments which the most barbarous Nations ever used, that we may at once put
them all in practice on that most abominable person who betrayed Francion.
Raymond could not abstain from smiling at his conceit, and told him he needed
not so much to trouble himself. Corsegua, observing that they looked merrily
round about him, entertained a greater confidence, insomuch, that for all the
punishments which they had threatened to inflict upon him, he would not confess
any thing more than what he had spoke before; but now the Iron began to be red
with heat, and the Grooms had already pucked off his Shoes, when Audebert said,
Before you put the Iron to the plant of his Feet, give me a cord; He took it,
and did wind it under his armpits, and afterward made it fast to two cramps
of Iron, which were struck into the wall under the window: Afterward they
began with another end of a Cord to bind his Legs with all the force they had,
which although it did put him to great pain, yet he still persisted in his
obstinacy. Raymond said, It was, because they did not use him roughly enough;
and because he perceived that they were unprovided of Instruments to rack him;
Nevertheless he was resolved to burn his feet. Thereupon they pulled off his
Stockings, and took the hot Iron from out of the Fire. He then perceived that
they were in earnest, and believed he should be a very fool to suffer himself
to be tormented for not discovering the truth. He told them then, that if they
would forbear to torture him, he would declare unto them whatsoever he did
know. Raymond assured him, that what he had as yet confessed was of little or
no importance, and that he had contradicted himself in it; and moreover, he was
confident that he had other secrets to reveal, and until he had declared them
to him, he neither could, nor would be satisfied. I will then declare unto you
all (said Corsegua) and more than you do expect. Begin then, said Audebert, and
we will unbind you, that with more ease you may discharge what lies upon your
Conscience. But will you promise then to pardon me, said Corsegua? I swear unto
you that I will, said Raymond. I told you before, said Corsegua, that I was a
Servant to Valerius, and I told you no untruth in it, Valerius is a Gentleman
of a good Family, I many years did wear his Fathers Livery, and I have since
been a Servant to his Son, but I never gained any great fortunes by him; for my
Master is more in appearance than effect, and his wealth is not so observable,
as the antiquity of his Family; nevertheless I do love him so entirely, that
there is nothing in the World which I would not do for him, except to give
away my life, which, to speak the truth, is more dear unto me than all the
obligations in the world, as you easily may perceive by me; for if I were
content to die for him, you should torment me as you please, rather than I
would discover his secrets to you, which now I do for the preservation of my
life. Understand then, that a long time he has born a deep grudge to the
Frenchman that was yesterday apprehended, and that before now he has
endeavored to procure his death, having betrayed him into a Castle, from
whence he thought he should never have come forth. He was much astonished when
afterward he heard he was at Rome, and that he continued to Court Nays, whose
good will he had gained. This did fill him with such rage and jealousy, that I
am not able to represent it to you. He himself loved Nays for her perfections,
and for her riches, which would have conduced much to have repaired the Ruins
of his Family, and it could not but be a great grief unto him to lose so good a
Fortune. Hereupon he was resolved to destroy Francion, and to take from him at
once both his Life and his Honor, by accusing him for coining of false monyes.
We have often seen him in the Churches, and other public places, and the
nimblest, and most experienced Cutpurses in this City have had notice of it,
but they could never (until this morning) convey the money into his Pocket.
Immediately afterward we acquainted the Mercers, That there was a brave French
Gentleman coming up that Street, who by his outside promised to be an
advantageous Customer unto them; As he passed by, they pressed upon him to buy
some Silks of them, with much importunity; but at the last, of his own accord,
he stayed at the Perfumers shop, where taking the money out of his Pocket, we
immediately seized upon him, and brought him before a Judge, who is altogether
at my Masters devotion, and will do according to his Direction. There is a Man
also bribed for a certain sum of Silver, who has accused Francion of diverse
crimes, which he strongly will maintain. To render the affair more criminal and
undoubtfull, I came hither this afternoon with a little Coffer under my Cloak,
in which were great store of counterfeit pieces; I had a design to have
conveyed it into Francions Chamber; You were then gone into the City, and the
Servants were sweeping the Chambers, I therefore entered without any difficulty,
pretending to ask for a Friend; but I mistook one Chamber for another, and
instead of conveying the Coffer into Francions Chamber, I have thrust it into
this: I believe you will find it on the further side of the Bed. But it was not
enough for my Master to have done this, He has given me since the Tools also
which they use in the Coining of false money, which being put into a leathern
bagg, I brought along with me when I came with the Officers, who were all in a
confusion; My design was to have hid them in some Cabinet near unto Francions
Chamber, and then to have brought thither my Companions, to cause them to seize
upon them, as belonging unto him; but I could not find the opportunity so to
do: I have therefore hid the Bagg in the Garret, and as I came to advertise the
Sergeants of it, who had Commission to make a general search, I found that
they were all gone, and that I was left alone to my own destruction.

When he had spoke this, they searched with a Candle behind the Bed, where they
found the little Coffer accordingly as he had said, but they had no key to open
it, but by the shaking of it, they found, that within it there was great store
of money; at the last they did break it open by force, and they found that they
were all false Pieces. As in a deep amazement they were beholding this,
Corsegua desired them that they would lend him a little longer their attention,
and thus he continued his Discourse; If what I have now revealed to you should
arive to my Masters ear, he would be inexorably incensed against me; but he
has no cause to complain of me; for having done what I have, I think I have
done enough for him, since I have thrown my self into the greatest dangers; And
because I have declared unto you his secrets, there is no reason that I should
spare others, (although you have not solicited me unto it) for I should be
sorry that he alone should be accused for an enterprise, when he has others to
be partakers with him. You shall understand therefore, that Nays has been
courted by a Venetian Lord, called Ergastus: He was heretofore wonderfully
jealous of my Master, and my Master was as jealous of him, but because they
perceived that neither of them were accepted, and that she neglected their
service to countenance a stranger, they reconciled themselves to enter into a
conspiracy against him, and caused him to be imprisoned in a Castle of one of
their friends, and immediately thereupon one Salviati was hired to counterfeit
disobliging Letters in the name of Francion, which were sent unto Nays, to make
her believe that he grew weary of her service, and would abandon her for ever,
having no mind at all to come to Rome; But Francion not long afterward came
hither, quite contrary to the expectation of Valerius and Ergastus, who began
both again to be Suitors to Nays, with so much heat and jealousy, that they
both returned to their ancient enmity; but understanding that Francion was the
only man in favor, they did shake hands again, to confer on this affair, and
grew great friends, out of a desire to ruin him. They have sworn to employ all
the malice of their art and power against him. I have declared unto you already
what was the design of Valerius to destroy Francion, by causing him to be
condemned to death, nevertheless he is quite out of favor with his Mistress,
for she cares not for him. But Ergastus has proceeded another way, as lately I
have learned of Salviati, a corrupted man, whom he employeth in all his
affairs; He knew that a Venetian called Lucinda was come hither with her
Daughter Emilia, not so much to solicit her process (as she would make the
world to believe) as to see if her Daughter could meet with a better fortune in
Rome than in Venice; He has heretofore very much frequented the Company of
those Ladies, and has been very amorous of Emilia, with whom, some say, he
has been too familiar, and will not marry her, because she is but poor,
nevertheless he would be glad to hear that she had circumvented some other
young Gentleman, not for any great good will he does bear unto her, but to be
well discharged of her; and because he knew that Francion was of so amorous a
Complexion, that he might easily be tempted, he persuaded himself, that at the
first sight he would fall in love with her, for according to the sharpest
judgment of the most discerning eyes, she is believed to be one of the most
beautiful young Ladies that ever Nature produced. The business and the
difficulty of it was to lay the plot so happily, that he might but any where
encounter her to represent unto her the passionate desire he had to be
acquainted with her; and to arrive thereunto, he did assist himself with a
certain Mimick called Bergamin, who pretended to love Francion entirely, but
who was far more desirous to oblige Ergastus to him, whom he had known a longer
time. He brought Francion into a Church, where he knew Emilia was to be with
her; Mother, he pretended not to know them, the better to cover his design; He
came out of the Church as if he would attend them, and about an hour afterward
he came to acquaint Francion who they were: Afterward he did make himself known
to Salviati, who called himself their Solicitor, and who promised to bring him
to Lucindaes house, that he might behold the fait Emilia, who did possess him
with such vehement desires. Francion had no sooner seen her, but he became
desperately inamoured, and did write many Letters to her, all which Salviati
did deliver. The business was so managed, that one Evening he came unto
Emilia, as she was going to Bed, at which time he made a promise of marriage to
her. He did prevail more in this than Ergastus hoped for, he only expected that
he should so often frequent Lucindaes house, that Nays hearing of it, should be
so much incensed thereat, as absolutely for the time to come to renounce him
for his perfidiousnesse; but observe now the height of the misfortune of this
poor Gentleman, who on all sides was entangled in those nets which his Enemies
had laid for him. Salviati is a man secret enough, He never discovered to me
one word of it, nor ever would have done, if I had not made known unto him,
that I had been employed by Valerius in the like enterprises, and yet, I dare
swear unto you that he had still contained himself, if he had not found this
liberty of Speech to discover but this little amongst the Bottles and Tobacco
Pipes.

Here Corsegua made a stop, and those who were present were all surprised with
wonder, to hear so many malicious and bloody contrivances, which proceeded from
the revengefull Spirits of the Italians. They wished that Justice might take
such a strict notice of it, that punishment accordingly might be afflicted, and
that Francion m ght be re-estated into his liberty, and they promised to
themselves suddenly to divulge all the particulars, that the Innocence of
Francion might be acknowledged. Raymond said unto Corsegua, that as yet he had
no reason to be entirely satisfied, if he would not promise to acknowledge
before the Judges, all that which he had confessed before them. He made answer,
I shall then by this means be out of all hopes to re-establish my self in the
favor of my Master; Is it not enough for you that I have declared all these
secrers? No (said Raymond) For although we should allege them, yet no belief
would be given to our assertations, unless that you do justify them with us.
Therefore if you do not promise by inviolable oaths to confirm what you have
spoken, you shall not be exempted from Death; But if you shall perform what, in
reason, we shall require, I do promise you on my part, that you shall not stand
in need to be afraid of your Master, but that we will very liberally reward
you, and will take you into France along with us, if you have of your self a
desire unto it, and moreover we will give you that content, that you shall have
no cause to complain of the Evil which we have done unto you. Raymond expressed
this with such a freedom of Spirit, that Corsegua began to assure himself of
the truth of his words, and promised to do whatsoever he would have him, and
did swear unto him all the Oaths that could oblige a heart to the performance
of what he promised: But Audebert taking Raymond aside, did represent unto him,
that this man was but a knave, and no confi-dence could be reposed in him, and
probably, that on the next day, when he should be brought before the Judges, he
would deny whatsoever he had spoken, and would not be sensible at all of the
many imprecations he had made; he represented to him, that it was therefore
better to force from him some other acknowledgement, and to cause him to wrire
it under his own hand, and to sign to whatsoever he had confessed, that they
might represent it to the Judge, to which if they could persuade him, it would
be impossible for him to deny it. Raymond did approve the motion, and although
Corsegua did allege, that they ought not to mistrust him, yet Pen, Ink, and
Paper, were brought unto him, and he did write, that he had caused those false
pieces to be conveyed into the Pocket of Francion, by the Instigation of his
Master, and moreover, that he had brought into his Chamber a Coffer full of the
like pieces, together with the Instruments and tools of false Coyners,
maliciously to accuse Francion, and to prove him guilty. Having confessed this
under his own hand, they enforced him to sign it, and because he seemed very
unwilling to merchandise that business, Raymond and Audebert, redoubling their
threatenings, did so affright him, that he performed whatsoever they desired.
They afterward searched the upper lofts of the House, where they found that he
had convayed all those Instruments, accordingly as he had said, and they did
lay them up, to show them afterward to the Court of Justice. The night was
then far advanced, and Raymond commanded his prisoner to be shut up in a
Chamber, in which were diverse of his own Servants, who had him under custody,
and caused him to lie there for that night. Raymond afterward did go to his
bed, and Audebert and Hortensius did the like, but they could take no rest,
importunately every one desiring the appearence of the day, to make have to the
deliverance of their friend. The morning being come, Raymond left Audebert with
his Servants in the House to guard Corsegua, and he repaired with Hortensius to
the place where Francion was. He demanded of his Keeper to speak with him, for
he desired to acquaint him with this pleasing News, that he should not grow
into too deep a Melancholy, but be in hope after a few Hours to obtain his
Liberty. But the rough Keeper replied, That he should not speak with him, which
extremely did perplex him. He had a desire after that to speak unto the Judge,
which was permitted. He declared to him, That he had taken in his own Lodging a
Man who was come with the Ministers of Justice, and confessed to him that he
had put the false pieces of money into Francions Pocket, and that all which
followed thereupon was only the malicious plot of his Enemy Valerius, to take
away his life; and for his better assurance, he showed him the Confession which
Corsegua had signed. The Judge perceived well enough that they had detained
this Man, although he had received no advertisement of it, His Companions
imagining that he came forth with them by some way which they did not well
observe, so that they made no complaint of his detainment. Nevertheless the
Judge suspecting that they had forced him to what he had done, and taking part
with Valerius, whose life he knew, he did give a great check to Raymond, and
told him, that he had made an assault upon Justice it self, for having detained
that Man, and obliged him to write a Deposition, which ought not to be made,
but before the Magistrates; and that it seemed to him, that he himself would
take upon him the Office of a Magistrate for the execution of Justice. Raymond
made answer, That in that Necessity they got from their Enemy what they could,
and if he had not done that, he could not have a perfect assurance of the
Innocence of Francion. The Judge alleged to him, that he had done very ill in
it. But he said, I will maintain what I have done; and why should I be
compelled to make satisfaction? seeing I have done a Civil office for my
Friend, by which his justification is apparent, and undoubted.

The Proof of his Affection was worthy to be admired; but this barbarous Judge
took no notice of it, although at every word Hortensius cried, Behold an
Orestes! Behold a Pylades! Behold the true Paragon of Friendship! Do something
for the love to Virtue. But this inexorable Man commanded that they should
release Corsegua, for Raymond confessed that he was still at his Lodgings; He
commanded some of the Sergeants to fetch him. Raymond affirmed it did not much
trouble him, because he believed he would not deny his own hand. He therefore
sent Hortensius to his Lodging, to speak to Audebert that he should deliver
that Man unto the Sergeants without resistance. This incontinently was done,
and Audebert also came along with the^ to the Judge, the better to understand
how the Business was managed. They all then said unto the Judge, If you will
not believe what this Man has testified under his own hand, at least, let us
deserve to be believed. Behold three of us present! we are all of us Gentlemen,
and we have five or six Grooms, who have heard him all along to confess the
conspiracy which has been plotted against Francion; Shall we all be found to
be Liars? I will hear you every one by himself, (said the Judge.) That will
import but little (said Corsegua,) for I must confess, that I have spoken all
that which they say, and that I have written all which they do show unto you;
but it is not therefore true, because I have done it. I only did confess it,
to preserve my self from Death, and the Torments which they had prepared for
me, and what I have signed with my own hand, was only occasioned by the act of
fear.

In this manner this wretched Man endeavored to deny all that which he had
confessed, because he thought himself to be now in a place of assurance; and
the French were greatly amazed to see his horrible perfidiousnesse, calling to
mind the many Oaths by which he had obliged both his Soul and Body. The Judge
would do nothing contrary to Corsegua, who was his Friend, and had bestowed
many Presents on him. He said, he believed they had wonderfully tormented that
poor Man, and protested, that those who had done it should be severely
punished. Corsegua perceiving that the Judge adhered to him, did show him his
naked Body, which in many places had been pinched by the cruelty of his
Tormentors. He showed them also the mark of the Cord with which they had bound
his Legs a little above his anckle. On this, all the Italians did thunder
against Raymond, and the other of the French Nation, for their
unmercifullnesse, and made all the have they could to shut the Gate of the
House, to be assured of his Person. Corsegua did believe that Raymond and
Francion were sufficiently able to reward him, if he would have confessed unto
the Magistrates what he did know of his Master; but he considered with himself,
that peradventure he should never go with them into France, and that either
Valerius, or some of his Kindred, would cause him to be killed by treachery.
This he thought on all the Night before, so that he continued in his
treacherous resolution. On the other side, the Judge who was present, did take
counsel to send for a strong Guard to send the French to Prison, for his own
House was not large enough to receive so many Prisoners. He was resolved to
commence a Process against them, as well as Francion, for being his
Accomplices, and for having offered Violence to him who assisted the Sergeants.
As he was in this Determination, there were some who knocked violently at the
Gate, and being admitted, they represented to him, that he must make appearance
himself before another Judge who was Superior to him. This made him to tremble
for fear; for in such Cases the Judge is never demanded to appear before a
Superior, but only for unjust proceedings. Being charged to come himself, and
to bring along with him the French Gentleman who was a Prisoner, He immediately
did obey the Summons, and Francion came forth, having with him a multitude of
People to attend him. This was a pregnant Demonstration of the good Disposition
of Dorini, who, although he conceived that Francion was much to be condemned
for having abused his Cousin, yet he would not abandon him in his distress, but
did solicit in the favor of him, being obliged to it by the remembrance of
the many merry hours which sometimes they had passed together in their
agreeable Debauchments. He had been himself with Lucio, who was the Superior
Judge, and represented to him, that the brave Frenchman was fallen into the
hands of Caraffe, who was a Judge that had a dependence on him, and had an ill
Report for many irregular proceedings. Dorini alleged to Lucio, that it was a
shame to hear the Impertinences for which Francion was accused, which had not
the least appearance of Truth, and that of Necessity there must be much of
Malice in his accusation. He told him, that if he had known the Confession of
Corsegua, he could better be enabled to lay open the Case unto him, but he was
not yet thoroughly advertised of it; for those who had been sent unto his
Lodging to acquaint him with it, did not find him within. Nevertheless, that
which he had spoken was sufficient to exasperate Lucio against Caraffe, who
long before had received many complaints against him.

When they were all before him, he did forbid Caraffe to meddle any more in the
affair of Francion; for he said, that the Cognizance thereof should be reserved
to himself. Caraffe made answer, That he did submit unto him in that, and in
all other things; nevertheless he would make it apparent, that in this
particular he had done nothing unjustly, and that Francion was apprehended for
putting off false Quadrubles to a Merchant, his Pocket being found to be full
of them; and that, if his Coffers were examined, which he had caused to be
arrested, there would be yet found more of them, and peradventure there might
be found with them the Utensils of his Profession; He certified, That he had
caused some of his Servants also to be apprehended, who might discover more of
their Masters practice, and could certify whether their Master did ever employ
them in that felonious exercise, or not. For this purpose, he caused the two
Lackyes of Francion to be produced, whom the day before before they had
apprehended, the one was an Italian, the other born in Piedmont, both of them
very young, and without any knowledge of the affairs of their Master, who had
not long entertained them in his Service. Lucio did easily perceive it, after
he had heard them speak but two or three words, so that he found their
testimony to be of no effect. Afterward he caused the Boxes to be opened,
where he found nothing but Linen, and his wearing clothes, and in the
Portmantle there was nothing at all but Books and Papers, which were produced,
to the shame of those who believed they should have found some great store of
counterfeit moneys in them; for Corsegua, before hand, at their first entrance
into Raymonds Lodgings, had advertised them, with all speed to seize upon a
little Coffer which they should find in Francions Chamber, for he intended to
have foysted into his Chamber the Coffer full of the counterfeit Pieces, but by
misprision he had hid it in the Chamber of Raymond, as by and by we shall make
apparent. Lucio was at the same time informed, that not long before Francion
had delivered to his Host all the money which he had, to keep for him, so that
there was found in his Chamber no money at all, and they who thought to have
seized upon it, were very much deceived.

He who brought in the Accusation the day before, did then begin to appear, and
did declare some part of that to Lucio, which on the day before he had spoken
to the other Judge, but his Fear did make him now more moderate; But the
Magistrate, who was of an admirable apprehension, did plainly discover, that he
was not well grounded in his Accusation, and would not vouchsafe him so much
patience, as to hear him out, were it not only for the recreation which he gave
him; for he took much pleasure to see how he fumbled in his Accusation. At the
last, he demanded of him, How long he had known Francion? and what was the life
which he did lead? To which he made answer, not only in pursuit of the
Instructions which he had received, but according to the extravagant Inventions
of his own Brain. Lucio afterward did put Interrogatories to some Deponents
concerning the same Accusation; but he found they did nothing agree in their
Depositions, and that this Informer had no knowledge at all of the party whom
he accused. All the Proof which he could make against him, was, That false
moneys were found in his Pocket; But Raymond came up to the Bar, and
declared, That he would make it manifest this was one of the most remarkable
Conspiracies that was ever contrived in Italy, or peradventure in the World,
and that Valerius was the Man who caused Francion to be accused for false
moneys. He thereupon declared the whole proceedings of the Conspiracy, and
withal showed what Corsegua had confessed under his own hand. He afterward
discovered in what a great perplexity these Conspirators were, because they
could not find the false money, nor the Utensils in Francions Lodgings; but, he
said, He would now do them the favor to help them out of that Trouble, and
would inform them where they were. Thereupon he gave order, that the Leathern
Bagg, and the little Coffer should be brought into the Court; Behold! (said he)
What they have hid amongst us, to make the Innocent guilty; but the Invention
did not answer the expectation. Corsegua did mistake one place for another, and
he himself is fallen into my hands so happily, that I have caused him to
confess all, and to sign his Confession under his own hand. Corsegua thereupon
protested, that whatsoever he had spoken, or writ, was only upon Compulsion,
and demanded of the Court, that Raymond might be enforced by the payment of
some great Fine, to make amends for having constrained him to defame his
Master, and for tormenting his own Body. Dorini, having heard all this, was
wonderfully amazed, nevertheless he was glad that the Innocence of Francion
should suddenly be acknowledged. He therefore was permitted to speak himself
unto the Magistrate, to whom he did demonstrate, that whatsoever Raymond had
spoken in the defense of Francion was true, and he himself could justify that
Valerius was always an Enemy unto him, and that having not long before betrayed
him into a Castle, he gave a charge to the Captain thereof, who was his Friend,
to put Francion to death, but it pleased God to preserve him from that danger.

The Judge desired him that he would be pleased not to perplex himself, for he
would impartially do a thorough piece of Justice upon all, and assured him,
that he already did see more clearly into the cause than he conceived. The
effect did prove, that he did speak the truth, for he compared those things
which he did then hear, with those which were already passed, and from thence
he did draw infallible consequences of truth. He himself did open the Bags
where the Instruments were, amongst which he found a small Seal^, and the
tools that made it, by mis-regard huddled in amongst the rest, on which were
the Arms of Valerius, so that this was a proof evident enough to demonstrate,
that all the other tools, with the Seal, came from his house, and did render
Valerius more guilty than was before conceived; For to what use did those tools
serve him? Did he make them on purpose to have them carried into Francion's
Chamber? Did he find them made to his hand, as soon as ever he had the design
to betray Francion, or could he possibly cause them afterward to be made in so
short a time? Of this last there was but little appearance. It must be
therefore, that he had them lying by him many years, and that he had made use
of them himself. The affairs of his house having been a long time in an ebbing
condition, and he himself having not wherewith to maintain so great a train,
did make use of this dangerous profession, in which this wretched Corsegua, and
some others as yet undiscovered, did assist him, and Corsegua himself, not six
months before, had been accused for the same fact before Caraff; but this
petty Judge, who had his Conscience both stained and seared, did save him at
that time from the danger of the Law, by excuses as false as was his money,
Valerius having filled his Purse with pieces more current than those which he
ordinarily vented. The Superior Judge, whose name was Lucio, did clearly
petceive it; but his discretion would not make it apparent at that present, and
he reserved himself to another occasion, to punish the corruptions of Caraff;
he had found enough besides for this present Cause to conserve the Integrity of
Justice. The crime of Valerius was evidently verified, and for that of Caraff
he had received also information heretofore. There remained nothing to clear
the cause which was under present consideration; and as Lucio was intent on the
dispatch thereof, he turned to Corsegua, and taking him aside, he said unto
him, that he was a wretched fellow to deny a thing which he had confessed
before several persons, and which he had also signed with his own hand. He
assured him, that if he continued in his perverseness, he would give sentence
against him, and afterward send him to the Gibbet. Corsegua for all this did
think to make use of his accustomed Artifices; but Lucio did so affright him,
that he confessed, that whatsoever Raymond had declared, was very true, and
that under his own hand he had acknowledged no more of the things in relation
unto the conspiracy against Francion, but as in order they were done, and as he
knew them to be so. It was most unlikely to allege that Raymond should have
suggested them unto him, or had constrained him to write them down, and
afterward to sign them; for how could he ever entertain such Inventions in his
thoughts, which did agree so well with the Intentions and the malice of
Valerius? This Lucio did consider of before hand, and examined Corsegua on the
fact of his Master, and demanded of him, where he found or had those tools with
which he coined the false pieces? to which he made many impertinent answers;
but Lucio had already given order that Valerius should be apprehended and
carried to prison, which was suddenly put in execution; and seeing the
perverseness and stubbornness of Corsegua, he commanded that he should also be
carried thither with the same Man who had accused Francion; The Accuser being
taken aside, and examined by himself, did almost presently confess, that
whatsoever he had spoken before, was very false, and did now justify the truth
of what his Companion had, not long before, acknowledged. The Innocence of
Francion was then most manifest. The Judge believed that it would be a piece of
injustice to detain him prisoner any longer; wherefore he did aloud pronounce,
that he was free to go where he pleased, and that those should be severely
punished who unjustly had accused him. But Bergamin and Salviati who were both
present, did immediately address themselves unto the Magistrate. They had
thrust themselves into the throng, to observe what should become of Francion,
for they were accessory to the accusation which was formed against him, and
perceiving that he was acquitted, and found innocent, they propounded to
themselves that he would not stay long in Rome, but it was likely enough would
so obscure himself, that they could not readily be revenged of him. They
concluded therefore betwixt themselves, to arrest him at the Suit of Lucinda
and Emilia, by which means they should either constrain him to espouse whom he
professed to have loved, or at least to have him condemned to pay great
damages, and make amends by some vast sums of money to Emilia: Salviati was he
who did plead against him, as being most experienced in those affairs; He
declared to the Judge, that he opposed the liberty of Francion, who ought to be
detained for another crime, for he alleged that he had promised matriage to the
Daughter of Lucinda, whom he was accustomed to visit in the night, so that he
could not repair her honor but only by marrying of her. Raymond did very well
understand this accusation, and besought Lucio that Corsegua might be sent for
again, that by him he might better understand the Truth of that affair; Lucio
did immediately send for him, and the Messenger did overtake him, being yet not
gone so far as half way unto the Prison. When he was returned, Raymond demanded
of him if he did not know Salviati, and if it were not he who was employed on
the affairs of Ergastus, and who had told him of all the design which that
Signior had contrived to deceive Francion, by tempting him to love a Lady, with
whom he himself had already been familiar, to the end that he might lose the
favor of another Lady, whom they both courted? Corsegua did readily
acknowledge it, for he would have been sorry, if his Master only and himself
had been found guilty in the Treachery. He was of the same disposition as
almost all guilty men are, who are glad to have Companions in their
wickedness. Lucio perceived that this Emilia had been a Maid too liberal of
her honor, so that a man could not be much obliged to her, when she had agreed
but to grant him that, which she had already given to another. Otherwise the
complaint of Salviati had not been altogether inconsiderable. As for Francion,
he always affirmed that he never promised any thing to Emilia, neither did he
boast that he ever had received from her the least favors of Love: And as for
the rest, it was no honor for her, nor for any that did belong unto her, if
they would make the world to believe, that he had known her too familiarly,
when he had so often protested to the contrary.

Francion having thus cleared himself, the pleading of Salviati did pass for
an indiscretion, when the Court immediately afterward was enforced to give Ear
to the complaint of one of the Sergeants who was then present; who seeing that
Bergamin and Salviati would arrest Francion for a Trespass of Love, he would
also arrest Raymond on the same Action. He had almost since his first coming
into Rome taken notice of him, for a man who had done him a remarkable affront,
but until this present he had not the opportunity to revenge himself. At last
advancing toward the Judge, he with joined hands did beseech him (poynting to
Raymond) to do justice on that Gentleman, whom he did show unto him, because
he had dishonored his house. The Judge made answer to him, That he should
declare how it was done; whereupon, with a low and trembling voice he
proceeded, Sir, I will represent unto you a strange thing: You are to
understand, that one Morning departing very early out of my house to solicit
my own affairs, and being enforced to return sooner than I was resolved,
because I had forgot one of my Writings, which was a Paper of great importance,
I found this Frenchman in my Chamber, making much of my Wife, who was not then
quite ready. You know how ill at Rome we do resent that any one should enter
so privately, and familiarly into our Houses, especially into our Wifes, whom
we cannot keep with Vigilance enough. I much reproved my Wife for giving
permission to that Man to come unto her, and I spoke also very angrily unto
him; but he excused himself, alleging it was the fashion of his Country, which
he could not forget; not considering that we here live otherwise at Rome. For
the rest, he came unto me (he said) upon serious business, and desired me to
acquaint him with the proceedings at Law of a Gentleman, a friend of his, with
whom I had some acquaintance. That Excuse made well for him, for I was
thoroughly instructed in that affair, and I had some Papers in my Closet which
did much concern it. Going therefore to look them out, and the other Paper
which I had forgotten, I had no sooner turned my back, but this wicked man
followed me, and made fast the Door upon me, and did double-lock it; I cried,
and knocked; but he would not open it: I commanded my Wife to come and
dis-ingage me; but she told me, she could not; and, in effect, that Traitor
afterward did take my Wife, to do with her as he would himself. The Door of
my Closet was made of two Boards, which were placed at such a distance, that
they were the breadth of two fingers the one from the other, I know not whether
it were for good luck, or for ill luck, but I could there see all that they
were doing to my prejudice, that afterward I might have by law some recompense
for it: Nevertheless I evidently perceived my Misfortune through the cleft of
the Door: I cried out against my Wife; but she said, That the Man did force
her: I exclamed also against him, and gave him a thousand ill words; but he
would return no answer to them at all. I cursed them both with all my heart,
and took down from the hook an old Fox which I had in my Closet, and having
unsheathed it, I did thrust, and thrusted the blade through the cleft of the
Door, threatening to kill that French Traitor, if he would not open the Door
unto me; but I could not reach him with it, and I was in such a rage, that so
violently I did beat the hilts and the blade against the chair in my Closet,
that I thought I had broken it all in pieces. I retired my self a little, and
came afterward again to the Door, against which I did so thunder, that if it
had not been strong, and new, I am confident I had laid it on the floor. At the
last my Wife came and opened the Door, and I, furious as I was, did run after
that treacherous Frenchman to kill him; but he saved himself by flight. I
turned my self to my Wife, and said unto her, That if I had known she had been
consenting to that which was passed, I would Massacre her immediately. She did
protest unto me, That her Body was as undefiled as her Conscience; and that the
Frenchman had vainly exercised his strength against her, which so forcibly she
did resist, that he could not accomplish his Desires. And indeed, it did seem
to me, to be as she said; but withal, it may be she so extremely labored to
resist him, that she could not feel what he was doing to her. Moreover, she
confessed, that this luxurious Frenchman going away, did swear unto her, That
what he did was only in mirth, and that he had not locked me up in my Closet,
nor offered any familiarities to her, but only to laugh at my jealousy. She,
poor woman, was so simple as to believe it; but I could not entertain that
Conceit, knowing well enough the wanton Dispositions of the French. Since that
time, I could never find so apt an opportunity as this to make my Complaint
against him; I demand therefore some reparation for the dishonor sustained,
and that the Offender may be corporally punished.

This Man did not Declare unto the Judge this History with so low a Voice, but
there were some others besides the Judge who did take notice of it; so that the
News thereof did pass from one unto another, and every one did know the
Misfortune of the Sergeant. All that he had spoken against Raymond was true,
but therein he showed him away to excuse himself; for Raymond persisted in the
same Story which the Woman had made unto her Husband, and alleged, That he had
not dishonored the Woman: for all that he did, was but a gallantry to pass
away the time, without the least evil Intention. Lucio, who oftentimes had
heard of the Wife of this Sergeant, and that she had made him a Cuckold,
(although he believed himself to be none) would have this Complaint to pass no
further; but told him, That he ought to be satisfied with that which Raymond
had declared. But he protested against this Sentence of the Judge, with great
contumaciousnesse, insomuch that the Judge told him, He was too blame, so
passionately to desire, and endeavor to prove that his Wife had dishonored
him, when by her own, and Raymonds Deposition, it was apparent that it was not
so. He was therefore constrained to hold his peace, and there were some
present, who suspected the Truth of their Depositions, and resolved with
themselves to make some Mirth of it to his Reproach. Raymond, although he was
of a bold and hardy Spirit, yet he was now ashamed to have his Loves laid open
before so grave a Judge. To take away therefore the remembrance of it, he
addressed himself to Francion, and did conferr with him of his own affair;
assuring him, that he had managed his business with that Discretion and
Dexterity, that he had discovered the Conspiracies of his Rivals, and believed,
that when Nays should be advertised of it, she would moderate her passion. And
afterward, addressing himself to Dorini, he said unto him, That he might
remonstrate unto Nays, that if Lucinda and Emilia had been with her, to make
her believe that Francion had failed in his Faith, it was an Enterprise to
which they were carried violently, by the artifice and contrivement of
Ergastus, which reflected on two considerations; the one, by that means to
deliver himself from Emilia; and the other, to hinder Francion from marrying
Nays. Dorini made answer, That he heard what Corsegua had confessed, and that
he could wish, with all his heart, that his Cousin would entertain an assured
belief of it.

Whiles they were in this Conference, there came a Messenger to Lucio, to
inform him, that there were two Ladies who attended to speak with him;
whereupon, because he had dispatched a great part of his affairs, he did go
down into his Hall to entertain them. It was Lucinda and Emilia, who, having
understood that Francion was accused for counterfeited moneys, they did belive
that he had been condemned to die, and thought it dishonorable to entertain
any more any thought of him. Bergamin and Salviati were still in the Court,
and, for the present, did forget to acquaint them with the News of his
Justification. These two Ladies understood, that Ergastus was at that present
in Rome, and did conjecture, that Francion being to be put to Death according
to Justice, this Venetian Signior would be a Suter again to Nays: so that
Emilia should lose all her hopes to enjoy him. She desired, that if she failed
in one Husband, she might be sure of another, who, in effect, was more obliged
to her. The Mother said to Lucio, that she was come to declare unto him, That
when they were at Venice, this Signior Ergastus had so passionately desired,
and did so much delight himself in the Company of her Daughter, that she had a
Child by him, of which she was brought to Bed before her time, nevertheless he
has since broken all his vows, and falsified his promise to espouse her, by
reason of her poverty, insomuch that she was enforced to wait upon him, to
demand justice against the Jmpostor. The Judge replied, that it was not
necessary for her so openly to reveal the dishonor of her Daughter, and that
such a cause ought more gently to be handled; he therefore advised her to send
for Ergastus to understand his resolutions. The Ladies did seem both of them to
approve it, for the Judge did appear to be inclined to them; He therefore
commanded one of his Servants to go unto Ergastus lodgings, and to desire him
to take the pains to come unto him with all the speed he could. He lodged not
far from the Judges house, so that he came presently unto the Judge. Lucio
repeated to him what the Ladies had declared, and demanded of him, if he could
deny it?

He was not so impudent as to contradict the truth, but, after some little
pause, he said, that Emilia peradventure had no more reason to remember her
ancient affections, since she had entertained such new ones, as lately to
permit one Francion to have free access unto her. Speak you not of that (said
Lucio) It is you your self who are the cause of it, and you did it to
circumvent the Gentleman, and by that means to remove him from another love,
where he was coversant with you, and more favored than your self. Ergastus was
much amazed to perceive that the Judge understood so much of his affairs. He
was so circumspect as not to speak too boldly, yet he would persuade the Judge
to believe, that he had never any thing to do with Francion; but the Judge
replied, that he could presently produce a man to witness the contrary, and
moreover, Emilia on her behalf could produce so many proofs against him, that
if he would not be content to marry her in Love, he should be constrained to it
by Justice. He then alleged, that his true Judge was at Venice, and that there
was the place to which Emilia ought to appeal; But Lucio did demonstrate to
him, that those who mere injured might demand Justice in the place where they
were, and that he, being then resident in Rome, as well as Lucinda and Emilia,
was to be adjudged by the Magistrates of that City. Ergastus was touched with a
remorse of Conscience, and with the new temptations of Emilias beauties. He
remembered the many promises which sometimes he had made unto her, and seemed to
be sorrowful that he had abandoned her; He therefore said to the Judge, that he
would take some time for the better accommodation of that affair; but the Judge
made answer, that he could allow him no delay, and if he demanded any, he must
put in security for the performance of his promise. Hereupon Lucio caused
Dorini to be called, who was one of his familiar friends, and told him, how he
had employed himself to make a marriage betwixt Ergastus and Emilia, and gave
him a short account of that which happened: Dorini seemed to be much amazed at
it, but most of all, that having made himself sure to Emilia, he so
passionately should court his Kinswoman Nays; He told Ergastus, that he
understood well enough that he did bear a great affection unto Nays, but he
ought no longer to entertain any hope that she would consent to marry him, for
at that time when she rejected Francion, she accepted not of him, having never
any inclination to him. This caused him to accomplish what he had begun, he
therefore most faithfully promised that he would marry Emilia, and for the time
to come that he would constantly entertain her with all the testimonies of
unfeigned affection. Her beauty indeed was so rare, that he might be well
contented with it, and although her Mother was poor, and entangled in variety
of Suits in Law, yet she had great hopes to gain her process. Lucinda was even
ravished with joy, to see that she should have him for her Son-in-Law, whom
always she had so much desired; As for Francion, and the hopes which she
entertained of him, it was only by the Instigation of others, who did persuade
her that it would be for the advantage of her Daughter, and because at that
time she could hope for nothing from Ergastus.

This Signior then did ingenuously confess, that a long time he had born an
ill will to Francion, and that only to bring his own ends about he did put it
into Lucindas head to discover her self to Nays, to the end she might hate him,
whom she was about to marry; Moreover he confessed, that if Bergamin was to
look out Francion, to make known unto him the complaints of Emilia, it was not
without his advice, to make a trial what he would do, and if he would change
Nays for Emilia. Dorini being assured of this, did beseech Lucio to take the
pains to go unto his Cousin, who also was allied to her himself, that by
resolving her in these uncertainties, he might take away the discontents which
she entertained against Francion. He was willing to accompany him, for what
would not any man do for such a Lady? After that Lucinda, Emilia, and Ergastus
were departed, and every one of them well satisfied, Lucio considered with
himself what he had yet to do with those persons which were brought before him.
As for the complaint of the Sergeant against Raymond, he found it was but
frivolous; For that of Salviati against Francion it was already answered, and
both the Solicitor Salviati, and Bergamin were departed in a confused shame.
As for Corsegua, he was sent back to Prison, and all the Officers of Justice
being dismissed, there remained none but the French Gentlemen, who all thanked
Lucio for the great Act of Justice which he performed, and above all of them
Francion, who was he that was most interested in it. Dorini then acquainted him
with the happy conjunction betwixt Ergastus and Emilia, of which he was
wonderfully glad; and that his joy had a greater cause to enlarge it self, when
he understood that Lucio and Dorint were both of them taking the pains to
satisfy Nays, and to stop the proceedings of the process which she had
commenced against him. Lucio then smiling, said unto them, that for ordinary
persons he caused them to come to his own House, to hear and to determine their
Causes and Complaints, but as for his kinswoman Nays, she deserved that he
himself should wait upon her. Francion did protest unto him that he did owe him
all obligations, and speaking those words, Lucio departed to the House of Nays
with Dorini. It was ordered, that Francion should have his Coffers and his
movables carried back to his own lodgings, to which he returned with Raymond,
Audebert, and Hortensius, who always were present to assist him. But on the way
they beheld a spectacle which did more amaze them, than can possibly be
represented.

They heard behind them so great a hooping and hallowing of Men and Boys, and
an outcry of Women, that they were enforced to look back, and presently they
discovered a young Man, who had nothing but his shirt on his Back, and not so
much as shoes on his feet, who was followed by a number of the Kennel-rakers,
who made a perpetual shout. He did run with all the speed he could make. They
immediately perceived that it was Du Buisson: It did much afflict them to see
him in such an equipage, for they conceived that he had either received some
affront, or that he had lost his understanding; and this last conception seemed
to be the more probable, because sometimes he would make a flourish with a
Cudgel which he had snatched from a Lackey, and sometimes he would lay about
him, as if he had a quarter staff in his hands, and ceased not to sing a
thousand catches, and idle songs. As he ran by us, he seemed not to take notice
of us, only he gave Hortensius a sound box on the ear. Then the shouts began to
be doubled, and he did run away as fast as before. Some said he was drunk;
Others, that he was a Madman; Some were of opinion that he was distracted with
a Calenture, and that the Air of Rome was obnoxious to the greatest part of the
French Nation; others affirmed that it was some desperate and wilful humor in
him, and that the best course was to stop him, and to bind him Hand and Feet.
But our French Gentlemen would not permit that any violence should be offered
to him, and followed him unto the House where Raymond lodged, into which he did
fling himself. They were there almost as soon as himself; when he sew them, he
counseled them to shift for themselves from that vile Rabble, and to give him
leave for some few Hours to take his Rest. They then perceived that he had not
lost his Senses; and bringing him into a Chamber where a good Bed was, they
advised him to lie down, and some of them opening the Bed-cloaths, he nimbly
slipped in betwixt the Sheets. Having taken a little respite, he did speak in
this manner to his Friends, Of Necessity in this place I must declare unto you
my Follies; I have been oftentimes to see the Courtesans of this City, with
whom I took pleasure to commerce, as I have been accustomed to do with those of
France. There is one of the^ who seemed to have a desire to make a trial of my
abilities, her Name is Fiametta, I promised not to come unto her until this
Night, but I could not forbear to go unto her yesterday in the Evening; for
although my head was much troubled with the accident which did befall Francion,
yet I would not be wanting to my self to give my self all the pleasures that I
could privately, I therefore conveyed my self into her House, and did speak
unto her Servant, who caused me to enter into a Wardrobe, where she told me I
must attend, until a Kinsman of her Mistresses was departed, being unwilling
that he should be a witness of her Loves. At the last, the Maid returned, and
told me, that he was gone, and that I had nothing to do, but to undresse my
self, and to go to bed to Fiametta. I was unwilling to obey her, alleging, that
I desired to salute her first; but she in a frolic humor did begin to pull off
my clothes her self, and told me, it would commend the sport, if I should go
and surprise her Mistress. When I was naked to my shirt, she opened the Door
of the Wardrobe, and caused me to pass along without a Candle, which willingly
I did, thinking it was the ready way to go into her Chamber; I was no sooner
gone out, but immediately she made fast the Door upon me; I then suspected that
she had deceived me. Attempting to go forward, I thought I should have broke my
Neck; for I thought the way was plain and even, but I fell down a pair of
Stairs, and bruised both my Legs, and my recourse was unto the Door again of
the Wardrobe, where I cried, and knocked with both my fists; but the Maid
servant told me, If I would not be civil, and hold my peace, she would send one
to me, who would make me quiet. I hoped to prevail upon her by Promises and
Entreaties; but I found that to be unprofitable. She continued her threats so
much, that I was constrained to be silent. Although that in the time of Day it
is warm enough at Rome; yet the Nights, I promise you, are very cold, and very
unfriendly, I am sure the last Night was so to me. Upon my life I never knew a
colder. I sat upon one of the Stairs, stooping with the forepart of my Body,
and drawing up my lower parts as close as ever I could unto it to keep the cold
from them. When the day appeared, I was a long time making my Complaint,
without receiving any answer; and I believe that the Maid of the House was
commanded forth on purpose, that she might not be obliged to speak unto me. At
the last a great Lubber came down the Stairs, having a Sword in one hand, and a
Bulls pizzle in the other, and giving me a blow with the pizzle on my shoulder,
he commanded me to be gone; I was inforeed to go down the Stairs, being not
able to make him understand my Reasons, and without any hope to have my Clothes
restored. I found that at the Bottom of the Stairs there was a hole made to go
out into a little Lane, thorough which he violently did thrust me, and
afterward made it fast against me. I stayed there without Doors sitting on a
Stone, being in a deep meditation what to do. But few persons traveled that
way, for the Lane had but one passage which was directly thorough it, and those
who walked by, were people of a mean Condition. I complained to them, that my
clothes were taken from me. Some of them laughed at me, saying I was served
well enough, because I was so stiff, and of so high a humor, as to give a
visit to the Roman Ladies. Others pitied me, and told me, they were not able to
assist me. Sometimes I would not speak a word at all, and I believe I was taken
for a Beggar; for sitting all Night upon the Stairs, which were covered with
Dust, my shirt was extremely fowl. At the last, I considered with my self, that
I might stay there long enough, if I did not take some other Course; and to be
gone in that naked posture, when it was broad Daylight, would appear very
strange; I conceived therefore, that it was my best course, by some Messenger
to advise my Friends of my Misfortune, and to desire them that some Clothes
might be dispatched to me. I did speak to one Man, but I believe he could not
find my Lodging; he made me stay a long time in expectation of him, and I
believe he is not yet returned. At the last, I entertained in my Spirit a
dangerous and a brisk Conceit, which was, to counterfeit a Madman, rather than
to stay always there. I generously advanced, and passing thorough the Streets,
I did sing a thousand Jiggs and Songs. The Boys in amazement flocked round
about me, and I believe had done me much mischief, had not you assisted me. If
I have given a box on the ear to Hortensius, it was only to authorize my Folly,
and I crave pardon of him with all my heart. Hortensius replied, That he did
pardon him, but advised him to take heed how he adventured again to seek for
Forage in such reproachful places. Raymond told him, That he received a
punishment great enough for turning out of the right way. But my brave Raymond,
said Francion, Have not you also had your part? Have not you received some
Dishonor, concerning what has been published of your Loves before the Judge
himself? Raymond replied, If you had but seen the Wife of the Sergeant, you
would confess she was worth that Penalty; and although she is but of a low
Condition, yet she is not the less amiable. Whatsoever she is (said Francion,)
I am very glad to understand that adventure; for you can now reprove me no more
for being so secret in my love unto Emilia: I said truly enough, when I
affirmed to you, That there are some things, the Secrets whereof we ought to
reserve unto our selves. But let us return to the Disaster of Du Buisson; Will
no Man go to demand his Clothes? Was there any store of money in your
Pockets? A great deal, said Du Buisson; but I will give it all to Fiametta, if
she will return but my clothes unto me. She shall be sure to receive both
disgrace, and loss, if she will not restore them. Francion did so well comply
with him, that he persuaded the Host to go, and sent some Lackyes with him, who
so much threatened Fiametta, that she surrendered the Clothes. In the mean
time, the Crew that raised the Coyl, being the Offals of the City, stood still
before the Door, in expectation of Du Buissons coming forth; but they caused
them all to depart, alleging to them, That he was a poor young Man who had a
Fever on him, and was now much distempered in his Bed.

When the hour was come to go to Dinner, our French Gentlemen did seat
themselves all at the Table, amongst whom was Du Buisson, having taken some
Repose. They ceased not merrily to upbraid one another with their adventures.
There was only Audebert amongst them, on whom them could not cast the least
aspersion; for although he was of a lively and frolic disposition, yet he was
very temperate and wise, and delighted more to confer with the Learned Men of
that City, than to seek after the Company, and Acquaintance of the Courtesans.
Francion, having considered of the Fortune of all the rest, did experimentally
protest, that there was not one amongst them whose Misfortune was so great as
his own, and that Valerius and Ergastus having both conspired against him, it
was a question which of them both had done him the greatest prejudice. Some
affirmed it was Valerius, who accused him for coining of counterfeited Money,
which was a Fact attended with so much Ignominy, that it deserved Death for its
punishment. But he himself maintained, that it was Ergastus who did him the
greatest Injury, for he caused him to lose the favor of Nays, and the
prejudice he received was not so much, when he had betrayed him to the sight and
knowledge of Emilia (for he received nothing but pleasure in that Conversation)
as when he provoked Emilia to complain to Nays of him. Noe long after Dinner
Dorini came unto him, and acquainted him, that Lucio had so great a Care of his
affairs, that he had rendered him less distasteful to his Cousin, and she
permitted that he should give her a visit that afternoon; He immediately
prepared himself to wait upon her, and was more curious in his habit than
before, having no care to accommodate himself in a place which was but a prison
to him; He was accompanied with those Gentlemen of France: When he came into
the room where Nays was, she looked upon him with a more serious and majestical
countenance, but he feared nothing, and did speak unto her in this manner.
Madam, behold an Innocent falsely accused, who does address himself unto you,
to give you the testimonies of his Integrity. She replied, Be not you so vain,
as to profess your self to be altogether exempted from offense, for by that
means you will take from me the glory to forgive you. Since Pardon is assured
me on your part (said Francion) I may well esteem my self to be faulty. Nay, in
some degree you are so, said Nays, for it is true that you have loved Emilia. I
have loved her (replied Francion) as I love some fair fruit upon a Tree, which
I only look on, but have no desire either to touch them, or to taste of them; or
rather, I have loved her with such a love as we bear unto beautiful flowers,
and not more passionately. I do believe, Madam, you have no desire to have me
blind, or that I should cease to consider of the workmanships of Nature, I do
find them all beautiful, but the affection which I do bear unto them does
return to you; for there is nothing of beauty in the world, but in some part it
resembles you. Howsoever, if it were a sin, so to live, and so to love, I
should willingly change even that humor, to be found within the compass of
any obedience: You may speak what you please (said Nays) but you cannot so
easily excuse your self for your false Loves, as for your false moneys. Dorini
then taking her aside, did entreat her to forbear the severity of her Rigor,
alleging, that Francion was not so much to be blamed as she believed, and if he
had given a Visit to Emilia, it was at that time when she herself not looking
upon him with a friendly eye, he endeavored some other way to give a respite
to the afflictions of his mind. For the rest, she had already sufficiently
understood, that there was nothing which did oblige him to that Lady, who was
suddenly to be married to Ergastus. On the other side, she considered with her
self, that if she should break off with him, having already gone so far, she
should be laughed at by all the world, and that Francion himself, having many
friends, and power enough, might be enforced by his passion to put in practice
some dangerous Counsels. She was willing therefore to give him a particular
entertainment, and to confirm the acceptance of his service; so that there
seemed to be betwixt them a new Contract, and a new Accordance. Dorini was of
advice that the marriage was no longer to be delayed, because their Enemies,
who were jealous of their happiness, would be always busying themselves to
hinder the accomplishment of their Loves. They sent therefore for a Priest, and
were betroathed on that hour, and their marriage on the next morning was to be
solemnized. When Francion was returned to his lodging with his friends, he told
them, that for the time to come he would be more wise than heretofore, for he
believed, that being espoused to Nays, he now should arrive at a safe Port, and
should float no more on the Sea of uncertain affections, on which heretofore he
troubled his repose, being every hour in danger to be shipwracked. The disgrace
which he received for Emilia did then represent it self before his eyes,
insomuch that ^e absolutely resolved with himself to love none but Nays only.
He also endeavored to persuade his friends to retire themselves from a
dissolute life, and to be no longer an evil Example unto others.

The Evening passed away in these considerations, and on the next morning every
one made himself gallant to assist at the marriage of Francion and Nays. They
were glad to understand, that on that day also Ergastus was espoused to Emilia,
who although he esteemed her to be most beautiful, and full of merit, yet he
had within him a secret repugnance to marry her, when he remembered that
Francion had frequented her Company. He propounded to himself, that it may be
he had been too familiar with her, and it was not his least grief, that he
himself was a procurer of it. This remorse of Conscience was sufficient to
punish him, but more gentle it was, or at least not so public, as was the
punishment of Valerius, who being condemned, for having coined false moneys,
was sent on the same day into banishment; Corsegua also, and he who accused
Francion, having assisted Valerius in his bad practices, were both condemned to
the Galleys. For Bergamin and Salviati, who would have circumvented Francion in
another Nature, they had not committed so great a Crime, they were therefore
left without any other punishment but their own misery. The others who so
rigorously were sentenced, had committed other exorbitances besides their last
imposture. There was also hanged on that day a Cutpurse, who at the Gibbet
speaking in his own defense, did affirm, that he was none of those who did
steall money from others, but on the contrary, that two days before he had put
a great deal of money into the Pocket of a Frenchman. He was asked more at
large concerning this particular, and it was known, that it was the same man
whom Corsegua had hired to make so cunning a conveyance, that his false moneys
might be found in the Pocket of Francion; so that his innocence was now fully
justified to the contentment of all those who knew him, and more particularly
of those who were at the marriage, to whom all the news was related. There was
at the marriage no great Company, only the most intimate of the friends, and
the nearest kindred of Nays; for it is not the custom there to make any great
Assembly, or that the entertainment should be extraordinarily magnificent at
the marriage of a Widow. The principal joy was, of the parties newly married.
It shall suffice that they contented themselves in the enjoyment of their
legitimate pleasures, and that none may seem to participate in their
Contentment, we will not be elaborate to express it. It is enough to affirm
that it was extreme, and that it has never since been diminished. Francion
finding himself obliged to live no more at random, did take upon him from that
day, so serious, and so grave a temper, that you might almost say, he was not
the same Man; Nevertheless it is supposed, that although he understood well
enough that it is not permitted to do evil, that good may come thereby, yet he
did with some difficulty repent of those many petty extravagancies which in his
youth he had committed to chastise the vices of men. As for Raymond and Du
Buisson, Whatsoever Remonstrances he could make unto them, they would employ
the remainder of the time they had to stay in Rome, in sollacing themselves
with the pleasures of the world, Audebert came first of them all into France,
who did put himself into the train of the ordinary Ambassador, being at that
time on his return; for having satisfied himself in seeing all the rarities of
Italy, he had no desire to reside there any longer. He took not Hortensius with
him, for Nays had placed him with a Cardinal, who was one of her Kinsmen, where
he lived at his own pleasure, and lost not his hopes of being a King, for the
happy condition in which he was did miraculously elevate his courage, insomuch
that from day to day, he attended when the Polonians should send another
Ambassador to him, and by this means his conversation became always most
delightful. When Francion perceived that at last Raymond and Du Buisson were
preparing to return into France, he was willing to accompany them, and with his
new Spouse to take a journey with them into his own Country, to visit his
friends and kindred. Dorini was one of their number, and their Journey was most
happy and pleasant. Francion was excessively glad to see himself for a few
months amongst his ancient acquaintance, and at that time it was, when he did
relate unto diverse of them his unparalleld Adventures.

FINIS.

