DAVVNINGS OF LIGHT: Wherein the true interest of Reformation is opened in
general, and in particular, in this Kingdom, for the establishment of weaker
judgments: AND Many other things impartially Hintted, to a further Discovery
of Truth and Light, in many or our present controversies. With some Maxims of
Reformation.

1 Cor. 13.11. For now we see through a glass darkly, now I know in part. 1
Cor. 13.10. But when that which is perfect is come, then that which is in part,
shall be done away. By JOHN SALYMARSH, Preacher of Gods Word, at Brasteed, in
the County of KENT.

London, Printed for. R. W. and are to be sold by G. Calvert, at the
black-spred-Eagle near Paul's. 1646.

To the Honorable, The Knights and Burgesses for the County of Yorkshire, in
the Commons House of Parliament, viz. The Lord General Fairfax, Sir William
Strickland, Sir Philip Stapleton, Sir Henry Cholmley, Sir William Alison, Mr.
Henry Darly, M. Hoyle, M. Alured, M. Pelham, etc.
I Should exceed an Epistle, to speak of you in your several spheres of
activity, for the advancement of the cause of God; Some of ye have jeoparded
your lives in the high places of the Field; Some of ye offered your selves,
willingly among the people. When the great work of God is finished, the names
of those shall be sought for that have acted for him, and it shall be said,
What honor and dignity has been done to Mordeca^ for this? You that work both
for God and your Country, shall be recorded both in the Chronicle of Heaven
and Earth: And ye are the more eminent in this, that ye have sat out the
Aposta^ies, and unfortunate failings of so many ( preserved through the power
of Christ) They went out from ye, because they were not of ye: And such is the
quality of your employment, that ye may learn to be at once both Saints, and
Statesmen, in this work: for the daily opening of the secrets of affairs before
ye, both religious and civil, may make your house a Senate and a Temple; and
the more spiritually ye work in State Affairs, ye act in a higher capacity then
common Statesmen, or former Parliaments.

My prayer is for ye, That ye may be steadfast and unmovable, always abounding
in the work of the Lord, knowing that your labor shall not be in vain in the
Lord.

So prays your Servant, John Saltmarsh,

To the Worthy and Eminent Committee in the County of KENT.
I Have through the providence of God been seated in the influence of your
government, where I have enjoyed, as others of that place have done, a peace
and security, while many places of the kingdom hear the Alarms of War, and put
on garments rolled in blood. The Lord, who is the mighty Counselor; has
poured out a spirit of wisdom and counsel upon you and so long as you act in
the strength of him, and in relation to him, you see you have salvation for
Walls and Bulwarks.

You have much experience of God (as I have observed) in the conduct of your
affairs, which has not only been advantageous to the public, and to the peace
of your own Country; but exemplary to others abroad, and the more you go on to
involve your selves into the cause of God, the greater share you may look for
in the Honor, and Happiness^, and Success of it.

You know well (nor need I remind you) how the interest of your County is
wrapped up in that public and Parliamentary association, which while you
preserve (through the blessing of God) as you do, in that constitution, you may
expect to live by the same line of prosperity you have done. And so prays,

Your Servant, John Saltmarsh,

To Mr. Tho. Fuller, the Author of a Book entitled, Truth maintained: at
Oxford, or elsewhere.
AS you accused me once of haste in my Observations upon your Book, so you may
now charge a delay upon me for the Answer I am preparing to your second
Treatise: my interruptions have bin many, yet the Truth I defend, I hope will
overtake you at length, though you set forth long before me: I shall deal
better with you, then you have done with me, to let you see our usage on this
side of Oxford has more charity; for I shall fairly interpret the good, and
heartily reject the bad: I could wish you would prevent me in coming over to
our present Reformation, and so you may satisfy the question better. Yet, Sir,
we might both do better to hearken to our learned Umpire, Mr. Herle, who tells
us, How needless further d^sputes were about Reformatian, by how much
Reformation is necessary.

The Preparatory.
I Have in this short discourse lalaboured to give you rather the spirits and
extractions of things, then to write at large; and to point only to the
advancement of truth amongst us: for I saw so many plunged in the controversies
of our times, that it had been good some of them were either well out, or had
never come in; for the disputes which only before warmed us, have now set us
all on flame, and we have reasoned our judgments much beyond those boundaries
in the Word, of godly peace, and edification: Discourses of this nature ought
to be free and peaceably bold; for the soul is more at liberty for debating,
where the less engagement or interest appears, else the enquiries can be but
narrow and impartial: I hope I need make no larger Apology for my plain
dealing with all. I have writ little conclusive or positive: Determinations
being not the proper work of us that stand below, who only aim at oyling the
wheels in this great work; And whilst we are but on the way to Reformation,
in peremptory conclusions, and final inferences, there may be more haste then
good speeed.

I thought, that openings and discoveries of this nature would help to a more
solid and clear firmation in the truths received; for there is nothing brings
greater unsettlement, then arguing things half way: and therefore our Reverend
Assembly are not to be accused of any unnecessary delay in things of so high
consideration.

I have writ in expressions not popular, for we should not be too much the
peoples, till the light we hold out were well quit of the vapors that darken
it; not that I decline the multitude, save only in order of time, and there are
certain cautions in the Word for not revealing or communicating too suddenly.

Have thou faith ^ have it to thy self before God, Romans 14.22.

Take heed left by any means this liberty of yours become a stumbling block to
them that are weak, 1 Cor. 8.

I have yet many things to say unto you, but you cannot bear them now, John
16.12.

And he communicated only privately, with some that were of reputation, Acts.

If I be thought by any to speak too favorably of things so generally
dissented from: I desire such to take notice in what capacity I write; not as
one that delivers positions to the world, but as one that would fain see what
is the grounds or secret that the Prelates and some amongst us are concen^red
in this, to call all other Heretics and Schismatics, who may be found perhaps
to differ but as the stronger and weaker Christians, who though one eat herbs,
and another regard a day, do it both to the Lord.

CONSIDERATIONS in REFORMATION.
COnsider, that the Controversies of our times amongst some, take up the
application of them so wholly, as a few particular truths are made their only
business, and the positive work of salvation little advanced; These ought we
to have done, and not to leave the other undone.

Consider, that the measure of grace is not equal in all, nor the degrees of
light the same; and this has ever brought forth in the practice of the godly,
according to the examples in Scriptures, an indulgency and godly prudence
toward one another; and this would be a seasonable consideration in these
times of Reformation, where all cannot bear the truths revealed to some; and in
the establishment of Reformation to come, where if all the truths be not settled
that many desire, yet so much may be settled as ought rather to be the object
of godly indulgency and praise, then scandal and murmuring; and to bless God
for our very removes from Popery and Prelacy into the Reformation to come, yet
so, as this be no caution against the peaceable testimony of those, for the
greater advancements in the worship or government of God, whom God shall stir
up.

Consider that the wars in the several States of Christendom, as Germany,
Denmark, Italy, Ireland, England, etc. are but pieces of the great work, and
preparatories, and fall in their several degrees and orders into the design
of God for his Church, and the ruin of Antichrist, and are not to be looked
upon as pieces and splinters that brake out from confused troubles: therefore
when you hear of wars and rumors of wars, be not troubled, for the end is not
yet.

Consider, that unless we be a people more sanctified by the success and
means we have, our enemies shall not fall through any divine favor to us,
but through the provocation of their own sins, and then their ruin will
scarcely be our salvation, but they shall only have the precedence to be first
in the judgment: yet here we may look up at the prerogative of Gods mercy
working sometimes above sins and provocations, He went on frowardly in the way
of his heart, I have seen his ways and will heal him. And there is to this
too a supplement in the holiness of the Representative of our State, or
Parliament, though the body or people of the Kingdom be not so disposed as we
could wish; and this saved a Kingdom in Iosiahs and Ezekiahs times, and may
save ours.

Consider, that our days of Fasts, etc. as they ought to be exceedingly
advanced, we having experienced much by them, so they may be possibly made to
take up the real and substantial Reformation that ought to be, if our
Ministers look more to their own design, then Gods in them, and so the days
and duties may almost devour the power of godliness in the practice; for the
reformation of a day is the easier duty, then that of a whole life, and sooner
done: and it would be well observed, whether we rise up equally in this, that
they be not mistaken, as it were, for the occasional Antidotes of our weekly
sinning? and then if people once think an extraordinary day the only remedy
provided, they will soon grow remiss in their constant practice. This I speak
that we keep not up a standing sin, with a standing remedy: that it may be
considered, that God lose not any thing through man's additionall of
circumstance in worship, and because I see the very formality of the duty is as
much looked upon by some as the duty, and the duty, as him to whom it refers,
and carries almost the glory of our success from Christ himself, at least is
made by some indistinctly a competitor in our deliverances: these things would
be rightly and clearly stated to the people, God and duties must have their
right places; and that may not only keep many right, but save some from going
wrong in this point: let us be as much in these extraordinaries of humiliation
as we can, so we hold up God and Christ in their glorious preheminencies in
them, and the people be taught to be as constant in the power of godliness, as
occasional, and to know Christ for the only power, both of the duty and
deliverance.

Consider, whether our provocations under so many Protestations and Covenants,
be not equivalent to that excellent duty of our first Obligations; and whether
the humiliation for this, ought not to be as solemn as the League and
Covenant, and as National.

Consider, that our debates and disputes about worship and government, have not
been assisted with any public or particular acknowledgement of former and
present superstitious inclinations both in Ministry and people, and with any
public or particular seeking God, for revealing his will in this present
Reformation to us: thi^ may make us so long in seeking.

Consider, whether all of Prelacy be removed, as well as their vitiousnesse and
superstitions, and that none of their pride, superciliousnesse, and
self-seeking be left behind in us, and any of our own Ministers, especially
any that stand above others in place of Reformation: and if so, let us
endeavor the extirpation of it by virtue of our Covenant.

Dawnings of Light. Wherein the true Interest of REFORMATION is opened.
The Interest stated.
BEing to treat of the interest of the creature only, Romans 11.33.1 Joh. 5.7.
I shall not speak of the interest of the Creator, of GOD himself, Joh. 5.26.
Rev. 8.22.
which is so deeply and unsearchably laid in his own Essence, Act. 17.28. Jer.
23.23, 34.
each person in the Godhead subsisting in the same infiinite oneness or being,
Romans 1.20
and so acting abroad adessentially, Psalm. 8.5.
and intrinsecally upon the creature. Ps. 13 5.6.


There is not any thing created, but it has an interest, there is a natural
or physical interest, that which consists in such a being or cause, or in
several causes which are in consociation, to the producing and improving such
and such effects; and this interest is strengthened and improved by the putting
forth the effects and causations.

2. There is a political or civil interest, Judge. 16.17.
and that is the strength of every State: 1 Chronicles. 19.2.
as Sampson had his locks wherein his might lay, Act. 12.20.
so there is no Kingdom or State but they have their locks, 2 Kings 18.39.
some complication where their power is twisted and takes root, and like vines
cast out themselves in several veins and sinews of negotiation, and so acquire
improvements.

But there is a Supernatural interest, and that is it which I aim at in this
place, or an intorest of Reformation: this interest is considerable, either
toward God, or toward men.

The interest toward God is increated, divine, more immediate, more immanent,
more pure, and primary.

The interest toward man is more incorporated, more complicated, more
circumstantiated, more secondary.

These two parts, if well studied, might be exalted into a transcendent
science, and it is pity that now when several Ages of Reformation draws on,
few or none that I know, elder or more modern, that have much enquired into the
mystery and sublimity, whereas every variety here below is drawn up into
systemes and aphorisms, only this wanders incompleatly under the shadow of the
science Theology, which is so universal, that there is not that perfection
attained in it, as there might be, if like other Sciences it were taken in, or
enclosed, and so studied; for then some whose spiritual ingeny might be of a
complexion fitter for such or such a part in Divinity, would apply thither,
when as now they wander up and down in the unbounded wastes of Theology, and
like the Philosopher, who laying himself out to nature at large, sits down with
a narrow satisfaction; whereas the ^stronomer, or any other single scienced
person, knows every star and circle, and variation, and has a more exact and
particular knowledge, then such an universal contemplation can give him.

The increated Interest:
FIrst then for the Interest of Reformation, as it relates to God, I mean the
supernatural interest, or the increated interest: and we must know it lies
radically in the counsels of God, and subsists in his power and infinity, and
takes not degrees and improvements here below, as other interests natural and
political do: and therefore it is, that the Interest of Reformation rays out
in some ages gloriously at its very first rise, and then when it seems to have
the least engagement or complication below, but seems rather to flow from new
created springs and originals, so as that scripture holds forth, Things which
are seen, Heb. 11.2^
are not made of things which do appear: Psalm. ^7.^^
and though sometimes other contraries may seem to have anticipated all the
interest, and taken up the advantages beforehand, yet on a sudden God lets out
an effusion of light, and spirit, and in a moment disinteresses and
dispossesses all the former, and this appears in that, when the people which
sat in darkness saw great light, Mat. 3 ^
and to them which sat in the region and shadow of darkness, light is sprung
up: for as the appearance of Christ to judgment, is implied to be momentary,
As the lightning that lightneth out of the one part of heaven, Luke 17.24.
shines unto the other part, so shall also the Son of man be in his day: now
the Son of man is thus in his day of Reformation, as well as Condemnation; and
as in light there is not that graduall alteration, and propagation, and working
for interest in the air, but a transfusion and illumination in such an
interminate subject or body, because there is not in it any quality contrary,
or obstructive, that can put any impediment to so immateriall a thing as light:
So it is in the spiritual transfusions of grace and reformation, when the
power and will of God carries it and applies it irresistibly, efficaciously to
such and such a season or State, or people; for God being as it were more
immediate, and indistant, and intrinsecal in this work, he will not sometimes
admit of any such gross or inferior artifice, and preparings, and
consociations, which argues an impotencie in the agent and work: but as he is
infinite, and the Creator, so he commands the creature to make room, and the
creature in an obedientiall and passive capacity opens and entertains his
dispensations, this is then when he would make bare (as it were) his glory, and
show himself to his people, and put off the creature, and as it were divest
himself of his interests here below, and act more immediately upon the world,
and then his light and dispensation is carried on without reluctance or
disputings in the creature, there is a melting at his presence, this divine
work is sweetly insinuated in that Scripture, Psalm. 97.4, 5.
his lightnings enlightened the world, the earth saw and trembled, the hills
melted like wax at the presence of the Lord: the earth trembles, the earth, or
the most gross and opace impediment^, the hills, or high obstructions flow
down, and are powered out, when God powers out himself in any strong activity
upon them.

The work of Reformation being of this nature in part, and such an immediate
efflux of God in Christ, we should rise into higher conceptions and
contemplations concerning it, and find out the interest on which it turns, in
the most spiritual motions and beginnings.

The more spiritual effluxes of the Interest, with a Caution.
ANd these are the very same which God brought his Dispensations into the world
by at first, and carried on his truths on a naked power, witness all his
miraculous actings for his Law and Church then under Moses and Joshua, God
carrying them on by a mighty hand, and after under several Judges, and by such
sudden lightnings of mercy, when all their own interest was lost and overflowed
by the enemies, as the Scriptures intimate; Then the Lord raised them up a
Deliverer. Jud. 3.15.
The sudden restoring of the worship under Asa, Jehoshaphat, Hezekiah, Josiah:
And so the raising of the Temple under Cyrus and Darius, the expressions all
hold out the most high, and divine risings, and actings, as those concerning
Cyrus, Ezra 1.1.^
The Lord stirred up the spirit of Cyrus, and then rose up the fathers of
Benjamin, and Judah, with all them whose spirit God had raised to go up: and as
these concerning Artaxerxes, N^h. 28.18.
And the King granted me ( says Nehemiah) according to the good hand of God
upon me, and then I told them of the hand of my God which was good upon me: And
in the time of Mordecai, Esth. 9.1.
And in that very day that the e^^mies of the Jews hoped to have rule over them
it was turned to the contrary, and the Jews had rule over them. And thus the
Reformation under the Gospel was carried on by a pure heavenly work, and
immediate concurrence; Mark. 16.20.
The Lord (says the Scripture) working with them, and confirming the Word With
signs following, and many of them which heard the Word beleeven, and the
number of the men was about five thousand, all on sudden: Act. 4.4.
Thus the Interest of Reformation, or the Gospel, lay then most in the naked
and immediate power of God, subsisting in his very omnipotency, and so in
diverse ages to this; though in a particular account from Ecclesiastical Story,
we may soon be led into some false experiments of this interest; for it was a
luxuriancie in some of them, to put down some miraculous passages, or stories,
which indeed are very questionable; for the mystery of iniquity working higher
every age then other, the learning of after times, partly in an easy and
corrupt piety, and partly in a policy to preserve the reputation of so divine
an interest, kept up many Legends to this day: But for later Centuries, in
France, and Gormanie, Scotland, and our own kingdom, God has brought in
himself according to the former Scriptures, with an high hand with signs and
wonders, with raising and stirring up the spirits of his people, working even
immediately by himself; casting out the interest of Antichristianisme and
Prelaecie, and placeing his own there, as at this day, we experience in the
late opening of heaven, and radiation upon this Kingdom, when the Prelaecy was
at highest, and interweaving it self into Popery, and fastening its interest at
the very foot of the Chair in Rome.

How the increated Interest works to be discerned below.
THis increated interest of the Gospel lying thus in the counsels, wisdom, and
power of God, it comes abroad sometimes on the Wheel of some omnipotency, when
God has a purpose to undo or dissolve the gatherings, and strong holds, the
wisdom of the world, and to exalt himself to the eyes of his people and his
enemies, Wonderful things did he in the land of Egypt in the field of Zoan:
And here we may rise into this enquiry, How God may be discerned in such a
work? though best by the Spirit, which searches the deep things of God. 1 Cor.
2.10.


First, God, in making any clear discovery of this interest, must assume such
Agents as may not seem to stand in the way of his omnipotency, I mean, by
casting any shadow upon it, but they must be such as he may be seen in, even to
a carnal eye, as the Magitians of Egypt, who could then only discern God, and
but his finger neither, in the judgment of Lice; Exo. 8.19.
of this nature were those things he made use on, as Moses rod, and Aarons,
Number. 17.
both blossoming with miracles al^ke, the Waters of Jordan, rams horns, Josh.
3.15 16 17.
lamps and pitchers, a sling and a pible stone, the jaw bone of an Ass, clay
and spittle, Josh. 6.20
handkerchiefs and shadows, Judge. 7.2^
a Gideon or poorest family in Manasseh, 1 Samuel 17.50.
and he the poorest in his fathers house, Jud. 15.15
and thus the Gospel had its rise and increase, Joh. 9.6, 7
God choosing the base things, Act. 19.12
the weak things, Act. 5 15.
and foolish things, fishermen, Judge. 6.15
and Women, and laying aside whatsoever might exalt it self, 1. Cor. 1.27, 28.
so as not many wise men after the flesh, Man. 1.16.17.
nor many mighty, nor many noble were called: 1 Cor. 1.26.
Nay, in the great and final work for his Church, 1 Cor. 1.21.
his very word, which he calls (in the name of the world) the foolishness of
preaching, shall be acted by that omnipotency, as all the power of ^abylon
seems only to fall at the noise of that: I dispute not here, what other
concomitant God may annex, yet the Word carries the reputation; and it is most
reasonable, in this way of the Lords working, that God should overthrow them by
that, which they in their own wisdom reputed but foolishnes.

The Interest suffers no change from the creature.
NOw this interest is only and entire in God, and the Design works only below
for completing the body of Christ; and this body is made up of all nations and
kindreds, and though in some nations where the Gospel is, God may not equally
dispense success or advancement to it, but may often in his own wisdom let the
interest seem to dye out, as in our own Kingdom, and that of Scotland, he has
formerly done, and in that of Ireland of late; yet even then we must look at
the design of Reformation, as it is in God, and not in the creature, and not
think so far below such a glorious business, as if the perishing or wasting in
any particular had put any stop to the work of God, as if any thing of the
world had power to disorder the uniformity of such a work, and should put God
about, but we must know that God has fully and from eternity made up the glory
of this business: and though there may be unevenness on the worldly side of
it, yet on the heavenly side of it there is none; as in former interruptions,
not only when God dwelt in curtains, and in a Temple made with hands; but
after, when he took up a more spiritual habitation in his people, Acts 8.1.
for even then their Churches were scattered abroad throughout the Regions of
Judea, and Samaria, except the Apostles: and here the Spirit hints to us, how
God sometimes locks up or lays up his interest in some remainder, as here in
the Apostles, when the rest were scattered, the word it self was hid in the
root of Jesse, and the branch, Dan. 4.20
the tree in the vision had a stump left in the earth, 1 King. 19 18.
and God had seven thousand unknown to the Prophet, which had not bowed to
Baal, and the woman which he lodged in the wilderness, to whom he gave the
wings of an Eagle.

Isa. 55.5.
My thoughts are not your thoughts, neither are your ways my ways; God has
diverse ends in making overtures of light, and withdrawing it, in Gods work
there is nothing lost nor in vain, and when the wisdom of man is not able to
make any thing of disadvantages, the wisdom of God can. Christ is the same
yesterday, and to day, and for ever, nor in him is any variableness or shadow
of change.

I shall here for a further advancement to this, make a discovery of such
secret principles, as if clearly discussed, might prove of powerful advantage,
to some present and succeeding controversies.

A right stating of the Churches Interest, of great concernment to some present
Controversies.
IF the Churches Interest has been always below, (I speak now of the period
from Christ) then this saves the birth of a new Ministry, or Ordinances, and
all this may stand good: viz. Of receiving them out of mystical Babylon, as
the Jews did the golden vessels, then it would be discussed whether any such
way of arguing necessary visibility, and whether it did as fully advance the
Attributes of God: viz. his omnipotency, etc. and equally comply with the
revealed design of God in his word, of always preserving a Church; and
whether the defection, or ap^^tacie, and the slaying of the witnesses could
stand with such nterest, and how the temple of God, on which Antichrist sits,
her golden cups or jewels, may be in the Spirits sense the true Church or
Ordinances in bondage, or only a counterfeiting resembling; and what coming
down may imply, whether such a continued inter^st or no; and whether the
Scriptures themselves, being the Ark of Gods revealed will, be not the
conservatory of the Interest in such intervals, and whether th^^ hur^h or
Scriptures for preserving and propagating such an interest.

And if the Church has always had interest, whether this interest has been
always the same from the first, because some do so quarrel that, and call it
a going to Moses from Christ, a seeking for Gospel to the Law; and indeed, if
some stronger labors were of this nature in full, not in broken Treatises,
then as yet we have seen, they might heal many an objection about our
Ministry and Ordinances, which for want of it, some may think lie too open:
and here might be administrations God took up for such seasons, and how
administrations were intended to be answerable to each other, both before the
Law, and under the Law, and how the Law is fulfilled in the Gospel, and
whether there be not a fulfilling by way of eminency; and if so, then whether
there be any such special or particular relating in the Christ, Abraham, and
Moses: and this done, the subject and circumstances of one Ordinance which falls
under so peremptory a precept (I mean Circumcision) will sooner clear up to the
weaker judgments.

And in this it would be observed what latitude such proof allows, whether
Papists can take any of the same shadow to sit under for proving any thing of
their Hierarchy, Ceremonies, and music, to be a fulfilling of that part of the
Law, the Priesthood and Service.

All these things deserve large and corner stones, and beginning to build: and
this I should recommend to the pens of the most godly learned of our age, by
way of special advancement to the cause of God at this present.

The contemplation of this Interest very strengthening, and the higher, the
more safe.
I Intend at this time but to let out a glimpse of this Interest of
Reformation, to awaken us into a closer pursuit and enquiry after it, for I
know not any that have taken pains in this, except godly Bucer; and he has not
pursued this Interest under this notion; nor higher then into the next
organicall part of it, concerning the Kingdom of Christ in its several
administrations; and believe it, if this part were rightly and supreamly
discussed, and held forth in such ages as this, when God is casting out new
beams every day to the world, till at length all be on a pure light, and our
day be like the first day of the Creation when God said, Let there be light, as
if all the stars and luminaries of heaven were disbanded, and let out from
their Orbs, when the light of the Moon shall be as the light of the Sun, and
the light of the Sun as the light of seven days: If this part, I say, of the
the Reformation were methodically heightened and drawn into principles, and
Aphorisms, it would raise up the souls of Gods people in all seasons, and
would be a subliming and strengthening to faith, even the very substance of
things hoped for, Heb. 11.1.
and the evidence of things that are not seen and such a spiritualizing to the
soul, that we might live in the same region with the Apostle, whose
conversation (as he says) was in heaven, in the same region with Enoch, who
walked with God, and with all the blessed Saints and Patriarchs, who studied
the science of this interest more then any; and therefore it is, that they
stood firm and higher then all the lower regions of Providence, even in a
serene firmament all the time of losses, and tempests, and miscarriages, and
declinings, Heb. 11.27.
as seeing him who is invisible, and looking for a City which has foundations,
whose builder and maker is God.

But this is not the interest we look so much after in this age, men are
carried by lower and more natural interests, which draw and entice the soul
into the senses, and so incarnates the contemplations and graces of the soul,
and when we should live a life even hid wi^h Christ in God, Col. 3.
we are hiding our life in the things below, rising and falling, ebbing and
flowing with the ordinary Providence, not being able to attain to that
spiritual consistencie of soul which the former agents in Reformation had,
Nay, you shall see, that even the holy men of God, while they let themselves
down into these outward Providence, they would often decline some degrees, as
David, 1 Samuel 27.1.
I shall one day perish by the hand of Saul: and as Paul, Sirs, Act. 27.10
I perceive that this voyage will be with hurt and much damage, not only of the
lading of the ship, but also of our lives; but when he had conversed more
above, and had seen a vision from God, he then could say, Sirs, I now exhort
you to be of good cheer, Act. 27.22, 23, 24.
for there shall be no loss of any man's life among you, for this night there
stood by me the Angel of God, whose I am, and whom I serve. The reason that
there are so many doubtings, and despondencies, and discouragements, is only
this, Many look too much upon the natural interest of Reformation, not upon
the supernatural, and that which is the more hidden and secret, which though
it be invisible, and not so discernable to a carnal eye, yet it is the only
unchangeable, eternal and sure interest, hid and involved in God himself, and
in his power and wisdom; but the soul and spirit of man being in union and
correspondencie with something more corporeal then it self, the body inclines
after interests that are corporeal too, as outward power and forces, and
success, and excellency of agents and instruments, and strength of
contributions, and auxiliaries, and whatsoever may conduce to the advancing and
propagating the cause below; and if once they look about, and see not the
workings, the relations, advantages, contextures, and fullness of things below
as they expect, and saw usually before, they are presently cast down, and never
on the wings of comfort, but when things have a strong and natural interest,
and are on wing too; as the weak Spouse could then only delight her self
abroad, when she could see the flowers appear on the earth, Cant. 2.12, 13.
and hear the singing of birds, and the vo^ce of the turtle, and see the
figtree putting forth, and the vines with the tender grapes. These puttings
forth, and blossoms, and outward appearance, and visibility of things is the
support and only comfort of the Spouse: Can. 5.4.
thus she was raised too, when she saw but her lover putting in his finger at
the holes of the door. So it is with the Spouse now, with the Church and people
of God now, they can only delight themselves abroad, in the Providence of God,
then, and to look about toward Reformation, then, when the grapes appear, and
the fig tree puts forth, and the singing of birds is come, when there is any
cheerful budding and blossoming providence, and any music of success, and
advancement: this was Gideons error, an overlooking and neglecting the
spiritual and supernatural interest, and fixing his eyes too much on the
natural: Oh my Lord, Judge. 5.
says he, (...) God be with us, why th^n (...) all this befallen us? and where
he all the miracles our fathers told us on? But now the Lord has forsaken us,
and delivered us into the hands of the Midianites: and yet we know, even then,
the Divine and supernatural interest was working most strongly for their
deliverance from the Midianites.

But I shall set down, before I take off my pen, my Observations concerning the
natural and political interest which Reformation has in this age of ours,
even that visible interest which is undeniable and apparent: but yet with this
caution, that I do not lay these open, as affirming any unquestionable,
necessary success, but as probable und deducible a success as ever age had,
because I know there may be withdrawings and retirings in God respectively to a
particular State and Church, and yet his Church have a fair and eminent
interest both there, and elsewhere in other States and Kingdoms; for as a Nation
is not dead in the funerals of a few persons, nor an house ruined in the
falling of a pillar or tyle, no more is the Church, which is a catholic,
invisible, spiritual body, by any particular declination in such a City, or
State, or Nation; though I must affirm this, That there is a most clear,
visible, powerful and mighty interest which Reformation has in the Christian
world, and this Kingdom at this time, and if it succeed not here, I can accuse
no want of supernatural, natural, or political interest, for we are able
enough in these, but I must accuse some special sins that have done it, Isa.
59.2.
which have separ^ted betwixt us and our God, and have withheld good things
from us, and made our God refuse to show us the pattern, and his will, for here
are conditionals implied, If the h^^^se of Israel sh^^^ be ashamed of their
iniquities, Ez. ^.
I will show them the form of the ^^^^e: and ag^^^, If any man will do his
will, Joh. 7.17.
he shall know of the doctrine, whether it be of God or no.

At what instant I shall speak concerning a nation, and concerning a kingdom,
to pluck up, and to pull down, and to destroy it,

If that Nation, against whom I have pronounced, turn from their evil, Jer.
18.7, 8.
I will repent of the evil that I thought to do unto them.

Several secrets in the Interest.
1. The Interest in Christ.
THis Interest is laid up in Christ from all eternity, and here we may rise
into most spiritual apprehensions concerning it, for though God causes the
Interest to beam forth into the things below, yet it is in Christ like light in
the body of the Sun; God does so dispense himself into Christ, that there is
not any thing of God stowes beside him, but all in him, and through him, All
things that the Father has are mine: for Christ, as he was the Word, Joh. 16.15
was With God in the beginning, and was God, Joh. 1.10.
without him was not any thing made that was made, in him was life: in these
expressions the Spirit lets us see how God made himself over to Christ: And
further, Ephesians. 1.15.17, 18.
He was the image of the invisible God, he is before all things, and by him all
things consist, Heb. 1.3*
and he is the head of the body, the Church, who is the beginning, being also
the b^^ghtnesse of his glory.

And the Scripture opens this mystery further yet: God was in Christ,
reconciling the world unto himself, 2 Cor. 5.19.
and in him the fullness of the Godhead dwells bodily: and when Christ that
eternal Word came to apply the Interest nearer the creature, Isa. 53.2.
He grew up before him, as a tender plant, and as a root out of a dry ground;
Pro. 8.22 30.
yet the Lord possessed him in the beginning of his way before his Works of
old, he Was by him, as one brought up with him. The holy Spirit holds out the
mystery of laying up the Interest in Christ yet more, and writes to the Church
to comfort her in the acknowledgement of the mystery of God, Col. 3.2, 3.
and of the Father, and of christ, in whom are hid all the treasures.

But if we would see a further glimpse of this interest, sweetly opened by
Christ himself, let us heighten our meditations upon these Scriptures, where
Christ discourses with his Father, implying the spiritual interest all the way.

All mine are thine, Job. 17.10
and thine are mine, and I am glorified in the^, and as thou Father art in me
and I in thee, that they also may be one in us, 21
and the glory which thou gave me, I have given them, 23
I in them, and thou in me, that they may be made p^rfect in one. So as now God
being thus in Christ, and the Church adopted so near to that infinite Unity, of
God in Christ, the Interest is unchangeably, and eternally preserved; and to
the all fast with the heavenly cordage of love, Jer. 31.33 Ezech. 36.26.
God holds our himself in ^ovena^t, He^. 8. Col. 1.19.
in an everl^sting C^venant: And thus it has pleased the Father, that in him
should all f^lnesse dwell, and all our Interest should be treasured in him,
even to that of grace and glory, that our life should be hid with Christ in God.

II. The Spiritual Interest in Allegory.
THat we may discern the Interest more nearly it is conveyed to us on the scene
of Allegories, for God being invisible in himself, and more immediate
approaches, makes himself appear through such expressions as the^e.

Thou shall hide them in the secret of thy presence, Ps. 3^.20.
thou shall keep them secretly in a pavilion. Cant. 2.
I sat down under his shadow with great delight. Prove.
The Name of the Lord is a strong tower, the righteous run unto it and are
safe, under the shadow of his wings will I make my refuge. Come my people, Isa.
29.20.
enter thou into thy chambers, and shut thy doors about thee, hide thy self as
it were for a little moment: Psalm. 48.12, 13.
Walk about Sion, go round about her, tell the thereof, Isa. 22.23.
mark ye well her bulwarks, consider her palaces. Cant. 2.14.
My beloved has a vineyard, etc. he fenced it, and built a tower in the midst.
And I will fasten him as a nail in a sure place. O my Dove, thou art in the
clifts of the rocks in the secret places of the stairs. Thus God hides his
interest in these Allegories, Clefts, in Rocks, and secret places and chambers,
and wings, and shadows, and bulwarks, and palaces, and towers, and fences, and
pavilions, and the secrets of his presence, for God is so indistant, and
present with his, that they are safe in the midst of dangers, and he holds
these invisible Sanctuaries over them: Lo, he goes by me, and I see him not;
he passes on also, but I per^eive him not. Thus said Job, when his sight was
dim with affliction, that he could not see into the Interest beyond the
creature.

III. The Recipients of the Spiritual Interests.
THose things which are of nearest capacity to the receiving of the Interest,
are first the Covenant, or eternal Paction and engagement, whereby God stands
bound of his mere free grace to his Church or people, and by this interceding
act he and his people are brought together.

The next is the Scriptures of God, or the Word, whereby the interest is
propagated, being the power of God unto salvation.

The other is the Church of God, which is the Fountain sealed, the garden
enclosed wherein all the sweets and fragrancies of grace breath forth.

IV. The Recipients of the Interest.
THe Prophetical truths in the Prophets, Revelation of John, are the several
orbs and spheres the Interest works in, and hence follow the several degrees
of radiation that the truth of God casts out in the ages past, present, and to
come. The operations and fluxes of the Spirit, Diversities of gifts, and
diversities of administrations, inspirations, illuminations, instincts,
motions, created powers and mights, for effecting successes, preservations,
deliverances, advancements, etc.



V. The Engines the Interest works by.
THere are certain created powers, and qualifications spiritual, natural, and
civil, which the infinite supreme Agent makes use on here below (as I hinted
before) the virtues, gifts and graces, likewise the policy, power and
authority, and consociations, all these God takes up, and carries on his
interest by them in States and Kingdoms, nor was there ever R^form^tion, but
God set it on by such ways of application, either by eminency of gifts and
inspirations, or by eminency of power, and some of these he used more
eminently at one time, then at another, as in Iosiahs and Asaes, 2 Chronicles.
15.13.2 Kings, 23.2^.
when the coercive authority was the greatest wheel in the Reformation.

To conclude this, God improves Reformation by created means and entities,
which are like wheels and springs, and God moves by these, sometimes in the
way of his omnipotency, sometimes more connaturally, and according to his way
of moving, the improvements are; if he move in a connaturall way, he works with
the creature little further then its own capacity, and then things may go
slowly on, because he puts not out his hand to bring on the creature faster
then its own strength will carry it: See this in Iosiahs, Asa's, Ezra's
Reformation, in Edward the sixth's, Elizabeth's, where the Reformation went on
gradually from one obstruction to another.

God having thus laid in qualifications of several orders for advancing his
great work, they all work in their proper subserviency and subordination, for
the whole creation serves but this glorious end, that God may have his Church
completed through so many several ages and providence, according as he has
drawn it out in kis e^^rnall Model or Idea, which is, his own wisdom or
counsel; and when God is upon his work of Reformation, you may observe all the
lower interests are set a going, Judge. 5.20
The stars shall fight against Sisera in their course, thus shall the natural
interest help on. Ezra 1.1. Neh. 2.8. Ezra 7.
Cyrus, and Artaxerx^^ shall send out commissions and letters to their Princes
and ministers of State; thus shall the politic interest help on. H^gga^
Zechariah, the people of God, shall pray and prophecy, so shall the more
spiritually-organicall means help on.

VI. The Obstructions, and how removed.
THe Spiritual obstructions are intrinsecall, and forain, and extrinsecall;
the intrinsecall are malignity of nature, carnal reasonings, idolatrous,
superstitious principles, principles of Atheism, Libertinisme; there are but
two ways of removing these, by a Power spiritual, and a Power civil, or of
Magistracy, and the disciplines and orbs where both these powers work, and
influence; and here it would be well inquired how far this latter of
Magistracy may be improved to remove the more spiritual obstructions, and to
compel up to a Reformation, and how near the interests of Moses and Aaron are,
seeing they were at first in one subject or person, and after in two, but never
to be found any more in one, as the Papists and ^relates would have
incorporated them again: and its said, we clearly see not the right interest of
Christian Magistracy by any practical truth in the Gospel, and that which
makes it so dark is this, that no nations were wholly converted in Christ's and
the Apostles times, by which we might have experiments of their power in
cooperating with the Apostles, and what the true subserviencie of such a power
is to a spiritual interest, and in what latitude, is not yet clear to some. And
surely here we are too low of late in our Treatises, for we should first state
the interest of Magistracy, as we find it in the Gospel, and under the Law
respectively, and then enquire into the secret of Gospel-propagation, and why
the the Gospel begun below, and went up, and not as C^sar first, and so down?
and whether it equally respect both administrations? and how far that Scripture
that is not thought on in such case may be consulted? You are not come un^^ the
mountain that burned with fire, but ye are come unto mount Si^n? ^eb. 12.8.
And it would be clearly stated, whether spiritual persuasion, and conviction,
and the Evangelicall Ordinances, be the only mediums, or means, which were
then employed for carrying on the Gospel? and the auxiliary of miracles then
annexed for compelling reputation? and now that of miracles cea^ing, whether
Magistracy ought not to ^^ply? These are yet not beaten out so in our
discourses, as they might be.

The forain or extrinsecal obstructions are, some Laws, Customs, Traditions,
Adversaries or enemies to truth, Confederations with Princes and States abroad,
a people of forain interests in their own nation. These are removed by
suspending ^tatutes, opening Pulpits, Presses, and letting out the holy
dispensation of the Gospel freely, by State agencie, and vigilancie, and a kind
of sending out Hushaies to sit at Council table with Achitophels; and if this
has too much of David in it, yet the Jews which dwell near them may be
treated with for intelligence, as Nehemiah did. Neh. 4.12


Instances of mixtures in Scriptures, as that of Corinth, those seven of Asia,
the Parables improved, Mat 13.29, 30, of the Tares and Wheat.
WHen these and such like are urged in case of separation, and mixed
communicating in Ordinances; It would be further enquired, whether such a sense
come up more directly or obliquely to the holy Spirit? and whether
Church-corruptions, as Corinth's, and Ephesus etc. were intended any more for
Proofs, or Arguments, or Rules, then Personal corruptions, as David's lusts, and
Moses p^ssions, and Peter's fears? and whether all such examples be not rather
set down as cautions, and written for our admonition, that we should not lust,
1 Cor. 6.11.
as they also lusted? and further, whether the name Church be not sometimes to
be taken in the same sense under the Gospel, as the Ark and ^emple was tak^^
under the Law still for the places of (...) ^^^idence, though sometimes he was
not so ^^^^bly ther^? and whether the ^oly spirit for^ore not to (...) them,
because the fault was in some particular practices about Ordinances rather then
in the essential, or first form of Church constitution, which they had
perfecter then we? And whether this be a rule for the judgments of Gods
people, who are to go by the clear and visible Rules in Scripture, according to
which Churches are made up, or have constitution? And whether the Holy Spirit
would have reputed them still Churches, had they gone on in the toleration of
such corruptions, for all their first constitution, as appears in that caution
to Ephesus, Repent, or I will come unto thee quickly, and remove thy
candlestick? and whether the Parables of mixture of Tares and Wheat, and good
Fish and bad, be so as may make for toleration of visible mixtures any where
then in the world because they are shut up with the mention of the Worlds
dissolution? And whether such Church censures as christ has provided against
sins and scandals, import not an outward purity in all such as would pretend
to be members of his visible body? These things, because they are the hinges of
certain debutes amongst us, would be more fully opened.

Separation enquired after.
ANd for Separation, I find it not rightly stated: for, withdrawings, and
particular communicatings apart of the godly, that separate only upon grounds,
not so clearly or fully condemned in the Word, or commended, ought not to be
presently reputed Schism, or Separation, neither by those that so withdraw,
nor those from whom the pretended separation is made, if we would study the
common peace of Christians: and if this were rightly discussed, and the true
Scripture principles made clear which bear it, there would be no such division,
as there is separation, but it would be only a suspending one from another, as
in the intervals of uncleanness under the law, till Christ had revealed even
this unto them.

And indeed it would be well enquired, seeing God reveals his ^^uths in
several degrees in nations, and persons, Whether such a national conformity be
fully agreeable to such a method of Revelation, and that all ought to conform
outwardly, that conform not inwardly? and whether such an unity may not have
equally its inconveniences on the right hand, as formality hypocrisio, etc. as
well as the other on the left, errors, divisions, etc. and yet all State
inconveniences must be taken in here, which may spring from the want of such a
conformity; always provided that the rule in Scripture be fully consulted,
lest we make Church business bend further toward the maxims of State, then
there is just grounds in the word: and it would be well weighed, whether such
separation has not foundation enough for more spiritual correspondencie, then
some on all sides practice? and whether such differences in those that pretend
all to come out of Babylon, ought to be esteemed other than the several
complections and features of so many members of the same body? some are more
honorable then others. And here we might do well to observe better that great
engine of Satan's, which he uses against the people of God, that of several
titles, and notes of distinction, as of Presbyterial, Independent, Brownist,
Anabaptist: For by putting us thus under Paul, and Apollos, or Cephas, he
draws us into scandal, and offense, and sidings, and parties, amounting almost
to the disinteressing and unclasping our selves one from another, and letting
us out into these several channels, and then our stream must needs slow more
weakly against the banks of the common enemy, and the power of hell and
darkness. I conclude thus, that these Scriptures would be further searched.

Now I beseech you etc. that you all speak the same thing, 1 Cor. 1.10.
etc. and that you be perfectly joined together in the same same mind. Phil. 3.
Let us therefore as many as be perfect, 15.
be thus minded, and if in any thing you be otherwise minded, 16.
God shall reveal even this unto you.

Nevertheless whereunto we have already attained, let us walk by the same
rule, let us mind the same things.

We then that are strong ought to bear the infirmities of the weak, Romans 15.
and not to please our selves.

Let every one of us please his neighbor, Romans 15.2.
for his good to edification.

For one believes that he may eat all things, Romans 14.2.
another who is weak eats herbs.

Let not him that eats, despise him that eats not. 3.


In these Scriptures are almost the full latitude of Christianity: in the
first, the perfect Rule of unity is commended; in the other, the several
degrees to this unity are opened, and commanded.

Christ's interests, and the Worlds.
ME thinks, in stating several controversies of late, we go not high enough,
but we strive in the valleys, where the mist is thickest, whereas we might see
better and farther, if we could go up higher, to the interest of Christ: the
Disciples saw more of him when he took them up with him, Luke 9.
then they saw before.

This interest would be well cleared and held forth in its glory and
spirituality, and abstracted from all other worldly interests which complicate
with it: the Kingdom of Christ and the World are two, in their fundamentals,
policy, laws, governors, ends, designs, and the more the World insinuates
any of its policy into the Kingdom of Christ* the more is the Kingdom of
Christ darkened, and corrupted; and as it is in a civil State, the more of
arbitrarinesse that comes in, the more is the established government subverted;
so in Christ's, whose government is more one and unchangeable, by how much a
Kingdom in a spiritual notion, is more perfect, then a Kingdom in a
temporal or worldly.

And if we observe well, we shall see that the great mystery of iniquity is no
more then a mere spiritual arbitrary government.

The Worldly interests works much in mixed aggregations and counsels,
authoritative power, in servile dependencies and subordinations, in promiscu^us
unity and conformity, and universality, in blind and implicit obedience, in
falsely pretended antiquity, as appears in the popish and Prelaticall p^licy.

The interest of Christ is in a spiritual freed me or priviledging, Joh. 8.36.
Act 6.5.
in ^nction or knowledge, in consociations, 1 Cor. 7.22, 23.
in homogentall unity, Ep^. 2.19.
in directive and supe^intending, in persuasive, 1 John 2.27.
and reprehensive administrations or ordinances, and the government of Christ
seems to be so framed, as neither Tyranny should get in at any consociation,
nor Anachy or Libertinisme get in at any dissociation, or particular gathering,
and at this beam we may weigh our controversies of this age.

And they that argue for any complication of interests, Jer. 31.43. Acts 15.2.3.
must look well to the spirituality of the Kingdom, Acts 20.17.
and that God in this latter dispensation applies not so to the outward man, 2 Timothy 3.16.
as he did in the former, and that simplicity, paucity, pers^icuity, humility,
2 Timothy 2.25.
^enity, and visible sanctity, Gal. 6.1. Col. 3.12.
are the proper orbs, where the evangelicall light moves.

And yet here I would be rightly understood, for I make but overtures for
enquiry, while things are making to their constitution amongst us, which if
once constituted, all ought to be either actively or passively obedient.

The Disputes for liberty improved.
THere are great disputings now for Libert^, and this springs from a mutual
jealousy in each party, the one fearing the others establishment will endure
no other interest near its own, and the more prevalent fearing the insinuations
and encroachments of a tolerated interest that is diverse from it.

Now we should enquire here, whether these jealousies be the more proper
passions of States, or Christians, and how far Christ, who is protector of his
Church, is to be trusted with the defense of his own government in such cases,
and yet the true evangelicall latitude is not found out? Some plead upon such
principles as would bring in an universal toleration, and while they would
open a door only for themselves, they set in all promiscuously.

Therefore it would be enquired here if all must be tolerated, for fear of
persecuting the truth through ignorance; then whether does not this ground
argue for a plenary Liberty, for all to propagate their interests equally with
that, which is the commonly received truth of that place; for a truth, I
conceive, may be no more suppressed ignoran^ly, then it may be persecuted
ignorantly: and it was as great a sin, if not greater, in that Council, Acts
4.18
to charge the Apostles they should not teach the people in his name, as to
whip them for the doctrine they taught.

Again, it would be further enquired if such a Liberty be the Gospel way, what
use of the reserves of martyrdom and persecution, which Christ has made into
such a glorious condition, as if he intended it as a blessed supplement to that
of Liberty, and it would be enquired whether such a m^lky way as that of
Liberty be always consonant to the estate of the Church, Can. 2.2.
being a Lilly among Thorns.

And it would be enquired too, whether such a Liberty be fully Christ's mind,
because the enemies of the truth, heathen Empires, and popish States as well as
others are and have been abe^tors of it, and so it be rather a State principle
tolerating only those which either the necessity of some evil consequence or
some State expedients, or the experienced innocence of the tolerated Religion
has produced: and yet on the other side, it would be enquired further, whether
they that desire this Liberty be not such as are on the same fundamentals with
us, and brethren in the Lord, and may be brought to meet with us in certain
common principles, walking by the same rule, Phil. 3.16
minding the same thing in that whereunto we have attained, and may not let out
themselves unto mutual peace and edification, their dissentings, having a
certain orb or sphere allowed them, wherein they may move, that still upon
occasion, we may all fall into one common society against the public enemy of
the Gospel, as Abraham and Lot, who though they lived other times at distance,
yet were ever ready to relieve one another; and here I desire to know whether
such several motions as this, which agree in the same unity of faith, of
mutual edification, and contribute together to the same public preservation;
may not be with as little prejudice to the grand spiritual sphere, as in the
natural, wherein we see nature abounding in several motions and orbs, and yet
all these (as occasion opens) mutually assisting the interest of the universe
or whole.

And here me thinks we should study the latitudes of Christianity more then we
do: especially when the Scriptures holds it out to us, both in principles and
practice: yet this caution I must lay down, that all our dissenting Brethren be
as careful o^ their parts to study things that make for common peace, Gal.
6.2. Phil. 3.15.16.
as they would have Authority careful in acting against their particular peace.

There is much arguing now against compulsive authority, in case of Religion,
and the arguments run thus: 1. That it is a note of Persecution. 2. That it
drives on the Popish and Prelaticall design of Uniformity. 3. That it
distracts and wounds tender doubting consciences. 4. That it arms the enemies
of the truth in their tyranny, from the Magazine of true Professors. 5. That it
assumes dominion over the consciences. 6. That it intrudes into the place of
God, and his Ordinances, which immediately influence on the soul. 7. That it
was but judicial and political to the Jews. 8. That it runs an hazard of
fighting against God. 9. That there is no express command nor example in the
Gospel for such compulsion. 10. That it is a means of keeping out truths that
are yet to be revealed. 11. That the authority of the Magistrate in Scripture,
reaches only to Moral and Civil transgressions; and to spiritual, as they
come forth into the outward man, and so trouble the civil peace or government
of the State. 12. That it makes Formalists, and Hypocrites.

Yet here it would be enquired further, whether there be not the same moral
and and judicial equity, for the Magistrate to assist God in the design of
his Church now, as there was before. 2. Whether Heresies and Schisms, do not
naturally bring forth such divisions, and distractions, as dash so on the power
of the civil Magistrate, that they justly raise up that power against them. 3.
Whether the pleaders for this compulsive power, do not over argue it, through
indulgency, and the opposers argue it but half way, through jealousy; the one
having it on their side at present, and the other against them: and whether a
more moderate way be not the more Scripture-path viz. That the compulsive power
may be found in the Gospel-principles, stated with such Cautions and Rules from
the word, as the Enemies and opposers of truth, may neither triumph in an
unwarrantable liberty, nor the weaker Christians have cause to complain of an
unwarrantable authority, whose doubtings are experienced to wound their own
souls, more then the soul of States, the Government.

Establishment of Reformation.
IT has not yet been far enough argued according to the principles in
Scripture, of what nature the establishments ought to be under the Gospel and
sure we ought more properly to advise with him that has the keys of David, and
knows best how to shut and open, for else we may shut so fast, that we may be
forced to have our doors broken open from Heaven; as of late under Prelacy (we
sadly experience) who had shut up all with so sure an establishment, that a
truth could not get in but by violence; and thus Rome and those Princes of
Bondage under her, as the Spaniard, etc. make use of their keys in all their
dominions for shutting out, so as the Gospel Truths have no visible entrance
but by force, unless God bring them in at some other door yet unknown to us,
as he seems to intend: now whether the establishment ought to be such under the
Gospel as may universally except all but what is received, or such as may
contrive some holy prudentiall way, for trying any new revealed truths; if such
be offered clearly from heaven by the hands of men, we find that in Arts and
Sciences the Sistemes are not such as will admit of no advancement: Bacon (...)
Aug. (...)
the profoundest agents in nature are led daily on to new experiments, and the
Aristotelian magistrality has been found no little hinderance to young
travelers in the regions of nature.

And that which may carry us on further in this enquiry, is the possibility of
not seeing all at once, strenghened by experience in our own and others
reformations; yet here we must enquire too, whether Kingdoms ought to ^it so
loose in their decrees, and whether the conscience of Nations or Parliaments
are to remain still in such a constant potentiality to new degrees, and whether
such a way would not keep a Kingdom always tottering and uncertain? Yet
further, whether the potentiality of acquiring new degrees of this nature,
would not bring such an alteration as were rather perfective, then corruptive,
or destructive? and if so, whether these jealousies may not be saved? we see,
that in the bodies natural and spiritual, there is a potentiality to any
perfective alteration, as in the air to light, and in the soul to degrees of
illumination, till they come to the statu^e of the fullness of Christ.

The advancers out of Babylon.
IN our commings out of Babylon, we have many fellow travelers that pretend as
well to leave her behind as we; and these are called Heretics, Schismatics,
Anabaptists, Separatists. Now before we be too far engaged in this, being they
are such as pretend to come from the same point of advancement, or setting
forth, it would be well enquired how Popery and Prelacy come to oppose them so
directly, and their interests to be so inconsistent, if they be all enemies to
the truth: I find Christ's maxim tend to another sense, How can Satan cast
out Satan? Mat. 12.16.
yet here again, I find that Satan may appear as well an Angel of Light as
Darkness, and Heresies may walk abroad, as well in white as in black; and that
some vices are as inconsistent and destructive to one another, as vices and
virtues. However, they pretend with us to come out of Babylon, so it is
possible they may only mistake their way in their going out: yet we must ask
further in such cases, where popery and Prelacy agree with us thus in unotertio
(as appears in this one experiment of calling the others Heretics and
Schismatics) whether a godly jealousy may not do well? for it is possible, to
cast out the courser part of popery and Prelacy, and yet hold it by a finer
thread, as it has been to this age in our partial Reformations, when at first
popery was cast out only by the head, and so gradually still holding it by some
parts, for it is harder casting out a mystery then every one conjectures at
the first sight, Rev. 17 5
for popery being a mystery in the Spirits sense, has something more then a
visible train of Hierarchy courts and ceremonies, there is something more
spiritual in it, their mixed unity, their tyranny, their magistrality, their
universality, their implicit obedience, with others, etc.

Now it would be enquired what interest or remainder these may have left
behind, for it is possible for popery to leave such roots and stumps in the
ground where it has planted so deeply, and to work again upon these hidden and
occult dispositions, for the Man of sin rose by such interests at first, and
this the holy Spirit had observed betimes, saying, 1 Thessalonians. 2.7.
the mystery of iniquity does already work, defections, compliancies, and
ap^stasies, as we have seen, are easily obtained, when the man of sin has such
invisible interests and agents laid in to work by; nor ^as the grosser or more
visible ag^^ts the only means to actuate this Kingdom back again toward Rome
so often (as we experience) but these more secret and mercuriall engines which
I have named.

First for their unity, it has such cold principles as freeze and congeale
multitudes heterogenially together in the worship of God, and then puts the
name of Schism upon all the Reformed Churches that will not come into the dark
with them, where all colors are like.

tyranny reaches to the most spiritual cruelty, That of compelling souls
under the penalty of martyrdom.

magistrality, in obtruding the decrees of their counsels, their infallibility,
with Anathema's, their Lording it over the heritage.

universality, in holding out their religion for Catholic, because the ten
horns have given their Kingdom to the Beast, R^v. 17.17
though no longer then until the words of God shall be fu^fi^^d.

implicit obedience, wherein all light and liberty is denied to the people,
but such as streams through their ministry and dispensations, which must needs
be of their own color, and will never be purer, coming so; Now these and such
like would be enquired into further; and our ministry may do well, a little
more then they do, to set upon this part of discovery of the interests of
popery and prelacie in their magistrality, unity, and implicitie obedience (as
their Covenant oblieges them) for this I take to be the more spiritual part of
it, and little studied, and thus they shall be more faithful to their
Covenant, which ingages them to a universal extirpation: and now that we are
upon reforming, or refining, the extractions must not be only of the grosser,
the government, superstition, ceremonies; but of the more essential, and
formal, and vertual parts of prelacie and popery in the things I named; only we
must take heed, that in such extractions, the purer spirits do not exhale with
the other, and therefore in such spiritual experiments the furnace must be
chimically heated, for it is possible that Gods unity, order, and subordination
may go out with the other, if the extractions be more violent, then the word of
God, and Apostolical practices will endure.

The several Interests of REFORMATION in this Kingdom.
I. The Supernatural Interest.
THe supernatural interest appears in those many great and eminent mercies
since the first opening of Heaven upon this Nation (I reckon now from our own
late epoche of Reformation.)

And first in that design of calling a Parliament, and engaging them against
the Kingdom of Scotland, and so to have turned back the Reformation in its
first advancing, a design not unlike that of Herod's, of killing Christ in the
cradle; and here God let in some glimpses, and cast in some jealousies into
that great Counsel, which rescued it from such an engagement, and for all the
State Artifice of Court Declarations, and pretenses; suspicions sprang up in
the hearts of people, and though armies are levied by prerogative, and carried
down, yet God takes off their spirits and success, both in their advancings
and skirmishings with Scotland, and this is made by Providence, a necessity of
calling a Parliament again, so as this inter design of the enemies, served
only to land us upon clearer discoveries.

This Parliament is summoned, and excellent Members elected by a corrupt
commonalty, Psalm. 29.3.
So as the voice of the Lord is upon the Waters.

And now all things work and turn upon heavenly engines, and the long design
of keeping of Parliaments, is turned into a necessity of a Trien^^all one, and
further, to that of an everlasting one, by an act of continuation: and God has
fastened it as a rail in a sur^ place, and now Reformation moves some degrees
on.

Votes and suffrages begin to disinteresse Properie and Prelacie, Gods voice is
upon the waters again, Petitions upon Petitions from City and Countries for
Reformation, a mighty over-powring still in the voices and votes for
Reformation, both in the house, and elsewhere, Papists and popish cast out of
Interest, and place in the great Counsel, the Prerogative losing many
State-advantages, and the Prelacy many Ecclesiastical.

The contrary designs of Jesuits and Prelates disappointed, and all turned
into designs for Religion and Liberty, and Unity with Scotland.

The several plots defeated and discovered, which were still countermining.

That of bringing up the Army from the North at first.

That of bringing the Cavaliers to the doors of the Parliament.

That of betraying the Militia of City and Parliament, and surprising all.

The several endeavors of betraying Cities, Towns Ar^i^s.

The corrupting Parliament Agents, and getting interests in their several
counsels and forces.

The attempts of unclasping us into several parties.

The restoring a Parliament from the day of small things, in the general
defeatures, not long since.

The preserving the most famous City of London, which has been like Ezekiels
potters house, the place where all the wheels of Reformation moved.

And to all these, an assembly of many godly and eminent men for repairing the
Temple, voting out Prelacy and Superstition in the places where they sat
voting not long since to establish it, with Oaths and Laws.

The several success of Battles at Keinton, Newbery, York, etc.

The Protestations and Covenants, like heavenly cordage to fasten both
Parliament and Kingdoms, and make them the more steadfast and unmovable in the
work of the Lord.

The many several preservations and successes of late, as that of Newcastle.

Thus the supernatural interest has wrought, and things have been as it were
created and supported, by that naked power, and wisdom of God in Christ, which
carried on his Church with signs and wonders, in the times of its first rising.

The spiritual Interest.
THe next interest I find Reformation to have in this Kingdom is spiritual.

And first the many interrupted assayes formerly by godly Divines and others in
the reign both Qu. Elizabeth, and King James, by Petition, Treatises, Days of
prayer and seeking God, the seed time of which light we now enjoy, light is
sown f^^ the righteous.

The many assemblings of private Christians, in latter times, their spiritual
contributions then of prayer and humiliation.

And now the means of grace powered out so effectually in Preaching, and
prophes^ing, and prayer amongst us.

The effectual door which is opened of late, and a seeking to Sion with our
faces thitherward.

The return of the banished, persecuted, godly.

The daily seekings to heaven, in solemn humiliations.

The Gospel lightning from many Treatises, Discourses, Expositions.

The sending out laborers into the harvest, the springing up of many young
Prophets, as if this generation were the Seminary for the next: and to these
spiritual subsidiaries in our own Kingdom, the prayers, and holy
contributions of all other Reformed Churches of Germany, Geneva, New England,
the Netherlands, with the Churches in France, and Scotland, and low Ireland,
these all fall in with us into the spiritual design of Reformation, we are
engaged in.

This spiritual interest reaches to every Ordinance of God, to every
minist^ation, to every grace, to every spiritual faculty, or power that makes
toward Heaven or God, in this Kingdom, or other reformed States.

This Interest is yet stronger in the Prophetical part of it, the fifth Angel
now pouring out his violl on the seat of the beast: and here I dare follow
Expositors to this, That Babylon is falling in the near parts of it; and for
the time of the total ruin, the Prophecy runs strongly, and the Interpreters
too, that is not much above six years.

To these, the meltings and dissolvings of customs, Cant. 2.17
traditions, superstitions, for the day breaks and the shadows fly away.

The enemies filling up the measure, and Ephah, by their daily sins,
idolatries, and provocations.

The work of God upon Sion and Jerusalem, or his people, in the present wa^s or
tribulation.

The st^nding spiritual remedy of many godly Divines, in the conjuncture of an
Assembly who like Aaron and Hur, hold up the hands of Moses.

The Politic or Civil Interest.
THe power and acting of the King or Supreme, in a Kingdom Monarchically
constituted, as this would soon give the Reformation a powerful and spreading
Interest, as we see in one Cyrus, and Artaxerxes, and Constantine, and an
Edward, and Elizabeth; therefore Princes are called nursing Fathers, and
nursing Mothers, to the Churches of Christ: yet though we want this Interest
for the present, and the personal actings of a King, yet we have in the mean
time a supplement, a Parliamentary regal power of two Kingdoms: A strong
fundamental in the work of Reformation, and a power very agreeable to the
constitution of both, and very natural, for the propagating Reformation in
this Kingdom, and this improved by Associations, and Covenants.

The present power, armies, and success in most of the parts in this Kingdom,
but the West; and yet some strong Interests there to.

The consideration with other Protestant States and Churches, (though I could
wish it more) the commotions and troubles abroad, in Denmark, in States of
Italy, Germany, Spain, France, whose engagements gives them not time, to
apply themselves to our disadvantages and distractions; God making them to hear
a rumor of war in their own land.

Further Searchings.
I. Non-comm^nion, an^ Excommunication.
SEeing there is such a difference amongst us, concerning Non-communion, and
Excommunication, that the first is not so proportionable, and ^dequate, and
powerful as the latter: now, that which may be considerable here, is, whether
it appear an Ordinance or no, and then all such consequences are saved, and the
objections are but imaginary; for if it be an Ordinance, and spititually
strenghened and armed from Heaven: it is all one whether you call it
Non-communion, or Excommunion: nor is it the weakness of any thing on the
worldly side of it, that ought to make us prejudge it for no Ordinance, because
there may be an heavenly and spiritual supplement to make up whatsoever may be
suspected in it.

II. National and Congregationall.
That which makes the difference here, is, a disputing about the fittest
subject for Church ordinances, and we differ here in point of latitude and
qualification; for on the one side, it is thought that a people nation^ (...)
the ^it recipi^nts of all the (...); on the other side, it (...) only congre^^
(...) ^^cipie^ts, and (...) di^ference; if we (...), we shall see that such
quali^^^ations are ^^ated by both, and such cautions, as the Ordinances are,
but neither prostituted by the one, nor the other, but a due regard had to the
predisposing, and preaccommodating to the Ordinances, which are of a pure and
heavenly constitution.

Concerning the Model in Scriptures.
THat which makes the controversy here, is the consideration of Gods way of
policy at the first with his Church, under the Tabernacle and Temple, which
were all so exactly and completely sent down from Heaven, with laws, and
cautionary precepts, for the just observance, and to these under the Gospel the
notions in Scripture, of Kingdom, City, Family, Officers, Offices,
Church Censures, Administrations, Applications, with many things of spiritual
policy, both in principles and practice, with necessary inference from Gods
first method: On the other side, all this is acknowledged, yet in a little more
latitude, and godly prudence is let in, for making up some^hing where there is
not a deficiency suspected: but no clear principles or rul^s revealed.

Pretended Heresies, Divisions.
AS we should not go about to excuse or defend any error, clearly convicted,
so not to condemn any thing for error, which seems not to bear up equally to
our received principles: and here we must observe, that there are many, who
when the notion of error or heresy is abroad, are only Pentioners to the
multitude, and measure the error or heresy, by those that are for it or
against it, and are resolved however to write that way that they see the most
condemn; and these are such, who though they do not kindle, yet they blow the
fire amongst us: and I have observed, that these do so overwrite a cause, that
at length they improve an error, and arm it more against the truth then it
was before, by charging things on the wrong side of it, as we have seen of
late: and thus while we think to gain, by letting in such a promiscuous stream
of opposers, we rather lose: as in the case of some present controversies, who
co^plain that they are rather oppressed then convinced, and bo^n down, then
writ down: and certainly, that which makes us on all sides so far from peace, and
issue, or success: the more we dispute, is our intemperancy and unnatural
heats, in which we spend as much paper as in the cause it self: and I am sure
in some differences I could name, the truth stands by, while we wrangle beside
it, and the dust that we raise in arguing, makes the truth less discernable;
and that which is considerable amongst us here, is the exceeding prejudice
received against difference of judgment, and divisions, not considering that
it is Gods secret or engine for discovery, as well of truth as error, and for
advantaging the one, as well as disadvantaging the other. To instance in our
late debates about Government, it will appear that truth is improved, and has
received advancement from those very principles that seemed to oppose it; and I
am sure in the case of the Antinomians, that error about Free Grace has drawn
our Divines into more studying and preaching it then before, and stating it
clearer; and the very Heresies almost of all times, have accidentally (...)
advanced some particular Scripture truth. And that very controversy about the
Ministry received from Bishops, has brought forth some advantage amongst many
of the godly, even a deep humiliation, because it came to us with a mark of the
beast with it: and let not any jealousy or fear of derogation or
disparagement, cause us to fold it up without any National contrition or
acknowledgement, now in a season when we are laying new spiritual
fundamentals, as in that late Act for Ordination: let the Prelates own designs
of connivence, whose principles dare not look the Light in the face.

Self indulgency: with the right use of Heresies and Errors.
FIrst, it is impossible but Heresies and Errors should be, though there be a
woe upon the Authors and Abettors, so as one would think this prediction of
Christ should cool us in the heat of our tumults about them, and we should
make no wonder at that which Christ has prepared us so long before hand to
receive; yet here we should do as the Disciples did, when their Lord had
foretold them of a treachery to befall him, every one said, Master is it I?
this reflective disposition, or selfe-jealousie I find much wanting in many,
while every one rather ^its armed at his own door, and will neither search his
house himself, nor suffer another to go in without opposition: and thus all
count their opinions truth and will not do so much as suspect their own
judgments, which was not the Disciples practice; and so we are forced to
confute one another, while no man will confute himself, and thus differences
are inflamed.

And be it, that the things we condemn for Heresies and Errors, be so, then
there is this left us, to work up to Gods design in such cases, and to turn
them into advantages for the truth, and such a work is next to Gods, who takes
in every sin and distemper, and makes it act something to his glorious ends,
He has commanded light to shine out of darkness.

Are they Anabaptists, as they call them? Let it provoke us to awaken the
Scriptures more for what we do; let us study the substance of the Covenant
more, let us study Scripture inference and deductions more, let us study the
correspodency of the Seals under both dispensations more, and we shall gain
this, to be able to do, what we do, upon clearer and stronger principles.

Are they Brownists or Separatists as they call them? Let it stir us up to look
to our Fundamental truths better, to our Ministry, to our Churches, to our
Practices: and sure while these controversies involve us more into the
Scriptures, we shall only come forth more refined and clearer in judgment and
practice; and what we might possibly have taken in under the notion of
Tradition or Authority, and so have engaged our selves implicitly to the
truths we profess, we shall now give up unto God a more reasonable sacrifice.

Are they Antinomians, as some call them? or these that cry down Law, or duties?
Let us draw this advantage, to seek out how the riches of Free grace are
offered, and how the Law is established by the Gospel, and what power of it is
annulled, and how Christ is to be advanced above all, and how he is all in all,
and the true Fountain in whom our life is hid; and that our being in him, and
he in us, is the cause of all graces and duties in us: and that our life now in
grace ought to be in conformity to that we shall live hereafter in glory, where
being filled with Christ, we shall only live to the obedience and praise of
him, for that work of justification and redemption we had by him: and let us
study to give duties their right origination, order and end, Prayer,
Repentance, Obedience, etc. as gr^^^s that flow from Christ into his, and back
again from his into Christ; and that we interpret all Scriptures that concern
either Christ, or the Law, or Sin, or Obedience, or Duty, into the glory of God
in Christ, that all our conclusions may exalt him, whom God had in design only
to exalt, To be a Prince and a Savior.

And thus we should drive on Gods ends more then we do, in making every thing
serve his glory, and our own edification, and not dash our selves merely one
against another, and go out only in vapors of heat and opposition, which too
many do.

Trials of God amongst us.
THat which is an argument of trouble, and distraction to carnal judgments,
ought to be the only confirmation and strengthening to Gods people, who live in
a higher region, and stand on the vantage ground above the men of the world,
and see how the designs of Heaven are managed, and are able to discern that in
the creature, which others are not, even a providence work which shines sorth
in the contexture of things and affairs, like the Sun beams on the wall and
first let it be no wonder that God is in the midst of troubles and tumults, I
will shake all Nations, says God, and then it follows, the desire of all
Nations (or Christ) shall come before me; Hag. 2 7.
and when he was with Israel he was in a cloud and fire at one time, Exo. 19 9.
in lightning and thunder at another; 1 Kin 19.12.
and when with his Prophet, there went a whirlewinde and fire before kim, and
the Spirit of God which knows Gods manner of presence best, sets him forth
thus, Psalm. 50.3.
Our God shall come, a fire shall devour him, and it shall be very tempestuous
round about him: when he was with Gideon and his people, it was so, as he could
see little of him, If the Lord be with us, why then is all this befallen us?
when, with his people in captivity, Judge. 6.1
it was so as the Prophet could say, Can these dry bones live? Eze. 37.^.
When with his Disciples, it was so, as there was no comeliness in him, he was
not desirable: when with his Apostles, Isay 53.^
he struck the room with a whirlewinde, and enlightened it with fire.

See Gods method and goings before amongst his people, and you shall trace him
now in the same spiritual and providentiall impressions.

First, in our Parliamentary and Divine Assembly, and the rising of people to
build the Temple of God; so it was before, when the Temple in type was raised,
and the Lord stirred up the spirit of Zerubbabel the son of Shelathiel,
Governor of Judah, and the spirit of Joshua the son of Josedech the high
Priest, Hag. ^.
and the spirit of all the remnant of the people, and they came, and did work
in the house of the Lord.

In the beginnings of the war, when a few Delinquents drew in so great a party
to the Kings party, and when so many revolted from the work; so it was before
in that of Gibe^^, which got in the Tribe of Benjamin to their quarrel against
all Israel. And in that of Abijah and Jeroboam, when Jeroboam was four hundred
thousand men more then Judah: 2. Chron.
but there were gathered to them vain men, the children of Relial, who thought
to withstand the kingdom of the Lord, with whom was a great multitude, and
golden Calves, who cast out the Priests of the Lord But with Abijah was the
Lord God, and the Priests which minister unto the Lord, and they which burn
sacrifice morning and evening, and which sounded trumpets to cry alarm against
ye, O children of Israel.

In the Contributions brought into the work of the Lord, as the Plate, Money,
Jewels, Levies, Loanes. Neh. 7.
So it was before, when some of the chief of the Fathers gave unto the work,
and the rest of the people, twenty thousand drams of gold and silver.

In the diverse success the enemies had in the proceeding of this War: So it was
before when the Sons of Belial in Gibeah involved a whole Tribe into their
quarrel, Judge. 20.
and got the better of it in diverse battles.

In the battles and victories we had in many places, as Edge kill and York,
where our multitude did not deliver us. So it was before in Gideons, when God
took off his Army to three hundred, and then gave him the success against his
enemies.

In other particular deliverances of besieged places, as Bradford, Hul, Lime,
Gloucester. So it was in Ziph. in Keilah, 1 S^m. 23.
in Jerusalem, when God caused Saul and Senache^ib to hear a rumor of war to
divert them from the siege. Isa 36.


In our divisions about some ^cripture truths, in our murmurings and
disputings, and our ways of conciliation by an Assembly. So it was before
amongst the Brethren, till a Council at Jerusalem reconciled them: So amongst
the Grecians and the Hebrews, till the Brethren were called together to
consider of it.

In the discoveries of Conspiracies and Plots against Parliament, and City, and
Armies. So it was with Israel, when Elisha discovered the councels of the
Syrians: So with Nehemiah, when Sanballats and To^iabs plots were revealed: So
with the Jews, when Hamans was discovered and defeated: So with Absolons, when
Achitophels was tu^^^d into folly. The Lord is known by the judgments that he
executes: the wicked is snared in the works of their own hands.

In stirring up the younger sort into attempts against the Armies and enemies
of God. So it was before, when Ahab said, By Whom? And he said, Even by the
young men of the Princes of the Provinces. 1 King. 20.34.


In raising up new Armies after discomfitures and losses; as in the general
rout we had throughout the Kingdom not long since, when our Southern, Western,
and Northern Armies were scattered. So it was before when Israel had loss
after loss in their way to Canaan, and still recruited by the power of their
God.

In carrying on the cause through windings and turnings through losses and
victories, making us a mutual scourge to one another, dashing us both in
pieces, and repairing us again, and thus keeping up a standing affliction
amongst us, till his work be finished on Mount ^ion, and his judgment on his
enemies. So it was before, when Israel and Iud^h were engaged against each
other: ^o it was with Ionahs ship, when they rowed hard to shore, but they
could not, for the wind blew and was tempestuous against them.

God standing in these times.
THey that would see God in this work, must consider the spiritualnesse of the
design, and Gods way of mysterious acting, and not let themselves down into
the creature, and think that the breaking of an Army, or a Party, breaks Gods
design; for it remains the same yesterday and today, and the same for ever;
and God takes in miscarriages, disadvantages, and improbabilities, and seeming
impossibilities, and treacheries, and enemies workings, and makes them all work
into his purpose: He took in a treachery at the completing of the spiritual
design of our redemption, and a Judas must accidentally, though woefully, help
in the work of our salvation. So that if we would but study Gods design
concerning his Church and method, and rise up higher then the creature and the
creatures method in our conceptions, and look on the other side of it, we
should not be at such losses and stands, and in such despondencies and
discouragements as we are: And while we grasp at the creature too fast, either
at Agents, or Armies, or Counsels, God many times (as we experience) draws
them either off from us, or us from them.

Again, we must look at Gods standing amongst us: He is not now as he appeared
to Israel on the Mountain, with a clear paved work of a Sapphire under his feet;
but he is now as he was before in the visions, he stands in the bottom among
the Myrtle trees, on a red horse, so shaded as none but his own can see him;
His spirit is in the wheels, and one wheel within another: He walks in the
midst of the seven golden Candlesticks, yet none but a Disciple sees him. The
work of Church providence is intricate and perplexed; so it was when the Jews
were his people, and now it is when the Gentiles are his people too: so it was
in the first part of his work about his Church, and so it is in this second
p^rt of his work too; for it is all but one work, only in several complexions
and methods, to Israel and the Gentiles.

Maxims of REFORMATION.
Go^s engagement for deliverance.
WHen the people of God are under any spiritual or civil oppression, God will
be sure to be mindful of them, designing some course for their deliverance,
not in the way of his common providence, but from the engagement that he has
laid upon himself by covenant: and in this his season of thoughts toward them,
their sighs and complaining^ of soul do move him and put him on, and actuate
his wisdom into experiments. Exodus 2.^3, 34, 25.
And the children of Israel sighed by reason of bondage, and they cried, and
their cry came up unto God and God heard their groaning, and remembered his
covenant, and had respect unto them.

Eminent workin^s.
When God sets himself to deliver a people, he comes toward some of them in
some eminent working, and engages them to go before the people.

Come therefore, and I will send thee unto Pharaoh, Exodus 3.1.
that thou may bring forth my people.

Disp^si^io^s b^f^rehand.
When God intends actually to enlarge a people, he lays in dispositions
beforehand into the hearts of the Princes and Elders, so that all their motions
shall fall easily into such conjunctures as tend that way.

And they shall hearken unto thy voice, and thou shall come, Exo. 3.^
thou and the Elders of Israel.

Gods design upon obstructions.
When the Lord is upon the work of enlargement and bringing out his people, he
often allows the obstructions which their enemies cast in, and yet goes on to
make up his glorious design of their impediments.

And I am sure the King of Epypt will not let you go, Exo. 3.19.
n^, not by a mighty hand.

Mutual concurrences.
The Lord in the great design of leading forth his people, acts both the
Elders and Ministers into mutual concurrences and strengthnings of each other,
that the failing of each may be made up by the others supply.

And Aaron shall be thy spokesman unto the people, Exo. 4.16.
and he shall be to thee in stead of a mouth, and thou shall be to him in stead
of God.

Some experiments eccentrick to Gods time.
There are oftentimes certain experiments which the people of God make in their
way to deliverances before the fullness of time come: But still there is such a
want of correspondency in the things they look for, that they make no
proceeding, but fail, being eccentrick to Gods time of success.

He supposed his brethren would have understood how that God by his hand would
deliver them, Acts 7.25
but they understood not.

Success through disadvantages.
When God stirs up a people to go out from bondage, he gives the enemy the
liberty of obstructing and raging, and draws forth his people through many
windings and turnings; so as their passage is not even and direct, but their
success is made up of disadvantages, of contrarieties, and improbabilities.

He brought them out, Act. 7.36.
after that he had showed signs and wonders in the land of Egypt.

The season of seeking God.
When tidings of public calamity are abroad, then is the season of seeking
God, and enquiring after sin, and putting God in mind of covenants and
engagements that he stands in to his people.

And they said unto me, Neh. 1.3, 4, 5* 8, 10.
the remnant that are left of the captivity there in the Province, are in great
affliction and reproach; the wall of Jerusalem also is broken down: and it
came to pass when I heard these things, that I sat down and wept, and prayed,
and I said, I beseech thee O Lord remember now these are thy servants whom thou
have redeemed.

Relations for advantaging the cause of God.
We must observe all our relations in public times, and see how we are placed
for advantaging the cause of God, and we must put forward every engagement,
still keeping an eye upon him for directing our designs to his own ends.

Prosper I pray thee thy servant this day, Neh. 1.11
and grant him mercy in the sight of this man: for I was the Kings Cupbearer.

When to impart the appearances of G^d.
That which will exceedingly excite the spirits of people to public
endeavors, is a wise imparting the several preparations that God has made,
and the appearances of God to the rises and beginnings that are attempted; for
men are the easilyer drawn to engage there, where they see God engaging first.

Then I told them of the hand of my God which was good upon me, Neh. 2.18
as also the Kings words that he had spoken unto me, and they said, let us
rise up and build: so they strengthened their hands for this good work.

Treating with few, and a just survey.
In the first designing of Reformation, it is good treating only with few at
first, and that in secret, and to take as just a survey of the necessity as you
can.

And I arose in the night, Neh. 2.12.
I and some few men with me, neither told I any man what God had put in my
heart, to do at Jerusalem: neither was there any beast with me, save the beast
that I rode upon.

Let your enemies see your interest.
When the enemies of God are beginning to plot against the endeavors of
Reformation, the safest is to let them see the interest you rest on, and that
your judgment and resolution is seated higher then to be easily taken down
with contempts, or scandals, or practices.

But when Sanballat the Horonite, Neh. 2.19 20.
and Tobiah the servant the Ammonite, and Geshem the Arabian heard it, they
laughed us to scorn, and despised us, and said, what is this thing that you do,
will you rebel against the King? Then answered I them, and said unto them, the
God of Heaven he will prosper us; therefore we his servants will arise and
build: but you have no portion, nor right, nor memorial in Jerusalem.

Holy preparations, foundations, for Reformation.
In the work of Reformation, your beginnings and foundations, must be laid in
prayer and holy preparations, the works of God must be advanced in the ways of
God, and Reformation must go up in sanctification.

Then Eliashib the High Priest rose up with his Brethren, Neh. 3.1.
the Priests, and they built the sheepgate, they sanctified it, and set up the
doors of it even unto the tower of Meah, they sanctified it unto the tower of
Hananell.

Watching with both eyes.
In the practices of the enemy, we must watch with both eyes, one toward
Heaven, and the other toward the work we have to do; though God is able to
fortify the weakest proceedings, and shade them from violence: yet we must not
so tempt God for extraordinaries, as we take not the ordinaries he provides us.

Nevertheless we made our prayer unto our God, Neh. 4.9.
and set a watch against them day and night because of them.

The time of the strongest conspiracies.
The times of the enemies strongest and most effectual conspiracies, is then,
when the work of Reformation appears in some success and preparation.

But it came to pass, that when Sanballat and Tobiah, Neh. 4.7.
and the Arabians, and the Ammonites, and the Ashdodites, heard that the walls
of Jerusalem were made up, and that the breaches began to be stopped, then they
were very wroth.

When Reformation is violent.
When a people are superstitiously principled, 2 Cro. 3^.
and Nationally converted, reformation is but violent, and formal, and they
turn only by a power from without, and not within.

And yet for all this, Jer. 3.10.
her treacherous sister Judah has not turned unto me with her whole heart, but
fainedly, says the Lord.

How people cool.
When the people are all on a flame in Reformation, they cool as soon upon
intermissions, and obstructions, for such heats are but moods and passions. O
Ephraim what shall I do unto thee? Hos. 6.4.
O Judah what shall I do unto thee? For your goodness is as a morning cloud,
and as the early dew it goes away. As in the time of Elijah, when they killed
Baals Priests one day, and would have killed Elijah the next.

Dispensations of right principles.
That a Reformation which is lasting, must be sure to abound with dispensation
of right principles, and there must such courses be projected, as the light may
be dispersed amongst the people, and interests must be sought for, 2 Cro. 17.8,
9.
by laying in good principles to work out the bad.

And with them he sent Levites, and they taught in Judah, etc.

Carnal reasonings in Reformation.
Take heed of carnal reasonings in Reformation, they will soonest weaken the
hands, for there is scarce any Reformation but it will hold out some parts
which may offend the darker side of judgments or opinions, there was so much
in Ezekiahs as might have stumbled some, because the very Serpent which Moses
set up was broken down; and so much in Christ's, because he put down Moses and
the Law, which God himself had given, though he did but indeed fulfill it, and
so much in the Apostles, because they were men without learning, which turned
back the Pharisees and Rulers that they could not believe in him; and so much
in ours now, because old customs, and old laws, and old traditions are broken
down.

The design of Fixation.
In times of Reformation, there must be an eminent design amongst many others,
and that is the design of fixation, which must be advanced by all spiritual
and civil means: This Kingdom has most need of that, for they have still
changed Religion with the change of successors: and yet this design of
fixation must be so cautionary and provisionall, as may let them out to higher
degrees of Reformation, this was Isreal's and Iudahs case, Hos. 64.^
a recovering and backsliding with the succession of good and bad Princes? Oh
Judah what shall I do unto thee? for your goodness is as the morning cloud,
and as the early dew it goes away.

Reformation times.
Reformation times prove often very hard and expensive times, and times of
murmuring; yet that should not make for discouragement, but redress.

And there was a great cry of the people: some there were that said, Neh. 5.^,
3.4, 7.
We have morgaged our lands: some also that said, We have borrowed money. Then
I consulted with my self.

In public engagements particular interests must be laid by, and the yoke of
oppressions taken off, and the cause of God must take up all: they that build
their own houses and the Temple together, are no fit workmen for a spiritual
fabric.

I rebuked the Nobles and Elders, Neh. 5.^, 8.
and said unto them, You exact usury, restore I pray you, unto them their lands
and their vineyards.

A sad Preferment.
They that are called out to the public, ought to let all their designs and
endeavors run in such a chanel as may flow thi^ther, and not to stream back,
or aside, in any other course. It is a sad preferment to be enriched with the
calamity of Church or State, and to build up your own ship with the broken
planks of the Kingdoms vessels; or to settle your own inheritance, before the
publicks.

But the former Governors were chargeable unto the people, Neh. 5.16 17.
and had taken of their bread and wine, besides forty shekels of silver: but so
did not I, because of the fear of the Lord; I also continued in the work of the
Lord, I also continued in the work of the Lord, neither bought we any land.

No hearkening to pretenses.
It is no safe hearkening or turning aside to the pretenses of those whom you
are not assured of to be cordial in the work: Such only make out either to
stand in your way, or to break the strength of your applic^cations to the
public.

Then Sanballat and Geshem sen^t to me, saying, Come let us meet together: bug
I sent, saying, I a^ doing a great work, why should the work cease whilst I
leave it?

Imaginary dangers.
The fears and jealousies, and imaginary dangers, are usually the contrivances
of the enemy, nor ought they to be reckoned further into the common work, then
cautious for strengthening; they that account them as other serve not so much
the design of God, as the Enemies:

For they all made us afraid, Neh. 6.9. ^ 5.
that we might do so, and sin, and there they might have matter for an evil
report.

Astonishment from God.
The more that God is sought to, the more of astonishment will the success
have in it, and the more wonder and fear will it shed upon the hearts of the
despisers.

Now therefore, O my God, Neh. 6.9.10, 16, 17.18.
strengthen my hands, and, O my God, think thou on Tobiah. So the wall was
finished, and they were much cast down in their own eyes, for they perceived
that this work was wrought of God.

Secret workings.
The greatest hindrances, are the secret and inward workings by such who hold
correspondency with some without: and if the work be Gods, there will be many
of these: therefore relations, alliances and dependencies ought to be carefully
looked to; for the Enemy winds in at these, to betray and act by. Neh. 6.1.18,


The Nobles of Judah sent many letters unto Tobiah, and the letters of Tobiah
came to them, and there were many in Judah sworn unto him, because he was the
son in law of Shecaniah. Heavenly instruments.

It is the safest and most harmonious in the work of God, to employ such agents
as have much of God in them: Heavenly work is the best set on by heavenly
instruments.

Then I gave my brother Hanaeniah the Ruler of the Palace, charge over
Jerusalem, for he was a faithful man, and feared God above many, Neh. 7.2.

Public designations.
In public designations to place or employment, it is good ordering and
disposing men abroad, according to their nearest relations and interests.

And appoint watches of the inhabitants of Jerusalem, every one in his watch,
and every one to be over against his own house, Neh. 7.3.

Originations.
In the proceedings of the business of God, he has his special times of
working, of new beginnings, and originations: for God is never at such a loss,
but he knows where to begin: and therefore we fall very short of Gods design,
in doubtings and despondencies, seeing that he is so immediate and infinite an
Agent as he is.

And my God put into my heart to gather together the Nobles and the Rulers,
etc.

Gods Treasurers.
Gods work is of that nature, that draws out the strength and contribution of
all sorts, and God only seems to lay up provisions amongst his people for such
a time: Men are but treasurers for God, and must open their coffers, when
providence puts the key into their hands.

And some of the c^iefe of the Fathers gave unto the work, and that which the
rest of the people gave, was twenty thousand drams of gold, etc. Neh, 7.72, 73.

Also we made ordinances for us to charge our selves yearly for the service of
the house of our God, Neh. 10.32.

Scriptures openly consulted.
It is the surest way, to consult the Scriptures of God, and find out the
mind of him in every part of our way to Reformation; and to draw out those
principles there, which the people are to work by: The more light the multitude
see from thence, the more firmly and faithfully will they walk.

And Ezra opened the book in the fight of the people day by day, from the first
day unto the last day he read in the book of the law of God.

The mixed, or Neutralists.
There ought to be a godly and faithful care in the times of Reformation, to
discriminate and separate those that are mixed or Neutralists, for they are
such as stand in the way; and if the business flow into their orb of
negotiation, there it sticks and is retarded.

In those days saw I also Jews that had married wives of Ashdod, of Ammon, and
Moab: and their children spoke half in the speech of Ashdod, and could not
speak in the Jews language: And I contended with them, and smote them, Neh.
13.23, 24.

Prayer beforehand.
When we expect God down amongst us to do some great thing for his Church, then
should be the season of our holy assemblings and meetings: and it is a sign of
Gods immediate following, when he sends out a spirit of Prayer and Supplication
beforehand.

Then returned they unto Jerusalem, and all continued with one accord in prayer
and supplication. Act. 1.12, 14.

Public appointments.
In public appointments there is much godly prudence in selecting those that
are not experimentally known amongst us.

Wherefore of those men which have accompanied with us all the time, must one
be ordained to be a witness, Act. 1.21

Resort and consociate.
When evident dangers and obstructions are in the way, then it is good for the
people of God to resort and consociate, and to make the maine part of their
design a communicating of the state of their affairs to God, for they relate
most to him, and it is the fittest to impart to him those impediments what he
can only remove.

And being let go they went unto their own company, and when they heard that,
they lift up their voice to God with one accord, etc. Acts 4.23.

Differences composed.
Differences amongst the godly are best healed, and composed by the godly, and
meetings or gatherings of the people of God are remedies very agreeable to the
distemper.

There arose a murmuring of the Grecians, ^ct. 6.1, 2
against the Hebrews Then the twelve called the multitude of the Disciples
together.

Spiritual providence.
When once the Gospel has been admitted, there must be a spiritual providence
used, not only for propagating, but strengthening and establishing.

Heard that Samaria had received the word, ^cts 8.14
they sent uato them Peter and John.

An eminent Agent.
If there be any one agent whom God has eminently engaged and prospered in his
work, there ought to be an eminent care for his preservation and accommodation,
least the light fall out if the candlestick be broken.

And they watched the gates day and night to kill him, Acts 19.24, 25.
then the Disciples took him by night, and let him down by the wall in a
basket.

Gracious seasons.
When the Lord gives any gracious seasons to his people from troubles or
persecutions, those times must be only Spiritual, else the people of God come
not up to his ends in the mercies received, and it may be just with God to
break off such seasons, when they are no better acknowledged.

Then had the Churches rest and were edified, Acts 19.31.
walking in the fear of the Lord.

Care in communicating.
Where any thing is acted by any of the people of God, by a more then ordinary
light, there ought to be much care in communicating and clearing up to the
minds of darker Brethren, the reasons and grounds of such actings, and no such
disputings or contendings as may rather ravell out a controversy, then guide
into any orderly information.

And when Peter was come up, Acts 11.2, 3.
they of the circumcision contended with him. And Peter rehearsed the matter
from the beginning, and expounded it by order unto them.

The whole counsels of God.
It is godly prudence, to prepare people in their way to reformation, with
telling them as well of the Cross as the Crown, and to open the true
constitution of things below, and this i^ to publish the whole counsels of God,
and to lay in a principle of patience, and premonition before any thing come to
pass.

They returned again, Acts 14.22.
and confirmed the souls of the Disciples, and exhorting them to continue in
the faith, and that through much tribulation we must enter into the kingdom of
Heaven.

FINIS.

