The Bishop of EXONS CAUTION TO HIS DIOCESE Against False Doctrines, Delivered
in a SERMON AT TRVRO in CORNWALL at his Primary Visitation.

depiction of the Tower of Babel and the confusion of tongues Confusion of
Tongues. Gen: ii. 7. 8


London, Printed for Timothy Garthwait, 1669.

THE PREFACE TO THE DIOCESE.
WHEN I see so many false Teachers subtly insinuating themselves into the
affections of the people, and busily enticing them by many artifices, from the
stedfastness of their faith, and Allegiance to God in his Anointed and his
Church. The care of the Diocese committed to my charge, and the remembrance of
the Account which I must give to God for your souls, sets me not only to my
prayers, but my study too, to prevent your ruin; And I know no better way to
do it then by performing the Watchmans part, Ezekiel. 4. Giving you warning to
avoid the temptations, and encouraging you to stand fast in the Lord; and I
could not find any way to do that, but by making my advice so public, that
all who listed might receive it. And because that counsel and advice is most
acceptable, when it is put into the dress of a Sermon; I resolved to make use
of that Method which was most likely to instill effectually this Caution. When
I had determined this, I resolved further to present it as short and plain as
might be, that it might be the more serviceable to those who most needed it,
those namely who have least time to read, and least ability to understand: But
withal I have endeavored in this short piece to deliver all necessary
Cautions with as clear evidence and demonstration out of Scriptures, as I
could. It was not possible for me to Caution against every particular Error or
false doctrine spread amongst you; there be so many that it would have required
a volume, to recount and refute them, and few would have given themselves the
trouble to read so large a discourse; nor was it necessary, for it is more
easy, and as safe, to secure from the danger of all, by some general Rules and
Prescriptions, which if they be observed, will certainly preserve you from all
damnable doctrines, and keep you steadfast in the holy Faith. I shall heartily
desire you to believe that this Caution is given you by him who loves you as
his own soul and can with the greatest sincerity say of you, as St. Paul of his
Thessalonians, What is my hope or joy, or crown of rejoicing, are not even ye
in the presence of the Lord? Ye are our Glory and joy, if any of you shall draw
back and fall from the stedfastness of the faith, my Soul shall have no
pleasure in him, Heb. 10.38. But, Now I live if you stand fast in the Lord.

THere is lately published A RATIONALE upon the Book of Common Prayer of the
Church of England.

By the Lord Bishop of Exon.

1 Thessal. 3.8. Now we live, if you stand fast in the Lord.


SAint PAUL having lately converted the Thessalonians to the Christian Faith,
was called to preach the Gospel in other parts; in this his necessary absence,
he still retains a tender fatherly affection for his children. We being taken
from you for a short time, endeavored the more abundantly to see your face
with great desire, chap. 2.17. Wherefore we would have come unto you once and
again, I Paul especially, but Satan hindered us. He had put upon Saint Paul a
necessity of staying where he was, to settle some unseasonable Disputes and
Controversies with the Stoics and Epicureans, raised by this great enemy of
Souls, on purpose to divert the blessed Apostle from his charitable design
toward the Thessalonians. When St. Paul found himself thus hindered, he sends
Timothy with a Commission, in his name, to Visit his Thessalonians, to stablish
his new Converts, to comfort them, and to know their faith, lest by some means
the Tempter has tempted you, and our labor be in vain, verse 5. When Timothy
had finished his Visitation he returns to St. Paul, to give an account of his
Enquiries and proceedings, and brought this good tidings, that he had found the
Thessalonians, firm and steadfast in the Faith which St. Paul had taught them;
at the hearing of this good report, St. Paul breaks out into this Rhetorical
expression of his joy and contentment in the Message, Now we live, etc.

I AM come hither on the very same errand, to know your Faith; and though I
cannot but hope, that after so long profession of the holy Faith, ye are well
rooted and grounded in it, yet I cannot but know that there are amongst us many
busy and cunning Tempters, who use various and subtle arts to withdraw you
from the holy Faith; and I have reason to fear, as St. Paul did, lest by some
means the Tempter has prevailed upon some; and therefore could no longer
forbear to come and know your Faith, and if I shall find you like these
Thessalonians, strong and steadfast therein, I shall say with the same sincerity
that the Apostle did, Now I live if you stand fast in the Lord.

AND that you may continue constant and steadfast in the holy Faith which our
Lord has delivered, I shall briefly and plainly set before you such rules and
directions out of the holy Scriptures and ancient Writers, as by Gods
assistance upon your hearty prayers, shall undoubtedly preserve you.

I. RULE, Is to make a serious and hearty Resolution of Believing and adhering
to this Christian Faith, whatsoever it may cost. This is that which our Savior
advises, Luke 14.28. Which of you intending to build a tower, sits not down
first and counts the cost, whether he has sufficient to finish it, lest
happily after he has laid the foundation, and is not able to finish it, all
that behold him, begin to mock him. It will be no less ridiculous for any man
to profess himself a Disciple of Christ and his holy doctrine, that does not
first consider the cost he may be at, and resolve to go on with it. And the
cost may be great, the loss of Father and mother, and whatsoever is nearest and
dearest to us. Verse 26. If any man come to me and hates not his father and
mother, and wife and children, and brethren and sisters, yea and his own life
also, He cannot be my Disciple; he cannot be steadfast in the Profession of the
holy Faith, which may and sometimes will put him upon this cost. Let no man so
far mistake our Lord, as to think that he teaches disobedience to Parents,
whose first commandment with promise, is, Honor thy father and mother; or that
he teaches us to hate our children, who by his Apostle St. Paul tells us that
they are worse than Infidels, who provide not for their family, 1 Timothy 5.8. or
that he teaches us to hate our selves, who has summed up his Commandments into
these two grand precepts, Love God above all, and thy neighbor as thy self,
St. Mat. 22.40. St. Lukes phrase of hating father and mother, etc. is best
expounded by St. Mat. 10.37. He that loves father and mother more than me. He
that prefers father and mother more than me and my doctrine, and will renounce
that or any part of it to save them or his own life, and whatsoever is dearest
to him in this world, is not worthy of me. The sincere Resolution of preferring
God and his holy Truth before all worldly advantages, is that which makes the
honest and good heart, which affords depth of earth for the Seed of Gods Word
to root in, and bring forth fruit to life eternal, St. Luke 8.15. Let us
therefore retire to our closets and frequently renew this honest purpose and
resolution, especially when we come to the holy Eucharist, that we may get it
sealed and confirmed there by the Grace of the holy Spirit; let not the cost we
may be at affright us; the rich pearl of the holy Faith (the end of which is
the salvation of our souls, 1 Pet. 1.9.) is not dearly bought, though we sell
all that we have to purchase it, St. Mat. 13.46.

THIS resolution will not continue steadfast, unless we purge out of our hearts
all such violent lusts and passions, as will ravish our Wills from the holy
Faith which we have believed; let us therefore be careful to cast out them,
especially those which are most dangerous to the stedfastness of the Faith. As,

1. THE inordinate love of this present world, this made Demas forsake St.
Paul, after he had been a long time his fellow-laborer in the preaching of the
Gospel, 2 Timothy 4.10. There be too many such, who follow Christ's doctrine for
gain, who make great profession of this holy Faith, when it fills their
baskets, Jo. 6.14. who run away from it as fast, to any impertinent, nay
damnable Error which appears more advantageous; if we have hearts exercised
with covetous designs, we shall certainly forsake the right way as Balaam did
for the wages of unrighteousness, 2 Pet. 2.14.

2. AMBITION and Vainglory, Diotrephes who loves to have the pre-eminence,
receives not the Apostles nor their doctrine, Jo. ep. 3. Nay slights their
doctrine, vilifies their persons, prating against them with malicious words,
verse. 10. and all this, to get himself a name and esteem amongst the credulous
vulgar. This has made most of the Heretics and Schismatics in elder times,
as Epiphanius and others have observed; when they thought their worth and merit
not enough rewarded, when they could not be so great or powerful as they
affected to be; when they could not obtain by the regular and just ways of
preferment, such places and dignities, such esteem and repute, as their
ambition made them covet, and think themselves to have deserved; then they
broacht new Doctrines, and invented new Disciplines to draw parties after them
of the weaker sort, that they might be in a Faction, what they could not be in
the Church, Chiefs and Leaders. Nor does this Ambition appear only in the
Leaders, but every little member of the most ridiculous Sect is swollen with the
same tumorous vainglory, each party affecting to be called the Godly. Where
this wind of Ambition blows, no wonder if it carries them away to diverse and
strange doctrines, Heb. 13.9. How can ye believe, receiving or catching at
Glory one of another, Joh. 5.44. When the Teachers court the people, and they
again the Teachers for applause and reputation, when vainglory is the end of
the de^ign, how can men be steadfast? for when the holy Faith becomes, as
oftentimes it does, vile and contemptible in the eyes of the people, such men
must needs forsake it, and profess any new, though damnable doctrine, that
grows popular. Besides, no man can hope to stand steadfast in the Faith, without
the assistance of Gods grace, who resists the proud and gives his grace only to
the Humble, Jam. 4.6. if we will be constant Disciples of Christ we must be
like him, lowly in Spirit, Mat. 11.29.

3. THERE is in our nature a softness or tenderness that is apt to betray our
constancy. As many as desire to make a fair show in the flesh, (...), that
would appear with a fair face without a skar, renounce their Christianity and
turn Jews; only lest they should suffer persecution for the Cross of Christ,
Gal. 6.12. This tenderness made the Apostles, St. Peter and all, once forsake
their Lord; and the same has made too many forsake the Lords holy Truth. It
may not perhaps be thought needful to urge this any further at this time, when
God be thankt, there is no present danger of suffering persecution for the
Faith of Christ, it being now defended by the Defender of the Faith; but though
Confessors of the Faith and Doctrine of our Lord be not persecuted by the sword
of Authority, it is, at least some part of it, curstly persecuted by the spears
and arrows, and sharp swords of slanderous tongues, who like the Donatists of
old, cry out of persecution, even then when they are thus sharply persecuting
those who profess and preach the holy Truth and Faith of Christ. To instance in
a few particulars, let any man preach or practice Decency and Order in the
Service and Worship of God, which is a direct command in Christ's holy Doctrine,
1 Cor. 14.10. Let him preach or practice Loyalty and Obedience to the King and
his Laws, which is part of the same holy doctrine, Romans 13.5. 1 Pet. 2.13. Let
him preach or practice obedience to the Church, according to our Lords
direction, Mat. 18.17. And submission to the guidance of those, who by God and
man's Laws are set over us to watch for our Souls, Heb. 13.17. and he shall soon
find the truth of that which I have said, his doctrine slandered, and his
person reproached and persecuted by malicious tongues. The fear of this
persecution we see, has made some, who are too tender, follow our Lords
doctrine as St. Peter did his Master, at a distance; it is not amiss to
remember, what the Holy Ghost has observed for our instruction in St. Peter,
that soon after he drew back and followed at a distance, he forsook, nay
forswore his Lord, Mat. 26.58,74. from all which we may certainly conclude,
that we shall never stand steadfast in the Doctrine and Faith of our Lord,
unless we endeavor to harden our faces and strengthen our foreheads against
all such fear of the looks or tongues of men, Ezekiel. 3.8,9.

4. AS there is a tenderness, so there is a fickleness and love of change in
our corrupted nature; St. Paul calls it childishness, Ephesians. 4.14. loving much
but not long, delighting in change, not only in ordinary matters, dresses and
fashions, but even in Religion too; new Prayers, new Doctrines, new
Governments; many men having itching ears, heap to themselves Teachers, 2 Timothy
4.3. after their own lusts, such as may rub their ears, and gratify their
lusts and several humors, with doctrines suitable, and please their
childishness with novelties; new Revelations, new Truths are by many much
affected and daily expected: I pray God we come not to the Jews Innovation, New
Gods which our Fathers never heard of, Deuteronomy. 32.17. We seem weary of the old
garment, the old Religion, and love to put new pieces to it, though thereby we
make it much worse, Luke 5.36. Nothing can be more directly opposite to our
stedfastness in the Truth, then this love of change; since the holy Faith and
Christian truth is like Jesus Christ who taught it, the same yesterday and to
day, the same for ever, Heb. 13. Let us labor therefore to correct this
childishness, to quit our selves like men, and earnestly contend for that Faith
which was once and but once delivered, Jude 3. By the means aforesaid we may,
by Gods grace, secure our selves against our selves, that our own hearts shall
not mislead us; but though our hearts be sincere, our understandings may be
weak, and we may be daily in danger of being seduced by the various arts and
subtilties of cunning and busy seducers, who lie in wait to deceive; and
therefore I shall offer this SECOND Caution, which our blessed Lord has taught
us, Mat. 7.15.

II. BEWARE of false Prophets or false Teachers, as St. Peter calls them, 2
Pet. 2.1. and you will readily grant the Caution to be most seasonable and
necessary, if you will consider, the Crafts they use to deceive you, and your
own danger if you be deceived; inwardly, says our Savior, they are ravening
Wolves, whose aim and design, is no less then the ruin and damnation of your
souls. What danger can be greater? This cruel and malicious design they hide
and cover under Sheeps clothing, soft and fair pretenses of meekness and
humility, professors of extraordinary holiness, great care of souls, singular
love of Gods glory, to which they add good words; kind and flattering speeches,
Romans 16.18. and (which is the master piece of cunning) they promise them
liberty, 2 Pet. 2.19. Simon Magus, Basilides, Carpocrates of old, taught their
Disciples to live as they listed, and to do whatsoever they pleased; Marcion
taught his Disciples to believe that Christ came into the world to deliver men
from the service of the Creator; Meletius gave his followers a license to live
without fear, and to be ruled and governed by none. I might instance in many
more such false teachers of the same leaven, but I need not, since St. Peter in
the place aforesaid, assures us, that it is the wont of false Teachers of what
sort soever, to promise their followers liberty; this sweet promise of liberty,
or rather licenciousness being the most catching argument in the world to
entice itching ears and lustful hearts to their party. It is not unworthy of
our observation, that St. Peter says they promise them liberty, but indeed,
they neither do nor can, by these means make them free, for whosoever
commits sin, is the servant of sin. What liberty then can it be, to be
exposed and tempted to the deadly slavery of Error and sin?

FALSE Teachers having all of them such malicious designs of ruin and such
cunning artifices to deceive; it behooves us very much to remember our Lords
Caution, Beware of false Prophets. But how shall we discern them to be such?
Their inward designs we cannot see, and their outward appearance is innocent
and harmless, fair and plausible, sheeps clothing, By their fruits you shall
know them, says our Savior; they may act the sheep for a while, but if you
heed and mark them well, you shall see the Wolf appear, by their fruits you
shall know them. When you see some creeping into houses, and instilling
doctrines into the weaker sort; by this you have just cause to suspect them for
false Teachers, 2 Timothy 3.6. of this sort are they which creep into houses, from
such turn away. There shall be false Teachers among you, who privily shall
bring in damnable doctrines, 2 Pet. 2.1. when they who offer themselves to be
your Teachers, shall forsake the lawful and public assemblies established by
just authority in the houses of prayer, by this fruit you may know them.
Beloved remember the words which were spoken before of the Apostles of our Lord
Jesus Christ, How that they told you there should be in the last time Mockers
or Deceivers, Jude 17, 18. These be they who separate themselves; beware of
such therefore, by these fruits you shall justly suspect them to be false
Teachers; but there is one Character or mark by which you shall undoubtedly
know them, St. Paul, St. Peter, St. Jude, and all tell us for certain, those
are false Teachers, by all means to be avoided, who despise Government, and
speak evil of dignities; when therefore you hear any Teachers blaspheming and
reviling their Governors Civil or Ecclesiastical, when you see them contemning
their Laws, confronting their Authority, refusing to come at Moses and Aarons
call, to the Assemblies appointed by their Laws; and setting up Meetings,
gathering assemblies against Moses and Aaron, the Civil and Ecclesiastical
authority; come not near, lest ye perish in their sin, Number. 16. It is Gods own
caution there, verse. 26. and in the like case too, for what else was the sin of
Korah, Dathan and Abiram, but refusing to come at the call of Moses and Aaron,
Number. 16.12. We will not come up; and the Gathering Congregations against them,
verse. 19. And certainly to gather Congregations contrary to the Laws and
commands of Moses and Aaron, is to gather against THEM, for it is the Authority
that makes the King and the Priest; Moses and Aaron so sacred that no man must
rise against them, when therefore you see or hear any so gathering
Congregations contrary to the Laws; Depart from them; when you hear any
Teachers thus despising Dominion, remember that the Apostles have told us, they
are false Teachers, and forget not our Lords own Caution, Beware of false
Prophets; if any man after all this monition will still be bold to receive
such, because they come in sheeps clothing, he deserves more blame then pity,
if he be ruined and devoured.

III. OBEY your spiritual Guides, and submit your selves to their conduct and
direction, Heb. 13.17. This Rule is given us to this very purpose, that we may
stand fast in the faith. For after the Apostle had forewarned us, verse. 9. Be
not carried about with diverse and strange doctrines; he prescribes this as the
best prevention of such giddiness and lightness to obey them that have the Rule
over us, and submit our selves to them who watch for our souls. Almighty God in
infinite goodness to man, knowing the weakness of the peoples understanding,
together with the want of time and means for the study of Truth, has provided
some Pastors and Teachers for the perfecting of the Saints, for the work of the
Ministry, for the edifying of the Body of Christ, Ephesians. 4.12. That we henceforth
be no more children, tossed to and fro, and carried about with every wind of
doctrine, by the sleight of men, and cunning craftiness of men, whereby they
lie in wait to deceive, Verse. 14. God has you see appointed you Pastors and
Teachers to keep you from being deceived by false Teachers, and if you will not
submit to their direction, you expose your selves to the danger of being
deceived, and frustrate the merciful intendment of Gods goodness toward you,
to keep you steadfast in the Truth. I know not what excuse any man can make why
he does not readily submit to the guidance of these Pastors and Teachers, but
only this, That first he does not certainly know whom Christ has appointed for
his Guides now, since the Apostles themselves are dead long since.

AND if he does know them, yet he cannot confidently rely upon their guidance,
since they are not infallible in their doctrines, as the Apostles were, and
therefore may possibly be deceived themselves, and deceive him that submits to
them.

TO the first I answer.

1. YOU may as certainly know who are your Spiritual Guides, as who are your
Civil Governors; namely by the Laws of Church and Kingdom, and their solemn
Investiture in their several places and charges; Which is a greater and surer
evidence then any man can have of his natural Parent, whom you cannot otherwise
know then by the common repute of the neighborhood, and the Testimony of your
Mother, who is bound in reputation to call her own husband your father; since
God has commanded you, upon pain of damnation to obey him, who is thus reputed
your Father; why should you not fear the same penalty for disobeying your
Guides of souls, whom God has equally commanded you to obey, and given you a
greater evidence and assurance of their authority over you.

TO the second scruple I answer, that I assert no Infallibility in your
Spiritual Guides. They are men, and may be deceived, they may be cunning men
and lie in wait to deceive. And may not those be such, whom you heap to your
selves, and so willingly run after? Those who are set over you, are restrained
by the Laws, and accountable to their Superiors, so that they cannot publish
dangerous Errors without their own danger and the censures of the Laws, if they
be discovered; and being allowed to preach only in the Church, cannot promise
themselves any safety from secrecy. And it is not so probable that they will
willingly deceive you, who are in danger to lose by their fraud, as they who by
false doctrines make parties to their no small advantage. Besides, God always
assists his own Institutions, and blesses his own appointments. God has
forewarned you to avoid strangers, to heap to your selves Teachers, 2 Timothy 4.3.
and who can reasonably expect Gods assistance in Disobedience? It is just with
him to suffer us to be deceived by those whom he has warned us to avoid; but
it is most reasonable to expect his blessing and assistance in obedience to his
own order. He has commanded us to submit to them who are set over us, and will
not suffer us to perish by obedience; If we shall be mislead by our own Guides
into small Errors, he will graciously accept our obedience, and not impute
those Errors to our condemnation; and he will never suffer us to be led by them
into damnable Errors, unless it be our own fault, 1 Cor. 10.13. God is faithful
who will not suffer you to be tempted above that you are able to bear, but with
the Temptation will make way to escape; This promise would fail, if having
commanded us to be guided by them, he should not, either certainly withhold
them from Teaching Damnable doctrines, or else afford us some means for the
avoidance and discovery, if we be watchful, and not wilfully refuse them.

1. OBSERVE this Rule of our Savior, S. Jo. 5.39. Search the Scriptures,
acquaint your selves with the plain and evident texts which need no
interpretation, and if your Teachers commend any doctrine to you contrary to
those, believe them not. It is an old observation and daily experience confirms
it, that false Teachers use to build their doctrines upon some few hard and
obscure texts, that under the color of the holy text they may obtrude upon
their unwary Disciples, their own pernicious Glosses, Interpretations and
inferences; so that their disciples belief rests only upon the Interpretation
of the preacher who may be deceived, or which is worse, may endeavor to
deceive; but when the sober and wary Chrian grounds his belief upon the evident
Texts which are so plain that they cannot be more plainly expressed or
interpreted, he relies undoubtedly upon Gods own word who cannot deceive or be
deceived. This is the best way to secure our selves against the damnable
doctrines of your own false Teachers; as for example, when you are by any of
them taught to rebel against the King, or to oppose his Laws, to contemn the
Church, and separate from her Communion; Guard your faith against their crafty
insinuations of Rebellion by pretense of obscure Scriptures, by such plain
Texts as these, Let every Soul be subject to the higher powers, to him that
bears the fword not only for wrath but also for conscience sake, and whosoever
resists shall receive damnation, Romans 13. Be subject to every ordinance of man
for the Lords sake, whether it be to the King as Supreme, or unto Governors,
who are sent by him, 1 Pet. 2.13. which are words as plain as can be spoken,
and cannot admit of any other interpretation. These are enough to secure you
against the damnable doctrine of Rebellion, and against contempt of the Church
and Schismatical separation from her Communion; take these plain Texts, St.
Mat. 18. He that will not hear the Church, let him be to thee as an Heathen man
and Publican. Keep the unity of the Spirit in the Bond of Peace, Ephesians. 4.3. Not
forsaking the public assembling of our selves, Heb. 10.25. according to the
commands of those who are our Governors, Heb. 13.17.

IF it be objected that all these Texts do suppose the Kings and the Churches
commands to be lawful, otherwise I may, nay I must refuse to obey the King, I
must not hear the Church, I must forsake those Assemblies if unlawful. The
answer is easy, That I cannot be safe in going contrary to these plain texts,
till I can find, that those particular Commands of my Superiors, and those
Assemblies, be as plainly forbidden in some other Texts; It is not safe to say,
I will not obey the the King, nor hearken to the Church, nor frequent those
public Assemblies, because I think, and some powerful Preachers tell me, these
ordinances and Assemblies are unlawful.

REMEMBER, it is God who commands in those plain Texts before mentioned, and
none but himself can discharge my obedience, and therefore you must obey till
you find the particular commands of your Superiors forbidden by as plain Texts,
as those which in general require you to obey. If you observe this rule, you
cannot be cheated into Rebellion and Schism, and if you do not, it is your own
fault, that you are deceived.

THIS Rule is certain, but perhaps not large enough to secure us from all
damnable Errors, there being some such, which may not seem flat contrary to the
express words of Scripture; the necessary Truths of which those errors are
destructive, not being delivered in express terms in the holy Scriptures, yet
sufficiently contained therein, and may be undoubtedly proved out of them by
comparing of Texts, observing the context, and scope of the Text, and other
rules of Art; Which the people not being so well able to do, let them observe
this second rule.

2. KEEP steadfast in the Faith of all such Truths as the Catholic Apostolic
Church has believed and delivered as necessary, and believe not your
particular Guide, when he teaches contrary to these. The Church is the ground
and pillar of Truth, 1 Timothy 3.5. into her bosom and Registry, the Apostles
committed all necessary Truths as our Lord commanded them, Mat. 28.19,20. Go
teach all Nations to observe all things whatsoever I have commanded you, they
knew their Lords Commands and were true to their trust in teaching them
accordingly. These necessary truths thus laid up in the Treasury of the Church
are Domestic household doctrines, which all of that Family should hold fast,
and not be carried about with every wind of strange or foreign doctrine, Heb.
13.9. These necessary truths, committed by the Apostles to the Churches of
their own plantation, God has promised, Mat. 28.20. should be delivered down
through all succession to the end of the world, Lo I am with you (namely in the
teaching all that I have commanded) to the end of the world. What therefore
has been constantly delivered and believed as commands of Christ, by the
general Testimony of the universal Church in all ages, ought to be firmly
believed; upon the same consentient Testimony we receive and believe the
Canonical Scriptures to be the word of God, and why should we not be satisfied
with the same Testimony of all other necessary Truths? But how shall the people
be able to know which Truths are so generally delivered from the first ages
till now; they cannot themselves search and find them, and perhaps their own
Teachers may tell them that their Errors are such.

I ANSWER, you may find and know these necessary truths, by the public
doctrine of our own Church, delivered in her Liturgy and Articles of Religion,
by the unanimous consent of all your spiritual Guides. Acquaint your selves
thoroughly with that public doctrine and adhere to that, and if your own
Teacher teach otherwise, believe him not. If to these directions here given,
you carefully attend, adding your constant humble prayers to that Merciful God
who would have no man to perish, but that all should come to the knowledge of
the Truth, 1 Timothy 2.4. He will certainly preserve you from all damnable Errors,
and keep you steadfast in the holy Faith; That faith which is the ground and
foundation of the lively hope of an inheritance incorruptible and undefiled,
and that fades not away, reserved in Heaven for you, 1 Pet. 1.3,4. that Faith
by which through the power of God ye are kept unto Salvation, verse. 5. that
faith, which being preserved firm and steadfast, after it has been tried by
manifold temptations will be found unto Praise, and Honor, and Glory at the
appearance of Jesus Christ, Verse. 6, 7. That faith which makes us here in this
life to rejoice with joy unspeakable, and full of Glory, Verse. 8. and in the
end brings us to the salvation of our souls, Verse. 9. which God of his infinite
mercy grant us all, for Jesus Christ's sake, to whom with the Father and the
Holy Ghost be all honor and Glory, world without end. Amen.

FINIS.

