THE LARGER TREATISE CONCERNING TITHES, Long since written and promised by Sir
Hen: Spelman Knight. Together with some other Tracts of the same Author, And a
Fragment of Sir Francis Bigot Knight, all touching the same Subject. Whereto is
annexed, An Answer to a Question of a Gentleman of quality, made by a Reverend
and Learned Divine living in London, concerning the settlement or abolition of
Tithes by the Parliament, which caused him to doubt how to dispose of his son,
whom he had designed for the Ministry. Wherein also are comprised, Some
Animadversions upon a late little Pamphlet called, The Countries plea against
Tithes: discovering the ignorant mistakings of the Authors of it touching the
maintenance of the Ministry by such means: As also, upon the Kentish Petition.

Published by JER: STEPHENS B. D. According to the appointment and trust of the
Author.

LONDON, Printed by M. F. for Philemon Stephens at the Gilded Lion in Paul's
Churchyard. 1647.

TO THE WORSHIPFUL My much Honored friends, John Crew Esquire, and Richard
Knightley Esquire, worthy Patriots of our Country Northamptonshire.
I Address unto you both, these several Treatises, not only out of duty and
obligations to your selves, but in regard of your public good affection to
maintain the patrimony of the Church in Tithes, which is so fundamentally
settled by our Laws, that nothing can be more certain by them. And the times now
growing dangerous to the whole state of the Clergy in this particular, your
selves having de^l^red your opinions for Tithes, and accordingly been careful
to preserve us in our rights, I hope this my service will be acceptable to you:
what farther may be done depends upon Gods providence, and the good endeavors
of all pious men to afford t^^^r best assistance. Seeing the Parliament has
honorably declared themselves for Tithes, both by their Ordinance and the
repulse given to some Petitioners against them. For mine own part, though I
expect censure and opposition from many, yet as an Ancient said, In causa qua
Deo placere cupio, homines non formido. I have therefore in this needful time,
at the earnest request of many, adventured the rather to discharge the trust
reposed in me by the worthy Knight Sir Hen. Sp. who being employed in greater
works, committed these to my care and trust to be published. His charge does
nearly concern me, and in conscience I could not longer conceal them from the
public view. They have been long in my custody; and if the favor of your
self M. Crew, in a time of danger, besides M. Knightleys public deserts and
defense of me since from scandalous people, had not prevented, they had been
utterly lost by the injury of soldiers, together with other Manuscripts and
Monuments of great consequence against the common adversary. Your selves having
preserved them and me, I could not do otherwise then return you the thanks and
fruit of your own favors; and whosoever shall think these worthy the public
view, will have the like cause to render you thanks for saving both them and my
self, being extremely injured by some that are styled in our ancient Laws,
Villani, Cocseti, Perdingi, viles and inopes Ll. H. 1. c. 29.
personae; by whose troubles I am enforced to omit diverse additions material
to this argument, which the learned Knight committed to me. But lest hereafter
they should miscarry by any common danger, or neglect of mine, I could find no
better means to prevent the same, then by committing these to the Press, that
they may live and be extant for the common benefit of Gods cause and Church.
The piety, excellent learning and moderation of the Author, in all his
expressions, will prevail much with those that are truly wise and sober, and if
your protection shall concur to defend both them and my poor studies, I shall
hope to give you farther account hereafter in other works of great moment. Thus
praying God to guide and bless you in all your pious endeavors, I subscribe
my self,

Yours ever obliged, JER: STEPHENS*

To the READER.
THe eminent worth and dignity of this religious Knight needs not to be set
forth by the praise or pen of any man; his excellent learning, piety, and
wisdom, were very well known to the best living in his time; and his own
works published in his life, together with the great applause conferred on
them, both at home and in forain parts by learned noble Parsonages, and great
Princes, are testimonies beyond all denial, or exception. Among all other his
singular deserts and works, there is none more illustrious, then his piety
toward God, testified both in his holy course of life, and especially by his
learned and godly Treatises, of the Rights and Respect due to Churches. Wherein
he has so accuratly proved, what is due to God, and to be rendered unto him,
both for the time of his worship, and also for the means and places, wherein
his worship is to be performed, that no true Christian, who embraces the
Gospel, but must acknowledge willingly his singular deserts and piety: His
great knowledge in the Common Law of our Kingdom, and all other Laws
whatsoever, divine or humane, ancient or modern, Civil or Canonical,

-- Multatenens antiqua, sepulta, vetusta, Ennius.

Quae faciunt mores veteresque novosque tenentem,
renders him singularly judicious above many other, and able to deliver the
truth when he descends to speak of humane laws and authorities, after he had
first founded and settled his opinion upon the divine Law of God. Yet
notwithstanding his piety, learning, and moderation in all his expressions,
there wanted not a perverse spirit to oppose and scribble something against
him, whereof he took notice, and added a censure in his learned work the
Glossary; and also among other his papers of this argument, he has left a
sufficient apology and justification of his former Treatise, which, is here
published for satisfaction to all that be truly pious and well-affected sons of
the Church of England.

For his larger work of Tithes, which he prepared long ago, it is also here
added, though in some few places imperfect, and might have been better polished
by his own hand, if he had engaged himself upon it, and desisted from his
greater works so much desired by many eminently learned both at home and
abroad: yet rather then suffer the loss of such a testimony of his piety to
God, and good affection to uphold the settled maintenance of Gods House and
Ministers, to whom double honor is due, as the Apostle says, it is 1 Timothy 1.
15.
thought fit to publish it, as he left it, imperfect in some passages, and
defective of such ornaments and arguments, as he could have added further, out
of his store and abundance: though what he has here delivered is so complete,
as does fully discover the ability of his judgment; and that these reasons and
illustrations produced by him could hardly have proceeded from any other.
Author, being agreeable to his expressions, style, and arguments delivered in
his other writings. And at this instant it seems very necessary, in regard the
humor and displeasure of many in the world, is now obstinately bent to beat
down, root up, overthrow, and destroy, whatsoever the piety and wisdom of our
forefathers built and contributed in the Primitive times of their faith and
conversion to Christianity, as if all they did, were Popish and superstitious,
fit to be rooted up: and as if themselves had a Commission as large as the
great Prophet had from God, and were set over the Nations and Kingdoms, to
root out, and pull down, to destroy and to throw down, to build and to plant,
Jer. 1. 10.

But if men will rest satisfied, either with proof from divine authority, there
wants not enough here to guide their consciences: or with humane Laws and
Statutes confirmed, and fully enacted by many Parliaments, whereby they are now
become ancient and fundamental, as well as any other Laws, together with the
constant course and practice of above a thousand years in our Commonwealth,
there wants not here the testimony of all our ancient Monuments, Statutes,
Deeds, and Charters of our Kingdom, Princes, and Noble men, which this learned
Knight has more fully and completely published in order of time, and in their
original Saxon-language, in his first Tome of our English Laws and Councels,
for the first five hundred years before the Conquest, being his last work
before his death. Whereunto when the second Tome (which he has also finished)
shall be added for the next 500. years after the Conquest, together with his
learned Commentary upon all difficult and ancient rites and customs; there
will be abundant proof from all humane Laws, and the authority of our Common
Law, together with the practice of our Kingdom, in several ages, that no man
can raise a doubt or exception, that shall not receive satisfaction fully and
clearly. As for the Laws of Israel, and the Heathens also in imitation of Gods
own people, the Decrees and Canons of general Councels, in succeeding times,
here is also such abundant testimony produced, that no judicious Reader can
refuse to yield his vote thereto, and approbation for continuance.

There is another noble and religious Knight of Scotland, Sir James Sempil, who
has so accurately labored in this argument, and proved the divine right of
Tithes from the holy Scriptures, insisting thereupon only, and no other humane
Authorities, or Antiquities, further then he finds the^ to play upon the Text,
pro or contra, (as himself says in his Preface) that much satisfaction may be
received from his pious endeavors; having therein cleared some Texts of
Scripture from sinister interpretations, and exactly considered the first
Institution and Laws for Tithes, delivered by God himself both in the Old and
New Testaments.

If both these godly and learned witnesses of the truth will not serve the turn
to convince the judgment of some ill-affected, they being both raised up by
God out of both Nations, like to Eldad and Medad, among the people,
extraordinarily Numb. 11. 26.
to prophecy, and defend the truth, being moved and inspired doubtless by God
himself, (besides those that belong to the Tabernacle) to uphold and maintain
his own cause against the adversaries of his Church; yet they may well stop the
mouths of worldlings and Mammonists from clamor and inveighing, and persuade
them to acquiesce upon the known and fundamental Laws of the Kingdom: which
areas ancient and fundamental as any other, or rather more, because they
concern especially the upholding and maintenance of the worship of God, then
which nothing can be more necessary or fundamental: and therefore the pious
and good King Edward the Confessor, does begin his Laws with the recital and
confirmation of the Ecclesiastical Laws, and particularly of Tithes,
Churchpossessions, and Liberties thereof: A legibus igitur sanctae Ll ad
confess. in Prooem.
matris Ecclesiae sumentes exordium, quoniam per eam Rex and regnum solidum
habent subsistendi fundamentum, leges, libertates, and pacem ipsius concionati
sunt. Because thereby the King and Kingdom have their solid foundation for
subsistence, therefore the laws, liberties, and peace thereof are first
proclaimed and established.

And thus begins also Magna Charta, -- Nos intuitu Dei, pro salute animae
nostrae, ad exaltationem sanctae Ecclesiae, etc. and so also many other
Statutes successively, pour le common profit de Saint Esglise and del Realm,
Westminst. 1.
etc.

The possessions, tithes, and rights of the Clergy being thus settled, they may
doubtless be enjoyed, having been freely collated (according as was foretold
by the Prophets, Esaias and others) by Kings, Nobles, and many good men, Esaias 49.
23. If these things had not been primarily due unto God, by the rule of his
Word, yet are they now his, and separate from us, by the voluntary gift and
dedication of our ancient Kings and P^cdecess^rs. Spelmans first Treatise, 5.
and cap. 28. inf.
fully confirmed by Law and Parliament, established by the possession of many
hundred years: and that although in the beginning perhaps things were not so
commanded in particular, as any man else may enjoy lands, goods, chattels,
gifts and grants whatsoever is freely collated, purchased, or obtained by
industry, or is freely given and bequeathed by Ancestors, or other Benefactors,
although perhaps there be not divine right in special, to prove and justify
so much land, money, rents, or goods of any sort to be his due and right.

God did foretell and promise by the Prophet Esaias, cap. 49. 23. that he would
raise up in the Church of the redeemed, Kings and Queens to be nursing fathers,
and nursing mothers to his Church; that is, says Calvin upon the Text, Magni
Reges ac principes non solum Christi jugum subierunt, sed etiam facultates suas
contulerunt, ad erigendam and fovendam Christi Ecclesiam, ita ut se patronos
and tutores ejus praestarent. Kings and Princes should give much Lands,
Revenues, and great maintenance for the worship of God, and his Ministers,
attending thereon, which promise God abundantly performed by many and great
Emperors, Kings, and Princes in all Countries after their conversion to the
faith.

The donations, gifts, and buildings of Constantine the first, and great
Christian Emperor born at York, and Helena his mother an English Lady,
exceeding religious and devout, are famous in History, together with their
buildings and endowing of many ample and beautiful Churches in several
Counties of the Empire. Dominicum aureum. Nobilissimum Antiochiae templum a
Constantino M. inceptum, sub Cons^antio vero absolutum; and hoc epitheto prae
excellentia honoratum * insigni. Episcoporum populorumque confluentia ejus
encaeniam ce^^^nte, Hieron. in Chronico. In Antiochia Do^^^^icum quod vocatur
aureum, aedificari coeptum. Et infra mox. Antiochiae Dominicum aureum
dedicatur. Glossar. Spelman. pa. 224.

Cyrill describing a Church of Constantines building in Jerusalem, ^als it,
(Cat. 14.) (...), a Church all adorned, and embossed with silver and gold.

Eusebius reporting of the spacious and beautiful Church of Tire, which was
built anew by the famous B. P. Paulinus says, the luster and splendor was
such, (...), as made beholders amazed to behold it.


Neither did he thus alone in his own person, but he also gave leave to his
subjects to do the like, whereby the Church was greatly enriched in a short
time. C. L. 1. c. de sacrosanct. Ecclesiis, Si quis authent. de Ecclesia.

The gifts and buildings of diverse other Emperors and Kings, as Theodosius,
Justinian, Pipin, and Charles the great are endless to be repeated. When as
any does the like now, or repair old Churches formerly built, he is by some
ignorant people termed Popish, or Popish affected.

The grants, buildings, and gifts of our own English Kings, Noble men, and
Bishops, ever since our first conversion, are famous in our Histories:
especially of King Lucius, and Ethelbert, the two first of the British and
Saxon Kings: so also of Egbert, Alured, Ethelwolph, Edgar, Edward the
Confessor, and many others in times following after the Conquest* (no Princes,
or Nobles, being more bountiful then ours in England.) Their Charters and Acts
of Parliament are extant in the first Tome of our Councels by this Author; and
many are also mentioned by the learned Seldom in his History. Now when Churches
are built, and grants of lands, tithes, and oblations are freely given by great
Kings, confirmed by several Acts of Parliament, oftentimes renewed and
reiterated, as by the great Charter thirty times confirmed, and many other
Statutes since, as also by the Text and body of the Common Law, which does
affirm Tithes to be due Jure divino: as is asserted by that ever honorable
Judge and Oracle of Law, the Lord Coke, in the second part of his Reports,
Dismes sont chooses spirituels, L'Evesque de winchester case, fol. 45.
and due, de jure divino.

Being thus settled and confirmed, and thereby becoming fundamental Laws of
the Kingdom, they may, and ought to be enjoyed peaceably, without grudging, or
repining, alienation or spoil, without casting an evil eye upon Gods
allowance, and because he has given the flower of wheat to make bread for his
Sanctuary: whereof God himself gives charge in the last vision of Ezekiel,
contained in Ezekiel. 45, etc.
the last four chapters, where he appoints a third part of the land to be set
forth for his Temple, Priests, and servants, besides the portions for the
Prince, and for the people; which vision for performance concerns the
Christian Church, and was never fulfilled in the Jewish State, as this Author
and many others do show: and there God does especially forbid alienation,
selling or exchanging of his Temples portion, as being most holy unto the Lord,
Ezekiel. 48. 14.

It concerns us therefore that live in these times of the Christian Church,
when we see the ancient prophecy fulfilled by Kings and Princes, in giving
much to the Church, to preserve Gods portion entire without alienation, spoil,
or violence. The Primitive times of the Church, as this Author shows, chapter 6.
as had not been since the very Creation: times wherein God opened the windows
of persecution, and rained blood upon his Church, as he did water upon the
world in the days of Noah, during the ten grievous persecutions in the first
300. years after Christ, so that no man must expect then to find settled Laws
for Tithes, Lands, or maintenance of the Clergy, when the Emperors and
Magistrates were Heathens persecuting the Church, and made many furious edicts
for rasing and ruinating of Churches, which had been built by Christians in
some times of intermission, as appears by Eusebius, when he comes to the times
of Dioclesian. Every good Christian, and almost every Clergyman, lost his life
for religion; no man did care or expect for preferment, maintenance, or
dignity, save only the crown of martyrdom, which many thousands did obtain:
The Church, says this Author, Cap. 6.
did all that while expose the dugs of her piety unto others, but did live her
self on thistles and thorns, in great want oftentimes, necessity, and professed
poverty. Now those men that would reform all according to the pattern of the
Primitive Church, and the Apostolical times, do not consider, that the Clergy
must be reduced again to the same condition of poverty, want, and misery, as
formerly they were, if the pious and charitable gifts, and donations of Kings
and Nobles, in the ages next succeeding the persecutions, should be taken away,
and the ancient patrimony of Tithes abated, or subverted by the worldly and
covetous practices of them that esteem gain to be godliness. The kytes of
Satan (as this Author terms them) have already pulled away many a plume from
the Church in several ages, yet thanks be to God, there be some feathers left
to keep her from shame and nakedness, if the sacrilegious humor of the times
prevail not against her. And there is the more reason to hope and expect that
we may enjoy our portion and tithes quietly, because we have so much less then
the old Priests and Levites received from the people: for they had several
tithes and oblations for themselves, for the feasts and for the poor, wherein
they did share in a far greater proportion then is now required by the Clergy
of the Gospel.

The learned Scaliger, Seldom, and many others do prove apparently by instance
of particulars, that the Israelites did pay out of their increase of corn much
more then a tenth, even almost a fifth part for several tithes and duties then
commanded to them. I will recite Mr Seldens example, History ca. 2. 4.

The Husband-ma^ had growing, 6000 Bushels in one year. 100 Bushels was the
least that could be paid by the husbandman to the Priests for the first fruits
of the threshing floor. 5900 Bushels remained to the husbandman, out of which
he paid two tithes. 590 Bushels were the first Tithe paid to the Levites. 59
Bushels the Levites paid the Priests, which was called the Tithe of the Tithes.
5310 Bushels remained to the husbandman, out of which he paid his second
Tithe. 531 Bushels were the second Tithe. 4779 Bushels remained to the
husbandman, as his own, all being paid. 1121 Bushels are the sum of both
Tithes joined together, which is above a sixth part of the whole, namely,
nineteen out of an hundred.

So that of six thousand bushels the Levites had in all 1063. whole to
themselves: the Priests 159, and the husbandman only 4779. He yearly thus
paid more then a sixth part of his increase, besides first fruits, almost a
fifth: many of no small name, grossly skip in reckoning these kinds of their
Tithes, says Mr Seldom. Observe how much (faith Chrysostom, speaking of the
great In Epist. ad Philip. Tom. 4. Edit. Savil.
maintenance of the Levites) the Jews gave to their Priests and Levites, as
tenths, first fruits, then tenths again: then other tenths, and again, other
thirtieths, and the sicle, and yet no man said, they eat, or had too much.

The Rabbis also reckon 24. gifts to the Priesthood, according as they are set
down both by Rabbi Bechai, and R. Chaskoni, on Numb. 18. and so Jarchi on Genesis
29. 34. and in Talmud. in the Massech, Cholin. 133. f. 2. page in this order:
i. The twenty four gifts of the Priesthood were given to the Priests, twelve at
Jerusalem, and twelve in the borders: the twelve that were given in Jerusalem,
are these, the sin-offering, the trespasse-offering, the peace offerings of the
Congregation, the skins of the holy things, the shewbread, the two loaves, the
omer, or sheaf, the remainder of the meat offerings, the residue of the log, or
pint of oil for the Leper, the oblation of the thanksgiving, the oblation of
the peace offering, the oblation of the Ram of the Nazarite. And these
following are the twelve that were given in the borders: the great
heaveoffering, the heave offering, or oblation of the tithe, the cake, the
first fruits, the first of the fleece, the shoulder, the two cheeks and the
maw, the firstborn of man, the firstborn of the clean beast, the firstling of
the Ass, the dedications or vows, the field of possession, the robbery of the
stranger, Lev. 6. 5. Numb. 5. 7, 8. These are the 24. gifts that belonged to
the Priesthood. But among these, there is no mention of the firstborn of any
unclean beast, but only the Ass, and no mention at all of the tithe of
cattle. Thus a learned M. Nettles, page 120.
Author observes out of the Rabbis.

All these several tithes, oblations and duties were paid, not deducting nor
accounting their charges and labor of the husbandman; and yet they among their
aphorisms both divine and moral, do tell us, that as the Masoreth is the
defense of the Law: so (...), Maighsheroth seag Laighsher, that is, tithes paid
are the defense of riches: so God promised, Mal. 3. Bring ye all the tithes
into the Storehouse, that there may be meat in my house, and prove me
herewith, says the Lord of hosts, if I will not open you the windows of
heaven, and pour you out a blessing, that there shall not be room enough to
receive it.

And one notes, that at this day, when they have no Temple, nor Priesthood: Qui
religiosiores sunt inter Judaeos, loco decimarum, eleemosynam pendunt de
omnibus lucris december aureos de centum, centum de mill: as Mr Seldom observes
in his Review, cap. 2.

Yea, they paid not only their tithes, but their first fruits also, wherein
they were so liberal in some ages, that even from the abundance of
first fruits paid by the owners to the Priests, there was not a Priest in the
24. courses of them, but might be accounted a very rich, or largely furnished
man; as Mr Seldom observes out of Philo: and that they prevented the officers
in demanding of them, paid them before they were due by Law, as if they had
rather taken a benefit then given any; both sexes of their own most foreward
readiness in every first-fruit season, brought them in with such courtesy,
and thanksgiving, as is beyond all expression; whereas in these times under the
Gospel the Priesthood is far more excellent then that of the Law, and the
Clergy deserves infinitely more then the old Priests and Levites: whose
employment is not to light candles, snuff lamps, set bread upon the table,
kindle fire, put incense at the Altar, to kill, slay, and hew beasts in pieces,
but have incumbent onus, even Angelis formidabile, if men would rightly
understand In Epi Philip Edit.
what they undergo, or others value what these sustain. They have (...) of the
souls of men, which is an office no temporal satisfaction can countervail:
accountable to God for themselves and others. Their study, labors, after long
and chargeable education, in reading, watching, preaching, praying, visiting
the sick, are fully expressed by this learned Author, cap. 14. Yet the
husbandman pays now but one tenth to the Clergy, and no particular tithe for
feasts, or to the poor, or other uses, as the Israelites did. But the Clergy
now besides out of their small receipts, bear the burden of tenths and
firstfruits Decimae Philippo Regi Francorum in oppugnationem Saladani
Mahometani principis concessae erant. Hujusmodi etiam obtinuit Rex Angliae
Richardus 1. ut testatur Matthew. Paris. in Anno 1189. and ab exemplis istis
posteri saepe Reges.

Annatas, sive primitias, Bonifacius Papa beneficiis Ecclesiasticis primus
imposuit, circa annum 1400. sunt tamen qui hoc inventum Iohanni 22. ascribant:
hanc autem consuetudinem omnes admisere, praeter Anglos, qui id de solis.
Episcopatibus concessere, in caeteris beneficiis non adeo. Platina. Hodie fisco
penduntur non tantum ex Episcopatibus, verum etiam ex beneficiis quibuslibet
Ecclesisticis, annui valoris 10. marcarum, Vicariisque 10. lib. nec minores
sane, quam unius anni fructus integri, juxta tabulas Regias aestimandos.
Glossarium Spelm. in Annatis.


to the value of thirty thousand pounds yearly, imposed on them lately, whereas
tenths were not annually paid before the 26 H. 8. (which Statute was repealed
by Q. Mary) but at some times: but they were a Popish invention at the first,
and only of late years, though now continued yearly, and further charges
imposed in taxes to the poor, and subsidies to the public in a greater
proportion then by the Laity; provision of arms also, though their tithes and
dues are abated and cut short more then anciently, not only by fraud and false
payment, but also by unconscionable small rate-tithes and customs almost in
every Parish: And also many great estates wholly discharged of tithes, as
Cistercian lands, and those of the Templars and Hospitalers, (who had thirty
thousand manours in Christendom, whereof a great part were in England) by the
Popes pretended privileges, and exemptions: though we abhor and detest the
Pope, yet for our profit we make use of his Bulls and authority: all which
losses and charges are not to be forgotten, though we submit under them
patiently, as our Savior Christ did to pay tribute, when it was not due, Mat.
17.

And this we yield unto further, though we have lost almost all the ancient
privileges and immunities, which were formerly granted to the Clergy: which
were given, that they might be encouraged to attend their studies without
distraction or avocation by secular troubles: The ancient Kings and
Parliaments, allowing many freedoms from several services, impositions, and
taxes: as appears by many Laws and Charters, in the first Tome of our English
Tom. 1. Council. Britan.
Councels, (see the title De libertatibus Ecclesiae) and by Lord Coke in the
second of his Institutes upon Magna Charta, page 3, 4. where he reckons up
many privileges, and how Ecclesiastic all persons ought to be quit and
discharged of tols, and customs, as avirage, pontage, paviage, and the like,
from distresses by Sheriffs, and many others: but as he there confesses, they
are now lost, or not enjoyed: though anciently they had more and greater
liberties, then other of the Kings subjects; but now no men are more burdened
with taxes, and impositions, that we are become in the sight of too many men,
as the filth of the world, and the offscouring of all things; as the Apostle
complains, 1 Cor. 3. And whereas this Author shows, ca. 3. how the
habitation of the Minister should be as becomes students, and men of
contemplative life, under their own command and solitary. It now happens, that
no men's habitation is more troubled with vexations and soldiers quartered upon
them.

Besides the Priests and Levites had the ransomes of the firstborn both of man
and beast, great benefit by several kinds of sacrifices, and head-money paid
yearly, and many other perquisites, and to what a sum (says Philo) these Exodus
30. 13.
might amount, may be guessed by the populousness of the Nation: and further
they had 48. Cities set out by Joshua, cap. 21. for their habitations, and two
thousand cubits about them, (each cubit being a full yard) besides Numb. 35.
4, 5. No Tribe but the royal Tribe of Juda had so many Cities allowed to them:
as Jos. 15. and 21
one thousand next the walls for their cattle: whereunto were added 20. cities
more in process of time, when the number of the Tribe was increased greatly,
as this Author shows, ca. 3. And all this they had, though the Tribe of Levi
was not near a tenth part of the people, which yet is an error, that has
possessed some great Names, (as M. Seldom well observes) they thinking there was
such a proportion of the Tithes, and the receivers, and have rested therefore
fairly satisfied in this, that the Levites being one of the 12* Tribes, had the
tenths as a competent maintenance to themselves, being near the tenth, that is,
being the twelfth part of the people, as if arithmetically the people and the
revenues had been divided: but long since the sleightnesse and falsehood of this
fancy has been discovered. And clearly had such a proportion of persons, and
the name of tenth held; yet examine all that was paid to the Priests and
Levites in first fruits, and the several prediall tenths only, and it will be
near a fifth part, to omit the Cities and suburbs; but for proportion betwixt
the tithes, we have sufficient testimony in holy writ, that it was far
otherwise, for they were only about a threescore part of the people. And Number.
1. and 3.
so Bellarmine shows, Tom. 2. declericis, cap. 25. -- Jam igitur addendo
Levitas caeteris Hebraeis, dividendo totum numerum per viginti duo millia,
efficiuntur parts divisae sexaginta. Ergo Levitae non erant pars tertia
decimae, sed vix sexagesima totius populi. It is to A pitiful wonder it is to
see learned men allege such reasons: as Sir James Sempil says, p. 23.
no purpose to look after any such thing, I rest in this (says M. Seldom) that
it pleased the Almighty so to enrich that Tribe, which was reserved only for
the holy service in the Temple: why he did so, or with what proportion, let him
for me examine, who dare put their profane fancies to play with his holy text,
and so most impudently and wickedly offer to square the one by the other.
Review, cap. 2.

Now because the Israelites were thus bountiful to their Priests and Levites,
therefore the Christians in succeeding times, gave not only many rich gifts
and grants in lands, and several oblations, but also for the continual
support and maintenance of the Clergy by tithes, they made Laws Council.
Valentin. Anno 855. Com. 10. Tom. 3. Council.
that every one should pay a ninth part, besides their tenths, that so they
might be sure to pay more then a tenth, with an overplus rather then come short
by any less quantity: and much to that purpose the learned Grotius shows, De
jure belli ac pacis, li. 1. ca. 1. 17. Lex vetus de Sabbatho and altera de
decimis, monstrant Christianos obligari, nec minus septima temporis part ad
cultum divinum, nec minus fructuum decima in alimenta eorum qui in sacris rebus
occupantur, aut similes pios usus seponunt. But this is more fully proved by
the learned Nonae] quas pii ex propensiori in Deum animo dabant, ultra decimas.
Quod plurimis L^. allatis probat and explicat. Glossar. Dni. Spelm.
Spelman in his Glossary, where he alleges and explicateth several Laws of
diverse Kings, which are too many to be here recited, but shall be produced in
due time and place.

Now if any motives will effectually encourage men to pay their dues with a
liberal hand and eye, or deter the hearts of worldly men from keeping back,
profaning or taking away that which has been settled, given and granted by
Laws divine and humane, it must be the actions and examples of our Savior
Christ himself, who plainly discovered his zeal against sacrilege and
profaning of holy things and places, more then against any other sin. For when
he began to execute his Prophetical office, and reproved all kind of sins
among the people, yet he preceeded to punish not any save only sacrilege,
which is very remarkable. He refused to be Judge in dividing the inheritance
between the two brethren, and he would give no sentence against the woman taken
in adultery: but in case of sacrilege himself made the whip, himself punishes
the offenders, himself overthrows the money tables, and drives out the
prophaners out of the Temple, with their sheep and their oxen, not suffering
the innocent doves to remain, though all these were for sacrifice, and but in
the outward Courtyard of the Gentiles: such was his zeal as himself refused
not to be the accuser, the Judge, and the executioner; and this not only once
but twice, at the first in the beginning of his Ministry, recited by S. John,
c. 2. 14. and at the last near the conclusion thereof, Mat. 21. 11. Jesus quam
ad sacra emendanda bis conspicuo signo testatum hoc fecit, templum velut
sacrorum sedem purgando circa initium, and circa clausulam sui muneris, ut in
quo inceperat in eo se desinere ostenderet. Grotius in Johan. 2. 14. And S.
Hierome accounts it to be one of the greatest miracles that ever Christ did.
Many men In Mat. 21.
do account that the greatest miracle that ever Christ did, Plerique
arbitrantur maximum esse signorum, quod Lazarus est suscitatus: quod caecus ex
utero lumen acceperit: quod ad Iordanem vox audita sit Patris: quod
transfiguratus in monte, gloriam ostenderit triumphantis: mihi inter omnia
signa, quae fecit, hoc videtur mirabilius esse, quod unus homo, and illo
tempore contemptibilis, and in tantum vilis, ut postea crucifigeretur, Scribus
and Pharisaeus, contra se saevientibus, and videntibus, lucra se destruisse,
potuerit ad unius flagelli verbera, tantam ejicere multitudinem, mensasque
subvertere, and Cathedras confringere, and alia facere, quae infinitus non
secisset exercitus, igneum ei quiddam atque sydereum radiabat ex oculis ejus,
and divinitatis Majestas lucebat in facie. Hieron.
was the raising of Lazarus out of the grave, or the restoring of sight to him
that was born blind; that the voice of his Father was heard at Jordan; or that
at his transfiguration in the Mount he showed forth his glory: but I rather
think, the greatest wonder that ever Christ did, was, that he being but one
single man, and all that time in a contemptible condition, and so vile, that
shortly after they crucified him, should be able with a whip to drive out of
the Temple such a multitude of men, officers, buyers and sellers, and overthrow
their tables, seats, and receipts, (the Scribes also beholding it, and seeing
their own profit to be overthrown thereby) and do such a strange thing, as a
whole Army of men could not have done it at another time. But his principal end
being to cleanse and purge his Temple and House of Prayer, from profanation,
sacrilege, and abuses, it plainly shows us, how odious a sin it is, to be
guilty of the like abuses: and what punishment men must expect in his appointed
time to follow upon the like offense, though now he does forbear such
miraculous proceedings in these latter days; when we are directed to search the
Scriptures so plainly published to us, and to take admonition from former
examples, which are recorded for our admonition upon whom the ends of the world
are come.

Some are of opinion lately, that so the Clergy may have a competent
maintenance, whether it be by stipend, or any way else, it is sufficient
provision for them: and because diverse have published their opinion this way,
here shall be something in answer to them. These men make themselves wiser then
God himself, for he required tithes and firstfruits in their kind, not in
money: Decimas and primitias tuas non tardabis offerre, Exodus 22. 29. he could
have appointed some shekels of the Sanctuary to be paid to every Priest and
Levite, for the maintenance of himself and his family, if that had been the
best and most certain means. But the uncertainty of stipends, collections, or
payments in money is so great, as would in process of time bring very great
losses and inconveniences, both upon the people in payments, and upon the
Clergy; for the change and variations of the standard for money is so great and
uncertain in all ages, (as this learned Author shows in his Glossary in voce,
Esterlingus and Libra -- --) that if an hundred pound according to these times,
should be allowed for a stipend to a Minister yearly, it may be as much in
value as 300 ^. or 400 ^. in the compass of an hundred years following: as we
find evidently by the experience of the last hundred years past; and so
likewise of every hundred years since the Conquest, and before it: which has
happened of late times by the discovery of the West Indies, the trade and
commerce thither, and the riches of their mines brought into Europe, all which
may fail in the next age, or be otherwise diverted, and stopped, beyond the
imagination or providence of any man. Further, by payment of tithes in kind out
of all profits arising by Gods blessing on our labors, the Clergy do partake
with the people in times of plenty, or suffer with them in extremities, whereas
by a certain stipend in money, they would be far less sensible. Also the change
and alteration of the fundamental Laws of this Kingdom touching tithes,
glebe, oblations, and other means, which have continued In M
in force above a thousand years, and settled by the Common Pler* tra^ (...)
Law, will produce many mischiefs, especially to the Crown, in payment of
tenths and first fruits, subsidies, pensions, and other taxes, which amount
yearly unto many thousand pounds to the Exchequer: all which must be abated and
lost to the Crown; for no reason they should be paid when the means and
maintenance shall be taken away, out of which they arise.

Besides the impossibility to provide a sure and settled means in every Parish
to pay a certain stipend in money quarterly to the Minister, there can be no
caution, provision, or security given or established for payment of money; for
we see by daily experience that all bonds, conveyances, and securities do
fail often, whatsoever the devise be for secure payment. No way is comparable
to Gods own way of giving yearly the tenth part in kind, of every increasing
commedity, and all lawful profits, as they arise and grow due at several
seasons of the year. As for stipends and pensions, because they have been
lately invented in some forain Churches, in times of war, great troubles and
distractions; I will mention only one mischief, which is already published in
print; and that is, that the best learned are oftentimes neglected, and put to
hard shifts, as in the Low Countries John Drusius lately a very painful and
learned man, well known for his singular works: He complains in an Epistle to
Joseph Scaliger before his Commentary on the Maccabees, that he was in want of
things necessary; and elsewhere prays unto God to stir up the hearts of the
great ones to help him: May heaven and earth take notice (says one thereof)
how miserable the condition of the learned is, when tithes the fixed honourary
of the Priesthood by divine right, are usurped by the Laics, and reward is
measured not by true worth, or by the measure of the Sanctuary, which was full,
running over and double to the common and profane measures; but by the
ignorant estimate of niggardly Mechanics and their underagents. Many more such
complaints might be easily alleged out of Luther, Melancthon, Calvin, and
others, which I will now forbear: one great reason being that their Churches
for most part are still under great persecution, miserable wars, pitifully
wasted, being never almost quietly composed, nor settled by Kings and
Parliaments, as ours has been; for the Emperor and many great Kings and
Princes continue Papists, and great adversaries to Reformation: whereby
Germany, France, and Poland, have most sharply suffered, and lost many thousand
Churches and Ministers, since the the blazing Comet 1618. the people being
relapsed and enforced to Popery for want of Ministers: which makes the reverend
and learned Deodatus, Professor at Geneva, magnify the Church of England, as
the most eminent of all the reformed Churches in Christendom styling it,
Florentissima Anglia, Ocellus ille Ecclesiarum, peculium Christi singular,
perfugium afflictorum, imbellium Armamentarium, inopum promptuarium, spei
melioris vexillum, -- splendidae Domini caulae, -- and much more he adds,
speaking of our condition before these troubles.

If any demand what success the labors of this worthy Knight found among the
Gentlemen of Norfolk, and other places, where he lived long in very great
esteem, and publicly employed always by his Prince and Country in all the
principal offices of dignity and credit, it is very observable to allege some
particular testimonies worthy to be recorded to posterity, and with all honor
to their names, who were persuaded presently upon the reading of his first
little Treatise (and perhaps upon sight of the larger work now published, more
the like good effects may follow) to restore and render back unto God what was
due to him.

And first the worthy Knight practiced according to his own rule: for having an
Impropriation in his estate, viz. Middleton in Norfolk, he took a course to
dispose of it for the augmentation of the Vicarage, and also some addition to
Congham a small Living near to it: Himself never put up any part of the rent,
but disposed of it by the assistance of a reverend Divine his neighbor M.
Thorowgood, to whom he gave power to augment the Vicars portion, which has
been performed carefully: and having a surplusage in his hands he waits an
opportunity to purchase the Appropriation of Congham, to be added to the
Minister there, where himself is Lord and Patron.

Next Sr Ralph Hare Knight, his ancient and worthy friend in that Country, upon
reading of the first Book, offered to restore a good Parsonage, which only he
had in his estate, performing it presently, and procuring license from the
King, and also gave the perpetual Advowson to Saint John's College in
Cambridge, that his heirs might not afterward revoke his grant: wherein he was
a treble benefactor to the Church, and the College has deservedly honored
his memory with a Monument of thankfulness, in their Library, and also wrote a
respective letter of acknowledgement to this excellent Knight, to whom they
knew some part of the thanks to be due, for his pious advice and direction.

Sir Roger Townsend a religious and very learned Knight, of great estate in
that County, restored three Impropriations to the Church, besides many singular
expressions of great respect to the Clergy, having had a great part of his
education together with S^ John Spelman, (a Gentleman of incomparable worth)
eldest son to S Henry, and by his directions both attained great perfection and
abilities.

The like I have understood of others in that Country, but cannot certainly
relate their names and all particulars at this present, that Shire abounding
with eminent Gentlemen of singular deserts, piety, and learning, besides other
ornaments, as Cambden observes of them.

In other parts diverse have been moved with his reasons to make like
restitution, whereof I will mention some: as Sir William Dodington Knight of
Hampshire, a very religious Gentleman, restored no less then six
Impropriations, out of his own estate, to the full value of six hundred pounds
yearly and more.

Richard Knightley of Northamptonshire lately deceased, restored two
Impropriations, Fansley and Preston, being a Gentleman much addicted to works
of piety, charity, and advancement of learning, and showing great respect to
the Clergy.

The right honorable Baptist Lord Hicks Viscount Campden, besides many
charitable works of great expense to Hospitals and Churches, as I find printed
in a Catalogue of them in the Survay of London, restored and purchased many
Impropriations.

1. He restored one in Pembrokeshire which cost 460l. 2. One in Northumberland,
which cost 760l. 3. One in Durham, which cost 366l. 4. Another in Dorsetshire,
which cost 760l.
He redeemed certain Chantry lands, which cost 240l.

And gave pensions to two Ministers, which cost 80l.

Besides Legacies to several Ministers. --

The particulars are more fully recited in the Survay, to which I refer, page
761.

Ms Ellen Goulston Relict of Theodore Goulston Dr of Physic, a very learned
man, being possessed of the Impropriate Parsonage of Bardwell in Suffolk, did
first procure from the King leave to annexe the same to the Vicarage, and to
make it presentative, and having formerly the donation of the Vicarage, she
gave them both thus annexed freely to St John's College in Oxon: expressing
many godly reasons in a pious letter of her grant, to advance the glory of God
to her power, and give the world some testimony, that she had not been a
fruitless observer of those who taught her that knowledge, without its fruit,
and that love of Christ, without love to his Church was but an empty mask of an
empty faith.

Thus with devout prayers for a blessing from God upon those which should be
chosen Rectors there, she commended the deeds and conveyances of the Parsenage
for ever to the College. And this way does justly seem the best manner of
restitution, it being a double benefit to the Church both in providing
carefully for the Parish, and selecting out of the Universities able and worthy
Divines in due time and manner without any corruption, which the Colleges are
careful to avoid; and therefore that course was followed by Sir Ralph Hare
already mentioned, by the prudent advise of Sir Henry Spelman: which course if
it had been observed by them who lately were employed in purchasing of
Impropriations, they had freed themselves from sinister suspicions, by
devesting themselves wholly of any profits reserved to their disposing, and
might have much advanced the glory of God by diligent preaching, within the
campasse of few years: and many would have been persuaded easily to become
contributers and benefactors to their purpose.

Diverse Colleges in Oxon: having been anciently possessed of Impropriations,
have of late years taken a course to reserve a good portion of the tithe corn,
from their tenants, thereby to increase the Vicars maintenance: so that the
best learned Divines are willing to accept the Livings, and yet the College is
not diminished in rents, but loses only some part of their fine, when the
tenants come to renew their Leases.

Certain Bishops also have done the like; as Dr Morton, whiles he was Bishop of
Lichfield did abate a good part of his fine to increase the portion of the
Minister in the Vicarage of Pitchley in Northamptonshire, belonging to his
Bishopric: and so did his successor Dr Wright, for the Vicarage of Torcester
also in the same shire: which was very piously done, considering what great
Lands and Manours were taken away from that Bishopric among others, and some
Impropriations given in lieu of them.

Besides, this present Parliament has taken singular care to augment the
maintenance of many poor Vicarages, and other small Livings: wherein they have
proceeded carefully, and have made many additions to several poor benefices,
for the better inabling of the incumbent Ministers to be faithful and diligent
in their callings.

And while Sir Hen. Sp. lived, there came some unto him almost every Term at
London to consult with him, how they might legally restore and dispose of their
Impropriations to the benefit of the Church: to whom he gave advice, as he was
best able, according to their particular cases and inquiries, and there wanted
not others, that thanked him for his book, promising that they would never
purchase any such appropriate Parsonages to augment their estates. Whereby it
appears how effectually the consciences of many men were moved with his
moderate and pious persuasions: and himself was much confirmed in his opinion
of the right of Tithes, which moved him to consign his works of this argument,
besides others, to my care, with direction to publish them, as is also
expressed in his last Will and Testament.

Whereupon I hold my self obliged in conscience and duty to God, and to the
memory of this excellent Knight, to whom I was infinitely obliged for his
instructions, conferences, and favors, which I enjoyed in the course of my
studies, many years frequenting his house and company: not to conceal these
works any longer from the public view, but to publish them to the benefit of
the Church, and servants of God, now especially when profaneness has so
licentiously overflowed, and the covetous wretches and Mammonists of this
world, have begun to withdraw and deny their Tithes, muttering that they are
Popish and superstitious, and therefore to be rooted out, as their language is:
wherein yet the Parliament has honorably discovered their zeal and care by
their censure and check upon the Petition against Tithes exhibited in May 1646.
and by their Ordinance providing for the true payment of all tithes, rights,
and dues to the Church, as more fully appears therein.

Wherein they have followed the modern and ancient Laws, as that expression
of the Act of Parliament, 27 Hen. 8. cap. 20. That whereas numbers of ill
disposed persons, having no respect of their duty to Almighty God, but against
right and good conscience did withhold their Tithes due to God, and holy
Church: as in that Statute is more at large expressed. So in the 12. Tables,
Sacrum sacrove commendatum qui dempserit rapseritve, parricida esto. It being
accounted sacrilege by all Laws to take away such things as have been formerly
given to God: for so they were given expressly to God: as Magna Charta says:
Concessimus Deo -- we have given to God, for us and our heirs, etc. So Charles
the great: We know that the goods of the Church are the sacred indowments of
God. To the Lord our God we offer and dedicate whatsoever we deliver to his
Church. Cap. Car. lib. 6. So Tully anciently: Communi jure gentium sancitum est
ut ne mortales, quod Deorum immortalium cultui consecratum est usucapere
possint. So Calvin, Sacrum Deo non sine insigni in eum injuria ad profanos usus
applicatur. Instit. li. 3. cap. 7. 1.

Tithes therefore being consecrated unto God, ought carefully to be preserved
in these days, in regard the Church enjoys not the tithe of the tenth, which
formerly it had, and has also to this day among the Papists, who do not take
away from the Church, but are ready to restore, as they have done in many
Countries.

CONTENTS OF THE SEVERAL TREATISES AND CHAPTERS.
The larger Book of Tithes containing these particulars following.
The Introduction to it. Cap. 1. What things be due unto God: first a portion
of our time. page 1 Cap. 2 The second sort of tribute, that we are to render
unto God, that is, a portion of our land. page 2 Cap. 3 That the portion of
land assigned to God must be sufficient for the habitation of the Ministers.
page 3 Cap. 4 That Christ released not the portion due to God, out of our
lands. page 6 Cap. 5 What part in reason, and by direction of nature might seem
fittest for God. page 8 Cap. 6 Concerning the revenue and maintenance of the
Church, in her infancy, first, in Christ's time, then in the Apostles, in the
Churches of Jerusalem, Alexandria, Rome, and Africa. page 11 Cap. 7 That the
service of the Levites was clean altered from the first Institution, yet they
enjoyed their Tithes. page 33 1. Of Templar Levites. 2. Of Provincial Levites.
Cap. 8 The great account made of Priests in the old Law, and before. page 42
Cap. 9 When our Savior commanded the Disciples should take nothing with them,
but live of the charges of the faithful; this bound not the Disciples
perpetually. page 44 Cap. 10 That many things in the beginning both of the Law
and the Gospel were admitted, and omitted for the present, or reformed
afterward. page 46 Cap. 11 That upon the reasons alleged, and others here
ensuing, the use of Tithing was omitted in Christ's, and the Apostles time: and
these reasons are drawn ab expediente, the other a necessitate. page 51 Cap. 12
That Ministers must have plenty. page 55 Cap. 13 Not to give less then the
tenth. page 57 Cap. 14 The Etymology and definition of Tithes, and why a tenth
part rather then any other is due. page 67 Cap. 15 Who shall pay Tithe. page 76
Cap. 16 Out of what things Tithe is to be paid. page 79 Cap. 17 That things
offered unto God be holy. page 62 Cap. 18 Tithes must not be contemned, because
they were used by the Church of Rome. page 64 Cap. 19 That the Tradition of
ancient Fathers and Councels is not lightly to be regarded. page 86 Cap. 20
Ancient Canons of Councels for payment of Tithes. page 88 Cap. 21 In what right
Tithes are due; and first of the Law of Nature. page 93 Cap. 22 How far forth
they be due by the Law of Nature. page 94 Cap. 23 Tithes in the Law of Nature,
first considered in Paradise. page 97 Cap. 24 The time of Nature after the
fall. page 100 Cap. 25 That they are due by the Law of God. page 104 Cap. 26
That they are due by the Law of Nations. page 113 Cap. 27 That they are due by
the Law of the Land. page 129 Cap. 28 Tithe is not merely Leviticall; How it
is, and how not; and wherein Judicial. page 139 1. An Objection touching
Sacrifice, First Fruits, and Circumcision. 2. Touching the Sabbath day, Easter,
and Pentecost.
Cap. 29 How Appropriations began. page 151 1. That after the Appropriation the
Parsonage still continues spiritual. page 157 2. That no man properly is
capable of an Appropriation, but spiritual men. page 159 3. What was granted
to the King. page 161 4. Whether Tithes and Appropriations belonged to the
Monasteries, or not. page 163 5. In what sort they were granted to the King.
page 164 6. That the King might not take them. page 165 7. Of the Statute of
dissolution, that took away Impropriations from the Church. page 167 8. That
the King may better hold Impropriations then his Lay Subjects. page 169
An Apology of the Treatise, De non temerandis Ecclesiis. An Epistle to M.
Rich: Carew, concerning Tithes* A Treatise of Impropriations by Sir Francis
Bigot Knight of Yorkshire. An Epistle to the Church of Scotland, prefixed to
the second Edition of the first Treatise printed at Edinburgh.
Errata, and addenda.
IN the Introduction, pa. 1. owes, r. only. Page 17. quinto r. quinque. P.
18. Cities, r. Citizens. P. 20. Abraham, r. Abel. P. 67. T^^tum, r. totum. P.
68. quaestorum, r. quaesitorum. P. 75. caeduus, r. arduus. P. 78. guests, r.
gifts. P. 82. N. F. r. ut ff. P. 115. peret, r. pe^et. P. 117. Therumatus, r.
Therumahs. P. 166. even christian, r. emne christen.
Some places and quotations are defective in the original, and could not
easily be supplied, which the Reader may please to excuse, till further search
can be made.

In the catalogue of Benefactors and Restorers of Impropriations, there is
omitted among others,

The Right honorable Lo: Scudamore, Viscount Slego, who has very piously
restored much to some Vicarages in Herefordshire: whereof yet I cannot relate
particulars fully.

Dr Fell the worthy Dean of Christ-Church in Oxon: (with the consent of the
Prebendaries) has for his short time, since he was Dean, been very careful
and pious in this kind, besides great reparations of the decayed and imperfect
buildings, and other necessaries of the college: in renewing and granting
Leases to the Tenants of Impropriations, he has reserved a good increase of
maintenance to the incumbent Ministers in diverse places: and has put things
into a course for the like increase in other Vicarages, as Leases shall happen
to be renewed. And much more might have been done, if King Hen. 8. had not
taken away the goodly Lands provided for that college by Wolsey, giving
Impropriations for them, by which exchange he was a great gainer.

New College, Magdalen Coll: and Queens Coll: have done the like upon their
Impropriations, and some others have made augmentations also, whereof the
particulars shall appear hereafter, upon perfect information.

The Introduction.
GOD has created all things for his glory; Prove. 16. 4. for himself. Esaias.
43. 7.
and must be glorified by them, all in general, and by every of them in
particular. The celebration of this his glory, he has committed in heaven to
the Angels, in Earth unto Man. Yea the devils declare his glory, and Hell it
self roareth it forth. For this purpose he has assigned unto man the circuit
of the whole earth, to be the stage of this Action, and the place of his
habitation, whilst it is in hand. He has delivered Wisd. 9. 2. Ecclus. 17. 2.
unto him the wealth and furniture thereof, to be the materials for performing
of it: and the means of his maintenance in the mean season. And lest he
should want leisure, and opportunity sufficient for so great a business, he has
commanded the heavens themselves, the Sun, the Moon, the Stars, yea the
whole frame of Nature, to attend Deuteronomy. 4. 19.
upon him, to apply their sweet influence unto him: to assist him in all his
endeavors, and to measure him out a large portion of time and life for the
full accomplishing Ecclus. 17. 2.
of this right noble most glorious Vocation.

It is a rule in Philosophy, that Beneficium requirit officium. And we are
taught by the law of nature, that he which receives a benefit owes to his
benefactor, Honor, Faith, and Service, according to the proportion of the
benefit received. Upon this rule was the ancient law not only of England, but
of other Nations also, grounded, that compelled every man that had Lands, or
tenements of the gift of another to hold them of his Donor, and to do him
fealty and service for them, (that is, to faithful unto him, and to yield him
some kind of vassallage) though no such matter were once mentioned between
them; Yea at this day, if the King give Lands to any man without expressing a
tenure, the Donee shall not only hold them of him, but he shall hold them by
the greatest and heaviest service, viz. Knights service in Capite. But God
knowing the heart of man, and seeing that man was like those husbandmen in the
Gospel, which having the possession of the Vineyard, forgot their Lord of whom
they received it; he thought not fit in wisdom to leave the rights and
services due unto him in respect of this his seignory and donation unto the
mutable construction of Law and Reason: but has expressly declared in his
written word in what sort man shall enjoy and hold these his infinite benefits.
Therefore since our own reason has taught us, that we owe no less unto our
earthly benefactors then Homage, Fealty, and some honorary and subsidiary rent
for the Lands and tenements we receive of them; much more effectually must the
same reason teach us, that we owe a far larger proportion of all these unto
God, of whom besides our essence and creation we have received such innumerable
blessings.

But as ^^d is a Prince full of all royal munificence and bounty, so i^ he
likewise of all abundance and riches: therefore ^^ ^^^ther needs nor
requires anything of all that we possess, as a subsidiary rent wherewith to
enrich his coff^rs, or support his estate, but as an honourary tribute toward
the magnifying of his goodness, and the expressing of our own thankfulness.
This* to be short, is the sum of all religion. Therefore whilst David with
admirable strains of divine meditations flies through the contemplation of all
the glorious works of God, and of our duty to him in respect thereof, he
breaks out in every passage of his Psalms with variety of acclamations and
invitations to stir us up to glorify God, not only inwardly by the spirit,
but outwardly also, in, and by, and with all worldly things and means
whatsoever. And not knowing how or where to contain himself in this his
passion of most blessed zeal, he runs at last, as he were wild with it, and
closes up his Psalter, with Psalm upon Psalm, six or seven together, one
upon the neck of another, only to quicken and enforce our sluggish disposition
to a work of so great consequence and necessity.

It almost carries me from my purpose; but to return to my self, let us see
in what way we must glorify God with these external things that we have thus
received from him, and that is, as before we have showed, in the same steps
that the rules and maxims of his own law have prescribed. viz.

First, that we shall do unto him Homage, that is, true 1.
and faithful service. For it is written; Him only shall thou serve.

Secondly, that we shall be faithful unto him, as becomes 2.
true tenants, that is, not to adhere to his enemies, the world, the flesh, and
the devil, as conspiring with them, or suffering them to subtract, or encroach
upon any part of that, which belongs to God our Lord paramount.

Thirdly, that we shall pay duly unto him, all rights, and 3.
duties, that belong unto his Seignory: for it is written, Give unto God that
that is Gods. And again; Give the Lord the honor due unto his name, etc.
Psalm. 29. 1.

For all which we must be accomptants at the great Audit: and there lies a
special writ of Praecipe in that case; Read rationem villicationis tuae, Give
an account how thou have carried thy self in this thy business, that is, this
his service committed to thee.

But omitting to handle the first and second of these great Reservations, I
have undertaken the last, viz. de reddendis Dei Deo, of ren dring that unto God
that is Gods. And in this I humbly beseech his blessed hand to be with me, and
guide me, for whose only sake and honor I have adventured to leave the shore
I crept by in my former book, and now as with full sails to launch forth into
the deep, upon so dangerous and uncertain adventure.

Amen.
Of TITHES.
CAP. I. What things be due unto God.
THat that is to be rendered unto God for his honor, out of temporal things
granted by him unto man, are by his word declared to be some particular
portions of the same things.

The things granted unto man be of three sorts, viz.

First, the time measured out unto him for this life.

Secondly, the place allotted to him for his habitation.

Thirdly, the benefits and blessings assigned to him for his sustenance. Out of
every of these, God must have his honorary part, as by way of reservation and
retribution, in right of his seignory. Let us then see what those parts are,
and how they grow due unto him.

Touching the first, which is the Time of our life: he has out thereof
reserved to himself, the seventh part; for it is written, six days shall
thou labor, and do all that thou have to do, but the seventh day is the
sabbath of the Lord thy God. What other time soever we employ privately and
particularly in his worship, this must generally be performed, and kept both by
our selves and our very cattle, for if every creature groan with us, Romans 8.
22. it is also just, that they rejoice with us sometime. But though God be much
wronged in this kind, as well as in other his rights, yet since it is confessed
of all parts to be due unto him, by the express Canon of his word, I will not
meddle with it any farther: only I desire that the abusing of it were severely
punished, or at least in such sort as the Laws have appointed.

CAP. II. The second kind of tribute that we are to render unto God, i. a
portion of our Land.
THe second thing that God has given unto man is a place for his residence,
and that is the earth in general, and to every nation and family a part
thereof in particular. The earth has he given to the children of men: Psalm.
115. 16. But as he reserved a portion of the time of our life for the
celebration of his honor, so has he also reserved a portion out of the place
of our residence. For in Ezekiel. 45. he commands the children of Israel, and in
them all the nations of the world, that when they come to inhabit the land he
gives them, they must divide it into three parts, one for the people, another
for the King, but the first for God himself. God must have Enetiam partem, as
the Lawyers term it, the part of the eldest, or first borne; for the tribe of
the Levi (that is, his Priests and Ministers) are called to be the first borne
of his people.

Therefore he says, When ye shall divide the Land for inheritance, ye shall
offer an oblation to the Lord, an holy portion of the Land. Ezekiel. 45. And by
and by he declares how it shall be employed, one part to the building of the
house of God, and the other part for the Priests and Ministers to dwell on. And
this is no Leviticall precept, but an institution of the Law of nature; and in
performance of the duty that he was tied unto by this Law, Jacob when he was
poor, and had not wherewithal to build God an house, yet he sanctified a
portion of ground, (when God had blessed him) to that purpose, by erecting a
stone and pouring oil on the head thereof, calling the place Bethel, that is,
the house of God, and vowing to build it, when God should bless and make him
able to do it: Genesis 28. 22. which as Josephus testifies, Antiq. lib. 1. cap.
27. he afterward performed. And as God commanded the whole Nation of the
Israelites in general, that in laying out the chief City, they should first
assign a place unto God for his Temple and Priests: So likewise he commanded
every Tribe thereof in particular, that after they had their portion in the
division of the Land, they should likewise out of the same assign unto the
Levites Cities to dwell in, with a circuit, or suburbs of a thousand cubits
round about to keep their cattle in. Command the children of Israel that they
give unto the Levites of the inheritance of their possessions Cities to dwell
in: ye shall also give unto the Levites the suburbs of the Cities round about:
so they shall have the Cities to dwell in, and the suburbs shall be for their
cattle, and for their substance, and for their beasts: And the suburbs of the
City, which ye shall give unto the Levites from the wall outward shall be a
thousand cubits round about. Numb. 35. 2, 3, 4.

In execution of this Commandment every Tribe of Israel allotted certain
Cities to the Levites, out of their portion, according to the quantity thereof:
as appears, Jos. 21. 41. The whole Land of promise according as St. Hierom
lays it out in his Epistle to Dardanus, Tom. 3. 68. contains in length from
Dan to Bersabe scarce 160. miles, and in breadth from Joppa to Bethlem 46.
miles. A small portion of ground for a Kingdom so famous; and so small indeed,
as St. Hierom there says, that he is ashamed to tell the breadth of it, lest
it should give occasion to the heathen to blaspheme, or deride it: yet out of
this small territory (not so much as the principality of Wales with the
Marches) forty eight walled Cities (more then are in all England, as I take
it) were assigned only for their Clergy to dwell upon: their maintenance, and
revenues being otherwise provided generally through the whole Kingdom by
Tithes, oblations, and other devotions of their brethren. So that it is
apparent both by the Law of God, and Nature, that God must have one portion of
our Lands to build him an house on, that is, his Churches, and another portion
thereof for the habitation of his Levites, that is, his Ministers.

CAP. III. That the portion of Land assigned to God must be sufficient for the
habitation of the Minister.
THough the portion of Land, thus to be rendered to God for his Ministers, be
not certain, yet is it thus far determined, that it must be answerable to
the necessity of the service, and to the number of the Levites; that is, there
must be Churches sufficient for the congregations; and habitations sufficient
for the Ministers and their families to dwell upon, with pasture convenient for
their domestical cattle. They must not be pulled from God with secular care,
and therefore their maintenance is appointed to arise by other means then by
tilling the Earth; but their habitation as befitteth students, and men of
contemplative life must be under their own command, and solitary. But what,
should the portion of the fruits of the earth assigned them for their
maintenance be certain, as namely the tenth part; and not the portion of Land
also allotted for their habitation? I answer, that as the people increase, so
also the fruit of the earth increases with them, by their industry and
labor; and therefore as the Levites increase in number, so do the rest of the
Tribes; and by reason thereof there is a greater increase of Tithe toward the
maintenance of the Levite: for the labor of ten men yields more profit then
the labor of five. But when the Levites were enclosed within walls, and
confined with immutable bounds, this circuit in reason could not always be
sufficient for them; And therefore being so increased as their Cities might not
contain them, they must of necessity have new places of habitation provided
for them. For in such cases God gave a general rule to the people, Deuteronomy. 12.
19. Beware that thou forsake not the Levite as long as thou live in the Land.
And the people of the Jews in this necessity did not forsake the Levites, for
before the transmigration to Babylon, (which was about 840. years after) the
Leviticall Cities (as appears, 1 Chronicles. cap. 6. and cap. 9. 1. were grown to
be about sixty eight, viz. twenty more then were appointed by Josua. They might
not enlarge the bounds prescribed to their Cities, but they might increase the
number of the Cities, as the number of the Levites increased, and necessity
required. The reason is, they might not add house to house, and field to
field, lest growing great in earthly possessions they should forget God, who
had otherwise provided for them, then by manuring the earth; but if they wanted
habitations, they might then seek for new Cities, and the care of the people
was to provide them for them. One Levite might not have more then sufficient
for his habitation, but if the Cities appointed were not sufficient to yield an
habitation for every Levite, then might they assign new Cities to that purpose.

CAP. IV. That Christ released not the portion due to God out of our Lands.
THe possession of Lands is ex jure humano, but the earth is the Lords ex jure
divino. Therefore when he granted the earth to the children of men, and
reserved a portion thereof for his service and Ministers, this part thus
reserved is in him and his Ministers ex jure divino. In this right Christ
calls the Temple the house of God, and says also, My house shall be an house
of prayer. And St. Paul says; Despise ye the house of God? So that, 1 Crr. 11.
22.
doubtless, God must have houses for his service in all places where we
inhabit. But Christ had not whereon to lay his head, Mat. 8. 20. Luke 9. 18.
therefore the Ministers must have no houses provided for them: for the disciple
is not above his master. Christ indeed had not whereon to lay his head: for he
came to his own, and his own received him not. But does this prove that
Ministers should neither have nests in the air like birds, nor holes in the
ground like foxes? Did not he that made the Vineyard in the Gospel, build a
tower in it for them that dressed it? So likewise must the Ministers that
attend upon the Vineyard of the Church, have their habitations in it. St. Paul
appointed it so, when he commands us to render a portion unto them, (...), of
all the good things, Gal. 5. 6. How have they a part in all, if they want it,
in the chiefest of all, that is, in our habitations? Again he commands that
they should be Hospitales, Goodhouskeepers; how should they be so, if they have
no houses to keep? John Baptist lived in the wilderness; it is true, and he
was commended for it. Christ did not so, though he frequented the fields, yet
in that he gave no Commandment that his disciples should follow him; for he
appointed them to remain in other men's houses. What? that they should go
sojourne where they listed? The Commandment has nothing to the contrary; but
the meaning is thereby apparent, they must have habitations provided for them,
or else, shake off the dust of your feet against them, Mat. 10. 14. as much as
to say, let them be accursed. So then our Savior has not repealed the Law of
providing for the Levites, unto his Ministers: He could not give them Cities to
possess, for his kingdom was not of this world. But he appointed them to such
places, as themselves should choose among the children of the Gospel. Does
this differ from the Commandment of providing Cities for the Levites?
Doubtless, no: for as the Logitians say, Convenient in eodemtertio. They agree
in this, that the Ministers must have habitations provided for them, as well in
the Gospel, as the Levites had under the Law. Oh, but they must have no
inheritance among their brethren, for the Lord is their portion. Numb. 18. 24.
It is true, the Lord has communicated with them his own portion, viz. his
tithes and his offerings, as he did with the Levites; therefore as the Levites
had no share in the division of the Land, so our Ministers must have no share
with us in tilling the Land, and matters of husbandry, for they are called from
secular cares to spiritual contemplation; but after the Israelites had their
shares in the Land they yielded portions to the Levites for their convenient
residence, and so must we for our Ministers. And so still the conclusion is,
they must be provided for. Which, to shut up the matter, is invincibly ratified
by our Savior himself, who in sending forth his disciples would not suffer
them to take the least implements of sustenance with them, because he would put
them absolutely upon the care and charge of the congregation, alleging a
Maxim of the moral Law for warranty thereof, that the labourer is worthy of
his hire. Mat. 10. 10. And therefore into whose house soever you enter, stay
there. Mat. 10. 11.

CAP. V. What part in reason, and by direction of Nature might seem fittest
for God.
It being agreed that some part by the Law of Nature is due unto God out of all
the time of our life, and the goods that we possess, it is now to be examined
how far this Law of nature or reason may lead us to the discovery of that part
or portion. For which purpose we must for a while lay aside Canonical
Divinity, I mean the Scriptures, and suppose our selves to live in the ages
before the Law was given, that is, in the time of nature. And then let us
propose this question to the Sages of that world, and see what answer we are
like to receive from them. And first touching this question, What portion of
our time or goods were sit for God.

It is like they would have considered the matter in this manner. That God has
not any need either of our time, or goods, and that therefore he requires them
not in tanto, that is, to have so much, and no less. But on our parts it is
our duty to yield unto him as much in quanto as we can conveniently for bear
over and besides our necessary maintenance. So that as Bracton says of Hyde,
that tenants are to yield unto their Lords, it must be honorarium Domino, and
not grave tenenti, so much as the Lord may be honored by it, and the tenant
not oppressed; wherein if a second, third, or fourth part be too much, so a
twentieth or thirtieth seem also too little. As God therefore desires but an
honourary part, not a pressory: so reason should direct us to give him that
part, wherein his own nature with the respects aforesaid is most properly
expressed; for the maxim, or axiom which our Savior alleged, Date Deo quae
Dei sunt, give unto God the things that are Gods, is grounded on the Moral law
originally; and therefore examining among numbers which of them are most
proper, and resembling the nature of God, we shall find that seven and ten
above all other perform this mystery, and that therefore they are most
especially to be chosen thereunto; therefore God in the Creation of the world
following the light of nature, chused the seventh part of the age thereof, as
Philo Judaeus in his Book De fabricatione mundi, page 36. has with singular
and profound observations declared.

And because it may be demanded hereupon, why he should not by the same reason
have the seventh part of our goods also; I answer, that as touching the time of
our life, he gives that unto us of his own bounty, merely without any industry
on our part: so that whether we sleep, or wake, labor, or play, the allowance
thereof that he makes unto us, runs on of its own accord; and therefore we
owe him the greater retribution out thereof, as having it without labor or
charge. But as for the fruits of the earth we have them partly by our own
labor, though chiefly by his bounty; and therefore he therein requires his
part, as it were with deduction or allowance of our charges, seeking another
number be fitting the same.

The first place in Scripture wherein a Priest is mentioned is Genesis 14. 18.
where Melchisedek is said to be the Priest of the most high God; there also are
tithes spoken of, and paid unto him, v. 20. Abraham gave him tithes of all.

The first place also, where an House of God, or Church, is spoken of, is Genesis
28. 18, and 22. there also are tithes mentioned and vowed unto God, even by
that very name whereby Parish Churches upon their first Institution in the
Primitive Church were also styled, that is, by the name of Tituli, Genesis 28. 22.
Lapis iste quem posui in titulum erit Domus Dei, and omne quod dederis mihi
decimas prorsus dabo tibi; wherein it seems the Primitive Church at that time
followed the translation then in use: for Damasus in the life of Euaristus
Bishop of Rome, Anno 112. says, Hic titulos in urbe Roma divisit Presbyteris,
Tom. Council. 1. page 106. And speaking Edit. 1606.
after of Dionysius, who lived Anno 260. he says, -- Presbyteris Ecclesias
divisit, and coemeteria, Parochiasque and Dioeceses constituit. Tom. Council. 1.
page 206. Thus Church and Tithe went together in their first Institution.

If there be no mention after of Tithes in the Scripture till the time of
Moses, that is no reason to exclude them, for so also is there not of any House
of God, or Priest: yet no man will deny, but both are necessary, and therefore
let them also say, whether they be ex Jure divino; I mean Churches and Priests
before the Law and Gospel.

CAP. VI. Concerning the Revenue and maintenance of the Church in her infancy,
first in Christ's time, then in the Apostles, by a communion of all things, and
submitting all to the Apostles; as in the Churches of Jerusalem, Alexandria,
Rome, and Africa. How the Clergy had their allowance given them, weekly, or
monthly, per sportulas, in baskets. De jure sportularum, concerning those
baskets and the manner of them. When Lands were first given. The Church goods
distributed by the Bishops and Officers under them. The liberality of
Constantine and other Emperors. The piety and charity of the Clergy in spending
their goods and means.
VVHilest the Church was in her foundation, she had no other maintenance, then
the poor private purse of our Savior, supported only by the alms and
contribution of his poor Disciples and followers; for as himself had no house
to live in, so had Joh. 12. 6.
he no rents to live on: being therefore often in want, he was constrained
sometimes to use the power of his Godhead to supply the necessities of his
Manhood, and to call the fish of the sea to aid him with money miraculously,
Mat. 17. 27. while the beasts of the Land withheld their devotion from him
unnaturally; but whatsoever it was that his Godhead blessed his Manhood
withal, he divided it, as appears in the Gospel of Saint John, 13. 29. into
two parts; one for the sustenance of his family, the other for relief of the
poor. Touching the part assigned to his family, it was not curious, nor
superfluous, no not at the great feast of Easter, when others were so
sumptuous, and profuse, his rule was then, to buy the things they had need of.
And touching the provision of his house at other times, we have twice an
Inventory taken of it, once in Matthew. 14. 17. where it was found to be but five
loaves and two fishes; yea, barley loaves: another time, Mat. 15. 34. but seven
Mar. 6. 38. Luke 9. 13. Joh. 6. 9.
loaves and a few little fishes, for himself and his whole household; twelve
Apostles in ordinary, besides some servants, and a multitude of Disciples
hanging upon him extraordinarily. All the beasts of the forest were his, and so
were the cattle upon a thousand hills, yet read we not that he once killed so
much as a Calfe, for the provision of his family: for flesh could not be had
but for money, and money going always low with him, he used such kind of
victuals especially, as might always be supplied unto him by the industry of
his Disciples from the common storehouse of nature, the sea, without being
beholding or burdensome to any man.

In this frugality lived our Savior touching his household expense, that there
might be the greater remanet for the poor: and from this model of the Church
in his poor family, was the great frame of the Universal Church first devised,
as well for raising, as disposing of her Revenues; the means of raising them,
from the oblations and devotion of the people: the manner of employment of
them, for the necessity only of the Minister and poor. Thus much does
Augustine also declare upon the place alleged out of Saint John, Tractat. 62.
Habebat Dominus loculos, etc. Our Lord had his treasury Did. 12. 9. 1. ^abe^at.
or bag, wherein he kept the things that were offered by the faithful, and
did distribute them to his family and such other as had need: then first was
the form of Church government instituted.

The Apostles following our Savior exactly, would not be rich servants of a
poor master, nor owners of any thing, when their Lord himself possessed
nothing: holding it therefore not fit for them, aut in imis consistere, sed nec
in mediis, they reached at the highest garland of per^ection: and because their
master had said, Let him that will be perfect, sell all that he has, and give
to the poor; whatsoever was their own, and whatsoever was given them by others,
they cast it all into the common treasury, disposing it by their masters
example to two uses only, Hospitality and Alms, or works of charity; in their
hospitality they provided for the whole family of the Church then living with
them at Jerusalem, (out of which arose the great business of serving the
Tables, spoken of in the Acts) all of them jointly caring for every man in
particular, and every man particularly applying himself to support the
general. Their alms and part assigned to them in necessity, they dispersed
fully and faithfully, not only to the poor of their own Town, City, or
Country, but wheresoever through the world the members of Christ had need.

And so careful they were in employing these things to the highest benefit and
honor of the church, that Paul chused rather to live in want, and earn his
sustenance with his fingers, then to diminish this blessed portion, by taking
his due share out of it. Yea, the only thing that the Apostles gave so
precisely in charge one unto the other, was in every passage, that they should
remember the poor, Gal. 2. 10. Act. 11. 36. 2 Cor. 9. 3. as the bowels of
Christ, the darlings of the Church, and those whom God especially had chosen to
be rich in faith, and heirs of the kingdom, Jam. 2. 5.

With this mortar (I mean this blessed theological work of charity, which S.
Paul so highly extolleth above all other) did our Savior lay the first stones
in the foundation of his Church, and with it (to hold uniformity) did the
Apostles build the second course, commending the pattern to be for ever after
pursued throughout all ages: for whatsoever is built without it, is like stones
laid without mortar, which cannot therefore couple together, and grow into an
holy Temple in the Lord, as is required, Ephesians. 2. 21.

In the succeeding Church founded by Saint Mark, (the Disciple of Saint Peter)
at Alexandria in Egypt, the same rule (used before by the Apostles at
Jerusalem) was Hi^ron. in vita Marci.
so precisely established, that he thereby drew all Christians to follow his
example; insomuch that Philo Judaeus, a famous Author of that time, reports
that not only there, but in many other Provinces the Christians lived together
in societies, and he calls even then their habitations (...), Monasteries:
saying, that none among them possessed any thing to his private use; no man was
rich, no man poor, but all divided their substance to them in necessity;
disposing themselves (...) i. e. temperantia, continentia, mo^estia.
wholly to Prayer, singing of Psalms, to matter of doctrine, and to temperance.

Come lower down. Dionysius Corinthius in an Epistle to Soter Bishop of Rome,
in the year of Christ, 170. congratulateth with him, that the Church of Rome
still continued her ancient use in dispersing her goods in works of charity. It
is now grown to be an ancient custom with you, to bestow many benefits upon
all the brethren of the Church, and to send maintenance to the Churches in
every City: so that thereby you do not only relieve the necessity of the
poor, but of the brethren also which are condemned to the slavery of the metal
Mines, and by this benevolence of yours, which now you have used to send into
all places, even from the first Plantation of your Church, your selves being
Romans, have diligently preserved the Romans custom instituted by the Fathers;
which also your Bishop, the blessed Soter, has hitherto kept very diligently;
and by his laborious industry wonderfully advanced: not only in distributing
lovingly unto the Saints the goods ordained to their maintenance: but like a
merciful and mild father toward his children, in exhorting the brethren
(which come unto him) to virtue by blessed and devout persuasions. I report
this place at large, for that this use continued exactly in the Church, as
Eusebius reciting it affirms, till the great persecution under Maximinian,
and Dioclesian, which began about the year of our Lord, 304.) being the age
wherein Eusebius himself lived, as he there also testifies, lib. 4. cap. 22.

And that it was not thus in Rome only, but in Africa and other Churches, it
appears plainly by Tertullian in Apologet. cap. 39. where upbraiding the
Gentiles with the piety and devotion of Christians, he says, Etiam si quid
arcae genus est, etc. whatsoever we have in the treasury of our Churches is not
raised by taxation, as though we put men to ransom their Religion; but every
man that will, once a month, or when it pleases himself, bestows what he
things good, and not without he lists; for no man is compelled, but left
freely to his own discretion. That which is given, is accounted as Depositum
pietatis, the pledge of devotion; for it is not bestowed in banqueting,
quaffing, or gluttony, but in nourishing and burying the poor, and upon
children destitute both of parents and maintenance, aged and feeble persons,
men wracked by sea, and such as are damned to the metal mines, banished into
Islands, or cast into prison, professing the true God, and the Christian faith.

I might thus pass over the first 300. years of the Church, but I desire to
make it more apparent how the Clergy of those times lived as well for
conversation, as for maintenance. The times (to tell the truth) were such as
had not been from the very creation: Times wherein God opened the windows of
persecution, and rained blood upon his Church, as he did water upon the world
in the days of Noah; and as in the planting of the Law, he scourged the enemies
of his people with ten famous plagues, so now in the founding of the Gospel he
tried his children with ten grievous persecutions; by reason whereof the Clergy
then aspired so generally to the crown of martyrdom, that they prepared their
bodies to this sacrifice by the austerest rules of conversation that they could
devise, contemning all worldly pleasure, all curiosity of meat, drink,
apparel, sustenance and necessities, wasting their flesh with abstinence,
fasting, thin clothing, going sometimes barefoot, denying all things to every
sense, that it particularly delighted in, applying themselves wholly to Prayer
and Preaching, to support and enlarge the Gospel; and to be short, to do the
work of Gods Vineyard faithfully in all things and laboriously, as appears
abundantly in Eusebius, Nicephorus, Socrates, Ruffinus, and other ancient
Ecclesiastical Authors. These are they of whom the world was not worthy, these
gained every man his ten talents, and sit now in the first seats of heaven,
next unto the throne of the Lamb.

Touching their maintenance, the means thereof arise chiefly (as appears by
Tertullian, Origin, Cyprian, and others) out of the oblations of the people,
benevolences, first fruits, tithes, etc. which being continually offered at the
Altar, or brought into the treasury of the Church, were one while employed in
common to the diet and necessities of the brethren and Clergy, but at length
distributed by portions, first, weekly, as it seems by a decree of Pius the
first, Bishop of Rome, in the year of our Lord, 158. after monthly, as
appears by an Epistle of Cyprian ad clerum, lib. 4. Epist. 5. to every Priest
particularly. The manner how this was performed, appears not sufficiently in
the Authors of those times; but I will recite the places in their own
obscurities; first, touching that assigned to Pius, Tom. Con. 1. page 125. In
vita Pii.
Col. 6. Vt de oblationibus quae offeruntur a populo, and consecrationibus quae
supersunt, vel de panibus, quos deferunt fideles ad ecclesiam, vel certe de
suis: Presbyter convenienter parts incisas habeat in vase nitido, and
convenienti, ut post missarum solennia, qui communicare non fuerunt parati,
Eulogias omni die Dominico, and in diebus festis exinde accipiant, quae cum
benedictione prius faciat. Ex codice quinto librorum, lib. 2. c. 117.

And Cyprian in the place above cited, p. 126. Caeterum Presbyterii honorem
designasse nos illis jam sciatis, ut et sportulis iisdem cum Presbtyeris
honorentur, and divisiones mensurae aequalis quantitatibus partiantur: whereby
it appears that the Priests at this time (which was about the year 240.) had
every man his allowance delivered monthly per sportulas; that is, by baskets,
whereupon they were called fratres sportulantes, basket-brethren, or brethren
that lived on the basket; and it may be that some understanding the words, as
we now use them for an alms basket, could be contented that the Ministers lived
in like manner at this day. To deliver therefore that sacred and most
honorable profession from such base imputation, I hold it necessary to say
something of this jus sportularum.

Sportula, is sometimes used generally for every basket, sometimes particularly
for a Market basket, or panyer, and because the use among the Romans was to
cast their Market money into this basket, therefore that very money, and the
Market meat it self also was called sportula.

Besides it is taken for a vessel, a place, a portion, or provision of
victuals.

So Sportula Salutatoria, or Salutantium, was a basket, or mess of meat that
the great men of Rome by way of congratulation do give to the Cities which
came to visit them. Martial. lib. 1. Ep. ad Flaccum.

Dat Bajana mihi quadrantes sportula centum,
Inter delicias quid facit ista fames?
And these great men had at the entry of their houses a place of purpose for
keeping this kind of provision, to bestow on their friends; which place was
thereupon also called sportula, which Iuvenal seems to aim at under the name
of limen primum, Satyr. 1. -- Sportula primo

Limine parva sedet, turbae rapienda togatae. But expressly in his third Satyr.

Nonne vides quanto celebratur sportula fumo? Sportula publica, was a like
distribution made upon some notable occasion by the Senate and Emperors of
Rome, to the people in lieu of the solemn feastings formerly bestowed on them:
which allowances being afterward too niggardly abridged, Domitian (as
Suetonius in his life, cap. 7. reports) sportulas publicas sustulit, revocata
coenarum rectarum consuetudine, which Martial also remembers in an Epigram to
Domitian l. 8.

Grandia pollicitus quanto major a dedisti?
Promissa est nobis sportula, Recta data est.
Sportula nuptialis, signified the wedding feast or provision; Coelius
Rhodiginus Antiq. lect. l. 28. c. 24. apud Apuleium sportulas legimus
nuptiales, quippe (inquit) ita placuerat, insuburbana villa potius ut
conjungeremur, ne cives denuo ad sportulam convolarent.

Sportula convivalis is described also by Coelius, lib. 27. cap. 24. Eranon
(inquit est) quod pluribus differtum occumbentibus sit; sed ita ut ferat sibi
unusquisque quod edat, quod etiam (...), dicebatur, id est, sportula. Sportula
opipara, I may term that which is mentioned by Tully in his Epistles, Famil.
lib. 9. Ep. 20. Dediscendae tibi sunt sportellae and artologani, where some
interpret sportellae, for those meats, quae secundis mensis numerantur, dishes
of the second course, and greatest dainties.

So that sportula presbyteria was no base thing, but an honorable congiary, or
portion of victuals distributed to the Clergy, whether by the basket, as the
word signifies, or in vase nitido, as Pius appointed it; And thus much does
the very place alleged out of Cyprian entreat, where he says, sportulis idem
cum presbyter is honorentur.

What this sportula contained I cannot declare, but Alexand. ab Alexand.
Genial. dier. lib. 5. cap. 24. speaking of the Roman sportula publica says, In
qua frequens obsonium panis, oleum, and porcina caro dari solita est, absque
vino; and Domitius in his Comment. on the first Satyr. of Iuvenal, much more
fully, ex sportula omnia sibi coemebant, que and ad victum and ad cultum
pertinerent. So that, sportula presbyteria, seems to be then a Cornu copia,
that ministered unto the Clergy all things they had need of, as well for
clothing, and other necessaries, as for sustenance. For no doubt the people of
God did at this time, not only according to the precept of the Apostle, make
the Ministers of the Word partakers of all their goods; but as Abraham did also
to Melchisedek present unto them, (...), the very top and chiefest part
thereof, following Abraham in offering the fat, and abhorring to give the
carrion things unto God, like the sacrifice of Cain.

And that it may be no disgrace to the honorable Ministers of the Church to
live thus, ex sportula, let me note by the way that the Kings and Princes of
the world are likewise said to live ex sportula; for their Exchequer or
Treasury has thereupon the name of Fiscus: which word as appears by
Ascanius, is all one with sportula. Fisci, fiscinae, fiscellae (says he)
sportea sunt Strigelius in leg. lib. 2. page 307.
utensilia ad majoris summae pecunias capiendas, unde quia major summa est
pecuniae publicae quam privatae, factum est ut fiscus pro pecunia publica and
inde confiscare dicatur; a little before he says, Sportae, sportulae,
sportellae, munerum sunt receptacula; And let me also remember that in the
Eastern Empire, the Master of the Storehouse and Wardrobe, as well Palatine,
as Ecclesiastical, was called, (...), and (...), that is, a Canistro, Codin. p.
5. Suidas.
vel Sportula.

Touching Lands, though the Churches at this time had little, yet were they not
altogether without any, as appears partly by that which Eusebius reports of
Paulus Samosatenus, that under Aurelian the Emperor ( i. e. about the year
274.) he wrongfully invaded an house belonging to the Church of Antioch. But
more amply by the edict of Licinius, and Constantine, where it Apud Eusebius. l.
10. ca. 5.
is expressly commanded that all Lands and places which belonged to the
Christians, as well for their public use, as in their private possession,
that had been taken from them in the persecution of Dioclesian, should be
restored to them. Platina says, that Vrbane Bishop of Rome, anno 227. first
instituted, that the Church might receive Lands and possessions offered by the
faithful, and then shows to what end she might enjoy them, namely, that the
Revenues thereof should be distributed by portions to every man, and that no
man should have them to his particular benefit. Vrbane himself in the Decretall
Epistle attributed unto him, affirms this usage to be more ancient, saying
also, that the Bishops within their Diocese, and other faithful persons
(appointed by them) both did and ought to distribute these Revenues in manner
before mentioned; adding further that they were called the oblations of the
faithful, for that they were offered unto God, and that they ought not to be
otherwise employed then to Ecclesiastical uses, the relief of Christian
brethren, living together in common, and of the poor people* for that they are
the vows of the faithful, the price of sin, the patrimony of the poor, and
delivered over unto the Lord for the performance of this work. Many account
this Epistle Apocryphal, I will therefore strengthen it with the opinion of
Origin a Father of those times, who in his 16. Homily upon Genesis, disputes
it to be utterly unlawful for the Ministers of the Gospel to possess any
Lands, (to their own use, for so I understand him) confessing himself not to be
faultlesse herein; and therefore exhorting others to join with him in
Reformation thereof, he says, Festinemus transire a sacerdotibus Pharaonis,
let us make haste to depart from the Priests of Pharaoh, who enjoy earthly
possessions, to the Priests of the Lord, who have no portion in earth, for that
the Lord is their portion, fol. 26. col. 3. And to show to what end the Church
enjoys her goods, and in what manner they ought to be divided amongst her
Ministers and poor children, in his 31. Homily upon Matthew he says -- Opus
habemus ut fideles simus pariter and prudentes ad dispensandos ecclesiae
reditus, etc. It behooves us to be faithful in disposing the rents of the
Church. Faithful, that we our selves devour not those things which belong unto
the widows, and that we be mindful of the poor; and because it is written, The
Lord has appointed that they which preach the Gospel, should live 1 Cor. 9. 14.
of the Gospel; that we therefore take not occasion to seek more for our selves
then our simple diet, and necessary apparel: retaining a greater portion to
our selves then that we give to the brethren that are hungry and thirsty, and
naked, and which suffer necessity in secular affairs. Discreet: as to minister
to every man his portion, according to his rank and dignity; remembering that
which is said, Blessed is he which considers the poor and needy, Psalm. 41.
for it is not sufficient for us, simply to give away the goods of the Church;
so to keep our selves clear from devouring or stealing of them, but we must
wisely consider every man's necessity; how he falls into it, what his dignity
is, how he came by it, how much he needs, and for what cause he needs it.
We must not therefore deal alike with them which were pincht, and hardly
brought up in their infancy, and with them who being nourished delicately and
plentifully are now fallen into necessity. Neither must we minister the same
things to men and to women, nor like quantity to old men, and young men; nor to
sickly young men that are not able to earn their living, and those (...) have
somewhat of their own to maintain themselves withal. It must also be considered
whether they have many children; and whether those children be idle, or
industrious; and how far forth they are insufficient to provide for themselves:
to be short, there is great wisdom required in him that would well dispose
the Revenues of the Church, and that by being a faithful and discreet disposer
he may become an happy man. Thus far Origin; to which purpose Cyprian also in
his Epistle to Eucratius, lib. 1. Epist. 10. shows that the Church maintained
many poor, and that her own diet was frugalioribus and innocentibus cibis,
sparing and plain, and all her expense, sumptibus parcioribus quidem sed
salutaribus, full of frugality, but sufficient for health.

The persons by whom this distribution of Church goods was made, were chiefly
the Bishops (as appears by the former Epistle of Vrbane) and Deacons
appointed under them as in the times of the Apostles, Acts ^. Therefore Origin
in his 16. Homily upon Matthew, fol. 31. col. 4. taxing the unfaithful Deacons
says, Diaconi autem, etc. But the Deacons which govern not well the tables of
the Ecclesiastical money, (that is, the goods and Revenues of the Church) but
do always purloin them, not distributing that which they give according unto
judgment; and so become rich by that which belongs unto the poor; they are
the Exchangers whose Tables Christ will overthrow. For the Apostles in their
Acts teach us, that the Deacons are Governors of the Tables of Ecclesiastical
moneys, (or Revenues) etc. and again after, -- unusquisque diaconorum. Every
one of the Deacons which gather wealth to themselves by defrauding the poor,
let them now so understand this Scripture, that they gather no more, lest the
Lord comes upon them, and overthrow the Tables of their distribution.

Thus much touching the use of Church goods in the first age of the Church, or
first 300. years of Christ: whereby it plainly appears, that no
Ecclesiastical person enjoyed any thing belonging to the Church to his own
benefit; but that the Churchmen had out of the Revenues and goods of the
Church, so much only as sufficed for their necessary maintenance in meat,
drink, cloth, and such like: the surplusage being faithfully employed to the
relief of the poor, the needy, the widows, persons banished for Religion, or
imprisoned, Captives, and Christians any way distressed. So that the Church
exposing all this while the dugs of her piety unto others, did live her self on
thistles, and thorns, that is, in want, necessity, and professed poverty.

When the flood of persecution had prevailed as many years against the Church
in the time of the Gospel, as that of waters did days against the wicked in the
time of Noah; and that Constantine like the Dove of the Ark had brought the
olive branch of peace unto the people of God: the Church then began to smell
the sweet savor of rest, and changing presently her disposition with her
fortune, changed also the very policy of her government: before in poverty, now
in riches; before a servant, now a Mistress; before a Captive, now a
Conqueror. For the noble Constantine being miraculously converted to the
faith, did not only free her from persecution, but settled her also in the very
bosom of peace, raised her to honors, endowed her with possessions,
established her with immunities; and to be short, poured upon her the fullness
of his regal munificence. Insomuch, that many prudent Fathers foreseeing then
another evil likely to proceed from hence; as namely, that her plenty might
make her wanton, and forgetful of her duty, began now to dispute whether it
were lawful for her to accept lands and Temporalties, or not: Some alleged
that the examples of our Savior and his Apostles bound them to contemn the
world, and to live in a strict and Stoic kind of poverty. Others conceived
that course to be but temporal, and like a medicinal diet prescribed by
Physicians to their patients in sickness only, not in health: affirming the
time to be now come, when it pleased God to crown the longsuffering of his
Church, with the blessings promised in the tenth of Mark, v. 29. 31. That since
they had forsaken house, and brethren, and sisters, and father, and mother, and
wife, and children, and lands for Christ's sake and the Gospel; they should
receive an hundred fold now at this present, with their persecutions, and in
the world to come eternal life. I will not argue this point, but letting pass
the Schoolmen, will rest my self upon the determination of many ancient
Councels, Fathers, and Doctors of the Church, who with one consent conclude
affirmatively, that the Church may hold them.

And I think their opinion to be of God, for that it has prevailed these 1500.
years against all the enemies thereof, though the Kytes of Satan have pulled
many a plume from it.

To return to Constantine; though he and others by his example did abundantly
enrich the Church, yet did not the Churchmen take these riches to the benefit
of themselves, and their families, but employed them as before to works of
charity. Yea, Silvester himself, though the sea of these things flowed into
his bosom, and were at his pleasure, yet took he as sparingly of them, as if
he had been but a little pitcher, suffering the whole streams thereof to run
abundantly amongst the children of the church, and poor people, as did also the
other Fathers, Priests, and Clergy of that time, who reckoned not otherwise of
riches then as dung, which being spread and scattered in the fields of God,
might make them the more fertile. For the resolution then was (as in the age
before) that no Churchman might take Lands to his private use, nor the Church
her self otherwise then for works of charity, and the necessary sustenance of
her Ministers, not to make stocks or portions for them in earth, whose
inheritance was in heaven, and that had God himself fortheir portion. Therefore
Prosper a godly Father of that time, whose authority Lib. 21. de vita
Contemplativa.
is often used in the Council of Aquisgrane, disputing the point, concludes it
thus; If every Minister of the Church have not a Living, the Church does not
provide one for him in this world, but helps him with things necessary, that
he may receive the reward of his labor in the world to come, resting in this
life upon the promise of our Savior. To which purpose he applies the place in
the 1 Cor. 9. 14. What is it to live of the Gospel, but that the labourer
should receive his necessaries from the place wherein he labors? And a
little before him, Hierome also in his Book De vita Monach. Cler. instituenda
-- says, If I be the Lords part and Epist. ad Nepotianum.
the lot of his inheritance, not having a part amongst the rest of the Tribes;
but as a Levite and Priest do live of tithes, and serving at the Altar, am
sustained by the offerings of the Altar: having victuals and clothing, I will
be contented herewith, and being otherwise naked, will follow the naked cross.
So in his Book De Co. virginitatis, having reproved the curiosity of some
Clerks of that time, he says also, Habentes victum and vestitum his contenti
sumus: for as Ambrose says upon Esaias 1. Tom. 2. In officio clericatus lucrum
non pecuniarum, sed acquiritur animarum. In the function of a Clegy-man the
gain of money is not to be sought, but the gain of souls.

All these are but particular opinions of some Western Fathers: hear now
therefore the determination of the Eastern church assembled in the Council of
Antioch, Anno 340. cap. 25. Episcopus Ecclesiasticarum rerum habeat potestatem,
ad dispensandum erga omnes qui indigent, cum summa reverentia, and timore Dei;
participet autem and ipse, quibus indiget, tam in suis, quam in fratrum qui ab
eo suscipiuntur, necessariis usibus, profuturis, ita ut in nullo qualibet
occasion fraudentur, juxta sanctum Apostolum sic dicentem, Habentes victum and
tegumentum his contenti sumus. Quod si contentus istis minime fuerit, convertat
autem res ecclesiae in suos usus domesticos, and ejus commoda vel agrorum
fructus, non cum Presbyterorum conscientia, diaconorumque pertractet, sed horum
potestatem domesticis suis, aut propinquis, aut fratribus, filiisque committat,
ut per hujusmodi personas occulte caeterae laedantur ecclesiae, Synodo
provinciae poenas iste persolvat. Si autem and aliter accusetur Episcopus, aut
Presbyteri, qui cum ipso sunt, quod ea quae pertinent ad ecclesiam, vel ex
agris, vel ex alia qualibet Ecclesiastica facultate sibimet usurpent, ita ut ex
hoc afsligantur quidem pauperes, criminationi vero, and blasphemiis tam sermo
praedicationis, quam hi qui dispensant, taliter exponantur, and hos oportet
corrigi, sancta Synodo, id quod condecet, approbante.

Prosper proceeds further, and will not suffer that a Minister able to live
of himself should participate any thing of Church goods. Nec illi qui sua
possidentes, etc. For says he, They which have of their own, and yet desire to
have somewhat given them of that whereon the poor should live, do not receive
it without great sin. The holy Ghost speaking of Clerks (or Clergymen)
says, They eat the sins of my people. But as they which have nothing of their
own, receive the food they have need of, and not the sins: so they which have
of their own receive not the food (which they abound with) but the sins of
other men.

Therefore though the Council of Antioch, An. 340. Can. 25. ordained that the
Bishops might distribute the Church goods, yet would it not suffer them to take
any portion thereof to the use of themselves, or of the Priests and brethren
that lived with them, unless necessity did justly require it, using the words
of the Apostle, 1 Timothy 6. 8. habentes victum and tegumentum his contenti sumus;
having food and raiment let us be therewith contented. And decreed further,
that if the Bishops should not be satisfied, but did employ any goods of the
Church, to their kindred, brethren, or children, they should answer it at the
next Synod. So likewise touching Priests, as the words subsequent imply: and as
Achilles Statius expounds it, page 14. for the Priests at that time had
nothing but by the assignment of the Bishops: and if the Bishops themselves
might take no more then only for their necessity, we may easily judge what the
inferior Clergy might do.

But Gregory looking upon 2 Thessalonians. 3. 7, 8. where it is said, You ought to
follow us, we take no bread of any man for naught; and that he which will not
work, should not eat: applies these to the Clergy, and concludes that though
such kind of Ministers have never so much need, yet they must not participate
the food of their function or Church Revenues; for says he, Pensemus cujus
damnationis sit, etc. let us think with our selves how great damnation it is to
receive the reward of labor without labor. Behold, we (the Clergy) live of
the oblations of the faithful; but what? do we labor to get the goods and
cattle of the faithful? do we take those things for our wages which the
faithful have offered for the redemption of their sins; and do we not
earnestly labor as we ought to do, against those sins, by industry of prayer
and preaching?

For the next Ages of the church, what the Author Note.
intended further will be supplied by himself in the 20. chap. following,
collecting out of diverse Councels several canons touching tithes: but for our
own church of England he does abundantly express himself in his first Tome of
our English Councels; out of which see the collections here following, cap. 27.
and much also may be observed out of Mr Seldom in his History, c. 6. where he
shows when Tithes began to be commanded by Laws and Synods, and withal
gives the reason out of Agobardus a very learned Bishop of Lions (as he truly
says of him) why Councels did not at first make canons touching Tithes and
gifts to the church: which Agobardus speaks touching general Councels; but
Provincial Councels did frequently command them, as will appear by the
collections following here, cap. 20. Agobardus words are considerable, in his
Book De dispensatione contra sacrilegos, p. 176. Jam vero de donandis rebus and
ordinandis ecclesiis, nihil unquam in Synodis constitutum est, nihil a sanctis
patribus public praedicatum: nulla enim compulit necessitas, fervente ubique
religiosa devotione, and amore illustrandi ecclesias ultro aestuante, etc.

Concerning giving of goods, and endowing of churches, nothing has ever been
decreed in Councels, nothing publicly promulgated by the holy Fathers, for no
necessity required it, the religious devotion, and love of beautifying the
churches every where abounding of their own accord. At first religious Acts 4.
34, 35.
christians sold all their lands, goods, houses, and possessions, laying down
the money at the Apostles feet, Acts 2. 45. and long after the Apostles time
devotion and zeal in this kind was so fervent, that there was no need of laws,
but when this zeal began to wax cold in the next Ages following, then laws and
canons were made more carefully for Tithes and maintenance.

Many Kings and Princes also were so pious and careful, that the full tenth
should be paid, that they made several laws to pay a ninth part, that so they
might be sure to pay more rather then less then a tenth: Ex propensiori in
Deum animo ultra decimas, nonas dabant pii: As this Author proves by very
many laws alleged in his learned Glossary, which shall be produced in due
place and time: and cap. 11. here following prudently observes: How many
things in the beginning both of the Law and Gospel, were admitted, and omitted
for the present, and reformed afterward: for when the Law was given, the wheels
thereof could not presently fall into their course; and so likewise in the New
Testament, the Apostles themselves are compelled to many necessities, and to
suffer many things which were reformed afterward.

To which discourse I leave the Reader, who may thence receive satisfaction,
why laws and canons for Tithes and maintenance were not made in the first Ages
so exactly and carefully as afterward they were enacted both by Temporal and
Ecclesiastical powers.

But as others also observe for succeeding times; Churches and Tithes were both
miserably overthrown and lost in most of these Western parts of the Empire, by
the Invasion of the barbarous people, Hunnes, Goths, and Vandals, upon the
Christian world, who first invading Italy under the Emperor Justinian, did
miserably spoil and harrow the Country, persecuted the Clergy, pulled down
Churches, robbed Bishops, and Colleges, overthrew schools of learning, and
committed all sorts of wickedness: and afterward they set their face against
France, where to oppose them Charles Martell would not encounter, unless the
inferior Clergy would yield up their Tithes into his hands to pay his Armies
and Soldiers: for which sacrilege he is infamous in the public Histories to
this day, especially because he did not restore the Tithes to the Clergy,
according to his solemn promise, after God had blessed him with good success,
killing many thousands in one great battle. This fact of Martell was done
about the year 660. Chr. and no redress of it till the Council of Lateran,
near five hundred years after, Anno 1189. under Alexander the third; and this
was the first violence that ever Tithes suffered in the Christian world, after
they left the Land of Jewry and came to inhabit among Christians. But by that
foot of Charles Martell it appears, that the Clergy in his time did hold and
receive Tithes, and doubtless by virtue of laws and canons made in former
times, (witness the Council of Mascon, Anno 586.) and not so late as about
the year 800. which some do pretend. For that Council of Mascon, Can. 5. does
affirm, and take them as due by authority and laws of ancient times, and also
by the Word of God, and that they were paid by the whole multitude of
Christians. So the words of the Canon are expressly. Leges divinae consulentes
sacerdotibus ac ministris ecclesiarum pro haereditaria portione omni populo
praeceperunt decimas fructuum suorum, -- quas leges Christianorum congeries
long is temporibus custodivit intemeratas.

Here is no small testimony as well of ancient practice in paying of them, as
of great opinion, for their being due; says M. Seldom, ca. 5. 5. and so
Spelman, ca. 18. infra.

So also the phrase used in the fourth Council of Arles. Vt Ecclesiae
antiquitus constitutae nec decimis, nec ulla possessione priventur; and other
Provincials of that time, and Laws of Charlemain agree with it, says Mr
Seldom; and those phrases must needs refer back to ancient times. So Boniface
an Englishman, Bishop of Ments, in an Epistle to Cuthbert Archbishop of
Canterbury (Spelman Council. p. 241.) speaks of some negligent and unworthy
Ministers that did receive Tithes and profits, but did not carefully perform
their duties: whereby it appears that Tithes were then paid, though some
unworthy men received them. And though the original right be due to God
himself, yet because he has assigned over his right to the Priests in the old
Law, and now to the Ministers of the Gospel, therefore they are to be paid to
the Priest or Minister; for he is the Steward of Gods house, and in this point
no man must respect what condition he is of: for the debt is due to his Master,
not to himself; so that whether he be good or bad, what condition soever he be
of, he stands or falls to his own Master, as Spelman shows, Cap. 14.

CAP. VII. That the service of the Levites was clear altered from the first
institution, yet they enjoyed their Tithes.
THere be two sorts of Leviticall service: the first instituted by Moses about
the Tabernacle, Number. 1. The second by David about the Temple. In the first the
Levites were appointed over the Tabernacle and the instruments thereof to bear
it, to take it down, and set it up, Number. 50. 51. to serve Aaron and his sons,
and to do the service of the Tabernacle, and keep the instruments thereof,
Numb. 3. 6, 7, 8.

The Levites that belonged to this service in general were 8580. men, between
the age of 30. and 50. years, and the chiefest occasion of their service was
upon the removing of the host: for better ordering whereof, it was divided
amongst them into three parts.

The 1. to the Kohathites, Numb. 3. The 2. to the Gershomites. The 3. to the
Merarites.
First, the Kohathites were 2750. men, and their office 1.
was about the Sanctuary, Numb. 4. 36. or Holiest of all, Number. 4. 4. under the
government of Eleazar the Priest, Numb. 3. 32. to bear the Ark of the
testimony, and all the instruments of the Sanctuary. The covering vail, (which
divided the Sanctuary and the Holiest of all) the Table of shewbread, the
dishes, the incense, the incesecups, the goblets, and coverings to cover it
with, and the bread that shall be thereon continually, v. 7. the Number. 4.
Candlestick, with the Lamps, Snuffers, Snuffe-dishes, and the oil Vessels
thereunto belonging, v. 9. the golden Altar for incense, v. 11. and the
instruments wherewith they minister in the Sanctuary, v. 12. The Altar (of
burnt-offering) with the instruments thereof which they occupy about it, viz.
the censers, the flesh-hooks, and the basins, (even) all the instruments of the
Altar, v. 14. But these being the holiest things, were to be taken down and
trussed up by the Priests, some of them in blew silk, some in scarlet, some in
purple cloth, all in badgers skins, and the bars and carriages to be put to
them by the Priests, as is prescribed, Numb. 4. and then the Cohathites came
and bare them away, but touch them they might not lest they die, v. 15. nor see
them when they were folded up, v. 20. and Aaron was to appoint what part every
man should bear, v. 19.

The Gershomites were 2630. men, Number. 4. 40. under 2.
the hand of Ithamar the Priest, the other son of Aaron. Their office was to
bear the curtains of the Tabernacle, and the Tabernacle of the congregation,
his covering and the covering of badgers skins, that is on high upon it, and
the vail of the door of the Tabernacle of the Congregation, v. 25. the curtain
also of the Court which is near the Tabernacle and near the Altar round about,
with their cords and all the instruments for their service, and all that is
made for them, v. 26. Aaron to appoint every man his charge, v. 27. and watch,
v. 28.

The Merarites were 3200. men, v. 44. under Ithamar 3.
also, and they had in charge the boards of the Tabernacle Exodus 26. 15.
with the bars thereof, and his pillars, and his sockets, v. 31. And the
pillars round about the Court, with their sockets, and their pins, and their
cords with all their instruments, even for all their service, to be reckoned by
name (or Inventory) and the instruments of their office and charge, v. 32.
Exodus 4. and Exodus ca. 3.

This was the office and charge of the Levites as they were simply Levites, and
not Priests also: and for their service in this kind, were they judged worthy
of the Tithes of all Israel. But when Solomon had builded the Temple and there
settled the Ark, the Altars, and all the holy implements, this business of
theirs was merely at an end: for those holy things were now no more to be
carried up and down. David therefore foreseeing it, transposed the Levites to
new offices; before they were Levites of the Tabernacle; now he makes some of
them Levites of the Temple, and other Provincial Levites: according to which
is the speech that Josiah uses to the Levites: Put the holy Ark in the house
which Solomon the son of David King of Israel did build; it shall be no more a
burden upon your shoulders; serve now the Lord your God, and his people Israel,
2 Chronicles. 35. 3.

1. Of the Levites of the Temple. The Levites of the Temple were those that
served about the Temple, and were (as I say) instituted by David, but inducted
by Solomon. David's bloody hands might not build the Temple of peace, 1 Chronicles.
22. 8. he prepared the treasure and stuff for the building, the men and the
manner for the order of the service, ( ib. v. 14. c. seq.) but Solomon
performed the work. The Levites of the Temple were of two sorts, one Levites
and Priests, the other Levites only: In the function of the Priests, he
changed little save the place of their service, not the manner; before they
served in the Sanctuary of the Tabernacle, now he removes them to the
Sanctuary of the Temple.

But to avoid confusion (because the posterity of Aaron was by this time (that
is, in 600. years) exceedingly multiplied) he divided the Priests into 24.
ranks or courses, according to the names of their families, as you may read, 1 Chronicles. 24. 7. appointing them their turns and times of attendance, which as it
seems, 2 Chronicles. 23. 8. (and as Praecepit eis ^^ unaquaeque generatio
ministraret Deo per dies octo, a Sabbatho usque ad Sabbathum. Joseph. Antiq. l.
7. cap. 15. p. 389.
Josephus explaineth it) was from one sabbath to another, therefore the Greek
translation calls these turns or courses, (...) and (...), which Theophylact
says is, hebdomia, a week: Hereupon Zacharias is said to be of the rank or
course of Abiah (which was the 8. rank) and to execute the Priests office, and
burn incense as his turn came, Luke 1.

The other Levites of the Temple; that is, those that were simply Levites and
not Priests; namely, such as descended not of the line of Aaron, he divided
into 3. parts: one to be singers; another to be porters, and take the charge of
the gates of the Temple; the third to be keepers of the Treasury.

The singers to be divided as the Priests, into 24. ranks or courses; The
porters into 5. parts, one part to every of the 4. gates of the Temple, and the
fifth to Asuppim, i. e. the Councell-house.

Their Treasury was generally committed to one as the chief, but under him, to
2. sorts of other officers, one to keep the Treasures of the house of the Lord,
(that is, that were given to the maintenance of the Temple) v. 22. and the
other to keep the dedicate things, v. 26 and 28. But I find that the Treasury
was divided into 3. parts: one called Mesark, wherein were laid up donaria
principum, the gifts of Kings and Princes; the second Corban, in which were
donaria sacerdotum, the offerings of the Priests; and the third Gazophylacium,
pro donariis transeuntium, for the offerings of the people in general, into
which it seems the poor widow cast her mite. Eos vero qui erant de germine
Mosis, eminentius honoravit; fecit eos aute^ custodes thesaurorum Dei, atque
vasorum quae reges Deo dicare contigerit. Antiq. l. 7. c. 15. page 390.
Josephus says that with this office of the Treasury, as the most eminent,
David honored the offspring of Moses.

2. Of the Provincial Levites. The Provincial Levites are those whom he
severed from the Temple, and placed abroad in the Country to be rulers over the
people, both in matters pertaining to God, and the affairs of the King, that
is, spiritually and temporally; some to be Judges, some to be other Officers in
the Commonwealth: 1700. of them he set on the West Side of Jordan, and 2700.
on the East Side, chief Fathers, and all worthy men, Chron. 26. 30. and 32.
Josephus counts the Levites of this kind with Iudices autem populi and
scribas eorum 6000. Antiq. l. 7. c. 15. p. 389.
their Scribes, as he calls them, to be 6000. whereby it appears that the
sect of the Scribes belonged to the Judges.

Thus David made a new form of the service of the Levites, far differing from
the first: yet the Tithes appointed to the first, remained over to the second
sort: and those that meddled not with the Temple and holy things, namely, the
Provincial Levites, had their part in the Tithe as well as the Templar
Levites; and therefore as the alteration of the service, whereto they were
first ordained, took not away the wages allotted to them: so the second
alteration of their service, namely, this of the Gospel, ought not to take from
the Levites thereof, our Ministers, the Tithe before paid to the two former
kind of Levites; I mean them of the Tabernacle, and of the Temple. The Templar
Levites were delivered from bearing the burden of the Tabernacle, and yet had
the Tithes; therefore the Levites of the Gospel must have their Tithes, though
they be delivered from bearing the burden of the Law, and ceremonies thereof.

Though this distinction of Templar and Provincial Note.
Levites may seem new to some men, yet it is plainly grounded upon the Text,
and is very material to be observed for many purposes. At first whiles the
number of the Levites and Priests was not very great, they all attended at the
Tabernacle at Shilo, first, or elsewhere: But when the Temple was built by
Solomon, and that Tribe greatly increased, they attended by courses, (which was
before designed by David, 1 Chronicles. 23, etc.) and then it fell out but one week
in an half year to each to attend at the Temple: for the Priests being divided
into 24. courses, and so likewise the Levites into 24. no course could come
oftener about, then once in 24. months, or a week in every half year, which
indeed was their usage, as Josephus shows; and so Scaliger and Salianus, with
other accurate Chronologers.

Now the whole Tribe being so mightily increased in David's time, as that there
were 38. thousand Levites besides the Priests, 1 Chronicles. 23. 3. Magnus sane
numerus pro isto populo, ut facile intelligas multos ornatui magis serviisse
quam necessitati: as Grotius there says.

Therefore God employed them for many uses more then to attend at the Temple:
some were designed for other employments in the Commonwealth, and they applied
other studies, as being the chief men for nobility and dignity, and also for
learning and knowledge in that Commonwealth.

Cum pingue haberent otium, non tantum omnia legis, sed and medicinae,
aliarumque artium diligentes ediscebant, ut and Aegyptii s^^erdotes, ideoque
primis seculis, ex illis, ut eruditioribus Senatus 70. virum legi maxim
solebat. Grotius in Deuteronomy. 17.

There was no other Academy or School then in the whole world, but at the
Temple among them, where the knowledge of Gods law, or learning in any kind
could be gained: The administration of law and justice throughout the kingdom
depended on them principally; for God made his covenant with Levi of life and
peace. The law of truth was in his mouth. The Priests lips should preserve
knowledge, and they should seek the law at his mouth: Mal. 2. 5, 6, 7. and so
Ezekiel. 44. 23. They shall teach my people the difference between the holy and
profane, and cause them to discern between the unclean and the clean: and in
controversy they shall stand in judgment, and they shall judge according to my
judgments: and they shall keep my laws, and my statutes in all mine
assemblies: they being the principal Judges and Lawyers in that Commonwealth
of Gods own constitution. And whereas it is now granted on all hands, than
there was 3. Courts of Justice in that kingdom; 1. the great Council of 70.
Elders; 2. the Court of Judgment consisting of 23. 3. the Court of three, or
some few more: the Priests and Levites were principal men, both Judges and
Officers in all Courts, Scophtim and Schoterim, as 1 Chronicles. 23. 4. both to give
sentence and judgment, and also to execute the same: so the Divines do affirm
also in their late Annotations, upon 1 Chronicles. 26. 29, 30. and 2 Chronicles. 19. 8.
11. They did study the Judicial and Politic laws, and had power to see the
law of God, and injunctions of the King to be observed, and to order divine and
humane affairs. And they held also other honorable offices: for we 1 Chronicles.
26. 14
read that Zechariah a Levite was a wise Counselor. And Benaiah a Priest, son
of Jehoiada, was one of David's 1 Chronicles. 27. 5.
twelve Captains, being the third Captain of the Host for the third month: and
in his course consisting of 2400. was his son Amizabad: Benaiah was also one 1 Chronicles. 11. 22
of David's principal Worthies, having the name among the three Mighties. He was
also Captain of the guard to David, and after the death of Joab, he was made
Lord General of the Host, by King Solomon, in Joabs room, 1 Kings 2. 35.

And because some have doubted whether they were employed in the administration
of justice, it is more clearly of late evinced then formerly has been: for
besides Sigonius, Bertram, Casaubon, Moulin, and diverse others, the learned
Hugo Grotius, in his Annotations upon Matthew, cap. 5. 21. has very accurately
proved it out of the Text, Josephus, and Philo, and other monuments of the Jews
(whose testimonies at large I cannot now recite) that there was no distinction,
nor division of the Courts of Justice, the one Ecclesiastical, the other
Civil, but the Courts were united, and the Priests and Levites, the principal
Judges and officers in every Court, to whom the people were to be obedient upon
pain of death, Deuteronomy. 17. 12. they being appointed to hear every cause between
blood and blood, between plea and plea, and between stroke and stroke, being
matters of controversy within thy gates; and as our Lawyers call them, Pleas
of the Crown, and Common pleas, or whatsoever else did arise among them. The
Provincial Levites were especially appointed to the Courts of Justice, and
also the Templar Levites, when they had performed their courses, (and went home
to their own houses) being but one week in half a year, were at very good
leisure to assist the people in every Tribe, where their Cities were allotted
to them, in governing, ruling, and directing in all matters pertaining to God
and the King, 1 Chronicles. 26. 30. 32. for which purpose God did scatter them in
every Tribe, and turned the curse of Jacob into a singular blessing, to be
divided in Jacob, and scattered in Israel, Genesis 49. 7.
appointing 1700. to be on the west side Jordan, and 2700. on the East Side.

The ancient frame of our Commonwealth, for 500. years before the Conquest,
was thus disposed and governed, as this learned Author shows fully in his
Glossary and Councels; and happy had it been if things had so continued still:
but now the law being otherwise settled, and the Courts divided, it is not safe,
or easy to make alteration.

Comes praesidebat foro Comitatus, non solus, sed adjunctus Episcopo; hic ut
jus divinum, ille ut humanum diceret; alterque alteri auxilio esset and
consilio: praesertim Episcopus Comiti, nam in hunc illi animadvertere saepe
licuit and errantem cohibere: idem igitur utrique territorium, and
jurisdictionis terminus: Glossar. Spelman.

The Bishop and Earl of the County were joint Magistrates in every Shire, and
did assist each other in all causes and Courts; and so Mr Seldom in his
History, cap. 14. 1. By this means there was great union and harmony between
all Judges and Officers, whereas there is now great contention for
jurisdiction, and intolerable clashing in all Courts, by injunctions,
prohibitions, consultations, and cross orders to the great vexation of the
clients and subjects.

The division of Courts seems to have proceeded first from Pope Nicholas 1. as
is mentioned in Gratian, Can. cum ad verum 96. did. about 200. years before
the Conquest, which was imitated here by William the Conqueror, whose statute
is recited and illustrated by Spelman in his Glossary and Councels, and lately
also published by Lord Cook, lib. 4. Institutes, cap. 52. But the further proof
hereof will require more then this place, or occasion will bear: only thus
much was necessary to be mentioned and asserted in regard of explication and
reference to many passages in this book, and also other parts of his works,
which perhaps are not obvious, or well observed by every common Reader. Vide
Glossar. Domini Spelman. in diatribis de Comite; de Gemottis; de Hundredo, etc.
and Concilia passim.

CAP. VIII. The great account made of Priests in the old Law, and before.
PRiesthood is of 3. sorts. 1. That before the Law. 2. That of the Law. 3. This
of the Gospel. The first belonged to the Gentiles, the second to them of the
Circumcision, the third to us under grace. The third came in lieu of the
second, and the second rise out of the first, which was from the beginning, and
the work of nature: for as Origin says, natural wisdom required Erant
ni^ilominus ea tempestate sacrdotes, nec dum adhuc a lege ordinati, sed
naturali s^p^entia h^s requirente and perficien^e. l. 11. in Job p. 2.
and established it: Abel and Cain, before the Priests office, by the instinct
of nature, not by commandment, when each of them sacrificed, or made an
oblation unto the Lord, Genesis 4. 4. their outward senses reported to them
continually the great mercies that God had showed unto them: and their inward
taught them presently, that they must be thankful, and what course was fittest
to express their thankfulness; namely, to honor him that gave all, with
somewhat of his own; I say to honor him with it, not to reward him: therefore
both of them (as it is said in Gen.) offered of their fruits; Cain like a
churl, his fruits simply, that is, his ordinary and lean stuff: but Abel like
a Prince, his first fruits, that is, his best fruits, namely, the fat, etc.
Genesis 4. 3, 4. Thus was Priesthood instituted, corrupted, and reformed even in
the beginning. Cain (for ought that here appears to the contrary) began it,
and likewise corrupted it; Abel continued, and reformed it: but some rather
think (and so says Hugo) that Adam taught it to his children: and this to me
seems more likely, that the In Genesis 4. 3.
better function should be derived from the better man, and not from the bloody
mind of murdering Cain.

From this fountain it ran under ground (I mean unspoken of) till the time of
Noah, and then breaking forth again, did show it self more perspicuously in his
person, for he not only offered an oblation, which he learned of his
Ancestors, but offered it also upon an Altar, which he taught his successors.

By this example of Noah, the exercise of sacrificing grew common (no doubt)
with the people of that time, and after in the confusion of languages to be
dispersed through all Nations, who losing their original faith with their
original tongue, and falling so to idolatry, applied this holy function to the
worship of idols and devils. Amongst which, notwithstanding, (as here and there
an ear of wh^at, in a field of thistles) God had his servants, who from time to
time, and age to age, traducing this holy mystery (as sacred fire) to
posterity, kept it ever in the original integrity. Besides the regal Priest
Melchisedek, such were Abraham and Job, whom though the Scripture intituleth
not with that name, yet it testifies that they used the function, which
seems then to be ordinarily, though the Scripture mentions it not; for
young Isaac could talk of the fire, and wood, and ask where the Lamb was for
the burntoffering, Genesis 22. before Abraham had made the sacrifice there spoken
of. But Abraham being first a Gentile, and after the Author of Circumcision,
brought the mystery of sacrificing, and thereby of Priesthood) from the V^ non
Gentes ex Iudaeis, sed Iudaei ex Gentibus sacerdotium acceperint. Ep. ad
Euagrium. Tom. 3. p. 38.
Gentiles to them of the Circumcision; so that (says Jerome) the Gentiles
received not Priesthood from the Jews, but the Jews from the Gentiles.

CAP. IX. When our Savior commanded that the Disciples should take nothing
with them, but live on the charges of the faithful; this bound not the
Disciples perpetually.
When our Savior prescribed his Disciples to take nothing with them, but to
live at the charge of them into whose houses they entered; this was a law to
bind the faithful to provide for the Minister, but not to bind the Minister to
live so, and no otherwise; for though at this time he commanded them to take no
scrip with them, (that is, no necessaries) yet after he says; But now he that
has a scrip let him take it, Luke 22. 36. So likewise he willed them to salute
no man, yet it was not his meaning, that afterward they should be so
uncourteous. If this had been a legal commandment to the Disciples, then
might they not vary from it, nor live in any other sort without sin. But Paul
and Barnabas left this course of maintenance and lived upon the labor of their
hands, therefore this was no binding commandment, but as a Charter of liberty
and power granted to the Disciples. They might both use and exact it, if they
would, or they might discedere de jure, and leave it if they listed. S. Paul, 1
Cor. 9. largely handles this point, and concludes it to the purpose we
allege: So (says he) the Lord ordained that they who preach the Gospel should
live of the Gospel, v. 14. But I (quoth he) have used none of these things,
neither write I these things, that it should (thus) be done unto me, v. 15. By
which words, says S. Austin, it appears that our Lord commanded not in such
sort, as they Tom. 4. 99.
which preached the Gospel, might not live otherwise then by that that was
ministered unto them by them to whom they preached it: for then (says he) the
Apostle did against this commandment, that got his living with the labor of
his hands, lest he should be chargeable to any. But our Lord (says he) gave
them power to do it (if they would) that thereby they might know that these
things were due unto them. And again, a little after he adds these words;
therefore when the Apostle says, That our Lord so ordained, but for his part
he used it not, he shows manifestly, that power was given them to use it, (if
they would) but no necessity imposed of doing it, (if they would not.)

And from this distinction is the reconcilement drawn of these two places in
Scripture, which otherwise seem contrary, Mat. 10. 10. and Luke 9. 3. say both,
that our Lord commanded that the Disciples should not take, no not a staff
with them: but Mark 6. 8. reports it, Nothing save a staff only. Saint
Augustine August. de Consens. Eu. Tom. 4. 100. a.
therefore in the first place understands it literally, not so much as a
staff to stay or uphold them: but in the second place figuratively, for power
and authority, as if the speech had been, Take no kind of necessaries with you,
no not so much as a staff to stay you, save only the staff of authority that
I now give you.

And in that our Savior left these things to the choice of the Disciples and
Ministers, he made them Lords and freemen, for necessity imposes bondage;
Therefore Paul and Barnabas showed not only their freedom in not using that
that lay in their power, but the nobleness of their mind also that would
depend upon no body; and hereby we must not judge them to have no right to
tithes, because they omitted them also.

CAP. X. That many things in the beginning both of the Law and the Gospel were
admitted, or omitted, for the present, or reformed afterward.
AS Painters in the beginning of their work, use rude colors, and unperfect
lines, for their present direction; so in all great mutations, many things are
for the present admitted, or omitted, which future time shall have just
occasion to reform. This in humane actions is so common, as needs no
instance: but insomuch as the holy rites themselves are not free from it,
neither in the old, nor new Testament, i^ is necessary for the point in hand to
show some examples thereof.

I observe therefore three kinds of alterations, 1. Admission of things
prohibited. 2. Omission of things commanded; and 3. Reformation of things
established.

Touching the first point; plurality of wives was forbidden, 1.
yet after Lamoch had broken this institution, the children of God were
permitted also to do it. So likewise was Divorcement: yet Moses tolerated it.

None might sacrifice in the high places, or under green trees, but only in
the Tabernacle, Deuteronomy. 12. 2. yet till the building of the Temple, God often
accepted it, as of Gedeon.

The Priests only might eat the shewbread, yet David and his followers did
eat it also upon necessity.

On the other side, things commanded were omitted 2.
for a time; for when the Law was given, the wheels thereof could not
presently fall into their course. Circumcision it self was not used during all
the 40. years travel in the wilderness, and happily had never been revived,
if God had not commanded Joshua to circumcise the children of Israel the second
time, Jos. 5. 2. Yea, the great ceremonies of sacrifices and oblations slept
all that while, the people offered to Idols, and Aaron with them, but from the
first sacrifice that Aaron offered, at the entering into the wilderness, Lev.
9. 8. etc. not one Altar breathed unto the Lord in 40. years, Amos 5. 26. Even
Moses himself was buried in this sleep. How the Passover and other Feasts were
celebrated appears not, they are seldom mentioned, and may seem therefore
seldom kept. One Passover at the going out of Egypt, Exodus 12. 11. Another
in the wilderness of Sinai, God then reviving that commandment, Numb. 9. 1.
etc. After by Joshua at Gilgal beyond Jordan, Jos. 3. 10. and from that day
till the 18. year of Josias, (that is, above 800. years) all are passed over as
obscure, except one in the time of Solomon, 2 Chronicles. 35. 13. and 2 Kings 23. 2.
But I must not conceal that Moses omitteth the History of 36. years travail in
the wilderness, reporting only the punishment of him that gathered sticks on
the Sabbath day, Numb. 15. 32. and therefore in that time whether it were kept
or not, we can conclude nothing: but it is plain that before Ezekias his days
it was so utterly lost, that when he came to renew it, it seemed merely a new
thing, 2 Chronicles. 29. and all this time also, was both the Temple forlorn and
shut up, and all the holy rites almost extinguished till he renewed them, ib.

For the point of Reformation; the Levites were 3.
by Moses assigned to the Tabernacle; the Priests to the Altar, but both of
them confusedly without distinction, and yet so they continued till the time of
David: who to reform this confusion, divided them into ranks, allotted a part
of the service to every rank, and assigned to them of the ranks times of
attendance, and intermission, 1 Chronicles. 23, 24, 25, 26. cap. upon which it is
said that Zacharias was of the course (or rank of Abia) and executed the
Priests office, as his course or turn came in order, Luke 1. 5, and 8.

Some things also that were never commanded were brought into the old Law
afterward, and well accepted, as the act of fasting, and the habit thereof,
sackcloth and ashes.

The brazen Serpent was set up by Gods own commandment, Numb. 21. 6. yet when
the people burnt incense to it, Ezekias brake it in pieces, 2 Kings 18. 4.
without any commandment.

None might slay the burnt-offerings but the Priests, but when they were too
few, and till more were sanctified, the Levites did it, 2 Chronicles. 29. 34.

Likewise in the New Testament, the wheels of the Gospel were not by and by in
their course. The Apostles themselves are compelled to the same necessities.

First, to admit many ceremonies abolished, for if they 1.
struck at them all at once, they drive all the Jews from the doctrine at once;
again, if they imposed them upon the Gentiles, the Gentiles repined at the
burden: to carry the matter therefore as even as they might, they call a
Council, and consulting upon it, they write to the Gentiles, that they
purposed not to burden them but with these necessary things, viz. to abstain
from things offered unto idols, and blood, and that that is strangled, and from
fornication, Acts 15. 29. by which the Gentiles could not complain of being
burdened with ceremonies, nor the Jews that their ceremonies were contemned. In
like sort Saint James and the Elders at Jerusalem seeing many thousand Jews to
believe, and yet to be zealous of the Law, ( Act. ^1. 20.) they not only
tolerated it for the present, but persuaded Saint Paul (coming thither) to do
the like, and further to make a show also that himself observed the law:
whereupon as before he had circumcised Timothy in show of keeping the law, Acts
16. 3. so now he also personateth a Nazarite, Numb. 6. 8.
he is purified, and he is shaven (as one already) at Cenchrea, Act. 21. 26.
and 18. 18.

Thus the Apostles applied themselves to the necessity of the time, the place,
and the persons: thus Paul becomes a Proteus, a Jew to the Jews, a Gentile to
the Gentiles, weak to the weak, all to all, and all this to gain all them to
Christ, 1 Cor. 9. 22.

In the mean while, many things required to the 2.
establishing of the Church, must needs be omitted; the main matters they
uphold unto death, but the secondary and remote dependances they refer to
opportunity: therefore they by and by pressed no man with keeping the Lords
day, and though themselves began by little and little to sanctify it with
breaking of bread, and preaching, Acts 20. 9. 1 Cor. 16. 2. yet the first
mention of it is above 22. years after the Passion of Christ in Acts 20. 7. and
I suppose it to be begun about that time, because I find that till that time
the Apostles used the Judicial Sabbath, but never after, through all the New
Testament; and the reason why they then used it was, for that the greatest
Assemblies being on that day in the Temple and Synagogues of the Jews*
therefore they resorted thither, there they preached the Gospel, there they
taught the people, as if themselves had celebrated that Sabbath. And as it was
long ere they brought in the Lords day, so in matters more remote and outward,
matters belonging to the body, they were less curious; therefore though they
labored hard in the Lords Vineyard, yet they required no wages of any man. And
though Paul prescribed that Bishops should be good housekeepers, yet few or
none of them were owners of houses, but rather as fugitives to escape
persecution, or as pilgrims to preach the Gospel.

If the law that was given in a solitary place, to a people 3.
sequestered from all other, and at union amongst themselves, and having no
public nor potent adversary to hinder the course thereof; if they I say,
could not preserve it in the original integrity, much more of necessity must
the establishment of the Gospel be impeached and turned out of the course
thereof, it rising in the midst of the enemies, in the flame of persecution,
and with the opposition of the greatest Potentates in every Region. It must
therefore have the greater need of sundry Reformations: some of the first
lineaments must be wiped out, some altered, and some as occasion served must be
added or amended; the Judicial ceremonies that for many years together were
permitted in the cradle time of the Church, must be taken away: Paul that then
suffered them, now suppresseth them, Col. 3. Gal. 3. ca. 4. c. 5. and the holy
Ghost throughout all the Epistle to the Hebrews, beats them down for ever.

Thus as old branches be cut off, so some new be ingraffed; the Lords day, the
Feasts of Easter and Whitsontide, not spoken of in the beginning, are brought
in at length. Deacons are ordained presently after Christ, Act. 6. 2. but no
Bishops in 20. years after, nor were they then particularly ascribed every one
to his limit, but many together over one City, as at Ephesus, Act. 20. 28. So
women at first were admitted to be Deacons, Conc. Laodicen. c. 11.
but time afterward wore them out. Christ commanded his Disciples that they
should not go from house to house, but Paul says, I have taught you openly,
and from house to house, Acts 20. 20.

To conclude, all could not be suddenly done, nor compendiously written, that
belonged to the government of the Church, therefore the Apostles left much to
the wisdom of the Church, under this general Commission, Let all be done in
order, 1 Cor. 14. 40. a few words, but of great extent, like that of the
Dictators at Rome, which being but two words, providere reipub: gave them
authority over every thing.

CAP. XI. That upon the reasons alleged, and other here ensuing, the use of
tithing was omitted in Christ's, and the Apostles time; and these reasons are
drawn, one ab expediente, the other a necessitate.
THe greater matters thus quailing as aforesaid, it could not be chosen but
things of less importance must also be neglected; especially such as were
outward, and concerned only the body, amongst which the use of Tithing was
likewise discontinued, both in the Apostles time, and in the first age of the
Law, when the great ceremonies of Circumcision, Sacrifice, and Oblations, the
Passover, etc. and many other holy rites were suffered to sleep.

But some will say, God strictly exacted When there shall be a place which the
Lord God shall choose to cause his name to dwell there, thither shall you bring
all that I command you; your burnt-offerings and your sacrifices, your tithes
and the offerings of your hands and all your special vows, which you vow unto
the Lord, Deuteronomy. 12. 11. these things were not respited till then, but appointed
that then also they must be performed; for it is also said, Exodus 12. 21. When
ye shall come into the Land which the Lord shall give you, -- then ye shall
keep this service, i. e. of the Passover; which was done, Ios. 4. 6. but yet I
take this to be discharge of it in the mean time. Quaerc.
not these things till the place he had chosen was prepared for them, that is,
till the building of the Temple; as it is true in part touching the old Law, so
is it likewise true in the new Law: and that therefore Christ and the Apostles
exacted not the payment of Tithes in the first pilgrimage and warfare of the
Gospel, but referred them amongst some other things till the Church were
established; for as Solomon says, Every thing has his time, and the time was
not yet come, that the Church should demand her own, lest with Martha, she
seemed curious about worldly things, rather then as Mary to seek the spiritual.

When the Kingdom was rent from Saul and given to David, David by and by
sought not the Crown, but life and liberty: so the Priesthood being rent from
Levi and given to the Church, the Church by and by required not her earthly
duties, but as David did life to grow up, and liberty to spread abroad; for
love (says Saint Paul) seeks not her own, 1 Cor. 13. 5. and should then the
mother of all love (the Church) be curious herein, especially when her
necessities were otherwise so abundantly supplied?

Saint Paul makes it manifest (1 Cor. 9. throughout) where he shows, that
very much liberty, and great matters were due unto him in respect of his
Ministry, yet he concludes, I have not used this power ((...)) but on the
contrary part suffered all things, ibid. v. 12. and again, v. 15. I have used
none of all these things; But why did he not use them, since they were due unto
him? his reason is, that we (as though he spoke in the name of all the
Apostles) should not hinder the Gospel of Christ, ibid. v. 12. But why should
the taking of that was due unto him hinder the Gospel? because the malicious
backbiters would thereupon report that he rather preached it for gain, then of
zeal, and so abased his authority in the Gospel, ib. 18. whereas by this course
of taking nothing for his pains, he made it, as he says, free, ibid. and
stopped their mouths. Thus it is evident, that the Apostles not only
neglected, but absolutely refused even the things that they certainly knew to
belong unto them.

Another reason why the Apostles received no Tithes, drawn a necessitate.
The very condition of the Church in the time of the Apostles could not suffer
them to receive Tithes; for as the Levites received them not in their travel,
and ways, but when they were settled, and the Temple built: so the Apostles
being altogether in travel through all parts of the world, and in continual
warfare with the enemies of the Gospel, one while in prison, another while in
flight, always in persecution, much less could they look after Tithes, which
also were not to be paid as they needed them, but at the times and places
only, when and where they grew to be due, and ere that time came, they that
were to receive them, were in another Country many hundred miles off: for
example, the holy Ghost says that Peter walked through all quarters; Acts 9.
32. one while at Lydda, ib. another while at Joppa, ib. v. 36. first at
Jerusalem, after at Antioch (in Syria) Gal. 2. 11. then at Babylon in Egypt,
Many affirm that he was at Rome. Metaphrastes and some other that he was here
in Britannia: Petri igitur muneris erat ut qui jam complures orientis
Provincias praedicando euangelium peragrasset, jam (quod reliquum esse
videbatur) lustraret orbem occidentalem, and usque ad Britannos (quod tradunt
Metaphrastes and alii) Christi sidem annuncians penetraret. Baron. Tom. 1. f. 5
97. l. 13. Metaph. die 29. Junii.
1 Pet. 5. 13. Paul and Barnabas being at Antioch, aforesaid, or sent forth by
the holy Ghost, first to Seleucia in Syria, then to Salamis and Paphus in the
Isle of Cyprus; after from thence to Perga in Pamphilia, so to the other
Antioch in Pisidia, Acts 13. after to Iconium, Lystria, Derbe, the parts of
Lycaonia. So again, to Antioch in Syria, thence to Jerusalem, and presently
back to the same Antioch, where Paul and Barnabas breaking company, Barnabas
with Mark saileth to Cyprus; Paul taking Silas, travelleth through Syria and
Cilioia, confirming the Churches. Then he comes to the Countries of Phrygia,
Galatia, Mysia; from whence being called by the holy Ghost, he leaves Asia,
and passes by Samothracia into Europe; preaches at Philippi, a City of
Macedonia, furthest Northward of all Greece: then back again, and up and down
Asia to Jerusalem again, and from thence at length to Rome; Read Acts 13. 14,
15, 16. cap.

I will not speak of that, Theodoretus, and Sophronius the Patriarch of
Jerusalem affirm, that after his first imprisonment at Rome he preached the
Gospel to the Britains our Countrymen, for happily he might do that at Rome.
But to come to the rest of the Apostles, Bartholomew (as Jerome witnesses
Catalog. script. Eccles. Tom. 1.) goes to the Indians, Thomas to the Medes,
Persians, Hyrcanians, and Bactrians, Matthew up and down Aethiopia, every one
of them one way or other, to carry the sound of the Gospel through all the
world, Psalm. 19. I ask now what these men should have done with their Tithes?
where they should have placed their Parsonage or Rectory? where their Cellar
for their tithe of Wines? where the tithe Barn for the Corn? or if they had had
such places, how should they have been defended a fisco? how from the rapine of
their persecutors? Our Savior sending his Disciples but to the neighbor Towns
of Iudaea, would not suffer them to encumber themselves with carrying any
thing. And therefore the Apostles had great reason to eschew all impediments in
these their turbulent and long peregrinations.

CAP. XII. That Ministers must have plenty.
THose that would have Ministers live of alms and benevolence, make their
reason, that they must follow the example of Christ and the Apostles; but by
the example of Christ and the Apostles they are taught to abound in all works
of charity themselves, to feed the hungry, to cloth the naked, lodge the
harbourlesse, etc. and how shall they perform this, living in want? 5000. did
Christ feed at one time, Joh. 6. 10. Mat. 14. 21. above 4000. at another time,
Mat. 15. 38. and even herein are his Ministers bound to follow him, not in the
miracle, but in showing like mercy and compassion: for he says not, I desire
to do a miracle, but I have compassion on this people, Mat. 15. 32. and
therefore lest his merciful disposition toward them should be unprofitable
(wanting then other means) he chose rather to perform it by a miracle, then to
leave it undone; yet to show that all ordinary means must first therein be
used, as far as it may be, he neither called for Manna from heaven, nor quails
from the sea, ( Exo. 16. 13. Numb. 11. 31.) but begins the feasts by
ordinary means, the one with 5. loaves and 2. fishes, the other with 7. and a
few little fishes. In which example of charity and hospitality, the Ministers I
say are bound to follow him as far as they can; for the commandment is,
Sequere me, Follow thou me, Mark 10. 21. and cap. 5. 27. Ioh. 21. 19. and if
the Minister be not able to follow him for worldly wants (as the Galatians
would have given Paul their eyes, so) the Congregation must give him their
legs, that is, means and faculty to do it: for the arm of working of miracles
is now taken from our mother the Church, and therefore her children must now
strengthen her hand the more abundantly to work by ordinary means, that is,
they must furnish her with worldly necessaries, whereby she may be enabled to
perform these great works of charity required of her.

Paul commands that the Bishops should be (...), 3 Tim. 3. 2.
hospitales, good housekeepers, and how should they be so, if they have not
provision and means to maintain it, and that in a certain manner? for if
themselves be fed at the trencher of benevolence, what assurance have they of a
dish of meat for their poor brethren? The heavens themselves are unstable; now
it raineth, and we have abundance, then comes drought, and all is in
scarcity. The humor of man is as variable; the people of Lystra that made a
god of Paul on the one day, stoned him on the other, Acts 14. and in the fiery
time it self, when zeal was most inflamed, our Savior as it seems found even
then a cooling blast; when for want of ordinary supply he was fain to fetch
20d. by a miracle out of a fishes mouth to serve his need withal, Mat. 17. 27.

It is merely therefore unfit that Ministers should live upon benevolence and
uncertainty: therefore though Christ and the Apostles lived so for the present,
yet it is not prescribed as a perpetual law to the succeeding Ministers.

CAP. XIII. Not to give less then the Tenth.
IF those that ministered without the vail of the Temple were worthy of the
tenth part, how much more deserved they that minister in the Sanctuary? the
Levites might not come within the vail, that is, into the first Tabernacle, or
holy place, Heb. 9. 2. nor meddle with the ceremonies, but did only the
outward work and drudgery of the Lords house, as to bear the burdens, prepare
the wood, the water, fire, vessels, and instruments for the sacrifice and holy
rites, kill, dress, and flea the bullocks and beasts for the burnt sacrifice,
yet even in this by the rules of equity they deserved a tenth part of the
increase of the Land; yea, the Ministry of the Priests themselves was but in
earthly and transitory things, as in types and ceremonies to foreshew a better
Testament, yet because their vocation was more honorable then the rest of the
Levites, as being called into the Sanctuary, and to perform the holy
ceremonies, therefore they received a more honorable portion; for first, they
had the Tithe of their brethren the Levites part, that is, the tenth part of
the tithe of all the land, which because they were but few in respect of the
whole Tribe of the Levites, as not the 40. part perhaps, therefore the
allowance of every one of them was much greater then of any other Levite, and
yet to increase it, they had the first fruits, and their portions and fees out
of the sacrifice and other offerings, and all these great allowances had they
for their service about the earthly Sanctuary, or as it is called in the
Epistle to the Hebrews, 9. 1. the worldly Tabernacle.

Come then unto the Ministers and Clergy of our Church, look upon them with the
eye of common equity, compare them with the Leviticall Ministry, what
proportion their deserts hold one to the other: surely though it be an axiom
of Philosophy, yet it holds also in Divinity, that Eadem (...) partium quae
est totius, there is the same reason of the parts that is of the whole;
therefore if the Priesthood of our Savior be much more excellent then that of
Aaeron, and the Ministration of the Gospel, then that of the Law, then much
more excellent must the members be of the Gospel, then of the Law. And as their
calling is more honorable, so is their charge, as having the care of souls
committed to them, for which they must give a stract account: the Levite and
the Leviticall Priest were free thereof, and stood only charged with the
performing the ordinary ceremonies, and no further. Their pains much more
laborious then the Levites, who neither Though the Levite be said, 2 Chronicles. 25.
3. to teach all Israel, yet it seems not that they expounded the Word of God
unto the people, or had it in charge so to do, but that they i^nstructed them
how to carry themselves in their sacrifices and ceremonies: therefore Jerome
translateth this place, Levitis quoque ad quorum eruditionem omnis Israel
sanctificabatur Domino.
were burdened with preaching, nor served any where, but in the Temple at
Jerusalem, and not above a week at a time, and notwithstanding had their
corrodary, or allowance in the vacation. If then the Levite and Priest of the
Law had the tenth part for his entertainment, how much rather is it to be
conferred and enlarged upon the Ministers that invest us with spiritual and
heavenly blessings; that as I say are called to a more excellent function, and
consequently deserve a more excellent reward; that have a great charge
committed to them, and consequently much great travel and labor in
performance thereof? The Levite traveled only in body, but the Minister of
the Gospel ^oth in body and mind: he must not only do the part of the
Leviticall Priest, which is to perform the ordinary service, sacraments, and
rites of the Church, like the ox that treads out the corn that is brought
home, but he must be also like the Dove of the Ark, he must fly about to seek
and fetch home to his Parishoners the blessed olive branch of peace. He must be
like Solomon's Eagle, whose way is in heaven, there seeking food for his
Parishoners: and like that Eagle (that God compares himself unto, Deuteronomy. 32.
11.) that dresseth up her nest, floteth over her birds, stretches out her
wings, takes and bears them upon her wings, (the feeble and sick souls of
his Parishoners) always teaching, comforting, strengthening, and confirming them
committed to his charge; and thus shall he dearly earn the portion assigned to
him.

Some then will say, this is like Simon Magus, to sell the grace of the holy
Ghost. No, Ministers must be no Merchants, they must in no case sell Doves, i.
e. the holy Ghost* (Christ did drive them out of the Temple) but the people
must be just; piety, justice, and the law of nature requires that every man
render a reward to the labourer, not only according to his labor, but with
respect of his function, and the quality of his person; the Minister must not
sell the breath of his mouth, but he may sell the sweat of his brows, he may
not sell his doctrine, but he may take reward for his travel. It is Gods
commandment to Adams posterity, In the sweat of thy face shall thou eat bread,
Genesis 3. 19. much precious sweat do many worthy Ministers distill for us in
their function, which God no doubt puts up in his bottle, and therefore they
must have bread for it: much labor in reading, writing, watching, studying,
preaching, and praying, many pined and wasted herewith; for much reading (the
holy Ghost says it) is awearinesse to the flesh, and wills man to take heed
of it, Eccles. 12. 12. and therefore if there were no more in it but so, a
worthy reward is due unto them; but besides this, they minister unto us
spiritual things, that is, things inestimable: and is it much then if we
return them temporal things? And though sometimes there may be found amongst
them, such as Judas among the twelve Apostles, and in all ages some unworthy of
that sacred calling, they being subject to humane frailties, yet tithes are not
to be denied, because they are due originally to God, who assigned them over to
the Levites in the old Testament; for he says, I have given them to them, Number.
18. 24. the tithes of the children of Israel I have given to the Levites; and
in the new Testament to the Ministers of the Gospel, for they that preach the
Gospel, must live of the Gospel; they are therefore to be paid to the Priest,
or Minister, for he is the steward of Gods house, and in this point we are not
to respect what condition he is of, for the debt is due to his Master, not to
himself: so that whether he be good or bad, what condition soever he be of, he
stands or falls to his own Master.

CAP. XIV. The Etymology, and definition of Tithe; and why a tenth rather then
any other part is to be paid.
DEcimae, and decumae, in the plural number; or decima, and decuma, in the
singular, (which Tully most uses) in Greek, (...), quasi (...), i. capacem,
says Philo: (...), a capiendo, because it comprehends all other kind of
numbers, as more largely hereafter shall appear: and because this part should
of all the rest be the best and the largest which in our English we commonly
call, Tithe: of the Saxon word Teotha, i. e. the tenth: and Teothan sceattas,
tithes: of the verb Teo, i. traho, extraho, and Tiehth, Subtrahit, as if we
should say, the choice part, or the part that is taken and chosen from the rest
for God himself, which whether it be the tenth or not, yet it is generally
comprehended in Latin under decimae, and in English under the name Tithe. For
which cause the Latins used the word decimare and exdecimare, to choose and
cull out the principal things; and our own English word, Tithe, imports as
much: for it comes of the Saxon Teoth, i. e. the tenth, which is a verbal of
Teo, that signifies to take out, as if it should admonish us that the tithe or
part given to God must be a choice or principal part.
Omnia sua decimabant (says Augustine) and de omnibus fructibus suis decimam
partem detrahebant and ipsam dabant. and paulo post. Tectum decimabant, id est,
decimam partem detrahebant, and eleemosynas dabant, Augustine. Tom. 10. p. 27. D.

Before I proceed further in this Treatise of Tithes, I hold it fit first, to
propose a definition thereof, that my discourse may be the more certain. I
define it therefore.

Tithe is the tenth part of that we lawfully possess, rendered by us unto God,
by way of thanksgiving for his blessings bestowed on us.

Or according to Hostiensis; In sum. de deci.. 1. V. Vocab. Vtrius. Jur. in
verbo decima.


Decima est omnium bonorum mobilium licite quaestorum pars decima Deo data,
divina constitutione debita, (quae forte addit author vocabularii) ut
colligitur de decim. Ca. 1. and ca. Parochianos, C. nonest. Ca. tua nobis
verum. C. non sit ab homine -- vel, Decima est omnium bonorum just
adquisitorum Raymundus.
talis pars Deo debita.

This definition leads us first to examine why the 1.
tenth part, rather then any other should be yielded unto God.

Secondly, out of what it is to be yielded: all that we 2.
lawfully possess.

Thirdly, unto whom it is to be rendered; unto God. 3.


Fourthly, in what manner it is to be rendered, viz. by 4.
way of thanksgiving.

Fifthly and lastly, upon what consideration it is to 5.
be rendered; and that is for his blessings bestowed upon us.

I have not read why in this matter of Tithing the tenth in number should be
rather allotted unto God, then any other: and therefore wanting a guide to
direct me, I will walk this way the more respectively; but according to mine
own apprehension I observe two reasons thereof, one Mystical, the other
Political. Touching the first, as Plato and the Pythagoreans attributed great
mysteries and observations unto numbers: so do likewise all the greatest
Doctors of the Church, and the very books of God themselves, and therefore it
is not to be thought that in this point of rendering Tithes, but the number of
10. is also respectively chosen. Multis aliis atque aliis numerorum formis
(quaedam similitudinum) in libris sanctis seponuntur* quae propter imperitiam
numeroru^ legentibus clausa sunt. De do^tri. Christ. lib. 2.
S. Augustine says, that many things are not yet understood in Scripture, for
that we cannot attain unto the knowledge of the virtue or power of numbers. And
both he and Saint Jerome through their whole works continually observe great
secrets therein: so do the rest of the Fathers, and not only in the Old
Testament and Ceremonial Law, but in the New Testament also: Insomuch that I
think there is not almost any number there mentioned, out of which some
particular observation is not made. But to come to this we are in hand with.
Let us see why this was allotted to God above others, and what part in reason
is due unto him: Reason tells us certainly, the best, and the choicest:
therefore he refused the unclean beasts; the lame and the blemished things: for
as he is best worthy, so he requires the best of every thing, the blood of the
sacrifice, because it was the life: the fat, because it was the perfection of
it: to be short, the number it self allotted to him, (the tenths I mean) if the
mysteries thereof be opened, tells us, both why it was yielded, and why above
other he should require it.

It is said to signify the first and the last, the beginning and the end; it
is finis simplicium numerorum, initium compositorum; the end of simple numbers,
and the beginning of compound: the first articular number, and the last number
of single denomination. The number wherewith the progress of numeration
running as it were circularly, always ends and begins again. Repraesentat
(says Bartholomeus) merito ipsum Christum qui est A, and O* principium and
finis; that is, it worthily represents Christ who is Alpha and Omega, the
beginning and the end. In these and such other respects it is also said to be
like a circle, the greatest and the perfectest body in Geometry, having neither
beginning nor ending, (as other Attributes of God.) Hermes justly named
Trismegist, laboring to describe God by the most significative resemblance
that man's wit could attain unto, said; God is like an imaginary circle, or
sphere, whose center is every where, and whose circumference no where: meaning
infinite and beyond extent. And as the circle a sphere, of all forms and bodies
is most spacious and of greatest capacity, comprehending all other, and it
self comprehended of none: so the number of 10. comprehends all numbers, and
is it self comprehended in none of them, neither is there any number beyond
it, but that rises out of it. Decas (says Saint Ambrose) De Abraham
Patriarch. l. 2.
numerum omnem complectitur. It is the foot and base whereon all of them are
founded, and it contains not only all dimensions, but to be short, all the
reasons of Arithmetic, Geometry and Music. Therefore Philo Judaeus says,
they that first gave names unto things (for they were wise) seem to me to have
named decadem, that is, the number of 10. quasi (...), i. capacem, (...), a
capiendo, quod capiat and amplectatur omnia genera numerorum, rationum ex
numeris collectarum, proportionum, harmoniarum, rursus and concentuum, proprie
appellasse, i. e. of taking or comprehending, for that it takes or
comprehends all kinds of numbers, of reasons gathered out of numbers, of
proportions, harmonies and concordances. In this manner the number of 10.
represents unto us (as such things may) the nature of God, the perfectest,
the greatest, comprehending all, and comprehended of none, the beginning and
the end, yet infinite and without beginning or end. So that this number (10.)
this tribute money in question has (in the respects before alleged) the
apparent image of God, and therefore let us see whether it has his inscription
or not; for sure if it has his image or inscription, it is due unto him by his
own words, his own argument. The Hebrews, and from them the Graecians express
it by the letters Mat. 22. 21.
that begin his greatest and essential name, Jehovah; that is, ^ and ^, jod
and iota. The Romans and we of the Western parts of the world, one while by
the letter X, and another while by the figures 10. All know that the letter X
signifies ten, and the learned also know, that it likewise signifies the name
of Christ; for commonly in ancient times, and to this day in many books it is
so written, X', or X^, Xi, Xo, Xm, for Christus, Christi, Christo, Christum:
and in like manner for decimus, decimi, decimo, decimum, in the time of the Law
it was marked with the letters of the Fathers name, in the time of grace with
the Sons name. Yet the truth is, that the letter X thus used for the name of
Christ, is no Latin letter, but borrowed from the Greek, where it signifies
Ch, because it represents not only the name, but the Cross of Christ, in
which the Latin letter X, as the number and character of ten* has also much
hieroglyphicall signifition. To come to the Arithmeticall figures that express
it, which are the figure of 1, and the cyphero, 1 signifies the same that
Alpha does in Greek, that is, one. The cipher o, presents to us, Omega, for
Omega is no more but great O, and in ancient time was noted only by circle, or
cipher, and in effect still is: so that 10. in figures expresses A and O. As A
is the first letter in the Greek Alphabet, and O the last: so in the Alphabet
of Arithmetique, the figure of 1, is the first, and the cipher o, is the last;
therefore in like respect the figures of this number of 10. signifies the
first and the last, the beginning and the end. But as the cipher o, in this
respect signifies the end, so we must mark that it is a circle, and has no
end. Being therefore joined to the figure of 1, which signifies the beginning,
it shows unto us, that the beginning is without end, and the end it self
without beginning or end, both infinite and without any limit. The first
character in the figure of 10, viz. 1. begets al numbers (for it is semen
numeroru^) and is begotten of none: so that it is unus and omnis, one and all,
and so do the very figures signify in notis antiquorum, according to Valerius
Probus and P. Diaconus. Therefore to conclude, it has both the image of God,
in signification of his nature, and the inscription of his name in the frame of
the characters and figures; In all languages and with all Nations after one
manner or other, as though nature her self had taught them that this part
belongs to God, which by no wit, or any learning can be applied to, or found
in any number between 2, and millions of thousands. Reddite ergo quae sunt
Caesaris Caesari, and quae sunt Mat. 22. 21. Mar. 12. 17. Luke 10. 25. Joh. 13.
7.
Dei Deo. Give unto Caesar the things which are Caesar's, and unto God, the
things that are Gods.

All that we have belongs unto him, yet is he pleased to accept a part only;
but we must note further, Decima omnia complectitur. Bullinger in ^. Heb.
that it is such a part as implies the whole, because the whole is his. He
loves not to have a piece of us simply, it must be such a piece as
comprehends all in effect; therefore when he said, Give me thy heart, it was
as much as, give me all: for he will have all or none. Therefore in his
sacrifice he specially required the head, and the tail; the head as
principium, the tail as finem; the beginning and the end of all our actions:
for so the whole is his. And in the same sense the Law of the Land did
anciently reckon those parts. For though the whole Fish Royal belongs to the
King, yet Bracton says, it suffices if he have the head and the tail; for
that in those parts the whole is implied: and consequently when we give God the
tithe, or tenth part, we put him in possession of all, yea, we put the nine
parts remaining into his protection; for the number of ten Lib. de 10. praecep.
sol. 75, 76. and seq. Quid si numero isto denario universitas regu^ significata
est? De C. D. lib. 20. 23. Decima hora: numerus iste legem significat quia in
10. praeceptis data est lex, in cap. 1. Evang. Joh. Tract. 7. To. 10. Sermon. 15.
de verb. Domini in Evang. Mal. Ser. 15. Tom. 10
in like respect implies the whole, as Philo Judaeus discourses it. And so
also does Saint Augustine expound it, and therefore thinks that by the 10.
horns in Daniel is meant the whole succession of Kings in the Roman Empire.

The same Father yet further says, that the number of 10. signifies the Law
of God, Quia in december praeceptis lex data est. And in another place, Denarius
legem (significat) undenarius peccatum: quia transgressio est denarii 1. The
number of 10. signifies the Law, and for that the number of 11. exceeds it,
the number of 11. signifies sin. Therefore because God hates sin, and has
made the number of 10. to be as it were the number of perfection, and
righteousness, (for so likewise does Saint Augustine term it) when he
requires the number of 10. of us, it puts us in mind, that he requires also
the fulfilling of his Laws, and the keeping of his Commandments.

That God accepted the tithe, or tenth, as, and for the whole of that whereof
it is yielded, is apparent by Gods own exposition, for when he had reserved it
to himself, as his rent out of the Land of Can^an, given by him to the children
of Israel, and assigned that rent over to the Levites for their maintenance,
yet out of that assignment, he reserved also a ^ithe, or tenth part, to be laid
up in the chambers of the treasure house, to be offered to himself, as it were
thereby to hold his possession, and to keep seism of his inheritance, which in
the 18. of Number. 20. is called an heave offering: and this very heave offering,
which was as I say, but the tenth part of the tenth, that is, the 100. part of
the whole, was accepted and taken by God, as the full seisin and satisfaction
for the whole; therefore he bids Moses say to the Levites, -- Your
heave offering shall be reckoned unto Numb. 18. 27.
you as the corn of the barn, or as the abundance of the winepresse: that is,
the tithe that you are to give, though it be the hundredth part, yet I will
accept of it, as if it were all the corn of your barn, and of your fields, and
as the whole profits, even as the abundance of your Vineyards. In like manner
also does he accept the fat of such offerings, in the 29. v. to show unto us,
that since all is his, he will have perpetual seisin of the whole, and will
not be disinherited of the least part.

Doubtless he is well pleased with this tenth part, for when he threatened the
destruction of the Land by Isaiah, he concludes, yet there shall be a tenth
part remaining as to replenish it again, and as holy seed, Isa. 6. 13. he will
save his own part. We have received all things of the fullness of God,
therefore out of our fullness it is fit that we render something back unto him,
not by way of reward, but in honor of him. This number is also said to be the
number of fullness, and to signify the greatest things, wherein as numbers
have their secreta and latebras, to use Saint Augustines words, so Tom. 10.
fol. 15.
has this number above all other a peculiar secret and blessing given unto it,
as if God had marked it for himself; for as God in Hezekiah's time, blessed the
offerings 2 Chro. 31. 10.
and tithes in abundance, so it seems the word abundance, ( plenitudinem)
Exodus 22. 29. is used for the tithe and first fruits: and it has of old been
observed that in natural things, the tenth is usually the fullest and the
greatest: the tenth flood, and the tenth egg. Festus, Lib. 4.
and many other Authors do affirm it: and to that purpose Ovid says,

Vastius insurgens decimae ruit impetus undae, i. e.

The whole force of the tenth flood, wave, or billow, rising up more hugely
then all the rest, rushed into the the ship. And Valor. Flaccus terms it, --
Decimae tumor coeduus undae, the high swelling of the tenth wave: Lib. 14.
Pharsal. 5. In Agamem.
so likewise is it noted by Silius Ital. Lucan, Seneca.

And this observation amongst the Ancients has been so notorious and
remarkable, that they commonly used the word tenth in Latin, decimus,
decumanus and decimanus, to express the greatest things; therefore in the
division of their fields, they called the greatest extent, decumanum limitem;
the greatest or chief gate in their Camp, decumanam portam; the greatest
shields, decumana scuta; and so likewise, decumanos fluctus, and decumanaova,
decumanu^ acipenserem: and upon the like reason Cic. in Verrem.
they used the word decimare, and exdecimare, for to choose and cull out the
choice and principal things, as Perrot reports. And because in the
procreation of men, and many other living creatures, the number of 10. is most
happy and effectual, as the tenth month in some, and the tenth week in others;
the Romans admired the secret virtues of this number so superstitiously, as
they canonized it among their gods by the name of Decuma, as you may read in
Tertullian, Gellius, and many other. And for this cause Romulus closed up the
year in the compass of ten months, as the time of fullness and perfection.

I will prosecute the mysteries of this number no further, but conclude with
Philo Judaeus, that he that Satis amplum ex se ad librum conficiendum praebet
argumentum. Phil. de 10. praecep.
should run into the Mathematical powers and observations thereof, has work
enough for a large Volume. De ratione decimarum, and denario numero, pluribus
agit Philo lib. de congress. quaer. ernd. gratia.

X
Exprimit antiquis haec Christum littera scriptis:
Exprimit and partem quam petit ille sacram.
Ergo citus, Christi quae sunt, dato munera Christo.
Caesaris accipiat Caesar: uterque suum.
This X of old expressed Christ's holy name,
And eke the sacred Tenth which he does claim.
Give then to Christ, what is Christ's, without delay.
Give Caesar, Caesar's due, and both their pay.
CAP. XV. Who shall pay Tithe.
THe Laws and Commandments of God, are commonly given in the second person
singular; as, thou shall love the Lord thy God; thou shall not steal. And so
here, thou shall not keep back thine abundance, that is, thy first fruits and
tithes; and, thou shall give the tithe of all thy increase, etc. a Pronoun of
particularity, (thou) for the Adjectives of universality, Nullus and Omnis; as
if he should say, None or no man shall keep back his abundance: Quia omnia Dei
sunt* per quae vivit, sive terra, sive ^lumina, sive semina, vel omnia quae sub
coelo ^unt, aut super coelos. De re^ti^ud. Cath. convers. Tra^t. Tom. 4.
And all men shall give the tithe of all the increase. For it is an axiom in
Logic, that, Indefinitum aequipollet universali, Indefinite propositions are
equivalent with universal: And so every man must pay tithe; Every man, says
Saint Augustine, Quia omnia Dei sunt, per quae vivit, etc. because all things
whereby he lives are Gods, whether it be the Earth, or Rivers, or Seas, or all
the things that are under, or above the heavens. Abraham and Jacob paid tithes,
and therein bound all whosoever be of their posterity to do it. Even Levi
himself, who after received tithes of his brethren, was bound thereby, and paid
them in the loins of Abraham, (as it is said in the 7. Heb.) 400. years before
he was born, and we also as Abraham's children. For if the Levites themselves,
that (as the mean Lord, to use the Lawyers term) received tithes of their
brethren, were not freed from paying them over to the Lord Paramount, God
Almighty, how much more are all we bound of what sort and condition soever to
pay them likewise? But some happily will ask, if the Levites paid tithes? yea,
they did pay the tenth part of their living to God, as well as their brethren,
as before we have touched it in speaking of the heave offering, and as it is
manifest in the 18. of Numbers, v. 26. Speak unto the Levites (says God to
Moses) and say unto them, when ye shall take of the children of Israel the
tithes which I have given you, of them, for your inheritance, then shall you
take (elevationem) an heave offering of the same for the Lord, even the tenth
part of the tithe: which in the next verse save one, they are commanded to
deliver to Aaron, Gods general Vicar in spiritual function. And in the 10. of
Nehem. it is further said, The Priest the son of Aaron shall be with the
Levites, when the Levites take tithes, and the Levites shall bring up the tenth
part of the tithes unto the house of our God, unto the chambers of the treasure
house. So then the Levites themselves paid tithes, and by their example the
Clergy of our time must do it likewise; but the question will be then, to
whom? First, let us see what became of these tithes Paramount, thus laid up in
the treasury. We must understand that the Treasury of the Temple was not
particularly for that purpose, but for the guests and offerings also whatsoever
dedicated and given to God: and I find that of this Treasury there were 3.
sorts: Mesack, where the munificent gifts of Kings and Princes were laid up:
Corban, where those of the Priests: and Gazophylacium, whereinto the people and
all passengers brought their offerings, and into which the poor widow, as it
seems, cast her two mites. I find not any particular limitation of these
Treasuries, but the common end of them all was to be employed upon things
necessary for the house and service of God, and for relief of the poor, and of
orphans, widows, and strangers. Josephus expounds Antiq. Iud. l. 4. ca. 3.
Corban, for the very gift it self offered by them that dedicated themselves to
God, as the Nazaraei, and shows that the Priests disposed it to the needy.
And to these ends must our Clergy give and pay over their own Tithes unto God,
first, in repairing and maintaining the house and service of God, as 2 Kings
12. 4. then in alms and charitable devotion to the poor: for the poor are Gods
Publicans, and by him appointed to gather and collect this rent or custom due
to him, and to carry it into his Treasury of heaven, as the Porters thereof,
there to be laid up for our use and benefit in the world to come. Decima^ Deo
in pauperibus vel in ecclesiis donet, says De rectitud. Cath. Convers. Tom. 9.
S. Augustine. Let him give it to God either in bestowing it upon the poor, or
in the Churches. Though Christ be ascended into heaven in his person, he is
still upon earth by his Proctors and Substitutes, the poor and needy; and
therefore a Father ( Jerome I take it) answers Mary when she complained, that
they had taken away the Lord; Oh, says he, but they have not taken away his
Sustulerunt dominum, at non servum.
servants, meaning the poor and needy, on whom she might abundantly express
her charity. As the Law of God enjoined the Levite to pay tithe to the high
Priest: so also the old Law of the Land binds our Bishops themselves to pay
Tithes, yea, the King himself. I command my Sheriffs (says Ethelstane)
through my Kingdom in the name of the Lord, and of all the Saints, and upon my
love, that they presently pay my own Tithes to the uttermost, both of living
things, and of the fruits of the earth; and that the Bishops do the same of
their own goods, and also my Aldermen and Sheriffs.

Tom. 1. Council. Britan. page 402. And the very glebe Land of the Parson
himself, if it be letten to another, must pay tithe, as was adjudged in the
Kings Bench this Term Sancti Hillarii. Quaere.

CAP. XVI. Out of what things Tithe is to be paid.
IT is recorded in Genesis, that Abraham before his name Genesis 14. 20. Heb. 7.
was changed, Gave him tithe of all. And Jacob in the 28. ca. says: Of all
that thou shall give me will I give the tenth unto thee. In the 27. Lev. All
the tithe of the Land V. 30.
of the seed of the ground, and the fruits of the trees is the Lords, it^ is
holy unto the Lord: and in the 14. Deuteronomy. 22. Thou shall give the tithe of all
the increase of thy seed that comes forth of thy field year by year: that we
should bring the tithes of our Land unto the Levites, that the Levites might
have the tithes (in all the Cities) of our travel or labor. So in the 2 Chro.
31. 5* they brought the tithes of all things abundantly; and v. 6. they brought
the tithes of bullocks, and sheep, and the holy tithes, which were consecrated
unto the Lord their God, i. by a vow.

In these general precepts there needs no particular enumeratio^ of what
should be paid, they run upon the word All; and without exception, all
whatsoever the ground yields either by industry, or naturally, corn, wine,
oil, the fruits and increase of every thing, whether living or vegelative. And
more then so, for even those things that are gotten by labor and travel; for
therein we have our part of his mercy and blessing, as well as in his other
gifts and bounty. And the words in Nehe. [in all the Cities] Nehem. 10. 37.
seem to extend to the handy-crafts-men, for Citizens commonly occupy not
fields, or husbandry, which is rather proper unto the Villages and Country
people: So that if Citizens should not yield the tithe of their travel, most of
them should yield nothing at al, and no man must appear before the Lord empty,
Exodus 23. 15. for he has showed Deuteronomy. 16. 16.
mercy upon all, and he will have some acknowledgement from all. This upholdeth
the custom of many places of England, where the very servants pay a tithe out
of their wages, some deduction being made for apparel: and by like reason I
think, that those that have Annuities and fees, as Officers and such like,
ought to yield a tithe thereof; for out of those the King has his Subsidies
and tenths, and by like, yea better reason should God have his portion: Of all
that thou shall give me, says Jacob, will I give the tenth unto thee; and in
the Gospel, the Pharisee, though braggingly, yet according to the use of the
righteous of that time, says, I give tithe of all that I possess; as it
seems, even of his goods, and dead commodities, as of the fruits of the
earth. For I suppose that the Ancients paid tithes in two sorts, some ex
praecepto, others, ex arbitrio, or placito; some by commandment of the Law,
others out of their The tenth of bullocks and sheep, and all that goes under
the rod commanded, Lev. 32.
free will and benevolence. In the 31. of the 2 Chronicles. v. 6. it is said, They
brought the tithes Boum and pecudum, of oxen and sheep, things tithed before
whilst they were young, as I conceive, and not now again to be tithed, when
they were grown to their full ages. So in the 10. of Nehe. 37. they brought
first fruits of their dough, yet no doubt, their dough was tithed before in the
corn it was made of: therefore I take these tithes to be tithes ad placitum, in
the election of the party, whether he will give them or not; but if he do
allot them to God, he is tied like Ananias and Sapphira to perform them
faithfully, for they then become due ex praecepto; for he that voweth unto the
Lord, is commanded not to break his promise, Numb. 30. 3. And these kind of
tithes no doubt were often paid by the godly, sometime upon general occasion,
as that of Hezekiah, sometime of particular, as that pretended by the Pharisee.

Military spoil, and the prey gotten in war is also tithable, for Abraham
tithed it to Melchisedek, and thereof, if we may depart a little out of the
circle of holy Scripture into the Histories of the Gentiles, (who even by
instinct of nature found this duty to belong unto God) we abound with examples
thereof: as paid by Cyrus Herodot. Clio. lib. 1. f. 36. Livy li. 5. Pliny l.
12. c. 24*
at the taking of Sardis; by Furius Camillus, upon the overthrow of the Veians;
by Alexander the great, upon his conquest of Arabia, when he sent a whole ship
laden with frankincense for the Altars of his gods. But occasion to speak of
these shall serve me better afterward, and therefore to return to that is more
material. The example of Abraham in this point of tithing the prey, teaches
us also, that we give God a tithe out of every accession of wealth, that he
sends to us in any course whatsoever: so that the gains of buying and
selling, and the great improvement arising by merchandise, is under this title
both registered and commanded. I know not what the rich City of London does in
this kind, but I read in Herodotus, that the poor Samians Melpont. l. 4. f. 267.
yielded at one time six talents to that purpose, and that the Siphnians out
of their silver and gold Mines sent Thalia l. 3. f. 1^0.
so great a tithe to Delphos, as the richest man of that age was not more worth.

St Augustine says, Vnusquisque de quali ingenio aut artificio vivit de ipso
decimam Deo in pauperibus vel in ecclesiis donet. Let every man out of the
trade or craft whatsoever he lives by, give God the Tithe.

De rectitud. Cathol. conversat. Tractat. Tom. 9 f. 250.

CAP. XVII. That things offered to God be holy.
I Must first explain what I mean by holy, and that is, not that they are
divine things, or like those of the Sanctuary, which none might touch save the
anointed Priests. But like the lands and possessions of the Levites mentioned
in Leviticus, -- that were said to be holy and separate from common use, and
separate from man, Levit. 27. 28, 29. that is, from the injury of secular
persons, and to be only disposed to and for the service and servants of God,
defensum and munitum ab injuria hominum, N. F. de rer. divis. L. sanctum, as
the persons of Emperors and Kings are said to be holy and sacred: for as the
Altar sanctifies the offering, Mat* 23. 19. so these things being offered to
God, are by this very act of oblation made holy, and taken so into his own
tuition, as they may not after be divorced. Woe be therefore to the Scribes and
Pharisees that devour widows houses, Mat. 23. 14. how much more woe then unto
those that destroy the house of God, and by divorcing Christ from his Spouse
the Church, make him also a widower, and his Church a widow, and so devour both
the widows house, and the widow her self.

But some are of opinion, that the Church it self is no longer holy, then
while the service of God is in hand therein: as the Mount and the Bush were no
longer holy then while God was there: and by that reason a Church and an
Alehouse are of like sanctity, for a man may preach in an Alehouse, and
minister the Sacraments in an Alehouse, and occasion sometimes does
necessarily require it: And what is their reason hereof? why, their reason is,
that consecration of places, and of the implements belonging to the service of
God were Leviticall ceremonies, and therefore ended with the Leviticall Law.
These men reason, as if before the Leviticall Law there had been no rules of
Gods honor: and as though the Moral Law, and the Law of nature taught us
nothing therein: Does not God himself leave the precepts of the Leviticall Law,
and reason with the Israelites out of the Law of nature, Mal. 3. when he says,
will any man spoil his goddess? as if he should say, that the Law of nature
has sanctified those things that are offered unto God, and therefore will any
man violate the Law of nature? Does not Saint Paul reason also in the same
sort, when he says, Despise ye the Church of God? 1 Cor. 11. 22. If I should
apply the places of Scripture that are spoken of the great reverence of the
Temple, it would be said, that that were Leviticall: but the office of the
Temple was Moral, as well as Leviticall, and therefore though these be ended,
yet the other, the Moral remains.

When Christ had cast the oxen and doves that were for the Leviticall service
out of the Temple, yet he said, that it was an house of Prayer, as figurating
that after the ceremonies were ended and gone, yet the Moral office of the
Temple to be an house of Prayer still remained. Saint Paul, 1 Cor. 11. 22. when
he says, Despise ye the Church of God? speaking it as if he wondered that any
should be so irreligious, or rather sacrilegious to despise the Church; and no
man I think doubts but that this was spoken of the material Church, for he
blames them that did use unseemly drinking in the Church.

See the first Treatise, of the rights and respect due. 10. Note.
Of the three several places, and three functions of the Temple: and how the
last continues holy, for Prayer, Doctrine, and instruction of the people:
which therefore had in it no Ceremonial implement at all.

CAP. XVIII. Tithes must not be contemned because they were used by the Church
of Rome.
IF we should reject Tithes because they were used by the Church of Rome, by
the same reason we must also reject our Churches; but the Apostles used both
the Synagogues and the Temple it self after Christ's Ascension, though they were
polluted with the doctrine and ceremonies of the Jews; and therefore we are not
to reject Tithes and other things profitable to Gods service, because the
Papists used or misused them. The Censors ordained for Gods honor were
impiously abused by Corah, Dathan, and Abiram, yet God rejected them not, but
commanded them to be still employed in some better course of his service,
namely, in making plates for the Altar, Numb. 16. 38.

And by this Scripture does Huge and Origin reprove them that judge the works
of an heretic to be burned without preserving the good things in them: and
the Altar to be pulled down whereat a Schismatique has ministered. Hugo in
Genes. 16. fol. 136. a. and Origin in Homil. 9. sup. Number. fol. 104.

God refused not the burnt-offering of Gedeon, though he made it with the
idolatrous wood of Baals grove, yea, himself commanded it so, Judge. 6. 26. and
in the Gospel the offerings of the proud Pharisees were as well received into
the Treasury of the Temple as the mite of the poor widow. When Jericho was
destroyed and accursed, yet God required the gold and silver for his holy
utensils, Jos. 6. 19. For though filthy gains are forbidden to be offered unto
God, yet good things because they have been abused, are not forbidden to be
offered unto him. When the pottage provided for sustenance of the children of
the Prophets was infected by him that threw in the wild gourdes, or
colloquintida, Elisha the Prophet commanded them not to be cast away, but
cleansing them from their infectious venom used them still for food of the
children, 2 Kings 4. 38. So if the pottage of the Ministers have been abused
with Roman Colloquintida, purge the infection, but take not their pottage (I
mean their Tithes) from them.

Aristophanes brings in Hercules laughing to see effeminate In Ranis.
Bacchus clad in the Lions skin: but we may well lament to see a spruce
Castilio, and his masking mistress trickt and trimmed up with those
Church Livings that godly and grave men in times past gave for maintenance of
Gods service, and the Ministers thereof.

I can but wonder, what should move Flacius Illyricus (a man so conversant in
the history of the Church) to affirm, that Tithes were lately extorted by the
Popes; Decimas nupeius extortas per papas. Caal. test. ter primo impositas in
Council. per Pelagium Papam Anno 588.
and that they were first imposed by Pope Pelagius in the Council, Anno 588.
unless his meaning be, that in elder times they were paid at pleasure, and now
first commanded to be paid of duty: which construction (though contrary to the
understanding of a common Reader) if we do allow him, yet is it untrue also;
for that Council recites that they had been paid before of long time, and
that by the whole multitude of Christians, and as due by the Word of God, and
consequently not at pleasure. ( Council. Matisconense. 2. c. 5. Anno 588. Tom.
2.) So that this Council did but revive and quicken the cold devotion of that
time, and not infer new matters unheard of before.

CAP. XIX. That the Tradition of ancient Fathers and Councels is not lightly to
be regarded.
IT appears by diverse ancient Fathers and Councels, that Tithes were paid
long before their times in the Primitive Church, and were unto the age of the
Apostles, though little memory thereof remains in the Authors of those times.
And shall we not believe the Fathers received such instruction from their
elders? Does not God bid us ask after the days of old, and the years of so many
generations, saying, Ask thy father, and he will show thee; thine elders, and
they will tell thee? Deuteronomy. 32. 7. If we shall not believe them, why should we
ask them? and why did the children of Israel complain, that their Fathers heard
not the words of the book of the Law, 2 Kings 22. 13. but because they
therefore could not report it to them their children?

Shall we think nothing to be done, but what is written? does not the
Evangelist tell us, that if all were written that Christ did, he supposed the
world could not contain the books, Joh. 21. 25? are not many actions of elder
time alleged in latter Scriptures, and yet no testimony of them in the former?
it is said, 1 Chro. 26. 18. that Samuel, Abner, and Joab, dedicated many things
unto God, yet their story reports no such matter. Solomon is noted, 1 Chronicles.
10. to have kept a famous Passover: yet is there not a word of it in the
history of his time. Fasting was brought into the Church before Christ, and the
use also of building of Synagogues, but it appears not when, or how. Paul
alleges, that our Savior said, It is better to give, then to take, Act. 20.
35. yet no Evangelist does mention it. Jude says, v. 9. that Michael and the
Devil strove for the body of Moses, yet the Old Testament notes no such thing;
how then came they by these instructions? Surely by books that are perished, or
by inspiration, or by relation of others: and doubtless the ancient Fathers
came to the knowledge of many things by all these ways. First, by books that be
perished, for it is manifest by Eusebius, Jerome, Gennadius, and others, that
the ancient Fathers saw many thousands, which are not now extant. If by
inspiration, the holy Ghost, that was sent down upon the Apostles, and passed
from one to another, returned not by and by to heaven, but remained actually
amongst the Fathers of the Primitive Church; and therefore what they generally
taught is carefully to be kept. But if they received these things by Tradition,
the very Tradition of those first ages of the Church are much to be received;
for all that time, no doubt, infinite speeches and actions of Christ and the
Apostles (whereof many were collected by Ignatius and Papias, as Jerome
reports, but now lost) were then fresh in the mouths of every man, as not
only the Fathers of that time do abundantly testify, but our own experience
also induces us to conceive; for do not we our selves hear and believe many
things to be done in the time of King Hen. 8. that never yet were written, nor
like to be?

CAP. XX. Ancient Councels and Canons for payment of Tithes.
THe Canons attributed to the Apostles, come first in rank to be mentioned, yet
I will not insist upon them. Neither does Bellarmine (as they are now
published) maintain them to be the children of those Fathers. Yet can it not be
denied that the first 35. of them are very ancient and near the time of the
Apostles; for Dionysius Exigu. that lived within 400. years of the Apostles,
translated them out of Greek as received long before in the Eastern Church.

The fifth of those Canons ordains, that all other fruit should be sent as
first-fruit (and tithe) home to the house of the Bishop and Priests, and not to
be offered upon the Altar; adding further, that it was manifest that the
Bishops and Priests did divide it to the Deacons, and the rest of the Clerks.
And though the Greek copy in this place, calls not these fruits (...),
Tithes, yet the Canon seems to be meant thereof, for other fruit none was to
be carried to the house of the Bishop, or to be divided amongst the Priests,
and the Deacons, save offerings, tithes, and first fruits; therefore the old
Translation of the Canons out of Zonaras, expresses it tithe and first fruits.
And this fashion here received of sending these things to the house of the
Bishop, and his dividing of them among the Priests and Deacons, shows the
great antiquity of this Canon; for it appears, that the first usage was so,
and that the Ministers had menstruam sportulam, every month a basket of the
offerings and tithes for their maintenance* whereupon they were called Clerici
sportulantes, i. basket Clerks.

Vid. Cyprian. Epist. 34. and 66. Baron. anno Chapter 57. Number. 72. and 145. and
anno 58. Number. 89. And the people then offered accustomably to the Altar, and
for the maintenance of the Priests.

Concilium Agrippinense, cap. 6. Anno 356. first decrees, that Tithes shall be
called Dei Census, Gods rent: and reciting that the third part thereof, as was
declared in the Toletan Council, belonged to the Bishops, yet according to the
Roman use, they agreed to take but every year the fourth part, which upon
excommunication they commanded to be paid. Burchand. lib. 3. ca. 135.

Council. Romanum 4. sub Damaso, about the year 375. Damas. p^* patrim. adiit,
An. 367.
amongst the Decrees thereof it is ordained, ut decimae atque primiti^ a
fidelibus darentur, qui detrectant anathemate feriantur; that tithes and
first fruits should be paid by the faithful.

Council. Aurelianense 1. sub Symmacho, An. 507. Can. 17. decrees, that the
Bishops shall have every year the fourth part, or every fourth year the whole
tithe Tom. 2. Con.

Concilium Tarraconense sub Hormisda, An. 517. Can. 8. juxta Burchandum, 9.
juxta Bin. says, that it was an Order, antiquae consuetudinis, that the Bishop
should have the third part of all things yearly, and therefore willed it still
to be kept. Burchard lib. 3. Ca. 33. Bin. Tom. 2. Conc.

Concilium Mediomatricis, Anno wills the Bishops to reprove ( prohibeant)
them that would not pay Tithe without some reward be given them. Bur. l. 3. C.
134.

Concilium Toletanum, Anno 533. divides all Church rights into two sorts of
oblations, one to be those that are offered ( i. e. given) to the Parish
Churches, as Lands, Vineyards, bondmen, etc. and wills that these should be
wholly in the ordering of the Bishops. The other to be those of the Altar,
whereof it commanded ^^e third part to be carried to the Bishop, and two parts
to be for the Clerks. And of Tithes it says, that according to some, the third
part yearly, or every third year the whole was so paid. But that they following
the manner of the Roman Church, decreed, that the Bishops should have every
year the fourth part, or every fourth year the whole tithe. Burchard lib. 3. C.
136. and Bin. paulo aliter Tom. 1.

In a collection of Canons of an uncertain Author, in the Vatican Library, this
is attributed to Sylvester, who was Bishop of Rome 315. Binnius in a note upon
this Canon somewhat differs in words.

Concilium Matisconense 2. sub Pelagio 2. Anno 588. affirms Tithes to be due
by the Laws of God; that Hoc. confirm. Con. Hispalens. Tom. 2. Et approbat. p^r
Gualter. and Hospinian. de origin. honorum ecclesiae, ca. 3. p. 123.
the whole multitude of Christians kept those Laws very warily of long time,
that by little and little they were in those days almost wholly neglected. And
this Council decrees, that the ancient usage of the faithful should be
revived, and that all the people should bring in their Tithes to them that
ministered the ceremonies of the Church, etc. otherwise to be excommunicated.
Tom. 2. Con.

Concilium Hispalense sub Gregorio 1. Anno 590. concludes thus: That if any
mantithe not all these things ( viz. before named) he is a spoiler of God, a
thief, and a robber, and the cursings that God put upon Cain for his deceitful
dividing, are cast likewise upon him. Ivo. p. 2. and 174. Tom. 2. Council.

Council. Valentinum sub Leone 4. Anno 858. ca. 10. That all faithful men
should with all readiness offer their ninths, and tithes to God of all that
they possess, etc. upon peril of excommunication. Tom. 3. Con.

Council. Rothoma. cap. 3. names particularly what ought to be tithed, and
commands to do it upon pain of excommunication. Burchard li. 3. ca. 130. and
annexeth the Council, Mogunt. ca. 38.

Council. Cavallon. ca 18. Anno 8^3. That Bishops, Abbots, and religious persons
should pay them to Churches out of their possessions, and families where they
baptized and received. Burch. lib. 3. ca. 132.

And Council. Cavallon. c. 1. decrees, that all Churches with their whole
livings and tithes should be wholly in the power of the Bishops, and to be
ordered ^^d disposed by him: Burchard lib. 3. ca. 146.

Council. Moguntin. 1. ca. 8. recited by Burchard, who lived about 6^0. years
since, says, that Abraham by his action, and Jacob by his promise declared
unto us, that tithe was to be given to God; The Law has since confirmed it,
and all the holy Doctors are mindful of it, etc. Hereof the venerable Doctor
Saint Augustine says, Tithes are required as a debt: What if God should say
(quoth he) thy self a man art mine, and so forth as follows in that Sermon of
his that hereafter we exhibit. The Council proceeds further, showing reasons
why Tithes should be paid. That if the Jews were so careful in executing this
commandment, as they would not omit it in the least things, mint, and rue,
etc. as our Savior testifies; how much more ought the people of the Gospel to
perform it, that has a greater number of Priests, and a more sincere manner of
Sacraments? They are therefore to be given unto God, that being better pleased
with this devotion, he may give more liberally the things we have need of. That
this kind of maintenance is fittest for the Clergy, that they otherwise be not
troubled with worldly business, but may attend their calling.

That the daily offerings of the people, and that Tithes are to be divided into
four parts, according to the Canons; The first to the Bishop, another to the
Minister or Priest, ( Clericorum) the third to the poor, the fourth to
repairing of Churches. Burchard li. 3. c. 133.

Council. Moguntin. 1. cap. 10. tempore Appae 4. and 4. Lothar. Imp. Anno 847.
sub Rabano Archiepiscopo qui scribit Ludovico. This Council admonishes men to
pay their Tithe carefully, because God himself appointed it to be paid to
himself. And that it is to be feared, that if any man take Gods right from him,
God for his sins will take things necessary from him also. Tom. 3. Conc.

Roman. Con^il. 5. Anno 1078. Tom. 3. says, that Laymen upon pain of
sacrilege, excommunication, and damnation, might not possess Tithes, and
Church livings, though granted by Kings and Bishops, but must restore them.

CAP. XXI. In what right tithes are due: and first of the law of nature.
WE have said in our definition, that they be due unto God: now we are to show
by what right, and to prove it. First, therefore, I divide Tithes into two
sorts, Moral, and Leviticall; Moral, are those which were due to God before
the Law given in the time of nature. Leviticall, are those nine parts assigned
by God himself, (upon giving the Law) unto the Levites for their maintenance,
the tenth part being still reserved to himself, and retained in his own hands.
Moral tithes were paid by man unto God, absque praecepto, without any
commandment; Leviticall tithes were paid by the Israelites unto the Levites,
as transacted and set over by God unto them pro tempore for the time being, and
that by an express Canon of the Ceremonial law. To speak in the phrase of
Lawyers, and to make a case of it; God is originally seized of tithes to his
own use, in dominico suo, ut de feodo, in his own demesne, as of fee-simple, or
as I may say, Jure Coronae, and being so seized by his Charter dated, year
after the Flood, he granted them over to the Levites, and the issue male of
their body lawfully begotten, to hold of himself in Frank-Almoigne, by the
service of his Altar and Tabernacle, rendering yearly unto him the tenth part
thereof: So that the Levites are merely Tenants in tail, the reversion
expectant to the Donor, and consequently their issue failing, and the
consideration and services being extinct and determined, the thing granted is
to revert to the Donor, and then is God seized again as in his first estate, of
all the ten parts in fee.

But we must prove the parts of the case: and first, the title, namely, that he
was seized in fee of original Tithes, that is, that original Tithes do for
ever belong unto him. Hear the evidence: which I will divide into three parts,
as grounding it first upon the law of Nature; secondly, upon the Law of God;
and thirdly, upon the Law of Nations.

CAP. XXII. How far forth they be due by the Law of Nature.
When I said by the Law of Nature, my meaning is not to tiemy self to that
same jus natural, defined by Justinian, which is common to beasts, as well as
to men. But to nature taken in the sense that Tully after the opinion of
others, delivers it to be, -- Vim rationis atque ordinis participem, tanquam
via progredientem De not. Deo. l. 2.
declarantemque, quid, cujusque causa, res efficiat, quid sequatur, etc. the
virtue and power of reason and order, that goes before us as a guide in the
way, and shows us, what it is that works all things, the end why, and what
thereupon ensues or depends. This by some is called the Law of Nature,
secondary or special, because it belongs only to reasonable creatures, and
not generally to all living things; in respect whereof it is also called the
law of reason, and it is written in the heart of every man, by the instinct of
Quis scribit in cordibus hominum naturalem ^egem nisi Deus? Aug. des^rm. Domini
in monte l. 2.
nature, as Isidor faith, (not by any legal constitution) teaching and
instructing all Nations through the whole world todiscern between good and
evil, and to affect the one as leading to the perfection of worldly felicity,
and to eschew the other, as the opposite thereof. This is that law written in
the hearts of the Heathen, made them to be a law unto themselves, as it is
said, Romans 2. 14. and by the instinct of nature, to do the very works of the
Law of God, with admirable integrity and resolution. This is that Law that led
them to the knowledge of God that they had, whereby they confess him to be the
Creator, supporter, and preserver of all things, seeing all things, knowing all
things, and doing whatsoever pleases himself, to be omnipotent, eternal,
infinite, incomprehensible, without beginning or end, good, perfect, just,
hating evil, and ever doing good, a blessed Spirit, and as Plato calls him,
(...), the greatest Spirit, that gives all good things unto man, that guides
his actions, and blesses his labors: All this and much more, did the very
Heathen by this Law of Nature, conceive and pronounce of God, and therewithal
confessed, that by reason thereof they were justly tied to yield him all
service, honor, obedience, praise, and thanksgiving; but wanting graceto
direct them above nature in the right ways thereof, they first swarved on one
hand, then on the other, and at length they fell into their innumerable
superstitions and idolatries; yet as they concurred with us in these
fundamental points of Christian confession, touching the nature of God, so did
they likewise in the fundamental course of serving and worshipping him; as by
prayer, to crave blessings, by hymns, to celebrate his praise; by oblations,
to show their thankfulness to him; by sacrifice, to make atonement with him
for their sins and trespasses; by honoring and maintaining his servants,
Priests, and Ministers, to express the honor, love, and reverence they bear
unto himself. Some are of opinion that they learned much of this from the
children of God. So Ambrose alleges, that Plato did of Jeremy the Prophet,
meeting him in Egypt; but it appears that Jeremy lived before Plato almost
300. years: yet it is doubtless, that with their blood and lineage they
deducted many particular rites and ceremonies from Noah and his Nephews: but
these notions I speak of, rise out of the very law of nature written in their
hearts by the finger of God, as S. Augustine witnesses, saying, Quis scribit
in cordibus hominum naturalem legem nisi ipse Deus? who writes the law of
nature in the hearts of men but God himself? and Calvin agrees, that the
knowledge Instit. l. 1. c. 3.
of God is naturally planted in the minds of all men; Do we not see at this
day, the very barbarous, and (almost) savage Indians, agree in effect, most of
them, aforesaid touching the nature of God, and the course of worshipping him
also, yea, in the five ways we spoke of, viz. by prayer, by songs, by
offerings, by sacrifice, and by honoring and maintaining his Priests and
servants? who taught them this, if not the very law of nature? Me thinks I hear
some answer me, the Devil; and I must answer them, that it is true, the Devil
taught them to pervert these notions, but it is God that wrote them originally
in their heart, though the Devil has choked and corrupted them. But say that
the Heathen learned these of the children of God, whence did the Calv. I^st. l.
1. c. 4.
children of God learn it themselves, before the Law was given? who taught Cain
and Abel to offer their firstfruits, and to sacrifice? Abraham and Jacob to
give tithes of all that they had? Lactantius says, that the law of nature
taught to give offerings to God, and the practice of all the Nations of the
world, in all ages, and in all religions confirms it. As soon as Christ was
born, the wise men that came afar off out of the East, brought offerings unto
him, as directed only by the law of nature, for they were Gentiles: and none
used to visit the Temple of God but with some presents; not that God is
delighted with such things, but that their affections It seems this law of
nature is termed by Moses the Law of God, for he says, I declare the
Ordinances of God, and his Laws, Exodus 18. 16. when as yet the Law was not
given: and before, ca. 15. 26. If Israel will hearken to his Commandments and
keep his Ordinances, c. 19. 5.
by the fruits of their devotion were made manifest, the Church and service of
God maintained, and those that were in need and necessity, orphans, widows,
strangers, and the poor people provided for and relieved* for these are Gods
care, and are to him as the dearest kind of his children, and though younger
brothers as touching the worldly inheritance, yet those on whom he thinks the
fat Calf well bestowed. Donum (says Lactantius) est integritas animi: the
gifts we give unto God are a testimony of our frank and open heart toward him.
An offering of a free heart (says David) will I give unto thee: out of his
abundance we have received all things, and out of ours let us render some.

CAP. XXIII. Tithes in the time of Nature: first considered in the time of
Paradise.
I Would not be so curious as to seek the institution of tithes in Paradise:
yet no man will deny but that Paradise was a model of the Church, and that God
had his honourary rights in all the three kinds, he now requires them at our
hands, namely, ^ portion of time, place, and of the fruits; of the fruits, as
the tree of knowledge; of the place, as the midst of the Garden* the time, as
the cool of the day, which fignifieth the time of rest, and so the Lords day:
as more particularly we shall show by and by. Touching the fruit, it was the
portion that God reserved from Adam when he gave him all the rest; and that
portion also that justly and properly belongs to God, knowledge. And
therefore this part particularly was assigned by God unto his Priests, as the
sacred keepers of this his sacred Treasure, and therefore no other man might
invade this his right and inheritance, Knowledge (says Malachi) belongs to
the Priest. Touching place, what should be assigned to the chiefest, but the
chiefest? and what is the best and chiefest, but the midst? for medium -- and
therefore the place here where Gods portion is assigned him, is the midst of
the Garden; and therefore into this place does Adam fly as into Sanctuary, and
to the horns of the Altar, when he had offended, for it is said, that Adam hid
himself in the midst of the Garden: So Calvin, which is, the trees in the midst
of the Garden.

And touching the time, it is by all expositors upon the matter, applied to the
time of rest: for either they expound the cool of the day to be the evening, as
Oncalus, or the morning, as Calvin; and take it in either of these senses, it
may aptly discover the Judaicall Sabbath in the first sense, or the Christians
Sabbath in the latter. And as these are the times when we are to make our
public reckonings, confessions, and prayers unto God, and thereupon to receive
sentence of curse or absolution* so at this time, presently God calls Adam
and Eve, and the Serpent, that is, the whole congregation of Paradise to a
public reckoning, confession, and account; and like the great Ordinary and
Bishop of his Church, denounces against them the curse that their sins had
demerited.

If occasion required, I could show many other particulars wherein Paradise
exemplified the very Church of Christ.

Again, these rights of honor are likewise prefigured unto us in other
examples, under the age of Nature, the time I mean before the flood: for we
have therein three great examples of all these his three rights. First, in the
creation of the earth he reserved a particular place for himself as the place
of his own resort and pleasure, Paradise; which was the very local place of
his Church, and therefore out thereof he threw man, being accursed as a
profane and excommunicate person. And as touching his portion of time, he
figuratively showed the seventh part of our age to belong unto him, as in
respect of his Sabbath, when he took Enoch, being the seventh from Adam, to
keep his perpetual Sabbath.

And so likewise all the fruits of the tenth age* which was that of Noah (for
he was the tenth from Adam) he took wholly to himself: making the evil parts
as a sacrifice of his wrath, to honor him by their destruction, and the better
parts, which were saved in the Ark of his Church, to glorify his name by their
preservation: so that in this time of nature, the full tenth of all things was
paid unto God as a propitiatory sacrifice, for of the ten ages from Adam he
had the fruits of one whole age, which is all one as if he had had the tenth
part of every particular thing as it grew due in every particular age, and so
the Church expounds in that Canon of the Council of (...) where it is
commanded that the --

CAP. XXIV. The time of Nature, after the fall.
LEt us take a view of the state of Religion before the Law, and from thence
unto the calling of the Levites to the service of the Tabernacle. The time
before the Law was the kingdom of sin and of death, having no means propounded
whereby to escape, but what the light and law of nature taught unto men, who
finding themselves fallen from the favor devised by invocation and beating of
the heavens, with continual odours and savours to seek for mercy at Gods hand,
and by sacrificing of bullocks and brute beasts to ransom themselves as far as
they might from his heavy displeasure. Therefore in those times though every
man might offer oblations and sacrifices that would, yet because the order
thereof might be the more certain and reverent, both the children of God, and
the Heathen also, ordained to themselves particular persons of greatest worth,
wisdom, and sanctity, which they called their Priests to take care of these
things, to see them performed in such manner as might make them most acceptable
to God. Hereby grew the reputation of Priesthood to be above all dignities,
that in those days the Kings themselves in all Nations affected it as the
greatest and immediate honor under God himself. Yet because necessity required
so great a number of Priests for the service of God, as there could not be had
Kings enough for that purpose, therefore other inferior persons were also
called to that excellent function; yet such as in one respect or other were
still the noblest that were to be found. Therefore even in that time (I mean
before the Law was given) God promises the Israelites that if they will hear
his voice indeed, and keep his covenant, they shall not only be his chiefest
treasure upon earth, but they shall be unto him also a kingdom of Priests,
Exodus 29. 5, and 6.

Of these kingly Priests, two are mentioned in Scripture before the Law;
Melchisedek Priest and King of Salem, and Revel or Jethro, Prince and Priest of
Midian. Exodus 16. and 1^
Of other Priests it appears in Exodus 19. 22. and 24. that there were many.
Let the Priests (says God) that come to the Lord be sanctified; and again, Let
not the Priests break their bounds, etc.

Touching these Priests we find no mention either how they were called to
their function, or how they were maintained in it; neither of them that
executed that place after the Law was given till the calling of the Levites,
which though it were a short time, as not above a year and some months, yet
must they have some maintenance and means to live on even during that time. The
Priests of Egypt had not only lands for their maintenance, but they also had
a certain part appointed them by Pharaoh to live upon; and though it appears
not by the Scripture what this part was, yet it is plain, that it was such, and
so bountiful, as when all the other Egyptians sold their land to Joseph for
Pharaoh to save their lives in the famine, they lived upon this part and kept
their lands.

The children of God (no doubt) came not behind the Heathen in devotion, and
consequently not in their bounty to their Priests; therefore though we have no
authority to demonstrate unto us the particular means wherein they were
provided for, before the Law, yet we may very probably conceive it to be much
after the manner of the Heathen Priests of that time, for that the Priests and
children of God being then scattered amongst the Heathen, as Melchisedek among
the Canaanites, Jethro amongst the Midianites, could use no rites nor
ceremonies in the worship of the true God, but the Heathen would have the same
in the service of their gods: insomuch as nothing is mentioned in the Scripture
concerning the same before the Leviticall Institutions, but it is particularly
found among the Gentiles first, touching both their Priests and manner of
sanctifying of them, as also touching their offerings, altars, and sacrifices,
and the manner of feasting at the sacrifice of thanksgiving used by Jethro,
Exodus 18. 12.

I infer therefore, that seeing the Heathen took their original manner of holy
rites from the children of God, that therefore what original rites the Heathen
had in their service of their religion, that the same were in use also among
the children of God, though they be not mentioned in the Scripture: and
consequently, that insomuch as the Heathen universally paid Tithes and
first fruits unto their Gods and Priests, that therefore the children of God
did so likewise from the beginning to the true God. And to this agrees Hugo
Cardinalis, saying, It is thought that Adam taught his sons to offer
first fruits and tenths unto God: so that the children of God borrowed it not
from the Heathen, or the Heathen from them, but both the one and the other from
the law of nature; for as Ambrose says, God therefore by Moses followed not
the fashion of the Gentiles: Non ergo Deus per Mosem Gentilium formam sequutus
est; sed ipsa naturalis ratio hoc habet, ut quis inde vivat ubi laborat, in
Epist. 1 Cor. ca. 9. C. 41. Col. c.

And as the examples of Abraham and Jacob do plainly confirm it to be done by
them, so doubtless was it also done by other of the Hebrews; even before the
Leviticall Institutions, and even then holden and taken to be a duty belonging
unto God, as plainly appears by Gods own mouth in 22. Exodus 29. when he
says, and that before the Leviticall Institutions: Thine abundance and thy
liquor shall thou not keep back: which all Interpreters agree to be spoken of
the Tithe and first fruits of corn, oil, and wine, and therefore Jerome doubted
not so to translate it, viz. Thy tithes and firstfruits shall thou not keep
back: wherein the word keep back, non tardabis, is very materially to be
considered, as evidently showing, that it was a custom of old to pay these
tithes unto the Lord, and therefore that he now required them not as a new
thing, but as due unto him by an ancient usage. That the word non tardabis,
thou shall not keep back, or delay, implies a thing formerly due, very reason
tells us, and the use of it in other parts of Scripture does confirm it, for
the very same word (...) is used in the same sense, Deuteronomy. 23. 21. When thou
vowest a vow unto the Lord thy God, non tardabis, thou shall not be slack to
pay it, or shall not keep it back: this is not a commandment to pay or give a
new thing, but to pay that is already due, the thing vowed. In the same sense
it is said, 2 Pet. 3. 9. non tardat Dominus promissa, the Lord is not slack in
performing his promise, that is, not slack, or holding that back which in his
honor and justice he has tied himself to pay or perform; the blessing he
promised, which by his promise is made a debt.

CAP. XXV. That they are due by the Law of God.
IT is said in Genesis in the end of the 13. ca. and so on in the 14. and in
the 7. to the Hebrews, That whilst Abraham dwelt at Hebron, in the Plain of
Mamre, his brother Lot was carried away prisoner by the four ( Assyrian, or
Babylonian) Kings, with all that he had, and that Abraham confederate with
Mamre the Amorite and his brethren, Escol and Aner, armed his household, even
the bondmen as well as free, 318. in all, and pursued them unto Dan, where he
smote them in the night, and recovered Lot and the prey: And that as he
returned, Melchisedek King of Salem, Priest of the most high God, met him, and
gave him bread and wine, and blessed him, and prayed and praised God for him:
In the Hebrew text it is indefinite which of them gave tiths to other;
therefore the Jews say Melchisedek gave it to Abraham, but the holy Ghost in
the 7. to the Hebrews explaineth it, that Abraham gave them to Melchisedek.
and that Abraham did thereupon give him the tithe of all. This place of
Scripture is very material for our purpose, as portraiting unto us the whole
model or platform of the Church now under the Gospel, even as if the one were
measured out by the other, with a line, or rod, as Moses measured the
Tabernacle, and as if God had said as he did unto Moses, See that thou make it
in all things like the pattern I have showed thee, Exodus 25. 40. the last. We
will therefore stay a while upon it, and consider the action, the time, the
place, the persons, and some other circumstances. The action, as having nothing
in it belonging to the Leviticall Law, and therefore a plain direction unto us
how Codomannus says in the year 293. some other count it above 370.
to demean our selves under the Gospel. The time, as performed before the Law
was given, namely, about 300. years after the flood, both according to the
rites that time, and to be president for the time to come after the Law
abolished. The places where this action was performed, Hebron, Dan, and Salem;
Hebron, a place in Judah where Abraham dwelt afterward, one of the Leviticall
Cities, from whence Abraham departed, when he went into this expedition. Dan,
the uttermost limit of the holy land, whither Abraham pursued his enemies, and
there slew and chased them. Salem, the place where Melchisedek was King, which
by reason of Josephus his mistaking it, is commonly taken Melchised. Dei
sacerdos, Solymorum quam civitatem postea: Hierosolymam vocarunt. Ios. Antiq.
l. 1. c. 18. Hieron. in Ep. ad Euagr. et in loc. Heb. Lyra in Genesis 33.
to be Jerusalem, but erroneously, as Jerome and Lyra explain it: for Saint
Hierome out of the ancient Rabbis shows it to be a Town near so called in
his time, and men then showing the ruins of Melchisedeks Palace in great
magnificence. S. John also does witness it to be Enon, a known Town in Jeromes
time near Jordan, where the spring was that John Baptist baptized in: John also
(says he) baptized at Elim, besides Salem, because there was much Joh. 3. 23.
water there: So that the first door that was opened into the Kingdom of
heaven by the preaching of the Gospel, the first administration of the
Sacrament of Baptism, as S. John here reports it, was within the territories
of the Kingdom of Salem, that is, by interpretation, the Kingdom of peace and
righteousness, which Baptism brings by washing away original sin.

The persons are, Melchisedek, Abraham and his confederates, and family.
Melchisedek is the image of Christ, King of righteousness and peace, the
Priest of the high God, and a Priest for ever; for the Scripture neither
shows his beginning, nor his ending. A Priest, not anointed with material
oil, after the ceremony of the Leviticall* Law, not ordained for a time as
Aaron, but established with an oath by God himself to be for ever: and
sanctified with the spiritual oil of gladness above all the ranks and orders
of Leviticall Priesthood. Abraham an Hebrew and representing the rest of the
Hebrews, Gods chosen people: Father of the Jews by Circumcision, and by faith
the Father of the So that Melchisedek prefigurated the whole Priesthood of
Christian Religion, and Abraham the whole Laity; therefore Chrysostom says,
Considera quanta sit excellentia nostratis sacerdotii quandoquidem Abraham
Patriartha Iudaeorum progenitor Levitarum comperitur benedictionem accipere a
Melchisedec. Orat 4. advers. Iud. Sed ita Paulus ipse.
Gentiles. His confederates, Mamre, Escol, Aner, Amorites and Gentiles,
representing the whole body of the Gentiles. The family of Abraham, as well
bondmen as freemen, all mingled together, and all here marching as under one
ensign, not of the Leviticall* Law, which only belonged to the Jew, but of the
New Testament, embracing both Jew and Gentile, bondmen and freemen, the
children of Hagar as well as Sarah. Their enemies are the idolatrous* Assyrtans
or Babylonians, who spoil the people of God, and these Abraham pursues,
kills, and chaseth beyond Dan, that is, out of the Church.

To apply and moral this to the Church under the Gospel* They that are the
true children and consorts of Abraham, whether Hebrews or Gentiles, free or
bond, who now are all alike, they must depart out of the Leviticall* ^ities,
that is, the Ordinances and Ceremonies of the Law: they must fight against the
four great Kings, the enemies of Lot, and of the children of God; Sin, Flesh,
the World, and the Devil. So Hugo expounds them, they must chase and cast
Superbia vitae, Concupiscentia carnis, Hypocrisis, Ava^^tia vel concupiscentia
oculoru^. Hugo.
them not only out of the temple of their heart, but out of the compass and
bounds of the Church of Christ, and so kill and subdue them by faith and
repentance, even when they are asleep, and thereby seem to have surest
possession of them. Having thus conquered, Melchisedek, our Savior Christ,
will meet them in their return, but where? not till they come within the
territories of Salem, into the bounds of the Church by the sacrament of
Baptism; And then he will not stay till he be called and wakened, as he did in
the ship with Peter, but as he is our (...), he will Multo post futurum Domini
sacramentum an^e signavit, ac sacrificio panis and vini mysterium corporis and
sanguinis expressit. p. To. 4. 14. c.
come forth of himself and meet them, and give them bread and wine, as
Melchisedek did, to strengthen and confirm them, that is, the other sacrament
of the body and blood. Then as a perpetual high Priest and Mediator he does
bless them, and make intercession for them, as Melchisedek did Abraham, and
his spiritual posterity in the person of Abraham, as well Jews as Gentiles;
for in the person of Abraham, Melchisedek blessed both, the Jews as his
children by Circumcision, and the Gentiles as his children by faith. Then must
we do as Abraham did in his own and our person, give tithe of all to
Melchisedek and his Substitutes. Melchisedek gave bread and wine really, and we
must also as Abraham did, give him the tithe really. And this tithe was not
given to Melchisedek as a Leviticall duty, but as a duty belonging to God both
before the Law, and in Ministravit iste Melchisedek Abrahamo and exercitui
xenia, and multam abundantiam rerum optimarum simul exhibuit, and super epula^
eum collaudare coepit and benedicere Deum qui ei subdiderat inimicos. Jos.
Antiquit. l. 1. c. 18.
the time of the Gospel: for Melchisedek met not Abraham with oblations and
sacrifice, like a Priest of the Law, but with bread and wine, the elements of
the sacrament of the Gospel, which in figure thereof are only remembered in
this place by the holy Ghost; though Josephus mentions many other rich gifts
at this very time plentifully given by Melchisedek to Abraham: So that if
Melchisedek in the person of Christ received tithe, then doubtless is tithe
due unto Christ, and consequently to his Ministers.

This is the first place in Scripture wherein tithes be mentioned, therefore
some may think it the first time they were paid, but that is no argument; for
so it is the first place where a Priest is mentioned, yet no doubt Priests were
before. Noah performed the Priests office when he built an Altar, and offered
of every clean No fis^, as though the curse extended not to the sea.
beast, and fowl upon it, Genesis 8. 20. And it is very likely that Melchisedek
himself had borne the office of a Priest many hundred years before he met
Abraham, though the Scripture does not mention him till the meeting; for if it
be lawful to enquire of that the holy Ghost reveals not, many great Divines
are of opinion, that he was Sem the son of Noah; (whom the Salemites had made
their King) and it may well be, for it appears in Genesis 11. that Sem lived
600. years, whereof 502. after the Flood, and of them 209. in the life of
Abraham: So that to those of that new world that Abraham lived in, (I mean
after the Flood) he might well seem without father or mother, or any beginning,
being born almost 100. years before the Flood, and to have been a Priest for
ever. And then in like consequence he might have received tithes of diverse
other before he thus met Abraham: for that use was common long before among the
Heathen, and likely it is, that the Heathen rather learned it of the children
of God, then that the children of God should learn it of them, as Hemmingius
would have it, who says, that Abraham gave these tithes of his own accord,
following therein (without all doubt) the manner of Conquerors, which were wont
to confecrate the tithe of the spoil unto their gods, or to bestow it upon
their Priests. I read in Ovid, that Bacchus who lived before this time, having
conquered the Indians, and other Nations, sent the first fruits of the spoil
magno Jovi, to great Jupiter: but whether Abraham either heard of it, or took
it for a Precedent, that cannot I tell.

Te memorant Gange totoque orient subact^
Primitias magno supposuisse Jovi.
Cinnama tu primus captivaque thura dedisti,
Deque triumphato viscera tostabove. Fastor. li. 3.
The next place of Scripture mentioning tithes is the 28. Genesis ver. the last.
Jacob going upon his adventure, voweth, that if God will be with him in his
journey, and give him meat and cloth, and so that he return safe, then (says
he) the Lord shall be my God, and this stone which I here set up as a pillar
shall be Gods house, and of all that thou shall give me, will I give the tenth
unto thee. Romulus made the like vow for building the Live. ^. ^.
Temple to Jupiter Feretrius upon Mount Palatine. Tatius and Tarquinius upon
Tarpeius. William the Conqueror for Battle Abbey. But Hemmingius cannot say
that Jacob did it by their example, for they lived too too long after him. I
think rather that the law of nature and reason taught all Nations to render
honor, thanks, and service unto God, and that the children of God being more
illuminate in the true course thereof, then the Heathen by the light of reason
could be, first began the precedent, and that then the Heathen dwelling round
about them apprehended and dispersed it; for the use of paying tithes even in
those first ages of the world was general, as hereafter shall appear. But
Jacob does not here bargain and condition with God, that if God will do thus
and thus, that then he shall be his God, and that he will build him an house,
and pay him tithe, and otherwise not; but he alleges it as showing by this
means he shall be the better enabled to perform those debts and duties that he
owes unto God, and will therefore do it the more readily.

The actions and answers of the Sages are in all Laws a law to their posterity.
Justinian the Emperor does therefore make them a part of the Civil Law. The
common Lawyers do so allege them, and the Law of the holy Church has always
so received and allowed them. And though Saint Augustine says, that the
examples Non ideo nobis proponi exempla justorum, ut ab eis justificemur; sed
ut eos imitantes, ab eorum justificatore nos quoque justificari sciamus. Aug.
lib. de Catechisand. rudibus. Tom. 4. f. 218.
of the righteous are not set forth unto us, that thereby we should be
justified; yet he adds further, that they are set forth to the end that we by
imitating them may know our selves to be justified by him that justifies them.
Why then should we now call tithes in question, since we find them to be paid
and confirmed by two such great Sages and Patriarchs, Abraham and Jacob? Yea,
their payment practiced generally by all the Nations of the world for 3000.
years at least, never abrogated by any Law, but confirmed also by all the
Fathers and Doctors of the Church; and not impugned by a single Author, as far
as I can find during all the time I speak of?

Well; It will be said, that all this is nothing, if the Word of God commands
it not; for every thing must be weighed and valued by the shekel of the
Sanctuary, Lev. 27. 25. They may by the same reason take away our Churches, for
I find not in all the Bible any Text wherein it is commanded that we should
build us Churches: neither did the Christians either in the Apostles time, nor
100. years after, build themselves Perkins them. Problem. 9.
Churches like these of ours, but contented themselves at first to meet in
houses, which thereupon were called aedes sacrae. And to show that they were
commanded by the Leviticall Law, will not serve our turn, for it will be said,
the Statute of repeal, even the two words spoken by our Savior upon the
Cross, Consummatum est, John 19. 30. clearly abrogated that Law: but it is to
be well examined, how far this repeal extends: for though the letter of it be
taken away, yet the spiritual sense thereof remains; for Jerome says, that
Singulae paen^ syllabae, etc. spirant coelestia sacramenta. Tom. 3. Paulin^
Epist.
almost every syllable thereof breaths forth an heavenly sacrament. Saint
Augustine says, the Christians do keep it spiritually, so that if tithe be
not given in the tenth, according to the Leviticall Institution, yet the
spiritual meaning of providing for the Clergy our Levites remains. But with
the precepts of the Leviticall and Ceremonial Laws diverse rules of the Moral
Law are also mingled: as the Laws against Witches, Userers, Oppressors, etc.
the Laws that command Not to reap every corner of our field, nor to gather our
fruit clean: not to keep the pledge that belongs to the person of our brother.
us to lend to our brother without interest, and to sanctify the Sabbath; for
though the Institution of the Sabbath be changed, yet the spiritual
observation remains, and that not only in the manner of sanctifying it, but
as touching the time also, even the seventh day. Notwithstanding I find not,
that the Apostles commanded us to change it, but because they did change it, we
take their practice to be as a Law unto us: yet though they changed the time,
they altered not the number, that is, the seventh day. I will then reason that
God has as good right to our goods of the world, as to the days of our life:
and that a part of them belong unto him, as well as the other. And the action
of Abraham and Jacob may as well be a precedent to us for the one, (in what
proportion we are to render them) as that of the Apostles in the other; for
both of them were out of the Law, the one after it, the other before it: And
why may not the limitation of the day appointed to the Lord for his Sabbath be
altered and changed, as well as the portion appointed to him for the tenth? You
will say, the seventh day was not due to him by the law of nature, for then
Abraham and the Fathers should have kept it before the Law given, but it held
the fittest analogy to that natural duty, that we owe to the service of God;
and therefore when that portion of time was once particularly chosen by God for
his service, by reason himself had commanded it under the Law, the Apostles,
after the Law was abolished, retained it in the Gospel: And so since the number
of the tenth was both given to God before the Law, and required by him in the
time of the Law, being also most consonant to all other respects, great reason
it is to hold it in the age of the Gospel. Yet with this difference, that in
the old Law the Sabbath was the last part of the seven days, and in the Gospel
it is the first, because our Savior rose from the dead the first day of the
week, and not the seventh.

God is our Lord, and we owe him both rent and service: our service is
appointed to be due every seventh day, our rent to be the tenth part of our
increase. He deals not like the hard Landlords, that will have their rent
though their Tenants be losers by their Land, but he requires nothing save
out of their gain, and but the tenth part thereof only. These two retributions
of rendering him the seventh day of our life, and the tenth part of our goods,
are a plain demonstration to us, of our spiritual and temporal duty toward
God. Spiritually, in keeping the Sabbath* and temporally, in payment of tithes,
that is, in providing for his Ministry, and them in necessity; the one being
the image of our faith, the other of our works: for seven is the number of
spiritual sanctification, ten the number of legal justification. Therefore to
pay all the nine parts was nothing, if we failed in the tenth; for the tenth is
the number of perfection, and therefore required above all other as the type of
legal justification. And as our faith is nothing without works, so neither is
the Sabbath without tithes: for they that minister to us the spiritual
blessings of the Sabbath, must receive from us the temporal gratuities of
Tithing.

CAP. XXVI. That they are due by the Law of Nations.
THe Law of Nations is that which groundeth it self upon such manifest rules of
reason, as all the Nations of the world perceive them to be just, and do
therefore admit them as effectually by the instinct of nature as if they had
been concluded of by an universal Parliament. Therefore in truth, this is no
other, but that which the Philosophers call the law of Nature; Orators, the
law of Reason; Divines, the Moral law; and Civilians, the Law of Nations. As
far then as Tithe is due by one of these, so far likewise it is due by all the
rest: and consequently the reasons that prove it in the one, do in like manner
prove it in all the other. I will not therefore insist here upon arguments, but
remit you to that has been formerly said touching the law of Nature, and
demonstrate unto you by the practice of all Nations, what the resolution of the
world has been herein through all ages.

So ancient it is among the Heathens, that good Divines are of opinion, that
Abraham took example thereof from the Heathen: but others with more reason
conceive it to be practiced even by the children of Adam as well as sacrificing
and the offering of first fruits, as by the opinion of Hugo Cardinalis I have
showed in another place.

Besides, I find not any mention of Tithe paid by the Gentiles, before the time
of Dionysius commonly called Bacchus, who having conquered the Indians sent a
Present of the spoil Magno Jovi, as Ovid witnesses; and this was about 600.
after that Abraham tithed to Melchisedek.

Cyrus having collected a great sum of money amongst his captives, caused it to
be divided, and delivered the tithe thereof to the Praetors, to be consecrated
to Apollo, and Diana of Ephesus, as he had vowed. Xenophon in Cyro. l. 5.

Alexander the great having conquered the Countries of sweet odours and
frankincense sent a whole ship-loading thereof to Leonides in Greece, that he
might burn it bountifully unto the Gods. Plin. li. 12. c. 24.

Posthumous having overthrown the Latins, paid the tithes of the spoil, as
before he had vowed. Dionys. Halicar. li. 6. Livius.

Nebuchodonosor did the like (too bountifully as Josephus Largissime nimis.
reports it) to the Temple of Belus. Ant. l. 10. C. 13.

Rhodopis a Thracian woman, before the time of Cyrus, gave the tenth part of
all her goods unto Delphos. Herodot. Euterpe, page 139.

The Crotoniati warring upon the Locrenses, vowed the tenth part of the spoil
to Apollo: but the Locrians, to exceed them in their vow, vowed the ninth part.
Alex. ab Alex. 165.

Agis King of Lacedaemon went to Delphos, and there offered his Tithe unto God.
Xenophon de rebus gestis Grae. li. 3.

Agesilaus conquered so much of his enemies Country, that in two years he
dedicated above an hundred talents to God for the Tithe. Xenoph. de Agesil.
laud.

The Liparians having overcome the Hetruscians in many sea battails, sent the
Tithe of the spoil to Delphos. Diodor. 292. l. 40. (...).

The custom of the ancient Gauls (and so likewise, no doubt, of our British
Ancestors) was to give all (in effect) that they got by the wars unto their
gods, as Caesar witnesses, and to sacrifice the cattle so taken. De Bell.
Gal. lib. 6. 132.

And this use of Tithing the spoil obtained in war was every where so
ordinary, that Croesus the King of Lydia being overcome by Cyrus, and taken
into mercy told him, as advising him for his good, that he must of necessity
render the Tithe of the spoil unto Jove, and that he should therefore set a
guard at every gate of the City to prevent the soldiers from embezling of it.
Herodot. in Clio. li. 1. p. 36.

I reckon up these particulars the more willingly to beget shame and remorse,
if it were possible, in the soldiers of our time, that having been exceedingly
enriched in this kind, have not I fear remembered God, with so much as Croesus
did, when he sent no more but his iron shackles to Delphos. Herodot. ib. fo.
37. Yet God had 7000. servants that Elias knew not of, and therefore I will not
judge them.

As Military men abounded thus with devotion, so those of peaceable professions
came not behind them; for Festus witnesses, lib. 4. p. 213. l. 67. That they
of the old world offered every tenth thing unto God; and Varro in his Book, De
re Rustica, advises every man to pay his Tithes diligently of the fruits of
his ground.

Therefore because the Sicilians were more happy in corn, then other Nations,
they exceeded all other in thankfulness to Ceres, as appears by Diodor. Sic.
288. in pede, etc.

And for that the Athenians were next in that felicity, they did the like, and
instituted further in her honor, initia Eleusina, i. the feast of the
first fruits, which for the great antiquity and holiness thereof were, as
Diodorus reports, celebrated of all the people of the world.

Pliny says, the Arabians tithed their frank incense to their god Sabin, not
by weight, (as sparingly) but by measure, as a more bountiful manner. Lib. 12.
ca. 24. page 184. L. 57.

The Aethiopians cut not their cinnamon, but with prayers made first to their
gods, and a sacrifice of 44. Goats and Rams: and then the Priest dividing the
cinnamon, took that part belonging to their god, and left them the rest to make
merchandise of. Plin. l. 12. ca. 19. fol. 286. in pede.

The Siphnians sent at one time so great a Tithe out of their silver and gold
mines to Delphos, as the richest man of that age was not more worth. Herodot.
Thalia, lib. 3. fol. 180.

The Romans, and generally all Nations, paid the Neque Herculi quisquam decumam
vovit unquam si sapiens factus esset. Cic. de Not. Deor.
Tithe of their fruits to Hercules, and they held it the happyest thing to vow
the payment of them faithfully: and they thought that the cause that Lucullus
abounded so much above other in wealth was, that he paid his Tithe so
faithfully. Alex. ab Alex. lib. 3. 165.

As they paid their Tithes out of the fruits of the earth, so did they likewise
out of their privy gains and industry.

Herodotus writes, that the Samians (a small people) yielded at one time six
talents for the Tithe of their grain gotten by merchanchise. Melpom. li. 4. 267.

And that nothing might go untithed, the Ancients paid a Tithe of the very
beasts killed in hunting, namely, the skins thereof to Diana.

Et penet in Trivia. -- --
-- -- Dives praedae tamen accipit omni
Exuvias Diana tholo. -- -- Papin.
So Hesodius offered the tripod he won at Amphidamas game, as the prize of
Poetry, and upon the altar of the Muses.

Additions to the 26. Chapter of the Law of Nations.
These Laws of the Heathens are but few of many more that might have been
collected; If any Reader therefore desire to be further satisfied touching the
practice and custom of the Gentiles, in payment of tithes, he may abundanly
receive content from M. Seldom in his History, cap. 3. and Mountague in his
Diatrib. cap. 3. out of both some collections are here added.

Some perhaps will say, it is less material to consider their doings, seeing
we Christians have the light of Israel to direct us, and the assured Word of
God to our guide; as for the customs of the Gentiles, they might in many
things imitate Gods own people, but we may have recourse to the fountain of all
truth, to Him, who is the way, the truth, and the light.

It is true, but God himself has been often pleased to upbraid and provoke his
own people, by the example of a foolish and ignorant people, and to call heaven
and earth to witness against his own, when they have been obstinate and
perverse in their ways. And our Savior says, that the men of Ninive shall
rise up in judgment, and also the Queen of Sheba, against them who neglected
so great means of salvation and instruction, as the people enjoyed, when he and
his Disciples preached to them; and that it shall be more tolerable for Sodom
and Gomorrah at the last day, then for Chorazin and Bethsaida, who heard his
doctrine and saw his works.

So doubtless we Christians in this last age, in this light of learning and
sunshine of the Gospel, may learn by the examples of the very Heathens, who
were so precisely observant both of the quantity, the tenth, and of the
quality, in giving the best of the increase, which must needs proceed out of
some secret inclination unto that practice, whereof (as in many other remains
of natural notions) they knew no reason, but were secretly inclined thereto,
by that Providence which disposes all things, (...), or at least, from long
continued practice and traditions, as they had many, taken from divine
instruction at the first, though whence they had them they could not tell; not
utterly abolished and obliterated in the darkness of Pagan errors.

Paulus Diaconus, in his abridgement of Festus, does witness the general
practice of the Gentiles: Decima quaeque veteres diis suis offerebant.

Diodorus Siculus, lib. 4. says, That Hercules being very well pleased with
the kindness of the Inhabitants of Palatium, foretold them* that after his
Canonication those that would consecrate the tenth part of their substance unto
Hercules, should be very fortunate and prosperous in the whole course of their
life: which continued, says Diodorus, a custom unto my time; and he lived in
the days of Julius Caesar. And prosecuting the point, does instance in
Lucullus, and other wealthy Romans, saying, Many Romans accordingly, not only
such as were of very mean estates, but also many of the richest sort have made
these vows unto Hercules, to give him the tenth of all: and they becoming
afterward very wealthy, have accordingly given unto him the tenth, their state
amounting to M. M. M. M. Talents. L. Lucullus, well-nigh the wealthiest Roman
of his time, making an estimate of all that he was worth, gave the tenth in
oblation unto this Deity: which tenth he laid out upon many and sumptuous
feastings to his honor, gifts to his Temples, and the like.

And these Herculean Tenths were, Therumatus, of a fair eye, given with a
liberal and plentiful hand, as appears by that which Sylla, Lucullus, and
Crassus did: So Plautus uses, obsonare pollucibiliter, to riot it, and fare as
they do that sacrifice unto Hercules; and quaestus Herculeus, exceeding great
gains: which is a most sure proof how prodigally liberal these Pagans were in
paying their tithes of their never so great wealth unto their poppet gods,
having never heard of the reward of the righteous, nor happiness in heaven,
laid up for all those that so honor God. And to this does Tertullian allude,
speaking Apologet. c. 39.
of the prodigality of the Gentiles in such Feasts. Herculanarum decimarum and
polluctorum sumptus tabularii supputabunt. Which ready forwardness of theirs,
shall one day rise up in judgment, and cause it to be easier in the day of
vengeance for those Pagans that knew not God, then it will be for many millions
of Christians, that are both witty and courageous to withhold from God his due,
and defraud him of that which in his name, and for his right sake was given
unto those that intruded on his place, as an annexum thereto amongst the Pagans.

Halicarnasseus reports, that the Pelasgi in a dearth (...)
and great scarcity of all things, vowed, upon plenty sent unto them, to give
the tenth of all that God should send unto them, unto Jupiter, Apollo, and the
Cabiri, or the Samothracian Deities: intending that this misery and scarcity
came unto them for their former neglect and contempt of that part of piety.
Upon this vow of amendment, they had their desire; plenty was sent them, and
then, setting aside the dedicate portion, the tenth of all their increase of
their grounds, and of their cattle, they offered it unto those gods.

The perpetual use and practice amongst the Romans appears Lib. 3. Satur. 5.
by Trebatius, who wrote (says Macrobius) de religionibus, of the religious
rites and ceremonies of the Pagans. Trebatius in that Book, as Arnobius tells
us, declares a custom yearly with the Romans; That the increase of their
Vintage was by solemn words and formalities set apart from ordinary and common
use: for until that ceremony so performed, whereby God did as it were give
possession unto men, He as the giver of all things, and so of that natural
increase, had in their opinion (and this is a most remarkable passage for the
right of Tithes, as they opined) right unto, and interest in all. Nor was it
lawful among them for any man whatsoever, to use his own as his own, though it
grew upon his own ground, was manured, tilled, sowed, set, preserved at his
cost, with his labor and diligence, until God had given him leave to do it,
being supplicated and solicited thereunto by this formal ceremony. This is
the sum of Trebatius discourse in Arnobius.

This is that which may shame and confound all Christians, that acknowledge no
such right God has, nor will be induced to profess it so: this will rise up
in judgment against all maligners at, and detainers of the Churches portion in
Tithes, Gods right, our inheritance, by better conveyance then Muncipall Laws
can afford any. Cato de re rustica, ca. 132. has the practice and the form.

Jupiter dapalis, quod tibi fieri oportet (mark the word oportet, a matter of
necessity; not of voluntary devotion) in domo, familia mea, culignam vini Dapi
ejus rei ergo. macte hac illace dape pollucenda esto. then, manus interluito,
vinum sumito. He that performed this ceremony, Hujus rei cura non levis in
Latio -- nam flamen Dialis auspicatus vindemiam, et ut vinum legere jussit agna
^ovi facit. Varro.
was to do so, and then to say, Jupiter dapalis, macte istace Dape pollucenda
esto: macte vino inferio esto.

Nor did they thus appropriatly use this ceremony unto only Jupiter, but unto
what Deity soever they did, acceptum refer their increase.

Quoties aut thus, aut vinum super victimam fundebatur In 9. Aeneid.
(says Servius) dicebant; Mactus est Taurus vino, vel thure: hoc est, cumulata
est hostia; magis aucta est hostia. And Cato has the same form of words
concerning other sacrifices besides this, cap. 130. 141. 134. Arnobius in zeal
to Christian religion, derideth and scoffeth at this Pagan use and ceremony;
but because they did not, recte offerre, do it to the true God: not because
they did not, rite dividere, do that which was not to be done: not the thing
done, but done unto Jupiter, and unto Idols, not to the true God of heaven and
earth, was blamed. Withal he gives us to understand, That this erroneous act
of theirs, had beginning from a true ground: That, The earth is the Lords and
all that therein is; that, He has given it to the sons of men; that it is, He
that opens his hand, and fills all things living with plenteousnesse; that
tithes and first fruits are given unto God, to recognize his supreme dominion
over all: his admirable goodness in giving us whatsoever we possess: and that
by giving of them back unto him, as it were a certain quitrent unto the Lord
Paramount, thereby we do, and not otherwise, a quire unto our selves a right
unto the Remains, with an interest therein, and not otherwise, to use them unto
our own behoof; which if we do not, we are but Usurpers and Intruders. For all
the world, as the Jews did, who might not, durst not meddle with the increase,
until they had paid God his due, and thereby purchased liberty to use their
own. Thus the Gentiles who had not the Law, by direction and light of nature
though so much obscured, yet did the things of the Law.

Concerning the Siphnians (whereof mention is made already) In Phoc.
it is further to be remembered, what Pausanias expressly relates of them: who
says, when covetousness made them leave paying that tribute of Tithes, the
sea brake in upon them and swallowed up their mines; a just vengeance upon
detainers of Divine right, by dishonouring of God to lose all. So long as
yearly they paid Tithe of the increase, so long it was well with them: so soon
as they defrauded God of his right, God turned them in justice and vengeance
out of all.

Aristotle reports, that Cypselus had a special regard to the tenth, as
competent to a Deity, when he vowed all the goods of the Citizens, if he could
get Corinth. Oeconom. 2.
Aristotle was the great dictator of learning, in whom God would remonstrate
what he could do in mere Nature, without supernatural endowments of grace; he
speaks directly, That the tenth part is competent to a Deity, and that, He
vowed all the goods; but because this vow employed an absurdity, unless he
meant, which he did not intend to ruin the City, he was fain to have recourse
unto the ordinary use of Tithing: but so, that the Tithe decies repetita,
should answer the proportion of his vow: (...), having made a rate and
cessement of every man's goods and state, he took the tenth part, for that year;
and so the next for ten years together, leaving them nine parts to trade with
and live upon. Every one did not so, but every Conqueror that would not be
unthankful gave the tenth, (...), unto God; with us daily, men are not
thankful as they ought; yet they should be grateful.

Agesilaus, whiles he warred in Asia and had the spoil Xenophon*
of that wealthy Country, made such havoc upon the enemy, that within the
compass of two years, he sent more then one hundred talents, tithes, unto
Delphos, which proves an ordinary Spartane use and custom at least.

The same Agesilaus having vanquished the Thebans, Xen. Hellen. l. 4.
and their associates, in a great battle at Coronaea, though having received
many wounds in the fight, (...), forgot not God, says Xenophon, nor to be
thankful unto God.

That Retrait which Xenophon made with his ten thousand men out of upper Asia,
is the most remarkable piece of service one of them in all Antiquity. In this
hazard, Xenophon, as himself relates it, gave decimam spoliorum, partly unto
Apollo, partly unto Diana of the Ephesians.

The tenth being separated for these two Deities, was by general consent
committed unto the Captains to be dedicated. That for Apollo was laid up at
Delphos in the Athenian Treasury ( for most Nations of Greece had a several
one there.) But with that other part, Diana's part, Xenophon purchased a piece
of ground, and built there a Temple, and an Altar, and appointed the tenth of
the yearly increase for ever unto that service. This is a passage very
considerable, there being not such an express and observable example in all
Antiquity for Tithe in this kind with an endowment of a Church with lands.
Sacred is that land unto Diana; whosoever possesses or occupies the ground,
must every year consecrate the tenth unto the service of Diana, and employ the
rest upon the fabrique and upholding of the Temple. Tithes of spoils commonly
paid amongst the Graecians, but not accustomed in this sort to be employed. A
general sacred Revenue appropriated to a special end; where besides the
profits and Revenues of this land tithed, what was purchased with the tithe at
first, unto Diana, as president of the trade, and the chiefest ranger amongst
Pagans, Tithe of Venison and Game is said in the same place to have been paid.

Diodorus Siculus in his elventh Book has three several Page 259.
instances, for tithing spoils of war; the first of Pausanias, and the
Graecians, that having vanquished the Persians, and slain Mardonius in the
field: Set apart the tenth of the spoils, and therewith caused a tripos of gold
to be made, which they dedicated at Delphos; no vow preceding, nor other
intimation being, but as done out of duty and ordinary profession of
thankfulness.

Another of Cimon the Athenian General, who remaining Page 270.
victor at the battle upon the River Eurymedon, as Pausanias had done, so did
he, set out the tenth of the spoils, as Gods part, sacred and dedicated unto
him, to God in general, not naming Apollo, or any else.

In a third place, the Argivi having made the Mycenians Page 276.
their slaves and captives, consecrated the tithes of all they took to God, and
utterly rased the Town Mycenae.

Porphyrie declares, that first fruits were given unto God, (and what is said
of first fruits must be granted of Lib. 2. (...).
tithes) out of devotion by the Pagans, of all things useful to the life of
man: as of corn, honey, wine, oil, cakes, and what not? Those that gave nothing
by way of thankfulness, out of their increase and store, were called (...),
irreligious-people; not serving God, without piety: who never escaped
punishment for their Atheism. The Thoes a people confining upon Thracia, that
never used to give God first fruits of any thing which they enjoyed, nor
offered any thing at all unto the Deity, were utterly destroyed out of the
earth. The reason is well given by that profane Porphyrie, why men give tithe,
first fruits, sacrifice, and the like, out of the secrets of Christian
mysteries, (...), for all that we have or enjoy is Gods, though the use or
enjoying thereof seems to be ours, which reason being eternal, and
undeniable in nature, professed and acknowledged by Naturalists, without light
of grace, none can doubt, but that the practice in being was out of that
persuasion, and so of duty, and necessary tie, which none but (...), and (...),
as Pophyrie calls them, did neglect: and for contempt whereof, even in
opinion of Pagan Antiquity, exemplary punishment was inflicted on that people.
No men, nor City, nor stone remained, and their memorial perished from off the
earth, says Porphyrie.

The learned Greek Grammarians do testify and expound, the custom of tithing
by the Graecians, as Valerius Harpocration says: (...), for they tithe all the
spoils gotten of the enemy unto the gods. And long before Harpocration, the
learned Grammarian Didymus for his indefesse reading and writing, surnamed
(...), Ironside, or heart of Oak, says, as he is cited by Harpocration, that
properly and primarily, (...), to pay the Tithe, was (...) to sanctify,
dedicate, or consecrate unto divine service, (...), In as much as it was a
general custom amongst all the Graecians to give the tenth of any their
increase unto the gods. These two learned Grammarians did know what was the
ancient use among the Graecians, better then any man now: because they did only
hoc agere, having no other profession to distract their studies: and especially
because both of them had, especially Didymus, those helps in their days, which
none can attain now unto; the Authors being lost, whom they saw and perused,
whereby they might learn the Grecian customs more particularly.

Besides the practice of the Romans and Graecians, other barbarous Nations did
observe the Law of Tithing: For in the remains of natural understanding and
notions, the Barbarians had a part as well, and often a greater part then the
Graecians or Romans more civillized Nations had; and commonly the ancientest
customs are to be found amongst the Barbarians, and not among the Graecians,
nor Romans, as common experience observes. The Carthaginians sent the Tithes
of their Sicilian spoils unto Hercules at Tire, for Hercules was the chief
Patron and Protector of Tire, and the Carthaginians were a Tyrian Colony. Nor
did they send their Tithe once, or sometime, or as they would, out of arbitrary
devotion, but of ancient and ordinary custom, as Diodorus Siculus reports;
which growing into disuse, through negligence and disregard in long tract of
time, many dysasters in war, and other crosses in affairs of State befell them.
And thereupon to reconcile themselves, and appease Hercules, they renewed again
the forgotten custom, and sent thither not only the Tithe of the spoils, but
of all things increasing and renewing yearly. Thus much is reported by Diodorus,
where he relates into what straits the Carthaginians were driven, and into how
many hard assays, by Agathocles the Scicilian. It is a memorable place for such
piety; therefore it shall be here recited.

The Carthaginians supposing that these losses and dysasters were sent unto
them of God, betook themselves to all manner supplication and devotion; and
for so much as they supposed Hercules especially to be angry with them, who was
chiefly worshipped at Tyrus, from whence originally they were extracted, they
sent exceeding great presents and rich gifts thither. Being thence descended
they were accustomed in former times to send unto Tire the tenth for Hercules,
of all their Revenues and increase, any way renewing, issuing or growing; but
becoming in process of time very wealthy, and having exceeding great commings
in, they sent very seldom their Tithe, and that but small and refuse, unto
Tire, in neglect and disregard of the Deity. But upon this great loss, coming
home to themselves, and repenting of their irreligion, they became mindful of
the Gods, all that were worshipped at Tire, and sent unto them the tenth.

Altogether as we use to serve God. Phryx plagis. Israel when God smote them,
then they repented, returned, and honored him: but when he turned his hand,
they turned their hearts. So the Carthaginians being plagued first, returned
unto their former custom, (an ancient custom beyond the memory of man, and
yearly, not sometime) and gave willingly in abundance their tenth part of all
their commings in: not so much but of their children they gave the tenth, for
they used to sacrifice them unto Saturn, as Israel did in the Valley of Hinnom.
Old Father Ennius remembers this custom, Poeni sos folitei sont sacrificare
puellos: which custom seeing it remained unto Tiberius Caesar's time, it is not
likely they disused the other tenths.

In like manner Gelo the Sicilian having vanquished the Carthaginians in a most
memorable battle, and slain of them in the field an hundred and fifty
thousand men, the greatest blow for massacre of men, that they at any time
received in any battle: Gelo having achieved this, he reserved several and
apart the best and principal of the spoils (which cannot well be denied to be
a tenth) meaning to adorn and honor the Temple at Syracuse: of the remains he
reserved another portion ( without all doubt in quantity another tenth) which
he dedicated in the principal Churches of Himera; the residue, after God had
been served, he parted among his soldiers and confederates.

Thus it appears what the custom of Tithing was among the Heathens, which
doubtless they learned as many other things, from the people of God; as the
ancient Fathers have observed touching many passages of practice in holy writ:
there especially, when they entreat, de Graecorum furtis. So the names of
Deities, and other particular usages, they received from the Hebrews, (though
with much difference and variety, both as coming far, and not well
apprehended, or understood in the carriage and delivery) so also it is very
probable, that of them the Syrians, Phoenicians, and Egyptians, first learned
to give the tenth unto God, and other holy usages, and then more remote Nations
afterward: which might well admit in passing up and down, and in long
continuance, much variety, and not fully in every point answer the prototype,
or original.

But from whence soever they received their first direction, for custom and
practice they most part went beyond Gods own people: which though it be
strange, yet so it is, that in zeal unto piety and the service of God, not
only Samaria has exceeded Jerusalem, but even Babylon put down Sion. And so
Theodoret complains, that the heathens did give their tenths and
first fruits, to be employed in their idolatrous service, to the maintenance of
their Temples, Oratories, Priests, and Altars, in more liberal manner then
Christians: but says he, (...). Such honor (says he, speaking of the care
taken for the Egyptian Priests, Genesis 47.) the Priests of the living God, and
Ministers of our Redeemer Christ Jesus have not with us. And much less have
they in these days, especially with us, who boast to have reformed things
amiss. For yet, amongst those of the Church of Rome, it is otherwise, that
think nothing too dear for their Jesuits; and have their Priests in so great
respect, that they fall down on their knees and desire their blessing every
morning: but,

Nuper Tarpeio quae sedit culmine cornix,
Est been, non potuit dicere, dixit, erit.
Mr Seldom says, that the Turks pay the tenth according to the Mosaicall Law,
which they receive as authentic, but keep it according to Mahomets fancy, and
the doctrine of his Canonists.

Mr Blunt an accurate observer in his travails affirms, that the Turks in
their principal Cities have very stately Moskeetoes (i. Churches) of
magnificent building, accommodated with goodly Colleges for the Priests
lodgings, and Bathes, equal to the Monasteries of any City in Christendom.

Aelian relates (as Mr Seldom cites him) that some kind of beasts in Africa,
always divided their spoil into eleven parts, but would eat only the ten,
leaving the eleventh as a kind of first fruits or Tithe: and why may not
beasts of the field teach men the practice of piety? seeing man that is without
understanding is compared to them.

Thus Jews, Pagans, Turks, and some beasts have had a care to pay Tithes, but
many Christians in these times come far short in their duties, and may be
upbraided with these examples: Which are here more largely insisted on, to show
the impiety of many men in these last days, who are more inexcusable, then ever
any people were, because we have the rules and practice of all ages set before
us for our direction; as before the Law of Moses, in Abraham and Jacob: and
likewise under the Law, during the Priesthood of Aaron: and since under the
Gospel abundant light to guide us: besides all the Records, Histories, and
Monuments of Gods judgments in former times to instruct us. All which (says
the Apostle, 1 Cor. 10.) are written and recorded for our admonition, upon whom
the ends of the world are come. If we therefore offend now, we are greater
sinners then any former people, as sinning against conscience, knowledge, and
examples of all ages; and like to the servant, that knew his Masters will, but
did it not, who therefore must be beaten with many stripes.

CAP. XXVII. That they are due by the Law of the Land.
AS they are due by the law of Nature, and of Nations, by the Law of God, and
of the Church: so are they likewise due by the very Temporal Laws of the Land,
as well ancient as later; therefore Edward the elder, and Guthrun, Saxon and
Danish Kings, punished the not payment of Tithes by their temporal
Constitutions. Lambard. (...), page 54. Tom. 1. Council. Britan. page 392.

King Athelstan about the year of our Lord 924. not only decreed them to be
paid, by himself, his Bishops, Aldermen, and Officers, but maintains that his
Law by the example of Jacob, saying, Decimas meas, and hostiam pacificam
offeram tibi; and by other effectual Authorities: providing precisely, that
his own Tithes should diligently be paid, and appointing a time certain for
doing thereof, viz. the feast of the decollation of S. John Baptist. (...), pa.
57. Tom. 1. Council. p. 402.

King Edmund about the year 940. in a solemn Parliament, as well of the Laity,
as Spiritualty, ordained that every man upon pain of his christendom, and
being accursed, should pay them truly. (...), page 73. Tom. 1. Council. page 420.

King Edgar in a great Parliament about the year 959. confirmed the payment of
Tithes, assigning certain times when every thing should be paid, viz. the Tithe
of all young things before Whitsontide, of the fruits of the earth by the
harvest aequinoctiall, (i. about the 12. September.) and of seed by Martimas; and
this to be done under the pain mentioned in the Book of the Laws of the Land:
whereby it appears that the Laws of the Land had anciently provided for the
payment hereof (though the Book remains not to us at this day) as well as the
Laws of the Church. And he further enacted, that the Sheriff as well as the
Bishop and Priest, should compel every man to pay their Tithes, and should set
it forth, and deliver it, if they would not, leaving to the party offending
only the 9th part: and that the other eight parts should be divided, four to
the Lord, and four to the Bishop; and that no man should herein be spared, were
he the Kings Officer, or any Gentleman whatsoever. (...) page 77.

Tom. 1. Council pa. 444.

King Canutus, about the year 1016. made the like Law, with some little
enlargement, as appears in his Tom. Con. page 544.
Laws, ca. 8. and as Malmesbury testifies, strictly observed all the Laws of
the ancient Kings, de gestis Regum Angl. lib. 2. p. 55. And he wrote also about
the 15. year of his reign from beyond the seas a long letter to all the Bishops
and Nobility of England, conjuring them by the faith, that they ought both to
himself, and to God, that they caused these Laws touching Tithes and Rights of
the Church to be duly executed, and the Tithes to be paid as abovesaid. Malmsb.
p. 74.

But King Edward the Confessor, about the year 1042, made all certain; namely,
that Tithe was due unto God, and should be paid, the tenth sheafe, the tenth
foal, the tenth calf, the tenth cheese; where cheese was made, or the tenth
days milk, where there was no cheese made; the tenth lamb, the tenth fleece,
the tenth part of butter, the tenth pigge; and that they that had but a calfe
or two, should pay for every of them a penny. And to this price is the Parson
generally holden at this day, when ten of our pennies are scarcely worth one of
that time. He also ordained, that Tithe should be paid of bees, woods, meadows,
waters, mils, parks, warrens, fishings, coppises, orchards and negotiations:
and out of all things, says the Law, that the Lord gives, the For the
Sheriff and Bishops were in those days, the Kings Justices in every County,
and all matters were heard and decided before them.
tenth is to be rendered unto him that gives the nine parts with the tenth: and
binds the Sheriff, as well as the Bishop, to see this executed. And all
these were granted, says the Book, by the King, Barons, and Commonalty, as
appears in those his Laws, cap. 8. and Hoveden Annal. part. poster. page 602.

Long after the learned Author had written this, he published the first Tome of
our English Councels, wherein not only these Laws mentioned, are recited, but
also many other Laws and Constitutions concerning Tithes, by other Kings and
Parliaments of that age. It would have been an easy matter to have inserted
them at large here, being there set down in order of time successively; but
because I am unwilling to add any thing, or alter in the text of his discourse;
and that the Tome of the Councels is obvious to every man's perusal, I will
only add some brief references to them, as also to M. Seldom, in the eight
chap. of his History, who has recited them all, and some more then are here
mentioned. From both (these learned Lawyers) the studious Reader may be
abundantly satisfied, especially when the second Tome of the Synods shall be
extant, there will be full testimony of our own Laws, to confirm this truth,
for 500. years after the Conquest, as these are for 500. years before it.

When Gregory the great sent Augustine, ( about the year 600. Chr.) assisted
with 40. Preachers, to publish the Gospel to our forefathers in England, it is
testified by the Laws of Edward the Confessor among other things, that he
preached and commanded Tithes to be paid. -- Haec beatus Augustinus praedicavit
and docuit, and haec concessa sunt a Rege, Baronibus, and populo, sed postea
instinctu diaboli multi eam detinuerunt, etc. and all this was confirmed by the
King, and his Barons, and the people.

Tom. 1. Council. Brit. page 619. 8, 9.

Egbert Archbishop of York, brother to Eadbert King of Northumberland,
published Canons about the year 750. (which did bind all the Northern parts,
and Scotland in those days) wherein he directs all Ministers to instruct
their people, when, and how to pay their Tithes.

Tom. 1. Con. pa. 258. Can. 5, etc.

About the year 786. in the time of Offa, a great King of Mercia, and Helfwood,
King of Northumberland, and the two Archbishops, there was a great Council
held by two Legates from Hadrian the first, wherein Tithes were established;
and it was likewise confirmed in the South part by the King of West-Saxony. And
as M. Seldom says, it is a most observable Law, being made with great
solemnity of both powers of both States. History cap. 8. page 201.

Tom. 1. Con. page 291. Can. 17.

In the year 855. King Ethelwolph by the consent of all his Baronage and
Bishops, granted the perpetual right of Tithes to the Church, throughout his
whole kingdom, and that free from all taxes and exactions used then in the
State; and this statute is very remarkable, and was confirmed by other Kings,
Brorredus, and Edmundus of East Angles.

Tom. 1. Con. page 384.

For the Northern Clergy, there was a Law made to punish the non-payment of
Tithes.

Tom. 1. Con. page 501.

In a great Parliament at Earham, Anno 1009. by all the States assembled under
King Ethelred, Tithes are commanded and confirmed.

Tom. 1. Con. page 510, etc.

Maccabeus, an ancient King of Scotland, confirms Tithes in his Laws. Con.
page 571. Anno 1050.

In the Canons of Aelfric, Tithes are confirmed, Anno 1052. Con. page 572.

These and many other Constitutions and Laws are particularly, and more fully
recited in the first Tome of our Councels, and in Mr Seldens History, cap. 8.
from whence the Reader may please to take satisfaction, for the space of some
500. years before the Conquest.

William the Conqueror in the fourth year of his reign, when he took a view of
all the ancient Laws of the Land, he first confirmed the liberties of the
Church, because that by it (says Hoveden) the King and the kingdom have their
solid foundation ( page 601.) and herein amongst other Laws of King Edward,
these particularly touching Tithes; which Hen. 1. also did Anno 1100. as
appears by Mat. Par. pa. 53.

The like did also Hen. 2. in the 26. year of his reign, as Hoveden witnesses,
pa. 600.

And for a perclose of all that went before, or should follow after, King Hen.
3. in the ninth year of his reign, by that sacred Charter made in the name of
himself, and his heirs for ever, granted all this a new unto God. We have
granted (says he) unto God, and by this our present Charter have confirmed for
us, and for our heirs for evermore, that the Church of England shall be free,
and shall have all her holy rights inviolable. Magna Charta cap. 1. And that
this Charter might be immortal, and like the sanctified things of the Temple,
for ever inviolable, it was not only fortified by the Kings Seal, (the sacred
Anchor of the kingdom) but by his solemn oath, and the oath of his son, and
the Nobility of the kingdom. Yea, the whole kingdom yielded themselves to
stand accursed, if they should at any time after impeach this grant. And
therefore in the V. Rastals Abridg. de sta^tit. Confirm at. Sentenlia lata
super chartas.
25 Ed. 1. a special Statute was made for confirmation of this Charter,
wherein amongst other things it is ordained, that the Bishops shall
excommunicate the breakers thereof; and the very form of the sentence is there
prescribed, according to which upon the 13. Maii, Anno 1304. Ed. 1. 31.
Boniface the Archbishop of Canterbury, and five other Bishops solemnly
denounced this curse in Westminster Hall, the King himself with a great part of
the Nobility being present. First, against all them Vid. Pupil. oculi. part. 5.
cap. 22.
that should wittingly and maliciously deprive, or spoil Churches of their
rights.

Secondly, against those that by any art or devise infringed the liberties of
the Church or Kingdom, granted by Magna Charta and de Foresta.

Thirdly, against all those that should make new Statutes against the Articles
of these Charters, or should keep them being made, or bring in, or keep other
customs; and against the writers of those Statutes, Counselors, and
Executioners thereof, that should presume to give judgment according to them.

And lest this should seem a passion of some particular men for the present
time, rather then a perpetual resolution of the whole kingdom in the
succeeding ages, the zeal and care thereof was continually propagated from
posterity to posterity. So that in 42 Ed. 3. cap. 1. it was further enacted,
that if any Statute were made contrary to Magna Charta, it should be void. And
15. times is this Charter confirmed by Parliament in Ed. 3. time; eight times
in Rich. 2. reign; and six times in Hen. 4. Yea, the frontispice of every
Parliament almost is a confirmation of the rights and privileges of the
Church; as having learned of the very Heathen Poet, who had it from the law of
Nature, (...), we begin ever with God. Neither was there any man found, that
ever would, or durst (with Nero) lay hands upon his Mother the Church; for he
that smites his father or mother, shall die the death, Exodus 20. 15.

Heu tot sancitas per plurima secula leges
Hauserit una dies! hora una! et perfidus error!
My meaning is not to strain these Laws to the maintenance of such
superstitious gifts as were made to the Church against the honor of God, but
to those only that were for maintenance of his Word and Ministry, which if
they were lawfully conferred (as no man I think doubts but they were) then
let us consider how fearful a thing it is to pull them from God, to rend them
from the Church, to violate the dedications of our Fathers, the Oaths of our
Ancestors, the Decrees of so many Parliaments; and finally, to throw our selves
into those horrible curses, that the whole body of the kingdom has contracted
with God (as Nehemiah and the Jews did, Nehem. 10.) should fall upon them if
they transgress herein. For as Levi paid Tithes in the loins of Abraham, Heb.
7. so the lawful vow of the fathers descends upon their children. And as the
posterity of Jona^ab the son of Rechab were blessed in keeping it, ( Jer. 35*
18) so doubtless have we just cause to fear the dint of this curse in breaking
this vow.

Say then, that Tithes were not originally due unto God, and that there
belonged no portion of our Lands unto his Ministers, yet are we in the case of
Nehemiah and the Jews, (Nehem. 10. 32.) They made Statutes by themselves to
give every year the third part of a shekel for the service of the house of God.
And our fathers made Laws amongst themselves to give a portion of their Land,
and the tenth part of their substance, that is, these Parsonages for the
service of the house of God. If they were not due before, they are now due: For
when Eccles. also 5. 3, 4.
thou vowest a vow unto the Lord thy God, thou shall not be slack to be pay it,
for the Lord thy God will surely require it of thee, and so it should be sin
unto thee, Deuteronomy. 23. 20. Therefore S. Peter reasoning the matter with Ananias,
tells him, That whilst his land remained in his hands, it appertained unto
him; and when it was sold, the money was his own, Act. 5. 4. he might have
chosen whether he would give them God or not: but when his heart had vowed, his
hands were tied to perform them; he vowed all, and all was due: not by the
Levitical law, which now was ended, but by the Moral law which lasts for
ever; for Job being an Heathen man, and not a Jew, says also, Thou shall make
thy prayer unto him, and he shall hear thee, and thou shall render him thy
vows, Job 22. 27.

If the King give a gift of his inheritance to his son, his son shall have it;
if he give it to his servant, his servant shall have it, Ezekiel. 46. 16. If the
King then give a gift to his Father, (that is, to God Almighty) shall not God
have it? or the servant to his Master and Maker, shall not he enjoy it? Who
has power to take that from God, which was given unto him according to his
Word? can the Bishops? can the Clergy give this away? no, they are but
Vsufructuarii, they have but the use of it; the thing it self is Gods, for the
words of the grant be, Concedimus Deo, we give it to God, not to the Bishops.
Therefore when Valentinian the Emperor required the Church of Milan, of that
noble Bishop S. Ambrose, O says he, if any thing were required of me that were
mine, as my land, my house, my gold, or my silver, whatsoever were mine, I
would willingly Orat. de basilic. tradend. p. 2. 38.
offer it, but (says he) I can take nothing from the Church, nor deliver that
to others, which I my self received but to keep* and not to deliver.

CAP. XXVIII. Tithe is not merely Leviticall: How it is, and how not; and
wherein Judicial.
TIthe is not simply a Leviticall duty, but respectively; not the natural
child of Moses Law, but the adoptive: Consider first the action, and then the
end; the action, in payment of them; the end, in the employment or disposing of
them: The action of payment of them cannot be said to be properly Leviticall
for diverse reasons.

First, it is much more ancient then the Leviticall Law, as is already
declared, and cannot therefore be said to begin by it, or to be merely
Leviticall.

Secondly, the manner of establishing of it in the Leviticall Law, seems
rather to be an annexion of a thing formerly in use, then the creating or
erecting of a new custom; for in all the Leviticall Law, there is no original
commandment to pay Tithe, but in the place where first it is mentioned, Lev.
27. 30. it is positively declared to be the Lords, without any commandment
precedent to yield it to him. Some happily will affirm the commandment in the
22. Exodus that thou shall not keep back thy Tithe, does belong to the
Leviticall Law, though it were given before the Levites were ascribed to the
Tabernacle. Yet (if it were so) that is no fundamental Law whereupon to ground
the first erection of paying Tithe, but rather as a Law of revive, and
confirmation, as of a thing formerly in esse: for detaining and keeping back
do apparently imply a former right, and therefore Tithe was still the Lords,
ex antiquiore jure, and not ex novitio praecepto, by a precedent right, and not
by a new commandment.

Thirdly, it contains no matter of ceremony; for if it did, then must it be a
type and figure of some future thing, and by the passion of our Savior Christ
be converted from a carnal rite into some spiritual observation, (for so
says Jerome of the legal ceremonies) but no such thing appears in it, and
therefore it cannot be said to be a ceremony. The whole body of the Fathers do
confirm this, who in all their works do confidently affirm the doctrine that
S. Paul so much beats upon, that all legal ceremonies be abolished; and yet
as many of them as speak of Tithes, do without all controversy both conclude
and teach, that still they ought to be paid, and therefore plainly not to be a
ceremony.

Fourthly, the Tithing now used, is not after the manner of the Leviticall Law;
for by the Leviticall Law nothing was tithed, but such things as renewed and
increased out of the profits of the earth; but our manner of tiching is after
that of Abraham's, who gave Heb. 7. 2.
tithe of all. And this is a thing well to be considered, for therein as
Abraham tithed to Melchisedek not being of the Tribe of Levi: so our Tithing is
now to Christ being of Melchisedeks order, and not of the Tribe of Levi, but of
that of Juda, whereunto the Tribe of Levi is also to pay their Tithe.

Fifthly and lastly, the end whereunto Tithe was ordained is plainly Moral,
and that in three main points: Piety, Justice, and Gratitude. 1. Piety, as for
the worship of God. 2. Justice, as for the wages and remuneration of his
Ministers. 3. Gratitude, as sacrificium And to encourage them in the service of
God. 2 Chronicles. 31. 4.
laudis, an offering of thankfulness for his benefits received. All which were
apparent in the use of Tithes before they were assigned over to the Levites,
both in the examples of Abraham and Jacob, and by the practice of all Nations.
For God was to be worshipped before, in, and after the Law, and though the Law
had never been given; but his worship could not be without Ministers, nor his
Ministers without maintenance; and therefore the maintenance of his Ministers
was the maintenance of his worship; and consequently the tithes applied to the
one extended to both. God himself does so expound it, Mal. 3. 8* where he
terms the not-payment of Tithes to be his spoil: and wherein his spoil, but
in his worship? and how in his worship, but by taking from him, the service of
his Ministers, the Priests and Levites, who being deprived thereof could
neither perform his holy rites in matter of charge, nor give their attendance
for want of maintenance?

So that herein the children of Israel were not only guilty of that great
sin committed against piety, in hindering the worship of God; but of the
crying fin also committed against equity, in withholding the wages of the
labourer, (his Ministers) and consequently of that monstrous and foul sin of
Ingratitude, which Jacob in vowing of his Tithes so carefully avoided.

To come to the other point before spoken of, the disposing or employment of
the Tithes after they were paid, (that is, when they were out of the power of
them that paid them, and at the ordering of the Levites that received them) it
cannot be denied; but therein were many ceremonies, as namely, in the
sanctifying of them, in the eating them in the Tabernacle, the eating of them
by the Levites only and their family; and as they were otherwise applied to
the ceremonial habit of Gods service for that time: but yet notwithstanding,
even then they still served in the main point to the Moral end of their
original Institution; that is, the worship of God in genere; the maintenance
of his Ministers in genere; and for a token of thankfulness in genere. Against
which the particular applying them to the particular form of worship, and
ceremonies of the Leviticall Law, (for that time abolished) had no repugnancy.
And therefore though that manner of disposing them were Ceremonial, and did
vanish away with the ceremonies themselves: yet did it nothing diminish the
Moral use, and validity of the Institution in genere; which notwithstanding
still remained to be accepted and imitated by all posterity; and yet to be
altered and changed accidentally in the particular ordering and disposing of
them, as the present estate of Gods worship, and the necessity of the time
should require, viz. before the Law, at the pleasure of them before the Law:
under the Law, by the rules of the Law: and now in the time of the Gospel, as
the Church of God either has, or shall appoint them: keeping always (as I say)
the Moral considerations of their Institution, for they may not be diverted
from the Minister, though the course of Gods service be altered from that of
the Levites, but both they and the Levites are laborers in the Lords Vineyard;
and therefore what kind of work soever, either the one, or the other, be for
the time there employed upon, the wages appointed ( Denarius in diem, Mat. 20.
2.) is due unto each of them.

Therefore to take away the antithesis, or opposition that some make between
the Ministers of the Gospel, and the Levites and Priests of the Law; God
himself in the last of Esaias, v. 21. calls the Ministers of the Esaias 66. 20.
Gospel Priests and Levites, as though he had only changed the course of their
service, and not the main, or end of their Institution. I will take of them
(viz. of the Gentiles) for Priests and Levites, that is, the generation of Levi
shall no longer be appropriate to my service, but I will communicate their
function to the Gentiles, and out of them will I take Priests and Levites to
perform the service of my charge.

God therefore brought no new thing into the Leviticall Law, neither changed he
the nature of the former Institution thereof, nor the course of the payment,
nor the quantity of the portion assigned, nor the end whereto it was; but
looking generally into the equity of them all, and approving them all in the
general, (yea, though they were used by the Heathen) he descended into further
particularities for order and government, whereof he prescribed diverse rules,
and observances, some Moral, some Judicial, and some Ceremonial, according
to the fashion of his Church at that time; which like old garments being wholly
worn out with the old Law, the body whereupon they were put, remains still in
the first shape and vigor. And whereas before the Law it seems to be
somewhat at random and uncertain, God by his own mouth in the Books of Moses,
has established, and confirmed. So that these things considered, it cannot be
said to be Leviticall in substance, but respectively only, and by way of
accident.

1. An Objection touching sacrifice, and first fruits, and circumcision.
It may be objected, that sacrifice and first fruits were also in use under the
law of Nature, and from thence, (as Tithe was) translated into the Leviticall
Law: yet they ceased with the Leviticall Law, and why should not Tithe cease
likewise?

Though sacrifice and first fruits were in use under the law of Nature, and
from thence (as Tithe was) translated unto the Leviticall Law, yet the mark
they shot at, and the end whereto they were employed, being once accomplished,
there was in reason no further use of them; for they were like the cloudy and
fiery pillars, that directed the children of Israel to the land of promise, who
being arrived there, needed those helps no longer, and so they vanished away,
as then not necessary. But Tithe in it self and before the Institution of the
Leviticall Law, was only an act of justice and piety; and therefore though the
Leviticall Law, employed it partly unto ceremonies yet the nature thereof was
not thereby changed, and therefore it still lived, when the Leviticall Law
died. Touching the whole frame of Leviticall ceremonies, it is like that of
Daniels image: the body is decayed and gone, but the legs being partly iron, as
well as clay, by which it was supported; though the clay, that is, the ceremony
be abolished, yet the iron, that is, the Moral Institution thereof, endures
for ever.

The rites of the Leviticall Law were of two sorts; some the natural children
thereof, others the adoptive. I call them natural, that sprang out of the
bowels of it, as those touching the Ark, and Institution of the Levites.
Adoptive, those that being in use before were afterward annexed to it: And of
these I observe two sorts, one arising from some positive Constitutions, as
that of Circumcision; (whereof I will speak anon) and the other deduced from
the law of Nature, as those concerning the worship of God: whereof some were
general and necessarily incident to every form of his worship in all ages; as
Ministers to perform his service, which they called Priests, and means to
maintain it, which they ordained to be by Tithes. The other appropriate to the
natural condition of those times; as sacrifice, and first fruits, which though
they rose out of the law of Nature, as touching the common end of being offered
by way of thanksgiving unto God; yet in that they were also types and figures,
full of ceremony, they became temporal, and thereby transitory. For the
children of Adam finding themselves in the wrath of God, and their flesh,
blood, body, and life, to be altogether corrupted and accursed by the
transgression of their father; they sought by all invention possible to help it
as far as nature could; and therefore both to express the present estate of
their miserable condition* and the mark also they aimed at for redemption in
time to come, they held it as a necessary correspondency, that flesh should be
redeemed with flesh, blood with blood, life with life, the guilty body with a
guiltless body, and to be short, the trespass and corruption of man, by the
innocence of some sanctified creature offered unto God for remission of sin.
And because nothing under the sun could be offered up, but it also was full of
corruption, and that nothing could be acceptable unto God, that was impure,
therefore though they chose the cleanest and perfectest beasts, and things for
these offerings and sacrifices, and purged and sanctified them by all manner of
means they could, yet they devised further to sever the purer and aeriall part
thereof from the gross and earthly; consuming the one, that is to say, the
flesh and the bones (as the body of sin and corruption) with the deserved
torment of fire, and sending the other, that is, the fume and vapor, as the
purer part to carry their prayers and invocations up into heaven, before the
Throne of God. First, how corruptible they were, that is, even like the great
body of a bullock suddenly consumed. Secondly, the punishment in justice due
unto them, even the torment of fire. Thirdly, the place and person from whence
they hoped for redemption: Heaven and Almighty God. And lastly, the means
whereby they were to attain it, taken from two of the proprieties of fire,
light and heat: that is, first, the light of faith, whereby they long foresaw
the promised seed; and secondly, the heat of zeal and hearty prayer, breathed
and sent forth from the altar of a fervent heart, whereby they hoped to obtain
remission of their sins.

After all this they yet considering further, that the corruption and wrath
fallen upon them was perpetual, and that these oblations and sacrifices were
but temporal and momentary, they thought in reason (being only under the law
of Reason) that the one could not countervail the other, and that therefore it
was necessary by continual reiteration and multiplying of sacrifices to
solicit and importune God from day to day until the time came, that a
perpetual sacrifice might be offered up to make finalem concordiam, in the
high Court of heaven, a full atonement between God and man: which being once
accomplished by our Savior Christ, both the institution and the end of
sacrificing were wholly accomplished, and so no cause for ever after to use
that ceremony any more. For with one offering, says the Apostle to the
Hebrews, has he consecrated for ever them that are sanctified, Heb. 10. 14.

Touching Circumcision, though it were before the Leviticall Law, yet it rise
not out of the Law of Nature, or Moral Law, but was instituted by a positive
constitution, made by God himself, and not as a part of his worship, but as a
seal of his Covenant with Abraham, which by this ceremony* of cutting away the
impurer part of the flesh, did put the children of Israel ever in mind to cast
away carnal affections, and to hope for the promised Messiah, that should
cleanse them from the impurity of sin, and restore them again to the favor of
God: which being performed by our Savior, the Covenant was fulfilled, and the
seal of Circumcision presently thereby defaced.

2. Of the Sabbath day: Easter and Pentecost.
The Institution of the Sabbath day had in it much more Levitical ceremony,
then the matter of tithing; for no man ought to kindle a fire on that day, nor
dress the meat he should eat, nor carry any burden, take a Exodus 35. 3. 16.
24. Jer. 17. 11.
journey, or stir out of the place he was in. Tarry every man in his place, let
no man go out of his place the seventh day, Exodus 16. 29. It was besides a day
appointed for diverse particular ceremonies, sacrifices, and offerings, as ye
may read, Number. 28. 9, 10. and amongst other significations, to be a memorial
of the great deliverance out of Egypt, (a thing peculiar to the Jews.) Neither
have we any commandment, but only a precedent for the keeping of it, from the
Apostles, Acts 20. 9. 1 Cor. 16. 2. Rev. 1. 10. Yet durst never any man say,
that the Sabbath was therefore to be abolished, but the temporal and
ceremonial parts thereof being taken away, the moral use of the commandment,
which is, that the seventh part of our time must be dedicate to the general
service of God, remains for ever to the worlds end; for otherwise our Sabbath
is so remote from the Sabbath commanded in the Decalogue, that the one holds
almost no affinity with the other, as appears in the points aforesaid; and
for that their Sabbath was the last day of the week, ours is the first: theirs
was in celebration of the end of his works; ours in celebration of the
beginning thereof; for in the first day were the Elements, the Angels, etc.
made. August. Tom. 10. fol. 250. Theirs in memory of the Creation of the world,
ours of the Redemption, that Christ rise from the dead the first day of the
week. And though the Apostles taught us by example to exchange the Jewish
Sabbath for this of ours, as touching the public meeting on the first day of
the week, for setting forth the glory of God, yet they gave us no commandment
to abstain from work on that day; but the Church decreed, says S. Augustine,
that all the honor of the Jewish Sabbath should be transferred to the
Christian; ( loco dicto) and is done upon the Moral reason of the
commandment, not the Leviticall.

So likewise in tithing, cut off those parts that were temporal, and
ceremonial, which as I have showed were neither in the payment, nor in the
receiving of them, but in the manner of sanctifying and employment of part of
them, after the Levites were possessed of them: and then that which remains,
namely, the payment and receiving of them for maintenance of the service of God
remains for ever, as a part of the Moral Law, and common equity.

So touching Easter, Christ our Passover was sacrificed for us, 1 Cor. 5. 7.
and thereby the end of Institution accomplished: how come we then to continue
it, especially, having neither commandment, nor precedent thereof from the
Apostles? The Ceremonial part of the Paschall feast, viz. the Leviticall Lamb,
the Purification precedent, etc. are abolished with the Law, yet in that Christ
came in the room of that Leviticall Lamb, and was sacrificed at the same time,
and gave his body to be broken and eaten by all, as the Paschall Lamb was for a
satisfaction for our sins, as S. John Baptist says, Ecce Agnus Dei --
therefore is that Feast continued, as it was formerly used, without changing
either the number of the days, or season of the year, or the solemn estimation
that was anciently had thereof: yet note that Easter is kept according to the
Leviticall manner for the time, after the full Moon, and is therefore moveable;
whereas the day that Christ suffered is otherwise fixed, as that of the
Nativity.

So likewise Pentecost, being the 50. day from the first Passover, eaten by
the children of Israel, and the day also whereon the Law was given in Mount
Sinai, and therefore hallowed as one of the three greatest feasts; the Law then
being ended, the celebration of the birthday thereof, must in all reason also
be ended; yet because the fullness of grace, (that holds always an Antithesis
with the Law) that is, the holy Ghost in shape of cloven tongues was at the end
of 50. days after Christ's first Passover sent down upon the Apostles;
therefore is that Feast also continued, at the same time and number of days,
that the Jews used it: although in all the New Testament we have neither
commandment, nor example for keeping either of these Feasts; for though it be
said, Acts 2. 1. that when Pentecost was come, the Apostles were all together
in one place, yet was not that their meeting to celebrate the Judaical Feast:
but because the people from all parts then flocked to Jerusalem, the Apostles
were there also, for the better publishing of the Gospel, and for the same
reason was the holy Ghost also in this miraculous manner sent at this time,
that by this means the fame thereof might be carried throughout all the world.
For it cannot be intended, that the Apostles met to celebrate the Christians
feast, insomuch as at the beginning of this their meeting the holy Ghost was
not sent upon them. Yet all this while, nor in the Apostles time, as far as the
New Testament discovers, was Easter used, nor the Feast of Pentecost; for
though it be said, that when the Feast of Pentecost was come, they were all
with one accord in one place, Act. Nemo non sancti^icatus faciat. Phase. Nu. 9.
6. hac ceremonia sublata, manet festum.
2. 1. that is, at the time when the cloven tongues fell upon them, this like
the Sabbath was the Jews Pentecost, not the Christians; for it answered to the
Easter that the Jews had then last holden, not to that our Savior kept, being
the day before the Jews. So that neither of these Feasts seem to be begun in
the Apostles time, but rather by their next successors; yet Saint Paul, 1 Cor.
16. 8. says, I will tarry at Ephesus till Pentecost, for a great door and
effectual is opened unto me, and there are many adversaries: as though he
desired at that great Feast, to take the opportunity to publish the Gospel, and
confute his adversaries.

CAP. XXIX. How Appropriations began.
MAny things are notoriously wicked in conclusion, whose beginnings are not
suspected: so has it happened in Appropriations. The Livings that belong to
them, were first given for the maintenance of the Church and her family, that
is, Ministers and poor people. In the Primitive Church the Bishops disposed
them accordingly, but the burden growing in time too great for them, the
Parsons were themselves trusted to do it every one in his own Parish. Then
diverse religious men, as Abbots, Priors, single Deans and Prebends, that had
advowsons to them and their successors, perceiving this, began first to collate
themselves to those Churches, and for lucres sake were contented in their own
persons to do the divine service thereof; and finding sweetness in it, as
enjoying thereby the whole fruits of the Benefice. Every successor did the
like, and by that means kept the Living perpetually in their own hands,
without any favor, or thanks of, or to the Ordinary; at length to avoid the
multiplicity of Institutions and Inductions, they easily obtained license of
the King and Ordinary (sometimes of the Pope himself) that without these usual
ceremonies, they and their successors might be perpetual Incumbents, and take
the profits of those their Benefices. In old time whilst these Churches were
in the Clergy-hand, they were called Appropriations, because they were
appropriate to a particular succession of Churchmen; now they are called
Impropriations, for they are improperly in the hands of Laymen.

But thus Churches became first appropriate, yet only unto such as were merely
spiritual, and might in their own person minister the sacraments and divine
service. But shortly after Deans and Chapters obtained like licenses to them
and their successors, who being a Body corporate, consisting of a multitude,
could not jointly perform this function, and in particular none of them was
tied unto it. Then was it devised, that by their common seal (which is the
tongue of their Corporation) they might appoint a Deputy or Vicar to do it for
them; which invention gave the wound unto the Church, whereof she bleedeth at
this day.

By these examples, Abbots, Priors, single Deans and Prebends, that before
served God in their own persons, learned also to do it now by Vicars and
Substitutes, and so like faithless shepherds left their flocks to careless
pages, themselves minding nothing but the benefit of the Livings. And this
device being once a foot, the very Nuns and Prioresses (that could by no means
administer these holy rites) laid hold thereof, and being religious persons
obtained also the same Licenses: all of them pretending that with great
fidelity they would see that performed effectually to the Church and poor, that
those Livings were at first ordained unto, Divine service, and Hospitality. By
this window crept the Vicars into Churches, who for the most part were some of
the Monastery, whereunto the appropriation belonged; till the statute of 4 H.
4. cap. 12. provided, That in every Church so appropriate, a secular person be
ordained Vicar perpetual, Canonically institute and induct in the same, and
convenably endowed by the discretion of the Ordinary, (1) to do divine
service, (2) and to inform the people, (3) and to keep hospitality there -- and
that no Religious be in any wise made Vicars, in any Church so appropriate, etc.

Thus came Vicars to get a lock out of the Parsons fleece, which though it were
a very poor one, yet was it in some sort proportionable to the deserts and
quality of such heardmen, insomuch as then they were single men, as well as
simple Clerks; but yet notwithstanding they were thus endued before this
Statute, for in the Synod holden at (...) for the Province of Canterbury, Anno
1222. ca. 18. it was ordained, that less should not be assigned to a
perpetual Vicar then five marks a year in rent, which in the proportion that
the rents of that time hold to this, cannot be less then 301 or 401 a year.

So that the Appropriation of a Parsonage was no more at the first, but a grant
made by the Pope, etc. to an Abbot, Prior, Prebend, or some other spiritual
person, being a Body politic and successive, that he and his successors might
for ever be Parsons of that Church, that is, that as one of them died, his
successors might enter into the Rectory, and take the fruits and profits
thereof, without further trouble of admission, institution, or induction; which
upon the matter, Plowd. 500.
was no more but to do that briefly at one cut, that otherwise might and would
in length of time be done at several times, as to admit, institute, and induct
the whole succession of a religious body politic at once, whereas otherwise
every successor must have had a particular institution and induction; and
therefore every such successor during his time, was as perfect an Incumbent,
as if he had been particularly instituted and inducted: but when the succession
failed, then it was again presentative as upon the death of an ordinary
Incumbent: and by extinction of the House, dissolution, cession, or surrender
of the House and Order, the appropriation is determined, and they are now again
presentative: for the appropriation is Dier Howd. 497. Manwood 501
but as a stop in a run, which being taken away, the former right renueth.

What alteration then did the Statute make of them? did it make them lay, or
temporal Livings? no, the words of the Statute are, That the King shall have
them in as large and ample manner, as the Governors of those houses had them,
etc. So that though the Statute changed the owner of the thing, yet it changed
not the nature of the thing. The Monastical persons had them before as
spiritual Livings, and now the King must have them in as large manner, but
still as spiritual Livings: and with much more reason might the King so have
them, then any other temporal men; for as the Kingdom and Priesthood were
united in the person of our Savior Christ, so the person of a King is not
excluded from the function of a Priest, though as Christ being a Priest, meddled
not with the kingdom, so they as Kings, meddle not with the Priesthood. Yet by
the Laws of the Land the King is composed as well of a spiritual body
politic as of a temporal, and by this his spiritual body he is said to be
supreme Ordinary, that is, chief Bishop over all the Bishops in England, and in
that his Ecclesiastical or Spiritual authority, does many things, which
otherwise in his temporal he could not do; and therefore the Statute of 25 H.
8. cap. does agnise the words, authoritate In this part of his power W. 1. made
Appropriations of Parsonages, which otherwise he could not do. Coke p. 5. f.
10.
nostra regia Suprema and Ecclesiastica qua fungimur, which the King uses in
diverse Charters touching spiritual causes, do testify, that he takes upon
him the execution thereof: and therefore in this respect he may much better
hold them then his lay subjects. Neither is this authority of the King founded
upon the Statute of H. 8. or any other puisne institution, but deduced
anciently from the very Saxon Kings, as appears by many of their Laws, and
Charters, wherein as supreme Ordinary they dispose of the rights, and
jurisdiction of the Church, delivering unto religious persons, greater or
lesser portion thereof, according to their own pleasure, and abridging and
exempting other from the authority of the Bishops, and Archbishops, or any
other Ecclesiastical Prelate. And in this respect it seems that the Chapel
of the Kings house was in ancient time under no other Ordinary, then the King
himself; for William the Conqueror granting all exemption to Battle Abbey,
grants that it shall be as free from the command of any Bishops, as his own
Chapel. Dominica Capella, which as it thereby seems was under no other
Bishop then the King himself.

But the Bishops agreed to the granting away of these Object.
Church Livings.

It is true, that the Law accounts the judgment of the major part, to be the
judgment of all: but the Bishops cannot be said to have agreed unto it, as
being willing with it, but as concluded by legal necessity and inference. For
though all the Bishops said nay, yet the Lay Barons by reason of their number
exceeding the Bishops were not able to hinder it: and no man doubts, that in
public suffrages, very many times, major pars vincit meliorem; therefore I
neither accuse, nor condemn the reverend Bishops herein: for their voices,
though they had given them every one against the Bill, were not able to hinder
it. Neither do I think but that they being men of another profession,
unexercised in the elenchs of the Law, were overtaken in the frame of words,
and thereby passed that away in a cloud, which if they had perceived could
never have been won from them with iron hooks. But in this matter, there being
a question of Religion; Whether Tithes be due jure divino, or whether they
could be separated from the Church; it was not properly a question decidable by
the Parliament, being composed wholly of Lay persons, except some twenty
Bishops, but the question should first have been moved amongst the Bishops by
themselves, and the Clergy in the Convocation house, and then being there
agreed of according to the Word of God, brought into the Parliament. For as the
Temporal Lords exclude the Bishops when it comes to the decision of a matter
of blood, life and member: so by the like reason, the Bishops ought to exclude
the Temporal Lords, when it comes to the decision of a question in Theology;
for God has committed the Tabernacle to Levi, as well as the kingdom to Juda:
and though Juda have power over Levi, as touching the outward government, even
of the Temple it self; yet Juda meddled not with the Oracle, and the holy
Ministry, but received the will of God from the mouth of the Priest. Therefore
when Valentinian the Emperor required Ambrose to come and dispute a point of
Arianisme at his Court, he besought the Emperor, that he might do it in the
Consistory amongst the Bishops, and that the Emperor would be pleased not to
be present among them, lest his presence should captivate their judgments, or
entangle their liberty.

1.
That after the Appropriation, the Parsonage still continues spiritual.
It appears by that which is before showed, and the circumstances thereof,
that the Appropriating of a Parsonage, or the endowing of a Vicarage out of it,
do not cut the Parsonage from the Church, or make it temporal, but leaves it
still spiritual, as well in the eye of the Common Law, as of the Canon Law;
for if it became temporal by the Appropriation, then were it within the
Statute of Mortmain, and forfaited by that very Act. But it is agreed by the 21
Ed. 3. f. 5. and in Plowd. Com. fo. 499. that it is not Mortmain, and therefore
does continue spiritual; for which cause also the Ordinary, and
Ecclesiastical Officers must have still the same authority over such
appropriate Churches, as they had before those Churches were appropriate.

Therefore in the year 1252. Robert Bishop of Lincoln by commission from
Innocent 4. not only enlarged the endowments that before were made, to diverse
Vicarages, (as he thought good) but endowed others out of those Appropriations
that had no Vicarages endowed to the great coffeehouse of all the
Approprietaries of that time, as appears by Matthew. Paris. And therefore also
the Statute of 15 R. 2. cap. 6. and that of 4 H. 4. cap. 12. that ordained,
that in Licenses of Appropriation in the Chancery it should be contained, That
the Bishop of the Diocese in every Church so appropriated, should provide by
his dissretion that the Vicar were convenably endowed, Divine service
performed, and a convenient portion of the fruits thereof yearly distributed to
the poor of the Parish, did but agnise and affirm the spiritual end whereto
these Parsonages were appointed, and the authority the Church had still over
them, notwithstanding such Appropriation, commanding the Bishops to see it
executed. Neither do I yet find, where this power is taken from the Bishops,
for the Statute that gives these appropriate Churches to the King, says not,
that the King shall have them as temporal lands, or discharged of the Bishops
jurisdiction, but that he shall have them as the religious persons had them,
that is, as spiritual Livings, and consequently subject to the jurisdiction of
the Bishops before had over them; and then are they no otherwise in the hands
of the Laity; for testimony whereof they also carry at this day the badges and
livery of their Lords and Masters of the Clergy; for as Joseph was taxed in his
own City, so are they yet ranked amongst other spiritual Livings, and as
members of that body do still pay their Synodals and Proxies to the Bishops
and Archdeacons: and if Tithes be withholden from the Approprietary, he still
sueth for them (as spiritual things) in the Spiritual Court. All which are
(by Gods Providence) left upon them as marks of the Tribe they belong unto,
that when the Jubilee comes (if ever it please God to send it) they may
thereby be distinguished, and brought back again to their own Tribe.

2.
That no man properly is capable of an Appropriation but spiritual men.
Spiritual things and spiritual men are correlatives, and cannot in reason be
divorced: therefore was no man capable of Appropriations but spiritual persons
before the laws of dissolution, which first violated this holy marriage, and
(like Abimelech, Genesis 20. 2.) took the wife from the husband, and made Laymen
which before were the children of the Church now become spiritual Fathers. The
act of Appropriation is nothing but to make a body corporate or politic
spiritual, that has succession, perpetual Incumbents in a Rectory; or no
more, upon the matter, then to entail the incumbency to one certain succession
of spiritual men. Therefore as a Patron (says my Lord Dyer, Chief Justice,
and Plowden 496.) must present a spiritual person to a Church, and not a
temporal: so by the same reason, an Appropriation must be made unto a
spiritual person, and not temporal; for says he, the one has cure of souls,
as well as the other: and they differ in nothing but in this, the one is Parson
for his life, and the other and his successors, Parsons shall be for ever: and
for this in the beginning (says he) were the Appropriations made to Abbots,
Priors, Deans, Prebends and such like, as might (in their own person) minister
the Sacraments, and Sacramentals, and to none other. And for the same reason at
the first it was holden, that they could not grant their estates to any other,
no more then the Incumbent of a Parsonage presentative, who though he may lease
his Glebe, and Tithes, yet can he not grant his Incumbency to any other, but
must resign it; and then the Patron and Bishop must make the new Incumbent. And
so the Incumbency which is a spiritual office cannot be granted, nor by the
same reason could the perpetual Incumbent (which is the Approprietary) at the
first grant his estate which contained the Incumbency, and the Rectory, which
is the revenue of the Incumbent.

Therefore when the Order of the Templars (to whom diverse appropriate
Parsonages were belonging) was dissolved, and their possessions granted to the
Prior of S. John of Jerusalem in England, Justice Herle in 3 Ed. 3. said, that
if the Templars had granted their estate in the Appropriations to the
Hospitalers, that is, to them of S. John's of Jerusalem, the Hospitalers should
not have it; for it was granted only to the Templars, and they could not make
an Appropriation thereof over unto others. Therefore to make good the estate of
the Prior and Hospitalers, it was showed there that by the grant of the Pope,
King, and Parliament, the Prior had the estate of the Templars: And so by
Herle, an Appropriation cannot be transferred to another; and with good reason,
(says the book) for it has in it a perpetual Incumbency, which is a
spiritual function appropriate to a certain person spiritual, and cannot be
removed from them in whom it was first settled by any act of theirs.

Herle there also said that, That which was appropropriate unto the Templars,
was disappropriate by the dissolution of their Order, fo. 497. B. So that as
death is the dissolution of every ordinary Incumbent, so the dissolution of a
religious Order, Monastery, or Corporation, is the death thereof, and by that
death (according to this opinion of Justice Herle) the Church appropriate that
belonged thereunto is again become presentable as it was before the
Appropriation; whereunto my Lord Dyer and Manwood do also agree; and Dier
Plowd. 497. Manwood, ib. 501. l. 2.
therefore by the dissolution of religious houses, all Appropriations had been
presentable like other Churches, if the Statute of dissolution had not given
them to the King; and by as good reason, might the same Lawmakers have given
him the other also, for any thing that I perceive to the contrary. Yet let us
see in what manner they are given unto the King, for though I cannot examine
the matter according unto the rules of Law, being not so happy (which I lament)
as to attain that profession; yet under correction, I will be so bold as to
offer some points thereof to further consideration; as, first, what is granted
to the King; secondly, the manner how it is granted; thirdly, the ends why: And
herein I humbly beseech my Masters of the Law to censure me favorably: for I
take it by protestation, that I do it not as, asserendo docere, sed disserendo
quaerere legitima illa vera, that Littleton speaks of.

3.
What was granted to the King.
1. The Statute says, That the King shall have all such Monasteries, Priories,
and other such religious Houses of Monks, etc. as were not above 2001 a year.
And the Sites, and Circuits thereof, and all Manours, Granges, Meases, Lands,
etc. Tithes, Pensions, Churches, Chapels, Advowsons, Patronages, Annuities,
Rights, Conditions, and other Hereditaments appertaining or belonging to every
such Monastery -- 2. In as large and ample manner, as the Governors of those,
and such other religious Houses have, or ought to have the same in the right of
their Houses. 3. To have and to hold, etc. to his Majesty, his Heirs, and
Assigns, to do and use therewith, his and their own wills, to the pleasure of
God, and to the honor and profit of this Realm.

The words have diverse significations, and therefore make the sense the more
obscure.

Monasteries, Priories, and religious Houses are,

1. Sometimes taken personally, for the Heads and Members of the House, that
is, for the men of the House, as Church for the Congregation, City for Citizens.

2. Sometime they are taken locally, for the soil of the House, and in this
sense one while extensively, to all the Territory thereof: another while
restrictively, to the site and building only.

3. They are taken civilly, or locally, for the whole rights of the House, the
lands, the rents, the possessions, and inheritances whatsoever. In which of
these senses the Parliament has given them to the King, and whether in all of
them or not, it is not manifest; but I conceive the words must be taken in the
last sense, which as the more general, includes also the second; and if the
very carcasses of the Monastery persons had been worth the having, might well
enough have fetched them in also. Therefore though after these general and
spacious words, there follows a grant of diverse particular things, as Sites,
Circuits, Granges, Meases, Lands, Tithes, etc. yet I take this to be but an
enumeration of the things in specie, which before are granted in genere; for if
the general words have not carried them, as the body carries the members,
then it seems these particulars do not carry them, for they are granted but
as Appurtenances to the said Monasteries, and Houses, for the words be, Sites,
Circuits, Lands, Tithes, etc. appertaining or belonging to every such
Monastery; words in my understanding only of explanation and restraint, and
not trenching to the enlargement of the grant.

So that upon the matter the Parliament has granted Tithes and Appropriations
to the King, if they belonged unto the Monasteries, and not otherwise. Let us
therefore see whether they belong or not.

4.
Whether Tithes and Appropriations belonged to the Monasteries, or not?
Abbots, Priors, and such religious men had two sorts of Tithes; one
incorporate to their Houses, which I call Monastical Tithes: the other
depending upon their function, as they were Parsons of any Parish, which
therefore I call Parish Tithes. 1. The first of these came unto them, as their
very lands did, by plain point of Charter; for before the Lugdune and Lateran
Councels, every man might bestow his Tithes upon what religious House person he
listed: and then the founders and benefactors of religious Houses did
ordinarily grant all or some portion of their Tithes to those Houses, as by a
multitude of precedents thereof appears. From hence it rise that the
Monasteries Neol. Fossard dedit an. 1081. Aldwino Abbati de Ramsey, viz. Deo,
etc. Ecclesiam de Bromham and terram ad duas carrucas and decimas trium
villarum, and de duobis molendinis and tota^ decimam de propria aula. Liber MS.
Ramsey page 240.
had so many portions of Tithes, or rents for them (which we call Pensions) out
of so many several and remote places of the kingdom; and therefore all these
Tithes (how unjustly soever they were conferred upon them) were de corpore
Monasterii, and passed undoubtedly to the King. 2. But the other sort, that is,
Parish Tithes, belonged only to the Parson of the Parish, by reason of his
function, and incumbency; which function, though by act of Appropriation, it
were collated upon these religious men, yet did it not invest the property of
those Tithes in their Monasteries, but made their persons capable of them by
reason of that their function; for without their function of being
Ecclesiastical persons, they could not have them, being forain unto them, as I
may term it, and not domestical, as belonging to their house, or monastical,
as belonging to their conventuall body.

5.
In what sort they were granted to the King.
Though the Parliament has power to dispose temporal inheritance, and to make
Laws to bind the rights of subjects, yet it is confessed by the Books of the
Law themselves, that it can establish nothing against the law of God; and
therefore if Tithes be in the Clergy by the Law of God, as before we have
showed, then can they not be pulled from him by any law of man. Neither has
the Parliament as it seems attempted to do it, but insomuch as they were
misemployed by the Clergy of that time, therefore the Parliament took them from
them, and gave them to the King, not in any new course of property, or to be
enjoyed by him as his temporal inheritance: but to be his in as large and
ample manner (says the Statute) as the Governors of those religious Houses --
had or ought to have the same. Now it is apparent, that the Governors of
religious Houses, neither had them, nor ought to have them, otherwise then to
the service of God, and benefit of the Church.

6.
To what end they were granted to the King.
This point depends upon the precedent, for the end why they were given unto
the King, is declared by the manner of giving them unto him. Therefore though
the Statute says, To have and to hold -- to his Majesty, his heirs, and their
own wills, to do and use therewith, his and their own wills; yet lest their wills
should decline from the due employment of them (as the religious persons did)
therefore the Statute adds these words, to the pleasure of God, and to the
honor and profit of this Realm. So that the King had not the things themselves
simply, but in such manner only as the religious persons had them, and that
being but to the service of God, and benefit of the Church, the King could have
them in no other manner then for the service of God, and benefit of the Church;
and then to the words subsequent in the Habendum, viz. to do and use therewith
their wills, is no more, then if we should say, That the King, etc. should have
them to dispose of in the service of God and of his Church, according to his
own will and wisdom; which the words annexed plainly intimate, appointing unto
the King by what bounds and marks he must walk in disposing of them, namely
so, as may be to the pleasure of God, and the honor and profit of the Realm.
But it cannot be to the pleasure of God, that his Ministers should be
defrauded; nor to the honor and profit of the Realm, that the service of God
should be hindered, or neglected, and therefore the King must have and hold
them to those purposes, and to none other.

And that the King was not deceived in this kind of construction of the Act of
Parliament, it appears by a Declaration made by himself freely in an Oration
of his unto the Parliament, Anno 37. of his reign, where he says, -- I cannot
a little rejoice, when I consider the perfect trust and confidence, which you
have put in me, as men having undoubted hope, and unfeigned belief, in my good
doings and just proceedings; for you without my desire or request, have
committed to my order and disposition all Chauntries, Colleges, Hospitals, and
other places specified in a certain Act, firmly trusting, that I will order
them to the glory of God, and the profit of the Commonwealth. Surely, if I
contrary to your expectation should suffer the Ministers of the Church to
decay, or Learning (which is so great a jewel) to be minished, or poor and
miserable to be unrelieved, you might well say, that I being put in so special
a Trust, as I am in this case, were no trusty friend to you, nor charitable to
my even Christian, neither a lover of the public wealth, nor yet one that
feared God, to whom account must be rendered of all our doings. Doubt not I
pray you, but your expectation shall be served more Godly and Goodly, then you
will wish or desire, as hereafter you shall plainly perceive, etc.

So that the King hereby does not only ingenuously confess the Trust
committed to him by the Parliament, in the same manner that the Act assigns
it, viz. to be for the glory of God, and the profit of the Commonwealth: but
he descends also into the particularities of that Trust, as namely; for the
maintenance of the Ministers, the advancement of Learning, and provision for
the poor.

7.
That the King might not take them.
In the 45. chap. of Ezekiel, God commands the Prophet to divide the Land
into three parts, one for God himself, and his servants the Priests, the other
for the King, and the third for the people. And then he says, Let this
suffice, O ye Princes of Israel, v. 9. Leave off cruelty and oppression, and
execute judgment and justice, take away your exactions from my people. And
again, chap. 46. 18. The Prince shall not take of the peoples inheritance, nor
thrust them out of their possessions, but he shall cause his sons to inherit
his own possession, that my people be not scattered every man from his own
possession.

Though the said Texts savor something of the Leviticall Law, as to preserve
the Tribes from confusion, yet they present also unto us rules of Moral
justice. First, that in the division of the Kingdom, we must remember to give
him a part for his honor, that gives us all for our necessities; therefore he
says in another place, (45. 1.) When ye shall divide the Land for
inheritance, ye shall offer an oblation unto the Lord, an holy portion of the
Land. Secondly, that the Prince must be contented with the portion assigned
him, and not to disturb the people in their possession, but not God especially
in his, for that is privileged further and defended with another iron bar,
it is an oblation, says the Text, unto the Lord, yea, it is an holy portion of
the land. Holy, because it is offered unto God, and holy again, for that being
offered unto the Lord it is severed from the injury of man, it must not be
violated, nor plucked back, it must not be sold, nor redeemed, it is an
inheritance separate from the common use, it is most holy unto the Lord, Lev.
27. 28.

It being thus manifested, what are the chief ends and uses of Parsonages, it
appears how unjust it is to tolerate Appropriations, and how miserable their
condition is who hold them: Oh how lamentable is the case of a poor
Approprietary, that dying, thinks of no other account, but of that touching
his lay vocation, and then coming before the Judgment seat of Almighty God,
must answer also for this spiritual function; first, why he meddled with it,
not being called unto it; then why (meddling with it) he did not the duty that
belongs unto it, in seeing the Church carefully served, the Minister thereof
sufficiently maintained, and the poor of the Parish faithfully relieved. This,
I say, is the use whereto Parsonages were given, and of this use we had notice
before we purchased them; and therefore not only by the Laws of God, and the
Church, but by the Law of the Land, and the rules of the Chancery, at this day
observed, we ought only to hold them to this use, and no other. Look how many
of the Parishioners are cast away for want of teaching, he is guilty of their
blood; at his hand it shall be required, because he has taken upon him the
charge. He says, he is Parson of that place, and of his own mouth will God
judge him, for idle Parsons are guilty of the blood of the Parishioners; and
this S. Paul shows, when he says, I thank God I am pure from the blood of
all men, Act. 20. 26. meaning he taught the counsel of God so faithfully, as
if any be not saved thereby, their blood is upon their own heads, for he on his
own part adds, that he has kept nothing back, but showed them all the
counsel of God, v. 27.

It is not therefore a work of bounty and benevolence to restore these
Appropriations to the Churches, but of duty and necessity so to do. It is a
work of duty to give that unto God that is Gods, Mat. 22. 21. and a work of
necessity toward the obtaining remission of these sins; for, as S. Augustine
says, Non remittitur peccatum, nisi restituatur ablatum, cum restitui potest.
Augustine. Macedon. Ep. 54. The sin shall not be forgiven without restoring of
that which is taken away, if it may be restored.

8.
Of the Statute of dissolution, that took away Impropriations from the Church.
27 H. 8. c. 27.

We must note touching that first Statute, the time wherein it was made, the
persons by whom, the circumstances in the carriage and effecting of it, and the
end why. The time, while it was yet but dawning of the day, or twilight of both
Religions. The persons, then members of the Parliament, half of them I fear, if
not the greater half, either absolute Papists, or infected with Romish
Religion; the other half yet in effect but (...), and candidati restitutae
religionis, and so could not by and by conceive all dependencies in so great a
work, and what was fit in every respect, to be provided for. The circumstances,
incident to the business, as the great and strong opposition of the adverse
party; which happily was so potent in Parliament, as if opportunity had not
been taken at some advantage for passing of the bill, whilst many of them were
absent, it had not passed so soon: and this might well cause haste in the
carriage of it, and haste imperfection. How it fell out in that point I do not
know, but I have heard that anno 1. Mariae, when the Laws of H. 8. touching the
Praemunire, and of Ed. 6. This Parliament begun 5. October. 1554 and ended 5.
December. Fox p. 1396. Col. 2. l. 1.
touching Religion were repealed, the matter was so handled as there were but
28. persons in the Parliament House to give their voice with the Bill, and yet
carried it; So in this business the great haste and desire to effect it, and
the great matters aimed at, as the transferring of all Monasteries Livings unto
the King, A Parliament of 28. Bishops, etc. to undo 28. general Councels
happily not half 28.
made somethings in the Act to pass unconsidered, and no doubt amongst other
these appropriate Parsonages; which in truth are not named in that Act, but
carried away in the fluent of general words, wherein though Tithes be
inserted, yet the word may seem only to intend such portions of Tithes as
belonged to the Monastery it self, as many did, and not those belonging unto
Appropriations, since the Appropriations themselves are not there named. But I
will excuse the matter no farther then equity; for after Religion had gotten
some strength, the following Act of 31 H. 8. c. 13. gives them expressly to the
King by the words, Parsonages appropried, Vicarages, Churches, etc. yet was all
this done in the heat and agony of zeal then privily enflamed on all parts
against the Romish religion, insomuch as other inconveniences and enormities
likewise followed thereon, as in Ed. 6. the burning of many notable Manuscript
Books, the spoiling and defacing of many goodly Tombs and Monuments in all
parts of the kingdom, pulling down of Bells, Chancels, and in many places of
the very Churches themselves.

Moses for haste broke the Tables of the Law; and these inconveniences in such
notable transmutations cannot be avoided, some corn will go away with the
chafe, and some chafe will remain in the corn; man's wit cannot suddenly, or
easily sever them. Therefore our Savior Christ fore seeing this consequence
delayed the weeding out of the tares from the wheat, till the Harvest was come,
that is, the full time of ripeness and opportunity to do it. Besides, light
and darkness cannot be severed in puncto, the day will have somewhat of the
night, and the night somewhat of the day: the religion professed, brought
something with it of the religion abolished, and the religion abolished has
somewhat still that is Discipline in genere, according to the Primitive Church,
not in specie as they use it.
wanting in ours; and neither will ever be so severed, but each will hold
somewhat of the other: no rent can divide them by a line. When the children of
Israel came out of Egypt, they brought much of the Egyptian infection with
them, as appears in the Scripture, and they left of their rites and
ceremonies among the Egyptians, as appears in Herodotus. Therefore as Moses
renewed the Tables that were broken through haste, and time reformed the errors
of religion amongst the Israelites: So we doubt not but his Mty, our Moses, will
still proceed in repairing these breaches of the Church, and that time by Gods
blessing will mend these evils of ours. I will not take upon me like Zedechias
to foretell, having not the spirit of prophecy, but I am verily persuaded, that
some are already borne that shall see these Appropriate Parsonages restored to
the Church: let not any man think they are his, because Law has given them
him, for Tully himself the greatest Lawyer of his time, confesses, that,
Stultissimum est existimare omnia justa esse Delegibus.
quae sita sint in populorum institutis aut legibus, Nothing to be more foolish
then to think all is just that is contained in the Laws or Statutes of any
Nation. Experience teaches us, that our own Laws are daily accused of
imperfection, often amended, expounded, and repealed. Look back into times
past, and we shall find that many of them have been unprofitable for the
Commonwealth, many dishonorable to the kingdom, some contrary to the Word of
God, and some very impious and intolerable, yet all propounded, debated, and
concluded by Parliament. Neither is this evil peculiar to our Country; where
has it not reigned? Esaias found it in his time, and proclaims against it, Woe
be unto you, that make wicked Statutes, and write grievous things. So Tully and
the Roman Historians Orat. in M. Anto^. per servos, per vim, per latrocini^m.
cry out, that their Laws were often, per vim, and contra auspicia impositae
reipublicae, by force and against all religion imposed upon the Commonwealth.
God be thanked we live not in those times, yet do our Laws and all Laws still,
and will ever in one part or other taste of the cask, I mean of the frailty of
the makers. It is not therefore amiss (though happily for me) to examine them
in this point, if the^ be contrary to the Word of God, for I think no man will
defend them, they leave them to be a Law. God cannot be confined, restrained,
or concluded by any Parliament, let no man therefore (as I say) think that he
has right to these Parsonages, because the Law has given them him; the law of
man can give him no more then the law of Nature, and God will permit. The Law
has given him jus ad rem, as to demand it, or defend it, in Vi. Na. Br. 14. s.
369. Jus perfectum cum possideatur in promiss imperfectum dum non possideatur
promiss.
action against another man, it cannot give him jus in re, as to claim it in
right against God. Canonists, Civilians, and common Lawyers, do all admit this
distinction, and agree, that jus ad rem est jus imperfectum, right to the thing
is a lame Title, they must have right in it, that will have perfect Title. The
Law does as much as it can, it has made him rei usufructuarium, but it cannot
make him rei dominum, the very owner of the thing. The books of the Law
themselves confess, Doct. and Stud. li. 1. 6. 2. s. 4. a.
that all Prescriptions, Statutes, and Customs against the law of Nature (or
of God) be void and against Justice.

9.
That the King may better hold Impropriations, then his Lay Subjects.
No man by the Common law of the Land can have inheritance of Tithes, unless
he be Ecclesiastical, or have Ecclesiastical jurisdiction. Lord Coke part 5.
Rep. fol. 15. and Plowd. fol. So that he which has Ecclesiastical
jurisdiction, though he be no Ecclesiastical person, yet by the ancient Law of
the Land, he may enjoy Tithes: and this concurreth not only with the Canon
Law, but seems also to be warranted by the example of the Provincial
Levites, who meddled not with the Temple, and yet received their portion of
Tithes, and other Oblations, as well as those that ministered in the Temple. But
it plainly excludes all such as be merely Lay from being capable of them; let
us then see by what better Title the King may hold them.

As the head cannot give life and motion to the diverse members of the body,
unless it hold a correspondency with them in their diverse natures, and
compositions: So the King, the head of the politic body, cannot govern the
diverse members thereof in their several constitutions, unless he participate
with them in their several natures; which because they are part Lay, and part
Ecclesiastical, the jurisdiction therefore whereby he governs them, must of
necessity have a correspondent mixture, and be also partly Lay, and partly
Ecclesiastical; to the end that from these diverse fountains in the person of
his Majesty, those diverse members in the body of the kingdom may according to
their peculiar faculties receive their just and competent government. My
meaning is not, that a Prince cannot in moral matters govern his subjects
professed in religion, unless himself do participate with them in some
portion of their spiritual vocation: for I see that the Apostles Romans 13. 1. 2
Pet. 2. 13.
themselves were therein subject to the Heathen Princes, and gave commandment
to all Christians in general, that they likewise should do the same; and
Oportet nos ex ea part quae ad hanc vitam pertinet, subditos esse
potestatibus, i. homininibus res humanas cum aliquo honor administrantibus. in
li. expos. quarundum propositinum, ex Ep. ad Romans
thereupon S. Austin says, that in those things that concern this life, we
must be subject to them that govern humane things. But my meaning is, that a
temporal Prince cannot properly dispose the matters of the Church, if he have
not Ecclesiastical function, and ability, as well as Temporal; for I doubt
not but that the government of the Church, and of the Commonwealth, are not
only distinct members in this his Majesty's kingdom, but distinct bodies also
under their peculiar heads, united in the person of his Majesty, yet without
confusion of their faculties, or without being subject the one to the other.
For the King, as merely a temporal Magistrate, commands nothing in
Ecclesiastical causes, neither as the supreme Officer of the Church does he
interpose in the temporal government: but like the common arch arising from
both these pillars he protecteth and combineth them in perpetual stability,
governing that of the Church by his Ecclesiastical jurisdiction, and that of
the Commonwealth by his temporal. For this cause, as Moses was counted in
sacerdotibus, Psalm. 99. 6. though he were the temporal Governor of the people
of Israel, so the Laws of the Land have of old armed the King, persona mixta,
medium, or rather commune quiddam inter laicos and sacerdotes: and have
thereupon justly assigned to him a politic body, composed as well of
Ecclesiastical jurisdiction, as temporal, like to that of David, Jehosaphat,
Hezekias, and other Kings of Juda, who not only in respect of their Crown, led
the Armies of the people against their enemies: but as anointed with the holy
oil, ordered and disposed the very function of the Levites, of the Priests,
and of the Temple, as you may read in their several lives in the books of the
Kings and Chronicles.

But the Kings of England have proceeded yet further in the gradations of
Ecclesiastical profession, as thinking it with David, more honorable, to be a
doorkeeper in the House of God, then to dwell in the tents of the ungodly, that
is, to execute the meanest office in the service of God, then those of greatest
renown among the Heathen and Infidels. Therefore they have by ancient custom
even before the Conquest, amongst other the solemnities of their Coronation,
not only been girt with the regal sword of Justice by the Lay Peers of the
Land, as the emblem of their temporal authority, but anointed also by the
Bishops with the oil of Priesthood, as a mark unto us of their Ecclesiastical
profession and jurisdiction. And as they have habenam regni, put upon them, to
express the one, so also have they stolam sacerdotii, commonly called vestem
dalmaticam, as a Leviticall Ephod, to express the other. The reasons of which,
if we shall seek from the ancient Institutions of the Church, it is apparent by
the Epistle of Gregory the great, unto Aregius Bishop of France, that this
vestis dalmatica, was of that reverence Ep. l 7. c. 111.
amongst the Clergy of that time, that the principal Churchmen, no not the
Bishops themselves, might wear it without license of the Pope. And when this
Aregius, a Bishop of France, requested that he and his Archdeacon might use it,
Gregory took a long advisement upon the matter, as a thing of weight and
novelty, before he granted it unto them. But 22. years before the time of
Edward the Confessor, (unto whom those hallowed vestures happily did belong,
with which his Majesty was at this day consecrated) these dalmaticae, otherwise
called albae and stolae, were by the Propter solennitatem Sp. S. Diaconi
dalmaticis induantur. Idem Decr. p. distinct. 76. de Jejunio.
Council Salegunstadiens. cap. 2. made common to all Deacons, and permitted to
them to be worn in great solemnities, which the Kings of England also ever
since Edward the Confessors time, if not before, have always been attired with
in their Coronations.

And touching their unction, the very books of the Law do testify to be done,
to the end, to make them capable of spiritual jurisdiction, for it is there
said, that Reges sacro oleo uncti sunt spiritualis jurisdictionis capaces; the
Kings being anointed with the holy oil are now made capable of spiritual
jurisdiction. This ceremony of unction, was not common to all Christian Kings,
for they being about Hen. 2. time, 24. in number, only four of them besides
the Emperor were thus anointed, namely, the Kings of England, France,
Jerusalem, and Sicil.

The first English King as far as I can find, that received this privilege was
Elfred or Alured, the glorious son of noble and devout Ethelwolphus King of
West-Saxony, who about the year of our Lord 860. being sent to Rome, was there
by Leo 4. anointed and crowned King, in the life of his father, and happily was
the Wi^lasius R^x Merciorum subditus Ethelwolphi regis west-Sax. Coronat.
Ingolf. 856. l. 56.
first King of this Land that ever wore a Crown, whatsoever our Chroniclers
report (for of the 24. Kings I speak of, it is affirmed in ancient books, that
only four of them were in those days crowned.) But after this anointing, Alured
(as if the Spirit of God had therewith come upon him, as it did upon David
being anointed by Samuel,) grew so potent and illustrious in all kinds of
virtues, as well divine as moral, that in many ages the world afforded him no
equal: zealous toward God, and his Church, devout in prayer, profuse in alms,
always in honorable action, prudent in government, victorious in wars,
glorious in peace, affecting justice above all things, and with a strong hand
reducing his barbarous subjects to obedience of Law, and to love equity; the
first learned King of our Saxon Nation, the first that planted literature
amongst them; for himself does testify in his Preface to Gregory's Pastoral,
that there were very few on the South Side Humber, but he knew not one on the
Southside of the Thames, that when he began to reign, understood the Latin
Service, or could make an Epistle out of Latin into English, etc. He fetched
learned men from beyond the Seas, and compelled the Nobles of his Land to set
their sons to school, and to apply themselves to learn the Laws and Customs of
their Country, admitting none to places of Justice without some learning, nor
sparing any that abused their places, for unto such himself looked diligently.
He divided the Kingdom into Shires, Hundreds, Wapentakes, and them again into
Tithings and free Bourghs, compelling every person in his Kingdom to be so
settled in some of those free Bourghs, that if he any way trespassed, his
fellows of that free Bourgh answered for him.

The memory of this admirable Prince carries me from my purpose; but to return
to it, his successors have ever since been consecrated, and thereby made
capable of spiritual jurisdiction, and have accordingly used the same in all
ages, and thought by the Pope to be so enabled unto it, that Nicholas 2.
doubted not to commit the government of all the Churches of England unto Edward
the Confessor, as by and by we shall more largely declare. And the Kings of
France being so likewise consecrated ever since the time of Clodoveus, alias,
Ludovicus, whom Saint Remigius Bishop of Rheimes, both baptized and anointed
about the year of our Lord 500. have from time to time, in all ancient ages
exercised the like Ecclesiastical jurisdiction: insomuch that Clodoveus
himself being but newly entered into i^, doubted not to appoint a Council at
Orleans, and to call thither the Bishops and Clergy of France, but out of the
motion of Priestly mind, (to use the very words of the Council) commanded the
Priests, (meaning the Bishops) to assemble there for debating necessary
matters, which in his own consideration he had advised upon, and delivered to
them in heads and titles; and they having answered thereunto, and framed the
Canons of that Council, accordingly did submit them to his judgment, and
desiring if it approved them, himself for greater authority would confirm them.
Tom. 2. Council. page 309* in rescripto Synodi.

The Kings of Jerusalem and Sicil, were also anointed and endowed with
Ecclesiastical authority, whereof we shall speak more anon: for the right of
both these Kingdoms resideth at this present upon the Kings of Spain, who till
the same came unto them, were neither anointed, nor crowned; and though since
that time, they have been dignified with both these Prerogatives, yet are they
not so illustrious in them, as in the Kings of England and France, for that
these are ancient Kingdoms, raised by their own power and prowess, and those
other of less continuance, erected by the Pope, and not absolute, but
Feodaries of his Sea. And touching that of France also, the mere right thereof
reste^h upon his Majesty of England, though de facto, another for the time
possesses it: So that in this point of unction, our Sovereign the King of
England is amongst the rest of the Kings of Christendom, at this day Peerlesse
and transcendent; and well therefore might William Rufus say, that himself had
all the liberties in his Kingdom which the Emperor challenged in his Empire.
Mat. Paris.

But I wonder, why the Papists should so confidently deny the Kings of England
to be capable of spiritual jurisdiction, when Pope Nicholas 2. of whom we
spoke before in an Epistle to King Edward the Confessor, has upon the matter
agreed, that it may be so; for amongst other privileges that he there
bestows upon the Church of Saint Peter of Westminster then newly founded by
that virtuous King; He grants, and absolutely confirms, that it shall for
ever be a place of Regal Constitution and Consecration, -- and a perpetual
habitation of Monks that shall be subject to no living creature, but the King
himself, free from Episcopal service and authority, and where no Bishop shall
enter to give any orders, etc. Tom. Council. part 3. pa. 1129. a.

In which words I note, first, that the Kings of England in those ancient days,
being before their Coronation merely Lay persons, were by their consecration
made candidati Ecclesiasticae potestatis, and admitted to the administration
thereof; for to what other purpose was Consecration ordained, but to make
secular things to belong unto the Temple, and Lay persons to become sacred and
Ecclesiastical? like Jacobs stone in the time of the Moral Law, which
presently upon the anointing thereof became appropriate to the House of God.

Secondly, he plainly makes the King head of this Monastery, that is, of the
place it self, and of all the persons and members thereof, which then by
consequence he might likewise be of all other Ecclesiastical persons and
places through the whole Kingdom. And even that also he grants in a sort in
the end of his Epistle, Vobis and posteris vestris regibus committimus
advocationem and tuitionem ejusdem loci, and omnium totius Angliae Ecclesiarum,
ut vice nostra cum concilio Episcoporum and Abbatum, constituatis ubique quae
justa sunt. So that if the Kings of England be pleased to execute this
Ecclesiastical authority* as the Popes Vicar, then by this his Charter they
are invested therewith; and peradventure the Clergy of Rome can never revoke
it, being granted posteris regibus: and the Epistles of the Popes, being as
Barclayus says of Nich. 1. to Michael the Emperor, as an Ecclesiastical Law,
Lib. de potest. Papae. ca. 2. page 13.

But in the mean time it is hereby evident, which I endeavor to prove, that
the Kings of England are justly capable of spiritual jurisdiction by the Popes
own confession, for which purpose only I here allege it. And to give more
life to the matter, it appears by Baronius, that Pope Vrbane the granted not
only as much in the Kingdom of Sicil to the King of Spain, being the anointed
King thereof, but added also to that his Ecclesiastical jurisdiction, diverse
branches of spiritual power belonging merely to the keys, and not to the
sword, that is, to the very function of a Bishop, as namely, that of
Excommunication. All which, though Baronius impugneth mainly to be of no
validity, because that all things are void, (he says) that the Church does
against her self: yet the King of Spain both holds, and exercises this
function and jurisdiction only by the connivency of the Pope, but defended
therein by Cardinal Ascanius Colonna, against Baronius.

But to leave forain examples, and to go on with our domestical precedents;
It is manifest by other ancient Authorities, Charters, and Manuscripts, that
the Pope thereby granted no more to King Edward and his successors, then the
same King, and his Predecessors, before assumed to themselves. For this Epistle
could not be written to S. Edward, before the end of his reign, ( Nicholas not
being Pope till then) and in the Laws of the same King, before that time
published, himself does plainly declare himself to be, Vicarius su^d ^i Regis,
not summi pontificis: yea, and that in the government of the Church. For the
words of his own Law, (...). cap. 17. be these -- The King because he is the
Vicar of the highest King, is appointed to this purpose, that he should rule
his earthly Kingdom, and the Lords people: and should above all things worship
his holy Church, and govern it, and defend it against them that would wrong it,
and to pull the evil doers out of it, etc. So that write the Pope what he
will, S. Edward here takes upon him to have the rule and government of the
Church of England (committed to him from God, and not from the Pope) and to be
Gods Vicar, not the Popes: wherein he imitated his predecessors; for King Edgar
speaking of the government of the Church, says in plain terms, that it
belonged to himself, ad nos (says he) spectat. And because Casaubon in citing
this place out of the Manuscript, is charged by Parsons to falsify it, and
that it is, or should be on the contrary, ad vos spectat, scil. Ecclesiasticos:
give me leave to defend that worthy man being now dead, in whose behalf I must
avow that the original is plainly ad nos, and not ad vos; which lest it should
seem either mistaken, or questionable, King Edgar himself does manifestly clear
it, both by deeds and words: for of his own authority he removed generally the
Clerks of that time, that were not professed, out of the Monasteries, and
placed in their rooms, Monks and regular persons, as appears by his own
words, in his Charter of Malmesbury. (Malmsb* page 58. l* 17.) And also in the
foundation Book of the Abbey of Winchester, written all in golden letters,
wherein likewise he prescribes the rules for the government of the religious
persons there; and says, that himself will look to ^^e Monks, and that his
wife Aelfthryth shall look to the Nuns. And lest it should seem that he had
done this rather out of the will of a Prince, then by just authority, Hoveden,
and Historia Jornalensis, do testify, that he did it by the advice and means
of Ethelwould, Bishop of Winton, and Oswald, Bishop of Worcester. So that the
very Clergy of that time, agnised, executed, and affirmed his jurisdiction
herein: which I will close up with a material sentence out of his Charter in
Glastenberry, extant in Malmsbury de gest. Reg. li. 2. page 57. where the words
be these, Concessit etiam (scil. Edgarus) ut sicut ipse in propria, ita totius
insulae causas, in omnibus tam Ecclesiasticis quam secularibus negotiis, absque
ulla ullius contradictione Abbas and Conventus corrigeret, that is, King Edgar
granted, that the Abbot and Covent of Glastenberry should correct (or amend)
all causes, as well Ecclesiastical as secular, within the whole Isle of
Glastenberry, as himself did within his own Isle, namely, of England. So that
the King here denounces, that himself has the correction or ordering of all
Ecclesiastical causes within this his Isle. And in further declaration thereof
does by that his Charter by and by after prohibit all Bishops from meddling
within the Isle of Glastenberry: and lest he should seem to do a new thing, he
closes it up with this apology, That his predecessors, Cemwines, Ines,
Ethelardus, Cuthredus, Elfredus, Edwardus, Ethelstanus, Edmundus, had all of
them done the like; and he might have added out of Bid, l. 2. c. 7. that
Cenwalch King of West Saxon, of his own authority divided the Sea of Agilbert
his Bishop, being a French man, and of another language, which he understood
not, and gave one part thereof unto Winus a man of his own Nation, which though
he were afterward compelled by necessity and discontent of Agilbert to
reunite, yet his successor Inas, divided them again, and then they so
continued. Hen. Huntington l. 4. pa. 33. l. 49.

It is true, that ad majorem cautelam, King Edgar required John 12. to confirm
these privileges, lest any, as he says, should in future time, either take
them away, or throw out the Monks, but himself had first done it of himself;
and the vigor that the Pope added to it, was rather a fortifying of it with a
curse against robbers, and spoilers, then an enlargement of the validity
thereof, as quicking thereby a livelesse body. For so likewise may the Popes
own authority be disputable, insomuch as he also required the general Synod,
then holden at Rome, Anno 965. (as Malmsbur. says) to confirm it. But the
fashion of those times was, that secular Princes sought sometimes to have their
temporal Laws confirmed by the Pope with a curse against the breakers thereof*
as did Howell Dhae, for those his Laws of Wales; and in like manner was it
usual for Councels and Synods to seek the confirmation of their Canons from
temporal Princes, as did that of Orleans before spoken of from Clodoveus, and
the Council of Toledo from Euricus, who made a special Law for establishing
it, as you may see in the Laws of the Wisegothes, l. 12. tit. 1. ca. 3. ut sic
gladius gladium adjuvaret.

It may be objected, that Edgar being the great King of this whole Isle, (for
he styled himself totius Albionis basileus) might usurp upon the Church, and
do these things rather in the will of a Prince, then by just authority. It is
manifest partly by that which I said before, but plentifully by his Charters,
that the Clergy of that time were so far from denying, or repining at this his
jurisdiction, that they affirmed and subscribed unto it, as appears in his
Charters. And how large soever his Dominion was, his humility was as great, for
though in matters of government he carried himself as the head Officer of the
Church, yet in matters of faith he was so obedient, that to expiate his
incontinency with a Nun, he threw himself at the feet of Dunstan his Bishop,
submitted himself to seven years penance, and presumed not to be consecrated
till the 14. year of his reign.

But these things were no novelties either in the person of Edgar, or in the
Princes of those ages; for the minor Kings themselves within the orbs of their
own Dominion used the like jurisdiction, as you may perceive by those cited by
Edgar, in the Charter of Glastenberry, and by many other in particular Charters
of their own. Yea, the Kings of Mercia that were but vassals, and underlings to
the Kings of West-Saxony, within the limits of their little Kingdom used the
same plenitude of authority, as appears by the Charter of Kenulphus, who
lived about the year 850. made to the Abbot of Abingdon, wherein he says, --
Sit autem prae-dict' rus liberum ab omni regali obstaculo, and Episcopali jure,
in sempiternum aevum, ut habitantes ejus nullius regis aut ministrorum suorum,
Episcopive aut suorum officialium jugo deprimantur, sed in omnibus rerum
eventibus as defensionibus causarum Abbatis Abbindenensis, Monasterii de
caetero subjiciantur, Term. Trinitat. 1 H. 7. f. 18. b. And it is there said by
the Judges, fol. seq. b. that many Abbeys in England, had larger words then
these in the Kings Charter, as, Omnimoda justitia and quicquid regales
potestates conferri possunt.

To leave the Saxon Kings, and to come to the Normans, that we may see by what
channel this fluent of authority has been deduced to his Majesty. Lanfranc
Archbishop of Canterbury, in the Conquerours time, would have given the
Abbotship of S. Augustines, but the new King, (says the book) i. William the
Conqueror, did deny it, saying, that he would confer all Pastoral Staves in
his Realm, and would not confer that power to any whatsoever. Govern you
(says he) that which appertains to faith and Christianity among the Monks,
but for their outward service, you shall let me alone with that.

You see here, that the King does not in covert manner, or by little and
little, creep into Ecclesiastical jurisdiction, but with an absolute
resolution, whilst he yet stood as it were but upon the threshold of his
Kingdom, and might justly fear some notable transmutation in discontenting his
Clergy, the half arch of his Kingdom, even then he forbear not to contest
with them upon points of jurisdiction, confining theirs unto matters of faith,
and extending his own to the uttermost limits of the outward government of the
Church. But because his hand and his seal do more authentically enforce
credit, then the report of Authors and Historians, see what he assumeth in his
Charter of foundation of the Monastery Sancti Martini de bello, commonly called
Battle Abbey, for that he built it (as Romulus did the Capitol) in the place
where he overcame his enemies* In this Charter he grants that, That Church
shall be free from all servitude, and from all things whatsoever man's invention
can imagine, -- and commands therefore that it be free from all government of
Bishops -- neither shall the Bishop of Chichester, though it be in his
Diocese, make any Ordinations there, nor grieve it any thing, nor execute any
kind of government, or authority there; but that it be as free (says he) from
all his exactions, as my own Dominicall (or Demesne) Chapel. The Abbot shall
not be compelled to go to the Synod, nor forbidden to promote his Monks to
holy Orders, where him self lists; nor he, or his Monks to require what
Bishop they will to consecrate Altars, etc. And this also by my Regal
authority, -- I ordain, that the Abbot shall be Lord and Judge of all things in
his own Church, and within one league round about it, etc. see the Charter at
large. Here it appears, that this victorious King Will. 1. took himself to
have, Pallium Ecclesiasticae jurisdictionis, the fullness of Ecclesiastical
power; and as the supreme Magistrate thereof, not only abridgeth and revoketh
the jurisdiction of other Bishops within this place, as of the Archbishop of
Canterbury, and the Bishop of Chichester, but disposes the same according to
his own pleasure, namely, to the Abbey of Battle, with so great enlargement
of privilege and authority, as no Bishop of the Kingdom has the like. Free
from all servitude, and from all things whatsoever man's invention can imagine,
are exquisite words of privilege, and how far they might stretch at those
times, (when the profession of our Laws was not a science) into Regal, or
Canonical jurisdiction, I cannot judge: but I know by Staffords case, 1 H. 7.
f. 18. they will now be restrained with many exceptions. So likewise, that the
Abbot shall not be compelled to come at Synods, or to take Ordinations for his
Monks, or Consecration of Nec aliquis Episcoporum in Dioecesi collega^ suum
supergrediatur. Con. Carthag. c. 19. Burchard li. 1. ca. 64.
Altars, etc. from the Bishop of his Diocese, are directly against the Decrees
of the Church, Canons, Synods, and general Councels. As also it is, that he
should be Judge of things in his own Church, and the circuit assigned, which
though here it be but a league, I see not, but he might as well have made it
ten, if it had pleased him, and by consequence a County, or Province. And lest
the King should seem to have done this by some indulgence from the Pope, or
connivency of his own Clergy, he says expressly, that he does it by his Regal
authority, and that not closely, or underhand, but Episcoporum and Baronum
meorum attestatione. And to declare how far the Clergy of that time was from
repining or impugning this his jurisdiction, the Archbishop of Canterbury, the
Bishops of Chichester, Winton, and Worcester, are witnesses to the Charter, and
denounce a curse against the breakers thereof. One other thing also is worthy
of note, that the Kings Demean Chapel, seems by this, not to be within the
jurisdiction and Diocese of any Bishop, but exempt and as a Regal peculiar
reserved only to the visitation and immediate government of the King, or such
as it pleases him to substitute; for the Archbishop of Canterbury has no
jurisdiction there by his own confession, ut pat. Hoveden l. 4. 7. pa. 547.

William Rufus in like manner told Anselme Archbishop of Canterbury, that no
Archbishop or Bishop of his Kingdom should be subject to the Court of Rome, or
to the Pope, -- Quod nullus Archiepiscopus vel Episcopus regni sui (says Mat.
Paris.) curiae Romanae vt* Papae subesset. And because Anselm asked leave of
him to fetch his pall from Pope Vrbane at Rome, -- hanob rem (says Mat.
Paris.) a rege majestatis reus postulatur; he is called in question of High
Treason, an^ Gundulphus Bishop of Rochester, and very many other Bishops
approved the accusation; In vita Will. 2. p. 17* and 18. Malmsbery reports
that his offense was for appealing to the Pope in matters between the King and
him; but he agrees that all he had was confiscate* and himself banished by
consent of the Bishops; and he adds further, that being after recalled into
the Kings favor, upon a new difference between the King and him, he appealed
the second time to Pope Vrbane, and without the Kings license would go thither,
for which cause his whole Bishopric and goods were reseised into the Kings
hands, and he exiled. And though the Pope threatened to excommunicate the King,
if he restored him not, and the Council then holden at Rome, stormed much at
the matter, yet Anselm continued in that plight during the lives both of the
King and the Pope.

Malmsb. de gest. Pontif. li. 1. pa. 221, etc.

FINIS.
An answer to a question of a Gentleman of quality (proposed to and made by a
Reverend and learned Divine living in London) concerning the settlement or
abolition of Tithes by the Parliament, which caused him to doubt how to dispose
of his Son whom he had designed for the Ministrey: wherein also are comprised
some Animadversions upon a late little pamphlet called, The Countries plea
against Tithes, discovering the ignorant mistakings of the Authors of it,
touching the maintenance of the Ministry.
Sir,
THough it were high presumption for a private man, as I am, to presage what so
wise a Senate as the Parliament will do for the future, either in point of
Tithes, or any other affair of so public concernment, yet I hope I may,
without reaching above my line, take upon me to tell you, that the ground of
your doubt touching their alienation of Tithes from the Ministry, (which I
shall bring in its proper place) is but such as will serve rather to bear up a
transient suspicion or surmise of such a matter, then a settled assurance that
it either is so already, or that hereafter it will be so. For the first, That
it is not so, I am sure; because,

1. They have passed an Ordinance for the Ministers recovery of Tithes, and
other Ministerial dues from such as do detain them, November 8. 1644. which
is still in force, through the influence of their power and favor.

2. They have made competent additions to very many livings out of impropriated
Tithes in the hands of Delinquents; and this they have done with so much
cheerfulness, and beneficence on the Ministers behalf, by the Committee for
plundered Ministers* that many have cause to bless God for them as their great
Patrons, and benefactors for that manner of maintenance; wherein they have done
beyond and above any Parliament that were before them, and they continue and
persist in the making of such augmentations, as occasion is offered, to this
very day.

3. They have given the repulse to diverse petitions against Tithes, which by
the instinct and instigation of men of unsound principles and unquiet spirits
have been put up unto them.

For the second, that they will not take them away in time to come, I have
these grounds, if not of infallible certainty, yet of very great probability.

Though they have resolved upon the sale of Bishops lands and revenues, in
their Ordinance of November 16. 1646. for that purpose, they have made an
especial exception with respect to the maiutenance of Ministers in these
words, Except parsonages appropriate, tithes, tithes appropriate, oblations,
obventions, portions of tithes, parsonages, vicarages, Churches, Chapels,
advowsons, donatives, nomination, rights of patronage and presentation.

In excepting the right of patronage, they mean neither to leave it to the
power of the people to choose what Minister they please, (and the practice of
the Honorable Committee for plundered Ministers shows the same, for they
appoint and place Ministers very often without the petitions of the people, and
sometimes against them, as their wisdom sees cause; and if it were not so,
many would choose such as deserved to be put out again.) Nor to put the
Ministers upon the voluntary pensions, or contributions of the people for their
subsistence, but assign them under such a title what belongs unto them by
the Laws of the Land, viz. Tithes, obventions, etc. which intimates their mind
not only for the present, but for the future.

Their wisdom well knows that the Revenue of Tithes as it is most ancient
for the original of it, and most general in practice, both for times and
places, so it has the best warrant from the word of God (not only in the old
Testament, which none can deny, but in the new, which though it be denied by
some, is averred by others, as D. Carleton, M. Roberts, D. Sclater, M. Bagshaw,
in their treatises of Tithes, and yet unrefuted by any) and from the Laws of
many Christian States, especially from the Statutes of our Kingdom, whereof
abundant evidence is given in the book of the learned Antiquary, Sr Henry
Spelman.

3. That notwithstanding all the authority that may be pleaded for them, the
people are backward enough to pay to their Ministers a competent maintenance;
and if Tithes should be put down by the Parliament, it would be very much ado
to bring them up any other way to any reasonable proportion of allowance for
their support; and so in most places the Ministry would be reduced to extreme
poverty, and that poverty would produce contempt of their calling, and that
contempt atheism.

4. That it is evident that such as make the loudest noise against the tenure
of Tithes, are as opposite to the office and calling of Ministers as to their
maintenance; and intend by their lefthanded Logic (because as the saying is,
the Benefit or Benefice is allotted to the office) to make way for the taking
away of the Ministry, by the taking away of Tithes; and not to wait the
leisure of consequentiall operation, (according to the craft of Julian, who
robbed the Church of means, expecting the want of wages would in time bring
after it a want of workmen) but presently to bear down both, as Relatives
mutually infer one another, as well by a negative as a positive inference;
and so as the Parliament having put down the office of the Prelacy, now makes
sale of their lands, they, if they could prevail for the discarding of Tithes,
would by the same argument (clamor and slander) presently and importunately
press for deposition of the Ministry. And we see how they take upon them with
equal confidence and diligence, not only to write, but Erbury at Oxford and
Cox at London.
publicly to dispute against them both.

5. That if rights, so firmly set upon so many solid foundations, should be
supplanted, it would much weaken the tenure or title that any man has to his
lands, or goods, and would be a ready plea for rash innovators; and the rather,
because of the manner of the Anabaptists proceedings, who began their claim of
Christian liberty with a Sleydan Comment. l. 5. fol. 71. a
relaxation of Tithes, and went on to take off the Interdict or restraint in
hunting, fishing, and fowling, wherein they would allow neither Nobility, nor
Gentry, any more privilege then the meanest peasant. And as their principles
were loose; so were their practices licentious, for they held a Ibid.
community of goods, and equality of estates; Bonorum quoque communion^ and
humanitati cum primis esse consentaneam, and ut ex dignitate sunt omnet
aequales, and ex condition libere and promiscue omnibus bonis ut untur. Ibid.
fol. 64. prope sinem.
whereupon e Quo factum est, ut vulgus ab operis atque labor desisteret, and
qua quisque re careret ab aliis qui abundabant etiam invitis acciperit. Ibid.
See also l. 10. princip.
the Common people gave over their work; and whatsoever they wanted they took
from the rich even against their good wills; So that it was a breach of their
Christian liberty, belike, to have a lock or a bolt on a door, to keep a
peculiar possession of any thing from them. And the liberty was more and more
amplified, according to the fancies of their dreaming doctors, for their
dreams were the oracles of their common people; and every day they set forth
their liberty in a new edition, corrupted and augmented, till all the partition
walls of propriety were broken down; and so not content to have other men's
goods at their disposal, and to be quit from payment of rents, and debts,
(having made a monopoly of Saintship to themselves) they excommunicated all who
were not of their faction both out of sacred society of the Church, and out of
common communion in the world as wicked and profane, and unworthy not only of
livelihood but of life also; and usurped a power to Promittebat auxilium quo
viz. impiis interfectis, novi substituerentur principes and Magistratus: nama
Deo sibi mandatum esse profitebatur (scil. Muncerus) ut sublatis illis
constitueret novos Ibid.
depose Prince and other Civil Magistrates, as they pretended they had
commission to kill them, and to constitute new ones in their stead as they
should think fit. Sathanas sub Evangelii praetextu multos hoc tempore
seditiosos and plane sanguinarios ex citavit Doctores. Sleydan Comment: l. 5.
fol. 72. See more of their Doctrine l. 10. principio. and of their doings in
the following discourse of the Author of the same book.
Such seditious and sanguinary Doctors, as Luther called them, did Satan stir
up under the pretext of Evangelical liberty; a liberty which in them admitted
of no bounds, being like the etc. oath without banks, or bottom, of no rule
or order, being carried on with a wild and giddy violence; such as the great
and pernicious impostor of the world prompted them unto, though they vented
their diabolical illusions under the Title of Divine Revelations, as the
Prince of darkness made them believe, when he put on his holy day habit, the
appearance of an Angel of light. 2 Cor. 11. 14.

6. That the payment of Tithes where there are the fruits of the earth, and
increase of cattle, out of which they may be raised, is the most equitable way
and means of maintaining the Minister, since such a gain is not only
harmless, and without sin, for the manner of acquisition, (which we cannot
say of pensions and exhibitions made up out of trade or traffic) but such as
may be most permanent and constant, since whether the Tithe be less or more,
it is still proportionable to the other nine parts; and if the years be
plentiful, there is the more provision for housekeeping, if scarce, that part
though less is the more in price and worth, either for use in kind, or for
exchange for other commodities. Whereas a rate in money which is competent in
some places, and at some times, is incompetent in others, such is the change
both of moneys and necessaries bought with money. For money, the time was when
an ounce of silver now at 5. s. was valued but at 20. d. So in the Act of
Parliament in the third of Edward the first, Cokes Instit. part 2. p. 410. when
20 marks a year was enough honorably to maintain a Student at the Innes of
Court. Fortescue is his Commentary on the Laws of England, c. 49. p. 114. And
this was held so great a charge as was to be borne only by the sons of
Noblemen, and therefore they only, says the same Author, studied the Laws in
those Innes, Ibid. And of old the Revenues fit for a Knight was rated to 20. l.
a year, of a Baron to 400 marks a year, and of an Earl 400. l. a year: Cokes
Instit. l. 2. c. 3. Sect. 95. fol. 69. and Lindwood in his provincial
Constitutions notes upon the rate of a Vicarage (for such by the fraud and
rapine of the superior Popish Clergy Vitario perpetuum stipendium quinque
marcarum statuitur, nisi in partibus aliquibus Walliae ubi minore contenti
sintd. Lindwood constitut. l. 1. de offic. vicar. fol. 46. p. 2 col. 2. in
Textu and fol. 47. p. col. 1. Sed in glos. lit. g. Augmentatio facta est ad 8
Marcas, sed tamen alii qui no^ sunt contenti sine december Marcis; and revera 5
Marcae non sufficient ad hospitalitatem and alia Ibid. in glos. lit. g.
were many times deprived of Tithes, and put to pensions) that it was to be 5
marks in England, but in some parts of Wales they were content with less,
afterward their means was augmented to 8 marks a year, but some would not be
contented with less then 10 marks a year; and, indeed says the Gloss, 5
marks was too little for Hospitality, and other expenses; implying that 10
marks was sufficient for all occasions.

2 As for money, so for commodities to be bought with it, the prices have been
very various; In the Sea Polt Abridg. Edict. Londin. 1640. p. 11.
Statute entitled Assisa panis and cervisiae, made Anno 51 H. 3. and Anno Dom.
1266. the dearest rate for a quarter of wheat (which in the middle of the
Kingdom is a measure containing eight times four peckes, I render it by that
proportion, because it is more generally known) was 12. s. the cheapest 1. s.
so that betwixt these two extremes the ordinary rate might be about 6. s. the
quarter. And for other provisions the rate set upon them in a dearth in the
Reign of Edward the second was this, for an ox fatted with grass fifteen
shillings, for one fatted with corn twenty shillings; the best cow twelve
shillings, a fat hog of two years old three shillings; a fat sheep shorn
fourteen pence, with the fleece twenty pence; a fat goose two pence halfepenny,
a fat capon two pence halfepenny, a fat hen a penny, four pigeons a penny, so
that whosoever sold above should forfeit their ware to the King. Dan. Hist. l.
2. p. 209. And I well remember that not very many years ago there was a
controversy brought before the commissioners of charitable uses in Cheshire;
wherein was discovered the cheapnesse of things in former times: the case was
thus. There was a legacy of twenty marks given to the parish of Wood-church in
that County to buy oxen to till the ground of poor men, with which small sum
at the time of the donation, (about sevenscore years before) were bought no
fewer then twenty yoke of oxen; which because the poor people were not able so
to keep that they might be strong to labor, it was thought fit to sell them
and to buy in their stead as many milch kine as the money would reach unto,
which were to be hired at a low rate to such as were not able to buy such
cattle for themselves. But it is yet a cheaper price we read of in Edward the
first his days, when by Stat. Westminster. an ox was to be sold but at 5. s. so in
the 13th year of Edward the 1. cited in Cokes Instit. part 2. p. 410. How
rates are raised in the present age (whether by scarcity of things, or by the
increase of people, or multiplication of coin, or all) is not unknown to any,
and too much experimentally by many whose portion is too penurious for their
necessary expenses. Nor is this great difference of rates, either for money, or
for goods, brought to pass on the sudden, but raised by degrees; so that if
the rule of tithing should be laid down, the Ministers wages must be changed,
as Jacobs was in Labans service, many times over, which would be an intricate
trouble to proportion according to several variations of persons, and places;
to which inconvenience the maintenance by Tithes is not obnoxious; nor to any
other, which may be compared with such as will hardly be separated (if at all)
from the alienation of Tithes.

That if any innovation be made in this matter, and the people be displeased
with it, (as they will quickly be displeased with any thing which puts them to
cost) they will take the more boldness to contemn it, because it is new, and
for that it neither has, nor is like to have such a ratification of authority,
either divine, or humane, by constitution or prescription, as tithing has had;
no, though it should be supposed to last to the end of the world. For Tithes
were paid 1933 years, almost 2000 years before Christ; Salian Annal. Tom 1.
p. 251. nu. 41. and since Christ (excepting some times of persecution) for the
most part of sixteen hundred forty six years; and we cannot hope the
remaining age of the world will hold out half so long.

To these I could add diverse other considerations of importance, which cannot
be hid from the prudence of such a multitude of sage Counselors as that most
Honorable Senate the Parliament consists of; which makes me confident that
before they give assent to any such petitions as are put up against Tithes,
they will be pleased to hear what the Assembly of Divines can say in answer
to such objections, as are framed against them, upon pretense either of
Scripture or religious reason.

Animadversions upon the Petition of the Committee of Kent.
AGainst this, that which moved you to think the Parliament would take away
Tithes, was, that you have read in one of the news books, that the Knights
and Gentlemen of Kent presented a petition to the Honorable House of Commons,
against the payment of Tithes unto Ministers, and that they received thanks
from the Speaker in the name of the House for that service, and that it is held
fit to be a leading case for all other Counties of the Kingdom.

You must beware how you believe the news books, for they are many times
ignorantly and inconsiderately erroneous, or fallaciously false, out of an ill
affection to some, and apparent partiality to others.

For the Petition it self, 1. It comes not as from the Knights and Gentlemen
of that County in common, (who I am credibly informed are not very well pleased
with it) but from the Committee of Kent, who (if they be like the Committees in
many places) are not all of them men of sound, and orthodox Judgment, neither
for matter of Tithes, nor for diverse other Tenets of Religion.

2. Howsoever they profess a good meaning to establish a sufficient
maintenance for godly and well deserving Ministers; a very good meaning to
extend it so far as to succor their widows and fatherless children, as we
see by the 8th proposition of their new project. It will be a problem (which
the present age perhaps will not be able to resolve) who the Trusties in after
times will accept for such Ministers; although they may have cause to suspect
that some part of Kent for the present is not so reformed as it should be;
Anabaptists and other sectaries having misled many into adverse principles, not
only to Tithes, but to other matters of moment, concerning man's duty both of
the first and second Table.

3. For their exceptions against the received maintenance by Tithes they say
first, in general, That they bewail the sad condition of the Country, in
respect of the uncertain floting, and miserable condition of the Ministry,
occasioned by the very nature, manner, and adjuncts of the way of Tithes; which
the experience of thus many ages does plainly evince to be miserably attended
with these ensuing mischiefs.

To which I answer;

That the miserable and floting condition of the Ministry proceeds not from the
nature, manner or adjuncts of their subsistence by way of Tithes; nor does the
experience of thus many ages (that is, of the precedent ages hitherto) evince
so much; for God (who is omniscient, and therefore cannot but foresee all
subsequent inconveniences for many hundred years to come) established that
means to be a standing and settled maintenance for his service; and the misery
of the Ministry proceeds not from the nature or manner of Tithes (which to
affirm may seem to coast too near their conceit who imagine God to be the
author of sin) but from the ill consciences of men, who make no scruple to
rob God of his right, Malach. 3. (for Tithes are his portion, Levit. 27. 30.)
and Ministers may suffer very much in the present age, because there be many
Anabaptisticall sectaries (from which Kent is not more free, but as some say,
more infected then some other Counties) who take up importunate clamours
against Tithes as Antichristian and Jewish; and there will be the more by the
countenance they may have from such a petition; and such petitioners, because
diverse of them are of good reputation, not only for wealth, but for their
wisdom and learning well affected to Religion and the Parliament; and I
believe it the rather, because some godly ministers have expressed their
approbation both of it and them, though therein I conceive they showed more of
the simplicity of the dove then of the wisdom of the serpent; for albeit
their meaning might be so to gather the Tithes, and to put them into such
hands, as might be rather for the Ministers ease then for their loss, no man
can prophecy that so good a spirit will descend upon their successors, nor how
cross they may prove to such a Christian Intention.

2. For the particular exceptions, they say; first, That for the nature Petit.
of this subsistence it is a very mystery, and secret, not easily without much
art and industry attained unto; namely for the Minister to know his dues
demandable, or the parishioners their dues payable; whence arises that
multitude of scandalous and vexatious suites and brables betwixt Ministers and
people, which does fill all the Courts at Westminster, and other the
Justice-sittings in the Country likewise with causes in this kind.

In this charge there be two particulars contained, first, of the difficulty of
knowing the right of Tithes; secondly, of the vexatious suites raised betwixt
pastors and people upon that ground.

For the first, It is a very strange mystery, that after so many hundred years
of Tithing it should not yet be known what it is; but I doubt not but in this
case the right is better known unto Ministers that should receive Tithes, then
acknowledged by the people that ought to pay them; And how can they set up
their new design upon the old foundation of Tithing, as they project it, if it
cannot be known what is the Ministers demandable due, what the peoples payable
duty: that model is more like to be a mystery which they propound, since it
was never heard of in this Kingdom until they had devised it; and as like it
is to prove a misery to Ministers, if their portion should come into no better
hands then most of theirs, who have petitioned against Tithes since this
Session of the Parliament.

And secondly, for the multitude of scandalous and vexatious suites, they make
no more against the Right of Tithes, then against borrowing and lending, buying
and selling, letting of leases, settling inheritances, Joyntures, etc. upon
which titles are set the greatest number of suites; and for suites for Tithes
if the law allow them a right, it allows them a remedy to recover that right;
and for the suites that were occasioned thereby, they are neither so many as is
here presented, nor so scandalous for the Ministers part, for they may be
imputed to the old avarice of worldly minded men, who being of a contrary mind
to the Apostle, think it an hard bargain to exchange their carnal for the
Ministers spiritual things; but principally to the new principles and
practices of such unreasonable reformers, as imagine they are never sarre
enough removed from one extreme until they arrive at the other, accounting
all superstitious in point of Tithing, that are not sacrilegious.

2. For the manner of it, respecting either the collecting or payment Petit.
of Tithes, it is a mutual scourge in the hand of Ministers and people each to
other, if either or both (as too often it happens) prove covetous or cross.

If it be a mutual scourge, it would well become the wisdom Answ.
of these Committee Men to enquire where the right is, and who does the wrong,
and to project a way how the wrongdoer may be made to do right and to give due
satisfaction to such as suffer under an undeserved scourge, and I hope when our
reformation is grown up to such a competent degree of strength and stature as
that it may quit the service of Country Committees, there will be no more cause
of such a complaint then for many hundred years heretofore there has been.

3. For its adjuncts (that is of the maintenance by Tithes) the Petit.
mischiefs of them will appear innumerable, if the pregnancy of only one be
but considered; namely, in the unreasonable proportion of livings, or values of
Churches to which they are belonging, whence arise these inseparable evils.

By what newfound Logic will you frame such an Induction, Answ.
as from one particular to infer innumerable mischiefs, particularly from
the disproportion of livings? You seem to think otherwise, where you say in
your 8th proposition, that in the distribution of the revenues for Ministers
regard must be had to the desert of the person, his family, and charge; if so,
certainly there is a great disproportion in deserts; and for charge it is
considerable, not only for the greatness of a Ministers family, but for the
dearnesse of his education; some have spent many years, and a large patrimony
in the University, to make them fit for the Ministry; and should not they be
supplied with a more liberal allowance ( caeteris paribus) then those who have
been at little expense both of time and estate to be duly qualified for such a
calling? If the proportion of parts, and pains, of charge both Academicall,
and Oeconomicall, be duly weighed, there will be many more livings found too
little then too great for a Ministers maintenance; especially if you will allow
him a Library (such as a learned Knight thought necessary for a Minister) of
600. l. value. But if the proportion be unreasonable, must Tithes be supplanted
and their ancient Tenure abolished for such a disproportion? must the
foundation be dug up because the building is too high? may not a tree, whose
branches are too luxuriant, be lopped, and left entire in the body and root?
when a man's beard is too long, will you cut off his chinne? that out of doubt
were an unreasonable reformation.

4. From this unreasonable proportion, you say, arise these Petit.
unseparable evils. 1 That most unworthy persons, who by favor or friendship
or any sinister ways can get into the greatest livings, being once invested
with a legal right of freehold for their lives, securely fleece the flock,
and feed themselves without fear or care, more then to keep themselves without
the compass of a sequestration, whilst others both painful and conscionable
both serve starve.

This is not (as you call it) an unseparable evil from the proportion you
speak of; for there be some men who have Answ.
had, and at this present have great livings, not by any sinister ways, but by
such favor and friendship as is ingenuous, and just, and who keep as great a
distance from desert of sequestration as any Committee man does within the
County wherein they live. And if they carry themselves so as to be without
fear and care, and without the compass of a sequestration, in these
inquisitive and accusative times, they are more to be countenanced and
encouraged then many of those who are professed adversaries to them. But the
matter, it seems, that troubles you is, that they are invested with a legal
right of free hold for their lives, and if they have such a right, and walk so
warily as to keep out of the reach of a just sequestration, why should they not
enjoy it? would you have all to be betrusted to the discretion and conscience
of your arbitrary Committees? Truly Gentelemen, we are afraid to trust you so
far, as to give up such a certain title as formerly and anciently
established upon the Incumbent by the fundamental Laws of the Land, as the
right of any person to his Temporal estate, and to stand to your arbitrary
dispensations for our livelihood; lest Laban-like you should change our wages
ten times: and if your petition should take place, it might prove of very ill
consequence in another generation, were you never so well minded, and it may be
sooner (in the next succession:) for if the Trustees should be either proud or
covetous, or profane or licentious, heretical, or schismatic, the best
Mininisters might happily be the worst dealt withal; and the right of
receiving Tithes taken out of their hands might put them into the passive
condition of silly and impotent wards under subtle and domineering Tutors or
Guardians, in name such, but indeed nothing less then assertors and defenders
of their rights, as Tutors and Guardians ought to be. And that our fear and
jealousy is not without cause in respect of Trustees and Committeemen, nor so
much of you in particular, of some of whom we have heard and believe much good,
as of such as may have as great authority without so good an intention, we
shall give you our ground out of the observation and complaint of witnesses
above exception, viz. the well affected freemen and covenant-engaged Citizens
of the City of London, in their humble representation to the right Honorable
the Lords and Commons in Parliament assembled, in these words. And here we may
not omit to hint unto your Honors the exorbitant practices of many Committees
and Committee Men, who have such an influence by means of their authority upon
the people, they being at their wills and in their power to do them a
displeasure, that they dare not do otherwise, then obey their unlawful
commands, without the inevitable hazard of their peace and safety; through
which means tyranny is exercised by one fellow-subject upon another, and
justice and equity cannot enter. The cries of all sorts of people through the
land are grown so loud against the people of this vocation and profession, by
reason of those grievous oppressions that are continually acted by them, that
in tenderness of affection toward our brethren, not being ignorant or
insensible of our own sufferings in this kind, and the great dishonor
accrewing to the Parliament thereby, that we cannot but be earnest suitors to
your mercy and justice that such may be dissolved.

2. For obtainment of these livings we see such sordid compliances Petit.
with such persons as have the fattest benefices (as they count and call them)
in their dispose; such artifices in contriving, making, and coloring over
Simoniacall and sinful bargains, compacts, and matches, such chopping of
Churches, and restless change of places, till they get into the easiest and
warmest: and other such like practices not to be named, nor yet to be prevented
or removed, otherwise then by flucking up the very root which naturally
brancheth out it self into these foresaid mischiefs, so obstructive and
destructive to all reformation.

Here is a great deal of aggravating rhetoric against the greatness Answ.
of Church Livings. But why should all this evil be imagined rather of
Ministers fat benefices as you say they are called, then of great and gainful
offices in the State? Is there not more care had, and more strict trial taken
of Ministers sincerity and integrity then of secular officers? surely we are
bound in charity to expect a more reformed Ministry, then we have had, who
will rather say unto a Simoniacall patron as Peter to Simon Magus, Thy money
perish with thee, Acts 8. 20. then be Levies to such a Simeon in making a base
and corrupt contract for a benefice. And for that you say, that such practices
are not to be prevented or removed, otherwise then by plucking up the very
root, which naturally brancheth it self out into these foresaid mischiefs,
so obstructive and destructive to all religion. Whether you mean Tithes to be
this root, or the disproportion of Benefices, or the right of patronage and
protection, I cannot tell, but sure I am, that the Apostle calls covetousness
the root of all evil, and so the root of that evil which sometimes passes
betwixt a Patron and his Chaplain: and may as frequently, and with as much
injury be found betwixt some Committee Men and Trustees and the Ministers of
their choice, as any other. But as I am confident that there will be an
amendment on the Ministers part, by the regular way of the Parliaments
reformation, according to the directions of ordination of Ministers already
printed and accordingly practiced, so will it be not only possible, but easy
for the State to find out a fit means to prevent prevarication on the part of
the Patron; but if Tithes be removed from their ancient foundation, and lest
loose to the disposal of Trustees or Committee Men, they will be a more ready
prey for the covetous into whose hands they may come, and from whose hands
perhaps they cannot without great difficulty be redeemed.

Lastly, in the close of this Petition, the Petitioners show great care that
the Ministers may be freed from the encumbrance of Tithes, to serve the Lord
without distraction, and to give themselves to the Word of God and Prayer, and
to be only employed to make ready a people prepared for the Lord; And so they
may do if they be maintained by Tithes; for that means of maintenance gives a
man occasion of more and better acquaintance with the particular disposition of
his people, and it is his part to be diligent to know the state of his flock,
Prove. 27. 23. And for that trouble which may be thought inconsistent with the
Calling of a Minister, if his means be sufficient, he may have a servant to
take it from him, and ease him of it. I know a Minister whose Benefice was a
Vicarage, and his Parish so large, that it was 11 miles in length, and of a
proportionable breadth, yet did it not put him to the expense of one day in a
year to compound for, or gather in his dispersed portion.

Now for the success and acceptance of the Petition in the Honorable House of
Commons, to which it was presented; if such an innovation had been granted for
that County, it had been fitter to have been made a Sibboleth, for that cauthe
or angle of the Kingdom (for so the word Kent signifies) as their custom of
Gavelkind is a custom anciently observed in Kent, whereby the land of the
father is equally divided among all his sons, or the land of a brother equally
divided among his brethren, if he have no issue of his own, this was so common
a custom as appears by the Stat. in the 18. year of H. 6. ca. 1. that there
were not above 30 or 40 persons in Kent that held by any other tenure; but Anuo
31 H. 8. ca. 3. many Gentlemen upon Petition got an alteration thereof.
Gavelkind, then to be made a president or pattern of conformity to other parts
of the Kingdom, as the News-Book of the same week prescribed that to his
Reader.

But the answer of the worthy Senate was such as may further confirm us in our
confidence, that they will still continue to be gracious Patrons of the
maintenance of Ministers, and that they will be more ready to ratify precedent
Statutes and their own Ordinance made in that behalf, then to dissettle their
tenure which is founded upon them, and to make Ministers arbitrary Pensioners
to such as may be so far swayed by misprision of judgment, or personal
dis-affection, as to deal most penuriously with those, who being truly valued
(without erroneous mistaking or injurious misliking) may both by the eminence
of their parts, and their faithfulness in their places, deserve the most
ample, and most honorable Revenue. I will give you their answer in their own
words, which are most authentic, they are these.

M. Speaker by order of the House of Commons did give the Petitioners (the
Committee of Kent) thanks for their former services, and took notice of their
good affections to the Public; and did acquaint them, That the great
businesses of the Kingdom are now instant and pressing upon them, and that
they will take the Petition into consideration in due time, and that in the
mean time they take care that Tithes may be paid according to Law.

But there are some in the Parliament that hold the maintenance Object.
of Ministers by Tithes to be Jewish and Popish, and therefore they will give
countenance to Petitions that are put up against them, and do what they can
under such titles to render them offensive to such as are truly religious,
especially to those who have most power to abolish them.

1. It may be there are some such, and if there be some such among Answ.
so many, it is neither to be thought strange, nor true, for such a number of
them as may be able to carry the cause against the continuance of Tithes.

2. For the term Jewish, it is mis-applyed against Tithes, as it was by the
Prelates of late, and is by the Anabaptists at the present against the Sabbath;
nor are they more Popish then Jewish; For the Papists, though their people pay
them, and their Priests receive them, yet they for the most part holding the^
to depend merely upon Ecclesiastical constitution, made no scruple of changing
them into secular titles or uses, as in Impropriations in the hands of Laymen,
and many other distributions made out of them several ways, without any
respect to the service of the Sanctuary. Nor is there any thing in the payment
and receiving of Tithes under the state of the Gospel, which may prebably be
suspected to have any savor of Judaisme, or Popery, save only the payment of
Tenths by the Ministers to the King, as has been lately well observed by Mr L.
in his second Book against Mr S. I will set down his words, and seriously
commend them to the consideration of our religious Reformers; they are these,
in answer to Mr S. his Question.

Qu. What Smoke p. 25.
are the maintenance of Ministers by Tithes? Jewish and Popish undenyably.

Ans. How? Jewish and Popish undeniably? As undeniably as the Sabbath was
Jewish when the Prelates so called it, or the article of the Trinity Popish, as
Quod Ecclesiae resormatae adhuc in side Tinitatis cum Papistis conconveniret.
Bell. praesat. in lib. de Christo, Tom. 1. secund Controvers. general. p. 271.
Valentinus Gentilis took it, when he disliked the doctrine of the Reformed
Churches in that point, because they agreed with the Papists therein. You are
grossly mistaken Sir in the tenure of Tithes, for though there be a clamor
taken up against them by such as make no scruple either of slander or of
sacrilege, and some would change the Ministers portion, which is their masters
wages for his own work and reduce them to voluntary pensions of the people,
(because they would have a liberty to beggar them w^^ will not humor them in
their fond and false opinions, and licentious practices, but oppose them as of
conscience they are bound to do) neither you, nor all your party can prove
them either Jewish or Popish, as they are allowed and received for the
maintenance of the Ministers of England. And because you are so confident in
your opinion against Tithes, and show your self to have a good opinion of Mr
Nigh, (whom with Mr Goodwin Smoke p. 14.
you cite for a worthy saying touching the golden Ball of Government) I refer
you for satisfaction to him, who will tell you (as he has done diverse others
in my hearing) that Ministers of the Gospel may hold, and receive Tithes for
their maintenance by a right and title which is neither Jewish nor Popish, but
truly Christian; and there is nothing Jewish or Popish in Tithes, but the
assignation of the decimae decimarum, from the Numb. 18 28
Leviticall Priests to the high Priest, from the high Priest to the In veteri
lege primitiae debebantur sacerdotibus, decimae autem Levitis, and quia sub
sacerdotibus Levitae erant, Dominus mandavit ut ipsi loco decimarum solverent
summo sacerdoti* decimam decimae, unde nunc eadem ratione tenentur Clerici
summo ponti fici decimam dare si exiger et. Aquin. 22. q. 87. a. 4. ad 3. Soto
9. Inst. q. 4. art. 4. ad. 3. Lo^in. in Number. 18. 28. p. 687.
Pope, and from the Pope to the King; when first Pope Urbane gave them to
Richard the second to aid him against Charles the French King, and others that
uphold Clement the seventh against him, as Polyd. Virg. Hist. l. 16.
Polydore Virgil relates. And* King Henry the eighth taking from the Pope the
title of head of the Church to himself by Anno 26 H. 8. c. 1. Poult. Abridg. p.
561.
Act of Parliament, took from him the tenths, and other profits annexed to that
title, which were settled upon the Crown by Ibid. c. 2. p. 565.
Statute in the 26th year of Henry the 8. so that the Jewish high Priesthood
being expired, the papal Lordship abolished, the Tithes paid under those
titles, may be called Jewish and Popish, but not that which is assigned for the
maintenance of Ministers, because they are yet to do service to their Master,
and so to receive the maintenance of his allowance for his work; which
fellow servants cannot take upon them to take away without presumption; their
door-neighbor will not allow them a power to appoint the wages of their
servants, much less may they usurp upon the right of God, and his Ministers,
to alienate tithes from the support of his service and worship, for that is
rather Popish, as has before been observed.

Which being true and clear, (as touching the pedigree of such Tithes from the
high Priesthood of Aaron to the Independent Prelacy of the Pope, and from him
to the King, as by claim from the title, Head of the Church, translated from
the Miter to the Crown) it will not I conceive be thought congruous to the
Christian Reformation (the through Reformation professed by our worthy and
religious Rulers) that such Monuments of Superstition or Popery should be
removed, which were unprofitable, and that only retained (as a silver shrine
to Diana) which brings gain to the King or State, and puts the charge upon the
Ministers of the Gospel; who thereby (I may say it confidently for some whom I
know) are brought to this perplexed Dilemma, either to pay them with
reluctance, (as no less contrary to their consciences then to their
commodities) or to deny or withhold them with suspicion, or imputation of
avarice, or disobedience to lawful Authority.

Obj.
But the Parliament likes not that Tithes should be proposed, or pressed, as
many Divines do, both in Pulpit, and from the Press, as of divine right;
which because they think to be wrong, they will rather reject them, then
ratify them under a title of so high a strain.

1. Not only Divines, but diverse Sir* Ed. Coke in his second Report in the
Archb: of Can. his case. f. 49. b. And so the Author of the foregoing learned
Work.
others (who are men of very eminent note) hold Tithes to be due by divine
right, and some of them have undertaken to prove them so, and to answer all
objections against them, which how far they have performed Answ.
is left to the judgment of indifferent Readers.

2. It is more like that (as both religion and reason will dictate unto them)
they will be the more wary how they take them away, lest if that tenure should
prove true, they should be found guilty of the sin of sacrilege, that they
should abolish them, and that they will seriously search and enquire into the
ground of that title, and while they are in doubt, that they will resolve of
the safest course, which is, not to repeal them; for as we must forbear to feed
of meats of which another says, that they are sacrificed to idols, 2 Cor. 10.
28. (for his sake that says it, though but a private Christian;) so if Divines
say, (and bring Scripture and reason for it) that Tithes are dedicated to God,
or by him assumed, first to himself, and then assigned or set over by him to
his servants, for his work in waiting on his worship, which must be maintained
to the worlds end, it will be rather a reason for them to support the tenure of
Tithes by their Parliamentary power, then any way to prompt or dispose them to
desert it, or to alienate their right from Ecclesiastical uses.

The fear of sacrilege has been of such force with some heathen Moralists, as
Plutarch observes in his Morals, that if they pulled down a house contiguous
to a temple, they would leave some of that part standing which was next unto
it, lest they should with it take away any part of the Temple it self. Wherein
if they showed any spice of superstition, it will be more capable of pardon, or
less liable to punishment at the hand of God, then we may expect if we proceed
hastily to lay violent hands upon any thing peculiarly entitled to his honor,
who is the author and giver of all things to all men.

2. If the plea of a divine right for Tithes (supposing it sets them up too
high) should incline to irritation in some to make opposition against them, why
should not the contrary tenet which peremptorily takes them down too low,
calling them Jewish, Antichristian, and Popish, and that undeniably, (as has
been said, but never can be proved) move others the rather to retain them, and
confirm them? chiefly the Parliament (whose authority is most engaged for their
justification) and especially since the servants of God have had possession of
them by so many laws, and so long a prescription; for according to the maxim
of the law, the possessors title is the best until he be Longa possessio
(sicut jus) parit jus possidendi and roll it actionem vero domino. Bract. l. 2.
fo. 52.
fairly evicted out of it.

3. If the Parliament do not in their approbation of Tithes come up to the
tenure of divine right, they may yet be willing enough to establish them upon
other grounds, and leave Divines to the liberty of their judgment and
consciences to plead for them according to the principles of their own
profession, as in their Ordinances made for setting up of the Presbyterial
Government, though yet they be not satisfied of the claim of divine right for
it, they were pleased to authorize it by their Ordinance, and to require
Divines to prepare the people for the reception thereof by preaching of it, and
for it; so as both to clear it, and assure it (so far as they could) by the
sacred Scripture.

And on the other side while they approve it, though but by a civil assent,
(as to a prudentiall design, until they see more light, which they look for in
the Answer to their Queres proposed to the Assembly of Divines) the
Presbyterians who hold it in the highest esteem take none offense that they
proceed no farther, and profess themselves well satisfied with their civil
sanction; so one of the learned Commissioners of Scotland has said, in the
name of the rest, in these words, If they shall in a M. Gillespie his brotherly
examination of M. Colemans Sermon. p. 32, 33.
Parliamentary and Legislative way establish that thing, which is really, and
in it self agreeable to the Word of God, though they do not declare it to be
the will of Jesus Christ, they are satisfied.

Ob. If there were no purpose to put down Tithes by such as are in Authority,
how comes it to pass that the Anabaptists are more bold in London to take up
a public contestation against them, then the Presbyterians to make apology
for them? for did not one Mr B. C. an Anabaptist manage a dispute against Mr W.
I. of Chr. and after that undertake another upon the same argument against M.
I. Cr. and offered to proceed in it against all opposition, which M. Cr. durst
not do, upon pretense of a prohibition from authority?

Ans. 1. It is no strange thing for men who have a bad cause to set a good face
on it, and to make out with boldness and confidence what is wanting in truth
of judgment, and strength of argument; this is observed of the Papists by a
judicious Author, Sir Ed: Sands Europ. Specul. p. 85.
whom he shows to have been forward in the offers of disputation with
iterated and importunate suits for public audience and judgment. And
Bellarmine reports out of Surius, that Io: Cochleus a great Zealot for the
Papacy, offered to dispute with Obtulit se ad disputandum ^um quovis Lutherano
sub poena capitis si in probationibus defecisset. Bell. ce Eccles. Script. p.
423.
any Lutheran upon peril of his life, if he failed in the proof of his part of
the Question^

2. For the boldness of the Anabaptists at this time, and in this Cause, and
this City, there may be diverse conjectural reasons in particular given thereof,
besides the general already observed; as,

1. Because they advance in their hopes of a toleration of their Sect; and to
promote that hope they have been so ready to engage in military service, with a
design no doubt to get that liberty by force (if they be able) which by favor
of authority they cannot obtain.

2. For this matter of Tithes, they might be more forward to oppose their
tenure, because it is a very popular and plausible argument, wherein they might
have the good wills of the people, that they might prevail, and their conceits
that they did so, (though they did not) because they would be very apt to
believe Quod valde volumus facile ^redimus.
what they vehemently desire may come to pass; and it is not to be doubted but
a dram of seeming probability will prevail more with most worldlings to spare
their purses, then an ounce of sound reason to put them to charges.

3. They might take some encouragement to dispute against Tithes in this City,
because there is a project to change the maintenance of the Ministers set on
foot by many worthy, and well-minded Citizens, which yet in truth makes nothing
for the Anabaptists opinion, who would have Ministers maintained by mere
benevolence; for the Citizens, as they intend a more liberal allowance then
the former, (since they see many of their Churches are destitute of Ministers,
because their Ministers have been destitute of means) so they mean that it
shall be certain, settled by Authority, and not left arbitrary to the courtesy
of men.

3. For the two disputes, the one managed betwixt M. W. I. and M. B. C. the
other purposed betwixt M. I. Cr. and the same B. C. but disappointed, it makes
nothing at all for the taking away of Tithes; For as touching the former, they
who were not possessed with prejudice, or corrupted with covetousness against
the truth, were much confirmed in the lawfulness of such rates as are paid in
London under the title of Tithes, though indeed they are not Tithes, and of
such only was the debate at that time.

For the intended debate which was to be touching the divine right of Tithes,
though some godly and prudent men thought it should not have been taken in hand
without the warrant of public authority, yet they made no doubt but that the
truth of the cause, or ability of the man, who undertook the defense of it
against M. C. would prevail unto victory. But for the disappointment, it was by
the warrant of the Lord Major of the City, to them both, interdicting the
dispute, which was both without M. I. Cr. his knowledge, and against his good
will; yet he obeyed the prohibition, and when his Antagonist insisted, and
urged the performance of what was agreed upon, notwithstanding the contrary
command of the Lord Major, his answer was, that it was agreeable to the
Anabaptists principles to disobey Authority, but not according to the
principles of Presbyterians. And lest B. C. should take it for a token of
distrust in his cause, and make it an occasion of vainglory, either against
the cause or person of M. I. Cr. he proposed the printing of M. B. C. his
arguments against Tithes, and engaged himself to answer them in print, and so
to refer both to the judgment of al unbyas^ed Readers, which was the best way
to give clear and full satisfaction to such as doubt on which side the truth is
swayed by the most authentic testimony and soundest reasons.

It is no part of my task for the present to argue farther for Tithes, then may
answer the doubt you have proposed to me, which is, of the Parliaments purpose
and proceedings touching the establishing, or abolishing of them.

Animadversions upon the late Pamphlet entitled, The Countries plea against
Tithes.
YEt that you may not be scrupled in conscience (as you were in conceit) by a
new petty Pamphlet against payment of Tithes, which perhaps may come to your
hands; I will give you some animadversions upon it; which may also be of use to
others as well as to you. The title of the Book is, The Countries plea against
Tithes, with this addition, A Declaration sent to diverse eminent Ministers in
several parishes of this Kingdom, proving by Gods word and moral reason,
that Tithes are not due to the Ministers of the Gospel; and that the Law for
Tithes was a Leviticall Law, and to endure no longer then the Leviticall
Priesthood did, etc.

Wherein the Authors say much in the outside, but make no answerable proof in
the inside of the Book. They direct it in the Title page as a Declaration to
diverse worthy Ministers in the Kingdom, and in the beginning of the body of
the Book they present it as a joint Declaration of the people of several
parishes for their opinion concerning Tithes, as a Reply to certain papers
from some Ministers, pretending to prove Tithes due by authority of Scripture.
It had been fair dealing if they had printed those papers of the Ministers,
that it might appear how well they had answered them.

But for the confident contradiction of the Divine right they allege,

1. The novelty of them in the Christian state. 2. The ceremoniality of them,
as being merely Leviticall. 3. The inequality of them in several respects. 4.
The trouble of them to the Minister.
For the first; they refer the original of them under the Gospel, for the
author, to Pope Vrbane; for the time, to the three hundredth year after
Christ's ascension; and for proof of both, they cite Origin, Cyprian, and
Gregory, at large without any particular quotation to find what they cite:
until which time, say they, there was community of all things among Christians.

But first, they should tell us which Urban it was, (who they say began to
bring Tithes into use for the maintenance of the Ministry) for there were 8 of
that Name, and of those 8 (if Origin be a witness of it) it must be Urban the
first, Anno 227 who sat but 6 years, and 7 months, and there was not another
Pope called Urban until the year 1087. which was long after the latest of
those three, viz. Gregory, (whether they mean Greg. Nazianz. or Greg. Nyssen,
or Gregory surnamed,) the Great, Bishop of Rome; and if Origin testified so
much of Tithes recalled by Pope Urban, their original must be ancienter then
300 years after the ascenson; for that Urban lived not beyond the year 234, and
Origin flourished Anno 226. and if Tithes began when Christians gave over the
community of goods, as these men say p. 2. in the name of Tertullian, but bring
no proof of it, then had Ministers a propriety in Tithes as soon as others had
a propiety of estate; and sooner it could not be. And that which caused this
community, the persecution of the Church (which reached to his age: for the
Tom. 1. Council. p. 104.
next predecessor to that Urban, Calixtus was a Martyr) might very well cause a
suspension of Tithes for all that time.

2. For the tenure of Tithes; there be 3 disputable opinions: Decimae sunt pura
eleemosyna, and parochiani possunt propter peccata suorum praelatorum, ad
libitum suum auserre eas* Council. Constant. Session. 8. Tom. 7. Council. p.
1016. col. 2. Artic. 18.
1 Whether they be Moral; 2 whether Judicial; 3 whether Ceremonial, (there
is a fourth conceit that they are mere Alms, which is imputed to Wickleff in
the 8 session of the council of Constance; but that admits of no dispute since
it is repugnant to all appearance of reason.) 1 Some hold them Moral, as those
Ministers whom these men pretend to answer; most of the Canonists, Marc. Anton.
de Dom. de Rep. Eccl. l. 9. c. 2. Zepperus in Explic. legum forens. Mos. c. 10.
and many English Divines.

2. Some hold them Judicial, as Bell. lib de Cler. c. 25.

3. Some Ceremonial, as these parishioners do. There is the least reason for
this last opinion. For Tithes were taken as a tribute by God himself as the
chief Lord of all the earth, Levit. 27. 30. whereby he is acknowledged giver
of all; and that it is in his power to curse the earth with barrenness, and to
starve the creatures that live upon it; and this is true of all ages, and
therefore we read of payment of Tithes by Abraham, Genesis 14. 2. Heb. 7. 4. and
vowing of Tithes by Jacob, before the Leviticall Priesthood was established,
Genesis 28. 22.

Object.
But sacrifices, say they, are ancienter then Tithes, and were long before the
Ceremonial Law was ordained, yet they are not to be continued in the time of
the Gospel.

Answ.
True, because they were types of future things to be exhibited in the New
Testament, but Tithes have no typical intimation in their institution or use,
being set apart by God for himself, and given by him as the wages to his
servants for doing his work; which he assigned to the Levites for their time,
and made them suitable to their state by peculiar ordinances, as Number. 18. 26,
27. etc. Levit. 25. 3. 4. 5. which expired with the Priesthood, though Tithes
in general did not; and therefore such particulars are no more to be urged
against that maintenance of Ministers in the New Testament, then the Jewish
observations of the Sabbath against the keeping of a Christian Sabbath at this
day.

3. For that they say* of inequality in respect of impropriations, p. 6. in
respect of tradesmen in Towns and Cities, who gain more then farmers and pay
no Tithes, p. 9. and in respect of the loss which may befall the farmer, when
he has not increase to answer his cost and labor, Ibid.

For the two first, it is worthy consideration of those who are in authority
how to reduce them to more equality. For the third; the exception lies no more
against Tithes now, then in the time when they acknowledge them most in force;
and when it proves an ill year with the plowman, it will be well for him to
consider whether his unconscionablenesse in Tithes have not procured a curse
upon his portion, according to the commination in the third of Malac. 8, 9.

And lastly, for the trouble of the Minister; 1 If he have but a little Tithe,
it will be no great trouble for him to order it, especially since he may
lawfully exchange it into money. 2. If he have a great Tithe, it will bear the
charge of a servant to ease him of the trouble. And 3. If this inconvenience
could not be avoided, (as well it may) there would follow far greater upon
the taking away Tithes, such as before we have observed.

With these exceptions against this revenue of Tithes they have delivered
something worthy the acceptance of Ministers, which is p. 5. 6. It is the
desire, say they, of al Gods people (and so it ought to be) that the Ministers
of the Gospel should have a sufficient maintenance allowed them, nay not only
a sufficient maintenance, but an abundant, a large and rich maintenance, such a
maintenance as they may live liberally without any other employment but the
Ministry; Nor is it fit or becoming Christians that their Minister should
live in a mean condition either of diet or clothing, but as he is more
excellent in calling, so ought he to have a more large and better maintenance
in those respects then others, for he feeding the souls with spiritual
things, the word of God, the people ought to feed his body liberally with their
base temporal things: and in the next page say they; And is it not a shame for
a rich and flourishing commonwealth to have a poor and bare Ministry, either
in the general, or in some particulars? and yet into such a condition have
Impropriations brought the Ministry of this commonwealth in very many places.

They conclude with an address to the high court of Parliament for a
reformation in this particular of Tithes, p. 10. and herein we are content to
meet them at the bar of that most wise, pious, and impartial Judicatory of
the Kingdom, who, as they have, so we doubt not but they will ratify the
ancient Statutes, and their own late Ordinance concerning Tithes; and
whatsoever their title be in respect of religion, the people may (though
ignorant zelots hold, and covetous worldlings pretend they may not) pay them
with good conscience, for the State may impose them for the maintenance of the
Ministry, as well as they may impose the 20 ^ part, or any other part they
please, to maintain a just war, or to pay the debts of the Kingdom; and
others may conscientiously submit to such impositions; and hereto the most
learned Divines of the reformed Churches do agree, (though the most of them,
as they are mistaken in the true doctrine of the Sabbath, so are they also in
this question of Tithes) for albeit they maintain their Ministers while they
live, and provide for their widows and fatherless children, when they are
dead, Cujus legis (scil politicae) vi nec ipsi fideles reformati denegant
solvere decimas, in regnis illis, in quibus subjiciuntur. Principibus qui illas
lege solvendas sanciunt; qua ratione etiam a theologis responsum fuit nonnullis
qui s^^upulo conscientiae se teneri praetendebant, ne pontificiis
ecclesiasticis solverent decimas, qui Idololatriae sunt ministri. D. Riv^t.
Exercit. in Genes. Exercit. 80. p. 389. col. ^.
yet they resolve it lawful to pay the 10th to the popish priests, though they
officiate in an Idolatrous service, upon the command of the Prince, of State
under which they live.

This may suffice for this little Treatise, which, though little, if it had not
been less in weight then in length, I would not have been so observant of the
importunity of the Printers calling for my paper, as to dispatch mine
animadversions upon it in the short interim of one night, betwixt rising from
supper and reposing for sleep, which yet had been too much if most readers
were not too readily prepared to entertain any Text that makes for their
commodity, whether by acquiring advantage, or sparing expenses.

Now for your secondary doubt concerning the disposal of your son, give me
leave, Sir, to give you my sense fully and freely in the case.

1. I see by you and him (which I am sorry to observe, yet I fear it is like
to prove too true in all ages) that if there be not sufficient and certain
means allotted to the laborers in the Lords harvest, he is like to have but a
few workmen to undertake it, and go through with it; therefore those that
Julianlike, take away the hire of spiritual laborers, make way, as much as in
them lies, for the marring of the harvest; for either there will be a want of
workmen, or of such sufficiency in them as may make the work to prosper in
their hands: hence is the miserable condition of the Greek Church, living (if
not languishing) under the dominion of the Turks, where their Clergy as they
are the meanest sort of men, (like Ieroboams Priests, who though they were to
serve in the house of high places, were the lowest of the people, 1 Kings 12.
31.) so are they as despicable for their ignorance and mean qualifications
every way as for their poverty, G. Sandys his Travailes l. 1. p. 77.
having no schools of learning among them, and therefore more like either to
poison or famish the souls committed to their charge, then to feed and nourish
them with a competent measure of the sincere milk of the Word, that they may
grow thereby.

2. But I fear no such failing of maintenance for Ministers among us, as may
occasion such a discouragement to parents that they should not be willing to
dispose of their children in that Vincent. Charter. de Imag. Deor.
calling, for fear they should serve Christ upon such poor terms as the
Priests of Isis did that heathen goddess, who were not allowed a new suite
until the old was worn to rags.

3. Yet if that were true which you read in the weekly pamphlets, or which
you had by report, of the likelihood of putting down Tithes by the Parliament,
I must tell you plainly as your friend, I like not your wavering touching the
disposal of your son; for if he be furnished with personal abilities for
the service of the Sanctuary, if he be (as I hope he is) a man of holy life and
conversation, if he find himself inwardly moved by the holy Ghost to enter
into that holy function, it will be a greater sacrilege in you then robbing of
the Church of so much Tithe as would maintain him, to divert him from the
service of Christ, and salvation of souls, through distrust of the divine
providence for his support. And therefore,

4. If I conceived you to be so carnal a father (but I dare not think you are
such a one) I should turn my speech from you to your son, had I opportunity
to speak with him, and exhort Licet in limine pater ja^eat, per calcatum perge
patrem siccis oculis ad vexillum crucis evola. Hieron. ad Heliodor. Tom. 1. p.
2. Genus pietatis est in hac re crudelem esse. Ibid.
him not only to serve Christ, but to suffer for him, in the words of Hierom
to Heliodorus, rather to tread upon you, if you should lie as a block in his
way, then to make a stop, or to retire from following after Christ, though in
zeal and haste he should overtake the Cross; for in such a case it is a kind
of piety (says he) to show cruelty toward our chiefest friends.

Thus, as my little leisure would allow me, I have endeavored to satisfy your
desire in resolving your doubt, and I hope that I have written will reach a
little further then you thought of, even to the settling of your resolution to
dedicate your son to the service of our Savior; and to serve him upon such
terms whatsoever they be, as the Divine providence in the condition of the
times shall put upon him, and so you have my advice, and you shall have my
prayers for you and yours.

FINIS.
AN APOLOGY OF THE TREATISE De non temerandis Ecclesiis. AGAINST A TREATISE BY
an unknown Author, written against it in some particulars. By Sir Henry
Spelman, Knight. ALSO HIS EPISTLE TO Richard Carew Esquire, of Anthony in
Cornwall concerning Tithes.

LONDON, Printed by J. L. for Philemon Stephens, and are to be sold at his shop
in Paul's Churchyard, at the sign of the gilded Lion. 1646.

TO THE READER.
THe first Treatise, de non temerandis ecclesijs, being published above thirty
years ago, there wanted not the approbation of the best and most religious men
in behalf thereof: neither also wanted there one of a contrary humor, to
oppose something: which though it be in such weak manner, as deserved not any
just answer from so eminent a person, yet it pleased the learned knight, out of
his care to instruct him and others, to show the weakness of his reasons: and
that not only in this apology, but also in a more serious work, his learned
Glossary, so much commended, and desired to be finished, by great Princes and
chief men, both at home and in foreign parts. The passage shall be here
inserted for a more full testimony of the Authors judgment, and of the
weakness of the adversaries reasons.

Excerptum e Glossario Domini Spelmanni page 238. in voce Ecclesia.
ECclesia] pro templo, seu domo, qua fideles convenient, ritus divinos
celebraturi. Lippis and tonsoribus (...); adducor tamen ut asseram, quod
sciolus quidam libellum nostrum De non temerandis Ecclesijs, pro Mart suo
impetens, graviter mihi imponit, (...) ecclesijs dixisse hac significatione*
nec patitur vir bonus ut easdem, aedes appellarem sacras: ludibrio enim habet
ejusmodi epitheton, locis vel aedibus attributum. Carpsisset aequius, si
ignotis ei vocabulis, Basilicis, Dominicis, Titulis, Curiacis, Martyrijs vel
similibus usus fuissem. Sed doctrinam hominis and farinam videris.

Occurrit (...) apud Graecos veteres, ut Curia, and Senatus apud Romanos, non
solum pro caetu and congregatione, sed etiam pro loco in quem convenitur, ut
ipsa lexica testantur. Lucianus, (...), i. e. ubi ecclesiam (scil. Curiam in
qua consultant) undique stravero. perhibetur and Apostolus, secundum plures
interpretes, antiquos, medios, recentiores, hoc sensu dixisse. (...), Ecclesiam
1 Cor. 11. 22.
Dei contemnitis. Liquide Synodus Laodicena, (...). i. e. in sanctissima
ecclesia sanctissimae martyris ^uphemiae. Tertull. lib. de fuga in persecut.
sec. 3. Convenient in ecclesiam: confugiunt in ecclesiam. Augustine. epist. 109.
Quando ergo simul estis in ecclesia, and ubicunque viri sunt, invicem and
pudicitiam custodite. Hieronymus in Esaiam cap. 60. Videmus Caesares, --
aedificare ecclesias expensis publicis. and epist. 8. Alij aedificent
ecclesias, vestient parietes marmorum crustis, columnarum moles advehant,
earumque deaurent capita, etc. fastidit in re tam nota olei tantum perdere;
clarum est Ecclesiam idem esse christianis, quod Synagogam Judaeis; and
Augustinum habes in eandem sententiam in Psalm. 82. unde and priscus quidam.

Nobis ecclesia datur, Hebraeis Synagoga.

Plura si cupias, numerosa habeas exempla in Burchardi De^retorum. lib. 3. qui
de ecclesijs, inscribitur.

Besides also not to conceal the doubts and apprehensions of wiser and more
learned men upon the argument, there was also a gentleman of eminent quality
and learning, Mr. Richard Carew of Anthony in Cornwall who was not satisfied in
all points, with this treatise of Sir Henry, whereupon he wrote his doubts in
some particulars unto him; submitting much to his judgment. Unto whom for
satisfaction, Sir Henry wrote a very pious epistle which shall here follow
after the apology for satisfaction to the better sort, who sometime stumble out
of private interest, or passion, as well as inferior men. Hoping that such
will be easily corrected in their opinion as Mr. Carew was, being a Gentleman
ennobled no less in regard of his parentage and descent, then for his virtue
and learning, as Cambden testifies of him in his Britannia. In Cornwall.


THE APOLOGY.
This Apology clears some passages, as, 1. Touching the word Ecclesia, which
signifies either a material Church, or the Congregation of the people
assembled. 2. An explication of the text of Esa. 56. 7. My house shall be
called the house of prayer. 3. The place of the Apos^le, 1 Cor. 11. 12. Despise
ye the Church of God? 4. The exp^sition of the 83. Psalm. against such as
destroy Churches, and the maintenance of them, and the Ministers. 5. The number
o^ Churches spoil^ amon^ us.


COming to my worthy friend Sir Ralph Hare, and lying a while idle there, I
thought that idle time fittest for some idle work, and disposed my self
therefore to give some answer to such passages of this Treatise, as the Author
at his pleasure has very idly if not maliciously taxed me in. But being far
from my books, and having not so much as that Treatise of his by me, or any
note out of it, I shall no doubt forget, mistake, omit, and misplace many
things. Wherein (good Reader) I must entreat thy patience and favor.

It being brought unto me, I ran over diverse leaves thereof, wherein I met
multa verba, nulla verbera; but judging therefore the Author by his work, I
thought neither of them worth the answering: himself, as it seems, some rude
Naball delighting in contentions and uncivil speech: wherein I will not
contend with him, only I will consider of his reasons, though indeed they are
such as will show him to be a weak adversary Qui strepit magis quam sauciat.
And therefore though I sit safe out of his dint, yet will I let the reader see,
how vainly he bestows his shot, and how far from the mark.

As for the parts of my book wherein I labor as he says, to prove tithes to
be due ^ure divino, and his answers thereto, my purpose is not here to meddle
with them, for that they require a more spacious discourse then either that
volume admitted, or I now mean to enter into, it being not a private question,
between him and me, but long controverted by greater clerks) and left to this
day as questionem vexatam non judicatam. The truth is, the course of my
argument lead me upon it, and I therefore produced some arguments tending to
the maintenance thereof, but referring the point unto a greater work, and
forbearing to declare my self therein, without ample and more laborious
examination of so great a controversy: leaving therefore that as a general
cause, whereof he may perhaps have more another time, I will here wage my self
against him only in those things, wherein he charge me particularly in my
own person; and passing over amongst them such snatches of his, as scarcely
ruffle the hair, I will only meddle with those parts, where he thinks he
biteth deepest.

First, he quarrelleth with me about the title of my book, in that I use the
word Ecclesia for a material Church, or (as in contempt he terms it) a
Steeplehouse.
stone-house: affirming in his learning, that it signifies only the
congregation: which assertion if he could make good, would give him a great
hand in the cause, for that much of his argument following lies very heavily
upon this pin. Surely if I guess right some Dictionary has deceived him, for
perhaps his reading reaches not so far, as to resolve him herein: but if two
thousand authorities be sufficient to defend me withal, I speak it without
hyperbole, I assure my self I could produce them. Who knows not how ordinary
a thing it is, to have one word signify both the persons, and the place: as
Civitas, the citizens, or town; Collegium* the society or house; Senatus, the
Senators, or Senate house; Synagoga, the assembly, or place of assembly. I am
sure he will confess, that where it is said, He loves our nation and has
built us a synagogue: It is not there meant of the persons, he built them a
congregation, but of the place. A Synagogue, and Ecclesia, signify both one
and the same thing, the congregation, or place of congregation; in which sense
we Christians notwithstanding use only the word Ecclesia, for our
congregations, and houses of prayer, for that the Jews had taken up the other
word, for their ^ ratories, according to an old verse:

Nobis Ecclesia datur, Hebraeis Synagoga. And in this manner was the word (...)
used amongst the Greeks before the Christians borrowed it from them, as it
appears by some of your Lexicons, where it is said, (...), Caetus, concilium,
congregatio, etc. ponitur etiam pro loco ipso in quem convenitur. Lucianus,
(...). i. e. Ubi curiam (in qua consultant) undique stravero. And that the
Church has ever since used it in the same sort shall by and by appear, when
we come to insist more particularly upon this point. Feign would I know what
himself would call one of our stone-Churches, in Latin. Templum, savours of
Judaisme; and if I should have used a word of the ancient Fathers, and said, De
non temerandis Basilicis, Curiacis, or Dominicis, it may be I should have
driven him to his Dictionary, and yet left him pusled. I thought fanum too
profane a word, but he perhaps would think it so much the fitter; for a
Church, and a playhouse seem a like to him.

Another of his quarrels is that I apply the place of Isaiah the Prophet, cap.
56. 7. My house shall be called an house of prayer, locally to places of
prayer, whereas he says, it was spoken figuratively of the congregation of the
faithful. I exclude not that sense, but I assure my self our Savior Christ,
when he whipped the sellers out of the Temple, not out of the congregation,
applied this Scripture to the very place of prayer: and it is questionless
that the old and late classicke writers so expound it.

Some quotations here were intended out of ancient and modern Authors, which
though I could easily supply, yet being loath to add any thing to the original
copy, I leave it to the learned reader to consult the Commentators, which is
easily done.

Again it much offends him, that I interpret the words of Saint Paul 1 Cor.
11. 12. Despise ye the Church of God? as spoken of the material place, which
after his manner he will also have to be only understood of the Congregation;
and had the word ecclesia no other signification, then doubtless he had
obtained the cause. But observe I pray, what I have formerly said touching that
point, and then take into your consideration, the words of the Apostle as they
lie in that chapter. First in the 18. verse he says, (...). Quando convenisti
in ecclesia. For these be the very words, and how we shall English them is the
question. Whether when ye come together in the Congregation, that is, in the
assembly; or when ye come together in the Church, that is, in the place of the
assembly. I confess the words indefinitely spoken may bear either
interpretation, and I condemn neither of them in this place. Yet let us see
which is more probable, or at least whether my trespass deserves his
reprehension. The Apostle continuing his speech upon the same subject, in the
20. verse. goes on thus: (...): as if he should say, convenientibus igitur
vobis in eodem; leaving (...), in eodem, spoken neutrally, and as it were, to
be applied either to the assembly, or the place; which to put it out of doubt,
Beza, and our English Geneva translation do add the word, locus, a place, in
a different letter, to declare the meaning of the Apostle and read it
accordingly: When you come together therefore into one place. So that now it is
determined how the word Ecclesia, or Church, in the 18. verse. before going is
to be expounded: and then join the words subsequent unto it, wherein the
Apostle complains of the abusing that thing, which before he spoke of, and in
reprehension of the abuse committed therein by eating and drinking; he says
verse. 22. Have ye not houses to eat, and to drink in? or, despise ye the
Church of God? Where the very antithesis of houses, to eat and drink in, with
the Church of God do still pursue the precedent interpretation of Ecclesia for
the place of assembly: as if distinguishing between places and not persons, he
should have said, Your houses are the places to eat and drink in, but the
Church is the place of prayer: otherwise he might perhaps have said, Have ye
not other meetings to eat and drink at, but despise ye this holy meeting? And
I think it not without special providence, that the Translators therefore did
translate here, (...)? an ecclesiam Dei contemniti? Despise ye the Church of
God? not despise ye the Congregation of God? for the word Church, coming of
the German word Kirken, and that of the Greek word (...), which signifies
Dominicum, or the Lords House, and was in ancient times, as Eusebiu^ and
Nicephorus witness, the common name of material Churches, does to this day
properly signify the same: and we do never use it for a particular
congregation, but either generally for the body or society of the faithful
through a whole kingdom, or common wealth; or particularly for the very place
of prayer only.

This foundation being now laid upon the words of the Apostle himself, let us
see how it has been since understood by the Fathers, and Doctors of the
Church, as well ancient as modern. Hieroms opinion appears already in my
book, and Chrysostomes you shall hear anon. But this man despises the first,
and therefore I am sure he will account as lightly of the second. A Senate of
Fathers moves him not an hair: a right monothelite, he opposes his own only
will against them all. Yet to satisfy some others, whose ears perhaps may be
better in tune, I will cite one who for humbleness of spirit, integrity of
life, and admirable learning for the time he lived in, has ever since been
venerable throughout the world; and no forreigner but our Countreyman Bid, who
upon these words Numquid domos non habetis? -- an Ecclesiam Dei contemnitis?

Ecclesia (says he) homines sunt de quibus dicitur ut exhiberet sibi gloriosam
ecclesiam, hoc tamen vocari etiam ipsam domum orationum, idem Apostolus testis
est, vbi ait, numquid domos non habetis ad manducandum and bibendum? an
ecclesiam Dei contemnitis? and hoc quotidianus usus loquendi obtinuit, ut in
ecclesiam prodire, ad ecclesiam confugere, non dicatur nisi qui ad locum ipsum,
parietesque prodierit, vel confugerit, quibus ecclesiae congregatio continetur.
But he will say that all this old wine savours of the caske, therefore we will
spend no more time in broaching of it. Taste of the new. Peter Martyr upon the
place. Quando convenitis] potest (says he) hoc referri ad locum qui unus omnes
continebat, ita ut notetur corporalis conjunctio, etc. and then, An ecclesiam
Dei contemnitis? potest accipi Ecclesia (says he) pro caetu sacro, vel pro
loco quo fideles convenient, etc. Si vero de loco intellexeris (ut Chrysostomus
videtur sentire) docemur contaminari locum ex abusu. Vnde Augustinus dicebat,
In Oratorio nemo aliquid agat nisi ad quod factum est, vnde and nomen recepit;
ad alia munera obeunda plateas and domus habemus. And complaining of abusing of
Churches he goes on: At nunc templa deambulationibus, fabulis and omnibus
negotiis prophanis toto die patent C. hristus flagello parato ex funiculis,
ejectis ementibus, and vendentibus, templum Dei repurgavit: and goes still on
in this manner much further. Marlorat also a common and good friend to our
Preachers being well pleased with this exposition and invective of Peter
Martyr, translateth it verbatim into his own Commentary upon this place; and
thereby delivers it also to the world as his own opinion.

But come we now to that part of my book which puts him most out of patience
above all the rest, my application of the 83. Psalm to such as destroy
Churches, and bereave them of their maintenance. This he says, fitteth my
matter as an Elephants skin does a gnat, yea it has no cohaerency therewith
either figuratively, allegorical, or anagogicall. To retort his scoff I might
say, it seems, an Elephant of absurdity to the Gnat of his learning: but I
desire rather to satisfy him ( Si malitia non mutaverit intellectum) then to
disgrace him.

It cannot be denied if there be a correspondency between the body of our
Church and Common wealth, with the body of the Church and Common wealth of the
Jews, the same must also hold proportionably amongst the members thereof, and
in consequence that the passages of state, of government, of peace, war,
liberty, oppression, prosperity, adversity, and other occurrents either active
or passive, must hold some aspect and analogy, one unto the other. And then
also that whatsoever is denounced against the enemies of the one, trencheth
comparatively against the enemies of the other. Come then unto the matter. The
prophet inveigheth against them that seek to spoil, oppress, or disturb the
Church of God seated in India; be it openly by war, or secretly by some
stratagem of wit: Does not this thwart them also that attempt the like in our
Church? Yes, says he, against them of the King of Spaines Armado in 88. and
those of the Powder Treason, wherein the universal desolation both of the King
and Kingdom, Church and Commonwealth were not only projected, but attempted
by our enemies.

But show me, will he say, what has the appropriating of a pelting Parsonage,
or the pulling down of a stone-house, which you call a Church, is unto this?
for the one is an Elephant, the other but a Gnatt.

I answer. Eadem est ratio partium quae est totius. And out of this reason and
analogy our Savior Christ argues him that casts but a lascivious look to
be guilty of the great Commandment, non maechaberis, as well as him that
committed the very heinous act it self: and then also that whatsoever the
Prophet denounces against them that spoil the Church in general, the same
descends upon every particular man, that spoileth the same in any particular
part: as, Omne genus praedicatur de omnibus and singulis suis speciebus etiam
infimis and individuis.

Now that the taking up of these parsonages and defacing of places of public
prayer is a spoil of the Church of God, appears in this, that the means and
maintenance of the service of God, and of his ministers is thereby diminished,
and destroyed, which subtraction of maintenance from the minister, God in
Malachi 3. 8. declares to be a spoiling of himself, for that his service is
thereby hindered, and his Church impaired. And although this man affirms, that
although there were never a stone-Church or minister in the kingdom, yet the
Church, and service of God might stand well enough, for that every man's family
is a Church, and every master thereoftyed to instruct his servants, every
father his children: yet by example of the Church in the time of the Apostles,
we ought to have places of public prayer, and some to instruct these masters
and fathers; for the husbandman, the artisan, the day-labourer, are not
commanded to neglect their vocation and turn preachers, as too many now adays
do. And though perhaps some such good men out of their devotion would preach
now and then to instruct their brethren, yet who shall do it ordinarily, and
where shall the Assembly be entertained; for every town has not a Guild Hall,
a Sessionshouse, a Cockpit, or a Playhouse fit for such a multitude. And
though they may, as he says, serve God abroad with Paul; in a dungeon with
Jeremy, or on a muckhill with Job, yet heat or cold, wet or wind will hinder
them at one time or other: so that doubtless it were very necessary to have a
man, and a place publicly appointed for the service of God in every
Congregation. And then since this man cannot perform his office without
maintenance, and such a place as we speak of, the taking of them away puts him
from doing his duty, deprives his parishioners of their instruction, and then
by consequence spoils the Church of God; and so the curse of the Psalm lies
justly against them.

But let us now take a view of the gnat he speaks of, and which he contemns
so much in respect of the smalnesse thereof. Had there been but three or four
of these livings taken from the Church, his fancy might have had the more
color, to use such fond applications: but if it comes to three or four
hundred, it grows now beyond the size of a Gnat, what shall we then say of
3845. livings, or appropriate Parsonages,
thus taken from the Church, which is more by 1126. then the half of all those
that remain, and within 897. as many as them all: for the Churches not
appropriate are but 5439. through all England and Wales. So that the parishes
of the Churches appropriate contain near about the one half of the kingdom,
which is more, if Hierome in his Epistle to Dardanus (as I take it) deceive
Dordanus.
me not, then twice so much as all the land of Judea, though we reckon the
kingdom of Israel into it, but many times more then the kingdom of Judea,
which contained but the two tribes only that stuck to God; and of whose times
this Psalm seems to be a prophecy. And thus ye see both the gnat and the
Elephant that he speaks of, though I mean not to propose them to you by way
of comparison, but discover his intemperance or want of judgment.

But to support his credit with a broken prop, it may be he will say, that upon
the appropriating these Churches and transferring of them to the King, there
was a provision left in most of the parishes for a Vicar, or Curate to do
divine service there, and that nothing was taken from them but superfluity: so
to keep them in diet, and bridle their immoderate luxury, which he
proclaims to be so exorbitant as scarcely all England, and Virginia to boot,
can satisfy. Lord bless us! is it possible that our Churchmen should become
so monstrous? or has Shimei thus railed against the body of them without his
peril? I hope much better of their temperance, then of his tongue: But I leave
them to make their own Apology, for I have digressed beyond my purpose, and
therefore will spend no time in discoursing upon the provision made for Vicars
and Curates in these Churches appropriate. He seems to be of Micahs mind,
that ten shekels, or a matter of four nobles a year, besides diet and a suite
of apparel is a fair maintenance for one of our Ministers. In which point I
have elsewhere declared my self at large, and will not therefore here insist
upon it; only this I would know of him, what surplusage, or superfluity there
could be to give unto the King, or take from the Church, when besides the
maintenance of the Ministers, much was to be disposed by them in relieving the
poor, and other pious uses.

Henricus Spelmannus Richardo suo Careo viro praestanti Sal. P. D.
MAnsuctudinis tuae prorsus est (vir Eximie) ut hominem me pa^ui, and ignotum,
tanta benevolentia amplecterere. Quanquam enim secundum honorum vocabula quae
fastus mundanus jam obtinuit, Equestris dignitas major sit Armigera; in multis
tame^ Spelmannlis minor est Careo. Nec me certe pudet hoc liberius profiteri,
Cum magnus ipse sic edocuit Augustinus; and Episcopus licet* presbytero cessit
Hieronymo. Placent equidem and literae tuae, and tua omnia; placent seria,
placent joci, in nomine vero meo quae egregia benignitate lusisti non possum in
tuo (multo illustriori) retribuere. Palmam igitur cedo, and quod Graecis olim,
in Caria sua gente admirati sunt, nos in Carea nostra gente agnoscimus:
ingenium splendidum, bellarumque intentionum faecundissimum. Deus bone! quantum
in nomine, and ominis and numinis? Cariae gentes (inquit Herodotus in clione)
omnium quae illis temporibus claruerunt ingeniosissimae erant. An fatale hoc
Careo nomini? etiam in alio orb, and post tot saeeula? quin and seni? non
equidem invideo, miror magis: sed quem laudas authorem? an non Deus hanc tibi
prae caeteris copiam fecit? nec sola haec sed concomitantia inulta elargitus
est. Quid ergo respondit Simon, (Luc. 7. 43.) interroganti domino, Quis plus
diliget, nonne is, inquit, cui plus do^avit? recte. Nosti quae volo. Si divina
clementia tantas tibi indulserit benignitates? perpende sedulo, quantis tu
amoris, muneris and obsequii vinculis tenearis. Bona haec omnia in te congessit
bonus hic dominus, animi, corporis, fortunae: tunc in ipsius familiam hostis
accingeris? quin and ab ecclesia sua praedam referes?

O utinam fortis in re meliore fuisses.

Sed in host probitatem agnosco; video enim vacillantem te quasi, and de
militia ista dubie cogitantem. laudo. At sanum illud consilium amplectere, quod
omnium judicio probatissimum habetur, e dubiis certius tene, nec periculis
caput objicias: hoc est, omnino te non immisceas rebus sacris and deo dicatis,
hoc porro tutissimum. Vides rem non leviter litigatam a doctissimis: Vides
patres, Concilia, omnemque Theologorum scholam, graviter hos insectari, qui in
res ecclesiae utcunque involaverunt. Esto quod de decimis dissentiant, an sint
de jure divino? in isto tamen non consentire solum, sed and conjurasse plane
omnes videatur, Deo dicata surripi non posse in exitium ecclesiae. Quid autem
est ecclesiam excindere si hoc non sit? panem tollere ministrorum, quin and
sine noxa? At Ecclesiam (aies) in hoc connivisse; Episcopos conspirasse;
parliamentaria ipsa comitia Herculano nodo rem conclusisse, and sanxisse?
Sanxisse dicam? imo Deum testor quaenam sit sanctitas in ista sanctione. Sed de
re summa, summa cum humilitate. Nosti quam lenis sit ecclesia, tunicam
subtracturo, pallium etiam dimisit. Mat. 5. Number auferre igitur haec liceat
innocenti? dicant Corvi.

In eo autem cum salutis spem omnem sacramque ipsam posuisti anchoram; id
tandem revolvas animo, quinam hi essent Episcopi, and quoti? Valerentne suis
suffragiis procerum laicorum multitudini (qui spe haec omnia devoraverant)
repugnasse? Taceo technas, dolum, insidias, quae in tranfigendo negotio forte
non defuerant. Sed esto ecclesiam laeta front haec omnia concessisse; Certe
eatenus cum Baronio (Ascanio Cardinali respondente) in sententiam ivero,
Ecclesiam nihil posse in se statuere, hoc est, in suam perniciem. Idem enim est
and se abnuere, and ministros suos non alere. Nam in primis catalysis illius
legibus, nihil statutum est de ministrorum alimonio: mel abripitur, sed nec
loculi relinquuntur, nec alveus. Etiam ejiciuntur tam apes, quam faci, nulla
omnino habita examinis ratione. Hoc justum dixeris? Concilio certe tum lapsum
est, quod in caeteras itemque regni ecclesias non grassatum sit. Quid enim
emeruit ecclesia Petri, ut suis juribus potius privaretur quam Pauli? Quid
ecclesia unius populi magis quam aletrius? a neutris enim peccatum est. Ecce
aenigmatis solutionem. Viatorem duplicem furibus eripuimus; liberum hunc adhuc,
sed illum vinctum: de utroque statuimus (misericordes) ut invenimus.
Emancipatur liber, perpetuo carceri addictus est vinctus. Siccine nos edocuit
(Luc. 10.) Samaritanus? Sic fidem nostram apud Deum tuemur?

Jurarunt sane hi omnes, jurarunt, inquam, nostri majores, Reges, proceres,
parliamentariae ipsae celebritates, hoc est, Regnum integrum, omnisque populus,
non suo solum sed and nostro, and nepotum nostrorum nomine, interpositis etiam
horrendis execrationibus nulla se unquam temporum aeternitate, haec ecclesiae
surrepturos. Quis obsecro nos liberos faciet ab his vinculis? Quis audax orator
causam hanc apud Deum aget? An flocci pendeas? Cave ne fidem, quam apud me
splendidam habes illico labefactes. Si beati Rechabitae, qui nuda ipsa patris
sui mandata observaverunt, An non maledicti nos, qui non singularis unius, non
privati cujusdam parentis mandata contemnimus? Sed quos dixi horum omnium
fides, sanctiones, vota, juramenta, pertinaci quasi improbitate perfringimus,
violamus, mandataque nepotibus anathemata, in fingulorum capita tanquam ex
desiderio pertrahimus, cum refractariis Judaeis dicentes, Super nos sint, and
natos nostros.

Vereor insanos nos (uti Judaeos) non discernere quae ex his nobis proveniunt
calamitates. Deum enim putemus nec mortalium curare vota, sed nec perfidiam:
Quid si lex una repentina, ter dena concilia, Senatus-consulta totidem, omnium
patrum decreta, una explosione disruperit? adeone in ea sic inhaerendum est ut
ne in judicium, ne in examen vocetur? non cogitabo equidem quod in Tridentinum
Concilium solus ausus est and satis faeliciter Chemnitius. Sed iniquas leges
peccanti saepe populo irrepere novum non est; etiam in poenam alias a Domino
immissas esse, ut scriptum est, Dabo ijs leges quae non sunt bonae. Mihi autem
videtur, cum de abolendis monasteriis cogitaret Senatus ille consultus ( Anno
27. Henrici octavi) nihil etiam tunc in animo habuisse de tollendis
parochialium decimis praedijsve: sed de his tantum egisse quae ipsis caenobiis
inherebant: vel si quis id in cornu haberet faeni, latuisse hoc opinor sanctos
patres qui concilio aderant: in illo enim Actu ne verbum quidem de parochianis
decimis nec de ecclesiis, praediisve parochialibus. Sed nec de ipsis (quas
vocant) appropriatis. Cum vero in vulgus jam exiisset Actus ille
parliamentarius, caeperintque omnia demoliri, and vi eripi, e jurisconsultorum
prodiit interpretatione, ut praeda haec etiam in casses regios redigeretur.
Partita ergo ea demum inter regni nobiles, necessario tandem habitum est, ut
subalternis legibus corroboraretur.

Sed quo me rapiet fili hujus deductio? disrumpendum certe est, ne ulterius
trahar in labyrinthum. Putarem incaepturus silentii veniam (verbo uno aut
altero) a te exporasse; quod in rus vocatum, itineris me cura jam sollicitat;
Quandoquidem vero neque brevis est (dum redeam) via, sed nec tempus; haec
interea nobis excussit amor erga te noster fusius multo quam cogitarem.
Academici autem nitoris nihil in nostris paginis disquiras, oportet. Commune
enim illud (quod scribis) mihi tecum est. Cantabrigia (miserum me) matter exuit
cum 17. aestates non salutaveram, trajectoque celerrime Lincolniensi hospitio,
in patrium solum adolescens revocor. Gravibus hinc inde implicitus negotiis
privatis, (nec a publicis liber) ter rapior in Hiberniam. Quod reliquum fuit
vitae spatium, domi satis aerumnose exegi, denuo otii desiderio captus Londinum
tertio hinc anno veni: pace vero mihi videbar exoptatissima fruiturus, qua
Musarum limina ex voto delibarem. Sed En! nova in me rerum tempestas, nova
litium moles, inopinate proruit; qua luctantem adhuc varieque agitatum, nescio
quousque detinuerit. Poetae autem illud teneo, -- dabit Deus his quoque finem.
Habes vitae nostrae compendium; and (quam vides) magnam amoris effusionem donec
aliis tuis (per literas) quaesitis respondero. Sancte and faeliciter vale.

Londini, 18. September. 1615.
A Treatise concerning Impropriations of benefices, Cum privilegio regali.
THE PREFACE.
To the King our most gracious Sovereigne Lord, Francis Bigod Knight, his
humble and true faithful subject, and daily Orator, wishes daily
augmentation and increase of grace and honor.

I Did not perfytly know (most gracious, most christen, and most vyctorious
Prince) how that among all other virtues, that the virtuous gifts given by
grace only, through the goodness of Almighty God, of the incomparable gift of
gentleness and humanite, did so habundantly, accumulately, and so manifestly
possess and reign in your noble and princely heart, till that now it appears
manifestly by your exterior noble acts and deeds; for else undoubtedly I would
not only have bin ashamed so to attempt rudely, foolishly, and rather
presumptuously to trouble and disquiet such an imperyall majesty, with this my
rude and barbarous writing, in the hinderance of your godly and spiritual
studies, with which your highness takes such intolerable pain: as well to set
forth the mere sincere and new glory of God, as also the establishment,
quietness, and unity of this your christen Comen welthe. But also in my own
conceit and opinion calling to remembrance my great and manifold insufficiency
in learning, to write unto so mighty and famous a Prince I should even by and
by have disallowed mine own behavior in that behalf, and judged my self
worthy of blame. but now considering most benign Sovereign Lord, how much all
your subjects be imperpetually bound to laud, praise, and glorify almighty
god, to send unto us so Christen a king to have rule and governance over us
your subjects, by whose great and inestimable diligent labor, charge, study
and pain, we be delivered from the hard, sharp, and X. M. times more than
judicyall captivity of that Babylonicall man of Rome to the sweet and soft
service, yea rather liberty of the gospel. I can for my part no less do, then
to present to your grace something thereby to declare how gladly I would give
thanks to your highness, for such proofs, as I among others have received by
this said benefit in our deliverance which act is of it self so highly to the
great peace, unyte and wealth of this most noble Empire of England, that if
there were non other cause but that only we were bound to and with all our
diligence and industry to study, labor and devise how this benefit exceeding
all other, might world without end be extolled, praised, and made immortal,
and to receyte how much the furtherance of gods glory is by the same act set
forth and advanced, my learning ne yet wit will not serve me. Yet I dare
boldly afferme, pondering and considering depely the effect and circumstance of
this matter, This act is no less worth then well worthy to be set in the
book of Kings of the old testament, as a thing sounding to gods honor, as
much as any other history therein contained. but what should I attempt or go
about to express the condign and everlasting praises and thanks, which your
majesty has deserved of all your hole Cominalt for the benefits before named,
unless I would take in hand like an evil workman which by reason of his
unperfectnes in his science should utterly stain and deface the thing he would
most earnestly and diligently show and set forth. I will therefore most
excellent Emperor of this realm, set all this aside, and show to your grace
the cause of my enterprise, for so much as I perceave that all your gracious
proceedings are only driven and conveyed to the most high, just, and sincere
honor of Almighty God* the public wealth, and unity of all Christendom, most
especially of this your most noble Realm of England, it has animated and
encouraged me according to the small talent of learning that the Lord has lent
to me to put your grace in remembrance of the intolerable pestilence of
Impropriations of benefices to religious persons, (as they will be called) some
to men, and some to women, which in mine opinion is a thing plainly repugnant
to the most holy and blessed decrees and ordinances of Almighty God, and highly
to the extolling, supporting, and maintenance of the usurped power of the
Bishop of Rome, as your Majesty shall perceave in reading of this little
treatise, which your grace not being offended, I shall ever, God willing, be
able justly to defend, and also stop the mouths of them, that shall say and
abide by the contrary, and that not with mine own words, but with authorities
of holy Scripture. And further I do most humbly upon both my knees beseech
your Imperial Majesty, that unto such time, as this my little book be clearly
confuted by like holy Scripture and authorities, as I have approved the same,
that it may safely go abroad under protection of your gracious and redoubted
name.

And for the prosperous preservation of your most royal estate, of your most
noble and virtuous Queen, of your dear daughter Lady Princess, daughter and
heir to you both, (according to my most bound duty) I shall daily pray, my
life enduring.

Sir Francis Bigott Knight of Yorkshire wrote this Note.
Treatise: whereof this Preface I received from Sir Henry Spelman, but the rest
of the book, I could never yet find, though it be mentioned by several
Authors, Bale, Hollinshead, and lately by Sir Richard Baker in his history. It
seems to have bin written after the Kings breach with the Pope, his marriage
with Anne Bolen, and the birth of Queen Elizabeth: as I conjecture by
circumstances. His purpose was chiefly bent against the Monasteries who had
unjustly gotten so many Parsonages into their possessions. It is much desired
that if any man have the rest of the book, that he would please to communicate
the copy, that hereafter, as occasion serves, it may be published completely,
together with some other things of this argument, that the learned Knight has
committed to my charge: but by reason of the present troubles I cannot now
attend to prepare them for the Press. As for Sir Francis Bigott himself, he
was found afterward active in the troubles of Yorkshire, that happened in 28.
H. 8. and being apprehended among others, was put to death, 29. H. 8. as our
common Chronicles do report.

Baleus says of him. Franciscus Bigott ex Eboracensi patria auratus eques,
homo natalium splendore nobilis, ac doctus, and evangelicae veritatis amator,
Scripsit contra clerum. -- De Impropriaribus. lib. 1. Quosdam item latinos
libros anglicanos reddidit, inter seditiosos tandem, anno Domini 1537, invito
tamen eo, repertus, eadem cum illis indigna morte periit.

To the right Reverend Fathers and Brethren, the Bishops and Ministers of
Scotland.
I Have caused this little Treatise (right reverend and beloved in the Lord
Jesus) to be printed again in North-Britaine, for many causes: first, because
I was informed, that there came forth, but a few copies at the first printing
thereof in South-Britaine: Again, I hope this doing will incite that worthy
Knight, the Author thereof, quicklier to send out the greater work, which he
promises of that same argument; but principally to incite you, whom these
matters most nearely do concern, to look into them more advisedly, then as
yet ye have done: it was a private occasion, as that worshipful Gentleman
shows, that led him to this writing: You have a public, whereof it is pity
you are so little moved: who sees not the state of the Church of Scotland as
concerning the patrimony to go daily from worse to worse? Sacrilege and Simony
have so prevailed that it begins to be doubted of many, whether there be any
such sins, forbidden by God, and condemned in his Word? Neither can you deny
the cause of this evil, for the most part to have flowed from your selves:
your selling and making away of the Church rights without any conscience, the
buying and bartering of benifices, with your shameless and slavish courting of
corrupt patrones, has made the world think, that things Ecclesiastical are
of the nature of Temporal things, which may be done away at your pleasures:
and where at the first it was mere worldliness that led men on those courses,
now a great many to outface conscience, and delude all reproves, they stand
not to defend that Lands, Tithes, yea whatsoever belonged to the Church in
former ages, may lawfully be alienated by you, and possessed by seculars: which
opinion must either be taken out of the minds of men, or need you not look to
have these wicked facts in this kind unreformed: to this end should all
Ecclesiastical men labor to inform themselves, as well by the Word as by the
writings of Ancients, and Constitutions of Councels, touching the right and
lawfulness of ecclesiastical things, that when they are persuaded themselves
of the truth, they may the more effectualy teach others. There is no impiety
against which it is more requisite you set your selves in this time: for
besides the abounding of this sin and the judgment of God upon the land for
the same, who does not foresee, in the continuance of this course the assured
ruin and decay of true Religion?

Of all persecutions intended against the Church the Julian was ever held to be
the most dangerous: for occidere presbyteros, is nothing so hurtful, as
occidere presbyterium. When men are taken away, there is yet hope, that others
will be raised up in their places: but if the means of maintenance be taken
away, there follows the decay of the profession it self: Men do not apply
themselves commonly to Callings, for which no rewards are appointed; and say
that some have done it in our days, some out of zeal, and some out of heat of
contention, yet in aftertimes it is not like to continue so; neither let any
man tell me, that a Minister should have other ends proposed to him, then
worldly maintenance. I know that to be truth, yet as our Lord in the Gospel,
hoc etiam oportet facere, Et illud non omittere. Speaking of payment of tithes
to the Pharisees: It behooves them, says he, to be paid: if not, it is not to
be expected, that men will follow the Calling.

To rest upon the benevolence of the people, as it is a beggarly thing, and not
belonging to the dignity of the Ministry, so the first maintainers of that
conceit have found the charity of this kind so cold, that they will not any
more stand by their good-wills, to this allowance. Therefore it lies upon you
to foresee the estate of your Church, and either in this point of maintenance
to provide that it may be competent and assured, else look not for any thing
but ignorance and baseness, and all manner of mischiefs which flow from
these, to invade the whole Kingdom.

How a competency may be provided, except by restoring the Church to her
rights, I do not see; and what this right is, if I should stand to define, and
justify it here, I should exceed the bounds of an Epistle. Many of this time
have cleared the point sufficiently. And if any scruple be remaining, the
worthy Author, I hope, will remove it in the greater work we expect: whose
judgment and dexterity in handling the argument, may be perceived by this his
little pinnace. It should shame us of our calling to come behind men of his
place, either in knowledge, or zeal. His example who is nothing obliged, to
labor in these points, as you are, shall do much, I trust, with you, for the
time to come. Should any look carefuller to the Vineyard then the keepers? or
should any out-goe the servants of the house in diligence? Repent therefore and
amend your own negligence, in this behalf, and call upon others for
amendment, whilst you have time. Think it not a light sin, to spoil Gods
inheritance; and if we look for heaven, let us be faithful to our Lord here on
earth. I beseech God to give us all wisdom, and keep us in mind of that
strict account, that we must one day give for all our doings, and chiefly these
which concern the Church, which is his body. Amen.

I thought good not to omit this Epistle to the Clergy Note.
of Scotland, prefixed before this edition at Edenborough, presently after the
first impression here; both because it proceeded from a pious intent of the
Author, who it seems was very well affected, as also because he shows the
concurrence and approbation of the best religious in that Kingdom, where
sacrilegious practices have invaded that Church, more violently, since the
days of reformation, and clear light of the Gospel, then ever was done in the
darkest times of popery. Rolloc a grave and learned Divine of Scotland has
(besides Master Knox and others), in his Commentary upon Dan. 2. and 5.
discovered his judgment against the sacrilegious practices of his time, and
countrymen, reprehending them sharply, for taking to their own use and
profit, all that was pulled from the Church: and does severely cite them to
answer it before the tribunal of God: which though they neglect and contemn,
yet (says he) they shall be made inexcusable thereby.

Master Knox not long before his death, wrote to a General Assembly holden at
Sterling, 6. August 1571. and his Letter is among the Records of that Assembly,
out of which it is also published, with many other Records of Parliaments, and
Assemblies there holden in the compass of sixty years, in a Declaration lately
of the Church of Scotland.

The mighty Spirit of Comfort, Wisdom, and Concord remain with you: Dear
brethren, if ability of body would have suffered, I should not have troubled
you, -- etc. -- but now brethren, because the daily decay of my natural
strength threatens unto me certain and sudden departure from the misery of
this life, of love and conscience I exhort you, yea in the fear of God, I
charge and command you, that you take heed to your selves, and to the flock
over the which God has placed you Pastors. To discourse of the behavior of
your selves I may not, but to command you to be faithful to the flock, I dare
not forget. Unfaithful traitors to the flock shall ye be before the Lord
Jesus, if that with your consent, directly or indirectly ye suffer, unworthy
men to be thrust into the Ministry of the Church, under what pretense that
ever it be. Remember the Judge before whom ye must make an account, and resist
that Tyranny, as ye would avoid hell fire. This battle I grant will be hard,
but the second part will be harder, That is, with the like uprightness and
strength in God, ye gain-stand the merciless devourers of the patrimony of the
Church. If men will spoil, let them do it to their own peril and
condemnation* but communicate ye not with their sins of whatsoever state they
be, neither by consent, nor yet by silence, but with public protestation make
this known to the world, that ye are innocent of such robberies, which will,
ere it be long, provoke Gods vengeance upon the committers thereof, whereof you
will seek redress of God and man. God give you wisdom, strength and courage
in so just a cause, and mean happy end.

Knox.
Saint Andrews. 3. August. 1571.

