Reason against Rage: Being Some ANIMADVERSIONS UPON A late Scurrilous LIBEL,
Prefixed to A SERMON Preached Nine and thirty Years ago; And Dedicated in these
Words, (VIZ.) To Mr. Serj. Powlett, Recorder of the City of Bristol, and Mr.
Robert Yate, Mercht.

TOGETHER With an Occasional Discussion of some Particulars relating to
Persecution, and Liberty of Conscience.

To which is subjoined, A brief Application, made by way of Advice, humbly
offered to all the Inhabitants of the City aforesaid.

By THOMAS SPEED.

He that is first in his own cause seems just, but his neighbor comes and
searches him,

Prove. 18.17. Knowing this first, that there shall come in the last days
scoffers, walking after their own lusts,

2 Pet. 3.3. Nihil magis praestandum est, quam ne, pecorum ritu, sequamur
antecedentium gregem, pergentes non quo eundum est, sed quo itur.

Seneca de vit. Beat. London: Printed for Thomas Northcott, in George-Yard in
Lombard Street, 1691.

To the Honest-hearted Impartial READER.
HAd not my Indisposition, through Age, together with some emergent Diversions
prevented it, I had sooner appeared to obviate the Envy of my causless
Adversaries, and to disperse those Fogs of false Suggestions, by which they
have craftily endeavored to cast a Mist before the Eyes of their well-meaning,
but unwary Readers. Read what I have written without prejudice, and (having
begun) let me desire thee, to bestow a little time out of thy vacant Hours, to
read it throughout, lest by a transient taking up a Sentence here, and a
Sentence there, thou should happen (unintendedly) to do me, or my
Adversaries, wrong, for want of a full, and a sedate comparing of Things, with
Things, and Times, with Times, relating to the Matters in difference betwixt us.

Reason against Rage.
I Once thought that I might have passed the remainder of my Life in silence,
and not have had occasion to appear to the World in Print; but that meeting
lately with a malicious Libel, contrived, and published (on occasion of the
late Election of Members of Parliament for the City of Bristol) on purpose to
expose, and (if possible) to draw into popular contempt, the two Candidates, my
self, and other the sober Citizens that gave their Votes for them, I thought my
self obliged to appear in Print for the clearing of the Innocent, the fixing
the evil upon the Evil-doer, and the undeceiving of all those well-meaning
Citizens, who, through too much credulity, may, without due examination had of
men and things, conceive an inward displeasure against such as have not
deserved it.

In all cases, where a man is accused as a criminal, it is adjudg'd both just,
and reasonable, that he should know both his Crime, and his Accusers.

My Crime is not expressly mentioned in the venomous Indictment, but is therein
so plainly implied, that I am fully satisfied what it is; but the Names of my
Accusers I must not know, being hid under the Letters,

N.D. N.K. J.E. S.W.

And why so? Were you ashamed to own that in public under your Names, which
you had maliciously framed in private? You know it is an old received Maxim, (
Veritas non quaerit angulos.
Truth seeks not corners,) but is bold and barefaced: He that has Truth on
his side, need not be ashamed to own it. Possibly when you seriously had
reflected on what ye had written, you thought it unbecoming any ingenuous and
sober-minded men (as well you might) publicly to be known to be the Authors of
so deformed a Libel, whose Contents are fitter to be turned into a Song, to be
sung by a Crew of Drunkards at an Ale-bench, than to be exposed to the view and
perusal of any judicious and serious Readers. And therefore I shall be content
at present, that your review of the foulness of the birth of your own
begetting, may pass as an Apology, for the concealment of your Names.

But, Sirs, although you have kept me ignorant of your Names, by your
Expressions I clearly discern your Spirits. ( Exungue Leonem.
The Lion cannot be hid where his Claw is seen.) And therefore be not offended,
if I deal plainly with you, (for flatter you I dare not) and tell you, that
that Spirit which writ that scoffing Paper, and reprinted that Sermon,
thirsts after Blood, and would rejoice to have mine, and the Lives of other
the peaceable Dissenters in the City of Bristol, be offered up as a sacrifice
to your implacable envy and revenge.

It Is the same Spirit of Persecution, that, but a few Years passed, drove many
religious worshippers of God, according to their several persuasions, into
corners, whilst Debauchery and Profaneness walked to and fro in the open
Streets, without control. What levying of Fines was there? What spoiling
peaceable Neighbors of their Goods? What sierce Prosecutions of them by
Indictments in Courts of Justice? How zealously active were they, who were
possessed with this Spirit, in roving, running, and hunting after religious
Meetings? searching Houses, prying into all Creeks and Corners, (but suspected
for that Exercise) haling such as they found (if above such a number) either
praying to Almighty God, or seriously discoursing about their Souls concerns,
before the Magistrate, as if there had been then no other crime more heinous,
and more deserving to be punished by Authority, than Peoples worshipping the
God that made them, in that manner which they believed was most acceptable to
him.

And more particularly, 'twas this Spirit that then hurried many innocent and
peaceable Inhabitants of this City (without any regard to Age or Sex) into the
noysom Goal of Newgate, where they were treated by those that cast them in,
more like Dogs, than like Christian Men and Women. What generous spirited
person is there, who (delighting in Dogs) would not, in case of any of their
sickness, not only allow, but command their Keeper, to let them out of their
Kennel into the open Air, in order to their recovery? But this benefit was
denied to the languishing bodies of several of these innocent sufferers, who
lay thronged together in that miserable manner, in that unwholsom Prison, ready
to be stifled for want of Air to breath in, and convenient room for Rest, that
the sense of their sad condition would have drawn tears from hearts of Flint.

Their Complaints were spread abroad in the City, and the Cry of their
Barbarous Usage was great. Which, though it had no influence on their
Persecutors to move them to pity, yet it begot so much compassion in the hearts
of some sober Citizens (all or most of whom are yet living) as that they went
to view the Prison, and inquire into the distressed condition of their
suffering Neighbors, who (upon strict observation made touching both,) did
(like merciful men) give the following Certificate under their Hands, (viz.) We
find the said Goal is very noisome in general, and void of outlet for Air, and
therefore unfit to contain so great a number of Prisoners as we now find
therein, being One hundred twenty and five close Prisoners, besides the Keeper
and his Family, Fourscore and five whereof are the People called Quakers, who
are unreasonably thronged together, filling all the Rooms in the Goal, fit for
lodging, (except where the Felons are) with four, five, six, seven, and nine
Beds in a Room, besides diverse little corners filled with three in a Bed.
Notwithstanding all which, many of these People are necessitated to lie on the
ground, and spreading their Mats on the ground, they lie at a miserable rate,
that it was a grief to us to behold, (viz.) some athwart the Room, some under
the Table, (being a Kennel where the Dogs were wont to lie) some upon the
Tables, and some in Hammocks over the Table, which necessarily endangers their
lives.

A Certificate of the like Contents was given in, under the Hands of four
publicly known Physicians, inhabitants of the City (who are yet living) who
say, among other things, That great numbers of the People called Quakers, were
thronged in a miserable manner, into the noisome Goal of Newgate, and are
destitute of room for rest, which has a ready tendency to the destroying them,
and to the indangering of the lives, not only of the said Prisoners, but of the
many Inhabitants of this great and populous City.

Notwithstanding which, the Bonds of the Prisoners were not loosed, nor the
Prison doors opened, that the sick might have the benefit of the open air to
breath in, in order to their recovery, although large security was tendered for
their return again into Prison, either alive, if recovered, or their Bodies in
case of death; but this was rejected: so that they were still continued under
their merciless confinement and cruel usage (the particulars of which I shall
forbear to mention) until it pleased the Lord to deliver five of them from the
hands of their oppressors, by death in the Prison; and a sixth, that was
removed out of the Prison (but too late) soon died, and was returned back, and
buried thence.

Upon one of which six (being a woman of known honesty and of good reputation
in the City) was exercised a piece of cruelty exceeding (if possible) that of
Pagans; who, after she had long languish'd under the severities of the Goal,
being at the point of death, desired the company of some of her Friends and
fellow Prisoners, with whom she would have had some converse, before her
departure out of the world, a thing granted to Traitors and Felons before their
Execution, but was denied to this dying woman; and instead thereof, many of her
friends, she desired might come to her, were barbarously locked up in their
respective Rooms and Holes, to prevent their gratifying the request of their
dying Friend.

With what astonishment will the next Protestant Age be surprised! When as they
shall find upon record such Cruelties exercised by Christians upon Christians,
and by Protestants upon Protestants: especially when by inquiry they shall be
satisfied, that the crimes charged against the sufferers were of no deeper dye,
than the peaceable exercise of their consciences toward God, and their
worshipping him in that way which they did believe to be most acceptable to
him, without doing the least civil injury to their Neighbor.

I mention not these Cruelties (God is my witness) with the least desire or
design to provoke the living sufferers to so much as a thought of revenge, or
maliciously to expose the persons of their oppressors: No, far be it from me; I
hope there is not one of those, that patiently bore the fierce heat of that day
of their Afflictors wrath, but what has so well learned the Christian Doctrine,
as to be able truly to say, with the Apostle Paul, 1 Cor. 4.12.
Being reviled we bless, being persecnted we suffer it. And I doubt not, but
that had they who died in the Prison been asked one by one at their dying hour,
what revenge they would desire upon those, through whose severities they were
then drawing their last breath, they would heartily have cried out with that
holy Martyr Stephen, Acts 7.60.
Lord, lay not this sin to their charge. It Is for the sake of those, that are
yet living, who were either Actors or Abettors of any of these Dismal
Tragedies, that I mention these things, for whom I do make it my hearty
supplication unto the God of all Mercies, that he would show them mercy, in
giving them a true sight and sense of their unchristian practices, before they
go off the stage of this World, that they may with contrite hearts turn to the
Lord their Maker (against whom they have been striving) before they go down to
their Graves, in which there will be found no place for repentance.

It will not avail the guilty, in the day of God's righteous judgment, to plead
for their justification, that they had a Law, and by that Law they made havoke
of the Goods, cruelly imprisoned the Persons, and brought sore Distress upon
the Families of their dissenting (but peaceable-living) Neighbors, against
whom they could find no occasion, but (as they of old against Daniel) Dan. 6.5.
concerning the Law of their God. This was the last and strongest Plea, that
the Chief-Priests and stiff-necked Jews made against Christ before Pilate,
saying, John 19.7.
We have a Law, and by our Law he ought to die. But how little this prevailed
for their impunity with the Judge of the whole Earth, the continued series of
the severity of his hand upon that despised and scattered People for many
generations passed, even unto this day, does sufficiently demonstrate. Those
religious Men and Women that sealed their Testimony with their Blood, and
offered up their Bodies in the Flames, for the Name of their God, in the Reign
of Queen Mary, died by a Law. But were either their Tormentors thereby the more
justified, or those holy Martyrs the more justly condemned in the sight of the
just God?

I have made this Digression on this Subject, for the sake of those in whom
(with pity to them I write it) that Unchristian Spirit of Persecution, is yet
alive, and ready to re-act over those barbarous Cruelties upon those, who never
did them the least harm, but are (as to them-wards) innocent Livers in the Land
of their Nativity. And that I may not seem to impose my Sentiments in this
matter, upon the Judgments of any Men, otherwise than by reason, and not
knowing whether ever I may have the like opportunity (whilst on this side the
grave) to dear my Conscience, on this Subject; I shall take Liberty, fairly and
calmly, in the Spirit of Meekness to debate this Point, with all those, who
either (through a fiery misguided Zeal) are ready to call for Fire from Heaven,
to consume those, whose Consciences are not exactly of the same square with
theirs; or who (through want of true Judgment) may be of the Number of those,
of whom Christ foretold, John 16.2.
who think they do God service in killing those, who worship him, not in the
same way with themselves. And I am not without hope, but that I may prevail
with (some at least of) those, that are thus minded, to hear, consider, learn,
and forbear to strive with their Maker, lest happily ( Acts 5.35, 39.
as Gamaliel that prudent Doctor of Law cautioned the Persecutors of the
Apostles in the Jewish Sanhedrim) they should be found even to fight against
God.

That Fides non est cogenda.
Faith is not to be forced, is a Principle that has been asserted and
strenuously maintained, for Scores of Years passed, by many Protestant Pens, as
a Bulwark against all Imposition, by those of the Romish Religion. And what was
then thought, to be a reasonable Defense of a Protestant against a Papist, may
now be as truly urged for the Defense of a Protestant against all Imposition
from his Fellow Protestants. No attempt ought to be made, to force Faith;
because indeed it cannot be forced. No man can by compulsion be wrought into a
hearty Compliance with any Principles, of the Truth of which his Understanding
is not first fully convinced. The inward belief of Truth, was never the Product
of Violence. Penalties and Prisons may produce Fear, and Fear beget an outward
Conformity, to what the Heart does not believe, which is but horrid Hypocrisy,
and a Sin exceeding sinful, in the Sight of that God, Psalm. 51.6.
who desires Truth in the inward Parts.

No man can be dragoon'd, or tormented into a hearty embracing of any Religion,
of the Truth of which he is not inwardly persuaded. It is Illumination only
(not Mulcts, and corporal Punishments) that can beget a change in Men's minds.
Error is a Malady of the Understanding, which whosoever would cure, must apply
proper Remedies, and such as can effectually reach the distempered part, which
are not Afflictions, and Torments laid upon the Body, but Arguments joined with
gentle Admonitions, and wholesome Exhortations; these only can work true inward
Convictions. And therefore when Christ Jesus sent forth his Messengers, for the
gathering of Nations into his Church, he did not furnish them with weapons of
force, and compulsion, but with power and instructions, to preach the Gospel of
Salvation, which joined with the Example of their holy Lives, might prove
prevalent for the making many (who were Enemies to it) become Members of his
heavenly Kingdom. They that will undertake to make men Members of the Church of
Christ, must apply themselves to the use of Christ's Methods only, for the
effecting it. A Troop of malicious Informers, and Files of Musketeers, are
improper Agents to reduce men from Error, and bring them into, or conduct them
on in the way, that leads to Heaven, and Eternal Happiness. Would not that
Surgeon appear very ridiculous among men of understanding, who, when a
Person sought to him for the Cure of a Wound in his Head, should (with the
neglect of that part) apply only a Plaster to his Heel? As irregularly do they
proceed, who attempt to remove Error (or supposed Error) out of Men's minds,
by Confiscation of their Estates, Imprisonment of their Persons, and the ruin
of their Families, whilst their Understandings remain unilluminated, and their
Judgments (which are the Seat of Error) by the Power of Truth not rightly
informed, and consequently the inward Wound in their minds, left unhealed.
Christ sent forth his Apostles to invite, not to worry sheep into his Fold; and
to add to the Number of his Disciples, not by outward Force and Compulsion, but
by the inward Efficacy of sound Doctrine, that might reach Men's understandings,
and gentle Perswasives that might win upon their Affections. 2 Cor. 5.11.
Knowing (says the Apostle) the Terror of the Lord we do (not menace, but)
persuade men; and presently after adds, Ver. 20.
We are Ambassadors for Christ, as though God did beseech you by us; We pray
you in Christ's stead, be ye reconciled to God. What soft and alluring methods,
does the only wise and merciful God use, by his Messengers, to negotiate for
Peace betwixt himself, and poor Mortals! The Embassage, on which he sends them,
is not accompanied with Fire, and Sword, but with gentle entreaties; not with
persecution, but with Prayers. And why should vain Man (filled with fiery Zeal)
pretend to be wiser than his Maker, in attempting, by other means, than he has
appointed, to reclaim those that are supposed to err from the way of Truth? I
shall close what I have to say on this Subject, with the following particulars,
which I heartily recommend to the serious, and impartial consideration of all
those who are real lovers of, and searchers after Truth, for Truth's sake.

1. Let it be considered, whether outward forced conformity to any sort of
worship (not mixed with faith in the worshipper) be a Sacrifice well-pleasing
unto God; since the Scripture is positive that Heb. 6.11.
without faith its impossible to please him, and which is more, that Romans 14.23.
whatsoever is not of faith is sin? And consequently whether they, who, by
Terrors, and Torments do force men to any external form of Worship, of the
truth of which they are not inwardly persuaded, do not thereby compel them to
Sin, by offering up such an oblation to Almighty God, which at the very time of
such their offering, they do not believe is acceptable to him, or that they are
accepted for its sake? and whether the Persons that do so sin, or they that
forcibly provoke them thereunto, are to be adjudg'd the least Offenders, I
leave to be decided by the Judge of the whole Earth, who cannot err in
Judgment. 2. Whether they, who, with all imaginable Severities, have prosecuted
those, who only differed from them in their way of religious Worship (having
the breach of no other Law to charge them with) have not manifestly violated
that Royal Law of Christ Jesus (to which all mankind stands obliged to conform)
Viz. Matt. 7.12.
All things whatsoever ye would that men should do to you, do ye, even so, to
them? And as a proof thereof, I earnestly desire them to lay their hands upon
their hearts, and without prejudice and passion, in the cool of the day
(reflecting upon the Cruelties they have exercised upon others) to put this
Query to themselves: Have we done unto those our suffering Neighbors, as we
would they should do unto us? Would we be content, that they (if furnished with
outward authority) should force, or endeavor to force us, to conform to that
way of Worship, or embrace that Religion, which in our consciences we do not
believe to be true? And, in case of our refusal to comply (for conscience sake)
should we judge it Christian dealing in them to mete back the same measure to
us, which we formerly did mete to them, by casting our persons into Prison,
spoiling us of our Goods, and endeavoring the ruin of our Families? If men
would deal honestly with their own hearts, it would not be difficult to
conclude, what the answer would be. 3. Nor is it less worthy duly to be
considered, whether imposition, or attempts to impose, upon Conscience in
things religious, be not a high, and manifest contradiction to the Spirit of
Truth, speaking by the mouth of the holy Apostle, who (debating of things
pertaining to Conscience) says, Romans 14.5. (...).
Let every man be fully persuaded, or (as in the Margent of the Bible) fully
assured in his own mind. A full inward persuasion, removes so much as the least
doubt of the truth of what a man does embrace, or practice in the Worship of
God. He that made man, neither requires, or expects from him blind obedience,
that he should serve him with his lips, or with bodily service, until he be
fully persuaded in his mind, that his obedience is such, with which he will be
well-pleased. And what a vast difference there is betwixt forced Conformity,
obtained by the imperious mandates of men, and full inward assurance of the
truth of what they conform to, I leave to all the wise in heart to determine.
4. And above all it is seriously to be minded, whether every man, as a Creature,
standing obliged to render an account of himself to God his Creator, it be not
agreeable to right reason, as well as to the Scriptures, that he should manage
the concerns of his own Soul (which relate unto salvation) according to what he
himself does understand, and believe?
Upon this consideration it was, that the Apostle Paul allows no man to impose
upon his Brother's conscience, no, not in those low concerns of meats, and
observation of days, for, says he, Romans 4.4.
To his own Master he stands, or falls, and presently subjoyns, Every one
of us (including himself among the rest) shall give account of himself to God.

When Death (the King of Terrors) shall summon any man from off the Stage of
this World, nothing is more certain, than that he must then die for himself. No
man can, at that hour, die in his brother's stead, much less can he make up his
Soul's account for him with Almighty God. If poor Mortals, when they come to
lie upon their dying Beds, should then call to those, who had before forced (or
endeavored to force) them, to conform to what they did not believe to be true,
crying out, in the anguish of their hearts, and saying, Oh! now come and help
us, we have no inward peace in our bosoms: Now shoot the bottomless gulf of
Eternity for us, in our steads: We are shortly to appear before the great
Tribunal of the ever-living God, to give an account of all our deeds done in
these bodies. Now therefore stand by us, and for the eternal safety of our
immortal Souls, make up a satisfactory account to him for us. What other
returns could they then receive to their mournful cries, but this
heartbreaking answer? (viz.) We can neither die for you, nor give an account
to God for you; we now leave you to do both for your selves. What can be more
unreasonable, than that men should by Pains and Penalties be violently driven
to renounce their own Faith, and way of Worship, and conform to another's
whilst they live, and be bid to shift for themselves when they come to die?

Having for the reason beforementioned made this digression, I come now to
reckon with my nameless Adversaries, touching the Contents of their scoffing
Libel. And in the first place, I cannot forbear telling you, that you make too
bold with many Expressions used in the holy Scriptures, by an arrogant loading
them with your unsavory Scoffs. Doubtless, ye thought your selves very witty
in so doing: But you must know, Jocare in Seriis, and Judere cum Sanctis.
that to mingle Jests with things of a serious nature, and to sport with things
Sacred, has ever been exploded by men truly religious, as becoming none but
profane lips. You charge the Sergeant, and his fellow Candidate with appearing
for the cause of God, at the head of his People.

Animad. Well, and what then? if you would have men believe your own words to
be true, that they were (as you say) the People of God, in the head of whom
they did appear, how can you fix this upon them as a crime, or make it to
redound in the least to their dishonor? I find, through the New Testament,
those comprehended under the denomination of the People of God, Tit. 2.14. 1
Pet. 2.9, 10.
who have obtained mercy from him, found favor in his sight, and are beloved
by him, and therefore Emphatically styled his peculiar People. And if you
exclude your selves from the number of God's People (as by your mentioning them
with scorn ye seem to do) one may, without breach of Charity, doubt, if not
conclude, to what herd of Evildoers you do belong.

You add further, that their appearing administers comfort, and satisfaction to
all, who are the well-wishers of the peace of Zion.

Animad. The Scriptures make frequent mention of mount Zion with great
veneration, as being the place of God's worship, where he is said by the
Prophet Isaiah, Isa. 8.18. Isa. 24.2^.
both to dwell, and to reign; and therefore not to be made the subject of
derision, by the tongues of Scorners.

Pray, Sirs, observe, you are both Categorical, and Universal in your Position,
then let me ask you, Are you well-wishers, or enemies, to the peace of Zion? If
well-wishers, then their appearing (as before) does administer comfort and
satisfaction (among the rest) to you also; for under the word all you must
needs comprehend your selves.

And why then do you quarrel at their appearing? If you answer me, and say,
that you are enemies to the peace of Zion, (which I am most inclined to
believe) you do thereby at once proclaim both your sin, and your shame, by
professing your selves enemies to that, which God loves, and all good men pray
for.

You proceed on in your Epistle, to belch out your unsavory Scoffs, against
other Expressions of the holy Scriptures, which speak the great Love of God to
poor Mortals, (viz.) The Chosen Ones, The Household of Faith, and the Holy Ones.

Animad. To be chosen by an earthly Prince, to stand in his presence, and to be
admitted a Member of his Secret Council, is a favor highly estimable among the
Sons of Men; but how infinitely does the happiness of those Souls exceed that,
2 Thessalonians. 2.13.
who are chosen of God (as the Apostle words it) to salvation, to live lives of
holiness, to his praise, here, upon earth, and to live with him in the Kingdom
of Glory, when Time shall be no more! And believe it, Sirs, if you that are now
scorners of them, be not found at the last day among the number of God's Chosen
Ones, you will find no admission into Eternal Happiness.

And is it matter of derision to you, that a man should be one Gal. 6.10.
of the Household of Faith, or as the same Apostle has it, Ephesians. 2.19.
of the Household God? Consider it well; if your selves are not of the Household
of Faith, you must be of the Household of Infidels; and if not of the Household
of God, then, necessarily, of the Household of the Ungodly. And what the
certain, future Portion of each of those shall be, is worthy your serious and
timely consideration, before the Sands of your brittle Glass of Life are all
run out.

As to the Scoff ye bestow upon the Holy Ones; let me tell you, that ye do
thereby express your disdain of that which is the most beautiful Badge of a
true Christian. I will charitably suppose, that you all wear the outward Livery
of Christian Profession, and consequently, are all pretenders to the Kingdom of
Heaven. But you must know, unless ye be found clad with the clean Robe of
Holiness, (the present Object of your scorn) your certain doom will be, to be
shut out thence, for Heb. 12.14.
without Holiness no man shall see the Lord.

No unclean thing shall ever enter into his Kingdom. There are none but Holy
Ones in Heaven, and I much doubt, whether they that scoff at them here, would
make suitable companions to them there. Those glorified Souls are perfectly
holy, and their Work to eternity will be holy, sounding out Rev. 19.1. Rev.
4.11.
Hallelujahs, Glory and Honor to the Lord their God. So that it remains with
me as a doubt, if Scorners and Scoffers at Holiness were thrust into Heaven
(their Natures not changed) whether either the Exercise, or the Company of that
heavenly Host, would be well-pleasing to them.

When Christ shall come attended Mat. 25.31, 32.
with the holy Angels, sitting upon the Throne of his Glory Acts 17.31.
to judge the World in righteousness, he will then divide all Nations, that
shall appear before him, but into two sorts, Mat. 25.33.
Sheep, and Goats, holy, and unholy, and if it shall not then be your Lot to be
found among the number of the Sheep, (the Holy Ones) to whom he will Ver. 34.
say, Come, ye blessed of my Father, receive the Kingdom prepared for you, that
sad and irreversable Sentence will then be pronounced upon you, Ver. 41.
Depart from me, ye cursed, into everlasting fire, prepared for the Devil, and
his Angels.

You proceed on, to acquaint your Reader with the several sorts of Dissenters,
who voted for the Sergeant, and his Fellow-Candidate, (viz.) Presbyterians,
Independants, Anabaptists, Quakers, etc.

Animad. But why did you omit to make mention of the several hundreds of sober
Churchmen, who also (as I am informed) voted for them? Doubtless ye mentioned
these Voters of several Sects, as matter of reflection upon the two Candidates.
But your sober and prudent Readers will be otherwise minded, when they shall
duly consider, that to be of (or to be called by the Name of) either of those
Sects, is no stain at all, upon any men's reputation, whilst their outward
Profession is accompanied with a good Life. Could you have said (and that
truly) that few or none voted for them, but lewd and dissolute persons, Men of
debauched Principles and Practices, men of vicious Conversations, Drunkards,
Swearers, Unclean Persons, Envions Men, Haters of God and Goodness, Persecutors
of their Neighbors for Conscience Sake, Men of Turbulent Spirits, always
affecting Domination over others, never satisfied, but when they can have their
Feet upon the Necks of their Fellow-Citizens, and the Whip in their hands to
make Psalm. 129.3.
long Furrows upon their Backs for Nonconformity. I say, could you truly have
represented the Voters for the two Candidates, to the World, under these black
Characters, it might have looked (at least) as some ground of doubt, whether
they had not been men alike qualified. But your exposing them only, as men of
different Persuasions in matter of Worship, not fixing on them any of the evil
Qualifications beforementioned: instead of sullying the Reputations of the two
Candidates thereby, you have certainly (though against your wills) done them
great honor.

Besides which, you have (though not designedly) published the Dissenters to the
World, to be Men that did express a great deal of good nature, by voting, as
they did: in that they laid aside all inward animosity, against those from whom
they Dissent, and (waving all persons, that were of any one of their
particular, respective Persuasions) did unanimously join with many scores of
their Fellow-Citizens, to choose two Persons of known good Reputation in the
City, which are of the Communion of the Church of England. And did they in so
doing, do that, which they had no right to do? Have you, Sirs, and any select
number of Citizens, a Privilege by Patent, to choose Representatives for the
City to sit in Parliament, with the exclusion of all others? Had not these men
of your indignation, Liberties, and Properties, both Religious and Civil, to
lose as well as you, and your domineering Associates? And is it not then equal
and reasonable, that they should pitch their choice on such Men, whom they, in
their judgment, thought most capable, and heartily ready, to preserve them?

You go on, and say, that the Dissenters appeared at the Election, both such as
were within the City, and near you, and from afar off, as if they had been
summoned by the Spirit.

Animad. Hear you, Sirs, it is possible I may not have opportunity to have
another reckoning with you, whilst I live; therefore let me prevail with you,
not to despise my counsel, if I advise you, That (how bold soever ye make with
Men) you beware (I say, beware) of casting your scoffing Squibs at the Spirit.
I have not heard, nor do I believe, that any man pretended to be so summoned to
appear at the Election. 'Twas doubtless love to their Civil and Religious
Intrest (not any particular Summons from Heaven) that prompted them to their
appearance.

But rather than not throw out the dregs of your Venom, against the Men of your
displeasure, you would not spare to upbraid them with appearing by the Spirit;
hoping that it might pass for a black Character upon them, in the judgment of
your Society of Scorners. Whereas in truth you have in so doing only published
your selves to be Men, both of unclean Hearts, and of polluted Lips. You may
vaunt it, and brave it out among irreligious Men, (such as your selves) hoping
to be esteemed witty, in deriding the Spirit, and Men for its sake. But know,
that the living God (with whom ye cannot contend, and prosper) whose Spirit it
is, Gal. 6.7.
will not be mocked, but will severely reckon with you, for this your
Profaneness. Do you believe the holy Scriptures? (you give me great ground to
doubt it, if I may judge of your Faith by your Works) If you do, Pray remember
what the Author to the Hebrews has left upon Record, who, having spoken of
such who had done despite unto the Spirit, Heb. 10.29, 31.
presently adds this word of terror, as a future standing caution to all, that
should do the like, saying, It is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the
living God. And if that consideration stop not the mouths of all scoffers at
the Spirit, let them always carry in remembrance that dreadful Sentence
pronounced by the Lip of Truth, saying, Mat. 12.31, 32.
Whosoever speaks a word against the son of man, it shall be forgiven him,
but whosoever speaks against the Holy Ghost, it shall not be forgiven him,
neither in this world, neither in the world to come.

I am now come to account with you (my nameless Adversaries) touching my Crime,
and my Punishment. You expose me, toward the close of your nauseous Libel,
under the scoffing denominations of the Ancient, Pious, and Learned Author.
Ancient I confess I am, Piety I love, and hope shall continue a lover of, to
the end of my days; but of that Learning, which (I know) you intend, I do
pretend to have but a very small share; choosing rather to be learned in that
Doctrine which Christ Jesus taught his Disciples, when he said, Mat. 11.29.
Learn of me, for I am meek and lowly. True Humility, and Self denial, I do
esteem of, infinitely beyond all the Learning, that is acquirable in any, or
all, the Academies in the World. But wherein consists my transgression? Only in
this, that being a freeborn Englishman, and a Freeman of the City of Bristol,
I did presume (without the leave of those, who would be Rulers over Men's
Consciences, as well as their Civil Rights) to give my Vote for the Election of
two Persons (to sit in Parliament) both whom I have known for many Years past
to be (and do understand now they are) well esteemed in the City, and of the
Communion of the Church of England: and had they not been of that Communion, I
should not (for several Reasons) have given my Voice for them. And now, before
I proceed farther, I will nakedly declare, what consideration prompted me to
Vote at all, or as I did, having not appeared, but once before (that I do
remember) on the like occasion in all my lifetime. It was not (God is my
record) out of any, the least, inward prejudice, against the two persons, that
were chosen, both whom I have known from their youth upwards, and do not
remember, that ever I had any depending difference or dispute with either of
them, or they with me.

But, having understood, that (both before, and at the time of the Election)
several Expressions were dropped by some in the City, which I doubted to be
Symptoms of designed Endeavors (at least) to rescind and annul the late Act of
Indulgence to Dissenters: I thought my self obliged, to manifest my sober
dissent from those, who declared themselves to be spirited for Persecution.

And now, before I proceed farther, I desire the considerate Reader to observe
how hard the envy of my ranckerous Enemies was put to it, to find out an Arrow
sufficiently invenomed, to shoot at me, which rather than they would miss of,
they were fain to look back, and search for one that had lain rusting in the
Quiver, for near Forty Years past, by which they do implicitly, (though not
designedly) tell the World, how inoffensive my Conversation has been in the
City of Bristol, that, during so many Years past, their quick-sighted Envy
could meet with no wrong Steps I had made, nor justly accuse me of any Public
Misbehaviour in the City, either toward the Government under which I have
lived, or toward my Fellow-Citizens, with whom I have so long conversed, with
which they might hope, to blacken, or sully, my Reputation.

My Offense is, that I did dare to give my Voice, at the Election, without
License. My Punishment must be, (because none more proper could be found) to
have an Information exhibited against me, for what I spoke Nine and thirty
Years ago. A person does a Lawful Act in the Year 1690. for which (jure vel
injuria) right or wrong, he must be condemned: Why so? because of words that
were spoken in the Year 1651. Rare Justice! Admirable Ingenuity! Pray (Sirs)
recollect your selves, and reflect upon your method of proceeding. Can you
suppose, that any thinking and soberminded Readers will esteem it any Fruit of
your Piety, or Prudence, or will they not rather conclude it, to be the Fruit
of your Burning Rage and Fury, to charge the Sayings, or Sentiments, of a
Person, which were uttered and expressed so many Years passed, thereby to
punish him for a pretended Offense, now newly committed?

I doubt not but there was both a Tertullus, and an Ananias, in the Consult
among the Contrivers, when this malicious Epistle was framed. Pray then let
them both be asked, when a man is indicted as a Criminal, in any Court of
Justice, and upon trial is found not guilty, by his Jury, and consequently is
acquitted by the Judge, would it be adjudg'd a legal, or a righteous act in any
men, that should appeal to the Judge, and say, We desire that sentence of
condemnation may notwithstanding be passed upon this person, for that (though we
are convinced he has done no evil, in doing that, for which he stood indicted,
being the same that we our selves have done) yet we remember, that about forty
years ago, this man was very heterodox in his opinion, touching the Government,
that now is, both in Church and State. Would not such a Tertullus, with all his
quaint Oratory, be hissed out of a Court of Justice, for such his illegal and
nonsensical pleading?

Deep Malice and Subtilty were in conjunction, when this fiery Meteor of an
Epistle was brought forth, and the Sermon reprinted; touching both which, I now
come to a more strict reckoning with my Adversaries, N. D. N. K. J. E. S. W.

1. Are you not Men of brazen foreheads, who durst affront, and run upon that
Act of Pardon, Indemnity, and Oblivion, which King Charles the Second so many
years since granted, and published to all his Subjects, 12. Car. 2. cap. 11.
which was given to this very intent, that no Crime whatsoever committed
against him, or his Father, should hereafter rise up in judgment, or be brought
in question against any of his Subjects to the least endamagement of them,
either in their Lives, Liberties, Estates, or to the prejudice of their
Reputations, by any reproach, or term of distinction? Of what outrageous
Spirits have you then manifested your selves to be, that (rather than not be
some way revenged upon a person, that never did you the least wrong, and upon
whom you can charge no pretended new crime, but my voting, as before) you would
not stick to tear off that stamp of Amnesty, which the King had fixed upon that
healing Act, and thereby give the World to see, that Acts of King, and
Parliament, standing in your way, are no more than Sampson's green Withs,
whilst you are in the execution of your malice, upon the men of your fierce
anger?

You do hereby also give demonstration, what you would be at, had you but a Law
to back you, when as you dare so openly to violate, and trample under foot, a
Law made upon such weighty reasons, and for such great ends, as that Act was.

2. Your design, in reprinting the Sermon, must needs be to smuch me, and draw
a black line of reproach over me, thereby to render me (if possible) odious in
the sight, and raise a prejudice against me in the breasts of all that should
read it. To which end, I have understood, your Emissaries have been very
industriously active to disperse it abroad among those that know me, both
within, and without, the City, that so, as much as in you lies, ye might stab
my Reputation in every corner. But, Sirs, are you sure, that by this method, ye
shall gain your point upon me, among any, but your own credulous Followers, who
live more by implicit faith, than by any rule they find right by due inquiry?
If any moderate standers by should ask you this question, Are you certain, that
Thomas Speed does retain the same judgment now, touching all things mentioned
in that Sermon, which he seemed to have of them, in the Year, One thousand, six
hundred, fifty, and one? If for answer, ye should say, We know not, (for we
never asked him): It answers our end, if we can but expose him, and represent
him in the shape of some monstrous Creature. For we have envious Proselites
enough, (as bad as our selves) who stand full fraited with a sufficient stock
of Malice, to reproach, and revile him. Would not these men of moderation reply
upon you and say, This is a method of proceeding neither Christian nor
Ingenuous? For that you seem to manage him, not so much by the conduct of right
reason, as revenge, because he offended you, by his voting. And, in our
judgments, you have not so much sullied his reputation, by reprinting his
Sermon, as you have raised it, by that worthy Character you now give of him, in
your own Epistle, acknowledging [mark Reader] that he has, for many years last
past, sequestered himself from the world, and concernments thereof, to a
religious, and strict life, within the compass of his own family. Than which we
know not what more you could have said, to proclaim him to the World, to be a
good Christian, a good Subject, and a good Citizen.

And now (my nameless Adversaries) to confirm the Testimony you have given to
the World of my Christian manner of life, For many years last past, in which
you have (though unawares, I doubt) done me right; I am come to let you know,
that you have (in reprinting that Sermon) levelled it at me, as your principal
Dart, by a wrong aim, and so have missed your mark, and are wholly mistaken in
the man. For that, with equal truth, and boldness, I tell you, I am not the
same Thomas Speed, that I was Nine and thirty Years ago, not boastingly (but
with inward praises to that God, that made me, and has showed me mercy) I
speak it, I am not the same, that then I was, but another man. Many things,
that were then glorious in my eyes, are now with me of low esteem, and others
which I lightly esteemed, I do now highly prize. I once thought little strains
of wit, to be great ornaments; and to be able to charm the ears of the hearer,
with the enticing words of man's wisdom, to be a desirable attainment. But now,
I do really judge one Dram of the true knowledge of God, in Christ Jesus,
infinitely to exceed in value, the highest degree of the wisdom of man, by
which the world 1 Cor. 1.21.
never did (nor ever shall) know the true and living God.

I may say, with the Apostle Paul, 1 Cor. 13.11.
When I was a Child, I understood as a Child, I thought as a Child, and
therefore I spoke as a Child. And while I was under these circumstances, my
youthful years were attended with an inward affectation of popular applause,
and by it (doubtless) was prompted, to intermeddle with things that concerned
me not, and to give my Judgment of things I understood not. And what then? What
can you infer thence, at this time of the day? You do manifestly enough
intimate, by some Expressions in your Libel, what you design. Fain you would
entitle the two Candidates, and those that voted for them, to the Contents of
that Sermon, in which they are no way concerned, it being (if reprinted as
spoken) not theirs, but mine. And it is probable, that many of the Voters were
either in their childhood, or not born, when that Sermon was published, unless
you would by a newfound method of Logic argue thus: (Viz.)

The same Judgment that Thomas Speed is of, the two Candidates, and all that
voted for them are of also. But Thomas Speed is in his Judgment for Government
by a Commonwealth, etc. Therefore, etc. How is your Minor proved? Why thus;
The same Judgment that Thomas Speed was of 39 Years ago, he is of now. But 39
Years ago, he spoke much in favor of Government by a Commonwealth. Therefore
he is, in his Judgment, the same now.
Your Major being denied, as notoriously false, (as presently shall be made
appear) your whole Argument becomes a rope of Sand, and falls to the ground, as
having in it, neither right reason, good sense, or one Dram of honesty. I
would not do you wrong, (as bad as you are) but if you would fasten any thing
of reproach upon them, from what I either was in my judgment then, or now am,
your Argument must run so: That you would (if possible) wound them, through my
sides, is manifest, by your insinuating to the Reader, in your frothy Epistle,
as if they had an expectation of a newborn Commonwealth, which is in truth no
other than a newborn Chimaera of your own brains, begotten of the fiery
vapors, that ascended from the boiling rage, that lodged in your own breasts.
It Is out of all doubt, that the Candidates, and they that voted for them, at
the time of the Election, no more thought of a Government by a Commonwealth,
than you thought of confirming the Act of Liberty of Conscience to the
Dissenters. As to my self, I would have you, and your Accomplices (and indeed all
men) know, that from the time that it pleased the God of my life, to direct my
steps into the path of Peace, and to give me a measure of the knowledge of my
Christian duty, I have constantly judged it to be out of my Province, to
concern my self about the Choice, or the Change of outward Governments:
esteeming it to be my duty (not to dispute, but) to be subject to (and live
peaceably under) that Government, which his Providence, who rules in the
Kingdoms of men, does set over me. The highest expectation, that I have from
any Government is, but that I may enjoy the liberty of my Conscience, and pass
the remainder of my days, in the Land of my Nativity, in the peaceable exercise
thereof, without molestation.

I intend not hereby a liberty to Libertinism and Licentiousness: No, God
forbid. The Nation does too much abound with such Pollutions already; and it
would be the joy of all good men, to see them more severely curbed by
Authority. Not a liberty to do my Neighbor any Civil injury; by no means. No
man may pretend Conscience to dampnifie his Neighbor, either in his Person,
his Estate, or good Name. The Civil Law is set as a guard to preserve these,
and he that will presume to violate it, justly suffers by the hand of
Authority. And if the Government I am under, shall deny me the liberty of my
Worship, and shall cause me to suffer, on that score: Although this be an evil
in the Government, yet I am not therefore to plot, and contrive its
disturbance, or subversion, to obtain my ease, and relief. I did some years
past suffer, both by imprisonment, and otherwise, for no other cause, but the
Quiet exercise of my Conscience to God. But I did not therefore betake my self
to Plotting against the Government, for the procuring my liberty. No, no, I
bless God, I always stood firm, in the practice of that Christian Doctrine of
Passive Obedience, and Non-resistance, and hope so to continue to the end of my
days. Nor am I fond of the Government, by a Commonwealth, as you would
maliciously suggest to your Reader. For in truth, so little am I knowing in the
Politics of Government, that if I were asked, I could not give account of the
particular methods of Administration used in that form of Government. But since
I came to any measure of maturity of understanding, I have with my self, often
admired the Prudence of our Ancestors, who contrived the Frame of our ancient
English Government. For, where there is a Pious Prince, a Noble Counsel of
Peers, Noble, as well by the inward endowments of Virtue, as by Birth: A grave
Senate of prudent Patriots of their Country, lovers of God and Good Men; I say
where these three meet in one, steering their Conduct, with a steady aim, at
the glory of God, and the Peoples welfare, what Form of Government can be found
more conducing to the outward happiness of a Nation, than this?

You would farther bugbear your Readers, and beget them into a belief, that I
am now an enemy, to the public way of Worship, by reason of one Expression
dropped in the Sermon.

Touching which I shall give a plain, and candid Account of my self, by
informing you, and your Confederates, and all men else, that I hate no Man's
way of Worship, nor any sincere Worshiper of God, who does with an upright
heart (according to the utmost of his Knowledge) offer up to him that
Sacrifice, which he does believe is most acceptable to him; such his worshipping
being accompanied with a holy Life, and Conversation. I my self was educated in
the national way of Worship, from my Childhood: And was a zealous Worshiper in
that way; and do believe that God accepted my Sacrifice, because, according to
my then-understanding, I offered it up with a sincere heart. And although I am
not now in the practice thereof (being convinced of a way more agreeable (in my
judgment) to the practice of the Primitive Christians mentioned in the holy
Scriptures) yet I neither judge, nor condemn those that are; who (being
conscientiously concerned therein) do in Sincerity, and Uprightness worship
God, according to what is made manifest to them, and do bring forth the Fruits
of Love, and good Works in their Conversations in the World. It Is not the
Worship, but the Hypocrisy of those Worshipers, that I do condemn, who
contradict their Prayers, by their Practices; who do in words often pray, they
may be delivered from the Sin of Pride, and yet live in it; from vain Glory,
and yet abound in it; from Hypocrisy, and yet openly manifest themselves
guilty of it. Are not you (my nameless Adversaries) frequenters of the Public
Service? If you are I blame you not for it. But consider, do you not there pray
in these words, From Envy, Hatred, and Malice, good Lord, deliver Us? The
Prayer is good. But how far your Practice is remote from your Prayer, let your
Works speak. Can you think, that any understanding and unbiased Reader will
believe that your Hearts were not filled with Envy, when you contrived, and
framed that spightful Epistle? Could the most malicious among Mortals, (I had
almost said among Devils) express greater Hatred, and Malice, than you have
done against me, in reprinting a Sermon, which had lain buried in Oblivion, for
almost forty Years past, hoping thereby to murder me in my Reputation, and I
doubt not, but in my Life also, had it lain in your Power? And as a
Demonstration, that it was pure Malice in the very Abstract, that prompted you
thereunto, ye, did it without the least shadow of any just provocation given
you on my part. Is this less than a mocking of Almighty God to pray with your
Lips, that he would deliver you from Malice, Hatred, and Envy, when as at the
same time ye were studiously contriving (with Hearts full fraited with them
all) how to express them against your Neighbors? It Is far from me to condemn
any sincere Worshiper, in the national way of Worship. I condemn only that
which God condemns (Viz.) Deceit, and Hypocrisy; when Men draw Isa. 29.13.
Matt. 15.8.
near unto God with their mouths, and honor him with their lips, while their
hearts are far from him: And cry out the Church, the Church (as they did of
old, Jer. 7.4.
The Temple of the Lord, The Temple of the Lord) and at the same time live
vicious Lives, and are found in the Practice of Ungodliness, and Profaneness in
their Conversations; and so make their Prayers, and outward performances, a
Cloak to cover over their Iniquities. This is that, which the Spirit of God in
the Scriptures of Truth does condemn, and it is that only, which I do at this
day judge and condemn also.

True Religion consists not in the Exercise of any outward form of Worship, but
in an entire resignation of the heart Prove. 23.26.
to God, attended with a holy life. An unclean heart under a specious sorm of
outward worship, is no other than as a painted Sepulcher, which appears
glorious, and splendid without, whilst rottenness and corruption possesses the
inside. I am not so narrow spirited, as to confine acceptance from Heaven, to
any one outward way of worship in the world; but do believe with the Apostle
Peter, Acts 10.35.
that, in every Nation, he that fears God, and works righteousness, is
accepted with him. And, for a close of what I have to say, on this Subject, I
declare this, as my Faith, that it is not outward Service, but inward Sincerity
of heart, that God (the searcher of all hearts) has regard unto. And whoever
has that, for the companion of his Life, will not miss of Peace with his
Maker, which is a Jewel of a greater Value, than all the Treasures of the whole
Universe.

Happy will that man be, who, when he shall come to lay his head upon his
Death-Pillow, shall be able in Truth to make his appeal to Heaven, with good
Hezekiah, 2 Kings 20.3.
and say, Remember now I beseech thee, O Lord, how I have walked before thee,
in truth, and with a perfect heart, and have (not only said, not only
Professed, but) done that which is good in thy sight.

And now, for a close of what I have to say to you (my nameless Adversaries)
let me advise you to the study of Peace, and to forbear troubling an
(otherwise) quiet City, by your unquiet Spirits which is evidently seen, by
your stigmatizing your Fellow-Citizens, with Terms of distinction and reproach,
and thereby sowing the seeds of discord among Protestants, at this juncture of
time, when Unity in affection is so necessary, and by all true Protestants so
much desired. Be content, that (having your own liberty of worship to the full)
they that live quietly by you, may share therein also. Be not uneasy in your
minds, because your Neighbors have gotten a little ease. Show your selves good
Christians, and good Citizens, by doing unto others as you would they should do
unto you. Strive not to be Lords Paramount over other Men's Consciences, for
you would not, that other men should be Lords over yours. And remember always
that Sovereignty over Conscience is the alone Prerogative of Almighty God, so
that whoever do seek for Dominion there, do but justle with their Maker.

What more concerns my self is to tell you, that I owe you yet one Christian
Duty, which is (not revenge, but) forgiveness. And I do freely forgive you, all
the Evil, that ye have done, or had, or now have in your hearts to do, to me:
and do wish you true repentance, that ye may be forgiven of God also. Believe
it (whatever ye may fancy to your selves) by what you have done in the
management of this business you have not so much wounded me, as harmed your
selves. In shooting at me, ye have shot your Darts against a brass Wall, my
Innocence being my Breast Plate. Your reproaches I wear as an ornament, and
your malice is, as the dust under my Feet.

And not knowing, whether ever I may have the like opportunity of making so
public an application to them as now, I shall close all with a few words of
advice to all my Fellow Citizens, in the City of Bristol.

1. Be frequent and serious, in the meditating upon the end of your being
brought forth into the World, which was to serve the Lord in Righteousness, and
Holiness, and thereby bring Glory to his Name; Sin dishonours him. To prevent
which let his fear bear rule in your hearts: and as David did, Psalm. 16.8.
Psalm. 119.11.
set him always before your eyes, and hide his word in your hearts, that you
may not sin against him. Take good heed to the Dictates of his Grace, and good
Spirit, which do inwardly prompt you to Holiness, and will teach you (if
hearkened unto) as it did the holy men of old to deny ungodliness and worldly
Lusts, and Tit. 2.12.
to live soberly, righteously, and godly, in this present world. Let your
Conversations be adorned with love toward God, and love toward your
Neighbor. Banish envy from out of your hearts, and out of your Houses. Be not
offended with your Neighbor, because his Eye sight is either clearer, or
dimmer, than your own. Bear not evil will against him, because his Faith in
every particular Squares not with yours. If (through Temptation) he happen to
slip, and fall, to his own hurt, rejoice not over him, nor lay violent hands
upon him, because he is fallen, but lend him the hand of love to help him up
again; Gal. 6.1.
considering your selves, lest you also should be tempted, and fall.

2. You that are Parents of Children, it greatly behooves you to be unto them
Patterns of Piety, Patterns of Humility, Moderation, Temperance, and of every
other Virtue. That, as they grow in years, they may increase in Holiness, and
as they are yours, they may become also the Children of the most high God. Let
your savoury Communication season theirs; and the Light of your good
Conversations direct their steps into the just man's path. Their beholding your
good Works may strongly provoke them to do the same. Plus valent exempla quam
praecepta.
Examples are much more cogent to Piety, or Profaneness than Precepts. The most
wholesome Precepts contradicted, by the Example of the Givers, are but as Water
spilt upon the Rock. Children (through the proneness of corrupt Nature to that
which is evil) are easily brought over to vicious Practices. Of which we have
too many notorious Instances, among those that are but newly come out of their
Infancy, who frequently grate many modest Ears (as they pass the Streets)
either with Oaths, or Obscenity. What is it less, than cause of lamentation, to
hear such, who (by reason of their tender Years) can but newly speak plain
English, can yet not only lispe out, but accent, an Oath? And such as are not
come to so much understanding, as to offer up a sensibe Petition unto Heaven,
can yet call to their Maker to damn them.

I would not uncharitably judge, or condemn any Parents in particular, but
whether it is not much to be doubted, that they that are of younger Years, have
learned such Immoralities from the Example of their Elders, I leave to every
Parent's serious consideration. They that are Innocent in this matter I know
will not take offense at what I say; And for those, who, on Examination, find
themselves guilty; I heartily entreat them for God's, for their own, and for
their Children's sake, to amend and sin no more in that kind.

3. To all young Persons in the City, my hearty advice is, that you would
Eccles. 12.1.
Remember your Creator, in the days of your Youth, while the evil days come
not, nor the years draw nigh, when you shall say, we have no pleasure in them.
Let the time of your Youth be adorned with the Practice of Virtue, as with a
beautiful Garment. As you now begin to live, as Men, and Women, live also to
the Praise of him, that gave you Life, Breath, and Being. Conclude it to be
more your Happiness to be good, than great; and to be holy, than high in this
World. Let me desire you to have a constant regard to the guide of your Youth,
the measure of God's holy Spirit, which he has placed in your hearts, as a
Witness for himself, and against that which is evil: Hearken to its rebukes,
for it is the Friend of your Bosom. This is that, which reproves you in secret,
for those Evils, to which no Eye, nor no Ear was ever privy, besides your own.
This is that which does accompany you to your Shops, to your Counting-Houses,
to your several Employments, to your Beds, and will also to the Period of your
Lives. It was this, that inwardly smote David, and made him confess himself
guilty of Murder, and Adultery, in the matter of Vriah, and Bath-Sheba 2 Samuel
12.13.
. 'Twas this that kept Joseph chaste, by which he withstood the Temptation of
his unchaste Mistress. And although he might (probably) have committed folly
with her; with much security from punishment by his Master, and with worldly
Advantage from his Mistress; yet (hearkening to the Counsel of this his inward
Guide,) he gave a repulse to the Tempter, saying, Genesis 39.9.
How shall I do this great Wickedness, and sin against God? Some of the Ancient
and Pious Philosophers knew this, though by another Name, calling it their
(...).
Synteresis, which filled their Souls with a continual aversation, to that
which was evil, and a proclivity to that which is good. Let this Synteresis,
which, according to the Scriptures, we call the Measure of Romans 4.7.
God's Grace, his Holy 1 Cor. 12.7.
Spirit, the Joh. 1.9.
Light of Christ Jesus in Man's Conscience, Let this I say be your daily
Monitor. Let it be in your Hearts as a flaming Sword, to stop you in the way to
that which is evil, and as a continual prompter of you to all acts of Holiness.

Be diligent in searching the holy Scriptures. Bestow your vacant hours, rather
upon them, than upon Plays, and profane Interludes. And particularly let me
recommend to you the frequent, and serious reading of the second, third and
fourth Chapters of the Proverbs of Solomon. That which beautified Timothy's
Childhood, will no less grace your Youthful Years. And that knowledge which was
able to make him 2 Timothy 3.15, 16.
wise unto salvation, can (if with honest and humble hearts, ye wait for Divine
Instruction) do the same for you.

Be constantly upon your watch, knowing that the Enemy of your Soul's peace is
continually near you. Live so, as that Death may not surprise you at unawares.
But that, if summoned in the flower of your Age, you may be able cheerfully to
give up, and say, Lord, we are ready. And if you are spared until gray Hairs
become your covering, ye may (reflecting upon your bypast Lives) lay down your
hoary heads in peace.

Remember, O remember, that the end of the just man's Race (only) is Peace
Isal. 37.37. Isa. 26.7.
: which is not to be obtained, but by walking in the just man's path, that
leads to it, which is Vprightness. Let no man deceive you, nor deceive your own
precious Souls, I entreat you. Gal. 6.7.
Such as you sow, such you shall certainly reap. If you sow to the flesh, to
worldly pleasures, and vanity, ye shall reap to your selves sorrow and anguish:
But if ye sow to the Spirit, to Righteousness, and Holiness, ye shall reap the
Fruits of Peace, and Joy unspeakable.

The worst of men, which hates a good man's life, will yet covet the Numb.
23.10.
good man's end. But let me close my friendly Counsel to you with this great
Truth, That, if you would die the righteous man's death, you must
(indispensably) live the righteous man's life, or you will assuredly deceive
your own Souls.

Finally, When all Ranks and Orders of Men, Old and Young, High and Low,
Magistrates and People, shall live in the faithful discharge of their Duty of
Fear and Service toward God, and of true Love and Forgiveness one toward
another: Then shall the City of Bristol justly be styled as Jerusalem of old
once was, the Neh. 11.1.
holy City, the Psalm. 48.8.
City of our God, the Isa. 1.26.
City of righteousness, the faithful City.

And now, that Holiness to the Lord may be written upon her Gates; that Mercy
and Truth may ever be found within her Walls, and Righteousness and Peace
within her Borders: Amos 5.24.
That Judgment may run down in her Streets, as Waters, and Righteousness as a
Mighty Stream: That that doleful Lamentation, which Christ with Tears once took
over languishing Jerusalem, may never be justly taken up, over the City of
Bristol, saying, Mat. 23.37, 38.
If thou had known, even thou, at least in this thy day, the things, which
belong unto thy Peace! But now they are hid from thine eyes: That the bright
Sunshine of Heaven's Bounty, and Blessings, both Spiritual and Temporal, may
never be eclipsed over her: That all her Inhabitants, from the least to the
greatest, may know the Lord their Redeemer; And that they may fully understand
those things which do concern their Happiness in this World, and their Eternal
Happiness in that Kingdom which shall never have an end, is the hearty and
fervent Prayer of,

Your Faithful Friend, and Fellow-Citizen, Thomas Speed.

FINIS.

