REASONS why we should admit the King to a personal Treaty In PARLIAMENT, and
not Treat by Commissioners.

Printed in the Year 1647.

Reasons why we should admit the King to a Personal Treaty in Parliament, and
not to treat by Commissioners.
FIrst, in respect of the Writ, whereby the Lords are summoned, the Knights,
and Burgesses elected, and sent to Parliament, in which Writ the King declares,
that by the advice of his Counsel for certain difficult and argent affairs
concerning himself, his Realm of England, and the English Church, he has
appointed to hold a Parliament at Westminster, 3. November following, and there
to have conference and treaty with his Barons, and therefore enjoynes every
Baron upon his Allegiance to be Personally there to handle and give advice upon
the said urgent affairs, etc. wherein consider the things to be handled and
advised on. First, touching himself, the safety of his Person; then of the
Kingdom, the peace and government: Lastly of the Church, the settlement of
Religion, and (...) of the Clergy; surely these are inter ardua Regni, and for
which he called the Paliament to have conference with his Barons about them,
and to advice with them, and not to resolve without them: Let us remember that
the King does not pass any Bill touching the most trivial matter against his
meanest Subject, before he has had (if he desired it) personal conference and
advice from his Barons, and shall we in these matters, touching his own
Person, the peace and welfare of his whole Kingdom, the settlement of Religion
and maintenance of Gods Ministers, shall we in these difficult and urgent
affairs, (not to use a worse word) press him to consent to, and settle these
weighty businesses (Rege inconsulto) without conference with his Parliament,
only with a few Commissioners a way not consonant to the Writ, nor warranted by
presidents.

The King may under his great Seal make Commissioners to give in Parliament
his consent to any Bill. But what Law gives the two Houses power to make
Commissioners to take his Majesty's consent out of Parliament, if none, then
what can be the success of Commissionary treaties, but burdensome and
destructive delays?

By Law the King cannot be debarred in Parliament the conference and advice of
any one Baron, and shall we in Parliament at once deny him the conference and
advice of his whole Baronage, and that in matters of the highest nature? Let us
remember that we Knights and Burgesses are but representative persons.
Atturnies for our several Counties and Burrowes, and cannot exceed the power
celegated to us by the persons represented, which by the writ and return of
our Election appears to be to act and consent to such things as shall there
(in Parliament) happen to be ordained, etc. but gives us no power to act or
consent to things or dained or concluded by Commissioners at Uxbridge or
elsewhere out of Parliament, we must therefore with safety pursue our power
according to the usage of former Parliaments for innovations, and new
presidents, as this may be dangerous to us, hurtful to our Posterity.

Secondly, let the King treat in Person, that we may avoid the scandal that
otherwise will be thrown upon us out of our own Votes. Petitions,
Replications, Declarations, etc. as in our Vote 16. Mar. 1641. Resolved upon
the Question, that those persons that advise the King to absent himself from
his Parliament are enemies to the peace of the Kingdom, and Causers of the
Rebellion in Ireland; for surely it those that advise his absence from
Parliament be enemies to the peace of the Kingdom, they that force his absence
from Parliament, when his Majesty offers, and has so often desired to come to
his Parliament, are (in a higher degree) enemies to the peace of the Kingdom,
especially when his presence in Parliament, might as is hoped, give an end to
our taxes, loanes, billettings, etc.

Next in our Petition of the 16 of July. 1642. We beseech his Majesty to draw
nearer to his Parliament: His Majesty in his answer offers to come to his
Parliament to any place but Westminster, where, in respect of the Tumults (and
those unpunished) his Person could not be safe, which was the cause his Majesty
departed thence.

In our Replication, 26 of Jul. 1642 to that answer we continue our desires, To
have his Majesty come to his Parliament to the usual place (Westminster) as
the place of safety for his Royal Person, considering the assurance the
Parliament has of the Loyalty and Fidellity of the City of London to his
Majesty, and the care the Parliament will have to prevent dangers, his Majesty
may justly apprehend, besides the manifold conveniences to be had there beyond
other parts of the Kingdom: Now when his Majesty offers to come as we desired
to the usual place, as the place of safety for his Royal Person (lately
endangered) to the place where the Parliament (because nigh) may the better
prevent al dangers apprehended by his Majesty, to the place where manyfold
conveniences are to be had beyond other Parts of the Kingdom.

We will not admit him to come to his Parliament, but will treat with him by
Commissioners, a new way, at a place not usual (it may be) not safe for His
Royal Person, perhaps at a place where the Parliament cannot (in respect of
the distance) prevent the dangers justly apprehended by his Majesty, and at a
place short of the manyfold conveniences to be had at Westminster: and will
not all the world then believe that our ends and intents are other then our
Petitions and Declarations pretend?

Let the King treat in Person even to avoyde the mischief threatened by
Commissionary treaties, which (by miserable experience) are branded as
insuccesfull and tedious, and thereby continuing the Army unpayd, increasing
our taxes, lones, and insupportable payments, expelling trade and commerce both
for the importing foreign, and exporting home Commodities, decaying our
shipping the strength of our Nation, inviting the attendants of Civil War,
Dearth and Famine, to perfect the ruin of our made miserable Nation: for while
the Houses are instructing their Commissioners, their Commissioners certifying
the Houses, the Houses in a personal treaty might have concluded with the
King, paid and disbanded the Army, eased our taxes, freed us of billetting
Soldiers, and so meet in Diameter what we seem to hunt in circumference.

Lastly, it is considerable that all treaties, all concessions and grants made
by the King while at distance from the Parliament, and under a kind of
restraint (being tied to consent, and sign Bills before admitted to come to
Parliament) are in themselves void and null in Law, as Acts obtained by force
and durance, and then the Subject relying on such Acts for oblivion, etc. may
be hanged with his pardon about his neck, for the sworn Judge must judge
according to Law, not the intents of the King and Houses. But all Acts, Grants,
and Concessions made by the King in open and free Parliament without any
conditions or respects of former treaties are in themselves most honorable,
most just, and most firm, most valide in Law and conscience, which will be had
by a Personal Treaty, and doubtless render a wished safety to the Subject, a
blessed and lasting peace to the Kingdom, which God in his mercy send us.

FINIS.

