The Case of our Affairs, IN LAW, RELIGION, And other Circumstances briefly
Examined, and Presented to the CONSCIENCE.

Tudor Rose

Scottish Thistle

Printed in the Year, 1643.

The Case of our Affairs in Law, Religion, and other Circumstances briefly
examined, etc.
THough the Bonds of all Duty are originally and principally founded in God,
and tied by Religion; yet seeing all civil Duties relate to the particularitie
of the humane Ordinance, and according to the nature of it, is with more or
less importance to be exacted. What Subject soever would find the true rule
and bond of his obedience, must in the first place look what the State is
wherein he lives, and in whom the Soveraignitie is to which his obedience and
faith is inevitably bound.

Our State of England (even by the declaration of our Laws) is a Kingdom, an
Empire, a well regulated Monarchy; 25. H. 8. cap. 22. 24 H 8. cap. 12. 26. H.
8. cap* 2. 1. Eliz. 1. 1. Iac. 1. Co. 5. Codry case, fol. 9. b. vide the Parl.
writ.
the Head thereof a Supreme Head, a Sovereign, a King whose Crown is an
Imperial Crown, the Kingdom His Kingdom, His Realm, His Dominion, the People
His People, the Subject His Subject, not only as they are single men, but even
when being in Parliament assembled, they make the Body Representative of the
whole Kingdom considered apart without the King, so that the very Parliament it
self is also by our Laws called His Parliament: the King alone by Law has
power to call together in Parliament that Representative Body, and at His
pleasure to dissolve it; He personally has Homage and Oath of fidelity of all
the Peers as of His Barons, and all the Commons in Parliament do by Law swear
Allegiance to Him as to the Only Supreme Governor, and to assist and defend
all Jurisdictions, 1. Eliz. 1. and 5. El. 1.
Privileges, Preheminences, and Authorities, belonging to Him, His Heirs and
Successors, or annexed to the Imperial Crown of the Realm. By the same Oath
also is every Officer of considerable trust in Church and Commonwealth assured
to His Majesty; and not only they, but every single man of twelve years of
age ought by Law in some or other of His Majesty's Leetes to swear Allegiance
to His Majesty: and never in our Law have we known an Oath of obedience to be
made unto the Parliament, or any other Power in any case, either of
mis-government or danger, how extraordinary soever.

This Soveraignitie in the King appears not only by that Oath of Supremacy,
but by the constant acknowledgement of our Acts of Parliament both ancient and
modern, which always style the King Our Sovereign Lord the King, that is,
not Sovereign Lord to every single man only (as the Observer traitorously and
foolishly would make it) but the universalitie of us, even to our Body
Representative in Parliament. For we must note that though we have among us
many that are called Lords even by our Acts of Parliament themselves, yet being
Lords without relation to the community or public they are never called Our
Lords, but The Lords, with addition of such or such place or Office; and they
indeed are Lords singulis, not universis, for every particular man may call
such a Lord My Lord, but the Community may not call him Our Lord, for to be
Our Lord is to be Lord of the Community, and that belongs only to Our
Sovereign Lord the King.

Our very Acts of Parliament declaring this State to be a right Imperial
Kingdom, a Kingdom (we know) consists of no more than two formal parts
only, that is to say, a Sovereign Head, and a Subject Body; and then it
clearly follows that what cooperation soever there be of any of the Members
with the Head for the doing of any necessary Act of State, whatsoever
necessity there be of the concurrence of those Members; and howsoever they may
seem to be Parties, Orders, or States, co-equally authorized in the power of
acting with the Head, yet plainly there neither is, nor can be any
co-ordination, nor co-equalitie of any Estate, Order, or Degree, of the Subject
with the Sovereign, nor any competition of the Subjects power (in his
concurrence) with the virtuall and primary influence of the Sovereigns power;
but a plain subordination and subjected ministration of the one under the
Soveraignitie of the other, as in the further examination of their differing
interests will manifestly appear.

We see the Soveraignitie of this State clearly vested in the King, by Law
established in Him, Lo. Cha. Egertons Post nati 73. b.
and inseparably annexed to His Person, by which He has also inseparably both
the Sovereign power and Sovereign judgment: but as in judging and
determining matters of private interest, His power is not absolute, but is
restrained to judgment, (not judgment arbitrary in His owm Person but
judgment to be administered by the proper sworn Judges of His Courts of Law)
so in matters of public affair, for so much as concerns the making of Law;
His power and judgment are so restrained to the concurrence of the Nobles, and
Commons in Parliament, as that He cannot make any settled Law without their
consent* but then in all other things that are not expressly restrained by any
Law, as in providing for the present safety against sudden danger, which
Senates are so unapt to do, as that the famous Roman Senate was ever fain to
choose a Dictator to do it for them; likewise in levying of Arms, suppressing
of tumults and rebellions, convoaking of Parliaments, and dissolving of them,
making of Peers, granting liberty of sending Burgesses to Parliament,
treating with Foreign States, making of War, League, and Peace, granting safe
conduct and protection, indenizing, giving of Honor, rewarding, pardoning,
coining, and the like: in all these and diverse other points of Regalitie, the
Soveraignitie both of judgment and power ever has been and still is in the
King alone, freely and at his own discretion is secured to him by t^^ Oath of
Supremacy, whereby as aforesaid, the whole Representative of Commons, all
Magistrates and men in place both in Church and Commonwealth svvear To assist
and defend all jurisdictions, privileges, preheminences, and authorities
belonging to the Kings. For it is plain, that seeing that by the Law of God
and Nations, Psalm. 60, 7. Genesis 49.10 Deuteronomy. 33.4. and 5.
to be King is to be Supreme Judge and Lavv-giver; whosoever is King is
supreme in every thing wherein he is not especially restrained, and his
restraint being by the peculiar Laws of his Kingdom, he can be no further
restrained than the known Laws thereof expressly manifest.

The great restraint of regal absoluteness in our State is in the two points
of declaring and making of Law, in neither of which does the King depart
with any whit of his Soveraignitie. In the point declaring of Law, the King
is restrained ordinarily to the mediation of his Judges, who to declare the
Law by deliverie of the genuine sense and interpretation of Law according to
to art and rules of science, are in their respective Courts the proper and
authorized Judges, and Interpreters of Law, and do by their interpretation and
judgment then bind both the King and Subject.

Next above them upon error supposed in their judgment, the House of Lords
(who anciently were exercised in the Laws and learned in them, Lo. Cha.
Egertons Post nati fol. 22. and 23. sect. 4.
and are assisted with all or most of the Judges of the Benches) do upon Writs
of Error in Parliament revise, and by the advice of the Judges affirm or
reverse the Sentence of the next inferior Courts, where the judgment whither
given for the King or for a common person, may be reversed, and as well the
King as the common person bound by their reversall and judgment, unless they
be relieved by express Act of Parliament.

Other way of Declaring Law, in true propriety of speech (that is, to declare
the genuine sense and dictate of the Law as it naturally arises from the force
of Laws in being) there is none: for as for declaring Law by Act of
Parliament, though that of all other be most authentic, yet it is not
authentic for acurate judgment in interpretation supposed to be in the two
Houses there, so much as for authority legislative administered by the three
Orders of that high Court: for should the three Orders declare Law contrary to
what were Law indeed, yet could not their Declaration be erroneous, for that it
thenceforth altered the Law and made their dictate Law though it were none
before. Such Declaration of Law therefore being never possible to be made but
by the full legislative power of all the three Orders, is not so properly a
Declaring or interpreting of Law, as rather the making of it, and is therefore
to be referred to the point of restraint in making of Law. And this is clear
that in such declaring of Law the Kings power is so much less restrained than
it is by declaring of Law by their inferior Courts as that in this he himself
has ever a personal Vote in the Declaration, but in other he has none at all.

As to the restraint of regal absoluteness in point of making Law. When our
wise and pious Christian Princes had once brought the Kingdom to an happy frame
of just and regular Government, and sought by all means the establishment of
that good condition, which promised both prosperity to their people, and
stabilitie to their own Dominion. (Change and Innovation being thenceforth more
to be feared than any other thing) They for preservation of what they had done,
began to yield the absoluteness of their power, without which they could never
have brought the State into any perfect frame, unto some retardation of motion,
and regulation of power; and came by degrees not only to use the advice of the
Bishops and Barons in making of their Laws, but their consents also; and then
not only their advice and consents, but the advice and consents of the Commons
also; condescending at last that as to the power of making Law, their Scepter
should thenceforth be locked up under the cautelous ward of a triple hand; so
as no new Act whatsoever should obtain the Authority of a positive Law without
the agreement of the King, the Peers, and the Commons; to the end that no
unadvised Law, not well examined and found agreeing with the interests of every
of the three formal parts of this Kingdom, might in any part maime or enfeeble
the established frame, which yet did not so much coop up or curb the regal
power from any due work or office that belongs to it; as rather close and
fence it in, within the bounds of safety and of preservation.

Now this restraint being at first collateral and accidental to the
Sovereign power, did not in the beginning otherwise bind our Princes than by
their voluntary and pious submission of their wills, till constant custom
becoming a Law made that usage which was at first at their will, become an
absolute and inevitable limitation of their power, so as that at this day no
positive Law can now be made by the King, without the consent of the Peers and
of the Commons: and yet for all this necessity now of their concurrence and
consent, not any part of the Soveraignitie (to which the legislative power is
inseperably incident) is in any sort transferred, or communicate unto them: but
as in our Copy hold Estates, the Copy holder of a mere Tenant at Will, comes by
custom to gain a customary inheritance, and so to limit and restrain the will
and power of the Lord, as that he cannot make any determination of the
Copyholders estate otherwise than according to the custom of the Manor: yet
does not he deprive the Lord of his Lordship in the Copy hold, nor participate
with him in it, neither yet divest the Fee and Frank-tenement out of the lord,
but they still remain in him and are ever parcel of the Lords Demeasne. So in
this restraining of the Kings legislative power to the concurrence of the
Peers and Commons: though the custom of the Kingdom has so fixed and settled
the restraint, as that now the King cannot in that point use his sovereign
power without the concurrence of the Peers and Commons according to the
custom of the Kingdom, yet still the Soveraignitie (and with it the
inseparable legislative power) does soly reside in the King. As for the Peers
and Commons they being merely Instruments of Regulation and qualification of
the Kings legislative absoluteness, are no sharers with him in the
Soveraignitie, but always remain (as our very legislative Acts of Parliament
do always speak them) His Majesty's Subjects. And His Majesty for all this
restraining power of theirs remains (as they themselves in the legislative
Acts, and not without an Oath, acknowledge Him their true and only Sovereign.

Apparently therefore the Soveraignitie or regal power being thus in matters
of private interest restrained to the rule, jurisdiction, and administration of
Law, as well by inferior Courts as by the House of Lords; and in the public
affair of making Law, restrained to the concurrence of the Peers and Commons,
is not so properly said to be restrained, as regulated. For neither is any of
the Kings just and necessary power to the prejudice of the Crown taken from Him
(for the Law in no sort suffers any diminution of the just and due
Soveraignitie) neither is there any partnership of the Supremacy thereby
thrust upon the King, when the Law, notwithstanding the restraint expressly
declares Him The only Supreme Governor. Neither yet is any of the irregular
and exorbitant absoluteness, which the Law separates from the regalitie, any
way transferred to the Courts or persons that are the instrumentals of the
regulation, but the Law separating all irregular licentiousness from the
Regalitie, utterly annihilates and makes null all practice and exercise
thereof. In sum, all that is effected by this regulation is, the King as He
ever was, so still remains, wholly and soly Sovereign of the Kingdom only,
not of a licentious and illegal, but of a regular and legitimate Dominion.

But when the power and authority of Parliament is acknowledged to be the
highest, most absolute, and most Sovereign power in the Kingdom, and seems
repugnant to that which we have alleged, that the Soveraignitie is wholly and
soly in the King; We shall easily reconcile that apparition of contradiction,
if we consider that we use the word Parliament to diverse senses, and that in
two senses wherein we use the word Parliament there is no Soveraignitie to be
ascribed to it.

We sometimes use the word Parliament for the House of Lords only. As when
upon Writs of Error any Judgment in the Kings Bench is examined in the House
of Lords, and there affirmed or reversed, the Judgment is said to be affirmed
or reversed by Parliament. And yet though in that sense, the House of Lords is
well enough called The Parliament, yet is it not the high Court of Parliament,
which is the supreme Judgment, power, and Authority of the Kingdom, and that
we may easily see in this, that though the Lords have power there to reverse
the Judgments of their inferior Courts, yet have they not power to reverse
their own Judgments, nor to restore again any Judgment that they have
reversed; for they judging ministerially, and not soveraignely, do as well
bind their own hands as the hands of their inferiors, whereas the absolute
sovereign power does not so, but may reverse any judgment that they
themselves have given, and again restore the judgment that they themselves
reversed, for the absolute supreme Court having Juris dandi dictionem, can
never be at the last period of her jurisdiction; but looking ever forward to
the present occasion, whatsoever passed before, it pro re nata legislatively
judges, makes, and declares Law. But the House of Lords (though the most
superior of all Courts of ministerial jurisdiction) and all other inferior
Courts, (they having no other jurisdiction than only juris dati dictionem,) in
using their jurisdiction do consummate it, and bring it to a period, beyond
which they cannot go. Besides the House of Lords is nor universally to all
occasions a iudicatorie, and therefore not sovereign, but is the distinct
Court of the Kings Barons of Parliament of particular and ministerial
jurisdiction, in which the King (though one of the three Voters in Parliament)
yet in those things which come by process of Law to receive determination
there only, has no Vote at all, no more than in all other Courts of
ministerial jurisdiction.

Sometime we use the word Parliament for the two Houses of Parliament only,
and that in regard they are the gross of the Body, whereof the Parliament
consists, there wanting only the Sovereign Head to complete it. But the two
Houses alone without the King are so far from being the supreme and high
Court of Parliament, as that they are not at all a complete Court, neither can
they so unite or conioyne as to be an entire Court of either sovereign or
ministerial jurisdiction. But are two distinct Courts (if so be the House of
Commons which cannot minister an Oath, nor fine, nor imprison any but their own
Members) may be called a Court, then are they Courts, not otherwise
cooperating, than by concurrence of Votes in their several Houses, for
preparing matters in order to an Act of all the three Orders of the Parliament,
which when they have done their Votes, are so far from having any Legal
Authority in the State, as that in Law there is no style, nor form of their
joint Acts, nor does the Law so much as take notice of them, until they have
the royal assent, which if the King refuses, he yet does no injury to any,
for that every of the three Orders that are the formal parts of the high Court
of Parliament, (that is, the King, the Peers, and Commons) are every of them
by Law trusted for their own respective interests to be the only assured
Conservatours of the rights that do belong unto them, and may therefore every
one of them freely dissent from the Votes of the other two, nor is their any
danger that it should be so, but contrarily the most assured safety that may
be, for the consequence of their not agreeing can be no worse, than that their
several interests shall still remain in the condition that they were before,
until such time as that they shall all three agree upon the state of
alteration. Now when the two Houses alone do no way make an entire Body,
House, or Court, and when their is no known style, nor form of any Law, or
Edict by the Votes of them two only, nor any notice of them taken by the Law,
it is apparent there is no Soveraignitie in their two Votes alone.

To argue now as some do, that the King must not deny His Vote, for if by
denying it He may frustrate the Votes of the two Houses, by the same reason may
He frustrate the Votes of all inferior Courts, and open a way to the most
boundless tyranny that ever was, is a most perverse and absurd falsitie;
there being no affinity nor resemblance of the course of those Courts with
that of Parliament. For in inferior Courts the Judges sit and give Judgment
for the King, and not for themselves; and the Law there authorizes them to give
the Kings Judgment, and none but them, and therefore the Kings Dissent or
Countermand cannot frustrate their Judgments. But in Parliament the Peers and
Commons neither sit nor Vote for the King, but for themselves. And the Law
appoints the King himself to give His own Vote there (which if the Peers and
Commons in His absence could have supplied, the Statute 33. H. 8.21. needed not
have provided that His Consent or Vote by His Letters under His Great Seal
should be as effectual, as if He himself in Person had assented.) Besides the
Judgment given by the Judges in inferior Courts, is complete in Law without
the assent of the King, and therefore cannot be frustrate by the Kings dissent;
but the Votes of the two Houses are therefore to be frustrated for want of the
Kings assent, because without it they are not complete nor perfect. The high
Court of Parliament therefore resembling a Chair of three feet, the two Houses
make but two of the three, which without the third is lame and useless (as to
making of Law) but with the third becomes a firm and useful seat, and makes
that sacred Tripos from whence the Civil Oracles of our Law are delivered. When
therefore we speak of the Sovereign power and Authority of the Parliament,
that never is to be understood of the power of the two Houses only, nor any
such Sovereign power to be ascribed unto them*

Now in the last place, we use the word Parliament for the three Orders of
Parliament agreeing in their Votes; then, and then only use we the word
Parliament properly, and in that sense only is the Parliament the supreme
Court, the highest judicatorie, and most sovereign power, and authority in
the Kingdom. But we must ever understand, that it is not the most Sovereign
Court, for any Soveraignitie placed in the two Houses, and from them
transferred or communicated to His Majesty, by their joining or consenting
with him; but it is therefore the most sovereign Court, because every complete
and perfect Act of it is the Act of the personal will, and power of the
Sovereign himself, Standing in His highest Estate Royal, Crompt. ^ur. 10. b.
The speech of H. 8. in Parl. by information of the Judges.
and (through the concurrence of those that are the instrumentals of His
restraint) more freely and absolutely working there, than in any other time and
place he can do. For as a man that yeildeth himself to be bound by keepers,
has the use of his strength taken from him, but none of the natural strength
it self, much less any of it transferred to them that bound him, but
whenever they loose his bonds, he again works and acts by virtue of his own
natural strength, and not by any received from them: So the natural right and
interest of the Soveraignitie being soly in the King, and the Peers and
Commons being only interessed in the Office of restraining, for the regular
working of true legitimate Soveraignitie, in whatsoever the Peers and Commons
by consenting remit the restraint, the King in that wills and works
absolutely by the power of his own inherent Soveraignitie. And whatsoever Act
of the Court so passes the hands of all the three Orders, does in truth
virtually proceed from the King, as from the true and proper efficient thereof:
which does not obscurely nor rarely appear in our Acts of Parliament, Stat.
West. 1, 3. E. 1.1.3. E. 1.3. and 6* and 42. Stat. of Merch. 13. E. 1. Westminster.
3.18. E. 1.1. Stat. of waste 20. E. 1. of Appeal, 28. E. 1.1. E. 2.1. and all
the Titles of the Acts of our Parliament.
but plainly and frequently throughout the whole Body of our ancient Laws,
The King Wills, the King Commands, the King Ordains, Provideth,
Establishes, Grants, etc. And yet though properly they be the Acts of the
King in Parliament; yet are they also truly the Acts of the whole high Court of
Parliament, because that every of the three Estates contribute their power
according to the diversity of their office and interest, the two Houses by
remitting through the consenting the restraint, and the King by using his then
unrestrained power.

We are also to consider, that though this high Court of the three Orders be
the supreme Judicatorie of the Kingdom, yet it has not that superiority of
judgment ascribed to it, for any sovereign faculty it has in discerning the
true dictate and result of Law, no more than of any other particular Science
(as of Divinity, Vnicuique in sua art credendum, 11. H 7.9.34. H. 6 14
Philosophy, Physic, Mathematiques, etc.) for the judgment of Sciences
belongs to the professors thereof, and the judgment of Law as well as of
other Sciences. But the high Court of Parliament is the supreme judge, for the
great trust the Law reposeth in the concurrence of all the three Orders, (who
have means to have the best information of Law that the whole profession does
afford, and are supposed to use it) and likewise for the great power they have
to bind all other judgment, and to make their sentence Law, though (as we
have said) it were not Law before.

But we are further to observe that in the point of making of Law, the Law
restraining thus the Sovereign power to the consent of the Peers and Commons,
the more that by this regulation it purged it from destructive exorbitances,
the more tender it grew of the just and legitimate rights thereof remaining,
and therefore considering the person of the Sovereign to be single, and his
power counterpoised by the opposed wisdom of the two numerous Bodies of the
two Houses, it allowed unto the King power to swear unto himself a Body of
Council of State (which our Laws sometime call His Grand Council) and to
swear unto him also Counselors at Law, 25. E. 3.4.37. E. 3.18 42. E 3.3.17.
R. 2. Vide the Oath of the Justices, an. 18 E. 3. Ye shall swear etc. that
lawfully ye shall counsel the King in his business, and ye shall not counsel
nor assent to any thing which may turn him in damage, etc. and ye shall do and
procure the profit of the King, and of his Crown, with all things, where ye may
reasonably do the same, and if ye be found in default, etc. ye shall be at the
Kings will, of body, goods, and lands, thereof to do as shall please him. So
help, etc. Vide the Statute de Big^m.
even the Judges themselves, and others learned in the Law, faithfully to
advise him in his Government, that he may neither do nor receive wrong,
especially not in Parliament, where the wrong may be perpetual. And if upon a
general pretense of evil counsel, without any instance in what, his Majesty
be deprived of the use and assistance of and assistance of any of his sworn
Counsel (especially in Parliament time, when the Soveraignitie may be so
easily overmatched) it will make such a breach of the privilege of the first
of the three Orders in Parliament, as will destroy the true frame of
Parliaments, diminish the power of the Crown, and bring the settled estate of
the Kingdom into the calamitous innovation of an unsettled and ever changing
Form of Government, and so into all manner of misery and confusion.

The Soveraignitie in the King alone, is so clearly acknowledged by our Law, as
that (unless we would reject the judgment and recognition of all our
Parliament, and especially of all our most sincere and unquestioned Parliaments
all the time of Queen Elizabeth, and ever since, all which do not only affirm
but swear it) it would be idle to go about to make praise of it. But when the
incredible perverseness of some, and in particular of him that writes, The
treachery and disloyalty of Papists, etc. does not only affirm the
contrary, but would pretend to prove it. It cannot be a digression in a word or
two to give some answer to his reasonings.

I shall pass over Minshaw's Dictionarie, Speed, Stowe, Vowell, Fox, and
others, whose authority he is not ashamed to cite for determining matter in
Law, and which (if indeed it were a question) were of the greatest consequence
that ever was stirred in Law. And because he so much insists upon Bracton, I
shall briefly examine Bracton, and the Authors integrity in citing him and
others.

And first, that all men may know how little authority in Law Bracton either
now has, or anciently has had. Our yeare-bookes tell us that in the 35. H. 6.
It was declared by the whole Court, that Bracton was never held an Author in
our Law, 35. H. 6. Fitz* A^r. tit. guard. 72. page 3: Braect. li. 1: c. 16. part
3 fol. 34.
and then it is not material what is the opinion of one that is of no
authority. But if he were; yet those words in Bracton so much insisted on, Rex
habet superiorem Deum, Legem, item Curiam suam* etc. are not indeed Bractons
assertion. For Bracton speaking of the Kings Deeds and Charters, and affirming
(which we would be loath should be Law at this day) that Neither the Justices
nor private men may dispute the Kings Deed, but that if there be doubt of his
Deed, or Charter, the resolution must come from the Kings own interpretation
and will, etc. Then goes he on thus; But some may say (says he) that the King
may do justice, and well: and if so, he may by the same reason do ill, and so
put a necessity upon him, that he mend the injury, least both King and
Justices fall into the judgment of the living God for the injury. The King
has a Superior, to wit, God: also the Law, by which he is made King: also His
Court, to wit, the Earls and Barons, etc. Now whosoever considers the place,
it is all a reasoning which Bracton supposes some other to make, and no
affirmation of his own, and that is also plain by his words in another place,
where speaking of the King, Bract. li. 1. c* 8 p. 5.
If Justice (says he) be demanded of him, seeing no Writ lies against him, one
must petition, that he would correct and amend what he had done. Which if he do
not, it is sufficient for his punishment, that he must expect God to be the
Avenger of it. Not a word of the Courts avenging or rectifying of the injury,
or of their enforcing the King to do it himself. Again, speaking of Earls,
though with little judgment he would seem to derive their Office from the
Etymology of the Latin name Comes (which was but a late borrowed translation
brought in use by the Conqueror) and would so make them a kind of Companions
with the King; yet does he not make them Companions thrust upon the King by
Law, but the Kings (says he) do associate such to themselves for advice and
government. Every one truly is under him, and he under none but God, and he
has no Peer in his Kingdom, for then he should loose the Command, when as one
Peer has no command over another, much less has any one command over his
superior, for so he should be inferior to his own Subjects: and the King
ought not to be under man, but under God, and the Law: now these words of
Bracton tell us that the other are neither his assertion nor approbation.

And whereas by those words of Bracton, that The King ought to be under the
Law, he would infer a direct Soveraignitie over the King, he very much
corrupts the meaning of Bracton, for it is one thing to be subject to Law, and
to the administration of Law, and another thing to be a Subject to those that
have the administration of Law as to his Sovereigns. Our Savior Christ was
subject to the Law, and to the administration of the Law in the hands of them
that were the Ministers of it: yet was not Christ the Subject of those
Ministers, nor they his Sovereigns, but contrary he theirs, he being Borne
King of the Jews. And Bracton's reason that the King must be under the Law is,
because he is Christ's Vicar on earth. And Christ himself was under the Law; so
as plainly Bracton means not the King, otherwise under the Law, then as our
Savior Christ was, who did subject himself to the just execution of the
positive Laws of the Kingdom, of which he himself was the Head and Fountain,
not that he should be subject to the administration of any arbitrary Law,
residing in the people, who should in the last resort be Sovereigns over their
own King: for that was not suitable to one that should be Vicar of Christ, but
to a Vicar of the people. Neither is the King more subject to any judgment
that can be given in Parliament, than He is to judgments given in inferior
Courts, to which if you will say the Parliament is superior to those Courts,
and the superiority that is but subordinately in them is soveraignely in the
Parliament; truly the superiority (if it may so be called) that is
subordinately in the inferior Courts, is but more superiourly in the House of
Lords than them, but it is not soveraignely neither in the Lords House, nor any
other part of Parliament, till we come to the judgment of all the three
Estates, (where the Kings will is the efficient formal of the Law) and there
you may see that the Vicar of Christ the King, like Christ His Lord, whom He
represents; in being subject to the Law, of which He is Sovereign, becomes
at last subject to none but Himself: for that high Court of Parliament
speaks not without Him.

But ere we give over his citation of Bracton, we must not forget his
unfaithful application of it. For as for those words, The King has a superior
(that is to say) God, also the Law, also His Court, to wit, the Earls and
Barons. He would not only have them Bracton's words, and have them understood
to carry Soveraignitie over the King, but would have that Soveraignitie placed
in the two Houses, when as Bracton expressly expounds that the Court which he
means is the Earls and Barons, that is to say, the House of Lords only, and
not the Commons too; plainly showing that he means no other superiority than
such as is incident to the regular course of Justice in the way of legal suit
and process, which in that course never goes further than the House of Lords:
there is no form of prosecution in that kind in the two Houses, and therefore
neither Soveraignitie nor Superiority in that kind can be ascribed to them.

Page 38.
Neither may we pass over his falsehood and shuffling to extenuate the Oath of
Supremacy, that security may make men swallow their perjurie and never know
it: for though it be true, that the Oath was pricipally intended against
Papacy, (because the Papacy was the first that ever pretended Soveraignitie
over Kings) and the clause of renouncing runs against Foreign powers only,
as those that then were only feared to be pretenders under the Papacy; yet
the recognition it self, that The King is the only Supreme Governor. And the
Oath it self, to bear faith and true Allegiance to the King, His Heirs, and
Successors, and to assist and defend all jurisdictions, privileges,
preheminences, and authority belonging to them, etc. are clearly general,
absolute, and unrestrained to any particularitie of Papacy, Forraigners, or
any thing else whatsoever.

But to come to that that is the maine Authority, scope, and drift of his
book, and which he would by all means inculcate though but under the show of
telling what popish Parliaments have done, lest otherwise his horrible
intention might appear, he brings us precedents that the two Houses of
Parliament have upon all occasion soveraignely disposed of the Crown, and of
all the rights that do belong unto it, and that even our Kings themselves have
submitted their sovereign rights to the determination of the two Houses. 2 Timothy 3.13.
Good God! How Evil men and Seducers wax worse and worse, deceiving, and being
deceived. He that writ the Observations upon His Majesty's Answers and
Expresses had so much ingenuitie left him as to acknowledge, that There was
never King deposed by any Parliament lawfully assembled; and that the Acts of
the Parliament, R. 2. were not so properly the Acts of the two Houses as of H.
4. and His victorious Army. But this man being not ashamed to lick up what
his fellow vomited out, presents the world with a cull of all the irregular
times of our unfortunate Princes, in which (by the consent of all men) the Acts
of neither side are to be drawn into example, and bring us for judicial
Authorities, Ed. 2. Page 8. to page 15.
the horrid facts of irregular power, in the Times of King John, R. 2. H. 4. H
6. etc. And is so supine in his purpose, that with the factious Parliaments in
the Times of H. 3. E 2. and R. 2. (which he cites to have exercised authority
over Kings) he sticks not to couple the Rebellions in the North, against H. 4.
and the rebellious Insurrections of Jack Cade, Jack Straw, Wat Tyler, Doctor
Mackerell, Ket, and others, Page 15.
as Acts that made equal proof of the sovereign power of the Peers and
Commons: indeed in both there were much what the same pretenses, and both had
much what the same warrant.

But all those Parliaments as they were called in the troublesome Times of
Faction, and Civil War, so were they ever swayed by those that were the Heads
of the most potent Faction, and while they always acted in favor of them and
their Design, they are so far from being instances of the power, and
authority of the two Houses, as that clean contrary, they are plain instances
of the weakness and unsteadinesse of them; when forsaking the moderation and
guidance of their natural Head, they suffered themselves to be lead by the
private conduct of every popular pretender; Page 33, 34, 35, 35*
and so even among the precedents which he cites, we see that when Canutus
prevailed by his Arms, he could have a Parliament resolve that his Title was
the best. When Hen. 4. had an Army of 60000. he could have a Parliament depose
R. 2. and confer the Crown upon himself. When Edw. Duke of York grew
potent, he could have a Parliament be the instrument of determining the Reign
of H. 6. and leave him only the name of King for his life, but give the Duke
the very Kingdom, under the names of Protector and Regent, Edw. 4. could by
Parliament procure H 4. H. 5. and H. 6. to be declared Kings in fact, but not
in right: R. 3. though an Usurper, could procure a Parliament to declare him a
lawful King. Henry 7. could procure the forementioned Acts in favor of Edw.
4. and. R. 3. to be adnulled. Hen. 8. could have a Parliament authorize his
Divorces. And Queen Elizab. could by Parliament make it High Treason to say,
that the Queen could not by Act of Parliament bind and dispose the rights and
Titles which any person whatsoever might have to the Crown; when yet we know
that no Act of Parliament, no not an Attainder by Parliament, Adjudged H. 7.
can disable the right Heir to the Crown, because the descent of the Crown
upon Him purges all disabilities whatsoever, and makes Him capable of it.

This is the sum and true estimate of all the Authorities which he cites, in
which if the Acts could be granted to be the mere Acts of the two Houses; yet
did they no more prove the sovereign power to be in the two Houses, than the
Popes deposing of Kings proves the right of deposing them to be in him, that
the things were done, is no proof that they were lawfully done: and yet as
idle and vile a collection of examples (not to be imitated) as he has made,
Page 4.
he is fain to belie them to makem seem to serve his turn; for truly though he
affirms that the popish Parliaments, etc challenged, or claimed, greater
jurisdiction over Kings, than any ever since, yet his instances prove no more
claim of Soveraignitie than a robber claims when he exercises an arbitrary
power over a man's person and fortunes: what they did they did de facto, upon
some inferior reasons, not upon claim of the Soveraignitie; they neither
taught, nor ever learned that Jesuitique depth of Satan, that the
Soveraignitie over the Sovereign is placed in the Body Representative of the
Subject. All claim therefore of either the Soveraignitie it self, or of the
rights thereof by any Representative of the Subject, is a transcendent impiety
beyond the parallel of all his unimitable examples, in which I cannot but the
more wonder that he should ascribe the Acts unto the two Houses, when by making
the Acts theirs, he makes all the long misery and bloodshed that ensued upon
those Acts to have been brought upon the Land by the mere Act of the two
Houses. Considering therefore the every way faulty Argument of that Book, both
in citing and applying, I am forced to conclude with the same words that in the
frontispice of his Book he begins with The treacherous dealers have dealt
treacherously; yea, the treacherous dealers have dealt exceeding treacherously.
As for the second part of the same Author that came since forth under a title
that pretends to show the lawfulnes of a defensive war; that answers it self,
that it comes nothing to the case in question, where the War is acknowledged to
be an Invasive War to take from His Majesty certain Counselors, pretended to
be evil Counselors. If possibly therefore he should prove what he undertakes
to maintain that Subjects may make a Defensive War against their Sovereign,
yet being nothing to our case deserves at all no answer here, I therefore
return again unto my purpose.

That the Soveraignitie (with all the rights claimed by His Majesty) is in the
King inseparably inherent in the person of His Majesty; Co. 5. de jure and
Ecc. fol. 9. b.
we have not only the forementioned testimonies and reasons, but we have the
witness of the two Houses themselves, for whom our deceiving Pamphlets do now
make all the new arguments of pretense. For first, we have (as I have said) the
whole current and body of our very Acts of Parliament acknowledging it in
these very terms, Our Sovereign Lord the King. 25 H. 8.21*
We have the Parliament 25. H. 8 declaring thus, This Your Graces Realm
recognizing no Superior under God but Your Grace. 16. R 2, 5.
The Parliament 16. R. 2.5. affirming The Crown of England has been so free at
all times* that it has been in no earthly subjection, but immediately to God,
in all things touching the regalitie of the said Crown, and to none other. 25.
H, 5.
In the 25. H. 5. both Houses declare That it belongs to the Kings regalitie
to grant or deny what petitions in Parliament he pleases. 15. E. 3.
In the 15. E. 3. The King being unwillingly drawn to consent to certain
Articles prejudicial to the Crown, and to promise to seal the Statute
thereupon made, least otherwise his affairs in hand might have been ruinated.
Another Statute the same year reciting the matter enacted in these words, 5. E.
3.
It seemed to the said Earls, Barons, and otherwise men, that since the
Statute did not of Our free will proceed, the same be void, and ought not to
have the name nor strength of a Statute, and therefore by their counsel and
assent We have decreed the said Statute to be void, etc. In the Statute of
Banishment of H. Spencer, the first Article against him, is for making a Bill,
wherein he affirmed Homage and allegiance to the King is more by reason of
their own, Vide Ola Mag. Cha. D^ar. H. 4.
than of the person of the King. The word has a note of a Parliament roll
Diarie of H. 4. The Commons in Parliament pray the King that They may not be
made parties to any judgment in Parliament, but where in rei veritate they are
parties, for that the judgment belongs only to the King, except where it is
given by Statute. As for the Militia, the Ships and Forts of the Kingdom. The
King and His Predecessors have not only been ever in possession of them,
commanded and disposed of them even during the sitting of Parliaments, but have
enjoyed that possession without any claim of right made by the two Houses, and
our Law has not a surer badge of right than continual and unquestioned
possession. Besides, the Parliament it self, 7. E. 1. declares unto the King,
that To him of right belongs straightly to defend (that is, 7. E. 1.
to forbid) all force of Arms, and thereunto they are bound to assist him as
their Sovereign Lord. The Statute 11. H. 7 18. recites, 3. E. 3. De queux ils
nont pas cognizance 25. E. 3.2.
Where every Subject by the duty of his Allegiance is bound to serve assist
his Prince and Sovereign Lord at all seasons when need shall require, etc. In
the 3. of Edw. 3. The House of Commons disclaim the having cognizance of such
matters, as the guarding of the Seas and Marches of the Kingdom. And by the
Statute 25. E. 3.2. It is made High Treason for any to meddle with the Militia,
so far as To levy War against the King, or to aid them that do it. And we
all know that to levy War without Commission from the King, or to give aid
unto it, is by our Law to levy War, and give aid against our Sovereign Lord
the King, His Crown and Dignity. And we never knew of any exception out of
that Law in case the War were levied by Authority of the two Houses? And
when we have not in our power to search the Parliament rols for clearing these
things. If (besides our published Statutes) our Law-bookes have any authority,
3. E. 3. Fitz, tit. Cor. sta(...). pl* Cor. 153.

Bract. ti. 2. cap. 22. fol. 52. a. Rex parem non habet, nec vicinum nec
superiorem.


we have not only Bracton (whom they insist upon) but other authentic
Law-bookes concurring with him who all speaking of the King and the Houses do
expressly say, that seeing The King has no Peer, The King cannot be judged by
them. So that whatsoever authority is in the constant practice of the Kingdom,
and whatsoever authority in the known and published Laws and Statutes, all do
conclude the Soveraignitie in the person of the King, and the allegiance,
faith, obedience of the Subject even of the Subject virtually united in the
Body Representative, to be inevitably devinct and obliged to the person of the
King.

The Soveraignitie both of the frame of the State and positive Laws of the
Kingdom being fixed in the person of the King, and the Allegiance of the
Subject by Law inevitably thither assigned, then comes in Religion, and
fortifies, and enforces all those bonds of duty and obedience, and that under
the severe menace of damnation, which when it is in diverse precepts and
examples (well known unto us) abundantly set forth in the Scriptures. It will
not be safe for us to let slip the consideration of two examples especially.

The Children of Israel being redeemed out of Egypt, baptized in the Red Sea,
and brought for trial into the wilderness as they were the type of the Church
of God in all Kingdoms whatsoever in this world: so Moses their Governor was
the type of that regal power under which the Church of God in this world was
generally to be governed: so as though he were not a King in point of interest,
(for the people were not yet in the Country that was to be the Kingdom,
neither was Moses of the Tribe to whom the Kingdom was promised) yet (says the
Text) He was King when the heads of the people were assembled. Deuteronomy. 33.5.
Moses so personating the kingly Office, when as yet there was no express
command concerning obedience and subjection, more than Honor thy father and
thy mother, and he that curses father or mother let him die the death. It
happened that Corah, Dathan, and Abiram rebelled against him, and their
rebellion was but this: they in the behalf of the Congregation of the Lord,
because that it was holy every one of them, Numb. 16.3.
and the Lord among them, question Moses his Soveraignitie, charge him and
Aaron that they exalted themselves above the Congregation of the Lord, and that
Moses had not kept touch with them to bring them to a Land that flowed with
milk and honey, but sought to starve them in the wilderness, while blinding
the eyes of the people he might in the mean time make himself a Prince over
them, and out of jealousy of this they refused obedience to Moses, ib. v. 13.
and would not come at him when he sent to call them, and so much was their
cause believed to be just and right: as that they were seconded with two
hundred and fifty Princes of the Assembly famous in the Congregation: ib. v. 2.
all of them so confident, that they durst join issue with Moses, and put
themselves upon trial by Gods immediate judgment in the case, and they were
also backed with many thousands of the people. This was the Rebellion: the
Judgment we all know to be most exemplar Judgment that ever was given in any
case. The Heads of the Rebellion Corah, Dathan, and Abiram, with their wives,
their children, and all their substance, were swallowed up of the earth, they
went down quick into Hell (says the Psalmist. Psalm* 106.17.
) The two hundred and fifty that invaded the holy Office were slain with fire
from Heaven, and fourteen thousand and seven hundred of the people (that
favored their attempts and murmured at the Judgment) were in an instant (in
less than Aaron could get his Censer with fire from the Altar and run among
them) consumed in a speedy plague.

It will be objected that Moses was a man of extraordinary calling, and that
Rebellion against an ordinary Governor (though a sovereign King) is not like
Rebellion against a Governor of so extraordinary calling and privilege; all
that granted, yet this exemplar Judgment comes home to manifest the heinous
sin of rebelling against Kings at this day.

Moses had an extraordinary calling, he could not else have been a type of
regal Authority, Deuteronomy. 33.5.
but in type He was King when the heads of the people were assembled. He had
the Priest made subordinate to him, He shall be unto thee instead of a mouth,
Exo. 4.16.
and thou shall be unto him instead of God. And had the Magistracy, derived
from his Authority, to bear the burden with him, Numb. 11.15.
God took off the spirit that was upon him, and put it upon the seventie two
Elders. So Moses was clearly endued with regal power; and for trangression
against that very Authority of his was the Judgment made so exemplar. It
could not be exemplar in regard of any other Authority which he had then, and
no other since either had or could have: but that we may know the Judgment was
exemplar against Rebellion, against regal Dominion, which would often be
committed in the later days, the holy Ghost speaking against the seducers and
deceivers which in the later days should make perilous times, describes them not
only by being Cursed speakers, disobedient to parents; (that is, 2 Timothy 3* 2.
and 4. 2 Pet. 2.10 Jude 8.10. and 11.
as well to Civil parents as Natural) traitorous, headie, high-minded,
resisting the truth: like them that resisted Moses; Despising Dominion,
despising Government, speaking evil of Dignities, of those that are in
Authority, of those things which they know not, etc. but by this likewise that
They perish in the gainsaying of Corah. The other example is that of David.
Saul was a wicked apostate King, 1 Samuel 16.14. verse 1.
from whom The Spirit of God (the inward anointing) was departed. Saul rejected
from reigning over Israel. So by God himself declared. David in his stead by
God provided to be King: and to that end by Gods command anointed; by all which
David's privilege then was more above the privilege of all Subjects now, than
Readiness privilege of that time was above the privilege of Kings at this day;
and yet David for all those circumstances so much authorizing him, and
dis-authorising Saul, did not know Who could lay his hands upon the Lords
Anointed and be guiltless. Nay, 1 Samuel 26.9.
he did but lay his hand upon Readiness garment to cut off the lap for a
testimony of his loyalty, Afterward David was touched in heart because he had
cut off the lap of Saul's garment. 1 Samuel 24.6.
and innocent intention toward Saul, and yet even for that (says the Text) his
heart smote him; that he cried out, The Lord forbid I should do that thing to
my Master, to lay mine hand upon the Lords Anointed: his reason we may know in
the other words of his, The Lord shall smite him, or his day shall come to die,
or he shall descend into battle, and perish: the Lord keep me from laying
mine hand upon him: plainly inferring, that to call Princes to account belongs
only to God: that God has time and ways of his own to do it in, and will do
it: and that therefore man must not meddle with the doing of it: for if
anointed David might not intermeddle with rejected Saul, much less may common
Subjects meddle with their unrejected Sovereigns. Sufficiently therefore do
these examples show the heinousness of Subjects lifting up themselves, and
resisting the person of their Sovereign, upon what pretense soever.

Now while the severitie of these examples, and other passages of Scripture,
justly striking terror into every soul, does make us wonder what great
straight of humane affairs could be so violent an impulsive with us, as to
make Christian Subjects contrary to sworn Faith, to Law, and to Religion, not
only disobey their Sovereign, but resist, invade the sovereign rights, and
employ their Sovereigns Militia, Ships, Forts, Arms, Treasure, yea and his
own sworn Subjects too against Him; truly all that the most searching thought
can find to secure his conscience with, against the horror of so foul a
guilt, is, that otherwise we fear (or pretend to fear) that His Majesty,
seduced by evil Counselors, by popishly affected Prelates, Courtiers, and
Cavaliers, should destroy our Law, our Parliaments, our established Form of
Government, and change them into tyrannnie, and the true Protestant Religion
into Popery. This, this Fear or pretense of Fear alone is all the warrant we
can find for our unparallelled proceedings against our Sovereign. And if this
before the Tribunal of God, and of our own Laws be not sufficient for our
excuse, then have we nothing to discharge us of the guilt of public violence,
robbery, murder, perjury, treason, resistance of the Ordinance of God, and of
forcing others against their consciences by act or aid to resist with us. Now
all these evils are universally committed all over the Kingdom, and all these
evils upon no other warrant done, than that the good of Reformation (as is
pretended) may come thereon. So make we the Word of God of none effect, while
we entertain and prefer the Jesuitique tradition before it, and maintain that
what is for the good of the Church must be done, notwithstanding any bonds of
duty, of Faith, or Oath whatsoever to the contrary.

And if we examine the grounds of this Fear, and what just suspicion and
probability of such an innovation, as is pretended to be feared, is given. We
see for our assurance to the contrary, that His Majesty (after once He was
truly informed of our grievances) condescended not only to give us ease of
them, but to make His Acts of Grace in them at once exceed the Acts of all His
Predecessors since the granting of our Magna Charta; and did not only in
present relieve our sufferings, but (often invoking the Sacred Majesty of God,
as a severe Witness of His purpose for the time to come) tie Himself for ever
to settle matters of Religion according to the purest times of the Protestant
Church of England (with such ease for tender Consciences, as by a lawful
judgment of the Clergy should be judged fit) and to govern according to the
known Laws of the Land. Here is little sign of one led by evil counsel, or
of a mind that would subdue Law and Religion to the satisfaction of His
private will. This shows our Fear to be both groundles and wicked; and indeed,
after this if jealousy it self could yet make scruple of any thing, how easy
were it for the wisdom of the Body Representative, by preparing a Law of
severitie against the instruments of innovation, exposing their persons and
fortunes to certain ruin, nullifying the innovations themselves, and
discharging the Subject from all obedience and conformity unto them, to have
secured the Kingdom against all manner of fear in that kind, when as His
Majesty freely offers His Gracious assent to any Act that should in that
behalf be necessary.

But (if what cause, what ground, what reason of duty soever we find, though
constantly and universally received for true, both by the judgment of our Law,
and by the authority of our Religion, we must notwithstanding reject all to
believe the all concluding judgment of the Body Representative, whom we never
knew to have such Supremacy of judgment, till it self bearing witness of it
self did tell us so) it cannot yet but make much to the satisfaction of the
conscience, to examine how well the two Houses, now sitting, do attain the
condition of a full and free Assembly of the two Houses of Parliament, that
pretend to have such judgment.

And first it is known that the House of Commons now sitting, however elected,
was never yet perfected by a right determination of Elections, but that some
set as Members there that ought not to have been returned, and some are not
received that yet were rightly chosen, some are excluded for having hands in
Monopolies, and proiects; and others (as much interessed in them) for their
assured affection retained: the greatest part of both Houses, by means of
popular menacings, tumults, poasting up of names, branding men with the name of
Malignants, (things never known before in Parliaments) and again undeserved
expellings from the House, or imprisonings, have been so overawed, that they
have been forced to suppress their Votes, to give them contrary to their
judgments, to hide themselves, or to fly from the Houses; the residue of both
Houses, (and among them the Knights and Burgesses which the Countries sent to
reside in Parliament, that there the whole Representative advising together,
might with the more safety Vote and consent for us) they make over their
Countries trust to a few Committees of their own, and wholly betake themselves
to martial Offices and employments, exercising in them a new found arbitrary
power over those that sent them. And then the remainder of the Peers and
Commons (which are scarce a fourth part of them) call themselves the
Parliament, and all the known rights of Soveraignitie does this Epitome of
Parliament assume unto themselves and exercise; yea, the House of Commons alone
(notwithstanding their Protestation to God for the Defense of the Laws and
Liberty of the Subject) by warrant under their Speakers hand, beyond all Law
and example, imprison Subjects, that were never Members of their House, and
deny them their Habeas Corpus. And not only invade the Liberty of the
Commons, but press upon the House of Lords, the voting of things which in a
full House they had before, upon mature advice, orderly rejected. They seconded
a tumultuous Petition that demanded the names of the Lords that had dissented
from the Commons House, though the dissenters were the major part of the House
of Lords. This Epitome of Parliament has taught that which never Parliament
knew before, That their Members may not without the Order of their House be
restrained, no not for Treason. And, professing tender care of the Kings Honor
and safety, has authorized Books, The Book of Observations, Treachery and
disloyalty of Papists, etc.
wherein His Soveraignitie is made subject to the Representative of His
Subjects, and wherein the deposing of our English Kings by their Subjects is
declared warrantable; and upon the authority and warrant of this Parliament
must the poor Christian Subject that is under their power (against his
Conscience) act and give aid to the Army, which against the Kings express
Command and Proclamations they have levied; when though conscious horror and
shame will not suffer it to be acknowledged to be raised against the King; yet
are their Soldiers sure they shall meet with no other opposite than with their
rightful Sovereign, and His Followers arming for the safety of His Person,
for defense of the just rights of the Crown, for the due Privileges of the
first of the three Orders of Parliament, and for the necessary power wherewith
He is to protect Religion, Laws, and Subjects of His Kingdom. Who that makes
conscience of what he does, as one that must make account for it before the
great Tribunal (where a little integrity (though now despised) and a little
innocence of cause shall bring one more support than either King on the one
side, or Parliament on the other, or Army on either side) who (I say) thereof
mindful, can against the thousand witnesses of his conscience, recede from the
duty which all his life, till now, has both by Law and Christian Religion
been inculcate to him, and rejecting all, cast himself soul, body, and
fortunes, wholly upon the newfound warrant of strangely conditioned apparition
of Parliament.

These, and other particulars that may be instanced in, take off the confidence
and repose that one would otherwise have in the two Houses, especially when
they (setting on foot claims and pretenses, not agreeing with the duty that
men from their youth have found their consciences ever bound unto) go not the
fair and open way of satisfaction, to have in so high concernments the
Parliament Rolls as freely and fully searched on the Kings behalf, as on the
Parliaments, and to have their new and strange learning, as freely argued by
the Kings Council, and by the Judges, as by the instruments of the Parliament:
but as the Papacy, in invading the Soveraignitie of the Church, Voted her
self into the Supremacy, and then suppressed all examination of the Truth by
damning all Writings to the contrary, and branding the Authors and users of
them with the name of Heretics: So we invading the Soveraignitie of our own
State, Vote our selves into it, brand with the name of Malignants, all that
concur not with us in it, interdict them the freedom of search and
discovery of the Truth, and damn their Writings as scandalous and seditious
Pamphlets; and so making them Vote-convicted State Heretics, We thenceforth
hold no Faith nor Truth to be kept toward them, but prosecute them as Enemies
to the State, for no other offense but because we have made them Malignants,
popishly affected, dissolute, desperate, blood-sucking Cavaliers and plunderers.

Yet truly, if we consider the quality of them that adhere unto His Majesty
and to His Cause do now lie under that censure, we shall find them the flower
and greater part of our Nobility and Gentry of the Kingdom, the greater part
of His Majesty's Honorable Privy Counsel, yea and of His Great Council too,
even of the Peers and Commons, the chief of the Judges, and with them the
opinion of the residue even of that whole Profession, the spirits and prayers
of the far greatest part of the Clergy, and the hearts of the greater part
of the most substantial men of the Commonaltie, whose soul and conscience,
presented with the consideration of these things, would not shrink with inward
horror to think he should either attempt or give aid to the cutting off (not
like David, of a lap of his Sovereigns ordinary garment) but of this lively
apparrell-politique of his Sovereign, wherewith for safety, as well as
ornament, His Majesty is now begirt; nay, to cut off the very limbs of his
Civil body, and not without eminent danger to His Sacred Person, how loud and
frightfull would the spirit of David cry in the ears of his guilty
conscience, The Lord forbid I should do this thing to lift up my hand against
the Lords Anointed.

O, but Religion is now at stake, and it is not to be believed that popishly
affected Counselors and Commanders with the help of a popish Army should so
much forsake their own ends as to fight for Establishment of the true
Protestant Religion: truly it is sincerely confessed, it is not likely, and
therefore I shall never believe that the Design of Reforming our Religion by
the hands of Brownists, Anabaptists, and Sectaries, (which by a constant and
credible report, is believed to have been so much fostered and advanced by the
Cardinal Richelieu and the late French Ambassador, as that Chambers the
Cardinals Secretary was on purpose sent into the Scottish Army here in
England) was ever with intent of Establishing the true Protestant Religion, or
that for the Protestant Religions sake, the death of the Cardinal was by some
of our active Parliament men (in our hearing) lamented as of a great friend of
the Parliament, or that the great correspondence and intercourse observed to be
between the late French Ambassador and Master Pym, was for the advancement of
the Protestant Religion. But where is any popish Army, under the conduct of
popish Commanders, that, according to the Design of popish Counselors, is
likely to oppress the Protestants, and advance Popery? Certainly, both his
Majesty, and his Protestant Followers are well assured, that not any part of
the War is managed by the Design of persons that are so affected; but who
knows not the ground of calumny? The King must either deny his Subjects that
are Papists the protection of his Army, and refuse their aid and service, or
else their aid and service must make his Army a popish Army: surely, not to
admit them into his Army, when they cannot otherwise be safe, were uniustly to
deny them the protection of Subjects, and to spare them (either in their
personal or pecuniarie assistance) were with inequality toward his Protestant
Subjects, and with danger to their Cause, to refuse his needful duties from
the Papists: though therefore Protestants should never lay down their jealousy
of the growth of Popery, yet should they not let it so abuse them, as to make
them believe they have no danger to fear but only Popery; especially now
when Schism and Sectarisme do with such authority invade us, and when nothing
can more advance the bringing in of Popery, if it be possible, than the
confusion in Church and State that does inevitably follow them (the expectance
whereof was the cause that made the Cardinal and the popish party from beyond
sea so effectually labor the promoting of them.) Undoubtedly, if Popery be at
this time to be feared, it is to be feared from the prevailing of Schismatickes
by the Design and manage of so potent and active foreign Instruments of
Popery; and it would return with comfortable satisfaction to our consciences,
that having for a feigned fear of Popery engaged our selves in real
Rebellion, we should find our pains rewarded with the felicity of becoming
instruments of the evil that at so dear a rate we did unnecessarily resist.

When in every thing considerable to resolution, the conscience is on every
hand so strongly beset with reasons, all concluding for obedience to our
Sovereign, and for our utmost assistance to His Cause. How weak is the sole
Authority of an imperfect representative of Peers and Commons, so to possess
the conscience with persuasion to the contrary, as upon it to venture the
present and eternal safety of ones self, and of so many thousands in our
Israel.

But say that this world were only to be considered in the business, let us
yet but see what must needs be the event, in case the Parliament Forces (which
God forbid) should prevail; either they must leave the Soveraignitie in the
King as it was before, and content themselves with strict Laws against all
grievances that may be feared in Religion or in Government: (and then they
bring no more to pass then what His Majesty, before their War, did of
himself, and does yet graciously offer) or else they must take the sovereign
power from the King into their own hands, and leave him no more (at most) than
the contemptible name of King, then shall we loose our old legal Government,
and be governed by the absolute arbitrary and tyrannical way of their Votes,
and they, to secure themselves in that new and uncouth way of Government that
they must institute, must (to the overthrow of Trade, and intolerable burden
of the Subject) keep the Kingdom under perpetual Garrisons; and then what
with the Faction and discord of our ambitious New-States, what with the
unrulinesse of the commanding Soldier, and what with the attempts of those
whose fidelity will ever excite their utmost endeavor for their Sovereigns
never dying right, we shall fall into an incessant Civil War, (until the
Kingdom being ruined) the Soveraignitie return into the hand to which it
rightfully belongs.

Unles therefore it please God, that our great Metropolis of London (partaking
rather of the wise spirit of the men of Abel, 2 Samuel 20.16.
than of the obstinacy of Gibeah the Benjamite) shall either deal so
effectually with those that there reside in show of Parliament, as that they
bring them to yield to the equality of a free and legal Parliament, and so
provide against future grievances, without any violation of the Rights of the
Crown: or else, (in case they refuse) shall like the Abelites, deliver unto the
King the Heads of those Opposites that rise up against Him. Judges 20
We may assure our selves that that City like those of Gibeah and Benjamin,
are hardened to all our Isreal's punishment, and to their own destruction, and
may (as they did) prevail once, and again, against the residue of the
Kingdom, until they have fulfilled Gods determined Visitation upon the Land,
and then consummate all with their deplorable destruction.

FINIS.
A DISCOVERY OF LONDONS OBSTINACY, AND MISERY.
THere has been many Admonitions sent from His Majesty, advising that City
of their own preservation, yet they have continued stubburne, though they
cannot but see the hand of the Lord to assist all the King's Majesty's
proceedings, whereas their actions are so far from prosperity that they
wind themselves wilfully, and force others ignorantly, into miserable
adversity.

Furthermore, though God has manifestly fought against the Rebels for the
King, giving Him Victory in many Battles, when all humane helps and
advantages were on the Rebels side, though God has miraculously, and beyond
the hope of man restored unto Him the hearts of the people, (which the Heads of
this Rebellion by slander had stolen from Him:) though from small and
contemptible beginnings in the eyes of His Enemies (few or none standing for
Him, but God and the justice of His Cause) God has prospered him into many
mighty Armies, which render Him formidable to the proudest, and stoutest of the
Rebels; though every Victory has been seconded by a tender of Peace, and with
an overture of Pacification, so that as Himself speaks in that Declaration
published July 30 1643. He could not probably fall under the scandalous
imputation which has usually attended His Messages of Peace, that they proceed
from the weakness of His Power, not love of His People. Lastly, though like an
indulgent Father of rebellious Children, He has courted this City, and wooed
it, by many pardons, many, and often repeated Acts of Grace and Favor to
recall us to our former Loyalty, (if ever we were Loyal) yet, inconsiderate,
unthankful wretches as we are, we overlook, or slight all these invitations,
for instead of returning, we have added this, as the complement of our other
Rebellions, that (whether more unthankfully or undutifully, I cannot tell) we
have cast dirt in our Sovereigns face, and slandered the footsteps of Gods
Anointed; as if He were guilty of all those Miseries, which at this time
threaten the subversion of this Nation: we will no longer wound the King
secretly, through the sides of his evil Counselors, or Cavaliers, but charge
Him directly, and point blanke, as in that most seditious Declaration, or
whatever you will call it, presented by Sir David Watkins, and that broken
Citizen, out at elbowes, called Satin Shute, to the Common Council, and by
them to the remainder of the Lower House; if it be not breach of Privilege to
call it so.

How willing have we obeyed every Commandment, except God and the Kings? How
forward have we been to employ the large Revenues of our several Companies,
and Brotherhoods, (as heretofore to excess, and gluttony, so now) to support
this Rebellion? How ready, even beyond our abilities, have we been to submit to
every Tax, and illegal Imposition, even to the bondage and slaverie of
Excise, by which we are not so much Proprietaries of our own, as Stewards, or
Casheerers to the heads of the Rebellion; and all this, to no other end but to
keep up the Rebellion: we have not only protected, and supported the Kings
mortal Enemies, but as much as in us lay, have persecuted all His Friends, or,
if but suspected to stand well affected to Him, and the Justice of His Cause,
not sparing the effusion of innocent blood, as that of Master Tomkins, and
Master Chaloner, which, like the blood of Abel, calls loud to Heaven for
vengeance, on this bloody City, and questionless will in time be heard, for
not content to buy these men's bloods with great sums of moneys, which could
not be advanced but on this condition, that Master Tomkins, and Master
Chaloner, be delivered up to their pleasure, and murdered for a strange
Conspiracy called Obedience to the King, but being dead, in an unheard of
barbarousnesse they press into the houses, where their dead bodies lay, before
their Funerals, and thinking they could never be sure enough of so great a
guilt, they will not believe that they are dead, unless they force the houses
to see the bodies of them whom themselves had murdered; insomuch, that to
avoid further violence and rage of the Citizens, they were fain to set open the
doors where their bodies lay, and expose them to the view of all, that so they
might glut themselves with beholding that sad spectacle which themselves had
made.

That the Kings Gracious offers of Peace have been slighted, and rejected,
with scorn, and contempt, and His Messengers that brought them (contrary to
the Law of Arms and Nations) imprisoned; That those miserable distractions,
which have rent and torn this flourishing Kingdom, are so far from being
closed, that they are rather made wider; That the Sword of War, so long
devouring, is not yet sheathed, except in one another bowels; That this
Kingdom is still made the Scene of Murders, Rapines, Oppression, and
Plunderings, and whereon all the horrid acts of rage, and injustice are every
day acted, and the Nation put almost out of hope, ever to enjoy her former
Peace and Plenty, is our fault, and ours wholly: Had not the (...) ^f this
Rebellion been animated by this City, and encouraged by promises of more
Supplies of Men and Moneys, they had long before this laid down their Arms,
and come with halters about their necks, and cast themselves at the Kings
feet, submissively begging those Pardons, which they have presumptuously
rejected* Time was, when the two Houses gave a Law to the City, now it is come
to that pass, that the City prescribe to the Relics of the two Houses; They
must not conclude of War or Peace, without consulting the City, if they do,
they reckon without their Host.

Nay, though Fairfax be utterly routed in the North, and William, once surnamed
a Conqueror, be totally defeated in the West, yet can they neither be
persuaded, nor beaten into thoughts of Peace. On the 20th of July last, no
longer ago, many Thousands (as the printed paper tells you) preferred a
Petition to the House of Commons, presented by M. Norbury, of the Cursitors
Office, and John Hat an Attorney of Guild Hall, both pernicious men; which as
it evidently shows their obstinate aversion from Peace, so it is the most
desperate devilish slander, that ever yet durst look the world in the face; for
first, they tell the House of Commons, and in them the world, That the King
without any touch of conscience, and in defiance of God, has raised an Army
of Papists, Outlawes, and Traitors, for Robbing, Burning, Murdering, and
Destroying of His Religious, Honest, and well meaning People. And then knowing
not only their interest in, but their power over the House of Commons, they do
not so much Petition, as Command them to accept of their assistance, for the
raising a new Army, and in express terms prescribe unto them, and limit them
to a Committee of their own nomination, for the seizing and receiving of such
sums, as the willing shall think fit to offer, or they shall think fit to
extort from the unwilling for this service: and that you may judge of the whole
bunch, by some, they name Pennington the pretended Lord Mayor, Stroad one of
the five Members, Harry Martin Plunder-master General, and Denis Bond Burgess
of Dorchester, and Patriarch Whites own disciple, a man of a double capacity
to be a Rebel, and finding themselves more alone in these undertakings than
they did imagine, like desperate Traitors, they call on the whole Kingdom, as
one man, according to the intent of the late Covenant, to join with them in
this Rebellion. And having thus taken a course to raise new Forces, on Saturday
the 29th of July, at a Common Hall, they Voted Sir William Waller* General of
their new intended Army, whom to indeare the more, they interest him in the
Government of the City, hoping that being as mad as his Lady, he will hold up
the Rebellion, as long as he can, and then be one of the last to run away; I
mean not from Battle, for in that he has showed himself as forward as the
foremost, but from Justice, and the due reward of his disloyalty. By all which
it is most evident, that this Languishing Rebellion had before this day gasp'd
its last and given up the ghost, had not this rebellious City by its wealth
and multitudes fomented it, and given it life.

If therefore Posterity shall ask, who broke down the bounds to those
streams of blood, that have stained this earth, if they ask, who make
Liberty captive, Truth criminal, Rapine just, Tyranny and Oppression
lawful, who blanched Rebellion with the specious pretense of Defense of Laws
and Liberties: War with the desire of an established Peace, Sacrilege and
profanation, with the show of Zeal and Reformation. Lastly, if they ask who
would have pulled the Crown from the Kings head, taken the Government off the
hindges, dissolved Monarchy, inslaved the Laws, and ruined their Country,
say, 'Twas the Proud, Unthankful, Schismatic, Rebellious, Bloody City of
London; so that what they wanted of devouring this Kingdom by cheating and
couzening, they mean to finish by the Sword.

That therefore these dangerous Defluctions, and continual (not small
Distillations) but Floods of Men, Money, Ammunition, and Arms, descending from
the Head City, and Metropolis of this Kingdom, may not for ever dissolve the
nerves, and luxate the Sinews of this admirable composed Government* it will
highly concern this Nation to look about them, to undeceive themselves, and to
consult their own Peace and safety, by joining with their Gracious Sovereign,
in chastizing these rebellious insolences, and reducing this stubburne City
of London either to obedience or ashes.

FINIS.

