CERTAIN CONSIDERATIONS UPON THE DUTIES BOTH OF PRINCE and People.

Written by a Gentleman of quality, a Well-wisher both to the KING and
PARLIAMENT.

OXFORD, Printed by LEONARD LICHFIELD, Printer to the University. 1642.

CERTAIN CONSIDERATIONS upon the duties both of Prince and People.
AMONG many intemperances that minister disturbance to the Church and State, we
have those, whose supine affectation of flattery has grown to that impudence,
as that they have not only for learnings sake disputed, but in the name of the
word of God, and at the time and place when we should expect no other then the
lively Oracles of God, delivered, that the persons, and fortunes of all
Subjects, are absolutely at the will and command of the Prince, to dispose
according to his will and pleasure. To such licentiousnes, we need give no
other answer, then only to demand, that the maintainers of such Doctrine,
would put us but a case, wherein (those opinions of theirs being admitted) a
Prince can commit any Injustice, and that they would show us, wherein lies the
justice which the Scripture commands Princes to execute, and which it affirms
to be the establishment of their Thrones, Prove. 29. 4.
and the violation of it to be their adversity or subversion.

We have on the other side those, who finding it written, that Governors are
for the good of the People, pursue it with Sophistry; That the people are the
end of Princes and Governors beings: and that therefore as their government is
for, or against the good of the People, so may they be continued or deposed by
them. To that end also there are opinions set on foot; That all government
first came from the people, and that all authority does in the last place
reside in them; That in every Kingdom the whole body of the people must of
necessity contain, all power and authority whatsoever either is or may be
erected in it; so as that all the people or the greater part of them (which
amounts to all) may by their votes, reassume all power into their own hands:
abrogate all Ordinances: anull the forms of present government: and new mould
the State into such forms and institutions as best likes them. These are
falsities which yet lay hold upon reasons, and prevail over the judgments of
many that are understanding men, and which have no evil affection toward
government, and these are of that consequence, as that they subvert the
stability of all kind of government whatsoever.

But were we shie of Iesuitisme, as well as of Popery, we would not with so
little examination receive opinions, which we know had their first hatching in
the School of the Jesuit. The matter would require a very large field, should
we set forth all things that fitly conduce to the support of the truth, but my
purpose is to be very short. Therefore declining to controvert what may be, and
usually is alleged in the matter, I shall humbly offer to consideration such
apprehensions of the truth as I have conceived less vulgar, and submitting
them to the approbation or correction of better judgments, expect they shall
return unto me, with confirmation, or rectification of my own private
thoughts; if from so mean a talent, no mite of benefit be raised to the
public,

And first, we are to consider that the original of Kingdoms is of three
sorts, to wit, Natural, (which we may also call civil,) Violent, (or if you
will, Martial,) or mixed of these two. The first was of Parents over their
children, childrens children, and servants bought or borne unto them. In this,
the person of the Governor was before the being of the Subject, and his
authority, before ever the Subject consented, or had power to obey or disobey.
Such a King was Shem, called therefore Melchisedeck, or King of righteousness.
And a Prince of this kind was Abraham, after that by Gods command he had left
his Country and his father Shems house, and lived of himself, and Kings of
this nature were they that were intimated in the names of Abimelech, Abiam,
Abiram, Abram, Abishalom, etc. And this sovereignty was not inherent to the
person of the Father only, but from him descended, by right of primogeniture,
Genesis 4. 7.
to the eldest son, to whole rule, we see that God subjected the younger.

The second sort of Kingdoms was wholly founded by the sword, over people that
were subjugated by usurpers and invaders, such as followed the way of Nimrod:
who being potent in his natural dominion, used his power to the oppression of
his neighbors, and changed the state of government into tyranny; I say not the
state of liberty, (as if till then men had lived in solute liberty) but changed
the natural government into that which is tyrannical.

The third sort had much what the same original with the second: where people
surcharged at home and forced abroad; men in division; in distress; in fear;
exiles; and fugitives, distrusting their present condition, served themselves
on the Wit, Spirit, and courage of some notable man; to whose command they
(with such limitation of his power as they could agree on,) subjected
themselves; and then falling into action prospered even into a Kingdom: from
hence sprung our Modern Kingdoms, more novell and various in their frame, and
many of them so qualified, as not properly to be called Kingdoms, but rather
Republiques under Regal styles, with Princes elective, much circumscribed in
authority, and obnoxious to deposing. Now in the first and second sort,
apparently the people had never any thing to do with the institution and
limitation of Sovereign Power: and though in the third sort they had more to
do therewith, yet not alike in all of that sort, nor had they the whole and
sole power of instituting, scarce in any of that sort, so as we must rectify
that misapprehension, that in all Kingdoms the first derivation of authority
was from the people.

In the next place, we are to consider; that Kingdoms are not associations of
men in their natural capacityes: but communions of men quatenus members
politic, united in one common bond of obedience into one political body,
where none can move to give his due aid for the weal of the body, but in the
capacity of a politic member, and according to the peculiar office which
every several member properly ought to execute; which office the members duly
exercising, make a true and perfect civil Communion. Now though we consider a
Kingdom as a mere Civil or temporal State only; Yet even there, the
observance of this communion is a duty strictly required of every member, even
by the law of nature, or moral law, and by the law of God it self. For man
having lost his original righteousness or justice, and consequently the right
of governing himself; and being thereby necessarily subjected to the
government of some justice without himself: it was necessary, for his own
good and safety, that he should not only be subject to that justice in the
things that concerned the well governing himself toward others; but likewise
in those things that concerned his safety and defense from the violence of
others misgoverning themselves toward him, and that necessarily brings in
Empire. So that (unless we can imagine some Kingdom to consist of people
sprung of themselves, in perfection of righteousness, not depending, nor obliged
to God, or nature, nor obnoxious to those conditions to which the fall of man
has subjected all men,) we cannot devise how men should naturally be free from
subjection to government; and less, how (being subject) private men in any
State, should in their natural capacity, meddle with any thing concerning
government; or so much as go about the making, changing, on anulling of
ordinances; or so compel Governors* to do them, without being criminally
culpable; not only against the positive laws of the land, but even against
conscience pressed with the bonds of natural, or moral, and also divine law.
Therefore to explicate the sense which all intend, but some (not well
distinguishing) confound: It is certainly true, that all the people of a
Kingdom must needs comprehend all power whatsoever is, or may be exercised in
it: but when we say so, we by all the people, mean, the whole entire body of
the members politic, from head to foot, every one of them abiding and working
according to his proper and ordained office politic. But if beside their
ordained office and power, any shall do or attempt any alteration in the
State, (howsoever intended for common good) their act must needs be so far
from being lawful, as being from the beginning repugnant and resisting the
ordained power, it can never become a lawful act, though all the Subjects of a
Kingdom should after consent unto it.

But in the third place, we are farther to consider: That if the Kingdom be
also a Church of God, then is the original, and authority of it, of far
higher nature, and more remote from the reach and power of the people. It is
true, God is King of all Kings, and highest Sovereign in all Kingdoms, as
well Heathen as Christian: yet, as he cautioned in the behalf of his Church,
that no stranger should be King there, but by any means one that was of the
Brethren of the people: so in His Church He himself is a nearer and (as it
were) a more cognate Sovereign, then in other Kingdoms; and his Vicegerents
there, are of more immediate and more important subordination to him. For which
cause he there reserves to himself the choice of the man, and leaves the
people no more then the bare investing of him. Not but that God in all
Kingdoms, makes Kings whom he pleases; but he will have it known, that in his
Church, the choice is not only his, and to be sought at his hand, but that he
more strictly requires the observance of his right, in his Church; then he does
otherwhere. Therefore he expressly commands there; Deuteronomy. 17. 15.
Thou shall in any case set him over thee, whom thy Lord thy God shall choose.

And as in his Church he to himself reserved the nomination; so when he had
nominated, he did not leave it to the people, there to declare the right and
manner of the Kingdom: but by the Prophet by whom he signified his choice, by
the same was the manner of the Kingdom declared to the people, 1. Sam. 10. 25.
written in a book and laid up before the Lord.

Kings of Gods Church, having from God a more immediate and more sacred
ordination, have also a more especial endowment of his spirit, for which cause
they have been ever instituted with anointing, and their persons therewith
consecrate, for the exercise of their function. This we see in Saul, whose
person (though he were a wicked Prince) David in this respect declared so
sacred, as that he pronounced a curse upon the Mountains of Gilboa, because in
them his person was cast down and vilefied, without regard of the sacredness
of his anointing. Their anointing therefore is not a mere outward solemnity,
but is significant of the spirit of God in a more especial manner given unto
them, and from thence proceeds that which the Scripture witnesses, Prove. 16.
10.
A divine sentence in the lips of the King, yea, and a sacred integrity also,
His mouth transgresses not in judgment. And suitable to their Prerogative of
graces, beyond the ordinary of other Princes, God vouchsafes them his ear,
with more favor and familiarity then to the other, as we may see by his ready
hearing, gracious answers, vouchsafed messages sent, and will declared touching
them; not only to the good, as David, Solomon, Asa, Iehosaphat, Hezechiah,
Josiah, etc. but even to Coniah, Saul, Jeroboam, Ahab, Jehu, and other wicked
Princes. And we not only hear God himself saying, by me Kings Reign; Prove.
8. 15. Psalm. 81.
and I have said ye are Gods: but his word couples also the fear that is to
be rendered unto Kings, with the fear that is due unto himself, Fear God and
the King. Keep the Kings Commandment, in regard of the oath of the Lord. Nor
is it ordinary obedience that is commanded, but the highest (under God) Submit
unto the King, 1. Pet. 2. 13.
as unto the Supreme. And that not for the danger that may ensue, but (as the
Apostle says) Not for wrath only, Romans 13. 5.
but also for conscience sake. Now if the King be supreme, then is there in no
Kingdom any superintending power or authority, that may lawfully call the King
to account: for that power only is the supreme, over which there is not any
other to take account. So high and sacred is the authority of them whom God has
made, nursing fathers, and nursing mothers, to his Church.

When Kings then, both in their Persons, and Functions, are of so sacred an
ordination, and so hedged in, by Gods especial protection, where is there
place for the people to interpose and meddle with the affairs that do belong
unto them? besides, when without the Kings consent there can be no concurrence
of people, to join in any accord for the disposing of any affairs of the
Kingdom, but that the matter must first pass the project, solicitation, and
prosecution of diverse private men, no way thereunto authorized: how can any
act of the people to such an end be justifiable, when an unlawful beginning,
(what number or quality soever the attempters be of) can never make a lawful
act? Therefore omitting those places of Scripture, It is not fit to say to a
King thou art wicked, Who may say to a King, what do thou? Fear God and the
King, Prove. 24. 21.
and meddle not with those that love innovation: And many others (which yet
block up the way against private men's meddling with matters of government.) If
it were to be granted that the people in any Kingdom had power over all rights
of the Kingdom; yet unless that by the Ordinances of that Kingdom, it be
expressly declared and appointed, how, and by whom, that power shall be
executed, (and by the way, where such Ordinances are, there is not a right
Kingdom, but a Republique) and again, unless those ordinances be rightly
pursued, there can be no combinement, to do any such act, but with the guilt
of Sedition, and Treason, in the sight of God. For it will lie against every
particular man, between God and his conscience to answer, who has called thee
to this? who has separated thee? who has made thee a Judge or an Executor of
these matters? And though it be pretended (and perhaps intended too) that the
work so to be done shall make for the glory of God and good of his Church: yet
that will but little help the matter; for, for men to do God a good office
against his declared will, is to be Gods good masters, not his good servants.
Romans 13. 1. 2.
He does expressly command, that Every soul be subject to the higher powers;
and declares plainly, that the powers that are, are ordained of God, and that
they that resist the power, resist the ordinance of God, and receive to
themselves damnation: and our Savior himself forbids us, that we do not
evil, that good may come thereon. 1. Sam. 15. 22.
The Scripture tells us the reason, for God has no need of a wicked man, and
he is best glorified when his voice is obeyed. We have also the examples of
Scripture to the same purpose. It did not only turn to sin to Saul, that he,
to satisfy the people in their devotion, spared the best of the Amalekites
spoil to offer in sacrifice unto the Lord, when God had commanded that all
should be destroyed: but it became a final sin even unto his rejection. And
Vzza was struck with sudden death, 2. Sam. 6. 6. 1. Chr. 13. 10,
for nothing but putting his hand to the Arc of Gods Covenant; (which no man
but the sons of Aaron might do) yet Vzza did not do it, but with a good and
a pious mind to save the Arc of Gods Covenant from falling. Therefore it is
not enough for men to be assured that the work which they do, in their
consciences tends to a good and a religious effect: but they must every man
have a sufficient warrant for his conscience, and for his calling to the work;
that is, either the express word of God, or else such manifest inference and
deduction from it, as by the concurrent judgment of the Church universally in
all ages, is agreed for truth, not such judgment as some particular ministers
take upon them to make, for the spirit of the Prophets, 1. Cor. 14. 32, 33.
are subject to the Prophets; that is the spirits of the particular, to the
spirit of the universal: For God is not the author of confusion, which else
would necessarily follow. Men therefore must look to the ground and first
beginning of their actions; for if the root be evil, so will also the branches
be, though it promises never so good fruit, and be countenanced by all the
people of a Kingdom.

If further we look into Scripture, The story of Moses is not without some
doctrine to this point. Moses having an ardent zeal to the relief of his
brethren the people of God, and finding himself above others enabled to be the
instrument of their deliverance, both by his extraordinary abilities, and also
through the great power he had with Pharaohs daughter, persuades himself, and
(as appears by St Stephens relation) would have the people understand, Acts.
7. 25. Exodus 2. 12.
that he was even then called to be their deliverer. Hereupon he makes his
address to the people, and by the slaughter of one of their oppressors, takes
say of their affection toward an attempt of liberty, as if there needed no more
in the case, but that the people should resolve, and join with him to break
from the subjection of the King they lived under, who was an enemy to Gods
Church. In this now, (though we make no question but that Moses had a zeal
acceptable to God) yet may we see by that which follows, that he had not yet
a particular calling thereunto, neither was the way wherein he thought to have
executed his zeal agreeable to the will of God; therefore the people
themselves (whom Moses only sought unto) they reject him: his attempt is
frustrate, and himself is driven to repent it with forty years exile in the
wilderness. Acts. 7. 30.
After that long space of expiating the error of his selfe-led zeal, God
calls him then indeed to the work to which he came of himself before; Exodus
3. 10.
Come now (says God) and I will send thee: and God sends him then indeed; but
sends him not to the people (that we may know he sent him not before) but
(though he could have made the people able to make their own way by the sword,
and could by his command have made it lawful so to have done) yet (to teach us
the observance of justice and duty, in our proceedings) he sends him to the
King, of him to demand the dismission of his people, that so the peoples
obedience to his messengers, and to the word delivered in his name, might be
without any reluctance of conscience in regard of their allegiance to the King.
When Moses did this way set upon the work, all went the right way, and the
unspeakable obstinacy of King Pharaoh, being aggravated by the fairenes of
proceedings toward him, did to his condemnation before men and Angels, and to
the magnifying of Gods justice redound the more unto his praise and glory.

It is not inconsiderable that God by a Star declared our Savior in his
birth to be the borne King of the Jews; and in that style brought the wise men
to worship him. And likewise, that when our Savior (to fulfill the prophesyes
concerning him) did solemnly present himself to Jerusalem: he suffered his
Disciples publicly to congratulate his coming by the name of King, and told
those that were offended at it, that their gratulation was so necessary, as
that if they should omit it, the stones in their default would have performed
it also. That he himself before Pilate, maintained that he was a King, and at
his death had his Cross (notwithstanding the Jews opposed) adorned with the
Title, King of the Jews: but when the people would have made him King, he
refused their officiousnes and would by no means accept of that dignity from
them: he would rather be without his right, then receive it either in a wrong
way, or from a wrong hand: no, he would not at any of their instances so much
as acknowledge himself to be authorized for a judge or divider amongst them.
So little did he acknowledge any power in them to conferr crowns, or to have
superintendence over them. But it is true, that when God had determined to make
a division of the Kingdom of his people, the first King of the ten Tribes was
of the peoples making, and was made in the way of reformation: 1. King. 12. 4.
but that you may know it was only permitted by God, that so he might give that
stiff-necked people of the fruit of their own hands, and make them an example
unto others; he designed Jeroboam King, which neither anointing, nor blessing,
nor other ceremony then a rent: the Prophet rent the new coat into twelve
pieces, and when he had done, he gave him none of them, but (as if he would
show he should be a King in fact, not in right, in some way in which God would
own nothing but the permission only) he bad him (as one would say) be his own
carver, and take ten pieces to himself. What the progress of the story was we
all know; when the people had made a King of their own, then they and their
King must have a Religion of their own fitted to their new framed Kingdom, and
to effect that, the old Priests of God must be sent away, as absolute
impediments to the settling of their new government: and when that was done;
then were they absolute indeed, and had as much authority over their God, as
they before had taken liberty against their King: so it followed, that when the
People had made an usurper King, their King and they made a Calfe their God;
and the sum of the peoples reforming their Kings misgovernance, and relieving
their own grievances, was; they made them selves a King that made them all
castawaies: he himself the reproach of Sovereignty, and an infamous
stigmatique to all posterity, and his sins for ever adhering to the People,
till they had caused their utter extirpation, and till of freeborn Subjects
under a King of their own, they became perpetual slaves to the Subjects of
another Kingdom. So unpleasing to God, and so pernicious to the people
themselves, are the fruits of those reformations which only or principally are
managed by the popular inclination, in which, though for the most part a desire
of doing justice, or preserving true religion be pretended; yet private
discontent in some, and ambition in others, is commonly the chief and radical
incitement of the work.

The means that belongs to private men to use, for reforming of Kingdoms, 1.
Tim. 2. 1.
is that which the Apostle shows, Let prayers, (says he) and supplications be
made for Kings and all that are in Authority, that we may lead a Godly life.
The people must not with impatience and puffed up minds invade Gods peculiar
right, of calling Kings to account, but every man betaking himself to the
reformation of himself, and to prayers unto God, must seek of him ( that has
the hearts of Kings in his hand) to dispose the Kings heart to the desired
reformation. Prove. 21. 1.
Many think this way long and tedious, and like better that the people should
Offer themselves willingly, and help God in some readier way. But truly if such
private reformation and prayer be the right means of public good, and be too
long neglected, that is the peoples own fault; and they may not by their fault,
gain a power which before they had not. Yet true it is, that in great
misgovernances, God often uses the peoples hand, to do his work of Justice,
but that we may know the way is not right; as not agreeable to his revealed
will; we shall find that the work of justice that he so begins by them, he
ends not till he has finished it on them, and his hand is never more heavy,
then against that rodd, that in the way of injustice, has done his justice
service. But will you hear God himself taking cognizance of the misgovernance
of Princes, and determining of it?

In the 81. Psalm, God declares himself to stand in the congregation of
Princes, and to be judge among Gods (so calls he Kings there.) Then he
expostul^teth the matter with wicked Princes, How long will ye give wrong
judgment and accept the persons of the wicked? Then he complains, They will
not be instructed, but walk on in darkness, the foundations of the earth are
out of square. The misgovernance is great and the consequence of it desperate,
but does God in that case give the people power to reform? No clean contrary:
God without any revocation still affirms, I have said ye are Gods, and ye are
all children of the most high, Verse. 6.
persons sacred, not to be approached by the profane hands of the people: but
to awe, and restrain Princes, he tells them, that though he has made them
Gods, yet they shall dye like men, when they must make account to him of their
misgoverning: so that God reserves the judgment of them to himself, and no
whit authorizes the people to have any thing to do with their misdoeings.

This is not to flatter Princes, to say God has appointed men no means to
relieve themselves against their misgovernment, but only prayers, to be made
either to them, or for them: and that men have not otherwise to meddle with the
right of liberty and duties of Princes, then only by way of supplication. Nor
is this a security for Princes, for though in a lawful and ordinate way there
be no other means, yet no examples are more familiar, then those in which the
sin, the injustice, and violence of wicked Princes, are in this world
punished, by the sin, injustice, and violence of wicked people, sometimes
their own, sometime others subjects, Gods extraordinary and supreme justice is
tied to none of those regulations, with which he has circumscribed his ordinary
justice committed to the administration of man, but (as we said before) we may
still observe Gods indignation, not more fatally incensed against any, then
against those whose wickedness has put them forward to be the instruments of
his extraordinary justice upon others.

But to pursue the examination of the right that people may have in questioning
and reforming the rule of Kings. Let us farther examine what we find in
Scripture. David sinning by numbering the people, was enforced to his choice of
one of three plagues, Famine, Sword, or Pestilence; and Deus malum avertat,
this is but a doleful instance for the people. The King sins, and God lays
all the punishment upon the people: Nay he gives not them so much as the choice
of the punishment which they must suffer for the King, but the sinning King
must choose, which of the three plagues, the innocent people must undergo:
this is strange, did not the great judge of heaven and earth do right? yes
undoubtedly, and the matter was; the wickedness of the people had grievously
provoked God, 2. Sam. 24. 1.
so as the King must be let go, and suffered to fall into sin, that way may
be made for the peoples punishment. This seems no less strange on the other
side; that because the people sin, therefore the Prince should be let fall:
that for the transgressions of the land, the Prince (as we have it in another
place) should be punished with division and diminution, and many should be the
Princes of the land: Nay, that for the sin of the people, the Prince should
be cast away, 1. Sam. 12. 25
as in that place, If ye do wickedly ye shall perish, you and your King. All
this were strange indeed, should we consider Prince, and people, as persons
strangers in interest to one another: but therefore these places show the
strict union, and indivisible mutuality of interest, that they have in the
doings and sufferings each of other, beyond any thing that can be created by
the mere constitution or agreement of men.

This case of David's further teaches; that if when the sins of the people be
grown high, it be any way necessary that the King be let fall into sin before
the People be punished: then are Kings immediately between God and the people,
and stand there like Moses in the gap, to withold the hand of God from the
people, until that they also by falling someway be removed. Again if the Kings
transgression in government has the original from the sins of the people;
then are the People the prime offenders, and first agents in the Kings
transgression, and He himself is as it were accessory, and in a manner passive
in it. We see that God himself here judged so, and laid the real punishment
upon the people, whom he accounted the original sinners: as for the King (to
whom the sin is verbally ascribed) we see God reckons, as if he were only
passive in committing it, and therefore inflicts no punishment on him, but what
he voluntarily took upon him, an humbling of himself, and a compassionate
fellowfeeling of punishment, such as a good common father has always by the
sense of his peoples suffering.

It now follows plainly: that the people that have their hands in sin, are
no competent Iusticiars for hearing, judging, and reforming of any
misdemeanors; especially of those in which they themselves (having the
principal hand) are the principalls; and less, where the person questioned,
is but an accessory, drawn in by them: and least of all, where he is a person
sacred, and one so much superior, as by Gods ordinance to stand immediately
betwixt God and them, sure, he that would not suffer one with a beam in his
eye, to pull a moat out of the eye of his brother; does not permit him to do
it toward one so much superior as his Prince: nor suffer guilty Subjects to
arraigne their sovereign; guilty servants, their Lord; nor guilty sons their
common father.

To conclude, we may consider the unlawfulness of popular animadversion into
the manners and government of Princes, (especially of Princes that are lawful
Christian Monarchs) even in this alone, that there are no received, nor known
bounds of limitation, how far people may walk in the way of questioning and
reforming the errors of Princes, but that if any thing at all be lawful for
them to do therein, then may they without restraint proceed so far as to
depose Princes, and deprive them of their lives, if (according to the doctrine
of the Jesuit) they find it for the good and reformation of the Church and
Commonwealth, which how well it is warranted by the word of God, we may see
plainly enough in the case between Saul and David.

Saul was King, but, misgoverning himself and the Kingdom, became as bad as
excommunicate and deposed: 1. Sam. 15. 23. and 16. 13.
for he was rejected of God, and David was by Gods express command anointed
to be King, all which notwithstanding; neither David nor the people ever sought
to depose him; to renounce obedience unto him; to combine against him; question
his government, or so much as meddle with ordering any of the affairs that
belonged to the King. Nay, Saul after this persecuted David unjustly, and in
the midst of his unjust and hostile persecution, was delivered into David's
hand, and it was of necessity that David should take the advantage and kill
him, for he could not otherwise have any assurance of his own life: David did
then but even cut of the skirt of Saul's garment, to the end it might witness
his faithful loyalty, because it made it manifest he could as easily have cut
the thread of his life; and even for this, his heart so smote him, as that he
cries out, The Lord forbid that I should do this thing to my Master the Lords
anointed, to stretch forth my hand against him. 1. Sam. 24. 5.
That was not all neither, but there were more circumstances in the case, Saul
was not yet reformed, and going on still, was another time delivered into
David's hands, and the people both times understood it, the special delivery of
his enemy into his hands by God, and would have embraced the opportunity and
have made him away: David restraines them still with the same bridle; The Lord
forbid etc. and tells them, 1. Sam. 26. 9.
Who can lay his hands on the Lords anointed and be guiltless? No, David
(though already anointed) would tarry Gods time, the Lord should smite Saul, or
his day should come, or he should descend into battle and perish, but David's
hand should not be against him. No whatsoever Saul was, or whatsoever he had
done; neither his falling from God, nor Gods declaring him rejected, nor David's
anointing by Gods command, nor Saul's unjust persecution of David the Lords
anointed in future, could dissolve the duty of his Subjects, nor make it
lawful for them to lay their hands on him, no not when he was in wicked
hostility against them. But Saul in David's account, was still the Lords
anointed, still a sacred person, still David's master, notwithstanding the
circumstances which might seem to have discharged the ties of duty which David
and the people did formerly owe unto him.

Neither is the anointing of Kings a thing sacred as to their own Subjects
only: but the regard thereof is required at the hands of strangers also,
because of the profanation and sacrilege that in the violation of their
persons is committed even against God. Wherefore, we see that though the
Amalekite were a stranger, and made a fair pretense, that he had done Saul a
good office, when at his own request he dispatched him of the pain of his
wounds, and of the pangs of his approaching death: yet David (taking his fact
according to his own confession) makes a slight account of the causes which he
pretended, as a frivolous extenuation of an heinous fact, and condemns him,
though a stranger, as an heinous Delinquent against the Majesty of God. How
were thou not afraid (says he) to stretch forth thy hand to destroy the Lords
anointed? neither his being a stranger, nor any of the other circumstances
were so availeable, but that his blood fell deservedly upon his own head. The
act is in it self perfectly wicked, and in the degree heinous; altogether
against the word of God: and therefore all actions of Subjects, that in the
progress of them tend, or by the way threaten to arrive at that upshot, are
all unlawful, foul, and wicked; and not only the actors themselves wicked,
but their assistants, favorers, those that wish them well, or (as St John
speaks) That bid them God speed, are partakers of their evil deeds.

But error in this point, has made such impressions in the minds of many, as
that they will never be persuaded, but that they may disobey and resist
Authority, if ever they find it faulty, or the commands thereof not agreeing
with their consciences. They will grant, that they may not disobey Authority in
the lawful commands thereof, neither do evil that good may come thereon:
but then, they themselves will be the judges what commands are lawful, and
what not; what things good, and what evil; and so they make obedience
arbitrary, and government (by pretending conscience) at the discretion of the
Subject: yea, though the things whereat they take check, be of their own nature
indifferent, or doubtful, (and therefore not matters of faith) yet will not
they submit themselves, nor their opinions unto any, no not to the judgment of
the Church they live in, no not to the judgment of the Church Catholic, nor
to the authority of it, even in the purest times thereof. But they from the
authority of their own opinions, or from the authority of such Teachers, as
they themselves have chosen to themselves to be their guides, they will both
censure, condemn, disobey, and revile the Ordinances of their Church, and the
Governors thereof, so secure in opposing imaginary, or at least unproved
superstition, as they will not see how incompatible, self-will, presumption,
disobedience, arrogance and railing are with true Religion, nor that the false
Teachers, and their Disciples (which our Savior and his Apostles foretold
should be in the last and perilous times, and which St Peter calls cursed
children) are not only described by this, that they have a form of Godliness,
but deny the power thereof. 2. Tim. 3. 5.
That they are in sheeps clothing, but are inwardly Wolves. That the fruit they
bear is not answerable to the tree they seem to be. Matthew. 7. 16.
That their way of working is after the way of private insinuation, 2. Tim. 3.
6. 4. 3.
creeping into houses, and leading silly Women captive. Having itching ears,
and after their own liking heaping to themselves teachers. Jude. 19.
That they be they that separate themselves, and the like. 2. Tim. 3. 3.
But they are especially described to be Traitorous, Heady, high-minded, 2.
Pet. 2. 10.
to be such as despise government, as are presumptuous, self willed, and not
afraid to speak evil of dignities. And again that they despise dominion, Jude.
8. and 11.
and speak evil of Dignities. And that they Perish in the gainsaying of Corah.
now we know that the sin of Corah was, that he (being a Levite, and
countenanced by an hundred and fifty Princes of the assembly, famous in the
Congregation, Numb. 16.
and at least fourteen thousand seven hundred of the people) upon his own
private opinion (to which also his followers adhered) that both he, and all the
Congregation were holy, and might offer incense before the Lord as well as
Aaron, Charged Moses and Aaron that they took too much upon them, and that
they exalted themselves above the Congregation of the Lord, and therefore they
holding themselves in a parity of authority with them, would not appear on
their Summons, nor be obedient unto them. Yet (as if these passages of
Scripture nothing concerned our times) we are nothing shie of those things
whereof they do admonish us.

There be some, that justify, that private men may resist authority, when it
would do that which is hurtful to the Church of God, yea, that it is then
their duty to resist it, that such resistance is no disobedience, no rebellion,
no sin at all. These swallow that which may not be granted, viz: that they
are competent Judges of the Churches hurt, and besides they make the rule that
our Savior gave us for discovering teachers of false Doctrine to be nothing
worth. Mat. 7. 16.
Our Savior tells us, we shall know them by their fruits, as granting fruit to
be a thing apparent, known of all and unchangeable: but these men make the
fruit to alter according to the diversity of the tree that bears it, though
otherwise it have the same shape, taste, and virtue. For example: disobedience,
resistance of authority, sedition, and rebellion, are by the law of God, and by
the law of nature, agreed both by Christians and Heathens to be evil fruits.
But these men (and Jesuits) tell us that resisting authority, and raising
force against it, thereby to work the good and safety of the Church of God,
though done by Subjects, is no resistance, no rebellion, no sin. The fruit
has lost his own nature, which in it self was naught, and takes a new nature
of goodness, because it was brought forth by the good tree of piety toward the
Church of God. So our Saviors precept is made of no effect, and we must learn
of the Jesuit, to un-know a known thing, and know it for some other thing,
then ever we knew before, and that by a new way too; viz: by that which is not
to be known of it self. We must know the fruit by the tree.

We deny not, but that authority may command things, that by no means at all
ought to be done, and that then we must not do them: but those things are such
as are manifestly contrary to the express word of God, and principles of
Religion. And even in them we are only simply to refuse the doing of the evil
commanded, without any actual resistance otherwise, and so doing, our not
obeying, is not to be counted disobedience; because it being necessary
obedience to the express word of God, the primitive Sovereign of all
authority: it can never be disobedience as to the derivative. But where
authority commands nothing against the express word of God, and principles of
Religion (as in things disputable it does not) there, except the Governors
that are the derivative be obeyed, God, the primitive is disobeyed. For he
strictly commands obedience to his Vicegerents, even in every ordinance of
man.

But we are also to take heed we play not the hypocrites with God. When
thinking to do a good office to the Church or State, we resist authority, that
presses us with that, which (as we suppose) threatens depravation of true
Religion, or due liberty. For what know we but that by wrongful suffering
(whereto all are called) God calls us to a trial of our faith, 1. Pet. 2. 21.
patience, and obedience in that way, which if we do not show by keeping close
to his command, not turning on the left hand to do any evil though commanded,
nor on the right hand to resist authority with violence, although it has
commanded evil, we then refuse Gods trial, and with an unseasonable zeal for
Religion, and for our wordly rights, we contrary to Gods command resist his
lawful Vicegerents, and the excuse we have for it, is little better then like
the Pharisees, to say Corban, God shall have profit by it in the good that we
shall do his Church thereby, and make the precept of God of no effect; and
antevert the glory that god seemed to seek in our trial: And having so
justified our resistance, we must then call it pious, and an act of duty, and
such as God requires, and so make God the author of our sin, and lodge it
where we can never repent us of it.

There may undoubtedly be such pressures laid upon Subjects* as that humanity
cannot but commiserate, and perhaps in some part excuse their impatience and
resisting of them. But the pittifulnes of the case cannot make the resistance
lawful, though we remit much to the doers, we must yet condemn the fact; and
though their sufferings wash away much of the soil that would make both the
deed and the doers more odious, yet must they be content to confess the deed
to be evil. But to justify it, were to commit the accursed sin of calling
good evil, and evil good; yea, the sacrilegious sin of making God weak and
wicked, who for the necessary support of his Church, should stand in need, and
require not only the help of sinful men, but even of their sins also.
Private men, in things not plainly forbidden, cannot say they resist not
authority, but sin: not the lawful power, but the licentiousnes of them
which abuse it: for they have no authority to distinguish. And if they offer to
pull the mote out of the Governors eye, they will put a beam into their own.
For though we be every one tied to resist sin in our selves that we commit it
not; yet are we not every one tied to resist it in others, that they commit it
not; and we must leave every thing to be rectified by those only, to whom it
properly belongs; and where there is no ordidinate means of reforming, there
God has reserved that particular case unto himself, and we must not justle him
out of his tribunal.

We might in this place remember also what infinite doubts, and questions
(perpetually ensnaring and wounding the consciences of private men, and with
continual disturbance and divisions threatening the ruin of the State) do
follow the admitting of this one opinion: that when other remedies fail,
Subjects in case of necessity may leavy Arms, and defend their Laws,
Liberties, and Religion, against the oppressors of them. For what shall be
sufficient necessity? and who shall be judge of it? what way, and how far may
Subjects so proceed? who shall command? etc. But it is impossible to set forth
all the branchings and consequents of errors, or the confusions that follows
upon them. We might also remember, what dangerous strains and snares these
opinions are to those that have taken express oaths of obedience and
allegiance; but we hope, that this shall be hint enough to stir men up to take
heed, how they entertain such opinions: and if already they have been led away
with them, they make a more advised examination of the matter, and like good
Christians be content (whatsoever censure fall upon their actions past, or
whatsoever diminution upon their present esteem) they will yet submit, that
Gods truth may not be corrupted, nor his holiness blasphemed, Psalm. 51.
but that, as the Psalmist faies, he may be justified in his sayings and be
clear when he is judged, yea that God may be found true and every man a liar.

We do not all this while contend that Princes are without law, we have in the
entrance of our discourse shown the contrary: and we doubt not but that the
rights and manners of Kingdoms, are religiously to be observed as well of the
Prince as of the People: that the establishment of a Kingdom depends upon the
observance of the rights thereof, as well by the one, as by the other: and that
the Rights, and Manner of every Kingdom is as sacred as the Kingdom it self.
When God laid a curse upon those that removed the bounds between private man
and private man, he left not the bounds of public right (in which all private
right is included) open to secure violation: but what was wicked in the one
case he accounted heinous in the other, as carrying with it, not only the
transitory fortunes, but even the lives and souls of the People. And for this
cause, when God finds in Princes the sin of those that remove the bounds,
Hosea. 5. 10.
he threatens that he will Power out his wrath on them like water. It will not
be unworthy our labor a little to enquire into the reason.

Tyranny (as we have touched) began first in the Eastern parts, and thence
dispersed it self through the world. And being from the beginning grievous,
and incomportable, in time it discovered it self to be but weak. Withal it was
supposed, that the greivousnesse of it consisted in the Monarchall form, for
remedy of which they instituted, in some places Aristocraticall, in some places
Popular government, But in the use of them, they all also were discerned to be
but other faces of the same tyranny: and men found plainly, that the absolute
government of either People, or Nobles, was as well obnoxious unto tyranny, as
the sole government of the Prince: and that in which of the three soever the
government absolutely resided, the government was both tyrannical and infirm:
and that in every of them the comportablenesse and stability depended only on
the well regulating of the sovereign power, by a reasonable interposition of
some power committed into the hands of the two other potent limbs. So it became
an experimented principle among Statists; that the composite form (wherein
every of the three potent limbs, for the surer support of the instituted State,
had such apportioned influence and power as was proper for the frame of
government) was the only firm and durable form; and that of the three powers,
Regal, Aristocraticall, or Popular, any of them prevailing so far, as to be
wholly free from being qualified or tempered by some operation of the other two,
corrupted the legitimate form into a tyrannical, and made a prognostic of the
States declining into ruin. This principle of State is not impeached by any
instance of long continuance of the old Assyrian, or present Turkish Empire,
because the Assyrian had a peculiar advantage of continuance, by the simplicity
and unactivenesse of the age it was in. And the Turks to work their security
and continuance, have wholly put out the light of knowledge from among their
people, and have subdued them to a false Religion, that has in it self no
other end, nor office, then only to keep men in subjection; so that they having
deprived themselves of the principal of all conditions of humanity, and made
themselves (in a manner) an Empire of beasts, the success of their affairs
determines nothing of the event of theirs, that aim to live as men; much less
of theirs, who are to live the lives of supernatural men, that is to say of
Christians.

Absolute power then, when it has neither bound, nor limitation, (like the
natural heat too much enforced, which soon devoures the radical moisture that
maintains it) tends not to prosperity, but to the destruction of itself. For
all things being created in number, weight, and measure, the destruction of
their proportions must needs be the decay of their being. Eccles. 36. 25.
Where there is no enclosure (says the wise man) there the possession goes to
decay. For though one, by decaying his fence, gives himself liberty to prey
upon his neighbors, (which seems some advantage) yet he thereby lays himself
open to be a prey also unto them; and when after he would close it again, he
will find it hard to shut unruly beasts out from the haunt they have once
gotten. Now for preservation of the bounds and fences of a Kingdom, it is
necessary, not only to have just and equitable laws, but it must have also an
institution of good and sound orders, for the making and executing of those
Laws: which orders must be sacredly observed. for as evil words corrupt good
manners; so evil manners frustrate the effect of all good laws; and good
manners (especially those that belong to government) are not preserved without
strict adherence to the instituted orders of the Kingdom. Neither will those
orders long continue valid and of use, unless the protection and care of them
be committed into the hands of some conservatory power, more especially
interessed in the continuance of them. Who though not absolutely, nor with any
single power of immediate coertion, yet by their powerful intercession in the
Counsels, and convocate Assemblies of the State, may be effectually operative
to the preservation of the public right, for which cause the use of these
Assemblies are by no means long to be neglected.

When then the continuance and prosperity of every State, stands upon no surer
ground, then the observance of the Rights and Orders of the Kingdom: upon no
better stand the lives and fortunes of the Subject, of the Prince, and Royal
race; yea, and of the inheritance, and Church of God himself. And it is then
no marvel that God should threaten to power out his wrath like water on
Princes that are like to those that remove the bounds. Hosea. 5. 10.
It is no marvel that to the Kings of Judah, (to whom God (no question) with
a promise of perpetuity, gave the most absolute dominion that has been
communicable to the Princes of his Church) he should command, Execute Ye
judgment and righteousness, Ier. 22. 3. 7.
etc: for then shall King sitting on the throne of David, enter in by these
gates, etc: but otherwise, I will prepare destroyers against thee. It is the
important consequence that makes God not give the charge without threatening.
Though God declares Princes to be Gods among men, yet between him and them, God
(as David confesses) has made the observance of the rule of justice and
religion, to be the condition of their reigning. 2. Sam. 23. 3.
Bear rule (says God to David) over men, being just, and ruleing in the fear
of God. Indeed when Princes derive their authority from Christ, and justly
challeng the prerogative of his vicegerents, it well behooves them to look
that the derivatives fail not of the condition of their primitive. Psalm. 45. 7.
The Scepter of Christ's Kingdom is declared to be a right Scepter, and
therefore his seat to endure for ever. If his vicegerents would have their
seats durable, they also must have care their Scepters be right Scepters: they
must see that the aunciently-established Forms and Orders of their Kingdoms
be not violated or neglected, but from time to time renewed and kept: they must
not, to be absolute, break the Rights, and Orders of the Kingdom, and think
to be good and just Princes in their Arbitrary Rule: it were a reproachful
incongruity, and nothing suitable to the vicegerents of Christ, to be good and
fair Governors of that which they have made a tyrannical government. The
Governors and government must have one face and way, their rule cannot
otherwise escape infamy; not their providence cut off occasion from after times
of invading the Rights, and consequently the continuance of their Kingdoms.

The Laws then, the Rights, and Orders of Kingdoms, are most sacred, and
binding, even to Kings themselves: but that is to be understood, in Safety, in
Honor, in Conscience between God and them: not in any way, wherein, in their
default, the people can become authorized. For if we look to what is written,
we find that when Subjects do amiss, they ought to fear, Romans 13. 4.
for the Ruler is Gods minister to take vengeance, and bears not the sword in
vain. But we read of no authority committed to the people, in case the Prince
fails of his Duty; nor of any sword that is to be born by them: if therefore
they take the sword, or any course that leads unto it, they take the sword of
injustice to the wounding of their own souls. But while we name the people in
these things, we do not make all Subjects, living under the obedience of
Sovereigns, naturally to have this protence, that they may do themselves
right, in case their Prince do not. 1. Sam. 8. 5.
For as we see them of their own natural inclination to desire a King, so we
know they naturally submit unto his government. And Prince, and people, of
themselves stand naturally well-affected one to the other. But as there are
those that are sinisterly officious to the one, so are there toward the other
also. And as those often counsel the Prince, as if they would have him pull
out the stones from out the foundation of his Throne, to build higher the roof
and enlarge the battlements thereof: so these often persuade the people, that
they have the authority of Princes, though they have neither Throne, Scepter,
nor any thing belonging to the Sovereigne right: these find pretenses, and
broach opinions in the peoples behalf; and then the people naturally jealous,
and impatient of the violation of their supposed Right or Liberty, are facile
to entertain suggestions, and through want of judgment easily carried away
with them; but wanting also moderation, they so violently adhere unto them, as
that with their intemperate prosecution, they often by their own instruments
bring upon themselves the evils that they most do fear from others.

So the people of Rome having expelled their Kings and settled a Republique with
such hatred to the memory of them, as that they would not endure the name of
King: growing afterward ill satisfied with the proceedings of their Senate,
they would not only have Tribunes, (Guardians of their Liberty, and Rights,)
which was indeed no more then necessary, but they would have their Tribunes
endued with Consular authority; then with that of the Dictator; of the Pontifex
Max: and whatsoever other power the commonwealth afforded. In the end, they
made them so unresistable, to vindicate their Liberty against the Nobles, and
the Senate, as that in the upshot, when they were become secure against their
adverse party, they had no means of interposition against the absolutenes of
their own Guardians. Insomuch as that Caesar, obtaining to be head of their
Faction, could not be hindered, but that even under the forms which they
ordained to preserve their Liberty, he introduced a Tyranny more absolute, and
worse conditioned, then was that of their Kings, which they expelled.

Hitherto tends the Doctrines of those, who while they pretend to instruct for
the common good, Liberty, and Right; do as it were appeal unto the people,
and support their doctrines with the peoples approbation and applause, and do
so, in show, make the people, and indeed themselves, the sovereign judges of
all things.

FINIS.

