A DANE
A NORMAN
England Wales Scotland and Ireland Described (...) and Abridged With ye
History Relation of things worthy memory from a far larger Voulume

Done by John Spied

Anno Cum priuilegio 1676



AN EPITOME OF Mr. JOHN SPEED's THEATER of the EMPIRE OF GREAT BRITAIN. And of
His PROSPECT Of the Most Famous Parts of the WORLD.

In this New Edition are added, The Descriptions of His Majesty's Dominions
abroad, viz. New England, 226 New York, Carolina, 251 Florida, Virginia, 212
Maryland, Iamaica, 232 Barbados, 239

AS ALSO The Empire of the Great Mogol, 255 with the rest of the East Indies,
The Empire of Russia, 266 With their respective Descriptions.

London, Printed for Tho. Basset at the George in Fleet Street, and Ric.
Chiswel at the Rose and Crown in St. Paul's Churchyard. 1676.

England Scotland and Ireland
map of England, Scotland, and Ireland

A Catalogue of all the Shires, Cities, Bishoprics, Market Towns, Castles,
Parishes, Rivers, Bridges, Chases, Forests, and Parkes, contained in every
particular shire of the Kingdom of England.
Shires. Cities Bishopckes. Mark Towns Castles Parish (...) Rivers Bridgs
Chases Forests. Parkes Kente 02 02 17 08 398 06 14 00 00 23 Sussex 01 01 18 01
312 02 10 00 04 33 Surrie 00 00 06 00 140 01 07 00 0 17 Middlesex 02 02 03 00
073 01 03 01 00 04 Hant-shire 01 01 18 05 248 04 31 00 04 22 Dorcet shire 00 00
18 06 248 04 29 01 02 12 Wilt shire 01 01 21 01 304 05 31 01 09 29 Somerset
shire 03 02 29 01 385 09 4^ 00 02 18 Devon shire 01 01 40 03 394 23 106 00 00
23 Corrnuall 00 00 23 00 161 07 31 00 00 09 Essex 01 00 21 01 415 07 28 00 01
46 Hartford shire 00 00 18 00 120 01 24 00 00 23 Oxfordshire 01 01 10 00 208
03 26 00 04 09 Buckinghamsh. 00 00 11 00 185 02 14 00 00 15 Berck shire 00 00
11 01 140 03 07 00 0^ 13 Gloucester shire 01 01 20 01 280 12 22 01 02 19 Suffolk
00 00 28 01 464 02 32 00 00 27 Norfolk 01 01 26 00 625 03 15 00 00 00 Rutlande
00 00 02 00 047 00 01 00 00 04 Northampton-sh 01 01 11 02 326 05 24 00 03 23
Huntinton-shire 00 00 05 00 078 01 05 00 00 07 Bedford-shire 00 00 10 00 116 01
06 00 00 12 Cambridg-shire 00 01 06 00 163 01 07 00 00 05 Warwick shire 01 01
12 01 15^ 07 21 01 00 16 Lecester shire 00 00 11 02 200 01 10 00 02 13
Staffordshire 01 00 12 05 130 13 19 01 01 38 Worcester shire 01 01 07 03 152
05 17 01 02 16 Shrop shire 00 00 13 13 170 18 13 00 07 27 Hereford shire 01 01
08 07 176 13 11 01 02 08 Lincoln shire 01 01 26 02 630 09 15 00 00 13
Nottingham sh. 00 00 11 00 168 05 17 00 01 18 Darby shire 00 00 08 04 106 1^ 2^
00 01 34 Cheshire 01 01 09 03 068 09 19 00 02 18 Yorke-shire 01 01 46 14 563 36
62 04 08 72 Lancasshire 00 00 08 06 036 33 24 00 01 30 Durham 01 01 05 04 062
11 20 00 00 21 Westmoreland 00 00 04 06 026 08 15 00 02 19 Cumberland 01 01 08
15 058 20 33 00 03 08 Northumbrland 00 00 11 ^2 040 21 16 00 01 08 Monmouth 00
00 06 07 14^ 15 14 01 00 08 Glamorgan 00 01 07 ^2 151 16 06 00 00 05 Radnor 00
00 04 05 043 13 05 00 03 00 Brecknok 00 00 03 04 070 27 13 00 00 02 Cardigan 00
00 04 00 077 26 09 00 0^ 00 Carmarthin 00 00 06 04 08^ 20 16 00 0^ 0^ Pembrok
00 01 06 05 142 06 07 00 02 03 Montgomery 00 00 06 03 042 28 06 00 00 00
Merionidth 00 00 03 02 034 26 07 00 00 00 Denbigh 00 00 03 03 05^ 24 06 00 00
06 Flint shire 00 01 03 04 024 04 0^ 00 00 02 Anglesey 00 00 03 00 08^ 08 02 00
00 00 Caernarvon 00 0^ 05 03 073 17 06 00 00 00 * The total Sum, of this
Catalogue is 5 ^ Shires. 25 Cities 26 Bish 645 Market 156 Castles ^725 Pa.Ch
555 Rivers 956 Bridge 93 Chas. 62 For. 783 Parks

The General of Great BRITAIN.
CHAPTER I.
THE State of every Kingdom well managed by prudent government, seems to me to
represent a humane Body, guided by the sovereignty of the Reasonable Soul: the
Country and Land it self representing the one, the Actions and State Affairs
the other. Since therefore the excellencies of the whole are but imperfectly
laid open, where either of these Parts is defective, our intendment is to take
a view as well out of the outward Body and Lineaments of the now flourishing
British Monarchy (the Islands) Kingdoms and Provinces thereof in actual
possession, (for with others, no less justly claimed in the continent, we
meddle not) which shall be the continent of our first or Chorographical Tome,
containing the four first Books of this our Theater: as also of its successive
government and vital actions of State, which shall be our second or Historical
Tome, containing the five last Books. And here first we will (by example of the
best Anatomists) propose to view the whole Body and Monarchy entire (as far as
conveniently we could comprise it) and after will dissect and lay open the
particular Members, Veins, and Joints, (I mean the Shires, Riv^^s, Cities, and
Towns) with such things as shall occur most worthy our regard, and most
behoveful for our use.

(2) The Isl^nd of Great Britain (which with her adjoining Isles is here first
presented) contain^th the Kingdoms of England and Scotland, and is of many
accounted the greatest Island in the World, though Iustus Lypsius gives that
praise to Cuba in America, as the Oriental Navigators do unto Sumatra (taken
for P^olomy's Tapro^aria) or to Madagascar, the Island of S. Laurence, both
which are near unto, or under the Equi^octial Line; in which we will not
contend: as pleasing our selves with her other praises greater than her
Greatness: yet with this honor also, that it was (without question) the
greatest Island of the Roman World, and for any thing yet certainly known, of
all the rest. Concerning whose positure in respect of Heaven, Lucretius (the
first of the Latin Writers that names Britain) seems to place it in the same
Parallel with Pontus, where he says: Nam quid Britannum coelum differ
putamus, etc.
What differs Britains Heaven from that of Nile?
Or Pontus welkin from Gades warmer I Will?
In which, by a certain cross comparison, he opposes two likes against two
unlikes, Britain and Pontus against Egypt and Gades. But to seek into profound
Antiquity, rather than present practice, for matters in which Use makes
perfectness, were to affect the giving light by shadows, rather than by
Sunshine.

(3) It is by experience found to lie included form the degree fifty, and
thirty scruples of Latitude, and for Longitude extended from the 13. degree,
and 20. minutes, unto the 22. and 50. minutes, according to the observation of
Mercator. It has Britain, Normandy, and other parts of France upon the South;
the Lower Germany, Denmark* and Norway upon the East; the Isles of Orkney and
the Deucaledonian Sea, upon the North; the Hebrides upon the West, and from it
all other Islands and Ilets, which do scatteredly inviron it, and shelter
themselves (as it were) under the shadow of Great Albion (another name of this
famous Island) are also accounted Britannish, and are therefore here described
all together.

(4) Britain thus seated in the Ocean has her praises, not only in the present
sense, and use of her commodities, but also in those honorable Eulogies, which
the learned of Antiquaries has collected out of the noblest Authors, that he
scarce seems to have left any gleanings: neither will we transplant them out
of his flourishing Gardens, but as necessity compels, since nothing can be
further or otherwise better said.

(5) That Britain therefore is the Seas High Admiral, is famously known: and
the Fortunate Island ^upposed by some, as Robert of Amesbury does show: whose
Air is more temperate (says Caesar) then France; whose s^yl brings (...)
Grain in abundance, ^aith Tacitus; whose Seas produce orient Pearl, says
Suetonius; whose Fields are the seat of a Summer Queen, says Orpheus; her
wildest parts free from wild beasts, says the ancient Panegyric; and her
chief City worthily named Augusta, as says Ammianus: So as we may truly say
with the royal Psalmist, Our lines are fallen in pleasant places, yea, we have
a fair inheritance. Which whatsoever by the goodness of God, and industry of
man it is now, yet our English Poet has truly described unto the first face
thereof, thus; The Land which warlike Britains now possess,
And therein have their mighty Empires raised,
In ancient times was savage Wilderness,
Unpeopled, unmanur'd, unprov'd* unprais'd.


(6) And albeit the Ocean does at this present thrust it self between Dover and
Callis, dividing them with a deep and vast entrenchment; so that Britain
thereby is of a supposed Penisle made an Island, yet diverse have stiffly held,
that once it was joined by an arm of land to the Continent of Gallia. To which
opinion Spencer farther alluding, thus closes his Stanza. Ne was it Island
then* ne was it paisde
Amid the Ocean waves, ne was it sought
Of Merchants far, for profits therein prasde,
But was all desolate, and of some thought
By Sea to have been from the Celtick Mainland brought.
Which as a matter merely conjectural (because it is not plain that there were
no Islands nor Hills bofore Noah's flood) I leave at large: Virgil surely (of
all Poets the most learned) when describing the Shield which Vulcan forged (in
Virgils brain) for Aeneas, he calls the Morini (people about Calis) the outmost
men, does only mean that they were Westward, the furthest inhabitants upon the
Continent, signifying that Bri^ain as being an Island, lay out of the World,
but yet not out of the knowledge of men, for the Commodities thereof invited
the famous Greek Colonies of Merchants, Which dwelt at Marsilia in France, to
venture hither, as has been well observed out of Strabo.

(7) And as Julius Caesar was the first Roman which ever gave an attempt to
conquer it, so will we close its praises with a late Epigram, concerning the
outward face of the Isle, and the motive of Caesar's coming.

Albionis vertex frondoso crine superbus.
Arboreas frondes plurimus ales habet.
Gramineam Montes and fundunt pascua pubem;
Et carpunt, circum pascua gramen oves:
Sed Latii caruit potioribus Insula donis,
Victori potior Gloria ni Latio.
Albions high tops her woody locks far show,
With Quires of chanting Birds these Woods resounding,
Her Downs and Meadows clad in verdant hew,
Meadows and Downs with Flocks and Herds abounding,
Latium had greater Wealth, yet Caesar thought,
To British Glory, Latiums Wealth worth naught.
(8) The division of Britain concerning the government and territories thereof,
at such time as Caesar here arrived, does not sufficiently appear. Caesar
himself makes so sparing mention therein, that we have little cause to believe
Florus, where he makes Livie say, that after Caesar had slain an huge multitude
of Britains, he subdued the residue of the Isle; but rather with exq^isite
Horace, that he did not at all touch them, as the word inactus does in him
purport.

(9) Kings they were, and therefore that division which was here in Caesar's
time, was into Kingdoms: the old names of whole Nations, as also the knowledge
of their several abodes, hidden under the rubbish of so many ages, have of late
with infinite labors and exquisite judgment, been probably restored and
abounded; yet that no man's expectation and desire be too much frustrated,
reason wills that we briefly set forth such divisions of the Land, as many
repute not ancient only, but authentic.

(10) Our seeming ancient Historians begin it at Brute, who to every of his
three sons gave a part called presently after by their names; as Loegria to
Locrine his eldest son; Cambria to Camber his second son; and Albania to
Albanist his third son: And doubtless, if there had been more Nations of fame
in this Island, Brute should have had more sons fathered on him; which conceit
some ascribe to Monmouth's holding that before him it was never so divided.

(11) Ptolomy naming Britain the Great and the Less, has been by some
mistaken, as so dividing this Island into two parts; But his proportion and
distance from the Equator, compared with his Geographical description will
evince, that he calls this our Island Great Britain, and Ireland Britain the
Less.

(12) Howbeit some later do make indeed the South and more Champion to be
called Great Britain, and the North more Mountainous, Britain the Less; whose
inhabitants anciently were distinguished into the Majatae, and Caledo^ii, and
now by the Scots are into Heilandmen, and Lawlandmen. But that Northern clime
being more piercing for the Roman constitutions, and less profitable or
fruitful, they set their bounds not far from Edinburgh, and altogether
neglected the other parts more Northward.

(13) This nearer part of Britain they then divided into two parts; for the
more Southern tract, together with Wales, Dio terms the Higher, and that more
Northward the Lower, as by the seats of their Legions does appear; for the
second Legion Augusta (which kept at Caerleon in South Wales) and the twentieth
called Victrix, (which remained at Chester) he places in the higher Britain
but the sixth Legion surnamed also Victrix, resident at York, served (as he
writes) in the Lower Britain, which division, as seems, was made by Severus
the Emperor, who having vanquished Albinus, General of the Britains, and
reduced their State under his obedience, divided the government thereof into
two provinces, and placed two Prefects over the same.

(14) After this again the Romans did apportion Britain into three parts, whose
limits our great Antiquary assigns by the ancient Archiepiscopal Seats,
grounding his conjecture on the saying of Pope Lucius, who affirms that the
Ecclesiastical Jurisdictions of the Christians, accorded with the precincts of
the Roman Magistrates, and that their Archb^shops had their Sees in those
Cities wherein their Presidents abode: so that the ancient Seats of the three
Archb^shops here, being London in the East, C^erleon in the West, and York in
the North; Londons Diocese (as seems) made Britain prima, Caerleon Britain
secunda; and York, Maxima Caesari^nsis.

(15) But in the next age, when the power of their Presidents began to grow
over great, they again divided Britain into five parts, adding to the three
former Valentia and ^lavia Caesariensis: the first of which two seems to have
been the Northerly part of Maxima Caesariensis, recovered from the Picts and
Scots by Theodo^lus the General under Valence the Emperor, and in honor of
him named Vale^tia: and Flavia may be conjectured to receive the name from
Flavius the Emperor (son of The^d^sius) for that we read not of the name
Britain ^lavia, before his time.

(16) So these five partitions had their limits assigned after this manner:
Britain prima contained those coasts that lay betwixt Thamesis, the Severne,
and the British Sea: Britain Secunda extended from Severne unto the Irish
Seas, containing the Country that we now call Wales: Flavia Caesariensis, was
that which lay betwixt the Rivers Humber and Tyne: and Valentia from the said
River, and Picts wall reached unto the Rampire near Edinburgh in Scotland, the
farthest part that the Romans possessed when this division was in use. For the
several people inhabiting all those parts, with their ancient Names and Borders
(whether designed by the Romans, or the old Britains) together with our modern
Names and Shires, answerable to each of them, we will refer you to the Tables
thereof elsewhere.

(17) This whole Province of Britain, as in our History shall appear, was
highly esteemed of the Emperors themselves, assuming as a glorious surname
Britannicus: coming thither in person over those dangerous and scarce known
Seas; here marrying, living, and dying: enacting here Laws for the whole
Empire, and giving to those Captains that served here, many ensigns of great
honor; yea Claudius gave Plantius (the first Prefect of that Province) the
right hand, as he accompanied him in his Triumph; and his own Triumph of
Britain was set out with such magnificence, that the Provinces brought in
golden Crows of great weight, the Governors commanded to attend, and the very
Captains permitted to be present at the same: A Naval Coronet was fixed upon a
Pinnacle of his Palace, Arches and Trophies were raised in Rome, and himself on
his aged knees mounted the stairs into the Capitol, supported by his two sons
in Law: so great a joy conceived he in himself for the Conquest of some small
portion of Britain.

(18) Now the Romans found it, held it, and left it, as times ripened and
rottened their success, with the Names, the Inhabitants, Manners, and
Resisters, I leave to be pursued in the following Histories: and will only now
show thee these three Kingdoms, that are (in present) the chief Bodies of Great
Britains Monarchy; two of which ( Scotland and Ireland) shall in their due
places have their farther and more particular Descriptions.

THE KINGDOM OF ENGLAND
map of England
ENGLANDS General Description.
CHAPTER II.
THE Saxons glory now near to expire, by his appointment who holds both times
and Kingdoms in his all-ordering hand, their own Swords being the Instruments,
and the Dan^s the mauls that beat their beautiful Diadem into pieces* the
Normans a stirring Nation, (neither expected, nor much feared) under the
leading of William their Duke, and encouragement of the Roman Bishop (an usual
promoter of broken titles) made hither suddenly into England, who in one only
battle, with the title of his sword and slaughter of Harold, set the imperial
Crown thereof upon his own head: which no sooner was done, but the English went
down, and the Normans lording it, became Owners of those Cities which
themselves never built, possessed those Vineyards which they never planted,
drunk of those Wells which they never had dug, and inhabited those Houses,
filled with riches, for which they never had labored: for they found it to be
as the land whereupon the Lord set his eye, even from the beginning to the end
of the year: not only drinking water of the rain of Heaven, but having also
rivers of waters and fountains in her valleys, and without all scarcity, whose
stones are Iron, and out of whose mountains is dug brass. This made them
more resolute at first to settle themselves in this fairest and fruitfullest
part of the Island; the conqueror using all policy, both Martial and Civil, to
plant his posterity here for ever. How he found the Land governed we showed in
the Heptarchy; but his restless thoughts were not contented with conquering the
Nation and their Land, unless he also overcame their very Customs, Laws, and
Language.

(2) Touching the distribution of the Kingdom, whereas other Kings before him
made use of it, chiefly for the good of the people, and better ministering of
Justice, he made use of it, to know the wealth of his Subjects, and to enrich
his Coffers; for he caused a description to be made of all England, ^ow much
land every one of his Barons possessed how many Knights fees, how many
Plow-lands, how many in villanage, how many heads of beasts, yea, how much
ready money every man, from the greatest to the ^ast, did possess, and what
rents might be made of every man's possession: the Book of which inquisition
(yet in the Exchequer) was called Doomesday, for the generality of that
Judgment on all the Land: Whereunto we may add his other distribution of this
Land (worse than any former) when thrusting the English out of their
possessions, ^e distributed their inheritances to his Soldiers; yet so, that
all should be held of the King, as of the only true Lord and possessor.

(3) For the Laws by which he meant to govern, he held one excellent rule and
purpose, which was, that a people ought ^to be ruled by Laws written and
certain: for otherwise new Judges would still bring new Judgments: and
therefore he caused twelve to be chosen out of every County, which should on
their oath, without inclining one way or other, neither adding nor de^racting,
open unto him all their ancient Laws and Customs. By whose relation
understanding that three sorts of Laws formerly were in the Land, Merchelenage,
West-Saxonlage, Dane-lage; he had preferred these last, (himself and people
being anciently derived from those Northern people) had not all the Barons
bewayling to the King, how grievous it was for a Land to be judged by those
Laws which they understood not, altered his resolute purpose: yet in bringing
in the strange ^orms of Norman Process, and pleading in the French tongue
(which continued till Edward the thirds time) that grievance was bu^ slend^rly
prevented. So likewise did he much alter the old Courts of Justice, where these
Laws should be ministered, but whereas the ancient Kings of England, ac^ording
to Moses his example, sat in person in the seat of Justice, to right the
greater affairs of their Subjects, as William Lambe^^ shows in King Alfred,
Edgar, Canutus, etc. and proves out of the Kings Oath, out of Bracto^, Britain,
^axon Laws, etc. King William not only continued this, but beside^ er^cted some
other C^urt^ of justice, as the Exchequer, and certain Courts and Sessions to
be held four times every year ^appointing both Judges (some to hear causes,
others to whom appeals should be made, but none from them) and also Praefects
to look to good orders. Those last Polydor calls Justices of Peace; but their
instruction seems to be far later: and no less is his error on the other side,
in saying the Conqueror first instituted Sheriffs, and the trial by twelve
men, which were both ancienter.

(4) And because the Conqueror, for honor of Bishops, caused them to remove
from small obssure places to Cities of more renown; we have therefore reserved
to this last ^lace that division of this Kingdom* which is according to
Jurisdiction Episcopal. Formerly in the year of Salvation, 636. Honorius the
first Archbishop of Canterbury, first divided England into Parishes, which at
this day are contained under their several Diocesans, and these again under
their two Metropolitanes (Can^erbury and York) in manner following. CANTERBVRY.
Bishoprics. Counties. Parishes. Canterbury. Kent. 257. Rochester. 98. London.
Essex. 623. Middlesex. Hertford-shire part. Lincoln. Lincolnshire. 1255.
Leichestershire. Huntington. Bedford-shire. Buckingham-shire. Hertford-shire
part. Chichester. Hertford-shire 250. Sussex. Winchester. Hant-shire. 362.
Surrey. Wight Isle. Gernesey Isle. Iersey Isle. Salisbury. Wilt-shire. 248.
Bark-shire. Exeter. Devon-shire. 604. Corne-wall. Bath and Wells.
Sommerset-shire. 388. Gloucester. Gloucester-shire. 267. Worcester.
Worcestershire. 241. Warwickshire. Litchfield and Coventry. Warwick shire
part. 557. Staffordshire. Derby-shire. Shrop-shire part. Hereford. Shrop shire
part. 313. Hereford-shire. Ely. Cambridge-shire. 141. Ely Isle. Norwich.
Norfolk. 1641. Suffolk. Oxford. Oxfordshire. 195. Peterborow. Northampton.
293. Rutland-shire. Bristow. Dorset-shire. 236. Glamorgan. Landaffe.
Monmouth-shire. 177. Brecknock-shire. Radnor-shire. S. David. Pembroke-shire.
308. Caermarden. Bangor. Caernarvon-shire. 107. Anglesey Isle. Merioneth-shire.
Denbigh-shire. S. Asaph. Devon-shire part. 121. Flint-shire part. YORK. York.
Yorkshire. 581. Nottingham-shire. Chester. Cheshire. 256. Richmond-shire.
Cumberland part. Lanca-shire. Flint part. Carlisle. Cumberland part. 93.
Westmorland. Durham. ^urham 135. Northumberland. Sodor. Man Island. 17. Total
Bishoprics 27. Parishes 9285.

(9) To speak nothing of these twenty eight Flamins the Priests of Idolatry,
and the three Arch-Flamins, whose seats were at London, Caerlion, and York; all
of them converted by King Lucius into Christian Bishops Sees; let us only
insist upon the three last, by the same King appointed to be Metropolitanes
over the rest; among whom London is said to be chief; whose first Christian
Archbishop was Thean, the builder of S. Peter's Church in Cornhill for his
Cathedral, as by an ancient Table there hanging, was affirmed, and tradition to
this day does hold. Our British Historians do bring a succession of fifteen
Archbishops, to have sat from his time unto the coming of the Saxons, whose
last was Vodius, slain by King Vortiger, for reprehending his heathenish
marriage with Rowen, the Daughter of Hengist. At what time began the misery of
the Land, and of holy Religion, both which they laid waste under their profane
feet: until Ethelbert of Kent, the first Christian Saxon King, advanced
Christianity, and Augustine to the Archbishopric of Canterbury, when London
under Melitus became subject to that See.

(6) At Caerlion upon Vske in the time of the great Arthur, sat Dubritius, a
man excellently learned, and of an hol^ conversation; he had sat Bishop of
Landaffe a long time, and with Germanus and Lupus, two French Bishops, greatly
impugned the Pelagian Heresy, infecting at that time the Island very far,
whose fame and integrity was such, that he was made Archbishop of all Wales but
grown very old, he resigned the same unto Davi^ his Disciple, a man of greater
birth, and greater austerity of life, who by consent of King Arthur, removed
his Archbishops See unto Menevia, a place very solitary and meet for
meditation: the miracles of the man (which are said to be many) changed both
the name of the place into his own, and robbed Caerlion of her Archiepiscopal
seat: This See of S. David's (as in an ancient Register belonging to that Church
is recorded) had seven Bishops Suffragans subject unto it, which were Exeter,
Bath, Hereford, Landaffe, Bangor, S. Asap^, and ^ernes in Ireland:
notwithstanding, either for want of Pall, carried into Britany by Archbishop
Sampson, in a dangerous infection of sickness, or by poverty or negligence, it
lost that jurisdiction, and in the days of King Henry the first, became subject
to the Sea of Canterbury.

(7) York has had better succes^ than either of the former, in retaining her
original honor, though much impaired in her circuit, challenging to have been
sometime Metropolitan over all the Bishops in Scotland; and although it was
made equal in honor and power with Canterbury, by Pope Gregory, as Beda
relates, and had twelve suffragan Bishoprics that owed obedience, only four
now acknowledge York their Metropolitan, but Canterbury the Superior: for
William the Conqueror thinking it dangerous to have two in like authority,
lest the one should set on his Crown, and the other (...) it off, left York to
be a primate, but Canterbury only the primate of all England.

(8) That Lichfield was made an Archiepiscopal See by Pope Hadrian the first,
at the suit of Offa, the great King of Mercia, is manifested by Matthew of
Westminster, unto whose Jurisdiction were assigned the Bishoprics of
Winchester, Hereford, Leicester, Sidnacester, Helmham, and Dunwich, and whose
first and last Archbishop was Aldwin. That Winchester also had intended an
Archiepiscopal Pall, the same Author records, when Henry Bloys, of the Blood
Royal, greatly contended with the Archbishop of Canterbury for superiority,
under the pretense of being Cardinal de latere; to him an Archiepiscopal Pall^
was sent, with power and authority over seven Churches; but he dying before
that the design was done, the Sea of Winchester remained in subjection to
Canterbury. And that (long before) the Sea of Dorchester by Oxford, had the
Jurisdiction of an Archbishop, is apparent by those provinces that were under
his Diocese, which were Winchester, Oxford, Lincoln, Salisbury, Bristow, Wells,
Litchfield, Chester, and Exeter; and the first Bishop of this great circuit,
Derinus, was called the Apostle and Bishop of the West Saxons: which in his
next successor was divided into two parts, Winchester and Dorchester, and not
long after into Lichfield, Sidnacester, and Legecister; and lastly, the Sea
removed from Dorchester to Lincoln, as now it is. And thus far for the division
of this Realm, both Politic and Ecclesiastic, as it has stood and stands at
this day.

(9) But the whole Islands division by most certain Record was anciently made,
when Julius Agricola drew a trench or fortification upon that narrow space of
ground betwixt Edenborough Frith, and Dunbetton Bay, makes the Southern part a
province unto the Roman Empire. Afterward Hadrian the Emperor, seeing perhaps
the Province too spacious to be well governed without great expense, drew back
these limits almost sourscore miles shorter, even to the mouth of the River
Tyne, which he fortified with a wall of admirable work unto Carl^le, where
stood the Lands border, while it was a Roman Province: yet the conquering
Saxons did spread again over those bounds, and (as seems) enlarged their
government to that first Tract, as by this inscription in a Stone Cross
standing upon a Bridge over the water of Frith, appears.

I am a free Mark as Passengers may ken,
To Scots, to Britains, and to English men.
(10) But afterward William the Conqueror, and Malcolm King of Scotland,
falling to an agreement for their limits* arreared a Cross upon Stanemore,
where on the one side the portraiture and Arms of the King of England was
sculptured, and of the King of Scots on the other (a piece whereof is yet
remaining there near to the Spittle) thence called the Rey-Cross, there erected
to be a Meare-stone to either Kingdom. His successors also abolished the two
partitions in the West, whereby the Welsh became one Nation and Kingdom with
the English. It is also said that King Stephen, to purchase friendship with the
Scottish Nation, gave unto their King the County of Cumberland, who with it
held both Westmorland and Northumberland; but as Newbrigensis writes, he
restored them to King Henry the second, wisely considering his great power and
right to those parts.

(11) The last known borders were from the Sulway in the West bay, along the
Cheviot hills, unto the water of Tweed by Barwick in the East; to maintain
which, on each part many Laws have been made, and many inrodes, robberies, and
fewdes practiced; all which by the hand of God is cut off, and by the rightful
succession of King James our Sovereign, who has broken down the partition of
this great Island, and made the extremes of two Kingdoms, the very midst of
his great united Empire.

KENT
map of Kent
KENT.
CHAPTER III.
KENT, the first province appearing in the South of this Kingdom, is bounded
upon the North with the famous River Thamisis, on the East with the German
Ocean: on the South with Sussex and the narrow Seas* and upon the West with
Sussex and Surrey. The length thereof extending from Langley in the West, unto
Ramsgate Eastward in the Isle of Thanet, is about 53 English miles. From Rother
in the South, unto the Isle of Grain Northward, the breadth is not much above
26, and the whole circumference about 160 miles.

(2) In form it somewhat resembles the head of a Hammer or Battle-axe, and
lies corner-wise into the Sea; by Strabo, Caesar, Diodorus, and P^olomy,
called Cantium, of Cant, or Canton, an Angle or Corner: or of Caine a British
word, which signifies Bushes or VVoods, whereof that County in those former
times was plentifully stored.

(3) The Air though not very clear, because of the vapors arising from the
Sea, and Rivers that environ the same, is both wholesome and temperate, as
seated nearest to the Equinoctial, and the furthest from the North Pole, not
touched with cold as the other parts of the Land are.

(4) The soil toward the East is uneven, rising into little hills, the West
more level and Woody; in all places fruitful, and in plenty equals any other of
the Realm, yea, and in some things has the best esteem; as in broad cloths,
Fruits, and feeding for Cattle. Only Mines (except Iron) are wanting: all
things else delivered with a prodigal heart and liberal hand.

(5) Sundry navigable Rivers are in Kent, whereof Medway, that divides the
shire in the midst, is chief; in whose bosom securely rides his Majesty's
Navy Royal, the walls of the Land, and terrors of the Sea, besides ten other
of name and account, that open with twenty Creeks and Havens for Ships arrivage
into this Land, four of them bearing the name of Cinque Ports, are places o^
great strength and privileges, which are Dover, Sandwich, Rumney, and
Winchelsey: among which Dover with the Castle is accounted by Matthew Paris the
Monk, the lock and key to the whole Realm of England; and by John Rosse and
Lidgate is said to be built by Julius Caesar, fatal only for the death of King
Stephen, and surrender of King John therein happening.

(6) A conceit is, that Goodwin Sands were sunk for the sins of himself and his
sons: Shelves indeed that dangerously lie on the North-east of this County, and
are much feared of all Navigators. These formerly had been firm ground, but by
a sudden inundation of the Sea were swallowed up, as at the same time a great
part of Flanders and the Low Countries were; and the like also at the same time
befell in Scotland, as Hector Boethius their Historiographer writes. A like
accident happened in the year 1586, the fourth day of August, in this County, at
Mottingham, a Town eight miles from London, suddenly the ground began to sink,
and three great Elmes thereon growing, were carried so deep into the bowels of
the earth, that no part of them could any more be seen, the hole left in
compass fourscore yards about, and a line of fifty fathoms plummed into it,
does find no bottom.

(7) The Kentish people in Caesar's time were accounted the civillest among the
Britains; and as yet esteem themselves the freest Subjects of the English, not
conquered, but compounded with by the Normans; and herein glory, that their
King and Commons of all the Saxons were the first Christians, converted in Anno
596; yea, and long before that time also Kent received the Faith: for it is
recorded that Lucius the first Christian British King in this Island, built a
Church to the name and service of Christ, within the Castle of Dover, endowing
it with the Toll of the same Haven.

(8) This County is enriched with two Cities and Bishops Sees, strengthened
with 27 Castles, graced with 8 of His Majesty's most Princely Houses, traded
with 24 Market Towns, and beautified with many stately and gorgeous buildings.
The chiefest Ci^y thereof, the Motropolitane and Archbishops See, is
Canterbury, bui^t (as our British Historians report) 900 years before the birth
of christ; by Henry of Huntington, called Caier-Kent, wherein (as M. Lambard
says) was erected the first School of professed Arts and Sciences, and the
same a pattern unto Sigibert King of the East Angles, for hi^ foundation at
Cambridge; notwithstanding by the computation of time, this Sigibert was slain
by Penda, King of Mercia, thirty years before that Theodore the Grecian was
Bishop of Canterbury, who is said to be the erector of that Academy. But
certain it is, that Austin the Monk had made this City famous before that time,
by the conversion of these Saxons unto Christiani^y, and in building a most
magnificent Church to Gods service, wherein eight of their Kings have been
interred, but all their Monuments since over-shadowed by the height of Beckets
Tomb, that for glory, wealth, and superstitious worships, equalized the
Pyramides of Egypt, or the Oracle of Delphos, yet now with Dagon is fallen
before the Ark of God.

This City has been honored with the presence and Coronations of King John
and Queen Isabel his wife, with the marriages of King Henry the third, and of
King Edward the first, and with the interments of Edward the Black Prince, King
Henry the fourth, and of Queen Joan his wife: as Feversham is with the burials
of King Stephen, and of Maud his Queen and wife. But as in glory so in
adversity has this City born a part, being diverse times afflicted by the
Danes, but most especially in the days of Ethelred, who in that revenge of
their massacre, made havoc of all, and herein slew forty three thousand and
two hundred persons, the tenth besides reserved to live. Afterward it recovered
breath and beauty by the liberality of Bishop Lanford; Characters and
privileges by King Henry the third; strength in Trench and Fortifications from
King Richard the second; and lastly, Walls for her defense by Simon Sudbury
Archbishop of that See: whose Graduation is placed for Latitude 51. 25, and
parallelized for Longitude 22. 8, her sister Rochester differing not much in
either degree.

(9) Which City (as Beda says) was built by one Rof, Lord of the same, though
some ascribe the foundation of the Castle to Julius C^sar, and has been often
ruinated by the injuries of war, both in the times when the Saxons strove for
superiority among themselves, wherein this City was laid waste, Anno 680. as
also in the assaults of their common enemy the Danes, who about the year 884.
from France sailed up the River Medway, and besieged the same; so that had not
King Elfred speedily come to the rescue, it had been overthrown by those
Pagans. And again in Anno 999. the D^nes miserably spoiled this City in the
time of King Ethelred: neither ha^n it stood safe from danger since (though not
defaced so much by war) for twice has it been sore endamaged by chance of
fire: the first was in the Reign of King Henry the first, Anno 1130. himself
being present with most of his Nobility, for the consecration of the Cathedral
Church of S. Andrew. And again almost wholly consumed about the latter end of
the Reign of King Henry the second, Anno 1177. Yet after all these calamities,
it recovered some strength again, by the bounty of King Henry the third, both
in buildings, and in ditching her about for defense.

(10) Civil broyls and dissentions has this County been burdened with, and
that not only under the Saxons and Danes, whose desolations were many and
grievous, but also by other rebellions since the Normans Conquest, both in
those infamous insurrections, called The Barons Wars, in the reign of King
Henry the Third, wherein much harm was done: as also under King Richard the
Second, when Wat Tyler, Captain of a dreadful commotion, assembled at
Black Heath, Mile-end, and in London, doing many outrages, where in Smithfield
he was lastly struck down by William VVallworth then Mayor of the City, and
worthily slain for his notorious treasons. Again, upon Black Heath, Michael
Joseph, the Lord Dawbeney with their Cornish Rebels, were overthrown by King
Henry the Seventh, Anno 1497.

(11) Kent in the time of Julius Caesar, was governed by four several Kings.
Under Vortigern the Britain, by a Lieutenant called Guoronge, from whom the
said King gave it to Hengist the Saxon, in favor of his Daughter Howen, who
seeking to make himself absolute King thereof, eight years after his first
entrance, fought a victorious battle against the Britains near unto Crayford,
and thenceforth accounted that Province his own. Yet afterward Vortimer the
valiant Britain, gave him battle at Aylesford: in the which both Horsa and
Catigern, brethren to both the Generals, were slain, and the Saxons driven into
the Isle of Thanet, their first assigned habitation, not daring to enter the
Continent so long as Vortimer lived. Catigern was interred upon that plain,
where to this day remains his Monument, being 4 stones pitched in manner of
the Stonehenge, and is vulgarly called Citscotehouse. The like Monument was of
Horsa at Horsted, which storms and time have now devoured. Hengist made this
Province a Kingdom for himself and successors, which name and power it retained
the space of three hundred and twenty years, when Egbert King of the
West Saxons subdued and joined it to his own: in which subjection it stood
until the time of the Normans. Then it was given under the title of an Earldom
by the Conqueror, unto Otha Bishop of Bayeux his half brother, whose
successors in that dignity were those most honorable families, whose Arms and
Names within this plot are blazed and expressed. It is divided principally into
five Lathes, subdivided into 66 hundreds, and them again into 398 Parishes: and
wherein had been seated twenty three Religious Houses.

SUSSEX
map of Sussex
SUSSEX.
CHAPTER IV.
SOUTH-SEX, a word compounded of the site thereof Southward, lies stretched
along the British Seas: The North confronts upon Surrey and Kent, and the West
butteth upon Hampshire.

(2) For form it lies long and narrow, so that all her Rapes do run quite
through the Shire, and contains from Westharting in the West, to Kent ditch,
that divides it from Kent in the East, sixty four miles, but in the broadest
part little above twenty, the whole circumference about one hundred fifty eight
miles.

(3) The Air is good, though somewhat clouded with mists, which arise forth of
her South bordering Sea, who is very prodigal unto her for Fish and Sea-fowl,
though as sparing for Harbors or Ships arrivage; and those which she has, as
uncertain for continuance, as dangerous for entrance.

(4) Rich is the Soil, and yields great plenty of all things necessary, but
very ill for travelers, especially in the winter, the Land lying low, and the
ways very deep, whose middle tract is garnished with Meadows, Pastures and Corn
fields, the Seacoast with Hills, which are called the Downs, abundantly
yielding both Grain and Grass, and the North side over shadowed with pleasant
Groves and thick Woods, where sometimes stood the famous wood Andradswald,
containing no less than an hundred and twenty miles in length, and thirty in
breadth, taking the name of Andexida a City adjoining: both which were won from
the Britains by Ella the first Saxon King of this Province, and the place made
fatal to Sigebert King of the VVest-Saxens, who being deposed from his Royal
throne, was met in this Wood by a Swine-herd, and slain in revenge of his Lord,
whom Sigebert had nurdered.

(5) The ancient people in the Romans time were the R^gni, of whom we have
spoken, and who were subdued by Vespasian the Leader of the second Legion under
Aulus, Plautius, Lieutenant in Britain for Claudius the Emperor. But after the
departure of the Romans, this, with Surrey, was made the South ^axons King^ome:
yet that giving place to the West Saxons, as they in time to the Normans, i^
became a Province under the Conquerours power, who gave to his followers much
Land in these parts.

(6) The place of most account in this Shire is Chichester, by the Britains
called C^ercei, a City beautiful and large, and very well walled about, first
built by Cissa the second King of the ^outh Saxons, wherein his Royal Palace
was kept. And when King William the First had enacted that Bishops Sees should
be trans^^ted out of small Towns unto places of greater resort, the Re^idence
of the Bishop (until then held at Selsey) was removed to this City, where
Bishop Raulfe began a most goodly Cathedral Church: but before it was fu^ly
finished by a sudden mischance of fire was quite consumed. Yet the same Bishop
with the helping liberality of King Henry the First, began it again, and saw it
wholly finished; whose beauty and greatness her fatal enemy still envying,
again cast down in the days of King Richard the First, and by her raging
flames consumed the buildings both of it and the Bishops Palace adjoining,
which Seffrid the second Bishop of that Name re-edified and built anew. And now
to augment the honor of this place, the City has born the Title of an
Earldome; whereof they of Arundel were sometimes so styled. Whose Graduation
for Latitude, which is removed from the Equator unto the degree fifty five
minutes; and for Longitude, observing the same point in the West, whence
Mercator has measured, are twenty degrees.

(7) With whom for frequency, bigness, and building, the Town Jews seems to
contend, where King Athelstane appointed the mintage of his Moneys, and
William de VVarron built a strong Castle, whereunto the disloyal Barons of
King Henry the Third in warlike manner resorted, and fought a great Battle
against their own Sovereign and his son, wherein the King had his Horse flain
under him, Richard, King of the Romans surprised and taken in a Windmill, and
Prince Edward delivered unto them upon equal conditions of peace. But a greater
Battle was fought at Battle, when the hazard of England was tried in one days
fight, and Harold the King gave place to his Conqueror by losing of his life,
among sixty seven thousand, nine hundred seventy four Englishmen besides; whose
blood so spilt, gave name to the place, in French Sangue lac. And the soil
naturally after rain becoming of a reddish color, caused William Newbery
untruly to write, That if there fall any small sweet showers in the place where
so great a slaughter of the Englishmen was made, presently sweateth forth very
fresh blood out of the earth, as if the evidence thereof did plainly declare
the voice of blood there shed, and cried still from the earth unto the Lord.

(8) But places of other note in this Shire are these: from Basham, Earl Harold
taking the Sea for his delight, in a small Boat, was driven upon the Coast of
Normandy, where by Duke William he was retained, 'till he had sworn to make him
King after Edward the Confessors death; which oath being broken, the Bastard
arrived at Pensey, and with his sword revenged that Perjury. At
VVest-VVittering also Ell^ the Saxon before him had landed for the conquering
of those parts, and gave name to the shore from Cimen his son But with greater
glory does Gromebridge raise up her head, where Charles Duke of Orleance,
father to Jews the twelfth: King of France, taken prisoner at Agincourt, was
there a long time detained.

(9) The commodities of this Province are many and diverse, both in Corn,
Cattle, VVood, Iron, and Glass; which two last, as they bring great gain to
their possessors, so do they impoverish the County of Woods, whose want will be
found in ages to come, if not at this present in some sort felt.

(10) Great have been the devotions of religious Persons, in building and
consecrating many houses unto the use and only service of Christ; whose Beadmen
abusing the intents of their Founders, has caused those Foundations to lament
their own ruins: For in the tempestuous time of King Henry the Eighth, eighteen
of them in this County were blown down, whose fruit fell into the Laps of some
that never meant to restore them again to the like use.

This County is principally divided into six Rapes, every of them containing a
River, a Castle and Forest in themselves, besides the several Hundreds
whereunto they are parted, that is the Rape of Chichester into seven, of
Arundel into five, of Bramber into ten, of Jews into thirteen, of Pevensey
into seventeen, and of Hastings into thirteen, in all fifty six; wherein are
seated ten Castles, eighteen Market Towns, and three hundred and twelve
Parish-Churches.

SURREY
map of Surrey
SURREY.
CHAPTER V.
SURREY, by Beda called Sutbri, lies separated upon the North from the
counties of Buckingham and Middlesex, by the great River Thamisis; upon the
East, Kent does inbound it; upon the South is held in with Sussex and
Hamp-shire; and her West part is bordered upon by Hamp-shire and Bark-shire.

(2) The form thereof is somewhat square, and lies by North and by East,
whereof Redrith and Frensham are the opposites, betwixt whom are extended
thirty four miles. The broadest part is from Awfold Southward, to Thamisis by
Stanes, and them asunder twenty two: the whole in circumference is one hundred
and twelve miles.

(3) The heavens breathing Air in this Shire is most sweet and delectable, so
that for the same cause many Royal Palaces of our Princes are therein seated,
and the Country better stored with game than with grain, insomuch that this
County is by some men compared unto a homespun freeze-cloth, with a costly
fair list, for that the out-verge does exceed the middle it self. And yet it is
wealthy enough both in Corn and Pasturage, especially in Holmesdale, and
toward the River of Thamisis.

(4) In this shire the Regni (an ancient people mentioned by Ptolomy) were
seated, whom he brancheth further through Sussex and some part of Hamp-shire.
And in the wane of the Romans Government, when the Land was left to the will of
invaders, the South Saxons under Ella here erected their Kingdom, which with
the first was raised, and soonest found end. From them no doubt the Country
was named Suth-rey as seated upon the South of the River; and now by
contraction is called Sur^ey:

(5) And albeit the County is barren of Cities or Towns of great estate, yet is
she stored with many Pri^cely Houses, yea and five of his Majesty's, so
magnificently built, that of some she may well say, no shire has none such, as
is None such indeed. And were not Richmond a fatal place of Englands best
Princes, it might in estem be ranked with the richest: For therein died the
great Conqueror of France, King Edward the Third, the beautiful Ann daughter
to Charles the Fourth, Emperor, and entirely beloved wife to King Richard the
Second; the most wise Prince King Henry the Seventh, and the rarest of her Sex,
the Mirror of Princes, Queen Elizabeth, the worlds love, and Subjects joy.

(6) At M^rton likewise Kenulph King of the West Saxons came to his untimely
end: and at Lambeth the hardy Canute, and last of the Danish Kings, died among
his Cups. But as these places were fatal for the last breath of these Princes,
so other in this County have been graced with the body and beginning of other
worthy Monarchs: for in Cher^sey Abbey King Henry the Sixth, who was deposed and
made away in the Tower of London, was first interred without all ^uneral pomp,
but for his holy life was imputed a Saint, and lastly translated, and intombed
at Winsor. At Kingstone likewise stood the Chair of Majesty, wherein Athelstan,
Edwin, and Etheldred sat at their Coronation, and first received their S^epter
of Imperial power. Guildford likewise has been far greater than now it is,
when the Palace of our English-Saxon Kings was therein set. And seeing it is
the midst of the Shire, the graduation from thence shall be observed, where for
Latitude the Pole is raised from the degree 51, 22 s^ruples: and her Longitude
from the West in the degree 20 and 2 scruples.

(7) Neither can we account Okam and Ripley, two small Villages, the least in
this Shire, which have brought forth the well known men, William de Okam, that
deep Philosopher, and admirable Scholar, and George de Ripley, the ringleader
of our Alchymists and mystical impostors; both of them born in this County, and
very near together. But why speak I of these, since a place nearer to sight and
greater for ^ame, even Lambeth, is the High Seat of Ecclesiastical Government,
Piety and Learning, and Palace of Canterburies Archbishops, the Metropolita^s
of England. First erected by Archbishop Baldwin, and ever since has been the
residing of all those worthy Prelates of our Church, who in a long succession
(even from Anno 596:) have continued to him that now most worthily sits at the
Churches stern, Richard by Gods providence Lord Archbishop of that See, a most
faithful and prudent Counselor unto King James, and a most learned and
provident Guide of our most flourishing Church: whose gracious favor
undeservedly conferred upon me, has been a great encouragement to these my
poor endeavors.

(8) Memorable places of Battles fought before the Conquest, were Wembledon,
where (when the fullness of prosperity burst forth into Civil Dissentions among
the Saxons) a bloody Battle was fought betwixt Cheaulin the West Saxon and
young Ethelbert of Kent, wherein he was discomfited and two of his principal
Leaders slain, about the year of Christ 560. and three hundred thirty three
years after, King Elfred with a small power overcame the Danes with a great
slaughter at Farnham in this County, which somewhat quelled the courage of his
savage enemy.

(9) Religious Houses erected in this shire by the devotion of Princes, and set
apart from public uses to Gods Divine Service, and their own salvation, as
then was taught, the best in account, were Shene, Chertsey, Merton, Newarke,
Rygats, Waverly, Horsleg; and in Southwarke, Bermundsey, and S. Mary's. These
all flourished with increase, till the ripeness of their fruit was so pleasing
in sight and taste unto King Henry the Eighth, that in beating the boughs he
brake down body and all, ruinating those houses, and seizing their rich
possessions into his own hands: So jealous is God of his honor, and so great
vengeance follows the sin of Idolatry.

(10) In this Shire have stood eight fair and strong Castles: such we^e
Addington, Darking, Starburgh, Rygate, Gilford, Farnham, Goseford, and
Brenchingley: but of greater State are Oking, Otlands, Nonesuch, and Richmond,
his Majesty's Royal Manors. And for service to the Crown or Commonwealths
employments, this Counties division is into thirteen Hundreds, wherein are
seated eight Market Towns, and one hundred and forty Parish-Churches

SOUTHAMPTON
map of Southhampton
HANT-SHIRE.
CHAPTER VI.
HANT-SHIRE, lying upon the West of England is bordered upon the North by
Barkshire, upon the East with Surrey and Sussex, upon the South with the
British Seas, and Isle of Wight, and upon the West with Dorset and Wilt-shire.

(2) The length thereof from Blackwater in the North upon Surrey, unto Bascomb
in the South upon the Sea, extended in a right line, is fifty four English
miles, and the breadth drawn from Petersfield in the East, unto Tidworth in the
West, and confines of Wilt-shire, is little less than thirty miles, the whole
circumference about one hundred fifty and five miles.

(3) The Air is temperate, though somewhat thick by reason of the Seas, and the
many Rivers that through the Shire do fall, whose plenty of Fish, and fruitful
increase, do manifoldly redeem the harms which they make.

(4) The Soil is rich sor Corn and Cattle, pleasant for Pasturage, and as
plenteous for Woods; in a word, in all Commodities either for Sea or Land,
blessed and happy.

(5) Havens it has, and those Commodities both to let in, and to lose out
Ships of great burden in trade of Merchandise, or other employments: whereof
Portsmouth, Tichfield, Hamble, and South-hampton are chief: Besides many other
creeks that open their bosoms into those Seas, and the Coast strengthened with
many strong Castles, such as Hurst, Calshot, South-hampton, S. Andrews. Worth,
Porchester, and the South Castle, besides other Bulwarks, or Block-houses that
secure the Country: and further in the Land, as Malwood, Winchester, and
Odiam, so strong that in the time of King John, thirteen Englishmen only
defended the Fort for fifteen days against Lewis of Franca, that with a great
Host assaulted it most hotly.

(6) Anciently it was possessed upon the North by the Segontians, who yielded
themselves to Julius Caesar, and whose chief City was Vindonum, Caer Segonte,
now Silcester; and upon the South by the Belgae and Regni, who were subdued by
Plausius and Vespasian the Romans, where Titus rescuing his Father, straightly
besieged by the Britains, as Dio and Forcatulus do report, was grasped about
with an Adder, but no hurt to his person, and therefore taken for a sign of
good luck. Their chief Town was Rincewood, as yet sounding the name: and more
within Land inhabited the Manures, as Beda calls them, whose Hundreds also to
this day gave a relish of their names.

(7) Near Ringwood, and the place once YTENE, from God and peoples Service, to
Feast and luxury, thirty six Parish Churches were converted, and pulled down by
the Conqueror, and thirty miles of circuit enforrested for his game of
Hunting, wherein his sons Richard and Rufus, with Henry the second son to Duke
Robert, his first, felt by hasty death the hand of Justice and Revenge: for in
the same Forest, Richard by blasting of a Pestilent Air, Rufus by shot taken
for a Beast, and Henry as Absalom hanged by a bough, came to their untimely
ends. At so dear a rate the pleasures of Dogs, and harbor for beasts were
bought in the blood of these Princes.

(8) The general Commodities gotten in this Shire, are Wools, Clothes, and
Iron, whereof great store is therein wrought from the Mines, and thence
transported into all parts of this Realm, and their Clothes and Karsies carried
into many foreign Countries, to that Countries great benefit, and Englands
great praise.

(9) The Trade thereof with other provisions for the whole, are vented through
eighteen Market Towns in this Shire, whereof Winchester, the Britains Caer
Gwent, the Romans Venta Belgarum, in chief, ancient enough by our British
Historians. as built by King Budhudthras, nine hundred years before the
Nativity of Christ; and famous in the Romans times for the weavings and
embroderies therein wrought, to the peculiar uses of their Emperors own
persons. In the Saxons time, after two Calamities of consuming fire, her walls
was raised, and the City made the Royal Seat of their West Saxons Kings, and
the Metropolitan of their Bishops See, wherein Egbert and Elfred their most
famous Monarchs were Crowned: and Henry the third, the Normans longest Reigner,
first took breath: And here King Aethelstane erected six Houses for his Mint,
but the Danish desolation over running all, this City felt their fury in the
days of King Ethelbright, and in the Normans time, twice was defaced by the
misfortune of fire, which they again repaired and graced with the trust of
keeping the public Records of the Realm. In the civil wars of Maud and
Stephen, this City was sore sacked, but again received breath, was by King
Edward the third appointed the place for Mart of Wool and Cloth. The Caehedral
Church built by Kenwolf King of the West Saxons, that had been Amphibalus, S.
Peter's, Swethins, and now holy Trinity, is the Sanctuary for the ashes of many
English Kings: for herein great Egbert anno 836. with his son King Ethelwolf,
857. Here Elfred Oxfords founder, 901. with his Queen Elswith 904. Here the
first Edmund before the Conquest, 924. with his sons Elfred and Elsward. Here
Edred, 955. and Edwy, 956. both Kings of England: Here Emme, 1052. with her
Danish Lord Canute, 1035. and his son Hardicanute, 1042. And here lastly, the
Normaus, Richard and Rufus, 1100. were interred; their bones by Bishop Fox were
gathered and shrined in little gilt coffers fixed upon a wall in the Quire,
where still they remain carefully preserved.

This Cities situation is fruitful and pleasant, in a valley under hills,
having her River on the East and Castle on the West, the circuit of whose walls
are well near two English miles, containing one thousand eight hundred and
eighty paces; through which opens six gates for entrance. and therein are
seven Churches for divine Service, besides the Minister, and those decayed;
such as Callender, Ruell Chapel, S. Mary's Abbey, and the Friars without the
Suburbs, and Sooke; in the East is S. Pete^s, and in the North Hyde Church and
Monastery, whose ruins remaining, show the beau^y that formerly it bare. The
graduation of this City by the Mathematics, is placed for Latitude in the
Degree 51, 10 minutes, and for Longitude 19, 3 minutes.

(10) More South, is South-hampton, a Town populous, rich and beautiful, from
whom the whole Shire deriveth her name, most strongly walled about with square
stone, containing in circuit one thousand and two hundred paces, having seven
Gates for entrance, and twenty nine Towers for defense, two very stately Keys
for Ships arrivage, and five fair Churches for Gods divine Service, besides an
Hospital, called Gods-house, wherein the unfortunate Richard, Earl of
Cambridge, beheaded for treason, lies interred. On the West of this Town is
mounted a most beautiful Castle, in form Circular, and wall within wall, the
foundation upon a hill so topped, that it cannot be ascended but by stairs,
carrying a goodly prospect both by Land and Sea; and in the East without the
walls a goodly Church sometimes stood, called S. Mary's, which was pulled down,
for that it gave the French direction of course, who with fire had greatly
endangered the Town: instead thereof, is newly erected a small and unfinished
Chapel. In this place, says learned Cambden, stood the ancient Clausentium,
or Fort of the Romans, whose circuit on that side extended it self to the Sea:
this suffered many depredations by the Saxon Pirates, and in Anno 980. was by
the Danes almost quite overthrown. In King Edward the thirds time, it was fired
by the French, under the Conduct of the King of Sicils son, whom a Country man
encountered and struck down with his Club, he crying Rancon, that is Ransom:
but he neither understandiog his language, nor the Law that Arms does allow,
laid on more soundly, saying, I know thee a Frankon, and therefore shall thou
die: And in Richard the seconds time it was somewhat removed, and built in the
place where now it stands. In this Clausentium, Canute to evict his
flatterers, made trial of his Deity, commanding the Seas to keep back from his
seat: But being not obeyed, he acknowledged God to be the only supreme
Governor, and in a religious devotion gave up his Crown to the Rood at
Winchester. More ancient was Silcester built by Constantius, great Constantines
son; whose Monument (they say) was seen in in that City, and where another
Constantine put on the purple robe against Honorius' as both Ninius and Gervase
of Canterbury do withess. Herein by our Historians record, the warlike Arthur
was Crowned. Whose greatness for circuit contained no less than fourscore Acres
of ground, and the walls of great height, yet standing two miles in compass
about. This City by the Danish Rovers suffered such wrack, that her mounted
tops were never since seen, and her Hulke (the walls) immured to the middle of
the earth, which the rubbish of her own desolations has filled.

(11) Chief Religious houses within this County erected and again suppressed
were these, Christ's-Church, Beaulieu, Wh^rwall, Rumsey, Redbridge, Winchester,
Hyde, South-hampton and Tichfield. The honor of this Shire is dignified with
the high Titles of Marquess, and them Earls of Winchester and South-hampton;
whose Arms of Families are as thou see, and her division into thirty seven
Hundreds, and those again into two Hundred fifty three Parishes.

WIGHT ISLAND
map of the Isle of Wight
VVIGHT ISLAND.
CHAPTER VII.
WIGHT ISLAND was in times past named by the Romans, Vecta, Vectis, and
Vect^sis, by the Britains, Guyth, and in these days usually called by us, The
Lsle of Wight, it belongs to the County of South-hampton, and lies out in
length over against the midst of it Southward. It is encompassed round with
the British Seas, and severed from the Main-land, that it may seem to have been
conjoined to it, and thereof it is thought the British name (Guyth) has been
given unto it, which betokens separation, even as Sicily being broken off and
cut from Italy, got the name from Secando (which signifies cutting.)

(2) The form of this Isle is long, and at the midst far more wide than at
either end: From Binbridge Isle in the East, to Hurst Castle in the West, it
stretches out in length 20 miles, and in breadth from Newport haven Northward,
to Chale-bay Southward 12 miles. The whole in circumference is about sixty
miles.

(3) The Air is commended both for health and delight, whereof the first is
witnessed by the long continuance of the Inhabitants in the state of their
bodies before they be decayed, and the other for quantity gives place to no
neighboring Country.

(4) The ground (to say nothing of the Sea, which is exceeding full of Fish)
consists of soil very fruiful; yet the husbandmans labor deserves to be
thankfully remembered, by whose pains and industry it does not only supply is
self, but affords Corn to be carried forth to others. The Land is plentifully
stored with Cattle and Grain, and breeds every where store of Conies, Hares,
Partridges and Phesants, pleasant for meadows, pasturage, and Parks; so that
nothing is wanting that may suffice man. The middle yields plenty of pasture;
and forage for Sheep; whose wool the Clothiers esteem the best; next unto
that of Leinster and Cotteswold. If you cast your eyes toward the North, it is
all over garnished with Meadows, Pastures, and Woods: If toward the South
side, it lies (in a manner) wholly bedecked with Corn fields enclosed, where
at each end the Sea does so incroach it self, that it makes almost two Islands
besides, namely, Freshwater Isle, which looks to the West, and Binbridge
Isle, answering it to the East.

(5) The Commodities of the whole chiefly consist of Cattle, Sea fowl, Fish,
and Corn, whereof it has sufficient: Woods are not here very plentiful; for
that it is only stored with one little Forest; yet the Country of Hant-shire
for vicinity of Site, is a friendly neighbor in that behalf; so (as it were
being tied together in affinity) they are always ready and propense to add to
each others wants and defects by a mutual supply.

(6) The ancient Inhabitants of this Island were the Belgae, spoken of in the
several Provinces of Sommerset-shire, Wilt-shire, and Hant-shire. Such as did
then possess it were called Lords of the Isle of Wight, till it fell into the
Kings hands, by Roger (Son to William Fits Osburne, slain in the war of
Flanders) that was driven into exile. And Henry the first King of England gave
it unto Richard Ridvers, with the Fee or Inheritance of the Town of
Christs-Church, where (as in all other places) he built certain Fortresses.

(7) The Principal Market Town in the Isle of Newport, called in times past
Medena; and Novus Burgus de Meden; that is, The new Burgh of Meden, whereof the
whole Country is divided into East- Meden, and West- Meden. A Town well
seated, and much frequented; unto whose Burgesses his Majesty has lately
granted the choice of a Major, who with his brethren do govern accordingly. It
is populous with Inhabitants, having an entrance into the Isle from the Haven,
and a Passage for Vessels of small burden unto the Key. Not far from it, is the
Castle Caresbrook, whose founder is said to have been Whitgar the Saxon, and
from him called VVhite-Garesburgh: but now made shorter for easier
pronunciation; the graduation whereof for Latitude is in the degree 50, 36
minutes: and her Longitude in 19, 4 minutes, where formerly has stood a
Priory, and at Quarre a Nunnery; a necessary neighbor to those Penitentiaries.
And yet in their merry mood the Inhabitants of this Island do boast, that they
were happier then their neighbor Countries for that they never had Monk that
ever wore hood, Lawyer that cavelled, nor Foxes that were craft^.

(8) It is reported, that in the year of man's Salvation, 1176. and twenty three
of King Henry the second, that in this Island it rained a shower of blood,
which continued for the space of 2 hours together, to the great wonder and
amazement of the people that beheld it with fear.

(9) This Isle of Wight is fortified both by Art and Nature, for besides the
strength of Artificial Forts and Block houses (wherewith it is well furnished)
it wants not the Assistants of natural Fences, as being enriched with a
continual ridge and range of craggy Cliffs and Rocks, and Banks very dangerous
for Sailors, as the Needles, so called by reason of their sharpness: The
Shingl^s, Mixon, Brambles, etc.

(10) Vespasian was the first that brought it to the subjection of the Romans,
whilst he served as a private person under Claudius Caesar. And Cerdic was the
first English Saxon that subdued it, who granting it unto Scuffe and VVhitgar,
they jointly together slew (almost) all the British Inhabitants (being but few
of them, there remaining) in the Town aforesaid, called of his name
VVhitgaresburgh. VVolpher King of the Mercians reduced this Island afterward
under his obedience, and at that ^ime when he became Godfather to Edelwalch
King of the South Saxons, and answered for ^im at his Baptism; he assigned it
over unto him with the Province also of the Menuari. But when Edelwalch was
slain, and Arvandus the petty King of the Island was made away, Caedwalla King
of the West Saxons annexed it to his Dominion, and in a tragical and lamentable
Massacre put to the sword (almost) every mothers child of the in-born
Inhabitants.

The thing that is best worthy note and observation is this, That Bishop
Wilfrid was the first that instructed the Inhabitants of this Island in
Christian Religion, and brought them from Idolatrous Superstition, with the
which (unto that time) they were obscurely blinded.

For Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, this Country belongs to the Bishop of
Winchester, and for Civil government to the County of South-hampton. It is
fortified with the strength of six Castles, traded with three Market Towns, and
has 36 Parish-Churches planted in it.

Dorcet Shire
map of Dorsetshire
DORCESTER-SHIRE.
CHAPTER VIII.
DORCESTER, from her ancient people DUROTRIGES, is most likely to have received
that name: By the Britains called DWRGWEIR, lies bounded upon the North side
with Sommerset and Wilt-shire, upon the West with Devon-shire, and some part
with Sommerset; upon the East altogether with Hamp-shire: and her South part is
wholly bounded with the British Seas.

(2) The form grows wider from the West, and spreads her self the broadest in
the midst, where it extends to twenty four miles, but in length is no less than
forty four: The whole in Circumference about, is one hundred and fifty miles.

(3) The Air is good, and of an healthful constitution: the soil is fat,
affording many commodities, and the Country most pleasant in her situation:
for the Inland is watered with many sweet and fresh running-Springs, which
taking passage through the plain Valleys, do lastly in a loving manner unite
themselves together, and of their many branches make many big bodied streams:
neither does the Sea deny them entrance, but helps rather to fill up their
Banks, whereby V^ssels of Burden discharge their rich Treasures, and her self
with open hand distributeth her gifts all along the South of the Shore*

(4) Anciently it was possessed by the Durotriges, whom Ptolomy places along in
this Tract, who being subdued by the Romans yielded them room, and unwilling
subjection. After them the Saxons set foot in these parts, whereof Portland
seems from that Port to take name, who in this place arrived in Anno 703. and
did sorely infect and annoy all the South Tract. And at Bindon before him
Kinegillus King of the West Saxons, in the year of Christ 614, in a doubtful
and dangerous Batte^ vanquished the Britains. Neither were the Saxons so surely
herein seated, but that the Danes sought to defeat them thereof: for twice
these bold Rovers landed at Chartmouth, the first was in Anno 831. and reign of
King Egbert; and the other eight years after, when Elthelwolfe was King: in
both which they went away Victors. Yet when the Iron-side wore the English
D^adem, and these fierce people ^ought to pluck it from his Helmet, he met them
at Pen-ham in Gillingham Forest, and with a small power obtained a great
victory, causing their King Canute with discourage to retire.

(5) Commodities arising in this County are chiefly Wools and Woods in her
North, where the Vorrests are stored with the one, and the pleasant green Hills
with the other. The other part is overspread both with Corn and Grass, and the
Sea yields the Isidis Plocamos, a Shrub growing not unlike the Corral without
any leaf; besides her other gifts, turning all to great gain: which the more
is made manifect by the many Market Towns in this Shire, whereof Dorchester is
the chief, in Antonius his Itinerarum termed Durnovaria, situated upon the
South side of From, and the Roman Causey called Fosse-way, wherein some of
their Legions kept, as by the Rampires and Co^ns there daily dug up is
probably conjectured; at which time it seems the City was walled, whereof
some part yet stands, especially upon the West and South sides, and the Tract
and Trench most apparent in a Quadrant-wise almost meets the River,
containing in circuit one thousand and seven hundred paces, but were cast down
by the Daues, whose trampling feet destroyed all things wheresover they came,
and hands here razed the Trenches Maudbury and Poundbury, the seals of their
Siege, and signs of times misery. About three hundred paces Southward from
hence, stands an old Fortification of Earth, trenched about and mounted above
the ordinary Plain, thirty paces containing some five Acres of ground; wherein
(at my there-being) plenty of Corn grew. This the Inhabitants call The Maiden
Castle, having entrance thereunto only upon the East and West. This is thought
to have been a Summer-Camp or Station of ^he Romans, when their Garrisons kept
the Frontiers of this Province.

The government of this City is yearly committed to two Bailiffs, elected out
of eight Magistrates or Aldermen, a Recorder, Town Clerk, and two Sergeants
attending them: whence the North Pole is elevated 50 degrees, 48 minutes in
Latitude, and for Longitude is removed from the first Westpoint unto the
Meridian of eighteen degrees.

(6) Other places also are memorable through the actions therein happening, or
antiquities there yet remaining: such is ^adbury, now nothing but a Trench and
decayed Castle, hardly seen, though sometimes it was the Court of the
West Saxons Kings. Such also is Cerne, where Augustine the English Apostle
brake down the Altars and Idols of the Saxons God HELL, whom they devoutly
honored as the only conserver of their health. Shaftsbury also, wherein one
Aquila (whether a Man or Eagle I know not) by our Historians report, is said to
have prophesied the future times of this our Empire, and that after the reigns
of the Saxons and Normans it should again return unto the government of the
British Kings. But with such vain predictions, our Nation is more than once
taxed by Philip Comineus the famous French Writer. In this City Edward the son
of great Edgar, and one and thirtieth Monarch of the Englishmen, was interred,
being murdered at Corfe, a Castle seated in the Isle of Purbeck, by his Step
mother Aelfrith, to make way for her Son to enjoy his Crown: in repentance
whereof, and to pacify Heaven for his blood, she built the Monasteries of
Ambresbury and Whorwell, in the County of Wilt-shire and South-hampton. In the
former of which with great penitency she spent the rest of her life.

(7) As upon the like occasion the Monastery of Middleton was laid in this
Shire by King Ethelstan to appease the Ghost of Edwin his innocent brother, and
to expiate the sin of his own soul for the blood of that just Prince, whom most
unjustly he caused to die: and with the like devotion, thought not to satisfy
for the like bloody sins, did Queen Cuthburga sue a Divorce from her second
husband the Northumberlands King, and at Winburne built her a Nunnery, whereof
her self became Abbess, where afterward was raised a most stately Minster,
which added not only more glory to the place, but withal enlarged the name,
and made it to be called Winburn-Minster, where King Etheldred, a most virtuous
Prince, after much disquietness had with the Danes, in peace here rests, with
his Tomb and ins^ription, as in his History (Christ assisting) shall be
further seen. Neither among these may I omit Sherburne, which in the year of
grace, 704. was made a Bishops See, in whose Cathedral Church was interred the
bodies of Ethelbald and Ethelbert, brethren, both of them Monarchs of the
English men.

(8) Seven more besides these were set apart from worldly impolyments,
consecrated only to God and his service in this Service; which were Camestern,
Cranburn, Abbottesbury Bindon, Sturminster, Tarrant and Warham. These with the
others came to their full period under the hand of King Henry the Eighth, which
lay with such weight upon their fair buildings, that he crushed the juice
thereof into his own Coffers.

(9) Castles for defense in repair and decayed, were at Sherburne, Dorchester,
Branksey, Portland, Corfe, Newton, Woodford, and Wareham; so that with these
and others the County has been strengthened, with twelve Religious Houses their
poor relieved, with eighteen Market Towns at this day is traded, and
principally into five divisions parted, subdivided into thirty four Hundreds,
and them again into two hundred forty eight Parishes.

DEVONSHIRE
P. Kaerius caelavit.
map of Devonshire
DEVON-SHIRE.
CHAPTER IX.
DEVON-SHIRE, by the Cornish Britains called Devinan; and by contraction of the
vulgar Denshire, is not derived from the Danes, as some would have it, but from
the people Danmonii, the same we will speak of in Cornwall, and whom Ptolomy
has seated in these Western Borders.

(2) The West of this County is bounded altogether by the River Tamer: the East
is held in with the verge of Sommerset-shire; and the North and South sides are
washed wholly with the British and Severn Seas: betwixt whose shoares from
Cunshire in the North unto Salcombe Haven entering in at the South, are fifty
five miles: and from the Hartland Point West, to Thorncombe East, are fifty
four: the whole in circumference about two hundred and two miles.

(3) The Air is sharp, healthful and good: the Soil is hilly, woody and
fruitful, yet so as the hand of the Manurer must never be idle, nor the purse
of the Farmer never fast shut, especially of them that are far from the Sea,
whence they fetch a sand with charge and much travel, which being spread upon
the face of the earth, bettereth the leanness thereof for grain, and gives
life to the Glebe with great efficacy.

(4) As Cornwall, so this has the same Commodities that arise from the Seas:
and being more inla^ded has more commodious Havens for Shippings intercourse,
among whom Totnes is famous for Brutes first entrance, if Geffry say true, or
if Havillan the Poet took not a Poetical liberty, when speaking of Brute, he
wrote thus: The Gods did guide his sail and course: the winds were at command:
And Totnes was the happy shour where first he came on land.


But with more credit and lamentable event, the Danes at Teigne-mouth first
entered for the invasion of this Land, about the year of Christ 787, unto whom
Britrik King of the West Saxons sent the Steward of his house to know their
intents, whom r^sistantly they slew: yet were they forced back to their Ships
by the Inhabitants, though long they stayed not, but eagerly pursued their
begun enterprises.

With more happy success has Plymouth set forth the purchasers of same, and
stopped the entrance of Englands Invaders, as in the reign of that eternized
Queen, the ^irrour of Princes, Elizabeth of everlasting memory; for from this
Port Sir Francis Drake, that potent man at Sea, setting forth Anno 1577 in the
space of two years and ten months did compass the circle of the earth by Sea.
And the Lord Charles Howard, Englands high Admiral, did not only from hence
impeach the entrance of the proud invincible Spanish Navy, intending invasion
and subversion of State, but with his Bullets so signed their passage, that
their sides did well show in whose hands they had been, as seals of their own
shame, and his high honor.

(5) The Commodities of this Shire consist much in Wools and Clothings, where
the best and finest Kersies are made in the Land. Corn is most plenteous in the
fruitful Valleys, and Cattle spreading upon the topped Hills; Seafish and Fowl
exceedingly abundant. Veins of Lead, yea and some of Silver in this Shire are
found: and the Lodestone (not the least for use and esteem) from the Rocks
upon Dart-more has been taken. Many fresh Sp^ings bubble from the Hills in
this Province, which with a longing desire of Society search out their passage,
till they meet and conjoyn in the Valleys, and gathering still strength with
more branches, lastly grow bodies able to bear Ships into the Land, and to
lodge them of great burden in their bosoms or Falls: whereof Tamer, Tave, and
Ex are the fairest and most commodious.

(6) Upon which last the chief City and shire Town of this County is seated,
and from that River has her name Excester: this City by Ptolomy is called
Isca; by the Itinerary of Antonius Emperor, Isca Danmonioram; and by the Welsh
Pencaer. It is pleasantly seated upon the gentle ascent of an hill, so stately
for building so rich with inhabitants, so frequent for commeree and concourse
of strangers, that a man can desire nothing but there it is to be had, says
William of Malmesbury. The walls of this City first built by King Athelstane,
are in a manner circular or round, but toward the Ex rangeth almost in a
straight line, having six Gates for entrance, and many Watch-Towers interposed
betwixt, whose compass contains about fifteen hundred paces; upon the East
part of this City stands a Castle of Rugemont, sometimes the Palace of the
VVest-Saxon Kings, and after them of the Earls of Cornwall, whose Prospect is
pleasant unto the Sea, and over against it a most magnificent Cathedral Church,
founded by King Athelstane also, in the honor of S. Peter, and by Edward the
Confessor made the Bishops See, which he removed from Crediton or Kirton in
this County unto the City of Excester (as says the private History of that
place:) whose dilapidations the reverend Father in God William now Bishop of
the Diocese, with great cost has repaired; whom I may not name without a most
thankful remembrance for the great benefits received by his careful providence
toward me and mine. This City was so strong, and so well stored of Britains,
that they held out against the Saxons for 465 years after their first entrance,
and was not absolutely won until Athelstane became Monarch of the whole, who
then peopled it with his Saxons, and enriched the beauty thereof with many fair
buildings; but in the times of the Danish desolation, this City with the rest,
felt their destroying hands; for in the year 875 it was by them sore afflicted,
spoiled, and shaken, and that most grievously by Swane in the year of Christ
Jesus 1003. who razed it down from East to West, so that scarcely had it gotten
breath before William the bastard of Normandy besieged it, against whom the
Citizens with great manhood served, till a part of the wall fell down of it
self, and that by the hand of Gods providence, says mine Author: Since when it
has been three times besieged, and with valiant resistance ever defended. The
first was by Hugh Courtney, Earl of Devonshire, in the civil broiles betwixt
Lancaster and York: Then by Perkin VVarbeck, that counterfeited Richard Duke of
York: And lastly, by the Cornish Rebels, wherein although the Citizens were
grievously pinched with scarcity, yet continued they their faithful allegiance
unto King Edward the sixth; and at this day flourishes in tranquillity and
wealth, being governed by a Major, twenty four Brethren, with a Recorder,
Town Clerk, and other Officers their Attendants. This Cities graduation is set
in the degree of Latitude from the North Pole 50 and 45 scruples: And for
Longitude from the West, to the degree 16, and 25 scruples. Neither is Joseph
that excellent Poet, whose birth was in this City, the least of her Ornaments,
whose Writings bear so great credit, that they were divulged in the German
Language under the name of Cornelius Nepos.

The like credit got Crediton in her birth child VVinifred the Apostle of the
Hassians, Thuringers, and Frisians of Germany, which were converted by him unto
Gospel and knowledge of Christ.

(7) Places memorable in this County remaining for signs of Battles, or other
antiquities, are these: Upon Exmore certain Monuments of Antick-work are
erected, which are stones pitched in order, some Triangle-wise, and some in
round compass: These no doubt were trophies of Victories there obtained, either
by the Romans, Saxons, or Danes, and with Danish Letters one of them is
inscribed, giving direction to such as should travel that way. Hublestowe
likewise near unto the mouth of ^awe, was the burial place of Huba the Dane,
who with his Brother Hungar, had harried the English in diverse parts of the
Land: But lastly, was there encountered with, and slain by this Shires
Inhabitants, and under a heap of copped stones interred, and the Banner Reasen
there and then taken, that had so often been spread in the Danes quarrel, and
wherein they reposed no small confidence for success.

(8) A double dignity remains in this County, where Princes of State have
born the Titles both of Devon-shire and Excester: of which City, there have
been entitled Dukes, the last of whom, namely, Henry Holland, Grandchild to
John Holland, half-brother to King Richard the Second; siding with Lancaster
against Edward the fourth, whose Sister was his wife, was driven to such
misery, as Philip Comineus repotteth, that he was seen all torn and barefooted
to beg his living in the Low Countries: And lastly, his body was cast upon the
shore of Kent (as if he had perished by shipwreck) so certain is Fortune in
her endowments, and the state of man, notwithstanding his great birth.

(9) Religious Houses in this Shire built in devotion, and for Idolatry pulled
down, were at Excester, Torhay, Tanton, Tavestokes, Kirton, Hartland,
Axminster, and Berstuble.

(10) And the Counties divisions are parted into thirty three Hundreds, wherein
are seated thirty seven Market Towns, and three hundred ninety four
Parish-Churches.

Cornwaile
map of Cornwall
CORNWALL.
CHAPTER X.
CORNWALL (as Matthew of Winchester affirms) is so named partly from the
form, and partly from her people: for shooting it self into the Sea like an
Horn (which the Britains call K^rne) and inhabited by them whom the Saxons
named Wallia; of these two compounded words it became Cornwallia. Not to
trouble the Reader with the Fable of Corinnus cousin to King Brute, who in free
gift received this County in reward of his prowess, for wrestling with the
Giant Gogmagog, and breaking his neck from the Cliffe of Dover, as he of
Monmouth has fabuled.

(2) Touching the temperature of this County, the Air thereof is cleansed as
with Bellows, by the Billows that ever work from off her environing Seas,
where through it becomes pure and subtle, and is made thereby very healthful,
but withal so piercing and sharp, that it is apter to preserve than to recover
health. The Spring is not so early as in more Eastern parts; yet the Summer
with a temperate heat recompenseth his ^low fostering of the fruits with their
most kindly ripening. The Autumn brings a somewhat late Harvest: and the
Winter, by reason of the Seas warm breath, makes the cold milder than
elsewhere. Notwithstanding that Country is much subject to stormy b^asts,
whose violence has freedom from the open waves, to beat upon the dwellers at
Land, leaving many times their houses uncovered.

(3) The Soil for the most part is lifted up into many hills, parted asunder
with narrow and short val^^es, and a shallow earth does cover their outside,
which by a Sea weed called Orewood, and a certain kind of fr^^sul Sea-sand,
they make so rank and batten, as is uncredible. But more are the riches that
out of those hills are gotten from the Mines of Copper and Tinn; which Country
was the first, and continues the best stored in that merchandise, of any in
the world. Timaeus the Historian in Pliny reports, that the Britains fetched
their Tinn in Wicker boats, stitched about with Leather. And Diodorus Siculus
of Augustus Caesar's time writes, that the Britains in this part dug Tin out
of stony ground, which by Merchants was carried into Gallia, and thence to
Narborne, as it were to a Mart. Which howsoever the English Saxons neglected,
yet the Normans made great benefit thereof, especially Richard brother to King
Henry the third, who was Earl of Cornwall, and by those Tinn-works became
exceedingly rich: for the incursions of the Moors having stopped up the
Tinn-Mines in Spain, and them in Germany not discovered before the year of
Christ 1240. these in Cornwall supplied the want in all parts of the world.
This Earl made certain Tinn-Laws which with liberties and privileges were
confirmed by Earl Edmund his son. And in the days of King Edward the third, the
Commonweal of Tinn-works from one body was divided into four, and a Lord
Warden of the Stanniers appointed their Judge.

(4) The Borders of this Shire on all parts but the East, is bound in with the
Sea: and had Tamer drawn his course but four miles further to the North,
betwixt this County and Devonshire, it might have been rather accounted an
Island, than stood with the Main. Her length is from Launston to the
Lands-end, containing by measure 60 miles: and the broadest part stretching
along by the Tamer, is fully forty, lessening thence still lesser like a horn.

(5) The Ancient inhabitants known to the Romans, were the Danmonii, that
spread themselves further into Devon-shire also, by the report of Diodorus
Sicul^^, a most courteous and civil people: and by Michael their Poet extolled
for valor and strength of limbs: nor therein does he take the liberty that
Poets are allowed, to add to the subject whreof they write, but truly repotteth
what we see by them performed, who in activity surmount many other people.

When the Heathen Saxons had seated themselves in the best of this Land, and
forced the Christian Britains into these rocky parts, then did Cornwall abound
in Saints, unto whose honor most of the Churches were erected, by whose names
they are yet known and called. To speak nothing of Visula that Counties Dukes
daughter, with her company of canonized Virgin-Saints, that are now reputed but
to trouble the Calender. These Britains in Cornwall so fenced the Country, and
defended themselves, that to the reign of Athelsta^e they held out against the
Saxons, who subduing those Western Parts, made Tamer the Bounder betwixt them
and his English, whose last Earl of the British Blood was called Candorus.

(6) But William the Bastard created Robert (his half-brother by Herlotta their
mother) the first Earl of the Normans race: and Edward the Black Prince, the
ninth from him, was by his Father King Edward the third invested the first Duke
of Cornwall, which Title ever since has continued in the Crown.

(7) The Commodities of this Shire, ministered both by Sea and Soil, are many
and and great; for besides the abundance of Fish, that do suffice the
Inhabitants, the Pilchard is taken, who in great shuls swarm about the Coast,
whence being transported to France, Spain, and Italy, yield a yearly revenue of
gain unto Cornwall: wherein also Copper and Tinn so plentifully grow in the
utmost part of this Promontory, that at a low water the veins thereof lie bare,
and are seen: and what gain that commodity begets, is vulgarly known. Neither
are these Rocks destitute of Gold nor Silver, yea and Diamonds shaped and
pointed Angle wise, and smoothed by Nature her self, whereof some are as big as
Wallnuts, inferior to the Orient only in blackness and hardness.

Many are the Ports, Bays, and Havens that open into this Shire, both safe for
arrivage, and commodious transport; whereof Falmouth is so copious, that an
hundred Ships may therein ride at Anchor apart by themselves, so that from the
tops of their highest Masts, they shall not see each other, and lie most safely
under the Winds.

(8) This County is fruitful in Corn, Cattle, Seafish, and Fowl: all which,
with other provision for pleasures and life, are traded through twenty two
Market Towns in this Shire, whereof Lauston and Bodman are the best; from which
last, being the middle of the Shire, the Pole is elevated to the degree of
Latitude 50, 35 minutes, and for Longitude from the first West-Point 15, 13
minutes, as Mercat^r has measured them.

(9) Memorable matters both for antiquity and strangeness of sight, are these;
At Boskenna upon the South west of her Promontory, is a trophy erected, which
are eighteen Stones placed round in compass, and pitched twelve foot each from
others, with another far bigger in the very center: These do show some victory
there attained, either by the Roman, or else King Athelstan. At the foot of the
Rock near unto S. Michaels M^^nt, in the memory of our Fathers, were dug up
Spearheads, Axes, and Swords of Brass, wrapped in linen, the weapons that the
Cimbrians and ancient Britains anciently used.

At Camelford likewise pieces of Armours both for horse and man, are many times
found in digging of the ground, imputed to the signs of that fight wherein
Mordred was slain, and wherein great Arthur received his deaths wound. And at
Castle Dennys are the Trenches wherein the Danes lodged when they first minded
to subdue the Land. In the Parish S. Clare, two stones are pitched, one of them
inscribed with a strange Character, and the other called The other half stone.
The Hurlers also, fabuled to be men metamorphosed into stones; but in truth
show a note of some victory, or else are so set for Landmarks Bounders. There
also the Wring-Cheese does show it self, which a^e huge Rocks heaped one upon
another, and the lowest of them the least, fashioned like a Cheese, l^ing
pressed under the rest of those Hills, which seem^th very dangerous to be
passed under. But near to Pensans, and unto Mounts bay, a far more strange Rock
stands, namely, Main-Amber, which lies mounted upon others of meaner size,
with so equal a counterpoize, that a man may move it with the push of his
finger, but no strength remove it out of its place.

(10) Religious Houses built, and suppressed within the limits of Cornwall, the
fairest and greatest for account, were Launston, S. Neotes, S Buriens, S.
Michaels Mount, and S. Germains, a Bishops See: so was Pedman also, from whence
King Edward the Confessor removed it unto the City of Excester.

(11) The division of this Shire is into nine hundreds, wherein are seated
twenty two Market Towns, and 161 Parish-Churches.

SOMERSET SHIRE
Petrus Kaerius caelavit.
map of Somersetshire
SOMMERSET-SHIRE.
CHAPTER XI.
SOMMERSET-SHIRE is both a rich and spacious Country, having the Sever^ Sea
beating upon it on the North side, the South part bordering upon Devon and
Dorset-shires, the West confined with Devon shire, and the East and North-East
upon Wilt shire, and Gloucester shire. It took the name of Sommerron (sometime
the chief Town of this Shire) whence in the Ancient Historian Asserius, this
County is called Sommertunensis, that is, Sommertun-shire.

(2) The form thereof is large, bearing it self still wider as it slretcheth
into the middle part thereof, and contains in length from Brackley near unto
From Selwood Eastward, to Our in the West, Miles 55. In breadth from Parshut
Point in the North, to Chard Southward, is somewhat above forty miles. The
whole ciacumference is about 204 miles.

(3) The Air is mild and pleasing, and for the most part subject to such
temperate dispositions as the Sommer-season affords, whence some have
erroniously conceited, that the Region borrowed her name from the nature of her
Clime: yet how delightful soever it is in the time of Summer, with change of
the season it may well change her pleasing name, and borrow some Winterly
denomination; so full of wet, so miry and moorish it is; in so much as the
Inhabitants can hardly travel to and fro without their encumbrance.

(4) Howbeit they pass over this with all patience, knowing their ensuing
seasonable profits far to exceed any present detriments and displeasures: for
as it is fowl, so it is fruitful, which makes them comfort themselves with this
Proverb, that What is worst for the Rider, is best for the ^bider: the Soil and
Glebe thereof being very fertile, and every side garnished with Pastures and
delightful Meadows, and beautified with Manor houses both many and fair; and
(in a word) has every thing in it to content the purse, the heart, the eye, at
home: and sufficient ports to give entertainment to commodities from abroad.

(5) The ancient Inhabitants that possessed this Province were the Belgae, who
spread themselves far and wide, as well here as in Wilt-shire, and the inner
parts of Hant-shire, who being branched from the Germans, conferred the names
of those places from whence they came, upon these their seats where they
resided.

(6) The general profits of this province are Corn and Cattle, wherewith it is
so plentifully stored, as it may challenge any neighboring County for the
quantity to make show of Cattle so fat, or Grain so rich. Some places are
peculiarly enriched by Lead-mines, as Mindiphils, (perchance so called of the
deep Mines) by Leiland aptly termed Minerarii, Mineral-hills, which yield
plenty of Lead, the most Merchantable Commodity that is in England, and vented
into all parts of the world. Some are beautified with Diamonds, as S, Vincent
Rock, whereof there is great plenty, and so bright of color, as they might
equalize Indian Diamonds, if they had their hardness: yet being so many, and so
common, they are less sought after or commended.

(7) This Country is famoused by three Cities, Bath, Wells, and Bristow. The
first takes name of the hot Bathes, which Antonine called Aquae Solis, The
waters of the Sun; Stephanus, Badiza: we at this day Bathe, and the Latinists
Bathonta: a place of continual concourse for persons of all degrees, and almost
of all diseases, (weence it was sometimes called Akemancester) who by divine
providence do very often find relief there, the Springs thereof by reason of
their Mineral and sulphurous passage, being of such exceeding power and
medicinable heat, as that they cure and conquer the rebellious stubbornness of
corrupt humors, in repect of which admirable virtues, some have fabled, that
they were first conveyed by Magic Art. To testify the antiquity of this
place, many images and Roman Inscriptions are found in the walls, which can now
be hardly read, they are so worn and eaten into by age. Wells (as Leiland
reports) was sometimes called Theoderodunum, but from whence it had that
denomination he makes no mention, the name it now bears is taken (as some
think) from the River there, which King Kinewulph in his Charter Anno 766
calls Wel^e, or (as others) from the Wells or Springs which there break
forth, and whereupon that See (under whose Jurisdiction is also the City of
Bath) has been anciently called Fontanensis Eccle^^, the Fountain Church:
where the Cathedral built by King Inas to the memory of S Andrew, is very
beautiful and richly endowed. The City is likewise well replenished both with
Inhabitants and seemly buildings. Whose government is managed by a Mayor yearly
elected, a Recorder, and seven Masters, having the Assistancs of sixteen
Burgesses, a Town Clerk, and Two Sergeants at Mace. Whose Latitude is 51, 20
minutes, and Longitude 17, 31 minutes. Bristow is not so ancient, as it is fair
and well seated: The beauty of it being such, as for the bigness thereof, it
scarce gives place to any City of England, and does worthily deserve the Saxons
name Bright-stad: whose pleasantness is the more, by reason that the River Avon
scowres through the midst of it, which together with the benefit of Sewers
under all the streets clears the City of all noisome filth and uncleanness. It
is not wholly seated in this County of Sommerset, but one part thereof in
Gloucestershire; but because it is an entire County of it self, it denies
subjection unto either, having for its own government both a Bishop, with a
well furnished College, and a Mayor, with a competent assistance of Aldermen,
and other Officers for civil affairs.

(8) This Province has been the Theater of many Tragical events and bloody
battles: the Danes did grievously afflict Porlock by cruel Piracies, in the
year eight hundred eighty six. Yet near unto Pen a little Village neigbouring
upon North Cadbury, Edmund, surnamed Iron-side, gave them a notable foil, as
he was pursuing Canutus from place, to place, for usurping the Crown of
England. And Keniwach (a West Saxon) in the same place had such a day against
the Britains, that they ever after stood in awe of the English-Saxons prowess.
Marianus relates that not far from Bridge-water, as the Danes were straggling
abroad, Ealstane Bishop of Sherbourne did so soil their Forces in the year 845,
as their minds were much discomfited, and their powers utterly disabled. Ninius
also writes that King Arthur did so defeat the English-Saxons in a battle at
Cadbury, that it deserved to be made perpetuously memorable. Neither is Mons
Badonicus (now Banesdown) less famous for Arthurs victories. And King Elfred in
another battle not far from hence gave the Danes such an overthrow, as he
forced them to submission, and induced Godrus their King to become a Christian,
himself being Godfather to him at the Font. So happy is this Region, and so
beholding to Nature and Art for her strengths and fortifications, as she has
a^ways been able to defend her self, and offend her enemies.

(9) Neither has it been less honored with beauteous houses consecrated to
Religion: such was that of Black Ohanons at Barelinch in the first limit of his
Shire Westward: and King Athelsta^ built a Monastery in an Island called
Muchelney (that is to say) the great Island, which is between the Rivers Iuel
and Pedred, running together, where the defaced wall^ and runs thereof are yet
to be seen. King Henry the third also erected a Nunnery at Witham, which was
afterward the first house of the Carthusians Monks in England, as Hinton not
far off was the second. But above all other for antiquity, glory, and beauty
was the Abbey of Glostenbury, whose beginning is fetched even from Joseph of
Arimathea, which Davi Bishop of S. David's repaired, being fallen to ruin, and
King Inas lastly builded a fair and stately Church in this Monastery, though it
be now made even with the ground, the ruins only showing how great and
magnificent a Seat it has anciently been; which several houses were thus
beautified by bounteous Princes, for religious purposes, and to retire the mind
from worldly services, though blinded times and guides diverted them to
superstitious and lewd abuses.

(10) Other memorable places are these: Camalet a very steep hill hard to be
ascended, which appears to have been a work of the Romans by diverse Coins dig'd
up there, on the top whereof are seen the lineaments of a large and ancient
Castle, which the Inhabitants report to have been the Palace of King Arthur.
Ilchester, which at the coming of the Normans was so populous, that it had in
it an hundred and seven Burgesses, and it appears to be of great antiquity, by
the Roman Caesar's Coyns, oftentimes found there. The Churchyard of Avalenia or
Glastonbury, where King Arthurs Sepulcher was searched for by the command of
King Henry the second, which was found under a stone, with an Inscription upon
it faftned, almost nine foot in the ground. Also Du^stere, where (as is
reported) a great Lady obtained of her husband so much Pasture ground in a
Common by the Town side, for the good and benefit of the Inhabitants, as she
was able in a whole day to go about barefoot.

This County is divided into 42 Hundreds, for the disposing of business needful
for the State thereof, wherein are placed 33 Market Towns, fit for buying and
selling, and other affairs of Commerce. It is fortified with four Castles, and
planted with 385 Parishes, for concourse of Divine Service.

WILT SHIRE
map of Wiltshire
VVILT-SHIRE.
CHAPTER XII.
WILT-SHIRE, is enclosed upon the North with Gloucester-Shire, upon the East is
bounded with B^rk-shire, upon the South with Dorset and Hamp-shire, and upon
the West is confronted against partly by Gloucester, and the rest by
Somersetshire.

(2) The form thereof is both long and broad; for from Inglesham upon Thamisis
in the North, to Burgat Damarum in the South, are thirty miles; the broadest
part is from Buttermer Eastward, to the Shire-stones in the West, being tweuty
nine; the whole in Circumference, is one hundred thirty nine miles.

(3) For Air, it is feated in a temperate Climate, both sweet, pleasant, and
wholesome; and for soil (says John of Sarisbury) is exceeding fortile and
plentiful, yea, and that with variety.

(4) The Northern part which they call North-Wilt shire, rises up into
delectable hills, attired with large Woods, and watered with clear Rivers,
whereof Isis is one, which soon becomes the most famous in the Land. The South
part is more even, yielding abundantly Grass and Corn; and is made the more
fruitful by the Rivers Wily, Adder, and Avon. The midst of this County is most
plain, and thereby is known and commonly called Salesbnry Plains; and lie so
level indeed, that it does limit the Horizon; for hardly can a man see from the
one side to the other. These Plains grase an infinite number of sheep, whose
fleeces and flesh bring in a yearly revenue to their owners.

(5) Anciently this County was possessed by the Belgae, who are seated by
Ptolomy in Hamp-shire, Sommerset shire, and in this Tract; and they (as it
seems by Caesar) were of the Belgae in Gaul. These (as some hold) were
subdued by Vespatian, Lieutenant of the second Legion under Claudi^, when the
foundation of his future greatness was in these parts first laid by his many
Victories over the Britains. And herein surely the Romans seated; for besides
Ta^esbury Trench, by Tradition held to be his, in many other Forts in this
Shire the Tract of their Footing has been left, and the stamped Coins of their
Emperors found, and apparent testimony of their abode.

(6) After them the West Saxons made it a part of their Kingdom, whose border
was Avon, as witnesses Athelward though the Marcians many times encroched upon
them, whereby many great Battles, as Malmesbury tells us, betwixt them were
fought, when in the young years of their Heptarchie each sought to enlarge his,
by the lessoning of the next: but grown unto more ripeness, they assigned their
limits by a great and long ditch crossing through the midst of these Plains,
which for the wonder thereof is supposed by the vulgar to be the work of the
Devil, and is called of all, Wansdike, undoubtedly of Wooden, the Saxons
Ancester and great reputed God, where a little Village yet stands, and
retains to name Woodens-burg. At this place, in Anno 590, Cea^lin the
West Saxon, received such a foyl of the Britains and his Contrymen, that he
was forced to sorfake his Kingdom, and to end his days in exile, becoming a
pitiful spectacle even unto his own enemies. And in this place Ina the
West Saxon joined Battle with Ceolred the Mercian, whence both of them departed
with equal loss. The like was at Bradford by Kenilwalch and Cuthred; at Wilton
betwixt Egbert and Beornwolfe; at Edindon where King Elfred was vanquisher of
the Danes; and at wilton, where the Danes won the day against him. With as
bloody success, though not happening by sword, was the issue of that Synod
assembled at Calne, a small town in this County, in the year of Christ Jesus
977, where being hotly debating for the single life, and against the marriages
of the Clergy, what wanted by the word to prove their divorce, was supplied by
a Stratagem, and that very bloody; for suddenly the main timber brake, and down
fell the floor with the Nobles and Prelates, the Gentlemen and Commons, whereby
a great number were hurt, and many more slain; only Dunstan the Prefident, and
mouth for the Monks escaped untouched, the Ioist whereon his Chair stood
remaining most firm: which confirmed the sentence of their separations, whom
God had conjoined, and became the fall and snare of much incontinency in both
sexes.

(7) The chiefest City of this Shire is Salesbury, removed from a higher, but a
far more convenient place; whose want of Water was not so great in the mother,
as is supplied and replenished in the daughter, every street almost having a
River running through her midst; and for sumptuous and delicate buildings is
inferior to none. The Cathedral, a most rich magnificent Church, was begun by
Richard Poors, Bishop, and with forty years continuance was raised to her
perfect beauty: wherein are as many windows as there are days in the year, as
many cast Pillars of Marble, as there are hours in the year, and as many gates
for entrance as there are Months in the year. Neither does this City retain
true honor to her self, but imparteth hers, and receives honor from others,
who are entitled Earls of Salesbury, whereof eight Noble Families have been
dignified ^ince the Normans Conquest. This Cities situation is in degree, of
Latitude 51 10 minutes, and from the first West point observed by Mercator, 18
Degrees, and 31 Minutes of Longitude.

(8) Over this, old Salesby shows it self, where Kenrick over came the
Britains, and where C^nutus the Dana did great damage by fire. This formerly
had been the seat of the Romans: as likewise was Lecham, as by their Coins
dug up is apparent: so were Brokenbridge and Cosham, the Courts of the Saxon
Kings. But Fortune long since has turned her face from all these, as lately
she did from many ancient and religious foundations planted in this Province,
whereof Malmesbury, was the most famous. I will not with Monmouth avouch the
foundation thereof unto Malmutius, but by true Records from Maidulph a Scot, a
man of great learning that therein built a Coll, and led an Hermits life,
whereof Beda calls it the City of Maidulph, and we by contraction Malmesbury.
Adelme his Disciple and Successor, built here a fair Monastery, which
Athelstane the Monarch richly endowed, and left his body after death there to
rest. Neither has any graced this more than William her Monk, in recording to
post^rities the Chronicles of our Land, concerning both the Church and
Commonweal, wherein himself lived and worte those Histories.

(9) Ambresbury for repute did second this, built by Alfritha King Edgar his
wife, to expiate the sin of murder which she committed upon young Edward her
son in law, that hers might be King. In this place Queen El^anor widow to King
Henry the Third, renounced all Royal pomp, and devoted her self unto God in the
habit of a Nun. Other places erected for piety, were at Salesbury, Lacock,
Stanley, Wilton, Ivichurch, Parnleg, Bradstoks, Briopune, and Bromhore. These
graffs grown to full greatness, were cut down by the Pruiner, least the cankers
thereof should infect the whole body (as by them was alleged) and their
Revenues bestowed upon far better uses, both for the bringing up of youth, and
the Maintenance of estate.

(10) With eight strong Castles this County has been guarded; in nineteen
Market Towns her commodities are traded; into twenty nine Hundreds for business
is divided, and in them are seated three hundred and four Parish-Churches.

BARKSHIRE
map of Berkshire
BARK-SHIRE.
CHAPTER XIII.
BARK-SHIRE, whether of the Box woods there sited, according to the censure of
Asseriu^ Menevensis, or from a naked and bear less Oak-tree, whereunto the
people usually resorted in troublesome times, to confer for the State, I
determine not: only the County a long time has been so called, and bounded
with other in manner as follows: The North part is parted by Thamisis from
Buckingham and Oxford Shires; the South near Kenne^, does tract upon
Hamp-shire; the East is confined with the County of Surrey; and the West with
VVilt-shire and Gloucestershire is held in.

(2) The form of this Shire does somewhat resemble a Sandall for a man's foot,
lying long wise from East to West, in which part she is broadest, the middle
most narrow, and then spreading wider like to the heel: though for her rich
endowments and stately magnificence, it may be well accounted the heart of the
whole.

(3) The length thereof from Inglesham in the West, to old Windsor in the
East, extends unto forty miles; from Ink-pen to VVightham, the broadest part
from South to North, are twenty four; the whole in Circumference, about one
hundred and twenty miles.

(4) The Air is temperate, sweet, and delightful, and prospect for pleasure
inferior to none; the Soil is plenteous of Corn, especially in the Vale of
VVhite-horse, that yields yearly an admirable increase. In a word, for Corn,
and Cattle, Waters, and Woods, of profit and pleasure, it gives place unto none.

(5) Her ancient inhabitants, by Ptolomy and Caesar, were the Attrebatii, and
them of those that descended from Gallia, among whom Comiu^ (conquered by the
Dictator) was of good respect, and could do much with the (...), who (as
Frontinus reports) used this stratagem, though it proved nothing at last: he
flyed before Caesar to recover aid of these Attrebatians, light bedded upon a
shelf in the Sea, whereupon hoysting his ^ailes as before a fore-wind, gave
show to his pursuer that they were in swift flight; so that hopeless to hail
them, he gave over the chase; yet no sooner had Caesar made over among them,
but that some of these people, by the name Bibrotes, yielded him subjection,
which proved the ruin of all former liberty. But when the Romans had rent
their own Empire, and retired their Legion into a narrower circuit, the Saxons
set foot where their forces had been, and made this County a parcel of their
Western Kingdom.

The Danes then setting their desire upon spoils, from their roaving Pinnaces
pierced into these parts, and at Redding fortified themselves betwixt the
Rivers Kennet and Thamisis, whether after their great overthrow received at
Inglefield by the hand of King Ethelwolfe, they retired for their further
safety.

(6) This Town King Henry the first most stately beautified with a rich
Monastery and strong Castle, where in the Collegiate Chuch of the Abbey,
himself and Queen (who lay both veiled and crowned) with the daughter Maud the
Empress, called the Lady of England, were interred, as the private History of
the place avoucheth, though others bestow the bodies of these two Queens
elsewhere. The Castle King Henry the second razed to the ground, because it was
the refuge for the followers of King Stephen. From whence the North pole is
raised in Latitude 51 degrees and 40 minutes, and in Longitude from the first
West-point observed by Mercator 19 degrees and 35 minutes.

(7) A Castle and Town of greater strength and antiquity was Wallingford, by
Autonie and Ptolomy called Gellena, the chiefest City of the Attrebatians,
whose large circuit, and strong fortifications, show plainly that it was a
place of the Romans abode, and since in a conceived safety has made many very
bold, especially when the sparks of Englands civil dissentions were forced to
flame in case of the Crown betwixt Maud the Empress and King Stephen, whether
her self and associates resorted as their surest defense.

(8) But of far greater magnificence and state is the Castle of Windsor, a most
Princely Palace and Mansion of His Majesty. I will not with Ieffery affirm it
to be built by King Arthur, but with better authority say, it was so thirsted
after-by the Conqueror, that by a composition with the Abbot of Westminster,
whose then it was, he made it to be the Kings possesson, as a place, besides
the pleasures, very commodious to entertain the King. In this Castle that
victorious Prince King Edward the third was born, and herein after he had
subdued the French and Scots, held he at one and the same time, as his
Prisoners, John King of France, and David King of Scotland. Neither was it ever
graced with greater Majesty than by the institution of the most honorable
Order of the Garter, a signal Ornament of Martial Prowess; the invention
thereof some ascribe to be from a Garter falling from his Queen, or rather from
Joan Countess of Salisbury, a Lady of an incomperable beauty, as she danced
before him; whereat the bystanders smiling, he gave the impress to check all
evil conceits, and in golden Letters imbellished the Garter with this French
Posie, HONI SO^^ QU^ MALY PENSE. And yet that worthy Clarenceaux alleging the
Book of the first institution, finds the invention to be more ancient; as when
King Richard the first warred against the Turks, Saracens, Cypres, and Acon, he
girt the legs of certain choice Knights with a tack of leather, which promised
a future glory to the wearers. The most Princely Chapel thereof is graced with
the bodies of those two great Kings, Henry the sixth, and Edward the fourth,
whom the whole Kingdom was too little to contain, the one of Lancaster, the
other of York, where the rest now united in one mould, with a branch of both
those Houses, even King Henry the eighth, who there lies also interred, and
rests in the Lord.

(9) Other places of note in this Shire are Sinodum in the North, and Watham in
the East, both of them places of the Romans residence, as by their moneys there
oftentimes found appears. Neither was Sunning the least in this Tract, that
had been the seat of eight Bishops before the Sea was translated thence unto
Shirburne, or that to Salisbury. Wantage also is not wanting of honor, in
bringing to life that learned and most valiant King Ealfred, the scourge of the
Danes, and great Monarch of the English. And Finchhamstead for wonder inferior
to none, where (as our Writers do witness) that in the year, a thousand and
hundred, a Well boiled up with streams of blood, and fiftoen days together
continued that Spring, whose waters made red all others where they came, to the
great amazement of the beholders.

(10) The riches and sweet Seats that this County affords, made many devout
persons to show their devotions unto true piety, in erecting places for Gods
divine Service, and their exemptions from all worldly business: such were
Abington, Redding, Bysham, Bromehall, Hendley, Hamme, and Wallingford, whose
Votaries abusing the intents of their Founders, overthrew both their own Orders
and places of professions; all which were dissolved by Act of Parliament, and
given the King to dispose at his will.

This Shires division is into twenty Hundreds, and has been strengthened with
six strong Castles, is yet graced with three of His Majesty's most Princely
Houses, and traded with twelve Market Towns, and is replenished with one
hundred and forty Parishes.

MIDLE-SEX
map of Middlesex
MIDDLESEX.
CHAPTER XIV.
MIDDLESEX, so called in regard of the situation as ^eated betwixt the
West Saxons and East Angles, was sometimes together with Essex and
Hartford-Shire, that part and portion which the East Saxons enjoyed for their
Kingdom: it lies bordered upon the North with Hartford-Shire, upon the West by
Col^^, is severed from Buckingham; the South, by Thamesis, from Surrey and
Kent; and on the East from Essex, by the River Lea.

(2) The length thereof extended from Stratford in the East, to Morehall upon
Colne in the West, is by measure nineteen English miles; and from South-mines
in the North, to his Majesty's Manor of Hampton Court in the South, are
little above sixteen miles, the whole Circumference extending to ninety miles.

(3) In Form it is almost square, for Air passing temperate, for Soil
abundantly fertile, and for Pasturage and Grain of all kinds, yielding the
best, so that the Wheat of this County has served a long time for the Manchet
to our Princes Table.

(4) It lies seated in a vale most wholesome and rich, having some hills also,
and them of good ascent, from whose tops the prospect of the whole is seen like
unto Z^ar in Egypt, or rather like a Paradise and Garden of God.

(5) The ancient Inhabitants known to Caesar, were the Trinobants, whom he
names to be the most puisiant in the Land; whose chief City and ^eat yields
him subjection, made the whole, with less loss to the Romans, to bear the yoke
of their own bondage, and to come in under terms of truce. But when their
Forces in these parts were spent, and the Empire shaken by intestine wars, the
Saxons setting their eyes upon so fair a soil made their footing as sure
herein; which lastly with Hartford and Essex, was the portion of the
East Saxons Kingdom.

(6) Five princely Houses, inheritable to the English Crown, are ^eated in this
Shire, which are, Enfield, Hanworth, White Hall, S. James, and Hampton Court, a
City rather in show than the Palace of a Prince, and for stately Port and
gorgeous building, not inferior to any in Europe. At Thistleworth once stood
the Palace of King Richard of the Romans, Earl of Cornwall, which the Londoners
in a tumultuous broile, burned to the ground, many other stately Houses of our
English Nobility, Knights and Centlemen, as also of the Worshipful Citizens of
London, are in this Shire so sumptuously built and pleasantly seated, as the
like in the like circuit are no where else to be found. Near unto Thamesis
entrance into this County, is kept the remembrance of Caesar's entrance over
Thamesis, by the name of Coway-stakes, stuck fast in the bottom to impeach his
designs; and further at Stanes a Maire-stone once stood for a mark of
Jurisdiction, that London had so far upon Thame^is.

(7) Which City is more ancient than any true Record bears, fabuled from
Brute, Troynovant, from Lud, Ludstone: But by more credible Writers, Tacitus,
Ptolomy, and Antonine, Londinium; by Ammianus Marcellinus for her successive
prosperity, August^, the great title that can be given to any: by Britains
Londayn; by Strangers Londra; and by us London. This City does show as the
Cedars among other Trees, being the seat of the British Kings, the Chamber of
the English, the model of the Land, and the Mart of the World: for thither are
brought the silk of Asia, the Spices from Africa, the Balms from Grecia, and
the riches of both the Indies East and West, no City standing so long in fame,
nor any for divine and politic government may with her be compared. Her walls
were first set by great Constantine the first Christian Emperor, at the suit
of his Mother Queen Helen* reared with rough Stone and British Brick three
English miles in compass; through which are now made seven most fair gates,
besides three other passages for entrance. Along the Thame^is, this wall at
first ranged, and with two gates opened^ the one Doure-gate, now Dowgate, and
the other Billingsgate, a receptacle for Ships. In the midst of this wall was
set a mile-mark (as the like was in Rome) from whence, were measured their
stations, for carriage or otherwise; the same as yet stands, and has been
long known by the name of London Stone. Upon the East of this City, the Church
of S. Peter's is thought to be the Cathedral of Restitut^^, the Christians
Bishops See, who lived in the reign of great Constantine; but since St. Paul's
in the West part, from the Temple of Diana, assumed that dignity, whose
greatness does exceed any other at this day, and spires so high that twice it
has been consumed by lightning from heaven. Besides this Cathedral, God is
honored in one hundred twenty one Churches more in this City: that is, ninety
six within the walls; sixteen without, but within the Liberties; and nine more
in her Suburbs; and in Fitz* Stephens time, thirteen Convents of relgious
Orders. It is divided into 26 Wards, governed by so many grave Aldermen, a Lord
Major, and two Sheriffs, the yearly choice whereof was granted them by Patent
from King John, in whose time also a Bridge of stone was made over Thames, upon
nineteen Arches, for length, breadth, beauty, and building, the like again not
found in the World.

(8) This London (as it were) disdaining bondage, has set her self on each
side, far without the walls, and has le^t her West gate in the midst, from
whence with continual buildings (still affecting greatness) she has continued
her streets unto a Kings Palace, and joined a second City to her self, famous
for the Seat and Sepulcher of our Kings; and for the Gates of Justice, that
termly there are opened; only once a Bishops See, whose title died with the
man. No walls are set about this City, and those of London are left, to show
rather what it was, than what it is: Whose Citizens, as the Lacedaemonians did,
do impute their strength in their men, and not in their walls, how strong
soever. Or else for their multitude, cannot be circulated, but (as another
Jerusalem) is inhabited without walls, as Zachary said. The wealth of this City
(as Isa once speak of Nilus) grows from the Revenues and Harvest of her South
bounding Thames; whose trafique for merchandising, is like that of Tyrus,
whereof Ezekiel speaks, and stands in abundance of Silver, Iron, Tinn, and
Lead, etc. And for London her channel is navigable, straightened along with
meadowing borders, until she takes her full liberty in the German Seas. Upon
this Thamesis the Ships of Tharsis seem to ride, and the Navy, that rightly is
termed the Lady of the Sea, spreads her sail: Whence twice with lucky success
has been accomplished, the compassing of the universal Globe. This River,
C^nutus laying siege against London, sought by digging to divert, and before
him the Danes had done great harms in the City, yet was their State recovered
by King Elfred, and the River kept her old course notwithstanding that cost. In
the times of the Normans, some civil broils have been attempted in this City,
as in the days of King John, whereinto his Barons entered, and the Tower yielded
unto Lewis. And again, Wa^ Tyle^* herein committed outragio^s cruelties, but
was worthily struck down by the Major, and stain in Smithfield. This Cities
graduation for Latitude is the degree 51, 45 minutes, and in Longitude 20
degrees, 29 minutes.

(9) In this County at Barnet, upon Easter Day, a bloody battle was fought,
betwixt Henry the sixth and Edward the fourth, wherein was slain one Marquess,
one Earl, three Lords, and with them ten thousand Englishmen.

(10) The division of this Shire is into seven hundreds, wherein are seated two
Cities, four Market Towns, and seventy three Parish Churches, besides them in
London: where in the Church of Gray-^ry^rs, now called Christ-Chu^ch, three
Queens lie interred, which were, Queen Margaret, the D. of Phil. the hardy,
King of France, second wife to King Edward the first; the second was Queen
Isabel, wife to King Edward the second, and D. to Philip the fair King of
France: and the third was Queen Joan, their daughter, married to David King of
Scotland.

ESSEX COUNTY
map of Essex
ESSEX.
CHAPTER XV.
ESSEX, by the Normans, Excessa, and by the vulgar Essex, is a County large in
compass, very populous, and nothing inferior to the best of the Land.

(2) The Form thereof is somewhat circular, excepting the East part, which
shoots her self with many Promontories into the Sea; and from Horsey Island
to Haidon in the West, (the broadest part of the Shire) are they by measure
forty miles; and the length from East Ham upon Thamesis in the South, to
Sturmere upon the River Stow in the North, are thirty five miles; the whole in
circumference one hundred forty six miles.

(3) It lies bounded upon the North, with Suffolk and Cambridge-Shires, upon
the West with Hertford and Middlesex, upon the South by Thamesis is parted from
Kent, and the East Side thereof is altogether washed with the German Seas.

(4) The Air is temperate and pleasant, only toward the waters somewhat
aguish: the soil is rich and fruitful, though in some places sandy and barren;
yet so that it never frustrates the Husbandmans hopes, or fills not the hands
of her Harvest-labourers: but in some part so fertile, that after three years
glebe of Saffron, the Land for eighteen more, will yield plenty of Barley,
without either dung or other fa^ning earth.

(5) Her ancient inhabitants known to the Romans, were by Caesar called the
Trinobants, of whom in the former Chapter we have spoken, and in our History
shall speak more at large. But this name perished with the age of the Empire,
the Saxons presently framed a new; and with Hertford and Middlesex made it
their East Saxons Kingdom, until that Egb^rt bought this and the whole into an
entire and absolute Monarchy: the Danes after them laid so ^ore for this
Province, that at ^^^mfleet and Havenet (now S^^bery) they fortified most
strongly; and at Barklow, besides the hills mounted for their burials) the
Danewort with her red berries, so plentifully grow, that it is held and
accounted to spring from the blood of the Danes which in that place was spilt,
and the herb as yet is called from them the Danes-bloud; neither yet were they
quelled to surcease that quarrel; but at Ashdowne abode the Iron side in ^ight,
wherein so much blood of the English was spilt, that Canutus their King in
remorse of conscience, built a Church in the place, to pacify God for the sins
of his people: but when the Normans had got the garland of the whole, many of
the Nobles there seated themselves, whose posterities since, both there and
elsewhere are spread further abroad in the Realm.

(6) The Commodities that this shire yields, are many and great, as of Woods,
Corn, Cattle, Fish, Forests, and Saffron; which last grows with such gain
and increase upon her North parts, that from a split Clove much like unto
Garlike, a white bluish Flower shortly springs, from whence fillets of
Saffron are gathered before the Sun, and dried, are sold as spice with great
gain. From the Islands Canvey, Mersey, Horsey, Northly, Osey, Wallot, and
Foulness, great store of Fish and Fowl are daily gotten: and so from their
Cattle have they continual increase, which men and boys milk; as well the Ewe
as the Kin^; whereof they make great and thick Cheese, sold abroad in the Land,
much thereof transported unto other Countries. Their Oysters which we call
Walfleet, the best in esteem, and are thought from Pliny to have been served in
the Romans Kitchins. But least we should exceed measure in commending, or the
people repose their trust in the soil; behold what God can do to frustrate both
in a moment, and that by his meanest creatures: for in our age and remembrance,
the year of Christ 158. an Army of Mice so over ran the Marshes in Dengey
Hundred, near unto South minster in this County, that they shore the grass to
the very roots, and so tainted the same with their venomous teeth, that a great
Murtain fell upon the Cattle which grazed thereon, to the great loss of their
owners.

(7) The chiefest City for account at this day, in this Shire, is Colchester,
b^ilt by Collus the British Prince, one hundred twenty four years after the
birth of our Savior Christ (if he of Monmouth say true) wherein his son
Lu^ius, Helena, and Constantine, the first Christian King, Empress, and
Emperor in the World, were born: which made Nech^m for Constantin^ to sing as
he did.

From Colchester there ros^ a Star,
The Rays whereof gave glorious light,
Throughout the world in Climates far,
Great Constantine, Romes Emperor bright.
And the Romans to the great honor of Helena inscribed her, Piissima
Venerabilis August^. But of these we shall be occasioned to speak more
hereafter. This City is situated upon the South of the River Coln; from whence
it has the name, and is walled about, raised upon a high Trench of earth,
though now much decayed, having six gates of entrance, and three Posterns in
the West wall, beside^ nine Watch-Towers for defense, and contains in
compass 1980 paces; wherein stand eight fair Churches, and two other without
the walls, for Gods divine service: S. Tenants, and the Black Friars decayed in
the Suburbs; Mary Magdalens, the Nunnery, S. John's, and the Crouched Friars,
all suppressed: within toward the East is mounted an old Castle, and elder
ruins upon a Trench containing two Acres of ground, whereas yet may be seen
the provident care they had against all ensuing assaults.

The trade of this Town stands chiefly in making of Cloth and Bays, with
Says and other like Stuffs daily invented; and is governed by two Bailiffs,
twelve Aldermen, all wearing Scarlet; a Recorder, a Town Clerk, and four
Sergeants at Mace. Whose position for Latitude is in the degree 52, 14 minutes;
and for Longitude, in the degree 21, and 50 minutes.

(8) Places of Antiquity and memorable note in this County; I observe the most
Famous to be Camolodunum, by us Maldon, which was the Royal Seat of Cunobelin
King of the Trinobants, as by his money therein minted appears, about the
time of our Saviors birth* which City afterward Claudius won from the
Britains, and therein placed a Colony of Soldiers, which were called
Victri^^nsis. This City Queen Bodu^, in revenge of her wrongs razed to the
ground, what time she stirred their people against Nero, with the slaughter of
seventy thousand of the Romans. Of some later and lesser account was
Itha^chester, now S. Peter's upon the wall, where the Fortenses with their
Captain kept, toward the declination of the Roman Empir^. In the East
promontory in this County, in the Reign of Richard the second, the teeth of a
Giant were found (if they were not of an Elephant) of a mavelous size (says
Ralph Coggeshall;) and not far thence, in the reign of Elizabeth, more bones to
the like wonder were dug up.

(9) I purposely omit the message of a Pilgrim from S. John Baptist, by whom he
sent a Ring to King Edward Confessor; for which cause his house took the name
Havering* seeing the Monks of those times made no great dainty daily to forge
matter for their own advantage: who in this Shire so swarmed that they had
houses erected at Waltham, Pritelewel, Tiltey, Dunmow, Lecy^, Hatfield-Peverel,
Chelmesford, Cogg^shall, Maldon, Earls coln, Colchester, S. Osiths,
Saffron-Walden, Hatfield-Bradock^, and more with great revenues thereto
belonging, all which felt the Axes and Hammers of destruction, when the rest of
such foundations fell under the flail of King Henry the Eighth, who with
Hezekiah brake down all these Brazen Serpents.

(10) This Shire is divided into 23 Hundreds, wherein are seated 21
Market Towns, 5 Castles, 5 Havens, 2 of His Majesty's Mannours, and 415
Parish-Churches.

SVFFOLCK
map of Suffolk
SUFFOLK.
CHAPTER XVI.
SUFFOLK, in regard of them which were seated in Northfolk, is a County most
plenteous and pleasant for habitation. It is separated from Norfolk, by the
Rivers of the lesser Ouse, and Waveney, whose heads meet almost in the midst of
her Verge, and that very near together, the one taking course East, and the
other full West, upon which part Cambridge-shire does wholly confront. The
So^th side is severed by Stoure from Essex, and the East together washed with
the German Seas.

(2) The Air is good, sweet, and delectable, and in some parts, of some of our
best Phy^icians, held to be the best in the Land: the soil is rich, fruitful,
and with all things well replenished; in a word, nothing wanting for pleasure
or profit.

(3) The Form thereof is somewhat Cressant, shooting up narrower in the North,
and spreading wider toward the South, whose broadest part is about twenty
miles: but from East to West much more: for from Easton point (the furthest of
this Shire, yea of all Britain, into the Sea) unto great Ouse River, her
Western bounder, are forty five miles, and the whole in Circumference, about
one hundred and forty six miles.

(4) Anti^ntly this part of the Island was possessed by the Iceni, who as it
seems by Tacitus, joined in Amity with the Romans, a mighty people (says he)
and never shaken with wars before the reign of Claudius, but then by Ostorius
very vanquished, though not without great slaughter of the Romans; and in a
battle against them, M. Ostorius the son of the General, won great honor in
saying of a Roman Citizens life; so ready were they to give, and receive
Honors to themselves, but slightly to pass over, and to smother far greater
exploits of the Britains: which notwithstanding long in these parts they could
not do; for the wrongs of the Icenians growing intolerable, who by the Roman
Soldiers were put out of their rightful possessions, their Princes accounted
no better than Slaves, and their Queen whipped in most ignominious manner;
under Bod^a they wrought their revenge, as in the History (Christ assisting)
shall be further related.

Next to these Icenians, were the Saxons that got their footing into these
parts, and of them, this with Norfolk, Cambridge-shire, and the Isle of Ely,
was made their East Angles Kingdom; though as it seems ever in subjection,
either to the Mercians, or to the Kings of Kent; whose offspring ending in S.
Edmund the Martyr, after the Danes had laid it most desolate, Edward the Elder
subdued it unto his West Saxons Monarchy: and that likewise ending in King
Edward the Confessor, many Noble Normans got their possessions in these parts,
whose offspring are plenteously replenished in this Shire to this day.

(5) The Commodities of this Shire are many and great, Whereof the chiefest
consists in Corn, Cattle, Cloth, Pasturage, Woods, Seafish and Fowl; and as
Abba Floriensis has depainted, this County is of a green and passing fresh
hue, pleasantly replenished with Orchards, Gardens and Groves: thus he
described it above six hundred years since, and now we find as he has said, to
which we may add their gain from the Pail, whose Cheeses are traded not only
throughout England, but into Germany, France, and Spain, and are highly
commended by Pantaleon the Physician, both for color and taste.

(6) And had Ipswi^h (the only eye of this Shire) been as fortunate in her
Surname, as she is blessed with commerce and buildings, she might worthily have
born the title of a City: neither ranked in the lowest row, whose trade,
circuit, and seat, does equal most places of the Land besides.

It seems this Town has been walled about both by a Rampire of Earth,
mounted along her North and West parts, and places of entrance where Gates have
stood; which no doubt, by the Danes were cast down, in the year of Jesus
Christ, ^991. when they sacked with spoil all these Sea coasts: and again in
the year one thousand, laid the streets desolate, and the houses on heaps: yet
afterward recovering both breath and beauty, her buildings from Stoke-Church
in the South, to Saint Margarets in the North, now contain 1900 paces, and from
S. Helens in the East, to S. Matthews Church in the West, are no less than 2120
full of streets plenteously inhabited, wherein are twelve Parish-Churches
seated, besides them suppressed; such were Christ-Church, S. Georges, S. James,
the White, the Black, and Gray-Fryers. The Site of this Town is removed from
the Equator, unto the degree 52, 25 minutes: and by Mercators observation, from
the first West-points, 22 degrees, 9 minutes: and is yearly governed by two
Bailiffs, and ten Port-men, all wearing Scarlet, with twenty four of t^eir
Common Counsel in Purple, a Recorder, a Town Clerk, five Sergeants, whereof one
is for the Admiralty, a Beadle, and Common Crier, all in blew, with the Towns
Arms on their sleeves.

The other eye of this Shire is S. Edmundsbury. By Abbo the Royal-Town, wherein
at the daybreak of the Saxons conversion, Sigebert King of the East Angles
sounded a Christian Church: and upon the occasion of King Edmunds burial (who
at Hoxon was shot to death) has been ever since called S. Edmundsbury, where
was built to his honor one of the fairest Monasteries in the world, begun by
King Canute, much affrighted with the seeming appearance of that Martyrs Ghost,
who to expiate the sacrilegious impiety of his Father Suenus, enriched the
place with many endowments, and offered up his own Crown upon the Holy Martyrs
Tomb. For the beauty and buildings of this Abbey and Town, let Leyland for me
declare: The Sun (says he) has not seen a City more finely seated, so
delicately, upon the easy ascent of an hill, with a River running on the East
side; nor a more stately Abbey, either for revenues or incomperable
magnificence, in whose prospect appears rather a City than a Monastery, so
many Gates for entrance, and some of them brass, so many Towers, and a most
glorious Church, upon which attend three others, standing all in the same
Churchyard, all of them passing fine, and of a curious workmanship. Whose
ruins lie in the dust, lamenting their fall, moving the beholders to pity
their case.

Near unto this Town a great battle was fought by Robert Bossu, Earl of
Leicester, against his Sovereign King Henry the second: but was worthily
overcome by Richard Lucy, the Kings high Justice, himself and wife taken, with
many Flemings and Englishmen slain.

(7) Other places worthy of remembrance this County affords; such is Exning in
the West, formerly famous for the birth of S. Audr^y, daughter to King Anna,
one of the three names of the Shires division: Renlisham in the East, where
Redwald the First Christian in this Kingdom held his Court: and Hadley in her
South, where Guthrum the Dane, whom Elfred baptized, was buried. And things of
stranger note are the limits of the East Angles Territories, running along
New-market-Heath, vulgarly called the Devils-ditch: the like fable is formerly
told by Nubrigensis, that at Wulpes in the heart of this Shire, two green boys
of Satyrs kind arose out of the ground, from the Antipodes; believe it if you
will: and Ralfe Coggeshall, in the Monuments of Colchester, declares, that a
Fish in all parts like a man was taken near Oxford, and for six months was kept
in the Castle, whence after he escaped again to the Sea,

As strange, but most true, was a crop of Pease, that without tillage or sowing
grew in the Rocks, betwixt this Oxford and Aldebrough, in the year 1555, when
by unseasonable weather a great dearth was in the Land; there in August were
gathered above one hundred Quarters, and in blossoming remained as many more,
where never grass grew, or earth ever seen, but hard solid Rocks, three yards
deep under their roots.

(8) Places separated from common use, and devoted to God and his service by
religious Princes, were at S. Edmunds, Ipswich, Ikleworth, Blithborow, Clare,
Ieston, Burgh Castle, wherein Sigebert King of the East Angles entered the
profession of a Monk: but was thence forced by his people, to fight against the
Mercians: in which Battle he was slain. And Dunwich, where Foelix founded his
Episcopal See. These with many others in this County were suppressed in the
fall of the Monasteries, and their Revenues assumed by King Henry the Eighth.

(9) This Shire is principally divided into three parts, which are called
Celdable, S. Edmunds, and S. Andreys Liberties, subdivided into twenty two
Hundreds, and them again into 575 Parish-Churches, wherein are seated seven
Castles, and twenty eight Market Towns.

NORFOLCKE
map of Norfolk
NORTHFOLK.
CHAPTER XVII.
NORTHFOLK is an Island inclining to an oval form, closed on the South part
with the Rivers of Wavenay, and the lesser Ouse, which divides it from Suffolk.
On the East and North with the German Ocean; on the West toward
Cambridge-shires, with some branches of the greater Ouse; toward
Lincolis-shire, with that part of the Neve which passes from Wisbitch into the
Washes.

It contains in length (from Tarmouth to Wifbitch) about fifty miles. In
breadth (from The^ford to Wells) about thirty. The whole Circuit is about two
hundred forty two miles.

The Name arises from the situation of the people, who being the Norther-most
of the Kingdom of East Angles, are therefore called the Northfolk, as the
Souther-most Southfolk.

The Air is sharp and piercing, especially the Champion and near the Sea;
therefore it delayeth the Spring and Harvest, the situation of the Country
inclining thereto, as being under the 53 degree of Latitude.

The Soil diverse: about the towns commonly good; as Clay, Chalk, or fat Earth,
well watered, and with some Wood: upward to the Heaths naked, dry and barren:
Marsland and Flegge exceeding rich: but Marsland properly for Pasture, Flegge
for Corn.

(2) The parts from Thetford to Burneham, and thence Westward, as also along
the Coast, be counted Champion: the rest (as better furnished with Woods)
Woodland. The Champion abounds with Corn, Sheep, and Conies and hesein the
barren Heaths, (as the Providence of our Ancestors has of old disposed them)
are very profitable: For on them principally lie our Fould courses, called of
the Saxons (whose institution they therefore seem to be) Paldyocum, that is,
Liberty of fold or fo^^dage. These heaths by the compasture of the sheep (which
we call Tathe) are made so rich with Corn, that when they fall to be sown, they
commonly match the fruitfullest grounds in other Countries: and laid again, do
long after yield a sweeter and more plentiful feed for Sheep: so that each of
them maintain other, and are the chiefest wealth of our Country. The Woodland
(fitter for grass) is maintained chiefly by feeding of Cattle, yet well stored
with Corn and Sheep.

The Coast is fortunate in Fish, and has many good harbors, whereof Lynn and
Tarmouth be the mother-ports, and of great traffic: Wells and Blackeney next
in estimation.

The whole County abounds with Rivers and pleasant Springs, of which the Ouse
is the chiefest, by whose plentiful branches, the Isle of Ely, the Towns and
Shires of Cambridge, Huntington, and the County of Suffolk vent and receive
Commodities. The next is Hi^rus or Year, passing from Norwich to ^armouth,
where it receives the Bure coming from Aylsham, both of them of great service
for water carriages, but very notable for their plenty of fish: for some one
man out of an hold upon the Bnr^, has drawn up ordinarily once a year, between
two Nets, above five or six score Bushels of Fish at one draught. The Waveney
and the lesser Ouse are also Navigable and of great use. The residue I omit.

(3) The people were anciently called the ICENI, as the also of Suffolk,
Cambridge-shire, and Huntington-shire, and supposed to be of them whom Caesar
names Cenimagni; Ptolomy, Simeni; some Tigeni. Their manners were likely to be
as the rest of the Britains, barbarous at those times, as appears by Caesar
and Tacitus. Neither can I otherwise commend their successors the Saxons; for
so also their own Countreyman Ethelward terms them. Since the entry of the
Normans, they have been counted civil and ingenious, apt to good Letters,
adorning Religion with more Churches and Monasteries, than any Shire of
England, and the Laws and Seats of Justice (for many ages) with some excellent
men; from whom most of our chief Families, and some of the greatest Nobility of
the Kingdom, have taken advancement. And herein is Northfolk fortunate, that as
Crete boasted of an hundred Cities, so may she of an hundred Families of
Gentlemen, never yet attainted of high Treason. How the Government of this
County was about Caesar's time, is uncertain, but (agreeable no doubt to the
rest of the Britains) under some peculiar Toparch or Regulus, as Tacitus
terms him. The latter Romans held it by two Garrisons, one at Gariannum near
^armouth; the other at Branodunum, now called Brancastre, both of horse, and
commanded by the Comes Maritimi Tractus, as Mercellinus calls him, and termed
after Comes Littoris Saxonici. Upon the entry of the Saxons, this County with
Suffolk fell in the portion of the Angles, and about the year five hundred
sixty one, were together erected into a Kingdom by Vffa, of whom the succeeding
Kings were tituled Vffines. But having suffered many Tempests of Fortune, it
was in the year 870, utterly wasted and extinct by Hungar and Hubba the Danes,
who overthrew the virtuous King Edmund about Thetford, and after martyred him
at S. Edmundsbury. Yet they did not long enjoy it: for King Edward shortly
recovered it from them, and annexed it to his other Kingdoms. The Da^es
notwithstanding inhabited abundantly in these parts, so that many of our Towns
were sounded by them, and a great part of our people and Gentry are risen out
of their blood.

(4) This Kingdom of East Angles was after allotted to an Earldom of that name
by William the Conquero^r, who made Radulph a Britain, marrying his Kinswoman,
Earl thereof; but gave the greatest parts of this County about Wimonham,
Keninghall, Lenn, Burnham, Fulmerstone, etc. to W. de Albany, Pincerne, and W.
de Warranna Forrestario, who to strengthen themselves (according to the use of
that time) with the homage and service of many Tenants, divided large portions
of the same amongst their friends and followers; so that most of the Manors
and Lands in the parts aforesaid, were in those days either mediately or
immediately holden of one of them. And as Northfolk and Suffolk were first
united in a Kingdom, then in an Earldom, so they continued united in the
Sheriff-wick till about the fifteenth year of Queen Elizabeth.

(5) The Towns here are commonly well built, and populous; three of them being
of that worth and quality, as no one Shire of England has the like, Norwich,
Lynn, and Yarmouth: to which for ancient reputation (as having been a seat of
the Kings of East Angles) I may add Thetford, known to Antoninus, Ptolomy, and
elder ages by the name of Sitomagus, when the other three were yet in their
infancy, and of no esteem: For I accept not the Relations of the Antiquity and
State of Norwich in the time of the Britains and Saxons, though Alexander Nevil
has well graced them. Her very name abridgeth her Antiquity, as having no
other in Histories but Norwich, which is mere Saxon or Danish, and signifies
the North-Town or Castle. It seems to have risen out of the decay of her
neighbor Venta, now called Castor, and as M. Cambden notes, not to have been
of mark before the entry of the Danes, who in the year 1004, under Swane their
Captain, first sacked, and then burnt it, even in her infancy. Yet in the days
of Edward the Confessor it recovered 1320 Burgesses. But maintaining the cause
of Earl Radulph aforesaid against the Conqueror, they were by famine and sword
wasted to 560, at which time the Earl escaping by Ship, his wife upon
composition yielded the Castle, and followed. In William Rufus time it was
grown famous for Merchandise and concourse of people; so that Herbert then
translated the Bishopric from Thetford thither, made each of them an ornament
to other. In variety of times it felt much variety of Fortune: By fire in Anno
1508. By extreme plagues, whereof one in Anno 1348, was so outrageous, as 57104
are reported to have died thereof between the Calends of January and of July.
By misery of war was sacked and spoiled by the Earl of Flanders and Hugh Bigod,
Anno 1174. In yielding to Lewis the French, against their natural Lord King
John, Anno 1216. By the disinherited Barons, Anno 1266. By tumult and
insurrection between the Citizens and Churchmen: once about the year 1255.
which if Henry the third had not come in person to appease, the City was in
hazard to be ruined the second time in Anno 1446, for which the Mayor was
deposed, and their Liberties for a while seized. In Edward the sixths time, by
Ketts rebellion, whose fury chiefly raged against this City. Since this it has
flourished with the blessings of Peace, Plenty, Wealth, and Honor: so that
Alexander Nevil doubts not to prefer it above all the Cities of England,
except London. It is situate upon the River Hierus, in a pleasant valley, but
on rising ground, having on the East the Hills and Heath called Mussold for
Musswould, as I take it. In the 17 year of King Stephen it was new founded, and
made a Corporation. In Edward the firsts time closed with a fair Wall, saving
on a part that the River defends. First governed by four Bailiffs; then by
Henry the fourth in Anno 1403, erected into a Majoralty and County; the limits
whereof now extend to Eatonbridge. At this present it has about thirty
Parishes, but in ancient time had many more.

(6) Lynn having been an ancient Borough, under the government of a Bailiff or
Reve, called Praepositus, was by King* John in the sixth year of his Reign made
Liber Burgus, and (besides the gift of his memorable Cup, which to this day
honors his Corporation) endowed with diverse fair Liberties. King Henry the
third in the Seventeenth year of his Reign (in recompense of their servi^^
against the outlawed Barons in the Isle of Ely) enlarged their Charter, and
granted them further, to choose a Major Loco Praepositi: unto whom King Henry
the eighth, in the sixteenth year of his Reign, added twelve Aldermen, a
Recorder, and other Officers, and the bearing of a Sword before the Mayor. But
the Town coming after to the same King, he in the ewenty ninth of his Reign,
changed their name, from Mayor and Burgensis Lynn Episcopi, to Mayor and
Burgenses Lynn Regis.

(7) ^^rmouth is the Key of the Coast named and seated by the mouth of the
River ^ere. Begun in the time of the Danes, and by small accessions growing
populous, made a Corporation under two Bailiffs by King Henry the third, and by
his Charter, about the fifteenth year of his Reign, walled. It is an ancient
member of the Cinque Ports, very well built and fortified, having only one
Church (but fair and large) founded by Bishop Herbert in William Rufus days. It
maintains a Peer against the Sea, at the yearly charge of five hundred pound,
or thereabout: yet has it no possessions as other Corporations, but like the
Children of Aeolus and Thetis; maria and 4 ventos, as an Inquisitor finds
Anno 10. H* 3. There is yearly in September the worthiest Herring fishing in
Europe, which draws great concourse of people, and makes the Town much the
richer all the year, but very unsavory for the time. The Inhabitants are so
courteous, as they have long held a custom to feast all persons of worth,
repairing to their Town.

(8) The Bishopric of Norwich had first her seat at Dunwich in Suffolk, and
was there begun by Faelix, who converted this County, and the East Angles to
the Faith. Being brought out of Burgundy by Sigebert (the first Christian King
of the East Angles) he landed at Babingley by Lynn, and there builded the first
Church of these Countries, which in his memory, is at this day called by his
Name. The second he built at Sharneburn then of wood, and therefore called
Stock Chapel. After Faelix and three of his Successors, this Bishopric was
divided into two Sees; the one with eleven Bishops in succession, continuing at
Dunwich; the other with twelve, at Elmham in Northfolk. Then united again in
the time of King Edwin, the entire See for twelve other Bishops remained at
Elmham, and in the Conquerours time was by his Chaplain Arfastus (being the
thirtieth) translated to Thetford, from thence by Herbert (his next Successor
save one) bought of W. Rufus for 1900 pounds, and brought to Norwich. This
Herbert (surnamed Losinga a Norman) builded the Cathedral Church there, and
endowed it with large possessions. Not far from thence he also builded another
Church to S. Leonard, a third at Elmham, a ^ourth at ^ynn, (S. Margarets a very
fair one) and the fifth at Yarmouth before mentioned. By the Cathedral Church
he builded a Palace for the Bishops, and founded the Priory there (now
converted to Dean and Chapter) and another Priory at Th^tford. Since his time
the Bishops See has immoveably remained at Norwich, but the ancient
Possessions are severed from it* and in lieu thereof the Abbey and Lands of S.
Benedict of Holme annexed to it. The Commodities of this County I have
contained in these four Verses.

Ingenio and populi cultu Norfolcia clara est;
Hinc fluviis; illinc Insula clausa mari;
Qua ratis, and vellus, frumenta, cuniculus, agnus,
Lac scatet, and pisces, pabula, mella, crocus.
This Description of Norfolk, I received from the Right Worshipful, Sir HENRY
SPELMAN Knight.

CAMBRIDGE SHIRE
map of Cambridgeshire
CAMBRIDGE-SHIRE.
CHAPTER XVIII.
CAMBRIDGE-SHIRE, lies bounded upon the North with Lincoln shire and
Northfolk; upon the East with Northfolk and Suffolk; upon the South with
Har^ford^shire and Essex; and upon the West with Bedford and Huntington-shires.

(2) This Province is not large, nor for air greatly to be liked, having the
Fens so spread upon her North, that they infect the Air far into the rest: from
whose furthest point unto Royston in the South, are thirty five miles, but in
the broadest is not fully twenty: the whole in Circumference, traced by the
compass of her many indents, one hundred twenty and eight miles.

(3) The Soil does differ both in Air and Commodities, the Fenny surcharged
with waters: the South is Champion, and yields Cor^ in abundance, with
Meadowing Pastures upon both the sides of the River Come, which divides that
part of the Shire in the midst, upon whose East-bank the Muses have built their
most sacred Seat, where with plenteous increase they have continued for these
many hundred years.

(4) For from ancient Grantcester, Camboritum by Antonine, now famous
Cambridge, the other breast and Nurse-mother of all pious literature, have
flowed full streams of the learned Sciences into all other parts of this Land,
and else where: ancient indeed, if their story be rightly writ, that will have
it built by Cantaber a Spaniard, three hundred seventy five years before the
birth of our Savior, who thither first brought and planted the Muses. This
City Grantcester by the tyranny of time lost both her own beauty and her
professed Athenian Students, so that in Beda's days, seven hundred years after
the word became flesh, it is described to lie a little desolate City, and as
yet retains the name, without any memory of circuit by walls.

Of this City, in the year of Christ (...) as the Monk of Button does report,
nine Scholars received their Baptism, and became Preach^^^ of the Gospel among
the Britains; which (as he says) happened in the Reign of Hadrian the
Emperor. But when the Picts, Scots, Hunnes and Saxons had laid all things
waste* and with their savage swords cut ou^ the leaves of all civil learning,
this as the rest yielded to destruction, and so lay forlorn till the Saxons
themselves became likewise civil, when Sigebert the first Christian King of the
East-Angl^s, from the example of France, whither he had been banished, built
Shools in his Kingdom, and here at Grancester the chief, recalling thither the
Prof^ssors of Arts and Sciences, as the Story records, and Traditions do hold.

But afterward, as it seems, their increase being straightned, the Students
complained (as the Prophets did to Elisha) that the place was too little for
them to dwell in, therefore enlarging more Northward, seated themselves near
unto the Bridge, whereupon the place began to be called Grantbridge, though
others from the crooked River Came will have it named Cambridge. This place
(though sacred and exempted from Mars, as Sylla once spoke, when he spared
Athens,) the Danes in their destructions regarded no whit, wherein they often
wintered after their spoils, and left the scars of their savage sores ever
behind them. And in the year 1010, when Suen in his fierceness bare down all
before him, this place was no place for Scholars to be in: Wars loud Alarm
ill consorting the Muses mild Harmonies. Yet when the Normans had got the
Garland on their heads, and these Danish storms turned into Sunshine days,
Gislebert the Monk, with Odo, Terricus, and William, all three of the like
Monastical Profession, in the Reign of King Henry the first, resorted unto this
place, and in a public Barn read the Lectures of Grammar, Logic, and
Rhetoric, and Gislebert Divinity upon the Sabbath and festival days. From this
little Fountain (says Peter Blessensis) grow a great River, which made all
England fruitful, by the many Masters and Teachers proceeding out of Cambridge,
as ont of a holy Paradise of God. The first College therein endowed with
Professions was Peterhouse, built by Hugh Balsham Bishop of Ely, in the year of
Grace 1284, whose godly example many others followed, so that at this day there
are sixteen most stately Colleges and Halls; for building, beauty, endowments,
and store of Students so replenished, that unless it be in her other ^ister
Oxford, the like are not found in all Europe.

But at what time it was made an University, let Robert de Remyngton tell you
for me. In the Reign (says h^) of King Edward the first, Gran^bridge, of a
School, by the Court of Rome, was made an University, such as Oxford is. Lastly
the ^eridian Line Cut^ing the Zenith over this City, is distant from the
furthest West Point, according to Mercator, 20 degrees, 50 scruples, and the
Arch of the same M^ridian, lying between the Equator and Vertical point, is 52
degrees 20 scruples.

(5) Another City formerly in great fame is Ely, had in account for the repute
and holiness of Votary Nuns there residing; built first by Audry, wife to one
Tombrot a Prince in this Province, who had this place as a part of her Dowry:
she having departed from her second Husband ^ Egbert King of Northumberland,
devoted her self to the service of God, and built here a Monastery, whereof she
became the first Abbess. This in the Danish desolations was destroyed, but soon
after re-edified by Ethelwood Bishop of Winchester, who stored it with Monks;
unto whom King Edgar granted the jurisdiction over four hundreds and a half,
within these Fenns and the East Angles limits, which to this day are called.
The liberties of S. Audrey: after whose example many Nobles so enriched it with
large Revenues, that as Malmesbury says, The Abbot thereof laid up yearly in
his own Coffers a thousand and four hundred pounds. And of later times the
Monks thereof became so wealthy, that their old decayed Church they renewed
with new and most stately buildings, which is now the Cathedral of the Diocese,
and for beauty gives place to no other in the Land. Eight other foundations
set apart from secular use in this Province, were at Thorney, Charteres, Denny,
Elsey, Beach, Barnwell, Swasey, and Shengey, all which in the days of King
Henry the Eighth came to the period of their surpassing wealth, and left their
Lands to the dispose of his Will.

(6) The general Commodity of this Shire is Corn, which in the South and
Champion part does abundantly grow, as also Saffron, a very rich Spice. Some
Woods there are, and Pasture both pleasant and profitable. The North part
thereof is Fenny, but withal fruitful, whereof Henry of Huntington, and William
of Malinesbury thus do write: This ^enny Country is passing rich and
plenteous; yea, and beautiful also to behold, wherein is so great store of fish
that strangers do wonder; and water fowl so cheap, that five men may therewith
be satisfied with less than an half penny.

(7) Places of ancient note in this Shire are these, the Erminstreet-way, which
upon the lower West parts of this County, through Roiston, runs forth right
unto Huntington. And from Reach a Market Town standing near to the River Come,
a great Duch and Trench is cast all along New-Market-Heath, which for the
wonder received thereat, is of the vulgar called The Devils Ditch, being in
truth made for a defense against the Mercians by the East Angles, whose Kingdom
it inverged. The G^gmagog Hills near Cambridge retain the memembrance of the
Danish Station, where as yet on their tops is seen a Rampire, strengthened with
a three-sold Trench, whereof Gervase of Tilbury tells many a pretty Tale.

(8) This Shire is divided into seventeen Hundreds, wherein are seated eight
Market Towns, and has been strengthened with seven Castles, and God divinely
hono^red in one Hundred sixty three Parish-Churches.

Hartforde Shire
map of Hertfordshire
HERTFORD-SHIRE.
CHAPTER XIX.
HERTFORD-SHIRE is bordered upon the North with Bedford and Cambridge-shires;
upon the East, is altogether bounded by Essex; upon the South, is confined with
Middlesex; and her west butteth upon Buckingham, and Bedford-shires.

(2) The form thereof is somewhat circular, with many indents to fetch in those
Towns that are dispersedly stragled into her next Shire: whereof Roiston and
Totteridge are the two extremes from North to South, betwixt whom in a straight
drawn line are twenty seven English miles, and from Putnam Westward, to Cheston
Nunnery in the East, are twenty eight; the whole circumference, about an
hundred and thirty miles.

(3) The Air is temperate, sweet, and healthful, as seated in a Climate neither
too hot nor too cold: the soil is rich, plenteous and delightful, yielding
abundance of Corn, Cattle, Wood, and Grass, destitute of nothing that
ministereth profit or pleasures for life, which are more augmented by ^he many
Rivers that arise and run through this Shire, watering her own and others, till
they empty themselves into the Sea.

(4) Her ancient Inhabitants in the time of the Romans were the Ca^ieuc^lanians
or Cassians, and the Trinobants, as their Writers declare, and in the Heptarchy
was possessed by the East Saxons, excepting some small portion thereof, that
the Mercian Kings enjoyed. The Da^es also in their overrunnings, sought to stay
themselves in this Shire, and at Ware (then Wear) pitched down their rest and
hope: for passing the Lea in their light Pinnaces and Shallops, raised therein
a Fort, which mangre the English they kept, until that by the wise policy of
King Elfred, that River was parted into more running streams, whereby their
Ships perished, and they intercepted both of provision and further supply.

(5) The Romans before them made Verolanium^ in this Shire their greatest for
account, which in Nero's time was a Municipal, as Ninius in his Catalogue of
Cities does call it, or as Tacitus, a Freo Town; sacked by Boduo that ever
eternized Queen of the Icenians, when seventy thousand of the Romans and
Confederates by her revenging sword perished: the site and circuit whereof, in
this Card we have set according to our view and measure there taken: whose
magnificence for Port and stately Archit^cture, were found by her large and
arched Vaults in the days of King Edgar, which were dug into and cast down
by Elred and Edmer, Abbots of S. Albans, for that they were the receptacles and
^urking holes of Whoores and Thieves: the ruins of which have raised the beauty
of her surviving and fair S. Albans, where Offa the great Mercian, in great
devotion, built a most stately Monastery, whose Church yet standing, retains
the ashes of many Nobles, there slain in the quarrel of York and Lancaster; and
a Font of solid Brass brought out of Scotland by Sir Richard Lea, from the
siege of Leeth.

(6) Many other Towns, both for Commerce, stately Buildings, and of ancient
Record, this Sh^^e affords, whereof Hertford, though the Shire Town, is not
the richest; the passage through Ware has left her ways so untrodden: to
prevent which, in former times that River at Ware was chained up, and the
Bailiff of Heriford had the custody of the Key: which howsoever they have lost,
yet has the Town gotten her Governor to be preferred from the name of a
Bailiff unto a Mayor, assisted with nine Burgesses, a Re^order, and two
Sergeants their Attendants. Herein a Castle, for situation pleasant, for
Trench, Walls, and River, sufficiently fenced, was lately seen; but marked to
de^^iny as the Town to decay, has found the hand of Fortune to overmatch her
strength, and to ruinate the Priory, S. Nicholas, and S. Mary's Churchos,
besides a Cell of S. Albans Monks, that therein were seated. The like fate
falls unto Hensled, and her fair Castle, wherein Richard King of the Romans
left his life. Yet Langley is graced both in the birth of Prince Edmund the
fifth son to King Edward the third, and the burial of Richard the second that
unfortunate King, who in the Cell of Friars Preachers was there first buried,
but afterward removed and enshrined at Westminster. And in another Langley,
near the East from thence, was born that Pontifical Break-speare, Bishop of
Rome, known by the name of Hadrian the fourth, (and famous for his
stirrup-holding by Frederick the Emperor) whose breath was last stopped by a
Fly that flew into his mouth.

(7) The civil Battles that in this Shire have been fought, in the Map it self
are inserted, and therefore here omitted, but the more ancient remembered unto
us by Oister-hill near S. Albans, whom the judicious Cambden supposes to have
been the Camp of Ostorius the second Lieutenant, and Subduer of great
Caractacus; as also seven small round Hills betwixt Stevennedge and Knebworth,
in which are supposed some Roman Soldiers to lie buried.

(8) Religious Houses built and suppressed, the chiefest for account in this
Shire, were S. Albans, Roystone, Ware, Sopwell, Langley, besides them at
Hertford, whom B^da calls Herudford: which Cities graduation is distant and
removed from the Equator 52 degrees, 5 minutes of Latitude, and set from the
first point of the West, according to Mercator, in the 20 degree, 29 minutes of
Longitude. The Earldoms whereof, were enjoyed only by those two honorable
Families, whose achievements we have also therein expressed.

(9) This Counties division is into eight hundreds, wherein are seated eighteen
Market Towns, and one hundred and twenty Parish Churches.

BEDFORD SHIRE
map of Bedfordshire
BEDFORD-SHIRE
CHAPTER XX.
BEDFORD-SHIRE, seated in the South-East of this Island, is a plain and
champion Country, and lies bounded upon the North with Huntington-Shire; upon
the East with Cambridge and Hartford-shires; upon the South with Hertford and
Buckingham-shires; and upon the West with Buckingham and Northampton-shires.

(2) The Form thereof is somewhat oval, and not very large: for from Tilbroke
in the North unto Studham in the South, are but twenty four English miles; and
from Turny in the West, unto Hartly Coking in the East, are not fully fourteen;
the whole Circumference, about seventy three miles.

(3) The Air is temperate, and the Soil bounteous, especially in the North,
whose Borders the fruitful Ouse with her many windings waters. The South is
more lean, and with greater industry brings forth Barley, no better
elsewhere. Generally this County is Champion, though some places be sprinkled
with Pasturage and Woods.

(4) The ancient Inhabitants known to the Romans, that held in this Shire, were
part of the Cattieuchlani, a Stout and war-stiring people: and yet upon the
report of Caesar's proceeding, sent him their subjection for peace. But when
that conquering Nation had brought Britain into a Pr^vince under Rome, their
Legions lay at Selenae and Magintum, which are now Sandy and Dunstable, places
of memorable note in this Shire. After them the Saxons coveting for so fair a
Seat, first dispossessed the Britains, under the leading of Cuthwulf^ the
West Saxon, about the year of Grace, 572, who making it their own, was lastly
enjoyed by the Mercians, as a part of their Kingdom.

(5) In the year of Christ's Incarnation 1399, immediately before those Civil
Wars, that rent in pieces the peace of this Land, between the Princes of
Lancaster and York, the River Ouse near unto Harwood, stood suddenly still, and
refrained to pass any further; so that forward, men passed three miles together
on foot in the very depth of her Channel; and backward, the waters swelled unto
a great height: which was observed by the judicious, to foretell some unkind
division that shortly should arise.

(6) This County, among the common calamities of the Land, when it lay trampled
under the feet of the Danes, sustained a part: and after that in the time of
King Stephen, when the Civil Wars thundered betwixt Maud the Empress and
himself, the Shire-Town was sore wasted, with great slaughter of men: So when
the Barons forsook their allegiance to King John, the Town and Castle were
rendered up into their hands: And lastly, by King Henry the third, laid level
even with the ground, some ruinous walls appearing toward the Ouse, but not a
stone left upon the Mount where stood his foundation.

(7) This Town by the Britains was called Lettidur; and of us, Bedford; being
the chiefest in the County, from whom it takes the name, and is most fruitful,
and pleasantly seated, having the Ouse running through the Town in the midst,
and a fair Stone bridge built over the same, whereon are two Gates to lock and
impeach the passage, as occasion shall (...). At the first entrance stands S.
Leonards Hospital for Lazars: and further toward S. John's, and S. Mary's
Churches, within the Town, S. Paul's a most beautiful Church, S. Cuthberts, and
S. Peter's: without the Town stands the Friars, S. Loyes, Alhallows, and
Ca^dwell Abbey: not far whence, sometimes stood a Chapel upon the Bank of
Ouse, wherein (as Florilegus affirms) the body of Offa the great Mercian King
was interred, but by the over-swelling of that River, was born down, and
swallowed up; whose Tomb of Lead (as it were some fantastical thing) appeared
often to them that seek it not, but to them that seek it (says Rosse) it is
invisible. This Town is governed yearly by a Mayor, two Bailiffs, two
Chamberlains, a Recorder, a Town Clerk, and three Sergeants with Maces.

(8) A tale of vain credit is reported of Dunstable, that it was built to
bridle the outragiousness of a ^heef named Dun, by King Henry the first: but
certain it is, the place was formerly held by the Romans, whose Legions there
lay, as appears by the Coyns there usually found, which from Magintum are
corruptly called Madning-money.

(6) Castles in this Shire are Woodhill, Eaton, Temsford, and Amphill, an
honor now appertaining to the Crown. And places of Religion, built by devout
persons, but for Idolatrous Abuses again abolished, were at Bedford, Harwood,
Helenstow, Newenham, Chicksand, Wardon, Woborne, and Dunstable. All these, with
the like, felt the hand of Henry the eighth to lie so heavy upon them, that
they were not able to sustain the weight, but were crushed to pieces, and fell
to the ground.

(10) The Graduation of this County, taken for the Shire-Town, is placed from
the Equator in the degree of 52 and 30 minutes for Latitude, and is removed
from the first West point of Longitude, 20 degrees, and 16 minutes.

(11) Whose Princely Families, that have born the Titles both of Dukes and
Earls, are expressed; and whose Counties division are into nine hundreds,
wherein are seated ten Market Towns, and one hundred and sixteen
Parish-Churches.

BUCKINGHAM SHIRE
map of Buckinghamshire
BUCKINGHAM-SHIRE.
CHAPTER XXI.
BUCKINGHAM, for the plenty of Beech-trees there growing, and those in the
elder time of the Saxons called Buck^n, may well be supposed from them to have
the name, as afterward the whole Shire had hers from this Town Buckingham.

(2) In form it somewhat resembles a Lion Rampant, whose head or North-point
touches the Counties of Northampton and Bedford; whose back or East part is
backed by Bedford and Hertford-Shires: his loins or South-borders rest upon
Bark-shire, and his breast the West side is butted upon wholly by Oxford-shir^.
The length thereof from Waisbury in the South, to Braidfield in her North, are
thirty nine miles; the breadth at the broadest, from Ashbridge in the East, to
Brenwood Horrest in the West, are eighteen; the whole in Circumference one
hundred thirty eight miles.

(3) The Air is passing good, temperate and pleasant, yielding the body health,
and the mind content. The soil is rich, fat, and fruitful, giving abundance of
Corn, Grass, and Meat. It is chiefly divided into two parts by the Chiltren
hills, which run through this Shire in the midst, and before time were so
pestered with Beech, that they were altogether unpassable and became a
receptacle and refuge for Thieves, who daily endammaged the wayfaring man; for
which cause Laestan Abbot of S. Albans caused them to be cut down: since when
those parts are passable, without any great incombrances of trees; from whose
tops, a large and most pleasant prospect is seen. The Vale beneath is plain and
champion, a clayie soil, stiff, and rough, but withal marvelous fruitful,
naked of woods, but abounding in meadows, pastures, and tillage, and
maintaining an infinite number of sheep, whose soft and fine fleeces are in
great esteem with the Turks as far as Asia.

(4) The ancient Inhabitants that were seated in this Shire, were the
Catteuchlani, mentioned by Ptolomy, and them dispersed through the Tract of
Bedford, Hertford, and this. These yielded themselves with the first to Caesar
under the Romans subjection, whose over-worn Empire ending in Britain, the
Saxons by strong hand attained this Province, and made it a part of their
Mercian Kingdom: yet was it first subdued unto them by Cherdike the West Saxon,
whose memory is i^part continued in the To^n Chersey, upon the West of this
Country, where in a sharp and bloody battle he was Victor over the Britains. So
also Cuthwul^e a West Saxon at Alesbury in the year of grace 592, overcame the
Britains, and bare down all things before him; yet no sooner was their
Heptarchy weaned, and their Monarchy able to stand alone, but that the Danes,
before their strength and growth was confirmed, waxed upon them; and they not
able in so weak a hand to hold fast that weight of greatness they had so
grasped, gave place to their Conquerours, who did many harms in this Province*
for in the year 914, the Danes furiously raged as far as Brenwood, where they
destroyed the City Burgh, the ancient seat of the Romans, afterward a Royal
house of King Edward the Confessor, which they utterly destroyed.

(5) The Shire-Town Buckingham, fruitfully seated upon the River Ouse, was
fortified with a Rampire, and Sconces on both banks, by King Edward the elder,
says Marianus the Scottish Writer; where in the heart of the Town has stood a
strong Castle, mounted upon a high hill, which long since was brought to the
period of her estate; now nothing remaining besides the signs, that there she
had stood. The River circulates this Town on every side, that only on the North
excepted, over which three fair stone bridges lead, and into which the Springs
of a Well run, called S. Rumalds, a child-saint born at Kings-Sutton,
canonized, and in the Church of this Town enthrined, with many conceited
miracles and cures: such was the hap of those times, to produce Saints of all
ages and sexes. This Town is governed by a Bailiff, and twelve principal
Burgesses; and is in the degree removed from the first point of the West for
Longitude 19, 33 scruples, and the North Pole elevated in Latitude for the
degree of 52, 18 scruples.

(6) A Town of ancient note is Stony Stra^ford, the Romans Lactorodum, being
built upon that ancient Causey-way which is called VVatling Street, where
remain the marks thereof even unto this day. At this place Edward the elder
stopped the passage of the Danes, whilst he strengthened Torcester against
them: and herein, King Edward the eldest since the Conquest, reared a beautiful
Cross, in memory of Eleanor his dead Queen, as he did in every place where her
Corpse rested, from Herdby in Lincolnshire, till it was received and buried at
Westminster.

(7) Places intended for Gods true worship, built by devout persons, and
sequestered from worldly employments, were at Launden, Luffeld, Bidlesden,
Bradwell, Nothey, Ankerne, Missenden, Tekeford, Patrendune, Asbridge, and
Alesbury: Asbridge in great repute for the blood (supposed out of Christ's
sides) brought out of Germany by Henry the eldest son of Richard King of the
Romans, and Earl of Cornwall, whereunto resorted great concourse of people for
devotion and adoration thereof. But when the Sunshine of the Gospel had pierced
through such clouds of darkness, it was perceived apparently to be only honey
clarified and colored with Saffron, as was openly showed at Paul's Cross by the
Bishop of Rochester, the twenty fourth of February, and year of Christ 1538.
And Alesbury for the holiness of S. Edith was much frequented, who having this
Town allotted for her Dowry, had the world and her husband farewell, in taking
upon her the vail of devotion, and in that fruitful age of Saints became
greatly renowned, even as far as to the working of miracles. These all in the
storms and rage of the time, suffered such shipwreck, that from those turmoiled
Seas, their Merchandise light in the right of such Lords as made them their own
for wreacks indeed.

(8) With four Castles this Shire has been strengthened, and through eleven
Market Towns her Commodities traded; being divided, for service to the Crown
and State into eight hundreds, and in them are seated one hundred fourscore and
five Parish-Churches.

OXFORDSHIRE
map of Oxfordshire
OXFORDSHIRE
CHAPTER XXI.
OXFORDSHIRE receives her name from that famous University, and most
beautiful City Oxford, and this of the Foord of Oxen, say our English Saxons;
though Leiland upon a ground of conjecture will have it Ousford, from the River
Ouse (by the Latins called Isis) which gives name likewise to the adjoining I
stand Ousney. The North point of this Shire is bordered upon by the Counties of
Warwick and Northampton the East with Buckingham, the West by Gloucestershire,
and the South altogether is parted from Bark-shire by Thamisis, the Prince of
British Rivers.

(2) The blessings both of the sweet-breathing heavens, and the fruitful sight
of this Counties soil, are so happy and so fortunate, that hardly can be said
whether exceeds. The Air mild, temperate and delicate; the Land fertile,
pleasant, and bounteous; in a word, both Heaven and Earth accorded to make the
Inhabitants healthful and happy: The hills laden with Woods and Cattle, the
valleys burdened with Corn and Pasturage, by reason of many fresh springing
Rivers which sportingly therethorow make their passage; whereof Evenlod,
Charwell, Tame, and Isis are chief: which two last making their Bed of Marriage
near unto Dorchester, run thence together in one channel and name.

(3) The length of this Shire is from Cleydon in the North-West, unto Caversham
in her South-East, near unto Thamisis, and amounts almost to forty miles; the
broadest part is in her Western Borders, which extending from the said Cleydon
in the North, unto Faringdon seated upon the River Isis in the South, are
scarcely twenty six: and thence growing narrower like unto a Wedge, containing
in circumference about one hundred and thirty miles.

(4) The ancient Inhabitants known to the Romans, where the Dobuni, part
whereof possessed further Westernly into Gloucestershire; and nearer Eastward,
betwixt the bowing of Thamisis, were seated the Ancalites, who sent their
submission unto Julius Caesar, when report was made that the Trinobants had put
themselves under his protection; whereof followed the Britains servitude under
the proud yoke of the all-coveting Romans: yea, afterward this Counties
people, being very puissant (as ^acitus terms them) and unshaken by wars,
withsto^d Ostorius Sc^pula the Roman Lieutenant, chosing rather to yield their
lives in battle, than their persons to subjection. Of later times it was
possessed by the Mercian Saxons, as part of their Kingdom, though sometimes
both the West Saxons and the Northumbrians had the dispose of some part
thereof: for Beda a^firm^th that King Oswold gave the then flourishing City
Dorchester unto Berinus the West Saxons Apostle, to be his Episcopal See:
whence the good Bishop coming to Oxford, and preached before VVulpherus the
Mercian King (in whose Court Athelwold the South Saxons heathenish King was
then then present) he with all his Nobles were converted to the Faith of
Christ, and there baptived, whereby Berinus became the Apostle also of the
South Saxons.

(5) Other places of memorable note, either for actions therein happening, or
for their own famous esteem, are the Roll-rich stones, standing near unto
Enisham in the South of this Shire, a monument of huge stones, set round in
compass, in manner of the Stonehenge: of which fabulous tradition has reported
forsooth, that they were metamorphosed from men, but in truth were there
erected upon some great victory obtained, either by or against Rollo the Dane,
who in the year 876, entered England, and in this Shire fought two battles, one
near unto Ho^k-Norton, and a second at the ScienStane.

(6) Rod^ot likewise remains as a monument of Oxfords high^ styled Earl, but
unfortunate Prince, Robert de Vere, who besides the ^arldom, was created by
King Richard the second, M^^quess of Dublin, and Duke of Ireland: but at that
Bridge, discomfited in fight by the Nobles, and forced to swim the River, where
began the downfall of his high mounted fortunes; for being driven forth of his
Country, lastly died in exile and distressed estate. But more happy is this
County in producing far more glorious Princes, as King Edward the Confessor,
who in Islip was born; Edward the victorious black Prince, in Woodstock and in
Oxford, that warlike Coeur de Lion, King Richard the first, the son of King
Henry the second, first took breath.

(7) Which City is, and long has been the glorious seat of the Muses, the
British Athens, and learnings well spring, from whose living Fountain the
wholesome waters of all good literature streaming plenteously, have made
fruitful all other parts of this Realm, and gained glory amongst all Nations
abroad. Antiquity avoucheth, that this place was consecrated unto the sacred
Sciences in the time of the Old Britains, and that from Greek-lod, a Town in
Wilt shire, the Academy was translated unto Oxford, as unto a Plant-plot, both
more pleasing and f^uitful: whereto accords the ancient Burlaeus and Necham,
this latter also alleging Merlin. But when the beauty of the Land lay under
the Saxons profane feet, it sustained a part of these common calamities,
having little reserved to uphold its former glory, save only the famous
monument of S. Frideswids Virgin Conquest; no other School then left standing
besides her Monastery: yet those great blasts, together with other Danish
storms, being well blown over, King Elfred that learned and religious Monarch,
recalled the exiled Muses to their sacred place, and built there three goodly
Colleges for the studies of Divinity, Philosophy, and other Arts of humanity,
sending thither his own son Ethelward, and drew thither the young Nobles from
all parts of his Kingdom. The first Reader thereof was his supposed brother
Neote, a man of great learning, by whose direction King Elfred was altogether
guided in this his goodly foundation. At which time also, Assereus Menevensis,
a writer of those times affairs, read the Grammar and Rhetoric, and affirms,
that long before them, Gildas Melkin, Ninius, Kentigern, S. German, and others,
spent there their lives in learned studies* From which time that it continued a
Seedplo^ of learning till the Norman Conquest, Ingulphus ^ecordeth, who himself
then lived. No marvel then if Matthew Paris calls Oxford, the second School
of Christendom, and the very chief Pillar of the Catholic Church. And in the
Council holden at Vienna, it was ord^ined, that in Paris, Oxford, ^ononi^, and
Salamanca, the only Universities then in Europe) should be erected Schools for
the Hebrew, Greek, Arabic, and Caldean tongues, and that Oxford should be the
general universi^y for all England, Ireland, Scotland, and Wales, which point
was likewise of such weight with the Council of Constance, that from this
p^^cedent of Oxford University, it was concluded, that the English Nation was
not only to have p^ecedence o^ Spain in all General Councils, but was also to
be held equal with France it self. By which high pe^ogatives this of ours has
always so flourished, that in the days of King Henry the third, thirty t^ousand
Students were therein resident, as Archbishop Armachanus (who then lived) has
writ, and Ri^ha^ger (then also living) shows, that for all the civil wars
which hindered such plac^s of quiet study, yet 15000 Students were there
remaining, whose names (says he) were entered in Matricula in the
matriculation book. About which time, John Baliol (the father of ^aliol, King
of Scots) built a College, yet bearing his name, Anno 1269, and Walter Merton
Bishop of Rochester, that which is now called Merton College; both of them
beautified with bui^dings, and enriched with land^, and were the first endowed
Colleges for learning in all Christendom. And at this present there are
sixteen Colleges (besides another newly builded) with eight Halls, and many
most fair Collegiate Churches, all a^orned with most stately buildings, and
enriched with great endowments, noble Libraries, and most learned Graduates of
all professions, that unless it be her sister Cambridge, the other ^ursing
breast of this land, the like is not found again in the World. This City is
also honored with an Episcopal See. As for the site thereof, it is removed
from the Equat^r in the degree 52, and one minute, and from the West by
Mercators measure, 19 degrees, and 20 minutes.

(^) As this County is happy in the possession of so famous an Academy, so it
is graced with most Princely Palaces apper^aining to the English Crown, whereof
Woods^ock is the most ancient and magnificent, built to that glory by King
Henry the first, and enlarged with a Labyrinth of many windings by King Henry
the second, to hide from his jealous Juno, his entirely beloved Concubine
Rosamond Clifford, a Damosel of surpassing beauty; where notwithstanding,
followed by a clew of silk that fell from her lap, she was surprised and
po^soned by Queen Eleanor his wife, and was first buried at Gods^ow Nunnery, in
the midst of the qui^e, under a Hearse of silk, set about with lights, whom
Hugh Bishop of Lincoln (thinking it an unf^t object for Virgins devotion)
caused to be removed into the Church ^ard: but those chaste sisters liked so
well the memory of that kind Lady, as that her bones they translated again into
their Chapel.

Bensington is another of his Majesty's Manors, built by William de la Pole,
Duke of Suffolk, but now in neglect through the annoyance arising from the
waters or marshes adjoining. Houses built for devotion, and for abuse
suppressed and again put down, the chief in account were Enisham^, Osney,
Bruern, Gods^ow, Burchester, and Tame, besides S. Frideswides, and very many
other stately Houses of Religion in this City.

The Division of this Shire is into fourteen Hundreds, wherein are seated ten
Market Towns, and two ^undred and fourscore Parish C^u^ches.

Gloucester Shire
map of Gloucestershire
GLOUCESTERSHIRE.
CHAPTER XXIII.
GLOUCESTERSHIRE, lies bordered upon the North with Worcester, and
Warwickshires, upon the East with Oxford and Wilt-shires, upon the South
altogether with Somersetshire, and upon the West with the River Wye and
Hertford shire.

(2) The length thereof extended from Bristow upon the River Avon in her South,
unto Clifford upon another Avon in her North, are about forty eight miles; and
her broadest part from East to West, is from Lechland unto Preston, containing
twenty eight: the whole circumference about one hundred thirty eight miles.

(3) The Form whereof is somewhat long and narrow: the Air thereof is pleasant,
sweet, and delectable; and for fruitfulness of Soil hear Malmesbury, and not
me; The ground of this Shire throughout ( says he) yields plenty of Corn,
and brings forth abundance of Fruits; the one through the natural goodness
only of the ground, the other through the diligent manuring and tillage, in
such wise, that it would provoke the laziest person to take pains. Here you may
see the Highways, and Common Lanes clad with Apple Trees and Pear Trees, not
ingraffed by the industry of men's hand, but growing naturally of their own
accord: the ground of it self is so inclined to bear fruits, and those both in
taste and beauty far exceeding others, and will endure until a new supply come.
There is not any County in England so thick set with Vineyards as this Province
is, so plentiful of increase, and so pleasant in taste. The very Wines made
thereof carry no unpleasant tartness, as being little inferior in sweet
Verdure to the French Wines; the houses are innumerable, the Churches passing
fair, and the Towns standing very thick. But that which adds unto all good
gifts (a special glory) is the River Severn than which there is not any in all
the Land, for Channel broader, for Stream swi^ter, o^ for Fish better stored.
There is in it a daily rage and fury of waters, which I know not whether I may
call a Gulf or Whirl-pool of waters, raising up the sands from the bottom,
winding and d^iving them upon heaps: sometimes overflowing her banks, roveth a
great way upon the face of her bordering grounds, and again retireth as a
Conqueror into the usual Channel. Unhappy is the Vessel which it takes full
upon the side: but the Watermen will beware thereof when they see that Hydra
coming, turn the Vessel upon it, and cut through the midst of it, whereby they
check and avoid her violence and danger.

(4) The ancient people that possessed this Province, were the DOBUNI, who
spread themselves ^urther into Oxford-s^ire. But betwixt the Severn and VVy^
were seated part of SILURES, or Inhabitants of South Wales. And upon what
ground I know not, let Lawyers dispute it, the Inhabitants in some part of this
Shire enjoy a private custom to this day, that the Goods and Lands of Condemned
Persons fall unto the Crown but only for a year and a day, and then return to
the next heirs, contrary to the custom of all England besides.

(5) The general Commodities of this Shire, are Corn, Iron, and VVols, all
passing fine, besides Pasturage, Fruits, and VVoods, which last are much
lessened by making of Iron, the only bane of Oak, Elm, and Beech.

(6) These, with all other provisions, are traded through twenty five
Market Towns in this County, whereof two are Cities of no small import: the
first is Gloucester, from whom the Shire takes name, seated upon Severn, near
the midst of this Shire, by Antonin^ the Emperor called Glouum, built first
by the Romans, and set as it were upon the neck of the Silures, to yoke them,
where their legion called Colonia Gleuum, lay. It has been walled about
(excepting that part that is defended by the River) the ruins thereof in many
places appear; and some part yet standing, does well witness their strength.
This City was first won from the Britains by Cheulin the first King of the
West Saxons, about the year of Christ, 570, and afterward under the Mercians
it flourished with great honor, where Offrick King of Northum^erland, by the
sufferance of Ethelred of Mercia, founded a most stately Monastery of Nuns,
whereof Kineburgh, Edbergh, and Eve, Queens of the Mercians, were Prioresses
successively each after other.

(7) Edelfled a most renowned Lady, ^ister to King Edward the elder, in this
City built a fair Church, wherein her self was interred, which being overthrown
by the Danes, was afterward rebuilt, and made the Cathedral of that See,
dedicated unto the honor of S. Peter. In this Church the unfortunate Prince,
King Edward the second, under a Monument of Alablaster does lie; who being
murdered at Barkley Castle, by the cruelty of French Isabel his wife, was there
entombed. And not far from him another Prince as unfortunate, namely, Robert
Curthose, the eldest son of William the Conqueror, lies in a painted wooden
Tomb in the midst of the Quire; whose eyes were plucked out in Cardiffe Castle,
wherein he was kept prisoner twenty six years, with all contumelious
indignities, until through extreme anguish he ended his life. And before any of
these, in this City say our British Historians, the body of Lucius our first
Christian King was interred: and before his days the Britains Arviragus.

The graduation of this County I observe from this City, whence the Pole is
elevated in the degree of Latitude 52, and 14 minutes, and in Longitude from
the West, 18, and 5 minutes.

(8) The other City is Bristow, fair, but not very ancient, built upon the
Rivers Avon and From, for trade of Merchandise a second London, and for beauty
and account next unto York. This City stands partly in this County, and
partly in Sommerset-shire: but being a County of it self, will acknowledge
subjection to neither.

(9) A City more ancient has been Circestar, by P^olomy called Corinium; by
Antonine, Durocornovium; by Giraldus, Passerum Vrbem, The Sparrows City, upon a
flying report, that Gurmund a Tyrant from Africa* besieging this City, tied
fire unto the wings of Sparrows, who lighting in the Town upon light matter,
set flame upon all. The circuit of whose walls extended two miles about,
wherein the Consular Port or ways of the Romans met and crossed each other.
This City was won from the Britains by Cheulin first King of the West Saxons:
afterward it was possessed by the Mercians; and lastly, by the Danes under
Gurm^nd (the former no doubt mistaken for him) wherein a rabble of them kept the
space of a year, Anno 879, and never since inhabited, according to the circuit
of her walls.

(10) Places of memorable note are these: The Island Alney near unto Gloucester,
wherein Edmund Iron-side the English, and Canutus the Dane, after many battles
and blood, fought in single Combat hand to hand alone, until they compounded
for the Kingdoms partition: Barkley Castle, where King Edward the second was
through his fundament run into his bowels with a red burning Spit: Tewkesbury
the fatal period of King Henry the sixth his government, and the wound of the
Lanc^strian Cause; for in a battle there fought in Anno 1471, Prince Edward,
the only son of King Henry, had his brains dashed out in a most shameful
manner, the Queen and his Mother taken prisoners, and most of their favorites
slain and beheaded. And at Alderley, a little Town standing eight miles from
the Severne, upon the Hills to this day are found Cockles, Periwincles, and
Oysters of solid stone, which whether they have been Shel-fish and living
creatures, or else the sports of Nature in her works, let the Natural
Philosophers dispute of and judge.

(11) The places of piety, set apart from other worldly Services, and dedicated
to religious uses by the devotions of Princes, erected in this Shire, were
Tewkesbury, Deor^ust, Gloucester, Minching, Burkley, Kinswood, Circester,
Winchcombe, and Hales; which last was built with great cost by Richa^d Earl of
Cornwall, King of the Romans, wherein himself and his Duchess was interred.
Their Son Earl Edmund brought out of Germany the blood of Hales, supposed and
said to be part of that which Christ shed upon his Cross. In this place with
great confluence and devotions of Pilgrimage it was sought and worshipped, till
time proved it a mere counterfeit, when the glorious light of the Gospel
revealed to eyesight such gross Idolatries, and the skirts of Superstition
were were turned up, to the show of her own^shame.

(12) Dukes and Earls that have born the title of Gloucester, the first of every
Family are by their Arms and Names expressed, ever fatal to their Dukes, though
the greatest in blood and birth. The first was Thomas Woodstock, son to King
Edward the third, who in Callis was ^mothered in a Featherbed to death. The
second was Humfrey brother to King Henry the fifth, by the fraudulent practice
of the malignant Cardinal and Queen, made away at S. Edmundsbury. And the last
was Richard brother to King Edward the fourth, who by the just hand of God was
cut off in battle by King Henry the Second.

(13) This Shires division is principally into four parts, subdivided into
thirty Hundreds, and them again into two hundred and eight Parish-Churc^es.

Hereford SHIRE
map of Herefordshire
HEREFORD-SHIRE.
CHAPTER XXIV.
HEREFORD-SHIRE, (formerly accounted within the limits of Wales) lies
circulated upon the North with Worcester and Shrop-shires; upon the East with
Malvern Hills is parted from Gloucestershire; upon the South is kept in with
Monmouth-shire; and upon the West in part with the Haiterall Hills is divided
from Brecknock; and the rest confined with Radnor-shire.

(2) This Counties climate is most healthful and temperate, and Soil so fertile
for Corn and Cattle, that no place in England yields more or better
conditioned: sweet Rivers running as veins in the body, do make the
Corn-bearing grounds in some of her parts rightly to be termed the Golden Vale:
and for Waters, Wool, and Wheat, does contend with Nilus, Colchos, and Egypt;
such are Le^ster, Irchenfield, the banks of Wye, Luge, and From.

(3) The ancient people known to the Romans, (whose power they well felt before
they could subdue them) were the Silures, placed by Ptolomy in this Tract, and
branched further into Radnor, Breck^ock, Monmouth, and Glamorgan shires, at
this day by us called South^wales, and by the Welsh Deheubarth. Their Original,
as Tacitus conjectureth by their site, colored countenances, and curled hair,
was out of Spain, and both as he and Pliny describes them, were fierce,
valiant, and impatient of servitude, which well they showed under Caratacus
their Captain, and nine years scourge to the Roman assaulters, for whose only
conquest (and that made by treachery) the Victor in Rome triumphed with more
than a usual Aspect, and with so equal an hand bare the Scoale of Resistance,
that their own Writers evermore term it a dange^ous War. For the Legion of
Marius Valence they put to ^light, and that with such havoc of the Associates,
that Asterius the Lieutenant of Britain for very grief gave up the ghost: and
Veranius under Nero assaulted them in vain. But when V^spasian was Emperor,
and expert Soldiers employed in every Province. Julius Frontinus subdued these
Silures unto the Romans, where continually some of their Legions afterward
kept, till all was abandoned in Valentinians ^ime.

(4) The Saxons then made themselves Lords of this Land, and this Province a
part of their Mercians Kingdom; yea, and Sutton the Court of great Offa their
King.

(5) But Hereford after, raised of the ruins of the old Ariconium (now
Kenc^ester shaken in pieces by a violent earthquake) grew to great fame, through
a conceived sanctity by the burial of Et^elbert King of the East Angles, slain
at Sutton by Offa, at what time he came thither to have espoused his Daughter;
whose grave was first made at Merden, but afterward c^nonized and removed to
this City, when in honor of him was built the Cathedral Church by Milfrid, a
petty King of that County, which Gruffith Prince of South Wales and Algar an
English^^an, rebelling against Edward Confessor, consumed with fire; but by
Bishop Remel^n was restored as now it is, at what time the Town was walled, and
i^ so remaining in good repair, having six gates for entrance, and fifteen
Watch-Towers for defense, extending in compass to fifteen hundred paces: and
whence the North Pole is observed to be raised 52 degrees, 27 minutes in
Latitude, and is set from the first point of the West in Longitude, 17 degrees,
and 30 minutes; being yearly governed by a Mayor, chosen out of one and thirty
Citizens, which are commonly called the Election, and he ever after is known
for an Alderman, and clothed in Scarlet, whereof four of the eldest are
Justices of Peace, graced with a Sword Bearer, a Recorder, a Town Clerk and
four Sergeants with Mace.

The greatest glory that this City received, was in King Athelstans days; where
(as Malmesbury does report) he caused the Lords of ^ales by way of Tribute, to
pay yearly (besides Hawks and Hounds) twenty pound of Gold, and three hundred
pound of Silver by weight; but how that was performed and continued I find not.

(6) Things of rare note in this Shire are said to be, Bone-well, a Spring not
fa^ from Richards Castle, wherein are continually found little Fishes bones,
but not a ^in seen; and being wholly cleansed thereof, will notwithstanding
have again the like, whether naturally produced, or in veins thither brought,
no man knows.

(7) But more admirable was the work of the Omnipotent, even in our own
remembrances, and year of Christ jesus 1571, when the Marcley Hill in the East
of this Shire, rouzed it self out of a dead sleep, with a roaring noise removed
from the place where it stood, and for three days together traveled from her
first ^ite, to the great amazement and fear of the beholders. It began to
journey upon the seventh day of February, being sunday, at six of the Clock at
night, and by seven in the next morning had gone forty paces, carrying with it
Sheep in their coats, hedge-rows, and trees; whereof some were overturned, and
some that stood upon the plain, are firmly growing upon the hill; those that
were East were turned West; and those in the West were set in the East: in
which remove, it overthrew ^^^^aston-Chappel, and turned two highways near an
hundred yards from their usual paths formerly trod. The ground thus traveling,
was about twenty six Acres, which opening it self with Rocks and all, bare the
earth before it for four hundred yards space without any stay, leaving that
which was Pasturage in place of the Tillage and the Tillage overspread with
Pa^turage. Lastly, overwhelming her lower parts, mounted to an hill of twelve
fathoms high, and there rested her self after three days travel, remaining his
mark, that so laid hand upon this Rock, whose power ^ath poysed the Hills in
his Balance.

(8) Religious Houses built by the devotions of Princes, and s^ored with
Votaries and revenues for life, were in this Shire no less than fourteen, most
stately seated in the places as follows: at both the Herefords, Barro^,
Ewayot, C^^fford, M^nemue, Acornbury, Lemster, Linbroke, Peterchurch, Kilpeck
D^r^, and VViggermore: and suspected of hypocrisy, were called in question by
King Henry the Eighth, and so strictly pursued, that some faul^s were apparent,
whereby they were laid open to the general Deluge of the Time, whose streams
bare down the walls of all those Foundations, carrying away the Shrines of the
dead, and defacing the Libraries of their ancient Records.

(9) This County before the Conquest being accounted in Wales, was then
strengthened with Forts against the English: and being once made a Pro^ince to
England, was fortified with Castles against the Welsh, wherein we find no less
than twenty eight, though many of them now are ruinated to nothing. Such were
Alban, at both the Ewyats, Godridg, Grosmond, Herdly, Hereford, Old Castle,
Dorston, Brampton, Bredwarden, Saint Brivels, Ledbury, Lenals, Snowd^^,
Harlewois, Huntington, VVilion, VVigmore, Richards, Monemue, Cor^t, Kilbeck,
Clifford, Skensfred, VV^teney, Radenwer, and K^nevenleis; and is traded with
eight Market Towns, being divided into eleven Hundreds, and in them seated one
hundred seventy and six Parish-Churches, containing in compass an hundred and
two miles.

Worcestershir
map of Worcestershire
VVORCESTER-SHIRE.
CHAPTER XXV.
WORCESTERSHIRE, is a County both rich and populous, and lies circulated upon
the North with Stafford^shire; upon the East with Warwick and Oxford-shires,
upon the South with ^locester^shire; and the West by Malverne Hills is parted
from Hereford^shire: the rest lies confronted upon, and in part divided from
Shrop-shire by the River Dowles.

(2) The form thereof is triangle, but not of equal proportion; for from North
to South are thirty two miles, from South to North-West twenty two, and from
thence to her North-East point are twenty eight: the whole in circumference is
one hundred and twenty miles.

(3) The Air of this Shire is of a favorable temperature, that gives an
appetite for labor, diet, and rest: The Soil is fertile, and to me seemed
inferior to none other in this Land: for besides the abundance of Corn in
every place spread, the Woods and Pasturage in her hills and Plains, sweet
Rivers that water the Valleys below, the Cattle that cover the tops of higher
ground; the Fields, Hedge-rows, and Highways are beset with fruitful
Pea^-trees that yield great pleasure to sight, and commodious use: for with
their juice they make a bastard kind of Wine, called Perry, which is both
pleasant and good in taste. Many Salt Springs also this County affords: yea,
and more than are commonly in use, such with the Germans, our ancient
Predecessors, were esteemed most sacred and holy; so that (as Tacitus writes)
to such they wontedly resorted to s^pplicate their Gods with their devout
pra^ers, as to places nearest the Heavens, and therefore the sooner to be
heard. And Poets in their feignings will have the Nymphs residence in shady
green groves, and banks of sweet Springs: if so, then (as Helicon) this County
affords both: such are the Forests of Wire and Fecke^^am, the great Woods of
Norton, and most fair Chase of Malvern. And for waters, to witness what I say,
is the Severn that cuts this Shire in the midst, Teme, Salwarp, and Avon, all
of them making fruit^ul their passage, and stored with Fish of most delicious
taste.

(4) The ancient people, poss^ssors of this Shire, were the CORNAVII*
inhabitants of Che^shire Shrop-shire, Stafford, and Warwick-shires subdued by
the Romans in Claudius Caesar's time, and after their departure, made a portion
of the Merci^n^Saxons Kingdom, and in Beda's time were called the VVicii,
whereof it may be this Shire had the name: unless you will have it from the
Salt Pits, which in old English are named Witches; or from the famous Forest
of Wyre. Howsoever, true it is that the County does hold the name from the
Chief City Worcester.

(5) Which is most pleasantly seated, passing well frequented, and very richly
inhabited. This was the Branonium, mentioned by Antonine and Ptolomy, called by
the Britains, C^er-VVrangon; by Ninius, C^er-Guorcon; and by the Latins,
Vigornia, This City is seated upon the East bank of Sever^e, and from the same
is walled in, triangle-wise about, extending in circuit one thousand six
hundred and fifty paces: through which seven Gates enter, with five other
Watch-Towers for defense. It is thought the Ro^ans built this to restrain the
Britains that held all beyond S^verne. This City by Hardy Canute in the year of
Christ 1041, was so^ely endangered, and set on ^^re, and the Citizens slain
almost every one, for that they had killed his Collector of the Danish Tribute:
yet it way presently repaired and peopled, with many Burgesses, and for fifteen
Hides discharged it self to the Conqueror; as in his Doomesdays is to be seen.
But in the year 1113, a sudden fire happened, no man knew how, which burnt the
Castle and Cathedral Church. Likewise in the civil ^royles of King S^ephen it
was twice lighted into a flame, and the latter laid it hopeless of recovery.
Notwithstanding from those dead Ashes a new Phoenix arose, and her building
raised in a more stately proportion, especially the Cathedral dedicated to S.
Mary, first laid by Bishop Sexwolfe, in Anno 680: ^ince when it has been
augmented almost to the River: In the midst of whose Qui^e, from his many
turmoiles, rests the body of King Io^n (the great withstande^ of the Popes
proceedings) under a monument of white Marble, in Princely Vestures, with his
portraiture thereon according to life. And in the South-^ide of the same Quire
lies entombed Prince A^thur the eldest Son to King Henry the seventh; his
Monument is all black Iett, without remembrance of him by Picture.

This City is governed by two Bailiffs, two Aldermen, two Chamberlains, and two
Constables, yearly elected out o^ twenty four Burgesses clothed in Scarlet,
assisted with forty eight other Citizen^*; whom they call their Common
Councell^rs, clad in Purple, a Recorder, Town Clerk, and five Sergeants with
Mace their Attendants. Whose Geographical Position is distant in Longitude from
the West Meridian 18 degrees, 10 scruples, ^aving the North Pole elevated in
Latitude 52 degrees, and 32 scruples.

(6) Places of further note for memorable antiquity, is Vpton, of great account
in the Roman time, where some of their Legions kept, as witness their Moneys,
there often found; the admirable Ditch upon Malvern H^lls, drawn by Gilbert
Clare, Earl of Gloucester, to divide his Lands from the Church of Worcester: the
Saxons or Augustines Oak, where he the English Apostle met with the British
Bishops for the uniform celebration of Easter, from whence both parts departed
with discontented minds, after many hot words and thwa^ting disputes.

(7) Neither is it without adm^ration to me, that many places of this Shire lie
far within the Precincts of other Provinces, as Aulston, Washbor^es, Cuttesden,
Paxford, Hanging-Easton, Northwick^, Blockley, Eurlode in Gloucestershire, and
Goldcote, Alderme^ston, New^old, Steddenton, Armiscote, Blackwell,
Darlings-cote, Shipton, Tydmin^on, Olbarrow in Warwick shi^e, Dudley in
Staffordshire, and Rochford in Her^ford-shire, whither I must refer the Reader
to find out these and the like in these Western Tracts.

(8) Religious places erected in this Shire, and devoted unto God by devout
persons, were Breden, Brodlege, Evesholme, Al^ecester, Cochel, Eladbury,
Malverin, Pershore, Stodl^ge, Westwoods, and Worcester, plenteously provided
for, and further secured by many privileges, both which they abused, as were
the Inditements of all such in the days of King Henry the eight, at whose Bar
himself being Judge) they were found guilty, and received sentence of their
ends and dest^uction.

(9) Castles for defense built in this County, ^uinate or in strength, were
Hartleb^ry, Holt, Ha^dley, Norton, Elmely, and Worcester, besides his Majesty's
Manor of Tichnel.

(10) This Shires divi^ion is into seven Hundreds, wherein are seated ten
Market Towns, and one hundred fifty two Parish-Churches.

WARWICK SHIRE

VVARVVICK-SHIRE.
CHAPTER XXVI.
WARWICKSHIRE, (so called from her Shire-Town) is bounded upon the North with
the County of Stafford; upon the East, with Watling-street-way is parted from
Leichestershire, and the rest bordered upon by Nort^ampton-^hire: the South
part is butted by Oxford and Glocester-shires; and all her West with the County
of Worces^er.

(2) The Form thereof is not much unlike to a Scallop-shell, growing from her
Western-head, and spr^ading her body wider, with many indents. The length
thereof from Newton in the North, to Long-Compton in the South, are miles
thirty and three: and the broadest part of this Shire is from H^wellgrange in
the West, unto Hill-morton in the East, distant assunder twenty five miles; the
whole in circumference, abo^t one hundred thi^ty and five miles.

(3) This Shire is seated near unto the heart of all England, and therefore
participates with her in the best both for Air and soil, wanting nothing for
profit or pleasure for man. The South part from Avon (that runs through the
midst of this County) is called the Feldon, as more champion and tractable to
be stirred for Corn, which yearly yields such plenty of harvest, that the
Husb^ndman smileth in beholding his pains, and the meadowing pastures with
their green mantles so imbroydred with ^lowers, that from Edg-hill, we may
behold another Eden, as Lot did the Plain of Io^dan, before that Sodom fell.
The Woodland lies upon the North of Avon, so called in regard of the plenty of
Woods; which now are much thinner by the making of Iron, and the soil more
churlish to yield to the Plough.

(4) The ancient people that po^sessed this Province, are by Ptolomies
description called the Cornavii, wherein after were seated the Mercian Saxons,
a part of whose Kingdom it was, and great^y sought after by the West Saxons,
whose King Cut^red, about the year of Christ Jesus 749, in Battle ^ew Ethelbald
at Sekington near unto Tamworth. And not far from thence, King Edward the 4, a^
unfortunatel^ fought against that ^tout make-King Richard Nevil Earl of
Warwi^k; near unto which, upon Blacklow hill, Pierce Gaveston (that proud and
new-raised Earl of Cornwall) was beheaded by Guy Earl of Warwick: assisted
with the Earls of Lancaster and Hereford. And surely, by the testimony of John
Rosse, and others, this County has been better replenished with people; who
makes compl^int of whole Town-ships depopulations, altogether laid waste by a
puissant Army of feeding sheep.

(5) Notwithstanding, many fair Towns it has, and some of them matchable to
the most of England. The chief thereof is Coventree, a City both stately for
building, and walled for defense: whose Citizens having highly offended their
first Lord Leofrik^, had their privileges infringed, and themselves oppressed
with many heavy Tributes; whose wife Lady Godiva pitying their estates,
uncessantly s^ed for their peace, and that with such importunacy, as hardly
could be said whether was greater, his hatred, or her love: at last overcome
with her continual intercessions he granted her suit upon an uneivil, (and as
he thought) an unacceptable condition, which was, that she should ride naked
through the face of the City, and that openly at high noon day. This
notwithstanding she thankfully accepted, and performed the Act accordingly
enjoined: for this Lady Godiva stripping her self of all rich attire, let loose
the tresses of her fair hair, which on every side so covered ^er nakedness,
that no part of her body was uncivil to sight: whereby she redeemed her former
freedoms, and remissions of such heavy Tributes. Whose memory I wish may remain
honorable in that City for ^ver, and her pity followed by such pos^essing
Ladies.

This City had grant to choose their yearly Magistrates, a Mayor and two
Bailiffs, and to build about and ^mbattle a wall, by King Edward the 3, whom
Henry the 6 corporated a County of it self, and changed the names of their
Bailiffs into Sheriffs: and the walls then were built as they now stand; through
which open 13 gates for entrance, besides 18 other Towers thereon for defense.
At Goffordgate in the East hangs the shield-bon^ of a wild-Boare, far bigger
than the greatest Oxe-bone: with whose s^out the great Pit called Swanswell was
turned up, and was ^^ain by the famous Guy, if we will believe report.

(6) Next unto this City, in account and commerce, is Warwick, upon the North
west bank of Avon, built by Gurgunstus, the son of Beline, as John Rosse, Monk
of the place, says 375 years before the birth of Christ: by Ninus called
Caer-Guarvic and Caer Leon; and by learned Cambden judged to be PRAESIDIUM, the
Roman Garrisons Town. The situation of this place is most pleasant, upon a hill
ri^ing from the River, over which is a strong and fair Stone Bridge, and her
sharp stream upon the Town-side checked with a most sumptuous and stately
Castle, the decays whereof with great cost and curious buildings, the right
worthy Knight Sir Foulke Grevil (in whose person shines all true virtue and
high Nobility) has repaired: whose merits to me-ward I do acknowledge, in
setting this hand free from the daily employments of a manual trade, and giving
it full liberty thus to express the inclination of my mind, himself being the
Procurer of my pr^sent estate.

It seems this Town has been walled about as appears by the Trench in some
places seen, and two very fair Gates, whose passages are hewed out of the Rock,
as all other into the Town are: over whom two beautiful Chapels are built;
that toward the East called S. Peter's, and that on the South-west, S. James.

Two fair Churches ar^ therein seated, called S. Marries and S. Nicholas: but
these in, and about the Town suppressed, S. Lawrence, S. Michaels, John
Baptist, and John of Jerusalem, beside the N^nnery in the North of the Town;
whose North Pol^ is elevated in Latitude, 52 degrees, 45 minutes, and is seated
from the first point in the West of Longitude, 18 degrees, and 45 minutes,
being yearly governed by a Bailiff, twelve Brethren, twenty four Burgesses for
Common-Counsell, a Recorder, a Towncl^rk, and one Serg^ant their Attendant.

(7) Places of most memorable note observed in this Shire, are Shugbury, where
the precious stone Astroites is found: Off-Church, which was the Palace of
great Offa the Mercia^, and the burialplace of S. Frem^nd his son: Che^terton,
where the famous Fosse-way is seen. At Leamington, so far from the Sea, a
Spring of Salt Water boyleth up: and at Newenham Regis most sovereign wate^
against the Stone, Green wounds, Ulcers, and Imposthu^es, and d^unk with Salt
loses, and with Sugar binds the body; and turns wood into stone, as my
self saw by many sticks that therein were fallen, some part of them Ash, and some
part of them Stone: and Guy Cliffe, where the famous Earl Guy, after many
painful exploits a^chieved, retired, and unknown, led an Herm^ts life, and was
lastly there buried.

(8) The chiefest Commodities in this County growing, ar^ Corn, whereof the Red
Horse Vale yields most abundantly; Wools in great plenty; Woods and Iron,
though the producer of the one, will be the destruction of the other. Such
honorable Families as have been dignified with the Earldom of this Sbire To^ns
(...) the Normans Conquest, in the great Map it self are inserted, and by their
several names expressed.

This County is strengthened with eight strong Castles, traded with fifteen
Market Towns, enriched with many fair buildings, and by the devotion of many
Nobles, had many foundations of religious Monasteries therein laid. The
chiefest were at Stoneley, Warwick Thellisford, Roxhall, Balshall,
Killingworth, worth, Coventree, Comb, Nun-^aton, Ashley, ^therston, and
Pollesworth: all which came to their period in the Reign of King Henry the
eight, when the rich Revenues were alienated to his use, and those stately
buildings either overturned, or bestowed upon his Courtiers: but yet to Gods
glory, and his divine service, one hundred fifty eight Parish-Churches therein
remain, dispersedly seated in the nine Hundreds of this Shires Division.

NORTHAMPTON SHIRE
map of Northamptonshire
NORTHAMPTONSHIRE.
CHAPTER XXVII.
NORTHAMPTONSHIRE, situated near unto the midst of England, lies separated
upon the North from Lincolnshire by the River Weland; from Huntington-shire on
the East is parted by the water Nene: her South is bounded with Buckingham and
Oxford-shires, and the West from Warwick with VVatling-street-way, Avon, and
VVeland is divided from Leicester.

(2) The Form of this County ^s large and narrow, broadest in the South-west;
and thence shoo^ing still lesser like unto a Horn, nor not much unlike to the
Form of Cornwall: and from the entrance of C^erwel into this Shire, unto the
fall of VVeland and Nene near unto Crowland, are by measure forty six miles;
and the broade^t part is from Ouse unto Avon, which is not fully twenty miles:
the whole in circumference one hundred and nineteen miles.

(3) The Air is good, temperate, and healthful: the soil is champion, rich, and
fruitful, and so plenteously peopled, that from some Ascents, thirty
Parish-Churches, and many more Wind-mills at one view may be seen:
notwithstanding the simple and gentle Sheep, of all creatures the most
harmless, are now become so ravenous, that they begin to devour men, waste
fields, and depopulate ho^ses, if not whole Town-Ships, as one merrily has
written.

(4) The ancient people known to the Romans, and recorded by Ptolomy, were the
Coritany, who possessed this County, and were branched further through
Leicester, Lincoln, Nottingham, Rutland, and Darby-shires: these joining with
the Icenians, with them were fettered with the chains of subjection, when for
Claudius, Publius Ostorius Scapula entered his Lieutenantship in Britain, and in
battle subdued all betwixt the Rivers Nene and Sabrina. But when the Romans
were content to let go that which so long was desired, and had cost so much in
the getting, the Saxons, a most warlike Nation, put into these parts, and made
it a portion of their Mercian Kingdom: but their government also grown out of
date, the Normans seated themselves in these fair possessions, the branches of
whose Stems, are spread abroad in these parts, most fruitful and fair.

(5) Commodities arising in this Shire, are chi^fly gotten by tillage and
plough, whereby Corn so plentifully abounds, that in no other Coun^y is found
more, or so much: the pas^ures and woods are filled with Cattle, and every
where sheep laden with their sleeces of wool.

(6) The chief Town in this Shire is No^thampton whereof the County takes
name, which for circuit, beauty, and building, may be ranked with the most of
the Cities of our Land. It is seated at the meeting and confluence of two
Rivers, the greater whereof bears the name Nen. This Town has been built all
of stone, as by many foundations remaining to this day is seen, and is walled
about both strong and high, excepting the West, which is defended by a River
parted into many streams. In the depredations of the Danes, Swen their King set
this Town on fire, and afterward it was sorely assaulted by the disobedient
B^rons of King John, who named themselves, The Army of God: But the loyalty of
this Town stood nothing so sure unto King Henry his son, whence the Barons with
displayed Banners sounded the Battle against their Sovereign. And yet after
this a woeful field of E^glands civil division was fought, whence Richard Nevil,
the stout Earl of Warwick, led away prisoner that unfortunate man King Henry
the sixth. Upon the West part of this Town stands a large Castle, mounted
upon an hill: whose aged countenance well sh^weth the beauty that she had born,
and whose gaping chinks do daily threaten the downfall of her walls. To this
upon the South the Town wall adjoyneth, and in a round circuit meets the
River in the North, extending in compass two thousand one hundred and twenty
paces: whose site so pleased the Students of Cambridge, that thither they
removed themselves upon the Kings Warrant, in mind to have made it an
University: from whence the North Pole is elevated 52 degrees 36 scruples for
Lati^ude, and in Longi^ude is removed from the West 19 degrees, and 40
scruples; being yearly governed by a Mayor, two Bailiffs, twelve Magis^rates, a
Recorder, Town Clerk, a Common Counsel of forty eight Burgesses, with five
Sergeants to execute bu^iness.

(7) But the devotions of the Saxon-Kings made Peterb^row more famous, formerly
called Medd^swell, where VVolphere King of Mercia began a most stately
Monastery to the honor of S. Peter, for satisfaction of the blood of his two
sons, whom he had ^urthered in case of Chris^ianity; but himself being for the
like made away by his Mother, his brother Penda continued the work, with the
assistance of his brother Ethelred, and two sisters, Kineburga and Kineswith.
This among the Danish Desolatio^ was cast down, yet was it again restored to
greater beauty by Ethelwold Bishop of Winchester, with the help of King Edgar,
and of Adulph his Chancellor, who upon prick of conscience, that in bed with
his wife he had over-laid and smothered an Infant their only son, lai^ all his
wealth upon the re^edifying of the place, and then became Abbot thereof
himself. The Cathedral is most beautiful and magni^ical, where, in the Quire
lie interred two unfortunate Queens: on the North side Katherine Dowager of
Spain, the repud^ate wife of King Henry the eight, under an Hearse covered with
black Say, having a white Cross in the midst: and on the South side, Mary Queen
of Scotland, whose Hearse is spread over with black Velvet. The Cloy^ter is
large, and in the Gla^^e windows is very curiously portrayed the History of
VV^lphere the Founder, whose Royal Seat was at VVedon in the street, converted
unto a Monastery by S. VVerburgh his holy daughter, and had been the Roman
Station, by Antonine the Emperor called Bannavenna. So likewise Norman-Chester
was the ancient City Durobriva, where their Soldiers kept, as by the moneys
t^ere daily found is most apparent.

(8) Houses of Religion devoted to Gods Service by the pious intents of their
well meaning Founders, were at Peterborow, Peakirk, Pipewell, Higham,
Davintree, Sulby, Saulscombe, Sewardesleg, Gare, S. Dewy, S. Michael, Luffeild,
Catesby, Bruch, Barkley, Finshead, Fotheringhay, VVeden, and VVithrop, besides
them in Northampton, all which felt the storms of their own destruction, that
raged against them in the Reign of King Henry the eight, who dispersed their
Revenues to his own Coffers and Courtiers, and pulled the stones asunder of
their seeming ever sure Foundations; and in the time of young Edward, his son,
whose mind was free from wronging the dead, the Tombs of his own Predecessors
were not spared, when as Edward slain at Agincourt, and Richard at Wakefield,
both of them Dukes of York, were after death assaulted with the weapons of
destruction, that cast down their most fair Monuments in the Collegiate Church
of Fotheringhay Castle.

(9) Eight Princely Families have enjoyed the Title of the Earldom of
Northampton, whereof the last, Henry Howard, late Lord Privy Seal, a most
honorable Patron to all learned proceedings (that I may acknowledge my dutiful
and humble Service) has most honorably assisted and set forward these my
endeavors.

(10) This Shires division, for service to the Crown, and employment of
businesses, is into twenty Hundreds, has been strengthened with ten Castles,
and is still traded with ten Market Towns, and God honored in three hundred
twenty six Parish-Churches.

HUNTINGTON SHIRE
map of Huntingtonshire
HUNTINGTON-SHIRE.
CHAPTER XXVIII.
HUNTINGTON-SHIRE, (part of the Iceni under the Roman Monarch of Mercia in the
Saxon Heptarchy) is severed with Nene; the North bounder from
Northamptonshire, to which it in part adjoyneth west; from Bedford and
Cambridge, by mearing Towns on the South; and from Ely, by a fence of water
East, the work of Nature, Benwick Stream* or of Art, Canutu^ Delph: severed
when Alfred, or before him, Off ^ shared the open circuit of their Empery into
Principalities: that by residence of subordinate rule, Peace at home might be
maintained; Foreign offense (by apt assembly of the Inhabitants) resisted; Tax
and Revenue of the Crown laid more even^ly, and en^ily levied: Justice at men's
doors with less charge and journey administered: all causes Civil having a right
and speedy dispatch, in the County or Earls monthly Court, as Criminal in his
Lieutenant the Sheriff* Turn, twice a year. In form of a Lozeng this shire
lies of positure temperate, and is 52 degrees, 4 scruples removed from the
Equator: the Hilly soil to the Plough-man grateful: the Vale, contiguous to
the fens, best for Pasture, in which to no part of England it gives place:
Woods are not much wanted, the Rivers serving Coal, as the Moors, Turff, for
Fuel.

(2) This Content was (as the whole Continent) Forest, until Ca^utus gave this
Law of grace, Vt quisque tam in agris, quam in silvis excite^ agitetque feras.
Long were the hands of Kings to pull (of old) the Subjects right into Regal
pleasure, when perambulation and Proclamation only might make any man's land
forest. It is in the first Williams time a Phrase in Record, not rare, Silva
hujus Mane^ii FORISEST miss^ in Silvam R^gis, from which word of power, Forest
may seem not unaptly to be derived. Cum videbat Henricus primus tres Bi^sas,
sitting in his Forest of Lyfield, he caused Husculphus his Ranger to keep them
for his Game, as the record does testify. Thus did the second of his name, and
the first Richard, in many parts: well therefore may the Exchequer Book call
the Forest Justice for Vert and Venison, not Iustum absolut^, but Iustum
secundum Legem Forestae. That Foresta is defined, Tuta ^erarum statio, may seem
to confine the Forresters Office only to his Games care, which of ancient was
as well over Mineral and Maritimal revenue. The Office of Baldwi^e the great
Forrester of Flanders, Non agrum tantum spectabat, sed and Maris custodiam,
says Tullius, out of the old Charters of the French Kings. And s^e how just
this squares to our Legal practice, for of Assarts, Purprestures* Emprovement,
Greenhugh, Herbage, Paunage, Fowls, Mills, Honey, Mines, Quarries, and Wreacks
at Sea, did the Itineral Justice of the Forest h^re enquire. His Subjects of
this Shire, Henry the 2, from servitude of his beasts, (whose Grandfather
pro^feris homines in^arceravit, exhaereditavit, multilavit, tru^idavit) did
pretend by Charter to enfranchise, except Wabridge, Saple, Herthy, His own
Demaines. But such was the success by encroachments, under his two ^ucceeding
Sons, that it drew on the oppressed people to importune anew the Sovereigns
redress, which was by the great Charter of the third Henry ^ruitlesly effected.
His son in the seventh of his Reign, by a perambulation, re^uming back the
fruit of his fathers goodness, and so remaining, until in his twenty ninth year
by Petition, and purchase of his people (for they gave him a full fifteen) he
confirmed the former Charter, and by Jury, View, and Perambulation, settled that
Boundary of ^orrest, which contented the People, became the square of universal
Justice in this Kind, and left in this Shire no more than the three former (his
own grounds) Forest.

(3) This Shire has four Centuriatae or Hundreds, and had of old time five;
these so called, Quia prima iustitutione ex Hiderum aliquot center ariis
compositae. These are subdivided into 79 Parishes, whereof five besides the
Shire-Town have Markets. These Parishes are measured by Hides, and Carucks, or
Plough-lands, more or less, is either richness of Soil, or strength of the Lord
strengthened or extended their limits, the Mass in whole containing of the first
sort, 818, and of the other, 1136, (These hides the ancient and general measure
of land (except in Kent) where the account was by Solms, or Lincolnshire. Vbi
non sunt Hidae, sed pro Hidis sum Carucatae) were esteemed one hundred Acres,
Non Normanico sed Anglico numero, una hida pro sexies viginti Acris, duo pro
duodecies viginti, as in the Book of Doomesday, Caruca the Teame-land (not
Carucata, for they be different) was in quantity of Acres, proportioned to the
quantity of Soil, but usually in this Shire reputed 60. The Virgata, or
Yard-land, was a more or less part of the Hide, as the Acres in number varied,
which I find in this County from 18 to 42, but for the most part 30, which was
the half Plough-land. And the Bovata or Oxgang (presumed in Law for Land in
Granary) was suited in number of Acres to that Yardland, of which it was a
Moity. Thus (except in the Fens, laid out per Leucas and quarentenas, miles and
furlongs) stands all ameasurement of Land in this Shire, which contains in
Knights, Fees, 53 one half, 2 fifts, and a twentieth part. And in full
estimation of rent and worth, rose in the time of the Conqueror, to 912 l. 4
s. and now pays in Fifteen to the King, 871 l. 9 s. 7 d. ob. and in tenth
from the Clergy, 142 l. 6 s. q.

(4) This County in discision of Titles, and administration of Justice, did at
the first, as the Germans our Ancestors, Iura per pagos and vicos reddere;
Every Township by their Friburg^, or Tenemental, as Triers, and the Baron,
Thain, or Head Lord there, or the Decanus (a good Freeholder) his Deputy, as
Judge, determining all Civil causes, a representation of this remains still
in our Court Leet. Above this, and held twelve times a year, was our Hundred or
Wapentake. Quae super december Decanos and centem Friburgos judicabat. Here the
Judges were the Aldermen, and Barons or Freeholders of that Hundred; Aegelwinus
Aldermannu^ tenuit placitum cum ^oto Hundred^, says the Book of Ely. This
Court had Cognoscence of Causes Ecclesiastical, as Temporal, therefore the
Judge or Alderman ought to be such as Dei leges and hominum jura studebat
promovere: thus it went although the Conqueror commanded, Ne aliquis de
legibus Episcopalibus amplius in Hundredo placita teneret. The next and highest
in this Shire, was Generale placitum Comitatus (the County or Sheriffs Court)
to which were proper Placita Civilia ubi Curia Dominorum probantur desecisse,
Et si placitum exurgat inter Vavasores duorum Dominorum tractetur in Comitatu.
The Judge was the Earl or Sheriff. The Tryers Barons Comitatus (Freeholders)
Qui liberas in eo terras habent, not Civil only, but Probats of Wills,
Questions of Tithes, Et deb^^a vera Christianitatis Iura, were heard, and first
heard in this Court. Therefore Episcopus, Presbyter Ecclesiae and Quatuor de
melioribus villae, were adjuncts to the Sheriff, Qui dei leges and seculi
nego^ia justa consideratione definirent. The Lay part of this lives in a sort
in the County, and Sheriff Turn; the Spiritual, about the Reign of King
Stephen, by Sovereign connivence, suffered for the most into the quarterly
Synod of the Clergy, from whence in imitation of the Hundred Court, part was
remitted to the Rural Deaneries, of which this Shire had four: And these again
have been since swallowed up by a more frequent and superior jurisdiction, as
some of our civil Courts have been. There being now left in use for the most of
this Shire for Causes Criminal, View of Frankpleg, by grant or prescription, A
Session of the Peace quarterly, and two Goal deliveries by the Sovereigns
Commission: and for Civil Causes, Cou^ts of Mannours, or of the County monthly,
and twice by the Judges of Assise yearly.

The Office of Execution and custody of this County is the Sheralfey, of old
inheritable, until Eustachius, who by force and favor of the Conqueror
disseised Aluric and his heirs, forfeited it to the Crown; but since it has
passed by annual election, and has united to it the County of Cambridge.

(5) Having thus far spoken of the Shire in general, next in observation
falls the Shire-Town Huntington, Hundandun, or the Hunters Down, North,
seated upon a rising bank, over the rich meadowing river Ouse, interpreted by
some Authors, the Down of Hunters, to which their now common Seal (a Hunter)
seems to allude. Great and populous was this in the foregoing age, the
following having here buried of fifteen all but three, besides the
Mother Church S. Mary's, in their own graves. At the reign of the Conqueror,
it was ranged into four Ferlings or Wards, and in them 256 Burgenses or
Households: It answered at all assessments for 50 Hides, the fourth part of
Hur^tington Hundred, in which it stands. The annual rent was then 30 l. of
which, as of three Minters there kept, the King had two parts, the Earl the
third; the power of coy^age then and before, not being so privatley in the
King, but Borows, Bishops, and Earls enjoyed it; on the one side stamping the
face and style of their Sovereign, in acknowledgement of subordinacy in that
part of absolute power, and on the reverse their own name, to warrant their
integrity in that infinite trust.

(6) The Castle supposed by some the work of the elder Edward, but seemingly by
the Book of Doomesday, to be built by the Conqueror, is now known but by the
ruins: It was the seat of Woltheof the great Saxon Earl, as of his succeeding
heirs, until to end the question of right between Sentlice and the King of
Scots, Henry the second laid it as you see; yet does it remain the head of that
honor, on which in other Shires many Knights Fees, and sixteen in this
attended. Here David Earl of this and Arguise, Father of Isabel de Brus,
founded the Hospital of S. John Baptist: And Love^ote here upon the Fee of
Eustace the Vicount, built to the honor of the blessed Virgin, the Priory of
Black Cannons; valued at the Suppression 232 l. 7 s. ob. Here at the North end
was a house of Friars, and without the Town at Hinchingbrook, a Cloister of
Nuns, valued at 19 l. 9 s. 2 d. founded by the first William, in place of S.
Pandonia at Eltesly (by him suppressed) where near the end of the last Henry,
the Family of the Cromwells began their Seat. To this Shire-Town, and benefit
of the neighbor Countries, this River was Navigable, until the power of Gr^y,
a minion of the time, stopped that passage, and with it all redress either by Law
or Parliament. By Charter of King John this Town has a peculiar Coroner,
profit by Toll and Custom, Recorder, Town-Clerks, and two Bailiffs (elected
annually for government) as at Parliament two burgesses, for advice and as^ent:
and is the Lord of it self in Fee-farm.

(7) The rest of the Hundred (wherein this Shire Town lies) is the East part
of the County, and of Hurst a Parish in the center of it, named HURSTINGSTON,
it was the Fee-farm of ^amsey Abbey, which on a point of Fertile Land thrust
out into the Fens, is therein si^uate, founded in the year 969, to God, our
Lady, and S. Benedict, by Earl Aylwin of the Royal blood, replenished with
Monks from Westbury, by Oswald of York, and dedicated by Dunstan of Canterbury,
Archbishops. By Abbot Reginald 1114, this Church was re-edified, by Magnavill
Earl of Essex, not long after spoiled, and by Henry the third first of all the
Norman Princes, visited; when wasted with the Sicilian wars, Regalis mensae
Hospitalitas ita abbreviata fuit, ut cum Abbatibus, Clericis and viris satis
^umilibus, Hospitia quaesivit and prandia. This Monastery (the shrine of two
martyred Kings, Ethelbright and Ethelred, and of Saint Ive the Persian Bishop)
by humble piety at first, and pious charity, ascended such a pitch of worldly
fortune, that it transformed their Founder (religious povert^) into their
ruin, the attribute of Ramsey the rich; for having made themselves Lords of
387 Hides of Land (whereof 200 in this Shire, so much as at an ea^ie and under
rent, was at the Suppression valued at 1983 l. 15 s. 3 d. q. but by account of
this time annually amounts to 7000 l.) they then begin to affect popular
command, and first enclosing that large circuit of Land and Water, for in it
lies the Mile-square Mere of Ramsey as a peculiar Seigniory to them, called
the Baleu^ or Bandy, bounded as the Shire, from Ely, and from Norman-Crosse
with the hundred Mere, by Sovereign Grant they enjoyed regal liberty. And then
aspiring a step further, to place in Parliament, made Bro^ghton the head of
their Barony, annexing to it in this Shire four Knights* Fees. Thus in great
glory it stood above 400 years, until Henry the Eight (amongst many other once
bright Lamps of Learning and Religion in this State, though then obscured with
those blemishes to wealth and ease concomitant) dissolved the house, although
John Warboys then Abbot, and his 60 black Monks there maintained, were of the
first that under their hands and conventual Seal protes^ed, Quod Romanus
Pontifex non habet majorem aliquam Iurisdictionem collatam sibi a Deo in Regno
Ang^iae quam quiuis alius externus Episcopus. A Cell to this rich Monastery was
S. Iv^s Priory, built in that place of Slep by Earl Ad^lmus, in the reign of
the last Edmund, where the incorrupted body of S. Ive there once an Hermit, in
a Vi^ion revealed, was by Ed^othus taken up in his Robes Episcopal, and
dedicated in the presence of Siward Earl of this County, and that Lady of
renowned piety Ethel^leda, to the sacred memory of this Persian Bishop. Not far
from this is Somersham, the gift of the Saxon Earl Brithnothus to the Church of
Ely, before his own fatal expedition against the Danes: It is the head of those
five Towns, of which the Soke is composed, and was an house to the Sea of Ely,
well beautified by John Stanley their Bishop; but now by exchange is annexed to
the Crown. As these, so all the rest of this hundred was the Churches land,
except Rippon Regis ancient Demaine. To which Saple (reserved Forest)
adjoined, and the greater Stivecley, given by the last David Earl of
Huntington, in Fee to his three Servants, Sentlice, Lakervile, and Camoys.

(8) NORMANSCROS the next Hundred, takes name of a Cross above Stilion, the
place where in former ages this Division mustered their people, whence
Wapentake is derived: it had in it two Religious houses, the eldest in the
confines of Newton and Chesterton, near the River of Avon, now Nene founded (by
the first Abbess Keneburga, the Daughter of Penda, and Wife of Elfred, King of
Northumber land) West side a Trench, where Ermin-street-way crossed over the
River by a Stone Bridge, whose ruins are now drowned, whence the Roman Town
there seated on both sides took the name Durobrivae, as Trajectus Fluminis. But
this Nunnery as raised, was also ruined by the Danes before the Conquest. The
other a Monastery of Cistercian black Monks, erected in ho^^u^ of the Virgin
Mary, by the second Simon Earl of Huntington, at Soltry Iudeth, the Land of a
Lady of that name, wife of Earl Waltheof, daughter of Lambert Earl of Leins,
Niece to the Conqueror by hi^ sister, (her Mother) and Grandmother to this
Founder Malcome, and William, Kings of Scots, Earls of Huntington, and Heirs of
this Lady, strengthened by several Charters this pious work. Many chief of that
Line, as the last Earl David, brother to King William, as Isabel, the wife of
Robert de Brus his daughters Heir; and most of the second branch, her progeny
making here their Burials. This house now level with the ground, maintained
besides the Abbot, six Monks, and 22 Hindes, and was at the Suppression valued
at 199 l. 11 s. 8 d. The Founders and Patrons of this Monastery were the Lords
of the next place Conni^gton, first the seat of Turkillus Earl of the East
Angles, that invited Swayne from Denmark to invade this Land; and who first
squared out the unbounded marshes of this part, to the bordering Towns; his
rule of proportion allowing to every parish tantum de Marisco, quantum de ^icc^
terra in breadth, in which none, ^ine licentia Domini might vel fodere, vel
falcare, but leaving most to inter-common by vicinage. This Dane exiled (when
the rest of his Countrymen were by Edward Confessor) his land here was given
to Earl waltheof, by whose eldest heir Matild^ married to David King of Scots,
it went along in that Male Line, until by death issuless of John Earl of
Chester and Huntington, it fell in partage, to his sister Isabel de Brus, one
of his Heirs, from whose second Son Bernard, the Family of Cotton by Lineal
succession holds this Land, whereto Glatton the adjoining Parish is now by
bounty of a second branch annexed. It was in this Shire the head of the honor
of Bolleine, on which Connington, Walimsford, Sibson, Stibington, and Vescyes
Manor in Chesterton attended: part of it is the fresh Sea Wittlemere, four
mile in breadth; over which when Emma, and her Children, the issue of Canutus,
sailed with some peril, her Husband in prevention of the like, from Bottesey in
a straight course to the opposite firm land, lined with his Attendant Swords
that passage, which since has born the name of Sword^ Delph, Kings or Canutus
dyke. This Seignory was granted by the Conqueror to Eustace Earl of Bollei^,
Brother to Lambert Earl of Leins, and Father to Godfrey King of Jerusalem;
reverting it was given to Richard Earl of Cornwall, who granted out of it the
two Meeres, Vbbe Mere and Brich Mere, in Fee-Farme to the Church of Ramsey.
Then after sundry changes it came to John of Gaunt, in exchange of the Earldom
of richmond, and so by descent fell again to the Crown. VVashingley, (not far
off) from the ancient Lord of that name, by Drw^, and Otter, came to the
Princes that now pos^esseth it. In Chesterton from VVadsheafe by Den^yes there
is to the Sevils (an ancient name in this Shire) a Manor descended. The rest
from Aegidius de Merk. (who gave there much to Royston Priory) passed by
Amundevil to Gloucester, and so to Vescey by exchange. In Elton, the house rich
in a beauteous Chapel, from Denham to Sapcotes, and Satl^re Beaumes, from that
surname (near the time of the Conquest) by ^outh to Cornwallis descended; as
Bottle-bridge by Gimels, Drayton, Lovet, unto Sherley the now Lord.

(9) LETUNESTANHUNDRED have that name from Leighton, a Town in the midst of it,
given by Earl VViltheof to the Church of Lincoln, which after shared it into
two Prebendaries. One, the Parsonage impropriate, which still remains: the
other (the Lordships) was resumed by Henry the eight, and now by the Heir of
Darcy matched to the Lord Clifton, is become the seat of the Barony. This
Hundred had in it no house of Religion, but Stolney* a Priory of seven black
Cannons of the order of S. Augustine, founded by the Bigrames, and at the
Suppression valued at 62 l. 12 s. 3 d. ob. It stood within the reach of the
great Manor Kimbolton (once an Hundred) which was the Land of Earl Harold the
Usurper: after by grant it came with the Chase of Swinesheved to Fitz-Peter,
from whom by Mag^avil to Bohum (who in time of the tumul^uous Barons built
there a Forcelet) and so to Staffard, by whose attainture forfeited, it was
given by Henry the eight to the Family of Wingfield that now possesses it. At
Bugden the Sea of Lincoln has a seat, and was Lord of Spaldwick, and the Soke
(given in compensation from the Church of Ely, when rent from them, it was by
the first Henry made a Bishopric) until of late that Church gave up their
interest in Spaldwick to the Crown. Brampton was given by King John at Mirabel,
to Earl David, and by Ada his youngest Daughter fell to Hastings Earl of
Pembroke, and now is reverted to the King. To the same Earl David by gift of
the former King came Alcumesbury, and by the bounty of John Scot his son to
Segrave, and so the Lord Barkley the late possessor. To Serlo de Quincy Earl of
Winchester, was Keston by Henry the second given, by whose Heir general
^errars, it came to the late Earl of Essex and by exchange to the Crown.

(10) TOULESLANDHUNDRED, takes name likewise of a Town therein situate in the
out Angle of this, to the memory of S. Neotus a Monk of Glastenbury, but the
supposed son to Ethelwolfe King of the West Saxons (whose body from Neostock
in Cornwall was transferred to Ar^alphesbury, then of Arnulphus a holy man, now
Enesbury named) Earl Alrick and Ethelsteda turned the Palace of Earl Elfred
into a Monastery of black Monks, which was razed by the Danes; but out of the
ashes of this, Roisia (wife to Richard the son of Earl Gilbert) to God, our
Lady de Becco, and S. Neot (as a Cell to the Abbey of Becco in Normandy)
erected up of black Monks in the year 1113, the late Priory of S. Needs,
suppressed by Henry the eight, and valued at 256 l. 15 d. q. At Southo (the
Land of Eustachius the Sheriff) Lovetote made the seat of that Seigniory: on
which in this Shire 13 Knights Fees and a half depended: but from his line by
gift of Verdon and Ves^y drowned were these in the honor of Gloucester. Near
to this at Cretingsbury dwelt Sir Adam de Cretings, famous in Edward the thirds
wars of France, whose Heir General Wauto^ does now possess it. Staunton given
by the first William to Gilbert de Gaunt, after the death issueless of De
Rupes, escheated to the King, who gave it to John his ^ister Queen of Scots.
She on the Abbey of Tarant bestowed part, the rest reverting being given to
Segrave, descended to the Barons of Berkly, Godmanchester, or Gormanchester (so
named of that Dane to whom Aelfred at his conversion granted some regiment in
these parts) was the old Land of the Crown, now the Inhabitants in Fee farm,
by grant of King John, pro Sexies viginti libris pondere and numero. It is flat
seated by as fruitful and flowery Meadows as any this Kingdom yields, and is
the most spacious of any one Parish in fertile tillage, often having waited on
their Sovereign Lords with ninescore Ploughs in a rural pomp: Some from the
name Gunicester, which this often bears in record) suppose it the City where
Machutus placed his Bishops Chair. But for certain it was the Roman Town
Durosipont, of the Bridges named, so many hundred years (until the light of our
Britain story overshone it) forgotten. Thus as this City, so the old Families
have been here with time outworn, few only (of the many former) now remaining,
whose sirnames before the reign of the last Henry were in this Shire of any
eminency. But, Non indignemur mortalia Nomina solvi,
Cernimus exemplis Oppida posse mori.
Let Us not repine that Men and Names do die,
Since stone-built Cities dead and ruined lie.


This Description I received from a right worthy and learned Friend.

RVTLANDE SHIRE

RUTLAND-SHIRE.
CHAPTER XXIX.
RUTLAND-SHIRE, the least of any County in this Realm, is circulated upon the
North with Lincolnshire; upon the East and South with the River VVeland is
parted from Northamptonshire; and the West is altogether held in with
Leichestershire.

(2) The Form thereof is round, and no larger in compass than a light horse man
can easily ride about in a day: upon which occasion some will have the Shire
named of one Rut, that so rode. But others from the redness of the Soil, will
have it called Rutland; and so the old English-Saxo^s called it, for that Roet
and Rut is in their Tongue Red with us, and may very well give the name of this
Province, seeing the earth does stain the wool of her Sheep into a reddish
color. Neither is it strange, that the stain of the Soil gives names unto
places, and that very many: for have we not in Che-shire the Red Rock, in
Lanca-shire the Red Bank, and in Wales Rutland Castl^. To speak nothing of that
famous Red Sea, which shoots into the Land betwivt Egypt and Arabia, which
gave back her waters for the Israelites to pass on foot: all of them named from
the color of the Soil.

(3) The longest part of this Shire is from Caldecot in the South upon the
River Ey, unto Thistleton a small Village seated in the North, not fully twelve
miles: and from Timwell Eastward, to Wissenden in the West, her broadest
extent is hardly nine: the whole circumference about forty miles.

(4) The Air is good both for health and delight, subject to neither extremity
of heat nor cold, nor is greatly troubled with foggy mists.

The Soil is rich, and for Corn and tillage gives place unto none. Woods there
are plenty, and many of them imparked, Hills feeding herds of Neat, and flocks
of Sheep; Valleys besprinkled with many sweet springs; Grain in abundance, and
Pastures not wanting: in a word, all things ministered to the content of life,
with a liberal heart and open hand. Only this is objected, that the Circuit is
not great.

(5) The draught whereof, that I may acknowledge my duty and his right, I
received at the hands of the right Honorable John Lord Harrington, Baron of
Exton, done by himself in his younger years.

Near unto his house Burley, stands Okam a fair Market Town, which Lordship
the said Baron enjoys, with a Royalty somewhat extraordinary, which is this:
If any Noble by birth come within the precinct of the said Lordship, he shall
forfeit as an homage a shoe from the horse whereon he rides, unless he redeem
it at a price with money. In witness whereof, there are many Horseshooes nailed
upon the Shire-Hall door, some of large size and ancient fashion, others new,
and of our present Nobility; whose names are thereupon stamped as follows.

Henry Hastings. Roger Rutland. Edward L. Russel, Earl of Bedford. Ralph L.
Euwer of Parram. Henry L. Bertley. Henry L. Mordant. William L. Compton. Edward
L. Dudley. Henry L. Winsor. George Earl of Cumberland. Philip Earl of
Montgomery. L Willoughby. P. L Whart^n. The Lord Shandois. Besides many others
without names.
That such homage was his due, the said Lord himself told me; and at that
i^st^nt a suit depended in Law against the Earl of Lincoln, who refused to
forfeit the penal^y, or to pay his fine.

(6) Her ancient Inhabitant known to the Romans, mentioned in Prolomy, were the
Coritani, and by him branched through Leicester, Lincoln, Nottingham,
Darby-shire, and this: who with the Icenians were subdued by P. Ostorius under
the yoke of Claudius the Roman Emperor: and at their departure, by conquest of
the Saxons made it a Province unto their Mercian Kingdom, whose fortunes
likewise coming to a full period, the Normans annexed it under their Crown.

(7) This County King Edward Confessor bequeathed by his Testament unto Queen
Eadgith his wife, and after her decease unto his Monastery at Westminster,
which William the Conqueror cancelled and made void, bestowing the Lands upon
others, the Tithes and the Church unto those Monks.

That the Ferrars here first seated, besides the credit of Writers, the
Horse-shooe, whose badge then it was, does witness; where in the Castle, and
now the Shire-Hall, right over the ^eat of the Judge, a Horse-shooe of Iron
curiously wrought, containing five foot and a half in length, and the breadth
thereto proportionably is fixed. The Castle has been strong, but now is
decayed, the Church fair, end the Town spacious; whose degree of Longitude is
19, 46 scruples, and the North-poles elevation in Latitude 53 degrees, and 7
minutes.

(8) Let it not seem offensive, that I (to fill up this little Shire) have
inserted the seat of a Town not sited in this County: for besides the
convenience of place, the circuit and beauty, but especially it being for a
time an University, did move much; yea, and the first in this Island, if John
Hardings Author fail him not, that will have Bladud to bring from Athens
certain Philosophers, whom here he seated, and made public profession of the
Liberal Sciences, where (as he says) a great number of Scolars Studied the
Arts, and so continuing an University unto the coming of Augustine, at which
time the Bishop of Rome interdicted it, for certain Heresies sprung up among
the Britains and Saxons. But most true it is, that the Reign of King Edward the
third, upon debate falling betwixt the Southern and Northern Students at
Oxford, many Schoolmen withdrew themselves hither, and a while professed, and
named a College, according to one in Oxford, Brazen-nose, which retains that
name unto this day. This was so great a skar unto the other, that when they
were recalled by Proclamation to Oxford, it was provided by Oath, that no
Student in Oxford should publicly profess or read in the Arts at Stanford, to
the prejudice of Oxford.

(9) As this Shire is the least in circuit, so is it with the fewest
Market Towns replenished, having only two. And from societies that feed upon
the labors of others, was this Land the freest: for besides Rishal, where
Tibba the Falconers Goddess was worshipped for a Saint, when Superstition had
well near put Gods true hononr out of place, I find very few; neither with more
Castles strengthened than that at Okam, whose ruins show that a Castle has
been there.

Divided it is into five Hundreds, and therein are planted forty eight
Parish-Churches.

LEICESTER SHIRE
map of Leicestershire
LEICHESTERSHIRE.
CHAPTER XXX.
LEICESTERSHIRE, lies bordered upon the North with Nottingham-shire; upon the
East with Lincoln and Rutland; upon the South with Northamptonshire; upon the
West with Watling-street-way, is parted from Warwickshire; the rest being
bounded with the confines of Darby, is a County Champion, abounding in Corn,
but sparing of woods, especially in the South and East parts, which are
supplied with Pit-coals plenteously gotten in the North of this Province, and
with abundance of Cattle bred in the hills beyond the River Wr^ak, which is
nothing so well inhabited as the rest.

(2) The Air is gentle, mild, and temperate, and gives appetite both to
labor and rest: wholesome it is, and draws man's life to a long age, and that
much without sickness; at Carleton only some defect of pronunciation appears
in their speech.

(3) The Soil thus consisting, the Commodities are raised accordingly of Corn,
Cattle, and Coals; and in the Rocks near Bever are sometimes found the
Astroites, the Star-like precious Stone.

(4) The ancient people that inhabited this County, were the Coritani, who were
spread further into other Shires, but after that the Romans had left the Land
to it self, this with many more fell to be under the possession and government
of the Mercians, and their Kings, from whom the English enjoyed it at this day.

(5) In Circular-wise (almost) the compass of this Shire is drawn indifferently
spacious, but not very thick of Enclosures, being from East to West in the
broadest part not fully 30 miles, and from North to South but 24 the whole
circumference about 196 miles: whose principal City is set, as the Center,
almost in the midst; from whom the Pole is elevated 53 degrees, and 4 minutes
in Laritude, and for Longitude, 19 degrees, 22 minutes.

(6) From this Town the Shire has the name, though the name of her self is
diversely written, as Legecestria, Legara, Leg^o-cester: by Ninius, Caer-Lerion;
by Matthew of Westminster (if we do not mistake him) ^irall; and now lastly,
Leicester: ancient enough if King Leir was her builder, eight hundred and forty
and four years before the birth of our Savior, wherein he placed a Flamine to
serve in the Temple of Ianus, by himself there erected, and where he was
buried, if Ieffery ap Arthur say true: but now certain it is, that Ethelred the
Mercian Monarch made it an Episcopal See, in the year of Christ Jesus 680,
wherein Sexwul^^ of his el^ction became the first Bishop; which shortly after
was thence translated, and therewith the beauty of the Town began to decay;
upon whole desolations that erectifying Lady Edelfled cast her eyes of
compassion, and both re-edified the buildings, and compassed it about with a
strong wall, where, in short time the Cities Trade so increased, that Matthew
Paris in his lesser Stor^ reports as follows; Lege-cester (says he) is a
right wealthy City, and notably defended; and had the wall a sure foundation,
were inferior to no City whatsoever. But this pride of prosperity long lasted
not under the Normans, for it was sore oppressed with a world of Calamities,
when Robert Bossu the Crouch-back Earl of that Province, rebelled against his
Sove^aign Lord King Henry the second: whereof hear the same Author Paris speak:
Through the obstina^e stubbornness of Earl Robert (says he) the whole City
Leicester was besieged and thrown down by King Henry, and the Wall that seemed
indissoluble, was utterly raced even to the ground. The pieces of these
Fragments so fallen down remained in his days like to hard Rocks, through the
strength of the Mortar cementing whole lumps together: and at the Kings command
the City was set on fire and burnt, the Castle raced, and a heavy imposition
laid upon the Citizens, who with great sums of money bought their own
banishments: but were so used in their departure, that for extreme fear many of
them took Sanctuary, both at S. Edmunds and S. Albans, In repentance of these
mischiefs, the Author thereof, Earl Robert, built the Monastery of S. Mary de
Pratis, wherein himself became a Canon Regular, and for fifteen years
continuance in sad laments served God in continual prayers. With the like
devotion, Henry the first Duke of Lancaster built an Hospital, for an hundred
and ten poor people, with a Collegiate Church, a Dean, twelve Canons
Prebendaries, as many Vicars, suffciently provided for with Revenues; wherein
himself lies buried: and it was the greatest ornament of that City, until the
hand of King Henry the eighth lay over-heavy upon all the like foundations; and
laid their aspiring tops at his own feet.

The fortunes of another Crouch-back (King Richard Usurper) who no less
remarkable in this City than the former Robert was, both of them in like degree
of dishonorable course of life, though of different issue at their deaths, the
one dying penitent and of devout esteem; the other leaving the stench of
Tyranny to all following ages; who from this City setting forth in one day with
great pomp, and in Battle array, to keep the Crown sure upon his own Helmet, in
a sore fought field, yields both it and his life, unto the head and hands of
Henry of Richmond his Conqueror: and the next day was brought back, like a
Hog, naked and torn, and with contempt, without tears obscurely buried in the
Gray Friars of this City; whose suppression had suppressed the plot place of
his grave, and only the stone-chest wherein he was laid (a drinking trough now
for horses in a common Inn) retains the memory of that great Monarchs
Funeral: and so did a stone in the Church and Chapel of S. Mary's; enclose the
Corpse of the proud and pontifical cardinal Wolsey, who had prepared for
himself, as was said, a far more richer Monument.

(7) Other places worthy of remembrance in this Shire were these: In the West,
where a high Cross was erected, in former times stood the fair City Cleycester,
the Romans BENONNE, where their Legions lay, and where their two principal ways
crossed each other, as the Inhabitants report: Loughborow in the North verge,
was (as Marianus affirms) taken from the Britains by Cuthwolse their King,
about the year of Christ 572.

At Redmore, near Bosworth, Westward in this County, the Kingdom of England lay
in hazard of one Battle, when King Richards field was fought, where the Land at
once was free from a Tyrant and wicked Usurper. Neither may we pass
Lutterworth, as the least in account, where the famous John Wickliff, Englands
Morning star, dispersed the clouds of all Papistical darkness, by preaching the
Gospel in that his charge; the style of his pen, so piercing in power, that the
man of Sin ever since has been better known to the world.

(8) Religious houses by Princes erected, and by them devoted to God and his
service, the chiefest in this Shire were at Leicester, Grace-Dieu,
Kerby-Bellers, and at Burton a Spittle for Lazers, a disease then newly
approached in this Land, for the erection whereof a common contribution was
gathered through the Realm: the patients in this place were not so much deformed
in skin, as the other were in the defects of the soul; whose skirts being
turned up to the sight of the world, their shames were discovered, and those
houses dissolved, that had long maintained such Idolatrous sins.

(9) This Shires division is into six Hundreds, and in them are seated twelve
Market Towns for commerce, and contains in circuit two hundred
Parish-Churches.

LINCOLN SHIRE
map of Lincolnshire
LINCOLNSHIRE.
CHAPTER XXXI.
THe County of Lincoln, by the Normans called Nicolshire, is confined on the
North with Hamber, on the East with the German Ocean, upon the South, is parted
from Cambridge and Northamptonshire by the River Nine; and on the West from
Nottingham and York-shires by Dun and Trent.

(2) The length of this Province extends from Barton unto Humber in the
North, unto Stanford upon the River Nine in the South, are miles by our English
measure fifty five, and the breadth thereof from Newton in the West stretched
unto Winthorp upon her East Sea contains thirty five. The whole in
circumference about one hundred and eighty miles.

(3) The Air upon the East and South part is both thick and foggy, by reason of
the Fens and unsolute grounds, but therewithal very moderate and pleasing. Her
graduation being removed from the Equator to the degree of 53 and the winds
that are ^ent of her still working-Sea^ to disperse those vapors from all
power of hurt.

(4) The Form of this County does somewhat resemble the body of a Lute, whose
East-coasts lie bow-like into the German-Ocean, all along pestered with inlets
of salt waters and sands, which are neither firm nor safe for travelers, as
those in the South proved unto King John, who marching Northward from
Northfolk, against his disloyal Barons, upon those washes lost all his
furniture and carriage by the sudden return of the Sea, and softness of the
Sands.

(5) Her Soil upon the West and North is abundantly fertile, pleasant and rich,
stored with pasturage, arable and meadowing grounds; the East and South Fenny
and brackish, and for Corn, barren; but for fowl and fi^h exceeding any other
in the Realm; wherein, at some times and seasons of the year, has been taken
in nets, in August, at one draught, above three thousand Mallards, and other
Fowls of the like kind.

(6) The Shires commodities consist chiefly in Corn, Cattle, Fish, Fowl, Flax
and Alablaster; as also in a Plaster much esteemed of by the Romans for their
works of Imagery; and whereof Pliny in his Natural History makes mention. And
the Astori^es, a precious sto^e, Star-like, pointed with five beams or rays,
anciently esteemed for their virtue in victories, upon the South-west of this
County near Bever are found: not far thence in our Fathers memory, at Harlaxton
was ploughed up a brazen vessel, wherein was enclosed a golden Helmet of an
ancient fashion, set with precious stones, which was presented to Katherine of
Spain, Wife and Dowager to King Henry the eighth.

(7) This Shire triumphs in the birth of Beauclerk, King Henry the first,
whom Selby brought forth, and of King Henry the fourth, at Bullingbrooke born;
but may as justly lament for the death of King John, herein poisoned by Simon a
Monk of Swynsted Abbey; and of Queen Eleanor, wife to King Edward the first,
the mirror of wedlock, and love to the Commons, who at Hardby, near
Bullingbrooke, his birthplace, ended her life.

(8) Trade and commerce for provision of life is vented through thirty one
Market Towns in this Shire, whereof Lincoln the Counties Namer is chief, by
Ptolomy and Antonine called Lindum, by Beda Linde-Collina, and by the Normans,
Nichol. Very ancient it is, and has been more Magnifical, as by her many
overturned ruins does appear, and far more populous, as by Doomesdayes Book is
seen, where it is recorded that this City contained a thousand and seven
mansions, and nine hundred Burgesses with twelve Lage-men, having Sac and Soc.
And in the Normans time, says Malmesbury, it was one of the best Cities of
England, being a place of traffic of Merchandise for all commerce by Land or
Sea. Herein King Edward the third ordained his Staple for the Mart of Wools,
Leather and Lead; and no less than fifty Parish-Churches did beautify the
same: but now contains only fifteen, besides the Cathedral. Some ruins yet
remain both of ^riari^s, and Nunneries, who lie buried in their own ashes, and
the City conquered, not by war, but by time and very age: and yet has she not
escaped the calamity of Sword, as in the time of the Saxons, whence Arthur
enforced their Host: the like also did Edmund to the destroying Danes; and by
the Normans it suffered some damage, where King Stephen was vanquished and
taken prisoner; and again, by the third Henry, that assaulted and wa^ it from
his rebellious Barons. By fire likewise it was for defaced, wherein not only
the buildings were consumed, but wihal many men and women in the violence
thereof perished: as also by an Earth quake her foundation was much weakened
and shaken, wherein the fair Cathedral Church, dedicated to the Virgin of
Virgins, was rent in pieces. The government of this City is committed yearly to
a Mayor, two Sheriffs, twelve Aldermen in Scarlet, a Sword, a Hat of Estate, a
Recorder, Sword Bearer, and four Sergeants with Maces: whose situation on a
steep hill stands for Longitude, in the degree 20, 10 scruples, the Pole
elevated for Latitude from the degree 53, and 50 scruples.

(9) Much has been the devotion of Princes in building of religious houses in
this County, as at Crowland, Lincoln, Markby, Leyborn, Grenfeld, Alvingham,
Newnersby, Grymmysby, Newsted, Elshaw, Stansfeld, Syxhill, Torkesey, Bryggerd,
Thor^eholme, Nuncotten, Fosse, Hovings, Axholme Isle, Gokewell, S. Michaels
near Stamford, Swyneshed, Spalding, Kirkested, etc.

(10) Commotions in this shire were raised the eight and twentieth of King
Henry the Eight, where twenty thousand making insurrection, violently swear
certain Lords and Gentlemen to their Articles. But no sooner they heard of the
Kings power coming, but they dispersed themselves, and sued for pardon. And
again in the third year of King Edward the Sixth, in ease of Enclosures, Lincoln
rose in seditious manner, as did they of Cornwall, Devonshire, Yorkshire, and
Norfolk: but after some slaughters of their chiefest men, were reduced to
former obedience.

The Shires division is into three principal parts, viz. Lindsey, Kesteven, and
Holland; Lindsey is subdivided into seventeen Hundreds, Kesteven into eleven,
and Holland into three, containing in all thirty one, wherein are situated
thirty Market Towns, and six hundred thirty Parish Churches.

NOTTINGHA^ SHIRE
map of Nottinghamshire
NOTTINGHAM-SHIRE.
CHAPTER XXXII.
NOTTINGHAM-SHIRE (from Nottingham her chiefest Town has the Name, and that,
somewhat softened from the Saxons Snoddenzaham, for the many Dens or Caves
wrought in her Rocks and under ground) lies bordered upon the North and
North-west with Yorkshire; upon the East a good distance by Trent is parted
from, and with Lincolnshire altogether confined: the South with
Leichestershire; and the West by the River Erwash is separated from Darby-shire.

(2) For Form long and Oval-wise, doubling in length twice her breadth, whose
extremes are thus extended and distance observed: From Feningley North of
Steanford in the South, are thirty eight English miles; West part from Teversal
to Besthorp in the East, are little more than nineteen; whose circumference
draws much upon one hundred and ten miles.

(3) The Air is good, wholesome and delectable: the Soil is rich, sandy and
clayie, as by the names of that Counties divisions may appear: and surely for
Corn and Grass of fruitful, that it secondeth any other in the Realm: and for
Water, Words, and Canell Coals abundantly stored.

(4) Therein grows a Stone softer then Alabaster, but being burnt makes a
plaster harder than that of Paris,; wherewith they floor their upper Rooms;
for betwixt the Ioysts they lay only long Bulrushes, and thereon spread this
Plaster, which being thoroughly dry becomes most solid and hard, so that it
seems rather to be firm stone than mortar, and is trod upon without all
danger.

In the West near Worksop, grows plenty of Liquo^ice, very delicious and good.

(5) More South in this Shire, at Stoke, in the Reign of King Henry the
seventh, a great ba^te was fought by John De-la-Poole Earl of Lincoln, which
Richard the U^urper had declared his heir apparent; but Richard losing his
life, and De-la-Poole his hopes, in seeking here to set up a Lambert, fell down
himself: and at Newark, after many troubles, King John got his peace with the
end of his life.

(6) Trade and Commerce for the Counties provision is frequented in eight
Market Towns in this Shire, whereof Nottingham is both the greatest and best, a
Town seated most pleasant and delicate upon a high hill for building stately, a
number of fair streets, surpassing and surmounting many other Cities, and for a
spacious and most fair Marketplace, does compare with the best. Many strange
Vaults ^ewed o^t of the Rocks, in this Town are seen; and those under the
Castle of an especial note, one for the story of Christ's Passion engr^^en in
the Walls, and cut by the hand of David the second King of Scots, whilst he was
therein detained Prisoner. Another wherein Lord Mortimer was ^upprized in the
nonage of King Edward the Third, ever since bearing the name of Mortimers
Hole; these have their Stairs and several Rooms made artificially even out of
the Rocks: as also in that Hill are dwelling Houses, with Winding-stairs,
Windows, Chimneys, and Room above Room, wrought all out of the solid Rock. The
Castle is strong, and was kept by the Danes against Burthred, Ethelred, and
Elfred the Mercian, and West Saxon Kings, who together laid their siege against
it: and for the further strenght of the Town, King Edward surnamed the Elder,
walled it about, whereof ^ome part as yet remains, from the Castle to the
West-gate, and thence the foundation may be perceived to the North: where in
the midst of the way ranging with this bank, stands a Gate of Stone, and the
same Tract passing along the North part may well be perceived; the rest to the
River and thence to the Castle are built upon, and thereby buried from sight:
whose circuit, as I took it, extends two thousand one hundred twenty paces.

(7) In the wars betwixt Stephen and Maud the Empress, by Robert Earl of
Gloucester these Walls were cast down, when also the Town it self suffered the
calamity of fire: but recovered to her former estate, has since increased in
beauty and wealth, and at this day is governed by a Mayor and six Aldermen,
clad in Scarlet, two Sheriffs, two Chamberlains, a Town-Clark, and six
Sergeants with Maces, their attenders; whose position has the Pole elevated
fifty three degrees, 25 minutes in Latitude, and has the Meridian nine degrees
and 25 minutes. This Town has been honored by these Princes Titles, and these
Princes dignified with the Earldom of Nottingham, whose several Arms and Names
are in the great Map expressed.

Religious houses that have been erected and now suppressed in the compass of
this County, chiefly were Newsted, Lenton, Shelford, Southwell, Thurgarton,
Blithe, Welbeck, and Radford; in Nottingham the White and Gray Friars, besides a
little Chapel dedicated to S. John. All which show the devotions of those
former times; which their remembrance may move, if not condemn us, that have
more knowledge, but far less piety.

The Shires division is principally into two: which the Inhabitants term the
Sand and the Clay; but for Tax to the Crown, or service for State, is parted
into eight Wapentakes or Hundreds, wherein are seated 168 Parishes Churches.

DARBY SHIRE
map of Derbyshire
DARBY-SHIRE.
CHAPTER XXXIII.
DARBY-SHIRE lies enclosed upon her North parts with Yorkshire; upon the East
with Nottingham-shire; upon the South of Leichestershire; and upon the West is
parted with the Rivers Dove and Goyt from Stafford and Chess-shires.

(2) It is in Form somewhat triangle, though not of any equal distance, growing
from her narrow South-point still wider, and in the North is at the broadest:
For from Stretton near the head of Mese, to New-Chappel seated near the head of
Derwent the two extremes from North to South are thirty eight miles: but from
the Shire-Oaks unto the meeting of Mersey and Goyt, the broadest part of all
this Shire is not full twenty nine; the whole in circumference ex^endeth to an
hundred and thirty miles.

(3) The Air is good and very healthful; the Soil is rich, especially in her
South and East parts; but in the North and West is hilly, with a black and
mossie ground, both of them fast handed, to the Ploughers pains, though very
liberal in her other gifts, whose natures thus dissenting, the River Derwent
does divide asunder, that takes course through the heart or the midst of this
County.

(4) The Ancient People that possessed these parts in the times of the Roman
assaults, were the Coritani, whom Ptolomy dispersed through Northamptonshire,
Leicester, Rutland, Lincoln, Nottingham, and this Shire, who were all of them
subdued by P. Ostorius Scapula, Lieutenant in this Province for Claudius the
Emperor. But Romes Empire falling in Britain, by the intestine Wars among
themselves* the Saxons (a more savege and fearful Nation) soon brought it*
under their subjection, and made this a Province unto their Mercians Kingdom,
whom the West Saxons first wan and again lost to the Normans.

(5) It is stored with many commodities, and them of much worth; for besides
woods and Cattle, Sheep and Corn, every where over spreading the face of this
County, the Millstone, Crystal and Alablaster, the Mines of Pit-coal, Iron,
and Lead, are of great price, whereof the last is mentioned in Pliny who
writes, that, in Britain, in the very crust of the Ground, without any deep
digging, is gotten so great store of Lead, and there is a Law expressly made of
purpose, forbiding men to make more than to a certain stint, whose stores are
plente^usly gotten in those Mountains, and melted into Sowes to no small profit
of the Country. There is found also in certain veins of the earth- Stibium,
which the Apothecaries call Antimonium, and the Alchymists hold in great esteem.

(6) Places of Commerce, or memorable note, the first is Darby, the Shire-Town,
called by the Danes Deoraby, seated upon the West-bank of Derwent, where also a
small Brook rising Westward, runs through the Town under nine Bridges before
it meets with her far greater River Derwent, which presently it does, after she
has passed Tenant-Bridge in the South-East of the Town. But a Bridge of more
beauty built all of Freestone, is passed over Derwent in the North-East of the
Tow^, whereon stands a fair stone Chapel, both of them bearing the names of
S. Mary's* five other Churches are in this Town, the chief whereof is called
Alh^llows, whose Steeple or Bell-Tower being both beautiful and high, was built
only at the charges of young Men and Maids, as is witnessed by the inscription
cut in the same upon every square of the Steeple. Among the miserable
desolations of the Danes, this Town bare a part, but by the Lady Ethelfleda was
again repaired, and is at this day incorporated with the yearly government of
two Bailiffs, elect out of twenty four Brethren, besides as many Burges of
Common Counsel, a Recorder, Town Clerk, and two Sergeants with Mace; whose
Graduation is observed from the Equator to be 53 degrees, 25 scruples, and
from the first point in the West, 19 degrees, 2 scruples.

(7) Little-Chester (by the Romish Money there daily) seems to have been
ancient, and that a Colony of of the Roman Soldiers there lay. Yet of far
greater Fame was R^pandunum, now Rep^on, where Ethelbald the ninth King of the
Mercia^s, and fifteenth Monarch of the Englishmen, slain at Segg^swald by the
treason of his Subjects, was interred: and whence Burt^red, the last King of
that People, was exp^lsed with his Queen Ethelswith, by the rage of the Danes,
after twenty two years Reign. But with a more pleasing eye we may behold
Melborn, the Memorial of Englishmens great valor, where in that Castle was
kept prisoner John Duke of Burbon, taken Captive in the Battle of Agincourt,
and therein detained the space of nineteen years.

(8) Things of stranger note are the hot Water-springs bursting forth of the
ground at Buxton, where out of the Rock within the compass of eight yards, nine
Springs arise, eight of them warm, but the ninth very cold. These run from
under a fair square building of Freestone, and about threescore paces off
received another hot Spring from a Well, enclosed with four flat Stones, called
Saint Anns; near unto which, another very cold Spring bubled up. The report
goes among the bydwellers, that great cure^ by these waters have been done:
but daily experience shows, that they are good for the Stomach and Sinews,
and very pleasant to bathe the body in. Not far thence is Eld^n hole, whereof
strange things have been told, and this is confidently affirmed, the waters
that trickle from the top of that Cave (which indeed is very spacious, but of
low and narrow entrance) do congeal into stone, and hang as is^ckles in the
Roof, some of them were showed at my being there, which like unto such as the
Frost congealeth, were hollow within, and grew Taper-wise toward their points,
very white, and somewhat Chrystal-like. And seven miles thence upon a
mounted-hill, stands a Castle, under which there is a Hole or Cave in the
ground of a mavelous capacity, which is commonly called The Devils Arse in
the Peak, whereof Gervase of Tilbury has told many pretty* Tales, and (...) do
make it one of the wonders of our Land.

(9) As in^other Csounties the devotions of the Religious have been made
apparent in the erectio^ of Places for Gods peculiar Service; so in this have
been founded eight of that nature, which were Dale, Derelege, Darby, Repton,
Bechef, Graiesley, Faverwell, and Pollewerke: whose peace and plenty stood
secure from all danger, till the blustering Winds arising in the Reign of King
Henry the Eight, blew off the Pinacles of their beauteous Buildings, and shook
asunder the revenues of those Foundations which never are like again to be laid.

(10) This Shire is divided into six hundreds, wherein have been seated seven
Castles, and is still traded with eight Market Towns, and replenished with one
Hundred and six Parish-Churches.

Staffordshir
map of Staffordshire
STAFFORDSHIRE.
CHAPTER XXXIV.
STAFFORDSHIRE, whose situation is much about the middle of England, mee^eth
upon the North with Chess-shire and Darby, and that in a Triangle point, where
three Stones are pitched for the bounds of these Shires; it is parted from
Darby-shire on the East with Dowe and with Trent; the South is confined with
Warwick and Worcester-shires, and the West butteth against the County of
Shrop-shire.

(2) The form thereof is somewhat Lozeng-like, that is, sharp at both ends, and
broadest in the midst. The lengh extending from North to South, is by measure
forty four miles; and the breadth from East to West, twenty seven miles; the
whole in Circumference one hundred and forty miles.

(3) The Air is good and very healthful, though over sharp in her North and
Moreland, where the Snow lies long and the Wind blows cold.

(4) The Soil in that part is barren of Corn, because her Hills and Moors are
no friends unto Tillage: the middle more level, but therewithal woody, as well
witnesses that great one, called the Cank. But the South is most plenteous in
Corn and Pasturage.

(5) Her ancient Inhabitants were the CORNAVII, whom Ptolomy places in the
Tract that contains Shrop-shire, Worcestershire, Chess-shire, and this: all
which were p^s^essed by the Mercian-Saxons, when their Heptarchy slourished.
And Tameworth in this Shire was then held their King^ Court. The Danes after
them often assayed herein to have seated, as witnesses T^trall, then
Theoten^^ll, by inte^pretation, The habitation of Pagans, imbrued with their
blood by King (...) the Flder. But the Inhabitants of this Province Beda terms
The midland-Englishmen, because to his seeming it lay in the heart of the Land,
which when the Normans had made Conquest of all, many of them set down their
rest here, whose posterity at this day are fairly and further branched into
other parts.

(6) The Commodities of this County consist chiefly in Corn, Ca^tle,
Alablaster, Woods, and Iron, (if the one prove not the destruction of the
other) Pit-coal, Flesh and Fish, whereof the River Trent is said to swarm: and
others arising and running through this Shire, do so bat^en the ground, that the
Meadows, even in the midst of Winter, grow green: such are Dowe, Manifold,
Churnot, Hunsye, Yenden, Tean, Blithe, Trent, Tyne, and Sow; whereof Trent is
not only the principal, but in esteem accounted the third of this Land.

(7) Stafford the Shire-Town, anciently B^theney, from Ber^elin, a reputed holy
Man that therein lead an Hermits life, was built by King Edward the Elder,
incorporated by King John, and upon the East and South Parts was Walled and
Trenched by the Barons of the Place: the rest from East to North was secured by
a large Pool of Water, which now is become fair Meadow-grounds. The tract and
circuit of these Walls extended to twelve hundred and forty Paces, through which
four Gates into the four Winds have passage, the River Sow running on the
South and West of the Town. King Edward the Sixth did incorporate the Burgesses*
and gave them a perpetual Succession, whose Government in under two Bailiffs,
yearly elected out of one and twenty Assistants, called the Common-Counsel, a
Recorder, whereof the Dukes of Buckingham have born the Office, and as yet is
kept a Court of Record, wherein they hold Plea without limitation of sum; a
Town Clerk also, (from whose Pen I received these Instructions) and to attend
them two Sergeants at Mace. This Town is sited in the degree of Latitude 53, 20
scruples, and of Longitude 18, and 40 scurples.

(8) But Leichfield, more large, and of far greater fame, is much her ancient,
known unto (...) by the name of Licidfeld, which Rosse does interpret to be The
field of dead bodies, for the number of Saints under the rage of Dioclesian
there slain: upon which cause the City bears for her Arms an Eschucheon of
Landscape, with diverse Martyrs in diverse manner Massacred. Here Oswin King of
Northumberland overcoming the Pagan-Mercians, built a Church, and made it the Sea of Duma the Bishop: whose Successors grown rich, with golden reasons so
overcame King Offa, and he Adrian the Pope, that an Archiepiscopal Pale was
granted Bishop Eadulph, to the great disgrace of Lambert Archbishop of
Canterbury. In this Church were interred the Body of VVulfhere and Celred,
both of them Kings of the Mercians. But when the minds of Men were set
altogether upon gorgeous building, this old Foundation was new reared Roger
Clinton, Bishop this See, and dedicated to the Virgin Mary and Saint Chad, and
the Close inwalled by Bishop Langton. The government of this City is by two
Bailiffs and one Sheriff, yearly chosen out of twenty four Burgess^s, a
Recorder a Town-Clerck, and two Sergeants their Attendants

(9) Houses of Religion erected in this Shire, were at Leichfield, Stafford, De
la Cross, Cruxden, Trentham, Burton, Tamworth, and VVolver-hampton. These
Votaries abusing their Founders true pieties, and heaping up Riches with
disdain of the Laity, laid themselves open as marks to be shot at: whom the
hand of the skilful soon hit and quite pierced, under the aim of King Henry the
Eighth, who with such Revenues in most places, relieved the Poor and the
Orphans, with Schools and maintenace for the training up of Youth: a work no
doubt more acceptable to God, and of more charitable use to the Land:

(10) With thirteen Castles this County has been strengthened, and in Thirteen
Market Towns her Commodities traded, being divided into five Hundreds, and in
them seated one hundred and thirty Parish-Churches.

Shropshire
Petrus Kaerius caelavit.
map of Shropshire
SHROP-SHIRE.
CHAPTER XXXV.
SHROP-SHIRE, is both large in circuit, well peopled, and very fruitful for
life. It lies circulated upon the North with the County Palatine of Chester;
upon the East altogether with Staffordshire; upon the South with Worcester,
Hereford, and Radnor-shire; and upon the West with Mountgom^ry and Denbigh.

(2) The form thereof is almost circular or round, whose length from Wooserton
below Lodlane South, to Over near unto the River Trent in the North, is thirty
four miles: the broadest part is from Tongue in the East, to Oswestre fited at
the head of Morda in the West, twenty and five miles: the whole in circuit
about, extending to one hundred thirty four miles.

(3) Wholesome is the Air, delectable and good, yielding the Spring and the
Autumn, Seed-time and Harvest, in a temperate condition, and affords health
to the Inhabitants in all seasons of the year.

(4) The Soil is rich, and stands most upon a reddish Clay, abounding in
Wheat and Barley, Pitcoals, Iron and Woods; which two last continue not long in
league together. It has Rivers that make fruitful the Land, and in their
Waters contain great store of fresh-fish, whereof Severn is the chief, and
second in the Realm, whose stream cutteth this County in the midst, and with
many winding sporteth her self forward, leaving both Pastures and Meadows
bedecked with flowers and green colors, which every where she bestows upon
such her attendants.

(5) This River was once the bounds of the North-Britains, and divided their
possession from the Land of the Saxons, until of latter times their began to
decay, and the Welsh to increase, who enlarged their lists to the River Dee. So
formerly had it separated the Ordovices from the Cornav^^, those ancient
Inhabitants mentioned by Ptolomy. The Ordovices under Caractacus purchased
great honor, whilst he a Prince of the Silures removed his Wars thence among
them, where a while he maintained the Britains liberty with valor and courage,
in despite of the Romans. His Fort is yet witness of his unfortunate Fight,
seated near Clune-Castle, at the confluence of that River with Temd, where (in
remembrance of him) the place is yet called Caer-Caradoc, a Fort of his won by
P. Ostorius Lieutenant of the Romans, about the year of Grace 53. The Cornavii
were seated upon the North of Severn, and branched into other Counties, of whom
we have said.

(6) But when the strength of the Romans was too weak to support their own
Empire, and Britain emptied of her Soldiers to resist, the Saxons set foot in
this most fair Soil, and made it a part of their Mercian Kingdom: their line
likewise issued to the last period, and the Normans beginning where these
Saxons left, the Welshman took advantage of all present occasions, and brake
over Severn unto the River Dee; to recover which, the Normans first Kings often
assayed, and Henry the Second with such danger of Life, that at the Siege of
Bridge-North he had been slain, had not Sir Hubert Syncler received the Arrow
aimed at him, in stepping betwixt that Shaft and his Sovereign, and therewith
was shot through unto death. In the like danger stood Henry Prince of Scotland,
who in the strait Siege of Ludlow, begirt by King Stephen, had been plucked
from his Saddle with an Iron-hook from the Wall, had not Stephen presently
rescued him, Anno 1139.

(7) This then being the Marches of England and Wales, was sore afflicted by
bloody broils, which caused many of their Towns to be strongly walled, and
thirty two Castles to be strongly built: Lastly, into this County the most wise
King Henry the Seventh sent his eldest Son Prince Arthur, to be resident at
Ludlow, where that fair Castle became a most famous Princes Court And here King
Henry the Eight ordained the Council of the Marches, consisting of a Lord
President as many Counselors as the Prince shall please, a Secretary, an
Attorney, a Soliciter, and four Justices of the Counties in Wales, in whose
Court were pleaded the Causes depending and termly tried for the most part in
presence of that honorable President.

(8) But the Shire-Town Shrewsbury, for circuit, trade and wealth, does far
exceed this, and is inferior to few of our Cities, her buildings fair, her
streets many and large, her Citizens rich, her trade for the most part in the
Staple Commodities of Cloth and Freeses; her Walls strong and of a large
compass, extending to seventeen hundred pa^es about, besides another Bulwark
ranging from the Castle, down unto and in part along the side of Severn: through
which there are three entrances into the Town, East and West, over by two fair
Stone-Bridges, with Towers, Gates and Bars, and the third into the North, no
less strong than them over which is mounted a large Castle, whose gaping chinks
do doubtless threaten her fall. This Town is governed by two Bailiffs, yearly
elected out or twenty four Burgesses, a Recorder, Town Clerk, and Chamberlain,
with three Sergeants at Mace: the Pole being raised hence from the degrees of
Latitude 53, 16 minutes, and from West in Longitude 17 degrees, 27 minutes.

(9) Yea and ancienter Cities have been set in this Shire: such was R^xalter,
or Wroxcester, lower upon Severn, that had been Vriconium, the chiefest City of
the Cornavii; Vfoc^nia, now Okenyate^ near unto the Wrekin: and under
Red-Castle the Ruins of a City, whom the Vulgar report to have been famous in
Arthurs days: but the pieces of Romish Coins in these three do well assure us
that therein their Legions lodged; as many other Trenches are signs of War and
of Blood. But as Swords have been stirring in most parts of this Province, so
Beads have been hid for the preservation of the whole, and places erected for
the maintenance of Votaries in whom at that time was imputed great holiness; in
Shrewsbury many, at Coulmere, Stow, Dudley, Bromfield, Wigmore, Hamond,
Lyleshill, Bildas, Bishops-Castle, and W^nloke, (where in the Reign of Richard
the Second, was likewise a rich Mine of Copper. But the same blasts that blew
down the Buds of such Plants, scattered also the Fruits from these fair Trees,
which never since bare the like, nor is likely any more to do.

That only which is rare in this Province, is a Well at Pitchford in a private
man's yard, whereupon floateth a thick Skum of liquid Bitumen which being clear
off to day, will gather the like again on the Morrow: not much unlike to the
Lake in the Land of Iewry.

This Shire is divided into fifteen Hundreds, wherein are seated fourteen
Market Towns: and has in it one hundred and seventy Churches for Gods sacred
and divine Service.

CHESTER
Petrus Kaerius caeelavit.
map of the County Palatine of Chester
The County Palatine of CHESTER.
CHAPTER XXXVI.
CHESSE-SHIRE; the County, Palatine of Chester, is parted upon the North from
Lancashire with the River Mercey; upon the East by Mercey, Goit, and the Dane,
is separated from Dar^y and Stafford-shires: upon the South touches the
Counties of Shrop-shire and Flint; and upon the West with Dee is parted from
Denbigh-shire.

(2) The form of this County does much resemble the right Wing of an Eagle,
spreading it self from Wirall, and as it were with her Pinion, or first
Feather, touches Yorkshire, betwixt which extremes, in following the windings
of the Shires divider from East to West, are 47 miles; and from North to South
twenty six miles. The whole Circumference about one hundred forty two miles.

(3) If the affection to my natural producer blind not the judgment of this my
Survey, for Air and Soil it equals the best, and far exceeds her Neighbors the
next Counties: for although the Climate be cold, and touches the degree of
Latitude 54, yet the warmth from the Irish-Seas melts the Snow, and
dissolveth Ice sooner there then in those parts that are further off; and so
wholesome for life, that the Inhabitants generally attain to many years.

(4) The Soil is fat, fruitful and rich, yielding abundantly both profit and
pleasures for Man. The Champion grounds make glad the hearts of their Tillers:
The Meadows imbroydered with diverse sweet smelling Flowers, and the Pasture
makes the Kines Udder to strout to the Pail, from whom and wherein the best
Cheese of all Europe is made.

(5) The ancient Inhabitants were the CORNAVII, who with Warwickshire,
Worcestershire, Staffordshire, and Shrop-shire, spread themselves further
into this County, as in Ptolomy is placed; and the Cangi likewise if they be
the Cea^gi, whose remembrance was found upon the Shore of this Shire, on the
surface of certain pieces of Lead, in this manner inscribed: IMP. DOMIT. AU.
GER. DF CEANG. These Cangi were subdued by P. Ostorius Scapula, immediately
before his great Victory against Caractacus, where in the mouth of Deva he
built a Fortress at the back of the Ordovices, to restrain their power, which
was great in those parts, in the Reign of Vespasian the Emperor. But after the
departure of the Romans, this Province became a Portion of the Saxon-Mercians
Kingdom: notwithstanding (says Ran Higdan) the City it self was held by the
Britains until all fell into the Monarchy of Egbert.

Of the dispositions of the fince Inhabitants, hear Lucan the Monk (who lived
prelently after the Conquest) speak; They are found (says he) to differ from
the rest of the English, partly better, and partly equal. In feasting they are
friendly, at meat cheerful, in entertainment liberal, soon a^gry, and soon
pacified, lavish in words, impatient of servitude, merciful to the afflicted,
compassionate to the poor, kind to their kindred, spary of labor, void of
dissimulation, not greedy in eating, and far from dangerous practices.

And let me add thus much, which Lucian could not: namely, that this Shire has
never been stained with the blot of Rebellion, but ever stood true to their
King and his Crown: whose loyalty Richard the Second so far found and esteemed,
that he held his Person most safe among them and by the Authority of Parliament
made the County to be a Principality, and styled himself Prince of Chester.

King Henry the Third gave it to his eldest Son Prince Edward, against whom
Lewlin Prince of Wales gathered a mighty Band, and with them did the County
much harm, even unto the Cities Ga^es. With the like scare-fires it had often
times been affrighted, which the ylast^y defenced with a Wall made of the
Welsh-mens Heads, on the South side of Dee in Hambridge.

The Shire may well be said to be a Seed-plot of Gentility, and the producer of
many most ancient and worthy Families: neither has any brought more men of
valor into the Field,, than Chess-shire has done, who by a general speech,
are to this day called, The chief of Men: and for Natures endowments (besides
their nobleness of minds) may compare with any other Nation in the World: their
Limbs straight and well-composed, their complexions fair, with a cheerful
countenance; and the Women for grace, feature, and beauty inferior unto none.

(6) The Commodities of of this Province (by the report of Ranulphus the Monk
of Chester) are chiefly Corn, Cattle, Fish, Fowl, Salt, Mines, Metals, Mears
and Rivers, whereof the Banks of Dee in her West, and the Vale-Royal in her
midst, for fruitfulness of pasturage equals any other in the Land, either in
grain or gain from the Cow.

(7) These, with all other provision for life, are traded through thirteen
Market Towns in this Shire, whereof Chester is the fairest, from whom the Shire
has the name. A City raised from the Fort of Ostorius, Lieutenant of Britain
for Claudius the Emperor, whither the twentieth Legion (named Victrix.) was
sent by Galba to restrain the Britains: but grown themselves out of order,
Julius Agricola was appointed their General by Vespasian, as appears by
Moneys then Minted, and there found; and from them (no doubt) by the Britains
the place wa^ called Cder-Legion, by Ptolomy, Denan^; by Antonine, Dena, and
now by us West-Chester but Henry Bradshaw will have it built before Brute, by
the Giant Leon Gaver, a Man beyond the Moon, and called by Marius the
vanquisher of the Picts.

Over Deva or Dee a fair Stone Bridge leads, built upon eight Arches, at
either end whereof is a Gate, from whence in a long Quadrant-wise the Walls do
incompass the City, high and strongly built, with four fair Gates, opening into
the four Winds, besides three (...), and seven Watch-Towers, extending in
compass one thousand nine hundred and forty paces.

On the South of this City is mounted a strong and stately Castle, round in
form, and the base Court likewise enclosed with a circular Wall. In the North
is the Minster, first built by Earl Leofrike to the honor of S. Werburga the
Virgin, and after most sumptuously repaired by Hugh the first Earl of Chester
of the Normans, now the Cathedral of the Bishops See. Therein lies interred
(as report does relate) the body of Henry the Fourth, Emperor of Almane, who
leaving his Imperial Estate, lead lastly therein an Hermites life.

This City has formerly been sore defaced; first by Egfrid King of
Northumberland, where he slew twelve hundred Christian Monks, resorted thither
from Bangor to pray. Again by the Danes it was sore defaced, when their
destroying feet had trampled down the beauty of the Land. But was again rebuilt
by Edelfleada the Mercian Lady, who in this County, and Forest of Delamer,
built two fine Cities, nothing of them now remaining, besides the Chamber in
the Forest.

Chester in the days of King Edgar was in most flourishing estate, wherein he
had the homage of eight other Kings, who rowed his Barge from S. John's to his
Palace, himself holding the Helm, as their Supreme.

This City was made a County incorporate of it self by King Henry the Seventh,
and is yearly governed by a Major, with Sword and Mace born before him in
State, two Sheriffs, twenty four Aldermen, a Recorder, a Town Clerk, and a
Sergeant of Peace, four Sergeants, and six ^eomen.

It has been accounted the Key into Ireland, and great pity it is that the
Port should decay as it daily does, the Sea being stopped to secure the River
by a Causey that thwarteth Dee at her bridge. Within the Walls of the City are
eight Parish-Churches, St. John's the greater and lesser: in the Suburbs are the
VVhite-Fryers, Blackfriars, and Nunnery now suppressed. From which City the
Pole is elevated unto the degree 53, 58 minutes of Latitude, and from the first
point of the West in Longitude unto the 17 degree and 18 minutes.

(8) The Earldom whereof was possessed from the Conqueror, till it fell lastly
to the Crown, the last of whom (though not with the least hopes) is Prince
Henry, who to the Titles of Prince of Wales, and Duke of Cornwall, has by
Succession and Right of Inheritance, the Earld^m of Chester annexed to his most
happy Styles: Upon whose Person I pray that the Angels of Jacobs God may ever
attend, to his great glory, and Great Britains happiness.

(9) If I should urge credit unto the report of certain Trees, floating in
Bagmere only against the deaths of the Heirs of the Breretons thereby seated,
and after to sink until the next like occasion: or enforce for truth the
Prophecy which Leyland in a Poetical fury forespake of Beeston-Castle, highly
mounted upon a steep Hill: I should forget my self and wonted opinion that can
hardly believe any such vain Predictions, though they be told from the mouths
of Credit, as Bagmere-Trees are, or learned Leyland for Beesson, who thus
writes: The day will come when it again shall mount his head aloft.
If I a Prophet may be heard from Seers that say so often.


With eight other Castles this Shire has been strengthened, which were
Ould-Castle, Shocloch, Sho^witch, Chester, Pouldford, Dunham, Frodesham, and
Haulten: and by the Prayers (as then was taught) of eight Religious Houses
therein seated, preserved; which by King Henry the Eight were suppressed;
^^amely, Stanlow, Ilbree, Maxfeld, Norton, Bunbery, Combermere, Rud-neath, and
Vale-Royal, besides the White and black Fri^rs, and the Nunnery in Chester.

This Counties division is into seven Hundreds, wherein are seated thirteen
Market Towns, eighty five Parish-Churches and thirty-eight Chapels of Ease.

Lancaster
map of the County Palatine of Lancaster
LANCA-SHIRE.
CHAPTER XXXVII.
THE County Palatine of Lancaster (famous for the four Henry's, the fourth,
fifth, sixth, and seventh, Kings of England, derived from John of Gaunt Duke of
Lancaster) is upon the South, confined and parted by the River Mersey, from the
County Palatine of Chester; the fair County of Darby-shire bordering upon the
East; the large County of Yorkshire together with Westmerland and Cumberland,
being her kind neighbors upon the North, and the Sea called Mare Hibernicum,
embracing her upon the West.

(2) The form thereof is long, for it is so enclosed between Yorkshire on the
East side, and the Irish-Sea on the West, that where it boundeth upon Cheshire
on the South Side, it is broader, and by little and little more Northward it
goes (confining upon Westmerland) the more narrow it grows. It contains in
length from Brathey Northward, to Halwood Southward, fifty seven miles; from
Denton in the East, to Formby by Altmouth in the West, thirty one; and the
whole circumference in compass, one hundred threescore and ten miles.

(3) The Air is subtle and piercing, not troubled with gross vapors or foggy
mists, by reason whereof the People of that Country live long and healthfully,
and are not subject to strange and unknown diseases.

(4) The Soil for the generality is not very fruitful, yet it produces such
numbers of Cattle of such large proportion, and such goodly heads, and horns,
as the whole Kingdom of Spain does scarce the like. It is a Country replenished
with all necessaries for the use of Man, yielding without any great labor, the
commodity of Corn, Flax, Grass, Coals, and such like. The Sea also adds her
blessing to the Land, that the People of that Province want nothing that
serves either for the sustenance of Nature, or the satiety of appetite. They
are plentifully furnished with all sorts of Fish, Flesh, and Fowls. Their
principal Fuel is Coal and Turff, which they have in great abundance, the
Gentlemen reserving their Woods very carefully, as a beauty and principal
ornament to their Manors and Houses. And though it be far from ^ondon, (the
Capital City of this Kingdom) yet does it every year furnish her and many other
parts of the Land besides, with many thousands of Cattle (bred in this Country)
giving thereby, and other ways, a firm testimony to the World, of the blessed
abundance that it has pleased God to enrich this noble Dukedom withal.

(5) This Counties ancient Inhabitants were the Brigantes, of whom there is
more mention in the description of Yorkshire, who by Claudius the Emperor
were brought under the Roman subjection, that so held and made it their Seat,
secured by their Garrisons, as has been gathered as well by many Inscriptions
found in Walls and ancient Monuments fixed in Stones, as by certain Altars
erected in favor of their Emperors. After the Romans, the Saxons brought it
under their protection, and held it for a part of their Northumbrian Kingdom,
till it was first made subjugate to the Invasion of the Danes, and then
conquered by the victorious Normans, whose Posterities from thence are branched
further into England.

(6) Places of antiquity or memorable note are these: the Town of Manchester
(so famous, as well for the Marketplace, Church and College, as for the
resort unto it for Clothing) was called Man^unium by Antonine the Emperor, and
was made a Fort and Station of the Romans.

Riblechester (which takes the name from R^ibell, a little River near
Clith^r^) though it be a small Town, yet by Tradition has been called the
richest Town in Christendom, and reported to have been the Seat of the Romans,
which the many Monuments of their Antiquities, Statues, Pieces of Coin, and
other several Inscriptions, dug up from time to time by the Inhabitants, may
give us sufficient persuasion to believe.

But the Shire Town is Lancaster, more pleasant in situation, than rich of
Inhabitants, built on the South of the River Lon, and is the same Longovicum,
where (as we find in the Noti^e Provinces) a company of the Longovicarians
under the Lieutenant General of Britain lay. The beauty of this Town is in the
Church, Castle, and Bridge: her Streets many, and stretched fair in length.
Unto this Town King Edward the Third granted a Mayor and two Bailiffs, which to
this day are elected out of twelve Brethren, assisted by twenty four Burgesses,
by whom it is yearly governed, with the supply of two Chamberlains, a Recorder,
Town Clerk, and two Sergeants at Mace. The elevation of whose Pole is in the
degree of Latitude 54 and 58 scruples, and her Longitude removed from the West
point unto the degree 17 and 40 scruples.

(7) This Country in diverse places suffers the force of many flowing Tides of
the Sea, by which (after a sort) it does violently rent asunder one part of the
Shire from the other: as in Fourness, where the Ocean being displeased that the
shore should from thence shoot a main way into the West, has not obstinately
ceased from time to time to slash and mangle it, and with his Fell irruptions
and boisterous Tides to devour it.

Another thing there is, not unworthy to be recommended to memory that in this
Shire, not far from Fo^rness-Felles, the greatest standing water in all England
(called Winander Mere) lies, stretched out for the space of ten miles, of
wonderful depth, and all paved with stone in the bottom: and along the Seaside
in many places may be seen heaps of sand, upon which the People pour water
until it recover a saltish humor, which they afterward boil with Turffs, till
it become white Salt.

(8) This Country, as it is thus on the one side freed by the natural
resistance of the Sea from the force of Invasions, so is it strengthened on the
other by many Castles, and fortified places, that take away the opportunity of
making Roads and Incursions in the Country. And as it was with the first that
felt the fury of the Saxons cruelty, so was it the last and longest that was
subdued under the W^st-Saxons Monarchy.

(9) In this Province our noble Arthur (who died laden with many Trophies of
honor) is reported by Ninius to have put the Saxons to flight in a memorable
Battle near Duglasse, a little Brook not far from the Town of Wiggin. But the
attemps of War, as they are several, so they are uncertain; for they made not
Duke Wade happy in his success, but returned him an unfortunate enterpriser in
the Battle which he gave to Ardulph King of Northumberland at Billango, in the
year 798. So were the events uncertain in the Civil Wars of York and Lancaster:
for by them was bred and brought forth that bloody division, and fatal strife
of the Noble Ho^ses, that with variable success to both Parties (for many years
together) molested the peace and quiet of the Land, and defiled the earth with
blood, in such violent manner, that it exceeded the horror of those Civil Wars
in Rome, that were betwixt Marius and Scylla, Pompey and Caesar, Octavius and
Antony; or that of the two renowned Houses Valoys and Burbon, that a long time
troubled the State of France: for in the division of these two Princely
Families there were thirteen Fields fought, and three Kings of England, one
Prince of Wales, twelve Dukes, one Marquess, eighteen Earls, one Vicount, and
three and twenty Barons, besides Knights and Gentlemen, lost their lives in the
same. Yet at last by the happy Marriage of Henry the Seventh, King of England,
next Heir to the House of Lancaster, with Elizabeth daughter and Heir to Edward
the Fourth, of the House of York, the white and red Roses were conjoined in the
happy uniting of those two divided Families, from whence our thrice renowned
Sovereign Lord King James, by fair sequence and succession, does worthily enjoy
the D^adem: by the benefit of whose happy government, this County Palatine of
Lancaster is prosperou^ in her Name and Greatness.

(10) I find the remembrance of four Religious Houses that have been founded
within this County (and since suppressed) both fair for Structure and Building,
and rich for seat and Situation: namely, Burstogh, VVhalleia, Holland, and
Penwortham. It is divided into six Hundreds, besides Fourness Felles, and
Lancasters Liberties, that lie in the North part. It is beautified with fifteen
Market Towns, both fair for situation and building, and famous for the
concourse of people for buying and selling. It has twenty six Parishes,
besides Chapels, (in which they duly frequent to Divine Service) and those
populous, as in no part of the Land more.

York SHIRE
map of Yorkshire
YORKSHIRE.
CHAPTER XXXVIII.
AS the courses and confluents of great Rivers, are for the most part fresh in
memory, though their heads and fountains lie commonly unknown: so the latter
knowledge of great Regions, are not traduced to oblivion, though perhaps their
first originals be obscure, by reason of Antiquity, and the many revolutions of
times and ages. In the delineation therefore of this great Province of
Yorkshire, I will not insist upon the narration of matters near unto us; but
succinctly run over such as are more remote: yet neither so sparingly, as I may
seem to diminish from the dignity of so worthy a Country; nor so prodigally, as
to spend time in superfluous praising of that which never any (as yet)
dispraised. And although perhaps it may seem a labor unnecessary, to make
relation of ancient remembrances either of the Name or Nature of this Nation,
especially looking into the difference of Time it self (which in every age
brings forth diverse effects) and the dispositions of men, that for the most
part take less pleasure in them, than in divulging the occurrents of their own
times: yet I hold it not unfit to begin there, from whence the first certain
direction is given to proceed; for (even of these ancient things) there may be
good use made, either by imitation, or way of comparison, as neither the
reperition, nor the repetition thereof shall be accounted impertinent.

(2) You shall therefore understand: That the County of York was in the
Saxon-tongue called Ebona ycyne, and now commonly Yorkshire, far greater and
more numerous in the Circuit of her miles, than any Shire of England. She is
much bound to the singular love and motherly care of Nature, in placing her
under so temperate a clime, that in every measure she is indifferently
fruitful. If one part of her be stone, and a sandy barren ground: another is
fertile and richly adorned with Cornfieldsd. If you here find it naked, and
destitute of Woods, you shall see it there shadowed with Forests full of
Trees, that have very thick bodies, sending forth many fruitful and profitable
branches- If one place of it be Moorish, miry, and unpleasant; another makes a
free tender of delight, and presents it self to the Eye, full of beauty and
contentive variety.

(3) The Bishopric of Durham fronts her on the North-side, and is separated by
a continued course of the River Tees. The German-Sea lies sore upon her
East Side, beating the shores with her boisterous Waves and Billows. The West
part is bounded with Lancashire, and Westmerland. The Southside has Cheshire
and Darby-shire (friendly Neighbors unto her) with the which she is first
enclosed: then with Nottingham and with Lincoln-shires: after divided with that
famous Arm of the Sea Humber; Into which all the Rivers that water this
Country, empty themselves, and pay their ordinary Tributes, as into the common
receptacle and storehouse of Neptune, for all the watery Pensions of this
Province.

(4) This whole Shire (being of it self so spacious) for the more easy and
better ordering of her Civil Government, is divided into three parts: which
according to three quarters of the World, are called, The West Riding, The
East Riding, and The North Riding. West Riding is for a good space compassed
with the River Ouse, with the bounds of Lancashire, and with the South limits
of the Shire, and bears toward the West and South. East Riding bends it self
to the Ocean, with the which, and with the River Derwent she is enclosed, and
looks into that part where the Sun rising, and showing forth his Beams, makes
the World both glad and glorious in his brightness. North Riding extends it
self Northward, hemmed in as it were with the River Tees and Derwent, and a
long race of the River Ouse. The length of this Shire, extended from Horthill
in the South, to the mouth of Tees in the North, are near unto seventy miles,
the breadth from Flambrough-head to Horn-Castle upon the River Lu^, is
fourscore miles; the whole Circumference is three hundred and eight miles.

(5) The Soil of this County for the generality is reasonable fertile, and
yields sufficiency of Corn and Cattle within it self. One part whereof is
particularly made famous by a Quarry of Stone, out of which the stones newly
hewn be very soft, but seasoned with wind and weather of themselves do
naturally become exceeding hard and solid. Another, by a kind of Limstone
whereof it consists, which being burnt, and conveyed into the other parts of
the Country, which are hilly and somewhat cold, serve to manure and enrich
their Corn fields.

(6) That the Romans flourishing in military prowess, made their several
stations in this Country, is made manifest by their Monuments, by many
Inscriptions fastened in the Walls of Churches, by many Columns engraven with
Roman work lying in Churchyards, by many votive Altars dug up that were
erected (as it should seem) to their Tutelar Gods (for they had local and
peculiar Topic Gods, whom they honored as Keepers and Guardians of some
particular Places of the Country) as also by a kind of Brick which they used:
for the Romans in time of peace, to avoid and withstand idleness (as an enemy
to virtuous and valorous enterprises) still exercised their Legions and Cohorts
in casting of Ditches, making of Highways, building of Bridges, and making of
Bricks, which having sithence been found, and from time to time dug out of
the ground, prove the Antiquity of the place by the Roman Inscriptions upon
them.

(7) No less argument of the piety hereof, are the many Monasteries, Abbeys and
Religious Houses that have been placed in this Country; which whilst they
retained their own state and magnificence, were great ornaments unto it: but
since their dissolution, and that the Teeth of Time (which devours all things)
have eaten into them, they are become like dead Carcasses* leaving only some
poor Ruins and Remains alive, as Relics to Posterity, to show of what beauty
and magnitude they have been. Such was the Abbey of Whitby, founded by Lady
Hilda, daughter of the grandchild unto King Edwine. Such was the Abbey built
by Bolton, which is now so razed and laid level with the earth, as that at this
time it affords no appearance of the former dignity. Such was Kirks^alt Abbey,
of no small account in time past, founded in the year of Christ 1147. Such was
the renowned Abbey called S. Mary's in York, built and endowed with rich
livings by Ala^ the third Earl of Lit^^^ Britain in America; but since
converted into the Princes House, and is called The Manor. Such was the
wealthy Abbey of Eo^n^ains, built by Thurstan Archbishop of York. Such was the
famous Monastery founded in the Primitive Church of the East Saxons, by Wilfrid
Archbishop of York, and enlarged (being fallen down and decayed) by Od^
Archbishop of Canterbury. Such was Drax, a Religious House of Canons. Such,
that fair Abbey built by King William the Conqueror at Selby (where his Son
Henry the first was born) in memory of Saint German, who happily confuted that
contagious Pel^gia^ Heresy, which oftentimes grew to a Serpentine head in
Britain.

These places for Religion erected, with many more within this Provincial
Circuit, and consecrated unto holy purposes, show the antiquity, and how they
have been sought unto by confluences of Pilgrims in their manner of Devotions:
The mists of which superstitious obscurities, are since cleared by the pure
light of the Gospel revealed, and the skirts of Idolatry unfolded to her own
shame and ignominy: And they made subject to the dissolution of Times, serving
only as antique Monuments and remembrances to the memory of succeeding Ages.

(8) Many places of this Province are famous as well by Name, being naturally
fortunate in their situation, as for some other accidental happiness befaln
unto them. Hallifax, famous, as well for that Ioha^nes de sacr^ Bost^, Author
of the Sphere, was born there, and for the Law it has against stealing, and
for the greatness of the Parish, which reckons in it eleven Chapels, whereof
two be Parish Chapels, and in them to the number of twelve thousand People.

In former times it was called Horton, and touching the alteration of the name,
this pretty story is related of it; namely, That a Clerk (for so they call him)
being far in love with a Maid, and by no means either of long praises or large
promises, able to gain like affection at her hands, when he saw his hopes
frustrate, and that he was not like to have his purpose of her, turned his love
in rage, and cut off the Maids head, which being afterward hung upon an
Ewe-tree, common people counted it as an hallowed Relic till it was rotten:
And afterward (such was the credulity of that time) it maintained the opinion
of reverence and Religion still: for the People resorted thither on Pilgrimage,
and persuaded themselves, that the little Veins that spread out between the
Bark and Body of the Ewe trees like fine threads, were the very Hairs of the
Maids head. Hereupon it was called by this name Haligfax, or Halyfax, that is,
Haly Hair.

Pomfret is famous for the Site, as being seated in a place so pleasant, that
it brings forth Liqu^rice and great plenty of Skirtworts, but it is infamous
for the murder and bloodshed of Princes: The Castle whereof was built by
Hilde^^rt Laty, a Norman, to whom William the Conqueror gave this Town, after
Alrick the Saxon was thrust out of it.

(9) But I will sorbear to be prolix or tedious in the particular memoration of
places in a Pr^vince so spacious, and only make a compendious relation of York,
the second City of England, in Latin called Eboracum and Eburacum; by Ptolomy,
Brigantium (the chief City of the Brigants) by Ninius, Caer Ebrauc; by the
Britains, Caer Effroc. The British History reports that it took the Name of
Ebrau^ that founded it; but some others are of opinion, that Eburacum has no
other derivation than from the River Ous^ running through it: It over-masters
all the other places of this Country for fairness, and is a singular ornament
and safeguard to all the North-parts. A pleasant place, large, and full of
magnificence, rich, populous, and not only strengthened with fortifications,
but adorned with beautiful buildings, as well private as public. For the
greater dignity thereof, it was made an Episcopal See by Constantius, and a
Metropolitan City by a Pall sent unto it from Ho^^rius Egbert Archbishop of
York, who flourished about the year seven hundred forty erected in it a most
famous Library. Richard the third repaired the Castle thereof being ruinous,
and King Henry the eight appointed a Council in the same, to decide and
determine all the Causes and Controversies of the North parts, according to
Equity and Conscience: which Council consists of a Lord President, certain
Counselors at the Princes pleasure, a Secretary, and other Underofficers.

The original of this City cannot be fetched out but from the Romans, seeing the
Britains before the Romans came, had no other Towns than Woods fenched with
Trenches and Rampires, as Caesar and Strabo do testify. And that it was a
Colony of the Romans, appears both by the Authority of Ptolomy and Antonine,
and by many ancient Inscriptions that have been found there. In this City the
Emperor Severus had his Palace, and here gave up his last breath; which
ministers occasion to show the ancient custom of the Romans, in the military
manner of their burials.

His body was carried forth here by the Soldiers to the funeral fire, and
committed to the flames, honored with the ^usts and Tournaments both of the
Soldiers, and of his own Sons: His ashes bestowed in a little golden pot or
vessel of the Porphyrat stone, were carried to Rome, and shrined there in the
Monument of the Antonines. In this City (as Spartianus makes mention) was the
Temple of the Goddess B^llona; to which Severu^ (being come thither purposing
to offer Sacrifice) was erroniously led by a rustical Augur.

Here Fl. Valerius Co^stantius, surnamed Choru^ (an Emperor of excellent
virtue and Christian Piety) ended his life, and was Deified as appears by
ancient Coins: and his Son Constantine being present at his Fathers death;
forthwith proclaimed Emperor; from whence it may be gathered of what great
estimation York was in those days, when the Romans Emperors Court was held in
it. This City flourished a long time under the English-Saxons Dominion, till
the Da^es, like a mighty Storm, thundering from out of the North-East,
destroyed it, and distrained it with the blood of many slaughtered persons, and
wan it from Olbright and Ella Kings of No^thumberland, who were both stain in
their pursuit of the Danes: which Alcuine in his Epistle to Egelred King of
Northumberland, seemed to presage before, when he said; What signifies that
raining down of blood in St. Peter's Church of York, even in a fair day, and
descending in so violent and threatening a manner from the top of the roof? may
it not be thought that blood is coming upon the Land from the North parts?

Howbeit Athelstane recovered it from the Dantsh subjection, and quite
overthrew the Castle with the which they had fortified it; yet was it not (for
all this) so freed from Wars, but that it was subject to the Times fatally next
following. Nevertheless in the Conquerors time, when (after many woeful
overthrows and troublesome storms) it had a pleasant calm of ensuing Peace, it
rose again of it self, and flourished afresh, having still the helping hand of
Nobility and Gentry, to recover the former dignity, and bring it to the
perfection it has. The Citizens senced it round with new Walls, and many
Towers and Bulwarks, and ordaining good and wholesome Laws for the government of
the same: Which at this day are executed at the command of a Lord Mayor, who
has the assistance of twelve Aldermen, many Chamberlains, a Recorder, a
Town Clerk, six Sergeants at Mace, and two Esquires, which are, a Sword Bearer,
and the Common Sergeant, who with a great Mace goes on the left hand of the
Sword. The Longitude of this City, according to Mercators account, is ^9
degrees, and 35 scruples: the Latitude 54 degrees and forty scruples.

(10) Many occurents present themselves with sufficient matter of enlargement
to this discourse, yet none of more worthy consequence than were those several
Battles, fought within the compass of this County; wherein Fortune had her
pleasure as well in the proof of her love, as in the pursuit of her tyranny;
sometime sending the fruits of sweet peace unto her, and other whiles suffering
her to taste the sowreness of War.

At Conisborough (in the Britain Tongue Ca^r-Conan) was a great Battle fought
by Hengist, Captain of the English-Saxons, after he had retired himself thither
for his safety, his men being fled and scattered, and himself discomfited by
Aurelius Ambrosius; yet within few days after, he brought forth his men to
Battle against the Britains that pursued him, where the field was bloody both
to him and his; for many of his men were cut in pieces, and he himself had his
head chopped off, as the British History says; which the Chronicles of the
English-Saxons deny, reporting that he died in peace, being surcharged and
over-worn with the troublesome toils and travels of War.

Near unto Kirkstall, Oswie King of Northumberland put P^nda the Mercian to
flight: the place wherein the Battle was joined, the Writers call Winwid-Field,
giving it the name by the Victory: And the little Region about it (in times
past called by an old name Elmet) was conquered by Eadwin King of
Northumberland, the son of Aela, after he had expelled Cereticus a British
King, in the year of Christ, 620.

At Casterford (called by Antonine Legiotium and Legetium) the Citizens of York
slew many of King Ethelreds Army, and had a great hand against him, in so much
as he that before sat in his Throne of Majesty, was on a sudden daunted, and
ready to offer submission.

But the most worthy of memory, was that Field fought on Palm Sunday, 1461. in
the quarrel of Lancaster and York, where England never saw more puissant Forces
both of Gentry and Nobility: for there were in the Field at one time (partakers
on both sides) to the number of one hundred thousand fighting men. When the
fight bad continued doubtful a great part of the day, the Lancastrians not able
longer to abide the violence of their enemies, turned back and fled amain, and
such as took part with York, followed them so hotly in chase, and killed such a
number of Nobles and Gentlemen, that thirty thousand Englishmen were that day
left dead in the Field.

(11) Let us now loose the point of this Compass, and sail into some other
parts of this Province, to find out matter of other memorable moment. Under
Knausbrough there is a Well called Dropping Well, in which the waters spring
not out of the veins of the earth, but distill and trickle down from the Rocks
that hang over it: It is of this virtue and efficacy, that it turns Wood into
Stone: for what Wood soever is put into it, it will be shortly covered over
with a stony bark, and be turned into Stone, as has been often observed.

At Giggleswick also about a mile from Settle (a Market Town) there are certain
small Springs not distant a quaits cast from one another: the middlemost of
which does at every quarter of an hour ebb and flow about the height of a
quarter of a yard when it is highest, and at the ebb falls so low, that it is
not an inch deep with water. Of no less worthiness to be remembered is St.
Wilfrids Needle, a place very famous in times past for the narrow hole in the
close vaulted room under the ground, by which women's honesties were wont to be
tried, for such as were chaste pass through with much facility; but as many as
had played false, were miraculously held fals^, and could not creep through.
Believe if you list.

The credible report of a Lamp found burning (even in our Fathers remembrance,
when Abbeys were pulled and suppressed) in the Sepulcher of Constantius, within
a certain Vault or little Chapel under the ground, wherein he was supposed to
have been buried, might beget much wonde^ and admiration, but that Lazius
confirms, that in ancient times they had custom to preserve light in
Sepul^hres, by an artificial resolving of Gold into a liquid and fatty
substance, which should continue burning a long time, and for many ages
together.

(12) This Yorkshire Picture I will draw to no more length, lest I be
condemned with the Sophister, for insisting in the praise of Hercules, when no
man opposed himself in his discommendation. This Country of it self is so
beautiful in her own natural colors, (that without much help) she presents
delightful varieties both to the sight and other senses.

The Bishipprick oF DURHAM
map of the bishopric of Durham
The BISHOPRIC of DURHAM.
CHAPTER XXXIX.
THe Bishopric of Durham, contains those parts and Town-ships that lie
betwixt the River Tees and Derwent, and all along the German Seas. It is
neighboured on the North with Northumberland, and their Jurisdictions parted by
the River Derwent: her West is touched by Cumberland, Westmorland, and from
Stain-More divided by the River Tees, and by the same water on her South, from
Yorkshire even unto the Sea; and the East is altogether coasted by the
German-Seas.

(2) The form thereof is triangular, and sides not much differing; for from her
South-East, unto the West-point, are about thirty miles: from thence to her
North-east and Tyne-mouth, are likewise as many, and her base along the Sea
shore are twenty-three miles; the whole in circumference, about one hundred and
three miles.

(3) The Air is sharp and very piercing, and would be more, were it not that
the vapors from the German-Seas did help much to dissolve her Ice and Snow;
and the store of Coals therein growing and gotten, do warm the body, and keep
back the cold; which fuel besides their own use, does yield great commodities
unto this Province* by trade thereof into other parts.

(4) For Soil, it consists much alike of Pastures, Arable, and barren
grounds; the East is the richest and most champion, the South more moorish, but
well inhabited; her West all rocky, without either Grass or Grain,
notwithstanding recompenceth her possess^rs with as great gain, both in rearing
up Cattle, and bringing forth Coal, whereof all this County is plentifully
stored, and grows so near to the upper face of the earth, that in the
trod-ways the Cart-wheels do turn up the same. Some hold their substance to be
a clammy kind of clay hardened with heat abounding in the earth, and so becoming
concocted, is nothing else but Bitumen; for proof whereof, these Coals have
both the like smell and operation of Bitumen: for being sprinkled with water,
they burn more vehemently, bu^ with oil are quite extinguished and put out.

(5) The ancient Inhabitants known unto Ptolomy, were the Brigantes, of whom we
have spoken in the General of Yorkshire, they being subdued by the Romans;
after whom the Saxons made it a part of their Northumberland Kingdom; at first
a Province belonging to the Deirians, and enjoyed by Ella their first King;
afterward invaded by the Danes, and lastly possessed by the Normans: whose
site being so near unto Scotland, has many times felt their fury, and has
been as a Buckler betwixt them and the English; for which cause the Inhabitants
have certain freedoms, and are not charged with service as other Counties are,
so that this with Westmorland, Cumberland, and Northumberland, are not divided
into hundreds in those Parliament Rolls whence I had the rest; which want I
must leave for others to supply.

(6) Over this County, the Bishops thereof have had the Royalties of Princes;
and the Inhabitants have pleaded privilege not to pass in service of War over
the River of Tees or Tyne; whose charge (as they have alleged) was to keep and
defend the Corpse of S. Cuthbert their great adored Saint, and therefore they
termed themselves, The holy work folks. And the repute of this Cuthbert and his
supposed defense against the Scots was such, that our English Kings in great
devotion have gone in Pilgrimage to visit his Tomb, and have given many large
possessions to his Church: such were King Egfred, Aelfred, and Guthrun the
Dane, Edward and Athelstane Monarch of England, and zealous Canu^e, the
greatest of all, who came thither barefooted, and at Cuthberts Tomb both
augmented and confirmed their Liberties. This Saint then, of nothing made
Durham become great, and William the Conqueror, of a Bishopric made it a
County Palatine: at that time William Cereceph, Bishop of the Diocese, pulled
down the old Church which Aldwin had built, and with sumptuous cost laid the
foundation of a new, wherein S. Cuthberts Shrine in the vacancy of the Bishops,
was the Keep^er of the Castle-Keys.

In the West of this Church, and place called Gallile, the Marble-Tomb of
venerable Beda remains, who was born at Iarr^ in this County, and became a
Monk at Weremouth, whose painful industry and light of learning in those times
of darkness are wonderful, as the Volums which he wrote do well declare: And
had the idle Monks of England employed their time after his example, their
Founders expectations had not been frustrate, nor those Foundations so easily
overturned. But the revenge of sin ever following the actions of sins,
dissolved first the largeness of this Counties liberties, under the Reign of
King Edward the First, and since has shaken to pieces those places herein
erected under the Reign of King Henry ^he Eight: such were Durham, Sherborne,
Stayndrop, Iarro, Weremouth, and Egleton; all which felt the reward of their
idleness, and wrath of him that is jealous of his own honor.

(7) Things of rare note observed in this Shire, are three pits of a wonderful
depth, commonly called the Hell-Kettles, which are adjoining near unto
Darlington, whose waters are somewhat warm. These are thought to come of an
Earthquake, which happened in the year of Grace 1179, whereof the (...) of
Ti^-mouth makes mention, whose record is this: On Christmass-day, at Oxenhall
in the Territory of Darlington, within the Bishopric of Durham, the ground
heaved up aloft, like unto an high Tower, and so continued all that day, as it
were unmovable, until the evening; and then fell with so horrible a noise,
that it made all the neighbor dwellers sore afraid: and the earth swallowed it
up, and made in the same place a deep pit, which is there to be seen for a
testimony unto this day.

(8) Of no less admiration are certain Stones lying within the River Were, at
Butterbee (...) Durham; from whose sides at the Ebb and low Water in the
Summer, issues a certain salt (...) water, which with the Sun waxes white,
and growing into a thick substance, becomes a necessary Salt to the use of the
by-dwellers.

(9) And places of elder times had in account by the Romans, were Benovium, now
Bi^chester, and Condercum, Chester in the street, where their moneys have been
dug up, and at Condercum so much, that Egelrick Bishop of Durham was
therewith made exceeding rich.

This County has been strengthened with seven strong Castles, is yet traded
with six Market Towns, and Gods divine honor in one hundred and eighteen
Parish-Churches celebrated.

Westmorland and Comberla^d
map of Westmoreland and Cumberland
WESTMORLAND.
CHAPTER XL.
WESTMORLAND, by some late Latin Writers is called Westmaria, and
Westmorlandia, by some later Westmoria, and in our English Tongue Westmorland.
It came to be thus named in our language by the situation, which in every part
is so plenteously full of Moors and high Hills, reaching one to another, that
Westmorland (with us) is nothing else but a Western moorish Country. Having on
the and North-side Cumberland, on the South part Lanca-shire, on the East Side
Yorkshire, and the Bishopric of Durham.

(2) The length thereof extended from Burton in her South, to Kirkland in her
North part is 30 miles: the broadest part from East to West, is from the River
Eden to Dunbal raise stones, containing 24 miles, the whole circumference about
112 miles.

(3) The form thereof is somewhat long and narrow: the Air sharp and piercing,
purging it self from the trouble of gross foggy mists, and vapors, by reason
of which the people of this Province are not acquainted with strange diseases
or imperfections of body, but live long, and are healthful, and at^ain to the
number of many years.

(4) The Soil for the most part of it is but barren, and can hardly be brought
to any fruitfulness, by the industry and painful labor of the husbandman,
being so full of infertile places, which the Norteern Englismen call Moors;
yet the more Southerly part is not reported to be so sterile, but more fruitful
in the Valleys, though contained in a narrow room, between the River Lone, and
Winander-mear, and it is all termed by one name. The Barony of K^^dale or
Ca^dale, that is, the dale by Can, taking the name of the River Can, that runs
through it.

(5) The ancient Inhabitants of this County were the Brigantes, mentioned in
the several Counties of York* Lancaster and Cumberland.

(6) It is not commended either for plenty of Corn or Cattle, being neither
stored with Arable Grounds to bring forth the one, nor pasturage to breed up
the other: the principle profit that the People of this Province raise unto
themselves, is by Clothing.

(7) The chiefest place of which is Kandale or Kendale, called also Kirkeby
Kendale, standing on the Bank of the River Can. This Town is of great Trade and
resort, and for the diligent and industrious practice of making Cloth so excels
the rest, that in regard thereof it carries a super-eminent name above them,
and has great vent and Traffic for her Woollen-cloaths through all the parts
of England. It challenges not much glory for Antiquity; only that it
accounts it a great credit, that it has dignified three Earls with the title
thereof, as John Duke of Bedford, whom Henry the Fifth (being his brother)
advanced to that honor, John Duke of Somerset, and John de Foix, whom King
Henry the Sixth preferred to that dignity for his honorable and trusty
services done in the French Wars. It is a place of very civil and orderly
government, the which is managed by an Alderman, chosen every year out of his
twelve Brethren, who are all distinguished and notified from the rest by the
wearing of purple Garments. The Alderman and his Senior Brother are always
Justices of Peace and Quorum. There are in it a Town Clerk, a Recorder, two
Sergeants at Mace, and two Chamberlains. By Mathematical observation the site
of this Town is in the degree of Longitude 17, 30 scruples from the first
West-point, and the Pole elevated in Latitude to the degree 55, and 15 minutes.

(8) Places of memorable note for Antiquity are Vertera, mentioned by Antonine
the Emperor; and Aballaba, which we contractly call Apelby. In the one, the
Northern English conspired against William the Conqueror in the beginning of
the Norman Government. In the other, the Aurelian Maures kept a Station in the
time of the Romans, and their high street is yet apparently to be seen by the
ridges thereof, which lead by Apelby to a place called Brovonacum, mentioned in
the Book of Provincial notices. The antique pieces of Roman Coin otherwhiles
dug up hereabouts, and some Inscriptions not long ^ince found, show of what
continuance they have been: although Time, which devoureth all things, has so
fed upon their carcasses many Ages together, as it has almost consumed both
Houses and Inhabitants, for Apelby now is bare both of People and Building; and
were it not for the antiquity that makes it the more estimable, in whose Castle
the Assizes are commonly kept, it would be little better in account than a
Village. Verterae is long since decayed, and the name of it changed into Burgh:
for it is commonly named Burgh under Stanemore. In which, it is said, a Roman
Captain made his abode with a Band of Directores, in the declining Age of the
Roman Empire- These two places William of Newborough calls Princely Holds,
and writes, that William King of Scots a little before he himself was taken
Prisoner at Alnewicke, surprised them on a sudden, but King John recovered them
after, and liberally bestowed them upon Robert Vipont, for his many worth^
services.

(9) There is mention made but of one Religious House that has been in all
this Country, and that was a little Monastery seated near unto the River Loder,
built by Thomas the son of Gospatricke, the Son of Orms: where there is a
Fountain or Spring that Ebbs and Flows many times a day, and it is thought that
some notable Act of Achievement has been performed there, for that there be
huge Stones in form of Pyramides, some nine foot high, and fourteen foot thick,
ranged for a mile in length directly in a row, and equally distant, which might
seem to have been there purposely pitched in memory thereof: but what that Act
was it is not now known, but quite worn out of remembrance by Times injury.

(10) Other matters worthy of observation are only these: That at Ambogla^^,
now called Amble-side, near the upper-corner of Winander-Mear, there appears at
this day the ruins of an ancient City, which by the British-Bricks, by
Roman-Money oftentimes found there, by Highways paved leading unto it, and
other likelihoods, seems to have beed a work of the Romans: The Fortress
thereof so long fenced with a Ditch and Rampire, that it took up in length one
hundred thirty two Else, and in breadth eight. There are also near Kendale in
the River Can, two Catadupae or Waterfalls, where the Waters descend with such
a forcible downfall, that it compels a mighty noise to be heard, which the
neighbor Inhabitants make such use of, as they stand them in as good stead as
Prognostications: for when that which stands North from them sounds more
clear, and with a louder echo in their ears, they certainly look for fair
weather to follow* But when that on the South does the like, they expect foggy
mists and showers of rain.

(11) This Province is traded with four Market Towns, fortified with the
strength of seven Castles, and has 26 Parishes in it for the celebration of
Divine Service.

CUMBERLAND.
CHAPTER XLI.
CUMBERLAND, the furthest North-West Province in this Realm of England,
confronteth upon the South of Scotland, and is divided from that Kingdom partly
by the River Kirsop, then crossing Eske, by a tract through Solom^-Moss, until
it come to the Solwaye-Frith, by Ptolomy called the Itune-Bay. The North-West
part is neighboured by Northumberland, more Eastward with Westmerland, the
South with Lancashire, and the West is wholly washed with the Irish-Seas.

(2) The form whereof is long and narrow, pointing wedg-like into the South,
which part is altogether pestred with copped hills, and therefore has the name
of Cop-land. The middle is more level, and better inhabited, yielding
sufficient for the sustenance of man: but the North is wild and solitary,
cumbred with Hills, as Copland is.

(3) The Air is piercing, and of a sharp temperature, and would be more biting,
were it not that those high Hills break off the Northern storms, and cold
falling Snows.

(4) Notwithstanding, rich is this Province, and with great varieties thereof
is replenished: the Hills, though rough, yet smile upon their beholders, spread
with Sheep and Cattle, the Valleys stored with Grass and Corn sufficient: the
Sea affords great store of Fish, the Land overspread with variety of Fowls,
and the Rivers feed a kind of Muskle that brings forth Pearl, where in the
mouth of the Irt, as they lie gaping and sucking in Dew, the Country people
gather, and sell to the Lapidaries to their own little, and the buyers great
gain. But the Mines Royal of Copper, whereof this Country yields much, is for
use, the richest of all: the place is at Keswick and Newland, where likewise
the Black-Lead is gotten, whose plenty makes it of no great esteem; otherwise
a commodity that could hardly be missed.

(5) The ancient Inhabitants known to the Romans, were the Brigantes, whom
Ptolomy disperseth into Westmorland, Richmond, Durham, Yorkshire, and
Lancashire. But when the Saxons had overborn the Britains, and forced them out
of the best, to seek their resting among the vast Mountains, these by them were
entered into, where they held play with their enemies, maugre their force, and
from them, as Marianus does witness, the Land was called Cumber, of those
Kumbri the Britains. But when the State of the Saxons was sore shaken by the
Danes, this Cumberland was accounted a Kingdom of it self; for so the
Flower-gatherer of Westminster records: King Edmund (says he) with the help
of Leoline Prince of South Wales wasted all Cumberland, and having put out the
eyes of the (...) so^s of Dunmail King of that Province, granted that Kingdom
unto Malcolm King of Scots, whereof their eldest sons became Prefects. This
Province, King Stephen, to purch^se favor with the Scots, what time he stood
in most need of aid, confirmed by gift under their Crown; which Henry the
Second notwithstanding made claim unto and got, as Nubrigensis writes, and
laid it again in the Marches of England: since when, many bickerings betwixt
these Nations herein have happened, but none so bitter against the Scottish-side,
as was that at Salome Moss, where their Nobility disdaining their General
Oliver Sinclere, gave over the Battle, and yielded themselves to the English:
which dishonor pierced so deeply into to the heart of King James the fifth,
that for grief thereof he shortly after died.

(6) Many memorable Antiquities remain and have been found in this County: for
it being the Confines of the Romans Possessions, was continually secured by
their Garrisons, where remains at this day part of that admirable Wall built by
Severus: also another Fortification from (...) to El^^-Mo^th, upon the
Seashore toward Ireland, by Stillic^ raised, when under (...) he suppressed
the rage of the Picts and Irish, and freed the Seas of the Saxon Pirates. Upon
Hard-knot hill, Moresby, Old-Carleil, Pap-Castle along the Wall, and in many
other places, their ruins remain, with Altars, and I^scriptions of their
Captains and Colonies, whereof many have been found, and more as yet lie hid.

(7) The chiefest City in this Shire is Careile, pleasantly seated betwixt the
Rivers Eden, Petterel^, and Caud, by the Romans called Luguvallum; by Beda,
Luell; by Ptolomy, Leucopibia; by Ninius, Caer-Lualid; and by us Carlisle. This
City flourishing under the Romans, at their departure, by the furious outrages
of the Scots and Picts was dejected, yet in the days of Egfrid King of
Northumberland, was walled about: but again defaced by the overrunning Danes,
lay buried in her own ashes the space of two hundred years: upon whose ruins
at length Rufus set his compassionate eye, and built there the Castle, planting
a Colony of Flemings to secure the Coasts from the Scots, but upon better
advisement removed them into Wales. After him, Henry his Brother and Successor
ordained this City for an Episcopal See; whose site is placed in the degree of
Longitude from the first West part 17 and 2 scruples, and the Pole thence
elevated from the degree of Latitude 55 and 56 scruples.

(8) West from hence, at Burgh upon the Sand, was the fatal end of our famous
Monarch King Edward the First, who there leaving his Wars unfinished against
Scotland, left his troubles, and soon missed life, to his untimely and soon
lamented death.

(9) And at Salkelds upon the River Eden, a Monument of seventy seven Stones,
each of them ten foot high above ground, and one of them at the entrance
fifteen, as a Trophy of Victory was erected. These are by the By-dwellers
called Long-Meg and her Daughters.

(10) This Country, as it stood in the Fronts of Assaults, so was it
strengthened with twenty-five Castles, and preserved with the Prayers (as then
was thought) of the V^taries in the Houses erected at Carlil^, L^ncroft, Wether
all, Holme, Daker, and Saint Bees. These with others were dissolved by King
Henry the Eight, and their revenues shadowed under his Crown: but the Province
being freed from the charge of Subsidy, is not therefore divided into Hundreds
in the Parliament Roles, whence we have taken the divisions of the rest: only
this is observed, that therein are seated nine Market Towns, fifty eight
Parish-Churches, besides many other Chapels of Ease.

NORTHUMBERLAND
map of Northumberland
NORTHUMBERLAND.
CHAPTER XLII.
THE County of Northumberla^d, has on the South the Bishopric of Durham,
being shut in with the River Derwent, and with Tyne; the North is confined upon
Scotland, the West upon part of Scotland and part of Cumberland; the East Side
lies altogether upon the Sea, called Mare Germanicum:

(2) The form thereof is Triangular, and differs not much in the sidings; for
from her South-East unto the South-West point are near unto 40 miles; from
thence to her North-point are sixty miles, and her base along the Seashore 45
miles: The whole in circumference is about one hundred forty five miles.

(3) The Air must needs be subtle and piercing, for that the Northernly parts
are most exposed to extremity of weathers, as great winds, hard fro^ts, and
long lying of snows, etc. Yet would it be far more sharp than it is, were not
the German-S^as a ready means to further the dissolution of her Ice and Snow,
and the plenty of Coals there gotten, a great help to comfort the Body with
marmth, and defend it from the bitter coldness.

(4) The soil cannot be rich, having neither fertility of ground for Corn or
Cattle, the most part of it being rough, and in every place hard to be man^red,
save only toward the Sea and the River Tyne, where, by the great diligence and
industrious pains of good husbandry, that part is become very fruitful.

(5) The ancient Inhabitants of this Country, mentioned by Ptolomy, were called
OTTALINI, OTTADENI, and OTTADINI, which by an ea^ie alteration (as M. C^mbden
says, if it had been called OTTATINI, signifying, about the River Tyne, or on
the further side of Ty^e, (for so this People were planted) there would have
been much consonance both with the name of the Inhabitants, and the Position
and Site of the Province.

(6) The chiefest commodity that enricheth this County, are those Stones
Linthancrates, which we call Sea-coals, whereof there is such plenty and
abundance dug up, as they do not only return a great gain to the
Inhabitants, but procure also much pleasure and profit to others.

(7) No place of ^his Province vents forth so many of these Sea-coals into
other Regions, as New Castle does, being the very Eye of all the Towns in this
County: for it does not only minister relief (by such provision) to all other
parts of England, but does also furnish the wants of foreign Countries with her
plenty. By means of this and the intercouse of Traffic which it has, the
place is grown exceeding rich and populous. Before the Conquest it was called
Monk-chester: having been (as it seemed) in the possession of ^onks: and
Chester being added, which signifies a Bulwark or place of defense, and shows
that in ancient time it had been a place of Fortification.

(8) After the Conquest it got the name of Newcastle, by the New Castle which
Robert the Son of William the Conqueror built there, out of the ground. What
it was called in old time is not known, yet some are of opinion, that it may be
thought to have been Gatrosentum, for that Gates^ead, the suburb (as it were)
of the same, expresses in their own proper signification that British name,
Gatrosentum. It is now most ennobled both by the Haven (which Tyne makes) of
that not able depth, that it bears very tall Ships, and is able to defend
them against Storms and Tempests. As also by many favors and honors wherewith
it has been dignified by Princes: for Richard the Second granted that a Sword
should be carried before the Mayor, and Henry the Sixth made it a County
consisting of a Corporation within it self. It is adorned with four Churches,
and fortified with strong Walls that have eight gates. It is distant from the
first West line 21 degrees and 30 minutes and from the Equinoctial-line toward
the North Pole thirty four degrees and fif^y-seven minutes.

(9) The utmost Town in England, and the strongest Hold in all Britain, is
Barwick. From whence it had the name is not certainly made known. Some fetch it
from Berengarius, a Duke (never read of:) Howsoever, this is better to be said
than trusted: and whencesoever it has the name, it is seated between two
mighty Kingdoms, shooting far into the Sea, with the which and the River Tweed,
it is almost encompassed: and whenever any discord fell between the two
Nations, this place was the first thing they took care of. It has endured the
brunts of diverse inroads and incursions, and been oftentimes possessed and
repossessed of the S^ots and English: But since it was reduced under the
command of Edward the Fourth, our Kings have from time to time so strengthened
it with new Works and Fortifications, as they cut off all hopes of winning it.
The Governor of this Town is also Warden of the East-Marches against Scotland.
The Longitude of it according to Mathematical observation, is 21 degrees and 43
minutes: the Latitude 55 degrees and 48 minutes.

(10) The Inhabitants of this Country are a warlike People, and excellent
Horsemen, and ar^ made fierce and hard by the several encounters of the Scots,
and not much unlike them in neither, betwixt whom in this County, many Battles
have been fought, and the successes oftentimes waved through very doubtfully,
the Victory sometimes falling to the Scots, sometimes to the English. At
Otterburne was one, in which three or four times it stood doubtfully
indifferent, till in the end the Scots got the upperhand of the English:
Howbeit, their glory was not made so illustrious by this Conquest, but that it
was as much darkened by the foil they received at Anwicke, where William. King
of Scots was taken and presented Prisoner to Henry the Second. As also by that
Battle at Brumridge, Where King Athelstan fought a pitched field against Anlafe
the Dan^, Constantine King of (...), and E^genius King of Cumberland, and that
with such fortuna^e success, as it has left matter sufficient to fill the pens
of Historians. Flodden-Field also, memorable in the death of James the fourth,
King of Scots, who was there slain, and his Army overthrown in a sharp Fight,
as he displayed his Banner (in great hope) against England, when King Henry the
Eight lay at the siege of Turnay in France.

(11) Other Battles in this County have been, as that at Hexam (called by Beda,
Hangust^ld) wherein John Nevil, Marquess M^ntacute, encountered the Leaders of
the Lancastrian Faction with much courage, and with greater success, put them
to flight, for which he was made Earl of Northumberland by Edward the Fourth.
As also that of Dilston, (by Beda called Devilshurne) where Oswald having the
Faith of Christ for his Defense and Armor, slew Cedwall the Britain in a set
Battle himself straightwaies becoming a professed Christian, and causing his
people to be instructed in Christain Religion.

(12) Many memorable Antiquities are found in this Country along the Wall, and
in other places: As pieces of Coin, Inscriptions, broken and unperfect Altars,
etc. the ruins of the Wall yet to be seen: but none that deserves more to be
remembered than Wall-Town (by Beda called Ad Murum) for that Segebert King of
the East Saxons was in it baptized in the Christian Faith by the hands of
Paulinus: and Halyston, where the said Paulinus is said to have baptized many
thousands into the Faith of Christ in the Primitive Church of the English
Nation.

(13) Busy-gap is a place infamous for robbing and thieving, and is therefore
rather remembered as a cautionary note for such as have cause to travel that
way, than for any proper matter of worth it has, that merits place with other
parts of this Province.

Other matters of observation are only these, that North-Tyne (running through
the Wall) waters two Dales, which breed notable light-horse-men, and both of
them have their hills^ (hard by) ^o boggy, and standing with water on the top,
that no horsemen are able to ride through them, and yet (which is wonderful)
there be many great heaps of Stones (called Laws) which the neighboring people
are verily persuaded were cast up and laid together in old time, in remembrance
of some that were slain there. There is also a martial kind of Men which lie
out, up and down in little Cottages (called by them Sheals and Shealings) from
April to August, in scattering fashion, summering (as they term it) their
Cattle, and these are such a sort of people as were the ancient Nom^d^s^ The
last, not least, matter of note is this, that the Inhabitants of Morpeth set
their own Town on fire in the year of Christ 1215, in the spite they bare to
King John, for that he and his Rutars overran these Countries.

This County has five Market Towns in it for her Trade of Buying and Selling,
26 Castles for her strength and fortification, and 460 Parish-Churches for
Divine Service.

THE ISLE OF MAN
map of the Isle of Man
MAN-ISLAND.
CHAPTER XLIII.
THe Isle of Man is termed by Ptolomy, Moneda; by Pliny, Menabia; by Or^sius,
M^navia: by Beda, Menavia secunda, and by Gildas; Eubonia, and Menaw. The
Britains name it Menow; the Inhabitants Maninge; and we Englishmen; The Isle of
Man. It boundeth Northward upon Scotland, Southward upon the Isle of Auglesey,
Eastward upon part of Lanca-shire, and Westward upon the Coast of Ireland.

(2) The form is long and narrow, for from Cranston to the Mull-hills, where it
is longest, it only stretches it self to twenty nine miles; but from the
widest part, which is from Peele-Castle to Douglas-point, are scarce nine; the
whole compass about, is fourscore and two miles*

(3) The Air is cold and sharp, being bordering upon the Septentrion^l parts,
and for her shelter having but a wall of water. They have few Woods, only they
light sometimes upon subterranean trees buried under the ground, by digging up
the earth for a clammy kind of Turff, which they use for fuel.

(4) The Soil is reasonable fruitful both for Cattle, Fish, and Corn; yet it
rather commends the pains of the People than the goodness of the ground; for
by the Industry of the Inhabitants it yields ^uffciently of every thing for
it self, and sends good store into other Countries. It has Fields (by good
manuring) plenteous of Barley and Wheat, but especially of Oats; and from hence
it comes that the People eat most of all Oaten-bread. It bears abundance of
Hemp and Flax, and is full of mighty Flocks of Sheep and other Cattle: yet are
they smaller in body than those we have in England, and are much like to the
Cattle in Ireland that are neighboring upon it.

(5) This Commodity makes this I^land more happy than we are here: for the
People are there free from unnecessary commencements of Suits, from long and
dilatory Pleas, and from frivolous feeing of Lawyers. No Judge or Clerks of the
Count take there any penny for drawing Instruments, or mak^ng of Processes. All
Controversies are there determined by certain Judges, without writings or other
charges, and them they all Deemsters, and choose forth among themselves. If any
complaint be made to the Magistrate for wrong, either done or suffered, he
presently takes up a Stone, and fixes his mark upon it, and so delivers it
unto the Party Plaintiff, by virtue of which he both calls his Adversary to
appearance, and to produce his Witnesses. If the Case fall out to be more
litigious, and of greater consequence than can easily be ended, it is then
referred to twelve Men, whom they term, The Keys of the Island. Another
happiness enricheth this Island, namely, the Security and Government thereof,
as being defended from neighbor Enemies by Soldiers that are p^est and ready;
for on the South side-of the Isle stands Bala-Curi (the Bishops chief place of
residence) and the Pyl^, and a Blockhouse standing in a little Island, where
there is a continual Garrison of Soldiers. And it is so well managed for
matter of rule and civil Discipline, that every man there possesses his own in
peace and safety. No man lives in dread or danger of what he has. Men are not
there inclined to Robbing or Thieving, or Licentious living.

(6) The Inhabitants of this Island are for the most part religious, and loving
to their Pastors, to whom they do much reverence and respect, frequenting daily
to Divine Service, without division in the Church, or innovation in the
Commonwealth. The wealthier sort, and such as hold the fairest possessions, do
imitate the people of Laca-shire, both in their honest carriage and good
housekeeping. Howbeit, the common sort of People both in their language and
manners, come nighest unto the Irish, although they somewhat relish and favor
of the qualities of the Norw^gians.

(7) Things not worthy to be buried in the grave of oblivion are, that this
Island in the midst thereof rises up with hills, standing very thick; amongst
which the highest is called Sceafull, from whence upon a clear and fair day, a
man may easily see three Kingdoms at once; that is, Scotland, and Ireland. This
Isle prohibits the customary manner of begging from door to door, detesting the
disorders, as well Civil as Ecclesiastical of Neighbor Nations. And the last,
not least, that deserves to be committed to memory, is, that the women of this
Country, wheresoever they go out of their doors, gird themselves about with the
Winding Sheet that they purpose to be buried in, to show themselves mindful of
their mortality: and such of them as are at any time condemned to die, are
sowed within a Sack, and flung from a Rock into the Sea.

(8) The whole Isle is divided into two parts, South and North, whereof the one
resembles the Scottish in Speech, the other the Irish. It is defended by two
Castles, and has seventeen Parishes, five Market Towns, and many Villages.

A Chronicle of the Kings of MAN.
CHAPTER XLIV.
IT is here very pertinent to the purpose, to insert a small History of this
Island, that the achievements heretofore had, may not be utterly buried,
although they are waxen very old, and almost torn from remembrance by the teeth
of ^ime. I is confessed by all, that the Britains held this Island, as they did
all Britain. But when the Nations from the North overflowed these South parts,
like violent tempests. it became subject to the the Scots. Afterward, the
Norwegians who did most hurt from the Northern Sea by their manifold robberies,
made this Island and the Hebrides to be their haunt, and erected Lords and
pe^^y Kings in the same, as is expressed in this Chronicle, written (as is
reported) by the Monks of the Abbey of Russin.

A Chronicle of the Kings of MAN.
ANno Dom. 1065 Edward, of blessed memory, King of England, departed this life,
and Harald the Son of Godwin succeeded him in the Kingdom: against whom Harold
Harfager (King of Norway) came into the Field, and fought a Battle at
Stainfordbridge: but the English obtaining the Victory put them all to flight.
Out of which chase Godred, surnamed Crovan, the Son of Harald the black of
Iseland, came unto Godred the Son of Syrric, who reigned then in Man, and
honorably received him.

(2) The same year William the Bastard conquered England, and Godred the Son of
Syrric died, his Son Fingal succeeding him.

(3) An. 1066. Godred Crovan assembled a great Fleet, and came to Man, and
fought with the people of the Land, but received the worst, and was overcome.

The second time renewing his Forces and his Fleet, he sailed into Man, and
joined Battle with the Manksmen but was vanquished as before, and driven out of
the Field. Howbeit, what he could not at first bring to pass with power in
those two several onsets, he afterward effected by policy. For the third time
gathering a great multitude together, he arrived by night in the haven called
Ramsey, and hid three hundred men in a Wood, which stood upon the hanging
hollow brow of an Hill called Sceafull. The Sun being risen, the Manksmen put
their People in order of Battle, and with a violent charge encountered with
Godred. The fight was hot for a time, and stood in a doubtful suspense till
those three hundred Men starting out of the Ambush behind their backs, began to
foil the Manksmen, put them to the worst, and forced them to fly. Who seeing
themselves thus discomfited, and finding no place of refuge le^t them to
escape, with pitiful lamentation submitted themselves unto Godred, and besought
him not to put the Sword such poor remainder of them as was left alive. Godred
having compassion on their calamities, (for he had been pursed for a time and
brought up among them) sounded a Retreat, and prohibited his Host any longer
pursuit. He being thus possessed of the Isle of Man, died in the Island that is
called Isle, when he had reigned sixteen years. he left behind him three sons
Lagman, Harald, and Olave.

(4) Lagman the eldest, taking upon him the Kingdom, reigned seven year. His
brother Harald rebelled against him a great while; but at length was taken
Prisoner by Lagman, who caused his members of generation to be cut off, and his
eyes to be put out of his head: which curelty this Lagman afterward repenting,
gave over the Kingdom of his own accord, and wearing the Badge of the Lords
Cross, took a journey to Jerusalem, in which he died.

(5) An. 1075. All the Lords and Nobles of the Islands hearing of the death of
Lagman, dispatched Ambassadors to Murccard O^brien, King of Ireland, and
requested that he would send some worthy and industrious man of the Blood Royal
to be their King, till Olave, the son of Godred came to full age. The King
yielding to their request, sent one Dopnald the son of Tade, and charged him to
govern the Kingdom (which by right belonged to another) with lenity and
gentleness. But after he was come to the Crown, forgetting or not weighing the
charge that his Lord and Master had given him, swayed his place with great
Tyranny, committing many outrages and cruelties, and so reigned three years:
till all the Princes of the Islands agreeing together, rose up against him, and
made him fly into Ireland.

(6) An. Dom. 1111. Olave the son of Godred Craven aforesaid, began his Reign,
and reigned forty years a peaceable Prince. He took to wife Africa, the
daughter of Fergus of Galway, of whom he begat Godred. By his Concubines he had
Raignald, Lagman, and Harald, besides many daughters, whereof one was married
to Summerled, Prince of Herergaidel, who caused the ruin of the Kings of the
Islands. On her he begat four sons, Dulgal, Raignald, Engus and Olave.

(7) An. Dom. 1144. Godred the son of Olave, was created King of Man, and
reigned thirty years. In the third year of his Reign the People of Dublin sent
for him, and made him their King. Which Murecard King of Ireland maligning,
raised War, and sent Osibeley his half brother by the Mothers side with 3000
Men at Arms to Dublin, who by Godred and the Dublinians was slain, and the rest
all put to flight, These Achievements made, Godred returned to Man, and began
to use Tyranny, turning the Noblemen out of their Inheritances. Whereupon one
called Th^rsin (Otters son) being mightier than the rest, came to Summerled,
and made Dulgal (Summerleds son) King of the Islands: whereof Godred having
intelligence, prepared a Navy of 80 Ships to meet Summerled. And in the year
1156 there was a Battle fought at Sea on Twelfth day at night, and many slain
on both sides. But the next day they grew to a pacification, and divided the
Kingdom of the Islands among themselves. This was the cause of the overthrow of
the Kingdom of the Isles.

(8) An. 1158. Summerled came to Man, with a Fleet of fifty three Sail, put
Godred to flight, and wasted the Island. Godred upon this crossed over to
Norway for aid against Summerled. But Summerled in the mean time arriving at
Rhinfrin, and having gathered together a Fleet of 160 Ships, coveting to subdue
all Scotland, by the just Judgment of God, was vanquished by a few, and both
himself and his son slain, with an infinite number of people.

(9) The fourth day after, Raignald began to reign, but Godred coming upon him
out of Norway with a great number of Armed Men, took his Brother Raignald, and
bereft him both of his Eyes and Genital Members. On the fourth Ides of
November, An. Dom. 1187. Godred King of the Islands died, and his body was
translated to the Isle of Ely. He left behind him three sons, Raignald, Olave,
and Tvar. He ordained in his life time that Olave should succeed him, because
he only was born legitimate. But the people of Man seeing him to be scarce ten
years old, sent for Raignald, and made him their King. This caused great
division, and many turbulent attempts between the two Brethren for the space of
thirty eight years; which had no end, till at a place called Tingualla there
was a Battle struck between them, wherein Olave had the Victory, and Raignald
was slain. The Monks of Russin translated his Body unto the Abbey of S. Mary de
Fournes, and there interred it in a place which himself had chosen for that
purpose.

(10) An. 1230. Olave and Godred Don (who was Raignalds son) with the
Norwegiaus came to Man, and divided the Kingdom among themselves. Olave held
Man, and Godred being gone unto the Islands, was slain in the Isle Lodaus. So
Olave obtained the Kingdom of the Isles. He died the twelfth Calends of June,
Anno 1237. in Saint Patricks-Islands, and was buried in the Abbey of Russin.

(11) Harold his Son succeeded him, being fourteen years of Age, and reigned 12
years. In the year 1239 he went unto the King of Norway, who after two years
confirmed unto him, his Heirs and Successors, under his Seal, all the Islands
which his Predecessors had possessed.

(12) An. 1242. Harald returned out of Norway, and being by the Inhabitants
honorably received, had peace with the Kings of England and of Scotland. The
same year he was sent for by the King of Norway, and married his Daughter. In
the year 1249 as he returned homeward with his Wife, he was drowned in a
Tempest near unto the Coasts of Radland.

(13) An. Dom. 1249. Raignald the Son of Olave, and brother to Harold, began
his reign and on the thirtieth day thereof was slain by one Tvar a Knight, in a
Meadow near unto the holy Trinity-Church, and lies buried in the Church of S.
Mary of Russin.

(14) In the year 1252. Magnus the son of Olave, came to Man, and was made
King. The next year following he went to the King of Norway, and stayed there a
year.

(15) In the year 1265. Magnus (Olaves son) King of Man, and of the Islands,
departed this life, at the Castle of Russin, and was buried in the Church of S.
Mary of Russin.

(16) In the year 1266 the Kingdom of the Islands was translated, by reason of
Alexander King of Scots, who had gotten into his hands the Western Islands, and
brought the Isle of Man under his dominion, as one of that number.

(17) An. 1340. William Montacute Earl of Salisbury wrested it from the
Scottish by strong hand and force of Arms: and in year the 1393 (as Thomas
Walsingham says) he sold Man and the Crown thereof unto William Scroope for a
great sum of money. But he being beheaded for high Treason, and his Goods
confiscate; it came into the hands of Henry the Fourth King of England, who
granted this Island unto Henry Piercy Earl of Northumberland. But Henry Piercy
entering into open Rebellion the fifth year following, the King sent Sir John
Stanley and William Stanley to seize the Isle and Castle of Man, the
inheritance whereof he granted afterward to Sir John Stanley and his Heirs by
Letters Patents, ^with the Patronage of the Bishopric, etc. So that his Heirs
and Successors, who were honored with the Title of Earls of Darby, were
commonly called Kings of Man.

HOLY ISLAND
map of Lindisfarne GARNSEY
map of Guernsey FARNE
map of the Farne Islands IARSEY
map of Jersey
HOLY-ISLAND.
CHAPTER XLV.
THis Island is called Lindisfarne, by the River Lied that is opposite unto it
on the Coast of Northumberland. Beda termed it a Dem^-Island. The Britains name
it Iuis Medicante, for that it twice every day suffers an exordinary
inundation and overflowing of the Ocean in manner of an Island, which twice
likewise makes it continent to the Land, and returning unto her watery
habitation, lays the Shore bare again, as before. It is called in English,
Holy-Island, for that in ancient times many Monks have been accustomed to
retired themselves thither, and to make it their receptacle for solitude:
having on the West and South, Northumberland, and more South Eastward the
Island Farne.

(2) The form of it is long and narrow, the West Side narrower than the East,
and are both conjoined by a very small spang of Land that is left unto Conies.
The South is much broader than the rest. It is from East to West, about two
thousand two hundred and fifty paces: and from North to South, twelve hundred
and fifty paces; so that the circumference cannot be great.

(3) The Air is not very good either for health or delight, as being seated on
those parts that are subject to extremity of cold, and greatly troubled with
vapou^s and foggy mists that arise from the Seas.

(4) The Soil cannot be rich, being rocky and full of Stones, and unfit for
Corn and Tillage. It is neither commended for Hills to feed Sheep, nor Pastures
to fat Cattle; neither has it Valleys replenished with sweet Springs, or
running Rivolets, only one excepted, descending from a standing Pond. The only
thing this Island yields, is a fit and accommodate aptitude for Fishing and
Fowling.

(5) Notwithstanding, this is very worthy of note concerning the same, which
Alcun wrote in an Epistle to Egelred King of Northumberland, namely, that it
was a place more venerable than all the places of Britain, and that after the
departure of S. Paulinus from York, there Christian Religion began in their
Nation, though afterward it there felt the first beginning of misery and
calamity, being left to the spoil of Pagans and Miscreants.

(6) It is also remembered of this Island, that sometime there has been in it
an Episcopal See, which Aidan the Scot instituted (being called thither to
Preach the Christian Faith to the People of Northumberland) being thus
delighted with the solitary situation thereof, as a most fit place for
retirement. But afterward when the Danes rifled all the Seacoasts, the
Episcopal See was translated to Durham.

(7) This Island so small in account either for compass or commodity, and so
unpeopled and unprofitable, cannot be numerous in Towns and Villages. It has
in it only one Town, with a Church and a Castle, under which there is a
commodious Haven, defended with a Block-house, situate upon an Hill toward the
South-East.

FARNE-ISLE.
THis Isle South-Eastward seven miles from Holy-Island, shows it self distant
almost two miles from Brambrough Castle. On the West and South it bears upon
Northumberland, and on the North-east-side it has other smaller Islands
adjoining to it, as Widopons and Staple-Island, which lie two miles off
Bronsinan, and two lesser than these, which are called the Wambes.

(2) The Form of this I^le is round, and no longer in compass than may easily
be ridden in one half of a day. The breadth of it is but five miles* and the
length no more. The whole circumference extends it self no further than to
fifteen miles.

(3) The Air is very unwholsom, and subject both to many Dysenteries and other
Diseases, by reason of the mi^ty Fogs and Exhalations that are thereunto drawn
up from the Ocean. It is many times troubled with unusual Tempests of Winds,
with boisterous ^ury of stormy Rains, and with several and uncouth rages of the
Sea.

(4) The Soil cannot be fertile, being incircled about with craggy Clifts;
neither has it in it much matter either of pleasure or profit. It can neither
defend it self from Cold, lacking Fuel, as Wood, Coal, Turffs, etc. Nor from
Famine, wanting Food, as Corn, Pastures, Cattle, etc. The best Commodity it
yields, is Fish and Fowl.

(5) This thing nevertheless is worthy to be remembered of it, which Beda
(writing of the Life of Cuthbert Bishop of Lindisfarne, that Tutelar Patron of
the Northern E^glishmen) reports, namely, that in this Isle he built a City
fitting his Government, and erected certain Houses in the same; the whole
building standing almost round in compass, and reaching the space of four or
five Pearches. The Wall about it, he made higher than a Man's height, to
withold and keep in the wanton lasciviousness both of his thoughts and eyes,
and to elevate the whole intention of his mind up to heavenly desires, that he
might wholly give himself to the service of God. But these are all made the
ruins of time, as sithence many other Monuments have been of worthy Antiquity.

(6) I cannot report that there are now many Houses standing in it, much less
Towns or Villages: Only this, that it has a Tower or Place of Fortification
belonging unto it, placed well-neer in the middle part of the Isle.

GARNSEY.
THis Island lies about five leagues North-West from Iersey, and is compa^^ed
(like to her neighbor) with the British Sea. It lies in length from
Plymouth-Bay South-West, to Lancro^se de Anckers North-East, thirteen miles: in
breadth from S. Martins-point South-East, to the How North-West nine miles:
and is in circuit thirty six miles. The Emperor Antonine having the rule and
dominion of France (at that time called Gaul, from whence the word Gallia is
derived) did name this Island Sarnia, which afterward by the change of Times
and corruption of Languages, was long since (and is at this day) called Garnsey.

(2) This Isle in form and fashion stands in the Sea, much like to a Park
that is encompassed ^ound about with a Pale of Rocks, being very defensible
unto the Island from the attempting invasion of Enemies.

(3) The Air and Climate of this Isle has little or no difference in temper or
quality from that of Iersey. And this deserves to be remembered of it; that in
this Isle is neither Toad, Snake, Adder, or any other venomous creature, and
the other has great plenty.

(4) It stands for the most part upon a Rock, very high in many places from
the Sea. Nevertheless the Soil is very fruitful, yielding forth great plenty of
Grass for their Sheep and other Cattle, which they have to serve all uses.
Their Fields in the Summer time are so naturally ga^nished with Flowers of all
sorts, that a man (being there) might conceit himself to be in a pleasant
artificial Garden.

(5) The Inhabitants are not so much given to Tillage as they of Iersey, though
the Soil be as fruitful. They have of late taken great delight in Planting and
Setting of Trees of all sorts, and especially of Apples, by reason whereof they
make much Sider. Their Commodities are alike, and their helps from the Sea no
less, or rather more.

(6) In this Isle are many great ^teep Rocks, among which is found a hard stone
called by the ^re^ch-Men, Smyris, which we term Emerill. The Stone is
serviceable for many purposes, and many Trades, as Glasiers, etc. but
especially for the Goldsmiths and Lapidaries, to cut their precious Stones.

(7) It has a head of Land upon the North part thereof, the passage into which
is so narrow, that a man would think that at every Tide (the Sea beating
strongly on both sides) it were in a continual danger to be fundred from the
other part of the Isle. This place is called S. Mic^^^l in the Vale, where (in
former times) stood a Priory, or a Covent of Religious Persons, the ruins
whereof are at this day to be seen.

(8) The government of this Isle, in nature and for^ rese^bles the other of
I^rs^y, of whom shall be said. The People in their Original and Language alike
also, but in their Customs nnd Conditions they come nearer the civil fashions
of the English, Other matters of mo^ent I find not worthy to be recorded.

It has ten Parishes, and one Market Town, being also a Haven, and is called
S. (...) ^lose by the Peer,, and Cast^-Corn^t.

IERSEY.
THe two Islands Iersey and Garnsey, being the only remains of the Dukedom of
Normandy; that in former times many years together was in the possession, and
under the command of the Kings of England, annexing thereunto a large Territory
and glorious Title to the Crown, are both seated in the Sea called Mare
Britannicum, the Ocean parting them a good distance asunder, and are now both
adjuncts, and within the circuit of Hampshire. For the first (being the Isle of
Iersey) it lies upon the British-Sea, having on the North parts the Coasts of
Hampshire, and on the South the Country of Normandy.

(2) This Island is long, not much unlike the fashion of an Egg. It contains in
length from Sentw^n-Poole upon the West, to Mount-Orguil Castle on the East,
ten miles, and in breadth from Dubonpoint to Plymoun^-bay, six miles: the whole
circuit of the Island being thirty eight miles. It is distant from a little
Island ca^^ed Alderney, about four leagues. It was in old time called Caesaria;
whether from Julius Octavius, or any the other Caesar's that followed, is
unknown. But the Frenchmen have by corruption of speech long time called it
Iersey.

(3) It is a very pleasant and delightful Island, and gives a pleasant aspect
unto the Seas. It lies Southward not far from a craggy ridge of Rocks, which
is much feared of the Mariners, and makes the passage that way very dangerous,
howbeit it serves for a forcible defense against Pirates, or any stranger that
attempts invasion, and they are termed Casquets.

(4) The Soil is very fertile, bringing forth store of Corn and Cattle, but
especially of Sheep, that are of reasonable bigness, the most of them bearing
four horns apiece: Their Wool very fine and white, of which the Inhabitants
make their Iersey Stockings, which are ordinarily to be had in most parts of
England, and yield a great commodity unto the Island.

(5) The first original of the Inhabitants sprung either from the Normans or
Britains, or both. They speak French, though after a corrupt manner, and have
continued their Names, Language, Customs, and Country, without any, or little
intermix^ure, these many hundred years, having been under the jurisdiction of
the English ever since the untimely and unnatural death of Robert Duke of
Normandy, eldest son to William the Conqueror.

(6) The People of this Country live very pleasantly, as well by the profits of
the Land, as the helps and furtherances of the Sea, that yields unto them (and
especially in Summer season) great store of Fish but principally for Conger and
Lobsters, the greatest and fat^est upon the Coa^t of England. Wood is very
scant, for their best Fuel is Turff, some Coal they have brought unto them, but
it is very dear; Straw, Furrs's, and Fern serving their ordinary uses. The
middle part of the Island has many pretty Hills rising in it, yielding a
delightful object unto the Valleys, that receive from one another a mutual
pleasure.

(7) The Governor of this I^le is the Captain thereof, who appoints certain
Officers under him: the principal of whom, carries the name and title of a
Bailif, that in civil causes has the assistance of twelve Iurats to determine
of differences, and minister Justice: in criminal matters seve^: in matters of
reason and conscience, five. Their Twelve are chosen out of the twelve
Parishes; so that no man goes further to complain, than to his own Iurate in
ordinary Controversies: but matters of moment and difficulty are determined
before the Baili^^ in a General Meeting.

(8) This Isle has two little Islands adjacent; the one S. Albous, the other
Hillary Island. It has twelve Parishes, and four Castles. No other Monuments
of Name or Note.

WALES
map of Wales
The Description of WALES.
CHAPTER I.
ANtiquity has avouched, that the whole Isle of Britain was divided into three
Parts. The first and fairest lay contained within the French-Seas, the Rivers
of Sev^rn^, D^^, and Humber, called then L^oyger, which name it yet retains
in Welsh; in English called England. The second part occupied all the Land
Northward from Humber, to the Orkney-Sea, called by the Latins, Mar^
Caledonium, or D^uc^l^^o^ium, now famously known by the name of Scotland. The
third part was this, lying betwixt the Irish-Seas, the Rivers S^verne and Dee,
and was called C^mbria, which name does yet continue with them, though we, the
E^glish, call it Wales, as the People Welshmen, which is, strange and
strangers; for so at this day the dwellers of Tyroll in the higher Germany,
whence our Saxons are said to have come, do name the Italian their next
neighbor) a Welshman, and his language Welsh.

(2) This opinion Versteg^n does altogether contradict, rather judging by the
ancient T^ut^^ick tongue, which the Germans spoke, and wherein the G is
pronounced for W that these S^xo^s called them Gallish from the Gauls, whence
their original proceeded, rather than Wallish from strangers: which he thinks
could not be, considering their habitations so near unto them; and that the
like was in use, he proves by the words of Erench Guardian for Wardian,
Cornugalles for C^rw^lles, yea and Galls for Walls, calling our most famous
Edward Prince of Galls not Prince of W^lles: insomuch that the County of
Lombardy, bordering along upon the Germans, was of them called G^lli^ci^
cis-alphina, and at this day Welsh-land. So likewise do the Netherlands call
the Inhabitants of Henalt and Artois, Wallen or Wallo^s, and some part of
Brabant and Flanders, Welsh-Brabant, and Welsh-Fla^ders, and all because of the
Language and Lineage of the Gauls. Neither do the mere Natives of Wales know
any other name of their Country than Cambria, of themselves than Cambri or
Cumri, or of their Language than Cambraoc. But leaving this opinion free to his
affection, we will proceed.

(3) Wales therefore being anciently bounded as before, the Saxons did
afterward win by force from the Britains, all the plain and Champion Country
over the River Dee; and especially Offa King of Mercia, made their limits
straighter, by making a Ditch of great breadth and depth, to be a Mear betwixt
this Kingdom and Wales. This Ditch is in many places to be seen at this day,
and bears the name of Clawh Offa, that is, Offaes Ditch. The Country between it
and England is commonly called the Marches, and is for the most part inhabited
by Welshmen, especially in North Wales, even to the River Dee. This admirable
Trench began at Bassi^gwerke in Elintshire, between Chester and Ruthland, and
ran along the Hills to the South Sea, a little from Bristow, reaching above an
hundred miles in length.

(4) Silvester Giraldus makes the River Wye to be the Mear between England and
Wales, on the South part, called South Wales: whence he ascribes the breadth
of Wales unto Saint David's in Men^vi^, to be an hundred miles; and the length
from Caerleon upon Vske in Gwentland, to Holly-head in Angles^y, an hundred
miles, he might have said thirty more.

(5) About the year of Christ 870, our Alfred reigning in England, Rodericus
Magnus King of Wales did divide it into three Talaiths, Regions, or
Territories, which were called Kingdoms. This Rodericus Magnus gave Ven^d^tia,
Gwyneth or North Wales, to Anarawd his eldest son; to Cadeth his second son
Deme^ia, Debeu^arth or South-VValls; and to Mervin his third son, Powys.

(6) North-VVales had upon the North-side the Irish-Sea, from the River Dee to
Bassingwerke to Aberdyvi: upon the West and South-West* the River Dyvi, which
divides it from South Wales, and in some places from Powysland. And on the
South and East, it is divided from Powys, sometimes with high Hills, and
sometimes with Rivers, till it come again to the River Dee. It is generally
full of high Mountains, craggy Rocks, great Woods, and deep Valleys, many
strait dangerous places, deep and swift Rivers.

(7) This Land was of old time divided into four parts, Mon, Arvon, Meryonith*
and y Bervedhwlan, or the middle Country, and each of these were again divided
into several Countries, and they subdivided into their Cymeden or Commots,
wherein we follow that division which was in the time of Llewylyn ap Ruffin,
last Prince of Wales, according to a Copy imparted to me by a worshipful
Friend and learned Antiquary, as seeming far more exact than that of Doctor
Powels.

(8) A^gl^sey the chiefest, is separated from the main Land with the River
Moenai, wherein at Aberfraw was the Princes Court, now a mean Village. In this
Island is a fair Town called Beaumarish, And common passage to Ireland at
Caergybi, in English, Holly-head.

(9) Arv^n, the second part of North-VVales, is now called Carnarvanshire, the
strongest Country within that Principality, giving place to none for fertility
of the ground, or for plenty of Wood, Cattle, Fish, and Fowl, etc. Here are the
Towns of Caernarvan, in old time called Caer-Sego^t, and Bangor the Bishops
See, with diverse other ancient Castles, and places of memory. This portion has
on the North, the Sea and Moe^ai; upon the East and South-East, the River
Conwey, which divides it from Den^igh-shire: and on the South-West is
separated from Merionyth, by Rivers, Mountains, and Mears.

(10) Merionyth was the third part of Gwyneth, and keeps the name till this
day; it is full of Hills, and much noted for the resort of People that repair
thither to take Herr^ngs. Upon the North it has Arvon and Denbigh land; upon
the South, Caerdigan-Shire; and upon the East, Montg^m^ry-shire, heretofore
part of Powis. In this County stands the Town of Harlech, and a great Lake
called Llyn-Tegyd, This Country is likewise full of Cattle, Fowl, and Fish, and
has in it great store of red Deer and Roes, but there is much scarcity of Corn.

(11) Y Bervedhwland was the fourth part of Gwyneth, and may be called in
English, The middle Country: is enclosed with Hills, on the East, West, and
South-parts, and with the Sea Northward. It is plentiful of Cattle, Fish, and
Fowl, as also of Corn: and is divided in the midst with the River Clwyd, to
which run a number of other Rivers from the Hills. In this part is
Dyffryn-Clwyd, the fairest Valley within Wales, containing eighteen miles in
length, and seven in breadth. In which is the Town and Castle of Ruthl^n, near
unto the Sea; and not far thence, S. Assaph, an Episcopal seat, between the
Rivers Clwyd and Elwy. Herein stands the fair Town and goodly Castle of
Denbigh, situated upon a Rock, the greatest Market Town of North Wales: and
from thence is seen the Town and Castle of Ruthyn, fair for prospect, and
fruitful for fite. This part of North Wales has the Sea upon the North; Dee
toward the East; Arvon, The River Conwey, and M^ri^nyth upon the West; and the
Country then called P^wys, upon the South.

And these were the Mears and Bounds of the four Parts of Vened^tia, Gwyneth,
or North Wales.

(12) The second Talaith or Kingdom, was Mathraval or Powys. To this belonged
the Country of Powys, and the Land between Wye and Sev^rne. It has South Wales
upon the South and West, with the Rivers Wye and Tywy, and other Mears: upon
the North, Gwy^eth; and upon the East, the Marches of England, from Chester to
Wye, a little above Hereford. This part was divided into Powis Vadoc, Powis
between Wye and Severne, and Powis-We^wynwyn. In Powis-Vadoc is the Castle of
Holt in Bromefield and the Castle of Chirke in Chirk^land; the Castle likewise
of Whittington; and Lordship of Oswestrie, with others.

(13) The second part of Powi^, or the Territory belonging to Mathr^v^l, is
Po^is between (...) and Severne, (or Guy and Hauren) whereof some is at this
day in Montgo^ery-shir^, some in Radnor-shire, and some in Brecknock-shire; and
among sundry other, has these Towns and Castles following.

Montgomery: The Castle of Cly^, The Town of Knight^n: The Castle of Cy^aron:
Presteyn: The Town and the Castle of Rad^or, called in Welsh, Maesyvet, which
is at this day the Shire-Town: The Town of Kinton, and the Castle of Huntington.

(14) The third part belonging to Mathraval (the chief seat of Powis, after the
Welsh were driven from Pe^gwern or Shrewsbury) was Powis Wenwynwy^, a County
full of Woods, Hills, and Rivers, having in it among others, the Towns of
Welsh-Pool, New-Town, Machin^a^th Arustly was anciently in this part, but
afterward it came to them of Gwyneth.

This may suffice, for the description of that which in old time was called
Gwyneth and Powis.

(15) It now remains that we describe the last Kingdom of Wales, called
Demetia-Deheubarth, or the Talaith of Dinevowr, which although it was the
greatest, yet was it not the best, because it was much molested with Flemings
and Normans, and for that also diverse parts thereof would not obey their
Prince, as in Gwent, and in Morganwe.

(16) This was divided into six parts, of which Cardiga^ was the first, and is
a Champion Country, without much Wood. It has Merionyth-shire on the North:
part of Powys upon the East: Carmarden-shire and Pembroke-shire, with the River
Tivi, upon the South: and upon the West, the Irish-Sea. In this part is the
Town of Cardiga^ upon Tivi, not far from the Sea; as also the Town of
Aberstwyth upon the River Istwyth; and L^a^bad^r^evowr, which in times past wa^
a great Sanctuary: there were also many Castles; as of Str^tneyrie, of Walter,
of L^an^ysted, of Dyv^rth, and of A^er-Royd^ll, etc.

(17) The second part was called Dyvet, and at this day Pembroke-shire. It has
upon the North and West, the Irish-Sea; upon the East, Carmarden-shire; and
upon the South, Severne. There are in it sundry Towns and Havens: among others,
these: Pembroke: Tenby: Hereford-West, with the goodly and many Branched Haven
of Milford, called in Welsh, Aberdangledhett: S. David's, or Menevia, which is
the chiefest See in Wales: Fiscard, called Aberwayn: and Newport, named
Tresdreth.

(18) The third part was Carmarden-shire, which is a Country accounted the
strongest part of all South Wales: as that which is full of high Mountains,
great Woods, and fair Rivers.

(19) The fourth called Morganwe, now Glamorgan-shire, has on the South, the
Severne-Sea, which divides it self from Devon-shire and Cornwall upon the West
and North-West, Carmardenshire: upon the North-East, Brecknock-shire; and upon
the East, Monmouth-shire.

(20) The fifth now called Gwent, and in Monmouth-shire, has in it the ancient
City of Caerlhe^n upon Vske. There are also diverse Towns and Castles, Chepstow,
Glynstrygul, Ros, Tynterne upon the River Wye, etc. This is a fair and fertile
Country. It has on the West, Glamorgan and Brecknock-shir^s: upon the North,
Hereford-shire: upon the East, Gloucestershire: with the River Wye, and the
River Severne upon the South and South-East.

(21) The last is Brecknock-shire, for the most part full of Mountains, Woods
and Rivers. This Country is both great and large, being full of fair Plains and
Valley, for Corn; it has plenty of thick Woods Forests and Parks. It is full
also of clear and deep Rivers, of which Severne is the chiefest; although,
there be other fair Rivers, as Vske and the like.

(22) Thus far concerning the ancient Welsh division by Talaiths: but the
present division distributeth them more compendiously into two Countries, and
twelve Shires, enacted so by Parliament under King Henry the Eighth. The
Countries are North Wales, and South Wales, which have shared, and as it were
devoured between them, all Powysland; each of which Countries contains (...)
Shires.

North Wales,
A^gles^y, C^ernarvan, Merionyth, Denbigh. Flint. Montgomery.
South Wales.
Cardigan. Pembroke. Carmarden. Glamorgan. Brecknock. Rad^^r.
But whereas Monmouth-shire and Radnor, were anciently parts, the first of
South Wales, the other of Powys-land: Monmouth-shire by Act of Parliament also
under the same King, was plucked away wholly from Wales, and laid to England,
one of whose Counties and Shires it was from that time forward, and is at this
present reckoned; and Radnor-Shire (as it were in lieu thereof) is comprehended
in South Wales. Humphry Hluyd a Welsh Gentleman, in his Epistle and Map of old
Wales, makes mention of a West-Wales, which he calls Deme^ia and Dyfer, the
one the Latin, and the other the British name there: but because it is wholly
swallowed up by this last division, we will not perplex the Reader with
superfluous and impertinent recitals.

PEMBROK Shire
map of Pembrokeshire
PEMBROKE-SHIRE.
CHAPTER II.
PEMBROKE-SHIRE the furthest Promonto^y of all West-Wales, li^th parted on the
North from Cardigan-shire, with the Rivers Tivy and Keach; and on the East is
Confronted by Caermarden-shire; the South and West shooting far into the
Irish-Seas, is with the same altogether washed.

(2) The form thereof is longer than it is broad; for from S. Govens
South-point to Cardigan-bridge in the North, are twenty six miles; the Eastern
Landenie to S. Davids-point in the West, are twenty miles; the whole
circumference is ninety three miles.

(3) The Air is passing temperate, by the report of Giraldus, who (...) his
reason from the sit^ of Ireland, against which it butteth, and is so nearly
adjoined, that (...) Ruf^ thought it possible to make a Bridge of his Ships
over the Sea, whereby he might pass to (...) on foot.

(4) Anciently it was po^^essed by the Demetia, further branched into Cardigan
and Caermarden-shires, as in that County has been said, and in the Saxons
Conquest and H^ptarchy, by the Britai^s forced into those parts for refuge,
whither H^^ry the First, and third of the Normans Kings, sent certain Flemings
(whose Country was overwhelmed with the breaking in of the Seas) to inhabit
the Maritime Tract called Rosse, lying West upon the River Dougledye. These
Dutchmen (says Giraldus) were a strong and stout Nation, inured to Wars, and
accustomed to seek gain by Cloathi^g, Traffic, and Tillage, and ever ready
for the Field to fight it out, adding withal, that they were most loyal ^o the
English, and most faithful to the Englishmen. Whereupon Malmesbury writes
thus: Many a tim^ did King William Rufus a^^aile the Welsh, but ^ver in vain:
which is to be wondered a^, ^nsid^ring his other fortunate success. But (says
he it may be the unevenness of the ground, and sharpness of the air, that
maintained their courage, and impeached his valor: which to redress, King
Henry his Brother found means; for those Flemings, who in regard of his Mothers
kindred by the Fathers side, s^rely pestred and endamaged the English he sent
into Wales, both to purge and disburden his own Kingdom, and to quell and keep
back the courage of his enemies. These men here seated, deceived not his
expectation, but so carried themselves in his quarrel, that they seldom
communicated with their Neighbors, so that to this day they speak not the
Language, and the Country is yet called Little England beyond Wales.

(5) The Commodities of this Shire are Corn, Cattle, Seafish, and Fowl, and in
Giraldus his days of saleable Wines, the Havens being so commodious for Ships
arrivage: such is that at Tenby and Milford, and Haven of such capacity, that
sixteen Creeks, ^ive Bays, and thirteen Roads known all by several names (...)
therein contained, where Henry of Richmond, of most happy memory, arrived with
(...) of E^glands freedom from under the government of an usurping Tyrant.

(6) Near unto this is Pembroke the Shire-Town seated, more ancient in show
than it is in years, and more houses without Inhabitants, than I saw in any one
City throughout my Survey. It is walled long-wife, and them but indifferent for
repair, containing in circuit eight hundred and fourscore paces, having three
Gates of passage, and at the West End a large Castle, and locked Causey, that
leads over the water to the decayed Priory of Monton. The site of this Town is
in the degree of Longitude, as Merc^tor does measure, 14 and 35 minutes, and
the Elevation from the North Pole in the degree of Latitude 52.

(7) A City as barren is old Saint David's, neither clad with Woods, nor
garnished with Rivers, nor beau^ified with Fields, nor adorned with Meadows,
but lies always open both to Wind and Storms. Yet has it been a Nursery to
Holy Men, for herein lived Calphurnius, a Britain Priest, whose Wife was
Choncha, Sister to Saint Martin, and both of them the Pa^ents of Saint Patrick
the Apostle of Ireland. Devi a most Religious Bishop, made this an
Archepiscopal See, removed from Isca Legi^num. This the Britains call Tuy Dewy,
the House of Devi: we Saint David's,: a City with few Inhabitants: yet has it a
fair Cathedral Church, dedicated to Saint Andrew and David, in the midst of
whose Quire lies intombed Edmond Earl of Richmond, Father to King Henry the
Seventh: whose Monument (as the Prebends told me) spared their Church from
other defacements, when all went down under the Hammers of King Henry the
Eighth. About this is a fair Wall, and the Bishops Palace, all of Freestone, a
goodly House I assure you, and of great Receipt, whose uncovered Tops cause the
curious Works in the Walls daily to weep, and them to fear their downfall ere
long.

(8) But Monton the Priory, and S. Dogmels, places of devout piety erected in
this County, found not the like favor, when the commission of their
dissolutions came down against them, and the axes of destruction cut down the
props of their Walls.

(9) This Shire has been strengthened with sixteen Castles, besides two
Block-Houses commandi^g the Mouth of Milf^rd-Haven, and is still traded in five
Market Towns, being divided into seven Hundreds, and in them seated one hundred
forty five Pari^h-Churches.

RADNOR BREKNOK CARDIGAN and CAERMARTHEN discribed
Petrus Kaerius caelavit 1500.
map of Radnorshire
RADNOR-SHIRE.
CHAPTER III.
RADNOR-SHIRE, lies bordered upon the North with the County Monmouth, upon the
East touches Shropshire; and Herefo^dshire; the Rivers Clarwen and Wye, divide
it from Brecknock in the South; and the West part does shorten point-wise in
Cardigan-shire.

(2) The form thereof is in proportion triangle, every side containing almost a
like distance: for from West to North are twenty miles; from North to South,
twenty two miles; and from South to West are twenty four miles: the whole in
circumference extending to fourscore and ten miles.

(3) The Air thereof is sharp and cold (as most of Wales is) for that the Snow
lies and lasts long unmelted under those shadowing high Hills and
over-hanging Rocks.

(4) The Soil is hungry, though not barren, and that in the East and South the
best: the other parts are rough and churlish, and hardly bettered by painful
labor; so that the Riches of the North and West consisted chiefly in the brood
of Cattle.

(5) Anciently this County was posse^^ed by the Sil^res, warlike People, and
great withstanders of the Romans Impo^itions, who had not only them to ^ight
against, but withal the unacce^^ible Mountains, wherewith this Shire is so
overpressed and burdened, that many times I feared to look down from the
hanging Rocks, whereunder I passed into those deep and dark Dales, seeming to
me an entrance into Limb^. Among th^se (as say our Historia^s) that hateful
Prince to God and Man, V^rtig^r, his Countries scourge, and last Monarch of the
British-blood, by Fire from Heaven was consumed with his incestuous Wise, from
whom ^ini^ names the Country wherein his Castle stood, Guartiger-Maur, of
whose Rubbish the Castle Guthremion was raised, as some are of opinion. Yet
they of North Wales will have his destruction and Castle to stand in their
parts near unto Beth-Kellech, whereof we will further speak in the relation of
his Life. Fatal was this place also to Llewellin the last Prince of the British
Race, who being betrayed by the Men of Buelth, ^^ed into those vast Mountains
of Radnor, where by Adam Francton he was slain, and his Head (Crowned with Ivy)
set upon the Tower of London.

(6) Places most worthy of note in this Shire, are as ensues; The first is
Radnor, from whom the County receives her name anciently Magi, where the
Commander of the Pacensian Regiment lay, and thought to be the Magnos in
Antonine the Emperors Survey. This Town is pleasantly seated under a Hill,
whereon stands mounted a large and strong Castle, from whose Bulwark a Trench
is drawn along the West of the Town, whereon a Wall of Stone was once raised,
as by the remains in many places appears. This Trench does likewise inverge
her West Side so far as the River, but after is no more seen: whose Graduation
is observed to have the Pole elevated for Latitude 52 degrees, and 45 minutes;
and for Longitude, from the first Point of the West set by Mercator 17 degrees
and one minute.

Prestayn for beauteous building is the best in this Shire, a Town of Commerce,
wonderfully frequented, and that very lately. Next is K^ighton, a Market Town
likewise, under which is seen the Clawdh-Offa, or Offaes Dit^h, whose Tract for
a space I followed along the edge of the Moun^ain, which was a bound set to
separate the Welsh from the English by the Mercian King Offa: and by Egber^ the
Monarch, a Law made, by the instigation of his Wife, that it should be present
death for the Welsh to pass over the same, as John Bever the Monk of
Westminster reports: and the like under H^^ald as John of Salisbury writes;
wherein it was ordained: that what Welshman soever should be found with any
weapon on this side of that Limit, which was Offaes Ditch, should have his
right hand cut off by the Kings Officers. The fourth place for account is
Raihader Gowy, who besides the great fall of Wye with a continual noise, has
her Markets there kept upon the Sabbath, which I there observed, and here note
for an offense.

(7) Many Rivers arise and run through this Shire, which were it not that the
Hills so cluster together might make the Soil both fertile and fat. Such are
Teme, Lug, Ithon, Clowdok, Dulas, Comatton, Somegill, Guithel, Arro, Machaway,
Edway, Hawye, Eland, Clarwen, and Wye, besides other Lo^ghs that stand betwixt
the Hills.

This Shire is divided into six Hundreds, wherein are seated three Forests,
four Market Towns, si^ Castles, and fifty two Parish-Churches.

BRECKNOCK-SHIRE.
CHAPTER IV.
BRECKNOCK-SHIRE, in the British language Brethin^a^, (so called as the
Welshmen relate, of a Prince named Brecha^ius, the Father of an holy
offspring, whose twenty four Daughters were all of them Saints) is a County
neither very large, nor greatly to be praised or disliked of, whose bounds upon
the North is parted from Radn^r with the Rivers Clarwen and Wye: the West lies
butted upon by Cardigan and Caermarden-shires: the South is confined by
Glamorgan: and the East with Monmouth and Radnor-shires, is wholly bound.

(2) The length of this Shire from North to South, betwixt L^anuthel and
I^tradgunles, are twenty eight English miles; and her breadth from East to
West, extended betwixt Frentisso and Elywell, are twenty miles; the whole
circumference, about one hundred and two miles.

(3) This County is full of Hills, and uneven for travel, which on the South
part mount in such height that as Giraldus has written, They make the Air much
colder, and defend the Country from the excessive heat of the Sun, where by a
certain natural wholsomness of Air makes it most temperate: and on the East
side the Mountains of Tolgar and Ewias do as it were fore fence the same. Among
which, there arise and run so many fruitful Springs, that their Valleys are
thereby made most fertile, yielding in plenty both Corn and Grass.

(4) The ancient Inhabitants and possessors of this Shire, with the rest in
this South Tract, were the Silures, much spoken of, and great opposers to the
Romans, whose Countries were first made subject by Julius Frontinus, who
besides the valor of the enemy, had to struggle with the Mountains and
Straits, as Tacitus tells us; neither any more hard, we may well say, than them
of this Shire; whereof one in the South, and three miles from Brecknock, is of
such height and operation, as is uncredible: and were it not, that I have
witness to affirm what I shall speak, I should blush to let the report thereof
pass from my Pen: In my Perambulation in these parts, remaining in Br^cknock to
observe the site of that Town, the Aldermen or chief Seniors thereof regarding
my pains with friendly and courteous entertainments, at my departure, no less
than eight of them, that had been Bailiffs of the Town, came to visit me;
where they reported upon their Credit and Trials, that from the top of that
Hill, in the Welsh called Mounch-denny, or Cadier Arthur, they had oftentimes
cast from them* and down the North-East Rock, their Cloaks, Hats, and Staves,
which notwithstanding would never fall, but were with the Air and Wind still
returned back, and blown up: neither, said they, will any thing descend from
that Cliffe being so cast, unless it be stone or some Metalline substance:
affirming the cause to be the Clouds, which are seen to rack much lower than
the top of that Hill. As strange Tales are told of the Mear Llynsavathan, two
miles by East from Brecknock, which at the breaking of her frozen Ice, makes a
fearful sound like unto Thunder. In which place, as is reported, sometimes
stood a fair City, which was swallowed up in an Earthquake, and resigned her
Stone-Walls unto this deep and broad Water: whither unto this day leads all
the ways in this Shire: which, as learned Camd^n conjectureth, might be that
Loventrium, which Ptolomy in this Tract places; and the more confirmed by the
Rivers name adjoining, being also called Lovenny, which River also passes
through this Mear without any mixture of her waters, as by the color thereof is
well perceived, which glideth through it with the same stream, and no greater
than wherewith she first entered in.

(5) The Towns for Commerce, are Hay, Bealt, and Brecknock, two of them
unfortunate of their former greatness, whom Wars and sedition have defaced and
cast down. Hay upon Wye and Dulas, pleasant for situation, in the Rebellion of
Owen Glendowerdy, was diswalled, depopulated, and burnt, in whose foundations
for new repairs, many Roman Coyns have been found: and thereby thought to be
the Seat of their Legions: and Buelth, now Bealt, though of good frequency, yet
not so great as when Ptolomy observed her position for graduation, who calls
it Buleum Silurum, neither when it with the Country was possessed by Aurelius
Ambrosius, by whose permission Pascentius the Son of Vortiger ruled all, as
Ninius writes; nor yet as of later times, when Leolin the last Prince of the
Britains, was therein betrayed and slain.

(6) Brecknock the Shire-Town, for Buildings and Beauty retains a better
regard, whose Walls in Oval-wise are both strong and of good repair, having
three Gates for Entrance, with ten Towers for defense, and is in circuit six
hundred and forty paces about, upon whose West part a most sumptuous and
stately Castle is seated, the like whereof is not commonly seen, whose decays
approaching do increase her ruins daily, and in the end is feared will be her
fall. This Town is seated upon the meeting of two Rivers, Houthy and Vske,
whose yearly Government is committed to two Bailiffs, fifteen Aldermen, two
Chamberlains, two Constables, a Town Clerk, and two Sergeants their Attendants,
having the Poles Elevation in 52, 21 minutes of Latitude, and for Longitude is
placed in the 16 and 32 minutes, as the Mathematicians do measure them.

(7) This Shire is strengthened with nine Castles divided into six Hundreds,
wherein are seated three Market Towns, and sixty one Parish-Churches.

CARDIGAN-SHIRE.
CHAPTER. V.
CARDIGAN-SHIRE, (in the Welsh called Sire Aber-Tivi) is parted on the North
from Merioneth-shire with the River Dovi; by the Plinillimon Hills from
Montgomery-shire in part of her East; and the rest from Brecknock shire, with
the water Towy; and with Tyvy altogether on the South from Caermarden-shire:
The West is wholly washed with the Irish-Sea.

(2) The Form thereof is Horn-like, bowing compass, long and narrow, and
growing wider stll toward the North: so that from Cardigan, the Shire-Town and
uttermost point in the South, unto the River Dovi, her farthest North-bounder,
are thirty two miles: and from the head of Clarwan in the East, to Abersthwyth
on her West, the broadest part in the Shire, are only fifteen: the whole in
circumference is one hundred and three miles.

(3) The Air is open and somewhat piercing; The Soil is hilly, and ( Wales
like) uneven: yet more plain and champion toward the Sea, than in the East or
North of the Land. For besides that great and high Hill called Plinillimon, a
continual range of lesser does shoot along, yielding in their Valleys both
goodly rich Pastures, and very large Pools, which being assisted with Springs
from the Rocks, do branch themselves as Veins in the Body, and make fruitful
their passages unto the Sea. In Tyuy one of these, as Giraldus has written,
the Beaver has been found, a Creature living both by Land and Water, whose
Stones the Physicians hold in great price. His fore^eet are like unto a Dog,
but the hinder whole skinned, as is the Goose: the Dog-like serve him on shore
for to run; and the Goose-like as Oars give him swift motion in swimming; his
Tail broad and gristly, he uses as a Stern, wherewith on the sudden he can
divert his swi^t floating course. But this creature in these parts a long time
has not been seen, whose room we may well say the Salmon has possessed, who
still coveting fresh-water-Rivers, at their downright falls uses this policy:
He bends himself backward, and takes his Tail in his Mouth, and with all his
strength unloosing his circle on the sudden (as a Lath let go) mounteth up
before the fall of the Stream; whereupon such water-falls are called the
Salmons-leap: and in these Rivers many such Salmons are caught.

(4) The Commodities of this Shire chiefly consist in Cattle, Sea-Fowl, and
Fish; Corn sufficient, but of Woods some scarcity; and at the Head of Istwyd
are certain Veins of Lead, a Merchandise of no mean regard or wealth.

(5) The ancient People that possessed this Province, were the Dim^tae, by
Ptolomy branched through the Tract of Caermarden, Pembroke, and this Shire; who
in their struglings against the Romans, did not a little rely upon Caractacus
their most warlike King, (from whose name, though unlikely, some will have the
Shire called Cardigan) yet lastly felt the fortune of subjection with the rest,
when Julius Frontinus warred with these Mountains. Scarce had the Normans
settled their Kingdom in Britain, but that they a^^ailed this County, as well to
enjoy so fair a Possession, as to secure those Seas from any Invasion against
them: so that Rufu^ first wrested from the Welshmen the Maritime Coasts, and
Henry the first gave the whole County to Gilbert de Clare.

(6) This Gilbert fortified Cardig^n, and Shire-Town, with a Wall and strong
Castle, whose aged Lineaments do to this day show the industry both of Nature
and Art: for the Town is seated upon a steep bank, her South side guarded with
the deep River Tyvy, and passable no way but by a bridge under the Castle. The
Walls take the advantage of the rising Rocks, and circulate the Town even round
about. The Castle is higher built upon a Rock, both spacious and fair, had not
Storms impaired her beauty, and time left her carcass a very Anatomy. The Walls
range as thou feast, and are indifferent for repair, having three ways for
entrance, and contain in compass six hundred and fourscore paces: whose
position for Latitude is in the degree 52, 33 minutes from the North Pole, and
for Longitude from the first West point by M^rc^tor, in the degree 15 and 10
minutes.

(7) This Shire, as it is little in circuit, so accordingly is besprinkled with
Townships, whereof four only have the Trade of Markets: neither find I other
remembrance of religious Foundations, but at Cardigan, Istradfleet, and at Llan
B^dern Vaur, where sometimes was seated an Episcopal See, which (as Hoveden
writes) was decayed many years since, when the people had wickedly stain their
Pastor. And yet Llan-Devi-brevi, built and so called in memory of the most
famous David Bishop of Menevia, was in great esteem, where in a frequent Synod
there holden, he refuted the Pelagian-Heresie, sprung up again in Britain, both
by the authority of holy Scriptures, and also by miracle, as is reported, while
the earth whereon he stood and preached, rose up unto a certain height under
his Feet.

(8) The Shires Division, for businesses belonging either to the Crown or
Commonwealth, is into five Hundreds, wherein are seated four Market Towns, and
sixty four Parish-Churches for Gods Divine and daily Service.

CAERMARDEN-SHIRE.
CHAPTER VI.
CAERMARDEN-SHIRE, so called from the chief Town Caermarden, lies bordered
upon the South, with Cardigan-shire; upon her East, by Brecknock and
Glamorgan-shires; upon the South, with a Bay of the British-Seas; and upon the
West with Pembroke-shire.

(2) The form of this County is long, and shoots it self from the South-West
into the North and by East, betwixt whose further bounds are thirty five
English miles, and in her broadest part twenty miles; the whole in
circumference about one hundred and two miles.

(3) This Shire is not altogether so pestred with Hills as her bordering
Neighbors are: and those that she has, neither so high nor so thick, and
therefore is better for Corn and Pasturage, yea and in Woods also, so that for
Victuals this County is very well stored, which the Stomach does as well
digest, the Air being wholesome, temperate, and pleasing.

(4) Anciently these parts were possessed by the Dimetree, as Ptolomy, Gildas,
and Ninius do name them: though Pliny holds opinion that they were part of the
Silures, with whom no doubt they were subdued to the Romans yoke by Julius
Frontinus, when he struggled with the Rocky Hills in those Southern parts. And
this County is accounted by Writers to be the very strength of South Wales. In
the West thereof, at Kilmanlloid (as it should seem) their Legions were kept,
where lately an earthen Pot hoarded with store of Roman-Coyns, was by the Spade
dug up, being stamped upon imbased Silver, from the time of Commodus unto
the first Tribuneship of Gordian the third, which fell in the year of Christ
two hundred forty three: and amongst these were the Coyns of Helvius Pertinax,
Marcus Opellius, Antonius Diadumenianus, Julius Veru^ Maximu^, the Son of
Maximus, of Coelius Balbinus, of Clodius Pupienus, of Aquilla Severa, the wife
of Heliogabalus, and of Soll. Barbia Orbiana^ pieces rarely found.

(5) The Commodities of this Shire chiefly consist in Cattle, Pit-coal, Fowl,
and Seafish, whereof the Salmon is common among them, and that of such
greatness and plenty, as no place is better furnished therewith than the
Shire-Town Caermarden is.

(6) Which Town by Ptolomy is called Maridunum; by Antonin^ the Emperor,
Muridunum; by the Britains, Caerfridhin; and by us, Caermarden. It is
pleasantly seated upon the South-West side of the River Tovy, that runs
through the midst of this Shire, and falls South from hence into the British
Sea, where before-times was a convenient Haven for Ships arrivage, but now is
sore pestred with Sands and Shelves* notwithstanding some small Vessels ascend
up the River, even unto the Bridge of this Town, which is fairly built of
Freestone. And over the same, upon a hanging Rock, stands a very large
Castle, from whose Stone-wall another intermingled with Brick rangeth about the
Town, being in circuit one thousand and four hundred paces. The Inhabitants of
this place do not a little glory of their Merlin, who (as they say) was therein
born the Son of a bad Angel, or of an Incubus Spirit, the Britains great
Apollo, whom Geffery ap Arthur would rank with the South-saying Seer, or rather
with the true Prophets themselves: being none other than a mere Seducer and
Fantastical Wizard: which howsoever Alani de Insulis in his Commentaries has
labored to unlock those dark and hidden Similies, wherewith his Book is
pestred and full, yet was it not without cause forbid the reading by the
Council of Trent, as vain, and not worthy of Countenance or Credit.

At the entrance of the Normans this Town was brought under their obedience,
and for a long time was distressed with the Calamities of War, yet afterward
was made by the English Princes the Chancery and Exchequer of all South^Wales:
And at this day is yearly governed by a Mayor, who ever after is an Alderman
and Justice of the Peace, two Sheriffs elected out of sixteen Burgesses, all of
them in Scarlet, a Sword Bearer, a Town Clerk, and two Sergeants with Maces:
from whence the Pole is raised 52 degrees 15 minutes in Latitude, and for
Longitude is in the degree 15 and 30 minutes from the first point in the West,
according to Mercator.

(7) East from this place are the ruins of Carreg-Castle, which stood mounted
on a high Hill, under the which many Vaults and spacious Caves far into the
ground are seen, wherein is thought the People unable to ^ight, were therein
secured in time of their Wars. Where also is a Well (take the report from
Giraldus, who writes it) that in this place twice in four and twenty hours
^bbing, and twice flowing resembles the unstable motions of the main Sea.

(8) This Shire is watered with twenty eight Rivers and Rivelets of name,
strengthened with ten Castles, traded in six Market Towns, divided into six
Hundreds, wherein are seated fourscore and seven Parish-Churches.

GLAMORGAN Shire
map of Glamorganshire
GLAMORGAN-SHIRE.
CHAPTER VII.
GLAMORGAN-SHIRE, as some think, named from Prince Morgan the possessor
thereof, or according to others, is taken from Morgan an Abbey, founded by
William Earl of Gloucester, upon the Sea-shoar in the South of this Shire, lies
bounded upon that part altogether with the British-Sea, the West by Logor is
parted from Caermarden-shire; the North butteth upon the County of Brecknock;
and the East by Remney is divided from Monmouth.

(2) The form of this Shire grows still wider from her West-point, spreading
her broadest touch in the East, betwixt which extremes I find by measure to be
well-near forty English miles, and from North to South, not altogether twenty
miles: the whole in circumference, about one hundred and twelve miles.

(3) The Air is temperate, and gives more content to the mind, than the Soil
does fruit or ease unto Travelers. The Hills being high and very many, which
from the North notwithstanding are lessened as it were by degrees; and toward
the Seacoasts, the Country becomes somewhat plain, which part is the best,
both for plenty of Grain, and populous of Inhabitants. The rest all Mountain,
is replenished with Cattle, which is the best means unto wealth that this Shire
does afford; upon whose Hills you may behold whole Herds of them feeding; and
from whose Rocks most clear springing waters through the Valleys trickling,
which sportingly do pass with a most pleasant sound, and did not a little
revive my wearied spirits among those vast Mountains, employed in their search:
whose infancy at first admitted an easy step over; but grown unto strength,
more boldly forbad me such passage, and with a more stern countenance held on
their Journey unto the British-Seas; and Ta^e among these is accounted for a
chief.

(4) Upon whose fall, and East-bank, the fairest Town of all South Wales is
seated, the Britains Caerdid, the English Caerdiffe, which Fitz-Haimon
fortified with a Wall and Castle, in the Reign of King Rufus, when he and his
Norman-Knights had overcome Rhese the Prince of these parts, and thrust out
Iustine from his lawful possession. This Town he made his own Seat and Court of
Justice, enjoining his Consorts to give Aid to this honor, and to hold their
Portions in Vassallage of him. Strong was the Castle, as by the trust therein
reposed may well appear, where the youngest brother Bea^clark kept Captive the
eldest Curthose, both of them Sons to the Conqueror, the space of twenty six
years. This Castle is large, and in good repair, whence the Town-Wall went both
South and East to the Rivers side, through which, four Gates enter into the four
Winds, and contain in compass nine hundred and twenty paces; and along the
River (a sure defense) upon her West Side, three hundred more; so that the Town
contains in circuit twelve hundred and fourscore paces. But as the Tave is a
friend to the Town, in making a Key for arrivage of shipping; so is she a foe
to S. Mary's Church in the South, with undermining her Foundations, and
threatening her fall. The Town is governed by a Mayor, yearly elected out of
twelve Aldermen, assisted with other twelve Burgesses, a Town Clerk, four
Constables, and two Sergeants with Maces: whose site is observed from the
North-Star to lie in the degree of Latitude 51 and 49 scruples, and from the
first point in the West, 16 and 53 scruples.

(5) In the same graduation almost is sited the City Landaf, wherein is a
Castle and Cathedral Church, dedicated to S. Telean, Bishop of the same,
without any other memorable matter worthy the speaking of.

(6) But things of strange Note are these, by the report of Giraldus, who
affirms that in a Rock or Cliffe upon the Seaside, and Island Barry, lying
near the South-East point of this County, is heard out of a litttle chink ( let
him take heed what he faith) the noise as it it were of Smiths at their work;
one whiles ^he blowing of Bellows to increase the heat, then the str^aks of the
Hammer, and sound of the Anvil; sometim^s the noise of the Grind stone in
grinding of Iron Tools; then the hissing Sparks of Steel^gads, as they fly
from their ^eating, with the puffing noise of Flames in a Furnace. And whether
this is the place whereof Clemens Alexandrinus speaks, I de^ermine not; where
in his Writings he has these words; They that have recorded Histories ( says
he) do say, that in the Isle of Britain, there is a certain Hole or Cave under
the bottom of an Hill, and on the top thereof a gaping Chink, into the which
when the Wind is gathered, and tossed to and fro in the Womb or concavity
thereof, there is heard above, a sound of Cymbals: for the Wind being driven
back from his hole, is forced to make a loud sound as her vent.

(7) More Westward from hence, upon the River Ogmore, and near unto Newton, in
a sandy plain about an hundred paces from Severne, there springs a Well,
though not of the clearest water, where at the flowing and fullness of the Sea,
can hardly any water be gotten; but at the Ebb and Fall o^ Tide it walloweth up
amain. The cause may be, as Polibius reports of the like at Cadys; Wherein the
windy air, when it is deprived of his ^onted issues, forcibly returns,
shutting and stopping up the pa^sages and veins of the Spring, whereby the
waters are kept in. But contrariwise when the surface thereof is void and empty
of water, the veins of the Source or Spring are unstopped and set free, which
then boileth up in great abundance.

(8) And upon the same Shore more North and by West, on the top of an Hill
called Minyd-Marga^, is erected a Monument inscribed with a strange Character,
and as strange a conceit held thereof by the by-dwellers whose opinions are
possessed, that if any man read the same, he shall shortly after die.

This Shire, as it is the furthest Coast of South Wales, and lay open to
foreign Invasion; so was it fortified with twenty five stronger Castles,
whereof times and storms have devoured the most: such were Barry, Saint
D^neits, Denispowis, Morlashe, Meneshe, Logh^r, Llanddeny, Llanquian, Oxwich,
Oystermouth, Ogmor, Pile, Porkery, Pennarth, Winston, Newcastle, Caersly,
Coche, Peullyn, Kethligar^^, Kenfeage, Tallavan, Treer, and Cothy.

Neither was the County so ill seated for sufficiency of Life, or barren of
Grain, but that therein were planted places for divine piety: such were Neath,
Margan, and Caerdif, besides the Episcopal See of Landaf, which last still
remains; the other three suppressed among the fall of their like, under King
Henry the eight.

This Shire is divided into ten Hundreds, wherein are seated six Market Towns,
and one hundred and eighteen Parish-Churches.

Mounmouth Shire
map of Monmouthshire
MONMOUTH-SHIRE.
CHAPTER VIII.
MONMOUTH-SHIRE, from Monmouth Town, and that from Monnowe-water bearing name,
is altogether enclosed on the North, and is separated from Hereford-shire with
the same River, upon the East both it and Wye divides this County from
Gloucestershire. The South Side is wholly wa^hed by the Severne-Sea, and some
of her Went part by Rempney is parted from Glamorgan, and the rest lies
bordered upon by Brecknock shire.

(2) The form thereof is Scallop-wise, both long and broad, shooting her North
point to Llantony, and her South to the fall of Rempney, betwixt which two are
twenty four English miles: and from Chep^tow East to Blanagwent West, are not
altogether nineteen miles: the whole in circuit draws somewhat near to
seventy seven miles.

(3) The Air is temperate, healthful and clear, the Soil is hilly, woody and
rich, all places fruitful, but no place barren. The Hills are grased upon by
Cattle and Sheep, the Valleys are laden with Corn and Grass, never ungrateful
of the Husbandmans pains, nor makes frustrate his hope of expected increase;
whose Springs abundantly ris^ng in this County with many Streams, do fatten the
Soil even from side to side.

(4) Anciently the Silures inhabited this Shire, whose chief City by the
Emperor Antonine is named Venta Silurum, by the Welsh-Caer^^ent, and was by
Tathaie the British Saint, made an Academy, and a divine place for Worship. So
likewise Caer-lion now, once Is^a, was where the second Roman Legion called
Augusta lay, as by their Coins, Altars, Tables, and Inscriptions there found,
and daily therein dug up, does evidently appear.

By the report of Giraldm, in this City was the Court of great Arthur, whither
the Roman Ambassadors resorted unto him; and as Alexander Elsebiensis writes,
therein was a School of two hundred Philosophers, skilful in Astronomy and
other Arts. Which is the more credible, for that Amphibalus, S. Albant
Instructor, was therein born, and Julius and Aaron, two noble Proto-Martyrs of
great Britain, in this City received the Crown of Martyrdom, where their Bodies
were also interred. But as all things find their fatal period, so this City for
beauty, circuit, and magnifical respect, is laid in the ruins of her own
decay: neither may any more lament the loss of glory than Monmouths Castle,
which Captive-like does yield to conquering Time. Her down-cast Stones from
those lofty Turrets do show what beauty once it bare, standing mounted round in
compass, and within her Walls another Mount, whereon a Tower of great height
and strength is built, which was the birth place of our Conquering Henry, the
great Triumpher over France, but now decayed, and from a Princely Castle, is
become no better than a regardless Cottage. In this Town a beautiful Church
built with three Isles is remaining, and at the East End a most curiously built
(but now decayed) Church stands, called the Monks Church: In the Monastery
whereof, our great Antiquary Geoffery, surnamed Monmouth, and ap Art^ur, wrote
his History of Great Britain: whose pains as they were both learned and great,
so have they bred great pains among the learned both to defend and to disprove.
The Towns situation is pleasant and good, seated betwixt the Rivers Monnow and
Wye: three Gates yet stand, besides that Tower or Lock of the Bridge, and a
Trench or Tract of Wall running betwixt them on each side down to the River,
containing in circuit about eight hundred paces. The Town is in good repair,
and well frequented, governed by a Mayor, two Bailiffs, fifteen
Common-Co^^ellors, a Town Clerk, and two Sergeants for their Attendance. It is
in Latitude removed from the Equator 52 degrees and 8 minutes, and from the
West point of Longitude is set in the degree 17, 36 minutes.

Religious Houses erected and suppressed in this Shire, for greatest account
have been in Caerlion, Chepstow, Gold-cliff, Monmouth and Llantony; which last
stood so solitary, and among Hills, that the Sun was not seen to shine there,
but only betwixt the hours of one and three.

This Shire is strengthened with fourteen Castles, traded with six Market Towns,
divided into six Hundreds, wherein are situated one hundred twenty and seven
Parish-Churches, and is not accounted among the Welsh-shires, being subdued by
Henry the Second, who passing the Nant-Pe^-carne, a small Brook and of no
danger, yet held fatal by the Welsh, over credulous to a Prophecy of Merlyn
Sylvester the British Apollo, who had fore-shewed that when a stout and
freckled faced King (such as Henry was) should pass over that Ford, then the
power of the Welshmen should be brought under; whereby their stout courage was
soon abated, and the whole County the sooner in subjection to the English.

Montgomerie Merionidh Shires
map of Montgomeryshire and Merionethshire
MOUNTGOMERY-SHIRE.
CHAPTER IX.
MOUNTGOMERY-SHIRE, in the British speech called Siretrefaldwin, and that of
the principal Town Mountgomery, lies bounded upon the North with
Denbigh-shire, upon the East with Shrop-shire, on the South with Radnor and
Cardigan-shires, and on the West with Merioneth shire.

(2) In form it somewhat resembles a Pear or Pineapple, as it were growing
out of the West, and rising thence with many high Hills and plentiful Springs,
which water and make fruitful the Soil every where: whose searching rills with
a longing desire haste ever forward to find an increase, and to augment their
growth into a bigger body, whereof the Severne is the chief, and the second
River in the Land: whose Head rising from the spired Mountain Plynillimon,
runs not far without the Receipts of other Rivolets into her Stream, and with
many Wings does sport her self through all the East-part of this Shire.

(3) That this River took her name from Abren, the beautiful base daughter of
Locrinus, begotten out of Wedlock upon Estrildis the daughter of Humber the
Scythian King, that invaded this Land, and both of them drowned in this River
by Guendolena King Locrinus surviving Widow: let Geoffrey relate, and Poets
enlarge, whereof one among them in good account, thus writes: -- In flumen
praaecipitatur Abren,
Nomen Abren fluvio de Virgin, nomen eidem
Nomine corrupto, deinde Sabrina datur.
Into this stream fair Abren headlong-cast,
Gave name of Abren to those waters vast,
Corruptly called Sabrina now at last,


(4) The River makes the East part of this Shire for fruitfulness to be
compared with most of the Land, and to exceed any other Shire in Wales: the
West Side is more hilly and less inhabited, yet surely those mountains breed
innumerable of Cattle, especially of Horses, whose Portraiture for making and
incomparable swiftness, Giraldus Cambrensis Archdeacon of Brecknock, does
greatly commend.

(5) The ancient Inhabitants that were seated in Gwineth and Powisland, whereof
this Shire was a part, were to the Romans known by the name of ORDOVICES, a
puissant and courageous Nation, whose Hearts and Hills held them the longest
free from the Yoke of Subjection, either of the Romans or English: for unto the
days of Domitian, they kept plea with the Romans, and were not brought to the
will of the English before the Reign of King Edward the first. Those ORDOVICES
inhabited the Counties of Mountgomery, Merioneth, Caernarvan, Denbigh, and
Flint, which are of us called now North Wales, a people generous and of affable
conditions, goodly for feature, fair of complexion, courageous of mind,
courteous to strangers, and that which is most commendable, most true and loyal
to the English Crown.

Towns for Trades and Commerce in this County are six: the chiefest thereof and
Shire-Town is Mountgomery, very wholesome for Air, and pleasant for situation,
upon an easy ascent of an Hill, and upon another far higher mounted, stands a
fair and well-repaired Castle, from the East-Rock whereof, the Town has been
walled, as by some part yet standing, and the Tract and Trench of the rest even
unto the North-side of the said Castle, may evidently be seen: whose graduation
for Latitude is placed in the degree 53, and for Longitude 17, the lines
cutting each other in the site of this Town.

This Town has lately received the Honor and Title of an Earldome, whereof
Philip Herbere the second Son of Henry Earl Pembroke, was created the first, in
Anno 1605. And the Shire divided into seven Hundreds, wherein are seated six
Market Towns, and forty seven Parish-Churches.

MERIONETH-SHIRE.
CHAPTER. X.
MERIONETH-SHIRE, which the Britains call Sire Verioneth, and in Latin Mervia;
is bordered upon the North by Car^arvon and Denbigh-shires, upon the East with
Mountgomery, upon the South by the River Dowy, is parted from Cardigan-shire,
and the West side altogether washed with the Irish-Seas, whose rage with such
vehemence beats against her Banks, that it is thought and said, some quantity
of the Land has been swallowed up by those Seas.

(2) In form this Shire somewhat resembles a Welsh-Harp, though small is the
Music that to her Inhabitants she makes, being the roughest, and most
unpleasant to see to (as Giraldus their own Historian writes) in all Wales.
The Air for great pleasure, nor Soil for great profit, I cannot greatly
commend, unless it be for the many and mighty great winds, that for the most
part therein do rage, and the spired Hills clustred together so near and so
high, as the same Author affirms, that Shepherds upon their tops falling at
odds in the morning and challenging the Field for fight, before they can come
together to try out the quarrel, the day will be spent, and the heat of their
fury shut up with their sleep.

(3) These mountains formerly did abound with Wolves, for whose avoidance Edgar
the peaceable, did impose (as Malmesbury writes) a yearly Tribute of three
hundred Wolves, upon Ludwall Prince of that Country, whereby in three years
space they were quite destroyed: and now their faces are covered with fruitful
Flocks of Sheep, besides Neat and other Cattle that therein abundantly do
grase, w^erein the only riches of this Shire does consist: for by reason of
this unevenness of the Soil and Rocks so near the face of the Earth, the Plough
cannot be drawn, nor the Corn prosper, which some have imputed to the idleness
of the Inhabitants, wherein they have been greatly wronged.

(4) These People are a part of the Ordovices, of whom we have spoken, who by
the advantage of these Mountains held out with the longest against the Romans,
and their Necks not brought under the yoke of Bondage before the days of King
Edward the first; since when they have attempted to cast off their subjection
to the English, upon those stirs raised by Owen Glendover, who having been a
Favorite of King Richard the second, and discontented by King Henry the fourth,
in a quarrel with the Lord Gray of Rut^in, that intruded upon his demains,
quarrelled with the King, and entered into open Rebellion and Confederacy with
all other his Rebels, drawing the Welsh-men wholly to his side, in hope to have
had Princes restored of their own blood: and he maintained the same with
wonderful pride, policy, and obstinacy for a long time, until his Confederates,
Followers and Favorites, and his own courage, credit, and maintenance, were
brought so low by that powerful King, that in the end he perished for very want
of Food.

(5) Their Towns are not many, neither those that they have of any stately
Buildings, whereof Bala, Dolgelhe, and Harlech are the Markets. By Bala in the
North-East of this County, in the Welsh L^integid, in English, Pimble-mear, a
great Pool of Water does drown at least threescore Acres of ground: whose
nature is, as the report does pass, that the High-land Floods, though never so
great, cannot make her swell bigger by their receipts* but if the Air be
troubled with over great blasts and tempests of Winds, she, in as great a rage,
rises and passes her Banks, as if she would encounter that enemy in fight.
Into the South whereof the two headed Dee with a pretty sharp stream enters,
and through the same glideth without any mixture of the same water, as the
Inhabitants believe: more strongly conceited in their opinion, for that the
Salmon, usually taken in Dee, is never found in that Pool; and the Fish called
Guiniad, bread in that Mear, never is seen in the River D^^ South thence near
Dolgelhe, in a lower Hill, a great Rampire of Stone and compass is seen, and
has been some fortification or defense in War: which whilst we were curious to
find out some instructions thereof, by report this only we learned, that it was
called Caddoryrita Dr^n, according to the name of her neighbor and far higher
Hill.

(6) Upon the West and Seashore of this Shire, Harlech a Market and Mayor-Town
stands bleak enough and barren, but only for Fowl and Fish; Houses not many,
neither curiously built, wherein ^tandeth a little Chapel decayed and without
use, in which lies buried Sir Richard Thimbleby, an English Knight, who for
the delight he took in that game, removed his abode from a far better Soil.
Here also stands a most strong and beautiful Castle, mounted upon a Hill, and
with a double Bulwark walled about, commanding the Sea, and passage of entrance
of such as seek to invade the Coast: and surely a great pity it is to see so
fair a Work fall to decay: the Constable whereof by Patent is ever the Mayor of
this Town; near unto which are two great Inlets of Seas, which at low water may
be pa^sed upon the Sands with Guides. Upon whose Shore, as upon the Sea Coasts
in this County, abundance of Herrings are caught, for which cause they are much
frequented in the season of the year, by many People from diverse Countries.

(7) This Town being the chiefest of the Shire, The Pole shall be elevated only
from thence, whose height for Latitude stands in the degree 53, 29 minutes,
and for Longitude in the 15, 47 minutes. The whole being bivided into six
Hundreds, wherein are feared thirty seven Parishes-Churches.

DENBIGH and FLINT discribed
map of Denbighshire and Flintshire
DENBIGH-SHIRE.
CHAPTER XI.
DENBIGH-SHIRE, called in Welsh, Sire Denbigh, retiring more from the Sea
within the Country, on this side of the River Conwey shoots Eastward in one
place as far as to the River Dee: on the North, first the Sea, (for a small
space) and then Flint-shire encompasseth it: on the West, Caernarvan and
Merioneth shire: on the East, Cheshire and Shropshire; and on the South,
Mountgomery shire.

(2) The form thereof is long, growing wider still toward the North-West, and
narrower toward the East. It is in length from East to West, one and thirty
miles; and in breadth from North to South, seventeen miles: in the whole
circuit and circumference, one hundred and fourteen miles.

(3) The Air is very wholesome and pleasant, yet bleak-enough, as exposed to the
winds on all sides, and the high Hills, wherewith it is in many places
environed, long retaining the congealed Snow. The tops whereof, in the Summer
time, are the Harvest-Mens Almanacks, by the rising of certain Vapors thereon
in the Mornings, and foreshew a fair Day ensuing.

(4) The Soil is but barren toward the West-part: yet the middle, where it
lies flat in a Valley, is most fertile. The East Side, when it is once past
the Valley, finds Nature to be a very sparing niggard of her favors: but
next unto Dee it feels a more liberal extent of her blessings. The West part
is but here and there inhabited, and mounteth up more than the other with bare
and hungry Hills; yet the leanness of the Soil (where the Hills settle any
thing flatting) has been now a good while begun to b^ overcome by the diligent
pains and careful industry of the Husbandmen; for they parting away the upper
Coat of the Earth into certain Turffs, with a broad kind of Spade, pile them up
artificially on heaps, and fire them, so as being turned into Ashes, and thrown
upon the ground so pared, they fructify the hungry barrenness and sterility of
Soil, and make the Fields bring forth a kind of Rye or Amell-Corn, in such
plenty, as is hardly to be believed.

(5) The ancient Inhabitants of this Country were the Ord^vices, who being also
named Ordevices, or Ordovicae: a puissant and courageous People, by reason they
kept wholly in a mountainous place, and took heart even of the Soil it self:
for they continued longest free from the Yoke both of Roman, and also of
English dominion. They were not subdued by the Romans, before the days of the
Emperor Domitian (for then Julius Agricol^ conquered almost the whole Nation)
nor brought under the command of the English, before the Reign of King Edward
the First; but lived a long time in a lawless kind of liberty, as bearing
themselves bold upon their own magnanimity, and the strength of the Country.

(6) The Mountains of this County yield sufficiency of Neat, Sheep, and Goats.
The Valleys in most places are very plenteous of Corn, especially Eastward on
this side, betwixt the Rivers of Alen and Dee; But the most Westerly part is
Heathy, and altogether barren. The heart of the Shire shows it self beneath the
Hills, in a beautiful and pleasant Vale, reaching seventeen miles in length
from South to North, and five miles, or thereabouts, in breadth, and lies open
only toward the Sea. It is environed on every side with high Hills, amongst
which, the highest is Moillenly, on the top whereof is a warlike Fence with
Trench and Rampire, and a little Fountain of clear Water. From these Hills the
River Cluyd resorts unto this Vale, and from the very Springhead (increased
with Becks and Brooks) does part it in twain, running through the midst of it;
whereof in ancient time it was named Strat-Cluyd: for Marianus makes mention
of a King of the Strat-Cluyd of the W^lsh: And at this day it is commonly
called Diffryn-Cluyd, that is, The Vale of Cluyd.

This thing is worthy observation, as a matter memorable, both for admiration
and antiquity, that in the Parish of Lan-sanan within this Country, there is a
place compass cut out of the main Rock by Man's hand, in the side of a Stony
Hill, wherein there be four and twenty Seats to sit in, some less, some bigger,
where children and young men, coming to seek their Cattle, use to sit, and to
have their sports. And at this day they commonly call it Arthurs Round Table.

(7) Henry Lacy Earl of Lincoln, obtaining Denbigh by the Grant of King Edward
the First, after the Conviction and Beheading of David Brother of Llewelin for
High Treason, was the first that fortified it with a Wall about, nor large in
circuit, but very strong, and on the South Side with a fair Castle, strengthened
with many high Towers. But he gave it over, and left the work unfinished,
conceiving grief (as a sorrowful Father) that his only Son came to untimely
death, and was downed in the Well thereof: The fame of this Town spreads it
self far for repute, a^ being reckoned the most beautiful place in all
North Wales: and it is of no less report, for the Castle adjunct unto it is
impregnable for fortification. And this strange accident happening there in the
year 1575, deserves not to be omit^ed, being left as a continual remembrance of
Gods merciful Providence and preservation at that time: that where by reason of
great Earthquakes, many People were put into great ^ear, and had much harm done
unto them both within and without their Houses, in the Cities of ^ork,
Worcester, Gloucester, Bristo^, Hereford, and in other Countries adj^cent, yet
in the Shire-Hall of Denbigh the Bell was caused to Toll twice, by the shaking
of the earth, and no hurt or hindrance at all either done or received. The
government of this Town is managed by two Aldermen, and two Bailiffs, who are
yearly elected out of twenty five Burgesses, that are their assistants. It has
no Recorder, one Town Clerk, and two Sergeants at Mace: and by observation of
the Mathematics, the Pole is elevated in the degree of Lati^ude 53, and 49
s^ruples, and from she first point in Longitude 16 and 45.

(8) This County with them of Flint and Carnarven-shires. are not divided by
pricks into their several hundreds, according to the rest of this work, the
want of their particulars in the Parliament Roles so causing it, which for the
good of these three Shires, I earnestly sought to have supplied from the Nomina
Villarum, in their Sheriffs Books, and had promise of them that might easily
have procured the same. But whether a fearless jealousy possessed their
spirits, lest the riches of these Shires, by revealing such particulars* should
be further sought into, I cannot say: yet this I have observed in all my
Survey, that where least is to be had, the greatest fears are poss^ssed. Take
these Shires therefore to be done as I could, and not as I would, that wish
both the wealth of them all, and their esteem to be of better regard by those
that may do them good.

(6) This Shire then is divided into twelve Hundreds, for the readier ordering
of businesses necessary to the State of the Country; wherein are placed three
Market Towns, ^it for buying and selling, and other negotiations. It has five
Castles to defend her self, and to offend her enemies, and fifty seven Parishes
for Gods Divine Service and Worship.

FLINT-SHIRE.
CHAPTER XII.
FLINT-SHIRE, stretching out in length, broad at one end, and narrow at
another, is not much unlike in fashion to a Wedge, a piece of which is cut off
by the meeti^g of Cheshire and Denbighshire, South-East in distance some four
miles. It borders Eastward with part of Cheshire, from whence it is guarded in
length with the River Dee unto the North, which parts Worrall and
Flint-shire, till you come to a little Island called Hellebree. Northward it is
bounded with the Virginian-Sea: on the West, a little River, called Cluyd,
parts her and Denbighshire asunder: and on the South altogether by
Shrop-shire.

(2) This Country is nothing mountainous, as other parts of Wales are, but
rising gently all along the River Dee, makes a fair show and prospect of her
self to every eye that beholds her, as well upon the River, being in most
places thereabouts four or five miles broad, as upon the other side thereof,
being a part of Cheshire,

(3) The Air is healthful and temperate, without any foggy clouds or fenny
vapors, saving that sometimes there arises from the Sea, and the River Dee,
certain thick and smoaky seeming Mis^^, which nevertheless are not found
hurtful to the Inhabitants, who in this part live long and healthfully.

(4) The Clime is somewhat colder there than in Cheshire, by reason of the Sea,
and the River that engi^ts the better part of her; by which, the
Northern-winds, being long carried upon the Waters, blow the more cold; and
that side of the Country upward, that lies shoring unto the top, having
neither shelter nor defense, receives them in their still power, and is
naturally a Bulwark from their violence unto her bordering Neighbors, that
makes the Snow to lie much longer there than on the other side of the River.

(5) The Soil brings forth plenty both of Corn and Grass, as also great store
of Cattle, but they be little. To supply which defect, they have more by much
in their numbers than in other places where they be bigger. Great store of Fish
they take in the River of Dee, but little from the Sea, by reason they have no
Havens or Creeks for Boats. No great store of Woods either there or in any
other part of Wales are found, it having been a general plague unto all the
Country ever since the headstrong Rebellions of their Princes and great Men
against the Kings of England, that (in time) took away the principal helps of
their Innovations, by cutting down their Woods, whereof in this Shire there
has heretofore been great plenty. Fruits are scarce, but Milk, Butter and
Cheese plenty, as also store of Honey, of the which they make a pleasant Wine,
in color like (in taste not much unlike) unto Muskadine, which they call
Metheglin. Yea, and in the days of Giraldus Cambrensis, near the place now
called Holy-Well, was a rich Mine of Silver, in seeking after which, men
pierced and pried into the very bowels of the earth.

(6) The ancient Inhabitants of this Country were the Ordovices, a sturdy
People against the Romans, but now most kind and gentle toward the English,
and indeed make much of all Srangers, except they be crossed: and then they are
the contrary.

(7) Places of defense are the Castles of Flint, Hawarden, vulgarly Harden,
Treer, Rudland, Mold, Yowley, and Hope: of which Flint and Harden are the two
principal. The Castle of Flint, famous for the benefit it received from two
Kings, and for the refuge and relief it gave unto the third. It was founded by
Henry the Second, finished by Edward the First, and long after gave harbor and
entertainment to that noble, but unfortunate Prince, Richard the Second, coming
out of Ireland, being within her Walls a free and absolute King, but no sooner
without, but taken Prisoner by Henry Bullingbroke, Duke of Lancaster, losing at
that time his liberty, and not long after his life. This stands in the
graduation of Latitude 53, 55 minutes, in Longitude 17.

For the Castle of Hawarden, no Record remains of the first Founder, but that
it was held a long time by the Stewards of the Earls of Chester. Howbeit their
resistances did not so genearally consist in the strength of their Castles and
Fortifications, as in their Mountains and Hills, which in times of danger
served as natural Bulwarks and Defenses unto them against the force of Enemies.
As was that which stands in a certain strait set about with Woods, near unto
the River Alen, called Coles-hull, that is, Coles-hill, where the English, by
reason of their disordered multitude, not ranged in good array, lost the Field,
and were defeated, when King Henry the Second had made as great preparation as
might be to give Battle unto the Welsh, and the very Kings Standard was
forsaken by Henry of Essex, who was Standard Bearer to the Kings of England in
right of inheritance.

(8) This Country has many shallow Rivers in it, but none of fame and note,
but Dee and Cluyde. Howbeit, there is a Spring not far from Rudland Castle, of
great report and antiquity, which is termed Fons Sacer, in English, Holy-Well,
and is also commonly called S. Winefrids-Well; of whom antiquity thus
reports: That Winefrid a Christian Virgin, very fair and virtuous, was doated
upon by a young lustful Prince or Lord of the Country, who not long able to
rule his headstrong affections, having many times in vain attempted and tried
her chastity, both by rich gifts and large promises, could not by any means
obtain his desires; he therefore (in a place of advantage) suddenly surprised
and ravished her weak (yet resisting) body. After the deed done, the cruel
Tyrant, to stop her cries and acclamations, slew her, and cut off her head; out
of which place did suddenly arise a Spring that continues to this day,
carrying from the Fountain such a forcible stream and Current, as the like is
not found in Christendom. Over the Head of the Spring there is built a Chapel
of Freestone, with Pillars curiously wrought and engraved, in the Chancel
whereof, and Glass-Window, the Picture of the Virgin is drawn, together with
the memorial of her Life and Death, To this Fountain Pilgrims are accustomed to
repair in their zealous, but blind devotion; and diverse others resort to Bath
in, holding firmly that the water is of much virtue.

There be many red Stones in the bottom of this Well, and much green Moss
growing upon the sides: the superstition of the People holding that those red
spots in the Stones were drops of the Ladies Blood, which all the Water in the
Spring can never wash away; and that the Moss about the Wall was her Hair,
which though some of it be given to every Stranger that comes, yet it never
wastes. But howsoever this be carried for truth by the Tradition of time, the
Moss it self smells exceeding sweet.

There is also hard by Kilken (a small Village) within this County, a little
Well of no great note, that at certain times rises and falls, after the
manner of Sea-tydes.

(9) In the South-part of this Country, divided from the rest, is a place ( in
some written Copies of Antonine, called Bovium) which we now term Banchor,
first a City, and afterward a Monastery of famous memory, and the first that
is read of in the World: wherein (as Beda says) were a great number of Monks,
and them divided into seven Companies, every one having his several Ruler
assigned. None of these Companies had less than three hundred Persons devoted
to Prayer, and to get living by their own labor, for themselves and the poor:
although it has long since been utterly ruinate, so as now there is scarce
seen the face and outward show of a dead City or Monastery. It has only the
names of two Gates remaining, one standing a mile di^tant from another, and
betwixt which the River Dee now runs, where are oftentimes found many
pieces of Roman Coin, and other tokens of antiquity. But of these shall be more
mention made in the following History.

Another like Monastery, but of lesser account, stood in the Vale beneath
Varish (a little City placed by the Romans in the consines of this Shire and
Denbigh-shire) and upon the Bank of Elwy and Cluyd. This the Britains call
Llan-Elwy, of the River; the Englishmen, Asaph, of the Founder; and the
Historiographers, Asaphensis. It is more famoused for antiquity, than for
building or bravery: for about the year 560 Kentigern Bishop of Glasco, being
fled hither out of Scotland, placed here a Bishops See, and erected a
Monastery, gathering together 663. in a Religious Brotherhood, whereof 300 that
were unlearned, gave themselves to husbandry, and to work within the Monastery;
the rest to Prayer and Meditations. When he returned into Scotland, he ordained
Asaph, a godly and upright man, to be Governor over this Monastery, of whom it
took the name, and is called Saint Asaphs.

Another Monastery of great account was at Basingwarke in this County, near
unto which began that admirable Ditch drawn thence into the Month of Severne by
King Offa, the Tract whereof I have expressed through this Shire, and will
further speak thereof in the following History.

(10) This Shire is divided into five Hundreds, fortified with seven Castles,
has only one Market Town, and twenty eight Parishes, in which there is a
continual celebration of Divine Service.

ANGLESEY and CARNARVAN
map of Anglesey and Caernarvonshire
ANGLESEY.
CHAPTER XIII.
ANGLESEY was in the time of the Romans called Mona, by the Britains Mon, and
Ver-Mon, (that is) the Land of Mon, of the ancient England-Saxons Moneg: And at
last, after the Englishmen had by their sharp and several assaults brought it
under their rule, and became Lords thereof, it was termed Anglesey, as one
would say, The Englishmens Island.

(2) For an Island it is, albeit it be severed from the Continent of Britain,
but with a small and narrow straight of the River Menai, and on all other parts
beaten upon with the surging and troublous Irish Sea, in which it lies
somewhat square-wise not much different in length and breadth; being, where it
reaches out in length, from Beau-marish Eastward, to the utmost Promontory
Westward, which we call Holy-head, twenty miles; and in breadth from
Llambederick Northward, to the point of Menai Southward, seventeen miles; the
whole circuit or circumference amounting toward seventy miles.

(3) The Air is reasonable grateful and healthful, and not generally subject to
Diseases, excepting certain Agues at sometimes, which are occasioned by the
Fogs and misty Exhalations, which arise from the Sea called Mare Virginium,
with the which this Isle is encompassed.

(4) The Commodities that commend (or rather beautify) this Country, are in
Corn and Cattle, wherewith it not only enricheth it self exceedingly, but
sends out great Provision thereof to others to supply their defects, and
although the ground may seem dry and stony, or unpleasant and nothing sightly,
wherein for the outward quality it resembles some other parts of Wales, that
are not so fruitful, yet for the inward bounties of nature, it is far unlike;
for above all the Coasts of Wales it is most plentiful of Wheat, insomuch as by
Giraldus Cambre^sis report, they are wont to say in Welsh, by way of a Proverb,
Mon Mam Cambry, which is to say, Mon is the Mother of Wales; for that when
other Countries Harvest fails round about, or their Provision is exhaust and
drawn dry, this alone, like a provident and full breasted Mother is able to
sustain the rest. Whereunto Nature most providently has added another benefit
serviceable and necessary to the former, in that the Country produces also
those kind of Stones which are called Molares, as of all other fittest to make
Millstones or Grindstones. In some places also it yields an Earth of
Aluminous quality, out of which some not long since began to make Al^m and
Copperose, who (like unflesht Soldiers) gave over their enterprise without
further hope, because at first they saw it not answer their overhasty
expectations.

(5) The ancient Inhabitants of this Country were the Ordovines, mentioned
before in the precedent Provinces of Denbigh-shire, Flint-shire, and
Carnarvon-shire. And this very Island was that ancient, and so much ennobled
Seat of the British Dr^yds, who so amated the Army of Roman Invaders, as
Tacitus reports, and as elsewhere we have related in the sixth Book and
seventh Chapter of our ensuing History.

(6) This Nation was attempted first by Paulinus Suetonius in the Reign of
Nero, but brought under the Roman Empire by Julius Agricola. When the Empire of
the Romans in Britain began to decline and go downward, some out of Ireland
entered into this Isle by stealth, and ^estled themselves there, as may be
gathered by certain mounts of earth entrenched about, and yet to be seen, which
they call the Irish-mens Cottages: as also by a place named of the Irish-men,
y^ Hiericy G^idid, who did there (as is recorded) put the Britains to flight
under the leading of Sirigus. The Norwegians also were often infestuous to this
Island; but King Ethelreds Fleet, having in the year 1000 scoured the Seas
round about this Isle, far exceeded all both Irish and Norwegian depopulations,
for they was^ed the Country in all hostile manner.

(7) After this, two Hughs, both Normans, did greatly afflict this Island: The
one being Earl of Chester, the other of Shrewsbury; at which very time Magnus
the Norwegian arriving there, shot Hugh Earl of Shrewsbury through with an
Arrow, and departed after he had ransacked the Island. It was afterward
grievousl^ infested by the Englishmen, who never gave over from time to time to
invade it, until in the Reign o^ King Edward ^^e first, it was whol^y bro^ght
under his subjection.

(8) The principal Town in this Isle is Beaumarish, which the said King Edward
the First built in the East Side thereof, and for the f^^r situation, th^u^h in
a Moo^ish-place, gave it the name which it now bears, whereas in times past
it was called Bonover; which ^e also fortified with a goodly Ca^tle.

(9) The Mayor is the chiefest Magistrate of the Town, who is yearly chosen,
and has the assistance and help of two Bailiffs, two Sergeants at M^ce, and
one Town Clerk: by whose careful diligence the affairs of this Town are orderly
managed and commanded: whose Latitude is 54, and Longitude 15, 45 minutes.

(10) Not far from hence is Lhaanvais, in times past a fair Religious House of
the Friars Minors, which although it be now in a manner rased out of memory,
yet antiquity makes mention that it has been of great regard among the Kings
of England, who h^ve showed themselves very bountiful Patrons unto that Covent,
both in respect of the sanctimonious life of such as conversed there, as also
because there the Bodies of very eminent persons, as the Daughter of King John,
the Son of a King of the Danes, as likewise of many great Lords, Knights and
Squires, were enterred, that were slain in the Wars against the Welsh, in the
time of many illustrious Kings of England.

(11) This Isle is reckoned to have had anciently many Villag^s in it, even to
the number of three hundred threescore and three; and the same even at this day
is very well peopled.

The division of this Isle for disposition of affairs that belong either to the
state of the Crown, or to the condition of the Country, is into six Hundreds:
in which are seated two Market Towns, and seventy four Parish-Churches for Gods
Divine Honor and Worship.

CAERNARVON-SHIRE.
CHAPTER. XIV.
CAERNARVON-SHIRE, in Welsh, Sire Caer-ar-v^n, so called because it is just
over against Anglesey, (which the Britains call Mon) and in composition was
termed also Snowden-Forrest, before Wales was laid into Shires; the North-side
whereof and the West butteth upon the Irish-Sea, the South Side is enclosed
with Merioneth, and the East with Denbigh shires, from which it is severed by
the River Conwey.

(2) The form thereof is much like a wedge, long and narrow toward the South
and growing still wider toward the North: so that from Pev^nkel-point
Southward, to Orms-head-point Northward, are forty miles, from the River Conwey
Eastward, to the River Ll^noy Westward, miles twenty: and the whole
circumference one hundred and ten miles.

(3) The Air is sharp and piercing, by reason that the Country has not natural
Provision to ensconce her self against the extremity of Winds and Weather: but
especially, as may be thought, through the continuance of the Snow on the
Hills, which also exclude the Suns aspect and warmth.

(4) The Soil cannot be much commended for the fertility, except those parts of
the Seacoasts, which lie on the West toward Ireland: but for the heart of
this Shire, it is altogether mountainous, as if nature had a purpose here, by
rearing up these craggy Hills so thick together, strongly to compact the joints
of this our Island, and to frame the Inland part thereof for a fit place of
refuge to the Britains, against those times of adversity which afterward did
fall upon them; for no Army, though never so strongly, or scarce any
Travelers, though never so lightly appointed, can find passage among those so
many rough and hard Rocks, so many Vales and Pools here and there, crossing all
the ways, as ready obstacles to repel any Inroads of foreign assailants. These
Mountains may not unfitly be termed the British Alps, as being the most vast of
all Britain, and for their steepness and cragginess not unlike to those of
Italy, all of them towering up into the Air, and round encompassing one far
higher than all the rest, peculiarly called Snowdon Hills, though the other
likewise in the sa^^e sense, are by the Welsh termed Craig Eriry, as much as
Snowy Mountains, taking their name as does (by Plinies testimony) Niphates in
Armenia, and Imaus in Scythia: For all the year long these lie mantelled over
with Snow hard crusted together, though otherwise for their height they are
open and liable both to the Sun to dissolve them, and the Winds to over-sweep
them.

(5) The ancient Inhabitants of this Country were the O^^ovices, of whom we
have sufficiently spoken in the description of the former Provinces; neither
need I insist either upon the pleasures or profits that this Country yields,
by reason of the great affinity it has both of Climate and Commodities with
Denbigh-shire and Flint-shire before mentioned: But this beyond the other in
some places breeds certain Shel-fishes, which being conceived by an heavenly
dew, bring forth Pearls, in ancient times more reckoned of than now they are.

(6) Touching places of note, that City is very ancient which the Emperor
Antonine call^^h Segontium, taking name of a River running by, which at this
day is called S^^ent: some Relics of the Walls whereof do yet appear, near
unto a little Church consecrated to the honor of Saint Publicius. This City
Ninius calls Caer Custenith, which some interpret the City of Constantine.
Indeed Matthew Westminster says (how true I know not) that Anno 1283. here was
found the body of Constantius (Father to Great Constantine) which King Edward
the first caused to be sumptuously bestowed in the Church of the new City,
which he raised out of the ruins of the old, and is now called Caernarvon,
which gives name to this whole Shire. The Town it self yields a most
excellent prospect toward the Sea, and is encompassed (in a manner) round with
the Walls of the Castle: so as we may say, it is a City within a Castle, which
takes up the whole West Side of it: and great pity it is, that so famous a
work should not be perpetuous, or ever become the ruin of time, which is much
feared, for the merciless underminings of the Sea, that with her daily and
forcible irruptions never cease to wash away the Foundations of the Key. The
People of this Town are well approved for courtesy, and also Civil Government,
which is administered by the Constable of the Castle (who is ever Mayor by
Patent) having the assistance of one Alderman, two Bailiffs, two Sergeants at
Mace, and one Town-Cle^k. The Townsmen do not a little glory that King Edward
the Second was born there, in a Tower of the Castle called Eagle-Tower, and
surnamed of Caer-nar-von, he being the first Prince of Wales of the English
Line. The site of this Town according to Mathematical observation is in the
degree of Longitude 15 and 50 scruples from the first West point, and the Pole
elevated in Latitude 53 and 50.

Bangor the Bishops See, though it be now but a small Town, yet it was in time
past so large, that for the greatness thereof it was called Banchor-Vaur, that
is, Great-Banchor; which Hugh Earl of Chester fortified with a Castle: But it
has been long since utterly ruinated and laid level with the ground, insomuch
as there is not any footing to be found or other monuments left thereof,
although they have been sought with all diligent enquiry. This Bishops See has
been the Diocese of ninety six Parishes. But the ancient Church which was
consecrated unto Daniel, sometime Bishop thereof, was defaced and set on fire
by that notorious Rebel Owen Glendowerdwy, who had a purpose also to destroy
all the Cities of Wales, for that they stood for the King of England. And
though the same Church was since repaired about the time of King Henry the
seventh, yet has it scarce recovered the resemblance of her former dignity.

The River Conwey (which limiteth this Shire on the East Side) is in Ptolomy by
corruption or ignorance of Transcribers called Toissonius, instead of Cononius,
whence Canonium (a Town mentioned by Antonine) took name: and albeit both it
and its name be now utterly extinct, yet is there a covert remembrance thereof
in the new name of a poor Village, standing among the rubbish thereof, called
Caer-hean, (that is) the ancient City: Out of the Spoil whereof King Edward the
first, built a new Town at the Rivers mouth, termed thereupon Aber-Conwey:
(that is) the mouth of Conwey, which being formerly fortified by Hugh of
Chester, and strongly situate and senced both with Walls and a fair Castle by
the Rivers side, deserves rather the name of a City than a Town, if it were
more populous and traffiqued with Inhabitants. Neither must I here forget
Nowin, though but a small Market Town, for that it pleased the English Nobles,
Anno 1284, to honor it and the memory of King Arthur, with triumphant
celebrity, after they had subdued the rebellious Ringleaders of Wales.

(7) Other matters of memorable note this Country affords not much, unless
perhaps this: That just over against the River Conwey, where it issues into
the Sea, there sometimes stood an ancient City named Diganwey, which many years
ago was consumed by Lightning, and so made utterly desolate, as many other
Monuments have been, of ancient and worthy memory. As likewise that in the Pool
Lin-Peris, there is a kind of Fish called there T^rcoth, having a red Belly, no
where else seen. For touching these two other miracles famoused by Gira^dus and
Gervasius, that on those his high Hills there are two Pools called the Mears,
the one of which produces great store of Fish, but all having only one Eye,
and the other there is a moveable Island, which as soon as a man treads
thereon, it forthwith floateth a great way off, whereby the Welsh are said to
have often escaped and deluded their Enemies assailing them: these matters are
out of my Creed, and yet I think the Reader had rather believe them, than to go
to see whether it be so or no.

It is traded with five Market Towns fit for bargaining, buying and selling,
fortified with four Castles, and has sixty eight Parish-Churches in it, where
the Inhabitants concur and meet together for the celebration of Divine-Service.

THE KINGDOM OF SCOTLAND
map of Scotland
SCOTLANDS General Description.
CHAPTER. I.
SCOTLAND, the second Kingdom of Great Britain, and the North part of the
Island, has on the East the German-Ocean; on the North, the Orkneys, and
Deucalidon-Sea; the West affronted with Ireland; and the South has the River
Tweed, the Cheviot-Hills, and the adjacent Tract, reaching to the Sulway-Sands,
whereby it is separated from England.

(2) This Kingdom is fair and spacious, and from these South borders spreads
it self wide into the East and West, till again it contracts it self, narrower
unto the Northern Promontories: furnished with all things befitting a famous
Kingdom; both for Air and Soil, Rivers, Woods, Mountains, Fish, Fowl, and
Cattle, and Corn so plenteous, that it supplyeth therewith other Countries in
their want. The People thereof are of good feature, strong of body, and of
courageous mind, and in Wars so venturous, that scarce any service of note has
been performed, but that they were with the first and last in the Field. Their
Nobility and Gentry are very studious of learning, and all civil knowledge; for
which end they not only frequent the three Universities of their own Kingdom
(S. Andrews, Glasco, and Edo^borough, the Nurseries of Piety, and Mansions of
the sacred Muses) but also much addict themselves to travel into forain
Countries.

(3) The Counties contained in this Kingdom are many, and every where bestrewed
with Cities, Towns, and Burrows, as is that of England: and, as England, I
intended to describe it, had I not been happily prevented by a learned
Gentleman of that Nation, who has most exactly begun, The South pert of
Scotland wherein are contained Edinbrough St. Andrew and Glasco Archbisho^
map of southern Scotland and gone through the greatest difficulties thereof;
to build upon whose foundations, I hold it injurious: and am so far from any
ambition to prevent his noble purposes, that I heartily wish all happy
furtherances thereto, with a longing desire to see, by his industrious labors,
another Scene added to the perfecting of the Theater of Britains glory.

(4) Yet, in the mean while, lest I should seem too defective in my
intendments, let me without offense, in this third, though short Book) give
only a general view of that Kingdom, upon observations from others; which to
accomplish by mine own survey (if others should hap to fail, and my crazy-aged
body will give leave) is my chief desire; knowing the Island furnished with
many worthy remembrances, appertaining both unto them and us, whom God now has
set under one Crown: and the rather, for that their more Southern People are
from the same Original with us the English, being both alike the Saxo^
branches: as also, that the Picts anciently inhabiting part of that Kingdom,
were the inborn Britains, and such as thither fled to avoid the Romans
servitude: whose names began first to be distinguished under Dioclesian the
Emperor, when they were termed Picts for painting their Bodies, like the
Britains, as says Flavius Vigetius: which is more strengthened, for that the
Northern Britains converted by Saint Columb, are called Britain-Picts.

(5) But the Highland-men (the natural Scot indeed) are supposed to descend
from the Scythians, who with the Getes infesting Ireland, left both their issue
there, and their manners, apparent in the Wild-Irish even to this day: And from
Scytha (as is thought) the name of Scot grew; for so the Netherlanders by
Scutten express indifferently the Scythian or Scot: so Gildas called the
Irish-Britains, Scythians: so King Elfred in translating the History of
Orosius, turns Scotos into Scyttan: and so says Walsingham, from one and the
same original, Scythae, Scytici; Scota, Scotici, take their names, as from
Geta, Getici; Gothi, Gothici have done.

The Southren part of Scotland wherein is ye strange Lake Lomund
Petrus Kaerius caelavit
map of southern Scotland with Loch Lomond

(6) Their Manners were alike, says Diodorus Siculus, and Strabo, and their
Garments not much different, as by Sidonius Apollinaris may be gathered, where
he seems rather to describe the modern Wild-Irish, than the antike Get.
Notwithstanding this Nations Original by some has been derived from Scota, the
supposed Daughter of the Egyptian King Pharaoh, that nourished Moses,
afterward married unto Gaithelus, the Son of Cecrops, (Founder of Athens) who
first seating in Spain, passed thence into Ireland, and lastly into Scotland,
where his Wife Scota gave Name to the Nation; if we believe that they hit the
mark, who shoot at the Moon.

(7) But that the Scythians came into Spain, (besides the Promontory bearing
their name Scythicum) Silius Italicus, a Spaniard born, does show, who brings
the Concani, a Nation therein seated, from the Massagetae, which were the
Scythians; and the Sarmatae whom all confess to have been Scythians, were the
builders (as he says) of the City Susanna in Spain. And how from Spain they
possessed themselves of Ireland, (at the time when the Kingdom of Judah
flourished) Ninius the Disciple of Elvodugus does tell, and their own Histories
of Nemethus and Delas, besides Cisnerus and others, do show; who were first
known by the name of Scots, as is gathered out of Porphyry (alleged by S.
Jerome) in the Reign of Aurelianus the Emperor. Gildas calls them the
Irish-Spoilers: Giraldus, A Scottish Nation descended from Ireland: which in
regard of them, by Eginhardus, is termed, The Isle of Scots: by Beda, The Isle
inhabited by the Scots; and by other Historians, Scotland the great; as their
seat in Britain was called Scotland the less.

(8) These, when the Roman Empire was far in the wane, burst into Britain under
Reuda their Captain, who entering amity with the Picts, possessed the North part
of the Island, and assisted them against the Britains, then ready to fall, when
the Romans were gone. But these afterward entertaining dissentions amongst
themselves,, put the hazard of their estates on the trial and chance of one
days battle, fought betwixt them in the year of Salvation, 740, wherein the
Picts not only lost their The Eastern part of Scotland wherein there are diverse
Shires and the University of Aberdyn
Petrus Kaerius caelavit
map of eastern Scotland lives, but soon after even their very n^me also, and
Fortune crowning the Scots with victory, advanced these Kingdom unto such fame
and strength, that the same has long continued without any absolute conquest
or surprise, against the ass^ults of whatsoever enemies.

(9) Scotlands South-part in Galloway, washed with the water of Solway-Bay,
touches degree 56 of Latitude, and thence imbosoming many Loughs and Inlets
upon the East and West, extends it self unto the degree 60, and 30 minutes:
whose Logitude is likewise laid betwixt the degree 13 and 19, and the same
grown very narrow, being so near the North Pole, as lying directly under the
hinder-most Stars of the Greater Bear.

(10) The which Kingdom is divided into two parts by the great River Tay; the
South whereof is the more populous, and more beautified in manners, riches, and
civility: the North more rude; retaining the customs of the Wild-Irish, the
ancient Scot, in whose several Territories these Counties ensuing are contained.

South.
Teifidale, Merch, Laudier, Liddesdale, Eskedale, Anuandale, Niddesdale,
Galloway, Carricke, Kyle, Cunningham, Arrar, Cluidesdale, Lennox, Stirling,
Fife, Stratberne, Menteith, Argile, Cantire, Lorne,
North.
Loquabrea, Braidalhin, Perth, Athol, Anguis, Merns, Mar, Buquhan, Murrey,
Rosse, Sutherland, Cathanes, Strathnavern.
Part of Scotland it is called of the inhabitance Stranauerne with his borderers
Petrus Karius caelavit 1599.
map of part of Scotland

(11) And these again are subdivided into Sheriffdomes. Stewardships, and
Bailiwicks, for the most part Inheritory unto honorable Families. The
Ecclesiastical Government is also subject under two Metropolitan Archbishops,
which are of S. Andrews, (the Primate of Scotland) and of Glasco; whose
Jurisdictions are as follows: S. Andrews.
Dunkeld, Aberdon, Murray, Dunblan, Brechin, Ross, Cathenes, Orkney.
Glasco.
Galloway, Argile, Isles.


Amongst the things worthy of Note of Antiquity in this Kingdom, most memorable
was that Fortification drawn from Abercorne upon the Frith of Edenboroug^, unto
Alcluyd, now Dunbritton, opening upon the West-Sea, where Julius Agricola set
the limit of the Roman Empire; past which, says Tacitus, there was no other
bounds of Britain to be sought for: and that here the second Legion Augusta,
and the 20 Legion Victrix, built a part of the Wall, certain Inscriptions there
dug up, and reserved at Dunloyr and Cader do witness: as also an ancient
coped Monument of an high and round compass, which as some think, was a Temple
consecrated unto the God Terminus; others, a Trophy raised by Carausius, who
fortified this Wall with seven Castles, as Ninius does declare.

(12) At this place began the great and dark Wood Caledonia, famous for the
wild white Bulls The Isles of Hebrides with there borderers
Petrus Kaerius caelavit.
map of the Hebrides that therein were bred, whose Manes were Lion-like, thick
and curled, of nature fierce and cruel, and so hateful to mankind, that they
abhoried whatsoever was by them handled or breathed upon: these Woods stretched
far and wide with many turning, dark shades, and dreadful dens, and so famous
in the Roman Writers, that they often used that name for all Britain; whose
Inhabitants were the last in this Island, that yielded their Necks to the Yoke
of Subjection, as shall appear in our following Story.

(13) Ninian a Britain is recorded to have converted the South-Picts unto the
Faith of Christ in the Reign of Theodosius the you^ger, and the Church in
Galloway bearing his name does witness it: so likewise in the same age
Palladius sent from Pope Celestine, became an Apostle unto the Scots, whose
Relics lay enshrined at Fordon in Mernis, as was verily supposed: but that
Christianity had been formerly planted in this uttermost Province, is testified
by Tertullian, in saying the Britains had embraced the Faith further than the
Romans had power to follow or persecute them, whereupon Peter Monk of Clun in
Spain, concludes their conversion to be more ancient than the Southern
Britains.

(14) But touching things observable for the present, surely admirable is the
report of the plenty of Cattle, Fish, and Fowl there abiding: their Neat but
little, yet many in number: Fish so plentiful, that men in some places (for
delight) on Horseback hunt Salmons with Spears: and a certain Fowl, which some
call Soland-Geese, spreading so thick in the Air, that they even darken the
Suns light; of whose Flesh, Feathers, and Oil, the Inhabitants in some parts
make great use and gain; yea, and even of Fishes brought by them, abundant
Provision for Diet, as also of the Sticks (brought to make their Nests)
plentiful provision for Fuel.

(15) With these, as of Wonders, I might speak of the natures of those two
famous Longhs, Lomund and Nessa, the latter whereof never freezeth in Winter,
though never so extreme, and the CATHANES and ORKNAY INS
Petrus Kaerius caela.
waters of the other most raging in the fairest and calmest weather; wherein
also floateth an Island that removes from place to place, as the wind forces
her spongeous and unfastened body. In Buqu^an upon the banks of Ratra is a
Well, whose trickling drops turn (in Piramid-wise) into hard stone, and another
near Edenborough that floateth with Bitumen. In Dee and Dene, besides the
admired plenty of Salmons, is found a Shellfish, called the Horse. Muskel,
wherein Pearls are engendered, most precious for Physic, and some of them so
Orient, that they give not place to the choicest.

(16) No less strange than any the forementioned waters, but more lamentable
is the remembrance of the great inundation, happening, by the sudden rising of
Tay, which bare away the Walls and Town of Berth, and with it the Cradle and
young Son of King William into the Sea, wherein the Royal Infant with many
others perished, the King and his Courtiers hardly escaping the danger with
life. The ruin of this Town raised another more famous, and more commodiously
seated, even Berth, since called Saint Iohns-Town.

(17) Islands and Ilets yielding both beauty and subjection to this
Scottish-Kingdom, are the Western, the Orkneys and the Shetlands, reckoned to
be above three hundred in number; the Inhabitants for the most part using the
frugality of the ancient Scot.

(18) The Western lying scattered in the Deucalidonian Sea, were anciently
ruled by a King of their own, whose maintenance was out of their common
Coffers, and the Regal Authority never continued in lineal succession, for (to
prevent that) their Kings were not permitted to have Wives of their own, but
might by their Laws accompany with other men's: as the like Law was in the other
parts of Scotland, that the Virginity of all new Wives, should be the Landlords
prey, till King Malcolme enacted, that half a mark should be paid for
redemption. The residence of those forementioned Kings, was chiefly in Ila,
Bunals, and Iona, now Columbkill, where (as Donald Munro, who traveled through
these Islands, reports) are three Tombs, having the several Inscriptions of
the Kings of Scotland, of Ireland and of Norway.

(19) Among these Western Islands, the Hebrides, Sky, Mula, Ila, and Arran,
are the greatest: All of them plentiful of Corn, Woods, Salmons and Herrings,
as others of Conies, Deer, Horses, and Sheep, where in some they are wild, and
in others without any owners; but the People uncivil, and lacking Religion,
they rather live rudely in state of necessity, than as Lords of these portions
which God has allotted them; and with a sufferable ease, ignorant of ambition,
enjoy those contentments, which some others (though they no great sum) do more
laboriously attain unto by the Precepts of Philosophy: for feeding themselves
with competency without any excess, they return all the overplus unto their
Lords, as do the Inhabitants of Hirta and Rona: but alas, Religion not known
among them, these penurious virtues are rather the curses of Cham, than the
followings of Christ, who forbids us to be too careful for the morrow.

(20) The ^sles of Orkenay upon the North of Scotland, lying in a most raging
and tempes^uous Sea, are about three and thirty in number, whereof thirteen are
inhabited, and the other replenished with Cattle: in these are no venomous
Serpents, nor other ugly vermin; the Air sharp and healthful, and the Soil apt
to bear only Oats and Barley, but not a stick of Wood,: among these, Pomonia is
the greatest, accounted and called the Main-Land, affording six Minerals of
lead and Tin, and in her chief Town, a Bishops See: wherein are seated twelve
Parish Churches, one of them very magnificent for so remote a Country.

(21) Of all the Romans, Julius Agricola first discovered the Orkenays; yea,
and subdued them, if we will believe Tacitus: but Pomponius Mela, that wrote
thirty years before him, does mention them, and Iuvenal in Hadrians time after
him, tells us the Romans had won them; and lastly, Claudian names Saxons that
were slain in them, and so does Ninius name Octha and Ebissus, Saxou
Commanders, who in their roving Pinnaces wasted the Orknays. These Islands
Donald Bane the Usurper of the Scottish Crown, gave the King of Norway for his
assistance, and by the Norwegians were they held the space of an hundred and
sixty years, until that Alexander the third King of Scotland, with Sword and
Composition got them from Magnus the Fourth, King of Norway, which afterward
King Haquin confirmed unto King Robert Bruce: but lastly, Christian the First,
King of Norway and Denmark, utterly renounced all his right to those Islands,
when he gave his Daughter in Marriage unto King James the Third, which deed was
further ratified by the Pope, who opens the way to the possession of Kingdoms
with his own Key.

(22) More North, and further than this Chart could well express, lie the Isles
of Shetland, of some thought to be Thule, and by the Commenter upon Horace, the
Fortunate Island, where, as Tze^zes fabuleth, the Souls of good Men are ferryed
into those Elizian Fields that ever grow green, and whence Julius Caesar could
hardly be drawn, as Muretus had written: but their Fictions intended only that
the virtuous Souls of the dead passed the uttermost bounds of earthly abode,
and attained to an ever-pleasing repose, and ever-flourishing happiness; which
whether they borrowed from the description of Paradise, (taken both for a fair
Garden and the Souls happy rest) I cannot define; but sure they would not have
made those Fields always green, if they had seen how they lie ever covered with
Ice and Snow, being in the 63 degree of Latitude, as Ptolomy has placed it,
where (for the most part) is a continual Winter: but for proof that this was
the Thule, besides Ptolomies Positure, Saxo Grammaticus betwixt Norway and
Scotland has placed it; and Solinus, two days sailing from the point of
Caledonia; and Tacitus says, that the Romans kenned Thule afar off, as they
sailed about Britain by the Orcades: and lastly, Mela makes it to face Berge a
City in Norway.

THE KINGDOM OF IRLAND
map of Ireland
IRELAND Described.
CHAPTER I.
THe Traditions of time have delivered unto us diverse names, whereby this
famous Island is recorded to have been called: yet none of more fair
probabili^y, than that of Ortheus, Aristotle and Claudian, by whom it is named
Ierna: by Iuvenal and Mela called Iuverna, by Diodorus Siculus, Iris: by
Martian of Heraclea, Ioyepnia: by Eustachius, Oyernia and Bernia: by the native
Inhabitants, Erin: by the Britains Yverdon: the Welsh. Bards in their Ballads,
Tirvolas, Totidanan and Banno: and by the Eng^ish, Ireland, But from whence
these diversities were derived, arise many opinions. Doubtless it is, that
Hibernia, Iuverna, and Overnia, came from Ierna, spoken of by Orpheus and
Aristotle; and the same Ierna, as al^o Iris, Iverdhon, and Ireland, from Erin,
the term that the Inhabitants now us^. From this Erin therefore (a word proper
to the Nation) the original is most likely to be deduced.

(2) Some derive Hibernia from Hiberno tempore, that is, from the Winter
season; some from Hiberus a Spaniard; some from a Duke named Irnalph; some
again from the ancient River Iberus, and some from Hiere, an Irish word, which
signifies the West, or a Western* Coast, whence Erin may also seem to fetch^he
derivation: for it lies furthest Westward of any Region in ail Europe. As also
for that the River running in the most remo^e West-part of this Island, is in
P^olomy called Iernus; like as the furthest Western Promontory in Spain, from
whence our Irish-Men came, is by Strabo called Ierne, and the River next unto
it, by Mela, Ierna: yea, and Spain it self, for the Western situation, is
called Hesperia: the West-Cape of Africa* Hesperium; and in Germany, Westrich
and Westphalen from their position have their names. Postelius (a man that
rather followed his own fancy, than the judgment of others (fetches the
original of Ireland from the Hebrews, as if I^in should be as much as Iurin,
that is the Jews land: which opinion I hold no better than those that would
have it from the Winter-like storms, although upon every Wind the Air is cold
there.

(3) Festus Avienus, in that little Book which he entitled Orae Maritimae,
calls Ireland, Sacram Insulam, that is, The holy Island: to which opinion the
people are soon drawn, by reason of the many Saints that the Island is said to
produce, and the blessed Soil that affords no venomous Creatures to retain
Life. It is thought that Plutarch meant Ireland by his Ogygia, for her great
antiquity; and of latter times by Isidore and Bid it was called Scotia, of
those Scots that inhabited it: and that thence the name of Scotland, together
with the Scots themselves, came into Britain.

(4) For largeness and circuit, in times past, this Island challenged the third
place in rank of all the Isles of the then known World for thus have
Geographers left us, that the Indian Taproban for greatness was the first, the
Isle of Britain the next, and this of Ireland the third: and for that cause
does Ptolomy call it the Little-Britain. But howsoever Strabo has extended the
breadth, as broad as the length, and others have formed it in shape like an
Egg, yet later dimensions have found it far otherwise, twice longer than broad,
and may be compared to the fore-leg of a Bear, if the Si^ile breed no offense.
Whose East Side has on it that tempes^uous Sea that cutteth her Channel
betwixt England and this Ireland: the West is washed with the Western-Ocean;
the North with the D^ucaledonian, and the South with the Virginian-Sea.

(5) The Air of this Island is delectable and wholesome, though neither so clear
nor subtle as is ours of England, which (as Mela says) is nothing favorable
for the ripening of Corn: but so grateful to the ground, that it causes grass
to grow abundantly, not only fresh and long, but withal very sweet for all
Cattle, and in Winter is more subject to Wind than Snow: and that I may use the
words of Giraldus, It is of all Countri^s most temperate, neither forcing the
I^habitants to seek shade from the frying heat of Cancer, nor the chilling cold
of Capricorn to drive t^em to the fire: but at all seasons most mild, betwixt a
sufferable cold, and gentle warm heat.

(6) The Soil (says Cambrensis) is uneven, woody, wild, waterish, and boggy,
so full of Loughs and Mears, that great Ponds of Water are found upon the high
Mountains. These indeed make the places somewhat dangerous unto all new
Comers, by breeding of Rheums, Dysenteries and Fluxes, whose usual remedy is
Vskebah, a wholesome Aqua vitae, that dries more, and enflameth less, than many
other hot Confections.

(7) The Commodities of this Kingdom chiefly consist in Cattle, whose seed is
so sweet and so rank, that they will soon graze to a surfeit, if they may be
suffered to feed as they will. Their Sheep are many, but bear not the best
Wool, which twice are shorn within one year. Of these they make Mantles,
Caddowes, and Coverlets, vented from thence into foreign Countries. Their
Hobbies likewise are of great esteem, and are answerable to the Ienners of
Spain. Bees are there in such abundance, that honey is found in holes of Trees,
and in rests of the Rocks. No annoyance of hurtful Snake or venomous Creatures:
and to speak all in a word, nothing wanting for profit or pleasure: for so much
does Giraldus affirm, in saying, that Nature had cast into this Western Kingdom
of Zephyrus a m^re gracious eye ^han was ordinary.

(3) Touching the original peopling of this fair Island, if we will believe
their Records, they make antiquity it self but young unto themselves, affirming
the Da^sel Caesarea, and Ni^ce unto Noah, to have found it out before the
Flood; and that three hundred years after, when Iaphets posterity took into
these Wests-parts of the World, one Bartholarus of his Progeny, a Scythian by
birth, encouraged by the late success of Nimrod (who now had intruded upon the
Monarchy of Syria) wandered so far West, that Fortune at last cast him and his
people upon the coast of Ireland. There he settled with his three sons,
Languinna, Salanus, and Ruthurgus, who searching through every creek and corner
of the Land, left their own names by three notable places, Languini, Stragrus,
and Mount Salanga, which the revolution of times has since called by other
names, as S. Dominickhill, Ruthurgi, and Stagnum. Under the government of these
three sons, and their offspring, this Land was kept about three hundred years;
at which time there arrived also in Ireland, a Giant-like kind of People of
Nimrods race, who in bodily shape exceeded the proportion of usual men, using
their strengths to win soveraignties, and to oppress with rapine and violence.
These growing to numbers, accounted it necessary to prevent dominion, lest the
curse of slavery (prophesied by Noah) should light upon them: to prevent the
which, they set up a King of their own; then quarrels bred daily, either
parties purposing to hold their interest by their Swords; against whom, lastly
a Battle was fought, and an infinite company of Giants slain; when also died
most of those of the posterity of Iapheth, leaving them of Cham Lords of the
Island.

(9) Whereupon Nemethus a Scythian with his four Sons, arrived in Ireland, and
by strong hand seated themselves among these Giants; where for two hundred and
sixty years they kept, but then no longer able to hold out against them, they
left their ^tandings, and departed the Land.

(10) Soon after, the five Sons of Dela, descended from the said Nemetheus,
came into these coasts, and with manly prowess drove these miscreants out of
Ireland, whereby the Seed of Cham was utterly expelled, and these of Iapheth
divided the Land into five parts, whereof they became themselves Kings: but
falling at variance, gave advantage unto others, among whom the BRITAINS set in
a foot.

(11) But to make this Island more famous, certain Historians have fetched
their Kings from most uncertain Records, as namely from Gaothel the Grecian,
and Scotia, (the daughter of King Pharaoh, and nourisher of Moses) his Wife:
who at that time, when Israel were in Egypt, with a Colony came into Spain, and
after into Ireland, where he was made King, and in honor of his Queen, the
Land named Scotia, from whom also the Inhabitants took name: his posterity
increasing in the parts of Spain, where first they had seated, in process of
time sought further adventures under the four Sons of Milesius King of Spain,
whose names were Hibernus, Hermion, Ever, and Erimon.

(12) These, by the direction, sufferance and assistance of Gurguntius, King of
the Britains, after that Ireland had been very much dispeopled by a contagious
pestilence, seated themselves, and from the eldest, Hibernus, called the Island
Hibernia, as some are of opinion: these divided the whole into five Provinces,
famously known by the names of Mounster, Leinster, Connaught, Vlster, and Mead
in their midst: and from these the present Irish repute themselves to come. Yet
surely, as I make no question, but that this Island became inhabited even of
old time, when mankind again overspread the face of the earth, so doubt I not,
but that our Britains passed thereinto themselves, such infinite number of
words in the Irish language yet in use, such ancient names of Waters, Isles,
Mountains, and Places, merely British words, yet remaining, and the testimony
of Tacitus, who says, that their manners were fashioned to the Britains,
inforceth so much; and Ptolomy before him, calls that Island by the name of
Little-Britain: all which show a former interest for Ireland, than that which
by conquest under Henry the second was made.

(13) That it ever was subject to the Romans, is doubtful, though Agricola did
wish it, and Tacitus held most necessary: yea, and in the division of their
Empire, Ireland, with Britain and Thule, fell unto Constantine the Son of
Constantine the Great; yet their Manners unreclaimed, and barbarism retained
long after those days, do witness no such civility sown, to be in that plot.
But when Romes great Empire began to grow less, the Scots or Scythians grew
mighty in Ireland* and as Orosius writes, that Island was wholly inhabited by
the Scottish Nation in the days of Honorius, and Arcadius, the Emperors: whose
Wars and Slaughter, Claudian does lightly touch in this his Verse.

Scotorum tumulos flevit glacialis Ierne.
The frozen Ireland wept to see, her Scots all slain on heaps to be.
(14) As these for the most part, by the testimony of Ninius, were the ancient
Inhabitants, so by other ancient Writers, their customs and manners are thus
set forth: Strabo says, The Inhabitants of Ireland are more rude than the
Britains* they feed upon the flesh of men, yea, and think it a point of worth
to eat their dead Parents: wa^tonly they accompany with women, making no
difference of other men's wives, their own sisters, nor of their natural
mothers: but of these things ( says he) we have no certain witness of
sufficient credit. Po^ponius Mela records, That the Irish are uncivil,
ignorant of virtues, and void of Religion. And Solinus affirms, That after
victory they drink the blood of the slain, and besmear their own faces
therewith, so given to war, that the mother at the birth of a man-child,
feeds the first meat into her Infants mouth, upon the point of her husbands
sword, and with heathenish imprecations, wishes that it may die no otherwise
than in war or by sword.

(15) But from these ancient and barbarous manners, let us come to the
conditions of their middle time; whom Giraldus Cambrensis describes as
follows: The Irish (says he) are a strong and bold people, martial and
prodigal in War, nimble, stout, and haughty of heart; careless of life, but
greedy of glory; courteous to stranger, constant in love, light of belief,
impatient of injury, given to fleshly lusts, and in e^mity implacable. At the
baptizing of their Infants, their manner was, not to dip their right arms into
the water, that so (as they thought) they might give a more deep and incurable
blow; never calling them by the names of their Parents whilst they lived
together, but at their death took it upon them. Their women nursed not the
children they bare; and they that nursed others, did affect and love them much
more than their own.

(16) So much were they given to fantastical conceits, that they held it very
ominous to give their neighbors fire upon May Day: to eat an old Egg,
endangered the death of their Horse: and before they cast in their Seed, they
send Salt into the Field: to hang up the Shells in the Roof, was a preservative
of the Chickens from the Kite: to set up green Boughs at their Doors in the
Month of May, increased their Kines Milk; and to spit upon Cattle, they held
it good against Witchery, whereof Ireland was full.

(17) Superstitious Idolatry among the wild Irish was common, yielding divine
honor unto the Moon after the change, unto whom they both bowed their knees
and made supplications; and with a loud voice would thus speak unto that
Planet: We pray thee leave us in as good estate as thou foundst us. Wolves they
did make their Godsibs, terming them Chari Christ, and so thought themselves
preserved from their hurts: the hoofs of dead Horses they accounted and held
sacred: about childrens necks they hung the beginning of Saint John's Gospel, a
crooked nail of an horse-shoe, or a piece of a Wolves Skin: and both the
sucking-child and nurse were girt with Girdles finely plated of woman's hair; so
far they wandered into the ways of error, in making these arms the strength of
their healths.

(18) Their Wives were many, by reason of divorcements, and their Maids married
at twelve years of age, whose customs were to send to their Lovers Bracelets
pleated, and curiously wrought of their own Hair, so far following Venus in the
Knots of these Allurements. The Men wore Linen Shirts exceedingly large,
stained with Saffron, the Sleeves wide, and hanging to their Knees, strait and
sh^rt Trusses plated thick in the Skirts, their Breeches close to the Thighs, a
short Skein hanging point down before, and a Mantle most times cast over their
Heads. The Women wore their Hair plated in curious manner, hanging down their
Backs and Shoulders, from under foulden Wreaths of ^^ne Linen, rolled about
their Heads, rather loading the Wearer than delighting the Beholder: for as the
one was most seemly, so the other was unsightly: their Necks were hung with
Chains and Carkanets, their Arms wreathed with many Bracelets, and over their
Side-garments the Shag-Rug Mantlets purfled with a deep Fringe of diverse
colors, both Sexes accounting Idleness their only Liberty, and Ease their
greatest Riches.

(19) In Wars they were forward, and fought with Battle-Axes, whose Bearers
were called G^lloglasses, the Common-Souldier but lightly armed, who served
with Darts and sharp Skeins; their Trumpet was a Bag-pipe, and Word for
Encounter, Pharroh; which at the first Onset with great Acclamation they
uttered, and he that did not, was taken into the Air, and carried into the Vale
of Kerry, where transformed (as they did believe) he remains until he was
hunted with Hounds from thence to his home.

(20) For the Dying and Dead they hired Women to mourn, who expostulated with
the Sick, why he would die: and dead, at his Funerals such outcries were made,
such clapping of hands, such howlings and gestures, that one would think their
sorrows unrecoverable, holding the opinion of Pythag^ras for the Souls departed.

(21) Their Diet in necess^^y was slender, feeding upon Watercresses, Roots,
Mushromes, Shamrogh, Butter tempered with Oat-meal, Milk, Whey, yea, and
Raw-(...), the Blood being crushed out* their use was also to let their K^ne
blood, which standing a while, and coming to a jelly, with Butter they did eat,
as a very good Dish.

(22) That the Gospel of Christ should be preached in Ireland by James the
Apostle, I will not affirm, though Vicentius has said it: neither will I, with
the Scots, bring the Islands conversion from a Christian woman, who (as their
Historians do avouch) first instructed the Queen, and the Queen her Husband,
and he again his Subjects, till all became ^hristians. But most true it is,
that the Scots first received the doctrine of Christ in this Kingdom of
Ireland; for thus writes Prosper: Caeles^^n Pope of Rome sent his Archdeacon
Palladius into Britain to withstand the Pelagian heresy, who at one time did
drive out these enemies of grace* and ordained a Bishop among the Scots,
whereby that barbarou^ Nation embraced Christianity. Yet ^inius reports, That
Palladius did nothing in neither being taken away by untimely death: but that
S. Patrick, born at Eiburne in Cluedsdale, the Son of Calphurus, by the Sister
of S. Martin, was the first Apostle for Ireland, who sowed his heavenly seed
with such plentiful increase, that the soil it self shortly was called
Sanctorum Patria, The Country of Saints: for whose Sepulcher after his death
rose as great variance, as was for Homer amongst them of Greece: they of Down
challenged his Grave to be with them, upon certain Verses written on a To^b,
which ascribes Patrick, Bridget, and Columbe to be bu^ied therein: they of
Armagh lay claim by the warrant of S. Bernard, who says, that Patrick in his
time there ruled, and after death there rested. Glascenbury in England by
ancient Records will have his body interred with them; and Scotland avo^cheth
his birth to be at Glasco, and bones to rest at Kirk Patrick with them: of such
reverent esteem was this Irish Apostle.

(23) This Patrick in his youth had been taken captive by the Irish Pirates, and
for six years continuance served Machuain as his slave, and keeper of his
Swine: in which dejected condition, so desirous he was of the Lands Salvation,
that in his Dreams he thought the Infants unborn cried unto him for Baptism;
and redeeming himself thence for a piece of Gold found in the Feld, which a
Swine had turned up, in his aged years came back again into Ireland, preached
the Gospel converted the People, and lastly became Archbishop of Armagh. Of
whose miracles and Purgatory, I leave others to speak; that are more credulous
in the one, and have better leisure to relate the other; and will show thee
Ireland, as now it is, first in general, and then in parts.

Mounster
map of the province of Munster
The Province of MOUNSTER.
CHAPTER II.
THis Province, called in Irish, Mown; in a more ordinary construction of
Speech, Wown, in Latin, Momonia; and in English, Mounster; lies open
Southward to the Virginian Sea: Northward it affronteth part of Connaught: The
East is neighboured by Leinster: and the West is altogether washed with the
West-Ocean.

(2) The length thereof extended from ^allatimore-Bay in her South, unto the
Bay of Galway in her North, are about ninety miles. Her broadest part from East
to West, is from Waterford-Haven to Feriter-Haven, and contains an hundred
miles. The whole circumference, by following the Prometaries and indents, are
above five hundred and forty miles.

(3) The ^orm thereof is quadrant or apiece. The Air mild and temperated,
neither too chilling cold, nor too scorching hot. The Soil in some parts is
^illy, looking aloft with woody, wild, and solitary Mountains: yet the Valleys
below are garnished with Cornfieldsd. And generally, all, both pleasant for
sight, and fertile for Soil.

(4) This Province is at this day divided into two parts: that is, the West-
Mounster, and the South- Mounster. The West- Mounster was inhabited in old time
by the Luceni, the Velabri, and the Vterini: the South- Mounster by the Oudiae
or Vodiae, and the Coriondi. The Velabri and Luceni are said (by Orosius) to
have dwelt in that part of the Country, where it lie^h outmost Westward, and
passing toward the Cantabrian-Ocean, looks afar off to Gallitia in Spain.
The Luceni of Ireland (who seem to have derived their name and original from
the Lucensii of Gallitia, and of whom there still remain some Relics in the
Barony of Lyxnouw) are supposed to have been seated in those parts that lie
neighboring upon the bank of the River Shennon.

(5) The general Commodities of this Province, are Corn, Cattle, Wood, Wool,
and Fish. The last whereof, it affords in every place, and abundance of all
sorts. But none so well known for the store of Herrings that are taken there,
as is the Promontory called Eraugh, that li^s between Banire and Ballatimore
Bay, whereunto every year a great Fleet of Spaniards and Portugals resort (even
in the midst of Winter) to fish also for Cods.

(6) The principal City of the Province is Limericke, which the Irish call
Loumeagh, compassed about with the famous River Shennon, by the parting of the
Channel. This is a Bishops See, and the very Mart-Town of Mounster. It wa^
first won by Reymond le Gross an Englishman, afterward burnt by Duenald an
Irish petty King of Thuetmond. Then in process of time, Philip Breos an
Englishman was infeoffed in it, and King John fortified it with a Castle, which
he caus^d therein to be built. In this Castle certain Hostages making their
abode in the year 1332, grew (as is reported) so full of pride and inconstancy,
that they slew the Constable thereof, and seized the Castle into their own
hands. But the resolute Citizens, that could neither brook nor bear with such
barbarous cruelty, did in revenge then show such manly courage and vivacity, as
they soon after recovered the Castle again, repaying the Hostages in such
hostile manner, as they put them all to the Sword without partiality. The
position of this Town is by Mercator placed for Latitude 53 degrees, 20
minutes; and for Longitude, 9 degrees 34 minutes. Near unto the River that
Ptolomy calls Daucona, and Giraldus Cambrensis (by the alteration of some few
letters) names Sauranus, and Savarenus, which issues out of Muskerey
Mountains: is seated the City Cork, graced also with another Episcopal dignity
(and with the Bishops See of Clon annexed unto it) which Giraldus calls
Corragia, the Englishmen Cork, and the native inhabitants of the Country
Coreach. This Town is so bes^t on every side with neig^bouring molesters, as
that they are still constrained to keep watch and ward, as if there lay
continual siege against it. The Citizens of this place are all linkt together
in some one or other degree of affinity, for that they dare not match their
daughters in marriage into the Country, but make contracts of Matrimony one
with another among themselves. In this place, that holy and religious man
Briock, is said to have his birth and breeding, who flourished among the Gauls
in that fruitful age of Christianity, and from whom the Diocese of Sambrioch in
Britain Armorica, commonly called S. Brie^, had the denomination.

(7) The City which the Irish and Britains call ^orthlargy, and the English,
Waterford, though it be last in place, yet is it not least in account, as being
the second City in all Ireland, as well for the convenience and commodiousness
of the Haven* that affords such necessary aptitude for trade and traffic, as
also for the faithful loyalty which it has always showed to the Imperial Crown
of England: for ever since it was won by Richard Earl of Pembroke, it still
performed the obedience and peaceable offices of duty and service unto the
English, as they continued the course in the Conquest of Ireland: whence it is
that the Kings of England have from time to time endowed it with many large
Franchises and Liberties, which King Henry the Seventh did both augment and
confirm.

(8) Although since the time of S. Patrick, Christianity was never extinct in
this Country, yet the government being haled into contrary factions, the
Nobility lawless, and the multitude wilful, it has come to pass, that religion
has waxed (with the temporal common sort) more cold and feeble, being most of
them very irreligious, and addicted wholly to superstitious observations: for
in some parts of this Province, some are of opinion, that certain men are
yearly turned into Wolves, and made Wolf-men. Though this has been constantly
affirmed by such as think their censures worthy to pass for current and
credible: yet let us suppose that happily they be possessed with the disease and
malady that the Physicians call Lycanthropy, which begets and endange^eth
such like fantasies through the malicious humors of Melancholy: and so
oftentimes men imagine themselves to be turned and transformed into forms which
they are not. Some again embrace another ridiculous opinion, and persuade
themselves, that he who in the barbarous acclamation and outcry of the
Soldiers, which they use with great forcing and straining of their voices,
when they join battle, does not shower and make a noise as ^he rest do, is
suddenly caught from the ground, and carried as it were fl^ing in the Air, out
of any Country of Ireland, into some desert valleys, where he feeds upon
grass, drinks water, has some use of reason, but not of speech, is ignorant
of the present condition he stands in, whether good or bad: yet at length shall
be brought to his own home, being c^ught with the help of Hounds and Hunters.
Great pity that the foul fi^nd and father of darkness, should so grievously
seduce this people with misbelief, and that these errors be not chased away
with the truth of Christian Religion, whereby as they carry much grace in their
countenances, they may also not be void of the inward grace of their souls and
understanding.

(9) This Province has been sore wasted in the rebellions of Desmond, to whose
aid Pope Gregory the thirteenth, and Philip King of Spain, sent c^rtain
companies of Italians and Spaniards, who arrived not far from Dingle, fortified
themselves, and gave it the name of Fort de Ore, sounding loud threats against
the whole Country. But Arthur Baron Gray, Lord Deputy of Ireland, at the first
onset decided their quarrel, by sheathing his Sword in their bowels; and
Desmond fearfully flying into the woods, was by a Soldier cut shorter by the
head. And again, when the Kingdom of Ireland lay bleeding, and put almost to
the hazard of the last cast, Don John D'Aquila, with eight thousand Spaniards
(upon confidence of the excommunications of Piu^ the fifth, Gregory the
thirteenth, and Clemen^ the eight, Popes, all of them discharging their curses
like unto thunderbolts against Queen Elizabeth of blessed memory) landed near
unto Kinsale presuming that the rebellions of Tyrone had turned the hearts of
the Irish for Rome: Sir Charles Blunt Lord Mountjoy, in the depth of Winter,
and with his tired Soldiers, so daunted their Spanish hearts that with one
victory he repressed their bragging ^oldness, and recovered the Irish that were
ready to revolt.

(10) God has oftentimes showed his tender love and affection to this people,
in laying his fatherly chastisements and afflictions upon them, sometimes by
winds, sometimes by famine and dearth, and sometimes again by opening his hand
of plenty into their laps to convert them to himself, and to divert their
hearts from superstitions. In the year 1330, about the feast of Saint John
Baptist, there began such a dearth of Corn in this Country, by the abundance of
rain and the inundation of waters (which continued until Michaelmas following)
that a Cranoc of Wheat was sold for twenty shillings, a Cranoc of Oats for
eight shillings, a Cranoc of Pease, Beans, and Barley for as much. The winds
the same year were so mighty, that many were hurt, and many slain outright by
the fall of houses that was forced by the violence of the same. The like
whereof were never seen in Ireland. In the year 1317, there was such a dearth
of Corn and other Victuals, that a Cranoc of Wheat was sold for twenty three
shillings. And many Householders, that before time had sustained and relieved a
great number, were this year driven to beg, and many famished. In the time of
which famine, the mercy of God so disposed, that upon the 27th day of June, in
the year 1331, there came to land such a mighty multitude of great Sea-fishes
(that is) Thursheds, such as in many ages p^st had never been seen, that the
people were much comforted in this distress, and received great relief and
sustenance by the same.

(11) Places of Religion in this Country. were the two Abbeys at Toghall,
calls the North-^bbey and South-Abbey: The two Abbeys at Limerick, S. Francis
Abbey, and S. Dominick Abbey: The two Abbeys at Cork, the Abbey of the Isle,
and S. Frances Abbey: and the famous Abbey (in times past) for the holy Cross
which has had many privileges and liberties granted unto it, in honor of a
piece of Christ's Cross, that was (as they say) sometimes preserved there. Thus
were Christians persuaded in ancient times. And it is a wonder in what Troops
and Assemblies people do (even yet) con^low thither upon devotion, as unto a
place of holiness and sanctity: so firmly are they settled in the Religion of
their Forefathers, which has been increased beyond all measure by the
negligent care of their Teachers, who should instruct their ignorance, and
labor to reduce them from the errors they persevere in.

This Province is governed by a Lord President* who has one assistant, twelve
learned Lawyers, and a Secretary to keep it in duty and obedience. It was in
times past divided into many parts, as Towoun, that is, North Mounster;
Deswoun, that is, South Mounster; Hierwoun, that is, West Mounster; Mean woun,
that is, Middle Mounster; and Vrwoun, that is, the Front of Mounster. But at
this day it is distinguished into these Counties; Kerry, Desmond, Limerick,
Tiperary, Holycross, Waterford, and Cork which County in times past had been a
Kingdom, containing with it Desmond also: for so in the Grant given by King
Henry the second unto Robert Fitz-Stephen, and to Miles de Cogan, it is called
in these words: Know ye that I have granted the whole Kingdom of Cork,
excepting the City and Cantred of the Oustmans, to hold for them and their
heirs, of me and John my son, by the service of sixty Knights. The County of
Waterford, King Henry the sixth gave unto John Talbot Earl of Shrewsbury, with
the name, style, and the title of Earl of Waterford, which was afterward again
assumed to the Crown. Touching the County of Holy Cross, as the opinion of that
much frequented Abbey is much lessened, so that County is swallowed up
altogether in the County Tipperary. It is fortified with five strong Castles,
traded with six Market Towns, and divided as follows. MOVNSTER
Limerick. Kerry. Cork. Waterford. Des^ond. Holy-Cross in Tipperary.


LINSTER
map of the province of Leinster
LEINSTER.
CHAPTER III.
THis Country, the Natives call Leighnigh, the Britains Lein; in Latin,
Lagenia; in the ancient lives of the Saints, Lagen; and in English, Leinster.
It lies Eastward along Hibernicum Sea; on Connaught side Westward it is
bounded with the River Shaenon; the North with the Territory of Louth, and the
South with part of the Province of Mounster. This Country butteth upon England,
as Mounster and Conn^ught do upon Spain.

(2) The form thereof is triangle, and sides not much unequal, from her South
East unto the West-point about 80 miles, from thence to her North-west about 70
miles, and her East Coast along the Irish Seashore, eighty miles: the
circumference upon two hundred and seventy miles.

(3) The air is clear and gentle, mixed with a temperate disposition, yielding
neither extremity of heat or cold, according to the seasonable times of the
year, and the natural condition of the Continent. The soil is generally
fruitful, plentiful, both in fish and flesh, and in other victuals as butter,
cheese, and milk. It is fertile in Corn, Cattle, and pasture grounds, and would
be much more, if the husbandman did but apply his industry, to which he is
invited by the commodiousness of the Country. It is well watered with Rivers,
and for the most part well wooded, except the County of Divelin, which
complains much of that want, being so destitute of wood, that they are
compelled to use a clammy kind of fat turff for their fuel, or Sea-coal brought
out of England.

(4) The Inhabitants of these parts in Ptolomies days were the Brigantes,
Menapii, Cauci, and ^lani; from which Blani may seem to be derived and
contracted the latter and modern names of this Country, L^in, Leighnigh, and
Leinster* The Menapii, (as the name does after a sort imply) came from the
Menapians, a Nation in Low Germany, that dwelt by the Seacoasts. These
Brigantes, called also Brigants, Florianus del Campo (a ^paniard labors to
fetch from the Brigants of his own Country, of whom an ancient City in Spain
(called Brigantia) took the name. But they may seem rather to derive their
denomination from the River Birgus, about which they inhabited, for to this the
very name is almost sufficient to persuade us.

(5) The commodities of this Country do chiefly consist in Cattle, Sea-fowl,
and Fish. It breeds many excellent good horses, called Irish Hobbies, which
have not the same pace that other horses have in their course, but a soft and
round amble, setting very easily.

(6) This Country has in it three Rivers of note, termed in old time the three
sisters, Shour, Neor, and Batraeo* which issue out of the huge Mountain (called
by Giraldus, Bladinae Montes) as out of their mothers womb, and from their
rising tops descending with a downfall into several Channels, before they empty
themselves into the Ocean, join hand in hand altogether in a mutual league and
combination.

(7) Places very dangerous for shipping are certain flats and shallows in the
Sea, that lie over against Holy-point, which the Mariners call the Grounds.
Also the shelves of sand that lie a great way in length opposite to Newcastl^,
which over looks them into the Sea from the top of an high hill adjoining.

(8) In this Province are placed many fair and wealthy Towns, as Kilkenny,
which for a Burrough-Town excels all the midland Buroughs in this Island.
Kildare, which is adorned with an Episcopal See, and much graced in the first
infancy of the Irish Church, by reason of Saint Brigid, a venerable Virgin, had
in great account and estimation for her virginity and devotion, as who was the
Disciple of S. Patrick of so great fame, renown, and antiquity: also Weisford
(a name given unto it by these Germans, whom the Irish term Oustmans) a Town
though inferior to some, yet as memorable as any, so that it became the first
Colony of the English, and did first submit it self unto their protection,
being assaulted by Fitz Stephen, a Captain worthily made famous for his valor
and magnanimity.

(9) But the City which fame may justly celebrate alone, beyond all the Cities
or Towns in Ireland, is that which we call Divelin, Ptolomy Eblana, the
Latinists Dublinium, and Dublini^; the West-Britaines, Dinas Dublin; the
English-Saxons in times past, Duplin; and the Irish, Balacleigh, that is the
Town upon hurdles: for it is reported that the place being fennish and moorish,
when it first began to be builded, the foundation was laid upon hurdles.

(10) That it is ancient, is persuaded by the authority of Ptolomy. That it was
grievously rent and dismembered in the tumultuous wars of the Danes, and brought
afterward under the subjection of Edgar King of England, (which his Charter
also confirms, wherein he calls it the noble City of Ireland) is written by
Saxo Grammaticus. That it was built by Harold of Norway, which may seem to be
Harold Harsager, when he had brought the greatest part of Ireland into an awful
obedience unto him, we read in the life of Griffith ap Sinan Prince of Wales.
At length it yielded unto the valor and protection of the English, at their
first arrival into Ireland, by whom it was manfully defended from the fierce
assaults as well of Auscoulph Prince of the Dublinians, as afterward of Gotard
King of the Isles: since which time it has still augmented her flourishing
estate, and given approved testimony of her faith, and loyalty to the Crown of
England, in the times of any tumultuous straights and commotions.

(11) This is the Royal Seat of Ireland, strong in her munition, beautiful in
her buildings, and (for the quantity) matchable to many other Cities, frequent
for traffic and intercourse of Merchant^. In the East Suburbs, Henry the
second, King of England (as Hoveden reports) caused a royal Palace to be
erected: and Henry Loundres, Archbishop of Divelin, built a Store house about
the year of Christ 1220. Not far from it is the beautiful College consecrated
unto the name of the holy Trinity, which Queen Elizabeth of famous memory
dignified with the privileges of an University. The Church of S. Patrick being
much enlarged by King John, was by John Comin Archbishop of Dublin, born at
Evesham in England. first ordained to be a Church of Prebends in the year 1191
It does at this day maintain a Dean, a Chanter, a Chancellor, a Treasurer, two
Archdeacons, and twenty two Prebendaries.

This City in times past, for the due administration of Civil Government, had a
Provost for the chief Magistrate. But in the year of man's redemption 1409, King
Henry the fourth granted them liberty to choose every year a Major and two
Bailiffes, and that the Major should have a gilt sword carried before him for
ever. And King Edward the sixth (to heap more honor upon this place) changed
the two Bailiffs afterward into Sherif^s: so that there is not any thing here
wanting that may serve to make the estate of a City most flourishing.

(12) As the people of this Country do about the neighboring parts of Divelin
come nearest unto the civil conditions and orderly subjection of the English:
so in places farther off they are more tumultuous, being at deadly feuds
amongst themselves, committing oft-times Man slaughter one upon another, and
working their own mischiefs by mutual wrongs: for so the Irish of Leinster
wasted Leinster with many Towns in the same Province in the year 1294. And in
the year 1301, the men of Leinster in like manner raised a war in the winter
season, setting on fire the Town of Wykinlo, Rathdo^, and others, working their
own plague and punishment by burning up their sustenance, and losing their
Castle by depr^dation.

(13) Matter of observation, and no less admiration among them, is the Giants
dance, commonly so called, and so much talked of, which Merlin is said by Art
of Magic to have translated out of this Territory unto Salisbury Plain, which
how true it is, I leave to the vain believers of miracles, and to the credulous
observers of antiquity.

(14) In this County have been erected many famous Monasteries, Abbeys, and
religious houses, consecrated to devout and holy purposes: As the Monastery of
Saint Mary's of Oustmanby, founded for preaching Friars, unto which of late
days the Judicial Courts of the: Kingdom have been translated: also the
magnificent Abbey called S. Thomas Court at Dublin, builded and endowed in
times past with many large privileges and revenues of King Henry the second,
in expiation of the murder of Thomas Archbishop of Canterbury. Likewise
Teniern Monastery, or the notable Abbey which William Marshall Earl of
Pembrooke founded, and called De^voto, for that he had vowed to God (being
^ossed at Sea with many a sore and dangerous tempest) to errect an Abbey
wheresoever he came to land, and being (after shipwreck) cast upon land in this
place, he made performance of his vow accordingly.

This Province contains the Counties of Kilkenny, Caterlough, Queens County,
Kings County, Kildare, East-Meath, West-Meath, Weisford, and Dublin (^o say
nothing of Wickl^ and ^ernes, which either be already, or else are to be
annexed unto it) and subdivided into fifteen Market Towns. It has been
fortified with the strength of many Castles against the power of enemies, and
is thus divided: Counties,
East Mead. West-Meath. Kilkenny. Caterlough. Queens County. Kings County.
Kildare. Weisford. Dublin.


CONNACK
Petrus Kaerius caelavit.
map of the province of Connaught
The Province of CONNAUGHT.
CHAPTER IIII.
THis Province named by Giraldus Cambrensis, Conachtia; and Co^acia: by the
Irish Conaughty, and by Englishmen, Connaught: is bounded Eastward, with part
of the County of Leinster; Northward, with part of Vlster; Westward, with the
West-main Ocean, and on the South, it is confined with a part of the Province
of Mounster, closed in with the River Shennon, and butting against the Kingdom
of Spain,

(2) The form thereof is long, and toward the North and South ends, thin and
narrow: but as it grows toward the middle, from either part it waxes still
bigger and bigger: extending in length from the River Shennon in her South, to
Enis Kelling in her North, 126 miles; and the broadest part is from Tromer in
her East, to Barragh Bay in her West, containing about fourscore miles. The
whole in circuit and compass is above four hundred miles.

(3) The Air is not altogether so pure and clear, as in the other Provinces of
Ireland by reason of certain most places (covered over with grass) which for
their softness are usually termed Boghes, both dangerous, and full of vaporous
and foggy mists.

(4) This County as it is divided into several portions, so is every portion
severally commended for the soil, according to the seasonable times of the
year to Twomond or the County Clare, is said to be a Country so conveniently
situated, that either from the Sea or Soil there can be nothing wished for more,
than what it does naturally afford of it self, were but the industry of the
Inhabitants answerable to the rest. Galway is a land very thankful to the
painful husbandman, and no less commodious and profitable to the Shepherd.
Maio, in the Roman Provincial called Mageo, is replenished both with pleasure
and fertility abundantly rich in Cattle, Deer, Hawks, and plenty of Honey.
Slego (coasting up the Sea) is a plenteous Country for feeding and raising of
Cattle. Le-Trim (a place rising up throughout with hills) is so full of rank
grass and forage, that (as Solinus reports) if Cattle were not kept
sometimes from grazing* their fullness would endanger them. And Roscomen is a
Territory, for the most part plain and fruitful, feeding many Herds of Cattle,
and with mean husbandry and tillage, yielding plenty of Corn. As every
particular part is thus severally profitab^e be inbred commodities: so is it
no less commended (in the generality) for the many accommodate and fit Baies,
Creeks, and navigable Rivers, lying upon her Seacoasts, that after a sort
invite and provoke the Inhabitants to Navigation.

(5) Such as in ancient time made their abode and habitations in this Province,
were the GANGANI, who were also called CONCANI, AUTERI, and NAGNATAE. As the
Luceni (that were next neighbors unto them) came from the Lucensii (in Spain)
so those Gangani and Concani may seem also to have fetched their derivation from
the Concani (a Nation of the self-same Country) both by the affinity of name,
and vicinity of place. In Strabo, according to the diversity of reading, the
same people are named Coniaci and Conisci: and Silius testifies them at the
first to have been Scythians, and to have used ordinarily to drink horses blood
(a thing nothing strange among the wild Irish even of late days.) And some may
also happily suppose that the Irish name Conaughty, was compounded of Concani and
Nagnatae. Howsoever, it is sure that these were the ancient inhabitants of this
Country, as is to be seen in Ptolomy.

(6) The Principal City of this Province, and which may worthily be accounted
the third in Ireland, is Galway, in Irish, Gallive, built in manner much like
to a Tower. It is dignified with a Bishops See, and it is much frequented with
Merchants, by reason whereof, and the benefit of the Road and Haven, it is
gainful to the Inhabitants through traffic and exchange of rich commodities,
both by Sea and Land. Not far from which, near the West shore that lies
indented with small in-lets and out-lets, in a row, are the Islands called
Arran, of which many a foolish fable goes, as if they were the Islands of the
living, wherein none died at any time, or were subject to mortality; which is
as superstitious an observation, as that used in some other corners of the
Country, where the people leave the right Arms of their Infants males
unchristned (as they term it) to the end that at any time afterward, they
might give a more deadly and ungracious blow when they strike* which things do
not only show how palpable they are carried away by traditious obscurities, but
do also intimate how full their hearts be of inveterate revenge.

(7) This Province presents no matter more worthy of memory, than the battle of
Knock-^^^ (that is) The hill of Axes, under which the greatest rabble of
Rebbels, that were ever seen before in Ireland (raised and gathered together by
the Arch-Rebbels of that time, William Burk O Brien, Mac-Nenare, and O Carrol)
were after a bloody overthrow discomfited and put to flight by the noble
service of Girald Fitz-Girald Earl of Kildare. And the suppression of certain
Irish (the posterity of Mac-William) who usurping a tyranny in these parts,
raged sometimes upon themselves, with mutual injuries, and oppressed the poor
people a long time with extorting, pilling and spoiling; so as they left scarce
one house in the Country unrifled, or unrased; but were bridled and repressed
(even in our remembrance) by the severity and resolution of the Commissioners
of those times, who in his wisdom and policy well understood, that their
excessive insolence, and those their unjust doings, would be a means to draw
the people away from the due obedience to their Prince: such therefore as
refused to obey the Laws, and sided with the tumultuous, with all care and
diligence he soon scattered, forcing their Forts, and driving them into woods
and lurking holes (for troubling the blessed estate of tranquillity) till the
Lord Deputy, who took pity of them, upon the^ humble supplication, commanded by
his missives, that they should be received upon term^ of peace. But they being
a stiff-necked people, took Arms again, entered a-fresh into actual rebellion,
dra^e away booties, made soul uproars, and upon fair promises procured the aid
of the Scottish Islanders, from out of the Hebrides whereupon the Governor
assembled an Army, and pursued them with such powerful violence through the
Woods and Forests, that after six or seven weeks, being grievously
hunger-bitten, they submitted themselves in all humility. The Auxiliary forces
also of the Scots he by day and night affronted so near, and followed so
hardly, that he put them to flight, after he had killed and drowned about three
thousand of them in the River Moin.

(8) About the year 1316, there was such a great slaughter made of the Irish in
this Province of Connaught, through a quarrel that rose there between two Lords
or Princes, that there were slain on both sides about four thousand men; and so
great a tribulation at that time came upon the people, that they did devour and
eat one another, so as of 10000, there remained not above 300 living. As it is
reported for truth, that the people were then so hunger-starved, that in
Churchyards they took the d^ad bodies out of their graves, and in their sculls
boiled the flesh, and fed upon it: yea, and that women did eat their own
Children. Thus appeared the ire and anger of God, in punishing their sins, and
seeking their conversion.

(9) Places memorable, are Iuis Ceath, well known by the Monastery of Colman (a
devout Saint founded for Scots and Englishmen; and Inis Bovind, which Beda
calls, White Calfe lsle. Also Maio, a Monastery built (as Beda writes) for
thirty men of English Nation. Likewise the Barony of Boil^, under Curlew hills,
where in times past was a famous Abbey built, together wi^h the Abbey of
Beatitude, in the year of grace 1152. These Abbeys and monasteries erected at
the first for religious services, and through ignorance and other obscurities
diverted since unto superstitious uses, are now made the ruins of time.

(10) The Province of Connaught is at this day strengthened with fourteen
Castles, traded with nine Market Towns, and divided as ensues: Counties,
Clare, or Twomond. Galway. Maio. Slego. Letrim. Roscomen.


ULSTER
map of the province of Ulster
The Province of ULSTER.
CHAPTER. V.
THis Province, called by our Welsh Britains Vltw, in Irish Cui Guilly, in
Latin Vltonia, and Vlidia, in English Vlster; on the North is divided by a
narrow Sea from Scotland; Southward it extends it self to Connagh and
Leinster; the East part lies upon the Irish Sea; and the West part is
continually beaten with the boyst^rous rage of the main West Ocean. This
Province and furthest part of Ireland* affronteth the Scottish Islands, which
are called the Hebrides, and are scattered in the Seas between both Kingdoms;
whose Inhabitants at this day is the Irish Scot, Successor of the old Scythian.

(2) The form thereof is round, reaching in length from Coldagh Haven in the
North to Kilmore in her South, near an hundred miles; and in breadth from
Black-Abbey in her East, to Calebegh point in her West, one hundred thirty and
odd miles: The whole in circumference, about four hundred and twenty miles.

(3) This Country seldom feels any unseasonable extremities, the quick and
flexible Winds cooling the heat of Summer, and soft and gentle Showers mollify
the hardness of the Winter. Briefly, the frozen nor torrid Zone have not here
any usurpation; the clouds in the air very sweet and pleasant, yea, and when
they are most impure, are not unwholesome, nor of long continuance, the rough
winds holding them in continual agitation.

(4) This equal temperature causes the ground to bring forth great store of
several Trees, both fit for building* and bearing of fruit; plentiful of Grass
for the feeding of Cattle, and is abundantly furnished with Horses, Sheep, and
Oxen; the Rivers likewise pay double tribute, deep enough to carry Vessels
either for pleasure or profit, and Fish great store, both for their own uses,
and commodity of others. Salmon in some Rivers of this County abound more in
number than in any River of Europe. To speak (in general) though in some places
it be somewhat barren, troubled with Loughs, Lakes, and thick Woods, yet it is
every where fresh, and full of Cattle and Forage, ready at all times to answer
the husbandmans pains. But nature is there so little beholding to Art or
Industry, that the various show upon Banks, the Shady Groves, the Green
Meadows, hanging Hills, and fields fit for Corn, (if they were manured) do seem
to be angry with their Inhabitants for suffering all to grow wild and
barbarous* through their own negligence.

(5) This Country in Prolomies days was wholly possessed by the Voluntii,
Darni, Robogdii, and Erdini, who branched and spread themselves into the
several parts of that Island.

(6) The people of this Province were accustomed in controversies and solemn
protestations to swear by S. Patricks Staff, which oath they feared more to
break, than if they had sworn by the holy Evangelists. Their ancient custom in
making their King, was this: A white Cow was taken, which the King most kill,
and sees the same in water whole, then must he bathe himself therein stark
naked; and sitting in the Caldron wherein it was sod, accompanied with his
people round about him, he and they used to eat the flesh and drink the broth
wherein he ^ate, without cup, or dish, or use of hand. How far these
prescriptions and customs were different from the conformities of other civil
Monarchies, we may well perceive by these and other like observations of those
gross times: and as yet they are more barbarous than is any other part of the
Island besides.

(7) Historians relating of Ireland, tell of several Islands in ^he several
Provinces: some full of Angels, some full of Devils; some for Male only, some
for Female; some where none may live; some where none can dye; and such effects
of trees, stones, and waters, that a man (but of easy conceit) may well esteem
them as heedless as uncertain. So also S. Patrieks Purgatory (a thing of much
note in the Tract of this Province) is a vault or narrow cave in the ground,
near a Lake (called Ern^ Liffer*) much spoken of, by reason of (I wot not what)
fearful walking spirits and dreadful apparitions, or rather some religious
horror) which (as some ridiculously dream) was dug by Ulysses when he went
down to parely with those in hell. This is the Cave which the Inhabitants in
these days call Ellan (...) ^rugadory, that is, The Isle of Purgatory, and S.
Patricks Purgatory; for some persons, less devout than credulous, affirm that
S. Patrick (or rather Patricius Secundus, an holy Abbot of that name) laboring
the conversion of the people of this Province, and much enforcing the life to
come, they replied contemptuously unto him, that unless they saw proofs of
those joys and pains he preached, they would not lose the possession of their
present pleasures, in hope or fear of things to come, they (...) not when.
Whereupon (as they say) he obtained at Gods hands by earnest prayer, that the
punishments and torments which the godles* are to suffer after this life, might
be there presented to the eye, that so he might more easily root out the sins
and Heathenish Errors, that stuck so fast in the hearts of the Irish. But
touching the credit hereof (although common fame, and some records do utter it)
I neither will urge the belief, nor regard, seeing it is no Article of our
Creed.

(8) Matters memorable within this Province are these: first, that the Bishops
of Ireland were wont to be consecrated by the Archbishop of Canterbury, in
regard of the Primacy which they had in this Country, until such time as John
Papirio a Cardinal was sent thither from Pope Eugenius the fourth, to reform
Ecclesiastical Discipline in this Island, which was then grown so loose, that
there were Translations and Pluralities of Bishops, according to the will and
pleasure of the Metropolitan. Also that the Irish men were accustomed to leave
and forsake their wedded Wives at their own free-wills, whereof Lanfranck
Archbishop of Canterbury complained unto Therdeluac a King of Ireland. And had
not this Nation been corrupted with this vice, even unto these our days; both
the right of lineal succession had been more certain among them, and the Gentry
and Commonalty had not in such cruelties imbrued themselves, with such effusion
of their own kindreds blood, about their Inheritances and legitimation.

(9) The principal Town in this Tract is Armagh, near unto the River Kalin,
which (albeit it makes a poor show) is the Archiepiscopal See and
Metropolitan of the whole Island. Before Saint Patrick had built there a fair
City, for site, form, quantity, and compass, modelled out (as he says) by the
appointment and direction of Angels, this place was named Drumsalrich; the
Irish tell much that it received the name of Queen Armacha: but the better
opinions are, that it is the same which Beda calls Dearmach, and out of the
Scottish and Irish Language interprets it, The Field of Oaks. Here (as S.
Bernard writes) S. Patrick the Apostle of Ireland ruled in his life time, and
rested after death: in honor of whom it was of such venerable estimation in
old time, that not only Bishops and Priests, but Kings also and Princes were
(in general) subject to the Metropolitan thereof in all obedience, and to his
government alone. Among the Archbishops of this Province, S. Malachy is
famoused, who first prohibited Priests marriage in Ireland, and (as S. Bernard
says, who wrote his life at large) borrowed no more of the native barbarousnes
of that County, than Sea-fishes do saltness of the Seas. Also Richard
Fitz-Ralph (commonly called Armachanus) is of famous memory, who turned the
edge of his style, about the year 1355, began to oppose his opinion against the
order of Mendicant ^ryers, as detesting in Christians such voluntary begging.
The chief Fort in this Tract is E^is K^lling, defended by the Rebels in the
year 1593, and won by Dowdal a most valiant Captain: near unto which is a great
downfall of water, termed, The Salmon Leap: of which there is a common Speech
current among the Inhabitants, that it was once firm ground, very populous, and
well husbanded with tillage; till it was suddenly over-flown with water, and
turned into a Lake, for some filthy abominable acts of the people against
Nature committed with Beasts.

(10) The places of Religion, sequestered from other worldly services, and
consecrated to holy purposes, erected in this province, were, The Abbey which
shows it self at Donegal: The Monastery of Deryo, where the Irish Rebel Shan
O Neal received such an overthrow (by Edward Randolph, renowned for his service
in the behalf of his Co^ntry) that he could never after recover the loss he
sustained at that time: The Monastery near unto the River Liffer: The famous
Monastery at the Bay of Knockfergus, of the same institution, name and order,
as was that ancient Abbey in England, near unto Chester, called Banchor: also
Mellifont Abbey, founded by Donald a King of Vriel, and much commended by S.
Bernard: And lastly, the most renowned Monastery, built at Armagh in the year
of our Salvation 610, out of which very many Monasteries were afterward
propagated both in Britain and Ireland. These places were far and near
frequented and sought unto by great confluences of Pilgrims, till Time proved
their devotions to be erroneous, and the pure light of the word revealed,
opening the eyes of their understanding, has taught them to shake off the
shame of such Superstitions,

(11) That the people of this County might be kept within the bounds of their
duty, this Province has been secured with fifty six Castles and Forts; and for
trade of commerce, nine Narket-Towns appointed, being divided into these
Counties ensuing: Counties.
Dunghall, or Tyr connel. Upper Tyrone. Nether Tyrone. Fermanagh. Cavan.
Monaghan. Colrane. Antrim. Down. Armagh, Lough.


FINIS.
The Table to find the Maps as appears by Folio.
ENgland, Scotland, and Ireland. 1 England. 2 Kent. 3 Sussex. 4 Surrey. 5
Southampton. 6 The Isle of Wight. 7 Dorcetshire. 8 Devonshire. 9 Cornwall. 10
Sommersetshire. 11 Wiltshire. 12 Barkshire. 13 Middlesex. 14 Essex County. 15
Suffolk. 16 Norfolk. 17 Cambridgeshire. 18 Hartfordshire. 19 Bedfordshire. 20
Buckinghamshire. 21 Oxfordshire. 22 Gloucestershire. 23 Herefordshire. 24
Wo^cestershire. 25 Warwickshire. 26 Northamptonshire. 27 Huntingtonshire. 28
Rutlandshire. 29 Leicestershire. 30 Lincolnshire. 31 Nottinghamshire. 32
Darbyshire. 33 Staffordshire. 34 Shro^shire. 35 Chester. 36 Lancashi^e. 37
Yorkshire. 38 The Bishopric of Durham. 39 Westmorland and Cumberland. 40
Northumberland. 41 The Isle of Man. 42 Holy Island, etc. 43 Wales. 44
Pembrokeshire. 45 Radnor, Breknock, Cardigan and Caermarden described. 46
Glamorganshire. 47 Monmouthshire, 48 Montgomery, etc. 49 Denbigh and Flint
described. 50 Anglesey and Carnarvan. 51 The Kingdom of Scotland. 52 The South
part of Scotland. 53 The Southern part of Scotland. 54 The Eastern part of
Scotland. 55 Part of Scotland, Stranavern. 56 The Isles of Hebrides. 57
Cathanes and Orknay. 58 Ireland described. 59 Mounster. 60 Leinster. 61
Connaught. 62 Vlster. 63 MIDIA. 64
A PROSPECT OF THE MOST FAMOUS PARTS of the WORLD.

VIZ.

ASIA, 13 AFRICA, 24 EUROPE, 35 AMERICA. 46
With these Kingdoms therein contained, Graecia, 57 Roman Empire, 67 Germany,
78 Bohemia, 88 France, 98 Belgia, 109 Spain, 120 Italy, 131 Hungary, 142
Denmark, 151 Poland, 161 Persia, 175 Turkish Empire, 180 Kingdom of China, 189
Tartaria, 198


LONDON, Printed by W. G. 1675.

A NEW AND ACCVRAT MAP OF THE WORLD
Drawn according to ye truest Descriptions latest Discoveries
Pe. Kaerius Caelavit 1646.


The General Description of the WORLD.
HEaven was too long a reach for Man to recover at one step: And therefore God
first placed him upon the earth, that he might for a time contemplate upon his
inferior works, magnify in them his Creator; and receive here a hope of a
fuller bliss, which by degrees he should at last enjoy in his place of rest.
For this end was the lower World created in the beginning out of a rude Mass,
which before had no Form. And that it might be made habitable, the Lord
separated the dry Land from the Waters upon the third day. Yet so as still they
make but one Globe, whose center is the same with the middle World; and is the
Point and Rest as it were of all heavy Bodies, which naturally apply themselves
to it: and there are supported by their own weight and equal poise.

(2) It has seemed incredible (to such as measure the Wonders of God by Man's
Wisdom) that this m^ssie part of the World should subsist by it self, not bo^n
up by any outward Prop, encompast only with (...) and fleetingAir, such as can
neither help to sustain nor r^sist the fall, could the earth be moved from her
duce place. But the wonder will ce^^e if we remember that the Lord sits upon
the circle of the earth* Isa. 40. He set it upon her foundations so that it
shall never move. He covered it with the Deep as much a Garment. The Waters
would stand above the Mountains, but at his rebuke they fled. Yet he set them a
bound which they should not pass

(3) Thus ordered by Divine Providence the Earth* and Sea composed themselves
into a Spherical Figure, as is here described. And is caused by the proper
inclination of each part, which being heavy, falls from ever^ point of the
Circumference, and claps about the center: there settles as near as it may
toward his place of rest. We may illustrate both the figure and situation by a
familiar similitude, to an ingenious apprehension. Suppose we a knot to be knit
in the midst of a cord that has many ends: and those to be delivered to sundry
men of equal strength, to be drawn several ways round from every part, above
and below, and on each side; questionless whilst every man draws in the boes
of the knot, it must needs become round: and whilst they continue to pluck
with equal strength, it must rest immovable in the middle betwixt them: since
every strength that would destory, has a strength equal to resist it. So it is
in the bosom of the earth, where every part meets upon equal privilege of
nature; nor can any press farther than the center, to destroy this compacted
figure: for it must meet there with a body that will oppose it. Or if not, yet
could it not pass, since every motion from the middle were to ascend, which
Nature will not permit in a body of weight, as the earth is.

(4) Now though in a Sphere every cross line, which way soever drawn, if it run
through the middle, must needs be of equal quantity, and therefore admits no
difference of length or breadth: yet the Geographers for their purpose have
conceived (and but conceived) a Longitude and Latitude upon the earth. The
Longitude they reckon from the first Meridian in the Azores, and so Eastward
round number the degrees upon the Equator: The Latitude from the Equator to
each Pole, and number the degrees upon the outward Meridional circle. This
inkling may suffice to instruct the ignorant in the search of any place that
shall be hereafter mentioned in my Discourse.

(5) The compass of the whole is cast by our latest and most learned to be
21600 English miles: which though none ever yet so paced, as to measure them by
the foot: yet let not the ignorant reject this account, since the rule by which
they are led cannot fail. For we see by continual experience, that the Sun for
every degree in the Heavens gains 60 miles upon the earth toward his circuit
round: and after 360 degrees returns to the same point in respect of us as
before it was. Repeat the number of sixty so often, and you will find the account
just. And so by proportion of the circumference to the Diameter (which is
tripl^ s^squi septim^ the same which 22 has to 7) we may judge likewise of the
earths thickness to the Center. The whole Diameter must (by rule) be somewhat
lesser than a third part of the circuit: that in proportion to 21600 will be
6872: half the number will reach^ the middle of the world, and that is 3436. In
this report both of the quantity and form of the earth, we must not require
such exactness as cannot vary a hairs breadth: for we see the mountains of the
earth, and oftentimes the waves of the Sea make the superficies unequal. It
will be sufficient, if there be no difference sensible to be reckoned in so
great a bulk. for let us rudely hew a ball out of rough stone; still it is a
ball, though not so smooth as one of Crystal: Or suffer a mote to fall upon a
Sphere of glass, it changes not its figure: far less are the mountains which
we see in respect of the whole lump. For other rules or terms Geographical, I
refer them to a peculiar tract, that will afford me more room and time.

(6) When the Earth and Sea were thus prepared with a due figure, a just
quantity and convenient ^eat both in respect of the Heavens and themselves:
Nature began (at command of the most High) to use her Art, and to make it a fit
dwelling place for the Image of God, for so was man created, and so indeed was
the Earth no other than the picture of Heaven. The ground brought forth her
plants and fruits: the Skies were filled with the Fowl of the Air: the waters
yielded their fish, and the fields their Cattle. No sooner his house was thus
finished, but man enters upon his possession the sixth day. And that shall be
our tract to find out the worlds first Inhabitants; where it was peopled in the
beginning: and how it was overspread with Countries and Nations, as now it is.

(7) In the first Age, there was little need of skill to measure the whole
Earth. A garden plot might suffice, and so (for a time) it did. It was planted
in Ed^n: But where that was, I may not peremptorily determine, nor indeed dare
I be so curious in the search. The hidden things belong to the Lord, the
revealed to us, Deuteronomy. 29. God himself in the beginning set a Cherubion, and the
blade of a sword shaken to keep the re-entry from our first parents; and we may
affirm, has concealed it ever since. Yet to satisfy (in some measure) such as
are more inquisitive, I will touch at the several conjectures, which has
passed upon the place of this earthly Paradise. Rog. Higd^n Monk of Chester,
and with him John Trevisa set it in the field of Damascus: and many others
(probably enough) have thought it was in the Land of Canaan: for that in diverse
places, it is noted with attributes proper to the garden of Eden. She was
seated in the midst of Nations* Ezekiel. 5. It was a Land of Wheat, Barley and
Vines, Fig Trees and Pomgranates, a Land of Olives and Honey, a Land whose
stones were Iron, and out of whose hills might be dug brass, Deuteronomy. 8. She
was pleasant above all Lands, Ezekiel. 20. Yet Franciscus Iunius, D. Willet, Sir
Walter Raleigh, and others, make it a part of Mesopotamia, North-west from
Babylon, about the degrees of 78 in Longitude, and of Latitude 35, where still
the Rivers meet, mentioned in Genesis and where Ptolemy has his Audanites, a
corrupt name, (as is supposed) from Ed^n. Certainly it was about the middle of
the Earth, and abounded by a peculiar blessing of God, with all kinds
serviceable for the use of man.

(8) But Adam soon lost this possession by his disobedience, and was cast out
on the East Side of the garden, where he placed himself. Moses makes no more
particular relation. Cain is specified to have gone out of the presence of the
Lord into the Land of Nod, and there built him a City, and named it after his
sons name Henoch: this was the first City, and was seated (some thing) about
Mount Libanus. As the place, so the time when it was found is uncertain: but
the common conjecture gives it to be about 2 or 3 hundred years after the
Creation, when the world was replenished: as well it might be within that
compass, if we compare it to our known stories. Abraham in 215 years had 600
thousand of his own stock, in the blessed line, besides women and children. And
in this number we omit his other seed, of whom came twelve Princes.
Questionless after this proportion the people multiplied in the beginning, and
so for 1656 years forward, and that must needs (...) a large portion of the
earth, most likely those parts of Asia that lay nearest to their first seat.
For they wandered no farther than necessity of room compelled them.

(9) But now as man, so the sin of man was grown to a height. For this the
wrath of God fell upon them in a flood, that destroyed the whole earth saving
eight persons, Noah and his family, who were commanded into an Ark built by
Gods own direction, and is held to have been the pattern for all Ships to all
posterity.

(10) When the anger of the Lord was ceased, and the waters abated, after 150
days float the Ark rested upon the Mountains of Arrarat in Armenia. They are
supposed by most to be the same which Ptolomy calls Montes Cordios, about the
degree in 75 Longitude, and in Latitude 39. Master Cartwright, a Traveller of
our own Nation, reports himself an eyewitness of many ancient and ruinous
foundations there, which the inhabitants have believed through all ages to be
the work of those first people, that for a long time durst not adventure into
the lower Countries for fear of another flood.

(11) But God blessed the remnant which he had preserved; and when he had given
them the Rainbow for a sign of his mercy, that he would no more break up the
fountains of the great deep, nor open the windows of heaven upon them to root
out all flesh, by degrees they descended from the hills Eastward, and seated
themselves upon a plain in the Land of Shinar. This was the lower part of
Mesopotamia which compassed Chaldea and Babylonia, lying under the Mount
Singara, a hill near the degrees of 77 in Longitude, and of Latitude 36, and
stands in the direct way from Arrarat or the Moutes Cordios toward Baby^on.

(12) There when their number increased, and they forced still to seek new
Colonies, they were ambitious to leave a name behind them for posterity, and
therefore adventured upon a building whose top should reach Heaven: and so
indeed in did; for it fetched from thence Gods second vengeance. He confounded
their speech, that they no longer understood one the other. Thus they were
broke off from their impious attempt, and scattered upon all the earth (about
an hundred years after the Flood) into seventy two several Nations, as some
have punctually numbered them

(13) Whether Noah himself were present or to what place he removed, is
uncertain. He had yet two hundred and fifty years to live, and is thought to
have had his habitation in Phenicia, Northward from Palestine about the degree
of 66, and 33.

(14) His Sons, Sem, Ham, and Iapheth, possessed their several Provinces of the
World. From Iapheth came the Isles of the Gentiles, of which we are a part, to
him Europe is by most allotted. Sem not guilty questionless of that proud
enterprise, rested himself in the land of Canaa^, which he knew as it was
revealed to Abraham, should be given to his posterity. Yet part of his issue
(the Sons of Iocktan) were divided and lived remote toward the East. To him was
Asia. But Cham by his fathers curse, for discovering his nakedness, roved to
the utmost parts of the earth, and peopled with his Progeny especially those
Countries which are most touched in Histories for Barbarism and Idolatry. As
indeed how could it otherwise be? since himself had lost his father that should
instruct him: and therefore could deliver no precepts to his children, but left
every one to his own inventions. And those that at the confusion spread, where
ever they came, this diversity of Customs and Religions, that possess the world
at this day. To him was Africa.

(15) America too doubtless had her portion in the division, though not so soon
or so immediate, but seemed rather of later times to have received her people
from the bordering parts of Asia; and those are thought by most to have been
first inhabited by Iocktan and his thirteen Sons, the issue of Sem. It is said
in the Text, they possessed the East-part from Mesha to Sephar: Iosophus takes
the first for a Country, and the second for a Mountain in India, insomuch as
that he strictly bounds out their possession from the River Cephew to Ieria,
which is now called the East or Portugal Indies. Indeed many of those Eastern
Regions are noted to bear the name as yet of Iocktans sons. The Shabeans found
as if they had Sheba to their Father. And from Havilah is a Country in Ieria,
From Shaphira, Josephus derives Ophir; both of especial fame for their plenty
of Gold. But it is Doctor Willets opinion that Ophir was rather the same Region
in the West Indies which is now called Peru. To say truth we have little
certainity of the first Inhabitants which were seated in America, or the Parts
of Asia near about her: whether ^^ey were so long since known I must doubt. For
the bestowing of Iocktan, and his sons, it was toward the East from Mesha to
Sephar: but where those are, Saint Hierome confesses himself at a stand. And
for my part I will travel no farther in these hidden Mysteries, than I find a
path beaten before me.

(16) This may satisfy the ingenuous, that I have (as far as I might in this
little room) trac't the first Nations from their first Founders which they had
in the beginning. But to draw the direct line of every people mixed as they now
are, I think a work impossible; to me I am sure it is. For besides our several
translations and promiscuous commerce, that puzzle us in the knowledge of our
selves: we have of late found, and as yet are in search of a new people, that
know not their own Original, nor have we any means to examine it, but
conjectural, such as may fail. To Moses time the Scripture affords us a
certain truth for as many as he mentions, and since we have some light from
such as have labored in the search of Antiquities. The Families (as Josephus
gives time) are truly and curiously brancht forth and placed among the
Genealogies before our Bible of the last Translation, by our well-deserving
Countryman Mr. John Speed.

(17) Thus far it was requisite we should know at large the growth of the world
from the beginning; and how the whole earth, which at first knew but one
Landlord, has been since rent into several parcels, which Kings and Nations
call their own, and maintain their claim by force of Arms. This little compass
will not admit a more particular relation of their affairs. For that I must
refer my Reader to their Historians: and now desce^d to the Geographical
Description and division of the world, as in after Ages it was found by our
first Artists, and has been since more at large discovered by the experience
of our later Travelers.

(18) And in this we may still observe our method. For questionless by the same
degrees almost as it was inhabited, so it grew into the knowledge of our
ancient Geographers. And therefore our first Authors in this Science bounded
their Descriptions within a less compass, and divided the world into those
three parts only, which you see lie closest about the point of the earth, where
the first men, first Religion, first City, first Empire, and first Arts were.
For in Prolomy's time (about an hundred and forty years after Christ) we hear
not of either Land or Sea known more than was contained in Asia, Africa, and
Europe.

(19) And of that he never knew the East and North parts of Asia, nor the South
of Africa, no nor the most Northerly parts of Europe: but placed the end of the
world that way in Vltima thule, about sixty three degrees from the Equator.
And Southward the other way not above 17 degrees, Prasso Permotorio* which at
this day is called Mosambique R^cks. So the whole Latitude of the world, then
known, did not reach the fourth part of the Compass. In the Longitude indeed
they came not so far short; yet le^t they just half to the search of their
posterity. For they placed their first Meridian in the Fortunate Islands, and
ended their reckoning in Region Sinarum of the Eastern Indies, and that is
distant but 180 degrees toward the 360, which is the compass of the whole.

(20) But God in these later times has enlarged our possessions, that his
Gospel might be propagated, and has discovered to us Inhabitants almost in
every corner of the earth. Our later Geographers have set their mark beyond
Ptolomy's 60 degrees Eastward. And Westward to the utmost parts of America. So
that there are already known 340 of the earths Longitude. Toward the North Pole
we have gained, more in proportion, as far as Nova zembla, and the Sea is known
to be navigable to the eighty first degree: whether the rest be Land or not, it
never yet appeared to any (^s I hear of) but an Oxford Friar by a Magic
V^yage. He reports of a black rock just under the Pole, and an Isle of Pygmies*
Other strange miracles, to which (for my part) I shall give little credit till
I have better proof for it than the Devils word.

Now of all, the Southern course is most unknown; and vet Ar^ has not been
Idle, nor altogether lost (...) in the search: it has discoverd Countries
about the 52 degree toward the Pole, but so ^ncertainly, that it may well yet
keep her name of Terra incognita.

(21) Admirable was the wit of that man, that first found out the virtue of the
Lodestone, and taught^ us to apply it in the Art of Navigation. And indeed the
industry of them is much to be honored, that have since ven^ured born their
means and persons upon dangerous attempts, in the discoveries of People and
Nations that (...) God, nor had apparent means for their Redemption without
this help. Among these (though the Gen^^, Spaniard, and Portugal carry the
first name) we have noble spirits of our own Nation, not to be ranked in the
last place. Stupenda fuit revera industria Anglorum, says Keckerman. And
indeed we may justly enough requite him with his own Elogy. The Dutch to have
done their parts to join a new World to the old.

(22) To us it may well be called a new World, for it comprehends in it two
Continents, either of them larger than two parts of the other are.

The one is that Western Hemisphere that bears the name America from Americus
Vesputius but was indeed discovered seven years before he knew it) by
Christopherus Columbus, in the year 1492. And the other is the Terr^
Magellanica, seated about the South Pole, and first sound out by Ferdinand
Magellanus some twenty year^ after, or thereabout, and is thought to be greater
than the whole earth be^ides. Hitherto it is but conjectural* and some few
Provinces have been rather descried than known. You shall find them named in
their several Regions upon the Seacoasts. Nova Guinea, Terra del Feugo, (...)
Regio, Lucach, Beach, and Mal^tur.

(23) With these additions the World by some is divided into six parts, Europe,
Asia, Africa, America, Septentrionalis incognita, and Terra Australis
Magellanica: which are thus disposed in the Globe of the Earth. Asia in the
E^stern Hemisphere.

And being the first part which was inhabited, shall be the Point unto which I
will direct the rest: part on the West, and part on the South is Africa
si^uated: on the North and West Europe, more toward the West America u^raque:
full North Septen^rionalis incognita: and full South the Terra Magellanica.

(24 Those we will reduce (in our method) to the four common parts, which
generally pass in our de^criptions of the World: Europe, Asia, Africa, America
utraque: in this last include the Terra Set^entrionalis and Magellanica (as
others have before done) and allow it not a several part by it self, in reg^rd
that little can be reported of those Countries, but what may be dispatched in a
few words. The Inhabitants are not many in either, and those barbarous: In the
Terra Magellanica they go naked. In the Land del ^eugo, there is much smoke. In
(...) Region there are great Parrats. In B^ach, Gold. In Maletur* Spices.

(25) Of the rest severally I shall nor need here to enlarge my discourse,
since the particular Map of every Region may justly challenge is their proper
right; and will be, I hope, very shortly extant for my Reader to peruse.

ASIA
map of Asia
The Description of ASIA.
THe method propounded in our general Description of the World, gives Asia the
prerogative as well for worth as time. Europe shall not want her due, in her
due place. It will suffice her, if she be at this day most famous for the acts
of men, and so it is allowed by most. But in Asia did God himself speak his
miraculous work of the Creation. There was the Church first collected: there
was the Savior of the World born, crucified, and raised again: indeed the
greatest part of Divine History was there written and acted. And if we should
as well compare her to the rest, in that earthly glory of Kingdoms, Empires and
Nations, which sounds fairest to man's sense, she would still keep her rank. For
was not the first Monarchs and Monarchies of the World in Assyria, Persia,
Babylonia, Media? Did not the first People of the World receive their Being in
Mesopotamia? And had not the several Tongues of the World their original in
Babylonia? These are parts of Asia, and were in the first Ages blessed with Gods
own holy pre^ence, Exodus 3. and the footing of Angels, Exodus 14. however now it
is left (for her infidelity) to the punishment of a Prophetical curse that long
before past upon her, and is delivered up into the hands of T^rks and Nations
that blaspheme their Creator; and therefore does not ^ourish in that height as
heretofore. Consider that Gods hand is now upon her, and the rest will follow
without much wonder.

(2) In respect of both Europe and Africa, it is situated Eastward. But if we
compare it to the Equator it lies almost wholly in the N^rthern Henisphere: I
need except none of the main Continent, only a few Islands, which are as it
were, retainers to Asia, and lie partly Southward beyond the Line. It is
divided on the West from Europe (...) the River Tanais, Pontus Euxinus, and
part of the Mediterraneum Sea. From Africa by that (...) which divides the
Red Sea from the Mediterraneum, and is above 72 miles long. On the other three
sides, it is begirt with the vast Ocean, which in the East is called Pontus
River, on the North, Mare Scithicum, the Tartarean Sea, and in the South the
Indian Sea. Through the middle runs the Mount Taurus at full length, with the
whole Continent of Asia, and divides it toward the North and South into Asiam
Exteriorem and Interiorem, with so many windings, that the length is reckoned
by G^adus to be 58060 stadia, by Maginus 45000 stadia, and that is 5625 Italian
miles, those of our own Nation account it 6250 English miles* The breadth (as
Strabo reports it) is in most places 3000 stadia, as our own Geographers 375
miles. From the North-shore comes the Mountain Imaus, directly South almost,
and divides it toward the East and West into Scythia intra Imaum, and Scythia
extra Imaum. By these bounds the length is set to be 5200 and the breadth 4560
miles.

(3) Now add together, that this Region was at first the Paradise of the World,
and indeed still enjoys a fertile Soil and temperate Air, and that it exceeds
in compass the two other parts of the old World, to which she was the Mistre^s
for Arts and Sciences: yet is not at this day so well peopled in proportion, as
this little Europe, which came after many hundred years. For this we need
search no farther cause than Gods just anger: (...) he not exercised upon her,
only by miraculous and immediate punishment from Heaven: but has ^uffered (as
it were) her own creatures, over which at first Man had the rule, to turn head
upon their Lords, and possess their habitation: For it is so overrun with Wild
Beasts, and cruel Serpents, that in (...) places they live not without much
danger.

(4) In this though the Nation suffer for their monstrous irreligion, yet the
Earth, which did not offend, reserves her place, and abounds with many
excellent Commodities, not elsewhere to be had, Myrrh, Frankincense, Cinnamon
^loves, Nutmeg, Mace, Pepper, Musk, Jewels of great esteem, and Minerals of all
sorts: it breeds Elephants, Camels, and many other Beasts, Serpents, Fowls wild
and ^ame, and some have added such monstrous shapes of men, as pass all belief.

(5) And thus from the general view of Asia, we will glance upon her several
Regions, Kingdo^s, and Provinces, as it has been heretofore divided. In this
we find difference of Authors, that follow their several placita, all perhaps
true enough in their own sense, though not alike, if they be compared. These we
will not so much as name, but insist upon one that may best fit my short
Description. Her parts are Asia the less, and Asia the greater, and the Islands
near about.

(6) Asia the less is that that lies next to Europe, and began Eastward from
thence; it was called by the Geographers there residing by a special name
Anat^lia (corruptly Natolia) (...), On the west therefore and toward the North
is Greece: full West is the Archipelagius* on the East is the River Euphrates;
on the North the Pontus Euxinus, and on the South the Mediterraneum. It is
included betwixt the Meridians of the 51 degree of Longitude, and the 72. so
Maginus: and in the Latitude it is ^eated almost betwixt the same parallels
with Italy.

(7) A Country it was once of singular fertility, exceeding rich in fruits and
pasture auratisque omnibus, and indeed all things else that either man's
necessity, commodity, or pleasure could requite. It was mother to many of our
learned Ancients. The Dorica, Ionica, and Aeoli^a Dialects of the Greek Tongue
had here their Originals. It was the Seat of the Trojane Kingdom, and many
other Nations famous in Histories, as well Christians as Ethnicks, though now
there remains no face of so excellent a Region, Cyrus first began the spoil:
then the Macedonians and Alexanders Captains: (...) them the Romans: and last
of all the Turks miserably rent in pieces, and have left the ruins to show of
four thousand Towns and Cities, The residue have lost both their names and
memory of their Predecessors. And the people are fallen from the Knowledge,
Industry, and Religion of their Forefathers* For before Christ, when they were
at worst that Histories report of them, they were for the most (...) learned,
and laborious in ordering of their Soil to the best advantage. Afterward they
became good Christians, for with them were the seven Churches which Saint John
mentions in the Apocalypse*

Now scarce is it inhabited but toward the Seaside; and that by a base and
abject people, such as are both lazy in their life, and odious Idolaters in
their Religions. For the most part Mahumetans.

(8) Let my first division of this Asia the Less, be into two Regions; of these
one has the particular appellation of Asia propria, and contains the several
Regions of (1) Caria, (2) Ionia, (3) Doris, (4) Aeolis Phrygia, (5) Lydia, (6)
Minor, (7) and Major. The other has no one name as I find among Geographers,
but is known by her Provinces of (1) Cilicia; (2) Pamphilia, (3) Lycia, (4)
Bythynia, (5) Pontus, (6) Paphlagonia, (7) Galatia, (8) Cappadocia, (9)
Lycaonia, (10) Pisidia, and (11) Armenia minor.

(9) Asia propria was the scene of many noble actions much celebrated among our
Historians. First, in Caria stood the City Mindum, upon which Diogenes brake
his Jest, That the Citizens should take heed lest it run out at her Gates And
Halicarnassus the birth place of Dyonisius and Herodotus: and of this was
Artemisia Queen, that erected the miraculus Monument in honor of her Husband
Mausolus. The second Province is Ionia* and here stood Miletum, where Paul made
his Oration to the Elders of Ephesus; and here Ephesus it self, the Star of
Asia, that as well for her Religion as her miraculous Temple, set the World at
a gaze upon her. It was raised in the middle of the City, modelled out by
Ctesiphon, but was 220 years in building; and was ordered in such a ground,
that no Earthquake should move it: it was 425 foot long, and 220 broad, and
had an hundred twenty seven Pillars, given by so many several Kings (says
Vadianus) whereof twenty seven were most curiously graven, all the rest of
Marble polished. In this City Saint John the Evangelist is said to have gone
down into his Grave alive: there be who yet question his Death: and Irenaeus
reports that he lived in Trajans time. This with the third and fourth Provinces
of Doris and Aeolis, were only accounted Greeks: the other Nations of Asia were
called Barbarians. (5) Lydia was the fifth named in our Division; and in her
are many Cities, which we have mentioned in Scripture, and are common among
other Writers. Of these the chief are Laodicea, Thyatira, Philadelphia, Sardis,
where Croesus kept his Court, and Pergamus the Seat of Attalus, that made the
Romans his Heir, and where Galen the great Physician was born, and lived 140
years. (6) The first was phrygia minor; it is called Troas by the Inhabitants,
and those are now Greeks, Turks, and Arabians; heretofore they were the ancient
Trojans, that gave Homer his subject for his admired Poem. Here is that
Adramittium named in the Acts. and Trajanopolis: and the Mount Tmolus, that
sends down a River into Lydia with abundance of Gold and Silver. And lastly,
the Mount Ada, famous for the judgment of Paris past upon the three Goddess^s.
(7) The last was Phrygia major; and on this was Gordion, the very Town where
Gordius hampered his Plow-tacklings in such a knot that none might unty, but he
that should possess the Monarchy of the World; and indeed it proved true enough
in Alexander the Great. Another was Midaium, where Midas son to this Gordius
turned all to Gold with a Touch. A third Coloss, the place of the Colossians to
whom Saint Paul directs an Epistle. And all these were contained within the
compass of that one part which bears the name of Asia propria.

(10) The other Provinces of Asia minor have their Stories worth the Memory.
(1) The first was Cilicia now called Garamania; whose People in times past were
noted for grand Pirates, till overcome by Pompey, and when by force they were
turned honest, they gained the repute of a warlike Nation, especially in
Sea Fights. So Lucan,

Itque Cilix justa non jam pirata Carina. It was a rich Province to Rome when
Cicero was Proconsul: and still it is full of pleasant places: but withal has
many wild and waste grounds, that are no man's peculiar: but who will, may there
freely feed his Goats, which afford them good commodities, as well by their
milk as their hair, of which are made most curious Chamlets. In this Province
was Tarsus, the City of Saint Paul, and Nicopolis, and Pompeiopolis and
Alexandria* (2) The second Pampbilia. The People were once called Soli* and
used a rude kind of Idiom, from whence the very word Solaecismus, and here was
Perga, Sida, and Attalia, Sea Towns mentioned in the Acts. (3) The third was
Lycia, a fruitful Country in the Plains, and was heretofore of great fame. The
Metropolis was Patara Saint Nicholas his birthplace, and where sometimes
Apollo's answers were returned. (4) Pontus and Bythinia were the fourth and
fifth, though once severed, yet afterward they made but one Province, and was
governed by Mithridates that first found out the Medicine that bares his name.
He had many years war with Rome, but at last with much ado was overcome. Her
Cities were Chalcedon, the place of the fourth General Counsel, and Nice of the
first, as also Nicomedia, Apamia, etc. (6) The sixth Paphlagon^a, and from
hence had the Venetians their original, and were at first called Heneti, but
being driven out by sedition, they followed Anten^^ into Italy, and there it
seems changed a letter of their name. (7) Galatia the seventh: and to the
Inhabitants Saint Paul directed one of his Epistles. It was the seat of King
Deiotarus, Client to Cycero as appears by an Oration in his behalf. In this
Province were many Jews disper^ed after the Passion; the chief Cities are
Iuliopolis and Ancyra, where a Synod hererofore was held, called Synod
Ancyrana. (8) The eigth Capadocia, heretofore Leucosyria. Here is the City
Amasia, which receives the Turks eldest Son after their circumcision, till
their Father's (the Emperor's) death. And here Mazaca, where St. Basil lived,
that first gave himself to a Monastical life: and the flourishing City of
Trepizand, heretofore a Seat Imperial. (9) Ninethly, Lycaonia. In the South of
this Region is the Hill C^imaera, that gives occasion to a Poetical Fiction of
a Monster, with a Lions head, a Goats body* and tail of a Serpent: for so on
the top of this Hill were Lions, in the middle Goats, and in the valley
Serpents. Bellerophou ^id it, and first made it habitable: and thence this
Fable. Here was Iconium and Lystra where Timothy was born, and Paul and
Barnabas adored as Gods. (10) Pisidia was famous for the Cities of Antiochia
and Lysinia (11) Lastly, Armenia Minor is by most thought to be the Land of
Ararat, where the Ark rested: And there is great store of Oil and excellent
Wine.

(11) Hitherto our Tract has been of Asia the less, or Anatolia. It rests
that we proceed to Asia Major, which lies remote from Europe toward the East.
And of this we can make no large description in so small a scantling: we will
only mark cut the Provinces, and refer my Reader to more particular Relations
in our several Maps that contain the Turkish Empire, Tartaria, Persia, and
China, all Kingdoms of Asia the great. The parts, as for the present we will
divide it, are these, (1) Syria, (2) Palestina, (3) Armenia Major, (4) Arabia
triplex, (5) Media, (6) Assyria, (7) Mesopotamia, (8) Persia, (9) Chaldea, (10)
Parthia, (11) Hircania, (12) Tartaria, (13) Chin, (14) India.

(12) Syria is the first, and has in it the Provinces of Phaenicia,
Caelosyria, and Syrophaenicia. In Phaenicia was Tire, and Sydon, Sarepta, and
Ptolemais, where two Kings of England have laid their Siege, Richard, and
Edward the first. In C^losyria stands Hieropolis and Dam^scus, Aleppo,
Tripolis, etc. The second Palestina, which Ptolomy reckons into Syria. It is in
length 200 miles, in breadth not above 50. It contained the Provinces of
Samaria, Idumaea, Judea, where Jerusalem was, and not far thence Bethlehem;
Galilaea, both the higher called Galilaea Gentium, and the lower: and in this
was Nazareth, and Mount Tabor, where Christ was transfigured. (3) The third is
Armenia Major, or Turkomania. In this was Colchus, whence Jason fetched his
golden (...): now it is inhabited by Turks. (4) Arabia is the fourth, and that
had three parts, Arabia deserta, where the Children of Israel were fed with
Manna forty years. Arabia petrosa, where mount Sinai was, and the law given.
The last Arabia felix, counted the fruitfullest Country in the world. In this
Arabia is the City Medina, where Mahomet is intombed in an iron Chest,
supported only by a roof of Adamant, without other Art ^o keep it from falling
to the ground. (5) The fifth Media, it was once a large Empire, and one of the
first. The fruits of the Country are said to be always green. (6) The sixth
Assyria, a very pleasant and temperate Country: and here was the City Ninive^,
whither Jonas was sent. (7) The seventh Mesopotamia, in whose lower part
Chaldae^ stood, as our latest Writers affirm, and Babylonia. (8) The eighth
Persia, a mighty Empire governed by a Sophy The people are Mahumetans, vet
differ somewhat from the Turks. Their Language passes current through the
whole Eastern world. The Metriopolitane is Persepolis (9) The ninth Chaldaea,
often mentioned in the Scripture; and here was the fifth Sybil, called
Erythraea, that prophesied of Christ. (10) The tenth Parthia, a Province of
note for its continual hostility with Rome, and excellent Archery: for the
Inhabitants used their Bow with as much dexterity in their retreat as in the
Battle; and by that means oftentimes won advantage upon the enemy by their
slight. (11) Hircania the eleventh, an illustrious Country, and has many
Cities of note, abounds with Wine and Honey. (12) Tartaria, called heretofore
Scythia, the Inhabitants Scythians, and before that Mag^zins, from Magog, the
son of Iapheth, that first Inhabited these parts. It was once possessed by the
Amazons, a Nation of women; after their dissolution came the Scythians, among
whom Tomyris is ennobled by Iustine for her victory over Cyrus. Upon them came
the Goths, and those were driven out by the Tartars which began their Empire
1187. so Maginus. It is a large Country, and the people stout. They have no
Cities nor Houses, but live in Tents by troops, which they call herds. Their
Prince is named Cham, and obeyed with great reverence. (13) The thirteenth is
China, by Ptolomy, Sinarum Regio: it has in it 240 Cities of note. In this
Region is Quinsay, the greatest City in the world. It has on the North a wall
of 100 miles in length. (14) The last is India, and the largest portion of
earth that passes under one name. Strabo writes that there were 50000 Towns
quorum nullum Cominus fuit. In the middle runs the River Ganges, and divides
it into India intra Gangem, the part that lies toward the West, and India
extra Gangem, which is the part toward the East. The Scripture calls it
Havilah. This Region has very many precious Commodities, Medicinal drugs, and
Merchandise of great estimation. The chief place is Goa, where the Viceroy of
Portugal resides, and with a Council of the King of Spain, exercises a power
over all these quarters.

(13) The Islands of Asia, at they are of less account than the Main, so they
must be content with a shorter Surve^. We will rank them into the same order
with the Continent.

(14) The first are of Asia the less, and lie more Westward toward Europe.
They only worth note are two, Rhodes, and Cyprus. (1) First Rhodes is in the
Sea over against Caria In the chief City of this Isle stood the Colossus in the
form of a man, erected in a kind of Religion to the Sun, that once a day at
least breaks out upon the Isle, howsoever cloudy it be in other places.
Graeians heretofore possessed it; and when the Christians had lost the Holy Land,
the Emperor of Constantinople gave this Isle to the Knights of Saint John in
Jerusalem, in the year 1308. But now the Inhabitants are most Turks, and some
Jews sent thither out of Spain. As for Christians, they may not stay in the
City in the night time. (2) The second is Cyprus, a place heretofore
consecrated to Venus, to whom both men and women peformed their sacrifice
naked, till by the prayer of Barnabas the Apostle the Temple was ruined. Trogus
reports, that the fathers of this Isle were wont to prostitute their Daughters
to Mariners for money, whereby to raise them a portion against they could get
them husbands: but Christianity corrected those barbarous Customs. In time it
was made a Roman Province, and in the division of the Empire was assigned to
the Emperor of Constantinople. So it continued till Richard the first of
England, in his voyage put into this place for fresh water: but being incensed
by the discourteous usage of the Cyprians, turned his intent into an invasion,
took the King prisoner, and bound him in silver fetters. Afterward he sold it
to the Templers for a time, but recovered it again, and exchanged it for the
title of Jerusalem.

(15) Lastly, the Islands of Asia the great lie most in the Indian or Eastern
Ocean, and indeed are innumerable, but the chief of account are these; Ormus,
Zeilan, Summatra, Avirae Insulae, Bocuro, Iava, Major and Minor, Iapan, and
Moluccoes, and the Philippian Isles.

The first is Ormus, exceeding barren, and yet of it self a kingdom, and full
of Trade. (2) Zeilan so happy in pleasant ^ruits, that some have thought it was
the place of Paradise. (3) Summatra lying directly rectl^ under the Equator,
the Inhabitants are (...) (4) And so are the Inhabitants of the Avirae Insulae
that lie West from Summatra. (5) Bocuro, so large an Isle, that the compass is
said to be three months sail. (6) Iava major called by Scaliger, the Compendium
of the world. The Inhabitants feed on Rats and Mice: it yields much Spice. (7)
And so does Iava Min^r. (8) Iapan abounds so with Gold that the Kings Palace
was covered with it in the time of Paulus Ven^tus. They enter not into their
Dining Room with their shoes on (9) The Mol^ccoes are ^^ve, and abound much
with all sorts of Spices. In these is said to be the Bird of Paradise that
flies continually, having no ^eet to rest upon: The Hen lays her eggs (if
you will believe it) in a hole of the Cocks back. (10) Last'y, the Phillippian
^sles that lie North of the Molucc^^s are 1100. as Maginus numbers them. They
were discovered in the time of Philip the ^econd of Spain, and from him took
their name, 1564. They abound with Spices, and part of the Inhabitants have
entertained Christianity.

(16) And thus I have made a brief dispatch both of the Continent and Islands
of either Asia, and have given my Reader a hint (at least) of their stories,
which he may find at large in their several Authors.

AFRICA
Petrus Kaerius caelavit
map of Africa
The Description of AFRICA.
AFrica, as it lay nearest the seat of the first people, so questionless it was
next inhabited: and therefore requires the second place in our Division. It is
generally agreed upon, that the North parts were possessed by the sons of Cham
not long after the confu^ion. And so indeed that Kingly Prophet in the 78
Psalm, uses the tents of Cham for the Land of Egypt, which is that part of
Africa which joins upon the South west of Asia, and is divided from the Holy
Land but by a small Isthmus. Give the people their own asking, and they will
have the glory of the first Inhabitants of the world: and prove it too both
from the temperature of their air, and fertility of their soil, which breeds
and nourishes not only Plants and fruits, but sends forth, of its own virtue,
living creatures in such sort, as amazeth the beholder. We have a report (if
you will belive it) that in a ground near the River Nilus, there have been
found Mice half made up, and Nature taken in the very nick, when she had
already wrought life in the fore-parts, head and breast, the hinder joints yet
remaining in the form of earth. Thus I suppose they would have man at first
grown out of their soil, without the immediate hand of God in his Creation. And
it has been the opinion of some vain Philosophers, that for this cause have
made the Eihiopians to be the first people: for that there the Sun by his
propinquity, wrought soonest upon the moisture of the ground, and made it fit
for mortality to sprout in.

(2) But to leave these, without doubt Africa is of great antiquity, and so is
allowed by all Historians of credit: In the year 1566 the people were increased
to an exceeding multitude; and therefore were enforced to enlarge their bounds,
upon their neighboring Countries. For as it was of a most rare fertility; so
it lay not any long way, and had free access to it by land from the garden of
our first Parents.

(3) In the time of Abraham we have better assurance from the Word of God, that
it was then a place of ^ame, and the Inhabitants of some growth, for they were
able to supply the wants of the Countries adjoining by their store: and thither
went Abraham out of the Land of Canaan, to avoid the great famine, Genesis 12. She
had then her Princes, Pharaoh and his mighty men, that feared not to resist
God, and were afterward made the instruments of his punishments upon the
children of Israel: for they kept them in bondage four hundred years, as was
foretold to Abraham in the 15 of Genesis.

(4) But this proof of Ancientry concerns not the whole Country: only those
Regions which lie under the temperate Zone. The rest for a long time after were
unknown to our Geographers, held not habitable, indeed, beyond mount Atlas, by
reason of the extreme heat. The reports which pass of it before Ptolomy's time
were but at random, and by guess of such as had never ^ailed it round, or
scarce come within sight of it, but at a great distance, and by this means,
either out of their own error, or else a desire of glory more than they had
deserved: or perhaps a Travelers trick, to cheat the ignorant world that could
not confute their reports, they spread many idle fables of monstro^s people
without heads, with their eyes and mouths in their breasts, maintained to this
day by some Authors of good esteem. But for my part I hold it most reasonable
to credit Saint Augustine, who was born and died in Africa. That he in his
eighth Book De Civitate Dei, acknowledges no such creatures; or if they be,
they be not men, or if men, not born of Adam. And our later Discoveries join in
with him, that report not (upon their own* experience) of any other people than
such as our selves are: and yet I suppose they have seen more of the Country
than ever any heretofore did. For they pass not now to sail it round once a
year, by the Cape of good hope to the East Side of the very Ist^inus toward the
Red Sea.

(5) This course by the South was discovered by one Vasco de Gama, in the year
1497. and a way found to the East Indies, by which the Princes of Portugal
receive an infinite gain, both in Spices and other Merchandise. The hope of
which first set them upon the Adventure. And in this one thing we owe much to
our own Country, otherwise a detestable plague, that the in^atiate desire of
wanton commodi^ies has opened to us a large part of the world before not
known, and which we hope may hereafter increase the light of the Gospel, and
the number of the Elect.

(6) If we compare her to the two other portions of the same Hemisphere, she is
situated wholly South, and in part Westward. It is divided on the North from
Europe by the Mediterran^um Sea: On the South, where it runs into a kind of
point at the C^pe of good Hope, it is bound with the vast Ocean, which in that
part has the name of the Athiopick Sea: on the East with the Red Sea, and on
the West with the Atlantic Ocean, called there in our common Maps, Mare del
North. So that in brief we reckon both her Longitude and Latitude in the
largest parts to be near upon 4200. English miles.

(7) Not withstanding this vast extent of ground, yet we of Europe still keep
our own, and by authority of the most and best Geographers, exceed as much for
number, as either this or Asia do for room. Cause enough there is why Africa
indeed should come short of both: for in most parts she has scarce plenty
sufficient to maintain Inhabitants, and where there is, we shall meet with
multitudes of ravening Beasts, or other horrible Monsters, enough to devour
both it and us. In a word, there is no Region of the world so great an enemy to
man's commerce: there is such scarcity of water, that no creature almost could
live, had not nature provided thereafter; that the grea^er part of them endures
not drink in the very midst of Summer. So Pliny reports. And if, as sometimes
they be enforced by such as take them, they suddenly perish. Thus we see how
God gives a property to each place, that may make up her defects, lest it
should be left as well by beasts as men. Their Land is full of sandy deserts
which ^e open to the winds and storms, and ofttimes are thrown up into Billows
like waves of the Sea, and indeed are no less dangerous. Straho writes that
Cambyses his Army was thus hazarded in Ae^hiopia. And Herodotus, that the
Psilli, an ancient but foolish Nation (it seem^) in Africa, as they marched
toward the South, to revenge themselves upon the winds for drying up their
Rivers, were overwhelmed with sand, and so died in their graves. Besides these
annoyances, it is so full of a venomous kind of Serpent, that in some places
they dare not dress their Land, unless they first sense their legs with Boots
against the sting. Other wild creatures there are which range about, and
possess to themselves a great portion of this Country, and make a Wilderness of
Lions, Leopards, Elephants, and in some places Crocodiles, Hyenaes, Basilisks,
and indeed Monsters without either number or name. Afr^ca now every year
produces some strange creature before not heard of, peradventure not extant.
For so Pl^ny thi^ks that for want of water, creatures of all kinds at some
times of the year gather to those few Rivers that are, to quench their thirst:
And then the Males promiscuously enforcing the Females of every Species which
comes next him, produces this variety of forms; and would be a grace to
Af^ica, were it not so full of danger to the Inhabitants, which, as Salus^t
reports, die more by Beasts than by diseases, And those Tracts about Barbary
are every tenth year, 15 or 25, visited with a great plague, and continually
infected with the French disease, in such violence, that few recover, unless by
change of Air into Numidia, or the Land of Negro^s, whose very temper is said
to be a proper Antid^te against those diseases.

(8) But among all these inconveniences, commodities are found of good worth;
and the very evils yield at last their benefit, both to their own Country and
other Parts of the world. The Elephant, a docible creature and exceeding useful
for Battle: The Camel, which affords much riches to the Arabian: The Bar^ary
Horse, which we our selves commend: the Ram, that besides his flesh gives
twenty pound of wool from his very tail: The Bull, painful, and able to do best
service in their tillage. And so most of their worst, alive or dead, yield us
their medicinal parts, which the World could not well want.

(9) In her division we will follow our later Masters in this Art, whom time at
least and experience, if no other worth, have made more authentic, and those
divide it into seven parts. (1) Barbary or Mauritania. (2) Numidia. (3) Lybia
or Africa p^opria. (4) Nigritarum Terra. (5) Aethiopia superior. (6) Aethiopia
inferior. (7) Egypt: and to these we add the (8) Islands belonging to Africa.

(10) Barbary is the first. The bounds of it are Northward the Mediterraneum,
Westward the Atlantic: On the South the Mountain Atlas, and on the East
Egypt. It is estee^ed the most noble part of all Africa: and has its name
from an Arabic word Barbara, that signifies a kind of rude sound, for such the
Arabians took their language to be: and thence the Grecians call them
Barbarians that speak a ha^sher language than themselves. Aft^r the Latins,
and now we, esteem the people of our own Nation barbarous, if they ever so
little differ from the rudeness either of our Tongue or Mann^rs. The
Inhabitants are noted to be faithful in their course: but yet crafty in
promising, and per forming too: for they are covetous, ambitious, jealous of
their Wives beyond measure. Their Country yields, Oranges, Dates, Olives, ^igs,
and a certain kind of Goat, whose hair makes a Stuff as fir^ as S^^k. It
contains in it the Kingdoms of ^unnis, Algeires, ^esse, and Morocho* (1)
Tunnis, is famous for several places mentioned of old. Here was Dona where
Augustine was Bishop* and Hippo his birthplace. And Tunnis a City five miles
in compass, and old Carthage built by Virgils Dido, Romes am^la for wealth,
valor, and ambition of the universal Empire. It was twenty two miles in
c^rcuit: And Vtica, memorable for Cato's death. (2) Algeires contains in it a
strange harbor for the Turkish Pirates; and is of note for the resistance it
made Charles the Fifth; who received before the chief Towns in this Region an
innumerable loss of Ships, Horses, O^dnance and Men. (3) Eesse has a City in
it with seven hundred Churches, and one of them a m^le and half in coni^ass (
Stafford): And in this Country was our English Stukely slain. (4) Morocho,
where the chief Town of the same name has a Church larger than that of ^ess^,
and has a Tower so high that you may discern from the top of the hills of
Azasi at an hundred and thiry miles distance. Here is likewise a Castle of
great same, for their Globes of pure gold that stand upon the top of it, and
weighing 130000 Barbary Ducats.

(11) Numidia was the second part in our division of Africa, and has on the
West the Atlantic, on the East Egypt, on the North Atlas, and the Deserts of
Lybia on the South. It is called likewise Regio Dactylifera, from the abundance
of Dates; for they feed upon them only; and people, Idolaters, Idiots, Thieves,
Murderers, except some few Arabians that are mingled among them of ingenious
disposition, and addicted much to Poetry. They seldom stay longer in one place
than the eating down of the grass: and this wandering course makes but few
Cities, and those in some places three hundred miles distant.

(12) Lybia, the third, is limited on the East with Nilus, Westward with the
Atlantic, on the No^th with Numidia, and the South with Terra Nigritarum. It
was called Sarra, as much as Desert: For so it is, and a dry one too, such as
can afford no water to a Traveller sometimes in seven days Journey. The
Inhabitants are much like to the Numidians, live without any Law almost of
Nature. Yet in this place were two of the Sibyls, which prophesied of Christ,
and Arrius the Heretic. About Lybia were the Garamantes, and the Psilli
mentioned before for their simple attempts against the South Wind.

(13) Terra Nigritarum, the Land of Negroes is the fourth, and has on the West
the Atlantic, on the East Aethiopia superior, on the North Lybia, on the South
Kingdom of Manilong^ in the inferi^r Aethiopia. It has the Name either from
the color of the people, which are black, or from the River Niger, famous as
Nilus almost, for her overflowing, insomuch that they pass at some times in
Boats through the whole Country. It is full of Gold and Silver, and other
Commodities* but the Inhabitants most barbarous. They draw their Original form
Ch^s, and have er^ertained all Religions that came in their way. First their
own, then the Jews, the Mahometans, and some of them the Christian. For the
most part they live not as if Reason guided their actions. Maginus numbers
twenty five Provinces of this Country, which have had their several Governors.
Now it knows but four Kings* and those are (1) The King of Tombulum, and he
is an infinite rich Monarch, hates a Jew to the death of his Subject that
converseth with him: keeps a Guard of three thousand Horsemen besides Foot. (2)
Of Bornaum, where the people have no proper Names, no Wives peculiar, and
therefore no Children which they call their own. (3) Of Gonga, who has no
estate but from his Subjects as he spends it. (4) Gualatum, a poor Country, God
wot, not worth either Gentry of Laws, or indeed the name of a Kingdom.

(14) Aethiopia Superior the fifth, and is called likewise the Kingdom of the
Abyssines. It is limited on the North with Egypt, on the South with the Montes
Lunae, on the East with the Red Sea, and on the West with the Kingdom of the
Nigers and Manilongo. It is distinct from the Aethiopia so often mentioned in
Scripture; For by all probability that was in another quarter of the world, and
teaches from the Red Sea to the Persian Gulf. It is governed by one of the
mightiest Emperors in the world: For his power reaches almost to each Tropic,
and is called by us Presbyter John. He is the only white man amongst them, and
draws his Line from Solomon, and the Queen of the South. His Court rests not
long in one place, but his moving as well for Housing as Retinue. For it
consists of Tents only to the number of six thousand, and incompasseth in,
about twelve or thirteen miles. He has under him seventy Kings, which have
their several Laws and Customs: Among these the Province of Dobas has one,
that no man marry till he has killed twelve Christians. The Inhabitants of the
whole Region are generally base and idle: the better sort have the modesty to
attire themselves though it be but in Lions and Tigers skins, Their Religion is
mixed. Christians they have, but yet differ from us; For they circumcise both
Sects. Their Oath is by the life of their King, whom they never see but at
Christmas, Easter, and Holy Rood. Their Commodities are Oranges, Lemmons,
Citrons, Barley, Sugar, Honey, etc.

(15) Aethiopia inferior the sixth part of Africa, is on every side begirt with
Sea, except toward the North; that way it is severed form the Abissines by the
Montes Lunae. The government of this Region is under five free Kings, (1) of
Aiana, which contains in it two petty Kingdoms of Adel and Adia, and abounds
with Flesh, Honey, Wax, Gold, Ivory, Corn, very large Sheep. (2) Zanguebar, in
this stands Mesambique, called by Ptolomy, Prassum Promontorium, and was the
utmost part South ward of the old world. The Inhabitants are practiced much in
South-saying, indeed Witch* craft. (3) Of Monomol^pa, in which is reported to
be three thousand Mines of Gold. Here there lives a kind of Amazons as valiant
as men. Their King is served in great pomp, and has a guard of two hundred
Mastives. (4) Cafraia, whose people live in the Woods without Laws like brutes.
And here stands the Cape of good Hope. about which the Sea is always rough and
dangerous: It has been especially so to the Spaniard. It is their own note; in
so much; that one was very angry with God, that he suffered the English
Heretics to pass so easily over, and not give his good Catholics the like
speed. (5) Manicongo, whose Inhabitants are in some parts Christians, but in
other By-Provinces Anthropophagi, and have shambles of man's flesh, as we have
for meat. They kill their own children in the birth, to avoid the trouble of
breeding them, and preserve their Nation with stolen brats from their
neighboring Countries.

(16) Egypt is the seventh and last part of the African Continent, which
deserves a larger Tract than we can here afford it: But for the present be
content with brief Survey; and satisfy your self more particularly in the many
several Authors that write her story. It has on the East the Red Sea Barbary
on the West: on the North, the Mediterraneum, and Aethiopia Superior on the
South, It was first possessed by Cham, and therefore called Chemia^ in their own
antique Stories: Or at least by Mitzraim his Grandchild, and is so agreed upon
by most. For plenty it was called Orbis h^rr^um, yet it had very seldom any
rain, but that defect was supplied by the River Nilus: The places of note are,
Caire and Alexandria. The first was heretofore Memphis. Some say Babylon,
whither the Virgin (...) to escape Herod's tyranny intended to our Savior: and
blush not to show the very Cave where ^he had hid her Babe. In a desert about
four miles distant stand the Pyramids, esteemed rightly one of the seven
wonders of the world. Al^zandria was a mangnificent City, and the place where
Ptolomy took his Observations, and was famous for the rarest Library in the
world. To the Inhabitants of this Country we owe the invention of Astrology,
Physic, writing on Paper. Their Kings names were Pharaoh toward the beginning,
now what the Turks pleases.

(17) And this is as far as we may travel by Land: it remains that we lose out
into the bordering Sea, and descry what Islands we can, near those parts of
Africa which we have here mentioned. And these lie either Southward in the
Aethi^^pick Sea, or else Westward in the Atlantic Ocean.

(18) The Aethiopick Islands are only two. (1) The Islands of S. Lawrence of
Madagascar, four thousand miles in compass, and the length more than Italy,
rich in all Commodities almost that man can use. The Inhabitants are very
barbarous, most of them black, some white there are, supposed to have been
transplanted out of China. (2) Zocratina at the mouth of the Red Sea, in length
sixty, in breadth ^wenty five miles. It lies open to sharp winds, and by that
means is extreme dry and barren. Yet it has good Drugs, and form hence comes
the Alo^ Zocratina. The people are Christians and adore the Cross most
superstititously, and give themselves much to Enchantments.

(19) The Atlantic Islands are (1) S. Thomas Island, and lies directly under
the Equator, it was made habitable by the Portugals, which found it nothing
but a Wood. It is full of Sugar, little ^ther Commodities, (2) Prince. Island,
between the Equator and Tropic of Capricorn: It is rich enough for the owner,
though I find no great report of it, (3) The Gorgades, of old the Gorgoss,
where Medusa and her two fisters dwelt; I forbear the fable, they are nine in
number, and because near to Cape Virid^, in the Land of Negroes, the have a
second name of Insulae Capitis Viridis. They abound with Goats; and the chief
of them is called Saint James. (4) The Canaries called for their fertility, The
Fortunate IsIands, and was the place of the first Meridian, with the ancient
Geographers, to divide the world into the East and West, and from thence the to
measure earths Longitude: but now it is removed into the next Islands more
North, which are the Azores, and belong properly to Europe as lying nearer
Spain than any other Continent. The number of the Canaries are seven. The chief
Canary, next Palus, where our Ships touch to refresh themselves in their voyage
toward ^merica. Then Tanariffa, which has no water but from a cloud, that
hangs over a tree, and at noon dissolves, and so is conveyed into several
parts. The other four are Gomera Hieior, Lansarat, and Fu^rl^ ventura, some few
other not worth note or name. The men lend their Wives like Horses or any other
Commodity. (5) Lastly, the H^sperides, not far from the Gorgad^s, they are
often mentioned by our ancient Poets in the fable of Atlas his Daughters. It
was supposed to be their seat of their blessed, which they called the Elizian
field. And indeed it is a very happy soil, the weather continually fair, the
seasons all temperate, the air never extreme. To conclude, Africa affords not a
sweeter place to rest in.

EUROPA
P. Kaerius Caelavit.
map of Europe
The Description of EUROPE.
EVROPE may perhaps think her self much injured to be thus cast back into the
third place of my Division, and reckoned the last of the old World: but my
promise shall be here made good to give her her due. And though Chronology will
not allow the precedence: yet compare her present estate with the rest, and you
may take her rank here to be ad Pompam: as most commonly in our solemn
Triumphs, those of most worth are ^^arshalled forth last* Yet were she so
minded to quarrel for Antiquity, she should not want abettors, such as would
have some parts of Europe flourish within thirty years after the con^usion of
Tongues. The original of the German^ Kingdom is drawn by Aventinus Helcrus, and
others, form Tuisc^, the son of Noah, and he began his Reign in the year 1787.
after the Creation, and that was but one hundred thirty one years after the
Deluge, not above thirty from the time that they were dispersed out of Babel.
But to pass by those uncertain s^ories which may admit dispute, we have to this
day the Germane Triers, a City standing from the time of Abraham, and bears as
yet the marks both of the Art and ambition of the Babyl^nians. As if here they
strove to reach eternity, as they did before in the plain of Shinar to top
Heaven.

(2) Sure I am, what ever part of the world was first famous, Europe soon got
the start, and took the Scepter of the earth into her hand, she had the name
with Pliny of Orbis domitorum genitrix: and well she might, if we but read her
story, since first she came in view: In the Greek Monarchy Alexander was her
Champion. In the Latin Empire the Romans bare the sway, and scarce left a
corner of the earth then known unconquered. And to this day the Princes of
Eur^pe enlarge their D ominions upon the Regions of the other three. A small
portion as we are of this little Isle, in respect of their vast Continent, yet
have we a part too in America for our peculiar, and hope still to bring more
into our prossessions that we may bring them unto Christ.

(3) In respect of the two other quarters in the Eastern Hemisphere, Europe is
partly West, and partly North, for she is situated Northward, betwixt the
Tropic of Cancer and the Polar Artick: and Westward has no Continent betwixt
her and America, but is bounded with the Atlantic Ocean. On the East toward
Asia, she has the Mare Aegeum, which the Italians call Archipelagus, and the
Pontus Euxinus, or Mare Magor. And the Palus Meoris and the River Tanais.
Southward it has the Mediterraneum and Fretum Herculeum; So that it is almost
encompast with the Seas, and has the form of a Peninsula, whose Isthmus that
joins it ot the rest of the Continent is to be reckoned that part, which lies
betwixt the branches of the River Tanais, and the Mare Glaciale: These are her
out bounds

(4) If we view her within we shall find that Nature has not spent her store,
nor was she close handed when she allotted her portion. And though Europe
indeed be the least, yet is she furnished in all points with the like variety:
her Rivers as commodious as those of Asia and Africa, and her Mountains no less
famous than Taurus or Atlas. Her measure indeed is not comparable to any of the
other three: She bears in Longitude but 3800. miles from S. Vincent in Portugal
to Constantinople. And in Latitude at most 1200. and that too from the Aegean
to the frozen Sea, by some account not above 900.

(5) But by her extent (as it is) small; it adds to her glory, that in exiguo
res numerosa jacet: that yet sheexceeds those vaster Regions, and bears the
name of the most happy Country in the world, both for plenty of Corn, Plants,
Fruits, for Rivers and Fountains of admirable virtues, for beauty as well of
Cities, Castles, and Horses, as men and women of excellent feature. For the
study of Arts, for sincerity in Religion, and whatever else God has pleased
to bless his Church with from the beginning.

(6) She wants nothing but what she may well spare; wild beasts, which cause
Deserts in the parts where they breed: hot Spices, which fit not our temper:
and rather corrupt our manners, than mend our diet: precious Jewels, and the
like, which have brought in a degree of vain and useless pride, not known
before by our Predecessors; yet too of gold, silver, and other commodious
Metals she has her portion. And in brief is of a very prosperous temper, yet
of so strange variety, that it is admirable to think that there is no place in
this quarter, but is fit for any man to live in. Insomuch as every corner is
inhabited, as is confirmed by our later Travelers: though heretofore it has
been questioned by reason of the extreme cold toward the Pole. This in general.

(7) In her division, we will begin from her Western parts, that lie toward
the first Meridian of Longitude, and so on till we come to her Eastern limits,
which join her to Asia. The order is, (1) Spain (2) France. (3) Belgia. (4)
Germany. (5) Italy. (6) Denmark. (7) Hungary. (8) Polonia. (9) Sclavonia. (10)
Greece. (11) Dacia. (12) Norwegia. (13) Suevia. (14) Muscovia.

(8) Every least Region of Europe merits a peculiar description at large, and
shall in its turn partake of my pains, such as it is. In the mean time I will
here instruct my Reader in the general knowledge of each, and direct him
principally to their situation, that he may with ease find their propinquity
and distance in respect of each other, which cannot be so aptly expressed in
their several Maps; nor so easily scanned as in this, which presents to his eye
all at one view.

(9) Spain is the first and the amplest Region of Europe, for in breadth in
numbreth 10000 stadia. says Appianus, and little less (as it seems) in
length. The compass is reckoned by us to be 1890 English miles. It is begirt on
every side with Seas, unless on the Eastern, and there it is joined to France
by a kind of Isthmus, when the Pyrenaean Mountains cross from one Sea to the
other, and set the limits to both Kingdoms. On the West it is bounded with the
Atlantic Ocean, on the North with the Cantabrick, and on the South with the
Fretum Herculeum: South East with the Mediterraneum Till within this 800 years
it continued mangled and broken by many turns of Fortune. Since it has felt
variety enough, now it is wholly subject to one Monarch, though it yet carry
the name of three Kingdoms, Aragou, Castile, and Portugal. The Land yields all
sorts of Wines, Sugar, Fruits, Grain, Oils, Metals, especially Gold and Silver.
It is fertile enough for the Inhabitants. For indeed they are not many, nor
have they so great Cities as there are in other Regions in Europe. Besides, the
conditions of those for the most part are base: The meanest proud, the best
superstitious and hypocrites: most of them lascivious. Give them their own,
they are good Soldiers, not so much for their valor in performing, as
patience to endure labors, hunger, thirst, and by this means oft-times, weary
out an enemy rather than Conquer him.

(10) France the second Region of Europe, begins from the West at the
Pyrenean Mountains, and is bounded on the East with Germany: on the North with
our English Seas, and Southward with the Mediterraneum, South East with the
Alps, which divide it from Italy. It was once tributary to Rome, as most of
these parts besides, and had its division into Provinces as they pleased. Now
the chief are Loraign, Burgundy, Savoy, and these have their free Princes; the
rest are Norway, Brittany, Berry, Aquitane, Picardy, Poictou, Languedock,
Anjow, Gascoin, Province, Compagne, and many more. The Country is very
fruitful, and calls her neighboring Nations to her for Traffic. Their
special Commodities are, Wine, Corn, and Salt. Well peopled, and has very many
illustrious Cities. But the Inhabitants are naturally light in their carriage,
almost Counter-point to the Spaniard: yet of great ^ame, both in learning and
wars. Commended by all strangers for complete Courtship.

(11) Belgia has France on the South, on the North Denmark, on the East
Germany, and the main Ocean on the West: It is known best with us by the Name
of Low Countries or Netherlands. The compass of it is about a thousand miles.
It is divided into 17 Provinces. And of these four are Dukedoms, seven
Earldoms, five Baronies, and one Marqueship. The Dukedoms are (1) Brabant, and
in this is Antwerp (2) Luick (3) Lutzenburg, here stands the vast Forest of
Ardeuna. (4) Gelderland. The Earldom^ (1) Flanders. (2) Artois. (3) Hainalt.
(4) Holland. (5) Zealand. (6) Zutphen. (7) and Hamme. The Baronies (1)
Friezland. (2) Vtreck (3) Mechlin. (4) Overissell. (5) Groueling. The
Marqueship is that of the holy Empire. The Land is good, and affords great
store of Butter, Cheese, and breeds Oxen of incredible bigness and weight. The
people too are very industrious and excellent Mechanics. The men commonly are
of a goodly Porrtaiture: yet of more fame for their wars than their volour; but
are forced to maintain their liberty by the Sword: good Seamen indeed, and in
that they bear some sway. Their Governors are called the States of the Low
Conntries. The General of their Forces is the Prince of Orange.

(12) Germany lies Eastward from Belgia, and on her own East is bounded with
Hungary and Polonia, and the River Vistula, and the North with the Germane
Ocean, and on the South with the Alps that divide her from Italy. In the
middle is situated the Kingdom of Bohemia, compassed with the Sylva Hircinia;
and in this stands Prague, where the Emperor commonly keeps his Court. And
comprehends many Provinces of note: Saxony, Brandenberge, Pomerania, Bavaria
Silesia, Franconia, Austria, Helvetia, East-Friezland, Westphalia, Cleveland,
Alsatia, Brunswick, and Hassia. It has now the name of the Empire, as once
Rome had, but it comes far short of her in glory. The right to it descends: not
by succession, but by choice of six Electors, Archbishops of Triers, Mentes,
and Cullen Count Palatine of Rhene, Duke of Saxony, and Marquess Brandenb^^g.
In case of equality, the King of Bohemia has a suffrage which carries it. It
is a rich Country, in Corn, Wine, Fruits, Mines, and has in it healthful
Bathes. The people warlike and ingenious for the invention of many useful
implements.

(13) Italy has Germany on the North, divided by the Alps, on the South the
Mediterraneum, on the East the Adriatique Sea, and on the West, Mare Tyrrhenum.
In length it is 1010 miles, and in the broadest place 420. It was once entirely
one. Now it is divided into many States and Provinces. The chief are, the
Kingdom of Naples, the Territory of Rome, Lumbardy, Tuscain, the Seignory of
V^nice, Verona, and others of great fame. For indeed the whole Country is of
admirable fertility, and called by good Authors, The Paradise of the earth. The
Inhabitants grave and frugal: yet hot and lascivious.

(14) Denmark is joined to Germany on the South, and on the West has the Mare
Germanicum, and so almost is environed with Sea, and is a Peninsula. In the
Continent are two Provinces of note Irglant and Holsten. The other are petty
Islands for the most part. The chief Zealand and Loiland* The Country breeds
goodly Horses and store of Cattle. The people are good Soldiers, and subject
to one King.

(15) Hungaria has part of Germany on the West, on the East the River Tibiscus
and Walachia, on the North with Poland, and on the South with the River Saure,
South West with Sclavonia. The great Danubius cuts her in the middle, and names
her parts Citerior and Vlterior. The chief Provinces are (1) The Country of
Soliense: where the earth sends forth such a ftench, that it poysoneth the very
Birds which fly over it. (2) An Island in Danubius exceeding fertile. And so
indeed is the whole Country. The people are generally strong, but show the
Ancientry to be of the Scythians by their barbarous manner, and neglect of
learning. Their daughters portion are only a new attire: and their Sons equally
inherit without privilege of birthright. The Emperor of Germany and the Turk
share it betwixt them.

(16) Polonia and Silesia, a Province of Germany on the West, on the East the
River Boristhenes or Neiper: on the North the Baltic Sea, and Hungary on the
South. It is in compass 2600 miles. The chief Provinces which belong at least
to Poland are Liv^nia, Lituania, Volinia, Samogiiia, Podolia, ^ussianigra,
Mazoria, Prussia, Podlassia. The Dukedomes of Optwittes, and Zotor, Polonia
propria. The Land abounds with Honey, Wax, Mines of Copper and Iron; It breeds
store of Horses fit for service. Their Religion is promiscuous, of all kinds,
from the true worship to the very Atheist, which acknowledges no God; yet they
are governed by one King, which does not succeed, but is chosen by the Nobles.

(17) Sclavonia has Hungary on the North, on the South the Adriatic S^a,
Greece on the South-East, and on the West part of Italy. It is in length 480
miles, in breadth, 120. The people were called Sclavi, and were by Conquest of
the Venetians made their drudges: It is now divided into Illyricum, Dalmatia,
Croatia. The mother tongue of this Nation is used through many Countries, both
of Europe and Asia* part of it belongs to the government of Hugary: some to the
Turk; some to the Austrians, and a portion to the Venetian State.

(18) Greece i^ limited on the West with the Adriatic Sea: on the East with
the Aegean, Hellespont Propontis. Northward with the Mountain Haemus, and
Southward with the Mediterraneum. It was once the seat of the worlds Empire,
and flourishes far beyond all other in every kind of humane learning, which to
this day is received by all civil Nations as their rule. It was one of the
first among the Gentiles that received the faith of Christ, and bred many
Fathers of our Church, St. Chrysostom, Basil, St. Gregory, and others. But
the Inhabitants are now curbed and kept low, as well in knowledge, as estate,
by the tyranny of the Turk Their women are well favored, but not fair. The
common division is into these Regions, Peloponesus, Achaia, Epirus, Albania,
Macedonia, Migdonia, Thracia; They afford us Gold, Silver, Copras, Colors,
Wines, Velvet, Stuffs, etc.

(19) Dacia on the West has Hungary on the East the Euxine Seas, on the South
Greece, on the North Sarmatia, from which it is divided by the Carpathian
Mountains. It was heretofore Misia, and was by Domitius parted into Misia
superior and inferior. Now the chief Regions are Transylvania, Moldavia
Walachia, Servia, Rasia, Bulgaria, Bosuia.

(20) Norwegia or Norway, describes her situation in her very name, which
signifies in the German tongue, no other than North-way: for so it is in
respect of the rest of Europe: and encompassed almost round with Sea. The
length is 1300 miles. The breadth about 600. The people were once valiant, and
spread their Conquest in most palces of Europe: Among the rest England has her
share, and was forced to submit to Duke William, and Ireland to Tancud. But now
themselves are under a foraign government of the King of Denmark, and live
simply enough: possess little worth the commending except honesty. Theft is
counted the greatest sin among them. Yet they have Cables, Masts, Fuirs good
store, and Stock Fish* which the poor eat in stead of bread. The Metropolitan
City is Nidrosio; besides this, there is not above two of eminent note. Bergla
one of the Mart Towns of Christendom, and Asloia a Bishops-See. On the North
and West stands the populous Province of Frimark.

(21) Suevia or Sweden, is on the East of Norway, divided from it with the
Dofrine Mountains. On the North and South it is bounded with Seas: at the East
end it is joined to Muscovia, by reason of their neighborhood, they partake
much in their dispositions with the Norwegians. Their Country is fertile, and
in some Provinces has very great plenty of Corn, Furts, Mines of Gold and
Silver, Copper, Lead, and other excellent Commodities, from which they take
their name, For the first is Gotland, as much as good land. The second Finland,
quasi Fineland. The rest are Bodia, Serick-firmia, Lapland, and others. The
Inhabitants live to a great age, of 140. and are much given to Witchcraft.

(22) Muscovia is the last Region of Europe toward the East, and indeed stands
a good part in Asia. It is bounded on the West with Livonia, and some part of
Swevia, on the East with Tartary, on the North with the frozen Seas, and
Southward with Lituania. The length of it is 3000 miles, the breadth 3065. It
is likewise known by the name of Russia alba. The most parts of it are extreme
cold: but Nature for the help of the Inhabitants has lined it with rich Furrs,
Sables, Martins, white Fox, and he like: and has furnished it with other
Commodities, Corn, Fruits, and Cattle. The whole Region is subject to the
Emperor of Russia. A vast Territory, and as wild a government. For the people
are very base, contentious, ignorant, and sottishly superstitious. They bury
their dead upright, with a slaff in his hand, a pen^y in his purse, and a
Letter to St. Nicholas to procure him entrance into heaven. There are many
Provinces of note. The chief are (1) Muscovia, where Mosco stands, the prime
City and seat of the Emperonr. (2) Permia, where they eat Stags-flesh instead
of bread. (3) Rhesan, so full of Corn that Horses cannot tread it down, not a
quail pass through it. But for this I am not very urgent to enforce belief upon
my Reader. Others there are which have their stories of as much wonder, and as
little credit. But I must not pass too far this way, lest I a little trespass
upon another possession. I have already set footing into Asia: Give me leave
to recover my self into my proper bounds, and I will set you a brief
description of the Islands which are reckoned as the appendices to Europe.

(23) The West in the Atlantic are Cronland, Groviland, Island, Freizland.
These lie nearest to the Artick, and are extreme cold, but send forth good
store of Fish. The next rank is in the British Seas: Ireland, Great Britain,
with her train, the O^cades, Hebrides, Silly Islands, Man, Anglesey, Iarsie,
Garnsey, Wight. Let not the rest envy, if I here as I pass, do a due homage to
our own, and salute her Queen of European Seas: She is a parcel of earth culled
out from the rest, which for her portionable distance from the Torrid and
frized Zones, enjoys so sweet a temper, that neither our Summer heat need
compel us to the shade, nor our Winter cold invite us to the fire; so Maginus.
And indeed our lines are fallen into pleasant places, we have a fair
inheritance: others you shall find of less regard in the German Seas, and those
which divide Norway and Sweden, from Germany and Poland. More toward Spain are
situated the Azores, 9 in number. Of these one called Faiall is with us of
greatest note, for our noble Sir Walter Raleighes victory over the Spaniard,
1597.

(24) The Southern Islands of Europe lie about the Mediterraneum. The first
rank are (1) Baleares near unto Spain. (2) Carsica. (3) Sardinia, over against
Italy where it parts from France. (4) Sicily, famous for the Gulf Charybdis,
which answers to the Rock Scylla on Italy side, and for the shipwrecks which
oftimes they enforce, have made up the fiction of the Sea Monsters mentioned in
our ancient Poets. (5) Malta the seat of the illustrious Knights. The second
Classis is of those in the Adriatic and Ionium Seas. In Ptolomy I find
situated on the North-East of Italy, Absorrus, Curicta, Scardona, Insulae
Di^media, Issa, Targurium, Pharia, Corcyra, Melitum. More South toward the
Mediterraneum, Corcyra, Ericusa, Cephalenia, Ithaca, the Country of Ulysses,
Echinades Insulae, Zacynthus, the Strophades, Cythera, And just as it were in
the mouth of the Aegeum, now called Candia, an Isle of 520 miles circuit, and
feigned by the arcient Poets to be the birthplace of Jupiter. It abounds with
Cypres Trees, and a las^ivious Wine which we call Malmsey.

(25) The last on the Southern Islands in the Aegean Sea, which indeed are not
easy to be numbered: but the chief are Meles, Chias, Bria, the Cyclades,
Sporades, Delos, Tenos, Icaria, Samos, Andros, Eubia, a very large Island,
Scyros, Lesbos, Lemnos, Samothracia, and Mytikne, whose chief Town Methymia
offers it self to the confines of Afi^. And now we are not many miles distant
from Troas. You see we want Sea-room to travel further* If you desire to have
an ex^ct review of the particulars, you must allow each almost a several
voyage. Let it suffice for the present, that when your desire serves to make
further search into other Authors, your passage is here discovered to your hand.

AMERICA
Petrus Kaerinus Caelav. Anno Do 1646
map of America
The Description of AMERICA.
AMERICA must yield her self to the last place of my Division. She is styled
commonly the New World in respect of what was known in Ptol^my's time. And this
name imports glory enough that she singly can equallize the title of World, and
a larger World than can be made up by the other three, if we reckon in the
Territories not yet fully discovered, and therefore indeed deserve not each to
it self a several Description.

(2) And since the has enough upon due right to prefer her worth, there will
be no need of that counterfeit gloze of ancientry, which many pretend in the
search of her original. Some there are that upon their own bare conjecture
pronounce her as old as the story of our Antipodes: others as Solomon's Voyage
for Gold into the Land of Ophir. In brief, my line will reach but 132 years
backward, to the time of Christopher Columbus a Genoay: before him I read of
none that durst arrogate to himself any certain knowledge of those parts,
unless a br^gging Spaniard without a name or note of description. There are a
sort of ungreatful ones, that commonly debase them most that deserve of them
best: and judge it a thing worthy their hate, to be out gone in any fair
action, though it redound to their own profit. Pardon my zeal to truth; it
warms my style against those Robbers, in the behalf of so honorable a man:
They are no petty thieves that would steal from one his immortality; as what
less could he deserve, that gave us the knowledge of another world, and laid
the way open for the entrance of the Gospel, to the saving (as we hope) many
millions of souls?

(3) His lights were little besides his own projecting wit, excellent skill in
Astronomy and Navigation; by which he fully perswads himself of some lands that
must needs lie in that portion of circle, which should make up the World into a
Globe, and withal saw, there could be no distemper either of heat or cold, that
could make it less habitable or fruitful, than those places of the old world,
which lay under the same Climates, and had the like respect to the Heavens.
These indeed were good rational persuasions, but the difficulty would have
daunted a mean spirit, and dashed not the action only, but the very thought. His
resolution was confirmed, and his purpose well digested to himself in the year
1486 and put into practice about six years after.

(4) When the gap was once opened many rushed in, and in a short space
discovered a large Territory Americus Vesputius got ground upon the Continent,
and gave it that name. Ferdinande Magellanus found out the South-sea-limits,
and first attempted the compass of the world that way. Our own Heroic, Sir
Francis Drake, Noble Candish, track'd him in his Discoveries, and added of
their own. Northward Furbisher and Davis put fair for a passage round from the
East Side of the Continent; from the West Willougbby and Buroughs.

(5) Let their several endeavors give you the parts of her division: The
Regions contained in this Western Hemisphere, under the name of the New World
or America, in the largest sense are four (1) America propria, (2) The Islands.
(3) Terra Septentrionalis incognita. (4) T^rra Australis incognita or Terra
Magellanica.

(6) America propria, with her Islands are the first, and were first
discovered: She is divided from the old world by the Atlantic Ocean on her
East, and on her West, with the pacifique Sea, or Mare del Znr North; and South
she has the Terrae incognitae, and so possesses to her self almost the whole
Hemisphere. What lies beyond her toward each Pole from the Equator appears as
yet but as wastle ground in our Maps: for the experience of our Travelers have
not reached so far, as to search fully into the Commodities of the Countries;
or nature of their Inhabitants, yet questionless there are many and may
hereafter yi^ld as much profit as any other.

(7) Of the quality of this Region in general we can speak but little. For by
reason of her length and breadth, she lies at such several distance in respect
of the Heavens, that she admits indeed all variety almost either of plenty or
want, which we have hitherto found in Asia, Africa, or Europe. Here admirable
for the fertility of soly; then again as barren: here temperate, their
scorching hot, elsewhere as extreme cold. Some Regions watered with dainty
Rivers, others again infested with perpetual drouth. Some Plains, some Hills:
some Woods, some Mines; and what not in some tract or other within the compass
of America? Yet nothing almost common to the whole but Barbarism of manners,
Idolatry in Religion, and sottish ignorance, such as hardly distinguishes them
from brutes; else they would not have taken reasonable men to be immortal Gods
as at first they did: yet what either God was, or immortality, they knew no
more than instinct of nature gave them, only a confused thought they had of
some place or other (God knows where) behind some Hill, where the blessed after
their death. And from thence they supposed the Spaniards came at their first
arrival. But it was not long before the Tyrants cudgelled their simplicity, and
by their cruelty appeared to them rather Devils from hell, than Saints from
Heaven.

(8) Yet still the In lund Countries retain for the most part their inbred
blindness: and worship the Sun, Moon, and Stars, and they have their other
Spirits, which they call their Zemes, and adore them in Images made of
Cotton-wooll, which oft-times by the delusion of Satan seem to move, and utter
an hideous noise, that works in these poor Idolaters a great awe, lesst they
should harm them.

(9) The rest of their Customs are answerable to their Religion, beastly. They
go naked, and are very lustful people without distinction of sex. In many
places they are Anthropophagi, and prey upon each other like Wolves. They
labor not much to sustain themselves: but are rather content to take what the
earth can yield without Tillage. This in general.

(10) Time has not given way to many divisions of this America. I find one
only in the best Authors: and that it seems nature marked out to their hands;
For she has severed the Continent into two Peninsulae; The one lies
Northward from the Aequinoctial, and is called Mexicana, The other for the
most part Southward toward the Magellanick Straits, and is called Peruviana.
Each of them are subdivided into their Provinces.

(11) Mexicana is the first, and her bounds on the East and West are the
Atlantic Ocean, and Mare del Zur. By the first it is severed from Europe: and
by the last from the Regions of China and Tartaria in Asia and is distant not
above 250 miles, if we measure the passage at the shortest cut. On the South it
has the Peninsula Peruviana: and Northward we are not sure whether Sea or
Land. It comprehends in compass 13000 miles. The quality of the Inhabitants,
and the riches of her soil shall appear in her several Provinces, which are
numbered thus: (1) Nova Hispania or Mexicana propria. (2) Quivira. (3)
Nicarugua, (4) Iacutan. (5) Florida. (6) Virginia. (7) Norumbega. (8) Nova
Francia. (9) Terra laboratoris or Corterilalis. (10) Estot^landia.

(12) Nova Hispania, or Mexicana propria, is the largest Province of this North
part of America, and gave the name Mexiacana to the whole Peninsula, which her
self received from her chief City Mexico. Her bounds Southward is the Isthmus
that joins the Continents. Northward the same with the Peninsulaes; on the
West Califormia or Mar Viriniglio, and on the East Incutan. It was first
possessed by the Spaniard 1518. But it cost them much blood to entitle their
Kings Hispaniarum Reges. It is an excellent Country, full of all variety almost
in every kind usual with us; and exceeds in rarities full of wonder. There is
one tree which they dress like our Vine, and order it so, that it yields them
almost all useful necess^ries. The leaves serve them instead of Paper, and of
the Vine ^ark they make Flax, Mantles, Mats, Shoes, Girdles, and Cordage: She
has in her four principal Regions of note: (1) Nova Galicia, found out by
Nunnus Gusmannus 1530. Her Cities are Compostella, now a Bishops See, Sancte
Espritte, and Guadalaiara. The inhabitants lived at large heretofore without
any government. But since the Spaniard came, they have endured incredible
servitude, and cruelty. (2) Mechnacan a fertile Region, the Inhabitants comely
and witty. Her chief Cities, Sinsonse the place of their native Kings* Pascuar
and Valudolit, the Bishops See. (3) Mexico or Tomistian, which contains in it
the City of Mexico, in compass six miles, the seat of an Archduke: and the
Spanish Viceroy: and in it is an University, a Printing House, and a Mint for
coynage. Other Cities there are, Tescuvo and Angelorum Civitby. (4) Ganstecan
lying open on the East near Mare del Nort. It is but barren, and the people
poor, but cunning. The Spaniards have here two Colonies, Panuce and S. James in
the valleys.

(13) Quivira bordereth upon the West of the Continent toward Tartary: It is
temperate and fertile. But the chief riches is the Kine, which feed them with
their flesh, and cloth them with their Hides. Her Provinces are Cibola and
Nova Albion. The last was discovered by our noble Sir Francis Drake, and
voluntarily yieded to the protection of our admired Queen of England Elizabeth.

(14) Nicarugua on the South-east of Nova Hispania, had a kind of settled Common
wealth before they knew Christianity, and is reported to have a tree that
withers at a man's touch. The chief Cities are now Granado, and Leo a Bishops
See.

(15) Incutan is situated over against the Isle Cuba upon the East of the
Peninsula, The people adored the Cross before they heard of Christ. The Country
is indifferent fertile: though that indeed as in all other places of this new
World, have proved worse for the Inhabitants; for it has drawn upon them their
foreign Invadour.

(16) Florida lies near the Gulf of Mexico, and bordereth upon the Mare del
Nort. A pleasant Region it is, and was discovered by our English under
Sebastian Cuhbot 1497. out left for the Spaniard to posses, which for a while
he did: and after him the French, but neither in quiet. For they warred upon
each other, till they left neither of them men enough to hold it. The French
built the City called Ara Corobina. The Spanish Est Hevens, and S. Matthews,
and planted there three Forts, Saint James, Saint Philip, Saint Augustine,
which was burnt by Sir Francis Drake 1586. but recovered again,

(17) Virginia carries in her name the happy memory of our Elizabeth, On the
East it has Mare del Nort, on the North Norumbega, Florida, on the South, and
Westward, the bounds are not set. It was first entered by Sir Walter Raleigh
1584. and some at that time left there to discover the Country till more were
sent, but they perished before the second supply. Since there have been many
Colonies planted out of England, which have there manured the ground, and
returened good Commodities to the Adventurers. For indeed it is a rich Country,
in Fruits Trees, Beasts, Fish, Foul, Mines of Iron and Copper, Viens of Pitch,
Alum and Tar, R^zin, Gums, Dies, Timber, etc. The Plantation went on with good
success till the year 1622. And then by the treachery of the Inhabitants there
were murdered near upon three hundred of our men. The Natives are very vile
people, horrible Idolaters, adore the creature which they most fear, and hate
them which keep them not in awe: they were kindly entreated by our English, and
invited by all friendly means to Christianity. The North parts are most
inhabited by our men, and is therefore called New E^gland. It has but one
entrance by Sea at a fair Bay. Her Capes are called Cape Henry, and Cope
Charles. The chief Towns are Ianus Town, Regnoughton, and Balesguift.

(18) Norumbega on the North of Virgi^ia, lies toward the Mare del Nort, and
is a very fertile Region. It is inhabited by the Spanish and French. The Seas
are shallow, and endanger many ships. So full of Fish, that the Boats cannot
have free passage, says Maginus.

(19) Nova Francia is further Northward from Norumbega: a barren Country, and
the people barbarous; some Anthropophagi. A few French there are besides the
Natives.

(20) Terra Laboratoris or Conterialis, still more Northward upon the
Seacoast, and is divided from Norumbega by the River Lanada. It reaches into
the Sea in form of a P^niusula. The men are barbarous, live in Caves, run
swiftly, and are good Archers. The chief places are Bresto, Cabo, Marzo, and
South Maria.

(21) Estotiland the last Province of the Northern Peninsula, still creeps by
the edge of the Atlantic: and on the North has the Straits called Fretum
Daveissii an English man, who this way attempted the North-west unto Cathai and
China. And in regard it was adventured in the name of our Queen, the Promontory
is called Elizabeth's Fore-land: and the Sea running by it is likewise named
Forbishers Straights, from another of our worthy Countrymen, that were
interested before in the same service. This Region is held to be the first
discovered of the New world. The North of it is still unknown. It yields plenty
of gold, but is exteam cold. The people ingenious and good Artificers in most
kinds, they are clothed with Beasts Hides; and are skilled to make themselves
Boats of Sea Calves skins, which they venture into the main Sea without danger.

(22) Peninsula Peruviana, is the South tract of America from the Isthmus to
the Magellanick Straights. The same Seas are the bounds upon the East and West,
which were of the other Mexicana, by which she is divided from Africa on the
East, and on the West at a large distance from the most Southren Islands of
Asia. The compass of it is 17000 miles. From North to South, there runs a
continued course of high Mountains, whose tops the very Fowls of the air cannot
reach by flight. And from thence descend many admirable Rivers, among which
Maragno and Argenteus are most famous. The one for his extent, and the other
for his plenty of silver. The Country is exceeding rich, but the people differ
not much from the worst of Beasts. They devour man's flesh, filthy worms, and
what else comes in their way. The chief Provinces are numbered thus; (1)
Castella Aurea. (2) Guiana. (3) Peru. (4) Brasil. (5) Chile.

(23) Castella Auren is the first, named from her plenty of gold. She lies
part in the Isthmus. The ^est is the Northern tract of Peru: (1) Castella del
oro in the very Isthmus, which is by some measured to be seventeen miles in
breadth, by others twelve, the Merchandise sent from Spain is unladen at Nombre
de Dios, and conveyed cross the Isthmus by land to Panamais: from thence
shipped again for the North-west of Peru: Near these parts was an admirable
achievement performed by our valiant Countryman John Oxenham, who by the
direction of Moors skilled in the Country, went to the Land of Pearls, and took
from the Spaniards an incredible weight of gold and Silver. (2) Nova Andalusia
Southward from Castella del oro. The chief Towns are Tocoio and Sancta
Espritia. (3) Nova Granata a rich Region with Mines of gold and silver, part of
it lies under the Aequinoctial. And this is S. Foy, one of the Archbishops
Sees. (4) Carthagena a fruitful Country, which yielded (when time was) to out
still renowned Sir Francis Drake, store of prize, and 240 pieces of Ordnace.

(24) Guiana is the second Province of the Peninsula Peru Maria, situated just
under the Aequinoctial. On the North it has the main River Oronoque or Raliana
from Sir Walter Raleigh, who went further than any before him into the Country.
This River is navigable by report above 1000 miles, On the South it has
likewise another great River of the Peninsula called Maragnon, which exceeds
the former, and is navigable 600 miles in length. In this province stands the
largest City of America called el Dorodo, or the gilded City: For indeed there
is plenty of gold. The length, as it is spoken by some Travelers, will exceed
belief. The second memorable Town is S. Thome: not so much for her own worth,
as the disastrous fortunes of Sir Walter Raleigh, who there first lost his
eldest son, and after returned home with that ill success, as it cost him his
own life.

(25) Peru the third in rank, yet by name it seems to be the chiefest Province
of this Southern Tract. It is contained almost betwixt the Equator and the
Tropic of Capricorn. On the North it has Castella del oro. on the South
Chila, on the West mare del Zur, and on the East the Mountains of Peru. It is a
very rich Country, abounds with gold and silver, little esteemed among the
Inhabitants. For by report the Spaniard ordinarily shooed their Horses with
gold: Another great Commodity is Tobacco, a toy to play withal, but yields a
great Revenue to the King of Spain. In this Province stands Lima the
Archbishops See, and place of residency for the Vicer^y Cusco, where the
Native Kings of Peru had wont to keep their Court. The Inhabitants are strange
Idolaters, and worship a black Sheep, Serpents, and other ugly creatures.

(26) Brasile on the North has the great River Maragnon. and on the South and
West Argenteus, on the East Mare del North. The ^ongitude from North to South
is accounted 150, the breadth 500, the compass about 3000. The Inhabitants are
rude, live for the most part in the Bodies of trees. They swim excellently, and
are able to keep under the water for a long space. Their chief Commodities are
Sugar and Brazile wood. The people are covered with natural hair, cruel,
lascivious, false, and what not? In this Region is an herb, called Viva, which
if you touch, it will shut up, as a Dasie in the night, and will not open till
the party that injured it be out of sight. Here are few Towns of note, St.
Anna, Equitum, Ascensio, Pernanbuco.

(27) Chile is the last of the Peninsula, and on the North has Peru, on the
West the Mare del Zur, on the South the Magellanick Straits, on the East the
Virginian Ocean, She has her name from her extreme cold temper, in so much
that many are frozen to death, and hardened like marble. It is a rich Country as
well for Gold as other Commodities of worth. The Rivers are fed with Snow that
falls from the tops of high Mountains. The people are of large stature, and
very valiant. The chief City is St. James, where a Colony of Spaniards keep
hold.

And thus we are traveled from the Basis to the very Pyris, at the South
America. The utmost point of it is called Caput victoriae from Magellanus ship.
The rest must be performed by Sea. Our best Cour^e will be from the East
Atlantic Ocean round by the Magellanick Straits into the Pacifick Sea. For
within this compass lies all the Islands that belong to this new world, and
those were my second part in the general division of the whole Hemisphere.

(28) The Islands of America in the Atlantic Ocean are, (1) Margarita not far
from Castella delor^ It is very barren in provision for victuals, but exceeds
in plenty of precious stones of the greatest value: And so does her neighbor.
(2) Aubagna. (3) Trinidado stored with Tobacco. (4) Bacala^^ over against Terra
Laboratoris. (5) Boriqu^n Northward from Guiana; Her principal Cities are S.
Iolas and Port Rico, ruined by our Earl of Cumberland 1597. (6) Iamaica,
spoiled by the Spaniards cruelty of most of her Natives: Insomuch that the
mothers strangled their babes in their womb to prevent their servitude under so
hard a Master as the Spanish Governor. (7) Laba a rich Isle: In this there is
a Bishops See called Ingo. (8) Lucaiae insulae in number a 130. and is best
commended for the beauty of her women. (9) Barmudae, many in number; discovered
by Sir Thomas Summers, and thence have the name of Summers Islands, possessed by
a Plantation of English, and agrees well with their temper. (10) Hispaniola or
Haitie, the first that was described by Columbus in the beginning of his
attempt: An excellent Island for temper of air, fertility of soil, rich Mines,
Amber, Sugar, and Roots medicinal. One of the chief Towns in D^mingo, ransackt
by Sir Francis Drake 1585. The rest are S. Isabella, S. Thome, S. Iolius, etc.
(11) There are a rank of Islands near the Basis of the South America, that are
called Insulae Car^lum or Canibalorum, part of them are Canibals and wild
people; yet they yield Commodities, especially the Guia^um or lignum Sanctum.

(26) The Islands of America on the West in the Pacisick Sea are not many of
much account. (1) The chief is Califormia, an Island of about 500 leagues from
the North Cape, Mendocina to the South S. Lucas, which enters a little within
the Tropic of Cancer. (2) Insulae Salemonis, supposed by some to be the Land
of Ophir. (3) Insulae L^tronum, named from the Natives theft, who stole
Magellanus Coch-boat when he first entered in.

Ella
GREECE
Petrus Kaerius Caelav.
map of Greece
The Description of GRAECIA.
GReece is divided from Italy but by a short cut of the Adriatic Sea. Each is
so placed in Contra-view of the other, as if she were ordered to overlook her
neighbors actions. And so indeed there that been continually a mutual
emulation betwixt the two flourishing Nations, which have either in turns
possessed, or at once divided the Empire of our Christian world.

(2) However now she lies dejected, and groans under a miserable servitude:
yet once she had as well the pre-eminence of Rome in glory, as the precedence
in time. For to say truth, she was the wisest of any people, that were not
enlightened with the knowledge of that great mystery: she set a patteren for
government to all her succeeding ages; and (in brief) she was the mistrest
almost of all Sciences* some there are which (in a strict account) will except
none but the Mathematiques: And yet too (though those without doubt owet^eir
Being to the Chaldeans and Egyptians,) sure I am that even in them, she bred
some of the most famous Artists that ever the World had, Euclid^ may be my
proof. In Philosophy S^crates, Plato, and our great Aristole. In Oratory
Demosthemes, Aeschines and Isocrates. In Historiography Xenophon, Theucidides,
Plutarch and Herodotus. In Poesy Hesiod, Homer Sophocles, and Aristophanes. In
State policy the wisest, Solon of Athe^s, and Lycurgus of Lac^demoni^; In
Military affairs Themis^ocles, Miltiades, and the great Alexander, and infinite
others, which had all past their times, and Greece almost sunk in her luster,
before the name of Rome was heard of almost in her Territories.

(3) She was at first but a small parcel of this quarter, till by her prowess
she grew on upon her neighboring Countries, and enlarged her Dominions through
all M^cedonia, Pelopon^esus, Epirus, the Aegean Islands, and Thrace: and
besides sent forth Colonies into other parts, as well of Asia and Africa* as of
Europe, whereof some retain the Greek names to this day. Her self enjoyed the
liberty for a long time which the first Inhabitants took to themselves, and
felt not the burden of a tributary Nation, till the time of the Persian Cyrus.
He first brought her under: After him Xerxes, and other of the Kings of Persia;
which held it till it was recovered by Phillip King of Macedonia; and from him
it fell to Alexander the great, who first took up his Greek Monarchy: and at
his death in the division delivered this with the rest to his successors in
the Kingdom of Macedonia: and so it continued until their last Perseus, in
whose time it fell into the power of the Romans.

(4) But when that Empire too had its fate to be severed by Constantine the
great into the East and West, the Greeks again put in for a part: and were for
a time Rulers of the East, till they were successively overrun by the Goths,
Bulgarians, Saracens and Turks, under whom to this day, the poor wretches
suffer continual persecution for the name of Christ; and a^e scarce permitted
by that great tyrant, means of learning to know the Names for which they suffer.

(5) This Region was first called Helles, from Hello the son of Dencalion and
Pyrrha, and in after times took the name of Graecia, from Graecus the son of
Cecrops, and King then of that part only which was called Attica: For then
there were many States, which were ordered by their peculiar Princes: But when
once they were joined into a Monarchy, the whole retained the name of that part
which was accounted most famous: and the Inhabitants in their stories generally
called Graecians, though sometimes by the like synecdoche, Ach^i, Achevi,
Argivi, Danai, Dolopes, Doors, Dryopes, Hellenes, Jones, Myrusidones and
Pelasgi.

(6) The bounds of Greece have been severally set, as her government has been
either enlarged by her own valor, or impaired by a foraign enemy. But as she
is now taken by Geographers, her mark on the East is the Aegean Sea: on the
West the Adriatic, which severs her from Italy; on the North the mountain
Hanus, which is reported (though falsely) to be of such height, that from the
top a man may descry Seas four several ways: and on the South the Meditertaneum
Ionium Seas.

(7) The Region thus limited was once as fertile, pleasant and rich, as any
part of the whole Continent: And by reason of her plenteous Rivers, and
commodious access for ships, from almost all Coasts, she could want no means to
export her own overplu^, or import foreign merchandise from all parts of the
known world: If at this day it appears not in that luster, no marvel.

Barbarus has segetes?
Impius hac tam culta nevalia miles habebat.
(8) And besides the base misusage of the mis-believing Turk, the very Natives
themselves are fallen from the noble disposition of their Predecessors into an
incredible sottishness: and those which before reckoned the rest of the earth
Barbarous in comparision to their polite Commonwealth, are now themselves sunk
below the envy of the meanest Nation, and become the most miserable object of
pity living upon the earth. Indeed they may hardly be said to live, for that
they take no farther care than barely to live. They are lazy beyond belief, and
ignorant almost beyond recovery: for they have now no means to bring their
children either to learning or manners. Not an Academy in all Greece. Their
carriage generally uncivil: their feasts riotous, and their mirth debaucht.
Their Wives are well-favoured, and so indeed they must be; for they use them no
longer as their Wives than they continue to their liking: when they once fade
they are put to the house drudgery. Their language is the same as heretofore
but rudely corrupted, though (as Maginus reports) it differs not so much as the
Italian from the pure Latin. They have no habit almost proper; but those which
serve the Turk wear their fashion: the rest which are under the Venetian,
observe them in their apparel; for they are slaves to both in their whole
course.

(9) Yet they retain still a show of the Christian Religion which was here
settled by Tim^thy, to whom Saint Paul wrote two Epistles, and was after in the
Primitive time, professed by diverse learned and reverend Divines of their own
Nation, which are with us received as Authenick Fathers of the Church: S.
Chrysostom, Basil, the Gregory's, Nysene and Nazianzen, were all Grecians.

The government Ecclesiastical is in the power of four Patriarchs: (1) of
Constantinople, and his extends over all Greece, Muscovie, Sclavonia, Dacia,
part of Poland, and all the Islands of the Adriatic and Aegean Seas: (2) Of
Alexandria, and his over Ae^^pt and Arabia (3) of Jerusalem, and his over the
Greeks in Palestine. (4) Of Antioch, and his over Syria* Armenia and Cilicia.

(10) The people of this Country were heretofore distinguished by their
principal dialects. And those were the Attike, Ionike, Dorike, and Aeolike. A
fifth there was which was called a mixed or common dialect. Each differed from
other no more than we do from our selves in several parts of our Kingdom. But
this division will hardly reach the limits, which bounds Greece according to
our description: we will adhere rather to that of our modern Geographers, whith
reckon to Greece six Provinces. (1) Thrace. (2) Macedonia. (3) Albania. (4)
Epirus. (5) Achaia, (6) Pel^ponnesus, and (7) The Islands.

(11) Thrace is the most Northern tract of all Greece, and lies on the South
of the mountain Hemus, on the North of the Aegean Sea, on the West of the
Pontus Euxinus, and East of Macedonia. It has the name from the sharpness of
the air: and indeed it is very unpleasant for the most part, and too unnatural
to its own fruit, that it scarce ever ripens what it brings forth. The people
are many, and those very strong, ^ierce and heady; and most impatient of
government or discipline: and by this means they have seldom had success in
their battles, whereas if they could have been brought to a joint force it is
said they would have been invincible.

(12) Part of this Nation was heretofore persuaded, that their ancestors did
not at all die neither should they; but pass only out of this world into
another to their supposed god Za^m^xis, once a scholar of Pythagoras, who when
he had persuaded them into this Religion, seemed wonderfully to vanish out of
their sight, and appeared not any more: but left them fully possessed that he was
the deity, which must after a time entertain them. And this they expected with
that great joy, that as often as one died, in stead of mourning they set forth
games and feasts to congratulate his freedom from the troubles of this earthly
condition: and the wife only, whom he loved best (for they had many) was
thought worthy to be killed by her best friends at her husbands grave, that she
might bare him company in the other world: the rest bewailed their neglect, and
the residue of their life was to them as a disgrace. When a child was born,
neighbors were called to bemoan his entrance into a multitude of calamities:
and in course they reckoned up, what he was to pass before he could go to their
go^ Zalmoxis: for they acknowledged no other: but blasphemed and shot arrows
against the Heavens as often as they heard it thunder.

(13) Their Kings, says Quadus, are chose by suffrage: and those especially
which are best known to be most mild; not young, nor yet a Father of any
children: for they will not by any means admit that their government should
become hereditary. If the Prince himself offend, he shall not escape their
Laws, even to death: yet no man may set a hand to his execution, but by a
common desertion he is allowed no necessaries to live, and therefore must needs
die. Here once reigned Polymnestor, which murdered Priam's youn^ est son
Polydorus: And Tereus, and Diomedes, etc.

(14) This Province is now called Romenia, and takes that name from her chief
City Constantinopolis or Roma nova: heretofore Bizantium, of great fame from
her first building, and that was six hundred threescore and three ^ears before
the Incarnation: her founder Pousanias a Lacedemonian. She stands so
commodiously and commands the Euxine Sea, the Propontis and Hellespont, that
there can hardly be any passage to or fro betwixt Europe and Asia in those
parts, without her leave. And (likely enough) that for this cause Constantine
the great when he divided the Empire, chose this for his Eastern feat: and in
the year three hundred fifteen enlarged it with magnificient buildings, and
decked her in the appa^el of old Rom^: from whence he translated hither many
ancient and costly monuments, and fain would have removed her name, but that
his Subjects out of their endeared affection to their Prince, would hear no
other than Constantinopolis the City of C^nstantine. It is in compass eighteen
miles, contains commonly seventy thousand Inhabitants, though almost every
third year she be visited with a great Pestilence. The other eminent Cities of
Thrace are Abdera, Nicopolis, Philopolis, Hadrianopolis, Trajanopolis,
Phinopolis, Pemithus, etc. The Chersonesus over against Troas in Asia, is
called Saint George his Arm: and in it stands Sestos, where the love passed
betwixt Leander and Here,

(15) Mac^donia is on the West of Thrace, East of Albania: North of Epirus and
Achaia, and So^th of Mysia superior. It had this name from Macedo, grandchild
to Deucalion, as Solinus gives him. The Land is fertile and pleasant: rich with
Mi^^^ of gold and silver: and the quality of the Inhabitants were heretofore
answerable. Their disposition noble and free: Their Laws good, and those their
own: their attempts great, and their Kings valiant and victorious. The most
renowned were Philip, and (the greatest one that ever the world knew) Alexander
his son, which conquered the world, and set here the Throne of the third Empire.

(16) There are many under-Provinces in Macedonia. The principal is Thessalia,
and here stands Triaeca the Bishops See of Heliodorus author of that excellent
fiction of Theagines and Cariclea, though he were too much wedded to a youthful
fable, when he chose rather to forgo his charge, than disavow his work. And
here likewise is the Pharsalis, famous for the great battle betwixt Caesar and
Pompey. The other Provinces are Aemathia, Bi^^ia, Pelasgia, Eshotis, and
Phthiotis, which yield matter for many of their stories; and are famous for
diverse Hills and Rivers often mentioned in our ancient Poets. The chief are
Olympus, Pelion and Ossa, with their delicious valley Tempe, Pi^dus, Nymphaus,
At^^s, etc. The Rivers Axius and Erigonius. The chief City in the whole Region
was (in Augustus his time) Thessalonica, now Salonike, comparable they s^y in
state and merchandise to Naples in I^aly.

(17) Albania is on the West of Macedonia, and East of the Adriatic Sea: North
of E^irus, and South of Sclavonia. Her chief Cities Albanopo^is and Duractinum,
he^etofore called Epida^num and Croya. The whole Country was invaded by
Amurath, ^n^ recovered by George Castriot or Scanderbeg, the terriblest enemy
that ever the Turk had.

(18) Epirus in her name carries no more than a firm land; and is a part (as
most esteem it) of Albania, but indeed lies somewhat more Southward than
Abania propria: on the East she is divided from Achaia, by the River Achelous,
and on the West is bounded with Mon^es Acroceraunii; on the South with the
Ionian Sea. It was of old divided into C^aonia, which took her name from Chaon,
the brother of Helenus: and Acarnania which is now called Graecia the less. The
Country was fertile and populous, but at this day lies wast, and breeds better
Cattle than men: especially, Bulls, Sheep, and Dogs of wonderful bigness: among
the rest extraordinary Mares, which from thence were called Eporiticae. It was
the Kingdom of Pyrrhus, and of later years was governed by George Castriot.

(19) Achaia is upon the South of Thessalia, East of the River Achelous; West
of the Aegean Sea, and North of Peloponnesus. It contains many famous
Provinces, the chief are (1) Attica, and her prime City was Athens now Setines:
she had her first name from Minerva, whom they honored as their peculiar
goddess: as being at that time accounted the best learned among the Heathens:
and excelled as well in Martial affairs. In a word, they came short to no^e in
wealth, State Policy, and what else might make a people happy above expression:
so Pliny sets her forth. The second Priovince is Daris, a tract near Parnassus
Mount, and mother to the most elegant Greek Dialect. (3) Aetolian and in this
the City C^lynan. (4) Locris, and Regio Opuntiorum, her chief City Naupactus,
and the famous Lepanto. (5) Phocis, which can glory in nothing more than the
City Delphi, where the Oracle of Apollo gave answer (for many years) to the
silly Idolaters. (6) Beotia, and in this stood Thebes. (7) Megaris, her
principal City Megara, and from hence was the Se^ta Megarica, of which Euclide
was chief.

(20) P^loponnesus is a Peninsula on the South of Graecia, and joined to the
rest by an Isthmu^, which is not above 5 miles in breath from one Sea to the
other, insomuch that it has been sometimes attempted to be dug through, and
was began by Nero but the work was found not worth the charge and trouble. It
wa^ fenced cross with a strong wall and five Castles; which being once
destroyed was the second time by many hands erected in five days, and called
Hexamillium.

(21) This Peninsula is indeed the fortress of all Greece: and though it wants
much of the ancient glory, which it might well vaunt in the time of Agamemnon,
Menelaus, Ajax, and the rest: yet is she not so much to be contemned as other
parts of this ruinated Co^ntry. However the Turk is her Master, and she his now
called generally Morea.

(22) Her Provinces were (1) Corinthia near the Isthmus, and is named from her
chief City Corint^us: which being ^^red, melted sundry metals into a confused
medly, and made up the Aes Corinthium, held more precious than any other, of
its own simple nature. (2) Argia, her Commonwealth was heretofore of great
note, and her City Argos is at this day held pleasant and well seated. And in
this likewise stood Epidamnus. (3) Laconia to the South of the Peninsulae: her
Chief City was Lacedemonia, once Sparta: when Lycurgus gave his Laws, and is
now called Misithra. (4) Messeni^, and her chief Cities are Messene, Methone,
Corone, etc. (5) Elis. (6) Achaia propria: and here stood Aegina, and Aegium,
and Patras. (7) Arcadia once Pelasgia, in the Cente^ almost of Peloponnesus,
full of pleasant Mountains, fit for pasture: and is therefore made the
Shep^erds scene in our renowned Sir Philip ^idney's poetical story. Her
principal City is Megalopolis.

(23) Thus have we passed the Continent of Greece, and want co^ing only to give
m^ Reader a brief survey of the Islands which lie round in the Adriatique,
Mediterane^n, Ionian, and Aegean seas. But by reason the compass is so large,
and the number so great: the little space which is left me will scarce admit
more than their bare names, which I will set down, with reference to their next
neighboring Provinces, as I have described them in the Continent.

(24) First then near Pelep^^^esus, and the Ionian sea toward Macedonia and
Epirus, the chief ^re Aegina, Cithera, the St^oph^des, Z^^yn^bus, Cephalonia,
Ithac^, E^^inades, Corcyra or Corphin and Saph^, etc. In the Aegean sea
belonging to Greece, are the Cyclades and Sporades, and over against Thrace
Thassus, Samothracia, Imbrus, and Lemnos Vulcani. Near Macedonia, Pepanthos,
Scopelos, Scyathos, Scyros, A^^onnesus, Cycinnethus, Dromus, Seraquinus. Near
Achaia is Euboea now Megreponte a very large Island; and not far distant
Andros, Tenos, Delos, Rhene, Melos, and many others.

THE ROMAN EMPIRE
Petrus Karius Caelavit
map of the Roman Empire
The Description of the Roman Empire.
VIRTVTE Duce, comite Fortuna, is the word of most Historians, upon the low
birth and quick growth of the state of Rome. For had not matchless prowess, and
infallible success joined in their full strength to make up an Empire for the
world to admire: I see not how she could in so few years raise her self from so
small grounds, to so high a pitch of lu^tre, as set the whole earth at a gaze,
and found us all business enough for a time, to do little else but ob^erve her
actions. Look back to Romulus her first founder; you shall find him no better
man, than the base son of a licentious Vestall; his father not truly known to
this day, but simply surmised to be Mars the god of War. His mother Rhea burnt
by law for that very fact, in which she conceived him; and himself an outcast,
exposed with his brother Rhemus, to be torn by the wild Beasts. Little hope we
see left, for such a Nation to spring from their loins, had not Fortune lulled
them in her own lap, and delivered them by mere chance, into the hands of one
Faustulus the Kings Shepherd: when they were thus found, the best Writers
afford them no better Nurse, than the Shepherds wife, a known Strumpet, who for
her insatiate lust was called Lupa, and might perhaps occasion the fable of the
Sh^w^lf: She suckled them with no choicer milk than she did her own homespun
brats; nor were they bred under Faust^lus to any better fortune than the
Sheep-hook: yet no sooner the yonkers were start up to the knowledge of their
true birth, but they stripped themselves out of their disguise, revenged their
mothers death upon their usurping Uncle Ae^ilius Sylvius, rest^red the Latin
Kingdom to the rightful Numitor, and erected a new Empire for their own
posterity.

(2) These were the progeny of Aeneas, who arrived here from the Tr^jan War,
and made love to Lavinia, da^ghter to Latinus King of the Laure^ti^i. The great
combat betwixt him and Turn^s the Rutilian, grew upon no other terms than for
her fair looks, which he could not, nor did he peaceably enjoy, till he had
vanquished his corrival, and then he soon fastened himself in the right to that
Kingdom, and not long after p^ssest it, about the year of the world two
thousand seven hundred eighty seven. It would not be much to our purpose, to
lead you down step by step through the succession, till we come to Romulus. All
before him, were before this Empire had Being; and therefore out^eacht the line
of my story: yet this in brief, we may recount here, that he was the 17 from
Aeneas, and founded Rome in the year 3198.

(3) The platform was first cast in a figure of a quadrangle upon the mons
Palatinus, for the other six noted hills were not then taken in, but added in
after ages, by their several Kings. It was began (it seems) but slight, and
the walls raised not very high when Rhemus could skip them over, in contempt of
his brot^ers poor enterprise: but the mock cost him his life; he was slain by
Ro^ulus: and he now left the sole founder to give name to this new building.

(4) Romulus then is their first King, and takes upon him the government of
such discontented and mas^erless young Shepherds, as he had raked together to
people his Commonwealth; a crew so scor^ed of their neighbors, that their
daughters denied to join in marriage with such ^ refuse of men: so that by this
means this up-start Nation was like to sink in the birth, for mere want of
issue to continue their succession: And without doubt themselves had seen their
last man born, had not their own wit bestead them more, than the women's love.
For when they saw their worth was not sufficient to woe fairly with effect,
they proclaimed a day for solemn sports, which they presu^ed (and rightly too)
would call in their borders of both sex: and for that purpose had made
provision of strength to force the women to their lust, whom the^ could not
enti^e to their lawful e^braces. The plot held, and the Sabi^^s bear the name
to have suffered most in that brutish treache^y; yet others (it se^^s) ^^d
their part too in the injury, and jointly beset them round with strong enemies,
which the R^mans notwithstanding shook off with that ease and undaunted
courage, that the rest were glad at last to yield them truce for their own
quiet, and assist them too in their ^nsuing Conquest.

(5) The City at this time was not above two miles in circuit; the Inhabitants
not much above the proportion of that little ground; till Romulus had built an
Asylum, a R^fuge for debaucht people; where the servant might secure himself
from his Master, the ^urderer from his Magistrate, the debtor from his arrest,
and each fault from his punishment: and then he soon called in incredible
swarms (such as they were) of Latins, Tuscaines, Trojans, Arcadians, and made
up a Miscellany of people, each brought in the proper sins of his own Country,
and have there left them as a testimony of their ancest ^rs to this day.

(6) This policy might seem good at first to make up his number; For who else
(but such) would leave a settled state (though mean) in a well ordered Kingdom,
to apply himself to novel^es of so uncertain event? But in a few years their
King found that there was more need of a Pistrinum to correct, than an Asylum
to shelter his offenders, and therefore was fo^ced to make settled Laws for his
Commonwealth; and cull out a certain number of the best ordered, to assist him
with their c^unsell, and see execution duly performed upon the rest. These be
called Patres or Senatores, and were at first not above one hundred, chosen out
of the elder, w^alth^er, and gravest Citizens, who were either called Patricii,
for that they had m^st of them many children, or Patroni, as being the Patrons
of the Plebeii or poorer sort, which were therefore often times called Clients,
as having no business of act^on in the Commonwealth, scarce so much as to
require their own right, unless under the protection of some one or other of
the Patricii; yet afterward both the number of Senators was increased to 200*
and at last 300. and the Plebeii too in time had the privilege to be elected
into their society,

(7) No sooner Romulus had thus set the form, but while he was yet in speech to
the people at a set ass^mbly, a tempest rose, the skies darkened, and ^ trick
was found to juggle him clean out of their ^ight, as if at this instant he had
been rapt into the Heavens. He past not (it seems) to lose his life, so that he
might gain the opinion of a God. For so the Romans believed; and it was
confirmed by one Proculus, who pretended to have seen him after his change, and
received a charge from his dei^y, that he should be thence forward honored in
Ro^e as her tutelare. In brief, the more likely sur^ise of his manner of death
is, that in the storm he was cut in pieces by some of his Senators, who had
either suffered under his tyranny, or at least had hope to ^aise themselves by
his fall.

(8) Their second King was Numa Pompilius, religious in his kind beyond all
others, and ordained in Rome a set form to worship their gods, invested Priests
and South-sayers to perform their rites, and fortel things to come: committed
the Vestal fire to Virgins, to be kept a^ a perpetual watch over the Empire, in
an emulation to the bright stars of heaven, which were never extinguished: and
in brief, civilized the people so far as they began now, (and scare till now)
to have a sense of mo^ral goodness, a moderate love to themselves mixed with
some equity toward others.

(9) Their third Tullus Hostilius stirred them up first with the desire of true
honor, and enabled them by martial discipline to provoke the Albanes, a Nation
then of long standing, and great fame through most parts of Italy; yea so equal
was their prowess, that open war might well lessen their several strengths, but
not determine the conquest, till by the tried fortune of the Horatii, and
Curiatii, brothers on each party, it stoopt at last to Rome, beyond her own
hope: for she had at last but one Champion left of her Horatii, against the
three others, who were notwithstanding by a feigned flight of their own
adversary drawn severally out into single combat, and successively fell by the
sword of the Roman victor. Alba was now carried captive to Rome, and gave up
her honors as a Trophy to this new born Empire.

(10) Ancus Martius their ^ourth King enlarged her walls, joined those parts of
the City, which were before served by the River Tyber, with a large bridge.
Their next Tarq^inius Priscus was a Corinthian, and knew well how to use his
Greek wit, with a Roman valor. Nor peace nor war could ^ver-march him* He
triumphed over the Tu^cains, and was the first which entered the City in
Chariotroyal, drawn with four horses, and first indeed that ordained the
vestments, and ensigns of honor, which were after in frequent use, to stir up
the soldier to deserving actions.

(11) Their sixth Servius T^llius was so d^x^erous in his rule, that no person
past him almost without equity of his wealth, years, worth, employments, for
which special purpose he distinguished the people by several Tribes; and
overlookth all (by this method) with as much ease, as a nimble housewife does
her private family.

(12) Tarquinius Superbus was the seventh and last King, proud and cruel, yet
that too, though it cost him his Crown, enlarged the Kingdom to the Romans: for
it prevailed upon many strong Provinces of Italy, which they after enjoyed with
better hearts, and ruled with more equity, than he used in the unjust
oppression of his neighbors. His name was grown odious when the lust of his
Son Tarquinius wronged the chaste Lucretia, both together stirred the people to
dis^obe him of his Title, and bethink themselves of some other form of
government, which might sound more of the Roman liberty.

(13) This variety had took up hitherto scarce 245. years since the City was
first built, a time too short for her greatness, if we compare her with the
progress of other Nations: yet to her own ensuing fortunes, it is esteemed but
her childhood, her infancy: while she had not yet spoke, nor the world well
heard of her actions, farther than her own home, and her Countries near about.
She began now to feel her strength, and when she had first freed her self from
the oppression of her home bred Tyrant; she soon after spread her Arms over all
Italy, and her fame through most parts of the world. Her power was now no more
at the disposing of one King, but designed over into the hands of two aged and
wise Citizens, of their own (though the best) rank: and this they were to use,
rather as ^eo^^es in trust, than free possessors; wherefore the Romans baulkt
their insolency, which their last King had before practiced, both in the name
of their new Governors, for they were called only Consules a Consulendo; and
in their term of Government, for it became now annual, which was not before
limited unless by death: and lastly, by their ensigns of state, their twelve
lictors and fasces, which were not allowed to both, but to each in turns for
their several month. And this went on without breach almost six years, till the
Romans thought fit to correct their Laws by the Greek Copy; and therefore
deputed three of their best esteemed subjects to see Athens, to peruse their
orders and customs, of which the world had then a great opinion: for it was
indeed the mother of learning.

(14) They returned them written at first in ten tables made of brass; two more
were soon after added, and together were distinguished from their own municipal
laws by the name of Leges 12. tabularum. The Consuls power was now taken off;
and thus was their rule of justice put into the hands of ten, whom they called
Decemviri. Each ruled in his turn, and (for that course) had a power wellnigh
as large as their Kings or Consuls, else differed little at other times from a
private Roman. This began some 303 years after their first founder, and had
continued but three, when Appius laid false claim to Virginia for his
bond-maid, that indeed he might dishonor her as his strumpet. By this means he
doubly provoked the Commons, both with her injuries, and her fathers sorrow,
who was forced to murder his own daughter, to quit her from the lust of the
Decemviri: and therefore they took revenge, not upon him only, but his office;
abrogated the Decemviratus and returned the authority into the hands of Consuls
as before: yet so, as often times by intercourse the Tribuni militum put in for a
consulary sovereignty, and was admitted to the same dignity, though not the
name, which the Patricii only referred to themselves as their royalty. It was
first procured by the importunate motion of the Commons, that they might be
equally capable of the Consulship. To this, though the nobility would not give
their full assent in all circumstances, yet they were constrained for their own
peace to yield in effect, and mince it with another title of Tribuni plebis
Consulari pot^state.

(15) Under these forms of government for three hundred years after the fall of
Tarquinnius to Appius Claudius, and Q* Fulvius Coss. They were still in growth,
but not yet come to their state of honors: and therefore Florus rightly styles
it the youth of Rome, in comparison to the age of man. In this while their most
famous stories are the war with Porsenna, some eight years after their first
Consuls: the creation of Dictators and Tribunes of the People within twenty;
the injuries of M. Coriolanus, and attempt against his own Country not long
after: the construction of many set Laws, which continued in force to after
ages: the Lex ag^aria, Publia, de Aventino, Tarp^ia, of the twelve Tables,
Clodia, Ae^^ilia, de Ambitu, de Mulctis, etc. The Censors first created about
68 years after the Regifugium: the conspiracy of the servants some 92 after:
many victories in the interim, and Rome her self at last taken by the Gauls,
but freed by Camillus about the 120. Marcus Curti^s casts himself into the pit
to preserve his Country: more Laws are made; the first Punik^ war waged, all
within 120 and odd years after Rome was surprised: some 28 after that, the
Bellum Ligusticum and Ianus Temple the second time shut: then the Bellum
Illyricum, Gallicum Ci^alpinum, and (the last of this age) the second Punike
war.

(16) By this time Italy was subdued, and now she swept on with full sail, and
confirmed strength: and about twenty after was able to resist the Macedonian,
made war with Perses, set on to the third Punike war; wasted Carthage, and then
Numantea: took Arms against Iugurtha, all in less compass of years than one
hundred; and about this time was the Eagle took up by Marius for the Roman
ensign. Soon after was the Bellum Marsicum, and Mithridaticum; Catilines
conspiracy, and the noble acts of those great Heroes, Scylla, and Cicero, C^s^r
and Pompey, and the rest, which removed the Greek Empire to Rom^, and made her
the seat of the fourth Monarchy about seven hundred and three years after the
City was built, forty eight before Christ.

(17) Hitherto (though with some change and curb) they continued the succession
of Consuls, till Julius Caesar returned from Spain with victory over Pompeys
sons: and then the Senate, expressing more worship to him than foresight of
their own future mischief, invented new titles of singular honor, call him
Pater patriae C^nsul in Decennium, Dictator in perpetuum, Sacrosanctus and
Imperator, all which himself made good, not in bare name only, as perhaps they
meant, but in short space gathered a power equal to their fla^tery, and by his
own strength kept, what was only thei^s to give till by Brutus and Cassius he
was slai^ in the Senate, and then the rule fell for a short while to a
Triumviratus which began and ended with Octavius Caesar, A^tonius and Lepidus*
After ten years the whole Empi^e was left to Octtavius, and his ti^les were
A^g^stus Caesar, and Imperator: they continue to his successors to this d^y.

(18) Rome as yet sinks not in her glory, but goes fairly on with full victory,
till the Imperial seat was removed to Biza^tium, and after divided into the
East and Wes^ by Thedo^ius. Betwixt these whiles was a great part of the world
still called in, to enlarge their Domini^ns, and our selves among the rest,
though with some difficulty, were forced to yield Brit^in a Province to C^sar,
and the Roman Empire. For let us take her limits at their best advantage; and
she was on the West bounded with the Atlantic Ocean; on the East with the
Riv^r Tigris in Asia; on the North with Rhene and Danubius in Europe, and on
the S^uth with the Mount Atlas in Africa: They contain these several Provinces,
almost in order (of time) as they were subdued. Italy, par^s of Africa, Spain,
and Germany, Britain, Illiricum, Liburnia, Dalmatia, Achaia, Macedonia, and
Dardania, Mesia, and Thracia, Pontus, Armenia minor, Mesopotamia, Parthia,
Arabia, Iudaa, Cilicia, Syria, Egypt, Cantabria, Austria, Alps Maritimae,
Rhetium, Noricum, Panonia, Armenia major, and the Islands round: so Ortelius
Marshals them.

(19) We m^st omit for want of space many emi^ent turns of Fortune which Rome
suffered in these interims, and take her now as at that time she was in her
^ull height of honor; in compass ^^fty miles, seated on the River Tyber
fifteen from the Sea: on her walls were raised 740 turrets, fit to receive
provision in war for defense of the City in time of siege. Livy numbers her 37
gates, and her foundation was pitched upon seven hills: (1) Palattinus, which
(as some say) gave the name to our Kings Palaces. (2) Capi^olinus, upon which
was built the Capitol, delivered from the Gauls by the gaggling of Geese. (3)
Vimi^alis. (4) Aventinus, from whence their condemned persons were cast into
the River Tyber. (5) Esquilinus. (6) Coelius, where once stood the chief
Councel-house for the Senators. (7) Quirinalis. You may not expect here an
exact description; take at large the speech of the Emperor Constantius, when
with wonder he beheld the Campus Martius, the Sepulcher of Augustus, the Forum,
Temples, Bathes, Theaters, the Ar^us triumpbales, Aquaducts, stateness, and
infinite other Monuments, he gave a brief epitomy of her antique glory; that
Nature had spent her self in the making up of that one City, as if we might not
hope to see the like in after-ages: and true enough it is, that she could not
long support her self in that state of honor, but (as a string stretched to the
utmost) cracks on the sudden.

(20) No sooner she was once divided, but she lay open as a prey to the Goths,
Huns, Vandals, Alani, Burgundians and Lombards: all now left of the Empire, is
almost a naked title, and that scarce heard of in Rome, for it has its seat in
Germany, and is conferred upon some Christian Prince by the suffrages of the
seven Electors. The spiritual (1) Archbishop of Me^tz, Chancellor of the
Empire through all Germany. (2) Archbishop of Cullen. Chancellor of the Empire
through I^aly. (3) Archbishop of Triers, Chancellor of the Empire through all
France. The Temporal. (4) Count Platine of Rhene, Arch-sewer to the Emperor.
(5) Duke of Saxony, Lord Ma^shal. (6) Marquess of Brandenberg, chief
Chamberlain; and (7) in case of equality of voices among the other ^ix, the
King of Bohemia casts the Diadem into whose lap he pleases.

(21) For the state of Rome as now it is, and what else concerns the Empire
since the removal of the seat royal, I refer my Reader either to the
descriptions of Italy and Germany, or at least to some other modern Authors,
who have scope to write more at large: my intent here was briefly to set down
the beginning, increase, top and limits of the ancient Roman government.

GERMANIA
Petrus Caerius Caelavit
map of Germany
The Description of GERMANY.
GERMANY is continued with Belgia, and lies next Eastward in our course
toward Asia. We shall find them often times no otherwise distinguished, than by
the terms of higher and lower, greater and l^sser Germany. And indeed as this
is the larg^st portion of the whole Region, which is known by that name: so is
it the largest Region of our whole quarter, which is known entirely by any one
name.

(2) As for her antiquity; it does not only compare her to the rest of Europe;
but compares Europe her self with any other part of the second world, which
accounts her years but from Noah's Flood, or the confusion of Tongues. For this
purpose we had before occasion, in our general Descriptions, to mention the
original of the German Kingdoms: and that (as you may remember) was drawn by
Chronologers from Tuisc^ (some say) the son of Noah, which lived soon after the
world was repaired, and began his Empire about thirty years from the fall of
B^bel.

(3) It appears sufficiently upon the record of received Historians, that in
the time of their Idolatry, they worshipped one Thyst or Tuisco, as a God,
which sprang from the earth: and to this day, as I hear, there is a street
about Culle^ called Deuts^h, and is thought as yet to retain a sound of the
name of Tuisco: for there he is supposed to have kept his residency. Whether
thus or no, I leave to ^y Authors proof, and my Readers judgment to believe or
reject as it shall seem best. All I can enforce i^, that doubtless the Germans
were an anient people: and that they might challenge, had they no other
testimony (...) show for it, than her very names of Tuiscia, or T^^^scke,
Theus^hland, Al^ania, and Te^toni^, by which she was known, in several ages,
long before the Romans gave her this last app^lla^ion (...) (...).

(4) Tuisci^, Teutsch, or Teuschlant, was received from her first King, and
Almania from her second, the son of Tuisc^, who (as their story gives it with
equal credit as it does the rest) was likewise worship^ed for a God, by the
name of Mannus: The same account is rendered for Tutonia, from T^to a Captain of
the Germans; and their ninth from Tuisco. Under these they continued till the
Romans ^ntred after their Conquest over the Gauls: for whose likeness to them
both in feature, and c^ulor, in goodly portraiture and carriage of their wars,
they were from that time called (...), as if broth^rs to the Gauls. Yet there
are too, which compound the name of the (...) words G^r or G^r, which
signifies all or wholly, and Man, which retains with us its prime
significa^ion of (...): as if they were all men to the proof: or, as other
interpret, as if they were a mixed Nation o^ all s^rts of men from several
Countries.

(5) But this last agrees not with the conjecture of some G^ographers, that
(...) has not ch^nged her Inhabitants since she was first possessed: (...) And
this indeed differs not much from the report of (...) and other ancient
Writers. But the reason I hold not good: for ^owso^ver it might be true in
(...) times of some, and the most part perhaps of (...) (as it was then (...))
that it was (...) yet now she has changed her (...)

(6) By her first Geographers she was (...) tongue and Empire exercised over
the Region of Prussia. Southward she reaches beyond Danubius to the very
Alps which border upon Italy. North^ ward she has ever kept her own, but has
been curbed indeed from seeking new Kingdoms in that tract, by the main Ocean,
which divides her in part from Swevia, Norway, etc. And to these limits we
apply our Description. No marvel^ if it give her more honor, than she had in
former times. For her compass now is reckoned to be 2600 English miles. Her
ground fertile enough of it self: and yet besides enjoyes the benefit of many
Navigable Rivers, which enrich her with traffic from other Kingdoms.

(7) Those of greatest fame are (1) Danubius the largest of Europe, called, by
Pliny, and others Ister: It takes in sixty Navigable Rivers; and is at last
discharged by many passages into the Pontus Euxinus. (2) Rhene, which has its
rising from the Alps, and runs into the German Ocean. From thence have we, our
best Rhen^sh Wines: and upon his banks s^ands the City Strasburge. (3) Ama^us
Fms, which glides by W^stphalia into the German Sea. (4) Maemu Megu, whose head
is in the Mountains of Bo^emia, and from thence passes by Francfort into the
German sea. (5) Albis Elve, which rises from the eleven Fountains meeting into
one, about the Sylva Hircinian. (6) Odeca, which has not his passage
immediately into the Sea, but in^o the River Albis. The middle mark of this
Country is the Kingdom of ^ohemia, encompassed with the Sylva Hircinia.

(8) The chief commodities of Germany are Corn, Wine, Salt, Metals of all
sorts, Fruits good store, Safron, etc. The Air wholesome, her Bathes healthful,
her Gardens pleasurable; her Cities fair, her Castles strong, and her Villages
very many, and well peopled.

(9) The Inhabitants have put off their ancient rudeness, as the Country her
barrenness. They are as goodly of person as ever, as stout as ever, and far
more civil than in the time of the Romans. It seems they were then esteemed
but an ignorant and simple people: more able to fight than to m^nage a battle.
They were ever hardy enough, but wanted Commanders of their own, of skill and
judgment. Since they had commerce with other Nations: and have suffered the
upbraid (asit were) of their Predecessors dullness: they have been (in a manner)
shamed out of it, and are now become, rather by industry than wit, a most
ingenious people, and skilful in the Latin, Greek, and Hebrew learning: famous
beyond any others in Europe, unless Belgia, for the invention of many notable
and ^seful Engines. The Gun and Gunpowder was first brought to light by one
Bertholdus Swart a Franciscan, which has almost put by the use of any other
warlike Instrument, in those parts of the world, where the practice is
perfectly understood. Generally the poorer sort are excellent Mechanics, and
the rest for the most part Scholars.

(10) It bred Albert^s M^gnus, Appean, Ge^ner, Munster, Luther, Vrsin,
Zuinglius, Scultetus, Iunius, Keckerman, and many others, in their several
kinds and Religions: some Papists, some Lutherans, some Calvinists, and among
the rest many Jews.

(11) The Government of this Germany is Imperial, as once that of Rome was,
though it flourish not in so full glory. The right descends not by succession;
nor is the election continued by the like suffrage as in old Rome. The power of
choice was conferred by Pope Gregory the tenth upon seven German Princes: three
Spiritual, and four Temporal. These are the Archbishop of Ment^, Chancellor
of the Empire through Germany: Archbishop of Cullen, Chancellor of the Empire
through Italy; Archbishop of Triers, Chancellor of the Empire through France*
The Temporal are, the King of Bohemea, who has the casting voice, only in case
of equality among the other six: his office is to be chief Cup^ bearer at the
great solemnity: Next him the Count Palatine of the Rhene, Arch-sewer to the
Emperor: Duke of Saxony, Lord Marshal: and Marquess of Brandenburge, chief
Chamberlain. Each of these perform his own Office in person, upon the day of
Inauguration. The Duke of Saxo^y bears the sword. The Count Palatine places
his meat on the Table. The King of Bohemia bears his Cup, and delivers it him
to drink: Marquess of Brandenb^rg serves him water to wash: And the three
Bishops bless his meat. He receives three Crowns, before he is fully settled
into the Majesty of the Empire. The first is of Silver, for Germa^y. The second
of Iron, for Lombardy. And the third of Gold, for the Empire: the last is set
on at Rome. For to this day it pretends to the name of the Roman Empire and
gives the title o^ Caesar, or Ro^ani imperii Imperator.

(12) The first which enjoyed the institution of Pope Gregory, was Radulphus
Nabs Purgensis, 1273. after twelve years interregnum. The last before him was
our Richard Earl o^^ Cornwall, and brother to Henry the third, King of England.
Since it has continued firm in this course of Election, howsoever not with
that liberty as was intended. For commonly the Emperor in being, while he has
his power about him, and can (at least) entreat, if not command the subjects of
the Empire, promise a choice of the Rex Ro^a^orum: who is no other than a
Successor designed to rule after his death, or resignation* And by this means
it has a long time continued in the house of Austria without any intermission.

(13) Thus we ^^e much plotting, great state, many ceremonies to the making up
of an Emperor, and yet when it is well weighed, it is little better then a
bare title. For howsoever these outward ob^ervances of the G^rman Princes make
show of an humble subjection to the Emperor: yet when it comes to tr^all, it
has very little to do in their Governments: But each of them takes upon ^im as
a ^ree and absolute Commander in his own Country: permits or suppresseth the
Beligion, which he ^ither likes or disl^kes: makes and abrogates Laws at
pleasure, stamps Coin, raises soldiers, and sometimes against their great
Master, as the Duke of Saxony against Charles the fi^th, and at this day diverse
others in defense of the Princ^ P^latine For of this q^ality and power there
are many Dukes, Marquesses, Counts, etc. besides 64 Franc Cities, which make
only some slight acknowledgment to the Emperor: appear perhaps at his
^arliaments; and (they say) are bound to ^urnish him at need with 3842 horse
(among them) and 16200 foot.

(14) The chei^est Regions of Germany, best known to us, and noted* by our
Geographers with a more eminent Character than the rest, are these: (1) East
Frizeland. (2) Westphalia. (3) Cullen. (4) Munster. (5) Triers. (6) Cleve. (7)
Gulick. (8) Hassis. (9) Alsatia. (10) Helvetia. (11) Turingia. (12) Brunswick
and Lunenburg. (13) Franconia. (14) Palaltinus Rh^ne. (15) Wittenburg. (16)
A^sper. (17) Bayden. (18) Mentz. (19) Bamberg. (20) Weirstberg (21) Saxonia
(22) An^^^t. (23) Mansfield. (24) Swevia. (25) Bavaria. (26) Brandenburg. (27)
Lusatia. (28) Tirolum. (29) Misnia. (30) Bohemia. (31) Silesia. (32) Moravia.
(33) Pomeranea. (34) Mecklinburg. (35) Austria.

15 East-Frezeland is on the West side of Germany, and bounded with the North
Sea. Her chief Town is Embden. (2) Wesphalia is on the South of East Frizeland.
It is most famous for Swine and excellent Bacon, which is esteemed with us, one
of our greatest dainties to commend a feast. Part of it belongs to the three
next Bishops, of Cullen, Munster, and Triers. (3) Cullen her Archbishop is an
Elector. The chief Town was called Vbiopolis, afterward Agrippina, and lastly
Cullen, from a Colony which was there planted by the French. It is a received
tradition among the Inhabitants that the bodies of the Wisemen, which came from
the East to worship Christ are here interred. None almost, but has heard of
the three Kings of Cullen. (4) Munster. Her chief City is Munster, notable
since the year 1533 at which time a company of brain sick Anabaptists named it
Jerusalem* and raised them a new Governor, by the title of the King of S^^^.
(5) Triers. Her Arch bishop an Elecator. Her chief City T^iers, of great
antiquity, founded by Trebeta the son of N^^ius; and ^^pport sacked by our Earl
Richard King of the Romans.

(16) (6) Clivia or Cleeveland, a Duke dome of that name. Her chief Cities are
Wesell, Emrick, and Cleve. Her commodity the Tophus-stone, of which they make
Cement (7) Iuliacum, Gulick, a Duchy. Her principal City is Aken or
Aquiseranum, where the Emperor receives his Silver Crown for Germany; and does
great worship to a clout, which they take to be our Saviors Mantle, in which
he was wrapped. (8) Hassia, a mountainous Country, but fruitful. Her Metropolis
Marpurgum an University: and the chief place of her Lant-grave is Cassels. It
comprehends likewise the Counties of Nass^w and Hanaw. (9) Alsatia, Her chief
City is Strasburg, famous for a Clock of wonderful art and a Tower of five
hundred seventy eight paces high. Other Towns here are of note, as Bing, Worms,
Confluence and Andernach. (10) Helvetia Swetzerland on the East of France, and
North of Italy. It contains thirteen Cantons: Zurich, Berne, ^^ ucerne, Vrenia,
Glavis, Zugh, Basell, Friburg, Vnderwalt, So^o^r, Shas^ha^^en, Ape^sol, and
Suits. Her chief Cities are Zurike or Tigurum, where Zuinglius was martyred;
and Seng^ll or Civitas Sancti Galli, and Ba^ell, where a general Council was
decreed to be above the Pope, in the year one thousand four hundred thirty one.

(17) Tari^gia. Her Prince a Lant-grave. Her ground though not of large extent,
nor above twelve German miles either in length or breadth (says Maginus) yet
it is very rich, it comprehends twelve Counties, as many Abbeys, a hundred
forty four Cities, as many Towns, above two thousand Viliages, two hundred and
fifty Castles. Her Metropolisis E^^ord (12) Brunswick on the East of
W^s^phali^, a Dukedom: whose principal Citi^s are Brunswick, H^l^erst^de,
Wol^heiton, and Luneburg, which gives title to an other Duk^dom, whose chief
Seat is Cella.

^18) (13) Franconia. I^ lies on the West of T^ringia, and joins to Hossia
Northward. The Inhabitants were converted to Christianity by Boniface. In this
Province stands Francfort, famous for her ^wo Marts every year, and Norem^erge;
within the Territories are comprehended the seven other which ^elong to this
section. (18) The Palatine of Rhene, some seventy two miles from North to
South, and from East to West nienty six. Her chief City is Heidelberge* Her
Prince an Elector, and has many more privileges than the other six. In the
vacancy he is Governor of a great part of Germany. (^^) W^tte^^^rge, The chief
Towns are Tubing an University, St^dgard, etc. (16) A^spech, a Marqui^a^e. Her
chi^f Town A^^pech. (17) Bad^n, a Marquisate, pleasant and fruitful, betwixt
the Rivers Rhene and N^ccar. Her chief Cities are (...) and Baden, in which
there be Bathes that cures many diseases. (18) Ment^, M^guntia, a Bishopric:
The Prince is a Spiritual Elector, and sits always at the right hand of the
Emperor. (19) Bamberg, a Bishopric of it self of large revenues. In this
stands Fochia, where, they say, Pontius Pilate Was born. (20) Weirstberg. Her
Bishop is entitled Duke of Franconia.

(19) (21) Saxony on the East of Hassia, and South of Brunswick, and North of
(...). In this Province was Luther born at Is^eben. Within her bounds are
likewise comprehended t^ese two other Principalities of Anhalt and Mansfield.
(22) Anhalt, whose Governor with great courage and power bore Arms in defense
of the Palatines right to the Kingdom of Bohemia. (23) Mans^^eld an E^rldom,
the more famous for the valiant acts of the present Count, who to this day wars
upon the Emperors party, in the behalf of the illustrious P^latine, and his
unparrelled ^ady Elizabeth, Sister to his royal Majesty of England.

(20) (14) Swevia on the South of Franconia. It is a Country full of people,
and those (...) goodly personage: great wit and valiant. In this Province is
the head of Danubius, and runs through the middle of the Country. Her chief
Towns are Vlme, Lendawe, and Auspurg, or Augusta Vindelicorum Norlingen, etc.
(25) Bavaria on the South of Bohemia and Franconia. There is both the upper and
lower Bavaria. Of the first, the chief Cities are Muchen, Ingolstade, Frising;
and about thirty four Towns more, equal to the most Cities of the lower
Bavaria: the principal are Ratisbone, Pat^vium, P^ss^n, Lanshutum, and
Salt^p^rge. In this City lies ^uried Paracelsus. (26) Brandenburg: on the East
of Saxo^y, a Marquisate of five hundred and twenty miles in compass. It was
heretofore inhabited by the Vandales. The Metropolis is Brandenburg, and
Francfort ad O^i^um: for so it is distinguished from the other Francfort in
Franconia, and Berlium. Her^ are fifty-five Cities, and sixty-four Towns. (27)
Lusatia, it looks Westward toward Saxony. The chief City is Gorlit^ia. (28)
Tyrolum, on the South of South of Bavaria, and East of Helvetia. Her chief
Cities are Oonipus, Inspruck, Br^ixen, Tridentum Trent, where the general
Council was held, one thousand five hundred forty six. (29) Misnia, on the East
of L^satia, a ^ruitfull Region. Her chief Ci^ies are Misnia, Dresden, Lipsin, a
place of learning, and Torga: many Writers place this Province with Saxony.

(21) (30) Bohemia, on the South of Saxony and Misnia, encompassed with the
Sylva Hircinia, a ^ruitfull and pleasant Country. It may deserve a particular
description of it self; and therefore I will mention it here with no other
solemnity, then I do the rest of Germany* Her Metropolis is Prague, which was
taken by the Imp^rialists in th^^ last quarrel, the King and Queen (being at
that time) in the Church celebrating Gods service, were forced suddenly to fly
for their safety into Sile^ia. (31) Sil^sia East^ward from part of Bohemia: two
hundred miles long, and eighty one broad, a fruitful Country: the people
valiant. Her principal Cities are Breselare, and Neisse. (32) Moravia, on the
East of Bohemia, and South of Silesia. Her chief Cities are Almusium; Olmutz
and Brin, (33) Pomerania. It is bounded on the East with I^tula; on the North
with the Baltic Ocean. Her Metropolis is Stetin Others ch^ef are Wol^^st,
Wallin, etc. On the West of this Region stands (34) Mecklingburg or
M^galop^lis, a place Provincial of it self, and has Towns of note, Mal^hawe,
Rostock etc.

(22) (35) A^stria, an Arch-Dukedome, it lies upon Hungary, and is esteemed by
the Germans the Easte^n b^^nd of the Empire. It was formerly called Pannonia
superior. It is a rich Country. Her chief Cities are Vi^nna, famous for beauty,
wealth, and learning: Emps, St. Leopald, etc. There are reckoned to this Region
the Provinces of Styria, Carinthia, Carinola, and by some Tirolum.

BOHEMIA
Petrus Kaerius Caelavit

The Description of the Kingdom of BOHEMIA.
IN our Description of Germany, we reckoned Bohemia, but as a Province among
the rest: and therefore she was mentioned there with no more solemnity, than
the other parts were. We purpose here to declare it an entire Kingdom of it
self: which besides her own compass (as she is most commonly limited by
Geographers) has under-subjects, Dukedoms, and Marquisates, such as do her
homage, and make her well worthy of a more particular History, than we had
before room for.

(2) The ancient Inhabitant of these parts was the Bemorum magna gens, as
Ptolomy calls it: and places it somewhat South, toward Danubius under Suna
sylva: After them, the Boii, a people of Gallia Lugdunensis, which had been
before conquered by Caesar (says Quadus) and packt over the Alps to seek them
a new seat in Italy. But, when they found the Romans too hot for their abode
there, they were forced to trudge farther, and to pass the River. Rhene into
Germany, as Strabo witnesses, where they found them a fit place to lurk in,
compassed with a large Wood called the Sylva Hircinia: and like enough they
joined in with the Bemi, to make up the name of Bohemia. But neither here did
they enjoy their peace long, for they were in time nestled out by a potent
people of Swevia, called Marcomanni: and they again had the like measure from
the Sclavonians, a barbarous crew, which came in upon them, under the conduct
of an exiled murderer of Croatia, one Zechius, about the year five hundred and
fifty.

(3) From that time there has been no general expulsion: but the present
Bohemians are the progeny of those Sclavonians, whose very language and customs
are in use among them at this day. Doubtless it was at first a rude
Commonwealth, that had no other Governors, but so ungoverned a multitude: for
so they continued above an hundred years after Zechius. But when they had for a
time endured the misery of such a confusion, they were content to agree upon
some one for their Prince, that might rule them: and the first which they
elected was Cro^us, a man of great esteem among them for his wisdom and
goodness.

(4) Till the time of Vratislaus it had the title of a Dukedom only. He was
the first King, and was created by Henry the fourth of Germany, Anno one
thousand eighty six. Yet after that again, for the succession of six Princes,
it was governed by Dukes. For the second King was Vladislaus, the third crowned
by Frederick the Emperor, in the year one th^usand one hundred fifty nine: and
the third, Primaslaus, crowned by the Emperor Phillip, one thousand one
hundred nienty nine: after six other Dukes from his Predecessor Vla^islaus the
third. It has been now long since fully settled into a Kingdom: and is the
title of the right noble Frederick Count Elector Palatine of the Rhene, and
husband to the illustrious Elizabeth, daughter to our late Sovereign King
James. They were both crowned at Prague, in the year one thousand six hundred
and nineteen: but have been enforced ever since to maintain their right by
continual wars against F^rdinand the second* who by virtue of an adoption which
declared him successor to Matthias, lays claim to the Crown of Bo^^mia. But
the ^as^ was before de^ided in their third Vladislaus, who though as deeply
(...) to the Kingdom, as (...) co^ld be: yet for that he had past no l^gall
^l^ct^on, acc^^ding to ^^^ir Cust^mes and Priviledg^s, he was deposed by the
States, and Vladisl^us chose in his room.

(5) There remains no great difficulty, concerning the name. It appears
suff^cien^ly to proce^d either from her first people, or first Prince, who (as
some report) was one Boemus. And it is worth observin^ that though this Land
has in sundry ages, being so oft^n ran^a^kt, and po^^st by s^rangers and
Tyrants, yet in her name she constantly preserves the memory only of her f^^st
Natives* and has not suffered that change, as we have done, from Albion to
Britain, from Britain to E^gland. And so indeed it is with almost all which
have been equally subject to the like Inva^^ons.

(6) The situation of this Kingdom is almost in the midst of Germany, and is
easily des^ried in ou^ common Maps, by the Hircinian Forest, held, in the
Romans time, to be nine days journey in breadth, and in length at l^ast forty.
So Caeser in his sixth Com. It ^oseth Bo^emia on every side, insomuch that (to
show) they are not unlike an A^phit^eater, it is M^ginus his comparison. The
several parts of th^s Wood are known by diverse names, which they take from the
Country adjacent. The portion North west, is by S^rabo called Ga^reta Sylva,
that South toward Danubius, Lu^a Sylva by Ptolomy, non S^lva Passarica: and so
the rest. Without this Wall of Bohemia (as Q^adus calls it) her limits are on
the West Franconia, on the North L^satia and Mis^ia: on the South ^avaria and
Austria: on the East ^oravia and Silesia. The figure of it is in a manner
circular, and the Diameter is esteemed three da^es journey to a quick
traveller. The circuit contains five hundred and fifty miles, of good ground
fertile and pleasant, enricht as well by her Rivers as Land commodities.

(7) Her principal are (1) Albis Elve, which has h^s rising in the Hircinian
Wood, and the name from eleven Fountains, which meet in o^e at the head of the
River. For Elve or Elbe in the German Tongue signi^ies eleven. It runs through
a great part of the Country, and by the chief City Prague, and at last vents it
self into the German Ocean. Of this Lucan thus: Fundat ab extremo flavos
Aquilene Suevos
Albis and indomitum Rheni caput --
(2) Multaria Mulda (3) Egra, which gives a name to a Town (4) Sass^va. (5)
Gisera. (6) Missa. (7) Vatto. They are received all into the River Albis, yield
excellent Salmon, and plenty And if we will believe report) there is often times
found in the sands, lumps of pure gold, which need no other refining, and very
precious shells of great value.

(8) It seems the water supplies that only defect which is to be found in their
Land. For it is to be observed to be full with Mines of all sorts of metals,
Gold only excepted. Their Tin was found out by an E^glish man of Cornwall, in
the year one thousand two hundred and forty; one belike which h^d been skilled
in that work, in his own Country: for it is said, That at that time there was
no Tin known elsewhere in E^rope. The earth gives good Corn, and their pastures
breed as good Cattle. There is Wood good store, as there are Woods which
harbor multitudes of wile Beasts, Fox^s, Bears, Hearts, Bulls, and others:
which afford them sport in the hunting, and meat for the best man^ Table. Among
the rest there is a wild Beast, which they call Lomi, armed by nature with a
strange defense against the hounds which ^ollow her: For they say, she has a
kind of bladder, hanging under her ^aws, which in the hunting she fills with a
s^lding hot water* and ^asts it upon the Dogs, with that nimbleness, that they
are not able to avoid or pursue her: but often times have their very hair ^all
off, as from a dressed Pig. The Co^n^ry is generally (...) in Saffron, and other
med^cinal drugs: Wine it has too, but not so kind or pleasi^g as in other
places: ^nsomuch that the richer sort furnish themselves out of A^stria,
H^ngary, and the Reg^on about, which they in lieu of it, supply with excellent
Beer. For they are held very good at the art of brewing, and not behind hand at
dr^nking when they have done. It is said (of the (...) sort I (...)) that if
once they set to a Ve^^el of good l^quor, they will not loo^e it t^ll they
(...) ^ound it ^^pty.

(...) before them, as often as he was heard (though in a dead sound) by the
enemy, whom he had so often crushed, while he was yet living.

(10) For matter of learning, they have not been very famous heretofore:
howbeit now, the better parts are not now behind with the other parts of
Germany. The chief of note, were John Huss^, and Hi^rome of Prague, two worthy
members of the Church: They were condemned for Heretics in the Council of
Constance, one thousand four hundred and fourteen, for attempting a reformation
of such errors, as they held not agreeable with the word of God. But yet their
sufferings could not dead the good seed which they had sown in the true
hearted. It lives still among them in some measure: though they have been often
assayed by strange Impostures in Religion, such as the heart of man could not
conceive, without a strong and extraordinary working of that great Deceiver.

(11) I cannot pass the most wicked cousenage of Picardus, who pos^est great
multitudes of these silly people, with an opinion, that he could recall them to
that perfect state in which Adam was created: placed them in an Island for that
purpose, which he called Paradise, caused them to walk naked, and named this
Sect Adamites. Horrible sins were committed under that pretense, promiscuous
whoredom and incest at their very Divine Service. It is feared that at this
day, there are many secret professors, which live under ground, meet at their
solemnities, have their prayers framed to their own humor: and when the Priest
pronounces the words of Genesis (as his custom is) Crescite, and
multipli^amini, and replete terram, the lights are suddenly pop 't out, and
without any respect had to alliance or kindred, or reverence to their exercise,
they mingle like Beasts; and when they have acted their wickedness, and are
returned to their seats, the Candles are again lighted, and they fall to their
pretended prayers, as if there had been no harm done.

(12) The King is one of the seven Electors of the Emperor: and in case the
other six be equally divided, he gives the suffrage, which carries it. It is
to be thought, that his power was conferred upon (...) not without great
counsel, and good reason. For (besides that the place it self is by nature
strong) the people to have a special inbred love to Germany, and defense of her
liberties. At Coronation he is Cup Bearer, and performs it himself in person,
if he bepresent. His revenues are cast up to be three Millions of Crowns, which
are not gathered all within the compass here limited, but part out of other
Principalities, which are annexed to this Kingdom. For there are four Regions
which make up his Title, and are subject to his government: (1) Bohemia it
self, as we have described it. (2) Lusatia. (3) Silesia. (4) Moravia. They were
named in the Map of Germany, as being parts of the whole Country, but will
admit here a more particular tract, as belonging properly to this Kingdom.

(13) First then for Bohemia it self, it contains about thirty Cities, which
are immediate subjects to the King, (as Quadus calls them) besides many others,
which are held in possession of the chief Princes, Primates, Barons, Counts,
and Nobles of the Country. The Metropolis is Prague, heretofore know by the
names of Bubienum and Morobudum, says Maginus; but rather I think (by the
situation) it should be the same which Ptolomy calls Casurgis. It was compassed
with a wall, by Primaslans their third King; and received the name of Prague,
by the wise Lubussa a Limine, which they say is called Prague in the Bohemian
language. It is indeed a very stately City, seated in the middle of the Country
in the River Multaria, and compared by some to Florence. It consists of three
Cities which are called the old Town, the new Town, and the little Town. The
old Town is the chief, and is adorn^d with may illustrious buildings. The new
Town is divided from the old* by a large ditch. And the little Town stands on
the other side of the River Mulda, but is joined to the old Town, by a stone
bridge of twenty four Arches. It was made an Archbishops See by Charles the
Emperor and King of Bo^emia, was once the chief University; but that now is
removed to Lipsia, in the Province of Misnia. It is the Regal seat of Bohemia,
and here was the King and Queen when it was taken by the Imperialists.

(14) The other Cities of this Region which are worth the noting, are (2) Egra.
It stands upon the River, from whence it bears the name: before it was called
by Ptolomy, Monosgada, on the West end of Sylva Gabreta, that part of the
Hircinia, which portends toward Franconia. It was a City Imperial, till the
right was sold by Lodovicus Bavares to John King of Bohemia. It is a very
strong City fortified as well by Nature as Art, for the most part is built upon
a Rock. It is in compass two miles within the walls, and with the Suburbs
three. Not far from it, there is a fountain of a kind of sharp wa^er, which the
Inhabitants drink Instead of Beer. (3) Krens, toward Austria, on the North side
of Da^ubius. (4) Pi^sen, on the West of Bohemia, a City which long held out
against General Tilly, by the defense of the now Count Man^^ield, but was at
last betrayed by some of his Captains. (5) Lan^^^, North west from Pilsen,
noted for the most fruitful place in the whole Region.

(15) Now the out Provinces, which are part of the Kingdom, though not of
Bohemia, are first L^^atia: It Iyeth betwixt the Rivers Albis and Odera, and
the Mountains of ^ohemia. On the West it has Saxony. On the North and East
Brandenburg. On the South Silesia. It is divided into the higher and lower
L^satia, and is watered with the River Niss^. It is indeed part of Saxony,
though under rule to the King of Bohemia. For both this and Silesia was given
to Vratislaus by the Emperor Hen^y the ^ourth. It is a very fruitful Country,
in most kind of grain: and the Inhabitants, though employed much in Husbandry,
yet are they a warlike people, as most of Germany, and so they have been tried,
by the Duke of Saxony, and others of the Emperors party: though they have been
by number and main strength overborn. The first that was surprised was
Bantsen: but the Metropolis is ^orlit^ia, next Zittan, etc. No soil nor
Customs differ much from the next Province.

(6) Silesia on the West has part of Bohemia, upon the North Dusatia, and part
of Poland, upon the South Moravea, and upon the East Polonia. At the beginning,
it was part of the Hircinian Forest. It is watered with the River Odera, and
from hence took her name, as Conradus Celtus delivers it, Lib Amorum 2. Eleg.
5. Hic Odera (a priscis qui nomina Suevus habebat)
Nascitur, and Godani praecipitatur aquis.
Suevos qui Siesum socium sibi convocat amnem:
A quo nunc nomen Slesia terra gerit.
But Johannes Crato, a Silesian, rather thinks that the name came from the
Q^adi: a people that heretofore inha^^ted these parts: and the rather, for that
the very Q^adi in the Slavonian Tongue, signifies the same which S^l^sium did
in the S^xon and old German. That they did possess this Prov^nce is agreed upon
by most: but where they were before seated, Geographers somewhat differ.
Ptolom^ places them by the Hir^inian, under L^na sylva: and others not far
off. It was the people which in their war with M^rcus A^tonius the Emperor)
were sca^tered with thundering and lightning, obtained by the prayers of the
Christian Legion. For when the R^man was driven to such straight, that he could
foresee no help which might come from man: he put himself upon their prayers to
God for his deliverance. A strange hope that he could believe in their faith,
and yet not in that God, in who^ they believed. But the Almighty was pleased to
show his power, and force the very heathen ^o honor his people. For here ended
the fourth Persecution, 174. and the Christian Legion was surnamed the
Thunderer.

(17) The air here is somewhat cold, but mild: and the Land ^ertile. The
Inhabitants good Husbandmen to make the best. They have a kind of forced Wine,
which the meaner sort drink freely. The richer have it sent from those
neighboring Provinces which are better stored. The chief City is Perslaw or
Vratis^avia, which takes name from her Founder Vratislaus, and in honor of him
giv^^ the Letter W in her Arms. About the seat of this City Ptolom^ places
Budorgis; insomuch that some think this was raised out of her ruin. Not far
off, there is yet to be seen the remainders of statel^ old buildings, which are
supposed to have been the houses of the ancient Quadi. I^ the year 1341. ^t was
ruined by fire: but built again with stone, and it is now one of the stateliest
Cities of Germa^y, for ^xcellent buildings and fair streets. It is an
Archbishops See, and an Academy. The rest are Neissa Ni^sa ^ Bishops See, and a
fair Town, Glats, Oppolen, Olderberge, Glomor, etc. Maginus numbers 15
Dukedomes in Silesia, whereof six remain in their ancient families: the rest
for want of heirs are ^allen to the King of B^hemia. But the two chief of name
are Ligintz, and Swevitz. The first is immediately the Kings: Swevitz too is
under his government, but yet has a Duke of its own, which is honored with
the title and revenues.

(18) Moravia is bounded on the North and East with Silesia: on the West with
Brandenburg; on the South with Austria and Hungary. It was heretofore called
Marcomannia, received the latter name from the River Moravia, which runs
through the Country. It yields plenty of Corn, Wine, Fish, and People, which
use a kind of confused mixed language of Sclavonick* Bohemick, and Tutonick. In
plowing up their grounds there has been oftentimes found a certain Coin of the
Roman Emperors Marcus Antonius, with this inscription de Marcomannis; which
the Inhabitants interpret to be of the Spo^ls which the Roman took from the
Marcoman^i, who inhabited this Region. For certain it is, that this people were
vanquished by Marcus Antonius, as appears in their Historians.

The People were converted to Christianity by Methodius: Their chief City is
Olmuzium Olmuz, an ^niversity, Brin, etc. It is reported by Dubrarius, that in
Gradi^co, a part of this Province, there grow eth a kind of Myrrh and
Frankincense out of the ground, which in likeness resemble the hidden parts of
man and woman. It was first added to the King and Kingdom of Bohemia by
Sigis^und the Emperor, in the Reign of Albertus.

GALLIA
map of Gaul
The Description of FRANCE.
No people but are ambitious to win upon Antiquity as far as their Line will
reach. Among others, the French are great prerenders to that Title, and fetch
their original from Mesech the sixth son of Iapheth, not above an hundred and
fifty years after the Ark ^ested. But this passes not for current truth among
her own Historians; and therefore is not the plea which gives France here the
second place in my Division of Europe. I observe rather her situation, which
ranks her next to Spain Eastward: and that was the course proposed in my
general Description.

(2) As for her Inhabitants, the first certainly, which we can make good, were
the Gauls: A people of whose beginning we can give no unquestionable account:
yet this of them is most sure, they were a Nation of noted valor above four
hundred years before Christ. It is ^ow full two thousand and twelve since they
sacked Rome, and took the Capitol. In the memory of that great* Action we may
claim a part* For first were themselves conquered by the two ^oble British
spirits, Brennius and ^elinus Kings of England; and after led on by them (if we
may trust the story) unto those glorious adventures, which have to this day
continued their fame almost above any other Nat^on. Let the proof res^ upon my
Author. This says Matthaeus west mon^ste^iensis out of the Roman History.

(3) ^^ecenta millia ^allorum ad seeds novas querendas pr^^ecti ducibus B^lin^
and Brennio Romam invaseru^t, ibique diu morati ^unt. Sed mill libras auri
praemium discessionis ^ Romany suscipientes, mox diversis agminibus alii
Grae^iam, alii Macedoniam, alii Thraciam petiverunt, and sua prole velut quodam
examine totam Asiam replerunt. Tantus inde terro^ Gallici nominis and armorum,
invectaque f^licit^s ^rat in illis dieb^s, ut r^ges orientis si^e ^^rcenario
^^ru^ exer^itu ulla-bella gerere non pr^su^e^ent, nequepulsi a r^gno ad alios
quam ad Gallos con^uger^^t, Non enim aliter Maj^st^tem suam tutari, ^^qu^
amis^am re^^p^rare se posse nisi Gallic^ virtute arbitrabantur. Itaq^e in
auxilium regis Bithi^^i^ ^vocati; reg^^m cum eo peract^ vict^ri^ diviserunt,
eamque regionem ^^llo-Graeciam cognominav^runt, which we now call Gallatia. And
thus for a time their Victories carried all before them: yet at last they had
their turn too of ill Fortune, were expulsed Ro^e by C^mi^^^^, fared as their
neighbors did, and became tributary to the ^mpire.

(4) Then did the name of Gallia comprehend a large portion of Europ^, besides
that which we now call ^rance; and was divided by the ancient in Cisalpinam:
which indeed was a part of Italy; that which we now call Lomb^rdy: and
Transalpinam, which Pliny cal^s Comata from the curled ^air of the Inhabitan^s,
and Ptolomy, Celto Galatiam, as the Greeks gave it. Nor yet was this equal to
the name of France, but was again divided by Caesar in his Commentaries. (1) in
Belgi^am, which for the most part belongs to Germany. (2) Celtican, and (3)
Aquitaniam. After him; Ptolomy gives a third ^ivision into four parts: (1)
Aquitaniam, (2) Lugdnnensem, the same with Caesar's Celtica. (3) Narbonen^em, or
Braccatam, and (4) ^elgicam.

(5) We must here pass by the out-reaches of Belgia and the rest, and confine
our tract to those part^ which are governed by one King. And though it retain
still the antique appellation, which the Inha^itauts received from the Greek
(...), for their beauty and white color; yet is ^t best and most properly
known by the name of France, from the Franci, or Francones, a people of Germany
that overran these parts, and subdued most of them to themselves.

(6) Now the limits of this new Gallia or Fr^nce are West ward the Pyrenean
Mountains, which divide her from Spain, and run cross the Isthmus, that joins
both the Kingdoms. They were very famous for rich Mines; insomuch that being
once fired by Shepherds, the gold and silver run streaming down into the lower
Countries called up the Inhabitants to prey; and was the first occasion of a
foreign entry upon those parts. Eastward it lies upon Germany, South^E^st it
is sev^red with the Alps from Italy. Northward it is bounded with our English
Seas, and Southward with the Mediterraneum. Her chief Rivers reckoned by
Maginus are (1) Garnana Garone the greatest. (2) Ligeris Loyre the sweetest.
(3) S^quana or Seyne the richest. (4) Rhodanus Rosne the swiftest: to these we
may add, (5) Some, upon which stands Amicus.

(7) Her air is healthful, and her grounds fertile; abounds almost with all
commodities that may make her one of the happiest Regions in Christendom, yet
her greatest plenty is of Corn, Wine, and Salt; which she distributes among her
neighboring Nations: and enricheth her self with such commodities from them as
are not so fully afforded within her own limits. The women do partake of their
Countries fruitfulness: Insomuch that as the earth is scarce able to bear her
plenty, so her plenty could hardly sustain her people, had she not a vent for
them into Spain, Italy, Germany, England, and other Countries: And yet were
there long since reckoned Habitatores ^upra quindecin milliones, inter quos
octodecim millia nobillium, by Maginus.

(8) In so great a multitude we must look to find as much variety of customs
and dispositions. It was the report of Caesar long since* and seconded by a
late authentic Author, Gallicas gentes lingua, legibus and institutis inter se
differ: multa tamen multis esse communia. For the most part they are of a
fiery spirit for ^he first onset in any action, but will ^oon flagg. They
desire change of Fortunes: and pass not greatly whether to better or worse.
Their women very jo^und, of a voluble tougue, and as free of their speech,
complemental to strangers, and win more by their wit than their beauty: one and
the other are great enticers of men's affections; and they enjoy them as freely
and securely, without either check of conscience, or care of report. It is
esteemed Vitium gentile, and indeed they can hardly hear ill for it from any
there, which is not equally guilty. Very factious, not only in carriage or
public affairs, but in their private families, which proceeds for the most
part from a self^conceit of their own wit and wealth: and those will hardly
admit a superior. Their Nobility have been reported to be liberal; but I
suppose that fashion is now worn out: My self have specially noted the contrary
in diverse* which respect their purse more than their honor, and let pass the
service and deserts of worthy persons unrewarded, as if their gracious
acceptance were a sufficient return of thanks for any office a man can do them.
They are practiced to this garb by their pesantry, whom they reckon but as
slaves, and command as their proper servants, which the poor sneaks take as a
favor, and are glad to be employed by their betters, that by their protection
they may stand more free from the injury of their equals. For the meanest of
them are cruel, and affect to oppress their adversary, either by open violence
or suit in Law, though to their own ruin. They are very ready to take Arms, and
serve in the defense of King and Country: need no more press than the stroke of
a Drum; but are as rash in their achievements. They will not wait upon
Counsel, but run as far on, as upon their strength they may, and when they find
that fails, they will as soon give ground.

(9) It has had heretofore (and yet breeds) men of great esteem for Learning
and Religion. St. Bernard, Calvin, Beza, and Ramus were French, and many
others, both of the Romish and Reformed Churches. For as yet the people stand
divided betwixt both, but not equally. The Papists are like to continue the
stronger hand, as long as their holy Father shall make murder a meritorious
act: For by their several Massacres they have destroyed many assemblies of the
Hugonotes, as they call them. The greatest I think that ever was practiced by
such as had entertained the name of Christians, was at Paris in the year 1572.
when above thirty thousand souls suffered Martyrdom, and among the rest, some
Personages of great worth and note.

(10) It is subject to a Monarchical government, weilded by one sole and
absolute King, which bears the Title of the Christian King of France: his
eldest son the Dauphin of France. By their Salique Law, no woman or her heirs
may inherit: how justly, I may not determine But yet the English have good
reason to examine the Equity: For it cost our Edward the Third his Crown of
France, to which he was heir in general by marriage of a daughter. But the
truth is, we have been ever easy to part with our hold there, or at least
forced to forgo it by our civil dissentions at home, else, after all those
glorious Victories of our Predecessors, we might have had some Power more to
show there as well as Title.

(11) There are very many Provinces belonging to this Kingdom, more than will
find room here for their full Descriptions in several, and therefore we will
reduce as well this new France, as the old Gallia to the four parts of
Ptolomies division: (1) Aquitania, (2) Lugdunensis, (3) Narbonensis, and (4)
Gal^ia Ielgica; To these we will add (5) the Isles adjoining. Their principal
under^Territories shall be mentioned, as Maginus ranks them.

(12) Aquitania lies on the West of France, close upon the Pyrenean Mountains
and Countries. (1) Another part of Biscay mentioned in the Map of Spain, and
indeed differs from that but very little. (2) Gascoign and Guien. The first
to this day keeps its name (with a very little change) from the Spanish
Vascones. The chief City is Burdigala, or Burdiaux, a Parliamentary and
Archiepiscopal Seat and University of good esteem, was honored with the birth
of our Richard the Second. Another City of note is Tho^ouse a seat
Parliamentary, and supposed to be as ancient as the rule of Deborah in Israel.
This Gascogin contains in it the Earldomes of Fory, Comminges, Armeniaci, and
the Dutch Albert. (3) Pictavia, Poictou, on the north of Guien, a pleasant
Region and a plentiful. It contains three Bishoprics; Po^tiers, Lucon, and
Mailazai. Her chief Cities are Poictiers, an ancient, and the largest next
Paris in all France. Castrum Heraldi once the title of the Scotch Earls of
Hamildon. In this Province was fought the great Battle betwixt our black Prince
and John of France, where, with eight thousand he vanquished forty thousand:
took the King Prisoner and his Son Philip, 70 Earls, 50 Barons, and 12000
Gentlemen. (4) Sonictonia, severed from Poictiers but by the River Canentell,
and so differs but little from her fertility. Her Metropolis Saints. Her other
chief Bourg, Blay, Marennes, S. John D'angely, and Anglosme. Betwixt this
Country and Poictiers stands ^ochel, a place the best fortified both by nature
and art of any in Europe. And is at this ti^^e possessed by those of the reformed
Religion: where they stand upon their guard, and defend their freedom of
conscience against the Roman Catholics of France. (5) Limosin, in Limo sita,
(say some) Maginus takes (...) from Limoges her chief City toward the North;
which revolted, and was recovered by our black Prince. Her other Towns of note
are Tulles and Vxerca, and Chalaz, where our Richard the first was shot. It
has been by turns possessed of French and English, till Charies the Seventh;
since we have had little hold there. (6) Berry, regio Biturigum, from her chief
City Bituris now Burges, an Archiepiscopal See and University. It is
exceedingly stored with sheep, and sufficiently well with other Merchandise of
value. (7) Burbone, from her chief City Burbone (heretofore Boya) a Dukedom,
and much frequented by Princes, and the Nobility of France, by reason of her
healthful air and commodious Baths. (8) Turiene, the Garden of France. Her
chief Cities ^loys, Amboyse, Taurs, and a little higher upon the Layre stands
Orleance.

(13) Lugdunensis or Celtica, lies betwixt the Rivers Loyre and Seyne, and
takes the name from Lugdunum or Lions her chief City. This Province comprehends
(1) Brittany, heretofore Armo^ica, till subdued by Maximinus King of England,
about the year 367: since it has had the name of Britanny, and for distinction
from this of ours, it is commonly styled Minor Britannia. There is yet
remaining a smack of the W^lch tongue, which it seems the Invaders had so great
a desire to settle in those parts as a trophy of their Conquests, that when
they first mingled in marriage with the Inhabitants, they cut out their wives
tongues, as many as were Natives, that no sound of French might be heard among
their children. It has few Rivers, but that defect is (in some measure) made
up by the neighborhood of the Sea, insomuch that the Country is reckoned one
of the most fertile in all France, for Corn, Wine, and Wood. It breeds good
Horses, and special Dogs, Iron, Lead, etc. Her chief Cities are Nants, Rhenes,
S. Breny, and Rohan. It is divided into Britanniam inferiorem, the base or
lower Britanny, Westward and nearest England, and Superiorem toward the Loire
Eastward. Her chief parts are S. Malo and Breast. (2) Normandy, a part of the
Region which was heretofore called Newstria, and took the name it has from the
Norwegians. Their first Duke was Rollo, and the ^ixth from him our William the
Conqueror. It was lost from his Successors in the time of King John. Her chief
Cities are Rhothomagus or Rhoan, the Metropolis, Constance, and Cane, memorable
for the siege of our English Henry the fifth: And Verveile besieged by Philip
the second of France, in the time of our Richard the first: which when the King
heard, as he sat in his Palace at Westminster (it is said) he swear he would
never turn his back to France, till he had his revenge: and to make good his
oath, brake through the walls, and justly performed his threat upon the
besieger. Her principal parts are Harflew: the first which King Henry the fifth
of England assaulted; and New Haven, given up by the Prince of Conde to Queen
Elizabeth as a Pledge for such Forces as she would supply him with to maintain
wars with the King in defense of Religion. And Diep, etc. (3) Anjove regio
Audegarensis, a fertile Country, and yields the best Wine of France, excellent
Marble, and other fair stone for buildings. Her chief City is Anjours, which
Ortelius takes to be Ptolomy's Iuliomagum. It is now an University. To this
Dukedom there are four Earldomes which owe a kind of homage: Many, Vandosm,
Beauford and Laval. (4) Francia, which gives name to the whole Kingdom, and
received it her self from the German Francones, which before inhabited the
great Forest called Sylva Hircinia. Her chief City, and the glory of France,
is Paris or Lute^ia, quasi in luto sita, in compass twelve miles, is reckoned
the first Academy of Europe, consists of 55 Colleges. And here was Henry the
sixth crowned King of France and England. In this Province stands S. Vincent,
where Henry the fifth died: and Saisons, and the Dukedom of Valoys, etc. (5)
Campaigne and Bye partners in the title of Earldom, it is severed from Picardy
only with the River. A fertile Country, and has many eminent Cities. The
principal is Rheimes, where the Kings most commonly are crowned, and anointed
with an Oil sent (they say) from Heaven, which (as often as it has been used)
never decreaseth. It is the seat of an Archbishop and University of note,
especially with our English Roman Catholics, who have a College there
appointed for their Fugitives. And others of note are Troys, and Brye, and
Auxerre, and Sans, an Archbishops See, etc. (6) Burgundia, both the Duchy and
Country. The Duchy or Burgundia suferiour, and Western, lies on the South of
higher Germany. Her principal places are Digion, Saint Bernards birth-Town,
Antun, Bealne, Sologue, and Aliza, once the famous City of Alexia. The County
of Burgundy or Burgundia Ihperior, yields not to the choicest Garden in France
for fertility of soil, nor to the most renowned for stoutness of Inhabitants.
They acknowledge not as yet the French command, no more than Savoy and Lorain:
They were under diverse Generals, and are called Walloons, corruptly for
Galle^s, a trick of the Dutch. Her principal Cities are Besanson, the
Metropolis of both Burgundies, Salives, Arboys, Gray, and Dola. (7) Lugdunense
Territorium, Lione an illustrious City. The center of Europe: I mean where
Merchants meet for Traffic from all quarters. All these Provinces belong
either wholly, or at least, in part, to Gallia Lugdunensis. For indeed some lie
divided, and stretch into their neighbors Territories, as Campania into
Belgica, and this last Lugdunense is in part under the Government of Savoy.

(14) Narbonensis Gallia on the West has the Comitatus Armenaici and
Comminges, East^ward part of the Alps, Northward the Mountain Cemenus, and
Southward the French Seas. It is generally a fruitful Country, not inferior in
the esteem of Pliny, to Italy it self; it comprehends the Provinces, (1) of
Languedo, supposed from Languegotia, language of the Goths, it reaches from
the bounds of Armenia and Comminges to the Mediterraneam: Her chief Cities are
Narbon, from whence this whole Region receives her appellation, and is reckoned
the first Roman Province in Europe: and Mons pessulame Mont-Pellein, an
University most famous for the study of Physic. Nimes where there is at this
day many relics of Antiquity, and Pons Sancti Spiritus, etc. (2) Provence
provincia (...), divided from Languedoc by the River Rhodanus Rhoan. It belongs
part to the Crown of France, part to the Pope, and a third to the Prince of
Orange. In the Kings portion are Air, a Parliamentary City, ^rles, and
Ma^silia, the last built in the time of the Roman Tarquin. To the Bishop of
Rome belongs ^^enian, a City and Archbishops See, with the whole Comitatus
Venissimus. To the Prince of Orange the chief City Aurangia, or Orange, on the
River Meine, Estang, Boys de S Poll, etc. (3) D^^lphine on the North of
Provence* regio Allobrogum, and is divided in Delphinatum superiorem and
inferiorem: The first contains in it Embrum, where Agaric and Manna is
plentifully gathered, and Valentia, etc. The latter Grinnoble, Vienna,
Daulphin, Romans. (4) Savoy Sabadia on the East of Daulphin, a Dukedom,
without whose limits stands the well known City Geneva, which entertains people
from all Countries of any Religion: But yet enforces a Law upon fugitives, not
common elsewhere: For whatsoever malefactor is there apprehended for mischief
done in his own Country, suffers as if he had been there condemned. The
principal Cities besides are Tarantise, Bele, Moustire, Maurience, etc. To this
Dukedom belong Cambrey, on the West side of the Alps, and the Country of
Bresse, whose heir is entitled Prince of Piemont, a part of Italy, at the very
East foot of the Mountains, which ^ever her from this Country.

(15) Gallia Belgica the last, is the Eastern tract toward Germany, and as much
as belongs to this Kingdom contains only Picardy, which is divided into the
higher and lower. The first portends toward the British Seas, and here stands
Calice distant but thirty miles from Dover: It is that which Caesar called
Portus I^cius, won from the French by our Edward the third, lost by Q. Mary.
Upon her Confines, toward England, is the Country of Bononia, and Guinnes,
which contain sundry Towns and Villages. The chief ^^lloin, conquered by our
Henry the Eighth, but delivered back in the reign of Edward the Sixth. In this
Picardy stands Terwin, besieged by King Henry in person, where the Emperor
Maximilian served under his Colors, and received pay as his Soldier. In the
lower Picardy stands Ambianum Amiens: the Metropols: Here are the Duchy of
Terache, whose chief City is Guisa, which gave name to the family of the
Guises: and the Country of Vermindois, where Saint Quintin stands, Retelois and
Retel her Metropolis; Artelois and La^erre, here is Ponthein and Aberille.

(16) The Islands which are reckoned properly French, are only those which lie
near in the Atlantic Ocean. They are but few and of no great account. The
principal Dame de Bovin, L'ille de Dieu, Marmotier, Insula regis.

A NEW MAPE OF YE XVII PROVINCES OF LOW GERMANY
P. Kaerius Caelavit
map of the provinces of Low Germany
The Description of BELGIA.
IN this we continue still the Description of Belgia, begun in the Map of
France. For the title is common as well to those Territories, as indeed to all
the North-East Tracts of the old Gallia. The portion hereditary to the French
King, was marked out among the rest of his Dominions. The residue (since it
has been by length of time, chance of war, or at least chance of Fortune,
dispersed into the power of several Princes) is better known to us by the
familiar names of the Low Countries, than Netherlands, Flandars, etc.

(2) In the search of her Original, we may have reference to our precedent
Discourse. For questionless it was possessed by the Gauls, as the other parts
were: and (if trust may be given to those Antique Stories, whose truth is
almost worn out with age) she reaches her pedigree as high as any and likely
enough did partake in the Spoils of Rome, when the Capitol was ransaked by the
Gauls, under the conduct of our two ^nglish Brothers. For her chief Captain
^elgius, whose memory she preserves to this day in her name, is mentioned by
Q^adus andother as companion to Brennius in his expedition toward Macedonia,
after they were entreated from Rome.

(3) In the first times they were a stout people, and practiced to continual
wars by the bordering Germans, which made them as well expert as hardy. It
seems Caesar found them so in his trial: ^or he gives them (in his
Commentaries) the honor of a val^ant Nation above any other part of Gallia.
Yet at last he brought them under, and in time they were expulsed by the
Germans; who for their* nearest speech, and customs are s^pposed, and justly
too, the Predecessors to the now Inhabitants.

(4) For her first name I find no other likely account given, than from a City
built by their ^elgius* in the Province of Hannonia, where now stands Bavaria.
The r^st, Germania in^erior* the Low Countries and Netherlands require no long
search: for without doubt they have little other ground, than* her low
situation upon the Seas: and indeed it is such as has often times endangered her
by inundations, and sunk many hundreds of their Towns and Villages, which to
this day in some places show their tops above water at a dead low ebb. Lastly,
Flanders, though but a single Province in this Belgia, yet of that esteem, as
the whole Country bears her name, and may indeed well enough upon the same
reason as she took it up. For (as the most will) it had its its Etymon a
flatibus fluctibusque quib^^ tota haec obn^xia est regio.

(5) For on the North it is bounded with a part of the great Sea, and on the
West with the main Ocean: On the East with the Rivers Rhene and Mosa and on the
South with Loraign, Campaigne and Picardy, parts of the Kingdom of France. It
is accounted to be in circuit 1000 Italian miles; no Country abounds more with
Lakes, Pools, and Rivers of great note. The principal are Rhene, Mosa, and
Scaldis, 16 others are specially named by Maginus, and more intimated, which
afford them great store of Fish, as well for their own use, as supply for
traffic to other Nations.

(6) Yet by reason of her watery situation, it must needs be that the air is
exceeding moist, and therefore unwholesome: but not so as heretofore. For the
multitude of Inhabitants, and those wonderful industrious, have labored out of
many of her marshes, and drawn their Pools into running channels; and by this
means fewer vapors arise, insomuch that now the Natives at last may very well
agree with the temper, which (as Maginus gives it) incolarum ^anitati necnon
digestioni conducit. Their Summer is pleasant, not extreme hot, nor abounds it
with such troublesome flies and gnats as ours does. There is seldom any
thunder heard, or lightning seen, or Earthquake felt. The reason is the same
for all. The Winter is not altogether so tolerable; but brings with it bleak
winds and much rain. Yet betwixt both, the Country is moderately fertile,
yields corn and fruit, in some places more, and in some le^s: very few Grapes,
and those make but a hard Wine: no store of Mines; and yet they are as rich as
those which have.

(7) For the people are very thrifty, painful, and ingenious in the invention
of many pretty things, which draw many other Nations to them for Traffic: and
they lie as fit for it, having free access by Sea to and from all the chief
parts, as of Europe, so also Asia, Africa, and America, and are as skilful to
trace the Seas at pleasure. They have the name for the first Authors of the
Compass, Clock, and Printing. They are excellent Artificers, for working of
Pictures in glass, for laying Colors in Oil, for Tapestry and other Hangings:
^in brief, for any Oeconomical commodity, either for use or ornament: and in
their own private Families excel any other people. The men are of a goodly
presence; of a cold, or at least no choleric temper. They neither love nor
hate any extremely; but will soon forget both a good turn, and (they say) an
injury. They are not very open, or easy of belief, nor apt to be deceived. Not
very proud, nor exceeding base. Not much given to Venus, but more to Bacchus,
especially when he presents himself upon an English Beer-barrel. For they will
hardly make a bargain before they be well whetted. This is their common
character; but for the best part of it we have found it far other, as in their
commerce with us in the East Indies we have found, where by their extreme
dealings with our Nation, they have made known their unthankfulness for the
many benefits our English have showed them. But I return to their better
qualities. Their women are fair, somewhat bold and free in their carriage, but
yet sober and honest: excellent housewives, and in some places traffic
abroad, while their men play the cot-qu^ans at home.

(8) As in their other businesses, so in their studies they are very laborious,
and indeed trouble the world with writing more than they have thanks for: as if
they had a right (since they were the inventers of the Press) to use it at
pleasure; so they do; and send forth every (...) performed by their boys
tow^rds a Degree, with a clutter of tedious Anagrams prefixed* ^ But (...) has
heretofore bred ma^y excellent men in their faculties, Iust^s Lipsius, Erasmus,
Rodulph^s, (...), Ortelius, Mercator. And at this day, how many others, good
members of the Reformed (...), within the compass of the States government. The
rest which are under the Archduke must appear Roman Catholics. In diverse
parts of Belgia, the Christian Religion was planted by Wilbrod an English man.

(9) The last quality required in a Nation of esteem (as they are) is valor.
And indeed I may well place it last. For so it grew upon them since the long
war which they have had with the Archduke. Before they lived for the most part
in peace; and as they had but little use of Chivalry, so they had as little
heart to it: but were counted a heavy dull people. To say truth, they have
hardly yet recovered that censure: for in the managing of their Land-fights
especially, they are content enough to give way to other Nations, and will
hardly second them in any dangerous attempt. The English have both acted and
suffered their parts in the behalf of the Low Countries: and that (methinks)
might have been remembered in the midst of their tyrannical usage of our
Merchants.

(10) These Netherlands toward our latter times were divided into 17
Provinces, whereof the most part had several Rites and Governors, four
Dukedomes, seven Earldomes, five Baronies, and one Marqueship. But by the next
marriages of the heirs to the sundry Titles, the whole at last fell upon one,
and was made an entire Government, and known by the name of the Dukedom of
Burgundy. Yet still does each Province retain her proper Laws, liberty of
Religion, and other Customs, which their Rulers in succession were sworn to
maintain for their parts: and the people again for their security, had this
main prerogative left them from the beginning; that if their Prince should at
any time attempt the contrary, they might, after Declaration, proceed to the
choice of a new Governor. These Conditions confirmed, it continued for a while
peacefully, and by marriage with Mary, heir and last of the house of Burgundy,
it fell to Maximilian of Austria, Emperor of the Germans. And his Successor
Philip matching in the like sort with Joan, heir to the Kingdom of Spain,
joined both together in his eldest son Charles the fifth, who by the Mother was
entitled to Spain, and by his Father to Bargundy or Netherlands, as for
Austria it passed to another brother. Thus came it subject to the King of
Spain. And while yet the Emperor enjoyed it, they felt no misery of civil wars
among themselves. When he left it, he commanded this charge withal to his son
Philip the second, that he should entreat the Low Countries well. But this he
either forgot or neglected: and taking it in foul scorn to be so curbed by the
conditions of his Predecessors, began first with a pretense to Religion, and at
last embroiled them in a bloody war, which has found no end to this hour; and
caused them to cast off the Spanish clog, which they did in the year 1581. and
declared by their Writings, that Philip the second, King of Spain, had
forfeited his Government of the Low Countries by breach of his faith. And
withal they bound their people by a new oath, never to return to their
obedience: which they yet make good against the Arch-Dutchess, who by kindred
to the Spanish King, and marriage to the Archduke, is at this time interested
in the Government, and therefore in the quarrel.

(11) To her there belongs of the 17 Provinces, (1) The Dukedoms of Lutzenburg.
(2) Limburg, and (3) Brabant. (4) The Earldoms of Flanders. (5) Artoyse. (6)
Hannault. (7) Namurcia. (8) The Barony of Mechlin. (9) The Marquisate of the
holy Empire. To the States are reckoned, (10) Duchy of Geldria. (11) The
Earldoms of Zutphen. (12) Zealand, and (13) Holland. (14) The Baronies of
Vtrech. (15) Overissell. (16) Frizeland. (17) And Groyning.

(12) We begin with the Dukedomes entailed to the Spanish Faction: and for the
easier finding their situation, we will take them as they lie from West to
East: And in this order is (1) Lutzenburg; It stands betwixt the River Mosa on
the West, and the Forest of Ardenna East: on the South it joins upon a part of
France. Her chief City is Lucenburg, called by Ptolomy, Angusta Romanduorum. In
circuit, this Dukedom is 240 miles, and contains in it many other Towns, which
have been much battered in the Wars, betwixt the French and Spanish Kings,
before the States were at difference among themselves: Th^onville among others
is of note for the stronger Bost^nachum, for the chief Merchandise. It is
called the Paris of Ardenna, for by some that Forest is reckoned into this
Dukedom. It stands on the East Side, was in Caesar's time 500 miles in compass,
now about 90. Near to Ardenna is the Spaw Baths, of great fame for the cure of
sundry diseases: And has oftentimes given our false English a pretense to
leave their Country forsooth for Physic: when they have no other excuse to
get free, and join themselves with the Romish Catholics. Maginus reckons into
this Region 1168 Villages, besides Castles, with several Earldoms, many other
petty Governments. In the South is the Duchy of Bovillon, belonging to a Peer
of France. (2) Limburg, on the North East of Lutzenburg, divides the Government
between her own Duke, and the Bishop of Luick, who commands the Western Tract,
as much as contains 24 walled Towns, and 1800 Villages, and has under him 52
Baronies. Luick the chief City of the Bishopric is an University, memorable
for this one story, above any other in Christendom: That at one time there
studied 9 Kings sons, 24 Dukes sons, 29 Earls sons, etc. The Dukes part in the
East is not of that fame, either for multitude of Towns and Villages, or
command of under territories. In the year 1293, the heirs male were extinct,
and by that means it fell to the Duke of Brabant. The whole Region is exceeding
fertile, and affords almost all necessaries except Wine: Among other
commodities, it abounds with a kind of stone, of excellent use in Physic,
called Lapis Calaminani. The principal City Limburg stands upon the River Wesa.
(3) Brabant on the North of Limburg, which commonly is supposed to have the
name from Brachlant, as if a barren soil: but it is otherwise reported, unless
toward the North. The people are very jolly, ut very gravem senectutem sentire
videantur: And that methinks should argue plenty. Her chief Cities are Loraign
an University* which contains 20 Colleges, and among the rest a Seminary for
English Jesuits. Bruxels, and this is the Dukes seat, strengthened with a
double wall, and is adorned with very elegant buildings. Bergen ap Some, which
is yet fresh in the memory and mouths, since the siege 1622. Bolduc whose
people are noted to have preserved the antique valor of their Predecessors,
more than any other of the Provinces. Breda was the place of the Prince of
Orange, got from the Spaniard by a desperate policy of a small number of
Gentlemen, which ventured themselves into the Castle, being conveyed in a Boat
covered with turves: when they were past recoil, they were forced to set their
best strength forward, as well for their lives as the Victory; and were blessed
with a success beyond hope: They mastered the Castle, and the rest soon
followed. It was of late recovered by the Spaniards after a long siege, where
our English got honor though not conquest, under the conduct of our noble and
valiant Earl of Oxford. And lastly, within the compass of this D. is contained,

(13) The Marquisate of the holy Empire, whose chief City is Antwerp; a Town
heretofore of infinite Trading; had two Marts every year, qualified with an
extraordinary privilege, that during the time no man might be arrested, nor
his goods seized: and questionless this invited many which were in debt, and
could not have the freedom of tra^tique elsewhere.

(14) The Earldoms are (1) Flanders: First indeed as well in esteem as
situation: For it gives name to the whole Region of the Netherlands: and the
Prince writes himself Comes Dei gratia: it is the very North west tract of this
Belgia: and is divided in Teutonican, Imperatoriam, and Gallicam. The first is
the Flandria Flandricans, properly Flanders. The principal Cities are Gandad^m*
Gaut, the birth place of our John Duke of Lanc^ster: She is severed by the
River Shead, and lets into 26 Islands, and has passage from one to another by
98 Bridges. Her walls are seven miles in compass. Her other Towns are Burgies
and Graveling: Her Ports Dunkirk, Scluse, Newport, Ostend, etc. The two last
notable, one for a pitched field, the other for a long siege. In both the
English honorably maintained the right of the States against the Arch^Duke.
Flandria Imperatoria is but a small parcel, and borders upon Brabant, is called
the Earldom of Hulit, which is the chief City within her Territoties. Gallica
Flandria is not of any large extent, but very fertile and pleasant. Her chief
Towns are Lilla or Lilse, Duacum Doway an University, Orchais, Tornai, taken by
King Henry the Eighth, and ransomed by the Inhabitants for 100000 Ducats. (2)
Artesia, Artoyse, the seat of the Atrebates in Caesar's time. Their chief City
was then called Atrebatum, now Arras, whence we have our rich hangings and
their name. It lies most on the South of Flanders; Maginus reckons to her 12
Cities, and 852 Villages. The chief of name beside their Mother Town Arras, are
Air, Pernes, S. Omer, S. Paul. (3) Hannonia Hanolt, on the East of Flanders,
60 miles long, broad 48, contains 950 Villages, and 24 Towns, besides Castles.
The chief are Banais, supposed to stand in the same place where the ancient
Belgium was built, Mons, Conde, Valenciennes, etc. (4) Namurce, on the East of
Hanolt, a fruitful Country, and full of Mines, especially of Iron. It has but
four Cities, 182 Villages. The Metropolis is Namurce, and the rest Charlemont,
Valen-Court, Bornies.

(15) The only ^arony of the Archdukes Province is Mechlen, a City in Brabant,
which stands almost at equal distance betwixt Lovaine, Bruxels and Antwerp.
Before the Spanish wars it was a place of Parliament for the States. Since a
great part of it was scattered by unfortunate chance of fire, which caught
among 800 Barrels of Gunpowder. In this stands a Monastery, which at some times
has in it 1600 Nuns; and within these limits is the power of the Archduke
confined: And surely by reason of his infinite charge to maintain war, and the
ticklish terms he stands upon for fear of displeasing his Subjects, who (as he
suspects) may be apt enough to revolt, he can reap but little clear profit, and
dare use but as little authority

(16) To the States there hold first the Dukedom of Geldria, which some will
have to take her name from Gelduba, once her chief City: whether or not, there
appears not now any monument of such a Town. The Province stands on the East of
Brabant, and North of Limburg; It is a very fertile soil; especially if it be
well tilled, it returns the husbandman a liberal reward for his labor. Her
pastures are excellent, insomuch that they feed up their Cattle to an
incredible bigness and weight. A report passes of one Bull which weighed 3200
pounds: It was killed at Antwerp, 1570. It has in it 22 walled Towns, and
about 300 Villages. The principal of account are Neomagus or Namm^gen an
Imperial City, stands at the mouth of Rhene, which is called the Vahall. It was
honored with the title of a Vice-County, had authority to coin money, and was
bound to acknowledge subjection to the Emperor only by a small tribute, a
glove of Gunpowder, which they were to tender at Aken once a year. Others of
note are Ruermund, Arnem, and Zu^p^en.

(17) The Earldoms are (1) Zu^phen, a Town only in Gelderland, at the North of
the River Barikel, where that valiant Soldier, and incomparable Poet Sir
Philip Sidney received his last wound. It was joined into the States strength
1590. (2) Zeland, it stands in the North tract upon the Seas, from whence it
has the name as it were of Zeland; And indeed it often times so falls out, that
they can hardly say whether they live in a Sea or upon the Land. Eight Islands
have been utterly lost: what remains of this Province is by the water divided
into seven Islands Walcheria, in which Islands Middleborough and Flushing:
South Beveland, North Develand, Wolfors-dick. These are the Western; The
Eastern are Schoven, Tolen, and Develand. They are most of them a fierce
people, crafty in merchandise, good Seamen, and great Fishers. (3) Holland, or
Holtland, a woody Country: It is but a small Region, such, as be a man where
he will within her compass, he may travel it out in three hours: And yet is it
of great fame, and better known to the common sort of people than any of these
parts. The Inhabitants heretofore the Batavi: on the West it has the Sea and
Isle of Zeland: on the North the main Ocean. It comprehends about 400 Villages,
and 29 walled Towns. The chief are Dordret or Dort, memorable for a Synod held
against the Arminians, 1618* Harlem, a Town which first sent forth a Printed
Book into the other parts of Europe: Del^t, Amsterdam, a great place of
traffic, Rotterdam, Lugdunum Batavorum, Leyden an University. Among the rest
the Hague may claim a room here, though but a Village, yet the fairest in
Christendom and sear of the States Council. The report l^eth upon this
Province, of Margare^ sister to the Earl of ^loris, that she brought at one
birth 365 children, all living till they were Christened.

(18) Baronies are (1) Vltrajactense Vtrecht, on the East of Gelderland, and in
part West, North, and South of Holland. It has the name from her mother City
Trajectum: and she hers, (as is supposed) from a common Ferry which was there:
For before it was called Antonina. It has four other good Towns, and seventy
Villages. (2) Overyssell or Transisulana on the North of Gelderland: It has
above 100 Villages, and 11 Towns of note. The chief Deventer won by our Robert
Dudley Earl of Leicester from the Spaniards to the States: It was once under
Government of the Bishop of Vtrech: And the first was Wilbrod an Englishman.
(3) Frizia West Friezland, on the North of Overyssall: It has 345 Villages and
5 Towns. The chief Lewarden, Harlingham a Sea-town, and Francker a late
University. (4) Groyning a Town only of West- ^riezland, but has command over
145 Villages, has her proper laws and jurisdiction of a Province.

(19) These last eight join together in an Aristarchical Government, weilded by
the LL. the states of the Low Countries, and their assistants. Each Province
has one, and his common Council is elected out of her own principal Towns; but
the residency of the general Council of the States is at the Hagua in Holland;
And to this are admitted with equal privilege of suffrage, their General of
their Forces, and our English Ambassador.

HISPANIA
map of Spain
The Description of SPAIN.
IN our Division of Europe, we placed her Regions as they lay from the first
Meridian of Longitude in the Azores, and so on toward Asia Eastward. We will
not here vary the course which was there proposed, and that gave Spain the
precedence, as lying most Westward into the Atlantic Ocean. And indeed she
puts forward as well upon her terms of Antiquity, as order of place. For if her
(...) may be heard, she derives ^^er Being from Tubal, the grandchild of Noah,
and would be one of the first Nations of the second world. Likely enough those
parts might be inhabited by his Progeny; but I doubt whether so soon after the
flood, as himself lived, and as some would have it, who suppose that he then
kept Cattle, and named the Province Taraconensis, from the Hebrew Taraco* a
possession of Herds. This and other the like improbable Relations pass over her
original. Which as we may not accept for truths, so we have no room here to
confute them for lies. We must be content rather to omit those former ages,
which give us no light but by Fables; and begin with the affairs of Spain,
which come within the compass of our known and approved Stories. As for the
exploits of Hercules, of Gerion, and Cacus, and the rest; questionless, they
had some ground from truth it self, if we knew how to search it forth: and here
was their residence, men twelve hundred years by compute before the Romans or
Carthaginians enjoyed it. But by reason that the passage of those times, was
delivered only in vain fictions, we can warrant nothing for certain till the
Syrians there planted themselves in the Isle of Gades: and of them little, till
the Carthaginians were called in to aid them against the disturbance of ill
neighbors; when once they were mingled with so flourishing a Nation, they
wanted not Writers to record their actions, and sundry turns of Fortune.

(2) The next Inhabitants there of Spain, after the Syrians, and indeed the
first which affords us any Story worth observing, were the Carthaginians: and
the first cause of their entrance was to defend the Islanders of Cales: but
when they had once got firm footing, and sucked the sweetness, they were not to
be removed by the easy term of friendship: but there kept hold, till a people
stronger than themselves dispossessed them. The attempt was made by Scipio and
the Roman forces; but they withstood their assault with so resolved a courage,
and so strong a hand, that it might often times be questioned Vter populus alteri
esset pariturus? and so held play almost 200 years, and could not be fully
subdued into the form of a Province, till the Reign of Augustus Caesar, yet
after, they were held to it till Honorius.

(3) About his sixth year was there a second Invasion made by the Vandales, and
soon after by the Goths, which bare sway for above 300 years. The last King
was Rodericus, who lost both himself and Kingdom for a rape committed upon the
Daughter of Julian, a Noble Gentlemen, and at that time Ambassador with the
Moors in Africa. When the Father had understood of his Daughters unworthy
injury, he brought back his revenge with him, 30000 Horse, any 180000 Foot, of
Moors and Sarazens; which discomfited the King, overthrew all the ressistance
which he could make, and bespread the Country with their Forces, where they
and their posterity stood firm, till within the memory of some which yet live.

(4) This change of State was before prophesied, and concealed in a large Chest
within a part of the Palace, which both the last King and his Predecessors were
forewarned not to discover. But the hope of an inestimable treasure made him
transgress: and when he had entered, there appeared nothing but the
Portraictures of armed Moors, with a presage annexed, that when the part of the
Palace should be forced open, such enemies should ruin Spain. It is now at
last but one people, but yet retains the mixtures of those many Nations which
have heretofore possessed it, Goths, Sarazens, and Jews, who were partly banished
hither by Hadrian the Emperor, and partly sent hither by Vlider Vbit the
Caliph after the Moors conquest.

(5) In all this discourse touching the beginning and settling of the State of
Spain, it appears not from whence she derives her several names of Iberia,
Hesperia, and Hispania. It seems they are more ancient than the entrance of the
Carthaginians, and therefore they allow us no certain Story, nor other reason
indeed, more than likely conjecture: and in some scarce that. Her first name of
I^eria was given by her ancients, from a River that runs almost through the
middle of the Country; So says Maginus, and relies upon Pliny and Justin for
his Authors. Others give it rather to the Iberi, the ancient people of Asia,
thas came in under Panus from toward Syria, and possessed it before the
Carthaginians. Her second name admits as much question: Some fetch it from
Hesperus the brother of Atlas, and their twelfth King from Tubal* Others beyond
the Moon from the Evening star, because it is situate upon the West of Europe.
The last Hispania is supposed from one Hispanus or Hispalus, who reigned in
those parts, and was the third in the account of some from Tubal: or else from
Hispalis, now Seril: rather we may take it from the forementioned Panus,
Captain of the Iberians, by the prefiction of an S. for so the Greeks give it
(...), and since by their own addition and corruption, it is made Espania,
Hispania.

(6) Her whole compass is reckoned to be 1893 English miles: and her bounds are
Seas on every side, unless on the East toward France, from which she is
severed by the Pyrenaean Mountains. On the West the Atlantic Ocean, on the
North the Cantabrick, and on the South the Fretum Herculeum, and other of the
Mediterraneum, which divide her from Africa. Her Rivers of note are specially,
(1) Minius of Mingo. (2) Dorio now Duerus. (3) Tagus now Taio, famous for her
golden sands. (4) Botis or Guadilquiver. (5) Iberius now Ebro; and (6) Ana or
Guadiana, which in one place glides under ground for fifteen miles together,
and gives the Spaniard an occasion (as he will catch at any) to brag that they
have ten thousand Cattle daily feeding upon one bridge. Yet give them their own
sense, the truth may be questioned; For they have not such plenty of meat, as
they have of sauce.

(7) It yields indeed abundance of Oranges, Lemmons, Capers, Dates, Sugar, Oil,
Honey, Licorish, Horses. It has been heretofore noted for rich Mines, insomuch
that Hannibal received daily 3000 from one Mine in Spain. The number is not
answerable in proportion to other Regions of Europe. Their Cities not so great,
nor so many. The reason may be, because indeed their Women are not so fertile
to multiply among themselves, and their usage of strangers so uncivil, that
very few of other Countries seat themselves there, as in France, England, and
Germany. And yet they have of late times sent many Colonies abroad into both
Indies.

(8) They are extremely proud, and the ^illiest of them pretend to a great
portion of wisdom, which they would seem to express in a kind of reserved
state, and silent gravity, when perhaps their wit will scarce serve them to
speak sense. But if once their mouths be got too open, they esteem their breath
too precious to be spent upon any other subject than their own glorious
actions. They are most unjust neglecters of other Nations, and impudent vain
flatterers of themselves. Superstitious beyond any other people: which indeed
commonly attends those which affected to be accounted religious* rather than to
be so. For how can hearty devotion stand with cruelty, lechery, pride,
Idolatry, and those other Gothish, Moorish, Jewish, Heathenish conditions, of
which they still savor?

(9) Yet it has yielded heretofore men very famous for their excellent
endowments, both of wit and Religion. The Apostle himself expresses a great
desire to see Spain, as hoping to do much good among those which had
entertained the name of Christ. Osius a learned Bishop in the time of
Constantine the Great: And Pacianus mentioned by S. Hierome, Isidore,
^ulgentiu^, Arius, Montanus, Tostatus and (...) were all Spaniards: S^neca,
Quintilian the Orator (Lumen Romanae* el^quentiae, as Valla styles him)
Martialis, Lucan, Silius, and Pomponius Mela, were Spaniards* Trajan the
Emperor, Theodosius, Ferdinand the Catholic, and Charles the Emperor were
Spaniards. To this day it breeds good Soldiers, ^low, but sure, and successful
in their Conquests. Yet such as prevail more by art than valor. Their
continual scarcity of victuals inureth them to hunger and other hardness, which
often times wearieth out their enemy, and makes him yield at least to their
patience if not to their strength.

(10) She has been subject to many divisions, according to the humor of those
that have been her Lords. The first of note was made by the Romans in
Citeriorem, which lay nearest to their Territories, and Vlteriorem, which was
all the extent, beyond the River Iberus ad fretum usque Herculeum. The second
was by them too, in Baeticum the whole tract beyond the River Ana Southward.
(2) Lusitanium Northward, toward the Cantabrick Ocean, and (3) Terraconensem
Eastward, joining upon France. When the Moors enjoyed it, they rent it into
twelve parcels, a multitude of petty royalties. Arragon, Catalonia, Valentia,
Castile, Toledo, Biscay, Leon, Gallicea, Murcia, Navarre, Corduba, and
Portugal. And these yet retain the name of Kingdoms, but their government was
long ago recovered into the hands of five, which bare the titles of Castile,
Arragon, Granada, Navarre, and Portugal. It was of latter times contracted into
the three Kingdoms of Arragon, Castile, and Portugal, but is in the power of
one King, called the Catholic King of Spain. We stand to this last division as
most proper for our times, and best befitting my brief Discourse. Give me leave
to add the Islands which lie near to each Kingdom.

(11) The present state of Arragon comprehends three of those Kingdoms, as it
was scattered by the Moors and Sarazens. (1) Arragon it self, which lies on
the South of Navarre, on the East of Castile, on the North of Valentia, and the
West of Catalonia. The ancient Inhabitants were the Iaccetani, Lutenses, and
Celtiberi: her chief City Caesar Augusta. (2) Catalonia: It lies betwixt*
Arragon and the Pyren^an hills. It is supposed a mixed name from Gothi and
Alani, people which heretofore possessed it after the Vandals had lost their
hold. The Region is but barren; yet it has in it many Cities, the chief Terra
cona, which gave name to the whole Province, called by the Romans,
Terraconenses. (3) Valentia, which on the East is touched with the
Mediterraneum, on the North with Castile, on the South with the Kingdom of
Murcia. It is reported for the most pleasant and fruitful Region in all Spain;
it has her name from her chief City, and as Maginus relates, admits as yet of
22 thousand Families of Moors. In this is the University where S. Dominick,
Father of the Dominicans, studied; and the old Saguntum besieged by Hannibal,
now Morvedre.

(12) The state of Castile as now it stands, comprehends all the rest of those
scattered Governments, as were possessed by the Moors, Portugal only excepted.
And first Castile it self, both the old which joins with Arragon on the East of
Portugal, and the west of Navarre; and the new which touches her upon the
South. The first abounds not much with fruits, but yet it breeds many Cattle.
The Metropolis is Burgos, and the other chief are Salamanca, an University, and
Valadolit, once the seat of the Kings of Spain. Now Castile abounds more with
Corn, is watered with the River Tagus and Ana: And in this stands the Kings
chief Cities, Madrid and Toledo, which was heretofore a propriatory of it self.
The rest that belong to Castile are 2. Toledo, however now but a City of new
Castile, yet in the division, her Territories spread themselves over a large
compass. The City is in the midst of Spain. It was the seat of the Gothish
Kings, and successively of the Moorish Princes: now of the Archbishops, who
exceed in Revenues any other Prelate in the world, except the Pope. Here has
sat eighteen National Councils in the time of the Gothish Kings 3.

(13) Biscay, heretofore Cantabria, on the North of old Castile toward the
Ocean, it was the last people which yielded to the Romans, and after to the
Moors. A Mountainous Country, but affords excellent Timber for ships, and good
Iron. Her Cities are S. Sebastian, Fonterabia, and Bilbao, which stands but two
miles from the Sea, and is noted for excellent Blades: some have been tried by
the English upon their own Crests 4.

(14) Leon heretofore Austria, on the East has Biscay, on the West Gallicia,
on the North the Cantabrick Ocean, and on the South old Castile. The Region is
reported to yield plenty of Gold, Vermilion, red Lead and other Colors, else
she is barren, her inhabitants not many, and those live most upon Hunting and
Fishing. It is the title of the eldest Son of Castile, as Wales is to our
Prince of England. Her chief City is Oveido, which bears part with her in the
name of a Kingdom; and indeed was the Title of the first Christian King after
the Moors Conquest.

(15) Gallicia, on the East joins upon Leon, on the West it is bounded with the
Atlantic Ocean, on the North with the Cantabrick, and on the South with the
River Mingo. It breeds Iennets in abundance, insomuch that they have been
Poetically feigned to be conceived by the wind. Niger writes, that here has
been an incredible plenty of Gold, Lead, and Silver; that the Rivers are full
of a mixed earth, and that the Plough could scarce wag for clods of Golden Ore.
There appears now no such matter. The principal Cities are Saint Iago, where S.
James the Apostle lies buried, his Relics kept, worshipped, and visited by
Pilgrims. And the other of note especially with us, is Corugna, an excellent
Port for Ships, and mentioned often in our wars with the Spaniards by the name of
the Groyne. Here likewise is the Promontory Nerius, called by our Mariners Capo
de finis terrae.

(16) Murcia, on the North has new Castile; on the South and East the Spanish
Seas. It is not much peopled, but yet is famous for several commodities,
especially for pure earthen Vessels, and fine Silk. Heretofore it enriched the
Romans with a daily supply of 25000 Drachmae of silver. Her chief places are
Alicante, whence our Alicant Wines come; and new Carthage often commended by our
Travelers, for her large and safe Haven; and lastly, Murcia, a Town which
gives name to the whole Region.

(17) Navarre lies close to the Pirenaean Hills, and as Maginus gives it, is
enclosed with Mountains; and so it is North and East: on the West it has the
River Ebro, and on the South Arragon. The Vascones are said to have lived here,
who afterward placed themselves in France, and kept there their name to this
day of Vascones, corruptly Gascoigns. The chief Towns are Bampelme, the
Metropolis, and Viana, the title of the Navarran Prince. Maginus sets the
Revenue annual of this Kingdom at 100000 Ducats.

(18) Corduba, now a City only, heretofore a Kingdom, and included Andaluzia,
Granada, and Estremadura; Equalized almost the whole Province which the Romans
in their second division called Baetica Andaluzia has lost but one Letter of
her name since she was possessed by the Vandales. From them she was first called
Vandalicia: since Andalicia, corruptly Andaluzia. It lies on the west of
Granada, and is a very fertile Country. In this Region is the chief City
Corduba, whence we receive our Cordavan Leather. The second of note is Sevil,
the Metropolitan of Andaluzia, and the fortunate Islands, esteemed the
goodliest City in all Spain; and though (as Corduba. it was not honored with
the Title of a Kingdom, yet it honored a Kingdom with her Title, in the
opinion of some, which derive Hispania from her former appellation Hispalus.
From this shore they lanch forth toward the Indies, and from hence they send
their Sevil Oranges. The Archbishop of Sevil is second to Toledo, as well in
Revenues as degree. Near to Andaluzia is the Island of Gades, by which the
Carthaginians entered into Spain: Since it is called Cadis, and commonly Cales.
The English have had their turn in the possession of that Isle. Now again,
fortune has cast it upon the Spaniard. On the very South edge of this Region
stands one of Hercules Pillars, which answers to the other Promontory in
Mauritania. The Sea betwixt both is called Fretum Herculeum, and Straits of
Gibralter. The second Province of Corduba was Granada, on the East of
Andaluzia, the West of M^rcia and South of new Castle toward the Spanish Seas.
It has been far more fertile than now it is: yet it still reserves a show of
her former beauty* affords as excellent Sugar, Silk and Wines. The principal
Towns of note are, Granada and Malaga the first for Stockins, and the other for
good Sacks. The third Province of Corduba ^stremadura lies on the South of
Castile, and is wat^ed through the middle with the River Ana. And in this
stands the City Merida, once a Roman Colony, and named by them Augusta Emerita,
from the Inhabitants which were there planted by Augustus, and c^lled out of
his ancient tried Soldiers.

(19) Portugal is the third Kingdom in our last division of Spain, and it may
well be esteemed one of her largest Territories: for it runs along the
Atlantic Ocean, from the borders of Gallicea, as Andaluzia; on the North it is
limited with the River Mingo, on the South with part of the Mediterraneum, the
West with the Atlantic, and on the East with the Castiles, Andal^zia; and
Estremadura. Her name some derive a portu Gallorum, Maginus rather a portu
Cale, a Haven of that name which was much frequented by Fishermen. It is almost
the same portion of Spain, which was heretofore Lusitania, and her people were
esteemed the most valiant, crafty and agile Soldiers of the whole Region; yet
now they are held to be simple ad proverbium usque: But it is their neighbor
Spaniards ce^sure, who indeed have over reached them in cunning, and brought
them under the subjection of their Catholic King, which were before a free
State of themselves, and carried with them another Kingdom of the Algarbi,
which stands in her very South, and shows the Cape of St. Vincent into the
Atlantic Ocean: Give them their due, they are excellent Seamen, and the best
alive to atchieve adventurous actions: For they added to their Dominions many
Territories of Africa, Asia, and America, could they have been so fortunate as
to have kept their Kingdoms and themselves out of the reach of the cogging
Spaniard.

(20) The Country affords not much Corn, but fruit reasonable store, and Mines
of several metals, Alum, Marble, good Silks, etc. The chief City is Lisbone,
in Latin Vlissipona, supposed to have been built by Ulysses. And from hence
they set sail toward the East Indies, to Aethiopia, Brasill, etc. Insomuch
that this very City yields more revenue than the rest of the whole Kingdom.
Another eminent place of this Region, is the Metropolis and Academia of
Conimbria, called before Mo^da. And this briefly is the whole Continent of
Spain, but does not terminate the Spanish Dominions, which commands as well the
Islands which lie near in the Atlantic and Mediterraneum, as many other parts
of the World besides interminate with other Regions. The Kingdom of Naples in
Italy, Duchy of Millain, Isles of Sicily and Sardinia, the Canaries, Towns and
Castles, and Havens in Barbary; In the West- Indies, Mexico, Peru, Brasil,
large portion in the East.

(21) The Islands near Spain in the Atlantic, chiefly the Tarsarae. In the
Mediterraneum are the Balears, and those are two principal, Majorica, commonly
called Mallorca, and Minorica, commonly Minorca. Other less Islands are
Dragonera, Cabrera, Pytussa, Erisa, Vedraw, Gonorello, Dragomago, and
Scombraria.

ITALIA
Petrus Kaerius Caelavit
map of Italy
The Description of ITALY.
ITaly is divided from France and Germany by the Alps, and stretches her self
South-East, betwixt the Tyrrhene and Adriatic Seas, almost in just proportion
of a man's leg. I may spare my Reader her lavish attributes, which he can hardly
baulk, if he will but look into any Author where her name is mentioned. She
must (for me) and well may, be content here with the brief Elogy of Pliny, to
which (I think) the wit of man can add but little. Certainly the most blessed
seat of man upon earth can deserve no more Italia terrarum omnium alumna, eadem
and Parens, numine deorum electa quae c^lum ip^um clarius faceret, sparsa
congregaret imperia, ritus molliret, tot populorum discordes linguas, sermones,
commercia, ad colloquia distra^eret, and humanitati hominem daret.

(2) Yet to speak truth we cannot abate her much of this title. The mother of
Countries we may call her, since most writers agree, that she was first
inhabited by Ianus, (or Noah, as some would report him) the Father of Nations.
It was doubtless a very long time since the World was honest, and deserved the
name of a golden age: yet then was she peopled (as Justin delivers out of
Trogus) by the Aborigines, whose King was first Ogyges, then Saturn, a man so
just, that under his Government there was known no tyranny from their Prince,
no disloyalty from the Subject no injury from the Neighbor: They had all one
Patrimony, one possession: and where all acknowledge no peculiar, there can be
but little cause of strife*

(3) I presume not to set down the just year when men were thus ordered: But if
you will believe the story of the Gentiles compared in Chronology, by some of
late years and better trust, as Munster, Quade, etc. Ianus pater hominum and
deorum, immediate predece^^or to Saturn, was in Italy within 200 years after
the flood, and received the aged Chronus into part of his Kingdom with him,
being expulsed by his son Jupiter out of Crete. Each of them built a City, and
left ^ ^ound of his name for their remembrance: the one Ianua, which to this
day has suffered no farther change than to Genus: and the other Saturnia; and
both in their times gave name to the whole Region: which are not yet fully worn
out: though others have since took place; as Latium, quia hic latebat Saturnus;
Italia ab It alo Siculorum Rege. Hesperia from the Western star; Au^onia and
Oenotria from her excellent Wines.

(4) But this is the largest scope which we can give to her Antiquity. Helvicus
and other authentic observers of time, cuts off (well nigh) a thousand years
from this account of the Aborigines, and places their Dynastia 2622 years
after the creation: 966 after the flood: and before Christ 1327.

(5) The first change of Inhabitants was forced by Evander the Arcadian, a man
of that admirable eloquence that he was called the son of Mercury, but had by
chance slain his Father, and was therefore expulsed his inheritance, and
advised into Italy by his Mother, a great Prophetess of those times. He removed
the Aborigines from their seat, and planted his companions in the same plot of
ground, where after Rome was built: and in the Mons Palatinus founded a little
Town, which he called Pal^auteum, in memory of his great grand^father. And this
was about the year 2710.

(6) About 60 years after, Aeneas arrived in this Country from the siege of
Troy, was entertained as an amorous suitor by Lavinia, with consent of her
Father Latinus: and after the death of his corrival Turnus, King of the
Rutilians, was settled heir to the Latin Monarchy after his Father.

(7) From Aeneas to Numitor the succession went on (not without some rubs) but
suffered no great breach for almost four hundred years: When the title should
have fallen to him, being the elder and true heir, he was spoiled of the
Kingdom by his younger, Amulius Sylvius: nor could it be recovered, till time
had given growth and strength to Romulus and Remus his grandchildren, by his
daughter Rhea.

(8) The birth and breeding of these two brothers is well known, we need not
enlarge their story farther than thus. They were the sons of Rhea, a Virgin
which was cloystered up into the Temple of Vesta, by her Uncle Amulius Sylvus,
that she might not bring forth an heir to endanger his Title. Notwithstanding
means was found, so that she conceived at once two children by Mars, and was
delivered among her Sister V^stals. For this, her self (as the censure was upon
such delinquents) was buried alive: her boys exposed to be destroyed: but were
preserved by Faustulus the Kings Shepherd, and nursed by his wife Laurentia, or
L^pa, for her bad life.

(9) When years, and their supposed father had taught them their pedigree, and
the base tyranny of their Uncle; they began with revenge upon him, for their
mothers quick burial: for their own intended murder, and their Grandsires
injury. To be brief, they slew their great Uncle Am^lius Sylvius, and turned
the Kingdom to the rightful (...).

(10) Thus when they had once dealt in disposing of Empires, they could not
easily return to the Shepherds hook, but bethought them of the like fortune for
their own advancement: and stirred not far to make good their purpose, but in
the very Mons Palatinus, the place where they sucked their nurse, they drew
together a monstrous head of debaucht Shepherds, and built the City, which is
now called Rome from Romulus; who in strife for the name, or (as some say) for
a disdainful skip over the new walls, slew his brother Rhemus, and was left the
sole Founder and Commander of this rascal crew, for so indeed it was, and held
in that contempt by their borderers, that they could not by entreaty get wives
from them, to continue their succession, till by a guile they had enticed the
Sabines to their Pastimes, ravished their women, and afterward by degrees either
made their peace, or wan it with the sword* from the people round about them.

(11) Thus began the Empire of Rome: and was governed at first by 7 Kings in a
direct succession to Tarquinius Superbus, who lost both himself and Kingdom, by
his own pride, and his Son Sextus rape upon Lucretia. It was next taken up by
Consuls, two annually chosen out of the Patritii, or principal Citizens. The
third rank were of Decemviri: but they again were dispossessed for the like rape
of Appius upon Virginia, and Tribunes were constituted of Consulary authority.
Then Consuls again in another course; and for a while Dictators; which when
Caesar had once clapsed, he soon made to himself a power Imperial: and (though
after five years it cost him his life, which he enchanged with Brutus and
Cassius for 23 wounds in the Senate House; yet) the liberty of Rome was never
so fully recovered, but that soon after the Government fell upon Angustus, by
the death of Anthony and deposing of Lepidus, who for a while were joined with
him into the Triumviratus.

(12) Th^s hold was scarce ever lost clearly to this day: though by the
changing of the seat Imperial from Rome to Bizantium, in the reign of their
forty third Constantinus: by the division into the Eastern and Western, in the
time of Theodotius: by the many invasions of the Goths, Huns, Vandals, Alani,
Burgundians and Lombards, it comes now far short of that full glory in which it
once shined.

(13) Yet is Italy still as before a happy soil, pleasant and fertile: at all
times moderate weather and healthful air: full of variety as well of living
creatures, as Plants, Corn, Wine, Oil, Linen, Herbs, etc. And can afford into
other Countries, Rice, Silks, Velvets, Sattins, Taffataes, Grogram, Rash,
Fustians, Gold-wire, Armor, Allom, Glasses, etc. The rich are very rich: for
wealth will come, with much labor, in great abundance: but the poor are
extreme poor; for they are most of them very idle.

(14) Her chief Rivers are Padus or Poe, Athesis, Rubica, Tyberis, Arnus, etc.
And her chief Mountains are the Alps, and Mons Appennius. The first are in
height 5 days journey, covered with snow, and from thence have their name a
nivibus albis. They have two passages from Germany into the Country, and three
out of France. From Germany, by the Valtoline and by Trent. Out of France
through Provence and Liguria: through the hills Genura to Lombardy: and through
the Country of Turaign. The Appennine Mountains run at length with Italy, like
the ridge of a man's back, and is called indeed Spina. The measure of Italy is
from North-west to South-East about 1020 miles, and from the two Seas cross in
some places 410.

(15) The Inhabitants are of a sad temper, solid judgment, witty, Politic,
and frugal: yet they are as deeply engaged to their peculiar vices; hot
letchers, and those seldom stand quit from that horrible torture of jealousy
over their Wives, for it measures others actions by its own rule* Both in them
are incredible; and makes treachery and murder seem no fault in their eye, if
they be provoked by suspicion. Little friendship with them but for advantage;
and a man must beware that he venture not farther upon those terms, than he may
well step back, lest he be betrayed (perhaps forced) to a love worse than their
hate; for they are most unnatural in their lust. The Women when they have their
free liberty differ not much, but their close keeping either hinders, or at
least hides their faults, so as they appear modest, lovely, and witty, for as
much as they dare speak.

(16) For war and learning, it bred in times past the mirror of both;
Camillus, Fabius Maximus, Scipio, Pompey, Caesar, Cicero, Livie, Tacitus,
Virgil, Ovid, and many hundreds which yet prompt our tongues and pens with
examples of goodness in several kinds. Nor has it lost that glory in this age;
For that Nation directs not their travelers into these parts, to see, hear,
and partake of their excellent learning, though they compass it with great
expense, and venture through dangerous hazzards, by reason of their treacherous
dispositions, and cruel barbarous usage of such as shall in any light
circumstance seem to be averse from their idolatrous suspicion. But their
Universities are many, and very famous; Rome, Ferrara, Naples, Salernum,
Venice, Padua, Verona, Florence, Millain, Mantua, etc.

(17) I must omit those many divisions of Italy, made first by Cato in
Appenninam, Cisappenninam, Transappenninam. By Pliny in Liguriam, Latium, etc.
By Strabo in Venetiam, Lucaniam, Apaliam, Romam, etc. By Ptolomy into 45
several Nations. We will rest in the latest, which best ^its the present state,
and numbers ten Provinces.

(1) The Kingdom of Naples. (2) The Land of the Church. (3) The Commonwealth of
Venice. (4) The Dukedom of Florence. (5) The Dukedom of Millain. (6) The
Dukedom of Mantua. (7) The Dukedom of Vrbin. (8) The Principality of Parma. (9)
The State of Genoa. (10) The State of Luca.

(18) The first is the Kingdom of Naples in the South part of Italy, and is the
most fertile: it is bounded with the Seas, unless on that side toward the
Papacy. It is of large compass, and comprehends many Provinces. (1) Campania
faelix, or terra laboris, and in this stands Naples the Metropopolis: and Cuma,
where the Sybyls Cave was, by which Aeneas went down to Hell* And not far off
is the lake Avernus. (2) Abrazzo, her chief Towns of note are Sulmo and Aquine,
the birthplace of our great School-man Thomas Aquinas. (3) Calabria inferior.
The chief City Salernum, an Academy, famous for Physic. (4) Calabria superior,
called Magna Grecia, from a multitude of Greek Colonies, which there built
Cities, and possessed a great part of the Countries. The principal of note was
Tarentum. (5) Terra Di Otranto, for her Metropolis Otranto, once Hydruntun. And
here stands Brundusi^m, famous for one of the best Havens in Christendom. (6)
Puglia, and her chief City was Arpinum, Tully's birthplace.

(19) The Land of the Church lies on the West of Naples, and South-East of the
Commonwealth of Venice: North and South she crosses from the Adriatique to
the Tuscau Sea. Her under-Provinces are (1) Romandiola: and her chief Cities
Bononia, and Ferrara, and Ravenna. (2) Marchia Anchonitana, in which stands
Loretta, the place where so many miracles are performed by our Lady, as they
deliver among the rest of their Legends. (3) Ducato Spoletano: and in this
Asis, where Saint Francis was born. (4) Saint Peter's Patrimony, a large
portion: and I believe more than ever he enjoyed, or could leave to his heirs.
Her ancient Towns, well known and often mentioned in the Roman Stories, were
Alba, the seat of the Sylvian Kings, and Ostia, built by Ancus Martius, and
Tybur, Preneste, the Ga^ii, the Veii, and that which bustles for the place
above any other in Christendom, Rome her self: we will not repeat her
beginning: she was then but two miles in compass: but after she grew far, she
burnished to 50 miles about; upon the walls 740 Turrets, and the Inhabitants
innumerable. For those memorable actions which were performed in her under the
Antique Empire, we will refer the Reader to a particular Description, derived
wholly to that purpose. As it is now, it stands somewhat lower on the banks of
Tiber, in the Campus Maetins: she retains yet 11 miles round, and 200000
Inhabitants, a great part Friars, and such odd idle fellows, which pretend to
Religion, for want of other means to live: cloister themselves up to a single
life, only to avoid the charge and encumbrances of marriage, not to separate
themselves from the world, or desires of the flesh: for among them they
maintain commonly 40000 Curtizans in good custom, and so rich, that they are
able to pay 30000 Ducats yearly to the Pope. The buildings in which they most
glory in, are the Church of Saint Peter, the Castle of Saint Angelo, the
Vatican Library, and the Popes Palace. The truth is, there is pride enough to
attire the Whore of Babylon, as there can hardly be any other meant than Rome:
she sits upon the Beast with seven heads: for she was built upon seven Hills,
Palatinus, Capitolinus, Viminalis, Aventinus, Esquilinus, Caelius Quirinalis;
was ruled first by seven Kings, and has been since subject to seven several
forms of Government; if you join the Popedom to those former which I have now
mentioned.

(20) The Commonwealth of Venice, on the North of the Papacy, is a large
Territory, and is now as famous for State Policy, as it has been heretofore
glorious for warlike achievements. The Inhabitants were first a people of
lesser Asia, and assisted their neighbor Trojans in their ten years quarrel
with the Greeks. So long since they were known by the name of Heneti: and that
differs not much from Veneti as they are now called. Though they have a Duke,
yet it is a free State, and governed by an A^istarchy: for he is ordered to the
very clothes on his back, by a certain number of the chief Citizens of Venice,
(for that is their Gentry) and has his allowance out of their treasury (little
enough to keep him from the thought of tyranny) about 40000 Ducats by the
year. The City it self is eight miles round, built upon 72 Islands, five miles
from the firm land, but for convenience of passage is always furnished with
Boats, and has 4000 Bridges. Their Arsnal keeps in continual readiness 200
Galleys. In their Magazin of War, there is ever furniture for 100000 men at
Arms. The younger brothers of the Gentry may not marry to increase the number
beyond maintenance: yet to make up their liberty, they allow them stews. Her
Provinces are (1) Marca Trarigniana, and her chief Cities are Truisco and Padua
(the University best frequented by Physicians, by reason of her rare garden of
Simples,) and Verona, with many others. (2) Frinby. (3) Histria. (4) Part of
Dalmatia. (5) The Islands, Candie, Corsica, Ithaca, Zant, Leucadia, Cythera,
etc.

(21) The Dukedom of Florence betwixt the Appennine Mountains on the North,
and the Tyrrhene Sea on the South, has on the West Romagna, and Piss^o on the
East. A great part of it was Tuscany, and gives yet to their Prince the title
of great Duke of Tus^any. Her chief Cities are Florence, where the most ^legant
Italian is spoke familiarly, and Pisa, which the Florentines besieged and
conquered, by the valor of our English Sir John Haukewood, who raised himself
by his brave carriage in the wars, ha^ing been before but a very poor Tailor in
Essex; the third is Pistoya, where first began the quarrel of the Gue^fes and
Gabellines.

(22) The Dukedom of Millain in Lombardy, on the South of Traginana, North of
Liguria, West of Mantua, and East of Piedmont. A pleasant and rich Province.
Her chief City Millain of seven miles compass, the seat of St. Ambrose his
Bishopric.

(23) The Dukedom of Mantua on the East of Millain, is of circuit not much
short of Florence; and her chief Town is Mantua, who may still glory in the
birth of that excellent Pot Virgil. It is very strongly situated, and fenced on
three sides with water a quarter of a mile broad: and the rest is guarded by a
firm wall. And to this Principality belongs the Dukedom of Mount-ferrat in the
South East of Piedmont.

(24) The Dukedom of Vrbin, in the midst of the Papal Territories, and upon the
North side of the Appennine Mountains. Her principal City is Vrbin, the
birthplace of another Virgil, though not of equal ^ame; yet one in whom we
have somewhat more interest; for he writ an English History, being at that time
here resident, and Collector of the Popes Peter Pence. Besides this, here are
two hundred Castles. The rock of S^. Leo, Marivol, etc. Some other Towns, as
Cabo, Pisanco, etc.

(25) The Principality of Parma on the South of Mantua, and the North of the
Appennine; East of Millain, and West of Medena; Besides other commodities,
which she yields in equal plenty with other parts of Italy, sends a pleasant
Cheese into other Countries, which we call Parmasans. And her chief City is
Parma. This Principate carries with it Mirandula and her Territories, a place
heard of by the common mention which is made of learned Picus de Mirandula.

(26) The state of Genoa is contracted now from that large compass which
heretofore it fetched in. It contained once Liguria and Capua, with the Taurica
Chersonesus, Hetruria, and a fair company of Islands in the Greek Seas. Little
left at this time upon the main Land besides Liguria, and that lies betwixt
the Rivers Varus and Marca, has the Alps on the West, which divide her from
Provence; Hetruria on the East; on the North of the Appennine Mountains, and on
the South the Tyrrhene Seas. She has her name from the chief City built by
Ianus. It is in compass eight miles; and the houses for two stories high are
built with marble. The people noble minded, and forward to any honorable
action, be it in Wars by the Land, or hazard by Sea. One Christopher Columbus
is sufficient to make good this Elogy, for whose birth she deserves to be
honored to the Worlds end. The women of Genoa are the most happy of any in
Italy; for they may see a man, and speak, and be courted, if not too boldly,
without suspicion of their friends, or jealousy of their husbands.

(27) The state of Luca is in Tuscania, and comprehends the Territories and
City Luca, built by Lucum^ King of Italy upon the River Serchius. It was once
the rendezvous of Pompey, Caesar, and Crassus. Here they joined their forces in
their great attempt. This has been the Emperors, the Genoa's, the V^netians,
the M^llanois, and the Florentines, in their several turns: They now rest under
the protection of the King of Spain.

HUNGARIA
Petrus Kaerius Caelavit
map of Hungary
The Description of the Kingdom of HUNGARY.
IT is not without example of good authoriy, if I take into this Description,
not only that part which is now more peculiarly known by the name of Hungary:
but the whole Country likewise of Darcia, which was once one with it, though
time and fortune have at last severed them: so that each has now its own
Princes, Laws, Customs, Language and Religion, different from other.

I the rather take to my self this leave, to avoid both the charge and trouble
of ordering for every one a several Table.

(2) First then the Kingdom of Hungaria is on the South-East of Germany* and
joins upon the Dukedom of Austria. They heretofore divided betwixt them the
Country of Pannonia. Austria was the superior, and this the inferior Pannonia.
The government and titles are now dis-joyned; and Austria has got the start in
power; for she is the mother of many German Princes, and has drawn the crown
Imperial almost into a succession.

(3) Yet is Hungary still an absolute Kingdom; and if not so rich and populous
as heretofore, it must not take from her honor, since her fortunes sunk not
through want of valor, and fault of her former Inhabitants; but we have been
for a long time exposed to hazard in the defense of Christendom against the
mis-believing Turks: and for that it has been by some styled the Co^k-pit of
the world, where once in a year at least a prize is played, and some ground
either won or lost by either party.

(4) The first Inhabitants of this Country were the Pannones; those were
expulsed by the Goths. And when the Goths went into Italy, it was le^t to the
possession of the Hunni, a Scythian people, which lived before near the Pal^s
M^otis; and when they saw their time, changed their seat: and about the year
three hundred seventy three* brake by great multitudes into these parts of
Europe, which they held till they were displaced by the Lombards. These last
were the Winnili, which lived in Scandia or Scandinaria, a Northern Peninsula,
betwixt the German and Hyperborean Seas. Their seat it seems was too barren for
their number, and mere want of Victuals forced them to seek better sustenance
in some other quarter. They overran many Countries, e're they could find any
one to their content: Among the rest the Parnonia had her course: and here they
continued till they marched into Italy, under the command of Alboinus, where,
after 200 years, their Kingdom was ruined by Charlemain.

(5) When it was thus left by Lombards, the Hunnes returned to their former
seat: and after some time of rest, grew up to a great Nation, able to encounter
the Roman Macrinus, to break his forces, and return victors from the battle.
About the year 439. they chose for their King, Attyla, whose inscription was,
Attyla Mundizi filius, and Magni Nim: nepos Engadiae natus, divina benignitate,
Hunnorum, Medorum, Gothorum, ac Danor um, metus orbis, Deique flagellum: An
insolent title; but indeed he was victorious over most parts of the then known
world, and bethought himself of enlarging his Territories in Asia and Africa:
But that design was drowned in wine and Lust; which at length brought him to a
most miserable destruction; For in the night time, when he had filled himself
with both, as he lay by his Concubine, with his face upward in a dead sleep,
his nose gusht a bleeding, and ch^ked him, being not able to recover himself
from his back to give it pas^age.

(6) Since this settling, they were once more disturbed by the Lombards, and
after by Charles the Great; so that they were not well ^astned in their
possession of this Country, till the time of the Emperor Arnulphus, about the
year 900. And indeed at this day hardly enjoy it, by reason of the incredible
spoils and massacres which the Tartars commit amongst them. This last name of
H^ngaria without doubt had the Original from their present Inhabitants and
their Predecessors, which at times have peopled this Country above 1200 years.

(7) This Hungaria propria is bounded on the West with Austria, on the East
with the River Tibi^cus, on the North with Poland and Russia, and on the South
with the River Savus.

(8) The Land thus limited, it is hard to believe what most Geographers report
of her fertility. That she yields Corn thrice in one year, almost without any
tillage or care of the husbandman. Fruit of all kinds in great abundance, and
Grapes which make an excellent, wholesome, and rich Wine. It breeds Cattle in
such plenty, that this one Country, besides store for her own Inhabitants,
sends Sheep and Oxen into for eign Nations, which lie about her: and might (say
they) suffice to feed all Europe with flesh. Venison is not here any Dainty:
Does, Hares, Goats, Boars, are every man's meat: and the game common, as well to
the Boors as Gentry: And so for Phesant, Partridge, Black-birds, Pigeons, most
Fowl, wild and tame.

(9) The earth is enricht with variety of Mines, which yields her plenty of
Iron, Steel, Copper, Silver and Gold: Lead she has not, and scarce at all any
Tin. Her Rivers are equally commodious, as well for their own wealth, as fit
conveyance of foreign Merchandise by shipping into their quarters. The chief
and only one indeed, which belongs properly to this Region, is Tibi^cus or
Teissa: and this imparts not her streams to any other Country, but fully and
freely pays her tribute to the Hungarian, more Fish than can be spent yearly
within their own limits. It passes proverbially upon this River, that two
parts of it are water, and a third Fish. The rest which are common to this,
with other Countries, are Danubius (here Ister*) and Savus, and Darvus, all of
them well stored with water provision, and in some places cast up a sand mixed
with very good Gold. Here are besides many waters of excellent virtues; whereof
some turn wood into Iron, others Iron into Brass: some very medicinal for
sundry diseases: others again so pestiferous, that they kill the creature which
does but taste them. The like is reported of an Hiatus in the ground,
unaccessible by any but the ^owls of the air, and those fall suddenly dead with
the stench which ascends from it.

(10) The people for the most part are strong, fierce, revengeful, harsh to
strangers: briefly, illmannered, and worse learned: For they affect not either
liberal Arts or mechanic Trades. Yet it affords one of the most reverend
Fathers of our Church, good Saint Hierome. Their greatest pride is, their name
of a warlike Nation; and the basest infamy to put up the term of Coward. Yet
the person charged may not acquit himself upon his upbraider; but must make
good his honor in single combat with a Turk: when he has overcome him (and
not till then) he may (by order of the Country) wear a Feather, as a note of
his true Gentry. The sons only are inheriters. If it chance that the males
fail, the estate descends not to the Daughters* but is forfeit to the common
treasury. They have no portions with their wives, but a wedding garment; and
till they are married, neither one nor the other are accustomed to lie in beds.
Their language is the Scythian, and their Religion diverse: some Papists, more
Protestants. They received Christianity above six hundred years since.

(11) Hungary has been heretofore divided in citeriorem and ulteriorem. The
former circa, and the other ultra Danubium. And both again had their division
into fifty Counties, as Maginus calls them. Her most illustrio^, Cities are (1)
Buda the Metropolis, and seat of their Kings, before it was taken by the Turk.
For pleasant situation, wholesome air, fertile fields about her, stately
buildings, and whatsoever else may commend her. Quadus sets her equal with any
other in Europe. Vadianus mentions here a stature of Hercules, which himself
saw made of brass so artificially, that the very veins were lively expressed:
besides the ruins of other rich work, a goodly Library furnished by Matthias
Corvinus King of Hungaria. But at his being there, it was not in the glory that
it had been: and not long after was for the most part utterly wasted by the
inhumane Turks. it is commonly called Os^en: and is thought by some to be the
same with C^rta in Ptolomies descriptions.

(12) (2) Southward from Buda stands Albanum an ancient Town, which of late
they have called Alba, now Alba Regalis; for it was the place where their Kings
were both Crowned and buried. (3) Strigonium Grau, an Archbishops seat and
Metropolitan of Hungary. It has had the several chance of war, was won by the
Tark in the year one thousand five hundred forty three, and recovered one
thousand five hundred ninety five. In which last action our noble Sir Thomas
Arundel took with his own hand the Turkish Banner; and was honored by the
Emperor Rodulphus with the title of a Count there: and here, by his own
Sovereign, Lord Arundel of Wardour. (4) Quinque Ecclesiae, a Bishops See taken
by the Turk one thousand five hundred forty three. (5) Comara, in a small
Island, which takes her name from the Town. And her^ it is reported that the
grass exceeds in length the height of a man. (6) ^avarium* not far from Coma^^*
and is called Rab. (7) Neuhensel, where ^^ucquoy was slain in the year one
thousand six hundred twenty one; having adventured too far upon the Hungarians
Ambush, with i^tent on^y to have received the order of their Forces, and
fittest place for access to bid them battle. And thus of the Kingdom of
Hungary, as it is strictly bounded with its own proper limits.

(13) Dacia is on the East of H^ngary, and is divided on the North from
Sarmatia by the Carpathian Mountains; on the South from Greece with Haemus; and
on the East re^^heth the Pontus Euxinus. The first Inhabitants were the Maesti
of Asia. Afterward the Daci, or (as Strabo calls them) the Dari, a Nation of so
slavish a disposition, that the Athenians brought them into a Proverb; and in
their Comedies presented their Sycophants, under no other name than D^^ri. The
Country is fruitful and enricht with Mines: their Horses are very comely, and
their manes so long, that they touch the ground. Their last King, before it was
made a Province to the Romans, was Decebalus, who (as Dion delivers it)
affrighted the Emperor from an assault which he intended, with an incredible
number of stakes, stuck up in battle array, and attired in his Soldiers old
habits. A wooden shift it was, but served him for the present; yet after, he
was vanquished by Trajan; and being sunk (by the fortune of war) below the hope
of recovering his Kingdom, fell upon his own sword* It is now divided into (1)
Transylvania. (2) Moldavia. (3) Walachia. (4) Servia. (5) Rascia. (6) Bulgaria.
(7) Bosnia.

(14) Transylvania is the Province of Dacia, and was it self called Dacia
Mediterranea, and Ripensis Dacia: Since Transylvania, because it was compassed
with Woods; and septem Castra, from her seven Castles of defense upon the
Frontiers, built by the Saxons, who questionless gave her the German name
Sibenburgen, which she yet keeps as a remembrance of her residence in these
parts. The Country is populous and fertile: It breeds fair and fierce Horses,
wild Bulls. Indeed their men in some parts are not very tame. Toward the North,
in the Province Zaculcia, they live most upon the spoil, maintaining continual
war with the Turks and Germans, and acknowledge no difference of worth or
degrees among themselves. Their Government, or rather want of government, is
compared to the Helvetian. Three places they have, H^sdy, Corbay, and Sceply,
whither they resort to determine of their State business. The chief Towns of
Transylvania, are Harmenstad, Alba Iulia, or Weisingburg, Claneenburg,
Schlesburg, Millenbachium, Coronae, or Cronstant.

(15) Moldavia lies in the North of Transylvania, and reaches as far as the
Euxine Sea: on the West it has part of Ruthenia. This Country has been by
course in the several possessions of the Emperor of Germany, the King of
Poland, and sometimes the Turk, thereafter as it was cast by chance of war. It
was a Vayvodate, and her chief Cities Occazonia, Fuchiana, and Falezing. To
this Moldavia belongs the Country of the Bessi, mentioned by Ovid in his 6 de
Tristibus.

Vivere quam miserum est inter Bessosque Getasque. They were a people of
Thrace, not far from Pontus, who lived most by theft and pillage, and after
possessed the Mountain Haemus, and a part which lies betwixt it and Lituania, and
from the Inhabitants bears the name of ^essaralia. Their principal Towns are
^ilim and Chermem. This last is the seat of the Turkish Sanziack; for the whole
Province became subject to his tyranny in the year 1485.

(16) Walachia is supposed rather to have been first named Flaccia, by the
Roman Flaccus, who placed here a Colony, which have continued the Latin tongue
to this day among the Inhabitants* though in a corrupt idiome, such as can
hardly be understood. Near to this, over the River Danubius, stands Pons
Trajanus, built by the Emperor Trajanus Nerva, a work worth admiration, as
appears by those ruinous parcels which are yet standing. It has puzzled the
best Artificers to find out how such a vast foundation could be framed in so
deep and fierce a stream, which could not be turned into any other course to
give way to the building The Country abounds with good commodities, Gold,
Silver, and Iron, Salt Pits, Wine, Cattle, and excellent great Horses. The
chief Cities are Sabinivus, Pr^ilaba, and Tergoresta.

(17) Servia lies divided from Hungary and Rascia, with the River Savus on her
North, and Bosnia on her West. It was the seat of the ancient Triballi, who met
with Philip King of Macedonia, and took from him the spoils which he had
brought from Maeteas King of the Sarmatians. It was, it seems, but a barbarous
people, and therefore Aristophanes in one of his Comedies among his mock-gods
names Marathane-triballos. Her chief Cities are (1) Taurunum, which Pliny
places in the utmost bounds of Pannonia. It is commonly known by the name of
Belgard, and Alba Graeca: It is not so great as glorious: nor is it fortified
so much with walls as Rivers; it lies open for a siege only one way: which the
Turk often attempted, and returned with great loss: yet at last in the year one
thousand five hundred twenty one it gave up to Solomon, and became a Province
to his Empire. It stands near where the Rivers Danubius and Savus are
dissevered: and is the Town which the Hungarians report to have been once
delivered by the admirable industry of Ioannes Capistranus a Franciscan, who is
much honored for the action, by those of his own Society. But Ioannes
Huviades, tha^t great Soldier and terror to the Turk, challenges the glory
as his peculiar. Vadianus. (2) Samandria, and (3) Stoniburg.

(18) Rascia is on the North of Danubius, where it parts with the River Savus,
and lies betwixt Servia and Bulgaria. In her chief City Boden there is kept a
Fair once every year, and much people resort for enterchange of commodities
from most Countries thereabout.

(19) Bulgaria somewhat North-East from Rascia, and is bounded with Danubius
upon the South* Theophylact was here Bishop, and was called Bulgarius: Near
this is the City Tomos, where Ovid lived in Banishment, as himself mentions
in his 3. de T^istibus. The principal Cities at this present are, (1) Sophia,
the seat of the Berlegbeg of Greece. And (2) Nicopolis. The ornament of their
King was imperial, a Crown of gold* attire of silk and red shoes. Their title
(...), a term allowed by the Greek Emperors, to those only which might wear
this habit, the rest they called (...), as much as Reges.

(20) Bosnia on the West of Servia, and South of the River Savus, had her name
from the Bossi or Bessi, the people of Bulgaria: within the memory almost of
our Fathers, it was governed by Kings* and as yet retains the title of the
Kingdom of Bosnia. The chief Towns are Cuzachium and Ia^iga: the first is the
place of residency, and the second of burial for the Bosnian Kings. Heretofore
the City Sinderoria had that honor, which some suppose to be the same that was
once called Dardanum.

DANIA
map of Denmark
The Description of the Kingdom of DENMARK.
THE Kingdom of Denmark strikes into the Sea, upon the North of Germany, as
Italy on the South: the manner of both is not much unlike: and the glory of
this heretofore was not inferior. For however in these latter ages, the pride
of Rome has pranked up her Territories in gay apparel: yet the day was, when
both she and they stooped to the Inhabitants of this Country, though then known
by another name of Cimbria Chersonesus. Three Roman Consuls, Manilius,
Sillanus, and Cepio fell by their sword: and the Empire it self (it seems) was
in a shrewd hazard, when their own Historian reports that, Actum esset de
imperio, nisi illi saecul. Marius contigisset.

(2) The people were then and had been from their beginning the Cimbri, a
Progeny of Gomer, first son of Iapheth; who before they removed into this
quarter of the world, dwelt in the inner Asia, near the straight which passes
from the Pontus Euxinus, to the Polus Maeotis: there we yet find the Bosphorus
Cimmericus in Ptolomy, which took name from the Cimmerii, for so they were
called at large, and by contraction Cimbri.

(3) From thence they were in time disturbed by the Scythians, and forced to
seek them a new sea for their habitation, which (after long travel) here they
found fittest for their security, as being a Peninsula fenced almost round with
Seas, from the force of all foreign Enemies. Yet here too they met at last with
a worse danger, which they could less resist. For the main Ocean brake into a
great part of the Country, displaced many of their Colonies, and sent them
Petitioners to Rome for a dwelling within her Dominions: but their entreaty
being with some neglect denied, it kindled the sparks, which to this time had
lain (as it were) dead in a dejected Nation, and now they break out into
flames, which stirred them* to require that by force of Arms* which they could
not request by submissive Oratory.

(4) Hence grew their first quarrel with the Romans, which they put on with
that courage and success, that they were emboldened at last to assault the very
City, with so strong Forces, that the glory of it began to shake, and had
shattered to pieces, had not the victory followed rather the fortune of one
Marius, than the valor of the whole Roman Legions: and that too (as some
relate it) was bought of his heathenish gods at a dear rate, by the bloody
sacrifice of his own daughter. The great and most memorable encounter was six
hundred and forty years after the City was built, about an hundred and eleven
before Christ. And then indeed they received (in a manner) a fatal crush, which
quelled them for the present: yet not so, but that in after ages, they
recovered strength and same: spread their victories over the most part of
Europe: and left their name (for many years since that) in Italy it self.

(5) For without doubt those Cimmerii mentioned by Starbo, which lived on the
North side of the Appennine Mountains near Boianum, were of this stock, and of
that note, as they gave occasion for many Proverbs and Fables to both Greek and
Latin Poets. It was a people which belike seldom saw Sun, but lurked for the
most part under ground, lived upon theft, and issued forth only in the night, a
season most fit for deeds of darkness: and so was their whole course, which
caused our well known Adage of tenebrae Cimmeriae pro densissima caligine. The
horrid dens, and dismal Rivers, which ran by the place of their abode, bred at
length a terror in the silly Heathens, and was esteemed by them, the passage
down to their Elysium. So Homer gives it in the second of his Odysses, and
Virgil in his sixth of the Aeneidos: and here did Naso feign his house of
sleep, Metamorph. 11.

Est prope Cimmerios longo spelunca recessu
Mons Carus, ignavi domus and penetralia Somni.
(6) Thus was their Original and progress for the first Age, whilst it
continued i^ the possession of the Cimmerians. The next which succeeded were
the Saxons, a people no less famous; but since their story has been elsewhere
remembered in our other Descriptions, it must give place here to the third
Invader the Danes, who whilst the Saxons were employed with us here in the
Conquest of England, start out of those petty Isles in the Sinus Codanus, and
took up their room in this Peninsula. There they have continued to this day;
and added other Territories to their Dominions: so that the then Cimbria
Chersonesus is but a parcel of the now Kingdom of Denmark, (as shall appear
when we come to her division) and that only which in our latter times is called
Iuitland, and runs North ward in form almost of a Hounds tongue into the
Baltic Ocean.

(7) The Danes (like enough) were at first one Nation with the Cimbri, but
being together expulsed by the Scythians from their native soil, they were
severally dispersed, though not at any great distance. These settled themselves
in the Northern Isles, as the other did in their Chersonesus. The first (at
their removal) varied not their antique name of Cimbri: As for Chersonesus it
is not peculiar to this Country, being as common as Peninsula: for it imports
no more than (...), a terra and insula: and of these there are many more, some
perhaps of equal same. Taurica Chersonesus was not far distant from the place
of their first abode; Peloponnesus well known in Greece, Thracia, Chersonesus
in Thrace, and Aurea Chersonesus in India.

(8) But the Danes it seems suffered some change as well in their name as
fortunes. Saxo Grammticus gives it to one Dan the son of Huniblus, which was
their first Governor in their new Commonwealth. But this is controuled by
Reccanus (says Quade) who renders another Etymon, how likely, I leave to
those, who can best judge by their skill in the Danish Language. The Cimbri
(says he) when they were grown to great multitudes, bethought themselves of
several names to distinguish their Colonies: Each following their own concei^
best to express the quality, in which they most gloried. Among the rest, some
there were which affecting at least the opinion of a valiant people, such as
scorned riches without honor, honor without victory, and victory without the
blood of their enemies; assumed their name from that creature, which Nature had
marked out with this Character, Gallum igitur gallinaceum, tum bellicae laudis,
and generosissimi animi, tum indolis regalis and militis strenui, and adomnia
momenta vigilis optimum exemplar, ut pro Symbolo and synthemate quodam sivi
acceperunt, it a nomen quoque ab eo placuit mutuari; vocarunt enim sese Dic
Hanem and compositae per concis^onem Danem quod Gallina^^^ significat.

(9) However the Etimon may be far fetched, for ought I know, yet doubtless at
this day they make good the Elogy of a valiant and warlike Nation; strong of
body, big boned, and of a terrible countenance, ambitious of a glorious death,
rather than a sluggish idle life. It is the saying of Valerius Maximus, Cimbros
and Celteberos in acie gaudio exultare consuevisse, tanquam gloriose and
feliciter vita excessuros: lamentari vero in morbo, quasi turpiter perituros.
We our selves heretofore have felt their strokes, and submitted to their
Conquests in the time of Osbert King of Northumberland. They were provoked by a
rape done upon the Sister of the Danish King: for which the poor English dearly
paid, with two hundred fifty five years servitude under their tyranny. Yet
since we have had, and at this time do enjoy the benefit of their magnanimity,
under the personal conduct of the right valiant and illustrious King Christian,
who hazards both his state and life in the behalf of his dear niece Elizabeth,
and her Royal Husband the Prince Palatine of the Rheine.

(10) Their first Prince which established them a settled and civil government,
was Gotricus, in the year seven hundred ninety seven. Before it was but a
confused state, and affords us little certainty of their story. From that time
the government has been under a sole King, of equal power with the greatest,
though his Revenues are hardly answerable: His best profit is from a breach of
the Sea, which runs into the middle part of the Country, commonly called the
Sound; which is a passage so narrow, that no shipping can pass that way,
without the license and favor of the Wathch-men: keeping Garrison there to
receive the Imposts and Customs of the arriving Vessels for the King. It is
easily gathered to what sum of money that Impost amounts, by the infinite
number of Shipping, of H^lland, Zealand, France, England, S^otland, Norway, and
the Baltic Sea, that sail in those Seas, and of necessity must pass the ^aws
of that narrow strait. The Inhabitants are as greedy of Rh^nish, French and
Spanish Wines, the Spices of Portugal, and the fruits of Andaluzia, as they
again are needy of the Wax, Honey, and Skins which are brought thither from
Prussia, Livonia, Muscovia, and the bordering Nations. The other chief riches
of Denmark are goodly Horses, great store of Cattle, and Corn enough, sent to
the supply of diverse other parts of Christendom: It has been observed, that
50000 Oxen have been driven out of these Provinces into Germany, for which,
toll has been paid at Guttaorp. Such incredible plenty of Herring, (near the
Isle of Scania) that the Ships (they say) are searce able by main strength of
Oars to row out of the Harbor. Besides these, here are furniture for War both
by Sea and Land, Armor, Masts, Cables, Steel, Saddles, etc.

(11) Their chief person of fame in course of Learning, was Ticho Brahe, an
excellent Mathematician: memorable for his artificial Tower in the Isle of
Fimera. In Religion the greatest part of them are now Lutherans, but were first
converted to Christianity by Ansuerus.

(12) We are come to her division, which the Sea almost has made to our hands.
For her several Provinces are well-nigh so many Islands, at least Peninsula.
The chief are (1) Iuttia, or the old Cimbria Chersonesus. (2) Diethmarsia. (3)
Scania. (4) Hollandia. (5) Bles^ide. (6) The Islands in the Sinus Codanus,
which lie betwixt Iuttia and Scanta: That is the West, and this is the East
limits of the Danish Dominions, North and South are the Ocean, and the River
Esdora or Hever.

(13) Iuttia as it was the first, so it is the principal part of this Kingdom:
Her bounds upon the West, and East, and North, are the B^ltick Seas, and upon
the South, it ^s joined to Holjatia, and the Istumes of Dith^arsex. It is in
length, (...) Muginus, eighty German (...) from the River Albis to the Cimbrick
Promontory called Seagen, and in breadth twenty. It is a fruitful Region, for
Wheat, Rye, Barley, etc. And in the North-west there is good pasture, though
more Northward it becomes sandy and barren, and puts the Inhabitants to fish
for their victuals, by which they make a shift to live, though hardly enough
God Knows, in poor sheds slightly clapped together, and of a slender stuff,
such as if need be they can remove at their pleasure upon very short warning,
and bear them away almost upon their back. They transport into other Countries
great store of good Horses for service, besides Barley, Cheese, Butter, Suet,
Hides, and rich Skins, Nuts and Fish. In this Province are twenty eight Cities,
twenty Castles, and four Bishops Sees: Ripensis, Arthusienses, and AElburga,
all near to the Seaside, wilburga in the up-land Country. From this Province
came the Iuits, who joined in with the Saxons and Angles to conquer England.
Her chief Towns are Rincopen, Hoine, and Achausen.

(14) Diethmarsia is situated betwixt the Rivers Albis and Eidera. They were a
parcel of the old German Saxons: and the Country it self is by some yet
reckoned the lower Saxony: but it is in subjection to the King of Denmark: for
it is the seat and title of his first Son and heir apparent, as the Dauphinate
is to the Son of France, and Wales to the Son of England. Her Metropolis is
Breme: the rest Meldorp, and Heininckst, and Tellinckst, and other rich Towns;
yet the soil cannot be very fertile, by reason of the moist air and her many
Marshes, especially toward the North, which makes it unfit for tillage, and
indeed impassable for travelers: Upon which impediments the Inhabitants have
made this advantage to keep out all foreign Invaders, and appropriate what
wealth they have to their own secure possession.

(15) Scania or Scandinaria, in the largest compass, comprehends more than
belongs to the Kingdom of Denmark; and is environed round about with Seas,
except on that side where it is joined to Muscovy. On her West ^s the Kingdom
of Norway, on her East Swethland, and upon the South of that, is this Scania,
which gives place to no Region, (at least within these Dominions) either for
wholesome air, or fertile soil, for commodious Havens, and plenty of
Merchandise; for dainty Rivers of store of Fish, for Cattle, Mines of Iron,
Lead, Silver and Gold, fair Towns, and civil Customs. The Metropolis is Lumpis.
This whole Province is some eighteen miles in length, and in breadth about
twelve in some places, in others not above six.

(16) Hollaudia on the North of Scania, and South of Suecia, is bounded with
the Seas upon the West, and on the East with vast Woods, which divide her from
Gothland. It is a fertile Region, and not much unlike unto Scandia, but that it
comes somewhat short of her happiness in soil. Her chief Town is Hallausoc.

(17) Blescida or Blicker is bounded on the East and South with Baltic Ocean,
and on the North is parted from Scania by a little patch of the Sea. It is a
Region full of Rocks, Woods, and Mountains. Her chief City and Castle is
Culmaria, a strong defense against the Swethelander: and the next Town of note
is Malmagia, the birthplace of Casparus Bartholinus a late approved Writer in
the Arts.

(18) In the Sinus Codanus near to the Cimbria Chersonesus, there are numbered
35 Islands. The chief are (1) Zealand, in length 64 miles, in breadth 52, it
contains in it 13 Cities, 7 Castles, with diverse pretty Towns and Villages. The
Metropolis is Ha^^nia, the single University within the King of Denmarks
government. And here is his chief place of re^idency, which by the Germans is
called Kopp^nhagen, the Merchants Haven. Her other Towns are Roschilt, a
Bishops See, and heretofore a strong Fortress, well fur^isht for war, and
honored with the Sepulchers of some of their Kings: but yet it is now at a
lower ebb, and of little respect. Elsner or Helsinura is a Sea-town. That in
Helsinura is called Croneburgh, well furnished with all provision. The other in
Scania Hepsigburgh of equal strength, to cause the best Ship to cast Anchor,
and satisfy their King, before they shall have the way open out of the Baltic
into the Ocean.

(19) (2) Fionia or Fimera is second to Zealand both in bigness and plenty of
rich commodities. It is in length 12 miles, and 4 in breadth. A pleasant
Region, fertile and fruitful. Here are in this Island 8 Cities: the chief is
Ottonium, Odensch or O^sell, in the very middle almost. It was a Bishops See,
well built, but ill fenced: for it has been often times wasted and burnt by the
Enemy. The other Towns are upon the Sea^ coast, and their names are Neburgh,
Sinborgh, Feborch, Ascens, Eorgena, Middlesar, and Kortemunde: beside some
Castles, many Villages and Noble-mens houses.

(20) (3) Laglant 7 miles in length, and has in it many Villages and fair
buildings. The City R^theopinga, and the Castle Trancura. (4) Loilant near
Seelant. It is full of Hazels, that they fraught Ships with Nuts and traffic
for them into many other Countries. It has five Towns, Nistad, Nasco, Togrop,
Rothus, and Marilus, with some strong Castles, pretty Villager, and Noble-mens
houses. (5) (...) in length four miles. Her Cities are Stubecopen and Nicopen,
a pleasant and a fair one, for which she is by some styled the Neopolis of
Denmark. (6) Moena or Muen. In this the City Steck and Elmelanda. (7) Femera or
Femeren. Her chief Cities are Derborch, and Petersborn, and Stabull: and here
is the Castle Vraniburgh, built by the great Mathematician Ticho Brahe, which
besides the fame of its own artificial structure, is much celebrated for the
admirable Instruments, which are there kept, whereby the particular motion of
the Heavens is excellently observed.

(21) (8) And to this Kingdom belongs the Islands Bor^holme, which lies in the
Baltic Seas, called more particularly Mare Suevicum, betwixt Blicker and
Pomerania. It is a Region of excellent pasture, and feed abundance of Cattle:
and therefore is full of Butter, Cheese, Wool, Hides, etc. and sends into other
Countries much of their provision for victuals, powdered and barrelled up for
the longer keeping. It has some well peopled Towns: the chief is Boruholme. It
had lain for fifty years together in pawn to the State of Lubeck; but was
redeemed by Frederick the second.

(22) From these, and those many other Northern Islands, there have issued in
several ages an innumerable sort of Nations, which like so many birds, as
Maginus calls them, have flown over the greatest part of our Christian world.
He concludes, that ex his insulis olim, Gothi, Ostrogothi, Vestrogothi*
Vandali, Franci, Cimbri, Gepidae, Dani, Hunni Suedi, Herculi, Rugi, Alani,
Longobardi, Alemani, and alii plures, Danubio and Rheno superatis, omnem
Europam, and praesertim ipsam Italiam, altricem imperii and dominum 400. and
plus annis perpetua quadam regionum successione subjugarunt, ac Romani nomines
gloriam fere omnem extinxerunt.

POLONIA
P. Kaerius Caelavit
map of Poland
The Description of POLAND
THE Kingdom of Poland borders upon the East Side of Germany, and indeed as far
as the R^ver Vistula, it is accounted a part of the Empire: and uses the same
Speech, Religions, and Customs, as the other Territories, admitting only that
variety, which all of them have among themselves: and must needs be found in so
large compass, s governed by so many several free Princes. Beyond the River, as
it shrinks from the seat of Christianity, so it begins to degenerate into a
kind of Heathenish rudeness, which favors of their Predecessors.

(2) For this Tract is a part of Sarmatia Europae, and the first Inhabitants
were the Sauromatae, a Scythian people, as well for barbarism as by name. It
was next possessed by the Vandals, an active Nation, of whom we have had some
inkling, at least almost, in every place which we have past For they have
spread their Victories through Europe; and have left either name or story
behind them in Spain, France, Italy, Germany, Tnrace, and where not? Their most
received pedigree is from Vandalus (whom Tacitus remembers) the Tuscane King of
the Progeny of Tuisco, first Founder of the Germans. Yet Munster in his
Cosmography mentions a pretty conjecture of some well wishers, it seems,
(perhaps to their own Country) which gave the original of their name of
Vandals to one Vanda, a Queen of Poland.

(3) Briefly, Were the Vandals natives, or were they invaders; here they were
found, and ejected by the Sclavonians, and these were the third Inhabitants of
Polonia: She was overrun at the same time, and had the same fortune with
Bohemia: they were both lost to their old Lords, and divided betwixt the two
runnagate brothers of Croatia, Zechius and Lechius, who being forced (for a
murder) out of their own soil, brought on their crew into these parts, about
the year 550. and here have continued, (in their posterity) to this day. They
are as yet remembered in the very names of the people. For the Bohemians in
their proper language call themselves Zechians, and in the greater Poland there
is still extant a Territory, known by the title of Regnum Lechitorum.

(4) Her Etimon signifies no other, than the site of the Country, as the
Sclavonians first descryed it. For it was a Champian or plain field, and so is
Pole land interpreted out of the Sclavonish tongue. It was before called
Sarmatia, and the people Sauromatae, ab oculis Lacertarum, Lizzards eyes, (...)
and (...), a property (it seems) which gave name to all her Nations. For this
was divided from another Sarmatia by the River Tanais; that on the one side was
Asiatica, for the most part wild, Heathen^sh Idolaters, and in the farthest
parts of Scythia some (...): this other is Europaea, which being joined with
some parts of Germany Westward to the River Odera, Silesia, and Mo^avia, make
up the Kingdom of Polonia, as it is here described.

(5) The bounds then of this great Region are on the West the River Odera,
Silesia, and Moravia: on the East the River Neiper, which Ptolomy calls
Boristhenes: on the North Pomerania, or rather the Baltic Ocean, and on the
South Russia, and the Mountains of Hungary. And if we will, with Maginus, take
in the out Provinces which belong to this Government, we must reach Eastward
the Tartars and (...), that live near on the other side of Boristhenes: and
North-east ward part of Muscovia, Southward the Hungarian mountains, and the
Vallaci: insomuch that the compass would come little short of all Spain, as it
lies beyond the Pyrenaean.

(6) The principal Rivers of Poland, are (1) Vistula, it has its rise in the
Caparthian Mountains, which divide this Kingdom from Hungary, and it self runs
into the Baltic, but by the way takes in diverse other streams, on the West out
of the Polonia Germanica, and on the East, out of the Sarmonica. It is
navigable 400 miles. (2) Neister, which has her Fountains in the hills of
H^ngary, and gl^des East ward, on the South of Podolia into the Pontus Euxinus.
(3) Neiper or Boristhenes, which bounds the Kingdom on the East, is navigable
600 stadia, and runs from North to South, into the Pontus Euxinus, where there
is naturally cast up plenty of Salt, which needs no art to perfect it. (4)
Rubin in Lituania. (5) Hypanis, now Bugh, not far distant from the City Oleska,
and falls at last into the River Vistula; with many others of lesser note,
though all conduce to make the Country in some kinds very fertile.

(7) For it abounds with most sorts of Corn and Pulse, sufficient both for
their own spending, and continual traffic into other Countries. Many of her
neighboring Regions could not well miss her plenty, as well of Whet, Rye, and
Barley, as Beeves and other Cattle, which gives supply to Saxony, and the rest
of Germany near hand, which hardly yield enough for their Inhabitants out of
their own store. The blessing of this fertility cannot come alone; but must
needs bring with it the like riches of butter, Cheese, Milk, Wax, Honey, and
whatever else has its birth from the ground. It is well nigh past belief which
is reported of the multitude of Bees, such as yield more Honey and Wax, than
the people can find room for: They need here neither Art, nor care of the good
Huswife to order their Hives, but naturally are their own Guardians, and
provide so diligently for their own safety within the bulks of trees, that they
easily pass over the hardest winter without hurt. There is store of game, both
for hunting, fowling, and fishing. In her Forests is seen a kind of wild Horse
with an horn like an Hearts, and the Alces, etc. Lastly, among other good
commodities, the worst is not her Pitch and Rosin, which yield her a large
annual revenue.

(8) Her chief wants proceed from her bleak situation; For it is a plain
Country, and shadowed for the most part with Woods: very cold, and by that
means she has little Oil, and scarce Grapes enough to teach them the use of
Wine. A great defect among so good drinkers; for they have a name for that
equal with any part of Germany: and that I think gives no ground to the rest of
Europe: But they make a shift to find themselves play with a kind of Metheglin,
Gold or Silver here is not much, unless about Cracovia: and (as Maginus says)
in Sandomica, where there are likewise some Mines found of the Lapis Lazulus,
perfect Lead, and Iron, and pieces of Copper. Near the Towns of Nochow and
Palukie, there is extant a kind of Miracle, a certain Earth naturally formed up
into pots, which if you take forth and dry, they differ very little by sight
from such as are made by hand, and serve aptly for the same use.

(9) The Inhabitants, though they had but a wild beginning, yet in the more
civil parts are of a gentile behavior to strangers, and not i^iurious one to
the other. Theft is a voice not known to the Polands: For they dare travel
alone long journeys in the depth of Winter, with one poor one to draw their
sledge in the night times, etc. and this with more security and less danger,
than we ^ay walk in our open streets in the dusk of Evening. Questionless, this
special practice of honesty in that kind, above other Nations, proceeds from an
inbred desire which they generally have to be in employment: for they are very
industrious in their several faculties. Those which pretend to Learning, addict
themselves much to the study of Languages. The Latin is familiar to the Gentry
as their own: (and as Maginus reports) is used in some Towns by rich and poor
as their proper speech. They are prodigal both in diet and apparel, give much
entertainment, and keep a large retinue of servants. In brief, they are as
equal to themselves, as they are courteous to others; For they will not be
oppressed by the greatest Potenate either home bred or foreign. They are very
vallant, and meet their enemy with an undaunted courage, be they never so much
overborn either by number or strength. The truth is, no Peasant is suffered to
bear arms: only their Nobility and Gentry of place in their Common wealth: such
as war, not for others only, and upon constraint, but have somewhat themselves
to lose: and therefore are ready as well for their own safety, as defense of
their King and Country, to set on upon all assays, and raise an incredible
number of excellent Horse, well manned almost, in an instant: For they are kept
in continual motion by the Muscovite.

(10) They have a good mind to Religion, but cannot fasten upon any one to
their liking: and therefore they will try all. Christians they have been ever
since the year 965. but from that time, they have scarce slipped any error,
schism, or heresy, which has crept into the Church. Here are Jesuits, and
others of the Romish Sects; Here are Lutherans, and Calvinists, and Arrians,
and Anabaptists, and Anti-trinitarians; none allowed, but all tolerated: and
indeed Poland had the seniority of Amsterdam, for that old saying, That if a
man had lost his Religion, here he might find it. They have one ancient custom
in their Churches, which, methinks may well interpret our standing up at
rehearsal of the Creed; when the Gospel is reading, the Nobility and Gentry
unsheath their Swords, and stand as it were prepared to defend it with their
lives against any which dare violate it.

(11) Their King is chosen by the general States, and is for the most part some
great Warrior of their neighboring Princes: For they have no peace on their
East limit, with Muscovites and Tartars, but what they make with the Sword. The
Laws are only temporary Statutes, there are none fundamental: But when the King
has any great design in behalf of the Common wealth, he assembles a Council of
the Nobility to assist him. His Revenues coming in, are thought to be about six
hundred thousand Crowns: and each quarter of his Kingdom maintains his expense
for one quarter of the year. Their first King was Boeslaus, crowned by Otho 3.
in the year 1001. But the Regal dignity was lost again to Boleslaus the Bold,
who began his Reign 1078. but was deposed by the Pope, and no other suffered to
take up the Scepter and rule by the name of King, till the year 1295. The first
of the second course was Primastaus, the second Duke of Poland and Pomerania:
Since whose time there has been no breach to this day.

(12) The chief Provinces of the Kingdom of Poland as they lie from her West
to East, are (1) Pomerania. (2) The Dukedoms of Ozwits and Zator. (3) Polonia.
(4) Prussia. (5) R^a nigra. (6) Samiogitia. (7) Massoria. (8) Livonia. (9)
Podlassia. (10) Lituania. (11) Volhinia. (12) Podolia.

(13) The first is Pomerania, bounded on the North with the Baltic Ocean, on
the West with Germany: and it is accounted by some a Province of the Empire, as
we have ordered in our description. But in regard the greatest part is subject
to the King of Poland, I hope I shall wrong neither to give both their due, and
reckon it as well to this government, since it has an equal, if not a greater
title to the rule, though not to the Inhabitants; for they are most Germans. It
is a plain Country, but exceeding fertile and rich in all commodities, which
any other part affords: flourishes with forty Cities, which are fenced round
either with the Sea, or ditches answerable for safety. Her chief stands upon
the shore: for it is by nature so well guarded from the violence of the Sea,
that they need fear no inundation: but yet have a very easy and secure
entrance for ships. Along the Coast stand Coberg, Camin, Costin, Gribswald,
etc. In the up-Land Stetinum the Me^ropolis, Newgard, Lemburg, etc. The people
were harsh persecutors of the Church of Christ till the year 1122. (2) The two
Dukedoms of Oswittes and Zator by. Silesia in the West bounds of this Kingdom.
They were heretofore sui juris: but now belongs to this government; the first
since the year 1454. in the time of Casimirus: and the last was brought under
by Sigismond the first about an hundred years after.(3)

(14) Polonia is divided into the greater and less. The greater Poland is more
Northern, and joins upon Pomerania and Prussia. It was therefore called the
greater, because here Lechius first planted himself and built the City Guesna,
which was the Regal seat till it was translated to Cracovia in the lesser
Poland 1320. yet at this day is her Archbishop Primate of the Kingdom: during
an interregnum has the power of a Prince; and Crowns the new King at his
Inauguration. Polonia the less is more Southern, lies hard upon Russia and
Hungary. It is now esteemed the more noble part of this Province: For here
stands the Metropolis Cracovia on the banks of Vistula and Lublin, and other of
the best note in Poland.(4)

(15) Prussia Spruce, on the East of Pomerania, has the Baltic Seas on the
Nor^^, and Massori^ on the South: and on her own East Lituania. It is now a
Dukedom, and contains Cities of note, Dan^zike, where Keckerman professed, and
Mons Regus Regimont: Maneburg, Heilsperge, C^lne, etc. Her chief commodity is
Leather, much used heretofore to make Ierkins, where none more brave than the
younker, that could compass a Leather Ierkin. Here is likewise great store of
Amber, a juyco growing like a Corral in a Mountain of the North Sea, which is
clean covered with water, and cast up by violence of the waves into their
Havens. (5) Russia nigra on the East and South of Poland the less, and the
North of Hungary, and West of Podolia, and had her name, as some suppose, first
Ruthenia and Russia, which in the Ruthen tongue signifies no other than a
dispersed Nation: For so were the Russians through all Sarmatia Europaea, and a
part of the Asiatick from the frozen Ocean to the Mediterr^neum, and the Sinus
Adriaticus, and the Pontus Euxinus, and the Mare Balticum: all that used the
Sclavonian tongue, and professed Christ after the manner of the Greeks, were
called Russi and Luthen^. But the Province here meant is only the South Tract,
as much as belongs to the King of Poland, and is called Nigra, to distinguish
it from Muscovia, or Russia Alba. The people are valiant, and in their fights
use weapons of exceeding weight and bigness. Her Prince is e^tituled Duke: the
name of King they will not endure. This Province contains the Territories
Leopoliensis, with her chief city Leopolis. Lunt-burg, a fair Town, and an Arch
bishop See: And the Territories Haliciensis, ^elzensis, Praemifliensis, etc. (6)

(16) Samogitia toward the North, and her West has the Sinus Balticus: North
East Livora. It is in length fifty miles, very cold, compassed in with Woods
and Rivers. Her principal Town is Cam^a. But not that nor any other is very
famous for Lordly buildings; the fairest are but sheds in respect of other
Countries: The Peasants are truly so indeed; for they reckon themselves but
little better than their Cattle; live under the same roof with them, without
any partition or nice loathing of their nastiness; a life fit enough for such a
people, for they are yet most of them gross Ido laters: and are often times met
in their Woods with horrid visions; and are strangely cozened by the Devil with
a belief that they can prophecy. The silly blasphemers nourish in their house a
poor snake (like themselves) gathered out of some ditch, and call it their god,
worship it with great fear and reverence, and sacrifice once in a year, I
October. to their devil, but by the name of their god Ziem enike. The better sort
are Christians, of a comely portraiture, and good feature, valiant and ready to
take Arms when occasion calls them. Their greatest plenty is of Honey, which
they gather ready made to their hands in their hollow trees.

(17) Massoria on the South of Prussia, and North of Polonia and Russia, and
the East of either Poland, West of Lituania: She had her name from a former
Duke, which was ejected by Casimirus, where it had a peculiar Prince of its
own, it belonged to the second son of the Kings of Poland; but in the year
1526, after the untimely death of John and Starislaus, heirs to this State, it
became a peculiar to the Crown of Poland. Her chief City is Marscoria, which
has many under her: all use the same speech and customs, with the other
Polonians. (8) Livonia, to the North bounded with Finland, on the South with
Lituania, on the West with the Baltic Sea, and on the East with Muscovie. It
is a large Province, carries in breadth one hundred and sixty miles, and in
length five hundred. It is Fenny and Woody; but yet has Corn and Fruit plenty,
Cattle good store, wild and tame, especially Horses: They have Honey, Wax, etc.
enough to exchange with other Countries for Wine and Oil: For this yields
little or none. It became Christian, one thousand two hundred. Her chief Towns
are Riga, Rivalia, Derpe, and Venda. About some twelve miles from the Continent
is the Isle of Osel (9.)

(18) Podlussia on the East of Massoria, and West of Lituania, was joined to
Poland, one thousand five hundred sixty nine. The Inhabitants are Massorites,
Russians, and Polands. Her chief Towns are Titock sin, a Fort where the Kings
Treasure is kept, Beisco, and Russin. In this the King has a fair Court,
furnished magnificently, both for state and pleasure. (10) Lituania, on the East
of Poland, and South of Livonia, on the West of Muscovia, and North of Podolia.
The air is very unnatural, and by that means the creatures thereof every kind
are very small, and their wants great of Corn, Wine, Salt, etc. The people are
of a slavish disposition, and live thereafter poor and basely. The women have a
freedom by custom to keep many Stallions, which their Husbands love us
themselves, and call them their adjutories. But the men may by no means play
false. Their condemned persons (be it to death) must execute themselves, or be
tormented till they expire. They became Christians, (...) as they are, one
thousand three hundred eighty six. The principal Cities are Vilna, (...), and
Brestia, and Norigredum, a City by report larger than Rome.

(19) (11) Volhinia lies betwixt Lituania, Padolia and Russia, a plentiful
Region, and breeds hardy Soldiers. They live as Russians, use the same speech
and customs. Her chief Towns are Kioria, and Lircassia, upon the edge of
Boristhenes. (12) Podo^ia is on the South of Lituania, East of Poland, and
North of the River Niester or Boristhenes, as it runs from his head to the
Pontus Euxinus, and on the West of Russia. It affords great plenty it seems;
three Harvests (they say) of one sowing. It is pity (says Vadianus) it should
be left desert, as in manner it is, unless here and there a Village* Her chief
is Camiensen, the only one, able to return the Turks and Tartars with the loss,
as it has oftentimes done. The rest are not many, and those but weakly
peopled* For the often incursions of the Tartars; their speedy Horse, to ride a
great compass in a little time; their (...) of Faith, upon terms of
composition; and their cruelty when they have got a victory, causes the
Inhabitants of those parts to fly them at a great distance, and leave their
Land waste: since they dare not trust their peace, nor are able to withstand
their war.

PERSIA
P. Karius Caelavit
map of Persia
The Description of the Kingdom of PERSIA.
THis Empire was one of the first, and most potent in the Eastern world; and
though since in several ages, she has felt the variety of fortunes, to which
all Kingdoms are subject, and been forced to deliver up her glory to the
succeeding Monarchies of the Macedonians, Parthians, Turks, and Sarazens; yet
now at last is she recovered to her own height and greatness, and the name of
Persia reaches farther than ever, if we take in, (as most Geographers do) the
Regions of Media, Assyria, and the rest; which were heretofore the seat of
several illustrious Kingdoms.

(2) Surely the first which inhabited any part of this compass, were the Medes,
a people of great antiquity, who reach both their original and name from Madai,
the son of Iapheth: for it was not long after the flood; that they were subdued
by Ninus King of the Assyrians: one and the other, Media I mean and Assyria,
though then they had apart their peculiar governments, yet both were but a
parcel of this Country, which is now known by the name of Persia.

(3) To Ninus and his successors they continued faithful for many years, till
the effeminate weakness of Sardanapalus gave opportunity to the ambition of
Belochus governor of Babylon, and Arbaces of Media, to divide his Empire
betwixt them, which they did in the year of the world three thousand one
hundred forty six; and then began the Monarchy of the Medes, which spread it
self through the the greatest part of Asia; and (for above two hundred years)
gathered strength, till the time of Astiages, who dreamed himself out of his
Empire, as Iustine relates the story.

(4) Persia proprie dicta, from whence this whole Country at last took name,
was at this time but an obscure Kingdom in respect of what now it is, and
tributary to the Medes. Her Prince was Cambyses, the Father of the great Cyrus,
by Mandanes daughter to Astiages; when she was great, and expected the time of
her deliverance, her Father touched with a perplexed dream, that she made so
much water as would drown all Asia, interpreted it, that her issue should be
the overthrow of his state; and therefore delivered the child which was born to
her, into Harpagus his charge to be destroyed, and he to the Kings Herdsman,
who (unawares to Both) preserved the guiltless infant, so that at last he took
revenge upon his cruel Grandfather, and laid a foundation for the Persian
Monarchy.

(5) In this attempt his anger wrought him no farther than his enemy: for he
left the government of Media still to Cyaxares the son of Astyages, and
afterward married his daughter, joined with him in his conquests, and till his
death gave him pre-eminence of title. They were both engaged in the taking of
Babylon, slaughter of Baltazar, and destruction of the Chald^ans: The Scripture
gives this victory to Darius Medus, who, as most hold, was no other than
Cyaxares: and he only named as the principal of the two while he yet lived,
though Cyrus had his part in the action, after his Uncles death enjoyed it as
his own, and made perfect the Monarchy of the Persians in the year of the world
3046.

(6) About thrity seven years after, the succession was broke for want of
lawful heirs, to Cambyses their second King; and therefore their Princes
consulted to salute him, whose Horse first neighed at a set meeting upon the
Court green, before the Sunrising. Darius Histaspes was one, and by the
subtiliy of his Horse-keeper carried the Crown; for the night before, in the
same ground, he had coupled a Mare with the Horse that his Master should ride,
which when the lustful Steed missed the next morning, being full of spirit, no
sooner had he set footing upon the place, but with much eagerness he snuffed
and neighed after his Mare, and gave the quue to the other Princes to proclaim
Darius King of the Persians. This was he whom the Scripture calls Ahasuerus: he
was H^sters husband.

(7) Thus is the Empire now settled, and entailed by descent after him to that
famous Xerxes, who made war upon Greece, with an incredible Army, joined Asia
to Europe with a bridge, and dammed up Hellespont with his Navy; yet was at
last vanquished by four thousand at Thermopyle, and after by Themistocles
forced to make his flight in a small boat toward his own Country, contemned
of his subjects, and within a few years slain in his Palace by Artabanus. His
immediate successor was Artaxerxes Lengimanus, who. sent the Prophet Esdras to
re-edifie the Temple, and so on to Darius the last Persian of. that course, who
was ost vanquished by Alexander the Great, and left the Monarchy of the world
to the Macedonians: After the death of their victorious Captain, it was divided
among many of the most potent Princes of Greece.

(8) But when the Persians saw the force of their enemy thus severed, they
began to conceive a hope of recovering their liberty; and so they did indeed
under the conduct and command of the Parthian Arsaces, but. found themselves
little bettered in their condition, as being now become new slaves to a more
harsh tyrant; and therefore in the year two hundred twenty eight after the
Incarnation, they made a second attempt to quit themselves from the Parthians;
they took their time, when their Masters were sore afficted with a strong enemy
from Rome, which had broke their Forces to their hands; so that by the
admirable prowess of another Artaxerxes, they made good their Conquest upon the
Parthians, and adventured so far with the Romans themselves, that their name
began to grow terrible, and the Emperor Constantine forced to fortify his
Provinces, which lay toward the East; and his might be some cause too, why he
removed his seat to Constantinopolis.

(9) After this fell into the hands of the Saracenical Caliphs, in the year six
hundred thirty four, and to the Turks in the year one hundred and thirty, next
to the Tartars, and so again to the Parthians, by the help of Gempsas, who
redeemed both his own and this from the Tartarian; and briefly after many
turns, it became the possession of Isma^l Sophy of Persia whose race continues
it to this day.

(10) The bounds of this Empire on the North are the Caspian Sea, and the River
Oxus; on the South the Sinus Persicus, and the Ma^e Indicum, heretofore called
Rubrum; on the West the Turkish confines, as far as the River Tigris, and the
lake Giocho: on the East the River Indus, and the Kingdom of Cambaia; a
spacious Land it is, and contains from East to West 38 degrees, and about 20
from the North to South.

(11) This variety of distance in respect of the Heavens, must needs cause as
much difference in the qualities of her several Regions: In some places there
is that fertility, which makes her equal to any part of Asia; in others again
she is so barren, unfruitful, and unprofitable, that the Land is left waste, as
being not able to nourish an Inhabitant. Ora maritima (says Quadus) aestuosa
est ac ventosa, and fructuum inops, praeterquam palmarum, mediterranea regio
Campestris est and omnium ferax, pecorumque optima nutrix, stuminibus and
lacubus plena. Maxim autem suppeditat Araxes plurimas commoditates. It abounds
much with metals, and stones of great price.

(12) The ancient Persians were warlike, and ambitious of rule; for not content
with their own, which they freely posses in Asia, they attempted the nearest
parts of Africa and Europe, which cost them the first fall from their Monarchy.
Nec enim petituri Macedones Persidem vide bantur, in priores Persae Graeciam
provocassent, faith Vadianus. Their customs are most of them superstitious,
but they held nothing almost in so great reverence as water: it might not
lawfully be soyled, so much as with a soul hand; but to piss, or cast rubbish,
or a dead carcass into the Rivers, was a kind of Sacrilege. They had many
Wives, and more Concubines: for they were exceeding desirous of increase, and
great rewards were appointed by their King himself, for him that could most
augment the number of his subjects in one year. They seldom entered into any
consultation of State, till they had well armed themselves with drink; for then
they thought they should be more free to speak what they most thought. To spit,
or laugh before their Prince, was a crime well nigh unpardonable: some say that
they bury not their dead, but cast them forth to be devoured by wild beasts,
and thought him most happy which was soonest torn to mammock; the rest their
friends bewailed, as such who had lived impurely; and were therefore by this
sign declared worthy of hell only, without any redemption.

(13) Their Philosophers were called Magi, and studied principally the art of
foretelling things to come; from whence we have our term of Magic; and usurp
the word only in the worse sense whereas (questionless it was no other with
them, than the Greeks Philosophy, Philosophi, or Sapientes with the Latins:
for it is by most thought that such were those good Magi, which came from the
East to worship Christ; and Saint Chrysostom directly names Persia to be that
East from whence they were led by the Star.

(14) They have now put off most of their antique barbarism, and are become
good Politicians, excellent Warrior, sgreat Scholars, especially in Astrology,
Physic and Poetry. Those which apply themselves to Mechanic trades, are not
inferior to any almost in our quarter; they deal most in making of Silks,
which they send into all the Eastern Countries in great abundance. They are
mild and courteous to Strangers, yet jealous of their Wives, which for the most
part are very fair and richly attired; not withstanding their affection to them
usque ad insanam Zelotypiam; yet are they much addicted to that beastly sin of
the Turks, and have their Stews on purpose, whither they resort without
control or shame. Their language is elegant, and in use in most of those
Eastern Countries. The Christian Religion was once planted here both by Saint
Thomas and Saint Andrew; yet are they now fallen to Mahametism, and differ but
as Schismatics from the Turks, which occasioneth much hatred and perpetual war
betwixt them.

(15) The Regions which belong to the Empire of Perfia are (1) Persii. (2)
Media. (3) Assyria. (4) Sus^ina. (5) Mesopotamia. (6) Parthia. (7) Hyrcania.
(8) Bactriana (9) Parapomissus.(10) Aria.(11) Drangiana. (12) Gedrosia. (13)
Carmania, and (14) Ormus.

(16) Persis had her name from Perseus, which came hither out of Greece; and
this gives it to the whole Empire: It is now called Fa^st or Fars^st^n, and was
heretofore Panchaia. It lies betwixt Media on the North, and the Sinus
Persicus on her South: on her West Susiana, and East Carmania. Her Metropolis
is Siras, once Persepol^s, and is built toward the mid land near the River
Araxis: it was surprised by Alexander, and many thousand talents of gold sent
into Greece, with other rich spo^l and trophies of Victories, which the
Persians had. before gotten from most parts of the then known world. Upon the
Seacoast stands Cyrus, a City which was built by their first absolute Monarch,
and called by the Inhabitants Grechaia: It was the Bishop seat of the learned
Theodoret, who lived here about the year 450, and in this Region is Laodicea
built by Antiochus, and Passagarda, where Cyrus had his Sepulcher.

(17) (2) Media now Servania, on the North of Persis, and South of the Caspian
Sea, has Armenia major and Assyria on her West, and on her East Parthia and
Hyrcania. It was before Cyrus, the seat of the Empire, and mother to a warlike
potent Nation. Their Kings had many wives, seldom fewer than seven: and their
women thought it a great calamity to have less than five husbands. In this
stands the Territory of Tauris, which was called by our ancients Erbathana, and
does stand some eight days journey from the Hyrcinian Sea: it is rich and
populous, and was the seat of the Sophies, till it was removed to Casbin, which
lies somewhat more South. Betwixt both stands the City Turcoman: and elsewhere
in this Province are many others dispersed of good note, especially Suliana,
Symmachia, Nassinum, Ardovil, Marant, and Saucazan, etc.

(18) (3) Assyria now Arzeram on the West of Media, South of Armenia, North of
Susiania, and East of Mesopotamia: it was the seat of Ninus his Kingdom, lost
by Sardanapalus; and here stands the most famous City Nineveh near. the River
Tigris, larger than Babylon containing full threescore miles in compass: for
the community which the Babylonians had with them in course of government, they
were often times promiscuously used by Historians: both had this custom, to sell
their Virgins, which were fair and most desired, and tender the price into the
common treasury. The homelier sort were placed in marriage with that money, to
those which would accept of them for gain at least, if not for beauty. They
were much addicted to Astrology, and were questionless led to it by the
opportunity of their situation, which gives them a more perfect view of the
Heavens, and several course of the Planets, than any other part of the world
besides.

(19) (4) Susiana, now Cuceston, seems to have her name from Cus, upon the
South of Assyria, West of Persia, East of Babylonia, and North of the Persick
bay. It is severed by Pliny from Elemauss the great by the River Euleus, of
whose waters only the Persian Kings were wont to drink, as being more sweet and
pure, than any other in this Country.

(20)(5) Mesopotamia, now Diarbecha, heretofore Aram or Charam, lies betwixt
the two Rivers Euphrates and Tigris, and has Armenia major on her North, and
on her South Arabia deserta: it is of large extent, and has much variety of
commodities in her several quarters, but has suffered great calamities by
reason of her continual wars with the Turk. Her chief Cities are Charon or
Haran, where Abraham settled himself when he was called forth of Chaldaea and
where that gurges Avaritiae, the Roman Marcus Crassus, lost his life. Not far
distant is the City Nisibis, which was once called Antiochia, and Migdonia; to
these Maginus adds Merdin and Mosus.

(21) (6) Parthia, now Arach, on the East of Media, on. the South of Hyrcania,
North of Carmania, and West of Aria. The Inhabitants were valiant, and had
their course of Sovereignty in the Eastern Monarchy. Her chief Cities are
Cassan and Hispaham, which the Persian has in so great account, that he calls
it half the world.

(22) (7) Hyrcania, now Strava, on the North of Parthia, and East of Media, and
South of the Mare Caspium: it is plain, fertile, and rich. Her Metropolis
Hyrcania: the rest of note are Bestan, Mesnadran, (8) Bactriana now Charassan,
on the South is divided from Aria by the mountain Parapomissus: Her chief City
Bactra, the birth place of that great Physician Avicenna, and Zoroaster Magus:
This Region belongs not entire to the Sophie of Persia. (9) Parapomissus now
Sublestan and Candbear on the East of Aria a mountainous Country, and the
Inhabitants rude and ragged, yet her chief City Candatura is a great market,
and well frequented both from India and Cathaia.(10) Aria now Eri, on the East
of Parthia: the Inhabitants of this Region rebelled against Alexander, but were
forced by his Armies to fly for shelter into a Cave upon the ^op of a Rock;
yet thither he pursued them, and dammed up the Caves mouth with Timber, which
he set on fire, and stifled most; the rest were taken to the Victors mercy: the
treason of Philotus against Alexander was here discovered. (11) Drangiana now
Sigestan: In this Country the Hill Taurus is called Caucasus, where. the Poets
seign, that Prometheus was perpetually gnawn by a Vulture for stealing fire
from Heaven: Her chief Cities are Sim and Cabul, built by Alexander at the foot
of Caucasus; and therefore Alexandria Arachosiae.(12) Gedrosia now Circan, near
the Mare Indicum, a barren Country, scarce worth a farther description; and so
(13) Carmania.

(23) (14) Upon the confines of the Persian Empire stands a potent Kingdom,
which comprehends part of the coast of Persia, some Islands of the Persick bay:
and a good portion of Arabia Foelix near to those Seas. The chief seat is the
City and Island Ormutz a place of a great merchandise, but of it self affords
little provision for victuals; so that they are forced to have it brought in
from other Parts of the Empire, though at an extreme dear rate. It bounds with
a precious Pearl called the Union: Their King is now tributary to Portugal, as
once it was to the Persian Emperor.

THE TURKISH EMPIRE
map of the Turkish Empire
The Description of the TURKISH EMPIRE.
THe Turk is admired for nothing more, than his sudden advancement of so great
an Empire. For before these three hundred and odd years, we must seek this
people (which is become now a terror to the whole world) lurking in the
by-corners of Asia, like runnagates and thieves, as indeed they were; such as
so infested their neighbors with rapines and murders, as that they neither
enjoyed their own lives freely, nor possessed more wealth than they could
maintain with the sword.

(2) The great Osmand was. the first which redeemed them from obscurity: his
Predecessors were scarce mentioned as a Nation worth story; and therefore it is
not easy to give their true original, or set justly the place of earth from
whence they sprang. There are which say from the Caspain mountains; and that in
the time of the Macedo^ian ^^asilius, they served the Sarazens in their Indian
Wars, but turned the Victory to their own advantage: for when they had once
tried their strength, and found their Forces sufficient in behalf of others,
they bethought themselves at last, to use them for their own advancement; and
to that purpose, turned head first upon their pay masters, out of whose spoils
they raised incredible Armies, which overspread all Asia, to the very Euxine
Sea. Others again conjecture, that they were a Scythian people; and the rather,
for that they made their way into these parts through Pontus and Cappadocia and
so on, as it were in a direct course from Scythia. The truth is, the customs of
both are not much unlike, their habit very near, and their wars waged with the
same weapons and discipline.

(3) But admit their first attempt upon the Sarazens: yet were they again
scattered by their civil dissension, lived as before, and could not be
recollected into a Nation, till Othoman took upon him to be their Leader in the
year 1300, a man of as low birth and fortunes as the meanest, but had (...)
spirit, and an able wit may weild it: which put upon this great action, to
conquer the world, and suffered him not to rest in it, till he had seated
himself in an Empire, which his progeny enjoy to this day. He began with a
rascal crew of such as were led on by want, and seemed rather to bear Arms in
defense of their privy thests, than with intent to invade an enemy: for he
appeared not at first as an open Warrior, but wrought his spoils by stratagems
and sleights, and clandestine excursions, upon such as were unprovided for
resistance; possessed himself of mountains and woods, as lay most convenient for
his lurking practices, and whither he might retire safe, if at any time he were
pursued.

(4) By these means he was content for a while, to increase his wealth and
power, which soon grew to that eminency, as in few years he durst meet a strong
enemy to the face; buckle with him upon his own ground, for his possessions,
and at last so prevailed where ever he set footing, that he scarce stepped back
till he claspt into his own government, Pontus and Cappadocia, Galathia and
Bythinia, Pamphilia and Licia, and Phrygia, and all Asia minor, to the Greek
Seas: to which his successors have in latter times added many other Countries
of Asia, Africa, and Europe: so that it is now become the most potent and
tyrannical Empire of the world.

(5) The first of State was at Prussia in Bythinia, from thence it was removed
Hadrianopolis, and at last to Constantinople, a City of Greece in the Province
of Romania. His Palace is called Seraglio is built in the most eminent part of
the Town, contains three miles in circuit within the walls, and surpasses all
other Courts under Heaven for Majesty, and number of buildings, for pleasurable
gardens, sweet fountains, and rich furniture. The Emperor himself has for his
common Guard four thousand footmen, the sons of tributary Christians, which are
called Ianizaries, and their Captain Agu, besides ten thousand others,
dispersed under several Commanders through diverse parts of the Empire: and
fifteen thousand Hersemen in ordinary pay. In these numbers, I ^eckon not those
multitudes of Timariotae, which are assigned to several of the Turkish States;
and deliver incredible sums of money into his Treasury. As his wealth is great,
so is his life luxurious; fifteen hundred women are cloystered up ^or his
pleasure, and out of them one hundred and fifty c^lled as choice for his daily
lust; so Maginus. The offices within the Court are performed by Eunuchs, such
as (he will be sure) shall not partake with him in his unsatiate and brutish
pleasures.

(6) The Ministers of State are (1) Mu^ti, who interprets their Law, and lays
open their Alcoran, with the like Authority as the Pope among the Roman
Catholics. (2) Cadilesche^i, who are the supreme Judges, to determine of their
causes controverted, and these are three; the one for Enrope, whose residency
is in Romania; another for Asia in Natolia; and the third set up by Selimus the
first, to judge such offenses as are brought to him from Egypt, Syria, Arabia,
and part of Armenia. These Cadilescheri have under them peculiar Judges of
every Province, which are called Cadi, and are chosen at their pleasure, but
confirmed by the Emperor himself. (3) The third rank are Vizer Passa, their
Emperors Council; their chief is Vizer Azem, a man of great power through all
the dominions of the Turk: and for the most part, present at his treaties of
State. (4) The fourth order are the Beglerb^gs, whose office answers almost to
our Generals, and as the Judges were, so are these placed in the three several
quarters of the Empire: one in Greece for Europe: a se^ond in Anatolia for
Asia; and the third is an Admiral of the Seas, and commands those parts which
are left by the other two: all of equal respect and place with Vizer bassa.
Those of inferior rank, and pet^y employments in the Commonwealth are almost
innun erable, many of them not natives, but apostate Christians, and in
conditions, differ as the Countries from whence they first sprang.

(7) The multitude, I mean the born Turks, savor still of their barbarous
Ancestors, and carry the marks in their foreheads, and l^mbs of Scythians and
Tartars: They are for the most part broadaced, strong-boned, well-proportioned,
dull and heavy-headed, of gross understanding, idely disposed; and yet greedy
of wealth, luxurious in their diet, and beastly in their lustful affections,
without distinction of kindred or sex, base minded, slaves to themselves and
their superiors in their own Country; yet ignorantly proud, and contemptuous
of other Nations, which they take in soul scorn, should be compared with their
lubberly Inhabitant. They pass not to cousen a Christian in their course of
traffic; nor do they think they are bound to keep promise unless it make for
their advantage. The greatest part they have by due desert, is their strict
obedience to the discipline of war: no sedition, no tumult, no chat in their
Camp or March, insomuch that oft-times many thousands on a sudden surprise
their enemies unawares, with so very little noise, as not to be heard in their
approach. No difficulty can be demanded, which they are not ready to perform,
without any respect at all had to the danger; be it to pass Rivers, top
Mountains, scale Walls, stand Sentinel: In brief, they are not to eat or sleep
in War, but at full leisure; and are the truest military men upon earth.

(8) No great marvel then, if with so great multitudes, so well ordered, they
daily improve their Empire upon the Christians, who are not so zealous in
defense of their true faith as these mis believers, bold and foolhardy to
uphold their false god. But the truth is, their superstitious credulity of
fate, which they think has immutably prefixed every man's hour for life or
death, which he can neither defer nor hasten, makes them fearless to incur
dangers, and careless for their own security.

(9) Diverse Schools they have, where their chief study is the imperial Laws;
from thence some are preferred to secular, some to Eccl^s^astick O^^^ces. Their
Religion is a mere couzenage, thrust upon the silly people by the impious
subtilty of one Mahomet, whose story is well worth our knowledge, and may cause
us to commiserate the desperate state of those ignorant, yet perverse and
bloo^y Antichristians.

(10) His place of birth is questioned, whether he were a Cyrenaick, an
Arabian, or Persian, it is not yet fully decided; certain ^no^gh he was of base
parents; his father (some say) a worshipper of Devils, and his Mother a
faithless Jew. Betwixt them they sent into the world a pernicious deceiver
(which none but two such Religions could have made up) in the year five hundred
ninety seven. When he had been for a while thus instructed by his distracted
Parents, poverty, and hope to improve his Fortunes, persuaded him from his
Native soil, to live for another while among true professed Christians, where
he received so much knowledge of the world, and light of the Gospel, as to
pervert it to his destruction, and ruin of many millions of souls.

(11) In his first adventurous travels abroad, he fell into the hands of
theevish Sarazens, which sold him to a Jewish Merchant; and he employed him to
drive his Camels through Egypt, Syria, Palestine, and other Foreign Countries,
where he still gathered ^arther instructions of that truth which he intended to
abuse. His wickedness first brake forth into fraud, open theft, and rapine, and
other sins of highest rank; in which he continued and seduced others, till the
death of his Master, and after married his aged, but rich mistress.

(12) He had means now to act his malicious purposes, and wealth to countenance
his exceeding pride, which would not be satisfied with any lower ambition than
to be called a Prophet of God. This he began to practice, by the counsel of one
Sergius a Monk, who being cast out for Heresy from Constantinople, betook
himself into Arabia, and joined in with Mahomet, to make up this mischief
perfect: see now their juggling. There wanted not craft betwixt them, to make
use of his worst actions to gull the simple: For when by his debaucht drinking
and gluttony, he was fallen into an Epilepsie, and in his fits lay Bear-like
grovelling, and foaming upon the earth, as one without sense, he pretended an
extatick swound* wherein his soul was rapped from his body, whilst he converst
with Gabriel, an Angel from Heaven. To make this familiarity with God the more
to be believed, he had bred up a Dove to take her meat from his ear, which he
most blasphemously professed to be the holy Ghost, which at such times, and in
that shape, infused the Prophecies* which he was to preach. Lastly, what they
in their wicked fancies had conceived, and meant to propagate, they digested
into a Volume, and called it the Alcoran.

(13) For this too they had a trick, that it might seem to have been sent from
heaven into the hands of Mahomet; and to this purpose he had himself fed up a
tame Bull, which by custom became so familiar, that no sooner he heard the
voice of his Master, but he would straight run, cast the head in his lap, and
use his wanton dalliance as with a fellow. Betwixt the horns of this Bull had
he fastened the Alcoran, and conveyed him into a by-place, near where he had
assembled the multitude at a set time, to expect a wonderful miracle from
Heaven, that might confirm his Prophecy. The sce^e thus ordered, on the sudden
he lift up his voice, and made a loud cry, which no sooner the Beast heard, but
he brake his way through the prease, overturned many of the spectators, which
now stood at a gaze, and gently laid his Horns and Book in the bosom of this
false Couzener; which he with much ceremony and feigned reverence received, and
in their presence opening the Volume, began to interpret the chief of their
Laws, which for hereafter they were to observe.

(14) Circumcision he allowed, and with the old Law, forbad Swines flesh, that
he might with more ease lead on such as were Jewish; he suffered himself to be
baptized by Sergius, that the Christian too might have in some measure his
content. Moses and our Savior he denied not to be great Prophets; but that
neither party might emulate the greater observance of other; and indeed,
especially that his own might seem new, and yet take place from both, he
changed the Circumcision of the Jews from the eight day, and multiplies
Baptism, which can be conferred but once for all, upon the true believer. For
the like reason of difference with other Nations and Sects, he left both the
Jews Sabbath, and Diem Christianorum Dominicum, and commands his holy
ceremonies to be celebrated on the Friday, for so it was, when the Bull
bestowed on him his Alcoran. Before they enter the Temple, they wash all the
unclean parts of their bodies, and then to Prayer, which must be performed five
times in a day, with their face toward the South. They have a months fast too
once every year, but it i^ observed only for the day; for they may, when the
Sun is down, redeem it with what gluttony they please: Wine is forbidden, only
for a show, that he might not seem to have loved that, which (as he was guilty
to himself) had brought him into his epileptical fits. Briefly, what he knew
would best agree with the brutish desires of the people, that he took order
should be confirmed by his laws; four or five wives to every husband, and as
many Concubines as they would maintain. For their bliss after life, he proposed
no invisible delights which over-reacht their understanding, but proportioned
to each of their sensual thoughts, and promised to those which could keep his
Law a Paradise of all kinds of pleasure, which they themselves most affected.
To the covetous, wealth; to the ambitious, honors; to the gluttonous, meats;
to the Virgins, rich attire, and embraces of Angels; the poor souls were never
so fitted: and when he had thus for a long time, discoursed over his Alcoran,
he took a yoke from Sergius, and put it upon the Bulls neck; for it was
foretold by an inscription brought by his door, that whosoever could yoke the
Bull, it should be a sign to declare the man, as one sent from God to govern
his people.

(15) This huddle of miracles put the gazers beyond all pause, so that in an
instant they cried him up King, and held his companion in reputation of a minor
Prophet; called themselves Musulmanni, true believers, which the Turk still
affects, rather than his right name of Turk, which imports banishment, and
upbraids him with the disgrace of his original.

(16) And now he has past the difficulty of his attempt, an easy matter to
draw on millions of followers, such as would like that Religion best which
baulkt not their pleasures; yet at last he met with an end answerable to his
beginning; for he was poisoned by some of his own Family.

(17) He had long before prophesied, that he should be wonderfully conveyed to
Heaven: and to make good this fraud, had framed an iron chest for his
Sepulcher, which he purposed should have been held up by force of a Lodestone,
placed in the top of the Temple, and by this means have appeared to the
beholder to hang in the air without any support: But this trick (it seems) was
prevented by death; yet they expected still his ascent to Heaven, till he stank
upon earth: so that at last they were forced to convey him into his iron
coffin, which remains to this day in Mecha a City of ^ersia, and is visited by
the Turks, as the Sepulcher of our Savior at Jerusalem by Pilgrim Christians.

(18) I took leave here to supply the room with the Customs and Religion of
the Turks, which in course of our former method, was due to the division of the
Empire and her several Provinces: But I suppose, I have the less trespassed, in
regard that most of them have already had their place and description in each
of their particular Kingdoms, to which they did formerly belong. It will be
sufficient here to name them, with reference to the Map, where you have them
delivered more at large.

(19) In Europe it runs along the Sea coast of the Adriatic bay, from the Land
of Epidaurus. now Ragusi, and so about the Aeg^an Sea, and Propontus, and a
great part of the Euxine to the City Theodosia in the Taurica C^ersonesus,
which is now called Ca^^a. In the Mediterranean from Iovarinum in Hungary, to
Constantin^ple in Greece. The several Provinces of this compass are (1) a great
part of Hungary, Bosnia, Servia, Rassi^, Bulgaria, Walachia, and Transylvania,
etc. in the description of Hungary. (2) Graecia and her Provinces, Thracia,
Macedonia, Epirus, Achaia, Peloponnesus, with the Islands of the Egean, etc. in
the description of Greece. (3) A part of Sclavonia.

(20) In Africa almost all the Seacoasts from the City Bellis de ^omera to the
Arabic bay; In this stands Algiers, Tunis, Tripolis, all Egypt, F^sse,
Marolum, etc. in the African description.

(21) In Asia, Natolia, the Islands of Cyprus, all Syria, Palestine, Iudaea,
Coelofyria, Phoenicia, Babylonia, Arabia Triplex, Turcomannia, and Georgea,
Mesopotamia, and part of Media. And these belong to the description of Asia.

CHINA
Petrus Kaerius Caela.
map of China
The Description of the Kingdom of CHINA.
THE whole Tract of Asia, which lies severed from Persia by the River Indus on
the West, is well known by one General name of the East-Indy; and that again is
divided by the other famous River Ganges, into India intra Gangem, the part
which looks toward Europe, and is conjectured by most to be the land of Evilah:
and India exter Gangem to the very East, some think it was that, which of old
was called Seria: both have now other names imposed by the Inhabitants; the
first Indostand; this other Tame, Tangis, Mangi, or Macys, and las^ly, Sinarum
regio, China.

(2) This Kingdom then is the utmost bounds East ward of the whole Continent,
and therefore lies farthest remote from Christendom; the Mistress of Arts, and
example of civility to all the other parts of the world; yet do the Chinois^
much exceed us, for ample Cities, ingenious artificers, and multitude of
Inhabitants; (which methinks) pleads fairly for her antiquity, though I give
not ^ull credit to those, which settle here the sons of Iocktan, much less to
their own records, which reckon two hundred threescore and two Kings, in almost
a continued succ^s^^on to this day; and number from their first, above four
thousand years. For to make this good, they must either vary from us in their
measure of times, as we from the Germans in length of miles; else we must
commit a foul error, to look beyond the Flood for their original: since that
time, it is not yet above three thousand n^ne hundred and twenty; and surely I
think they were not exempted from the general deluge, no more than from the
sins of the whole earth.

(3) But if this conjecture of different account be not approved, the solecisme
must rest (for me) upon their own ignorant vainglory, which in their stories,
transport them beyond probability; upon hope (perhaps) that no other Nation
could control them; for in those first ages, they had li^^le converse, unless
with men more barbarous than themselves; such as could not deliver their acts
to posterity; and therefore being left wholly to their own relations, good
reason they thought they had to do themselves what honor they might, though
ignorance of the main truth makes them often times to trespass upon Chronology,
and forge stories so unlikely, that the whole may be justly suspected.

(4) Their first King they name Vitei, and report him to have reigned an
hundred years: his successors went on without breach or conquest, to their two
hundred forty second Prince, but were then for a while, cut off by the
Tartarians. This change was foretold to Fairfar* the last China King of the
first race; and the Prophecy laid it upon one, which should have an hundred
eyes; and so had Chisanbaan the Invader, if you will allow his name to make up
the miracle; For the very word in their language signifies no other than an
hundred eyes: A poor cousenage of the Devil, but served the turn first to dazzle
them with a strange Prophecy, and then to keep up the credit in the
performance, with the simple Idolaters. After nine Tartarian Princes it was
again recovered to the state, in which it now stands, by the prowess of one
Gombne their 250 King*

(5) This brief account of their beginning and progress, is more than I can
warrant for undoubted truth. The most part was past* e're they were a people
known to the Europaeans; for Ptolomy himself scarce reached so far toward the
East: or if it be the same with his Sinarum Regio, (which yet some doubt) yet
(it seems) he knew little more of it than the bare name; we must be content to
pass over many ages untoucht, and break abruptly, into our own times and
stories, which do afford us more certainty by the relation of later travelers,
some of our own Nation.

(6) It is now a vast Empire, which contains in latitude almost forty degrees
from the Tropic of Cancer, to the fifty three toward the Pole Artick; and
thirty in longitude from the degree one hundred thirty to one hundred sixty:
the bounds on the West is Industan, India intra Gangem, on the East Mare Cin,
on the North the Empire of the great Chane, severed from the Chinoy^e by high
mountains, continued with a wall of a thousand miles in length, built by
Tzanitzan, their 117 King: on the South, the Kingdom of Chauchinchinae part of
the other India intra Gangem.

(17) The Air here is temperate, and the ground fruitful: the mountains and
wild fields breed incredible numbers of Cattle, and the Woods wild Boars,
Foxes* Hares, Conies, and other useful beasts, which gives us flesh for our
food, and skins for our clothing. The tilled ground returns again plenty of
Corn, Wheat, and Barley; their higher Poulse, and their lower Rice, in great
abund^nce; their Gardens pleasant, set with all sorts of Flowers, which may
delight either the eye or scent; no clod (almost) of earth there, but has its
wealth; for what yields not fruit, is inrich^ with Mines of Gold and Silver.
The chief River is Polysango, both it and the rest give fish in great
abundance, and water fowl enough almost to feed a whole Nation: Maginus reports
it, that ten or twelve thousand w^ld Ducks have been commonly spent in one day
in the City Canton; besides their own profit, they advantage them much in their
course of traffic, to convey their Merchandise into several parts of the
Empire, to meet with their Chapmen from all quarters. Their principal
commodities are Silks and Sugars: yet besides these, they send forth Wool,
Cotton, Olives, Metals Rhubarb, Honey, Purs^^^n d^shes, Camphire, Ginger,
Pepper, etc. Musk, Salt great store, whose Custom, in only one Town of Canton,
amounts to the yearly value of 18000 Crowns. To this happiness of soil may be
added the thrift and great industry of the Inhabitants, who hold it a soul
disgrace to be accounted idle: and therefore make the most of what they have;
so that without doubt, as they are infinitely populous, so they are
proportionably rich, beyond any other Nation of the world.

(18) The Chinoyse is described with a broad face of a dusky color, crooked
nose, small and black eyes, and very thin beard, but long hair on the head: if
any be deformed (for so they take it) with a better feature, they are as like
to break a jest upon his handsome comely visage, as a scoffer would upon their
ill-fashioned countenance. The better sort are clothed in long silk garments,
the ordinary people in linen, for they have not yet the Art well to weave
woollen: their women deck their heads with gold and precious Jewels, seldom
show themselves abroad without great attendance of servants.

(9) The men in their several employments, are infinitely laborious and
ingenious; it is very rare to see any of them in a strange Country: nor will
they easily admit a Stranger far into theirs, unless he be first well tried for
his honesty and good meaning toward their State; they are addicted much to
manual arts, for they have excellent practick wits; and indeed, for that go
beyond any other Nations. Much quarrel has been about the invention of Guns
and Printing, which several people have been ambitious to take to themselves,
as the masterpiece of man's wit: but without doubt, they were both used here,
long before any of Europe pretended to the knowledge of either. In their
writings, they make not their lines from the right hand to the le^t, as the
Hebrews; nor from the left to the right as we do; but from the top to the
bottom of the Page: and use all one Character through the whole Kingdom, though
several parts differ much in their language, or at least in their idiomes.
Their special skill, which we much admire, but cannot imitate, is in making the
Purslain dishes white as very snow, and transparent as glass, formed up only of
Cockles found in the Seashore mixed with Egg-shells; but lie buried in the
earth many years before they come to perfection, and are seldom took up by the
same artificer which kneads them, but are left as a portion to some of his
posterity.

(10) Their fashions in private Houses are not much unlike to those of Europe:
at board they sit in chairs, and upon forms, not loll on the floor, as most of
the Asiaticks do* they touch not their meat with the Hand, but use the Silver
fork, or else some stick of Ivory or Ebony, not much unlike it: they eat thrice
in one day, but sparingly enough: when they travel over the plains, they use a
kind of Coach, yet not drawn with Horses or other beast, but driven by the wind
under sail, as a Bark on the Sea, which the people are as perfect to guide
which way they please, as the Mariner is to direct his course unto any coast,
whither he is bound: as they sail upon Land, as if it were Sea, so they dwell
as frequently upon the Sea, as if it were land: for they have an incredible
number of ships, and boats, which are in many places ranked like streets upon
the waters, and filled with Inhabitants, such as are here born, live,
traffic, marry, and die. Mr. Purchase reports, that upon one River from
Nanquin to Paquin, they are thus ordered for 300 leagues. No marvel then, if
their number exceed any part ^roportionably of the whole earth; since their
Land is not sufficient, but is forced to borrow room out of the Sea for their
Habitation: yet are they all governed by one Monarch, whom they call the Lo^d
of the World, son to the Sun. For they are a proud Nation, and admit not equal
comparison with any other earthlings; but cast it as a Proverb into their
teeth, that they have but one eye to see with, in respect of the Chinoys, who
alone (as themselves boast) see with two: the truth is, in matters of State,
they are very politic, in peace wary, and in war valiant, crafty, and
excellent Engineers.

(11) Their Laws are for the most part just, and severely executed, especially
against idle droans, which set not a hand to advance their State, or maintain
themselves. They will not cherish the very blind by alms, since without eyes a
man may be fit for some corporal employment; but to the maimed and lame they
deny not a charitable mainten^nce. The son is bound to exercise his Parents
occupation, so that no pretense almost is left for wanderers: and briefly, as
far as humane Laws can provide, all other vain occasions, for mis-expence of
time, are taken off; for within the Cities no Stews are allowed, or lewd
persons to withdraw them; adultery is punished with death, but yet they have
liberty to take many wives; one they keep at home, the rest are disposed of
abroad, where they best please. Their Marriages they chiefly solemnize at the
new Moon, and for the most part in March. which begins their year.

(12) For their Religion they are Gentiles, but have a confused knowledge of
God, Heaven, and the Creation, which they ascribe to one Trine, who first (say
they) made Pauson and Pausona, and their posterity continued for 90000 years;
but were then for their wickedness destroyed, and a new race was created. The
first of their second was one Lutitzan, who had two horns; from the right come
men, as they fondly imagine, and from the left women; when they would descipher
their great god, they express him by the first letter of their Alphabet; and in
their devotions they worship him as their chief, (but not only) preserver; for
they have their prayers to the Sun, Moon Stars, and to the Devil himself, that
he would not hurt them. Their Priests are distinguished into the black and white
Friars, as we call them; for they much resemble Friars in their course of life;
some are clothed in white, their heads shorn, and their victuals in common;
others in black, long hair, and live apart: neither are married, but both take
their liberty to live obscenely, as the debauchedst swaggerers.

(13) The Empire is divided into 15 Provinces. (1) Canton. (2) Feguien. (3)
Olam. (4) Sisnam. (5) Tolench. (6) Causaie. (7) Minchien. (8) Ochiam. (9)
Horan. (10) Pagino. (11) Zaiton. (12) Quinchien. (13) Cheguem. (14) Susnam.
(15) Quinsay. All of large extent, and contain in them many Towns and Cities,
in number more, in compass bigger, and in wealth more eminent than the best of
ours.

(14) (1) In the Province of Canton are 190 Towns, and 37 Cities. (2) In
Feguien, 99 Towns, and 33 Cities. (3) In Olam 130 Towns, and 90 Cities. (4) In
Sisnam, 150 Towns, and 44 Cities. (5) In Tolench 235 Towns, and 51 Cities; and
this is governed immediate by the Emperor himself, without any substitute, as
all other Provinces have, except Pagina. (6) Causaie has 122 Towns, 24 Cities.
(7) Minchien 29 Towns, 25 Cities. (8) Ochiam 74 Towns, 19 Cities. (9) Honan,
102 Towns, and 20 Cities. (10) Pagina, 150 Towns, and 47 Cities.

(13) The chief of this is Paquin, where he has his continual residence, and
scarce at any time leaves the City, unless upon occasion of war; for it is
seated near to the Tartars, who oft-times make assaults upon the Chinoyse, and
force the King to gather his strength into that quarter; and he himself present
to withstand their entry: lest if they should once get footing into any part of
his Country, they might encroach farther, and enable themselves by his spoils
to follow their blow upon his other Provinces. His Palace here is compassed
with a triple wall, carries the bulk and face of a fair Town; for indeed his
retinue are no fewer than might well people a large City: among the rest he
has 16000 Eunuchs daily attending, such as their own parents have emasculated
in their infancy, to make them capable of this Court preferment. The seat
Imperial was heretofore at Nanquim, where still remains a golden testimony of
her past glory. It is a fair City thirty miles in compass, seated nine leagues
from the Sea, upon a fair and navigable a River, where there rides commonly at
least 10000 of the Kings Ships, besides Merchants. It has three brick walls,
the streets are six miles in length, of a proportionable breadth, and trimly
paved.

(16) (11) Zaiton has 78 Towns, and 27 Cities; the chief Zaiton, which has a
fair harbor, and is seldom without 500 ships. (12) Quinchien has 113 Towns,
and 45 Cities. (13) Chaguean, 95 Towns, and 39 Cities. (14) Susnam, 105 Towns,
and 41 Cities. (15) And lastly, Quinsey 114 Towns, Cities.

(17) The Metropolis is Quinsay or Suntien, the largest City of the world: for
it contains 100 miles in compass: it is seated in a low and Fenny ground, is
subject to Floods, and has been forced in very many places to erect bridges
for free passage from one street to another: there are in all 12000, built of
stone, and most of them so high, that a good ship may strike under them with
full sail: each of them has its ten watchmen for a night guard. The
inhabitants of this City live luxuriously, especially their women, who are much
more comely than their men; yet all of them almost eat both Horse and Dogs
flesh. Toward the South part of the City there is a great lake about 24 miles
in circuit; in the midst stand two Islands, whither the chief Nobility repair
and invite their friends to solemnize their marriage, and have in each a
stately place erected, furnished sufficiently with all fitting ornaments for a
wedding jollity. In many parts of the City there are public places of receipt
for such as sustain any misfortune by fire; there they may lodge their goods
safe upon a sudden casualty till they can make better provision.

(18) It were vain to give a more particular Description of the many Cities
which make up the several numbers in each Province: they stand so thick, and
are so populous, that they all seem to be as one; one, as well for their
continued building almost, as their fashion of building; for they all observe
the same form, and dispose their streets alike; two broad, cro^^ing each other
in the middle in so strait a line, that the eye may reach clean from one end to
the other.

(19) We may conclude, that both the Revenues of the whole Empire, and number
of Inhabitants, are not easily to be reckoned: yet this in brief, he has
subject under him 70 crowned Kings, gathers up yearly 120 millions of Crowns,
stirs not into the field without 300000 Foot, and 200000 Horse. To this Empire
did once belong most of the Islands in the Eastern Seas, but it seems the
Chinoyse in time found, that their defense was a business of more charge than
their worth countervailed: and therefore let them even slip into their own
hands, and bounded their government with the Sea-coa^t; yet for such as lie in
the same Latitude, from the Tropic toward the Pole, they may most properly be
named at least in this description; and but named; since they were before set
forth in our general Map of Asia. The chief are Lequio minor, Reix Magos,
Lequio major, Mazacar, Iapan, a very large Island, Insula de Maico, and
Satyrorum Insula, etc.

TARTARIA
map of Tartary
The Description of the Kingdom of TARTARY.
SCYTHICARVM gens semper antiquissima. It was a judged case (long since)
betwixt the Egyptian and Inhabitant of this Country. Yet were not the
Scythans the first which possessed it: At least it was the first name by which
they were known. For, before the entrance of Scythes the supposed Son of
Hercules, we find here a people which derive their pedigree from Magog the son
of Iopheth, and were called Magogins, in remembrance of their antique Founder.
To this purpose Iunius and other learned interpret terram Magogin, in the 38 of
Ezekiel. 2. and Rev. 20. 8. and so in sundry places elsewhere of divine Scripture,
take it for other land, than that which was after by profane Writers called
Scythia, and Sarmatia, and now Tartaria; though perhaps these have not all had
still the same bounds from the beginning; for what any one Kingdom of the earth
has? All States have had their course to rise and fall, to be impaired, or
enlarged, at pleasure of the most High, who disposes of Empires as seems best
in his wisdom.

(2) Of the Magogins we have not much story; yet they have left their name
behind them, which is now corrupted i^to Ma^gol, as most imagine. While the
Scythae bare rule, they infested their neighbors without mercy or equity; and
practiced their rapines, as far almost, as they could find a subject to work
on. Insomuch that they gave name to all the rude and inhumane Nations, both of
Asia and Europ^ ^^rth of Danubius: which* for their cruelty were much feared,
and for brutish customs grown (...) the more civil parts of the World.

(3) (...) barum mores, was meant of these by the Poet, and well it might. For
who could be more barbar^^s than the Essedons, which lived here by the Palus
M^otis, and (as Herod, in his fourth Book of Histories delivers) were wont to
sing their Parents to the grave, invite their best friends, to feast with their
fathers flesh, and use his ^k^ll as a Cup to drink in, at their lascivious
banquets. Who more than the Axiacae? who quenched their thirst with the blood
of him whom they first flew, as it gusht warm from his wounds? Who more
foolishly proud than the Agathyrsi? who, as God and nature had come short in
their making up, were used to mend their beauty by a deformed painting, and
ugly staining of their bodies with motly colors. Our Picts are supposed by
some to have had hence their original.

(4) It were too much to recite here the other scattered Nations which
overspread the earth: for she was, as most style her, the offi^ina generis
humani: and sent forth swarms of her brood, which soon fastened themselves
where^ever they set footing. For they were strong of body, bold and hardy,
beyond the rule of valor; distinguished not right from wrong in their quarrels,
but reckoned justly their own, whatever they could clasp by force of Arms. And
this they all practiced almost without difference of sex, unless in this, that
their women were most warlike: witness that incomparable story of Tomyris, who
cut off the Persian Cyrus, and 200000 more of his Soldiers at one encounter,
and cast his head into a cauldron of blood, with this upbraid, for the
slaughter of her son Pergapises: Satia te ^anguine, quem sitisti. Nor was she
the single one that put off the weakness of her sex to take Arms. For here
lived those professed Amazons, which admitted no man into their Camps, but at
set times of necessity, to preserve their race: ye were they a terror to the
world, vexed a great part of Asia the less, and built the renowned Ephesus,
Smyrna, Cuma, Magnesia, etc.

(5) These had their time. The Goths or Getae succeeded, and were inheritors
as well of their mischievous customs, as ill-gotten possessions: for which they
purchased them the name of Polonei* among their neighbors, thieves and
destroyers, such as were no less grievous to them th^n their predecessors.
Doubtless a curse of perpetual tyranny lies upon their wicked Empire. For when
next the Tartars came on, the State it self was not much bettered, nor the
innocent which lay near any whit more secured.

(6) These last have been supposed to be the remnant of those ten Tribes which
were led captive by Salmanassar. How likely the Reasons are I will not dispute.
But surely if so, they must have retained some knowledge of the the true God,
at least some precepts of civility from their Forefathers, though never so
long since. For what people can we read of in Stories, which have at any time
been enlightened with the truth, and yet afterward fallen into that gross
barbarism, which is now found among the Tartarians? See their Character, which
(as they are by most described) deals impartially; gives them ill-fashioned
bodies, answerable to their rude minds, fit Houses for so unclean Guests.

(7) There stature is different. The most part have large shoulders, a broad
face, with a crooked nose, deformed countenance, swarthy color, hollow eyes,
hairy and untrimmed beard, and head close shaved. Their speech is boisterous
and clamourous; their noise in singing like the yell of Wolves; and endurance
of Hunger, Thirst, Heat, Cold, and Watching, equals them (in strength of body)
to the most able beast, for it exceeds the common power of a man. Their lust is
without law. For they except no kindred but their own Mothers, Daughters, and
Sisters: No species, for they mix with Beasts: no sex, for they are insatiate
Sodomites: and yet take liberty for as many wives as they can maintain; which
contrary to our civil courses they buy of their Parents, instead of receiving
dowries. Their meat is the raw flesh of Horses, without regard how they were
killed, or of what diseases they died: sometimes they suck blood from the
living, to appease their Hunger and Thirst, if (in a journey) they be
distressed for want of food.

(8) Cities they have but few, nor Houses, other than moveable Tents, made of
Beasts skins, which they pitch up by great multitudes, in the form of a Town,
and those are called Hordes; when the grass is once eaten bare, and the ground
yields not meat for their Cattle, they trudge with bag and baggage to another
quarter: and so in course they wander through the vast deserts, unsettled, and
indeed impatient to be settled, or rather imprisoned (as they take it) within
any one bounded compass, having the wid^ world to roam in. Their chief Arms are
Bow and Arrows, which they use most on Horseback, for their more speedy flight;
and have them commonly strongly poisoned, for the more sure mischief to the
Foe. Their Stratagems are down right fraud, and breach of truth; for they keep
no Faith with any enemy, regard not any compact made upon terms of peace; but
follow their own sense, and commit what outrages they can with least danger to
themselves.

(9) Their Religion is answerable to their vile customs; Some are Pagans,
others Mahometans, yet will not be called Turks, but Bersemanni, and their
chief Priest Said, whom they reverence more than their Maker, and admit that
none should touch his Hand, but their Kings, and these too with an humble
gesture: their Dukes aspire not above his knee, nor their Nobles higher than
his feet: the rest are happy, if they can but reach at his garment, his horse,
his any thing, so simple are they in their Superstition: and thus have they
continued either Atheists or false Idolaters, ever since their first entrance
upon this Kingdom in the year 1187. Before, they were not esteemed a Nation at
all, but wild people, without law or reason almost, who lived in the open
fields, and conversed with no other than their own Herds of Cattle.

(10) Their first King was one Chinchis, a man of low birth, but high spirit,
impatient of that slavish condition to which he was bred; he brake forth at
last, and drew more by his example, into the thoughts of better fortunes: which
he ceased not to prosecute, till he had made good his purpose, and not only
settled himself in the throne, but enlarged the dominion of the Tartars, through
a great part of Asia and Europe, which had scarce before heard of any such
people. His first Forces he employed upon Tenduch and Argon, bounded with the
Eastern Seas, both of them were then Provinces governed by Vnchan, or Presbyter
John. Soon after they got ground in Sarmatia Asiatica, followed their blow upon
Russia, Hungary, and Polonia, fetched in the Kingdoms of China, Mein, and
^engala, and left many out-reaches to their successors, which have not kept
entire to this day, as being not able to match so many potent adversaries, as
they have from every quarter of their Kingdom.

(11) The limits are now on the North the Scythian Ocean, on the West the
Muscovian Empire, Sarmatia Europoea, and mare Caspium: on the South Mount
Caucasus, the Kingdom of Persia, and part of India: and on the East partly the
Easterly Seas, and partly the Kingdom of China. Thus divided she contains five
Provinces. (1) Tartaria minor. (2) Asiatica. (3) Antiqua. (4) Zagathai intra
Imaum. (5) Cathai extra Imaum.

(12) Tartaria minor is called likewise Horda Precopensium, a sort of Tartars
which have their name from one City Precops, but inhabit all those plains which
lie round about the ^ontus Euxinus, or Mare Magor, and Palus Maeotis, including
the whole Taurica Chersonesus, so that she extends her limits from the banks of
the River Boristhenes, as far as Tanais. Her chief Province is the Chersonesus,
a Peninsula, seventy miles in compass, which took the name of Taurica from
O^yris, who (they say) first ploughed this Land with a yoke of Bulls. It was
invaded by one Vlanus, from whom the Inhabitants of this whole Region were
sometimes called Vlani, as they were after Crym Tartars, from that City Crym,
once the Kings seat of this Peninsula, though it stood not within her limits:
For her principal Town was, (1) Theodosia, now Casta, where there was
heretofore a Colony of Genoaes, till they were dispossessed by Mahomet the eighth
Emperor of the Turks. (2) Eupatoria. (3) Parthenium, etc. The other Towns of
this Tartaria Precopensis, which stand without the Chersonesus, are Oc^acon,
which this people took from the Dukes of Lituania and Tanas, which stands in
the utmost part of this Tartaria, above the mouth of the River Tanais, some
three miles distant. It is called by the Inhabitants Azac, and it is a place of
great Traffic, and free access from many neighboring Nations. Near this
Southward, begins the Palus Maeotis* reaches as far as the Taurica
Chersonesus, betwixt which and the main Land, is the Bosphorus Cimmerius; and
on their South banks flows their Poutus Euxinus, which runs into the Propontis,
but returns not This Sea is in some places so deep, that the water appears at
top black, and was therefore called Mare nigrum. It might be thought that the
people living so near the civil parts of Christendom, were better mannered
than the Asiatick Tartars; but their stubborn rudeness takes in foul scorn to
be taught by any other Nation; and therefore stands stiffly to their old course
of life, in Woods and wild Fields, and cease not to commit continual murders
and rapines upon the Countries adjoining, with an inveterate hate to such as
profess the Name of Christ; insomuch that they have engaged themselves to pay
yearly three hundred Christians, as tribute to the great Turk; which number
they draw out of Polonia, Russia, Lituania, Walachia, and part of Muscovia.

(13) Asiatica, or Tartaria deserta and Mu^covitica, differs not much from the
ancient Sarmatia As^^tica, which in Ptolomy's description is bounded on the
West with the River Tanais and Palus Maeotis, on the East with Scythia intra
Imaum, on the North with the Montes Hyperborei, and on the South with the
mountains Coran and Caucasus. The Inhabitants live in Hordes as the rest do,
which remove often, and direct their wandering course by observing the
Pole Star. In this too their Hordes have divisions, and are known by several
names: The chief is Zavell, which for the most part lies betwixt the Rivers
Volga and Layich, and in regard it is as it were the Mother Horde to the rest,
it was called magna Horda, and her Emperor Vlacham, magnus dominus; for so he
was, and had full power of a Prince, till they were subdued by the Precopen^es,
in the year one thousand five hundred six, and after by Basilius Duke of
Moscovia. Next to this are the Casanenses, which have their chief City Casan,
upon the River Velga, near the confines of Muscovia. It was once an entire
government to it self, but in the year one thousand five hundred fifty one,
after many victories and revolts, it was fully and irrecoverably vanpuisht, and
made an addition to the Duke of Muscovia's title. The Inhabitants here are
somewhat more ingenious than the Precopenses: they till their ground, and in
some places build houses, and practice Merchandise with the Turks and
Moscovites. Not much unlike to these are the Astroc^anenses, situate toward the
Mare Caspium, and have their name from the rich Metropolis Astrachan, twenty
Italian miles distant from the mouth of Volga; both they and it were subdued in
the year one thousand four hundred ninety four, by the Duke of Muscovia.
Besides these, there are many other wild Hordes of Tartars; Of the Nohaicenses,
Thumenenses, Sc^ibaschienses, Casachienses, Astnichanenses, Basc^irdi,
Kirgessi, Molgamozani. These last strange Idolaters of the Sun, and a piece of
a red clout, hung up before them upon a pole. They live in Caves, and feed for
the most part upon such creatures as creep upon the ground: some of them are
Anthropophagi. And hereabouts is the great Lake called Kvtay.

(14) Tartaria Antiqua, the ancient seat of the Tartars, and Kingdom of Magog,
when both the first Inhabitant was placed by the Son of Iapheth, and when these
last Tartars entered, under the Command of Chinchis. It was the utmost portion
of the Tartarian Empire, to the frozen Seas on her North, the Scythian on the
East, and the mare de Annian: for it contains many dispersed Hordes, all
(almost) subject to the great Cham of Cathai. In the most Northern tract, which
strikes into the Sea beyond the Polar circle, dwell the Dani, Neptalitae,
Mecriti, etc. more Southward the Kingdom of Tabor, and the vast desert
Caraecoranum, and the Mount Altay, the place of burial for the Tartarian
Emperors. Toward the East Seas, and near the Promontory of Tabin, are the
Regions of Arzaret, (which some think to be the very place first possessed by the
remnant of the ten Captive Tribes) and Annian, and Argon, and Tenduch, and
Mongal, and many other, whose people live after the antique manner in tents
moveable: some few Cities they have, poorly built, and as rudely customed.
Among other incivilities they have this fashion, to prostitute their wives and
sisters to such guests, as they would entertain most friendly; and when it was
once forbad by their great Cham, they recovered it again with much suit and
solemn protestation, that they had not thrived since it was laid aside, The
ground b^ings forth good store of especial good Rhubarb.

(15) Zagathai, the same with Scythiaintra Imaum, and is bounded upon the West
with the mare Caspium, upon the East with the Desert as far as Lop: upon the
North with the River Iaxartus, and upon the South with the Mount Caucasus. It
has the name from their Prince, brother to the^r great Cham, and contains in
it these several Provinces: (1) Zagatai, where Tamberlane was born, and first
bare rule in the City Sarmachand, a place enr^cht by his victories, and
memorable for the death of Clytus, slain by Alexander in his drunken fury. The
seat of the Governor is in Bochara, another town of the best note here. (2)
Bactria now Coccazzan, the Inhabitants were led by ^essus, which ^lew Darius,
and the first King was Zoroastes, in the time of Ninus the Assyrian, and twice
tried the fortune of war with him, but was at last vanquished, and his Kingdom
made a Province to the Monarchy: In several ages it has been tossed into the
hands of diverse States, among the rest, the Romans had it once in their
possession, at which time, the Inhabitants received knowledge of the truth from
the mouth of Saint Thomas: but have lost it since by the tyranny of the
Sarazens and Tartars. (3) Sogdiana, on the North of Bactria, where G^opolis
stood, built for a Fort against the Scythians, and standing to the time of
Alexander, who battered it to the ground. (4) Margiana, and (5) Turchestan,
East of the Mare Caspium, and was the s^at of the Turks before they brake into
Armenia.

(16) Cathaie the same with Scythia extra Imaum, and is the Empire of the
great, Cham of the Tartars, and true progeny of Chinchis; It is compassed
almost with mountains and deserts: and is divided from China, only by a great
wall on the South. The soil is exceeding fertile, and the people far more civil
than in the other parts of Tartaria. Her Provinces are (1) Cathaie, which is
supposed to be the Antique seat of the Seres: and is therefore called Regio
Serica: For it sends forth excellent Silks, Stuffs, and Chamlets, and other
rare commodities, which equalize her (at least in her own esteem) to the best
parts of Europe. Her Metropolis is Cambelu, twenty eight miles in compass,
besides the Suburbs, built four square by the River Polysangus, and enricht
from India, China, and other Regions, with all sorts of Merchandise. Here their
great Cham lives, but is buried at the Mount Altay, and is conveyed thither by
a strong guard, which kills all they meet in the way, and commands them to
serve their Lord in the other world. Maginus reports from Marcus Polus, that
while he was in Cathai, ten thousand persons lost their lives upon one such
occasion. (2) Tangut, which (they say) had the Art of Printing many hundred
years before it was known among us. (3) Camul. (4) Tanifu. (5) Tebet, not much
differing either from themselves, or the other parts of Tartaria, which belong
to the Kingdom of Carthaie.

FINIS.
The Description of Virginia.
VIRGINIA, now Properly so called; and which is here peculiarly to be
described, is is the most Southern part of that tract of Land, which at its
first discovery (namely by the two Cabots, and after them John V^razzano a
Florentine, though afterward more distinctly by others) was all comprehended
by this name: whether from Vignina an ancient King thereof, or from our Virgin
Queen Elizabeth; the other parts being since distinguished by the names of
New England, New York, and Maryland. After the more perfect discovery of these
parts (which is said to have been first encouraged and promoted by Sir Walter
Raleigh) by several worthy Adventurers; as first Captain Philip Amidas, and
Captain Arthur Barlow, Anno 1584. Sir Richard Greenvil, 1585. Mr. John White,
1587, and 1589. Captain Gosnol, 1602, Captain Martin Pring, 1603, set out by
the City of Bristol. Captain George Weymouth, 1605, set out by the Lord Arundel
of Warder; at last i^ the year 1606, some footing being got, for all the
forementioned voyages had proved succesless, those that went over with Captain
Newport, carrying with them a commission from King James for the establishing a
Counsel to direct those new discoveries, landed on the 19th of December at a
place afterward called Cape Henry, at the mouth of Chesapeac-Bay, and
immediately opened their Orders, by which eight of the Counsel were declared,
with power to choose a President to govern for a year together with the
Counsel. The next year Letters Patents bearing date April the 10th. were
granted by the King to Sir Thomas Gates, Sir George Summers, and the rest of
the Undertakers, who were diverse Knights, Gentlemen and Merchants of London,
Bristol, Exeter, Plymouth, an^ other parts, to make a double Colony for the
more speedy Planting of the place; the first Colony to be undertaken by those
of London, the other by those of Bristol, Exeter, Plymouth, etc. However, it
was not till in some years after, that this Plantation came to be considerably
peopled: and that principally by the great care, industry, and activity in this
affair of the Valiant Capt. John Smith, who in the year 1615, in the 12th. of
King James his Reign, procured by his interest at Court, his Majesty's
recommendatory Letters for the encouragement of a standing Lottery for the
benefit of the Plantation; which accordingly succeeded: and in two or three
years time turned to no bad account. And perhaps the cancelling and making void
of the Patent granted to the Corporation of the first Colony of Virginia, and
all other Patents by which the said Corporation or Company of Adventurers of
Virginia held any interest there which was done in Trinity Term 1623, by reason
of several misdemeanors and miscarriages objected against the said Corporation,
was an inlet of a far greater conflux into these parts than otherwise would
have been, by reason that this Corporation been dissolved, and the Plantation
governed be persons immediately appointed by commission from the King, a
greater freedom of Trade was opened to all his Majesty's Subjects that would
adventure into those parts. The greatest disturbance the English received from
the Natives was in the year 1622, when by a general insurrection of the
Barbarians 300 of our men were massacred.

In the year 1631, being the 7th. of the Reign of King Charles the First, the
most Nothernly part of this Country was parcell'd out into a particular
Province, and by Patent granted to the Lord Balt^more by the name of Maryland.
And in like manner in the 15th year of his present Majesty, being the year of
our Lord 1663, that part of Florida which lies South of Virginia, to Edw. Earl
of Clarendon, then Lord High Chancellor of England; George Duke of Albermarl;
William Earl of Craven; John Lord Berkley; Anthony Lord Ashly, now Earl of
Shaftsbury; Sir George Carteret; Sir William Berkley, and Sir John Colleton, by
the name of Carolina; as is specified more at large in the particular
discourses of these two Countries.

So that Virginia as it now stands, with these two Provinces lopt from it; for
in Carolina also is included some part of the Land which belonged formerly to
the dissolved Company of Virgina; extends it self only between 36 and 37
degrees; and 50 minutes of Northern latitude, being bounded to the East by the
Ocean, to the North by Maryland, to the West by the South-Seas, and to the
South by Carolina.

The Air of Virginia is accounted of a temperature very wholesome and agreeable
to English constitutions, (especially since by the cut^ng down of the Woods,
and the regulation of diet, the seasonings have been abated) only within the
present limits of Virginia it is somewhat hotter in Summer than that part
called Maryland; and the seasoning was formerly more violent and dangerous
here to the English at their first landing.

The Soil which is generally plain, but sometimes diversified with variety of
hill and dale, is capable (being very fertile) of producing all things that
naturally grow in these parts: besides which, there are of the proper growth of
this Country, a sort of Plant called Silk-grass, of which is made a very fine
Stuff of a silky gloss, and cordage more strong and lasting than any of hemp or
flax. For fruits, the Mettaqu^sunanks, something resembling the Indian Fig; the
Chechinquamins, which come nearest to the Chestnut; the Putchcamines, a fruit
somewhat like a Damsin; Messamines, a sort of Grape in show; Rawcomens, the
resemblance of a Gooseberry; Morocoks, not much unlike a Strawberry; Macoquer,
a kind of Apple; Ocoughtanamnis, a berry much like C^pers. For Roots,
Musquaspen, with the juice whereof, being a rich sort of paint, they color
their Mars and Targets; Wichsacan, yielding a most excellent healing j^ice for
wounds; Pocones, an emulgent of much efficacy for swellings and aches;
Tockawaugh, frequently ^aten; there is also a Plant called Matonna, of which
they make bread; and Assament, a sort of Pulse, a great delicacy among the
natives.

The Beasts peculiar to this Country are the Opassum, a certain beast which
carries and suckleth her young in a bag which she has under her belly; the
Assapanic or flying Squirrel; the Mussascus, a musk-sented beast, having the
shape of a Water-rat; the Aroughena, a sort of Badger; the Utchu^qu^is,
somewhat like a wild Cat; also a sort of beast called Roscones. Of Fish, the
most peculiar is the S^ringraise, which is also common to this Country with
New England.

So many several Towns as were anciently among the natives, so many distinct
Nations there were, all Monarchical except that of the Sesquahanocks, all
something differing in disposition, customs, and religious Ceremonies, and most
of all in language; but all of them in general valiant, well-set, of a tawny
complexion, with black, flaggy, and long hair, crafty, and treacherous,
sufficiently laborious in the art of War, which they used frequently to
exercise among each other; and wonderful lovers of hunting, in other things
most scandalously lazy and indulgent to their ease; mean in their apparel,
homely in their diet, and sluttish in their houses.

All Ships that come to Virginia and Maryland enter through the Bay of
Chesapeac; at whose opening to the South, Virginia begins between those famous
Capes, Cape Henry and Cape Charles. Into this Bay which runs up 75 Leagues
Northward into the Co^ntrey, and is in some places seven leagues broad, there
fall several noted Rivers, the chief whereof are James River, formerly called
Powhatan, the denomination of a very potent King of this Country, at the time
of the English first adventuring thither: this River is found navigable 50
leagues, or thereabout. 2. York River, otherwise Pamaunke in the language of
the natives; which lies about 14 miles Northward from the other, and is
navigable 26 Leagues. 3. Rapa^anock, or Topahanock, the last River of Virginia
Northward, and navigable 40 leagues. 4. Patowmec River, mentioned in the
Description of Maryland, to which part of the Country this River also
belongs, Besides these greater Rivers, there are some others of lesser note
which fall into them, as into Po^hatan or James River, Southward Apame^uck;
Eastward Quiyonycohanuc, Nansamund, and Chesopeac; Northward Chickamahania,
into Pamaunkee Payankatank.

The English Plantation here is divided into 22 Counties; on the Eastern shore
Northampton County in Acomac; on the Western shore Carotuc, James, Henrico,
Charles, York, Gloucester, Surry, Hartford, Warwick, Lancaster, New Kent,
Surrey, Middlesex, Nansemund, Lower Norfolk, Northumberland, Westmorland,
Northampton, Warwick, Isle of Wight, and Rappahanoc; in each of which are
monthly held those inferior County Courts, where matters not of highest
concernment, or relating to life, are tried; and from whence appeals are made
to the Quarter Court at Iames-Town, where all criminal and Civil Causes are
determined, and where the Governor and Counsel sit as Judges.

The Metropolis, or chief Seat of the English here is Iames-Town, or rather
Iames-City so denominated in honor of King James, where the Quarter Courts,
General Assemblies and Secretaries Office are kept. This Town adorned with many
fair Brick-houses, and other handsome Edifices, is situated in a Peninsula on
the North-side of James River. The other Towns and Places of chief note are
Elizabeth City, seated nearer the mouth of the same River on the same side;
near which, at a place named Green-spring, Sir William Berkley the present
Governor, has a very pleasant Mansion House built of brick; Henricopolis, or
Henry's Town, so denominated from Prince Henry, living when it was first built,
seated in a commodious place about 80 miles from James City. Dale's gift, so
named from Sir Thomas Dale, Deputy Governor of the Place in the year 1610, at
whose charge it was built, and a Colony here planted; besides others of less
note, some whereof still retain the Indian names, as Wicocomoco, etc. which
doubtless are by this time increased to a very considerable number, in regard
of the amplitude and grandeur to which by the continual access of people, this
Plantation is of late arrived.

VIRGINIA and MARYLAND
map of Virginia and Maryland
The Description of Maryland.
IT was in the year 1631 that his late Majesty gave a grant to George Lord
Baltimore for the possessing and planting the Southern part of New-Netherland,
now New-Yorkshire, lying toward Virginia; when upon his Embassy to the States
of Holland, they declared by public writing their dissent to whatever had
been acted by any of their subjects in prejudice of his Majesty's Right and
Title in those parts, as has been already mentioned. Crescentia was the name
first in designation for this Country; but it being left to his Majesty at the
time of his signing of the Bill, to give it what denomination he judged
fittest; he was pleased in honor of his Royal Consort Queen Mary, to erect it
into a Province by the name of Maryland: which Patent, upon the death of his
Lordship, before the final ratification thereof, was not long after confirmed
under the Broad-Seal of England, bearing date June 20, Ann. 1632, to his Son
and Heir Coecilius the now Lord Baltimore; investing him, his heirs and
successors with the Sovereignty, attended with all Royal Prerogatives both
Military and Civil, as absolute Lords and Proprietors of the said Province,
saving only the Allegiance and Sovereign homage due to his Majesty, his Heirs
and Successors; of whom they were to hold it, as of his Majesty's honor of
Windsor; for the yearly payment at the Castle of the said honor of Windsor on
every Easter Tuesday, of two Indian Arrows of those parts; and the fifth part
of all the Gold and Silver Oar which should happen to be found there.

The next year after this Patent had past, viz. in the year 1633, a Colony of
about 200 in all, Servants and Planters, (whereof some persons of quality) was
sent over by the Lord Proprietor, under the Conduct of his Lordships two
Brothers, Mr. Leonard, and Mr. George Calvert: the first of whom was made
Governor of the Province for his Lordship, and from thence forward this
Plantation has prospered, and by the several supplies since sent, very much
increased; to which good success, the good Government of the said Mr. Leonard,
and his strict observance of his Lordship's prudent instructions, very much
conduced. The first place they pitched upon to plant themselves in, was
Yaocomaco, now St. Mary's, which the Governor purchased of the Natives; (for
never has any forcible or violent invasion of any man's right been made here by
any of his Lordships Ministers) with such commodities as they brought from
England, though at so much the more easy rate, in regard of their
pre-intentions to leave this place, as thinking it their safest course to
remove farther off from their too potent and valiant Neighbors the
Sesquehanocks.

After the happy restoration of his present Majesty, viz. in the year 1661,
the Lord Proprietors only So^, Mr. Charles Calvert went over into these parts,
his Fathers Lieutenant; in which charge he has continued ever since in great
tranquillity and prosperity, and with general contentment and satisfaction by
his obliging carriage to all that live under his Government, or have any
interests or concerns in the Province.

This Province, according as it is bounded and set out by the forementioned
Patent, extends one way from the most Northernly part which bounds it to the
South, and from which it is parted by the Southernly bank of the River
Patowmeck to New York, or the most Southernly part of New England which bounds
it Northward; and from the Atlantic Ocean and Delaware-Bay Eastward to the
true Meridian of the first Fountain of the River Patowmeck Westward.

The Climate here in Summer time inclines to an extraordinary heat, and in
Winter is very cold; but both the heat of the Summer is very much allayed by
cool Breeses, and the cold of the Winter is of short continuance; so that the
Country is accounted sufficiently healthful, and of late agrees well enough
with English bodies, since the abatement and almost extinction, through the
regulation of diet, felling of the woods, etc. of that distemper called the
Seasoning, which used to be very fatal to the English at their first landing.

This Country is for the most part champain, the Soil fruitful and abounding
with many sorts of fruits and other commodities which are common in our parts
of the World; and for those that are peculiar, it cannot be imagined that in so
small a distance, and even in the same Country as it has been formerly
accounted, they should differ much from those of Virginia. Yet there is a sort
of fruit called a Persimon mentioned as most especially belonging to Maryland:
and among Birds, one named the Mock-bird, from its imitation of all other
Singing-birds, which differing among themselves in the mixture of their
colors; that which is black and yellow is called Baltemore-bird, from the
color of his Lordships Coat of Arms, which are Or and Sable, excelling in
beauty all the other sorts.

The same is to be said of the complections, customs, dispositions, government,
etc. of the Natives of this Province as of those of Virgini^ and other adjacent
parts: that is in brief, tha^ they are somewhat tawny, their hair long, black
and uncurl'd, but cut into fantastical forms; more ingenious and docile than
industrious; each Town a distinct Nation, and governed by i^s several Weroance
or King, only the Sesqua^anocks are a Republic.

As the Province is now inhabited by the English, it is divided into ten
Districts or Counties, five on the Eastern-shore of the Bay of Chespeack,
namely Dorchester, Somerset, Kent, Caecil, and Talbot; and five on the West
side of the Bay, St. Mary's, (where the Provincial Court, or chief Court of
Judicature consisting of Governor and Consiliar Judges, is held every quarter
of a year) Anne Arundel, Baltemore, Charles and Calvert.

The chief Rivers of this Country are Patowmec, Patuxent, Ann Arundel alias
Severn, Sasquesahanough, Choptank, Nantecoke, Pocomoke, besides others of less
note: of those mentioned, the first four on the West side, the other three to
the East fall into Che^apeack Bay, which is navigable for 200 miles, and which
between two Capes, Cape Charles to the North, and Cape Henry to the South,
being seven or eight leagues distant, receives all the Ships that come for
Virginia or Maryland, and passes Northernly through the midst of Maryland.
On the Eastern shore of this Bay are diverse convenient Harbors, Creeks and
Islands; and Northward thereof is the entrance of Delaware Bay.

The original Seat, and Principal City of this Province where the Provincial
Courts, the general Assembly, the Secretaries office, and other public offices
are held: and where the seat of Trade is fixed, is St. Mary's, situate in St.
Mary's County, on the East Side of St. Georges River. Here formerly at the
Palace of St. John's, the Governor Mr. Charles Calvert used to reside; but he
has now a very pleasant and commodious habitation at a place called Mattapany
upon the River Patuxent, about eight miles from St. Mary's: here is also
another fair house where the Chancellor usually resides.

There were also some years since in all the rest of the Counties the
foundations of Towns laid, which no doubt by this time are very near, if not
altogether completed, particularly in Calvert County near the River Patuxent;
1. Calverton in Battle-creek: 2. Harvy Town over against Point Patience: 3.
Herington upon the Cliffs.

As for the present Government of Maryland by the English, the Lord Proprietor
in the first place is invested, as has been mentioned, with an absolute power
and dominion; by whose sole command all things relating to peace or War are
ordered; and in whose name issue forth all public Instruments, Patents,
Warrants, Writs, etc. In the enacting of Laws he has the consent and advice of
the general Assembly, which is made up of two Estates; the first consisting of
his Lorships Privy Council, (of which the Chancellor and Secretary always are)
and such Lords of Manors as are called by his special Writ, the other of the
Deputies of each Province, elected by the free voice of the Freeholders of the
respective Province, for which each Deputy is chosen.

The names of the present Governor, the prime Officers of State, and the rest
of his Lordships Privy Council are as follows: the Governor Mr. Charles
Calvert, his Lordships Son and Heir: the Chancellor Mr. Philip Calvert, his
Lordships Brother: the Secretary Sr. William Talbot: the Muster-Master General
Mr. William Calvert: Mr. Baker Brook, all three his Lordships Nephews: the
Surveyor General Mr. Jerome White, Mr. Edw. Lloyd, Mr. Henry Coursy, Mr. Thomas
Trueman, Major Edward Fitz-Herbert, Mr. Samuel Chew.

Vast quantities of Tobacco, the grand Trade of this Province of Maryland are
yearly vended from hence, not only in England, but likewise in several of the
other English Plantations: besides the importation also of some other
commodities, to the great improvement of his Majesty's Revenue by Custom and
Excise. The common way of traffic here is by barter or trucking of commodities
one for anotherr; though money is not altogether wanting, as well of the coin
of England and other parts, as of his Lordships own Coin being stamped on the
one side with his Lordships Coat of Arms, with this circumscription, Crescite
and Multiplicamini; and on the other side with his Effigies, and this
circumscription, Caecilius Dominus Terrae Mariae, etc.

The Description of New England.
WHat has been said in General of the discovery of Virginia, largely so
called, may in consequence be applied to this Country of New England; being as
above mentioned, one of the three principal Colonies comprehended therein: but
in the year 1602, it began to be more particularly known a part from the rest,
from the discovery as some think, of Captain Gosnold; and in the year 1606, it
was granted by Patent by King James, to diverse Lords and Gentlemen under the
denomination of the Plymouth Company; yet after that several that set out for
this Plantation successively, either miscarried or returned re infecta, as
first Captain Henry Chaloung, who meeting with the Spanish Fleet that came from
the Havana was with all his Company carried Prisoner into Spain: Not long
after, Thomas ^ Haman sent to the succor of Chaloung by Sr. John Popham Lord
chief Justice of England. Next Captain Prinne set out by the Bristol Company,
whose Voyage, though it had not its wished success, yet he returned with a
farther discovery of the Coast than had been made before. Not long after George
Popham and Raleigh Gilbert, were fitted out at the charge of Sir John Popham,
with one hundred men, who though they had seated themselves not uncommodiously
in a Peninsula at the mouth of the River Sagadahoc, and were upon making
farther discoveries; yet in the year 1608, upon the death of George Popham
their Commander, and soon after of the Lord Chief Justice, they returned into
England, notwithstanding supplies had but lately been sent them, to the very
great distaste of the chief promoters of the design; and whereupon the French
had taken occasion to plant themselves in these parts, had they not been timely
expelled by Sr. Samuel Argal from Virginia. The next that attempted a
settlement here, was Captain Hobson, who by reason of the opposition raised
against him by two Natives, whom having been detained some while in England he
took back along with him, upon an affront offered them by some of the English,
was forced to return without effecting of any thing, notwithstanding which
insuccess, he ventured again, having under his command several Land Soldiers in
the company of Captain Harly, who was fitted out by Sr. Ferdinando Gorges then
Governor of Plymouth. Afterward in the year 1615, there went Sr. Richard
Hawkins, then Captain Rocroft; after him Captain Dormer: And in the year 1623,
Captain Robert Gorges. By all which Voyages, however though this Plantation was
not brought to any settlement, by reason of the many misfortunes and
disappointments that attended them; yet so many of them as were made, and
following so thick upon the neck of each other, could not but add much light to
the discoveries that were first produced, and at least make way for future
improvements: but that which chiefly conduced to the full peopling, and that
flourishing estate which this Colony at present injoys, was that general
aversion at that time grown to a great height, against the Church Government of
this Nation, which caused multitudes of people greedily to take hold on this
occasion, that they might betake themselves to a place where they might
securely indulge to that liberty of Conscience they so much desired, and for
which many of them had fled before into Holland, especially when at length upon
consideration of the little loss, but rather benefit, the absence of persons so
disaffected and unconformable would be to the Kingdom, and of the advantage
that would accrue to the Colony from the supplement of so great a number of
people, free liberty was granted for their transportation. So that in the year
1630, there landed of them a very considerable number at Plymouth Plantation,
and that without any opposition from any of the Natives, one great reason
whereof might probably be the great Mortality that happened at that time among
the Narragansetts, Niantics, Tarantines, Wippanaps, Peoods, those of
Agissawang, Pockaneki, and Abargini, and other chief Tribes of the Indians of
these parts. From this time forward, what with the industry of the people, and
the continual supplies that were sent from time to time for some years, they
soon increased to a great height, and are become at present one of the most
powerful and thriving of the English Plantations in America.

At the^r first arrival they divided themselves into four sub-Colonies, the
Massachusetts, Plymouth, Canectico, and New Haven, which commonly met together
in Counsel upon all important occasions, either of Peace or War: As some little
Wars they had at first, chiefly with the Pequods, whom nevertheless they
quickly subdued, having first concluded a Peace with Cannonicus the supreme
Sachem of the Narragansits.

This County lying in the midst of the temperate Zone between the 41 and 45
degrees of Northern Latitude, and aequidistant between the Artic circle and
Tropic of Cancer in the same Parellel with France, and some part of Italy; is
bounded to the North-East with Norumbigua, to the South-West with Novum Belgium
or New-Netherlands now New York.

The temperature of the Air, and fertility of the Soil differs not remarkably,
as may well be imagined, from the rest of the Virginian tract; and consequently
affords the like plenty and variety of all sorts of Commodittes, yet there are
reckoned as chiefly appropriated to this part of the Country diverse kinds of
Plants, and Trees, among which the Cedar, the Sprewse, sassafras, and Dyers
Sumach, and also some peculiar Beasts, Birds, and Fishes.

Of Beasts, the Musquash less than a Beaver, but much resembling it in shape,
the Musky Scent whereof proceeds from the stones of the male, and whose skins
in regard of their sweet Scent, are brought over as rich Presents. The Moose as
big an Ox, slow of foot, yet in shape somewhat like a red Dear, and headed like
a Buck, yielding flesh good for meat, hides for clothing: This Beast in regard
of its fruitfulness (for the female brings forth three at a time) and its
hardiness; for it will live in winter without fodder, may be with good
advantage kept tame, and accustomed to the Yoke. The Rackoon, tailed like a
Fox, otherwise like a Badger, but with a deep furr: This beast sleeps by day in
a hollow tree; in moonshiny nights at low tide it feeds on Clams by the
Seaside.

Of Birds, the Loon, a most ill-favored bird not much unlike the Cormorant,
and very unweildy, for it cannot fly, and scarce go; it makes a noise like a
Sow-gelders horn. The Humility or rather Simplicity, in regard it so simply
exposes it self to the shot of the fowler, the bigger sort is about the
bigness of a green Plover, the other no bigger than that sort of bird we call
here a Knot: but the Humbird is no less curious and remarkable than any other
bird whatsoever, whether in New England or any other part of the World, if we
consider the rarity of its bulk, it being no bigger then a Horne^, yet having
the perfect shape and proportion of a bird; it seems to take its name from the
humming noise it makes.

Of Fishes the most peculiar are the Seal or Sea-calf, chiefly prised for its
Skin, next for its Oil, of which it yields a large quantity, the chief use
whereof is to burn in lamps; for its flesh wholly useless, as not fit to be
eaten. The Shark sometimes as big as a horse, having three rows of teeth with
which they have many times snapt off the hands and feet of men as they swam:
With the flesh of this fish (being good for nothing else) they often manure Land.
The Hollibut, a fish in shape somewhat resembling a Pleace, but of a far larger
size, that is to say, two yards long, one wide, and a foot thick, the best of
this for the table is accounted the head and fins, especially baked or stewed.
The Basse, a fish of all others in these parts accounted the greatest delicacy
to eat, exceeding Ling or Haberdine, when salted up for winter, as usually the
bodies of them are, the heads being eaten fresh; the common size is two or
three foot long. The Clam or Clamp, a shellfish, having some resemblance of a
Cockle, with a round hole by which it takes in and spouts out water
continually, the biggest of them which are as big as a large apple, are among
the Natives a great dainty, and by the English not altogether despised. The
Alewife, a sort of fish most like a Herring, coming up once a year, namely in
April, in vast shoales into Rivers and fresh waters to spawn, from whence till
they have spawned, not the most violent disturbance that can be devised, can
force them to return.

Of Noxious Creatures the chief is the Rattle Snake, being generally a yard and
a half long, thick in the middle, yellow bellied, spotted on the back with
various colors, its thin neck stretching into a wide swallow, wide mouthed,
with teeth as sharp as needles, wherewith such as are bitten cannot be cured,
but by chawing the root of snake-weed, and applying the chawed root to the
wound: which root chawed by any that are not thus bitten, is of it self poison.
Of Insects the most peculiar and principal are the Wild Be, as they call it,
which building habitacles like Cobwebs among the Vine leaves, guards the
Grapes. The Gurnipper, which no bigger than a flea, bites also like a flea,
though somewhat more rancorously, and lives but three weeks. The Musqueto,
which lives chiefly in thick woods or swamps, scarcely enduring wind, or excess
of cold or heat, but in thick close weather, and against rain it raises where
it bites a venomous kind of itching.

The ancient Inhabitants of this part of the Country were formerly divided into
several Tribes or petty Nations, the chief whereof were East and North-East the
Churchers and Tarentines: Southward the Pequods and Naragansetts: Westward the
Canectacuts and Mawhacks: North-West, the Aberginians; all which people how
different from each other in nature and disposition in so small a compass of
ground, is wonderful to imagine; the Mawhacks most bloody, savage, and
man-eaters: The Tarentines little less cruel, but not Canibals: The Aberginians
more mild, innocent, and harmless, etc. But in religious Ceremonies, Habit,
Civil manner of Government, Marriages, Burials, Ingenuity in Arts and
Manufactures, Games and Exercises, not materially differing. Among the rest,
which it would be too tedious here to insist upon; it is observable that the
figures of Beasts and other things described upon their bodies, are not
described by superficial painting, but by incision and impunction of colors
between the skin and the flesh.

What Provinces this Country was anciently divided into, I find not otherwise
than acco^ding to the several Tribes or people already mentioned: Only there is
peculiar mention made of the Province of Laconia, now inalrged into a greater,
called the Province of Main, and much about the same, either more or less with
the Country of the Troquois anciently so called. The name of Laconia seems
derived from those Lakes, which are the most noted, if not only ones of
New England, but since is one grand one named the Lake of Trequois made by the
River Sagadahoc, and said to contain 60 Leagues in length, and 40 in breadth,
in which Connent there are about four or five pretty large Islands.

The Rivers of this Country are Tamescot, Agomentico, Nansic, Conecticut,
Sagadahoc, Apanawapesk, Merimec, Pascat^way, Newishwavoc, Mistic, Neraganset,
Pemnaquid, Ashamahaga, Tachobacco, the most of which have English
denominations, and among the rest, Chir^s River.

The number of well built Towns is far greater here, than in any of the rest of
his Ma^esties American Plantations, by reason it was so numerously peopled from
the very first time of its settlement. The first is Boston, by the Indians
called Accomonticus, the principal Town or City, and chief seat of Government,
secured with three hills, whereon strong Fo ^^s are raised. 2. St. Georges
Fort, the first place where any Plantation was settled, being at the mouth of
the River Sagadahoc. 3. New Plymouth, the first Rendezvous of our
Nonconformists, s^ated on the Bay of Pawtuxed. 4. Mahumbec or Salem,
delightfully seated on a neck of Land between two Rivers. 5. Mashawnut or
Charles Town, seated on an Isthmus or neck of Land on the North of a River
called Charles River, and through a part of which the River Mestic runs; it is
adorned with a handsome Church, and a fair Market place near the River side. 6.
Roxbury a pleasant place for fruitful Gardens and fresh Springs, between Boston
and 7. Dorchester, no less pleasant for Gardens and Orchards, and watered with
two small Rivers, though standing near the Seaside* 8. Pigsgusset or Water
Town upon one of the branches of the River Charles. 9. Linne, by the Indians
named Saugus, between Salem and Charles Town. 10. Amoncangen or New-Town, now
Cambridge, built in the year 1633, between Charlestown and Water-Town, on the
River Merimec: it is the only University of New England, having two Colleges,
and was once the seat of Government. 11. Sawacatus or Ipswich, seated on a
pleasant River in the Sagamoreship of Aggawan, now called Es^x. 12. Newbury 12
miles from Ipswich, near Merimec River. 13. Hartford built by the people of
Cambridge. 14. Concord, seated upon a branch of the River Merimec. 15. Hingham,
a Seacoast Town South-East of Charles River. 16. Dukesbury alias Sandwich,
situate also upon the Seacoast in Plymouth Government. 17. Newhaven, built in
the year 1637, by a new supply near the shalles of Capecod. 18. Dedham, in the
County of Suffolk, 12 miles from Boston. 19. W^ymouth a Sea-Town. 20. Row^y 6
miles North-East from Ipswich. 21. Hamptou, built in the year 1639, in the
County of Norfolk near the Seacoast. 22. Salisbury, overagainst Newbury, on
the other side the River Merimec. 23. Aguwon or Southampton, built in the year
1640, by a supply that settled in long Island. 24. Sudbury built in the same
year. 25 Braintre bu^lt at Mount Wollaston, by some old Planters of Boston. 26.
Gloucester, built in the year 1641, by Mr. Ri^hard Blindman at Cape Anne. 27.
Dover, situate upon Pascatoway (...) North-East of B^ston. 28. W^burn, built in
the year 1642. 29. Reading, built in the year 1644. 30. Wenham, in the
Matachusetts Government, between Salem and Ipswich. 31. Springfield, built in
the year 1645, by Mr. Pinchin conveniently for a brave trade with the Indians
upon the River Canectico. 32. Haverhill, founded in the year 1648, and not long
after, 33. Malden by some that came out of Charles Town, which lies over
against it on the other side the River Mistic. 34. Oxford, alias Sagoquas. 35.
Falmouth, alias Totum. 36. Bristol. 37. Hull, alias Passataquac. 38. Dartmouth,
alias Bohanna. 39. Exeter. 40. Greens Harbor. 41. Taunton, alias Cohannet. 42.
Norwich, alias Segocket. 43. Northam, alias Pascataqua. 44. Yarmouth. 45.
Berwick.

NEW ENGLAND and NEW YORK
mapof New England and New York
The Description of New-Neatherlands, now called New York.
NOvum Belgium, or New-Netherland, now called New York, was first discovered by
Henry Hudson, Aun: 1609, at the charge of the East India Company; but in regard
he returned without leaving any men upon the place; the Dutch in the year 1614,
under Adrian Block and Godyn began to plant themselves there; and doubtless had
soon settled themselves, (upon a double pretense; first, as finding the place
not pre-possest, and therefore free for any that would enter: next, as having
contracted with Hadson for his interest, and bought all his Charts and
Instruments) had not Sir Samuel Argal, then Governor of Virginia, disputed the
business with them. And upon a serious debate and conference with them about
it, wherein he alleged that Hudson being a Subject of the King of England, and
acting solely by his commission, had not power to alienate any Country he
discovered for the King his Master, without his Majesty's consent; but that
this Country more especially belonged to him as his own Dominion, being
accounted part of the Province of Virginia: he brought them to acknowledge the
King of England's Title, and to submit to the holding of the Country as
feodatory of the Crown of England, and under the Government of Virginia. Yet
this compliance was not of a very long continuance; for upon the expectation of
a new Governor they fell back into their first principles, and made no scruple
to usurp the whole Sovereignty; and to denominate it their own, called it by
the name of Novum Belgium, or the New Neatherlands: and moreover they fell to
building of Towns and Forts; the Town they erected they called New Amsterdam;
their first Fort Fort-Orange; after which they raised another by the name of
Fort-Ams^el. However, these proceedings upon complaints made to his late
Majesty, and by him represented to the States of Holland, were absolutely
disowned by them, and wholly laid upon the East India Company of Amsterdam;
upon which the most Northernly part toward New England, was by his Majesty
granted by Patent to Sir Edmund Loiden, by the name of Nova Albion; the most
Southernly toward Virginia, to Sir George Calvert, now Lord Baltimore, by the
name of Maryland; and the Dutch upon some consideration agreed on, were
forthwith to have quitted the place: yet for all this, as the custom of this
people is, never to let go any opportunity that serves their turn, whether by
right or wrong, taking advantage of the unhappy dissentions and civil wars that
soon after happened in this Nation, they not only stood upon higher demands than
were at first agreed on, but also endeavored to stir up the Natives against
the English, that they might have the better opportunity to fix themselves. In
this state things remained till his present Majesty, after his restoration,
resolving to make a full determination of his right to these parts, sent three
Men of War, by whom New Amsterdam being easily reduced, the Country came
thenceforth into the sole possession of the English, and was immediately,
together with Long Island, conferred by his Majesty upon the Duke of York, by
the t^tle of Yorkshire, which has now quite swallowed up that of New
Neatherland; the name of New Amsterdam being changed into that of New York; of
Fort-Orange into Fort-Albany; of Fort-Amscel into Fort-Iames. Moreover the
Patent of Maryland has been by his present Majesty renewed, and confirmed to
Cecil Lord Baltemore; by whose extraordinary care and promotion it has been of
late advanced to a very populous, well regulated, and thriving Pian^ation; as
is observed more at large in the description of the Province of Maryland.

This Country of New Yorkshire contains all that tract of Land lying between
New England which bounds it to the North-east; and Virginia, or rather
Maryland, which bounds it to the South-west, extending from the 38 th degree
and an half of Northern latitude, to the 41 st. and 15 min. The breadth of it
about 200 miles. Within this tract of Land are three Island, Mu^^ hatans
Island; in which stands the Town of New York, Long Island, and Staten Island.

The temperature of the Climate, fertility of the Soil, and productions of the
Earth, differ not materially from New England, and other adjacent parts.

The principal Rivers are three, Hudson's River, formerly named Manhattes, by
the Dutch, Nassorius, or Noordt River; one branch whereof called Hell-gate,
empties it self over against the Isle of Manhet^n, or Isle of Nuts, near
New York; another at May-Port, or the Port of Cornelius May. 2. Zuid River, the
same, as I take it, which is also by some termed Raritan. 3. Delaware-Bay
River. 4. Afterskull.

The only noted Town of New Yorkshire was built by the Dutch, by the title of
New Amsterdam, though now wholly changed into that of New York, in the neck of
the Island of Manhatans; with very fair Streets, and well built Houses. For the
security of this Town, on one side thereof is a Fort, which was at first termed
Fort-Amscel, now James Fort. This Town is governed by a Mayor, Aldermen, a
Sheriff and Justices of the Peace.

The nature and complexion of the native Inhabitants differ not much from those
of the Fl^ridans: but their customs, habits, and ceremonies in Religion are not
altogether the same. They observe no set-meals, but eat as often as their
appetite serves: their Sappaen, which is Indian Wheat stamped and boiled to pap,
is a great dish with them. Men turn away their Wives upon the least occasion
imaginable, and marry again; nor scruples any one to marry a woman that has
been lain with before, when a single woman. Both men and women wear a girdle of
Whale-sins, and Sea-shells, the men putting half an ell of cloth three
quarters broad between their legs, so as that a square piece hangs before over
his belly, another below behind his back. The women wear a coat that reaches
half way down their legs, curiously wrought with Sea-shells; and for an upper
garment they have a large Dear-skin, the lappets whereof hang full of points,
buttoned on the right shoulder, and tied about the middle. The men go
bare-headed; the women tying their hair behind in a tuft, wear over it a
square-cap, wrought with Sea-shells; of which they also wear chains and
bracelets about their middle, neck and arms: the men paint their faces with
several colors; the women use only here and there a black spot: their usual
painting colors are either the Juices pressed out of several Plants, or the fine
ground powders of certain curious colored Stones: the chief of these plants
has a great resemblance to a myrtle, especially in its leaves: out of the red
berry of this plant a juice is squeezed, and dried in the Sun, and preserved
for ordinary use in bags; when they have occasion to use it, they temper it
with water, producing the richest purple color that can be imagined: they use
pleated hair, which being colored red, has a fine gloss, in stead of feathers.

It is observable in their religious worship that in the midst of their
sorceries and diabolical ceremonies, the Devil, whom alone they worship, as the
regent of mischief, and sitting president in every bodily pain, and therefore
most proper to be sought and obliged, is said to appear in the shape of a wild
or tame beast, informing them obscurely of things to come; and portending, if
the first, bad; if the last, good fortune. Yet they acknowledge a God, who
living in profound bliss, not troubling himself with humane affairs, solaceth
himself with a Goddess of most surpassing beauty, and the Mother of all
terrestrial creatures. Moreover, they believe that the souls of those that have
lived well here, are translated after their decease to some Southern Clime,
where they live in utmost pleasure and delight: whereas the souls of the wicked
are hurried up and down in a miserable vagrancy.

Remarkable also is the manner of their proceeding against Criminals condemned
to death; which is, to hunt them like wild beasts into the woods; whither, in
stead of being committed to Prison, they are forced, or rather suffered to fly;
as soon as he is discovered, the King having first shot, if he miss, the rest
follow; and happy is he who has the fortune to give the Malefactor his
deaths-shot, for he is sure to be made a Captain, or some eminent Commander in
the Wars.

Not to mention the several beasts, birds, and other animals that are common to
this Country, with the European Countries in general, or with other parts of
America; there is seen on the borders of New York toward Canada, a sort of
beast, which in its cloven feet and shaggy main resembles an Horse, in its neck
a Dear, in its tail a wild-Hog, having black eyes, and an horn in the midst of
the forehead. Of this animal the males never keep company with the females,
except at time of copulation. Toward the South are many Buffalo's, a beast in
shape between an Horse and a Stag; like the last of which it has branchy
horns; also a skin for thickness not easily penetrable: the tail is short, the
hair varying color each succeeding season, the lips hanging, the teeth small:
this beast, though strong, is subject to the Falling Sickness, and dies of a
small wound. When hunted by the dogs, it defends it self by vomiting out an hot
scalding liquor upon them.

The chief Trade of this Country at present consists of Corn and Cattle;
though great plenty of Flax is also sowed, at least sufficient for so much
wearing cloth as serves for the use of the Inhabitants themselves, who live in
very happy plenty and quiet, and very good amity and correspondence with the
Indians, especially ever since the arrival of Colonel Nichols; who about eight
years since, upon the Patent granted of this Country, by his Majesty, to his
Highness the Duke of York, was sent over his Highness's Deputy Governor.

IAMAICA
map of Jamaica
The Description of Iamaica.
THis is one of those Islands which by some are called the Antilles, or
Camercan^s; the rest being Hispaniola, Cuba, Porto-rico, and several others;
though there are by whom the Antilles are accounted the same with the Caribes.
But setting aside that dispute, this is agreed on; that it was one of the first
discovered places of America, by Christopher Columbus, under whose conduct the
Spaniards first planted themselves in the North-west part of the Isle, and
built Melila, but soon removed to O^istana, and from thence afterward to
another more healthful place, where they built a fair City, by the name of St.
Iago de la Vega; and here they settled till the year 1655. In which the English
failing of that grand exploit in which they were employed by Oliver Cromwell for
the taking of St. Domingo in Hispaniola, made their retreat hither; and though
but the remnants of a broken Army, were yet strong enough to force their
entrance. Nor was this the first time; for in the year 1596, the English, under
Sir Anthony Shirly, took the Island, putting the Spaniards to flight: though
either not able, or not thinking it worth the while to keep it, they soon
quitted the place. But this second seizure has taken faster hold; insomuch,
that what with the natural fe^tility of the place, and the great improvements
that have been m^de of late, it is become one of the richest of his Majesty's
Plantations, and scarce inferior to any Colony in the West Indies; b^ing also
become so well peopled, so increased in Shipping, and other advantages, by the
c^ntnual supplies that have been sent from time to time, as not to fear
invasion from any Naval power that can be made either by the Spaniard or any
other Prince. Whereas the Spaniard not regarding the place equal to its value,
and rather affecting Hispaniola; especially in regard of the absolute Lordship
and Proprietorship which the Dukes of Veragua Columbus the descendants of
Christopher had over Iamaica; had so slenderly peopled it, that no wonder they
were so easily dispossessed as they were: for though at first flying to the
mountains they stood upon terms of treaty, depending upon effectual Succors to
be sent them: yet those Succors not coming equal to expectation, and those
that came from Cuba and other parts, 500 at one time, and 30 small Companies at
another, being defeated by L. General Edw. Doyly, the Negroes also abandoning
their Masters in their declining condition, and revolting to the prevailing
Party: they were forced at last to quit the Island, and leave the English
absolute Masters thereof. And it is but just they should be for ever ejected
out of a Possession which they had gained with so much cruelty: for it is
received for a general truth, that at their first arrival here, and in
Po^to-Rico, no less than 60000 of the native Inhabitants were in a few years
destroyed by their inhumane tyranny; whereby such an universal aversion was
conceived against them, that women oft-times chose rather to strangle children
in the birth, than bring them forth to that servitude and misery they were like
to undergo under such a tyrannical Nation.

This Island of Iamaica being in form very near oval; in length from East to
West above 160 miles; in breadth, where broadest, 170; in compass 450: lies
almost eq^ally between the Equat^r and the Tropic of Cancer, in the 17 and 18
degrees of Northern Latitude, bearing South from Hispanigoa about 25 leagues,
South-east from Po^to-Rico about 160 leagues.

The Air of this Islana is much more temperate than in any of the Caribes; and
though more Southernly than Hispaniola and the rest of the Antilles, yet not
less mild, by reason of the breezes or cool winds which blow Easternly from 9
in the morning till noon; and Westernly from 8 a clock at night till the next
morning; as also the frequent showers, and nightly dews: the length of the day
and night is pretty near an equality all the year long, and Winter being only
distinguished by somewhat more than usual rain and thunder, and that chiefly in
May and November.

The Soil is generally rich and fat, consisting of a blackish earth, mixed with
clay in the North-parts, and in the South-west parts more red and loose; but
generally in all parts so productive, that the Woods, and Havanas, or
Pasture-Meadows, discover a continual verdure.

The Cocao is so principal a commodity here, that the culture and management
thereof is one of the great employments of the Country, and sets a great
number of people on work; there being already above 60 Cocao-walk's brought to
perfection, besides what in some places are growing up, and in others newly
planted. It abounds also with many other rich Plants, precious Drugs, aromatic
Spices, and delicious Fruits; as Fustick, Redwood, Loggwood, Mothogeny,
B^asilletto, Guaiacum, Ebony, Granadilla, Ginger, Cod-Pepper, Piement or
Iamaica Pepper, China, Sarsaparilla, Tamarinds, Vinillos, Achiots or Anetto,
Contrayerva, Cyperas Assole Pie, Adjuntum Nigr^m, Cucumis Agrestis, Sumach and
Acacia, Pomegranats, Oranges, Limes, G^avars, Mammes, Alume^-Supotas, Avocatas,
Suppotillias, Ca^hues, Prickle-apples, Dildows, Sower-sops; besides several
others whose names are not known.

Of the Beasts, Birds and Fishes of this Country, there are only mentioned
such as are frequent and familiarly known among us; only some noxious creatures
there are which are common to this place, with some of the Caribbe Isles, and
other places of America, as the Manchonele, in form somewhat like a Crab, the
Guiana, a kind of Snake, and the Alligator, which seems to be a kind of
American Crocodile.

The most noted River of Iamaica runs by Los Angelos, and St. Iago, and falls
into Cagway-Bay.

The Bays, Roads and Harbors of this Island are both many, and very
convenient; of which the most considerable are, 1, Cagway, now chiefly known by
the name of Port Royal, abundantly commodious for Shipping, as being in most
places two or three leagues over, and so deep, that a Ship of 1000 Tun may load
and unload close to the shore, secured by a Castle, one of the strongest and
best provided of any in his Majesty's American Dom^nions, and land-lock'd by a
point of land which runs 12 miles Sou^h-east from the main land; by reason of
which advantages and conveniences it is become the chief place of ^rade in the
whole Isle, and much frequented both with Men of War and Merchantmen, there
being built upon the said point no less than 800 houses for Merchants,
Warehouse keepers, Vin^ners, and other Trades: yet in other respects it is ill
enough provided, having neither accommodation of wood or fresh water. It is
seated about 12 miles from St. Iago de la V^ga, the chief Town of the Island.
2, Port-Morant, a capacious Harbor, sufficiently convenient for wooding and
watering, and where Ships may ride secure from the winds: it lies on the
Eastern Point, where the English have a good substantial Colony. 3, Port
Antonio, a very secure land-lock'd Harbor in the North-part of the Isle, not
otherwise incommodious except in the entrance, which is somewhat impeded by a
small Island that lies before it: this place belongs to the Earl of Carl^sle.
4, Point-Negril, a good Harbor for the secure riding of S^ips, North-east of
which lies the old Town of Melilla: this Bay lies on the utmost Western-point
of the Island. 5, Old Harbor, a commodious Bay lying Westward from St. Iago.
Besides these which are the most noted, there lie along the Coast of this
Island many other not inconvenient Bays, viz. in the North-part Porto-Maria,
Ora-Cabessa, Cold-Harbour, Rio-Novo, Montego-Bay, Orange-Bay: in the South-part
Cabarita's Bay, Blewfields Bay, Lewana Bay, Palate Bay, Point Pedro, Allegator
Point, Micary Bay, Michaels Hole.

This Island is divided into 14 Precincts or Parishes; those on the North-side
are St. Georges, St. Mary's, St. Annes, St. James's, and St. Elizabeth's,
besides two more unnam'd. those on the South Side Port Royal, St. Katharines,
St. John's, St. Thomas, St. Andrews, St. David's, and Clarendon. The Towns are
only these following; 1, Sevilla, the first Town of any note built by the
Spaniards, situate in the North-part of the Island, and formerly graced with a
stately both Monastery and Collegiate Church; in one whereof Peter Marty^, the
famed Author of the Historical Decads of the West Indies had been Abbot,
invested with Episcopal Jurisdiction. 2, Melilla, the first place of settlement
of the Spaniards in this Island; in the North-west part whereof it lies,
landing under the conduand of Columbus; who in his return from Veragu^, where
he had like to have been Shipwrack'd, put in here to mend his Ships. 3, Orista,
a Town lying upon the South Sea, whither, the Spaniards disliking the situation
of Melilla, removed. Before this place lie several little Rocks and Islands, as
Serrana, so called from Augustine Pedro Serrana, who saving himself with much
ado from Shipwreck, lived here a solitary life for some years, Quitosv^na and
Servavilla. 4, St. Iago de la Vega, lying six miles from the Seaside,
North-west: the fixed Seat of the Spaniards, upon their abandoning of Oristam,
also as a place unhealthfully and incommodiously situated; and at last
accounted the Metropolis, or principal Town of the Island, having two Churches,
two Chapels, an Abbey, and about 2000 Houses. When the English made themselves
Master of the Country, by whom although at their first arrival it was very
much demolished and defaced: yet since their settlement here it has begun to
grow up to its former splendour, and continues still the predominant Town, and
the principal place of Iudica^ure, and all affairs relating to the Government,
and where the Governor keeps his most constant residence. 5, Port-^oyal, a
Port-Town about 12 miles distant from St. Iago, next to which it is at this
time the most important place, and for Trade rather exceeding it, as being the
principal of all the Ports, among which it has been already more particularly
mentioned. 6, Passage, a small Town in the midway between St. Iago and
Port Royal, whence it has its denomination, being just six miles from each,
and built chiefly for the convenience of traveling from one to the other. It
lies upon the mouth of the River, and has a Fort raised for its security.

The present Governor of this Island for his Majesty of Great Britain, is Sir
Thomas Linch.

BARBADOS
map of Barbados
The Description of Barbados.
AMong those Islands generally called the Caribes, by others less properly the
Antilles; which name Sanson attributes to those greater Islands of Hispaniola,
Cuba, etc. Barbados is certainly the most flourishing, and best peopled of all
of them that are possessed by the English, if not all the Caribes in general:
first discovered by Christopher Columbus. The first Colony planted in this
Island was in the year 1627, and that by the English, who have all along kept
continual and undisturbed possession.

This Island being of an oval form, about eight leagues in length* and five in
breadth, is seated in the latitude of 13 degrees, and 20 seconds; on the
North-east of St. Vincent, very strong both by Nature and Art, as being guarded
with Rocks and Shoals, and a well-grown wood, which invirons the whole Island;
and also fortified with Rampires, Trenches, Palisadoes, and Counterscarfs,
three Forts, and a standing Militia, consisting of two Regiments of Horse, and
five of Foot, well disciplined, and ready at a short warning.

The weather here is so hot for eight months, that it would be very
intolerable to travelers, but for the cool breezes which rising and mounting
with the Sun, blow generally from the North-east and by East, except in the
time of the Tornado, when for a few hours they change into the South. Yet
notwithstanding this great heat of the Air, it is also so moist, that all
iron-tools, without continual use, are wonderfully apt to contract rust. This
heat and moisture of ^he Air, besides the natural fertility of the Soil,
causes here no less increase than delight; insomuch that the fields and woods
are continually green, and bring forth their Crops all the year long. However,
the two most proper times of the year for planting, are May and November. The
Sun rises and sets here at six all the year long, and makes the days and
nights of an equal length, except in October, and then the difference is but
small. The principal productions of this Island are Logwood, Fustick, Indico,
Cotton, Ginger, and Sugars; with which four last Commodities it drives a very
vast Trade, and supplies not only England and Ireland, but also several of his
Majesty's other Dominions in America. The Sugarcanes are planted all the year
long, and yield better Sugar, when refined, (though not altogether so white)
than that of Brasile. Nor is there wanting here store of Tobacco, in which also
a considerable Trade is driven. The chief Fruits, besides what are familiar
here with us, are Pomegranats, Citrons, Dates, Oranges; Limes, Macows,
I^niper-apples, Papayers, Custard-apples, Momins, Aca^ous, Monbains,
Indian-figs, Prickled-apples, Prickled-pears, Icacos, Cocos, Plantin^, Bonanos,
Guavers, and Pine-apples, accounted the most delicious of Indian-fruits. The
other most peculiar trees are the Locust-tree, the Mastick-tree, Redwood, the
Prickled yellow-wood, the Iron-wood-tree, the Cassia Fistula, Coloquintida,
Tamarinds, Cassa^y, the Poison-tree, the Phystick-nut, the Calibash, a sort of
Gourd, the Mangrass-tree, of a large compass, the Roucon, of whose bark ropes
are made, the Lignum vitae beforementioned, and the Palm^to. The other Plants
are but the same with what are common here: so likewise the Beasts, except
Asinegos, and Birds, Some sorts of Fish there are peculiarly belonging to this
and the rest of the Ca^ibbess, as Snappers, Terbums, Cavallos, Parrat-fish,
Coney-fish, and Green Turtles, esteemed by many a very great delicacy. Likewise
some kinds of Insects, as Musketoes, Cockroches, Merrywings, which sting much
in the night: but the most remarkable is a very little Fly termed Cayonyo^,
whose wings cast such a sparkling light, that the Indians catching them, have
been observed to make use of them in stead of candels, by tying them to their
hands or feet.

As small as this Island is, it is said to have been divided in former times
into several petty Nations, who with their puny Kings used to go to War each
against the other, selling the Prisoners they took, to the Europeans that came
thither to traffic. Their habitation is thought to have been chiefly in Caves,
of which there are several in this Island, both very deep, and large enough to
hold each of them 500 men: they are now become the refuges and sculking-places
of the Negro-slaves that run away.

The most usual drinks of the Country are Mobby, which is an infusion of
Potatoes in water, as Planti^ of Plantins in water; Perino of Casaru-root,
Beveridhe, a drink made of Spring Water, juice of Oranges and Sugar; also,
Crippo, Kill-devil, and Punch: but above all, Wine of Pines, a most delicious
drink doubtless, as made of so delicious a fruit.

The whole Island is so taken up in Plantations, that there are no more
vacancies of building than what the ground employed requires, is divided into
eleven Precincts or Parishes, containing in all 14 Churches and Chapels: four
of these Parishes are very well built, and have the name and repute of noted
Towns; as, 1, St. Michael, heretofore called Bridge-Town, or Indian-Bridge,
having several fair Streets of handsome well built Houses, though seated in a
place somewhat low and moorish, and by consequence unhealthful, namely in the
bottom of Caerlisle-Bay, in the Southern part of the Island, a very large Bay,
and capable of giving harbor to no less than 500 Ship at a time, secured with
two strong Forts opposite to each other, with a Platform in the midst well
mounted with great Guns, and commanding the Road. The chief of these ^orts
called Charles-Fort, is seated on Nedhams Point: this Town being the principal
Emporium of this Isle, is graced with the Courts of Judicature, the residence
of the Governor or his Deputy, the Store-hou^es of Merchants and Factors,
whence the Inhabitants are furnished with foreign Commodities for those which
are the product of the Isle, which they bring in exchange. 2, Sprights-Bay, now
Little Bristol, about four leagues from St. Michaels Southward; it is a place
of good Trade and concourse, well guarded by two strong Forts. 3, St. James's,
not far from Bristol; it is a place of good Trade, fortified with a large
Platform, and Brestworks, and affording a safe Harbor ^ot Ships: here are kept
the monthly Courts for this Precinct. 4, Charles Town, seated on Oyster-Bay,
two leagues from St. Mich^el Northward, and guarded by two strong Fo^ts, the
one on the North-side, the other on the South Side of the Town, with a Platform
in the midst. In this Town are kept weekly Markets, and the monthly Courts for
the Precinct: also along the Seacoast are these places of note, viz.
Maxwels-Bay, Austins-Bay, Fowl-Bay, the Hole, Spikes-Bay, Black-Rock,
Balises-Bay, Long-Bay, Clarkes-Bay, and Constance-Bay.

The water which supplies this place is chiefly in Pools and Ponds, besides
Wells and Cisterns belonging to most houses for the rece^t of rainwater: but
of Rivers there are only reckoned two, if the first be not rather to be
accounted a Lake, since it runs but a very little way into the Land: the other
they call the River Tuigh, on the surface of whose waters there swims an Oil,
which being gathered thence, is usually burnt in Lamps.

The Estate of a Master Planter here consists chiefly in servants and
Negro-slaves; and of these three Classes or Orders the whole Islands consists:
the Masters live not only in all manner of plenty and delight: for besides
Beef, Mutton, Pork, Kid, Pease, Beans, and excellent Roots, they have all
variety of Fish and Fowl, and plenty of Wine, Strong Water, and English Beer
and Ale; but also in full stretching ease, having their Overseers to manage
their business for them, who calls the Servants and Slaves to their work, by
ringing of a Bell at six a clock in the morning, and one after dinner, and
dismisses them at eleven at noon, and six at night, orders them their several
tasks, and corrects them for all misorders and neglect of their duties. The
Servants have this advantage of the Slaves, that their servitude lasts but for
five years; which time being expired, they either acquire Plantations of their
own, or have good allowances for working under the chief Planters. The Negroes
on the other side, who are bought like beasts in a Fair, are kept in perpetual
bondage, they and their children; and therefore though the Christian Servants
are also bought, yet double the price is given for the Negroes, viz. twenty
pound a piece for the men, fifteen for the women. The diet, clothing and
lodging is very hard both for servants and slaves; but the servants have a
double allowance of clothes, and their accommodation of lodging much better:
Sunday, which is allowed as a day of respit from the Masters labor, the most
ingenious spend in some kind of manufacture for their own benefit; others in
wrestling, dancing, and such like recreations.

For the better administration of Government, and putting in execution the Laws
of this Country, which, if not the same, have a very near correspondence with
ours in England, excepting some that are peculiar to the place. The Island is
divided into four circuits, in each of which there is a Court of Judicature for
civil Causes, from whence appeals may be made to the Supreme Court, which
Supreme Court is in the nature of our Parliament, both as having a Legislative
Power, and consisting of three Estates, namely, the Governor or his Deputy, ten
of his Counsel, which are in stead of our House of Peers; and the Burgesses
elected by the Freemen, two out of each Parish. For the execution of Justice
here are held five Sessions yearly.

The present Governor is the Right Honorable, William Lord Willoughby of
Parham.

The Description of Florida.
FLorida, a pleasant and spacious Country, was so called by the Spaniards,
whereas the ancient name was Irquassa, because to Iuan Ponce de Leon, the first
of that Nation that steered his course toward this Coast, it gave landing in
1512 on Palm Sunday, which they call Pascha de Flores, or Florida Pascha:
though it had been formerly discovered, viz. Ann. 1497. by S^bastion Cabot, by
the encouragement of K. Henry the 7th. of England. Ponce, by reason of the
resistance of the Natives, being soon forced to quit the place; and dying not
long after of a wound he received in one of his encounters, not many years
after Lucas Vasques de Aylon arriving with two Ships, was courteously
entertained by a King of the Country, and well he requited him; for at his
departure he treacherously hoisted Sail with diverse of the Indians, whom he
carried with him captives, to work in the Mines at Hispaniola, but it thrived
with him accordingly, when having obtained the Government of Florida, he was
beaten out with the loss of one Ship, and about 200 of his men; this
notwithstanding discouraged not Pamphilus Nervaes from making another attempt,
who after many strange adventures, losses and hazards, at length lost himself,
it being never known what became of him; and of 80 that accompanied him, but 4
escaped to return home alive. Much more remarkable and puissant, and more
destructive to the poor Indians, of whom many thousands were slaughtered, was
the expedition of Ferdinando Soto, Ann. 1534. who nevertheless, after many
losses, died therein, and his successor Ludovico de Alvarado was forced to an
hasty retreat, in which he lost half his Army; upon hopes therefore of better
success, in the two following expeditions of the Spaniards, Religion was
thought fit to be joined with political interest, and first with Pietro
Albumada were sent five Dominicans, who from the jealous Indians, not
understanding they were designed Converts to the Christian Faith, meeting only
with such usage as made them pass for Mar^yrs; three Jesuits next, Petrus
Martinius, Ioannes Rogerus, and Franciscus Villaregius went with Pietro
Menendez, whom such a storm encountered in the very landing, that the Ship being
driven to Cuba, those that were left on Shore perished with hunger. However, of
so many landings as had at several times been made by the Spaniards, some
footing, notwithstanding all misfortunes, could not but be made in the place.
Enough it seems to disturb the following approaches of the French, of whom Iean
Ri^ald, and Rene Laudoniere being the first that discovered those Coasts, had
at several efforts their men totally cut off by the Spaniards, yet at last they
were met with by Dominic de Gourgues a Gascoigner, who in the year 1567, in
revenge of his Contrymen, of whom diverse were hanged, and especially of the
death of Ribaut, who is said to have been flead alive, ventured of his own
accord to make thither with three Ships well manned with Soldiers and Seamen,
and with the help of diverse Casicks of the Country engaged to his Party by
Pierre du Bre, the only Frenchman that escaping the Massacre of the Spaniards
in Laudonieres attempt, was left alive in the place, took from them Fort
Carolina, and two other Forts, hanged diverse Spaniards on the same trees
whereon they had hung the French, and returned with honor, though not without
sufficient trouble to clear himself of the boldness of such an uncommissioned
exploit. After this, we hear not of any other adventures of the French in this
part of America: however there fell not long after a terrible storm upon the
Spaniards here from the English, under Captain Drake, who An. 1585. returning
from the sacking of Domingo and Carthagena, and as he sailed along that Coast,
having intelligence of the state of the Spaniards, and firing his great Guns
against the Fort St. John, forced them to quit both that and the City St.
Augustine, which finding totally deserted, he entered, and seizing on a Chest of
2000 l. and 14 Brass-Guns, he returned to his Ships, and contented with his
prize, hoisted Sail. Since which they have met with little or no disturbance,
but remained quiet in those Colonies they possess: besides which, there has
been found space enough of the Country for the parcelling out into a peculiar
Province, which has been done of late years by his present Majesty, and
granted by Patent to several Noble and Honorable persons of his Subjects, by
the name of Carolina, as is mentioned more at large in the peculiar description
thereof.

This Country of Florida lying South-west of of Virginia, extends from the 30
(some say the 25) to the 50 degree of Northern Latitude, if we consider the
extent, as it was before (...) was taken out of it) and is bounded South and
South-west with the Gulf of M^xico, and M^^ Virginium, full West with part of
New Gallicia, and other Countries not yet thoroughly discovered, North-East
with Virginia, or rather with Carolina, which being now separated (...) a
Province by it self, lies between Florida and Virginia.

The temperature of the Air of this Country is such, that Carolina, which
having been accounted a part of it, cannot be thought to differ much in
constitution of Climate, is generally reputed not only one of the best Colonies
the English possess, but for health, pleasure and profit, comparable to (if not
transcending) any part of America beside. The richness of the (...) meeting
with such a temperature of Air, as has been observed, must needs produce very
delicious fruits, as well of those kinds that are frequent with us, as Apples,
Pears Plums, Cherri^s, Apricocks, Peaches, Grapes, etc. as those peculiar to
the Country; of which, I find the (...) most especially taken notice of.

The ancient Inhabitants of Florida are of an Olive color, of a full stature,
and well proportioned, with long black hair reaching down below their wastes,
which are tied about with the skins of hunted Beasts, adorned with diverse
colored feathers hanging down to their knees, else naked, only having their
bare arms, back, breast and legs exquisitely painted: their women most
especially are esteemed very handsome, and of an excellent shape, which by
their going so naked, appears to the greater advantage. They are crafty,
ingen^ous, exquisite dissemblers, revengeful, and frequent in warlike
consultations held in the Kings Palace, where he himself sits Arbiter and
directer: Their warlike Arms are chiefly Bow and Arrows, which pointed with
fishbones, they carry in quivers by their side. They have a gross belief of the
souls immortality, but the Ceremonies of their Religion are bruitishly
barbarous and bloody; their victories, horrid cruelty to prisoners, and burial
of their dead, attended with many strange and extravagant fancies and conceits.

There are by some named several Provinces, into which this Country has been
formerly divided, viz. Panuca, bordering upon New Spain, Aranaris, Albardaosia,
whose Natives are peculiarly noted for their sub^ilty, Irquasia, inhabited by a
people exceeding all others in swiftness of foot, and Alpachia, Authia, and
Someria* remarkable for expert swimmers, even to the very women, who make
nothing to cross over wide Rivers with children in their arms: it is said to
abound also with Hermophradites, who are made use of as drudges to follow the
Camp, and carry the luggage of the Army. Colas, bordering upon Cape Florida:
Tegista, or Florida, properly so called, which stretches our North and South
100 leagues in length, into a long Peninsula toward the Isle Cuba, by the Cape
Los Martyrs, Acuera, Vitacu^^us, etc. But the more common division of the
Floridans is into their several Tribes, as the Quitones, the Susolas, the
Maticones, the Avavares, the Camoni, the Canagadi, the Marianes, and the
Quevenes, of each of which the supreme Head or Prince is called the Paraousti.

This Country of Florida is well watered with many large and convenient
Rivers; of which the only mentioned in any noted Writer of these parts, are
these, 1, Rio Grande. 2, Rio Secco. 3, Rio de Nieves. 4, Rio de Spiritu Santo.
5, Serravahi. 6, Garuna. 7, Ligeri^. 8, Sequana. 9, Axona. 10, Charente, all
which fall into the great Lake of Mexico. 11, Maio, so called by Ribault, from
the Month in which he discovered it, if it be not one of those already
mentioned under another name.

The principal Towns of Florida, whereof some built by the Spaniards (and one
by the French) others by the ancient Inhabitants, are, 1, St. Helens, situate
on or near a Promontory or point so called, on the utmost Frontier of the
Country toward Virginia. 2, Arx Carolina, or Fort Charles, built by Laudonier
on the banks of the River Majo, and by him so called, in honor of King Charles
the 9th. of France, in whose time the Conquest of Florida was undertaken by the
French: but this place was not long after taken from them by the Spaniard, and
very much ruinated. 3, Port Royal, a place inhabited for the sake of the Haven
only, which for the commodiousness of it, is very much frequented. 4, St.
Matthews, one of the principal sortifications of the Spaniards, lying on the
Eastern Coast of Tergesta of Florida, properly so called. 5, St. Augustines,
another of their ancient sortified places on the same Shore, only somewhat more
Southernly: This Town, as above mentioned, was in the year 1585 taken and
sacked by Sir Francis Drake. 6, Vitacuche, once the chief Seat of the Province
or petty Kingdom of Vitacuche; though n^ better indeed than an indifferent
Village, consisting but of 200 houses, or rather cottages, however thought
worthy to be taken by the Natives from the Spaniards: As also; 7, Ocalis, the
Metropolitan Village of Acuera, of so much the more note, by how much the
larger than the other. 8, Osachite, another Provincial Town of the Floridans.
9, Apatache, an ancient Native-built Town, probably once of some note and
resort, at least taken by the Spaniards for such, which made them the more
eager to take it under the conduct of Pamphilus Narvaes, in hopes of finding
there great riches. Doubtless it was then a place much larger, and more
considerable, than to consist but of 40 or 50 houses or cottages, (as has been
by some delivered) since it was capable of making so smart a resistance as it
did when it was attacked, and of repelling them after the departure of Nervaes.
10, Ante, another ancient Town or Village of the Floridans, chiefly remarkable
for a sharp Engagement between them and the Spaniards, whom at this place,
though said to be nine days march from Apatache, they overtook, and forced to
retreat, not without the loss of very many of their men, some of note. 11, St.
Philip. 12, St* Iago, both heretofore fortified by the Spaniards, if not still
possessed by them.

CAROLINA
map of Carolina
The Description of Carolina.
CAROLINA having been formerly accounted a part of Florida, though of late
separated into a peculiar Province, little or nothing is to be said more of the
discovery, situation, climate, temperature, soil, commodities, nature and
customs of the natives, than what has been already mentioned in Florida it
self; of which we have been the more particular; in regard this part of it
which is called Carolina, from his present Majesty King Charles the Second, and
which makes up a considerable Province, belongs now to the English: it being
not so proper to attribute those things to a part only, which are applicable to
the whole; it remains only therefore to speak of the present interest and
propriety: when, upon what occasion, and to whom the Patent was granted; and if
there be any thing else peculiar to this Province above the rest of Florida.

It was by the care, charge, and industrious endeavors of diverse noble
persons, as Edward Earl of Clarendon, lord Chancellor of England; George Duke
of Albemarl; William Earl of Craven; John Lord Berkly; Anthony Lord Ashly, now
Earl of Shaftsbury; Sir George Carteret, Vice-Chamberlain of his Majesty's
Household; Sir William Berkly Knight and Baronet; Sir John Colleton Knight and
Baronet; that this Province of Carolin^, as the best part of all Florida, was
impropriated into the interest and possession of the English; (to whom indeed
of right the whole Country may be accounted properly to belong; both in regard
it was discovered by Sir Sebastian Cabott, by the encouragement, and for the
use of King Henry the seventh of England; and for its neighboring situation to
our other Plantations, besides several other conveniences.) by settling therein
two considerable Plantations; the one at Albemarl-Point, which lying to the
North, borders upon Virginia; and whither very many Families have transplanted
themselves from New England, and other of our American Plantations: the other
at Charlestown, or Ashly River, almost in the center of the Country: which
being the better Plantation of the two, may in all likelihood invite a far
greater, as well from New England and other parts that way, as from Barbados
and Bermudas many have already removed their effects hither.

The most apparent boundary between Carolina and Virginia appears plainly by
Mr. Ledderers Map, who has written a very exact description of his travels
into these parts, to be the R^ver Rorenock, alias Shawan; that is to say, the
main River for above half the way; and afterward, a smaller branch running on
Northward toward the Hills as far as Sapon, in the Country of the Nabissans;
the rest of the main stream running farther into the heart of the Country,
which from this boundary stretches a long way North-west. This Sapon is the
first Town within the limits of Carolina, and situate as it were upon the
utmost point of the said branch of the River Rorenock; whereby, though it stand
dry upon an high ground, yet it is environed with a fruitful and productive
Soil. Nor far from it is a place called Pint^h^, a stately and pleasant Seat,
the Royal Mansion of the King of the Nahissans, who is an absolute Monarch.

About fifty miles from Sapon is Ak^^atzy, a small, but well-peopled Island,
lying upon the direct course of the River, and bearing South and by West:
governed by two Kings; the one Superintendent over their Martial affairs; the
other over their Hun^ing and Husbandry. Thirty miles farther, South-west from
Akenatzy, are the O^nock Indians, dwelling in a Town built round a Field, in
which they usually practice their sports and exercises of activity. Their
Houses are built some of Reed and Bark, some of Watling and Plaster. Their
Government is Democratical. Fourteen miles South-west of the Oenocks dwell the
Shackory Indians, whose Country abounds in Antimony: Forty miles farther
South-west is Watary. Thirty miles farther Westward is Sara, lying more toward
that ridge of the Apalat^an Mountains; by the Spaniards called Suala, where
great quantities of Cinabar are found. South-west from thence is Wisacky, over
a continued marish ground overgrown with reeds: this Town is subject to the
King of Ushery; on which also this King has his Royal Seat about three miles
from the Town: and this is the utmost Town South-west that I find mentioned,
belonging to Carolina. To the North, over the Suala Mountains, lie the
Rickockans. but back again, North-east, returning on the other side of the
River toward Virginia, is the Town of Katearas, a place of notable Trade, and
the Seat of the proud Emperor of the Toskiroros, called Kascusara, or Kascous.
There are also the Towns of Kasriocam and Mencherink; which, though on the
Virginian side of the River Rorenock, yet are accounted rather belonging to
Carolina.

The Country, as it is now in possession of the English, is divided and
governed according to a platform and model drawn up by my Lord Shaftsbury, with
the consent and approbation of the rest of the Lords Proprietors, judged by
many serious persons that have perused it, of equal advantage to the
Inhabitants, with any that ever has been yet experienced, in respect of the
equal balance of the interests of all parties.

The whole Province is divided into several Counties, each containing forty
square plats of 12000 acres a piece: of these square plats, eight are to be
divided among the Lords Proprietors, that is, each to have one, with the title
of a Signory; eight more among the Nobility, of which there are to be three in
every County, a Landgrave, and two Cassiques; only the Landgrave to have double
the proportion to the two Cassiques; that is, four to their two a piece; the
rest containing 24 acres, falls to the people: and this division is to be
observed alike in every County; by which means one fifth of the Land comes to
the Proprietors, another to the Nobility, and three to the People. The
Signories or Lands belonging to the Proprietors are to be hereditary, and
descend with the Dignity to their Heirs, and in like manner the Baronies.

The Parliament which is to be Biennial, is to consist of the Proprietors, the
Nobility; and for the people, one chosen out of every District by the
Freeholders; which representatives are to have a free Vote in the making of
Laws; the force whereof is determined to set a time, viz. sixty years, or
thereabouts, to prevent the encumbrances and mischiefs arising from the
multiplicity of rules and penalties, which the longer a Law continues, are
liable to be increased and perplexed by the cunning of such as make a gain by
the practice of the Law.

Besides the Parliament which has the Legislative Power, there are e^ght
supreme Courts for the dispatch of all public affairs. The first is that of
the Palatine; for so the eldest of the Proprietors is styled, who has power to
call Parliaments, and dispose of public affairs. The second is the Chief
Justices, for the judging of Criminals, and trial of Causes about Right and
Propriety. The third is the Chancellor's Court, which is for the passing of
Charters, and managing the grand affairs belonging to the Province. The fourth
is the High-Constabl^s, which is for the ordering of the Land-Militia. The
fif^h is the Admirals, for the disposing of the Naval-Forces, and other
Maritime affairs. The sixth is the High Stewards, which inspects into the
business of Trade. The seventh is the Treasurers, which looks after the incomes
and disbursements of the public Stock or Treasury. The eighth is the
Chamberlain's, which marshals and orders the ceremonies and fashions in all
great Marriages, Burials, and public Solemnities. All these Courts (each of
which consists of one Proprietor, and six Counselors; whereof two are chosen
by the Nobility, and two by the People,) joined together make up the Council of
State, or Grand Council, by which all affairs of highest concernment are
managed; and to which the last appeal lies in all Causes belonging to them.
There is also a Court in every County, and in every District another: in each
of which, to prevent long Suits, whereby the people suffer, only to enrich a
numerous Tribe of glib-tongu'd Orators, no Cause is tried above once; only an
appeal to be made from an inferior to a superior Court, till it come to the
Proprietors Court, where the last determination is made without farther appeal:
neither indeed are there any mercenary Pleaders allowed. And farther, to
prevent the occasion of Controversies, and S^^^s in Law; there is to be a
Register of all Grants and Conveyances of Land.

Lastly, to prevent all disturbance and annoyance to public or private weal
and safety, strict enquiry is to be made into the conversations of such as
shall be found to have neither estates not employments; such provision being to
be made as shall take away all excuses of following illegal courses: nor are
any to be suffered to make a Trade of begging, who have ability of body, and
are obliged by necessity to work: since it is apparent that idle^ess and
beggary are the source of all those villainies, which by the hand of Justice
bring so many to untimely ends, whose lives might otherwise happily have one way
or other conduced to the service of their King or Country; and that it must
needs be much more advantageous to the public to prevent the necessity of
inflicting capital punishments, than to inflict them when deserved.

As to the Government in point of Religious affairs, there is only this to be
observed; that a free toleration and liberty of Conscience is granted to all,
excepting in the case of Atheism, Profaneness, and debauchery of life, as
destructive to all Government and humane Society: whereas ceremonies and
indifferent circumstances in Religion are judged to tend most to disturbance,
when most strictly and rigorously imposed.

A Map of EAST INDIA
map of East India
The Description of India.
INDIA, by the Ancients simply so denominated, but by the Moderns surnamed
Orientalis, for distinction sake; in regard America, or the new found World, is
usually styled India Occidentalis, or the West Indies: is that Region of Asia,
which under one appellation takes up the largest part thereof; it being all
that part which lies beyond the River Indus, now S^^do, and bounded Eastward
with part of China, and the Indian Ocean; Southward wholly with the Indian or
Oriental Ocean; Westward with Persia; and Northward with that part of Mount
Taurus which divides it from Tartary. This Country, as it was by the Ancients,
so is still primarily distinguished into India intra Gangem, and India extra
Gangem: the first is vulgarly termed Indostan, the other Mangi; under which
some doubt not to comprehend China it self, already described.

It extends from the nequator to the 44th degree of Northern latitude, which
makes the longest day 15 hours, and; as in terrestrial length it reaches from
the Fountains of the River In^us to the utmost Promontory of the Golden
Chersonese, six hundred German miles. So that the temperature of the Air must
needs be very diverse under so large an extent; lying partly under the torrid,
partly under the temperate Zone. Many vast and barren Deserts there are; but
generally the Soil is fruitful, and the Country abounding with things
convenient for life: and in some parts are produced most delicious fruits,
especially the Palm, of which the people of those parts make Wine more
frequently than of the Grape: and for Gums, Spices, and all sorts of rich
Drugs, it surpasses all other Countries: but that which is the chief glory of
the East Indies, is, that the rest of the World receives luster from the
Diamonds, Rubies, and other precious Gems that are brought from thence. So that
it so far out-shineth the opposite or Occidental Indies, by how much these Gems
exceed in value Gold it self; besides the great Trade that is driven in many
places in Silks, and other curious Stuffs, and rich Commodities; whereupon they
are much frequented, and resorted to by Strangers from all parts of the World.

The Indian people are generally of a complexion somewhat tawny, tall of
stature, and strong of constitution, healthful, and for the most part
long-lived, even many times to the age of 130 years, notwithstanding their
addiction, above all other people in the World, to luxury and venereal
exercises. It is permitted them to marry every man as many Wives as he can
maintain; whereof, nevertheless, one of them has a more peculiar respect, and
observance, and a predominance over the rest; for which she pays dear enough,
if she survive her Husband; for at his death she is obliged to throw her self
into the same Funeral Pyre with him. They are simple-hearted, and vold of all
fraud and deceit in their bargains and contracts, and not given to any quirks
or cavils in the Law; and scarcely is there any such thing as the every known
among them: so that their houses have little or no need of the guards of locks
and bolts, so usual and necessary among us. The lowermost rank of people go
very ill-habited, or rather almost stark naked, except their head, feet, and
what decency requires to have hid: but those of Quality, Birth or Estate, go
richly clad in Silks, fine Linen, or other the most costly attire; and spare
for no adornments of Pearl, and the most precious of Gems; and they stand very
much upon the honor of their Birth and Family, observing a suitable grandeur
in their garb and retinue, admitting not of any mixture of affinity with those
of mean degree.

The strength of the Indian Militia consists in their Nairi, who are a select
number of the Nobility, and better sort of Citizens; who from seven years of
age are trained up in all manner of bodily exercises; by which, and by a
continual inunction and suppling of their nerves, joints and bones with oil of
Sesamum, they attain in time to an incredible dexterity and agility of body.

The chief Ministers and Dispencers of the Rites and Ceremonies of their
Religion, or rather Idolatry, are said to be of the stock of those ancient
Brachmanes, who doubtless were the same with the Gymnosophists, so termed by
the Greeks, among whom they had a very great fame; being mentioned for their
Learning and Philosophy by diverse, both Greek and Latin Writers; and reckoned
in the same rank of honor and esteem as the Magi among the Persians, and the
Druids among the Gauls and Britains.

The great Mountain Taurus, which for extent is doubtless the biggest in the
World; stretches in a continued ridge through the whole length of Asia, only
under several names, as Imaus, Emodus, Caucasus, Parapomisus, etc. This
Mountain Taurus is judged to be the same with that Mount Ararat mentioned in
holy Scripture, upon which the Ark of Noah rested after the Flood.

Of the Rivers of India Oriental, Indus and Ganges are the chiefest, and most
famous; and of the number of the most principal and largest of all Asia. Indus,
which gives denomination to the Country, and is now vulgarly called Hiind,
Duil, Inder, Caercede, and by some Pengah, taking its rise in Parapomisus, or
Naugrocot, a branch of the Mountain Taurus, falls after 900 miles course
Northward, with seven mouths into the Indian Ocean, having taken in by the way
19 navigable Rivers; the chief whereof are Hydaspes, and Hypasis, which
terminated Alexander the Great's expedition. This River, where broadest, is
accounted 50 furlongs broad; where deepest, 15 paces deep. Ganges, now Guencam,
from her uncertain original (some say the Mountain Ima^s) falls into the Ocean;
having, according to the testimony of Pliny, taken in by the way 30 Navigable
Rivers. This River, where narrowest, is accounted two German miles broad; where
shallowest, 100 foot deep. It is moreover famous for the 460 Channels, cut like
so many wounds out of its sides, by Cyrus King of Persia, in revenge for the
drowning of an Horse, upon which he set a very great value.

The Empire of the Great Mogul is so promiscuously spread throughout that part
of India which lies within Ganges, that there are reckoned up no less than 37
Provinces or Kingdoms under his Dominion.

But because his Dominion does not exactly comprehend all Indostan, or Interior
India: others have chosen rather to divide it into those several Regions which
have been adjudged the proper contents or comprehensions of it. In most of
which, however, the Mogul has the greatest share, if not the entire
Jurisdiction of them, namely these 14 following; 1, Dulcinda, in which the
chief Cities and places of note are Caximir, Roree, Sestan, and Multan. 2,
Pengah, supposed the ancient Kingdom of Porus, conquered by Alexander the
Great. The first Ci^y of this Province is La^or, once the Royal Seat of the
Mogul. Other places of note are Sultan-Puare, Athe^, and (if we reckon, as some
do, the Kingdoms of Haiacan and Buchor under this division,) Buchor and Suchor.
3, Mandao, the warlike temper of whose women-Inhabitants has made them pass
for a race of the Amazons. The Head-City of this Province is of the same name,
remarkable both for its 30 miles circuit, and for the great Battle between
Baldurius King of Cambay, and Mirumudius or Merhamed, the Great Mogul. The
others of most note are Moltan, Sche^^us, for anti^uity, Polymbothy, the
Palibothra of Ptolemy. 4, Delly, so named from its Mother City, sometimes the
Seat of the Great Moguls, where many of them had their Sepulchral Monuments:
many other great Towns and Cities there are in this Province; among which
Tremer is particularly culiarly mentioned; and also Doceti, made the more
remarkable by the great overthrow given by Merhamed to Badurius. 5, Agra, whose
Supreme City, of the same name, is the present Imperial Seat, and ordinary
residence of the Great Mogul, ever since the time of Ec^ar; it stands on the
Eastern-bank of the River Iem^na, and not above 18 miles (the way being stag'd
with Mohammedan Temples) from Fatepore, once a stately City; to which Echebar
removed his Court from Caximir, and built him here a Royal Palace, with
sumptuous Gardens; but much demolished since the removal of the Imperial Seat
to Agra, whither the materials of the said Palace were conveyed. Hendee,
adorned with a Regal Castle, which serves for a Prison of State, hewn out of
the main Rock: as also two Hospitals for maimed Commanders. Biani, the most
peculiar place in all East India for the manufacture of Indico, all the way
between Lahor and Agra, which is reckoned 400 miles, is set with rows of
Mulberry, and other fair trees on each side the way: and at every ten miles end
fair houses for the entertainment of Travelers. Within this Terrritory is
included the Kingdom of Gualiar, with its grand City of the same name, where
the Mogul has a rich Treasury of Gold and Silver, and a strong Castle for
Prisoners. 6, Sanga, once a Kingdom, whose Regal City Citor, of 12 miles
circuit, and seated on a Rocky Hill with a narrow access, shows the ruins of
100 Temples; since its being taken first from Queen Crementina, by Badurius
King of Cambaia; afterward from him by the Great Mogul. 180 miles from Agra is
Azimere, remarkable for the Pillars erected by Echebar between that and Agra;
one at the end of every mile and half, and at 15 miles end a Caravansera, or
Inn for Travelers. Into this division is reckoned the Kingdom of Nagracut,
with its Metropolis of the same name, in which is a Chapel seel'd and paved
with Plates, and adorned with figures of massy Silver. 7, Cambaia, divided into
3 Provinces, Sinda, Gusarate and Cambaia, properly so called. Of Sinda, a great
part whereof is a wast sandy Desart^ the chief Towns or Citi's are Tutta, a
Town well Traded by the Portugheses; Lauribander, supposed very near, if not in
the same place, with that ancient A^exandria. Calwalla, given by Echebar for
the maintenance of a race of Women-dancers. Radempoor, a large City at the
entrance of the Desert, fortified with a strong Castle. Nuraquemire, a grateful
retreat for such as have past a wearisome journey of ten days through the
Desert, at the farthest end whereof it is seated. Sarrama, the center of the
Province to which it belongs, as it is usually accounted. Of Guasarate, (whose
ancient Inhabitan^s, are the R^sboochs, yet unsubdued by the Mogul.) Diu, a
Town of great importance to the Portugh^ses, by whom it has been long possessed,
and so well fortified, that it held out, and baffleda strong Siege laid against
it by the Admiral of the Great Turk, Solomon the Magnificent, in the year 1537.
Sauran, a Town of the forementioned Resboochs, which fortified with a strong
Castle, defies the whole power of the Mogul. Boldra, a Town more neat and
handsome than large. Amadabat, accounted by some the chief City of Gusarate.
S^rk^ff, adorned with the Sepulchers of the ancient Cambaian Kings, Ardovat,
Saringo, and Periano. Of Cambaia, properly so called, the Metropolitan City of
the same name; for its populousness termed the Caire of the Indies. Baracho,
where the best Calicuts are made. Swally, giving name to a very commodious Bay.
Surat, a pleasant, well built, and wellfortified City; and at present a very
eminent Factory of English Merchants. Neriand, a Town of all the East Indies,
second only to that of Biani for the manufacture of Indico's. Daman, a neat and
well-fortified Town in possession of the Portugheses. Campanel, once the usual
R^sidence of the Cambaian Kings, being encompassed with a sevenfold wall, and
seated on the top of an high Hill. Dacaiotote, a place whose strength rendered
it capable to capitulate with the Mogul for a King or Governor of their own.
Netherby, a Town trading in A^mory and brazen Ware. Tanai and Bandore. 8,
Decan, having a City of the same name, whose Inhabitants are very wealthy,
though Bider was rather made choice of for the Royal Residence; at least it was
the Seat of Mamut^a, as Danager of Ni^almoxa, and Visapore of Idalcan. Goa, the
most flourishing Emporium of the Portugheses in the East Indies, and therefore
the Seat of their Viceroy, and an Archbishops See: and so impregnably
fortified, that Idalcan attempted in vain with all his force to take it, in the
year 1573. Chaul, a Seaport Town, in possession also of the Portugheses; by
them no less strongly fortified, and no less vainly assaulted by Nisamolocco,
another King of Decan. Brampore, once the Royal Seat of Chanlis, taken from
Miram, the then King, by the Mogul, in the year 1600. Sintacora and Balagnate,
the native people of this Country were formerly called Venazarari, who still
hold out in some parts against the Mogul, as the Resboochs in Cambaia. 9,
Canara, ancient accounted a part of Decan, but now almost wholly in the power
of the Kings of Narsinga, except what the Portugals possess of it. The now most
flourishing Towns belonging to it are Me^inde, Onor, Seaport Towns: Baticalia,
Mayendre, Mongalor, recovered from the Portugals by the King of Narsinga.
Lispor, chiefly remarkable for the Quarries of Adamant near it. Salsette,
seated in a Peninsula under the subjection of the Portugals. 10, Malabar,
divided into 7 Provinces, some whereof are Kingdoms, viz. Calecut, Granganor,
Cochin, Caicolam, Coulan and Travancor. The most memorable Towns or Cities of
Calecut are the Metropolitan, from whence it takes denomination; and whence
that sort of linnen-Cloath, which had here its first manufacture, is called
Calicut. Of Cranganor, there is only of note one City of the same name, in
which are said to be no less than 70000 Christlans, of the race of those
converted by Sr. Thomas: Of Cochin Angamale, an Archiepiscopal See of these
Thomasian Christians; and Cochin, an Episcopal See. Of Caicolam, one only of
remark giving name to the Province. Of Coulam, the like accounted by some the
Sovereign City of all Malaba^, and once the peculiar Residence of the Cob^itin,
or Archpriest of the Bramines. Of Travancor, the denominating City; and
Quilacare, which a petty King of Travancor holds of the King of Narsinga by a
most bloody tenure; being obliged at 12 years end to sacrifice himself in a
horrid manner to a filthy Idol. 11, Narfinga, or Bisnagar, in which are many
Cities worth notice; as Cael, whose Inhabitants, the Paravi, a sort of
Christians* live by Pearl-fishing. Chamdagrir, sometimes honored with the
Residence of the Narsingan Kings. Prepeti, where an annual Feast is celebrated
to their Saint Pereimar, once sole King of Malabar. Golconda, peculiar to
Musulipatan, a little Province subject to the Crown of Narsinga: Madura, Gingi,
and Tanajor, the Seat of the Naigi, or Tributary Roytelets to the King of
Narsinga. M^liapur, called by the Christians St. Thomas, from a supposition
that this Apostle, martyred by the Idolaters, was here interred: it is said to
have had once 330 Temples. Cheromandel, whence all that Seacoast which lies on
the West Side of the Gulf of Bengala is denominated. Negapatan, said to be
chiefly inhabited by Thomasians. Tarnassart, once the Royal Seat of a Kingdom
so named. Casta, remarkable for the kind custom of women there, who
accompanying their dead Husbands into the Grave, are buried with them alive.
Bisnagar, ruined by the joint Forces of four Decan Kings; whereupon the Court
was removed first to Ponegardo; thence, after a short time, to the City of
Narsinga; where yet for the most part it remains. 12, Oristan, whose eminent
Towns or Cities are, besides that which gives name and credit to the Country.
Catech ^, once the Seat of the Kings of this Country, till vanquished by the
Mogul. Bacolli, peculiar to a little Kingdom so called: Angeli, Simergan, and
Senerpase. 13, Bofanter, containing diverse petty Kingdoms, as Botia, Kacares,
Conche, Gouren, Rame, Recon, Tippura, all denominated from their predominating
Cities. 14, Patanau, of which Patane is the mother City: the rest are Banaras,
seated upon the River Ganges, frequented by those whose supe^stition leads them
to bath in that reputed holy stream. Siripur, and Ciandecan, the Seat of two
old Princes not yet subdued by the Mogul. Sagtagam, reckoned of late too. 15,
Bengala, taking name, together with a famous Gulf, from a City of great Trade,
seated on the Ganges, whose holy waters enrich it also with a concourse of
Pilgrims. The rest are Gonro, anciently the Seat of the Bengalan Kings.
Caligan, a place once of Traffic, as seated on the Gulf Taxda, till the
diversion of the Channel. Porto Grande, and Porto Pequeno, two Towns built by
the Portugheses, adjoining to the North of Bengala; and therefore accounted
part of it the City and Kingdom of Arachan.

India extra Gangem, contains several Territories which are either large
Kingdoms of themselves, or are divided into diverse lesser Kingdoms: the first
are six, namely, 1, Brama or B^rma. 2, Cauchin-China. 3, Camboia. 4, Iangoma.
5. Siam. 6, Pegu. 1, Brama is subdivided into these following lesser Kingdoms,
viz. Cavilan or Calum Prom, Melinta, Miranda, Bacan, Tangu, ^va and Brama,
peculiarly so called; all taking ^his appellation from their grand Cities, and
inhabited by the Brames or Bramines. 2, Cauchin-China, with its principal City
of the same name: it is divided into three Provinces, each governed by his
particular petty King, but all under one Head, and he tributary to the King of
China. 3, Camboia, with its Capital City of the same name; divided also into
two inferior Provinces, Champa and Camboia, properly so called. 4, Iangoma, or
the Country of the Laos, divided into three Provinces, Lavea, Curroy, and
Iangoma, strictly so called. 5, Siam, a Peninsula, the same which of old was
termed Aurea C^ersonesus, or the Golden Cher^onese; and supposed by some to be
Solomon's Land of Ophir, as the other tract of this part of India was called
the Silver Region. This Peninsula comprehends within it the Kingdoms of Malaca,
Patane, Ior, Muontay, and Siam, peculiarly so called. Malaca, denominated from
its Emporium, or City of greatest Trade, belongs to the Portugheses; who have
also Sincapura and PaloZambilan. Patane, or as some say, Pathane, to
distinguish it from that Patane already mentioned, taking name also from its
chief City; where, by the Queens leave, (for it has of late been governed by
Queens) the English and Hollanders have their several Factories, Muantay, whose
chief City Odia may be well reputed the Metropolis of the whole Kingdom of
Siam, being the Seat-Royal of the Siamese Kings: it is situate, like Venice,
upon several little Islands tacked together with Bridges in the River Capumo.
Siam, specially so called; whose Cities of chiefest note are Socotai,
remarkable for a Temple 80 spans high, all entirely made of metal. Quedoa, a
Town of great Trade for Pepper, of which the best sort is there to be had.
Tavy, lying on the Seacoast, and bordering on the Kingdom of Pegu. Lugor, near
the Isthmus of the Chersonese. Calantan, peculiar to a petty Kingdom
subordinate to the Crown of Siam. Pegu, divided into several lesser Kingdoms,
Verma, Marin, Martavan, Orachan, and Pegu, peculiarly so called; all
denominated from their prevalent Cities: besides which, we find not in the
three first any of remark; but in Orachan there are also mentioned. Dianga,
destroyed by the Portugheses, who took it Ann. 1608. In Pegu, Cosmi, built of
Canes, of a vast circumference, in the midst of a wilderness. Coilan, a
quadrangular City, whose four sides are said to consist of four miles a piece.
Dala, chiefly memorable for the Stables of the Kings Elephants. Lanagen,
delightfully seated among Palm Trees. Tocabel and Dian, both seated upon a
River full of habitable Vessels, as big as Galleys. Meccao, a place of retreat
for the King* by reason of its strong Castle in time of imminent danger: but
above all the Cities, Pegu it self exceeds in strength, pleasantness of
situation, and sumptuousness of building.

RUSSIA
map of Russia
The Description of Russia.
RUSSIA, (surnamed Alba, to distinguish it from Russia Nigra, a Province of
Poland,) otherwise called also Moscovia, from its chief Province, is the
greatest, or rather only Empire of all Europe, and one of the greatest of all
the World; extending from the 43 d to the 66th. degree of Northern latitude:
the longest day in the most Southern parts 16 hours and an half, and in the
most Northern 22 hours and an half* the length in terrestrial measure is
reckoned from the Promontory Litamin, vulgarly Cape Oby, to the Town Czercassy,
380 German miles; the breadth, from Corelenburgh, a Town in the Confines of
Finland, to the River Ob near Lopin, 300 German miles, each German mile being
equivalent to four of ours; all under the Dominion of one Prince, the Czar, or
Emperor of Russia, otherwise styled the Great Duke of Moscovy. It is bounded on
the North with the frozen Sea, on the East with Tartary, on the South with part
of Livonia, a Province now belonging to the Kingdom of Poland; and those
Cremensian Tartars inhabiting the Southern Shores of Mar del Zabache, and the
Euxin, or Black Sea; on the West with certain Mountains, and the River Polne,
which separates it from Livonia and Finland.

This large Country is judged to have been the principal habitation of the
ancient Sarmatae, or Sauromatae; who yet, besides what belongs at present to
the Great Czar, are concluded also to have possessed all Borussia, Livonia, and
Lithuania, and that part of Moldovia between the Rivers Ister, Tyra, and
Hierasus.

As to the temperature of the Air, it must needs be supposed, that in a
Territory of so vast an extent, all parts cannot be alike, some being so very
distant from others. In Moscow and the adjacent Provinces the Air is so sharp
and p^ercing cold, that sometimes no Furr is able to protect the nose and ears
of those that venture forth into the Air; yet the earth being kept very warm
with the snow, at the first approach of Spring, which is almost as soon as in
Germany, the face of Heaven puts on a pleasant and most serene aspect* and the
earth a most lively verdure. In Winter they travel for the most part in
Sledges* which being low, and covered over with Canvas, and the Passengers
wrapped warm in Sheepskins, they feel no cold, but travel as it were in moving
Stoves; and in Summer the heat is very near as intolerable as the cold in
Winter.

Among their Plants there is one peculiar sort which they call Boranez, from
its form or shape resembling a Lamb; upon a stalk, which seems to be its
navel-string, as far as which stalk permits, it changes place, and makes the
gr^ss wither as it turns about. This fruit is clothed with an hairy rind, which
they say is dressed in stead of Furr: and Scaliger writes that no beast will
feed on it but the Wolf; whom to entrap, it is often set as a bait. Their
Melons, of which there is plenty, are commended as singularly well-tasted, and
of an extraordinary large size.

The frequency of Wood and Forest furnishes this Country with store of
Venijon, and all those kinds of beasts whose Furrs are in highest price;
besides one of a very peculiar kind, and proper to these parts, called the
Reen, by the Modern Latins Rangifer, and thought to be the same with the
Tarandius of the Ancients. With the skin of this beast the Samoides cloth
themselves: it is in shape, and bigness, and horns, partl^ like a Stagg, partly
an ^lk, but with long, rough, and white hair; a cloven foot, whose horn strikes
so far into the ice, that it never slips: it is frequently made use of in the
drawing of their Sleds upon any occasion of expedition, for it is reported to
run 30 German leagues a day. Of Fish, none is here wanting but the Carp. Of
Fowl, none but the Stork.

The Moscovites are strong and active of body, of a middle stature, but
square-set, and brawny armed; of a natural ingenuity and subtilty, which they
make use of to cheat with in their bargains and contracts* being false,
treacherous, and perfidious; withal very lazy, and wholly unaddicted to
Learning and Ar^s; only necessity obliges them to follow Husbandry: they are
malicious, quarrelsome, and scurrilous in company; yet their choler seldom
advances to farther violence than can be managed with the stick, fist, or foot
which saves many a murder the Sword or Gun would be guilty of. They are
generally lascivious, and beastly drinkers, both men and women, when occasion
offers: for all their great Solemn^ies and Feastivals are so many drunken
Bacchanals, in which they walow one among another like Swine: at other times,
if they are sober, it is for want of what they love above all things, strong
liquor; for their ordinary drink is but a pitiful poor sort of tiff: and though
the Country affords wherewith to fare delicately enough, yet the best of them
scarce know how to feed elegantly, and the meaner sort eat like what they are,
poor slaves, and lodge as ill, that is, like the wild Irish, or b^rbarous
Indians: the whole Family, man, woman, and beast, lie higgledy-piggledy
altogether in a room upon straw or mats, and in Summertime upon benches or
tables. And no wonder their manner of life is so animal and uncultivated, since
they live subordinately in most wretched slavery; the common People to the
Nobles, the Nobles to the Czar: whose grand Maxim it is, as generally in
Monarchies so very absolute, to proscribe Learning, well knowing that the necks
of the ignorant most ^amely subject themselves to the yoke of tyranny.

The Religion they profess is according to the Greek-Church, which they are
said to have received from the Patriarch of Constantinople, Ann. 987; though in
the Moscovi^ish Annals their first Conversion is boasted to have been from St.
Andrew the Apostle: others say that Duke Wolodomirus received Baptism in the
year 987, upon his Marriage with Anna the Daughter of the Emperor Basilius: but
the most received opinion is, that Leo coming out of Greece, and planting the
Christian Faith among the Russians, became their first Patriarch, and fixed his
Seat at Kiovia; whence, after some time, the Patriarchal Seat was removed to
Volodimiria, and lastly to Mosco, where it continues. The Patriarch, who till
about 100 years since, could not be confirmed but by the Patriarch of
Con^tantinople; but has ever since been chosen and confirmed only by the Czar,
or Great Duke, though with the consent of the generality of the Clergy, has
subservient to him two Metropolitans, or Archbishops, the Archbishop of
Novogrode, and the Archbishop of Rostow: and under these there are 18 Bishops,
enjoying very large Revenues, and therefore the largest contributers to the
Great Duke, when he has occasion to raise an Army.

Of the Rivers of this Country, the chief are the Dni^per, or Borysthenes of
the ancients whose Fountain, though unknown to Herodotus, has been since found
to be near Dnieperko, a' Village of Moscovia, in the Wood Wolskonski; and which
flowing Southward by the Cities Smolensko and Kiovian, after having taken in
many lesser Rivers, discharges it self at last into the Euxin, or Black Sea.
2, Ducina, concluded to be the Turuntus of Ptolemy, which springing not far
from the Fountains of Bory^thenes in the same Wood, and flowing by Riga, the
Capital City of Livonia, falls at last into the Baltic Sea. 3, Volga, the Rha
of Ptolemy, and now called Edel, which springing from a Lake of the same name,
being about 25 miles from Mosco, and flowing with a long course, and many
windings after the taking in of many lesser streams, disburtheneth it self with
no less than 70 mouths into the Caspian Sea, not far from the the City
citracham. 4, Don, or Tanais, by the Italians called Tuna, which dividing
Europe from Asia, has its source, as some are of opinion, from the Riphae^n
Mountains in a certain Wood, out of a vast Lake not far from the City Tulla,
and flowing with a long course beyond the Confines of Russia, Southward, makes
the Lake M^otis. 5, Occa, which springing out of the Province Mo^ceneck, which
it semi-circles; after a long course enters the Volga,, beneath Inferior
Novogrod. The most noted Lakes are the Ilmen, or Ilmer, 12 German miles in
length, and 8 in breadth. The Ladoga, whose length is 25 German miles, the
breadth 15, and containing diverse Islands. The White Lake, called by the
Inhabitants Bielcyesero, twelve miles in length, and as many in breadth; and
into which 360 Rivers (small streams or rivulets doubtless) are said to empty
themselves: near this Lake is another, whose waters cast up a sulphurous scum.
Of the Mountains of th^is Country, the only of note are those famous Amadoci,
Riphaei, and Hyperbore^, so much spoken of, and so obscurely defined by the
Ancients, being one continued ridge of ^il^s, which under these several names
runs overthwart European Sarmatia, and tends first North, then South, lastly
Eastward into Asiatick Sarmatia.

The Russian or Moscovian Empire is divided into 30 Provinces, whereof several
are Dutchies and Principalities, viz. 1, Moscovia, properly so called; the
Principal City whereof, and not only of this Province, but of the whole Empire,
is Mosco, seated on a River of the same name, but five miles in compass, since
burnt by the Tartar: it contains 16 Churches, built for the most part like the
houses of mud and wood: but the chief ornament of the Town is the Emperor's
Palace, like a Town for largeness: next it is the Palace of the Patriarch. This
City is defended by two Castles, Kitugorod and Basigorod: the next Town of note
is Sloboda, a Bishop's See. This Province extends from East to West 600 German
miles: and, besides the inferior Soldiery, furnishes the Great Duke with 3000
Boiares, who serve in the nature of the Tu^kish Timariots, or such as hold by
Knights service. 2, Volodomire, a Dukedom added to the Title of the Great Duke;
a fertile Province, once the Seat of the Empire, till the time of John
Danielovit^, who removed to Mosco, from which it is distant 36 Polonish miles:
the next City of note is Muron. 3, Novogardia the lower, not inferior to
Wolodomire in fertility; and a Dukedom, whose denominating City, scarce
paralleled by any other of the Empire for largeness and fair building, is
seated on the Confluence of the Volga and Occa, and guarded with a strong
Castle hewed out of a Rock by the Great Duke Basi^ius, and adorned with a
stately Temple, reported to be built in imitation of that of St. Sophia at
Constantinople. In some out-skirts of this Province (rather than in distinct
Provinces) there may be said to live (rather than inhabit) sculking up and down
in Woods and Wildernesses, two rustic people; the Czeremissi wonderfully swift
of foot, both men and women, and most expert handlers of the Bow and Arrow: and
the Mordwits, the civiller of the two, and not altogether without Houses, and
little scattering Villages; but both of them either Ma^umetans, or rather the
greatest part of them downright Idolaters, being both of them a sort of
Tartars, though within the Great Dukes Dominion. 4, Rostow. 5, ustynga. 6,
Vologda. 7, Iaroslow, with their several Provincial Towns or Cities of the same
denomination, which some will have to belong to the Province of Moscovia:
Rostow and Iaroslow, seated on the banks of Volga, have both the Titles of
Dukedoms, and belonged heretofore to the Great Duke's second Son: the first is
one of the Metropolitan Sees, and guarded with a Castle; the other a Bishop's
See, Vologda is also a Bishop's See, and fortified with a strong Castle, where
the Czar keeps part of his treasure. 8, Duina, as it were Twain, so called from
its principal Town, and that from the River upon which it stands; in which are
united the streams of Iuch and Sachona. But the places of most trade and
concourse are St. Nicholas, a Seaport Town, and Bishops See; on the Gulf of
Granvicus, otherwise called the Bay of St. Nicholas, into which the River Duina
cischargeth it self: and especially St. Michael, generally called Archangel,
where the English Merchants have a very great Trade, and large-Priviledges:
there are also to be taken notice of, Sanga, so named from the stream Sachona,
on which it stands; and Cargapol, another Bishops See, besides the strong
Castles Colmagro and Pine^ul. 9, Rhesan, between Occa and Tanais, adding the
Title of another Dukedom to the Czar: a very fertile Province, and well
peopled, yielding to the service of the Czar no less than 1500 Boiari K^ights,
or Horsemen, and consequently Foot proportionably. The Town from which the
Province takes name stands upon the River Octa, the rest are Cossira, an
Episcopal See; Tulla, the source or fountainhead of Tanais; and Colluga, a
strong Garrison against the Tartars. 10, Severia, a large, and in some places
fertile Duchy; for it is very much taken up with vast Deserts and Forests: the
most observed Towns are Starodub, Pot^volo, and Czernigo. 11, The Duchy of
Wo^otine, which stretches it self along the Western-Bank of the River Occa,
upon which also stands the Town of Worotine, with a strong Castle. 12, Permia,
a large extended Province, and deriving name from its chief Town, seated on the
River Vishore, second to which Town is Siewarsky. 13, Smolensco Duchy, full of
thick Forests, extending it self along the banks of the River Ni^per, upon
which the City Smolensco stands, an Episcopal See. 14, Mosaiski, a Dukedom,
extending in length above 87 German miles, and as much in breadth; taken by John
the Father of Basilius, from Alexander King of Poland: the City which
denominates this Province is a Bishops See. 15, Biela, or Bielski; a
Principality, with a City and Castle of the same name, seated on the River
Opska. 16, The Dukedom of Ruschovia, whose City and Castle of the same name is
seated on the River Volga, which takes its source in this Province from the
Lake Volga. 17, Tuver, heretofore one of the chief Principalities of Russia,
whose City Tuverda, an Episcopal, See, and reported more magnificent than Mosco
it self; is situated on the Volga, along whose Banks is extended this fair and
spacious Territory, affording the Czar no less than 40000 B^ia^i, and double,
if not treble the number of Foot. 18, Plescow, a Principality which stretches
it self above 80 German miles in length, and near a third part in breadth: whose
spacious Metropolis, of the same name, is, of all the Cities of the Russian
Empire, the only walled City. It was in the year 1509 taken by the Great Duke
Basi^ius from the King of Poland; some say by the treachery of the Priests. 19,
The Dukedom of Novogardia or Novogrod, for distinction sake entitled
Novogardia Magna, as being indeed one of the amplest Provinces in all the
Russian Empire, as the City that gives appellation to i^, one of the largest
Cities, but generally consisting of wooden or clay buildings, seated on the
River Narva, or Ny, ah Archiepiscopal See, and one of the four great Marts or
Hans Towns of Russia, heretofore belonging to the King of Poland, as Duke of
Lithuania, from whom it was taken by the Great Duke Basilius, or, as some say,
his Son Ioannes. The other Towns thought worthy mention, are, Narva, taken also
by the Great Duke from the Polander; situate Northward at the Influx of Duina
into the Bay of Finland, Pozow, and Volocoluc, two Frontier Towns strongly
fortified, to prevent the incursions of the Poles, besides the strong Castle of
Iuanagogo^od, which serves as a frontier defense aganist the Suedes of Narva.
20, Volzka, or Wot^ka, a little Region lying North-west from Novogardia, and
whose primary City of the same name was besieged in vain by Steven King of
Poland, with an Army of 10000 men. One remarkable thing is reported of this
Country, namely, that the Cattle, of what colored hair soever, that are
brought into it, after a short while turn perfectly white. The Volsks, or
people of this Country, have a Language peculiar to themselves. 21, Corelia, a
Province separated toward the East, with a long tract of Hills from Finland:
its chief Towns are Corel^burgh, according to the name of the Province; and
Nordenburg, seated at the entrance of the River Warfuga into St. Nicholas-Bay;
besides Hexholm, in possession of the Swedish King; to whom therefore, as Lord
of Finland, this Province is tributary. 22, Biarmia, or West-Lapland, for it is
accounted a part of Lapland, though subject to the Great Duke; since the people
of this Country, called Dikil^pp^* are a sort of wild Laplanders, Tude and
barbarous, without settled habitations in Towns or Cities, but living most in
Caves, some in scattered sheds toward the Seaside; withal, brutish Idolaters,
but performing strange things by sorcery. 23, Bieleiezioro, a Dukedom
increasing the Titles of the Czar, or Great Duke: It is named from the Lake
Biolisero, or the White Lake, on which it is situated: extending 36 German
miles in length, and as many in breadth. This Country is almost all over fenny,
and full of woods, 24, 25, 26 and 27; Four Provinces comprehended in a vast
Promontory, which lying on the other side of the Bay of Granvick, or St.
Nicholas, over against Biarmia, shoots Northward into the Arctick Region, all
won from the Tartars of late years, to the Russian Empire; namely, Petzora,
with its chief Town, so named from the River on which it is situate, near its
influx into the Sea, and girdled with a parcel ridge of those Hills called
H^perborei. Condora, more Northward, whose chief Town is Pustozera, so cal^ed
from the Lake Ozera, near which it stands. Obdora, lying on each side of the
River ob, from whence it is so named. Iugria, between the Provinces of Petzora
and Duina; the original habitation (as some Writers affirm) of the Pannonians
or Hungarjans, as is conjectured, from the resemblance of the Language, or, as
others say, of the ancient Ia^yges often mention^d in History. 28, wiathca, a
barren Country, and much taken up with large woods, lying beyond the River
Camm^, Eastward; taken from the Tartar by the Great Duke Basilius, yet still
inhabited according to the Tartarian manner of Hoords and movable Habitations,
excepting one City built by the Moscovites since their taking of this Country,
whereof it bears the name, serving as a Fortress, being garrisoned, to de^end
it against those from whom they took it; but that which has given greatest
advantage to the Russian over the Tartar, has been the taking of 29 Casan, and
30 Astracan, heretofore two Potent Kingdoms of Tartaria Deserta, from the
Nothacensian Tartars. They were first conquered by B^silius, but revolting,
totally subdued about the year 1553 by John Vasilovich, annexed to the Russian
Empire, and give Royal addition to the Style of the Czar: Homonymous with these
two Kingdoms are their Capital Cities; besides which, there are most taken
notice of in Casan, the Cities S^iatski, 20 versts from the City, that is,
within a fourth part so many Italian miles. Tetus, 120 versts distant. Samara,
350. Soratof, as many from Samara. In the Kingdom of Astacan, Zarisa, 350
versts beyond Saratof, toward Astracan; Tzornogar, 200 versts from Sariza.

Before the first Conquest of these two Kingdoms by Basilius Casan, and the
total subduing of them by Ioannes B^s^^ides; and the winning of those Provinces
before mentioned. The Tartarian yoke was sh^ken off by John the third, before
whose time the Russians were so slavishly tributary to the Tartars, that the
Czar was obliged once a year to feed an Horse of the Cham's, which was kept at
Mosco for the purpose, with Oats out of his own Cap.

On the Northern or frozen Ocean, there lie two Islands toward the Coast of
Russia, and therefore supposed to belong to the Russian Empire, viz. Nova
Zembla, and Willoughby's Island; so called, as being first discovered in the
year 1553 by Sir Hugh Willoughby; who in a second Voyage* the next year, his
Ship being fixed in the ice, was in these Seas frozen to death, with all his
Company.

FINIS.

