TON SESOSENON YNOS OR THE Song of the Delivered.

Set forth in a SERMON Preached in the College of Bristoll the 24. of October,
being the Day set apart for Public Thanksgiving unto GOD, for the Memorable
VICTORY Obtained over the SCOTTISH ARMY at WORCESTER.

By Thomas Speed.

LONDON, ^^^^^ed by R.W. for Giles Calvert, and are to be sold at the Sign of
the Black-spread-Eagle at the West end of Paul's, 1651.

TO THE Right Worshipful JOSEPH JACKSON Mayor, the Aldermen, and the rest of
the Corporation of the City of Bristoll.
Right Worshipful, and much respected,
THere are three noble acts of the soul toward God, by which Christians do
properly begin to live the life of Glory in the Kingdom of (...) The first is
by a firm dependence on him as the fountain of all their good. The second, by a
cheerful compliance with his will in the product of all his purposes. The
third, by breathing out continual Hallelujahs, Songs of praise and honor to
his glorious Name, as the head-spring of all their Salvations. By the first (in
the day of their straits and darkness) they are lodged in the arms of safety.
By the second, they do (without reluctance) set their seal to every piece of
Divine pleasure manifested as glorious. By the third, they do solace their
enlarged Souls in the bosom of their Deliverer. Waiting upon God by dependence
and submission (in the midst of devouring flames) has been the business of his
poor sighing people in this bleeding Nation for these ten years past; but now
behold (through his rich grace) they are come forth glad with the white robe of
Salvation, having their hearts tuned by the Spirit of the most High, to sing
the songs of the Redeemed, by giving glory, and hon^^^ and thanks to him that
sits on the Throne, who lives for ever and ever. In which glorious work
(the first fruits of Eternity) that you also might have your hearts elevated to
bear a part, is my single aim in the ensuing Discourse. You are not all
ignorant whose desire brought it to the Pulpit; neither is it less known to
some of you whose request led it to the Press. I would not that my dedicating
it to you should be interpreted my (unworthy) courting your favor, thereby to
procure its Patronage; but my real and sincere intending your profit; which if
it shall effect, I shall esteem my self to have obtained my End. The serious
breathings of my heart, are, that that flying shadow, that floating foundation
of true rest, that empty Idol of the blinded world, called Popularity, might
in none of my achievements bribe, either my judgment or affections ^o any
thing irregular or unworthy; much less (...) it should be to me in the place of
the living God, whilst I intermedle in things Divine; in which we always do
come so far short of the true end, as (in our ayms and intentions we fall
beneath the highest glory: I have therefore studied how I might present you
with this feeble Birth of the travel of my poor thoughts, rather in the plain
dress of naked Truth, then in the gaudy garb of Oratory; humbly entreating you
not to entertain it with the embraces of your favor because its mine, nor
rashly explode it because its not another: But (wisely walking betwixt those
two rocks of Credulity and Prejudice) having well weighed the whole in a sound
Judgment, balance your election by the standard of the Sanctuary. The Zenith
of my ambition (if I know any thing of my self) is, the advancement of the
Kingdom of Christ in your souls; that among those many thousands that at this
day make melody in their hearts to God their Redeemer, you might not be found
to stand o^ for Ciphers. If you esteem your selves to be (what indeed you are)
eminent sharers in the Common Deliverance: Why should you not also stand, as
figures of great significancy, in the number of those that make returns of
Glory? It pleased the Lord in the day of your fears (with the hand of Grace) to
write down your City in the book of his remembrance, among such as by the wing
of his power and loving kindness, he would save from the teeth of the cruel:
from the bottom of my heart do I beg (and, O that I might obtain!) that you
would make it the great work of your lives (as your thank-offering unto Heaven)
to make your City more God's, Christ's, the Gospel's, the Commonwealths; that
this may be written over all her Gates in indelible Characters, Lo this is the
righteous City which was saved by ^^^^d. In the glory of this world I may
(with^^^ ^lattery) pronounce it inferior to none: (...) un-intermitted
happiness in that glory which is Divine to excel all. May that dark and
dismal Winter never pass over it, in which it may not spring and flourish with
those glorious fruits of Knowledge, Truth, Righteousness and Peace. And if
there be any other Gemm which may add luster to the Crown of its earthly or
Spiritual glory, which my pen (unwilling to transgress its due limits) has
spared to mention: Let me beg your belief that that, and much more, is
cordially wished to it by him, who is

Your Faithful and most humble Servant, Thomas Speed

PSALM 50.15. And call upon me in the day of trouble; I will deliver thee, and
thou shall glorify me.


WE are this morning met together, to speak well of the Name of the most High
God, for that which (next to the Redemption of lost man through Christ) we may
truly call, the greatest demonstration of grace that ever Heaven made to any of
the sons or daughters of men: for that, which is the joy of all those hearts
that wish well to Zion, and the equal terror of all its adversaries: for that,
which is the wonder and amazement of all neigh^^^ing Nations; and which
(through the good^^^^ ^^ God) may prove a happy preamble to the establishment
of Truth and Peace in this Commonwealth.

The words which I have read in your ears (my small portion of time allotted
me, not permitting me to meddle with the context) do contain in them three
parts.

1. First, An exhortation to a duty. Call upon me. To which is annexed, the
circumstance of time when. In the day of trouble. 2. Secondly, An engagement of
grace. I will deliver thee. 3. Thirdly, An injunction laid on the delivered, to
make returns of praise to the Deliverer. And thou shall glorify me.
The first, presents us with the souls of Christians, looking by Faith to
their God, in the day of their darkness.

The second, speaks the gracious readiness of their God, to satisfy the
expectations, and comply with the desires of their souls.

Upon which follows the third, which is, the thankful improvement of their
Deliverances, by studying the advancement of the glory of God their Savior.

Of each of these distinctly: And first, in the first of these three parts, I
shall begin with the circumstance of time (in the day of trouble) forasmuch as
that does properly precede the souls acting toward God, in the offering up of
its prayers and tears: (...) is as the wound, hastening the Patient to the
Ch^^^geon or as the wrong offered the childe^^ (...) him to pour out his
complaints into the (...) father. The burden on the shoulder, makes the person
sustaining it, to cry out for help. Clouds, and darkness, and difficulties,
pressing hard on the soul, do (in like manner) prompt it, to look out for some
one to rescue it.

The (...)
Hebrew word used in the Text for trouble, is of great significancy. The (...)
root whence it comes, signifies, to besiege, or environ with an Army. Thus
it is made use of in 1 Samuel 23.8. where it is said, that Saul called all the
people together to war, to go down to Keilah, to (...) Ad angustiandum.
besiege David and his men. And thence the Scripture uses the word in the
Text, to express the greatest straits and exigences to which it pleases God to
reduce men in this life. There are two words especially by which it is usually
rendered, which bear great weight with them: And they are, tribulation, and
distress. The first we meet with in Judge. 10. where from verse 7. to the end of
9. we have a narrative of the many black clouds that did then hang over poor
Isreal's head: In verse 10. we have them crying unto God: and in ver. 14. God
returning this killing answer; Go, and cry unto the Gods which ye have chosen,
let them deliver you in the time of your (...)
tribulation. We find it rendered by the second: in Psalm. 120. 1. In my (...)
distress I cried unto the Lord. When Joseph, both by his demeanor, and his
words, spoke roughly to his indigent brethren, Genesis 42. They, reflecting upon
that day, when (...) the anguish of his soul prevailed not against their
^^^manity: from their bloody premises, drew this (...) ^^^clusion, ver. 21.
Therefore is this (...)
distress come

But more particularly: there are two principal ingredients that go to the
making up of a day of trouble.

1. The first is, God's hedging up the way of his peoples comforts, as it were
with thorns. When as, which way ere they cast their eyes, they meet with
nothing but terrors, and discouragements.

This is often effected by the power, and rage of unreasonable men. The first
of which, made it a day of straits and fears to good Jehoshaphat; when as,
through a sense of his own impotency to contest with the Army that came against
him, he was put to this stand in his Councels, that he knew 2 Chro. 20.12.
not what to do. The second, expressed in the blasphemous vomitings of railing
Rabshakeh, made tender-spirited Hezekiah to signify to Isaiah the Prophet,
that God had brought upon him a (...)
day of trouble and rebuke. Thus was it a day af trouble to pursued Israel at
the Red Sea. Thus also did God make it a day of distress and straits to our
Army (surrounded with might and malice) at Dunbar. When as we are beset with
evils, and the Conduit-pipes of second causes which should convey succor to
us, seem to be quite cut off; then may the day of trouble truly be said to have
overtaken us. God will sometimes spoil his of their beloved enjoyments, and
they shall not be able to cast their eye upon that thing in the whole Creation,
that may yield them supply. When God would make Israel sensible of the depth of
his distress under the Babylonish captivity, he says, that the enemy having
laid hold of the (...) none should be able to deliver it Isa. 5.29.
. And they (...) their deliverance thence, was to themselves (...) probable
(having no means in their eye (...) effect it) that their return seemed to be
of equal credit to them, with the phantasms of dreaming men. When soft Jacob
with his unmartial'd train was to meet his rough-spirited brother in the head
of an armed company: looking on himself as a helpless prey to the teeth of the
Lion; he was (as the Text says) greatly afraid and distressed. Genesis 32 7.
(...)
What made it a day of trouble to many, when the late vagabond Army came into
this Nation? Why this, destruction seemed to be nigh at hand, and help to be
afar off.

2. The second ingredient is, Gods making darkness so much the pavilion of our
souls, that, under our pressures we shall not be able to reach the end of the
present dispensation. No affliction is joyous to the flesh; but when as, with
that, the cloud is so thick, that the soul cannot (so much as by a probable
conjecture) reach the end, the strait is thereby much increased. Which truth
does hang on this principle; That the view of a good end, does much sweeten and
make facile, all the difficulties that lie in the way to it.

So that if the representation of the goodness of the end do lighten the
burden; then must the concealment thereof, needs make it much more burdensome.

The soul of old Jacob was sore distressed by the tidings of his beloved-
Joseph's unfortunate end: but could he have been but assured of his so glorious
a resurrection to power, and opportunity to save him ^^d his family from
perishing, it would not have (...) one sigh from his heart, or a tear from his
eye. (...) was it that the hovering of the late ensnared (...) ^ver us, created
so many troubles, and shakings in our Spirits? but only, that the end that God
had upon them was not so clear: And by how much the issue was more or less
foreseen by the eye of our faith; by so much to every heart was it more or less
a day of trouble. We may call the whole time of Paul's life (after his
conversion) a day of trouble and straits; but yet, his looking to that weight
of glory which was to come, made all his affliction to be (beyond expression) 2
Cor. 4.17. (...)
light. His thorny passage was made smooth and pleasant, by having his eye
fixed on that glory which lay beyond it.

Object. But here steps in an objection: It is asked, Why should the emphasis of
the exhortation lie on that time, the day of trouble? The heart of man is
sufficiently propense to fly to God for help in that day; and even they, that
will not have him for their Ruler in the time of prosperity; in the day of
their distress would fain have him for their Deliverer. In their affliction
they will seek me early Hos. 5.15


The Answer to this, will lead me to speak of the duty contained in the first
part of the Text, viz. call on me.

Answ. For answer therefore I say; That the Exhortation (as to the circumstance
of time) is not groundless: for that, although most men do seem to hasten to
God, in the day of trouble, in word, and pretense; yet even at that time do
most men's hearts catch at something besides him, which they make their stay,
and their dependence. God made (...) promises to Israel that he would not
withdraw (...) presence from them for their protection and (...) and in the day
of their straits God (...) pretense, but their hearts leaned on Egypt.

We must therefore here come to make enquity, what there is wrapped up in the
bowels of this expression? For that it cannot be understood simply in the
Letter; as if a bare verbal calling upon the name of God, were that, which he
would honor with acceptance, or answer with deliverance.

There are three sorts of calling upon God, which do never find that
acceptance with him, so as to obtain answer.

1. First, there is an hypocritical calling upon God: A calling on him with the
lips, when as the heart strayeth from him. The Jews were a people eminent for
this: None more in lip prayers, and mock-Fasts (to gain the esteem of being
religious) then they. Job by an interrogation makes it positive, that such
prayers do never reach the ear of God: when as (speaking of the hypocrite) he
says. Job 27.9
Will God hear his cry when (...)
trouble comes on him? 2. There is a cursory, ignorant calling upon God, to
which is annexed no other reward, then the labor it self. A cursory calling,
is so to call, as therein to rest: when men pray merely because they think they
must: with which is usually joined a deep ignorance; when as men are no way
apprehensive of the nature of that God on whom they call. Such was that calling
upon God used by thousands, during the sign of that silly Idol, the
Common Prayer Book: (...) as the sum of their devotion lay no higher, then
(...) hearing so many prayers read in their ears: (...) minding communion with
that God they in^^^ (...) which is the life of prayer. What heart does not weep
to remember, how in any time of distress, that heap of confusion must be
searched into, to find out words to express the condition of the distressed?
And if none pertinent could be found, then some impertinency must serve: using
prayer merely as a spell or a charm to drive away some eminent evil. Such
calling on God might well deserve that Inscription, which Paul found on the
Altar at Athens, Act. 17.23
To the unknown God (...).
For what difference is there betwixt worshipping an unknown God, and
worshipping the true God (in name only, but) under false notions? save this,
that they retain the name, but are strangers to that nature with which its
clothed. The Stoics were more regular in their judgments, touching their
false Gods, then such men are in their practices toward the true God. For that
they held it, Epict. Enchir. cap. 38. (...).
The chief thing in the worship of their Gods, to have true apprehensions of
them. 3. There is a prayer of blood and cruelty; when as men call on the name
of God, with their hands full of blood, having peace and sweetness in their
words, but rapine, and a devouring spirit lodges within. Such cries which call
God to aid, only to effect the revenge of malicious hearts, prove fruitless,
for he will not hear them. God speaks it with an emphasis, Isa. 1.15. When ye
make many prayers, I will not hear: your hands are full of blood. 'Twere well
if this age could not give ample testimonies to this: when as the Covenant and
Uniformity must be made the cloak; (...) Fasting and Prayers had in secret,
pretended for (...) conciling of Brethren, whilst the woundings (...) and the
destruction of the Commonwealth (...) bottom. These cries God has not heard,
so as to favor them with acceptance; but he has given the blood-thirsty blood
to drink. To Ages of Ages let his name be praised therefore; and let all the
friends of Zion, say, Amen.
These three sorts of invocation being excluded, I shall present you with three
things, which speak out the very heart of that which is true calling upon God.

1. The first is, the fervent pouring out of the soul to God, mixed with Vera
invocatio non nisi in fide fundata est. Calvi.
Faith and understanding, as to one that is able and willing to relieve. God
does not always give a particular Faith, as to the thing we beg; neither is it
safe to be peremptory in determining the pleasure of God, in relation to the
particulars of our requests: but the Faith of Christians, in Prayer, has this
for its object, God ready to accomplish the desire of their souls, as far as
they are subservient to that high End, his own glory. Now then, when those
Oratorical sighs and groans, are sent Heavenwards in full vollies, and these
after God as a tender Father, Is demum vere nomen Domini invocat, qui per fidem
in Christo renatus, factus filius Dei, accepto spiritu, per quem clamamus Abba
pater, auxilium Dei in adversis implorat. Bullin. in Act. Apost. cap. 2. ver.
21.
with a holy boldness, and child-like familiarity on the Christians part; this
is after the due manner to call upon his name. Jacob can no more let God go
without a blessing, then a poor child can the hand of his father, when he is
ready to sink. Hezekiah in the day of his straits runs to the bosom of God,
and before him spreads his case: much like an injured son before his tender
father. I doubt not but the name of God was lately thus called upon, by
^^^^sands of waiting souls in this Nation: among (...) many were favored with
a particular Faith, as (...) ^^^ermined issue: but all, with a sweet hope (the
Anchor of the soul) joined with this confidence that the end of the Lord should
be good. 2. With this is joined a naked dependence on the Lord, as one whose
power alone, is able to accomplish the desires of our souls. By naked
dependence, I exclude not the use of means; but do intend, a looking to God by
Faith as the prime agent effecting his pleasure by, and through, creatures.
When as (in the day of our straits) our hearts are most enlarged with desire;
and our heads and hands most active for the working our deliverance: then to
keep our eyes fixed on him as the original productive cause of our expected
salvation: and to lay our highest hopes on him as giving life and vigor to all
second causes. Iehoshaphat (upon the approach of his potent adversaries)
keeps his sword in his hand, but had his 2 Chr. 20.12.
eye on his God. 1 Samuel 17.4.40.45.
David advancing to dispute Isreal's quarrel with the champion of the
Philistines, took his smooth stones in his scrip, and his sling in his hand;
but his heart leaned on the name of the Lord of hosts. Then do we use our
prayers and our arms to their proper end, when as we make them not our
deliverers; but when, in the use of both, we have our reliance on the Lord. 3.
To this may be added, a patient waiting upon God by Faith, for the
accomplishment of his pleasure, which way soever made out. Which is done, when
as, having poured forth our souls unto God with strong cries, and the
Chariot-wheels of his po^^^ and goodness seem to run slowly to our succou^
(...) have our hearts stayed by patience, and kept (...) precipitant
excursions: When we forbear ((...) of our distress) to prefix either the end or
time, but do bear about in our breasts this resolution, to comply with the
product of our Fathers pleasure, what ere it be. To speak all in a word; then
are we to be reckoned among the number of those that do truly call upon the
name of God: when as having with fervency and a holy boldness, spread our case
before him (in the midst of our clouds and darkness) we retain this sweet
complacency of spirit in the close of all: as to be able to say, Father, not my
will, but thy will be done.
I shall only add two words by way of Corollary from what has been said of
this first part, and so pass to the second part of the Text.

1. They that are dearest in the eyes of the Lord, have their days of trouble.
They to whom his ear is open, and his hand ready to help, have them: from
whence the Corollary does naturally follow. I shall not spend time to bring a
candle to the Sun, in making a repetition of those many examples with which the
Scripture does abound, to prove an assertion so clear. If we look back and
consult with the lives of all the holy Patriarchs and Prophets from Adam to
Christ, and with the lives of all the Saints from him to the last Apostle, we
shall find none of them that went down to their graves, who in their passage,
met not with some days of darkness and distress. The consideration of which
should stay our hearts under the ^^^est of our pressures: knowing, that no new
thing (...) ^^^^ened unto us, more then what was the portion (...) many
thousands of precious ones which (...) heaven before us. 2. Secondly, the
surest application that we can make in the day of trouble, is unto God. When
our vain hearts are deceived into confidence on any thing on this side him, we
do but seek the living among the dead, and waters of refreshing in empty pits.
And so I have done with the first part of the Text, viz. The duty, together
with the circumstance of time.

The second part that follows in order to be spoken to, is the engagement of
grace. I (...) Te eruam.
will deliver thee. Which word is applied as well to the quitting of the mind
from its straits, as to the deliverance of the outward man. Psalm. 6.4.
David under the apprehensions of divine displeasure, cries unto God, that he
would deliver (...)
his soul from that heavy yoke.

Behold here the gracious readiness of God to comply with the requests of Faith
of his distressed people! It Is but cry, and be heard; beg and obtain. No
distressed child, may with more boldness and confidence make application to
his dear father, then Christians in the day of their straits may unto their
God. There are gods many, and lords many, but there is none like to the God of
Israel, whose heart and hands are always wide open for the satisfying the
desires of his poor little ones. The poor Priests of Baal may cry long and
loud, and (like seduced worshippers) make the drawing of their own blood an
argument to persuade their spiritless Idol to appear for them; but he has
neither an ear to hear, (...) hand to help, nor a heart to pity them. But
(...) God of Israel are all these, I will deliver th^^ (...) is as much as if
God should have said in (...) thus much; In the day of your darkness and
distress, let not your vain hearts suggest to you thoughts of diffidence, or
despair; know, that he that made you, and redeemed you, has not left you as
Orphans in the midst of cruel men: know, that when the ears and hearts of men
are closed against you here on earth; yet even then, you have more left you
then the whole world can give you, viZ. a God in heaven who will plead your
righteous cause. And as much as you expect the return of the Sun above your
Horizon, after a few hours setting: so confidently may you expect the drawing
forth of my power, and my love, for the revenging of all your wrongs, when
ever you make your appeal unto me.

Object. But here we meet with an Objection, which (at first view) does seem
much to overshadow the glory of this truth; which is, that we do often see the
strongest cries of Christians go unheard; and the most fervent breathings of
their hearts, go unaccomplished; Were there not many prayers put up for the
saving of Bristol, when it was first taken, all which proved fruitless?

Answ. To which I shall give answer in these two words.

1. It speaks as great grace from heaven, to lend us support under the
trouble, as to deliver us from it. And on our parts we have properly a
deliverance, when as (though God break not our bonds, yet) he does (...) upon
our souls with such bright rays of his (...) presence and spirit, as do make
our hearts (...) ^^ich truth is bottomed upon this Principle, (...) and
foundation of all trouble, is the absence of God; so that to have the glory of
his presence is deliverance from trouble. We have a most clear demonstration of
this in Christ; of whom the Author to the Hebrews Heb. 5.7.
says, That when he had offered up prayers and supplications with strong
crying and tears, unto him that was able to save him from death, he was heard
in that he feared. Now how can it be said, that he was heard in that he feared,
which was death, since he did not escape it? If Christ drank of the cup of
death, how was he heard in being saved from it? The Evangelist Luke 22.43
Luke does unty this knot for us, who says, that (upon his prayers) that that
cup which was provided for him to drink, might pass from him, There appeared an
Angel unto him from heaven strengthening him. So that, Gods sending an Angel
for the succor of Christ under his Agony, is interpreted by the Author to the
Hebrews, to be as much a hearing of him in the very letter of his prayer, as if
he had delivered him from it. 2. Secondly, Gods wise deferring the
accomplishment of the desires of his People until his own due time, cannot be
interpreted his refusing to hear them. Deliverance is then sufficiently soon,
when as it is in Gods time. And thus we do now enjoy the things we begged for
these ten years past. And our eyes do at this day behold the glorious
accomplishment of those many prayers that seemed to be buried in oblivion.
But to return to the business of the day. A gre^^ piece of which (if I mistake
not) is to take a s^^^^ review of the glory of that Salvation w^^^^ (...)
heaven has encompassed us. For suitable (...) we have of the greatness of our
Deliverance, will be the truth and fervency of our Praises. Praise is a
sacrifice offered up to God, by the affections, which supposes them to be set
on work by the judgment; which being apprehensive of large receipts of grace,
prompteth the affections to make equal returns of glory. No apprehension of
good received, no praise: narrow apprehensions of great Deliverances, weak
Praises. Every man and woman in this place, whose judgments do not give in
this verdict to their affections, That God has declared rich grace in the
salvation he has wrought for England, but do esteem it rather a plague then a
privilege, that (after so many sore conflicts) he gave the day as he did: I
say all such do stand only as ciphers, among the number of those that this day
make melody in their hearts to the most High.

Therefore that our hearts may be the better tuned to offer up our sacrifice of
spiritual praises unto God: I shall endeavor to set before you, the glory of
our deliverance, by speaking to two things.

1. I shall spread before you some of the capital mischiefs whence God has
delivered us. 2. I shall speak of the way or manner how he has delivered us.
And here I shall not confine my self, to speak only of the glory of our
Deliverance, in relation to the signal mercy given in at Worcester; but shall
extend (...) discourse to all that which God has saved us (...) the whole
series of our Deliverances for some (...) ^^till that last wrought there, which
the (...) has set as a crown upon all the former. Therefore if any man ask me,
What God has delivered us from? I answer first in general, He has delivered
us from the devouring rage of merciless cruelty: he has plucked us out of the
jaws of that ravenous malice, which was not to be satiated, but by the
destruction of the soul, as well as the outward man. Our blood and our lives
are saved from being trodden down as mire in the streets, by the feet of the
cruel. We with our wives, our little ones, our friends, and dearest relations,
are alive this day before the Lord, as legible demonstrations, and living
monuments, of our so great Salvation.

To undertake to enumerate all the particular pieces of this glorious lump of
our Deliverances, would be a work, which would make me too great a trespasser,
as well upon my own strength, as your patience. I shall therefore speak only to
three principal comprehensive mischiefs, whence the hand of heaven has
graciously delivered us.

1. We are (through unspeakable mercy) in a great measure delivered from that
yoke, which was likely to have continued upon our necks, through that
inevitable ruin that was coming upon our LAWS and LIBERTIES; our BIRTHRIGHTS
as we are men.

It Is not difficult to quote that time, when as property was almost become a
stranger in the Land: especially among those that had not the guard of
greatness (...) keep it unviolated. There is none here can be so (...) a
stranger to the public concernments (...) Israel, as not to know, how through
Bri^^^^ (...) ^^^tortion, and Maladministration of (...) hearts of the
inhabitants began to bleed and groan. It Is more then sad to remember that time,
when as the justice of a man's cause, was measured by the strength of his purse:
and he should not miss of receiving the most favorable sentence, who was able
to return the greatest reward.

Object. But me thinks, I hear some asking me; Are not the relicts of injustice
yet remaining in the midst of us? Do the streams of righteousness run so pure,
that there is no tincture of defilement mixed with them? Are the arms of the
oppressor so broken, that there are no cries of the oppressed in the Land?

Answ. 1. To this I answer first, Rome was never built in a day; neither is a
house finished as soon as the foundation is laid. Was ever any child a monster
to his father, because not a man the first day it was born? It does
sufficiently rejoice a tender mother (after her bitter travel) that her child
is born perfect, as to the parts of a man; she does not renew her sorrow,
because she does not find it born with strength, eloquence, policy, and those
other endowments which are the Concomitants of riper years: she is well content
to have those only in hope, and await the perfection of them as the work of
time.

And shall we deny that to so vast a body as a Commonwealth, which we are
content to allow to those bodies of lesser magnitude?

2. Secondly, Let us bless God for what he has (...) done in beginning, and
wait his pleasure for (...) ^^^eating of this piece of our Deliverance. (...)
search, that error will be found too (...), which makes men to have their
mouths filled with more complaints (looking to what they have not) then their
hearts with true thankfulness for what they have. It Is storied by Plutarch
Plutar. in vit. Lycur.
concerning Lycurgus, that when he first established his new Commonwealth in
Sparta, for the prevention of injustice and oppression, he made these two
Decrees.

1. That no man should make use, either of silver or gold. 2. That none of his
Laws should be written upon Tables.
By the first he intended the extirpation of covetousness; and consequently the
removal of oppression. By the second he intended, that every man should have
his Laws written in his breast, which mixed with the Law of love, and good will,
he thought to be of sufficient force to make men act justly. I shall only make
this short application of it. That, we may not expect to have the Commonwealth
free from every tincture and spot of injustice, until it shall please God to
accomplish these two great works, upon all men's hearts. First, that by the
power of his spirit, he do cruse them not to cease to use, but to covet silver
and gold. Then shall it be a glorious Commonwealth indeed: when (as Lycurgus
did banish the use of money out of men's houses, so) God shall banish
covetousness out of men's hearts. Secondly, that he do write that noble Law of
Spiritual love upon the tables of their hearts, whereby they (...) light to act
righteously from the love (...) ousness.

But though until the effecting of (...) works in the hearts of men, we may
not expect to have our Commonwealth spotless, as to these defilements: yet I
would add (and I hope without offense to any that are honest of the long Robe)
that I doubt not but many among us shall live to see that time, when as those
cunning Cooks of the Laws, which have for many years disht out so many of the
peoples privileges to them (with the poisonous sauce of their own
interpretation) as might serve their own ends, will by the power of the Gospel
or the Sword, be made more just, or be cut much lower.

2. God has delivered his poor People in this Nation from the heart-wounding
taunts and reproaches of their blaspheming adversaries: Who can express
(besides those that feel it) how deep it strikes into the tender hearts of
ingenuous Christians, to hear the blasphemous reproaches of their triumphing
enemies in the day of their distress? Doubtless that Babylonish taunt, sunk
into the Israelites grieved souls, as deep as their bonds: Psa. 137.3
when as they that wasted them, required mirth of them, saying (in scorn) sing
us one of the songs of Zion. David professes, that his morsels were embittered
to him, and all his comforts besmeared with gall, whilst his ears were pierced
by his enemies continual repetition of that cutting reproach, Psalm. 42.3.
Where is thy God?

These Irons God has prevented from entering into our souls. He has not given
us up as a prey to the (...) of the cruel; that we should be cast into (...)
^^nd Dungeons, to be made the objects of (...) If they should call to us for
one of the (...) can cheerfully sing it with melody in our hearts, unto the
Savior of Zion. If they ask us, Where is our God? we can answer them with joy
and boldness, that our God is the living God, who scattered them in his
displeasure at Marston-Moore; whose power brake them in pieces at Naseby field;
who smote their great ones in Kent; who by a handful put thousands to flight
at St. Faggons; the stroke of whose terror they felt in the North: whose
strength made the weak strong, to stain the glory of their pride at Dunbar:
whose hand was never drawn back, but was stretched out still, until he had put
on the top-stone of our deliverance at Worcester.

3. Thirdly, God has delivered his People in this Nation, from those yokes
which are heavier then all; viz. Those that were preparing for, and in part
laid upon their consciences. For although it be true, that those things which
the Stoics call (...).
Things in our power (as the actings and negotiations of the soul) cannot be
taken from us, nor suffer violence from any thing without; and consequently
none can spoil us of the Liberty of our consciences: yet forasmuch as those
transient acts which relate to the worship of God, may be hindered from without,
we may be thence said to be spoiled of the free exercise of our consciences.
Now in this consists a great piece of the glory of our Deliverance.

They are not many years since the wills of silly men, were become Dictators to
the Faith of Christians. So that to have been in ones Faith, (...) step beyond
the teachings of a Blind-guide (...) over-holy. How was the life of religion
(...) ^^^sist in complying with the fond inve^^^^^ (...) and even swallowed up
with the inroad of created Ceremonies? How were needless burdens multiplied
upon the consciences of poor Christians? So that in things Spiritual as well as
Civil, it was hard to tell, which lay heavyest, the Mitre or the Crown:
although its more then probable, that the Crown might have been easier borne,
had not the Mitre stood so near it. To be righteous beyond a man's neighbor,
how Heterodox was it? and to be holyer then the will of a proud Prelate
allowed, not less then grand Heresy. Nay, whether were we sinking? when as the
very external duties (the carcass) of Religion became a reproach to the
exerciser? Are there none here, that can give testimony of that time, when as
it was an abomination to some men, to hear but a Psalm sung, or a Chapter read
in the Family? So that (as much as in them lay) they studied, and attempted to
banish the lowest appearances of God from among men. Are there more then twelve
years past over our heads, since Christians would have reckoned it among their
greatest Privileges, to have had but liberty to have gone but one days journey
out of Egypt, to worship their God, without the profane mixtures of sottish
Ceremonies? Would it not have been to them as life from the dead, could they at
all times have freely, and without interruption met together (though but in
corners) mutually to declare among themselves that God had done for their
souls, and to pour out (...) ^^arts to him in Prayer?

(...) ^hen (Christians) the glory of your De^^^ (...) all these bonds! God
has not been (...) ^^^ording to the waitings of your souls; but he has
outdone both your hopes, and your thoughts. Those glorious Privileges which
(lying under vast heaps of improbabilities, ever to be brought forth in their
true luster) ye scarce durst beg for your selves; lo, even them has the hand
of grace cast into your bosoms. You have now all the polluted rags of
Ceremonies pulled off from the face of Worship. Ye now know no Bishop of your
souls, besides him who is your God, and your Redeemer. You need not now privily
fly to corners to speak of God, or exercise the freedom of your consciences.
You are not now constrained to leave the Land of your nativity, that you might
worship God without the mixtures of men's inventions. And which is the life of
your Liberty (see a wonder of Providence!) your Rulers are become your Patrons,
so that you may be as holy as you can, as Religious as you can. What then
remains, but that we wait in our souls for that time: when as he that has
given Liberty, will also give us hearts to walk more entirely with himself?

And so much touching the Capital mischiefs we are delivered from.

2. The second thing that speaks the glory of our Deliverance, is, the manner
how we have been delivered; and of this, only these three words.

1. We have been delivered, not by humane power or policy, but by the alone arm
of our God. His wisdom has so ordered it, that his naked power has been
clearly seen to do all, that there might (...) sacrificing unto men. It is he
that has (...) this Nation, in the greatness of his ow^ (...) love, for these
ten years past; an^ (...) sharp throws) has at length brought forth that
glorious Birth, which our eyes this day behold. Lest the vain heart of arrogant
man should assume that glory to himself, which is due only to his Redeemer; it
pleased God to draw a thick cloud over all sleshly power and wisdom, that his
own arm might be seen to bring salvation to us. 2. He has delivered us, having
first often brought us even to the pit of destruction. The difficulties and
straits of the wilderness, did much commend the love of their guide, and the
sweetness of Canaan. In like manner, the glory of our Deliverance, and the
goodness of our Deliverer are not a little commended, in that he has carried
us through the flames for some years together, and yet suffered us not to be
consumed He has often reduced us to that sad state, that salvation has scarce
been within our ken; but then, even in our lowest condition, when the jaws of
ruin have been closing upon us, he has not failed to own as. I am sure the
year Forty eight is fresh in your memories, when so many fires were kindled on
all sides of us, that there was no visible way open, by which we might escape
burning. A terrible fire in Kent, another in Wales, a third in the North; but
through his grace all soon quenched, and we are delivered. How often have we
been giving up the Buckler to the enemy? and should have been content to have
had from (...) the tithe of that by Indenture, which we now (...) Freeholders,
by Deed from none but God? (...) (which adds not the least luster to the
(...) Deliverance) he has delivered us, af^^^ (...) made to him, both by us
and our adversaries. We and they are both filled with very strong presumptions
of the justice of our Cause; yet neither so refractorily resolute as to decline
the Umpiredge of some third person: therefore (as to the meetest Judge) they
appeal to Heaven, and so do we; and both put it upon this test (making this the
signal of Heavens approbation) Victory given in to the most righteous cause.
God (for ever blessed be his Name therefore) seals to the justice of our
Cause, in giving us the day through the greatest disadvantages. But our
adversaries (as if Heaven had given an unrighteous verdict for us, or as if God
had mistaken himself in giving sentence on our side, they) will appeal again.
But neither passion, nor pretenses can bribe the Almighty to comply with the
unrighteous requests of unreasonable men. And therefore, in the heat of his
indignation, he does again pronounce the same sentence against them, making it
legible in the eyes of all Nations, in Characters written with their own blood:
in effect telling them, that his first Determination was righteous; and that
they were peremptory beyond the due bounds of Creatures, in refusing to be
concluded by the unerring judgment of him: whom themselves had chosen for
their Judge.
And so I have done with the second part of the Text (viz) the engagement of
grace, I will deliver thee.

Upon which follows the improvement o^ (...) ^^liverance, which comes now to
be spoke (...) And thou shall glorify me.

If it be asked, What it is to glor^ (...) rit of God (the surest Interpreter of
his own mind) will resolve us in the last verse of this Fiftyeth Psalm; Whosoever
offers praise, glorifieth me. All that Creatures can Deum glorificamus, non
addendo, sed tantum declarando.
glorify God by, is, by declaring only, not by adding; For in him dwells the
fullness of all glory. Then do we give glory to him, when as with praise and
thankfullness of heart, we live over the salvations of God. Salvation deserves
praise. It is but a due debt paid to the grace of God, to look to him as our
Savior, with all thankful acknowledgments of his goodness.

But before I speak particularly to this part of the Text; peradventure there
may be some here, who (being otherwise minded) cannot return praise for the
late appearances of God, because they esteem them no mercies. To such (if there
be any present) I would speak these three words in the spirit of meekness.

1. Its Pity that any member of Israel, should sit with a frozen spirit, under
those warm Sunbeams of grace, which at this day do shine forth, from the face
of Isreal's keeper. Its more then to be lamented, that any should be gnashing
their teeth through anguish and discontent, for that, for which others are in
their hearts singing the songs of Zions praises unto the Lord their Redeemer. I
have more charity, then to pass sentence of perverseness upon such spirits; but
sure I am that it cannot (when most favorably inter^^^^d) be esteemed other
then deep blindness, that (...) see the hand of God, when it is so glori^^^
(...) on the behalf of his People.

(...) ^^^not take in the whole bulk of our deliverance under the notion of a
mercy, so as to return praise therefore; yet, that in the work of this glorious
Day, you may bear some part, give thanks for so much of it as you esteem a
mercy. If you esteem it no mercy, because Deliverance is given in by the hands
of such men; or if you can see no mercy in this that God has by it opened a
way to the flourishing of the Gospel, Truth and Righteousness; yet give thanks
for the lower part of it (viz) that in the common Deliverance, you have been
saved from the violence of men; that the noise of War is hushed, and is kept
from coming into your borders.

Plutarch Plutarch in vit. Cri. Marii.
reports of divine Plato, that when he came to dye, he gave thanks to God for
these three things.

1. First, That he had made him a Reasonable creature, and no brute beast. 2.
Secondly, That he was a Greek, and no Barbarous man. 3. Lastly, That he was
borne in the time of Socrates.
I shall only apply it in a word thus.

Behold, the lower part of this mercy, contains more glory in it then all
Plato's laid together. God has not only made you men; but, he has also put a
price into your hands, to get the wisdom of Christians. To live under the
Sunshine of the Gospel, is much more then to be borne a Greek. He esteemed it
a great Privilege that he was born in the time o^ ^^crates; But (which is ten
thousand times (...) you live in those days wherein (...) does reign and rule
as Lord and King (...)

3. In the great things that have been of late accomplished, strive to mind God
more, and Man less. Esteem not the great changes that have fallen out upon the
Nation, as effected so much by the wills of men as the hand of God; and to be,
not the birth of men's pleasures, but the fruits of his purposes: and such as
have been brought to pass in much grace and favor. Why else should he
continue to give his presence in such constant success, to those that have
seriously waited on him, by whom (as Instruments) these Changes have been
wrought? It Is true, that naked success, is but a probable Argument at best to
prove Heavens approbation of that Cause to which it is given. But, being
clothed with so many considerable Circumstances as that has been (of which we
now speak) it does amount to little less then a Demonstration. For, why God
should continue to give such an unintermitted series of successes, to a company
of People waiting upon him by faith and prayer; and that, after Solemn Appeals
made to him; together with the offering up of their humble requests to him,
that he would manifest his pleasure, both concerning them and their cause, by
the success; I say, why God should thus comply both with their Prayers and
their Enterprises, and not do it in grace and favor, is to me as yet a Riddle,
not to be unfolded. I believe we may (without Presumption) challenge the most
gray headed Historian, to produce a Para^^^^ What does God intend by all those
signal favors (...) which he has of late encompassed his People, (...) ^^ere
the putting of his Seal to those things (...) brought forth, in relation to the
esta^^^^ (...) New-born-Commonwealth?

But to return to our duty; Let us all that have called upon God in the day of
our trouble, and have tasted of his salvation, give all glory to him in our
hearts.

If you ask me how we shall do it? I answer in general, thus. We shall
discharge our selves of this duty by offering up our selves to God entirely, in
all holiness of mind and conversation. Then are we truly saved, to the glory
of God, when as we are saved into nearer fellowship and communion with himself.
We called upon him in the day of our distress, and he delivered us; let us
remember what we are, and pay our vows to the most High. Let us call to mind,
what great things we did resolve upon in the day of our straits, if God would
deliver us but this once. Now that he has heard our cries, let us not be slack
in performance. Far let it be from us, now to sink lower into the world, since
his goodness has kept us from sinking into desolation. Let not the goodness of
God in saving us, put us at a greater distance from him. Let us never give
occasion to God (through our ingratitude) to say of us: Well, in the day of
your trouble I heard from you, and I had a lodging and a place of residence in
your hearts and thoughts; but now I am become as a stranger to you; ye hung
close to me in the time when you needed my help; but now your souls do cleave
to other lovers besides me. Let not his loosing the bonds of our servitude, set
us loose in our hearts from himself. For then our Deliverance will prove our
Plague, rather then our Privil^^^^ (...) Ten thousand times better had it been
that (...) of our enemies had lain upon our necks all (...) our lives (our
hearts enjoying sweet (...) him) then, that his breaking our (...) at a greater
distance from him. For who is there that will not say, that fellowship with God
in bonds, is much to be preferrd before the liberty of the outward man, with
the loss of his presence? The presence of God (completely enjoyed) makes up
the formality of heaven; so that, if by gaining external deliverance we lose
that, what do we do other then make a foolish exchange of heaven for earth? of
gold for lead? of the glory of the Creator (blessed for ever) for the poor,
unsatisfying sweetness of dying creatures?

Thus much of the duty in general. More particularly I would offer two things
to you, by which you may give glory to God.

1. First, Let every man (according to the particular relation in which he
stands) ask himself, What great thing shall I do for God, the expressions of
whose goodness have been so great to me? 2. Secondly, Let us all (upon a
serious review of the matter and manner of our Deliverance) thus resolve in our
spirits, that we will make God our trust in all our future straits.
And first (in my discourse of the first of these) I would direct my humble
request unto you, Right Worshipful, which is, that you would strive to do some
great thing for God, by out-doing all your Predecessors, even those that have
done most worthily. Content not your self to tread in their steps, but endeavor
^o excel them. If they have studied to advance the ^^^dom of Jesus Christ in
the City, do you much (...) If they have been a terror to evildoers, and
(...) them that do well; do you be so much (...) have labored to promote the
(...) of godliness, and goodmen; let it be your crown and your glory to
endeavor it much more, that the Ages to come may have cognizance of this our
year of Jubilee, from the records of your actions; that when (upon the reading
of them) it shall be asked, how it came to pass that so many glorious things
were effected in the year of such a man's government? It may be answered, that
they were done in testimony of thankfulness for a memorable Deliverance that
was given to the whole Nation at Worcester.

Next, I would say to all, strive to do some great thing for God. Let the
consideration of his loving kindness, be a prevailing motive with you to live
to him in the paths of Holiness and Righteousness, all the days of your lives.
Walk as a People saved by God: let your love to the Gospel be more then ever,
and that both as it is the price of much precious blood, and also the gift of
Divine love. Let your joy in God be purer then ever; let your estimation of the
concernments of eternity be higher then ever, that all men may run and read the
Salvation of God, in your Heavenly Conversations.

2. Secondly, Resolve to trust God in all future straits.

If at any time the Heavens shall grow dark over your heads, and mischief and
desolation shall seem to be nigh unto you; if then your hearts begin to sink,
call to mind the memorable Salvation he wrought at Worcester; and rest
confident that he, who (by his mighty power and pres^^^^ scattered great clouds
there, is still the same; (...) and willing to become a refuge from (...) to
all those that wait upon him by (...)

I shall now wind up all, in (...) Exhortation.

Let every man when he comes home, write this Motto upon his Door posts, Saved
by God; upon his Wife and Children, Saved by God; upon his Estate, Saved by
God; upon his Liberty (both in relation to his Privileges Civil and Religious)
Preserved by God. And then from all, let him thus seriously resolve in his own
breast.

Is it indeed so, that I have not been constrained to leave my house as an
habitation unto Strangers? has the grace and wisdom of Heaven so ordered it,
that mine eyes have not seen my Wife and Little ones given up as a Prey to the
teeth of the Cruel? has the favor of my God been extended even to the
keeping off the hand of the violent, from spoiling me of my Estate, so that I
am not brought to a morsel of bread; but do sit under my own vine, and eat the
fruits of my own fig tree? Am I at once saved both from the Captivity of my
outward man, and the bondage of my inward: so that (being not subjected to the
wills of profane men) I may be as spiritual as I can, as heavenly as I can? I
will therefore offer up as a sacrifice unto thee O God my Redeemer, my Wife,
Children, Estate, Liberties, my All: and will make it the business of my life,
how I may bring glory to thee through all. The Records of thy matchless
lovingkindness shall always remain so legible upon the Table of my heart; that,
whilst I live, nothing shall be by me esteemed too dear to part with, or too
difficult (...) be done or suffered for thy Names sake, to whose (...) I owe
every enjoyment which may be called (...) glorious.

FINIS.

