A SPEECH WITHOUT DOORS, Made by a PLEBEAN, TO HIS Noble Friends.
PARLIAMENTS have been wont to take up some space at the first Meetings, to
settle the House, and to determine of Unlawful Elections, and in this point
they never had greater cause to be Circumspect, than at this time: For by an
Abuse lately crept in, there is introduced a Custom, which if it be not seen
and prevented, will be a great derrogation of the Honor, and a weakening of the
power of your House, where the Law gives a freedom to Corporations, to Elect
Burgesses, and forbids any indirect course to be taken in their Elections,
many of the Corporations are so base minded, and timorous, that they will not
hazard the Indignation of a Lord Lieutenants Letter, who underhand sticks not
to Threaten them, if he has not the Election of the Burgesses, and not they
themselves.

And commonly those that the Lords recommend, are such as desire it for
Protection, or are so ignorant of the place they serve for, as that there being
occasion to speak of the Corporation, for which they are chosen, they have
asked their Neighbors sitting by, whether it were a Sea, or a Land Town?

The next thing that is required, is, Liberty of Speech, without which
Parliaments have little force or power; Speech begets doubts, and Resolves
them; and doubts in Speeches beget understanding; He that doubts much, asks
often, and learns much; and he that fears the worst; soonest prevents a
mischief.

This privilege of Speech, is anciently granted by the Testimony of Phillip
Cominus, a stranger, who preferrs our Parliaments, and the Freedom of the
Subject in them, above all other Assemblies; which Freedom, if it be broken or
diminished, is negligently lost since the Days of Cominus.

If Freedom of Speech should be prohibited, when Men with modesty make
repetition of the Grievances and Enormities of the Kingdom; when Men shall
desire Reformation of the wrongs and injuries committed, and have no relation
of evil thoughts to His Majesty, but with open heart and zeal express their
dutiful and reverent respect to him and his Service: I say, if this kind of
Liberty of Speech be not allowed in time of Parliaments, they will extend no
fartther than to Quarter Sessions, and their Meetings and Assemblies will be
unnecessary, for all means of disorder new crept in, and all Remedies and
Redresses will be quite taken away.

As it is no manners to contest with the King in his Election of his
Counselors and Servants, (for Kings obey no Men, but their Laws,) so were it a
great Negligence, and part of Treason, for a Subject not to be free in Speech
against the Abuses, Wrongs and Offenses, that may be occasioned by persons in
Authority. What Remedy can be expected from a Prince to a Subject, if the
Enormities in his Kingdom be concealed from him: Or what King so Religious and
just in his own Nature, that may not hazard the loss of the Hearts of his
Subjects, without this Liberty of Speech in Parliament? For such is the
misfortune of most Princes, and such is the unhappiness of Subjects where Kings
Affections are settled, and their Loves so far transported to promote Servants,
as they only trust and credit what they shall inform.

In this Case, what Subject dares Complain or what Subject dares contradict the
words or Actions of such a Servant, if it be not Warranted by Freedom of a
Parliament, they speaking with Humility? for nothing obtains Favor with a
King, so much as diligent Obedience.

The surest and safest way betwixt the King and his people, which has least
scandal of partiality, is, with Indifference, and Integrity and sincerity, to
examine the Grievances of the Kingdom, without touching the person of any Man,
further than the Cause gives the Occasion: For otherwise, you shall Contest
with him that has the Princes Ears open to hearken to his enchanting Tongue;
he informs secretly, when you shall not be admitted to Excuses, he will cast
your deserved Malice against him, to your Contempt against the King; and so
will make the Prince the shield of his Revenge.

These are the sinister practices of such Servants to deceive their Sovereigns,
when our Grievances shall be Authentically proved, and made manifest to the
World by your pains to Examine, and Freedom to Speak. No Prince can be so
affectionate to a Servant, or such an Enemy to himself, as not to admit of this
indifferent proceeding: If his services be allowable and good, they will appear
with Glory; if bad, your Labor shall deserve thanks both of Prince and Country.

When Justice shall thus shine, people will be animated to serve their King
with Integrity; for they are naturally inclined to imitate Princes in good and
bad.

The Words of Cicero will then appear, That Malicious and evil Men make Princes
poor, and one perfect good Man is able to make a Realm rich.

There is no Remedy left for mis-reports, but a freedom of Speech in
Parliament. For there is no Wise Man that speaks, but knows what, and when to
speak, and how to hold his peace. Whilst Subjects Tongues are tied, for fear
they may reach him a rap whose Conscience cries Guilty; the King and his people
are kept from understanding one another; the Enemy is heartned abroad, and the
malignant humor of Coffeehouse nourished at home, and all for one who is
like a Dragon, that bites the Ear of the Elephant, because he knows the
Elephant cannot reach him with his Trunk; and Princes are abused by false
Reports whispered in their Ears by Sycophants and Flatterers.

Diogenes being asked what Beast bit sorest? answered, Of Wild Beasts the
Back-biter; of Tame the Flatterer.

Now to descend to Grievances which are of two kinds; some concerning the
Kingdom in general, some in particular, which have relation to the general.

Grievances in general, are so many in number, as will serve for every Member
of the House to present two a piece to your Views: and I will presume so far to
rank my self with you, as to tender the number of Two unto your Consideration.

My first Complaint is of Titles of Honor; and in Two Kinds.

First, In respect of the parties themselves, their Estates and Parentage.

Secondly, In respect of the manner of their attaining thereunto, which is
Mercenary, Base, and Corrupt, which in Reason should not hold: for by Law the
Consideration is unlawful.

Trajanus commended Plutarch for his Precepts in School, when he Taught that
Men should Labor to deserve Honor, but avoid the getting of it basely: for if
it were Reputation to have it by Desert, it were Infamy to buy it for Money. In
that Age where Rich Men were Honored, Good Men were Despised.

Honor is not to be valued according to the vulgar opinion of Men, but prized
and esteemed as the Surname of Virtue, engendered in the mind; and fuch Honor
no King can give, or Money can purchase. He that will strive to be more
Honorable than others, must abandon Passion, Pride, and Arrogance; so that his
Virtue may shine above others. For Honor consists not in the Title of a Lord,
but in the opinion people have of their Virtue, for it is much more Honor to
deserve, and not to have, than to have it, and not deserve it.

There is one of Three things, that commonly causes Man's Advancement, Desert,
Favor, and Power.

The first makes a Man worthy of it, the other Two are but Abuses: for Favor
is but a blind Fortune, an Ounce of which at Court, is better than a pound of
Wisdom: Fortune never favors, but flattereth; she never promises, but in
the end she deceives; she never raises, but she casts down again. And this
Advancement is meeter to be called Luck, than Merit.

That Honor that is compassed by power, takes unto it self Liberty, and
desires not to be governed by Wisdom, but Force. It knows not what it desires,
nor has a feeling of any Injury: It is neither moved with sweet Words, nor
pitiful Tears; such Men leave not to do evil, because they have a desire to
it, but when their power fails to do it.

The true Honor among the honourablest, is, where Fortune casts down, where
there is no fault: but it is Infamy where Fortune raises, where there is no
Merit.

Examine the state and condition of Men raised to Honor these Twenty Years
past, and whether it be Desert, Favor, or Power that has preferred them.

Enter into the Mischief the Kingdom has suffered, and does suffer by it, and
the cause of his Majesty's great Wants will soon appear: If you collect with
your selves how many hungry Courtiers have been raised to the highest top of
Honor.

After this Examine their Princely Expense in these Twenty Years, their Estates
in present, and what is requisite to maintain them in their future degrees of
Honor, to themselves and their posterity, and you shall find His Majesty's
Annual Revenues consumed and spent upon those unworthy persons. Besides the
impairing and impoverishing the State, it brings with it the contempt of
greatness and Authority, it breeds an inward malice in Gentlemen better
deserving of their Country, and better able to maintain the degree of Honor
without charge to King or Kingdom, and whose Houses and Alliances may better
challenge it than the best of them.

The Character of a Covetous Man is, That he gets his Goods with Care, and
Envy of his Neighbors, with Sorrow to his Enemies, with Travel to his Body,
with Grief to his Spirit, with Scruple to his Conscience, with Danger to his
Soul, with Suit to his Children, and Curse to his Heirs: His desire is to live
Poor, and to dye Rich; but as these Vices are made Virtues, even so is he
honored for them with Titles of Nobility.

When Phillip the Second, King of Spain, entered with Arms upon his Kingdom of
Portugal, and though with his Sword he might have made fitting Laws; yet were
there some few Privileges which the Portugals besought they might enjoy, one
whereof was, That the King would make no Unworthy Person Noble, or without
their Approbation, which was granted them, and to this day they hold their
Freedom, which keeps that Kingdom in the ancient State, Honor, and Dignity;
(that is to say) two Dukes, one Marquess, and eighteen Earls: And thus much for
the point of Honor.

The second Grievance I will recommend to your view is, The Carriage of our
Wars; the excessive Charges vainly spent therein, the Unworthiness of the
People employed, the Grave and Experienced neglected, the Designs not warranted
by Reason and Direction, and the Executions worse performed; with many other
Circumstances that depend upon it.

I must crave leave to declare the Property and Condition of Impostures, and
deceivers of Princes.

Abusers of Princes are they that persuade them to War, to become Poor when
they may live in Peace, and become Rich; when they may be Loved, cause them to
be hated; when they may enjoy their Lives surely, put them in hazard of Cross
Fortune rashly; And lastly, having necessity to use their Subjects, put them
into that necessity, as they refuse to do for Him: All this is the Pride of the
Perswader, as Socrates says.

The first Lessening of the Greatness of the Roman Empire, was by the Insolence
of Soldiers; and the first raising of the Ottoman House, was by Permission and
Conniving at his Army.

England with small Charge, can raise what Men His Majesty pleases to command,
and that suddenly, and Discharge them again without trouble or charge as
quickly. England wants no good and able men if His Majesty had occasion to use
them: The Wise men of England would have thought Two or Three hundred Thousand
pounds better spared, than thus wastfully Consumed, and Disorders committed; we
may compute it to that Sum, and yet keep our selves within compass: And
notwithstanding, the want of Money, and the ways to Exact it on the Subject, is
all the Song now sung: He that sees and complains of the Evil managing of
things, is either Imprisoned, Banished the Court, or censured for a Discontent.

There is no Englishman but knows the Heart of every other true Englishman,
and with one consent will all obey our Prince, and to his Person we owe all due
Reverence; and we may truly say, no King is more happy in Subjects for their
Love, nor no Subjects readier to serve their King with their Purses and
Persons; nor never people were better blessed with a King.

False Informers and Misguiders of good Kings are much more Perilous, than if
Princes themselves were Evil; for commonly as Worms breed soonest in soft and
sweet Wood, so are the best Natures, inclined to Honor and Justice, soonest
abused by false Flatterers.

The Evil they commit under the Authority of good Princes, is accounted as done
by the Prince himself; but commonly such people in the end pay for it; for he
that desires not to do Good, cannot be Wise, but will fall into four thousand
Follies.

One of the first Propositions made to the House, will be for Money to Support
His Majesty's vast Expense at this time, that the Enemy threatens Thunder
against the Kingdom. Your often Alarums upon such pretenses, may make you now
too secure; for true it is, that the last Parliament Books were published of
Invincible preparations, intended against us, and nothing came of it. But
beware that you be not deceived by an Old saying, That when one usually tells
Lies, he is not trusted when he speaks Truth; for certainly the danger is more
than by the power and greatness of another Enemy.

In this Case you must give for your own sakes, that so you may be sure to
enjoy what is yours; for your Sovereigns sake, to maintain his Greatness and
State; and for your Countries sake, to keep it from Oppression of the Enemy;
but withal, you ought to lay down the Condition of the Kingdom, and to show
that your Necessity cannot run parallel with your Hearts and your Desires; that
your minds will be carried with a willingness to give, but your Hands will keep
back your Hearts for want of Ability to give.

Themistocles demanding Tribute of the Athenians, told them he brought two Gods
with him, that is to say, Persuasion and Violence; They answered, that they had
two other Gods in their Country, both great and powerful, which were Poverty
and Impossibility, which hindered them from giving.

We may truly say, That God has so placed and Sealed this Isle of England,
that nothing but Evil Council can hurt it. But true it is, Advice that is not
warranted from Wise Men, may prove more forcible and perilous than the power of
an Enemy.

The Scripture tells us, That the Thought perishes that takes not Council.

A King of the Lacedaemonians asked how a Kingdom might ever stand, and was
answered, Two ways; If a King take Counsel of Wise Honest men, and they speak
freely; and do Justice Uprightly.

There was never Censor that Judged, Senator that Ordered, Emperor that
Commanded, Council that Executed, Orator that persuaded, nor any other Mortal
man, but sometimes he committed Errors, and deserved either blame or punishment
for his Misdoings, and if he were Wise, desired Advice what to do.

St. Gregory says, No man can give so faithful Council as he who loves one
more than his Gifts; Then who are or can be so true Counselors to our Noble
King, as a House of Commons that has no Relation to a Kings Gift, but only to
his Honor, flourishing Estate and safety?

This is the time to amend Evil Counsels past, and to let Evil Counselors see
their Errors.

This is the time for all men to put to their helps, some with their Hands to
Fight, others with their Advice to Counsel; and for my Advice it is this:

That you present to His Majesty in all Humbleness, your Willing mind and
hearts, to Repair and fit to Sea, His Majesty's Navy, your selves to have power
to make them able and Serviceable, with the advice of Experienced Men that you
may call unto you. This is a matter of great Importance at this present for the
safety of the King, Realm, and Subject; for the strength of the Kingdom much
depends upon this Bulwark, which we may well term The Walls of England.

His Majesty will find himself much cased by it, businesses shall be carried
without his trouble or care. Money shall not be sought for to that end, but
provided by you, His Majesty may dispose of the rest of his Revenue at his
pleasure.

By your Frugality and Husbandry, His Majesty shall have occasion to judge of
things past, of yours in present, and hereafter it will serve for a president
to walk after; it will stop the mouths of Malignant Tongues, that inform His
Majesty of the unwillingness of the Subject to give; and it will make it
apparent, that their true Grief is not in the matter of giving, but to see the
Evil Employing of it when it is given.

If any man shall pervert this good meaning and motion of yours, and inform His
Majesty, It Is a Derogation from his Honor to yield to his Subjects upon
Conditions. His Majesty shall have good cause to prove such men's eyes malicious
and Unthankful, and thereby to disprove them in all their other Actions: For
what can it lessen the Reputation of a prince whom the Subject only and wholly
obeys, that a Parliament which His Majesty does acknowledge to be his highest
Council, should advise him, and he follow the advice of such a Council? What
dishonor rather were it to be advised and ruled by one Counselor alone,
against whom there is just exception taken of the whole Commonwealth?

Marcus Portio says, That that Commonwealth is Everlasting, where the Prince
seeks to get Obedience and Love, and the Subjects to gain the affection of the
Prince; and that Kingdom is Unhappy where their prince is served out of ends
and hope of Reward, and has no other assurance of them but their Service.

FINIS.
London, Printed for B. T. 1681.


