OF THE Law-Terms: A DISCOURSE Written by The Learned ANTIQUARY. Sir HENRY
SPELMAN, Knight. WHEREIN The Laws of the Jews, Grecians, Romans, Saxons and
Normans, relating to this Subject, are fully explained.

LONDON, Printed for Matthew Gillyflower, in Westminster Hall. 1684.

SECT. I.
Of the Terms in general.
AS our Law Books have nothing, to my knowledge, of the Terms, so were it much
better if our Chronicles had as little: For though it be little they have in
that kind, yet is that little very untrue, affirming that William the
Conqueror did first institute them. It is not worth the examining who was
author of this error, but it seems that Deinde constituit [Guilielmus
Conquaestor] ut quater quotannis, etc. Lib. 9. p. 154. l. 16. etc.
Polydore Virgil (an alien in our Commonwealth, and not well endenized in our
Antiquities) spread it first in print. I purpose not to take it upon any man's
word: but, searching for the fountain, will, if I can, deduce them from thence,
beginning with their definition.

The Terms are certain portions of the year in which only the King's Justices
hold plea, Definition.
in the high Temporal Courts, of Causes belonging to their Jurisdiction, in the
place thereto assigned, according to the ancient Rites and Customs of the
Kingdom.

The definition divides it self, and offers these parts to be considered.

1. The names they bear. 2. The original they come of. 3. The time they
continue. 4. The persons they are held by. 5. The causes they deal with. 6. The
place they are kept in. 7. The rites they are performed with.
These parts minister matter for a Book at large, but my purpose upon the
occasion imposed being to deal only with the institution of the Terms; I will
travel no farther than the three first stages of my division, (that is)
touching their Name, their Original, and their Time of continuance.

SECT II.
Of the Names of the Terms.
THE word Terminus is of the Greek (...), which signifies the Bound, End, or
Limit of a thing, here particularly of the time for Law-matters. In the
Civil-Law it also signifies a day set to the Defendant, and in that sense does
Bracton and others sometimes use it. Mat. Paris calls the Sheriff's Turn,
Terminum Vicecomitis, and in the addition to the M: SS: Laws of King Inas,
Terminus is applied to the Hundred-Court; as also in a Charter of Hen. 1.
prescribing the time of holding the Court. And we ordinarily use it for any set
portion of time, as of Life, Years, Lease, etc.

The space between the Terms, is named Vacation, a Vacando, as being Leisure
from Law-business, by Latinists Justitium a jure stando, because the Law is now
at a stop or stand.

The Civilians and Canonists call Term-time Dies Juridicos; Vacation, Dies
Feriales, Days of leisure, or intermission, Festival-days, as being indeed
sequestered from troublesome affairs of humane business, and devoted properly
to the service of God, and his Church. According to this our Saxon and Norman
Ancestors divided the year also between God and the King, calling those days
and parts that were assigned to God, Dies pacis Ecclesiae, the residue allotted
to the King, Dies, or tempus Pacis Regis.

Divisum Imperium cum Jove Caesar habet. Other names I find none anciently
among us, nor the word Terminus to be frequent, till the time of Hen. 2.
wherein Gervascius Tilburiensis, and Ranulphus de Glanvilla (if those books be
theirs) do continually use it for Dies pacis Regis.

The ancient Romans, in like manner, divided their Year between their Gods, and
their Commonwealth, naming their Law-days, or Term-time, Fastos, because their
Praetor or Judge might then Fari, that is speak freely; their Vacation, or days
of Intermission (as appointed to the service of their Gods) they called
Nefastos, for that the Praetor might ne fari, not speak in them judicially.
Ovid Fastorum lib. 1.

Ille Nefastus erat, per quem tria verba silentur,
Fastus erat per quem lege licebat agi.
When that the three Judicial words
The Praetor might not use,
It was Nefastus: Fastus then,
When each man freely sues.
The three Judicial words were Do, Dico, Abdico; by the first he gave license
Citare partem ream, to Cite the Defendant; by the 2d. he pronounced sentence;
and by the 3d. he granted execution. This obiter.

The word Term has also other considerations, sometimes it is used for the
whole space, from the first Return to the end of the Term, including the day of
See Sect. 5. Cap. 6.
Return Essoine, Exception, Retorn. Brev. Sometimes and most commonly excluding
these from the first sitting of the Judges in full Court (which is the first
day for appearance) and this is called full-Term by the Statute of 32. of Hen.
8. Cap. 21. as though the part precedent were but Semi-Term, Puisne-Term, or
Introitus Termini: The words of the Stat. are these, That Trinity-Term shall
begin the Monday next after Trinity-Sunday, for keeping the Essoines, Returns,
Proffers and other ceremonies heretofore used, etc. And that the full term of
the said Trinity-Term shall yearly for ever begin the Friday next after Corpus
Christi- Day. Here the particulars I speak of, are apparently set forth, and
the Term declared to begin at the first Return. By which reason it falls out
that the eight days wherein the Court of the Exchequer sits, at the beginning
of Michaelmas-Terms, Hilary-Term and Easter, are to be accounted as parts of
the Terms, for that they fall within the first Return: the Exchequer having one
Return in every of them, more than the Courts of Common Law have, viz. Crastino
Sancti Michaelis, Octabis Hilarii, and Octabis or Clausum Paschae: And it
seems that Trinity-Term had Crastino Trinitatis in the self-same manner,
before this Statute altered it.

SECT. III.
Of the Original of Terms or Law-days.
LAW-days or Dies Juridici, which we call Terms, are upon the matters as
ancient as offenses and controversies: God himself held a kind of Term in
Paradise, when judicially he tried and condemned Adam, Eve, and the Serpent. In
all Nations, as soon as Government was settled, some time was appointed for
punishing offenses, redressing of wrongs, and determining of controversies; and
this time to every of those Nations was their Term. The Original therefore of
the Terms or Law-days, and the time appointed to them, are like the Signs of
Oblique Ascension in Astronomy, that rise together. I shall not need to speak
any more particularly of this point, but show it, as it farther offers it
self in our passage, when we treat of the time appointed to Term or Law-days,
which is the next and longest part of this our Discourse.

SECT. IV.
Of the Times assigned to Law-matters, called the Terms.
WE are now come to the great Arm of our Division, which spreads it self into
many branches in handling whereof we shall fall, either necessarily or
accidentally, upon these points, viz.

1. Of Law-days among the Ancients, Jews and Greeks. 2. Of those among the
Romans using choice days. 3. Of those among the Primitive Christians using all
alike. 4. How Sunday came to be exempted. 5. How other Festivals, and other
Vacation days. 6. That our Terms took their original from the Canon Law. 7. The
Constitutions of our Saxon Kings; Edward the Elder, Guthurn the Dane, and the
Synod of Eanham under Ethelred, touching this matter. 8. The Constitutions of
Canutus more particular. 9. The Constitutions of Edward the Confessor more
material. 10. The Constitution of William the Conqueror. And of Law-days in
Normandy. 11. What done by William Rufus, Stephen and Henry the 2d. 12. Of
Hilary-Term according to those ancient Laws. 13. Of Easter-Term in like manner.
14. Of Trinity-Term and the long Vacation following. 15. Of Michaelmas-Term.
16. Of the later Constitutions of the Terms by the Statutes of the 51. of Hen.
3. and 36. of Edw. 3. 17. How Trinity-Term was altered by the 32. of Hen. 8.
18. And how Michaelmas-Term was abbreviated by Act of Parliament 16. Carol. 1.
CHAP. I.
Of Law-days among the Ancients.
THE time allotted to Law-business seems to have been that from the beginning
amongst all, or most Nations, which was not particularly dedicated (as we said
before) to the service of God, or some rites of Religion. Therefore whilst
Moses was yet under the Law of Nature, and before the positive Law was given,
he sacrificed and kept the holy Festival with Jethro his father-in-law on the
one day, but judged not the people till the day after; Some particular instance
(I know) may be given to the contrary, as I shall mention, but this seems to
have been at that time the general use.

The Greeks, Greeks.
who (as Josephus in his book against Appion witnesses) had much of their
ancient Rites from the Hebrews, held two of their Every month had about 6. more
or less of them, so called because on them the Prytanaean Magistrates might
hold Court.
Prytanaean-Days in every Month for civil matters, and the third only for
their Sacra.

Aeschines, in his Oration against Ctesiphon, charge Demosthenes with writing
a Decree in the Senate, that the So called from the (...), where their business
was to sit only on things inanimate, as when a piece of stone, timber or iron,
etc. fell on a man, if the party that flung it were not known, sentence was
past on that thing which slew him; and the Masters of this Court were to see
that thing cast out of the Territories of Athens. See the Attick Antiq. l. 3.
Chap. 3. Sect. 4.
Prytanaean Magistrates might hold an Assembly upon the 8. day of the
approaching Month of The month February, or, as others would have it March,
when Sacrifices were most usually offered to the Goddess Diana, (...) ab (...),
cognomen Dianae, quod est, jaculis cervos figens.
Elaphebolion, when the holy Rites of Aesculapius were to be solemnized.

The Romans Romans.
likewise (whether by instinct of nature or president) meddled not with Law
Causes during the time appointed to the worship of their Gods, as appears by
their Primitive Law of the 12. Tables, Feriis jurgia amovento, and by the
places before cited as also this of the same Tables.

Post semel exta Deo data sunt licet omnia fari.
Verbaque honoratus libera Praetor habet.
When Sacrifice and holy Rites were done,
The Reverend Praetor then his Courts begun.
To be short, it was so common a thing in those days of old, to exempt the
times of exercise of Religion from all worldly business; that the Barbarous
Nations, even our Angli, whilst they were yet in Germany, the Suevians
themselves, and others of those Northern parts would in no-wise violate or
interrupt it. Lib. de Moribus Germ. Cap. 40.
Tacitus says of them that, during this time, Non bellum ineunt non arma
sumunt, clausum omne ferrum; pax and quies tunc tantum nota, tunc tantum amata.
Of our German Ancestors we shall speak more anon; our British are little to
the purpose: they judged all Controversies by their Priests the Druides, and to
that end met but once a year as De bello Gallico lib. ^.
Caesar shows us by those of the Gauls.

I will therefore seek the Original of our Terms only from the Romans, as all
other Nations that have been subject to their Civil and Ecclesiastical Monarchy
do, and must.

CHAP. II.
Of Law-days amongst the Romans using choice days.
THE ancient Romans, whilst they were yet Heathens, did not as we at this day
use certain continued portions of the year, for a legal decision of
Controversies, but out of a superstitious conceit that some days were ominous,
and more unlucky than others (according to that of the Egyptians,) they made
one day to be Fastus, or Term-day, and another (as an Egyptian day) to be
Vacation or Nefastus: Seldom two Fasti, or Law-days together, yea they
sometimes divided one and the same day in this manner,

Qui modo Fastus erat, mane Nefastus erat,
The afternoon was Term, the m^rning Holy Day.
Nor were all their Fasti applied to Judicature, but some of them to other
meetings and Consultations of the Commonwealth; so that being divided into
three sorts, which they called Fastos proprie, Fastos Intercisos, and Fastos
Comitiales, they contained together 184. days, yet through all the Months in
the year there remained not properly to the Praetor, as Judicial or Triverbal
Days above 28; Whereas, before the abbreviation of Michaelmas Term by the
Statute of 16. Car. 1. we had in our Term above 96. Days in Court, and now have
86. besides the Sundays and Exempted Festivals which fall in the Terms; and
those are about 28. or there about. De Rep. Angl. lib. 3.
Sir Thomas Smith counts it strange, that three Tribunals in one City in less
than a third part of the year should satisfy the wrongs of so large and
populous a Nation as this of England. But let us return where we left off.

CHAP. III.
Of Law-days amongst the primitive Christians, and how they used all times
alike.
TO beat down the Roman superstition touching the observation of days, against
which St. Augustine and others wrote vehemently; the Christians at first used
all days alike for hearing of Causes, not sparing (as it seems) the Sunday it
self, thereby falling into another extreme: Yet had they some president for it
from Moses and the Jews. For Lib. 3.
Philo Judaeus in the life of Moses reports, that the cause of him that
gathered sticks on the Sabbath Day, was by a solemn Council of the Princes,
Priests, and the whole Multitude, examined and consulted of on the Sabbath Day.
And the Talmudists, who were best acquainted with the Jewish Customs, as also
Galatinus the Hebrew, do report that their Judges in the Council called
Sanhedrim sat on the weekday from morning to night, in the Gates of the City;
and on the Sabbath, and on Festivals upon the Walls. So the whole year then
seemed a continual Term, no day exempted. How this stood with the Levitical
Law, or rather the Moral, I leave to others.

CHAP. IV.
How Sunday came to be exempted.
BUT, for the reformation of the abuse among Christians, in perverting the
Lord's day to the hearing of clamorous Litigants, it was ordained in the year
of our Redemption 517. by the Fathers assembled in Concilio Taraconensi Cap. 4.
after that in Concilio Spalensi Cap. 2. and by Adrian Bishop of Rome in the
Decretal Cause. 15. quaest. 4. That, Nullus Episcopus vel infra positus Die
Dominico causas judicare [aut ventilare] praesumat, No Bishop or inferior
person presume to judge or try causes on the Lord's day. For it appears by
Epiphanius, that in his time (as also many hundred years after) Bishops and
Clergymen did hear and determine Causes, lest Christians, against the rule of
the Apostle, should go to Law under Heathens and Infidels.

This Canon of the Church for exempting Sunday was by Theodosius fortified with
an Imperial Constitution, whilst we Britains were yet under the Roman
Government, Solis die, quem dominicum certe dicere solebant majores, omnium
omnino litium and negotiorum quiescat intentio. Thus was Sunday redeemed from
being part of the Term; but all other days by express words of the Canon were
left to be Dies Juridici, whether they were mean or great Festivals; For it
thus follows in the same place of the Cause. 15. quaest. 4. C. 1.
Decretals; Caeteris vero diebus convenientibus personis illa quae justa sunt
habent licentiam judicandi, excepto criminali (or as another Edition reads it)
exceptis criminalibus negotiis. The whole Canon is verbatim also decreed in the
Capitulars of the Emperors Lib. 6. Cap. 245. a Benedict. Levit^,
Carolus and Ludovicus.

CHAP. V.
How other Fastival and Vacation Days were exempted.
LET us now see how other Festivals and parts of the year were taken from the
Courts of Justice. The first Canon of note that I meet with to this purpose is
that in Concilio Triburiensi Ca. 35. in or about the year 895. Nullus Comes,
nullusque omnino secularis Diebus Dominicis vel Sanctorum in Festis seu
Quadragessimae, aut jejuniorum, placitum habere, sed nec populum praesumat illo
coercere.

After this manner the Council of Bin. Tom. 3. Part. 1. Sect. 2. Circa annum
Christi 845.
Meldis Ca. 77. took Easter-week, commonly called the Octaves, from
Law-business; Paschae hebdomade feriandum, forensia negotia prohibentur. By
this example came the Octaves of Pentecost, St. Michael, the Epiphany, etc. to
be exempted, and principal Feasts to be honored with Octaves.

The next memorable Council to that of Tribury was the Council of Ertford in
Germany in the year 932. which though it were then but Provincial, yet being
afterward taken by Gratian into the Body of the Canon Law, it became General,
and was imposed upon the whole Church. I will recite it at large, as it stands
in Council. Tom. 3. part. 2. page 142. In istius Council. Cap. 2.
Binius, for I take it to be one of the foundation-stones to our Terms. Placita
secularia Dominicis vel aliis Festis diebus, seu etiam in quibus legitima
Jejunia celebrantur secundum Canonicam institutionem, minime fieri volumus. In
super quoque Gloriosissimus Rex [Francorum Henricus] ad augmentum Christianae
Religionis concessit, (or as Decret. Cau. 15. quaest 4. C 1.
Gratian has it) [Sancta Synodus decrevit] ut nulla judiciaria potest as
licentiam habeat Christianos sua authoritate ad placitum bannire septem diebus
ante Natalem Domini, and a al. Septuagessima.
Quinquagessima usque ad Octavas Paschae, and septem diebus ante Natalem Sancti
Johannis Baptistae, quatenus adeundi Ecclesiam orationibusque vacandi liberius
habeatur facultas. But the Council of St. Medard extant first in Cau. 22. ^ 5.
Ca, 17.
Burchard, and then in Gratian enlarges these vacations in this manner,
Decrevit Sancta Synodus, ut a Quadragessima usque in Octavam Paschae, and ab
Adventu Domini usque in Octavam Epiphaniae, necnon and in Jejuniis quatuor
temporum, and in Litaniis Majoribus, and in diebus Dominicis, and in diebus
Rogationum (nisi de concordia and pacificatione) nullus supra sacra Evangelia
jurare praesumat. The word [ jurare] here implies Law causes, or hold Plea on
these days, as by the same phrase in other Laws shall by and by appear, which
the Gloss also upon this Canon makes manifest, saying, in his etiam diebus
causae exerceri non debent, citing the other Cau. 15. q. 4. C. 1.
Canon here next before recited, but adding withal, that the Court and Custom
of Rome it self does not keep Vacation from Septuagessima, nor, as it seems,
on some other of the days. And this president we follow, when Septuagessima and
Sexagessima fall in the compass of Hilary-Term.

CHAP. VI.
That our Terms take their Original from the Canon Law.
THUS we leave the Canon Law, and come home to our own Country, which out of
these, and such other foreign Constitutions (for many more there are) has
framed our Terms, not by choosing any set portion of the year for them, but by
taking up such times for that purpose, as the Church and common Necessity (for
collecting the fruits of the Earth) left undisposed of, as in that which
follows plainly shall appear.

CHAP. VII.
The Constitutions of our Saxon Kings in this matter.
IN AS one of our ancient Saxon Kings, made a very strict Law against working
on Sunday.

Gif theo mon yrce on sunnan daeg. be his hlafordes haese. sy he freo. Legum
Cap. 3.


If a Servant work on Sunday by his Master's command, let him be made free, etc.

And Legum Alured Cap. 39.
Alured prohibited many Festivals; but the first that prohibited Juridical
proceedings upon such days was Edward the Elder and Guthurne the Dane, who in
the League between them, made about ten years before the Council of Ertford,
(that it may appear we took not all our light from thence) did thus ordain;

Ordel and athas syndon tocedene. Freols dagum. and riht faesten dagum; Vide
Foedus Eavardi and Gu^^urni Regum Cap. 9.


We forbid that Ordel and Oaths ( So they called Law-tryals at that time) be
used upon Festival and Lawful fasting Days, etc.

How far this Law extended appears not particularly, no doubt to all Festival
and Fasting-days then imposed by the Roman Church, and such other Provincial,
as by our Kings and Clergy here were instituted. Those which by Alured were
appointed to be Festivals, are now by this Law made also days of Vacation from
Judicial Trials, yet seem they, for the most part, to be but Semi-Festivals, as
appointed only to freemen not to bondmen, for so this See the aforesaid 39.
Chapter of the Laws of K. Alured.
Law declares, viz. The 12. days of Christmas, the day wherein Christ overcame
the Devil, the Anniversary of St. Gregory, the 7. days before Easter, and the
seven days after, the day of St. Peter and St. Paul, and the whole Week before
St. Mary in the harvest, and the Feast Day of All Saints. But the four
Wednesdays in the four Ember Weeks are remitted to Bondmen to bestow their work
in them as they think good.

To come to that which is more perspicuous, The Synod of Eanham.
I find about 'Twas held between the years 1006. and 1013. See the Author's
Conc. Britan. Tom. ^. page 510.
Sixty years after, a Canon in our The word Synod here signifies more than
Council, not as it is usually restrained to that of the Clergy only.
Synod of Eanham, under King Ethelred in these words. First, touching Sunday,
Council. Eanham. Can. 15.
Dominicae solennia diei cum summo honor magnopere celebranda sunt, nec
quicquam in eadem operis agatur servilis. Negotia quoque secularia
quaestionesque publicae in eadem deponantur die. Then commanding the Feast-days
of the Council. Eanham. Can. 15.
B. Virgin, and of all the Council. Eanham. Can. 15.
Apostles, the Can 16.
Fast of the Ember days, and of the Can. 17.
Friday in every Week to be duly kept; it proceeds thus, Can. 18.
Judicium quippe quod Anglice Ordel dicitur, and juramenta vulgaria, festivis
temporibus and legitimis jejuniis, sed and ab Adventu Domini usque post Octabas
Epiphaniae, and a Septuagesima usque 15. dies post Pascha minime exerceantur:
Sed sit his temporibus summa pax and concordia inter Christianos, sicut fieri
oportet. It is like there were some former Constitutions of our Church to this
purpose; but either mine eye has not lighted on them, or my memory has
deceived me of them.

CHAP. VIII.
CAnutus succeeding shortly after by his Danish sword in our English Kingdom,
not only retained but revived this former Constitution, adding, after the
manner of his zeal, two new Festival and Vacation days.

And e forbeodath ordal. and ath^s freols dagum. and ymbren dagum. and len^^en
dagum. and riht faesten dagum; and fram Adventum domini eth se eah to tha dag;
Canuti Leg's cap. 17.


And we forbid Ordal and Oaths on Feast-days, and Ember days, and Lent, and set
fasting days, and from the Advent of our Lord till eight days after [ the]
twelve [ days] be past. And from Septuagessima till fifteen nights after
Easter. And the Sages have ordained that St. Edward's day shall be Festival
over all England on the 15. of the Kalends of April, and St. Dunstan's on the
14. of the Kalends of June, and that all Christians (as right it is) should
keep them hallowed and in peace.

Canutus, following the example of the Synod of Eanham, sets down in the
Paragraph next before this recited, which shall be Festival and which
Fasting-days, appointing both to be days of Vacation. Among the Fasting days he
names the Saints Eves and the Frydays; but excepteth the Frydays when they
happen to be Festival days, and those which come between Easter and Pentecost;
as also those between Midwinter (so they called the Nativity of our Lord) and
Octabis Epiphaniae. So that, at this time, some Frydays were Law-days and some
were not. Those in Easter Term, with the Eve of Philip and Jacob, were, and the
rest were not. The reason of this partiality (as I take it) was; they fasted
not at Christmas for joy of Christ's nativity, nor between Easter and
Whitsontide, for that Christ continued upon the Earth, from his Resurrection
till his Ascension; And Mat. 9. 15. Mark. 2. 19.
the Children of the wedding may not fast so long as the Bridegroom is with
them: Nor at Whitsuntide for joy of the coming of the Holy Ghost.

CHAP. IX.
The Constitution of Edward the Confessor most material.
SAint Edward the Confessor drew this Constitution of Canutus nearer to the
course of our time, as a Law in these words: Leges Ed. Conf. c. 9.
Ab Adventu Domini usque ad Octabas Epiphaniae pax Dei and sanctae Ecclesiae
per omne Regnum; similiter a Septuagessima usque ad Octabas Paschae; item ab
Ascensione Domini usque ad Octabas Pentecostes; item omnibus diebus quatuor
temporum; item omnibus Sabbatis ab hora nona, and tota die sequenti, usque ad
diem Lunae; item Vigiliis Sanctae Mariae, Sancti Michaelis, Sancti Johannis
Baptistae, Apostolorum omnium and Sanctorum quorum solennitates a Sacerdotibus
Dominicis annunciantur diebus; and omnium Sanctorum in Kalendis Novembris, ab
hora nona Vigiliarum, and subsequenti solennitate: Item in Parochiis in quibus
dedicationis dies observatur; item Parochiis Ecclesiarum ubi propria festivitas
Sancti celebratur, etc. The Rubric of this Law is, De temporibus and diebus
pacis Regis, intimating Term-time, and here in the Text the Vacations are
called Dies pacis Dei and sanctae Ecclesiae, as I Sect. 2.
said in the beginning. But pax Dei, pax Ecclesiae, and pax Regis in other Laws
of Edward the Confessor, and elsewhere, have other significations also more
particular. Hora nona is here (as in all Authors of that time) intended for
three of the Clock in the afternoon, being the ninth hour of the artificial
day, wherein the Saxons, as other Nations of Europe, and our ancestors of much
later time, followed the Judaical computation: perhaps till the invention and
use of Clocks gave a just occasion to alter it, for that they could not daily
tarry for the unequal hours.

CHAP. X.
The Constitution of William the Conqueror.
THIS Constitution of Edward the Confessor was amongst his other Laws
confirmed by William the Conqueror; as not only In Hen. ^. page 600.
Hoveden, and those ancient Authors testify, but by the Decree of the
Conqueror himself, in these words; Legum Anglo -- Saxon. page 137.
Hoc quoque praecipio ut omnes habeant and teneant Leges Edwardi in omnibus
rebus, adauctis his quae constituimus ad utilitatem Anglorum. And in those
Auctions nothing is added, altered, or spoken, concerning any part of that
Constitution. Neither is it likely that the Conqueror did much innovate the
course of our Terms or Law-days, seeing he held them in his own Duchy of
Normandy, not far differing from the same manner, having received the Customs
of that his Country from this of ours, by the hand of Edward the Confessor, as
in the beginning of their old Customary themselves do acknowledge. The words
touching their Law-days or Trials are these, under the Title, De Temporibus
quibus leges non debent fieri: Custom: Cap. 80.
Notandum autem est quod quaedam sunt tempora in quibus leges non debent fieri,
nec simplices, nec apertae, viz. omnia tempora in quibus matrimonia non possunt
celebrari. Ecclesia autem legibus apparentibus omnes dies Festivos perhibet,
and defendit, viz. ab hora nona die Jovis, usque ad ortum Solis die Lunae
sequenti, and omnes dies solennes novem lectionum and solennium jejuniorum, and
dedicationis Ecclesiae in qua duellum est deducendum. This Law does generally
inhibit all Judicial proceedings, during the time wherein Marriage is
forbidden, and particularly all trials by Battle, (which the French and our
Lib. 4. c. 1. Lib. 14. c. 1. 2.
Glanvill call Leges apparentes, alias Apparibiles, vulgarly Loix Apparisans)
during the other times therein mentioned. And it is to be noted, that the
Emperor Frederick the Second in his Lib. 2. (...). 31.
Neapolitan Constitutions includes the Trials by Ordeal under Leges paribiles.
But touching the times wherein Marriage was forbidden, it agreed for the most
part with the Vacations prescribed by Edward the Confessor, especially
touching the beginning of them. Of Dies novem lectionum, we shall find occasion
to speak hereafter.

CHAP. XI.
What done by William Rufus. Hen. 1. K. Stephen, and Hen. 2.
AS for William Rufus, we read that he pulled many lands from the Church, but
not that he abridged the Vacation Times assigned to it.

Henry the 1. upon view of former Constitutions, composed this Law under the
Title, De observatione Legis faciendi, viz, Ab adventu Domini usque ad Octabas
Ep^^haniae, and a Septuagessima usque ad 15 dies post Pascham, and Festis
diebus, and quatuor Temporum, and diebus Quadragessimalibus, and aliis
legitimis Jejuniis, in diebus Veneris, and vigiliis Alii legunt. Singulo. rum.
Sanctorum Apostolorum non est tempus leges faciendi, vel jusjurandum ( misi
primo] al. pro.
nisi primo fidelitate domini vel concordia) vel bellum, vel ferri, vel aquae,
vel leges al. examinationis.
exactiones tractari, sed sit in omnibus vera pax, beata charitas, ad honorem
omnipotentis Dei, etc. The Copy of these Laws is much corrupted, and it
appears by Florence Wigorn's Continuer, that the Anno Dom. 1142.
Londoners refused them, and put Maud the Empress to an ignominious flight when
she pressed the observation of them. But in this particular branch there is
nothing not agreeable to some former Constitution. The word Bellum here
signifies Combats, which among our Saxons are not spoken of, and by those of
Ferri vel Aquae, are meant Ordal.

King Stephen by his Charter recited at Malmesbury, confirmed and established
by a Generality Hist. Nov. lib. 1. page 179.
bonas leges and antiquas, and justas consuetudines.

Henry the 2d. expressly ratified the Laws of Edward the Confessor, and William
the Conqueror, as In Hen. 2. page 600.
Hoveden tells us, saying, that he did it by the advice of Ranulph Glanvill
then newly made Chief Justice of England; which seems to be true, for that
Lib. 2. Cap. 11.
Glanvill does accordingly make some of his Writs returnable in Octabi, or
Clauso Paschae where the Laws of Edward the Confessor appoint the end of Lent
Vacation: And Dial. de Scacc.
Gervascius Tilburiensis also mentions the same return.

CHAP. XII.
The Terms laid out according to these ancient Laws.
TO lay out now the bounds of the Terms according to these Canons and
Constitutions, especially that ancient Law of Edward the Confessor; it thus
appears, viz.

Hilary Term began then certainly at Octabis Epiphaniae, Hilary-Term.
that is the thirteenth day of January, seven days before the first Return is
now, and nine days before our Term begins, and ended at the Saturday next
before Septuagessima, which being movable made this Term longer some years than
in others. Florentinus Wigorniensis, and Walsingham in his Page 441. Lin. 18.
Hypodigma Neustriae says, -- Anno 1096. in Octabis Epiphaniae apud
Sarisburiam Rex Gulielmus Rufus tenuit Consilium in quo jussit Gulielmo de Anco
in duello victi oculos eruere, and testiculos abscindere, and Dapiferum illius
Gulielmum de Alderi, filium Amitae illius suspendi, etc. proceeding also
judicially against others. Though Walsingham calls this Assembly Consilium
with an s, and Wigorniensis Concilium with a c, (the word Term perhaps not
being in use in the days of William Rufus) yet it may seem to be no other, than
an Assembly of the Barons, in the King's Court of State, (which was then the
place of Justice) to proceed judicially against these offenders. For the Barons
of the Land were at that time the Judges of all Causes, which we call Pleas of
the Crown, and of all other belonging to the Court of the King: So that the
proceedings being Legal and not Parliamentary, it appears that it was then no
Vacation, and that the Term was begun at Octabis Epiphaniae; whereby it is the
liklier also that it ended at Septuagessima, lest beginning it, as we now do,
some years might happen to have no Hilary-Term at all, as shall anon appear.
And this our ancient use of ending the Term at Septuagessima is some inducement
to think, the Council of Ertford to be depraved, and that the word there
Quinquagessima should be Septuagessima, as the gloss there reports it to be
in some other place: And as well Gratian mistakes this, as he has done the
Council it self, attributing it to Ephesus, a City of Ionia, instead of Ertford
a town in Germany; where Burchard before him, and Binius since, has placed it.

It comes here to my mind, what I have heard an old Chequerman many years ago
report, that this Term and Trinity-Term were in ancient time either no Terms at
all, or but as relics of Michaelmas and Easter-Terms, rather than just Terms
of themselves: Some courses of the Chequer yet incline to it. And we were both
of the mind, that want of business (which no doubt in those days was very
little) by reason Suits were then for the most part determined in inferior
Courts, was the cause of it. But I since observe another cause, viz. That
Septuagessima or Church-time one while trod so near upon the heels of Octabis
Epiphaniae (I mean came so soon after it,) that it left not a whole week for
Hilary-Term; and again, another while, Trinity-Sunday fell out so late in the
year, that the common necessity of Hay-seed and Harvest, made that time very
little, and unfrequented.

For inasmuch as Easter-Term (which is the Clavis, as well to shut up
Hilary-Term, as to open Trinity-Term,) may according to the General Council of
Nice, holden in the year 922. fall upon any day between the 22. of October
exclusively, which then was the Aequinoctium, and the 25 of April inclusively
(as the farthest day that the Sunday following the Vernal Full-Moon can happen
upon;) Septuagessima may sometimes be upon the 18. of January, and then they
could not in ancient time have above 4. days Term, and we at this day no Term
at all, because we begin it not till the 23. of January, which may be six days
after Septuagessima, and within the time of Church-Vacation. But what
Hilary-Term has now lost from the beginning of it, it has gained at the
latter end of Trinity-Term. And I shall speak more of this by and by.

CHAP. XIII.
Easter-Term.
EAster-Term, which now begins two days after Quindena Paschae, began then
as the Law of Edward the Confessor appointed it, at Octab. This is verified by
Glanvill, who makes one of his Writs returnable thus; -- Summoneo per bonos
summonitores quatuor legales milites de vicineto de Stock, quod sint ad Clausum
Paschae coram me vel Justiciariis meis apud Westmonasterium ad eligendum supra
sacramentum suum duodecim legales milites. But, as it began then nine days
sooner than it now does, so it ended six or seven days sooner, ( viz.) before
the Vigil of Ascension, which I take to be the meaning of the Law of Edward the
Confessor, appointing the time from the Ascension ( inclusive) to the Octaves
of Pentecost with Ascension-Eve to be dies pacis Ecclesiae, and Vacation.

CHAP. XIV.
Trinity-Term.
TRinity-Term therefore in those days began as it now does (in respect of the
return) at Octab. Pentecostes, which being always the day after Trinity-sunday
is now by the Stat. of 32 of Hen. 8. appointed to be called Crastino
Trinitatis. But it seems that the Stat. 51. of Hen. 3. changed the beginning
of this Term from Crastino Trinitatis to Octab. Trinitatis, and that therefore
the Stat. of Hen. 8. did no more in this point than reduce it to the former
original. As touching the end of this Term, it seems also that the said Stat.
of 51. Hen. 3. assigned the same to be within two or three days after Quindena
Sancti Johannis (which is about the twelvth of July) for that Statute names no
return after.

Bnt, for ought that hinders by the Canons, it is tanquam Terminus sine
termino; for, there was no set Canon or Ecclesiastical Law (that I can find) to
abridge the continuance thereof till Michaelmas-Term, unless the 7. days next
before St, John Baptist, were (according to the Canon of Ertford) used as days
of intermission, when they fell after the Octaves of Pentecost as commonly they
do, though in the year 1614. four of them fell within them. And except the
Ember-days next after Holy Rood; for Jejunia quatuor Temporum, as well by the
Laws of Canutus, and Edward the Confessor, as by all other almost before
recited, are either expressly or implicitly exempted from the days of Law. But
when Trinity-Sunday fell near the Feast of St. John Baptist, then was the first
part of this Term so thrust up between those days of the Church, that it was
very short; and the latter part being always very late did so hinder Hay-seed
and Harvest following, that either the course of it must be shortened, or it
must still usurp upon the time, allotted by nature to collect the fruits of the
earth.

For as Religion closed the Courts of Law in other parts of the year, so now
does public necessity stop the progress of them; following the Constitution of
Cod. lib. 3. Tit. 12 De Feriis. Cap. 7.
Theodosius, thus decreeing; -- Omnes dies jubemus esse juridicos. Illos tantum
manner feriarum dies fas erit, quos geminis mensibus ad requiem laboris
indulgentior annus excepit: aestivos fervoribus mitigandis, and autumnos
fructibus discerpendis. This is also confirmed in the Tit. De Feriis. Ca. 5.
C. -- and in Cau. 15. quaest. 4.
Gratian with the Glosses upon them to which I leave you, but is of old thus
expressed by Silvarum lib. 4. Carm. 4. quod inscribitur. Ad Victorium Marcellum.
Statius, as if it were ex jure Gentium: Certe jam Latiae non miscent jurgia
Leges,
Et pacem piger Annus habet, messesque reversae
Dimisere Forum: nec jam tibi turba reorum
Vestibulo, querulique rogant exire Clientes.
The Latian Laws do no man now molest,
But grant this weary Season peace and rest;
The Courts are stopped when harvest comes about,
The Plaintiff or Defendant stirs not out.


So the Longobards (our brethren as touching Saxon original) appointed for
their Vintage a particular Vacation of 30 days, which Paulus Diaconus does thus
mention: Proficiscentes autem eo ad villam, ut juxta ritum imperialem triginta:
Whereby it appears that this time was not only a time of Vacation, in those
ancient days, but also of feasting and merriment, for receiving the fruits of
the earth; 1 Samuel 25. 4.
as at Nabal's and Absalom's sheep-shearing, 2 Samuel 13. 23.
and in diverse parts of England at this day. So the Normans, whose Terms were
once not so much differing from ours, might not hold their Assizes or times of
law, but after Easter and Harvest; that is after the times of holy Church and
public necessity) as appears by their Customary. And forasmuch as the
Swaiumote or Swanimote, ( from the Saxon sang i. e. a Country Clown or Free
holder, and mot or gemot Conventus) is a Court of Free holders within the
Forest. See 3 Hen. 8. c. 18.
Swainmote-Courts are by the ancient Forest-Laws appointed to be kept fifteen
days before Michaelmas; it seems to be intended that Harvest was then done,
or that in Forests little or no corn was used to be sown.

But is to be remembered, that this Vacation by reason of Harvest, Hayseed,
Vintage, etc. was not of so much solemnity as those in the other parts of the
year, and therefore called of the Civilians, Dies feriati minus solennes;
because they were not dedicated divino cultui, but humanae necessitati.
Therefore though Law-business was prohibited on these days to give ease and
freedom unto Suitors whilst they attended on the Storehouse of the
Commonwealth; yet was it not otherwise than that by consent of parties they
might proceed in this Vacation, whereof see the Lib. 2. cap. 21.
Decreta Gregorii.

CHAP. XV.
Of Michaelmas-Term according to the ancient Constitutions.
MIchaelmas-Term (as the Canons and Laws aforesaid leave it) was more uncertain
for the beginning than for the end. It appears by a Fine taken at Norwich, 18
Hen. 3. that the Term was then holden there, and began within the Octaves of
Saint Michael; for the note of it is; Haec est finalis concordia facta in Curia
Domini Regis apud Norwicum, die Martis proximo post festum Sancti Michaelis,
anno regni Regis Henrici filii Regis Johannis 18. coram Tho. de Mulet, Rob. de
Lexint, Olivero, etc. I observe that the Tuesday next after St. Michael can (at
the farthest) be but the seventh day after it, and yet it must be a day within
the Octaves; whereas the Term Before the abbreviation by 16. Cat. 1. cap. 6.
now is not till the third day after the Octaves. But Dial. lib. 2. cap. 3.
Gervasius Tilburiensis, who lived in the days of Hen. 2. has a Writ in these
words: -- N. Rex Anglorum, [illi vel illi] Vicecomiti salutem. Vide, sicut
teipsum and omnia tua diligis, ut sis ad Scaccarium [ibi vel ibi in Crastino
Sancti Michaelis, vel in Crastino Clausi Paschae] and habeas tecum quicquid
debes de veteri firma and nova, and nominatim haec debita subscript. viz. etc.
By which it appears that the Term in the Exchequer, as touching Sheriffs and
Accomptants, and consequently in the other parts, began then as now it does,
saving that the Statute De Scaccario, 51 Hen. 3. has since appointed, that
Sheriffs and Accomptants shall come to the Exchequer the Monday after the feast
of St. Michael, and the Monday after the Utas] i. e. Octava, the eighth day
after any Term or Feast.
Vtas of Easter. So that this time being neither ferial nor belonging to the
Church, may justly be allotted to Term affairs, if the Octaves of Saint Michael
have no privilege: More of which hereafter.

The end is certainly prefixed by the Canons and Laws aforesaid, that it may
not extend into Advent. And it holds still at that mark; saving that because
Advent Sunday is moveable, according to the Dominical-Letter, and may fall upon
any day between the 26th of November and the 4th of December, therefore the
28th of November (as a middle period by reason of the Feast and Eve of St.
Andrew) has been appointed to it. Howbeit when Advent-Sunday falls on the
27th of November, as sometimes it does, then is the last day of the Term
(contrary to the Canons and former Constitutions) held in Advent, as it after
shall more largely appear.

CHAP. XVI.
The latter Constitutions of the Terms.
TO leave obscurity and come nearer the light, it seems by the Statutes of 51
Hen. 3. called Dies communes in Banco, that the Terms did then either begin and
end as they do now, or that those Statutes did lay them out, and that the
Statute of 36 Ed. 3. cap. 12. confirmed that use: For the Returns there
mentioned are neither more nor fewer than Anno 1614. in which year this Tract
was written.
at this day.

CHAP. XVII.
How Trinity-Term was altered and shortened.
TRinity-Term was altered and shortened by the Statute of 32 Hen. 8. chap. 21.
which has ordained it quoad sessionem, to begin for ever the Friday after
Corpus-Christi-day, and to continue 19 days; whereas in elder times it began
two or three days sooner. So that Corpus-Christi-day being a moveable Feast,
this Term cannot hold any certain station in the year, and therefore in the
year 1614, it began on St. John Baptist's day, and the year before it ended on
his Eve. Hereupon, though by all the Canons of the Church and former Laws, the
Feast of St. John Baptist was a solemn day, and exempt from legal proceedings
in Courts of Justice; yet it is no vacation day, when Corpus-Christi falls
(as it did that year) the very day before it: Because the Statute has
appointed the Term to begin the Friday next after Corpus-Christi-day, which in
the said year 1614. was the day next before St. John Baptist, and so the Term
did of necessity begin on Saint John Baptist's day. This deceived all the
Prognosticators, who counting St. John Baptist, for a grand day, and no day in
Court, appointed the Term in their Almanacks to begin the day after, and
consequently to hold a day longer; so deceiving many by that their error.

But, the aforesaid Statute of 32 H. 8. changed the whole frame of this Term:
For it made it begin sooner by a Return, viz. Crastino Sanctae Trinitatis, and
thereby brought Octabis Trinitatis which before was the first Return, to be the
second, and Quindena Trinitatis which before was the second, now to be the
third; and instead of the three other Returns of Crastino Octabis, and Quindena
Sancti Johannis, it appointed that which before was no Return, but now the
fourth and last, called Tres Trinitatis.

The altering and abbreviation of this Term is declared by the Preamble of the
Statute, to have risen out of two causes, one for health, in dismissing the
Concourse of people, the other for wealth that the Subject might attend his
Harvest, and the gathering in the fruits of the earth. But there seems to be
a third also not mentioned in the Statute, and that is, the uncertain station,
length and Returns of the first part of this Term, which, like an Excentrick,
was one year near to St. John Baptist, another year far removed from it;
thereby making the Term not only various, but one year longer, and another
shorter, according as Trinity-Sunday (being the Clavis to it) fell nearer or
farther off from St. John Baptist. For if it fell betimes in the year, then was
this Term very long, and the two first Returns of Octabis and Quindena
Trinitatis might be past and gone a fortnight and more, before Crastino Sancti
Johannis could come in: And if it fell late, (as some years it did) then would
Crastino Sancti Johannis be come and past, before Octabis Trinitatis were gone
out. So that many times one or two of the first Returns of this Term (for ought
that I can see) must in those days needs be lost.

CHAP. XVIII.
How Michaelmas-Term was abbreviated by Act of Parliament 16. Car. 1. Cap. 6.
THE last place our Statute-Book affords upon this Subject of the limits and
extent of the Terms is the Stat. 16. Car. 1. Chap. 6. entitled, An Act
concerning the limitatiom and abbreviation of Michaelmas-Term. For, whereas by
former Statutes it does appear, that Michaelmas-Term did begin in Octabis
Sanctae Michaelis, that Statute appoints, that the first Return in this Term
shall ever hereafter be a die Sancti Michaelis in tres septimanas, so cutting
off no less than two Returns from the ancient beginning of this Term, viz.
Octabis Sancti Michaelis, and A die Sancti Michaelis in quindecim dies, and
consequently making the beginning of it fall a fortnight later than before.
Wherefore the first day in this Term will always be the 23d. day of October,
unless it happen to be Sunday, for then it must be deferred till the day
following, upon which account we find it accordingly placed on the 24. for the
year 1681. This is all the alteration that Statute mentions, and therefore for
the end of Michaelmas-Term, I refer the Reader to what our Author has said
already in the 15th. Chapter. It may not be amiss in persuit of our Author's
method to set down the motives of making this abbreviation as we find them
reckoned up in the Preamble to that Statute. There we find, that the old
beginning of Michaelmas-Term, was generally found to be very inconvenient to
his Majesty's subjects both Nobles and others. 1. For the keeping of
Quarter Sessions next after the feast of St. Michael the Archangel; 2ly. For
the keeping their Leets, Law-days and Court-Barons: 3ly. For the sowing of land
with Winter-Corn, the same being the chief time of all the year for doing it;
4ly. For the disposing, and setting in order of all their Winter husbandry and
business; 5ly. For the receiving and paying of Rents; 6ly. Because in many
parts of this kingdom, especially the most northern, Harvest is seldom or never
Inned till three weeks after the said Feast. All which affairs they could
before by no means attend, in regard of the necessity of their coming to the
said Term, so speedily after the Feast of St. Michael the Archangel, to appear
upon Juries, and to follow their Causes and Suits in the Law.

SECT. V.
Other Considerations concerning Term-Time.
HAving thus laid out the frame of the Terms, both according to the Ancient and
Modern Constitutions, it remains that we speak something of other points
properly incident to this part of our division touching Term-Time, viz.

1. Why the Courts sit not in the Afternoons. 2. Why not upon some whole days,
as on Grand-days, double Feasts, and other exempted days, and the reason of
them. 3. Why some Law-business may be done upon some days exempted. 4. Why the
end of Michaelmas-Term is sometimes held in Advent, and of Hilary-Term in
Septuagessima, Sexagessima, and Quinquagessima. 5. Why the Assizes are held in
Lent, and at times generally prohibited by the Church. 6. Of Returns. 7. Of the
Quarta dies post. 8. Why I have cited so much Canon, Civil, Feodal, and foreign
Laws in this Discourse, with an incursion into the original of our Laws.
CHAP. I.
Why the high Courts sit not in the Afternoons.
IT is now to be considered why the high Courts of Justice sit not in the
Afternoons. For it is said in Exodus 18. 14.
Scripture, that Moses judged the Israelites from Morning to Evening. And the
Romans used the Afternoon as well as the Forenoon, yea many times the Afternoon
and not the Forenoon, as upon the days called Endotercisi, or Intercisi,
whereof the Forenoon was Nefastus or Vacation, and the Afternoon Fastus or
Law-day, as we showed in the beginning. And the Civilians following that Law do
so continue them amongst us in their Terms at this day. But our Ancestors and
other the Northern Nations being more prone to distemper and excess of diet (as
the Canon Law notes of them) used the Forenoon only, lest repletion should
bring upon them drowsiness and oppression of spirits; according to that of St.
Jerome, Pinguis Venture non gignit mentem tenuem. To confess the truth, our
Saxons (as appears by Hist. lib. 6. 1.
Huntington) were unmeasurably given to drunkenness. And it is said in Cap. 10.
13.
Ecclesiastes, Vae Terrae cujus Principes mane comedunt. Therefore to avoid the
inconvenience depending hereon the Council of Nice ordained, that Judices non
nisi jejuni judicia decernant. And in the Council of Salegunstad it was
afterward decreed, A. D. 1023, ut lectio Nicaeni Concilii recitetur, which
being done in the words aforesaid, the same was likewise there confirmed.
According to this in the Laws of Carolus Magnus the Emperor it is ordained,
Tit.
L -- lib. 2. ut Judices jejuni causas audiant and discernant: and again in the
Lib. Cau.
Capitulars Caroli and Lodovici, ne placitum Archaed. verb. Comes cap. 1. 15.
Comes habeat nisi jejunus. Where the word Comes, according to the phrase of
that time is used for Judex, as elsewhere we have it declared to the same
effect in the Capitular ad Legem Salicam: And out of these and such other Et
alia cap. Car. 6. 4.
Constitutions arises the rule of the Canon Law, that Quae a prandio fiunt
Constitutiones inter decreta non referuntur. Yet I find that Causes might be
heard and judged in the afternoon; for in Capitulars lib. 2 -- 33, and again
lib. 4. Cau. 16. it is said, Causae viduarum pupillorum and pauperum audiantur
and definiantur ante Meridiem, Regis vero and Potentiorum post Meridiem. This
though it may seem contradictory to the Constitutions aforesaid, yet I conceive
them to be thus reconcilable: That the Judges (sitting then but seldom)
continued their Courts both Forenoon and Afternoon, from Morning till Evening
without dinner or intermission, as at this day they may, and often do, upon
great Causes: though being risen and dining, they might not meet again; yet
might they not sit at night, or use candle light, Quod de nocte non est
honestum judicium exercere. And from these ancient Rites of the Church and
Empire is our Law derived, which prohibiteth our Jurours, being Judices de
facto, to have meat, drink, fire or candle light, till they be agreed of their
verdict,

It may here be demanded how it comes to pass, that our Judges after dinner do
take Assizes and Nisi prius in the Guild Hall of London, and in their Circuits?
I have yet no other answer but that ancient Institutions are discontinued often
by some custom grating in upon them, and changed often by some later
Constitution, of which kind the instances aforesaid seem to be. For Assizes
were ordained many ages after by Henry the second, as appears by the Charter
of Beverly Glanvill and Radulphus Niger, and Nisi prius by 13 Ed. 1. cap. 30.
Edward the first, in the Statutes of Westminster 2; though I see not but in
taking of them the ancient course might have been continued if haste would
suffer it.

CHAP. II.
Why they sit not at all some days.
THough there be many days in the Terms, which by ancient Constitutions before
recited are exempted from Law-business, as those of the Apostles, etc. and that
the An. 5. and 6. Edv. 6. cap. 3.
Statute of Ed. 6. appointed many of them to be kept Holy Days, as dedicated,
not unto Saints, but unto divine worship, which we also at this day retain as
Holy Days: Yet do not the high Courts forbear sitting in any of them, saving on
the Feast of the Purification, the Ascension, St. John Baptist, All Saints, and
the day after, (though not a Feast) called All Souls. When the others lost
their privilege and came to be Term-days I cannot find; it suffices that
Custom has repealed them by confession of the Canonists. Yet it seems to
me, there is no provision made for it in the Constitutions of our Church under
Isleep Archbishop of Canterbury in the time of Edward the third. For though
many ancient Laws and the Decretals of Gregory the 9th had ordained, judicialem
strepitum diebus conquiescere feriatis; yet in a Synod then holden, wherein are
all the Holy Days appointed and particularly recited, no restraints of
Judicature or Forensis strepitus is imposed, but a cessation only ab universis
servilibus operibus, etiam Reipublicae utilibus. Which though it be in the
phrase God himself uses touching many great Feasts, viz. Lev. 23. 21, 25.
Omne servile opus non facietis in iis, yet it is not in that when he
instituteth the seventh day to be the Sabbath, Ex. 20. 10, 11. Lev. 23. 3.
Non facies omne opus in eo, without servile, Thou shall do no manner of work
therein. Now the act of Judicature, and of hearing and determining
Controversies is not opus servile, but honoratum and plane Regium, and so not
within the prohibition of this our Canon, which being the latter seems to
qualify the former. Yea the Canonists and Casuists themselves not only
expound opus servile of corporeal and mechanical labor, but admit 26 several
cases where (even in that very kind) dispensation lies against the Canons, and
by much more reason then, with this in question. It may be said that this Canon
consequently gives liberty to hold plea and Courts, upon their Festivals in
the Vacations. I confess that so it seems; but this Canon has no power to
alter the bounds and course of the Terms, which before were settled by the
Statutes of the Land, so that in that point it prevails not. Why? but there
arises another question how it comes to pass that the Courts sit in
Easter-Term upon the Rogation days, it being forbidden by the Council of
Medard, and by the intention of diverse other Constitutions? It seems that it
never was so used in England, or at least not for many ages, especially since
Gregory the ninth; insomuch that among the days wherein he prohibiteth Forensem
strepitum, clamorous pleading, etc. he names them not. And though he did, the
Glossographers say, that a Nation may by Custom erect a Feast that is not
commanded by the Canons of the Church. Tabien. Feriae Sect. 10.
Et eodem modo posset ex consuetudine introduci, quod aliqua quae sunt de
praecepto non essent de praecepto, sicut de tribus diebus Rogationum, etc. To
be short, I find no such privilege for them in our Courts, though we admit them
other Church rites and ceremonies.

We must now show (if we can) why the Courts, Why on some Festivals, and not on
others.
sitting upon so many Ferial and Holy Days, do forbear to sit upon some others,
which before I mentioned; the Purification, Ascension, St. John Baptist,
All Saints, etc. For, in the Synod under Isleep before mentioned, no
prerogative is given to them above the rest, that fall in the Terms; as namely,
St. Mark and St. Philip and Jacob, when they do fall in Easter Term, St. Peter
in Trinity-Term, St. Luke (before the late abbreviation by 16. Car. 1.) did
fall, and St. Simon and Jude, does always fall in Michaelmas-Term. It may be
said, that, although the Synod did prohibit only Opera Servilia to be done on
Festival-days, as the offense most in use at that time; yet did it not give
license to do any Act that was formerly prohibited by any Law or Laudable
Custom. And therefore if by color thereof, or any former use (which is like
enough) the Courts did sit on lesser Festivals, yet they never did it on the
greater, among which ( majoris cautelae gratia) those Opera Servilia are there
also prohibited to be done on Easter Day, Pentecost, and the Sunday it self.
The differences of ^^stivals.


Let us then see which are the greater Feasts, and by what merit they obtain
their privilege, that the Courts of Justice sit not on them. As for Sunday, we
shall not need to speak of it, being canonized by God himself. As for Easter
and Whitsunday, we shall not need to speak of them neither, because they fall
not in the Terms: Yet I find a Parliament held, at least began on Whitsunday.
But touching Feasts in general, it is to be understood, that the Canonists, and
such as write Vide Duraudi lib. 7. c. 1. n 31.
De Divinis Officiis, divide them into two sorts, viz. Festa in totum duplicia,
and simpliciter duplicia: And they call them duplicia, or double Feasts, for
that all, or some parts of the service, on those days were begun Voce Duplici,
that is, by two singing-men; whereas on other days all was done by one. Our
Cathedral Churches do yet observe it: And I mean not to stay upon it, for you
may see in the Durand. lib 7. Ca. 1.
Rationale which Feasts were of every of these kinds. The ordinary Apostles
were of the last, and therefore our Courts made bold with them: But the
Purification, Ascension, St. John Baptist, with some others that fall not in
the Term, were of the first, and because of this and some other prerogatives
were also called, Festa Majora, Festa Principalia, and Dies novem Lectionum,
ordinarily, double Feasts, and Grand days. Mention is made of them in an Rast
Excom. 5.
Ordinance 8. Ed. 3. That Writs were ordained to the Bishops, to accurse all
and every of the perturbers of the Church, andC. every Sunday and Double Feast,
etc. But we must needs show why they were called Dies novem Lectionum, for so
our old Rituale de Sarum, styleth them, and therein lies their greatest
privilege. After the Arian Heresy against the B, Trinity was by the Fathers of
that time most powerfully confuted and suppressed, the Church in memory of that
most blessed victory, and the better establishing of the orthodox faith in that
point, did ordain, that upon diverse Festival-days in the year, a particular
Lesson touching the nature of the Trinity, besides the other 8. should be read
in their Service, with rejoicing and thanksgiving to God for suppressing that
Heresy: And for the greater solemnity, some Belethus Explicat. Cap. 158.
Bishop, or the chiefest Clergyman present did perform that duty. Thus came
these days to their styles aforesaid, and to be honored with extraordinary
Music, Church Service, Robes, Apparel, Feasting, etc. with a particular
exemption from Law-Trials amongst the Normans, who therefore kept them the more
respectfully here in England: Festa enim Trinitatis (says Belethus) digniori
cultu sunt celebranda.

In France they have two sorts of Grand days, Grand days in France.
both differing from ours: First, they call them, Les Grand jours, wherein an
extraordinary Sessions is holden in any Circuit, by virtue of the King's
Commission directed to certain Judges of Parliament; Secondly, those in which
the Peers of France hold once or twice a year their Courts of Faught Justice;
all other Courts being in the mean time silent. See touching this their
Loyscean De Seigniors.

To come back to England, Grand days in England.
and our own Grand-days, I see some difference in accounting of them: Durandus
in his first Chapter, and seventh book reckons the Purification, Ascension
and St John Baptist, to be Grand-days, not mentioning All Saints; but both he
in his 34th. Chapter, and Belethus in his -- do call it Festum Maximum and
Generale, being not only the Feast of Apostles and Martyrs, but of the
Trinity, Angels and Confessors, as Durandus terms it. And that honor and
duty Quod in singulis valet, potentius valebit in conjunctis. As for the Feast
of All Souls, neither Durandus, nor Belethus, nor any Ancient of those times
(for they lived above 400. years since) do record it for a Festival. But my
Countryman Walsingham the Monk of St. Albans says, that Simon Archbishop of
Canterbury in the year 1328. at a Provincial Council holden at London, did
ordain, Tho. Walsingham, Hist. Angl. page 129
Quod die Parasceue and in commemoratione Omnium Animarum ab omni servili opere
cessaretur. Surely he mistook it; for neither is it so mentioned in Lindewood,
reciting that Canon, nor in the ancient Copy of the Council it self, where the
two Feasts canonized by him are the Parasceue and the Conception of the Blessed
Virgin. Yet doubtless, whenever it was instituted it was a Great Feast with
us, though no where else. For the old Primer Eboracensis Ecclesiae, does not
only set it down in the Calendar for a double Feast, but appoints for it the
whole Service, with the nine Lessons; for it is as a Feast of the Trinity. And
though neither the Statute of Edward the 6. nor our Church at this day does
receive it; yet being formerly a Vacation-day (as it seems) our Judges still
forbear to sit upon it, and have not hitherto made it a day in Court, though
deprived of Festival rites, and therefore neither graced with Robes, nor
Feasting.

The Feast also of St. Peter and Paul on the 29th. of June was a Double Feast,
The Feast of St. Peter and St. Paul.
yet it is now become single, and our Judges sit upon it. I confess I have not
found the reason, unless that by Canonizing St. Paul and so leaving St. Peter
single, we allow him no prerogative above the other Apostles, lest it should
give color for his Primacy; for to St. Paul, as one born out of time, we allow
no Festival, either in the Statute of Edward 6. or in the Almanacks and
Kalendars of our Church. And why St. Peter has it not is the more observable,
for that he not only is deprived of the ancient dignity of his Apostleship,
contrary to the Canons (as the other are;) but of the privilege given him in
that place by Pope Nicholas the 2d. in a Bull to Edward the Confessor, as
being Patron of the Paroch and Dedication of Westminster, where the Terms are
kept, and where by right thereof this day was also privileged from
Court-business.

Other Festivals I enquire not after, as of St. Dunstan and the rest that stand
rubricate in old Kalendars; they being abrogated by old Canons of our own
Church, or the Statute of Edw. 6. whereof I must note by the way that I find it
repealed by Queen Mary, but not revived by Queen Elizabeth, or since. It
seems that the Statute of the 5. and 6. Edw. 6 Cap. 3. notwithstanding the
Repeal of it amongst a multitude of others by Queen Mary, Anno 1. Sessione 2.
Cap. 2. is revived again, though not by Queen Elizabeth, yet by ^ Jacobi Cap.
25. in these words; That an Act made in the first year of the Reign of Queen
Mary, entitled an Act for the repeal of certain Statutes made in the time of
King Edw. the 6. shall stand repealed.

I am carried from the brevity I intended, St. George' s day.
yet all this lies in my way; nor is it out of it to speak a word of St.
George's- day, which sometimes falls in Easter-Term, and is kept in the Court
Royal with great solemnity, but not in the Court Judicial. Though he stood
before in the Calendar, and was the English Patron of elder time, yet H.
Chichley, Archbishop of Canterbury gave him his greatness by canonizing his day
to be a Double Feast and Grand day, as well among the Clergy as Laity; and that
both the one and the other repairing to their Churches should celebrate it (as
Christmas Day) free from Servile-work, in ardent prayers for safety of the King
and Kingdom. The occasion of this Constitution was, to excite K. Henry the 5th.
being upon his expedition for Normandy; and this, among many Holy Days, was
abolished by the Stat. of 5. and 6. of Edw. 6. Yet it being the Festival of the
Knights of the Garter, it was provided in the parag. 7.
Statute, That the Knights might celebrate it on the 22. 23. and 24th. of
April. Other Feasts there were of this nature; St. Winifred.
as that of St. Winifred on the 2d. of November, which is in effect no day of
sitting, but applied to the pricking of Sheriffs.

These are vanished, and in their room we have one new memorable day of
intermitting Court and Law-business for a little in the morning, whilst the
Judges in their Robes go solemnly to the great Church at Westminster on the
5th. of November yearly, The 5th. of November.
to give God thanks for our great deliverance from the Powder Treason, and hear
a Sermon touching it, which done they return to their benches. This was
instituted by Act of Parliament 3. Jacobi, Cap. 1. and it is of the kind of
those Ferial days, which being ordained by the Emperors, not by the Popes, are
in Canon and Civil Law called Feriati dies repentini. I will go no farther
among the tedious subtilties of distinguishing days; I have not been
matriculated in the Court of Rome: And I confess I neither do nor can explain
many objections and contrarieties that may be gathered in these passages. Some
Oedipus or Ariadne must help me out.

CHAP. III.
Why some Law-business may be done on days exempted.
IN the mean time let us see, why some Law-business may be done on days
exempted, and sometimes on Sunday it self, notwithstanding any thing above
mentioned.

For as in Term time some days are exempted from Term business, and some
portion of the day from sitting in Courts; so in the Vacation time and days
exempted, some Law business may be performed by express permission of the
Canon Law, according to that of the Virgil. Georg. lib. 1. v. 268, etc.
Poet in the Georgicks, Quippe etiam Festis quaedam exercere diebus
Fas and jura sinunt --


The Synod of Medard admits matters de pace and concordia: The Laws of Hen.
1. matters of Concord and doing Fealty to the Lord. The Decree of Gregory the
ninth, in cases of necessity, and doing piety, according to that of Lib. Ep.
Prosper, Non recto servat legalia Sabbata cultu,
Qui pietatis opus credit in his vetitum.


The rule is verified by our Savior's healing on the Sabbath day. Out of these
and such other authorities of the Laws Ecclesiastical and Civil, cited in the
Glosses, the Canonists have collected these Cases, wherein Judges may proceed
legally upon the days prohibited, and do the things here next following.

For matters of Peace and Concord, by reason whereof our Judges take the
acknowledgment of Fines, Statutes, Recognizances, etc. upon any day, even the
Sabbath it self; (though it were better then to be forborne.)

For suppressing of Traitors, Thieves, and notorious Offenders, which may
otherwise trouble the peace of the Commonwealth, and undo the Kingdom.

For manumission of Bondmen: A work of Piety.

For saving that which otherwise would perish: A work of Necessity.

For doing that, which, time overslipt, cannot be done: As for making Appeals
within the time limited, etc.

For taking the benefit of a Witness that otherwise would be lost, as by Death
or Departure.

For making the Son sui Juris: As if, amongst us, a Lord should discharge a
Ward of Wardship. All which are expressed in these Verses; Haec faciunt causas
Festis tractare diebus,
Pax, Scelus admissum, Manumissio, Res peritura,
Terminus expirans, mora Festi abesse volentis,
Cumque potestatis Patriae jus filius exit.
Or thus according to Panormitanus; Ratione Appellationis, Pacis, Necessitatis,
Celeritatis, Pietatis, Matrimonii, Latrocinii, and ubicunque in mor a promptum
est periculum. So likewise by consent of parties upon dies Feriati minus
solennes, viz. Harvest, Hayseed, etc. as we have said before. And diverse others
there are. See the Cau. 15. q. 4. Tit. de Feriis c. 5.
Glosses.

CHAP. IV.
Why the end of Michaelmas-Term is sometimes holden in Advent; and the Octaves
of Hilary in Septuagessima.
BUT the Terms sometimes extend themselves into the days of the Church which we
call Vacation; as when Advent Sunday falls on the 27th of November, then
Michaelmas-Term borrows the day after out of Advent; and when Septuagessima
follows suddenly upon the Purification, Hilary-Term not only usurpeth upon
it and Sexagessima (which by the President of the Church of Rome here before
mentioned it may do) but also upon Quinquagessima, Shrove-Tuesday, and
Quadragessima it self; for all which there is matter enough in one place or As
An. 1. 27. and 1. 26. Hoveden p. 663.
other already shown. Yet it is farther countenanced by the Statute of 3 Ed. 1.
cap. 51. where it is thus provided; Forasmuch as it is great charity to do
right to all men at all times (when need shall be;) by assent of all the
Prelates it was provided, that Assizes of Novel Disseisin, Mortdauncester, and
Darrain Presentment, should be taken in Advent, Septuagessima and Lent, even as
well as inquests may be taken, and that at the special request of the King made
unto the Bishops. Where it is to be noted, that Inquisitions might be taken
before this Statute within the days prohibited, or Church time, and that this
License extended but to particulars therein mentioned.

CHAP. V.
Why Assizes are holden in Lent.
IT seems that by virtue of this Statute, or some other dispensation from the
Bishops Assizes began first to be holden in Lent, contrary to the Canons. I
find in an ancient Manuscript of the Monastery of St. Albans a dispensation of
this kind thus entitled;

Licentia concess. Justic. Reg. de Assistenend. sacro tempore non obstante.
Pateat universis per praesentes nos Richardum (miseratione divina) Abbatem
Monasterii Sancti Albani, licentiam and potestatem authoritate praesentium
dedisse dilecto nobis in Christo Domino Johanni Shardlow and sociis ejus
Justic. Dom. Regis Assisas apud Barnet ( nostrae Jurisdictionis exemptae) die
Lunae proximo ante Festum S. Ambrosii capiendas, juxta formam, vim and effectum
Brevis Domini Regis inde iis directi. In cujus, etc. Anno Domini, etc.

Sub magno Sigillo.
Whether this was before or after the Statute it appears not; it may seem
before, or that otherwise it had been needless. But I find In com. ejus.
Shardlow to be a Justice of Oier in Pickering Forest, 17 Aug. An. 8. Ed. 1. If
it were after, it seems the Writ to the Justices extended to somewhat out of
the Statute, and that this License was obtained in majorem cautelam. But to
conclude, although we find not the reason of things done in ancient ages, yet
we may be sure nothing was done against the rule of the Church without special
License and dispensation. The Feast of St. Ambrose mentioned in the License was
on the fourth of April, which commonly is about a Week or two before Easter.
And the Abbat of St. Alban, having exempt jurisdiction within the Province of
Canterbury, grants the dispensation to hold Assizes in tempore sacro, as the
Rubric explaineth it, lest the words [ nostrae jurisdictionis exemptae] might
be applied to some layick Franchise: I assure my self there are many of this
kind, if they might come to light.

CHAP. VI.
Of the Returns.
OF the Returns I will not venture to speak much, but nothing at all of Essoins
and Exception-days, for that draws nearer to the faculty of Lawyers, wherein
I mean not to be too busy. The Returns are set days in every Term appointed to
the Sheriffs, for certifying the Courts what they have done, in execution of
the Writs they received from them. And I take it, that in old time they were
the ordinary days set to the Defendants for appearance, every one of them being
a se'night after another, to the end that the Defendant according to his
distance from the place where he was to appear, might have one, two, three or
more of these Returns, that is, so many weeks for his appearance, as he was
Counties in distance from the Court where he was to appear. This is verified by
the Law of Leges Ethelredi Cap. 93.
Ethelred the Saxon King in case of vouching upon Trover.

Gif he cenne ofer an scira. haebbe an ucena first; gif he cenne ofer tra scira
habbe tra ucena first; gif he cenne ofer III. scira. haebbe III. ucena first;
Ofer eall sa fela scira. sa he cenne. haebbe sa feala ucena first;

If the Vouchee dwell one Shire off, let him at first have one week; if he
dwell two Shires off, let him have two weeks; if he dwell three Shires off, let
him have three weeks; and for so many Shires as he dwells off, let him have
so many weeks.

The Law of Legum Hen. 1. Cap. 41.
Henry the First is somewhat more particular; Qui residens est ad domum suam
summoniri debet de placito quolibet cum testibus. Et si domi non est idem
dicatur vel dapifero, vel denique familiae suae libere denuncietur; si in eodem
Comitatu sit, inde ad septem dies terminum habeat; si in alia sit 15. dierum
terminum habeat; and si in tertio Comitatu sit, 3. Hebdomadae; si in quarto,
quartae Hebdomadae, and ultra non procedit ubicunque fuerit in Anglia, nisi
competens eum detineat Sonius M: SS. Seld.
soinius; si ultra mare est 6. Hebdomadas habeat and unum diem ad accessum and
recessum maris, nisi vel occupatio servitii Regis, vel ipsius aegritudo, vel M:
SS. Cod. l. intempestas.
tempestas, vel competens aliquod amplius respectet.

The This Statute was published Anno. 52. Hen. 3. Anno. Salut. 1267.
Statute of The same with Marleborough in Wilts, famous for nothing more than
that this Parliament was holden there. So Coke Institut. part 2. fol. 123.
Marlebridge Cap. 12. sounds to this purpose; In Coke ut supra fol. 149. has
it thus, Sed si warrantus ille fuerit infra Comitatum, tunc, etc.
Assisis autem ultimae praesentationis and in placito Quare impedit de
Ecclesiis vacantibus dentur dies de Quindena in Quindenam, vel de tribus
septimanis in tres septimanas, prout locus fuerit propinquus vel remotus. And
again, Cap. 27. Sed si vocatus, etc. (ad warrantum coram Justiciar.
itinerantibus) fuerit infra Comitatum, tunc injungatur Vicecomiti, quod ipsum
infra tertium diem vel quartum (secundum locorum distantiam) faciat venire
sicut in itinere Justiciar, fieri consuevit. Et si extra Comitatum maneat, tunc
rationabilem habeat Summonitionem 15. dierum ad minus secundum discretionem
Justiciar. and Legem Communem.

There was also another use of Returns, as appears by the Reformed Customary
of Normandy, Artic. 10th. Some of them belonged to Pleas of Goods and Chattels,
which we call personal Actions, as those of Octab. Some to Pleas of Land, and
real Actions, as those of Quindena to Quindena. Null n'est tenu de respondere de
son heretage en mavidre tems que de quinizanie in quinizanie. The more solemn
Actions had the more solemn Returns, as we see by the Anno. 51. Hen. 3. al^ered
by the Statute of 32. Hen. 8. Cap. 21.
Stat. dies communes in Banco, which I leave to my Masters of the Law.

I will not speak of the Returns particularly, more than that Octab* is
sometimes reckoned by 7. days, sometimes by 8; By 7. excluding the Feast from
which it is counted; By 8. including it. And the word is borrowed from the
Constitutions of the Church, where the seven days following Easter were
appointed to be Ferial-days (as we have showed before) in imitation of the
seven days Azymorum, following the Passover in the Levitical Law. But in this
^^nner Octab. Trinitatis always includes nine days, reckoning Trinity-Sunday
for one, by reason the just Octabis falls on the Sunday following, which
being no day in Court, puts off the Return till the next day after, making
Monday always taken for the true Octab. unless you will count these two days
for no more than one, as the Anno 21. Hen. 3.
Stat. de Anno Bissextili in the like case has ordained.

CHAP. VII.
Of the Quarta Dies post.
TOuching the Quartam diem post allowed to the Defendant for his appearance
after the day of Return, it is derived from the Ancient Saxon, Salique, French
and German Laws, where it was ordained, that the Plaintiff should per triduum
seu amplius adversarium expectare, usque ad occasum solis (which they called
Sol Satire,) as appears abundantly in their Laws, and in the Formular of
Marcellus, as Bignonius notes upon the same. To which also may be added that
which occurreth in Gratian Cap. Biduum vel triduum. But the original proceeds
from the ancient custom of the Germans mentioned by Tacitus; Lib. de morib.
Ger. manorum Cap. 11.
Illud ex liberate vitium quod non simul nec jussi convenient, sed and alter
and tertius dies cunctatione coeuntium absumitur. He says, ex liberate,
because that to come at a peremptory time was a note of Servitude, which the
Germans despised.

CHAP. VIII.
Why I have used so much Canon and Foreign Law in the discourse, with an
incursion into the Original of our Laws.
I Have used much Canon and some other Foreign Laws in this discourse, yet, I
take it, not impertinently, for as the Western Nations are, for the most part,
deduced from the Germans, so in ancient times there was a great agreement and
affinity in their Laws. -- Facies non omnibus una,
Nec diversa tamen, qualem decet esse sororum.


They that look into the Laws of our English Saxons, of the Saliques, French,
Almayns, Ripurians, Bavarians, Longobards, and other German Nations, about 800.
years since, shall easily find, that out of them, and many other Manners, Rites
and Customs of the Saxons and Germans is the first part and foundation of our
Laws, commonly called the Laws of Edward the Confessor, and Common Law. Two
other parts principally (as from two Pole Stars) take their direction from the
Canon Law and the Laws of our brethren the Longobards (descending from Saxon
lineage as well as we) called otherwise the Feodal-law, received generally
through all Europe. For in matters concerning the Church and Churchmen,
Legitimation, Matrimony, Wills, Testaments, Adultery, Diffamation, Oaths,
Perjury, Days of Law, Days of Vacation, Wager of Laws, and many other things,
it proceeded, sometimes wholly, sometimes for the greater part, by the rules
and precepts of the Canon Law. And in matters touching Inheritance, Fees,
Tenures by Knights service, Rents, Escheats, Dower of the third part, Fines,
Felony, Forfeiture, Trial by Battle, etc. from the Feodal-Law chiefly; as
those that read the books of those Laws collected by Obertus and Gerardus may
see apparently. Though we and diverse other Nations (according as befitteth
every one in their particular) do in many things vary from them; which Obertus
confesses to be requisite, and to happen often among the Longobards
themselves. I wish some worthy Lawyer would read them diligently, and show the
several heads from whence these of ours were taken. They beyond the Seas are
diligent in this kind, but we are all for profit and Lucrando Pane.

Another great portion of our Common Law is derived from the Civil (unless we
will say that the Civil-Law is dervived from ours;) for Dr. Cowell, who has
learnedly traveled in comparing and parallelling of them, affirms, that no
Law of any Christian Nation whatsoever, approaches nearer to the Civil-Law
than this of ours. Yet he says that all of them generali hujus disciplinae
aequitate temperantur, and quasi condiuntur. Had he not said it, his book it
self, entitled, Institutiones Juris Anglicani ad methodum and seriem
Institutionum Imperialium compositae and digestae, would demonstrate it: Which
Bracton also above 300. years before right well understanding, not only cites
the Digests and Books of the Civil-Law in many places for want of our
Common Law, but in handling our Law persueth the Method, Phrase and Matter of
Justinian's Institutes of the Civil-Law.

When and how these several parts were brought into our Common Law is neither
easily nor definitively to be expressed. Those no-doubt of the Canon Law by the
prevalency of the Clergy in their several Ages, those of the Feodal by military
Princes, at, and shortly after the Conquest. And those of Civil-Law by such of
our Reverend Judges and Sages of ancient time, as for Justice and knowledge
sake sought instruction thence, when they found no rule at home to guide their
Judgments by. For I suppose they in those days judged many things, ex aequo and
bono, and that their Judgments after as Responsa Prudentium among the Romans,
and the Codex Theodosianus became Presidents of Law unto posterity.

As for the parts given unto Common Law out of the Constitutions of our Kings
since the Conquest, and before Magna Charta; I refer them (as they properly
belong) to our Statute Law, though our Lawyers do reckon them ordinarily for
Common Law.

But among these various heads of our Law, I deduce none from the Scots, yet I
confess that if those Laws of theirs, which they ascribe to Malcolm, the
Second, who lived about 60 years before the Conquest, be of that antiquity,
(which I cannot but question) and that our Book called Glanvill be wholly in
effect taken out of the Book of their Law verbatim, for the greatest part,
called Regiam Majestatem, (for they pretend that to be elder than our Glanvill;
I must (I say) ingenuously confess, that the greatest part or portion of our
Law is come from Scotland, which none I think versed either in story or
antiquities will or can admit.

To come therefore to the point; If my opinion be any thing, I think the
foundation of our Laws to be laid by our German Anestours, but built upon and
polished by materials taken from the Canon Law and Civil Law. And under the
capacious name of Germans, I not only intend our Saxons, but the ancient
French and Saliques; not excluding from that fraternity the Norwegians, Danes
and Normans. And let it not more mislike us to take our Laws from the noble
Germans, a principal People of Europe, than it did the conquering Romans to
take theirs from Greece, or the learned Grecians theirs from the Hebrews. It is
not credible that the Britains should be the authors of them; or that their
Laws after so many transmutations of people and government, but especially
after the expulsion (in a manner) of their Nation, or at least of their
Nobility, Gentry and Freemen, the abolishing of their Language, and the
cessation of all commerce with them, should remain or be taken up by the
conquering enemy, who scarcely suffered one Town in a County to be called as
they named it, or one English word almost, (that I yet have learned) to creep
into their Language. Admit that much of their servile and base people remained
pleased perhaps as well with their new Lords as with their old; can we think
that the Saxons should take either Laws or Manners, or form of Government from
them?

But more expressly Seneca speaking of Claudius the Emperor's having made an
absolute conquest of this Island.

Senecs Philosoph. De morte Cl. Caesaris.
Jussit and ipsum
Nova Romanae
Jura securis
Tremere oceanum.
In the Ocean Isle new Laws he set,
Which from the Roman Axe were fet.
And more plainly Herodian, speaking of Severus the Emperor's going ont of
this Island, (...) etc. Herodiani Hist. Lib. 3. Cap. 48.
he left (says he) behind him in that part of the Island subject to the Romans
his youngest Son Geta, to administer Law and the Civil affairs thereof, and
some of his ancient friends to be his Councillors, taking his eldest Son
Antonius for his wars against the Barbarians.

When the Romans conquered this Land, they neither removed the Inhabitants nor
brought any Foreigners upon them, other than (to govern and keep them in
obedience) some Legions of Soldiers, and small Colonies. Yet that they made an
alteration of their Laws, we may see in the Scripture by the example of Judaea.
For though Pompey obtained the Kingdom there, rather by the confederacy with
Hyrcanus, than by right of Conquest, (and therefore suffered them to enjoy
their rites of Religion, with the Liberties of most of their Cities;) yet it
being reduced into a Province (as this of ours was) their Laws were so changed,
as that, by their own confession, John 18. 31. it was not lawful for them to
put any man to death. Therefore our Savior and the two Thieves were judged,
and suffered upon the Cross after the Roman manner, not according to the Laws
of the Jews, (for their Law never inflicted the Cross upon any offender) and
the punishment of Blasphemy wherewith they charged Christ was stoning; and the
punishment of Theft a Quadruple Restitution, or bondage in default thereof. As
for the stoning of Stephen, it was not judicial but tumultuous, an act of fury,
and against Law: In which course also they thought to have murdered St. Paul,
had not Lysias prevented them, by sending him to his legal trial before
Caesar's judgment Seat.

By this we may conceive how the Romans dealt with the Britains touching their
Laws; and the story of Saint Alban and Amphybalus somewhat shows it: But what
Laws soever the Romans made in Britain, the Saxons doubtless swept them all
away, with the Britains. There is certain proof of it; for Antonius made a
Constitution, that all Nations under the Roman Empire should be called Romans,
and this was done when the Northern People brake into the lower parts of
Europe, and made their habitation there.

But more plainly Seneca speaking of Claudius the Emperor's having conquered
this Island, as above; Jussit and ipsum
Nova Romanae
Jura securis
Tremere oceanum.
In the Ocean Isle new Laws he set,
Which from the Roman Axe were fet.


The old Inhabitants, whom they expelled not but lived mingled with, were still
called Romans; as we see in the ancient Laws of the Saliques, and Burgundians,
in Cassiodorus and others, and their Laws distinguished by the Titles of Lex
Barbara, and Lex Romana. But here in Britain after the Saxons had conquered, we
never hear nor find any mention of Lex Romana, or of any Roman: Which shows,
that both that, and the Laws of the Britains were expelled and driven away
together, or that of the Romans with the Romans, and that of the Britains with
the Britains.

What the Laws of the Britains were, it remains at this day to be seen by a
model of them in an ancient Manuscript under the Title of These Laws were made
by Hoel Dha King of Wales, about the year 940. and since the writing of this
Tract have been published to the world by our Author himself, in the first
Tome of his Concilia Britannica, page 408.
The Laws of Hoel Dha, (that is Hoel the good;) nothing consonant to these of
ours at this day, or those of the Saxons in time past. But we find by the Red
Book in the Exchequer, that the Laws of Hen. 1. do so concur in many things
with them of the other Nations we speak of, that sometimes he not only cites
the Salique Law, and the Rubuarian or Belgique by name, but deduceth much of
the Text verbatim from them. And we find also a great multitude of words of
Art, names of Offices, Officers and Ministers in our Law, common in old time to
the Germans, French, Saliques, Longobards, and other Nations, as well as to our
Saxons, Danes and Normans; but not one to my knowledge that rises from the
British tongue, nor do we, to my knowledge, retain any Law, Rite or Custom of
the ancient Britains, which we received not from the Saxons or Germans, as used
also by them of old, before they came into Britain.

For these few words that are found in our Law Chirographer, Protonotary, etc.
whereby some argue the antiquity of our Law to be from the Druides, whom Caesar
and Pliny report to have used the Greek tongue, it is doubtless, that they come
to us from the Civil Lawyers, and the one of them being a Mongrel, half Greek
and half Latin, could not descend from the Druides, who had neither knowledge
nor use of the Latin tongue.

They therefore that fetch our Laws from Brutus, Multnutius, the Druides, or
any other Brutish or British inhabitants here of old, affirming that in all the
times of these several Nations, ( viz. Britains, Romans, Saxons, Danes and
Normans) and of their Kings, this Realm was still ruled with the self same
customs that it is now governed withal; do like them that make the Arcadians
to be elder than the Moon, and the God Terminus to be so fixed on the
Capitoline-Hill, as neither Mattocks nor Spades, nor all the power of men or of
other Gods, could remove him from the place he stood in.

And thus I end.
FINIS.

