

^

A PROSPECT OF THE MOST FAMOUS Parts of the World.

VIZ. ASIA, 3 AFRICA, 5 EVROPE, 7 AMERICA. 9


WITH These Kingdoms therein contained.

Grecia, 11 Roman Empire, 13 Germany, 15 Bohemia, 17 France, 19 Belgia, 21
Spain, 23 Italy, 25 Hungary, 27 Denmark, 29 Poland, 31 Persia, 33 Turkish
Empire, 35 Kingdom of China, 37 Tartaria, 39 Summer Islands, 41 Civil Wars,
in England, Wales, and Ireland.
You shall find placed in the beginning of the second Book marked with these
*** and (5)

TOGETHER With all the Provinces, Counties, and Shires, contained in that
large THEATOR of Great BRITAINS Empire. Performed BY JOHN SPEED.

LONDON, Printed by John Legatt, for William Humble. and are to be sold at his
Shop in Pope's Head Palace. 1646.

The general Description of the World.
HEaven was too long a reach for man to recover at one step. And therefore
God first placed him upon the earth, that he might for a time contemplate upon
his inferior works, magnify in them his Creator: and receive here a hope of
a fuller bliss, which by degrees he should at last enjoy in his place of rest.
For this end was the lower world created in the beginning out of a rude mass,
which before had no form. And that it might be made habitable, the Lord
separated the dry land from the waters upon the third day. Yet so as still they
make but one Globe, whose Center is the same with the middle world; and is the
point and rest as it were of all heavy bodies, which naturally apply
themselves to it: and there are supported by their own weight and equal poyze.

(2) It has seemed incredible (to such as measure the wonders of God by man's
wisdom) that this massy part of the world should subsist by it self, not
borne up by any outward prop, incompast only with subtle and fleeting air,
such as can neither help to sustain nor resist the fall, could the earth be
moved from her due place. But the wonder will cease if we remember, that the
Lord sits upon the circle of the earth, Isa. 40. He set it upon her
foundations so that it shall never move. He covered it with the deep as with a
Garment. The waters would stand above the mountains, but at his rebuke they
fled. Yet he set them a bound which they should not pass, Psalm. 104.

(3) Thus ordered by divine providence the Earth and Sea compose themselves
into a Sphericall figure, as is here described. And is caused by the proper
inclination of each part, which being heavy, falls from every point of the
circumference, and claps about the center: there settles as near as it may
toward his place of rest. We may illustrate both the figure and situation by a
familiar similitude, to an ingenious apprehension. Suppose we a knot to be knit
in the midst of a cord that has many ends: and those to be delivered to sundry
men of equal strength, to be drawn several ways round from every part,
above and below, and on each side; questionless whilst every man draws in
the boes of the knots, it must needs become round: and whilst they continue to
pluck with equal strength, it must rest immovable in the middle betwixt them:
since every strength, that would destroy, has a strength equal to resist it.
So it is in the bosom of the earth, where every part meets upon equal
privileges of nature: nor can any pass farther then the center, to destroy
this compacted figure: for it must meet there with a body that will oppose it.
Or if not, yet could it not pass since every motion from the middle were to
ascend, which Nature will not permit in a body of weight as the earth is.

(4) Now though in a Sphere every cross line which way soever drawn, if it
run through the middle, must needs be of equal quantity, and therefore
admits no difference of length or b^edth: yet the Geographers for their purpose
have conceived (and but conceived) a Longitude and Latitude upon the earth. The
Longitude they reckon from the first Meridian in the Azores, and so Eastward
round number the degrees upon the Equator: The Latitude from the Equator to
each Pole, and number the degrees upon the outward Meridionall circle. This
inkling may suffice to instruct the ignorant in the search of any place that
shall be hereafter mentioned in my Discourse.

(5) The compass of the whole is cast by our latest and most learned, to be
216000. English miles; which though none ever yet so paced, as to measure them
by the foot: yet let not the ignorant reject this account, since the rule by
which they are led cannot fail. For we see by continual experience, that the
Sun for every degree in the Heavens gains sixty miles upon earth toward
his circuit round: and after 360. degrees returns to the same point in
respect of us, as before it was. Repeat the number of sixty so often, and you
will find the account just. And so by proportion of the Circumference to the
Diameter (which is triplu sesqui septima the same which 22. has to 7.) we may
judge like wise of the earths thickness to the Center. The whole Diameter must
(by rule) be somewhat lesser then a third part of the circle: that in
proportion to 216000. will be 6872. half the number will reach the middle of
the world, and that is 3436. In this report both of the quantity and form of
the earth, we must not require such exactness as cannot vary a hairs breadth:
for we see that the mountains of the earth, and often times the waves of the
Sea make the superficies unequal. It will be sufficient, if there be no
difference sensible to be reckoned in so great a balke. For let us rudely hew a
ball out of a rough stone; still it is a ball though not so smooth as one of
Crystal. Or suffer a mote to fall upon a Sphaere of glass it changes not its
figure: far less are the mountains which we see in respect of the whole
lump. For other rules or terms Geographicall I refer thee to a peculiar
tract, that will afford me more room and time.

(6) When the earth and sea were thus prepared with a due figure, a just
quantity and convenient seat both in respect of the heavens and themselves:
Nature began (at command of the most High) to use her art, and to make it a fit
dwelling place for the image of God, for so was man created: and so indeed was
the earth no other then the picture of heaven. The ground brought forth her
plants and fruits: the skies were filled with the foul of the air: the waters
yielded their fish, and the field their cattle. No sooner his house was thus
furnished, but man enters upon his possessions the sixth day. And that shall be
our tract to find out the worlds first Inhabitants; where it was peopled in the
beginning: and how it was overspread with Countries and Nations, as now it is.

(7) In the first age, there was little need of skill to measure the whole
earth. A garden plot might suffice, and so (for a time) it did. It was planted
in Eden. But where that was I may not peremptorily determine, nor indeed dare I
be so curious in the search. The hidden things belong to the Lord, the revealed
to us, Deuteronomy. 29. God himself in the beginning set a Cherubin, and the blade of
a sword shaken to keep the re-entry from our first Parents: and we may
affirm, has concealed it ever since. Yet to satisfy (in some measure) such
as are more inquisitive, I will touch at the several conjectures, which have
passed upon the place of this earthy Paradise, Rog. Higden Monk of Chester, and
with him Ioh. Trevisa set it in the field of Damascus: and many other probably
(enough) have thought it was in the land of Canaan. For that in diverse places,
it is noted with attributes proper to the garden of Eden. She was seated in the
midst of Nations. Ezekiel. 5. It was a Land of Wheat, Barley, and Vines, Figtrees,
and Pomegranates, a Land of Olives and Honey, a land whose stones were iron, and
out of whose hills might be dug brass, Deuteronomy. 8. She was pleasant above all
Lands, Ezekiel. 20. Yet Franciscus Iunius, D. Willet, Sr. Walt. Raleigh and
others, make it a part of Mesopotamia, North-west from Babylon, about the
degree of 78. in Longitude, and of Latitude 35. where still the Rivers meet
mentioned in Genesis. And where Ptolemy has the Audanites, a corrupt name (as
is supposed) from Eden. Certainly it was about the middle of the earth, and
abounded by a peculiar blessing of God, with all kinds serviceable for the use
of man.

(8) But Adam soon lost his possession by his disobedience, and was cast out
on the East side of the Garden where he placed himself. Moses makes no more
particular Relation. Cain is specified to have gone out of the presence of the
Lord into the Land of Nod, and there built him a City, and named it after his
sons name Henoch: this was the first City and was seated (some think) about
Mount Libanus. As the place, so the time when it was founded is uncertain: but
the common conjecture gives it to be about two or three hundred years after the
Creation, when the world was replenished; as well it might be within that
compass, if we compare it to our known Stories. Abraham in 215. years had
600. thousand of his own stock, in the blessed line, besides women and
children. And in this number we omit his other seed, of whom came twelve
Princes. Questionless after this proportion the people multiplied in the
beginning, and so for 1656. years forward, and that must needs fill a large
portion of the earth, most likely those parts of Asia that lie nearest to their
first seat. For they wandered no farther then necessity of room compelled them.

(9) But now as man, so the sin of man was grown to a height. For this the
wrath of God fell upon them in a Flood, that destroyed the whole earth saving
eight persons, Noah and his family, who were commanded into an Arc built by
Gods own direction, and is held to have been the pattern for all Ships to all
posterity.

(10) When the anger of the Lord was ceased, and the waters abated, after 150.
days float the Arc rested upon the Mountains of Ararat in Armenia. They are
supposed by most to be the same which Ptolemy calls Montes Cordios, about the
degree 75. Longitude, and in Latitude 39 Master Cartwright a Tayailor of our
own Nation reports himself an eyewitness of many ancient and ruinous
foundations there, which the Inhabitants have believed through all ages to be
the work of those first people, that for a long time durst not adventure into
the lower Countries for fear of another Flood.

(11) But God blessed the remnant which he had preserved; and when he had given
them the Rainbow for a sign of his mercy, that he would no more break up the
fountains of the great deep, nor open the windows of heaven upon them to
root out all flesh, by degrees they descended from the hills Eastward, and
seated themselves upon a plain in the Land of Shi^^r. This was the lower part
of Mesopotamia which compassed Chaldea and Babylonia, lying under the Mount
Singara, a hill near the degrees of 77. in Longitude, and of Latitude 36. and
stands in map of the World A NEW AND ACCV^^^^ MAP OF THE WORLD Drawn according
to ye truest Descriptions latest Discoueries and best Observations yt have
been made by English or Strangers. 1626.
the direct way from Ararat or the Montes Cordios toward Babylon.

(12) There when their number increased, and they forced still to seek new
Colonies, they were ambitious to leave a name behind them for posterity: and
therefore adventured upon a building whose top should reach heaven: and so
indeed it did; for it fetched from thence Gods second vengeance. He confounded
their speech, that they no longer understood one the other. Thus they were
broke off from their impious attempt, and scattered upon all the earth (about
an hundred years after the Flood) into seventy two several Nations, as some
have punctually numbered them.

(13) Whether Noah himself were present, or to what place he removed, it is
uncertain. He had yet two hundred and fifty years to live, and thought to
have had his habitation in Phaenicia Northward from Palestine about the degree
of 66. and 33.

(14) His sons, Sem, Ham, and Iapheth possessed their several Provinces of the
world. From Iapheth came the Isles of the Gentiles, of which we are a part, to
him Europe is by most allotted. Sem not guilty questionless of that proud
enterprise, rested himself in the land of Canaan, which he knew as it was
revealed to Abraham, should be given to his posterity. Yet part of his issue,
(the sons of Iocktan) were divided and lived remote toward the East. To him
was Asia. But Cham by his fathers curse, for discovering his nakedness, roaved
to the utmost parts of the earth, and peopled with his progeny especially those
Countries which are most touched in Histories for Barbarism and Idolatry. As
indeed how could it otherwise be? since himself had lost his father that
should instruct him: and therefore could deliver no precepts to his children,
but left every one to his own inventions. And those that at the confusion
spread where ever they came this diversity of Customs and Religions, that
possess the world at this day. To him was Africa.

(15) America too doubtless had her portion in the division, though not so
soon or so immediate, but seemed rather of later times to have received her
people from the bordering parts of Asia: and those are thought by most to have
been first inhabited by Iocktan and his thirteen sons the issue of Sem. It
is said in the text they possessed the East part from Mesha to Sephar, Josephus
takes the first for a Country, and the second for a Mountain in India: in so
much as that he strictly bounds out their possession from the River Cephew to
Ieria, which is now called the East or Portugal Indies. Indeed many of those
Eastern Regions are noted to bear the name as yet of Iocktans sons. The
Shabeans sound as if they had Sheba to their father. And from Havilah is a
Country in Ieria. From Saphira, Josephus derives Ophir, both of especial fame
for their plenty of Gold. But it is Doctor Willets opinion that Ophir was
rather the same Region in the West Indies which is now called Peru. To say
truth, we have little certain of the first Inhabitants which were seated in
America, or the parts of Asia near about her: whether they were so long since
known I must doubt. For the bestowing of Iocktan and his sons, it was toward
the East from Mesha to Sephar: but where those are Saint Jerome confesses
himself at a stand. And for my part I will travel no farther in these hidden
mysteries, then I find a path beaten before me.

(16) This may satisfy the ingenuous, that I have (as far as I might in this
little room) tract the first Nations from their first Founders which they had
in the beginning. But to draw the direct line of every people mixed as now they
are, I think a work impossible. To me I am sure it is. For besides our
several translation, and promiscuous commerce, that puzzle us in the knowledge
of our selves: we have of late found, and as yet are in search of a new people,
that know not their own original; nor have we any means to examine it, but
conjecturall, such as may fail. To Moses time the Scripture affords us a
certain truth for as many as he mentions. And since we have some light from
such as have labored in the search of Antiquities. The families (as Josephus
gives time) are truly and curiously brancht forth and placed among the
Genealogies before our Bible of the last translation.

(17) Thus far it was requisite we should know at large the growth of the
world from the beginning; and how the whole earth which at first knew but one
Landlord, has been since rent into several parcels, which Kings and Nations
call their own, and maintain their claim by force of Arms. This little
compass will not admit a more particular Relation of their affairs. For that
I must refer my Reader to their Historians, and now descend to the
Geographicall description and division of the world, as in after ages it was
found by our first Artists, and has been since more at large discovered by
the experience of our later travell^urs.

(18) And in this we may full observe our (...). For questionless by the same
degrees almost as it was inhabited, so it grew into the knowledge of our
ancient Geographers. And therefore our first Authors in this Science bounded
their descriptions within a less compass, and divided the world into those
three parts only, which you see lie closest about the point of the earth,
where the first men, first Religion, first City, first Empire, and first Arts
were. For in Ptolemyes time (about an hundred and forty years after Christ) we
hear not of either Land or Sea known more then was contained in Asia, Africa,
and Europe.

(19) And of that he never knew the East and North parts of Asia; nor the South
of Africa, no nor the most Northerly parts of Europe: but placed the end of the
world that way in ultima Thule, about sixty three degrees from the Equator.
And Southward the other way not above 17. degrees, in Prosso perm^torio, which
at this day is called Mosambique Kicks. So the whole Latitude of the world,
then known, did not reach the fourth part of the Compass. In the Longitude
indeed they came not so far short; yet left they just half to the search of
their posterity. For they placed their first Meridian in the Fortunate
Islands, and ended their reckoning in Region Sinarum of the Eastern Indies,
and that is distant but 180. degrees toward the 260. which is the compass of
the whole.

(20) But God in these latter times has enlarged our possessions, that his
Gospel might be propagated, and has discovered to us Inhabitants almost in
every corner of the earth. Our latter Geographers have set their mark beyond
Ptolemies 60. degrees Eastward. And Westward to the utmost parts of America.
So that there are already known 340. of the earths Longitude. Toward the North
Pole we have gained more in proportion, as far as Nova z^mbla, and the sea is
known to be navigable to the eight first degrees. Whether the rest be Land or
not, it never yet appeared to any (as I hear of) but an Oxford Friar by a
magique voyage. He reports of a black rock just under the Pole, and an Isle of
Pygmies: other strange miracles, to which (for my part) I shall give little
credit till I have better proof for it then the Devils word.

Now of all the Southern course is most unknown; and yet Art has not been
idle, nor altogether lost it self in the search: it has discovered Countries
about the 52. degree toward the Pole, but so uncertainly, that it may well yet
keep her name of Terra incong^ita.

(21) Admirable was the wit of that man that first found out the virtue of the
Loadstone, and taught thus to apply it in the Art of Navigation. And indeed the
industry of them is much to be honored, that have since ventured both their
means and persons upon dangerous attempts, in the discoveries of people and
Nations that knew not God, nor had apparent means for their redemption without
his help. Among these (though the Genoa, Spaniard, and Portugal, carry the
first name) we have noble sp^rits of our own Nation, not to be ranked in the
last place. Stupenda fuit revera industria Anglorum, says Keckerman. And
indeed we may justly enough requite him with his own Elogie. The Dutch too
have done their parts to join a new world to the old.

(22) To us it may be well called a new World: for it comprehends in it two
Continents, either of them larger then two parts of the other are.

The one is that Western Hemisphere that bears the name America from Americus
Vesputius: but was indeed discovered (seven years before he knew it) by
Christopherus Columbus in the year 1492. And the other is the Terra
Magellanica, seated above the South Pole, and first found by Ferdinand
Magellanus some twenty years after or thereabout: and is thought to be greater
then the whole earth besides. Hitherto it is but conjecturall, and some few
Provinces have been rather described then known. You shall find them named in
their several Regions upon the Seacoasts. Nova Guinea, Terra del Feugo,
Psittacorum regio, Lucach, Beach, and Maletur.

(23) With these additions the world by some is divided into six parts,
Europe, Asia, Africa, America, Septentrionalis, Incognita, and Terra Australis
Magellanica: which are thus disposed in the Globe of the earth. Asia in the
Eastern Hemisphaere.

And being the first part which was inhabited, shall be the point unto which I
will direct the rest: part on the West and part on the South is Africa
situated: on the North and West Europe: more toward the West America utraque:
full North Septentrionalis incognita: and full South the Terra Magellanica.

(24) Those we will reduce (in our method) to the four common parts which
generally pass in our descriptions of the world: Europe, Asia, Africa, America
utraque: in this last include the Terra Septentrionalis, and Magellanica (as
others have before done) and allow it not a several part by it self, in
regard that little can be reported of those Countries, but what may be
dispatched in a few words. The Inhabitants are not many in either, and those
barbarous, in the Terra Magellanica they go naked. In the land Del Feugo there
is much smoke. In Psitta^^rum Region there are great ^^^rats. In Beach gold.
In Mal^^^ spices.

(25) Of the rest severally I shall not need here to enlarge my Discourse,
since the particular Map of every Region may justly challenge it as their
proper right: and will be I hope very shortly extant for my Reader to peruse.

The Description of ASIA.
THE method propounded in our general description of the World, gives Asia the
prerogative, as well for worth as time. Europ^ shall not want her due, in her
due place. It will suffice her, if she be at this day most famous, for the acts
of men, and so it is allowed by most. But in Asia did God himself speak his
miraculous work of the Creation. There was the Church first collected: there
was the Savior of the world born, Crucified and raised again: indeed the
greatest part of Divine History was there written and acted. And if we should
as well compare her to the rest, in that earthly glory of Kingdoms, Empires,
and Nations, which sounds fairest to man's sense, she would still keep her
rank. For was not the first Monarchs and Monarchies of the world in Assyria,
Persia, Babylonia, Media? Did not the first people of the world receive their
being in Mesopotamia? And had not the several tongues of the world their
original in Babylonia? These are parts of Asia, and were in the first ages
blessed with Gods own holy presence: Exodus 3. and the footing of Angels: Exodus
14. however now it is left (for her Infidelity) to the punishment of a
Prophetical curse that long before past upon her: and is delivered up into the
hands of Turks and Nations that blaspheme their Creator; and therefore does not
flourish in that height as heretofore. Consider that Gods hand is now upon her,
and the rest will follow without much wonder.

(2) In respect of both Europe and Africa, it is situated Eastward. But if we
compare it to the Equator it lies almost wholly in the Northern Hemisphaere:
I need except none of the maine Continent, only a few Islands, which are as it
were retainers to Asia, and lie partly Southward beyond the line. It is divided
on the West from Europe by the River Tanais, Pontus Euxinus, and part of the
Mediterraneum Sea. From Africa by that Pathmos which divides the Red Sea from
the Mediterraneum, and is about 72. miles long. On the other three sides, it is
begirt with the vast Ocean, which in the East is called Pontus River, on the
North, Marc Scythicum the Tartarian Sea, and in the South the Indian Sea.
Through the middle runs the Mount Taurus at full length, with the whole
Continent of Asia, and divides it toward the North and South into Asiam
Exteriorem and Interiorem, with so many windings that the length is reckoned by
Gnadus to be 580^0 stadia, by Maginus 45000. stadia, and that is 5625. Italian
miles, those of our own Nation account it 6250. English miles. The bredt^ (as
Strabo reports it) is in most places 3000. stadia, as our own Geographers 375.
miles. From the North-shore comes the Mountain Imaus, directly South almost,
and divides it toward the East and West into Scythia intra Imaum, and Scythia
extra Imaum. By these bounds the length is set to be 5200. and the breadth 4560.
miles.

(3) Now add together, that this Region was at first the Paradise of the
world, and indeed still enjoys a fertile soil and temperate air, and that
it exceeds in compass the two other parts of the old world, to which she was
the Mistress for Arts and Sciences; yet it is not at this day so well peopled
in proportion, as this little Europe, which came after many hundred years. For
this we need search no farther cause then Gods just anger: yet has he not
exercised upon her, only by miraculous and immediate punishment from heaven:
but has suffered (as it were) her own creatures, over which at first man had
the rule, to turn head upon their Lords, and possess their habitation. For it
is so ever-run with wild beasts and cruel Serpents, that in many places they
live not without much danger.

(4) In this though the Nation suffer for their monstrous irreligion: yet the
earth which did not offend reserves her place, and abounds with many excellent
Commodities, not elsewhere to be had, Myrrh, Frankincense, Cinnamon, Cloves,
Nutmegs, Mace, Pepper, Musk, Jewels of great esteem, and Minerals of all
sorts: it breeds Elephants, Camels, and many other beasts, Serpents, Fowls
wild and tame, and some have added such monstrous shapes of men, as pass all
belief.

(5) And thus from the general view of Asia, we will glance upon her several
Regions, Kingdoms, and Provinces, as it has been heretofore divided. In this
we find difference of Authors, that follow their several placita, all
perhaps true enough in their own sense: though not alike if they be compared.
These we will not so much as name, but insist upon one that may best fit my
short Description. Her parts are Asia the less, and Asia the greater, and the
Islands near about.

(6) Aes^a the less i^ th^^ th(...) Europ^^ and began Eastward from thence,
it was called by the Geographers there residing by a special name Anatolia
(corruptly Natolia) (...). On the West therefore and toward the North is
Greece: full West is the Archipelagius: on the East is the River Euphrates: on
the North the Pontus Euxinus, and on the South the Mediterraneum. It is
included betwixt the Meridians of the 51. degree of Longitude and the 72. so
Maginus: and in Latitude it is seated almost betwixt the same parallels with
Italy.

(7) A Country it was once of singular fertility, exceeding rich in fruits
and pasture auratisquo omnibus: and indeed all things else that either man's
necessity, commodity, or pleasure could require. It was mother to many of our
learned Ancients. The Dorica, Ionica, and Aeolica Dialects of the Greek Tongue
had here their originals. It was the seat of the Troiane Kingdom, and many
other Nations famous in Histories, as well Christians as Ethnicks, though now
there remains no face of so excellent a Region. Cyrus first began the spoil:
then the Macedonians and Alexanders Captains: after them the Romans: and last
of all the Turks miserably rent in pieces, and have left the ruins to show of
four thousand Towns and Cities. The residue have lost both their names and
memory of their Predecessors. And the people are fallen from the knowledge,
industry, and religion of their Forefathers. For before Christ, when they
were at worst that Histories report of them, they were for the morst part
learned, and laborious in ordering of their soil to the best advantage.
Afterward they became good Christians: for with them were the seven Churches
which Saint John mentions in the Apocalypse. Now scarce is it inhabited but
toward the Seaside: and that by a base and abject people, such as are both
lazy in their life, and odious Idolaters in their Religions. For the most part
Mahumetans.

(8) Let my first division of this Asia the less, be into two Regions, of
these one has the particular appellation of Asia propria, and contains the
several Regions of (1) Caria, (2) Ionia, (3) Doris, (4) Aeolis Phrygia, (5)
Lydia, (6) Minor, (7) and Mayor. The other has no one name as I find among
Geographers, but is known by her Provinces of (1) Cilicia, (2) Pamphilia, (3)
Lycia, (4) Bythinia, (5) Pontus, (6) Paphlagonia, (7) Galatia, (8) Cappadocia,
(9) Lycaonia, (10) Pisidia, and (11) Armenia minor.

(9) Asia propria was the scene of many noble actions much celebrated among our
Historians. First in Caria stood the City Mindum, upon which Diogenes brake
his jest, that the Citizens should take heed lest it run out at her gates. And
Halicarnassus the birthplace of Dionysius and Herodotus: and of this was
Artemisia Queen that erected the miraculous Monument in honor of her husband
Mausolus. The second Province is Ionia, and here stood Miletum where Paul made
his Oration to the Elders of Ephesus: and here Ephesus it self the star of
Asia, that as well for her Religion as her miraculous Temple set the world at a
gaze upon her. It was raised in the middle of the City, modelled out by
Ctesiphon, but was 2^0. years in building: and was ordered in such a ground
that no earthquake should move it: it was 425. foot long, and 220. broad, and
had an hundred twenty seven pillars, given by so many several Kings (says
Vadianus) whereof twenty seven were most curiously graven, all the rest of
Marble polished. In this City Saint John the Evangelist is said to have gone
down into his grave alive: there be who yet question his death: and Irenaeus
reports that he lived in Traians time. This with the third and fourth Provinces
of Doris and Aeolis were only accounted Greeks: the other Nations of Asia were
called Barbarians. (5) Lydia was the fifth named in our Division, and in her
are many Cities, which we have mentioned in Scripture, and are common among
other Writers. Of these the chief are Laodicea, Thyatira, Philadelphia,
Sardis, where Croesus kept his Court, and Pergamus the seat of Attalus, that
made the Romans his heir, and where Galen the great Physician was borne, and
lived 140. years. (6) The first was Phrygia minor; it is called Troas by the
Inhabitants and those are now Greeks, Turks, and Arabians; heretofore they were
the ancient Trojans, that gave Homer his subject for his admired Poem. Here is
that Adramittium named in the Acts: and Traianopolis: and the Mount Tmolus,
that sends down a River into Lydia with abundance of gold and silver. And
lastly, the Mount Ada, famous for the judgment of Paris past upon the 3
goddesses. (7) The last was Phrygia mayor: and on this was Gordion, the very
town where Gordius hampered his plow-tacklings in such a knot that none might
unty, but he that should possess the Monarchy of the world: and indeed it
proved true enough in Alexander the great. Another was Midaium where Midas
son to this Gordius turned all to gold with a touch. A third Colosse, the
place of the Colossians to whom Saint Paul directs an Epistle. And all these
were contained within the compass of (...) which (...) the name of Asia
propri^.

(10) The other Provinces of Asia minor (...) their Stori^^ worth the memory,
(1) The first was Cilicia now called Caramania; whose people in times past were
noted for grand Pirates, til overcome by Pompey, and when by force they were
turned honest, they gained the repute of a warlike Nation, especially map of
Asia ASIA with the Islands adjoining described, the atire of the people, and
Towns of importance, all of them newly augmented by I. S. Ano. Dom: 1626
in Seafights. So Lucan. Itque Cilix iusta non iam pirata Carina.
It was a rich Province to Rome when Cicero was Proconsul: and still it is full
of pleasant places; but withal has many wild and wast grounds, that are no
man's peculiar: but who will, may there freely feed their Goats, which afford
them good commodities, as well by their milk as their hair, of which are made
most curious Ch^^^lets. In this P^ovi^^ce was Tarsus the Ci^y of Saint Paul,
and Nicopolis and Pompe^opolis and Alexandria. (2) The second Pamphilia. The
people were once called Soli, and used a rude kind of Idiom, from whence the
very word Soloecismus, and here was Perga, Sida, and Attalia, Sea Towns
mentioned in the Acts. (3) The third was Lycia, a fruitful Country in the
Plains, and was heretofore of great fame. The Metropolis was Patara Saint
Nicholas his birthplace, and where sometimes Apollos answers were returned.
(4) Pontus and Bythinia were the fourth and fifth, though once severed, yet
afterward they made but one Province, and was governed by Mithridates that
first found out the medicine that bears his name. He had many years war with
Rome, but at last with much ado was overcome. Her Cities were Chalcedon, the
place of the fourth general Council, and Nice of the first: as also
Nicomedia, Apamia, etc. (6) The sixth Paphlagonia, and from hence had the
Venetians their original, and were at first called Heneti, but being driven
out by sedition, they followed Autenor in Italy, and there it seems changed a
letter of their name. (7) Galatia the seventh: and to the Inhabitants Saint
Paul directed one of his Epistles. It was the seat of King Deiotarus, Client to
Cicero, as appears by an Oration in his behalf.In this Province were many
Jews dispersed after the Passion: the chief Cities are Iuliopolis and Ancyra,
where a Synod was heretofore held, called Synod Ancyra^a. (8) The eighth
Cappadocia, heretofore Leucosyria. Here is the City Amasia, which receives
the Turks eldest son after their circumcision, till their Fathers (the
Emperors) death. And here Maza^a, where Saint Basil lived, that first gave
himself to a Monastical life: and the flourishing City Trepizand, heretofore
a seat Imperial. (9) Ninthly, Lycaonia. In the South of this Region is the
hill Chimaera, that gives occasion to a Poetical fiction of a Monster, with a
Lions head, a Goats body, and tail of a Serpent. For so on the top of this
hill were Lions, in the middle Goats, and in the valley Serpents. Bellerophon
rid it, and first made it habitable: and thence this fable. Here was Iconium
and Lystra, where Timothy was borne, and Paul and Barnabas adored as Gods.
(10) Pisidia was famous for the Cities of Antiochia and Lisinia. (11) Lastly,
Armenia Minor is by most thought to be the Land of Ararat, where the Arc
rested. And there is great store of Oil and excellent Wine.

(11) Hitherto our Tract has been of Asia the less, or Anatolia. It rests
that we proceed to Asia Mayor, which lies remote from Europe toward the East.
And of this we can make no large description in so small a scantling: we will
only mark out the Provinces, and refer my Reader to more particular
Relation in our several Maps that contain the Turkish Empire, Tartaria, Persia
and China, all Kingdoms of Asia the great. The parts, as for the present we
will divide it, are th^se, (1) Syria, (2) Palestina, (3) Armenia Mayor, (4)
Arabia triplex, (5) Media, (6) Assyria, (7) Mesopotamia, (8) Persia, (9)
Chaldea, (10) Parthia, (11) Hircania, (12) Tartaria, (13) China, (14) India.

(12) Syria is the first, and has in it the Provinces of Phaenicia,
Caelosyria, and Syrophaenicia. In Phaenicia was Tire and Sidon, Sarepta, and
Ptolomais, where two Kings of England have laid their siege, Richard and Edward
the first. In Caelosyria stands Hieropolis and Damascus, Aleppo, Tripolis, etc.
(2) The second Palestina, which Ptolemy reckons into Syria. It is in length
200. miles: in breadth not above 50. It contained the Provinces of Samaria,
Idumaea, Judaea, where Jerusalem was, and not far thence Bethlehem. Galilaea
both the higher called Galilaea Gentium, and lower: and in this was Nazareth
and Mount Tabor, where Christ was transfigured. (3) The third is Armenia Mayor,
or Turkomania. In this was Colchus, whence Jason fetched his golden fleece: Now
it is inhabited by Turks. (4) Arabia is the fourth: and that had three parts.
Arabia desorta, where the children of Israel were fed with Manna forty years.
Arabia petrosa, where Mount Sinai was, and the Law given. The last, Arabia
faelix, counted the fruitfullest Country in the world. In this Arabia is the
City Medina where Mahumet is intombed in an iron Chest, supported only by a
roof of Adamant, without other art to keep it from falling to the ground. (5)
The fifth Media, it was once a large Empire, and one of the first. The fruits
of the Country are said to be always green. (6) The sixth Assyria, a very
pleasant and temperate Country: and here was the City Ninivie, whither Jonas
was sent. (7) The seventh Mesopotamia; in whose lower part, Chaldaea stood, as
our latest Writers affirm, and Babylonia. (8) The eighth Persia, a mighty
Empire governed by a Sophy. The people are Mahumetanes, yet differ somewhat
from the Turks. Their language passes current through the whole Eastern
world. The Metropolitan is Persepolis. (9) The ninth Chaldaea, often mentioned
in the Scripture; and here was the fifth Sibyl called Erythraea, that
prophesied of Christ. (10) The tenth Parthia, a Province of note for its
continual hostility with Rome, and excellent Archery: for the Inhabitants
used their Bow with as much dexterity in their retreat as in the battle: and
by that means often times won advantage upon the enemy by their flight. (11)
Hircania the eleventh, an illustrious Country, and has many Cities of note,
abounds with wine and honey. (12) Tartaria called heretofore Scythia, the
Inhabitants Scythians, and before that Magozi^^, from Magog the son of Iapheth,
that first inhabited these parts. It was once possessed by the Amazons, a
Nation of women, after their dissolution came the Scythians, among whom Tomyris
is innobled by Iustine for her victory over Cyrus. Upon them came the Goths,
and those were driven out by the Tartars, which began their Empire 1187. so
Maginus. It is a large Country, and the people stout. They have no Cities nor
houses, but live in tents by troops, which they call herds. Their prince is
named Cham, and obeyed with great reverence. (13) The thirteenth is China, by
Ptolemy Sinarum regio: it has in it 240. Cities of note. In this Region is
Quinsay, the greatest City in the world. It has on the North a wall of 100.
miles in length. (14) The last is India, and the largest portion of earth that
passes under one name. Strabo writes that there were 50000. Towns quorum
nullum Co minus fuit. In the middle runs the River Ganges, and divides it
into India intra Gangem, the part that lies toward the West, and India extra
Gangem, which is the part toward the East. The Scripture calls it Havilah.
This region has many very precious Commodities, Medicinal drugs, and
Merchandise of great estimation. The chief place is Goa, where the Viceroy of
Portugal resides, and with a Council of the King of Spain, exercises a power
over all these quarters.

(13) The Islands of Asia, as they are of less account then the Maine, so they
must be content with a shorter Survey. We will rank them into the same order
with the Continent.

(14) The first are of Asia the less, and lie more Westward toward Europe.
They only worth note are two, Rhodes and Cyprus. (1) First Rhodes is in the
Sea over against Caria. In the chief City of this I Will stood the Colossus in
the form of a man, erected in a kind of Religion to the Sun, that once a
day at least breaks out upon the I Will, howsoever cloudy it be in other places.
Graecians heretofore possessed it, and when the Christians had lost the Holy
Land, the Emperor of Constantinople gave this I Will to the Knights of Saint John
in Jerusalem in the year 1308. But now the Inhabitants are most Turks, and
some Jews sent thither out of Spain. As for Christians they may not stay in
the City in the night time. (2) The second is Cyprus, a place heretofore
consecrated to Venus, to whom both men and women performed their sacrifice
naked, till by the prayer of Barnabas the Apostle the Temple was ruined. Trogus
reports, that the fathers of this I Will had wont to prostitute their daughters to
Mariners for money, whereby to raise them a portion against they could get them
husbands: but Christianity corrected those barbarous customs. In time it was
made a Roman Province, and in the division of the Empire was assigned to the
Emperor of Constantinople. So it continued till Richard the first of England
in his holy Voyage put into this place for fresh water: but being incensed by
the discourteous usage of the Cyprians, turned his intent into an invasion,
took the King prisoner, and bound him in silver fetters. Afterward he sold it
to the Templers for a time, but recovered it again, and exchanged it for the
title of Jerusalem.

(15) Lastly, the Islands of Asia the great lie most in the Indian or Eastern
Ocean, and indeed are innumerable, but the chief of account are these. Ormus,
Zeiland, Summatra, Auirae Insulae, Bocuro, Iaua Mayor and Minor, Iapan, and
Moluccoes, and the Philippian Isles.

The first is Ormus, exceeding barren, and yet of it self a Kingdom, and full
of Trade. (2) Zeilan so happy in pleasant fruits, that some have thought it was
the place of Paradise. (3) Summatra lying directly under the Equator, the
Inhabitants are (...). (4) And so are the Inhabitants of the Auirae Insulae
that lie West from Summatra. (5) Bocuro so large an I Will, that the compass is
said to be three months sail. (6) Iaua Mayor, called by Scaliger, the
Compendium of the world; the Inhabitants feed on Rats and Mice; it yields much
spice. (7) And so does Iauan Minor. (8) Iapan abounds so with gold, that the
Kings Palace was covered with it in the time of Paulus Venetus. They enter not
into their dining room with their shoes on. (9) The Moluccoes are five, and
abound much with all sorts of spices. In these is said to be the Bird of
Paradise that flies continually, having no feet to rest upon: the Hen lays
her eggs (if you will believe it) in a hole of the Cocks back. (10) Lastly,
the Philippian Isles that lie North of the Moluccoes are 1100. as Maginus
numbers them. They were discovered in the time of Philip the second of Spain,
and from him took their name, 1364. They abound with Spices, and part of the
Inhabitants have entertained Christianity.

(16) And thus I have made a brief dispatch both of the Continent and Islands
of either Asia and have given my Reader a hint (at least) of their Stories,
which he may find at large in their several Authors.

The Description of AFRICA.
AFRICA as it lay nearest the seat of the first people, so questionless it was
next inhabited: and therefore requires the second place in our Division. It is
generally agreed upon, that the North parts were possessed by the sons of Cham
not long after the confusion. And so indeed the Kingly Prophet in the 78.
Psalm, uses the Tents of Cham for the Land of Egypt, which is the part of
Africa which joins upon the South west of Asia, and is divided from the holy
Land but by a small Isthmus. Give the people their own asking, and they will
have the glory of the first Inhabitants of the World: and prove it too both
from the temperature of their air, and fertility of their soil, which breeds
and nourishes not only Plants and fruits, but sends forth, of its own
virtue, living creatures in such sort, as amaseth the beholder. We have a
report (if you will believe it) that in a ground near the River Nilus, there
have been found Mice half made up, and Nature taken in the very nick, when she
had already wrought life in the fore-parts, head and breast, the hinder joints
yet remaining, in the form of earth. Thus I suppose they would have man at
first grown out of their soil, without the immediate hand of God in his
Creation. And it has been the opinion of some vain Philosophers, that for
this cause have made the Ethiopians to be the first people: for that there the
Sun by his propinquitie, wrought soonest upon the moisture of the ground, and
made it fit for mortality to sprout in.

(2) But to leave these, without doubt Africa is of great antiquity, and so is
allowed by all Historians of credit; In the year 1566. the people were
increased to an exceeding multitude; and therefore were enforced to enlarge
their bounds, upon their neighboring Countries. For as it was of a most rare
fertility: so it lay not any long way, and had free access to it by land from
the garden of our first Parents.

(3) In the time of Abraham we have better assurance from the word of God, that
it was then a place of fame, and the Inhabitants of some growth, for they were
able to supply the wants of the Countries adjoining by their store: and thither
went Abraham out of the Land of Canaan, to avoid the great famine, Genesis 1^. She
had then her Princes, Pharaoh and his mighty men, that feared not to resist
God, and were afterward made the instruments of his punishments upon the
children of Israel: for they kept them in bondage four hundred years, as was
foretold to Abraham in the 15. of Genesis.

(4) But this proof of Ancientry concerns not the whole Country: only those
Regions which lie under the temperate Zone. The rest for a long time after were
unknown to our Geographers, held not habitable, indeed beyond Mount Atlas, by
reason of the extreme heat. The reports which pass of it before Ptolemyes time
were but at random, and by guess of such as had never sailed it round, or
scarce come within sight of it, but at a great distance, and by this means,
either out of their own error, or else a desire of glory more then they had
deserved: or perhaps a Travailors trick, to cheat the ignorant world that could
not confute their reports, they spread many idle fables of monstrous people
without heads, with their eyes and mouths in their breasts, maintained to this
day by some Authors of good esteem. But for my part I hold it most reasonable
to credit S. Augustine, who was born and died in Africa. That he in his eighth
book De Civitate Dei, acknowledges no such creatures, or if they be, they be
not men; or if men, not borne of Adam. And our later discoveries join in with
him that report not (upon their own experience) of any other people then such
as our selves are; and yet I suppose they have seen more of the Country, then
ever any heretofore did. For they pass not now to sail it round once a year,
by the Cape of good Hope to the East Side of the very Isthmus toward the
Red Sea.

(5) This course by the South was discovered by one Vasco de Gama, in the year
1497. and a way found to the East Indies, by which the Princes of Portugal
receive an infinite gain, both in Spices, and other Merchandise. The hope of
which first set them upon the adventure. And in this one thing we owe much to
our own Country, otherwise a detestable plague, that the insatiate desire of
wanton commodities has opened to us a large part of the world before not
known, and which we hope may hereafter increase the light of the Gospel, and
the number of the Elect.

(6) If we compare Her to the two other portions of the same Hemisphere* she is
situated wholly South, and in part Westward. It is divided on the North from
Europe by the Mediterraneum Sea. On the South where it runs into a kind of
point at the Cape of good Hope, it is bound with the vast Ocean, which in that
part has the name of the Aethiopicke Sea; on the East with the Red Sea; and on
the West with the Atlantike Ocean, called there in our common Maps, Mare del
North. So that in brief we reckon both Her Longitude and Latitude in the
largest parts, to be near upon 4200. English miles.

(7) Notwithstanding this Vast extent of ground, yet we still of Europe keep
our own, and by authority of the most and best Geographers, exceed as much for
number, as either this or Asia do for room. Cause enough there is why Africa
indeed should come short of both: for in most parts, she has scarce plenty
sufficient to maintain Inhabitants: and where there is, we shall meet with
multitudes of ravening beasts, or other horrible monsters, enough to devour
both it and us. In a word, there is no Region of the world so great an enemy to
man's commerce: there is such scarcity of water, that no creature almost could
live, had not Nature provided thereafter, that the greater part of them endures
not drink in the very midst of Summer. So Pliny reports. And if (as
sometimes they be enforced by such as take them) they suddenly perish. Thus we
see how God gives a property to each place, that may make up her defects, lest
it should be left as well by beast as men. Their Land is full of sandy deserts,
which lie open to the winds and storms, and often times are thrown up into
billows like waves of the Sea, and indeed are no less dangerous. Strabo writes
that Cambyses his army was thus hazzarded in Aethiopia. And Herodotus, that the
Psitti an ancient but foolish Nation (it seems) in Africa, as they marched
toward the South, to revenge themselves upon the winds for drying up their
Rivers, were overwhelmed with sand, and so dyed in their graves. Besides these
annoyances it is so full of a venomous kind of Serpent, that in some places
they dare not dress their Land, unless they first fence their legs with
boots against the sting. Other wild creatures there are which range about, and
possess to themselves a great portion of this Country, and make a Wilderness
of Lions, Leopards, Elephants, and in some places Crocodiles, Hyenas,
Basilisks, and indeed monsters without either number or name. Africa now every
year produces some strange creature before not heard of, peradventure not
extant. For so Pliny thinks, that for want of water, creatures of all kinds at
sometimes of the year gather to those few rivers that are, to quench their
thirst: And then the Males promiscuously enforcing the Females of every species
which comes next him, produces this variety of forms: and would be a grace to
Africa, were it not so full of danger to the Inhabitants, which as Salust
reports, dye more by beasts then by diseases. For those traits about Barbary
are every tenth year, 15. or 25. visited with a great plague, and continually
infected with the French disease in such violence, that few recover, unless by
change of air into Numidia, or the Land of Negroes, whose very temper is said
to be a proper Antidote against those diseases.

(8) But among all these inconveniences, commodities are found of good worth:
and the very evils yield at last their benefit, both to their own Country and
other parts of the world. The Elephant a docible creature and exceeding useful
for battle: The Camel which affords much riches to the Arabian. The Barbaric
horse, which we our selves commend: The Ram, that besides his flesh gives
twenty pound of wool from his very tail: The Bull, painful, and able to do
best service in their tillage. And so most of their worst, alive or dead, yield
us their medicinal parts, which the world could not well want.

(9) In her division we will follow our latter Masters in this Art, whom time
at least and experience, if no other worth, have made more Authentike, and
those divide it into seven parts. (1) Barbary or Mauritania. (2) Numidia. (3)
Lybia or Africa propria. (^) Nigritarum terra. (5) Aethiopia superior. (6)
Aethiopia inferior. (7) Egypt: and to these we add the (8) Islands belonging
to Africa.

(10) Barbari^ is the first. The bounds of it are Northward the Mediterraneum,
Westward the Atlantike: On the South the Mountain Atlas, and on the East
Egypt. It is esteemed the most noble part of all Africa: and has its name
from an Arabic word Barbara, that signifies a kind of rude sound, for such the
Arabians took their Language to be: and thence the Grecians call them
Barbarians that speak a harsher Language then themselves. After the Latins,
and now we, esteem the people of our own Nation barbarous, if they ever so
little differ from the rudeness either of our tongue or manners. The
Inhabitants are noted to be faithful in their course: but yet crafty in
promising, and performing too. For they are covetous, ambitious, jealous of
their wives beyond measure. Their Country yields Oranges, Dates, Olives,
Figs, and a certain kind of Goat, whose hair makes a stuff as fine as
silk. It contains in it the Kingdoms of Tunnis, Algeires, Fesse, and Morocho.
(1) Tunnis, is famous for several places mentioned of (...). Here was Dona
where Augustine was Bishop, and Hippo his birthplace. And Tunnis a City five
miles in compass, and old Carthage built by Virgils Dido, Romes emula for
wealth, valor, and ambition of the universal Empire. It was twenty two miles
in map of Africa AFRICAE, described the manners of their Habits, and buildinge:
newly done into English by I.S. and published at the charges of G. Humble Ano
1626
circuit: And Vtica, memorable for Catoes death. (2) Algeires contains in it a
strange Harbor for the Turkish Pirates: and is of note for the resistance it
made Charles the fifth; who received before the chief Towns in this Region,
an innumerable loss of Ships, Horses, Ordnance and men. (3) Fesse has a City
in it with seven hundred Churches, and one of them a mile and half in compass
(Stafford): And in this Country was our English Stukeley slain. (4) Morocho,
where the chief Town of the same name has a Church larger then that of Fesse,
and has a Tower so high, that you may discern from the top of it the Hills of
Az^si at an hundred and thirty miles distance. Here is likewise a Castle of
great fame, for their Globes of pure gold that stand upon the top of it, and
weighing 130000. Barbary Dukets.

(11) Numidia was the second part in our Division of Africa, and has on the
West the Atlantike, on the East Egypt, on the North Atlas, and the deserts of
Lybia on the South. It is called likewise regio dactylifera, from the abundance
of Dates; for they feed upon them only; a people, Idolaters, Idiots, Thieves,
Murderers, except some few Arabians that are mingled among them of ingenious
disposition, and addicted much to Poetry. They seldom stay longer in one place
then the eating down of the grafle: and this wandering course makes but few
Cities, and those in some places three hundred miles distant.

(12) Lybia the third is limited on the East with Nilus, Westward with the
Atlantike, on the North with Numidia, and the South with terra Nigritarum. It
was called Sacra, as much as Desert: For so it is, and a dry one too, such as
can afford no water to a travellor sometimes in seven days journey. The
Inhabitants are much like to the Numidians, live without any Law almost of
Nature. Yet in this place were two of the Sibyls, which prophesied of Christ,
and Arrius the Heretic. About Lybia were the Garamantes, and the P^illi
mentioned before for their simple attempts against the South wind.

(13) Terra Nigritarum, the Land of Negroes is the fourth, and has on the West
the Atlantike, on the East Aethiopia superior, on the North Lybia, on the South
the Kingdom of Manilongo in the inferior Aethiopia. It has the name either
from the color of the people which are black, or from the River Niger, famous
as Nilus almost, for her overflowing, insomuch, that they pass at some times
in Boats through the whole Country. It is full of Gold and Silver, and other
Commodities: but the Inhabitants most barbarous. They draw their original from
Chus, and have entertained all Religions that came in their way. First their
own, then the Jews, the Mahumetans, and some of them the Christian. For the
most part they live not as if reason guided their actions. Maginus numbers
twenty five Provinces of this Country, which have had their several
Governors. Now it knows but four Kings, and those are (1) The King of
Tombulum, and he is an infinite rich Monarch, hates a Jew to the death of his
subject that converseth with him: keeps a guard of three thousand Horsemen
besides Foot. (2) Of Bornaum, where the people have no proper Names, no Wives
peculiar, and therefore no Children which they call their own. (3) Of Goaga,
who has no estate but from his Subjects as he spends it. (4) Gualatum, a poor
Country, God wot, not worth either Gentry or Laws, or indeed the name of a
Kingdom.

(14) Aethiopia Superior the fifth, and is called likewise the Kingdom of the
Abissines. It is limited on the North with Egypt, on the South with the Montes
Lunae, on the East with the Red Sea, and on the West with the Kingdom of the
Nigers and Manilongo. It is distinct from the Aethiopia so often mentioned in
Scripture: For by all probability, that was in another quarter of the world,
and reaches from the Red Sea to the Persian Gulf. It is governed by one of
the mightiest Emperors in the world: For his power reaches almost to each
Tropicke, and is called by us Presbyter John. He is the only white man amongst
them, and draws his Line from Solomon, and the Queen of the South. His Court
rests not long in any one place, but is moveable as well for housing as
retinue. For it consists of Tents only to the number of six thousand, and
incompasseth in, about twelve or thirteen miles. He has under him seventy
Kings, which have their severa^l Laws and Customs; Among these the Province
of Dobas has one, that no man marry till he has killed twelve Christians. The
Inhabitants of the whole Region are generally base and idle: the better sort
have the modesty to attire themselves, though it be but in Lions and Tigers
skins. Their Religion is Mixed. Christians they have, but yet differ from us;
For they Circumcise both sects. Their oath is by the life of their King, whom
they never see but at Christmas, Easter, and Holy Rood. Their Commodities are
Oranges, Lemmons, Cittrons, Barley, Sugar, Honey, etc.

(15) Aethiopi^ inferior the sixth part of Africa, is on every side begirt with
Sea except toward the North; that way it is severed from the Abissines by the
Montes Luna. The government of this Region is under five free Kings, (1) Of
Aiana, which contains in it two petty Kingdoms of Adel and Adia, and abounds
with Flesh, Honey, Wax, Gold, Ivorie, Corn, very large Sheep. (2) Zanguebar, in
this stands Mesambique, called by Ptolemie, Prassum Promon^orium, and was the
utmost part Southward of the old world. The Inhabitants are practiced much in
So^th-saying, indeed Witchcraft. (3) Of Monomolopa, in which is reported to be
three thousand Mines of Gold. Here there lives a kind of Amazons as valiant as
men. Their King is served in great pomp, and has a guard of two hundred
Mastives. (4) Cafraia, whose people live in the Woods without Laws like
brutes. And here stands the Cape of good Hope, about which the Sea is always
rough and dangerous: It has been especially so to the Spaniard. It is their
own note, in so much, that on^ was very angry with God, that he suff^red the
English Heretics to pass it so easily over, and not give his good Cathol^k^s
the like speed. (5) Manicongo, whose Inhabitants are in some parts Christians,
but in other by-Provinces Anthropophagi, and have shambles of man's flesh, as we
have for meat. They kill their own children in the birth, to avoid the trouble
of breeding them, and preserve their Nation with stolen brats from their
neighboring Countries.

(16) Egypt, is the seventh and last part of the African Continent, which
deserves a larger Tract then we can here afford it: But for the present be
content with a brief Survey; and satisfy your self more particularly in the
many several Authors that write her story. It has on the East the Red Sea,
Barbary on the West: on the North, the Mediterraneum, and Aethiopia Superior
on the South. It was first possessed by Cham, and therefore called Chemia in
their own antique Stories: Or at least by Mitzraim his Grandchild, and is so
agreed upon by most. For plenty it was called Orbis horreum, yet it had very
seldom any rain, but that defect was supplied by the River Nilus: The places
of note are, Caire and Alexandria. The first was heretofore Memphis: Some say
Babylon, whither the Virgin fled to escape. Herod's tyranny intended to our
Savior: and blush not to show the very Cave where she had hid her Babe. In a
desert about four miles distant stand the Pyramides, esteemed rightly one of
the seven wonders of the world. Alexandria was a magnificent City, and the
place where Ptolemie took his Observations, and was famous for the rarest
Library in the World. To the Inhabitants of this Country, we owe the invention
of Astrology, Physic, Writing on Paper. Their Kings names were Pharaoh
toward the beginning: Now what the Turk pleases.

(17) And this is as far as we may travel by Land: it remains that we loose
out into the bordering Seas, and descry what Islands we can, near those parts
of Africa which we have here mentioned. And these lie either Southward in the
Aethiopicke Sea, or else Westward in the Atlantic Ocean.

(18) The Aethiopicke Islands are only two. (1) The Island of S. Laurence or
Magadassar, four thousand miles in compass, and the length more then Italy,
rich in all Commodities almost that man can use. The Inhabitants are very
barbarous, most of them black, some white there are, supposed to have been
transplanted out of China. (2) Zocatrina at the mouth of the Red Sea, in length
sixty, in breadth twenty five miles. It lies open to sharp Winds, and by
that means is extreme dry and barren. Yet it has good Drugges, and from
hence comes the Aloe Zocatrina. The people are Christians and adore the Cross
most superstitiously, and give themselves much to Enchantments.

(19) The Atlanticke Islands are (1) Sir Thomas Island, and lies directly under
the Equator, it was made habitable by the Portugalls, which found it nothing
but a wood. It is full of Sugar, little other commodities. (2) Prince Island,
between the Equator and Tropicke of Capricorn: It is rich enough for the
owner, though I find no great report of it. (3) The Gorgades of old the
Gorgons where Medusa and her two sisters dwelt; I forbear the fable, they are
nine in number, and because near to Cape Virido, in the Land of Negroes, they
have a second name of Insulae Capitis Viridis. They abound with Goats, and the
chief of them is called Saint James. (4) The Canaris called for their
fertility The fortunate Islands, and was the place of the first Meridian, with
the ancient Geographers, to divide the world into the East and West, and from
thence to measure the earths Longitude: but now it is removed into the next
Islands more North, which are the Azoris, and belong properly to Europe, as
lying nearer Spain then any other Continent. The number of the Canaris are
seven. The chief Canarie; next Palus, where our Ships touch to refresh
themselves in their voyage toward America. Then Tanariffa, which has no water
but from a cloud, that hangs over a tree, and at noone dissolves, and so is
conveyed into several parts. The other four are Gomera, Hieiro, Lansarat, and
Fuerte ventura, some few other not worth note or name. The men lend their Wives
like Horses or any other Commodity. (5) Lastly, the Hesperides not far from
the Gorgades, they are often mentioned by our ancient Poets in the fable of
Atlas his Daughters. It was supposed to be the seat of their blessed, which
they called the Elizian field. And indeed it is a very happy soil, the weather
continually fair, the seasons all temperate, the air never extreme. To
conclude, Africa affords not a sweeter place to rest in.

The Description of EVROPE.
EVROPE may perhaps think her self much injured to be thus cast back into the
third place of my Division, and reckoned the last of the old world: but my
promise shall be here made good, to give her her due. And though Chronology
will not allow the precedence: yet compare her present estate with the rest,
and you may take her rank here to be ad Pompam, as most commonly in our solemn
Triumphs those of most worth are marshalled forth last. Yet were she so minded
to quarrel for Antiquity, she could not want abetters, such as would have
some parts of Europe flourish within thirty years after the confusion of
tongues. The original of the Germane Kingdom is drawn by Aventinus Helcr^^,
and others, from Tuisco, the son of No^h, and he began his reign in the
year 1787* after the Creation, and that was but one hundred thirty one years
after the Deluge, not above thirty from the time that they were dispersed out
of Babell. But to pass by those uncertain stories which may admit dispute, we
have to this day the Germane Triers, a City standing from the time of Abraham,
and bears as yet the marks both of the art and ambition of the Babylonians.
As if here they strove to reach eternity, as they did before in the plain of
Shinar to top heaven.

(2) Sure I am what ever part of the world was first famous, Europe soon got
the start, and took the Scepter of the earth into her hand, she had the name
with Pliny of Orbis domitorum genitrix: and well she might, if we but read her
Story, since first she came in view. In the Greek Monarchy Alexander was her
Champion. In the Latin Empire the Romans bare the sway, and scarce left a
corner of the earth then known unconquered. And to this day the Princes of
Europe enlarge their Dominions upon the Regions of the other three. A small
portion as we are of this little I Will, in respect of their vast Continent, yet
have we a part too in America for our peculiar, and hope still to bring more
into our possessions, that we may bring them unto Christ.

(3) In respect of the two other quarters in the Eastern hemisphere, Europe is
partly West, and partly North, for she is situated Northward, betwixt the
Tropike of Canc^r and the polare Articke: and Westward has no Continent
betwixt her and America, but is bounded with the Atlantic Ocean. On the East
toward Asia, she has the Mare Aegeum, which the Italians call Archipelagus,
and the Pontus Euxinus, or Mare Magor. And the Palus Meotis, and the River
Tanais. Southward it has the Mediterranean and Fretum Herculeum; So that it is
almost incompast with the Seas; and has the form of a Peninsula, whose
Isthmus that joins it to the rest of the Continent is to be reckoned that
part, which lies betwixt the branches of the River Tanais and the Mare
Glaciale: These are her out-bounds.

(4) If we view her within we shall find that Nature had not spent her store,
nor was she close handed when she allotted her portion. And though Europe
indeed be the least, yet is she furnished in all points with the like variety:
her Rivers as Commodious as those of Asia and Africa, and her Mountains no
less famous then Taurus or Atlas. Her measure indeed is not comparable to any
of the other three: She bears in Longitude but 3800. miles from S. Vincent in
Portugal to Constantinople. And in Latitude at most 1200. and that too from
the Aegean to the frozen Sea, by some account not above 900.

(5) But be her extent (as it is) small; it adds to her glory, that in Exiguo
res numerosai^cet: that yet she exceeds those vaster Regions, and bears the
name of the most happy Country in the world, both for plenty of Corn, Plants,
Fruits, for Rivers and Fountains of admirable virtues, for beauty as well of
Cities, Castles, and Horses, as men and women of excellent feature. For the
study of Arts, for sincerity in Religion, and what ever else God has pleased
to bless his Church with from the beginning.

(6) She wants nothing but what she may well spare; wild Beasts, which cause
Deserts in the parts where they breed: hot Spices, which fit not our temper:
and rather corrupt our manners then mend our diet: precious jewels and the
like, which have brought in a degree of vain and useless pride not known
before by our Predecessors; yet too of gold, silver, and other commodious
metals, she has her portion. And in brief, is of a very prosperous temper,
yet of so strange variety, that it is admirable to think that there is no
place in this quarter, but is fit for any man to live in. Insomuch as every
corner is inhabited, as is confirmed by our later Travelers: though heretofore
it has been questioned by reason of the extreme cold toward the Pole. This in
general.

(7) In her Division, we will begin from her Western parts, that lie toward
the first Meridian of Longitude, and so on till we come to her Eastern limits,
which joins her to Asia. The order is (1) Spain. (2) France. (3) Belgia. (4)
Germany. (5) Italy. (6) Denmark. (7) Hungary. (8) Polonie. (9) Slavonia.
(10) Greece. (11) Dacia. (12) Norwegia. (13) Suevia. (14) Muscovia.

(8) Every least Region of Europe merits a peculiar Description at large, and
shall in its turn partake of my pains such as it is. In the mean time I will
here instruct my Reader in the general knowledge of each, and direct him
principally to their situation, that be may with ease find their propinquitie
and distance in respect of each other, which cannot be so aptly expressed in
their several Maps; nor so easily scanned as in this, which presents to his
eye all at one view.

(9) Spain is the first and the amplest Region of Europe, For in breadth it
numbreth 10000. stadia says Appianus, and little less (as it seems) in
length. The compass is reckoned by us to be 1890. English miles. It is begirt
on every side with Seas, unless on the Eastern, and there it is joined to
France by a kind of Isthmus, when the Pyrenaean Mountains cross from one Sea
to the other, and set the limits to both Kingdoms. On the West it is bounded
with the Atlantic Ocean, on the North with the Cantabrick* and on the South
with the fretum Herculeum: Southeast with the Mediterraneum. Till within this
800. years it continued mangled and broken by many turns of Fortune. Since it
has felt variety enough, now it is wholly subject to one Monarch, though it
yet carry the name of three Kingdoms, Aragon, Castile, and Portugal. The Land
yields all sorts of Wines, Sugar, Fruits, Grain, Oils, Metals, especially
Gold and Silver. It is fertile enough for the Inhabitants. For indeed they are
not many, nor have they so great Cities as there are in other Regions in
Europe. Besides, the conditions of those for the most part are base. The
meanest proud, the best superstitious and hypocrites: most of them lascivious.
Give them their own, they are good Soldiers, not so much for their valor in
performing, as patience to endure labors, hunger, thirst, and by this means
oft-times, weary out an enemy rather then conquer him.

(10) France the second Region of Europe, begins from the West at the
Pyrenean Mountains, and is bounded on the East with Germany, on the North with
our English Seas, and Southward with the Mediterraneu^, South-east with the
Alps, which divide it from Italy. It was once tributarie to Rome, as most of
these parts besides, and had its division into Provinces as they pleased. Now
the chief are Loraigne, Burgundy, Savoy, and these have their free Princes;
the rest are Normanie, Brittanie, Berry, Aquitane, Picardie, Poictou,
Languedock, Aniow, Gascoine, Provenue, Compagne, and many more. The Country is
very fruitful, and calls all her neighboring Nations to her for Traffic.
Their special Commodities are, Wine, Corn, and Salt. Well peopled, and has
very many illustrious Cities. But the Inhabitants are naturally light in their
carriage, almost Counter-point to the Spaniard: yet of great fame, both in
learning and wars. Commended by all strangers for complete Courtship.

(11) Belgia has France on the South, on the North Denmark, on the East
Germany, and the maine Ocean on the West: It is known best with us by the name
of Low Countries or Netherlands. The compass of it is about a thousand miles.
It is divided into 17. Provinces. And of these, four are Dukedomes, seven
Earledomes, five Baronies, and one Marqueship. The Dukedomes are (1) Brabant,
and in this is Autwerp. (2) Luicke. (3) Lutzenburg, here stands the vast
Forest of Ardenna. (4) Gelderland. The Earledomes (1) Flanders. (2) Artois.
(3) Hainolt. (4) Holland. (5) Zealand. (6) Zutphen. (7) and Hamme. The Baronies
(1) Freizland. (2) Vltrecke. (3) Mechlin. (4) Overissell. (5) Grovelling. The
Marqueship is that of the holy Empire. The Land is good, and affords great
store of Butter, Cheese, and breeds Oxen of incredible bigness and weight. The
people too, are very industrious and excellent Mechanics. The men commonly are
of a goodly portraiture: yet of more same for their wars then their valor;
but are forced to maintain their liberty by the Sword; good Seamen indeed, and
in that they bear some sway. Their Governors are called the States of the
Low Countries. The General of their Forces, is the Prince of Orange.

(12) Germany lies Eastward from Belgia, and on her own East is bounded with
Hungary and Polonia, and the River Vistula, on the North with the Germane
Ocean, and on the South with the Alps that divide her from Italy. In the
middle is situa^ed the Kingdom of Bohemia, compassed with the Sylva Hyrcinia,
and in this stands Prage, where the Emperor commonly keeps his Court. And
comprehends many Provinces of note: Saxony, Brandenberge, Pomerania Bavaria,
Sle^ia, Franconia, Austria, Helvetia, East-Friezland, Westphalia, Cleveland,
Alsatia, map of Europe EVROP, and the chief Cities contaned therein, described;
with the habits of most Kingdoms now in use. By Io: Speed (...) 1626.
Brunswicke, and Hassia. It has now the name of the Empire, as once Rome had,
but it comes far short of her in glory. The right to it descends not by
succession, but by choice of six Electors, Archbishops of Triers, M^nts, and
Cullen, Count Palatine of Rhene, Duke of Saxony, and Marquess Brandenberge:
In case of equality, the King of Bohemia has a suffrage which carries it. It
is a rich Country, in Corn, Wine, Fruits, Mines, and has in it healthful
Bathes. The people warlike and ingenious for the invention of many useful
implements.

(13) Italy has Germany on the North, divided by the Alps, on the South the
Mediterraneum, on the East the Adriatique Sea, and on the West, Marc Tyrrenum.
In length it is 1010. miles, and in the broadest place 420. It was once
entirely one. Now it is divided into many States and Provinces. The chief are,
the Kingdom of Naples, the Territory of Rome, Lumbardy, Tuscaine. The
Signorie of Venice, Verona, and others of great fame. For indeed the whole
Country is of admirable fertility, and called by good Authors, the Paradise
of the earth. The Inhabitants grave and frugall: yet hot and lascivious.

(14) Denmark is joined to Germany on the South, and on the West has the Mare
Germanicum, and so almost is environed with Sea, and is a Peninsula. In the
Continent are two Provinces of note, Irglant and Holston. The other are petty
Islands for the most part. The chief Zealand and Loiland. The Country breeds
goodly Horses and store of Cattle. The people are good Soldiers, and subject
to one King.

(15) Hungaria, has part of Germany on the West, on the East the River
Tibiscus, and Walachia, on the North with Poland, and on the South with the
River Saure, Southwest with Slavonia. The great Danubius cuts her in the
middle, and names her parts Citerior and Vlterior. The chief Provinces are (1)
The Country of Soliense: where the earth sends forth such a stench, that it
poysoneth the very Birds which fly over it. (2) An Island in Danubius exceeding
fertile. And so indeed is the whole Country. The people are generally strong,
but show their Ancientrie to be of the Scythians by their barbarous manner, and
neglect of learning. Their Daughters portions are only a new attire: and their
Sons equally inherit without privilege of birthright. The Emperor of
Germany and the Turk share it betwixt them.

(16) Polonia and Silesia, a Province of Germany on the West, on the East the
River Boristhenes or Neiper: on the North the Balticke Sea, and Hungary on the
South. It is in compass 2600. miles. The chief Provinces which belong at
least to Poland are, Livonia, Lituania, Volinia, Samogitia, Podolia, Russia
nigra, Mazaria, Prussia, Podlassia, the Dukedomes of Optwittes, and Zator,
Polonia propria. The Land abounds with Honey, Wax, Mines of Copper and Iron. It
breeds store of Horses fit for service. Their Religion is promiscuous of all
kinds from the true worship, to the very Atheist, which acknowledges no God:
yet they are governed by one King, which does not succeed, but is chosen by the
Nobles.

(17) Slavonia, has Hungary on the North, on the South the Adriaticke Sea,
Greece on the Southeast, and on the West part of Italy. It is in length 480.
miles, in breadth, 120. The people were called Sclavi, and were by Conquest of
the Venetians made their drudges: It is now divided into Illyricum, Dalmatia,
Croatia. The mother tongue of this Nation is used through many Countries, both
of Europe and Asia: part of it belongs to the government of Hungary: some to
the Turk, some to the Austrians, and a portion to the Venetian State.

(18) Greece is limited on the West with the Adriatique Sea: on the East with
the Aegean, Hellespont, Propontis, Northward with the Mountain Haemus, and
Southward with the Mediterraneum. It was once the seat of the worlds Empire,
and flourished far beyond all other in every kind of humane learning, which
to this day is received by all civil Nations as their rule. It was one of the
first among the Gentiles that received the faith of Christ, and bred many
Fathers of our Church, S. Chrysostom, Basil, S. Gregory and others. But the
Inhabitants are now curbed and kept low, as well in knowledge as estate, by the
tyranny of the Turk. Their women are well favored, but not fair. The common
division is into these Regions, Peloponnesus, Achaia, Epirus, Albania,
Macedonia, Migdonia, Thracia; They afford us Gold, Silver, Copras, Colors,
Wines, Velvet, Stuffes, etc.

(19) Dacia on the West has Hungary, on the East the Euxine Seas, on the
South Greece, on the North Sarmatia, from which it is divided by the Carpathian
Mountains. It was heretofore Misia, and was by Domitius parted into Misia
superior and inferior. Now the chief Regions are Transylvania, Moldavia,
Walachia, Servia, Rasia, Bulgaria, Bosnia.

(20) Norwegia or Norway, describes her situation in her very name, which
signifies in the Germane tongue, no other then North-way: for so it is in
respect of the rest of Europe, and encompassed almost round with Sea. The
length is 1300. miles. The breadth about 600. The people were once valiant, and
spread their Conquests in most places of Europe: Among the rest England has her
share, and was forced to submit to Duke William, and Ireland to Tancud. But now
themselves are under a foreign government of the King of Denmark, and live
simply enough: possess little worth the commending except honesty. Theft is
counted the greatest sin among them. Yet they have Cables, Masts; Furs good
store, and Stock Fish, which the poor eat in stead of bread. The Metropolitan
City is Nidrosio; besides this, there is not above two of eminent note. Bergla
one of the Mart towns of Christendom, and Asloia a Bishops See. On the North
and West stands the populous Province of Frimarke.

(21) Suevia or Sweden, is on the East of Norway, divided from it with the
Dofrine Mountains. On the North and South it is bounded with Seas: at the East
end it is joined to Muscovia. By reason of their neighborhood, they partake
much in their dispositions with the Norwegians. Their Counntry is fertile, and
in some Provinces has very great plenty of Corn, Furs, Mines of Gold and
Silver, Copper, Lead, and other excellent commodities from which they take
their name. For the first is Gotland, as much as good land. The second Finland,
quasi fine land. The rest are Bodia, Serick-firmia, Lappland, and others. The
Inhabitants live to a great age of 140. and are much given to Witchcraft.

(22) Muscovia is the last Region of Europe toward the East, and indeed stands
a good part in Asia. It is bounded on the West with Livonia, and some part of
Swevia, on the East with Tartary, on the North with the frozen Seas, and
Southward with the Lituania. The length of it is 3000. miles, the breadth 3065.
It is likewise known by the name of Russia alba. The most parts of it are
extreme cold: But Nature for the help of the Inhabitants has lined it with
rich Furs, Sables, Martines, white Fox and the like: and has furnished it
with other Commodities, Corn, Fruits, and Cattle. The whole Region is subject
to the Emperor of Russia. A vast Territory and as wild a government. For the
people are very base, contentious, ignorant, and sottishly superstitious. They
bury their dead upright, with a staff in his hand, a penny in his purse, and a
letter to S. Nicholas to procure him entrance into heaven. There are many
Provinces of note. The chief are (1) Muscovia, where Mosco stands, the prime
City and seat of the Emperor. (2) Permia, where they eat stagsflesh in stead
of bread. (3) Rhesan, so full of Corn that Horses cannot tread it down, nor a
Quail pass through it. But for this I am not very urgent to enforce belief
upon my Reader. Others there are which have their stories of as much wonder,
and as little credit. But I must not pass too far this way, lest I a little
trespass upon another possession; I have already set footing into Asia: Give
me leave to recover my self into my proper bounds, and I will set yon a brief
description of the Islands which are reckoned as the appendices to Europe.

(23) The West in the Atlantic, are Cronland, Groviland, Island, Freesland.
These lie nearest to the Artike and are extreme cold, but send forth good store
of Fish. The next rank is in the British Seas: Ireland, Great Britain with
her train, the Orcades, Hebrides, Silly Islands, Man, Anglesey, Iarsie,
Gernsey, Wight. Let not the rest envy, if I here as I pass, do a due homage
to our own, and salute Her Queen of European Seas. She is a parcel of earth,
culled out from the rest, which for her proportionable distance from the Torrid
and frized Zones, injoyeth so sweet a temper, that neither our Summer heat
need compel us to the shade, nor out Winter cold invite us to the fire, so
Maginus. And indeed our lines are fallen in pleasant places: we have a fair
inheritance, others you shall find of less regard in the Germane Seas, and
those which divide Norway and Sweden, from Germany and Poland. More toward
Spain are situated the Azons, 9. in number. Of these one called Faiall is with
us of greatest note, for our noble Sir Walter Raleighs victory over the
Spaniard, 1597.

(24) The Southern Islands of Europe lie about the Mediterraneum. The first
rank are, (1) Baleans near unto Spain. (2) Corsica. (3) Sardinia, over
against Italy where it parts from France. (4) Sicily, famous for the gulf
Charybdis, which answers to the Rock Scylla on Italy side, and for the
shipwracks which oft-times they enforce, have made up the fiction of the
Sea Monsters mentioned in our ancient Poets. (5) Malta the seat of the
illustrious Knights. The second Classis is of those in the Adriatique and
Ionium Seas. In Ptolemy I find situated on the North-east of Italy, Absorrus,
Curicta, Scardona, Insulae Diomedaeae, Issa, Targuriu^, Pharia, Corcyra,
Melitum: more South toward the Mediterraneu^ Corcyra, Ericusa, Cephalenia,
Ithaca the Country of Ulysses, Echinades Insulae Zacynthus, the Strophades,
Cythera: And just as it were in the mouth of the Aegeum, now called Candia an
Isle of 520. miles circuit, and feigned by the ancient Poets to be the
birthplace of Jupiter. It abounds with Cypress trees, and a lascivious Wine
which we call Malmesey.

(25) The last on the Southern Islands in the Aegean Sea, which indeed are not
easy to be numbered: but the chief are Melos, Chias, Bria, The Cyclades,
Sporades, Delos, Tenos, Icaria, Samos, Andros, Eubia, a very large Island,
Scyros, Lesbos, Lemnos, Samothracia, and Mytilene, whose chief town Methymia
offers it self to the confines of Asia. And now we are not many miles distant
from Troas. You see we want Sea-roome to travel further: If you desire to have
an exact review of the particulars, you must allow each almost a several
voyage. Let it suffice for the present, that when your desire serves to make
further search into other Authors, your passage is here discovered to your
hand.

The Description of AMERICA.
AMERICA must yield her self to the last place of my division. She is styled
commonly the new World in respect of what was known in Ptolemi^s time. And
this name imports glory enough that she singly can equalize the title of World,
and a larger World then can be made up by the other three, if we reckon in the
Territories not yet fully discovered, and therefore indeed deserve not each to
it self a several Description.

(2) And since she has enough upon due right to prefer her worth, there will
be no need of that counterfeit gloze of ancientrie, which many pretend in the
search of her original. Some there are that upon their own bare conjecture
pronounce her as old as the story of our Antipodes: others as Solomon's voyage
for Gold into the land of Ophir. In brief, my line will reach but 132. years
backward, to the time of Christopher Columbus a Genoaie: before him I read of
none, that durst arrogate to himself any certain knowledge of those parts,
unless a bragging Spaniard without a name or note of description. There are a
sort of ungrateful ones, that commonly debase them most that deserve of them
best: and judge it a thing worthy their hate, to be out-gone in any fair
action, though it redound to their own profit. Pardon my zeal to truth; it
warmes my style against those robbers, in the behalf of so honorable a man:
They are no petty thieves that would steal from one his immortality: as what
less could he deserve, that gave us the knowledge of another world, and laid
the way open for the entrance of the Gospel, to the saving (as we hope) many
millions of souls?

(3) His lights were little beside his own projecting wit, excellent skill in
Astronomy and Navigation: by which he fully persuades himself of some lands,
that must needs lie in that portion of circle, which should make up the world
into a Globe, and withal saw, there could be no distemper either of heat or
cold, that could make it less habitable or fruitful, then those places of the
old world, which lay under the same Climates, and had the like respect to the
heavens. These indeed were good rational persuasions, but the difficulty
would have daunted a mean spirit, and dashed not the action only, but the very
thought. His resolution was confirmed; and his purpose well digested to
himself in the year 1486. and put into practice about six years after.

(4) When the gappe was once opened many rushed in, and in a short space
discovered a large Territory. Americus Vesputius got ground upon the
Continent, and gave it that name. Ferdinando Magellanus found out the
South-Sea-limits: and first attempted the compass of the word that way. Our
own Heroicks, Sir Francis Drake, Noble Candish, tract him in his Discoveries,
and added of their own. Northward Forbisher and Davis, put fair for a passage
round from the East side of the Continent, from the West Willoughby and
Buroughs.

(5) Let their several endeavors give you the parts of her division: The
Regions contained in this Western Hemisphere, under the name of the New world
or America, in the largest sense are four. (1) America propria. (2) The
Islands. 3 Terra Septentrionalis incognita. (4) Terra Australis incognita or
Terra Magellanica.

(6) America propria, with her Islands are the first, and were first discovered:
She is divided from the old world by the Atlantic Ocean on her East, and on
her West, with the pacifique Sea, or Mare del Zur North, and South she has the
Terrae incognitae, and so possesses to her self almost the whole Hemisphere.
What lies beyond her toward each Pole from the Equator appears as yet but as
waste ground in our Maps: for the experience of our Travelers have not reached
so far, as to search fully into the Commodities of the Countries, or nature
of their Inhabitants. Yet questionless there are many, and may hereafter yield
as much profit as any other.

(7) Of the quality of this Region in general we can speak but little. For
by reason of her length and breadth, she lies at such several distance in
respect of the heavens, that she admits indeed all variety almost, either of
plenty or want, which we have hitherto found in Asia, Africa, or Europe. Here
admirable for the fertility of soil; Then again as barren: here temperate,
there scorching hot, elsewhere as extreme cold. Some Regions watered with
dainty rivers: others again infested with perpetual drouth. Some Plains, some
Hills, some Woods, some Mines, and what not in some tract or other within the
compass of America? yet nothing almost common to the whole but Barbarism of
manners, Idolatry in Religion, and sottish ignorance, such as hardly
distinguishes them from brutes: else they would not have taken reasonable men
to be immortal Gods, as at first they did: yet what either God was or
immortality, they knew no more then instinct of nature gave them, only a
confused thought they had of some place or other (God knows where) behind some
Hill, or where the blessed resided after their death. And from thence they
supposed the Spaniards came at their first arrival. But it was not long before
the Tyrants cudgelled their simplicity, and by their cruelty appeared to them
rather Devils from hell, then Saints from heaven.

(8) Yet still the Inland Countries retain for the most part their inbred
blindness: and worship the Sun, Moon, and Stars, and they have their
other Spirits, which they call their Zemes, and adore them in Images made of
Cotten-wooll, which oft-times by the delusion of Satan seem to move, and utter
an hideous noise, that works in these poor Idolat^rs a great awe, lest they
should harm them.

(9) The rest of their Customs are answerable to their Religion, beastly. They
go naked, and are very lustful people without distinction of sex. In many
places they are Anthropophagi, and prey upon each other like Wolves. They
labor not much to sustain themselves: but are rather content to take what the
earth can yield without Tillage. This in general.

(10) Time has not given way to many divisions of this America. I find one
only in the best Authors: and that it seems Nature marked out to their hands;
For she has severed the Continent into two Peninsulae; The one lies Northward
from the Aequinoctiall, and is called Mexicana. The other for the most part
Southward toward the Magellanick straights, and is called Peruviana. Each of
them are subdivided into their Provinces.

(11) Mexicana is the first, and her bounds on the East and West are the
Atlantic Ocean, and Mare del Zur. By the first it is severed from Europe: and
by the last from the Regions of China and Tartaria in Asia: and is distant not
above 250. miles, if we measure the passage at the shortest cut. On the South
it has the Peninsall Peruviana: and Northward we are not sure whether Sea or
Land. It comprehends in compass 13000. miles. The quality of the Inhabitants,
and the riches of her soil shall appear in her several Provinces, which are
numbered thus: (1) Nova Hispania or Mexicana propria. (2) Quivira. (3)
Nicarugua. (4) Iacutan. (5) Florida. (6) Virginia. (7) Norumbega. (8) Nova
Francia. (9) Terra laboratoris or C^rterialis. (10) Estotilandia.

(12) Nova Hispania, or Mexicana propria is the largest Province of this North
part of America, and gave the name Mexicana to the whole Peninsula, which her
self received from her chief City Mexico. Her bounds Southward is the
Istthmus that joins the Continents. Northward the same with the Peninsulaes;
on the West Calformia or Mar Veriniglio, and on the East Incutan. It was first
possessed by the Spaniard 1518. But it cost them much blood to entitle their
Kings Hispaniarum reges. It is an excellent Country, full of all variety
almost in every kind usual with us, and exceeds in rarities full of wonder.
There is one tree which they dress like our Vine, and order it so, that it
yields them almost all useful necessaries. The leaves serve them in stead of
Paper, and of the Vine bark, they make Flax Mantles, Mattes, Shoes, Girdle,
and Cordage: She has in her four principal Regions of note: (1) Nova Galitia
found out by Nunnus Gusmannus 1530. Her Cities are Compostella, now a Bishops
Sea, Sancte Esprite, and Guadalaiara. The Inhabitants liv^d at large heretofore
without any government. But since the Spaniard came, they have endured
incredible servitude, and cruelty. (2) Mechnacan a fertile Region, the
Inhabitants comely and witty. Her chief Cities, Sl^s^nse the place of their
native Kings, Pascuar and Valudolit, the Bishops See. (3) Mexico or T^mistian,
which contains in it the City of Mexico, in compass six miles, the seat of
an Archduke: and the Spanish Viceroy: and in it is an University, a
Printing House, and a Mint for coynage. Other Cities there are, Tescuvo and
Angelorum Civithy. (4) Ganstecan lying open on the East near Mare del Nort. It
is but barren, and the people poor, but cunning. The Spaniards have here two
Colonies, Panuco and St. James in the valleys.

(13) Quivira bordereth upon the West of the Continent toward Tartarie: It is
temperate and fertile. But her chief riches is the Kine, which feed them with
their flesh, and cloth them with their Hides. Her Provinces are Cibola and
Nova Albion. The last was discovered by our Noble Sir Francis Drake, and
voluntarily yielded to the protection of our admired Queen of England,
Elizabeth.

(14) Nicarugua on the South-east of Nova Hispania, had a kind of settled
Commonwealth before they knew Christianity, and is reported to have a tree
that withers at a man's touch. The chief Cities are now Granado, and Leo a
Bishops See.

(15) Incutan is situated over against the I Will Cuba upon the East of the
Peninsula. The people adored the Cross before they heard of Christ. The
Country is indifferent fertile: though that indeed as in all other places of
this new World has proved worse for the Inhabitants. For it has drawn upon
them their foreign Invadour.

(16) Florida lies near the Gulf of Mexico, and borders upon the Mare del
Nort. A pleasant Region it is, and was discovered map of America AMERICA with
those known parts in that unknown world both people and manner of buildings
Discribed and enlarged by I.S. Ano. 1626
by our English under Sebastion Cubbot 1497. but left for the Spaniard to
possess, which for a while he did: and after him the French, but neither in
quiet. For they warred upon each other, till they left neither of them men
enough to hold it. The French built the City called Ara Carobina. The Spanish
Est Hevens, and St. Matthews, and planted there three Forts, St. James, St.
Philip, St. Augustine, which was burnt by Sir Francis Drake 1586. but recovered
again.

(17) Virginia carries in her name the happy memory of our Elizabeth. On the
East it has Mare del Nort, on the North Norumbega, Florida, on the South and
Westward, the bounds are not yet set. It was first entered by Sir Walter Raleigh
1584. and some at that time left there to discover the Country till more were
sent, but they perished before the second supply. Since there have been many
Colonies planted out of England, which have there manured the ground, and
returned good Commodities to the Adventurers. For indeed it is a rich Country,
in Fruit, Trees, Beasts, Fish, Foul, Mines of Iron and Copper, Veins of
Pitch, Alum, and Tar, Rozen, Gummes, Dies, Timber, etc. The Plantation went
on with good success till the year 1622. And then by the treachery of the
Inhabitants there murdered near upon three hundred of our men. The Natives are
very vile people, horrible Idolaters, adore the creature which they most fear,
and hate them which keep them not in awe: they were kindly entreated by our
English, and invited by all friendly means to Christianity. The North parts are
most inhabited by our men, and is therefore called New England. It has but one
entrance by Sea at a fair Bay. Her Capes are called Cape Henry, and Cape
Charles. The chief Towns are Ianus Town, Regnougton, and Balesguift.

(18) Norumbega on the North of Virginia, lies toward the Mare del Nort, and
is a very fertile Region. It is inhabited by the Spanish and French. The Seas
are shallow, and endanger many ships. So full of Fish, that the Boats cannot
have free passage, says Maginus.

(19) Nova Francia is farther Northward from Norumbega: a barren Country, and
the people barbarous; some Ant^ropophagi. A few French there are besides the
Natives.

(20) Terra Laboratoris or Conterialis, (...) more Northward upon the sea
coast, and is divided from Norumbega by the River Lanada. It reaches into the
sea in form of a Peninsula. The men are barbarous, live in Caves, run swiftly,
and are good Archers. The chief places are Breast, Cabo Marzo, and South Maria.

(21) Escotiland the last Province of the Northern Peninsula still creeps by
the edge of the Atlantic: and on the North has the straights called Fretum
Daveissii an Englishman, who this way attempted the Northwest unto Cathai and
C^ina. And in regard it was adventured in the name of our Queen, the
Promontorie is called Elizabeth's Fore-land: and the sea running by it is
likewise named ^orbishers Straights, from another of our worthy Contrymen,
that was interested before in the same service. This Region is held to be the
first discovered of the New World. The North of it is still unknown. It yields
plenty of Gold, but is extreme cold. The people ingenious and good Artificers
in most kinds, they are clothed with beasts Hydes: and are skilled to make
themselves Boats of sea Caloes skins, which they venture into the main sea
without danger.

(22) Peninsula Peruviana, is the South tract of America from the Isthmus to
the Magellanick Straights. The same seas are the bounds upon the East and West,
which were of the other Mexicana, by which she is divided from Africa on the
East, and on the West at a large distance from the most Southern Islands of
Asia. The compass of it is 17000. miles. From North to South there runs a
continued course of high Mountains, whose tops the very Fowls of the air
cannot reach by flight. And from thence descend many admirable Rivers, among
which Maragno and Argente^^ are most famous. The one for his extent, and the
other for his plenty of silver. The Country is exceeding rich, but the people
differ not much from the worst of beasts. They devour man's flesh, filthy
worms, and what else comes in their way. The chiefest Provinces are numbered
thus; (1) Castella Aurea. (2) Guiana. (3) Peru. (4) Brasile. (5) Chile.

(23) Castella Aurea is the first, named from her plenty of Gold. She lies
part in the Isthmus. The rest is the Northern tract of P^ru: (1) Castella del
ore in the very Isthmus, which is by some measured to be seventeene miles in
breadth, by others twelve, the Merchandise sent from Spain is unladen a^ Nombre
de Dios, and conveyed cross the Isthmus by land to Panamais: from thence
shipped again for the Northwest of Peru: Near these parts was an admirable
achievement performed by our valiant Countryman John Oxenham, who by the
direction of Moors skilled in the Country, went to the Land of Pearls, and
took from the Spaniards an incredible weight of gold and silver. (2) Nova
Andalusia Southward from Castella del ore. The chief Towns are Tocoio and
Sancta Espritta. (3) Nova Granata a rich Region with Mines of Gold and Silver,
part of it lies under the Aequinoctiall. And this is St. Foy, one of the
Archbishops Sees. (4) Cartagena a fruitful Country, which yielded (when time
was) to our still renowned Sir Francis Drake, store of prize, and 240. pieces
of Ordnance.

(24) Guiana is the second Province of the Peninsale Peru Maria, situated just
under the Aequinoctiall. On the North it has the maine River Oronoque or
Raliana from Sir Walter Raleigh, who went further then any before him into the
Country. This River is Navigable by report above 1000. miles. On the South it
has like wise another great River of the Peninsula called Maragnon, which
exceeds the former, and is Navigable 600. miles in length. In this Province
stands the largest City of America called el Dor^do or the gilded City: For
indeed there is plenty of Gold: The length as it is spoke by some Travelers,
will exceed belief. The second memorable Town is St. Thome: not so much for
her own worth, as the dysasterous Fortunes of Sir Walter Raleigh: who there
first lost his eldest son, and after returned home with that ill success, as
it cost him his own life.

(25) Peru the third in rank, yet by name it seems to be the chiefest Province
of this Southern tract. It is contained almost betwixt the Equator and the
Tropic of Capricorn. On the North it has Castella del oro, on the South
Chila, on the West Mare del Zur, and on the East the mountains of Peru. It is a
very rich Country, abounds with gold and silver, little esteemed among the
Inhabitants. For by report the Spaniard ordinarily shooed their Horses with
gold: Another great Commodity is Tobacco, a toy to play withal, but yields a
great revenew to the King of Spain. In this Province stands Lima the
Archbishops See and place of residency for the Viceroy Cusco, where the native
Kings of Peru had wont to keep their Court. The Inhabitants are strange
Idolaters, and worship a black Sheep, Serpents, and other ugly Creatures.

(26) Brasile on the North has the great River Maragnon, and on the South and
West Argenteus, on the East Mare del Nort. The Longitude from North to South is
accounted 1500, the breadth 500. the compass about 3000. The Inhabitants are
rude, live for the most part in the bodies of trees. They swim excellently,
and are able to keep under the water for a long space. Their chief commodities
are Sugar and Brasile wood. The people are covered with natural hair, cruel,
lascivious, false, and what not? In this Region is an herb called Viva, which
if you touch it, it will shoot up, as a Dasie in the night, and will not open
till the party that injured it be out of sight. Here are few Towns of note,
Saint Anna, Equitum, Ascensio, Pernanbuco.

(27) Chile is the last of the Peninsula, and on the North has Peru, on the
West the Mare del Zur, on the South the Magellanick Straights, on the East the
Virginian Ocean. She has her name from her extreme cold temper, in so much
that many are frozen to death, and hardened like marble. It is a rich Country
as well for gold as other commodities of worth. The Rivers are fed with Snow
that falls from the tops of high mountains. The people are of large stature, and
very valiant. The chief City is Saint James, where a Colony of Spaniards keep
hold.

And thus we are traveled from the Basis to the very Pyris, at the South
America. The utmost point of it is called Caput victoria from Magellanus Ship.
The rest must be performed by Sea. Our best course will be from the East
Atlantic Ocean round by the Magellanick Straights into the Pacifick Sea. For
within this compass lies all the Islands that belong to this new World, and
those were my second part in the general division of the whole Hemisphere.

(28) The Islands of America in the Atlantic Ocean are (1) Margarita not far
from Castella del oro. (...) very barren in provision for victuals, but exceeds
in plenty of precious stones of the greatest value: And so does her neighbor.
(2) Cubagna. (3) Trinidado stored with Tobacco. (4) Bacalaes over against Terra
Laboratoris. (5) Boriquen Northward from Guiana; Her principal Cities are St.
Iolas and Port Rico, ruined by our Earl of Cumberland 1^97. (6) Iamaica
spoiled by the Spaniards cruelty of most of her Natives: Insomuch that the
mothers strangled their babes in their womb to prevent their servitude under
so hard a Master as the Spanish Governor. (7) Laba a rich I Will. In this there
is a Bishops Sea called St. Ingo. (8) Lucaiae insulae in number 4^0. and is
best commended for the beauty of her women. (9) Barmudae many in number;
discovered by Sir Thomas Summ^rs, and thence have the name of Summer Islands,
possessed by a plantation of English, and agrees well with their temper. (^0)
Hispaniola or Haitie the first that was described by Columbus in the beginning
of his attempt: An excellent Island for temper of air, fertility of soil,
rich Mines, Amber, Sugar, and Roots medicinal. One of the chief Towns in
Domingo, ransackt by Sir Francis Drake 1585. The rest are St. Isabella, St.
Thome, St. Iolius, etc. (11) ^here are a rank of Islands near the Basis of the
South America, that are called Insulae Caralum or Canibalorum, part of them are
Canibals and wild people: yet they yield commodities especially the Guiacum or
lignum Sanctum.

(19) The Islands of America on the West in the Pacifick Sea are not many of
much account. (1) The chief is Califormia, an Island of about 500. leagues from
the North Cape, Mendocino to the South, S. Lucas, which enters a little within
the Tropic of Cancer. (2) Insulae Salomonis, supposed by some to be the Land
of Ophir. (3) Insulae Latronum, named from the Natives theft, who stole
Magellanus Cockboat when he first entered it.

The Description of GRAECIA.
GREECE is divided from Italy, but by a short cut of the Adriaticke sea. Each
is so placed in Contra-view of the other, as if she were ordered to overlooke
her neighbors actions. And so indeed there has been continually a mutual
emulation betwixt the two flourishing Nations, which have either in turns
possessed, or at once divided the Empire of our Christian world.

(2) How ever now she lies dejected, and groans under a miserable servitude:
yet once she had as well the pre-eminence of Rome in glory, as the precedence
in time. For to say truth, she was the wisest of any people, that were not
enlightened with the knowledge of that great mystery: she set a pattern for
government to all her succeeding ages; and (in brief) she was the mistress
almost of all Sciences: some there are which (in a strict account) will accept
none but the Mathematikes: And yet too (though those without doubt owe their
being to the Chaldeans and Egyptians,) sure I am that even in them, she bred
some of the most famous Artists that ever the world had, Euclide may be my
proof. In Philosophy Socrates, Plato, and our great Aristotle. In Oratory
Demosthenes, Aeschines, and Isocrates. In Historiographic Xenophon, Thucidides,
Plutarch and Herodotus. In Poesy Hesiod, Homer, Sophocles, and Aristophanes.
In State Policy the wisest Solon of Athens, and Lycurgus of Lacedemonia: In
Military affairs Themistocles, Miltiades, and the great Alexander, and
infinite others, which had all past their times, and Greece almost sunk in her
luster, before the name of Rome was heard of almost in her Territories.

(3) She was at first but a small parcel of this quarter, till by her prowess
she grew on upon her neighboring Countries, and enlarged her dominions through
all Macedonia, Peloponnesus, Epirus, the Aegean Islands and Thrace: and besides
sent forth Colonies into other parts as well of Asia and Africa as of Europe,
whereof some retain the Greek names to this day. Her self enjoyed the
liberty for a long time which the first Inhabitants took to themselves, and
felt not the burden of a tributary nation, till the time of the Persian Cyrus.
He first brought her under. After him Xerx^s and other of the Kings of Persia;
which held it till it was recovered by Philip King of Macedonia; and from him
it fell to Alexander the great, who first took up his Greek Monarchy: and at
his death in the division delivered this with the rest to his successors in the
Kingdom of Macedonia: and so it continued until their last Perseus, in whose
time it fell into the power of the Romans.

(4) But when that Empire too had its fate to be severed by Constantine the
great into the East and West, the Greeks again put in for a part: and were for
a time rulers of the East, till they were successively overrun by the Goths,
Bulgarians, Saracens, and Turks, under whom to this day, the poor wretches
suffer continual persecution for the name of Christ: and are scarce permitted
by that great Tyrant, means of learning to know the Name, for which they
suffer.

(5) This Religion was first called Helles from Hello the son of Deucalion
and Pyrrha, and in aftertimes took the name of Graecia from Graecus the son
of Cecrops: and King then of that part only, which was called Attica: For when
there were many States, which were ordered by their peculiar Princes: But when
once they were all joined into a Monarchy, the whole retained the name of that
part which was accounted most famous: and the Inhabitants in their stories
generally called Graecians, though sometimes by the like Synecdoche, Achaei,
Achivi, Argivi, Danai, Delopes, Doors, Dryopes, Hellenes, Jones, Myrmidones,
and Pelasgi.

(6) The bounds of Greece have been severally set, as her government has
been either enlarged by her own valor, or impaired by a foreign enemy. But
as she is now taken by Geographers, her mark on the East is the Aegean Sea: on
the West the Adriaticke, which severs her from Italy: on the North the
Mountain Haemus, which is reported (though falsely) to be of such height, that
from the top a man may descrie Seas four several ways: and on the South
the Mediterranean Ionium Seas.

(7) The Region thus limited was once as fertile, pleasant, and rich, as any
part of the whole Continent: And by reason of her plenteous Rivers and
commodious access for Ships, from almost all Coasts, she could want no
means to export her own overplus, or import foreign merchandise from all
parts of the known world: If at this day it appears not in that luster no
marvel.

Impius haec tam culta novalia miles habebat:
Barbarus has segetes.
(8) And besides the base misusage of the mis-beleeving Turk, the very Natives
themselves are fallen from the noble disposition of their predecessors into an
incredible sottishness: and those which before reckoned the rest of the earth
Barbarous in comparison to their polite Commonwealth, are now themselves sunk
below the envy of the meanest Nation, and become the most miserable object of
pity living upon the earth. Indeed they may hardly be said to live, for that
they take no farther care then barely to live. They are lazy beyond belief,
and ignorant almost beyond recovery: for they have now no means to bring their
children either to learning or manners. Not an Academie in all Greece. Their
carriage generally uncivil: their feasts riotous, and their mirth debaucht.
Their Wives are well favored, and so indeed they must be: for they use them no
longer as their wives then they continue to their liking: when they once fade,
they are put to the house-drudgerie. Their language is the same as heretofore,
but rudely corrupted, though (as Maginus reports) it differs not so much as the
Italian from the pure Latin. The have no habit almost proper, but those which
serve the Turk wear their fashion: the rest which are under the Venetian,
observe them in their apparel: for they are slaves to both in their whole
course.

(9) Yet they retain still a show of the Christian Religion, which was here
first settled by Timothy, to whom Saint Paul wrote two Epistles, and was after
in the Primitive times, professed by diverse learned and reverend Divines of
their own Nation, which are with us received as Authentike Fathers of the
Church: Saint Chrysostom, Basile, the Gregory's, Nisene, and Nazianz^n, were
all Grecians.

The government Ecclesiastical is in power of four Patriarchs: (1) Of
Constantinople; and his extends over all Greece, Moscovie, Sclavonia, Dacia,
part of Poland, and all the Islands of the Adriatike and Aegevn Seas: (2) Of
Alexandria, and his over Egypt and Arabia: (3) Of Jerusalem; and his over the
Greeks in Palestine: (4) Of Antioch; and his over Syria, Armenia, and Cilicia.

(10) The people of this Country were heretofore distinguished by their
principal dialects. And those were the Attike Ionike, Dorike and A^olike. A
fifth there was which was called a mixed or common dialect. Each differed from
other no more then we do from our selves in several parts of our Kingdom,
But this division will hardly reach the limits, which bounds Greece according
to our description: we will adhere rather to that of our modern Geographers,
which reckon to Greece, six Provinces. (1) Thrace. (2) Macedonia. (3) Albania.
(4) Epirus. (5) Achaia. (6) Peloponnesus. And (7) the Islands.

(11) Thrace is the most Northern tract of all Greece, and lies on the South
of the Mountain Haemus, on the North of the Aegean Sea: on the West of the
Pontus Euxinus, and East of Macedonia. It has the name from the sharpness of
the air: and map of Greece Ellas GREECE Reuised by John Speed and are to be
sold by Geo: Humble 1626
Revised by John Speed and are to be sold by Geo: Humble 1626

indeed it is very unpleasant for the most part, and too unnatural to its own
fruit, that it scarce ever ripens what it brings forth. The people are many,
and those very strong, fierce, and heady: and most impatient of government or
discipline: and by this means they have seldom had success in their battles,
whereas if they could have been brought to a joint force, it is said they
would have been invincible.

(12) Part of this Nation was heretofore persuaded, that their ancestors did
not at all die, neither should they; but pass only out of this world into
another to their supposed god Zalmoxis, once a Scholar of Pythagoras, who when
he had persuaded them unto this Religion, seemed wonderfully to vanish out of
their sight, and appeared not any more: but left them fully possessed that he was
the Deity, which must after a time entertain them. And this they expected with
that great joy, that as often as one died, in stead of mourning they set forth
games and feasts to congratulate his freedom from the troubles of this earthly
condition: and the wife only, whom he loved best (for they had many) was
thought worthy to be killed by her best friends at her husbands grave, that she
might bear him company in the other world: the rest bewailed their neglect,
and the residue of their life was to them as a disgrace. When a child was
borne, neighbors were called to bemone his entrance into a multitude of
calamities; and in course they reckoned up, what he was to pass before he
could go to their god Zalmoxis: for they acknowledged no other: but blasphemed
and shot arrows against the heavens as often as they heard it thunder.

(13) Their Kings, says Quadus, are chose by suffrage: and those especially
which are best known to be most mild; not young, nor yet a father of any
children: for they will not by any means admit, that their government should
become hereditary. If the Prince himself offend, he shall not escape their
laws even to death: yet no man may set a hand to his execution, but by a common
desertion he is allowed no necessaries to live, and therefore must needs die.
Here once reigned Polymnestor, which murdered Pryam's younger son Polydorus:
And Tereus, and Diomedes, etc.

(14) This Province is now called Romenia, and takes that name from her chief
City Constantinopolis or Roma nova; heretofore Bizantium, of great fame from
her first building, and that six hundred threescore and three years before
the Incarnation: her founder Pausanias a Lacedemonian. She stands so
commodiously and commands the Euxine Sea, the Propontis and Hellespont; that
there can hardly be any passage to or fro betwixt Europe and Asia in those
parts, without her leave. And (likely enough) that for this cause Constantine
the Great when he divided the Empire, chose this for his Eastern seat: and in
the year three hundred fifteen enlarged it with magnificent buildings, and
decked her in the apparel of old Rome: from whence he translated hither many
ancient and costly monuments; and feign would have removed her name, but that
his subjects out of their endeared affection to their Prince, would hear no
other then Constantinopolis the City of Constantine. It is in compass
eighteen miles, contains commonly seventie thousand Inhabitants, though
almost every third year she be visited with a great Pestilence. The other
eminent Cities of Thrace are Abdera, Nicopolis, Philopolis, Hadrianopolis,
Traianopolis, Phinopolis, Pemithus, etc. The Chersonesus over against Troas in
Asia, is called Saint George his Arm: and in it stands Sestos, where the love
passed betwixt Leander and Hero.

(15) Macedonia is on the West of Thrace, East of Albania: North of Epirus and
Achaia: and South of Misia superior. It had this name from Macedo grandchild
to Deucalion, as Solinus gives him. The land is fertile and pleasant: rich with
mines of gold and silver: and the qualities of the Inhabitants were heretofore
answerable. Their disposition noble and free: their laws good, and those their
own: their attempts great, and their Kings valiant and victorious. The most
renowned were Philip, and (the greatest one that ever the world knew) Alexander
his son, which conquered the world, and set here the throne of the third Empire.

(16) There are many under-Provinces in Macedonia. The principal is Thessalia,
and here stands Triaeca the Bishops Sea of Heliodorus, Author of that
excellent fiction of Theagines and Cariclaea; though he were too much wedded to
a youthful fable, when he chose rather to forgo his charge, then disavow his
work. And here likewise is the Pharsalis, famous for the great Battle betwixt
Caesar and Pompey. The other Provinces are Aemathia, Pieria, Pelasgia, Eshotis,
and Phthiotis, which yield matter for many of their stories: and are famous for
diverse hills and Rivers often mentioned in our ancient Poets. The chief are
Olympus, Pelion, and Ossa, with their delicious valley, Tempe, Pindus,
Nymphaus, Athos, etc. The Rivers Axius and Erigonius. The chief City in the
whole Region was (in Augustus his time) Thessalonica, now Salonike, comparable
they say in state and merchandise to Naples in Italy.

(17) Albania is on the West of Macedonia, and East of the Adriaticke Sea:
North of Epirus, and South of Sclavonia. Her chief Cities Albanopolis, and
Duractinum, heretofore called Epidammum and Croya. The whole Country was
inwaded by Amurath, and recovered by George Castriot or Scanderbeg, the
terriblest enemy that ever the Turk had.

(18) Epirus in her name carries no more then a firm land, and is a part (as
most esteem it) of Albania, but indeed lies some what more Southward, then
Albania propria: on the East she is divided from Achaia, by the River Achelous,
and on the West is bounded with Montes Acroceraunii; on the South with the
Ionian Sea. It was of old divided into Chaonia, which took her name from
Chaon, the brother of Helenus: and Acarnania, which is now called Graecia the
less. The Country was fertile and populous, but at this day lies waste, and
breeds better Cattle then men: especially Bulls, Sheep and Dogs of
wonderful bigness: among the rest extraordinary Mares, which from thence were
called Epiroticae. It was the Kingdom of Py^rhus, and of late years was
governed by George Castriot.

(19) Achaiae is upon the South of Thessalia, East of the River Achel^us: West
of the Aegean Sea, and North of Peloponnesus. It contains many famous
Provinces, the chief are (1) Attica, and her prime City was Athens now
Setines: she had her first name from Minerva, whom they honored as their
peculiar goddess: as being at that time accounted the best learned among the
Heathens: and excelled as well in martial affairs. In a word, they came short
to none in wealth, State-policie and what else might make a people happy above
expression: so Pliny sets her forth. The second Province is Doris, a tract
near Pernassus Mount, and mother to the most elegant Greek Dialect. (3)
Aetolia, and in this the City Calydon. (4) Locris, and Regio Opuntiorum, her
chief City Naupactus, and the famous Lepanto. (5) Phocis, which can glory in
nothing more then the City Delphi, where the Oracle of Apollo gave answer (for
many years) to the silly Idolaters. (6) Beotia, and in this stood Thebes. (7)
Megaris, her principal City Megara, and from hence was the Secta Megarica, of
which Euclide was chief.

(20) Peloponnesus is a peninsula on the South of Graecia, and joined to the
rest by an Isthmus, which is not above five miles in breadth from one Sea to the
other, in so much, that it has been sometimes attempted to be dug through,
and was begun by Nero: but the work was found not worth the charge and trouble:
It was fenced cross with a strong wall and five Castles; which being once
destroyed was the second time by many hands erected in five days, and called
Hexamilium.

(21) This Peninsula is indeed the Fortress of all Greece: and though it wants
much of the ancient glory, which it might well vaunt in the time of Agamemnon,
Menelaus, Ajax and the rest: yet is she not so much to be contemned as other
parts of this ruinated Country, how ever the Turk is her master, and she is
now called generally Morea.

(22) Her Provinces were (1) Corinthia near the Isthmus, and is named from her
chief City Corinthus: which being fired, melted sundry metals into a confused
medly, and made up the Aes Corinthium, held more precious then any other, of
its own simple nature. (2) Argia, her Commonwealth was heretofore of great
note, and her City Argos is at this day held pleasant and well seated. And in
this likewise stood Epidamnus. (3) Laconia on the South of the Peninsula: her
chief City was Lacedemonia, once Sparta: when Lycurgus gave his Laws, and is
now called Misithra. (4) Missevia, and her chief Cities are Messeve, Mothone,
Corone, etc. (5) Elis. (6) Achaia propria: and here stood Aegina, and Aegium,
and Pateras. (7) Arcadia once Pelasgia, in the Center almost of Peloponnesus,
full of pleasant mountains, fit for pastue: and is therefore made the
Shepherds seen in our renowned Sir Philip Sidneis Poetical story. Her
principal City is Megalopolis.

(23) Thus have we passed the Continent of Greece, and want comes only to
give my Reader a brief Survey of the Islands which lie round in the Adriatique,
Mediterranean, Ionian and Aegean Seas. But by reason the compass is so large,
and the number so great* the little space which is left me, will scarce admit
more then their bare names, which I will set down, with reference to their
next neighboring Provinces, as I have described them in the Continent.

(24) First then near Peloponnesus, and in the Ionian Sea, toward Macedonia
and Epirus, the chief are Aegina, Cythera, the Strophades, Zacynthus,
Cephalonia, Ithaca, Echinades, Corcyra or Corphin and Sapho, etc. In the Aegean
Sea belonging to Greece, are the Cyclades and Sporades, and over against
Thrace, Thassus, Samothracia, Imbrus, and Lemnon Vulcani. Near Macedonia,
Pepanthus, Scopelos, Scyathos, Scyros, Allonnesus, Cicinnethus, Dromus,
Seraquinus. Near Achaia is Euboea now Negroponte a very large Island: and not
far distant Andros, T^nos, Delos, Rhene, Melos, and many others.

The Description of the Roman Empire.
VIRTVTE Duce, comite Fortuna is the word of most Historians, upon the low
birth and quick growth of the state of ROME. For had not matchless prowess,
and infallible success joined in their full strength to make up an Empire for
the world to admire: I see not how she could in so few years raise her self
from so small grounds, to so high a pitch of luster, as set the whole earth at
a gaze, and found us all business enough for a time, to do little else but
observe her actions. Look back to Romulus her first Founder; you shall find
him no better man, then the base son of a licentious Vestall; his father not
truly known to this day, but simply surmised to be Mars the god of War. His
mother Rhea, burnt by law for that very fact, in which she conceived him; and
himself an outcast, exposed with his brother Rhemus, to be torn by the wild
Beasts. Little hope we see left, for such a Nation to spring from their loins,
had not Fortune lulled them in her own lap, and delivered them by mere
chance, into the hands of one Faustulus the Kings Shepherd, when they were
thus found, the best Writers afford them no better Nurse, then the Shepherds
wife, a known Strumpet, who for her insatiate lust was called Lupa, and might
perhaps occasion the fable of the She- wolf: She suckled them with no choycer
milk then she did her own home-spoone brats; nor were they bred under
Faustulus, to any better fortune then the Sheep-hook: yet no sooner the yonkers
were start up to the knowledge of their true birth, but they stripped themselves
out of their disguise, revenged their mothers death upon their usurping uncle
Aemilius Sylvius, restored the Latin Kingdom to the rightful Numitor, and
erected a new Empire for their own posterity.

(2) These were the progeny of Aeneas, who arrived here from the Troiane
war, and made love to Lavinia, daughter to Latinus King of the Laurentini.
The great combat betwixt him and Turnus the Rutilian, grew upon no other terms
then for her fair looks, which he could not, nor did he peaceably enjoy, till
he had vanquished his corrivall, and then he soon fastened himself in the
right to that Kingdom, and not long after possessed it, about the year of the
world two thousand seven hundred eighty seven. It would not be much to our
purpose, to lead you down step by step through the succession, till we
come to Romulus. All before him, were before this Empire had being; and
therefore out-reach the limme of my story: yet this in brief, we may recount
here, that he was the 17. from Aeneas, and founded Rome in the year 3198.

(3) The plot-forme was first cast in a figure of a quadrangle upon the mons
Palatinus, for the other six noted hills were not then taken in, but added, in
after ages, by their several Kings. It was begun (it seems) but slight, and
the walls raised not very high, when Rhemus could skip them over, in contempt of
his brothers poor enterprise: but the mock cost him his life; he was slain by
Romulus; and he now left the sole founder to give name to this new building.

(4) Romulus then is their first King, and takes upon him the government of
such discontented and masterlesse young Shepherds, as he had raked together to
people his Commonwealth; a crew so scorned of their neighbors, that their
daughters denied to join in marriage, with such a refuse of men: so that by
this means this up-start Nation was like to sink in the birth, for mere want
of issue to continue their succession: And without doubt themselves had seen
their last man borne, had not their own wit bested them more, then the women's
love. For when they saw their worth was not sufficient to woo fairly with
effect, they proclaimed a day for solemn sports, which they presumed (and
rightly too) would call in their borderers of both sex: and for that purpose
had made provision of strength to force the women to their lust, whom they
could not entice to their lawful embraces. The plot held, and the Sabines
bear the name to have suffered most in that brutish treachery; yet others (it
seems) had their part too in the injury, and jointly beset them round with
strong enemies, which the Romans notwithstanding shook off with that ease and
undaunted courage, that the rest were glad at last to yield them truce for
their own quiet, and assist them too in their ensuing Conquests.

(5) The City at this time was not above two miles in circuit; the Inhabitants
not much above the proportion of that little ground, till Romulus had built an
Asylum, a Refuge for debucht people; where the servant might secure himself
from his master, the murderer from his magistrate, the debtor from his arrest,
and each fault from its punishment: and then he soon called in incredible
swarms (such as they were) of Latins, Tuscaines, Trojans, Arcadians, and made
up a Miscellany of people, each brought in the proper sins of his own
Country, and have there left them as a testimony of their ancestors to this
day.

(6) This policy might seem good at first to make up his number; For who else
(but such) would leave a settled state (though mean) in a well ordered
Kingdom, to apply himself to novelties of so uncertain event? But in a few
years their King found that there was more need of a Pistrinum to correct,
then an Asylum to shelter his offenders, and therefore was forced to make
settled laws for his Commonwealth; and cull out a certain number of the best
ordered, to assist him with their counsel, and see execution duly performed
upon the rest. These he called Patres or Senatores, and were at first not above
one hundred, chosen out of the elder, wealthier, and gravest Citizens, who were
either called Patricii, for that they had most of them many children, or
Patroni, as being the Patrons of the Plebeii, or poorer sort, which were
therefore oft-times called Clientes, as having no business of action in the
Commonwealth, scarce so much as to require their own right, unless under the
protection of some one or other of the Patricii, yet afterward both the number
of Senators was increased to 200. and at last 300. and the Plebeii too in time
had the privilege to be elected into their society.

(7) No sooner Romulus had thus set the form, but while he was yet in speech
to the people at a set assembly, a tempest rose, the skies darkened, and a
trick was found to juggle him clean out of their sight, as if at this instant
he had been wrapped into the heavens. He past not (it seems) to lose his life,
so that he might gain the opinion of a god. For so the Romans believed; and
it was confirmed by one Proculus, who pretended to have seen him after his
change, and received a charge from his deity, that he should be thence-forward
honored in Rome as her tutelare. In brief, the more likely surmise of his
manner of death is, that in the storm he was cut in pieces by some of his
Senators, who had either suffered under his tyranny, or at least had hope to
raise themselves by his fall.

(8) Their second King was Numa Pompilius, religious in his kind beyond all
others, and ordained in Rome a set form to worship their gods, invested
Priests and Soothsayers to perform their rites, and foretell things to come:
committed the Vestall fire to virgins, to be kept as a perpetual watch over
the Empire, in an emulation to the bright stars of heaven, which were never
extinguished: and in brief, civilized the people so far as they began now, (and
scarce till now) to have a sense of moral goodness, a moderate love to
themselves mixed with some equity toward others.

(9) Their third Tullus Hostilius stirred them up first with the desire of true
honor, and enabled them by martial discipline to provoke the Albanes, a
Nation then of long standing, and great fame through most parts of Italy; yea
so equal was their prowess, that open war might well lessen their several
strengths, but not determine the conquest, till by the tried fortune of the
Horatii, and Curatii, brothers on each party, it stoopt at last to Rome,
beyond her own hope: for she had at last but one Champion left of her Horatii,
against the three others, who were notwithstanding by a feigned flight of their
own adversary drawn severally out into single combat, and successively fell
by the sword of the Roman victor. Alba was now carried captive to Rome, and
gave up her honors as a Trophie to this newborn Empire.

(10) Ancus Martius their fourth King enlarged her walls, joined those ports of
the City, which were before severed by the River Tyber, with a large bridge.
Their next Tarquinius Priscus was a Corinthian, and knew well how to use his
Greek wit, with a Roman valor. Nor peace nor war could overmatch him. He
triumphed over the Tuscaines, and was the first which entered the City in a
chariot royal, drawn with four horses, and first indeed that ordained the
vestments, and ensigns of honor, which were after in frequent use, to stir
up the soldier to deserving actions.

(11) Their sixth Servius Tullius was so dexterous in his rule, that no person
past him almost without inquiry of his wealth map of the Roman Empire A NEW
MAP OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE newly described by John Speed and are to be sold
in pops head alley by G. Humble 1626
years, worth, employments, for which special purpose he distingusht the
people by several Tribes; and over-lookt all (by this mothod) with as much
ease, as a nimble hous-wife does her private family.

(12) Tarquinius Superbus was the seventh and last King, proud and cruel, yet
that too though it cost him his crown, enlarged the Kingdom to the Romans: for
it prevailed upon many strong Provinces of Italy, which they after enjoyed with
better hearts, and ruled with more equity, then he used in the unjust
oppression of his neighbors. His name was grown odious when the lust of his
son Tarquinius wronged the chaste Lucretia, both together stirred the people to
disrobe him of his title, and bethink themselves of some other form of
government, which might found more of the Roman liberty.

(13) This variety had took up hitherto scarce 245. years since the City was
first built, a time too short for her greatness, if we compare her with the
progress of other Nations: yet to her own ensuing fortunes, it is esteemed but
her childhood, her infancy: while she had not yet spoke, nor the world well
heard of her actions, farther then her own home, and her Countries near
about. She began now to feel her strength, and when she had first freed her
self from the oppression of her homebred Tyrant: she soon after spread her
Arms over all Italy, and her fame through most parts of the world. Her power
was now no more at the disposing of one King, but designed over into the hands
of two aged and wise Citizens, of their own (though the best) rank: and this
they were to use, rather as feoffees in trust, then free possessors; wherefore
the Romans baulkt the insolency, which their last King had before practiced,
both in the name of their new Governors, for they were called only Consules,
a consulendo; and in their term of Government, for it became now annual,
which was not before limited unless by death: and lastly, by their ensigns of
state, their twelve lictors and fasces, which were not allowed to both, but to
each in turns for their several month. And this went on without breach almost
six years, till the Romans thought fit to correct their laws by the Greek
copy; and therefore deputed three of their best esteemed subjects to see
Athens, to peruse their orders and customs, of which the world had then a
great opinion: for it was indeed the mother of learning.

(14) They returned them written at first in ten tables made of brass; two
more were soon after added, and together were distinguished from their own
municiple laws by the name of Leges 12. tabularum. The Consuls power was now
taken off, and this was their rule of justice, put into the hands of ten,
whom they called Decemviri. Each ruled in his turn, and (for that course) had
a power wel-nigh as large as their Kings or Consuls, else differed little at
other times from a private Roman. This begun some 303. years after their
first founder, and had continued but three, when Appius laid false claim to
Virginia for his bondmayd, that indeed he might dishonor her as his strumpet.
By this means he doubly provoked the Commons, both with her injuries, and her
fathers sorrow, who was forced to murder his own daughter, to quit her from
the lust of the Decemviri: and therefore they took revenge, not upon him only,
but his office; abrogated the Decemviratus, and returned the authority into the
hands of Consuls as before: yet so, as ofttimes by intercourse the Tribuni
militum put in for a consulary soveraigntie, and was admitted to the same
dignity, though not the name, which the Patritii only referred to themselves
as their royalty. It was first procured by the importunate motion of the
Commons, that they might be equally capable of the Consul-ship. To this, though
the nobility would not give their full assent in all circumstances, yet were
they constrained for their own peace to yield in effect, and mince it with
another title of Tribuni plebis Consulare potestate.

(15) Under these forms of government for three hundred years after the fall
of Tarquinius, to Appius Claudius and Q. Fulvius Coss. They were still in
growth, but not yet come to their state of honors: and therefore Florus rightly
styles it the youth of Rome in comparison to the age of man. In this while
their most famous stories are the war with Porsenna, some eight years after
their first Consuls: the creation of Dictators and Tribunes of the people
within twenty; the injuries of M. Coriolanus, and attempt against his own
Country uot long after: the construction of many set laws, which continued in
force to after ages: the Lex Agraria, Publia, de Aventino, Tarpeia, of the
twelve tables, Clodia, Aemilia, de Ambitu, de Mulctis, etc. the Censors first
created about 68. years after the Regi-fugium: the conspiracy of the Servants
some 92. after: many victories in the interim, and Rome her self at last taken
by the Galls, but freed by Camillus about the 120. Marcus Curtius casts
himself into the pit to preserve his Country: more laws are made; the first
Punike war waged, all within 120. and odd years after Rome was surprised: some
28. after that, the Bellum Ligusticum and Ianus Temple the second time shut:
then the Bellum Illyricum, Gallicum Cisalpinum, and (the last of this age,) the
second Punike war.

(16) By this time Italy was subdued, and now she swept on with full sail, and
confirmed strength: and about twenty after was able to resist the Macedonian,
made war with Perses, set on to the third Punike war; wasted Carthage, and
then Numantia: took Arms against Iugurtha, all in less compass of years
then one hundred: and about this time was the Eagle took up by Marius for the
Roman ensign. Soon after was the Bellum Marsicum, and Mithridaticum:
Catilines conspiracy, and the noble acts of those great Heroes, Scylia and
Cicero, Caesar and Pompey, and the rest, which removed the Greek Empire to
Rome, and made her the seat of the fourth Monarchy about seven hundred and
three years after the City was built, forty eight before Christ.

(17) Hitherto (though with some change and curb) they continued the
succession of Consuls, till Julius Caesar returned from Spain with victory
over Pompeys sons: and then the Senate, expressing more worship to him, then
foresight of their own future mischief, invented new titles of singular
honor, call him Pater patriae, Consul in Decennium, Dictator in perpetuu^,
Sacro-sanctus and Imperator, all which himself made good, not in bare name
only, as perhaps they meant, but in short space gathered a power equal to
their flattery, and by his own strength kept, what was only theirs to give:
till by Brutus and Cassius he was slain in the Senate, and then the rule fell
for a short while to a Triumviratus, which began and ended with Octavius
Caesar, Antonius and Lepidus. After ten years the whole Empire was left to
Octavius, and his titles were Augustus Caesar, and Imperator: they continue to
his successors to this day.

(18) Rome as yet sinkes not in her glory, but goes fairly on with full
victory, till the Imperial seat was removed to Bizantium, and after divided
into the East and West by Theodosius. Betwixt these whiles was a great part of
the world still called in, to enlarge their Dominions, and our selves among the
rest, though with some difficulty, were forced to yield Britain a Province to
Caesar, and the Roman Empire. For let us take her limits at their best
advantage; and she was on the West bounded with the Atlantic Ocean; on the
East with the River Tigris in Asia: on the North with Rhene and Danubius in
Europe, and on the South with the mount Atlas in Africa: They contain these
several Provinces, almost in order (of time) as they were subdued. Italy,
parts of Africa, Spain, and Germany, Britain, Illiricum, Diburnia, Dalmatia,
Achaia, Macedonia, and Dardania, Maesia, and Thracia, Pontus, Armenia minor,
Mesopotamia, Parthia, Arabia, Iudaea, Cilicia, Syria, Egypt, Cantabria,
Austria, Alps Maritimae, Rhetia, Norricum, Pannonia, Armenia mayor, and the
Islands round, so Ortelius marshals them.

(19) We must omit for want of space many eminent turns of Fortune which Rome
suffered in these interims, and take her now as at that time she was in her
full height of honor; in compass fifty miles, seated on the River Tyber
fifteen from the Sea: on her walls were raised 740. turrets, fit to receive
provision on war for defense of the City in time of siege. Livie numbers her
37. gates, and her foundation was pitched upon seven hills: (1) Palatinus, which
(as some say) gave the name to our Kings Palaces. (2) Capitolinus, upon which
was built the Capitol, delivered from the Gals by the gaggling of geese. (3)
Viminalis. (4) Aventinus, from whence their condemned persons were cast into
the River Tyber. (5) Esquilinus. (6) Caelius, where once stood the chief
Councel-house for the Senators. (7) Quirinalis. You may not expect here an
exact description; take at large the speech of the Emperor Constantius, when
with wonder he beheld the Campus Martius, the Sepulcher of Augustus, the Forum,
Temples, Bathes, Theaters, the Arcus triumphales, Aquaducts, statenesse, and
infinite other Monuments, he gave a brief epitomy of her antique glory; that
Nature had spent her self in the making up of that one City, as if we might
not hope to see the like in after-ages: and true enough it is, that she could
not long support her self in that state of honor, but (as a string stretched
to the utmost) cracks on the sudden.

(20) No sooner she was once divided, but she lay open as a prey to the Goths,
Hunns, Vandals, Alani, Burgundians and Lombards: all now left of the Empire, is
almost a naked title, and that scarce heard of in Rome: for it has it seat in
Germany, and is conferred upon some Christian Prince by the suffrages of the
seven Electors. The spiritual (1) Archbishop of Mentz, Chancellor of the
Empire through all Germany. (2) Archbishop of Cullen, Chancelour of the Empire
through Italy. (3) Archbishop of Triers, Chancellor of the Empire through all
France. The Temporal (4) Count Palatine of Rhene, Archsewer to the Emperor.
(5) Duke of Saxony, Lord Marshall. (6) Marquess of Brandenberge, Chief
Chamberlain; and (7) in case of equality of voices among the other six, the
King of Bohemia casts the Diadem into whose lap he pleases.

(21) For the state of Rome as now it is, and what else concerns the Empire
since the removal of the seat royal, I refer my Reader either to the
descriptions of Italy and Germany, or at least to some other modern Authors,
who have scope to write more at large: my intent here was briefly to set down
the beginning, increase, top and limits of the ancient Romans government.

The Description of GERMANY.
GERMANY is continued with Belgia, and lies next Eastward in our course
toward Asia. We shall find them ofttimes no otherwise distinguished, then by the
terms of higher and lower, greater and lesser Germany. And indeed as this is
the largest portion of the whol^ Region, which is known by that name: so is it
the largest Region of our whole quarter, which is known entirely by any one
name.

(2) As for her antiquity; it does not only compare her to the rest of
Europe: but compares Europe her self with any other part of the second world,
which accounts her years but from Noah's Flood, or the confusion of Tongues. For
this purpose we had before occasion, in our general Descriptions, to mention
the original of the Germane Kingdoms: and that (as you may remember) was
drawn by Chronologers from Tuisco (some say) the son of Noah, which lived
soon after the world was repaired, and began his Empire about thirty years
from the fall of Babel.

(3) It appears sufficiently upon the record of received Historians, that in
the time of their Idolatry, they worshipped one Thyst or Tuisco, as a God which
sprang from the earth: and to this day, as I hear, there is a street about
Cullen called Deutsch, and is thought as yet to retain a sound of the name of
Tuisco: for there he is supposed to have kept his residency. Whether thus or
no, I leave it to my Authors proof, and my Readers judgment to believe or
reject as it shall seem best. All I can enforce is, that doubtless the
Germans were an ancient people: and that they might challenge, had they no
other testimony to show for it, then her very names of Tuiscia or Teutscke,
Theuschland, Almania, and Teutonia, by which she was known, in several ages,
long before the Romans gave her this last appellation of Germany.

(4) Tuiscia, Teutsch or Theuschlant was received from her first King, and
Almania from her second, the son of Tuisco, who (as their Story gives it with
equal credit as it does the rest) was likewise worshipped for a God, by the
name of Mannus: The same account is rendered for Teutonia, from Teuto a Captain
of the Germans: and their ninth from Tuisco. Under these they continued, till
the Romans entry, after their Conquest over the Gals: for whose likeness to
them both in feature, and color, in goodly portraiture and carriage of their
wars, they were from that time called Germany, as if brothers to the Gauls.
Yet there are two, which compound the name of the Teutonike words Gar or Ger,
which signifies all or wholly, and man, which retains with us its prime
signification of Man: as if they were all men to the proof: or as others
interpret, as if they were a mixed Nation of all sorts of men from several
Countries.

(5) But this last agrees not with the conjecture of some Geographers, that
Germany has not changed her Inhabitants since she was first possessed: quoniam
non est verisimile (says one) aliquos Asia, aut Africa aut quidem Italia
relicta Germaniam pettisse, terris informem, Coelo asperam, cultu tristem,
aspectuque minime nisi indigenis gratam. And this indeed differs not much from
the report of Mela, Tacitus, and other ancient Writers. But the reason I hold
not good: for howsoever it might be true in their times of some, and the most
part perhaps of Germany (as it was then limited) that it was sylvis horrida,
paludibus faeda, et fluviorum cursibus praepedita, montium anfractibus
exasperata ob idque maxim invia: yet now she has changed her hue, and by the
help of good husbandry is become so fertile and pleasant: by the large
additions to her Territories in these our after ages is grown so populous,
that she vayles not to France, Spain, or Italy it self, says Quadus.

(6) By her first Geographers she was limited on the West with the River Rhene,
on the east with Ietula, on the south with Danubius: each of these tracts have
won upon their neighboring Countries: and enlarged the compass of Germany to
a double extent of what it was before: For on the West she passes Rhene as
far as ^icardy and Burgundy, parts of France. Eastward is the German tongue
and Empire exercised over the Region of Prussia. Southward she reaches beyond
Danubius to the very Alps, which border upon Italy. Northward she has ever
kept her own, but has been curbd indeed from seeking new Kingdoms, in that
tract, by the maine Ocean, which divides her in part from Swevia, Norway, etc.
And to these limits we apply our Description. No marvel if it give her more
honor, then she had in former times. For her compass now is reckoned to be
2600. English miles. Her ground fertile enough of it self: and yet besides
enjoyes the benefit of many Navigable Rivers, which enrich her with trafique
from other Kingdoms.

(7) Those of greatest fame are, (1) Danubius the largest of Europe, called by
Pliny and others Ister. It takes in sixty Navigable Rivers; and is at last
discharged by many passages into the Pontus Euxinus. (2) Rhene, which has its
rising from the Alps, and runs into the German Ocean. From thence have we
our best Rhenish Wines: and upon his banks stands the City Strasburg. (3)
Amasus Ems, which glides by Westphalia into the German Sea. (4) Maemu Megu,
whose head is in the Mountains of Bohemia, and from thence passes by
Francfort into the German Sea. (5) Albis Elve, which rises from eleven
Fountains meeting into one, about the Sylva Hircinia. (6) Odeca, which has not
his passage immediately into the Sea, but into the River Albis. The middle mark
of this Country is the Kingdom of Bohemia, encompassed with the Sylva
Hircinia.

(8) The chief Commodities of Germany are Corn, Wine, Salt, Metals of all
sorts, Fruits good store, Saffron, etc. The Air wholesome, her Baths
healthful, her Gardens pleasurable: her Cities fair, her Castles strong, and
her Villages very many and well peopled.

(9) The Inhabitants have put off their ancient rudeness, as the Country her
barrenness. They are as goodly of person as ever, as stout as ever, and far
more civil, then in the time of the Romans. It seems they were then esteemed
but an ignorant and simple people: more able to fight then to manage a
battle. They were ever hardy enough, but wanted Commanders of their own, of
skill and judgment. Since they have had Commerce with other Nations: and have
suffered the upbraid (as it were) of their Predecessors dullness: they have
been (in a manner) shamed out of it, and are now become, rather by industry,
then wit, a most ingenious people, and skillful in the Latin, Greek, and
Hebrew learning, famous beyond any others in Europe, unless Belgia, for the
invention of many notable and useful Engines. The Gun and Gunpowder was first
brought to light by one Bertholdus Swart a Franciscan, which has almost put by
the use of any other warlike Instrument, in those parts of the world, where the
practice is perfectly understood. Generally the poorer sort are excellent
Mechanikes, and the rest for the most part Scholars.

(10) It bred Albertus Magnus, Appian, Gesuer, Munster, Luther, Vrsin,
Zwinglius, Scultetus, Iunius, Keckerman, and many others in their several
kinds and Religions: some Papists, some Lutherans, some Calvinists, and among
the rest many Jews.

(11) The government of this Germany is Imperial, as once that of Rome was,
though it flourish not in so full glory. The right descends not by Succession:
nor is the Election continued by the like soffrage as in old Rome. The power of
choice was conferred by Pope Gregory the tenth upon seven German Princes: three
Spiritual, and four Temporal. These are the Archbishop of Mentz,
Chancellor of the Empire through Germany; Archbishop of Cullen, Chancellor
of the Empire through Italy; Archbishop of Triers, Chancellor of the Empire
through France: The Temporal are the King of Bohemia, who has the casting
voice, only in case of equality among the other six: his Office is to be
chief Cup Bearer at the great solemnity. Next him the Count Palatine of the
Rhene, Arch-sewer to the Emperor: Duke of Saxony, Lord Marshall; and
Marquess of Brandeburge, chief Chamberlain. Each of these perform his own
Office in person, upon the day of Inauguration. The Duke of Saxony bears the
sword. The Count Palatine places map of Germany A. NEW MAPE OF GERMANY Newly
Augmented by John Speed Ano. Dom: 1626
his meat on the Table. The King of Bohemia bears his Cup and delivers it
him to drink: Marquess Brandeberg serves him water to wash: And the three
Bishops bless his meat. He receives three Crowns, before he is fully settled
into the Majesty of the Empire. The first is of Silver, for Germany. The
second of Iron, for Lombardy. And the third of Gold, for the Empire: the last
is set on at Rome. For to this day it pretends to the name of the Roman
Empire, and gives the title of Caesar, or Romani imperii Imperator.

(12) The first which enjoyed the institution of Pope Gregory was Radulphus
Nabs purgensis, 1273. after twelve years interregnum. The last before him, was
our Richard Earl of Cornwall, and brother to Henry the third, King of England.
Since it has continued firm in this course of Election, howsoever not with
that liberty as was intended. For commonly the Emperor in being, while he has
his power about him, and can (at least) entreat, if not command the Subjects of
the Empire, promise a choice of the Rex Romanorum, who is no other then a
successor designed to rule after his death, or resignation. And by this means
it has a long time continued in the house of Austria without any intermission.

(13) Thus we see much plotting, great state, many ceremonies to the making up
of an Emperor: and yet when it is well weighed, it is little better then a
bare title. For howsoever these outward observances of the German Princes make
show of an humble subjection to the Emperor: yet when it comes to trial, he
has very little to do^ in their Governments: But each of them takes upon him
as a free and absolute Commander in his own Country: permits or
suppresseth the Religion, which he either likes or dislikes; makes and
abrogates Laws at pleasure, stamps Coin, raises Soldiers, and sometimes
against their great Master, as the Duke of Saxoni^ against Charles the fifth,
and at this day diverse others in defense of the Prince Palatine. For of this
quality and power there are many Dukes, Marqueses, Counts, etc. besides 64.
Franc Cities, which make only some slight acknowledgement to the Emperor:
appear perhaps at his Parliaments; and (they say) are bound to furnish him at
need with 3842. hor^e (among them) and 16200. foot.

(14) The chiefest Regions of Germany, best known to us, and noted by our
Geographers with a more eminent Character then the rest, are these. (1) East
Friz^land. (2) Westphalia. (3) Cullen. (4) Munster. (5) Triers. (6) Cleve. (7)
Gulick. (8) Hassia. (9) Alsatia. (10) Helvetia. (11) Turingia. (12) Brunswicke
and Luneburg. (13) Franconia. (14) Palatinatus Rhene. (15) Wittenburg. (16)
Ausper. (17) Bayden. (18) Mentz. (19) Bamberg. (20) Weirstberg. (21) Saxonia.
(22) Anhalt. (23) Mansfield. (24) S^evia (25) Bavaria. (26) Brandeburg. (27)
^usatia. (28) Tirolum. (29) Misnia. (^0) Bohemia. (31) Silesia (32) Moravia.
(33) ^omerania. (34) Mecklinburg. (35) Austria.

(15) East-Frizeland is on the West side of Germany, and bounded with the North
Sea. Her chief Town is Embden. (2) Westphalia is on the South of East
Frizeland. It is most famous for Swine and excellent Bacon, which is esteemed
with us, one of our greatest dainties to commend a feast. Part of it belongs to
the three next Bishops, of Cullen, Munster, and Triers. (3) Cullen her
Archbishop is an Elector. The chief Town was called Vbiopolis, afterward
Agrippina, and lastly Cullen, from a Colony which was there planted by the
French. It is a received tradition among the Inhabitants, that the bodies of
the Wisemen, which came from the East to worship Christ are here interred. None
almost, but has heard of the three Kings of Cullen. (4) Munster. Her chief
City is Munster, notable since the year 1533. at which time a company of
brainsicke Anabaptists named it Jerusalem, and raised them a new Governor, by
the title of the King of Sion. (5) Triers. Her Archbishop an Elector. Her
chief City Triers, of great antiquity, founded by Trebeta the son of
Ninius; and Bopport sacked by our Earl Richard, King of the Romans.

(16) (6) Clivia or Cleave-land, a Dukedom of name. Her chief Cities are
Wesell, Emrick, and Cleve. Her Commodity the Tophus-stone, of which they make
Cement. (7) Iuliacum, Gulick a Duchy. Her principal City is Aken or
Aquisgranum, where the Emperor receives his Silver Crown for Germany; and
does great worship to a clout, which they take to be our Saviors mantle, in
which he was wrapped. (8) Hassia, a mountainous Country, but fruitful. Her
Metropolis Marpurgum an University: and the chief place of her Lant-grave is
Cassels. It comprehends likewise the Countes of Nassaw and Hanaw (9) Alsatia.
Her chief City is S^r^sburg, famous for a Clock of wonderful art and a
Tower of five hundred seventy eight paces high. Other Towns here are of note,
as Bing, Worms, Confluence, and Andernach. (10) Helvetia, Switzerland on the
East of France, and North of Italy. It contains thirteen Cantons. Zurich,
Berne, Lucerne, Vraenia, Glavis, Zugh* Basell, Friburg, Vnderwalt, Solour,
Shaffnansen, Ape^sol, and Suits. Her chief Cities are Zurike or Tigurum, whe^^
Zwinglius was martyred: And Sengall or Civitas Sancti Galli, and Basell, where
a general Council was decreed to be above the Pope: in the year, one thousand
four hundred thirty one.

(17) Turingia. Her Prince a Lant-grave. Her ground though not of large extent,
not above twelve German miles either in length or breadth (says Maginus,) yet
it is very rich, it comprehends twelve Counties, as many Abbeys, a hundred
forty four Cities, as many Towns, above two thousand Villages, two hundred
and fifty Castles. Her Metropolis is Erford. (12) Brunswick on the East of
Westphalia, a Dukedom: whose principal Cities are Brunswick, Halberstade,
Wolsheiten, and Luneburgh, which gives title to another Dukedom, whose chief
seat is Cella.

(18) (13) Franconia. It lies on the West of Turingia, and joins to Hassia
Northward. The Inhabitants were converted to Christianity by Boniface. In this
Province stands Franckefort, famous for her two Marts every year, and
Noremberg; within the territories are comprehended the seven other which belong
to this section. (14) The Palatine of Rhene, some seventy two miles from North
to South, and from East to West ninety six. Her chief City is Heidelberge.
Her Prince an Elector, and has many more privileges then the other six. In
the vacancy he is Governor of a great part of Germany. (15) Wirtenberge. The
chief Towns are Tubing an University, Studgard, etc. (16) Auspech, a
Marquisate. Her chief Town Auspech. (17) Baden, a Marquisate, pleasant and
fruitful, betwixt the Rivers Rhene and Neccar. Her chief Cities are Turlach
and Baden, in which there be Bathes that cure many diseases. (18) Mentz*
Moguntia, a Bishopric. The Prince is a Spiritual Elector, and sits always at
the right hand of the Emperor. (19) Bamberg, a Bishopric of it self of large
rev^newes. In this stand Fochia, where they say Pontius Pilate was borne. (20)
Weirstberg. Her Bishop is entitled Duke of Franconia.

(19) (21) Saxoni^ on the East of Hassia, and South of Br^nswick* and North of
Turingia. In this Province was Luther borne at Isleben. Within her bounds are
likewise comprehended these two other Principalities of Anhalt and Mansfield.
(22) Anhalt, whose Governor with great courage and power bore Arms in defense
of the Palatines right to the Kingdom of Bohemia. (23) Mansfield an Earldom,
the more famous for the valiant acts of the present Count, who to this day wars
upon the Emperors party, in the behalf of the Illustrious Palatine, and his
unparalleled Lady Elizabeth, Sister to his Royal Majesty of England.

(20) (24) Swevia on the South of Franconia. It is a Country full of people,
and those of goodly personage: great wit and valiant. In this Province is the
head of Danubius, and runs through the middle of the Country. Her chief
Towns are Vlme, Lindawe, and Auspurg, or Augusta Vindelicorum, Norlingen, etc.
(25) Bavaria on the South of Bohemia and ^ranconia. There is both the upper and
lower Bavaria. Of the first, the chief Cities are Muchen, Ingolstad^, Frising;
and about thirty four Towns more equal to most Cities of the lower Bavaria:
the principal are Ratisbone, Patavium, Pussan, Lanshutum, and Saltspurge. In
this City lies buried Paracelsus. (26) Brandeburge: on the East of Saxony, a
Marquisate of five hundred and twenty miles in compass. It was heretofore
inhabited by the Vand^les. The Metropolis is Brandeburge, and Francfort ad
Odicum: for so it is distinguished from the other Francfort in Franconia, and
Berlium. Here are fifty five Cities, and sixty four Towns. (27) Lusatia, it
looks Westward toward Saxony. The chief City is Gorlitzia. (28) Tyrolum, on
the South of Bavaria, and East of Helvetia. Her chief cities are Oonipous,
Inspruck, Brixen, Tridentum, Trent, where the General Council was held, one
thousand five hundred forty six. (29) Misnia, on the East of Lusatia, a
fruitful Region. Her chief Cities are Misnia, Drisden, Lipsia, a place of
learning, and Torga: many Writers place this Province with Saxony.

(21) (30) Bohemia, on the South of Saxony and Misnia, encompassed with the
Sylva Hircinia, a fruitful and pleasant Country. It may deserve a particular
description of it self: and therefore I will mention it here with no other
solemnity, then I do the rest of Germany. Her Metropolis is Prage, which was
taken by the Imperialists in this last quarrel, the King and Queen (being at
that time) in the Church celebrating Gods service, were forced suddenly to fly
for their safety into Silesia. (31) Silesia Eastward from part of Bohemia: two
hundred mile long, and eighty one broad, a fruitful Country: the people
valiant. Her principal Cities are Breselare, and Neisse. (32) Moravia, on the
East of Bohemia, and South of Silesia. Her chief Cities are Almusium, Olmutz,
and Brin. (33) Pomerania. It is bounded on the East with Istula; on the North
with the Baltic Ocean. Her Metropolis is Stetin. Others chief are Wolgast,
Wallin, etc. On the West of this Region stands (34) Mecklinburg or Megalopolis,
a place Provincial of it self, and has Towns of note, Malchawe, Rostock,
etc.

(22) (35) Austria, an Arch-Dukedome, it lies upon Hungary, and is esteemed
by the Germans the Eastern bound of the Empire. It was formerly called
Pannonia superior. It is a rich Country. Her chief Cities are Vienna, famous
for beauty, wealth, and learning: Emps, Sr. Leopald, etc. There are reckoned to
this Region the Provinces of Styria, Carinthia, Carinola, and by some Tirolum.

The Description of the Kingdom of Bohemia.
IN our Description of Germany, we reckoned Bohemia but as a Province among the
rest: and therefore she was mentioned there with no more solemnity, then the
other parts were. We purpose here to declare it an entire Kingdom of it self:
which besides her own compass (as she is most commonly limited by Geographers)
has under-subjects, Dukedomes and Marquisates, such as do her homage, and
make her well worthy of a particular History, then we had before room for.

(2) The ancient Inhabitant of these parts was the Bemorum magna gens, as
Ptolemie calls it; and places it somewhat South, toward Danubius under Suna
sylva. After them, the Boii, a people of Gallia Lugdunensis, which had been
before conquered by Caesar (says Quadus) and packt over the Alps to seek them
a new seat in Italy. But when they found the Romans too hot for their abode
there, they were forced to trudge farther, and to pass the River Rhene into
Germany, as Strabo witnesses, where they found them a fit place to lurk in,
compassed with a large Wood called the Sylva Hercinia: and like enough they
joined in with the Bemi, to make up the name of Bohemia. But neither here did
they enjoy their peace long: for they were in time nessled out by a potent
people of Swevia, called Marcomanni: and they again had the like measure from
the Slavonians, a barbarous crew, which came in upon them, under the conduct of
an exiled murderer of Croatia, one Zechius, about the year five hundred and
fifty.

(3) From that time there has been no general expulsion^ but the present
Bohemians are the progeny of those Sclavonians, whose very language and
customs are in use among them at this day. Doubtless it was at first a rude
Commonwealth, that had no other Governors, but so ungoverned a multitude: for
so they continued above an hundred years after Zechius. But when they had for a
time endured the misery of such a confusion, they were content to agree upon
some one for their Prince, that might rule them: and the first which they
elected was Crocus, a man of great esteem among them for his wisdom and
goodness.

(4) Till the time of Vratislaus it had the title of a Dukedom only. He was
the first King, and was created by Henry the fourth of Germany, anno one
thousand eighty six. Yet after that again, for the succession of six
Princes, it was governed by Dukes. For the second King was Vladislaus the
third, crowned by Frederick the Emperor, in the year one thousand one
hundred fifty nine: and the third, Primaslaus, Crowned by the Emperor Philip,
one thousand one hundred ninety nine: after six other Dukes from his
Predecessor Vladislaus the third. It has been now long since fully settled
into a Kingdom: and is the title of the right Noble Frederike Count Elector
Palatine of the Rhene, and husband to the illustrious Elizabeth, Daughter to
our late Sovereign King JAMES. They were both Crowned at Prague in the year,
one thousand six hundred and nineteen: but have been enforced ever since, to
maintain their right by continual wars, against Ferdinand the second, who
by virtue of an adoption, which declared him successor to Matthias, lays
claim to the Crown of Bohemia. But the case was before decided in their third
Vladislaus, who though as deeply interessed to the Kingdom, as Ferdinand could
be: yet for that he had past no legal election, according to their Customs
and Privileges, he was deposed by the States, and Vldarilaus chose in his
room.

(5) There remains no great difficulty, concerning the name. It appears
sufficiently, to proceed either from her first people, or first Prince, who (as
some report) was one Boemus. And it is worth observing, that though this Land
has in sundry ages, been so often ransackt, and possessed by strangers, and
Tyrants: yet in her name she constantly preserves the memory only of her
first Natives, and has not suffered that change, as we have done, from Albion
to Britain, from Britain to England. And so indeed it is with almost all
which have been equally subject to the like Invasions.

(6) The situation of this Kingdom is almost in the midst of Germany, and
is easily descried in our common Maps, by the Hircinian Forest, held in the
Romans time, to be nine days journey in breadth, and in length at least forty.
So Caesar in his sixth Com: It closes Bohemia on every side, insomuch that (to
show) they are not unlike an Amphitheater, it is Maginus his comparison. The
several parts of this Wood are known by diverse names, which they take from
the Country adjacent. The portion North West, is by Strabo called Gabreta
Sylva, that South toward Danubius* Luna Sylva by Ptolemy, non Sylva Passarica:
and so the rest. Without this wall of Bohemia (as Quadus calls it) her limits
are on the West Franconia, on the North Lusatia, and Misnia: on the South
Bavaria and Austria: on the East Moravia and Sile^ia. The figure of it is in a
manner circular: and the diameter is esteemed three days journey to a quick
travailour. The circuit contains five hundred and fifty miles, of good
ground, fertile and pleasant, enricht as well by her Rivers, as Land
Commodities.

(7) Her principal are (1) Albis Elve, which has his rising in the Hercinian
Wood, and the name from eleven Fountains, which meet in one, at the head of
the River. For Elve or Elbe in the Germane tongue signifies eleven. It runs
through a great part of the Country, and by the chief City Prague, and at
last vents it self into the German Ocean. Of this Lucan thus: Fundat ab
extremo flav^s Aquilone Suevos
Albis and indomitum Rheni caput --
(2) Multaria Mulda. (3) Egra, which gives a name to a Town. (4) Sassava. (5)
Gisera. (6) Missa. And (7) Vatto. They are received all into the River Albis,
yield excellent Salmon, and plenty. (And if we will believe report,) there is
oft-times found in the sands, lumps of pure gold, which need no other refining,
and very precious shells of great value.

(8) It seems the water supplies that only defect which is to be found in
their Land. For it is to be observed to be full with Mines of all sorts of
Metals, Gold only excepted. Their Tin was found out by an Englishman of
Cornwall, in the year, one thousand two hundred and forty; one belike which
had been skilled in that work, in his own Country: for it is said, that at
that time there was no Tin known elsewhere in Europe. The earth gives good
Corn, and their pastures breed as good Cattle. There is Wood good store, as
there are Woods which harbor multitudes of wild Beasts, Foxes, Bears, Hearts,
Bulls, and others: which afford them sport in the Hunting, and meat for the
best man's Tables. Among the rest there is a wild Beast, which they call Lomi,
armed by nature with a strange defense against the Hounds which follow her. For
they s^y, she has a kind of bladder, hanging under her jaws, which in the
Hunting she fills with a scalding hot water, and casts it upon the Dogs, with
that nimblenesse, that they are not able to avoid or pursue her: but oft-times
have their very hair fall often, as from a dressed Pigge. The Country is
generally rich in Saffron, and other Medicinal drugges: Wine it has too, but
not so kind or pleasing as in other places: in so much that the richer sort
furnish themselves out of Austria, Hungary, and the Regions about, which they
in lieu of it, supply with excellent Beer. For they are held very good at the
art of brewing, and not behind-hand at drinking when they have done. It is said
(of the meaner sort I suppose) that if once they set to a Vessel of good
liquor, they will not loose it till they have found it empty.

(9) Else they are not branded with any eminent bad Character. They are of tall
and portly personage, broad shouldered and strong brested, generally yellow
haired, which they wear long and curled. Of a great spirit, which seldom
goes without pride, ambition, vainglory, contempt of others, and such like
weaknesses of the strongest men. There is a story passes of one Zisca a
Bohemian Captain (in defense of the Hussites against the Pope) that when he had
won so many battles, as his very name began to be a terror to the foe;
he was not content to be feared alive, but bethought himself, how he might
speak map of Bohemia BOHEMIA Newly described by John Speed Anno Dom: 1626
loud when he was dead. And therefore willed his Soldiers, that they would
flea him, and make a Drum of his skin; which he was persuaded, should ever
beat the victory before them, as often as he was heard (though in a dead sound)
by the enemy, whom he had so often crushed, while he was yet living.

(10) For matter of learning, they have not been very famous heretofore:
howbeit now, the better parts are not now behind with the other parts of
Germany. The chief of note, were John Husso, and Hierome of Prague, two worthy
members of the Church. They were condemned for Heretics in the Council of
Constance, one thousand four hundred and four teene, for attempting a
reformation of such errors, as they held not agreeable with the word of God.
But yet their sufferings could not dead the good seed, which they had sown in
the true hearted. It lives still among them in some measure: though they have
been often assayed by strange Impostures in Religion, such as the heart of man
could not conceive, without a strong and extraordinary working of that great
deceiver.

(11) I cannot pass the most wicked couzenage of Picardus, who possessed great
multitudes of these silly people, with an opinion, that he could recall them to
that perfect state in which Adam was created: placed them in an Island for that
purpose, which he called Paradise, caused them to walk naked, and named this
Sect Adamites. Horrible sins were committed under that pretense, promiscuous
whoredom and incest at their very Divine Service. It is feared that at this
day, there are many secret professors, which live under ground, meet at their
solemnities, have their prayers framed to their own humor: and when the
Priest pronounces the words of Genesis (as his custom is) Crescite, and
multiplicamini, and replete terram, the lights are suddenly popt out, and
without any respect had to alliance or kindred, or reverence to their exercise,
they mingle like Beasts, and when they have acted their wickedness, and are
returned to their seats, the Candles are again lighted, and they fall to their
pretended prayers, as if there had been no harm done.

(12) The King is one of the seven Electors of the Emperor: and in case the
other six be equally divided, he gives the suffrage, which carries it. It is
to be thought, that his power was conferred upon him not without great
counsel, and good reason. For (besides that the place it self is by nature
strong) the people too have a special inbred love to Germany, and defense of
her liberties. At Coronation he is Cup Bearer, and performs it himself in
person if he be present. His revenewes are cast up to be three millions of
Crowns, which are not gathered all within the compass here limited, but part
out of other Principalities, which are annexed to this Kingdom. For there are
four Regions, which make up his Title, and are subject to his government: (1)
Bohemia it self, as we have described it. (2) Lusatia. (3) Silesia. (4)
Moravia. They were named in the Map of Germany, as being parts of the whole
Country, but will admit here a more particular tract, as belonging properly to
this Kingdom.

(13) First then for Bohemia it self, it contains about thirty Cities, which
are immediate subjects to the King, (as Quadus calls them) besides many others,
which are held in possession of the chief Princes, Primates, Barons, Counts,
and Nobles of the Country. The Metropolis is Prague, heretofore known by the
names of Bubienum and Marobudum, says Maginus; but rather I think (by the
situation) it should be the same which Ptolemy calls Casurgis. It was composed
with a wall, by Primaslaus their third King; and received the name of Prague,
by the wife Lubussa a Limine, which they say is called Prague in the Bohemian
language. It is indeed a very stately City, seated in the middle of the
Country on the River Multaria, and compared by some to Florence. It consists
of three Cities which are called the old Town, the new Town, and the little
Town. The old Town is the chief, and is adorned with many illustrious
buildings. The new Town is divided from the old, by a large ditch: and the
little Town stands on the other side of the River Mulda, but is joined to the
old Town, by a stone bridge of twenty-foure Arches. It was made an Archbishops
See, by Charles the Emperor and King of Bohemia, was once the chief
University: but that now is removed to Lipsia, in the Province of Misnia. It
is the Regal seat of Bohemia: and here was the King and Queen when it was
taken by the Imperialists.

(14) The other Cities of this Region which are worth the noting, are (2) Egra.
It stands upon the River, from whence it bears the name: before it was called
by Ptolemy, Monosgada, on the West end of Sylva Gabreta, that part of the
Hercinia which portends toward Franconia. It was a City Imperial, till the right
was sold by Lodovicus Bavares to John King of Bohemia. It is a very strong
City, fortified as well by Nature as Art, for the most part is built upon a
Rock. It is in compass two miles within the walls, and with the Suburbs three.
Not far from it, there is a fountain of a kind of sharp water, which the
Inhabitants drink in stead of Beer. (3) Krems toward Austria, on the North
side of Danubius. (4) Pilsen on the West of Bohemia, a City which long held
out against General Tilly, by the defense of the now Count Mansfield, but was
at last betrayed by some of his Captains. (5) Launum, North-west from Pilsen,
noted for the most fruitful place in the whole Region.

(15) Now the out-Provinces, which are part of the K^ngdome, though not of
Bohemia, are first Lusatia: It lies betwixt the Rivers Albis and Odera, and
the Mountains of Bohemia. On the West it has Saxony. On the North and East
Brandeburg. On the South Silesia. It is divided into the higher and lower
Lusatia, and is watered with the River Nisse. It is indeed part of Saxony,
though under rule to the King of Bohemia. For both this and Silesia was given
to Vratislaus by the Emperor Henry the fourth. It is a very fruitful
Country, in most kind of grain: and the Inhabitants though employed much in
husbandry, yet are they a warlike people, as most of Germany, and so they have
been tried, by the Duke of Saxony, and others of the Emperors party: though
they have been by number and maine strength overborne. The first that was
surprised was Bantsen: but the Metropolis is Gorlitzia, next Zittan, etc. No
soil nor customs differ much from the next Province.

(16) Silesia on the West has part of Bohemia upon the North Lusatia, and part
of Poland, upon the South Moravia, and upon the East Polonia. At the beginning,
it was part of the Hercinian Forest. It is watered with the River Odera, and
from hence took her name, as Conradus Celtus delivers it, Lib. Amorum 2. Eleg.
5. Hic Odera (a priscis qui nomina Suevus habebat)
Nascitur, and Godani praecipitatur aquis.
Su^vus qui Slesum socium sibi convocat amneru:
A quo nunc nomen Slesia terra gerit.
But Ioannes Crato, a Silesian, rather thinks that the name came from the
Quadi, a people that heretofore inhabited these parts: and rather, for that the
very Quady in the Sclavonian tongue, signifies the same which Silesium did in
the Saxon and old German. That they did possess this Province is agreed upon
by most: but where they were before seated Geographers somewhat differ. Ptolemy
places them by the Hercinian under Lunasylva: and others not far off. It was
the people which (in their war with Mareus Antonius the Emperor,) were
scattered with thunder and lightning, obtained by the prayers of the Christian
Legion. For when the Roman was driven to such straight, that he could foresee
no help which might come from man: he put himself upon their prayers to God for
his deliverance. A strange hope that could believe in their faith, and yet not
in that God, in whom they believed. But the Almighty was pleased to show his
power, and force the very heathen to honor his people. For here ended the
fourth Persecution, 174. and the Christian Legion was surnamed the Thunderer.

(17) The air here is somewhat cold, but mild: and the Land fertile. The
Inhabitants good husbandmen to make the best. They have a kind of forced Wine,
which the meaner sort drink freely. The richer have it sent from those
neighboring Provinces, which are better stored. The chief City is Perslaw or
Vratislavia, which takes name from her Founder Vratislaus, and in honor of him
gives the letter W. in her Arms. About the seat of this City Ptolemy places
Budorgis; in so much that some think, this was raised out of her ruiue. Not
far off, there is yet to be seen, the remainders of stately old buildings,
which are supposed to have been the houses of the ancient Quadi. In the year
1341. it was ruined by fire: but built again with stone, and it is now one of
the stateliest Cities of Germany, for elegant buildings and fair streets. It
is an Archbishops See, and an Academie. The rest are Neissa Nissa a Bishops
See, and a fair Town, Glats, Oppolen, Olderberg, Glogm^r, etc. Maginus numbers
15. Dukedomes in Silesia, whereof six remain in their ancient families: the
rest for want of heirs are fallen to the King of Bohemia. But the two chief of
name are Ligintz, and Swevitz. The first is immediately the Kings: Swevitz too
is under his government, but yet has a Duke of its own, which is honored
with the title and revenewes.

(18) Moravia is bounded on the North and East with Silesia: on the West with
Brandeburg, on the South with Austria and Hungary. It was heretofore called
Marcomannia, received the latter name from the River Moravia, which runs
through the Country. It yields plenty of Corn, Wine, Fish, and People, which
use a kind of confused mixed language of Sclavonicke, Bohemicke, and Teutonicke.
In plowing up their grounds there has been oftentimes found a certain Coin
of the Roman Emperors Marcus Antonius, with this Inscription de Marcomannis;
which the Inhabitants interpret to be of the Spoils which the Roman took from
the Marcomanni, who inhabited this Region. For certain it is, that this people
were vanquished by Marcus Antonius, as appears in their Historians.

The people were converted to Christianity by Methodius: Their chief City is
Olmuzium Olmutz, an University, Brin, etc. It is reported by Dubrarius, that
in Gradisco, a part of this Province, there grows a kind of Myrrh and
Frankincense out of the ground, which in likeness resemble the hidden parts
both of man and woman. It was first added to the King and Kindome of Behemia by
Sigismund the Emperor, in the reign of Albertus.

The Description of FRANCE.
NO people but are ambitious to win upon Antiquity as far as their Line
will reach. Among others the French are great pretenders to that Title, and
fetch their original from Mesech the sixth son of Iapheth, not above an
hundred and fifty years after the Arc rested. But this passes not for
current truth among her own Historians; and therefore is not the plea, which
gives France here the second place in my division of Europe. I observe rather
her situation, which ranks her next to Spain Eastward: and that was the
course proposed in my General Description.

(2) As for her Inhabitants, the first certainly, which we can make good, were
the Gauls: A people of whose beginning, we can give no unquestionable account:
yet this of them is most sure, they were a Nation of Noted valor above four
hundred years before Christ: It is now full two thousand and twelve since they
sacked Rome, and took the Capitol. In the memory of that great Action we may
claim a part. For first were themselves Conquered by the two noble British
spirits, Brennius and Belinus Kings of England: and after led on by them (if we
may trust the story) unto those glorious adventures, which have to this day
continued their fame almost above any other Nation. Let the proof rest upon my
Author. This says Matha^^ Westmonasteriensis out of the Roman History.

(3) Trecenta millia Gallorum ad seeds novas quaerendas prof^cti ducibus Belino
and Brennio Romam invaserunt, ibique din morati sunt. Sed mill libras auri
praemium discessionis a Romany susci' pientes, mox diversis agminibus alii
Graeciam, alii Macedoniam, alii Thraciam petiverunt, and sua prole velut quodam
examine totam Asiam replerunt. Tantus inde terror Gallici nominis and armorum,
invictaque foelicitas erat in illis diebus ut reges Orientis sine mercenario
little exercitu ulla bella gerere non praesumerent, neque pulsi a regno ad alios
quam ad Gallos confugerent. Non enim aliter Majestatem suam tutari, neque
amissam recuperare se posse nisi Gallica virtute arbitrabantur. Itaque in
auxilium regis Bithyniae vocati, regnum cum eo peracta victoria diviserunt,
camque regionem Gallo Graciam cognominaverunt, which we now call Galatia. And
thus for a time their victories carried all before them: yet at last they had
their turn too of ill fortune: were expulsed Rome by Camillus, fared as their
neighbors did, and became tributarie to the Empire.

(4) Then did the name of Gallia comprehend a large portion on Europe, besides
that which we now call France: and was divided by the ancient in Cisalpinam:
which indeed was a part of Italy, that which we now call Lombardy: and
Transalpinam, which Pliny calls Comata, from the curled hair of the
Inhabitants, and Ptolemy Celto Gallatiam, as the Greeks gave it. Nor yet was
this equal to the name of France, but was again divided by Caesar in his
Commentaries. (1) in Belgicam, which for the most part belongs to Germany. (2)
Celticam, and (3) Aquitaniam. After him Ptolemy gives a third division into
four parts. (1) Aquitaniam, (2) Lugdunensem the same with Caesar's Celtica, (3)
Narbonensem, or Braccatam, and (4) Belgicam.

(5) We must here pass by the out-reaches of Belgia and the rest, and confine
our tract to those parts which are now governed by one King. And though it
retain still the antique appellation, which the Inhabitants received from the
Greek (...), for their beauty and white color; yet is it best and most
properly known by the name of France, from the Franci or Francones, a people
of Germany that overran these parts, and subdued most of them to themselves.

(6) Now the limits of this new Gallia or France are Westward the Pyrenaean
Mountains, which divide her from Spain, and run cross the Isthmus, that
joins both the Kingdoms. They were very famous for rich Mines: in so much
that being once fired by Shepherds, the Gold and Silver run streaming down
into the lower Countries, called up the Inhabitants to prey; and was the first
occasion of a foreign entry upon those parts. Eastward it lies upon Germany.
South-east it is severed with the Alps from Italy. Northward it is bounded
with our English Seas; and Southward with the Mediterraneum. Her chief Rivers
reckoned by Maginus are (1) Garumna Garrone the greatest. (2) Ligeris Lo^re the
sweetest. (3) Sequana or Seyne the richest. (4) Rhodanus Rosne the swiftest: to
these we may add, (5) Some upon which stands Amicus.

(7) Her air is healthful, and her grounds fertile; abounds almost with all
commodities that may make her one of the happiest Regions in Christendom, yet
her greatest plenty is of Corn, Wine, and Salt, which she distributes among
her neighboring Nations: and enricheth her self with such Commodities from
them as are not so fully afforded within her own limits. The women too partake
of their Countries fruitfulness: In so much that as the earth is scarce able
to bear her plenty: so her plenty could hardly sustain her people, had she
not a vent for them into Spain, Italy, Germany, England, and other Countries:
And yet were there long since reckoned Habitatores supra quindecim milliones,
inter quos octodecim millia nobilium, by Maginus.

(8) In so great a multitude we must look to find as much variety of Customs
and Dispositions. It was the report of Caesar long since, and seconded by a
late Authentike Author, Gallicas gentes lingua, legibus, and institutis inter
se differ: multa tamen multis esse communia. For the most part they are of a
fiery spirit for the first onset in any action, but will soon flagge. They
desire change of Fortunes: and pass not greatly whether to better or worse.
Their women very jocund, of a voluble tongue, and as free of their speech,
complementall to strangers, and win more by their wit then their beauty: one
and the other are great enticers of men's affections; and they enjoy them as
freely and securely, without either check of conscience or care of report. It
is esteemed Vitium gentile: and indeed they can hardly hear ill for it from
any there, which is not equally guilty. Very factious not only in carriage of
public affairs, but in their private families, which proceeds for the most
part from a self-conceit of their own wit and wealth: and those will hardly
admit a Superior. Their Nobility have been reported to be liberal: but I
suppose that fashion is now worn out: My self have specially noted the
contrary in diverse, which respect their purse more then their honor, and let
pass the service and deserts of worthy persons unrewarded, as if their
gracious acceptance were a sufficient return of thanks for any office a man
can do them. They are practiced to this garb by their pessantry, whom they
reckon but as slaves, and command as their proper servants, which the poor
snakes take as a favor, and are glad to be employed by their betters, that by
their protection they may stand more free from the injury of their equals. For
the meanest of them are cruel, and affect to oppress their adversary, either
by open violence or suite in Law, though to their own ruin. They are very
ready to take Arms, and serve in the defense of King and Country: need no
more press then the stroke of a Drum: but are as rash in their achievements.
They will not wait upon Council, but run as far on, as upon their
strength they may, and when they find that fails, they will as soon give
ground.

(9) It has had heretofore (and yet breeds) men of great esteem for Learning
and Religion. St. Bernard, Calvin, Beza, and Ramus were French, and many
others, both of the Romish and reformed Churches. For as yet the people stand
divided betwixt both, but not equally. The Papists are like to continue the
stronger hand, as long as their holy Father shall make murder a meritorious
act. For by their several Massacres they have destroyed many Assemblies of the
Hugonites as they call them. The greatest I think that was ever practiced by
such as had entertained the name of Christians, was at Paris in the year: 57^.
when above thirty thousand souls suffered Martyrdom, and among the rest, some
personages of great worth and note.

(10) It is subject to a Monarchical government, weilded by one sole and
absolute King, which bears the title of the Christian King of France: his
eldest son the Dolphin of France: by their Salique Law, no woman or heirs may
inherit: how justly I may not determine. But yet the English have good reason
to examine the Equity. For it cost our Edward the Third his Crown of France,
to which he was heir in general by marriage of a Daughter. But the truth is,
we have been ever easy, to part with our hold there, or at least forced to
forgo it by our civil dissentions at home, else after all those glorious
Victories of our Predecessors, we might have had some power more to show there
as well as title.

(11) There are very many Provinces belonging to this Kingdom, more then will
find room here for their full Descriptions in several, and therefore we will
reduce as well this new France, as the old Gallia to the four parts of
Ptolemies division: (1) Aquitania. (2) Lugdunensis. (3) Narbonensis, and (4)
Gallia Belgica. To these we will add (5) the Isles adjoining. map of France
FRANCE revised and augmented. the attires of the French and situations of their
chiefest cities observed by John. Speed. Are to be sold in Pops: head alley
by Geo^Humble Ano. 1626 THE SCALE OF MILLES
Their principal under-territories shall be mentioned, as Maginus ranks them.

(12) Aquitania lies on the West of France, close upon the Pyrenaean
Mountains and Contunies. (1) Another part of Biscay mentioned in the Map of
Spain, and indeed differs from that but very little (2) Gascoigne and Guien.
The first to this day keeps its name (with a very little change) from the
Spanish Vascones. The chief City is Burdigala, or Bordeaux, a Parliamentary
and Archiepiscopall seat and University of good esteem, was honored with the
birth of our Richard the second. Another City of note is Toulouse, a seat
Parliamentarie, and supposed to be as ancient as the Rule of Deborah in Israel.
This Gascoigne contains in the Earledom^s of Forie, Comminges, Armeniaci, and
the Dutch Albert. (3) Pictaria Poictu on the North of Guien, a pleasant Region,
and a plentiful. It contains three Bishoprics; Poitiers, Lucon, and
Mailazai. Her chief Cities are Poictiers, an ancient, and the largest next
Paris in all France, Castrum Heraldi once the title of the Scotch Earls of
Hamildon. In this Province was fought the great Battle betwixt our Black Prince
and John of France, where with eight thousand, he vanquished forty thousand:
took the King Prisoner and his son Philip, 70. Earls, 50. Barons, and
12000. Gentlemen (4) Sonictonia, severed from Poictiers, but by the River
Canentell, and so differs but little from her fertility. Her Metropolis Saints.
Her other chief, Bourg, Blay, Marennes, Saint John D'angely, and Anglosme.
Betwixt this Country and Poictiers stands Rochell, a place the best fortified
both by nature and art of any in Europe. And is at this time possessed by those
of the Reformed Religion: where they stand upon their guard, and defend their
freedom of conscience against the Roman Catholics of France. (5) Limosin, in
limo sita, (says some) Maginus takes it from Liwoges her chief City toward
the North: which revolted, and was recovered by our Black Prince. Her other
Towns of note are Tulles and Vxerca, and Chaluz, where our Richard the first
was shot. It has been by turns possessed by French and English, till Charles
the Seventh. Since we have had little hold there. (6) Berry, regio Biturigum
from her chief City Bituris, now Burges, an Archiepiscopall See and
University. It is exceedingly stored with sheep, and sufficiently well with
other Merchandise of value. (7) Burbone, from her chief City Burbone
(heretofore Boya) a Dukedom and much frequented by Princes and the Nobility of
France, by reason of her healthful air and commodious Baths. (8) Tureine the
Garden of France. Her chief Cities Bloys, Amboys, Trurs, and a little higher
upon the Loyre stand Orleance.

(13) Lugdunensis or Celtica lies betwixt the Rivers Loyre and Seyne, and
takes the name from Lugdunum or Lions her chief City. This Province
comprehends (1) Britany, heretofore Armorica, till subdued by Maximinus King of
England about the year 367. since it has had the name of Britany, and for
distinction from this of ours, it is commonly styled Minor Britannia. There is
yet remaining a smatch of the Welsh tongue, which it seems the Invaders had so
great a desire to settle in those parts as a trophie of their Conquests, that
when they first mingled in marriage with the Inhabitants, they cut out their
wives tongues, as many as were Natives, that no sound of French might be heard
among their Children. It has few Rivers, but that defect is (in some measure)
made up by their neighborhood of the Sea, in so much, that the Country is
reckoned one of the most fertile in all France, for Corn, Wine, and Wood. It
breeds good Horses, and special Dogs, Iron, Lead, etc. Her chief Cities
are Nants, Rhenes, St. Brenie, and Rohan. It is divided into Britanniam
inferiorem, the base or lower Britanie, Westward and nearest England, and
Superiorem toward the Loyre Eastward. Her chief ports are St. Malo and Breast.
(2) Normandy, a part of the Region which was heretofore called Newstria and
took the name it has from the Norwegians. Their first Duke was Rollo, and the
sixth from him our William the Conqueror. It was lost from his Successors in
the time of King John. Her chief Cities are Rhothomagus or Rhoan the
Metropolis, Constance, and Cane, memorable for the siege of our English H. the
fifth: And Verveile, besieged by Philip the second of France, in the time of our
Richard the first: which when the King heard as he sat in his Palace at
Westminster (it is said) he swear he would never turn his back to France, till
he had his revenge: and to make good his oath, brake through the walls, and
justly performed his threat upon the besi^ger. Her principal parts are
Harflew: the first which King Henry the fifth of England assaulted; and New
Haven given up by the Prince of Conde to Queen Elizabeth as a Pledge for such
Forces as she would supply him with to maintain Wars with the King in
defense of Religion. And Deep, etc. (3) Anjoue regio Andegavensis, a fertile
Country, and yields the best Wine of France, excellent Marble, and other fair
stone for buildings. Her chief City is Anjers, which Ortelius takes to be
Ptolemy's Iuliomagum. It is now an University. To this Dukedom there are
four Earledomes which owe a kind of homage. Many, Vandosme, Beufort and
Laval. (4) Francia which gives name to the whole Kingdom, and received it her
self from the Germane Francones, which before inhabited the great Forest
called Sylva Hircynia. Her chief City* and the glory of France is Paris or
Lutetia auasi in lu^o sita in compass twelve miles, is reckoned the first
Academie of Eu^rope, consists of fiftie-five Colleges. And here was Henry the
sixth Crowned King of France and England. In this Province stands St. Vincents,
where Henry the fifth died: and S^isons and the Dukedom of Valoys, etc. (5)
Campaigne and Brye partners in the title of Earldom, it is severed from
Picardie only with the River. A fertile Country, and has many eminent
Cities. The principal is Rheimes, where the Kings most commonly are Crowned,
and anointed with an Oil sent (they say) from Heaven, which (as often as it
has been used) never decreaseth. It is the Seat of an Archbishop and
University of ^ote, especially with our English Roman-Catholiques, who have a
College there appointed for their fugitives. And others of note are Troys, and
Brye, and Auxerre, and Sans, and Arch-bi^shops See, etc. (6) Burgundis, both
the Duchy and County. The Duchy or Burgundia inferior, and Western lies
on the South of higher Germany. Her principal places are Digion, Saint
Bernards birth-Towne, Antun, Beal^e, Sologue, and Aliza once the famous City
of Alexia. The County of Burgundy or Burgundia superior, yields not to the
choysest Garden in France for fertility of soil, not to the most renowned for
stoutnesse of the Inhabitants. They acknowledge not as yet the French Command,
no more then Savoy and Loraine. They were under diverse Generals, and are called
Wallons, corruptly for Galleus, a trick of the Dutch. Her principal Cities are
Besauson the Metropolis of both Burgundies, Salives, Arboys, Gray, and Dola.
(7) Lugdunense Territorium, Lione an illustrious City. The Center of Europe: I
mean where Merchants meet for traffic from all quarters. And these Provinces
belong either wholly, or at least in part to Gallia Lugdunensis. For indeed
some lie divided, and stretch into their neighbors Territories, as Campania
into Belgica, and this last Lugdunense is in part under the Government of Savoy.

(14) Narbonensis Gallia on the West has the Comitatus Armenaici and
Comminges, Eastward part of the Alps, Northward the Mountain Comenus, and
Southward the French Seas. It is generally a fruitful Country, not inferior
in the esteem of Pliny to Italy it self: it comprehends the Provinces, (1)
of Languedoc, supposed from Languegotia, language of the Goths. It reaches
from the bounds of Armenia and Comminges to the Mediterraneum: Her chief Cities
are Narbon, from whence this whole Region receives her appellation, and is
reckoned the first Roman Province in Europe, and Mons pessulame, Mont-Pelleine,
an University most famous for the study of Physic. Nimes where there is at
this day many relics of Antiquities, and Pons Sancti Siritus, etc. (2)
Provence Provincia, (...), divided from Languedoc by the River Rhodanus Rhohan.
It belongs part to the Crown of France, part to the Pope, and a third to the
Prince of Orange. In the Kings portion are Air, a Parliamentary City, Arles,
and Marfilia, the last built in the time of the Roman Tarquine. To the Bishop
of Rome belongs, Avenian, a City and Archbishops See, with the whole Comitatus
venissimus. To the Prince of Orange the chief City Aurangia, or Orange on the
river Meine Estrang, Boys de St. Poll. etc. (3) Daulphine on the North of
Province, Regio All^brogum, and is divided in Delphinatum superiorem and
inferiorem; The first contains in it Embrum, where Agaric and Mama is
plentifully gathered, and Valentia, etc. The latter Grinnoble vienna, Daulphin,
Romans. (4) Savoy Sabadia on the East of Daulphin, a Dukedom, within whose
limits stands the well known City Geneva, which entertaines people from all
Countries of any Religion: But yet enforces a law upon fugitives, not common
elsewhere: For whatsoever Malefactor is there apprehended for mischief done in
his own Country: suffers as if he had been there condemned. The principal
Cities besides are Tarantise, Bele, Moustire, Maurience, etc. To this Dukedom
belong Cambrey on the West side of the Alps, and the Country of Bresse, whose
heir is entitled Prince of Pi^mount, a part of Italy at the very East foot of
the mountains, which sever her from this Country.

(15) Gallia Belgica the last is the Eastern tract toward Germany, and as much
as belongs to this Kingdom contains only Picardie, which is divided into the
higher and lower. The first portends toward the British Seas, and here stands
Calls distant but thirty miles from Dover: It is that which Caesar called
Portus Iccius, won from the French by our Edward the third, lost by Queen
Mary: upon her Confines toward England is the Country of Bononia, and Cuinnes,
which contain sundry towns and villages. The chief Bulloigne, Conquered by our
Henry the eight, but delivered back in the reign of Edward the sixth. In this
Picardie stans Terwin, besieged by King Henry in person, where the Emperor
Maximilian served under his Colors, and receved pay as his Soldiers. In the
lower Picardie stands Ambianum Ameins the Metropolis: Here are the Duchy of
Terache, whose chief City is Guisa which gave name to the family of the Guises:
and the Country of Vermeudois, where Saint Quintin stands, Retelois and
Retelher metropolis; Arteleis and Laferre here is, Pontheine and Abberille.

(16) The Islands which are reckoned properly French, are only those which lie
near in the Atlantic Ocean. They are but few and of no great account. The
principal Dame de B^vin. L^^le Dieu, Marmotier, Insula Regis.

The Description of BELGIA.
IN this we continue still the Description of Belgia, begun in the Map of
France. For the title is common as well to these Territories as indeed to all
the North-east Tracts of the old Gallia. The portion hereditary to the French
King, was marked out among the rest of his Dominions. The residue (since it
has been by length of time, chance of war, or at least chance of Fortune,
dispersed into the power of several Princes) is better known to us by the
familiar names of the Low Countries, then Netherlands, Flanders, etc.

(2) In the search of her Original, we may have reference to our precedent
Discourse. For questionless it was possessed by the Gauls, as the other parts
were: and (if trust may be given to those antique Stories, whose truth is
almost worn out with age) she reaches her Pedigree as high as any, and likely
enough did partake in the spoils of Rome, when the Capitol was ransacked by
the Gauls, under the conduct of our two English Brothers. For her chief
Captain Belgius, whose memory she preserves to this day in her name, is
mentioned by Quadus and others, as Companion to Brennius in his expedition
toward Macedonia after they were entreated from Rome.

(3) In the first times they were a stout people, and practiced to continual
wars by the bordering Germans, which made them as well expert as hardy. It
seems Caesar found them so in his trial: for he gives them (in his
Commentaries) the honor of a valiant Nation above any other part of Gallia.
Yet at last he brought them under, and in time they were expulsed by the
Germans, who for their nearest speech and customs are supposed, and justly
too, the Predecessors to the now Inhabitants.

(4) For her first name I find no other likely account given, then from a City
built by their Belgius in the Province of Hannonia, where now stands Bavaris.
The rest, Germania inferior, the L^w-Countries and Netherlands require no long
search: for without doubt they have little other ground, then her low situation
upon the Seas: and indeed it is such as has oft-times endangered her by
inundations, and sunk many hundreds of their Towns and Villages, which to
this day in some places show their tops above water at a dead low ebb. Lastly,
Flanders, though but a single Province in this Belgia, yet of that esteem, as
the whole Country bears her name, and may indeed well enough upon the same
reason as she took it up. For (as the most will) it had its Etymon a flatibus
fluctibusque quibus tota haec obnoxia est regio.

(5) For on the North it is bounded with a part of the great Sea, and on the
West with the maine Ocean: On the East with the Rivers, Rhene and Mosa, and on
the South with Loraigne, Campaigne, and Picardie, parts of the Kingdom of
France. It is accounted to be in circuit 1000. Italian miles: no Country
abounds more with Lakes, Pooles, and Rivers of great note. The principal are
Rhene, Mosa, and Scaldis, 16. others are specially named by Maginus: and more
intimated, which afford them great store of fish, as well for their own use,
as supply for traffic to other Nations.

(6) Yet by reason of her watery situation, it must needs be that the air is
exceeding moist, and therefore unwholesome: but not so as heretofore. For the
multitude of Inhabitants, and those wonderfully industrious, have labored out
many of her marshes, and drawn their Pooles into running channels, and by
this means fewer vapors arise, in so much that now the Natives at last may
very well agree with the temper, which (as Maginus gives it) incolaru^ sanitati
nec non digestioni conducit. Their Summer is pleasant, not extreme hot, nor
abounds it with such troublesome flies and gnats as ours does. There is seldom
any thunder heard, or lightning seen, or earthquake felt. The reason is the
same for all. The Winter is not altogether so tolerable: but brings with it
bleake winds, and much rain. Yet betwixt both, the Country is moderately
fertile, yields Corn and fruit in some places more, and in some less: very
few Grapes, and those make but a hard Wine: no store of Mines: and yet they are
as rich as those which have.

(7) For the people are very thrifty, painful, and ingenious in the invention
of many pretty things, which draw many other Nations to them for Traffic: and
they lie as sit for it, having free access by Sea to and from all the chief
parts, as of Europe, so also Asia, Africa, and America, and are as skillful to
trace the Seas at pleasure. The have the name for the first Authors of the
Compass, Clock, and Printing. They are excellent Artificers, for working of
pictures in glass, for laying colors in Oil, for Tapestry and other
hangings: in brief, for any Oeconomicall commodity either for use or
ornament: and in their own private Families excel any other people. The men
are of a goodly presence: of a cold, or at least no choleric temper. They
neither love nor hate any extremely; but will soon forget both a good turn,
and (they say) an injury. They are not very open, or easy of belief, not apt
to be deceived. Not very proud, nor exceeding base. Not much given to Venus,
but more to Bacchus especially, when he presents himself upon an English
Beere-Barrell. For they will hardly make a bargain before they be well
whetted. This is their common Character, but for the best part of it we have
found it far other, as in their commerce with us in the East Indies we have
found, whereby their extreme dealings with our Nation, they have made known
their unthankefulnesse for the many benefits our English has showed them. But
I return to their better qualities. Their women are fair, somewhat bold and
free in their carriage, but yet sober and honest: excellent housewives, and in
some places traffic abroad, while their men play the Cotqueans at home.

(8) As in their other business, so in their studies they are very laborious,
and indeed trouble the world with writing more then they have thanks for: as if
they had a right, (since they were the inventers of the Press) to use it at
pleasure: for so they do. And send forth every common exercise performed by
their boys, toward a degree, with a clutter of tedious Anagrams prefixed. But
yet it has heretofore bred many excellent men in their faculties. Iustus
Lipsius, Erasmus, Rodulphus Agricola, Ortelius, Mercator. And at this day how
many others, good members of the Reformed Church, within compass of the States
government? The rest which are under the Archduke must appear Roman
Catholics. In diverse parts of Belgia, the Christian Religion was planted by
Wilbrod an English man.

(9) The last quality required in a Nation of esteem (as they are) is valor.
And indeed I may well place it last. For so it grew upon them: since the long
war, which they have had with the Arch duke. Before they lived for the most
part in peace; and as they had but little use of Chivalry, so they had as
little heart to it: but were counted a heavy dull people. To say truth, they
have hardly yet recovered that censure: for in the managing of their
Land-fights especially, they are content enough to give way to other Nations,
and will hardly second them in any dangerous attempt. The English have both
acted and suffered their parts, in the behalf of the Low Countries: and that
(me thinks) might have been remembered in the midst of their tyrannical usage
of our Merchants.

(10) These Netherlands toward our latter times were divided into 17.
Provinces, whereof the most part had several Rites and Governors, four
Dukedomes, seven Earledomes, five Baronies, and one Marquiship. But by the mixed
marriages of the heirs to the sundry Titles, the whole at last fell upon one,
was made an entire Government, and known by the name of the Dukedom of
Burgundy. Yet still does each Province retain her proper Laws, liberty of
Religion, and other Customs, which their Rulers in succession were sworn to
maintain for their parts: and the people again for their security, had this
maine prerogative left them from the beginning: that if their Prince should at
any time attempt the contrary, they might after Declaration proceed to the
choice of a new Governor. These Conditions confirmed, it continued for a while
peacefully, and by marriage with Mary Heir and last of the house of Burgundy,
it fell to Maximilian of Austria, Emperor of the Germans. And his Successor
Philip matching in the like sort with Joan heir to the Kingdom of Spain,
joined both together in his eldest son Charles the fifth, who by the Mother
was entitled to Spain, and by his Father to Burgundy or Netherlands, as for
Austria it passed to another brother. Thus came it subject to the King of
Spain. And while yet the Emperor enjoyed it, they felt no misery of civil
wars among themselves. When he left it, he commanded this charge withal to his
son Philip the second, that he should entreat the Low Countries well. But
this he either forgot or neglected: and taking it in foul scorn to be so
curbed by the conditions of his Predecessors, began first with a pretense to
Religion, and at last embroyled them in a bloody war, which has found no end
to this hour: and caused them to cast often the Spanish clogge, which they did
in the year 1581. and declared by their public Writings, that Philip the
second King of Spain, had forfeited his government of the Low Countries by
breach of his faith. And withal they bound their people by a new oath never to
return their obedience: which they yet make good against the Arch-Dutchesse,
who by kindred to the Spanish King, and marriage to the Archduke is at this
time interest in the government, and therefore in the quarrel.

(11) To her there belongs of the 17. Provinces (1) the Dukedomes of
Lutzenburg. (2) Limburg, and (3) Brabant. (4) The Earledomes of Flanders. (5)
Artoyse. (6) Hannault. (7) Namurcia. (8) The Baronie of Mechlin. (9) The
Marquisate of the holy Empire. To the States are reckoned the (10) map of Low
Germany A NEW MAPE OF YE XVII PROVINCES OF LOW GERMANY, mended a new in many
places. Anno 1626.
Duchy of Geldria. (11) The Earledomes of Zutphen. (12) Zealand, and (13)
Holland. (14) The Baronies of Vtrech. (15) Overissell. (16) Frizland. (17) And
Groyning.

(12) We begin with the Dukedomes intayled to the Spanish faction: and for the
easier finding their situation, we will take them as they lie from West to
East: And in this order is (1) Lutzenburg; It stands betwixt the River Mosa on
the West, and the Forest of Ardenna East: on the South it joins upon a part
of France. Her chief City is Lucenburg, called by Ptolemy Augusta Romanduorum.
In circuit this Dukedom is 240. miles, and contains in it many other Towns,
which have been much batterred in the wars, betwixt the French and Spanish
Kings, before the States were at difference among themsel^es. Theonville among
others is of note for the stronger Bostonacum, for the chief Merchandise. It
is called the Paris of Ardenna, for by some that Forest is reckoned into this
Dukedom. It stands on the East Side, was in Caesar's time 500. miles compass,
now about 90. Near to Ardenna is the Spaw bathes, of great fame for the Cure of
sundry diseases: And has oftentimes given our false English a pretense to
leave their Country forsooth for Physic: when they have no other excuse to
get free, and join themselves with the Romish Catholics. Maginus rockons into
this Region 1168. Villages, besides Castles, with seven Earledomes, many other
petty Governments. In the South is the Duchy of Bovillon, belonging to a Peer
of France. (2) Limburg, on the North-east of Lutzenburg, divides the government
betwixt her own Duke, and the Bishop of Luicke, who commands the Western
Tract, as much as contains 24. walled Towns, and 1800. Villages, and has
under him 52. Baronies. Luicke the chief City of the Bishopric is an
University, memorable for this one story, above any other in Christendom:
That at one time there studied 9. Kings sons, 24. Dukes sons, 29. Earls
sons, etc. The Dukes part in the East is not of that fam^, either for
multitude of Towns and Villages, or command of under-territories. In the year
1293. the heirs Male were extinct, and by that means it fell to the Duke of
Brabant. The whole Region is exceeding fertile, and affords almost all
necessaries except Wine: Among other Commodities, it abounds with a kind of
stone, of excellent use in Physic, called Lapis calaminani. The principal
City Limburg stands upon the River Wesa. (3) Brabant on the North of Limburg,
which commonly is supposed to have the name from Branchlant, as if a barren
soil: but it is otherwise reported unless toward the North. The people are
very jolly, ut viri gravem senectutem sentire videantur: And that me-thinkes
should argue plenty. Her chief Cities are Loraine an University, which
contains 20. Colleges, and among the rest a Seminary for English Jesuits.
Bruxells, and this is the Dukes seat, strengthened with a double wall, and is
adorned with very elegant buildings. Bergen ap Some, which is yet fresh in the
memory and mouths, since the siege 1622. Bodue whose people are noted to have
preserved the antique valor of their Predecessors, more then any other of the
Provinces. Breda was the place of the Prince of Orange, got from the Spaniard
by a desperate policy of a small number of Gentlemen, which ventured themselves
into the Castle, being conveyed in a Boat covered with turves: when they were
past recoile, they were forced to set their best strength forward, as well for
their lives as the victory; and were blessed with a success beyond hope. They
mastered the Castle, and the rest soon followed. It was of late recovered by
the Spaniards after a long siege, where our English got honor though not
conquest, under the conduct of our noble and valiant Earl of Oxford. And
lastly, within the compass of this D. is contained.

(13) The Marquisate of the holy Empire, whose chief City is Antwerpe, a
Town heretofore of infinite Trading: had two Marts every year, qualified with
an extraordinary privilege, that during the time no man might be arrested, nor
his goods seized: and questionless this invited many which were in debt, and
could not have the freedom of traffic elsewhere.

(14) The Earledomes are (1) Flanders: First indeed as well in esteem as
situation; For it gives name to the whole Region of the Netherlands: and the
Prince writes himself Comes Dei gratia. It is the very Northwest tract of this
Belgia: and is divided in Teutonicam, Imperatoriam, and Gallicam. The first is
the Flandria Flandricans, properly Flanders. The principal Cities are Gandadu^
Gaunt, the birthplace of our John Duke of Lancaster: She is severed by the
Rivers Shead, and lets into 26. Islands, and has passage from one to another by
98. bridges. Her walls are seven miles in compass. Her other Towns are
Burgies and Graveling: Her Ports Dunkerke, Scluse, Newport, Ostend, etc. The
two last notable, one for a pitched field, the other for a long siege. In both
the English honorably maintained the right of the States against the Archduke.
Flandria Imperatoria is but a small parcel, and borders upon Brabant, is called
the Earldom of Hulit, which is the chief City within her Territories:
Gallica Flandria is not of any large extent, but very fertile and pleasant. Her
chief towns are Lilla or Lilse, Duacum Doway an University, Orchais, Tornay
taken by King Henry the eighth, and ransomed by the Inhabitants for 100000,
Ducats. (2) Artesia, Artoyse, the seat of the Atrebates in Caesar's time. Their
chief City was then called Atrebatum now Arras, whence we have our rich
hangings and their name. It lies most on the South of Flanders; Maginus
reckons to her 12. Cities, and 852. Villages. The chief of name besides their
mother town Arras, are Air, Pernes, St. Omer, St. Paul. (3) Hannonia Hanolt on
the East of Flanders, 60. miles long, broad 48. Contains 950. Villages, and
24. Towns beside Castles. The chief are Banais supposed to stand in the same
place, where the ancient Belgium was built, Mons, Conde, Valenciennes, etc. (4)
Namurce on the East of Hanolt, a fruitful Country, and full of Mines
especially of Iron: It has but four Cities, 182. Villages. The Metropolis is
Namurce, and the rest Charlemount, Valen-Court, Bornies.

(15) The only Barony of the Arch Dukes Province is Mechlin a City in Brabant,
which stands almost at equal distance betwixt Lovane, Bruxells and Antwerpe.
Before the Spanish w^rs it was a place of Parliament for the States: Since a
great part of it was scattered by unfortunate chance of fire, which catch among
800. Barrells of Gunpowder. In this stands a Monastery, which at sometimes has
in it 1600 Nuns; and within these limits is the power of the Archduke
confined: And surely by reason of his infinite charge to maintain war, and
the ticklish terms he stands upon for fear of displeasing his Subjects, who
(as he suspects) may be apt enough to revolt, he can reap but little clear
profit, and dares use as little Authority.

(16) To the States there hold first the Dukedom of Geldria, which some will
have to take her name from Gelduba, once her chief City: whether or not,
there appears not now any monument of such a Town. The Province stands on the
East of Brabant; and North of Limburg: It is a very fertile soil; especially
if it be well tilled, it returns the husbandman a liberal reward for his
labor. Her pastures are excellent, in so much, that they feed up their Cattle
to an incredible bigness and weight. A report passes of one Bull which
weighed 3200. pound: It was killed at Antwerpe, 1570. It has in it 22. walled
Towns, and about 300 Villages. The principal of account are Neomagus or
Nummegen an Imperial city, stands at the mouth of Rhene, which is called the
Vahall. It was honored with the title of a vice-County, had authority to coin
money, and was bound to acknowledge subjection to the Emperor only by a small
tribute. A glove of Gunpowder, which they were to tender at Aken once a year.
Others of note are Ruermund, Arnem, and Zutph^n.

(17) The Earledomes are (1) Zutphen a Town only in Gelderland, at the north of
the river Barikell, where that valiant soldier, and incomparable Poet Sir
Philip Sidney received his last wound. It was joined into the States strength
1590. (2) Zeland, it stands in the North tract upon the Seas, from whence it
has the name as it were of Zeland: And indeed it often times so falls out, that
they can hardly say whether they live in Sea or upon the Land. Eight Islands
have bin utterly lost: what remains of this Province is by the water divided
into seven Islands: Walcheria, in which stands Middle-borough and Flushin. South
Beveland, North Develand, Wolfors-dicke. These are the Western. The Eastern
are Schoven, Tolen, and Develand. They are most of them a fierce people,
crafty in merchandise, good Sea men, and great Fishers. (3) Holland or
Holtland a woody Country: It is but a small Region, such as be a man where he
will within her compass, he may travel it out in three hours: And yet is it
of great fame, and better known to the common sort of people then any of these
parts. The Inhabitants heretofore the Batavi: on the West it has the Sea and
Isles of Zeland: on the North the maine Ocean. It comprehends about 400.
Villages, and 29. walled Towns. The chief are Dordret or Dort, memorable for a
Synod held against the Arminians, 1618. Harlem a Town which first sent forth a
printed Book into the other parts of Europe. Delft, Amsterdam, a great place
of traffic, Roterdam, Lugdunum Batavorum, Leyden an University. Among the
rest the Hage may claim a room here though but a village, yet the fairest in
Christendom, and seat of the States Council. The report lies upon this
Province of Margaret sister to the Earl of Floris, that she brought at one
birth 365. children, all living till they were christened.

(18) Baronies are (1) Vltrasectense utrecht on the East of Gelderland, and in
part West, North, and South of Holland. It has the name from her mother City
Traiectum: and she hers, (as is supposed) from a common Ferry which is there:
For before it was called Antonina. It has four other good Towns, and seventy
villages. (2) Ov^rissall or Transisulana on the North of Gelderland: It has
above 100. Villages, and 11. Towns of note. The chief Deventer won by our
Robert Dudley Earl of Leicester from the Spaniards to the States: It was once
under government of the Bishop of Vtrech: And the first was Wilbr^d an
Englishman. (3) Frizia West Friezeland on the North of Overissall: It has 345.
Villages and 5. Towns. The chief Lewarden, Harlingham a Sea-town, and
Francker a late University. (4) Groyning a Town only of West Friezland, but
has Command over 145. villages, has her proper laws and jurisdiction of a
Province.

(19) These last eight join together in an Aristarchicall Government, weilded
by the LL. the States of the Low Countries, and their assistants. Each Province
has one, and his Common Council is elected out of her own principal Towns:
But the residency of the general Council of the States is at the Hage in
Holland; And to this are admitted with equal privilege of suffrage their
General of their Forces, and our English Ambassador.

The Description of SPAIN.
IN our Division of Europe, we placed her Regions as they lay from the first
Meridian of Longitude in the Azores, and so on toward Asia Eastward. We will
not here vary the course which was there proposed; and that gave Spain the
precedence, as lying most Westward into the Atlanticke Ocean. And indeed she
puts forward as well upon her terms of Antiquity, as order of place. For if
her plea may be heard, she derives her being from Tubal, the grandchild of
Noah, and would be one of the first Nations of the second world. Likely enough
those parts might be inhabited by his Progeny, but I doubt whether so soon
after the Flood, as himself lived, and as some would have it, who suppose that
he then kept Cattle, and named the Province Taraconensis, from the Hebrew
Taraco, a possession of Herds. This and other the like improbable Relations
pass of her original. Which as we may not accept for truths, so we have no
room here to confute them for lies. We must be content rather to omit those
former ages, which give us no light but by fables; and begin with the affairs
of Spain, which come within the compass of our known and approved Stories. As
for the exploits of Hercules, of Gerion, and Cacus, and the rest;
questionless, they had some ground from truth it self, if we knew how to
search it forthand and here was their residence, men twelve hundred years by
compute before the Romans or Carthaginians enjoyed it. But by reason that the
passage of those times, was delivered only in vain fictions, we can warrant
nothing for certain till the Syrians there planted themselves in the I Will of
Gades: and of them little, till the Carthaginians were called in to aid them
against the disturbance of ill neighbors, when once they were mingled with so
flourishing a Nation, they wanted not Writers to record their actions, and
sundry turns of Fortune.

(2) The next Inhabitants there of Spain after the Syrians, and indeed the
first which afford us any Story worth observing, were the Carthaginians: and
the first cause of their entrance, was to defend the Ilanders of Cales: but
when they had once got firm footing, and sucked the sweetness, they were not
to be removed by the easy term of friendship: but there kept hold, till a
people stronger then themselves dispossessed them. The attempt was made by
Scipio and the Roman forces; but they withstood their assault with so resolved
a courage, and so strong a hand, that it might oft-times be questioned Vter
populus alteri esset pariturus? and so held play almost 200. years, and could
not be fully subdued into the form of a Province, till the Reign of Augustus
Caesar, yet after they were held to it till Honorius.

(3) About his sixth year was there a second Invasion made by the Vandales, and
soon after by the Goths, which bare sway for above 300. years. The last King
was Rodoricus, who lost both himself and Kingdom for a rape committed upon
the Daughter of Julian a noble Gentleman, and at that time Ambassador with the
Moors in Africa. When the Father had understood of his Daughters unworthy
injury, he brought back his revenge with him 30000. Horse, and 180000. Foot
of Moors and Sarazens, which discomfited the King, overthrew all the
resistance which he could make, and bespread the Country with their Forces,
where they and their posterity stood firm, till within the memory of some
which yet live.

(4) This change of State was before prophesied, and concealed in a large Chest
within a part of the Palace, which both the last King and his Predecessors were
forewarned not to discover. But the hope of an inestimable treasure made him
transgress: and when he had entered, there appeared nothing but the
Portractures of Armed Moors, with a presage annexed, that when that part of
the Palace should be forced open, such enemies should ruin Spain. It is now
at last but one people, but yet retains the mixture of those many Nations which
have heretofore possessed it, Goths, Sarazens, and Jews, who were partly banished
hither by Hadrian the Emperor, and partly sent hither by Vlider Vbit the
Caliph after the Moors conquest.

(5) In all this Discourse touching the beginning and settling of the State of
Spain it appears not, from whence she derives her several names of Iberia,
Hesperia, and Hispania. It seems they are more ancient then the entrance of
the Carthaginians, and therefore they allow us no certain Story, nor other
reason indeed, more then a likely Conjecture: and in some scarce that. Her
first name of Iberia was given by her ancients from a River that runs almost
through the middle of the Country; So says Maginus, and relies upon Pliny and
Justin for his Authors. Others give it rather to the Iberi, the ancient people
of Asia that came in under Panus from toward Syria, and possessed it before the
Carthaginians. Her second name admits as much question. Some fetch it from
Hesperus the brother of Atlas, and their twelfth King from Tubal. Others beyond
the Moon from the Evening star, because it is situate upon the West of
Europe. The last Hispania is supposed from one Hispanus or Hispalus, who
reigned in those parts, and was the third in the account of some from Tubal: or
else from Hispalis now Seril: rather we may take it from the forementioned
Panus, Captain of the Iberians, by the prefixion of an S, for so the Greeks
give it (...), and since by their own addition and corruption it is made
Espania, Hispania.

(6) Her whole compass is reckoned to be 1893. English miles: and her bounds
are Seas on every side, unless on the East toward France, from which she is
severed by the Pir^naan Mountains. On the West he Atlantic Ocean, on the North
the Cantabrick, and on the South the Fretum Herculeum, and other parts of the
Mediterraneum, which divide her from Africa. Her Rivers of note are specially,
(1) Minius or Mingo. (2) Dorio now Duerus. (3) Tagus now Taio, famous for her
golden sands. () Betis or Guadilquiver. (5) Iberus now Ebro, and (6) Ana or
Guadiana, which in one place glides under ground for fifteen miles together,
and gives the Spaniard an occasion (as he will catch at any) to brag that
they have ten thousand Cattle daily feeding upon one bridge. Yet give them
their own sense, the truth may be questioned. For they have not such plenty of
meat, as they have of sauce.

(7) It yields indeed abundance of Oranges, Lemons, Capers, Dates, Sugar, Oil,
Honey, Licorish, Raisins, Saffron, Rice, excellent Sacks, and other Wines. And
in some places, Sheep, Goats, and swift Horses. It has been heretofore noted
for rich Mines, in so much that Hannibal received daily 3000. from one Mine in
Spain. The number is not answerable in proportion to other Regions of Europe.
Their Cities not so great, nor so many. The reason may be, because indeed their
women are not so fertile to multiply among themselves, and their usage of
strangers so uncivil, that very few of other Countries seat themselves there,
as in France, England, and Germany. And yet they have of late times sent many
Colonies abroad into both Indies.

(8) They are extremely proud, and the silliest of them pretend to a great
portion of wisdom, which they would seem to express in a kind of reserved
state, and silent gravitie, when perhaps their wit will scarce serve them to
speak sense. But if once their mouths be got too open, they esteem their
breath too precious to be spent upon any other subject then their own glorious
actions. They are most unjust neglectors of other Nations, and impudent vain
flatterers of themselves. Superstitious beyond any other people: which indeed
commonly attends those which affect to be accounted religious, rather then to
be so. For how can hearty devotion stand wih cruelty, lechery, pride, Idolatry,
and those other Gothish, Moorish, Jewish, Heathenish conditions of which they
still savor.

(9) Yet it has yielded heretofore men very famous for their several
endowments, both of wit and religion. The Apostle himself expresses a great
desire to see Spain, as hoping to do much good among those which had
entertained the name of Christ. Osius a learned Bishop in the time of
Constantine the Great: And Pac^anus mentioned by S. Hierome, Isidore,
Fulgentius, Arias Montanus, Tostatus and Masius, were all Spaniards: Seneca,
Quintilian the Orator ( Lumen Romanae eloquentia, as Valla styles him)
Martialis, Lucan, Silius, and Pomponius Mela were Spaniards, Traian the
Emperor, Theodosius, Ferdinand the Catholic, and Charles the Emperor were
Spaniards. To this day it breeds good Soldiers, slow, but sure, and
successful in their Conquests. Yet such as prevail more by art then valor.
Their continual scarcity of victuals inureth them to hunger and other
hardness, which oft-times wearieth out their enemy, and makes him yield at
least to their patience, if not to their strength.

(10) She has been subject to many divisions, according to the humor of
those that have been her Lords. The first of note was made by the Romans in
Citeriorem, which lay nearest to their Territories, and Vlteriorem, which was
all the extent, beyond the River Iberus ad fretum usque Herculeum. The second
was by them too, in Baeticum the whole tract beyond the River Ana Southward.
(2) Lusitanium Northward, toward the Cantabricke Ocean, and (3) Tarraconensem
Eastward joining upon map of Spain SPAIN Newly described, with many adictions,
both in the attires of the people and the setuations of their chiefest Cityest
by John. Speed. 1626
France. When the Moors enjoyed it, they rent it into twelve parcells, a
multitude of petty royalties. Arragon, Catalonia, Valentia, Castile, Toledo,
^^ay, Leon, Gallicea, Murcia, Navarre, Corduba, and Portugal. And these yet
retain the name of Kingdoms, but their government was long ago recovered into
the hands of five, which bare the titles of Castile, Arragon, Granada, Navarre,
and Portugal. It was of latter times contracted into the three Kingdoms of
Arragon Castile, and Portugal, but is in the power of one King, called the
Catholic King of Spain. We stand to this last division as most proper for
our times, and best befitting my brief Discourse. Give me leave to add the
Islands which lie near to each Kingdom.

(11) The present state of Arragon comprehends three of those Kingdoms, as it
was scattered by the Moors and Sarazens. (1) Arragon it self, which lies on
the South of Navarre, on the East of Castile, on the North of Valentia, and the
West of Catalonia. The ancient Inhabitants were the Iaccetani, Lucenses, and
Celtiberi: her chief City Caesar Augusta. (2) Catalonia: It lies betwixt
Arragon and the Pyrenaean hills. It is supposed a mixed name from Gothi and
Alani, people which heretofore possessed it after the Vandales had lost their
hold. The Region is but barren; yet it has in it many Cities, The chief Terra
cona, which gave name to the whole Province, called by the Romans,
Terraconenses. (3) Valentia, which on the East is touched with the
Mediterraneum, on the north with Castile, on the south with the Kingdom of
Murcia. It is reported for the most pleasant and fruitful Region in all
Spain, it has her name from her chief City, and as Maginus relates, admits
as yet of 22. thousand Families of Moors. In this is the University where St.
Dominicke, father of the Dominicans studied. And the old Saguntum besieged by
Hannibal now Morvedre.

(12) The state of Castile as now it stands, comprehends all the rest of those
scattered governments, as were possessed by the Moors, Portugal only excepted.
And first Castil it self, both the old which joins with Arragon on the East of
Portugal, and the West of Navarre; and the new which touches her upon the
South. The first abounds not much with fruits, but yet it breeds many Cattle.
The Metropolis is Burgos* and the other chief are Salamanca, an University,
and Valadelit once the seat of the Kings of Spain. Now Castile abounds more
with Come: is watered with the river Tagus and Ana: and in this stands the
Kings chief Cities, Madrid and Toledo, which was heretofore a proprietarie of
it self. The rest that belong to Castile are a Toledo how ever now but a City
of new Castile, yet in the division, her Territories spread themselves over a
large compass. The City is in the midst of Spain. It was the seat of the
Gothish Kings, and successively of the Moorish Princes: now of the Archbishops,
who exceed in revenews any other Prelate in the world, except the Pope. Here
has sat eighteen National Councels in the time of the Gothish Kings. 3.

(13) Biscay, heretofore Cantabria on the North of old Castile toward the
Ocean, it was the last people which yielded to the Romans, and after to the
Moors. A Mountainous Country, but affords excellent Timber for Ships, and
good Iron. Her Cities are St. Sebastian, Fonteralia, and Bilbao, which stands
but two miles from the Sea, and is noted for excellent Blades: some have been
tried by the English upon their own Crests. 4.

(14) Leon heretofore Austria, on the East has Biscay, on the West Gallicia,
on the North the Cantabricke Ocean, and on the South old Castile. The Region is
reported to yield plenty of Gold, Vermilion, red Lead, and other Colors, else
she is barren, her Inhabitants not many, and those live most upon Hunting and
Fishing. It is the title of the eldest Son of Castile, as Wales is to our
Prince of England. Her chief City is Oveido, which bare part with her in the
name of a Kingdom; and indeed was the Title of the first Christian King after
the Moors Conquest. 5.

(15) Gallicia, on the East joins upon Leon, on the West it is bounded with the
Atlanticke Ocean, on the North with the Cantabricke, and on the south with the
River Mingo. It breeds Iennets in abundance, in so much that they have been
Poetically feigned to be conceived by the wind. Niger writes that here has
been an incredible plenty of Gold, Lead, and Silver. That the Rivers are full
of a mixed earth, and that the Plough could scarce wagge for clods of golden
Ore. There appears now no such matter. The principal Cities are Saint Iago,
where St. James the Apostle lies buried, his Relics kept, worshipped, and
visited by Pilgrims. And the other of note especially with us is Corugna, an
excellent Port for Ships, and mentioned often in our wars with the Spaniards by
the name of the Groyne. Here likewise is the Promontorie Nerius, called by our
Mariners Capo de finis terrae.

(16) Murcia, on the North has new Castile; on the South and East the Spanish
Seas. It is not much peopled, but yet is famous for several Commodities,
especially pure earthen vessels, and fine Silk. Heretofore it enriched the
Romans with a daily supply of 25000. Drachmae of Silver. Her chief places are
Alicante, whence our Alicant Wines come, and new Carthage often commended by our
Travelers, for her large and safe Haven, and lastly, Murcia, a Town which
gives name to the whole Region.

(17) Navare lies close to the Pirenaean Hills, and as Maginus gives it, is
enclosed with Mountains: and so it is North and East, on the West it has the
River Ebro, and on the South Arragon. The Vascones are said to have lived here,
who afterward placed themselves in France, and keep there their name to this
day of Vascones, corruptly Gascoignes. The chief Towns are Pampelme, the
Metropolis, and Viana the title of the Navarran Prince. Maginus sets the
Revenue annual of this Kingdom at 100000. Ducats.

(18) Corduba, now a City only, heretofore a Kingdom and included.
Andaluzia, Granada, and Estr^madura. Equalized almost the whole Province which
the Romans in their second division called Baetica. Andaluzia has lost but one
letter of her name since she was possessed by the Vandales. From them she was
first called Vandalicia: since Andalicia, corruptly, Andaluzia. It lies on the
West of Granada, and is a very fertile Country. In this Region is the chief
City Corduba, whence we receive our Cordavan Leather. The second of note is
Sevill: the Metropolitan of Andaluzia, and the fortunate Islands, esteemed the
goodliest City in all Spain, and though (as Corduba) it was not honored with
the title of a Kingdom, yet it honored a Kingdom with her title in the
opinion of some, which derive Hispania from her former appellation Hispalis.
From this shore they lanch forth toward the Indies, and from hence they send
their Sevill Oranges. The Archbishop of Sevill is second to Toledo, as well in
Revenewes as degree. Near to Andaluzia is the Island of Gades, by which the
Carthaginians entered into Spain. Since it is called Cadis, and commonly Cales.
The English have had their turn in the possession of that I Will. Now again
fortune has cast it upon the Spaniard. On the very South edge of this Region
stands one of Hercules Pillars, which answers to the other Promontory in
Mauritania: The Sea betwixt both is called Fretum Herculeum, and Straights of
Gibralter. The second Province of Corduba was Granada, on the East of Andaluzia
the West of Murcia, and South of new Castile toward the Spanish Seas. It has
been far more fertile then now it is: yet it still reserves a show of her
former beauty, affords as excellent Sugar, Silk, and Wines. The principal
Towns of note are, Granada and Malaga: the first for Stockins, and the other
for good Sacks. The third Province of Corduba Estrem^dura lies on the South of
Castile, and is watered through the middle with the River Ana. And in this
stands the City Merida, once a Roman Colonie, and named by them Augusta
Emerita, from the Inhabitants which were there planted by Augustus, and culled
out of his ancient tried Soldiers.

(19) Portugal is the third Kingdom in our last division of Spain, and it
may well be esteemed one of her largest Territories: For it runs along by the
Atlantic Ocean, from the borders of Gallicea, as Andaluzia; on the North it is
limited with the River Mingo, on the South with part of the Mediterraneum, on
the West with the Atlantic and on the East with the Castiles Andaluzia and
Estremadura. Her name some derive a portu Gallorum, Maginus rather a portu Cale
a Haven of that name which was much frequented by Fishermen; It is almost the
same portion of Spain which was heretofore Lusitania, and her people were
esteemed the most valiant, crafty and agile Soldiers of the whole Region; yet
now they are held to be simple ad proverbiu^ usque. But it is their neighbor
Spaniards censure, who indeed have overreached them in cunning, and brought
them under the subjectio^ of their Catholic King, which were before a free
State of themselves, and carried with them another Kingdom of the Algarbi,
which stands in her very South, and shows the Cape of St. Vincent into the
Atlanticke Ocean: Give them their due they are excellent Seamen, and the best
alive to atchieve adventurous actions: For they added to their Dominions many
Territories of Africa, Asia, and America, could they have been so fortunate as
to have kept their Kingdoms and themselves out of the reach of the cogging
Spaniard.

(20) The Country affords not much Corn, but fruit reasonable store, and
Mines of several metalls, Alum, Marble, good Silks, etc. The chief City is
Lisbone, in Latin Vlyssipona, supposed to have been built by Ulysses. And from
hence they set sail toward the East Indies, to Aethiopia, Brasile, etc. In so
much that this very City yields more revenew then the rest of the whole
Kingdom. Another eminent place of this Region is the Metropolis and Academia of
Conimbria, called before Mouda. And this briefly is the whole Continent of
Spain, but does not terminate the Spanish Dominions, which commands as well
the Islands which lie near in the Atlanticke and Mediterraneum, as many other
parts of the world besides interminate with other Regions. The Kingdom of
Naples in Italy, Duchy of Myleine, Isles of Sicily and Sardinia, the Canaries,
Towns and Castles and Havens in Barbary; In the West Indies, Mexico, Peru,
Brasile, large portion in the East.

(21) The Islands near Spain in the Atlanticke chiefly the Tarsarae. In the
Mediterraneum are the Baleares, and those are two principal, Maiorica commonly
called Mallorca, and Minorica commonly Menorca. Other less Islands are
Dragonera, Cabrera, Pyttussae, Erisa, Vedrau, Conirello, Dragomago, and
Scombraria.

The Description of ITALY.
ITALY is divided from France and Germany by the Alps, and stretches her
self South-east, betwixt the Tyrrhene and Adriaticke Seas, almost in just
proportion of a man's leg. I may spare my Reader her lavish attributes; which
he can hardly ba^^e, if he will but look into any Author where her name is
mentioned. She must (for me) and well may, be content here with the brief
Elogie of Pliny, to which (I think) the wit of man can add but little.
Certainly the most blessed seat of man upon earth can deserve no more. Italia
terrarum omnium alumna, eadem and parens, numine deorum electa quae coelum
ipsum clarius faceret, sparsa congregaret imperia, ritus molliret, tot
populorum discordes linguas, sermones, Commercia, ad colloquia distraberet, and
humanitati hominem daret.

(2) Yet to speak truth we cannot abate her much of this title. The mother of
Countries we may call her, since most Writers agree, that she was first
inhabited by Ianus (or Noah, as some would report him) the father of Nations.
It was doubtless a very long time, since the world was honest: and deserved
the name of a golden age: yet then was she peopled (as Iustine delivers out of
Trogus) by the Aborigines, whose King was first Ogyges, then Saturn, a man so
just, that under his government there was known no tyranny from their Prince,
no disloyalty from the subject, no injury from the neighbor: They had all
one patrimony, one possession: and where all acknowledge no peculiar, there can
be but little cause of strife.

(3) I presume not to set down the just year when men were thus ordered: But
if you will believe the story of the Gentiles compared in Chronology, by some
of late years and better trust, as Munster, Quade, etc. Ianus pater hominum
and deorum and immediate predecessor to Saturn, was in Italy within 200.
years after the Flood, and received the aged Chronus into part of his Kingdom
with him, being expulsed by his son Jupiter out of Crete. Each of them built
a City and left a sound of his name for their remembrance: the one Ianua,
which to this day has suffered no further change then to Genua: and the other
Saturnia; and both in their times gave name to the whole region: which are not
yet fully worn out: though others have since took place: as Latium, quia his
latebat Saturnus, Italia ab Italo Siculorum rege. Hesperia from the Western
star, A^sonia and Oenotria from her excellent Wines.

() But this is the largest scope which we can give to her antiquity. Helvicus
and other authenticke observers of time, cuts off (well-nigh) a thousand years
from this account of the Aborigines, and places their Dynastia 2622. years
after the creation: 966. after the Flood: and before Christ 1327.

(5) The first change of Inhabitants was forced by Evander the Arcadian, a man
of that admirable eloquence, that he was called the son of Mercury, but had
by chance slain his father, and was therefore expulsed his inheritance, and
advised into Italy by his mother, a great Prophetess of those times. He
removed the Aborigines from their seat, and planted his companions in the same
plot of ground, where after Rome was built: and in the Mons Palatinus founded a
little Town, which he called Pallanteum, in memory of his great grandfather.
And this was about the year 2710.

(6) About 60. years after, Aeneas arrived in this Country from the siege of
Troy, was entertained as an amorous suitor by Lavinia, with consent of her
father Latinus: and after the death of his corrivall Turnus, King of the
Rutilians, was settled heir to the Latin Monarchy after his father.

(7) From Aeneas to Numitor the succession went on (not without some rubs,) but
suffered no great breach for almost four hundred years. When the title should
have fallen to him, being the elder and true heir, he was spoiled of the
Kingdom by his younger Amulius Sylvius: nor could it be recovered till time
had given growth and strength to Romulus and Rhemus his grandchildren by his
daughter Rhea.

(8) The birth and breeding of these two brothers is well known, we need not
enlarge their Story further then thus. They were the sons of Rhea, a Virgin
which was cloystered up into the Temple of Vesta, by her uncle Amulius Sylvius,
that she might not bring forth an heir to endanger his title. Notwithstanding
means was found, so that she conceived at once two children by Mars, and was
delivered among her sisters Vestals. For this her self (as the censure was
upon such delinquents) was buried alive: her boys exposed to be destroyed: but
were preserved by Faustulus the Kings Shepherd, and nursed by his wife
Laurentia: or Lupa for her bad life.

(9) When years and their supposed father had taught them their pedigree, and
the base tyranny of their uncle; they began with revenge upon him, for their
mothers quick burial: for their own intended murder, and their grandsires
injury. To be brief, they slew their great uncle Amulius Sylvius, and
returned the Kingdom to the rightful Numitor.

(10) Thus when they had once dealt in disposing of Empires: they could not
easily return to the Shepheards-hooke, but bethought them of the like fortune
for their own advancement: and stirred not far to make good their purpose,
but in the very Mons Palatinus, the place where they sucked their nurse, they
drew together a monstrous head of debaucht Shepherds, and built the City:
which is now called Rome from Romulus, who in strife for the name, or (as some
say) for a disdainful skip over the new walls slew his brother Rhemus, and was
left the sole Founder and Commander of this rascal crew, for so indeed it was,
and held in that contempt by their borderers, that they could not by entreaty
get wives from them to continue their succession, till by a guile they had
enticed the Sabines to their pastimes, ravished their women, and afterward by
degrees either made their peace or wanne it with the sword, from the people
round about them.

(11) Thus began the Empire of Rome: and was governed at first by 7. Kings in a
direct succession to Tarquinius Superbus, who lost both himself and Kingdom,
by his own pride, and his son Sextus rape upon Lucretia. It was next taken
up by Consuls, two annually chosen out of the Patritii or principal Citizens.
The third rank were of Decemviri: but they again were dispossessed for the like
rape of Appius upon Virginia, and Tribunes were constituted of Consulary
authority. Then Consuls again in another course: and for a while Dictators;
which when Caesar had once clasped, he soon made to himself a power
Imperial: and (though after five years it cost him his life, which he
enchanged with Brutus and Cassius for 23. wounds in the Senate house: yet) the
liberty of Rome was never so fully recovered, but that soon after the
Government fell upon Augustus, by the death of Autony and deposing of Lepidus,
who for a while were joined with him into the Trium viratus.

(12) This hold was scarce ever lost clearly to this day: though by the
changing of the seat Imperial from Rome to Bizantium, in the reign of their
fourtie-third Constantinus: by the division into the Eastern and Western, in
the time of Theodosius: by the many invasions of the Goths, Hunnes, Vandals*
Alani, Burgundians, and Lombards, it comes now far short of that full glory
in which it once shined.

(13) Yet is Italy still as before a happy soil, pleasant and fertile: at all
times moderate weather and healthful air: full of variety as well of living
creatures, as Plants, Corn, Wine, Oil, Linen, Herbs, etc. And can afford
into other Countries, Rice, Silks, Velvets, Sattins, Taffaties, Grogram, Rash,
Fustians, Gold-wire, Armor, ^llom, Glasses, etc. The rich are very rich: for
wealth will come, with much labor, in great abundance: but the poor are
extreme poor: for they are most of them very idle.

(14) Her chief Rivers are Padus or Poe, Athesis, Rubica, Tyberis, Arnus, etc.
And her chief Mountains are the Alps and Mons Appenninus. The first are in
height 5* days journey, covered with snow, and from thence have their names a
nivibus albis. They have two passages from Germany into this Country, and
three out of France. From Germany by the Valtoline and by Trent. Out of France
through Provence and Liguria: through the hills Genura to Lombardy: and through
the Country of Turaigne. The Appennine Mountain runs at length with Italy,
like the ridge of a man's back, and is called indeed Spina. The measure of Italy
is from Northwest to Southeast about 1010. miles, and from the two Seas cross
in some places 410.

(15) The Inhabitants are of a sad temper, solid judgment, witty, politic,
and frugall: yet they are as deeply engaged to their peculiar vices; hot
letchers, and those seldom stand quit from that horrible torture of jealousy
over their wives, for it measures others actions by its own rule. Both in them
are incredible: and makes treachery and murder, seem no fault in their eye,
if they be provoked by suspicion. Little friendship with them but for
advantage: and a man must beware that he venture map of Italy ITALIA Newly
augmented by. I. Speed and Are to be sold in Pops-head aley by George Humble.
1626.
not further upon those terms, then he may well step back, lest he be
betrayed (perhaps forced) to a love worse then their hate: for they are most
unnatural in their lust. The women when they have their free liberty differ
not much, but their close keeping either hinders, or at least hides their
faults, so as they appear modest, lovely, and witty, for as much as they dare
speak.

(16) For war and learning, it bred in times past the mirror of both,
Camillus, Fabius Maximus, Scipio, Pompey, Caesar, Cicero, Livie, Tacitus,
Virgil, Ovid, and many hundreds which yet prompt our tongues and pens with
examples of goodness in several kinds. Nor has it lost that glory in this
age. For what Nation directs not their travailes into these parts, to see,
hear, and partake of their excellent learning, though they compass it with
great expense, and venture through dangerous hazzards, by reason of their
treacherous dispositions, and cruel barbarous usage of such as shall in any
light circumstance seem to be averse from their idolatrous superstition. But
their Universities are many and very famous; Rome, Ferrara, Naples, Salernum,
Venice, Padua, Verona, Florence, Millaine, Mantua, etc.

(17) I must omit those many divisions of Italy, made first by Cato in
Appenninam, Cisappennina^, and Transappenninam. By Pliny in Liguriam, Latium,
etc. By Sirabo in Venetiam, Lucaniam, Apuliam, Romam, etc. By Ptolemy into 45.
several Nations. We will rest in the latest, which best fits the present
state, and numbers ten Provinces.

(1) The Kingdom of Naples. (2) The Land of the Church. (3) The Commonwealth
of Venice. (4) The Dukedom of Florence. (5) The Dukedom of Millain. (6) The
Dukedom of Mantua. (7) The Dukedom of Vrbin. (8) The Principality of Parma.
(9) The State of Genoa. (10) The State of Luca.

(18) The first is the Kingdom of Naples in the South part of Italy, and is
the most fertile: it is bounded with the Seas unless on that side toward the
Papacis. It is of large compass and comprehends many Provinces. (1) Campania
foelix, or terra laboris, and in this stands Naples the Metropolis: and Cuma,
where the Sibylls Cave was, by which Aeneas went down to Hell. And not far
off is the lake Avernus. (2) Abrazzo, her chief Towns of note are Sulmo, and
Aquine, the birthplace of our great Schoole-man Thomas Aquinas. (3) Calabria
inferior. The chief City Salernum an Academie, famous for Physic. (4)
Calabria superior, called Magna Graecia, from a multitude of Greek Colonies,
which there built Cities, and possessed a great part of the Countries. The
principal of note was Tarentum. (5) Terra Di'otranto from her Metropolis
Otranto, once Hydruntum. And here stands Brundusium, famous for one of the best
Havens in Christendom. (6) Puglia, and her chief City was Arpinum, Tullies
birthplace.

(19) The Land of the Church lies on the West of Naples, and South-east of the
Commonwealth of Venice: North and South she crosses from the Adriatique to
the Tuscane Sea. Her under-provinces are, (1) Romandiola: and her chief Cities
Bononia, and Ferrara, and Ravenna. (2) Marchia Anchonitana, in which stands
Loretto, the place where so many miracles are performed by our Lady, as they
deliver among the rest of their Legends. Ducato Spoletano: and in this Asis,
where Saint Francis was borne. (4) Saint Peter's patrimony, a large portion:
and I believe more then ever he enjoyed or could leave to his heirs. Her
ancient Towns, well known and often mentioned in the Roman Stories were Alba,
the seat of the Sylvian Kings, and Ostia, built by Ancus Martius, and Tybur,
Proueste, the Gabii, the Veii, and that which bustles for the place above any
other in Christendom, Rome her self: we will not repeat her beginning: she
was then but two miles in compass: but after she grew fat, she burnished to
50. miles about, upon the walls 740. Turrets, and the Inhabitants innumerable.
For those memorable actions which were performed in her under the antique
Empire, we will refer the Reader to a particular Description, derived wholly
to that purpose. As it is now, it stands somewhat lower on the banks of Tiber,
in the Campus Martius: she retains yet 11. miles round, and 200000.
Inhabitants, a great part Friars, and such odd idle fellows, which pretend to
Religion, for want of other means to live: Cloister themselves up to a single
life, only to avoid the charge and encumbrances of marriage, not to separate
themselves from the world or desires of the flesh: for among them they
maintain commonly 40000. Curtizans in good custom, and so rich, that they are
able to pay 30000. Ducats yearly to the Pope. The buildings, in which they
most glory in, are the Church of Saint Peter, the Castle of Saint Angelo, the
Vaticane Library, and the Popes Palace. The truth is, there is pride enough to
attire the whore of Babylon, as there can hardly be any other meant then Rome:
she sits upon the Beast with seven heads: for she was built upon seven Hills,
Palatinus, Capitolinus, Viminalis, Aventinus, Esquilinus, Caelius, Quirinalis:
was ruled first by seven Kings, and has been since subject to seven several
forms of government; if you join the Popedom to those former, which I have
now mentioned.

(20) The Commonwealth of Venice, on the North of the Papacis, is a large
Territory, and is now as famous for State-policie as it has been heretofore
glorious for warlike achievements. The Inhabitants were first a people of
lesser Asia, and assisted their neighbor Trojans in their ten years
quarrel with the Greeks. So long since they were known by the name of
Heneti: and that differs not much from Veneti as they are now called. Though
they have a Duke, yet it is a free State, and governed by an Aristarchie: for
he is ordered to the very clothes on his back, by a certain number of the
chief Citizens of Venice (for that is their Gentry,) and has his allowance
out of their treasury (little enough to keep him from the thought of tyranny)
about 40000. Ducats by the year. The City it self is eight miles round,
built upon 72. Islands, five miles from the firm land, but for convenience of
passage is always furnished with Boats, and has 4000. Bridges. Their Arsnall
keeps in continual readiness 200. Galleys. In their Magazin of war, there
is ever furniture for 100000. men at Arms. The younger brothers of the Gentry
may not marry to increase the number beyond maintenance: yet to make up their
liberty, they allow them stews. Her Provinces are (1) Marca Trarigniana, and
her chief Cities are Truisco and Padua (the University best frequented by
Physicians, by reason of her rare garden of simples,) and Verona, with many
others. (2) Frinby. (3) Histria. (4) Part of Dalmatia. (5) The Islands, Candie,
Corsica, Ithaca, Zaus, Leucadia, Cythera, etc.

(21) The Dukedom of Florence betwixt the Appennius Mountains on the North,
and the Tyrrhene Sea on the South, has on the West Romagna, and Pissco, on the
East. A great part of it was Tuscanie, and gives yet to their Prince the title
of great Duke of Tuscanie. Her chief cities are Florence, where the most
elegant Italian is spoke familiarly, and Pisa, which the Florentines besieged
and conquered by the valor of our English Sr. John Haukwood, who raised
himself by his brave carriage in the wars, having been before but a very
poor Tailor in Essex; the third is Pistoya, where first began the quarrel of
the Guelfes and Ghibellines.

(22) The Dukedom of Millain in Lombardy, on the South of Tragniana, North of
Liguria, West of Mantua, and East of Piedmont. A pleasant and rich Province.
Her chief City Millain of seven miles compass, the seat of Saint Ambrose his
Bishopric.

(23) The Dukedom of Mantua on the East of Millain, is of circuit not much
short of Florence: and her chief Town is Mantua, who may still glory in the
birth of that excellent Poet Virgil. It is very strongly situated, and fenced
on three sides with water a quarter of a mile broad: and the rest is guarded by
a firm wall. And to this Principality belongs the Dukedom of Mount-ferrat in
the South-east of Piedmont.

(24) The Dukedom of Vrbin in the midst of the Papal Territories, and upon
the North side of the Appennius Mountains. Her principal City is Vrbino, the
birthplace of another Virgil: though not of equal fame: yet one in whom we
have somewhat more interest: for he writ an English History, being at that time
here resident, and Collector of the Popes Peter Pence. Besides this, here are
two hundred Castles. The rock of Saint Leo, Marivol, etc. Some other Towns as
Cabe, Pisanco, etc.

(25) The Principality of Parma on the South of Mantua, and the North of the
Appennius: East of Millain, and West of Medena: Besides other Commodities,
which she yields in equal plenty with other parts of Italy: sends a pleasant
Cheese into other Countries, which we call Parmasans. And her chief City is
Parma. This Principate carries with it Mirandula and her Territories, a place
often heard of by the common mention which is made of learned Picus de Mirandula.

(26) The State of Genoa is contracted now from that large compass which
heretofore it fetched in. It contained once Liguria and Capua, with the Taurica
Chersonesus, Hetruria, and a fair company of Islands in the Greek Seas. Little
left at this time upon the maine Land besides Liguria, and that lies betwixt
the Rivers Varus and Marca, has the Alps on the West, which divide her from
Provence: Hetruria on the East: on the North the Appennius Mountains, and on
the South the Tyrrh^ene Seas. She has her name from the chief City built by
Ianus. It is in compass eight miles: and the houses for two stories high are
built with Marble. The people noble minded: and forward to any honourabale
action, be it in the wars by Land, or hazard by Sea. One Christopher
Columbus is sufficient to make good this Elogy, for whose birth she deserves to
be honored to the worlds end. The women of Genoa are the most happy of any in
Italy; for they may see a man, and speak, and be courted, if not too boldly,
without suspicion of their friends, or jealousy of their husbands.

(27) The State of Luca is in Tuscanie, and comprehends the Territories and
City Luca, built by Lucumo King of Italy upon the River Serchius. It was once
the randevouse of Pompey, Caesar, and Crassus. Here they joined their forces in
their great attempt. This has been the Emperors, the Genoa's, the Venetians,
the Millanoy's, and the Florentines in their several turns. They now rest
under the protection of the King of Spain.

The Description of the Kingdom of Hungary
IT is not without example of good authority, if I take into this Description,
not only that part which is now more peculiarly known by the name of
Hungary; but the whole Country likewise of Daria, which was once one with it,
though time and fortune have at last severed them: so that each has now its
own Princes, Laws, Customs, Language and Religion different from other. I the
rather take to my self this leave, to avoid both the charge and trouble of
ordering for every one, a several Table.

(2) First then the Kingdom of Hungary is on the Southeast of Germany, and
joins upon the Dukedom of Austria. They heretofore divided betwixt them the
Country of Pannonia, Austria was the superior, and this the inferior Pannonia.
Their government and titles are now dis-joyned; and Austria has got the start
in power: for she is the mother of many German Princes, and has drawn the
Crown Imperial almost into a succession.

(3) Yet is Hungary still an absolute Kingdom: and if not so rich and
populous as heretofore, it must not take from her honor, since her fortunes
sunk not through want of valor, and fault of her former Inhabitants: but have
been for a long time* exposed to hazard in the defense of Christendom
against the mis-beleeving Turk: and for that, it has been by some styled the
Cockpit of the world, where once in a year at least a prize is played, and
some ground either won or lost by either party.

(4) The first Inhabitants of this Country were the Pannones: those were
expulsed by the Goths: And when the Goths went into Italy, it was left to the
possession of the Hunni, a Scythian people, which lived before near the Palus
Maeotis: and when they saw their time, changed their seat: and about the year
three hundred seventie three, brake by great multitudes into these parts of
Europe, which they held till they were displaced by the Lombards. These last
were the Winnili, which lived in Scandia or Scandinaria, a Northern Peninsula,
betwixt the Germane and Hyperborean Seas. Their seat it seems was too barren
for their number; and mere want of victuals forced them to seek better
sustenance in some other quarter. They overran many Countries, ere they could
find any one to their content: Among the rest the Pannonia had her course: and
here they continued till they marched into Italy, under the command of
Alboinnus, where after 200. years, their Kingdom was ruinated by Charlemain.

(5) When it was thus left by Lombards, the Hunnes returned to their former
seat: and after some time of rest, grew up to a potent Nation, able to
encounter the Roman Macrinus, to break his Forces, and return victors from
the battle. About the year 439. they chose for their King, Attyla, whose
inscription was, Attyla Mundizi filius, and Magni Nim: nepos Engadiae natus,
divina benignitate, Hunnorum, Medoru^ Gothorum, ac Danoru^, metus orbis, Deique
flagellum. An insolent title; but indeed he was victorious over most parts of
the then known world, and bethought himself of enlarging his Territories in
Asia and Africa: But that design was drowned in wine and lust; which at length
brought him to a most miserable destruction: For in the night time, when he had
filled himself with both, as he lay by his Concubine, with his face upward in
a dead sleep, his nose gusht a bleeding, and choked him, being not able to
recover himself from his back to give it passage.

(6) Since this settling, they were once more disturbed by the Lombards: and
after by Charles the Great: so that they were not well fastened in their
possession of this Country, till the time of the Emperor Arnulphus, about the
year 900. And in deed at this day hardly enjoy it, by reason of the incredible
spoils and massacres which the Tartars commit amongst them. This last name of
Hungaria without doubt had the Original from their present Inhabitants and
their Predecessors, which at times have peopled this Country above 1200.
years.

(7) This Hungaria propria is bound on the West with Austria, on the East with
the River Tibiscus: on the North with Poland and Russia, and on the South with
the River Savus.

(8) The land thus limited, it is hard to believe what most Geographers report
of her fertility. That she yields Corn thrice in one year, almost without any
tillage or care of the husbandman. Fruit of all kinds in great abundance, and
grapes which make an excellent, wholesome, and rich wine. It breeds Cattle in
such plenty, that this one Country, besides stores for her own Inhabitants,
sends Sheep and Oxen into foreign Nations, which lie about her: and might
(say they) suffice to feed all Europe with flesh. Venison is not here any
dainties: Does, Hairs, Hearts, Goats, Boares, etc. are every man's meat: and
the game common, as well to the Boores as Gentry: And so for Phesant,
Partridge, Black-birds, Pigeons, most foul, wild and tame.

(9) The earth is inricht with variety of Mines, which yields her plenty of
Iron, Steel, Copper, Silver and Gold: Lead she has not, and scarce at all any
Tin. Her Rivers are equally commodious, as well for their own wealth, as fit
conveyance of foreign Merchandise by shipping into their quarters. The chief
and only one indeed which belongs properly to this Region, is Tibiscus or
Teissa: and this imparts not her streams to any other Country, but fully and
freely pays her tribute to the Hungarian, more Fish then can be spent yearly
within their own limits. It passes proverbially upon this River, that two
parts of it are water, and a third fish. The rest, which are common to this,
with other Countries, are Danubius (here Ister) and Savus and Darvus, all of
them well stored with water provision, and in some places cast up a sand mixed
with very good Gold. Here are besides many waters of excellent virtues: whereof
some turn Wood into Iron, others Iron into Brass: Some very medicinal for
sundry diseases: others again so pestiferous, that they kill the creature
which does but taste them. The like is reported of an Hiatus in the ground,
unaccessable by any but the fowls of the air, and those fall suddenly dead
with the stench which ascends from it.

(10) The people for the most part are strong, f^rce, revengefull, harsh to
strangers: briefly, ill mannered and worse learned: For they affect not either
liberal Arts or mechanicke Trades. Yet it affords one of the most reverend
Fathers of our Church good Saint Hierome. Their greatest pride is their name of
a warlike Nation: and the basest infamy to put up the term of coward. Yet
the person charged may not acquit himself upon his upbraider: but must make
good his honor in single combat with a Turk: when he has overcome him (and
not till then) he may (by order of the Country) wear a Feather, as a note of
his true Gentry. The sons only are inheritors. If it chance that the males
sail, the estate descends not to the daughters: but is forfeit to the common
treasury. They have no portion with their wives, but a wedding garment: and
till they are married, neither one nor the other are accustomed to lie in beds.
Their language is the Scythian, and their Religion diverse: some Pap^sts, more
Protestants. They received Christianity above six hundred years since.

(11) Hungary has been heretofore divided in citeriorem and ulteriorem. The
former citra, and the other ultra Danubium. And both again had their division
into fifty Counties, as Maginus calls them. Her most illustrious Cities are
(1) Buda the Metropolis, and seat of their Kings, before it was taken by the
Turk. For pleasant situation, wholesome air, fertile fields about her,
stately buildings, and whatsoever else may commend her, Quadus sets her equal
with any other in Europe. Vadianus mentions here a statute of Hercules, which
himself saw made of Brass to artificially, that the very veins were lively
expressed: besides the ruins of other rich work, a goodly Library furnished by
Matthias Corvinus King of Hungary. But at his being there it was not in the
glory that it had been: and not long after was for the most part utterly
wasted by the inhumane Turks. It is commonly called Offen: and is thought by
some to be the same with Curta in Ptolemies descriptions.

(12) (2) Southward from Buda stands Albanum an ancient map of Hungary THE MAPE
OF HUNGARI newly augmented by John Speed Ano Dom: 1626.
Town, which of late they have called Alba, and now Alba Regalis: for it was
the place where their Kings were both Crowned and buried. (3) Strigonium Gra^
an Archbishops seat and Metropolitan of Hungary. It has had the several
chance of war, was won by the Turk in the year one thousand five hundred
forty three, and recovered one thousand five hundred ninety five. In which
last action our noble Sir Thomas Arundell took with his own band the Turkish
Banner: and was honored by the Emperor Rodulphus with the title of a Count
ther^: and here by his own Sovereign made Lord Arundell of Wardour. (4)
Quinque Ecclesia a Bishops See taken by the Turk one thousand five hundred
forty three. (5) Comara in a small Island, which takes her name from the Town.
And here it is reported that the grass exceeds in length the height of a man.
(6) Iavarium not far from Comara, and is called Rab. (7) Neubensell, where
Bucquoy was slain in the year one thousand six hundred twenty one, having
adventured too far upon the Hungarians Ambush, with intent only to have
received the order of their Forces, and fittest place for access to bid them
battle. And thus of the Kingdom of Hungary as it is strictly bounded with
its own proper limits.

(13) Dacia is on the East of Hungary, and is divided on the North from
Sarmatia by the Carpathian mountains; on the South from Greece with Haemu^;
and on the East reaches the Pontus Euxinus. The first Inhabitants were the
Masii of As^a. Afterward the Daci, or (as Strabe calls them,) the Dari, a Nation
of so slavish a disposition, that the Athenians brought them into a Proverb:
and in their Comedies presented their Sycophants, under no other name then
Dari. The Country is fruitful and enricht with Mines: their horses are very
comely, and their manes so long, that they touch the ground. Their last King
before it was made a Province to the Romans was Decebalus, who (as Dion
delivers it) affrighted the Emperor from an assault which he intended, with an
incredible number of stakes, stuck up in battle array, and attired in his
Soldiers old habits. A wodden shift it was, but served him for the present:
yet after, he was vanquished by Traian; and being sunk (by the fortune of
war) below the hope of recovering his Kingdom, fell upon his own sword. It
is now divided into (1) Transylvania (^) Moldavia. (3) Walacbia. (4) Servia.
(5) Rascia. (6) Bulgaria. (7) Bosnia.

(14) Transylvania is the Province of Dacia, and was it self called Dacia
mediterranea and Ripensis Dacia. Since Transylvania, because it was compassed
with woods: and septem Castra from her seven Castles of defense upon the
Frontiers, built by the Saxons, who questionless gave her the German name
Sibenburgen, which she yet keeps as a remembrance of her residence in these
parts. The Country is populous and fertile: It breeds fair and fierce horses,
wild bulls: Indeed their men in some parts are not very tame. Toward the North
in the Province Za^culcia they live most upon the spoil, maintaining
continual wars with the Turks and Germans, and acknowledge no difference
of worth or degrees among themselves. Their government or rather want of
government is compared to the Helvetian. Three places they have, Hisdy, Corbay,
and Scepsy, whither they resort to determine of their State business. The
chief Towns of Transylvania are Harmenstad, Alba Iulia, or Weisenburg,
Clansenburg, Schlesburg, Millenbachium, Corona, or Cronstant.

(15) Moldavia lies in the North of Transylvania, and reaches as far as the
Euxine Sea: on the West it has part of Ruthenia. This Country has been by
course in the several possessions of the Emperor of Germany, the King of
Poland, and sometimes the Turk, thereafter as it was cast by chance of war. It
was a Vayvodate, and her chief Cities Occazonia, Fuchiana, and Falezing. To
this Moldavia belongs the Country of the Bessi, mentioned by Ovid in his 6. de
Tristibus.

Vivere quam miserum est inter Bessosque Getasque!
They were a people of Thrace not far from Pontus who lived most by theft and
pillage, and after possessed the Mountain Hamus, and a part which lies betwixt
it and Lituania, and from the Inhabitants bears the name of Bessaralia. The
principal Towns are Kilim, and Chermen. This last is the seat of the Turkish
Sanziacke: for the whole Province became subject to his tyranny in the year
1485.

(16) Walachia is supposed rather to have been first named Flaccia, by the
Roman Flac^us, who placed here a Colony, which have continued the Latin tongue
to this day among the Inhabitants, though in a corrupt idiome, such as can
hardly be understood. Near to this, over the River Danubius, stands Pons
Traianus built by the Emperor Traianus Nervaza work worth admiration, as
appears by those ruinous parcells which are yet standing. It has puzzled the
best Artificers to find out how such a vast foundation could be framed in so
deep and fierce a stream, which could not be turned into any other course to
give way to the building. The Country abounds with good commodities, Gold,
Silver, and Iron, Salt Pits, Wine, Cattle, and excellent great Horses. The
chief Cities are Sabinivus, Prailaba and Tergoresta.

(17) Servia lies divided from Hungari^ and Rascia, with the River Savus on her
North, and Bosnia on her West. It was the seat of the ancient Triballi, who met
with Philip King of Macedonia, and took from him the spoils which he had
brought from Mateas King of the Sarmatians. It was it seems but a barbarous
people, and therefore Aristophanes in one of his Comedies among his mock-gods
names Marathane-triballos. Her chief Cities are (1) Taurunum, which Pliny
places in the utmost bounds of Pannonia. It is commonly known by the name of
Belgard and Alba Graeca. It is not so great as glorious: nor is it fortified so
much with walls as Rivers. It lies open for a siege only one way: which the
Turk often attempted, and reckoned with great loss: yet at last in the year
one thousand five hundred twenty one it gave up to Solomon, and became a
Province to his Empire. It stands near where the Rivers Danubius and Savus are
dissevered: and is the Town which the Hungarians report to have been once
delivered by the admirable industry of Ioannes Capistranus a Franciscan, who
is much honored for the action, by those of his own Society: But Ioannes
Huniades that great Soldier and terror to the Turk challenges the glory as
his peculiar Vadianus. (2) Samandria, and (3) St^nib^rg.

(18) Rascia is on the North of Danubius, where it parts with the River Sa^m,
and lies betwixt Servia and Bulgaria. In her chief City Boden there is kept
a Fair once every year: and much people resort for enterchange of commodities
from most Countries there-about.

(19) Bulgaria some what Northeast from Rascia, and is bounded with Danubius
upon the South. Theophylact was here Bishop, and was called Bulgarius: Near
this is the City Tom^s, where Ovid lived in Banishment, as himself mentions
in his 3. de Tristibus. The principal cities at this present are (1) Sophia,
the seat of the Beylerbeg of Greece. And (2) Nicopolis. The ornament of their
Kings was Imperial, a crown of gold, attire of silk and red shoes. Their
title (...), a term allowed by the Greek Emperors, to those only, which
might wear this habit, the rest they called (...), as much as Reges.

(20) Bosnia on the West of Servia, and South of the River Savus, had her name
from the Bossi or Bessi, the people of Bulgaria: within the memory almost of
our Fathers it was governed by Kings, and as yet retains the title of the
Kingdom of Bosnia. The chief Towns are Cuzachium and Iaziga: the first is the
place of residencie, and the second of burial for the Bosnian Kings.
Heretofore the City Sinderoria had that honor, which some suppose to be the
same that was once called Dardanum.

The Description of the Kingdom of Denmark
THe Kingdom of Denmark strikes into the Sea, upon the North of Germany, as
Italy on the South: the manner of both is not much unlike: and the glory of
this heretofore was not inferior. For how ever in this latter ages, the pride
of Rome has pranked up her Territories in gay apparel: yet the day was, when
both she and they stooped to the Inhabitants of this Country, though then
known by another name of Cimbria Chersonesus. Three Roman Consuls, Manilius,
Sillanus, and Cepio fell by their sword: and the Empire it self (it seems) was
in a shrewd hazard, when their own Historian reports, that Actum esset de
imperio, nisi illi saeculo Marius contigisset.

(2) The people were then and had been from their beginning the Cimbri, a
Progeny of Gomer, first son of Iapheth; who before they removed into this
quarter of the world, dwelt in the inner Asia, near the straight which passes
from the Pontus Euxinus to the Palus Maotis: there we yet find the Bosphorus
Cimmericus in Ptolemy, which took name from the Cimmerii: for so they were
called at large, and by contraction Cimbri.

(3) From thence they were in time disturbed by the Scythians, and forced to
seek them a new seat for their habitation, which (after long travel) here they
found fittest for their security, as being a Peninsula fenced almost round
with Seas, from the force of all foreign Enemies: Yet here too they met at
last with a worse danger, which they could less resist. For the maine Ocean
brake into a great part of the Country: displaced many of their Colonies, and
sent them Petitioners to Rome for a dwelling within her Dominions: but their
entreatie being with some neglect denied; it kindled the sparks, which to this
time had lain (as it were) dead in a dejected Nation, and now they brake out
into flames, which stirred them to require that by force of Arms, which they
could not request by submissive Oratorie.

(4) Hence grew their first quarrel with the Romans, which they put on with
that courage, and success, that they were imboldened at last to assault the
very City, with so strong Forces, that the glory of it began to shake, and had
shattered to pieces, had not the victo^y followed rather the fortune of one
Marius then the valor of the whole Roman Legions: and that too (as some relate
it) was bought of his heathenish gods at a dear rate, by the bloody sacrifice
of his own Daughter. The great and most memorable Encounter was six hundred
and forty years after the City was built, about an hundred and eleven before
Christ. And then indeed they received (in a manner) a fatal Crush, which
quelled them for the present: yet not so, but that in after ages, they
recovered strength and fame: spread their victories over the most part of
Europe: and left their name (for many years since that) in Italy it self.

(5) For without doubt those Cimmerii mentioned by Strabo, which lived on the
North side of the Appennine Mountains near Boianum, were of this stock, and
of that note, as the gave occasion for many Proverbs and Fables to both Greek
and Latin Poets. It was a people which belike seldom saw Sun, but lurked
for the most part under ground, lived upon theft, and issued forth only in the
night, a season most fit for deeds of Darkness: and so was their whole
course, which caused our well known Adage of tenebrae Cimmeriae pro denscssima
caligine. Their horrid dens, and dismal Rivers, which ran by the place of
their abode, bred at length a terror in the silly Heathens, and was esteemed by
them, the passage down to their Elysium. So Homer gives it in the second of his
Odysses, and Virgill in his sixth of the Aeneidos: and h^re did Naso feign his
house of sleep, Metamorph. 11.

Est prope Cimmerios longo sp^lunca racessu
Mons Carus, ignavi domus and penitralia Somni.
(6) Thus was their Original and progress for the first age, whilst it
continued in the possession of the Cimmerians. The next which succeeded were
the Saxons, a people no less famous: but since their Story has been
elsewhere remembered in our other Descriptions, it must give place here to the
third Invader the Danes, who whilst the Saxons were employed with us here in
the Conquest of England, start out of those p^tty Isles in the Sinus Codanus,
and took up their room in this Peninsula. There they have continued to this
day: and added other Territories to their Dominions: so that the then Cimbria
Cbersonesus is but a parcel of the now Kingdom of Denmark, (as shall appear
when we come to her division) and that only which in our latter times is
called Iuitland and runs Northward in form almost of a Hounds tongue into the
Balticke Ocean.

(7) The Danes (like enough) were at first one Nation with the Cimbri, but
being together expulsed by the Scythians from their native soil, they were
severally dispersed, though not at any great distance. These settled themselves
in the Northern ^l^s, as the other did in their Chersonesus. The first (at
their removal) varied not their antique name of Cimbri: As for Chersonesus it
is no^ peculiar to this Country, being as common as Peninsula: for it imports
no more (...) a terra and Insula: and of these there are many more, some
perhaps of equal ^ame. Taurica Chersonesus was not far distant from the place
of their first abode; Peloponnesus well known in Greece, Thracia Chersonesus in
Thrace: and Aurea Chersonesus in India.

(8) But the Danes it seems suffered some change as well in their name as
fortunes. Sxao Grammaticus gives it to one Dan the son of Huniblus, which was
their first Governor in their new Commonwealth. But this is controlled by
Becanus (says Quade) who renders another Etymon, how likely I leave to those,
which can best judge by their skill in the Danish Language. The Cimbri (says
he) when they were grown to great multitudes, bethought themselves of several
names to distinguish their Colonies: Each following their own conceit best to
express the quality, in which they most gloried. Among the rest some there
were which affecting at least the opinion of a valiant people, such as scorned
riches without honor, honor without victory, and victory without the blood of
their Enemies: assumed their name from that creature, which Nature had marked
out with this Character. Gallum igitur gallinaceum, tum bellicae la^dis, et
generosissimi animi, tum indolis regalis et militis strenui, et ad omnia
m^menta vigilis optimum exemplar, ut pro Symbolo et synthemate quodam sibi
acceperunt, ita nomen quoque ab eo placuit mutuari; Vocarunt enim sese Dic
Hanem et composite per concisionem Danem quod Gallinaceum significat.

(9) How ever the Etymon may be far fetched, for ought I know, yet doubtless
at this day they make good the Elogie of a valiant and warlike Nation: strong
of body, big boned, and of a terrible countenance, ambitious of a glorious
death, rather then a sluggish idle life. It is the saying of Valerius Maximus
Cimbros et C^ltiberos in acie gaud^o exultare consuevisse, tanquam gloriose et
faelici er vita excessuros: lamentari vero in morbo, quasi turpiter peritur^s.
We our selves heretofore have felt their strokes, and submitted to their
conquests in the time of Osbert King of Northumberland. They were provoked by a
rape done upon the sister of the Danish King: For which the poor English
dearly paid, with two hundred fifty five years servitude under their Tyranny.
Yet since we have had, and at this time do enjoy the benefit of their
magnanimity, under the personal conduct of the right valiant and illustrious
King Christian, who hazzards both his state and life in the behalf of his
dear niece Elizabeth, and her royal husband the Prince Palatine of the Rheine.

(10) Their first Prince which estabilshed them in a settled and civil
government, was Gotricus in the year seven hundred ninety seven. Before it
was but a confused state, and affords us little certainty of their Story. From
that time the Government has been under a sole King of equal power with the
greatest, though his revenues are hardly answerable: His best profit is from a
breach of the Sea, which runs into the middle part of the Country, commonly
called the Sound; which is a passage so narrow that no shipping can pass that
way, without the license map of Denmark THE KINGDOM OF DENMARK augmented by
John Speed and are to be sold in pops head Alley by G. Humble
and favor of the Watchmen, keeping Garrison there to receive the Impostes
and Customs of the arriving Vessels for the King. It is easily gathered to
what sum of money that Impost amounts, by the infinite number of Shipping,
of Holland, Zeland, France, England, Scotland, Norwey, and the Balticke Sea,
that sail in those Seas, and of necessity must pass the Iaws of that narrow
straight. The Inhabitants are as greedy of Rhenish, French, and Spanish Wines,
the Spices of Portugal, and the fruits of Andoluzia, as they again are needy
of the Wax, Honey, and Skins, which are brought thither from Prussia, Livonia,
Moscovia, and the bordering Nations. The other chief riches of Denmark are
goodly Horses, great store of Cattle, and Corn enough, sent to the supply of
diverse other parts of Christendom: It has been observed, that 50000. Oxen
have been driven out of these Provinces into Germany, for which, toll h^th been
paid at Gutthorp. Such incredible plenty of Herring (near the I Will of Scania,)
that the Ships (they say) are scarce able by maine strength of Oars to row out
of the Harbor. Besides these, here are furniture for war both by Sea and Land,
Armor, Masts, Cables, Steel, Saddles, etc.

(11) Their chief person of fame in course of Learning, was Ticho Brahe, an
excellent Mathematician: memorable for his artificial Tower in the Isle of
Fi^^ra. In Religion the greatest part of them are now Lutherans, but were first
converted to Christianity by Ansuerus.

(12) We are come to her division, which the Sea almost has made to our hands.
For her several Provinces are well nigh so many Islands at least Peninsulae.
The chief are (1) Iuttia, or the old Cimbria Chersonesus. (2) Diethmarsia (3)
Scania. (4) Hall^ndia. (5) Blescide. (6) The Islands in the Sinus Codanu^, which
lie betwixt Iuttia and Scania: That is the West, and this the East limits of
the Danish Dominions, North and South are the Ocean and the River Esdora or
Hever.

(13) Iuttia as it was the first, so is it the principal part of this
Kingdom: Her bounds, upon the West, and East, and North, are the Balticke
Seas; and upon the South, it is joined to Holsatia and the Istumes of
Diethmarsia. It is in length, says Maginus, eighty German miles from the
River Albis to the Cimbricke Promontory called Scagen, and in breadth twenty. It
is a fruitful Region, for Wheat, Rye, Barley, etc. And in the Northwest there
is good Pasture, though more Northward it becomes sandy and barren, and puts
the Inhabitants to fish for their victuals, by which they make a shift to live,
though hardly enough God knows, in poor sh^ddes slightly clapped together, and
of as slender stuff, such as if need be they can remove at their pleasure upon
very short warning, and bear them away almost upon their back. They transport
into other Countries great store of good Horses, for service, besides Barley,
Cheese, Butter, Suet, Hides, and rich Skins, Nuts and Fish. In this Province
are twenty eight Cities, twenty Castles, and four Bishop-Sees: Ripe^sis,
Arthusiensis, and Aelburga, all near to the Seaside, Wilburga in the up-land
Country. From this Province came the Iuits, who joined in with the Saxons and
Angles to Conquer England. Her chief Towns as Rincopen, Holne, and Achausen.

(14) Diethmarsia is situated betwixt the Rivers Albis and Eidera. They were a
parcel of the old German Saxons: and the Country it self is by some yet
reckoned the lower Saxony: but is in subjection to the King of Denmark: for it
is the seat and title of his first son and heir apparent, as the Dolphinate
is to the son of France, and Wales to the son of England. Her Metropolis is
Breme: the rest Meldorpe, and Heininckst, and Tellinckst, and other rich
Towns: yet the soil cannot be very fertile, by reason of the moist air and
her many marshes, especially toward the North, which makes it unfit for
tillage, and indeed impassable for travelers: Upon which impediments the
Inhabitants have made this advantage to keep out all foreign Invaders, and
appropriate what wealth they have to their own secure possession.

(15) Scania or Scandinaria, in the largest compass, comprehends more then
belongs to the Kingdom of Denmark: and is environed round about with the
Seas, except on that side where it is joined to Muscovie. On her West is the
Kingdom of Norwey, on her East Swethland, and upon the South of that, is this
Scania, which gives place to no Region (at least within these Dominions) either
for wholesome air, or fertile soil, for commodious Havens, and plenty of
Merchandise; for dainty Rivers or store of Fish, for Cattle, Mines of Iron,
Lead, Silver and Gold, fair Towns and civil Customs. The Metropolis is
Lunpis. This whole Province is some eighteen miles in length, and in breadth
about twelve in some places: in others not above six.

(16) Hallaudia on the North of Scania, and South of S^ecia, is bounded with
the Seas upon the West, and on the East with vast woods, which divide her from
Gothland. It is a fertile Region, and not much unlike unto Scandia, but that it
comes some what short of her happiness in soil. Her chief Town is Hallans^e.

(17) Blescida or Blicker is bounded on the East and South with the Balticke
Ocean, and on the North is parted from Scania by a little patch of the Sea. It
is a Region full of Rocks, Woods, and Mountains. Her chief City and Castle is
Culmaria, a strong defense against the Swethlander: and the next Town of note,
is Malmogia, the birthplace of Casparus Bartholinus a late approved Writer in
the Arts.

(18) In the Sinus Codanus near to the Cimbria Chersonesus, there are numbered
35. Islands. The chief are (1) Zealand, in length 64. miles, in breadth 52. it
contains in it 13. Cities, 7. Castles, with diverse pretty towns and villages.
The Metropolis is Haffnia, the single University within the King of Denmarkes
government. And here is his chief place of residencie, which by the Germans is
called Koppenhagen, the Merchants haven. Her other Towns are Roschilt a Bish.
See, and heretofore a stong Fortress, well furnished for war, and honored
with the Sepulchers of some of their Kings: but yet it is now at a lower ebb,
and of little respect. Elsnor or Helsinura is a Sea-Towne. That in Helsinura is
called Croneburgh, well furnished with all provision. The other in Scania
Helsinburgh of equal strength, to cause the best Ship to cast Anchor and
satisfy their King, before they shall have the way open out of the Balticke
into the Ocean.

(19) (2) Fionia or Firnera is second to Zealand both in bigness and plenty of
rich Commodities. It is in length 12. miles, and 4. in breadth. A pleasant
Region, fertile and fruitful. Here are in this Island ^. Cities: the chief is
Ottonium, Odensch or Oesell, in the very middle almost. It was a Bish. See,
well built, but ill fenced: for it has been often times wasted and burnt by the
Enemy. The other Towns are upon the Seacoast, and their names are Neburgh,
Sinborch, Feborgh, Asc^ns, Eorgena, Middlefar and K^rtemunde: besides some
Castles, many villages and Noble-mens houses.

(20) (3) Laglant 7. miles in length, and has in it many villages and fair
buildings. The City Rutheopinga, and the Castle Trancura. (4) Loilant near
Seelant. It is so full of Hazels, that they fraught Ships with Nuts and
traffic for them into many other Countries. It has 5. Towns, Nistad, Nasco,
Togrop, Rothus, and Marilus, with some strong Castles, pretty villages and
Noble-mens houses. (5) Falsteria in length four miles. Her Cities are
Stubecopen and Nicopen a pleasant and a fair one, for which she is by some
styled the Neopolis of Denmark. (6) M^na or M^^n. In this is the City Stecke
and Elmelanda. (7) Femera or Femeren. Her chief Cities are Derborch, and
Petersborn, and Stabull: and here is the Castle Vraniburgh, built by the great
Mathematician Ticho Brahe, which besides the fame of its own artificial
structure, is much celebrated, for the admirable instruments, which are there
kept, whereby the particular motion of the Heavens is excellently observed.

(21) (8) And to this Kingdom belongs the Island Boruh^lme, which lies in the
Balticke Seas, called more particularly Mare Su^vicum, betwixt Blicker and
Pomerama. It is a Region of excellent Pasture, and feeds abundance of Cattle:
and therefore is full of Butter, Cheese, Wool, Hides, etc. and sends into
other Countries much of their provision for victuals, poudred and barrelled up
for the longer keeping. It has some well peopled Towns: the chief is
Bor^holme. It had lain for fifty years together in pawn to the State of
Lubecke; but was redeemed by Frederick the second.

(22) From these and those many other Northern Islands there have issued in
several ages an innumerable sort of Nations, which like so many birds, as
Maginus calls them, have flowne over the greatest part of our Christian world.
He concludes that ex his Insulis olim, Gothi, Ostrogothi, Vestrogothi, Vandali,
Franci, Cimbri, Gepidae, Dani, Hunni, Suedi, Herculi, Rugi, Alani, Longobardi,
Alemani, and alii plures, Danubio and Rheno superatis, omnem Europam, and
praes^rtim, ipsam Italiam, altricem imperii and dominam 400. et plus annis
perpetua quadam regionum successione subiugarunt, as Romani nominis gloriam
fere omnem exti^xerunt.

The Description of POLAND.
THE Kingdom of Poland borders upon the East side of Germany, and indeed as
far as the River Vistula, it is accounted a part of the Empire: and uses the
same speech, Religions and Customs as the other Territories, admitting only
that variety, which all of them have among themselves: and must needs be found
in so large compass, governed by so many several free Princes. Beyond the
River as it shrinkes from the seat of Christianity, so it begins to degenerate
into a kind of Heathenish rudeness, which favors of their predecessors.

(2) For this Tract is a part of Sarmatia Europaea, and the first Inhabitants
were the Sauromatae a Scythian people, as well for barba^isme as by name. It
was next possessed by the Vandalls, an active Nation, of whom we have had some
inkling at least, almost in every place which we have past. For they have
spread their victories through Europe, and have left either name or story
behind them in Spain, France, Italy, Germany, Thrace, and where not? Their
most received pedigree is from Vandalus (wh^m Tacitus remembers) the Tuscane
King, of the progeny of Tuisco first founder of the Germans. Yet Munster in
his Cosmographie mentions a pr^tty conjecture of some well wishers, it seems
(perhaps to their own Country) which give the original of their name of
Vandalls to one Vanda, a Queen of Poland.

(3) Briefly, were the Vandalls natives or were they invaders; here they were
found, and ejected by the Sclavonians, and these were the third Inhabitants of
Polonia. She was over run at the same time, and had the same fortune with
Bohemia: they were both lost to their old Lords, and divided betwixt the two
runagate brothers of Croatia, Zechius and Lechius, who being forced (for a
murder) out of their own soil, brought on their crew into these parts, about
the year 550. and here have continued (in their posterity) to this day. They
are as yet remembered in the very names of the people. For the Bohemians in
their proper language call themselves Zechians, and in the grea- Poland there
is still extant a Territory, known by the title of Regnum Lechitorum.

() Her Etymon signifies no other, then the sight of the Country, as the
Sclavonians first descried it. For it was a Champian or plain field, and so is
Pole-land interpreted out of the Sclavonish tongue. It was before called
Sarmatia, and the people Sauromatae, ab oculis Lacertarum, Lizzards eyes, (...)
and (...), a property (it seems) which gave name to all her Nations. For this
was divided from another Sarmatia by the River Tanais: that on the one side was
Asiatica, for the most part wild, heathenish Idolaters, and in the farthest
parts of Scythia some (...): this other is Europaea, which being joined with
some parts of Germany Westward to the River Odera, Silesia, and Moravia make
up the Kingdom of Polonia, as it is here described.

(5) The bounds then of this great Region are on the West the River Odera,
Silesia, and Moravia: on the East the River Neiper, which Ptol^my calls
Boristhenes: on the North Pomerania, or rather the Baltic Ocean, and on the
South Russia and the Mountains of Hungary. And if we will with Maginus take in
the out Provinces which belong to this government, we must reach Eastward the
Tartars and Muscovites, that live near on the other side of Boristhenes: and
North-eastward part of Moscovia, Southward the Hungarian Mountains, and the
Vallacci: in so much that the compass would come little short of all Spain,
as it lies beyond the Pyrenaean.

(6) The principal Rivers of Poland are (1) Vist^la, it has its rise in the
Carpathian Mountains, which divide this Kingdom from Hungary, and it self
runs into the Balticke, but by the way takes in diverse other streams, on the
West out of the Polonia Germanica, and on the East out of the Sarmatica. It is
navigable 400. miles. () Neister which has her fountains in the hills of
Hungary, and glides Eastward, on the South of Podolia, into the Pontus
Euxinus. (3) Neipher or Boristhenes, which bounds the Kingdom on the East is
navigable 600. stadia, and runs from North to South, into the Pontus Euxinus,
where there is naturally cast up plenty of Salt, which needs no art to perfect
it. (4) Rubin in Lituania. (5) Hypanis, now Bugh, not far distant from the
City Oleska, and falls at last into the River Vistula; with many others of
lesser note, though all conduce to make the Country in some kinds very fertile.

(7) For it abounds with most sorts of Corn and Pulse, sufficient both for
their own spending, and continual traffic into other Countries. Many of her
neighboring Regions could not well miss her plenty, as well of Wheat, Rye,
and Barley, as Beeves and other Cattle, which give supply to Saxony, and the
rest of Germany near hand, which hardly yield enough for their Inhabitants out
of their own store. The blessing of this fertility cannot come alone: but must
needs bring with it the l^ke riches of Butter, Cheese, Milk, Wax, Honey, and
what ever else has its birth from the ground. It is wel-nigh past belief
which is reported of their multitudes of Bees, such as yield more Honey and
Wax, then the people can find room for: They need here neither art, nor care
of the good huswife to order their hives, but naturally are their own
Gardians, and provide so diligently for their own safety within the bulks of
trees, that they easily pass over the hardest Winter without hurt. There is
store of game, both for hunting, fowling, and fishing. In her Forests is seen
a kind of wild Horse with an horn like an Hearts, and the Alces, etc. Lastly,
among other good commodities, the worst is not her Pitch and Rosin, which yield
her a large annual revenew.

(8) Her chief wants proceed from her bleake situation: For it is a plain
Country, and shadowed for the most part with Woods; very cold, and by that
means she has little Oil, and scarce Grapes enough to teach them the use of
Wine. A great defect amongst so good drinkers: for they have a name for that
equal with any part of Germany: and that I think gives no ground to the rest
of Europe: But they make a shift to find themselves play with a kind of
Metheglin. Gold or Silver here is not much, unless about Cracovia: and (as
Maginus says) in Sandomica, wh^re there are likewise some Mines found of the
Lapis Lazulus, perfect L^ade, and Iron, and pieces of Copper. Near the Towns
of Nochow, and Palukie, there is extant a kind of miracle, a certain earth
naturally formed up into pots, which if you take forth and dry, they diff^r
very little by sight from such as are made by hand, and serve aptly for the
same use.

(9) The Inhabitants though they had but a wild beginning, yet in the more
civil parts are of a gentle behavior to strangers, and not injurious one to
the other. Theft is a vice not yet known to the Polands: For they dare
travail alone long journeys in the depth of Winter, with one poor one to draw
their sledge in the night times, etc. and this with more security and less
danger, then we may walk in our open streets in the dusk of Evening.
Questionless, this special practice of honesty in that kind, above other
Nations, proceeds from an inbred desire which they generally have to be in
employment: for they are very industrious in their several faculties. Those
which pretend to Learning, addict themselves much to the study of Languages.
The Latin is familiar to the Gentry as their own: (and as Maginus reports) is
used in some Towns by rich and poor as their proper speech. They are
prodigal both in diet and apparel, give much entertainment, and keep a large
retinue of servants* In brief, they are as equal to themselves, as they are
courteous to others; For they will not be oppressed by the greatest Potentate
either home-borne or foreign. They are very valiant, and meet their enemy
with an undaunted courage, be they never so much over-borne either by number or
strength. The truth is, no Peasant is suffered to bear arms: only their
Nobility and Gentry of place in their Commonwealth: such as war, not for
others only, and upon constraint; but have somewhat themselves to lose: and
therefore are ready as well for their own safety, as defense of their King
and Country to set on upon all assaies, and raise an incredible number of
excellent Horse, well manned almost in an instant. For they map of Poland A.
NEW. MAPE of POLAND Done into English by I. Speed
are kept in continual motion by the Muscovite.

(10) They have a good mind to Religion, but cannot fasten upon any one to
their liking; and therefore they will try all Christians, they have been ever
since the year 965. but from that time, they have scarce slipped any error,
schism, or heresy, which has crept into the Church. Here are Jesuits, and
others of the Romish sects. Here are Lutherans and Calvinists, and Arians, and
Anabaptists, and Antitrinitarians: none allowed, but all tolerated: and indeed
Poland had the seniority of Amsterdame for that old saying: That if a man had
lost his Religon, here he might find it. They have one ancient custom in their
Churches which me thinks may well interpret our standing up at rehearsal of
the Creed: when the Gospel is reading, the Nobility and Gentry unsheath their
swords, and stand as it were prepared to defend it with their lives against any
which dare violate it.

(11) Their King is chosen by the general States, and is for the most part
some great warrior of their neighboring Princes: For they have no peace on
their East limit, with Muscoves and Tartars, but what they make with the sword.
The Laws are only temporary statutes, there are none fundamental: But when
the King has any great design in behalf of the Commonwealth, he assembles a
Council of the Nobility to assist him. His revenues coming in, are thought
to be about six hundred thousand Crowns: And each quarter of his Kingdom,
maintains his expense for one quarter of the year. Their first King was
Boleslaus, Crowned by Otho 3 in the year, 1001. But the regal dignity was
lost again to Boleslaus the bold, who began his reign 1078. but was deposed
by the Pope, and no other suffered to take up the Scepter and rule by the name
of King, till the year 1295. The first of the second course was Primaslaus the
second Duke of Poland and Pomerania: Since whose time there has been no
breach to this day.

(12) The chief Provinces of the Kingdom of Poland as they lie from her West
to East are: (1) Pomerania. (2) The Dukedomes of Ozwitts and Zator. (3)
Polonia. (4) Prussia. (5) Russia nigra. (6) Samogitia. (7) Massoria. (8)
Livonia. (9) Podlassia. (10) Lituania. (11) Volhinia. (12) Podolia.

(13) The first is Pomerania, bounded on the North with the Baltic Ocean, on
the West with Germany: and is accounted by some a Province of the Empire, as we
have ordered in our description. But in regard the greatest part is subject to
the King of Poland, I hope I shall wrong neither to give both their due, and
reckon it as well to this government, since it has an equal, if not a greater
title, to the rule, though not to the Inhabitants: for they are most Germans.
It is a plain Country, but exceeding fertile and rich in all Commodities,
which any other part affords: flourishes with forty Cities, which are fenced
round either with the Sea, or ditches answerable for safety. Her chief stands
upon the shore: for it is by nature so well guarded from the violence of the
Sea, that they need fear no inundation: but yet have a very easy and secure
entrance for ships. Along the Coast stand Colberg, Camin, Coslin, Gribswald,
etc. In the upland Stetinum the Metropolis, Newgard, Lamburge, etc. The people
were harsh persecutors of the Church of Christ till the year 1122. (:) The two
Dukedomes of Ozwittes and Zator by Silesia in the West bounds of this Kingdom.
They were heretofore sui juris: But now belongs to this government; The first
since the year 1454. in the time of Cas^mirus: and the last was brought under
by Sigismond the first about an hundred years after. (3)

(14) Polonia is divided iuto the greater and l^ss^. The greater Poland is more
Northern, and joins upon Pomerania and Prussia. It was therefore called the
greater, because here Lechius first planted himself and built the City
Guesna, which was the regal seat till it was translated to Cracovia in the
lesser Poland 1320. yet at this day is her Archbishop Primate of the Kingdom:
during an interregnum has the power of a Prince: and Crowns the new King at
his inauguration. Polonia the less is more Southern, lies hard upon Russia
and Hungary. It is now esteemed the more noble part of this Province: For here
stands the Metropolis Cra^ovia on the banks of Vistula and Lublin, and other of
the best note in Poland. (4)

(15) Prussia Spruce on the East of Pomerania, has the Baltic Seas on the
North, and Massoria on the South: and on her own East Lituania. It is now a
Dukedom, and contains Cities of note, Dantzke, where Ke^kerman professed, and
Mons Regius Regimont: Maneburg, Heilsperge, Culne, etc Her chief Commodities
is leather much used heretofore to make jerkins, where none more brave then the
younger, that could compass a leather jerkin. Here is likewise great store of
Amber, a juice growing like Corroll in a mountain of the North Sea, which is
clean covered with water, and cast up by violence of the waves into their
Havens. (5) Russia nigra on the East and South of Poland the less, and the
North of Hungary, and West of Podolia, had her name as some suppose first
Ruthenia and Russia, which in the Ruthen tongue signifies no other then a
dispersed Nation: For so were the Russians through all Sarmatia, Europaea, and
part of the Asiatike from the frozen Ocean to the Mediterraneum, and the Sinus
Adriaticus, and the Pontus Euxinus, and the Mare Balticum, all that used the
Sclavonian tongue, and professed Christ after the manner of the Greeks were
called Russi and Rutheni. But the Province here meant is only the South tract,
as much as belongs to the King of Poland, and is called Nigra to distinguish it
from Moscovia or Russia Alba. The people are valiant and in their fights use
weapons of exceeding weight and bigness. Her Prince is entitled Duke: the
name of King they will not endure. This Province contains the territories
Leopoliensis, with her chief City Leopolis. Lunt-burg, a fair Town, and an
Archbishops See: And the territories Haliciensis, Belzensis, Praemisliensis,
etc. (6)

(16) Samogitia toward the North, and her West has the Sinus Balticus:
North-East Livonia. It is in length fifty miles, very cold, compassed in with
Woods and Rivers. Her principal Town is Camia: But not that nor any other is
very famous for Lordly buildings: the fairest are but sheds in respect of other
Countries: The Peasants are truly so indeed. For they reckon themselves but
little better then their Cattle: live under the same roof with them, without
any partition or nice ^oathing of their nastinesse: a life fit enough for such
a people; for they are yet most of them gross Idolaters: and are often times met
in their Woods with horrid visions: and are strangely cozened by the Devil
with a belief that they can Prophecy. The silly blasphemers nourish in their
house a poor snake (like themselves) gathered out of some ditch, and call it
their God, worship it with great fear and reverence, and sacrifice once in a
year 1. October. to their devil, but by the name of their God Ziem enike. The
better sort are Christians of a comely portraiture, and good feature, valiant
and ready to take Arms when occasion calls them. Their greatest plenty is of
Honey, which they gather ready made to their hands in their hollow trees. (7)

(17) Massoria on the South of Prussia, and North of Polonia, and Russia, and
the East of either Poland, West of Lituania: She had her name from a former
Duke, which was ejected by Casimirus, where it had a peculiar Prince of its
own, it belonged to the second son of the Kings of Poland: but in the year
1526. after the untimely death of John and Starislaus, heirs to this state it
became a peculiar to the Crown of Poland. Her chief City is Marscoria, which
has many under her: all use the same speech and Customs, with the other
Polonians. (8) Livonia, to the North bounded with Finlan, on the South with
Lituania, on the West with the Baltike Sea, and on the East with Mos^ovie. It
is a large Province, carries in breadth, one hundred and sixty miles, and in
length, five hundred. It is Penny and Woody: but yet has Corn and Fruit
plenty, Cattle good store, wild and tame, especially Horses. They have Honey,
Wax, etc. enough to exchange with other Countries for Wine and Oil: For this
yields little or none. It became Christian, one thousand two hundred. Her
chief Towns are Riga, Rivalia, Derpe, and Venda. About some twelve miles from
the Continent is the I Will of Osel. (9)

(18) Podlussia on the East of Masoria, and West of Lituania, was joined to
Poland, one thousand five hundred sixty nine. The Inhabitants are Massorites,
Russians, and Polands. Her chief towns are Titocksin, a Fort where the Kings
treasure is kept, Beisco, and Russiu. In this the King has a fair Court,
furnished magnificently, both for state and pleasure. (10) Lituania, on the East
of Poland, and South of Livonia, on the West of Moscovia, and North of Podolia.
The Air is very unnatural, and by that means the creatures there of every
kind are very small, and their wants great of Corn, Wine, Salt, etc. The
people are of a slavish disposition, and live thereafter po^re and basely. The
women have a freedom by custom to keep many Stallions, which their Husbands
love as themselves, and call them their adjutories. But the men may by no
means play false. Their condemned persons (be it to death) must execute
themselves, or be tormented till they expire. They became Christians, such as
they are, one thousand three hundred eighty six. The principal Cities are
Vilna, Vilkomire, and Brestia, and Norigredum, a City by report larger then
Rome.

(19) (11) Volhinia lies betwixt Lituania, Podolia* and Russia, a plentiful
Region, and breeds hardy Soldiers. They live as Russians, use the same speech
and Customs. Her chief Towns are, Kioria, and Lircassia, upon the edge of
Boristhenes. (12) Podolia is on the South of Lituania, East of Poland: and
North of the River Neister or Boristhenes, as it runs from his head to the
Pontus Euximus, and on the West of Russia. It affords great plenty it seems;
three Harvests (they say) of one sowing. It is pity (says Vadianus) it should
be left Desert, as in a manner it is, unless here and there a Village. Her
chief is Camiensen, the only one, able to return the Turk and Tartars with
the loss, as it has oftentimes done. The rest are not many, and those but
weakly peopled. For the often incursions of the Tartars; their speedy Horse, to
ride a great compass in a little time; their breach of faith, upon terms of
composition: and their cruelty when they have got a victory, causes the
Inhabitants of those parts, to fly them at a great distance, and leave their
Land waste: since they dare not trust their peace, nor are able to withstand
their war.

The Description of the Kingdom of PERSIA.
THis Empire was one of the first, and most potent in the Eastern world: and
though since in several ages, she has felt the variety of fortunes, to which
all Kingdoms are subject, and been forced to deliver up her glory to the
succeeding Monarchies of the Macedonians, Parthians, Turks, and Saracens; yet
now at last is she recovered to her own height and greatness, and the name of
Persia reaches farther then ever, if we take in (as most Geographers do) the
Regions of Media, Assyria, and the rest; which were heretofore the seats of
several illustrious Kingdoms.

(2) Surely the first which inhabited any part of this compass, were the
Medes, a people of great antiquity, who reach both their original and name
from Madai the son of Iapheth: for it was not long after the Flood, that they
were subdued by Ninus King of the Assyrians: one and the other, Media I mean and
Assyria, though then they had apart their peculiar governments, yet both were
but a parcel of this Country, which is now known by the name of Persia.

(3) To Ninus and his successors they continued faithful for many years, till
the effeminate weakness of Sardanapalus gave opportunity to the ambition of
Belochus governor of Babylon, and Arbaces of Media to divide his Empire
betwixt them, which they did in the year of the world three thousand one
hundred forty six: and then began the Monarchy of the Medes, which spread
it self through the greatest part of Asia; and (for above two hundred years)
gathered strength, till the time of Astiages, who dreamed himself out of his
Empire, as Iustine relates the story.

(4) Persia proprie dicta, from whence this whole Country at last took name,
was at this time but an obscure Kingdom in respect of what now it is, and
tributary to the Medes. Her Prince was Cambyses, the father of the great Cyrus,
by Mandanes daughter to Astiages: when she was great, and expected the time of
her deliverance, her father touched with a perplexed dream, that she made so
much water as would drown all Asia, interpreted it, that her issue should be
the overthrow of his state; and therefore delivered the child which was born to
her, into Harpagus his charge to be destroyed; and he to the Kings Heardsman,
who (unawares to both) preserved the guiltless infant, so that at last he
took revenge upon his cruel Grandfather, and laid a foundation for the
Persian Monarchy.

(5) In this attempt his anger wrought him no farther then his enemy: for he
left the government of Media still to Cyaxares the son of Astiages, and
afterward married his daughter, joined with him in his conquests, and till his
death gave him the pre-eminence of title. They were both engaged in the taking
of Babylon, slaughter of Baltazar, and destruction of the Chaldeans: the
Scripture gives this victory to Darius Medius, who as most hold, was no other
then Cyaxares; and he only named as the principal of the two while he yet
lived, though Cyrus had his part in the action, after his uncles death enjoyed
it as his own, and made perfect the Monarchy of the Persians in the year of
the world 3046.

(6) About thirty seven years after the succession was broke, for want of
lawful heirs to Cambyses their second King: and therefore their Princes
consulted to salute him, whose Horse first neighed at a set meeting upon the
Court green, before the Sunrising. Darius Histaspes was one, and by the
subtlety of his horsekeeper carried the Crown: for the night before, in the
same ground, he had coupled a mare with the horse that his Master should ride,
which when the lustful steed missed the next morning, being full of spirit, no
sooner had he set footing upon the place, but with much eagerness he snuffed
and neighed after his mare, and gave the quue to the other Princes to proclaim
Darius King of the Persians. This was he whom the Scripture calls Ahasuerus: he
was Hesters husband.

(7) Thus is the Empire now settled, and intayled by descent after him to that
famous Xerxes, who made war upon Greece, with an incredible Army, joined Asia
to Europe with a bridge, and dammed up Hellespont with his Navy; yet was at
last vanquished by four thousand at Thermopylae, and after by Themistocles
forced to make his flight in a small ^oat toward his own Country, contemned
of his subjects, and within a few years slain in his Palace by Artabanus. His
immediate successor was Artaxerxes Longimanus, who sent the Prophet Esdras to
reedifie the Temple, and so on to Darius the last Persian of that course, who
was often vanquished by Alexander the great, and left the Monarchy of the world
to the Macedonians: After the death of their victorious Captain, it was
divided among many of the most potent Princes of Greece.

(8) But when the Persians saw the force of their enemy thus severed, they
began to conceive a hope of recovering their liberty; and so they did indeed
under the conduct and command of the Parthian Arsaces, but found themselves
little bettered in their condition, as being now become new slaves to a more
harsh tyrant: and therefore in the year two hundred twenty eight after the
Incarnation, they made a second attempt to quit themselves from the Parthians:
they took their time, when their masters were sore afflicted with a strong
enemy from Rome, which had broke their forces to their hands; so that by the
admirable prowess of another Artaxerxes, they made good their Conquest upon
the Parthian, and adventured so far with the Romans themselves, that their
name began to grow terrible and the Emperor Constantine forced to fortify his
Provinces, which lay toward the East, and this might be some cause too, why he
removed his seat to Constantinopolis.

(9) After this it fell into the hands of the Saracenicall Caliphs, in the year
six hundred thirty four, and to the Turks in the year one hundred thirty,
next to the Tartars, and so again to the Parthians, by the help of Gempsas,
who redeemed both his own, and this from the Tartarian; and briefly after many
turns, it became the possession of Ismaell Sophie of Persia, whose race
continues it to this day.

(10) The bounds of this Empire on the North are the Caspian Sea, and the River
Oxus; on the South the Sinus Persicus, and the Mare Indicum heretofore called
Rubrum: on the West the Turkish confines, as far as the River Tigris, and the
lake Giocho: on the East the River Indus, and the Kingdom of Cambaia a
spacious land it is, and contains from East to West 38. degrees, and about 20.
from the North to South.

(11) This variety of distance in respect of the Heavens, must needs cause as
much difference in the qualities of her several Regions: In some places there
is that fertility, which makes her equal to any part of Asia: in others again
she is so barren, unfruitful, and unprofitable, that the land is left waste,
as being not able to nourish an Inhabitant. Oramaritima (says Quadus) aestuosa
est ac ventosa, and fructuum inops, praeterquam palmarum, mediterranea regio
Campestris est and omnium ferax, pecorumque optima nutrix, fluminibus et
lacubus plena. Maxim autem suppeditat Araxes plurimas commoditates. It abounds
much with metals, and stones of great price.

(12) The ancient Persians were warlike and ambitious of rule: for not content
with their own, which they freely possessed in Asia, they attempted the nearest
parts of Africa, and Europe, which cost them the first fall from their
Monarchy. Nec enim petituri Macedones Perside^^ videbantur, ni priores Persae
Graecia^ provocassent, says Vadianus. Their customs were most of them
superstitious, but they held nothing almost in so great reverence as water: it
might not lawfully be soyled, so much as with a foul hand; but to piss, or
cast rubbish, or a dead carcass into their Rivers, was a kind of Sacrilege.
They had many wives and more Concubines: for they were exceeding desirous of
increase, map of Persia THE ^^^^DOME OF PERSIA with the chief Cities and
Habites described. by John Speed
and great rewards were appointed by their King himself, for him that could
most augment the number of his subjects in one year. They seldom entered into
any consultation of state, till they had well armed themselves with drink; for
then they thought they should be most free to speak what they most thought. To
spit, or laugh before their Prince, was a crime welnigh unpardonable: some say
that they bury not their dead, but cast them forth to be devoured by wild
beasts, and thought him most happy, which was soonest torn to mammock: the
rest their friends bewailed, as such who had lived impurely: and were therefore
by this signed eclared worthy of h^ll only, without any redemption.

(13) Their Philosophers were called Magi, and studied principally the art of
foretelling things to come; from whence we have our term of Magic: and
usurp the word only in the worse sense, whereas (questionless) it was no
other with them, then the Greeks Philosophy, Philosophi, or Sapientes with the
Latins: for it is by most thought that such were those good Magi, which came
from the East to worship Christ: and Saint Chrysostom directly names Persia to
be that East from whence they were led by the star.

(14) They have now put off most of their antique barbabarisme, and are become
good politicians, excellent warriors, great scholars, especially in
Astrology, Physic, and Poetry. Those which apply themselves to Mechanic
trades, are not inferior to any almost in our quarter: they deal most in
making of silks, which they send into all the Eastern Countries in great
abundance. They are mild and courteous to strangers, yet jealous of their
wives, which for the most part are very fair and richly attired;
notwithstanding their affection to them usque ad insanam Zelotypiam: yet are
they much addicted to that beastly sin of the Turks, and have their stews on
purpose, whither they resort without control, or shame. Their Language is
elegant, and in use in most of those Eastern Countries. The Christian Religion
was once planted here both by Saint Thomas, and Saint Andrew; yet are they now
fallen to Mahumetisme, and differ but as schismatics from the Turks, which
occasioneth much hatred and perpetual war betwixt them.

(15) The Regions which belong to the Empire of Persia, are (1) Persia. (2)
Media. (3) Assyria. (4) Susiana. (5) Mesopotamia. (6) Parthia. (7) Hyrcania.
(8) Bactriana. (9) Parapomissus. (10) Aria. (11) Drangiana. (12) Gedrosia. (13)
Carmania and (14) Ormus.

(16) Persis had her name from Perseus, which came hither out of Greece; and
this gives it to the whole Empire: It is now called Farsi or Farsistan, and was
heretofore Panchaia. It lies betwixt Media on the North, and the Sinus
Persicus on her South: on her West Susiana, and East Carmania. Her Metropolis
is Sitas, once Persepolis, and is built toward the midland near the River
Araxes: it was surprised by Alexander, and many thousand talents of gold sent
into Greece, with other rich spoils and trophies of victories, which the
Persians had before gotten from most parts of the then known world. Upon the
Seacoasts stands Cyrus, a City which was built by their first absolute
Monarch, and called by the Inhabitants Grechata: It was the Bishop-seate of the
learned Theodoret, who lived here about the year 450. and in this Region is
Laodicea, built by Antiochus, and Passagarda, where Cyrus had his sepulcher.

(17) (2) Media now Servania, on the North of Persis, and South of the Caspian
Sea, has Armenia major and Assyria on her West, and on her East Parthia and
Hyrcania. It was before Cyrus, the seat of the Empire, and mother to a warlike
potent Nation. Their Kings had many wives, seldom fewer then seven: and their
women thought it a great calamity to have less then five husbands. In this
stands the territory of Tauris, which was called by our ancients Erbathana, and
does stand some eight days journey from the Hyrcanian Sea: it is rich and
populous, and was the seat of the Sophies, till it was removed to Casbin,
which lies somewhat more South. Betwixt both stands the City Turcoman: and
elsewhere in this Province are many others dispersed of good note, especially
Suliania, Symmachia, Nassinun, Ardovill, Marant and Saucazan, etc.

(18) (3) Assyria now Arzeram on the West of Media, South of Armenia, North of
Susiana, and East of Mesopotamia: it was the seat of Ninus his Kingdom, lost
by Sardanapalus, and here stands the most famous City Ninive, near the River
Tigris, larger then Babylon, containing full threescore miles in compass: for
the community which the Babylonians had with them in course of government,
they were ofttimes promiscuously used by Historians: both had this custom to
sell their virgins, which were fair and most desired, and tender the price
into the common treasury. The homelier sort were placed in marriage with that
money, to those which would accept of them for gain at least, if not for
beauty. They were much addicted to Astrology, and were questionless led to it
by the opportunity of their situation, which gives them a more perfect view of
the heavens, and several course of the Planets, then any other part of the
world besides.

(19) (4) Susiana now Cucestan seems to have her name from Cus, upon the South
of Assyria, West of Persis, East of Babylonia, and North of the Persike bay. It
is severed by Pliny from Elemais the great by the River Euleus, of whose waters
only the Persian Kings were wont to drink, as being more sweet and pure, then
any other in this Country.

(20) (5) Mesopotamia now Diarbecha, heretofore Aram or Charam, lies betwixt
the two Rivers Euphrates and Tigris, and has Armenia major on her North, and
on her South Arabia deserta: it is of large extent, and has much variety of
Commodities in her several quarters, but has suffered great calamities by
reason of her continual wars with the Turk. Her chief Cities are Charan or
Haran, where Abraham settled himself, when he was called forth of Chaldaea:
and where that gurges avaritiae the Roman Mar^u^ Crassus lost his life. Not far
distant is the City Nisibis, which was once called Antiochia, and Mygdonia: to
these Maginus adds Merdin and Mosus.

(21) (6) Parthia now Arach on the East of Media, on the South of Hyrcania,
North of Carmania, and West of Aria. The Inhabitants were valiant, and had
their course of soveraigntie in the Eastern Monarchy. Her chief Cities are
Cassan and Hispaham, which the Persian has in so great account, that he calls
it half the world.

(22) (7) Hyrcania now Strava, on the North of Parthia, and East of Media, and
South of the Mare Caspium: it is plain, fertile, and rich. Her Metropolis
Hyrcania: the rest of note are Bestan, Mesandran. (8) Bactriana now Charassan,
on the South is divided from Aria by the mountain Parapomissus: her chief
City Bactra, the birthplace of that great Physician Avicenna, and Zoroaster
Magus: This Region belongs not entire to the Sophie of Persia. (9) Parapomissus
now Sublestan and Candehar on the East of Aria a mountainous Country, and the
Inhabitant as rude and ragged: yet her chief City Candatura is a great market
and well frequented both from India and Cathaia. (10) Aria now Eri on the East
of Parthia: the Inhabitants of this Region rebelled against Alexander, but were
forced by his Armies, to fly for shelter, into a cave upon the top of a rock;
yet thither he pursued them, and dammed up the caves mouth with Timber, which
he set on fire, and stifled most; the rest were taken to the Victors mercy: the
treason of Philotus against Alexander was here discovered. (11) Drangiana now
Sigestan: In this Country the Hill Taurus is called Caucasus, where the Poets
seigne, that Prometheus was perpetually gnawn by a Vulture for stealing fire
from Heaven: her chief Cities are Sim and Cabul, built by Alexander, at the
foot of Caucasus: and therefore called Alexandria Archosiae. (12) Gedrosia now
Circan, near the Mare Indicum, a barren Country, scarce worth a farther
description: and so (13) Carmania.

(23) (14) Upon the confines of the Persian Empire stands a potent Kingdom,
which comprehends part of the coast of Persia, some Islands of the Persike bay;
and a good portion of Arabia Faelix near to those Seas. The chief seat is the
City and Island Ormutz, a place of great merchandise, but of it self affords
little provision for victuals: so that they are forced to have it brought in
from other parts of the Empire, though at an extreme dear rate. It abounds
with a precious Pearl called the Union: Their King is now tributary to
Portugal, as once it was to the Persian Emperor.

The Description of the TVRKISH EMPIRE.
THE Turk is admired for nothing more, then his sudden advancement to so great
an Empire. For before these last three hundred and odd years, we must seek
this people (which is become now a terror to the whole world) lurking in the
by-corners of Asia, like runnagates and thieves, as indeed they were; such as
so infested their neighbors, with rapines and murders, as that neither enjoyed
their own lives freely, nor possessed more wealth, then they could maintain
with the sword.

(2) The great Osmand was the first which redeemed them from obscurity: his
predecessors were scarce mentioned as a Nation worth story; and therefore it is
not easy to give their true original, or set justly the place of earth, from
whence they sprang. There are which say from the Caspian Mountains: and that
in the time of the Macedonian Basilius they served the Saracens, in their
Indian wars, but turned the victory to their own advantage: for when they
had once tried their strength, and found their Forces sufficient in behalf of
others, they bethought themselves at last, to use them for their own
advancement: and to that purpose, turned head first upon their paymasters, out
of whose spoils they raised incredible Armies, which overspread all Asia to
the very Euxine sea. Others again conjecture, that they were a Scythian people;
and the rather for that they made their way into these parts, through Pontus
and Cappadocia, and so on, as it were in a direct course from Scythia. The
truth is, the customs of both are not much unlike, their habit very near, and
their wars waged, with the same weapons and discipline.

(3) But admit their first attempt upon the Saracens: yet were they again
scattered by their civil dissentions, lived as before, and could not be
recollected into a Nation, till Othoman took upon him to be their Leader in
the year 1300. a man of as low birth and fortunes as the meanest, but had a
tumultuous spirit, and an able wit to weild it; which put him upon this great
action, to conquer the world, and suffered him not to rest in it, till he had
seated himself in an Empire, which his progeny enjoy to this day. He began
with a rascal crew, of such as were led on by want, and seemed rather to bear
Arms in defense of their privy thefts, then with intent to invade an enemy:
for he appeared not at first as an open warrior, but wrought his spoils by
stratagems, and slights, and clandestine excursions, upon such as were
unprovided for resistance; possessed himself of mountains and woods, as lay most
convenient for his lurking practices, and whither he might retire safe, if at
any time he were pursued.

(4) By these means he was content for a while, to increase his wealth and
power, which soon grew to that eminency, as in few years, he durst meet a
strong enemy to the face; buckle with him upon his own ground, for his
possessions: and at last, so prevailed, where ever he set footing, that he
scarce stepped back till he claspt into his own government, Pontus and
Cappadocia, Galatia and Bythinia, Pamphylia and Lycia, Ionia and Phrygia, and
all Asia minor to the Greek Seas: to which his successors have in latter
times added many other Countries of Asia, Africa, and Europe: so that it is now
become the most potent and tyrannical Empire of the world.

(5) The first seat of state was at Prussia in Bithynia, from thence it was
removed to Hadrianopolis; and at last to Constantinople, a City of Greece in
the Province of Romania. His Palace is called the Seraglio, is built in the
most eminent part of the town, contains three miles in circuit within the
walls, and surpasses all other Courts under heaven for Majesty, and number of
buildings, for pleasurable gardens, sweet fountains, and rich furniture. The
Emperor himself has for his common Guard, four thousand footmen, the sons
of tributary Christians, which are called Ianizaries, and their Captain Agu,
besides ten thousand others, dispersed under several Commanders through
diverse parts of the Empire: and fifteen thousand horsemen in ordinary pay.
In these numbers, I reckon not those multitudes of Timariotae, which are
assigned to several of the Turkish states: and deliver yearly incredible sums
of money into his Treasury. As his wealth is great: so is his life luxurious:
fifteen hundred women are cloystered up for his pleasure, and out of them one
hundred and fifty culled as choice for his daily lust: so Maginus. The offices
within the Court are most performed by Eunuchs, such as (he will be sure)
shall not partake with him in his unsatiate, and brutish pleasures.

(6) The Ministers of state are (1) Mufsti, who interprets their Law, and lays
open their Alcoran, with the like authority, as the Pope among the
Roman-Catholikes. (2) Cadilescheri, who are the supreme Judges, to determine of
their causes controversed; and these are three: the one for Europe, whose
residency is in Romania: another for Asia in Natolia; and a third set up by
Selimus the first, to judge such differences as are brought to him from Egypt,
Syria, Arabia, and part of Armenia. These Cadilescheri have under them peculiar
Judges of every Province, which are called Cadi, and are chosen at their
pleasure, but confirmed by the Emperor himself. (3) The third rank are the
Vizer bassa, their Emperors Council; their chief is Vezir-Azem, a man of
great power through all the dominions of the Turk: and for the most part,
present at his treaties of state. (4) The fourth order are the Beglerbegs,
whose office answers almost to our Generals, and as the Judges were, so are
these placed in the three several quarters of the Empire: one in Greece for
Europe: a second in Anatolia for Asia: and the third is an admiral of the
Seas, and commands those parts, which are left by the other two: all of equal
respect and place with the Vizer-bassae. Those of inferior rank, and petty
employments in the Commonwealth are almost innumerable, many of them not
natives, but apostate Christians, and in conditions, differ as the Countries
from whence they first sprang.

(7) The multitude, I mean the borne- Turks savor still of their barbarous
ancestors, and carry the marks in their foreheads, and limbs of Scythians and
Tartars. They are for the most part broad-faced, strong-boned, well
proportioned, dull and heavy headed, of gross understanding, idly disposed,
and yet greedy of wealth, luxurious in their diet, and beastly in their
lustful affections, without distinction of kindred or sex, base minded,
slaves to themselves, and their superiors in their own Country: yet
ignorantly proud, and contemptuous of other Nations, which they take in foul
scorn, should be compared with their lubberly Inhabitant. They pass not to
cosen a Christian in their course of traffic: nor do they think they are
bound to keep promise unless it make for their advantage. The greatest praise
they have by due desert, is their strict obedience to the discipline of war:
no sedition, no tumult, no chat in their Camp or March, in so much that often
times many thousands on a sudden surprise their enemies, unwares, with so very
little noise, as not to be heard in their approach. No difficulty can be
commanded, which they are not ready to perform, without any respect at all had
to the danger; be it pass to Rivers, top Mountains, scale Walls, stand
Centinell: In brief, they care not to eat or sleep in war, but at full
leisure: and are the truest military men upon earth.

(8) No great marvel then, if wi^^ so great multitudes, so well ordered, they
daily improve their Empire upon the Christians, who are not so zealous in
defense of their true faith, as these mis-beleevers, bold and foole-hardy to
uphold their false god. But the truth is, their superstitious credulity of
fate, which they think has immutably prefixed every man's hour for life or
death, which he can neither defer nor hasten, makes them fearelesse to
incur dangers, and careless for their own security.

map of the Turkish Empire THE TURKISH EMPIRE. Newly Augmented by. John. Speed.
1626.


(9) Diverse Schools they have, where their chief study is the imperial
laws; from thence some are preferred to secular, some to ecclesiastic
offices. Their Religion is a mere cousenage, thrust upon the silly people by
the impious subtlety of one Mahomest, whose story is well worth our knowledge,
and may cause us to commiserate the desperate state of those ignorant, yet
perverse and bloody Antichristians.

(10) His place of birth is questioned, whether he were a Cyrenaike, an
Arabian, or Persian, it is not yet fully decided: certain enough he was of base
parents; his father (some say) a worshipper of Devils, and his mother a
faithless Jew. Betwixt them they sent into the world a pernicious deceiver
(which none but two such Religions could have made up) in the year five
hundred ninety seven. When he had been for a while thus instructed by his
distracted parents, poverty and hope to improve his fortunes, persuaded him
from his native soil, to live for another while among true professed
Christians, where he received so much knowledge of the Word, and light of the
Gospel, as to pervert it to his destruction, and ruin of many millions of
souls.

(11) In his first adventurous travailes abroad, he fell into the hands of
theevish Saracens, which sold him to a Jewish Merchant; and he employed him to
drive his Cammels through Egypt, Syria, Palestine, and other foreign
Countries, where he still gathered farther instructions of that truth which he
intended to abuse. His wickedness first brake forth into fraud, open theft and
rapine, and other sins of highest rank; in which he continued and seduced
others, till the death of his Master, and after married his aged but rich
Mistress.

(12) He had means now to act his malicious purposes, and wealth to
countenance his exceeding pride, which would not be satisfied with a lower
ambition, then to be called a Prophet of God. This he began to practice, by the
counsel of one Sergius a Monk, who being cast out for heresy from
Constantinople, betook himself into Arabia, and joined in with Mahomet to
make up this mischief perfect; see now their juggling. There wanted not craft
betwixt them, to make use of his worst actions to gull the simple: For when by
his debaucht drinking and gluttony, he was fallen into an Epilepsie, and in
his sits lay Beare-like grovelling, and foaming upon the earth, as one without
sense: he pretended an extatike swone, wherein his soul was wrapped from his
body, while he converst with Gabriel an Angel from heaven. To make this
familiarity with God the more to be believed: he had bred up a Dove to take
her meat from his ear, which he most blasphemously professed to be the holy
Ghost, who at such times and in that shape infused the Prophecies which he was
to preach. Lastly, what they in their wicked fancies had conceived, and meant
to propagate, they digested into a volume, and called it the Alcoran.

(13) For this too they had a trick, that it might seem to have been sent
from heaven into the hands of Mahomet: and to this purpose he had himself fed
up a tame Bull, which by custom became so familiar, that no sooner he heard
the voice of his Master, but he would straight run, cast the head in his lap,
and use his wanton dalliance as with a fellow. Betwixt the horns of this Bull,
had he fastened the Alcoran, and conveyed him into a by-place, near where he
had assembled the multitude at a set time, to expect a wonderful miracle from
heaven, that might confirm his Prophecy. The scene thus ordered, on the
sudden he lift up his voice, and made a loud cry, which no sooner the Beast
heard, but he brake his way through the prease, overturned many of the
spectators, which now stood at a gaze, and gently laid his horns and Book in
the bosom of this false couzener: which he with much ceremony, and feigned
reverence, received, and in their presence opening the volume began to
interpret chief of their Laws, which for hereafter they were to observe.

(14) Circumcision he allowed, and with the old Law forbad swines flesh, that
he might with more ease lead on such as were Jewish: he suffered himself to be
baptized by Sergius, that the Christian too might have in some measure his
content: Moses and our Savior he denied not to be great Prophets; but that
neither ^^rty might emulate the greater observance of other: and indeed
especially that his own might seem new and yet take place from both, he
changed the Circumcision of the Jews from the eight day, and multiplies
Baptism, which can be conferred but once for all, upon the true believer. For
the like reason of difference with other Nations and Sects, he left both the
Jews Sabbath, and diem Christianorum Dominicum, and commands his holy
ceremonies to be celebrated on the friday; for so it was, when the Bull
bestowed on him his Alcoran. Before they enter the Temple, they wash all the
unclean parts of their bodies, and then to prayer, which must be performed
five times in a day, with their face toward the South. They have a months fast
too once every year, but it is observed only for the day; for they may, when
the Sun is down, redeem it with what gluttony they please: wine is
forbidden, only for a show that he might not seem to have loved that, which
(as he was guilty to himself) had brought him into his epilepticall fits.
Briefly, what he knew would best agree with the brutish desires of the people,
that he took order should be confirmed by his Laws: four or five wives to
every husband, and as many Concubines as they could maintain. For their bliss
after life, he proposed no invisible delights which over-reacht their
understanding, but proportioned to each of their sensual thoughts, and
promised to those which would keep his Law a Paradise of all kinds of
pleasure, which they themselves most affected. To the covetous, wealth; to the
ambitious, honors; to the gluttenous, meats; to the virgins, rich attire, and
embraces of Angels; the poor souls were never so fitted; and when he had thus
for a long time, discoursed over his Alcoran, he took a yoke from Sergius, and
put it upon the Bulls neck: for it was foretold by an inscription brought by
his door, that whosoever could yoke the Bull, it should be a sign to declare
the man, as one sent from God, to govern his people.

(15) This huddle of miracles put the gazers beyond all pause, so that in an
instant they cried him up King, and held his companion in reputation of a minor
Prophet; called themselves Musulmanni, true believers, which the Turk still
affects, rather then his right name of Turk, which imports banishment, and
upbraids him with the disgrace of his original.

(16) And now he has past the difficulty of his attempt, an easy matter to
draw on millions of followers, such as would like that Religion best which
baulkt not their pleasures; yet at last he met with an end answerable to his
beginning: for he was poisoned by some of his own Family.

(17) He had long before Prophesied, that he should be wonderfully conveyed to
heaven* and to make good this fraud, had framed an iron Chest for his
Sepulcher, which he purposed should have been held up by force of a
Lodestone, placed in the top of the Temple, and by this means have appeared
to the beholder to hang in the air without any support: But this trick (in
seems) was prevented by death; yet they expected still his ascent to heaven,
till he stanke upon earth: so that at last they were forced to convey him into
his iron Coffin, which remains to this day in Mecha a City of Persia, and is
visited by the Turks, as the Sepulcher of our Savior at Jerusalem by
pilgrim-Christians.

(18) I took leave here to supply the room with the Customs and Religion of
the Turks, which in course of our former method, was due to the division of the
Empire and her several Provinces: But I suppose, I have the less trespassed,
in regard that most of them have already had their place and description in
each of their particular Kingdoms, to which they did formerly belong. It will
be sufficient here to name them, with reference to the Map, where you have
them delivered more at large.

(19) In Europe it runs along the Seacoast of the Adriatic bay, from the
land of Epidaurus, now Raguss, and so about the Aegean Sea, and Propontis, and
a great part of the Euxine to the city Theodosia in the Taurica Chersonesus,
which is now called Caffa. In the Mediterranean from Iavarimum in Hungary, to
Constantinople in Greece. The several Provinces of this compass are (1) a
great part of Hungary, Bosnia, Servia, Rascia, Bulgaria, Walachia, and
Transylvania, etc. in the description of Hungary. (2) Graesia and her
Provinces, Thracia, Macedonia, Epirus, Achaia, Peloponnesus, with the Islands of
the Aegean, etc. in the description of Greece. (3) A part of Sclavonia.

(20) In Africa almost all the Seacoasts from the City Bellis de Comera to the
Arabike bay: In this stands Algeires Tunis, Tripolis, all Egypt, Fesse,
Marolum, etc. in the African description.

(21) In Asia Natolia, the Island of Cyprus, all Syria, Palestine, Iudaea,
Caelosyria, Phaenicia, Babylonia, Arabia Triplex, Turcomannia, and Georgia.
Mesopotamia, and part of Media. And these belong to the description of Asia.

The Description of the Kingdom of CHINA.
THE whole tract of Asia which lies severed from Persia by the River Indus on
the West, is well known by one general name of the East Indie: and that
again is divided, by the other famous River Ganges, into India intra Gangem,
the part which looks toward Europe, and is conjectured by most, to be the same
with the land of Evilah: and India extra Gangem to the very East, some think
it was that, which of old was called Seria: both have now other names imposed
by the Inhabitants: the first Indostand; this other Tame, Tangis, Mangi, or
Macys, and lastly Sinarum Regio, China.

(2) This Kingdom then is the utmost bounds Eastward of the whole Continent,
and therefore lies farthest remote from Christendom; the mistress of arts,
and example of civilitie to all the other parts of the world: yet do the
Chinoyse much exceed us, for ample Cities, ingenious artificers, and multitude
of Inhabitants; which (me thinks) pleads fairly for her antiquity, though I
give not full credit to those, which settle here the sons of Iocktan, much
less to their own records, which reckon two hundred threescore and two Kings,
in almost a continued succession to this day; and number from their first,
above four thousand years. For to make this good they must either vary from
us in their measure of times, as we from the Germans in length of miles; else
we must commit a foul error, to look beyond the Flood for their original:
since that time, it is not yet above three thousand nine hundred twenty; and
surely I think they were not exempted from the general deluge, no more then
from the sins of the whole earth.

(3) But if this conjecture of different account be not approved, the solecisme
must rest (for me) upon their own ignorant vainglory, which in their stories,
transport them beyond probability; upon hope (perhaps) that no other Nation
could controwle them; for in those first ages, they had little converse,
unless with men more barbarous then themselves; such as could not deliver
their acts to posterity: and therefore being left wholly to their own
relations, good reason they thought they had, to do themselves what honor
they might, though ignorance of the main truth, makes them often times to
trespass upon Chronology, and forge stories so unlikely, that the whole may
be justly suspected.

(4) Their first King they name Vitei, and report him to have reigned an
hundred years: his successors went on without breach or conquest to their two
hundred forty second Prince, but were then for a while, cut off by the
Tartarians. This change was foretold to Farfar, the last China King of the
first race; and the Prophecy laid it upon one, which should have an hundred
eyes: and so had Chisanbaan the Invader, if you will allow his name to make up
the miracle: For the very word in their language signifies no other then an
hundred eyes: A poor cousenage of the Devil, but served the turn first to
dazzle them with a strange Prophecy, and then to keep up his credit in the
performance, with the simple idolaters. After nine Tartarian Princes, it was
again recovered to the state, in which it now stands, by the prowess of one
Gombne their 251. King.

(5) This brief account of their beginning and progress, is more then I can
warrant for undoubted truth. The most part was past, ere they were a people
known to the Europeans: for Ptolemy himself scarce reached so far toward the
East: or if it be the same, with his Sinarum Regio, (which yet some doubt) yet
(it seems) he knew little more of it, then the bare name: we must be content
to pass over many ages untoucht, and break abruptly, into our own times and
stories, which do afford us more certainty by the relation of later
travailors, some of our own Nation.

(6) It is now a vast Empire, which contains in latitude almost forty degrees
from the Tropike of Cancer to the fifty three toward the Pole Artike; and
thirty in Longitude from the degree one hundred thirty to one hundred sixty:
the bounds on the West is Indostan, India intra Gangem, on the East Mare Cin;
on the North the Empire of the great Chane, severed from the Chinoyse by high
mountains, continued with a wall of a thousand miles in length, built by
Tzanitzon, their 117. King: and on the South the Kingdom or Chan chin chinae,
part of the other India intra Gangem.

(17) The air here is temperate, and the ground fruitful: the mountains and
wild fields breed incredible numbers of Cattle, and the Woods wild Boares,
Foxes, Hares, Conies, and other useful beasts, which gives us flesh for our
food, and skins for our clothing. The tilled ground returns again plenty
of Corn, Wheat, and Barley; their higher Poulse, and their lower Rice, in
great abundance: their gardens pleasant, set with all sorts of flowers, which
may delight either the eye, or sent: no clodde (almost) of earth there, but
has its wealth; for what yields not fruit, is inricht with Mines of Gold and
Silver. Their chief River is Polysango, both it and the rest give fish in
great abundance, and water-fowle enough almost to feed a whole Nation: Maginus
reports it, that ten or twelve thousand wilde-ducks have been commonly spent
in one day in the City Canton: besides their own profit, they advantage them
much in their course of traffic, to convey their Merchandise into several
parts of the Empire, to meet with their chapmen from all quarters. Their
principal Commodities are Silks and Sugars: yet besides these they send forth
Wool, Cotton, Olives, Metals, Rheubarbe, Honey, Purslaine dishes, Camphire,
Ginger, Pepper, etc. Musk, Salt great store, whose Custom, in only one Town
of Canton, amounts to the yearly value of 18000. Crowns. To this happiness
of soil may be added the thrift and great industry of the Inhabitants, who
hold it a foul disgrace to be accounted idle: and therefore make the most of
what they have: so that without doubt, as they are infinitely populous, so they
are proportionably rich, beyond any other Nation of the world.

(8) The Chinoyse is described with a broad face of a duskie color, crooked
nose, small and black eyes, and very thin beard, but long hair on the head:
if any be deformed (for so they take it) with a better feature, they are as
like to break a jest upon his handsome comely visage, as a scoffer would upon
their ill fashioned countenance. The better sort are clothed in long silk
garments; the ordinary people in linen, for they have not yet the art well to
weave woollen: Their women deck their heads, with gold and precious jewels,
seldom show themselves abroad without great attendance of servants.

(9) The men in their several employments, are infinitely laborious and
ingenious; it is very rare, to see any of them in a strange Country: nor will
they easily admit a stranger far into theirs, unless he be first well tried,
for his honesty and good meaning toward their state: they are addicted much to
manual arts, for they have excellent practick wits; and indeed for that go
beyond any other Nations. Much quarrel has been about the invention of
Gunnes and Printing, which several people have been ambitious to take to
themselves, as the masterpiece of man's wit: but without doubt, they were both
used here, long before any of Europe pretended to the knowledge of either. In
their writings, they make not their lines from the right, hand to the left, as
the Hebrews; nor from the left to the right as we do; but from the top to the
bottom of the page: and use all one Character, through the whole Kingdom,
though several parts differ much in their language, or at least in their
idiomes. Their special skill, which we much admire, but cannot imitate, is in
making the Purslaine dishes white as very snow and transparent as glass,
formed up only of Cockles found in the Seashore mixed with Egge-shelles: but
lie buried in the earth many years, before they come to perfection, and are
seldom map of China the KINGDOM OF CHINA newly augmented by I.S. 1626
took up by the same artificer, which kneads them, but are left as a portion
to some of his posterity.

(10) Their fashions in private houses are not much unlike to those of Europe,
at board they sit in chaires, and upon forms, not loll on the floor, as most
of the Asiaticks do: they touch not their meat with the hand, but use the
Silver-forke, or else some stick of Ivory or Ebonie, not much unlike it: they
eat thrice in one day, but sparingly enough: when they travail over the
Plains, they use a kind of Coach, yet not drawn with horses or other beast,
but driven by the wind under sail as a Bark on the Sea, which the people are
as perfect to guide, which way they please, as the Mariner is to direct his
course unto any coast, whither he is bound: as they sail upon land, as if it
were sea, so they dwell as frequent upon the sea, as if it were land: for they
have an incredible number of ships, and boats, which are in many places ranked
like streets upon the waters, and filled with Inhabitants, such as are here
borne, live, traffic, marry, and die. Mr. Purchase reports that upon one River
from Nanquin to Paquin they are thus ordered for 300. leagues. No marvel
then, if their number exceed any part proportionably of the whole earth; since
their land is not sufficient, but is forced to borrow room out of the Sea for
their habitation: yet are they all governed by one Monarch, whom they call the
Lord of the world, and son to the Sun. For they are a proud Nation, and
admit not equal comparison with any other earthlings; but cast it as a
Proverb into their teeth, that they have but one eye to see with, in respect
of the Chinoys, who alone (as themselves boast) see with two: the truth is, in
matters of state, they are very politic, in peace wary, and in war valiant,
crafty and excellent engineers.

(11) Their laws are for the most part just and severely executed, especially
against idle droanes, which set not a hand to advance their state, or maintain
themselves. They will not cherish the very blind by alms, since without eyes,
a man may be fit for some corporal employment; but to the maimed and lame,
they deny not a charitable maintenance. The son is bound to exercise his
parents occupation, so that no pretense almost is left for wanderers: and
briefly, as far as humane laws can provide, all other vain occasions, for
misexpence of time, are taken off; for within the Cities no stews are allowed,
or lewd persons to withdraw them: adultery is punished with death, but yet they
have liberty to take many wives: one they keep at home, the rest are disposed
of abroad, where they best please. Their Marriages they chiefly solemnize at
the new Moon, and for the most part in March, which begins their year.

(12) For their Religion they are Gentiles, but have a confused knowledge of
God, heaven, and the creation, which they ascribe to one Trine, who first (say
they) made Pauson and Pauzona, and their posterity continued for 90000.
years; but were then, for their wickedness destroyed, and a new race was
created. The first of their second world was one Lutitzam, who had two horns;
from the right came men, as they fondly imagine and from the left women: when
they would decipher their great god, they express him by the first letter of
their Alphabet; and in their devotions, they worship him as their chief (but
not only) preserver: for they have their prayers to the Sun, Moon, Stars,
and to the Devil himself, that he would not hurt them. Their Priests are
distinguished into the black and white Friars, as we call them: for they much
resemble Friars in their course of life; some are clothed in white, their heads
shorn, and their victuals in common: others in black, long hair and live
apart: neither are married, but both take their liberty to live obscenely, as
the debauchest swaggerers.

(13) The Empire is divided into 15. Provinces, (1) Canton. (2) Feguien. (3)
Olam. (4) Sisnam. (5) Tolench. (6) Causaie. (7) Minchien. (8) Ochian. (9)
Honan. (10) Pagina. (11) Zaiton. (12) Quinchien. (13) Cheguean. (14) Susnam.
(15) Quinsay. All of large extent, and contain in them many towns, and cities,
in number more, in compass bigger, and in wealth more eminent, then the best
of ours.

(14) (1) In the Province of Canton are 190. Towns and 37. Cities. (2) In
Feguien, 99. Towns and 33. Cities. (3) In Olam 130. Towns and 90. Cities. (4)
In Sisnam 150. Towns and 44. Cities. (5) In Tolench 235. Towns and 51.
Cities: and this is governed immediately by the Emperor himself, without any
substitute as all the other Provinces have, excep^ Pagina. (6) Cansaie has
122. Towns 24. Cities. (7) Minchien 29. Towns 25. Cities. (8) Ochiam 74.
Towns 19. Cities. (9) Honan 102. Towns and 20. Cities. (10) Pagina 150.
Towns and 47. Cities.

(15) The chief of this is Paquin where he has his continual residence, and
scarce at any time leaves the City, unless upon occasion of war: for it is
seated near to the Tartars, who often times make assaults upon the Chinoyse, and
force the King to gather his strengh into that quarter; and he himself present
to withstand their entry: lest if they should once get footing into any part of
his Country, they might incroach farther, and enable themselves by his spoils
to follow their blow upon his other Provinces. His palace here is compassed
with a triple wall, carries the bulk and face of a fair Town; for indeed his
retinue are no fewer then might well people a large City: among the rest he
has 16000. Eunuchs daily attending, such as their own parents have
emasculated in their infancy, to make them capable of this Court-preferment.
The seat Imperial was heretofore at Nanquin, where still remains a golden
testimony of her past glory. It is a fair City thirty miles in compass,
seated nine leagues from the Sea upon a fair and navigable River, where there
rides commonly at least 10000. of the Kings ships, beside Merchants. It has
three brick walls, the streets are six miles in length, of a proportionable
breadth, and trimly paved.

(16) (11) Zaiton has 78. Towns and 27. Cities: the chief is Zaiton, which
has a fair harbor, and is seldom without 500. ships. (12) Quinchien has
113. Towns and 45. Cities. (13) Cheguean 95. Towns and 39. Cities. (14)
Susnam 105. Towns and 41. Cities. (15) And lastly Quinsay 114. Towns 38
Cities.

(17) The Metropolis is Quinsay or Suntien, the largest City of the world: for
it contains 100. miles in compass: it is seated in a low and fenny ground, is
subject to Floods, and has been forced in very many places, to erect bridges
for free passage from one street to another: there are in a^l 12000. built of
stone, and most of them so high, that a good ship may strike under them with
full sail: each of them has its ten watchmen, for a night-guard. The
Inhabitants of this City live luxuriously, especially their women, who are much
more comely then their men; yet all of them almost eat both horse and dogs
flesh. Toward the South part of the City there is a great lake about 24. miles
in circuit; in the midst stand two Islands, whither the chief Nobility repair
and invite their friends to solemnize their marriage, and have in each a
stately palace erected, furnished sufficiently with all fitting ornaments, for
a wedding jollitie. In many parts of the City there are public places of
receipt, for such as sustain any misfortune by fire: there they may lodge their
goods safe upon a sudden casualtie, till they can make better provision.

(18) It were vain to give a more particular description of the many Cities
which make up the several numbers in each Province: they stand so thick, and
are so populous, that they all seem to be as one; one, as well for their
continued building almost, as their fashion of building: for they all observe
the same form, and dispose their streets alike; two broad, crossing each other
in the middle in so straight a line, that the eye may reach clean from one end
to the other.

(19) We may conclude, that both the revenues of the whole Empire, and number
of Inhabitants, are not easily to be reckoned: yet this in brief, he has
subject under him 70. crowned Kings, gathers up yearly 120. millions of
Crowns, stirs not into the field without 300000. foot and 200000. horse. To
this empire did once belong most of the Islands in the Eastern Seas, but it
seems the Chinoyse in time found, that their defense was a business of more
charge then their worth countervailed: and therefore let them even slip into
their own hands, and bounded their government with the Seacoast: yet for such
as lie in the same Latitude, from the Tropike toward the Pole, they may most
properly, be named at least in this description, and but named; since they were
before set forth in our general map of Asia. The chief are Lequio minor,
Reix Magos, Lequio major, Mazacar, Iapan, a very lare Island, Insula de Miaco,
and Satyrorum Insula, etc.

The Description of the Kingdom of TARTARY.
SCYTHARVM gens semper antiquissima It was a judged case (long since) betwixt
the Egyptian and Inhabitant of this Country. Yet were not the Scythians the
first, which possessed it: At least it was the first name by which they were
known. For, before the entrance of Scythes the supposed son of Hercules, we
find here a people which derive their pedigree from Magog, the son of Iapheth,
and were called Magogins in remembrance of their antique founder. To this
purpose Iunius and other learned interpret terram Magogin in the 38. of Ezech.
2. and Revel. 20.8. and so in sundry places elsewhere of divine Scripture,
take it for other land, then that, which was after profane Writers, called
Scythia, and Sarmatia, and now Tartaria; though perhaps these have not all had
still the same bounds, from the beginning; for what any one Kingdom upon the
earth has? All states have had their course to rise and fall, to be impaired
or enlarged, at pleasure of the most High, who disposes of Empires as seems
best in his wisdom.

(2) Of the Magogins, we have not much story; yet they have left their name
behind them, which is now corrupted into Maugol, as most imagine. While the
Scythae bare rule, they infested their neighbors without mercy or equity: and
practiced their rapines, as far almost, as they could find a subject to work
on. In so much that they gave name to all the rude and inhumane Nations, both
of Asia and Europe, North of Danubius: which for their cruelty were much
feared, and for brutish Customs grown odious to the more civil parts of the
world.

(3) Tollite Barbarum mores; was meant of these by the Poet, and well it might.
For who could be more barbarous then the Essedons, which lived here by the
Palus Maeotis, and as ( Herod: in his fourth Book of Histories delivers) were
wont to sing their Parents to the grave, invite their best friends, to feast
with their fathers flesh, and use his scull, as a Cup to drink in, at their
lascivious banquets. Who more then the Axiacae? who quenched their thirst with
the blood of him, whom they first slew, as it gushed warm from his wounds. Who
more foolish proud then the Agathyrsi? Who, as God and nature had come short in
their making up, were used to mend their beauty by a deformed painting, and
ugly staining of their bodies with motly colors. Our Picts are supposed by
some to have had hence their original.

(4) It were too much to recite here the other scattered Nations, which
overspread the earth: for she was, as most style her, the officina generis
humani: and sent forth swarms of her brood, which soon fastened themselves,
where ever they set footing. For they were strong of body, bold and heady,
beyond the rule of valor: distinguished not right from wrong in their quarrels,
but reckoned justly their own, what ever they could claspe by force of Arms.
And this they all practiced almost without difference of sex, unless in this,
that their women were most warlike: witness that incomparable story of
Tomyris, who cut off the Persian Cyrus and 200000. more of his soldiers at one
encounter, and cast his head into a cauldron of blood, with this upbraide, for
the slaughter of her son Pergapises: Satiate sanguine, quem sitisti. Nor was
she the single one, that put off the weakness of her sex to take Arms. For
here lived those professed Amazons, which admitted no man into their Camps,
but at set times of necessity, to preserve their race: yet were they a terror
to the world, vexed a great part of Asia the less, and built the renowned
Ephesus, Smyrna, Cuma. Magnesia, etc.

(5) These had their time. The Goths or G^tae succeeded, and were inheritors
as well of their mischievous customs, as illgot possessions: for which they
purchased them the name of Polonei, among their neighbors, thieves and
destroyers: such as were no less grievous to them then their predecessors.
Doubtless a curse of perpetual tyranny lies upon their wicked Empire. For
when next the Tartars came on, the state it self was not much bettered, nor
the innocent which lay near any whit more secured.

(6) These last have been supposed to be the remnant of those ten Tribes which
were led captive by Salmanassar. How likely the reasons are I will not dispute.
But surely, if so, they must have retained some knowledge of the true God, at
least some precepts of civilitie from their forefathers, though never so long
since. For what people can we read of in stories, which have at any time been
enlightened with the truth, and yet afterward fallen into that gross
barbarism, which is now found among the Tartarians? See their Character, which
(as they are by most described) deals impartially; gives them ill fashioned
bodies, answerable to their rude minds, fit houses for so unclean guests.

(7) Their stature is different. The most part have large shoulders, a broad
face, with a crooked nose, deformed countenance, swarty color, hollow eyes,
hairy and untrimmed beard, and head close shaved. Their speech is boystrous,
and clamorous: their noise, in singing, like the yell of Wolves; and endurance
of hunger, thirst, heat, cold, and watching equals them, (in strength of body)
to the most able beast, for it exceeds the common power of a man. Their lust is
without Law. For they except no kindred, but their own mothers, daughters, and
sisters: No Species, for they mix with beasts; No sex, for they are insatiate
Sodomites: and yet take liberty for as many wives, as the can maintain; which
(contrary to our civil courses) they buy of their Parents, in stead of
receiving dowries. Their meat is the raw flesh of horses without regard how
they were killed, or of what diseases they died: sometimes they suck blood from
the living, to appease their hunger and thirst, if (in a journey) they be
distressed for want of food.

(8) Cities they have but few, nor houses, other then moveable tents, made of
beasts skins, which they pitch up by great multitudes, in the form of a
town, and those are called hordes: when the grass is once eaten bare, and the
ground yields not meat for their Cattle, they trudge with bag and baggage to
another quarter: and so in course they wander through the vast Deserts,
unsettled, and indeed impatient to be settled, or rather imprisoned (as they
take it) within any one bounded compass, having the wide world to roame in.
Their chief Arms are Bow and Arrows, which they use most on horseback, for
their more speedy flight: and have them commonly strongly poisoned, for the
more sure mischief to the foe. Their stratagems are downright fraud, and
breach of truth; for they keep no faith with an enemy, regard not any compact
made upon terms of peace; but follow their own sense, and commit what
outrages they can with least danger to themselves.

(9) Their Religion is answerable to their vile customs: Some are Pagans,
others Mahumetanes, yet will not be called Turks but Bersemanni, and their
chief Priest Said, whom they reverence more then their Maker; and admit that
none should touch his hand, but their Kings, and these too with an humble
gesture: their Dukes aspire not above his knee, nor their Nobles higher then
his feet: the rest are happy, if they can but reach at his garment, his horse,
his anything, so simple are they in their superstition: and thus have they
continued either Atheists or false Idolaters, ever since their first entrance
upon this Kingdom in the year 1187. Before, they were not esteemed a Nation
at all, but wild people, without law or reason almost, who lived in the open
fields, and conversed with no other then their own Herds of Cattle.

(10) Their first King was one Chinchis, a man of low birth but high spirit,
impatient of that slavish condition to which he was bred: he brake forth at
last, and drew more by his example, into the thoughts of better fortunes: which
he ceased not to prosecute, till he had made good his purpose, and not only
map of Tartary A NEW MAPE OF TARTARY augmented by. John. Speed. and are to be
sold in pops head Alley by George Humble. Anno. 1626.
settled himself in the throne, but enlarged the dominion of the Tartars,
through a great part of Asia and Europe, which had scarce before heard of any
such people. His first forces he employed upon Tenduch and Argon, bounded with
the Eastern Seas, both of them were then Provinces governed by Vncham, or
Presbyter John. Soon after they got ground in Sarmatia Asiatica, followed
their blow upon Russia, Hungaria, and Polonia; fetched in the Kingdoms of
China, Mein, and Bengala, and left many out-reaches to their successors, which
have not kept entire to this day, as being not able to match so many potent
adversaries, as they have from every quarter of their Kingdom.

(11) The limits are now on the North the Scythian Ocean, on the West the
Muscovian Empire, Sarmatia Europaea, and mare Caspium: on the South Mount
Caucasus, the Kingdom of Persia, and part of India: and on the East partly the
Eastern Seas, and partly the Kingdom of China. Thus divided she contains
five Provinces. (1) Tartaria minor. (2) Asiatica. (3) Antiqua. (4) Zagathai
intra Imaum. (5) Cathai, extra Imaum.

(12) Tartaria minor is called likewise Horda Precopensium, a sort of Tartars
which have their name from one City Precops, but inhabit all those plains
which lie round about the Pontus Euxinus, or Mare Magor, and Palus Maeotis,
including the whole Taurica Chersonesus, so that she extends her limits from
the banks of the River Boristhenes, as far as Tanais. Her chief Province is
the Chersonesus, a Peninsula seventie miles in compass, which took the name
of Taurica from Osyris, who (they say) first plowed this land with a yoke of
Bulls. It was invaded by one Vlanus, from whom the Inhabitants of this whole
Region were sometimes called Vlani, as they were after Crym Tartars, from that
city Crym, once the Kings seat of this Peninsula, though it stood not within
her limits: For her principal Town was (1) Theodosia now Caffa, where there
was heretofore a Colony of Genoaes, till they were dispossessed by Mahomet the
eighth Emperor of the Turks: (2) Eupatoria: (3) Parthenium, etc. The other
Towns of this Tartaria Precopensis, which stand without the Chersonesus, are
Oczacon, which this people took from the Dukes of Lituania, and Tanas, which
stands in the utmost part of this Tartaria, above the mouth of the River
Tanais, some three miles distant. It is called by the Inhabitant Azac, and is a
place of great traffic, and free access from many neighboring Nations.
Near this Southward, begins the Palus Maeotis, reaches as far as the
Taurica Chersonesus, betwixt which and the main land, is the Bosphorus
Cimmerius; and on their South banks flows their Pontus Euxinus, which runs
into the Propontis, but returns not. This Sea is in some places so deep, that
the water appears at top black, and was therefore called Mare nigrum. It might
be thought, that the people living so near the civil parts of Christendom,
were better mannered, then the Asiatike Tartars; But their stubborn rudeness
takes in foul scorn to be taught by any other Nation: and therefore stands
stiffly to their old course of life, in woods, and wild fields, and cease not
to commit continual murders and rapines upon the Countries adjoining, with an
inveterate hate to such, as profess the Name of Christ; in so much, that they
have engaged themselves to pay yearly three hundred Christians, as tribute to
the great Turk; which number they draw out of Polonia, Russia, Lituania,
Walachia, and part of Moscovia.

(13) Asiatica or Tartaria deserta et Moscoritica differs not much from the
ancient Sarmatia Asiatica, which in Ptolemies descriptions is bounded on the
West, with the River Tanais and Palus Maeotis, on the East, with Scythia intra
Imaum, on the North with the Montes Hyperborei, and on the South with the
mountains Coran and Caucasus. The Inhabitants live in Hordes as the rest do,
which remove often, and direct their wandering course by observing the
Pole-starre. In this too their Hordes have divisions, and are known by several
names: The chief is Zaucll which for the most part lies betwixt the rivers
Volga, and Laych, and in regard it is as it were the mother-Hord to the rest,
it was called magna Horda, and her Emperor Vlacham, magnus dominus; for so he
was, and had full power of a Prince, till they were subdued by the Precopenses
in the year one thousand five hundred six, and after by Basilius Duke of
Moscoria. Next to this are the Casanenses, which have their chief City Casan,
upon the River Volga, near the confines of Moscoria. It was once an entire
government to it self, but in the year one thousand five hundred fifty one,
after many victories and revolts, it was fully and irrecoverably vanquished, and
made an addition to the Duke of Moscoria's title. The Inhabitants here are
somewhat more ingenuous then the Precopenses: they till their ground, and in
some places build houses, and practice Merchandise with the Turks and
Moscorites. Not much unlike to these are the Astrachanenses, situate toward the
mare Capium, and have their name from their rich Metropolis Astrachan, twenty
Italian miles distant from the mouth of Volga; both they and it, were subdued
in the year one thousand four hundred ninety four, by the Duke of Moscoria.
Besides these there are many other wild Hordes of Tartars; Of the Nohaicenses,
Thumenenses, Schibaschienses, Casachienses, As^nichanenses, Baschirdi,
Kirgessi, Molgamozani. These last strange Idolaters of the Sun and a piece of a
red clout, hung up before them upon a pole. They live in Caves, and feed for
the most part upon such creatures as creep upon the ground: some of them are
Anthropophagi. And hereabouts is the great lake called Kytay.

(14) Tartaria antiqua, the ancient seat of the Tartars, and Kingdom of Magog,
when both the first Inhabitant was placed by the son of Iapheth, and when
these last Tartars entered, under the command of Chinchis. It was the utmost
portion of the Tartarian Empire, to the frozen Seas on her North, the Scythian
on the East, and the mare de Annian: for it contains many dispersed Hordes, all
(almost) subject to the great Cham of Cathai. In the most Northern tract,
which strikes into the Sea beyond the polar circle dwell the Dani, Neptalitae,
Mecriti, etc. more Southward the Kingdom of Tabor, and the vast desert
Caraecoranum, and the mount Altay, the place of burial for the Tartarian
Emperors. Toward the East Seas and near the Promontory of Tabin, are the
Regions of Arzaret, (which some think to be the very place first possessed by
the remnant of the ten captive Tribes,) and Annian, and Argon, and Tenduch, and
Mongal, and many other, whose people live after the antique manner in tents
moveable, some few Cities they have, poorly built, and as rudely customed.
Among other incivilities they have this fashion, to prostitute their wives and
sisters to such guests, as they would entertain most friendly; and when it was
once forbad by their great Cham, they recovered it again with much suite, and
solemn protestation, that they had not thrived since it was laid aside. The
ground brings forth good store of especial good Rhubarbe.

(15) Zagathai, the same with Scythia intra Imaum, and is bounded upon the West
with the mare Caspium, upon the East with the desert as far as Lop: upon the
North with the River Iaxartus, and upon the South with the Mount Caucasus. It
has the name from their Prince, brother to their great Cham, and contains in
it these several Provinces: (1) Zagatai, where Tamberlane was borne, and first
bare rule in the City Sarmachand, a place enricht by his victories, and
memorable for the death of Clytus, slain by Alexander in his drunken fury. The
seat of the Governor is in Bochara, another Town of the best note here. (2)
Bactria now Cocazzan, the Inhabitants were led by Bessus, which slew Darius,
and the first King was Zoroastes, in the time of Ninus the Assyrian, and twice
tried the fortune of war with him, but was at last vanquished, and his
Kingdom made a Province to the Monarchy: In several ages it has been
tossed into the hands of diverse States, among the rest, the Romans had it once
in their possession, at which time, the Inahbitants received knowledge of the
truth from the mouth of Saint Thomas: but have lost it since by the tyranny of
the Saracens and Tartars. (3) Sogdiana on the North of Bactria where Gropolis
stood, built for a Fort against the Scythians, and standing to the time of
Alexander, who battered it to the ground. (4) Margiana, and (5) Turchestan,
East of the Mare Caspium, and was the seat of the Turks before they brake into
Armenia.

(16) Cathaie, the same with Scythia extra Imaum, and is the Empire of the
great Cham of the Tartars, and true progeny of Chinchis. It is compassed
almost with mountains, and deserts* and is divided from China, only by a
great wall on the South. The soil is exceeding fertile, and the people far
more civil, then in the other parts of Tartaria. Her Provinces are (1)
Cathaie, which is supposed to be the antique seat of the Seres: and is
therefore called Regio Serica: For it sends forth excellent Silks, Stuffes,
and Chamlets, and other rare Commodities, which equalize her (at least in her
own esteem) to the best parts of Europe. Her Metropolis is Cambelu,
twenty-eight miles in compass, besides the suburbs, built foure-square by the
River Polysangus, and enricht from India, China, and other Regions, with all
sorts of Merchandise. Here their great Cham lives, but is buried at the Mount
Altay, and is conveyed thither by a strong guard, which kills all they meet in
the way, and commands them to serve their Lord in the other world: Maginus
reports from Marcus Polus, that while he was in Cathaie, ten thousand persons
lost their lives upon one such occasion. (2) Tangut, which (they say) had the
Art of Printing many hundred years before it was known among us. (3) Camul.
(4) Tanifu. (5) Tebet, not much differing either from themselves, or the other
parts of Tartaria, which belong to the Kingdom of Cathaie.

The Description of the Summer Islands, once called the BERMUDAS.
AS it has pleased God of his especial grace and mercy to deliver this Nation
from that sink of errors, and superstitious practices wherewith the face of
Christendom was overspread: and has caused the truth of Piety and Religion to
shine amongst us, through the effectual Ministry of his Word: In so much that
there is no Nation in the world, to whom the grace of God has (in these latter
times) more abounded, nor where true Religion has been so generally embraced
and maintained, as in this Kingdom: So has he likewise delivered us from many
eminent dangers, and evil practices at home and abroad: has blessed us with
much peace and prosperity: and moreover, has honored us with such notable
favors, that the fame of the worthy exploits, and noble attempts of this
Nation by Sea and by Land, has resounded to the glory of his Name, even to the
farthest parts of the earth; And I beseech God (in the Name of him in whom
alone he is well-pleased) still to continue this his goodness toward us,
although in these times we have just cause to fear the contrary.

Amongst these latter sort of Benefits which God has vouchsafed to this
Nation, I mean that magnanimity and courage, and his divine assistance in the
prosecution of so many notable actions, may worthily, in my judgment (though
slighted at by some) be reckoned that noble enterprise, of planting VIRGINIA
with Christian Religion, and English people. And as he has manifested his
succor and providence many ways, beyond expectation, for the advancement of
this work, so not a little in the discovery of the Summer Islands: for (to omit
other reasons) these are as it were the Key, opening a passage, and making the
way more safe to many parts of this new World, and especially to Virginia: so
that if they had been discovered and inhabited by any such as would oppose the
planting of Virginia: It had proved a matter so difficult and dangerous, that
in all likelihood it had been relinquished ere this time; of these I have
exhibited this description, with the relation following.

These Islands, formerly called the Bermudas, now the Summer Islands, shunned by
Travelers, as most dangerous, and seldom seen by any, except against their
wills; reputed to be rather a hold and habitation of Devils, then any fit place
for men to abide in, were discovered in the year 1609. in manner following,
There was at that time eight Ships send by the Adventurers to Virginia, amongst
which one of the best and strongest was called the Sea-venture, in burden near
300. tun: In this, were their chief Commanders, Sir Thomas Gates, and Sir
George Summers, and with them about 150. persons. And upon the 25. of July the
same year, being at Sea, this Ship called the Sea-venture, was by a fierce and
terrible storm separated from the rest of the Fleet: and withal so shaken and
torn by violence of the weather, that she sprung a leake: whereat the water
came in so fast, that in short time it was seven or eight foot deep within the
hold. Whereupon, for safety of their ship and lives, they fell to pumping,
and bayling out the water with buckets; and continued their labor for three
days, and as many nights without intermission. But then perceiving that they
availed nothing, the water in this space rather increasing, then any whit
abating; Now hopeless of safety, tired and out-worne with labor, watching,
and discomfort, and desirous to refresh their enfeebled spirits with some
little rest before their death; they resolved to cease their labor, and so by
consequence permit their ship to sink. Sir George Summers sitting day and
night all this while upon the Poope, to direct the Ship as evenly as might
be, lest she should be over-turned or swallowed of the waves, espied land, and
thereupon called the Company together, and encouraged them again to pumping,
and casting out water, by which means they kept her up from sinking, and by
Gods providence escaped the rocks, till they gat within half a mile of the
shore, where she stuck fast between two rocks. The extremity of the storm
being then well qualified, they had time to land all their men, most part of
their provision, and to save much of their ships tacking and iron-worke before
she sanke. And thus it pleased God, by this evil, to bring to light a far
greater good, agreeable to that saying, Quae latet, inque boniscess at non
cognita rebus,
Apparet virtus, arguiturque malis.


Having thus escaped the eminent danger of present death, and all safely
arrived: We may well conceive their joy to have been great, especially when
they found there, in great abundance, Fish, Foul, Hogs, and other things for
the sustenance of man, and which they most of all feared, water: but no people,
nor any kind of cattle, except those Hogs, and a few wild Cats; which in
likelihood had swoom ashore out of some Ship cast away upon the coast, and
there increased. They abode there nine months, during which time, with help of
such things as they saved of the Sea venture, and of such as they found in the
Country, they built of Cedar, and rigged fit for the Sea, two Vessels, a Ship
and a Pinnace, and upon the tenth of May 1610. departed toward Virginia,
leaving only two men behind them, and carrying with them store of provision
for the relief of the people there. Upon the 24. of May, they arrived safely
there, and shortly after some of them returned to the Summer Islands again for
a further supply, in the same Ship which they had formerly built there; where
Sir George Summers dying, his men did not according to his last charge given
unto them, return to Virginia; but framed their course for England, leaving
behind them three men, that stayed voluntarily, who shortly after found in
Somerset Island, which is part of Sandys Tribe, a very great treasure in
Ambergris, to the value of nine or ten thousand pound sterling: there has
also been found since diverse times of the best sort.

This new discovery of the Summer Islands, being thus made known in England, to
the Virginian Company, by these men which returned, they sold to some hundred
and twenty persons of the same Company, who obtained a Charter from his
Majesty, and so hold it. And toward the latter end of April, 1612. sent
thither a ship called the Plough, with some sixty persons, to inhabit,
appointing Governor one Master Richard Moore, a man ingenious and careful,
who since died in Sir Walter Rawleyes last voyage to Guiana, (a place as
appears by our modern Geographers, very rich and spacious). But, as I say,
he arrived there about the beginning of July, and found the foresaid three men
that stayed voluntarily, very well. Master Moore spent three years of his
government for the most part in fortifying the Country, and trayning the people
in martial exercises, which custom has been continued by his successors: he
built some nine or ten Forts, placing Ordinance and Munition in them. In his
time, the Lord sent upon the Country a very grievous scourge and punishment,
threatening the utter ruin and desolation of it: That it came from God I need
not strive to prove, especially considering it was generally so acknowledged by
us at that time: The causes and occasions of it I need not name, being very
well known to us all that then lived there, which were about 600. persons,
though shortly after much diminished. I will only show the thing it self,
which was a wonderful annoyance by silly Rats: These Rats coming at the first
out of a Ship, few in number, increased in the space of two year, or less, so
exceedingly, that they filled not only those places where they were first
landed: But swimming from place to place, spread themselves into all parts of
the Country. In so much, that there was no Island, though severed by the Sea
from all other Lands, and many miles distant from the Isles where the Rats had
their original, but was pestered with them. They had their nests almost in
every tree, and in all places their Burrowes in the ground (like Conies) to
harbor in. They spared not the fruits of Plants or Trees, neither the Plants
themselves, but eat them up. When we had set our Corn, they would commonly
come by troops the night following, or so soon as it began to grow, and dig
it up again. If by diligent watching any of it were preserved till it came to
caring, it should then very hardly escape them. Yea, it was a difficult matter
after we had it in our houses, to save it from them, for they became noisome
even to the persons of men. We used all diligence for the destroying of them,
nourishing many Cats, wild and tame, for that purpose; we used Rats-bane, and
many times set fire on the Woods, so as the fire might run half a mile or
more before it were extinct: Every man in the Country was enjoined to set
twelve Traps, and some of their own accord set near a hundred, which they
visited twice or thrice in a night. We trained up our Dogs to hunt them,
wherein they grew so expert, that a good Dog in two or three hours space,
would kill forty or fifty Rattes, and other means we used to destroy them,
but could not prevail, finding them still to increase against us.

And this was the principal cause of the great distress whereunto we were
driven in the first planting of the Country, for these, devouring the fruits
of the earth, kept us destitute of bread a year, or two; so that, when we had
it afterward again, we were so weaned from it, that we should easily neglect
and forget to eat it with our meat. We were also destitute at that time of
Boats, and other provision for Fishing. And moreover, Mr. Moore had received
warning from England, that he should expect the Spaniard that year, yet they
came not, but with two Ships, which attempting to come in, and having their
Boat before map of the Bermudas Mappa AESTIVARUM Insularum alias Bermudas
dictarum, ad ostia Mexicani aestuarij iacentium in Latitudine Graduum 32:
minutorum 25. Ab Anglia. Londino Scilicet versus I^^ notum 3300 Miliaribus
Anglicanis, et a Roanoack (qui locus est in Virginia) versus Euro notum 500
Mil. accu(...)
A Mapp of the SUMMER (...)nds once called the ^^rmudas Lying at the mouth
(...) the bay of Mexico in the ^titude of 32. degr. 25. mi: ^^^tant from
England viz from ^^^don toward the west south^^st 3300. miles And from ^^anoack
in Virginia to^^rd the east south east ^^0 miles exactlie Surveyed.
them to sound the way, were shot at by the said Master Moore from Kings
Castle, and as we supposed one of them stricken thorough, whereupon they
presently departed. But (as I say) this expectation of them caused us (though
in great necessity) to hasten the fortifications of the Country. All these
jointly (but principally the Rats) were the causes of our distress: for being
destitute of food, many died, and we all became very feeble and weak, whereof
some being so, would not; others could not stir abroad to seek relief, but
died in their houses: such as went abroad were subject, through weakness, to
be suddenly surprised with a disease we called the Feages, which was neither
pain nor sickness, but as it were the highest degree of weakness, depriving
us of power and ability for the execution of any bodily exercise, whether it
were working, walking, or what else. Being thus taken, if there were any in
company that could minister any relief, they would straight-wayes recover,
otherwise they died there: Yet many after a little rest would be able to walk
again, and then if they found any succor were saved.

About this time, or immediately before, came thither a company of Ravens,
which continued with us all the time of this mortality, and then departed.
There were not before that time, nor since (so far as I hear) any more of
them seen there. And this, with some other reasons of more moment, moved many
to think that there were some other Islands near the Sommer-Ilands, between
Virginia, and it; and Master Moore (in his time, with some others of us) went
forth in a Boat so far as then we could conveniently, of purpose to discover
it: Since then, it has been endeavored by others, and is yet (as I hear) to
be further attempted. And howsoever I am persuaded (for certain causes which I
cannot here relate) there is no such thing; Yet would I not dis-animate any
from this enterprise, for if they find any, their labors will be well
recompensed; and though they find none, yet might they discover those parts so
well, that the passage to and from Virginia would be more safe and easy.

But to return from whence we have digressed: The extremity of our distress
began to abate a little before Master Moors time of Government was expired,
partly by supplies out of England, of victual and provision for fishing, and
partly by that rest and liberty we then obtained, the Country being
fortified. Yet the Rats increased and continued almost to the end of Captain
Tuckers time, although he was provident and industrious to destroy them, but
toward the end of his time it pleased God (by what means it is not well
known) to take them away, in so much that the wild Cats and many Dogs which
lived on them were famished, and many of them leaving the woods, came down to
the houses, and to such places where they use to garbish their Fish, and became
tame. Some have attributed this destruction of them to the increase of wild
Cats, but that is not likely they should be so suddenly increased rather at
that time, then in the four years before. And the chief occasion of this
supposition was because they saw such companies of them leave the Woods, and
show themselves for want of food. Others have supposed it to come to pass by
the coldness of the weather, which notwithstanding is never so great there, as
with us in March, nor scarce as it is in April, except it be in the wind;
besides, the Rats wanted not feathers of young Birds and Chickens which they
daily killed, and of Palmeto Moss (as we call it) to build themselves warm
nests out of the wind, as usually they did. Neither does it appear that the
cold was so mortal to them, seeing they would ordinarily swim from place to
place, and be very fat even in the midst of Winter. It remains then, that as
we know God does sometimes effect his will without subordinate and secondary
causes, and sometimes against them: So we need not doubt but that in the speedy
increase and spreading of these Vermin; as also, in the preservation of so
many of us by such weak means as we then enjoyed, and especially in the
sudden removal of this great annoyance, there was joined with, and besides the
ordinary and manifest means, a more immediate and secret work of God.

Now to proceed, Master Moors time of government being expired, Captain
Tucker succeeded, arriving there about mid-May, 1616. who likewise governed
(according to the custom) three years; which time he spent, for the most
part, in husbanding the Country, planting and nourishing all such things as
were found either fit for Trade, or for the sustentation and use of the
Inhabitants, wherein he traveled with much diligence and good success,
sending to some parts of the Indies for Plants and Fruits: he also added to the
fortifications, and made some enclosures. In his time, viz. in the year 1617.
was sent a Ship and provision, with men of skill, for the killing of Whales;
but they arrived there too late, to wit, about the midst of April, so that
before they could make ready their Shallops, and fit themselves, the principal
season for Whale-fishing was past: For the Whales come thither in January, and
depart again toward the latter end of May: yet they struck some, but found them
so lively, swift, and fierce after they were stricken, that they could take
none. They yield great store of Oil, as appeared by one that drove to shore
on Sommerset Island, in Sandys Tribe: and by another that we found not far
from thence dead upon a Rock.

I also received by Captain Tucker, directions from the Adventurers to divide
the Country, and to Assign to each Adventurer his shares or portion of land:
and withal, a description, with notes touching the manner how they would have
it done, as they had formerly determined by lot. Which thing I did with all
faithfulness and diligence, the manner of it does above appear, and is more
largely manifested in a Book of the Survey of the Country, exhibited to the
Right Honorable his Majesty's Council, and the Court of Adventurers for these
parts. And then began this, which was before as it were an unsettled and
confused Chaos (I mean as touching a Plantation, for considered only as a
Regiment it was otherwise) to receive a convenient disposition, form, and
order, and to become indeed a Plantation; for though the Country was small,
yet they could not have been conveniently disposed and well settled, without a
true description and Survey made of it; and again every man being settled where
he might constantly abide, they knew their business, and fitted their
household accordingly. They built for themselves and their families, not Tents
or Cabins, but more substantial houses: they cleared their grounds, and
planted not only such things as would yield them their fruits in a year, or
half a year: but all such too, as would afford them profit after certain
years, etc. So that in short time after, even before the expiration of
Captain Tuckers government, the Country began to aspire and nearly to
approach unto that happiness and prosperity wherein now is flourishes. For
may it not justly be accounted happiness and prosperity, for men to live
where they enjoy the means of true religion and salvation, to wit, the sincere
ministry of the Word and Sacraments? where the government is good, without
rigor and oppression, the place healthful and temperate? where they are freed
from all extreme care and toil? where they have food in abundance, and very
good, with other things needful to the body? and where they have commodities
meet for Trade, by which they may better and advance their estates? all which
and more is largely verified in the present estate of that Colony, whatsoever
some maliciously minded, or to evil ends suborned, may say to the contrary, so
that there may seem to be a restoration of that golden age so much spoken of.

The Governor now there resident, is one Captain Butler, for Captain Tucker
departing thence in December, 1618. left in his place, Captain Kendall, (who
also was one that supplied the same place in the interim, between Master
Moors time and Captain Tuckers) and has spent some nine or ten years in the
Country. But in the year 1619. about Midsommer, the Adventurers sent thither
as Governor for three years, (according to the custom) the said Captain
Butler, and four Ships, with some five hundred persons, there being at that
time in the Country only five hundred more: for by the space of four years,
to wit, during the later part of Master Moors government, and all the time of
Captain Tuckers, they had sent few thither, being almost hopeless of the
place, by reason of the Rats: But since there have been sent many Companies
more then have come to my knowledge. In so much that I understand the Country
is now almost fully Planted and Inhabited.

Thus I have briefly related, (so far forth as has come to my knowledge and
remembrance) every thing of most note and importance that has befallen in the
first discovery and planting of these Islands, till this present. I have
labored to contract my self, yet have exceeded my extended limits. Now I must
speak something of the Country it self: which consists of a company of
small Islands, situate and formed as above appears. It lies in the Western
Ocean, in that part of the world lately discovered, and called AMERICA, or the
NEW WORLD, vulgarly, the WEST INDIES: It has Latitude, or elevation (as is
abovesaid) 32. Degrees 25. minutes, which is almost the same with the
Maderaes, or rather more Southward. Now the better to manifest the situation
of it, I have reduced the whole into a narrow room, placing it, as above
appears at the Center or middle of the Fly or Compass: and withal have
made an appearance of the Seacoast of VIRGINIA, as also of sundry other places
of Note adjacent, according to their true position and distance from it, as
near as I could gather; so that the Compass shows how any of those places
bear from the SUMMER ISLANDS: and if you measure by the parts of the graduated
Meridian, from the middle of the Compass to any of those places, you have
their distance. For every Degree is twenty Leagues, or sixty Miles.

The Country is round about environed with Rocks; which to the Northward,
Westward, and South-West-ward, extend farther then has been yet discovered:
By reason of these Rocks the Country is very strong: For there is only two
places (and scarce two, except to such as know them well) where shipping may
safely come in: and those places are very well fortified: but within its room
to entertain a Royal Fleet. The Rocks in most places appear at a low water:
neither are they much covered at a high water; For it ebbs and flows there,
not above five foot. The shore it self (for the most part) is a Rock: so
hardened by the Sun, Wind, and Sea, that it is not apt to be worn by the
waves; whose violence is also broken by the Rocks, before they come at the
shore. The Mould is of diverse colors; neither Clay, nor Sand, but a mean
between. The Red, which resembles Clay, is worst; the whitish, resembling
Sand, and the blackish Clay, is good: the Brown between them both (which they
call white, because there is mingled with it as it were a white Marle) is best.
Under the mould two or three foot deep, and sometimes less, is a kind of
white, hard substance, which they call the Rock: the Trees usually fasten their
roots in it; and draw their nourishment from it: Neither is it indeed Rock or
Stone, nor so hard, though for the most part harder then Chalk, nor so white,
but Pumice-like and spungie, easily receiving and containing much water: I have
seen, in some places, Clay found under it. It seems to be engendered of the
Rainwater, draying through the earth, and drawing with it of his substance,
unto a certain depth where it congeales. The hardest kind of it (which is
commonly under the red ground) is not so spungie, nor re^^ins much water; but
lveth in the ground in Quarries, as it were thick Slates one upon another: and
there is some chinks or crevices betwixt one lare and another, through which
the water has passage: so that in such places there is scarce found any fresh
water. For all, or the most part of their fresh water (whereof they have good
store) comes out of the Sea; drayning through the sand, or through the fore
said substance, which they call the Rock, and leaving his salt behind, it
becomes fresh: Sometimes we dug wels of fresh water, within four or five
pases of the Seaside; sometimes further off. The most part of them would ebb
and flow, as the Sea did, and be level or little higher then the superficies
of the Sea.

The air is most commonly clear, very temperate, moist, with a moderate heat,
very healthful, and apt for generation and nourishing of all things; so that
there is scarce any thing transported from hence thither, but it yields a far
greater increase; if it be any living thing, becomes fatter and better-liking,
then here. By this means the Country was so replenished with Hens and Turkies,
within the space of three or four years, that being neglected, many of them
forsook the houses, and became wild, and so lived in great abundance. The
like increase there is of Hogs and other Cattle, according to their kinds.
There seems to be a continual Spring, which is the cause that some few things
come not to that maturity and perfection, as were requisite. And though the
Trees do shed their leaves, yet they are always full of green. The Corn is
the same which they use almost in all parts of the West Indies, to wit, Maiz:
which, to such as are used to it, is more hearty and nourishing then our
English Wheat, and yields a far greater increase, as a pound, sometimes, of
one or two grains. Of this Corn, and diverse other things without either
plowing or digging the ground, they have two harvests every year: for they set
about March, which they gather in July; and again in August, which is ripe in
December: And little slips of Fig Trees, and Vines, do usually bear fruit in
less then a year after they be planted, sometimes in half a year. The like
fertility it has in other things.

There is scarce at any time to be perceived either frost or snow, nor any
extreme heat; for there is almost always some wind stirring, which clears
and cools the air. Their Summers and Winters observe the same times with
ours, but their longest days and nights are shorter then ours in England by
two hours and almost a half: as also their shortest days and nights are as
much longer then ours: for their longest days and nights are about fourteen
hours, and their shortest ten. When it is Noone with us, it is Morning with
them; and when it is about five of the clock in the Evening with us, it is high
noone with them: so that whilst the Sun declines with us, it rises with
them, as also it does in Virginia. It is apt to thunder and lightning all the
year, oft-times more terrible then in England; but no man, or other living
creature have I known hurt by it. There is no venomous creature in the
Country: the yellow Spider which is there, making her web as it were of silk,
and bringing forth her young (as the Alchimists their stone) of Eggs like
little balls of quicksilver, is not perceived to be any whit venomous. Yet
there is a Plant (that clymeth trees like Ivy, the leaf also of the same
color, but in shape like the Vine) that is somewhat venomous, but of no great
force.

There is great store and variety of Fish, and so good that these parts of the
World afford not the like; which being for the most part unknown to us, each
man gave them names as they best liked: As one kind they called Rock-fish,
another Groopers, others Progy-fish, Hog-fish, Angel-fish, Cavallyes,
Yellow-tayles. Spanish Makarell, Mullets, Breame, Conny-fish, Morrayes,
Sting-tayles, Flying fish, etc. The like they did by the Foul, as Cohooes,
Sand Birds, Herons, Duck and Teale, Pemlicoes, Castleboobies, Hawks, etc. The
Country, when we first began the Plantation, was all over-growne with woods
and Plants of several kinds: and to such kinds as were unknown to us (which
were the most part) we also gave names; such as were known retaining their old
names: as Cedars, Palme-toes, Black-wood, White-wood, Yellow-wood,
Mulbery-trees, Stopper-trees, Laurel and Olive Trees, Mangrowes, Pepper-trees,
Yellow-berry-weed, Red-weed: These and many others, we have naturally growing
in the Country. But since it has been inhabited, there has been brought
thither, as well from the Indies, as from other parts of the World, sundry
other Plants, as Vines of several kinds, Sugarcanes, Fig Trees, Apple Trees,
Oranges, Lymons, Pomegranets, Plantaines, Pines, Parsnips, Raddishes,
Artichokes, Potatoes, Cassado, Indico, and many other: In so much that it is
now become as it were some specious Garden or Nurcery of many pleasant and
profitable things.

Now if I should proceed to a more special Narration, and speak of all these
Plants, Birds, Fishes, and other remarkable things particularly: I could not
but be much larger then were any ways expedient in this place. Besides, I have
long since understood, that Captain Butler (the Governor there resident) has
undertaken to write of these and the like things, a peculiar Treatise. This
therefore that is spoken touching the nature of the Country in general, shall
suffice. Only to give the Reader some taste and satisfaction in that kind, I
will make choice of two particulars, whereof I will speak, not so largely as
the thing requires; but so far forth as will be meet and convenient in this
place. The first shall be the Tortoys, which they call a Turckle: which having
some affinity and resemblance with Fishes, Beasts, and Fowls, shall serve in
stead of an History of them all. The other shall be that which they call the
prickled Peare-tree: which participating in nature, and resembling in some
things, Herbs, and in other, Trees; shall likewise serve in stead of the
natural History of them both.

And first of the Turckle, not regarding (for brevities sake) the large
discourses of others; I will only write what I have seen and known my self.
They are in the shape of their body like a Crab-fish; and have four ^innes:
they are as great as three or four men can carry: the upper part of them is
covered with a great shell, which we call a galley-patch weighing (as I take
it) half a hundred weight: that flesh that cleaves to the inside of this
being roasted against the fire, is excellent meat, almost like the marrow of
Beef; but the shell it self harder then horn: she has also a shell on her
belly, not so hard, but being boiled it becomes soft like the sinews or
gristle of Beef; and good meat. These live in the Sea, spending the
Springtime, and part of Summer about these Islands: but the residue of the
year, we know not where. They are like to Foul in respect of smalnesse and
fashion of their heads and necks: which are wrinckled like a Turkies, but
white, and not so sharp billed. They also breed their young of Eggs which
they lay. They resemble Beasts, in that their flesh is like Veale, but more
hard and solid; and they feed always upon grass growing at the bottom of the
water, neither can they abide any longer under water, the^ they hold their
breath; which the old ones will do long: but the young ones being chased to
and fro, cannot continue two minutes without coming up to breathe. Shortly
after their first coming in, the Male and Female couple, which we call cooting;
this they continue some three days together, during which time, they will
scarce separate though a Boat come to them, nor hardly when they are smitten.
Not long after, the she-Turckle comes up by night upon some sandy bay; and
further up then the water uses to flow, she digges a hole with her finne in
the sand, some two foot deep; and there coming up several nights lays her
eggs, some half a bushel (which are about the bigness of a Hens egg, and
round as a ball) and each time covers them with sand very curiously; so that a
man shall hardly find the place. These eggs (as it seems) are afterward
hatched by heat of the Sun, and then by the providence of God (the means as yet
unknown to us) are brought out of the earth, for we could never perceive that
she returns any more to them, and yet in likelihood they remain not long in
the earth after they are hatched, because (as I have before said) they cannot
live without breathing. We sometimes see of the young ones no bigger then a
man's hand, which some fish will devour. They grow slowly, and seem to have a
very long life; they will sleep on the top of the water, and were wont to sleep
often on the land, till the Country was peopled; they will also live out of
the water some three weeks, and that without meat, but mourn and pine a way;
they are weary witty. Being on the land turned upon their backs, they can no
more without some help or advantage recover themselves; by which means when
they come on shore to lay their eggs, they are easily taken, as also they are
when they are cooting. But otherwise we take them for the most part by night,
making a great light in a Boat, to which they will sometimes swim, and seldom
shun: so that a man standing ready with a staff in his hand, which has at one
end a socket, wherein is an Iron less then a man's finger, foure-square and
sharp, with a l^ne fastened to it, he strikes this Iron into the upper shell
of the Turckle, it sticks so fast, that after she has a little tired her self
by swimming to and fro, she is taken by it. They will live, the head being cut
off, four and twenty hours; so that if you cut the flesh with a knife, or
touch it, it will tremble and shrink away. There is no meat will keep longer
either fresh or salt.

But leaving these, we will now come to speak of the prickled pears, which are
a fruit growing in these Islands, in such places as are scarce fit for any thing
else, namely, upon rocks and cliffes, and commonly by the Seaside, as if the
salt water did somewhat help to the generation and nourishing of them. The
tree seems to grow certain years before it bears fruit, and then to
continue bearing, very many years, having almost all the year long fruit upon
it. And although we call this a tree, yet has it scarce any body or branches,
but consists in a manner wholly of leaves and fruit, soft and brittle. But
because there is a very learned Writer has made a description (as it may
seem) of this Plant, wherein he has given some light of that profit and
commodity that may arise of it; I have thought good to translate the same into
English, and here to insert it, which is as follows. Card de variet. Rerum.

The Purple or Scarlet dye has always been of greatest value, and it is
twofold, to wit, of Wool, which in times past was thus colored, with the
Juice of a There is in the Summer Islands (as I have seen, to the Westward of
Port-royall) such a kind of fish yielding a purple Iuice^ but I do not so well
remember it as to set down certainly whether it be the purple fish be here
speaks of.
fish, whereof we have spoken where we treated of fishes. Of late it has been
dyed with This seems to be of a kind of Palm, but much different from the
Palmetoes that are in the Som^er Islands.
Coccus, whereof we have also spoken in his place. But Silk as we have said,
was dyed with certain knots of He means not Cutchene^e which is a fly
brought from the Indies, without heads; but little worms, breeding on the
root of a Plant called Bibenella.
Bibenella: though now for the most part with the grain coming of the This is
that we call the prickled pear.
Indian Fig: hereof we made mention whilst we spoke of Aloes, as also where we
spoke of Silk dye: It will not be amiss now to gather them both into one. The
Indian Fig is so called, because in respect of the form of the fruit the
greatness of his leaves it resembles a Fig: But I will describe it more
accurately; for when I was at Genoway, I there saw it at a certain Physicians
house, where also I first saw the Indian Balm. This Indian Fig is called by
them of Mexico, where there is great store of them, Nuchtly, and the tree it
self Nopai: But the Indians of Hispaniola call both the tree and the fruit
Tuna. Some also do account that which they call Pythaya, to be of the same
kind: because in these two things they agree, namely, in that they have both a
very bright red color, stayning the hands, and coloring the urine, that it
seems to be blood: they both also have red grains within the fruit as a Fig,
and both grow on prickled Plants: but they differ in the fruit; that which they
call Pythaya, is not crowned as the other which they call Tuna is: but in form
resembles a Quince, being of a blood red-colour, and a very hard rynde.

The Plant therefore that bears the foresaid fruit, called Tuna or Nuchtly,
has his leaves a foot long, and half a foot broad, and near an Inch thick,
very green and full of long stiff* prickles, almost of an ash color. The best
fruit are those which are white, next, those which are yellow; in the next
place those which are of changeable color: the last and worst sort of these
There are only of these two last (...) in the Summer Islands.
are those which are green, and any of these sorts are usually eaten without
fear.

The fruit it self is very like a You must understand it to be meant whilst
the Figs are on the trees.
Fig, as well in respect of the limmernesse and softness of the rynde, as also
in form or shape, save that it is somewhat longer: and has as it were a crown
on the top, like Medlars.

The leaves grow one out of another without any stalk: and out of the sides of
the leaves grows the fruit, without stalks also, and without such Thorns as
are on the leaves. Some taste like pears, some like grapes, and have within them
those graynes which (as I have said) they use for the dying of Silk. This
fruit does cool as does the juice of their leaves, which they use for water.
The leaves therefore (as it is evident) are likened to Fig Tree leaves, only
in respect of their greatness: the fruit it self is likened to a Fig, in
respect of the thickness and softness of the rynde, and because of the
graynes within it; and hence it has been fitly called the Indian Fig. Now
whether Silk be dyed of these graynes alone, or that some other things be used
with them, it imports not much, seeing we intend not so much to teach the
adjuncts of this or that particular, which are subject to alteration and
change, but rather the things themselves, according to their causes and
reasons, which are unchangeable: for all things by tract of time, and many
things by the diversity of Countries are altered; yet the reason still
remains. As if any thing else should retain this bright red color, and be
also in substance somewhat subtle and condensate: Then having strength and
efficacy it shall be fit for the dying of Silk, or Wool. But if this Plant
could be produced He speaks of Italy.
here, it would prove a thing of marveilous profit: for they dye with this
Drug, not silk alone, but likewise wool, calling it a Crimson or Scarlet dye.

This his description of the Indian Fig called, as it seems by the Indians, in
some places, Tuna, in others Nuchtly, exactly agrees with that fruit which in
the Summer Islands we call the prickled Pear: Neither is there any such
difference as can make them appear to be of diverse kinds. I understand that
the like fruit is also growing in Virginia, I have seen of the leaves of this
tree, being full of great prickles, hanged round about the walls of a Storehouse
to preserve the Come that was therein the Rats: which after a month or two
dropping down, have again grown and produced other trees by the walls side.
The leaves are full of Juice, clear and clammy as the whites of Eggs. Now
touching the dying of Silk or Scarlet with this fruit I have known no trial
to be made: but this light being given, I doubt not but some will exercise
their skill that ways: Two things are herein requisite, first that it may have
his perfect maturity and ripeness; and then that it be used in such manner,
and with such materials as are convenient: whether Arsnick, Allome, Tartar,
alias Argoll, Wormeseed, the scum of Soap, the water of Bran, or what else: and
yet perchance the diversity of Regions may make all frustrate. For I have found
by experience setting the seeds here in England, the Plant to degenerate so
much that it could scarce be known from a Thistle. Much more might be spoken
hereof, which I let pass, that I might draw to an end.

Now because (as I have before said) these Islands may seem, as well in the
strange manner of their discovery as in respect of their strength and
situation, to be ordained and reserved by the providence of God, not so much
for themselves (being small) as for the more easy and commodious planting of
other parts of this new World; and especially of Virginia. And because by the
wisdom and discretion of his Majesty's Counsel for that place, it has been
lately ordered and foreseen that the Summer Islands might have some necessary
coherence, and as it were dependancy upon Virginia, (so that look how much
land any man does properly possess in the Summer Islands, he has at least
four times so much in Virginia) the care also and oversight of them both being
committed to the right Honorable the Earl of Southampton: (whose Honorable
affection and endeavors as they have every way appeared for the good of this
Commonwealth, so particularly in the government of these affairs: Insomuch
that they are on a sudden grown to thrice so great strength and prosperity as
formerly they had.) I say for these causes, having my self spent certain
years in the one place, and being sometimes conversant with such as have lived
in the other, I think it fit to express my opinion truly as I am persuaded of
these Plantations, and so explaining it by two or three arguments to conclude.
I say therefore the Countries being free to be possessed, affording things
meet for household provision and trade, and being also healthful and agreeable
to the constitutions of our Countrymen; all which of the one I know and can
affirm, and of the other understand no less: the planting of them (besides
the benefit of the adventurers) must needs add much to the strength,
prosperity and glory of this Kingdom, would prove a singular benefit to the
native Inhabitants of Virginia; and also to such our Countrymen as should go
over, and in all tend to the glory of God. For first, touching such as go
over. It is not unknown that amongst other things wherein God has prospered
our Nation, this is one: that he has caused us to multiply and increase
exceedingly; Insomuch that his blessing pronounced touching the Jews, that
their children should say, Isa. 40.20. The place is straight for me, give place
to me that I may dwell, may seem after a sort to be verified and accomplished
in us at this day: so that although many thousands were aspared, the land would
remain abundantly replenished: which being so, if such as lack means here (as
many do) to support the charges incident to themselves and their families, in
such sort as were requisite, to go over thither; they are forthwith endowed
with lands and employments, whence through their industry they may raise their
estates. And it is certain there are very few there, but they maintain
themselves far better, and with less care and pains then they did or could
do here. Again, if they be such as have means to purchase land there, and
transport servants at their own charge, they have in their lands large
penny-worths, and for their servants many profitable employments. Secondly, the
benefit that should redound to the native Inhabitants of Virginia is very
great, whilst by this means they might in time be reclaimed from their rude
conditions, and savage kind of life, to more humanity and knowledge, being
instructed in Arts and Occupations; and furnished with sundry instruments, so
necessary in humane Societies, that without them we could not well subsist: and
finally be reduced to a more civil and orderly form of government. But
chiefly and in the first place, those silly creatures sitting now in darkness,
and in the shadow of death: might be delivered from darkness to light, and from
the power and tyranny of Satan, unto God, by faith in Christ. Lastly, as it
would add much to the fame and glory of this Kingdom, so would it to the
strength and prosperity thereof: whilst we might be served from thence with
sundry commodities which we now obtain from other places with the exporting
and diverting hence an infinite treasure, and that many times to the enriching
of the enemies of our State and Religion: as Currants, and other fruit, Oils,
Gummes, Cotten-wooll, Sugar, Rich Furs, Caviary and Cordage, Masts, Plancks,
Boards, Pitch, Tar, Potashes, and Sope-ashes, Hemp, Flax, Iron, Salt,
Silks, Woad, Madder, Indico, and other Drugs for Dies, and Physic, etc. For
it is not to be doubted, but these and the like things do cost this Kingdom
yearly many Millions of wealth. Some men will say, though these things or any
them were brought us from these Plantations, yet would there be little saved to
this Commonwealth, because they would and in equity might expect to receive
their price for them; but the difference is very great: First, because we might
have them from thence at lower Rates, the voyage being shorter and less
dangerous then in any of the others: Secondly the customs and other duties
which we now pay in Foreign Countries would there be saved; for though they
were as great as they are in those countries, yet would they wholly redound to
the benefit of his Majesty, and consequently to the good of this Kingdom:
Thirdly, forasmuch as those which are Adventurers thither, live and have their
estates here in Englaud, and condition with such as they send over at their
charge upon their lands, to receive from them the ratable moyetie of all such
profits as shall be raised on their lands: It is evident that a great part of
those commodities would be brought in without any charge to this Kingdom,
whilst there should be neither money, nor wares exported for them: And so they
would become as it were the natural commodities of our own Country. Moreover
the Planters there are our Contrymen, members of the same Commonwealth with
us: who may no doubt in short time deserve of the Indians so well, in the
things before mentioned, and succouring them in their wants, etc. as may move
them freely without compulsion or injury, to resign themselves to his
Majesty's protection and government. And many other benefits are like to arise
of this worthy action, which might stir up forwardness in the prosecution of
it. But let this suffice to be spoken in this place.

BRITANNIA
THE THEATER OF THE EMPIRE OF GREAT BRITAIN: Presenting AN EXACT GEOGRAPHY of
the Kingdoms of ENGLAND, SCOTLAND, IRELAND, and the ISLES adjoining: With The
Shires, Hundreds, Cities and Shire towns, within ye Kingdom of ENGLAND,
divided and described By JOHN SPEED.

IMPRINTED AT LONDON Anno Cum Privilegio 1627

Are to be sold by George Humble at the Whit horse in Pope's Head Alley

A BRITAIN


A ROMAN


A SAXON


A DANE


A NORMAN




THE BRITISH EMPIRE CONTAINS AND HAS NOW IN ACTVALL possession, those many,
and renowned KINGDOMS, and PRINCIPALITIES DESCRIBED IN THIS OUR THEATER.
THE KINGDOM OF ENGLAND, anciently containing seven famous Kingdoms: 1 The
Kingdom of Kent. 2 The Kingdom of South Saxons. 3 The Kingdom of
West Saxons. 4 The Kingdom of East Saxons. 5 The Kingdom of Northumbrians. 6
The Kingdom of East Angles. 7 The Kingdom of Mercia.


THE KINGDOM OF SCOTLAND, anciently containing these three Kingdoms: 1 The
Kingdom of Scots. 2 The Kingdom of Picts. 3 The Kingdom of the Isles.


THE PRINCIPALITY OF WALES, anciently containing these three Kingdoms: 1 The
Kingdom of North Wales. 2 The Kingdom of Powys-land. 3 The Kingdom of
South Wales.


THE KINGDOM OF IRELAND, anciently containing these five Kingdoms: 1 The
Kingdom of Mounster. 2 The Kingdom of Leinster. 3 The Kingdom of Meth. 4 The
Kingdom of Connaught. 5 The Kingdom of Vlster.


THE KINGDOM OF MAN, with the Isles adjoining.

THE ACHIEVEMENT OF OUR SOVEREIGN KING JAMES AS HE NOW BEARS With the ARMS
of the Several kings that have aunciently reigned within his now Dominions
DIEV ET MON DROIT
HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE.


TO THE MOST HIGH AND MOST POTENT MONARCH, JAMES, OF GREAT BRITAIN, FRANCE, AND
IRELAND KING; THE MOST CONSTANT AND MOST LEARNED DEFENDER OF THE FAITH;
INLARGER AND UNITER OF THE BRITISH EMPIRE; RESTORER OF THE BRITISH NAME;
ESTABLISHER OF PERPETUAL PEACE, IN CHURCH AND COMMONWEALTH; PRESIDENT OF ALL
PRINCELY VIRTUES AND NOBLE ARTS:

JOHN SPEED, HIS MAJESTY'S MOST lowly and most loyal Subject and Servant,
consecrateth these his Labors, though unworthy the aspect of so high an
Imperial Majesty.

DIEV ET MON DROIT
HONISOITQVI MALYPENSE


TO THE WELL-AFFECTED AND FAVOVRABLE READER.
SO great was the attempt to assay the erection of this large and laborious
THEATER, whose only plat-forme might well have expected the readiest hand of
the best Artist, that even in the entrance of the first draught, as one
altogether discouraged, I found my self far unfit and unfurnished both of
matter and means, either to build, or to beautify so stately a project. But
how the Lord then composed my mind for the Work, or rather how his own great
power would be seen in my weakness, is now in some measure made manifest by
raising the frame thereof to this height, which here from the Press shows
his aspect unto the world. But with what content to thy eye (gentle Reader) I
stand in suspense, so many Master Builders having in this subject gone before
me, and I the least, not worthy to hew (much less to lay) the least stone in
so beautiful a Building: neither can I for my heedlesse presumption allege
any excuse, unless it be this, that the zeal of my Countries glory so
transported my senses, as I knew not what I undertook, The principal motives
of Writing.
until I saw the charges thereof (by others bestowed) to amount so high, as I
held it a conscience to frustrate their designements; wherein albeit, it may be
objected that I have put my Sickle into other men's Corn, and have laid my
Building upon other men's Foundations (as indeed who can do otherwise,
especially in a subject of this nature, seeing that the wisest of Kings
witnesses, Eccles. 1.9.
that there is nothing new under the Sun) yet let this in part suffice for my
defense, that in the work of the Tabernacle there was more metals used then
the orient Gold, Exodus 31.
and more workmen employed then Aholiab and Bezaleel; Exodus 25.
neither did all the Israelites offer to that most glorious Work, Gold, Silver,
Onix-stones, Purple, Scarlet, and fine Linen: but some of them, Brass, Wood,
Goats-haire, Rams fels, and Badgers skins, as necessary implements in their
several Services. Mark. 12.42.
If then, with the poor Widow, I cast in my mite, and by mine own travel
add somewhat more then has been already divulged, let me crave thy
acceptance, where I have done right, and thine assistance to correct where I
miss, which I trust may as well be hoped as requested, thy love with mine
being alike obliged unto this our native Land. Whose beauty and benefits, not
afar off, Exodus 34.
as Moses saw Canaan from Pisgah, but by mine own travels through every
Province of England and Wales, Things described upon a personal survey of all
England and Wales.
mine eyes have beheld: and whose Climate, Temperature, Plenty and Pleasures,
make it to be as the very Eden of Europe (pardon me I pray, if affection pass
limits) for the store of Corn in the Champian, and of Pasturage in the lower
Grounds, presses the Cart under the sheaves to the Barn, and fills the
Coffers of their possessors.

Neither are the faces of the Mountains and Hills only spread over with
infinite Herds and sorts of Cattle, Amos 2.13.
but their intrals also are in continual travel, and continually delivered of
their rich Progenies of Copper, Lead, and Iron, Marble, Crystal, Jet,
Alabaster; yea the most wonder-working Loadstone; to say nothing either of
Cannol and Sea coal, as rich for profit, and as needful for use, or of the
goodly Quarries of choicest stone, as necessary for strength, as estimable for
beauty. Her Seas and Rivers so stored with Fish, and her Fels and Fens so
replenished with wild Foul, that they even present themselves for ready prey
to their takers: briefly, every soil is so enriched with plenty and
pleasures, as the Inhabitants think there is no other Paradise in the earth
but where themselves dwell. The true plot of the whole Land, and that again
into parts in several Cards, What is performed in this Work.
are here described, as likewise the Cities and Shire-townes are inserted,
whereof some have been performed by others, without Scale annexed, the rest by
mine own travels, and unto them for distinctions sake, the Scale of Paces,
accounted according to the Geometrical measure, five foot to a pace I have
set; but in this employment I am somewhat to excuse my self from wrongs
conceived done unto more beautiful and richer Corporatious, which in this
survey are in silence over-passed, and places of less note and frequency
described: For satisfaction whereof (good Reader) understand my purpose,
according to the Title prefixed, which in this Island (besides other things) is
to show the situation of every City and Shire-towne only. Cities and
Shire-townes.
So that without injury to all, I could not insert some, though oftentimes it
grieved me much to leave such beautiful places untouched: which
notwithstanding being well known so to be, gives no little glory to the Land
in general, so to be replenished with store and choice, as hardly can be
judged which may be omitted. The Shires divisions into Lathes, Hundreds,
Wapentakes and Cantreds, Shire-divisions.
according to their ratable and accustomed manner, I have separated, and under
the same Title that the record bears, in their due places distinguished;
wherein by the help of the Tables annexed, any City, Town, Borough, Hamlet,
Tables to find all names in the Maps.
or place of note may readily be found, and whereby safely may be affirmed,
that there is not any one Kingdom in the world so exactly described, as is
this our Island of Great Britain, that only excepted which Josua conquered, and
into Tribes divided. The Arms of such Princes and Nobles as have had the
dignities, Arms of the titular Nobles.
and borne the titles either of Dukes, Marquesses, or Earls, in the same
Province, City, or place: and finally, the Battles fought either by the
foreign or homebred Conspirators, Places of great Battles.
I have also added. Where we from under our own Vines, without fear, may
behold the prints of endured miseries, sealed with the blood of those times, to
the loss of their lives and liberties; our selves (as in the reign of
Augustus, when the Temple of Ianus stood shut, and Mars his hands bound with
chains of Brass, as Virgil speaks) hear not the sound of the Alarm in our
Gates, nor the clattering of Armor in our Camps, whose Swords are now turned
into Mattockes, and Spears into Sithes, as Micah shows the peaceable times
under Christ. Micah 4.3.
In showing these things, I have chiefly sought to give satisfaction to all,
without offenoe to any, whereof if I fail, yet this to my self have I gained,
that whilst I set all my thoughts and cogitations hereon, I had small regard to
the bewitching pleasures and vain enticements of this wicked world, The
benefit made of this labor.
neither had I leisure to be led by an ambitious desire to raise my station
above the level of my equals, or with base flattery to follow, and fill the
ears of Fortunes Deputies, the raines of these intents checking the bit of
affection into another way. And applying my self wholly to the frame of this
most goodly Building, have as a poor Labourer carried the carved stones and
polished Pillars from the hands of the more skillful Architects, to be set in
their fit places, which here I offer upon the Altar of Love to my Country, and
wherein I have held it no sacrilege to rob others of their richest Jewels to
adorn this my most beautiful Nurse, whose Womb was my conception, whose
Breasts were my nourishment, whose Bosom my Cradle, and Lad (I doubt not)
shall be my bed of sweet rest, till CHRIST by his Trumpet raise me thence.

1 Chronicles. 28.8. Therefore in the sight of the Congregation of the Lord* and in
the audience of our God, let us keep and ^^cke for all the Commandments of
the Lord our God, that we may possess this good Land, and leave it for an
inheritance for our Children after us for ever.

Thine in Christ Jesus, JOHN SPEED.

Al'honneur de l'autheur et son oeuure.
LE trespuissant ouurier de la ronde machine,
Pour son chief d' oeuure teint cest' Isle separee:
Et quoy que des plus grands thresors du ciel parce
Son luster assuiettit an temps et a ruin.
D'un Dimidieu euurier d'une fabriq' divine,
Par la plume se void la bresche reparee,
La ruin dressee, et la force assuree
Contre la mort, que tant de beautes assassine,
La police, le nom, l'invincible courage,
Les Princes, Provinces, et tout qu' est d'avantage
Du Breton belliqueux, luisent en son Histoire:
Pour un ouur age donq' atouts tant admirable,
Faisons, fasons, Brettons, d'un burin memorable,
Graver le nom de Speed au temple de Memoire.
T. BARKHAM.

HEN. SPELMAN Mil. Lectori.
NON leve, nec temere laudo tibi seria, Lector,
Gratum opus and dignum consule (creed) vides.
Noster hic Ortelius, sic nostrum hunc exhibet orbem,
Vt res emineat, tota Britanna, simul.
Ora, sinus, fluvii, portus, nemus, oppida, tractus,
Regna, duces, populi foedera, bella, quies.
Rich. Saint George Norrey King at Arms, in favor of this Work.
IT is far from my purpose, to commend without cause, or by overcurious
flourish to make a shadow seem a substance, this work needs no such deceptio
visus; The Subject is of it self Honorable, and able to stand without such
weak props. The glory of our Nation being almost buried in the pit of
Obscurity, is herein revived; the continuance of Christianity traced from age
to age, the antiquity and situation of our Towns, Castles, Religious Houses,
Nobility, and all other memorable matters so lively portrayed, as in a Glass
we may rightly discern the true shape, quality and condition of each of them
in particular. This Work therefore being now brought upon the public Stage
and view of the world, may in my poor censure give satisfaction to the learned
Reader, and abide the touch of the malignant Opposer; which being affected
without hope of gain or vain ostentation, with so great care both of body and
mind, is the more precious; for, difficilia quae pulchra. Wherein Gods power
is made known in this his weak but worthy Instrument: and the glory of Great
Britain made more famous to the world, as well in the Geographicall dimension
of the Lands situation, as in the Historical relations of her most famous
Monarchs and glorious Actions; no Kingdom hitherto so particularly described,
nor Nations History by true record more faithfully penned: In honor whereof I
sacrifice these Lines of my love upon the Altar of this Work, and celebrate
the Authors remembrance to future posterities.

To my Friend Mr. JOHN SPEED, being very sick.
GReat Love, and little skill may cause me to missay
But certainly this sickness cannot make thee dye:
Though cruel Symptoms, and these thirteen years assay
For thy dear Country, does thy health and strength decay.
Yet since thy toylesome labor, and thy industry
Is for thy Countries sake, her fame on high to raise:
She shall thy Temples crown with everlasting Bays,
And in despite of Death, shall cause thy memory
To live in endless fame with all posterity.
Now may she see her beauty, and her riches store,
What erst she was in every age, and change of State,
And present greatness such as never heretofore,
Since this great Monarch ruled from North to Southern shore.
And since thy life is to thy Country dedicate,
Let none presume thy Laurel from thy head to reave
For this her Story, which thy skillful hand did weave:
But live and wear it [Speed] until the worlds great fate
Shall bring all earthly things unto their utmost date.
ALEX: GILL.

In exactissimi huius Operis Authorem, Eulogium THO: BARKHAM.
VIncta diu, rumpat despecta silentia, lingua,
Culmina ut immensi memorem superata laboris
Speidi tui: insueta jactor licet (optime) cura,
Quam tibi pro merito possim circundare palmam.
Qui coeant populi, quaecunque sub orb Britanno,
Digna refers, uno aspectu script o que, loc o que,
Sanguineas pugnas, atavorum bella, palaestras;
Nobilitans que apta patriam compagine rerum,
Ad nostra exactum deducis tempora filum.
Ergo erit haec magni merces non parva laboris,
Egregium pariunt haec quod monumenta decorem
Ipsa sibi, ventura quod haec mirabitur aetas,
Tota que perpetuas debet Respublica grates.
To the right well deserving Mr. JOHN SPEED, the Author of this Work.
IN this Book, ( Bibliothec, or Book of Books;
TIMES Library, PLACES Geographie)
All that is shown for which the curious looks
Touching this LAND, for Place, or History.
In which, thou have with pain, with care, and skill,
Surveyed this LAND more near then ere it was:
For which, thy Wit thou strained have to thy Will,
That wills as much as Wit can bring to pass.
The fair Hibernia, that Western Isle likewise,
In every Member, Artire, Nerve, and Vein,
Thou by thine Art do so Anatomize,
That all may see each parcel without Travel.
pain.
Here Time, and Place, like friendly foes do war
Which should show most desired Particulars;
But Place gives place, since Time is greater far;
Yet Place, well ranged, gets glory by these wars.
No helps thou had, nor no assisting aid
In this attempt: but, Virtue gave thee might
That well to do, that well thou have assaide,
Which shall (in grace) outlive immortal spite.
Had thou among the Romans lived when they
Did signiorize the World; A Signiory
Should then (at least) have guerdon'd thy Survey,
Thy Maps, Descriptions, and thine History.
But thou do live when all Arts save the Adulation.
eight
(Illiberall-liberall Art) a begging go;
That Art alone, with her true friend Deceit,
Gets all; then all seeks but that Art to know.
But, by thy Art though naught be purchased
But empty Fame (that feeds, but fattens not)
Yet shall it feed thy NAME till DEATH be dead;
While empty noble Names away shall rot.
The Leaves this Book contains, and Maps here grav'n,
Are still as Feathers to thy Fames fair Wings,
To fan fresh Air upon the face of Heaven;
And raise the same above all ending Things:
That when Confusion wracks this double FRAME,
A Spirit shall move on CHAOS called thy Fame.
The unfeigned lover of thy Person, JO: DAVIES.

OF Him that this Great Task has done
(Great for the goodness many ways)
Fame does affirm he well has won
Arts highest Prize, and Palm of praise.
In Climes, and Realms remote throughout,
His merits merit rare report:
For none the like has brought about;
Or, equaliz'd in any sort.
The Shafts of his endeavors, shot
At Gain, and Pleasure; both have hit:
His Observations have begot
On private, public Benefit.
Chief Cities, Towns, and Countries many
(Which this vast Globe of Earth affords)
I often have viewed; but never any
So well described by Maps and Words.
His traveled Body, toyled Mind,
(To bring this Work at last to rest
In Period which his Plot designed)
Should now rest famous with the best.
The Romans such Deserts did Crown
With Laurel, which their Soil brought forth;
But I, of Branches farre-off grown,
Bring Wreathes to this Work, more of worth*
The Palm, (wherein rare virtues be,
And for a Conquest, crowns a King)
The Olive, and the Cader Tree,
Fair, fat, and fruitful; these I bring.
In Egypt, Syria, and the Land
Of Promise (named by holiest High)
I could not see, nor understand,
For virtue, any Trees come nigh;
As these (worth praise) are profitable,
They being of the worthiest kinds:
So in best sense, has Speed been able,
To please (worth praise) the worthiest Minds.
In short, to give him then his due,
This Art his better never knew.
IO: SANDERSON.

THE CONTENTS OF THE CHOROGRAPHICALL PART.
THE FIRST BOOK. DESCRIBING THE WHOLE KINGDOM in general, with those Shires,
Cities, and Shire-townes, which are properly accounted for ENGLISH.
Countries and Counties. Fol. BArk-shire. 27 Bedford-shire. 41
Buckingham-shire. 43 Cambridge-shire. 37 Chesse-shire. 73 Cornwall. 21
Cumberland. 87 Darby-shire. 67 Devon-shire. 19 Dorcester-shire. 17
Durham-Bishopricke. 83 Englands General. 5 Essex. 31 Gloucestershire. 47 Great
Britain. 1 Hant-shire. 13 Hertford-shire. 39 Hereford-shire. 49
Huntington-shire. 57 Islands. 93 Kent. 7 Lanca-shire. 75 Leicester. 61
Lincolne-shire. 63 Man Island. 91 Middlesex. 29 Mounmouth-shire. 107
Northamptonshire. 55 Norfolk. 35 North and East Ridings* 81 Northumberland.
89 Nottingham-shire. 65 Oxfordshire. 45 Rutland-shire. 59 Saxons Heptarchie. 3
Shrop-shire. 71 Somersetshire. 23 Staffordshire* 69 Suffolk. 33 Surrey. 11
Sussex. 9 Warwicke-shire. 53 Westmorland* 85 West Riding. 79 Wight Island. 15
Wilt-shire. 25 Worcestershire* 51 Yorkshire. 77
THE SECOND BOOK. Containing the Counties of Wales.
Countries and Counties. Fol. ANglesey Island. 125 Brecknock-shire. 109
Caermarden-shire. 103 Caernarvon-shire. 123 Cardigan-shire. 113 Denbigh-shire.
119 Flint-shire. 121 Glamorgan-shire. 105 Merioneth-shire. 117
Mountgomery-shire. 115 Penbroke-shire. 101 Radnor-shire. 111 Wales General. 99
THE THIRD BOOK.
Scotlands Kingdom in one General. 131
THE FOVRTH BOOK. Containing the Kingdom of Ireland.
Countries and Counties. Fol. IReland General. 137 Mounster. 139 Leinster. 141
Conaugh. 143 Vlster. 145
A Brief Description of the Civil Wars, and Battles fought in England,
Wales, and Ireland.
IN this platform here are contained (Gentle Reader) the several Battles
fought by Sea and Land, at several times, and in several places of England
and Ireland, and the parts adjoining, within these five hundred years last
past. Descriptions of pictures after the manner of fight, as the plot would
give room, I have placed, and in the margent by numbers marked, observed the
time, year, and event of every Battle. Which being undertaken in
satisfaction of the honorable desire of certain Martial and Noble minded
Gentlemen, professors of Arms, and followers of Fame; desirous to see the
passed proceedings of their own professions: dealt liberally with me to draw
the plot, and were most diligent themselves, in giving directions, to set down
the places, persons, and the issue of every Battle fought either by Sea, or
Land, in England, Wales, and Ireland. And being finished in a far larger
platform (with the liking of the motioners, and good acceptance of her that
then was the mirror of her sex, and the maiden Martialist of the then known
world, the glorious and ever-living Queen ELIZABETH, to whose sacred censure
it was commended and dedicated) I intended there to have staid it from further
sight or publication. Since indeed the silence of Englands civil wars,
better befitted Englands subjects, they being the marks of her infamies, and
staynes to be washed away rather with repentance, then any way revived by too
often remembrance. But these defects I saw could not be so smothered, as to be
quite forgot: therefore I thought fit at least to make up her honor, with our
other proceedings in foreign parts; and insinuate my pen into some little
better applause by tracing the victories of the English, as far as the Sun
spreads his beams, or the girdle of the earth does any wise incircle it. Not
to mention then the fictions of Monmouth, that makes our Author another Caesar
in his conquests, nor Polydors proofs for Ethelstans title unto Scotland, by
the cut of his sword an ell deep into a Marble stone, things rather Poetical,
then substantial by truths testimony; In Syria the Long-shankes, for the
recovery of the holy Cross, made his sword drunk with blood. And before him
the Ceur-de-Lion upon the same intent, subdued Cyprus, forced Cursat the King
thereof into fetters of silver and gold: assumed the Island to himself, whose
title he intended to have changed for that of Jerusalem: unto whom Guido the
King thereof, with Geffrey de Lenizant his brother, and Raimund Prince of
Antioch, with Bo^mound his son, swear fealty to be true and loyal subjects
unto King Richard. France felt the heavy hands of Edward, and Henry our
English Kings: when the one of them at Poictiers took prisoners John King of
France, and Philip surnamed the hardy, his son. And the other at Azincourt in
a bloody battle took and slew four thousand Princes, Nobles, Knights, and
Esquiers, even all the flower of France, as their own Writers have declared.
And at Paris the Crown of France, was set upon Henry 6. his head, homage done
unto him by the French; that Kingdom made subject, and their Flower-de-Luces,
quartered with our Lions of England. Scotland like wise, felt the fury of Henry
2. when their King William was taken prisoner in the field. And to omit the
Bailiolls, that made themselves subjects to England: At Novils-Crosse, David
King of Scotland, was taken in battle by the English (Queen Philip wife to
King Edward the third, being present in field) and both the Kings of France and
Scotland, at one time retained prisoners in London, till their liberty was
obtained by ransom. Nor was Spain free from Englands power, when that
Thunderbolt of war (our black Prince) re-established Peter their King upon
his Throne at Burgus: to say nothing of the ruins Spain suffered at Cadez, by
the English led by Essex, in revenge of their unvincible vincible Navy, in
truth the seal of their truth-lesse cowardice unto this day. And not only the
Garter which King Richard the first tied about the legs of his Soldiers,
remains still the Royal bound of Englands Combinators; but the Round Table of
six hundred foot circumference erected at Windsor by King Edward the third,
with the allowance of an hundred pounds by week for the diet of his
Martialists, may like wise witness. Where the Worthy admitted, by conference
and continual practice, got such experience in military affairs, that, that
which was said of the Gadites, might have been said of them; They were all
valiant men of war, apt for Battle, and could handle spear and shield,
their faces were the faces of Lions, and were like the Roes in the mountains
for swiftness. In whose imitation Philip de Valoys, the French King erected in
Paris the like, though his Knights proved not in courage like unto Edwards. And
from this Academy of Military professors, commenced such Masters of Military
discipline, as Maximilian the Roman Emperor, held it such honor to be
incorporated into their Societies, as himself became the King of ENGLANDS
professed Soldier, wore the Cross of Saint George (the Royal Ensign of
England) and a Rose (the Kings badge) as his faithful Soldier, receiving his
pay daily for himself and followers, according to their degrees and estates.
Neither were the achievements of Land services crowned with more plumes of
Victories in the Helmets of the English, then were their Sea services,
defensive, and offensive, both at home and abroad. Their Navy Royal rightly
te^rmed the Lady of the Seas, and their Sea-Captaines far out-stripping
Ulysses in their Travailes and Descriptions: for twice in our time, has the
Sea opened her passage through the Straights of Magellan, for Drake in his
Pelican, and Candish in his Desire, to pass into the South World, and to
incirculate the Globe of the whole Earth, whereby themselves and Soldiers (all
English) have in those great deepes, seen the wonderful works of the LORD.
But upon this subject, I could willingly insist, were it not that the argument
of this present Description intends rather to speak of the Domestic and
Civil wars of England, then of the foreign and farre-fetched victories that
have adorned, and attended the Trophies of the English. From the prosecution of
the former, and promulgation of the latter, how unwillingly my Pen is drawn,
the roughness of the style, and the slender performance of the whole, does
manifestly show. They being for the most part civil Battles fought between
mere Englishmen, of one and the same Nation, wherein the parties victorers,
besides the loss of their own side, procured on the other, the fall and ruin
of them that were all of his own Country, many of them of his own
acquaintance and alliance, and most of them perhaps his own friends in any
other cause, then that in which he contended for. But from this general
argument, to proceed to some particulars, it shall not be amiss to make some
division of them, according to their several qualities of the several
quarrels in them which are found to be diverse, and of three several natures.
Whereof the first, were the invasions attempted by foreign Princes, and
enemies against the Kings and people of this Realm. The second, were mere
Rebellions of Subjects against their anointed Princes. And the third,
dissentious factions betwixt Princes of the blood Royal: of these three, all
these effusions of blood have consisted.

And to begin with the first battle in this plot, which was the first
beginning of government of this state as it yet continues. Such was the
attempt of William Duke of Normandy against King Harold the son of Earl
Goodwin, who prevailed so against him in fight at Battle in Sussex (a place
so called by this event) as the said Duke was afterward King of this Land, and
brought the whole Nation under his obedience, as it has been continued to his
posterity ever since. Such was the arrival of Jews son and heir to Philip
King of France, against John King of England, who being carried by his own
ambition, accompanied with French Forces, and assisted by the rebellious Barons
of this Realm, after variable fortune of fight in several skirmishes,
battles, and assaults, was forced in the end, without all honor, or hope to
prevail, to make a very shameful retreat into his own Country. Such was
also the entry made by James the fourth King of Scots, against King Henry the
eight, of famous memory, his brother in law, and sworn allie, at that time
absent in the wars of France, who contrary to his oath and alliance formerly
made, entered the North frontiers of England, with a mighty Army, had the same
discomfited and overthrown, and was himself slain in the field by the English
forces, under the leading of the Earl of Surrey, at that time Lieutenant
general for King Henry. And especially such was the late enterprise remaining
fresh in memory, of Philip late King of Spain, against our dread Sovereign
Lady now reigning, in the year of our Lord 1588. attempting by his invincible
Navy as he thought, and so termed, under the conduct of the Duke of Medina
Celi, which with great pride and cruelty extended against us, arrived on our
coasts to Englands invasion and subversion, had yet nevertheless here in the
narrow Seas, the one part of his Fleet discomfited, taken, and drowned, and
the other part forced to their great shame in poor estate to make a fearful
and miserable ^light about the coast of Ireland homeward, so that of 158. great
ships furnished for war, came to their own coast of Spain but few, and those
so torn and beaten by the English Cannons, that it was thought they were
unserviceable for ever, and eleven of their ensigns or banners of Idolatry,
prepared for triumph and pride in Conquest, were contrariwise to their shame
and dishonor showed at Pauls-Crosse, and in other places of this Realm, to
Gods glory, our joy, and their endless infamy.

map of England and Ireland The INVASIONS OF ENGLAND And IRELAND With all their
Civil Wars Since the Conquest.


The second sort of quarrels in these wars, were mere rebellions of subjects
against their anointed Princes and Governors: and of these some have been
private, and some general. Of the first kind for private occasions, was that
of Thomas Earl of Lancaster, against King Edward the second his cosingermane,
upon mislike of the Spencers, greatly favored by the King, and as much envied
of him, who having his forces defeated at Borrow-bridge, was there taken
prisoner, and after beheaded at Pomfret. Of the same kind was that of Henry
Lord Piercie, surnamed Hot-spurre, and Thomas Piercie Earl of Worcester his
Uncle, against King Henry the fourth, at Shrewesburie; where the said Lord
Henry was slain, and the other taken prisoner, and after beheaded in the same
Town. So was that of Michael Joseph the Blacksmith in Cornwall and his
company, against King Henry the seventh, for a Subsidy granted in Parliament
to the same King, who gathered a head of Rebellion so strong, that at
Black Heath near London, they abode battle against their Sovereign, but were
there taken, and afterward drawn, headed and quartered at Tiburne. Also such
was that of Robert Ket the Tanner of Windham in Norfolk, against King Edward
the sixth, pretended against enclosures and liberty to the weal public, was at
Norwich taken in the field, and afterward hanged on the top of the Castle of
the same Town. And lastly, so was that of Sir Thomas Wiat and the Kentish-men
against Queen Mary for the bringing in of Philip of Spain, they being cut off
at S. James, and himself yielded at the Court. Of the latter sort of
Rebellions being general, were those of the Barons against K. John, and King
Henry the third his son, in their several Reigns. Against the father, in
bringing in of foreign powers, and working a resignation of the Crown and
Diadem, to the great blemish of their King and Kingdom. And against the son
so prosecuted their attempts, that their wars to this day are called and
known by the name of the Barons-warres, which had so lamentable consequence,
as that after the overthrow and consumption of sundry most noble and ancient
houses of England, and both parties wearied with wars: the conclusions of
peace which ensued are reported in regard of the precedent murders to be
written with blood.

The third sort of these quarrels in these Civil wars and dissentions, were
factious dissentions between Princes themselves of the blood Royal,
ambitiously aspiring to the Crown of this Kingdom, and titles of Kings
thereof: Of which kind there have been two most notable known amongst us. The
first fell betwixt Stephen of Bloyse, Earl of Bolloigne, wrongfully succeeding
his uncle King Henry the first, in the Crown of England, on the one party, and
Maud the Empress, Daughter and sole heir to the said King Henry, and Henry D.
of Normandy (his son and heir, who afterward succeeded the same King
Stephen) on the other part, which was followed with such variable success of
fortune in many conflicts on both parts, that K. Stephen himself was taken
prisoner, and laid in Irons, with extremity used, and the Empress to save her
life dangerously adventured through the Scouts of the Enemy in the snow
slenderly guarded, and before that was driven to such distress, that faining
to be dead, she was laid as a livelesse coarse in a Coffin, and so conveyed
away in a Horse-litter. But the second and last of these two, being the
greatest of all the rest, was that which happened between the House of York,
descended of Lio^ell of Andwerp, D. of Clarence, second son to K. Edward the
third: and the House of Lancaster, issued of John of Gaunt, the third son
living of the same King; The occasion of a civil war that raged most cruelly
for a long time together, but at that time most extremely, when there reigned
two Kings, of either Family; one of Lancaster, Henry the sixth, another of
York, Edward the fourth: between whom with the favorers and followers, there
were twelve several Battles fought in little more then twelve years space.
In so much as one of our own Writers Edward Hall, the great Chronicler, says
that in these Civil wars betwixt these two Families it cost more English
blood, then twice had done the winning of France: and of foreign Writers
Philip Comines, Lord of Argentine in France, reports that it consumed no
less then fourscore Princes of the blood Royal: and Paulus Iovius a Bishop
of Novo Como in Italy, resembles the state of these wars to the most
tragical story of the City Thebes.

So let these few examples showed in these 3. general heads, suffice in this
brief Description, instead of many that might be brought; for by these we may
judge of the rest.

Now the benefit that may be gathered by perusing the several sorts of them,
shall be to consider, in the first, the blessing of God poured upon us, in
preserving our Country and Nation against the several Invasions of foreign
enemies, notwithstanding their several and many attempts. In the second, the
fall and ruin of rebellious Subjects taking Arms against their anointed
Kings, Princes, and Governors. And in the third, the power of God and his
heavy punishments in^licted upon us for our sins, in making the one party
the scourge or maule of the other, with revenging murder by murder, working the
depopulation of our fruitful Country, and ruinating of our Cities at home,
with loss and revolting of the territories in subjection unto us by just title
of inheritance and conquest abroad. And in all of them representing unto us the
lamentable Stories of the times fore-passed and gone, to compare with the same,
the peaceable estate of the happy times possessed and present, wherein Martial
men have leisure to win honor abroad, the rest to live in quiet and wealth
at home, all factions forgotten, and all rebellions surceased and repressed:
and for these blessings to yield due thanks unto Almighty God, that has
provided for us such a Prince, and so directed her in her government over us,
that with ease and pleasure we may both behold the one, and enjoy the other,
esoecially in these dangerous days of these latter times, when all hostility
and outrage of civil wars, broiles, and dissentions, have seemed by the
power of the Almighty hand of God stretched forth in our defense, to have
been transported out of this Island over the Seas into other Countries, in so
much as notwithstanding this calm security of our own at home, our
neighbour-Nations of all sides abroad, either through the licentious tyranny
of ungodly Princes, that have laid persecution upon their Subjects, or the
mutinous dissentions of disobedient people, that have raised Rebellions against
their Princes, have been so turmoyled with garboyle of wars, as they have
been pitifully enforced to pray and seek aid at her Majesty's hands, and to
submit themselves under the protection of her, whom with us they acknowledge to
be the very De^endresse of the Christian Faith and Peace, and the most natural
Nurse to the true Church of God. By all loyal duty therefore, we are indebted
to yield obedience unto her Majesty, and to her Majesty's most religious
government, by which we have received such peace as the world does admire, and
following ages to her eternal fame shall record: and with faithful hearts
pray, that peace may ever dwell within her walls, and prosperity abide within
her Palaces, and that the abundance of her peace may continue as long as the
Sun and Moon endures.

Cease civil broils, O Englands subject cease,
With streams of blood stain this fair soil no more:
As God, so Kings must be obeyed with peace,
Yield thou thy due, to them their right restore:
Wash with repentance, these thine acts before:
Give loyal pledge, with might resist her wrongs,
That reigns thy Prince, to her thy Sword belongs.
(1) AT Battle the 14* of October being Saturday, the year of Christ 1066.
William Duke of Normandy obtained this Land by Conquest, and slew Harald King
thereof, with Gerth and Leofwin his brethren, with 67974. Englishmen.

(2) York burnt and 3000. of the Citizens and Normans slain by the Danes,
under the leading of Harald and Canutus, sons to Sweno King of Denmark, for
the recovery of the Crown to the Danish blood, 1069. W. C. reg. 3.

(3) Malcolme King of Scots invaded Tefidale, Holdernesse, and Cumberland,
charging his Soldiers to spare neither sex nor age of the English Nation, A^.
1071. but the year following was himself forced to do homage to W. C. reg. 5.

(4) Elie surprised and won by the Conqueror, the last part of this Land
that stood out against the Normans, under Hereward their most valiant Captain.
An. reg. Conq. 7. 1073.

(5) The first seating of the English in Wales, through the dissension of their
Princes, who being called for partakers, took from the Welsh that which they
could not again recover. 1090. reg. 1. Ruf. 3.

(6) At Al^wick Malcolme King of Scots invading Northumberland, with his son
Edward was slain, and all his boast discomfited by Rob. Mowbray Earl of
North. reg. Ruf. 5. 1029.

(7) Northampton endammaged, and the Country adjoining spoiled through the
civil dissension of the three brethren, William, Robert, and Henry, sons to the
Conq. H. 1. An. 7. 1106.

(8) Powes land invaded by King Henry 1. and resisted so by the Welsh, being
struck with an arrow on the breast that it had almost cost him his life. An.
reg. 21. 1121.

(9) At Cardigan a sore battle was fought in October. 1136. whereinmany
thousands were slain, and men by women led away captives. reg. Steph. 1.

(10) Bristow taken by Robert Earl of Gloucester in the defense of his sister
Maud the Empress, against K. Stephen. reg. 3. 1138.

(11) David K. of Scots invading Northumberland made his spoil as far as
Alverton in Yorkshire, where being encountered by Thurstan Archbishop of York,
William Earl of Albemarle, Wa. Espeke, Will. Peverel, and the two Lacies, Aug.
22. was with his son Henry put to flight, and ten thousand Scots slain, 1139.
Sep. 4.

(12) Nottingham taken and burned by Rob. bastard Earl of Gloucester, in
defense of his sister Maud the Empress. 1140. Steph. 5.

(13) At Lincoln by Ranulph Earl of Chester, and Rob. Earl of Gloucester, K.
Stephen was taken prisoner, had to Glocest. thence to Bristow, and there laid
in irons. Feb. 2. 1141. reg. 5.

(14) From Winchester Maud the Empress, her Armies both of Scots and English
dispersed and overcome, fled to Lutegarshall, to Vies, and thence to Gloucester,
laid in a horse-litter, fained to be her dead corpse, and her brother Rob. taken
prisoner. reg. Step. 6. 1141.

(15) From Oxford Maud the Empress with five persons ^^e, apparelled in white
sheets, to deceive the Kings Scout-watch, fled through the snow, and so escaped
that besieged Town. An. 1142. Steph. 7.

(16) At Edmundsbury Robert Earl of Leicester, with Petronill his Countess
were taken prisoners, and 20000. taken and slain, by Richard Lucie L. chief
Justice, and Humfrey d^ Bohun high Constable of England. October. 17. 1173. H.
2.19.

(17) At Aluwick. W. King of Scots was taken prisoner by Rob. Scotvile,
Randulph Mandevile, Barnard Bailiol, and W. Vescy Capt: his army containing
80000. fighting men, July 7. 1174. he was sent to London, and by K. Henry
carried into Normandy, imprisoned at Roan, and ransomed at 4000. pounds.

(18) At Lincoln all the English Barons with 400. Knights that took part with
Jews, were overthrown and taken, May 19. 1217. and first of H. 3.

(19) At Montgomery Llewellen Prince of Wales through the practice of a
traitorous Monk, overcame and slew many of the Kings power. An. 1231. reg. H.
3.15.

(20) At Chesterfield a conflict was done, wherein Robert Ferrers Earl of
Darby was taken, and many slain, An. H. 3.41. 1256.

(21) Northampton surprised by King Henry 3. against his rebellious Barons.
April 4* 1263. reg. 48.

(22) At Jews, May 12. 1264. King H. 3. by his unfaithful Barons, with his
brother Richard King of Alman, and his son Prince Edward were taken prisoners.
There were slain about 4500. by Simon Montfort and Gil. Clare Earl^ of Leicest.
and Glocest. reg. H. 3.48.

(23) At Evesham, the 5. of Aug. 1265. a sore battle was fought wherein K. H.
3. prevailed against the Barons through their own dissentions, and most of
them slain, as Sim. Monfort Earl of Leicest. and 17. Lords and Knights besides;
Humfrey Bohun, and with him ten men of great account taken prisoners, and
slaughter of all the Welch-men. An. reg. 48.

(24) Berwick won, and 25000. Scottish slain. An. E. 1.24. 1296.

(25) At Bluith Leolin the last Prince that bare rule of the Britains, coming
from Snowdown, by Rog. Strangb. was slain, and his head crowned with Ivy set
upon the Tower of London, Edward 1.10. An. 1282.

(26) At Mitton 3000. Yorkshire men were slain encountering with the Scots
invading their Country, called the white battle, for that it consisted most
of Clergie^men. An. 1318. reg. E. 2.12.

(27) Unto Preston in Andernesse Rob. Bruise King of Scots invaded England,
burned the same Town, and haried the Country before him, reg. E. 2.14. An.
1322.

(28) Borrowbridge battle fought betwixt E. 2. and his Barons, Mar. 16. 1322.
under the leading of Andr. Hercley Earl of Carlisle, where Tho. Earl of Lanc.
was taken and with him 65. Lords and Knights, Hum. Bohun being thrust into the
fundament through a bridge was slain. An. reg. 14.

(29) At Blackamore the Scots following the English army, took prisoners the
Earl of Richm. and the French Ambassador, the King himself hardly escaped*
An. reg. E. 2.15. 1323.

(30) At Glamorgan K. E. 2. by his unnatural and cruel wife, was taken
November 16. 1326. and conveyed to Monmouth, to Ledbery, to Kenilworth, to
Corffe, to Bristow, thence to Barkley Castle, and there lamentably murdered,
Septem. 21.

(31) At Stannop park the Scots entrenched themselves, and against the English
made rimes of disgrace as follows. An. Edw. 3.2. 1328.

Long beards heartlesse, painted hoods witless.

Gay coats graceless, make England thriftlesse.

(32) At Halidow-hill a great battle fought against the Scots, wherein were
slain 8. Earls, 1300. horsemen, and common soldiers, 35000. and their
chief Champion Turnbul overcome by Rob. Venall Knight of Norfolk. An. E. 3.7.
1333.

(33) Southampton sacked by Genoway Pirates under the leading of the King of
Sicils son, yet the Townes-men sl^w 300. of them and their Captain brained by
a husbandmans club. An. 1338. E. 3.12.

(34) Carleil, Penreth, and many Towns else burnt by the Scots, under Will.
Douglas, yet lastly are overcome by the manhood and policy of Tho. Lucy, Rob.
Ogle, and the B. of that sea. An. reg. E. 3.19. 1345.

(35) At Nevils Cross David Bruise King of Scots invading England with 60000.
soldiers, was taken prisoner by Io. Copland Esquire, and conveyed to London
with many of his Nobility, besides many noble men slain in the field under the
leading of Will. Young. Archb. of York, vicegerent, the Lords Mowbray, Percie
and Nevill, Q. Phillip in her own person present, encouraging her people to
fight. reg. E. 3.20. 1346.

(36) The insurrection of the commons under the leading of Jack Straw, Wat.
Tiler, and others, after many rebellious acts done in Kent and Essex, from
Black-^eath, Mile-end, and Smith-field, were dispersed, where the said Wat.
Tiler was worthily slain by Will. Walworth Mayor of Land. on Saturday, Iun. 15.
reg. Rich. 2.4. An. 1381.

(37) At North-Walsham the rebellious commons by the instigation of Io. Wraw,
who had gathered 50000. in Suffolk, and under the leading of John Litisar of
Norwich Dyer, calling himself King of the Commons, were by Henry Spencer
Bishop of that City overcome, and their rusticall King drawn, hanged, and
beheaded, who had by violence carried with him the Lord Seals, the Lord
Morley, Stephen Hales, and Robert Sale Knights, to serve at his Table, and take
his assayes. Rich. 2.4. 1381.

(38) Near Hatfield the rebellious commons of Essex were overcome, and 500. of
them slain by Thomas Woodstock Duke of Glocest. An. 1382. Ric. 2.5.

(39) At Radcot-Bridge, Tho. Duke of Gloucester, the Earls of Arundel, Warwick,
Darby, and Nottingham, encountering with Robert Vere Duke of Ireland, maintained
by King Rich. 2. against them, with 5000. men* slew Sir Tho. Molineux Constable
of Chester, and put the said D. to such strait, that in swimming Thames ^e had
almost lost his life. 1387. r. Rich. 2.11.

(40) At Otterborne, under the leading of Will. Douglas, 1100. English men were
slain, and 30000. put to flight, Lord Henry and Ralph Percies sons to the
Earl of Northumberland, were taken prisoners, notwithstanding the said L. Hen.
had manfully slain that valiant Captain Will. Douglas at the first encounter,
An. 1388. Rich. 2.12.

(41) At Flint castle K. Ric. 2. was by the falsenesse of Henry Percie Earl of
Northumb. delivered into the hands of Henry D. of Lancaster, and thence
conveyed as prisoner to London, committed to the Tower, and shortly deposed:
thence sent to Loeds castle in Kent: lastly, to Pomfreit, and there murdered,
Feb. 13. 1430.

(*) At Circester the conspirators against K. Henry 4. were discomfited the
Dukes of Exc^ster and Surrey, the Earls of Salisburie, Gloucester and
Huntington, Sr. Thomas Blunt and Barnard Brocas knights, were there taken, and
in sundry places beheaded, 1400. Ian. 15. reg. 2.

(42) At Hallidowne hill again another great and bloody battle was fought
Sep. 14. against the Scots, by K. H. 4. wherein the said Scots were beaten down
and slain, and besides the loss of many thousand common Soldiers, fourscore
Earls, Lords and Knights of account were also then slain. An. 1402. reg. 3.

(43) At Pelale in Wales, 110. Englishmen were slain by Own Glendoure, and
Edmund Mortimer Earl of March taken prisoner, reg. H. 43. 1402.

(44) At Shrewsbury a bloody battle was fought against K. Henry 4. by the
Percies, Henry and Thomas, wherein Henry L. Percie surnamed Hotspur, was slain
in the place called Old field, and Lord Thomas Earl of Worcester taken and
beheaded: there was slain on both sides 6600. An. 1403.

(45) The French coming to aid Owen Glendoure besieged Carmarden and spoiled
it. An. 1405. reg. H. 4.6.

(46) At Bramham^moore, Henry Percie Earl of Northumberland, with Thomas L.
Bordolfe, and many ^^e, in taking arms against K. Henry 4. were slain by
Thomas Rockley Sheriff of York shire, 1408. reg. 9.

(47) On Black Heath twice Jack Cade (naming himself John Mortimer, captain of
the Kentish rebels) camped against King H. 6. reg. 28. An. 1450.

(48) At Sennock the Kings power was overcome by Jack Cade, and the two
Staffords, brethren, slain by those rebels: but from Southwarke they were
di^^ers^d, and Cade slain lurking in a garden, by Alexander Eden, G^^^ (...)
of Kent. 1450.

(49) At D^^^forth upon Bro^s-(...), Richard Duke of York incomped himself
with an army of 10000. men, against King Henry 6. reg. 30. An. 1452.

(50) Saint Albons first Battle fought May 23. against King Hen. 6. by Richard
Duke of York, wherein on the Kings side were slain Edmund Duke of Sommerset,
Henry Earl of Northumberland. Humfrey Earl of Stafford, John L. Clifford,
with many Knights of valor, and 5000. men on their parties sides: the King
himself was wounded with an arrow, and but only 600. of the Dukes men slain.
An. 1445. reg. 33.

(51) Blore-heath field fought on September 23. by Richard Earl of Salisbury
against K. Henry 6. the Lord Audley being General for the King: where the said
Lord was slain, with many Knights of Cheshire on his part, and with them 2400.
persons lost their lives. An. 1459. reg. 38.

(52) At Northampton the Earls of March and Warwick fought against K. Henry 6.
in the quarrel of Richard Duke of York, Wherein the King himself was taken and
conveyed to London, Humfrey Duke of Buckingham, John Talbot Earl of
Shrewesburie, the Lords Beamont and Egremont were there slain. 1459. June 10.
reg. 38.

(53) Wakefield Battle fought December 10. 1461. by Queen Margaret, in defense
of King Henry 6. her husbands title, wherein the said Duke was slain with
young Edmund Earl of Rutland his son, the two bastards Mortimers Knights,
and 220^. more: there Thomas Nevill Earl of Salisbury was taken prisoner, and
after beheaded at Pomfreit. An. reg. 39.

(54) At Mortimers cross Edward Earl of March, in revenge of the death of
Richard Duke of York his Father, obtained a great victory againts the Earls
of Pembroks and Wiltshire in the quarrel of Q. Margaret, and there flew 3800.
Englishmen, Feb. 2. being the day of Mary's Purification in this battle Owen
Teuther was taken and beheaded. An. 1461. reg. H. 6.39.

(55) Saint Alb^^s last battle fought by Queen Margaret against the Dukes of
Norfolk and Suffolk^, the Earls of Warwick and Arundel, that kept by force K.
Henry her husband, with whom by constrain be held and fought, and lost the
field: there were slain of Enlishmen 1916. persons. Feb. 17. being
Shreve-tuesday. 1416.

(56) Towton-field a most deadly and mortal Battle fought on Palme-sunday;
March 29. wherein were slain of Englishmen 35091. or as other have. 36776.
persons, amongst whom these Nobles died, Earls: Northumberland, Shrewesbury,
and Devonshire. Lords: Clifford, Beamont, Nevill, Willoughby, Wels, Ro^s,
Seals, Gray, Dacres, Fitz-bugh, Mollens, Bechingam. Knights: the two Bastards
of Excester, Percie, Heyron, Clifton, Hayms, two Crakenthorps, two Throlopes,
Haril, Ormond, Mollin, Pigot, Norbohew, and Burton, with many more Knights, and
others not named, K. H. 6. with succh as escaped fled into Scotland, leaving E.
4. victor. 1461.

(57) Hexam battle fought May 15. against King Henry 6. under the conduct of
John Nevill, L. Mountacute* wherein Henry Duke of Somerset, with the L. Rooes,
Mollens, and Hungerford were taken. K. Henry flying into Lancashire, remained
there in wants, and secret a years and more, and whence by deceit he was taken
and convaied to the Tower of London. 1464. reg. E. 4.4.

(58) Edgcoot-field fought upon Da^es-more, July 26. by the Northren Lords,
their Captains being Sir John Coniers, and Robbin of Ridsdale, against K. E.
4. under the leading of Will. Herbert Earl of Pembrooke, who together with his
brother Ric. was taken, as also Ric. Woodvile, L. Rivers, brother to the Q.
with John his son, and all four beheaded, 5000. of their boast being slain,
with most of the Wolch-men. 1469. reg. E. 4.9.

(*) At Wolney King Edward 4. gathering his boast to recover his loss, was
taken prisoner by his brother George, Duke of Clarence, and Ric. the stout
Earl of Warwick, and convayed to Middleham Castle in Yorkshire, whence
shortly be escaped to London. 1469.

(* *) At Stamford the Lincoln-shire-men, under the conduct of Sir Rob. Wills
Knight, instigated by Ric. Earl of Warwick against King Edw. 4. were overcome,
and 1100. of them slain, the rest in flight so cast away their furniture, that
to this day the battle is called Losecote-field, 1470. Edward 4.10.

(59) Barnes-field fought April 14. being Easter Day, by the Earls of Warwick,
Oxford, and Marquis Mountacute, against K. Ed. 4. who led Henry 6. prisoner to
the field wish him: In this battle were slain, Ric. Earl of Warwick, and
Marquis Mountocute his brother. On K. Edwards part were slain the Lord
Cromwell, Say, and Mountjoy: the slaughter in all amounted to 10000. says
Hall. 1471. Edw. 4.11.

(60) At Towkefoury King Ed. 4. obtained the diadem in subduing H. 6. under the
leading of Prince E. who was there slain and Q Margaret taken prisoner: there
died likewise Tho. Courtney. E. of Devonshire, Ioh. Sommerset, Marq. Dorset,
and the Lord Wenlake: of Knights, Hamden, Whitting, Vans, Harvy, Deluys,
Filding: Leukenor, Lirmouth, Vrman, Seamer, Roos and Henry: Edm. D. of
Sommerset was there taken, and beheaded with John Bough, Lord Prior of S.
John's, May 4. 1471. E. 4.11.

(61) Bosworth-field fought upon Redmore. Aug. 22 1458. and 3. of Ric. 3. where
himself was slain, with John, D. of Norfolk, Wa. L. Ferres, Richard Ratcliffe
and Rob. Brakenbury Knights, and 4000. more of his company: on the Earl of
Richmonds part only 10. persons, the chief where of was, Will. Brandon Knight,
his Standard Bearer. Earl Henry was there crowned in the field, and the union
of Lancaster with York effected, whose civil dissentions had cost more
English blood, then twice had done the winning of France.

(62) Stoke-field Iun. 16. 1487. was fought to arrest Lambert a counterfeit
Warwick against King Henry 7. where 4000. with the naked Irish were slain, and
with them died De la Pole Earl of Lincoln, Francis L. Lovel, Tho. Gerardine,
Chancellor of Ireland, Martin Swart, and Sir Tho. Broughton. Knights general
against the King. Lambert was there taken and made a turn-spit. Hen. 7.2.

(63) At Cockeledge ^^r York, the Commons rose and slew Henry Earl of
Northumberland, for a tax collected by him, granted in Parliament: their
Captain named John a Cumber was hanged at York. 1489. H. 7.4.

(64) Excest. besieged by Perkin Werbeck a counterfeit, naming himself Ric.
Duke of York, before murdered in the Tower of London after he had in dammaged
the North and North^^berl. was from this City expulsed to Bewdley Sanctuary,
and lastly executed as Tiburn. 1497. reg. H. 7.13.

(65) This same City was again besieged by the rebels of Devon-shire and
Cornwall the 3. of E. 6. under the leading of Hum. Arundel, Holmes, Winslow,
and Bury but was rescued by John L. Russel, with the Lord Gray, and 4000. of
them slain. 1549.

(66) On Black Heath again was fought a sore battle by Thomas Fla^^ock, gent.
Michael Joseph Blackesmith, and Iam. Twichet.. L. Andley, with the Cornish
rebels, where 2000. of them were slain by Giles L. Daubeney general for the
King, and 1500. taken prisoners, June 22. 1497. H. 7.

(67) Flodden-field the 9. of September, and 5. of King Henry 8. was fought
against the Scots, by L. Tho. Howard Earl of Surrey, lieutenant general for
the King, where James 4. King of Scots with 3. Bishops, 2. Lord Abbots, 12.
Earls, 17. Lords, and 8000. soldiers were slain, and the dead body of K.
James wrapped in Lo^d^, was brought to shine in Surrey, and there cast into a
corner, not long since remaining and seen.

(68) At Solommosse 15000. Scots under the leading of the L. Maxwell by Thou
bastard Dacres, and Jack Musgrave, were valiantly vanquished, and 21. of their
Nobility (whereof eight were Earls) brought as prisoners to London, and 200.
mere of great account, besides 800. common soldiers slain and taken, for very
grief whereof K. James fell sick, and shortly after died. 1542. H. 8.32.

(69) Muscleborrow-field fought September 10. 1546, by Edward D. of Sommerset
L. Protector, and John Dudley Earl of Warw. against the Scots, where 14000.
were slain, 1500. taken prisoners, only 60. English then slain. E. 6.1.

(70) At Norwich in a commotion led by Rob. Ket Tanner of Wind(...), Will. Lord
Marquess of Northampton was put to flight, and the Lord Sheffield slain, the
City fired, and many outrages done, 1549. E. 6.3.

(71) At Mount Surrey the Rebels, with their leader Rob. Ket, were by John
Dunley E. of Warwick overcome, and forced to yield, 5000. of them being slain,
and Ket taken and hanged on the Castle of Norwich, or as some have, upon the
Oak of reformation, Aug. 27. 1549. E. 6.3.

(72) Sir Tho. Wist with his company of Kentishmen driven to march from
Southworke to Kingstone, and thence to S. James, yielded himself at
Temple Bar, with the loss only of 40. persons on both parts, Feb. 7. 1554.
Mary 1.

(73) At Tadcaster Thomas Piercie Earl of Northumberland, and Charles Nevil E.
of Westmerland in their commotions took 200. footmen repairing toward York for
the defense of the City against those rebels, 1596. Eliz. 12.

(74) Durha^^ taken by the rebels of the North, under the leading of Piercy and
Nevil Earls, which had gathered 7000. and surprised Barnards Castle, were by
the Earl of Sussex, Lieutenant general for the Queens forced into Scotland,
and many of their Associates worthily put to death. 1569. And lastly (which God
grant may be the last) Thomas late Earl of Northumberland, was beheaded in
York. Aug. 20. 1572. Eliz. 14.

THE BRITISH ISLANDS PROPOSED IN ONE VIEW IN THE ENGLISH MAP: WITH A GENERAL
DESCRIPTION OF GREAT BRITAIN UNDER THE ROMANS. CHAPTER 1.
THE State of every Kingdom well managed by prudent Government, seems to me
to represent a humane Body, guided by the sovereignty of the reasonable Soul:
the Country and Land it self representing the one, the Actions and State
affairs the other. Since therefore the excellencies of the whole are but
unperfectly laid open, where either of these parts is defective, The scope of
this Work.
our intendment is to take a view as well of the outward body and Lineaments of
the now-flourishing British Monarchy (the Islands) Kingdoms and Provinces
thereof in actual possession, The distribution of the wh^le Work.
(for with others, no less justly claimed in the Continent, we meddle not)
which shall be the content of our first or Chorographicall Tome, The first Tome
Chorographicall.
containing the four first Books of this our Theater: as also of its
successive government and vital actions of State, which shall be our second or
Historical Tome, The second Tome Historical.
containing the five last Books. And here first we will (by example of the
best Anatomists) propose to the view the whole body and Monarchy entire ( For
some Islands as Gersey, and Gernsey we have left to their proper places.
as far as conveniently we could comprise it) and after will dissect and lay
open the particular Members, Veins and Joints (I mean the Shires, Rivers,
Cities and Towns) with such things as shall occure most worthy our regard, and
most behovefull for our use.

Britain the greatest Island.
(2) The Island of Great Britain (which with her adjoining Isles is here first
presented) contains the Kingdoms of England and Scotland, and is of many
accounted the greatest Island in the World, though Lib. de Cons^an.
Iustus Lipsius gives that praise to Cuba in America, as the Oriental
Navigators do unto Sumatra (taken for Ptolomees Taprobana) or to Madagascar,
the Island of S. Laurence, both which are near unto, or under the Equinoctial
Line; In which we will not contend: as pleasing our selves with her other
praises greater then her Greatness; yet with this honor also, that is was
(without question) the greatest Island of the Roman World, The Site of
Britain.
and for any thing yet certainly known, of all the rest. Concerning whose
Positure in respect of Heaven, Dere^^a. l. 6.
Lucretius (the Buchanus so notes against Humph. Lloyd.
first of the Latin Writers that names Britain) seems to place it in the
same Parallel with Pontus, where he says: Nam quid Brittannum coelum differ
putamus? etc.
What differs Britains heaven from that of Nile?
Or Pontus welkin, from Gadz warmer Isle?
In which, by a certain cross comparison, he opposes two likes against two
unlikes, Britain and Pontius against Egypt and Gades. But to seek into profound
Antiquity, rather then present practice, for matters, in which Use makes
perfectness, were to affect the giving light by shadows, rather then by
Sunshine.

The degrees of Britains Site.
(3) It is by experience found to lie included from the degree fifty, and thirty
scruples of Latitude, and for Longitude extended from the 13. degree, and 20.
minutes, unto the 22. and 50. minutes, according to the observation of
Mercator. The Countries abutting upon Britain.
It has Britain, Normandy, and other parts of France upon the South, the
Lower Germany, Denmark, and Norway upon the East; the Isles of Orkney and the
Deucaledonian Sea, upon the North; the Hebrides upon the West, and from it all
other Islands and Inlets, which do scatteredly inviron it, and shelter
themselves (as it were) under the shadow of Great Albion (another name of this
famous Island) are also accounted Britannish, All the Islands about Britain
counted British.
and are therefore here described altogether.

(4) Britain thus seated in the Ocean has her praises, not only in the
present tense, and use of her commodities, but also in those honorable
Eulogies, which the Cambdens Britannia.
learned of Antiquaries has collected out of the noblest Authors, that he
scarce feemeth to have left any gleanings: neither will we transplant them out
of his flourishing Garden, but as necessity compels, Britains Eulogies.
since nothing can be further or otherwise better said.

(5) That Britain therefore the Seas High Admiral, is famously known: and the
Fortunate Island supposed by some, as Robert of Avesbury does show: whose air
is more temperate (says Caesar) then France; whose Soil brings forth all
grain in abundance, says Tacitus; whose Seas produce orient Pearl, says
Suetonius; whose Fields are the seat of a Summer Queen, says Orpheus; her
wildest parts free from wild beasts, says the ancient Panegyric, and her
chief City worthily named Augusta, as says Lib. 18. c. 7. Psalm. 16.
Amianus: So as we may truly say with the royal Psalmist, Our lines are fallen
in pleasant places, yea, we have a fair inheritance. Which whatsoever by the
goodness of God, and industry of man it is now, yet our English Spen^ers
Fairie Queen, l. 2. Can. 10. Stan 5.
Poet has truly described unto us the first face thereof, thus: The Land
which warlike Britains now possess,
And therein have their mighty Empire raisde,
In ancient times were salvage Wilderness,
Unpeopled, unmanur'd, unprov'd, unpraisde.


(6) And albeit the Ocean does at this present thrust it self between Dover
and Callis, Britain once no Isle.
dividing them with a deep and vast entrenchment; so that Britain thereby is
of a supposed Or half Isle.
Penisle made an Island: yet Twine. Verste^an.
diverse have ^tifly held, that once it was joined by an arm of land to the
continent of Gallia. To which opinion Spencer farther alluding, thus closes
his Stanza: Ne was it Island then, ne was it paisde
Amid the Ocean waves, ne was is sought
Of Merchants far, for profits therein praisde,
But was all desolate, and of some thought
By Sea to have bin from the Celtick Mainland brought
Which as a matter merely conjecturall (because it is not plain that there
were no Islands nor hills before Noah's flood) I leave at large: Virgil surely (of
all Poets the most learned) when describing the Shield which Vulcan forged (in
Virgils brain) for Aeneas, Aeneid lib. 8.
he calls the Morini (people about Call is) Extremique huminum Morini.
the outmost men, does only mean that they were Westward, the farthest
Inhabitants upon the Continent, signifying withal that Britain as being an
Island, lay out of the world: but yet not out of the knowledge of men, for the
commodities thereof invited the famous Greek Colonies of Merchants, which
dwelt at Massilia in France, to venture hither, as has been well D. Cocks
Epist. l. 3 Report.
observed our of Strabo.

map of Great Britain and Ireland THE KINGDOM OF GREAT BRITAIN AND IRELAND


(7) And as Julius Caesar was the first Roman which ever gave an attempt to
Conquer it, so will we close its praises with a late Ca^^. Judah. M. S.
Epigram, concerning the outward face of the Isle, and the motive of Caesar's
coming.

ALBIONIS vertex frondoso crine superbit,
Arboreas frondes plurimus ales habet.
Gramineam Montes and fundant pascua pubem;
Et carpunt, circum pascua, gramen oves:
Sed LATII caruit potioribus Insuladonis,
Victori potior Gloria ni LATIO.
Albions high tops her woody locks far show,
With quiers of chanting Birds these woods resounding,
Her Downs and Meadows clad in verdant hew,
Meadows and Downs with flocks and herds abounding.
Italy.
Latium had greater wealth, yet Caesar thought,
To British Glory, Latiums, Wealth worth naught.
Britain but slenderly known to Caesar.
(8) The division of Britain concerning the government and territories thereof,
at such time as Caesar here arrived, does not sufficiently appear, Caesar
himself makes so sparing mention herein, that we have little cause to believe
Epit. Live l. 105.
Florus, where he makes Livie say, that after Caesar had slain an huge
multitude of Britains, Rebquam I^silae partem in potestatem sub^g^t.
he subdued the residue of the Isle, but rather with exquisite Horace, that he
did not at all touch them, as the word Epod. 7.
intactus does in him purport.

Britain had Kings in it in Caesar's time.
(9) Kings there were, and therefore that Division which was here in Caesar's
time, was into Kingdoms; the old names of whose Nations, as also the knowledge
of their several abodes, hidden under the rubbish of so many ages, have In
Cambdens B^itannia.
of late with infinite labors and exquisite judgment, been probably restored
and bounded; yet that no man's expectation and desire be too much frustrated,
reason wills that we briefly set forth such divisions of the Land, as many
repute not ancient only, but authenticke.

Britains supposed divisi^n (...) Brutes three (...).
(10) Our seeming ancient Historians begin it at Brute, who to every of his
three sons gave a part, called presently after their names; as England.
Loegria to Locrine his eldest son: Wales.
Cambria, to Camber his second son; Scotland.
and Albania to Albanist his third son; And doubtless, if there had been more
Nations of fame in this Island, G^ff, of Monmouth father to Brutes three sons.
Brute should have had more sons fathered on him: which conceit some ascribe to
Monmouth, holding that before him it was never so divided.

Britain the Great and Less.
(11) Ptolomey naming Britain the Great and the Less, has been by some
mistaken, as so dividing this Island into two parts; but his proportion and
distance from the Equator, compared with his Geographicall description will
evince, that he calls this our Island GREAT BRITAIN, and Ireland BRITAIN THE
LESS.

(12) Howbeit some latter do make indeed the South and more Champion to be
called GREAT BRITAIN, and the North more mountainous, BRITAIN THE LESS; whose
Inhabitants anciently were distinguished into the MAIATAE, and CALEDONII, and
now by the Scots are into Heghlandmen and Lawlandmen. But that Northern clime
being more piercing for the Romans constitutions and Appiau.
less profitable or fruitful, they set their bounds not far from Edinburgh,
and altogether neglected the other parts more Northward.

Britain the Higher and Lower.
(13) This nearer part of Britain they then divided into two parts; for the more
Southern tract, together with Wales, Dio terms the Higher, and that more
Northward the Lower, as by the seats of their Legions does appear; for the
second Legion Augusta (which kept at Caerleon in South Wales) and the twentieth
called Victrix (which remained at Chester) he places in the HIGHER BRITAIN:
but the sixth Legion surnamed also Victrix, resident at York, served (as he
writes) in the LOVVER BRITAIN; which division, as seems was made by Severus
the Emperor, Her^dian.
who having vanquished Albinus, General of the Britains, and reduced their
State under his obedience, divided the government thereof into two Provinces,
and placed two Prefects over the same.

(14) After this again the Romans did apportion Britain into three parts,
Britain divided into three parts.
whose limits our Camb. p. 111. Sexius Rusus
great Antiquarie assigned by the ancient Archiepiscopall Seats, grounding his
conjecture on (...) the saying of Pope Lucius, who affirms that the
^^^lesiasticall Jurisdictions of the Christians, accorded with the precincts of
the Roman Magis^^^^^s, Did. 80. cap. 1.
and that their Archbishops had their Sees in those Cities wherein their
Presidents abode: so that the ancient Seats of the three Archbishops here,
being London in the East, Britannia prima. Britannia secunda. Maxima
Caesariensis. Britain divided into five parts.
Caerleon in the West, and York in the North; Londons Diocese (as seems)
made BRIT. PRIMA; Caerleon, BRIT. SECVNDA; and York MAXIMA CaeSARIENSIS.

(15) But in the next age, when the power of their Presidents began to grow
overgreat, they again divided Britain into five parts, adding to the three
former VALENTIA and FLAVIA CaeSARIENSIS: the first of which two seems to have
been the Northerly part of MAXIMA CaeSARIENSIS, recovered from the Picts and
Scots by Theodosius the General, under Valence the Emperor, and in honor of
him, Valentia why called.
named VALENTIA: and Flavia may be conjectured to receive the name from Flavius
the Emperor (son of Theodosius) for that we read not of the name BRIT. FLAVIA,
Amianus. l. 28. Flavia why called.
before his time.

(16) So these five partitions had their limits assigned after this manner: The
bounds of Britains five parts*
BRIT. PRIMA contained those coasts that lay betwixt Thamesis, the Severne,
Britannia prima.
and the British Sea: BRITAIN SECUNDA extended from Severne unto the Irish
Seas, Britannia secunda.
containing the Country that we now call WALES: FLAVIA CaeSARIENSIS, was that
which lay betwixt the Rivers Humber and Tyne: Flavia Caesa.
and VALENTIA from the said River, Max. Caesar.
and Picts-wall reached unto the Rampire near Edinburgh in SCOTLAND, Valentia.
the farthest part that the Romans possessed when this Division was in use.
For the several people inhabiting all those parts, with their ancient Names
and Borders (whether designed by the Romans or the old Britains) together
with our modern Names and Shires, answerable to each of them: we will refer
you to the Tables thereof, Lib 5 cap. 5. and 6.
elsewhere.

(17) This whole Province of BRITAIN, as in our History shall appear, The
Emperors respect of Britains Conquest. Their surnames hence.
was highly esteemed of the Emperors themselves, assuming as a glorious
surname BRITANNICUS: coming thither in person over those dangerous and scarce
known Seas; here marrying, living, and dying; enacting here Laws for the
whole Empire, Their residence here.
and giving to those Captains that served here, many Ensigns of great honor:
Their favors.
yea Claudius gave Plantius (the first Prefect of that Province) the right
hand, as he accompanied him in his Triumph: Their Triumphs.
and his own Triumph of BRITAIN was set out with such magnificence, that the
Provinces brought in golden crowns of great weight, the Governors commanded to
attend, and the very Captains permitted to be present at the same: A Navall
Coronet was fixed upon a pinnacle of his Palace. Arches and Trophies were
raised in Rome, and himself on his aged knees mounted the stairs into the
Capitol, supported by his two sons in Law: so great a joy conceived he in
himself for the Conquest of some small portion of BRITAIN.

(18) How the Romans found it, held it, and left it, as times ripened and
rottened their success, with the Names, the Inhabitants, Manners and
Resisters, I leave to be pursued in the following Histories, and will only now
show thee these three Kingdoms that are (in present) the chief Bodies of
GREAT BRITAINS MONARCHY; Scotland vide lib. 3. Ireland vide lib. 4.
two of which ( Scotland and Ireland) shall in their due places have their
father and more particular descriptions.

WHen the Roman Empire began to be unweildy by the weight of her own
Greatness, How the Saxon H^ptarchie began.
and the Provinces ready to shake off subjection, by the Ambition of their
Prefects: Britain, then wanting her Soldiers (taken thence to serve in
foreign wars) and abandoned by the Romans, who were wont to protect her,
was now laid open and naked to her Enemies, who had long waited an opportunity
to lay her waste. Among whom the Picts and Scots, casting a covetous eye upon
so rich a prey, daily with inrodes molesting the weary, and now-weakened
Britains, enforced them to call in, to their assistance, the Saxons; who in a
short time, of ayding friends became oppressing enemies, and supplanting the
Natives of this Land, laid the foundation of their aspiring hopes so sure, that
thereupon in success of time they transformed the fabric of this one
Province into a sevenfold State, The seven Kingdoms of the Saxon Heptarchie.
which as seven-crowned Pillars, stood upon the Bases of Kent, South-Saxia,
West-Saxia, East-Saxia, Northumberland, Mercia, and East-Anglia; governed by so
many several Kings; whose limits are in this Map distinguished by their
several Arms, and circumscribed Lines; but for all the particular Counties
under each of their commands, we will refer you to the Table in the fourth
Chapter of our seventh Book: in which Book, the History of that growing
Heptarchy, and its settling again into one Monarchy, is contained at large.

(2) Neither may we think, that the Limits of the whole Heptarchy, or of each
particular Kingdom, were at their first raising apportioned, as afterward they
were; but that (as all other States do) by steps and degrees they came to
their settled bounds. Their utmost Northern border was at first no other (in
all likelihood) then that, The most Northern limit of the H^p^archie.
wherewith the Romans had formerly severed this their Province from Scotland,
being that famous partition called the Picts-wall, The Picts wall, the Romans
only partition Northward.
(which therefore in our Map you shall find described with Battlements)
girding the wast (or narrowest place) of the whole Island, from Sea to Sea, and
reaching twixt the Bay of A River in Cumberland.
Eden on the one coast, and the mouth of Tyne on the other; though afterward
the Northumbrians extended their Marches beyond that Wall. The Romans had no
other partition but only this Northern: The Saxons added two other bounds in
the West.
the Saxons (who had made the Britains also their enemies) added two others
(both in the West) to straiten them and strengthen themselves. The first was
divised by Offa the Mercian King, who made a Trench of admirable work and
charge, called Offa-Dyke, Offa-Dyke.
running about one hundred miles over mountains and hills, from the mouth of
Dee in Flint-shire, to the fall of Wye in Glocestershire, therewith encircling
the remainder of the dispossessed Britains in those Western and barren parts:
which oppression King Harold further aggravated by a Law; Io. Sarisbu* in
Poly^rat.
That if any Welshman were found with any weapon on this side that Ditch, he
should forthwith have his right hand cut off. The River Tamar.
The second partition was of King Athelstans device, who finding that the
Britains did still inhabit those other Western parts, from the Lands end of
Cornwall, even unto Excester in Devonshire, he not only thrust them out of
that City, fortifying the same with vast trenches, and a strong wall of
squared stone to prevent their attempts: but further ordered that they should
contain themselves within the River Tamar, whence that Promontory came to be
named Corn-wall; of the shape thereof like a Horn, which they call Corn, and
of the Marianus calls them Occidentales Britanes, as Saxo victor,est eales.
Inhabitants which the Saxons called ealsh, signifying Strangers.

(3) The like may be said of the particular Kingdoms, that they attained not
to those their certain bounds, the Kingly Titles, but by degrees: the whole
Saxons State being anciently divided, not into Shires, but into sundry small
Regions, The Saxons domini^^ns divid^d into Hid^s.
and those again into Hides (a Hide being four yeard land, or as others
think, as much as a Plow can till in one year) as by an ancien M. Ta^^.
Fragment preserved and divulged by M. Clarenc. p. 114.
two most judicious Antiquaries, may be seen, wherein all the land lying on
this side Humber is thus parted.

HIDES.
Myrcna contains 30000. hides Woken setna 7000. hides. Westerna 7000. hides.
Pec-setna 1200. hides. Elmed-setna 600. hides. Lindes-farona 7000. hides.
Suth-Gyrwa 600. hides. North-Gyrwa 600. hides. Fast-Gyrwa 600. hides.
East-Wixna 300. hides. West-Wixna 6000. hides. Spalda 600. hides. Wigesta 900.
hides. Heresinna 1200. hides. Sweordora 300. hides. Eyfla 300. hides. Wicca
300. hides. Wight-gora 600. hides. Noxgaga 5000. Hides. Oht-gaga 2000. hides.
Hwynca 7000. hides. Ciltern-setna 4000. hides. Hendrica 3000. hides. Vnecung-ga
1200. hides. Aroseatna 600. hides. Fearfinga 3000. hides. Belmiga 600. hides.
Witherigga 600. hides. East-Willa 600. hides. West-Willa 600. hides. East-Angle
30000. hides. East-Sexena 7000. hides. Cant-Warena 15000. hides. Suth-Sexena
7000. hides. West-Sexena 100000. hides.
(4) But when that sevenfold Heptarchie was brought to a Monarchy, and the
Kings from Pagans to be Christian professors, K. Elfred first divided the Land
into Shires, and why.
Elfred (that mirror of Kings) for the settling of his Kingdom and subjects
under a due and certain course of Justice and Government, did first distribute
his Kingdom into several Countries called Shires, Ingulphus.
( of the Saxon word Scyre, to cut or divide,) and into other
under-governments; of which let us hear Malmesburie. By occasion (says he)
and example of the barbarous (he means the Danes) the natural Inhabitants
also were addicted to robberies, so that none could pass in safety without
weapons for defense. Elfred therefore ordained Centuries, Malmesbury.
which they term Hundreds, and Decimes, which they call Tythings, that so
every Englishman living under law, should be within some Hundred and Tything.
And if a man were accused of any transgression, he should forthwith bring in
some of that same Hundred and Tything. And is a man were accused of any
transgression, he should forthwith bring in some of that same Hundred and
Tything that would be pledges for his appearance to answer the Law, and he that
could not find such a surety, should abide the severitie thereof. But in case
any man standing thus accused, either before or after such suretiship did fly,
then all that Hundred and Tything incurred a mulct imposed by the King, etc. By
this device he brought peace into the Country, so as in the very high ways he
commanded Bracelets of Gold to be hanged up to mock the greedy passengers,
whiles none was found so hardy as to take them away.

(5) This Custom King Elfred might borow from the use he saw in military
Government, where the Generals direction found easiest success by help of
under-rulers, Centurions and Decurions; or he might have it from the Germans,
Tacitus.
who kept Courts of Justice in every Territory, having a hundred men out of the
People as Assistants to perform their Lawdayes. By which his Partition, and
industrious care, Peace and true dealing so flourished, Ingu^phus.
that a Wayfaring man losing in his journey any sum of money, might a month
after return to the place and have it again.

(6) Those forementioned Tythings contained each ten Persons, Tythings.
whereof every one was Hence Franc, Plegis, and Freeborough, Lambert Peramb.
Pledge for another good bearing (for which cause in In Kent Bort^olders.
some places a Tything is yet called a Borow, of the Saxon Borh a Pledge) who
had one chief, called the Tythingman, or Borhes ealdor: so that there was no
one man in all the Kingdom, who in his rank had not the eyes of many to
observe his life. Each Hundred had under their verge ten such Tythings, A
Hundred.
and when any was chosen the chief of the Hundred, Ex leg. Ed. Corf.
at the usual place of their meetings, after some kind of reverence, every
one with their Lances touched a Spear, which he held upright in his hand, and
by that sign vowed to be peaceably ordered. Whence such a society was called
also a Wapentake, A Wapentach.
of the map of Britain BRITAIN AS IT WAS DIVIDED in the time of the English:
Saxons especially during their Heptarchy
Saxon eth-dac, a touching of weapons. In these Wapentaches many affairs were
handled, but what could not be there decided, ^hribinges and (...). A Lath,
thence seems a Leet Court to take name.
was referred to a Society or conventicle of greater jurisdiction, containing
usually three Hundreds (sometimes four) thence called Drihingas, and the
chief of them Drihingerefas, which assembly in some places were termed Leth,
of the Saxon word gelathian, to assemble together; as likewise all their
Counties were called gemotes, meetings. And lastly, what could not be there
defined, was referred to the whole Shire: for dispatch of which greater
affairs, and settling of the common peace, he appointed both Judges and
shere-gerefas, (now Sheriffs) in every County: whereas before the Provinces
were governed by Vidoms. Vicedomini. Ingulphus.


(7) So that hereby we see both the Saxons distributing of this Country (in
their highest glory) and also the government thereof, from the King (whom they
called their Conning, (either of his skill or power) to the lowest in the land.
Other intermediate Governors throughout the Land, next unto the Kings
Counselors, where (it seems) those which the Saxons callen then Eal Sepmen,
Aldermen. Earls.
(though a name now more humbled) and the Came. p. 20. but Lambert thinks it a
Saxon title, Peramb. p. 502 Portgreves. Burgesses. Thean. Vnderthaine.
Danes, Eorles; the chief Magistrates in Cities, the Port gerefan, Portgreves:
and Burgharen, Burgesses. For touching the name of laford, (whence we contract
Lord) it may seem rather a name of honor and reverence, then of civil
authority, so likewise Lamb. p. 502. but Came. p. 121. ^^inkes it Danish.

Churl. Y^omanry. The number of the Shires, 32.


THein, a style for men of the better rank, as under-THein, a note of service,
and Ceorle, or Churl, of their Yeomanly condition who were also called gemen,
the Yeomanry.

(8) Since that first most politic distribution of K. Elfred, the number of
the said Shires have found some change; for what their number was, An. 1016. in
the reign of King Ethelred, Malmesbury shows. The Danes (says he) at this
time when there were reckoned in England thirty-two Shires, Malmes.
invaded no less then sixteen of them: yea and afterward also there were no
more in number, at that time the Land received a new threefold distribution,
Polyc. li. 1. c. 19 A threefold ^^stibution. Three sorts of Laws, and Shires
subject to them.
according to the three sorts of Laws, by which it was governed; that is,
West Saxons Law, Danish, and Mercian. First, to the West Saxon Law were the
Counties of Kent, Sussex, Suthrie, Berkshire, Hantshire, Wiltshire,
Sommersetshire, Dorcetshire, and Devonshire; nine in number. To the Danish
laws were obedient fifteen other; Yorkshire, Darbyshire, Nottinghamshire,
Leicestershire, Lincolneshire, Northamptonshire, Bedfordshire, Buckinghamshire,
Hertfordshire, Essex, Middlesex, Norfolk, Suffolk, Cambridgeshire, and
Huntingtonshire. The Mercian Laws ruled the eight Counties remaining, which
were Gloucestershire, Worcestershire, Herefordshire, Warwickshire, Oxfordshire,
Chesseshire, Shropshire, and Staffordshire.

In Will Conq. time Shires 34. and more.
(9) But when William the Conqueror had got the English Diadem upon his head,
and taxed the Kingdom with a general survey, we find in that public record
of the Domes-day Bocke, thirty four named, besides those of Durham,
La^cashire, Northumberland, Westmorland, and Cumberland; the three last lay
exposed to the Scots, and the other two freed from tax to maintain the
Borders; which five Counties being added to the other, their number arises to
thirty-nine: Shires 39.
and the thirteen Shires of Wales added to both, make fifty two Counties, as
we have at this day. Shires 52.


Polyclnon. Shires 36.
(10) But the Author of Polychronicon (upon what warrant I know not) reckons
thirty six Shires and an half, Towns in the Conqu^rours time.
Parish-Churches. Knights Fees.
at the Conquerours survey: wherein, says he, were found fifty two thousand
and fourscore Towns; forty five thousand and two Parish-Churches; seventie
five thousand Knights-Fees, whereof twenty eight thousand and fifteen were of
Religious order; and yet among these he accounts no part of Cornwall: But
from this report it may well be that Rossus Warwicanus complains of the
depopulation of the Land, which with Towne-ships (says he) anciently had stood
so bestrewed, as a goodly Garden every where garnished with fair flowers.

(11) King Elfred (the first divider) instituted a Prefect or Lieutenant in
every of these Counties, Lieutenants. Camd. Higdon.
which then were called Custodes, (and ^fterwards Earls says Higdon) who kept
the Country in obedience to the King, and suppressed the outrages of notorious
robbers. But Canutus the Dane, A fourfold division ^^der Canutus the^ Dane.
when success had set him upon the English Throne, divided the care of his
Kingdoms affairs into a fourfold subjection; to wit, West-Sex, Mercia,
Northumbre and East-England; himself taking charge of the first and the
greatest, making three Tetrarches of especial trust over the rest, namely,
Edrich over Mercia; Yrtus over Northumbre; and Turkill over East-England. Wales
neither in this division nor that of King Elfred, was any ways liable, it
being cut (as we have said) from England, by King Offa: but those remnants of
the ancient Britains divided likewise that Western Province into Kingdoms,
Cantreds and Commots, Lib. 2.
as more largely we will show in the plot of that Principality. And this shall
suffice for the division of England under the Saxons, The continuance of the
Saxons government.
who enjoyed it the space of 567. years, from their first entrance under
Hengist, unto the death of Edmund Ironside, and again under Edward Confessor
the term of twenty years.

(12) Now if any shall be so minutely curious, The compartments of the Map
unfolded.
as to enquire the meaning of the Emblematicall compartments, bordering the
Map: the right side contains the first seven Kings of that sevenfold State,
their Names, their Kingdoms, their Escocheons, their years of first aspiring:
the left side does portraict the like of the seven first kings in each of those
Kingdoms, The first seven Kings.

The first seven Christian Kings.


which by Christian Baptism aspired to the hope of a Kingdom eternal, 1.
Ethelbert (of Kent) receiving Austens instruction. 2. Sebert (the East-Saxon)
converting (by advice of B. Miletus) the Temples of Diana and Apollo (now S.
Paul's in London, Lib. 7. c. 18. 2 Lib. 7. c. 8.. 3
and S. Peter's in Westminster) to the service of Christ. Li. 7. c. 11.. 3.
3. Erpenwald (the East-Angle) received Baptism by exhortation of King Edwin
the Northumbrian, (though as it seems Edwin himself for a time deferred his
own Baptism) and was therefore martyred by his Pagan Subjects. Lib. 7. c. 9..
8. and ib. c. 20.
4. Edwine (the Northumbrian) stirred up by a vision both to expect the
Kingdom, and to receive the Faith, which he did by the preaching of Paulinus,
whom he made Archbishop of York. Lib. 7. c. 7.. 7.
5. Kingill (the West Saxon) converted by the preaching of S. Berinus, whom he
made Bishop of Dorcester near Oxford. Lib. 7. c. 10. 5.
6. Peada (the Mercian) receiving Christian Faith, by persuasion of Oswy King
of Northumbers, was murdered by his own mothers (some say his wives)
procurement. 7. Ethelwolfe (the South-Saxon) Baptized at Oxford by S. Berinus,
Lib. 7. c. ^.. 3.
where Wulpherus King of Mercia was his God father at Font.

(13) And since these Saxons first gave to this Island the name of England, we
will here affixe (for a close of all) an ancient Epigram touching both this
Country and her Name; the rather, because In Io. Hondius his Map of Gallia.
of late a principal part and praise therein, is surreptitiously (against L.
15. c. 14. he lived An. 1330 his Author perchance much ancienter.
Lex Plagiaria) taken from England and ascribed as proper to France. A certain
Author (says (...), some read, not so well: because sertilus follows.
Bartholomeus de proprietatibus rerum) thus in verse describes England.

Anglia, terra This verse Hondius inserts as peculiar to France.
ferox, and fertilis, Angulus Orbis;
Insula praedives, quae toto vix eget Orb,
Et cujus totus indiget Orbis open:
Angliaplenajocis, Gens Libera, and aptajocari,
This verse Hondius inserts as peculiar to France.
Libera Gens, cui libera men's, and libera lingua,
Sed lingua melior liberiorque manus.
ENGLAND, fierce Land, Worlds, Angle, fertile art;
Rich I Will, thou needst no other Countries Mart,
Each other Country yet thy succor needs:
ENGLAND, Joys Land, be free and joyous long,
Free Race, free Grace, free Kind, free Mind and Tongue,
Yet Hands pass Tongues for free and glorious deeds.
THE TYPE OF THE FLOURISHING KINGDOM OF ENGLAND WITH THE GENERAL DESCRIPTION
OF IT, AS IT WAS FROM THE TIME OF THE NORMANS. CHAPTER III.
THE Saxons glory now near to expire, by his appointment who holds both times
and Kingdoms in his all-ordering hand; their own swords being the
instruments, and the Danes the maules that beat their beautiful Diadem into
pieces; the Normans, a stirring Nation, (neither expected, nor much feared)
under the leading of William their Duke, and encouragement of the Roman
Bishop, (an usual promoter hereof broken titles) made hither suddenly into
England, who inone only battle, with the title of his sword and slaughter of
Harold, set the Imperial Crown thereof upon his own head: which no sooner was
done, but the English went down, and the Normans lording it, Deuteronomy. 6. v. 10,
11.
became owners of those Cities which themselves never built; possessed those
Vineyards which they never planted; drank of those Wels which they never had
dug; and inhabited those houses, filled With riches, for which they never
had labored: for they found it to be as the Land whereupon the Lord set his
eye, Deuteronomy. 11. v. 11, 12.
even from the beginning to the end of the year: not only drinking water of
the rain of heaven, but having also Rivers of waters and fountains in her
valleys, Deuteronomy. 8. v. 7, 9.
and without all scarcity, whose stones are iron, and out of whose mountains
is dug brass. This made them more resolute at first to settle themselves in
this fairest and fruitfullest part of the Island; the Conqueror using all
policy both Martial and Civil, to plant his posterity here for ever. How he
found the Land governed we showed in the Heptarchie; but his restless thoughts
were not contented with conquering the Nation and their Land, unless he also
overcame their very Customs, Laws, and Language.

(2) Touching the distribution of the Kingdom, whereas other kings before him
made use of it, chiefly for good of the people, and better ministering of
Justice, he made use of it, to know the wealth of his Subjects, and to enrich
his Coffers: for he caused a description to be made of all England, how much
land every one of his Barons possessed; Florentius Wigor. p. 449.
how many Knights fees, how many Plow-lands, how many in villanage, how many
head of beasts; yea how much ready money every man from the greatest to the
least did possess, and what rents might be made of every man's possession: the
Book of which inquisition (yet in the Exchequer) was called Domes-day, for the
generality of that Judgment on all the Land: Gervas. Tilb. Ingu^phus.
Whereunto we may add his other distribution of this Land (worse then any
former) when thrusting the English out of their possessions, Camb. in Norm.
Mat. West. lib. 2. etc.
he distributed their inheritances to his Souldier^; yet so, that all should be
held of the King, as of the only tri^ Lord and possessor.

(3) For the Laws by which he meant to govern, he held one excellent rule and
purpose, which was, that a People ought to be ruled by Laws written and
certain: for otherwise new Judges would still bring new Judgments: Gervas.
Tilb. de Scaccar.
and therefore he caused twelve to be chosen out of every County, Hoveden p.
243. where they are set down.
which should on their oath, without inclining one way or other, neither adding
nor detracting, open unto him all their ancient Laws and Customs. By whose
relation understanding that three sorts of Laws formerly were in the Land,
Merchenlage, West-Saxon-lage, Dane-lage; he had preferred these last, (himself
and People being anciently derived from those Northern people) had not all the
Barons bewayling to the King, Ibid p. 347.
how grievous it was for a Land to be judged by those Laws which they
understood not, Ingulphus.
altered his resolute purpose: yet in bringing in the strange forms of Normas
Process, and pleading in the French tongue (which continued till Edward the
thirds time) that grievance was but slenderly prevented. So likewise did he
much alter the old Courts of Justice, where these Laws should be ministered:
but whereas the ancient Kings of England, according to Moses his example, sat
in person in the seat of Justice, to right the greater affairs of their
Subjects, Lamberts Archaion.
as William Lambert shows in King Alfred, Edgar, Canutus, etc. and proves out
of the Kings Oath, out of Bracton, Britain, Saxon-Lawes, etc. King William not
only continued this; but besides erected some other Courts of Justice, Gervas.
Regis Caria in qua i^s^ in propria person jura die^^^t.
as the Exchequer, and certain Courts and Sessions to be held four times
every year: appointing both Judges (some to hear causes, others to whom
appeals should be made, but none from them) and also Prefects to look to good
orders. Those last Polydore calls Justices of Peace; but their institution
seems to be far later: and no less is his error on the other side, in saying
the Conqueror first instituted Sheriffs, and the trial by twelve men, which
were both ancienter.

(4) And because the Conqueror, for honor of Bishops, caused them to remove
from small obscure places to Cities of more renown; we have therefore reserved
to this last place that division of this Kingdom, which is according to
Jurisdiction Episcopal. Formerly in the year of salvation, H^st. Derob.
636. Honorius the fifth Archbishop of Canterbury, first divided England into
Parishes, which at this day are contained under their several Diocesans, and
these again under their two Metropolitanes, ( Canterbury and York) in manner
following.

CANTERBVRIE.
Bishoprics. Counties. Parishes. Canterbury. Kent. 257. Rochester. 98. London.
Essex. 623. Middlesex. Hertfordshire part. Lincoln. Lincolneshire. 1255.
Leicestershire. Huntington. Bedfordshire. Buckinghamshire. Hertfordshire part.
Chichester. Hertfordshire part. 250. Sussex. Winchester. Hantshire. 362.
Surrey. Wight Isle. Gernsey Isle. Iersey Isle. Salisbury. Wiltshire. 248.
Barkeshire. Excester. Devonshire. 604. Cornwall. Bath and Wels. Somersetshire.
388. Gloucester. Gloucester. 267. Worcester. Worcestershire. 241.
Warwickeshire. Lichfield and Coventry. Warwickeshire part. 557. Staffordshire.
Derbyshire. Shropshire part. Hereford. Shropshire part. 313. Herefordshire.
Ely. Cambridgeshire. 141. Ely Isle. map of England THE KINGDOM OF ENGLAND
Norwich. Norfolk. 1121. Suffolk. Oxford. Oxfordshire. 195. Peterborow.
Northampton. Rutlandshire. 293. Bristow. Dorsetshire. Glamorgan. 236. Landaffe.
Monmouthshire. Breckneckshire. Radnorshire. 177. S. David's. Pembrokeshire.
Caermarden. 308. Bangor. Caernarvonshire. Anglesey Isle. Merionethshire.
Denbighshire. 107. S. Asaph. Denbighshire part. Flintshire part. 121.

YORK.
York. Yorkshire. Nottinghamshire. 581. Chester. Cheshire. Richmondshire.
Cumberland part. Lancashire. 256. Carlisle. Cumberland part. Westmorland. 93.
Durham. Durham. Northumberland. 135. Sodor. Man Island. 17.

Total Bishoprics 27. Parishes 9285.
(5) To speak nothing of these twenty eight Flamins the Priests of Idolatry,
and the three Arch-Flamins, whose seats were at London, Polyd. Hist. A^g. lib.
1.
Caerlion, and York; all of them converted by King Lucius into Christian
Bishops Sees: let us only insist upon the three last, by the same King
appointed to be Metropolitanes over the rest; among whom London is said to be
chief: whose first Christian Archbishop was Thean, the builder of S. Peter's
Church in Cornehill for his Cathedral, as by an ancient Table there lately
hanging, was affirmed, and tradition to this day does hold. Our British
Historians do bring a succession of fifteen Archbishops, to have sat from
his time unto the coming of the Saxons, whose last was Vodius, slain by King
Vortiger, for reprehending his heathenish marriage with Rowen, the daughter of
Hengist. At what time began the misery of the Land, and of holy Religion, both
which they laid waste under their profane feet: until Ethelbert of Kent, the
first Christian Saxon King, advanced Christianity, and Augustine to the
Archbishopric of Canterbury, when London under Melitus became subject to that
See.

(6) At Caerlion upon Vske, in the time of great Arthur, sat Dubritius, a man
excellently learned, and of an holy conversation: he had sat Bishop of
Landaffe a long time, and with Germanus and Lupus, two French Bishops, greatly
impugned the Pelagian Heresy, infecting at that time the Island very far,
whose fame and integrity was such, that he was made Archbishop of all Wales:
but grown very old, he resigned the same unto This David was the Vncl^ of
Arthu^, and son of Princ X^^thus, bego^ on M^lea^ia a Nun.
David his Disciple, a man of greater birth, but greater austeritie of life,
who by consent of King Arthur, removed his Archbishops See unto Menevia, a
place very solitary and meet for meditation: the miracles of the man, (which
are said to be many) changed both the name of the place into his own, and
robbed Caerlion of her Archiepiscopall seat: This See of S. David's, (as in an
ancient Register belonging to that Church is recorded) had seven Bishops
Suffraganes subject unto it, which were Exceter, Bathe, Hereford, Landaffe,
Bangor, S. Asaph, and Fernes in Ireland: Notwithstanding, either for want of
Pall, carried into Britanny by Archbishop Sampson, in a dangerous infection of
sickness, either by poverty or negligence, it lost that Jurisdiction, and in
the days of King Henry the first, became subject to the Sea of Canterbury.

(7) York has had better success then either of the former, in retaining her
original honor, though much impaired in her circuit, challenging to have
been sometime Metropolitan over all the Bishops in Scotland: and although it
was made equal in honor and power with Canterbury, Beda Hist^^. Angli^ lib.
1. cap. 2^.
by Pope Gregory, as Beda relates, and had twelve Suffragan Ha^^s^ald.
Linda^^rn, etc.
Bishoprics that owed obedience, only four now acknowledge York their
Metropolitan, but Canterbury the Superior: for William the Conqueror
thinking it dangerous to have two in like authority, lest the one should set
on his Crown, and the other strike it off, left York to be a Primate, but
Canterbury only the Primate of all England.

(8) That Lichfield was made an Archiepiscopall See by Pope Hadrian the first,
at the suite of Offa, the great King of Mercia, is manifested by Matthew of
Westminster, unto whose Jurisdiction were assigned the Bishoprics of
Winchester, An. Iom. 765.
Hereford, Leicester, Sidnacester, Helmham, and Dunwich, and whose first and
last Archbishop was Aldwin. That Winchester also had intended an
Archiepiscopall Pall, the same Author records, when Henry Bloys, of the
blood-royall, greatly contended with the Archbishop of Canterbury for
superiority, under the pretense of being Cardinal de latere; to him an
Archiepiscopall Pall was sent, with power and authority over seven Churches,
but he dying before that the design was done, the Sea of Winchester remained
in subjection to Canterbury. And that (long before) the Sea of Dorchester by
Oxford, had the Jurisdiction of an Archbishop, is apparent by those Provinces
that were under his Diocese, which were Winchester, Oxford, Lincoln,
Salisbury, Bristow, Wels, Lichfield, Chester, and Excester* and the first
Bishop of this great Circuit, Berinus, was called the Apostle and Bishop of the
West Saxons: which in his next successor was divided into two parts,
Winchester and Dorchester, and not long after into Lichfield, Sidnacester, and
Legecester; and lastly, the Sea removed from Dorchester to Lincoln, as now it
is. And thus far for the division of this Realm, both Politic and
Ecclesiasticke, as it has stood and stands at this day.

(9) But the whole Islands division, by most certain Record was anciently made,
when Julius Agricola drew a Trench or Fortification upon that narrow space of
ground betwixt Edenborough Frith, and Dunbretton Bay, making the Southern part
a Province unto the Roman Empire. Afterward Hadrian the Emperor seeing
perhaps the Province too spacious to be well governed without great expense,
drew back these limits almost fourscore miles shorter, even to the mouth of
the River Tyne, whence he fortified with a wall of admirable work unto
Carleile which stood the Lands border, while it stood as a Roman Province: yet
the conquering Saxons did spread again over those bounds, and (as seems)
enlarged their government to that first Tract, as by this Inscription in a
Stone Cross standing upon a Bridge over the water of Faith appears.

I am a free March as Passenger may ken, Chron. Winton Ho^lienshed. ^ scrip.
Brit. p. 12

To Scots, to Britains, and to Englishmen.
(10) But afterward William the Conqueror, and Malcolme King of Scotland,
falling to an agreement for their limits, arreared a Cross upon In the Nort
Riding of Yo^kshire.
Stanemore, where on the one side the portraiture and Arms of the King of
England was sculptured, and of the King of Scots on the other (a piece whereof
is yet remaining there near to the Spittle) thence called the Rey-Crosse,
there erected to be a Mearestone to either Kingdom. His Successors also
abolished the two partitions in the West, whereby the Welsh became one Nation
and Kingdom with the English. It is also said that King Stephen to purchase
friendship with the Scottish Nation, gave unto their King the County of
Cumberland, who with it held both Westmorland and Northumberland; but as
Nubrigensis writes, he restored them to King Henry the second, wisely
considering his great power and right to those parts.

(11) The last known borders were from the Sulway in the West-bay, along the
Cheviot hills, unto the water of Tweede by Barwicke in the East, to maintain
which, on each part many laws have been made, and many inrodes, robberies, and
fewdes practiced; all which by the hand of GOD is now cut off, and by the
rightful succession of King JAMES our Sovereign, who has broken down the
partition of this great Island, and made the extremes of two Kingdoms, the
very midst of his great united Empire.

KENT, the first Province appearing in the South of this Kingdom, is bounded
upon the North with the famous River Thamisis: on the East with the German
Ocean: on the South with Sussex and the narrow Seas: M. Lamb. peramb.
and upon the West with Sussex and Surrey. The length thereof extended from
Langley into the West, The length of Kent.
unto Ramsgate Eastward in the Isle of Thanet, is about 53. English miles.
From Rother in the South, unto the Isle of Grain Northward, The breadth.
the breadth is not much above 26. and the whole circumference about 160.

The form.
(2) In form it somewhat resembles the head of a hammer or Battle-axe, and
lies corner-wise into the Sea: by Strabo, The name.
Caesar, Diodorus, and Ptolomie, called Cantium, of Cant or Canton, As M.
William Lambard conjectureth.
an Angle or Corner: either of Caino a British word, which signifies Bushes or
Woods, whereof that Country in those former times was plentifully stored.

The site of Kent.
(3) The Air, though not very clear, because of the vapors arising from the
Sea, and Rivers that environ the same, is both wholesome and temperate, as
seated nearest to the Equinoctial, and the furthest from the North Pole, not
touched with cold as the other parts of the Land are.

The Soil.
(4) The Soil toward the East is uneven, rising into little hills, the West
more level and woody, in all places fruitful, The commodities.
and in plenty equals any other of the Realm, yea, and in some things has the
best esteem: as in Broadcloathes, Fruits, Will. Lambard, fol. 248.
and feedings for Cattle. Only Mines (excepting Iron) are wanting: all things
else delivered with a prodigal heart and liberal hand.

Rivers of Kent.
(5) Sundry navigable Rivers are in Kent, whereof Medway, that divides the
Shire in the midst, is chief; in whose bosom securely rides his Majesty's
Navy Royal, the walls of the land, and terrors of the Seas; besides ten others
of name and account, that open with twenty Creekes and Havens for Ships
arrivage into this Land, four of them bearing the name of Cinque Ports, The
Cinque Ports.
are places of great strength and privileges, which are Dover, Sandwich,
Rumney, and Winchelsey: among which Dover with the Castle is accounted by
Matthew Paris the Monk, Peramb. of Kent, fol. 148.
the Lock and Key to the whole Realm of England; and by John Rosse and Lidgate
is said to be built by Julius Caesar, fatal only for the death of King
Stephen, and surrender of King John therein happening.

(6) A conceit is, that Goodwin-Sands were sunk for the sins of himself and his
sons. Goodwin-sands.
Shelves indeed that dangerously lie on the North-east of this County, and are
much feared of all Navigators. These formerly had been firm ground, but by a
sudden inundation of the Sea were swallowed up, as at the same time a great
part of Flanders and the Low Countries were: Silvest. Giraldus in his Itinerary
of Wales Lamb. fol. 105. Hector Boethius.
and the like also at the same time befell in Scotland, as Hector Boethius their
Historiographer writes. A like accident happened in the year 1586. the fourth
day of August, in this County, at Mottingham, a Town eight miles from London,
suddenly the ground began to sink, John Stowe.
and three great Elmes thereon growing, were carried so deep into the bowels
of the earth, that no part of them could any more be seen, the hole left in
compass fourscore yards about, and a line of fifty fadomes plummed into it
does find no bottom.

The Inhabitants of Kent. Caesar. Com. lib. 5. fol. 52.
(7) The Kentish people in Caesar's time were accounted the civillest among the
Britains: and as yet esteem themselves the freest Subjects of the English, not
conquered, but compounded with by the Normans: and herein glory, that the King
and Commons of all the Saxons were the first Christians, converted in Anno 596.
yea, and long before that time also Kent received the Faith: for it is recorded
that Lucius the first Christian British King in this Island, Lam. Peram. in
description of Dover, fol. 158.
built a Church to the name and service of Christ, within the Castle of Dover,
endowing it with the Toll of the same Haven.

(8) This County is enriched with two Cities and Bishops See, strengthened with
27. Castles, graced with eight of his Majesty's most Princely Houses, traded
with 24. Market Towns, and beautified with many stately and gorgeous buildings.
The chiefest City thereof, Canterbury by King Rudhudibras. Lam. Peram. in
description of Canterbury, fol. 292.
the Metropolitan and Archbishops See, is Canterbury, built (as our British
Historians report) 900. years before the birth of Christ; by Henry of
Huntington, called Caier-Kent, wherein (as M. Lambard says) was erected the
first School of professed Arts and Sciences, and the same a Pattern unto
Sigibert King of the East Angles, for his foundation at Cambridge:
notwithstanding by the computation of time, this Sigibert was slain by Penda
King of Mercia, 30. years before that Theodore the Grecian was Bishop of
Canterbury, who is said to be the erector of that Academy. Ethelbert. Edbald.
Lotharius. Withred. Edelbert.
But certain it is, that Austen the Monk had made this City famous before that
time, by the conversion of these Saxons unto Christianity, and in building, a
most magnificent Church to Gods service, wherein eight of their Kings have been
interred, but all their Monuments since overshadowed by the height of Beckets
Tomb, that for glory, wealth, and superstitious worships, equalized the
Pyramides of Egypt, or the Oracles of Delphos, yet now with Dagon is fallen
before the Ark of God.

This City has been honored with the presence and Coronations of King John
and Queen Isabel his wife, 1 Samuel 5.4. Herein King John and his Queen were
Crowned.
with the marriages of King Henry third, and of King Edward the first, and with
the interments of Edward the Black Prince. King Henry the fourth, and of Queen
Joan his wife: as Feversham is with the burials of King Stephen, and of Maud
his Queen and wife. But as in glory, so in adversity has this City born a
part, being diverse times afflicted by the Danes, but most especially in the
days of King Ethelred, who in that revenge of their massacre, made havoc of
all, and herein slew forty three thousand and two hundred persons, the tenth
besides reserved to live. Afterward it recovered breath and beauty by the
liberality of Bishop Langford; Charters and Privileges by King Henry the
third; strength in trench and Fortifications from King Richard the second: and
lastly, walls for her defense by Simon Sudbury Archbishop of that See: whose
Graduation is placed for Latitude 51.25. and parallelized for Longitude 22.8.
her sister Rochester differing not much in either degree.

(9) Which City (as Beda says) was built by one Rof, Rochester.
Lord of the same, though some ascribe the foundation of the Castle to Julius
Caesar, and has been often ruinated by the injuries of war, both in the
times when the Saxons strove for superiority among themselves, wherein this
City was laid waste, Anno 680. as also in the assaults of their common ^nemy
the Danes, who about the year 884. from France sailed up the River Medway, and
besieged the same, so that had not King Elfred speedily come to the rescue, it
had been overthrown by those Pagans. And again, in Anno 999. the Danes
miserably spoiled this City in the time of King Ethelred: neither has it stood
safe from danger since (though not defaced so much by war) for twice has it
been sore endamaged by chance of fire: the first was in the reign of King
Henry the first, An. 1130. himself being present with most of his Nobility, for
the consecration of the Cathedral Church of S. Andrew. And again almost wholly
consumed about the latter end of the Reign of King Henry the second, Anno 1177.
Yet after all these calamities it recovered some strength again, by the bounty
of King Henry the third, both in buildings, and in ditching her about for
defense.

(10) Civil broils and dissentions has this County been burdened with,
Civil dissentions in Kent.
and that not only under the Saxons and Danes, whose desolations were many and
grievous, but also by other rebellions since the Normans Conquest, both in
those infamous insurrections called The Barons Wars, in the reign of King
Henry the third, wherein much harm was done: as also under King Richard the
second, when Wat Tilar, Captain of a dreadful commotion, assembled at
Black Heath, Mile-end, and in London, doing many outrages, where in Smithfield
he was lastly struck down by William Walworth then Major of the City, and
worthily slain for his notorious treasons. Again, upon Black Heath, Michael
Joseph, the Lord Dawbeny, with their Cornish Rebels, were overthrown by King
Henry the seventh, Anno 1497.

(11) Kent in the time of Julius Caesar was governed by four several Kings.
The government of Kent. Caes. Comment.
Under Vortigern the Britain, by a Lieutenant called Guorong, from whom the
said King gave it to Hengist the Saxon, in favor of his Daughter Rowen, who
seeking to make himself absolute King thereof, eight years after his first
entrance, fought a victorious Battle against the Britains near unto
Crayford, and thence-forth accounted that Province his own. Yet afterward
Vortimer the valiant Britain, gave him battle at Aylesford: in the which both
Horsa and Catigern, brethren to both the Generals, were slain, and the Saxons
driven into the Isle of Thanet, their first assigned habitation, not daring to
enter the Continent so long as Vortimer lived. Catigern was interred upon the
Plain, where to this day remains his Monument, being four stones pitched in
manner of the Stonehenge, and is vulgarly called Citscotehouse. The like
Monument was of Horsa at Horsted, which storms and time have now devoured.
Hengist made this Province a Kingdom for himself and successors, which name
and power it retained the space of three hundred and twenty years, when Egbert
King of the West Saxons subdued and joined it to his own: in which subjection
it stood until the time of the Normans. Then was it given under the title of
an Earldom by the Conqueror, The Earls of Kent.
unto Otho Bishop of Bayeux his halfe-brother, whose successors in that
dignity were those most honorable Families, whose Arms and Names within this
Plot are blazed and expressed. It is divided principally into five Lathes, The
division of Kent.
subdivided into 66. Hundreds, and them again into 398. Parishes ^ and wherein
had been seated three and twenty Religious Houses.

map of Kent KENT WITH HER CITIES AND EARLS Described and observed.


LATHES DIVIded into Hundreds, and Hundreds into Parishes.
Sutten. Black Heath, 7. Sutten. Bro^eley, 2. Sutten. Lesnes, 4. Sutten.
Axtane, 16. Sutten. Rookesley, 15. Sutten. Godsheath, 8. Sutten. Westerham, 4.
Sutten. Somerden, 6. Aylesford. Hoo, 5. Aylesford. Shamele, 11. Aylesford.
Toltingtroe, 6. Aylesford. Chetham, 3. Aylesford. Wortham, 4. Aylesford.
Larkfield, 15. Aylesford. Littlefield, 3. Aylesford. Twiford, 6. Aylesford.
Tunbridge, 2. Aylesford. Watchlingston, 5. Aylesford. West Barnefield.
Aylesford. Brenchley, 3. Aylesford. Marden, 2. Aylesford. Eyhorne, 13.
Aylesford. Maldstone, 7. Seray. Milton, 23. Seray. Tenham, 4. Seray. Feversham,
17. Seray. Bo^^on, 4. Seray. Felboro, 5. Seray. Chart, 9. Seray. Wye, 5. Seray.
Byircholt, 1. Seray. Galehill, 8. Seray. Ashford. Seray. Blackborne, 5. Seray.
Tenderden, 1. Seray. Barkley, 1. Seray. Cranbrooke, 3. Seray. Rolvenden, 2.
Seray. Selbrightenden, 1. Seray. East Barnfield, 1. Seray. Newyadene. S.
Augustine. Ringsloe, 4. S. Augustine. Blengate, 7. S. Augustine. Whirestable,
3. S. Augustine. Westgate, 4. S. Augustine. Downchamford, 6. S. Augustine.
Preston, 2. S. Augustine. Bredge, 7 S. Augustine. Kinghamford, 5. S. Augustine.
Seasalter. S. Augustine. Wingham, 5. S. Augustine. East^y, 11. S. Augustine.
Cor^iloe, 8. S. Augustine. Bewesbrough, 13. S. Augustine. Longport. Shepwey.
Folkestane, 8. Shepwey. Lovingboroe, 4. Shepwey. Stowting, 5. Shepwey. Heane,
2. Shepwey. Pyrcholt stan, 2. Shepwey. Streats, 3. Shepwey. Worth, 2. Shepwey.
Ilam, 3. Shepwey. Langport, 1. Shepwey. S. Martin. Shepwey. Newchurch, 4.
Shepwey. Alowsbridge, 6. Shepwey. Oxney, 3.
A
ACryse, Shep. Acton, Sera. Addesham, Aug. Addington, Ails. Akkam, Shep. S.
Albans, August. Aldington, Ails. Aldington, Shep. Aldwecke, Shep. Alhallowes,
Ails. Alkham, Shep. (...), Ails. (...) Coltham, Ails. Allington, Shep. All
Saints, August. APPLEDORE, Sera. As^^ey, August. (...) ASHEFORD, Seray. Ash^ey,
August. Ash^^^, Ails. Aylesford, Ails. Aynsford, Sutten. Aythorne, August.
B
^^llesmere, Seray. (...), Ails. (...)child, Seray. (...), August. (...),
August. (...), Sutton. (...), Shep. (...), Ails. (...) west, Ails. (...),
August. (...) bay, August. (...), Ails. (...), August. (...), Ails. (...),
August. (...), Sera. (...), Sutton. (...), August. (...), Ails. (...), August.
(...), Shep. (...), Sera. (...), Seray. (...) brook flu. (...), Sera. (...),
Ails. (...), August. (...), August. (...), Ails. (...), August. (...), Sera.
(...), Seray. Bewls flu. Bewtsfield, August. Bexley, Sutton. Bibrooke, Seray.
Bichborow, Shep. Bic^or, Sera. Bidborow, Ails. Biddenden, Sera. Biknore,
Ails. Bilsington, Shep. Bilsington, courie flu. Shep. Binbery, Ails.
Birchingston, August. Birling flu. Birling, Ails. Bishopsborne, August.
Bithborow, Shep. Blackmansbury, August. Blackmanston, Shep. Bleane, August.
Bobbing, Seray. Bocton, Ails. Bocton Malherbs, Ails. Bocton a Luph, Seray.
Bocton under Blean, Seray. Bonington, Shep. Bore place, Sutton. Borden, Seray.
Borden, Ails. Botham, Ails. Bormesh, Shep. Borsfield, Seray. Borsholder,
August. Boughton Maherb, Seray. Boughton Mouchelsay, Ails. Bourdfield, Seray.
Boxley, Ails. Braborne, Shep. Braborne east, Seray. Braborne west, Seray.
Bradborne, Sutton. Bradherst, Ails. Brandbridge, Ails. Brested Upland,
Sutton. The great Breach, Sutton. Bredgar, Seray. Bredge East, Shep. Bregge,
August. Brenchesley, Ails. Breny, Shep. Brenset, Shep. Brethe, August.
Bircholt, Seray. Bridge, August. Broad stayres, August. Brook, Seray. Brook
house, Sutton. Brookland, Shep. Bromefield, Ails. Bromehill, Shep. BROMLEY,
Sutton. Brompford, Seray. Broxam, Sutton. Buckland, Seray. Buckland, August.
Buckwell, Seray. Burham, Ails. Burtrash, Shep. Burton, Seray. Buston, Ails.
Buttesbridge, Shep.
C
Cabons, Shep. Calehill, Seray. CANTERBURY, Aug. Capell, Ails. Capell, Shep.
Capell fleet, Seray. Cartham, Seray. Chafford, Ails. Chalk, Ails. Challocke,
Seray. Chapel at Streat, Shep. Charing, Seray. Charleton, Sutton. Charleton,
August. Chart little, Seray. Chart great, Seray. Chart, Ails. Chartham, Seray.
Chartham, August. Chartham, Ails. Chelefield, Sutton. Chepsted, Sutton.
Cheriton, Shep. Chetham, Ails. Chevening, Sutton. Chidingston, Sutton.
Chilham, Seray. Chillenden, August. Chilton, August. Chiselherst, Sutton.
Chistelet, August. Choten Marsh, Seray. S. Clement, Shep. S. Cletes, Ails.
Cleave, August. Clobesden gate, Shep. Clysse, Ails. Cliffe well, August.
Cobham, Ails. Cobham hall, Ails. Cocks heath, Ails. Cockliscombe, Seray.
Cock^ell bridge, Shep. Colred, August. Coshall, Seray. Cokeing, August. Comber
west, Sutton. Combwell, Seray. Combdens hill, Seray. Comford, Ails. Comherst,
Ails. Cosmus bleane, August. Cossenton, Ails. Cowden, Sutton. Courseborne,
Seray. Court Lodge, Seray. Cowdham, Sutton. Cowling, Ails. Cowling Park,
Ails. Christchurch, August. Craford, Sutton. Cray North, Sutton. Cray flu.
CRANBROOK, Sera. Cranbrooke, Seray. Crocks, Ails. Crog deipp, Seray. Crundall,
Seray. Cuckstone, Ails.
D
Darrent, Sutton. Darrent flu. DARTFORD, Sut. Davington, Seray. Deal, August.
Deane, August. Deane, Seray. Deane Court, August. Denge Marsh, Shep. Denge
Nasse, Shep. Denhill, August. Denton, Ails. Denton, August. Dent de lion,
August. Deptford upper, Sutton. Deptford lower, Sutton. Detling, Ails.
Dimchurch, Shep. Ditton, Ails. Dodington, Seray. DOVER, August. Down, Sutton.
Small Downs, August. ^ Dray flu. Drome, August. S. Dunstone, August.
E
East bridge, Shep. East church, Seray. Eastry, August. Eastwell, Seray.
Ebbene, Shep. Ebny, Seray. Ebsfleer, August. Ebridge course flu. Shep. Eden,
Sutton. Eden bridge, Sutton. Edislay, Seray. Egarton, Seray. Egerton, Seray.
Elmesley, Seray. Elmested, Shep. Elmestone, August. Elsenham, Seray. ELTHAM,
Shep. Eltham, Sutton. S. Ens water, Shep. Epald bay, August. Erith, Sutton.
Eseling, Seray. Eton-bridge, Sutton. Ey-bridge, Ails. Eyhorne, Ails.
Eynesford, Sutton. Eythorne. Evering, Shep. Ewell, August. Eych-borom, Shep.
F
Fairefield, Shep. Fairelane, Ails. Farleigh east, Ails. Farleigh west,
Ails. Farneburgh, Sutton. Farmingham, Sutton. Faulkeham, Sutton. Field, Seray.
Fery, Seray. FEVERSHAM, Seray. Fincheolts, Seray. Finglesham, August. Fleet
North, Ails. Fleet South, Sutton. Flimwell, Seray. Folkston, Shep. Forde,
Ails. Ford, August. Fordwich, August. Footescray, Sutton. Francks, Sutton.
Frendsbury, Ails. Frendsted, Ails. Friendvile, August. Friars, Ails. Frith
North, Ails. Frith South, Ails. Frittenden, Seray.
G
Gads-hill. Genlad flu. S. Giles, August. Githorne, August. Gillingham, Ails.
Goddonton, Seray. Goldgate bay, August. Godmarsham, Seray. Godneston, Seray.
Goldwell, Seray. Goodwinston, August. Gore-court, Ails. Gore-end, August.
Gotley, Seray. Gowdherst, Seray. Glassenbary, Seray. Graudney, Seray.
GRAVESEND, Ayl Greane Isle, Ails. Greneb, Ails. Grench, Ails. Greenhill,
Seray. Greehyth, Sutton. Greenwich east, Sutton. Greenwich west, Sutton.
Greenway-Court, Ails. Greystone bay, August. Grombride, Ails. Grove sery,
August. Groveherst, Seray. Guilford, Shep. Guston, August.
H
Hadlow, Ails. Hadlow place, Ails. Haislath, Seray. Hakington, August. Hail,
Ails. High Halden, Seray. Halden park, Seray. Halkweell, Ails. Halling,
Ails. Halligrace, Seray. Halmessed, Seray. Halsted, Sutton. Halsted, Ails.
Halsto high, Ails. Halstow, Seray. Ham, August. Ham, Shep. Harhaldowne,
August. Harden upper, August. Harden nether, August. Hardrese, Shep. Haresgate,
Ails. Hariesham, Ails. Harrie, Seray. Hartley, Sutton. Hartlip, Seray.
Harwich, August. Hasting, Seray. Hastingleigh, Shep. Hatton, Seray. Haw,
August. Hawborow, Shep. Hawkherst, Seray. Hawking, Shep. Hawling, Ails.
Hawtesborne, Seray. Hearne, August. Hearnehill, Seray. Hedcorne, Ails.
Hedcorne, Seray. Heden, August. Heys, Sutton. Helling, Seray. Hempsted, Seray.
Herne, August. Herst, Shep. Hertfield bridge, Seray. Hever, Sutton. Higham,
Ails. Hilden, Ails. Hinxell, Seray. HITHE, Shep. Hithe west, Shep. Hoathe,
August. Hockenbury bridge, Sera. Hocket, Seray. Hollingborne, Ails. Huo,
Ails. Honton, Ails. Hope, Shep. Hope bay, August. Horns, Shep. Horn place.
Seray. Horsimonden, Ails. Horton ki^by, Sutton. Horton, August. Horton Monk^,
Shep. Hospital, August. Hotbisbrough, Ails. Hothefield, Seray. Hongham,
August. Howfield, August. Howlets Palace, Aug. Hucking, Ails. Hungers hall,
Ails. Hunton, Ails. Huntonford bridge, Ails.
I
S. James, Ails. Idehill, Sutton. Ifield, Ails. Ightam, Ails. Ileden,
August. Ilkham, August. S. John's, August. Ivechurch, Shep. Iwade, Seray.
K
Kellington, August. Kempsing, Sutton. Kennerdington, Seray. Kennington, Seray.
Kent-bridge, Seray. Kenthach, Sutton. Keston, Sutton. Kerbrooke, Sutton.
Kevingtown, Sutton. Kevingtown, Seray. Kingsdowne, Sutton. Kingsdowne, August.
Kingsdowne, Seray. Kings fery, Seray. Kingswoth, Seray. Kingston, August.
Kingswold, August. Kitskots-house, Ails. Knell, Sutton. Knowlton, August.
L
Lamberherst, Ails. Langden east, August. Langden west, August. Langley,
Ails. Langley, August. Langley, Sutton. Langport, August. Layborne, Ails.
La^kfield. Ails. S. Laurence, August. Leden, August. Lee, Sutton. Leedes,
Ails. Lees court, Seray. Legs flu, Ails. LENHAM, Ails. Lentham east,
Seray. Leigh. 1. Sutton. Leigh. 2. Sutton. Leisdon, Seray. S. Leonard, Ails.
Lesnes, Sutton. Leveland, Seray. Lewsham, Sutton. Lydde, Shep. Lydden, Shep.
Lydsing, Ails. Lymme, Shep. Lymen Flu Lyming, Shep. Lyngell, Sutton. Lingsted,
Seray. Linton, Ails. Littleborne, August. Longbeach, Seray. Longfield, Sutton.
Lone, Ails. Loose, Ails. Lovelace, Seray. Luddenham, Seray. Luddesdowne,
Ails. Lullingston, Sutton.
M
MAIDSTONE, Ayl. May^hill, Seray. Martham sery, Seray. Malling ^ast, Ails.
MALLING West, Ails. Maplesdowne, Sutton. Marden, Seray. Marden, Ails.
Margaret bay, August. S. Margaret, Sutton. S. Margaret, August. S. Margaret,
Ails. S. Margaret at Cliffe, August. S. MARY CRAY, Sutton. S. Mary, Shep. S.
Mary, Ails. Marsham, Seray. Marshland Flu* Shep. S. Martine, Shep. Martine,
August. Medway Flu. Mercham, Ails. Mereworth, Ails. Meriam Court, Ails.
Mersham, Seray. Marsham Hatson, Seray. Mersham, Shep. Merston, Ails. Midley,
Shep. Milgate, Ails. Mill-hall, Ails. Milkhouse, Seray. Milsted, Seray.
MILTON, Seray. Milton, Ails. Milton, August. Minster, Seray. Minster, August.
Mystole, August. Mole, Ails. Molands, August. Moldash, Seray. Mongham great,
August. Mongham little, August. Monckton, Seray. Moncton, August. Morants
Court, Sutton. Morston, Seray. Mote, Ails. Motingham, Sutton. Munchelsey,
Ails. Munford, Seray. Muttenden, Ails. Mylhall, Ails.
N
Nackington, August. Nash, Seray. Nash court, August. Sharp Nasse, Seray.
Shire Nasse, Seray. Peper Nasse, August. Swale Nasse, Seray. White Nasse,
August. Fair Nasse, August. Shell Nasse, August. Natington, August. Nayland
point, August. Nettlested, Ails. Nethercourt, August. Nevenham, August.
Newbridge, Seray. New church, Shep. New eye Flu Shep. Newenden, Seray.
Newenton, Seray. New haven, August. Newington, Shep. New^nham, Seray. Newhyth,
Ails. S. Nicholas, August. S. Nicholas at wood, Aug. S. Nicholas, Shep.
Nokholt, Sutton. Noninton, August. Norborne, August. North forland, August.
Norton, Seray. Nowre-heade, Seray. Nutsted, Ails.
O
O^sam, Ails. Old wives lease, Seray. Ollantigh, Seray. Organsweke, Shep.
Orlaston, Shep. Orlaston, Shep. Orpinton, Sutton. Orpinton, Seray. Ospringe,
Seray. Oslen hanger, Shep. Otham, Ails. Otham Abbey, Ails. Otteford, Sutton.
Otterdon, Seray. Otteringden, Ails. Overland, August. Our, Seray. Outmeston,
August. Oxney Island, Seray. Oxney, August. Oxenhoath, Ails.
P
Paddlesworth, Shep. Paddlesworth, Ails. Palmers bay, August. Panscray,
Sutton. Patriksborne, August. Pecham East, Ails. Pecham West, Ails.
Pedelsworth, Ayle. Pensherst, Sutton. Pepenbury, Ails. Pipingley, Ails. Pery,
Shep. Pet, Seray. S. Peter's, August. Petham, August. Pevinton, Seray. Pierling,
Ails. Pluckley, Seray. Plumsted, Sutton. Popeshall, August. Postling, Shep.
Preston, August. Preston, Seray. Preston, Ails. Priory, She^.
Q
Queenborow, Seray. Quekes, August.
R
Radignudes, August. Ramesgate, August. Raynam, Seray. Rave^borne, Flu.
Reculver, August. Reding, Seray. Rever, August. Richborow, August. Ridley,
Sutton. Rie^sh, Ails. Ringleton, August. Ripplel, August. Rivers, August.
River-hill, Ails. ROCHESTER, Ails. Rockins stairs, August. Rodmersham,
Seray. Royden-hall, Ails. Royton, Seray. Roking, Shep. Rolling, August.
Rolvinden, Seray. Romden, Seray. ROMNEY, Shep. Romneyold, Shep. Rookesley,
Sutton. Rothe^ Flu. Rucking, Shep. Rugu^ethill, Ails. Rusborne, August. Ride,
Seray.
S
All Saints, August. Saltwood, Shep. Sandherst, Seray. Sandhill, Seray.
Sandowne, August. Sandpit, Seray. SANDWICH, Aug. Sargate, Shep. Sard, Seray.
Scadbery, Sutton. Scadbury, Ails. Scale, Sutton. Scelling, Shep. Scorney,
Seray. Scots-hill, Shep. Scabrooke Flu, Shep. Scale, Sutton. Seasalter, August.
Sednor, Seray. Selling, Seray. Sellingder, Shep. SEVENOKE, Sutton. Sevington,
Seray. Sewards, Seray. Shaddockherst, Shep. Shaddockherst, Seray. Shaniford,
Seray. Sharsted, Seray. Sheyborne ruscall, Ails. Shelving, August. Shelwich,
Seray. Sheppey Island, Seray. Shere Flu. Shene course Flu, Shep. Shiborne,
Ails. Shepway cross, Shep. Sh^d Flu. Sholden, August. 1. Shorland, Seray. 2.
Shorland, Seray. Shone, Ails. Shoram, Sutton. Shooters-Hill. Shotenden, Seray.
Shurte, August. Sibertswood, August. Sidbrooke Flu, Shep. Sissingherst, Seray.
SITI INBORNE, Seray. Sittinborne little, Seray. Smalbrooke Flu. Ails.
Smalhead, August. Smalhythe, Seray. Smarden, Seray. (...), Shep. Snagat, Shep.
Snave, Shep. Snotheland, Ails. Secombe, Seray. Southe, Ails. Spelherst,
Ails. Spelmendon, Ails. Spetingbrooke Flu, Shep. Spilspill, Seray.
Stallisfield, Seray. Stanford, Shep. Stanford, Seray. Stanstead, Ails.
Stanstead, Shep. Staple, August. Staplegate, August. Stap^therst, Seray. Stare,
August. Starborow, Sutton. Stelling, Shep. S. Stephens, August. Stitcbridge,
Ails. Storke, Ails. Stodmaish, August. Stoke, Ails. Stoakbury, Ails.
Stoakbe^y, Seray. Stone, Sutton. Stone, Ails. Stone, Shep. Stone-end, Shep.
Holine Stone, Shep. Stone, Seray. Stone-bay, August. Stoner, August.
Stoningley, Ails. Stowmaish, August. Stowre Flu. Stouring, Shep. Stroud,
Ails. Sturrey, August. Sturmouth, August. Sturtmarsh, Seray. Stutstall, Shep.
Sundrich, Sutton. Surrenden, Seray. Sutton, August. Sutton at bone, Sutton.
Sutton East, Ails. Sutton valance, Ails. Swalecliffe, August. The East Swale,
Aug. Swanscombe, Sutten. Swingfield, Shep.
T
Tannington, August. Taperegge, Ails. Tenham, Seray. Tenterden, Seray. Teston,
Ails. Thanet Isle, August. Themote, Ails. Thorneham, Ails. Throwley, Seray.
Tilmaston, Seray. Tilmeston, August. Tokingham, Seray. Tongue, Seray. Torn,
Ails. Town, Seray. Tremworth, Seray. Trottischise, Ails. Tudesey, Ails.
Tudenham, Seray. TUNBRIDGE, Ails. Tunford, August. Tunstall, Seray. Tutsham,
Ails. Turvey stayies, August. Twydall, Ails. Twidley, Ails. Twyford bridge,
Ails. The Twist, Ails. Twytham, August.
V
Uddenham bridge, Seray. Vintners, Ails. Ulcombe, Seray. Ulcombe, Ails.
Upchurch, Seray. Upnor, Ails.
W
Watchorne, Shep. Waldershare, August. Wallingford course Flu. Walmer, August.
Waltham, Shep. Waltham, August. Wantsume, Flu. S. Warburg, alias Hoo. Ayl.
Warddon, Seray. Warchorne, Seray. Watringbury, Ails. Waye^-end, Shep. East
Wear, Shep.
Week, Ails. Well, August. Well-place, Sutton. Wells, Seray. Wellstreat,
Sutton. Westhere, August. Westcliffe, August. West-court, August. West-gate,
August. Westenhanger, Shep. Westheath, Shep. Westram, Sutton. Westre, Ails.
Westwell, Seray. Whetsted, Ails. Whitestable, August. Whoornes place, Ails.
Witcheling, Ails. Wickham East, Sutton. Wickham West, Sutton. Wickham brux,
August. Wide^ton, August. Wigme^e, August. Wigsell, Seray. Willesbrough, Seray.
Wilmington, Seray. Wilmington, Sutton. Wimingswold, August. Wingham, August.
Witham, Ails. Witrap, Shep. Wittresham, Shep. Witrisham, Seray. Woldham,
Ails. Wolwich, Sutton. Wood, August. Woodchurch, Seray. Woodfalls, Ails.
Woodland, Sutton. Woodnesborow, August. Wotton, August. Wo^th, August.
Wormsh^ll, Ails. WROTHAM, Ails. WY^, Seray. Wye Court
Y
Yaldam, Ails. Yalding, Ails. Yotes, Ails.
SVTH-SEX, a word compounded of the side thereof Southward, and of the Saxons,
whose Kingdom was the second in their Heptarchie, is written by them Suthex,
The name of SUSSEX.
and by us Sussex, lies stretched along the British Seas. The North confronts
upon Surrey and Kent, and the West butteth upon Hampshire.

The form, length and breadth.
(2) For form it lies long and narrow, so that all her Rapes do run quite
through the Shire, and contains from Westbarting in the West, to Kent ditch
that divides it from Kent in the East, sixty four Miles, but in the broadest
part little above twenty, the whole in Circumference, about one hundred fifty
eight Miles.

The Air.
(3) The Air is good, though somewhat clouded with mists, which arise from her
South bordering Sea, who is very prodigal unto her for Fish and Seafowle,
though as sparing for Harbors or Ships arrivage, and those which she has, as
uncertain for continuance, as dangerous for entrance.

The Soil.
(4) Rich is the Soil and yields great plenty of all things necessary, but
very ill for travelers, especially in the winter, the land lying low and the
ways very deep, whose middle tract is garnished with Meadows, Pastures, and
Cornfieldsd; the Seacoast with Hills which are called the Downs, abundantly
yielding both Grain and Grass, and the North side overshadowed with pleasant
Groves and thick Woods, where sometimes stood the famous Wood Andradswald,
containing no less then an hundred and twenty Miles in length, An. 478.
and thirty in breadth, taking the name of Anderida a City adjoining: both
which were won from the Britains by Ella the first Saxon King of this
Province, and the place made fatal to Sigebert King of the West Saxons, who
being deposed from his Royal Throne, was met in this Wood by a Swine-herd, and
slain in revenge of his Lord, whom Sigebert had murdered.

The ancient Inhabitants, of Sussex.
(5) The ancient people in the Romans time were the Regni of whom we have
spoken, and who were subdued by Vespasian the Leader of the second Legion under
Aulus Plautius, Lieutenant in Britain for Claudius the Emperor. But after the
departure of the Romans, this with Surrey was made the South Saxons Kingdom:
Sussex subdued to the Romans.
yet that giving place to the West Saxons, as they in time to the Normans, it
became a Province under the Conquerours power, who gave to his followers much
land in these parts.

Chief places in Sussex.
(6) The place of most account in this Shire is Chichester, by the Britains
called Caercei, and by the Saxons Cissan-Ceasr, a City beautiful and large,
and very well walled about, first built by Cissa the second King of the
South Saxons, wherein his Royal Palace was kept. And when K. William the first
had enacted that Bishops Seas should be translated out of small Towns unto
places of greater resort, the Residence of the Bishop (until then held at
Selsey) was removed to this City, where Bishop Raulfe began a most goodly
Cathedral Church: but before it was fully finished, by a sudden mischance of
fire was quite consumed. Yet the same Bishop, with the helping liberality of
King Henry the first, began it again, and saw it wholly finished; whose beauty
and greatness her fatal enemy still envying, again cast down in the days of
King Richard the first, and by her raging flames consumed the buildings both of
it and the Bishops Palace adjoining, which Seffrid the second Bishop of that
name reedified and built anew. And now to augment the honor of this place, the
City has born the Title of an Earldome; whereof they of Arundell were
sometimes so styled. Whose Graduation for Latitude, is removed from the Equator
unto the degree fifty, fifty five minutes; and for Longitude, observing the
same point in the West, whence Mercator has measured, are twenty degrees.

(7) With whom for frequencie, bigness, and building, the Town Jews seems
to contend, where King Athelstan appointed the mintage of his Moneys, Jews.
and William de Warron built a strong Castle, whereunto the disloyal Barons of
King Henry the third in warlike manner resorted, An. 1263.
and fought a great Battle against their own Sovereign and his son, wherein
the King had his horse slain under him, Richard King of the Romans surprised
and taken in a Windmill, and Prince Edward delivered unto them upon unequal
conditions of Peace: But a greater Battle was fought at Battle, when the hazard
of England was tried in one days sight, A battle at Jews battle.
and Harold the King gave place to his Conqueror by losing of his life, among
sixty seven thousand, nine hundred seventie four Englishmen besides; whose
blood so spilt, gave name to the place, in French, Sanguelac. And the soil
naturally after rain becoming of a reddish color, caused William of Newbery
untruly to write, Will Newbery.
That if there fell any small sweet showers in the place, where so great a
slaughter of the Englishmen was made, presently sweateth forth very fresh blood
out of the carth, as if the evidence thereof did plainly declare the voice of
blood there shed, and cried still from the earth unto the Lord.

(8) But places of other note in this Shire are these: Bas^^^.
From Basham Earl Harold taking the Sea for his delight, in a small boat was
driven upon the coast of Normandy, where by Duke William he was retained, till
he had sworn to make him King after Edward Confessors death; which oath being
broken; the Bastard arrived at Pensey, Pensey.
and with his sword revenged that Perjury. At West-Wittering also Ella the
Saxon before him had landed for the conquering of those parts, and gave name to
the shore from Cimen his son. Cimenshore.
But with greater glory does Gromebridge raise up her head, Gromebridge.
where Charles Duke of Orleance father to Jews the twelfth, King of France,
taken prisoner at Agincourt, was there a long time detained.

(9) The commodities of this Province are many and diverse, Commodities.
both in Corn, Cattle, Woods, Iron, and Glass; which two last, as they bring
great gain to their Possessors, so do they impoverish the County of Woods;
whose want will be found in ages to come, if not at this present in some sort
felt.

(10) Great have been the devotions of Religious persons in building and
consecrating many houses unto the use and only service of Christ; Religious
houses built and suppressed.
whose Bead men abusing the intents of their Founders, have caused those
foundations to lament their own ruins: for in the tempestuous time of King
Henry the Eight, eighteen of them in this County were blown down, whose
fruit fell into the lappes of some that never meant to restore them again to
the like use.

This Country is principally divided into six Rapes, every of them containing a
River, The Shires division.
a Castle, and Forest in themselves, besides the several Hundreds whereunto
they are parted, that is, the Rape of Chichester into seven, of Arundell into
five, of Bramber into ten, of Jews into thirteen, of Peuensey into
seventeene, and of Haslings into thirteen, in all fifty six, wherein are
seated ten Castles, eighteen market Towns, and three hundred and twelve Parish
Churches as in the Table following appears.

map of Sussex SUSSEX Described and divided into Rapes with the fi^sation of
Chichester the chief city thereof. And the arms of such Nobles as have been
dignified with the title of Earls since the conquest and other accidents
therein observed.


Hundreds and Rapes in SUSSEX.
Chichester Rape.
(...) hund. (...) hund. Dump or hund. (...) Manbou^ (...) Bex and (...)
hundred. Al^weck hund.
Arundel Rape.
West A(...) Botherbridge (...) P^ling (...) (...) Bary (...)
Bramber Rape.
West (...) hund. (...) hund. (...) hund. (...) hund. (...) (...) Fishe^gat^
hund. Tipnoke hund. (...) hund. S^ingle^^^sse hund.
Jews Rape.
Bark^^^ and Hamsey (...) S(...) H(...) I(...) U(...) H(...) F(...) P(...)
Battinghill North hund. Battinghill South hund. Wyncham hund. (...) North part.
Streat South part.
Peuensey Rape.
East gri^^te^ hund. H(...) hund. Rutherfield hund. Fox^^ald Kings hund.
Tinfield and Bucklie hun. Ringomer hund. I^field hund. Rushmonden hund.
Danchill horste^ hund. Danchill Sheffeild hund. Sheplake hund. Dill hund.
Longbri^ge hund. Willington hund. Eastborne hund. Alsiston hund. Flexborow
hund.
Hastings Rape.
Foxenall hund. D^nill hund. Shewswell hund. Goldespure hund. Staple hund.
Hanksborough hund. Nethersfeild hund. Boxhill hund. Ba^sloc hund. Gestling
hund. Gostrowe hund. Nenvill hund. Henhurst hund.
A
ADrington, Arund. Alberton, Bramb. Alborne, Bramb. Adingborone, Chich.
Adrington, ^ewes. Almanington, Chich. Aldfrisian P^u^n. Alsiston, Peuen.
Amberlie, Arund. Amersham, Chich. Angleton, Jews. Angmering West. Arund.
Angmering East. Arund. Angton, Arund. Anstye, Jews. Apoledrum, Chich. Apsl^y,
Bramb. Ardingleigh, Lexes Arundell forest. Arund. ARVNDEL, Arund. Arundel flu.
Ashburnham, Have. Ashefeuld, Arund. Athurst, Bramb. Assington, bramb. Aylworth,
chich.
B
Badw^rth park, Arun. Balcombe, L^w^^. Balesd^ane, jews. Balteslow Beacon
have. Barcombe, jews. Barlavington, arund. Barlugh arche^, jews. Barnham,
arund. BATTLE, have. Bayles Court, arund. The Beach, peuen. Beawbush. bramb.
Beckley, have Bedingham, peuen. Bedingstreat, bramb. Bentley, peuen. Bepton,
Chich. Bersted South. chich. Bersted North, chich. Berwyke, peuen. Bexill,
have. Bidlington, bramb. Bigmo^e, arund. Bignor, arund. Billinghurst, arund.
Bilson, arund. Binderton, chich. Binsted, arund. Bishophurst, bramb. Blackdow
Beacon, chich. Blackhouse, peuen. Blackston, bramb. Bletchington, jews.
Bletchington, peuen. Bogner ^ocks chich. Bodgiham, have. Bolbroke, peuen.
Bolney, le^es. Bony^k, bramb. Borcham Chapp^ll, have. Bormer, jews. Borsill,
have. Borstye, jews. Boscham, chich. Bosgrav^ chich. Bows, bramb. Bowley,
chich. Bramber, bramb. Bramble, peuen. Brantsnap, jews. Breed, have.
Brightling, have. BRIGHTLL, MERSTON* H. Broadwater, bramb. Brodhill* jews.
Brodhurst* peuen. Bromehill church decayed, H. Broncham, have. The Broile,
peuen. Broylehoe, peuen. Buckingham, bramb. Brucksmale, have. Buckhole, have.
Buckhurst, peuen. Bucksted* peuen. Buckstepe, have. Budditon, chich. Bugsill,
have. Bulverhyth, have. Burdham, chi^h. Burpham, arund. Burton, arund. Burton
West. arund. Burwash b^acon, Ha. Burwash, have. Bu^y, arund. Busham, arund.
Beshopston, peuen. Buttolphe, bramb. Byne, bramb. Byworth, arund.
C
Cackham, Chich. Camber head, have. Camber castle. have. Camber Salles, have.
Cansw^y, arund. Cardford, arund. Catesfield, have. Catestret, peuen.
Cawdershaw, arund. Celsey, chich. Celsey Peninsu, chic. Chameis court. jews.
Changton, bram. North Chapel, arund. Charleton, chich. Chaunton* peuen.
Chayligh, jews. Chelworth* bram. CHICHESTER, C. Chilgrove, chich. Chiltington,
bramb, Chiltington, jews. Chitthan, peuen. Chithurst, chich. Chittingle, peu.
Chydham, chich. Clapham, arund. Clapham, bramb. Claverham, peuen. Clayton,
jews. Cli^^e, peuen. Climping, arund. Coate^, arund. Cocking, chich.
Coldwatham, arun. Coleworth, chich. Combed, peuen. Combs, bramb. Compton,
chich. Covewald, bram. Cowding* have. Cowdry, chich. Crabbet, jews. Crawhurst,
have. Crawley* jews. Crawle, have. Crocksted, peuen. Cromble pond, peuen.
Crowborow, hill. peu. Cuckfeild, jews. Cuckine^e haven, peuen. Churlington,
chich.
D
Dallington, have. Dalingrig, peuen. Dallington forest, have. Dallington,
have. Danny, jews. Darum wood, have. Deane East, peuen. Deane West, chich.
Deane East, chich. Deane West, peuen. Delsham, bramb. Dento, peuen. DICHELING,
le. Didlesford, arund. Didling, chich. Down forest, peuen. Dounly, chich.
Downton, arund. Drayton, chich. Drungwick, arund. Dunhurst, arund. Dunnington,
which. Duddleswell, peuen. Dumpford, chich. Durrington, bramb. Dyke, Peuen.
E
Eartham, chich. Eastergate, arund. Easton, chich. Eawood, have. Eborne, chich.
EBOVRN* peu. Edburton, bramb. Ellsted, chich. Emley, chich. Emsworth, chich.
Eustons, have. Eridge have. Eridge, peuen. Eringham, bramb. Erlington, peuen.
Erule, chich. Estborne, chich. Etons, bramb. Etchingfold, bramb. Exc^^e,
peuens. Ey^s, jews.
F
Ferat, peuen. Farnechurst, chich. Far, arund. Fawmer, jews. Fawhurst,
bramb. Fawhurst, have. Fawhurst, jews. Fayrliegh, have. Felpham, arund.
Fernden, chich. Ferring, arund. Findon, bramb. Fithborne, chich. Fitleworth,
arund. Flansham, arund. Fletching, peuen. Flymwell, have. Forde, arund.
Foundington, chich. Foynton, peuen. Framfeild, peuen. Franchis, have. Friston,
peuen. Frogfurle, peuen. Furle, peuen.
G
Gatewike, bramb. Gate, have. G^stling, have. Glasenouse, arund. Glatting,
arund. Glyne, peuen. Goodwood, chi^h. Goreing, arund. Greatham, arund.
Greneley, peuen. Grasham, chich. Grantye, jews. Green, arund. GRINSTEAD East,
peu. Grinstead, bram. Grombridge peuen. Gulford, have.
H
Hadhurst, jews. Halneck, chich. Hampnet West, chich. Hampnet East. chich.
Hampton, arund. Hamsey, jews. Hamsill bridge, peu. Handerose. bramb. Hardham,
arund. Hardley beacon. peuen. Harlings, peuen. Harmar, have. Hartfeild, peuen.
Harting West, chich. Harting South, chich. Harting East, chich. Harting park,
chich. HASTINGS, have. Hastings, haven, have. New Haven, peuen. Haughton,
arund. Haule land, peuen. Hawkwood, have. HAYLSHAM, peu. Hayshort, chich.
Hayton, peuen. Heathfeild, peuen. Heene, bramb. Heild, bramb. Hellingle, peuen.
Hemsted, peuen. Henfeild, bramb. Herringham, arund. Hicksted, jews Highdown,
arund. Hoadleigh, jews. Hoadly East, peuen. Hollington, have. Holmidale,
peuen. Holmsted, jews. Holmewood, jews. Homons, jews. Hoo, have. Hoove,
jews. Horne^r^sse, arund. HORSHAM, bra. Heasted C^aym, peuen. Horsted little,
peuen. Hotton, bramb. Howcourt, bramb. Howicke, arund. Hunston, arund. Hunston,
arund. Hurst, arund. Hurst perpoint, jews. Hurstmonseu^, have Hyndall, peuen
Hyncleap peuen.
I
Iapton, arund. Ibernowe, arund. Ichnor West, chich. Ichnor East. chich.
Icketham, have. Iden, have. Iemington, peuen. Ifeild, bramb. Ifeild Court,
bram. Iss^^ld, jews. Iso^d, jews. Il^ham, arund. Immer^^urne, peuen. Isting,
chich. Itchiah^^n, have.
K
Kent ditch, have. Kenward, jews. Kingston, jews. Kingston, arund. Kingston,
bramb. Kn^pp Castle, bram. Kymer, jews.
L
Laborey, peuen. Langn^y peuen. Lavantsia. Lavant East, chich. Lavant West,
chich. Laughton peuen. Laughton, peuen. Launsing North, bram. Launsing South,
bram. Laythorne, chich. Leckford bridge chi. Le^, arund. S. Leonards, bramb. S.
Leonards forest, bram. Leugnerth^, chich. JEWS, jews. Linch^mere, chich.
Lindfi^ld draches, jews. Landfield bardo^e, jews. Littleton, arund.
Lodesworth, chich. Loefield borrow, jews. Lording^, arund. Lovell Cross,
jews. Loxwood, arund. Ludley, peuen. Ludsham, peuen. S. Lukes. chich.
Lurgershalt, chich. Lychouse, jews. Lydsey, chich. Lymister, arund. Lythe
chap. chich. Little, arund.
M
The Manhood, chich. Marieposte, bramb. Marsfield, peuen. Marshall, peuen.
Mawling, peuen. Maxfi^ld, have. Maydhurst, arund. Mayes, peuen. Mayfield, puen.
Meadhond park. arund. M^rden E^^^, chich. Me^den ^pper, chich M^rden West,
chich. M^rden North. chich. M^rch, have. Ma^s^on, chich. Michelham, peuen.
Michelham (...), arun. Mich^lg^^ve, arund Miching jews. Middl^ton, peuen.
Middleton, arund. MIDHVRST, chich Midlavant, chich. More, arund. Morchale,
have. Monscombe jews Mountharry, jews. (...), have. Mundham North, chich.
Mundham South, chich Mychelham, peuen. Myll-place, jews.
N
Nash, bramb. Neland, jews. Neafeild, have. Netherf^ild, have. Newbridge,
arund. Newicke, jews. N^wndparke, peuen Newtimber, jews. North Chapel,
arund Northwood, arund. Nordy Chapel, have. Nordiham, have. Nottington, peuen.
Norton, peuen. Nutborne, arund. Nutborne, chich. (...), bramb. Nutley, peuen.
O
(...), arund. Ossington, bramb. Okehurst, a^u^d. Oldbury, chich. Ovingdeane,
jews. Out, have. O^rmo^th, chich. Ow^ing, chich.
P
Pagh^m, chich. Pamell bridge, have* Pangden, jews. Parham, arund. New Park,
peu. Pashley, have. Patcham, jews. Patching, bramb. Patcham, arund. Pains,
jews. Pearching, jews. Peasmershe, have. The Pell, have. Pemsey, peu^n.
Pemsey haven, peu Penhurst, have. Pepplesham, have. Peppering, arund. Petley
wood, have. Pert, have. PE^WORTH, A. Peu^nsey mershe, P. Piddinghoe, jews.
P^gions, arund. Playstoe, chich. Playstowe Chap. arund. Pleaden, have. Pleshet
park, peuen. Plumpton, jews. Poling, arund. Poonings, lewe^. Popholl, chich.
Porteslade, jews. Pownsey, peuen. Preston, jews. Preston, chich. Priests
Hawes, peuen. Preston, ^^st, arund. P^lb^r^u^h, arund. Pycombe, jews.
Pippenford, peuen.
R
Racton, chich. Radmill, jews Rallingdeane, jews. Ratten, peuen. R^umer,
chich. Ringmer* peuen. Ripe, peuen. River, chich. River park, chich. Rogate,
chich. S. Rookes hill, chich. Rossey, bramb. Rother flu. Rother bridge al^b^y.
ha. Rother bridge, have. Rotherfeild, peuen. Rotterbridg^, arund. Rowdell,
bramb. Rowdant. jews. RYL, have. Rudwyke, arund. Runckton, chi^h. Rusper,
bramb. Russington, arund.
S
Sand, arund. Salehurst, have. Salomons bridge, C. Schelley, bramb. Seall,
bramb. Seaford, bram. Sedl^scombe, jews. S^dwick, bram. S^lham, chich.
Selhurst, chich. S^lmeston, peuen. Selscombe, have. S^dd^^ham, chich. Sidly,
have. Singleton, chich. S^sl^bury hill, bram. Shesfeild, peuen. Shelbred,
chich. Shermanbury, bram. Shilling park, arund. Shipley, bramb. SHOREHAM NEW,
b Shorcham old bramb. Shortfeild, bramb. Shripney, chich. Shullington, arund.
Sidly, have. Slaugham jews. Slindon, arund. Slowhouse, jews. The Sluice, have.
The Sluice, arund. Slynford, bram. Smythawe, arund. Snowring, bram. Socknyes,
have. South, pe^e^. Southes, jews. Sout^brooke, bramb. Southgate, chich.
Southover, jews. Southweeke, bramb Soweton, peuen. Stamerham, bramb. Stanmer
jews. Stansted, chich. Stapley beacon, have. Stedham chich. STENNINO, bra.
Stoake West, chich. Stock North, arund. Stock South, arund. Stockey hill,
peuen. Stoneham, peuen. Stonelinck, have. Stonland park peuen. Stopham bridge,
arund. Stopham, arund. Storrington arund. Stotover, chich. St^ughton, chich.
(...) jews. (...) Bramb. (...) chich. Sult^n, arund. Sutton, peuen. (...)
jews. Sydny, jews.
T
Tablehurst, peuen. Tangmer, chich. Te^^combe* jews. Te^ring, peuen. TERRING,
bram. (...) jews. T^^^ngton, arund. T^^hurst, have. Thakam, bramb. Themens,
arund. Thorney I^e, chich. Thorney, chich. Tortington, arund. Torton, arund.
Tottington, bramb. Tottington, arund. Tratton, chich. Tr^fort chich. Truly,
bramb. Turwick, chich. Tustons, have. Twin^ham, jews. Ties, jews.
V
V^^feild, peuen. Vdym^re, have. Vertwood, peuen. Vpwaltham, arund.
W
Wad^hurst, peuen. Wakehurst, jews. Walberton arund. Walderne, peuen.
Walderton, chi^h. Walchech, peuen. Waltham, chich. Wamingore, jews. Wapingh^r,
^ramb. Wapsburne, jews. Wa^bleton, have. Warminghurst br^. Warmingcampe, ar^.
Warnham, bram. Wartling, have. Wasshinton, bramb. Water down Forest, peu.
Waynway channel have. Week, arund. Wellingham, Peu. Wepham, arund. Westborne,
chich. Westergate, chich. Westerton, chich. Westfeild, have. Westgate, chich.
Westham, peuen. Westmiston, jews. Westwolves, bramb. Whilde^, jews. Whiteden,
peuen. Wickham, bramb. Wiggenhoult, arund Wigsill, have. Willington, peuen.
Willington, peuen. Winchelsey old, have. WINCHELSEY, H. Windeham. bramb.
Winton, peuen. Wiston, bramb. Wittering West, chich Wittering East, chich.
Wivelsfeild, jews. Wodmancote, bram. Wogham, jews. Wolbeding, chich.
Wollavington, arun. Worsham, have. Worth Forest, jews. Worth, jews. Worting,
bramb. Wotton, peuen. Wotton, jews. Wulbow, jews. Wyke, chich. Wily, peuen.
Wythyham, peuen.
SVRREY. CHAPTER VI.
SURREY, by Beda called Suthry and by the Saxons written Suthrea, The bounds of
Surrey.
lies separated upon the North from the Counties of Buckingham and Middlesex,
by the great River Thamesis; upon the East Kent does inbound it; upon the South
is held in with Sussex and Hampshire: and her West part is bordered upon by
Hampshire and Bark-shire.

The form.
(2) The form thereof is somewhat square, and lies by North and by East,
whereof Redrith and Frensham are the opposites, betwixt whom are extended
thirty four miles. The length.
The broadest part is from Awfold Southward, to Thamesis by Stains, and them
asunder twenty two: The circumference.
the whole in circumference is one hundred and twelve miles.

The Air and Soil.
(3) The Heavens breathing air in this Shire is most sweet and delectable, so
that for the same cause many royal Palaces of our Princes are therein seated,
and the Country better stored with game then with grain, in so much that this
County is by some men compared unto a home-spunne freeze cloth, with a costly
fair lift, for that the out-verge does exceed the middle it self. And yet is
it wealthy enough both in Corn and Pasturage, especially in Holmesdale, and
toward the River of Thamisis.

The ancient Inhabitants.
(4) In this Shire the Regni (an ancient people mentioned by Ptolemie) were
seated, whom he brancheth further through Sussex and some part of Hampshire. And
in the wane of the Romans government, when the Land was left to the will of
Invaders, the South Saxons under Ella here erected their Kingdom, which with
the first was raised, and soonest found end. From them no doubt the County was
named Suth-rey, as seated upon the South of the River; and now by contraction
is called Surrey.

Principal places in Surrey.
(5) And albeit the County is barren of Cities or Towns of great estate, yet is
she stored with many Princely houses, yea and five of his Majesty's, so
magnificently built, that of some she may well say, no Shire has none such, as
is Nonesuch indeed. And were not Richmond a fatal place of Englands best
Princes, it might in esteem be ranked with the richest: for therein died the
great Conqueror of France, King Edward the third, the beautiful Anne daughter
to Charles the Fourth, Emperor, and entirely beloved wife to King Richard the
Second; the most wise Prince King Henry the Seventh, and the rarest of her
Sex, the mirror of Princes, Queen Elizabeth, the worlds love, and Subjects
joy.

(6) At Merton likewise Kenulph King of the West Saxons came to his untimely
end: and at Lambeth the hardy Canute, and last of the Danish Kings, died among
his Cups. But as these places were fatal for the last breath of these Princes,
so other in this County have been graced with the body and beginning of other
worthy Monarkes: for in Chertsey Abbey King Henry the Sixth, who was deposed
and made away in the Tower of London, King Henry the sixth buried at Chertsey.
was first interred without all funeral pomp, but for his holy life was
imputed a Saint, and lastly translated, and intombed at Windsor. At Kingstone
likewise stood the Chair of Majesty, wherein Athelstan, Edwin, and Ethelred
sat at their Coronation, and first received their Scepter of Imperial power.
Guildford likewise has been far greater then now it is, when the Palace of
our English Saxon Kings was therein set. And seeing it is the midst of the
Shire, the graduation from hence shall be observed, where for Latitude the Pole
is raised from the degree 51.22. scruples: and her Longitude from the West in
the degree 20. and 2. scruples.

(7) Neither can we account Okam and Ripley, two small villages, the least in
this Shire, which have brought forth the well-known men, Cambden.
William de Okam, that deep Philosopher and admirable Scholar, and George de
Ripley, the ringleader of our Alchymists and mystical Impostors; both of them
borne in this County, and very near together. But why speak I of these, since a
place nearer to sight, and greater for fame, even Lambeth, is the high Seat of
Ecclesiastical Government, Piety, and Learning, and Palace of Canterburies
Archbishops, the Metropolitans of England. First erected by Archbishop
Baldwin, and ever since has been the residing of al those worthy Prelates of
our Church, who in a long succession (even from An. 596.) have continued to him
that now most worthily sits at the Churches stern, George by Gods providence
Lord Archbishop of that See, a most faithful and prudent Counselor unto King
Charles, and a most learned and provident Guide of our most flourishing Church:
whose gracious favor undeservedly conferred upon me, has been a great
encouragement to these my poor endeavors.

(8) Memorable places for Battles fought before the Conquest, Battles before
the Conquest in Surrey.
were Wembledon, where (when the fullness of prosperity burst forth into
Civil Dissentions among the Saxons) a bloody Battle was fought betwixt
Cheaulin the West Saxon, and young Ethelbert of Kent, wherein he was
discomfited, and two of his principal Leaders slain, about the year of
Christ, Some say this Victory was obtained at Fernham in Kent.
560. and three hundred thirty three years after, King Elfred with a small
power overcame the Danes with a great slaughter at Farnham in this County,
which somewhat quelled the courage of his savage enemy. John Stow.


(9) Religious houses erected in this Shire by the devotion of Princes, and set
apart from public uses to Gods Divine Service, and their own Salvation, as
then was taught, Religious houses erected and suppressed in Surrey.
the best in account were Shene, Chertsey, Merton, Newarke, Rygate, Waverley,
Horsleg; and in Southwarke, Bermundsey, and S. Mary's. These all flourished
with increase, till the ripeness of their fruit was so pleasing in sight and
taste unto King Henry the Eighth, that in beating the boughs he brake down
body and all, ruinating those houses, and seizing their rich possessions into
his own hands. So jealous is God of his honor* and so great vengeance
follows the sin of Idolatry.

(10) In this Shire have stood eight fair and strong Castles: The divisions of
Surrey.
such were Addington, Darking, Starburg, Rygate, Guilford, Farnham, Goseford,
and Brenchingley: but of greater State are Oking, Otlands, Non-such, and
Richmond, his Majesty's royal Manors. And for service to the Crown or
Commonwealths employments, this Counties division is into thirteen Hundreds,
wherein are seated eight Market Towns, and one hundred and forty
Parish-Churches, as in the Table following is inserted.

map of Surrey SURREY DESCRIBED AND DIVIDED INTO HUNDREDS


HVNDREDS IN SURREY.
1. CHertsey. 2. Woking. 3. Fernham. 4. Godalming. 5. Emley. 6. Kingston. 7.
Brixton. 8. Croydon. 9. Tanridge. 10. Reygate. 11. Copthorne. 12. Darking. 13.
Blackheath.
A
Abinger, Dark. Abroke, Emley. Abscourt, Emley. Addington, Croydon. Adleston,
Chert. Adscombe, Croydon. Albury, Black. S. Annes Hill, Chert. Anuvall, Fern.
Artingten, Godal. Ash, Woking. Ashted, Copthorne. Awford, Black.
B
Badshott, Fern. Bagshott, Woking. Bansted Croydon. Barn, Brix. Barnelmes,
Brixt. Basingstone, Woking. Battersey, Brixt. Baynard^, Black. Beachw^r^h West,
Darking. Beachworth East, Reyg. Bedi^gton, Croydon. Binscombe, Godalm. Bisley,
Chert. Bishops Court, Tanr. Blackheath, Woking. Bletching Foreign, Tanr.
Bletchingleigh, Tanr. Block^ield, Tanr. Bokham great. Copthorne. Bokham little
Copthorne. Bradley, VVoking. Bramley, Black. Brookham, Reyg. Brookwood, Woking.
Buckham lane, Chert. Buckland, Reyg. Burgate, Godal. Burghouse, Copth.
Burphants, Woking. Burstow, Reyg. Burstow Par^e, Tanr. Burstow lodge. Tanr.
Byflet, Chert.
C
Camerwell, Brixt. Capell, Dark Carshalton, Croydon. Caterham, Tanr.
Cattershull, Godal. Cawswaye, Dark. Chaldon, Croydon. Charte, Fern. Chartwood,
Reyg. Cheame, Croydon. Chellsham, Tanr. Chergworth, Emley. Chertsey, Chert.
Chesyington, Copth. Chiddingfold, Godal. Chilworth, Black. Chipsteed, Reyg.
Cleagate, Kingstone. Clandon West, VVoking. Clandon East, VVoking. Clapham,
Brixt. Cobham, Emley. Cobham, Chert. Cobham streat, Emley. Comb Park, Brix.
Comb Nevill, King. Cookham little, Cop. Cookham great, Cop. Colley, Reyg.
Compton, Fern. Compton, Godal. Consford, Black. Cranley, Black. Crowhurst,
Tanr. CROYDON, Croyd. Culsdon, Croyd.
D
DARKING, Darking. Deddington, Croyd. Dovers, Reyg. Dulwich, Brix. Dunsfold,
Black. Dytton thames, Kingst. Dytton long. Kingst.
E
Ebbesham, Cop. Ebbesham Court. Cop. Effingham, Cop. Egham, Chert. Elsted,
Fern. Embhams, Godal. Enton, Godal. Esher, Emley. Esher park, Emley. Eshing,
Godal. Ewell, Cop. Ewhurst, Black. Eywood, Dark.
F
Farley, Tanr. Farnecome, Godal. FARNEHAM, Fern. Fawell, Cop. Fetcham, Cop.
Flanchford, Reyg. Frensham, Fern. Frimley, Chert.
G
Gatton, Reyg. S. George Hill, Emley. Glashouse, Black. GODALMING, Co.
Godstone, Tan. Goldwhurd, Tan. GVILDFORD, Wok. Guildford Manor. Woking.
Gumshall, Black.
H
Hackstall, Tan. Haling, Croydon. Ham, Reyg. Hambledon, Godal. Hamhaw, Chert.
Hartmere, Godal. Hascombe, Black. Hasilmere, Godal. Hatcham, Brixt. Haw, Dark.
Hedley, Cop. Henley Park, Woking. Hindhead, Godal. Hodg Court, Tan. Holmbury,
Black. Holwoodborow, Dar. Horley, Reyg. Horstell, Chert, Horsley West, Woking.
Horsley East, Woking. Horton, Cop. Hourne, Tan.
K
Katerham, Tan. Katern hill, VVoking. Kennington, Brix. Kewe, Kingst. Kings
hill, Brix. KINGSTONE upon Thames, King. Kingfield, Tan. Knole, Black.
Kynnersley, Reyg.
L
Lagham, Tan. Lambeith, Brix. Lambeith deane, Brix. Lambeith marsh, Brix.
Lathesley, Godal. Laystrete, Reyg. Leighe, Reyg. Leth, Dark. Letherhead, Cop.
Lingfield, Tan. Lingfield street, Reyg. Littleton, Godal. Loxley, Black.
Limsfield, Tan.
M
Malden, King. Martin Nevill Brix. Martins on the hill, Black. Mayfort, Woking.
Merrowe, Woking. Merstham, Reyg. Mickleham, Copt. Milton, Dark. Mitcham,
Croydon. Molsey West, Emley. Molsey East, King. Morden, Croydon. Morden, Tan.
Morehouse, Fern. Mortclacke, Brix. Mounsted, Black. Mylford, Godal.
N
Newarke, Woking. Newchappell, Tan. Newington, Brix. Newlodge, Chert. Non-such,
Croydon. Norbury, Cop. Nore, Black. Nudigate, Reyg. Nuttfield, Reyg.
O
Ockham, Woking. Ockley, Dark. Ognersh, Black. Okeley, Dark. Okested, Tan.
Okewood, Black. Otlands, Emley. Oxenford, Godal.
P
Peckham, Brix. Pecham Rye, Brix. Pensgreene, Brix. Pepperharrow, Godal.
Pettersham, King. Pirford, Chert. Pittfall, Godal. Polsdon, Cop. Polsted,
Godal. Pophole, Godal. Potnol, Chert. Poundhill, Tan. Poyle, Fern. Preston,
Cop. Purbright, Woking. Purtenham, Godal. Putney, Brix.
R
Redrith, Brixt. REYGATE, Reyg. Reygato Foren, Reyg. Reygate Church, Reyg.
Richmond, Kingst. Ripleyff, Wok. Robarns, Wok. Rowhampton, Brix. Runfold, Fern.
Runwick alias Dipnel, Fern.
S
Sanderste, Croydon. Salton upon Thamesis. Emley. Salton on the hill, Cop.
Sansted, Cop. Scotsland, Black. Scale, Fern. Send, Wok Shakleford, Godal.
Shalford, Black. Shellwood, Reyg. Shere, Black. Shipley bridge, Tan. Shipley
bridge, Reyg. Shooland, Godal. Shotover mill, Godal. Shine, King. Shine East,
Brix. Sidlum, Reyg. Slyfield, Cop. Smalefield, Tan. South Park, Tan.
SOVTHWARKE, Brixt. Stanesborne, King. Starburg, Tan. Stenestreete, Dark.
Stockwell, Brix. Stoke, Woking. Stoke dauborne, Emley. Stowghton, Wok,
Stretham, Brix. Stroud, Chert. Sutton, Croydon. Sydney, Black,
T
Tadwort, Cop. Talworth Court, King. Tangley, Black. Tanridge, Tan. Tatesfield,
Tan. Temple Dar. Thorpe, Chert. Thursley, Godal. Tilford, Fern. Titting,
Woking. Tittesley, Tan. Tongham, Fern. Towting graveney, Brix. Towting beck.
Brix. Trotworth, Chert.
V
Vachery, Black. Vnsted, Black.
W
Walkamsted, Tan. Wallington, Croydon. Walton, Cop. Walton, Emley. Walworth,
Brix. Wanborow, Woking. Wansworth, Brix. Warlingham, Tan. Warmingfold, Black.
Waverley, Fern. Waybridge, Emley. Wescot, Dark. Weston, Black. Westwood,
Woking. Wheler street, Godal. Whitley, Godal. Wiggy, Reyg. The Wild, Godal.
Willmore pound, Cop. Willy, Reyg. Wimbledon, Brix. Windlesham, Woking. Winsham,
Chert. Wisley, Chert. Witley, Godal. Wodham, Chert. Wodham lane, Chert. Woking,
Woking. Woocote, Croyd. Woodcocke bride, Tan. Woodhatch, Reyg. Woodmanstone,
Croyd. Wooldingham, Tan. Worplesdon, Woking. Worplesdon, Woking. Wotton, Dark.
Wrecklesham, Fern. Wyke, Woking.
HANT-SHIRE, by the Saxons written Handeschyr, lying upon the West of England,
is bordered upon the North by Barke-shire, upon the East with Surrey and
Sussex, upon the South with the British Seas, and I Will of Wight, and upon the
West with Dorset and Wilt-shire.

The length and breadth of Hampshire.
(2) The length thereof from Blackwater in the North upon Surrey, unto Bascomb
in the South upon the Sea, extended in a right line, is fifty four English
miles: and the breadth drawn from Petersfield in the East, unto Tidworth in the
West, and confines of Wilt-shire, is little less then thirty miles, the whole
circumference about an hundred fifty five miles.

The air of Hampshire.
(3) The Air is temperate, though somewhat thick by reason of the Seas, and
the many Rivers that through the Shire do fall, whose plenty of fish and
fruitful increase, do manifoldly redeem the harms which they make.

The soil.
(4) The Soil is rich for Corn and Cattle, pleasant for pasturage, and
plenteous for Woods; in a word, in all commodities either for Sea or Land,
blessed and happy.

Havens.
(5) Havens it has, and those commodious both to let in, and to loose out ships
of great burden in trade of Merchandise, or other employments: whereof
Portsmouth, Tichfield, Hamble, and South-hampton are chief: besides many other
creekes that open their bosoms into those Seas, Creekes.
and the Coast strengthened with many strong Castles, Castles.
such as Hurst, Calshot, South-hampton, Saint Andrews, Worth, Porchester, and
the South Castle, besides other Bulwarks, or Block-houses that secure the
Country: And further in the Land, as Malwood, Winchester, and Odiam, so
strong, that in the time of King John, thirteen Englishmen only defended the
Fort for fifteen days against Lewis of France, that with a great Host
assaulted it most hotly.

Ninius in Catalog. Civit.
(6) Anciently it was possessed upon the North by the Segontians, who yielded
themselves to Julius Caesar, and whose chief City was Vindonum, Caer Segonte,
now Silcest^r; and upon the South by the Belgae, and Regni, who were subdued by
Plantius and Vespasian the Romans, where Titus rescuing his father, straightly
besieged by the Britains, as Dio and Forcatulus do report, was grasped about
with an Adder, but no hurt to his person, and therefore taken for a sign of
good luck. Their chief Town was Rincewood, Doomsdayes book.
as yet sounding the name: and more within Land inhabited the Manures, Beda
bist. lib. 4. cap. 13.
as Beda calls them, whose Hundreds also to this day give a relish of their
names.

New Forest. Gualter Maps.
(7) Near Ringwood, and the place once YTENE, from God and peoples service, to
Beast and luxury, thirty-six Parish-Churches were converted and pulled down by
the Conqueror, and thirty miles of circuit inforrested for his Game of
Hunting, wherein his sons, Richard and Rufus, with Henry the second son to
Duke Robert, his first, felt by hasty death the hand of Justice and Revenge:
for in the same Forest, Richard by a blasting of a pestilent air, Rufus by a
shot taken for a Beast, and Henry as Absalom, hanged by a bough, came to their
untimely ends. At so dear a rate the pleasures of dogs, and harbor for beasts
were bought in the blood of these Princes.

(8) The general commodities gotten in this Shire, are Woolles, Clothes and
Iron, whereof great store is therein wrought from the Mines, and thence
transported into all parts of this Realm, and their Clothes and Karsies
carried into many foreign Countries to that Counties, great benefit, and
Englands great praise.

(9) The Trade thereof, with other provisions for the whole, are vented through
eighteen Market-Townes in this Shire, The City Winchester.
whereof Winchester, the Britains Caer Gwent, the Romans Venta Belgarum, and
the Saxons Windaneasder is chief, ancient enough by our British Historians, as
built by King Rudhudibras, Lib. Notitiae.
nine hundred years before the Nativity of Christ: and famous in the Romans
times for the weavings and embroderies therein wrought, to the peculiar uses of
their Emperors own persons. In the Saxons times, after two Calamities of
consuming fire, Zosimus.
her walls were raised, and the City made the Royal Seat of their
West Saxons Kings, and the Metropolitan of their Bishops See, wherein Egbert
and Elfred their most famous Monarchs were crowned: Will. Malms.
and Henry the third, the Normans longest raigner, first took breath: And here
King Aethelstane erected six houses for his Mint: Henry Hunting.
but the Danish desolation overrunning all, this City felt their fury in the
days of King Ethelbright, and in the Normans time, twice was defaced by the
misfortune of fire, which they again repaired and graced with the trust of
keeping the public Records of the Realm. In the civil Wars of Maud and
Stephen, this City was sore sacked, but again receiving breath, The Staple.
was by King Edward the third appointed the place for Mart of Wool and Cloth.
The Cathedral Church built by Kenwolf, King of the West Saxons, that had been
Amphibalus, Saint Peter's, Swythins, and now holy Trinity, is the Sanctuary for
the ashes of many English Kings: for herein great Egbert, Anno 836. with his
son King Ethelwolfe, Kings buried in Winchester.
857. Here Elfred, Oxfords Founder, 901. with his Queen Elswith, 904. Here the
first Edmund before the Conquest, 924. with his sons Elfred and Elsward: Here
Edred, 955. and Edwy, 956. both Kings of England: Here Emm^, 1052. with her
Danish Lord Canute, 1035. and his son Hardicanute, 1042. And here lastly the
Normans, Richard and Rufus, 1100. were interred; their bones by Bishop Fox were
gathered and shrined in little guilt coffers fixed upon a wall in the Quire,
where still they remain carefully preserved.

This Cities situation is fruitful and pleasant, The situation of Winchester.
in a valley under hills, having her River on the East, and Castle on the West,
the circuit of whose walls are well-neare two English miles, containing one
thousand eight hundred and eighty paces; through which opens six gates for
entrance, and therein are seven Churches for divine service, besides the
Minster, and those decayed: such as Callendos, Ruell Chapel, Saint Mary's
Abbey, and the Friars, without in the Suburbs, and So^ke; in the East is Saint
Peter's, and in the North Hyde Church, and Monastery, whose ruins remaining,
show the beauty that form^tly it bare. The Graduation of this City by the
Mathematics, is placed for Latitude in the degree 51, 10 minutes, and for
Longitude 19, 3 minutes.

(10) More South, South-hampton.
is South-hampton, a Town populous, rich, and beautiful, from whom the whole
Shire deriveth her name, most strongly walled about with square stone,
containing in circuit, one thousand and two hundred paces, having seven Gates
for entrance, and twenty-nine Towers for defense, two very stately Keys for
Ships arrivage, and five fair Churches for Gods Divine Service, besides an
Hospital, called Gods house, wherein the unfortunate Richard, Earl of
Cambridge, beheaded for treason, lies interred. On the West of this Town is
mounted a most beautiful Castle, in form Circular, and wall within wall, the
foundation upon a hill so topped, that it cannot be ascended but by stairs,
carrying a goodly prospect both by Land and Sea, and in the East without the
walls a goodly Church sometimes stood, called Saint Mary's, which was pulled
down, for that it gave the French direction of course, who with fire had
greatly endangered the Town: In stead thereof, is now newly erected a small
and unfinished Chapel. In this place (says learned Cambden) stood the
ancient Clausentium, Clausentium.
or Fort of the Romans, whose circuit on that side extended it self to the
Sea* This suffered many depredations by the Saxon Pirates, and in Anno 980. was
by the Danes almost quite overthrown. In King Edward the thirds time, it was
fired by the French, under the conduct of the King of Sicils son, whom a
countryman encountered and struck down with his Club. He crying Rancon,
that is, Ransoms, but he neither understanding his language, nor the law that
Arms does allow, laid on more soundly, saying, I know thee a Frankon, and
therefore shall thou dye: And in Richard the seconds time it was somewhat
removed, and built in the place where now it stands. In this Clausentium,
Canute to evict his flatterers, made trial of his Deity, commanding the Seas
to keep back from his seat: but being not obeyed, he acknowledged God to be
the only Supreme Governor, and in a religious devotion gave up his Crown to
the Rood at Winchester. Silcester.
More ancient was Silcester, built by Constantius, great Constantines son,
whose monument (say they) was seen in that City, and where another Constantine
put on the purple Roabe against Honorius, as both Ninius and Gervase of
Canterbury do witness. Ninius. Ger. Can^u.
Herein by onr Historians record, the warlike Arthur was crowned. Whose
greatness for circuit contained no less then fourscore acres of ground, and
the walls of great height, yet standing two miles in compass about. This City
by the Danish Rovers suffered such wrack, that her mounted tops were never
since seen, and her Hulke (the walls) inmured to their middle in the earth,
which the rubbish of her own desolations has filled.

(11) Chief Religious houses within this Country erected, The chief religious
houses in this County.
and again suppressed were these, Christs-Church, Beaulieu, Wherwell, Rumsey,
Redbridge, Winchester, Hyde, Southhampton and Tichfield. The honor of this
Shire is dignified with the high Titles of Marquis, and them Earls of
Winchester and South-hampton; whose Arms of Families are as thou see, and
her division into thirty seven Hundreds, and those again into two hundred
fifty three Parishes, as in her Table shall appear.

map of Hampshire HANTSHIRE described and divided.


Hundreds in Hantshire.
1. Evinger. 2. Kingscleere. 3. Holshott. 4. Odiham. 5. Crundall. 6. Alton. 7.
Barmanspit. 8. Chutley. 9. Basingstook. 10. Overton. 11. Pastrow. 12. Andevor.
13. Wherwell. 14. Micheldever. 15. Buntesborow. 16. Sutton. 17. Selborne. 18.
Eastermeane. 19. Meanestoake, and Suberton. 20 Fawley. 21. Buddlesgate. 22.
Kingsunborne. 23. Bartonstacy. 24. Thornegate. 25. Newforest. 26.
Fordingbridge. 27. Ringwood. 28. Christ-Church. 29. Redbridge. 30. Waltham. 31.
Mansbridge. 32. Tichfield. 33. Portsdown. 34. Portsmouth. Liberty. 35. Bosmere,
and Hayling. 36. Fartham. 37. Finchdeane.
A
ABbots worthy, Michel. Abbots Ann, Andovor. Abboteston, Buntes. Abshot, Tichf.
Aldershot, Crund. Alungton, Mansb. Allow-house, Christ. Altesford old. Fawley.
ALRESFORD, Su. ALTON, Alton. Alwardstoake, Tichf. Amberlam, Ester. Amner Ferme,
Hamble. Amport, Andevor. ANDEVOR, And. Anfeild, Mansb. S. Andrews Castle, Man.
Anport, And. Anne little, Where. Appleshaw, And. Arnewood, Christch. Ash,
Overt. Ashely, Christch. Ashly, Kingsun. Ashmansworth, Evi. Ashton, Walth.
Aven, Christch. Avington, Fawley.
B
Baddesley, Mansb. Badsle South, New. Baghurst, Eving. Baldoxsee, Redbr.
Barmeston, Redbr. Barkley Kings, New. Baropey, Basing. Barrend, Michel. Harton
Peverell, Man's. Bartonstacy, Barton. BASINGSTOOK, Basing. Bascombe, Christch.
Basing, Basing. Batrumsly, New. Beacon, Newf. Beacon, Walth. Beamond, Ports.
Bear, Budles. Beareweeke, Budl. Bear Forest, Portesd. Bearehouse, Ports.
Beawley, New. Beaworth, Fawley. Beckam, Fording. Bedhampton, Ports. Bedham,
Kings. Bensteed, Alton. Bentley Crund. Bentworth, Odiham. Berseldon, Tichfeild.
Beriton, Finch. Bighton, Sutton. Bisterne, Ringwood. Bittern, Walth. Bisterene
Barkley, Redbr. Bishopstoake, Fawl. Black Cliffe, Christ. Blackwater, Crund.
Blendworth, Finch. Boldre, Newforest. Borocote, Mich. Borow Clear, Eving.
Bossington, Thorn. Botley, Mansb. Bowdeane, Ester. Boyate, Mansb. Bradley,
Overt. Bradley, Barmans. Bramdeane, Sutt. Bramere, Fording. Bramley, Basing.
Bramsbury, Budles. Bramsell, Hold. Bramshot, Crund. Bramshot, Alton. Brickton,
Fording. Britain Lee, Tichf. Brodlands, Redbr. Brokenhurst, New. Brook,
Kingsun. Broughton, Thorn. Brown Candaver, Bunts. Broxton, Alton. Buckholt
Forest, Thorn. Buckland, Ports. Bullington, Where. Bure, Christch. Burgate,
Fording. Burghcleere, Eving. Burly, New. Buticourt, Alton. Burrant West, Ports.
Burrant East, Ports. Burstlin, Walth. Burton, Christch. Burwell, Mean.
Bushwaltham, Walth. Butter-hill, East. Butteren, Walth. Butesashe, New.
Byndley, Eving.
C
Cadland, New. Calshot Castle, New. Cams, Tich. Caunterton, New. Caston,
Fawley. Catcombe, Port. Cavehurst, Kings. Chalton, Finch. Charke, Tich.
Charford North, Ford. Chaiford South, Ford. Charlcott, Eving. Charton, And.
Castle South, Por^. Chawton, Alton. Cheryton, Fawley. Chewton, Christch.
Chidden, Hamble. Chilboulton, Budles. Chilcombe, Fawley. Chillinge, Tich.
Chilton Candaver, Bunts. Chilworth, Man's. Chineham, Basing. Choldwarton, And.
CHRIST-CHURCH, Chr. Chure Forest, Ando. Clanfeild, And. Clanfeild, Finch.
Clatford upper, Ando. High Clear, Eving. Cleerewoodcot, Kir. Clydseden,
Basing. Cockerfeild, Alton. Coldre, Alton. Colderton, And. Colmer, Barton.
Comb, Past. Comb, Easter. Compton, Budles. Compton, Kings. Copperhouse,
Christ. Cornhampton, Mea. Cove, Crund. Cowderidge, Walth. Crokham, Crund.
Cramborne, Michel. Crawley, Budles. S. Cross, Budles. Croston, Tishf.
Crowdhill, Fawley. Croxeston, Past. Crundall, Crund.
D
Deane, Overt. Dean East, Thorn. Derly Loperwood, Red. Dibden, Redbr. Dimnead,
Hamb. S. Dionies, Walth. Dipnall, Crund. Drogmersfeild, Odi. Drayton, Ports.
Droxford, Walth. Dummer, Barm. Dunbury-hill, Ando. Durly, Walth.
E
Earlston, Kings. East Walban, Alton. Eastermeane, Ester. Eastly, Man's. Easton
Farm, Ports. Easton, Past. Easton, Fawley. Edmonosthorp, Kin. Edsworth, Finch.
Egbury, Eving. Eling, Redbr. Ellingham, Ford. Elvetham, Odiham. Empshott,
Selbor. Empsworth, Bosmer. Enham, Ando. Ervells, Hamble. Etchinswell, Eving.
Eversl^y, Hold. Ewshott, Crund. Exbury, New. Exton, Fawley.
F
Fackham, Past. FARHAM, Tich. Faringdon, Selborne. Farley, Kings. Farley,
Barmans. Farlington, Ports. Farnborrow, Crund. Farnhamsdean, Past. Fartham,
Farth. Faston, Ferme. Faston, Past. Faushot, Crund. Fawly, New. Ferlington,
Ports. Fernboro, Odib. Fontley great, Tichf. Fontley little, Tichf.
Fordingbridge, Ford. Forton, Where. Foxcott, Andover. Fremanton, Kings. Fritham,
New. Frobury, Kings. Froxfeild, Ester. Froyle, Alton. Frysalke, Eving. Fryvoke,
Eving. Fulflude, Budles. Fullerton, Kings. Fyfeild, Andover. Funtley great,
Tichf. Funtley little, Tichf.
G
Gallare, Where. Gynus, New. Gittins, New. Gildable, Kings. Glidden, Hamble.
Godshall, New. Goodworth Clatford, Where. Godsfeild, Buntes. Gosporte, Tichf.
Grange, Bu^tes. Gratly, Andover. Gertham, Alton. Grewell, Odi. Groveplace,
Redbr.
H
Hale, Fording. Hale, New. Haliborne, Alton. Hamble Have, Man. Hambledon,
Hamble. Hamblerise, Man's. Hame, Barton. Haninton, Chu^. Hanington Laurence,
Kings. Hardu^dge. Ringw. Hardley, New. Harneden, Finch. Hartley Wespell, Hold.
Hartley Mawdit, Alton. Hasell, Basing. Hatherden, Andov. Havant, Bosm. Haughton
North, Kings. Hawley, S^lborne. Hawley, Crund. Hayling, Bosm. Headley, Sutt.
Headborn worthy, Bart. Heath, Christch. Heathouse, Finch. Heckfeild, Hold.
Helliouse, Chut. Hengesbury head, Chris Henley, Eving. Henton Dawbney, Finch.
Henton Amner, Fawl. Heriott, Barman. Herford bridge, Odi. Hertley-row* Odi.
Hertley, Alton. Hertley, Odi. Highcleere. Hill* Walth. Hilside, O^i. Hinton,
Christch. Hithe, New. Hoddington* Fawley. Hoe, Mean Holbury, New. Holdshot,
Hold. Holiborn, Alton. Holmhurst, Christc. Hook, Tich. Hordwell, Christch.
Horbridge, Ford. Howghton, Bud. Hownd, Man's. Hunton, Bud. Hurton, Christch.
Hurne, Christch. Hursboorne, Past. Hursboorne, Eving Hursley, Bud. Hurst East,
Kingsun. Hurst West, Kings.
I
Ibbesley, Ford. Ifford, Christch. Ilfeild, Barm. Inhurst, Bart. Instead East,
Sell. Instead West, Sut. Itchell, Crund. Itching, Walth. Itchin Stoake, Bunt.
Itchin Abbots, Bunt.
K
Katrington, Finch. Kempshot, Basing. Keppernham, Kings. Keyhaven, Christch.
Kimpstone, Fa^ley. KINGS CLEEVE, Kings. Kingley, Alton. Kingston, Ports.
Kingston, Ringw. Kingsunborne, Kings. Kingswo^thy, Bart. Kirbridge, Walth.
Kympton, Ando.
L
Ladnam, Thorn. Langly, New. Langly, Red. Langrish, Est. Lassam, Odi.
Laverstooke, Overt. Lawnsle^^ll, Kings. Leap, New. Leckford, Kings. Lebritan,
Tich. Lee Earls, Kings. Lichfeild, Kings. Linchford, Crund. Lindhurst Park,
New. Lippocke, Alton. Littleton, Bud. Littleton, Ando. Lockerley, Thorn.
Lovington, Fawley. Long-parish, Where. Long Sutton, Crund. Longstocke, King.
Lungford, Fawley. LYMINGTON, Christ. Lyghe, Port. Lindhurst, New. Lynwood, New.
Lysse, Odiham.
M
Magdaline, Faw. Malchanger, Chut. Malwood Castle, New. Mappledorwell, Bas.
Mapledurham, Finch. Marchwood, Red. Lee Marks, Tich. Martin worthy, Fawley. S.
Mary's, Walth. S. Ma^y boorne, Evi. Mattingley, Hold. Maxston, Ando. Maxwell,
Fawley. Mean East, Mean. Mean West, Faw. Meanestoake, Mean. Medsted, Fawley.
Memsted, New. Micheldevor, Mich. Michelmersh, Budl. Migiam, Ford. Midleton,
Where. Milbrooke, Budles. Milbrooke Hill, Walth. Milcourt, Alton. Milford,
Christch. Milton, Christ. Minsted, Newf. Morecot, Red. Moresteed, Fawley.
Morrall, Odi. Mortymer, Hold. Motteffont, Thorn. Moyles Court, Ringw.
Munkeston, Ando. Mycheldever, Mich. Mynley, Hold.
N
Nashe, Christch. Nastwood, Past. Natley Severs, Bas. Natley upper, Bas. Newton
Valence, Selbor. Newton Bery, Redb. Netham, Alton. Netley, Man's. Newnam,
Basing. Newton, Eving. Newton, Selb. Newtonstacie, Bart. Ninkenholt, Past.
Northbrooke, Mich. Northington, Mich. Northwood, Bosmer. Norton, Selbor.
Nursling, Bud. Nursting, Red. Nurstead, Finch. Nutley, Barmans.
O
Obery, Kings. ODIHAM, Odi. Okehanger, Alton. Okeley, Kings. Okeley North,
Chut. Okeley church, Chu. Okeley-hall, Chut. Oldaltesford, Bunt. Oldstoake,
Budle. Oosham, Ports. Otterborne, Budle. Overton, Overt. Ovington, Fawley.
Ower, Redbridge. Owselbury, Faw. Oxenborne, Ester. Oxenborne, Mean.
P
Patow Beacons, Mic. Paltons, Redbr. Pamber, Hold. Pamber, Barton. Parkhouse,
New. Parlicu, Christch. Parsonage, Kings. Park, New. Pecke, Mean. Pennyngton,
Ring. Penton Grafton, And. Penton Mewson, And. Persint, Kingston. PETER'S FIELD,
Finc. Pettleworth, Thorn. Pilley, New. Pit, Budle. Platford, Ando. Polhampton,
Overt. Polsgrave, Ports. Popham, Michel. Porchester, Ports. PORTSMOUTH, Ports.
Portsey, Ports. Posbrooke, Tich. Preshoe, Mean. Preston Candaver, Barm.
Preston, Christch. Preve park, Basing. Prevet, Fawley. Priorsdeane, Barton.
Q
Qualey, Ando. Quidhampton, Over.
R
Rames Head, Tich. Ramesdeane, Ester. Raydon, New. Redbridge, Redbr. Redman,
Ando. RINGWOOD, Ri. Riplington, Ester. Rockeborne, Fordin. Rochcourt, Tich.
Ropley, Sut. Rotherweek, Odih. Rowner, Tich. Rumburge, Redbr. RUMSEY, King.
RUMSEY, Redb. Rye, Odiham.
S
Sandford, Kings. Sasbury, Tich. Saveston, Ando. Scotney, Barton. Selborne,
New. Selborne, Selbor. Setchfield, Fording. Shalden, Odiham. Shamblehurst,
Man's. Sharprickes, Christc. Shatsham, Man's. Sheet, Finch. Shelborne, Selb.
Shephoue, Crund. West Sherborne, Chut. Sherborne S. John's, Basing. Sherfield,
Odiham. Sherfield, Thorn. Shipton, Thorn. Shiadfield, Walth. Sidmanton,
Kings. Sidford, Man's. Silchester, Hold. Sinckles, Walth. Skewers, Basing.
Slackstead, Michel. Snodington, Thorn. Soak, Fawley. Soak Winton, Buntes.
Somborne, Somb. Somborne, Somb. Somerford, Christch. Soplv, Christch.
SOUTHAMPTON, Wa. Southam, Fording. Southbrooke, Tich. Southbrooke, Mich.
SOUTHCAST, Po. Southroppe, Odiham. Southweeke, Ports. Southwood, Bosmer.
Sparkford, Budles. Sparshote, Budles. Stanbridge, Kings. Stannog, Tich.
Stanswood, New. Stapley, Odiham. Steep, Ester. Stephenton, Basing. Stoake,
Eving. Stobridgton, Tich. STOCK-BRIDGE, King. Stone, R^dbr. Stoneham North,
Man's. Stoneham South, Man's. Stratton East, Mich. Stratton West, Mich.
Stratfieldsey, Hold. Streate, Christch. Stunnog, Tich. Suberton, Mean.
Sunburne little, Kings. Sunburne upper, Kings. Sutton, Sut. Sutton, Crund.
Sutton, Barton. Swampton, Eving. Swanthrope, Crund. Swanmore, Walth. Swanwick,
Tich. Swarwotton. Bunt. Swaye, Christch.
T
Tachbury, Redbr. Tadley, Over^. Taddiford, Christch Tangley, Past. Temple,
Selborn. Terstwood, Redbr. Tertio Deane, Faw. Thornay. Thruxston, Ando.
Tichborne, Fawl. Tichfield house, Tich. Tichfeild, Tich. Tisted East, Selb.
Tisted West, Sutt. Tockington, Where. Toothill, Man's. Totton, Redbr. Truxton
without, Ando. Tuddiford, Christ^. Turnworth, Basing. Turges, Hold. Tuston,
Hor. Twyford, Fawley. Tydworth, Ando. Tymsbury, Kings. Tytherley West, Thorn.
Tytherley East, Thorn.
V
The Vine, Basing. Upham, Walth. Upton gray, Barm. Upton, Past. Votherfeild,
Alton.
W
Wablington, Bosmer. Wade, Bosmer. Walhampton, Christ. Wallington, Ports.
Wallop upper, Thorn. Wallop nether, Thorn. Wallop middle, Thorn. Walsworth*
Ports. Walton North, Overt. Warborne, New. Ward, R^dbr. Warmansashe, Tich.
Warnborrow North, Odi. Warnborrow South, Bart. Warnford, Mean. Week, Eving.
Week, Budles. Weild, Fawley. W^^hill, Ando. Wellow West, Thorn. Wemerling,
Port. Westbery, Mean. Westcoat, Alton. Weston Patrickes, Odi. Weston, Barm.
Weston Carbets, Barm. Weston, Finch. Weston, Michel. Westover, Christch.
Wherwell, Where. WHIT-CHURCH, Evin. Whitsbury, Ford. Wickham, Tich. Widleigh,
Ports. Wigley, Thorn. Wimston, Redbr. Winchfeild, Odiham. Winckton, Christch.
Winhall, Fawley. Wintney, Odiham. Winton, Christch. Winton, Ring. WINCHESTER.
Winstade, Basing. Wisherborne, Chut. Witham, Andover. Wolles, King. Wonston,
Budles. Woodcott, Past. Woodgaston, Basing. Woodhaye East, Eving. Woodmancor,
Bunt. Woolferton, King. Woolston, Man's. Wortham East, Alton. Wartham West,
Alton. Worth Castle, Tich. Worting, Chut. Wotton, Chut. Wymering, Ports. Wyke,
Basing.
Y
Yabington, Fawley. Yatley, Crund. Yatton East, Where. Yatton West, Where.
THE DESCRIPTION OF THE VVIGHT ISLAND.
The ancient Name.
WIGHT Island was in times past named by the Romans Vecta, Vectis, and
Vectesis, by the Britains, Guyth, by the English Saxons, Wuit-lanth, and
Wicth-AEa, (for an Island they termed AEa) and in these days usually called by
us, The Isle of Wight. Ninius.
It belongs to the County of Southampton, and lies out in length over
against the midst of it Southward. It is encompassed round with the British
Seas, and severed from the Maine-land, that it may seem to have been conjoined
to it, The occasion of naming it Guyth.
and thereof it is thought the British name ( Guyth) has been given unto it,
which betokens separation, even as Sicily being broken off and cut from
Italy, got the name from Secando (which signifies cutting.)

(2) The form of this Isle is long, and in the midst far more wide then at
either end: from Binbridge I Will in the East, to Hurst Castle in the West, it
stretches out in length 20. miles, The length.
and in breadth from Newport Haven Northward, to Chale-bay Southward twelve
miles. Breadth.
The whole in circumference is about sixty miles.

Air.
(3) The air is commended both for health and delight, whereof the first is
witnessed by the long continuance of the Inhabitants in the state of their
bodies before they be decayed, and the other for quantity gives place to no
neighboring Country.

The Soil.
(4) The ground (to say nothing of the Sea, which is exceeding full of Fish)
consists of soil very fruitful; yet the husbandmans labor deserves to be
thankefully remembered, by whose pains and industry it does not only supply it
self, but affords Corn to be carried forth to others. The land is plenteously
stored with Cattle and Grain, The delectablenesse of it.
and breeds every where store of Conies, Hares, Partridges and Phesants,
pleasant for meadow, pasturage, and Parkes; so that nothing is wanting that may
suffice man. The midst yields plenty of pasture; and forage for Sheep;
whose wool the Clothiers esteem the best; next unto that of Leinster and
Cotteswold: If you cast your eyes toward the North, it is all over garnished
with Meadows, Pastures and Woods: If toward the South side, it lies (in a
manner) wholly bedecked with Cornefields enclosed, where at each end the Sea
does so incroch it self, that it makes almost two Islands besides, namely,
Freshwater Isle, which looks to the West, and Binbridge Isle answering it to
the East.

The commodities.
(5) The Commodities of the whole chiefly consist of Cattle, Sea-fowle, Fish,
and Corn, whereof it has sufficient: Woods are not here very plentiful; for
that it is only stored with one little forest; yet the Country of Hantshire
for vicinitie of Site, is a friendly neighbor in that behalf; so (as it were
being tied together in affinity) they are always ready, and propense to add
to each others wants and defects by a mutual supply.

Ancient Inhabitants.
(6) The ancient Inhabitants of this Island were the Belgae, spoken of in the
several Provinces of Sommerset-shire, Wilt-shire, and Hant-shire. Such as did
then possess it were called Lords of the I Will of Wight, till it fell into the
Kings hands, by Roger (Son to William Fitz-Osburne, slain in the war of
Flanders) that was driven into exile. And Henry the first King of England gave
it unto Richard Ridvers, Richard Ridvers.
with the fee or Inheritance of the Town of Christ-Church, where (as in all
other places) he built certain Fortresses.

(7) The principal Market-Towne in the Isle is Newport, called in times past
Medena, and Novus Burgus de Meden; Newport the chief town.
that is, the new Burgh of Meden, whereof the whole Country is divided into
East- Meden, and West- Meden. A Town well seated, and much frequented; unto
whose Burgesses His Majesty has lately granted the choice of a Major, who
with his Brethren, do govern accordingly. It is populous with Inhabitants,
having an entrance into the Isle from the Haven, and a passage for Vessels of
small burden unto the Key. Not far from it is the Castle Caresbrooke, whose
Founder is said to have been Whitgar the Saxon, and from him called
White-Garesburgh: but now made shorter for easier pronunciation; the graduation
whereof for Latitude is in the degree 50.36. minutes: and her Longitude in
19.4. minutes, where formerly has stood a Priory, and at Quarre a Nunnery; a
necessary neighbor to those Penitentiaries. And yet in their merry mood the
Inhabitants of this Island do boast, that they were happier then their
neighbour-Countreys, for that they never had Monk that ever wore hood, Lawyers
that cavilled, nor Foxes that were crafty.

(8) It is reported, that in the year of man's salvation, A shower of blood.
1176. and twenty three of King Henry the second, that in this Island it rained
a shower of blood, which continued for the space of two hours together to the
great wonder and amazement of the people that beheld it with fear.

(9) This Isle of Wight is fortified both by Art and Nature: The strength of
this Island.
for besides the strength of Artificial Forts and Block-houses (wherewith it
is well furnished) it wants not the assistance of natural Fences, as being
enriched with a continual ridge and range of craggy Cliffes, and Rocks, and
Bancks, very dangerous for Sailors, as the Needles, so called by reason of
their sharpness: The Shingles, Mixon, Brambles, etc.

(10) Vespasian was the first that brought it to the subjection of the Romans,
The Roman Governors.
whiles he served as a private person under Claudius Caesar. And Cerdic was the
first English Saxon that subdued it, who granting it unto Stuff and Whitgar,
they jointly together slew (almost) all the British Inhabitants, (being but few
of them there remaining) in the Town aforesaid, called of his name
Whitgaresburgh. Wolpher King of the Mercians reduced this Island afterward
under his obedience, The Mercian King.
and at that time when he became Godfather to Edelwalch King of the
South Saxons, and answered for him at his Baptism; he assigned it over unto
him, with the Province also of the Menuari. But when Edelwalch was slain, and
Arvandus the petty King of the Island was made away, Coedwalla King of the
West Saxons annexed it to his Dominion, and in a tragical and lamentable
massacre put to the sword (almost) every mothers child of the inborne
Inhabitants.

The thing that is best worthy note and observation is this, Wilfrid.
that Bishop Wilfrid was the first that instructed the Inhabitants of this
Island in Christian religion, and brought them from that Idolatrous
Superstition, with the which (unto that time) they were obscurely blinded.

For Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, this Country belongs to the Bishop of
Winchester, Bishop of Winchester their Diocesan.
and for Civil government to the County of Southampton. It is fortified with
the strength of six Castles, traded with three Market-townes, and has 36.
Parish churches planted in it.

map of the Isle of Wight WIGHT ISLAND


An Alphabeticall Table of all the Towns, Rivers, and memorable places
mentioned in Wight Island.
THE PARTITION of WIGHT Island.
VVest-Medine. East-Medine.
A
Ageston, E. Med. Apleford, E. Med. Apton-comb, E. Med. Ash, E. Med. Aston, VV.
Med. Atherfeld, VV. Med. Atherfeld Rocks, VV. Med. Atherton, E. Med. Averston,
E. Med. Avinton Forest, VV. Med.
B
Bannose, E. Medine. Barton, E. Med. Bery-Baron, VV. Med. Binbridge Isle, E.
Med. Binsted, E. Med. Black, VV. Med. Black-Rock, E. Med. Bonechurch, E. Med.
Bradney, E. Med. Bredlefford, E. Med. Brixton, VV. Med. Brock, VV. Med.
Bridge-Court, E. Med. Buleham, VV. Med. Bulner, VV. Med.
C
Calhourne, VV. Med. Caresbroke, VV. Med. Chak-Rockes, VV. Med. Chalt, E. Med.
Chale-bay, W. Med. Challorne, E. Med. Cheverton, W. Med. Cleybrok, W. Med.
Cliffe, E. Med. Cliffewhit, E. Med. Comley, E. Med. Compton Bay, W. Med.
Compton, W. Med. Coulver-cliffes, E. Med.
D
Dane, E. Med. Done-mosse, E. Med.
E
Elmesworth, W. Med.
F
The Farm, or Kings Freshwater, W. Med. Fayrlee, E. Med. Fish-house, E. Med.
Flesh-land, E. Med. Freshwater Isle, W. Med. Freshwater gate, VV. Med.
Freshwater cliffe, VV. Med. Forgeland, VV. Med. East Forland, E. Med.
G
Garnard, VV. Med. Gatcomb, VV. Med. Godshill, E. Med. The Gosse, VV. Med.
Gotton, E. Med.
H
Hall, E. Med. Hamsteds, VV. Med. Hany-mouth, VV. Med. S. Helen, E. Med. S.
Helens haven, E. Med. Hill, E. Med.
I
Iacmans chin, VV. Med.
K
S. Katherines, E. Med. Kerne, E. Med. Kinget, VV. Med. Kinchet chyne, W. Med.
Kinghton, E. Med. Kingsword, W. Med.
L
Langford, E. Med. Langhorne, E. Med. S. Lawrance Park, E. Med. Limerston, W.
Med. Luckome, E. Med.
M
Marvel, W. Med. Medhole, E. Med. Mersh, W. Med. Merston, E. Med. Mitton, E.
Med. Mountson, W. Med. The Myxon, E. Med.
N
The Needles, W. Med. Nettleston, E. Med. Nettles hithe, E. Med. Neunam, E.
Med. Newtowne, W. Med. Newtowne haven, W. Med. NEWPORT, W. Med. Newport haven,
W. Med. Newport Castle, W. Med. Newchurch, E. Med. Nighton, E. Med. Norris, E.
Med. North Court, E. Med. Northparke, E. Med. Northwood, E. Med. Nounwell, E.
Med.
P
Pan, E. Med. Pagan, E. Med. Pouppoll, E. Med.
Q
Quart, E. Med.
R
Redway, E. Med. Ride, E. Med. Rockley, E. Med. Roughbarrow, W. Med. Roxall, E.
Med.
S
Sand head, E. Med. SANDON Castle, E. M. Sandon bay, E. Med. Shankling, E.
Med. Shankling, E. Med. Sharpnor Castle, W. Med. Shaucome, W. Med. Shaufleete,
W. Med. Shauler, E. Med. Shoflet, E. Med. Shorwell, W. Med. Slutter, E. Med.
Smalbrok, E. Med. Standen, E. Med. Steynburro, E. Med. Sutton, W. Med.
Swynston, W. Med.
T
Thorley, W. Med. Thorney great, W. Med. Thornay bay, W. Med. Trablefeld, E.
Med.
W
Wachingwy park, W. Med. Waitcourt, W. Med. Warden Rocks, W. Med. Week, E.
Med. Wellow, W. Med. Westcourt, W. Med. Westcow Castle, W. Med. Westover, W.
Med. Whipingham, E. Med. Whitfeild, E. Med. Whitwell, E. Med. Wolverton, W.
Med. Woodhouse, E. Med. Worseleys Tower, W. Med. Wotton haven, E. Med. Wotton
park, E. Med.
Y
YARMOUTH, W. Med. Yarmouth haven, W. Med. Yarmouth Castle, W. Med. Yarmouth
Rode, W. Med. Yaverland, E. Med.
DORCESTER from her ancient people DUROTRIGES, is most likely to have received
that name: The ancient name of this Shire.
by the Britains called DWRGWEIR, and by the Saxons Dorseddar, lies bounded
upon the North side with Sommerset and Wilt-Wiltshires; The bounds of limits.
upon the West with Devon-shire, and some part with Sommerset; upon the East
altogether with Hampshire; and her South part is wholly bounded with the
British Seas.

The form and measure of it.
(2) The form grows wider from the West, and spreads her self the broadest in
the midst, where it extends to twenty four miles, but in length is no less
then forty four: the whole in circumference about, is one hundred and fifty
miles.

The Air.
(3) The air is good, and of an healthful constitution: the soil is fat,
affording many commodities, and the Country most pleasant in her situation:
for the Inland is watered with many sweet and fresh running springs, which
taking passage through the plain valleys, do lastly in a loving manner unite
themselves together, and of their many branches make many big bodied
streams: neither does the Sea deny them entrance, but helps rather to fill
up their Banks, whereby Vessels of burden discharge their rich Treasures, and
her self with open hand distributeth her gifts all along the South of this
Shore.

The ancient inhabitants.
(4) Anciently it was possessed by the Durotriges, whom Ptolemie places along
in this Tract, who being subdued by the Romans, yielded them room, and
unwilling subjection. After them the Saxons set foot in these parts, whereof
Portland seems from that Port to take name, who in this place arrived in Anno
703. and did sorely infest and annoy all the South Tract. And at Bindon before
him Kinegillus King of the West Saxons, in the year of Christ 614. in a
doubtful and dangerous Battle vanquished the Britains. Neither were the
Saxons so surely herein seated, but that the Danes sought to defeat them
thereof: for twice these bold Rovers landed at Chartmouth, the first was in
Anno 831. and Reign of King Egbert, and the other eight years after, when
Ethelwulfe was King: in both which they went away Victors. Yet when the
Iron-side wore the English Diadem, An. D. 1016. At Penham King Canute
overthrown.
and these fierce people sought to pluck it from his Helmet, he met them at
Pen-ham in Gillingham Forest, and with a small power obtained a great victory,
causing their King Canute with discourage to retire.

The Commodities.
(5) Commodities arising in this County are chiefly Wools and Woods in her
North, where the Forests are stored with the one, and the pleasant green
Hills with the other. The inner part is overspread both with Corn and
Grass, and the Sea yields the Isidis Plocamos, P^i^ie.
a Shrub growing not unlike the Corrall without any leaf; besides her other
gifts, turning all to great gain: which the more is made manifest by the many
Market-Townes in this Shire, whereof Dorcester is the chief, Dorchester the
chief City.
in Antonius his Itinerarium termed Durnovaria, situated upon the South side of
From, Fosse-way.
and the Roman Causey called Fosse-way, wherein some of their Legions kept, as
by the Rampires and Coins there daily dug up is probably conjectured; at
which time it seems the City was walled, whereof some part yet stands,
especially upon the West and South sides, and the Tract and Trench most
apparent in a Quadrant-wise almost meets the River, containing in circuit one
thousand and seven hundred pases, but were cast down by the Danes, whose
trampling feet destroyed all things wheresoever they came, and hands here
razed the Trenches Maudbury and Poundbury, Maudbury and Poundbury.
the seals of their Siege, and signs of times misery. About three hundred
pases Southward from hence, stands an old Fortification of earth, trenched
about, and mounted above the ordinary plain, thirty pases, containing some 5.
acres of ground, wherein (at my there being) plenty of Corn grew. This the
Inhabitants call The Maiden Castle, Maiden Castle.
having entrance thereunto only upon the East and West. This is thought to
have been a Snmmer-Campe or Station of the Romans, when their Garrisons kept
the Frontiers of this Province.

The government of this City is yearly committed to two Bailiffes, The
Magistracy of the City of Dorchester.
elected out of eight Magistrates or Aldermen, a Recorder, Towne-Clerke, and
two Sergeants attending them: The graduation of it.
whence the North Pole is elevated 50. degrees 48. minutes in Latitude, and for
Longitude is removed from the first West point unto the Meridian of 18. degrees.

(6) Other places also are memorable through the actions therein happening,
Other places memorable.
or Antiquities there yet remaining: such as Badbury, Badbury.
now nothing but a Trench and decayed Castle, hardly seen, though sometimes it
was the Court of the West Saxons King. Such also is Cerne, Cerne.
where Augustine the English Apostle brake down the Altars and Idols of the
Saxons God HELL, whom they devoutly honored as the only conserver of their
health. Shaftesburie also, Shafie^bury.
wherein one Aquila (whether a Man or Eagle I know not) by our Historians
report, is said to have prophesied the future times of this our Empire, and
that after the Reigns of the Saxons and Normans it should again return unto
the government of the British Kings. But with such vain predictions our Nation
is more the^ once taxed by Philip Comineus the famous French Writer. In this
City Edward the son of great Edgar, and one and thirtieth Monarch of the
Englishmen, was interred, being murdered at Corfe, Corfe.
a Castle seated in the I Will of Purbeck, by his Stepmother AElfrith, to make
way for her son to enjoy his Crown: in repentance whereof, and to pacify
Heaven for his blood, she built the Monasteries of Ambresbury and Whorwell, in
the County of Wilt-shire and South-Hampton. In the former of which with great
penitencie she spent the rest of her life.

(7) As upon the like occasion the Monastery of Middleton was laid in this
Shire by King Ethelstan to appease the Ghost of Edwine his innocent brother,
Middleton.
and to expiate the sin of his own soul for the blood of that just Prince,
whom most unjustly he caused to die: and with the like devotion, though not to
satisfy for the like bloody sins, did Queen Cuthburga sue a Divorce from
her second husband the Northumberlands King, Winburn.
and at Winburne built her a Nunnery, whereof her self became Abbess, where
afterward was raised a most stately Minster, which added not only more glory
to the place, but withal enlarged the name, and made it to be called
Winburn-minster, where King Ethelred, a most virtuous Prince, after much
disquietnesse had with the Danes, in peace here rests, with his Tomb and
Inscription, as in his History (Christ assisting) shall be further seen.
Neither among these may I omit Sherburne, Sherburn.
which in the year of Grace 704. was made a Bishops See, in whose Cathedral
Church, were interred the bodies of Ethelbald and Ethelbert brethren, An. D.
860. An. D. 866.
both of them Monarchs of the Englishmen.

(8) Seven more besides these were set apart from worldly employments,
Religious houses.
consecrated only to God and his service in this Shire; which were Camerstern,
Cranborn, Abbottesbury, Bindon, Sturmister, Tarrant, and Warham. These with the
others came to their full period under the hand of King Henry the Eight, which
lay with such weight upon their fair buildings, that he crushed the juice
thereof into his own Coffers.

(9) Castles for defense in repair and decayed, Castles in this Shire.
were at Sherburne, Dorchester, Branksey, Portland, Corfe, Newton, Woodford,
and Wareham. So that with these and others the County has been strengthened,
with twelve religious Houses their poor relieved, with eighteen Market Towns
at this day is traded, Market towns.
and principally into five divisions parted, subdivided into thirty four
Hundreds, and them again into two hundred forty eight Parishes, as in the Map
and Table adjoining is to be seen.

map of Dorsetshire DORSETSHYRE With the Shyre-towne Dorchester described, as
also the Arms of such noble families as have been honored with the Titles
there of since the Normans Conquest to this present Anno i6i0.


DORSET-SHIRE divisions and Hundreds.
Sherborns division.
Sherborn. Redlane. Newton. Brownsell. Yeatminster. Totcombe and Modborow.
Buckland. Whitway hund. and liberties.
Bri^port division.
Bridport. Whitechurch. Beamister. Redhoave. Eggarton. Godhertorne.
Shi^ton division.
Badbury. Cogdeane. Hanly. Cramborne. Lowsbarrow. Knowlton. Vpwimborne.
Der^hester division.
George. Tellerford. Puddleton hund. and liberties. Colliford. Vgicombe.
Bla^dford division.
Pimperne. Rushmore. Barrow. Coombeditch. Beer. Winfrith* Rowbarrow. Hasler.
A
Abbots Estoke, Bea^. Abbotte be Tithing, Sher. Abbotsbury, Vgs. Adams
chapel, Row. A^^lington, Row. Alderholt, Cramb. All^^ster, Vpwim. Allhollam,
cramb. Allington, Goder. Allweston, s^er. Alton pancras, Whit. Saint Andros
Glisset, Cramb. Anderson, Coomb. Aren point, Has. Aren, Has. Armitage, Vgs.
Ash, Beam. Ash, Pim. Ashmore, Cramb. Askerwell, Eggar. Athelhamston, P^^.
Athpuddel, bar.
B
Bagber, Cramb. Bagbore, Bro. Barnesley, Bad. Barnstone, Hasler. Batcombe,
Yeat. Baunton, Goder. BEAMISTER, Beam. Bear Hagard, Shir. Bedcister, Newt.
BEERKINGS, Beer. Belchalwell, Beer. Bereston, Knowle. Ber^ord, Bad.
Bettescombe, Goder. Bexington, Rush. Bindon, Rush. Bingehams Melcombe, Whit.
Blachemwell, Hasler. Blagden park, Cramb. Blakmore, Sher. Blanford S. Mary,
Comb. BLANFORD, Pimp. Bloxworth, Coomb. Bochampton, Georg. Bowridge, Vpwim.
Bradford, Sher. Bradford, Georg. Bradley, Hasler. Bradpoole, Red. Branksey
Island, Cogd. Branksey Castle, Cogd. Breadell, Has. Brianston, Pimp. Briddy
little, Vgs. The five Bridges, Red. BRIDPORT, Brid. Bringspuddell, Bar.
Broadmaine, georg. Brockhampton, Buck. Brodewinsor, Brid. Brodway, Cul.
Brokinton, Knowl. Buckland, Buck. Buckland, Cul. Buckorne weston, Red. Bugley,
Red. Burgh, goder. Bursey Island, cogd. Burstock, Whit. Burston, pud. Burton,
goder. Burton, Vpwim. Burton long, sher. Byncombe, goder.
C
Caldon, Rush. Came, Pud. Can, Vpwim. Canford lawndes, cogd. Caundell wake,
Brown. Caundell sturton, Brown. Caundell marshes, sher. Caundell purse, sher.
Caundell bishop, sher. Ca^leton, pimp. Castle town, sher. Catstocke, Tot. and
Mod. Cauford little, Bad. Caynston, pimp. Ceaford, Bad. Up Cearne, Sher. Nether
Cearne, Tot. and Mod. ABBAS CEARNE, Tot. and Mod. Chabury, bad. Chaldon, Winf.
Chantmerls, Toller. Charborrow, cogd. Chardstocke, beam. Charlton marshall,
cogd. Charmouth, Whit. Charmister, georg. Chedington, beam. Chelborrow east,
Tol. Chelborrow west, Tol. Cheselton Poril Island. Chesselborne, Whit.
Chetnoll, Yeat. Chettell, Vpwim. Chetwell, Yeat. Chickerell east, Vg.
Chickerell west, Cul. Chidyocke, Whit. Chilcombe, Vgs. Child Okeford, re^.
Child From, Tol. Clenston, comb. Cliffe, Pud. Clyston, sher. Combekeins,
VVins. Comb, goder. Comb nether, sher. Comb over, sher. Compton Hargrave,
Vpwim. Compton, goder. Compton, Tot and Mod. Compton over, sher. Compton
nether, sher. Corfe, VVin. Corfe Castle, Have. Corfe Mullin, ^ogd. Corscombe,
Beam. Corton, Vg. Craford, Lows. CRAMBORN, Cram. Cramborn Chase, Cram. Creech,
Have. Creech East, Have. Creklad park, Whit. Cripton, Cullis. Crokwey,
Eggardon. Cruxton, Tollerf.
D
Dalwood, Vg. Danush, Buckl. Develish Flu. Develish, Pimp. Didlington, Bad.
DORCHESTER, Vg. Dorweston, Pimp. Down, sher.
E
Eastbury, sher. Eastover, Red. Edmondsham, Cramb. Eagleston, Hasler. Saint
Elyns, Cogd. Elwell Cullis. Encomb, Have. EVERSHOT, Tollerf. Ewren Minster,
Hanly.
F
Fantelaroy Marsh, sher. Farneham* Cramb. Fifhead, Cramb. Fifhead, Whit.
Fifhead Navill, Pim. Fifhead Magdalen, Red. Fippenny ankford, Pimp. Fittleford,
Pim. Fleet, Vg. Foke, sher. Fordington Manor, Vg. FRAMPTON, goder. The Free,
Vpwim. From byllet, george. From vanchurch, Tollerf. From quintin, Tollerf.
Funtmell, hanly.
G
Gillingham Forest, Vpwim. Gillingham, Vpwim. Glasen, sherb. Godmanston, Tot.
and Mod. Grymston, georg. Gunfoild, Cramb. Gunfield, Cramb. Guslag, Knowl.
H
Haidon, sher. Handford, Red. Halstoke, Whit. Ham, Vpwim. Hamone, Pim.
Hampreston* Cramb. Hamworthy, cogd. Handfast point, Knowl. Hanly, han.
Hareston, row. Hasselbery brian, pimp. Haukechurch, Whit. Hauworthy, cogd.
Helton, Whit. Helwarden, Wins. Henton Martell, Bad. Hermitage, Tot. and Mod.
Herringston, cullif. Herston, row. H^ckford, cogd. H^llfeild, Tot. and Mod.
Hinton little, Bad. Holme West, have. Holme East, have. Holnest, sher. Holt
Forest, Bad. Holt, Bad. Holton, Bad. Holwell, cramb. Hook, Eggar. Horseys
Melcomb, Whit. Horton, Bad. Houndstreet, sher. Howton, pimp. Hutton Mary,
Newton. Hyde, rush.
I
Iberton, Whit. Ilsington, pudd.
K
Keasworth, cram. Kencombe, ^ggard. Knighton, pud. Knighton, pimp. Kingston,
row. Kingston, georg. Kington great, red. Kinson, cogd. Knolton, Knowl. Knowle,
have. Knowle, Buckl. Kritchell long, Knowle. Kunbridge, hasler.
L
Lake, Cogd. Lambart Castle, Whit. Lambart hill, Whit. Lancots, rush. Lanckton,
Vg. Lanckton, pimp. Langton Wallis, row. Landon, Beamis. Launston, pimp.
Lechiot beacon, cogd. Lechiot south, cogd. Leighe, Yeat. Lewcombe, Tollerf.
Lewson hill, Beamis. Lewston, sher. Lillington, sher. Limbridge, hasler.
Litchet Matravers, cogd. Litchet, Minster, cogd. Loders, goder. The Lodge,
hasler. The Lodge, Bad. Longbridge, Whit. Longbredy, eggar. Longcurchell,
Knowl. Long^let, cogd. Longham, Bad. Longlother, goder. Longlane mill, red.
Lulworth West, rush. Lulworth East, Win^. Lyddon Flu. Lydlynche, Brow.
LYMEKINGS, Brid. Lytton, Vg. Ly, Bad.
M
Maiden Newton, Tollerf. Mannyngton, Bad. Manston, red. Maperton, red.
Maperton, redl. Margaret Marsh, New. Marnhull, Newt. Marshwood park, Whit.
Marshwood vale, Whit. Martinstowne, george. Maston, comb. Maypowder, Buck.
Melbery, cramb. Melbery Sampford, Toller. Melbery Abbis, hanly. Melbery Osmond,
Yeat. Melbery bubb, Yeat. Melcomb Regis, Vg. Melplash, Beamis. Michaels
Gussage, Bad. Middle marsh, Tot. and Mod. MIDDLETON, Whit. Milborne S. Andrew,
Pud. Milborne Stiham, Beer. Milton, Vpwim. Milton abbas, Whit. Milton, eggar.
Mintern, Whit. Mintern great, Tot. and Mod. Minterne little, Buck. Meigne over,
Win^. Mo^ritchell, Bad. Morden, Low. Morden, rush. Morton, Winf. Mosterne, red.
Motcombe, Vpwim. Mountpoynings, rush. Muckelford* georg. Muncton, cramb.
Muncton, Vpwim. Muncton, Cullif. Muncton, Cullif. Munston, pud. The Mines,
cogd.
N
Netherbury, Beamis. Nettlecome, eggar. Newland, sher. Newton, rowbar. Newton
Castle, Whit. North-haven point, cogd.
O
Oborne, sher. Okeford shilling, cramb. Okeford Fitz-pain, New. Orchard East,
Newt. Orchard West, Newton. Osmington, Cullif. Over, Row. Ower, Winf.
P
Parston, Cogd. Parley West, Cramb. Parrat South, red. Paunhin, Beamis.
Pentridge, carmb. Petersham, cramb. Peverell point, row. Phillihome, Vg.
Pimperne, pimp. Plush, Buck. POOLE, hasl. Poorestocke, goder. Portland Island,
port. Portland Church, port. Portland Castle, port. Porston, georg. Pooreton,
red. Portsham, Vg. Povington, hasler. Poxwell, Winf. Preston, Bad. Preston,
Cullif. Puddle trencheard, Whit. Puddlehouton, pud. Puddletowne, pud. Pullham,
rush. Pulham West, Buck. Pulham East, Buck. Puncknoll, Vg. Purbick Island, Winf.
Pyllesdon, Whit. Pyllesdon Pen, goder.
Q
Quarston, pimp.
R
Radlestone, pimp. Rampisham, Tollerf. Rawston, pimp. Rhyme, Whit. Rimpscomb,
row. Ringston, Winf. Rodden, Vgscomb. Rodipoll, Cullif. Rowllington, row.
Rowseham, Beamis. Rumforth, Knowl. Rushton, Cramb. Ryme, Yeaton.
S
Samford, Yeat. Sandwiche bay, Row. Sandesfoote Castle, ^^d. Sandwiche, row.
Sexpenny henley, cramb. SHA^TESEVRY, Up. Shapwick, Bad. Shafton, Vpwim.
SHERBORNE Sher. Sherford bridge, hasl. Shepton, goder. Shillingaukford, pimp.
Shilhampton, Vg. Shitterton, Bar. Shopwicke, Bad. Shroughton or ^wrncourtney,
Red. Sidlin, Whit. Simondsborow, Whit. Sleep, hasl. Somerhaies, brown. Somerl
little, pud. South-haven point, cogd. Southover, eggard. Spesbury, pimp.
Stalbridge, brown. Stanton Gabriell, Whit. Steple, hasl. Stepington, cramb.
Stepleton, Vg. Stickland, pimp. Stockland, Whit. Stockwood, pud. Stock church,
Whit. Stoke wake, Whit. Stoke, Yeat. Stoke galliard, brown. Stoke bowood, beam.
Stone, Bad. Stowboro, hasl. Stowborow, Winf. Stoure Flu. Stowrer westover* red.
Stower castover, red. Stower pain, pimp. Stower provest, Whit. Straford, pud.
Stratton, georg. Studland, row. Studland Castle, Row. Sturhill, goder.
Sturmister marshall, cogd. STURMISTER NEWTON, Bro. Stynford, georg. Sutton,
Vpwim. Sutton waldron, red. Sutton, Cul. Sutton points, pud. Swier, Vg. Sydlin
Saint Nicholas, Tot. and Mod. Sylton, Red.
T
Tarrant keniston, Pimp. Tarrant muncton, Vpwim. Tarrant launston, pimp.
Tarrant hinton, pimp. Thornford, sher. Thornhull, Bad. Thornhill, brown.
Throupe, pud. Tinham east, hasler. Tinham west, hasler. Tinkleton, pud. Todber,
Newton. Tollerdwelve, Red. Toller fratrum, Toll. Toller Percorum, Toll.
Tolpuddell, pud. Tompson, Comb. Turnewood, pimp. Turnerspuddell, Barrow.
Turnworth, Cramb. Twi^ord, Vpwim.
V
Vanchurch, Tol. Vernen^nster* Cramb. Upsidling, Yeat. Upway, Vgscomb.
Upwimbon, Vpwim.
W
Waby house, Pud. Wadden friar, Vgscomb. Waldishe, goder. Walterston, pud.
Walton, georg. Wambroke, Whit. WARHAM, Winf. Warmwell, Winf. WAYMOUTH, Vgs.
Week Kings, pud. Welland, Whit. Wenford, Whit. Westbury, Sher. Westhall, Sher.
Weston, brown. Westworth, Rush. Whatcomb, Coomb. Whitchurch, pimp. Whitchurch,
Coomb. Whitchurch tithing, Whit. Whitc^i^^e, Rowbar. Withart vale, or
^lakemore, Sherb. Whitlovington, Barrow. Wichampton, Cramb. Widd^n Friar,
Vgscomb. Wilton, Eggar^on. WIMLORN MINSTER, Bad. Wimborne S. Cyles, Knowl.
Wimborn Alhallows, Knowl. Winfrith, Winf. Winford Eagle, Tollerf. Winterborn,
Rush. Winterborn, Pimp. Winterborn, Eggar. Winterborn Kingston, Beer. Wirtwood,
Bad. Woodcotes, Cramb. Woodland, Knowl. Woodford, Winf. Woo^e, Rush. Woolcomb,
Yeat. Worgret, Barrow. Worth, Rowbar. Worth, Rowbar. Wotton fitzpaine, Whit.
Wotton, Sher. Wotton Glanfeild, Buk. Wraxhall, Eggar.
Y
Yetminster, Yeat.
DEVON-SHIRE, by the Cornish Britains called Devinan; by the English-Saxons
Deven-schyre, The names of Devon-shire.
and by contraction of the vulgar Den-shire, is not derived from the Danes, as
some would have it, but from the people Danmonii, the same we have spoken of in
Cornwall, and whom Ptolemie has seated in these Western Borders.

The bounds of Devon-shire.
(2) The West of this County is bounded altogether by the River Tamar: the East
is held in with the verge of Sommerset-shire: and the North and South sides are
washed wholly with the British and Severne Seas: Betwixt whose shores from
Cunshere in the North, unto Salcombe Haven entering in at the South, are
fifty-five miles* and from the Hartland Point West, The length and breadth.
to Thorncombe East, are fiftie-foure: the whole circumference about two
hundred and two miles.

The Air.
(3) The Air is sharp, healthful and good: the Soil is hilly, woody and
fruitful, yet so as the hand of the Manurer must never be idle, The Soil.
nor the purse of the Farmer never fast shut, especially of them that are far
from the Sea, whence they fetch a sand with charge and much travel, which
being ^spread upon the face of the earth, bettereth the leanness thereof for
grain, and gives life to the Glebe with great efficacy.

Ports and Havens about Devon-shire.
(4) As Cornwall, so this has the same commodities that arise from the Seas:
and being more inlanded has more commodious Havens for Shippings intercourse,
among whom Totnes is famous for Brutes first entrance, ^if Geffrey say true,
Brutes reported entrance.
or if Havillan the Poet took not a Poetical liberty, when speaking of Brute,
he wrote thus: The gods did guide his sail and course: the winds were at
command:
And Totnes was the happy shore where first he came on land.
But with more credit and lamentable event, the Danes at Teigue-mouth first
entered for the invasion of this Land, The Danes first entrance. An. D. 787.
about the year of Christ 787. unto whom Brightrik K. of the West Saxons sent
the Steward of his house to know their intents, whom resistantly they slew: yet
were they forced back to their Ships by the Inhabitants, though long they
stayed not, but eagerly pursued their begun enterprises.

Sir Fra. Drake his Voyage.
With more happy success has Plymouth set forth the purchasers of fame, and
stopped the entrance of Englands Invaders, as in the reign of that eternized
Queen, the mirror of Princes, Elizabeth of everlasting memory: for from this
Port Sir Francis Drake, that potent man at Sea, setting forth Anno 1577. in the
space of two years and ten months did compass the circle of the Earth by
Sea. And the Lord Charles Howard, The Spanish Fleet, Anno Dom. 1588.
Englands high Admiral, did not only from hence impeach the entrance of the
proud invincible Spanish Navy, intending invasion and subversion of State, but
with his Bullets so signed their passage, that their sides did well show in
whose hands they had been, as seals of their own shame, and his high honor.

The Commodities. Cloth. Kersies. Lead. Silver. Lodestone.
(5) The commodities of this shire consist much in Wools and Clothings, where
the best and finest Kersies are made in the Land. Corn is most plenteous in
the fruitful Valleys, and Cattle spreading upon the topped Hills, Seafish and
Foul exceedingly abundant. Veins of Lead, yea and some of Silver in this
Shire are found: and the Lodestone (not the least for use and esteem) from
the rocks upon Dartmore has been taken. Many fresh Springs do bubble from
the Hills in this Province, which with a longing desire of Society search out
their passage, till they meet and conjoyne in the Valleys, and gathering still
strength with more branches, lastly grow bodied able to bear Ships into the
Land, and to lodge them of great burden in their Bosoms or Falls: whereof
Tamar, Tave and Ex are the fairest and most commodious.

The City Excester.
(6) Upon which last the chief City and Shire-Towne of this County is seated,
and from that River has her name Excester: this City by Ptolemie is called
Isca; by the Itinerary of Antonius Emperor, Isca Danmoniorum; by the English
Saxons Exanceasder, and Monketon; and by the Welsh Pencaer. It is pleasantly
seated upon the gentle ascent of an hill, so stately for building, so rich with
Inhabitants, so frequ^nt for commerce and concourse of strangers, that a man
can desire nothing but there it is to be had, says William of Malmesbury. The
walls of this City first built by King Athelstane, are in a manner circular or
round, but toward the Ex rangeth almost in a straight line, having six Gates
for entrance, and many watch-Towers interposed betwixt, whose compass
contains about fifteen hundred paces: upon the East part of this City
stands a Castle called Rugemont, Rugemount a Kings Palace.
sometimes the Palace of the West Saxon Kings, and after them of the Earls of
Cornwall, whose prospect is pleasant unto the Sea, and over against it a most
magnificent Cathedral Church, founded by King Athelstan also, in honor of S.
Peter, and by Edward the Confessor made the Bishops See, which he removed from
Crediton or Kirton in this County unto the City of Excester (as says the
private History of that place:) whose dilapidations the reverend father in God
William now Bishop of the Diocese with great cost has repaired; whom I may
not name without a most thankful remembrance for the great benefits received
by his careful providence toward me and mine. Excester withstood the Saxons
465. years.
This City was so strong and so well stored of Britains, that they held out
against the Saxons for 465. years after their first entrance, and was not
absolutely won until, Athelstan became Monarch of the whole, who then
peopled it with his Saxons, and enriched the beauty thereof with many fair
buildings: but in the times of the Danish desolations this City with the rest,
felt their destroying hands; for in the year 875. it was by them sore
afflicted, spoiled, and shaken, and that most grievously by Swane in the year
of Christ Jesus 1003. who razed it down from East to West, so that scarcely
had it gotten breath before William the bastard of Normandy besieged it,
against whom the Citizens with great manhood served, till a part of the wall
fell down of it self, and that by the hand of Gods providence, says mine
Author: since when it has been three times b^sieged, and with valiant
resistance ever defended. Hugh Courtney. A. D. 1497. Perkin Warbeck A. D. 1549.
The first was by Hugh Courtney Earl of Devon-shire, in the civil broils
betwixt Lancaster and York: then by Perkin Warbeck, that counterfeited Richard
Duke of York: and lastly, by the Cornish Rebels, wherein although the Citizens
were grievously pinched with scarcity, yet continued they their faithful
allegiance unto King Edward the sixth; and at this day flourishes in
tranquillity and wealth, being governed by a Mayor, twentie-foure Brethren,
with a Recorder, Towne-Clerke and other Officers their attendants. The Cities
Climate.
This Cities graduation is set in the degree of Latitude from the North Pole
50. and 45. scruples: and for Longitude from the West, to the degree 16. and
25. scruples. Neither is Joseph that excellent Poet, whose birth was in this
City, the least of her Ornaments, whose Writings bare so great credit that
they were divulged in the Germane language under the name of Cornelius Nepos.

The like credit got Crediton in her birth-child Winefred, Crediton.
the Apostle of the Hassians, Thuringers, and Frisians of Germany, which were
converted by him unto the Gospel and knowledge of Christ.

(7) Places memorable in this County remaining for signs of Battles, Exmore.
or rather antiquities are these: upon Exmore certain Monuments of Antique
work are erected, which are stones pitched in order, some triangle-wise, and
some in round compass: these no doubt were Trophies of victories there
obtained, either by the Romans, Saxons, or Danes, and with Danish letters one
of them is inscribed, giving direction to such as should travel that way.
Hublestowe.
Hublestow likewise near unto the mouth of Tawe, was the burial place of
Hubba the Dane, A. D. 878.
who with his brother Hungar, had harried the English in diverse parts of the
Land: but lastly, was there encountered with, and slain by this Shires
Inhabitants, and under a heap of copped stones interred, and the Banner Reasen
there and then taken, Asserius Menevensis.
that had so often been spread in the Danes quarrel, and wherein they reposed
no small confidence for success.

(8) A double dignity remains in this County, Dukes and Larles.
where Princes of State have borne the Titles both of Devon-shire and Excester:
of which City there have been entitled Dukes, the last of whom, namely, Henry
Holland, Grandchilde to John Holland, halfe-brother to King Richard the second;
siding with Lancaster against Edward the fourth, whose sister was his wife,
Philip Commin. cap. 50.
was driven to such misery, as Philip Commineus reports, that he was seen all
torn and barefooted to beg his living in the Low Countries: and lastly, his
body was cast upon the Shore of Kent (as if he had perished by shipwreck) so
uncertain is Fortune in her endowments, and the state of man, notwithstanding
his great birth.

(9) Religious houses in this Shire built in devotion, Religious Houses.
and for Idolatry pulled down, were at Excester, Torbay, Tanton, Tavestoke,
Kirton, Ford, Hartland, Axmister and Berstable.

(10) And the Counties divisions are parted into 33. Hundreds, Hundreds and
Churches.
wherein are seated 37. Market Towns, and 394. Parish-Churches, whose names
shall appear in the Table following.

map of Devonshire DEVONSHIRE WITH EXCESTER DESCRIBED And the Arms of such
Nobles as have borne the titles of them.


HUNDREDS in Devon-shire.
1. BRanten. 2. Sherwell. 3. South Moulton. 4. Bampton. 5. Tyverton. 6.
Witheridge. 7. Fremington. 8. Hartland. 9. Shebbeare. 10. North-Tauton. 11.
Black Torrington. 12. Winckley. 13. Creditor. 14. West Budley. 15. Halberton.
16. Hemyock. 17. Axmister. 18. Cullington. 19. Hayrudge. 20. S. Mary O^^ry. 21.
Clifton. 22. East Budley. 23. Wonford. 24. Tingbridge. 25. Exmister. 26.
Heytor. 27. Liston. 28. Tave stock. 29. Roborough. 30. Plympton. 31. Armington.
32. Stanborough. 33. Colridge.
A
ABbotesham, Sheb. Agelsortwell, Hey. Alesbeare, East b. Alhallowes, Hayrtd.
Alsheraphe, Witbr. Allington east, stan. Allington west, stan. Alme Flu.
Alphington, won. Aluerdiscot, fre. Alwington, sheb. Ansley Mary, wit^. Annary,
sheb. S. Annes Chapel, Brant. Anstie east, southmo. Anstie west, southmo.
Apeley, Frem. Apledon, s^eb. Arlington, sher. Arm Flu. Armington* arm.
Armouth, arm. Armington, arm. Ash, Brant. Ash king^ Northt. Ashberry Black.
ASHBERTON, Ti. Ashbright, Bam. Ashcomb Exm. Ashford* Brant. Ashford, Bam.
Ashprington, Col. Ashregny, Northt Ashton, With. Ashton, Exm. Ashwater, Black.
Atherington, Northt. Audley, sheb. Aueton gifford, arm. Aune Flu. Austerston,
sheb. AVTREY, Mary Ot. Ax Flu. Axmister, Axm. Axmouth* Axm.
B
Bag-point North. BAMPTON, Bam. BARNSTABLE, B. Barnstable, Bam. Bathe, Northt.
Beaford, sheb. Bear clifton. Beareferris, Rob. Beer, cull. Bediford, sheb.
Bediston, lift. Belston, black. Bery point, Heyt. Bery Castle, heyt. Bery
pomcry, heyt. Berrynerbert, brant. Beworthy Black. Bickley hayrid. Bickligh,
Robor. Bickington, Ting. Bickington high, North. Bickington Abbors, Black.
Bicton, East Bud. Bigbury arming. Bittedon, brant. Blakauton* colr. Blakdon,
heyt. Bonitracye, Ting. Bosingsale, colr. Bounden, colr. BOW, North. Bradford,
black. Bradford, Hayr. BRADINVCH, Ha. Bradston, lifton. Bradworthy, Black.
Brampford speak, Won. Branscombe, cull. Branton, brant. Bratton lovelly, lift.
Bratton flemyng, Bra. Bray Flu. Braye high, sher. Brendon, sher. BRENT south,
stanb. Brentor, tavest. Briddestow, lift. Bridgford, VVonford. Bridgreuell,
black. Brightley, southm. Brixham, Heyt. Brixton, Plymp. Brodwood kelly, bla.
Brodwood wigier, ^i. Brushford, Northt. Buckland east, brant. Buckland west,
brant. Buckland north, Rob. Buckland towsan, col. Buckland Monachop, Rob.
Buckland Bruer, sheb. Buckland in the moore, Heyt. Buckland fylly, sher.
Buckfastleigh, stan. Buckerell, Hem. Budleigh east, East b. S. Budox, Robor.
Bulkworthy, bart. Bult point, stanb. Bundley, Northt. Burrinton, plymp.
Burrington, Northt. Burlescombe, bamp. Butterley, clift.
C
Cadbery, Hayr. Cadbury, West b. Cadley hayrid. Callaton, Northt. Cannanleigh,
Bamp. Cave, Tyvert. Caverleigh, Tyvert. Chareles, sherw. Chareles, south^m.
Charleton, colrid. Challeigh, Northt. Chanon, VVonf. Chawley, With. CHEG^ORD,
Won. Chekston. East b. Cheldon, With. Cherinton Fitz-paine, West. Cherinton
bishops, Won. Cherston, heyt. Chestowe, stanb. Chettescomb. Tyvert. Chevelston,
col. CHIDLEIGH, Ex. Chi^ton, colr. Chylinleigh, With. Chymley, sher.
Chitlehampton, south. Chittenholt wood, south. Cholacombe, sher. Churstaunton,
hem. Citington, heyt. Clavell, har. Clayhaydon, hem. Clayhanger, Bamp.
Clannaborough, Nor. Clawton, Black. S. Clement, colr. Cliffe S. Mary, East b.
Cliffe S. George, Ea. Cliffe S. Laurence, Cl. Cliffe honiton, East b. Cliffe
broad, clif. Cliffe bishops, East b. Cliffe hiedon, clift. Clouelly, heart.
Cockatree, Northt. Cockingtor^, bey. Coffinswell, bey. Colbrooke, cred.
Collaton, arm. Collaton Rawley, East b. Columb John, VVon. Columb David, Hem.
Columpton Flu. COLVMPTON, H Colruge, Northt. Culmestoke, hem. Cookberry, black.
Comb, West b. Comb, Frem. Comb, cull. Combs point, Colr. Comb in tern,
hey. Combing tynhead, VVon. Combyne, axm. Comb martyns, bran. Compton, bey.
Compton gifford, Rob. Comranley, axm. Coplaston, cred. Connsbury, sher.
Cornewood, arm. Corneworthy, colr. Cotleigh, cull. Cullacombe, lift. Cullyford,
cull. CULLITON, Cull. Curriton, lift. Crecombe, With. CREDITON, cred. Credy
Flu. Crekam, With. Crekerwell, VVon. Cryde, brant. Cryde bay. Cruse morchard,
Wit.
D
Dalwood, axm. DARTMOUTH, C. Dartmouth castle, co. Dartmouth haven. Dartmoore,
Rob. Dart Flu. Dartington. stanb. Dawligh, exm. Deane prior, stanb. Delbridge,
With. Denbery, hey. Dexboro, black. Dipford, bamp. Dipford, stan Dittesham,
colr. Dodbrooke, colr. Doddescombleigh, E. Dowlton, Northt. Down S. Mary,
Northt. Downland, North. Dowrish, West b. Dunchidock, Exm. Dunckswell old,
hem. Dunsbroke Flu. Dunsford, VVon. Dunsland, black Dunterton, lift.
E
Eastdown, Bran. Ede, Exm. Edeford, Ting. Edgcombe, Rob. Edmeston, arm. Eford,
Rob. Egifford, North. Eggbuckland, Rob. Ekbury, heart. Exe more, sher. Exe mouth
East b. Exbridge, Bam. Exborne, black. Excester, VVon. Exmister, Exm. Ex Flu.
F
Farringdon, East b. Farwaye, cul. Fleer, arm. Fenantrye, East b. Fenton, hay.
Fylleigh, bran. Ford, axm. Forton Flu. Fremington, Frem. Frithelstock sheb.
Frobrian, hey. Fulford, VVon. Fulford, West b.
G
Gaymton, Hey. Georgehame, bran. Germans week, lift. Gidley, VVon. S. Giles,
Frem. S. Giles in the heath, Black. Gillesham, cull. Gittisham, East b.
Goodleigh, bran. Greneway, ^ey.
H
Hache, Stan. Hackpendown, hem. Halberton, arm. Halberton, hal. Hall, southm.
Hallwell, black. Hallwell, colr. Hamford, black. Hampton high, black.
Harberton, col. Harborn^ Flu. Harforde, Arm. Harpford, East b. Harrowbridge,
Rob. Hartland, heart. Hartland point, heart. HARTON, heart. Hatherland, Tyvert.
HATHERLEY, bla^. Hayes, East b. Hayne lift. Hayne, West b. Haynton, sheb. High
Haynton, black. Hele, Rob. Helwell, black. Hembury broad, hey. Hemiock, hem.
Hempston broad, he. Hempston little, hey. Hennock, Ting. Hethberton, VVon.
Hevitree, VVon. Hewishe, sheb. Hewishe south, stan. Hewishe north, stan.
Highley, With. Highweek, Ting. Hittesley, VVon. S. Hob-poole, West b.
Hocworthie, bamp. Holberton, arm. Holcomb, Mary-Ot. Holcombrogus, bamp. Holcomb
burnel, Won Holdworthy, black. Holle, stan. Hollacomb, black. HONITON, Ax. Hope
key, stan. Horwell, cred. Horwood, Frem. Huckham, hey. Huckesham, VVon.
Hunichurch, black. Huntesham, Tivert. Hunshow, Frem.
I
Jacobstowe, black. Iddesieigh, sheb. Idford, Ting. ILFARCOMBE, Br. Ilton,
stan. Ilsington, Ting. Ingerley, black. Ipplepen, hey. Juston, Frem. Ivybridge,
arm.
K
Kawton black, colr. Kegbeare, black. Kellye, lift. Kenne, Exm. Kenne Flu.
Kenford, Exm. Kennerley, cred. Kentisbeare, hay. Kentisbury, bran. Kenton, Exm.
Keswell Kings, Hey. Keswell Abbots, Hey. Killmington, axm. Knighton, Ting.
KINGSBRIDG, stan. Kingstanton, Ting. Kingston, arm. Kingswere, hey. Kingswer
castle, hey. Kirstow, VVon. Knowston, southm.
L
Lamerton, lift. Langtree, sheb. Lankey, southm. Lapford, Northt. Lee North,
black. Leigh North, cull. Leigh South, cull. Leman Flu. Lue North, black.
Lewtrenchard, lift. Lyd Flu. Lydford, lift. Lymson, East. Lynam, plymp. Lynton,
sher. Listleigh, Ting. Liston, lift. Littleham, sheb. Littleham, East b.
Loddeswell, stan. Lox^eare, Tiver. Loxhorne, sher. Luckham, West b.
Luffencott, black. Luppit, arm.
M
Maker, Robor. Malborough, stan. Manhedd, Exm. Manton, Ting. S. Mary's, hey. S.
Mary's, S. Mary-O. Maristowe, lift. Marledon, hey. Marshe, arm. Marton, sheb.
Martynhoe, sher. Marwood, bran. Membury, axm. Memland, axm. Mere, Tiver.
Merland, sheb. Merland Peter's, sheb. Meshewe, With. Mete, sheb. Mevychurch,
Rob. Mewston, plymp. Mewston, hey. S. Michael, stan. S. Michael, cull. Mill.
With. Milton south, stan. Milton damere, black. Milton Abbots, Tau. MODBURY,
arm. Molland, south. Morchard bishops, cred. More hayes, hay. Mooreley, stan.
MORETON, Ting. Moreton hampsted, Ting. Mortston, bran. Mort Bay, bran.
Morthooe, bran. Moul Flu. Moulton north, south. MOULTON SOUTH, south.
Mounsantie, axm. Muckenfeild, Northt. Munckle, sheb. Muckton, cull. Murbathe,
bamp. Musbery, axm.
N
Nemett Kings, With. Nemett Bishops, Wit. Nemett S. George, south. Netherex,
hay. Newncham, plymp. NEWTON Bishops, hey. Newton petrock, sher. Newton tracy,
Frem. Newton ferris, arm. Newton friars, cred. Newton, East b. S. Nicholas I Will,
Rob. Northlue, black. Northam, sheb. Northbonie, Ting. Northcott, black.
North-ewe Flu. Norton Dawney, col. Notwell court, East b. Nymett tracye, north.
Nymett Rowland, North.
O
Ocment Flu. Offwell, cull Ogwell east, VVonf. Ogwell west, VVonf. Okeford,
With. OKEHAMPTON. Okehampton Moncks, black. Oldridge, cred. Orcharaton, arm.
Otterford, hem. Ougborough, arm. Ounwell, arm. Overton, East b. Owelscombe,
hem. Oxton, Exm.
P
Padstow, sheb. Pancrasweek, black. Paynesford, colr. Parkham, sheb. Parkham,
heart. Paracombe, sher. Pavington, hey. Peamont, Exm. Pehembury, hay. Petherwya
North, black. Petrockstowe, sheb. Petton, bamp. Pilton, bran. Pines, VVonf.
Pinhawes, VVonf. Pyworthie, black. Plymouth, Rob. Plymouth Flu. Plymouth haven,
Rob. PLYMPTON MARYES, P. Plympton Stock plym. Plympton Morris, Nym. Plymtree,
hay. Poltimore, VVon. Pongill, West b. Poole south, colr. Portlecomb. colr.
Portlidge, sheb Portlidge mouth, her. Porteston, arm. Potheridge, sheb.
Powderham, Exm. Preston, Ting. Puddington, With. Punchardon, bam. Pusland,
plym. Putford east, heart. Putford west, black.
R
Rackenford, With. Ralev, bram. Rashley, North. Rattery, stan. Redford, plym.
Revellstoke, plym. Rue, VVon. Rinmore, arm. Rockbeare, East b. Romansley,
With. Rose ash, With. Rowborowe, from.
S
Salcombe, stan. Salcombe, East b. Salcombe haven, colr. Salterne, East b.
Sampford peverall, Hal. Samford shyney,' Rob. Samford courtney, Black.
Sangford, cred. Stanton, bran. Saterleigh, southm. Sauldon, black. Seal, VVon.
Seaton, cull. Shave, plymp. Shebbeare, sheb. Shepistor, Rob. Sherford, colr.
Shepwaishe, sheb. Sherwell, sher. Shildon, Hay. Shillingford, Ex. Shilton, Arm.
Shobrooke, West b. Shute, cull. Sidbury, East b. Sidmouth, East b. Sidnam
north, lift. Sidnam south, lift. Silverton, Hay. Slade, Plym. Slapton, colr.
Soureton lift. Sowton, VVon. Spraiton, VVon. Spurleston, plym. Staverton, Hey.
Stockley English, West. Stockley pomery, West b. Stockland, ^xm. Stockley,
West b. Stoford, arm. Stoke, VVon. Stoke Gabriell, Hey. Stoke Church, axm.
Stoke rivers, sher. Stoke Damerell, Rob. Stoken tynhead, VVon. Stokenham, Colr.
Stoke fleming, Col. Stonehouse, Rob. Store point, East b. Stowford, lift.
Stretchley arm. Stretrawley, East b. Stretpoint, Colr. Stre^wood head, East b.
Studley, With. Surcomb, black. Swimbridge, southm.
T
Tallaron, Hay. Tammerton floliet, Rob. Taynton bishops, Exm. Tanstock, Fre.
TAVESTOCK, T. Tauye Mary, lift Tauye Peter, Rob. Tauye Flu. Tanton Bishops,
south. Taunton north, Nor. Taunton south, VVon. Tawridge, cred. Tedborne, VVon
Teyntondrewe, Won. Templeton, With. Tetcott black. TAVERTON, Ta. Thelbridge,
With Therverton, West b. S. Thomas, VVons. Thornbery, black. Thorncomb, axm.
Thornton, hay. Throuley, VVon. Thrushell Flu. Thrushelton, lift. Thurlestow,
stan. Tidwell, East b. Tinge Flu. Tingmouth east, Exm. Tinmouth west, Exm.
Tingrase, Ting. Topsham, VVon. Tor-bay, Hey. Tormoham, Hey. Tormount, Hey.
Torrington land, Fr. Torrington little, sheb. Torrington black, Black.
TORRINGTON, Fr. TOTNES, Colr. Townstall, Colr. Towridge Flu. Trawbridge, cred.
Trebow, Black. Trenshoe, Bran. Trinity Chapel, Hey. Tobrian, Hey. Trusham,
Exm. Tuchyn, southm. Twitching, southm.
V
Venottery, East b. Vever Flu. Uscombe, Bamp. Ugbrocke, Ting. Virginstowe,
Lift. Ulber, Hey. Vowelscombe, Arm. Upantre, axm. Upcote, sheb. Upleman, Tiver.
Uplyme, axm. Upton pyne, VVon. Upton hellins, West b. Vynnyton, Hem.
W
Walkhampton, Rob. Wallopitt* stan. VVambrooke. VVare, sheb. VVareley, Rob.
Warkeleigh, southm Warpsley beacon, Wi. Warpsley hill, With. Washfeild Tiver.
Washefeild, West b. Washford pyne, Wit. Wayton, Hey. Wear gifford, sheb.
Welland, Hal. Welcombe, Heart. Wembworthy, North. Wenbery, plym. Were, Won.
Westcoote, Bran. Westdowne, Bran. Westleigh, Frem. Weston peverell, Rob.
VVhitchurch, Rob. Whitston, Won. VVidworthie, Cull. VVilsworth, Lift. VVimple,
Clif. VVinckley, Northt. VVynston, arm. VVytheridge, With. VVithycombe, stan.
VVithycombe, hey. Withycombe rawlew, East. Withycombe Chapel, East. VVognell
East, Hey. VVognell West, Hey. Wolfradisworth, Ha. VVholley, sheb. Wolesworthy,
With. VVood, stan. VVood, Hay. VVoodbury, East b. VVoodland, hey. VVoodland,
a^m. VVoodley, stan. VVorington, Black. VVorlington East, With. VVorlington
West, With. VVorthiham, lift. VVortley, southm.
Y
Yalme moth, Arm. Yalme Flu. Yaneton, Bran. Yaneton Court. Bran. Yarckcombe,
Axm. Yealmpton, plym. Yarnescombe, Heart. Youlston, sher.
Z
Zaelmonaco, Northt.
Flores Histor.
CORNWALL (as Matthew of Westminster affirms) is so named, partly from the
form, and partly from her people: for shooting it self into the Sea like a
Horn (which the Britains call Kerne) and inhabited by them whom the Saxons
named Wallia; of these two compounded words it became Cornwallia. Not to
trouble the Reader with the Fable of Corineus, cousin to King Brute, who in
free gift received this County in reward of his prowess for wrestling with
the Giant Gogmagog, and breaking his neck from the Cliffe of Dover, as he of
Monmouth has fabuled. Geffry Monmo.


Richard Carew. The Air.
(2) Touching the temperature of this County, the air thereof is cleansed as
with Bellows, by the Billows that ever work from off her environing Seas,
where-thorow it becomes pure and subtle, and is made thereby very healthful,
but withal so piercing and sharp, that it is apter to preserve then to
recover health. The spring is not so early as in the more Eastern parts; yet
the Summer with a temperate heat recompenceth his slow fostering of the fruits,
with their most kindly ripening. The Autumn brings a some what late harvest:
and the Winter, by reason of the Seas warm breath, makes the cold milder then
elsewhere. Notwithstanding, that Country is much subject to stormy blasts,
whose violence has freedom from the open waves, to beat upon the dwellers at
Land, leaving many times their houses uncovered.

The Soil.
(3) The soil for the most part is lifted up into many hills, parted asunder
with narrow and short valleys, and a shallow earth does cover their outside,
which by a Seaweed called Ovewood, and a certain kind of fruitful Seasand,
they make so rank and batten, as is uncredible. But more are the riches that
out of those hills are gotten from the Mines of Copper and Tin; which
Country was the first, and continues the best stored in that Merchandise, of
any in the world. Timaeus the Historian in Pliny reports, that the Britains
fetched their Tin in wicker boats, Lib. 6 cap. 8.
stitched about with Lather. And Diodorus Siculus of Augustus Caesar's time
writes, Tinne-Mines.
that the Britains in this part di^ged Tin out of stony ground, which by
Merchants was carried into Gallia, and thence to Narbone, as it were to a Mart.
Which howsoever the English-Saxons neglected, yet the Normans made great
benefit thereof, especially Richard brother to King Henry the third, who was
^arl^ of Cornwall, and by those Tinne-workes became exceedingly rich: for the
incursions of the Moors having stopped up the Tinne-Mines in Spain, and them
in Germany not discovered before the year of Christ 1240. th^se in Cornwall
supplied the want in all parts of the world. Privileges of Tinne-works.
This Earl made certain Tinne-Lawes, which with liberties and privileges
were confirmed by Earl Edmund his son. And in the days of King Edward the
third, the Commonweal of Tinne-workes from one body was divided into four,
and a LordWarden of the Stanniers appointed their Judge.

The Borders of Cornwall.
(4) The Borders of this Shire on all parts but the East is bound in with the
Sea: and had Tamer drawn his course but four miles further to the North,
betwixt this County and Devon shire, it might have been rather accounted an
Island, then stood with the Main. Her length is from Launston to the Land-end,
The Forms and Length.
containing by measure sixty miles: and the broadest part, stretching along by
the Tamer, is fully forty, lessening thence still lesser like a horn.

(5) The ancient Inhabitants known to the Romans, were the Danmonii, that
spread themselves further into Devon-Shire also, Lib. 5. cap. 8. Michael Cornw.
The ancient people and now Inhabitants.
by the report of Diodorus Siculus, a most courteous and civil people: and by
Michael their Poet extolled for valor and strength of limbs: nor therein does
he take the liberty that Poets are allowed, to add to the subject whereof
they write, but truly reports what we see by them performed, who in
activitie surmount many other people.

When the Heathen Saxons had seated themselves in the best of this Land, and
forced the Christian Britains into these rockie parts, then did Cornwall
abound in Saints, unto whose honor most of the Churches were erected, Bale
Cent. Lib. 1.
by whose names they are yet known and called. To speak nothing of Vrsula
that Counties Dukes daughter, with her company of canonized Virgin-Saints,
that are now reputed but to trouble the Calendar. These Britains in Cornwall
to fenced the Country, Will. Malmes.
and defended themselves, that to the reign of King Athelstane they held out
against the Saxons, who subduing those Western parts, made Tamer the Bounder
betwixt them and his English, whose last Earl of the British Blood was called
Candorus.

(6) But William the Bastard created Robert (his halfebrother by Herlotta their
mother) the first Earl of the Normans race: The Earls of Cornwall.
and Edward the Black Prince, the ninth from him, was by his Father King
Edward the third invested the first Duke of Cornwall, which Title ever since
has continued in the Crown.

(7) The commodities of this Shire, The commodities.
ministered both by Sea and Soil, are many and great: for besides the abundance
of Fish that do suffice the Inhabitants, the Pilchard is taken, who in great
skuls swarm about the coast, whence being transported to France, Spain, and
Italy, yield a yearly revenew of gain unto Cornwall: wherein also Copper and
Tin so plentifully grow in the utmost part of this Promontory, that at a low
water the veins thereof lie bare, and are seen: and what gain that
commodity begets, 1s vulgarly known. Neither are these Rocks destitute of
Gold nor Silver, Diamonds gotten in Cornwall.
yea and Diamonds shaped and pointed Angle-wise, and smoothed by Nature her
self, whereof some are as big as Walnuts, inferior to the Orient only in
blackness and hardness.

Many are the Ports, Bays, and Havens that open into this Shire, both safe for
arrivage, and commodious for transport; whereof Falmouth is so copious, that an
hundred Ships may therein ride at anchor apart by themselves, so that from the
tops of their highest Masts they shall not see each other, and lie most safely
under the winds.

(8) This County is fruitful in Corn, Market Towns.
Cattle, Sea fish, and Foul: all which, with other provisions for pleasures
and life, are traded through twenty-two Market-Townes in this Shire, whereof
Launston and Bodman are the best; from which last, being the middle of the
Shire, the Pole is elevated to the degree of Latitude 50.35. minutes, and for
Longitude from the first West point, 15.13. minutes, as Mercator has measured
them.

(9) Memorable matters both for antiquity and strangeness of fight, Memorable
things.
are these: At Boskenna upon the South-west of her Promontory, is a Trophy
erected, which are eighteen Stones placed round in compass, and pitched
twelve foot each from others, with another far bigger in the very center.
These do show some Victory there attained, either by the Romans, or else King
Athelstane. At the foot of the Rocks near unto S. Michaels Mount, in the
memory of our Fathers, were dug up Speare-heads, Axes, and Swords of Brass,
Brazen swords found by digging.
wrapped in linen, the weapons that the Cimbrians and ancient Britains
anciently used.

At Camelford likewise pieces of Armours both for horse and man, are many times
found in digging of the ground, imputed to be the signs of that fight wherein
Mordred was slain, and wherein great Arthur received his deaths wound, And at
Castle-Dennys are the Trenches wherein the Danes lodged when they first minded
to subdue the Land. In the Parish S. Clare, two stones are pitched, one of them
inscribed with a strange Character, The other half Stone.
and the other called the other half stone: the forms whereof we have
expressed in the Map. The Hurlers also, fabuled to be men metamorphosed into
stones; but in truth show a note of some victory, or else are so set for
Land-markes Bounders. There also the Wring cheese does show it self,
Wring-cheese.
which are huge Rocks heaped one upon another, and the lowest of them the
least, fashioned like a Cheese, lying pressed under the rest of those Hills,
which seems very dangerous to be passed under. But near to Pensans, and unto
Mounts bay, Main-Amber.
a far more strange Rock stands, namely, Main Amber, which lies mounted
upon others of meaner size, with so equal a counterpoize, that a man may move
it with the push of his finger, but no strength remove it out of his place.

(10) Religious houses built, and suppressed within the limits of Cornwall, the
fairest and greatest for account, were Launston, S. Neotes, S. Buriens, S.
Michaels Mount, and S. Germans a Bishops See: so was Bodman also, from whence
King Edward the Confessor removed it unto the Cities of Excester.

(11) The division of this Shire is into nine Hundreds, wherein are seated
twentie-two Market-Townes, and 161. Parish-Churches, whose names are
Alphabetically gathered in the Table of this Chapter annexed.

map of Cornwall CORNWALL


Hundreds in Cornwall.
1. PEnwith. 2. Kerrier. 3. Pider. 4. Powder. 5. West. 6. Lesnewth. 7. Trigge.
8. Stratton. 9. East.
A
Aborrows, Kerrier. Adven, Lesnew. S. Agnis, Pid. S. Allan, Powd. Alan flu,
Trig. All^^combe, strat. Alternon, Lesnew. Castle Andenas, Pid. Anowtham, pen.
Anstell* powd. Anthony, powd. Anthony East, East. Anthony West, East. S.
Anthony in menege, Ker. Ancron, Kerrier. Ardevora, powd. Arthurshall, Trig.
Arwanack, Ker. Arwothall, Ker. Asalt, East. Ashfield, powd.
B
Bake, East. Ba^lyn, Pid. Barrete, powd. Bedeve, Trig. Bedwyn, Trig.
Beedshaven, strat. Benaflock, powd. Benallock, Kerry. S. Benet, Pid. Benye,
Lesnew. Bear, strat. Beriobridge, East. Berose, Trig. Besill, Lesnew. Betonet,
East. Bickton, East. Bindon beacon, We. Binerton, Kerry Blackbitille point,
West. Blaise, powd. Blislond, Trig. Blostenim, East. Bochym* Kerry. Boconock,
West. Bodregan, powd. BODMAN, Trig. Bodrigy, Pen. Bolisto, Pen. Bonython,
Kerry. Borden, strat. Borrow, strat. Botadon, East. Botalleck, pen. Botsboro,
strat. Bolcastle, Lesnew. Boskenna, pen. Bossassill, pen. Bosvergus, pen.
Boyton, stratt. Breage, Kerry. Breland I Will, pen. Br^n^, pid. S. Breock, pid.
Breward, Trig. Bridgrule, strat. B^odocke, West. Brouagelly, west. Buckern,
Trig. Buckehy, Trig. Budocke, Kerry. Burgus, pid. Burian, pen. S. Burien, pen.
Burlace, pid. Burnere, Trig. Byneth wood, East. Bynnawy, strat.
C
Calstocke, East. Camborne, pen. CAME^FORD, Le. Canalegie, pid. Canyjeck, pen.
Caradon Beacon, East. Carantack, pid. Cardynbam, West. Cargallomb, West.
Cargem, East. Carmyono, Kerry. Carnonbigh, pen. Carnon, pid. Carock passage,
west. Caraglowse, pen. Carry bay, powd. Casthorne, pen. Cayne, West. Cayne
bridge, West. Chasfrench, East. Cheswring, East. Clayper bridge, East. Cleader,
Les. S. Clear, West. S. Clement, powd. S. Clements I Will, pen. Clifton, East.
Clowans, pen. Cober Flu. Colan little, pid. COLUMB great, pid. Columb less,
pid. Colquite, powd. Comb, powd. Constenton, Ker. Corbullock Park, East.
Cornely, powd. Cortether, West. Coswyn, penw. Court, powd. Cousham bay, East.
Crackington, Les. Creed, powd. Crigmere, pid. Crocadon, East. Crosthole, East.
Crowan, pen. Cubye, powd. Curye, Kerry. Coswath, ped. Cuttcall, East. Cuttbert,
pid. The ruins of a Castle, pen.
D
Davidstone, Les. S. Day, Kerry. S. Dennis, powd. Denmer bridge, Trid. Dewloe,
West. S. Dominick, East. Dounstocke, Le. Dosmery poole, West. Driffe, pen.
Duckpoole, strat. Dudman point, powd. Dulo, West. Dunacombe, strat. Dunhevid,
alias East. Daunceston, East Dyzarde, les.
E
S. Earth, East. S. Eartham, pen. Edith Chapel, Trig. Edgcombe, East.
Estorde, strat. Eglosaile, Trig. Egloskerry, East. Endellion, Trig. Enis,
Kerry. Enedor, pid. Erme, powd. Erne, East. Ervan, pid. Ethy, West. Eva, powd.
Evall, pid.
F
Fawey ^lu. Falmouth haven, powd. Fentongallon, powd. Feocke, powd. Forybery,
Les. Foy Well, Les. FOYE, powd. Foye haven, West. Frisie, Kerry.
G
Garlyn, pen. Gennis, Les. S. Germans, East. Germow, Kerry. Gerrance, powd.
Gillet, Les. Gluvyns, Kerry. Glyman, pid. Glynford, West. Gnarnack, powd.
Godolphyn, Kerry. Godolphyn Hall, Ker. Golant, powd. Golden, powd. Goon hilly
downs, Kerry. Golsury, pen. Grade, Kerry. GRAMPOUND, powd. Greston, East.
Gudreny Isle, pen. Gulnall, pen. Gullrock, pen. Gunhaskyn, pid. Gunwalow,
Kerry. Gunwallaw Mount, Kerry. Grendron, Kerry. S. Gurran, powd. Gwindrath Bay,
powd. Gwinier, pen. Gwithion, pen. Gwyn Rock, powd. Gwynap, Kerry.
H
Hacton, East. Hal^ Flu. Hall, West. Ham, strat. Harlyn, pid. Hay, East.
Helegan, Trig. Helford Haven, Ker. Helland, Trig. Helland bridge, Trig.
Hensbery* powd. Helset, Les. HELSTONE, Ker. Helstonford, East. Hillary, pen.
Hilston, strat. Hinckons down, East. Hurlers, East.
I
Jacobstowe, strat. Ilcombe, strat. Illogan, pen. S. John's, Kerry. S. John's,
East. S. Islac, pid. S. ITHIES, pen. S. Ithies bay, pen. S. Ive, East. Kern
Ivis, pen. S. Just* powd. S. Just, pen.
K
Karnusack, pen. S. Keave, west. Kellington, East. Kennegy, pen. Kenwyn, powd.
Kergoe, pid. Kern bridge, East. Kernbray, pen. Kerneth, powd. Karnmargh Beacon,
pen. Kernsew, Kerry. Kelstle, Kerry. Keswell, Trig. S. Keverne, Kerry. S. Kewe,
Trig. Kibberd, pid. Kilguh, pen. Killiow, powd. Kilkamton, strat. Kiliegath,
west. Killigrew* powd. Kilmarr, East. Kickleo, Ker. Kirthies, pen. Armed pen.
Knight, pen.
L
Ladocke, powd. Uny pen. Lalant, pen. Lalant, pen. Lamchan, west Lamorram,
powd. Lamornye point, pen. Labren, pid. Lanbrigan, pid. Ladew, East.
Landewenak, Kerry. Landilpe, East. Lands end, pen. Lancaste, East. Langdon,
strat. Langford, strat. Langhadern, powd. Lanhidrocke, pid. Lanivett, pid.
Lanlyverrye, powd. Lanno, Trig. Lanrake, East. Lanrest, west. Lansarllos, west.
Lanteglas, Les. Lanteglos, west. Lanwarnock, west. Lounce, powd. Launcells,
strat. LAUNSTON, Ea. S. Laurence, Trig. Lawannicke, East. Lawhitton, East.
Lawreth, west. Lee, strat. Lean Castle, East. Lelant, pen. Lepperry, pid.
Lesante, East. Lesnewth, Les. Lesterman, powd. Levan, pen. Levethan, Trig.
Lezante, ^ast. Lezard, Kerry. Lezard point, Kerry. Linkynhorne, East. Liver
Flu. Looburg East, west. The Low, Kerry. Loo Flu. Low East, west. LOW West,
west. Ludgnam, pen. Luggan, pen. Lugion, pen. Luland Isle, Trig. Port powd.
Luny, powd. Luxulian, powd. LYSKERD, we. LYSTWITHIEL, powd.
M
Mabe, Kerry. S. Mabyn, Trig. Madern, pen. Madern, pen. Madern Well, pen.
Magdalen Chapel. Kerry. Maker, East. Malader, powd. Manacka, Kerry. The
Manacles, Ker. Maniton, East. Manyng, strat. Markam Church, strat. MARKASIEW*
pen. Martherderna, pen. S. Martins, west. Martyn, Ker. S. Martyn, west. Maugan,
pid. Mawgan, Kerry. Mawla, pen. Mawnan, Kerry. The Mere, strat. Melocke, Les.
S. Mellyn, East. Menchilly powd. Merin, pid. Merthen, Kerry. Merther, powd.
Merther Uvy, Kerry. Mevagesie, powd. Meynamber, Kerry. Michael Chap, Trig. S.
Michaels Chapel. pen. Michael, pid. Michael carheis, powd. S. Michaels Isle,
west. S. Michaels Mount, pen. S. Michaels, powd. Michelstowe, Les. MILBROOKE,
Ea. S. Minyer, Trig. Moares, Kerry. and powd. Moorekirslow, strat. Moran, powd.
Moris, strat. Morva, pen. Morvall, west. Morvale, west. Morvath, pen. Mounts
Bay, pen. MOUSHOLE, p. Mowan, powd. S. Mo^e, powd. S. Moscea, powd. Mudgian,
Kerry. Mullian, Kerry. Myler Pooles, Kerry. Mynheniott, East. Mynster, Les.
N
Nans, pen. Nantgissallcove, pen. N^te point, Kerry. S Neott, west. Newbridge,
East. Newhe^s, East. Newies, pid. Newlin, pen. Newlyn, pid. Newport, East.
Newton, East. S. Nighton, west. Northill, East. Notterbridge, East. Norton,
Strat.
O
Otterham, Les.
P
PADDESTOW, p. Padstow haven, pid. Passage, Kerry. Paulchurch, pen. Pawton,
pid. Pedmandow, pen. Pellamontayne, pid. Pellees, pid. Pelyn, powd. Pelynt,
west. Pencrek, west. Pender, pen. Pendenys, Kerry. Penden And, pen. Penden Vow,
pen. Pendre, Trig. Pengersicke, Kerry. Pengwenyon point. Ker. Penhall, East.
Penhall, Trig. Penhale, pid. Penkenell, powd. Penlene, Les. P^nlett point,
East. Penpoint, Trig. Penro^, pen. Penros, Kerry. PENRYN, Ker. Pensand, Les.
PENSANS, pen Penshere, Trig. Pensiguance, Kerry. Pentuan, powd. Pentuane, powd.
Penuose, Trig. Penwarne, powd. Penwarren, Kerry. Peran in the Sands, pid. Peran
Uthno, pen. Peram Arwothall, Ker. Peramthno, pen. Perose, Trig. Petherick
little, pid. Petherwyn South, East. Phillacke, pen. Philly, powd. Pill, powd.
Pillaton, East. Pincheley, west. Plesh-bridge, East. Plinte, west. P^ffill,
strat. Pokenhorn, pen. Polgrene, pid. Polharma, powd. Polkeries, powd. Polmere,
powd. Polmarique, pid. Polnan, west. Polomawgon, west. Polperrye, west.
Polruddon, powd. Polterworgy, Trig. Polwhele, powd. Ponallom, Les. Ponde, East.
Poole, East. Porkellyes, Kerry. Port Hiot, East. Portcuruo, pen. Portlunz,
powd. Porthilly, Trig. Portillye, powd. Portissicke, Trig. Portkeveren Cove,
Trig. Portlevan, Kerry. Portquyn, Trig. Poughill, strat. Pounstocke, Les.
Predannor point, Kerry. Premadart, west. Pridiaux great, pid. Pridiaux heart,
powd. Probus, powd. Pulsath, strat. S. Pynnock, west.
Q
Quethiock, East.
R
Rame, East. Rame head, East. Redruth, pen. Relubas, pen. Repryn, Trig.
Rescosa, powd. Reskymer, Kerry. Roche, powd. The Rock, Kerry. Rosland, powd.
Roskestall, pen. Rosmoran, pen. Rowtore, Trig. Royalton, pid. Ruan, pid. Ruan
lanihorne, powd. Ruan little, Kerry. Ruan great, Kerry. Rudgwary^, East.
Ruchaell Penkevill, powd. Ruscarrak, Trig. Ruscrew, Kerry.
S
SALTASH, East. Sancred, pen. S. Saviors, pid. S. Savior, west. Scales, pen.
Senan, pen. Sener Castle, pen. Sheviocke, East. Shillingham, East. Sithny,
Kerry. Skewes, Kerry. Skey, powd. Skyberio Kerry. Sleven, pen. Southill, East.
Spargor, Ker. S. Stephens, East. S. Stephens in brannell, powd. Stithians, Ker.
Stoke clyms^and, Ea. Stow, strat. STRATTON, strat. Stratton century, strat.
Stuppert point, pid. Swanacole, strat. Sythy bay, west.
T
Talland, west. Talland point, west. Talvar, pen. Talvern, powd. Tamar Flu.
Tamerton, Strat. Tamyll, Les. Tamsquyte, Trig. S. Teath, Trig. Teluddy, pen.
Temple, Trig. Terladinas, pen. Tewedneke, pen. Theram, Kerry. Ther^ck, powd. S.
Thomas, East. Thurleber, Strat. Tintagell, Les. Tintagell Castle, Les.
Tophowses, West. Toplendycon. Trig. Town, pid. Towyn, powd. Tragardon, powd.
Trebasteall, Les. Trebe Ive, pid. Treberock, Trig. Trebigh, East. Treburget,
Trig. Trecarrell, East. Tredegy, Les. Treduneck, pid. Tredruston, pid. Trefrew,
strat. Trefusus, Ker. Tregarden, Trig. Tregare, powd. Treganethaw, powd.
Tregadyan, powd. Tregarget, Trig. Tregenno, pen. Tregernon, Les. Tregonock,
East. TREGONEY, pow. Tregonnon, powd. Tregoodock, East. Treguir, Trig. Tregull,
East. Tregunnon, powd. Trehan, powd. Treharrew, Les. Treistick, powd. Trekeve,
West. Trelasse, Trig. Trelaske, East. Trelauke, East. Trelawn, West.
Trelawerren, Kerry. Trelisticke, pid. Trelovowith, powd. Tremalye, West.
Trematon, East. Trembrose, Ker. Tremssy, pid. Tremene, East. Trenalgo, Les.
Treneglos, Les. Trengove, West. Trenowth, powd. Trenowth, Pid. Trentwith, Pen.
Treragger, Trig. Trerent, Pen. Trerise, Pid. Trerose, Ker. Tresiliang bridge,
Powd. Tresilian, Powd. Tresmere, Trig. Tresmere, East. Treso, Trig. Tresunger,
Trig. Tresusus, ker. Treswithin, Pen. Tretallock, Pid. Tretheag Flu. Trothevy
Stones, West. Trethilly, Powd. Trethune, Pid. Trethurse, Powd. Trevabees,
kerry. Trevacus, Powd. Trevalgon, Pen. Trevalgy, Les. Trevasus, Powd. Trevegay,
Trig. Treverne, Pid. Trevena, Pid. Trevena, Les. Trevenner, Pid. Trevera, Pid.
Trevethock, kerry. Trevillet, Les. Trevill, Pen. Trevilleck, Powd. Trevins,
kerry. Trevifly, Pid. Trevithick, Powd. Trevona, Powd. Trevoura, Pid. Trevonth,
West. Trewardinock, Pow. Trewardreth Baye, Pow. Trewardreth* Powd. Trewargon,
West. Trewathe, Pid. Trewen, East. Trewerveneth, Pen. Trewnard, Pen. Trevins,
kerry. Trewino, Powd. Trewindle, Trig. Trewolfe, pen. Treworgan, powd.
Treworgans, pen. Tremorgye, West. Trewothath, kerry. Trewullock, pid. Trewynon,
pid. Trimguenton, pen. Trincow, pid. Trinity, powd. Trithall, kerry. TRURO,
powd. S. Tudy, Trig. S. Tue, powd. Tuis, kerry. Twidnack* pen. Tyninghouse,
West.
V
Valle Flu. S. Udye, Trig. S. Veepe, West. Vertian, powd. Ugboroe, Strat. Uvy,
pen.
W
Wadefast, Strat. Warlegon, West. Warpstowe, Les. Week S. Mary's, Strat.
Wenne, pid. WESTLOE, West. Westnarth, West. Whalsborow, Strat. Whitsand Baye,
pen. Whitstone, Strat. Wicke, kerry. Windsor, pid. Withiall pid. Wotton, East.
Wulston, Les. S. Winnow, West. Wynnyton, kerry.
Z
Zenor, pen. Zwallock, Trig.
SVMMERSET-SHIRE is both a rich and spacious Country, having the Severne Sea
beating upon it on the North-side, The bounds of Sommerset-shire.
the South part bordering upon Devon and Dorset-shires, the West confined with
Devon-shire, and the East and North-East upon Wilt-shire, and Gloucester-shire.
It took the name of Sommerton (sometime the chief Town of this Shire) whence
in the ancient Historian Asserius, this County is called Sommertunensis, that
is, Sommortun-shire.

The length.
(2) The form thereof is large, bearing it self still wider as it stretches
into the middle part thereof, and contains in length from Brackley near unto
Frome-Selwood Eastward, to Our in the West, Miles fifty five. In breadth from
Porshut-point in the North, The breadth.
to Chard Southward, is some what above forty miles. The whole circumference
is about 204. miles.

The Air.
(3) The Air is mild and pleasing, and for the most part subject to such
temperate dispositions as the Summer season affords, whence some have
erroniously conceited that the Region borrowed her name from the nature of her
Clime: yet how delightful so ever it is in the time of Summer, with change of
the season it may well change her pleasing name, and borrow some Winterly
denomination; so full of wet, so myrie and moorish it is; in so much as the
Inhabitants can hardly travel to and fro without their great encombrance.

The Soil.
(4) How be it they pass over this with all patience, knowing their ensuing
seasonable profits far to exceed any present detriments and displeasures:
for as it is foul, so it is fruitful, which makes them comfort themselves
with this Proverb, that What is worst for the Rider, is best for the abider:
the Soil and Glebe thereof being very fertile, and every side garnished with
Pastures and delightful Meadows, and beautified with Manor houses both many
and fair; and (in a word) has every thing in it to content the purse, the
heart, the eye, at home: and sufficient Ports to give entertainment to
Commodities from abroad.

The Inhabitants.
(5) The ancient Inhabitants that possessed this Province were the Belgae, who
spread themselves far and wide, as well here as in Wilt-shire, and the inner
parts of Hampshire; who being branched from the Germans, conferred the names of
those places from whence they came, upon these their seats where they resided.

Commodities.
(6) The general profits of this Province are Corn and Cattle, wherewith it is
so plentifully stored as it may challenge any neighboring Country for the
quantity to make show of Cattle so fat, or Grain so rich. Some places are
peculiarly enriched by Lead-mynes, Lead.
as Mindsphils, (perchance so called of the deep Mines) by Leiland aptly
termed Minerarii, Mineral hills, which yield plenty of Lead, the most
Merchantable commodity that is in England, and vented into all parts of the
world. Some are beautified with Diamonds, Diamonds.
as Saint Vincent Rock, whereof there is great plenty, and so bright of
color, as they might equalize Indian Diamonds, if they had their hardness:
yet being so many and so common, they are less sought after or commended.

The chief Cities.
(7) This Country is famoused by three Cities, Bath, Wels, and Bristow. The
first takes name of the hot Bathes, which Antonine called Aquae Solis, The
waters of the Sun; Stephanus, Badiza; we at this day Bath, and the Latinists
Bathonia: a place of continual concourse for persons of all degrees, and
almost of all diseases, (whence it was sometimes called Akeman cester) who by
divine providence do very often find relief there, Bath once called
Akemancester.
the Springs thereof by reason of their Mineral and sulphurous passage, being
of such exceeding power and medicinable heat, as that they cure and conquer the
rebellious stubbornness of corrupt humors, in respect of which admirable
virtues some have fabled, that they were first conveyed by Magicke-Art. To
testify the antiquity of this place, many Images and Roman Inscriptions are
found in the walls, which can now be hardly read, they are so worn and eaten
into by age. Wels (as Leiland reports) was sometimes called Theodorodunum,
but from whence it had that denomination he makes no mention: Wels, once called
Theodo^od^num.
The name it now bears is taken (as some think) from the River there, which
King Kinewulph in his Charter An. 766. calls Welwe, or (as others) from the
Wels or Springs which there break forth, and whereupon that See (under whose
Jurisdiction is also the City of Bathe) has been anciently called
Fontanensis Ecclesia, the Fountain Church: where the Cathedral built by King
Inas to the memory of S. Andrew is very beautiful and richly endowed. The
City is likewise well replenished both with Inhabitants and seemly buildings.
The Magistracy of Web.
Whose government is managed by a Mayor yearly elected, a Recorder and seven
Masters, having the assistance of sixteen Burgesses, a Towne-Clerke, and two
Sergeants at Mace. Whose Latitude is 51.20. minutes, and Longitude 17.31.
minutes. Bristow is not so ancient, Bristow.
as it is fair and well seated: The beauty of it being such, as for the
bigness thereof, it scarce gives place to any City of England, and does
worthily deserve the Saxon name Bright-stad: whose pleasantness is the more,
by reason that the River Avon scowres through the midst of it, which together
with the benefit of Sewes under all the streets, cleares the City of all
noisome filth and uncleanness. It is not wholly seated in this County of
Sommerset, but one part thereof in Gloucestershire; but because it is an entire
County of it self, it denies subjection unto either, having for its own
government both a Bishop with a well furnished College, and a Mayor with a
competent assistance of Aldermen, and other Officers for Civil affairs.

(8) This Province has been the Theater of many Tragical events and bloody
Battles: the Danes did grievously afflict Porlock by cruel Piracies, Porlocks.
in the year eight hundred eighty six. Yet near unto Pen a little village
neighboring upon North Cadbury, Battles.
Edmund surnamed Iron-side, gave them a notable foil, as he was pursuing
Canutus from place to place, for usurping the Crown of England. And Keniwalch
(a West Saxon) in the same place had such a day against the Britains, that
they ever after stood in awe of the English-Saxons prowess. Marianus relates
that not far from Bridge-water as the Danes were straggling abroad, Ealstane
Bish. of Sherbourne.
Ealstan Bishop of Sherbourne did so foil their forces in the year 845. as
their minds were much discomfited and their powers utterly disabled. Ninius
also writes that King Arthur did so defeat the English-Saxons in a battle at
Cadbury, Arthur.
that it deserved to be made perpetuously memorable. Neither is Mons Badonicus
(now Bannesdown) less famous for Arthurs victories. And King Elfred in another
battle not far from hence gave the Danes such an overthrow as he forced them
to submission, Godrus.
and induced Godrus their King to become a Christian, himself being Godfather
to him at the Font. So happy is this Region, and so beholding to Nature and Art
for her strengths and fortifications, as she has always been able to defend
her self and offend her enemies.

(9) Neither has it been less honored with beauteous houses consecrated to
Religion: Religious places.
such was that of Black-Chanons at Barelinch in the first limit of this Shire
Westward: Barelinch.
and King Athelstan built a monastery in an Island called Muchelney (that is to
say) the great Island, Muchelney.
which is between the Rivers Iuel and Pedred, running together; where the
defaced walls and ruins thereof are yet to be seen, King Henry the third also
erected a Nunnery at Witham, Witham.
which was afterward the first house of the Carthusian Monks in England,
Hinton.
as Hinton not far off was the second. But above all other for antiquity,
glory and beauty was the Abbey of Glastenbury, Glastenbury Abbey.
whose beginning is fetched even from Joseph of Arimathea which Devi Bishop of
S. David's repaired being fallen to ruin, and King Inas lastly builded a fair
and stately Church in this Monastery, though it be now made even with the
ground, the ruins only showing how great and magnificent a Seat it has
anciently been; which several houses were thus beautified by bounteous
Princes, for religious purposes, and to retire the mind from worldly services,
though blinded times and guides diverted them to superstitious and lewd abuses.

(10) Other memorable places are these, Camalet.
Camalet a very steep hill hard to be ascended, which appears to have been a
work of the Romans by diverse Coins dug up there, on the top whereof are
seen the lineaments of a large and ancient Castle, which the Inhabitants
report to have been the Palace of King Arthur. Ilchester.
Ilechester, which at the coming of the Normans was so populous, that it had
in it an hundred and seven Burgesses, and it appears to be of great antiquity
by the Roman Caesar's Coins oftentimes found there. The Churchyard of
Avalonia or Glassenbury, where King Arthurs Sepulcher was searched for by the
command of King Henry the second, which was found under a stone, with an
Inscription upon it fastened, almost nine foot in the ground. Dunstere.
Also Dunstere, where (as is reported) a great Lady obtained of her husband so
much Pasture ground in common by the Towne-side, for the good and benefit of
the Inhabitants, as she was able in a whole day to go about bare-foote.

This County is divided into 42. Hundreds for the disposing of business
needful to the State thereof, The Counties division. Market Towns.
wherein are placed 33. Market-Townes, fit for buying and selling, and other
affairs of Commerce. It if fortified with four Castles, and planted with 385.
Parishes, for concourse for Divine service, as is denoted in the Table
following.

map of Somersetshire SOMERSETSHIRE Described: and into HUNDREDS divided, with
the plott of the famous and most wholesome waters and city of the BATHE.


HVNDREDS in Sommerset-shire.
1. CHewe. 2. Chewton. 3. Bathforme. 4. Keynsham. 5. Bruton. 6. Cattesayshe. 7.
Norton Feriis. 8. From. 9. Wellow. 10. Killmersdon. 11. Glaston. 12.
Horethorne. 13. Wels and Welford. 14. Whitston. 15. Taunton. 16. North Curry.
17. Milverton. 18. Carhampton. 19. Wylliton and Freemannor. 20. Whitleigh. 21.
Cannington. 22. North Petherton. 23. Anderfield. 24. Huntspil and Puriton. 25.
Abdicke. 26. Bulston. 27. Kingsbury. 28. South Petherton. 29. Crewkerne. 30.
Sommorton. 31. Pitney. 32. Stone. 33. Tintinhull. 34. Hundsborough. 35.
Barwicke. 36. Coker. 37. Martock. 38. Winterstoake. 39. Portbury. 40. Bempston.
41. Brent. 42. Hartcliffe, and Bedminster.
A
Abbottelye, Abdick. Abbas comb, H^r^thor. Arisholt, Cannington. Alford,
Cattes. Alfoxton, Wylli. Adber of Barwich hun. Hoar. Alhampton, W^^t.
Allerford, Carna^. Allerton, C^mp. Almersworthy, Car. Almisford, Cart^s. Alson
Mary's, Bemp. Angellsey, Taunt. Anthony, Summer. Apitcombe, Cattes.
Ashbrittell, Melver. Ashcott, What. Ashholt, Canning. Ash, Marteck. Ashton,
VVhitol. Ashwick, Killmer. Ashhill, A^deck. Ashington, Stone. Auler, Summer.
Audremore, Whitle. Aveland Island, Glass. Audre, Wh^tle. Avon, flu. Port.
AXBRIDGE, Wint. Axe flu. Bemp.
B
Babington, Killmer. Babcarye, Cattes. Baddesworth, Wint. Baddleton, Milver.
West Bagbarrowe, Taunt. Balsborow, Glass. Balsborowwood, Glass. Bandrip,
North-P^. Banwell, VVint. B^rle flu Carham. Ba^kly, From. Barton. North.
Barwicke, Barwicke. South Barrow, Cattes. Barrow, Bed. Barrington, South. P^.
North Barrow, Cattes. Bastian bridge, Whitle. Batcombe, Whit. Bathford, Bath.
Bathweek. Bath. BATH CITY, Bath. Hatch Beauchampe, Bath. Beckington, From.
Bedminster, Bed. Beer, Canning. Billinton, Keyn. Benager, Killmer. Barrington
of Brent hundred, Wint. Berrough, Brent. South Brent. Brent. Bicknaller,
Wyllit. Bickneell, Abdick. Bilsham, Bemp. Bingham, Coker. Bishopton, Tin^in.
Bisport, Bed. Bittescombe, Wyllit. Blackford, W^it^e. Blackford, Bemp.
Blackford, Car. Blackdon, Wint. Blagdon, Taunt. Blackwell, B^d. Bleydon, Wint.
Boncaston, Bath. Bosington, Carham. Bowe^, North Pet. Bradford, Taunt. Bradley,
Whit. Bradley, Glass. North Bradon, Abdick. South Bradon, Bulst. Brain, Bemp.
Brenham, Brut. Brent Marsh, Brem. and Wi East Brent. Brent. West Brent, Brent.
Bow-bridge, Hound. BRIDGEWATER, Nor. Brimpton, Stone. Brislington, Keyn.
BRISTOLL a City. Brockley of Cheweton hund. Bed. Brockley, Chew. Brodway of
Abdick hund. Sou. P^. Brodweldon, Bed. Brown, Carham. Burham, Brut. Brumfield,
Andros. Brumpton Raffe VVyllit. Kings Brumpton, VVyllit. BRVTON, Brut. West
Buckland of North Cu. hundred, Milver. Buckland, Kell. Buckland fee, North P^^.
Buckland marye, Bulst. Burcombe lodge, Brut. Burcot, Wells. Burland, Taunt.
Burnham, Bemp. Burnet, Keyn. Burtle-house, Whitle. Burton, Cattes. Burton, Bed.
Bushforde, VVyllit. Butcombe, Bed. Butley, Whitle.
C
South Cadbu^y, Cattes. North Cadbury, Cattes. Camely, Chewton. West Camel.
Summer. Cameleke Castle, H^^e. Queens CAMMELL, Cattes. Cammerton, VVella.
CANESHAM, Keyn. Camington, Canning. Castle Caree Cattes. Little Carew, Summer.
Carhampton, Carham. Carisitzpain, VVhitl. Cast, ^r^me. Castlelleary, Cattes.
Catcott, (...). Cattern, Bath. Cathange^, VVyllit. Chafcomb, South-Pet. CHARDE,
King. Chardland, King. Charsinch, North-Pet. Charlton Canuill, Heart. Charleton,
Keyn. Charleton musgrove, Norton. Charlecombe, C^^^. West Charleton, Whit. East
Charleton, S^mmer. Charterhouse, K^ll. Charterhouse, Wint. Chedder, Wint.
Chedder Rock, VVint. Cheddon, Taunt. Chedsey, North-pet. Chellington, South-pet
Chelton, Whitle. Chelworth, Keyn. Cheriton, H^re. Chesterblade, Wells. Cheveley
of Chewton hun. Pod. Chewton Canesham, Keyn. Cheweton, Clawton. Chewstock Chew.
Chilcompton, Chew. Chilton of Barwick hun. Hor. Chilton, Canning. Chilton,
North-pet. Chilton d^mmer, Stone East Chinock, Hound. Middle Chinock, Hound.
West Chinock, Hound. Chipstable, VVylli. Chiston, VVint. Chue flu. Chew.
Bishops Chue Chew. Churchland, Bemp. Churchill, VVint. Chuton meudip. Chew.
Clatworthy, VVyllit. Clauford, Fr^me. Claverton, Chew. Clausworth, Coker. Old
Cleve, VVyllit. Clevedon, Port. Cliverdon, Brus. Clopton, Port. Clutton, Chew.
Coat, Martock. West Coker, Coker. East Coker, Coker. Coldhenton. Cole, Brut.
Colepits, Killmer. Comb, VVyllit. Temple Comb, Hoar. Comb, VVyllit. Comb S.
Nicholas, King^. Comb, Bath. Combe^iory, Taunt. Combehay, VV^ll^. Compton,
Ca^tes. Compton David, Keyn. Compto^ dund^, W^^tl. Compton Paunsford, Cattes.
Compton Martine, Chew. Compton Bishops, Wint. Comwindge, Canning. Congresbury,
Wint. Crose, Taunt. Coripoole, Canning. Corson, VVell^. Corton, Hoar. Coston,
Bath. Cothleton, Taunt. Coxley, Wells. Coyldoe, North-Pet. West Cranmer, Wels.
East Cranmer, Kill. Creech, A^der. Cricket Malherb, Bulston. Crokampil, Port.
Bear Crockham, Abd. Crockham Brickham, VVylli. Crockham Studley. Wyllit.
CROKETHORN, Cro. Crockscombe, W^^t. Crycket Thomas, South-P. Cucklington,
Norton. Cudworth, South-P. Culbone, Carham. Cumpton, Whit. East Curry, North
Cur. Curry Mallet, Abdick. Curry Load, North Cur. Curryvivell, Bulston.
Cussington and VVint. Cush^ish, Taunt. Custoke, VVint. Cutcombe, Carham.
Chysselborough, H^u.
D
East Daulish, Abdick. S Decombs, Wyllit. Denison, North-Pet. Dichiat, VVnit.
Dinder, Wels. Doddington, Wyllit. Dolish wake, South-P. Domett of Abdick hund.
South-P. Donington, South-P. Donyford, VVyllit. Doulting, VVint. Down end,
North-P. Downhead, Whit. Drayton, ^ulston. Duddleston, Taunt. Dulcot, Well.
DVLVERTON, Wylli. Dundrye, Chew. Dunkerton, Wyllit. DVNSTER, Carham. Duniet,
K^ll. Durborrow, Whit. Durlay, Anderf. Durston, North-Pet. Dypford, Taunt.
E
Easton, Wels. Easton, Chewton. Easton, in gordon, Port. Eaton, VVint.
Eddington, Canning. Edington, VVhitl. Edstoke, Canning. Egarley, Glass. Elline,
From. Eline, From. Elworthy, VVyllit. Enborrow, Chewton. Enmore, Auderf.
Estreat, Glass. Everiche, Wels. Everiche lodge, Whit. Evilton, Summer. EVIL,
Stone. Ex flu. Carham. Exmore, Carham. Exford, Carham. Erton, VVyllit.
F
Farley castle, VVillo. Farmbero, Keyn. Farrenton, Chewton. Fayland, Port.
Felton, Bed. Fiddwicke, Taunt. Fifehead, Bulston. Fillwood park, Chewt.
Fitzheard, North cur. Fostock, VVello. Frary, Kill. Freshord, Bath. From flu,
Kill. FROM Selwood. From. North Fulford, Taunt. South Fulford, Taunt.
Furlong, Crew.
G
Gablington, Taunt. Gedney more, Bemp. Ged^ey, Glass. Georges, well, Taunt. S.
George, Port. GLASTONBVRY. Glast. Gotehurst. Anderf. Gothill, Ho^ethorne.
Greenham, Mil. Greenware, Chewton. Gregory took, Somm. Gre^nton, VV^^l.
H
Haddon beacon, VVyllit. Half, VVyllit. Priours Halsh, North Cur Halwaye,
VVyllit. Halton, Whitl. Halton, Norton. Hamden Hill. Tintinh. Hampton, C^ewt.
Hampton, Bath. Hamure, North Pet. Hankfield, Chew. Hardington, Coker. East
Harptrie, Wint. Hartlack bridge, Glast. West Harfry, Chewton. East Hartrye,
Wint. Haselbeare, Hound. Haslingrove, Cattes. Hastorcombe, Taunt. West Hach.
North Cur. Hawkridge, Wyllis. Heal, Taunt. Hergrove, North Pet. Hemington,
Kill. Hendeland, Taunt. Henford Martravers, Stone. Henstridge, H^r^t^rne.
Henton, Martock. Henton S. George, Crawk. Henton Bluet, Chewt. Henton, Well.
Hetchpen, Brut. Heth more, Whitl. Hethfield, Taunt. Hewish, King. Hewish, Cr^w.
Hewish Campstowe, Wylli. High bridge, Whitl. Hillbishop, Taunt. Higham, VV^^st.
Hilfarencie, Taunt. Hillhouse, Kill. Hinish, Went. Hobs passage, Brent.
Hockumbe, Taunt. Holcomb, Kill. Hollford Coursley, Taunt. Hollford, W^i^l.
Hollwaye, Taunt. Holwall, Horethorne. Honiberie, VVylli^. Honiwecke, Brut.
Hornblawton, Whit West Hortington, Wels. Horsey, North P^^. Horsington,
Horeth. Houlford, Taunt. Houlford in Taunt hun. Wyllis. Hungrode, Port.
Huntley, Stone. HNNSPILL, North p. Huntworth, North pet. Hurst, Martock.
Hurcott, Summer. Hutton, VVi^^. Hynton, Kill. Hythe, VVint.
I
S. James, Taunt. Ilbrue^, Balston. ILCHE^TER of Tintinhul hundred. Mar. I Will
bear, Taunt. ILMISTER, Abdick. Ilton, Abdick. Ilton park, Abdick.
Inglescombe, Well. Ivithorme, VVhi^^^.
K
Kelweston, Bath. Kenne, VVint. Killeston, North Curry. Killnterstone, Kill.
Killntington Norton. Killton, VVyllis. Kilue, VVyllis. Kaingeston, Taunt.
Kingston, VVint. Kingston, Tinti^^. Kingston, Abdick. Kingston, Chewton.
Kingston of Chewton ^un. Bed. Kingsbury, Horethorn. Kingsbury, King. Kingsdon,
Summer. Kingswood, VVint. Kineton, Casses. Kingweston, Casses. Kittesford,
Milver. Knape, North curry. Knights^e, Taunt. Knighton, Chew. Knowle, Chew.
Knowle, Pitney. Knowle, South pet. Kyllesdon, North cu^. Kymeton, Horethorne.
L
Lambroke, King. Lamyat, Whit. Langford bonduile, Pitney. LANGPORT, Pitney.
Langridge, Wylli^. Landgredge, Bath. Laverton, From. Launesdon, Bath. Laurence
Liddeard, Taunt. Lee, Taunt. Leeflory, Taunt. Leigh, South pet. Leighland,
Will. and Fr^ Lidford Pouncherton, Taun East Lidford, Cat. West Lidford, Cat.
Bishops LIDDIARD, North Ligh under Mendip, Kill. Ligh Abbeys, Pet. Listocke,
VVylli^. Littletoo, Summer. Littleton, Chew. Litton, Wels. Locking, Wint.
Locuston, VVint. Lodlhinshe, VVyllit. Longlande, Martock. Longham, Summer.
Longashton, Bed. Lopen, South per. Lotsham, VVhi^ Lovington, Ca^^es. West
Luccombe, Cath. Lullington, From. Luston, Tintinth. Luxborough, everet, Ca^^.
East Lydfo^d, Some. Lie, Port. Lym^^sham, Brent. Lymmington, Stone. Lying,
Anderf.
M
Maksbury, Keyn. Mapetton, Ca^^es. Margaret^ Thorn, Milver. Ma^y Magdalen,
Taunt. Mark, Bomp. Marshe, Stone. Broader Marston, Horethorn. MARTOCK, Mart.
Meatepoole, Glass. Meare, Glass. Mells, Kill. Mendip hi^^, Wels. Merston Bygot,
From. Meryfield, Abdiok. Meryott, C^ow. Midsomer Norton. Ch^w^s. Michaels
Burro, Somm. Michaelchurch, North p. Middlesey, W^^^l. Milborne, Hore^h.
Milton, Woitl. Milton, Brut. Milton, Wels. MILVERTON, Milver. Milverton
manner, Mil The Mineries, Wels. Moore, Bomp. North More, Summer. Morlinch,
Whitl. West Mouckton, Whi^l. Mouckton, Taunt. Mounte^ut, Tintint^. Mounck
silver, Wylli^. Muckney, Pitney. Muchenay Island. Pitney. Murfo^d, St^^e.
Myllayne, Taunt. Mylton, M^rtock. Mynchead, Taunt. MYNHEAD, C^^ham. Mylterton,
Crew.
N
Naylesborowe, Taunt. Naylesay, B^d. Nemnet, Chewton. Neroch forest, Abdick.
Netherham, Wylli^. Nettlecombe, Wyllit. West Newton. North pet. Newton, S.
Low, Well^. Newton Court, Well^. Newton placy, Wyllit. North curry, North cur.
Northover of Tintinhull hundred. Mart. Norchelme, Chew. Northlord, Glass.
Norton, Chew. Norton, Hound. Norton, Taunt. Norton Malt^ward. C^^w. Norton
Ferru, Norton. Nunnye* F^ome. Nyland hill, Wels. Nynhead, Taunt.
O
Obridge, Taunt. Odcombe, Hound. Oak, Taunt. Orchard, Taunt. Orchard, Canning.
Orchardly, From. Orche^ly, From. Othill, Crew. Otterford, Taunt.
Otterhampton, Canning. Ottersey, South pet. Ou^e, Carham.
P
Parret flu, North pet. North Parret, Hound. Poulton, Chewton. Paulett, North
pet. Pempereles bridge, Glass. Pen, Norton-F^r. Pendomer, Coker. West Pennard,
Glass. East Pennard, Whit. PENSFORD, Chew. Pensell wood, Norton. Pery bridge of
Brent hund. Wint. Peryton North pet. Petherto^ park, North p. North Petherton,
North p. South PETHERTON, Sout. Pharmborrow, Keyn. PHILIPSNORTON, K Pit comb,
Brut. Pixton, Taunt. Plainsfield, Canning. Pockington, Bulston. Polsham, Glass.
Porlocke, Ca^ham. Porlock bay, Ca^ham. Portshut, Port. Portshut, point, Porth.
Portbury, Port. Poundstord, Taunt. Poyntingten, Horeth. Preston, Stone.
Preston, K^^n. Preston bowger, Wylli^. Priddy, Welt. Publow, Keyn. Puckston,
VVint. Puddimore, Whatl. Pull, Whit. Pulton, Whit. Putland S. Graftrose,
Taunt. Pyll-bridge, Marteck. Pytney, Summer. Pytney, Pitney. Pytmister, Taunt.
Q
Queens more, Whitl. East Quantoxhead, Wylli^. West Quantonhead, Wyllit.
Quantoke h^ls, Wylli^.
R
Raddon, From. Radnestock, Walt. Radstock, Kill. Ragilbury, ^od. Ramwell,
Taunt. S. Ra^e hill, C^^w. Reddington, Wylli^. Redlynch, Brut. Ratcliffe, Wint.
Road, From. Rodway, Canning. Rokesbridge, ^ro^^. Rownam passage, Bed.
Rowberrowe, Wint. Runton, Milver. Ryston, Taunt.
S
Salford, Keyn. Samford, Milv^r. Samford, North pet. Samfordorcias, Hereth.
Samford Bre^, Wylli^. Seaborough, Crew. Sevedge more, Whitl. Segemore, Glass.
Selwood forest, Brut. Sevington abbot. southp. Sevington michael, south.
Sevington mary, south p. Seymour, Ch^w^on. Shapwick, Whitl. Sharpham park,
Whitl. SHEPTON maller, whit. Shepholm Island, Brent. Shepton Montague, Norton.
Shepton Beauchamp, South p. Sherston, North p. Sheselborough, Hund. Shipham,
VVint. Shurton, Canning. Siddington, Canning. Skilgate, VVylli^. Smaldon wood,
VVi^t. SOMMERTON, Somm. Sommerton Erly, Somm. Southarpe, South pe^. Sparkford,
Cattes. Spaxton, Canning. Stafferdel, Norton. Standerweek, From. Stanton
prior, Keyn. Stanton drew, Keyn. Staple, Abd^ck. Stapleton, Mart^ck.
Staplegrove, Taunt. Stathe, North curry. Staughleigh, Milver. Stocklinche
Magdaline, Abdi. Stert point, Canning. Stocklinch, Abdick. Stoford, Barwicke.
Stognusey, Canning. Stokeland, Kill. Stoke under hamden, Tint. Stoke pero,
Carham. Stoke giffard, VVint. Stoke garsey, Canning. South Stoke, Bath. North
Stoke, Bath. Stoke mary, Taunt. Stoke, Norton. Stoke, North pet. Stoke gomer,
Wyllit. Stokeland marsh, Ca^. Stone Chapel, Whit. Stonca^ton, Chew. Stowell,
VVhitl. Stowe, Chew. Over Stowley, Wyllis. Nether Stowley, Wyllit. Stowey,
Chew. Stowell, Heresh. Stratton in Vo^swey, Kill Streat, South pet. Streat,
Whitle. Strenixton, Canning. Over Strotton, South pet. Sutte pile, Wint.
Sutton, Chew. Sutton, Cattes. Sutton Coker. Sutton mallet, Whitle. Long Sutton,
Summer. Swansweeke, Bulston. Swill, Bulston.
T
TAVNTON, Taunt. Teltford, Walt. Thorney bridge, King. Thorn, Martock.
Thornfawken, North cur. Thrubwell, Keyn. Thurloxton, North p. Thurlebare, North
p. Tintinhull, Tintin. Tobridge, Taunt. Tolland, Taunt. Tone flu, Milver. The
Tor, Glass. The Tor, Tin. Tornock, Bemp. Walks Tower, Pet. Treboro, Wyllit.
South Trendle, Taunt. North Trendle, Taunt. Trent, Horeshorne. Trister, Norton.
Trull, North cur. Tuckerton, North pet. Trummer, Horethorne. Twyverton, Wells.
Tycknam, P^^. Tymberscombe, Ca^^. Tymsborow, Chew.
V
Vbleigh, Chew. Vphill, VVint. Vpton, Wyllit. Vpton noble, Brut.
W
WATCH^T, Wyllit. Walton, Por. Walton park, Port. Walton, Whitle. Walls,
From. Wanstrow, From. Wanstraw, Brut. Wayford, Chew. Wedmore, Bemp. Laurence
Week, Whit. Week, Canning. WELLS City, Wels. Wellesford, Milver. WELLINGTON
of north carry hund. M. Wello, VVello. Welton, Chew. Wemdon, North p. Weten.
Summer. We^e, Bemp. WESTON, Wittl. Weston, Cattes. Weston, Pe^. Weston upon
Mare, Wint. Westbury, VVelt. Westcombe, VVelt. Westholme, Glass. Wethihill,
Wyllis. VVhatlye, From. VVheathill, Whitl. Whitstanton, south p. Whitnell,
Whit. Whit lackington, Abd. VVhitchurch, VVolt. VVhitchurch, Keyn. VVicke,
Brut. VVigden, Stone. VVicke, VVolt. VVillitton, VVyllit. VVilmerston, K^yn.
Wilton, Taunt. WINCAVNTON. M^^. VVinesford, Wyllit. Winford, Bed. VVinscombe,
Wint. Winsham, King. VVitcome, Bath. Witcombe, Martock. Witcombe, Chewton.
VVitham, Kill. VVithcombe, Carh. VVithipoole, VVyllit. VVithihill, Taunt.
WIVESCOMB, north West Woodland, From. East Woodland, From. VVoodland,
Taunt. VVoodspring, Wint. VVooky, Wilt. VVooky hole, Wilt. VVolcot, Bath.
VVollavington, Whit. VVolloigh, Bath. Wolmarston, North p. VVolmyston, Crew.
VVolverton, From. Wotton, Whit. Wotton courtney, Carham. VVoorle, Wint.
VVorminster, Wolt. South Wotton, Whist. North Wotton, Glass. Wraxall, Per.
Wrentage, North cur. Wriggleton, Kill. Wrington of Brent hundred. Wint. Wyke,
Bru^.
Y
Yarcombe, north Taunt Yardley, Wels Yearlington, Brut. Yenston, Horethorne.
The ancient name of this Shire.
WILLT-SHIRE, in the ancient English-Saxons written Wilsetta, is enclosed upon
the North with Gloucester-shire, upon the East is bounded with Barke-shire,
upon the South with Dorset and Hamp-shire, and upon the West is confronted
against partly by Gloucester, and the rest by Somerset-shires.

The form.
(2) The form thereof is both long and broad; for from Inglesham upon Thamesis
in the North, to Burgat Damarum in the South, are thirtie-nine miles; the
broadest part is from Buttermer Eastward, to the Shire-stones in the West,
being twenty-nine; the whole in circumference is one hundred, thirty-nine miles.

The Air.
(3) For air, it is seated in a temperate Climate, both sweet, pleasant, and
wholesome; and for soil (says John of Sarisbury) is exceeding fertile and
plentiful, In his Polcraticon.
yea, and that with variety.

North-Wilt-shire.
(4) The Northern part, which they call North-Wilt-shire, rises up into
delectable hills, attired with large woods, and watered with clear Rivers,
whereof Isis is one, which soon becomes the most famous in the Land. The
South part is more even, yielding abundantly grass and corn, and is made the
more fruitful by the Rivers Wily, Adder, and Avon. The midst of this County is
most plain, Salesburie Plains.
and thereby is known and commonly called Salesbury-Plaines; and lie so level
indeed, that it does limit the Horizon: for hardly can a man see from the one
side to the other. These Plains grase an infinite number of sheep, whose
fleeces and flesh bring in an yearly revenew to their owners.

The ancient people.
(5) Anciently this County was possessed by the Belgae, who are seated by
Ptolemy in Hamp-shire, Somersetshire, and in this Tract; and they (as it
seems by Caesar) were of the Belgae in Gaul. These (as some hold) were
subdued by Vespasian, Vespasian Lieutenant under Claudius.
Lieutenant of the second Legion under Claudius, when the foundations of his
future greatness were in these parts first laid by his many victories over the
Britains. And herein surely the Romans seated; for besides Yanesburie Trench,
Yanesbury Trench.
by tradition held to be his, in many other Forts in this Shire the Tract of
their footing has been left, and the stamped Coins of their Emperors found,
an apparent testimony of their abode.

West Saxons poss^ssors of this Shir^.
(6) After them the West Saxons made it a part of their Kingdom, whose border
was Avon, as witnesses Athelward, though the Mercians many times encroched
upon them, whereby many great battles, as Malmsbury tells us, betwixt them were
fought, when in the young years of their Heptarchie each sought to enlarge
his, by the lessening of the next: but grown unto more ripeness, they
assigned their limits by a great and long ditch crossing through the midst of
these Plains, which for the wonder thereof is supposed by the vulgar to be the
work of the Devil, and is called of all, Wansdike, Wansdike.
undoubtedly of Woden, the Saxons Ancestor and great reputed God, where a
little village yet stands, and retains to name Wodens-burg. Wodensburg.
King Ceaulin.
At this place, in Anno 590. Ceaulin the West Saxon, received such a foil of
the Britains, and his Countrymen, that he was forced to forsake his Kingdom,
and to end his days in exile, becoming a pitiful spectacle even unto his
enemies. And in this place Ina the West Saxon joined Battle with Ceolred the
Mercia^, King Ina.
whence both of them departed with equal loss. The like was at Bradford by
Kenilwach and Cuthred; at Wilton, betwixt Egbert and Beornwolfe; King Elfred.
at Edindon, where K. Elfred was vanquisher of the Danes; and at Wilton, where
the Danes won the day against him. With as bloody sucesse, though not
happening by sword, was the issue of the Synod assembled at Calne a small Town
in this County, Calne. A Synod about the marriages of the Clergy.
in the year of Christ Jesus 977. where being hotly debating for the single
life, and against the marriages of the Clergy, what wanted by the Word to
prove their divorce, was supplied by a Stratagem, A pitiful mishap.
and that very bloody; for suddenly the main timber brake, and down fell the
floor with the Nobles and Prelates, the Gentlemen and Commons, whereby a great
number were hurt, and many more slain; Dunstan President
only Dunstan the President and mouth for the Monks, escaped untouched, the
Joist whereon his chair stood remaining most firm: which confirmed the
sentence of their separations, whom God had conjoined, and became the fall and
snare of much incontinencie in both sexes.

(7) The chiefest City of this Shire is Salesbury, Salesburie the chief Town.
removed from a higher, but a far more convenient place; whose want of water
was not so great in the mother, as is supplied and replenished in the daughter,
every street almost having a River running through her midst; and for
sumptuous and delicate buildings, is inferior to none. The Cathedral, The
Cathedral Church.
a most rich magnificent Church, was begun by Richard Poor, Bishop, and with
forty years, continuance was raised to her perfect beauty: wherein are as
many windows as there are days in the year, as many cast pillars of marble
as there are hours in the year, and as many gates for entrance as there are
months in the year. Neither does this City retain true honor to her self,
but imparteth hers, and receives honor from others who are entitled Earls
of Salesbury, whereof eight noble Families have been dignified since the
Normans Conquest, and now is enjoyed by that most wise and loyal Counselor
Robert Cecill, The Earl of Salesburie.
Lord high Treasurer of England, and the worthy Patron of the place whereof my
self am a member. This Cities situation is in the degree of Latitude 51.10.
minntes, and from the first West point observed by Mercator, 18. degrees and
31. minutes of Longitude.

(8) Over this, old Salesbury shows it self, Old Salesbury Ann. 553. Ann.
1003.
where Kenrik overcame the Britains, and where Canutus the Dane did great
dammge by fire. This formerly had been the seat of the Romans: as likewise was
Lecham, Lecham.
as by their Coins dug up is apparent: so were Brokenbridge and Cosham,
Brokenbridge. Cosham.
the Courts of the Saxon Kings. But Fortune long since has turned her face
from all these, as lately she did from many ancient and religious foundations
planted in this Province, whereof Malmesbury was the most famous. I will not
with Monmouth avouch the foundation thereof unto Mulmutius, Maidulph a learned
man.
but by true records from Maidulph a Scot, a man of great learning, that
therein built a Cell, and led an Hermits life, whereof Beda calls it the
City of Maidulph, and we by contraction, Malmsbury. Adelme his disciple and
successor, Adelme.
built here a fair Monastery, which Athelstan the Monarch richly endowed, and
left his body after death there to rest. Neither has any graced this more then
William her Monk, William of Malmesburie.
in recording to posterities the Chronicles of our Land, concerning both the
Church and Commonweal, wherein himself and wrote those Histories.

(9) Ambresbury for repute did second this, Ambresburie.
built by Alfritha, King Edgar his wife, to expiate the sin of murder which
she committed upon young Edward her son in Law, that hers might be King. In
this place Queen Eleanor, Qu. Eleanor.
widow to King Henry the third, renounced all royal pomp, and devoted her
self unto God in the habit of a Nun. Other places erected for piety, Places
of Religion.
were at Salesburie, Lacock, Stanlege, Wilton, Ivichurch, Farnleg, Bradstocke,
Briopune, and Bromhore. These grafts grown to full greatness, were cut down
by the Pruner, lest the Cankers thereof should infect the whole body (as by
them was alleged) and their Revenewes bestowed upon far better uses, Castles.
1. Malmesbury. 2. Castle-combe. 3. Lacock. 4. The devizes. 5. Lurgishall. 6.
Wardar cast. 7. Salesburie. 8. Marlingsborow.

both for the bringing up of youth, and the maintenance of estate.

(10) With eight strong Castles this County has been guarded; in nineteen
Market-Townes her Commodities are traded: into twenty-nine Hundreds for
business is divided, and in them are seated three hundred and four
Parish-Churches.

map of Wiltshire WILSHIRE


HVNDREDS in Wilt-shire.
1. HIghworth. 2. Malmsbury. 3. Kingsbridge. 4. Damerham north. 5 Chippenham.
6. Pottern. 7. Calne. 8. Sel^ley. 9. Ramsbury. 10 Kinwarston. 11. Elstube. 12.
Swanborne. 13. Melkesham. 14. Bradford. 15. Whorwelsdowne 16. Westbury. 17.
Warmister. 18. Haresbury. 19. Branche. 20. Amesbury. 21. Vnderditch. 22.
Alderburie. 23. Frustfeild. 24. Downton. 25. Cawden. 26. Da^worth. 27. Dametham
south. 28. Mere. 29. Chalk.
A
Abbotston, Frus. Ablington, Ame. Abury, Se^k. Allcannynge, swan. Aldburne
^ha^e, Ram. Alderburye, Ald. Alderborne cha^e, selk. Alderston, Frust.
Alderton, Chip. Allington, Pot. Allyngton, Ames. Alton, Ames. Alton barnes,
swan. Alverston, Chalk. Allworth, Brad. AMBERSBURY, Am^s. Amesbury little,
ames. S. Anns hill, Call. Ansley Dau. Ashlay Malm. Ashlington, swan. Ashton
gifford, Hare. Ashton keynes, High. Ashton west, Whor. Steple Ashton, Whor.
Aston, Elst. Aston, Mal. Atford, Chip. AUBURNE, Ram. Avon, Dam. Avon flu.
Axford.
B
Baberstoke, Caw. Badbury hill, Ram. Badhampton, Bran. Badhampton, Hare. Bagdon
hill, Pot. Bapton, War. Barbury hill selk. Barforde, Caw. Barwicke basset, Call.
Baycliffe Hare. Baydon, Ram. Baynton Whor. Beach. Ames. Beckhampton, selk. The
Beacon hill Dam. Bedborough, Pot. Bedwin great, Kin. Bedwin little, Kin.
Bemerton, Bran. Bemmerton, Vnd. Benecaz, Melk. Berwick S. James, Bran. Berwick
S. Leonards, Dau. Berwick S. John's, Chalk. Birtford, Caw Bishopstrove, War.
Birchamstock, swan. Black heath, Blan. Blunsdon broad, High. Blackmore forest.
Blunsdon S. Andrews, High. Boreham, War. Borton, Pot. Boscombe, ames. Botnam,
Down. Bowdon park, Chip. Box, Chip. Boyton, Hare. Bremble, Chip. Bradfeild,
Mal. BRADFORD, Brad. Bradley North, Whor. Malden Bradley, Mer. Bradon forest,
high. Bratton, West. Brembleham, Mal. Brenkworth, Mal. Brigmilston, ames.
Brixton deverell, hare. Brokenborowe, Mal. Brook, West. Broughton, Brad.
Brumhall, Swan. Burkington, Mel. Buckland, Call. Buckminster, ames. Bulford,
ames. Bupton, Pot. Burbiche, Kin. Burcombe South, Caw. Burcombe North, Bran.
Burchalke, Caw. Burdrop, Kin. Burg^t damarum, Caw. Burtford, ald. Burthall,
Chal. Burton hill, Mal. Bury Blunsdon, high. Bushopston, Ram. Bushton, Elst.
Buttermere, Kin. Bydston, Chip. Bynol, Kin. Byshopston, Down.
C
Cadnam house, Dam. CALNE, call. Calston, call. Calwayes houses, Dam. Cannings
bishops, Pot. Castle Eaton, high. CASTLECOMBE, Chapter Catcombe, selk. Chaddenton,
Kin. Chaldfeild, brad. Broad Chalk, chalk. Bur-Chalke, chalk. Chalk, chalk.
Chapmanslade, West. The Chapel of Plaster, chip. Charlton, swan. Charleton,
Down. Charlton, Mal. Charleton, Dau. Charnhamstreet, Kin. Chawdenwich, Mer.
Chekesgrove, Dau Chelterington, ames. Chelsworth, high. Cherrington, swan.
Cherroll, call. Cheselbury, Elst. Cheverell little, swan. Cheverell great, swan.
Chicklat, Dau. Chickletridge, Dau. Chilhampton, Bran. Chilmarke, Dau.
Chilternes, hare. Chilton folliot, Kin. CHIPNAM, chip. Chiselton, Kin.
Chittwaye, Pot. Choldrington, ames. Cholson, ames. Christ malford, Dam. Chut,
Kin. Chut forest, Kin. Clack, Dam. Claringdon park, Ald. Clatford, Selk. Clay
hill, War. The Clear, Brad. Cleve, Pot. Cleverton, Mal. Cleeve pepper, Kin.
Coat, Pot. Codfords, hare. Collerne Chip. Collingborne, Kin. Collingborn
dukes, elst. Comb basset, Caw. Comerwell, Brad. Compton, ames. Compton basset,
call. Compton chamberlain, D. south Conocke, swan. Corlington, hare. Corston,
Mal. Cosley little, War. Cosley great, War. Cossam, Chip. Coulston, Whor.
Cowsfeild, Frust. CREKELADE, high. Crokwood, Pot. Croston, Kin. Crudwell, Mal.
Compton, caw.
D
Leigh Dallamore, chip. Damerham, Dam. S. Dantsey Mal. West Deane, Ald. Deven,
Bran. Deverell kingstone, Dam S. Deverell langbridge, Dam. S. Munkston Deverell
Dam. Hill Deverell, hare. Brixton Deverell hare. DEVIZES, swan. Dichbridge,
chip. Diddingham, ames. Didmeton, chip. Dilton, War. Ditton Dau. Over Donet,
chalk. Nether Donet, chalk. Downton east, Down. Downton church, Down. Dracot,
swan. Draycott cerne, Mal. Great Drenford, Vnd. Little Drenford, Vnd. Dricote,
Ram. Duncton, Down. Dunhed, Dau. Durnford, ames. Durrington, ames.
E
East Everley Elst. Eastmanstret, call. Easton, Kin. Easton, Pot. Eastongrey,
chip. Eastrop, high. Ebbesborne wake, chalk. Echilhamton, swan. Eddington,
Whor. Elcombe, Kin. Elston, bran. Enforde, elst. Estcot, high. Estcot, swan.
East Everley, Elst. Estridge, Ram. West Everley, Elst. Everley warren, of
hares, Elst. Evilston, Bran.
F
Fallersdon, Down. Mouckton Farleigh, Brad. Farley, Ald. Farley hill, ames.
Fastbury, Kin. Faston, Kin. Fifeild, Elst. Fighilton, ames. Fitherton, Warm.
Fisherton, Bran. Fittleton, Elst. Flamston Down. Flittenberston, Down. Ford,
Kin. Fovant, caw. Foxley, Mal. Fresden, high. Froxfeild, Kin. Funtell gifford
Dau. Funtill bishops, Mer. Fyfeild, selk.
G
Garsdon, Mal. Grafton west Kin. Grafton east, Kin. The Green, swan. Greenham,
Kin. Grinsteed west, Ald. Grinsteed east, Ald. Grittleton, Dam. Groveley wood,
Dau. Grundwell, high. Gumbledon, Ald.
H
Haiston, Dau. Ham, Elst. Ham, Kin. Hampton nether, Caw. Hampton turvyle, Hi.
Hamston, high. Langford Hanging, Bran. Hankerton, Mal. Hankeridge, West.
Hannington, high. Haradon hill, ames. Harding, Kin. Haresbury, hare. Harnam
east, caw. Harnam west, caw. Hartham, chip. Hatch, Dau. Haselbury, chip. Nether
Haven, Elst. Up Haven, swan. Haxton, Elst. Heddington, call. Heldropp, Ram.
Helmerton, Kin. Hewishe, swan. Heighwaye, Pot. HIGHWORTH, H. Hilperton, Mel.
Hinton, Mer. Hinshe, swan. Hinton broad, selk. Hinton hatch, ames. Hinton
Oades, ames. Hinton pipard, ames. Holt, Brad. Horningsham, hare. Horton, Pot.
Houlston, Elst. Hulcott swan. Hullavington, Mal. Hunnington, caw. Hynton, Ram.
I
Idford, Ald. Idmerston, Ald. Idover bridge, Mal. Iford, Brad. Iford, Elst.
Imbar, hare. Ingesham, high. Isey, high. Ivichurch, Ald.
K
Kemble, Mal. Kennet flu. Kennet west, selk. Kennet east, selk. Kevyll, Whor.
Keaton Keynell, chip. West Keynton, chip. Keyton S. Michaels, Dam. Kings
manner, ald. Kingswood, chip. Kington, Down. Kingtons ash, caw. Knahill
Bishop^, Mer. Knahill east, Mer. Knahill west, Mer. Knuk, hare.
L
Lacock, chip. Lake, Vnd. Langley burrell, chip. Langford little, Bran. Steple
Langford, Bran. Langford, Fru. Latton, high. Laverstoke, ald. MARKET LAVINGTON,
swan. Lavington Bishop, Pot. Lea, Mal. Lea, high. Lekham, chip. Liddiard
treygove, Kin. Liddiard North, high. Lighe, Brad. Lighe, West. Linecoton, Brad.
Littlecote, Ram. Littleton, Whor. Littleton, swan. Littleton drew, chip.
Lockering, selk. Longford, sal. Long leat, bare. Longnewton, Mal. Luckington,
chip. Luddington, Kin. Ludwell, chalk. Lurgeshall, ames. Lushall, high. Lycham,
Kin. Lynt, high.
M
Maddenton, Bran. MALMESBURY, Malm. Sutton Manfeild, caw. Mannyngford, swan.
Mannyngford Abbots, swan. Mannyngford crucis, swan. MARLINGSBOROE, selk. The
Ma^sh, West. Marston south, high. Marten, Dam. south. Martenfall hill. swan. S.
Martin, caw. Marton, selk. Martyn, Kin. Maston, Pot. Melkesam, Melk. Merden,
swan. MERE, Mer. Merston measey, high. Middenhall, selk. Milborne, Mal.
Milsham, Brad. Milston, ames. Milton, Kin. Mounton, Brad. Munckton, call.
Deverell Munckton, Dam. S. Mylford, Vnd. Myntye, Mal.
N
Nettleton, Dam. Newton south, Bran. Newton Toney, ames. Long Newton, Mal.
Newenton, swan. Normanton, ames. Norridge, War. Norryngton, chalk. Norton,
hare. Norton, Mal. Norton bovant, War. Nuneaton high. Nunton, Down. Nusteed,
Pot.
O
Odstoke, caw. Ogborne S. George, selk. Ogborne S. Andrew, selk. Oke^^y, Mal.
Oldbury hill, selk. Orcheston S. George, hare. Orstons S. Mary's, Bran.
Overton, Kin. Overton east, Elst. Overton west, selk.
P
The little Park, Kin. Patney stands in Canning Hund. Penligh, West.
Pertwood, War. Pewsey, Kin. Pewsham forest, chip. Pinnells, Pot. Pitton, ald.
Platford, ald. Preshut, selk. Poole canes, Mal. Porton, ald. Poternewood, Pot.
Pottern Pot. Poulshot, Melk. Powlton, high. Putton, high.
Q
Queens lodge, ald. Quaere, caw.
R
Ramsbury, Ram. The Rey flu. Rodborne, high. Rodborne, Mal. Rokeley, selk.
Rowdon mounten, chi. Rowden, swan. Rowley, Brad. Ruchesen. ames. Rundwaye, Pot.
Rustis^ll, swan.
S
Salesbury Plain, Bran. sal. SALESBURY. Old Salisburie, ald. Salthorp, Kin.
Savernake forest, selk. Sedghyll. Dau. Seen, Melk. Segarye, Mal. Semble,
chalk. Seven hampton, high. Sevington, Whor. Shalborne, Kin. Sharnecote, high.
Sharston, chip. Shawe, Mel. Sheperidge little, ames. Sheperidge great, ames.
Sherington, hare. Sherington, Bran. Sherston pinckney, chip. Sheston great,
chip. Sherstones, chip. Shrawton, Bran. Upton Skidmore, War. Slangtenford,
chip. Smalebrook, War. Spy, Mel. Somerford little, Mal. Somerford great, Mal.
Somerford keynes, H. S^pworth, chip. Southweeke, Whor. Stanley nethermore,
chip. Stanton, Melk. Stanton Quinton, Mal. Stapleford, Bran. Staunton barnard,
swan. Staunton, high. Staverton, Mel. Stock, call. Stocktod. Elst. Stoell,
Elst. Stoke Kin. Stoke, Whor. Stoke, Brad. Stoke carle M^l. Stoke vereme,
chalk. Stoketon, War. Stonhenge, Vnd. Stoneley, Frus. Studley. call. Stratford
common, Vnd. Stratford dean, Vnd. Strattong S. Margarets, Hi. Streat, swan.
Fenny Stretford, Down. Stutton, M^re. Sutton benger, Mal. Sutton little, War.
Sutton great, War. Swallow cliff, Dau. Swindon, Kin.
T
Nether Tesunt, Dau. Over Tesunt. Dau. Tesunt great, War. Tetherton lucas,
chip. Tidworth north, ames. Tilbury, Dau. Tinhead, Whor. Titcombe, Kin.
Thamesis flu. Thetherington, har. Tokenham, Kin. Tollard Royal, chal. Trowle,
Brad. TRUBRIDGE, Mel. North Tudworth, Elst. Tylshead, Bran.
V
Vasterne, Kin. Uicot, Kin. Ug^ord, caw. Upton lovell, hare. Urchef^nt, swan.
W
Wanborowe, Kin. Warder castle, Dau. VVarmister, War. Week, Mel. Week,
Down. Week Pot. VVeekley, Bran. VVelton, Caw. WESBURY, West. VVestropp, high.
VVestwood, Elst. VVestwood, Brad. Westwel^owe, ames. VVexcombe, Kin. VVhaddon,
ald. VVhaddon. Melk. Whelpley Frus. Whethampton swan. VVhich^ury, Caw.
VVhitchurch, ald. VVhitchliffe, hare. VVhitteley Mel. VVhitteley house.
VVhittenditch, Ram. Widhill, high. VVilcot, swan. VVilleybourne flu. VVilsford,
swan. VVilsford. Vnd. Wilton, Bran. Wilton, Kin. VVinckfeild, Brad. VVinsley,
Brad. Winterbourne mount^n, selk. Winterborn Stoks, B. Winterborn basset, S.
Winterborn gunner, ald. Winterborn Larles, ald. Winterflow East, ames.
VVimerflow West, Winterflow daunt^sey, ald. Winton little, Elst. Wishford
great, Bran. VVishford, Bran. VVivesford, Dau. Wooddenton, swan. Woodborowe
swan. Woodford little, Vnd. Woodford great, Vnd. VVoodland Mer. VVoodland Ram.
VVoodshawe, Kin. VVoore, swan. VVorton, Pot. Wotton rivers Kin. WOTTON BASSET,
Kin. South Wraxall, Brad. North Wraxall, Chip. Wroughton, Kin. Wroughton, Elst.
Wulfall, Kin. Wyly, War. Wyly flu.
Y
Yatesbury, Call.
Z
Zeales, Mer.
BARKE-SHIRE, by the English Saxons written Berrocscyre, The ancient name.
whether of the Boxwoods there sited, according to the censure of Asserius
Menevensis, or from a naked and bearelesse Oke-tree, whereunto the people
usually resorted in troublesome times, to confer for the State, I determine
not: only the County a long time has been so called, The bounds.
and bounded with other in manner as follows: The North-part is parted by
Thamisis from Buckingham and Oxford shires; the South near Kennet does tract
upon Hampshire; the East is confined with the County of Surrey; and the West
with Wiltshire and Gloucestershire is held in.

(2) The form of this Shire does somewhat resemble a Sandall for a man's foot,
The form.
lying longwise from East to West, in which part she is broadest, the middle
most narrow, and then spreading wider like to the heel: though for her rich
endowments and stately magnificence it may well be accounted the heart of the
whole.

(3) The length thereof from Inglesham in the West, The measure.
to old Windsor in the East, extends unto forty miles; from Inkpen to
Wightham, the broadest part from South to North are twenty four; the whole in
circumference, about one hundred and twenty.

(4) The Air is temperate, The Air.
sweet, and delightful, and prospect for pleasure inferior to none; the Soil
is plenteous of Corn, especially in the Vale of White-horse, that yields
yearly an admirable increase. In a word, for Corn and Cattle, Waters and
Woods, of profit and pleasure, it gives place unto none.

(5) Her ancient Inhabitants, The ancient Inhabitants.
by Ptolemy and Caesar, were the Attrebatii, and them of those that descended
from Gallia, among whom Comius (conquered by the Dictator) was of good respect,
and could do much with the Britains, who (as Frontinus reports) used this
stratagem, though it proved nothing at last: he flying before Caesar to recover
aid of these Attrebatians, Frontinus.
light bedded upon a shelfe in the Sea, whereupon hoisting his sails as before
a forewinde, gave show to his pursuer that they were in swift flight; so that
hopeless to hayle them, he gave over the chase: yet no sooner had Caesar made
over among them, Caes. Commens. lib. 5.
but that some of these people, by name the The Inhabitants of Braye Hundred in
the East of this Shire.
Bibroces, yielded him subjection, which proved the ruin of all former
liberty. But when the Romans had rent their own Empire, and retired their
Legion into a narrower circuit, the Saxons set foot where their forces had
been, and made this County a parcel of their Western Kingdom.

An. D. 866.
The Danes then setting their desire upon spoils, from their roaving Pinaces
pierced into these parts, and at Redding fortified themselves betwixt the
rivers Kennet and Thamisis, Asserius. Redding the chief Town.
whither after their great overthrow received at Inglefeild by the hand of King
Ethelwolfe, they retired for their further safety.

Henry the first built Redding.
(6) This Town King Henry the first most stately beautified with a rich
Monastery and strong Castle, where, in the Collegiate Church of the Abbey,
himself and Queen (who lay both veiled and crowned) with their daughter Maud
the Empress, called the Lady of England, were interred, as the private
History of the place avoucheth, though others bestow the bodies of these two
Queens elsewhere. The Castle King Henry the second razed to the ground, Henry
the second razed Redding.
because it was the refuge for the followers of King Stephen. The Graduation.
From whence the North Pole is raised in Latitude 51. degrees and 40. minutes,
and in Longitude from the first VVest-point observed by Mercator 19. degrees
and 35. minutes.

Wallingford.
(7) A Castle and Town of greater strength and antiquity was Wallingford, by
Antonine and Ptolemie called Gallena, the chiefest City of the Attrebatians,
whose large circuit, and strong fortifications, show plainly, that it was a
place of the Romans abode, and since in a conceived safety has made many
very bold, especially when the sparks of Englands civil dissentions were
forced to flame in case of the Crown, betwixt Maud the Empress and King
Stephen, whither her self and associates resorted as their surest defense.

(8) But of far greater magnificence and state is the Castle of Windsor,
Windsor.
a most Princely Palace, and Mansion of his Majesty. I will not with Ieffrey
affirm it to be built by King Arthur, but with better authority say, William
the Conqueror comp^^nded for Windsor.
it was so thirsted after by the Conqueror, that by a composition with the
Abbot of Westminster, whose then it was, he made it to be the Kings Possession,
as a place besides the pleasures, very commodious to entertain the King. An. D.
1312.
In this Castle that victorious Prince K. Edward the third was born; and herein
after he had subdued the French and Scots, held he at one and the same time, as
his Prisoners, John King of France, and David K. of Scotland. Neither was it
ever graced with greater Majesty, then by the institution of the most
honorable Order of the Garter, The Institution of the most honorable Order of
the Garter.
a signal Ornament of Martial Prowess: the invention thereof some ascribe to
be from a Garter falling from his Queen, or rather from loan Countess of
Salisbury, a Lady of an incomparable beauty, as she danced before him, whereat
the bystanders smiling, he gave the impresse to check all evil conceits, and
in golden Letters imbellished the Garter with this French Poesy, HON I SOIT
QVI MALY PENSE. And yet that worthy Clarenceaux alleging the book of the
first institution, finds the invention to be more ancient, as when King Richard
the first warred against the Turks, Saracens, Cypres, and Acon, he girt the
legs of certain choice Knights with a tache of leather, which promised a
future glory to the wearers. The most Princely Chapel thereof is graced with
the bodies of those two great Kings, Henry the sixth. Edward the Fourth.
Henry the sixth, and Edward the fourth, whom the whole Kingdom was too little
to contain, the one of Lancaster, the other of York, where they rest now
united in one mould, with a branch of both those Houses, even King Henry the
Eight who there lies also interred, Hen. the Eight.
and rests in the Lord.

(9) Other places of note in this Shire are Sinodum in the North, Sinodum.
and Watham in the East, Watham.
both of them places of the Romans residence, as by their Monyes there
oftentimes found appears. Sunning.
Neither was Sunning the least in this Tract, that had been the Seat of eight
Bishops before the Sea was translated thence unto Shirburne, Shirburne. Wantage.
or that to Salisbury. Wantage also is not wanting of honor, in bringing to
life that learned and most valiant King Ealfred, the scourge of the Danes,
Finchamsted.
and great Monarch of the English. And Finchhamsted for wonder inferior to
none, where (as our Writers do witness) that in the year a thousand one
hundred, John St^w.
a Well boiled up with streams of blood, and fifteen days together
continued that spring, whose waters made red all others where they came, to the
great amazement of the beholders.

(10) The riches and sweet seats that this County affords, The commodities
of this Shire.
made many devout persons to show their devotions unto true piety, in erecting
places for Gods divine service, and their exemptions from all worldly
business: such were Abington, Redding, Bisham, Bromehall, Henley, Hamme, and
Wallingford, The devotions of the people.
whose Votaries abusing the intents of their Fou^ders, overthrew both their own
Orders and places of professions; all which were dissolved by Act of
Parliament, and given the King to dispose at his will.

This Shires division is into twenty Hundreds, The division of this Sh^re.
and has been strengthened with six strong Castles, is yet graced with three
of his Majesty's most Princely Houses, and traded with twelve Market Towns, and
is replenished with one hundred and forty Parish-Churches, all whose names are
further inserted in the Table following.

map of Berkshire BARKSHIRE DESCRIBED


HVNDREDS In BARKE-SHIRE.
1. HOrmer. 2. Ganfeild. 3. Farrington. 4. Shrivenham. 5. Wanting. 6. Compton.
7. Morton. 8. Lamborne. 9. Fairecrosse. 10. Theale. 11. Reading. 12. Charleton.
13. Sonnynge. 14. Wargrove. 15. Barnerlhe. 16. Braye. 17. Ripplemore. 18.
Cookham. 19. Oak. 20. Kentbury.
A
ABINGTON, Hor. Aldermerston, Theale. Aldworth, Count. Apleford, Oak. Apleton,
Oak. Arberfeild, Son. Ardington, Want. Ashamsteed, Mort. Ashbury, Shri. Aston
upthorpe, Mor. Aston tirrold, Mort. Avington, Kent.
B
Bagnor, Fair. Balking, Shriu. Barkham, Charl. Barrington, Far. Barton, Hor.
Basselden, Mort. Bayworth, Hor. Benham vale, Kent. Berneham, Read.
Blesselslighe, Hor. Biddon, Fair. Billingesbere, War. Bisham, Ber. Blubery,
Read. Borton, Shriu. Botley, Hor. Bourshill, Hor. Boxford, Fair. Bradfeild,
Theale. Braye, Braye. Bright walton, Fair. Brightwell, Mort. Brimpton, Fair.
Buckland Began. Bucklebury, Read. Burfield, Theale. Burwesket, Shriu. Bynfeild,
Cook.
C
Calcot, Kent. Catmer, Kent. Chaddleworth, Kent. Chalie, Hor. Chalow west,
Kent. Charlton, Want. Charney, Began. Chaulsey, Mort. Cheveley, Fair. Childry,
Want. Chilton, Count. Chilswell, Hor. Cholsey, Read. Churchspene, Read.
Cleworth, Rip. Clopcott, Mort. Colleshull, Shriu. Cookeha^, Cook. Compton,
Count. Compton, Shriu. Cothy Flu. Coxwell little, Far. Coxwell great, Far.
Cuckhamsley hill, Count. Cumner, Hor.
D
Demyston Castle, Fair. Denchworth south, Want. Donnington, Fair. Draiton,
Oak. Draycott more, Oak. Dudcot, Mort.
E
Early, Charl. Easthamsted, Rip. Eaton, Oak. Edington, Kent. Enborne, Kent.
F
Falley, Kent. Falowe, Shriu. FARRINGDON, Far. Farrington little, Far.
Farnebrough, Count. Fernisham, Shriu. Frilford, Oak. Frilsham, Fair. Fyfeild,
Oak. Fynchamsted, Char.
G
Garford, Oak. Garfton east, Lam. Ginge east, Want. Goosey, Oak. Grampond,
Hor. Greenham, Fair. Grove, Want.
H
Hagborne east, Mort. Hagborne west, Mort. Hampsted morryes, Fair. Lech
Hampsted, Fair. Hams west, Want. Hams east, Want. Hamsted marshall, Kent.
Hanney east, Oak. Hardwell, Shriu. Hartly Donnex, Theale. Harwell, Mort.
Hatford, Began. Hendred east, Read. Hendred west, Want. Hendred east, Want.
Hillend, Hor. Hincksey Laurence, Hor. Hincksey south, Hor. Hinton, Began. Hobcot,
Kent. HVNGERFORD, Kent. Hurley, Ber. Hurst, Son.
I
Ilsley west, Count. ILSLEYEAST, Count. Inglefeild, Theale. Inglisham, Fa.
Inkpen, Kent. S. John's bridge, Far. Isbury, Lam.
K
Kinburye, Kent. Kingstone bagpuze, Oak. Kingstone on lile, Shriu. Kennet Flu.
Kennington, Hor. Knight-bridge, Fair.
L
LAMBORNE, Lam. Langford, Far. Letcombe kings, Kent. Letcombe basset, Kent.
Leverton, Kent. Littleworth, Shriu. Locking west, Want. Locking east, Want.
Loddon bridge, Son. Loddon Flu. Longcot, Shriu. Longworth, Began. Lyford, Oak.
M
MADENHEAD, Bray. Marcham, Oak. Markney, Mort. Martlefton, Fair. Mershall,
Kent. Midgham, Fair. Mifton, Oak. Mortimer wookfeild, Theale. Morton north,
Mort. Morton south, Mort. Moulsforb, Mort.
N
NEWBERY, Fair. New bridge, Oak. Norcott, Hor.
O
Oak Flu. OKINGHAM, Son. Owre Chapel, Fair.
P
Padworth, Theale. Pangborne, Read. Peysmore, Fair. Purley, Theale. Pusay, Began.
R
Radcott bridge, Farring. Radley, Hor. READING, Read. Remneham, Bern. Ruscombe,
Son.
S
Sandensoe, Kent. Sandford, Hor. Sandhurst, Son. Satwell, Mort. Shallington,
Began. Shattesbrooke, Ber. Shawborne, Kent. Shawe, Fair. Shelford great, Lamb.
Shelford little, Kent. Shellingford, Began. Shilton, Far. Shinfeild, Charl.
Shipton, Hor. Shrivenham, Shriu. Silham, Theale. Slancler, Shriu. Sonnyngwell,
Hor. Spersholt, Want. Spene, Fair. Spinhamland, Fair. Stanford, Began. Stanford
dingbie, Fair. Stedes, Theale. Steventon, Oak. Stretley, Mort. Stronde, Hor.
Sulhamsted bannester, Theale. Sulthamsted Abbots, R. Sunyng, Son. Sunninghall,
Cook. Sutham, Theale. Sutton courtney, Oak. Swallowfeild, Theale.
T
Thatcham, Read. Thele, Theale. Thorp, Hor. Trup, Shriu. Twyfort, War.
Tydmershe, Theale. Tylehurst, Read.
V
The Vale of Whitehorse, Shriu. Vffington, Shriu. Vpton, Mort. Vstone, Theale.
W
Wadley, Shriu. WALLINGFORD, Mor. Waltham Laurence, War. Whit Waltham, Ber.
WANTAGE, Want. Warfield, War. Wargrove, War. Watchfeild, Shriu. Wasinge, Fair.
Welford, Fair. Westbroke, Kent. Whetston, Tynes. Whisley in hurst, Charl.
Whitley, Hor. Whitley, Read. Whitehorse hill, Shriu. Wickham, Kent. WINDSOR,
Rip. Windsor park, Rip. Windsor forest, Rip. Old Windsore, Rip.
Winckfield, Rip. Winterborne, Fair. Witham, Hor. VVitley park, Charl. Witnham
little, Oak. VVitnham long, Oak. VVolston, Shriu. VVoodhay, Kent. VVoodspene,
Fair. Woolley, Kent. Woolhampton, Theale. Wotton, Hor. Wiversley in hurst, Son.
Y
Yattington, Fair.
MIDDLESEX, so called in regard of the situation, as seated betwixt the
West Saxons and East Angles was sometimes, together with Essex and
Hartfordshire, that part and portion which the East Saxons enjoyed for their
Kingdom: it lies bordered upon the North, with Hartfordshire; upon the West by
Colne, is severed from Buckingham; the South, by Thamesis, from Surrey and
Kent; and on the East from Essex, by the River Lea.

The length.
(2) The length thereof extened from Stratford in the East, to Morehall upon
C^lne in the West, is by measure nineteen English miles; and from Southmines
in the North, to his Majesty's Manor of Hampton Court in the South, are
little above sixteen miles, the whole circumference extending to ninety.

The form.
(3) In form it is almost square, for air passing temperate, for soil
abundantly fertile, and for pasturage and grain of all kinds, yielding the
best, so that the Wheat of this County has served a long time for the Manchet
to our Princes Table.

(4) It lies seated in a vale most wholesome and rich, having some hills also,
and them of good ascent from whose tops the prospect of y^ whole is seen like
unto Zoar in Egypt, Genesis 14.10.
or rather like a Paradise and Garae^ of God.

The ancient Inhabitants.
(5) The ancient Inhabitants known to Cae^ar, were the Trinobants, whom he
names to be the most puissant in the Land; whose chief City and State
yielding him subjection, Caesar's Com.
made the whole, with less loss to the Romans, to bear the yoke of their
own bondage; and to come in vndertermes of truce. But when their forces in
these parts were spent, and the Empire shaken by intestine wars, the Saxons
setting their eyes upon so fair a soil, made their footing as sure herein;
which lastly with Hartford and Essex, was the portion of the East Saxons
Kingdom.

Five princely houses in this Shire.
(6) Five princely houses, inheritable to the English crown, are seated in this
shire, which are Enfie^d, Hanworth, Whitehall, S. James, and Hampton Court a
city rather in show then the Palace of a Prince, and for stately Port and
gorgeous building, not inferior to any in Europe At Thistleworth once stood the
Palace of Richard K. of the ^^mans, E. of Cornwall, which the Lond^ners in a
tumultuous broyle, burned to the ground: many other stately houses of our
English N^b^tty Knights, and gentlemen, as also of ye worshipful citizens of
Lon^^ are in this shire so sumptuously built and pleasantly seated, as the like
in the like circuit are no where else to be found. Near unto Thamesis entrance
into this County, Beda hist Aug. lib. 8. cap. 2.
is kept the remembrance of Caesar's entrance over Th^mesis by the name of Coway
stakes, stuck fast in the bottom to impeach his designs; and further at
Stanes a Maire-stone once stood for a mark of Jurisdiction that London had so
far upon Thamesis.

LONDON.
(7) Which City is more ancient then any true record bears, fabuled from
Brute, Troyno^ant, from Lud, Ludstone: But by more credible writers, Tacitus,
Ptolemy, and Antonine, Londinium by Aminianus Mercellinus for her successiue
prosperity, The names of London.
Augusta, the greatest title that can be given to any: by Britains, Londayn,
by the Saxons, London Ceasder, by Strangers Londra, and by us London. This
City does show as the Cedars among other trees, being the seat of the British
Kings, the chamber of the English, the model of the land, and the mart of the
world: for thither are brought the silk of Asia, the spices from Africa, the
Balmes from Grecia, and the riches of both the Indies East and West: no City
standing so long in fame, nor any for divine and politic government may with
her be compared. Her walls were first set by great Constantine the first
Christian Emperor at the suit of his mother, Simon of Durham. An. 306. London
walled by Constantine the Great.
Q. Helen, reared with rough stone and British Brick, three English miles in
compass: through which are now made 7. most fair gates, besides 3. other
passages for entrance. Along the Thamesis, this wall at first ra^ged, and with
two gates opened, the one Doure-gate, now Dowgate, and the other Billinsgate, a
receptacle for ships. In the midst of this wall was set a mile-marke (as the
like was in Rome) from whence were measured their statio^s for carriage or
otherwise; the same as yet stands, and has been long known by the name of
London Stone. London-Stone a mile-marke. S. Peter's in Cornehill the Cathedral
Church. S. Paul.
Upon the East of this city, the Church of S. Peter's is thought to be the
cathedral of Restitutus, the Christian Bishops see, who lived in the reign of
Great Constantine; but since S. Paul's in the West part, from the Temple of
Diana, assamed that dignity, whose greatness does exceed any other at this day,
and spires so high that twice it has been consumed by lightning from Heaven.
The number of Churches in London.
Besides this cathedral, God is honored in one hundred twenty one Churches more
in this city: that is, ninety six within the walls; sixteen without, but within
the Liberties; and nine more in her Suburbs; and in Fitz-Stephens time,
thirteen Conuents of religious Orders. The Wards of London.
It is divided into 26. Wards, governed by so many grave Alderme^ a ^. Ma^or
and 2. Sherifs, the yearly choice whereof was granted them by Patent from K.
John; in whose time also a Bridge of Stone was made over Thames, London Bridge.
upon nineteen Arches, for length, breadth, beauty, and building, the like
again not found in the world.

(8) This London (as it were) disdaining bondage, has set her self on each
side, far without the walls, and has left her Westgate in the midst, from
whence with continual buildings still affecting greatness) she has continued
her streets unto a Kings Palace, and joined a second Westminster.
City to her self, famous for the Seat and Sepulcher of our Kings; and for
the Gates of Justice, that termely there are opened, only once a Bishops See,
Westminster a Bishops Sec.
whose Title died with the man. No walls are set about this City, and those of
London are left, to show rather what it was, then what it is: whose Citizens,
as the Lacedaemonians did, do impute their strength in their men, and not in
their walls, how strong soever. Or else for their multitude, cannot be
circulated, but (as another Jerusalem is inhabited without walls, Zach. 2.4.
as Zachary said. The wealth of this City (as Isai once spoke of Nilus) grows
from the Reuenews and harvest of her south-bounding Thames; Isay 23.3.
whose traffic for marcha^dizing is like that of ^yrus, whereof Ezechiel
speaks and stands in abundance of Silver, Ezekiel 27.12
Iron, The trade of London.
Tyn and Lead, etc. And from London her channel is nauigable, straightened along
with medowing borders, until she takes her full liberty in the Germane Seas.
Upon this Thamesis the Ships of Tharsis seem to rid^, The Thamesis.
and the Navy, that rightly is termed the Lady of the Sea, spreds her sail.
Whence twice with luckie success has been accomplished, the compassing of
the universal Globe. This River, Canutus laying siege against London, sought
by digging to divert, and before him the Danes had done great harms in the
City, yet was their State recovered by K. Elfred, and the River kept her old
course, notwithstanding that cost. London invaded.
In the times of the Normans, some civil broiles have bin attempted in this
City, as in the days of K. John, An. 1216. An. 1380.
whereinto his Barons entered, and the Tower yielded unto Lewis. And again, Wat
Tiler herein committed outrageous cruelties, but was worthily struck down by
the Mayor and slain in Smithfield. This Cities graduation for Latitude is the
degree 51 45. min. and in Longitude 20. degrees 39. minutes.

(9) In this County at B^rnet, Battles in Middlesex. The 14. of April, An 1471
and eleventh of ^d. 6.
upon Easter day, a bloody battle was fought, betwixt Henry 6. and Edward 4.
wherein were slain one Marquis, one Earl, three Lords, and with them ten
thousand Englishmen.

(10) The division of this Shire is into seven Hundreds, The Shires division.
wherein are seated two Cities, four Market Towns, and seventy three
Parish-Churches, besides them in London; where in the Church of Gray-Fryers,
now called Christ-Church, three Queens lie interred, which were, Margaret wife
to Edward 1. Isabel wife to Edward 2 Ioane Queen of Scot^, all buried at
Gray-Fryers.
Queen Margaret, the D. of Philip the hardy, King of France, second wife to
King Edward the first; the second was Queen Isabel, wife to King Edward the
second, and D. to Philip the fair King of France; and the third was Queen
Joan, their daughter, married to David King of Scotland.

map of Middlesex MIDLE-SEX described WITH THE MOST FAMOUS Cities of LONDON and
WESTMINSTER


HVNDREDS in MIDDLESEX.
1 Edmonton. 2 Gore. 3 Fynnesbury, and Wenlaxebarn. 4 Osulston. 5 Elthorne. 6
Istleworth. 7 Spelthorne.
A
Acton West, Fynnesbury. Acton East, Fynnesbury. Alperton, G^re. Ascott,
Elthorne. Ash^forde, Spelthorne. Astleham, Spelthorne.
B
Baber bridge, Spelthorne. Fryarne Barnet, Fynnesbury. Bedfonte West,
Spelthorne. Bedfonte East, Spelthorne. Bednall Green, Osulston. Belsyfe,
Fynnesbury. Bishops hall, Osulston. Blackwall, Osulston. Boston, Elthorne.
Braineforde little, Elthorne. BRAINEFORD West, Eltho. Breakspeares, Elthorne.
Brent Flu. Brentstore, Gore. Broken borowes, Elthorne. Bromesley, Osulst.
Brompton, Fynnesb. Browswell, Fynnesb. Burmfeild, Edmont. Burystreete, Edmont.
C
Canons, Gore. Canbury, Fynnesb. Chalcot, Fynnesb. Charlton, Spelthorn.
Chelsey, Fynnesb. Cheswicke, Fynnesb. Childs hill, Fynnesbury. Clapton,
Osulston. Clarkenwell, Osulst. Colham, Elthorne. Colne Flu. Cony hatch,
Fynnesb. Coppermill, Istleworth. Coptehall, Osulst. Cowley, Elthorne.
Craneford, Elthorne. Craneford bridge, Elthorne. Cruch end, Fynnesbury.
D
Daleston hill, Fynnesbury. Dalis, Gore. Daneershill, Edmont. Deane wood,
Fynnesb. Dogs Isle, Osulst. Dormans well, Elthorne. Dorsey sars, Edmont.
Drayton West, Elthorne. Driuershill, Gore. Ducoates, Edmont. Durance, Edmont.
Durhams, Edmont.
E
East end, Fynnesb. EDGWARE, Gore. Edmonton, Edmont. Edmondstreete, Edmont.
Elynge, Fynnesb. Enfeild, Edmont. Enfeild chase, Edmont. Eueney farm,
Spelthor.
F
Feltham, Spelthor. Feltham hill, Spelthor. Fincheley, Fynnesb. The Fold,
Edmont. Fryain Manner, Fynnesb. Fryth, Gore. Fulham, Fynnesbury.
G
Green hill, Gore. Greeneford, Elthor. Greenestret, Edmont. Gunnetsbury,
Fynnes. S. Gyles, Fynnesb.
H
Hackney, Osulst. Hadley, Edmont. Halwayes, Fynnesb. Hamersinyth, Finnesb.
Hampton, Spelthorn. Hampton Court, Spelthorn. Hampsteed, Fynnesb. Hamsworth,
Elthor. Hanford, Spelthor. Hanworth, Spelthorn. Hangerwood, Fynnesb. Hanwell,
Elthorn. Harefeild, Elthorn. Harleston green, Fynnesb. Harlington, Elthorn.
Harmondesworth, Elthor. Harrow hill, Gore. Heayes, Elthorn. Hellingdon little,
Elthor. Hendon, Gore. Hendon house, Gore. Heston, Istle. Highwood, Gore.
Highgate, Fynnesb. Hillingdon little, Elthor. Hillingdon great, Elthor.
Hockesdon, Osulst. Hollick, Fynnesb. Holly well street, Osulst. Hornesey,
Fynnesb. The Hospital, Fynnesb. Hunslow, Istle. Hyde Park, Fynnesb.
I
S. James, Fynnesb. Ickenham, Eltho^n. I Will of dogs, Osulst. Islington,
Fynnesb. Istleworth, Istle.
K
S. Katherins, Lon. Lib. Kensingeton, Fynnesb. Kenton, Gore. Kenton, Spelthor.
Kentishtowne, Fynnesb. Kickesend, Edmont. Kingsland, Osulst. Kingesbury, Gore.
Kingston wike, Spelt. Knightsbridge, Fynnesb. Kylborne, Fynnesb.
L
Lal^ham, Spelthorne. Littleton, Spelthorne. Lodge hill, Fynnesb. LONDON.
Ludgraues, Edmont. Lymehouse, Osulst.
M
M^rybone, Fynnesb. Mendon house, Gore. Merestrete, Osulst. Milhill, Gore.
Morehall, Elthorn. Morehatche, Edmont. Muckings, Edmont. Muswell hill, Fynnesb.
Mile end, Osulst. Myms south, Edmont.
N
Northhall Lodge, Elthorn. Nefedon, Fynnesb. Newhouse, Spelth. Newington Stoke,
Fynnesb. Newington, Fynnes. Newington green, Fynnesb. Norcote, E^thorne.
Northall, Elthorne. North end, Fynnesb. Norton folgate, Osu^st. Norwood,
Elthorne.
O
Oldeford, Osu^st. Osterley, Elthorne.
P
Padingwick, Fynnesb. Padington, Fynnesb. Pancras, Fynnesb. Parsons green,
Fynnesb. Perrinale, Elthorne. Pinnes, Edmont. Ponders end, Edmont. Popler,
Osulst. Potters bar, Edmont. Preston, Gore. Pynner, Gore.
R
Rateclyffe, Osulst. Rimslippe, Elthorn. Roxoey, Gore.
S
Safforne hill, Fynnesb. Sauthold, Elthorn. Shackerwell, Osulst. Shepperton,
Spelth. Shorditch, Osulst. Southmyns, Edmont. STANES, Spelth. Stanmore great,
Gore. Stanmore little, Gore. Stanner great, Gore. Stanschurch, Spelth.
Stanwell, Spelth. Stepney, Osulst. Strande, Elthor. Stratford bow, Osulst.
Sudbury, Gore. Sunbury, Spelthor. Swaleys, Elthorne. Syon, Elthorne. Sypson,
Elthorne.
T
Tottenham, Edmont. Tottenham street, Edmont. Tottenham high-crosse. Edmont.
Totten Court, Fynnesb. Tuddington, Spelth. Turnham green, Elthor. Twickenham,
Istle. Twickenham Park, Istle. Twyford East, Fynnes. Twyford West, Gore.
V
VXBRIDGE, Elthor. Vxenden, Gore.
W
Wadhad green, Fynnesb. Waltham cross, Edmont. Wapping, Osulst. Weald, Gore.
Wemley hill, Gore. Westborne, Fynnesb. WESTMINSTER. Westminster City.
Whetstone, Fynnesb. Wewrsley, Elthorn. Whitton, Istle. Whitwebb, Edmont.
Willesdon, Fynnesb. Winchmorhill, Edmont. Woodhall, Gore. Worton, Istle.
Wyerhill, Edmont.
The name of ESSEX.
ESSEX, by the Saxons written East-seaxa, and East-sexscife, by the Normans
Exsessa, and by the vulgar Essex; is a County large in compass, very
populous, and nothing inferior to the best of the Land.

The form of Essex.
(2) The form thereof is somewhat circular, excepting the East part, which
shooterh her self with many Promontories into the Sea; The length and breadth.
and from Horsey Island to Haidon in the West, (the broadest part of the shire)
are by measure forty miles, and the length from East-Ham upon Thamisis in the
South, to Surmere upon the River Stow in the North, are thirty miles; the
whole in circumference, one hundred forty six miles.

The borders of Essex.
(3) It lies bounded upon the North, with Suffolk and Cambridge-shires, upon
the West with Hertford and Middlesex, upon the South by Thamisis is parted from
Kent, and the East side thereof is altogether washed with the German Sea.

The Air.
(4) The air is temperate and pleasant, only toward the waters somewhat aguish,
the soil is rich and fruitful, The Soil.
though in some places sandy and barren: yet so that it never frustrates the
Husbandmans hopes, or fills not the hands of her Harvest-Labourers: but in some
part so fertile, that after three years glebe of Saffron, the land for 18.
more, will yield plenty of Barley, without either dung or other fatning earth.

The Inhabitants.
(5) Her ancient Inhabitants known to the Romans, were by Caesar called the
Trinobantes, of whom in the former Chapter we have spoken, Caesar. Commen. lib.
5.
and in our History shall speak more at large. But this name perishing with the
age of the Empire, the Saxons presently framed a new; and with Hertford and
Middlesex made it their East Saxons Kingdom, until that Egbert brought this
and the whole into an entire and absolute Monarchy: Annals of the English
Saxons.
the Danes after them laid so sore for this Province, that at Beamfleet and
Havenes (now Shobery) they fortified most strongly; and at Barklow, (besides
the hills mounted for their burials) the Danewort with her red berries, so
plentifully grow, that it is held and accounted to spring from the blood of the
Danes which in that place was spilt, and the herb as yet is called from them
the Danes-blood; neither yet were they quelled to furcease that quarrel;
Danes-blood.
but at Ashdown abode the Ironside in fight, wherein so much blood of the
English was spilt, that Canutus their King in remorse of conscience; built a
Church in the place, to pacify God for the sins of his people: The Normans.
But when the Normans had got the garland of the whole, many of their Nobles
there seated themselves, whose posterities since, both there and els-where, are
spread further abroad in the Realm.

The Commodities.
(6) The Commodities that this Shire yields, are many and great, as of woods,
corn, cattle, fish, forests and Saffron; which last grows with such gain
and increase upon her North parts, that from a split clove much like unto
Garlike, a white bluish flower shortly springs, Saffron in Essex.
from whence fillets of Saffron are gathered before the Sun, and dried, are
sold as spice with great gain. From the Islands Canvey, Mersey, Horsey,
Northly, Osey, Wallot and Foulnes, great store of fish and foul are daily
gotten: and so from their cattle have they continual increase, which men and
boys milk; as well the Ewe as the Kine; whereof they make great and thick
Cheese, sold abroad in the Land, and much thereof transported into other
Countries. Oysters.
Their Oysters which we call Walfleet, the best in esteem, and are thought
from Pliny to have been served in the Romans Kitchins. But lest we should
exceed measure in commending, or the people repose their trust in the soil;
behold what God can do, to frustrate both in a moment, and that by his meanest
creatures: for in our age and remembrance, the year of Christ 1581. an Army
of Mice so over-ranne the Marshes in Dengey Hundred, Mice devour some part of
Essex.
near unto South-minster in this County, that they shore the grass to the
very roots, John Stowe.
and so tainted the same with their venomous teeth, that a great Murraine fell
upon the cattle which grazed thereon, to the great loss of their owners.

(7) The chiefest City for account at this day in this Shire is Colchester,
Colchester the chief City.
built by Coilus the British Prince, one hundred twenty-foure years after the
birth of our Savior Christ (if he of Monmouth say true) wherein his son
Lucius, Helena, and Constantine, the first Christian King, Empress, and
Emperor in the world, were born: which made Necham for Constantine to sing as
he did. From Colchester there rose a star, Constantine borne at Colchester.

The rays whereof gave glorious light
Throughout the world in Climates far,
Great Constantine, Romes Emperor bright.
And the Romans to the great honor of Helena inscribed her, Pitssima
Venerabilis Augusta. But of these we shall be occasioned to speak more
hereafter. The fortification of it.
This City is situated upon the south of the river Coln, from whence it has
the name, and is walled about, raised upon a high trench of earth, though now
much decayed, having 6. Gates of entrance, and 3. posterns in the West wall,
besides 9. Watch-towers for defense, and contains in compass 1980. paces;
wherein stand 8. fair Churches, and two other without the walls, for Gods
divine service: S. Tenants and the Black Friars decayed in the suburbs; Mary
Magdalins, the Nunnery, S. John's, and the Crouched Friars, all suppressed:
within toward the East is mounted an old Castle, and elder ruins upon a
trench containing two Acres of ground, whereas yet may be seen the provident
care they had against all ensuing assaults. The trade of this town stands
chiefly in making of cloth, Commerce.
and Baies, with Says, and other like Stuffes daily invented; Magistracy.
and is governed by two Bailiffes, 12. Aldermen, all wearing scarlet; a
Recorder, a Town Clerk, and four Sergeants at Mace. Whose position for Latitude
is in the degree 52.14. minutes; Graduation.
and for Longitude, in the degree 21. and 5. minutes.

(8) Places of antiquity and memorable note in this County, I observe the most
famous to be Camalodunum, by the Saxons Male oune, Maldon.
by us Maldo^ which was the Royal seat of Cunobelin King of the Trinobants, K.
Cunobelin.
as by his money therein minted appears, about the time of our Saviors birth:
which City afterward Claudius won from the Britains, and therein placed a
Colony of soldiers, which were called Victricensis, This City Queen Boduo,
Queen Boduo.
in revenge of her wrongs, razed to the ground, what time she stirred their
people against Nero, with the slaughter of 70. thousand of the Romans. Of some
later and lesser account was Ithanchester now S. Peter's upon the wall, S.
Peter's.
where the Fortenses with their captain kept, toward the declination of the
Roman Empire. In the east Promontory of this County, in the reign of Richard
the second, the teeth of a giant were found (if they were not of an Elephant)
of a mavelous size (says Ralph Coggeshall) and not far thence, in the reign
of Elizabeth, more bones to the like wonder were dug up.

(9) I purposely omit the message of a Pilgrim from S. John Baptist, A Pilgrims
Message.
by whom he sent a ring to K. Edward Confessor; for which cause his house took
the name Havering: seeing the Monks of those times made no great dainty daily
to forge matter for their own advantage: who in this Shire so swarmed that they
had houses erected at Waltha^, Religious houses.
Pritlewell, Tiltey, Dunmow, Leeye, Hatfeild-Peverell, Chelmesford, Coggeshall,
Maldon, Earls-coln, Colchester, S. Osiths, Saffron-Waldon, Hatfeild-Bradoke,
and more, with great revenues thereto belonging, all which felt the axes and
hammers of destruction, when the rest of such foundations fell under the flail
of K. Henry the 8. who with Ezekiah brake down all these Brazen Serpents.

(10) This Shire is divided into twenty Hundreds, Castles. Colchester. Plesys.
Hangham. Augre. Waleden. Hemingham. Market towns.
wherein are seated 21. Market-Townes, 5. Castles, 5. Havens, 2. of his
Majesty's Mannours, and 415. Parish-Churches: all which are expressed in the
Table annexed to this County following.

map of Essex ESSEX, divided into Hundreds, with the most ancient and sayre
Town COLCHESTER Described and -- other memorable MONUMENTS observed. Anno 1610.


HVNDREDS in ESSEX.
1. VTtlesford. 2. Hinckford. 3. Lexden. 4. Tendering. 5. Dengie. 6. Witham. 7.
Chelmesford. 8. Dunmow. 9. Clavering. 10. Harlowe. 11. Waltham. 12. Havering.
13. Becontree. 14. Freshwell. 15. Chafford. 16. Barstable. 17. Ongar. 18.
Thurstable. 19. Rotchford. 20. Winstree.
A
Abbey Roding, Ong. Abenton, winst. Abrey hatch, becont. Aldham, lex.
Allisford, tend. Alphamstone, hinck. Althorne, deng. Alvethlye, chaff.
Ammadonhall, vttl. Ardleyghe, t^n. Arkesden, vttles. Arnolds, ong. Ashdon,
fresh. Ashden, hinc. Asheldon, deng. Ashefeild, hinc. Ashingdon, rotch. Audley
end, vttl. S. Ayleths, vttl.
B
Bacches, rotch. Baddowe little, Chel. Baddowe great, Chel. Ballingdon, hinck.
Barrington hall, har. BARKING, bec. Barling, rotch. Barnish Roding, dun. Barnyk
hall, lex. Borrohall, rotch. Barwick parker, chaff. Bassets, deng. Bassildon,
barst. Bassingborne, vttl. Battle bridge, chel. Battle hall, clau. Bayton end,
clau. The Beakon, lex. Beamonte, ten. Beacham Roding, on. Beches, bar.
Belchampwater, hin. Belchamp S. Paul, hinck. Belchampotten, hinck Belhouse,
hinck. Bellows, dun. Benfeild, claver. Benflitt north, barst. Benflitt south,
barst. Bentley little, ten. Bentley great, ten. Berche hall, ong. Berdon
priory, clau. Berden, claver. Berechurch, lex. Bernes Roding, dun. Bersholt,
lex. Bettolls, chaff. Beweres hamlet, hinck. Bicknecie, chelm. Bilesdon, ong.
BILLERECAY, bar. Birch great, lex. Birch little, lex. Birchanger, uttles.
Black^ ^^^pell, dun. Black(...) Black-wat^^^^* Blockhouse, winst. Bobingworth,
ong. Bocking, hinck. Boreham, chelm. Boreley, hinck. Bovyll, ten. Bowcers, lex.
Bowers gifford, barst. Bower, winst. Bower hall, hinck. Bowrchers hall, thurst.
Boxted, lex. Boydon hall, chelm. Bradfeild, ten. Bradfeild ^aling, fresh.
Bradfeild little, Fresh. Bradfeild great, fresh. Bradwell, deng. Bradwell,
with. BRAINTRIE, hin. Bramston, dunm. Braxted great, with. Braxted little,
with. The new Breach, becon. Brentishe, ong. BRENTWOOD, C. Brettes, ten.
Bretton layer, winst. Brickelsey, ten. Brides green, dun. Brittens, becon.
Brodokes, vttle. Brokehall, hinck. Brokstreet, chaff.* Bromfeild, chelm.
Broxted hall, dunm. Broxted, dunm. Brumley little, ten. Brumley great, ten.
Brunden, hinck. Brunden, hinck. Brunden hall, hin^ck. Brunshobery, dunm.
Brunthall, hinck. Buckware, dun. Bulmer, hinck. Bulpham, barst. Bumstedhelion,
fresh. Bumsteed steeple, hinck. Burbrooke, hinck. Bures mont, lex. Burneham,
deng. Bursted little, barst. Bursted great, barst. Buttesbury. chelm. Byam
hall, hinck.
C
Campions, deng. Campions, harl. Canewdon, rotch. Canfeild hall, dun. Canfeild
great, dun. Canfeild little, dun. Canue Island, barst. Chaldwell, barst.
Chapel, lex. The Chapel, hau. Chatley, with. Chawdwell, becon. Chelmer flu.
CHELMESFORD. Chesterford great, uttles. Chesterford little, uttles.
Chesterford, uttles. Chevers, ong. Chickney, dun. Chignall S. James. chelm.
Chignall smely, chelm. Chigwell, ong. Chigwell row, ong. Chigwell dewes, ong.
Childerditche, chaff. China hall, walth. Chingeford, walth. Chipping hongar,
ongar. Chissell little, uttles. Chissell great, uttles. Clackton great, ten.
Clackton, little, ten. Clarret hall, hinck. Clavering, claver. Claybury, becon.
Cockrells, chaff. Codham, hinck. Coggeshall, little, with. COGGISHAL, lex.
COLCHESTER* lex Cold hall, chelm. Collier row, han. Colnewake, lex. Colne
white, lex. Colne Earls, lex. Colne flu. Colne Engame, lex. Cook hall, lex.
Copford, lex Coptchall, wall. Coringham, barst. Cotes, ten. Covers, ong.
Cowpers hall, ong. Cranham, chaf. Cressing, with. Cressing Temple, wi.
Cricksey, deng. Cricksey ferry, rotch. Cripping, lex. Crissall, uttles.
Crissall great, uttles. Crouche flu. Custridge, ten. Cusse hall, hinck.
D
Dagenham, becon. Dagenham little, cha. Danbury, chelm. Darwardes, hinck.
Debden, uttles. Dedham, lex. Delahayelayer, winst. Dengie, deng. Dewes, ong.
Dodinghurst, ong. Dunmow little, dun. DVNMOVV great, dun. Donyland west, lex.
Donyland east, lex. Dover Court, ten. Dowington waylet, barst. Down, harl.
Downham, barst. Dukes, winst. Dunmow Church, D. Dunton, barst. Dynes hall,
hinck.
E
Eastbury, becon. Easter good, dun. Easterford, with. Easter high, dun.
Easthorpe, lex. Easton little, dun. Easton great, dun. Eastwood, rotch. Edwards
hall, chelm. Elmdon, uttles. Elmstede, ten. Elsenham, uttles. Engaynes, ten.
EPPINGSTRETE, walt. Epping town, walt. Eythorp Roding, dun.
F
Fairestede, with. Falkborne, with. Fambridge North, d^ng. Fambridge South,
rotch. Fangie, barst. Farnham, claver. Fawbridge, ten. Feering, lex. Felsteede,
hinck. Fellows hall, with. Femings, chelm. Fiddlers, chelm. Finchingfeild,
hinck. Fingringhoo, winst. Flamberds, deng. Fobbing, barst. Fordham, lex.
Fowlnesse, rotch. Fox-earth, hinck. Frating, ten. Frennoll, barst. Frinton,
ten. Fryerning, chelm. Fyfeild, ong.
G
Gains, chaff. Gains park, ong. Garndes, dun. Gestlingthorpe, hin. Giddie
hall, haver. Gingrave, barst. Goldingham, hinck. Goldlngham hall, hin. Gooses,
haver. Gosfeild, hinck. Gouldhanger, thur. The Grange, fresh. Greensted, ong.
Greensted, lex. Gubbins, have. Gunfleete, ten. Gyldabbs, barst. S. Gyles,
wal^h.
H
Hackwell, rotch. Hacton, chaff Hadleigh, rotch. Hadleigh Castle, rotc.
Hadstocke, fresh. Hallifield, walth. Ham east, becon. Ham west, becon.
Haningfeild east, che. Haningfeild west, che. Haningfeild south, chapter Harlowe,
harl. Harlow street, harl. Harlowbury, har. Harolds wood, hau. Harrolds pa^ke,
walt. HARWICH, ten. Haseley, deng. Hassobury, clave^. Hastings wood, harl.
Hastingbury Morley, harl. Hastingbury little, harl. Hatfeild forest, harl.
Hatfeild peverel, wit. HATFEILD BRADOCKE, Havering, haver. HAV^S^EED GREAT, ha.
Haw^^^n, harl. Hell hall, ong. Hemstede, fresh. HEMYNGHAM CASTLE. Henham,
uttles. Heningham siblo, hi. Hennye little, hinck. Hennye great hinck. Herne,
barst. Herons, dun. Heybridge, thur. Heybridge, ong. Heydon, uttles. Hipford,
hinck. HIGH ONGER, o. Hockley, rotch. Holland great, ten. Holland little, ten.
Holl haven, barst. Horeham hall, dun. Hornedon on the hill, bar. Hornedon east,
bar. Hornechurch, haver. The Hooe, lex. Horseley great, lex. Horseley little,
lex. Horseley Island, ten. Horsingbroke, barst. West House, barst. Hull bridge,
rotch. Hull, rotch. Hutton, bar.
I
Ienkins, becon. Ienkins, barst. Iervis hall, barst. Ilford little, becon.
Ilford great, becon. Indywall, barst. Ingerstone, chelm. Inworth, lex. Ioselyn,
dun.
K
Kantis, barst. Kelnedon, with. Kelvedon, ong. Kentes, rotch. The Kings place,
wa* Kirkby, hinck. Kirkby, ten. Knoll hill, ong.
L
Lackingdon, dun. Laighton low, bec. Laighton stone, bec. Lamborne, ong.
Lamersh, hinck. Langdall hill, barst. Langdon, barst. Lanford, thur. Langham,
lex. Lanhenhoo, win. Langley, clau. Latton, har. Latton priory, harl. Laver
little, ong. Laver high, ong. Laver Magdalene, on. Lawford, ten. Lawling, deng.
S. Lawrence, deng. The Lea, harl. Leadon Roding, dun. Lee gardens, hau. Leigh,
rotch. Leighes great, chelm. Leighes little, chelm. Leighes prior, chelm. Leigh
hall, rotch. Lexden, lex. Littleberrie, uttles. Little berrie, ong. Loughton,
ong. Loxford, bec. Lindsell, dun. Lyston, hinc Lyston hall, hinc.
M
MALDON, deng. Manenden, clau. MANINGTREE. Maplesteed great, hin. Maplesteed
little, hin. Maplesteed hall, hin. Margaret roding, ong. Marget Inge, chelm.
Markets, hau. Marks Tey, lex. Markeshall, lex. Marney layer, winst. Marsey
east, winst. Marsey west, winst. Martins, ten. Mashberie, dun. Matching, har.
Mayland, deng. Marnards, dun. Maytors. hau. Medles mede, with. Meredich, bec.
Messing, lex. Messing hall, lex. Midlemeade, deng. Middleton, hinck. Milton,
rotch. Minster south, deng. Moll hall, uttles. Monhall, fresh. Morchell, harl.
Moreton, ong. Mose, ten. Mountnasing, chelm. Mowlsham, chelm. Moynes, hinck.
Mucking, barst. Muching hall, rotch. Mundon, deng. Mile end, lex. Miles, ong.
Misley, ten.
N
The Nase, Tendering. Nasing, Walth. Navestocke, ong. Nelmes, haver. Nether
hall, harl. Netreswell, harl. Nevendon, barst. Newarke, dun. Newbery, becon.
Newhall, dun. Newhall, with. Newhall, harl. Newland hall, chelm. Newport,
uttles. Newtran, uttles. Noke hill, haver. North end, haver. Northey I Will, deng.
Norton, deng. Norton Mandevill, ong. Notley white, with. Notley black, with.
O
Ockenden south, cha. Ockenden north. cha. Okeley great, ten. Okeley little,
ten. Old hall, hinck. Old Holt, lex. HIGH ONGAR, ong. Orsett, barst. Orwell
haven, ten. The Ose end, ten. Oseth Isle, deng. S. Osythes, ten. Ovington,
hinc. Oulting, with.
P
Paddlesham, rotch. Panfeild, hinck. Paringdon great, har. Paringdon little,
har. Pateswicke, lex. Pebmershe, hinck. Peldon, winst. Pentlowe, hinck.
Petches, hinck. S. Peter's chapel on the wall. d. Petswell, ong. Pickrels, ong.
Pinchpole, clau. Pirgo, hau. Pistingford bridge, ong. Pitsey, barst. Plaistowe,
bec. Pledgden, clau. Pleshy, dun. Pores hall, with. Porters, rotch. Porters,
fresh. Porters, bec. Potters street, har. Potters row, thur. Powncehall,
uttles. Pretons, chelm. Prittlewell, rotch. Purleighe, deng.
Q
Quenden, uttles. Quickbury, har.
R
Radley hall, with. Radwinter, fresh. RAILIGHE, rotch. Kamsdon craye, barst.
Ramsdon belhouse, barst. Ramsey, ten. Ramsey, den. Rawreth, rotch. Rawreth
hall, rotch. Rain little,* hinck. Raynham, chaff. Rettendon, chelm. Richell,
harl. Ric hall, uttles. Rickling, uttles. Ridgwell, hinck Rinsell, den. Ripple,
bec. Rivers hall, lex. Rockells, uttles. Roding morrell, ong. Roding high, dun.
Roding white, dun. Rodon flu. ROMFORD, hau. Rooding beacha^, ong. Rooding
Abbey, ong. Rotchford, rotch. Roughhedge, lex. Roxwell, chelm. Royden hall,
hinck. Royden, harl. Royden, ten. Roydon hamlet, wall. Royes hall, hinck.
Ruckward, ong. Rumwell, chelm. Ryvenghall, with. Rye, walth.
S
Sabretts, chelm. Safforn garden, barst. Salcot, winst. Saling old, hinck.
Samons, barst. Sampford great, fre. Sampford little, fre. Sandon, chelm.
Shackstones, chelm. Shalford, hinck. Shelley, ong. Shellow bowels, dun.
Shenfeild, ba^st. Shenfeild, chel. Shering, harl. Shopland, rotch. Showbery
north, rotch. Showbery south. rotch. Skrenes, chel. Smiters hall, chel.
Snerston, wall. South Church, rotch. South end, haver. Spaines, hinc.
Springfeild, chel. Stambridge little, rotch. Stambridge great, rotch.
Stanborne, hinc. Stanborne hall, hinck. Stanford rivers, ong. Stansgate, deng.
Stanford le hope, bar. Stansted hall, hinc. Stansted monfictes, uttles. Stanway
hall, lex. Stanway, lex. Stappleford tawnie, ong. Stapleford abbots, ong.
Stebbing, hinck. Steple, deng. Stifford clay, chaff. Stifford, chaff. Stock,
chel. Stondon, ong. Stowe Maryes, deng. Stowre flu. Stratford langthorne, bec.
Street, deng. Strettall, uttles. Sturmer, hinck. Stysteed, hinck. Sturfleete,
ten. Stutton great, rotch.
T
Takelev, uttles. Tendering, ten. Terling, with. Terrels, fresh. Tey little,
lex. Tey great, lex. THAXTED, dun. Thorington, ten. Thorndon west, bar.
Thordon, east, bar. Thornewood, ^ar. Thorpe, ten. Thorrocke west, cha.
Thorrocke little, bar. Thorrocke great, ^haff. Thoyden, boyce, ong. Thoyden,
charmon, ong. Thoyden mount, ong. Thremnolt priorie, uttles. Thunderley,
uttles. Thundershe, rotch. Thundersey, barst. Thurston, hinc. Tilburye east,
barst. Tilburye west, barst. Tillingham, deng. Tiptree, thurst. Toobye, chel.
Topesfeild, hinck. Torells hall, dun. Totham great, thurst. Totham little,
thurst. Toulsbury, thrust. Toulshount Knight, thrust. Toulshount Darcye,
thurst. Toulshount great, thurst. Tremmall, barst. Toys* with. Tuftes, deng.
Twinsteed, hinck. Tie hall, chel. Tylbury, hinck. Tylbury hall, hinc. Tyld
hall, deng Tyltie, dun. Tytho^p Roding, dun.
V
Valens, haver. Verley, winst. Vgle, claver. Vltinge, with Vpminster, chaff.
Vp^hire, walt. Vpton, becon.
W
Walbury, harl. WALDEN, uttles. Wallor, or Walsteet I Will, rotch. Waltham little,
chel. Waltham great, chel. WALTHAM ABBEY, wall. Walthamstow, bec. Waltham
Forest, bec. Walton, ten. Wansted, bec. Warley little, chaf. Warley great,
chaf. Watering hall, rotch. Watering little, rotch. Watering great, rotch.
Weald hall, ong. Weald south, chaf. Weald north, ong. Wenden loughes, uttl.
Wenden little, uttl. Wenden great, uttl. Wennington, chaf. Wethersfeild, hinck.
Whellers, ten. West house, bar. White Hall, bar. Wickes, ten. Wickford, barst.
Wickeham, thurst. Wickham S. Paul, winst. Wickham bonant, winst. Widdington,
uttles. Widford, chel. Wigborow little, winst. Wigborow great, winst. Wilbores,
clau. Willingale Spain, dun. Wilton tower, ten. Wimbish, uttles. Witham, with.
Wiverhoo, lex. Woodford bridge, bec. Woodford, bec. Wood-hall, uttles.
Wood-hall, clau. Woodham ferries, chelm. Woodham mortimer deng. Woodham water,
deng. Woodriding, walth. Wormingford, lex. Wrabnes, ten. Writtle, chelm.
VVrittle park, chel. VVyley, ten. VVyvonhoo, lex.
Y
Yealdam hall, hinck. Yealdam little, hinc. Yealdam great, hinc.
SVFFOLKE, by the Saxons called Suth-folc, The name of Suffolk.
in regard of them which were seated in Norfolk, is a Country most plenteous
and pleasant for habitation. It is separated from Norfolk, by the Rivers of
the lesser Ouse, and Waveney, whose heads meet almost in the midst of her
Verge, The bounds of Suffolk.
and that very near together: the one taking course East, and the other full
West, upon which part Cambridge-shire does wholly confront. The South side is
severed by Stoure from Essex, and the East together washed with the Germane
Seas.

The Air.
(2) The Air is good, sweet, and delectable, and in some parts, of some of our
best Physicians, held to be the best in the Land: the Soil is rich, fruitful,
and with all things well replenis^ed; in a word, nothing wanting for pleasure
or profit.

The form.
(3) The form thereof is somewhat Cressant, shooting up narrower into the
North, and spreading wider toward the South, whose broadest part is about
twenty miles: but from East to West much more; for from Easton point (the
furthest of this Shire, yea of all Britain into the Sea) unto great Ouse
River, her Western bounder, are forty five miles, and the whole in
circumference, about one hundred fourtie-sixe.

The old Inhabitants.
(4) Anciently this part of the Island was possessed by the Iceni, who as it
seems by Tacitus, joined in Amity with the Romans a mighty people (says
he) and never shaken with wars before the reign of Claudius, Tacitus.
but then by Ostorius were vanquished, Agricola.
though not without great slaughter of the Romans; and in a Battle against
them, M. Ostorius the son of the General, won great honor in saving of a
Roman Citizens life; so ready were they to give and receive Honors to
themselves, but slightly to pass over and to smoother far greater exploits
of the Britains: which notwithstanding long in these parts they could not do:
for the wrongs of the Icenians growing intolerable, who by the Roman Soldiers
were put out of their rightful possessions, their Princes accounted no better
then Slaves, and their Queen whipped in most ignominious manner; under Bodua
they wrought their revenge, as in the History (Christ assisting) shall be
further related.

Next to these Icenians, were the Saxons that got their footing into these
parts, and of them, this with Norfolk, Cambridge-shire, and the I Will of Ely,
was made their East Angles Kingdom; though as it seems ever in subjection
either to the Mercians, or to the Kings of Kent: whose offspring ending in S.
Edmund the Martyr, after the Danes had laid it most desolate, Edward the Elder
subdued it unto his West Saxons Monarchy: and that likewise ending in King
Edward the Confessor, many noble Normans got their possessions in these parts,
whose Offspring are plenteously replenished in this Shire to this day.

The Commodities.
(5) The commodities of this Shire are many and great, whereof the chiefest
consists in Corn, in Cattle, Cloth, Pasturage, Woods, Seafish and Foul;
and as Abbo Floriecensis has depainted, this County is of green and passing
fresh hue pleasantly replenished with Orchards, Gardens and Groves: thus he
described it above six hundred years since, and now we find as he has said;
to which we may add their gain from the Paile, whose Cheeses are traded not
only throughout England, but into Germany, France, and Spain, and are highly
commended by Pantaleon the Physician, Pantaleon.
both for color and taste.

Ipswich the chief City.
(6) And had Ipswich (the only eye of this Shire) been as fortunate in her
Surname, as she is blessed with Commerce and buildings, she might worthily have
borne the title of a City: neither ranked in the lowest row, whose trade,
circuit, and seat, does equal most places of the Land besides.

It seems this Town has been walled about, both by a Rampire of earth,
mounted along her North and West parts, and places of entrance where gates have
stood; which no doubt, by the Danes were cast down, in the year of Christ
Jesus, 991. when they sacked with spoil all these Seacoasts: and again in the
year one thousand, laid the streets desolate, and the houses on heaps: yet
afterward recovering both breath and beauty, her buildings from Stoke-Church
in the South, to S. Margarets in the North, now contain 1900. paces, and from
S. Helens in the East, to S. Matthews Church in the West, The length and
breadth of Ipswich.
are no less then 2120. full of streets plenteously inhabited, wherein are
twelve Parish-Churches seated, besides them suppressed; such were
Christ-Church, S. Georges, S. James, the White, the Black and Grey-Friers. The
Site of this Town is removed from the Equator, unto the degree 52.25 minutes:
and by Mercators observation, from the first West-points 22. degrees, 9
minutes: and is yearly governed by two Bailiffes, and ten Port-men, The
Governors of Ipswich
all wearing Scarlet, with twenty four of their Common-Counsell in Purple: a
Recorder, a Towne-Clerke, five Sergeants, whereof one is for the Admiraltie, a
Beadle, and Common-Crier, all in blew, with the Towns Arms on their Sleeves.

The other Eye of this Shire is the Saxons Bedericgueord. S. Edmundsbury.
By Abbo the Royal Town, wherein at the day-breake of the Saxons conversion,
Sigebert King of the East Angles founded a Christian Church: and upon the
occasion of King Edmunds burial (who at Hoxon was shot to death) has been
ever since called S. Edmunds-bury, For King Edmunds Martyrdom see more in the
History.
where was built to his honor one of the fairest Monasteries in the world,
hegun by King Canute, much affrighted with the seeming appearance of that
Martyrs Ghost, who to expiate the sacrilegious impiety of his Father Suenus,
enriched the place with many endowments, and offered up his own Crown upon
the holy Martyrs Tomb. For the beauty and buildings of this Abbey and Town,
Leyland his commendation of S. Edmunds-bury.
let Leyland for me declare: The Sun (says he) has not seen a City more
finely seated so delicately upon the easy ascent of an hill, with a River
running on the East Side; nor a more stately Abbey either for revenues or
incomparable magnificence, in whose prospect appears rather a City then a
Monastery, so many Gates for entrance, and some of them brass, so many
Towers, and a most glorious Church, upon which attend three others, standing
all in the same Churchyard all of them passing fine, and of a curious
workmanship. Whose ruins lie in the dust, lamenting their fall, moving the
beholders to pity their case.

Near unto this Town a great Battle was fought by Robert Bossu Earl of
Leicester, John Textor.
against his Sovereign King Henry the second: An. 1173.
but was worthily overcome by Richard Lucy, the Kings high Justice, himself and
wife taken, with many Flemings and Engligshmen slain.

(7) Other places worthy of remembrance this County affords; such is Exning in
the West, Exning.
formerly famous for the birth of S. Audrey, daughter to King Anna, one of the
three names of the Shires division. Rendlisham.
Rendlisham in the East, where Redwald the first Christian in this Kingdom
held his Court: and Hadley in her South, Hadley.
where Guthrum the Dane whom Elfred baptized, was buried. And things of
stranger note are the limits of the East Angles Territories, running along
Newmarket heath, vulgarly called the Devils ditch: the like fable is formally
told by Nubrigensis, Nubrigensis.
that at Wulpet in the heart of this Shire two green boves of Satyrs kind
arose out of the ground, Wulpet.
from the Antipodes; believe it if you will: and Ralfe Coggshall in the
Monuments of Colchester, declares that a Fish in all parts like a man, was
taken near Orford, and for six months was kept in the Castle, whence after he
escaped again to the Sea.

As strange, but most true, was a crop of Pease that without tillage or sowing
grew in the Rocks, Orford and Aldebrough.
betwixt this Orford and Aldebrough, in the year 1555. When by unseasonable
weather a great dearth was in the Land: there in August were gathered above one
hundred Quarters, and in blossoming remained as may more, where never grass
grew, or earth ever seen, but hard solid Rocks three yards deep under their
roots.

(8) Places separated from common use, and devoted to God and his service by
religious Princes, Religious houses built and suppressed.
were at S. Edmunds, Ipswich, Ikleworth, ^lithborow, Clare, Leston, Burgh
Castle, wherein Sigebert King of the East Angles entered the profession of a
Monk: but was thence forced by his people, to fight against the Mercians: in
which Battle he was slain. And Dunwich, Ann. 636.
where Foelix founded his Episcopal See. These with many others in this County
were suppressed in the fall of the Monasteries, and their Revenews assumed by
King Henry the Eight.

(9) This Shire is principally divided into three parts, The division of the
Shire.
which are called the Celdable, S. Edmunds, and S. Audreys Liberties,
subdivided into twenty-two Hundreds, and them again into 575. Parish-Churches,
wherein are seated seven Castles, and twenty eight Market Towns, The Market
Towns.
whose names are in the Table annexed.

map of Suffolk SUFFOLK described and divided into Hundreds, The situation of
the fair town IPSWICH showed, with the ARMS of the most noble families that
have been either Dukes, or Earls both of that County as also of Clare


HUNDREDS in Suffolk.
1. LAckford* 2. Thingoe. 3. Risbridge. 4. Baberghe. 5. Thedwastrie. 6.
Blackborne. 7. Stowe. 8. Cosforde. 9. Bosmere. 10. Sampford. 11. Col^eis. 12.
Ca^leford. 13. Thredlinge. 14. Hartesmere. 15. H^xone. 16. Loo^s. 17. Wilforde.
18. Plumesgate. 19. Blithing. 20. Wangford. 21. Mutford. 22. Lothingland.
A
Acton, Baberg. Akenham, Bosmer. ALDERBURGHE, Plum. Aldham, Cosford. Alderton,
Wilford. Aldringham, Blithe. Allington, Hoxon Alpheton, Babergh. Ampton, The^.
S. Andrews, VVang. All Saints* VVang. Arwerton, Sam. Ashbye, Lothing. Ash,
Looes. Ash Bocking, Bosmer. Ashefeild, Thread. Ashefeild Black. Aspall, Hearts.
Assington, Baberg. Aye, Hearts.
B
Backton, Hearts. Badley, Bosmer. Baddingham, Hoxon. Badwell, Black. Baiton
alias Beighton, Thed. Bardwell, Black. Bargham, black. Barham, bosmer.
Barkinge^, bosmer. Barn^ye, Mut. Barningham, black. Barrowe, Thingoc. Barsham,
VVang. Barton, Thed. Barton little, Lack. Batisford, bosmer. Baudsey, VVilford.
Bawdsey haven, Coln. Bayleham, bosmer. Bealings great, Carlef. Bealings little,
Carlef. BECKLES, VVang. Bedfeild, Hoxon. Bedingfeild Hoxon. Bellstead, Samp.
Belton, Lothing. Beneker, Blithe. Benhall, Plum. Bentley, samp. Bernerdiston,
Risbridge. Bildeston, Cosfor. Bildeston street, Crosfor. Blakenham great,
bosmer. Blakenham little, bosmer. Blaxhall, Plum. BLIGHBOROUGHE, Bli.
Blithford, blithe. Blithe ^lu. Blundeston, lothing. BONGEY, VVang. Bouldge, Wilf.
BOTYSDALE, Hearts. Boxford, baberg. Boxted, baberg. Boyton, VVilf. Boyscott,
VVang. Bradfeild Combusham, Thed. Bradfeild Monks, Thed. Bradfeild S. George,
Thed. Bradfeild S. Clear, Thed. Bradley great, Risb. Bradley little, Risb.
Bradwell, Loath. Bramford, bosmer. Bramp^eild, blithe. Brampton, blithe.
Brandeston, Looes. BRANDON FERRIE, Lack. Brantham, Samp. Brasiard, Plum.
Bredfeild, Wilf. Brent Ely, Baberg. Bresworth, Hearts. Bretton flu. Brettenham*
Cosford. Brightwell, Carlef. Brockelie, Thingoe. Brockford, Hearts. Brom,
Hearts. Bromswall, VVilf. Brundishe, Hoxon. Brysett, Bosmer. Buckelsham, Coln.
Bures, Baberg. Burgate, Hearts. Burghe, Carlef. Burgh Castle, Lothing.
Burstall, Samp. Burstall, Bosmer. BURY, Thingo. Burly Looes, Looes. Buxall,
Stowe.
C
Catwade bridge, Samp. Capell, Wilf. Capell, Samp. Carleton coluile, Mut.
Carlton, Hoxon. Carsey, Cosford. Cavendishe, Baberg. Cavenham, Lack. Clare ^lu.
CLARE, Risb. Claydon, Bosmer. Clopton, Carlef. Chatisham, Samp. Charfeild,
Looes. Chedburghe, Risb. Cheldmonston, alias Chempton Samp. Chelsworth,
Cosford. Cheston, Blithe. Chevingcon, Thi^go. Chillesford, Plum. Chilton, Risb.
Chiule, Risb. Cleydon* B^s^. Clopton Carlef. Cobdocke, Samp. Cocfeild, Baber.
Coddenham, Bos. Combs, Stow. Coniweston, Black. Cookelye, Blithe. Cornerd
great, Baberg. Cornerd little, Baberg. Cotton, Lothing. Cotton, Hearts. Cove
hith, blithe. Cove North, Wang. Cove South, blithe. Cowling, Risb. Cranesford,
Plum. Cratfeld, blithe. Creating West, Stow. Creating S. Mary, bosmer. Creating
S. Olive, bosmer. Creating all Saints, bosmer. Cretingham, Looes. Crofeild,
bosmer. S. Cross, VVang. Culfurth, black. Culphoe, Carlef.
D
Dagworth, Stow. Dalham, Risb. Dalinghoo Looes, Looes. Dalinghoo, VVilf.
Darsham, blithe. Debedge, VVilf. DEBENHAM, Thread. Demerdiston, Risb. Denham,
Risb. Denham, Hoxon. Dennington, Hoxon. Depden, Risb. Dermisden, bosmer.
DONWICHE, blithe. Downham, Lack. Dunnyngworth, Plum. Dunstall, Risb. Drinekston,
Thed.
E
Earlestonham, bosmer. Earlesham, Looes. Earwell, Lack. Easton Gosbeck, bosmer.
Easton, Looes. Easton baven, blithe. Edwarston, baberg. Eiken, Plum. Ellowe,
VVang. Elmeswell, black. Elmeseth, Cosford. Elveden, Lack. Ewston, black.
Erwarton, Samp. Estberdgholt, Samp. Exninge, Lack. E^te, Hearts. Eyke, Looes.
F
Fakenham great, black. Fakenham little, black. Falkenham, Coln. Farneham,
Plum. Felsham, Thed. Felixstowe, Coln. Flempton, Thing. Flixton, VVang.
Flixton, Lothing. Flonton, bosmer. Fordley, blithe. Forn^ham genes^se, Thed.
Fornham S. Martins, Thed. Fornham all Saints, Thing. Foxall, Carlef. Framesden,
Thread. FRAMLINGHAM, Looes. Frekenham, Lack. Fresingfeild, Hoxon. Freston, Samp.
Friston, Plum. Fritton Flu. Fritton, Lothing. Frostenden, blithe. Fynbarrowe
great, Stowe. Fynbarrowe little, Stowe. Fyningham, Hearts.
G
Gaseley, Risb. Gedding, Thed. Gisleam, Mut. Gislingham, Hearts. Gipping,
Stowe. Glemham great, Plum. Glemham little, Plum. Glem^forde, baberg. Gorlston,
Lothing. Grondesburghe, Carlef. Growton, Baberg. Gunton, Lothing.
H
Hacheston, Looes. HADLEIGH, Cosford. Hankdon, Risb. HALLESWORTH, Blithe.
Hardwicke, Thingo. Hargrave, Thingo. Harkestead, Samp. Harleston, Stowe.
Harteshe, Baberg. Hasketon, Carlef. Haslewoode, Plum. HAVERILL, Risb. Haughley,
Stowe. Hawsted, Thingo. Hedgesset, alias Hesset. Thed. Heigham green, Lack.
Helmingham, Bosmer. Hemingston, Bosmer. Hemley, Coln. Hengrave, Thingo. Henham,
Blithe. Henley, Bosmer. Hensted, Blithe. H^pworthe, Black. Heringfleet, Loath.
Heringswell, Lack. Heveyngham, Bli. Higham, Samp. Hinderclaie, Black.
Hintlesham, Samp. Hitcham, Cosford. Holebrooke, Samp. Holesley, Wilf. Holton,
Blithe. Holton, Samp. Homersfeild, Wan. Hoo, Looes. Hopton, Black. Hopton,
Lothing. Hotham, Hoxon. Horningsherth great, Thingo. Hoxone, Hox. Hulverster,
Wang. Hundon, Risb. Hunnington Black. Hunston, black. Huntingfeild, Blithe.
I
S. James, Wang. Icklingham, Lack. Ickworthe, Thingo. Ingate, Wang. Ingam,
Black. S. John's, Wang. IPSWICH, Bosmer. Ixworthe, Black. Ixworthorpe, Black.
K
Kedington, Risb. Kellyshall, Hoxon. Kenford, Lack. Kentford, Risb. Kenton,
Looes. Kessingland, Mut. Kesgrave, Carlef. Ketleberston, Cos. Kettleburghe, Lo.
Knadishall, Blithe. Kn^tleshall, Black. Kushmere, Mut. Kyrkley, Mut. Kyrton,
Coln.
L
Lackford, Thing. La^gham, Cos. Lakingheath, Lack. Langerston, Coln. Langham,
Black. Lanshull, Bab. LAVENHAM, Bab. S. Laurence, Wang. Laxfeild, Hox. Layston,
Blithe. LAYSTOST, Lothing. Levington, Coln. Letheringham, Loo^. Lidgate, Risb.
Linsey, Co^ford. Linsted great, Blithe. Linsted little, Blithe. Livemere great,
Thed. Livemere little Black. Longham, Thed. Lophamford, Black. Lownde, Lothing.
Luthinge Mere, Mut.
M
S. Margarets, Wang. S. Margaret^, Wang. Marle^ford Looes. Martlesham, Car.
Melles, Hearts. Mellford, Bab. Mells, Blithe. Melton, Wilf. Mendham, Hox.
MENDLESHAM, Hearts. Metfeild, Hox. Mettingham Wang. S. Michaels* Wang.
Midleton, Blithe. Mikefeild, Bosmer. Milding, Bab. MILDENHALL, ^ac. Mismer^
haven, Blithe. Moncks Fly, Baberg. Monkesoham, Hox. Moulton, Ri^b. Mourden,
Looes. Mutford, Mut. Mutford bridge, Mut.
N
Nacton, Coln. Naughton, Cosford. NEEDHAM, Bos^er. Nedginge, Cosford. Neiland,
Baberg. Nettlestead, Bosmer. Newborn, Carlef. NEWMARKET, ^ck. Newton, Baberg.
Newtown^, stowe. Newton, stowe. S. Nicholas, Wang. Norton, Black. Nothalls,
Blithe. Nowghton, Thin.
O
Ockold, Hearts. Okeley, Hearts. S. Olaves, Lothi^. One house, Stow Onse Flu.
Or Flu. ORFORD, Plum. Orford haven, Wilf. Orwell Flu. Oston, Bosmer. Otley,
Carlef. Oulton, Lothing. Owsden, Risb.
P
Pakefield, Mut. Pakenham, Thed. Palgrave, Hearts. Parham, Plum. Pesinghall,
Blithe. S. Peter's, Wang. Petestre, Wilf. Petranghe, Thread. Playford, Carlef.
Phlemton, Thing. Polsted, Baberg. Poslingford, Risb. Preston, baberg.
R
Ramsholte, Wilf. Ratlesden, Thed. Redgrave, Hearts. Redsham, Wrang.
Redlingfeild, Hearts. Reed, Thingo. Rendhams, Plum. Rendlesham, Looes.
Rickinghall great, black. Rickinghall little, black. Ringfeild, Wang. Risbie,
Thingo. Rissangles, Hearts. Romburghe blithe. Rougham, Thed. Roydon, Blithe.
Roydon, samp. Rushbroke, Thed. Rushmere, Carlef. Rushmere, Mut. Ryngshall,
bosmer.
S
Sapiston, black. Saxham great, Thing. Saxham little, Thing. SAXMONDHAM, Plum.
Saxstede, Hox. Saylehome, Hox. Seamer, Co^ford. Sekford, Carl. Shaddingfeild,
Wang. Shanfeild, Wang. Shelley, samp. Shellond, stow. Shepemedowe, Wang.
Shimpling, baberg. Shotley, samp. Shottesham, Wilf. Sibton, blithe. Smalebridge,
baberg. Sisewell, blithe. Skithe, Hearts. Snape bridge, Plum. Somerleto,
Lothing. Somerton, baberg. Somersham, bosmer. Sotherton, blithe. Sotterley,
Wang. Southelman, Wang. SOUTHOLD, blithe. Southolt, Hox. Southtowne, Lothing.
Spexhall, blithe. Sprowton, samp. Staningfeild, Thed. Stansfeild, Risb.
Stansted, baber. Stanton, black. Stenfeild, Plum. Stoke Ash, Hearts. Stoke,
Risb. Stoke, samp. Stoke, baberg. Stonham aspoll, bosmer. Stoneham little,
bosmer. Stoven, blithe. STOWE, stowe. Stow langto^^, black. Stowe uplane, stow.
Stowe west, black. Stradbrooke, Hox. Stradishall, Risb. Stratford, Plum.
Stretford, samp. Sturston, Hearts. Stutton, samp. Sudborne, Plum. SUDBURIE,
baberg. Sutton, Wilf. Swessling, Plum. Swillond, bosmer.
T
Tadingston, samp. Tattington, H^x. Thebarton, blithe. Thelnetham, black.
Thorndon, Hearts. Thornham great, Hearts. Thornham little, Hearts. Thorpe,
baberg. Thorpe, blithe. Thorpe, Thread. Thorpe Moridux Co^ford. Thrandeston,
Hearts. Thurlowe great, R^^b. Thurlowe little, Risb. Thurrington, blithe.
Thurston, Thed. Thwayte, H^rtes. Tostocke, Thed. Trimlye S. Martyne, Coln.
Trimlye S. Ma^y, Coln. Troston, black. Tuddenham, Lack. Tuddenham Carlef.
Tunstall, Plum. Tymworthe, Thed.
U
Ubbeston, blithe. Uslorde, Wilf. Uggshall, blithe.
W
Waiberswicke, blithe. Waldingfeild great, baberg. Waldingfeild little, baberg.
Waldringfeld, Carl. Walpoole, blithe. Washebrooke, samp. Walsham in the
Willowes, black. Walton, Coln. Wangford, blithe. Wangford, Lack. Wantesden,
Plum. Warlesfeild, black. Wattisham C^^f. Wenham great, samp. Wenham little
samp. Wenhaston, blithe. Westerfeild, bo^m. Westhall, blithe. Westleton, blithe.
Westhorpe, Hearts. Westlye, Thingo. Weston, black. Weston, Wang. Wetherden,
stow. Wetheringsett, Hearts. Weybread, Hoxon. Whatfeild, Co^ford. Wheltham
great, Thed. Whelvetham little, Thed. Whepstead, Thingo. Wherstead, samp.
Whitton, b^smer. Whisoe, Risb. Wickham, Wilf. Wickham brook, Risb. Wickham
Skeyth, Hearts. Wilbye, Hoxon. Willingham, Wang. Willisham, bosmer. Wingfeild,
Hoxon. Winston, Thed. Wiston, baberg. Wisset, blithe. Withesdale, Hoxon.
Witherfeild, Risb. Wiverston, black. Wittensham, Carl. Wolverston, samp.
WOOLDBRIDGE, Looes. WOOLPITT, Thed. VVordwell, black. VVarlingham, Wang.
VVorlingworth, Hoxon. VVorlington, Lack. VVortham, Hearts. VVratting great,
Risb. VVratting little, Risb. VVratting tallow, Risb. VVrentham, blithe.
VVynerstone, Hearts.
Y
Yaxley, Hearts. Yoxford, blithe.
NORTHFOLKE is an Island inclining to an Ovall form, closed on the South part
with the Rivers of Waveney and the less^r Ouse, which divides it from Suffolk.
On the East and North with the German-Ocean; on the West toward
Cambridge-shire, with some branches of the greater Ouse; toward Lincolne-shire
with that part of the Nene which passes from Wisbitch into the Washes.

Content.
It contains in length (from Yarmouth to Wisbitch) about fifty miles. In
breadth (from Thetford to Wels) about thirty. The whole Circuit is about two
hundred forty two miles.

Name.
The name arises from the situation of the people, who being the Norther-most
of the Kingdom of East Angles, are therefore called the North-folke, as the
Souther*most South-folke.

Air.
The Air is sharp and piercing, especially in the Champion, and near the Sea:
therefore it delayeth the Spring and Harvest, the situation of the Country
inclining thereto, as being under the 53. degree of Latitude.

Soil.
The Soil diverse: about the Towns commonly good; as Clay, Chalk, or fat earth,
well watered, and with some wood: upward to the Heaths naked, dry, and barren:
Marsland and Flegg exceeding rich; but Marsland properly for Pasture, Flegg for
Corn.

(2) The parts from Thetford to Burneham, and thence Westward, as also along
the Coast, be counted Champion: the rest (as better furnished with woods)
Wood-land. The Champion abounds with Corn, Sheep, and Conies, and herein
the barren Heaths (as the providence of our Ancestors has of old disposed
them) are very profitable. For on them principally lie our Fould courses,
called of the Saxons (whose institution they therefore seem to be) faldsocun,
that is, Liberty of fold or fouldage. These Heaths by the Compasture of the
Sheep (which we call Tathe) are made so rich with Corn, that when they fall
to be sown, they commonly match the fruitfullest grounds in other Countries:
and laid again, do long after yield a sweeter and more plentiful feed for
sheep: so that each of them maintain other, and are the chiefest wealth of our
Country. The Wood-land (fitter for grass) is maintained chiefly by feeding of
Cattle, yet well stored with Corn and Sheep.

The Coast is fortunate in fish, and has many good Harbors, whereof Lenn and
Yarmouth be the mother Ports, and of great traffic: Wels and Blakeney next in
estimation.

The whole County abounds with Rivers and pleasant Springs, of which the Ouse
is chiefest, by whose plentiful Branches the Isle of Ely, the Towns and Shires
of Cambridge, Huntington, and the County of Suffolk vent and receive
commodities. The next is Hierus or Year, passing from Norwich to Yarmouth,
where it rec^iveth the Bure coming from Aylsham, both of them of great service
of water carriages, but very notable for their plenty of fish: for some one man
out of an hold upon the Bure, has drawn up ordinarily once a year, At
Ranworth.
between two Nets, about five or six score bushels of fish at one draught. The
Waveney and the lesser Ouse are also Navigable and of great use. The residue I
omit.

(3) The People were anciently called ICENI, as they also of Suffolk,
Cambridge-shire, and Huntington-shire, and supposed to be of them whom Caesar
names Cenimagni; Ptolemic, Simeni; some Tigeni. Their manners were likely to
be as the rest of the Britains, barbarous at those times, as appears by
Caesar and Tacitus. Neither can I otherwise commend their Successors the
Saxons: for so also their own Countryman Ethelwerd terms them. Since the
entry of the Normans, they have been counted civil and ingenious, apt to good
Letters, adorning Religion with more Church^s and Monasteries then any Shire of
England, and the Laws and Seats of Justice (for many ages) with some excellent
men; from whom most of our chief Families, and some of the greatest Nobility
of the Kingdom, have taken advancement. And herein is Norfolk fortunate, that
as Crete boasted of an hundred Cities, so may she of an hundred Families of
Gentlemen, never yet (that searching I can find) attainted of high Treason. How
the government of this Country was about Caesar's time, is uncertain, but
(agreeable, no doubt, to the rest of the Britains) under some peculiar Toparch
or Regulus, as Tacitus terms him. The latter Romans held it by two Garrisons,
one at Gariannum near Yarmouth; the other at Branodunum, now called
Brancastre, both of horse, and commanded by the Comes Maritimi Tractus, as
Marcellinus calls him, termed after Comes Littoris Saxonici. Upon the entry
of the Saxons, this County with Suffolk fell in the portion of the Angles, and
about the year 561. were together erected into a Kingdom by Vffa, Aethol.
833. Hunting. lib. 2.
of whom the succeeding Kings were tituled Vffines. But having suffered many
Tempests of Fortune, it was in year 870. utterly wasted and extinct by Hungar
and Hubba the Danes, who overthrew the virtuous King Edmund about Thetford, and
after martyred him at S. Edmundsbury. Yet they did not long enjoy it: for King
Edward shortly recovered it from them, and annexed it to his other Kingdoms.
The Danes notwithstanding inhabited abundantly in these parts, so that many of
our Towns were founded by them, and a great part of our people and Gentry are
risen out of their blood.

(4) This Kingdom of East Angles was after allotted to an Earldom of that
name by William the Conqueror, who made Radulph a Britain, marrying his
kinswoman. Eal^e thereof; but gave the greatest parts of this County about
Wimondham, Keninghall, Lenn, Burneham, Fulmerston, etc. to W. de Albany,
Pincernae, and W. de Warranna Forrestario. who to strengthen themselves
(according to the use of that time) with the homage and service of many
Tenants, divided large portions of the same amongst their friends and
followers; so that most of the Manours and Lands in the parts aforesaid, were
in those days either mediatly, or immediately holden of one of them. And as
Norfolk and Suffolk were first united in a Kingdom, then in an Earldom, so
they continued united in the Sheriffewicke till about the fifteenth year of
Queen Elizabeth.

Norwich. Lenn. Yarmouth.
(5) The Towns here are commonly well built, and populous; three of them being
of that worth and quality, as no one Shire of England has the like, Norwich,
Lenn, and Yarmouth: to which for ancient reputation (as having been a seat of
the Kings of East Angles) I may add Thetford, Thetford.
known to Antoninus, and elder ages, by the name of Sitomagus, when the other
three were yet in their infancy, and of no esteem: for I accept not the
Relations of the Antiquity and state of Norwich in the time of the Britains
and Saxons, though Alexander Nevil has well graced them. Her very name
abridgeth her Antiquity, as having no other in H^stories but Norwich, which is
mere Saxon or Danish, and signifies the North-Towne, Becan G^^
Castle, or winding of a River. It seems to have risen out of the decay of
her neighbor Venta, now called Castor, and as Master Cambden notes, H^vend
129.
not to have been of mark before the entry of the Danes, who in the year
1004. under Sweno their Captain, first sacked, and then burn it, even in her
infancy. Yet in the days of Edward the Confessor it recovered to 1220.
Burgesses. But maintaining the cause of Earl Radulph aforesaid against the
Conqueror, they were by famine and sword wasted to 560. at which time the
Earl escaping by Ship, his Wise upn composition yielded the Castle, and
followed. In William Rufus time it was grown famous for Merchandise and
concourse of people; Mal^a. sol. 104.
so that Herbert then translating the Bishopric from Thetford thither, made
each of them an ornament to other. In variety of times it felt much variety of
fortune: By fire in An^o 1508. By extreme plagues, Alex. Nevil.
whereof one in An. 1348. was so outrage us, as 57104. are reported to have
dyed thereof between the Calends of January and of July. By misery of war, as
sack^d and spoiled by the Earl of Flaunders and Hugh Bigod, Anno 1174. In
yielding to Lewis the French, against their natural Lord King John, Anno 1216
By the disinherited Barons, Anno 1266. By tumult and insurrection between the
Citizens and Churchmen: once about the year 1265. which if Henry the third
had not come in prison to appease, the City was in hazard to be ruined* The
second time in Anno 1446. for which the Major was deposed, and their Liberties
for a while seized. In Edward the sixths time, by Ketts rebellion, whose fury
chiefly raged against this City. Since this it has flourished with the
blessings of Peace, Plenty, Wealth, and Honor: so that Alexander Nevil
doubts not to prefer it above all the Cities of England, except London. It
is situate upon the River Hierus, in a pleasant valley, but on rising ground,
having on the Last the Hills and Heath called Mussold for Moss-would, as I
take it. In the seventeeth year of King Stephen it was new founded, Mussold.
and made a Corporation. In Edward the firsts time closed with a fair Wall,
saving on a part that the River defends. First governed by four Bayliffes;
then by Henry the fourth in Anno 1403. erected into a Majoralty and County; the
limits whereof now extend to Eaton-bridge. At this present it has about thirty
Parishes, but in ancient time had many more.

(6) Lenn having been an ancient Borrough under the government of a Bayliffe or
Reve, Lenn.
called Praetositus, was by King John in the sixth year of his Reign made
Liber Burgus, and (besides the gift of his memorable ^up, which to this day
honors this Corporation) endowed with diverse fair Liberties. King Henry the
third in the seventeenth year of his Reign (in recompense of their service
against the outlawed Barons in the Isle of Ely) enlarged their Charter, and
granted them further, to choose a Major Loco Praepositi: unto whom King Henry
the eight, in the sixteenth year of his Reign, added twelve Aldermen, a
Recorder, and other Officers, and the bearing of a Sword before the Major. But
the Town coming after to the same King, he in the nine and twentieth year of
his Reign, changed the name, from Lenn Episcopi, to Lenn Regis.

(7) Yarmouth is the Key of the Coast, Yarmouth.
named and seated by the mouth of the River Year. Begun in the time of the
Danes, and by small accessions growing populous, made a Corporation under two
Bayliffes by King Henry the third, and by his Charter, about the fifteenth
year of his Reign, walled. It is an ancient member of the Cinque Ports, very
well built and fortified, having only one Church (but fair and large) founded
by Bishop Herbert, in William Rufus days. It maintains a Peer against the
Sea, at the yearly charge of five hundred pound, or thereabout: yet has it no
possessions, as other Corporations, but like the children of Aeolus and Thetis,
Maria and 4. ventos, as an Inquisitour finds, Anno 10. Henry third. Go^am M.
de Patishulll Wade Everwicke. etc.
There is yearly in September the worthiest Herring-fishing in Europe, which
draws great concourse of people, and makes the Town much the richer all the
year, but very unsavory for the time. The Inhabitants are so courteous, as
they have long held a custom to feast all persons of worth, repairing to their
Town.

(8) The Bishoprik of Norwich had first her seat at Dunwich in Suffolk, The
Bishopric.
and was there begun by Foelix, who converted this County, and the East Angles
to the Faith. Being brought out of Burgundy by Sigebert (the first Christian
King of the East Angles) he landed at Ba^ingley by Lenn, and there builded the
first Church of these Countries which in his memory, is at this day called by
his Name. The second he built at Sharnbourn then of wood, and therefore called
Stock-Chappell. After Foelix and three of his Successors, this Bishopric was
divided into two Sets: the one with eleven Bishops in sucession, continuing at
Dunwich; the other with twelve at Elmham in Northfolke. Then united again in
the time of King Edwyn, the entire See for twelve other Bishops remained at
Elmham, and in the Conquerours time was by his Chaplain Arfustus (being the
thirteenth) translated to Thetford, from thence by Herbert (his next successor
save one) bought of William Rufus for nineteen hundred pounds, and brought to
Norwich. This Herbert (surnamed Losinga a Norman) builded the Cathedral Church
there, and endowed it with large possessions. Not far from thence he also
builded another Church to S. Leonard, a third at Elmham, a fourth at Lenn, (S.
Margarets, a very fair one) and the fifth at Yarmouth before mentioned. By the
Cathedral Church he builded a Palace for the Bishops, and founded the Priory
there (now converted to Deane and Chapter) and another Priory at Thetford.
Since his time the Bishops See has immoveably remained at Norwich, but the
ancient Possessions are severed from it* and in lieu thereof the Abbey and
Lands of S. Benedict of Holme annexed to it. The Commodities of this County I
have contained in these four Verses: Ingenio and populi cultu Norfolcia clara
est:
Hinc fluviis, illinc Insula clausa mari;
Quaratis, and vellus, frumenta, cuniculus, agnus,
Lac scatet, and pisces, pabula, mella, crocus.


This Description of Northfolke, I received from the Right Worshipful, Sir
HENRY SPELMAN, Knight.

map of Norfolk NORFOLK WITH THE A COVNTIE ARMS OF SVCH FLOURISHING NOBLE
FAMILES and POPVLOVS AS HAVE BORNE DESCRIBED THE TITLES AND DIVIDED THEREOF.
WITH THE ARMS OF SVCH NOBLE FAMILES AS HAVE BORNE THE TITLES THEREOF.


HVNDRED^ in Northfolke.
1. SMethdon. 2. Brothercrosse. 3. North-Grenchoe. 4. H^lse. 5. North
Erpingham. 6. Tunstad. 7. Happing. 8. West-Flegg. 9. Blowse^ld. 10. Tavarham.
11. south-Erpingham. 12. Eynsford. 13. Gallowe. 14. Fr^cbridge. 15. Laundiche.
16. Mitsorde. 17. Forchoce. 18. Humbleyarde. 19. Heustead. 20. Lod. 21.
Clave^^ng. 22. Earsham. 23. Depwarde. 24. Dysse. 25. Gyltcrosse. 26. Shorpham.
27. Waylond. 28. South-Grenchoe. 29. Walsham. 30. Cla^kelosse. 31. Grymshooc.
A
Accle, Blow. Aileswythorpe, Fr^cb. Alby, Southerpe. Albu^rough* Norther.
Alburghe, Earsh. Aldeby, clav. Alderford, Eyns. Alpington, clav. Althorpe, Gal.
Anmer, Fr^cb. Antingham, Norther. Appleton, Fr^cb. Armingale, Henst. Ashby,
Fl^g. Ashby, clav. Ashill, Wayl. Ashmonhangle, Tuns. Ashwelthorp, Depw.
Aslacton, Depw. Attlebridge, Tav^r. Attleburgh, s^rop. AYL^SHAM, S. Er.
Aylmerton, Norther.
B
Baconsthorp, southe. Bagthorpe* Gal. Banham, Gyl. Baningham, souther. Barford,
Forc. Barmer, Gal. Barney, Norther. Barneham, Forc. Barningham Northwood, N E
Barningham, North. Barningham, southe. Barrow, Mit. Barrowe, Clav.
Bartonblendish, clav* Barwicke in the brakes, Smo. Barwicke. For^. Basham
North, Gal. Basham West, Gal. Basham East. Gal. Bassingham, Norther. Bastwicke,
Fleg. Bathely, Holt. Bawburgh, Forc. Bawdeswell, Eyns. Bawsey, Fr^cb. Bayseild,
Holt. Becham west, Southe. Becham east, N. Er. Beddenham, Clav. Beeston, Laun^.
Beeston S. Laurence, Tun B^igton, Blow. S. Benet, Tunst. Bensted, Hap.
Berningham, Southe. North Berningham, N. E. Berningham Winter, N. E. Berrowe,
Mit. Besthorpe, Shrop. Beston, Northerp. Beston, Tavar. Betely, La^md. Bexwell,
clack. Bicham-well, clack. Bidlesworth, Gylt. Bilaughe, Eyns. Billingford,
Earsh. Billingford, Eynes. Bilney east, Laun. Binere, Eynes Bittering little,
Laun. Bixley, Henst. Bixton, Forc. Blackney, holt. Blickling, Southerp.
Blingham north, Blo. Blingham south, Blo. Blow no^ton, Gylt. Blowfeild, Blow.
Bodham, holt. Bodney, Southgr. Booton, Southgr. Borowgh, Southerp. Bowthrope,
Forc. Bowton, Clac. Bracenash^, humb. Bradfeild, Tunst. Braddenham east,
Southgr. Braddenham west, Southg. Brancaster, Smeth. Brandon little, Forc.
Branston, Eynes. Bramerton, henst. Brampton, Southerp. Breckles, Wayl.
Brieston, Blow. Bresingham, Dyss. Brettenham, Shrop. Bridgham, Shrop. Briston,
holt. Bristlye, Laun. Brockdishe, Earsh. Broke, clav. Brom, Forc. Brom, clav.
Bronesthorpe, Gal. Brynton, hol^. Brundall, Blow. Buckenham little, Gr.
Buckenham old, Shr. NEW BUCKENHAM, Bucknam, Blow. Buckton, Tunst. Bunwell,
Depw. Burcham great, Smc. Burcham Newton, Smeth. Burnham depdale, Br. Burnham
thorpe, Bro. Burnham Sutton, Br* Burnham Norton, Br* Burnham westgate, B^
BURNHAM OVE^OY, Bro. Burningham, Holt. Borough, clav. Burrowe, holt. Burston,
Dyss. Burtos, West-Fleg. Burton, Tunst. Buxton, Southerp. Bylawgh, Southerp.
Bylney west, Fr^cb. Bylockby, West Fleg. Bynham, Northgr.
C
Caister, East-Fleg. Calthorpe, Southerp. Cantley, Blow. Carbrocke, Wayl.
Carleton, H^^mb. Carleton, clav. Carleton, For^. Carleton wood, Dep. Caster,
East Fleg. Castleacre, Fr^cb. Castor, Hensted. Catfeild, H^p. Catton, Tavar.
CAWSTON, Sout. Chappelgate, F^r^ho. Chetgrave, claver. Claxton, claver. CLAYE,
Holt. Claye, Southgr. Clench wharton, Fr. Cippisby, West-Fcl. Coethorpe,
Northgr. Colbye, Southerp. Colk^rke, Laund. Collney* Humb. Coltish^ll,
southerp. Corpustie, souther. Cost^slye, Forcho. Coston, Forcho. Cortnell,
clack. Cougham, Fr^cbr. Congrine ^lu. Coulston, Grymsh. Coulton, Forcho.
Crandworth, Mit. Cranwiche, Gryms. Creike North, Bro. Creike South, Bro.
Cressingham little, south. Cressingham Great, south. Crimplesham, clack.
Cringleford, Humb. CROMER, Norther. Croskeyes, Fr^cb. Croston, Gallow.
Crostwicke, Taver. Crostwicke, Tunst. Crownethorpe, Forc. Croxton, Gryms.
D
Denham west, clack Wood Dalling, Eyns. Denber, clack. Denton, Earsh. Depeham,
Forc. Dereham west, clack. DEREHAM EAST, mit. Dersingham, Fr^cbr. Dilham,
Tunst. Didlington, Tunst. Didlington, southgr. Didlington, Laund. Ditchingham,
claver. Docking, smeth. Downeham, Forcho. DOWNEHAM, cla. Drayton, Taver. Dunham
little, Laun. Dunham great, Laun. Dunston, humble, Dunton, Gallow. Dykebu^gh,
Dyss. DYSSE, Dysse.
E
Easton, Forcho. Easton, Wayl. Eccles, shrop. Eccles, Hap. Edingthorpe, Tunst.
Edgefeild, Holt. S^ Edmond, smeth. Egmer, Northgr. Ellingham little, Way
Ellingham great, sbr. Ellingham, claver. Elinham north* Laun* Elmerton,
Norther. Elsing, Eynes. Emneth, Fr^cb. Engham, Hap. Erisham, Earsh. Erleham,
Humb. Erpingham, souther. Estington, Depw. Estington, Fr^cb. Eton, Norw.
F
FAKENHAM, Gall. Farfeild, Dysse. Feildalling, Northgr. Felbridge, Northerp.
Felmingham, Tu^st. Feltwell, Grymsh. Felthorpe, Taver. Filbye, East-Fleg.
Fincham, clack. Fishley, Blow. Flitcham, Fr^cb. Flordon, Humb. Fomset peter,
Depw. Fordham, clac. Forehooe, Forch. Foullsham, Eynes. Fowlden, southgr.
Foxley, Eynes. Framingham Earl, Henst. Framingham Pigot, Henst. Fransham
little, Lau. Fransham great, Lau. Freethorpe, Blow. Frense, Dysse. Frettenham,
Taver. Fringe, smeth. Frytton, Depw. Fulmerston, Gallow. Fundenhall, Depw.
G
Garboiesthorpe, clac. Garboldisham, Gylt. Gravelston, wit. Gasthorpe, Gylt.
Gatelye, Laund. Gatesend, Gallow. Gayton, Fr^cb. Gaytontho^pe, Fr^cb. Gaywood,
Fr^cb. Geist, Eynes. Geistwicke, Eynes. Gelston, clack. Germans, Fr^cb.
Gillington all Saints, clav. Gillingham Mary, clav. Glamford, Holt. Godwicke,
Laund. Gooderston, southgr. Gresham, Northerp. Gressenhall, Laund. Grymston,
Fr^cb. Gunton, Northerp. Gunthorpe, Holt. Gymingham, North. Gyssing, Dysse.
H
Hackforth, Forcho. Hackford, Eynes. Haddescoe, cla^. Hales, claver.
Halvergote, Blow. Hanworth, Northerp. Hapsburgh, Hap. Hardingham, mit. Harwick,
Depw. Harleing west, Gylt. HARLEING EAST, Gyl. HARLESTON, Ea. Harpham, s^rop.
Harpley, Fr^cb. Hassingham, Blow. Hayham, Nor. Hayham, Hap. Haynford, Tavar.
Hearhold, humb. Heatherset, humb. Hecham* smeth. Heckingham, clav. Heddenham*
clav. Helgaye, clack. Hellesden, Tav. Hellington, clav. Helloughton, Gall.
Hemlington, Blow. Hempnoll, Depw. Hempstead, holt. Hempton, Gallow. Hemstead,
hap. Hemysbye, East Fle. Henlond, Eynes. Henyngham, souther. Heringby, Fleg.
Heydon, souther. HICKTING, hap. Hier Flu. Hilborough, southgr. Hilderston,
Eynes. Hillington, Fr^cb. Hindringham, Nort. Hobbies little, south. Hobbies
great, south. Hockering, mit. Hockham, shrop. Hockwold, Gryms. Hoo-cum
delington, Laun. Hoffton S. John, Tunst. Hoffton S. Peter, Tunst. HOLT, holt.
Holkham, Northgr. Holme, clac. Holme, smeth. Holmhall, southgr. Homingham,
Forc. Honinge, Tunst. Hopton, Depw. Hormingtost, Laund. Horning, Tunst. Horsey,
hap. Horsford, Taver. Horsham S. Fayths, Taver. Horsted, Taver. Hoveston,
hensted. Houghton, Gallow. Houlton, Gallow. Houlton, Northgr. Houlton on the
hill, south. How, claver. Hunstanton, smeth. Hunworth, holt. Hvndford, grymsh.
HYNGHAM, Forc.
I
Ickborowe, grymsh. Jermans, Fr^cb. Illington, shrop. Ingalsthorpe, smeth.
Ingworth, southerp. Intwood, humb. Itteringham, souther.
K
Kelling, holt. Kempston, Laund. Keningall gylt. Keswicke, Tunst. Keswicke,
humb Ketheringham humb. Ketleston, gallow. Kemberley, For^ho. Kirby bedon,
henst. Kirsted, claver. Knapton, Northerp. Kyrby, claver. Kylverston, Northerp.
L
Laister, henst. Lakenham, Northwi. Lammas, southerp. Langford, southgr.
Lanhall, claver. Langham, holt. Langley, claver. Langmer, Earsh. Lesiat, Fr^cb.
Lessingham, hap. Letheringset, holt. Letton, mit. Lexham east, Laund. Lexham
west, Laund. Lingwood, Blow. Limpenho^, Blow. Loddon, claver. Longham, Laud.
Lopham north, gylt Lopham south, gylt. Ludham, h^pp. Lycham, Laun^. Lynge,
Eynes. Lynne west, Fr^cb. LYNNE REGIS, Fr^c. Litlingford, shrop.
M
Mandlen, Fr^cb. Manington, souther. Mantby, East-Fleg. Marham, clac.
Marketsted, Forc. Markingham, Forc. Marsham, southerp. Martham, West-Fleg.
Martyn, Wayl. S. Maryes Fr^cb. Massingham little, Fr^cb. Massingham great,
Fr^cb Matlaske, Norther. Marshall, mit. Meadham, Earsh. Melton, holt. Melton
great, humb. Melton little, humb. Merston, holt. Methwold, grymsh. Metton,
Northerp. S. Michal, East fleg. Midleton, fr^cb. Moreley, forcho.
Morningthorpe, Dep. Moulton, Depw. Moulton, Blow. Moundeford, gryms. Mulberton,
humb. Mundham, claver. Munslie, North^rp. Murton, Eynes. M^leham, Laund.
Myntlin, fr^cb.
N
Narborough, southgr Narford, southgr. Necton, southgr. Nedham, Earsh.
Neusheard, Tunst. Newton, Taver. Newton, Fr^cb. Newton west, Fr^cb. Newton,
Henst. Newton, southgr. N^wton slotman, hu. Northwold, gryms. Wood Norton,
Eynes. Norton super Mount, Eyn. Norton, Claver NORWICHE, Nor.
O
Oby, West-Fleg. O^^esbye, East-Fle. Ormesbye S. Michael, E. Fl. Osmondston,
Dysse. Overstrand, North^. Ovington, Wayl. Oulton, southerp. Ouse Flu. Owtw^ll,
Clac. Oxborough, southgr. Oxn^t, southerp. Oxbrand, North. Oxwicke, Laund.
P
Palling, Happ. Panxford, Blow. Paston Tunste^. Patt^sley, Laund. Pentney,
^recb. Pensthorpe, g^l. Pickenham North, southgr. Pickenham South, southgr.
Plumsted Northerp. Plumsted great, Blo. Plumsted little, Blo. The old Podicke,
clack. The new Podicke, clack. Porland, henst. Postwick, Blow. Presthouses,
clack. Prumsted, hap. Pudding-norton, gal Pulham-mary* Earsh. Pulham-market*
Ear.
Q
Quiddenham, gylt.
R
Rackey, Tau. Ramgate, forc. Ranworth, Blow. Raveringham, clav. Raynham south,
gal Raynham east, gal. Raynham west, gal. Rednell, Earsh. Redham, Blow.
Remirston, mit. REPEHAM, Eynes. Reppes south, North. Reppes north, Norther.
Reppi^, West-fleg. Riborough little, gal. Riborough great, gal Ringland, Eynes.
Ringstead, smeth. Rockland, shrop. Rockland, henst. Rockland, way. Rolt-bye,
west-fleg. Rougham, Laund. Roughton, North. Rowdham, shrop. Roydon, Dysse.
Roydon, fr^^b. Roxam, clack. Rudham west, g^l. Rudham east, gal. Rington,
clack. Runham, East-fleg. Runhall, forc. Runton, North. Runton north fr^cb.
Rushall, Earsh. Rusham, Laund. Rushforth, gylt. Ruston, clack. Ruston east,
happ. Rising Castle, fr^cb.
S
Saham, Waylan^. Salhouse, Tave. Salthouse, holt. Salt^rnlode, fr^cb.
Sand^ngham, fr^cb. Saull, Eyns. Saxlingham, holt. Saxlingham* henst. Saxthorpe,
souther. Scarning, Laund. Scornston, southe. Scorn^ton* Tunst. Scottby*
East-fleg. Sederston, gal. Sedg^ord, smeth. Sething, ^la^. Sistead, North.
Sharington, holt. Shelfaner, Dysse. Sheltong, Dep. Sherborne, smeth. ^hereford,
gal. Sheringham, North Shimpling mull* Dyss Shingham, clac. Shipdham, mit.
Shottesham, henst. Showldham, Clack. Showldham, shrop. Skeyton, southe.
Skottough, southe. Skoulton, way. Skulthorpe, gal. Slingham, he^st. Sloly,
Tunst. Smalborough, Tunst S^^terington, shrop. Snoring great, Northgr. Snoring
little, gal. Sommerton west, we. fle. Sommerton east, we. fle Sothery, clac.
Soowode, Blow. Southacre, southgr. Southbridge, mit. ^perham, E^ns. Spixford*
Tav. Sporle, southgr. Sprowst^n, Tav. Stalham, hap. Stanfeild, Laund.
Stanfeild, fore. Stanford, grym. Stanhow, smeth. Staninghall* Tav. Starston,
Earsh. Stihard, gal. Stifkey, Northg. Stoake, henst. Stockton, clav. Stoke^bye,
East-fleg Stooke, clack. Stowe, wa^l. Stowe, clack. Stradsert, clack Stratton
null Depw. Stratton Mary Depw Stratton, souther. Strumshaw^, Blow. Sturston,
grym Studdy holt. Susted, Norther. Suffeild, Norther. SWETISHAM. smet. Sutton,
hap. Sutton, forc. SWAFFHAM, south. Swanton, holt. Swanton morley, Laund.
Swanton Abbot^, souther. Swarditonney, him. Swayfeild, Tunst. Swenington, Eyns.
Swinsthorpe, humb. Sydestroude* Nor^her. Sylfeild* s^rcho. Sysland, claver.
T
Taco^neston, Depw. Tarsh^m* Earsh. Tasborowe, Depw. Tatterset, gallow.
Tatterford, gallow. Taverham, Taver. Terrington, fr^cb. Teslerton, gallow.
Tharne, fleg. Tharston, Depway. Thelveton, Dysse. Themilthorpe* Eyns. THETFORD,
shor. Thorpe, Earsh. Thorpe little, Dysse. Thorpe, forchoc. Thorpe, cla^er.
Thorpe Norwich, Bl. Thorpe market, Nor. Thornag^, holt. Thorneham, smeth.
Thorpland gallow. Thr^xton, way. Thrickby, East-fleg. Thurgarton, North.
Thurlton, claver. Thurning, Eynsford. Thursford, Northg. Thursten, cla^er.
Thuxton, mit. Thwate, claver. Thwayte* southe. Tithwell, sm^th. Terrington,
fr^cb. Tittlesh^ll, Laund. Titshall Market. Dyss Titshall Mary, Dysse. Tompson,
wayl. Topcrost, claver. Toste, wayl. Tostes west, grym. Tostes, gallow. Tostes,
smeth. Tostmonachorum* C. Tortington, way. Townegreene, forc. Trowse, henstead.
Trunche, North. Trymingham, North. Tuddenham North, mit. Tuddenham East, mit.
Tunstall, Blow. Tunstad, Tunst. Tuttington, southe. Twyford, Eyns. Tybenh^m
Depw. Tylney* fr^cb. Tyvetshall Margaret, Dysse. Tyvetshall Mary, Dysse.
V
Up on, B^ow. U^well* cla^k. Ursted, Tunst.
W
Walcott, hap. Wallington, clack. Walpo^le fr^cb. WALSHAM NORTH, Tun. Waltham
south, Blo. WALSINGHAM GREAT. Walsingham old, North. Walsoken, frcb. Walton,
Depw. Walton west, fr^cb. Walton e^st, fr^cb. Warham, Northg. Waterden, B^oth.
Watlington, clack. Wattlefe^ld, forcho. WATTON, way. Waveney Flu. Waxham, hap.
Wayborne hope, holt. Wayborne, holt. Wearham clack. Weeting, grym. Welborne,
forcho. Wells, Northg. Wellingham, Laund Wendling, Laund. Wesenham* Laund.
Wes^acre, forch. Westfeild* mit. Weston, Eyns. Westwicke, Tunst. Whetacre,
clav. Whetacre borrowe, clav. Whitw^ll, Fyns. Wh^nbrough* mit. Wickhamton Blow.
Wicklewood, forc. Wickmer, souther. Wighton, Northg. Wightlingham, henst.
Wign^ll peter's, fr^cb. Wikin, fr^cb. Wilton, grymsh. Wim^oresham, clack.
Winsder F^u. Winterton, west-fleg. Wintertonnesse, west-fl. Wissingset, Laund.
Wiston, holt. Witchingham great, Eyn. Witchingham little, Eyn. Wolverton,
fr^cb. Woodrising, mit. Woodbaswick Blow. Woolvert^n, souther. Wormgave, clack.
WORSTEAD, Tun. Worthing, Lau^d. Wortwell, Ears^. Wott^n, clav. Wotton south,
fr^cb. Wotton north, fr^cb. Wramplingham, so. Wremingham, hum Wrettham west,
shr. Wrettham east, shr. Wretton, clack. Wroxham, Tav. Wrungey, fr^cb. Wylby,
shrop WYMONDHAM. Wynche west, fr^cb. Wynche east, fr^cb. Wyndall, clav.
Wyn^arthing, Dysse. Wytton, Blow. Wytton, Tunst. Wyverton, holt.
Y
YARMOUTH, E^st. Yardley, clav. Yeaxham, mit. Yelvert^n, henst.
CAMBRIDGE-SHIRE, written by the English-Saxons, Grent-brig-scyre, The ancient
Saxons name of this S^ire.
lies bounded upon the North with Lincolne-shire and Norfolk; upon the East
with Norfolk and Suffolk; The bounds of it.
upon the South with Hartford-shire and Essex; and upon the West with Bedford
and Huntington-shires.

The length, ^redth, and ^cumference.
(2) This Province is not large, nor for air greatly to be liked, having the
Fennes so spread upon her North, that they infect the air far into the rest:
from whose furthest point unto Roiston in the South, are thirty five miles; but
in the broadest is not fully twenty: the whole in circumference, traced by the
compass of her many indents, one hundred twenty and eight miles.

The Soyl^.
(3) The Soil does differ both in Air and Commodities; the Fenny surcharged
with waters: the South is Champion, and yields Corn in abundance, with
Meadowing-pastures upon both the sides of the River Came, which divides that
part of the Shire in the midst, upon whose East-banke the Muses have built
their most sacred Seat, where with plenteous increase they have continued for
these many hundred years.

Cambridge the University.
(4) For from ancient Grantcester, Camboritum by Antonine, now famous Cambridge,
the other breast and Nurse-mother of all pious literature, have flowed full
streams of the learned Sciences into all other parts of this Land and
elsewhere: ancient indeed, if their Story be rightly writ, Ex historia
Cantabrig. manuscript.
that will have it built by Cantaber a Spaniard, three hundred seventy five
years before the birth of our Savior, who thither first brought and planted
the Muses. This City Grantcester by the tyranny of time lost both her own
beauty and her professed Athenian Students, so that in Bedaes days seven
hundred years after the Word became flesh, it is described to lie a little
desolate City, and as yet retains the name, without any memory of circuit
by walls.

Of this City, in the year of Christ Jesus 141. as the Monk of Burton does
report, nine Scholars received their Baptism, and became Preachers of the
Gospel among the Britains, which (as he says) happened in the reign of
Hadrian the Emperor. But when the Picts, Scots, Huns and Saxons had laid all
things wast, and with their savage swords cut out the leaves of all civil
learning, this (as the rest) yielded to destruction, and so lay forlorn till
the Saxons themselves became likewise civil; Sigebert.
when Sigebert the first Christian King of the East Angles, from the example of
France, whither he had been banished* built Schools in his Kingdom, and here
at Grantcester the chief, recalling thither the professors of Arts and
Sciences, as the Story records, and Traditions do hold.

But afterward, as it seems, their increase being straightened, the Students
complained (as the Prophets did to Elisha) that the place was too little for
them to dwell in, 2 King. 6.1.
therefore enlarging more Northward seated themselves near unto the Bridge,
whereupon the place began to be called Grant-bridge, though others from the
crooked River Came will have it named Cambridge. Cambridge how it came to be
called Grant-bridge.
This place (though sacred and exempted from Mars, as Sylla once spoke, when he
spared Athens,) the Danes in their destructions regarded no whit, wherein they
often wintered after their spoils, and left the scars of their savage sores
ever behind them. And in the year 1010. when Suen in his fierceness bare
down all before him, this place was no place for Scholars to be in: Wars
loud Alarums ill consorting the Muses mild Harmonies. Yet when the Normans had
got the Garland on their heads, and these Danish storms turned into Sunshine
days, Gislebert the Monk, with Odo, Terricus, and William, all three of the
like Monastical Profession, in the reign of K. Henry the first, resorted unto
this place, and in a public Barn read the Lectures of Grammar, Logic, and
Rhetoric, and Gistebert Divinity upon the Sabbath and Festival days. From
this little fountain (says Peter Blessensis) grew a great River, which made
all England fruitful, by the many Masters and Teachers proceeding out of
Cambridge, as out of a holy Paradise of God. The first College therein endowed
with Possessions was Peter-house, Peter-house the first College built.
built by Hugh Balsham Bishop of Ely, in the year of Grace, 1284. whose godly
example many others followed, so that at this day there are sixteen most
stately Colleges and Hals, for building, beauty, endowments, and store of
Students, so replenished, that unless it be in her other Sister Oxford, the
like are not found in all Europe.

But at what time it was made an University, let Robert de Remyngton tell you
for me. In the Reign (says he) of King Edward the First, Grantbridge, of a
School, by the court of Rome, was made an University, such as Oxford is.
Lastly, the Meridian line cutting the Zenith over this City, The gradu^tion of
the City.
is distant from the furthest West-point, according to Mercator, 20. degrees,
50. scruples, and the Arch of the same Meridian, lying between the Equator
and Verticall-point, is 52. degrees, 20. scruples.

)5) Another City formerly in great fame is Ely, The City of Ely.
by the Saxons Eli^, had in account for the repute and holiness of Votary
Nuns there residing; built first by Audrey wife to one Tombret a Prince in
this Province, Saint Audrey.
who had this place as a part of her Dowry: she having departed from her
second Husband Egbert King of Northumberland, devoted herself to the service of
God, and built here a Monastery, whereof she became the first Abbess. This in
the Danish desolation was destroyed, but soon after reedified by Ethelw^ld
Bishop of Winchester, who stored it with Monks; unto whom King Edgar granted
the jurisdiction over four Hundreds and a half, within these Fennes and the
East Angles limits, which to this day are called The Liberties of S. Audrey:
after whose example many Nobles so enriched it with large Revenews, that as
Malmesbury says, the Abbot thereof laid up yearly in his own Coffers a
thousand and four hundred pounds. And of latter times the Monks thereof became
so wealthy, that their old decayed Church they renewed with new and most stately
buildings, which is now the Cathedral of the Diocese, and for beauty gives
place to no other in the Land. Eight other foundations set apart from secular
use in this Province, were at Thorney, Charteres, Denny, Elsey, Beach, Barnwel,
The religious houses in this Province.
Swasey and Shengey, all which in the days of King Henry the Eight came to the
period of their surpassing wealth, and left their Lands to the dispose of his
Will.

(6) The general commodity of this Shire is Corn, The Commodities of this
C^untie.
which in the South, and Champion part does abundantly grow, as also Saffron, a
very rich Spice. Some Woods are there, and Pasture both pleasant and
profitable. The North part thereof is Fenny, but withal fruitful, whereof
Henry of H^ntington and William of Malmesbury thus do write: This Fenny Country
is passing rich and plenteous, yea, and beautiful also to behold, wherein is
so great store of fish, that strangers do wonder, and water-fowle so cheap,
that five men may therewith be satisfied with l^sse then an halfe-penny.

(7) Places of ancient note in this Shire are these, Places of ancient note.
Erminstreet.
the Erminstreet-way, which upon the lower west parts of this County, through
Roiston, runs forthright unto Huntingdon. And from Reach a Market-Towne
standing near to the River Came, a great Ditch and Trench is cast all along
New-Market-Heath, which for the wonder conceived thereat, is of the vulgar
called The Devils ditch, being in truth made for a defense against the Mercians
by the East Angles, Devils Ditch.
whose Kingdom is inverged. Gogm^gog hills. Henry Hunt.
The Gogmagog hills near Cambridge retain the remembrance of the Danish
Station, where as yet on their tops is seen a Rampire, strengthened with a
threefold Trench, whereof Gervase of Tilbury tells us many a pretty Tale.

(8) This Shire is divided into seventeen Hundreds, The division of this Shire.
Market towns. Castles. Parish Chur^hes.
wherein are seated eight Market Towns, and has bin strengthened with seven
Castles, and God divinely honored in 163. Parish-Churches.

map of Cambridgeshire CAMBRIDGSHIRE described with the division of the
hundreds the Towns situation with the Arms of the Colleges of that famous
Vniuersiti.


An Alphabeticall Table of all the Towns, Rivers, and memorable places
mentioned in Cambridge-shire.
HVNDREDS in Cambridge-shire.
1. Wisbech. 2. Wichford. 3. Ely. 4. Staplehoo. 5. Chevelie. 6. Stane. 7.
Northstoe. 8. Papworth. 9. Chesterton. 10. Flendishe. 11. Radfeild. 12.
Chilford. 13. Whittlesford. 14. Thryplow. 15. Wetherley. 16. Stowe. 17.
Armingford.
A
Abington, Arming. Abington great, Chil. Abington little, Chil. Arrington,
Weth. Ashley, Cheu. Aure, Which. Audrey causey, North.
B
Badburham, Chil. Badlingham, Staple. Balsham, Rad. Barrington, VVeth.
Bartlowe, Chil. Barton, Weather. Bassingborne, Arm. Bedelthey, Ely. Brame, Ely.
Brinckley, Rad. Bottisham, Stane. Bourne, Stowe. Boxworth, Pap. Burrow, Rad.
Burwells, Staple.
C
Came Flu. Caldecott, Stowe. CAMBRIDGE, Flend. Castle Camps Chil. Shady Camps,
Chil. Carleton, Rad. Catlidge, Cheu. Caxton, Stowe. The Chare, Which.
Chatteris, Which. Chesterton, Chest. Chetcham, Ely. Chevely, Cheve. Childerley,
Chest. Chippenham, Stap. Clopton, Weather. Clowcrosse, Which. Colham, Which.
Weston Colvill, Rad. Comberton, Weather. Conyngton, Pap. Copthall, Ely.
Cottenham, Chest. Cottenham, North. Coveney, Which. Crawden, Arming. Croxton,
Stowe.
D
Ditton, Flend. Wood Ditton, Cheve. Dixford, VVhittlesf. Denny, North.
Doddington, Which. Downham, Ely. Dowsdale, Wis. Drayton fenne, Pap. Dry
Drayton, Chest. Dullingham, Rad.
E
East great, Stowe. Eldernall, Which. Elm, Wis. Elsworth, Pap. Eltisley,
Stowe. ELY, Ely. Erith causey, Which. Eversden great, Stowe. Eversden little,
Stowe.
F
Fordham, Stap. Forton, Thryp. Fowlmere, Thryp. The Frith dike, Which. Fulburne
little, Flend. Fulburne great, Flend.
G
Gamlinghey, Stowe. Gaton, Chest. Girton, North. Gogmagog hills, Flend.
Granceter, Weather. Gransden parva, Stowe. Gransden magna, Stowe. Graveley,
Pap. Gyherne, Wis.
H
Haddenham, Which. Hardwick, Stowe. Harimere chap, Wis. Harlston, Thryp.
Harlton, Weather. Hastingfield. VVeth. Hatley East, Arming. Hatley S. George,
Stowe. Hawxton, Thryp. Hildersham, Chil. Hinxton, Which. Hobbes house, Wis.
Hogginton, North. Hormingsey, Flend. Horsheathe, Chil. Cherry Hynton, Flend.
Hystons, Chest.
I
Ickleton, VVic. Impington, North. Isellham, Stap.
K
Kennitt, Stap. Kingstone, Stowe. Knapwell, Pap. Knesworth, Arming. Kyrtling,
Cheu.
L
Landbeach, North. Landwade, Stap. New Leame, VVic. Watersey Leame, Wis.
Leverington, Wis. Litlington, Arming. LITTLEPORT, Ely. Lowleworth, North.
LYNTON, Chil.
M
Maddingley, North. Maden lode, Ely. Maney, Which. S. Mary's, Wis. Melborne,
Arming. Melreth, Arming. Mepole, Which. Mershe, Which. Milton, North. Gilden
Morden, Arming. Steple Morden, Arming.
N
Newbernes, Ely. NEWMARKET, Che. Newmarket-heath, Che Newton, Thryp. Newton,
Wis. Norney, Ely.
O
Ouse Flu. Owre, Pap. Owtwell, Wis. Oxwell, VVeth.
P
Pampisford, Chil. Papworth Evered, Pap. Papworth Agnes, Pap. Persondrove, Wis.
Prickwillow, Ely.
Q
Quaney, Ely.
R
Rampton, North. Ramsey mere, Wic. RECHE, Which. ROYSTON, Arm.
S
Sawston, Wit. Saxum, Cheu. Shelford great, Thryp. Shelford little, Thryp.
Shengey, Arm. Sheperheth, Weth. Snaylwell, Stap. Soham, Stap. Soham mere, Stap.
Statchworth, Rad. Stanton long, North. Stapleford, Thryp. Stontney, Ely. Stowe,
Stowe. Stowe Quire, Stane. Streatham, Which. Streatham mere, North. Sutton,
Which. Swaffham prior, Stane. Swaffham bulbeck, Stan Swavesey, Pap.
T
Tadlow, Arming. Teversham, Flend. Thetfort, Which. Thorney, Ely. Thorney, Which.
Thryplowe, Thryp. Tofte, Stowe. Trokenhole, Wis. Trumpington, Thryp.
Turbulsey, Ely. Tydd S. Gyles, Wis.
V
Vp-mere, Which. Vpware, Which. Vpwell, Wis.
W
Walton, Weth. Waterbeach, North. Welney, Ely. Wendy, Armin. Wentworth, Which.
Westwick, Chest. Westley, Rad. Whaddon, Arm. Whittlesey, Which. Whittlesey
dike, Which. Whittlesey mere, Which. Whitwell, Weth. Wicham, Which. Wichford,
Which. Wickham West, Chil. Wicken, Stap. Widford, Thryp. Wilberham great, Stane.
Wilberham little, Stane. Wilberton, Which. Willingham, Pap. Willingham, Rad.
Willington, Which. WISBICH, Wis. Witcham, Which. Wittlesford, Whit. West
Wratting, Rad. Wymple, Weth.
HERTFORD-SHIRE. CHAPTER XX.
The bounds of Hertford-shire.
HERTFORD-SHIRE is bordered upon the North with Bedford and Cambridge-shires;
upon the East, is altogether bounded by Essex; upon the South, is confined with
Middlesex; and her West butteth upon Buckingham and Bedfordshires.

The form.
(2) The form thereof is somewhat circular, with many indents to fetch in those
Towns that are dispersedly stragled into her next Shire: whereof Ro^ston and
Totteridge are the two extremes from North to South, betwixt whom in a strait
drawn line are twenty seven English miles, The length. The breadth.
and from Putnam Westward, to Cheston Nunnery in the East, are twenty eight;
the whole circumference, about an hundred and thirty miles.

The Air.
(3) The air is temperate, sweet, and healthful, as seated in a Climate
neither too hot, nor too cold: the soil is rich, plenteous, and delightful,
yielding abundance of Corn, The Soil.
Cattle, Wood and Grass, destitute of nothing that ministers profit or
pleasures for life, which are more augmented by the many Rivers that arise and
run through this Shire, watering her own and others, till they empty
themselves into the Sea.

The ancient Inhabitants.
(4) Her ancient Inhabitants in the time of the Romans were the
Cattieuchlanians, or Cassiians, and the Trinobantes, as their Writers declare,
and in the Heptarchy was possessed by the East-Saxo^s, Ptol. Caesar. Tacitus.
excepting some small portion thereof that the Mercian Kings enjoyed. The Danes
also in their over-runnings, sought to stay themselves in this Shire, and at
Ware (then Wear) pitched down their rest and hope: Asserius.
for passing the Lea in their light Pinnaces and Shallops, raised therein a
Fort, The War^es.
which maugre the English they kept, until^ that by the wise policy of King
Elfred, that River was parted into more running streams, whereby their Ships
perished, and they intercepted both of provision and further supply.

S. Albans.
(5) The Romans before them had made Verolamium in this Shire their greatest for
account, which in Neroes time was a Municipiall, A Town endowed with the
Privileges of Rome. Tacit. Annal. lib. 14. cap. 10.
as Ninius in his Catalogue of Cities does call it, or as Tacitus, a Free Town;
sacked by Bodua that ever eternized Queen of the Icenians, when seventy
thousand of the Romans and Confederates by her revenging sword perished: the
site and circuit whereof, in this Card we have set according to our view and
measure there taken: whose magnificence for Port and stately Architecture, were
found by her large and arched Vaults in the days of King Edgar, which were
dug into and cast down by Elred and Edmer, Abbots of S. Albanes, for that
they were the receptacles and lurking-holes of Whores and Thieves: the ruins
of which have raised the beauty of her surviving and fair Saint Albanes, where
Offa the great Mercian in great devotion built a most stately Monastery, whose
Church yet standing, retains the ashes of many Nobles, there slain in the
quarrel of York and Lancaster; and a Font of solid brass brought out of
Scotland by Sir Richard Lea, from the siege of Leeth.

(6) Many other Towns, Market towns.
both for commerce, stately buildings, and of ancient Record, this Shire
affoordeth, whereof Hertford, though the Shire-Towne, is not the richest; the
passage through Ware has left her ways so untrodden: to prevent which, in
former times that River at Ware was whained up, and the Bailiffes of Hertford
had the custody of the Key: Hertford.
which howsoever they have lost, yet has the Town gotten her Governor to be
preferred from the name of a Bailiffe, unto a Mayor, assisted with nine
Burgesses, a Recorder, and two Sergeants their Attendants. Herein a Castle, for
situation pleasant, for Trench, Walls, and River, sufficiently fenced, was
lately seen; but marked to destiny, as the Town to decay, has found the hand
of Fortune to overmatch her strength, and to ruinate the Priorie, S. Nicholas,
and S. Mary's Churches, besides a Cell of S. Albanes Monks, that therein were
seated. The like fate falls unto Hemsted, Hemsted.
and her fair Castle, wherein Richard King of the Romans left his life.
Langley.
Yet Langley is graced both in the birth of Prince Edmund the fifth son to King
Edward the third, and the burial of Richard the second that unfortunate King,
who in the Cell of Friars Preachers was there first buried* but afterward
removed and enshrined at Westminster. And in another Langley, near and East
from thence, was borne that Pontifical Break-Speare, Bishop of Rome, known by
the name of Hadrian the fourth, (and famous for his stirrup-holding by
Frederick the Emperor) whose breath was lastly stopped by a Fly that flew
into his mouth.

(7) The civil Battles that in this Shire have been fought, Civil Battles in
this S^^^e.
in the Map it self are inserted, and therefore here omitted, but the more
ancient remembered unto us by Oister hill near S. Albans, whom the judicious
Cambden supposes to have been the Camp of Ostorius the second Lieutenant, and
subduer of great Caractacus; as also seven small round Hills betwixt
Stevennedge and Knebworth, in which are supposed some Roman Soldiers to lie
buried.

(8) Religious Houses built and suppressed, Religious houses erected and
suppressed.
the chiefest for account in this S^ire, were S. Albans, Ro^ston, Ware,
Spowell, Langley, besides them at Hertford, whom Beda calls Herudford: which
Cities graduation is distant and removed from the Equator, The site of Hertford.
52. degrees, 5. minutes of Latitude, and set from the first point of the West,
according to Mercator, in the 20. degree 29. minutes of Longitude. The Earls.
The Earledomes whereof, were enjoyed only by those two honorable Families,
whose achievements we have also therein expressed.

(9) This Counties division is into eight Hundreds, The Shires division.
wherein are seated eighteen Market Towns, and one hundred and twenty
Parish-Churches, as in the Table inserted by their Alphabet are easily to be
found.

map of Hertfordshire HARTFORD SHIRE DESCRIBED The sittuations of Hartford, and
the most ancient town S Albons with such memorable actions as have happened


HVNDREDS in Hertford-shire.
1. ODsey, Hund. 2. Edwinstree, Hun. 3. Branghing, Hund. 4. Brodewater, Hund.
5. Hitching, Hund. 6. Dacor, Hund. 7. Hertford, Hund. 8. Caisho, Hund.
A.
Abbotsbury, Edwinst. Ass^ey, Hitch. S. ALBANS, Caish. Aldbury, Dacor. Aldbury,
Edwinst. Aldbury Hall, Edwinst. Aldenham, Caish. Alswick, Edwinst. Amwell
little, Heart. Amwell great, Heart. Angabury, Hitch. Annables, Dacor. Anslye,
Edwinst. Ashwell, Odsey. Aspender, Edwinst. Aston, Brod. Ayott Laurence, Brod.
Ayott little, Brod.
B
The Beacon, Heart. The Beacon, Brod. The Beacon, Odsey. BALDOCK, Brod.
BARKHAMSTED, D. Barkhamsted, Heart. BARKWAY, Edwinst. Barley, Edwinst. Bartrams,
Brang. The Base, Heart. Beachams, Edwinst. Beaches, Edwinst. Beamonds, Caish.
Beche Wood, Dacor. Bedmont, Caish. Bedwell, Heart. Bedwell Park, Heart. Bell
Bare, Caish. Benington, Brod. Benjoy, Heart. HIGH BERNET, Caish. Bernet East,
Caish. Bersted, Dacor. Berwick, Brang. Bibswell, Hitch. Bleakswaye, Brang.
Bouington, Dacor Bourne Hall, Caish. Bourne end, Dacor. Box-wood, Brod.
Bradfield, Odsey Bragherend, Brod. Bramsifield, Caish. Branfield, Heart.
Branghing, Brang. Brickenden, Heart. High Bridge, Caish. Briggens, Brang.
Brodwater, Brod. Brokell Hall, Brod. Broxboume Wood, Heart. Broxbome, Heart.
Buckland, Edwinst. BVNTINGFORD, Ed. Burley, Brod. Burwells green, Brod. Bushey
Hall, Dacor. Bushie, Caish. Bygrave, Odsey.
C
Caddington, Dacor. Caishoe, Caish. Caishoe Bridge, Caish. Caishoburie, Caish.
Calkott, Odsey. Camberlow green, Odsey. Cassulburie, Brang. Chandose, Dacor.
Cheisfield, Brod. Chepperfield, Dacor. Cheston, Heart. Cheston Park, Heart.
Cheston Nunnery, Heart. Clothall, Odsey. Coddicott, Caish. Cokenhatch, Edwinst.
Colliers End, Brang. Colshill, Dacor. Colney, Caish. Colvestreet, Caish.
Coringley, Edwinst. Corner Hall. Dacor. Cottered, Odsey. High Cross, Brang.
Cudicott, Hitch. Cuhollgate, Caish.
D
Dane End. Dacor. Dane End, Brod. Darnels, Brod. Datchworth, Brod. Digswell,
Brod. Dogshed, Edwinst.
E
Eastwicke, Brang. Elstree, Caish. Epalletts, Hitch. Essenden, Heart.
F
Fincher end, Brod. Flamsteed, Dacor. Flaunden, Dacor. Fresden, Dacor. Friars,
Brang. The Friars, Dacor.
G
Gabbins, Heart. Gabbins* Caish. Gadsden little. Dacor. Gadsden great, Dacor.
Geldesden, Brang. Gigging, Edwinst. Gorehambury, Caish. Graveley, Brod.
Gravesend, Edwinst. Grove, Caish.
H
Hadham great, Edwinst. Hadham little, Edwinst. Hadham nash, Edwinst. Halmeley,
Brod. Haly, Heart. Harding, Dacor. Harpsfield Hall, Brod. HERTFORD, Heart.
Hartingfordbury, Heart. Hatfield Wood, Heart. HATFIELD Bishops, Brod. Haulwicke,
Brod. Helshams Hall, Edwinst. HEMPSTEED, Dacor. Henxworth, Odsey. Hexton,
Caish. Hide Hall, Odsey. Hidehall, Brang. Highover, Hitch. Highstreet, Dacor.
Hillend, Caish. HITCHING, Hitch. HODDESDON, Heart. Horkerell, Brang. Holey,
Heart. Hormead great, Edwinst. Hormead little, Edwinst. How End, Hitch. Holwell,
Brod. Hunsdon, Brang. Hyde, Caish.
I
Ickleford, Hitch. Ilestrey, Caish.
K
Kellshull, Odsey. Kempton, Hitch. Kensworth, Dacor. Kinswoodbury, Odsey.
Kinsburne, Dacor. Knebworth, Brod.
L
Ladwell, Hitch. Laiston, Edwinst. No man's Land, Caish. Kings Langley, Dacor.
Langley Abbey, Caish. Langley, Hitch. The Lea, Caish. Lechworth, Brod. Lenmere,
Dacor. Levesden, Caish. Ludwell, Hitch. Ludwick Hall, Brod. Lullie, Hitch.
M
Mallocks, Brang. S. Margets, Heart. Maiden Cross, Hitch, Meesden, Edwinst.
Merden, Heart. Merston long, Dacor. S, Michael, Caish. Milford, Edwinst.
Minhall, Caish. Minsingbery, Edwinst. Monden frewell, Brod. Monden furnivall,
Brod. More Park, Caish. Morehouse, Caish. North Myms.
N
Nasthide, Caish. Newbarne, Caish. Newenham, Caish. Newenham, Odsey.
Newgatestreet, Heart. Newhall, Brang. New place, Brang. Nimhall. Northaw, Caish.
Northchurch, Dacor. Norton, Caish. Norton, Odsey. Newsels, Edwinst. Nuthamsted,
Edwinst. Nimhall, Caish.
O
Odsey grange, Odsey. Owghton Head, Hitch. Owley, Edwinst.
P
Pansanger, Heart. Parkeward, Caish. Patmer Hall, Edwinst. Pelham burnt, Edw.
Pelham Furneux, Edw. Pelham stocking, Edw. Penley, Dacor. Periton, Hitch.
Pessebery, Brang. Potters crouch, Caish. Pottrels bare, Caish. Pottrels, Caish.
Popes, Heart. The Pree, Caish. Preston, Hitch. The Priorie, Brod. PVCKERIDGE,
Bran. Punchin end, Dacor. Punsburne, Heart. Putnam, Dacor. Putteridge, Hitch.
Q
Quenbery, Edwinst. Quickswood, Odsey.
R
Radwell, Odsey. Redborne, Caish. The Ree, Brang. Reed, Odsey. Redgewells,
Edwinst. Revels, Brod. Reyford, Heart. RICKMANSWORTH. Caish. Ricknesse, Brang.
Ridge, Caish. ROISTON, Odsey. Rose Hall, Caish. Rushden, Odsey.
S
Sabsworth, Brang. Salesbery, Caish. Sandon, Odsey. Sarret, Caish. Satridge,
Brang. Sauntridge, Caish. Sawcombe, Brod. The Scale, Heart. Shenley, Caish.
Sheepehall, Brod. Shepeshide, Caish. S^inglehall, Brang. Sinkles, Caish.
Sleep, Caish. Smalford, Caish. Sopwell, Caish. Spelbrooke, Brang. Standen,
Brang. Stansted Abbots, Brang. Stanthecle, Brang. Stapleford, Heart. S.
Stephens, Caish. Stevenage, Brod. STORTFORD Bishops. Brang. Studham, Dacor.
Sullemaca, Caish.
T
Tannis, Edwinst. Tednambury, Brang. Temple, Brod. Temple dinsley, Hitch.
Tewing, Heart. Tharfield, Odsey. S. Thomas Chapel, Hitch. Thoreley, Brang.
Throcking, Edwinst. Thundrick, Brang. Thyobald, Heart. Titten hanger, Caish.
Totteredge, Brod. Totteredge, Caish. TRING, Dacor. Tunwell, Brod. Two waters,
Dacor.
V
Vphall, Brang.
W
Wadesmill, Brang. Wakerley, Edwinst. Walden S. Paul's, Hitch. Walden Kings,
Hitch. Walkerne, Brod. Wallington, Odsey. Waltham Cross, Heart. Walsworth,
Hitch. Ware Park, Brang. WAR^, Brang. Watford Hall, Heart. WATFORD, Caish.
Watton, Brod. Waymer Castle, Brang. Welbery, Hitch. Welde, Caish. Wellwin,
Brod. Westhide, Caish. Westmill, Brang. Weston, Brod. Westwich, Caish.
Wheathamsteed, Dacor. Whitebarnes, Edwinst. Widboro hill, Brang. Widford,
Brang. Wigginton, Dacor. Willesborne, Dacor. Willion, Brod. Windridge, Caish.
Withiall, Edwinst. Woodgreene, Heart. Woodhall, Brod. Wormeley, Heart. Wulmer
grene, Brod. Wymley great, Brod. Wimley little, Brod.
Y
Yardley, Odsey.
BEDFORD-SHIRE. CHAPTER XXI.
BEDFORD-SHIRE, seated in the South-East of this Island, is a plain and
Champion Country, and lies bounded upon the North with Huntington-shire; The
bounds of Bedfordshire.
upon the East with Cambridge and Hartford-shires; and upon the West with
Buckingham and Northampton-shires.

The Form.
(2) The form thereof is somewhat ovall, and not very large: for from Tilbroke
in the North, unto Studham in the South, The Length and Breadth.
are but twenty four English miles; and from Turny in the West, unto Hatley
Coking in the East, are not fully fourteen; the whole in circumference, about
seventie three miles.

The Air. The Soil.
(3) The Air is temperate, and the Soil bountious, especially the North, whose
borders the fruitful Ouse with her many windings waters. The South is more
lean, and with greater industry brings forth Barley, no better elsewhere.
Generally, this County is Champion, though some places be sprinkled with
Pasturage and Woods.

The ancient Inhabitants.
(4) The ancient Inhabitants known to the Romans, that held in this Shire, were
part of the Cattieuchlani, a stout and warre-stirring people: and yet upon the
report of Caesar's proceeding, Caesar. Com. li. 5.
sent him their subjection for peace. But when that conquering Nation had
brought Britain into a Province under Rome, MAGINTVM a Roman Station.
their Legions lay at Sclanea and Magintum, which are now Sandy and Dunstable,
places of memorable note in this Shire. After them the Saxons coveting for so
fair a Seat, first dispossessed the Britains, under the leading of Cuthwulfe
the West Saxon, about the year of Grace 572. who making it their own, was
lastly enjoyed by the Mercians, as a part of their Kingdom.

The River O^se stayed her course.
(5) In the year of Christ's Incarnation 1399. immediately before those Civil
Wars, that rent in pieces the peace of this Land, betwixt the Princes of
Lancaster and York, the River Ouse near unto Harwood, stood suddenly still,
and refrained to pass any further; so that forward, men passed three miles
together on foot in the very depth of her Channel; and backward, the waters
swelled unto a great height: which was observed by the judicious, to foretell
some unkind division that shortly should arise.

Civil wars in this County.
(6) This County, among the common calamities of the Land, when it lay trampled
under the feet of the Danes, sustained a part: and after that, in the time of
King Stephen, when the Civil Wars thundered betwixt Maud the Empress and
himself, the Shire-town was sore wasted, with great slaughter of men: so when
the Barons forsook their allegiance to King John, the Town and Castle were
rendered up unto their hands, and lastly, by King Henry the third, laid level
even with the ground, some ruinous walls appearing toward the Ouse, but not a
stone left upon the Mount where stood his foundation.

(7) This Town by the Britains was called Lettidur; by the Saxons, Bedanford;
and of us, Bedford: Bedford.
being the chiefest in the County, from whom it takes the name, and is most
fruitful, and pleasantly seated, having the Ouse running through the Town in
the midst, and a fair Stone Bridge built over the same, whereon are two
Gates to lock and impeach the passage, Churches and religious houses in
Bedford.
as occasion shall serve. At the first entrance stands S. Leonards Hospital
for Lazars: and further inwards, S. John's and S. Mary's Churches: within the
Town, S. Paul's, a most beautiful Church, S. Cuthberts, and S. Peter's: without
the Town stands the Friars, S. Loyes, Alhallowes, and Caudwell Abbey: not
far thence, sometimes stood a Chapel upon the Bank of Ouse, wherein (as
Florilegus affirms) the body of Offa the great Mercian King was interred,
Flo^ilegus.
but by the over-swelling of that River, was borne down, and swallowed up:
whose Tomb of Lead (as it were some fantastical thing) appeared often to
them that seek it not, King Offa^s Tomb.
but to them that seek it (says Rosse) it is invisible. John R^sse.
This Town is governed yearly by a Major, two Bailiffes, two Chamberlaines, a
Recorder, a Town-Clerke, and three Sergeants with Mases.

(8) A tale of vain credit is reported of Dunstable, Dunstable.
that it was built to bridle the outragiousnesse of a thief named Dun, by King
Henry the first: but certain it is the place was formerly held by the Romans,
whose Legions there lay, as appears by the Coins there usually found, which
from Magintum are corruptly called Madning-money.

(9) Castles in this Shire are Woodhill, Castles and Houses of the Kings.
Eaton, Temsford, and Amphill, an honor now appertaining to the Crown. And
places of Religion, built by devout persons, but for Idolatrous abuses again
abolished, were at Bedford, Religious houses suppressed.
Harwood, Helenstow, Newenham, Chicksand, Wardon, Woburne, and Dunstable. All
these, with their like, felt the hand of Henry the eight to lie so heavy upon
them, that they were not able to sustain the weight, but were crushed to
pieces, and fell to the ground.

(10) The Graduation of this County, taken for the Shire-Towne, is placed from
the Equator in the degree of 52. and 30. minutes for Latitude, and is removed
from the first West point of Longitude, 20. degrees and 16. minutes.

(11) Whose Princely Families that have borne the Titles both of Dukes and
Earls, The Dukes and Earls.
within the Map it self by names, and their Arms are inserted, as thou see;
and whose Counties division are into nine Hundreds, wherein are seated ten
Market-Townes, and one hundred and sixteen Parish-Churches.

map of Bedfordshire BEDFORD SHIRE AND THE SITUATION OF BEDFORD described with
the arms of those Honorable Familyes that have borne ye titles of Dukes and
Earls thereof.


An Alphabeticall Table of all the Towns, Rivers, and memorable places
mentioned in Bedford-shire.
HVNDREDS in Bedford shire.
1. STodden, Hund. 2. Barford, Hund. 3. Wylly, Hund. 4. Wixamtree, Hund. 5.
Biggleswad, Hund. 6. Redbornstoke, Hu 7. Flitt, Hund. 8. Clifton, Hund. 9.
Manshead, Hund.
A
ANTHIL, Redborne. Arlesey, Clift. Ascotts, Wixam. Aspley guise, Mansh.
Aswicke, Biggle.
B
Barford, Barford. Barkmaw Park, Redbor. Battledon, Mansh. Beckring Park,
Mansh. BEDFORD, Wylly. Beeston, Wixam. Bletsoe, Wylly. Berkford, Biggle.
Berton, Flitt. BIGGLESWADE, Big. Billington, Man's. Biscott, Flitt. Blunham,
Wixam. Bolnhurst, Stod. Brom, Wixam. Brunham, Wylly. Bushmead, Barford.
Byddenham, Wylly.
C
Caddington, Flitt. Calmworth, Barford. Cambleton, Clift. Cardington, Wixam.
Carleton, Wylly. Caysooe, Stodden. Chalgrave, Man's. Chaulton, Flitt.
Chellington, Wylly. Chicksend, Wixam. Clapham, Stodden. Claphill, Flitt.
Clifton, Clifton. Clipson, Man's. Cranfield, Redborne. Crawley Husband, Man's.
Cuphull, Wixam.
D
Deane over, Stodden. Deane nether, Stodden. DVNSTABLE, Man's. Dunton, Biggle.
E
Eaton, Man's. Eaton Sotton, Barford. Edworth, Biggle. Eggington, Man's.
Elmersham, Wylly. Elstowe, Redborne. Euerdon, Biggle. Euersholt, Man's. Eyworth,
Biggle.
F
Farndish, Wylly. Flitton, Flitt. Flitwick, Redborne. Faldo, Flitt.
G
Goldington, Barford. Gravenerstes, Flitt. Gravenhurst over, Flitt. Gravenhurst
nether, Flitt.
H
Harwood, Wylly. Harlington, Man's. Hatch, Wixam. Hatley Port, Biggle. Hatley
Coking, Biggle. Hawnes, Flitt. Haxton, Flitt. Heath, Man's. Henlowe, Clifton.
Hide East, Flitt. Hide West, Flitt. Higham goben, Flitt. Hill, Wixam.
Hockecliffe, Man's. Holcott, Man's. Holme, Biggle. Houghton conquest, Redborne.
Houghton, Kings, Man's. Howell, Clifton.
K
Kempfton, Redborne. Knotting, Stodden.
L
Lanford, Biggle. Legenho, Redborne. LEIGHTON buzard, Man's. Ligrave, Flitt.
Limbene, Flitt. Littleton, Redborne. LVTON, Flitt.
M
Mauldon, Redborne. Margatt, Man. Melchborne, Stodden. Mepshall, Clifton.
Merston morton, Redborne. Milbrooke, Redborne. Milhoe, Biggle. Milton Briaw,
Man's. Mograrige, Wixam. Miltonernes, Stodden.
N
Newnehame, Wylly. Norhill, Wixam.
O
Ocley, Wylly. Ockley, Stodden. Ouse, Flu.
P
Patenham, Wylly. Peggifton, Flitt. Pettenhull, Stodden. Poddington, VVylly.
Potesgrave, Man's. POTTON, Biggle. Pullox hill, Flitt.
R
Radwell, VVylly. Ravensdon, Barford. Reynold, Barford. Ridgemond, Redborne.
Rysely, Stodden. Rokkesdon, Barford. Ruche, Man's.
S
Sandey, Biggle. Sawford, Man's. Scotfeild, Clifton. Segnowall, Man's.
Sharnbrocke, VVylly. Sharpenho, Flitt. SHEFFORD, Clift. Shelton, Stodden.
Shidlington, Clifton. Shillington, Flitt. Silvisho, Flitt. Sondon, Flitt.
Souldroppe VVylly. Southill, VVixam. Stagden, VVylly. Stanbridge, Man's. Standen
over, Clifton. Standen nether, Clifton. Stanford, VVixam. Steppingley,
Redborne. Steventon, VVylly. Stopseley, Flitt. Stoughton little, Stodden.
Stratton, Biggle. Stretley, Flitt. Studham, Man's. Sundon, Clifton. Summers,
Flitt. Sutton, Biggle.
T
Taternall, Man's. Tempsford, Biggle. Tettworth, Biggle. Tenkseke, Redborne.
Thorncott, VVixam. Thurlye, VVylly. Tilesworth, Man's. Tylbroke, Stodden.
Tylworth, Man's. Tyngrave, Man's. TVDDINGTON, M. Turvey, VVylly.
W
Werdon old, VVixam. Westning, Man's. Whipsand, Man's. Wildon, Barford.
Wilshamstead, Redborn. Willington, VVixam. WOBORNE, Man's. Woborne Abbey, Man.
Wodhill, VVylly. Woodenden, Man's. Wotton, Redborne. Womnleighton, Biggl. Wrast,
Flitt. Wrestingworth, Biggle. Wynyngton, VVylly.
Y
Yeldon, Stodden.
BVCKINGHAM-SHIRE. CHAPTER XXII.
BUCKINGHAM, for the plenty of Beech trees there growing, The name of this
Shire.
and those in the elder times of the Saxons called Bucken, may well be supposed
from them to have the Name, as afterward the whole Shire had hers from this
Town BUCKINGHAM.

The form. The limits.
(2) In form it somewhat resembles a Lion Rampant, whose head or North-point
touches the Counties of Northampton and Bedford; whose back or East-part is
backed by Bedford and Hertford-shires: his loins or South-borders rest upon
Barkeshire, and his breast the West side is butted upon wholly by Oxfordshire.
Length.
The length thereof from Waisbury in the South, to Bradfeld in her North, are
thirty nine miles: Breadth.
the breadth at the broadest, from Ashbridge in the East, to Brenwood Forest in
the West, Circumference.
are eighteen; the whole in circumference one hundred thirty eight miles.

Air.
(3) The air is passing good, temperate, and pleasant, yielding the body
health, and the mind content. The soil is rich, fat, and fruitful, giving
abundance of Corn, Grass and Marle. It is chiefly divided into two parts by
the Chilterne hills, Chilterne hills.
which run through this Shire in the midst, and before time were so pestered
with Beech, that they were altogether unpassable, and became a receptacle and
refuge for thieves, who daily endammaged the wayfaring man; Leostan Abbot of
S. Albans.
for which cause Leostan Abbot of Saint Albans caused them to be cut down:
since when those parts are passable, without any great encumbrances of trees;
from whose tops, a large and most pleasing prospect is seen. The Vale beneath
is plain and champion, a clayie soil, stiff, and rough, but withal
mavelous fruitful, naked of Woods, but abounding in meadows, pastures, and
tillage, and maintaining an infinite number of sheep, whose soft and fine
fleeces are in great esteem with the Turks as far as Asia. Plenty of sheep.


The ancient Inhabitants.
(4) The ancient Inhabitants that were seated in this Shire, were the
Cattieuchlani, mentioned by Ptolemie, and then dispersed through the Tract of
Bedford, Hertfort, and this. These yielded themselves with the first to Caesar
under the Romans subjection, whose over-worne Empire ending in Britain, the
Saxons by strong hand attained this Province, and made it a part of their
Mercian Kingdom: yet was it first subdued unto them by Cherdike the
West Saxon, Cherdike the West-^axon.
whose memory is in part continued in the Town Chersey, upon the West of this
County, where in a sharp and bloody battle he was victor over the Britains.
Cuthwulfe.
So also Cuthwulfe a West Saxon at Alesberie in the year of Grace 592.
overcame the Britains, and bare down all things before him: yet no sooner was
their Heptarchie wained, and their Monarchy able to stand alone, The Danes.
but that the Danes, before their strength and growth was confirmed, waxed upon
them; and they not able in so weak a hand to hold fast that weight of
greatness they had so grasped, gave place to their Conquerours, who did many
harms in this Province: for in the year 914. Brenwood.
the Danes furiously raged as far as Brenwood, where they destroyed the City
Burgh, the ancient seat of the Romans, afterward a royal house of King
Edward the Confessor, Edward Confessor.
which they utterly destroyed.

(5) The Shire-town Buckingham, Buckingham the chief Town.
fruitfully seated upon the River Ouse, was fortified with a Rampire, and
sconses on both banks, by K. Edward the elder, says Marianus the Scottish
Writer; where in the heart of the Town has stood a strong castle, mounted upon
an high hill, which long since was brought to the period of her estate, now
nothing remaining besides the signs, that there she had stood. The River
circulates this Town on every side, that only on the North excepted, over which
three fair stonebridges lead, and into which the springs of a Well run, called
S. Rumalds, S. Rumalds Well.
a child-saint borne at Kings Sutton, canonized, and in the Church of this
Town enshrined, with many conceited miracles and cures: such was the hap of
those times, to produce Saints of all ages and sexes. The Magistracy of
Buckingham.
This Town is governed by a Bailiffe and twelve principal Burgesses; and is in
the degree removed from the first point of the West for Longitude 19.33.
scruples; and the North Pole elevated in Latitude for the degree of 52.18.
scruples.

(6) A Town of ancienter note is Stony-Stretford, Stony Stretford.
the Romans Lactorodu^, being built upon that ancient Causey-way which is
called Watling street, Watling-street.
where remain the marks thereof even unto this day. At this place Edward the
elder stopped the passage of the Danes, whiles he strengthened Torcester against
them: and herein, K. Edward in memory of his wife Queen Eleanor.
King Edward the eldest since the Conquest, reared a beautiful Cross in
memory of Eleanor his dead Queen, as he did in every place where her Corpse
rested, from Herdby in Lincolne-shire till it was received and buried at
Westminster.

(7) Places intended for Gods true worship, Places of Religion.
built by devout persons, and sequestered from worldly employments, were at
Launden, Luffeld, Bidlesden, Bradwell, Nothey, Ankerne, Missenden, Tekeford,
Partrendune, Ashbridge, and Alesbury: Ashbridge a fained miracle.
Ashbridge in great repute for the blood (supposed out of Christ's sides)
brought out of Germany by Henry the eldest son of Richard King of the Romans,
and Earl of Cornwall, whereunto resorted great concourse of people for
devotion, and adoration thereof. But when the Sunshine of the Gospel had
pierced through such clouds of darkness, it was perceived apparently to be
only honey clarified and colored with Saffron, as was openly showed at Paul's
Cross, Bishop of Rochester.
by the Bishop of Rochester, the twenty four of February, and year of Christ
1538. Alesburie. S. Edith.
And Alesbury for the holiness of S. Edith was much frequented, who having this
Town allotted for her Dowry, bad the world and her husband farewell, in taking
upon her the veil of devotion, and in that fruitful age of Saints became
greatly renowned, even as far as to the working of miracles. These all in the
storms and rage of the times, The Shipwreck of Super^tition.
suffered such shipwreck, that from those turmoiled Seas, their Merchandise
light in the right of such Lords as made them their own for wreacks indeed.

(8) With four Castles this Shire has been strengthened, Castles, Newport.
Buckingham. Lounden. Hanshope. Market towns.
and through eleven Market Towns her Commodities traded; being divided, for
service to the Crown and State, into eight Hundreds, and in them are seated
one hundred fourscore and five Parish-Churches, as in the Table annexed
Alphabetically are expressed.

map of Buckinghamshire BUCKINGHAM Both Shyre, and Shire: town describ.


An Alphabeticall Table of all the Towns, Rivers, and memorable places
mentioned in Buckingham-shire.
HVNDREDS in Buckingham-shire.
1. NEwport. 2. Buckingham. 3. Collstowe. 4. Ashenden. 5. Alesbury. 6.
Disburrough. 7. Burnham. 8. Stock.
A
Achenborow, Buc. Ackeley, Buck. Addington, Buck. Adstocke, Buck. AGMONDSHAM,
Bu. AYLESBVRY, A. Vale of Aylesbury, Ales. Apstone, Dis. Ascott, Coll.
Ashridge, Coll. Ashendon, Ash. Aston clinton, Ales. Aston abbotts, Coll. Cold
Aston, Ales. Astwood, New. Aunslop, New.
B
Barton, Buck. Beach hampton, Bu. BEACONFIELD, Burn. Bearton, Ales. Bernwood
forest, A. Bidlesden, Buck. Blechley, New. Bledlow, Ales. Boreney, Bur.
Boreton, Buck. Bostall, Ash. Cold Bradfield, New. Bradnam, Dis. Bradnam park,
Dis. Bradwell, New. Brickhill little, New. Brickhill great, New. Bow
Brickhill, New. Brill, Ashen. Broughton, Ales. Broughton New. BVCKINGHAM, Buc.
Buckland, Ales. Burnham, Burn. East Burnham, Burn. Burston, Coll.
C
Calverton, New. Caldecott, New. Castlethorpe, New. Caveley, Buck. Caversfeild,
Buck. Chalfont S. Peter's, Burn. Chalfont S. Gyles. Burn. Chalwey, Stock.
Checkmore, Buck. Chechely, New. Cheddington, Coll. Chepping wickcomb Dis.
Chepping wickcomb florens, Dis. Cherslie, Ash. Chesham, Burn. Chesham boys,
Burn. Cheyneyes, Burn. Chilton, Ash. Chitwood, Buck. Cholesbury, Ales.
Choldesbury, Coll. Claydon middle, Ash. Steeple Claydon, Buck. Claydon East,
Ash. Clifton raines, New. Colbrocke in horton, Stock. COLBROCKE in LANGLEY, S.
Cold-aston, Ales. Crandon, Ash. North Crowly, New. Cublington, Coll. Cuddenton,
Ales.
D
Datchet, Stock. Denham, Stock. Dorney, Burn. Dorton, Ash. Drayton beauchampe,
Coll. Drayton parslowe, Coll. Dunton, Coll. Dynton, Ales.
E
Eaton, New. Eaton, Stock. Edgcott, Buck. Edlesburrough, Coll. Elsborough,
Ales. Emmerton, New. Eydroppe, Ash.
F
Farnam royal, Bur. Fawly, Dis. The Feath, Burn. Filgrane, New. Fingerst, Dis.
Folcott, Buck. Fulbro^, Col. Fullmere, Stock.
G
Gamboro, Ash. Gawcott, Buck. Mershe Gibbeen, Buck. Gotehurst, New. Grendon
long, Ash. Greneland, Dis. Grove, Coll.
H
Hadnam, Ales. Hambleden, Dis. Little Hamden, Ales. Great Hamden, Ales. Leck
Hamsted, Buck. Hanslop, New. Hardmere, New. Hardwick, Coll. Hardwood great,
Coll. Hardwood little, Coll. Hardwell, Ales. Haversham, New. Haulton, Ales.
Hawridge, Coll. Hedgeley, Stock. Hedstor, Dis. Hillesden, Buck. Hitchendon,
Dis. Hoggerston, Col. Hogshawe, Ash. Horidge, Ales. Horsenden, Ales.
Horsingdon, Ash. Horton, Stock. Hucket, Ales.
I
Ilmere, Ash. Ipston, Dis. Iuet, Stock. IVINGOE, Coll.
K
Kimbers, Ales. Kingsey, Ash. Krestow, Coll.
L
Langley marish, Stock. Lan^icke, Ales. Latimers, Burn. La^ndon, New. Lee,
Ales. Snipton Lee, Ash. S. Leonards, Ales. Lillingstone dayrell, Buck.
Linchlad, Coll. Lithershall, Ash. Littlecott, Coll. Lothbury, New. Loughton,
New. Luffeild, Buck. Lynford little, New. Lynford great. New.
M
Marlowe little, Dis. Marlowe great, Dis. Marlowe florens, Dis. Marshe gibbon,
Buck. Mayes morten, Buck. Mednam, Dis. Mentmore, Coll. Little Merdon, Ash.
North Merston, Ash. Mersworth, Coll. Middleton keynes, New. Great Missenden,
Ales. Little Missenden, Ales. Morton, Dis. Moulso, New. Mursley, Coll.
N
Nashe, Coll. Nettleden, Coll. Newington longfield, New. Newington blomareile,
New. NEWPORT, Ne^ Nothey, Ash.
O
Ockley, Ash. OVLNEY, Ne^. Oulswick, Ales. Ouse Flu.
P
Padbury, Buck. Pen, Burn. Pichcote, Ash. Pitston, Col. Poundon, Buck.
Prebend end, Buck. Preston, Buck.
Q
Quainton, Ash.
R
Radnage, Dis. Ratley, Buck. Ravenstone, New. Over Rendon, Ash. Rickmansworth,
Bur. Princes Risborough, Ales. Monks Risborough, Ales. Rowsham, Coll.
S
Sabbinton, Ash. Sander^on, Dis. Aston Standford, Ash. Saulden, Coll. Shaulton,
Buck. Sheney, New. Sherley brook end, Coll. Sherington, New. Sh^pton, Coll.
S^ckle-^urrow, Coll. Spnam, Burn. Sapton, Coll. Staunton, New. Stoke golding,
New. Stoke poges, Stock. Stoke manuill, Ales. Stoke hamond, New. Stone, Ales.
STONY STRATFORD, Ne. Stowe, Buck. Fenny Stratford, New. Waters Stratford, Buck.
Stuckley, Coll. Sulbury, Coll. Swanburne, Coll. Sympson, New.
T
Tame Flu. Thorneborowe, Buck. Thornton, Buck. Thurringham, New. Tingwick,
Buck. Tinweston, Buck. Topley, Burn. Tottenhoo, Coll. Tousey, Ash. Turfeild,
Dis. Turvye, New. Twyford, Buck.
V
Vpburne denicourt, Dis. Vpton, Stock. Vuing, Ash.
W
Waddosdon, Ash. Walton, Ales. Walton, New. Over Wamden, New. Warrington, New.
Waysbury, Stock. Weeden, Coll. Wendover florens, Ales. Wendover, Ales.
Westbury, Buck. Westcote, Ash. Weston under wood, New. Weston turvill, Ales.
Wexham, Stock. Whaddon chase, Coll. Whaddon, Coll. Whitchurch, Coll. HIGH
WICKHAM, Bur. West Wickham, Dis. Nether Winchington, Ash. Upper Winchington,
Ash. Wing, Coll. Wingrave, Coll. WINSLOWE, Coll. Winslow heath. Coll. Wolston
little, New. Wolston great, New. Wolverton, New. Woodsham, Ash. Wormenall, Ash.
Wotton underwood, Ash. Woughton, New. Wyllyne, New.
OXFORDSHIRE, receives her name from that famous University, and most
beautiful City Oxford, The name of this Shire.
and this of the Foord of Oxen, say our English Saxons; though Leiland upon a
ground of conjecture will have it Ousford, from the River Ouse (by the Latins
called Isis, which gives name likewise to the adjoining Island Ousney. The
borders of Oxfordshire.
The North point of this Shire is bordered upon by the Counties of Warwick and
North-Hampton, the East with Buckingham, the West by Gloucester-Shire, and the
South altogether is parted from Barke-Shire by Thamisis, the Prince of British
Rivers.

The Air and temperature.
(2) The blessings both of the sweet-breathing heavens, and the fruitful site
of this Counties soil, are so happy and fortunate, that hardly can be said
whether exceeds. The air mild, The Soil.
temperate and delicate; the Land fertile, pleasant and bounteous; in a word,
both Heaven and Earth accorded to make the Inhabitants healthful and happy:
The hills laden with woods and cattle, the valleys burdened with corn and
pasturage, The Rivers.
by reason of many fresh springing Rivers which sportingly there-thorow make
their passage; whereof Evenlod, Charwell, Tame and Isis are chief: which two
last making their Bed of Marriage near unto Dorchester, run thence together
in one channel and name.

The length, breadth, and circumference.
(3) The length of this Shire is from Cleydon in the North-West, unto Caversham
in her South-East, near unto Thamisis, and amounts almost to forty miles;
the broadest part is in her Western Borders, which extending from the said
Cleydon in the North, unto Faringdon seated upon the River Isis in the South,
are scarcely twenty six: and thence growing narrower like unto a Wedge,
containing in Circumference about one hundred and thirty miles.

The ancient Inhabitants.
(4) The ancient Inhabitans known to the Romans, were the Dobuni, part whereof
possessed further Westernly into Gloucestershire, and nearer Eastward, betwixt
the bowing of Thamisis, were seated the Ancalites, who sent their submission
unto Julius Caesar, Caesar. Com. l 5.
when report was made that the Trinobantes had put themselves under his
protection; whereof followed the Britains servitude under the proud yoke of
the all-coveting Romans: yet afterward this Counties people, being very
puissant (as Tacitus terms them) and unshaken by wars, withstood Ostorious
Scapula the Roman Lieutenant, choosing rather to yield their lives in Battle,
then their persons to subjection. Of later times it was possessed by the
Mercian-Saxons, as part of their Kingdom, though sometimes both the West
Saxons, and the Northumbrians had the dispose of some part thereof: for Beda
affirms that King Oswold gave the then-flourishing City Dorchester unto
Berinus the West Saxons Apostle, to be his Episcopal See: whence the good
Bishop coming to Oxford, and preaching before Wulpherus the Mercian King (in
whose Court Athelwold the South Saxons heathenish King was then present) he
with all his Nobles were converted to the faith of Christ, Historia domus S.S
wythini Winton.
and there baptized, whereby Berinus became the Apostle also of the
South Saxons.

(5) Other places of memorable note, either for actions therein happening, or
for their own famous esteem, are the Roll-rich-stones, standing near unto
Enisham in the South of this Shire: a monument of huge stones, set round in
compass, in manner of the Stonehenge: of which, fabulous tradition has
reported forsooth, that they were metamorphosed from men, but in truth were
there erected upon some great victory obtained, either by, or against Rollo the
Dane, who in the year 876. entered England, and in this Shire fought two
Battles, one near unto Hoch-Norton, and a second at the Scier Stane.

Simon Dunelm.
(6) Rodcot likewise remains as a monument of Oxfords high styled Earl, but
unfortunate Prince, Robert de Vere, who besides the Earldom, was created by
King Richard the second, Marquess of Dublin, and Duke of Ireland: but at that
Bridge, A Battle.
discomfited in fight by the Nobles, and forced to swim the River, where
began the downfall of his high mounted fortunes; for being driven forth of his
Country, lastly died in exile and distressed estate. But more happy is this
County in producing far more glorious Princes, as King Edward the Confessor,
who in Islip was borne; Edward the victorious black Prince, in Woodstock; and
in Oxford that warlike Coeur de Lion, King Richard the first, the son of King
Henry the second, first took breath.

OXFORD.
(7) Which City is, and long has been the glorious seat of the Muses, the
British Athens, and learnings wellspring, from whose living Fountain the
wholesome waters of all good literature streaming plenteously, have made
fruitful all other parts of this Realm, and gained glory amongst all Nations
abroad. Antiquity avoucheth, that this place was consecrated unto the sacred
Sciences in the time of the old Britains, and that from Greekelad, a Town in
Wilt-shire, the Academie was translated unto Oxford, as unto a Plant-plot, both
more pleasing and fruitful: whereto accords the ancient Burlaeus and Necham,
Merlin Vaticin. Necham de Na. ^erum, lib. 2. ^u^laeus in Prod^mata Arist.
this latter also alleging Merlin. But when the beauty of the Land lay under
the Saxons profane feet, it sustained a part of those common calamities,
having little reserved to uphold its former glory, save only the famous
monument of Saint Frideswids Virgine-Conquest, no other School then left
standing besides her Monastery: yet those great blasts, together with other
Danish storms, being well blown over, Will. Malmes.
King Elfred, that learned and religious Monarch, recalled the exiled Muses to
their sacred place, and built there three goodly Colleges for the Studies of
Divinity, Philosophy, and other Arts of humanity, sending thither his own
son Ethelward, Annals of the Abbey of Winchester.
and drew thither the young Nobles from al parts of his kingdom. The first
Reader thereof was his supposed brother Neote, a man of great learning, by
whose direction King Elfred was altogether guided in this his goodly
foundation. At which time also, Asserius Menevensis, a Writer of those times
affairs, read the Grammar and Rhetoric, and affirms that long before them,
Gildas, Melkin, Ninius, Kentigern, S. German, and others, spent there their
lives in learned studies. From which time that it continued a Seed plot of
learning till the Norman Conquest, Ingulphus records, who himself then
lived. No marvel then if Matthew Paris calls Oxford, the second School of
Christendom, and the very chief Pillar of the Catholic Church. And in the
Council holden at Vienna, it was ordained, that in Paris, Oxford, Bononia, and
Salamanca (the only Universities then in Europe) should be erected Schools
for the Hebrew, Clementin. 5.
Greek, Arabic and Chaldean Tongues, and that Oxford should be the general
University for all England, Ireland, Scotland, and Wales: which point was
likewise of such weight with the Council of Constance, that from this
precedence of Oxford University, it was concluded, that the English Nation was
not only to have precedence of Spain in all General Councels, See the
Disceptation in the Council printed a^ Loran, 1517.
but was also to be held equal with France it self. By which high
prerogatives this of ours has always so flourished, that in the days of King
Henry the third, thirty thousand Students were therein resident, as Archbishop
Armachanus (who then lived) has writ, Armachan. 5. Will. R^shing. M.S.
and Rishanger (then also living) shows, that for all the civil wars which
hindered such places of quiet study, yet 15000. Students were there remaining,
whose names (says he) were entered in matricula, in the matriculation Book.
About which time, John Baliol (the father of Baliol King of Scots) built a
College, yet bearing his name, Anno 1269. and Walter Merton Bishop of
Rochester, that which is now called Merton College; both of them beautified
with buildings, and enriched with lands, and were the first endowed Colleges
for learning in all Christendom. And at this present there are sixteen
Colleges (besides another newly builded) with eight Hals, Wadham College
newly builded.
and many most fair Collegiat Churches, all adorned with mest stately
buildings, and enriched with great endowments, noble Libraries, and most
learned Graduates of all professions, that unless it be her sister Cambridge,
the other nursing breast of this Land, the like is not found again in the
world. This City is also honored with an Episcopal See. As for the site
thereof, it is removed from the Equator in the degree 52. and one minute, and
from the West by Mercators measure, 19. degrees, and 20. minutes.

(8) As this County is happy in the possession of so famous an Academie, so it
is graced with most Princely Palaces appertaining to the English Crown, whereof
Woodstocke is the most ancient and magnificent, built to that glory by K. Henry
the first, and enlarged with a Labyrinth of many windings by K. Henry the
second, to hide from his jealous Juno, his entirely beloved Concubine Rosamond
Clifford, a Damsel of surpassing beauty; where nowtwithstanding followed by a
clew of silk that fell from her lap, she was surprised and poisoned by Queen
Eleanor his wife, and was first buried at Godstow Nunnery, in the midst of the
Quire, under a Hearse of Silk, set about with lights, whom Hugh Bishop of
Lincoln (thinking it an unfit object for Virgins devotion) caused to be
removed into the Churchyard: but those chaste sisters liked so well the memory
of that kind Lady, as that her bones were translated again into their
Chapel.

Bensington is another of his Majesty's Manors, built by Will. de la Pole Duke
of Suffolk, but now in neglect through the annoyance arising from the waters
or marshes adjoining. Houses built for devotion, and for abuse suppressed and
again put down, the chief in account were Enisham, Osney, Bruerne, Godstow,
Burchester, and Tame, besides Saint Frideswides, and very many other stately
houses of Religion in the City.

The Divsiion of this Shire is into fourteen Hundreds, wherein are seated ten
Market Towns, and two hundred and fourscore Parish-Churches, whose names are
Alphabetically inserted in the Table ensuing.

map of Oxfordshire OXFORDSHIRE described with ye City and the Arms of the
Colleges of yt famous University. Ao. 1605.


HVNDREDS in Oxfordshire.
1. BAnbury. 2. Bloxham. 3. Chadlington. 4. Wotton. 5. Ploughley. 6.
Bullington. 7. Bampton. 8. Tame. 9. Lewknor. 10. Pirton. 11. Dorchester. 12.
Ewelme. 13. Langtree. 14. Binfeild.
A
Adderbury, Blox. Addington, Plough. Adwell, Lewk. Alvescott, Bamp. Ambesden,
Bulling. Ardeley, Plough. Arnecott, Bulling. Ascott, Chad. Ascott, Tame.
Assenton, Pirt. Astoll, Bam. Astoll Lie, Bam. Aston Steeple, Wot. Aston, Bam.
Aston North, Wot. Aston Rowen, Lewk. Aulkerton, Blox.
B
Bampton, Bampt. BANBVRY, Ban. Balscott, Blox. Barford S. John's, Blox. Barford,
S. Michael, Wot. Steple Barton, Wot. March Baulden, Bulling. Toot Baulden,
Bulling. Baynton, Plough. Beckley, Bulling. Beckley Park. Bulling. Begbrocke,
VVot. Bensington, Ewel. Berington little, Bamp. Berwicke Priorie, Ewelme.
Berwicke Sulham, Ewelme. Bixbrand, Binf. Bix Gobon, Binf. Black Burton, Bamp.
Blackthorne, Bulling. Bladon, VVot. Bletchington, Plough. Bloxome, Blox. Blunt,
Lewk. Bodicott, Blox. Bolney, Bin. Bradwe, Bamp. Brickenton, Bamp. Bridsett,
Bulling. Bright Hampton, Bramp. Brisemorton, Bamp. Britwell Priory. Ewelme.
Britwell Baldwin, Ewelme. Britwell Fulham. Lewk. Broken, Chad. Brook Hampton,
Ewelm. Broughton, Blox. Broughton Poges. Bamp. Bruerne, Chad. Bucknell, Plough.
Burcester, Plough. Burcester Kings, Plough. Burcott, Dor. BVRFOBD, Bam. Burton
great, Banb. Burton little, Banb.
C
Carbridge, Bamp. Cassington, Wot. Caswell, Bamp. Caverfeild, Plough.
Caversham, Binf. Chackenton, Lang. Chadlington, Chad. Chalgrave, Ewelm. Chapel
on the Heath, Chad. Charleton, Plough. Charswell, Wot. Charwell Flu.
Chastleton, Chad. Chawfer, Lewk. Cherlbury, Ban. Chesterton, Plough. Chilson,
Chad. Chillworth, Bulling. Chinner, Lewk. CHIPPING NORTON, Cha. Chisleyhampton,
Dor. Church Cowley, Bulling. Churchhill, Chad. Chymney, Bamp. Clanfield, Bamp.
Clare, Pirt. Clatercott, Banb. Cleydon, Banb. Clifton, Dor. Clifton, Wot.
Cogges, VVot. Cokethorpe, Bamp. Coddington, Plough. Long Comb, VVot. Coome,
Bulling. Cote, Bamp. Cottesford, Plough. Cotton, Banb. Temple Cowley, Bulling.
Cowthorpe, Banb. Crawley, Bamp. Cromish Battley, Ewelm. Cromish Gifford, Lang.
Cornewell, Chad. Cropredie, Banb. Crowell, Lewk. Cuckham, Ewel. Cuddesdon,
Bulling. Cullam, Dor.
D
Deane, Chad. Deddington, VVot. Denton, Bulling. Dickley, VVot. Dorchester,
Dor. Dracot, Ewel. Drayton, Blox. Drayton, Dor. Ducklington, Bamp. Dunse Tive,
VVot. Dunsden, Bin.
E
Elsfeild, Bulling. Emington, Lewk. Enesham, VVot. Enston, Chad. Epwell, Blox.
Esington, Ewel. Evenclods Flu. Ewelme, Ewelm. Eye. Binf.
F
Faringdon little, Bamp. Fauler, Banb. Fencott, Bulling. Fifeild, Dor. Fifeild,
Chad. Finmore, Plough. Finscot, Banb. Foresthill, Bulling. Fringford, Plough.
Fritwell, Plough. Fullbrooke, Chad. Fulwell, Plough. Fylkins, Bamp.
G
Garsington, Bulling. Gatehampton, Lang. Glimpton, VVot. Godington, Plough.
Godstow, VVot. Goldar, Pirt. Goring, Lang. Gossard, VVot. Grafton, Bamp.
Grayes-Court, Binf. Grayes, Binf. Greenfeild, Pirt.
H
Hampton Short, Chad. Hampton Poyle, Plough. Hampton Gaye, Plough. Hanboro
Long, VVot. Hanwell, Blox. Hardwick, Plough. Harecourt, VVot. Harwicke, Bamp.
Haseley great, Ewel. Haseley little, Ewel. Haulton, Bulling. Hayley, Bamp.
Heath, Plough. Heathorpe, Chad. Heddington, Bulling. Hempton, VVot. HENLEY.
Hensington, VVot. Heyford Nether, Plough. Heyford warren, Ploug. Hinton, Lewk.
Holcombe, Ewel. Hollwell, Bamp. HOOK NORTON, Cha. Hordly, VVot. Horley, Chad.
Horton, Chad. Horspath, Bulling. Horspenden, alias Harding, Binf. Horton,
Bulling. Huddon, Bamp.
I
Ibsden, Lang. Idbury, Chad. Isley, Bulling. Ingeston, Lewk. Ipwell, Dor. Isis
Flu. Islipp, Plough.
K
Kellmiscott, Bramp. Kencott, Bramp. Kiddington Nether, VVot. Kidington, Chad.
Kidlington, VVot. Kingham, Chad. Kirtlington, Plough.
L
Langley, Chad. Lashbrooke, Binf. Latchford, Ewel. Lawnton, Plough. Ledwell,
VVot. Lefeild, Chad. Lewe, Bamp. Lewkenor, Lewk. Lillingston lovell. Plough.
Littlemore, Bulling. The Lie, Banb. Lie South, VVot. Lie North. VVot. Lyneham,
Chad.
M
Mangwell, Lang. Mappleduram Gourney, Binf. Mappleduram Chawes, Lang. Marston,
Bulling. Merton, Bulling. Middle Barton, Wot. Middle Aston, Wot. Middleton
Stony, Plou. Milcombe, Blox. Milton, Blox. Milton, Chad. Minster Lovell, Chad.
Mixbury, Plough. Moccott, Bulling. Mollington, Blox. More North, Chad.
Morecott, Plough. Morton, Tame. Mylton little, Tame. Mylton great, Tame.
N
Neithorpe, Banb. Nettlebed, Ewl. Newbridge, VVot. Newinton, Ewel. Newnham
Murrin, Lang. Newnham Courtney. Bulling. Newton, Blox. South Newton, VVot.
Newton Pursell Plough. Noke, Plough. Norton-brimer Bamp. Norton-Over, Chad.
Nusfeild, Ewel.
O
Odington, Plough. Otmore, Bulling. Ouy Chapel, Chad. OXFORD, Wotton.
P
Piddington, Bulling. Priton, Pirt. Piss hill, Pirt. Poscombe, Lewk. Prestend,
Tame. Priorate, Brampt. Pudicott, Chad.
R
Ramsden, Chad. Ricott, Tame. Rodcott-bridge, Bramp. Rotherfeild Grayes, Binf.
Rotherfeild Popper, Binf. Rousham, VVot. Roll-rich-stones. Wot. Rowlwright
great, Chad. Rowlwright little, Chad.
S
Sallford, Chad. Sandford, Bulling. Sandford Heath, Chad. Saresdine, Chad.
Scadham, Tame. Sewcott, Plough. Shelswell, Plough. Shirborne, Pirt. Shilton,
Bamp. Shifford, Bamp. Shiplake, Binf. Shipton upon Charwell, Wot. Shipton
Underwood, Cha. Shotover Wood, Bull. Shutford, Banb. Sidenham, Lewk. Sommerton,
Plough. Souldren, Plough. Southorpe, Chad. Spilesbury, Chad. Stanford, VVot.
Stanlake, Bamp. Stanton S. John's, Bulling. Staunton Harecourt, Wot. Steple
Aston, VVot. Stodham, Dor. Stoke Line, Plough. Stoke Rue, Lang. Stoke Stolemag,
Pirt. Stoke North, Lang. Stoke South, Dor. Stoken Church, Lewk. Stonesfeild,
VVot. Stratton Audley, Plough. Swaclive, Banb. Swerford, Chad. Swinbrooke,
Chad. Swincombe, Ewel. Sybberds gore, Blox. Sybberds Ferries, Blox. Synett,
Bamp.
T
Tackley, Wot. Tadmerton little, Blox. Tadmerton great, Blox. Tadlisthorpe,
Chad. Tamerton great, Blox. Tangley Chad. Tetsworth, Tame. Teynton, Chad. THEM
NEW, Tame. Them old, Tame. Them Park, Tame. Thorpe, VVot. Thorpe, Lang.
Thoulkford, Lewk. Tiddington, Bulling. Tive little, Wot. Tive great, Wot.
Tusmore, Plough. Tythorpe, Lewk.
V
Vpton, Bamp.
W
Walcott, Chad. Warborro, Ewel. Wardenton, Banb. Warrant, Plough. Warton, Wot.
WATLINGTON, Pir. Water Eaton, Wot. Waterpery, Bulling. Waterstocke, Tame.
Weald, Bamp. Wendlebury, Plough. Westall hill, Chad. Westcott Barton, Wot.
Weston South. Tame. Weston North, Tame. Weston on the Green, Ploug. Westwell,
Bamp. Whatley, Bulling. Whichwood Forest, Chad. Whitfeild, Pirt. Whitchurch,
Lang. Wickam, Banb. Wigginton, Blox. Wightill, Wot. Willcott, Wot.
Williamscott, Banb. WITTNEY, Bamp. Witch, Chad. Wiveold, Ewel. Woodcott, Lang.
Woodeaton, Bulling. WOODSTOCKE, W. Worton over, Wot. Worton nether, Wot.
Wotton, Wot. Wroxstone, Blox. Wulvercott, Wot.
Y
Yarnton, Wot. Yellford, Bamp.
The bounds of Gloucestershire.
GLOUCESTERSHIRE, in the Saxons Tongue, Gleaucesderschyre, lies bordered upon
the North with Worcester and Warwick-shires, upon the East with Oxford and
Wilt-shire; upon the South altogether with Sommerset-shire: and upon the West
with the River Wye and Hereford-shire.

The Length.
(2) The length thereof extended from Bristow upon the River Avon in her South,
unto Clifford upon another Avon in her North, are about forty eight miles; and
her broadest part from East to West, is from Lechlad unto Preston, The Breadth.
containing twenty eight: the whole circumference about one hundred thirty
eight miles.

The Form.
(3) The form whereof is somewhat long and narrow: the Air thereof is
pleasant, sweet and delectable: and for fruitfulness of soil hear Malmesbury
and not me: Will. Malmes.
The ground of this Shire throughout (says he) yields plenty of corn, and
brings forth abundance of fruits; The Soil.
the one through the natural goodness only of the ground, the other through
the diligent manuring and tillage, in such wise, that it would provoke the
laziest person to take pains. Here you may see the Highways and common La^es
clad with Apple Trees and Peare-trees, not engrafted by the industry of man's
hand, but growing naturally of their own accord: the ground of it self is so
inclined to bear fruits, and those both in taste and beauty far exceeding
others, and will endure until a new supply come. There is not any Country in
England so thick set with Vine yards as this Province is, so plentiful of
increase, and so pleasant in taste. The very wines made thereof carry no
unpleasant tartness, as being little inferior in sweet verdure to the French
Wines: the houses are innumerable, the Churches passing fair, and the Towns
standing very thick. But that which adds unto all good gifts (a special
glory) is the River Severne, then which there is not any in all the Land, for
Channel broader, for Stream swifter, or for Fish better stored. There is in it
a daily rage and fury of waters, which I know not whether I may call a Gulf or
Whirle-poole of waves, raising up the sands from the bottom, winding and
driving them upon heaps: sometimes overflowing her banks, roveth a great way
upon the face of her bordering grounds, and again retireth as a Conqueror into
the usual Channel. Unhappy is the Vessel which it takes full upon the side:
but the Watermen well ware thereof, when they see that Hydra coming, turn
the Vessel upon it, and cut through the midst of it, whereby they check and
avoid her violence and danger.

The Inhabitants.
(4) The ancient people that possessed this Province, were the DOBUNI, who
spread themselves further into Oxfordshire. But betwixt the Severne and Wye
were seated part of SILURES, or Inhabitants of South Wales. And upon what
ground I know not, let Lawyers dispute it, the Inhabitants in some part of this
Shire enjoy a private custom to this day, that the goods and lands of
Condemned Persons fall unto the Crown but only for a Year and a Day, and then
return to the next Heirs, contrary to the custom of all England besides.

The Commodities.
(5) The general Commodities of this Shire, are Corn, Iron and Wools, all
passing fine, besides Pasturage, Fruits and Woods, which last are much lessened
by making of Iron, the only bane of Oak, Elm and Beech.

Market Towns.
(6) These with all other provisions are traded through twenty five Market-Townes
in this County, whereof two are Cities of no small import: The first is
Gloucester, from whom the Shire takes name, seated upon Severne, near the
midst of this Shire, by Antonine the Emperor called Glevum, built first by
the Romans, and set as it were upon the neck of the Silures, to yoke them,
where their Legion called Colonia Glevum, lay. It has been walled about,
(excepting that part that is defended by the River) the ruins whereof in many
places appear; and some part yet standing, does well witness their strength.
This City was first won from the Britains by Cheulin the first King of the
West Saxons, about the year of Christ 570. and afterward under the Mercians
it flourished with great honor, where Osrik, King of Northumberland, by the
sufferance of Erhelred of Mercia, founded a most stately Monastery of Nuns,
whereof Kineburgh, Eadburgh, and Eve, Queens of the Mercians, were Prioresses
successively each after other.

Gloucester City.
(7) Edelfled a most renowned Lady, Sister to King Edward the elder, in this
City built a fair Church, wherein her self was interred; which being
overthrown by the Danes, was afterward rebuilt, and made the Cathedral of
that See, dedicated unto the honor of Saint Peter. In this Church the
unfortunate Prince, King Edward the second, under a Monument of Alablaster does
lie; who being murdered at Barkley Castle, by the cruelty of French Isabel his
wife, was there intombed. And not far from him another Prince as unfortunate,
namely, Robert Curthose, the eldest son of William the Conqueror, lies in a
painted wooden Tomb in the midst of the Quire; whose eyes were plucked out
in Cardiffe Castle, wherein he was kept prisoner twenty six years, with all
contumelious indignities, until through extreme anguish he ended his life.
And before any of these, in this City, say our British Historians, the body of
Lucius our first Christian King was interred: and before his days the
Britains Arviragus.

The graduation of this County I observe from this City, The Graduation.
whence the Pole is elevated in the degree of Latitude, 52. and 14. minutes,
and in the Longitude from the West 18. and 5. minutes.

(8) The other City is Bristow, Bristow.
fair, but not very ancient, built upon the Rivers Avon and Fro^me, for trade
of Merchandise a second London, and for beauty and account next unto York.
This City stands partly in this County, and partly in Sommerset-shire: but
being a County of it self, will acknowledge subjection to neither.

(9) A City more ancient has been Circester, Circester.
by Ptolemy called Cerinium; by Antonine, Durocornovium; by Giraldus, Passerum
Vrbem, The Sparrowes City, upon a flying report, that Gurmund a Tyrant from
Afric, Alexander Necham.
besieging this City, tied fire unto the wings of Sparrowes, who lighting in
the Town upon light matter, set flame upon all. The circuit of whose walls
extended two miles about, wherein the Consular Port or ways of the Romans met
and crossed each other. This City was won from the Britains by Cheulin, first
King of the West Saxons: afterward it was possessed by the Mercians; and
lastly by the Danes under Gurmund (the former no doubt mistaken for him)
wherein a rabble of them kept the space of a year, Marianus.
Anno 879. and never since inhabited, according to the circuit of her walls.

(10) Places of memorable note are these: Memorable places.
the Island Alney near unto Gloucester, wherein Edmund Iron-side the English,
and Canutus the Dane, after many battles and blood, fought in single combat
hand in hand alone, until they compounded for the Kingdoms partition: Barkley.
Barkley Castle, where King Edward the second was through his fundament run into
his bowels with a red burning Spit: Tewkesbury.
Tewkesbury, the fatal period of King Henry the sixth his government, and the
wound of the Lancastrian Cause; for in a battle there fought in Anno 1471.
Prince Edward, the only son of King Henry, had his brains dashed out in a most
shameful manner, the Queen his Mother taken prisoner, and most of their
favorites slain and beheaded. And at Alderley a little Town standing eight
miles from the Severne, upon the hills to this day are found Cockles,
Periwinkles and Oysters of solid stone, Shel-fish congealed into stones.
which whether they have been Shel-fish and living creatures, or else the
sports of Nature in her works, let the Natural Philosophers dispute of and
judge.

(11) The places of piety, Religious places.
set apart from other worldly Services, and dedicated to religious uses by the
devotions of Princes, erected in this Shire, were Tewkesbury, Deorhust,
Gloucester, Minching, Barkley, Kingswood, Circester, Winchcombe and Hales; which
last was built with great cost by Richard Earl of Cornwall, King of the
Romans, wherein himself, and his Duchess were interred. Their son Earl
Edmund brought out of Germany the blood of Hales, supposed and said to be part
of that which Christ shed upon his Cross. In this place with great confluence
and devotions of Pilgrimage it was sought to and worshipped, till time proved
it a mere counterfeit, when the glorious light of the Gospel revealed to
eyesight such gross Idolatries, and the skirts of Superstition were turned
up, to the show of her own shame.

(12) Dukes and Earls that have borne the title of Gloucester, Dukes and Earls
of Gloucester.
the first of every Family are by their Arms and Names within the Card
expressed, ever fatal to her Dukes, though the greatest in blood and birth.
The first was Thomas Woodstocke, son to King Edward the third, who in Callis
was smoothered in a Feather-bed to death. The second was Humfrey brother to
King Henry the fifth, by the fraudulent practice of the malignant Cardinal and
Queen, made away at Saint Edmundsbury, And the last was Richard, brother to
King Edward the fourth, who by the just hand of God was cut off in battle by
King Henry the seventh.

(13) This Shires division is principally into four parts, The Shires division.
subdivided into thirty Hundreds, and them again into two hundred and eighty
Parish-Churches* whose names are inserted in the Table upon the other part of
this Card.

map of Gloucestershire GLOCESTERSHIRE contrived into thirty three several
hundreds and those again in to four principal deuisions The City of
Gloucester and Bristow discribed with the arms of such noble men as have been
dignified with ye titlles of Earls and Dukes thereof


HUNDREDS in Gloucestershire.
1. BErkley. 2. Grombaldashe. 3. Langley and Swinshed. 4. Thornebury. 5.
Henbury. 6. Pockle-Church. 7. Kings Barton. 8. Kistgate. 9. Dirhurst. 10.
Cleeve. 11. Tibolston. 12. Cheltenham. 13. Tewkesbury. 14. Westminster. 15.
Slaughter. 16. Dudstone. 17. Blidesloe. 18. S. Briavels. 19. Westbury. 20.
Botloe. 21. Crothem. 22. Rapsgate. 23. Whitston. 24. Britles Barrow. 25.
Bradly. 26. Longtree. 27. Bisleigh. 28. Barton. 29. Wotton. 30. Gloucester.
A
Abeall, Brad. Abenhall, Briav. Ablington, Brit. Aboteston, Pock. Acton illger,
Gromb. Acton turfeile, Gromb. Addlestrape, Slaugh. Admington, Kissed. Alderleigh,
Gromb. Alderton, Tew. Alkington, Berk. Almondsbury, Berk. Alveston, Lang.
Alvington, Blid. Ampney Donu, Croth. Ampney Holyrode, Croth. Ampney Peter,
Croth. Apestrosse, Gromb. Apperley, Westmin. Arle, Chelton. Artingham, Whitst.
Arlingham, Berk. Arlington, Brit. Ashchurch, Tew. Ashleworth, Berk. Ashleworth,
Dud. Ashton underhill, Tib. Ashton underhill, Tew. Ashton upon Carren, Tew.
Ashton Somervill, Kissed. Ashton underedge, Kissed. Atherston, Kissed. Avening,
Longt. Avon Flu. Aulston, Worcest. Coun. Te. Aulsworth, Brit. Aunsbury, Henb.
Aust, Henb. Aust passage, Henb. Awre, Blid. Aylberton, Blid. Aylverton, Lang.
B
Badgenden, Croth. Badgeworth, Dudst. Badmanton great, Gromb. Badmanton little,
Gromb. BARKLY, Berk. Barton streat, Dudst. Barnewood, Dudst. Barnsley, Botl.
Barrington, Slaugh. Battesfort, Kissed. Bawton, Croth. Beaverston, Berk. Bekford,
Tew. Beckford, Tib. Bengrove, Tib. Bentham, Dudst. Bicknor English, Briav.
Birdly, Raps. Bisley, Bisl. Bitton, Lang. Blakney, Blid. S. Blasie Chapel.
Henb. Blayson, West. Bleddington, Slaugh. Bleisdone, West. Blockley of Worcest.
Coun. Kissed. Bodenten, Chelt. Boddington, Tew. Bowthorpe, Brit. Boxwell, Gromb.
Bradley, Wotton. Bradley, Wotton. Bradston, Berk. Bradway, Kissed. Bradwell,
Slaugh. Brenchyate, Lang. S. Briavels, Briav. Brimsfeild, Raps. BRISTOW.
Bochampton, Brad. Brockington, Cleeve. Brockworth, Dudst. Brodwell, Slaugh.
Brokwer, Briav. Bromsborrow, Botl. Bruckthropp, Dudst. Buckland, Kissed. Bulley,
Botl. Burton on the hill, Tew. Burton on the hill, Westminster. Burton super Mont.
Kissed. Burton on the water, Slaugh. Bybery, Brit.
C
Calmsden, Raps. Cambridge, Berk. CAMPDEN BROAD. Kissed. Cardiffe, Tew.
Cawhunborne, Kissed. Cemerton, Tew. Cerney North, Raps. Cerney South Croth.
Charfeild, Gromb. Charleton, Henb. Charleton, Long. Charleton Abbots, Kissed.
Charleton Kings, Chelt. Charringworth, Kissed. Chaseley, Westminster. Chedworth, Raps.
CHELTONHAM, Chapter Cherington, Long. Chesell pill, Henb. Childeswickham, Kissed.
Chipping, Campden, Gromb. CHIPPING SODBURY, Grom. Churcham, Westb. Churchbeame,
Briav. Churchdowne, Dudst. Churne Flu. CIRENCESTER, Cro. Clapton, Slaugh.
Cleeve Bishops, Cleeve. Clifford, Kissed. Clifford Chambers, Te. Clifton, Bart.
Clurewall Beam, Briav. Cotes-would, Bisl. Coats, Croth. Codrington, Gromb.
Cold Aston, Pock. Cold aston Lodge, Pock. Colford, Briav. Coln Flu. Comb,
Berk. Compton, Brad. Compton greenefeild, Henb. Compton little, Dirh.
Coteswowd, Bisl. Couldaston, Brad. Couldaston lodge, Chel. Cowberkley, Brad.
Cowley, Berk. Cowln allines, Brit. Cowln deanes, Dirh. Cowndemill, Brad. Cown
Rogers, Brad. Cownsborne, Raps. Cowly, Raps. Cranham, Raps. Crombhall, Berk.
Cross, Westmin. Cross Court, Westmin. Cross Wood, Westminster. Cuckerton, Long.
Cundicot, Kissed. Cundicott, Slaugh. Cutteiden, Kissed.
D
Daglingworth, Croth. DEANE GREAT, Briav. Deane little, Briav. Deane Forest,
Briav. Dedmerter, Gromb. Derham, Gromb. Derham lodge, Gromb. Didbrooke, Kissed.
Dikston, Tew. Dirdurst, Dirh. Dirhurst walton, Westmin. Dixton, Tew.
Doddington, Gromb. Dorsington, Kissed. Dorsington, Kissed. Douell, Longt. Doughton,
Longt. Dowdeswell, Brad. Downehart henley, Dudst. Doynton, Lang. Dristeld,
Croth. Dunbreton, Kissed. Dunington, Slaugh. Dunsborne Abbots, Croth. Dunsborne
Lyre, Raps. Dunsborne Rowse, Cro. DURSLEY, Wotton. Durham, Gromb. Durham lodge,
Gromb. Dymmock, Bot.
E
Eastlenton, Brad. Easton, Barton. Eberton, Kissed. Edgeworth, Bisl. Elberton,
Berk. Elmeley, Tew. Elmore, Dudst. Elmston, Chels. Elmstree, Longt. Elston,
Raps. Emington, Westmin. Estleach Marton, Brit. Estleach Turvill, Crit.
Estrington, Brad. Estrington, Whitst. Evenlod, Kissed. Eversholme Valley, Kissed.
F
Farmecott, Kissed. Fairefeild, Brit. Falefeild, Thorneb. Fiddington, Tew.
Filton, Berk. Flaxley, Briav. Ford, Kissed. Forthampton, Tew. Frampton, Bisl.
Frampton Cottrell, Lang. Frampton upon Sabtin, Whitst. Framilode passage,
Whitst. Fretherne, Whitst. Froceter, Whitst. Fromn Flu. From, Lang.
G
Gatcombe, Blid. Gitting Temple, Kissed. Gitting nether, Kissed. Gitting poor,
Kissed. GLOUCESTER* Du. Grafton, Tibol. Greet, Kissed. Gretton, Kissed. Grumball,
Gromb. Gudderington, Cleeve.
H
Ham, Wotton. Ham, Wotton. Humbrooke, Lang. Hampton mirsey, Croth. Hampnet,
Brad. Hamsfallow, Berk. Hangingston of Worcest. Coun. Kissed. Hanham west,
Barton. Hannan, Lang. Hardwick Whitst. Harescombe, Dudst. Harfeild, Whitst.
Harnell, Croth. Harnhill, Croth. Hartbury, Dudst. Harwick, Westmin. Haselton,
Brad. Hasfeild, Westmin. Hatherley, Dudst. Hatharpe, Brit. Hawksbury, Gromb.
Hawling, Kissed. The Haw passage Tew. Hayles, Kissed. Hempton, Lang. Hempsted,
Dudst. Henbury, Henb. Heydon, Westmin. Hidcott, Kissed. Hill, Berk. Himton on the
Green, Tib. Hincham, Dudst. Hinton, Gromb. Hinton, Berk. Harefeild, Berk.
Horseley, Longt. Horton, Gromb. HORWOOD, Gromb. Hucklecot, Dudst. Huelsfeild,
Brit. Huntingford, Berk. Huntley, Bot. Hyde, Kissed. Hynton, Kissed.
I
S. John's Ashes, Brad. Itcott, Lang. Itcott Ganuth, Thorneb. Iron Acton,
Thorneb. Itchington, Henb.
K
Kempley, Botl. Kempsford, Briav. Kemmerton, Tew. Kingscot, Berk. Kingsholme,
Dudst. Kings Rode* Henb. Kingswood, Gromb. Kingswood Forest, Lang. Kingweston,
Berk. Kynton, Thorneb.
L
Lancante, Westb. Lasborow, Long. Lassington, Dudst. Laterige, Thorneb.
Laverton, Kissed. Lea, Briav. Leaden Flu. Leaden Court, Glocest. Leaden hight,
Dudst. Leach Flu. Leckhampton, Chelt. Lecombe, Slaugh. Leighterton, Gromb.
Lemington the less, Tew. LETCHLAD, Brit. Lilton, Dudst. Littleton, Gromb.
Littleton upon Severne, Lang. Longborough, Kissed. Longford, Dudst. Longhope,
Botl. Longney, Whitst. Loyterton, Gromb. Luppiat nether, Bisl. Luppiat over,
Bisl. Lydney, Blid. The Lie, Chelt.
M
Maismore, Dudst. Mangersbury, Slaugh. Mangesfeild, Barton. MARSHFEILD, Tho.
Marsh-Salt, Henb. Marston, Kissed. Marston Sicca, Kissed. Matson, Dudst. Merton
Henmersh, Kissed. Mesyhampton, Croth. Mickleton, Kissed. Micklewood Chase, Wotton.
Milcot, Kissed. MINCHING HAMPTON, Long. Minsterworth, botl. Minsterden, bisl.
Moorton, Thorneb. Morton, Westmin. Morton Valence, Whitst. Mynetey, Croth.
N
Natton, Tew. Naunton, Slaugh. Naunton, Kissed. Newent, botl. New park, berk.
Newland, briav. NEWNEHAM, botl. Newton, Tew. Newton Bagpath, berk. NEWENT*
botl. New work, Wotton. New work, Dudst. New work, Wotton. Nimpsfield, berk.
NOTHLEACH, bri. Northwaye, Tew. Northwick of Worcest. Coun. Kissed. Northwick,
Henb. Norton, Dudst. Notgrave, brad. Nybley North, Wotton.
O
Oddington, Slaugh. Oldbury, Thorneb. Oldbury, Gromb. Olveston, Lang.
Osseworth, berk. Over, Dudst. Over, Lang. Onolpen, berk. Oxenden, Tew.
Oxenhall, botl. Oxling, Whitst.
P
Pacha, Lang. Pagenhull, bisl. Pariswick, bisl. Pumington, Tew. Pantley, botl.
Passage, Tew. Paxford of Worcest. Kissed. Painswick Lodge. bisl. Pebworth, Kissed.
Pinock, Kissed. Pirton Passage, blid. Pitchcombe, Dudst. Pocklechurch, Pockle.
Post lip, Kissed. Pulton in Wilsh Coun. Croth. Pulton, Croth. Prestbury, Dirh.
Preston, Dudst. Preston, botl. Preston Croth. Preston upon Stower, Dirh.
Prigne, Dudst.
Q
Queiton, Kissed. Quevinton, brit. Quedsley, Whitst.
R
Radburgh, Longt. Rangeworth, Thorneb. Redwicke, Henb. Rendcombe, Raps.
Ridland, Henb. Rissington great, Slaugh. Rissington little. Slaugh.
Rockhampton, Lang. Rodberow, Long. Rodmarton, Longt. Ruardyne, briav. Ruddle,
Westmin. Rudford, botl. Rudwick, Whitst.
S
Saintbury, Kissed. Sandhurst, Dudst. Salperton, brad. Sarney-North, Raps.
Sarney-South, Croth. Saperton, bisl. Saul, Whitst. Seasoncot, Kissed.
Sedgebarrow, Tew. Senhampton, brad. Settesley passage, Westb. Severne Flu.
Sewdeley, Kissed. Sewdeley, Kissed. Sewdeley Castle, Kissed. Sewdeley Park, Kissed.
Shardington great, Dudst. Shardington little. Dudst. Shearhampton, He^b.
Shenington, Tew. Sheperdine, berk. Sherborne, Slaugh. Sherenton, Kings.
Sherston Rock, Henb. Shipton Moigne, Longt. Shipton Olive, brad. Simonshall,
berk. Slaughter the less, Slaugh. Slaughter the upper, Slaugh. Slimbride,
berk. Snowshull, Kissed. Sodbury little, Gromb. Sodbury old, Gromb. Solars, brad.
Southam, Cleeve. Southorpe, brit. Southweeke, Tew. Standish, Whitst. Stanley
Kings, Whitst. Stanley Leonard, Whitst. Stanley Poutlarge, Kissed. Stanton,
briav. Staunton, Kissed. Stanway Church, Tew. Stanway Wood, Tew. Stapleton,
barton. Starton, Dirh. Steanbridge, bisl. Stinchcombe, berk. Stoke, Kissed. Stoke
Bishops, Henb. Stoke Gifford, Henb. Stoke Lodge, Henb. Stoke Orchard, Cleeve.
Stone, berk. Stone-house, Whitst. STOW on the Wowld, Slaugh. Stowell, brad.
Stowicke, Henb. Streatton, Croth. STROUD, bisl. Stroud Flu. Suddington Langley,
Croth. Sutton, Glocest. Sutton under brayles, Westminster. Suilliat Flu. Swell the
higher. Kissed. Swell the lesser, Slaugh. Swindon, Chelt. Side, Raps. Synwell,
berk. Syston, Pockle.
T
Tadilthorpe, Slaugh. Teintons, botl. TETBURY, Longt. TEWEKE^BURY, Tew.
THORNBURY, Thorn. Thormarton, brad. Throngham, b^sl. Tibberton, botl.
Titherington, Thorneb. Tockington, L^^g. Todden^a^, West. Todenham, Kissed.
Toddington, Tew. Todington, Kissed. Tormerton* Gromb. Torworth, Gromb.
Tuddington, Kissed. Tuffley, Dudst. Tunley, bisl. Turkedean, brad. Turfeild,
Gromb. Twiggeworth, Dudst. Twinning, Kissed. Twyning, Tew. Treacle, Westb.
Treddington, Tew. Tresham, Gromb. Tyddenham, West. Tyrley, Dirh. Tyrley, West.
V
Uckington, Dirh. S. Vincents R^cke, bart. Vineyard, Westmin. Uley, berk.
Upleadon, botl. Upton, Longt. Upton S. Leonard, Du^st. Urcote, Swin.
W
Walford, Kissed. Walland, Lang. Walton, Tew. Washborne Worcest. Cou. Tew.
Wapliegh, Gromb. Wanswell, berk. Waynlode-hill, Glocest. Week, Pock. Welford,
Dirh. Westall, Chelt. Westbury, West. Westbury upon Tri^n, Henb. Westcott,
Slaugh. Westerleygh, Pockle. Westington, Kissed. Weston Birt, Long. Weston Regis,
Henb. Weston Lawrence, Men. Weston under edge, Kissed. Whaddon, Dudst.
Whetenburst, Whitst. Whitfeild, West. Whiteley Park, berk. Whitmyster, Whitst.
Whittington, brad. Wickrissington, Slaugh. WICKWARRE, Grom. Wickwick, Lang.
Widford, Glocest. Willersey, Kissed. WINCHCOMB, Kissed. Windridge, Slaugh. Windrush
Flu. Windrush, Slaugh. Winston, brad. Winston, bisl. Wintesborne, Lang.
WITCOMBE GREAT, Dudst. Witcombe little, Dudst. Withibridge, West. Woodchester,
Longt. Woodmancott, Cleeve. Woodmancott, berk. Woodmercott, Raps. Woolaston,
West. Woolston, Dirh. Wormington little, Kissed. Wortly, berk. Wotton, Dudst.
WOTTON underedge, Wot. Wowlsworth, Longt. Wye Flu. Wyke, Puck. Wythington,
brad.
Y
Yate, Henb. Yate, Gromb. Yartelton Hill, botl. Yeonworth, brad.
The m^a^ure and cir^u^f^rence of this Shire.
HEREFORD-SHIRE, (formerly accounted within the limits of Wales) lies
circulated upon the North with Worcester and Shrop-shire; upon the East with
Malverne Hills is parted from Gloucestershire; upon the South is kept in with
Monmouth-shire; and upon the West in part with the Hatterall Hills is divided
from Brecknok; and the rest confined with Radnor shire.

The Climate.
(2) This Counties climate is most healthful and temperate, and soil so
fertile for Corn and Cattle, that no place in England yields more or better
conditioned: sweet Rivers running as veins in the body, do make the corn
bearing grounds in some of her parts rightly to be termed the Gilden Vale: and
for Waters, Wool, and Wheat, does contend with Nilus, Colchos, and Egypt: such
are Lemster, and Irchenfeild, the Banks of Wye, Lug, and From.

The ancient Inhabitants.
(3) The ancient people known to the Romans, (whose power they well felt
before they could subdue them) were the Silur^s, placed by Ptolemy in this
Tract, and branched further into Radnor, Brecknok, Monmouth, and
Glamorgan-shires, at this day by us called South Wales, and by the Welsh
Deheuharth. Their Original, Tacitus in vita Agricolae.
as Tacitus conjectureth by their site, colored countenances and curled hair,
was out of Spain, and as both he and Pliny describes them were fierce,
valiant, and impatient of servitude, which well they showed under Caratacus
their Captain, and nine years scourge to the Roman assaulters, for whose
only conquest (and that made by treachery) the Victor in Rome triumphed with
more then a usual Aspect; and with so equal an hand bare the Scoale of
Resistance, that their own Writers evermore term it a dangerous War. For
the Legion of Marius Valens they put to flight, and that with such havoc of
the Associates, that Ostorius the Lieutenant of Britain for very grief gave
up his ghost: and Veranius under Nero assaulted them in vain. But when
Vespasian was Emperor, and expert Soldiers employed into every Province,
Julius Frontinus subdued those Silures unto the Romans, where continually some
of their Legions afterward kept, till all was abandoned in Valentinians time.

Sutton the Court of King Offa.
(4) The Saxons then made themselves Lords of this Land, and this Province a
part of their Mercians Kingdom; yea, and Sutton the Court of great Offa their
King.

Her^ford the chief City.
(5) But Hereford after, raised of the ruins of old Artconium (now Kenchester,
shaken in pieces by a violent earthquake) grew to great fame, through a
conceived sanctity by the burial of Ethelbert King of the East Angles, slain
at Sutton by Offa, at what time he came thither to have espoused his Daughter;
whose grave was first made at Marden, but afterward canonized and removed to
this City, when in honor of him was built the Cathedral Church by Milfrid, a
petty King of that Country, which Grufsith Prince of South Wales, and Algar an
Englishman, rebelling against King Edward Confessor, consumed with fire; but by
Bishop Reinelin was restored as now it is, An. Dom. 1055.
at what time the Town was walled, and is so remaining in good repair, having
six gates for entrance, and fifteen Watch-Towers for defense, extending in
compass to fifteen hundred paces: and whence the North Pole is observed to be
raised 52. degrees. 27. min in Latitude, and is set from the first point of the
West in Longitude, 17. degrees. and 30. min. being yearly governed by a Major,
chosen out of one and thirty Citizens, which are commonly called the Election,
and he ever after is known for an Alderman, and clothed in Scarlet, whereof
four of the eldest are Justices of Peace, graced with a Sword Bearer, a
Recorder, a Town-Clerke, and four Sergeants with Mace.

The greatest glory that this City received, was in King Athelstans days;
where as Malmesbury does report, he caused the Lords of Wales by way of
Tribute, to pay yearly (besides Hawks and Hounds). twenty pound of Gold, and
three hundred pound of Silver by weight; but how that was performed and
continued I find not.

(6) Things of rare note in this Shire are said to be, Bone-well.
Bone-well, a spring not far from Richards Castle, wherein are continually
found little Fishes bones, but not a fin seen; and being wholly cleansed
thereof, will notwithstanding have again the like, whether naturally produced,
or in veins thither brought, no man knows.

(7) But more admirable was the work of the Omnipotent, even in our own
remembrances, and year of Christ Jesus 1571. when the Marcley Hill in the East
of this Shire, Marcley Hill.
rouzed it self out of a dead sleep, with a roaring noise removed from the
place where it stood, and for three days together traveled from her first
site to the great amazement and fear of the beholders. It began to journey
upon the seventh day of February, being Saturday, at six of the Clock at
night, and by seven in the next morning had gone forty paces, carrying with it
Sheep in their coats, hedge-rowes, and trees; whereof some were overturned,
and some that stood upon the plain, are firmly growing upon the hill; those
that were East, were turned West; and those in the West were set in the East;
in which remove it overthrew Kinnaston Chapel, and turned two highways
near a hundred yards from their usual paths formerly trod. The ground thus
traveling, was about twenty six Acres, which opening it self with Rocks and
all, bare the earth before it for four hundred yards space without any stay,
leaving that which was Pasturage in place of the Tillage, and the Tillage
overspread with Pasturage. Lastly, overwhelming her lower parts, mounted to an
hill of twelve fadomes high, and there rested her self after three days
travel: Job 28*9. Esaias 40.12.
remaining his mark, that so laid his hand upon this Rock, whose power has
poysed the Hills in his Balance.

(8) Religious Houses built by the devotions of Princes, Religious Houses.
and stored with Votaries and revenewes for life, were in this Shire no less
then thirteen, most sweetly seated in the places as follows: at both the
Herefords, Barron, Ewayot, Clifford, Monemue, Acornebury, Lemster, Lingbroke,
Peterchurch, Kilpek, Door and Wiggemore: and suspected of hypocrisy, were
called in question by King Henry the eight, and so strictly pursued, that some
faults were apparent, whereby they were laid open to the general Deluge of the
Time, whose stream bare down the Walls of all those foundations, carrying
away the Shrines of the dead, and defacing the Libraries of their ancient
Records.

(9) This County before the Conquest being accounted in Wales, was then
strengthened with Forts against the English: and being once made a Province to
England, was fortified with Castles against the Welsh, wherein we find no
less then twenty eight, though many of them now are ruinated to nothing. Such
were Alban, The number of Castles in this S^^^e.
at both the Ewyats, Godridg, Grosmond, Herdley, Hereford, Old Castle, Dorston,
Brampton, Bredwarden, Saint Biruels, Ledbury, Lenals, Snowdel, Harlewais,
Huntington, Wilton, Wigmore, Richards, Monemue, Corf^, Kilbeck, Clifford,
Skenefred, Witney, Radenwer, and Keneuenleis, Market Towns.
and is traded with eight Market Towns, being divided into eleven Hundreds, and
in them seated one hundred seventie and six Parish-Churches, containing in
compass 102. miles.

map of Herefordshire HEREFORD-SHIRE described With the true plot of the City
Hereford* as also the Arms of those Nobles that have been entitled with that
Dignitye


HUNDREDS in Hereford-shire.
1. VVigmore, Hund. 2. Wolsey, Hund. 3. Brox^sh, Hund. 4. Stretford, Hund. 5.
Radlow, Hund. 6. Grimsworth, Hun. 7. Greytree, Hund. 8. VVebtree, Hund. 9.
Ewiaslacy, Hund. 10. Wormelow, Hun. 11. Hunlington, Hun*
A
Akenbury, Gray. Alismoore, Web. Allmely, Stret. Altyrynis, Ewia. Amberley,
Brox. Arcoppe, Worm. Aresland, Stret. Arkeiton, Web. Arro Flu. Ashton, Wols.
Asperton, Rad. Aston, VVols. Aston, Gray. Aston, Wig. Arsorton, Wig. Avenbury,
Brox. Aylmystree, VVig. Aylton, Rad.
B
Backton, Web. Ballingham, Worm. Bartestre, Rad. The Batch, Ewia. Batch,
Hunl. Bearley, Stret. Bickleton, VVols. Birchall, Wols. Birrinton, Wols.
Birriton, VVols. Blackmere, Web. Boddenham, Brox. Boresford Wig. Boshbury, Rad.
Boulston, Worm. Boushopston, Grim. Brampton, Gray. BRAMYARD, Brox. Branstill
Castle, Rad. Breadwardyne, Web. Bridgesellars, Grim. Brietley, Wols. Briestowe,
Worm. Brimmeld, Wols. Bringewood chase, VVig Brobery, Grim. Brockhanton, Gray.
Brockmanton, Wols. Brodward, Wols. Brompton, Wig. Brompton brian, Wig.
Broxwood, Stret. Brilley, Stret. Brylley, Hunl. Brymsfeild, Wols. Brynsope,
Grim. Brynton, Grim. Buckton, Wig. Bullingham upper, Web. Bullingham nether,
Web. Bullington, Stret. Burfeild, Grim. Burrington, Wig. Burton, Stret. Bury,
Stret. Byford, Grim. Byrche little, Worm. Byrche great, Worm. Byrdenbury, Brox.
Byshopton, Grim. Byton, Wig.
C
Calowe, Web. Camberton, VVols. Canforme, Rad. Canon peon, Grim. Carsop, Grim.
Cascob, VVig. Chaunston, Web. Chorlestre, Web. Clayhonger, Web. Cledoll,
Ewia. Clyfford, Hunl. Coddington, Rad. Collington, Brox. Colwall, Rad. Comb,
VVig. Covenhope, Stret. Coughton Chapel, Gre. Cowarne little, Brox. Cowarne
great, Brox. Cowley, Rad. Coxall, Wig. Cradley, Rad. Craswell Chapel, Ewia.
Crednell, Grim. Croft Castle, VVols.
D
Delwine, Stret. Deluin little, VVols. Deluin solers, VVols. Dereford Castle,
VVig. Saint Deverax, Web. Dewchurch, Web. Dewchurch great, Worcester. Dewchurch
little, Worcester. Dewlas, Web. Dewsall, Worm. Didley, Web. Dockley, wols. Droier
Flu. Dormington, Gray. Dorston, web. Dounton, wig. Dowre, web. Druxton, web.
Dunington, Rad. Dynchill, Brox. Dyneder, web.
E
Eardisley, Hunling. Easbache, Rad. Eaton, wols. Eaton, Gray. Eaton Bishops,
web. Ecklesall, Gray. Edwin loche, wols. Edwin raph, wols. E^ton Chapel, wols.
Elstones Bridge, web. Elton, wig. Erdeslay, Stret. Eskle Flu. Eskle, Ewia.
Estnor, Rad. Evington, wols. Evisbache, Rad. Eye, wols.
F
Farlow, wols. Fawley Chapel, Gray. Fawnehope, Gray. Felton, Brox. The
Fothoke, Ewia. Fowchurch, web. Fowemynd Chapel, Ewia. Fowemynd, Ewia. Foye,
worm. Frogstreet, wig. From Flu. From, Gray. Castle From, Rad. Bishops
From, Rad.
G
Garnar Flu. Garran Flu. Garwaye, worm. Grafton, web. Grainge, wig. Gransam,
Rad. Grenden Warren, Brox. Bishops Grenden, Brox. Glew^ton, worm. Gotbridge,
worm. Gotheridge Castle, worm. Gunarewe, worm.
H
Ham, worm. Ham lacye, web. Hamnesh, wols. Hampton, Grim. Hampton, wols.
Hardwicke, Hunl. Harewood, worm. Hargast, Stret. Hargast, Hunl. Harlestewas,
web. Harton, wig. Hatfeild, wols. Hawood forest, web. Hennor, wols. Henteland,
worm. HEREFORD, Grim. Hereford little, wols. Hide, Brox. Hide hill, wols. West
Hide, Rad. Holmer, Grim. Hongaston, web. Hope, wols. Hoplers green, wols.
Horewethye, worm. Howcaple, Gray. Howton, web. Hullingwicke, Brox. Humber,
wols. Hunlington, Hunl. Huntington Chapel, Grim. Huntyngton, Stret. Huntisham,
worm. Hursley, wols.
I
Ingham, Gray. Ingleton, Rad. Inkeston, worm.
K
Kenbury, worm. Kenchester, Grim. Kenderchurch, web. Kevernall, worm. Kewstope,
Ewia. Kilpecke Castle, worm. Kimmalton, wols. Kings Caple, worm. Kings peone,
Stret. Kingesland, Stret. Kingesland, wig. Kingsham over, wig. Kingsham nether,
wig. Kingston, web. Kinnaston Chapel, Gre. Knill, wig. Kynechurch, web.
KYNETON, Hunl. Kynnarsley, Stret. Kynton, wig.
L
Llancony, Ewia. Llandinabo, worm. Llangarran, worm. Llanrothall, worm.
Llansillo, Ewia. Llanveyno Chapel, Ew. Llanwarne, worm. Llanyhangle, web.
Llanyhanrleeskle, Ewia. Llattons, Grim. Lawton, wig. Laystas Chapel, wols.
Nether Lee, wig. Over Lee, wig. Lea, Gray. LEMSTER, wols. Lenals Castle, Stret.
Lenthall Earls, wig. Lenthall Starkes, VVig. Lentwardyne, wig. Leonhalls,
Stret. Letton, wig. Letton, Stret. Limebrooke, wig. Lingan, wig. Lodan Flu.
Logason, wols. Longetowne, Ewia. Longward, Rad. Luckton, wols. Ludford, wols.
Lug Flu. Lugwardyne, Rad. Luntley, wols. Luston, wols. Lyde, Grim. Lydden Flu.
LYDBVRY, Rad. Lydbury Foreign, Rad. Lynton, Gray. Lynton, Brox. Llytton, wig.
M
Madley, web. Mansfeild gamage, Grim. Marcle great, Gray. Marcle little, Rad.
Marcle hill, Rad. Marden, Brox. S. Margarets, Ewia. Margast, Stret. Marlow,
wig. Marstowe, worm. Marston, Stret. Marston, Brox. Hope Maunsell, Gray.
Mathern, Brox. Michaelchurch, worm. Middleton, wols. Middleloyte, Ewia. Milton,
Stret. Mockas, web. Moke, Stret. Monderfeild, Brox. Monington, Grim. Monmo Flu.
Monnynton, web. Monsill lacy, Grims. Mordeford, Gray. Moreton Iefferes, Rad.
Moorehampton, web. Morton upon lugge, Grims. Morton, wols. Moukland, Stret.
Mouldley, wig. Munsley, Rad. Mychaelch^rch, Hunl. Mydlewood, Hunl.
N
Nash, wig. Nethwood, Brox. Newchurch, wols. Newcourt, web. Newton, Ewia.
Newton, Brox. Newton, wols. Newton Welsh, worcester. Newton, wig. Noke, Stret.
Norton, Grims. Norton, Brox.
O
Ocull, Brox. Ocull pitchar, Brox. Olcon Flu. Old town, Ewia. Old court, Ewia.
Oney Flu. Orleton, wols. Over hill, wols.
P
Park, Rad. Patchfeild, wig. Pedwardyne, wig. Pembridge Castle, worm.
PEMBRIDGE, Stret. Pencombe, Brox. Pencoyd, worm. Penrosse, worm. Penyard
Castle, Gray. Pery, Brox. Peterchurch, web. Peterstowe, worm. Piddleston, wols.
Pixley Chapel, Rad. Poston, web. Preston, Brox. Preston, web. Putley Chapel,
Gray. Putteley, Gray. Pype, Grims.
R
Castle Richards, wols. Risbury, wols. Rochford, wols. Rod, wig. ROSSE, Gray.
Rosse Ferren, Gray. Rosemaund, Brox. Rotheras, web. Rowlston, Ewia. Rudhall,
Gray.
S
Salers hope, Gray. Over Sappy, Brox. Nether Sappy, Brox. Sarnesfeild, Stret.
Sarnesfeild, Wols. Sarnesfeild Coffen, Stret. Selleck, worm. Shellwicke, Grims.
Shobden, VVig. Shobdon, Stret. Shorley, VVig. Snowdell Castle, Ewia. Stanbache,
VVig. Stanford Kings, Brox. Stanford Bishops, Bro. Staunton, VVig. Staunton
upon Wyland, Grims. Stepleton Castle, Wig. Stocklo, Stret. Stockton, Wols.
Stogbach, VVig. Stogbach, VVols. Stoke, VVols. Stoke Edye, Rad. Stoke Lacy,
Brox. Stoke Blish, Brox. Stouton, Stret. Stretton, Grims. Stretton, Rad.
Stretford, Wols. Stretford, Stret. Suggas, Grim. Suston, Gray. Sutton, Brox.
T
Tadington, Rad. Tedston Dalamer, Brox. Tedston Wafer, Brox. Teneraven Chapel,
Worm. Thornbury, Brox. Tregose, Gray. Tresek, Worm. Tretier, Worm. Trewin,
Ewia. Triago, Worm. Tripleton, VVig. Tupsley, Grims. Turnaston, Web. Twyford,
Web. Tyberton, Web. Tytley, VVig.
V
The golden Vale, Web. Vpton, VVols. Vpton, Gray.
W
Wackton, Brox. Wadels Flu. Walderston, Ewia. Walford, VVig. Walford, Gray.
Warham, Grims. Warton, VVols. S. Waynards, Worm. The Wears end, Wor. WEBLEY,
Stret. Wellington, Grims. Weobley, Stret. Weston, Stret. Weston beggar, Rad.
Weston subter, Gre. Wethington, Brox. Wheyle, VVols. Whitborne, Brox.
Whitchurch, Worm. Whitney, Stret. Witney, Hunl. Wicton, VVols. Wigmor Castle,
VVig. Willersley, Stret. Wilton Castle, worm. Winforton, Hunl. Winforton,
Stret. Winkcot, wols. Winssey, wols. Winslowe, Brox. Wolhope, Gray. The Worlds
end, Rad. Wormebridge, web. Wormsley, Grim. Wonton, Stret. Wullferlow, Brox.
Wytton, wig.
Y
Yarcle, Rad. Yarpoll, wols. Yasor, Grims. Yatton, Gray. Yetton, wig.
WORCESTERSHIRE, by the English-Saxons called Wir-ceasder-scyre, The anci^nt
Sax^n name.
is a County both rich and populous, and lies circulated upon the North with
Staffordshire; upon the East with Warwick and Oxford-shires; The bounds.
upon the South with Gloucestershire; and the West by Malverne hills is parted
from Hereford-shire: the rest lies confronted upon, and in part divided from
Shrop-shire by the River Dowles.

The form.
(2) The form thereof is triangle, but not of equal proportion; for from North
to South are thirty two miles, The length, b^edth, ^n^ circumference.
from South to North-west twenty two, and from thence to her North-east point
are twenty eight: the whole in circumference is one hundred and twenty miles.

The Air.
(3) The Air in this Shire is of a favorable temperature, that gives an
appetite for labor, diet, and rest: the Soil is fertile, and to me seemed
inferior to none other in this Land: for besides the abundance of Corn in
every place spread, the Woods and Pasturage in her hills and plains, Abundant
in fruits.
sweet Rivers that, water the valleys below, and Cattle that cover the tops of
higher ground; the Fields, Hedge-rowes, and Highwayes are beset with fruitful
Peare-trees, that yield great pleasure to sight, and commodious use: for with
their juice they make a bastard kind of wine, called Pe^rey, which is both
pleasant and good in taste. Many Salt. Springs also this County affords; yea,
and more then are commonly in use: such with the Germans, Corn^lius Ta^. in his
description of Germany.
our ancient Predecessors, were esteemed most sacred and holy; so that (as
Tacitus writes) to such they wontedly resorted to supplicate their Gods with
their devout prayers, as to places nearest the heave^s, and therefore the
sooner to be heard. And Poets in their fainings, will have the Nymphs residence
in shady green groves, and banks of sweet Springs: if so, then (as Helicon)
this County affords both: such are the Forests of Wire and Feckenham, the
great woods of Norton, and most fair Chase of Malverne. And for waters, to
witness what I say, is the Severne that cuts this Shire in the midst, Teme,
Salwarp, and Avon, all of them making fruitful their passage, and stored with
Fish of most delicious taste.

The ancient Inhabitants.
(4) The ancient people, possessors of this Shire, were the CORNAVII,
Inhabitants of Chesse-shire, Shrop-shire, Stafford, and Warwicke-shires,
subdued by the Romans in Claudius Caesar's time, and after their departure,
made a portion of the Mercian-Saxons Kingdom, and in Bedaes time were called
the Wicii, whereof it may be this Shire had the name: unless you will have it
from the Salt Pits, which in old English are named Wiches; or from the famous
Forest of Wyre. Howsoever, true it is that the County does hold her name from
her chief City Worcester.

Worcester the chief City.
(5) Which is most pleasantly seated, passing well frequented, and very richly
inhabited. This was the Branonium, mentioned by Antonine and Ptolemie, called
by the Britains, Caer-wrangon; by Ninius, Caer-Gourcon; by the old Saxons,
Wire-ceasder; and by the Latins, Vigornia. This City is seated upon the East
bank of Severne, and from the same is walled in triangle-wise about, extending
in circuit one thousand six hundred and fifty paces: through which seven Gates
enter, with five other Watch-Towers for defense. It is thought the Romans
built this to restrain the Britains that held all beyond Severne. This City by
Hardy Canute in the year of Christ 1041. was sorely endangered, Can^t^.
and set on fire, and the Citizens slain almost every one, for that they had
killed his Collector of the Danish Tribute: yet was it presently repaired and
peopled, with many Burgesses, and for fifteen Hides discharged it self to the
Conqueror, as in his Doomesdayes is to be seen. D^^m^sdayes Bo^ke.
But in the year 1113. a sudden fire happened, no man knew how, which burnt
the Castle and Cathedral Church. Likewise in the civil broiles of King
Stephen it was twice lighted into a flame, King Steph^n.
and the latter laid it hopeless of recovery. Notwithstanding from those dead
Ashes a new Phoenix arose, and her building raised in a more stately proportion,
especially the Cathedral dedicated to S. Mary, first laid by Bishop Sexwolfe,
in Anno 680. since when it has been augmented almost to the River: In the
midst of whose Quire, from his many turmoiles, rests the body of King John
(the great withstander of the Popes proceedings) under a Monument of white
Marble, King John.
in Princely Vestures, with his portraiture thereon according to life. And in
the South Side of the same Quire lies intombed Prince Arthur the eldest son
to King Henry the Seventh, Prince Arthur.
his Monument is all black Jette, without remembrance of him by Picture.

This City is governed by two Bailiffes, two Aldermen, two Chamberlaines, The
Magistracy of the City.
and two Constables, yearly elected out of twenty-foure Burgesses, clothed in
Scarlet, assisted with 48. other Citizens, whom they call their Common
Counselors, clad in Purple, a Recorder, Towne-Clerke, and five Sergeants with
Mace their Attendants. Whose Geographicall Position is distant in Longitude
from the West-Meridian 18. degrees, 10. scruples, having the North Pole
elevated in Latitude 52. degrees, and 32. scruples.

(6) Places of further note for memorable antiquity, is Vpton, Vpton.
of great account in the Roman time, where some of their Legions kept, as
witness their moneys there often found: the admirable Ditch upon Malverne
hills, drawn by Gilbert Clare Earl of Gloucester, Malverne Hills.
to divide his lands from the Church of Worcester: No certain place is
reccided of this Oak, but held to be in this Shire.
the Saxons Augustynes-ace, our Augustines Oak, where he the English Apostle
met with the British Bishops for the uniforme celebration of Easter, from
whence both parts departed with discontented minds after many hot words and
thwarting disputes.

(7) Neither is it without admiration to me, that many places of this Shire lie
far within the Precincts of other Provinces, Many Towns in other Shires
belonging to this County.
as Auston, Washbornes, Cuttesden, Paxford, Hanging-Easton, Northwicke,
Blockley, Eurlode in Gloucestershire, and Goldcote, Aldermerston, Newbold,
Treddenton, Armiscote, Blackwell, Darlingscote, Shipton, Tydminton, Olbarrow,
in Warwick shire; Dudley in Staffordshire, and Rochford in Hereford-shire,
whither I must refer the Reader to find out these and the like in these
Western Tracts.

(8) Religious places erected in this Shire, Religious Houses.
and devoted unto God by devout persons, were Bredon, Brodlege, Eutsholme,
Alnecester, Cochell, Fladbury, Malverin, Pershore, Stodleg, Westwoods, and
Worcester, plenteously provided for, and further secured by many privileges,
both which they abused, as were the inditements of all such in the days of
King Henry the Eight, at whose Bar (himself being Judge) they were found
guilty, and received sentence of their ends and destruction.

(9) Castles for defense built in this County, Castles.
ruinate or in strength, were Hartlebury, Holt, Handl^^, Norton, Elmeley, and
Worcester, besides his Majesty's Manor of Tichnell.

(10) This Shires division is into seven Hundreds, The Shires division and
Market Towns.
wherein are seated ten Market Towns, and one hundred fifty two Parish
Churches, as in the Table following is expressed.

map of Worcestershire WORCESTER SHIRE Described


HUNDREDS IN Worcestershire.
1. HAlfe-shire Hund. 2. Doddington Hun. 3. Worcester Limits. 4. Parshor Hund.
5. Bl^kenhurst Hund. 6. Oswalderstowe Hund. 7. Upton Limits.
A
Aberly, Dodding. Aberley hill, Dod. Abberton, Parsh. Acton Beacham, Worcester.
Aldermerston, Parsh. Aldington, Blak. Alechurch, Blak. Allchurch, Worcester. Alton,
Dod. Arelee nether, Dod. Armiscott, Oswald. Arrowe Flu. Astley, Dod. Aston
great, Oswald. Aulston, Oswald. Ausricke, Worcester.
B
Badsey, Blak. Balton hall park, Worcester. Barrowe, Vpton. Batten hall, Worcester.
Bayton, Dod. BEAWDLEY, Dod. Belbroughton, Half. Bell I inn. H^lf. Bengeworth,
Blak. Bentley pantefore, Half. Be^rington, Dod. Besford, Parsh. Beuley, Worcester.
Birlingham, Parsh. Bishampton, Osw. Blackmore, Vpton. Blackwell, Osw. Blocklie
home, Osw. Blocklie, Osw. Blockleton, Dod. Chenchill Bradicott, Worcester. Bradlie,
Osw. Braughton, Parsh. Braunsford, Worcester. Breedon, Osw. Breedon hill, Osw.
Bretforton* Blak. Bricklehampton, Parsh. Brodwas, Worcester. Brodwey, Parsh. Brom,
part of Staff. Half. BROM^SGROVE, Half. Bursley, Worcester. Bushley, Vpton.
C
Chaddesike, Half. Chadsley, Half. Canderton, Osw. Chatleton, Osw. Chattisley,
Vpton. Church hill, Half. Claynch* Worcester. Cleave priors, Osw. Clent, part of
Staff. Half. Clent hill, part of Staff. Half. Cleve, Blak. Clevelod, Vpton.
Clyfton upon Temde, Dod. Comberton great, Parsh. Comberton little, Parsh.
Coston* Half. Cotheridge, Worcester. Cottenden, Worcester. Cowley, Worcester. Cradley, Half.
Crome hill, Vpton. Crome Earls, Vpton. Crome younges, Vpton. Cropthorne* Osw.
Crowle, Half. Crowle, Worcester. Cuttesden, Worcester. Cudsoim, Osw. Cuntswicke, Dod.
D
Dailesford, Osw. Darlingscott, Osw. Defford, Parsh. Dichford higher, Osw.
Dichford middle, Osw. Dodenham, Dod. Doderhill, Half. Dormeston, Parsh.
Doverdale, Half. Draicote, Osw. DRAITWICHE, Half. Drove, Osw. Dubbicott, Vpton.
Dudley, Half. Dunklyn, Half.
E
Eastham, Dod. Eckinton, Parsh. Eld^esfeild, Vpton. Ely, part of Shrop-shire.
Half. Elmbridge, Half. Elmeley lovet, Half. Elmlie Castle, Osw. Emloade, Osw.
Estingten, Vpton. EVESHOLME, Blak.
F
Feckenham forest, Worcester. Fecknam home, Half. Fladbury, Osw. Flawell flyford,
Parsh. Frankley, Half.
G
Goldcote park, Blak. Grafton, Half. Grafton slyford, Parsh. Grimley, Worcester.
H
Hadsor, Half. Hagley, Half. Hallow* Worcester. Hales owen, part of Shrop-shire, Worcester.
Hampton lovet, Half. Hampton little, Blak. Hampton great, Blak. Hadbury, Worcester.
Hanging Easton, Osw. Hanley childs, Dod. Hanley williams, Dod. Hanley Castle,
Vpton. Hardington, Worcester. Harkett, Parsh. Harkett, Half. Hartelbury Castle, Worcester.
Harrington, Osw. Heightington, Dod. Henlip, Worcester. Hewell grange, Parsh.
Himbleton, Worcester. Hobb lench, Osw. Holme, Dod. Holt, Worcester. Holtfast, Vpton. Church
Honiboure, Blak. Hill, Osw. Hyndlipp, Worcester. Hynton, Osw.
I
Icambe, Osw. Inckbarrowe, Osw. S. John's, in Bedwarden Worcester.
K
Kemsey, Worcester. Kengwick, Worcester. Keyshend, Vpton. KIDDERMINSTER, Half. S. Kellams,
part of Shrop-shire, Half. Kidderminster foreign, Half. Kingford, Half. Kings
Norton, Half. Kington, Half. Knighton, Dod. Kokesey, Half. Kyar little, Dod.
Kyar ward, Dod. Kyneton, Osw.
L
Church Lench, Half. Lench rouse, Osw. Lenche atche, Blak. Lenche shrives,
Blak. Lenche wicke, Blak. Lickey beacon, Half. Leigh, Worcester. Lindridge, Dod.
Littleton north, Blak. Littleton south, Blak. Littleton middle, Blak. Longdon,
Vpton. Logdon, Osw. Ludley, Half. Lulsey, Wor. Lindon, Dod. Lie, Wor.
M
Madresfeild, Vpton. Malverne chase, Vpton. Malverne little, Vpton. Malverne
great, Vpton. Mamble, Dod. Martley, Dod. Marten hongtree, Wor. Mathon, Wor.
S. Michaels in Bedwarden, Wor. Mitton, Dod. Mitton, Osw. Moore, Osw. More,
Dod. Moreton, Osw. Castle Morton, Vpton. Birch Morton, Vpton. Morton abbats,
Blak. Mousley, Wor. Mitton, Half.
N
Naunton beaucham, Parsh. Netherton, Osw. Newbold, Osw. Newland, Worcester.
Northfeild, Half. Northwicke, Osw. Northwood, Dod. Norton, Blak. Norton, Osw.
Norton wood, Wor.
O
Odingley, Worcester. Offenton, Blak. Oldswinford, Half. Ombersley, Wor. Orlton,
Dod. Overbury, Osw. Overburgh, Osw. Overley, Dod. Overton, Osw. Overton, Half.
P
PARSHOR S* CRVCE, Parsh. Parshor Saint Andrew, Parsh. Paxford, Osw. Pedmore,
Half. Pendock, Vpton. Pensham, Parsh. Pepoleton, Parsh. S. Peter's, Half. Pidle,
Osw. Pidle north, Parsh. Pindsen, Parsh. Pirton, Parsh. Poicke, Worcester. Poole,
Vpton.
Q
Queen hill, Vpton.
R
Rea Flu. Reddiche tarbig, Half. Redston passage, Dod. Roche, Dod. Russhock,
Half. Russels, Half. Rybbesford, Dod. Rydmerley, Vpton. Rydmerley Oliphers,
Dod. Rydmerley Adams, Dod. Rypple, Vpton.
S
Salwarpe, Half. Salwarpe Flu. Sedgebarrow, Osw. Severne Flu. Shraley, Dod.
Shelsey Kings, Dod. Shelsey beaucham, Dod. SHIPTON upon STOWER, Osw. Sneade,
Dod. Speachley, Worcester. Stanford, Dod. Staunton, Vpton. Stildon, Dod. Stock, Osw.
Stokton, Dod. Stoke, Worcester. Stoke prioris, Worcester. Stoke Severne, Worcester. Stome, Half.
Storton, Dod. Stoulton, Worcester. Strensham, Parsh. STVRBRIDGE, Half. Suckley, Worcester.
Sudbury, Worcester. Sutton sturmy, Dod.
T
Tardbick, Half. Tenbury, Dod. Tichnell, Dod. Tidmington, Osw. Throckmorton,
Osw. Totenham, Worcester. Tredington home, Osw. Tybberton, Worcester.
V
Vffenham, Blak. Vpton warren, Half. Vpton snodesburie, Parsh. VPTON upon
SEVERNE, Vpton.
W
Walcot, Parsh. Wallashull, Parsh. Wandon, Worcester. Wareley, Half. Warrenton, Worcester.
Washbornes, Osw. Welland, Vpton. Whitborne, Worcester. Whitlady aston, Wor.
Whittington, Worcester. Wichbold, Half. Wichenford, Worcester. Wicke, Parsh. Wicke, Wor.
Wickansord, Blak. Widverton, Worcester. Wire forest, Dod. Wier, Osw. Witeley great,
Dod. Witeley little, Wor. Withon Chapel, Wor. Wolbarrowe, Wor.
Wolkershill, Osw. Woluley, Wor. North Wood, Dod. Woodberry hill, Dod.
WORCESTER, Worcester.
Y
Yardley, Worcester.
WARVVICK-SHIRE (so called from her Shire-towne) is bounded upon the North with
the County of Stafford; The bounds of VVarwicke-shire.
upon the East, with Watling-street-way is parted from Leichestershire, and the
rest bordered upon by North-hampton-shire: the South part is butted by Oxford
and Glocester-shires; and all her West with the County of Worcester.

The form of the Shire.
(2) The form thereof is not much unlike to a Scallop-shell, growing from her
Western-head, and spreading her body wider, with many indents. The length
thereof from Newton in the North, The Length.
to Long Compton in the South, are miles thirty and three: and the broadest
part of this Shire, is from Hewell grange in the West, unto Hill-morton in the
East, distant asunder twenty-five miles; the whole in circumference, about one
hundred thirty and five.

The Air.
(3) This Shire is sited near unto the heart of all England, and therefore
participates with her in the best both for air and soil, wanting nothing for
profit or pleasure for man. The South part from Avon (that runs through the
midst of this County) is called the Feldon, The Feldon.
as more champion and tractable to be stirred for corn, which yearly yields
such plentiful harvest, that the husbandman smileth in beholding his pains,
and the medowing pastures with their green mantles, so imbrodred with flowers,
that from Edg-hil we may behold another Eden, Genesis 12.10. The Woodland.
as Lot did the Plain of Jordan, before that Sodom fell. The Woodland lies
upon the North of Avon, so called in regard of the plenty of Woods; which now are
much thinner by the making of Iron, and the soil more churlish to yield to the
Plough.

The ancient Inhabitants.
(4) The ancient people that possessed this Province, are by Ptolemies
description called the Cornavii, wherein after were seated the Mercian Saxons, a
part of whose Kingdom it was, and greatly sought after by the West Saxons,
whose King Cuthred about the year of Christ Jesus 749. in battle slew Ethelbald
at Seckington near unto Tamworth. The Battles.
And not far from thence King Edward 4. as unfortunately sought against that
stout make-king, Richard Nevil Earl of Warwick: near unto which, upon
Blacklow hill, Pierce Gaveston (that proud and new raised Earl of Cornwall) was
beheaded by Guy Earl of Warwick assisted with the Earls of Lancaster and
Hereford. And surely, by the testimony of John Rosse and others, this County
has been better replenished with people; who makes complaint of whole
townships depopulations, altogether laid waste by a puissant Army of feeding
sheep.

(5) Notwithstanding, many fair Towns it has, and some of them matchable to
the most of England. The chief thereof is Coventree, a City both stately for
building, and walled for defense: whose Citizens having highly offended their
first Lord Leofricke, had their privileges infringed, and themselves oppressed
with many heavy tributes; whose wife Lady Godiva pitying their estates,
uncessantly sued for their peace, and that with such importunacy, as hardly
could be said whether was greater, his hatred, or her love: at last overcome
with her continual intercessions, he granted her suit, upon an uncivil, and
(as he thought) an unacceptable condition, which was, that she should ride
naked through the face of the City, and that openly at high noonday. This
notwithstanding she thankfully accepted, and performed the act accordingly
enjoined: for this Lady Godiva stripping her self of all rich attire, let loose
the tresses of her fair hair, which on every side so covered her nakedness,
that no part of her body was uncivil to sight, whereby she redeemed their
former freedoms, and remission of such heavy tributes. Whose memory I wish may
remain honorable in that City for ever, and her pity followed by such
possessing Ladies. This City had grant to choose their yearly Magistrates, a
Mayor and two Bailiffes, and to build about and embattle a wall, by K. Edward
3. whom Henry 6. corporated a County of it self, and changed the names of their
Bailiffs unto Sheriffs: and the walls then were built as they now stand; through
which open 13. gates for entrance, besides 18. other Towers thereon for
defense. At Gofford gate in the East hangs the shield-bone of a Or rather of
an Elephant, being not so little as a yard in length.
wild Bore, far bigger then the greatest Oxebone: with whose snout the great
pit called Swanswel was turned up, and was slain by the famous Guy, if we will
believe report.

(6) Next unto this City in account and commerce, is Warwick, upon the
North-west bank of Avon, built by Gurgunstus the son of Beline, as John
Rosse, Monk of the place, says, 375. years before the birth of Christ: by
Ninius called Caer-Guaruic and Caerleon; by the Saxons, Warryng-wyc; and by
learned Cambden judged to be PRAESIDIUM, the Roman Garrisons Town. The
situation of this place is most pleasant, upon a hill rising from the River,
over which is a strong and fair Stone Bridge, and her sharp stream upon the
Town side checked with a most sumptuous and stately Castle, the decays
whereof, with great cost and curious buildings, the right worthy Knight Sir
Foulke Grivel (in whose person shines all true virtue and high nobility) has
repaired: whose merits to me-ward I do acknowledge, in setting this hand free
from the daily employments of a manual trade, and giving it full liberty thus
to express the inclination of my mind, himself being the Procurer of my
present estate.

It seems this Town has been walled about, as appears by the Trench in
some places seen, and two very fair gates whose passages are hewed out of the
Rock, as all other into the Town are: over whom two beautiful Chapels are
built; that toward the East called S. Peter's, and that on the South-west, S.
James.

Two fair Churches are therein seated, called S. Mary's, and S. Nicholas: but
these in, and about the Town suppressed, S. Laurence, S. Michaels, John
Baptist, and John of Jerusalem, beside the Nunnery in the North of the Town:
whose North Pole is elevated in Latitude 52. degrees, 45. minutes, and is
seated from the first point in the west of Longitude, 18. degrees and 45.
minutes, being yearly governed by a Bailiffe, twelve Brethren, twenty-foure
Bugesses for Common Counsel, a Rocorder, a Town-clerke, and one Sergeant their
Attendant.

(7) Places of most memorable note observed in this Shire, are Shugbury, where
the precious stone Astroites is found: Of-Church, which was the Palace of great
Off a the Mercian, and the buriall-place of S. Fremund his son: Chesterton,
where the famous Fosse-way is seen. At Leamington, so far from the Sea, a
Spring of Salt Water boileth up: and at Newenham Regis most sovereign water
against the Stone, Green wounds, Ulcers, and Impostumes, and drunk with Salt
loses, but with Sugar binds the body: and turns wood into stone, as my
self saw by many sticks that therein were fallen, some part of them Ash, and
some part of them Stone: and Guy-cliffe, where the famous Earl Guy, after many
painful exploits achieved, retired, and unknown, led an Hermits life, John
Rosse.
and was lastly there buried.

(8) The chiefest commodities in this County growing, are corn, whereof the
Red-horse Vale yields most abundantly; wools in great plenty; woods and iron,
though the producer of the one will be the destuction of the other. Such
honorable Families as have bin dignified with the Earldome of this Shire-townes
name since the Normans Conquest, in the Map it self are inserted, and by their
several names expressed.

This County is strengthened with eight strong Castles, traded with fifteen
Market Towns, enriched with many fair buildings, and by the devotion of many
Nobles, had many foundations of religious Monasteries therein laid. The chief
were at Stoneley, Warwick, Thellisford, Roxhall, Balshall, Killingworth,
Coventree, Comb, Nun-eaton, Asley, Atherston, and Pollesworth; all which came
to their period in the reign of King Henry 8. when their rich Revenewes were
alienated to his use, and those stately buidings either overturned or bestowed
upon his Courtiers: but yet to Gods glory, and his divine service, one hundred
fifty eight Parish-Churches therein remain, dispersedly seated in the five
Hundreds of this Shires division.

map of Warwickshire THE COUNTI OF WARWICK THE SHIRE TOWN AND CITY OF
COVENTRE described


HUNDREDS in Warwickshire.
1. HEmlingford. 2. Coventree. 3. Knightlow. 4. Barlichwaye. 5. Kington.
A
Alne Lodge, Barlich. Amington, Heml. Alesley, Heml. Anchor Flu. Anstie, Covent.
Ardbury, Hem. Areley, King. Arrow, Bar. Ashborne, King. Ashoe, Knight. Ashow,
Knight. Ashton Cantlow, Bar. Astley, Knight. Atherston, Hem. Attleburrow, Hem.
AVLCESTER, Ba. Aulston, Bar. Austre, Hem. Auntley, Hem. Avon Flu. Awsley,
Knight.
B
Badgesley Enesot, Hem. Badgesley Clinton, Hem. Bagginton, Knight. Baliall,
Hem. Barceston, King. Barford, King. Barkswell, Hem. Barmington, King.
Barnacle, Knight. Barterley, Hem. Barston, Hem. Barton on the Heath, King.
Bassets Cross, Hem. Bastet, Hem. Beauchams Courts Bar. Bearlye, Bar. Bedworth,
Knight. Bensford Bridge, Knig. Bentley, Hem. Bewinton, Bar. Bewsall, Bar.
Bickenhull, Hem. Bilsley, Bar. Bilton, Knight. Binley, Knight. Birminghams,
Hem. Birminghams Aston, Hem. Bishopton, Bar. BITFORD, Bar. Blithe Flu.
Bolehall, Hem. Boreton upon Dunsmore, Knight. Bourne Flu. Bramcote, Hem.
Brandon, Knight. Brannot, Knight. Brayles, King. Bretford, Knight. Brettshall,
Hem. Bridgton, Bar. Brincklowe, Knight. Brom, Bar. Bromwich Castle, Hem.
Brownsover, Knight. Bubnell, Knight. Budbrooke, Bar. Bulkinton, Knight.
Burdingbury, Knight. Burnesebrome, Bar. Burton Hastings, Knigh. Old Bury, Hem.
Bynton, Bar.
C
Calendon, Covent. Canston hill, Knight. Canwall, Hem. Caresly, Covent. Caton
Bridge, Hem. Cawcot, Hem. Chadshunt, King. Charlecott, King. Chase, Knight.
Cherington, King. Chesterton, King. Chester over, Knight. Chilvers Cotton, Hem.
Church over, Knight. Church Lawford, Knight. Cardon, Bar. Cliff, Hem. Clifton,
Knight. Clopton, Bar. Clowdiesley Bush, Knight. Cobley, Bar. Cofeld VVast, Hem.
Comb Abbey, Knight. Combroke, King. Compton long, King. Compton in the hole,
King. Colesnul, Hem. Compton Fenny, King. Compton Mardock, King. Copston,
Knight. Corley, Hem. Cosford, Knight. Coton, Hem. Coughton, Bar. Counden,
Knight. COVENTREE, Cov. Cubbington, Knight. Curdworth, Hem.
D
Dasset Avon, King. Dasset Burton, King. Dastell, Hem. Dracot, Knight. Drayton,
Bar. Dudson Park, Hem. Dudson Hall, Hem. Dunchurch, Knight. Dunnington, Par.
Dunsmere Heath, Knig. Dutton, Hem.
E
Eatington nether, King. Eatington over. King. Etteleshall, Covent. Edgebaston,
Hem. Edmondscot, Knight. Edson, Bar. Elinedon, Hem. Escote, Hem. Esenhull,
Knight. Ethorpe, Knight. Exall, Bar. Exall, Covent.
F
Farnebrowe, King. Faseley, Hem. Fillongley, Hem. Flanders, Hem. Fleckno,
Knight. Fletchamsted, Hem. Fokeshill, Covent. Fordhall, Bar. Foxcott, King.
Francton, Knight. Freasley, Hem.
G
Geydon, King. Glascote, hem. Goldscots Park, King. Goodrest Lodge, Knight.
Grafton Temple, Bar. Granborow, Knight. Graves, hem. Grimdon, hem. Grove, bar.
Guilsdon, hem. Guy-Cliffe, King.
H
Hallaton, hem. Halford, King. Hallend, hem. Hampton in Arden, hem. Hampton
Lacye, bar. Hampton Bishops, bar. Hampton Curlew, bar. Harberhury, Knight.
Harborow great, Knigh. Hartshill, hem. Harwicke priors, King. Haseley, barl.
Hasseller, barl. Hatton, barl. Hawford, King. HENLEY in Arden, barl. Henwood,
hem. Hewell Grange, barl. High Cross, Knight. Hill, hem. Hill, Knight.
Hillmorton, Knight. Hodnell, Knight. Holt, hem. Honington, King. Honyngham,
Knight. Hopsford, Knight. Horeston, hem. Hunnyley, barl. Hurley, hem.
I
Idlicott, King. Ilmington, king. Ipsley, barl. Itchington long, knight.
Itchington Bishops, knight.
K
KENELWORTH, Kn. Kenelworth Duchy Castle, king. Kerby Monks, knight. KINETON,
king. Knightcote, King. Kingsbury, Helm. Kingsbrome, Bar. Kingshurst, Hem.
Kingswood, Hem. Knowle, Hem. Kynnerton, Bar.
L
Ladbrocke, knight. Langley, Barl. Langdon hall, Hem. Langley, Hem. Lapworth,
king. Church Lawford, Knight. Lawford long, knight. Lea, Hem. Leame Flu. Leeke
wotton, knight. Lemington priors, knight. Lemington hastings, knigh.
Lighthorne, King. Littington, knight. Loxley, Barl. Luddington, Barl.
M
Makestoke Castle, Hem. Maney, Hem. Manner, Hem. Manceter, Hem. Matchife, Barl.
Marson Culy, Hem. Marson Inbett, knight. Marson Burton, knight. Marson Priors,
king. Marson Buttles, king. Marton, knight. Maxstock, Hem. Merevale, Hem.
Meriden, Hem. Milverton, knight. Minworth, Hem. Mollinton, king. More-hall,
Hem. Morehall, Barl. Morton Meriall, king. Morton Baggot, Barl. Moxhall, Hem.
Mulcote Abbey, Hem. Myddleton, Hem. Mylcotte, Barl.
N
Napton on the Mount, king. Newbold, king. Newbold upon Avon, king. New-hall,
Hem. New-Inne, Hem. Newenham, knight. Newenham Kings, knight. Newton, Hem.
Newton, knight. Northend, king. Norton Curlew, Barl. Norton Lynsey, Barl.
Nun-eaton, Hem. Nuthurst, king.
O
Of-church, knight. Water Orton, Hem. Ouldbarrow belonging to Worcestershire.
Bar. Oulnall, Barl. Oxhill, king.
P
Packington great, Hem. Packington little, Hem. Packwood, King. Pailton,
knight. Park hall, Hem. Pillerton nether, king. Pillerton over, king. Pinley
Grove, Barl. Preston Bagott, Barl. Princethorp, knight. Pollesworth, Hem.
Poolley, Hem.
Q
Queens Park, Heml.
R
Radford Semeley, knight. Radford, Covent. Radway, king. Ragley, Bar. Ratley,
kingt. Ridfen, hem. Riton, knight. Rowington, Barl. Rownd Alne, Barl. Roxall,
Barl. RVGBY, knight.
S
Salford Abbots, Barl. Salford Priors, Barl. Samborne, Barl. Seckington, hem.
Sherburne Flu. Sherburn, Barl. Sherford, knight. Sheldon, hem. Shilton, knight.
Shystoke, hem. Shotswell, kingt. Shrowley, Barl. Shuckborow nether, King.
Shuckborough upper. king. Shuttington, hem. Skiltes, Bar. Snytterfeild, Bar.
Spernall, Barl. Solihul, hem. Sow, knight. Sow, Covent. Sow Flu. SOWTHAM,
king. Stivechall, Covent. Stockingford, hem. Stockton, knight. Stoke, Covent.
Stoneley, knight. Stoneley Abbey, knight. Stratford old, Barl. Stratford upon
Avon, Bar. Stretton, knight. Stretton, king. Stretton under Fosse, knight.
Studlyffe, Barl. SVTTON COFELD, Hem.
T
Tachbroke Mallery, knight. Tachbroke Bishops, king. Tame Flu. Tamworth, hem.
Tamworth, king. Temple Grafton, Bar. Thurlaston, Knight. Tiddington, Barl.
Tossed, knight. Tuttwell, Barl. Tysoe, king.
V
Vfton, knight. Vmbersley, king. Vpton, king.
W
Walton, king. Wapenbury, knight. Wardend, hem. Warmeley, hem. Warmington,
king. WARWICK, king. Wasperton, king. Wawins Wotton, Barl. Weddington, hem.
Wedgenocle Park, knight. Weethley, Bar. Weslborne Montford, king. Welsborne
hasting, king. Weston in Arden, knight. Weston in the thistles, king. Weston
under Wetherley, king. Wethirbroke, knight. Whatly, hem. Whatcott, king.
Whetacre nether, hem. Whetacre over, hem. Whitchurch, king. Whitley, knight.
Whitmore parkes, Covent. Whitmash, knight. Whittington, hem. Wibtost, knight.
Wickelssord, Bar. Wigginshill, hem. Willey, knight. Willenhall, knight.
Willincote, hem. Willowbye, knight. Winderton, king. Wishaw, hem. Witchford,
king. Witherley, hem. Withibroke, knight. Witton, hem. Wolhamcott, knight.
Wolford, king. Wolvershill, knight. Wolverton, Bar. Wolvey, knight. Woodlaw,
knight. Wormleighton, king. Wulfencote, knight. Wulston, knight. Wy^en, Covent.
Y
Yarnton Hall, Heml.
NORTHAMPTONSHIRE situated near unto the midst of England, by the Saxons
was written Northafendonscire, lies separated upon the North from
Lincolne-shire by the River Weland; The name of Northamptonshire.
from Huntington-shire on the East is parted by the water Nene: her South is
bounded with Buckingham and Oxford-shires, and the West from Warwick with
Watling-street-way, Avon and Weland, is divided from Leicester shire.

The form.
(2) The form of this County is large and narrow, broadest in the South-west;
and thence shooting still lesser like unto a Horn, nor not much unlike to the
form of Cornwall: The length.
and from the entrance of Cherwell into this shire, unto the fall of Weland and
Nene near unto Crowland, are by measure forty six miles; and the broadest
part is from Ouse unto Avon, The breadth. The circumference.
which is not fully twenty: the whole in circumference one hundred and
nineteen miles.

(3) The air is good, temperate, and healthful: the soil is champion, rich,
and fruitful, and so plenteously peopled, that from some Ascents, thirty
Parish Churches, and many more Windmilles at one view may be seen:
notwithstanding the simple and gentle sheep, of all creatures the most
harmless, are now become so ravenous, that they begin to devour men, wast
fields, and depopulate houses, if not whole Town ships, Sir Tho. Mores ^topia.
as one merrily has written.

(4) The ancient people known to the Romans, and recorded by Ptolemy, were
the Coritani, who possessed this County, and were branched further through
Leicester, Lincoln, Nottingham, Rutland, and Darb^e-shires: these joining with
the Icenians, with them were fettered with the chains of subjection when for
Claudius, Tacit. Annal. lib. 12. cap. 8.
Publius Ostorius Scapula entered his Lieutenantship in Britain, and in battle
subdued all betwixt the Rivers Nene and Sabrina. But when the Romans were
content to let go that which so long was desired, and had cost so much in the
getting, the Saxons, a most warlike Nation, put into these parts, and made it a
portion of their Mercian Kingdom: but their government also grown out of date,
the Normans seated themselves in these fair possessions, the branches of whose
Stems are spread abroad in these parts, most fruitful and fair.

The Commodities of it.
(5) Commodities arising in this Shire, are chiefly gotten by tillage and
plough, whereby corn so plentifully abounds, that in no other County is found
more, or so much: the pastures and woods are filled with Cattle, and every
where sheep laden with their fleeces of wool.

Northampton the chief Town.
(6) The chief Town in this Shire is Northampton, whereof the County takes
name, which for circuit, beauty, and building, may be ranked with the most of
the Cities of our Land. It is seated at the meeting and confluence of two
Rivers, the greater whereof bears to name Nen. This Town has been built
all of Stone, as by many foundations remaining to this day is seen, and is
walled about both strong and high, excepting the West, which is defended by a
River parted into many streams. In the depredations of the Danes, Hen.
Huntingd.
Suen their King set this Town on fire, and afterward it was sorely assaulted
by the disobedient Barons of King John, King John.
who named themselves The Army of God: but the loyalty of this Town stood
nothing so sure unto King Henry his son, whence the Barons with displayed
Banners sounded the Battle against their Sovereign. And yet after this a woeful
field of Englands civil division was fought, whence Richard Nevel the stout
Earl of Warwick, led away prisoner that unfortunate man King Henry the sixth.
King Henry the sixth. Ann. 1460.
Upon the West part of this Town stands a large Castle, mounted upon an
hill, whose aged countenance well shows the beauty that she has borne, and
whose gaping chinkes do daily threaten the downe-fall of her walls. To this
upon the South the Towns wall adjoyneth, and in a rouud circuit meets the
River in the North, extending in compass two thousand one hundred and twenty
pases: whose site so pleased the Students of Cambridge, A.D. 1261.
that hither they removed themselves upon the Kings Warrant, in mind to have
made it an Universitie: from whence the North Pole is elevated 52. degrees, 36.
scruples for Latitude, and in Longitude is removed from the West 19. degrees
and 40. scruples; being yearly governed by a Mayor, two Bailiffes, 12.
Magistrates, a Recorder, Towne-Clerke, a Common Council of forty eight
Burgesses, with five Sergeants to execute business.

(7) But the devotions of the Saxon Kings made Peterborow more famous,
Peterborow.
formerly called Meddeswell, where Wolphere King of Mercia began a most stately
Monastery to the honor of S. Peter, An D. 546.
for satisfaction of the blood of his two sons, whom he had murdered in case
of Christianity: but himself being for the like made away by his mother, his
brother Penda continued the work, with the assistance of his brother Ethelred,
and two sisters Kineburga and Kineswith. This among the Danish Desolations was
cast down, yet was it again restored to greater beauty by Ethelwold Bishop
of Winchester, with the help of King Edgar, and of Adulph his Chancellor, who
upon prick of conscience, that in bed with his wife had over-laid and
smoothered an infant their only son, laid all his wealth upon the reedifying
of the place, An. D. 960.
and then became Abbot thereof himself. The Cathedral is most beautiful and
magnificall, where in the Quire lie interred two unfortunate Queens: on the
North side Katharine Dowager of Spain, Katharine Dowager of Spain.
the repudiate wife of King Henry the eight, under an Hearse covered with black
Say, having a white Cross in the midst: and on the South side, Queen Mary.
Mary Queen of Scotland, whose Hearse is spread over with black velvet. The
Cloister is large, and in the glasse-windows very curiously portrayed the
History of Wolthere the Founder, whose Royal Seat was at Wedon in the street
converted into a Monastery by S. Werburg his holy daughter, and had been the
Roman Station, by Anto^ine the Emperor called Bannavenna. So likewise
Norman-chester was the ancient City Durobrivae, where their Soldiers kept, as
by the moneys there daily found is most apparent.

(8) Houses of Religion devoted to Gods Service by the pious intents of their
well-meaning Founders, Religious Houses.
were at Peterborow, Peakirke, Pipewell, Higham, Davintree, Sulby, Sausecombe,
Sewardesleg, Gare, S. Dewy S. Michell, Luffeild, Catesby, Bruch, Barkley,
Finshed, Fathringhay, Wedon, and Withrop, besides them in Northampton, all
which felt the storms of their own destruction that raged against them in the
reign of K. Henry the eight, who dispersed their revenewes to his own Coffers
and Courtiers, and pulled the stones asunder of their seeming ever-sure
Foundations; and in the time of young Edward, King Edward the sixth.
his son, whose mind was free from wronging the dead, the Tombs of his own
Predecessors were not spared, when as Edward slain at Agincourt, Edward.
Richard.
and Richard at Wakefield, both of them Dukes of York, were after death
assaulted with the weapons of destruction, that cast down their most fair
Monuments in the Collegiate Church of Fatheringhay Castle.

(9) Eight Princely Families have enjoyed the title of the Earldom of
Northampton, whereof the last, Henry Hayward late Lord Privy Seal, a most
honorable Patron to all learned proceedings (that I may acknowledge my
dutiful and humble service) has most honorably assisted and set forward
these my endeavors. Castles.
1. Maxey. 2. Fothringhay. 3. B^rnwels. 4. Rockingham. 5. Goddington. 6.
Brabroke. 7. Heigham. 8. Northampton. 9. Benifeild. 10 Alderingham.
Market towns;




(10) This Shires division, for service to the Crown, and employments of
business, is into twenty Hundreds, has been strengthened with ten Castles, and
is still traded with ten Market-Townes, and God honored in three hundred
twenty six Parish Churches.

map of Northamptonshire NORTHAMTON SHIRE


HUNDREDS in Northamptonshire.
1. NAssaburgh. 2. Willibrook. 3. Corby. 4. Polbrook. 5. Navisford. 6. Huxloe.
7. Rothewell. 8. Guilesburrowe. 9. Orlington. 10. Fansley. 11. Newbottlegrove.
12. Spelhoe. 13. Hamfordshoe. 14. Highamferyes. 15. Wymersley. 16. Towcester.
17. Warden. 18. Norton, 19. Cleley. 20. Sutton.
A
Abbington, Spel. Ac^urch, Navisford. Addington great, Hux. Addington little.
Hux. Adston, Norton. Adthorpe Tow. Aldrington, Cle. Althorpe, New. Apethorpe,
Willi. Archester, High. Ardingworth^ Roth. Armelton, Polb. Artleboro, Hux.
Ashbie cold, Guil. Ashbie cannones, Nort. Ashbie Leyors, Faust. Ashbie Oneeres,
Ham. Ashlie, Cor. Ashton, Cle. Ashton, Pol. Ashton, Nass. Ashton, War. Ashtree,
War. Aslael, Sut. Aubery hill, Fausl. Avon-well, Roth. Ayner, Sut.
B
Badby, Faus. Baddington, Nass. Badston, Sut. Barbie, Faus. Barnack, Nass.
Barnwell S. Andrews, Pol. Barton, Ham. Barton Segrave, Hux. Basset Sutton,
Cor. Baynton, Nas. Beckie weedon, Faus. Benifeld, Pol. Billing great, Spel.
Billing little, Spel. Bladerwick, Cor. Blakesley, Nor. Blysworth, Wym.
Boddingtones, War. Botheresthorpe, Wym. Boughton, Hux. Bowden little, Roth.
Boziet, High. Barbrooke, Roth. BRACKLEY, Sut. Braddyn, Nort. Brampton, Cor.
Bramptones, New. Bramston, Faus. Braynfeild, Wym. Bringtones, New. Brixtoke,
Cor. Brixworth Orl. Brockhold, New. Bromfeild, High. Broughton, Orl. Buckby
long, Guil. Buckton, Sp^l. Bugbroke, New. Bullwick, Cor. Burecote, Tow.
Burghley, Nas. Burnewell Al-saints, Hux. Buton Lattmer, Hux. Byfeild, War.
C
Caldecon, High. Caldecote, Tow. Capes preston, Faus. Carleton, Cor. Castle
Ashbie, Wym. Castor, Nas. Catesbie, Faus. Chalcombe, Sut. Charleton, Sut.
Charwell Flu. Charwelton, Faus. Chelveston, High. Cheney middleton, Sut.
Chipping Warden* War. Clapton, Nau. Claylaton, Guil. Cliffe park, Will.
Clipstonn, Roth. Cognihey, Wym. Collingtree, Wym. Colliweston, Will. Corby, Cor.
Coughton, Sut. Cosgrave, Cle. Costhorpe, Nas. Cottesbrooke, Guil. Cottestocke,
Will. Cottingham, Cor. Cotton end, Wym. Courten hall, Wym. Cranford, Hux.
Craneseley, Orl. Creton, Guil. Cricke, Guil. Croughton, Sut. Culworth, Sut.
D
Daddington, Ham, Dallington, New. Danes more, Wa^. DAVINTREE* Faus. Dene, Cor.
Denethorpe, Cor. Denford, Hux. Denshanger, Cle. Deping east, Nas. Desborowe,
Roth. Deynton, Wym. Dingely, Cor. Dodferd, Faus. Dodington, Will. Dowbridge,
Guild. Draughton, Roth. Dunston, New.
E
Eastfeild, Nas. Easton, Will. Easton maudall, High. Eaton, Spel. Ecton, High.
Edgecote, War. Elton, Will. Emington, Pol. Eston, Cle. Etton, Nas. Evenlie, Sut.
Everdons, Faus. Eya, Nas. Eydon, War. Eylesworth, Nas.
F
Farnedon, Roth. Fanesley, Faus. Farthingston, Faus. Favill weston, Spel.
Faxton, Orl. Femingho, Sut. Fine, New. Finshedd, Cor. Flackleton, Wym. Flower,
New. Fortherninghay, Will. Fortherninghay park, W. Further, Cle. Fynford, Sut.
G
Gayton, Tow. Geddington, Cor. Glapthorne, Will. Glinton, Nas. Grafton
underwood, Hux. Grafton Regis, Cle. Greves norton, Nort. Gretton, Cor. Gryndon,
Wym. Grymscott, ^ow. Grytworth, War. Gulbries yardley, Cle. Guilesborowe, Guil.
Gunthorpe, Nas.
H
Haddon East, New. Haddon West, Guil. Hanging Houghton, Orling. Hardingston,
Wym. Hardwick, Orling. Hardwyll, Cle. Hargrave, High. Harington, Roth.
Haringworth, Cor. Harleston, New. Harpole, New. Harrendon great, Orling.
Harrendon little Orling. Hastings yordley, Wym. Hasseboche, Roth. Havington,
Orling. Hellinden, Faus. Helmedon, Sut. Hemmyngton, Pol. Helpeston, Nas.
Hetherwest, Cle. Heryfords, New. Higham cold, Tow. HIGHAM FERYES, H. Hisham,
Orling. Holdenby, New. Holcott, Ham. Hoothorpe, Roth. Houghton great, Wym.
Houghton little, Wym. Horton, Wym. Hulcot, Cle. Hynton, Sut.
I
S. James, New. Imley, Sut. Irlingborough, Hux. Islippe, Hux.
K
Kellemarshe Roth. KETTER, Hux. Killingburye, New. Kings, Sut. Kingestorpe,
Spel. Kingscliff, Will. Kirkby, Cor. Killesbies, Faust.
L
Langport, Orling. Laxston, Cor. Lillford, Hux. Lillingston Lovell, Cle.
Loddington, Roth. Longthorpe, Nas. Lubnam Thorpe, Roth. Luddington, Pol.
Luffwick, Hux. Lutton, W^l. Lyfden, Navis. Lyfeild, Navis. Lylborne, Guil.
Lytchbarrow, Faust.
M
Maidwell, Roth. Maiser Thorpe, Roth. Mandevill Thorpe, Sut. Marham, Nas.
Marston Laurenes, Sut. Marston Trussell, Roth. Maxey Castle, Nas. Maydford,
Nort. Middleton Cheney, Sut. Middleton, Cor. Moulton, Spel. Morton Pynchney,
Nort. Mylton, Wym. Mylton, Nas.
N
Nasebye, Guil. Nassington, Will. Nerboro, Nas. Newarke, Nas. Newbottle, New.
Newbottle, Sut. Newnham, Fausl. Newton, High. Newton, Cor. Newton wood, Will.
NORTHAMPTON, N. Norburghe, Nas. Norton, Fausl. Nine, Flu.
O
Ocley great, Cor. Ocley little, Cor. Oldwincle, Hux. Orlingburie, Orl. Only,
Fausl. Orton, Roth. Overcote, Fausl. Overton, Spel. OVNDLE, Pol. Oxenden great,
Roth. Oxney, Nas.
P
Pantlerspurie, Cle. Passengham, Cle. Paston, Nas. Patteshall, Tow. Peakirke,
Nas. PETERBVRGH, Nas. Pilkton, Navis. Pillesgate, Nas. Pipwell, Cor. Polbrooke,
Pol. Potterspurie, Cle. Preston, Wym. Preston Capes, Fausl. Pyddington, Wym.
Pynckney Morton, Nort. Pysforde, Spel. Pytchley, Orling.
Q
Quynton, Wym.
R
Radston, Sut. Raunsthorpe, Spel. Raundes, High. Ringsted, High. Rockingham,
Cor. Rockingham forest, Cor. Rode, Cle. Rothewell, Roth. Rusheden, High.
Rushton, Roth.
S
Sawcey forest, Wym. Scaldwell, Orling. Sibbertost, Roth. Singlesale Nas.
Slayton, Nort. Slipton, Hux. Sowthorpe, Nas. Spratton, Spel. Stamford, Will.
Stanford, Guil. Stanwick, High. Stanyone* Cor. Staverton, Fausl. Steane, Sut.
Stoke Albony, Cor. Stoke Bruerne, Cle. Stoke daily, Navis. Stowe, Fausl.
Stuttesburie, Sut. Stoyxton, High. Sudborow, Hux. Sulbye, Guil. Sulgrave, War.
Suly lodge, Nas. Suthwicke, Will. Sutton, Nas. Sutton Basset, Cor. Syersan, Sut.
Sylverton, Nort. Sylverton, Cle. Sywell, Ham.
T
Tansover, Will. Thingdon, Hux. Thornebie. Thornehawe, Nas. Thorney mill, Nas.
Thorpe, Navis. Thorpe Lubnam, Roth. Thorpe underwood, R. THRAPSTON, Navis.
Thurnyng, Pol. Titchmarsh, Navis. Titon, New. TOWCESTER, Tow. Trafford, War.
Trussell marston* Roth. Twywell, Hux. Tyffeild, Tow.
V
Vfford, Nas. Vxton, Nas. Vpton, New.
W
Waddenhoe, Na^. Wakenley, Cor. Walgrave, Orl. Walmesford, Nas. Walton, Nas.
Walton, Nas. Wappenham, Sut. Warkton, Hux. Warkworth, Sut. Warmington, Will.
Warmington, Pol. Watford, Guil. Weedon, Nort. Weedon beckie, Faus. Weekly,
Cor. Weland Flu. Weldon great, Cor. Weldon little Cor. WELLINGBOROVGH, H.
Welton, Faus. Werington, Nas. Weston, Nort. Weston, Cor. Weston favill, Spel.
Whilton, New. Whiston, Wym. Whitfeild, Sut. Whitleburye, Nort. Whittlewood
forest, N. Wickiie, Cle. Wigesthorpe, Hux. Wickins, Cle. Wilbee, Ham.
Wilbaston, Cor. Wilford, Guil. Winwicke, Pol. Wittering, Nas. Wittering heath,
Nas. Wood newton, Will. Woodcroft, Nas. Woodend, Nort. Woodford, War. Woodford,
Hux. Woollaston, High. Wotton, Wym. Wowld, Orl. Wynwick, Guil.
Y
Yardley gubbens, Cle. Yardley hastings, Wym. Yarwell, Will. Yelvertost, Guil.
Ptolem. Chro. Sax^nica.
HUNTINGTON-SHIRE, of old Hundedunescyre (part of the Iceni under the Roman
Monarch of Mercia in the Saxon Heptarchy) is severed with Nene, the
North-bounder from Northamptonshire, to which it in part adjoyneth West, from
Bedford and Cambridge, by mearing Towns on the South; and from Ely, by a sense
of water East, the work of Nature, Benwicke Stream, or of Art, Canuius De^^h:
severed when Alfred, or before him, Iugulph. Crouland^ gist Abbat de Chertsey,
Malmes^^^ Teg. Alfred. Registrum S. Albam. 12. Hen. 7.17. Flucux.
Ossa shared the open circuit of their Emperie into Principalities: that by
residency of subordinate rule, Peace at home might be maintained; Foreign
offense (by apt assembly of the Inhabitants) resisted; Tax and Revenew of the
Crown laid more evenly, and easierly levied; Justice at men's doors with less
charge and journey administered: all causes Civil having a right and speedy
dispatch, in the County of Earls monthly Court, as Criminal in his
Lieutenant the Sheriffs Turn twice a year. In form of a Lo^eng this Shire
lies, of positure temperate, and is 52. degrees, 4. scruples removed from the
A^quator: the Hilly Soil to the Plough man grateful: the Vale, contiguous to
the Fennes, best for Pasture, in which to no part of England it gives place:
Woods are not much wanted, the Rivers serving Coal, as the Moors Turffe, for
fuel.

(2) This Content wa (as the whole Continent) Forest* until Canu^^^ gave this
Law of grace, Vt quisque tam in agris, quam in silvis excitet agi^^^ seras.
Long were the hands of Kings to pull (of old) the Subjects right into Regal
pleasure, when Perambulation and Proclamation only might make any man's land
Forest. Leg. Cama. Sax.
It is in the first Williams time a Phrase in Record not rare, Silva hujus
Man^rii FO^^ST EST missa in Silvam Regis, Lect. diverse. saper Stat. de Foresta.
Lib. Domesday.

Rot. Forest. in (...). de Commit. Rutl^nd. 33. Hen. 3.


from which word of power, Forest may seem not unaptly to be derived. C^^
videbat Henricus primus tres Bissas, fitting his Forest of Ly^ield, he caused
Husculphus his Raunger to keep them for his Game, as the Record does testify.
Thus did the second of his name, and the first Richard an many parts: well
therefore may the Exchequer Book call the Forest Justice for Vert and Venison,
not Iustum absolute, but (...) secundum Legem Foresta. That Foresta is defined,
Tuta scrarum statio, may seem to consine the Forresters Office only to his
Games care, which of ancient was as well over Mineral and Maritimall revenew.
Ger^^s. Tilb. de n^cess. obs. (...). Liber Niger in (...) Job. (...).
The office of Baldwine the great Forrester of Flanders, Non agrum tantum
spectabat* sed and Maris custodiam, says Tillius, out of the old Charters of
the French Kings. And see how just this squares to our Legal practice, for of
Assarts, Parpresiures, Emprovement, Greenh^gh, Herbage, Paunage, Fowls, Mil^,
Honey, Mine, Quarries, and (...) at Sea, did the ^^nerall Justice of the
Forest here enquire. His Subjects of this Shire, (...) Itine. and Foresiae.
Henry the second from servitude of his beasts* (whose Grandfather pro feris
homin^s (...), exha^red^ta^is, matilavit, trucidavit) did pretend by Charter to
enfranchise, except Wabridge, Histor. Iornalensis. Mat. West. Hist.
Staple, Herthy, his own Demaines. But such was the succesie by encrochments,
under his two succeeding Sons, that it drew on the oppressed people to
importune anew the Sovereign* redress, which was by the great Charter of the
third Henry fruitlesly effected. His son in the 7. of his reign, by a
Perambulation, resuming back the fruit of his fathers goodness, Dor. ^aus. A. 7.
E^. 1.
and so retaining until in his 29. year by Petition, and purchase of his
people (for they gave him a sull ^^fteene) he confirmed the former Charter, and
by Jury, View and Perambulation settled that Boundary of Forest, R^t. Car. A.
28. and 29. Ed. primi in arch. Tur. L^nd. Placit. in Bane. Reg. Hill. 33. Eliz.

Liber Niger in (...). 33. Lib. Domesday pro Comita^. Hunt.

S^ras^am. Reg. M^^^^t. S. Petri de Bargo.

(...) in (...). Epi. (...). Domes.

Ex Heji Elicus. cap. 13. and 42. Et pia. ast apud. Cant. 14. Ed. 1.

Ex R 4. in arch. T^r. Lon^. de Ha^^. in (...). Hund.

Ex Regi^ Romans vocat. Dearslether in Sca^^ar. 13. Edw. 3. f. Br^^f. 241.

Ex lib. rub. in S^^c. and in quo volunt. H. 2.

Ex lib. Domes. Ex Rot. comp. in Scac. Tacitus de mor^^^ Germ. Leg. S. Ed. c
7.19. Leg. H. pri. c. 22.

Ex Car^. Hen. primi de liberta^ibus.

Leg H pri. c. 10. Regist. Elieud. 2 Leg. Her. primi Ex Cart. Regis W^ll. primi
Remigio Ep. Lincoln.

Leg. Hen. 1. Gi^al. (...) in Simb. Elect.


which contented the people, became the square of universal Justice in this
kind, and left in this Shire no more then the three former (his own grounds)
Forest.

(3) This Shire has four Centuriata or hundreds, and had of old time five*
these so called, Q^ia prima institutione ex Hiderum aliquot centenariis
composita. These are subdivided into 79. Parishes, whereof five besides the
Shire-Town have Markets. These Parishes are measured by Hides, and Carucks, or
Plough-lands, more or less, as either richness of So^le, or strength of the
Lord strengthened or extended their limits, the Mass in whole containing of
the first sort, (...). and of the other, 1136. These Hides the ancient and
general measure of land (except in Kent) where the account was by Solins; or
Lincolnshire, Vbi non sunt Hidae, sed pro Hidis si^^ Caruca^ae) were esteemed
one hundred Acres, non Norman^^o, sed Angli^^ numero una Hida pro sexies
viginti A^ris, duo pro duod^^^s viginti, as in the Book of Domesday Caruca the
Teame-land (not Carucata, for they be different) was in quantity of Acres,
proportioned to the quality of Soil, but usually in this Shire reputed 60.
The Virgata, or Yard-land, was a more or less part of the Hide, as the Acres
in number varied, which I find in this County from 18. to 42. but for the
most part 30. which was the half Plough-land. And the Bovata or Oxgang
presumed in law for land in Granary) was suited in number of Acres to that
Yard-land, of which it was a moitie. Thus (except in the ^ennes, laid out per
Loucas and quarentenas, miles and furlongs) stands all a measurement of land in
this Shire, which contains the Knights Fees 53. one half, 2. fifts, and a
twentieth part. And in full estimation of rent and worth rose in the time of
the Conqueror, to 912. l. 4. s. and now pays in Fifteen to the King, 371.
l. 9. s. 7. d. ob. and in tenth from the Clergy, 142. l. 6. s. q.

(5) This County in decision of Titles, and administration of Justice, did at
the first, as the Germans our Ancestors, Iura per pago and vi^os reddere; Every
Township by their Friburgi, or Teumentall, as Triers, and the Baron, Thain, or
Head-lord there, or the Decanus (a good Freeholder) his Deputy, as Judge,
determining all civil causes; a representation of this remains still in our
Court-Leete. Above this, and held 12. times a year, was our Hundred or
Wapentake. Quae super december Decanos et centum Friburgos judicabat. Here the
Judges were the Aldermen, and Barons or Freeholders of that Hundred; Acgelwinus
Aldermannus tenuit placitum cum toto Hundredo, says the book of Ely. This
Court had Cognoscence of Causes Ecclesiastical, as Temporal, therefore the
Judge or Alderman ought to be such as Dei leges et hominum jura stu lebat
promo^ere: thus it went although the Conqueror commanded, Ne altquis de
legibus Episcopalibus amplius in Hundredo placita teneret. The next and highest
in this Shire, was Generale placitum Comitatus (the County or Sheriffs Court)
to which were proper Placita Civilia ubi curiae Dominorum pro^antur defecisse.
Et si placitum exurgat inter Vavasores duorum Dominorum tractetur in Comi^atu.
The Judge was the Earl or Sheriff. The Tryers Barons Comitatus (Freeholders)
Qui liberas in eo terras habe^t; not Civil only, but Probat^ of Wills,
Questions of Tithes, Et debita vera Christianitatis Iura, were heard, and first
heard in this Court. Therefore Episcopus, Presbyter Ecclesiae, and Quatuor de
melioribus villae, were adjuncts to the Sheriff, Qui dei leges and secult
negotia just a considerat^^n^ definirent. The Lay part of this lives in a sort
in the County, and Sheriff Turn; the Spiritual about the reign of King
Stephen, by Sovereign connivence, suffered for the most into the quarterly
Synod of the Clergy, from whence in imitation of the Hundred Court, part was
remitted to the Rural Deaneries, of which this Shire had four: And these
again have been since swallowed up by a more frequent and superior
Jurisdiction, as some of our Civil Courts have been. There being now left in
use for the most in this Shire for Causes Criminal, View of Frankpleg, by
grant or prescription, A Session of the Peace quarterly, and two Goal
deliveries by the Sovereigns commission: and for Civil Causes, Courts of
Manours, or of the County monthly, and twice by the Judges of Assise yearly.

The Office of Execution and custody of this County is the Sheralfey, of old
inheritable, until Eustachius, who by force and favor of the Conqueror
disseised Aluric and his heirs, Domesday in sine in com. Hun.
forfeited it to the Crown; but since it has passed by annual election, and
has united to it the County of Cambridge.

(5) Having thus far spoken of the Shire in general, next in observation
falls the Shire-Town Huntingdon, Hundandun, or the Hunters Down, Marian
Scotus.
North seated upon a rising bank, over the rich meadowed River Owse,
interpreted by some Authors, the Down of Hunters, to which their now common
S^ale (a Hunter) seems to allude. Great and populous was this in the
foregoing age, the following having here buried of fifteen all but three,
besides the Mother Church S. Mary's, in their own graves. At the reign of the
Conqueror, it was ranged into four ^eilings or Wards and in them 256. Hen.
Hunting. Regist. Prior de Hun. Domesday.

Ex number. (...) antiquae.


Burgenses or Households: It answered at all assesments for 50 Hides, the fourth
part of Hurstingston Hundred in which it stands. The annual rent was then
30. l. of which, 25 of three Minters there kept the King had two parts* the
Earl the third; the power of Coynage then and before, not being so privatively
in the King, but Borowes, Bishops, and Earls enjoyed it; on the one side
stamping the face and style of their Sovereign, in acknowledgement of
subordinacie in that part of absolute power, and on the reverse their own name,
to warrant their integrity in that infinite trust.

(6) The Castle supposed by some the work of the elder Edward, Ex. cit.
Waltheoph. and com. Hunt.
but seeming by the Book of Domesday, to be built by the Conqueror, is now
known but by the ruins: It was the seat of Walthcof the Great Saxon Earl, as
of his succeeding heirs, until to end the question of right between Sentlice
and the King of Scots, Ex Benedicto Monacho in vita Hen. 2.

Ex inquisit. de Feod^^ milit.

Ex carta original^ Da^id Comitis.

Ex cartis amiquis in Tur. Land.

Ex Rot cur. augment.

Ex cart. amiquis and Itiner. Job. ^eland^

Ex^ct. de Quo Warranto temp. Edw. primi. and Parliam. 50. Edw. 3.

Excart. Reg. Job. in Arch. Tur. Land. Ramsey, insula arictis.

Ex Regist. Ram. E^^lesiae.

Ex vita Abbat. Rams.

Matthew. Paris. Hist. Major. Chron. Ioh. de Walingford. Monach. S. Albani. Ex
lib. de translat. S. Iuonis.

Ex Regist. tertarium Monast. Ram.

Cart. Hen. 3. and Rot. de Quo Warrant. Edw. Primi. Broughton.


Henry the second, laid it as you see* yet does it remain the head of that
honor on which in other Shires many Knights Fees, and sixteen in this
attended. Here David Earl of this and Anguise, father of Isabel de B^^s,
founded the Hospital of S. John Baptist: and Lovetote here upon the Fee of
Eustace the Vicount, built to the honor of the blessed Virgin, the Priory of
Black Channons, valued at the Suppression, 232. l. 7. s. ob. Here at the North
end was a house of Friars, and without the Town at Hinchingbrooke* a Cloister
of Nuns, valued at 19. l. 9. s. 2. d. founded by the first William, in place
of S. Pandonia, at El^esley (by him suppressed) where near the end of the last
Henry the family of the Cromwels began their Seat. To this Shire-Town, and
benefit of the neighbor Countries, this River was navigable, until the power
of Gray* a minion of the time, stopped that passage, and with it all redress
either by Law or Parliament. By Charter of King John this Town has a peculiar
Cotoner, profit by Toll and Custom, Recorder, Town-Clerkes, and two Bayliffes,
(elected annually for government) as at Parliament two Burgesses, for advise
and assent: and is Lord of it self in Fee-Fa^me.

(7) The rest of the Hundred (wherein this Shire-Town lies) is the East part
of the County, and of Hurst a Parish in the center of it, named HURSTINGSTON,
it was the Fee-farme of Ramsey Abbey, which on a point of f^rtile land, thrust
out into the Fennes, is therein situate, founded in the year 969. to God, our
Lady, and S. Benedict, by Earl Aylwin of the Royal blood, replenished with
Monks from Westbury, by Oswold of York, and dedicated by Dunstan of
Canterbury, Archbishops. By Abbat Reginald 1114. this Church was reedified,
by Magnavill Earl of Essex, not long after spoiled, and by Henry the third,
first of all the Norman Princes, visited; when wasted with the Sicilian wars.
Regalis mensae Hospitalitas ita abbreciata fuit, ut cum Abbatibus, Clericis and
viris satis humilibus, hospitia quaesivit and prandia. This Monastery (the
shrine of two martyred Kings, Ethelbright and Ethelre^, and of Saint Ivo the
Persian Bishop) by humble piety at first, and pious charity, ascended such a
pitch of worldly fortune, that it transformed their Founder (religious
poverty) into their ruin, the attribute of Ramsey the rich: for having made
themselves Lords of 387 Hides of land (whereof 200 in this Shire, so much as at
an easy and under rent, was at the Suppression valued at 1903. l. 15. s. 3. d.
q. but by account of this time annually amounts to 7000. l.) they then began to
affect popular command, and first enclosing that large circuit of land and
water (for in it lies the Mile-square Mere of Ramsey) as a peculiar Seignory
to them, called the Ba^cuc or Bandy (bounded as the Shire, from Ely, and from
Norman-Crosse with the Hundred Mere) by Sovereign Grant they enjoyed regal
liberty. And then aspiring a step further, (to a place in Parliament) made
Broughton the head of their Baronie, annexing to it in this Shire four Knights
Fees. Thus in great glory it stood above 400 years, until Henry the eight
(amongst many other once bright Lamps of Learning and Religion in this State,
though then obscured with those blemishes to wealth and case concomitant)
dissolved the house, although John Warboys then Abbot, and his 60 black Monks
there maintained, were of the first that under their hands and conventuall
Seal protested, Ex protest. Original. sub sigil. Convent.

Gocclinus in vita S. Iuonis. Capgrave Leg. Sanct. Angliae.

Ex Lib. transla. S. Iuonis.

Hist Elicus. l. 2.


Quod Romanus Ponti^ex non habet majorem aliquam Iurisdictionem collatam sibi a
Deo in Regno Angliae quam quivis ali^s externus Episcopus. A Cell to this rich
Monastery was S. I^oes Priory, built in that place of Slep, by Earl Adelmus,
in the reign of the last Edmund, where the incorrupted body of S. Ivo there
once an Hermit, in a vision revealed, was by Ednothus taken up in his Robes
Episcopal, and dedicated in the presence of Siward Earl of this County, and
that Lady of renowned piety Ethelsleda to the sacred memory of this Persian
Bishop. Not far from this is Somersham, the gift of the Saxon Earl
Brithnothus to the Church of Ely, before his own fatal expedition against the
Danes: It is the head of those five Towns, of which the Soke is composed, and
was an house to the Sea of Ely, well beautified by John Stanley their Bishop:
Ex vita Episco. Elicus. E^^^. Lib. Domes. Regist. Priorat. de Bernwell.
but now by exchange is annexed to the Crown. As these so all the rest of this
Hundred, was the Churches land, except Rippon Regis ancient Demaine. To which
Saple (reserved Forest) adjoined, and the greater Stive^ly, given by the last
David Earl of Huntingdon, in Fee to his three Servants, S^mli^e, Lakervile,
and Camoys.

(8) NORMANS CROSS the next Hundred, takes name of a Cross above Stilton, the
place where in former ages this Division mustered their people, whence
Wapentake is derived: it had in it two religious houses, Swapham Reg. Monast.
S. Petri de Biergo.
the eldest in the consines of Newton and Chesterton, near the River of Avon,
now Nene, founded (by the first Abbess Kineburga the Daughter of Ponda, and
Wife of Aelfred* King of Northumberland) West side a Trench, where
Ermin-street-way crossed over the River by a Stone Bridge, whose ruins are now
drowned, whence map of Huntingtonshire HUNTINGTON BOTH SHIRE AND SHIRE TOWN
WITH THE ANCIENT CITY ELY DESCRIBED.
the Roman Town there seated on both sides took the name Durobrivae, as
trajectus Fluminis. Cambden in Com. Hunt.

Ex carta Original. inter evident D. Rob. Cotton Baronet. Stemat. Lotharingia
Famil. Chro. Priorat. Hunting

Ex l. Cartarion Sal^ri. Monast. Ex certificat. Commis. temp. sup. An. Hen. 8.
Regist. Monast. de Thorn. vocat. The red book Artestat^o Alex. Maure sub
Sig^ll. temp. Regis Stephani apud D. Rob. Cotton Baronet.

Liber Thorney and Domesday. Rot. Claus. 24. Hen. 2. Esches in (...). Tur.
Land. Placit. de Banc. 35. Hen. S. Rot. 424.

Dom^^ay. Lib. Rob. de foed Mi^ in Co. Hunt. R^t. Hundred. temp. Edw. 1.
^^^^isitio post ^^^rt. Edmund. Co^. Cor^. 28. Edw. primi. Hist. Eli^^s Ecles.
1. Lib. Domes. in Com. Hunt. Cart Hen. 3. Lib. Rams. in (...). Rot. Par. 38.
Edw. 3.

Ex evident Fa^miliae

Ex l. Prioras. de Royst.


But this Nunnery as raised, was also ruined by the Da^es before the Conquest.
The other a Monastery of Cistertian black Monks, erected in honor of the
Virgin Mary, by the second Simon Earl of Huntington, at Saltry Iudeth, the
Land of a Lady of that name, wife of Earl Waltheof, daughter to Lambert Earl
of Leins, Niece to the Conqueror by his Sister, (her Mother) and Grandmother
to this Founder Malcome, and William, Kings of Scots, Earls of Huntingdon, and
Heirs of this Lady, strengthened by several Charters this pious work. Many
chief of that Line, as the last Earl David, brother to King William, as
Isabel, the wife of Robert de Brus his Daughter heir; and most of the second
branch, her Progeny making here their Burials. This house now level with the
ground, maintained besides the Abbot* six Monks, and 22 Hindes, and was at the
Suppression valued at 199. l. 11. s. 8. d. The Founders and Patrons of this
Monastery were the Lords of the next place Connington, first the seat of
Turkilles Earl of the East-Augles, that invited Swayn from Denmark to invade
this Land: and who first squared out the unbounded marithes of this part, to
the bordering Towns; his rule of proportion allowing to every Parish tantum de
Marisco, quantum de s^ca terra in breadth, in which none, sine licentia Domini
might vel fodere, vel salcare, but leaving most to intercommon by vicinage.
This Da^e exiled (when the rest of his Countrymen were by Edward Confessor)
his Land here was given to Earl Waltheof* by whose eldest heir Matilda
married to David King of Scots, it went along in that Male line, until by
death issuelesse of John Earl of Chester and Huntingdon at fell in partage, to
his sister Isabel de Brus, one of his heirs, from whose second son Bernard,
the Family of Cotton by lineall succession holds this Land, wher^to Glatton
the adjoining Parish is now by bounty of a second branch annexed. It was in
this Shire the head of the honor of Bolleine, on which Covington, Walimsford,
Sibjon, Stibington, and Vesoyes Manor in Chesterton attended: part of it is
the fresh Sea Witlesmere, four mile in breadth; over which when Emma, and her
Children, the issue of Canut^s* sailed with some peril, her Husband in
prevention of the like, from Bottsey in a strait course to the opposite firm
land, lined with his Attendant Swords that passage, which since has born the
name of Swords Delph, Kings or Canutus like. This Seignory was granted by the
Conqueror to Eustace Earl of B^^lein, Brother to Lambert Earl of Leins* and
Father to Godfrey King of Jerusalem; reverting it was given to Richard Earl of
Cornwall, who granted out of it the two Meeres, Ubbe Mere and Brich Mere, in
Fee-farme to the Church of Ramsey. Then after sundry changes it came to John of
Gaunt, in exchange of the Earldome of Richmond, and so by descent fell again
into the Crown. Washingley, (not far off) from the ancient Lord of that
name, by Drwe, and Otter came to the Prices that now possesses it. In
Chesterton from Wa^^hea^e by Dennyes there is to the ^evils (an ancient name in
this Shire) a Manor descended. The rest from AEgidius de Merke (who gave there
much to Royston Priory) passed by Amundevill to Gloucester, and so to Ves^^ by
exchange* In Elton, the house rich in a beauteous Chapel, from Denham to
S^pcotes, and Saultree Beaumes, from that surname (near the time of the
Conquest) by Louth to Cornwallis descended; as Bottlebridge by Gimels, Drayton,
Lovet, unto Sherley the now Lord.

Ex Inquis. in Arch. Tur. Land. Ex Evident.

Familiae. Domesday. Cart. Hen. 8. Ex Certificat. Com. temp. H.S. Domesday.


(9) LETTUNESTAN HUNDRED has that name from Leighton* a Town in the midst of
it, given by Earl Waltheof to the Church of Lincoln, which after shared it
into two Prebendaries. One, the Parsonage impropriate, which still remains:
the other, the Lordships, was resumed by Henry the eight, and now by the Heir
of Dar^y matched to the Lord Clifton, is become the seat of his Barony. This
Hundred had in it no house of Religion, but Stonley a Priory of seven black
Channons of the Order of S. Augustine, founded by the Bigrames, and at the
Suppression valued at 62. l. 12. s. 3. d. ob. It stood within the reach of the
great Manor Kimbolton (once an Hundred) which was the land of Earl Harold the
Usurper: after by Grant it came with the Chase of Swinesheved to Fitz-Peter,
from whom by Magnavil to Bobum (who in time of the tumultuous Barons built
there a ^orcelet) and so to Stafford, Cart. Regis Job. Ex Chron. Ab bat. de
Lecest.
by whose attainture forfeited, it was given by Henry the eight to the Family
of Wingfield that now possesses it. At Bugden the Sea of Lincoln has a seat,
and was Lord of Spaldwick, and the Soke (given in compensation from the Church
of Ely, Ex Regist. S. Mar. de Lincoln.
when rent from them, it was by the first Henry made a Bishopric) until of
late that Church gave up their interest in Spaldwicke to the Crown. Brampton
was given by King John at Mirabel, to Earl David, Rot. Hundred. de Leightoni^.
E. 1.
and by Ada his youngest Daughter fell to Hastings Earl of Pembroke, and now
is reverted to the King. To the same Earl David by gift of the former King
came Alcumesbury, and by the bounty of John Scot his son to Segrave, and so
to the Lord Barkley the late possessor. Cart. Reg. John Rot. Hun. Ed. 1.
To Serlo de Quiney Earl of Winchester, was Keston by Henry the second given,
by whose Heir general Ferrars, it came to the late Earl of Essex, and by
exchange to the Crown.

(10) TOULESLAND HUNDRED, takes name likewise of a Town therein situate. In
the out Angle of this, to the memory of S. Neotus a Monk of Glastenbury, Ex
vita S. Neai.
but the supposed son to Ethelwolfe K. of the West Saxons (whose body from
Neost^ck in Cornwall was transferred to Arnulphesbury, then of Arnulphus a holy
man, now Eynesbury named) Earl Alrick and Ethel^^eda turned the Palace of
Earl Elfred into a Monastery of black Monks, which was razed by the Danes; Ex
Regist. Priorat. S. N^ott.
but out of the ashes of this R^isia (wife to Richard the son of Earl
Gilbert) to God, our Lady de Becco* and S. N^o^ (as a Cell to the Abbey of
Becco in Normandy) erected up of black Monks in the year 1113. the late
Priory of S. Ne^es, Lib. Domesd. Eschet. temp. dr^ers. R^g. R^^. H^nd. temp. Ed
1. Fr^sard. Domesday. Rot. Hund. d^ ^ous^and.
suppressed by Henry the eight* and valued at 256. l. 15. d. q. At So^tho (the
Land of Eustachius the Sheriff) Lovetote made the seat of that Seignory: on
which in this Shire 13. Knights Fees and a half depende^: But from his line by
gift of Ve^don and Vesey drowned were these in the honor of Gloucester. Near
to this at Cretingsbury dwelt Sir Adam de Cretings, famous in Edward the thirds
wars of France, whose Heir General Wa^ton does now possess it. Staunton
given by the first William to Gilbert de Gaunt after the death issuelesse of De
Rupes, escheated to the King, who gave it to Joan his sister Queen of Scots.
She on the Abbey of Tarent bestowed part. the rest reverting being given to
Segra^e descended to the Barons of Berkly, Chron. Saxon. Domesday.
Godm^nchester, or Gormonchester, (so named of that Da^e to whom Aelfred at his
Conversion granted some regiment in these parts) was the old land of the
Crown, now the Inhabitants in ^ee-farme, by grant of King John* pro Sexies
viginti libris pondere and numero. Cart. Reg. John Rot. de Quo Warranto Ed^.
primi.

Vi^a S. Ma^^u^.


It is flat seated by as fruitful and flowrie Meadows as any this Kingdom
yields, and is the most spacious of any one Parish in fertile tillage often
having wa^ted on the Sovereign Lords with ninescore Ploughes in a rural
pomp: Some from the name Gunicester (which this often bears in record)
suppose it the City where Machutus placed his Bishops Chair. But for certain
it was that Ro^ane Town Durosi^o^^, of the Bridges named, so many hundred
years (until the Ca^^ide^.
light of our Britain Story overshone it) forgotten. Thus as this Citi^, so
the old ^amilies have been here with time outworne, few only (of the many
former) now remaining, whose Surnames before the reign of the last Henry were
in this Shire of any eminency. But, Non indignemur mortalia Nomina solvi,
Cernimus exemplis Oppida posse mori.
Let Us not repine that Men and Names do dye,
Since Stone-built Cities dead and ruined lie.


This Description I received from a right worthy and learned Friend.

An Alphabeticall Table of all the Towns, Rivers, and memorable places
mentioned in Huntington-shire.
THE HUNDREDS.
NOrman-Crosse. Hurstingston. Leightenstone. Tosland.
A
Abbottesley, Tosl. Agden mill, Leigh. Alerton, Norm. Alkmundbury wood, Hurst.
Alkmundbury, Leigh. S. Andrews Chapel. Norm.
B
Barham, Leigh. Beggars bush, Tosl. Bigen, Hurst. Billingbrooke, Norm.
Birtholme Lodge, Leigh. Bithorne, Leigh. Bluntsham, hurst. Botsey, hurst.
Botulph Bridge, Norm. Brampton, leigh. Brinton, leigh. Brik-Mere* Norm.
Broughton wood, hurst. Broughton, hurst. Bruc-Castle* Norm. Buckworth, leigh.
Buckworth grove, leigh. Buckworth Beacon, leigh. Bugden, Tosl. Bury, Hurst.
C
Cal^ot, Norm. Calfo wood* leigh. Canutus Dike, or Sword Dyke, Norm. Great
Catworth, Leigh. Little Catworth, Leigh. Catworth mili, leigh. The Chase,
hurst. Chesterton, Norm. Colne, hurst. Conington, Norm. Conquest Loode, Norm.
Copinford, leigh. Covington, leigh. Cretingesbery, Tosl.
D
Dantree, Norm. Denton, Norm. Denton and Calton ^enne, Norm. Diddington, Tosl.
Durosiponte, Tosl.
E
Easton, leigh. Ellington, leigh. Elton, Norm. Elton-Parke, Norm. Elton-Mill,
Norm. Erith, hurst. Ermin-streete, Norm. Everton, Tosl. Eynesbury, Tosl.
F
Farset, Norm. Farset, Kings del^e, Norm. Fenton, hurst. Folkesworth, Norm.
G
Gramsey, hurst. Great Gidding, leigh. Little Gidding, leigh. Steeple Gidding,
leigh. Glatton, Norm. Glatton Fenne, Norm. Godmanchester, Tosl. Great
Grandsden, Tosl. Grasham, leigh.
H
Haddon Beacon, Norm. Haddon, Norm. Haddon Mill, Norm. Hamerton, leigh.
Hamerton Mill, leigh. Haleweston, Tosl. Heathmangrove, hurst. Hemingford Abbey,
Tosl. Hemingford Gray, Tosl. Herford, hurst. Highney, Norm. Highney-lodge,
Norm. Hilton, Tosl. Hinchingbrooke, hurst. Holm-lood, Norm. Holy well, hurst.
Holy well Fen, hurst. Horsey Bridge, Norm. Houghton, hurst. HVNTINGTON, hurst.
I
S. IVES, hurst. S. Ives street, hurst.
K
Keston, leigh. KIMBALTON, leigh.
L
Leighton, Leigh. Leighton Mill, leigh. Luddington, Leigh. Lutton, Norm.
M
Molesworth, leigh. Monkeswood, hurst. Morborn, Norm. The Moore, Tosl. Myddlo^,
Tosl.
N
Nedingworth, hurst. Neen flu. Norm. S. NEOT, Tosl. New-dike, Norm. New-parke,
leigh.
O
Offord Cluny, Tosl. Offord Dacy, Tosl. Ogerston, Norm. Overton Longvill, Norm.
Overton Watervill, Norm. Old Hurst, hurst.
P
Papworth Agnes, Tosl. Little Paxton, Tosl. Great Paxton, Tosl.
Pertenhall, leigh. Pidley, hurst. Pirry, leigh. Pits water, Norm. Portmed,
Tosl.
R
Ramsey, hurst. Ramsey Mere, hurst. Ramsey Fenne, hurst. Ramsey Moore, Norm.
Little Reveley, hurst. Great Reveley, hurst. Ripton Abbots, hurst. Ripton
Park, Hurst. Kings Ripton, hurst. Rowey, hurst. Romerstreeme lood, Norm.
S
Salom-wood, leigh. Saltrey-Mill, Norm. Saltrey Ab^ey* Norm. Saltrey Grange,
Norm. Saltrey Judith, Norm. Saltrey Moynes, Norm. Saltrey Beumes, Norm. Saply
Park, hurst. Sibthorpe, leigh. Small dike, Norm. Somersham fenne, hurst.
Somersham park, hurst. South-hoo, Tosl. Spaldwick-mill, leigh. Spaldwick,
leigh. Fenny Stanton, Tosl. Stibinton, Norm. Stilton, Norm. Stilton Fen, Norm.
Stilton mill, Norm. Stongate hole, leigh. Stonly, leigh. Stonly Priory, leigh.
Great Stoughton, Tosl. Stow, leigh. Stranground, Norm. Little Stukeley, hurst.
Great Stukeley, hurst. Swineshead, leigh.
T
Terwerth, T^^l. Thurning, leigh. Toseland, Tosl. Trundle Mere, Norm.
V
Ugmere Cote, Norm. Ugmere, Norm. Upton, leigh. Upwood, hurst. Upwood mill,
hurst.
W
Wabridge forest, leigh. Walton, Norm. Walton mill, hurst. Walton wood, Norm.
Warbois, hurst. VVarbois Fen, hurst VVarbois wood, hurst. VVaresley, Tosl.
VVashingle, Norm. VVat^r Newton, Norm. VValmesford, Norm. VVenington, hurst.
VVeston-grove, leigh. VVeston-mill, leigh. Weston old, leigh. VVitlesmere,
Norm. VVislow, hurst. VVinteringham, Tosl. VVinwick, leigh. VVitton, hurst.
VVoodhurst, hurst. VVoodston, Norm. VVoolly, Lieh.
Y
YAXLEY, Norm. Yelling, Tosl.
RVTLAND-SHIRE, the least of any County in this Realm, The bounds of this
Shire.
is circulated upon the North with Lincolne-shire, upon the East and South, by
the River Weland is parted from Northamptonshire; and the West is altogether
held in with Leichestershire.

The form, and occasion of the name.
(2) The form thereof is round, and no larger in compass then a light horseman
can easily ride about in a day: upon which occasion some will have the Shire
named of one Rut, that so rode. But others from the redness of the soil, will
have it called Rutland; and so the old English-Saxons called it, for that Ro^t
and Rut is in their tongue Red with us, and may very well give the name to this
Province, seeing the earth does stain the wool of her sheep into a reddish
color. Many places named from the nature of their soil.
Neither is it strange that the stain of the soil gives names unto places,
and that very many: for have we not in Chesse-shire the Red Rock, in
Lancashire, the Red Bank, and in Wales, Rutland Castle? To speak nothing of
that famous Red Sea which shoots into the Land betwixt Egypt and Arabia,
which gave back her waters for the Israelites to pass on foot: all of them
named from the color of the soil.

The dimension of it.
(3) The longest part of this Shire is from Caldecot in the South upon the River
Ey unto Thistleton a small Village seated in the North, not fully twelve miles:
and from Timwell Eastward, to Wissenden in the West, her broadest extent, is
hardly nine: the whole circumference about forty miles.

Air.
(4) The air is good both for health and delight, subject to neither extremity
of heat nor cold, nor is greatly troubled with foggie mists.

Soil.
The Soil is rich, and for Corn and tillage gives place unto none. Woods there
are plenty, and many of them imparked, hills feeding herds of Neat, and
flocks of sheep, valleys besprinkled with many sweet Springs, Grain in
abundance, and Pastures not wanting: in a word, all things ministered to the
content of life, with a liberal heart and open hand. Only this is objected,
that the circuit is not great.

The Lord Harrington.
(5) The draught whereof, that I may acknowledge my duty and his right, I
received at the hands of the right Honorable John Lord Harrington, Baron of
Exton, done by himself in his younger years.

Okham Royalty.
Near unto his house Burley, stands Okham a fair Market-towne, which
Lordship the said Baron enjoys with a Royalty somewhat extraordinary, which
is this: If any Noble by birth come within the precinct of the same Lordship,
he shall forfeit as an homage a shoe from the Horse whereon he rides, unless
he redeem it at a price with money. In witness whereof, there are many
Horse-shooes nailed upon the Shire-Hall door, some of large size and ancient
fashion, others new and of our present Nobility; whose names are thereupon
stamped as follows: Henry Hastings. Homigers to the Lord Harrington.
Roger Rutland. Edward L. Russell, Earl of Bedford. Ralphe L. Ewer of Parram.
Henry L. Bertley. Henry L. Mordant. William L. Compton. Edward L. Dudley. Henry
L. Winsor. George, Earl of Cumberland. Philip Earl of Montgomery. L.
Willoughby. P. L. Wharton. The Lord Shandois. Besides many others without names.


That such homage was his due, The Earl of Lincoln.
the said Lord himself told me; and at that instant a suit depended in Law
against the Earl of Lincoln, who refused to forfeit the penalty, or to pay
his fine.

(6) Her ancient Inhabitants known to the Romans, The ancient people.
and mentioned in Ptolomie, were the Coritani, and by him branched through
Leicester, Lincoln, Nottingham, Darby-shire, and this; who with the Icenians
were subdued by P. Ostorius under the yoke of Claudius the Roman Emperor:
Romans.
and at their departure, by Conquest the Saxons made it a Province unto their
Mercian Kingdom, Saxons.
whose fortunes likewise coming to a full period, Normans.
the Normans annexed it under their Crown.

(7) This County King Edward Confessor bequeathed by his Testament unto Queen
Eadgith his wife, King William the C^^q^^rour.
and after her decease unto his Monastery at Westminster, which William the
Conqueror cancelled and made void, bestowing the Lands upon others, the Tithes
and the Church unto those Monks.

That the Ferrers here first seated, The (...) of the F^rr^^s.
besides the credit of Writers, the Horse-shooe whose badge then it was, does
witness; where in the Castle, and now the Shire-hall, right over the Seat of
the Judge, a Horse-shooe of iron curiously wrought, containing five foot and a
half in length, and the breadth thereto proportionably is fixed. The Castle
has bin strong, but now is decayed, the Church fair, and the Town spacious;
whose degree of Longitude is 19.46. scruples, and the North-poles elevation in
Latitude 53* degrees and 7. minutes.

(8) Let it not seem offensive, Stanford not s^^ted in this S^ire.
that I (to fill up this little Shire) have inserted the seat of a Town not
sited in this County: for besides the convenience of place, the circuit and
beauty, but especially it being for a time an University did move much; yea,
and the first in this Island, if John Hardings ^
Author fail him not, that will have Bladud to bring from Athens certain
Philosophers, whom here he seated, and made public profession of the Liberal
Sciences, where (as he says) a great number of Scholars studied the Arts,
Stanford an University until Augustines time.
and so continued an University unto the coming of Augustine, at which time the
Bishop of Rome interdicted it, for certain Heresies sprung up among the
Britains and Saxons. But most true it is, that in the reign of King Edward the
third, upon debate falling betwixt the Southern and Northern Students at
Oxford, many Schoolmen withdrew themselves hither, and awhile professed, and
named a College, Brasen-nose College in Stanford.
according to one in Oxford, Brasen-nose, which retains that name unto this
day. This was so great a skarre unto the other, that when they were recalled by
proclamation to Oxford, it was provided by Oath, that no Student in Oxford
should publicly profess or read the Arts at Stanford, to the prejudice of
Oxford.

(9) As this Shire is the least in circuit, so is it with the fewest
Market Towns replenished, Two Market-townes only in this Shi^e.
having only two. And from Societies that fed upon the labors of others, was
this Land the freest; for besides R^hall, where Tibba the Falconers Goddess
was worshipped for a Saint, when Superstition had well-neere put Gods true
honor out of place, I find very few; neither with more Castles strengthened
then that at Okham, whose ruins show that a Castle has been there.

Divided it is into five Hundreds, The S^i^es partition.
and therein are planted forty eight Parish Churches, as in the Table
following shall appear.

map of Rutlandshire RUTLANDSHIRE With OUKHAM and STANFORD her bordering
Neighbor Newely described.


An Alphabeticall Table of all the Towns, Rivers, and memorable places
mentioned in Rutland-shire.
HVNDREDS in Rutland-shire.
1. EAst Hund. 2. Allstoe Hund. 3. Okeham Sook. 4. Martinsley Hund. 5.
Wrangedyke Hund.
A
Ashgate, Oak. Ashwell, Allst. Austhorpe, All. Austhorpe grove, All. Ayston,
Mart.
B
Barinsdale, All. Barlythorp, Oak. Baroughdon hey, Wrang. Baroughdon, VVrang.
Barrowe, All. The Beacon hill. Wrang. Beamont, Mart. Beehill, Wrang.
Belmesthorp, East. Belton, Oak. Bittewell, Oak. S. Butulphe, East. Bayal-wood,
East. Bradgate, VVrang. Braunstun, Oak. Brokemell wood, East. Brock, Oak.
Burley, All. Burley wood, All. Bysbrooke, Wrang.
C
Caldecote, VVrang. Casterton little, East. Casterton bridge, East. The Vale of
Catmouse, Oak. Catmouse mill, Oak. Chatter Flu. Clipsham, Oak. Coldlees, Oak.
Cottesmore, All. Cottesmore wood, All. Creston, Mar^. Cross mill, East.
D
Deepedale, Martin.
E
Eastwood, East. Edgeton, Oak. Ediweston, Mart. Ediweston wood, Mart. Eleshare,
VVrang. Empingham, East. Empingham wood, East. Exton, All. Ezeden, East.
F
Fauldall wood, East. Fregthorp, VVrang. Frithwood, East. Five mile Cross,
East.
G
Geeson, Wrang. Glaiston, VVrang. Greetham, All. Greetham wood, All. Guash Flu.
Gunthorpe, Mart.
H
Hamleyton, Mart. Hamleyton wood, Mart. Hardwicke, East. Hermitage, Oak. Horn,
East. Horn mill, East.
I
Ingthorpe, East. Iostors bridge, East.
K
Kelstone, VVrang. Kelthorpe, VVrang. Ketton, East. Kilpisham, East. Kings
Road, VVrang. The Kings Lodge, Oak.
L
Lamley Lodge, Oak. Langham, Oak. Leefeld forest, Oak. Lee Lodge, Oak.
Littlehall wood, All. Lovedall, All. North Luffenham, VVrang. South Luffenham,
VVrang. Lyddington, VVrang. Lyddington park, VVrang. Lynden, Mart.
M
Manton, Mart. Market overton, All. Martinsthorpe, Mart. Morecott, Wrang. Muley
hill, Oak.
N
Newbottle, VVrang. Normanton, Mart.
O
OKEHAM, Oak. Osburnall wood, East.
P
Pickworth, East. Preston, Mart. Prisley hill, VVrang. Pylton, VVrang.
R
Rankesborow hills, Oak. Redgate, VVrang. Ridlington, Mart. Ridlingtonparke,
Mart. Rullers stone, East. Rushpitt wood, All. Ryall, East.
S
Snewton, VVrang. Seyton, VVrang. Stirwood, Oak. Sto^edrye, VVrang. Stretton,
All. Stretton wood, All.
T
Tarringley wood, All. Thisselton, All. Tholthorpe, East. Thorpe, VVrang. Turn
course wood, East. Tyckencote, East. Tyghe, All. Tymwell, East. Tyxover,
VVrang.
V
VPPINGHAM, Mart. Vppingham park, Mart.
W
Wadeland Flu. Wadley, Oak. Weand Flu. W^^ton, All. Westland wood, All. Weston
fees, Oak. W^issenden, All. W^itwell, All. W^cheley heath, East. W^nge, Mart.
The Wispe, Oak. Wolfoky wood, All. Woodhead wood, East.
LEICHESTERSHIRE, lying bordred upon the North with Nottingham-shire; upon the
East with Lincoln and Rutland; upon the South with Northhampton-shire; and upon
the West with Watling-street-way is parted from Warwickshire; the rest being
bounded with the confines of Darby, is a Country Champion, abounding in corn,
but spary of woods, especially in the South and East parts, which are supplied
with Pit-coales plenteously gotten in the North of this Province, At Cole
Overton in Gas come hundred.
and with abundance of Cattle bred in the hills beyond the River Wreack, which
is nothing so well inhabited as the rest.

The Air.
(2) The air is gentle, mild, and temperate, and gives appetite both to labor
and rest: wholesome it is, and draws man's life to a long age, and that much
without sickness; at Carleton only some defect of pronuntiation appears in
their speech.

The Soil.
(3) The Soil thus consisting, the commodities are raised accordingly of corn,
cattle and coals, and in the rocks near Bever are sometimes found the
Astroites, Commodities.
the Star-like precious Stone.

(4) The ancient people that inhabited this County, were the Coritant, who
were spread further into other Shires, but after that the Romans had left the
land to it self, this with many more fell to be under the possession and
government of the Mercians and their Kings, from whom the English enjoys it
at this day.

(5) In Circular wise (almost) the compass of this Shire is drawn
indifferently spacious, but not very thick of Enclosures, being from East to
West in the broadest part not fully 30. miles, and from North to South but 24.
the whole circumference about 196. miles; whose principal City is set, as the
Center, almost in the midst: Leicester City the Center of the Shire.
from whom the Pole is elevated 53. degrees and 4. minutes in Latitude, and for
Longitude 19. degrees, 22. minutes.

(6) From this Town the Shire has the name, though the name of her self is
diversely written, as Legecestria, Leegora, Legte-ceste: by Ninius, Caer-Lerion;
The names of Leicester.
by Matthew of Westminster (if we do not mistake him) Wirall; and now lastly,
Leicester: ancient enough, if King Leir was her builder, eight hundred forty
and four years before the birth of our Savior, Geffrey Mon^.
wherein he placed a Flamine to serve in the Temple of Ianus, by himself there
erected, and where he was buried, if Geffrey ap Arthur say true, but now
certain it is, that Ethelred the Mercian Monarch made it an Episcopal Sea,
Leicester a Bishops See.
in the year of Christ Jesus 680. wherein Sexwulph of his Election became the
first Bishop: which shortly after was thence translated, and therewith the
beauty of the Town began to decay; upon whose desolations that erectifying
Lady Edalfled cast her eyes of compassion, and both rectified the buildings,
and compassed it about with a strong wall, An. D. 914.
where in short time the Cities trade so increased, that Matthew. Paris in his
lesser Story reports as follows, Legecester (says he) is a right wealthy
City, and notably defended; and had the wall a sure foundation, were inferior
to no City whatsoever. But this pride of prosperity long lasted not under the
Normans, for it was sore oppressed with a world of calamities, when Robert
Bossu the Crouch-back Earl of that Province, Leicester destroyed through the
Rebellion of Robert Crouch-backe.
rebelled against his Sovereign Lord King Henry the second: whereof hear the
same Author Paris speak: Through the obstinate stubbornes of Earl Robert
(says he) the noble City Leicester was besieged and thrown down by K. Henry,
and the wall that seemed indissoluble, was utterly razed, even to the ground.
The pieces of whose fragments so fallen down, remained in his days like to
hard rocks, Camden.
through the strength of the Mortar cementing whole lumps together: and at the
Kings command the City was set on fire and burnt, the Castle razed, and a heavy
imposition laid upon the Citizens, The Citizens grievously used.
who with great sums of money bought their own Banishments: but were so used in
their departure, that for extreme fear many of them took Sanctuary, both at S.
Edmunds and S. Albanes. In repentance of these mischiefs, the author thereof
Earl Robert built the Monastery of S. Mary de Pratis, wherein himself became
a Canon Regular, and for fifteen years continuance in sad laments served God
in continual prayers. With the like devotion, Henry the first Duke of
Lancaster built an Hospital for an hundred and ten poor people, with a
collegiate Church, a Deane, twelve Canons Prebendaries, as many Vicars,
sufficiently provided for with revenewes; wherein himself lies buried: and it
was the greatest ornament of that City, until the hand of King Henry the
eight lay over heavy upon the like foundations, and laid their aspired tops at
his own feet.

The fortunes of another Crouch-back (K. Richard the Usurper) were no less
remarkable in this City then the former Robert was, King Richard the third.
both of them in like degree of dishonorable course of life, though of
different issue at their deaths, the one dying penitent and of devout esteem;
the other leaving the stench of Tyranny to all following ages; who from this
City setting forth in one day with great pomp and in battle array, to keep the
Crown sure upon his own Helmet, in a sore fought field, yielded both it and
his life unto the head and hands of Henry of Richmond his Conqueror: and the
next day was brought back like a Hog, naked and torn, and with contempt
without tears obscurely buried in the Gray-Friers of this City; whose
suppression has suppressed the plot-place of his grave, and only the
stone-chest wherein he was laid (a drinking trough now for horses in a common
Inn) retains the memory of that great Monarchs Funeral: A drinking for
horses made of his stone Coffin.
and so did a stone in the Church and Chapel of S. Mary's, enclose the corpse
of the proud and pontifical Cardinal Wolsey, who had prepared for himself,
as was said, a far more richer Monument.

(7) Other places worthy of remembrance in this Shire were these: Places of
note.
In the West, where a high cross was erected, in former times stood the fair
City Cleycester the Romans BENONNES, Camden.
where their Legions lay, and where their two principal ways crossed each
other, as the Inhabitants report; Loughborow in the North-verge, Maria. Scotus.
which the Saxons called Leizanburge, was (as Marianus affirms) taken from
the Britains by Cuthwolfe their King, about the year of Christ 572.

At Redmore near Bosworth, Bosworth-field in Anno 1485. August 22.
Westward in this County, the Kingdom of England lay in hazard of one
Battle, when King Richards Field was fought, where the land at once was freed
from a Tyrant, and a wicked Usurper. Neither may we pass Lutterworth, as the
least in account, where the famous John Wickliffe, Englands Morning star,
dispersed the clouds of all Papisticall darkness, by preaching the Gospel in
that his charge; and style of his pen, so piercing in power, that the man of
Sin ever since has been better known to the world.

(8) Religious houses by Princes erected and by them devoted to God and his
service, Religious houses built and suppressed.
the chiefest in this Shire were at Leicester, Grace-Dieu, Keirkby-Bellers, and
at Burton a Spittle for Lazers, a disease then newly approached in this Land;
for the erection whereof a common contribution was gathered through the Realm:
the Patients in this place were not so much deformed in skin, as the other were
in the defects for the soul; whose skirts being turned up to the sight of the
world, their shames were discovered, and those houses dissolved, that had long
maintained such Idolatrous sins.

(9) This Shires division is into six Hundreds, The Shires division.
and in them are seated twelve Market Towns for commerce, and contains in her
circuit two hundred Parish-Churches: whose names with others are in the Table
following, to this Chapter belonging.

map of Leicestershire LEICESTER both Countye and City described, The
Honorable Famylies that have had the titles of Earls thereof. With other
accidents therein observed


HVNDREDS in Leichestershire.
1. West-Goscote. 2. Sparkingho. 3. Goodlaxton. 4. Gartrey. 5. East Goscote. 6.
Framland.
A
Abbey gate, West. Affordbie, east. Ailston, good. Allexton, east. Altongrange,
west. Anchor Flu. Ansty, West. Appleby little, spark. Appleby great, spark.
Apekettelbie, Fram. Arnesbye, Good. ASHBYE de la Zouch, west. Ashbye folvile,
east. Ashbye little, good. Ashbye great, good. Aston slamvill, spar. Atterton,
spar.
B
Bagrave, gart. Bagworth pakre, spar. Bagworth, spar. Barbythorpe, east.
Baresby, east. Bardon hill, west. Barkebie, east. Barkston, fram. Barlston,
spar. Barn park, spar. Barrow upon Zoram, east. Barton, spar. Barwell, spar.
Beebie, east. Belgrave, east. Belton, west. Bensford bridge, good. Bew manner,
west. Billesdon, gart. Bilston, spar. Bitteswell, good. Blabye, good.
Blackbrooke flu. Blangherby, west. Blason, gart. Boresworth husband, gart.
Borhisson, spar. BOSWORTH, spark. Botisford, fram. Bowden great, gart.
Bradgate, west. Bradley, gart. Brantingthorpe, good. Brantingthorpe, Westcotts,
spar. Braunston, fram. Braunston, spar. Braughton nether, fram. Bredon on the
hill. west. Brenkinsthorpe, spar. Brentingby, fram. Bringhurst, gart.
Brokesbie, east. B^oughton, Ashley, good. Buckminster, fram. Burbage, spar.
Burley park, west. Burrow, gart. Burstall, west. Burton layers, fram. Burton
upon ol^s, east. Burton overy, gart. Bushbye, gart.
C
Candwell, east. Carleton, spar. Carlton Curlew, gart, Cathorpe, gart. Charley,
west. Chamwood forest, west. Cawdwell, fram. Clawson long, fram. Cleybrooke,
good. Colderton, east. Collerton, west. Cosbye, good. Coson, fram. Cossington,
east. Counston, spar. Countesthorpe, good. Cottesboche, good. Cotes, east.
Cotton, spar. Cranoe, gart. Crawston, east. Crofee, spar. Cropston, west.
Croston South, east. Croxton Kerriall, fram.
D
Dadlington, spar. Dalbye little, fram. Dalbie Iacombe, east. Dalbye wood,
east. Dalbie upon Olds, east. Deane flu. Desforde, spar. Dishley grange, west.
Drayton, spar. Drayton, gart. Dunton Basset, good. Dunington, spar. DVNINGTON
CASTLE, west. Dyseworth, west.
E
Eaton, fram. Eastwell, fram. Easton, gart. Edmondthorpe, fram. Eye flu. Eye
Kettleby, fram. Elmesthorpe, spar. Elston, good. Enderby, spar. Engarsby, gart.
Erdisborowe, gart. Erlshilton, spar. Evington, gart.
F
Fleckney, gart. Foston, good. Foxton, gart. Freabie, fram. Frisbye, gart.
Frisbye upon Wreake, east. Frolesworth, good.
G
Gaddesby, east. Gadebye, spar. Galbye, gart. Garenton, west. Garthorpe, fram.
Gillmorton, good. Glenfeild, spar. Glenn great, gart. Glenn little, good.
Glowston, gart. Goadbie, fram. Goadbye, gart. Goldsmiths grange, fram. Grace
dieu. west. Grimston, east. Groobye, spar. Gumley, gart.
H
Hachton, fram. HALLATON, gar. HARBOROW, gart. Harbye, fram. Harston, fram.
Hatherne, west. Hawlstead, east. Heather, spar. Hemington, west. Higham, spar.
High cross, good. Hinckley bond, spar. HINCKLYE, spar. Hobie, east. Hoes,
fram. Hogs Norton, spar. Holt, gart. Hollwell, fram. Horninghold, gart.
Horsepoole grange, spar. Horsepoole, spar. Hoose, fram. Hoton, east. Houghton,
gart. Hucklescott, spar. Humberstone, east. Huncott, spar. Hungerton, east.
I
Ibstoke, spar. Illeston, gart. Ingersbye, gart. Isbye Walton.
K
Katthorpe, good. Keham, east. Kemington south, east. Kerbey muchese, spar.
Ketworth, west. Kibworth Beacham, gart. Kilbye, good. Kilworth north, good.
Kilworth harcott, gart. Kimcote, good. Kirby bellers, fram. Kirbey mallary,
spar. Knaptost, good. Knaveston, gart. Knighton, good. Knighsthorpe, west.
Knipton, fram. Knosson, gart.
L
Lungley, west. Church Langton, gart. Thorpe Lanckton, gart. Lancton east,
gart. Lancton west, gart. Laund, east. Lawghton, gart. Leicester Forest, spar.
Leesthorpe, fram. LEICESTER, east. Leicester Abbey, west. Leire, good. Lindley,
spar. Littlethorpe, good. LITTERWORTH, go. Lockington, west. Loddington, east.
LONGBOROW, west. Loseby, east. Lubenham, gart. Lubsthorpe, spar.
M
Marfeild South, gart. Markefeild, spar. Marston potters, spar. Medburne, gart.
MELTON Mowbray, fram. Merill grange, west. Misterton, good. Morebarne, spar.
MOVNTSORRELL, west. Mowsely, gart. Musson, fram.
N
Naneby, spar. Nelston, spar. Newbold verdon, spar. Newbold, west. Newbold,
gart. Newton, west. Newton harcourt, gart. Newton burcott, gart. Newton cold,
east. Newton nethercote, spar. Newtowne, spar. Norborow, spar. Normanton, fram.
Normanton, spar. Normanton on the health, spar. Norton, gart. Norton East,
east. Nosely, gart.
O
Oddeston, spar. Odeby, good. Orton upon the Mount, spar. Osberston, spar.
Osgathorpe, west. Overton cold, fram. Overton sausye, west. Oweston, gart.
P
The great Park, west. Peatling little, good. Peatling great, good. Peckleton,
spar. Pickering grange, spar. Pickwell, gart. Plungar, fram. Prestwold, east.
Q
Quarendon, west. Quenby, east. Quenyborowe, east.
R
Ragdale, east. Ratbye, spar. Ratcliffe, culie, spar. Ratcliffe upon Wreake,
east. Raunston in Darbysh. west. Rearsbie, east. Redmore, spar. Redmyle, fram.
King Richards field, spar. Rodeley, west. Rotherby, east. Rowlston, gart.
S
Saddington, gart. Saltbie, fram. Sapcote, spar. Saxbie, fram. Saxulbie, east.
Scallford, fram. Scechesley, spar. Scraptoste, gart. Segrave, east. Sense flu.
Sewsterne, fram. Seyston, east. Shakerston, spar. Shankton, gart. Sharnford,
spar. Shawell, good. Shaxton, spar. Sheepie little, spar. Sheepie great, spar.
Shenton, spar. Sheep head, west. Sheresbye, good. Shilton, spar. Shouldby,
east. Sibston, spar. Skeffington, east. Slawston, gart. Smeeto, gart. Snarston,
spar. Snibston, west. Snyte flu. Sproxton, fram. Stanton, spar. Stanton harold,
west. Stanton wyvell, gart. Stanton under Barton, spar. Stapleford, fram.
Stapleton, spar. Stathorne, fram. Stoke golding, spar. Stokerston, gart.
Stonesbie, fram. Stony Stanton, spar. Stoure flu. Stowghton, gart. Stretton
great, gart. Stretton little, gart. Sumerbee, fram. Sutton, good. Sutton
chenney, spar. Swannington, west. Swebston, west. Swift flu. Swinford, good.
Swithland, west. Sylebye, east. Sysesore, east. Sysonbee, fram.
T
Temple, spar. Theddingworth, gart. Thornton, spar. Thorpacre, west. Thorpe,
good. Thorpe Arnold, fram. Thorpe sachfeld, east. Thrinkston, west. Thurcaston,
west. Thurlston, spar. Thurmaston, east. Thurnby, gart. Thussington, east.
Tilton, east. Toly Park, spar. Tongue, west. Trent flu. Tugby, east.
Thurlancton, gart. Twicrosse, spar. Twyford, east.
V
Vlvescrosse Abbey, west. Vllesthorne, good. Vlveston, gart. Vpton, spar.
W
Walcot, good. WALTHAM on the wowld, fram. Walton, good. Walton on the wowld,
east. Wanlipp, west. Wartnabie, east. Welbie, fram. Welham, gart. Welland flu.
Welsborow, spar. Westerby, gart. Wetherlye, spar. Whalton long, west. Wheston,
good. Whittington grange, spar. Whitwike, west. Wigston little, good. VVigston
great, good. VVikeham, fram. VVikin, spar. VVilloughbye waterlesse, good.
VVilston, west. VViston, gart. VVithcorke, fram. VViverby, fram. VVoodhouse,
west. VVorthington, west. VVreake flu. VVykin, east. VVymondham, fram.
VVynaswold, east.
Y
Ybstocke, spar.
LINCOLNSHIRE. CHAPTER XXXII.
THe County of Lincoln by the English-Saxons called Lincoll-scyre, and by the
Normans Nicolshire, is confined on the North with Humber, on the East with the
Germane Ocean, upon the South is parted from Cambridge and Northamptonshire by
the River Nine, and on the West from Nottingham and Yorke-shires by Dun and
Trent.

The length of this Shir^.
(2) The length of this Province extended from Barton upon Humber in the North,
unto Stanford upon the River Nine in the South, are miles by our English
measure fifty-five, and the breadth thereof from Newton in the West, stretched
unto Winthorp upon her East Sea contains thirty five. The whole in
circumference about one hundred and eighty miles.

The Air.
(3) The Air upon the East and South part is both thick and foggy, by reason
of the Fennes and unsolute grounds, but therewithal very moderate and
pleasing. Her graduation being removed from the Equator to the degree of 53.
and the winds that are sent of her still working Seas, do disperse those
vapors from all power of hurt.

The Form.
(4) The form of this County does somewhat resemble the body of a Lute, whose
East coasts lie bowe-like into the Germane Ocean, all along pestered with
in-lets of salt waters and sands, which are neither firm nor safe for
travelers, as those in the South proved unto K. John, who marching Northward
from Northfolke, against his disloyal Barons, upon those washes lost all his
furniture and carriage by the sudden return of the Sea, and softness of the
Sands.

The Soil.
(5) Her Soil upon the West and North is abundantly fertile, pleasant and rich,
stored with pasturage, areable and meadowing grounds: the East and South Fenny
and blackish, and for Corn barren; but for Foul and Fish exceeding any other
in the Realm; wherein, at some times and seasons of the year, has been
taken in nets, in August, at one draught, above three thousand Mallards, and
other Fowls of the like kind.

Commodities.
(6) The Shires commodities consist chiefly in Corn, Cattle, Fish, Foul, Flax
and Alablaster; as also in a Plaster much esteemed of by the Romans for their
works of Imagerie; Plin. Not. Hist.
and whereof Pliny in his natural History makes mention. And the Astroites, a
precious stone, Greg. Agric. Mineral l^b.
Star-like, pointed with five beams or rays, anciently esteemed for their
virtue in victories, upon the South-west of this County near Bever are found:
not far thence in our Fathers memory, at Harlaxton was ploughed up a brazen
vessel, wherein was enclosed a golden Helmet of an ancient fashion, set with
precious stones, which was presented to Katharin of Spain, Wife and Dowager to
King Henry the Eight.

(7) This Shire triumphs in the births of Beaucleark, King Henry the First,
whom Selby brought forth, and of King Henry the Fourth at Bullingbrooke born:
but may as justly lament for the death of King John, herein poisoned by Simon a
Monk of Swynsted Abbey; and of Queen Eleanor, wife to King Edward the First,
the mirror of wedlock, and love to the Commons, who at Hardby, near
Bullingbrooke, his birthplace, ended her life.

Market-Townes.
(8) Trade and commerce for provision of life is vented through thirty one
Market-Townes in this Shire, Lincoln the chief Town.
whereof Lincoln the Counties namer is chief, by Ptolemie and Antonine called
Lindum, by Beda Linde-collina; by the Saxons, Linoo collyne, and by the
Normans, Nichol. Very ancient it is, and has been more magnificall, as by her
many over-turned ruins does appear, and far more populous, as by Domesdayes
book is seen, where it is recorded that this City contained a thousand and
seven Mansions, and nine hundred Burgesses, with twelve Lage-men, having Sac
and Soc. And in the Normans time, says Malmesburie, it was one of the best
peopled Cities of England, being a place for traffic of Merchandise for all
comers by Land or Sea. Herein King Edward the Third ordained his Staple for
the Mart of Wools, Leather, and Lead; and no less then fifty Parish-Churches
did beautify the same: but now contains only fifteen besides the
Cathedral. Some ruins yet remain both of Frieries and Nunneries, who lie now
buried in their own ashes, and the City conquered not by war, but by time
and very age: and yet has she not escaped the calamity of sword, as in the
time of the Saxons; An. D. 516. An. D. 940. An. D. 1140. An. D. 1217. An. D.
1123.
whence Arthur enforced their Ho^t: the like also did Edmund to the destroying
Danes; and by the Normans it suffered some damage, where King Stephen was
vanquished and taken prisoner; and again by the Third Henry, who assaulted and
wan it from his rebellious Barons. By fire likewise it was sore defaced,
wherein not only the buildings were consumed, but withal many men and women
in the violence thereof perished: An. 1186. Will. Malmes.
as also by an Earthquake her foundation was much weakened and shaken, wherein
the fair Cathedral Church, dedicated to the Virgin of Virgins, was rent in
pieces. The government of this City is committed yearly to a Mayor, two
Sheriffs, twelve Aldermen in Scarlet, a Sword, a Hat of estate, a Recorder,
Sword Bearer, and four Sergeants with Maces: whose situation on a steep hill
stands, for Longitude in the degree 20. 10. scruples, the Pole elevated for
Latitude from the degree 53. and 50. scruples.

(9) Much has been the devotion of Princes in building religious houses in
this County, Ann. 1536.
as at Crowland, Lincoln, Markeby, Leyborne, Grenfield, Alvingham, Newnersby,
Grymmysby, Newsted, Elsham, Staynsfeld, Syxhill, Torkesey, Bryggerd,
Thorneholme, Nuncotton, Fosse, Hevings, Axholme Isle, Goykewell, Saint Michaels
near Stanford, Swyneshead, Spalding, Kirk^sted, etc.

(10) Commotions in this Shire were raised the eight and twentieth of King
Henry the Eight, Ann. 1549.
where twenty thousand making insurrection, violently swear certain Lords and
Gentlemen to their Articles. But no sooner they heard of the Kings power
coming, but that they dispersed themselves, and sued for pardon. And again in
the third year of King Edward the Sixth, in case of Enclosures, Lincoln, rose
in seditious manner, as did they of Cornwall, Devon-shire, Yorke-shire, and
Norfolk: but after some slaughters of their chiefest men, were reduced to
former obedience.

This Shires division is into three principal parts, viz. Lindsey, Castles.
1. Nicole. 2. Clifford. 3. Brum^e. 4. Stanford. 5. B^^am 6. Swin^shead

Kesteven, and Holland, Lindsey is subdivided into seventeene Hundreds,
Kesteven into eleven, and Holland into three, containing in all thirty one,
wherein are situated thirty Market-Townes, and six hundred thirty
Parish-Churches, as in the Table following are Alphabetically expressed.

map of Lincolnshire THE COUNTY AND CITY OF LYNCOLNE DESCRIBED WITH THE ARMS
OF THEM THAT HAVE BEEN EARLS THEREOF since the Conquest.


HVNDREDS and Wapentakes in Lincolne-shire.
Lindsey.
1. Manly Wap. 2. Y^borough ^^a. 3. Brodley Wap. 4. Ludbrough Wa. 5.
Walshcroft Wa. 6. As^^^oe Wap. 7. Co^ringham W. 8. Well Wap. 9. Lawris Wap. 10.
Wraggot Wa. 11. Gorine Wa. 12. Lou^heask Hun 13. Ca^^eworth Hu. 14. Candleshy
Wa. 15. Hill Hund. 16. Bullingbrook W 17. Horncostle W.
Kesteven
18. La^go Wap. 19. ^oothby Wap. 20. Loveden Wap. 21. Fla^well Wa. 22.
Aswa^dburn W 23. W^^ebridge W 24. Grantham W. 25. Aveland W. 26. ^el^^she Wap.
27. Nesse Wap.
Holland.
28. Shirbeck Wa. 29. Kirton Wap. 30. Ellowe Wap.
A
Abye, Call. Agle, Boul. Alesbie, Brod. Alesbie, Call. ALFORD, Call. Alge^ki^ke,
K^^^. Alhallowes, Cand. Allington, Wi^. Althorpe, Man. Alvingham, Louth.
Amcotes, Man. Amw^cke, Flax. Ankam Flu. Ancaster, Lou. Anderby, Call. Anthorpe,
Lou. Appley, Wrag. Appleby Man. A^metree, Horn. Asbie, Man. Asgarbye, Bull.
Asgarby, Asw. Ashbye, Cand. Ashby, Ho^^. Ashby, Flax. Ashbye, Brod. Ashbye
childs, Hill. Askby, Hill. Aslackby, Av^. Aspye, Br^d. Asterby, Gart. Astrope,
Law. Aswarby Hill. Auburgh, Booth. Aveland, Avel. Aukley, Man. Aukeburgh, Man.
Auklam Flu. Avousbye, Asw. Au^^rope, Asw. Aust north, Louth.
B
Bagenderby hill. Ballin, Lincoln l^ber. Bamburghe, Gart. Bane Flu. Bareby,
Wiv. Bradney, Wrag. Bartholme, Nos. Barkeston, Grant. Barkworth west, Wrag.
Barkworth east, Wrag. Barnalby, Brod. Bame^by, Yar. Barrow, Yar. Barroughbye,
Wive. BARTON, Yar. Baston dike, N^s. Baston drane, N^s. Baston, N^s.
Bassingham, Booth. Bassingthorpe, Bol. BUCKINGHAM, Lov^. Beckring, Wrag.
Bekbye, Yar. Belchworth, Gart. Bele^by, Brod. Bellew, Call. Belton, Grant.
Belroste, Man. Belton, Man. Long Benington, Love. Benington, Skir. Beningworth,
Wrag. Berling, Law. Benby, Yar. Beseby, Call. Beseby, Brod. Bever Castle, ^oant.
Bewthorpe, Bol. Bicker, Kirt. Billingay, L^ng. Billingborrow, Avel. Billsby,
Call. Binbrooke, Walsh. Bishops norton, Asla. Biskthorpe, Wrag. Bitchfield, Bol.
Bitham little, Bol. Blankney, Lang. Bliburgh, Asla. Bliton, Corring. Bloxham,
Flax. Bolyston, Ellow. BOSTON, Skir. S. Bottolph, Skir.
Boothby pannell, Wive. Boothbye, Booth. Botiford, Man. Bo^bie, Yar. Boultham,
Booth. BOVRNE, Avel. Bracebye, Grant. Bradney, VVrag. Braesbridge, Lang.
Braisborough, Nos. Brakenburgh, Lud. Brambey, VVoll. Brampton, VVoll. Brandon,
Love. Branswell, Flax. Branston, Lin. Brant broughton, Love. Bratleby, Law.
Brawston, Lin. Bratost, Cand. Bridge end, Avel. Briggesley, Brod. Brinckle
hill. Brocklesbey, Yar. Brodley, Brod. Brombye, Man. Brotherhouse, Ellow.
Brothertost, Asw. Brothertost, Kirt. Broughton, Man. Bro^holme, Law. Brunthorp,
Call. Bucknall, Gart. Bulby, Bell. BVLLINGBROOK, Bu. Bullington, VVrag. Burgh
upon bane, Wrag. B^ne Flu. Burgh in the marsh, Can. Burham, Noss. Buringham,
Man. Burnham, Man. Burton, Boll. Burton, Law. Burton, Asw. BVRTON, Man.
Burthorpe, Avel. Burwell, Louth. Buslingthorp, Law. Butterwicke, Skir.
Butterwicke west, Man. Butterwicke east, Man.
C
Caburne. Brod. Cadney, Yar. Cadeby, Brod. Caester, Yar. Calsebye, Call.
Calverthorp, Asw. Cameringham, Asla. Candlesbye, Cand. Cane^bye, Man. Canwick,
L^n. Careby, Bell. Carltons, Louth. Carlton little, Louth. Carlton great,
Louth. Carton castle, Louth. Carlton north, Law. Carlton south, Law. Carlton,
Love. Carlton, Booth. Carleby, Noss. Casthorpe, Man. Castill, Louth. Castle
bitham, Bell. Cathorpe, Love. Catley, Flax. Caukwell, Gart. Cawthorp, Avel.
Cawthorp, Lud. Cainebie, Asla. Marsh Chapel, Brod. Cherry, Law. Claipoole,
Love. Claithorp, Call. Claws cross, Ello. Claxbye, Call. Claxbie, Hill. Claxbie,
Walsh. Clee, Brod. Cleethorp. Brod. Cleytham, Cor. Clixbie, Yar. Clowthouse,
Ellow. Clum, Lin. Coats north, Brod. Coats little, Brod. Coats great, Brod.
Cockrington north* Louth. Cockrington south. Louth. Cokeswould, Brod.
Colsterworth, Grant. Co^sholme, Louth. Comethorpe, Bell. Connesbye, Horn.
Co^bye, Bell. Coringham, Cor. Cotham Abbey, Yar. Co^tlehall, Man. Cott. Asla.
Covenham, Lud. Coulbye, Booth. Coulbye, Man. Cowbet, Ellow. Cowthorpe, Call.
Cra^well, Flax. Cretew, Bell. Croste, Cand. Crosby, Man. Croule, Man. CROWLAND,
Ellow. Croxby, Walsh. Croxton, Yar. Cumberworth, Call. Cunningholme, Louth.
Cunesby, Horn.
D
Dalby, Candle. DAVDERBY, Gart. Dembleby, Avel. Deeping west, Nosse. Deeping
east, Nosse. MARKET DEEPING, Nosse. Deeping Fenne, Ellow. Denton, Grant. Digby,
Flax. Baston Dike, Ellow. Dockdyke, Lang. Doddington, Booth. Dodington, Love.
Dogdike Ferye, Horn. Doveburne, Ellow. Dewesby, Avel. Donesby, Avel. Dowesdale,
Ellow. Dribie, Candle. Dun Flu. Dun holm, Law. DVNINGTON, Kirt. Dunnington upon
^ane, Gart. Dunsby, Flax. Dunsby, Avel. Dunston, Lang. Durrinton, Flax. Dyke,
Avel.
E
Ealand, Man. Eagle, Booth. Earebie, Brod. Easton, Grant. Eastoste, Man.
Edenham, Bell. Edlington. Edlington, Gar. Eglethorp, Avel. Elkington, Louth.
Elsham, Yar. Enderby mauis, Bull. Wood Enderby, Horn. Bag Enderbye, Hill.
Epworth, Man. Eveden, Asw.
F
Faldingworth, Law. Fanthorp, Louth. Farforth, Louth. Fareby, Yar. Faresby,
Bull. Farlesthorp, Call. Faston, Love. Faston, Grant. Fenn west, Horn. Fenn
east, Horn. Fenton, Lov^. Fenton, Well. Fereby north, Yar. Ferye east, Cu.
Fesdike Flu. Fesdike, Kirt. Fillingham, Asla. Finny^gley, Man. Fishtost, Skir.
Fiskerton, Law. Fleet, Ellow. Fleet Penn, Ellow. Flixborough, Man. Folethorp,
Call. FOLKINGHAM, Avel. Foldingworth, Lin. Fossdik, Kirt. Fotherby, Lud.
Fotherington, Candle. Frampton, Kirt. Frekingham, Avel. Freston, Skir.
Friskney, Cand. Friston, Love. Fordingham, Man. Fulbecke, L^ve. Fulbrooke,
Wivt. Fulletbye, Hill. Fullnetbye, Wrag. Fullstowe, Brod. Furby, Asla.
Fusworth, Cor. Fueby, Cand.
G
Gaiton in the marsh, Call. Gaiton in the wowld, L. GANESBROVGH, Cor. Garthorpe,
Man. Gateburton, W^ll. Gaudbie, Gart. Gedney, Ellow. Gedney Fenn, Ellow.
Gellstone, Love. Geringham, Cur. GLANFORD BRIDGE, Yar. Glentham, Asla.
Glentworth, Asla. Gokewell, Man. Gobesbye, Gart. Gonna^by, Grant. Gosberthy,
Kirt. Goulthro, Wrag. Goxhill, Yar. Grawesby, Brod. Grabye, Avel. Graie land,
Ma^l. The Grange, Law.
GRANTHAM Grant. Granthorp, Louth. Greenfield, Call. Gresby, Yar. Gree^ham,
Hill. Gre^ford, Nosse. Greetewell, Law. Grinbleby, Louth. Grimsby, ^ird.
Grimsthorpe, Bell. GRIMSBY GREAT, Brod. Gundbye, Bell. Gundbye, Cand.
Gunthorpe, Man. Gunnyet, Man. Gunwarby, Grant.
H
Harbrough, Yar. Hackthorne, Asla. Hacunby, Avel. Hagnaby, Bull.
Hagworthingham, Hill. Hakeliff, Brod. Haldingham, Flax. Hallam upon bane, Hor.
Hallington, Louth. Hameringham, Horn. Hamton, Wrag. Hamworth, Asla. Hanbeck,
Flax. Hangholme, Louth. Hannay, Call. Hanworth, Lang. Hardbye, Bull. Harlaxton,
Grant. Halton east, Yar. Harmethorp, Avel. Harmyston, Booth. Harpswell, Asla.
Harrington, Hill. Har^sholme, Booth. Hather, Wiv^. Hatterby west, Brod. Hatton.
Hatton, Wrag. Ha^etholme, Flax. Haughe, Call. Haulton, Bull. Haulton west, Man.
Haulton, Horn. Haulton, Wrag. Hawardby, Brod. Hawsted, Gar. Haxley, Man.
Havham, Louth. Haysbye, Avel. Healing, Brod. Heapham, Cor. Heighington, Lang.
Hekington, Asw. Helpringham, Asw. Hemingby, Gar. Hemswel, Asla. Hetost, Call.
Hiberstowe, Man. Hildich, Skir. Hoerbothe, Lang. Hoggesthorpe, Call.
Holbichthurne, Ellow. Holbeach, Ellow. Holbichdrove, Ellow. Hole great, Asw.
Hole little, Asw. Holgate, Bull. Holland fenne, Ellow. Hollywell, B^l.
Homerston, Brod. Horbling, Avel. HORNCASTLE, Horn. Horsington, Gar. Horstowe,
Yar. Mere Hospital, Lang. Horoft, Call. Houghton, Lout. Houghton, Cor. Hou^sby,
Gar. Netham House, Avel. Howell, Asw. Howght on the mount, Love. Howton, Wiv^.
Houlton in the clay, Bro. Howsham, Yar. Howthorpe, B^l. Howton in the more, Wa.
Humberston, Brod. Hameringham, Hill. Hundleby, Bull. Hunnington, Wiv^. Huntley*
Bull. Hycham south, Booth. Hycham north, Booth.
I
S. James deeping, Nos. Jerinham, Bell. Ikwi^h cast, Wrag. Immingham, Yar.
Ingalsby in Beltisloe Wapent, Asw. Ingham, Asla. Ingleby, W^ll. Ingoldmels
Thiddlethorp, Ca. Ingoldmels, Cand. Ithve, Cand. Itfo^d abbey, Walsh.
C
Keadby, Man. Easter Keales, Bull. Wester Keales, Bull.
Ked^ington, Louth. Kelbye, Asw. Keleby, Yar. Kellfeild, Man. Kellsey south,
Walsh. Kellsey north, Yar. Kelsterne, Louth. Kettlesbye, Hill. Ketlethorp*
Wall, Kexbie, Well. Killingholme, Yar. Kingerbye, Walsh. Kirkby, Walsh. Kirkby,
Asw. Kirkby green, Lang. Kirby upon bane, Gar. Kirkby underwood* A. Kirkby
east, Bull. Kirkseek, Grant. Kirksteed Abbey, Gart. Kirmington, Yar. Kirmonde,
Wrag. Kirmonde in the mire, Walsh. Kirton holme, Ki^. KIRKTON, Kirt. Kirton in
lindsey, Cor. Knathe, Cor. Kneadbye, Man. Kyme north, Lang. Kyme south, Asw.
Kysebye stands in the circuit of Aveland. As.
L
South Lake, Nosse. Langerton, W^l. Langrike ferye, Horn. Langton, Hill.
Langton, Gart. Langtost, Nosse. Langworth, Law. Largton, Gart. Laschy, Brod.
Lawghton, Avel. S. Leonard, Ellow.
Leake, Skir. Lebthorpe, Bell. Long Ledesham, Love. Lee, Corring. Legburne,
Call. Legsbye, Wrag. Lesingham. Flax. Levat east, Man. Leverton, Skir.
Levington, Bell. LINCOLN, Law Lingwood grange, La. Linwood, Walsh. Lissington,
Wrag. Londenthorp, Grant. London eastcoate, Nos. Longtost, Nosse. Longtost
drane, Noss. Kirk Loughton, Wrag. Loughton, Asw. LOVMHE, Louth. Lownde, Bell.
Ludford, Wrag. Luddinton, Man. Ludbroughe, Lud. Lusbye, Bull. Lutton burn,
Ellow. LYMBERGH GREAT, Yar. Lymbergh little* Yar.
M
Mablethorpe, Call. Maden house, Love. Maidewell, Louth. Malmton, Man. Maltby,
Call. Maltby, Louth. Manbye, Louth. Manbye, Man. Manesgate, Hill. Many, Bulling.
Manthorp, Gran. Manthorp, Bell. Manthorp, Call. Marching in the Fenne, Horn.
Maring on the hill, Horn. Markbie, Call. Martin, Gart. Marton, Well. S. Mary's.
Can.
Melton rosle, Yar. Melwood park, Man. Mereland, Booth. Merston, Love. Merton*
Lang. Messingham, Man. Metheringham, Lang. Milthorpe, Avel. Minting, Gart.
Moreby, Horn. Morton, Avel. Morton, Cor. Moulton, Ellow. Moulton Chapel, Ell.
Moulton second, Ellow. Muckton, Louth.
N
Nanelye, Booth. Netisham, Law. Nettleton, Yar. Newfeild, Yar. Newgate, Horn.
Netham house, Avel. Newsham Abbey, Yar. Newton, W^ll. Newton, Avel. Newton,
Walsh. Nockton, Lang. Normanby, Asla. Normanbie, W^ll. Normanby, Walsh.
Normanton, Love. Northorp, Corring. North ferebie. North rosbye, Brod. Norton
Disney, Booth. Numbye, Call. Numbye Chapel, Call.
O
Obthorpe, Nosse. Oldfeild, Law^^. Onebye little, Wive. Onebye great, Wive.
Onlesbie, Call. Orbye, Cand. Ormesbye north, Lud. Ormesbye, Hill. Osburnby,
Avel. Osgarbie, Bell. Osgodby, Walsh. Otenbie, Yar. Oumbie, Asla. Ouston, Man.
Owmby, Yar. Owresbye, Walsh. Oxcombe, Hill.
P
Panton, Wrag. Partney, Candle. Pawnton great, Grant. Pawnton little, Wive.
Pickworth, Avel. Pikale, Ellow. Pilham, Corring. Pluckarre, Hill. Pointon,
Avel. Potter, Lang^* Pyncebecke, Ellow.
Q
QVAPLODE. Quarrington, Asw. Quodring, Kirt.
R
Raithby, Louth. Rande, Wrag. Randbye, Gart. Rasen west, Walsh. Rasen east,
Walsh. Middle Rasen, Walsh. MARKET RASEN, Walsh. Ravendale east, Brod.
Ravendale west, Brod. Reau^bie, Bull. Redborne, Man. Red dear park, Bell.
Repham, Law. Reason north, Louth. Reston, Call. Ribie, Yar. Richmonton, Skir.
Rigsbie. Call. Ringston, Avel. Rippingall, Avel. Ropesley, Wive. Rothbye, Bull.
Rothbye, Cand. Rothwell, Brod. South Rouceby, Flax. North Rouceby, Flax.
Roughton, Gart. Roughton, Horn. Rowston, Flax. Roxbye, Man. Roxham* Flax.
Ruckland, Hill. Ryland, Law. Rysbie, Man. Ryskington, Flax.
S
Salmondby, Hill. Saltfletby west, Louth. Saltfletby east, Louth. Middle
Saltfletby, Louth. Saltflet haven, Louth. SALTFLEET, Louth. Saneton, Man.
Sausthorpe, Hill. Sapperton, Grant. Sawcleefe, Man. Saxbie, Yar. Saxbie.
Saxelbie, Law. Scalbie, Man. Scamelsbie, Gart. Scarle north, Booth. Scartho,
Brod. Scaupwich, Lang. Scothorne, Law. Scounthorp, Man. Scarfeild, Hill.
Scroope, Love. Seamelly, Gart. Sempringham, Av^l. Sentost ferry, Man. Serebie,
Yar. Shepewash, Lang. Sidebreck, Wive. Sibsey, Bull. Silesbie, Call. Silk, Asw.
Sixill, Wrag. Sixill Abbey, Wrag. Skampton, Law. Skendleby, Cand. Skegnes,
Cand. Skeldick, Kirt. Skellingthorpe, Booth. Skidbrough, Louth. Skillington,
Bell. Skirbeck, Skir. Skoston, Cor. Skotten, Cor. Skottere, Cor. Sk^ekington,
Asw. Skrele^bie, Gart. Skrembye, Can. Skynnard, Booth. SLEFORD, Flax Snatford,
Law. Snelland, Wrag. Snitterby, Asla. Solesbie, Call. Somerby, Yar. Somerby,
Wive. Somerby, Cor. Somerton castle, Booth. Sommerby, Hill. Sommercotes north,
Love. Sommercotes south, Love. Sotbie, Wrag. Southerton, Kirt. Southorpe, Cor.
Southrey, Gart. Southorpe, Bell. Sowthestoke, Grant. SPALDING, Ell. Spanby,
Avel. SPILLSBY, Bull. Spittlegate, Wive. Spittle in the street, Asla.
Spridlington, Asla. Springthorpe, Cor. Stain, Call. Stanygot, Gart. Stainfeild,
Wrag. Stainflet, Avel. Stainton, Wrag. Market Stainton, Gar. Stainton in the
hole, Walsh. Stapleford, Booth. Stallingbourgh, Yar. STAMFORD, Noss. Stamfeild,
Wrag. Stamford baron, Nosse. Stanygott, Gart. Staynbye, Bell. Steeping great,
Cand. Steeping little, Bull. Stickforth, Bull. Stickney, Bull. Stillington, Grant.
Stock^orth, Cor. Stoke north, Wive. Stothy, Wrag. Stowe, Nosse. Stowe, Well.
Stowe, Avel. Streglethorpe, Love. Strawghton, Grunt. Stretton, Well. Strotton,
Wive. Strobby, Call. Stubby, Call. Stukeswold, Gar. Stubton, Love. Stuton, Gar.
Sturton great, Gar. Stutton, Louth. Sudbroke, Law. Sudbrooke, Love. Surf^^er,
Kirt. Suridlington, Asla. Sutterby, Cand. Sutto^, Call. Sutton, Love. Sutton
burn, Ellow. Sutton S. Edmonds, Ellow. Sutton S. James, Ellow. Sutton S.
Mary's, Ellow. Sutton S. Leonards, Ellow Swabye, Call. Swafeild, Bell. Swallow,
Brod. Swaton, Avel. Swineshead, Kir. Swinestead, Bell. Swinehop, Walsh.
Swinethorpe, Wrag. Swynerton, Booth. Sydebrooke, Wive.
T
Taland, Man. Tathwell, Louth. Tattershall chase, Gart. TATTERSHALL, Ga.
Tayntons, Horn. Taynton lower, Horn. Taynton higher, Horn. Tedd S. Mary's,
Ellow. Temple bruer, Flax. Thetsord, Hill. Teuleby, Walsh. Thatleby, Noss.
Theddlethorps, Call. Theresthorpe, Call. Theresway, Walsh. Theresbie, Brod.
Thiniok, Cor. Thimelby, Horn. Thimel^y Gart. THONGE CASTLE, Brod. Tharganby,
Brod. Thorganbye, Walsh. Thor^bye australis, Call. Thorn, Man. Thornham, Man.
Thornton, Gar. Thornton, Yar. Thornton in the more, Wall. Thornton curtis, Yar.
Thorpe* Yar. Thorpe, Law. Thorpe, Lang. Thorpe, Cand. Thorpe, Bull. Thorpe on
the mount, Booth. Thorsthorp, Call. Thirsthorp, Law. Thurlebye, Booth.
Thursthorp, Call. Timberland, Lang. Tollington, Nosse. Torksey in the circuit of
Aslaco wap. La. Tossed, Bell. Tossed, Walsh. Tothill, Call. Totney, Brod. The Tower,
Gart. Towes, Walsh. Toynton, Bull. Trent Flu. Tumbey, Horn. Thurleby, Call.
Turrington East, Wrag. Terrington West, Wrag. Tu^ham, Gart. Tylney, Lang.
V
Vanby Abbey, Bell. Vffington, Nosse. Vlsebye, Yar. Vlsebye, Call. Vpton, Well.
Vsselbye, Walsh. Vtterby, Lud.
W
Waddingham, Man. Waddington, Booth. Waddington, Linc. Waddingworth, Gar.
Wailesbye, Well. WAINFLEET, Can. Waithe, Brod. Walcotts, Man. Walcott, Lang.
Walcott, Avel. Waldram hall, Nos. Wallton, Wive. Walshcrost, Walsh. Waltuth,
Cor. Waltting, Cor. Waltham, Brod. Waplade drove, P^r. Wapton, W^v^. Warton,
Cor. Washenburgh, Lan. Water Willowby, Avel. Welbourne, Booth. Welbye, Wive.
Well, Call. Wellane Flu. Wellinghore, Booth. Welton, Can. Welton, Law. Welton,
Louth. Wostborough, Louth. Westby, Bell. Weston, Ellow. Westwood, Man. Whapledd,
Ellow. Whiconbye, Wrag. Whitton, Man. Whystye, Booth. Wiberton rode, Kirt.
Wickham Ellow. Wigtost, Kirt. Wikam, Wrag. Wikkenbye, Wrag. Wilberton, Kirt.
Wildmore sen, Horn. Wildsworth, Cor. Willingham south, Wrag. Willingham north,
Walls. Willingham, Asla. Willingham, Well. Willisforth, Wive. Willoughby, Call.
Willowby, Love. Willowby, Asw. Willsby, Horn. Wilsthorpe, Nosse. Winceby, Hill.
Wingsby, Bulling. Winthorpe, Cand. Wintringham, Man. Wintrington, Man.
Wispington, Gar. Witham north, Bell. Witham south, Bell. Witham, Bell. Witham Flu.
Withcall, Louth. Witherne, Call. Witlingham, Law. Woodhall, Gar. Woodthorpe,
Call. VVollstrope, Gran. Work, Man. VVorlaby, Yar. VVotron, Yar. VVowld
Newton, Brod. VVragholme, Lud. VVrangle, Skir. VVragby, Wrag. VVraubie, Yar.
VVrighthold, Avel. VVyllyton, Asla. VVylsthorp, Noss. VVyngall, Walsh. VVysham,
Lud. VVytham, Bell.
Y
Yarburgh, Louth.
NOTTINGHAM-SHIRE. CHAPTER XXXIII.
The name of Nottingham.
NOTTINGHAM-SHIRE (from Nottingham her chiefest Town has the name; and that,
somewhat softened from the Saxons Snoddengaham, for the many Dens or Caves
wrought in her Rocks and underground) lies bordered upon the North and
North-west with Yorkshire; The Borders.
upon the East a good distance by Trent is parred from, and with Lincolnshire;
altogether confined: the South with Leichestershire and the West by the River
Erwash is separated from Darby-shire.

The Form.
(2) For form long and Ovall-wise, doubling in length twice her breadth, whose
extremes are thus extended and distance observed: From Finingley North to
Steanford in the South, are thirty eight English miles; her West part from
Teversall to Besthorp in the East are little more then nineteen; whose
circumference draws much upon one hundred and ten miles.

The Air.
(3) The Air is good, wholesome, and delectable; the Soil is rich, sandy, and
clayie, as by the names of that Counties divisions may appear: and surely for
Corn and Grass so fruitful, that it secondeth any other in the Realm: and
for Water, Woods, and Canell Coals abundantly stored.

Commodities.
(4) Therein grows a Stone softer then Alablaster, but being burnt makes a
plaster harder then that of Paris: wherewith they floor their upper rooms;
for betwixt the Joysts they lay only long Bulrushes, and thereon spread this
Plaster, which being thoroughly dry becomes most solid and hard, so that it
seemeh rather to be firm stone then mortar, and is trod upon without all
danger.

In the West near Worksop grows plenty of Liquorice very delicious and good.

Battles.
(5) More South in this Shire, at Stoke, in the Reign of King Henry the
seventh, a great battle was fought by John De-la-pole Earl of Lincoln, which
Richard the Usurper had declared his Heir apparent, but Richard losing his
life, and De-la-pole his hopes, in seeking here to set up a Lambert, fell down
himself: and at Newarke after many troubles King John got his peace with the
end of his life.

(6) Trade and commerce for the Countries provision is frequented in eight
Market Towns in this Shire, Nottingham.
whereof Nottingham is both the greatest and best: a Town seated most pleasant
and delicate upon a high hill, for buildings stately, and number of fair
streets surpassing and surmounting many other Cities, and for a spacious and
most fair Market place does compare with the best. Many strange Vaults hewed
out of the rocks, in this Town are seen; R^g. Hoved.
and those under the Castle of an especial note, one for the Story of Christ's
Passion engraven in the Walls, Asserius
and cut by the hand of David the second King of Scots, I^gul^his.
whilst he was therein detained prisoner. Another wherein Lord Mortimer was
surprised in the nonage of King Edward the third, Hen* Hunting.
ever since bearing the name of Mortimers Hole; these have their stairs and
several rooms made artificially even out of the Rocks: as also in that hill
are dwelling houses with winding stairs, windows, chimneys, and room above
room, wrought all out of the solid Rock. The Castle is strong, and was kept
by the Danes against Burthred, Ethelred, and Elfred, the Mercian, and
West Saxon Kings, who together laid their siege against it: and for the further
strength of the Town King Edward, surnamed the Elder, walled it about, whereof
some part as yet remains, from the Castle to the West-gate, and thence the
foundation may be perceived to the North; where in the midst of the way ranging
with this bank, stands a gate of Stone, and the same tract passing along the
North part may well be perceived: the rest to the River, and thence to the
Castle are built upon, and thereby buried from sight: whose circuit, as I took
it, extends two thousand one hundred and twenty pases.

(7) In the wars betwixt Stephen and Maud the Empress, by Robert Earl of
Gloucester these Walls were cast down, when also the Town it self suffered
the calamity of fire: but recovered to her former estate, has since increased
in beauty and wealth, and at this day is governed by a Mayor and six Aldermen,
clad in skarlet, two Sheriffs, two Chamberlains, a Town-clerke, and six
Sergeants with Maces, their attenders: whose position has the pole elevated
fifty three degrees, 25. minutes in Latitude, and has the Meridian nine
degrees and 25. minutes. This town has been honored by these Princes titles,
and these Princes dignified with the Earldom of Nottingham, whose several
Arms in the Card it self is inserted to sight. Religious houses that have
been erected and now suppressed in the compass of this County, Places of
Religion erected and suppressed.
chiefly were Newsted, Lenton, Shelford, Southwell, Thurgarton, Blithe, Welbeck
and Radford; in Nottingham the White and Gray Friars, besides a little Chapel
dedicated to S. John. All which show the devotions of those former times: which
their remembrance may move, if not condemn us, that have more knowledge, but
far less piety.

The Shires division is principally into two: The Shires division.
which the Inhabitants term the Sand and the Clay, but for Tax to the Crown,
or service for State, is parted into eight Wapentakes or Hundreds, wherein are
seated 168. Parish-Churches.

map of Nottinghamshire THE COUNTY OF NOTTINGHAM described THE SHIRE TOWNS
SITUATION AND THE EARLS THERE OF observed


1. BAssetlawe, Wapen. 2. Northclay, Divis. 3. Southclay, Division. 4. Newarke,
Wapentake. 5. Broxtow, Wapentake. 6. Thurgarton, Wapent. 7. Bingham, Wapentake.
8. Rushcliffe, Wapentake.
A
Akering, Southclay. Akley, Basset. Allerton, Basset. S. Ambrose, Bing. Ampton,
Southclay. Ansley, Brox. Ansley woodhouse, Brox. Arnold, Brox. Ashfeild, Brox.
Askam, Southclay. Astakton, Bing. Attenton, Brox.
B
Babworth, Bosset. Balderton, New. Bantree, Basset. Basford, Brox. Basingfield,
Bing. Barley grange, Thurg. Barmby in the willowes, New. Barmby on the more,
Bas. Barnston, Bing. Barton, Rush. Beckingham, Northclay. Belam, Northclay.
Bellon, Southclay. Benall, Brox. Bernthorp, New. Beskwood lodge, Brox. Bestwood
park, Brox. Besthorp, New. Beston, Brox. Bilborow, Brox. Bilsthorp, Southclay.
Bingham, Bing. Bircotes, Basset. Bleasbie, Thurg. Blodworth, Brox. BLITHE,
Basset. Bole, Northclay. Boucot, Thurg. Boughton, Basset. Bothmusall, Basset.
Bradmeere, Rush. Bramcot, Brox. Bridgeford East, Bing. Bridgeford West, Rush.
Brimsley, Brox. Brodham, New. Nether Broughton, Bing. Budly, Basset. Bulwell,
Bro. Bunney, Rush. Burton, Thurg. Burton West, Northclay. Bilbie, Basset.
C
Calverton, Thurg. Carberton, Basset. Carletons, Basset. Carleton, Thurg. 3.
Carleton, Thurg. 3. Carleton, Thurg. 3. Carroulston, Bing. Caunton, Thurg.
Chilwill, Brox. Claworth, Northclay. Claerbourgh, Northclay. Clifton North,
New. Clifton South, New. Clyfton, Bing. Clunther, Basset. Clipston, Rush.
Clipston, Basset. Coddington, New. Codgrave, Bing. Codlingstocke, Rush.
Collingham North, New. Collingham South, New. Colwick, Thurg. Cossall, Brox.
Cotes, Northclay. Cotham, Northclay. Cotham, New. Coulston, Bing. Coulston
Basset, Bing. Cropwell Bishop, Bing. Cropwell Butlet, Bing. Crumwell, Thurg.
D
Darleton, Northclay. Draiton West, Basset. Draiton East, Southclay. Dorkard,
Brox. Dunham, Southclay.
E
Easter Leake, Rush. Eaton, Southclay. Edwalton, Rush. Edwinstow, Basset.
Egmanton, Southclay. Elkesley, Basset. Elston, New. Elton, Bing. Eperston,
Thurg. Erwash Flu. Estwood, Brox. Everton, Northclay.
F
Farindon, New. Farnesfeild, Thurg. Fellie, Brox. Fenton, Northclay. Fiskerton,
Thurg. Fledborough, Thurg. Flintham, Bing. Flixthorp, Basset. Fymingley,
Basset. Fleet Flu.
G
Gamston, Southclay. Gaitforth, Basset. Girton, New. Godling, Thurg. Gonalston,
Thurg. Gotham, Rush. Granby, Bing. Gresthorpe, Thurg. Griesley, Brox. Gringley
on the hill, Nort Gringley, Northclay. Grove Southclay. Gunthorp, Thurg.
H
Hablestorp, Northclay. Halam, Thurg. Hallington, Thurg. Hanton, Thurg.
Hardwick, Brox. Hareby, New. Harworth, Basset. Haverham, Thurg. Hawksworth,
Bing. Hawton, New. Haiton, Northclay. Headon, Southclay. Heddingley, Thurg.
Hexgrave park, Thurg. Hickling, Bing. Hockerton, Thurg. Hodsokes, Basset.
Hokdike Flu. Holbeck Woodhouse, Basset. Holme, Bing. Holme, New. Horringham,
Thurg. Houghton, Basset. Hucknall, Brox.
I
Idle Flu. Idleton, Southclay.
K
Keeton, Bing. Kellam, Thurg. Kersall, Thurg. Keyworth, Rush. Kimberley, Brox.
Kingston, Rush. Kirkby, Brox. Kirklington, Thurg. Kirton, Southclay. 2. Kirton,
Southclay. 2. Knesall, Thurg. Kynolton, Bing. Kynston, Rush.
L
Lamley, Thurg. La^gar, Bing. Langforth, New. Langhton lodge, Brox. Langham,
Southclay. Laxton, Southclay. Lenton, Brox. Leverton South, Northc. Leverton
North, Northc. Linby, Brox. LITTLE-BROUGH, North. Lodge in the wowld, Bing.
Lowdham, Thurg. Lynhurst wood, Brox.
M
Manner, Basset. MANSFEILD, Brox. Mansfield Woodhouse, Brox. Markham East,
South. Markham West, South. Marnham, Thurg. Maplebeck, Thurg. Mattersey,
Basset. Maun Flu. Mering, New. Missen, Basset. Misterton, Northclay. Morehouse,
Southclay. Morton, Thurg. Muscombe South, Thu. Muscombe North, Th.
N
NEWARKE, New. Newsted, Bro. Newthorp, Bro. Normanton upon Sore, Rush.
Normanton, Basset. Normanton, Thurg. Norton Cucknie, Bas. Norwell, Thurg.
NOTTINGHAM, Thu. Nutthall, Brox.
O
Ordsall, Basset. Orston, Bing. Osburton, Basset. Ossington, Thurg. Ouldcots,
Basset. Ourney, Basset. Owthorpe, Bing. Oxton, Thurg.
P
Paplewick, Brox. Parklathes, Thurg. Plumtree, Rush. Perlethorpe, Basset.
R
Radford, Brox. Radforth, Basset. Ragnell, South. Rampton, Southclay. Ranskill,
Basset. Ratcliffe upon Sore, Rush. Ratcliffe, upon Trent, Bing. REDFORD, North.
Remston, Rush. Roulston, Thurg. Ruddington, Rush. Rughford, Basset.
S
Saundby, Northclay. Saxendale, Bing. Scarrington, Bing. Scofton, Basset.
Screveton, Bing. Scrooby, Basset. Selston, Brox. Shelford, Bing. Shel^ord
Abbey, Bing. Sherewood forest, Bing. Shelton, New. Sibthorpe, New. Skarle
South, New. Skarle North, New. Skegby, Brox. Slauford, Rush. SOVTHWELL, Thu.
Soveam, Basset. Spadworth, New. Stanford, Rush. Stapleford, Brox. Staunton,
New. Staunton, Bing. Stockwit^h, Northclay. Stoke, New. Stoke, Thurg. Stokham,
Southclay. Strelley, Brox. Stretford East, Northc. Sturrop, Basset. Sturton,
Northclay. Surlby, Basset. Sutton, Brox. Sutton, Bing. Sutton, Thurg. Sutton
upon Lound, Basset. Sutton Bonington, Ru. Sweynton, Thurg. Syerston, New.
T
Terleton, Rush. Teversall, Brox. Thornie, New. Thorney wood, Bas. Thoroton,
Bing. Thorpe, New. Thorpe, Basset. Thowresby, Basset. Thurmpton, Rus.
Thurgarston, Thurg. Tilney, Northclay. Tollaston, Bing. Torworth, Basset.
Towto, Brox. Triswell, Southclay. Trent Flu. Trowell, Brox. Tuxford, South.
Tythby, Bing.
V
Upton, Thurg. Upton, Southclay.
W
Waerton, Bing. Walesby, basset. Wallam, Northclay. Walley, basset.
Walkeringham, Nort. Wansley, bro. VVarnham, Thurg. VVarsope, basset. VVatnall,
brox. Welbeck Abbey, bass. Welley, Southclay. VVester Leake, Rus. VVesterford,
basset. Weston, Thurg. VVhatton, bing. Wheatley North, Northcl. Wheatley
South, Northclay. Whit Water Flu. Widmerepoole, Rus. VViest, Northclay.
VViggesley, New. VVilford, Rus. VVilloughbie, Rus. VVilloughbie, Thurg.
VVinkborne, New. VVinthorpe, New. VVisall, Rus. Woldingwels, basset.
VVollerton, brox. VVoodborow, Thurg. VVoodthorpe, Thurg. WORKSOP, Basset.
DARBY-SHIRE, which the English Saxons called Deorbicire, The bounds of
Darby-scire.
lies enclosed upon her North parts with Yorkshire; upon the East with
Nottingham-shire; upon the South with Leichestershire; and upon the West is
parted with the Rivers Dove and Goyt from Stafford and Chesse-shires.

The form.
(2) It is in form somewhat triangle, though not of any equal distance,
growing from her narrow South-point still wider, and in the North is at the
broadest: for from Stretton near the head of Mese, to New Chapel seated near
the head of Derwent, The Length.
the two extremes from North to South are thirty eight miles: but from the
Shire-Oakes unto the meeting of Mersey and Goyt, The Breadth.
the broadest part of all this Shire, is not fully twenty-nine; The
Circumference.
the whole in circumference extends to an hundred and thirty miles.

The Air. The Soil.
(3) The Air is good, and very healthful: the soil is rich, especially in her
South and East parts: but in the North and West is hilly, with a black and
mossie ground, both of them fast-handed to the Ploughers pains, though very
liberal in her other gifts: whose natures thus dissenting, the River Derwent
does divide asunder, that takes course through the heart or midst of this
County.

The ancient people.
(4) The ancient people that possessed these parts in the times of the Romans
assaults, were the Coritani, whom Ptolemie disperseth through Northampton,
Leicester, Rutland, Lincoln, Nottingham, and this Shire, who were all of them
subdued by P. Ostorius Scapula, Tacit. An. l. 12. cap 8.
Lieutenant in this Province for Claudius the Emperor. But Romes Empire
failing in Britain, by the intestine wars among themselves, the Saxons (a
more savage and fearful Nation) soon brought it under their subjection, and
made this a Province unto their Mercians Kingdom, whom the West Saxons first
wanne, and again lost to the Normans.

The Commodities.
(5) It is stored with many Commodities, and them of much worth; for besides
woods and cattle, sheep and corn, every where over-spreading the face of this
County, the Millstone, Crystal, and Alablaster, the Mines of Pit-coale, Iron,
and Lead, are of great price: whereof the last is mentioned in Pliny, who
writes, Pliny.
that in Britain, in the very crust of the ground, without any deep digging,
is gotten so great store of Lead, that there is a Law expressly made of purpose,
forbidding men to make more then to a certain stint. Whose stones are
plenteously gotten in those Mountains, and melted into Sowes, to no small
profit of the Country. There is found also in certain veins of the earth,
Stibium, which the Apothecaries call Antimonium, and the Alchymists hold in
great esteem.

Darby.
(6) Places for commerce, or memorable note, the first is Darby the Shire-towne,
called in the English Saxon-Tongue Nordhwodrhig, Athelward.
and by the Danes Deoraby, seated upon the West bank of Derwent, where also a
small Brook rising westward, runs through the Town under nine Bridges,
before it meets with her far greater River Derwent, which presently it does,
after she has passed Tenant Bridge in the South-East of the Town. Saint
Mary's Bridge.
But a Bridge of more beauty, built all of Freestone, is passed over Derwent
in the North-East of the Town, whereon stands a fair stone Chapel, and
both of them bearing the names of Saint Mary's: five other Churches are in this
Town, the chiefest whereof is called Alhallowes, whose Steeple or Bell-Tower
being both beautiful and high, was built only at the charges of young men and
maids, as is witnessed by the inscription cut in the same upon every square of
the Steeple. Among the miserable desolations of the Danes, this Town bare a
part, but by Lady Ethelfleda was a gain repaired, and is at this day
incorporated with the yearly government of two Bailiffes elect out of
twenty-foure brethren, besides as many Burgesses of Common-Counsell, a
Recorder, Town-Clerke, and two Sergeants with Mace: whose Graduation is
observed from the Equator to be 53. degrees, 25. scruples, and from the first
point in the West, 19. degrees, 2. scruples.

(7) Little-Chester (by the Romish Money there daily found) seems to have
been ancient, Little-Chester.
and that a Colonie of the Roman Soldiers there lay. Yet of far greater fame
was Repandunum, now Repton, Repton.
where Ethelbald the ninth King of the Mercians, and fifteenth Monarch of the
Englishmen, slain at Seggeswald by the treason of his subjects, was interred:
and whence Burthred, the last King of that people, was expulsed with his Queen
Ethelswith, by the rage of the Danes, after twentie-two years reign. But with a
more pleasing eye we may behold Melborne, Melborne.
the memorial of English-mens great valor, where in that Castle was kept
Prisoner John Duke of Burbon, taken captive in the Battle of Agincourt, and
therein detained the space of nineteen years.

(8) Things of stranger note are the hot Water-springs, bursting forth of the
ground at Buxton, Buxton Well.
where out of the rock within the compass of eight yards, nine springs arise,
eight of them warm, but the ninth very cold. These run from under a fair
square building of Freestone, and about threescore paces off, receive another
hot spring from a Well, enclosed with four flat stones, called S. Annes; near
unto which, another very cold spring bubled up. The report goes among the
by-dwellers, that great cures by these waters have been done: but daily
experience shows, that they are good for the stomach and sinews, and very
pleasant to bathe the body in. Not far thence is Elden-hole, Elden-hole.
whereof strange things have been told, and this is confidently affirmed, the
waters that trickle from the top of that Cave (which indeed is very spacious,
but of a low and narrow entrance) do congeale into stone, and hang as ickles
in the roof. Some of them were showed at my being there, which like unto such
as the frost congealeth, were hollow within, and grew Taper-wise toward their
points, very white, and somewhat Crystall-like. And seven miles thence, upon a
mounted hill, stands a Castle, under which there is a hole or Cave in the
ground of a mavelous capacity, which is commonly called The Devils Arse in
the Peake, Devils Arse in the Peake.
whereof Gervose of Tilbury has told many pretty tales, and others do make it
one of the wonders of our Land.

(9) As in other Counties the devotions of the religious have been made
apparent in the erection of places for Gods peculiar service; Religious houses.
so in this have bin founded 8. of that nature, which were Dale, Derelege,
Darby, Repton, Bechif, Graiesley, Faverwell, and Pollewerke: whose peace and
plenty stood secure from all danger, till the blustering winds arising in the
reign of King Henry the eight, blew off the pinacles of their beauteous
buildings, and shook asunder the revenewes of those Foundations which never are
like again to be laid.

(10) This Shire is divided into six Hundreds wherein have been seated seven
Castles, The division of Darby-shire.
and is still traded with eight Market Towns, and replenished with one hundred
and six Parish-Churches: whose names follow in the Table annexed.

map of Derbyshire Anno DARBIESHIRE described 1610


HUNDREDS in Darby-shire.
1. HIghpeak Hu. 2. Scarsdale H. 3 Worksworth Wap. 4 Morleston and Lytchurch H
5. Appletrie Hund. 6. Reppington and Gresly H.
A
Abney, Peak. Alderousley, Apple. Aldwarke, Work. Alderwashley, Work.
Allestree, Morl. ALLFRETON, Scar. Alsoppe, Work. Aluaston, Morl. Ambaston,
Morl. Amber Flu. Appleby* Rep. Arlaston, Apple. Aston, Peak. Atlowe, Apple.
Aulkmanton, Apple. Aulport, Peak. Aulton, Scar. Ash, Apple. ASHBORNE, Work.
Ashford, Peak. Ashlchay, Apple. Ashover, Scar. Aston, Scar. Aston upon Trent,
Mor. Auton, Apple.
B
Bakewell, Peak. Ballidor, Work. BANKEWELL, Peak. Barbrough, Scar. Barley,
Scar. Barowe, Morl. Barwardcote, Morl. Baslow, Peak. Beardhall, Peak. Bechif
Abbey, Scar. Beighton, Scar. Belay chapel, Scar. Belghe, Scar. Belpar, Apple.
Bentley fenny, Work. Bentley, Appl. Hungary Bentley. Appl. Birchhill, Peak.
Blackwell, Scar. Blaugherby, Rep. Bothmusoill, Peak. Bousover, Scar. Bouthe
nether, Peak. Bouteshall, Work. Bowdon, Peak. Bowdon Middlecall, Peak. Bowlton,
Morl. Boylston, Appl. Bradburne, Work. Bradford Flu. Bradley, Appl. Bradfall,
Marl. Bradwell, Peak. Braiston, Morl. Brakenfeild, Scar. Bralesford, Appl.
Bramford, Peak. Bramton, Scar. Brassington, Work. Bredfall, Appl. Bretbye, Rep.
Brinington, Scar. Church Broughtor, Appl. Burbrok Flu. Burton blunt, Apple.
Burghe, Peak. Butterley. Morl. Buxton Well, Peak.
C
Caldwall, Rep. Calke, Rep. Calew, Scar. Carlingthwart hall, Scar. Carson, Work
Castleton, Peak Castle in the peake, Peak. Catton, Rep. Cawlow, Work. Codnor,
Morl. Cawner, Peak. Cawton, Peak. Chadesdon, Morl. Chalesworth, Peak. Chamber
in the forest, Peak. New Chapel, Peak CHAPEL IN THE FRITH, Peak Chattesden,
Appl. Chattesworth, Scar. Chellaston, Rep. Chelmarton, Peak. Chester eaton,
Morl. CHESTER FIELD, Sc. Chilcot, Rep. Church broughton, Ap. Clapwell, Scar.
Clinton, Scar. Clown, Scar. Clownchurch, Scar. Clyfton, Morl. Clyfton, Appl.
Codner, Morl. Codner Castle, Morl. Compton, Morl. Corther, Scar. Coton, Rep.
Cowdale, Peak. Cowlowe, Peak. Crawloe Flu. Creswell, Scar. Crich, Morl. Crich
chase, Morl. Crougston, Work. Croxall, Rep. Crumforth, Work. Cubley, Appl.
D
Dalbury lees, Appl. Dale, Morl. DARBY, Morl. Darleygh, Morl. Darley, Peak.
Darley hall, Scar. Darwell Flu. Darwen chapel, Peak. Denby, Morl. Dethick,
Work. Dove Flu. Dove bridge, Appl. Dower, Scar. Draklowe, Rep. Dranfeild, Scar.
Draycot, Morl. Duckmanton, Scar. Duffeild, Appl. Dunfeild, Morl. Dunston, Scar.
E
Eaton, Work. Eaton, Appl. Eaton long, Morl. Eckelsborne Flu. Edall, Peak.
Edall, Peak Edlaston, Appl. Edleston hall, Scar. Edynsar, Peak. Egington, Morl.
Eham, Peak. Eissington, Work. Ekington, Scar. Elden hall, Peak. Elmeton, Scar.
Elton, Work. Elwall, Appl. Elwaston, Morl. Erewashe Flu. Eveley.
F
Fatters field. Peak. Fernhouses, Peak. Findern, Morl Flaghouses, Peak. Follow,
Peak. Formarke, Rep. Foston, Appl. Foxholes, Peak. Frithley, Morl. Furland
hall, Scar.
G
Glapwell, Scar. Gledles, Scar. Glossoppe, Peak. Gratton, Worcester. Gresley castle,
Rep. Gresley, Rep. Grinsowe, Peak.
H
Hadden hall, Peak. Hadden Ouell, Peak. Kirk Hallam, Morl. Hallam west, Morl.
Hanley, Scar. Hardwick, Scar. Hartington, Worcester. Hartley hall, Peak. Hartshorne,
Rep. Hartwood grange, Scar. Hassep, Peak. Hathersedge, Peak. Hatton, Appl.
Heanor, Morl. Heath, Scar. Heathfeild, Peak. Hethcote, W^rk. Higham, Scar.
Higham, Scar. Hilton, Appl. Hogmaston, Work. Holbroke, Morl. Holland, Appl.
Hollington, Appl. Holmehall, Scar. Hoone, Appl. Hope, Peak. Hopton, Work.
Hopwell, Morl. Horeston castle, Morl. Horsley, Morl. Houghton, Scar.
Hounsfeild, Scar. Hucklow great, Peak. Hucklow little, Peak. Huckney, Scar.
Hugh park, Worcester. Hussington grange* Worcester. Hyghlow, Peak.
I
Iberb Flu. Ible, Work. Iheo, Work. Ilkeston, Morl. Ingleby, Rep. Inkersell,
Scar. Ireton kirk, Work. Ireton little, Appl.
K
Kedleston, Appl. Kilborne, Morl. Kilmarsh, Scar. Knynsynton, Worcester. Knyveton,
Worcester.
L
Langford, Apple. Kirk Langley, Morl. Langley meanell, Appl. Langley, Morl.
Lang with Over, Scar. Lasco, Morl. Lea, Worcester. Lees hall, Appl. Linton, Rep.
Litchurch, Morl. Lithkell Flu. Longston, Peak. Lullington, Rep. Lytton, Peak.
M
Makeney, M^rl. Mapperley, Appl. Mappleton, Worcester. Marketon, Morl. Markworth,
Morl. Marlock* Worcester. Marston, Appl. Marston Montgomery, Appl. Measo Flu. Measam,
Rep. Melburne, Rep. Melburne castle, Rep. Meller chapel, Peak. Mersey Flu.
Mersh hall, Peak. Middleton, Worcester. Middleton stony, Peak. Mircaston, Appl.
Monyashe, Peak. Morehouses, Scar. Morley, Morl. Morley park, Morl. Morton,
Scar. Mogington, Appl. Mylnhouse, Peak. Mylntown, Scar. Mylton, Rep.
N
Nedam grange, Worcester. Netherthorpe, Scar. Newhold, Scar. Newmedow, Peak. Newton
kings, Rep. Newton stony, Rep. Norbery, Appl. Normanton, Scar. Normanton, Rep.
Normanton south, Scar. Norton, Scar. Now Flu. Nowstoole hill, Peak.
O
Oclebrook, Morl. Ogston, Scar. Okesgreene, Appl. Okethorpe, Rep. Oscote, Worcester.
Oslaston, Appl. Osmaston, Rep. Osmaston, Appl. Over great, Morl. Over little,
Morl. Ouston, Scar. Owlerset, Peak. Oxcroft, Scar.
P
Padley, Peak. Palterton, Scar. Parwich, Worcester. Peake forest, Peak. Pentrich,
Morl. Pilsey, scar. Pilsey, Peak. Pilsbury grange, Worcester. Pinxton, scar.
Pleasley, scar. Posther wood, Appl.
Q
Quarndon, Morl.
R
Radburne, Appl. Rauslaton, Rep. Rawston, Appl. Reppington, Rep. Rewthorp,
scar. Ridgehall, Peak. Ripley, Morl. Rodsley, Appl. Rossend, Appl. Rother Flu.
Rowland, Peak. Rowesley, peak. Rowetsley hall, scar. Rowthorpe, scar. Rysley,
Morl.
S
Sandeacree, Morl. Saperton, Apple. Sawloe, Morl. Scarcliffe, Scar. Scropton,
Apple. Scale grange, Rep. Seal nether, Rep. Seal over, Rep Sharlowe, Morl.
Shatton, Peak. Shawcrosse, Peak. Sheldon, Peak. Sherbroke, Scar. Sherley, Appl.
Shipley, Morl. Shire Oaks, Scar. Shirland, Scar. Shotley park, Apple. Sinsold,
Appl. Smalley, Morl. Smethike, Rep. Smisbye, Rep. Snytter, Worcester. Somercotes,
Scar. Somersall herbert, Appl. Spundon, Appl. Staden, Peak. Stainton, Peak.
Stanclyff, Scar. Standley, Appl. The Stand, Scar. Staneley, Scar. Stanley,
Morl. Stanton, Rep. Stanton ward, Rep. Stanton next dall, Morl. Stapenhall,
Rep. Starndalle, Peak. Kings Standalle, Peak. Steed, Appl. Steinesbie, scar.
Steinston, Apple. Stoke hall, scar. Stretton, scar. Stretton, Rep. Stubley,
scar. Sturton, Appl. Sutton upon the hill, Appl. Sutton, scar. Suelston, Appl.
Swadlingcote, Rep. Swaley, Morl. Swanwick, scar. Swarkeston, Rep. Sydbury,
Appl.
T
Taddington, Peak. Tansley, Worcester. Tansley, scar. Tharsethall, Peak.
Therlesbouth, Peak. Thornell, Peak. Thorpe, Worcester. Thurleston, Morl. Thurvaston,
Appl. Tibehelf, scar. TIDDESWELL, Peak. Tiffinton, Worcester. Tiknall, Rep. Topton,
scar. Tottley, scar. Trinity chapel, Scar. Tresley, Appl. Tunsted, Peak.
Turndiche, Appl. Twyford, Appl.
V
Vlgathorp, scar. Underwood, Work.
W
Wadshelfe, scar. Wakebridge hall, scar. Walton, scar. Walton upon Trent, Rep.
Warclowe, Peak. Warmsawdale, Peak. Washington, scar. Watstanwell bridge, Scar.
Wedingwell, Peak. Welne great, Morl. Welne little, Morl. Wensley, Work. Weston
upon Trent, Morl. Weston under wood, Morl. Whalay, scar. Wheatcroft, scar.
Wheston, Peak. Whittington, scar. Whittwell, scar. Williams thorpe, Scar.
Willignton, Morl. Wilsley, Rep. Windfall, Rep. Wineley hill, Apple. Wingfeild
Manor, Scar. Wingfeild South, Scar. Wingfeild North* Scar. Wingerworth, scar.
Wolley, scar. Woodhouses, scar. Woodhouses, scar. Woodland, Peak. Woodthorpe,
scar. Woodthorpe, scar. WORKSWORTH, W. Wormehill, Peak. Wulscote, Work.
Wyaston, Appl. Wynstre, Work.
Y
Yednaston, Appl. Yeldersley, Appl. Yolegreave, Peak.
STAFFORDSHIRE. CHAPTER XXXV.
The ancient name of this Shire.
STAFFORDSHIRE, which in the English-Saxons is written Stafford-scyre, and
whose situation is much about the middle of England, meets upon the North
with Ches-shire and Darbie, and that in a Triangle point, where three Stones
are pitched for the bounds of these Shires; it is parted from Darby-shire on
the East with Dowe and with Trent; The confine^ of it.
the South is confined with Warwick and Worcestershires, and the West butteth
against the County of Shrop-shire.

The form and dim^nsitude.
(2) The form thereof is somewhat Lozeng-like, that is, sharp at both ends, and
broadest in the midst. The length extending from North to South, is by measure
forty four miles; and the breadth from East to West, twenty seven; the whole
in circumference one hundred and forty miles.

The Air.
(3) The air is good and very healthful, though oversharp in her North and
Moreland, where the snow lies long, and the wind blows cold.

The Soil.
(4) The Soil in that part is barren of Corn, because her Hills and Mores are
no friends unto Tillage: the middle is more level, but therewithal woody, as
well witnesses that great one, called the Cank. But the South is most
plenteous in Corn and Pasturage.

(5) Her ancient Inhabitants were the Cornavii. the ancient people of it.
CORNAVII, whom Ptolemie places in the Tract that contains Shrop-shire,
Worcestershire, Ches-shire, and this: all which were possessed by the
Mercian-Saxons when their Heptarchy flourished. Tamworth.
And Tamworth in this Shire was then held their Kings Court. The Danes after
them often assayed herein to have seated, as witnesses Tetnall, then Theoten
hall, by interpretation, The habitation of Pagans, imbrued with their blood by
King Edward the elder. An. D. 911. Beda.
But the Inhabitants of this Province Beda terms The midland Englishmen,
because to his seeming it lay in the heart of the land, which when the Normans
had made Conquest of all, many of them set down their rest here, whose
posterities at this day are fairly and further branched into other parts.

The commodities of it.
(6) The Commodities of this County consist chiefly in corn, cattle,
alablaster, woods, and iron, (if the one prove not the destruction of the
other) pitcoal, flesh, and fish, whereof the river Trent is said to swarm: and
others arising and running through this Shire, do so batten the ground, that
the Meadows even in the midst of winter grow green; such as Dowe, Manifold, Ten
Rivers.
Churnut, Hunsie, Yenden, Tean, Blithe, Trent, Tyne, and Sow; whereof Trent is
not only the principal, but in esteem accounted the third of this Land.

Stafford the chief Town. John Capgrave.
(7) Stafford the Shire-Towne, anciently Betheney, from Bertelin, a reputed holy
man that therein led a Hermits life, was built by K. Edward the elder,
incorporated by K. John, King John.
and upon the East and South part was walled and trenched by the Barons of the
place; the rest from East to North was secured by a large poole of water, which
now is become fair meadow grounds. The tract and circuit of these walls
extends to twelve hundred and forty paces, through which four gates into
the four winds have passage, the River Sow running on the South and West of
the Town. King Edward the sixth.
King Edward the sixth did incorporate the Burgesses, and gave them a perpetual
succession, whose government is under two Bailiffes yearly elected out of one
and twenty Assistants, called the Common Council, a Recorder, Dukes of
Buckingham Recorders of Stafford Thomas Werswick.
whereof the Dukes of Buckingham have borne the Office, and as yet is kept a
Court of Record, wherein they hold Plea without limitation of sum; a
Towne-Clerke also, (from whose Pen I received these instructions) and to attend
them two Sergeants at Mace. This Town is sited in the degree of Latitude
53.20. scruples, and of Longitude 18. and 40. scruples.

(8) But Leichfield more large, Leichfield.
and of far greater fame, is much her ancient, known unto Beda by the name of
Licidfeld, John Rosse.
which Rosse does interpret to be The field of dead bodies, for the number of
Saints under the rage of Dioclesian there slain: upon which cause the City
bears for her Arms an Escocheon of Landscape, with diverse Martyrs in diverse
manner massacred. Here Oswin King of Northumberland overcomming the
Pagan-Mercians, An. D. 606.
built a Church, and made it the Sea of Duina the Bishop, whose successors
grown rich, with golden reasons so overcame King Offa, and he Adrian the Pope,
that an Archiepiscopall Pall was granted Bishop Eadulph, to the great disgrace
of Lambert Archbishop of Canterbury. An. D. 676.
In this Church were interred the bodies of Wulfhere and Celred, both of them
Kings of the Mercians. An. D. 718.
But when the minds of men were set altogether upon gorgeous building, this
old foundation was new reared by Roger Clinton, Bishop of this See, and
dedicated to the Virgin Mary and Saint Chad, and the Close inwalled by Bishop
Langton. An. 1148.
The government of this City is by two Bailiffes and one Sheriff, yearly
chosen out of twentie-foure Burgesses, a Recorder, a Towne-Clerke, and two
Sergeants their Attendants.

(9) Houses of Religion erected in this Shire, Houses of Religion.
were at Leichfield, Stafford, De la Cross, Cruxden, Trentham, Burton,
Tamworth, and Wolver-hampton. These Votaries abusing their Founders true
pieties, and heaping up riches with disdain of the Laity, laid themselves
open as marks to be shot at; whom the hand of the skillful soon hit and quite
pierced, under the aim of King Henry the eight, Castles.
Alton. Carswall. Chesterton. Madeley. Chatley. Stafford. Leichfield. Tamworth.
Hely. Newcastle. Duddeley. Tutbury. Eccleshall.

who with such Revenewes is most places relieved the poor and the Orphane,
with Schools and maintenance for the training up of youth: a work no doubt
more acceptable to God, and of more charitable use to the Land.

(10) With 13. Castles this County has been strengthened, and in 13.
Market-Townes her commodities traded, being divided into 5. Hundreds, and in
them seated one hundred and thirty Parish-churches, as in the Table is
Alphabetically expressed.

map of Staffordshire STAFFORD COUNTY AND TOWN with the ancient City
LICHFEILD described


An Alphabeticall Table of all the Towns, Rivers, and memorable places
mentioned in Staffordshire.
HVNDREDS in Staffordshire.
1. PYrehill. 2. Tottmonslo. 3. Cuddlestone. 4. Seisdon. 5. Offelowe.
A
Acton, Cud. Acton, Pyr. Acolate, Pyr. Adbastow, Pyr. Alderwas. Off. Aldriche,
Off. Alton, Tot. Alverton, Tot. Amblecott, Seis. Amerton, Cud. Aminton, Pyr.
Anneley, Pyr. Apedale, Pyr. Apeton, Cud. Areley, Seis. Argarth park, Tot.
Armitage, Off. Ashes seven, Pyr. Ashenhurst, Tot. Ashley, Pyr. Ashton little,
Pyr. Aston, Off. Aston, Pyr. Aston, Cud. Aston, Pyr. Aston, Cud. Aston little,
Off. Audley, Pyr. Aulston, Cud. Ausley, Off. Austonfield, Tot.
B
Bagnall^ Chapel. Pyr. Bar, Off. Barleston, Pyr. Barston, Pyr. Batton, Cud.
Barton, Off. Baswich, Cud. Baulterley, pyr. The beach. pyr.
Beudesert, cud. Bednall, cud. Bednoll, cud. Bentley, off. Bescote, cud.
Betley, pyr. Bickforde, cud. Bicknall, pyr. Biddulphe, pyr. Billington, cud.
Bilston, seis. Bishopbury, seis. Bishops ofley, pyr. Bishton, cud. Blakemere,
tot. Blich flit. Blithfeild, pyr. Blore, pyr. Blore, tot. Blore heath, pyr.
Bloxwich, off. Blorton, pyr. Blymyll, cud. Boblington, seis. Boningall, seis.
Bothall, cud. Bradeley, cud. Bradley, tot. Bradley, seis. Bradnoppe, tot.
Bradwall, pyr. Bramhurst, tot. Bramston, off. Branston, off. BREWOOD, cud.
Bridgeford, pyr. Brickley lodge, off. Brickwood, tot. Brocton, cud. Bromewich
west, off. Gerards Bromley, pyr.
Bromley Bagoots, pyr. BROMLEY PAGETTS, pyr. Bromley hurst, pyr. Bromley kings,
off. Bromley kings, off. Bromshulse, tot. Broughton hill, off. Bruerton, cud.
Brynton, cud, Bucknell, pyr. Bule, cud. Burlaton, cud. Burslem, pyr. BVRTON
upon Trent. off. Burton, off. Burton, cud. Burton under Nedwood. off. Bushbery,
seis. Butterton, pyr. Butterton, tot.
C
Caldon, tot. Calingwood, off. Cambridge, tot. Camwell, off. Canke, cud.
Cankewood, cud. Cannocke, cud. Careswall, tot. Castorne, tot. Camel, off.
Cauldon, tot. Cawton, off. Cawton, tot. Charley, off. Charleton deviseover,
pyr. Charnes, pyr. Chartley castle, cud. Chartley holme, pyr. Chatwall, cud.
Chebston, pyr. Checkley, tot. Cheddletton, tot. Chedull, tot. Chell, pyr.
Chestall, off. Chesterton, pyr. Chesterton, pyr. Chesterfield, off. Childcote,
off. Chillington, cud. Chomleywood, off. Church-Eaton, cud. Churnet flu.
Claton, pyr. Clente, seis. Clyfton, off. Codsill, seis. Collidge, cud. Colton,
pyr. Colwich, tot. Comberford, off. Compton, seis. Copinhall, cud. Corborow,
off. Coton, cud. Coton, Pyr. Cotton, cud. Coulton, cud. Cowen, cud. Cowley,
cud. Crackmarsh, tot. Crocksden, tot.
D
Darlaston, pyr. Darleston, seis. Darleston, off. Delvecrosse, tot. Denston,
tot. Dermington, pyr. Dolwich, pyr. Dove flu. Draicott, tot. Draiton, cud.
Draiton basset, off. Dreiton, cud. Drayton basset, off. Dudley Castle, seis.
Dulvarne, tot. Dunsmore flu. Dunstable, off. Dunston, cud.
E
Water Eaton, cud. ECCLESHALL deviseover, pyr. Eccleston, tot. Eddingall, off.
Ediall, off. Elaston, tot. Elenhall, pyr. Elford, off. Elford, off. Elmhurst,
off. Elnston, tot. Enston, pyr. Enveild, seis. Ensington, seis. Ensington, cud.
Evil, seis.
F
Fakeley bridge. Farley, tot. Farewell, off. Fauld, off. Field, tot. Field, tot.
Fenny lodge, off. Fenton, pyr. Fetherston, cud. Fisherwick, off. Forbridge,
cud. Fordswell, pyr. Forton, cud. Fauton, pyr. Foulderly, off. Foxbroke, tot.
Fordley, off. Froghall, tot. Fullford, pyr. Fullston, pyr.
G
Gayton, pyr. Gentleshall, off. Gnostill, cud. Gorsticott, off. Gratwich, tot.
Grinley, cud. Gryndon, tot. Guston, seis.
H
Haddenford, cud. Hamberwich, off. Hamstell, off. Hampstable, Ridware, off.
Handsworth, off. Handbury, off. Handsaker, off. Handford, pyr. Hamton, off.
Haracles, tot. Harborne, off. Harlastone, off. Haseller, off. Hatherton, cud.
Haughton, cud. Hawood, cud. Headley Castle, pyr. Heatley, cud. Heath-hill, cud.
Helswood, tot. Hempsted, off. Henley, seis. Hentley, tot. Hickson, cud. Highon,
cud. Hilderson, pyr. Hilton hall, seis. Hilton Abbey, pyr. Hilton, cud. Hintes,
off. Hollinton, tot. Hopton, pyr. Hopwayes, off. Horborne, off. Horcrosse, off.
Horningloe, off. Horton, tot. Hounhill, tot. Hulton, tot. Hunley, seis. Hunsey
flu. Huntington, cud. Hyde, cud. Hymore, off.
I
Ilam, tot. Ingleton, cud. Inglestrie, pyr. Ipston, tot.
K
Kebleston, pyr. Keele, pyr. Kingston, tot. Kingston, pyr. Kin^are, seis.
Kinsley, tot. Kinver, seis. Knightley, cud. Knighton, pyr. Knutton, pyr.
Knutshall, tot. Kynvaston, cud.
L
Lapley, cud. Lea, seis. Leacroft, cud. Lead, cud. LEEKE, tot. Leighe, tot. Tho
Luc. seis.
Levedall, cud. LEICHFEILD, Of. Lighe high, cud. Littleton, cud. Longcrosse,
off. Longdon, off. Longnor, cud. Longon, off. Longnor, tot. Longton, pyr.
Loxley, tot. Loynton, pyr.
M
Madeley, pyr. Madeleholme, tot. Mair, pyr. Many flu. Marbroke, tot.
Marchington, tot. Marchingdon, tot. Marston, pyr. Marston, cud. Marton great,
cud. Mason, off. Materfeild, tot. Mavestone Ridware, off. Meare, pyr. Meare,
cud. Meare, pyr. Milwich, pyr. Mitton, cud. Moreland hills, tot. Moreton, cud.
Morocopp hill, pyr. Morsall, off. Mose flu. Moseley, seis. Muckleston, pyr.
N
Nedwood Forest. tot. Newborowe, off. Newbold, off. NEW CASTLE UNDER LINE,
pyr. New Chapel, pyr. Newton, cud. Newton, pyr. Norbury, cud. Narrowdale,
tot. Norton, pyr. Norton, cud. Norton, off. Norton, off. Norton in the Mores,
pyr.
O
High Of^ley, pyr. Oken, seis. Okover, tot. Oldbury, off. Oncot, tot. Only,
pyr. Orgrave, off. Orton, seis. Otherton, cud. Overpen, seis. Ousley bridge,
cud.
P
Painsley, tot. Parkhill, tot. Patsell, seis. Pattingham, seis. Pelfalle, off.
Over Pen, seis. Nether Pen, seis.
Pencl^, pyr. Pencle, pyr. Penkirch, cud. Penke flu. Penford, seis. Penset
chase, seis. Peribury, off. Peryhall, off. Perton, seis. Pellington, cud.
Pellington hall, cud. Pipe, off. Placdwick, cud. Ponke flu. Prestwood, seis.
Prestwood, tot.
R
Ramsor, tot. Rannton, pyr. Rannton Monastery, pyr. Rickardscott, cud.
Rickardscott, pyr. Ridgley, cud. Ridware, off. Pipe Ridware, off. Hill Ridware,
cud.
Robaston, cud. Rolston, off. Rowcester, tot. Rowley, seis. Rowley, seis.
Rowley park, off. Rudiard, tot. Rushall, off. Rushton, tot. Rusheles, seis.
Riddsley, cud.
S
Salt, pyr. Sandon, pyr. Sandwall, off. Sardon great, cud. Sardon little, cud.
Saw flu. Scotfeild, off. Season, seis. Sedgeley, seis. Seigford, seis.
Seisdon, pyr. Shareshull, Cud. Shawford, pyr. Shene, tot. Shenston, off.
Sherishales, cud. Shire Oaks, off. Shitterford, seis. Shobnall, off.
Shredicott, cud. Shugborow, cud. Skeleton, pyr. Smestall flu. Smethwick, off.
STAFFORD, pyr. Stafford Castle, cud. Standon, pyr. Stanton, tot. Statford, off.
Stoke, pyr. Stokeley, off. The three Shire-Stones. tot.
STONE, pyr. Stowe, pyr. Stranshill, tot. Stratton Castle, off. Stretton, off.
Stretley hall, off. Stretlie, off. Stretton, cud. Stoure flu. Stubby lane, off.
Sturton Castle, seis. Sutton, cud. Swinford Kings, seis. Swinfeld hall, off.
Swinshead, pyr. Swithanley, tot. Swynerton, pyr.
T
Talk, pyr. TAMWORTH, off. Tatenell, off. Teane, tot. Teane flu. Terley, pyr.
Tettenhall Kings, seis. Tettenhall Clice, seis. Thickbrome, off. Thorn hill,
tot. Thorpe, off. Thorpe, off. Throley, tot. Tillington, pyr. Tipton, seis.
Titterfore, pyr. Tixall, pyr. Treislie, seis. Trent flu. Trent flu. Trentham,
pyr. Trescott, seis. Trisell, seis. Tunstall Court, pyr. Tunstall, pyr.
Turburie, off. Tyne flu. Typton, off.
V
Voxall, off. VTTOXCESTOR, tot.
W
Walgrang, tot. Wall, off. WALLSHALL, off. Wallfall Forest, off. Walton, pyr.
Walton, cud. Warslawe, tot. Waterfall, tot. Weddsbury, seis. Wednesfeild, off.
Wednesbury, off. Weford, off. Welobridge park, pyr. Weston, pyr. Weston Jones,
cud. Weston under Lisiard, cud. Weston upon Trent, pyr. Wharnford, tot.
Whattley hall, off. Whichnor, off. Whitmore, pyr. Whitstone, cud. Whittendon,
off. Whittenton, seis. Whittgreene, pyr. Whittington, off. Wichnor, off.
Wiggendon, off. Wilbrighton, cud. Wilenhall, off. Wilnall, seis. Witton, tot.
Wo^ley, off. Woken, seis. Wolaston, cud. Wolstanton, pyr. WOLVERHAMPTON^
Womborne, seis. Worley little, seis. Worley great, seis. Wotton, tot.
Wrottesley, seis.
Y
Yardley, pyr. Yendon flu. Yoxall, off.
SHROP-SHIRE.
The Saxonish names of this Shire.
SHROP-SHIRE, by the ancient Saxons written Sciripscyre, is both large in
circuit, well peopled, and very fruitful for life. It lies circulated upon
the North with the County Palatine of Chester; The limits.
upon the East altogether with Staffordshire; upon the South with Worcester,
Hereford, and Radnorshires; and upon the west with Mountgomery and Denbigh.

The form.
(2) The form thereof is almost circular or round, whose length from Wooferton
below Lodlane South, to Over near unto the river Trent in the North, is
thirty four miles: the broadest part is from Tongue in the East, to Oswestre
sited at the head of Morda in the West, twenty and five; the whole in circuit
about, extending to one hundred thirty and four miles.

Air.
(3) Wholesome is the air, delectable and good, yielding the Spring and the
Autumn, seed time and harvest, in a temperate condition, and affords health
to the Inhabitants in all seasons of the year.

Soil.
(4) The soil is rich, and stands most upon a reddish clay, abounding in
Wheat and Barley, Pitcoales, Iron, and Woods; which two last continue not long
in league together. It has rivers that make fruitful the Land, and in their
waters contain great store of fresh-fish, Severne.
whereof Severne is the chief, and second in the Realm, whose stream cutteth
this County in the midst, and with many windings sporteth herself forward,
leaving both pastures and meadows bedecked with flowers and green colors,
which every where she bestows upon such her attendants.

Severne once the bounds of the North-Britaines.
(5) This River was once the bounds of the North-Britaines, and divided their
possession from the Land of the Saxons, until of latter times theirs began to
decay, and the Welsh to increase, who enlarged their lifts to the River Dee. So
formerly had it separated the Ordovices from the Cornavij, Ordovices.
those ancient Inhabitants mentioned by Ptol^mie. The Ordovices under
Caractacus purchased great honor, Caractacus.
whilst he a Prince of the Silures removed his Wars thence among them, where
a while he maintained the Britains liberty with valor and courage, in
despite of the Romans. His Fort is yet witness of his unfortunate fight,
seated near Clune Castle, at the confluence of that River with Temd, where (in
remembrance of him) the place is yet called Caer-Caradoc, Caer-Caradoc.
a fort of his, won by P. Ostorius Lieutenant of the Romans, about the year
of grace 53. Cornavii.
The Cornavii were seated upon the North of Severne, and branched into other
Counties, of whom we have said.

(6) But when the strength of the Romans was too weak to support their own
Empire, and Britain emptied of her soldiers to resist, the Saxons set foot in
this most fair soil, This Shire a part of the Mercian Kingdom.
and made it a part of their Mercian Kingdom: their line likewise issued to
the last period, and the Normans beginning where these Saxons left, the
Welshmen took advantage of all present occasions, and brake over Severne unto
the River Dee; to recover which, the Normans first Kings often assayed, and
Henry the second with such danger of life, Henry the second.
that at the siege of Bridge-north he had been slain, had not Sir Hubert
Syncler received the arrow aimed at him, Sir Hubert S. Clerc.
in stepping betwixt that Shaft and his Sovereign, and therewith was shot
through unto death. In the like danger stood Henry Prince of Scotland, who in
the strait siege of Ludlow, Henry Prince of Scotland.
begirt by King Stephen, King Stephen.
had been plucked from his saddle with an iron-hooke from the wall, had not
Stephen presently rescued him, Anno 1139.

(7) This then being the Marches of England and Wales, Shrop-shire the Marches
of England and Wales.
was sore afflicted by bloody broiles, which caused many of their Towns to be
strongly walled, and thirty two Castles to be strongly built: lastly, into
this County the most wise King Henry the seventh sent his eldest son Prince
Arthur, King Henry the seventh. Prince Arthur.
to be resident at Ludlow, where that fair Castle became a most famous Princes
Court. King Henry the eight.
And here King Henry the eight ordained the Counsel of the Marches, consisting
of a Lord President, as many Counselors as the Prince shall please, a
Secretary, an Attorney, a Solicitor, and four Justices of the Counties in
Wales, in whose Court were pleaded the causes depending and Termely tried for
the most part in presence of that honorable President.

(8) But the Shire-towne Shrewesburie, Shrewsbury the chief Town.
for circuit, trade, and wealth does for exceed this, and is inferior to few
of our Cities; her buildings fair, her streets many and large, her Citizens
rich, her trade for the most part in the Staple commodities of cloth and
freezes; Commodities.
her walls strong, and of a large compass, extending to seventeene hundred
pases about, besides another Bulwark ranging from the Castle, Strength for
warlike defense.
down unto, and in part along the side of Severne: through which there are
three entrances into the Town, East and West over by two fair stone bridges
with Towers, Gates, and Bars, and the third into the North, no less strong
then them, over which is mounted a large Castle, whose gaping chinckes do
doubtless threaten her fall. Magistracy.
This Town is governed by two Bailiffes, yearly elected out of twentie-foure
Burgesses, a Recorder, Town-Clerke, and Chamberlain, Graduation.
with three Sergeants at Mace: the Pole being raised hence from the degrees of
Latitude 53.16. minutes, and from West in Longitude 17. degrees 27. minutes.

(9) Yea, Roxalter.
and ancienter Cities have been set in this Shire: such was Roxalter, or
Wroxcester, lower upon Severne, that had been Vriconium, the chiefest City of
the Cornavii; Vsoconia, now Okenyate, near unto the Wreken: and under
Red-castle the ruins of a Berry a City famous in Arthur days. Castles.
1. Whittenton. 2. Ellismere, 3. Oswestree. 4. Wem. 5. Red-castle. 6.
Morton-Corbeti. 7. Knockin. 8. Shrawerdon. 9. Watlesburgh 10. Rowton. 11.
Brocard. 12. Cause. 13. Ponderbach. 14. Atton-Burnell. 15. Carleton. 16.
Dalaley. 17. Tongue. 18. Bridgnorth. 19. Howgate. 20. Bramcroft. 21. Corsham. 22.
Clebery. 23. Ludlow. 24. Shipton. 25. Hopton. 26. Cl^n. 27 Newcastle. 28.
Bishopscastle 29. Bruges. 30. Shrewesbury. 31. Holgod. 32. Lavemuste.

City, whom the vulgar report to have been famous in Arthurs days: but the
pieces of Romish Coins in these three do well assure us that therein their
Legions lodged; as many other Trenches are signs of war and of blood. But as
swords have been stirring in most parts of this Province, so Beads have been
bid for the preservation of the whole, and places erected for the Maintenance
of Votaries, in whom at that time was imputed great holiness: in Shrewsbury
many, at Coulmere, Stowe, Dudley, Bromefeild, Wigmore, Hamond, Lyleshill,
Bildas, Bishops-castle, and Wenloke, (where in the reign of Richard the
second, was likewise a rich Mine of Copper.) But the same blasts that blew down
the buds of such plants, scattered also the fruits from these fair trees,
which never since bare the like, nor is likely any more to do.

That only which is rare in this Province, is a Well at Pichford in a private
man's yard, whereupon floteth a thick scum of liquid Bitumen, which being clear
off to day, will gather the like again on the morrow: not much unlike to the
Lake in the Land of Iewry.

This Shire is divided into fifteen Hundreds, wherein are seated fourteen
Market Towns; and has in it one hundred and seventie Churches for Gods sacred
and divine Service: the names of which are in the Table as follows.

map of Shropshire SHROPSHYRE DESCRIBED THE SITTUATION OF SHROWESBURY SHOWED
With the Arms of those Earls, and other Memorable things observed


HVNDREDS in Shrop-shire.
1 BRadford North. 2 Pimbill. 3 Bradford South. 4 Brymstry. 5 Wenlock. 6
Condover. 7 O^westrey. 8 Forde. 9 Chirbury. 10 Clunne. 11 Purslawe. 12
Munslawe. 13 Overs. 14 Stot^^sdo^. 15 Shrewsbury liberty
A
Abbafori^t. cond. Abcot, purs. Aberbury, ford. Abertanocke, Osw. Abton, wen.
Accleton, stott. Acton Burnell, cond. Acton, purs. Acton scott, mun. Adcott,
Pim. Admaston, B. south. Adney, B. south. Albrighton, pim. Albrighton, brym.
Alderton, pim. Alkynton, b. north. Allerton, b. north. Alscott, brym. Alscott
in Brimstry, h. south. Alstretton, cond. Alveley, stott. Anchmarch, cond.
Appley, b. south. High Arcole, brad. Arcole child's, b. north. Arlscot* ford.
Ashbaston, b. south. Ashbaston, b. south. Ash great, b. north. Ash little, b.
north. Ashford, mun. Ashford Bondmore, mun Ashford, stot. Ashton, b. north.
Aslanton, purs. Asterley, ford. Astley, b. south. Astley, wen. Aston, oswest.
Aston, b. south. Aston, mun. Aston, brym. Aston, purs. Aston, purs. Aston
Butlers, stot. Aston Rogers, chir. Aston Piggot, chir. Church Aston, b. south.
Atcham, b. south. Atherley, b. north. Atterley, wen. Atton, pym. Aveley, stot.
Aulcaston, mun. Auldon, mun.
B
Babins wood forest, osw. Badget, wen. Baggoteshop, over. Baggeley, pim.
Balderton, pim. Barrowe, wen. Barwicke, b. south. Baryate, stot. Baschurch,
pim. Battlefeild, b. south. Bearston, b. north. Bechfeild, chir. Beckbury, wen.
Beckley, purs. Bedston, purs. Belaport, b. north. Belserdyne, con. Bentall,
wen. Bergill, oswest. Berley, purs. Besford, pim. Bestow, b. south. Bettons,
cond. Betton, b. north. Bettus, clun. Beuston, cond. Bickton, clun. Bickton,
shrew. Bildas, b. south. Bildas little, b. south. Billey, cond. Birche, pim.
Blackemere manor. b. nor. Blechley, b. north. Blodwall, oswest. Bolas little,
b. north. Bolas great, b. south. Boningall, brym. Boreatton, slot. Boreatton,
oswest. Bow flu. Bracemel, shrew. Bradston, wen. Bradfeild flu. Brampton,
chir. Brampton, purs. Brampton, cond. Bramcroft castle, mu. Bramslowe, chir.
Bratton, b. south. BRIDGNORTH. Broadway, purs. Brocard castle, ford. Brockton,
mun. Brockton, purs. Brocton, chir. Brockton, b south. Brom, purs. Bromfeild,
mun. Bromiche, oswest. Bromlowe, chir. Broseley, wen. Broughton, purs.
Broughton, pim. Browncle-hill, wen. Brunslawe, purs. Bucknell, purs. Butford,
over. Burghall, b. north. Burlton, pim. Burton, cond. Burton, wen. BVSHOPS
CASTLE, purs. Byllingsley, stot. Bynweston, chir. Byrrington, cond. Bitterley,
over.
C
Caer-caradoc, purs. Calloton, wen. Camlet flu. Cantloppe, cond. Cardington,
mun. Carndon hill, chir. Carleton castle, b. sou. Carson, shrew. The new
Castle, clun. Caynham, stot. Cause, ford. New Chapel, clun. Chatford, cond.
Chatwall, cond. Lady Chaulton, mun. Chaulton, purs. Chelmarsh, stot.
Cheswardine, b. nor. Chetwyn end, b. sou. Chetwyn aston, b. so. Chetton. stot.
Cheyney, longerfeild, pu. Chilton, cond. Chipnall, b. north. Chirbury, chir.
Chirington, b. south. Chirhill, b. north. Claverley hall. b. nor. Claverleigh,
brym. Claverley, b. north. Clebury foreign, sto. Clebury north, stot. Clebury
park, stot. Clebury, stot. Cleeton, over. Cleve, pim. Clunbury, purs.
Clung^nas, purs. CLVN castle, con. Clun flu. Clunne forest, clun. Clunton,
purs. Cockshut, pim. Colmington, mun. Comyton, mun. Condover, cond. Cound,
cond. Conam, over. Copty venny, prim. Cordigate forest, os. Cordoke hill,
cond. Coreley, stot. Corove flu. Corsham Castle, mu. Corston, mun. Cotes new,
wen. Cotton, b. north. Cottall, b. south. Coston. purs, Coulmere, pim.
Cowbatche, purs. Creketh, oswest. Crouckhill, cond. Crosmeere, pim. Cructon,
ford. Crudgington, b. sou. Curlhurst, b. north.
D
Dalaley castle, b. sou. Darlaston, b. north. Dawley little, b. sou. Dawley
great* b. sou. Daywell, oswest. Deane park, over. Diddleston Chapel, oswest.
Dodington, cond. Dodington, b. north. Dorrington, b. north. Dothull, b. south.
Dotton, stot. Dowles, stot. Dowles, flu. Downesay, purs. Downton, b. south.
Downton, mun. Draton, cond. Draton, brym. DRAYTON, b. nor. Dridston, chir.
Dufaston, oswest. Dunnington, b. south. Dunnington, brym. Dydles bury, mun.
Dydmaston, tot. Dynchop Chapel, mun. Dytton, wen. Dytton, stot.
E
Eardington, stot. Easthop, mun. Eaton Constantine, b. s. Eaton, wen. Eaton, b.
north. Eaton, purs. Eaton, cond. Ebnall, oswest. Eddesley, b. north.
Edgebalton, b. north. Edge, ford. Edgemond, b. south. Edgton, purs. Edicliff,
clun. Ednoppe, clun. Edston, oswest. Egerley, oswest. Ellerton, b. south.
Ellesmere, pim. Elston, pim. Emstree, cond. Esdon, pim. Ercall great, b. south.
Estaston, b. north. Estwicke, pim. Evelyn. b. south. Eyton, b. south. Eyton
upon wild more, b. so. Eyton, ford. Eyton, purs. Eyton, pim.
F
Falls, b. north. Farley, ford. Farton, stot. Fayrlaw Chapel, stot.
Felhamton, mun. Felton, oswest. Felton butler, pim. Penmmeare, pim. Fernill
David, oswest. Fits, pim. English Franckton, pim. Welsh Franckton, pim.
Franckton, oswest. Frodesley, cond. Forde, ford. Forten, pim. Fynonvaire, clun.
G
Gattaker, stot. Gatten, ford. Gildendowne, chir. Glaseley, stot. Goulding,
cond. Grafton, pim. Gramston, b. south. Gravenhunger, b. n. Greet, over.
Gressedge, cond. Gretton, mun. Grynshill, pim.
H
Haberley, ford. Hadley, b. south. Hadnall, b. north. Hales eote, b. south.
Halesowen, brym. Halston, oswest. Halton, oswest. Hampton, pim. Hampton wood,
pim. Hamond, b. south. Hanwood, shrew. Hardwicke, pim. Hardwicke, purs.
Harnydge, cond. Harton, mun. Harton, mun. Cold Harton, b. south. Harton, b.
north. Hauford Chapel, m. Haughton, b. south. Haughmond, b. south. Hawne,
brym. Hawkeston, b. north. Haytons, over. Heath, wen. Hempton* stot. Henley,
over. Heulley, oswest. Hewlye, wen. Higford, wen. Higley* stot. Hinton, ford.
Hints, stot. Hisland, oswest. Hobbaries, clun. Hobendred, clun. Hockestow
forest, p. Hodnet, b. north. Holly hurst, b. north. Home, purs. Hope bowdler,
mun. Hope, chir. Hopesey, purs. Munck Hopton, wen. Hopton, purs. Hopton waters*
stot. Hopton, b. north. Hopton, pim. Ho^dley, pim. Hords park, wen. Horley,
cond. Horton, b. south. Horton, b. north. Houndenen, stot. Houghleton, chir.
Howl, b. north. Howgate Castle. mu. Hungerford, wen. Hugford, mun. Huntyton,
b. south. Hurst, ford. Hyllon* stot. Hynnyton, b. south. Hynton, b. north.
Hyssington, chi^. Hyne heath, b. north.
I
Jaye* purs. Ightfeild, b. north. Isembridge, b. south.
K
Kemberton, b. south. Kempton, purs. Kenley, cond. Kenston, b. north.
Kentwicke* pim. Kentwicke park, pi^. Kentwicke wood, pi Kevenkelinoge, pim.
K^ynton, b. south. Kinaston, oswest. Kings wood, b. south. Kingleford, brym.
Kinnerton, purs. Kinton, pim. Knockin, oswest. Kricketh, oswest. Kynlot, stot.
Kynerley, oswest. Kynersley, b. south. Kyntontoure, osw. Kynynion, oswest.
Kywilsey, clun.
L
Lacon, b. north. Llanamonah, oswest. Llancuan, clun. Langford, b. south.
Langton, mun. Langley, cond. Languill, wen. Llanva^rwaterden* C Llanwordan,
oswest. Latley, b. south. Laton, wen. Lawley, b. south. Lea ockley, purs. Lea,
purs. Lea, pim. Lee, ford. Leaton, pim. Leborwood, cond. Ledwitch flu.
Ledwitch, mun. Lee, pim. Lee, b. north. Leegunery, b. south. Leighton, b.
south. Leyd ^inlye, wen. Longdon, ford. Longdon, b. south. Long Chapel, b. s.
Longestowe, b north. Longford, b. south. Longford, b. north. Longnor, cond.
Longnon, cond. Longstanton, wen. Longvill, purs. Loppington, pim. Low ditches,
b. north. Ludford, mun. LVDLOW, over. Luton hope, clun. Lyddum, purs. Lydbury
North, purs. Lyleshill, b. south. Llynblis, oswest. Lyniall, pim. Lynley, purs.
Llyntidmon, oswest. Lythe, pim. Lythes, cond.
M
Madely, wen. Marchamley, b. north. Marington, chir. Marloo, purs. Marshe,
ford. Marton, chir. Old Marton, oswest. Mastorocke, oswest. Mathlynton, clun.
Maynston, clun. Measbury* oswest. Medeley, wen. Medowton, chir. Meele, ford.
Meeson, b. south. Mele flu. Meriton, pim. Merverley, oswest. Middle, pim.
Middleton, stot. Middleton, mun. Middleton, oswest. Middleton Scriven, stot.
Middle hope, mun. Milbornestoke, wen. Milf^rd, pim. Mocktree forest, mun.
Modlicott, purs. Monford, pim Mootton, oswest. Morda f^u. More, purs.
Morehouses, mun. Moreton co^bet, b. n. Moreton say, b. nort. Moreswood, purs.
Morse forest* stot. Morton, oswest. Morvill, wen. Moston, b. north. Mucketon,
b. north. Muckley, wen. Muncke weston, wen. Munflow, wen. Myddl^ton, chir.
Mysly Chapel, wen. Myllon, over. Mylton, stot. Mynsterley, ford. Mynton, mun.
Myntowne, purs. Mytley, b. north. Mytton, pim.
N
Nash, over. Nenesalers, over. Nesse strange, pim. Nesse little, pim. Nesse
cliffe, pim. Netley, cond. Mewcastle, clun. Newemarton, pim. Newenham, ford.
Newhall, wen. Newnes, pim. Newood houses, b. north. NEWPORT, b. sout. Newton,
mun. Newton, pim. Newton, pim. Newton, pim. Newtonne, b. north. Noball, shrew.
Norbury, purs. Norley, wen. Northwood, pim. North, wen. Norton, mun. Norton, b.
south. Norton, b. north. Noviley, pim. Nunneley, pim. Nyneton, stot.
O
Obley, clun. Ockley park, mun. Okenyate, b. south. Okley, purs. Old Church
more, pur. Onibury, mun. Onslow, shrew. Orlton, b. south. Osbaston, oswest.
OSWESTREY, os. Otkaynston, clun. Otley, pim. Overley, b. north. Ouney flu.
Owre, b. north. Oxenbould, wen.
P
Park hall, oswest. Partherodricke, clun. Parthloge, clun. Patton, wen.
Paynton, b. south. Pentregayer, oswest. Peplewe, b. north. Pepper hill, ^rym.
Peton, mun. Petton, pim. Pickestocke, b. north. Picklescott, cond. Pilson, b.
north. Pixley, b. north. Plashy, cond. Ployden, pim. Porkinton, oswest.
Pouderbach Castle, cond. Pouderbach Church, cond. Pousbury, ford. Pousford,
ford. PREES, b. north. Prees heath, b. north. Prene, cond. Prescott, pym.
Preston upon wilmore, b. sou. Preston brockhurst, pim. Preston, b. south.
Presthoppe, wen. Priors light, b. south. Prysweston, chir. Pulley, cond.
Purslawe, purs. Pychford, cond.
Q
Quatford, stot. Quat malverne, stot. Quenny flu.
R
Rabins wood forest, osw. Radnall, oswest. Rashton, b. south. Ratlinghopp,
purs. Rayesley, stot. Rea flu. Red Castle, b. north. Rickton, stot. Rocadyne,
b. south. Rodden flu. Roddington, chir. Roddington, b. south. Rodon, b. south.
Up Rossall, shrew. Down Rossall, shrew. Rothall chapel, mun. Rowndatton, wen.
Rowton, stot. Rowton, ford. Rowton, b. south. Roxalter, b. south. Royton, brym.
Royton little, cond. Royton great, cond. Royton, oswest. Ruckley, cond. Rudge,
pim. Rugantyn, clun. Rushbury, mun. Ryelth, clun. Ryston, chir. Rythin, clun.
S
Saint Margrets cle, Saint Maltin, oswest. Salcrosse, purs. Sanford, oswest.
Sanford, b. north. Seffeton, mun. Selley, clun. Severne flu. Sclatryn* oswest.
Shabie, b. north. Shadwall, clun. Shavington, b. north. Sheinton, stot.
Shesnall, brym. Shelderton, purs. Shelderton, mun. Shelhake, oswest. Shelton,
shrew. Shenton, b. north. Shenton, cond. Sheve, chir. Shipton, wen.
Shitterstones hill, ou. Shortlet wood, wen. Shotton, pim. Shrawardine, pim.
SHROWSBVRY. Shipley, stot. SHIPTON, pur. Sidbury, stot. Skyborra, clun. Sleep,
b. south. Sleep, pim. Smothcott, cond. Snawden flu. Sned, clun. Sowcon, b.
north. Sponell, wen. Sponley, b. north. Stanton, brym. Stanton, purs. Stanton
Lacye, mun. Stanton, b. north. Stanwardine in the wood, pi. Stanwardine in the
field, pi. Stappleton, cond. Superstons hill, chir. Stite, purs. Stockett, pim.
Stockton, b. south Stockton, brym. Stockton, chir. Stoke, wen. Stoke upon
Tearne, b. north. Stokeley, mun. Stottesdon, stot. Stowe, purs. Stradbrok flu.
Stratford, mun. Stretchley, b. south. Stretton little, mun. Strettons, ford.
Church Streton, mun. Sugdon, b. south. Sughton, Oswest. Sutton, Oswest. Sutton,
b. north. Sutton great, mun. Sutton little, mun. Sutton maddock, bry.
Sybberscott, ford. Sylvington, over. Swyney, oswest.
T
Tasley, wen. Term, b. south. Tearne flu. Techill, pim. Tedesmere, oswest.
Tetshull, pim. Tewkeshill, stot. Thembton, brym. Tollerton, purs. TONGUE, brym.
Trebert, clun. Trebrodder, clun. Trench, b. north. Trench, pim. Treornall,
oswest. Treowarde, clun. Trevelegh forest, os. Tugford, mun. Turklerton, wen.
Twiford, oswest. Tybberton, b. south. Tylley, b north. Tymberthe, chir.
Tylsopp, over. Tylstock, b. north.
V
Vckington, b. south. Venyngton, ford. Vffington, b. south. Vnderton, wen.
Vppington, b. south. Vpton great b. south. Vpton Creslet, stot.
W
Wall, mun. Wallford, pim. Wallopp, ford. Walcot, chir. Walcot, b. south.
Walcot, purs. Walliborne, ford. Walton, chir. Walton, b. north. Walton, wen.
Wambridge, b. south. Warren flu. Waters Vpton, b. sou. Watlesborough, for
Watlingstreet, b. sou Weenyngton, ford. Welbeche, cond. WELLINGTON, Wellington
forest. b. sou. Wem, b. north. Wenlock lit e, wen. WENLOCK GREAT. wen.
Wentner, purs. Westbury, ford. Westhoppe, mun. Westley, ford. Westley, cond.
Weston, pim. Weston, b. north. Weston, purs. Weston, chir Weston, oswest.
Weston chapel, wen. Wettleton, mun. Wheat naston, Whelbache, cond. Whettle,
stot. Whichcot chapel o. Whitcott kysett, clun. Whitcott yevan, clun.
Whitbatche, purs. Whitcott, purs. WHITCHVRCH. Whittinslaw, purs. Whittington,
oswest. Whitton, over. Whixall, b. north. Wigwigge, wen. Wike, wen. VVikey,
oswest. VVillaston, b. north. Willaston great, for. VVislcott, pim VVire
forest, stot. VVistanton, purs. VVistanslow, purs. Withiford great, b. n.
VVobury, stot. VVolston, oswest. VVoodcote, shrew. VVoodcott, b. south.
VVooderton, chir. VVoodhouse^, b. sou. VVoodhouses, oswest. Old VVoodhouses, b.
n. VVoodlands, b. nor. VVoodseves, b. north VVooferton, mun. VVooslaston, cond.
Worse flu. VVorthyn, chir. VVorvill, brym. Wotton, oswest. VVrekin hill, b.
south. VVrentnall, ford. VVrockerdyne, b. so. VVullerton, b. north. VVulston,
mun. VVygmore, ford. VVyllmyngton, chir. VVyllye, wen. VVynsbury, chir.
VVythington, b. sout. VVytton, ford.
Y
Yernstree park, mun. Yockleton, ford.
CHESSE-SHIRE, by the Saxons written Cester-scyre, and now the County Palatine
of CHESTER is parted upon the North from Lanca-shire with the River Mercey, The
borders of Chesse-shire.
upon the East by Mercey, Goit, and the Da^e, is separated from Darby and
Stafford-shires; upon the South touches the Counties of Shrop-shire and Flint;
and upon the West with Dee is parted from Denbigh-shire.

The form.
(2) The form of this County does much resemble the right wing of an Eagle,
spreading it self from Wirall, and as it were with her pinion, or first
feather, touches Yorkshire, betwixt which extremes, in following the windings
of the Shires divider from East to West, are 47. miles: and from North to South
26. The whole circumference about one hundred forty two miles.

The Air and Climate.
(3) If the affection to my natural producer blind not the judgment of this my
Survey, for air and soil it equals the best, and far exceeds her neighbors
the next Counties: for although the Climate be cold, and touches the degree of
Latitude 54 yet the warmth from the Irish Seas melts the Snow, and dissolveth
the Ice sooner there then in those parts that are further off; and so wholesome
for life, that the Inhabitants generally attain to many years.

The Soil.
(4) The Soil is fat, fruitful, and rich, yielding abundantly both profit and
pleasures of man. The Champion grounds make glad the hearts of their Tillers:
the Meadows imbrodered with diverse sweet smelling flowers; and the Pastures
make the Kines udders to strout to the paile, from whom and wherein the best
Cheese of all Europe is made.

The ancient Inhabitants. CORNAVII* CANGI.
(5) The ancient Inhabitants were the CORNAVII, who with Warwickeshire,
Worcestershire, Staffordshire, and Shrop-shire, spread themselves further
into this County, as in Ptolomy is placed; and the CANGI likewise if they be
the Ceangi, whose remembrance was found upon the shore of this Shire, on the
surface of certain pieces of Lead, in this manner inscribed; IMP. DOMIT. AUG.
GER. DE CEANG. Tacit. Annal. lib. 12. cap. 8.
These Cangi were subdued by P. Ostorius Scapula, immediately before his great
victory against Caractacus, where, in the mouth of Deva he built a Chester.
Fortress at the back of the Ordovices, to restrain their power, which was
great in those parts, in the reign of Vespasian the Emperor. But after the
departure of the Romans, Romans.
this Province became a portion of the Saxon Mercians Kingdom: notwithstanding
(says Ran. Higden) the City it self was held by the Britains until all fell
into the Monarchy of Egbert. Saxons.


Of the dispositions of the since Inhabitants, hear Lucian the Monk (who lived
presently after the Conquest) speak; They are found (says he) to differ from
the rest of the English, partly better, and partly equal. In feasting they are
friendly, at me at cheerful, in entertainment liberal, soon angry, and soon
pacified, lavish in words, impatient of servitude, merciful to the afflicted,
compassionate to the poor, kind to their kindred, spary of labor, void of
dissimulation, not greedy in eating, and far from dangerous practices.

And let me add thus much, which Lucian could not; namely, Annal. Britan.
that this Shire has never been stained with the blot of rebellion, but ever
stood true to their King and his Crown: whose loyalty Richard the second so
far found and esteemed, that he held his Person most safe among them, and by
authority of Parliament made the County to be a Principality, Cheshire made a
Principality. Nic. Trevet.
and styled himself Prince of Chester.

King Henry the third gave it to his eldest son Prince Edward, against whom
Lewlyn Prince of Wales (...) mighty Band, and with them did the Coun(...) even
unto the Cities gates. With the (...) it had oft-times been affrighted, A. D.
1255.
which th(...) ^efenced with a Wall made of the Welshmens (...) on the
South Side of Dee in Hanbridge.

The Gentility of Chesse-shire.
The Shire may well be said to be a Seed-plot of Gentilitie, and the producer of
many most ancient and Worthy Families: neither has any brought more men of
valor into the Field, then Chesse-shire has done, who by a general speech
are to this day called The chief of men: Cheshire chief of men.
and for Natures endowments (besides their nobleness of minds) may compare
with any other Nation in the world: their limbs straight and well-composed,
their complexions fair, with a cheerful countenance; Cheshire women very
fair.
and the Women for grace, feature, and bo^nty, inferior unto none.

Ranulph. Cest. lib. 1. cap. 48.
(6) The Commodity of this Province (by the report of Ranulphus the Monk of
Chester) are chiefly Corn, Cattle, Fish, Foul, Salt, Mines, Metals, Meares,
and Rivers, whereof the banks of Dee in her West, and the Vale-Royall in her
midst, for fruitfulness of pasturage equals any other in the Land; either in
grain or gain from the Cow.

(7) These, with all other provision for life, are traded through thirtee^e
Market-Townes in this Shire, whereof Chester is the fairest, from whom the
Shire has the name. A City raised from the Fort of Osterius* Lieutenant of
Britain for Claudius the Emperor, whither the twentieth Legion (named
Victrix) were sent by Galba to restrain the Britains: An. Do. 70.
but grown themselves out of order, Julius Agricola was appointed their
General by Vespasian, as appears by Moneys then minted, and there found; and
from them (no doubt) by the Britains the place was called Caer Legion; by
Ptolemy, Deunana; by Antonine, Deva; by the Saxons Legea-cesder, and now by us
West-chester: but Henry Bradshaw will have it built before Brute, Hen. Bradshaw.
by the Giant Leon Gaver, a man beyond the Moon, and called by Marius the
vanquisher of the Picts.

Over Deva or Dee a fair stone bridge leads, built upon eight Arches, at
either end whereof is a Gate, from whence in a long Quadren-wise the walls do
incompasse the City, Chester described.
high and strongly built, with four fair Gates opening into the fou^e winds,
besides three posternes, and seven Watch-Towers, extending in compass one
thousand nine hundred and forty paces.

On the South of this City is mounted a Strong and stately Castle, round in
form, and the base Court likewise enclosed with a circular wall. In the North
is the Minster, first built by Earl Leofrike to the honor of Saint Werburga
the Virgin; The Minster built.
and after most sumptuously repaired by Hugh the first Earl of Chester of the
Normans, now the Cathedral of the Bishops See. Henry the 4. Emperor of
Almaine, buried in S. Wereburgs,
Therein lies interred (as report) does relate) the body of Henry the fourth,
Emperor of Almaine, who leaving his Imperial Estate, led lastly therein an
Hermites life.

This City has formerly been sore defaced; first by Egfrid King of
Northumberland, where he slew twelve hundred Christian Monks, resorted thither
from Bangor to pray. Again by the Danes it was sore defaced, when their
destroying feet had trampled down the beauty of the Land. But was again
rebuilt by Ethelfleada the Mercian Lady, who in this County, Eadesburg.

Finborow.


and Forest of Dilamer, built Eadesburg and Finborow, two fine Cities, nothing
of them now remaining, besides the Chamber in the Forest.

Chester in the days of King Edgar was in most flourishing estate, Eadgar*
triumph.

Marianu^ Scot^^.

Ioh Fik.


wherein he had the homage of eight other Kings who rowed his Barge from S.
John's to his Palace, himself holding the Helm, as their supreme.

This City was made a County incorporate of it self by King Henry the seventh,
Will Malmes. Ran. Higden. Roger Hoven. Alfrid. Beverid. Flores Hist.
and is yearly governed by a Major, with Sword and Mace borne before him in
State, two Sheriffs, twenty four Aldermen, a Recorder, a Town-Clerke, and a
Sergeant of Peace, four Sergeants, and six Yeomen.

It has been accounted the Key into Ireland, and great pity is it that the
port should decay, as it daily does, the Sea being stopped to scour the River
by a Causey that thwarteth Dee at her bridge. The Causey.
Within the walls of this City are eight Parish-Churches, S. John's the greater
and lesser: in the Suburbs are the White Friars, Black Friars, and Nunry now
suppressed. From which City the Pole is elevated unto the degree 53.58. minutes
of Latitude, and from the first point of the West in Longitude unto the 17.
degree and 18. minutes.

(8) The Earldom whereof was possessed from the Conqueror, The Earls.
till it fell lastly to the Crown, the last of whom (though not with the least
hopes) is Prince Henry, who to the Titles of Prince of Wales, and Duke of
Cornwall, has by Succession and right of inheritance, the Earlddom of Chester
annexed to his other most happy Styles: Upon whose Person (...) of Jacobs God
may ever attend, to his (...) Britains happiness.

(9) If I should urge credit unto the report of certain Trees floating in
Bagmere, only against the deaths of the Heirs of the Breretons, thereby
seated, and after to sink until the next like occasion: or enforce for truth
the Prophecy which Leyland in a Poetical fury fore-spake of Beeston Castle,
highly mounted upon a steep hill: I should forget my self and wonted opinion,
that can hardly believe any such vain predictions, though they be told from
the mouths of credit, as Bagmere Trees are, or learned Leyland for Beeston, who
thus writes: The day will come when it again shall mount his head aloft,
If I a Prophet may be heard from Seers that say so often.
With eight other Castles this Shire has been strengthened, which were
Old-Castle, Shoclach. Shotwitch, Chester, Poulefourd, Dunham, Frodesham, and
Haulten: and by the prayers (as then was taught) of eight religious houses
therein seated, preserved; which by King Henry the eight were suppressed:
namely, Stanlow, Ilbree, Maxfeld Norton, Bunbery, Combermere, Rud-heath, and
Vale-Royall, besides the White and Black Friars, and the Nunnery in Chester.

This Counties division is into seven Hundreds, wherein are seated thirteen
Market-Townes, eighty six Parish-Churches, and thirty eight Chapels of ease.

map of the county of Chester THE COUNTYE PALATINE OF CHESTER With that most
aNCIENT CITY described.


Hundreds in Cheshire.
1. Wyrehalo. 2. Eddesbury. 3. Broxton. 4. Northwiche. 5. Bucklow. 6.
Nantwiche. 7. Macclesfeild.
A
Acton, Eddes. Acton, Nant. Acton Grange, Buck. Adynton, Mac. Aggeton, Brox.
Akedone, Buck. Nether Alderleigh, Mac. Over Alderleigh Mac. Aldelym, Nant.
Alford, Brox. Aldresey, Brox. Allostock, North. Almare Hall, Brox. Alpram,
Eddes. Alsacher, Nant. Alstanston, Nant. Alton, Eddes. ALTRINGHAM, B.
Alvandeley, Eddes. Alvaston, Nant. Anderton, Buck. Appleton, Buck. Arclydd,
North. Areley, Buck. Armitage, North. Arwe, Wyre. Ashefeild, Wyre. Assheley*
Buck. Asheton, Eddes. Assheton, Buck. Aston, Nant. Aston Grange, Buck. Aston
Chapel, Buck. Ayton, Eddes. Ayton, North.
B
Bache, Brox. Backford, Wyre. Badileigh, Nant. Baggeleigh, Nant. Bagmere Mere,
North. The Baits, Brox.
Barkesford, Nant. Barnshaw, North. Barnston, Wyre. Little Barrow, Eddes. Great
Barrow, Eddes. Barterton, Buck. Bartherton* Nant. Barthynton, Buck. Barton,
Brox. Bartumleigh, Nant. Bathynton, Nant. Over Bebynton, Wyre. Nether Bebynton,
Wyre. The Beacon, Mac.
Becheton, Nant. Beeston, Eddes. Beeston Castle, Eddes. Bexton, Buck.
Bickerton, Brox. Beleigh, North. Birkin Flu. Blakenhall, Wyre. Blakenhall,
Nant. Bnyrton, Brox. Bolyn, Mac. Bollyn Flu. Bolynton, Buck. Bolynton, Mac.
Boseleigh, Mac. Bostock, North. Bought^n, Brox. Bouthes, Buck. Bowdon, Buck.
Bradford, North. Bradley, Brox. Bradley, Buck. Bradwell, North. Bredbury, Mac.
Brereton, North. Briddesmeyre, Nant. Brindeleigh, Nant. Brinston, Wyre.
Bromall, Mac. Bromehall, Nant. Bromley, Nant. Broton hills, Brox. Broxton, Brox.
Broxton hills, Brox. Brunburgh, Wyre. Brunscath, Wyre. Brunynton, Mac. Bucklow,
Buck. Budeston, Wyre. Budworth, Eddes. Great Budworth, Buck. Buglawton* North.
Bukkeley, Brox. Bunbury, Eddes. Bureton, Nant. Burland, Nant. Burton, Eddes.
Burton, Wyre. Burton, Brox. Burwardley, Brox. Butteleigh, Mac. Byrches, North.
Byrchelles, Mac.
C
Caldey, Wyre. Great Caldey, Wyre. Caldecott, Brox. Calveleigh, Eddes.
Capenhurst, Wyre. Capensthorne, Mac. Cardyn, Brox. Caringham, North. Carrynton,
Buck. Chalkyleigh, Nant. Chad Chapel, Brox. The Chamber in the Forest, Edde.
Chapel in the street, Buck. Chedle, Mac. Chelford, Mac. WEST CHESTER, Bro.
Childer Thotron, Wyre. Cholmton, Eddes. Cholmundley, Brox. Cholmundeston, Nant.
Chorleigh, Nant. Chorleigh, Mac. Chorleton, Nant. Chorleton, Brox. Chorleton,
Wyre. Chowley, Brox. Churchenheath, Brox. Churton, Brox. Chydlow, Brox.
Clareton, Brox. Claughton, Wyre. Clifton, Buck. Clotton, Eddes. Clutton, Brox.
Clyve, North. Codynton, Eddes. Coddynton, Brox. Coggeshall, Buck. Coiley, Nant.
Combermere, Nant. CONGLETON, Nan. Conghull, Brox. Church Copenhall, Nant.
Coton, North. Coton, Brox. Crabball, Wyre. Cranage, North. Crauton, Eddes.
Crew, Nant. Crew, Brox. Church Cristleton, Brox. Little Cristleton, Brox. Row
Cristleton, Brox. Croughton, Wyre. Croxton, North. Cumberbache, Buck.
D
Dane Flu. North. Dane Flu. Mack. Dane Inche, North. Dareley, Eddes. Darford,
Nant. Darnall Grange, Eddes. Davenham, North. Davenport, North. Delamere
Forest, Edd. Deresbury, Buck. Disteleigh, Mack. Dodcot, Nant. Doddynton, Nant.
Dodleston, brox. Dodynton, Brox. Dokenfeild, Mack. Dokynton, Brox. Downs,
Mack. Dunham, Buc. Dunham, Eddes. Dudden, Eddes. Dutton, Buc.
E
Eaten boat, Brox. Ecchelles, Mac. Eccleston, Bro. Edlaston, Nant. Edge, Bro.
Eggerton, Bro. Elton, Edd^^. Elton, North. Erdley hall, Mac. Estham, Wyre.
F
Fadisleigh, Nant. Fallybrome, Mac. Farndon, Bro. The Ferye, Wyre.
Finborow, Eddes. Flaxyards, Eddes. Frankby, Wyre. FRODDESHAM, Ed. Froddesham
hills, Eddes. Fulbrooke Flu.
G
Gayton, North. Grafton, Bro. Le Granne, Wyre.
Graysby, Wyre. Le Green^, Wyre.
Grimsdiche, Buck. Gropenhall, Buc. Grynley, Bro. Godleigh, Mac. Goit, Flu.
Goit hall, Mac. Gostree, North. Goulborne David, Bro. Goulborne below, Bro.
Gowseworth, M^^. Gowy Flu.
H
H^le* Buck. Halghton, Eddes. Halywell, Brox. Hampton, Bro. Hanley, Bro.
Hanton, Bro. Happesford, Eddes. Harbridge, Bro. Harden, Mac. Haslewall, Wyre.
Haslyngton, Nant. Haslall, Nant. Hatherton, Nant. Hartesleigh, Mac. Hatton,
Buc. Hatton, Bro. Haulton, Buc. Haukylow, Nant. Hawarden, bro. Hellesby torr,
Eddes. Hellesby, Eddes. Henbury, Mac. Henhall, Nant. Henshaw, Mac. Hertford,
Eddes. Herthull, brox. Highcliffe hill, Buc. Hokchull, Eddes. Holes, North.
Hole, brox. Holford, North. Hollynworth, Mac. Honford, Mac. Honor, bro.
Hooton, Wyre. Horton, bro. Hough, Nant. Houlme* North. Houlme, North. Church
Houlme, North. Howfeild, Eddes. Hull, buck. Huntingdon, brox. Hunsterston,
Nant. Hurdesfeild, mac. Hurleston, Nant. Huxley, bro.
I
Idenshaw, Eddes. Inoe, Eddes. Irreby, Wyre.
K
Kekewick, buc. Kelsell, Eddes. Kent green, North. Kerthingham, North.
Ketelsholme, mac. Kiddington, bro. Kingesley, Eddes. Kirkby in Valley, Wyre.
West Kirkby, Wyre. Knocktyron, Wyre. KNOTTESFORD, buc. Kynarton, bro.
Kynderton, North.
L
Lache, brox. Lache Deneys, North. Lacheford, buc. Landecan, Wyre. Lareton,
Wyre. Larkton, bro. Church Lawton, North. Lea, Wyre. Lea, North. Lea Chap.
buc^. Lee, Na^^. Lee, bro. Lee, Flu. Leddesham, Wyre. Leford, Wyre. Leighes,
North. High Leigh, buck. Leighton, Wyre. Lestwiche, North. Lostocke Flu.
Lostocke gralam, North. Luscard, Wyre. Lyme, mac. Lymme, buck.
M
MACCLESFEILD, mac. Macclesfeild Forest, mac. MALPAS, brox. Manley, Eddes.
Marbury, buck. Marbury, Nant. Marleston, bro. Marsheton, buc. Marthall, buc.
Marton, mac. Marton mere, mac. Marton, Eddes. Malefen, bro. Matteleigh, mac.
Medietate, North. Little Meoles, Wyre. Great Meoles, Wyre. Merpull, mac. Mersey
Flu. Meyre, buc. Micklehurst, mac. Middleton Grange, buc. MIDDLEWICHE, North.
Milnhouse, mac. Milpoole, Nant. Mobberley, buc. Moldworth Great, Eddes. Little
Moldworth, Eddes. Molynton Banestre, Wyre. Molynton torrend, wyre. Monks
Copenhall, Nant. Moore, buck. Moresbarowe, North. Moreton, wyre. Moreton,
North. Morton, buc. Moston, North. Moston, brox. Mottram Andrew, mac. Mortram
in Longdendale, mac. Moulton, North. Mulneton, Eddes. Mulynton, buc. Mynshull
vernon, North. Church Mynshull, Nant.
N
NANTWICHE, Nan. Nesse, wyre. Little Neston, wyre. Great Neston, wyre.
Netherton, Eddes. Newbold, brox. Newbold, wyre. Newbold astbury, Nort.
Newhall, North. Newhall, mac. Newhall, Nant. Newton Chapel, mac. Newton, bro.
Newton, buc. Newton, Eddes. Newton, wyre. Newton, bro. Newton, bro. Newton,
North. Norbury, mac. Norbury, Nant. Norleigh, Eddes. Norton, buck. Norton
Priory decayed, wyre. Northerden, mac. NORTHWICHE North. Northwiche Castle,
Eddes.
O
Offerton, mac. Oggerleigh, brox. Okehanger Mere, Nant. Oldfeild, wyre.
Oldcastle, bro. Ollarton, buck. Olton, Eddes. Over, Eddes. Overchurch, wyre.
Overton, mac. Overton, bro. Ouleston, North. Ouston, Eddes. Oxton, wyr^.
P
Partington, buc. Peckferton, Eddes. Pennesby, wyre. Pephull, mac. Nether
Pever, but. Over Pever, buc. Pever Flu. Pickmer, buc. Pickmere, buc. Pickton,
buc. Plemestoo, bro. Plumleigh, buc. Plymyard, wyre. Podynton, wyre. Ponyngton,
mac. Portwood Hall mac. Fools, Nant. Nether Poole, wyre. Over Poole, wyre.
Pooton Lancele, wyre. Port Chap, mac. Poulford, bro. Poulton, bro. Poulton,
wyre. Pownall, mac. Powsey, buck. Prenton, wyre. Prestbury, mac. Preston, buck.
The Pyle, Eddes.

R
Raby, wyre. Radnor, North. Ranenow, mac. Ravenscroft, North. Red Rock, wyre.
Redings, buc. Ridge, mac. Ridley, Eddes. Ringay Flu. Rock Savage, buck.
Rode-hall, North. North Rode, mac. Romyleigh Chapel, mac. Ronaire, wyre.
Roncorne, buc. Roop, Nant. Rotherstorne, buc. Rudheath, North. Russheton,
Eddes. Rushton, North.
S
Sale, buc. Salghall little, wyre. Salghall mafly, wyre. Salghton, brox.
Sandyway, Eddes. Secome, wyre. Shavinton, Nant. Shilbroke, North. Shokylache,
brox. Church Shokylache, brox. Shotwicke, wyre. Rough Shotwicke, wyre.
Shrigliegh, mac. Shrowesbury Abbey, buck. Shurlingeslaw Hill, mac. Smallwood,
North. Smetenham, North. Smethewick, North. Soelleston, mac. Somerford, North.
Somerford, mac. SONDBACHE, North. Sound, Nant. Spittle, wyre. Sparston, North.
Spurstow, Eddes. Spurlache, North. Stackten, buc. Stanford, bro. Stanford
bridge, Nant. Stanley, Eddes. Great Stanney, Nant. Stanthorne, North.
Stapleford, bro. Stapleford, Eddes. Stapleleigh, Nant. Staveleigh, mac.
Stockton, brox. Stockham, buc. Stoke, Nant. Stoke, wyre. Stoorton, wyre.
STOPFORD, mac. Stretton, bro. Stretton Chap. buc. Stubbes, North. Sutton, mac.
Sutton, buc. Sutton, brox. Sutton, North. Little Sutton, wyre. Great Sutton,
wyre. Swanlowe, Eddes. Sydenhall, brox. Sydinton, mac.
T
Over Tableigh, buck. Nether Tableigh, buck. Tame Flu. Totenhall, bro.
Totenhall Heath, brox. Tatton, buck. Taxhall, mac. Taxall, mac. TERVIN, Eddes.
Tetton, North. Teverton, Eddes. Thingetwistee, mac. Thingwall, wyre. Thelwell
Chapel, buck. Thorneton, Eddes. Thorneton Mayow, wyre. Thurstanten, wyre.
Tilston, brox. Tittenleigh, Nant. Torkynton, mac. Torpurley, Eddes. Tossed, buc.
Tramnole, wyre. Great Troughford, brox. Bridge Troughford, Eddes. Tuffinham,
bro. Twembroke, North. Twenlow, North. Tydeleston Farnehall, Eddes.
Tyderington, North. Tymperleigh, buc.
V
Vale-riall, Eddes. Vernon, Nant. Upton, mac. Upton, wyre. Upton, bro.
Urdesseigh, mac. Utkynton, Eddes.
W
Walfeild, North. Wallatt^n, Eddes. Walrescote, Eddes. Over Walton, buc. Nether
Walton, buc. Walwarne Flu. Warbunton Chapel, buc. Wardley Eddes. Wareton,
North. Wareton, brox. Warmingham, North. Wayleigh, mac. Webunbery, Nant.
Weever, Eddes. Weever Flu. Welshrowe, Nant. Welford, buc. Weston, buc. Weston,
Nant. Wetenhall Chap. Eddes. Weverham, Eddes. Whatcraft, North. Whelocke,
North. Whelocke Flu. Whelocke Flu. Whernythe, mac. Over Whiteley, buc. Nether
Whiteley, buc. Whitby, wyre. Whitegate, Eddes. Wichehalgh, bro. Wigland, bro.
Wimslaw, mac. Wintel^y, Nant. Winyngton, Eddes. Wistanton, Nant. Withamshaw,
buc. Witton, North. Wollaston, wyre. Wollaston, Nant. Wolstanwood, Nant.
Woodbanke, wyre. Woodcot, Nant. Woodchurch, wyre. Woodford, mac. Woodhay, Nant.
Woodhead, mac. Woodhouses, Eddes. Worleston, Nant. Wreton, North. Wrenbury,
Nant. Wryenhill, Nant. Wrynehill Hall, Nant. Wymbold strongford, Eddes.
Wymboldesley, North. Wynyngton, Eddes. Wynyngham, bu^. Wyreswall, Nant. Wyrwyn,
brox. Wythinton, mac.
Y
Yardswicke, North. Yaton, mac.
LANCA-SHIRE.
THE County Palatine of Lancaster (famous for the four Henry's, The confines.
the fourth, fifth, sixth, and seventh, Kings of England, derived from John of
Gaunt Duke of Lancaster) is upon the South confined and parted by the River
Mersey, from the County Palatine of Chester; the fair County of Darbyshire
bordering upon the East; the large County of Yorkshire, together with
Westmerland and Cumberland, being her kind neighbors upon the North, and the
Sea called Mare Hibernicum embracing her upon the West.

Form.
(2) The form thereof is long, for it is so enclosed between Yorke-shire, on
the East side, and the Irish Sea on the West, that where it boundeth upon
Cheshire on the South side, it is broader, and by little and little more
Northward it goes (confining upon Westmerland) the more narrow it grows It
contains in length from Brathey Northward, Dimensitie.
to Halwood Southward, fifty seven miles; from Denton in the East, to Formby
by Altmouth in the West, thirtie-one; and the whole circumference in compass,
one hundred threescore and ten miles.

Air.
(3) The Air is subtle and piercing, not troubled with gross vapors or
foggie mists, by reason whereof the people of that Country live long and
healthfully, and are not subject to strange and unknown diseases.

Soil.
(4) The Soil for the generality is not very fruitful, yet it produces such
numbers of Cattle, of such large proportion, and such goodly heads, and horns,
as the whole Kingdom of Spain does scarce the like. It is a Country
replenished with all necessaries for the use of man, Commodities.
yielding without any great labor, the Commodity of Corn, Flax, Grass,
Coals, and such like. The Sea also adding her blessing to the Land, that the
people of that Province want nothing that serves either for the sustenance of
nature, or the satietie of appetite. They are plentifully furnished with all
sorts of Fish, Flesh, and Fowls. Their principal fuel is Coal and Turfe,
which they have in great abundance, the Gentlemen reserving their woods very
carefully, Woods carefully preserved in this Shire.
as a beauty and principal ornament to their Manors and houses. And though
it be far from London (the capital City of this Kingdom) yet does it every
year furnish her and many other parts of the Land besides, with many thousands
of Cattle (bred in this Country) giving thereby and otherwise a firm
testimony to the world, of the blessed abundance that it has pleased God to
enrich this noble Dukedom withal.

The old Inhabitant^.
(5) This Counties ancient Inhabitants were the Brigantes, of whom there is more
mention in the description of Yorke-shire, Roman.
who by Claudius the Emperor were brought under the Roman subjection* that so
held and made it their Seat, secured by their Garrisons, as has been gathered
as well by many Inscriptions found in walls and ancient monuments fixed in
stones, as by certain Altars erected in favor of their Emperors. Saxon.
After the Romans, the Saxons brought it under their protection, and held it
for a part of their Northumbrian Kingdom, till it was first made subjugate to
the invasion of the Danes, Dane.
and then conquered by the victorious Normans, Norman.
whose posterities from thence are branched further into England.

(6) Places of Antiquity or memorable note, are these: the Town of Manchester
(so famous, Manchester.
as well for the Marketplace, Church, and College, as for the resort unto it
for clothing) was called Mancunium by Antonine the Emperor, and was made a
Fort and Station of the Romans.

Riblechester.
Riblechester (which takes the name from Rhibell, a little River near (
lithero) though it be a small Town, yet by tradition has been called the
richest Town in Christendom, and reported to have been the Seat of the
Romans, which the many Monuments of their Antiquities, Statues, pieces of
Coin, and other several Inscriptions, dug up from time to time by the
Inhabitants, may give us sufficient persuasion to believe.

Lancaster more pleasant then full of people.
But the Shire-town is Lancaster, more pleasant in situation, then rich of
Inhabitants, built on the South of the River Lon, and is the same Longovicum,
where (as we find in the Notice Provinces) a company of the Longovicarians
under the Lieutenant General of Britain lay. The beauty of this Town is in
the Church, Castle, and Bridge: her streets many, and stretched far in
length. Unto this Town King Edward the third granted a Mayor and two
Bailiffes, The grant of King Edward the third unto the Town of Lancaster.
which to this day are elected out of twelve Brethren, assisted by twenty-foure
Burgesses, by whom it is yearly governed, with the supply of two
Chamberlaines, a Recorder, Town-Clerke, and two Sergeants at Mace. The
elevation of whose Pole is in the degree of Latitude 54. and 58. scruples, and
her Longitude removed from the first West point unto the degree 17. and 40.
scruples.

(7) This Country in diverse places suffers the force of many flowing tides
of the Sea, It is severed in some places by the force of the Sea.
by which (after a sort) it does violently rent asunder one part of the Shire
from the other: as in Fourenesse, where the Ocean being displeased that the
shore should from thence shoot a maine way into the West, has not obstinately
ceased from time to time to flash and mangle it, and with his fell irruptions
and boisterous tides to devour it.

Another thing there is, not unworthy to be recommended to memory, that in this
Shire, not far from Fourenesse Fels, the greatest standing water in all
England (called Winander-Mere) lies, Winander-mere.
stretched out for the space of ten miles of wonderful depth, and all paved
with stone in the bottom: and along the Seaside in many places may be seen
heaps of sand, upon which the people power water, until it recover a saltish
humor, which they afterward boil with Turfes, till it become white Salt.

(8) This Country, as it is thus on the one side freed by the natural
resistance of the Sea from the force of Invasions, so is it strengthened on the
other by many Castles and fortified places, that take away the opportunity of
making Roades and Incursions in the Country. It was last made subject to the
West Saxon Monarchy.
And as it was with the first that felt the fury of the Saxon cruelty, so was
it the last and longest that was subdued under the West Saxon Monarchy.

(9) In this Province our noble Arthur (who died laden with many trophies of
honor) is reported by Ninius to have put the Saxons to flight in a memorable
battle near Douglasse, Arthur put to flight the Saxons.
a little Brook not far from the Town of Wiggin. But the attempts of war,
as they are several, so they are uncertain: for they made not Duke Wade happy
in this success, Duke Wade put to the worst.
but returned him an unfortunate enterpriser in the Battle, which he gave to
Ardulph King of Northumberland, at Billangho, in the year 798. So were the
events uncertain in the Civil Wars of York and Lancaster: The civil wars of
York and Lancaster.
for by them was bred and brought forth that bloody division and fatal strife
of the Noble Houses, that with variable success to both parties (for many
years together) molested the peace and quiet of the Land, and defiled the
earth with blood, in such violent manner, that it exceeded the horror of those
Civil Wars in Rome, that were betwixt Marius and Sylla, Pompey and Caesar,
Octavius and Antony; or that of the two renowned Houses Valoys and Burbon, that
a long time troubled the State of France: for in the division of these two
Princely Families there were thirteen fields fought, and three Kings of
England, one Prince of Wales, twelve Dukes, one Marquis, eighteen Earls, one
Vicount, and three and twenty Barons, besides Knights and Gentlemen, lost
their lives in the same. Their happy conjunction.
Yet at last, by the happy marriage of Henry the seventh, King of England, next
heir to the House of Lancaster, with Elizabeth daughter and heir to Edward
the fourth, of the House of York, the white and red Roses were conjoined, in
the happy uniting of those two divided Families, from whence our thrice
renowned Sovereign Lord King James, by fair sequence and succession, does
worthily enjoy the Diadem: by the benefit of whose happy government, this
County Palatine of Lancaster is prosperous in her Name and Greatness.

(10) I find the remembrance of four Religious houses that have been founded
within this County (and since suppressed) both fair for structure and
building, and rich for seat and situation: Castles.
namely, Burstogh, Whalleia, Holland, and Penwortham. It is divided into six
Hundreds, Hundreds.
besides Fournesse Fellers and Lancasters Liberties, that lie in the North
part. It is beautified with fifteen Market-Townes, Market towns.
both fair for situation and building, and famous for the concourse of people
for buying and selling. Parishes.
It has twentie-sixe Parishes, besides Chapels, (in which they duly frequent
to divine Service) and those populous, as in no part of the Land more.

map of the county of Lancaster THE COUNT PALLATINE OF LANCASTER DESCRIBED AND
DIVIDED INTO HUNDREDS 1610


HVNDREDS in Lanca-shire.
1. Loynsedale. 1. Amoundernes. 3. Blackburne. 4. Lailand. 5. West Darbie. 6.
Salford.
A
Abram, West. Accrington new, Black. Accrington, Black. Adlington, Lail.
Aighton, Black. Akrinton Chapel, blac. Aldingham, Loyn. Alham, Black Alker,
West. Allerton, West. Alt flu. Alt-mouth, West. Althome, Black. Alston, Amound.
Andertonford, West. Anderton, West. Appleton, west. Ardwicke, Sal. Argholme,
Loyn. Ar^lath L^^^. Arnesyd, loyn. Arum, loyn. Ashley, Lail. Ashurst, West.
Ashton, Loyn. Ashton, Sal. Ashton in Makerfield, West. Ashton Chapel West.
Ashton under line, Sal. Ashworth, Sal. Astley, Lail. Astley, Sal. Astley, West.
Aspull, Sal. Atherton, sal. Atherton, West. Attithwan, Loyn. Aughton, West.
Aughton, Loyn. Aucliffe, loyn. Aynetres, West. Aytenfeild, sal.
B
Bacup, Sal. Bar, Loyn. Bal^di^on, Black. Baley, Black. Bankhall, West.
Bardley, Loyn. Barlow, sal. Barnsyde, Black. Baro head, loyn. Old Bairo I Will,
loyn. Barton, Amound. Barton, sal. Barton, West. Beckonfall lail. Bedforde,
West. Bergerode, Amound. Bewsey, West. Bickerstaffe, West. Bigger, loyn.
Bilesborowe, Amound. Billington, Black. Billing West. Birche, West. Bispham,
Lail. Bispham, Amound. BLACKBURN, Black. Blackley, sal. Blackbrode, sal.
Blackstone edge, sal. Blackrode, West. Blawithe, Loyn. Blesdaile, Amound.
Bolland, Black. Bold, West. Boothe, West. Boothes hall, sal. Borwick, Loyn.
Botton, Loyn. Boulton, Loyn. BOULTON, Sal. Bouth, Loyn. Bowland forest, Amo.
Bradley, West. Bradsey, Loyn. Bradshaw, sal. Bradlesham, sal. Brathey, Loyn.
Brereclist, Black. Brindle, Lail. Brinsap, West. Brockall, Amound. Broke flu.
Brotherton, Lail. Broughton, Amound. Broughton in Carmel, Loyn. Broughton in
fournes, Loyn. Brundall, Black. Bryn, West. Brinynge, Amound. Bulk, Loyn.
Burcots, Loyn. Burgh, Lail. BURY, Sal. Burn^ley, Black. Burrowe, Loyn.
Burscough, West. Burscott Abbey West. Burton wood, West. Butterworth, Sal.
Byram, West.
C
Calder flu. Calder flu. Cansfeild, Loyn. Cappul, Lail. Car, West. Carleton,
Amound. Carpmansal, Loyn. Cartmell, Loyn. Cartlone passage, Loyn. Castleton,
sal. Caton, Loyn. Catford hall, Amound. Catterall, Amound. Chadgley, Black.
Chatmosse, sal. Chatburne, Black. Chattertoun, sal. Charnock, Lail. Charnock
Richard, Lail. Chaverton Chapel, Sal. Cheeton, Sal. Childwell, West.
Childwall, West. Chippin, Black. Church, Black. Chorley, Lail. Chorlton, Sal.
New Church, Black. Class, Loyn. Claton hall, Sal. Claton in the dale, Bla.
Claton in the more, Bl. Claughton, Loyn. Clawghton, Amound. Clayton, Lail.
Clegge, Sal. Clifton, sal. Clifton, Amound. Clithcrowe, Black. Cloughoo hill,
Loyn. Cockerham, loyn. Cockley chap. Sal. Coker flu. Coker sandala, Loyn.
Coldcoats, Black. Colder flu. The College, Sal. COLNE, Black. Conder flu.
Coniston, Loyn. Conyside passage, Loyn. Corney raw, Amound. Cotham, Amound.
Coulton, Loyn. Crackford, Loyn. Cranfurth, Loyn. Cressingham, Loyn. Croste,
West. Crompton, Sal. Cronton, West. Crosbie great, West. Crosbie little,
West. Croshall West. Croshouse, Loyn. Croston, Lail. Crostath, West.
Crumsall, Sal. Culcheth, West. Cunseough, West. Curdeley, West.
D
Dalton, Loyn. Dalton, loyn. Dalton, West. Darwin flu. Doulton Castle, Loyn.
Dean, Sal. Denaholme, Sal. Denton, Sal. Denton hall, Sal. Derbie west West.
Diddesbury, Sal. Dilworthe, Black. Ditton, West. Docker, Loyn. Docker flu.
Dowgles, Lail. Dowgles flu. Downham, Black. Down-holland, West. Drilsden, Sal.
Duckley, Black. Dudden flu. Dunkinbalgh, Black. Durwen upper, black. Durwen
nether, black. Dutton, black. Duxburye, Lail.
E
Eatenburgh, Lail. Earton, West. Eccleston, West. Eccleston little, Amoun.
Eccleston, Lail. Eckles, Sal. Edgecrosse, Sal. Edgeworth, Sal. Edmarch Chapel,
Am. Egleston, West. Egton, Loyn. Elandas, Loyn. Elhills, Loyn. Ellynburgh,
Sal. Elswicke, Amound. Elston, Amound. South End, Loyn. North End, Loyn.
Extwist, Black.
F
Failsworth, Sal. Farleton, Loyn. Farneworth, West. Farrington, Lail.
Fawbridge, Black. Fazakerley, West. Fernehead, West. Fildesly, West.
Fithwick, Amound. Flixton, Sal. Flokesharo, Loyn. Formebye, West. Fosse flu.
Fulney I Will, Loyn. Fournise fels, loyn. Fournesse, loyne. Foxdenton, Sal.
Freckleton great, Amo. Frith hall, Loyn. Fulwood, Amound.
G
Garret, Sal. Garstrange Church, Amound. GARSTRANGE, Am. Garston, West.
Glason, Loyn. Glasbrooke, West. Glasten Castle, Loyn. Golborne, West. Gorton,
Sal. Gousnargh, Amound. Gowborn head, Loyn. The Grange, Amound. Grathwat, Loyn.
Grene, West. Greeno, Amound. Greenno Castle, Amo. Greenhalph, Amound.
Gresgarth, Loyn. Gressingham, Loyn. Grimstore, Amound. Grisedale, Loyn.
Grysehurst, Sal.
H
Hackinston, Amound. Hackensdall, Amound. Haclelock, West. Haighe, West.
Haighton, Amound. Hale, West. Halewood, West. West Hall, Loyn. Halliwell,
Sal. Halsall, West. Halton, loyn. Hambleton, Amound. Hamfeild hall, loyn.
Handley, black. Hapton, black. Hardhorne, Amound. Harrock hall, lail.
Hartlebeck flu. Harwich Chapel, Sal. Hardwood, sal. Harwood little, black.
Harwood great, black. Hastingden, black. Haughton west, sal. Hauxshead, loyn.
Haucolme Chapel, Sal. Hay, West. Haycote, loyn. Heapey, lail. Heath, lail.
Heaton, loyn. Heaton, sal. Heaton Norris, sal. S. Helins, West. Henthorne,
black. Heskin, lai. Heskethe, lai. Hest loyn. Hestbanke passage, lai.
Heyhouses, black. Highfeild, loyn. Hill, lai. Hindley, West. Hinton, West.
Hodder flu. Hollcroft, West. Holland Chapel, West. Holme, black. Holme, sal.
Hollin, West. Holme, West. Hoole much, lai. Hoole little, lai. Hopwood, sal.
Horneby Castle, loyn. Horwiche, sal. Hotherfall, Amound. Houghton, lai.
Houghton tower, black. Houghton Chapel, W Houghwick, lai. Howker, loyn. Hugh
hall, sal. Hulton park, sal. Hulton, sal. Huncot, black. Hunderfeild, sal.
Hurleston hall, West. Hut, West. Hutton, loyn. Hutton, lai. Hutton, loyn.
Hyndborn flu. Hysham, loyn.
I
Ighlenhill park, black. Iswick, Amound. Ince, West. Ince blundell, West.
Inkeslip, Amound. Inskippe, Amound. S. John's chapel, Amo. Irebye, loyn.
Irwell flu.
K
Kallamer, Amound. Kellet nether, loyn. Kellet over, loyn. Ken flu. Ken sands,
loyn. Kenmon, West. Kermansholme, sal. Keverdale, black. Kilcheth, West.
Kirkebie, West. Kirkebye Irelethe, loyn. Kirkedale, West. KIRKEHAM, Amoun.
Kirkland, Amound. Knowesley, West. Kuleshill, black.
L
Lailand mose, lai. Lailand, lai. LANCASTER, loyn. Langhoo hall, black. Langton
Chapel, lai. Langtree, lai. Larbreck, Amound. Larbricke, Amound. Lastok, sal.
Lathome, West. Laton, Amound. The Laund, Amound. Lawcon, West. Law, black.
S. Lawrence. Amound. Lea, Amound. Lecke, loyn. Lee, loyn. Leece, loyn. Legba^o,
loyn. Leighe, West. Leighe west, West. Lerpoole haven, West. LERPOOLE, West.
Little Lever, sal. Great Lever, Sal. Leven Sands, loyn. Leyghton, loyn.
Linecar, West. Litherland, West. Littleburgh, sal. The Lodge, lai. The Lodge,
Amound. Longridgehill, black. Longridge Chapel, black. Longton, lai. Lostock,
sal. Low, West. Lowick, loyn. Lun flu. Lycha^e, West. Lydiate, West. Lyndell,
loyn. Lythome, Amound. Lyvesey, black.
M
MANCHESTER, sal. Marton, West. Marton mere, West. Marton mose, Amound. Marton
mere, Amound. Marshden, black. Martholme, black. Masengill, loyn. Meals, West.
Mearley, black. Meawdisley, lai. Medler, Amound. Medlock flu. Melling, loyn.
Melling, West. Mellor, black. Michaels Church, Amoun. Middleton, sal.
Middleton, loyn. Mierstough, Amound. Milnerow, sal. Mitton, black. Morelees,
sal. Mosbarrow, West. Moscroft, West. The Moss, West. Moston, sal.
Mowbricke, Amound.
N
Nateby hall, Amound. Newbiggin, loyn. Newbridge, loyn. Newburgh, West.
Newchurch, West. Newhall, West. Newhall, sal. Newland, loyn. New park, West.
Nowton, loyn. Newton, Amound. Newton, Amound. Newton, sal. Newton, loyn. Newton
in make^feild, West. Nibthwat, loyn. Nighull, West. Norbreck, Amound.
Northmeal^^, West.
O
ORMESCHURCH. Orrel, West. O^baldeston, black. Osmonderley, loyn. Oswoldtwist,
black. Overto^, loyn. Ouldham, sal. Oxecliffe, loyn. Oxenfeild, loyn.
P
Paddynham, black. Park flu. New Park, West. Parbold, lai. Part, West. The
Pele, lai. The Pele, West. Pembleton, West. Pendle hill, black. Pendleton,
black. Pendleton, sal. Penketh, West. Pennington, loyn. Penwortham, lai.
Pilkington, sal. Pilline mose, Amound. Pillin hall, Amound. Pleasingh^on,
black. Plumpton wood, Amoun. Plumpton, Amound. Plumpton, loyn. Pooleton, West.
Powton, Amound. Prescott, West. PRESTON, Amoun. Prestwiche, sal. Prisall,
Amound. Priscoo, Amound. Prise, Amound. Pulten, loyn. Punnington, West. The
Pyle of fondraw, loyn.
Q
Quernmore, loyn.
R
Radcliffe, sal. Ramsyde, loyn. Ratcliffe, sal. Raventon, lai. Ravenpik hill,
sal. Rawcliffe nether, Am. Rawcliffe over, Am. Raynforde, West. Raynhill,
West. Read, black. Rediche, sal. Ribchester, black. Ribchester, black. Ribbie,
Amound. Ribble flu. Ribleton, Amound. Rimington, black. Risheton, black.
Rivington, sal. Rixton, West. Roberts-hall, loyn. Robie, West. Robrindale,
loyn. Roburne flu. Roche flu. ROCHEDALE, sal. Roseaker. Amound. Rosse hall,
Amound. Rossendale, black. Royton, sal. Ruseland, loyn. Rusforth, lai. Rysley,
West. Ryton, sal.
S
Saleburie, black. Salford, sal. Sambury hall, black. Samblesbury, black.
Saterthwat, loyn. Savoke, flu. Scaley, loyn. Scaley, loyn. Scals, loyn.
Scaresbrick, West. Scotfurth, loyn. Sells hall, loyn. Selton, West.
Shakerley, sal. Shay Chapel, sal. Shevington, lai. Shirehead, Amound.
Silverdale, loyn. Simonswood forest, West. Singleton little, Amound. Singleton
great, Amound. Skales, Amound. Skarth north, loyn. Skelmersdale, West. Skipp^n
flu. Skirton, loyn. Slyne, loyn. Smethels, sal. Souckie, West. Southwate,
loyn. Southworthe, West. Sowberthwat, loyn. Sowick, Amound. Sowrbie, Amound.
Speak, West. Spodden flu. Spotland, sal. Stalmyne, Amound. Stanall, Amound.
Standish, lai. Standish hall, lai. The Stanke, loyn. Stanley, loyn. Staning
hall, Amound. The County Stones, loyn. Stonyhurst, black. Strangwes, sal.
Stretforde, sal. Stubley, sal. Sunbrick, loyn. Sunderland point, loyn^. Sutton,
West. Symonston, black.
T
Tarleton, lai. Tatham, loyn. Taude flu. Taume flu. Terinker, Amound.
Terlescowood, West. Terver Chapel, loyn. Thistleton, Amound. Thorneley,
black. Thorneton, West. Thorneton, Amound. Thurland, loyn. Thurnham, loyn.
Thurstan flu. Tiberthwat, loyn. Tilfey, Sal. Tockholes, black. Todmerden, sal.
Torbucke, West. Torkscarth park, West. Torner, loyn. Tornesse, loyn.
Torrisholme, loyn. Tottingtonn, sal. Townley, black. Traford, sal. Trawden,
balck. Treales, Amound. Tunstall, loyn. Turton, sal. Twekeston, lai. Twiston,
black.
V
Ulneswalton, lai. ULVERSTON, loyn. Up holland, West. Urmston, sal. Urswick,
loyn.
W
Waarbreck, Amound. Waddiker, Amound. Walmesley, sal. Walney Island, loyn.
Walney Chapel, loyn. Walshwhitt, lai. Walton hall, lai. Walton in the dale,
black. Walton, West. Wantree, West. Warton, loyn. WARRINGTON, West. Warton,
Amound. Weasam, amound. Weeton, amound. Wennyngton, loyn. Werdale, black.
Werdley, sal. Werdon, lai. Westbie, amound. Whalley, black. Wheatley, black.
Wheelton, lai. Whickleswick, sal. Whiston, West. Whittle in the woods. lai.
Whittington, loyn. Whittingham, amound. Wicoler, black. Widdnes, West. WIGAN,
West. Wilpshire, black. Winander mere, loyn. Windle, West. Winmelay, amound.
Winnington flu. Winstanley, West. Winstenley, West. Winster flu. Winwick, West.
Winworth, sal. Wire flu. Wire flu. Wiswall, black. Withington, sal. VVithnell,
lay. VVitton, black. VVoodland Chapel, loyn. VVoolston, West. VVoolton
little, West. VVoolton great, West. VVoorston, black. VVordsall, sal. VVorsley
sal. VVorsthorne, black. VVorthington, lai. Wotton, West. VVraye, amound.
VVraysholme tower, loyn. VVrayton, loyn. VVrenesse hill, loyn. VVrightington,
lai. VVulf cragge, loyn. VVyersdale, loyn. VVyersale forest, loyn. VVinder,
loyn.
Y
Yelland, loyn.
THE DESCRIPTION OF YORKE-SHIRE.
AS the courses and confluents of great Rivers, are for the most part fresh in
memory, though their heads and fountains lie commonly unknown: The benefits of
Antiquity.
so the latter knowledge of great Regions, are not traduced to oblivion, though
perhaps their first originals be obscure, by reason of Antiquity, and the many
revolutions of times and ages. Yorkshire a great Province.
In the delineation therefore of this great Province of Yorkshire, I will not
insist upon the narration of matters near unto us; but succinctly run over
such as are more remote; yet neither so sparingly, as I may seem to diminish
from the dignity of so worthy a Country; nor so prodigally, as to spend time
in the superfluous praising of that which never any (as yet) dispraised. And
although perhaps it may seem a labor unnecessary, Men's affections most set to
modern matters.
to make relation of ancient remembrances, either of the Name or Nature of this
Nation, especially looking into the difference of Time it self (which in every
age brings forth diverse effects) and the dispositions of men, that for the
most part take less pleasure in them, then in divulging the occurrents of
their own times: yet I hold it not unfit to begin there, from whence the first
certain direction is given to proceed; for (even of these ancient things)
there may be good use made, either by imitation, or way of comparison, as
neither the reperition, nor the repetition thereof shall be accounted
impertinent.

Yorkshire how bounded.
(2) You shall therefore understand: That the County of York was in the
Saxon-tongue called Euerric-scyre, Effrdc-scyre, and Ebora-scyre, and now
commonly Yorkshire, far greater and more numerous in the Circuit of her
miles, then any Shire of England. She is much bound to the singular love and
motherly care of Nature, in placing her under so temperate a clime, that in
every measure she is indifferently fruitful. If one part of her be stony, and
a sandy barrain ground: another is fertile and richly adorned with Cornfieldsd.
If you here find it naked, and destitute of Woods, Full of Trees.
you shall see it there shadowed with Forests full of trees, that have very
thick bodies, sending forth many fruitful and profitable branches. If one
place of it be Moorish, Myrie, and unpleasant; another makes a free tender of
delight, and presents it self to the eye, full of beauty and contentive
variety.

How bounded North. East.
(3) The Bishopric of Durham fronts her on the Northside, and is separated by a
continued course of the River Tees. The Germane Sea lies sore upon her
East Side, beating the shoares with her boisterous waves and billows. The West
part is bounded with Lancashire, West. South.
and Westmerland. The South Side has Cheshire and Darbishire (friendly
Neighbors unto her) with the which she is first enclosed: then with Nottingham
and with Lincoln shires: after divided with that famous Arm of the Sea
Humber: Humber.
Into which all the Rivers that water this Country, empty themselves, and pay
their ordinary Tributes, as into the common receptacle and Storehouse of
Neptune, for all the watery Pensions of this Province.

(4) This whole Shire (being of it self so spacious) for the more easy and
better ordering of her civil government, Yorkshire divided.
is divided into three parts: which according to three quarters of the world,
are called The West Riding, West Riding.
The East Riding, and The North Riding: West Riding is for a good space
compassed with the River Ouse; with the bounds of Lancashire, and with the
South limits of the Shire, and bears toward the West and South. East Riding
bends it self to the Ocean, East Riding.
with the which, and with the River Derwent she is enclosed, and looks into
that part where the Sun rising, and showing forth his beams, makes the world
both glad and glorious in his brightness. North Riding extends it self
Northward, North Riding.
hemmed in as it were, with the River Tees and Derwent, and a long race of the
River Ouse. The length of this Shire, extended from Harthill in the South, to
the mouth of Tees in the North, are near unto 70. miles, the breadth from
Flambrough-head to Horncastle upon the River Lun, is 80. the whole
Circumference 308. miles.

The Soil.
(5) The Soil of this County for the generality is reasonable fertile, and
yields sufficiency of Corn and Cattle within it self. One part whereof is
particularly made famous by a Quarry of Stone, out of which the stones newly
hewn be very soft, but seasoned with wind and weather of themselves do
naturally become exceeding hard and solid. Another, by a kind of Limestone,
whereof it consists, which being burnt, and conveyed into the other parts of
the country, which are hilly and somewhat cold, serve to manure and enrich
their Cornfieldsd.

(6) That the Romans flourishing in Military prowess, The Antiquities.
made their several stations in this Country, is made manifest by their
Monuments, by many Inscriptions fastened in the walls of Churches, Columns.
by many Columns engraven with Roman-worke found lying in Churchyards, by many
votive Altars digd up that were erected (as it should seem) to their Tutelar
Gods (for they had local and peculiar Topic Gods, Altars.
whom they honored as Keepers and Guardians of some particular places of the
Country) as also by a kind of Bricks which they used: Bric^es.
for the Romans in time of Peace, to avoid and withstand idleness, (as an
enemy to virtuous and valorous enterprises) still exercised their Legions and
Cohorts in casting of Ditches, making of Highwayes, building of Bridges, and
making of Bricks, which having sithence been found, and from time to time digd
out of the ground, prove the antiquity of the place by the Roman Inscriptions
upon them.

(7) No less argument of the piety hereof, Abbeys.
are the many Monasteries, Abbeys, and Religious houses that have been placed
in this Country; which whilst they retained their own state and
magnificence, were great ornaments unto it: but since their dissolution, and
that the teeth of time (which devoures all things) have eaten into them, they
are become like dead carcasses, leaving only some poor ruins and remains
alive, as relics to posterity, to show of what beauty and magnificence they
have been. Such was the Abbey of Whitby, Whitby.
founded by Lady Hilda, daughter of the grand child unto King Edwine. Such was
the Abbey built by Bolton, Bolton.
which is now so razed and laid level with the earth, as that at this time it
affords no appearance of the former dignity. Kirkstall.
Such was Kirkstall Abbey, of no small account in time past, founded in the
year of Christ 1147. Such was the renowned Abbey called S. Mary's in York, S.
Mary's in York.
built and endowed with rich livings by Alan the third Earl of little Britain
in Armerica; but since converted into the Princes House, and is called The
Manor. Such the wealthy Abbey of Fountains, Fountains.
built by Thurstin Archbishop of York. Such the famous Monastery founded in
the Primitive Church of the East Saxons, Monast. Saint Wilfrid. Drax.
by Wilfrid Archbishop of York, and enlarged (being fallen down and decayed)
by Odo Archbishop of Canterbury. Such was Drax a Religious House of Chanons.
Such that fair Abbey built by King William the Conqueror at Selby (where his
son Henry the first was born) in memory of Saint German, Selby.
who happily confuted that contagious Pelagian Heresy, which oftentimes grew
to Serpentine head in Britain.

These places for Religion erected, Causes of diminishing Church Livings.
with many more within this Provincial Circuit, and consecrated unto holy
purposes, show the Antiquity, and how they have been sought unto by
confluences of Pilgrims in their manner of devotions: The mists of which
superstitious obscurities, are since cleared by the pure light of the Gospel
revealed, and the skirts of Idolatry unfolded to her own shame and ignominy:
And they made subject to the dissolution of Times, serving only as antique
monuments and remembrances to the memory of succeeding Ages.

(8) Many places of this Province are famoused as well by Name, Memorable
places.
being naturally fortunate in their situation, as for some other accidental
happiness befallen unto them. Halifax, Halifax.
famous, as well for that Johannes de sacro Bosco, Author of the Sphere, was
born there, and for the law it has against stealing, and for the greatness of
the Parish, which reckons in it eleven Chapels, whereof two be Parish
Chapels, and in them to the number of twelve thousand people.

In former times it was called Horton, Halifax once called Horton: and why the
name changed.
and touching the alteration of the name, this pretty Story is related of it:
namely, That a Clerk (for so they call him) being far in love with a maid,
and by no means either of long praises or large promises, able to gain like
affection at her hands, when he saw his hopes frustrate, and that he was not
like to have his purpose of her, turned his love into rage, and cut off the
maids head, which being afterward hung upon an Ewe tree, commonly people
counted it as an hallowed relic till it was rotten: Peoples credulities.
And afterward (such was the credulity of that time) it maintained the opinion
of reverence and religion still: for the people resorted thither on Pilgrimage,
and persuaded themselves, that the little map of Yorkshire YORK SHIRE
Veins that spread out between the Bark and Body of the Eve tree like fine
threads, were the very hairs of the maids head. Hereupon it was called by this
name Haligfax, or Haly-fax, that is, Holy-Hayre.

Pomfret.
Pomfret is famous for the Site, as being seated in a place so pleasant, that
it brings forth Liquorice and great plenty of Skiriworts, but it is infamous
for the murder and bloodshed of Princes: The Castle whereof was built by
Hildebert Lacy a Norman, to whom William the Conqueror gave this Town, after
Alrick the Saxon was thrust out of it.

(9) But I will forbear to be prolixe or tedious in the particular memoration
of places in a Province so spacious, and only make a compendious relation of
York, York City.
the second City of England, in Latin called Eboracum and Eburacum, by
Ptolemy, Brigantium (the chief City of the Brigants) by Ninnius, Caer Ebrauc,
by the Britains, Caer Effroc, and by the Saxons Euor-ric, and Eofor-ric. The
British History reports that it took the name of Ebrauc that founded it; but
some others are of opinion, that Eburacum has no other derivation then from
the River Ouse running through it: It over-masters all the other places of this
Country for fairness, and is a singular ornament and safeguard to all the
North parts. York a pleasant City.
A pleasant place, large, and full of magnificence, rich, populous, and not
only strengthened with fortifications, but adorned with beautiful buildings
as well private as public. For the greater dignity thereof it was made an
Episcopal See by Constantius, and a Metropolitan City by a Pall sent unto it
from Honorius. Egbert Arch-^ishop of York. Rich. the third.
Egbert Archbishop of York, who flourished about the year seven hundred
forty, erected in it a most famous Library. Richard the third repaired the
Castle thereof being ruinous, Hen the eight.
and King Henry the eight appointed a Council in the same, to decide and
determine all the causes and Controversies of the Northparts, according to
equity and conscience: which Counsel consists of a Lord President, certain
Counselors at the Princes pleasure, a Secretary, and other Under-officers.

The original of this City cannot be fetched out but from the Romans, seeing
the Britains before the Romans came, had no other towns then woods fenced with
trenches and rampires: as Caesar and Strabo do testify. And that it was a
Colonie of the Romans, appears both by the authority of Ptolemie and
Antonine, and by many ancient Inscriptions that have been found there. In this
City the Emperor Severus had his Palace, Severus Empe^our.
and here gave up his last breath; which ministers occasion to show the ancient
custom of the Romans, in the military manner of their burials.

His body was carried forth here by the Soldiers to the Funeral fire, and
committed to the flames, honored with the lusts and Tournaments both of the
Soldiers and of his own sons: His ashes bestowed in a little golden pot or
vessel of the Porphyratstone, were carried to Rome and shrined there in the
monument of the Antonines. In this City (^s Spartianus makes mention) was the
Temple of the Goddess Bellona; Goddess Bellona.
to which Severus (being come thither purposing to offer sacrifice) was
erroneously led by a rusticall Augur.

Constantius, surnamed Chlorus.
Here Fl. Valerius Constantius, surnamed Chlorus (an Emperor of excellent
virtue and Christian piety) ended his life, and was Deified as appears by
ancient Coins: and his son Constantine being present at his Fathers death,
forthwith proclaimed Emperor; from whence it may be gathered of what great
estimation York was in those days, when the Roman Emperors Court was held
in it. This City flourished a long time under the English-Saxons Dominion,
till the Danes like a mighty storm, thundering from out the North-East,
destroyed it, and distained it with the blood of many slaughtered persons, and
wan it from Osbright and Ella Kings of Northumberland, Osbright and Ella.
who were both slain in their pursuit of the Danes: which Alcuine in his
Epistle to Egelred King of Northumberland, seemed to presage before, when he
said; What signifies that raining down of blood in S. Peter's Church of York,
even in a fair day, and descending in so violent and threatening a manner from
the top of the roof? may it not be thought that blood is coming upon the Land
from the North-parts?

Ath^lstan.
Howbeit Athelstane recovered it from the Danish subjection, and quite overthrew
the Castle with the which they had fortified it; yet was it not (for all this)
so freed from wars, but that it was subject to the Times fatally next
following. Nevertheless, in the Conquerours time, when (after many woeful
overthrows and troublesome storms) it had a pleasant calm of ensuing peace,
it rose again of it self, and flourished afresh, having still the helping
hand both of Nobility and Gentry, to recover the former dignity, and bring it
to the perfection it has: The Citizens fenced it round with new walls, The
Citizens cost since Will. Conqueror.
and many towers and bulwarks, and ordaining good and wholesome laws for the
government of the same. The Magistracy of York City.
Which at this day are executed at the command of a Lord Major, who has the
assistance of twelve Aldermen, many Chamberlaines, a Recorder, a Towne-Clerke,
six Sergeants at Mace, and two Esquires, which are, a Swordbearer, and the
Common Sergeant, who with a great Mace goes on the left hand of the Sword. The
longitude of this City, according to Mercators account, is 19. degrees and 35.
scruples: the latitude 54. degrees and 40. scruples.

(10) Many occurrents present themselves with sufficient matter of enlargement
to this discourse, The Battles.
yet none of more worthy consequence then were those several Battles, fought
within the compass of this County; wherein Fortune had her pleasure as well
in the proof of her love, as in the pursuit of her tyranny; sometime sending
the fruits of sweet peace unto her, and otherwhiles suffering her to taste the
sowrenesse of war.

At Conisborough (in the Britain tongue Caer Conan) was a great Battle fought
by Hengist, Conisborough.
Captain of the English-Saxons, after he had retired himself thither for his
safety, his men being fled and scattered, and himself discomfited by Aurelius
Ambrosius; Aurelius Ambrosius.
yet within few days after he brought forth his men to Battle against the
Britains that pursued him, where the field was bloody both to him and his; for
many of his men were cut in pieces, and he himself had his head chopped off, as
the British History says; which the Chronicles of the English-Saxons deny,
reporting that he dyed in peace, being surcharged and over-worne with the
troublesome toils and travels of war.

Near unto Kirkstall, Kirkstall.
Oswie King of Northumberland, put Penda the Mercian to flight: the place
wherein the Battle was joined, the Writers call Winwid-feild, giving it the
name by the victory. And the little Region about it (in times past called by an
old name Elmet) was conquered by Eadwin King of Northumberland, the son of
Aela, after he had expelled Cereticus a British King, in the year of Christ,
620.

At Casterford (called by Antonine Legeolium and Legetium) the Citizens of
York slew many of King Ethelreds Army, Casterford.
and had a great hand against him, in so much as he that before sat in his
throne of Majesty, was on a sudden daunted, and ready to offer submission.

But the most worthy of memory, Palme-Sunday Battle.
was that Field fought on Palm Sunday, 1461. in the quarrel of Lancaster and
York, where England never saw more puissant Forces both of Gentry and
Nobility: for there were in the field at one time (partakers on both sides) to
the number of one hundred thousand fighting men. When the fight had continued
doubtful a great part of the day, Lancastrians put to flight.
the Lancastrians not able longer to abide the violence of their enemies,
turned back and fled amain, and such as took part with York, followed them
so hotly in chase, and killed such a number of Noble and Gentlemen, that thirty
thousand Englishmen were that day left dead in the field.

(11) Let us now loose the point of this compassse and fail into some other
parts of this Province, to find out matter of other memorable moment. Under
Knausbrough there is a Well called Dropping-Well, Places of other note.
in which the waters spring not out of the veins of the earth, but distill and
trickle down from the rocks that hang over it: It is of this virtue and
efficacy, that it turns wood into stone: for what wood soever is put into it,
will be shortly covered over with a stony bark, and be turned into stone, as
has been often observed.

At Giggleswicke also about a mile from Settle (a Market Town) there are
certain small springs not distant a quaits cast from one another: Giggleswicke.
the middlemost of which does at every quarter of an hour ebb and flow about
the height of a quarter of a yard when it is highest, and at the ebb falls
so low, that it is not an inch deep with water. Of no less worthiness to be
remembered is Saint Wilfrids Needle, a place very famous in times past for the
narrow hole in the close vaulted room under the ground, S. Wilfrids Needle.
by which women's honesties were wont to be tried: for such as were chaste pass
through with much facility; but as many as had played false, were miraculously
held fast, and could not creep through. Believe if you list.

The credible report of a Lamp found burning (even in our Fathers remembrance,
Constantius Sepulcher.
when Abbeys were pulled down and suppressed) in the Sepulcher of Constantius,
within a certain vault or little Chapel under the ground, wherein he was
supposed to have been buried, might beget much wonder and admiration, but that
Lazius confirms that in ancient times they had a custom to preserve light in
Sepulchers by an artificial resolving of gold into a liquid and fattie
substance, An ancient Roman custom.
which should continue burning a long time, and for many ages together.

(12) This Yorkshire picture I will draw to no more length, lest I be
condemned with the Sophister, for insisting in the praise of Hercules, when no
man opposed himself in his discommendation. York^shire delightful.
This Country of it self is so beautiful in her own natural colors, that
(without much help) she presents delightful varieties both to the fight and
other senses.

THE VVEST-RIDING OF YORKE-SHIRE. CHAPTER XL.
THE other Division, which is called the West Riding of Yorkshire, lying
toward the North-West, The bounds of the West Riding.
carries a great compass: On the North-side it borders upon part of the
North Riding: On the East upon part of the East Riding, and part of
Lincolnshire. The West Side is neighboured with part of Lanca-shire: The South
confined with Nottingham and part of Darby-shires.

The Air.
(2) The Air unto which this County is subject, is for the most part frigid
and cold, much subject to sharp winds, hard frosts, and other intemperate and
Winter-like dispositions of weather: in so much as the people of this Province
are inured to maintain a moderate and ordinary heat in their bodies, by an
extraordinary hardness of labor, and thereby become very healthful, and not
so often afflicted with infirmities, as others are that live more easily.

The S^yle.
(3) Although the Soil in the generality be not fruitful, as lying very high
and full of ragged rocks and swelling mountains, yet the sides thereof
stooping in some places do bear good grass, and the bottomes and valleys are
not altogether unfertill. That part that borders upon Lancashire is so
mountainous and waste, so unsightly and full of solitariness, that the
bordering neighbors call certain little Rivers that creep along this way, by
a contemptible name, Hell becks. That part again, where the River Ure cutteth
through the vale called Wends-dale, is very good ground, where great flocks of
sheep do pasture, and which, in some places, do naturally yield great plenty
of Lead-stones: In other places, where the hills are barren and bare of Corn
and Cattle, they make a recompense of those wants by the store of Copper,
Copper. Lead. Stone-Coale.
Lead, and Stone, or Pit-coale, with the which they are abundantly furnished.
That part where the River Swale running down Eastward, out of the West
Mountains (with a violent and swift stream) to unlade her self into the
River Ure, and passing along a large and open vale, which derives the name from
her, and is called Swale-dale, has a neighboring place full of Lead-Oare: and
for the lack of woods, Lead-Oare.
which does here much pinch the people, they are requited again with plenty
of grass, which this place yields them in great abundance. Thus has provident
nature for every discommoditie made amends with a contrariety, and furnished
the defects of one place with sufficient supply from another.

(4) The ancient Inhabitants known unto Ptolomey, and of whom there is other
mention made, Inhabitants.
as well in the general and other particular divisions of Yorke-shire, as in
the Countries likewise joining in proximitie unto them, were the Brigantes,
subdued by the Romans. And because the room best fitted for the City of
York, in this Chard I have placed it, whose description you may find in the
General; so the North Riding, spacious to contain the sites of the Towns,
Hull and Richmond, are therein charged: but wanting place there to relate of
both, I am constrained to speak of the latter here; desiring my Reader to
bear with these necessities. Richmond the chief Town of the North Riding,
seated upon Swale, seemed to have been fenced with a Wall, Richmond the c^iefe
town.
whose Gates yet stand in the midst of the Town, so that the Suburbs are
extended far without the same. It is indifferently populous and well
frequented, the people most employed in knitting of Stockings, wherewith even
the decrepit, and children, get their own livings.

The occasion of building it.
(5) Alan the first Earl thereof, distrusting the strength of Gilling (a Manor
house of his not far off, called by Bid Gethling) to withstand the violence
of the Danes and English, whom the Normans had despoiled of their inheritance,
built this Town, and gave it ^e name, calling it Richmond, as one would say,
The Rich Mount, which he fortified with a Wall and strong Castle set upon a
Rock: for Gilling ever since the time that Oswy King of Northumberland (being
there Guest-wise entertained) was murtherously made away, Oswy King of
Northumberland.
was more regarded in respect of Religion, then for any strength it had: in
expiation of which murder, the Monastery was founded and had in great account
among our Ancestors. The M^gi^tr^cie of Richmond.
This Town for the administration of government, has an Alderman yearly
chosen out of twelve Brethren, who is assisted by twenty four Burgesses, a
Recorder, four Chamberlaines, and two Sergeants at Mace. The position of this
place for Latitude is set in the degrees. 55.17. min. from the North Pole, The
graduation.
and for Longitude from the first West-point in the degr. 18. and 50 min.

(6) Things of raritie and worthy observation in this County, Matters
memorabl^.
are those hills near Richmond, where there is a Mine or Delfe of Copper, A
Copper Mine.
mentioned in a Charter of King Edward the fourth, having not as yet been
pierced into. Also, those Mountains, on the top whereof are found certain
stones much like unto Sea-winkles, Cockles on the top of the Mountains.
Cockles, and other Seafish; which if they be not the wonders of nature, yet
with Orosius (a Christian Historiographer) we may deem to be the undoubted
tokens of the general Deluge, that in Noah's time over-flowed the whole face of
the earth. Also the River Swale (spoken of before) which among the ancient
English was reputed a very sacred River, Swale River.
and celebrated with an universal glory, for that (the English-Saxons first
embracing Christianity) in one day about ten thousand men, besides a multitude
of women and children, were therein baptized unto Christ, by the hands of
Paulinus Archbishop of York: Paulinus Archbishop of York.
A holy spectacle, when out of one Rivers Channel so great a progeny sprung
up, for the celestial and heavenly City.

(7) Places in elder times had in great estimation with the Romans, Places of
Antiquity. Bayntbridge.
were Bayntbridge, where they in those days had a Garrison lying, the relics
whereof are there remaining. Bows, Bows or Levatrae.
in Antonines Itinerary called Lavatrae or Levatrae, (both by the account of
distance, and the site thereof, by the high street of the Romans) confirms the
antiquity by a large stone found in the Church, sometimes used for an
Altar-stone, with an inscription upon it to the honor of the Emperor Hadrian.
The first Cohort also of the Thracians lay here in Garrison, A Thracian Cohort
there.
whilst Virius Lupus ruled as Lieutenant General, and Propretor of Britain
under the Emperor Severus, as appears by inscriptions from hence translated
to Connington in Huntingtonshire. Here also in the declining estate of the
Roman Empire, the Band or Company of the Exploratores kept their Station,
under the dispose of the General of Britain, Exploratores band there.
as is witnessed by the Notice of Provinces. At Spittle on Stanemore is the
fragment of a Cross, Spittle.
by us called Rerecrosse, by Scots, Reicrosse, as one would say, The Kings
Cross, which Hector Boethius (a Scottish Writer) records to have been a
Meere-stone confining England and Scotland. And a little lower, upon the Romans
high Street, stood a little Fort of the Romans, built foure-square, which at
this day is called Maiden Castle. At Burgh (in times past called Bracchium) the
sixth Cohort of the Nervians lay in Garrison. Maiden Castle. Burgh.
And not long since, the Statue of Aurelius Commodus the Emperor was dug
up, which Statue of his may then seem to be erected, Aurelius Commodus Statue.
when he prizing himself more then a man, proceeded to that folly, that he
commanded himself to be called, The Roman Hercules, Jupiters Son. For he
was purtraied in the habit of Hercules, his right hand armed, holding a Club:
and this has appeared by a mangled inscription found lying under the same
Statue. Catarike and Catt-rrick-bridge (amongst the rest) bring in arguments of
their antiquity, Catarick.
as well by the situation thereof near unto the High-street-way which the
Romans made, as also by heaps of rubbish here and there dispersed, which show
very probable signs to confirm the same.

(8) Places of devotion, sequestered from other worldly affairs, Religious
Houses.
and consecrated to religious uses, were these: The Monastery built near
Richmond, Richmond.
the Abbey for Canons, erected at Coverham (now called Corham) in Coverdale,
and the Abbey of Cistertians, Cover^ham.
first founded at Fois, and after translated to Iervis or Iervalle, Fois.
which is watered by the River Ure. These flourished in the days of ignorance
and obscurity, Ignorance.
and were flockt unto in great Confluences, before the darkness of errors was
chased and driven away by the light of holy Faith: Faith.
but since the operation of Go^s Almighty grace has so wrought in the hearts
of the faithful, that they have not only spurned and trodden their Idols
under their feet, but have also made the very places (that were their
receptacles) to become the ruinous objects of superstition.

(9) This Division of Yorkshire, called the West Riding has been strengthened
with four strong Castles, Castles. Market towns.
is yet traded with twenty one Market-Townes, and Gods divine service is
celebrated in one hundred and four Parish-Churches, besides Chapels, whereof
there is an Alphabeticall enumeration in the Table following.

map of the West Riding of Yorkshire THE WEST RIDINGE OF YORKSHIRE with The
most famous and fair City YORK described. 1610


West Ri^ing, Hu^dreds.
1. Stancliffe Wap. 2. Claro Wapon. 3. Ansly Division. 4. Barks^on W^p. 5.
Skirack Wapon. 6. Morley Wapon. 7. Aggbrigge Wap. 8. Osgo^crosse Wap. 9.
S^rasforth Wap. 10. Staincrosse Wap.
A
Aber^orth, Skir. Acaster, Bark. Acaster Over. A^^^. Ackworth, Osgod.
Acro^tweeke, Stan. Addington, Stan. Adle, Skir. Adlingflet, Osg. Adwolton, Mor.
Adwicke upon Deune, Stras. Adwicke upon Straton, Stras. Aiketon, Ag. Akeham,
Anst. Akeham Grange, A^s^. Aldbulg, Clar. Alhallowegate, Clar. Allerton, Clar.
Allerton, Mor. Allerton by water, Skir. Allerton Chapel, Skir. Almonbrey, Ag.
Almoscliffe, Clar. Alcoftes, Ag. Alwoodley, Skir. Appleton, Bark.
Appeltreew^ke, Stan. Ardesley, Sta^. Ardesley East, Mor. Ardesley West, Mor.
Ardington, Skir. Are Flu. A^kendell, Clar. A^kley, Stras. Armeley, Mor.
Arme^horpe, Stras. Armin great, Bark. Arnecliffe, Stan. Armin little, Bark.
Aserley, Car. Aston, Stras. Ask^ham B^yan, Anst. Ask^ham Richard, Anst.
Askwith, Clar. As^e^by* Bark At cl^^^e, Stras. Aughton* Stras. Aughton*
Stras. Aukeswicke, Stan. Auste^feild, Stras. Austerly, Stras. Auston, Osgod.
Auston, Stras. Austroppe, Skir. Ausw^^k, Stan. Awdefeild, Clar. Awdebrough,
Clar. Awstweecke, Stan. Ayreton, Stan. Aze^ley C^ar. Azemon Derbie.
B
Baddesworth, Osgod. Badley, Skir. Baiden, Skir. Balby, Stras. Balnehall,
Osgod. Banck Newton, Stan. Barden Chase, Clar. Barden Tower, Stan. Bargh,
Stain. Barkesland, Mor. Barkston, Bark. Barley, Bark. Barmby Hall, Stain. Bamby
upon Dun, Stras. Barmbrough, Stras. Barnbrooke, Stan. Barinbow, Skir. Barnold
^weeke, Stan. Barton Chapel* Stain. BARNESLEY, Stain. Barseland, Mor.
B^shall, Stan. Bashall, Stan. Batings, Mor. Baitley, Mor. Barwi^ke, Skir.
BAWTRE, Stras. B^ylden, Skir. Beausley, Clar. Beacliffe, Stras. Bearley Hall,
Mor. Beel, Osgod. Beckwith, Clar. Beggermans, Stan. Beiston, Mor. Belton, Anst.
Bentham, Stan. Bentley, Stras. Be^ley. Bark. Berlunystrey, Clar. Bettrese Hill,
Bark. B^kerton, Anst. B^^burge, Anst. Ballam, Stras. Billingley, Stras. Bilton,
Anst. Bilton, Clar. Binglay, Skir. Beckon, Bark. Bestwith, Clar. Blackstone
edge, Ag. B^land Forest, Stan. Bolling, Mor. Bolton, Stan. Bolton, Mor.
Bodgate, Clar. Boulton, Stan. Boulton, Stras. Bourne. Bowland Forest, Stan.
Bowsterston, Stras. Bracthwell, Stras. Bradley, Mor. Bradley, Mor. Bradley
Chapel, Stan. Bradefeild, Stras. BRADFORD, Mor. Bradforth, Stan. Bradsay,
Skir. Branham, Bark. Branham Moore, Skir. Bramley, Stras. Bramley, Mor.
Bramope, Skir. Brampton, Stras. Brampton in Mo^^hing, Stras. Brampton Byerley,
Str. Bramwith, Stras. Brandley, Stan. Brasewell, Stan. Brawell, Stras. Brayton,
Bark. Brearton, Clar. B^etton, Stain. Bretton, Ag. Brexeton, Clar. Brierley,
Stain. Brierley Park, Stain. Brinham, Clar. Brightside, Stras. Brodholme,
Stras. Brodsworth, Stras. Bromchall, Stras. Brotherton, Bark. Broughton, Stan.
Bruncly^^e, Mor. Buerley, Clar. Buckdon, Stan. Burghwalles, Osgod. Burlay,
Skir. Brunsall, Stan. BVRROW BRIGDE, C. Button, ^ark. Button Stan Button
Grange, Stain. Button Leonard, Clar. Burstall, ^^r. Bushop Monckton, Clar.
Bushop Tho^nton, Clar. Bushopside, Clar. Bushopton, Clar. Bushopton, C^ar.
Bushopthorpe, Anst. Byerley North, Mor. By^gin, Bark. By^k^n, Bark. Byrom,
Bark.
C
Cadeby, St^as. Ca^ton, Clar. Calder Flu. Calton, Sta^. Calverley, Mor.
Cambill, Stain. Camleforth, Bark. Campfall, Osgod. Ca^e^ton. Stain. Carleton,
Ag. Carlton, Skir. Carlton, Stan. Carleton, Bark, Castleforth, Osgod.
Castleton, Clar. Castlye, Clar. Cattall, Clar. Cattall great, Clar. Catterton,
Anst. Caulder Flu. Cautley, Stras. Cawod Castle, Bark. Cawthorne, Stan. Cayley,
Skir. Chappleton, Skir. Chapel Hadlesay, Bar Chetehall, Ag. Chidsall, Mor.
Church Ferton, Bark. Clack Heatoa, Mor. Clapham, Stan. Clapham, Stan. Clayton,
Mor. Clayton, Stras. Clayton, Stain. Cly^ford, Bark. Clyfford, Bark. Clyfton,
Stras. Clyfton, Mor. Clyfton, Mor. Clyfton, Clar. Clint. Clar. Cluhero, Clar.
Collingham, Skir. Colny Chapel, Mor. Con^shton Cole, Stan. Conondly, Stan.
Conyston, Stan. Capgrave, Clar. Copley, Mor. Copley Hall, Mor. Corpenthorpe,
Anst. Coulton, Anst. County Stone, Stan. Cowhouse, Clar. Cowley, Stras.
Cowicke, Osgod. Cow^ling, Stan. Cow^horpe, Clar. Crakow, Stan. Carlton, Ag.
Crig^leston, Ag. Cr^^gaite, Clar. Crossand, Ag. Crossand South, Ag. Cros^on,
Ag. Croston, Chapel, Mor. Croston, Ag. Crumweth, Mor. Cudworth, Stain.
Cumberworth, Stain. Cumberworth, Ag. Cullinworth, Mor. Cunbrough, Stras.
Cusworth, Stras.
D
Dalton, Stras. Dalton, Ag. Da^strop, Stras. Darfeide, Stras. Da^^ey, Clar.
Darnall, Stras. Darubroke, Stain. Darrington, Osgod. Darton, Stain. Debdale,
Stan. Denby, Stras. Denby, Stain. Denby Ash Grange, Ag. Denby Hall, Stain.
Denholme Park, Mor. Denneley, Stras. Dent, Stan. Dent Flu. Denton Hall, Clar.
Dewestbury, Mor. South Dighton, Clar. North Dighton, Clar. Dodworth, Stain.
DONCASTER, Stras. Donkeswicke, Clar. Draughton, Stan. Draughton, Stan. Drax,
Bark. Drax, Stras. Drighlington, Mor. Dringhou^es, Anst. Dun Flu. Dunford over,
Clar. Nether Dunford, Clar. Dunningley, Mor. Dynington, Stras.
E
Eastbrand, Mor. Eastleforth, Osgod. Ecelfeild, Stras. Ecelfall, Stras.
Ecclesell, Mor. Ecope, Skir. Edlington, Stras. Egbrough, Osgod. Eland, Mor.
Eland Hall, Mor. Elinworth Chapel, Mo Elmesall North, Osgod. Elmesall South,
Osgod. Elstake, Stan. Elunley, Ag. Emley, Ag. Emley, Ag. Emsey, Stan. Emshaw,
Stan. Enbychworth, Stain. Eringdon, Mor. Eshton, Stan. Esington, Stan. Estby,
Stan. Estfeild, Mor. Ewoo^, Mor. Extrope, Stras.
F
Farneley, Mor. Farnley, Mor. Farnley, Ag. Farsley, Mor. Fayerbourne, Bark.
Fearnhill, Stan. ^elki^ke, Stain. Fellischiffe, Clar. Fenton South, Bark.
Fennicke Chapel, Stra. Ferntham, Clar. Ferneley, Clar. Ferry, Stras. Ferry
bridge, Osgod. Fetherston, Osgod. Flasbie, Clar. Flasbie, Stan. Flockton
Nether, Ag. Flockton Over, Ag. Fishlake, Stras. Firbeck, Stras. Fixbie, Mor.
Frickley, Stras. Fyinden, Mor. F^ke^by, Osgod. Follifer, Clar. Fontaines Abbey,
Clar. Foulby, Ag. Foyston, Clar. Furbeck, Stras. Fuyston, Clar.
G
Gaitforth, Bark. Gaerforth, Skir. Gargrave, Stan. Garshall, Stan. Ga^^e,
Stras. Gauhey, Clar. Gauthorpe, Clar. Gauthorpe, Skir. Ge^endall, Clar.
Giggleswicke, Stan. Gildenweiles, Stras. Gilki^ke, Stan. Girinigton, Stan.
Grismton, Stan. Gisborne, Stan. Gislay, Skir. Gole, Osgod. Golthrop, Stras.
Gomerfall, Mor. Goos^hurst, Bark. Go^pill Hill, Mor. Gouldall, Osgod.
Gouldesburgh, Clar. Gowthwate, Clar. Gledles, Stras. Glusborne, Stan. Glusoune,
Stan. Graston, Bark. Graston, Clar. Grantley, Clar. Gravesburgh, Stras. Great
Flu. Grasbrough, Stras. Green Woodley, Mor. Gretland, Mor. Grewelthorpe, Clar.
Grindleton, Stan. Grynleton, Stan. Grymston, Bark. Gunthwaite, Stain. Gurton
Salmon, Bark.
H
Hadlesai West, Bark. Hallam, Stras. HALLIFAX, Mor. Hallowes, Mor. Halton East,
Stan. Halton West, Stan. Halworth, Mor. Hamerton Grene, Clar. Hamledon, Bark.
Hampall, Stras. Hampesthwair, Clar. Handlethe, Stan. Harden, Mor. Hardwick,
Osgod. Hardington, Stras. Harrogatie, Clar. Harteshead, Mor. Harthill, Stras.
Hartlington, Stan. Harton in Craven, Stan. Harwood, Skir. Haselwood, Bark.
Hasley, Clar. Hateseile choose, Stras. Hatherker, Clar. Hauderby, Osgod.
Hauercrosse, Stain. Haugh, Stras. Haukesworth head, Str. Hausworth, Stras.
Hawden pa^ke, Skir. Hawksweeke, Stan. Hawkesworth, Skir. Hawethe, Mor. Hawton,
Stan. Hayalythe, Stan. Headingley, Skir. Hay Park, Clar. Headighe, Anst.
Headyghe, Anst. Heaton Clack, Mor. Heaton Chapel, Mor. Heaton in Brudfordale,
Mor. Heath, Ag. Hebeen, Stan. Hebeen Flu. Heck great, Osgod. Heck little,
Osgod. Heckmondwicke, Mor. Heley, Stras. Hellaby, Stras. Hellyfeild, Stan.
Helton, Stan. Hemsall, Osgod. Hemsworth, Osgod. Hepronstall, Mor. Herfeild,
Clar. Heshey, Clar. Hewick, Clar. Hickleton, Stras. Hickleton, Stras. Higham,
Bark. Hillom, Bark. Himshelfe, Stain. Hipeholme, Mor. Hodder Flu. Hoke, Osgod.
Hollinsuth, Ag. Homley, Ag. Honsingate, Clar. Hooton leuet, Stras. Hooton
pannell, Stras. Hooton Robert, Stras. Horbirry, Ag. Horton, Mor. Horton, Mor.
Horton on Rib, Stan. Horsserthe, Skir. Houghton, Osgod. ^ Houghton great,
Stras. Houghton little, Stras. Howdenhouse, Stras. Howdenparke, Skir. Howley
hall, Mor. Howne, Stain. Howtongill Chapel, Stain. Howland, Stras. Hoylland
high, Stain. Hoylland swain, Stain. Hubberton, Stan. Huboram, Stain.
Hudde^feild, Ag. Huddleston, Bark. Huddleston, Bark. Hunsener, Clar. Hunshelfe,
Stain. Hunsworth, Mor. Hunslet, Mor. Huerst, Bark. Hutherfeild, Mor. Hutton,
Anst. Hyndley, North, Stain. Hymsworthe, Stain.
I
Idle, Mor. Ilklay, Skir. Ingb^^^hworth, Stain. Ingerthorpe, Clar. Ingerthorpe,
Clar. Ingleborow hill, Stan. Ingleton, Stan. Ingleton, Stan. Ingmanthorp, Clar.
K
Kebeck Flu. Kebeck Flu. Ketreby, Clar. Keighley, Stan. Keling hall, Clar.
Kellington, Osgo^. Kerbrough, Stain. Kerstall, Skip. Kettlesdale spring, Stan.
Kettlesmed, Clar. Kettlewell, Stan. Keswick East, Skir. Kidhall, Skir.
Kildweeke, Stan. Kilholme, Stras. Killinghall, Clar. Kilmatshe, Stras. Kilnsey,
Stan. Kimberworth, Stras. Kinesdale spring, Stan. Kirsley, Osgod. Kipax, Skir.
Kirkbee, Stan. Kirkbye, Bark. Kirkbie, Clar. Kirbie madsyde, Clar. Kirkbie
overblowes, Cl. Kirkbie South, Osgod. Kirk burton, Ag. Kirk dighton, Clar.
Kirk heaton, Ag. Kirk hamerton, Clar. Kirklesse, Mor. Kirksandull, Stras.
Kittingley, Osgod. Knapton, Anst. KNARESBROVGH, C. Knaresburgh Forest, Cl.
Kridling park, Osgod.
L
Lacoke, Stan. Lady cross, Stain. Lambrekedike flu. Land North, Mor. Land
East, Mor. Langcliffe, Stan. Langfeild, Mor. Laughton, Stras. Langrike, Bar.
Langthwat, Stras. Langset, Stain. Langstrehdale chase, Stan. Langstrehdale
chase, Stan. Lareton, Cla. Leadhall, Bar. Leathley, Cla. Ledsam, Bar. Ledstone,
Bar. Ledston little, Bar. Ledston little, Skir. LEEDS, Skir. Leeds Kirkgait,
Skir. Leeds mamudding, Skir. Leighton in the morning. Stras. Lepton, Ag.
Letwell, Stras. Letwell, Stras. Leuenthorpe, Mor. Leuer^all, Stras. Leuersedge,
Mor. Lightcliffe chapel, M Lindley, Clar. Linton, Clar. Lockwood, Ag.
Lodghouse, Cla. Ludderton, Bar. Luddington, Mor. Lumby, Bar. Luone flu.
Lyndholme, Stras. Lynton, Stan. Lytton, Stan.
M
Maleby, Stras. Malewry, Cla. Maltby, Stras. Maltham, Stan. Malwater, Stan.
Markingfeild, Cla. Markington, Cla. Maningham, Mor. Mart, Stras. Marsden, Ag.
Marshe land, Osgod. Marshe ditch, Osgod. Marton, Bar. Marton, Cla. Marton East,
Stan. Marton West, Stan. S. Mary's, Bar. Maulam, Stan. Mawsirs, Stan. Medley,
Ag. Melton high, Stras. Melton West, Stras. Meltham, Ag. Menston, Skir.
Menwith, Cla. Melton upon mount, Str. Meathley, Ag. Mexbrough, Stras. Michlehaw
hill, Cla. Micklefeild, Bar. Middle headsley, Bar. Middlesmer, Cla. Middleton,
Cla. Middleton, Mor. Middlethorpe, Aust. Milforth North, Bar. Milforth South,
Bar. Minskippe, Cla. Mitton, Stan. Mere^unkton, C^a. Merehouse, Stras. Moreton,
Skir. Morley, Mor. Morton, Skir. Mulwith, Cla. Munckbreton, Stain.
Munckfriston, Bar. Myddop, Stan. Mydgley, Mor. Mydhopchap, Stras. Mynski^, Cla.
My^feild, Mor. Myssise, Cla. Mytton, Stan.
N
Nap^ay, Stan. Ne^feild, Cla Netherdale, Cla. Netherton, Ag. Newbiggin, Skir.
Newbiggen, Stan. Newbre, Cla. Newhall, Stras. Newhall, Stan. Newhall, Cla. New
Park, Ag. Newland, Bar. Newland, Ag. Newthorpe, Bar. Newthorpe, Bar.
Newthoase, Cla. Newsholme, Stan. Newsome, Stan. Newton, Stan. Newton, Stan.
Newton hall, Cla. Newton Kin, Bar. Nonnewicke, Cla. Nonmonekton, Cla. Notton,
Stain. Nostall, Osgod. Nydd, Cla. Nid Flu. North land, Mor. Normanton, Ag.
Notton, Osgod. Nun Apleton, Bar.
O
Okenshaw, Mor. Okeworth, Stan. Old Town, Mor. Ollerton, Bar. Olton, Mor.
Osendike, Bar. Osset, Ag. Osset, Ag. OTLAY, Skir. Otterburne, Stan. Ovendon,
Mor. Oulcoten, Stan. Ouse Flud, Cla. Outwood, Bar. Owletton, Stras. Owstom
North, Mor. Owstum South, Mor. Outwood, Ag. Oxnop, Mor. Oxspringe, Stain.
Oxton, Anst.
P
Padside, Cla. Pannall, Cla. Parlington, Skir. Patley bridge, Cla. Paythorne,
Stan. Pennygent-hill, Stan. Pennyston, Stain. Pigburne, Stras. Pinnow hill,
Stan. Plompton, Cla. Pollington, Osgod. PONTEFRACT, Osgod. Poppleton Nether,
Cla Poppleton Over, Cla. Posthouse, Ag. Potter Newton, Skir. Powle, Skir.
Preston, Osgod. Preston long, Stan. Pudley, Mor. Purston, Skir.
Q
Quarnbie, Ag. Quick, Ag.
R
Randon Park, Stan. Ramsgill, Cla. Rams-mill, Stan. Ramfeild, Stras.
Rastricke, Mor. Rather Flu. Ranucliffe, Osgod. Rawden, Skir. Rawmarsh, Stras.
Rawthmell, Stan. Redhouses, Cla. Redness, Osgod. Remmogton, Stan. Ribble Flu.
Stain. Ribton hall, Cla. Riddleston, Skir. Rigton, Skir. Rigton, Cla. Rilston,
Stan. Ripax, Cla. RIPPON, Cla. Riponden, Mor. Roche, Stras. Rocley, Stain.
Rocliffe, Cla. Rodeshall, Mor. Rondhay, Skir. Rosington, Stras. ROTHERHAM,
Stras. Rothwell, Mor. Rosset, Cla. Roiston, Stain. Rufford, Anst. Rush Park,
Bar. Rushforth, Skir. Rybstone great, Cla. Rybstone little, Cla. Ryle, Stain.
RYPLEY, Cla. Ryshworth, Mor. Ryther, Bar.
S
Sandall, Stras. Sandall, Ag. Sandall, Stras. Sandbecke, Stras. Saddleworth,
Ag. Sapeden, Mor. Sawley, Cla. Sawlle, Stan. Saxton, Bar. Scalnie Park, Bar.
Scharthingwell, Bar. Scausbie, Stras. Scawsbie Stras. Scricole, Mor. Scothorpe,
Stan. Scotten, Cla. Scryven, Cla. Seacrofte, Skir. Sedber, Stan. SELBYE. Bar.
SETTLE, Stan. Shadwell, (...) Sharleston, Ag. Sharo, Cla. Sharphill, Bar.
Shafton, Stain. Sheaffeild Manner, Str. Sheapley, A^. SHEFFEILD, Stras.
Sheffeild Manor, Stra. Shelburgh, Osgod. Shelfe, Mor. Shellen, Ag. Shelle, Ag.
SHERHORN, Bar. Sherston, Ag. Shibden, Mor. Shipley, Mor. Shitlington, Ag.
Sicklinghall, Cla. Silsden, Stan. Skale Park, Stan. Skelgaite, Cla. Skeleton,
Cla. SKIPTON, Stan. Skircotes, Mor. Sladbone, Stan. Slaghwaite, Ag. Slandburne,
Stain. Slemingforth, Cla. Smavis, Bar. Smeton, Osgod. SNATHE, Osgod. Snidale,
Ag. Sootill, Mor. Sowerby, Mor. Sowerby bridge, Mor. Sowland, Mor. Spoforth,
Cla Spoforth Park, Cla. Spiritbrough, Stras. Sprodbrug, Stras. Spruston, Skir.
Staineland, Mor. Stainton, Stras. Stamford, Stras. Stame, Cla. Stanfeild,
Stras. Stanley, Ag. Stanley, Ag. Staneley, Cla. Stanley North, Cla. Stane land,
Mor. Stan^feild, Mor. Stanfeild, Mor. Staneley, Cla. Staynebeck nether, Cla.
Staynebeck upper, Cla. Staynebet hall, Stain. Staineborne, Cla. Staynebrough,
Stain. Stayneley, Cla. Stayneley North, Cla. Stayneforth, Stras. Stayneforth,
Stan. Staynyngton, Stras. Stapleton, Osgod. Starhoton, Stan. Steton, Stan.
Stetonhull, Anst. Stokell, Cla. Stocketle, Cla. Stubbes, Stras. Stubham, Cla.
Studley, Cla. Studeley great, Cla. Streeton, stan. Streeton hall, Anst.
Streetethorpe, stras. Sturton, stan. Stutton, Bar. Suthill, Mor. Sutton, Bar.
Sutton, stan. Swilington, skir. Swinden, stan. Swinefleete, Osgod. Swinton,
stras. Sykehouse Chapel, stras. Synnenthwate, Anst. Syntton, stras.
Syxforthe, Cla. Sylxton, stain.
T
Tadcaster, Bar. Tankersley, stan. Tawne, Ag. Temple Newson, skir. Terne, stan.
Thorn, stras. Thorn, stras. Thornecrosse, Cla. Thornecliffe, stras.
Thornehill, Ag. Thorn, stras. Thorn mere, stras. Thorner, skir. Thornthwate,
Cla. Thornton, Mor. Thornton, stan. Thornton in Craven, stan. Thornton in
Lonsdale, stan. Thorpe, Cla. Thorpe, Cla. Thorpe, Bar. Thorpe, stras. Thorpe on
the Mount, Mor. Thorporch, Anst. Thorpsalve, stras. Threshfeild, stan.
Thoborgh, stras. Thropsalvyn, stras. Thurgoland, stain. Thurlston, stain.
Thurnsco, Stras. Thurnsco, stras. Thursland, Ag. Thurstonland, Ag. Tinglaw,
Mor. Tockwith, Anst. Todwicke, stras. Tongue, Mor. Topcliffe, Mor. Towton, Bar.
Towton, Bar. Treton, stras. Tristrop, stras. Turnbrigdike Flu. Tweselton, stan.
Tyckhill, stras. Tylen, stras. Tymble great, Cla. Tymble little, Cla. Tynslaw,
stras.
V
Vghtershaw, stan. Vllay, stras. Vpton, Osgo^. V^bane great, Cla. V^bane
little, Cla. Vskell, Bar.
W
Waddesley bridge, stras. Waddington, stan. Waddington, stan. Wadworth, stras.
Wadworth, stras. Wadsworth, Mor. Wakefeild kirkegate, Ag. Wakefeild Northgate,
Ag. WAKEFEILD Westgate, A Waldinwells, stras. Wadkingham, Cla. Wales, stras.
Walls, stras. Wallothwaite, Cla. Walton, Ag. Walton, Anst. Walton head, Cla.
Warley, Mor. Warmfeild, Ag. Warmsworth, stras. Warnsworth, stras. Warsbrough,
stain. Water fulton, Osg. Waterton hall, Ag. Watersham, skir. Wath upon dome,
stras. Washbroke Flu. Washforth, Cla. Weardlay, skir. Weeton, Cla. Went Flu.
Wenthrig, Osgod. Wentworth, stras. Westbury, stras. West Hall, Cla. West
Houses, Cla. Westerton, Mor. Westgaite, Cla. WETHERBIN, Cla. Weston, Cla.
Wharse Flu. Wharse Flu. Wharingbye, Mor. Wharledale, Cla. Wharnside hill, stan.
Wheatlye, stras. Wheatley, stras. Whelpston Hil^, stan. Whitcliffe, Cla.
Whitgift, Osgod. Whit^ey Hal, Ag. Whitley, Ag. Whitwood, Ag. Whiston, stras.
Whixley, Cla. Whitley, Osgod, Wibsey, Mor. Wicke, Mor. Wicke, Mor. Wickesley,
Cla. Wickensley, stras. Widhophead, Mor. Widkirke, skir. Wigill, Anst.
Wigglesworth, stan. Wigglesworth, stan. Wigheweseh, stras. Wigton, skir.
Wikeley, stras. Wilsthorpe, Anst. Wingby, Osgod. Winterborne, stan. Winterset,
stain. Wistow, Bar. Woodham, Cla. Wo^ry stain. Wombroel, stras. Womersley,
Osgod. Woodall, Cla. Woadhouse, stras. Woodhouse, stras. Woodsonne, Hall, Ag.
Woodsets, stras. Workeley, Mor. Wooroll, stras. Worspur, stain. Wo^tley, stain.
Wragby, Osgod. Wrenthorpe, Ag. Wyseda^e.
Y
Yeadon, skir. Yokenthwait, stan.
THese parts of the division of Yorkshire, and the East and North Riding, The
bounds of the North and East-Ridings.
are stretched out Eastward, even to the Spurn-head, and on the North coast
are separated from the Bishopric of Durham, and with the Sea: has Westmorland
on the West Humber on the South, and the German Sea upon the East, being
separated each from other by the River Derwent, running betwixt them with a
long winding course.

The Air.
(2) The air is subtle and piercing, and not inclined naturally to contagious
infections, which causes the people to live long and healthfully, and are not
so subject to Agues, Fluxes, or other imperfections as those Countries be, that
are more troubled with mists, or foggie vapors.

The Soil and other Commodities.
(3) The soil is generally indifferently fruitful; for though some part be
craggie, mountainous, and full of hills, yet some others exceeding good for
the gifts of Nature in her delightsome varieties, as of Corn, Cattle, and
Pasturage; with veins of Metal, and Iron, besides an Alum earth of sundry
colors, out of which some have lately begun to try very good Alum and
Copperasse. And for fish, H^rrings.
the Hollanders and Zelanders do raise unto themselves great profit upon this
coast, having long since obtained license, which they keep still by an ancient
custom: for the Englishmen granting leave unto others, reserved the honor to
themselves, which would be (no doubt) far the greater, if they made gain of
their own labors.

Kingstone upon Hull.
(4) Places for trade and venting forth of her commodities are many, yet none of
such convenience as Kingstone upon Hull: which notwithstanding, cannot fetch
her beginning from any great antiquity, being before time called Wike. King
Edward the first built this Town, making a a Haven, and granting diverse
liberties to the Burgesses; so that it is risen to great state, both for
stately buildings, and strong Block-houses for Ships, well furnished, and store
of Merchants, and is now become the most famous Town of that Country; whose
greatest riches is ascribed to the gainful trade they have by Iland-fish,
dried and hardened, Stock Fish.
commonly called Stock Fish. This Town is governed by a Mayor, (who has the
sword of State carried before him) twelve Aldermen, that in their Assemblies
go clad in Scarlet, one Sheriff, a Water-bailiffe, a Sword Bearer, a
Chamberlain, a Recorder, a Towne-clerke, and six Sergeants at Mace. Whose
graduation according as the Mathematickes have observed, is for Longitude 20
degrees and 30. scruples, and for Latitude 54. degrees and 28. scruples.

Beverly a Sanctuary.
(5) Beverley in honor of S. John Archbishop of York, by King Athelstane
obtained many privileges, whereof a Sanctuary was one, wherein Bankerouts and
men suspected of any capital crime, might be safe and free from danger of Law.
This is memorable, that the River from Hull was cut by the Townsmen,
sufficient to carry Boats and Barges.

Places where are stones found like Serpents.
(6) Places of memorable note, are Whitby, where are found certain stones
fashioned like Serpents, folded and wrapp^d round in a wreath, even the very
pastimes of Nature, who when she is wearied (as it were) with serious works,
sometimes forgeth and shapeth things by way of sport and recreation: so that by
the credulous they are thought to have been Serpents, which a coat or crust
of stones had now covered all over, and by the prayers of Saint Hilda turned to
stones. And also there are certain fields here adjoining, where Geese flying
over, fall down suddenly to the ground, Where Geese fall.
to the great admiration of all men. But such as are not given to superstitious
credulity, may attribute this unto a secret propriety of this ground, and a
hidden dissent betwixt this soil and these Geese, as the like is between
Wolves and the Squilla roots. At Skengrave (a little village) some seventie
years since, was caught a fish called a Seaman, Where a Seaman was c^ught.
that for certain days together fed on raw fishes, but espying his
opportunity, escaped again into his watery element. At Hunt-Cliffe are found
stones of a yellowish, others of a reddish color, of a certain salt matter,
which by their smell and taste make show of Copperasse, Nitre, and Brimstone.
Also great store of Marquesites, in color resembling brass.

Ounsbury hill, Water for diseased eyes.
besides a spring of medicinable waters for the eyes, is a prognostication unto
her neighbors; whose head being covered with a cloudy cap, presageth some
tempestuous storms or showers to follow. So does another place near Moulgrave
Castle, Black Amber or Jette.
where is found black Amber or Iette: some take it to be Gagates, in old time
a Gemme, and precious stone of great estimation. At Huntly Nabo, are stones
found at the roots of certain rocks, of diverse bigness, Round stones with
stone-Serpents in them.
so artificially shaped round by Nature, in manner of a Globe, as if they had
been made by the Turners hand. In which (if you break them) are found stony
Serpents, enwrapped round like a wreath, but most of them headless.

(7) Matters for martial note, The Battle of Battlebridge.
are the Battles fought at Battlebridge (of which it takes the name) where
Harald King of England had a great Victory against the Danes, who with a fleet
of two hundred sail, grievously annoyed the I Will of Britain: where Harald the
King of Norway was slain, The Battle of the Standard. David King of Scots.
and Harald of England, besides the Honor of the field, found a great mass of
Gold. Also the Battle, commonly called, the Battle of Standard; in which
David King of Scots was put to flight, and the English made a great slaughter
of his people.

At Thruske, Mowbray.
Roger Mowbray out of his strong Castle displayed his banner, and called the
King of Scots to the overthrow of his own native Country, even at that time
when King Henry the second had (as it were) rashly digd his own grave, King
Henry the second.
by investing his son King in equal authority with himself. But his
rebellion was, in the end, quenched with blood, and the Castle quite
dismantled, so that beside a ditch and rampire, there is no sign or show left
of a Castle.

(8) Places of Piety erected in these parts, Religious houses. Dunsley.
Gisburgh. Kirkham. Deirwa^d.
were the Abbey of Saint Hilda, built near Dunesly. The fair and rich Abbey
of Gisburgh, built about the year of our Salvation 1110. The Priory of Chanons
founded at Kirkham. The Monastery near unto Beverley, which Beda names
Derwaud. The Monastery of Saint Michael by Hull. The two Abbeys of Newborough
and Biland. The abbey of Meaux, and another not far from Cottingham, which
the founder purposely built for the Monks of the Cluniacke Order, that he
might be released of the Vow he had made to visit Jerusalem: all of them
resorted unto by continual concourse of Pilgrims, to make their adorations in
those days of Ignorance: but since the true God has unmasked the errors of
those times by the truth of his Word, the same places are worthily become the
subjects of his just displeasure, for worshipping Images, and false tutelar
Gods, instead of the true and everliving Savior.

(9) These parts and divisions of Yorkshire, Market-Townes.
consisting upon the North and East-ridings, contain twenty five Market-Townes
for buying and selling, eleven Castles for strength and fortification, and 459.
Parishes for Gods divine worship, under which be very many Chapels, for number
of Inhabitants, equal to very great Parishes.

An Alphabeticall Table of all the Towns, Rivers, and memorable places
mentioned in the North and East Riding of Yorkshire.
North Riding Hundreds.
1 Gillingwest wap. 2 Gillingeast wap. 3 Allerton Shire. 4 Langbargh. Lib. 5
Whitbystrand Li. 6 Pickering Wap. 7 Rydall Wapen. 8 Bulmar wapen. 6 Burdforth
wapen. 10 Hallikeld wapen. 11 Hangeast wapen. 12 Hangwest wapen.
East Riding Hundreds.
1 Buccrosse Wapen. 2 Dickering Wapen. 3 Holdernes Wapen. 4 Ouse and Derwent
Wapen. 5 Howd^us^er Wap. Harthil. W.
Wilton Devi. Baynton Devi. Holm^ Devi. Hunsley Devi.

A
Abbane Chapel, Di^ Acklam, Lan. Acklam, Buc. Aglethorp, Hangw. Anderby
aniers, Hangeast. Anderby Whe^^how Hal. Aismby, Hall^. Aiskew, Hangeast.
Aiskugge, Hangwest. Atton, Dic. Aldbrough, Hangeas^. Aldby, Buc. Aldwarke,
Bulm. Allerthorpe, Halli. Allerthorpe Wilt. Alleston, Pick. ALLERTON North, Al.
Alune, Bulme. Anderby Steeple, Gillinge. Amotherby, Rydal. Ampleforth, Burdf.
Ampleforth, Rydal. Ape^side, Hangwest. Applegarth, For^eit. Gillw. Applegarth,
Man^k. Gillw. Appleton, Rydal. Appleton, Rydal. Appleton, Lan. Appleton East,
Hang Appleton West, Hangeast A^den, Burdf. A^denside, Burdf. A^ke flu.
Arkengarth Dade, Gillw. Arncliff, Burdf. Arngill, Gillingwest. Armantwhaite,
Lan. Auran, H^ld. Arsham, Lan. Ask, Gillingwest. Asselby, Howd. Atwick, H^ld.
Auderby, Hangeast. Auderby, Hangeast. Aughton, H^lm. Auldburge, Gillingw.
Aumoad Park, Burdf. Awlb^ough, Hold. Awthorne, Hangwest. Ayska^th, Hangwest.
Ayslaby, Pick. Aysleybye, Lan. Ayton great, Lan. Ayton little, Lan.
B
Babthorpe, Derwent. Bagby, Burdf. Baldesby, Halli. Baindridge, Hangw. Ban^y
flu. Barden* Hangwest. Barforth, Gillingw. Barhouse, Huns. Ba^leby, Derwent.
Barmby, Howd. Barmeston, Hold. Barmingham, Gillinw Barnabre, Lan. Barnloye,
Wilt. Barnsdale Chap. Rid. Barton, Hal^i. Barton, Bulm. Barton, Gillingeast.
Barton in the street. Ryd. Barton upon Yor. Hang. Barthorpe, Bucc. Barwick,
Lan. Basbie, Lan. Battersbie, Lan. Bauder, flu. Bauder Dale, Gilling.
Balderskarth Hill, Gillinwest. Bargh little, Rydal. Bargh great, Rydal.
Bayesdale, Lan. Baiton, Baint. Bealhi, Holm. BEDALL, Hangeast Belbie, Howd.
Bellathy, Hangwest. Bellasisse, Howd. Bently, H^^s. Bempton, Dic. Bemingbrough,
B^l. Bemingham, Hold. Bery Chapel, Bucc. Bessomby, Dic. Bessewick, Baint.
BEVERLEY, Huns. Bewdlam, Rydal. Bew^am, Hold. Biland old, Burdf. Biland Abbey,
Burdf. Bilsdale, Rydal. Bilsealed, Burdf. Bilton, Hold. Bird^all, Buck.
Birkbie, Aller. Birkdale, Hangw. Blackholm. Black^ost, Howd. Blayde^, Hangw.
Blaker More, Whit. Blamby Park, Pick. Bolton, Gillingwest. Bolton, Wilt.
Bolton, Gillingwest. Barnell Howd. Booth, Howd. Bo^robie Burdf. Botrowbie,
Aller. Botrowbie, Lan. Bossalt, Bulm. Boultbie, Burdf. Boulton East, Hangw.
Boulton West, Hangw. Bourne, Ho^me. Bonwick, Hold. Bows, Gillingwest. Boynton,
Dic. Boythorpe, Dic. Bracken, Baynt. Brakenborgh, Burdf. Brackenholm, Derw.
Bradley, Hangw. Brickhall, Hang. Bransdale, Rydal. B^^nesbutton, Hold.
Brankingham, Huns. Branthingham, How. map of the North and East Riding of
Yorkshire THE NORTH AND EAST RIDINS OF YORKSHIRE
Bransby, Bulm^r. Bra^serton, ^ulm^r. Brawby, Rydall. Brawi^h, Aller.
BRIDLINGTON, D Bridlington key, Dic. Brighton, Holm. Brigham, Dic. Brigwell,
Gillingw. Briscoe, East, Gillinw* Briscoe, west Gillinw. Brittinby,
Gillingeast. Bromefleete, Huns. Brompton, Allerton. Brompton, Dic. Brompton,
Pick. Brompto^ upon Swayle Gillinwest. Brotton, L^ngh. Brough, Hold. Broughton,
Rydal. Broughto^ great, La^ Br^xay, Whit. Bubwith, Holm. Buckton, Dic.
B^dickepark, Lang. Bugthorpe, Bucc. Bulmer, Bulm. Burdforth, Burdf. Burdghall,
hangeast. Bu^gh, Hu^. Burnby, Wilton. Burnby, Holm. Bu^nholne, Holm. Bu^nholm
south, Hol Burmston, Halli. Burnton, Gillinge. Burrell, Hangeast. Bu^robe,
Alle^. Button, Gillinge. Button, Hangw. Button, Hangeast. Button Agnes, Dic.
Button Bishops, Hun Button Constable Hangwest Button Constabl Hol. Button
Fleming, Dic. Button North, Dic. Button Piesly, Hold. Burstalgarth, Hold.
Burstwick, Hold. Burstwick, Hold. Bu^bie, Langh. Bushopdale, Hangw.
Buttercramb. Bull. Butterside, Hangw. Butterswick, Rydal. Butterwick, Dic.
Byford, H^ld. Byland Abbey, Burd. By^^ington, Dic.
C
Camerton, Hold. Camp, Dic. Capilbroke, Hangw. Carlton, Hold. Carleton, Rydal.
Carleton, Burdf. Carleton, Burdf. Carleton, Lang. Carleton, Hangw. Carnaby,
Dic. Carpe^bit^, Hangw. Carthorpe, Halli. Castleton, Lang. Ca^^osse, Hold.
Caton, Pick. Catte^ick, Hangeast. Cattewicket, Hangw. Catton, Wilton. Catton,
Burdf. Catwick, Hold. Cave south, Huns. Cave south, Huns. Cavet-house, Hangw.
Cavil, Howd. Cauth^rne, Pick. Cauthorpe, Halli. Cauton, Rydal. Cawbu^gh, Hangw.
Cawdwell, Gillingw. Cawton, Rydal. Caythorpe, Di^. Caynham, Hold. Cherrie
button, Hun. Claxton, Bull. Cleasbie, Gillingw. Cleveland, Lang^argh. Cliffe,
Gillingw. Cliffe, Der^ont. Cliffe north, Huns. Cliffe south, Huns. Clifton,
Hangeast. Clouton, Pick. Clowbeck, Gillinge. Clifton, ^ul. Codbeck flu. Codbeck
flu. Coldon, Hold. Collingham, Huns. Colton, Rydal. Coltow flu. Co^isthorpe,
Bull. Conystone, Hold. Coolam, Buc. Coram, Han^west. Cornebrough, B^l.
Corcliffe, Aller. Cotham, Bucc. Cotham east, Lang. Cotham west, Lang.
Co^ehouse, Pick. Cothenstone, G^ll^w. Cotnes, Howd. Cottingham, Huns.
Cotinwith, Derwont. Cottingwith, East* H^lme. Cotton* Di^. Couckwold, Burdf.
Coverham, Hangw. Coverwood, Hangw. Coulsbie, Burdf. Coudney flu. Coundall
Halli. Cowborn^, Hangeast. Cowlby, Langli. Cow^by, Hangeast. Cow^ing, Hangeast.
Cowton East, Gill^. Cowton North, Gil.^. Cowton South, Gil^^. Crag^, Gillingw.
Craike Castle, Bull. Crakall, Hangeast. Crakeall, Burd. Crakpot, Hangwest.
Crambnie, Bull. Crawthorn, Lang^. Croome, Bucc. Cropton, Pick. Croftbridge,
Gillinge Crowmond Abbey, L^ Cudderston, Gillingw Cundall, Halli. Cunsby, Lang^.
D
Dailetown, Burd. Dalton, Burd. Dalton^, Gillingw. Dalton north, Bay^. Dalton
south, Hu^s. Dalto^ upon rease, gilw Danby, Hangw. Danby, Lang^. Danby Pa^k,
Langh. Danby upon wi^ke, Gillin East. Danthorpe, Hold. Dawby, Bull. Dawton,
Gillingeast. Dope Dale, Gillingw. Derwent flu. Dighton, All^r. Dighton,
D^rwent. Dinsde^^, All^r. Disserth, Halli. Donnington, Derw. Dow flu. Drewton,
Hu^s. Dri^feild great, Bayn. Dri^^eild little, Bayn. Dringod, Hold. Dromanby,
Lang^. Dripo^^e, Hold. Duffeild north, Derw. Duffeild south, Derw. Duggleby,
Bucc. Dunholme, Hangw. Dunnington, Hold. Dunsley over, Aller. Dunsloe, Whisby.
E
Easbie, Gillingwest. Easebie, Langb. Eastborn, Baynton. Easington, Hold.
Easington, Langb. Easingwould, B^^. Eastnewton, Hold. Eastnes West, Rydal.
Easton, Dic. Eastrington, Howd. Eastrope, Holm. Eaton, Wilton. Ebberstone,
Pick. Eckerbie, Hangeast. Eddlethorpe, Bucc. Edstone, Rydal. Egleton,
Gillingwest. Egton, Langb. Elemere, Burd. Ellarton, Hangwest. Ellerbeck, Aller.
Ellerborne, Pick. Ellerbie, Hold. Ellerbye, Langb. Ellerker, Howd. Ellerton,
Gillinge. Ellerton, Hangeast. Ellerton, Holm. Ellington, Hangeast.
Ellingstring, Hang. Elloughton, Huns. Elsternwicke, Hold. Elton, Huns.
Elvington, Derwent. Emmotland, Hold. Emswell, Baynton. Epelby, Gillingw.
Er^holme, Gillinge. Ereswick, Bull. E^k, Hold. Eskdaleside, Whit. Eskridge,
Derwent. Estone, Dic. Eston* Langb. Etherdwick, Hold. Evelot, Hangw. Eventon,
Pick. Evetingham, Holm. Eve^ly, W^it. Everthorpe, Huns. Exilbie, Halli.
F
Faceby, Langb. Fanckfosse, Wilton. Farlington, ^ul. Fa^manby, Pick.
Farl^ngton, Bull. Farmanby, Pick. Farndale, Rydal. Fawdington, Burd. Fax^^e^te,
Huns. Fearby, Hangeast. Feildham, Gillingw. Felixkirke, Burd. Fencottes,
Hangeast. Feriby, Huns. Filingdales, Whit. Finber, Bucc. Fingall, Hangw.
Finghall, Hangeast. Firby, Hangeast. Firby, Bucc. Fitling, Hold. Fladme^e,
Rydal. Flamborough head, Dic. Flawith, Bull. Flaxfleete, Howd. Flaxton, Bull.
Flaxton little, Bull. Flaymbrough, Dic. Fletcham, Hangeast. Flinton, Hold.
F^ixton, Dic. Flottenby, Dic. Fogathorpe, Holm. Fordon, Dic. Forset, Gillingw.
Fosham, Hold. Fosse flu. Fosse flu. Foston, Dic. Fosse, Bull. Foulebridge, Pick.
Foul sutton, Derw. Fowlkton, Dic. Foxholes, Dic. Foxton, Aller. Fraythorpe,
Dic. Frantenby, Pick. Freburgh hills, Lang. Fremington, Gilling^ Freswick, Bull.
Fridethorpe, Bucc. Fryton, Rydal. Fr^oppe hill, Rydal. Frodingham, Hold.
Frodingham North, holdernes. Fulsi^th, gate, Derw. Fu^fu^th water, Derw.
Fulsutton, Wilton. Futgarth, ^old. Fy^ey, Dic. Fyling hall, Wilt. Fysholm, Dic.
G
Gaintidby, Halli. Gales, Gillingw. Gauthorpe, Bull. Ganstead, hold. Ganton,
Dic. Gariston, Hangw. Gartham, huns. Garton, hold. Garton, Dic. Gate hamsley,
Bull. Gaut^es so^rest, Bull. Gembling, Dic. Gervis Abbey, hangw. Gilbe^dich, how.
Gi^lamere, Rydal. Gilling, Gillingw. Gilling Castle, Rydal Gilmanby, Gillingw.
Gi^lington, Gillingw. Girsbie, Aller. GISBROVGH, Lang G^aresdale Chapel, Langb
Golton, Lang. Goodale house, hold. Goodmanham, holm. Gomerset, hangw. Gotelard,
Pick. Govidale great, wilt. Goulesby, Burd. Gowethorpe, wilton. Goxhell, hold.
Grang, Bull. Gransmere, Dic. Grastwith, Burd. Graton, Baynton. Greenhowe, Langb.
Greta flu. Greatabridge, Gillw Grubthorpe, holm. Grimstone, Derwent.
Grimestone, hold. Grimstone north, buc Grinton, Hangwest. Gristroope, Pic.
Grownond Ab, Lang Gryndall, Dic. Gunby, holm.
H
Habton great, Rydal. Habton little, Rydal. Hackforth, hangeast. Hacknes, Wilt.
Hallykell, Aller. Hallhaf* hold. Handal Abbey, Lang. Hanxwel east, hangw.
Hanwel west, hangw. Happeswel, hangw. Harcaside, Hangw. Hardraw, Hangw. Harford
flu. Harlesay east, Burd. Harlesay west, Aller Harlethorpe, holm. Harneby,
hang. Haron, Rydell. Harpham, Dic. Harsewel, Holm. Hart^ord, Gilling. Harton,
Bull. Haward dale, Whit. Hartw^od dale flu. Hatefeild, hold. Hatfeild little,
hold. Haton, Bulm. Haton, Holm. Haulgat, Gillingw. Hawnaby, Gilling. Hawneby,
Burd. Habie, Bull. Haystroppe, Dic. HEADON, hold. Headey park, hang Healy,
Hangeast. Healy, Hangwest. Heaton, Aller. Helb^cke lands, Hangwest HELMELEY.
Helmsley nether, Bull. Helmsley over, Bull. Helperby, bull. Helperby, Burds.
Helperthorpe, Buc. Helw^th, Gillingwest. Hemsley gate, Bull. Hemlington, Lang.
Hemmingburgh, Der. Hemsley, Rydal. Hermitage, Huns. Heslington, Derwent.
Hessel, huns. Hesselskugh ash, hun. Hestetton cast, Buc. Hestetton west, Buc.
Hewby, Bull. Hewicke, Halli. Hewton, Bull. Hewworth, bull. Hilderskil Castle, Bull.
Hilton, Lang. Hiltour, Bull Hilton, hangeast. Hilston, hold. Hinderthwarts,
Gillw. Hintington, (...). Hinton, Bayn. Hipswel, hang. Hodgebeeke flu. Holgate
flu. Holgrave, Aller. Hollam, Hold. Holme, Aller. Holme, Rydal. Holme in
Spaldingmore, hol. Holme upon Would, Bayn. Hollomill Cross, Hangw Holtby,
Hangeast. Holtby, Bull. Holwich, Gillingw. Holwich crag, Gillingw. Hompton,
Hold. Hope, Gilling. Hophouse, Hangw. Hornebie, Aller. Hornby, Hang. Hornsey,
Hold. Hornsey beck, hold. Hornsey button, hold. Hornsey more, hold.
Ho^se-house, hangw. Ho^ket, Whit. Housegarth, Whit. HOVINGHAM, Ryd HOWDEN,
Hold. Howdenprice, huns. How, Halli. How, Rydal. Howsham, Buc. Hudeswel,
Hang. Hugget, Wilt. HVLL, Huns. Hull, flu. Humber flu. Humbe^ton, Halli.
Humblet^^, Hold. Hummanby, Dic. Hunsley house, huns. Hunton, Hangw. Hurry,
Gillingw. Husthtwate, Burd. Hutham, Huns. Huton, Rydal. Huton, Gillingw.
Hutton, Langb. Huton, ^alli. Huton, Bull. Huton buuel, Aller. Huton bushel,
Pick. Huton conyers, Aller Hutto^ ^cranwick, B^^n Hutton nulgrave, La Hutton
Sand, Burdf. Hylderthorpe, Dic. Hynderwell, Lang. Hyndeskell, Bull.
I
Ilkton, Hangeast. Ingleby, Lang. Ingleby arneclisse, Lan. Ingleby green how,
Lan. Inggs north, Bull. S. John's, Gillingw. S. John's mount, Burd. Ipsal Castle,
Burd.
K
Kearton, Hangwest. Kedler, Lang. Kee^by, Burd. Keldum, Rydal. Kele Chapel,
hangw. Kelfeild, Derwent. Kelings, Hold. Kelek, Hold. Kelke, Dic. Kelton,
Gillingw. Kenethorpe, Buc. Keingham, Hold. Kepwicke, Burdf. Keir^ingham, Buc.
Ke^by, Derwent. Kildale, Lang. Killenwick, Bayn. Kille^by, hangeast. Kilborne,
Burd. Killingwold, huns. Kilnsey, Hold. Kilvingto^ north, all^^ Kilvingto^
north, Bu^ Kilvingto^ south, Bu^. Kilton, La^g. Ki^wicke, Wilton. Kinthorpe,
Pick. Kiplin, Gillinge. Kirby, Langb. Kirby knole, Burdf. Kirkby, Halli. Ki
keburne, Bayn. Kirkbe, under dale, Buc. Kirkby fletha^, hang. Kirkby
grindlich, buc Kirby on the hill, Gillingw Kirby masperton* Rydal. KI^KBY
mo^side, (...) Kirkby upon the mount, Gill. w Kirkby overker, Pick Kirkby wick,
Gillinge Kirkdale, Rydal. Kirkelley, Huns. Kirkham, Buc. Kirkleadholme, Lang
Ki^kleaventon, Lang Kirklington, halli. Knedlington, howd. Knapton, Buc.
Knaton, Aller. KYLHAM, Dic.
L
Laiborne, Hangwest. La^ki^ke, Gillingw. Laiton, Buc. Landhouse, Pick.
Landmoth, Aller. Langthorpe, hangeast Lanton, Buc. Langton great, Gillw Langton
little, Gillw. Langtost, Dic. Lartington, Gillingw. Lasenby, Lang. Latholm,
Holm. Laton east, Gilling* w Laton west, gilling. w Latton east, Buc. Latton
west, buc. Laxton, Howd. Leaueming, Buc. Le^usham, Pick. Lebbeston, Pick.
Le^kby, Halli. Leeming, halli. Leeming little, ^ange Lekenfeild, Bayn. Lelly,
Hold. Leppington, Buc. Lestingham, Rydal. Leven, Hold. Leventhorpe, Lang.
Leverton, Langb. Lilling, Bull. Lisset, Hold. Litham, Huns. Lockenby, Lang.
Lockenton, Bayn. Lockton, Pick. L^ng, Gillingw. Longdale end, Whit. Longthorpe,
Halli. Losthouse, Lang. Lostsome, Holm. Lovingthorne, Halli. Longrouston, hold.
Lownsbrough, holm. Lowthorpe, Dic. Lund. Derwent. Lu^den, Bayn. Lune flu Lune
Forest, Gill. w. Lunton, Gillingw. Lynton, Bulm. Lynthorpe, Lan. Lythe, Lan.
M
Maidthorpe, Buc. Masham, Hangeast. Maltby, Langb. MALTON, Ryd. Malton old,
Rydal. Manfeild, Gilling. Maunby upon Wharle, Gil. e. Mapleton, Hold.
Mappleton, hold. Ma^fleet, hold. Ma^ish, Pick. Marrick, Gillingw. S. Martins,
hang. Ma^ton, Dic. Marton, Pick. Marton Abbey, Bull. Ma^ton, Holm. Marton,
H^ld. Marton, Lan. Ma^wich, Gillingw. S. Mary gate, Bull. Mar^k flu Marsk,
G^llingw. MASHAM, hang. Mask, D^n. Melborne, Holm. Melme^by, Halli. Melme^by,
Hangw. Meltenby, Wilton. Melton, h^ns. Melton, howd. Mesonby, Gillingw.
Menthorpe, Derwent. Menx, Hold. Merfleet, hold. Metham, howd. Micl^by, Lan.
Mickleton, Gillingw. MIDDLEHAM, hangw. Middlesbrough, Lan. Middleton, halli.
Middleton, Pick. Middleton, Lan. Middleton, Baynt. Middleton tras, Gil. e.
Middleton whernhow, halli. Milby, Halli. Millington, Wilton. Milnthouse,
Wilton. Montgrace Abbey, Bu^. Mereby, Derwent. Merehouse, Hold. Meresham, Lan.
Morton, hangeast. Morton, hangw. Morton, Bull. Morton, Bulm. Morton upon Swaile,
Gil. ^. Morvil hill, Hangw. Moudthorpe, Bull. Moulton, Gillingeast. Moulgrave
castle, La. Mowthorpe, Buc. Moxbie, Bull. Mu^ker, hangw. Muscots, Rydal. Muston,
Dick. Myton, Bull.
N
Naburne, Derw. Naby, Gill. w. Naste^ton, Dic. Napper, hangw. Nesse, Rydal.
Nesswicke, Baynt. Nesterseld, hang. Newbiggen, hangw. Newbiggen, Burdf.
Newbiggen hall, Lan Newbiggen hall, Lan Newbold, huns. Newburgh, Burdf.
Newburgh, Burdf. Newby, halli. Newby, Lan. Newby, Pick. Newby upon w^ke, Gill.
e. New For^est, Gill. w New Park, hangeast. Newholme, Whit. Newland, howd.
Newsam, Gillingw. Newsam, Burd. Newsam, holm. Newsam, Dick. Newsom, Rydal.
Newton, Buck. Newton, Halli. Newton, Hold. Newton, Lan. Newton, Pick. Newton,
hang. Newton, Rydal. Newton upon Derwent, Wilt. Newton Ma^il, Gill e. Newto^
Mulgrave, La Newto^ upon Ouse, Bu. S. Nicholas, Bull. Normanby, Rydal. Normanby,
Whit. Normanby, Lan. Norton, Hangw. Norton, Buc. Norton, Halli. Norton coniers,
aller. Nunbane holme, wilt. Nunhouse, Aller. Nunckling, hold. Nunnington,
Rydal. Nunthorpe, Lan.
O
Ossenton, Bull. Olewarke, Bull. Ollerstone Castle, Pic Ormesbie, Lan.
Osberwicke, Bull. Osgo^by, Derwent. Osgoodby, Pick. Osmotherlay, Aller.
Oswoldchu^ch, Ryd. Ottingham, hold. Otterington North, Aller. Otterington
south, Bu Otteringto^ south, Al Overton, Bull. Ovington, Gillingw. Ou^am, hold.
Ouse flu Owter Newton, hold. Owston, Burd. Owstwicke, hold. Ow^horne, hold.
Oxton, Dick. Oxton grange, Dic.
P
Pate^icke b^umpton, hang. Pattrington, h^ld. Pau^holme, hold. Pawle, hold.
Pawleholme, hold. Penhill bacon, hangw. Petersole, Ryd. P^^kall, halli.
PICKERING, Pick. Pickering forest, Pic Pickering lithe, Pic. Pickton, Lan.
Pinchingthorpe, Lan. Plewland, hold. POCKLINGTON, Pock^^y, Ryd. Portingtong,
howd. Pottoe, Lan. Potters, brinton, Dic. Preston, hold. Priston, hangwest.
R
Rainton, Halli. Rasdale Abbey, Ryd. Raskill, Bull. Raswicke, hangeast.
Rastorpe, Buc. Ratsey, Baynt. Ravensworth Castle, Gil. w Redker, Lan. Ra^th,
Gillingw. Rial^, hold. Ri^call, Derwent. Rical, flu. RICHMOND, Gil. w Ridale
flu. Ridmer, hangw. Rillington, Buc. Rimswel, hold. Ringbrough, hold. Ris^^o,
Huns. Risingarth, hold. Riston, hold. Rive Abbey, Burd. Robinhoods bay, Wh^
Rockcliffe, Bull. Rockby, Gillingw. Romanby, Aller. Rockeby, Gillingw. Rockwith,
hangeast. Rossall, Bulm. Rosse, hold. Rowley, Huns. Rowlston, hold. Ro^sbie,
Lan. Rowthe, hold. Rowton A^nould, hold. Roxby, Pick. Roxby, halli. Rudby, Lan.
Rudlam, Rydal. Rudston, Dick. Rumboldki^ke, Gil. w Runckton east, Lan Runckton
west, Alle^. Runswick, Lan. Ruston, Pick. Ruston, Dic. Ruswarpe, Whit. Rydale,
Rydal. Ryd flu. Ryghton, Dic. Rise, hold. Ryton, Rydal.
S
Saltmarsh, Howd. Salton, Rydal. Sanc^on, huns. Sandbeck, hangw. Sandhutton,
Bull. Sandholme, howd. Sandington, Burd. Sandysord, Lan. Sandysord, Lan.
Sattons, hangw. Sawden, Pick. Saxay, Lan. Seamer, Pick. Seamer flu. Seamer
beacon, Pick. Seassey, Aller. Seaton, hold. Seaton, holme. Selbury,
Gillingeast. Settrington, Buc. Seven flu. Sewerby, Dick. Seakleton, Bull.
Seagglethorpe, Buc. Scalby, Howd. Scalby, Pick. SCARBROVGH, pic Scereby,
Derwent. Scerbrough, Baynt. Scerton, Gillingeast. Scotton, hangeast. Sculcots,
Huns. Scutterskel^e, Lan. Scraston West, hangw Scranton, hangeast. Sherburn,
Buc. Sherifhutton, Bull. Shipsey, hold. Shipton, Holme. Shipton, Bull.
Sigglethorpe, hold. Sigston, Aller. Sigston Castle, Aller Silphoe, Whit. Silton
over. Silton nether. Silton pannell, Burd Sinde^by, halli. Sinington, Pick.
Skaling, Lan. Skargil, Gillingw. Skawton, Rydal. Skearne, Baynt. Skeckling,
hold. Skeeby, Gillingw. Skef^ling, hold. Skelder^kew, Lan. Skelfleet flu.
Skeleton, howd. Skeleton, halli. Skeleton, Bull. Skeleton, Gillingw. Skeleton, Lan.
Skemmingrane, Lan. Skensbie, Bull. Skiplam, Rydal. Skipw^th, Derwent. Skipsey,
Hold. Skipton, Burd. Skitingham, Buc. Ski^laugh North, Hold. Skirley, hold.
Skirpenbeck, buc. Skirsby, huns. Skonestone, buc. Skorton, Gillingeast.
Skouter, huns. Skedmer, buc. S^^r^bie, Rydal. Smeaton great, Gill. e. Smeaton
little, Gill. e. Sneaton, Whit. Snape, hangeast. Sne^enthorpe, Whit.
Snylesworth, Burd. Southburne, Baynt. Sowerby, Aller. Sowerby, Burd.
Spaddington, holm. Spawnton, Ryd. Spawnton, Ryd. Spennithorne, hangw. Speton,
Dic. Spittles, Dic. Spittle upon stranmere, Gill. w. Sprotely, hold. Sproxton,
Ryd. Spurnehead, hold. Stamford bridge, Der. Stamforth briggs, Will Stainham,
Bull. Stainston, Buc. Stainton dale, Pic. Stancke, Aller. Stansher, Whit.
Stanwick, Gillingw. Stanyhow, Gillinge. Stappleton, Gillinge. Stayne^bie, Lan.
Staynegrave, Ryd. Staynton, Lan. Staynton, hangw. Stathes, Lan. Staxton, Dick.
Steasbie, Bu^. Steresbie, bull. Stillingfleet, Derw. Stillington, Bull. Stituham,
bull. Stockton, bull. STOKESLEY, Dan. Stonedale, hangw. Stone Ferry, hol.
Stratford, Gillingw. Stratford, gillingw. Strensall, Bull. Strothwad, holm.
Subter, Aller. Sudcots, hold. Susseild, Whit. Sunderlandwick, bayn Sutton,
hangeast. Su^ton, Halli. Sutton, hold. Sutton, buc. Sutton, buc. Sutton upon
Derwent, Wilt. Sutton in the Forest, Bull. Sutton under Whitston cli^le, Bur.
Swanbie, Lan. Swainbie, halli. Sw^dale forest, hanw Swade flu. Sw^ton, Pic.
Swinton, Rydal. Swinton, hangeast. Swine, hold.
T
Tarfeild east, halli. T^nfeild west, halli. S. Teasell, Bull. Trees flu.
Terrington, bull. T^hthorpe, Baynt. Ti kham, bull. Theaxton, halli. Thimblebie,
Aller. Thintoste, Gillinge. Thirkleby, Burdf. Thirlebie, burdf. Thirklebie,
burdf. Thirlesbie, burdf. This^idale, buc. Thilthorpe, bull. Tho^naby, Lan.
Thorganby, Derwent. Tho^kleby, hold. Thormanby, bull. Thornalby, hangw.
Thornburgh, burdf. Thornbergh, hang. Thornholm, Dic. Thorn, hang. Thorn,
hold. Thornegunbold, hold. Thornethorpe, buc. Thorneton, Lan. Thorneton, Pick.
Thornton, Pick. Thornton, Wilton. Thornton, bull. Thornton, burd. Thornton,
hangeast. Thornton in the leaves, Aller Thornton in the more, burd. Thornton
ru^^, hanw. Thornton steward, h^nw. Thornton in the street, Aller. Thorpe,
hold. Thorpe, holm. Thorpe, howd. Thorpe, huns. Thorpe, Gillingw. Thorpe, Dic.
Thorpe, hangw. Thorpe basset, buc. Thorpe row, Aller. Thoroby, hangw.
Thorpp^^om, hang. Thaprow, hangeast. Throstenby, Pick. THRVSK, burdf.
Thur^bie, hangwest. Thwate, Hangwest. Thywynge, Dick. To^^^te^, Lan. Tole^bie,
Lan. Tollerton, bull. Topclisse, burd. Toppy hill, Lan. Toul^ho^pe, buc. The
Tower, Dic. Tranbie, huns. Tunstall, hold. Tunstell, hangeast. Turnton bridge,
Hal.
V
V^kerby, Gillingeast Verby, Lan. Vggelbarnby, Whit. Vgthorpe, Lan. V^^on,
Howd. Vlston, Burdf. Vpsall, burd. Vplethun, Lan. Vpstane, halli. Vpton, hold.
W
Wabu^^h^ll, Hangw. Waghe^, hold. Walwith, hangw. Walborne, hangw. Waldby,
huns. Walden, hangw. Walgrave, Pick. Wolkenton Provost, Huns. Walkinton, howd.
Walton, Baynt. Wanlas, hangwest. Wanford, Dic. Wapley, Lan. Waplinton, Wilton.
Watlobie, Gillinge. Warthell, bull. Warter, baynt. Warton, Wilton. Wasland,
hold. Wath, halli. Watlas, hangeast. Watles, hangeast. Waxham, hold.
Weaverthorpe, hold. Weickliffe, Gillingw. Well, hangeast. Welborne, Ryd.
Welborne, bulm. Welburne, burd. Welham, buc. Welton, Howd. Welton, hold.
Welton, huns. Welwicke, hold. Wensedale, hangwest. Wenslay, hangw. Westerdale,
Lan. We^^ow, buc. Westwarige, buc. Wherleton Castle, Lan. Wharram in the
street, Buc. Whayston, Gillingw. Wheldrake, Derw. Whenby, bull. Whiteside,
hangw. WHIT^Y, Whit. Whitwel, Gillingeast. Whitwel, bull. Whereleton, Lan.
Wickham, Ryd. Wickham, Pick. Wickham Abbey, pic. Wigginthorpe, bull. Wigginton,
bull. WIGHTON, Holm Wilbefosse, Wilton. Willerby, Dick. Willerby, huns.
Willitost, holm. Willowbe^ke flu. Wilsted, hold. Wilsted hall, hold.
Wilsthorpe, dic. Wilton, Pick. Wilton, Lan. Wilton Castle, Lan. Wilton Bishops,
W^l. Wintering, hangw. Winton, Aller. Wintringham, buc. Witton east, hangw.
Witton west, hangw. Wiske flu. VVoldnewton, Dic. VVoodal, hangw. VVoodhal,
Derw. VVoodhal park, hanw VVomental, Rydal. VVansforth, baynt. VVasall, Aller.
VVasall, Lan. VVrelton, Pic. VVressall, holm. VVulferton, huns. VVynestead,
hold. VVythernwick, hold. VVythernsey, hold. VVyton, hold.
Y
Yafford, Gillingw. Yapham, Wilton. YARVM, Lan. Ye^eley, Pic. Yeareslay, burd.
Yeastorpe, Rydal. Yeddingham, buc. Yeneiudale, Wilton. Yonckslee^e, howd.
YORK, bull. Yorkes wade, Wilton Youlthorph, Wilt. Your flu. Yowton, bull.
Yrton, Pick.
The Bishopric of DVRHAM.
THe Bishopric of Durham contains those parts and Town ships that lie
betwixt the River Tees and Derwent, The bounds of this Province.
and all along the Germane-Seas. It is neighboured on the North with
Northumberland, and their Jurisdictions, parted by the River Derwent: her West
is touched by Cumberland, Westmorland, and from Staine-more divided by the
River Tees, and by the same water on her South, from Yorkshire even unto the
Sea; and the East is altogether coasted by the Germane-Seas.

The Form.
(2) The form thereof is triangle, and sides not much differing; for from her
South-East, unto the West-point, The Dimensitude.
are about thirty miles; from thence to her North-East and Tyne-mouth, are
likewise as many, and her base along the Sea shore are twenty three; the whole
in circumference, about one hundred and three miles.

The Air.
(3) The Air is sharp and very piercing, and would be more, were it not that
the vapors from the German-Seas did help much to dissolve her ice and snow:
and the store of Coals therein growing and gotten, do warm the body, and
keep back the cold, which fuel, besides their own use, does yield great
commodities unto this Province, by trade thereof into other parts.

The Soil.
(4) For soil, it consists much alike of pastures, arable, and barren
grounds: the East is the richest and most champion, the South more moorish, but
well inhabited; her West all rockie, without either grass or grain,
notwithstanding recompenceth her possessors with as great gain, both in
rearing up cattle, and bringing forth coal, Coale-pits.
whereof all this Country is plentifully stored, and grows so near to the
upper face of the earth, that in the trod ways the cartwheeles do turn up the
same. Some hold their substance to be a clammy kind of clay hardened with heat
abounding in the earth, Cambden.
and so becoming concocted, is nothing else but Bitumen; for proof whereof,
these Coals have both the like smell and operation of Bitumen: for being
sprinkled with water, they burn more vehemently, but with Oil are quite
extinguished and put out.

The ancient Inhabitants.
(5) The ancient Inhabitants known unto Ptolemie, were the Brigantes, of whom
we have spoken in the General of Yorkshire, they being subdued by the Romans,
after whom the Saxons made it a part of their Northumberlands Kingdom; at
first a Province belonging to the Deirians, and enjoyed by Ella their first
King; afterward invaded by the Danes, and lastly possessed by the Normans:
whose site being so near unto Scotland, has many times felt their fury, and
has bin as buckler betwixt them and the English; for which cause, The
privilege of this people.
the Inhabitants have certain freedoms, and are not charged with service as
other Counties are, so that this with Westmorland, Cumberland, and
Northumberland, are not divided into Hundreds in those Parliament Rolls whence
I had the rest: which want I must leave for others to supply.

(6) Over this County, the Bishops thereof have had the Royalties of Princes,
and the Inhabitants have pleaded privilege not to pass in service of war
over the River of Tees or Tyne; whose charge (as they have alleged) was to
keep and defend the corpse of S. Cuthbert their great adored Saint, S. Cuthbert.
and therefore they termed themselves, The holy-worke-folkes. And the repute of
this Cuthbert and his supposed defense against the Scots was such, that our
English Kings in great devotion have gone in pilgrimage to visit his Tomb,
and have given many large possessions to his Church: The devotion of diverse
kings to S. Cuthbert.
such were King Egfrid Aelfred, and Guthrun the Danc, Edward, and Athelstan
Monarch of England, and zealous Canute, the greatest of all who came thither
bare footed and at Cuthberts Tomb both augmented and confirmed their
Liberties. This Saint then, of nothing made Durham become great, and William
the Conqueror, of a Bishopric made it a County Palatine: at that time William
Careleph, Bishop of the Diocese, pulled down the old Church which Aldwin had
built, and with sumptuous cost laid the foundations of a new, wherein S.
Cuthberts Shrine in the vacancie of the Bishops, was the keeper of the
Castle-keyes.

In the West of this Church, and place called Gallile, the Marble Tomb of
venerable Beda remains, Beda his tomb.
who was borne at Iarro in this County, and became a Monk at Weremouth, whose
painful industries and light of learning in those times of darkness are
wonderful, as the Volumes which he wrote do well declare. And had the idle
Monks of England employed their times after his example, their founders
expectations had not been frustrate, The Monks idleness the cause of their
overthrow.
nor those foundations so easily overturned. But the revenge of sin ever
following the actions of sins, dissolved first the largenesses of this
Counties liberties, under the reign of King Edward the first, and since has
shaken to pieces those places herein erected, under the reign of King Henry
the eight: such were Durham, Sherborne, Stayndrop, Iarro, Weremouth, and
Egleton, all which felt the reward of their idleness, and wrath of him that is
jealous of his own honor.

(7) Things of rare note observed in this Shire, are three Pits of a wonderful
depth, commonly called the Hell-Kettles, Hell-kettles.
which are adjoining near unto Darlington, whose waters are somewhat warm.
These are thought to come of an Earthquake, which happened in the year of
grace 1179. whereof the Chronicle of Tyn-mouth makes mention, whose record is
this: On Christmas day, at Oxenhall in the Territory of Darlington, within the
Bishopric of Durham, the ground heaved up aloft, like unto a high Tower, and
so continued all that day, as it were unmovable, until the evening; and then
fell with so horrible a no^se, that it made all the neighbor dwellers sure
afraid: and the earth swallowed it up, and made in the same place a deep pit,
which is there to be seen for a testimony unto this day.

(8) Of no less admiration are certain stones lying within the River Weere,
at Butterbee near Durham; from whose sides at the Ebb and low water in the
Summer, issues a certain salt reddish water, which with the Sun waxes
white, and growing into a thick substance, A salt proceeding of stones.
becomes a necessary salt to the use of the by-dwellers.

(9) And places of elder times had in account by the Romans, were Benovium,
now Binchester, Binchester.
and Condercum, Condercum.
Chester in the street, where their moneys have been dug up, and at
Condercum so much, that Egelrik Bishop of Durham was therewith made exceedingly
rich. Castles.


This Country has been strengthened with seven strong Castles, Hilton.
Bransp^th. Ra^ye* Durham. Luml^y. Wa^ton. Ba^nard.
is yet traded with six Market Towns, and Gods divine honor in one hundred and
eighteen Parish-Churches celebrated, whose names in the Table are further
inserted.

map of Durham ^^E BISHOPRIC AND CITY OF DU^^AM


An Alphabeticall Table of all the Towns, Rivers, and memorable places
mentioned in the Bishopric of Durham.
A TABLE of all the Towns in the Bishopric of Durham.
A
Acle. Scole Acle. Aldomedg. Ash. West Aukland. BISHOPS AVKLAND. S. Andrews
Aukland.
B
Balam. Barnetton. BARNARD CASTLE. Batterby. Beamond hill. Bedborne park.
Bedik. Bedik west. Bear yarke. Bellosyse. Benselside. Biarsgreene.
Biarsgarthe. Biarside. Bichborne. Billingham. Binchester. Birtley. Bishops.
Bishopton. Blackhall. Blakhall. Blackston. Blackwell. Blaydon. Bollyop.
Bowdens. Bradbury. Bradley hall. Brad wood. Brafferton. Brandon East. Brandon
West. Branspeth castle. Brantoste. Brearton. Brom. Buley grange. Thorp Bulmer.
Burdon great. Burdon little. Burdon old. Burdop flu. Burnhall. Butterwick.
C
Cassop. Chapwell. Chester. Chilton great. Chilton little. Claxton. Cletlam.
Cleydon. Cockerton. Cockfeild. Cokon. Coksey. Coteham. Cotham. Cowpigh hell.
Cowpon. Cowside hall. Crawcrake. Croke-hall. Cromforthe. Croxdale. Cundon.
Nether Cunsley. Over Cunsley.
D
Dawdon. DARLINGTON. Darwencote: Dauton. Denton. Derwen flu. Dowton. Nether
Dunsley. DVRHAM. Durpit Chapel.
E
East yate. Ebchester. Castle Eden. Eden little. Edder-akers. Edmondbyers.
Eggecliffe. Eggleton. Eldon. S. Ellins. Elmedon. Elstok. Elton. Elwick. Enewood
West. Eppleton. Escombe. Esington. Eslabye.
F
Farnton hall. Fellin. Fery on the mount. Finkeley. Fishborne. Flaske.
Follonsby. Ford. Foulforth. Foulthorp. Foxton. Frosterley. Fulwell.
G
Garmansway. Gatesend. Gaunlesse flu. Gaynford. Gibside. The Grange. Grayston.
Green croft. Gretham. Grindon.
H
Halam. Hamsterley. Harburhowse. Hardon. Hardwicke. Hardwicke. Harintons.
Harpley hill. Harroton. Hartborne west. Heart. HARTLEPOOLE Harton. Haswell
little. Haswell great. Haughton. Haughton. Hawthorp. Hebborne. Hedlam. Hedley.
Hedworth. Heighington. Hesselton hall. Munke Hesselton. Cold Hesselton. Hett.
Hetton in the hole. Hetton on the Mount. Heughewell. Nether Heworthe. Over
Heworthe. Hilton. Hilton Castle. Hollinside. Holinside. Holme. Houghton. Hude
flu. Hunsterworth. Hunwicke. Hurnworth. Hurworth. Huton.
I
Iarrow. Ingleton. S. John's Chapel. Iseton. The Isle.
K
Kellow. Kellop flu. Kepeyre. Ketton. Kibbleworth. Killarby. Kinchley.
L
Lamton. Lanchester. Landew. Langdon flu. Langley. Langley. Langley. Langton.
Layton. Littleburne. Ludworth. Lumley Castle. Lumsley.
M
The Manor. Mansforth. Marwood park. Marwood hagge. Mayland. Medumsley. Kirk
Merington. Middleton. Middleton. Middleton Ero. Middleton George. Midlam.
Milkborn flu. Mordon. Morehouse. Moresley. Mortons. Morton. Morton. Morton.
Mugliswicke. Munkwermouth. Mylhouses.
N
Nesbed. Nettleworth. Newbigin. Newbigin. Newbigin. New-bottle. Newfeild.
Newsham. Newtowne. Newton. Newton. Newton. Newton little. Newton long. Newton
hanset. Norton. Nunstanton. Nysam.
O
Oldakers. Old Durham. Owston. Owton.
P
West Park. East Park. Pedumsak. Peloo. Pelton. Pencher. Persbridge.
Piddington town. Kirk Piddington. The Cole Pits. Plausworth. The old Pork.
Preston. Preston. Premrose side.
Q
Quarinton.
R
Raby Castle. Ramside. Ravensworth. Ravensworth Castle. Rayntons. The Raw.
Redhugh. Redmarsham. Redworth. Relley. Riop. Rowley. Ryton.
S
Satley Chapel. Seaton. Seaton. Sedgefeild. Segerston haught. Seham. Selabye.
Shadford. Sheales. Shepley. Sherborne. Sherborne house. Sheroton. Shildraw.
Shildon. Shillington. Shinkley. Shotton. Shotton. Shotton. Silkesworth. Skern
flu. Skirmingham. Slingley. Snotterton. Sockborne. Sodburye. Somerhouse. Spen.
Standley. Stanhope. Stanhope park. Little Staynton, Great Staynton. STAYNDROP.
Stirtwith. Stokley. Stokton. Stotfeld. Stranton. Stretlam. Sudick. Sunderland.
Sunderland. Swalwoll.
T
Tanfeild. Teesdale. Thickley East. Thickley West. Thorp. Thornton. Thornley.
Thornerlet. Throstous. Thruslington. Trimden. Tuddaye. Tunstall. Tursdale.
V
Vfferton. Vnthank. Vnthank. Vrpethe. Vsshaw. Vsworth great. Vsworth little.
W
Wackerfeild. Waldridge. Wardley. Washinton. Wascrop Burn. Wellop fla.
Werdenlaw hill. Were flu. Weredall. Weremouth. Westgate. Wessoo. Westerton.
Westwick. Wharleton. Wheatley hill. Whikham. Whitborne lezard. Whitchurch.
Whithone. Whitton. Whitwell. Whitwell. Willington. Willynton. Windgate.
Windleston. Windridge. Winston. Witton. Witton Castle. Woodcroft hall. Wulley.
Wulsingham. Wulston. Wynyerd. Wytton.
CHAPTER XLIII.
WESTMORLAND, by some late Latin Writers is called Westmaria, The bounds of
Westmorland.
and Westmorlandia, by some later Westmoria, and in our English Tongue
Westmorland. It came to be thus named in our Language by the situation, which
in every part is so plenteously full of Moors and high hills, reaching one to
another, that Westmorland (with us) is nothing else but a Western Moorish
Country. Having on the West and North-side Cumberland, on the South-part
Lanca-sbire, on the East Side Yorke-shire, and the Bishopric of Durham.

(2) The length thereof extended from Burton in her South, The Length.
to Kirkland on her North-part is thirty miles: The Breadth.
the broadest part from East to West, is from the River Eden to
Dunbalrase-stones, containing 24. miles, the whole circumference about hundred
and twelve miles.

(3) The form thereof is somewhat long and narrow: The Form.
the Air sharp and piercing, purging it self from the trouble of gross
foggy mists and vapors, by reason of which the people of this Province are not
accquainted with strange diseases or imperfections of body, but live long, and
are healthful, and attain to the number of many years.

(4) The Soil for the most part of it, The Soil.
is but barren, and can hardly be brought to any fruitfulnes by the industry
and painful labor of the husbandman, being so full of infertile places, which
the Northern Englishmen call Moors: yet the more Southerly part is not
reported to be so sterile, but more fruitful in the valleys, though contained
in a narrow room, between the River Lone, and Winander-mear, and it is all
termed by one name. The Barony of Kendale or Candale, that is, the dale by Can,
taking the name of the River Can that runs through it.

(5) The ancient Inhabitants of this Country were the Brigantes, Inhabitants.
mentioned in the several Counties of York, Lancaster, and Cumberland.

(6) It is not commended either for plenty of corn or Cattle, Commodities.
being neither stored with arable grounds to bring forth the one, norpasturage
to breed up the other: the principal profit that the people of this Province
raise unto themselves, is by Clothing.

(7) The chiefest place of which is Kandale or Kendale, Kendale the chief Town.
called also Kirkeby Kendale, standing on the bank of the river Can. This Town
is of great trade and resort, and for the diligent and industrious practice of
making Cloth so excels the rest, that in regard thereof it carries a
supereminent name above them, and has great vent and traffic for her woollen
Clothes through all the parts of England. It challenges not much glory for
Antiquity; only this it accounts a great credit, that it has dignified
three Earls with the title thereof, Earls of Kendale.
as John Duke of Bedford, whom Henry the fifth (being his brother) advanced to
that honor, John Duke of Sommerset, and John de Foix, whom King Henry the sixth
preferred to that dignity for his honorable and trusty services done in the
French Wars. The Magistracy of Kendale.
It is a place of very civil and orderly Government, the which is managed by
an Alderman, chosen every year out of his twelve Brethren, who are all
distinguished and notified from the rest by the wearing of Purple garments. The
Alderman and his Senior Brother are always Justices of Peace and Quorum. There
are in it a Town-Clerke, a Recorder two Sergeants at Mace, Graduation of it.
and two Chamberlaines. By Mathematical observation the site of this Town is
in the degree of Longitude 17.30. scruples, from the first West point, and the
Pole elevated in Latitude to the degree 55. and 15. minutes.

(8) Places of memorable note for Antiquity are Verterae, Places of chief
(...) verterae.
mentioned by Antonine the Emperor; and Aballaba, which we contractly call
Apelby. In the one the Northern English conspired against William the
Conqueror in the beginning of the Norman government. Apelby.
In the other, the Aurelian Maures kept a station in the time of the Romans,
and their high street is yet apparently to be seen by the ridges thereof which
lead by Apelby to a place called Brovonacum, mentioned in the Book of
Provincial notices. Roman Coyns here sound.
The anticke pieces of Roman Coin otherwhiles dug up hereabouts, and some
inscriptions not long since found, show of what continuance they have been:
although Time, which devoureth all things, has so fed upon their carcasses
many ages together, as it has almost consumed both houses and Inhabitants. For
Apelby now is bare both of people and building, and were it not for the
antiquity that makes it the more estimable, Sessions at Apelby Castle.
in whose Castle the Assizes are commonly kept, it would be little better in
account then a Village. Verterae is long since decayed, and the name of it
changed into Burgh: for it is commonly named Burgh under Stanemore. In which,
it is said, a Roman Captain made his abode with a band of Directores, A Roman
Station at (...)
in the declining age of the Roman Empire. These two places William of
Newborough calls Princely Holds, and writes that William King of Scots a
little before he himself was taken prisoner at Alnewicke, surprised them on a
sudden, King John.
but K. John recovered them after, and liberally bestowed them upon Robert
Vipont for his many worthy services.

(9) There is mention made but of one religious house that has bin in all this
Country, One House of Religion.
and that was a little Monastery seated near unto the River Laden built by
Thomas the son of Gospatrick, the son of Orms: where there is a fountain
or spring that ebbes and flows many times a day, and it is thought that some
notable act of achievement has been performed there, for that there be huge
stones in form of Pyramides, Notes of Anquitie
some nine foot high, and fourteen foot thick, ranged for a mile in length
directly in a row, and equally distant, which might seem to have bin there
purposely pitched in memory thereof: but what that Act was, is not now known,
but quite worn out of remembrance by times injury.

(10) Other matters worthy observation are only these: Amble side
that at Amboglana, now called Amble-side, near the upper corner of
Wimander-mear, there appears at this day the ruins of an ancient City, which
by the British Brickes, by Roman-money oftentimes found there, by Highways
paved leading unto it, and other likelihoods, seems to have been a work of
the Romans: The Fortress thereof so long fenced with a ditch and rampire, that
it took up in length one hundred thirty two Else, and in breadth eight. There
are also near Kendale in the River Can, two Catadupae or Waterfals, where the
waters descend with such a forcible downfall, The River Ca^.
that it compels a mighty noise to be heard, which the neighbor Inhabitants make
such use of, as they stand them in as good stead as Prognostications: The
Commodities of it.
for when that which stands North from them sounds more clear, and with a
louder echo in their ears, they certainly look for fair weather to follow:
But when that on the South does the like, they expect foggy mists and showers
of rain.

(11) This Province is traded with four Market Towns, Market towns.
fortified with the strength of seven Castles, and has 26. Parishes in it for
the celebration of Divine service.

map of the county of Westmorland THE COUNTY WESTMORLAND AND KENDALE THE CHIEF
TOWN DESCRIBED With the Arms of Such Nobles as have been Earls of either of
them.


An Alphabeticall Table of all the Towns, Rivers, and memorable places
mentioned in Westmorland.
A
AMbleside. APPLEBY. Great Ashby. Little Ashby. Askham.
B
Banton. Barborne Chapel. Barnside. Barrow Flu. Barton. The Beacon. Below
Flu. Betham. Blaterne. Bolton. Branton. Brederdale head. Brederdale foot.
Brigsterparke. Brougham Castle. Buley Castle. Burberk Flu. Burgh Castle.
Buriels. Burton. Burton.
C
Caber. Camswick Park. Chappollan. Claperyate. Cleborn. Cliston. Colnhead
Park. Cottes flat. Coulby. Cowgarth. Crakenthorp. Croke. Crosby-Garret.
Crosby-Ravensworth Croscrake. Crostermond. Crosthwaite.
D
Depedale. Dribek. Drivevers. Duston.
E
Eden Flu.
F
Farleton. Farleton. Fawsetwood. Firbanke.
G
Gilse. Glenkroden. Glenkwen Flu. Grarigge hall. Gresmere.
H
Harberwen. Hartshop hall. Hartley Castle. Hawse. Helbeck. Helstonlathe.
Helton. Helton. Heltondale. Helvillon hill. Hoffe. Holimill Cross. Howgill
Castle.
I
The Inges.
K
Saint Katharins. Kellathe. KENDALL. Kendall Castle. Kentmere. Killington.
KIRKBY Steven. KIRKBY Landall. Kirkby Thuet. Kirkland. Knock. Knothill.
L
Little Langdale. Great Langdale. Langdale. Langrig. Lanridge. Lanton. Levens
Bridge. Lowther. Lune Flu.
M
Mallerstange. Mallerstange Forest. Malmesborne. Markendale Chapel. Marton.
Meborne. Methap. Middleton. Milborne. Milkinthorp. Morlan. Morton. Morton.
Great Musgrave. Little Musgrave. Mylnthorp.
N
Naneworth. Nathy. Newbiggin. Newbiggin. Nine Churches.
O
Oddelden. Oddelden Park. Little Ormeside. Great Ormeside. Orton.
P
Paterdale. Pendragon Castle. Preston Chapel.
R
Raisgill hall. Rasebeck. Rasgill. Ravinstangdale. Regill. Runthwate.
S
Seggeswick. Selfted hall. Shales. Shapp. Siserghe. Sleddale. Slegill.
Sleelmere. Smardale. Soulby. Sowerby. Sput Flu. Striklands. Stainmore. Stanley.
Stokbridge. Sunbiggin.
T
Templesowerby. Thornthwate. Thurnby. Trout Bek. Trout Bek. Tybay.
V
Vnderbarrow.
W
Warcop. Wastall head. Wastall foot. Watland. Warton hall. Whinfield.
Whinfield hill. Whinfield Forest. Wickerslack. Winderworth. Winton.
Witherslak. Wynster Flu. Wynster Chapel. Wynander-mere.
CVMBERLAND. CHAPTER XLIIII.
CUMBERLAND, the farthest North-west Province in this Realm of ENGLAND,
Cumberlands bounds.
confronteth upon the South of Scotland, and is divided from that Kingdom
partly by the River Kirsop, then crossing Eske, by a Tract through Solome-Mosse,
until it come to the Solwaye Frith, by Ptolemie called the Itune Baye. The
North-west part is neighboured by Northumberland, more Eastward with
Westmerland, the South with Lancashire, and the West is wholly washed with the
Irish Sea.

The form.
(2) The form whereof is long and narrow, pointing wedge-like into the South,
which part is altogether pestred with copped hills, and therefore has the name
of Cop-land. The middle is more level, and better inhabited, yielding
sufficient for the sustenance of man: but the North is wild and solitary,
combred with hills, as Cop-land is.

The Air.
(3) The Air is piercing, and of a sharp temperature, and would be more
biting, were it not that those high hills break off the Northern storms, and
cold falling snowes.

The Commodities.
(4) Notwithstanding, rich is this Province, and with great varieties thereof is
replenished: the hills, though rough, yet smile upon their beholders, spread
with sheep and cattle, the valleys stored with grass and corn sufficient:
the sea affords great store of fish, the land overspread with variety of
fowls, and the rivers feed a kind of Muskle that brings forth Pearl, where
in the mouth of the Irt, as they lie gaping and sucking in dew, the Country
people gather and sell to the Lapidaries, to their own little, and the buyers
great gain. But the Mines Royal of Copper, whereof this Country yields
much, is for use the richest of all: the place is at Keswick and Newland, where
likewise the Black Lead is gotten, whose plenty makes it of no great esteem;
otherwise a commodity that could hardly be missed.

The ancient Inhabitants.
(5) The ancient Inhabitants known to the Romans, were the Brigantes, whom
Ptolemie disperseth into Westmerland, Richmond, Durham, Yorke-shire, and
Lancashire. But when the Saxons had over-borne the Britains, and forced them
out of the best, to seek their resting amongst the vast Mountains, these by
them were entered into, where they held play with those enemies maugre their
force, and from them, as Marianus does witness, Marian Scotus.
the Land was called Cumber, of those Kumri the Britains. But when the State
of the Saxons was sore shaken by the Danes, this Cumberland was accounted a
Kingdom it self; for so the flower-gatherer of Westminster records: King
Edmund (says he) with the help of Leoline Prince of South Wales, King Edmund.
wasted all Cumberland, and having put out the eyes of the two sons of
Dunmail King of that Province, granted that Kingdom unto Malcolm King of
Scots, whereof their eldest sons became Prefects. This Province, King
Stephens gift to the Scots.
King Stephen, to purchase favor with the Scots, what time he stood in most
need of aid, confirmed by gift under their Crown; which Henry the Second
notwithstanding made claim unto and got, Henry the Second.
as Newbrigensis writes, and laid it again in the Marches of England: since
when, many bickerings betwixt these Nations herein have happened, but none so
sore against the Scottish side as was that at Sollome-Mosse, where their
Nobility disdaining their General Oliver Sinclere, Oliver S. Clear. James the
sixth, King of Scotland.
gave over the Battle, and yielded themselves to the English; which dishonor
pierced so deeply into the heart of King James the fifth, that for grief
thereof he shortly after died.

(6) Many memorable Antiquities remain and have been found in this County:
for it being the Confines of the Romans Possessions, was continually secured by
their Garrisons, where remain at this day parts of that admirable wall built by
Severus: also an other Fortification from Werkinton to Elns Mouth, upon the
Seashore toward Ireland, by Stilico raised when under Theodosius he suppressed
the rage of the Picts and Irish, and freed the Seas of the Saxons Pirates. Upon
Hardknot hill, Moresby, Old Carleil, Papcastle along the Wall, and in many
other places, their ruins remain, with Altars, and Inscriptions of their
Captains and Colonies, whereof many have been found, and more as yet lie hid.

(7) The chiefest City in this Shire is Carlisle, Carlisle the chief City.
pleasantly seated betwixt the Rivers Eden, Petterell, and Caud, by the Romans
called Luguzallum; by Beda, Luell; by Ptolemie, Leucopibia; by Ninius,
Caer-Lualid; and by us Carlisle. This City flourishing under the Romans, at
their departure, by the furious outrages of the Scots and Picts was dejected,
yet in the days of Egfrid King of Northumberland was walled about: but again
defaced by the overrunning Danes, lay buried in her own ashes the space of
two hundred years: upon whose ruins at length Rufus set his compassionate eye,
and built there the Castle, planting a Colony of Flemings to secure the Coasts
from the Scots, but upon better advisement removed them into Wales. After him,
Henry his brother and successor ordained this City for an Episcopal See:
whose site is placed in the degree of Longitude from the first West part 17.
and 2. scruples, and the Pole thence elevated from the degree of Latitude 55.
and 56. scruples.

(8) West from hence, at Burgh upon the sand, Edward the First.
was the fatal end of our famous Monarch King Edward the First, who there
leaving his Wars unfinished against Scotland, left his troubles, and soon
missed life, to his untimely and soon lamented death.

(9) And at Salkelds upon the River Eden, Castles.
1. B^w. 2. Askirton. 3 Scal^y 4. Nowath. 5. Castlesteed. 6. Castle-carock. 7
Corhy. 8 Lyndstok. 9. Rawcliffe. 10 Drumbugh. 11. A^^allwat. 12. The Roseca. 13
High^ate. 14 Wulsly. 15. Clad^k. 16. Haton. 17 Grastok. 18. Pemeth. 19 Daker.
20. Pape Cast. 21. Cokermouth. 22. Werkinton. 23 Hay. 24 Egremand. 25. Millum.

a Monument of seventie seven stones, each of them ten foot high above ground,
and one of them at the entrance fifteen, as a Trophie of Victory was erected.
These are by the By-dwellers called Long Megge and her Daughters.

(10) This County, as it stood in the fronts of assaults, so was it strengthened
with 25. Castles, and preserved with the prayers (as then was thought) of the
Votaries in the houses erected at Carlisle, Lenecoft, Wetherall, Holme, Daker,
and Saint Bees. These with others were dissolved by King Henry the eight, and
their revenewes shadowed under his Crown: but the Province being freed from
charge of subsidy, is not therefore divided into Hundreds in the Parliament
Rowles, whence we have taken the divisions of the rest: only this is observed,
that therein are seated nine Market-Townes, fifty eight Parish-Churches,
besides many other Chapels of ease.

map of Cumberland CUMBERLAND AND THE ANCIENT CITY CARLISLE DESCRIBED WITH MANY
MEMORABLE AN TIQVITIES THEREIN FOUND OBSERVED


A TABLE of all the Towns in Cumberland.
A
Acton. Aglionby. Aldby. Alhollowes. Alne Flu. Alme. Allonby. Alonby. Alwarby.
Ancautre. Kirk Ander. Anstable. Arladon. Armanthwat castle. Armanthwat.
Armebath. Artruth. Askerton castle. Aspatre. Austermore.
B
Kirk Banton. Little Banton. Bardsey hall. Barrenwood Park. Basmthauate.
Beamont. S. Bees head. S. Bees. Bekermond. Bew-castle. Birtby. Black-band.
Black-hall. Blek-hall. Blencongey. Blenge Flu. Blenkerne. Blynroser. Blenrake.
Bodell. Bolton. Borrodale. Boulnesse. Bowtell. Brakenthwar. Braken hill.
BRAMPTON. Brathwate. Brathwate. S. Brides. Bridgeham. Bridekirk. Brisco.
Brodwater. Bronelston. Brounrig. Brumfeild. Bucknes. Burds would. Burgh kirk.
Burns. Bustwath hill.
C
Cambek Flu. Kirk Cambok. Cammerton. Cander. Canda Flu. Cannonby. Cardew.
Cardronok. Carlton. Carleton. Carleton. CARLISLE. Castle Caroke. Castlesteed.
Caswald how. Catterley. Cauthwate. Chapel of the grune. Church. Cladbek.
Clifton. Coker Flu. Corryhouse. COKERMOVTH. Comb whitton. Copeland. Copeland
forest. Corby Castle. Corno. Cote hill. Cristenbury crag. Crokedale. Croglin
Church. Little Croglin. Crosby. Crosby. Crosthate. Croston. Cumcatith.
Culgaith. Cumrew.
D
Dacor Flu. Dacor castle. Dalemane. Dalegarth. Darwent fels. Darwen Flu.
Darwent Flu. Darwen Island. Dauston. Dauston hall. Denok Flu. Dent hill. Denton
hall. Over Denton. Nether Denton. Dereham. Derwentfote Haven. Devonby. Deyn.
Distinton. Douthwait. P. Drigg.
Drumbugh castle. Dubmill. Dudden Flu. Dunbalrasse stones.
E
Eden Flu. Eden Flu. Ednell. Eglesfeild. EGREMOND. Eimont Flu. Elne Flu.
Elneboro. Emleton. Emsaugh. Enerdale. Esgill. Esk Flu. Eskdale.
F
Fedington. Fingland. Flimby. Forlam. Fornside.
G
Gamlesby. Gamleby. Gargill. The Gele crag. Gelt Flu. Gilcrosse. Gilsland.
Glasenby. Glasen. Gofforth. The Grange. Grastocke Castle. Grinsdale. Grisedale.
H
Hale. Harbybrow. Kard-knot. Hareridge Hall. Harinton. Harington. Harper hill.
Hathewate. Haton Castle. Haton. Haughton. Hay castle. Helbeck crag. Hestedach.
Heskew. Hesket. Highgate. Highyate castle. Holme. The Horse Head. The Houses.
Hudles kew. Huthwate. Huton. Huton John.
I
IERBY. Inglewood forest. S. John's. S. John's. Iohnby. Irthing Flu. Irton. Iet
Flu. Isle. Itenfeild. Itunebay.
K
KESWICK. Kirbek Flu. Kirkanders. Kirkby. The Kirksop foot.
L
The Laith. The Lamiford. Lamonby. Lampley. Langanby. Langnewton. Lasen.
Lasenby. Lathes. S. Laurence. Legburgh wate. Lenecroft. White Leven. Kirk
Leventon. Lenton Flu. Black Leven Flu. The Lies. Limers dale. Lorton. Lowbyer.
Lowswater. Lynstoke Castle. West Lynton.
M
The Masthorn. Materdale. Old Mawborow. Medowhushwood. Melmerby. Mewtoo beacon.
S. Michaels chapel. Millum Castle. Millum Castle. Millum. Milne hill.
Momaster. Moresby. Mosedale. The Mote.
Motherby. The Mines Royal. The Mines.
Myterdale.
N
Naworth castle. Netherby. Newbiggen. Newbiggin. Newby. Newland chapel.
New-lathes. New-more. Newton in Ardale. Nunny.
O
Orton. Overhall. Ousby. Outerbye. Owterside. Owton.
P
Pap-castle. PENRETH. Penrodok. Petterell. Petterell wrey. Plumland. Pole.
Portinskal. Pottrose Flu. Punsonby.
R
Raby-Cotes. Rauderside hall. RAVENGLAS. Raughton head chapel. Rawthate.
Redmane. Reunok. Ribton. The Rose castle. Rotherby. Rowcliffe castle.
Rowcliffe.
S
Saberham. Salkeldes. Sawbarron. Scalbye. Scalby Castle. Scascall. Seaton.
Seaton. Sellofeld. Setmurther. Silluth. Silverside. Skeleton. Skiddow hill.
Skinburnesse. Skirwith. Skutterby. Stafle. Stainton. Stangartiksed. Stanwix.
Stannborn. Stapleton. Sollome Moss. Sowerby. Sowporte. Sowterfeild. Spade
Adam. Shire stones upon Wrenosse. Sunderland.
T
Tallantre. Tarraby. Taukin. Thakthwate. Thornthwate. Threlcot. Thurbury Flu.
Thuresbye. Thwate. South Tyne. Flu. Tomwat hill. Torpenny. The new Town.
Tretermane. Trout Bek.
V
Vent Flu. Uffay park. Uldale. Ulles Flu. Ullok. Unerigg. Unthank. Unthank.
Uprightby.
W
Wakthwate. Waleton. Wampul Flu. VVampall. VVardall. VVarnell. VVarton.
Warwick. VVasdale chapel. Nether Wasdale.
VVatenlath. VVathermelak. VVawburthwat. WERKINTON. VVestward. Westward
forest. VVesthall. Wetherall. Whidbek. Whitridge. Whithaven. Whitlaton.
VVhittyham. Whitelose. Wiborne. Widehope. Winsgell. With hill. Kirses Would.
VVulsty Castle.
THE County of Northumberland, which the English Saxons called
Nort-humberlond, The bounds of Northumberland.
has on the South the Bishopric of Durham, being shut in with the River
Derwent, and with Tyne; the North is confined upon Scotland, the West upon part
of Scotland, and part of Cumberland: the East Side lies altogether upon the
Sea, called Mare-Germanicum.

The Form.
(2) The form thereof is Triangle, and differs not much in the sidings; for
from her South-East unto the South West-point are near unto forty miles; from
thence to her North-point are sixty miles, and her base along the Seashore
fortie-five miles: The whole in circumference is about one hundred forty five
miles.

The Air.
(3) The Air must needs be subtle and piercing, for that the Northernly parts
are most exposed to extremity of weathers, as great winds, hard frosts, and
long lying of snowes, etc. Yet would it be far more sharper then it is, were
not the Germane Seas a ready means to futher the dissolution of her Ice and
Snow, and the plenty of Coals there gotten, a great help to comfort the
body with warmth, and defend the bitter coldness.

The Soil.
(4) The Soil cannot be rich, having neither fertility of ground for corn or
cattle, the most part of it being rough, and in every place hard to be
manured, save only toward the Sea and the River Tyne, where, by the great
diligence and industrious pains of good husbandry, that part is become very
fruitful.

Inhabitants.
(5) The ancient Inhabitants of this Country, mentioned by Ptolemy, were called
Ottalini, Ottadeny, and Ottadini, which by an easy alteration, (as Master
Cambden says) if it had been called Ottatini, signifying, above the Tyne, or
on the further side of Tyne (for so this people were planted) there would have
been much consonance both with the name of the Inhabitants, and the Position
and Site of the Province.

Commodities.
(6) The chiefest commodity that enricheth this County are those stones
Linthancraces, which we call Sea-coales, whereof there is such plenty and
abundance dug up, as they do not only return a great gain to the
Inhabitants, but procure also much pleasure and profit to others.

New Castle.
(7) No place of this Province vents forth so many of these Sea-coales into
other regions as Newcastle does, being the very eye of all the Towns in this
County: for it does not only minister relief (by such provision) to all
other parts of England, but does also furnish the wants of foreign Countries
with her plenty. By means of this, and the intercourse of Traffic which it
has, the place is grown exceeding rich and populous. Before the Conquest it
was called Monk-chester: A rich town.
having been (as it seemed) in the possession of Monks: and Chester being
added, which signifies a bulwark or place of defense, shows that in ancient
time it had been a place of fortification.

The occasion of naming it New Castle.
(8) After the Conquest it got the name of Newcastle, by the new Castle which
Robert the Son of William the Conqueror built there, out of the ground. What
it was called in old time is not known, yet some are of opinion that it may be
thought to have been Gatrosentum, for that Gateshead, the suburb (as it were)
of the same, expresses in the own proper signification that British name
Gatrosentum. It is now most ennobled both by the Haven (which Tyne makes) of
that notable depth, that it bears very tall ships, and is able to defend them
against storms and tempests. As also by many favors and honors where with it
has been dignified by Princes: Richard the second.
for Richard the second, granted that a Sword should be carried before the
Mayor, and Henry the sixth made it a County, Henry the sixth.
consisting of a Corporation within it self. It is adorned with four
Churches, and fortified with strong walls that have eight gates. It is distant
from the first West line 21. degrees and 30. minutes, and from the Equinoctial
line toward the North pole 34. degrees and 57. minutes.

Barwick.
(9) The utmost town in England, and the strongest hold in all Britain, is
Barwick. From whence it had the name is not certainly made known. Some fetch
it from Berengarius a Duke (never read of:) some say it was called Beornica-ic
in the old English-Saxon tongue, which is the Town of the Bernicians.
Howsoever, this is better to be said then trusted: The situation of Barwick.
and whencesoever it has the name, it is seated between two mighty Kingdoms,
shooting far into the Sea, with the which, and the River Tweed, it is almost
encompassed: and whenever any discord fell between the two Nations, this
place was the first thing they took care of. It has endured the brunts of
diverse inroades and incursions, and been oftentimes both possessed and
repossessed of the Scots and English: But since it was reduced under the
command of Edward the fourth, our Kings have from time to time so strengthened
it with new works and fortifications, as they cut off all hopes of winning it.
The Governor.
The Governor of this Town is also Warden of the East Marches against
Scotland. The longitude of it according to Mathematical observation, is 21
degrees and 43. minutes: the latitude 55. degrees and 48. minutes.

(10) The Inhabitants of this County are a warlike people, Battles in this
Country.
and excellent light horsemen, and are made fierce and hard by the several
encounters of the Scots, and not much unlike them in neither, betwixt whom in
this County many battles have been fought, and the successes oftentimes waved
through very doubtfully, the victory sometimes falling to the Scots, sometimes
to the English. At Otterburne was one, Battles at Otterburne.
in which three or four times it stood doubtfully indifferent, till in the
end, the Scots got the upper hand of the English: Howbeit their glory was not
made so illustrious by this Conquest, but that it was as much darkened by the
foil they received at Anwicke, Anwick.
where William King of the Scots, was taken and presented prisoner to Henry the
2. As also by that battle at Brumridge, Brumridge.
where King Athelstan fought a pitched field against Anlase the Dane,
Constantine King of Scots, and Eugenius king of Cumberland, and that with such
fortunate success, as it has left matter sufficient to fill the pens of
Historians. Flodden-field.
Flodden field also memorable in the death of James the fourth, king of Scots,
who was there slain, and his Army overthrown in a sharp fight, as he
displayed his Banner (in great hope) against England, when king Henry the 8.
lay at the siege of Turnay in France.

(11) Other battles in this County have been, as that at Hexam (called by
Bid, Hexam.
Hangustald) wherein John Nevill Marquess Montacute, encountered the Leaders of
the Lancastrian faction with much courage, and with greater success put them
to flight, for which he was made Earl of Northumberland by Edward the fourth.
Dilston.
As also that at Dilston (by Bid called Dinelsburne,) where Oswald having the
faith of Christ for his defense and armor, slew Cedwall the Britain in a set
battle, himself straight-wayes becoming a professed Christian, and causing
his people to be instructed in Christian Religion.

(12) Many memorable Antiquities are found in this Country along the wall,
Antiquities.
and in other places: As pieces of Coin, Inscriptions, broken and unprefect
Altars, etc. (the ruins of the wall yet to be seen: (but none that deserves
more to be remembered then Wall-Town (by Bid called Ad Murum) for that Segbert
King of the East Saxons was in it baptized in the Christian faith by the hands
of Paulinus: and Halyston, Halyston.
where the same Paulinus is said to have baptized many thousands in the faith
of Christ, in the Primitive Church of the English Nation.

(13) Busy-gap is a place infamous for robbing and theeving, Busy-gap.
and is therefore rather remembered as a cautiatory note for such as have cause
to travel that way, then for any proper matter of worth it has, that merits
place with other parts of this Province.

Other matters of observation are only these, Light Horsemen.
that North Tyne (running through the Wall) waters two Dales, which breed
notable light Horsemen, and both of them have their hills (hard by) so boggie,
and standing with water on the top, that no Horsemen are able to ride through
them, and yet (which is wonderful) there be many great heaps of stones (called
Laws) which the neighboring people are verily persuaded were cast up and laid
together in old time, in remembrance of some that were slain there. There is
also a Martial kind of men which lie out, up and down in little cottages, A
Martial kind of men.
(called by them Sheales and Shealings) from April to August, in scattering
fashion, summering (as they term it) their cattle, and these are such a sort
of people as were the ancient Nomades. The last, not least, matter of note is
this, that the Inhabitants of Morpeth set their own Town on fire in the year
of Christ 1215. in the spite they bare to King John, Morpeth.
for that he and his Rutars overran these Countries.

This County has five Market-Townes in it for her trade of buying and
selling, Market Towns.
26. Castles for her strength and fortification, and 460. Parish-Churches for
divine service.

map of Northumberland NORTHUMBERLAND.


A
ABsheles. Acam. Ackton. Acton. Akelynton. Allanton. Allenton. Almeburne.
ALNEWICK. Alnham. East Al^ow flu. West Allow flu. Anbell. Ancraft. Angetton.
Anter-Chester. Aperley. Ashington. Asper sheles. Averwick. Aumond hill. Aydon
Castle. Aylmouth. Aylnammore.
B
Bamburg. Barmore. Barodon. Barraford. Barrinton. BARWICK. Barwick. Great
Bavinton. Bearle. Bedenell. Bedlinton. Bedford. Bellister castle. Bellerley.
The Bellyn. Belkerk. Belsey castle. Beltingham. Beneley. Bentham. Benwell.
Berling. Great Bewick. Little Bewick. Bewfront. Bichefield. Bickerton. Biker.
Billingham. Billistone. Bilton. Bingfield. Brikes. Biwell castle. Blacklaw.
Black-brea. Black-bedon. Blakedon. Black-hall. Blake law. Blakeworth.
Blenkensop Castle. Blithe flu. Blithes Newkes. Bolam. Bottle Castle. Bowesden.
Bowmet. Bowton. Bradford. Bradley hall. Brankeston. Bransaugh. Branton.
Branton. Brearidge. Brenkhorn. Brinkley. Brom park. Bromeridge. Bromish flu.
Brumley. Brunton. Bruntons. Buckton. Budle. Burdop. Burrodon. Burtley. Burton.
Buston. Busigap. Buteland. Butterhagh.
C
Caddon. Callalee. Callie park. Cammas. Captheaton. Carehouse. North Carleton.
South Carleton. Carram. Carrow tower. Carswell. The Carter. Castley.
Catchaside. Catchborne. Causey. Cerbridge. Charleton. Chatton. Chesterwood.
Cheswick. Chetlop Burn. Cheviot hills. East-Chevinton. West-Chevinton.
Chillingham. Chirden. Chipechase. Chirtons. Cholerton. Claroo. Cockley. Cockley
town. Cocket flu. Coket Island. Cocklaw hill. Cold-Marton. Conwood chapel
Colwell. Cornwale. Corsenside. Cortington castle Cotewall tower. Coupland.
Cowpon. Cragshels. Cramlinton. Crawley. Crawstor. Christenbury cra. Crocklaw.
Cronkley. Cunningarth.
D
Dala Castle. Dareshall. Dawton. Deddington. Denijk. Denton. Detcham.
Dichborns. Dilston. Dissingtons. Doteland. Donols flu. Downeham. Doxford.
Druriche. Duke pull. Dunkefield. Dunnington. Dunston. Dunterley. Dunstaburgh
Castle. Durtreborn.
E
Eawden. Edderston. Edington. Edlingham castle. Eglingham. Eland hall. Eldes.
Elford. Elihaugh. Elis. Elishaw. Ellesden. Ellingham. Ellyke. Elmeley.
Eltringham. Embleton. Emmothilis. Emmouthough. Erington. Erisden. Eslington.
Espley. Essheales. Etall. Etall Castle. Evart.
F
Fallowfield. Farley. Farnlaw. Fauston hall. Fauterley. Fawlee. Faulick.
Fawnes. Felkinton. Felton. Fennam. Fennik. Fennik hall. Fetherston haugh.
Flights fell. Flodden hill. Font flu. Ford Castle. Fowbre. Framlington.
G
Garretlee. The Gelecrag. Gijsons. Gilderdale. Glanthisse. Glanton. Gloucester.
The Grange. Grange. Green. Greenchester. Green haugh. Green hatherly. Green
Leighton Greenested. Grindridge. North Gosford South Gosford. Goswick.
Grotehugh. Gunnerton.
H
Haden bridge. Haggerston. Haledon. Halewell. Halidon hill. Haliston. Halton
hall. Halton-sheeles. Halt-wesell. Hambleton. Hamburne hall. The Haggiston.
Haton. Hathrington. wark. Haughton. Haukeslaw. Haukwell. Hawcople. Hay close.
Haydon. Hartbottle castle. Harehaugh. Harelaw. Harford. Kirk Harle. West Harle
Harnam. Harlow. Harsingside. Hartborn. Harterton. Hartley flu. Hartley.
Hartside. Harvep. Harwood sheeles Headly. Heaton. Heborn. Hebborne. Heddon.
East Heddon. Hedgely. The He field. Hefferlaw. Helterborne. Heppescote. Hessh.
Heslaside. Heselridge. Old Heton. Herton. HEXAM. Hexley. Highley. Hoclugh.
Holy Island. Holinhead. Horde. The horshead. Horsley. Horton Grange. Horton
Castle. Howborne. Howick. Howtell. Long Houghton. Houghton. Houghton. Hugh.
Hull. Hurst. Hyndley.
I
Ilderton. Ingram. Ingey. S. John Lee.
K
Kemblespeth hill. Kenton. Kepik. Killam. Killinworth. Kinsingham. Kirkhaugh.
Kirkley. Kirk whelpington. Kineleyside. Knaresdale. Knewdon. Kyley.
L
Lamley. Lamyford. Langhaugh. Langley Castle. Langton. Leame. Leaplyshe.
Learmouth. Lee-hall. Lees. Leminaton. Lesbury. East Lilborne. West Lilborne.
Lire hillam. Longhope. Longhurst. Longshawes. Long-witton. The forest of
Lowes. Lowick. Lowlyn. Lucker. Lungridge. Lurbottle. Lynbridge. Line flu.
Lynton. Lyom.
M
Mad-fennes. Maiden cross. Marelet. S. Margaret. Medow-hough. Melchriche.
Meldon. Mickeley. Middleborn. Middleton. Middleton. Middleton hall. Middletons.
Milborne. Milfield. Minsterakers. Mitforth. Monk-seton. Moretowne. Nether
Morley. MORPETH. Morrik. Morton. Mosedon. Mowap. Mousewell. Munk. Munkryse.
N
Nesbet. Netherton. Nethpoole. Newbiggin. Newbiggin. Newbiggin. Newbiggins.
Newbiggins. Newborn. Newburgh. New Chapel. NEW CASTLE. Newlands. Newneham.
Newsham. Newshele. Newsted. Newtowne. Newtowne. Newtowne. Newtowne. Newton.
Newton. Newton. Newton. Newton hall. Newton kirk. Nobock. Nopton. Norham.
Norton. Nuke. Nunnikirk. Nunriding.
O
Ogle Castle. Oldtowne. Ord. S. Oswald. Otterburne. Over-hall. Over-Acres.
Ovinton. Ovingham. Ouldtowne. Outchester. Owmers. Owston.
P
Padston. Parkhead. Pegton. Penpughe. Permandley. Plankford. Plashe. Pont flu.
Pontland. Portgate. Prendick. Preslik. Pessan. Preston. Pruddo Castle.
R
Ratten Raw. Rause Castle hill. Raylees. Radeswouth. Redesdale. Rellosyse.
Revela. The Reye.
Ridlamhope. Ridland flu. Ridley flu. Little Rile Great Rile. Riplington.
Rising. Robbs Cross. Rock. Rochester. Rodom. Rothbury. Rotheley. Roseborne.
Roseden. Rosse. Rugley. Runington. Rutchester. Rutchester.
S
Sammeshouse. Sandon. Seaton. Seaton. Seaton dalavell. Sewenshele. Sibbenes.
Sibton sheles. Sighill. Simonburn castle. Simonside. Sindrop. Sharpenton.
Shavon. Shelduks. Shele flu. Shele-hall. Shepewash. Shilburnehaugh. Shilbottel.
Shilvington. Shipley. Shitlinton. Shorley. Shortslat. Shoston. Shotley.
Shotton. Skrimmerston. Skernwood. Slealey. Slekbornes. Smalborne. Smalborne.
Snepe. Snipe-house. Snitter. Snuke-banke. Spi-Crag. Spindleston. The Spittle.
The Spittle.
Spurtwell. White Squire hill. The red Squire. Stanforth. Stannington. Stanton.
Steel hall. Stele. Stonehall. Stokeswood. Stoubes. Stavertpeele. Sunderland.
Swinborne castle. Little Swinborn
Swinnon. The Side.

T
Tarsell. Till flu. Tinmouth. Tinmouth Castle. Titlington. Thecam. Thirlewall.
Thokerinton. Thornburn. Thornhope. Thornham tower Thornton. Thornton. Throple.
Throxton. Todhorn. Toddelwood. Togesden. Toneley. Tossons. Over Trewhet. Nether
Trewhet. Tritlinton. Troughwhen. Tuggell. Tweedmouth. Tweedmouth. Tweed flu.
Twisell Tylmouth. Tyne flu. Tyne flu. Tyne head. Tyndale.
V
Vgham. Vnthank. Vsway flu.
W
Wall. Wall town. Wallington. Walker. Walwick. Wamson. Wanspeck flu. Warden.
Warke Castle. Warn flu. Warnemouth. Warnford. Warton. Warmouth. Wateryate.
Wawbottle. Weldon. Welton. Wesell. Wetewood. Weteslades. West Newton. Widon.
Wilam. Williamston. Willinton. Willy Motswick. Winchester. Windram. Winnelraw.
Wintrig. Witherington Castle. Whanton. Wharby. The Whele Feil. West Welpington.
Whitchester. Whitfield. Whitfield hall. Whitlathe. Whitley sheeles. Whitside.
Whittel. Whittentons. Whittrenstall. Whittingham. Whitton Castle. Whitton
tower. Woodburnes. Wooden. Woodhall. Woodhouses. Woodhouse. Woperden.
Workesborn. Worndon. Wreghill. Wullaw. Wuller.
Y
Yardrop. Yarro. Yarnwiche. Yellinton. Yeverin hill.
THE I Will of Man is termed by Ptolemy, Moneda; by Pliny, Monabia; Diversity of
names.
by Orosius, Menavia; by Beda, Menavia secunda; and by Gyldas, Eubonia, and
Manaw. The Britains name ^^ Men^^; the inhabitants, Maninge; and we
Englishmen, The I Will of Man. It boundeth Northward upon Scotland, Southward
upon the I Will of Anglesey, Eastward upon part of Lancashire, and Westward upon
the Coast of Ireland.

Form.
(2) The form is long and narrow; for from Cransl^n to the Mull-hils, where it
is longest, it only stretches it self to twenty nine miles; but from the
widest part, Dimensitie.
which is from Peele-Castle, to Douglas-point, are scarce nine; the whole
compass about, is four score and two miles.

(3) The air is cold and sharp, being bordering upon the Septentrionall parts,
Air.
and for her shelter having but a wall of water. They have few Woods; only
they light sometimes upon subterranean trees buried under the ground, by
digging up the earth for a clammie kind of Turfe, which they use for fuel.

Soil.
(4) The soil is reasonable fruitful both for Cattle, Fish, and Corn; yet it
rather commends the pains of the people then the goodness of the ground; for
by the industry of the Inhabitants it yields sufficiency of every thing for
it self, and sends good store into other Countries. It has fields (by good
manuring) plenteous of Barley and Wheat, but especially of Oats; and from hence
it comes that the people eat most of all Oaten bread. It bears abundance of
Hemp and Flax, Oaten-bread.
and is full of mighty flocks of sheep and other Cattle: yet are they
smaller in body then we have in England, and are much like to the Cattle in
Ireland that are neighboring upon it.

Commodities.
(5) This commmodity makes this Island more happy then we are here: for the
people are there free from unnecessary commencements of Suites, from long and
dilatory Pleas, and from frivolous feeing of Lawyers. Freedom from vexation in
Lawing.
No Judge or Clerks of the Court take there any penny for drawing Instruments,
or making of Processes. All controversies are there determined by certain
Judges, without writings or other charges, and them they call Deemsters, and
choose forth among themselves. The Magistrates manner of warrant for summoning
a party before him.
If any complaint be made to the Magistrate for wrongs either done or suffered,
he presently takes up a stone, and fixes his mark upon it, and so delivers
it unto the party plaintiff, by virtue of which he both calls his adversary to
appearance, and to produce his witnesses. If the case fall out to be more
litigious, and of greater consequence then can easily be ended, it is then
referred to twelve men, whom they term The keys of the Island. Another
happiness enricheth this Island, namely, the security and government thereof,
as being defended from neighbor enemies by Soldiers that are pressed and ready;
for on the South Side of the I Will stands Bala-Curi (the Bishops chief place of
residence) and the Pyle, Bala-Curi the Bishops palace.
and a Blockhouse standing in a little Island, where there is a continual
Garrison of Soldiers. And it is so well managed for matter of rule and civil
discipline, that every man there possesses his own in peace and safety. No
man lives in dread or danger of losing what he has. Men are not there inclined
to robbing or theeving, or licentious living.

(6) The inhabitants of this Island are for the most part religious,
Religiousnesse of the people.
and loving to their Pastors, to whom they do much reverence and respect,
frequenting duly to divine service, without division in the Church or
innovation in the Co^mon-weale. The wealthier sort, and such as hold the
fairest possessions, do imitate the people of Lancashire, both in their honest
carriage and good hous-keeping. Howbeit the common sort of people both in their
language and manners, come nighest unto the Irish although they somewhat relish
and savor of the qualities of the Norwegians.

(7) Things not worthy to be buried in the grave of oblivion are, Matters
worthy of note.
that this Island in the midst thereof rises up with hills, standing very
thick, amongst which the highest is called Sceafull, from which upon a clear
and fair day, a man may easily see three Kingdoms at once; that is, England,
Scotland, and Ireland. This I Will prohibits the customary manner of begging from
door to door, detesting the disorders, as well Civil as Ecclesiastical, of
neighbour-Nations. The women's girdles when they go abroad
And last, not least, that deserves to be committed to memory, is, that the
women of this Country, wheresoever they go out of their doors, gird themselves
about with the winding sheet that they purpose to be buried in, to show
themselves mindful of their mortality: The manner of death for Malefactors.
and such of them as are at any time condemned to die, are sowed within a sack,
and flung from a rock into the sea.

(8) The whole I Will is divided into two parts, The partition of this Isle.
South and North, whereof the one resembles the Scottish in speech, the other
the Irish. It is defended by two Castles, and has seventeen Parishes, five
Market-Townes, and many Villages.

A Table of the Towns, Villages, Castles, Rivers, and Havens within the I Will of
Man, Alphabetically gathered.
A
Kirk Andrew. The point of Air.
B
Baladoul, Balalough. Kirk Balalough. Balicaken. Balisaly Abbey. Balisaly Town.
Friry Bewmakan. Kirk Bridge. Kirk Brodon.
C
Caltregh. The Calfe of Man. Castle Town Bay. Kirk Christ. Kirk Christ.
Chapel. Clanmoy flu. Cobbe Borne. Corte. Cranston.
D
Dauby point. Dauby Town. Douglas point. DOUGLAS town. Douglas haven.
E
Egnes.
F
Fleshik.
G
Glan-Brow. Glan-Cam.
I
Kirk Jarman. Jeorby point. Saint John's Chapel.
K
Saint Katherins Chapel Kirk Kerbrey.
L
The point Lang-nouse. Laxi-Bay. Laxi-point. LAXI TOWN. Kirk Lennon. Loughe.
M
Kirk Magh haul. Kirk Magh-hauls head. Malarlough. Kirk Mali. Kirk Migh-hil.
Kirk Migh-hill flu. Saint Migh-hills Island. Min-hugh. Kirk Mortown. The
Mull-hills.
N
Neb flu. The Nunnery.
O
Kirk Onkon.
P
Kirk Patriark. Kirk Patriark of the Peel. PEEL-Town. Peel-Castle. Polt Bash.
Port Earn. Portell Morrey. Portwick.
R
Ramsey. RAMSEY Town. Ramsey haven. RUSHIN Castle.
S
Scarthlat. Shellack point. Snafeld. Solbe mouth. Solbe flu. Spalork. The
Stack. Kirk Stanton.
V
Vark.
W
Watch-hill. The white Water. Black Water. Whetston.
map of the Isle of Man THE ISLE OF MAN Exactly desribed, and into several
Parishshes divided, with every Town, Village, Baye, Creke, and River therein
contained. The bordringe Coasts wherewith it is circulated in their Situations
self, and by the Compase accordi^gly showed, with their true distance from
every place unto this Island by a several scale observed


IT is here very pertinent to the purpose, to insert a small History of this
Island, that the atchieveme^ts heretofore had, may not be utterly buried,
although they are waxen very old, and almost torn from remembrance by the teeth
of Time. It is confessed by all, that the Britains held this Island, as they did
all Britain But when the Nations from the North over fl^wed these South parts,
like violent tempests, it became subject to the Scots. Afterward the
Norwegians, who did most hurt from the Northern sea by their manifold robberies
made this Island and the He^rides to be their haunt, and erected Lords and petty
Kings in the same, as is expressed in this Chronicle, Written (as is reported)
by the Monks of the Abbey of Russin.

A Chronicle of the Kings of MAN.
ANno Dom, 1^65. Edward, of blessed memory, King of England, departed this
life, and Harald the son of Godwyn succeeded him in the Kingdom, against
whom Harald Harfager (King of Norway) came into the field, and fought a battle
at Stainford bridge: but the English obtaining the victory, put them all to
f^ight. Out of which chase Godred, Syrric King of Man.
surnamed Crovan, the son of Harald the Black of Iseland, came unto Godred the
son of Syrric, who reigned then in Man, and honorably received him.

Fingall.
(2) The same year William the Bastard conquered Enggland, and Godred the son
of Syrric died, his son Fingall succeeding him.

(3) An. 1066. Godred Crovan assembled a great Fleet, and came to Man, and
fought with the people of the Land, but received the worst, and was overcome.

The second time renewing his forces and his Fleet, he sailed into Man and
joined battle with the Manksmen, but was vanquished as before, and driven out
of the field. Howbeit, what he could not at first bring to pass with power in
those two several Onsets, he afterward effected by policy. For the third time
gathering a great multitude together, he arrived by night in the haven called
Ramsey, and hid three hundred men in a Wood, which stood upon the hanging
hollow brow of an hill called Sceafull. The Sun being risen, the Manksmen put
their people in order of battle, and with a violent charge encountered with
Godred. Godred Crovan. King.
The sight was hot for a time, and stood in a doubtful suspense, till those
three hundred men starting out of the Ambush behind their backs, began to foyl
the Manksmen, put them to the worst, and forced them to fly. Who seeing
themselves thus discomfited, and finding no place of refuge left them to
escape, with pitiful lamentation submitted themselves unto Godred, and
besought him not to put to the sword such poor remainder of them as was left
alive. Godred having compassion on their calamities, (for he had been nursed
for a time and brought up among them) founded a retreat, and prohibited his
host any longer pursuit. He being thus possessed of the I Will of Man, dyed in the
Island that is called I Will, when he had reigned sixteen years. He left behind
him three sons, Lagman, Harald, and Olave.

Lagman King.
(4) Lagman the eldest, taking upon him the Kingdom, reigned seven years. His
brother Harald rebelled against him a great while; but at length was taken
prisoner by Lagman, who caused his members of generation to be cut off, and his
eyes to be put out of his head; which cruelty this Lagman afterward
repenting, gave over the Kingdom of his own accord, and wearing the badge of
the Lords Cross, took a journey to Jerusalem, in which he died.

(5) An. 1075. all the Lords and Nobles of the Islands hearing of the death of
Lagman, dispatched Ambassadors to Murecard O^brien King of Ireland, and
requested that he would send some worthy and industrious man of the Blood
Royal to be their King, till Olave the son of Godred came to full age. Dopnald
King.
The King yielding to their request, sent one Dopnald the son of Tade, and
charged him to govern the Kingdom (which by right belonged to another) with
lenity and gentleness. But after he was come to the Crown, forgetting, or
not weighing, the charge that his Lord and Master had given him, swayed his
place with great tyranny, committing many outrages and cruelties, and so
reigned three years: till all the princes of the Islands agreeing together, rose
up against him, and made him fly into Ireland.

Olave King.
(6) An. Do. 1111. Olave the son of Godred Crovan aforesaid, began his reign,
and reigned forty years, a peaceable Prince. He took to wife Africa, the
daughter of Fergus of Galway, of whom he begat Godred. By his Concubines he had
Raignald, Lagman and Harald, besides many daughters, whereof one was married to
Summerled, Prince of Herergaidel, who caused the ruin of the Kings of the
Islands. On her he begat four sons, Dungal, Raignald, Engus, and Olave.

Godred the second King.
(7) An. Dom. 1144. Godred the son of Olave, was created King of Man, and
re^gned thirty years. In the third year of his reign the people of Dublin sent
for him, and made him their King, Which Mure-card King of Ireland maligning,
raised war, and sent Osibeley his half brother by the mothers side with 3000.
men at Arms to Dublin, who by Godred and the Dublinians was slain, and the
rest all put to flight. These atchieveme^ts made, Godred returned to Man, and
began to use tyranny, turning the Noblemen out of their inheritances. Whereupon
one called Thorfin ( Otters son) being mightier then the rest, came to
Summerled, and made Dulgal ( Summerleds son) king of the Islands: whereof Godred
having intelligence, prepared a Navy of 80. Ships to meet Summerled. And in
the year 1156 there was a battle fought at Sea on Twelfth day at night, and
many slain on both sides. But the next day they grew to a pacification, and
divided the Kingdom of the Islands among themselves. This was the cause of the
overthrow of the Kingdom of the Isles.

(8) An. 1158. Summerled came to Man, with a Fleet of fifty three sail, put
Godred to flight, and wasted the land. Godred upon this crossed over to Norway
for aid against Summerled. But Summerled in the mean time arriving at
Rhinfrin* and having gathered together a fleet of a 160. ships coveting to
subdue all Scotland, by the just judgment of God, was vanquished by a few, and
both himself and his son slain, with an infinite number of people.

(9) The fourth day after, Raignald began to reign, but Godred coming upon him
out of Norway with a great multitude of armed men, took his brother Raignald,
and bereft him both of his eyes, and genitall members. On the fourth Ides of
November, An. Dom. 1187. Godred King of the Islands died, and his body was
translated to the I Will of Ely. He left behind him three sons, Raignald, Olave,
and Yuar. He ordained in his life time that Olave should succeed him, because
he only was born legitimate. But the people of Man seeing him to be scarce ten
years old, sent for Raignald, and made him their King. Raignald King of Man.
This caused great division, and many turbulent attempts between the two
Brethren for the space of thirty eight years; which had no end, till at a place
called Tnigua^^a there was a battle struck between them, wherein Olave had the
victory, and Raignald was slain. The Monks of Russin translated his body unto
the Abbey of S. Mary de Fournes, and there interred it in a place which himself
had chosen for that purpose.

(10) An. 1230. Olave and Godred Don (who was Raignalds son) with the
Norwegians came to Man, Olave the second King.
and divided the Kingdom among themselves. Olave held Man, and Godred being
gone unto the Islands, was slain in the I Will Lodhus. So Olave obtained the
Kingdom of the Isles. He dyed the twelfth Calends of June, An. 1237. in S.
Patricks Island, and was buried in the Abbey of Russin.

(11) Harrold his son succeeded him, Harrold King of Man.
being fourteen years of age, and reigned twelve years. In the year 1239. he
went unto the King of Norway, who after two years confirmed unto him, his
heirs and successors, under his Seal, all the Islands which his Predecessors
had possessed.

(12) An. Do. 1242. Harrold returned out of Norway, and being by the
inhabitants honorably received, had peace with the Kings of England, and of
Scotland. The same year he was sent for by the King of Norway, and married his
daughter. In the year 1249. as he returned homeward with his wife, he was
drowned in a tempest near unto the coasts of Radland.

(13) An. Dom. 1249. Raignald the son of Olave, and brother to Harrold,
Raignald the second King.
began his reign, and on the thirtieth day thereof was slain by one Yuar a
Knight, in a meadow near unto the holy Trinity Church, and lies buried in the
Church of S. Mary of Russin.

(14) In the year 1252. Magnus the son of Olave, came to Man, Magnus King of
Man.
and was made King. The next year following he went to the King of Norway and
stayed there a year.

(15) In the year 1265. Magnus, ( Olaves son) King of Man, and of the Islands,
departed this life, at the Castle of Russin, and was buried in the Church of S.
Mary of Russin.

(16) In the year 1266. the Kingdom of the Islands was translated, by reason of
Alexander King of Scots, who had gotten into his hands the western Islands, and
brought the I Will of Man under his dominion, as one of that number.

(17) An. 1340. William Montacute Earl of Salisbury wrested it from the Scottish
by strong hand and force of Arms: and in the year 1393. (as Thomas Walsingham
says) he sold Man and the Crown thereof unto William Scroope for a great sum
of money. But he being beheaded for high Treason and his goods confiscate, it
came into the hands of Henry the fourth King of England, who granted this Island
unto Henry Percy Earl of Northumberland. But Henry Percy entering into open
rebellion the fifth year following, the king sent Sir John Stanley and William
Stanley to seize the I Will and Castle of Man, the inheritance whereof he granted
afterward to Sir John Stanley and his heirs by Letters patents, with the
Patronage of the Bishopric, etc. So that his heirs and successors, who were
honored with the Title of Earls of Darby, were commonly called Kings of Man.

HOLY ISLAND.
THis Island is called Lindisfarne, by the River Lied that is opposite unto it
on the Coast of Northumberland. Beda terms it a Demi Island. The Britains
name it Inis Medicante, for that it twice every day suffers an extraordinary
inundation and over-flowng of the Ocean in manner of an Island, which twice
likewise makes it continent to the Land, and returning unto her watery
habitation, lays the Shore bare again, as before. It is called in English,
Holy-Iland, for that in ancient times many Monks have been accustomed to retire
themselves thither, and to make it their receptacle for solitude: having on the
West and South, Northumberland, and more South-Eastward the Island Farne.

(2) The form of it is long and narrow, the West side narrower then the East,
and are both conjoined by a very small spang of Land that is left unto Conies.
The South is much broader then the rest. It is from East to West about two
thousand two hundred and fifty pases; and from North to South, twelve hundred
and fifty pases; so that the circumference cannot be great.

(3) The air is not very good either for health or delight, as being seated on
those parts that are subject to extremity of cold, and greatly troubled with
vapors and foggy mists that arise from the Seas.

(4) The soil cannot be rich, being rockie and full of stones, and unfit for
Corn and tillage. It is neither commended for hills to feed sheep, nor
pastures to fat cattle, neither has it valleys replenished with sweet springs,
or running rivellets, only one excepted, descending from a standing pond. The
only thing this Island yields, is a fit and accommodate aptitude for Fishing
and Fowling.

(5) Notwithstanding this is very worthy of note concerning the same, which
Alcuin wrote in an Epistle to Egelred King of Northumberland, namely, that it
was a place more venerable then all the places of Britain, and that after the
departure of S. Paulinus from York, there Christian Religion began in their
Nation, though afterward it there felt the first beginning of misery and
calamity, being left to the spoil of Pagans and Miscreants.

(6) It is also remembered of this Island, that sometimes there has been in it
an Episcopal See, which Aidan the Scot instituted (being called thither to
preach the Christian Faith to the people of Northumberland) being much
delighted with the solitary situation thereof, as a most fit place for retire.
But afterward when the Danes, rifled and robbed all the Seacoasts, the
Episcopal See was translated to Durham.

(7) This Island so small in account either for compass or commodity, and so
unpeopled and unprofitable, cannot be numerous in Towns and Villages. It has
in it only one Town, with a Church and a Castle, under which there is a
commodious Haven, defended with a Block-house, situate upon an hill toward the
South-East.

FARNE I WILL.
THis I Will South-Eastward seven miles from Holy Island, shows it self distant
almost two miles from Bambrough Castle. On the West and South it bears upon
Northumberland, and on the North-East side it has other smaller Islands
adjoining to it, as Wid-pens and Staple Island, which lie two miles off
Brondsman, and two lesser then these which are called the Wambes.

(2) The form of this I Will is round, and no larger in compass then may easily
be ridden in one half of a day. The breadth of it is but five miles, and the
length no more. The whole circumference extends it self no further then to
fifteen miles.

(3) The air is very unwholesome, and subject both to many Dysenteries and
other diseases, by reason of the mistie fogges and exhalations that are
thereunto drawn up from the Ocean. It is many times troubled with unusual
tempests of winds, with boisterous fury of stormy raines, and with several
and uncouth rages of the Sea.

(4) The soil cannot be fertile, being encircled about with craggy clifts;
neither has it in it much matter either of pleasure or profit. It can neither
defend it self from cold, lacking fuel, as Wood, Cole, Turfs, etc. nor from
famine, wanting food, as Corn, Pastures, Cattle, etc. The best commodity it
yields, is Fish and Foul.

(5) This thing nevertheless is worthy to be remembered of it, which Beda
(writing of the life of Cuthbert Bishop of Lindisfarne, Beda in the life of
Cuthbert.
that Tutelar Patron of the Northern Englishmen) reports, namely, that in
this I Will he built a City fitting his government, and erected certain houses
in the same* the whole building standing almost round in compass, and reaching
the space of four or five pearches. The wall about it he made higher then a
man's height, to withold and keep in the wanton lasciviousness both of his
thoughts and eyes, and to elevate the whole intention of his mind up to
heavenly desires, that he might wholly give himself to the service of God. But
these are all made the ruins of time, as sithence many other Monuments have
been, of worthy antiquite.

(6) I cannot report that there are now many houses standing in it, much less
Towns or Villages. Only this, that it has a Tower or place of Fortification
belonging unto it, placed well near in the middle part of the I Will.

map of Holy Island HOLY ISLAND


map of the Farne Islands FARNE


map of Guernsey GARNSEY


map of Jersey IARSEY


GARNSEY.
THis Island lies about five Leagues North-West from Iersey, and is compassed
(like to her neighbor) with the British Sea. It lies in length from Plymouth
Bay South-West, to Lancrosse de Anckers North-East, thirteen miles: in breadth
from Saint Martins point South-East, to the How North-west nine miles; and is
in circuit thirty six miles. The Emperor Antonine having the rule and
domination of France (at that time called Gaul, from whence the word Gallia is
derived) did name this Island Sarnia, which afterward by the change of Times and
corruption of Languages, was long since (and is at this day) called Garnsey.

(2) This I Will in form and fashion stands in the Sea, much like to a Park
that is encompassed round about with a Pale of Rocks, being very defensible
unto the Island from the attempting Invasion of enemies.

(3) The Air and Climate of this I Will has little or no difference in temper or
quality from that of Iersey. And this deserves to be remembered of it; that in
this I Will is neither Toade, Snake, Adder, or any other venomous creature, and
the other has great plenty.

(4) It stands for the most part upon a rock, very high in many places from
the Sea. Nevertheless the Soil is very fruitful, yielding forth great
plenty of grass for their Sheep and other Cattle, which they have to serve
all uses. Their fields in the Summer time are so naturally garnished with
flowers of all sorts, that a man (being there) might conceit himself to be in
a pleasant artificial garden.

(5) The Inhabitants are not so much given to tillage as they of Iersey though
the soil be as fruitful. They have of late taken great delight in planting
and setting of trees of all sorts, and especially of Apples, by reason whereof
they make much Cider. Their commodities are alike, and their helps from the Sea
no less, or rather more.

(6) In this I Will are many great steep rocks, among which is found a hard stone
called by the Frenchmen Smyris, which we term Emerill. This stone is
serviceable for many purposes, and many Trades, as Glasiers, etc. but
especially for the Goldsmiths and Lapidaries, to cut their precious stones.

(7) It has a head of Land upon the North part thereof, the passage into which
is so narrow, that a man would think that at every Tide (the Sea beating
strongly on both sides) it were in a continual danger to be sundred from the
other part of the I Will. This place is called S. Michael in the Vale, where (in
former times) stood a Priory, or a Covent of Religious persons, the ruins
whereof are at this day to be seen.

(8) The government of this I Will, in nature and form resembles the other of
Iersey, of whom shall be said. The people are in their Original and Language
alike also, but in their customs and conditions they come nearer the civil
fashions of the English. Other matters of moment I find not worthy to be
recorded.

It has ten Parishes, and one Market Town, being also a Haven, and is called
S. Peter's Port, built close by the Peer, and Castle Cornet.

IERSEY.
THe two Islands Iersey and Garnsey, being the only remains of the Dukedom of
Normandy, that in former times many years together was in the possession, and
under the command of the Kings of England, annexing thereunto a large territory
and glorious title to the Crown, are both seated in the Sea called Mare
Britannicum, the Ocean parting them a good distant asunder, and are now both
adjuncts, and within the circuit of Hampshire. For the first (being the Isle of
Iersey) it lies upon the British Sea, having on the North parts the Coast of
Hampshire, and on the South the Country of Normandy.

(2) This Island is long, not much unlike the fashion of an egg. It contains
in length from Sentwon Poole upon the West, to Mount Orguil Castle on the East,
ten miles, and in breadth from Dubon Point to Plymount bay, six miles: the whole
circuit of the Island being thirty eight miles. It is distant from a little
Island called Alderney, about four leagues. It was in old time called Caesarea;
whether from Julius Octavius, or any the other Caesar's that followed, is
unknown. But the Frenchmen have by corruption of speech long time called it
Iersey.

(3) It is a very delightsome and healthful Island, and gives a pleasant
aspect unto the seas. It lies Southward not far from a craggy ridge of
rocks, which is much feared of the Mariners, and makes the passage that way
very dangerous, howbeit it serves for a forcible defense against Pirates, or any
strangers that attempt invasion, and they are termed Casquets.

(4) The Soil is very fertile, bringing forth store of Corn and Cattle, but
especially of Sheep, that are of reasonable bigness, the most of them bearing
four horns a piece: Their wool very fine and white, of which the Inhabitants
make their Jersey Stockings, which are ordinarily to be had in most parts of
England, and yield a great commodity unto the Island.

(5) The first original of the Inhabitants sprung either from the Normans, or
Britains, or both. They speak French, though after a corrupt manner, and have
continued their names, language, customs, and Country* without any, or little
intermixture, these many hundred years, having been under the jurisdiction of
the English ever since the untimely and unnatural death of Robert Duke of
Normandy, eldest son to William the Conqueror.

(6) The people of this Country live very pleasantly, as well by the profits
of the Land, as the helps and furtherances of the Sea, that yields unto them
(and especially in Summer season) great store of fish, but principally Conger
and Lobsters, the greatest and fattest upon the coast of England. Wood is very
scant, for their best fuel is Turfe: some Coal they have brought unto them,
but it is very dear; straw, furre, and fern serving their ordinary uses. The
middle part of the Island has many pretty Hills rising in it, yielding a
delightful object unto the valleys, that receive from one another a mutual
pleasure.

(7) The Governor of the I Will is the Captain thereof, who appoints certain
Officers under him: the principal of whom, carries the name and title of a
Bailiffe, that in civil causes has the assistance of twelve Jurats to
determine of differences, and minister Justice: in criminal matters seven: in
matters of reason and conscience, five. Their twelve are chosen out of the
twelve Parishes: so that no man goes further to complain, then to his own
Jurate in ordinary controversies; but matters of moment and difficulty are
determined before the Bailiffe in a general meeting.

(8) This I Will has two little Islands adjacent; the one S. Albons, the other
Hillary Island. It has twelve Parishes, and four Castles. No other Monuments
of name or note.

THE SECOND BOOK Containing THE PRINCIPALITY OF WALES.

DELIVERING An exact Topographie of the COUNTIES. Divisions of their CANTREVES
and COMMOTS. Descriptions of their CITIES and Shire-TOVVNES.


WITH A COMPENDIOUS RELATION OF THINGS MOST MEMORABLE IN EVERY OF THEM.

Performed BY JOHN SPEED.

LONDON, Printed by John Legatt, for William Humble. 1646.

Cum Privilegio.

DIEV ET MON DROIT
HONISOITQVI MALYPENSE


A Catalogue of such Princes sprung from THE ROYAL STEM OF THE ENGLISH
KINGS, AS HAVE BEEN Entitled PRINCES OF WALES, since the time of that
Countries last Conquest, and first voluntary subjection under King EDWARD the
First.
1 Edward Carnarvon, named afterward Edward 2. son to K. Edward 1. 2 Edward of
Windsor, afterward Edward the third. 3 Edward the Black Prince, son to K.
Edward 3. 4 Richard of Burdeux, son to the Black Prince, afterward R. 2. 5
Henry of Monmouth, son to Henry 4. afterward H. 5. 6 Henry of Windsor, the
son of Henry 5. afterward H. 6. 7 Edward of Westminster, the son of K. H.
6. 8 Edward of Westminster, the son of K. Edw. 4. 9 Edward, the son of K.
Richard the third. 10 Arthur, the son of K. Henry the seventh. 11 Henry, the
son of K. H. 7. afterward K. H. 8. 12 Edward, the son of H. 8. afterward
K. Edw. 6. 13 Mary, the daughter of K. H. 8. 14 Elizabeth, the daughter of K.
H. 8. 15 HENRY, the son of K. JAMES our Sovereign.
THE NAMES OF THE COUNTIES IN WALES (AS THEY ARE NOW NVMBRED, AND ANNEXED UNTO
THE ENGLISH Crown) in such order as we have described them.
1 Pembroke-shire. 2 Caermarden-shire. 3 Glamorgan-shire. 4 Brecknock-shire. 5
Radnor-shire. 6 Cardigan-shire. 7 Mountgomery-shire. 8 Merioneth-shire. 9
Denbigh-shire. 10 Flint-shire. 11 Caernarvon-shire. 12 Anglesey Isle.
THE GENERAL DESCRIPTION, AND SEVERAL DIVISIONS OF THE PRINCIPALITY OF WALES.
Antiquity has avouched, that the whole Isle of Britain was divided into
three parts. The first and fairest lay contained within the French Seas, the
Rivers of Severne, Dee, and Humber, called then Lhoyger, which name it ^^t
retains in We^sh; in English called England. The second part occupied all the
Land Northward from Humber to the Orkney Sea, called by the Latins, Mare
Cale^nium, or Deucalidonium, now famously known by the name of Scotland The
third part was this, lying betwixt the Irish Seas, the Rivers Severne and Dee,
and was called Cambria, which name does yet continue with them, though we, the
English, call it Wales, as the people Welshmen, which is, strange and
strangers; for so at this day the dwellers of Tyroll in the higher Germany,
whence our Saxons are said to have come, do name the Italian (their next
neighbor) a Welsh-man, and his language Welsh.

Verstegan lib. Rest^s. cap. 5.
(2) This opinion Verstegan does altogether contradict, rather judging by the
ancient Teutonicke tongue, which the Germans spoke and wherein the G is
pronounced for W that these Saxons called them Gallish from the Gauls, whence
their original proceeded, rather then Wallish from strangers: which he
thinks could not be, considering their habitations so near unto them; and
that the like was in use, he proves by the words of French, Guardian for
Wardian, Cornugalles for Cornwalles, yea, and Galls for Wales, calling our
most famous Edward, Prince of Galls, not Prince of Wales; in so much that the
County of Lombardy, bordering along upon the Germans, was of them called
Gall^a Cis al^ina, and at this day Welsh-land. So likewise do the Netherlanders
call the Inhabitants of Hen^li and Artois, Wallen or Wallons, and some part of
Brabant and Flanders, We^sh-Brabant, and Welsh Flanders, and all because of the
language or lineage of the Gauls. Neither do the mere Natives of Wales know
any other name of their Country then Cambria of themselves, then Cambri or
Cumri, or of their language then Cambraoc. But leaving this opinion free to his
affection, we will proceed.

Offa made M^ar between his Kingdom and Wales.
(3) Wales therefore being anciently bounded as before, the Saxons did
afterward win by force from the Britains, all the plain and champion Country
over the River Dee; and especially Offa King of Mercia, made their limits
straiter, by making a ditch of great breadth and depth, to be a Meare betwixth
his Kingdom and Wales. This ditch is in many places to be seen at this day,
and bears the name of Clawdh Offa, that is, Offaes Ditch. The Country between
it and England is commonly called the Marches, and is for the most part
inhabited by Welshmen, especially in North Wales, even to the River Dee. This
admirable trench began at Bassingwerke in Flintshire, between Chester and
Ruthlan, and ran along the hills to the South Sea, a little from Bristow,
reaching above hundred miles in length.

The breadth and length of Wales.
(4) Silvester Giraldus makes the River Wye to be the Meare between England and
Wales, on the South part, called South Wales: whence he ascribes the breadth
of Wales unto Saint David's in Menevia, to be an hundred miles; and the length
from Caerlcon upon Vske in Gwentland, to Holly-head in Anglesey, an hundred
miles, he might have said thirty more.

Rodericus Magnus divided it into three Regions, Ann. Christ. 870.
(5) About the year of Christ 870. our Alfred reigning in England, Rodericus
Magnus King of Wales did divide it into three Talaiths, Regions, or
Territories, which were called Kingdoms, whose names both British and English,
with their several chief seats, follow.

1 Gwyneth, ENG. Northwa. chief seats, Abersraw in Mon. or Anglesey. 2 Powys,
ENG. Powys Land. chief seats, Shrewsbury.
Pengw^rn, removed to Mathraval. 3 Dehenbarth, EN. South-w. chief seats,
Caermar^yn, removed to Dinevowr.
This Rodericus Magnus gave Venedotia, Gwineth or North Wales, to D. Powel.
Anarawd his eldes son; to Ca^e^h his second, Demetia, Deheubarth or
South Wales; and to Mervin his third son, Powys.

Gwyneth or North Wales.
(6) North Wales had upon the North-side, the Irish Sea, from the River Dee at
Bassingwerke to Aberdyvi upon the West and South-west, the River Dyvi, which
divides it from South Wales, and in some places from Powysland And on the
South and East, it is divided from Powys, sometimes with high hills, and
sometimes with Rivers, till it come again to the River Dee. It is generally
full of high mountains, craggy Rocks, great woods, and deep valleys, many
straight dangerous places, deep and swift Rivers.

(7) This Land was of old time divided into four parts, Anglesey.
Mon, Caernarvon.
Arvon, Meryonyth, and y Beruedhwlan, or the middle Country, and each of these
were again divided into several Cantreves, and they subdivided into their
Cymeden or Common, wherein we follow that division which was in the time of
Llewylyn ap Gruffin, last Prince of Wales, according to a Copy imparted to me
by a worshipful friend M. Tate.
and learned Antiquerie, as seeming far more exact then that of Hist. of
Wales. Mon or Anglesey the first part of North Wales.
Doctor Powels.

(8) Anglesey the chiefest, is separated from the maine Land with the River,
Beau-marish the chief town of Anglesey.
Moenay, wherein at Aberfraw was the Princes Court, now a mean village. In
this Island is a fair Town called Beau-marish, and a common passage to Ireland
at Caer^ybi, in English, Holly head. This Anglesey has ^antreves and Commots
as follows.

1 Cantrerhi Aberffraw or Aberffro, Cwmwd. Llivon al. llion. 1 Mall traeth. 2
2 Can. Cemais. Cwmwd. Talibolton. 3 Twr celyn. 4
3 Can. Rossir. Cwmwd. Tendaethwy. 5 Moenay. 6

(9) Arvon, Arvon or Caernarvon the second part of North Wales. Caernarvon the
Shire-towne of the County of Carnarvon.
the second part of North Wales, is now called Canarvonshire, the strongest
Country within that Principality, giving place to none for fertility of the
ground, or for plenty of wood, cattle fish, and foul, etc. Here are the
Towns of Caernarvon, in old time called Caer-Segont, and Bangor the Bishops
See, with diverse other ancient Castles, and places of memory. This portion has
on the North, the Sea and Moenai; upon the East and South-east, the River
Conwey, which divides it from Denbigh-shire: and on the South-west is
separated from Merioneth, by Rivers, Mountains and Meares; whose Cantreves and
Commots are these.

4 Can. Aber. Cwm. Llechred achaf. 7 Nant conwy. 8 Llechweddisaf. 9
5 Can. Arvon. Cwm. Vwch gwyrfai. 10 Is gwyrfai. 11
6 Can. Dinodyn. al Danodic. Cwm. Ardudwy. 12 Esionydd. 13
7 Can. Llyn. Cwm. Cymymaen, alias Cwm^inam. 14 Tinllaen. 15 Canologion. 16

(10) Merioneth was the third of Gwyneth, Merioneth the third part of
North Wales.
and keeps the name till this day: is full of hills, and much noted for the
resort of people that repair thither to take Herrings. Upon the North it has
Arvon and Denbigh-shire; upon the South, Caerdigan shire; and upon the Last,
Montgomery-shire, heretofore part of Powys. In this County stands the Town
of Harlech, and a great Lake called Llyn Tegyd. This Country is likewise full
of Cattle, Foul, and Fish; and has in it great store of red Dear and Ro^s,
but there is much scarcity of Corn: whose Cantreves and Commots are as
follows.

8 Can. Merionyd, al Meirton. Cwm. Talybont. 17 Pennal. 18 Yshm^ner, alias
eshomaneyr. 19
9 Can. Arwystly. Cwm. Vwch coed. 20 Is coed. 21 Gwarthrynion. 22
10 Can. Penllyn. Cwm. Vwch Meloch. 23 Is Meloch. 24 Micnynt, a Micnaint. 25

(11) Y Bervedhwlad was the fourth part of Gwyneth, Y Bervedhwlad the fourth
part of North Wales.
and may be called in English, The middle Country: is enclosed with hills, on
the East, West, and South-parts, and with the Sea Northward. It is plentiful
of Cattle, Fish and Foul, as also of Corn: and is divided in the midst with
the River Clayd* to which run a number of other Rivers from the hills. In this
part is Dyffryn Clwyd, the fairest Valley within Wales, containing D. Pow.
Hist. of Wales.
eighteen miles in length, and seven in breadth. In which is the Town and
Castle of Ricthlan, near unto the Sea; and not far thence, S. Assaph, an
Episcopal Seat, between the Rivers Clwyd and Elwy. Herein stands the fair
Town and goodly Castle of Denbigh, situated upon a Rock, the greatest
Market-towne of North wales: and from thence is seen the Town and Castle of
Rutbyn, fair for prospect, and fruitful for site. This part of North Wales,
has the Sea upon the North; Dee toward the East; Arvon, the River Conwey, and
Merionyth upon the West; and the Country then called Powys, upon ths South. It
has Cantreves and Cummots, as ensuing 11 Can. Rhysonioc al Rhywyniawc. Cwm.
Vwch aled, al. alech. 26 is aled, al. alech. 27
12 Cant. Ystrat. Cwm. Hiraethoc. 28 Cynmeircb. 29
13 Can. Rhos. Cwm. Vwch^ulas. 30 Is dulas. 31 Ycrcuddyn. 32
14 Can. dyffrynn. Clwyd. Cwm. Oleon, al. Cwmwt colian v^l Colegion. 33 Lian
arth, al. Cwmwt ^annerch. 34 Ruthun. 35 Dogscilyn additur Cwm. Ystrat. 36
15 Can Tegaingl. Cwm. Inglefeild in Flint, Cwnallt, al. Cwmwt cwmseled, or
cownsyllt. 37 Prestatum, al. cwmwt prestan. 38 Rhudhlan. 39



And these were the Meares and bounds of the four parts of Venedotia, Gwineth,
or North Wales.

(12) The second Talaith or Kingdom, Mathraval the second Kingdom.
was Mathraval or Powys. To this belonged the Country of Powys, and the Land
between Wye and Severne. It had South Wales upon the South and West, with the
Rivers Wye and Tywy, and other Meares: upon the North Gwyneth; and map of Wales
WALES
upon the East, the Marches of England, from Chester to Wye, a little above
Hereford. Powys Vadoc the first part belonging to Mathraval.
This part was divided into Powis Vadoc, Powis between Wye and Severne, and
Powis Wenwynwyn. In Powis Vadoc is the Castle of Helt in Bromefeild, and the
Castle of Chirke in Chirkeland; the Castle likewise of Whittington; the
Lordship of Oswestry, with others. It had Cantreves and Commots, as follows.

1 Can. Y. Barwm. Cwm. Dinmael. 1 Edeirnion. 2 Glyndy^^rdwy. 3
2 Can. Y. Rhiw. Cwm. Ial. 4 Ystrat alun. 5 Yrhob. 6
3 Can Vwch. nant. Cwm. Maelor gymraci. 7 Maelor saesonec. 8 Merfford in
Flintshire. 9
4 Can. Trefred. Cwm. Croes vain. 10 Treu Owain. 11 Croes Oswall. 12
5 Can. Rhoyader. Cwm. Mochnant is rhayadyr. 13 Cynllaith. 14 Nanbeudwy. 15

Powys between Wye and Severne, the second part belonging to Mathraval.
(13) The second part of Powis, or the Territory belonging to Mathraval, is
Powis between Wye and Severne, (or Gwy and Hauren) whereof some is at this day
in Montgomery-shire, some in Radnor-shire, and some in Brecknock-shire* and
among sundry other, has these Towns and Castles following.

Moantgovery: The Castle of Clin: The Town of Knighton: The Castle of Cymaron:
Presteyn: The town and Castle of Radnor, called in Welsh, Ma^syvet, which is
at this day the Shire-towne: The town of Kinton, and the Castle of Huntingdon.
The Cantreves and Commots are in number and name as ensues.

6 Can. Melienyd. Cwm. Ceri. 16 Swyd dugr al. said y gre. 17 Triallalli al.
Rhy. VVallakt. 18 Glyn Ieitbton. 19
7 Can. Elfael. Cwm. Vwch mine yah. 20 Is mynydb. 21 Llechdyunoc. 22
8 Can. Y. Clawd. Cwm. Dyffryn Tyvediad al. Teyvediat. 23 Swyddinogion al.
dhyuogen. 24 Penwellt. 25
9 Can. Buellt. Cwm. Swyd y drevlys. 26 Swyd y bham. 27 I^yrron al. isyrwon. 28

Powys Wenwynwyn the third part of Mathraval.
(14) The third part belonging to Mathraval (chief seat of Powys, after the
Welsh were driven from Pengwern or Shrewsbury) was Powys Wenwynwyn; a Country
full of Woods, Hills, and Rivers, having in it among others, the towns of
Welsh, Poole, Newtowne, Machinlbaeth: Arustly was anciently in this part, but
afterward it came to the Princes of Gwyneth. The Cantreves and Commots thereof
ensue.

10 Can. Y. Virnwy. Cwm. Mochnant vwchrhayadr. 29 Mechamis coed. 30 Llanner
hudol. 31
11 Can. ystlys al. ystlic. Cwm. Deudwr. 32 Gordwrisalh. 33 Gordwr uchau. 34
Ystrat marchell. 35
12 Can. Llyswynau. Cwm. Caer Einion. 36 Mechain Vwchcoed. 37
13 Can. Cydewen. Cwm. Cynan. 38 Hauren. 39
14 Can. Cynan. Cwm. Cyfe^lioc. 40 Mawdhwy. 41

This may suffice, for the description of that which in old time was called
Gwyneth and Powys.

South Wales the third Kingdom.
(15) It now remains that we describe the last Kingdom of Wales, called
Demetia, Deheubarth, or the Telaith of Dinevowr, which although it was the
greatest, yet was it not the best, because it was much molested with Flemings
and Normans, and for that also diverse parts thereof would not obey their
Prince, as in Gwent, and in Morganwc.

Cardigan the first part of South Wales.
(16) This was subdivided into six parts, of which Caerdigan was the first, and
is a Champion Country, without much wood. It has Merionyth shire on the
North: part of Powys upon the East: Carmarden-shire and Pembroke-shire, with
the River Tivi, upon the South: and upon the West the Irish Sea. The town of
Caerdigan.
In this part is the town of Cardigan upon Tivi, not far from the Sea; as
also the town of Aberystwyth upon the River Istwyth; and Lhanbadarnevawr,
which in times past was a great Sanctuary: there were also many Castles; as of
Stra^meyrie, of Walter, of Llanrysted, of Dynerth, and of Aber Roydoll, etc.
The Cantreves and Commots of Caerdigan are thus reckoned.

1 Can. Pennedic al. Penwedic. Cwm. Geneur glyn. 1 Per^ed. 2 Creudyn 3
2 Can. Canawl. Cwm. Mefenyd. 4 Anhiniawc al. Anhunec. 5 Pennarih. 6
3 Can. Cadell al. Cadall. Cwm. Mab wynion. 7 Cacrwedros. 8
4 Can. Isirwern al. Syrwen. Cwm. Gwinionyd. 9 Iscoed. 10

Dyvet or Pembroke the second part of South Wales.
(17) The second part was called Dyvett, and is at this day Penbroke-shire. It
has upon the North and West, the Irish Sea; upon the East, Carmarden-shire;
and upon the South, Severne. There are in it sundry Towns and Havens: among
others, these: Penbroke: Tinby: Here^ord West, with the goodly and many
branched Haven of Milford, called in Welsh, Aberdaugledhett: S. David's, or
Meuevia, which is the chiefest See in Wales: Fiscard, called Abcrwayn: and
Nowport, named Tresda^th. The Cantreves and Commots thereof are thus accounted.

Dyved.
1 Can. Emlyn. Cwm. Vmch cuch. 6 Is cuch. 7 Esaellevaethyr, al. Lethet^yr. 8
2 Can. Aberth. Cwm. Penthyn ar elais. 9 Esgair olyse al. estcrokf. 10
Talacharn. 11
3 Can. Dangleden. Cwm. Amgoed. 12 Pennant. 13 Ef^lffre. 14
4 Can. Coed. Cwm. Llanhacheden. 15 Castollgwis. 16
5 Can. Penuro. Cwm. Co^dir baf. 17 Ma^nor vyrr. 18 Penuro. 19
6 Can. Rhos. Cwm. Hwlffordh. 20 Castle gwalchmai. 21 y garn. 22
7 Can. Pebidiaw. Cwm. Mynyw. 23 Pen caer. 24 Pebidioc. 25
8 Can. Camais. Cwm. Vwch nefer. 26 Is nefer. 27 Trefdraeth. 28
9 Can. Finior. Cwm. Harsryn. 29 Dersed. 30 ^^^geneny. 31

(18) The third part was Caermarden-shire, Caermarden-shire the third part of
South Wales.
which is a Country accounted the strongest part of all South Wales: as that
which is full of high mountains, great woods, and fair rivers, divided into
these parts ensuing.

10 Can. Phinioc. Cwm. Hirsryn. 32 Peruedh. 33 Is cenhen. 34
11 Can. Eginoc. Cwm. Gwhyr. 35 Cydweli. 36 Carnwyllion. 37
12 Can. Bychan. Cwm. Mallaen. 38 Caed. 39 Maenor deivi al. Deilo. 40
13 Can. Mawr. Cwm. Cethinioc. 41 Mab eluyd al. El^yw. 42 Mab V^hdrud. 43

(19) The fourth, called Morganwc, now Glamorgan-shire, Glamorgan-shire the
fourth part of South Wales.
has on the South, the Severne Sea, which divides it from Devon-shire and
Corne-wall: upon the West and North-west. Caermarden-shire: upon the
North-east, Brecknock shire; and upon the East, Monmouth-shire: whose Cantreves
and Commots are as follows.

Morgannwe. Rhw^g Neth a Thawy. 44
14 Cronerth. al. Cronarth. Cwm. Rhwng Neth ac avan. 45 Tir ythwndred. 46 Tir
yrbarll. 47 Macnor glyn Ogwr. 48 Meliscen. 49
15 Can. Pen. ythew. Cwm. Glynn Rhodne. 50 Macnor daly van al. talavan. 51
Macnor Rhuthun. 52
16 Can. Brenhinawl. Cwm. Cibwrn. 53 Saing henyd. 54 Vwch Cayach. 55 Is Cayach.
56
17 Can. Gwennllws. Cwm. Yr Haid, al. yr hard ganol. 57 Cenawl. 58 Cithas, al.
eitha^ dylg gion. 59 dlygton. 60

(20) The fifth, now called Gwent, and in Monmouth-shire, Gwent the fifth part
of South Wales.
has in it the ancient City of Caerlheon upon Vsk. There ae also diverse Towns
and Castles, as Chepstow, Glynstrygul, Ros, Tynterne upon the River Wye, etc.
This is a fair and fertile Country. It has on the West, Glamorgan and
Brocknock-shires: upon the North, Hereford-shire: upon the East,
Gloucestershire: with the River Wye and the River Severne upon the South and
South-east: whose division is as follows.

18 Can. vch coet gwent. Cw. Vwchmynydh. 61 yt ^oed. 62 Llefynyd. 63 Tref y
grue. 64
19 Can. Iscoed. Cwm. Bryn Bugas. 65 Vwchcoed. 66 Ytairlief. 67 Ergin. 68 Enas.
69
Cantreu Coch, or Forest Avena, the Forest of Deane. 70
(21) The last is Brecknock-shire, Brecknock-shire the sixth part of South Wales.
for the most part full of mountains, woods, and rivers. This Country is both
great and large, being full of fair Plains and Vallyes for Corn: it has
plenty of thick VVoods, Forests, and Parkes. It is full also of clear and
deep Rivers, of which Severne is the chiefest, although there be other fair
Rivers, as Vske and the like.

Brychee vioc.
20 Can. Selyf. Cwm. Selyf. 71 Trahayarne. 72
21 Can. Canawl. Cwm. Talgarth. 73 Ystrat yw. 74 Eglwys Iaiil or Brwynllys. 75
22 Can. Mawr. Cwm. Tir Ranwlff al. Raulph. 76 Lliwel. 77 Cruc Howel 30. 78

(22) Thus far concerning the ancient Welsh division by Talaiths Cantreves,
and Commots: but the present division distributeth them more compendiously into
two Countries, and twelve Shires, enacted so by Parliament under King An. 35.
c. 25.
Henry the eight. The Countries are North Wales and South Wales, which have
shared, and as it were devoured between them, all Powys-land; each of which
Countries contains six Shires.

North Wales. Angelesey. South Wales. Caerdigan. North Wales. Caernarvon.
South Wales. Pembroke. North Wales. Merionyth. South Wales. Carmarden.
North Wales. Denbigh. South Wales. Glamorgan. North Wales. Flint. South Wales.
Brecknocke. North Wales. Montgomery. South Wales. Radnor.
But whereas Monmouth-shire, and Radnor, were anciently parts, the first of
South Wales, the other of Powys-land: Monmouth-shire by An. 27. c. 27.
Act of Parliament also under the same King, was plucked away wholly from Wales,
and laid to England, one of whose Counties and Shires, it was from that time
forward, and is at this present reckoned; and Radnor-shire (as it were in lieu
thereof) is comprehended in South Wales. Humphrey Hluyd a Welsh Gentleman, in
his Epistle and Map of old Wales, makes mention of a West-wales, which he
calls Demetia and Dyfer, the one the Latin, and the other the British name
thereof: but because it is wholly swallowed up by this last division, we will
not perplexe the Reader with superfluous and impertinent recitals.

PEMBROKE-SHIRE. CHAPTER III.
Pembroke-shire bounds.
PEMBROKE-SHIRE, the furthest Promontorie of all West-Wales, lies parted on the
North from Cardigan-shire with the Rivers Tyuy and Keach; and on the East is
confronted by Caermarden-shire; the South and West shooting far into the
Irish Seas, is with the same altogether washed.

The Form.
(2) The form thereof is longer then it is broad; for from S. Gouens
South-point to Cardigan-bridge in the North, are twenty six miles; the
Eastern Landenie to Saint David's point in the West, are twenty, the whole in
circumference is ninety-three miles.

The Air. Giral.
(3) The air is passing temperate, by the report of Giraldus, who confirms
his reason from the site of Ireland, against which it butteth, and so near
adjoined, that King Rufus thought it possible to make a bridge of his ships
over the Sea, Cambden.
whereby he might pass to Ireland on foot.

The ancient Inhabitants.
(4) Anciently it was possessed by the Demetia, further branched into Cardigan
and Caermarden-shires, as in that County has been said, and in the Saxons
Conquest and Heptarchie, by the Britains forced into those parts for refuge,
whither Henry the first, Henry the first planted Netherlanders in this Shire.
and third of the Normans King, sent certain Flemings (whose Country was
overwhelmed with the breaking in of the Seas) to inhabit the maritime Tract
called Rosse, lying West upon the River Dougledye. These Dutchmen (says
Giraldus) were a strong and stout Nation, inured to wars, and accustomed to
seek gain by Clothing, Traffic, and Tillage, and ever ready for the Field
to fight it out: adding withal that they were most loyal to the English, and
most faithful to the Englishmen. Whereupon Malmesbury writes thus: Many a
time did King William Rufus assail the Welsh, but ever in vain: which is to be
wondered at, considering his other fortunate success. But (says he) it may be
the unevenness of the ground, and sharpness of the air, that maintained
their courage, and impeached his valor: W. Malm. lib. 5.
which to redress, King Henry his brother found means; for those Flemings, who
in regard of his mothers kindred by the Fathers side, sorely pestred and
endammaged the English, he sent into Wales, both to purge and disburden his own
Kingdom, and to quell and keep back the courage of his enemies. These then
here seated, deceived not his expectation, but so carried themselves in his
quarrel, that they seldom communicated with their neighbors, so that to this
day they speak not the Language, and the Country is yet called Little England
beyond Wales.

The Commodities.
(5) The commodities of this Shire are Corn, Cattle, Seafish, and Foul, and
in Giraldus his days of saleable wines, the Havens being so commodious for
ships arrivage: such is that at Tenby, and Milford, an Haven of such capacity,
that sixteen Creeks, five Bays, and thirteen Roads, known all by several
names, are therein contained, where Henry of Richmond, of most happy memory,
arrived with signal hopes of Englands freedom from under the government of an
usurping Tyrant.

(6) Near unto this is Pembroke the Shire-towne seated, Pembroke the chief
Town.
more ancient in show then it is in years, and more houses without Inhabitants,
then I saw in any one City throughout my Survey. It is walled longwise, and
them but indifferent for repair, containing in circuit eight hundred and
fourscore pases, having three gates of passage, and at the West end a large
Castle, and locked-causey, that leads over the water to the decayed Priorie of
Monton. The site of this Town is in the degree of Longitude, as Mercator does
measure, 14. and 55. minutes, and the elevation from the North Pole in the
degree of Latitude 52.

(7) A City as barren is old Saint David's, S. David's.
neither clad with Woods, nor garnished with Rivers, nor beautified with
fields, nor adorned with Meadows, but lies always open both to wind and
storms. Yet has it been a Nursery to holy men; for herein lived Calphurnius,
a Britain Priest, whose wife was Concha, sister to Saint Martin, and both of
them the parents of Saint Patricke the Apostle of Ireland. Deui a most
religious Bishop, made this an Archiepiscopall See, removed from Isca Legionum.
This the Bitaines call Tuy Dwey, the house of Deui; the Saxons, Dauyo Mynden;
we Saint David's; A City with few Inhabitants, and no more houses then are
inserted in the draught; yet has it a fair Cathedral Church, dedicated to S.
Andrew and David, in the midst of whose Quier lies entombed Edmund Earl of
Richmond, Edmund Earl of Richmond.
father to K. Henry the seventh: whose Monument (as the Prebends told me)
spared their Church from other defacements, when all went down under the
hammers of King Henry the eight. About this is a fair wall, and the Bishops
Palace all of free stone, a goodly house I assure you, and of great receipt,
whose uncovered tops cause the curious works in the walls daily to weep,
Castles.
1. Kilgarren. 2. Newport. 3. Marberbury. 4. Walwin cast. 5. Roch cast. 6. The
Block-house. 7. Haverford. 8. Benton. 9. Carew cast. 10. Red castle. 11.
Narbarth. 12. Pickton. 13. Rise cast. 14. Castle Bigh. 15. Castle Male. 16.
Hayes.

and them to fear their downfall ere long.

(8) But Monton the Priory, and S. Dogmels, places of devout piety erected in
this County, found not the like favor, when the commission of their
dissolutions came down against them, and the axes of destruction cut down the
props of their walls.

(9) This Shire has been strengthened with sixteen Castles, besides two
Block-houses, commanding the mouth of Milford Haven, and is still traded in five
Market Towns, being divided into seven hundreds and in them seated one hundred
forty five Parish-Churches, as in the Table annexed follows.

map of Pembrokeshire PENBROKSHYRE described AND THE SITTUATIONS both of
PENBROKE and St. DAVID'S showed in due form as they were taken by John Speed


An Alphabeticall Table of all the Towns, Rivers, and memorable places
mentioned in Pembroke-Shire.
HVNDREDS in Pembroke-shire.
1. KIlgarran. 2. Kemes 3. Dewyslave. 4. Dungledy. 5. Rowse. 6. Narberth. 7.
Castle-Martyn
A
Ambleston, Dung. Amrothe, Nar. S. Anne chapel, Rows. S. Ayluew, Dew.
B
Bayuill, Kem. Benton castle, Rows. Bigelly, Nar. The Bishop and his Clarks,
Dew Bletherstone, Dung. Blookhouse, Cast. Blookhouse, Rows. Boheston, Nar.
Bolton hill, Rows. Bosherston, Cast. Boyuill, Kem. S. Brides, Rows. S. Brides
Island, Rows. Broad haven, Cast. Brody, Dew. Brydell, Kill. Bulston, Dung.
Burlaxton, Cast. Burton, Rows.
C
Caldey Island, Cast. Camros, Rows. Cannaston, Nar. Capell colman, Kill. Capell
Kiluerwir, Kill. Capell castelhan, Kill. Capell Michangell, Kem. Capell Daniells,
Cast. Capell Gorid, Dew. South Carew, Cast. Carew, Nar. Castle-bighe, Kem.
Castle-henry, Kem. Castle-martin, cast. Castle-male, Kem. S. Catherins, Dew.
Clarbeston, Dung. Cleydei, Kill. Clethy flu. Clothy flu. Coidrath forest, Nar.
Coidhenles, Nar. Cosheston, cast. The Cow and the Calfe, Dew. Creno, Nar.
Creswell, Nar. Crosford, cast. Crunuaier, Nar. Crynowe, Dung.
D
Dale, Rows. Dale rock, Rows. S. DAVID'S, Dew. S. David's head, Dew. S. Dogmels,
Kem. S. Dogwells, Dew. Doluath haven, Dew. Dungledye flu. Dynas, Kem. Dynas
head, Kem. Dynnaston, Nar.
E
Earware, Nar. S. Edryns, Dew. Egremond, Nar. Egloiswithen, Kem. Eglosserow,
Kem. S. Eluywes, Dew. Esington, cast.
F
Ferye house, Cast. FISHGARD, Kem. The Fleet, cast. S. Florens, cast. The
Flit, cast. Flymston, cast. Freistrope, Rows. Fresh Water, cast. Fresh Water
Flu.
G
Gateholme Island, Rows. Gelswicke, Rows. Giltor point, cast. Goltop rode,
Rows. S. Gowers, cast. S. Gowers point, cast. Graftone, Dew. Gromsfreston, Nar.
Gupton, cast. Gwyne flu.
H
Haiscastle, Dew. Haradstone, alias S. Ismaells, Row. Harberston, Rows.
Hareston wes^, Rows. Harismote, Kem. Hascard, Rows. Little Haven, Rows.
HAVERFORD WEST, Row Hentl^nd, cast. Hockwood. Rows. Hoge^ton, cast. The Horse,
Dew. Haberston, Rows.
I
Iameston, cast. Johnson, Rows. Iordanston, Dew. Iesfreston, Nar. S. Ismaells,
Rows. S. Issells, Nar.
K
S. Katerens rock, cast. S. Katterns, Dew. Keach Flu. Keirkmale, cast.
Keirkmahern, cast. Keuen bryn, Kill. Kilguyne, Kem. Kilgarran, Kill. Kilpaston,
cast. Kilredin, Kill. Kiluane, Nar. Kingsrode, Rows. Knowlton, Rows.
L
Lady Chapel, cast. Lamston, Rows. Llanbederuerfrey, Nar. Llandeloy, Dew.
Llandewy, Nar. Llandisillio, Dung. Llandilo, Kem. Llanedryn, Dew. Llangan,
Dung. Llanglas head, Dew. Llangolman, Kem. Llangone, Rows. Llanhaddon, Dung.
Llanhowell, Dew. Llanllawharne, Kem. Llanpeter, Nar. Llanrythan, Dew. Llanryan,
Dew. Llanstadwell, Rows. Llanstynan, Dew. Llantfray, Cast. Llantfray court,
Cast. Llantood, Kill. Llanuair nantygove, Kem. Llanuallteg, Dung. Llanuienaghe,
Kem. Llanuihangell penpedo, Kill. Llanunda, Dew. Llanuurnach, Kill. Llanwrenny,
Nar. Llanychaeth, Kem. Llanychlloydog, Kem. Llanykeuen, Dung. Lamphey, Cast.
Lamston, Rows. Lawhaden, Dung. Lawreny, Nar. S. Lawrence, Dew. S. Leonards
Chapel, Dung. Letterston, Dew. Leuaston, Cast. Loueston, Nar. Ludchurch, Nar.
Ludsop, Cast. Ludsop point, Cast. Lynyerew, Cast. Lly^yuran, Dung.
M
Maunclochog, Kem. Manachllogddy, Kem. Mauerbyre, Cast. Manernawen, Dew. S.
Margrets Chapel, Rows. Marlas, Rows. Martletwy, Nar. Meherye hill, Nar.
Meherye Castle, Nar. Melyney, Kem. Menerdyuy, Kill. Merian, Cast. Mewston, Rows.
Milford haven, Rows. Midland Island, Rows. Moelgroue, Kem. Monington, Kem.
Morthry, Dew. Moruill, Kem. The More, Kem. Mouncton, Nar. Mouncton, Cast.
Mucton Chapel, Nar. Munkerston rock, Nar. Mynwere, Nar.
N
Nangle, Cast. Nantgwyne, Kem. Narberth, Nar. Narberth forest, Nar. Nashe,
Cast. Nesseton, Rows. Nuerne Flu. Neuerne, Kem. Newcastle, Kem. Newmoate, Dung.
NEWPORT, Kem. Newton, Rows. Newton, Cast. Newton, Nar. S. Nicholas, Dew.
Nolton, Rows. S. Nones, Dew. Northard, Cast. Northard, Cast.
O
Orleton, Cast. Osmaston, Dung.
P
Paterchurch, Cast. Penallye, Cast. PENBROCK. Cast. Pencelly vych^n, Kem.
Penkenmas point Kem. Penner west, Cast. Penner east, Cast. Penner mouth, Cast.
Penrith, Kill. Pentuaen, Kem. Percely hill, Kem. S. Petrox, Cast. Pickton castle
Dung. Plumston rock, Rows. Pontuaine, Kem. Popton east, Cast. Popton west,
Cast. Portolais, Dew. Pouchardston, Kem. Prendergast, Dung. The Priory, Rows.
Pulchrochan, Cast. Pylles, Rows.
R
Ramsey Island, Dew. Rate Island, Cast. Redboxton, Dung. Red castle, Nar.
Redhart. Rednalston, Nar. Rieston, Dew. Rihye rock, Dew. Rise castle point,
Dung. Robeston, Nar. Robeston, Rows. Roche, Rows. Roche castle, Rows. Roche
castle hill, Rows. Roscrochan, Cast. Rosse Market, Rows. Rynoston, Dung.
Rywalton, Nar.
S
Sandy, Rows. Sandy haven, Rows. Scaline Island, Rows. Sheep Island, Rowse.
Shirlate rock, Dew. Sister houses, Nar. Slebeche, Dung. Spittell, Dung. Stack
rock, Cast. Stackpole, Cast. Stackpoole orde, Cast. S. Stevens, Dew. Steynton^
Rows. Stokeholme Island, Rows. Strumblehead, Dew.
T
Telbeny, Rows. Templeton, Nar. Trauegare, Dew. Trelloyne, Cast. Treuenyth,
Dew. Treuethell, Kem. Trewgarne, Rows. Trewent, Cast. S. Twynelles, Cast.
TYNBY, Nar. Tyuy Flu.
V
Vggarston mill, Cast. Vpton, Nar.
W
Wallwyn castle, Rows. Walton, Rows. Walton, Dung. Whitchurch, Kem.
Whitechurch, Dew. Whitsand bay, Dew. Williamston, Nar. Wiston, Dung. Withamston
park, Nar. Woram, Cast. Wrennyuair hill, Kill.
Y
Yarbeston, Nar. Yardlandstone, Rows.
CAERMARDEN-SHIRE. CHAPTER IIII.
CAERMARDEN-SHIRE, so called from the chief Town Caermarden, The name of this
Shire.
lies bordered upon the North with Cardiganshire, upon her East, by Breknock
and Glamorgan-shires; upon the South, with a Bay of the British Seas; and upon
the West with Pembroke-shire.

The Form.
(2) The form of this County is long, and shoots it self from the South-west
into the North and by-East, betwixt whose furthest bounds are thirtie-five
English miles, and in her broadest part twenty; the whole in circumference
about one hundred and two miles.

The Air.
(3) This Shire is not altogether so pestred with hills as her bordering
neighbors are: and those that she has, neither so high nor so thick, and
therefore is better for Corn and Pasturage, yea and in Woods also, so that for
victuals this Country is very well stored, which the stomach does as well
digest, the air being wholesome, temperate, and pleasing.

The ancient Inhabitants of this Shire.
(4) Anciently these parts were possessed by the Dimetre, as P^olemie, Gildas,
and Ninius do name them: though Pliny holds opinion that they were part of
the Silures, with whom no doubt they were subdued to the Romans yoke by Julius
Frontinus, when he struggled with the rocky hills in those Southern parts.
Tacitus in vita Agricol^.
And this County is accounted by Writers to be the very strength of
South Wales. In the West thereof, at Kilmanlloid (as it should seem) their
Legions kept, where lately an earthen Pot hoarded with store of Roman Coins,
Cambden.
was by the spade dug up, being stamped upon imbased silver, from the time
of Commodus unto the first Tribuneship of Gordian the third, which fell in the
year of Christ two hundred forty three: and amongst these were the Coins of
Helvius Pertinax, Marcus Opellius, Antonius Diadumenianus, Julius Verus
Maximus, the son of Maximus, of Caelius Balbinus, of Clodius Pupienus, of
Aquilia Severa, the wife of Heliogabalus, and of Sall. Barbia Orbiana, pieces
rarely found.

The commodities.
(5) The commodities of this Shire chiefly consist in Cattle, Pit-coale, Foul,
and Seafish, whereof the Salmon is common among them, and that of such
greatness and plenty, as no place is better furnished therewith then the
Shire-Town Caermarden is.

The chief Town.
(6) Which Town by Ptolemie is called Maridunum; by Antonine the Emperor,
Muridunum; by the Britains, Caerfridhin; and by us, Caermarden. It is
pleasantly seated upon the South-west side of the River Touy, that runs
through the midst of this Shire, and falls South from hence into the British
Sea, where before-times was a convenient Haven for Ships arrivage, but now is
sore pestred with sands and shelfes: notwithstanding some small Vessels ascend
up the River, even unto the Bridge of this Town, which is fairly built of
free stone. And over the same, upon a hanging Rock, stands a very large
Castle, from whose stone-wall another intermingled with brick rangeth about the
Town, being in circuit one thousand and four hundred paces. The Inhabitants
of this place do not a little glory of their Merlin, who (as they say) was
therein borne, the son of a bad Angel, or of an Incubus spirit, the Britains
great Apollo, whom Geffrey ap Arthur would rank with the Scoth-saying Seer, or
rather with the true Prophets themselves; being none other then a mere Seducer
and fantastical Wizard: Me^lin a phantasti^all Wizard.
which howsoever Alani de Insulis in his Commentaries has labored to unlock
those dark and hidden Similies, wherewith his book is pestred and full, yet
was it not without cause forbid the reading by the Council of Tren^, as vain,
and not worthy of countenance or credit.

At the entrance of the Normans, this Town was brought under their obedience,
and for a long time was distressed with the calamities of war, yet afterward
was made by the English Princes the Chauncery and Exchequer for all
South Wales: and at this day is yearly governed by a Major, who ever after is
an Alderman and Justice of the Peace, two Sheriffs elected out of sixteen
Burgesses, all of them in skarlet, a Sword Bearer, a Town-clerke, and two
Sergeants with Maces: from whence the Pole is raised 52. degrees 15. minutes in
Latitude, and for Longitude is in the degree 15. and 30. minutes from the first
point in the West, according to Mercator.

(7) East from this place are the ruins of Carreg-Castle, Carreg-Castle.
which stood mounted on a high hill, under the which many vaults and spacious
Caves far into the ground are seen, wherein is thought the people unable to
fight, were therein secured in time of their wars. Where also is a Well (take
the report from Giraldus, who writes it) that in this place twice in four and
twenty hours ^bbing, and twice flowing, resembles the unstable motions of
the maine Sea.

(8) This Shire is watered with twenty-eight Rivers and Riverets of name, The
Rivers and Market Towns.
strengthened with ten Castles, traded in six Market Towns, divided into six
Hundreds, wherein are seated fourscore and seven Parish-Churches, whose names
are inserted in the Table following.

map of Carmarthenshire Anno Domini 1010 CAERMARDEN Both Shyre and Town
described


An Alphabeticall Table of all the Towns, Rivers, and memorable places
mentioned in Caermarden-shire.
HVNDREDS in Caermarden-shire.
1. CAthinok. 2. Cayo. 3. Perueth. 4. Kidwellye. 5. Elluet. 6. Derllys.
A
Abarmarlas, Cayo. Abergerlech, Cathinok. Abergwillye, Elluet. Aberwenly,
Kidwell. Amond Flu.
B
Bachhannis Island, Kidwell. Bettus, Kidwell. Bettus, Elluet. Brane Flu.
Brechua ygothy, Cathinok.
C
CAERMARDEN, Elluet. Caier Flu. Calicote point, Kidwell. Cardyth Forest,
Derllys. Castle Carreg, Kidwell. Carthkenye Flu. Cledagh Flu. S. Cleres,
Derllys. Combeny Flu. Comgwilye, Elluet. Conwill Elluet, Elluet. Conwillgaio,
Cayo. Cothy Flu. Cowen Flu.
D
Denever Castle, Cayo. Capell Dewye, Kidwell. Dulas Flu. Dulas Flu. Dalashe
Flu. Druston Castle, Cayo. Capell Duthgye, Kidwell. Castle Dyram, Derllys.
E
Ebernant, Elluet. Egermont, Derllys. Eglosuaier aching, Derllys. Eglosuaier,
Derllys. Eglyskymyn, Derllys. Capell Euan. Elluet.
G
Glanranelthe, Elluet. Glyn, Kidwell. Golden grove, Kidwell. Capell Gunllo,
Kidwell. Gwendrath vaure Flu. Capell Gwenvye* Kidwell. Gwilye Flu.
H
Hawton, Kidwell. Heullan amgoed, Derllys.
I
S. Ismaels, Kidwell. S. Ismaels point, Kidwell. Istrad merther, Kidwell.
Istradworell, Elluet. Istradwalter, Perueth. Istrodfyne, Perueth.
K
Keach Flu. Kennarth, Elluet. KIDWELLYE, Kidwell. Kiffike, Derllys. Kilcombe,
Cayo. Kilmaenlloid, Derllys. Kilredyn, Elluet. Kilsant, Derllys. Kiluargon,
Cathinok. Kilycon, Cayo.
L
Llanarthney, Kidwell. Llaubrayne, Perueth. Llanboydy, Derllys. Llanbyther,
Cathinok. Llandach, Derllys. Llandebea, Kidwell. Llandebye, Kidwell. Capell
Llandedery, Kidwell. Llandessillio, Derllys. Llandilo Iskenen, Kidwell.
Llandingate, Perueth. Llandingat in Cayo, Cayo. Llandeuaylog, Kidwell.
Llandeuayson, Cayo. Llandylo in Peruethe, Perueth. Llandylo abercowen, Derllys.
LLANDILO in Cayo, Cayo. Llanedye, Kidwell. Llanegwad in Cathinok, Cathinok.
Llanegwad in Elluet, Elluet. Llanellye, Kidwell. LLANELTHYE, Kidwel.
LLANGADOKE, Perueth. Llangainge, Derllys. Llangann, Derllys. Llangather,
Cathinok. Llangathan, Cayo. Llangeller, Elluet. Capell Llangellbithon, Kidw.
Llangenarth, Kidw. Llanghor Flu. Llanglodwen, Derllys. Llangomer, Kidw.
Llangynn, Derllys. Llangynderum, Kidw. Llangynnok, Derllys. Llanharne, Derllys.
Llanhedy, Derllys. Llanllawthog, Elluet. Capell Llanlloch, Elluet. Llanllonye,
Cathinok. Capell Llanpymsent, Cayo. Llanpymsaint, Elluet. Llansadorn, Perueth.
Llansadornen, Derl. Llansant, Kidw. Llansawill, Cayo. Llanstephan, Derl.
Llantharoke, Kidw. Capell Llanthithgayne, Kidw. Llanthonor, Derl. Llanthowie,
Perueth. Llanthoysant, Perueth. Llannun, Kidw. Llanvair arbryn, Perueth.
Llanvaier, Derl. Llanualteg, Derl. Llanuenith, Cathinok. Llanvyhangell
Abercowen, Derl. Llanvyhangell Orarth, Cathinok. Llanvyhangell Aberbythyth,
Kidw. Llanwenye, Derl. Llanwrda, Cayo. Llauwnnyo, Derl. Llanycrise in Cayo,
Cayo. Llanycrois in Cathinok, Cathin. Llanyhangell ugwely, Elluet.
LLANYMTHEFRY, Perueth. Llanyhangell Roscorne, Cathinok. Lleghdeny, Kidw.
Lloynhowell, Cayo. Lloughor Flu.
M
Marlas Flu. Marros, Derl. Mathern Flu. Merthyr, Elluet. Morlas Flu. Mothvay,
Perueth. Muthvey Flu. Mydrym, Derl.
N
Newcastle Emlyn, Elluet. Newchurch, Elluet. Capell Newith, Perueth. Newton,
Cayo. S. Nicholas, Elluet.
P
Parkreame, Kidw. Penbray point, Kidw. Penbeyt, Elluet. Penbrey, Kidw. Capell
Pencader, Cathinok. Pencarrek, Cathinok. Pendyne, Derl. Penwernolye, Cathinok.
Pescotter Flu. Prenagrois, Kidw. Capell Pylin, Perueth.
S
Sauthey Flu.
T
Taue Flu. Talacouth, Elluet. Talley, Cayo. Towa Flu. Towy Flu. Towy haven,
Derl. Trausnant, Flu. Treleghe, Elluet. Trynsaren, Kidw. Turch Flu. Turghe Flu.
Tylo, Kidw. Tyvy Flu.
W
Whitland, Derl.
How this Shire took his name.
GLAMORGAN-SHIRE, as some think, named from Prince Morgan the possessor
thereof, or according to others, is taken from Morgan an Abbey, founded by
William Earl of Gloucester, upon the Sea-shoare in the South of this Shire,
lies bounded upon that part altogether with the British Sea; the West by
Loghor, is parted from Caermarden-shire; the North butteth upon the County of
Breknok; and the East by Remney is divided from Monmouth.

The Form of it and measure.
(2) The form of this Shire grows still wider from her West-point, spreading
her broadest touch in the East, betwixt which extremes I find by measure to
be well-neere forty English miles, and from North to South, not altogether
twenty: the whole in circumference, about one hundred and twelve miles.

The Air.
(3) The air is temperate, and gives more content to the mind, then the Soil
does fruit or ease unto Travelers. The hills being high and very many, which
from the North notwithstanding are lessened as it were by degrees; and toward
the Seacoasts, the Country becomes somewhat plain, which part is the best
both for plenty of Grain, and populous of Inhabitants. The rest all
mountain, is replenished with Cattle, which is the best means unto wealth
that this Shire does afford; upon whose Hills you may behold whole Herds of
them feeding, and from whose Rocks, most clear springing waters through the
valleys trickling, which sportingly do pass with a most pleasant sound, and
did not a little revive my wearied spirits among those vast mountains,
employed in their search: whose infancy at first admitted an easy step over;
but grown unto strength, more boldly forbad me such passage, and with a more
stern countenance held on their journey unto the British Seas: Tave the chief
River.
and Tave among these is accounted for a chief.

Caerdif the chief Town of all South Wales.
(4) Upon whose fall, and East-banke, the fairest Town of all South Wales is
seated, the Britains Caerdid, the English Caerdiffe, which Fitz-Haimon
fortified with a Wall and Castle, in the Reign of King Rufus, when he and his
Norman Knights had overcome Rhese the Prince of these parts, and thrust our
Iestine from his lawful possession. This Town he made his own Seat and Court
of Justice, enjoining his Consorts to give aid to this honor, and to hold
their portions in vassallage of him. Strong was the Castle, as by the trust
therein reposed may well appear, Beauclark.
where the youngest brother Beauclark kept captive the eldest Curthose,
Curthose.
both of them sons to the Conqueror, the space of twentie-sixe years. This
Castle is large, and in good repair, whence the Towne-wall went both South and
East to the Rivers side, through which, four Gates enter into the four winds,
and contain in compass nine hundred and twenty pases; and along the River (a
sure defense) upon her West side, three hundred more, so that the Town
contains in circuit twelve hundred and fourscore pases. But as the Tave is a
friend to the Town, in making a Key for arrivage of shipping; so is she a foe
to S. Mary's Church in the South, with undermining her foundations, and
threatening her fall. The Town is governed by a Major, yearly elected out of
twelve Aldermen, assisted with other twelve Burgesses, a Town-Clerke, four
Constables, and two Sergeants with Mace: whose site is observed from the
North-Starre to lie in the degree of Latitude, The graduation of Ca^dif
51. and 49. scruples; and from the first point in the West, 16. and 52.
scruples.

(5) In the same graduation almost is sited the City Landaf, Landaffe.
wherein is a Castle and Cathedral Church, dedicated to S. Telean, Bishop of
the same, without any other memorable matter worthy the speaking of.

(6) But things of strange note are these, by the report of Giraldus, Giraldus.
who affirms, that In a Rock or Cliffe upon the Seaside, and Island Barry,
lying near the South-East point of this County, Things of strange note.
is heard out of a little Chinke (let him take heed what he says) the noise as
it were of Smiths at their work; one whiles the blowing of Bellows to
increase the heat, then the strokes of the Hammer, and sound of the Anvile;
sometimes the noise of the Grind-stone in grinding of Iron tools; then the
hissing sparks of Steele-gads, as they fly from their beating, with the
puffing noise of flames in a Furnace. And whether this is the place whereof
Clemens Alexandrinus speaks, Clemens Alex. Stromat. ^^. 7.
I determine not; where in his writings he has these words: They that have
recorded Histories (says he) do say that in the I Will of Britain, there is a
certain Hole or Cave under the bottom of an hill, and on the top thereof a
gaping Chinke, into the which when the wind is gathered, and tossed to and fro
in the womb or concavitie thereof, there is heard above, a sound of Cymbals:
for the wind being driven back from his hole, is forced to make a loud sound
at her vent.

(7) More Westward from hence, upon the River Ogmore, and near unto Newton, in
a sandy plain, about an hundred pases from Severne, there springs a Well, A
strange Well.
though not of the clearest water, where at the flowing and fullness of the
Sea, can hardly any water be gotten; but at the ebb and fall of tide it
walloweth up amain. The cause may be, as Polybius reports of the like at
Cadys; ^olybius.
wherein the windy air, when it is deprived of his wonted issues, forcibly
returns, shutting and stopping up the passages and veins of the Spring,
whereby the waters are kept in. But contrariwise, when the surface thereof is
void and empty of water, the veins of the Source or Spring are unstopped and
set free, which then boyleth up in great abundance.

(8) And upon the same shore more North and by West, Minyd-Ma^^^^.
on the top of a hill called Minyd-Margan, is erected a Monument inscribed with
a strange Character, and as strange a conceit held thereof by the by-dwellers,
whose opinions are possessed, that if any man read the same, he shall shortly
after die.

This Shire, as it is the furthest Coast of South Wales, and lay open to
sorraine invasion; so was it fortified with twenty five stronger Castles,
whereof times and storms have devoured the most: The number of Castles in this
Shire.
such were Barry, Saint Doneits, Denispowes, Morlashe, Meneshe, Loghor,
Lla^ddeny, Lla^quian, Oxwich, Oystermouth, Ogmor, Pise, Porkery, Pennarth,
Winston, Newcastle, Caerfly, Coche, Peullyn, Kethligarne, Kenfeage, Tallavan,
Treer and Cothy.

Neither was the County so ill seated for sufficiency of life, or barren of
grain, but that therein were planted places for divine piety: Religious
Houses.
such were Neeth, Margan, and Caerdif, besides the Episcopal See of Landaf:
which last still remains; the other three suppressed among the fall of their
like, under King Henry the eight.

This Shire is divided into ten Hundreds, The division of this Shire.
wherein are seated six Market-Townes, and one hundred and eighteen
Parish-Churches, as in the Card and Table annexed, more at large appears.

map of Glamorganshire GLAMORGAN SHYRE With the sittuations of the chief town
CARDYFF and ancient LANDAFFE described.


An Alphabeticall Table of all the Towns, Rivers, and memorable places
mentioned in Glamorgan-shire.
HUNDREDS in Glamorgan-shire.
1. SWanzey. 2. Llangevelach. 3. Neath. 4. Newcastle. 5. Llantrissent. 6.
Caerfily. 7. Ogmor. 8. Cowbridge. 9. Denispowys. 10. Cardif.
A
ABERAVON, New. Aberdare, Llant. Aberpirgum, Neath. Aberthawe east, Denis.
Aberthowe west, Cow. S. Androwes, Denis. Arthurs Buts hill, Llant. Saint Athon
Cow. Avon Flu.
B
Bachhannis Island, Swan. Backinston, Swan. Baglane, Neath. Barry, Denis. Barry
Island, Denis. Bettus Chapel, New. Beveerton, Cow. Bewpeere, Cow. Bishopston,
Swan. Boulston, Denis. Capell Brathteare, Caerf. Bredruckun, Denis. Park
Brewis, Swan. Saint Brides the great, Ogmor. Saint Brides the less, Ogmor.
BRIDGEND, New. Saint Brides upon Hay, Denis. Brytton ferry, Neath. Burra Flu.
C
Cadoxton, Denis. Cadoxton, Neath. Caerfilly Castle, Caerf. Canton, Cardif.
Capell Krenant, Neath. CARDIFE, Cardif. Carnllayd, Denis. Cayreh, Cardif.
Cheryton, swan. Clase, Llant. Clementson, Ogmor. Cledaugh Flu. Cledaugh Flu.
Coche Castle, Caerf. Coidfranke Forest, Lla. Coidemerchan Park, Deni. Cog,
Denis. Cogan, Denis. Coganpill, Denis. Coston, Denis. Cowlston, Ogmor.
COWBRIDGE, Cow. Coytie Castle, Newcast. Coytchurch, Newcast. Cunnon Flu.
D
Denispowis Castle, De. S. Donetts Welsh. Cow. Saint Donetts, Ogmor.
Dredruckan, Denis. Dreergusse, Denis. Dulishe Flu. Dunraven, Ogmor.
E
Eghhelolid, Denis. Egloisbrywis, Cow. Egloissilan, Caerf. Elay Flu. Elay,
Denis. Ewenny Flu.
F
Saint Fagans, Denis. Faldray, Caerf. Flimston, Cow. The Friars, Cardif.
Funtgar, Denis. Funnum, Denis.
G
Saint Georges, Denis. Gilston, Cow. Capell Glodis, Caerf. Glyncorruge, Neath.
Gwennowe, Denis.
H
Hawood aport Chapel, New. Saint Hillary, Cow. The Holme, swan.
I
Illston, Swan. S. John's, Swan. Istradovodock, Llant. Istradowen, Cow.
K
Kanfigg Castle, Newcast. Kelligate, Caerf. S. Kennets Chapel, Swan.
Kethligarne Castle, Og. Kevenmable, Cardif. Kilibebyth, Neath. Kilvay, Swan.
Knellston, Swan. Capell Krenant, Neath.
L
Laleston, Newcast. Lamadoke, Swan. Llanbeder ynro, Denis. Llanbethery, Denis.
Llanblethran, Cow. Lancarvan, Denis. Lancod, Denis. Landaph, Cardif.
Llandilotalibout, Llang. Llandewy Castle, Swan. Llandogh, Cow. Llandough,
Denis. Landow, Ogmor. Landevodock, Ogmor. Llandydock, Newcast. Lanedeme,
Cardif. Langan, Ogmor. Llangenyth, Swan. Llangevelach, Llang. Llanginor, Ogmor.
Llangoned, Newcast. Llangug, Llang. Langwick, Llan. Llangibach, Llang.
Llangyneware, Newc. Lanhary, Cow. Lanharan, Cow. Llanihangell, Covv.
Llanihangle, Denis. Lanissen, Cardif. Llanmadok, Svvan. Lannaes, Covv.
Llannyenwere, Svvan. Llanquian Castle, Covv. Llanriden, Llan. Llanrydien,
Svvan. Lansamlett, Llan. Lansannor, Covv. Llantrissent, Llant. Lantrithed,
Denis. Lantroitt Vairdrey, Llant. Lantwit, Covv. Lantwyt, Neath. Lanvabon,
Caerf. Lanvedowe, Caerf. Llanverock point, Denis. Lanwuo, Llant. Llanyhangell,
Denis. Llanyhylotalibout, Svv. Llanyltiduandray, Llan. Llanylted, Neath.
Lanylyd, Covv. Leckwith, Denis. Lisuaure, Cardif. S. Lithams, Denis. Louchor
Castle, Svvan. Louchor, Svvan. Lloynigrat, Cardif. Lyswerney, Covv.
Llystalabout, Cardif.
M
Marcroes, Ogmor. S. Mary Church, Covv. S. Mary's hill, Ogmor. Margaiu,
Newcast. Michalaston, Svvan. S. Michael, Denis. Michellston upon Avon. Neat.
Michellston in the pit, Deni. Michelston upon Elay, Denis. Mychellston, Covv.
Meneche Castle, Denis. Merther Mawre, Org. Mertherdevan, Denis. Merthir, Caerf.
Morgan, Newcast. Morlashe Castle, Caer. Moulton, Denis. Mumbles point, Svvan.
N
Nashe little, Covv. Nashe great, Covv. Nashe point, Covv. NEATH, Neath. Neath
vauchan Flu. Neath Abbey, Llang. Newcastle, Newcast. Newton Welsh, Covv. Newton
Nottage, New. S. Nicholas, Denis. S. Nicholas Town, Svv. Nolton, Newcast.
O
Ogmore Flu. Ogmore Castle, Svvan. Oystermouth Castle, Svvan. Oystermouth,
Svvan. Oxwiche, Svvan. Oxwiche Castle, Svva. Oxwiche point, Svva.
P
Pendoyloni, Covv. Pengwerne, Svvan. Penmaen, Svvan. Penmarke, Denis. Pennarth
Castle, Svva. Pennarth point, Denis. Pennarth point, Svvan. Pennarth, Denis.
Pennarth Baye, Denis. Pennarth, Svvan. Penrees, Svvan. Penthery, Llang*
Pentrich, Llant. Peterston on the Mount, Ogmor. Peullyn, Ogmor. Pile, Nevvcast.
Porteynon, Svvan. Portkirig, Denis. Peterston upon Elay, Denis.
R
Radyre, Llant. Remgedro glytach, Llang. Resowlay, Neath. Reynalston, Svvan.
Rompney Flu. Rosylly, Svvan. Roth, Cardif. Rowse, Denis. Ruddrye, Caerf.
S
The Spittle, Cardif. Sully, Denis. SWANZEY, Svvan. Swanzey poche, Svvan. Syly,
Denis. Sylye Island, Denis.
T
Tallavant Castle, Covv. Talygarn, Llant. Tave Flu. Thevan, Caerf. Thule Flu.
Tilcot, Cardif. Tithegstowne, New. Towye Flu. Treer Castle, Covv.
W
Walterstown, Denis. Webley, Svvan. Wenny, Ogmor. Wenuor, Denis. West-Gower,
Svvan. Whitford point, Svvan. Whitchurch, Caerf. Whitchurch, Cardif. Wicke,
Ogmor. Winston Castle, Denis. Worleton, Denis. Wormeshead point, Svvan.
Y
Ycheloley, Denis. Ystradowen, Covv.
MONMOVTH-SHIRE. CHAPTER VI.
The name of Monmouth-shire.
MONMOUTH-SHIRE, from Monmouth Town, and that from Monnowe-water bearing name,
is altogether enclosed on the North, and is separated from Hereford-shire with
the same River, The borders of Monmouth-shire.
upon the East both it and Wye divides this County from Gloucester-shire. The
South Side wholly is washed by the Severne Sea, and some of her West part by
Rempney is parted from Glamorgan, and the rest lies bordered upon by
Breknock-shire.

The Form.
(2) The form thereof is Scallop-wise, both long and broad, shooting her North
point to Llantony, and her South to the fall of Rempney, betwixt which two are
twenty-foure English miles: and from Chepstowe East, to Blanagwent West, are
not altogether nineteen: the whole in circuit draws some what near to
seventy-seven miles.

The Air.
(3) The Air is temperate, healthful and clear, the soil is hilly, The Soil.
woody, and rich, all places fruitful, but no place barren. The Hills are
grazed upon by Cattle and Sheep, the Valleys are laden with Corn and Grass,
never ungrateful of the Husbandmans pains, nor makes frustrate his hope of
expected increase; whose springs abundantly rising in this County with many
streams, do fatten the soil even from side to side.

The ancient Inhabitants.
(4) Anciently the Silures inhabited this Shire, whose chief City by the
Emperor Antonine is named Venta Silurum, by the Welsh Caer-went, and was by
Tathie the British Saint, In the life of Tathie.
made an Academie, and a divine place for worship. So likewise Caer-lion now,
once Isca, was, where the second Roman Legion called Augusta lay, as by their
Coins, Altars, Tables, and Inscriptions there found, and daily therein dug
up, does evidently appear.

In Itinerar. Cambr.
By the report of Giraldus, in this City was the Court of great Arthur, whither
the Roman Ambassadors resorted unto him, and as Alexander Elsebiensis
writes, therein was a School of two hundred Philosophers, skillful in
Astronomy and other Arts. Which is the more credible, Giral.
for that Amphibalus St. Albans instructor, was therein born, and Julius and
Aaron, two noble Prot^-Martyrs of great Britain, in this City received the
crown of Martyrdom, where their bodies were also interred. But as all things
find their fatal period, so this City for beauty, circuit, and magnificall
respect is laid in the ruins of her own decay; neither may any more lament the
loss of glory then Monmouths Castle, which captive-like does yield to
conquering time. Her down-cast stones from those lofty turrets, Monmouth Tower.
do show what beauty once it bare, standing mounted round in compass, and
within her walls another mount, whereon a tower of great height and strength is
built, which was the birthplace of our Conquering Henry, King Henry the fifth
borne in Monmouth.
the great Triumpher over France, but now decayed, and from a Princely Castle,
is become no better then a regardlesse Cottage. In this Town a beautiful
Church built with three Isles is remaining, and at the East end a most curious
built (but now decayed) Church stands, called the Monks Church: In the
Monastery whereof, our great Antiquary Geffrey, surnamed Manmouth, and Ap
Arthur, wrote his History of Great Britain: whose pains as they were both
learned and great, so have they bred great pains among the learned both to
defend and to disprove. The Towns situation is pleasant and good, seated
betwixt the Rivers Monnowe and Wye: three Gates yet stand, besides that Tower
or Lock of the Bridge, and a Trench or tract of Wall running betwixt them on
each side down to the River, containing in circuit about eight hundred paces.
The Town is in good repair, and well frequented, governed by a Mayor, two
Bailiffes, fifteen Common Counselors, a Towne-Clerke, and two Sergeants for
their attendants. It is in Latitude removed from the Equator 52. degrees, and
8. minutes, and from the West-point of Longitude is set in the degree 17.36.
minutes.

Religious Houses erected and suppressed in this Shire, Religious houses
suppressed.
for greatest account have been in Caer-lion, Chepstow, Gold-cliffe, Munmouth
and Llantony; which last stood so solitary, and among hills, that the Sun was
not seen to shine there, but only betwixt the hours of one and three.

This Shire is strengthened with fourteen Castles, Castles.
traded with six Market Towns, Market Towns.
divided into six Hundreds, wherein are situated one hundred twenty and seven
Parish Churches, The Shires division.
and is not accounted among the Welsh-shires, being subdued by Henry the
second, who passing the Nant Pen-carne, a small Brook and of no danger,
Girald. Cambr.
yet held fatal by the Welsh, over-credulous to a Prophecy of Merlin
Silvester the British Apollo, who had foreshewed that when a stout and frecled
faced King (such as Henry was) should pass over that Ford, then the power of
the Welsh-men should be brought under; whereby their stout courage was soon
abated, and the whole County the sooner in subjection to the English. The
Names of the places in this Shire are expressed in a Table, Alphabetically
gathered in the Page ensuing upon the rest of this Map.

map of the county of Mounmouth THE COUNTYE OF MONMOUTH wih the sittuation of
the Shire-towe^ Described Ann 1610


An Alphabeticall Table of all the Towns, Rivers, and memorable places
mentioned in Monmouth-Shire.
HVNDREDS IN Monmouth-Shire.
1. BErgraveny H. 2. Skenfrith. 3. Vske. 4. Ragland. 5. Caldicot. 6. Wenlooge.
A
ABERGEVENNEW, Be. Abernsteth, Berg. Saint Aruans, Called. Avon Flu.
B
Bassaleg, Wenl. Basaleck, Wenl. Bedw^s, Wenl. Bedwellty, Wenly. Bettus, Ragl.
Bettus, VVenl. Bettus Chapel, Berg. Wealch Bicknor, Sken. Birthin Flu.
Blanagwent, VVeln. Blorench Hill, Berg. Saint Bride, Called. Saint Bride, VVenl.
Bryngwyne, Ragl. Bysheton, Called.
C
Caierwent, Called. Caldicote, Called. Carewent, Called. CARLION, Vsk. The Chapel,
Berg. Chappelhill, Sken. Chappelhill, Sken. Charston Rock, Called. Chepstow Park
Called. CHEPSTOW, Called. Christchurch, Called. Cledagnvagh Flu. Clitho, Ragl.
Coeedkernew, VVenl. Colbroke, Berg. Connyoy, Berg. Coumcarvon, Sken. Coydkirne,
VVenl. Creke, Called. Crindye, VVeln. Crucorne, Berg.
D
Denny Island, Called. Dewston, Called. Dyngestowe, Ragl. Dynham, Called. Dyxston,
Sken.
E
Edwith Vawre, Flu. Edwith Vauchan, Flu. Eries Wood, Called.
F
Fidan Flu.
G.
Goldecliffe, Called. Goldecliffe Rock, Called. Goldecliffe Point, Called. Goyttren,
Berg. Lyn Goyde, Berg. Gracedue, Ragl. The Grange, Called. Greenefeld, Castle,
VVenl. Grysmond Castle, Sken. Gwarneaolepa, VVenl. Gwernesseny, Ragl.
H
Herdwicke, Berg. Heuilis, VVenl. Howicke, Called. Hothny Flu.
I
Saint Ielian, Called. Iston, Called. Itton, Called.
K
Kebby Flu. Kylgoden, Berg. Kemis, Called. Kemis Commander, Berg. Kenueny Flu.
Kilgorucke, Sken. Kirten Beacon, VVenl. Kyllcornell, Berg.
L
Llanarth, Berg. Llanbadock, Vske. Llanbed, Called. Llandenny, Ragl. Llanaferyng,
Berg. Llandeuaige, Called. Llandeguith, Vske. Llandilobatthale, Berg. Llandogo,
Sken. Llanfoyst, Berg. Llangattokelenyg, Berg. Llangattock Vihanauell, Sken.
Llangattock Vibonauell, Sken. Langattock, Berg. Llangeby, Vske. Llangevye,
Ragl. Llangevew, Vske. Llangewa, Sken. Llangiby, Vske. Llangomes, Ragl.
LLANGOVEN, Sken. Llangston, Called. Llanhenoch, Vske. Llanhithell, Berg.
LLANHYLETHE, VVeln. Llanllowell, Vske. Llamnerton, Called. Llannoyth, Sken.
Llannyhangell, Berg. Llannyhangell Veddo, VVeln. Llannouer, Berg. Llan-pyll,
Sken. Llansanffred, Berg. Llanssey, Sken. Llanth^ruell Chapel, Wenl.
Llanthenyrytherch, Berg. Llantheywye, Vske. Llanthen, Berg. Llanthewy Retherch,
Berg. Llanthewy Steride, Berg. Llantilio Grossmont. Sken. Llantony, Berg.
Llantrishen, Vske. Llanvaier, Called. Llanvaghes, Called. Llanuaner Chapel Sken.
Llanvapley, Berg. Llanveghauan, Vske. Llanveyre, Berg. Llanvihangell, Called.
Llanvihangell Tormenith, Sken. Llanvihangell, Berg. Llanvihangell, Rag.
Llanvitheryn, Berg. Llanvreghvaye, Vske. Llanwaren, Called. Llanwenarth, Berg.
Llanyhangell Tonney groyse, VVenl. Llanyssen, Sken. Llyn Goyde, Berg.
M
Maghan, Wenl. Magor, Called. Malpas, VVenl. Manihilad, Berg. Marshfield, VVenl.
Marthelly Chapel, Called. Matharne, Called. S. Mellans, VVenl. Michaelchurch,
Berg. Michaelston, VVenl. Monnow Flu. MONMOUTH, Sken. Mounton Chapel, Called.
Saint Michael, Sken. Saint Moughans, Sken. Mynithisloyn, Wenl. Mychiltroy,
Sken.
N
Nashe, Called. Newchurch, Called. Chapel Newith, Berg. Bettus Newith Ragl.
Newport Haven, Wenl. NEWPORT, Wenl. Norton, Sken.
O
Olwye Flu. Ould-castle, Berg.
P
Panteage, Berg. Parcassik, Sken. Parkhill, Called. Penalth, Sken. Penclase,
Sken. Penclawth, Ragl. Pencarn Flu, Wenl. Pencoyde, Called. Penhow, Called. Penhow,
Called. Penrose, Ragl. Penrose, Vske. Penteaies hill, Berg. Penterry Chapel,
Sken. Saint Pere, Called. Pertholey, Berg. Perthing, Sken. Peterston, Wenl.
Pontemoile, Berg. Portesmete, Called. Pyl Flu. Pyl Flu.
Q
Quenoch Chapel, Vske.
R
Ragland, Ragl. Redwicke, Called. Riseley, Wenl. Rocherston Castle, Wenl.
Rockfield, Sken. Rogeat, Called. Rompney Flu. Rempney, Wenl. Runston, Called.
S
Shernewton, Called. Skenssreth, Sken. Skirivawre hill, Berg. Sroway Flu. Stanton
Chapel, Berg. Strogle Castle, Called. Sudbroke, Called.
T
Terestent, Wenl. Throggy Flu. Traowey, Ragl. Tredeager, Wenl. Tredonock, Vske.
Tregayre, Ragl. Trelecke, Sken. Trelecke Graunge, Sken. Trinity Chapel, Called.
Treuenthen, Berg. Trostrey, Vske. Trothy Flu. Troy, Sken. Trylaye, Berg.
Tyntarne, Sken. Tynterne Abbey, Sken. Tumberlow Hill, Wenl.
V
Vske Flu. VSKE, Vske.
W
Warigoch Chapel, Berg. Warnde, Berg. Wense Wood, Called. Whitt Castle, Berg.
Whitston, Called. Wick, Called. Wisewood Chase, Sken. Wolf Newton, Sken. Saint
Wollos. Woudye, Called. Wnnastowe, Sken.
BREKNOCK-SHIRE. CHAPTER VII.
BReknock-shire, in the British Language Brechineau, The bounds of
Breknock-shire.
(so called, as the Welch-men relate of a Prince named Brechanius, the Father
of an holy offspring, whose twenty four daughters were all of them Saints)
is a County neither very large, nor greatly to be praised or disliked of,
whose bounds upon the North is parted from Radnor with the Rivers Clarwen and
Wye: the West lies butted upon by Cardigan and Caermarden-shires: the South is
confirmed by Glamorgan; and the East with Monmouth and Radnor-shires, is wholly
bound.

The length and breadth.
(2) The length of this Shire from North to South, betwixt Llanuthel and
Istradgunles, are twenty eight English miles; and her breadth from East to
West, extended betwixt Pentrisso and Llywell, are twenty; the whole in
circumference, about one hundred and two miles.

(3) This County is full of hills, and uneven for travel, which on the South
part mount in such height, Girald. in lib. ^iuer. Camb.
that as Giraldus has written, They make the air much colder, and defend the
County from the excessive heat of the Sun, whereby a certain natural
wholesomnesse of air makes it most temperate: The nature of the Soil.
and on the East side, the Mountains of Talgar and Ewias do as it were
forefence the same. Among which, there arise and run so many fruitful springs,
that their valleys are thereby made most fertile, yielding in plenty both
corn and grass.

The ancient Inhabitants.
(4) The ancient Inhabitants and possessors of this Shire, with the rest in this
South Tract were the Silures, much spoken of, and great opposites to the
Romans, whose Countries were first made subject by Julius Frontinus, Tacitus in
vita Agricola.
who besides the valor of the enemy, had to struggle with the Mountains and
Straits, as Tacitus tells us; neither any more hard, we may well say, then them
of this Shire; whereof one in the South, and three miles from Breknock, is of
such height and operation, as is uncredible: and were it not that I have
witness to affirm what I shall speak, I should blush to let the report
thereof pass from my Pen: In my perambulations in these parts, remaining in
Breknock to observe the site of that Town, the Aldermen or chief Seniors
thereof, regarding my pains, with friendly and courteous entertainments at my
departure, no less then eight of them, that had been Bailiffes of the Town,
came to visit me; where they reported upon their credits and trials, that from
the top of that hill, in the Welsh called Mounch-denny, Arthurs Chair.
or Cadier Arthur, they had oftentimes cast from them, and down the North-East
Rock, their Cloaks, Hats, and Staves, which notwithstanding would never fall,
but were with the air and wind still returned back, and blown up: neither,
said they, will any thing descend from that cliffe being so cast, unless it be
stone or some metalline substance: affirming the cause to be the Clouds, which
are seen to rack much lower then the top of that Hill. Llynsauathans Mere.
As strange tales are told of the Mere Llynsavathan, two miles by East from
Breknock, which at the breaking of her frozen Ice, makes a fearful sound
like unto thunder. Girald. Cambr.
In which place, as is reported, sometimes stood a fair City, which was
swallowed up in an Earthquake, and resigned her stone-wals unto this deep and
broad water: whither unto this day leads all the ways in this Shire: which,
as learned Cambden conjectureth, might be that Louentrium, which Ptolemy in
this Tract places; and the more confirmed by the Rivers name adjoining, being
also called Leuenny, which River also passes through this Mere without any
mixture of her waters, as by the color thereof is well perceived, which
glideth through it with the same stream, and no greater then wherewith she
first entered in.

(5) The Towns for commerce, The Market Towns.
are Hay, Bealt, and Breknock, two of them unfortunate of their former
greatness, whom wars and sedition have defaced and cast down. Hay upon Wye
and Dulas, pleasant for situation, in the rebellion of Owen Glendowerdwy, was
diswalled, depopulated, and burnt, in whose foundations for new repaires, many
Roman Coins have been found; and thereby thought to be a seat of their
Legions: and Buelth, now Bealt, though of good frequencie, yet not so great as
when Ptolemy observed her position for graduation, who calls it Buleum
Silurum, neither when it with the Country was possessed by Aurelius Ambrosius,
by whose permission Pascensius the son of Vortiger ruled all, as Ninius
writes, nor yet of later times, when Leolin the last Prince of the Britains,
was therein betrayed and slain.

(6) Breknock the Shire-towne, Breknock.
for buildings and beauty retains a better regard, whose walls in
Ovall-wise are both strong and of good repair, having three Gates for
entrance, with ten Towers for defense, and is in circuit six hundred and
forty paces about, upon whose West part a most sumptuous and stately Castle is
seated, the like whereof is not commonly seen, whose decays approaching do
increase her ruins daily, and in the end is feared will be her fall. This
Town is seated upon the meeting of two Rivers, Houthy and Vske, whose yearly
government is committed to two Bailiffes, fifteen Aldermen, two Chamberlaines,
two Constables, a Town Clerk, and two Sergeants their attendants: having the
Poles elevation in 52.21. minutes of Latitude, and for Longitude is placed in
the 16. and 32. minutes, as the Mathematicians do measure them.

(7) This Shire is strengthened with nine Castles, The divisions.
divided into six Hundreds, wherein are seated three Market Towns, and sixty
one Parish-Churches.

map of Brecknockshire BREKNOKE BOTH SHYRE AND TOWN described Ann. Domini 16^0.


An Alphabeticall Table of all the Towns, Rivers, and memorable places
mentioned in Breknock-shire.
HVNDREDS in BREKNOCK-SHIRE.
1 BEalt Hundred. 2 Merthy Hund. 3 Talgarth Hund. 4 Crickhoel Hund. 5 Penkelli
Hund. 6 Dyuynnock Hund.
A
Aberbrayne, Merth. Aberkinvick, Penkel. Aberlleueny, Talgarth. Aberyskire,
Merth. Capell Afyne, Talgarth. Altemawre, Talgarth.
B
Battle Chapel, Merth. BEALT, Bealt. Capell Bettus, Dyuyn. Black Mountain,
Dyuyn. Blaynllynuy Castle, Crick. Brave Flu. BREKNOCK, Penkel. Capell
Brengoran, Talgarth. Bruntllys, Talgarth.
C
Capell Callwen, Dyuyn. Camlas Flu. Cantrest, Penkel. Clarthy Flu. Clarwen Flu.
Comartch Flu. Capell Coyelbryn, Flu. Craye Flu. Crickadarn, Talgarth.
Crickholl, Crick. Crickhoel, Crick. Capell Cunok, Merth.
D
Capell Defrunehenthy, Merth. Delas Flu. Dyuynnock, Dyuyn. Dulas Flu. Dylas
Flu. Castle Dynas, Talgarth.
G
Garthbrenguy Llanthew, Merth. Gilston, Penkel. Glasbury, Talgarth. Glyn Tawy,
Dyuyn. Groney Flu. Gwenthur, Talgarth. Gwetherick Flu.
H
Haterell Hill, Talgarth. HAY, Talgarth. Henuid Park, Merth. Hepsey Flu.
Houthy Flu.
I
Isker Flu. Istradgunles, Dyuyn. Istraduelltey, Dyuyn.
K
Ketheden, Crick. Kethitalgarth, Bealt.
L
Llamcamlach, Penkel. Llanauanuour, Bealt. Llanbedde, Crick. Llanddetty,
Penkel. Llandiualley, Targarth. Llandiuilog, Merth. Llandiloruan, Merth.
Llanelli, Crick. Llaneliw, Talgarth. Llangamarth, Bealt. Llanganten, Bealt.
Llangattuck, Crick. Llangeney, Crick. Llangonider, Crick. Llangors, Crick.
Llangouilog, Penkel. Llangoyd, Talgarth. Llangroney, Crick. Llangustye, Penkel.
Llangynyd, Crick. Llanlleenuell, Bealt. Llannyllo, Talgarth. Llansanffred,
Penkel. Llanspethitt, Dyuyn. Llanthetty, Penkel. Llanthew Castle, Penkel.
Llanthewi Aberwessyn, Bealt. Llanthewi Come, Bealt. Llanuair, Bealt.
Llanuanuecham, Bealt. Llanuigon, Penkel. Llanuyhangell Vachian, Merth.
Llanuyhangell Bryn pabian, Bealt. Llanuorted, Bealt. Llanurenach, Penkel.
Llanuthull, Bealt. Llanuillo, Penkel. Llanwerne, Penkel. Llanygon, Talgarth.
Llanyhangell Manthran, Merth. Llanyhangell Cumdye, Crick. Llanyhanglo, Penkel.
Llanyhangell Aberwessyn, Bealt. Llanynnis, Bealt. Llestinan, Bealt. Lleueny
Flu. Lleueny Flu. Lliwell, Dyuyn. Llyswen, Talgarth.
M
Maesmynys, Bealt. Tower Maltwalbury, Dyuyn. Melta Flu. Metherchynog, Merth.
Mounchdenny Hill, Penkel.
N
Capell Nanty, Penkel. Neath Flu. Newton, Dyuyn.
O
Olluannock, Dyuyn.
P
Patrisho, Crick. Penderyn, Dyuyn. Penketh Castle, Penkel. Peterchurch, Crick.
Pipton, Talgarth. Porthamble, Talgarth. Portheroyes, Bealt.
R
Capell Ridbrue, Merth.
S
Llyn Sanathan, Talgarth. Capell Senny, Dyuyn. Skethrog, Penkel.
T
Talgarth, Talgarth. Talyllyn, Penkel. Capell Tauechan, Penkel. Tauy Flu.
Trallong, Merth. Trangarth Flu. Trausnant Flu. Tree Castle, Dyuyn. Tretowre,
Crick. Turch Flu. Tylachthy, Penkel.
V
Tawe Vachan Flu. Neath Vachan Flu. Tawe Vawir Flu. Vaynor, Penkel. Vske Flu.
Vske Flu.
W
Weuery Flu. Wye Flu.
Y
Capell Ylldytt, Dyuyn. Yruon Flu.
RADNOR-SHIRE CHAPTER. VIII.
RADNOR-SHIRE lies bordered upon the North, The bounds of Radnor-shire.
with the County Monmouth; upon the East touches Shropshire and
Hereford-shire: the Rivers Clarwen and Wye divide it from Breknock in the
South; and the West part does shorten point-wise into Cardigan-shire.

The form.
(2) The form thereof is in proportion triangle, every side almost containing a
like distance: for from West to North are twenty miles; from North to South,
The Circuit.
twenty two; and from South to West are twenty four: the whole in
circumference extending to fourscore and ten miles.

The Air.
(3) The Air thereof is sharp and cold, (as most of Wales is) for that the
snow lies and lasts long unmelted under those shadowing high Hills and
overhanging Rocks.

The Soil.
(4) The Soil is hungry, though not barren, and that in the East and South the
best: the other parts are rough and churlish, and hardly bettered by painful
labor; so that the riches of the North and West consists chiefly in the
brood of Cattle.

The ancient people. Tacitus in vita Agricola.
(5) Anciently this County was possessed by the Silures, a warlike people, and
great withstanders of the Romans impositions, who had not only them to fight
against, but withal the unaccessible Mountains, wherewith this Shire is so
over-pressed and burdened, that many times I feared to look down from the
hanging Rocks, whereunder I passed into those deep and dark dales, seeming
to me an entrance into Limbo. Polychron.
Among these (as say our Historians) that hateful Prince to God and Man,
Vortiger, his Countries scourge, and last Monarch of the British Blood, by fire
from Heaven was consumed with his incestuous Wife, for whom Ninius names the
Country where in his Castle stood, Guartiger-Maur, of whose rubbish the Castle
Guthremion was raised, as some are of opinion. Yet they of North Wales will
have his destruction and Castle to stand in their parts near unto
Beth-Kelleck, whereof we will further speak in the relation of his life.
Fatal was this place also to Llewellin the last Prince of the British race,
who being betrayed by the men of Buelth, fled into those vast Mountains of
Radnor, Anno 1282.
where by Adam Francton he was slain; and his head (crowned with Ivy) set upon
the Tower of London.

(6) Places most worthy of note in this Shire, are as ensues: Radnor.
The first is Radnor, from whom the County receives her Name, anciently Magi,
where the Commander of the Pascensian Regiment lay, In the Book of Notices.
and thought to be the Magnos in Atonine the Emperors Survey. This Town is
pleasantly seated under an Hill, Cambden.
whereon stands mounted, a large and strong Castle, from whose Bulwark a
Trench is drawn along the West of the Town, whereon a wall of stone was once
raised, as by the remains in many places appears. This Trench does likewise
inverge her West side so far as the River, but after is no more seen: whose
Graduation is observed to have the Pole elevated for Latitude 52. degrees, and
45. minutes; and for Longitude, from the first point of the West, set by
Mercator 17. degrees and one minute.

Prestayn for beauteous building is the best in this Shire, Prestayn.
a Town of Commerce, wonderfully frequented, and that very lately. Next is
Knighton, Knighton.
a Market Town likewise, under which is seen the Clawdh-Offa, or Offaes
Ditch, whose tract for a space I followed along the edge of the Mountain,
which was a bound set to separate the Welsh from the English, by the Mercian
King Offa: and by Egbert the Monarch a Law made, by the instigation of his
Wife, that it should be present death for the Welsh to pass over the same, In
his Polycraton John Salub^^y.
as John Bever the Monk of Westminster reports: and the like under Harald,
as John of Salisbury writes; wherein it was ordained, that what Welsh-man
soever should be found with any weapon on this side of that Limit, which was
Offaes Ditch, should have his right hand cut off by the Kings Officers.
Raihader Gowy.
The fourth place for account is Raihadar Gowy, who besides the great fall of
Wye with a continual noise, has her Markets there kept upon the Sabbath,
which I there observed, and here note for an offense.

(7) Many Rivers arise and run through this Shire, which were it not that the
Hills so cluster together, might make the soil both fertile and fat. Such are
Teme, Lug, Ithon, Clowdok, Dulas, Comarton, Somegill, Guithel, Arro, Machaway,
Edway, Hawye, Eland, Clarwen and Wye, besides other Loughs that stand betwixt
the hills.

This Shire is divided into six Hundreds, wherein are seated three Forests,
four Market-Townes, six Castles, and fifty two Parish-Churches, as in the
Table in the last Page of this Chapter Alphabetically are set and inserted.

map of the county of Radnor THE COUNTY OF RADNOR DESCRIBED AND THE
SHYRETOWNES SITTUATIONE Anno 16^8.


An Alphabeticall Table of all the Towns, Rivers, and memorable places
mentioned in Radnor-shire.
HVNDREDS in RADNOR-SHIRE.
1 RAyader-Gowy. 2 Knighton. 3 Kevenllice. 4 Radnor. 5 Collowine. 6
Painescastell.
A
Aberdow, Coll. Arro Flu. Augop, Rad.
B
Banghwid, Pains. Bettas disserth, Coll. Bigildi, Knight. BLETHVACH, Keven.
Blethuach Forest, Keven. Brongwine, Pains. Buttus, Pains.
C
Cascop, Keven. Castle Dynbod, Knight. Clarwen Flu. Clirow, Pains. Clowedoke
Flu. Colwin Castle, Coll. Colva, Rad. Combehire, Rayad. Comaron Flu.
D
Darnall Flu. Discodde, Rad. Disserth, Coll. Dullas Flu.
E
Ednall, Rad. Edway Flu. Eland Flu.
F
Fuldibrok, Rad.
G
Garthuagh, Rayad. Glasbury, Pains. Glascomb, Coll. Glastray alias Glawdiscre,
Rad. Glyngwin, Rayad. Gwythell Flu.
H
Harton, Rad. Hawye Flu. Hiop, Knight.
I
Ithon Flu.
K
Kevelles Castle, Keven. Kregrena, Coll. Kinerton, Rad. KNIGHTON, Knight.
Knukles Forest. Knight. Knukles, Knight.
L
Llanamro, Knight. Llanbaderney gareg, Coll. Llanbaderne, Keven. Lanbadarne
vynith, Knight. Llanbeder, Pains. Llanbester, Knight. Llandegley, Keven.
Llandewy, Knight. Llandewy vach, Pains. Llandilo, Pains. Landrindod, Keven.
Llanelweth, Coll. Llangiallo, Keven. Llanihangell, Keven. Llanihangell
yerholegan, Rayad. Llanihangell Arro, Pains. Llanihangell Kevenllice, Keven.
Llanihangell Nantmelan, Rad. Llansanffred, Coll. Llansanffred in Comotoieth,
Rayad. Llanstephan, Pains. Llanuereth, Coll. Llanyere, Rayad. Llowes, Pains.
Lug, Flu. Llynhoghlen, Pains.
M
Machway, Keven. Michaels Church, Pains. Monaghree, Keven.
N
Nantmell, Rayad. Newcastle, Rad. Newchurch, Pains. Norton, Rad.
P
Painescastle, Pains. Pilim, Keven. PRESTEIGNE, Rad.
R
Radnor old, Rad. RADNOR new, Rad. Radnor Forest, Rad. RAYADER-gowy, Rayad.
Rulen, Coll.
S
S. Harmon, alias Phistharmon, Rayad. Standish, Rad. Samegill Flu.
T
Teme Flu.
W
Whitten, Keven. Whitehall, Knight. Weston hall, Keven. Wye Flu.
Y
Ython Flu.
CARDIGANS-SHIRE. CHAPTER. IX.
CARDIGAN-SHIRE, (in the Welsh called Sire Aber-Tivi) is parted on the North
from Merioneth-shire with the River Doui; The ancient name.
by the Plinillimon hills from Montgomery-shire in part of her East; Limi^^.
and the rest from Breknock-shire, with the water Towy; and with Tyvy
altogether on the South from Caermarden-shire: the West is wholly washed with
the Irish Sea.

The Form.
(2) The form thereof is horne-like, bowing compass, long and narrow, and
growing wider still toward the North: so that from Cardigan, the Shire-Towne
and uttermost point in the South, unto the River Doui, Dimensitie.
her farthest North bounder, are thirty two miles: and from the head of
Clarwen in the East, to Aberysthwyth on her West, the broadest part in the
Shire, are only fifteen: the whole in circumference is one hundred and three
miles.

Air.
(3) The Air is open and somewhat piercing; the soil is hilly, and (
Wales-like) uneven: yet more plain and champion toward the Sea, then in the
East or North of the Land. For besides that great and high hill called
Plinillimon, a continual range of lesser does shoot along, yielding in their
valleys both goodly rich Pastures, Soil.
and very large Pooles, which being assisted with Springs from the Rocks, do
branch themselves, as veins in the body, and make fruitful their passages
unto the Sea. In Tyvy one of these, The Beaver in former time found here.
as Giraldus has written, the Beaver has been found, a creature living both
by land and water, whose stones the Physicians hold in great price. His
fore-feet are like unto a dog, but the hinder whole skinned, as is the goose:
the dog-like serve him on shore for tto run; and the goose-like as Oars give
him swift motion in swimming: his tail broad and gristly, he uses as a
stern, wherewith on the sudden he can divert his swift floating course. But
this creature in these parts a long time has not been seen, whose room we
may well say the Salmon has possessed, The Salmon.
who still coveting into fresh water Rivers, at their downright falls uses
this policy: He bends himself backward, and takes his tail in his mouth,
and with all his strength unloosing his circle on the sudden (as a lath let
go) mounteth up before the fall of the stream; where upon such waterfals are
called the Salmons Leap: The Salmons Leap.
and in these Rivers many such Salmons are caught.

The commodities of this Shire.
(4) The commodities of this Shire chiefly consist in Cattle, Sea-folwe, and
Fish; Corn sufficient, but of Woods some scarcity: and at the head of Istwydh
are certain veins of Lead, a merchandise of no mean regard or wealth.

The ancient people.
(5) The ancient people that possessed this Province, were the Dimetae, by
Ptolomie branched through the Tracts of Caermarden, Penbroke, and this Shire;
who in their struglings against the Romans, did not a little rely upon
Caractacus their most warlike King, (from whose name, though unlikely, some
will have the Shire called Cardigan) yet lastly felt the fortune of subjection
with the rest, Iuli. Frontinus.
when Julius Frontinus warred with these Mountains. Scarce had the Normans
settled their Kingdom in Britain, but that they assailed this County, as well
to enjoy so fair a Possession, as to secure those Seas from any invasion
against them: King Rufus.
so that Rufus first wrested from the Welsh-men the maritime Coasts, King Henry
the first.
and Henry the first gave the whole County to Gilbert de Clare.

(6) This Gilbert fortified Cardigan, Cardigan the chief Town.
the Shire-Towne, with a Wall and strong Castle, whose aged lineaments do to
this day show the industry both of Nature and Art: for the Town is seated
upon a steep bank, her South Side guarded with the deep River Tyvy, and
passable no way but by a bridge under the Castle. The walls of it.
The walls take the advantage of the rising Rocks, and circulate the Town
even round about. The Castle.
The Castle is higher built upon a Rock, both spacious and fair, had not
storms impaired her beauty, and time left her carcass a very Anatomy. The
walls range as thou see, and are indifferent for repair, having three ways
for entrance, and contain in compass six hundred and fourscore pases: The
graduation.
whose Position for Latitude is set in the degree 52.33. minutes from the
North Pole, and for Longitude from the first West-point by Mercator, in the
degree 15. and 10. minutes.

(7) This Shire, as it is little in circuit, so accordingly is besprinkled with
Towne-ships, Market Towns.
whereof four only have the trade of Markets: neither find I other
remembrance of religious foundations, but at Cardigan, Religious houses.
Istradfleet, and at Llan-Badern-Vaur, where sometimes was seated an Episcopal
See, which (as Hoveden writes) was decayed many years since, Hoveden.
when the people had wickedly slain their Pastor. And yet Llan-Deui-breui,
Llan-Deui-breui.
built, and so called in memory of the most famous David Bishop of Menevia, was
in great esteem, where in a frequent Synod there holden, he refuted the
Pelagian Heresy, The Pelagian heresy refuted.
sprung up again in Britain, both by the authority of holy Scripture, and
also by miracle, as is reported, while the earth whereon he stood and preached,
rose up unto a certain height under his feet.

(8) The Shires division, The Shires division.
for businesses belonging either to the Crown or Commonwealth, is into five
Hundreds, wherein are seated four Market Towns, and sixty-foure
Parish-Cburches for Gods divine and daily service, whose names are further
inserted in the Table following.

map of Cardiganshire CARDIGAN SHYRE DESCRIBED with the due form of the
Shiretown as it was surveyed by I.S. Anno 16^0


An Alphabeticall Table of all the Towns, Rivers, and memorable places
mentioned in Cardigan-shire.
HVNDREDS in Cardigan-shire.
1. LLanbadarn. 2. LLanylar. 3. Pennarth. 4. Moythen. 5. Tredroir.
A
Aberporth, Tred. ABERYSTWYTH, Llanb. Arthe Flu. Ayron Flu.
B
Bangor, Tred. Bettus Bledrus, Moyth. Bettus Jevan, Tred. Bettus, Moyth. Bidder
Flu. Blayneporth, Tred. Blayne pennall, Pen. Brennyng Flu. Brongwyn, Tred.
C
CARDIGAN, Tred. Cardigan Island, Tred. Capell Christ, Moyth. Clarthye Flu.
Clarwen Flu. Cletter Flu. Combeystoyche, Llanb.
D
Dettor Flu. Douye Flu. Dyhewyll, Moyth. Dyhewidd Isekerdyne, Tred.
E
Eynon Flu.
F
The Forest, Moyth.
G
Capell Garthely, Moyth. Gogirthan, Llanb. Llyn Gonon, Llany. Gunros, Llany.
H
Heullandynye, Tred. Heueneroe, Llany.
I
Iscard, Moyth. Istradfler, Llany. Istradfler, Llany. Istradmyrick, Llany.
Istwyth Flu.
K
Kellan, Moyth. Kelekenyn, Llany. Capell Kenan, Tred. Kery Flu. Kilie ayron,
Llany. Capell Kiluellon, Llanb. Kilwyn, Tred. Kinuer Flu.
L
Llanarche, Moyth. Llanauon, Llany. Llanauon, Llany. Llanbadarn vawr, Llanb.
Llanbaddarn, Llany. Llanbadarne, Llany. Llanbadarne Odyne, Pen. Llanbadarne
Treuegloys, Llany. LLANBEDER, Moyth. Llandeuroigge, Tred. Llandissilio, Moyth.
Llandissill Isekerdyne, Tred. Llandissill uchkerdyne, Moyth. Llandogwy, Tred.
Llanfra Capell, Tred. Capell Llanbridge, Tred. Llangoydmore, Tred. Llangranoge,
Moyth. Llangynllo, Llanb. Llangybye, Moyth. Llangythye, Moyth. Llanrannok,
Tred. Llangytho, Tred. Llangunelyn, Llanb. Llanllohayrne, Moyth. Llanllair,
Moyth. Llansanfrayde, Llany. Llanthewy aberarthe, Llany. Llanthewy breuye, Pen.
Llantisilued Capell, Moyth. Llanthynoll, Llany. Llanuair treueligen, Tred.
Llanuaieralloyne, Tred. Llanuayrgledoge, Moyth. Llanuichangell, Llany.
Llanunen, Tred. Llanunnes, Llany. Llanwenoge, Moyth. Llanylar, Llany. Llanyna,
Moyth. Llanychayaron, Moyth. Llanyhangle castle qualtor, Llanb. Llanyhangle
Yerothen, Llany. Llanyhangle Rostea, Llany. Llanyhangle Lledrod, Llany.
Llanynay, Moyth. Llanygrothen, Llany. Llanychayarne, Llany. Llarumsted, Llany.
Llegenydd, Moyth. Llyn Legnant, Llany. Lery Flu. Leuenant Flu. Lyky, Moyth.
M
Massalak Flu. Mathern Flu. Mirik Flu. Mount, Tred.
N
Nantegnulle, Pen.
O
Oscoid Mortimer, Tred.
P
Penbryne, Tred. Penkemmas point, Tred. Penneralt, Tred. Pennobadath point,
Tred. Pescotter Flu. Plinellimon hill, Llanb. Preuethe, Llanb.
R
Rescob forest, Pen. Rossefayre, Llany. Rydall Flu.
S
Salek Flu. Silien, Moyth. Spittie ustroith, Llany. Spittye kinwen, Llanb.
T
Talaserne, Moyth. Tothea Flu. Towye Flu. Tredroir, Tred. TREGARON, Pen.
Tremayne, Tred. Treuilon, Llany. Treuygoid, Tred. Llyn Tyuy, Llany. Tyuy Flu.
V
Vchclawdd, Pen. Verwicke, Tred. Llyn Verwyn, Pen. Vmnrabowa, Llanb.
W
Weray Flu. Wye head, Llanb.
MOUNTGOMERY-SHIRE. CHAPTER. X.
The bounds of Mountgomery-shire
MOUNTGOMERY-SHIRE, in the British speech called Siretrefaldwin, and that of the
principal Town Mountgomery, lies bounded upon the North with Denbigh-Shire,
upon the East with Shrop-Shire, on the South with Radnor and Cardigan-Shires,
and on the West with Merioneth-Shire.

The form.
(2) In form it some what resembles a Pear or Pineapple, as it were growing
out of the West, and rising thence with many high Hills and plentiful
Springs, which water and make fruitful the Soil every where: whose searching
rilles with a longing desire have ever forward to find an increase, and to
augment their growth into a bigger body, whereof the Severne is the chief, and
the second River in the Land: whose head rising from the spired Mountain
Plymll^mon, runs not far without the receipts of other riverets into her
stream, and with many windings does sport her self through all the East part
of this Shire.

Severne.
(3) That this River took her name from Abren, the beautiful base daughter of
Locrinus, begotten out of wedlock upon Est^ldis the daughter of Humber the
Scythian King, that invaded this Land, and both of them drowned in this River
by Guendolena, King Locrinus surviving widow: let Ieffrey relate, and Poets
enlarge, whereof one among them in good account, thus writes; -- In flumen
praecipitatur Abren,
Nomen Abren fluvio de Virgin, nomen eidens
Nomine corrupto, deinde Sabrina datur.
Into this stream fair Abren headlong cast,
Gave name of Abren to those waters wast,
Corruptly called Sabrina now at last.


(4) This River makes the East part of this Shire for fruitfulness to be
compared with most of the Land, and to exceed any other Shire in Wales: the
West side is more hilly and less inhabited, yet surely those Mountains breed
innumerable Cattle, especially of horses, whose portraiture for making and
incomparable swiftness, Giraldus Cambrensis Archdeacon of Breknocke does
greatly commend.

(5) The ancient Inhabitants that were seated in Guineth and Pow^ysland, The
Inhabitants.
whereof this Shire was a part, were to the Romans known by the name of
ORDOVICES, a puissant and courageous Nation, whose hearts and hills held them
the longest free from the yoke of subjection, either of the Romans or English:
for unto the days of Domitian, they kept plea with the Romans, and were not
brought to the will of the English before the reign of King Edward the first.
Those ORDOVICES inhabited the Counties of Mountgomery, Merioneth, Caernarvan,
Denbigh, and Flint, which are of us called now North Wales, a people generous
and of affable conditions, goodly for feature, fair of complexion, courageous
of mind, courteous to strangers, and that which is most commendable, most true
and loyal to the English Crown.

Market-Townes.
Towns for Trades and commerce in this County are six: the chiefest thereof
and Shire-Towne is Mountgomery, very wholesome for air, and pleasant for
situation, upon an easy ascent of an hill, and upon another far higher
mounted, stands a fair and well-repaired Castle, from the East Rock whereof
the Town has been walled, as by some part yet standing, and the tract and
trench of the rest even unto the North-side of the said Castle, may evidently
be seen: whose Graduation for Latitude is placed in the degree 53. and for
Longitude 17. the lines cutting each other in the site of this Town.

The Earl.
This Town has lately received the honor and Title of an Earldom, whereof
Philip Herbert the second son of Henry Earl of Pembroke, was created the
first, in Anno 1605. The Shires division.
And the Shire divided into seven Hundreds, wherein are seated six
Market-Townes, and forty seven Parish-Churches: the names whereof are inserted
in the Table annexed.

map of Montgomeryshire MONTGOMERY SHIRE


An Alphabeticall Table of all The Towns, Rivers, and memorable places
mentioned in Mountgomery Shire.
HVNDREDS in Mountgomery-shire.
1 MEchavi. 2 Kare Eynion. 3 Ystrad Marchel. 4 Kidriorn. 5 Kery. 6 Ykrostly. 7
Kyfy. Log.
A
Aberhafais, Kidriorn. Agaiere, Ystrad. Angle Flu.
B
Bacho Flu. Llyn, Bar Ykrost. Becham Flu. Llyn Begelyn, Kyfy. Beryw,
Kydriorn. Berechlaid, Ykrost. Bettus, Kidriorn. Biga Flu. Brethen hill, Ystrad.
Brughan Flu. Buttington, Ystrad.
C
Caerfuse Castle, Ykrost. Carlion Hill, Ystrad. Carno Flu. Churchstoke, Ystrad.
Cregynog H^ll, Kidriorn. Castle Engerrimon, Kare.
D
Dolevoren Castle, Kidriorn. Dornoll Flu. Dorowen, Kyfy. Dul^s Flu. D^las Flu
Dulas Flu. 3. Dungum Flu.
F
Chapel Fordyn, Ystrad.
G
Garth-beibio, Kare. Llyn Glastyn, Kyfy. Gnedall Flu. Gogh Castle, Ystrad.
H
Haus Flu. Heldray, Ystrad. Hirnant, Mech. Hyssinton, Ystrad.
K
Karno, Ykrost. Kegidfa, Ystrad. Kemes, Kyfy. Kerig Flu. Kery, Kery.
L
Llanbrim Maire, Kyfy. Llanddosilio, Mech. Llanddynam, Ykrost. Llandissil,
Kidriorn. Llandrenio, Ystrad. Llanfair, Kare. LLANFILLYN, Mech. Llanfynhonwen,
ystrad. Llangadfan, Kare. Llangirrich, ykrost. Llangunoth, Mech. Llangynyw,
Kare. Llanllochaiarne, Kidriorn. Llanllygan, Kidriorn. Llanfauntfred in Mecham,
Mech. Llanuthin, Mech. Llanuaier ynghareynion, kare. Llanuyhangell ynghery,
kare. Llanwryn, kyfy. Llanwunog, ykrost. Llanwydelan, kydriorn LLANYDLOES,
ykrost. Llany Rewic, kidriorn. Llanyruill, kare. Lleding Flu. Lleighton,
ystrad. Llevenant* Flu. Lloyd Flu. Lloydyerd, Mech.
M
MACHENLLETH, Kyf. Maismaure, ystrad. Manafon, kidriorn. Mathavern, kyfy.
Mathravall Hall, kare. Meifod, Mech. Middleton Hall, kery. Moghtree, kery.
MOVNTGOMERY, Ystrad. Moylnadion, Hill. kyfy. Mulle Flu. Penant Mylangell, Mech.
N
NEWTOWNE, Kidriorn.
P
Penegos, kyfy. WELSH POOLE, ystrad. Penprice, ykrost. Penstrowed, ykrost.
Plymllymon Hill. kyfy.
R
Riader Flu. Rue Flu.
S
Severns head, kyfy. Severne Flu. Severne Flu.
T
Tagarell Chapel, ykrost. Tanot Flu. Taramon Flu. Towynmyn Flu. Trefeglos,
ykrost. Chapel Treflistin, ystrad. Tregynon, kidriorn. Turgh Flu.
V
Vurnuey Flu.
W
Wurway Flu. Wye Flu.
Y
Llanvihangell Ynghronfa, Mech.
MERIONETH-SHIRE. CHAPTER. XI.
MERIONETH-SHIRE, which the Britains call Scire-Verioneth, and in Latin, The
borders of Merioneth Sbire.
Mervinia; is bordered upon the North by Carnarvon and Denbigh-shires, upon the
East with Montgomery, upon the South by the River Dowy, is parted from
Cardigan-shire, and the West side altogether washed with the Irish-Seas, whose
rage with such vehemency beats against her Banks, that it is thought and
said, some quantity of the Land has been swallowed up by those Seas.

The form.
(2) In form this Shire somewhat resembles a Welsh-Harpe, though small is the
Music that to her Inhabitants she makes, being the roughest, and most
unpleasant to see to (as Giraldus their own Historian writes) in all Wales.
Giraldus.
The Air for great pleasure, nor Soil for great profit, I cannot greatly
commend, unless it be for the many and mighty great winds, that for the most
part therein do rage, and the spired hills clustered together so near and so
high, as the same Author affirms, that Shepherds upon their tops falling at
odds in the morning, and challenging the field for fight, before they can come
together to try out the quarrel, the day will be spent, and the heat of their
fury shut up with their sleep.

(3) These Mountains formerly did abound with Wolves, for whose avoydance
Edgar the peaceable, did impose (as Malmesbury writes) a yearly Tribute of
three hundred Wolves, Will. Mal.
upon Ludwall Prince of that Country, whereby in three years space they were
quite destroyed: and now their faces are covered with fruitful flocks of
Sheep, besides Neat and other Cattle that therein abundantly do grase,
wherein the only riches of this Shire does consist: for by reason of the
unevenness of the soil and rocks so near the face of the earth, the Plough
cannot be drawn, nor the Corn prosper, which some have imputed to the
idleness of the Inhabitants, wherein they have been greatly wronged.

The Inhabitants.
(4) These people are a part of the Ordovices, of whom we have spoken, who by
the adva^tage of these mountains held out with the longest against the
Romans, and their necks not brought under the yoke of bondage, before the
days of King Edward the first; since when they have attempted to cast off
their subjection to the English, upon some stirs raised by Owin Glendover, Anno
D 1282.
who having been a favorite of King Richard the second, and discontented by
King Henry the fourth, in a quarrel with the Lord Gray of Ruthin, that
intruded upon his demaines, quarrelled with the King, and entered into open
rebellion and confederacy with all other his rebels, drawing the Welsh-men
wholly to his side, in hope to have had Princes restored of their own blood:
and he maintained the same with wonderful pride, policy, and obstinacy for a
long time, until his confederates, followers, and favorites, and his own
courage, credit, and maintenance, were brought so low by that powerful King,
that in the end he perished for very want of food.

(5) Their Towns are not many, neither those that they have of any stately
buildings, The Towns.
whereof Bala, Dolge^he, and Harle^h are the Markets. By Bala in the North-East
of this County, in the Welsh Lhintegid, in English, Pimble-meare, a great Poole
of water does drown at least eight-score Acres of ground: Pimble-meare.
whose nature is, as the report does pass, that the high-land floods though
never so great, cannot make her to swell bigger by their receipts; but if the
air be troubled with overgreat blasts and tempests of winds, she in as great
a rage rises and passes her banks, as if she would encounter that enemy in
fight. Into the South whereof the two-headed Dee with a pretty sharp stream
enters, and through the same glideth without any mixture of the same water, as
the Inhabitants believe; more strongly conceited in their opinion, for that the
Salmon, usually taken in Dee, is never found in that Poole; Dee.
and the fish called Guiniad bred in that Meare, never is seen in the River
Dee. South thence, near Dolgelhe, in a lower hill, a great Rampire of stone
and compass is seen, and has been some fortification or defense in war:
which whilst we were curious to find out some instructions thereof, by report
this only we learned, that is was called Caddoryrita Dren, according to the
name of her neighbor and far higher hill.

(6) Upon the West and Seashore of this Shire, Harlech a Market and Major
Town stands, bleake enough and barren, Harloch.
but only for Foul and Fish; houses not many, neither curiously built,
wherein stands a little Chapel decayed and without use, in which lies
buried Sir Richard Thimblebye, an English Knight, who for the delight he took
in that game, removed his abode from a far better soil. Here also stands a
most strong and beautiful Castle, mounted upon a hill, and with a double
Bulwark walled about, commanding the Sea, and passage of entrance of such as
seek to invade the Coast. And surely a great pity it is to see so fair a
work fall to decay: the Constable whereof by Patent is ever the Major of this
Town: near unto which are two great Inlets of Seas, which at low water may be
passed upon the Sands with Guides. Upon whose Shore, as upon all the Seacoasts
in this County, abundance of Herrings are caught, for which cause they are much
frequented in the season of the year, by many people from diverse Countries.

(7) This Town being the chiefest of the Shire. the Pole shall be elevated
only from thence, whose height for Latitude stands in the degree 53.29.
minutes, and for Longitude in the 15.47. minutes, The whole being divided into
six Hundreds, wherein are seated thirty seven Parish-Churches, whose names in
the Table following are to be seen.

map of Merionethshire MERIONETH+-SHIRE Described 1610


An Alphabeticall Table of all the Towns, Rivers, and memorable places
mentioned in Merioneth-Shire.
HVNDREDS in Merioneth-shire.
1 ARdydury. 2 Penllyn. 3 Ydeirmon. 4 Talybont. 5 Mowthy. 6 Ystymanael.
A
Aberdowye, Ystymanael. Alwen Flu. Alwen Flu. Angel Flu. Artro Flu. Avon vane
Flu.
B
BALA, Penllyn. Barmouth, Ardydury. Benrose Wood, Talybont. Traeth Bychan,
Ardydury. Buttus, ydeirmon.
C
Cayne Flu. Cleton Flu. Clowedok Flu. Mowthy. Llyn Cotwry, Penllyn.
Cotsegeddol, Ardydury. Corwen, ydeirmon. Cunuell Flu.
D
Dee Flu. Derye Flu. Desunney Flu. Talybont. Desunney Flu. ystymanael. Dole,
ydeirmon. DOLGELHE, Talybont. Douye Flu. Druryd Flu. Dynas Mothus, Mowthy.
E
Llyn Eithaye, Ardydury.
F
Farles Flu. Festimog, Ardydury. Funnondo Verduwy, Penllyn.
G
Glanllintegid, Penllyn. Gwannas, Mowthy. Gwyddelwern, ydeirmon.
H
HARLECH, Ardydury. Hirgum Flu.
K
Kelyn Flu. Kemmer Abbey, Talybont. Kessilgum Flu. Kevenreage, ydeirmon.
L
Llanagbrethe, Talybont. Llanaelhairn, ydeirmon. Llanbeder, Ardydury.
Llandderfel Gadern, Penllyn. Llandanog, Ardydury. Llandeber Flu. Llandekwyn.
Llandegryn, Talybont. Llandryllo, ydeirmon. Lla^fawr In Melyn, Penllyn.
Llanfechraith, Talybont. Llangor, ydeirmon. Llanglynnin, Talybont. Llangower,
Penllyn. Llansansfred, ydeirmon. Llanenthowin, Ardydury. Llanthoyway, Ardydury.
Llanwrothen, Ardydury. Llanvihangell Y Pennant, ystymanael. Llanyhangell,
ydeirmon. Llanvair, ydeirmon. Llanunier. Llanullyn, Penllyn. Llanyhangell y
traythe, Ardyd. Llanykill, Penllyn. Llanymorothwy, Mowthy. Llanywhyllyn,
Penllyn. Llavern Flu. Llavyltyd, Ardydury. Llenegryn, Talybont. Lleyngoryl Flu.
Llue Flu. Llyn y comb, Ardydury Llyn Tegid, Penllyn. Llyn Troweryn, Penllyn.
Llyn Teckoyn, Ardydury. Llyn Eithaye, Ardydury.
M
Monach doure Flu. Mothvaye Flu. Maynlloyd, Mowthy. Maynturog, Ardydury.
N
Nanney, Talybont.
P
Penal, ystymanael.
R
Rarannare Hill, Penllyn. Rhedok, ydeirmon. Rhedok, ydeirmon. Rulace, Penllyn.
S
Sarnabugh Point, Talybont. Skethye Flu.
T
Taly Llyn, ystymanael. Thehery Castle, ystymanael. Llyn Tegid, Penllyn. Towin
Meryonidd, ystymanael. Traeth Mawer, Ardydury. Traeth Bychan, Ardydury.
Trawffynydh, Ardydury. Troweryn Flu. Llyn Troweryn, Penllyn.
V
Velynrydd Flu.
Y
Llyn Ycombe, Ardydury.
The limits.
DENBIGH-SHIRE, called in Welsh, Si^e Denbigh, retiring more from the Sea within
the Country, on this side of the River Conwey shoots Eastward in one place
as far as to the River Dee: on the North, first the Sea (for a small space)
and then Flint-shire encompasseth it: on the West, Caernarvon and
Merioneth-shire; on the East, Cheshire and S^ropshire; and on the South,
Mountgomery-shire.

The form and Dimensitude.
(2) The form thereof is long, growing wider still toward the North-west, and
narrower toward the East. It is in length from East to West, one and thirty
miles, and in breadth from North to South, seventeen miles: in the whole
circuit and circumference, one hundred and foureteen miles.

The Air.
(3) The air is very wholesome and pleasant, yet bleake enough, as exposed to
the winds on all sides, and the high hills, wherewith it is in many places
environed; long retaining the congealed snow. The tops whereof, in the Summer
time, are the harvest men's Almanacks, The harvest-mans Almanac.
by the rising of certain vapors thereon in the mornings, and foreshew a fair
day ensuing.

The Soil.
(4) The Soil is but barren toward the West part: yet the middle, where it
lies flat in a valley, is most fertile. The East side, when it is once past
the valley, finds Nature to be a very sparing niggard of her favors: but
next unto Dee it feels a more liberal extent of her blessings. The west part
is but here and there inhabited, and mounteth up more then the other with bare
and hungry hills: yet the leanness of the soil (where the hills settle anything
flattish) has been now a good while begun to be overcome by the diligent pains
and careful industry of the husbandmen; Good husbandry.
for they paring away the upper coat of the earth into certain Turfes, with a
broad kind of spade, pile them up artificially on heaps, and fire them, so as
being turned into ashes, and thrown upon the ground so pared, they fructify
the hungry barrenness and sterilitie of soil, and make the fields bring forth
a kind of Rye or Amellcorne, in such plenty, as is hardly to be believed.

The ancient Inhabitants.
(5) The ancient Inhabitants of this Country were the Ordovices, who be also
named Ordovices, or Ordovicae: a puissant and courageous people, by reason they
kept wholly in a mountainous place, and took heart even of the soil it self:
for they continued longest free from the yoke both of Roman, and also of
English dominion. They were not subdued by the Romans before the days of the
Emperor Domitian (for then Julius Agricola conquered almost the whole Nation)
nor brought under the command of the English, King Edward the first.
before the Reign of King Edward the first; but lived a long time in a
lawless kind of liberty, as bearing themselves bold upon their own
magnanimity, and the strength of the Country.

The Commodities.
(6) The Mountains of this Country yield sufficiency of Neat, Sheep, and
Goats. The Valleys in most places are very plenteous of Corn, especially
Eastward on this side, betwixt the rivers of Alen and Dee; but the more
Westerly part is healthy, and altogether barren. The heart of the Shire shows
it self beneath the hills, in a beautiful and pleasant Vale, reaching seventeen
miles in length from South to North, and five miles, or ther-abouts, in
breadth, and lies open only toward the Sea. It is environed on every side
with high hills, amongst which, the highest is Moillenlly, Moillenlly hill.
on the top whereof is a warlike Fense with Trench and Rampire, and a little
Fountain of clear water. From these hills the River Cluyd resorts unto this
Vale, and from the very Springhead (increased with becks and brooks) does part
it in twain, running through the midst of it; whereof in ancient time it was
named Strat Cluyd: for Marianus makes mention of a King of the Strat Cluyd of
the Welsh: And at this day it is commonly called Diffryn Cluyd, that is, The
Vale of Cluyd.

This thing is worthy observation, as a matter memorable, both for admiration
and antiquity, that in the Parish of Llan-sanan within this Country, there is
a place compass cut out of the main Rock by man's hand, in the side of a stony
hill, wherein there be four and twenty seats to sit in, some less, some
bigger, where children and young men coming to seek their cattle, use to sit,
and to have their sports. And at this day they commonly call it Arthurs round
Table. King Arthurs round Table.


(7) Henry Lacy Earl of Lincoln, obtaining Denbigh by the grant of King
Edward the first, Denbigh the chief Town.
after the conviction and beheading of David brother of Llewellin for high
treason, was the first that fortified it with a wall about, not large in circuit,
but very strong, and on the south side with a fair castle, strengthened with
many high towers. But he gave it over, and left the work unfinished, conceiving
grief (as a sorrowful father) that his only son came to untimely death,
and was drowned in the Well thereof. The same of this Town spreads it self
far for repute, as being reckoned the most beautiful place in all
North Wales: The fairest of all North Wales.
and it is of no less report, for the castle adjunct unto it is impregnable
for fortificatio^. And this strange accident happening there in the year 1575
deserves not to be omitted, being left as a continual remembrance of Gods
merciful providence and preservation at that time: that where by reason of
great Earthquakes, An Earthquake.
many people were put into great fear, and had much harm done unto them both
within and without their houses, in the Cities of York, Worcester, Gloucester,
Bristow, Herefored, and in other Countries adjacent, yet in the Shire-hall of
Denbigh the bell was caused to toll twice, by the shaking of the earth, and no
hurt or hindrance at all either done or received. The Magistracy of Denbigh.
The government of this town is managed by two Aldermen, and two Bailiffes, who
are yearly elected out of twenty five Burgesses, that are their assistants. It
has one Recorder, one Town Clerk, and two Sergeants at Mace: and by
observation of the Mathematics, Graduation of it.
the Pole is elevated in the degree of Latitude 53. and 49. scruples, and from
the first West point in Longitude 16. and 45.

(8) This County, This Shire and others not divided in the Map.
with them of Flint and Carnarvon-shires, are not divided by pricks into their
several hundreds in their Cards, according to the rest of this work, the want
of their particulars in the Parliament Rowls so causing it, which for the good
of these 3. Shires, I earnestly sought to have supplied from the Nomina
Villarum, in their Sheriffs books, and had promise of them that might easily
have procured the same. But whether a fearlesse jealousy possessed their
spirits, lest the riches of these Shires, by revealing such particulars, should
be further sought into, I cannot say: yet this I have observed in all my
Survey, that where least is to be had, the greatest fears are possessed. Take
these Shires therefore to be done as I could, and not as I would, that wish
both the wealth of them all, and their esteem to be of better regard by those
that may do them good.

(9) This Shire then is divided into twelve Hundreds, The Shire, division.
for the readier ordering of businesses necessary to the State of the Country;
wherein are placed 3. Market Towns fit for buying and selling, Market Towns.
and other negotiations. Castles.
It has 5. Castles to defend her self, Parishes.
and to offend her enemies, and 57. Parishes for Gods divine service and
worship; as this Table more particularly expresses.

map of Denbighshire DENBIGH SHIRE


An Alphabeticall Table of all the Towns, Rivers, and memorable places
mentioned in Denbigh-Shire.
HVNDREDS in Denbigh-shire.
1. BRomfeild. 2. Yale. 3. Chirkland. 4. Issallet. 5. Vchallet. 6. Istulas. 7.
Vochdulas. 8. Kynmerche. 9. Ruthin. 10. Llannerche. 11. Collion. 12. Dogvylyn.
A
Abenbury. Abergele. Aled Flu. Alen Flu. Alen Bachan Flu. Almere. Alwen Flu.
B
Bachinbid. Barrog. Barhavern. Bers. Bettus. Bodederis Landegley. Breynegloys.
Bystock.
C
Place Cadogan, Chirk. Chirk Castle. Christioneth Flu. Clawedok Flu. Clawedok
Flu. Clocanok. Cluyd Flu. Cluyd Flu. Common wood.
D
Dasart. Castle Denas brayn. DENBIGH. Derwen.
E
Eglos. Egluyseg. Elwy Flu.
F
Foxholes. Chapel Funhown vaier.
G
Chapel Garmon. Gresford. Gwenurow Flu. Gwetheryn. Gyrow Flu.
H
Hauotawern. Hendray. Hespyn Flu. Heullan. Holt park. Holt Castle. Holyn.
I
Iscoid Chapel.
K
Kenlet Flu. Keriog Flu. Chapel Ky.
L
Llanarmon. Llanarmon. Llanarmon Defrine Keriog. Llanbeder. Llancadwalater.
Llanddlas. Llandisilio in Devouret. Llandurnog. Llanegwa^t Abbey Llanelian.
Llanelidan. Llanganhaual. Llangedwin. Llangiruew. Langollen. Llangum.
Llangwiuen. Llanhiclian. Llankerigedredion Llanrayder. Llanrust. Llansanfrayd
in Glyn. Llansanfraid. Llansaiman. Llanshanshare. Llansyllyn. Llanthiged.
Llanvaier. Llanvarog. Llanverres. Llanusyd. Llannunnis. Llanyader Amoughnant.
Llaruth. Llavaier. Lleuenye. Lleueny Flu. Lleueny. Llynaled.
M
Manyan Flu. Markwiell. Maysmynan. Melendydar Flu. Moyluinlle hill. Chapel
Moynglathe.
N
Nanclin. Neag Flu. Newhall.
P
Chapel Pentreuidog. Pergwerne. Plasward.
R
Ru^bon. RVTHIN. Ryader Flu.
S
Snediok park.
T
Tauat. Tiherion.
V
Vagli. Veneghtid.
W
Wheler Flu. Whitchurch. WREXHAM.
Y
Place Ycha. Yspity.
The limits of it.
FLINT-SHIRE, stretching out in length, broad at one end, and narrow at another,
is not much unlike in fashion to a wedge, a piece of which is cut off by the
meeting of Cheshire and Denbigh-shire, South-East in distance some four miles.
It borders Eastward with part of Cheshire, from whence it is guarded in length
with the River Dee unto the North, which parts Worral and Flint-shire, till
you come to a little Island called Hell-bree. Northward it is bounded with the
Virginian Sea: on the West, a little River, called Cluyd, parts her and
Denbigh-shire asunder: and on the South altogether by Shrop-shire.

The circumference.
(2) This Country is nothing Mountainous, as other parts of Wales are, but
rising gently all along the River of Dee, makes a fair show and prospect of
her self to every eye that beholds her, as well upon the River, being in most
places there-abouts four or five miles broad, as upon the other side thereof,
being a part of Cheshire.

The Air.
(3) The Air is healthful and temperate, without any foggy clouds or fenny
vapors, saving that sometimes there arises from the Sea, and the River Dee,
certain thick and smoky-seeming mists, which nevertheless are not found
hurtful to the Inhabitants, who in this part live long and healthfully.

The climate.
(4) The Clime is somewhat colder there then in Cheshire, by reason of the Sea,
and the River that engirts the better part of her; by which, the Northern
winds being long carried upon the waters, blow the more cold; and that side of
the Country upward, that lies shoaring unto the top, having neither shelter
nor defense, receives them in their full power, and is naturally a Bulwark
from their violence unto her bordering neighbors, that makes the snow to lie
much longer there, then on the other side of the River.

Soil.
(5) The Soil brings forth plenty both of Corn and grass, as also great
store of Cattle, but they be little. To supply which defect, they have more by
much in their numbers then in other places where they be bigger. Great store of
Fish they take in the River of De^, Dee River.
but little from the Sea, by reason they have no Havens or Creekes for boats.
No great store of Woods either there or in any other part of Wales are found,
it having been a general plague unto all the Country ever since the
headstrong rebellions of their Princes and great men against the Kings of
England, that (in time) took away the principal helps of their Innovations,
by cutting down their woods, whereof in this Shire there has heretofore been
great plenty. Commodities.
Fruits are scarce, but Milk, Butter, and Cheese plenty, as also store of
Honey, of the which they make a pleasant Wine, in color like (in taste not
much unlike) unto Muskadine, which they call Matheglin. Yea, and in the days
of Giraldus Cambrensis, near the place now called Holy-Well, was a rich Mine
of Silver, in seeking after which, men pierced and pryed into the very bowels
of the earth.

Inhabitants.
(6) The ancient Inhabitants of this Country were the Ordovices, a sturdy people
against the Romans, but now most kind and gentle toward the English, and
indeed make much of all strangers, except they be crossed, and then they are
the contrary.

Castles.
(7) Places of defense are the Castles of Flint, Hawarden, vulgarly Harden,
Treer, Rudland, Mold, Yowley, and Hope: Fl^nt ^astle the chiefest.
of which Flnt and Harden are the two principal. The Castle of Flint, famous
for the benefit it received from two Kings, and for the refuge and relief it
gave unto the third. It was founded by Henry the second, Henry 2.
finished by Edward the first, Edward 1.
and long after gave harbor and entertainment to that Noble, but unfortunate
Prince, Richard the second, Richard 2.
coming out of Ireland, being within her walls a free and absolute King, but
no sooner without, but taken prisoner by Henry Bullinbroke, Duke of Lancaster,
losing at that time his liberty, and not long after his life. This stands in
the graduation of Latitude 53 55. minutes, in Longitude 17.

Hawarden Castle.
For the Castle of Hawarden, no record remains of the first Founder, but that
it was held a long time by the Stewards of the Earls of Chester: Howbeit,
their resistances did not so generally consist in the strength of their Castles
and Fortifications, as in their Mountains and Hills, which in times of danger
served as natural Bulwarks and Defenses unto them against the force of
enemies. As was that which stands in a certain strait set about with Woods,
near unto the River Alen, called Coles-hull, that is, Coles-hill, Coles-hill.
where the English, by reason of their disordered multitude, not ranged close
in good array, lost the field, and were defeated, when King Henry the second
had made as great preparation as might be to give battle unto the Welsh, and
the very Kings Standard was forsaken by Henry of Essex, who was Standard bearer
to the King of England in right of inheritance.

(8) This Country has many shallow Rivers in it, but none of fame and note,
but Dee and Cluyde. Howbeit, there is a Spring not far from Rudland Castle,
of great report and antiquity, which is termed Fons Sacer, Fons Sacer.
in English, Holy-Well, and is also commonly called Saint Winefrids Well; of
whom antiquity thus reports: That Winefrid a Christian Virgin, very fair and
virtuous, was doated upon by a young lustful Prince or Lord of the Country,
who not being able to rule his headstrong affections, having many times in
vain attempted and tried her chastity, both by rich gifts and large promises,
could not by any means obtain his desires; he therefore (in a place of
advantage) suddenly surprised and ravished her weak (yet resisting) body.
After the deed done, the cruel Tyrant, to stop her cries and acclamations,
slew her, and cut off her head: out of which place did suddenly arise a Spring
that continues to this day, A Spring arising miraculously.
carrying from the Fountain such a forcible stream and current, as the like
is not found in Christendom. Over the head of the Spring there is built a
Chapel of freestone, A Chapel built over it.
with Pillars curiously wrought and ingraved, in the Chancell whereof, and
Glasse-window, the picture of the Virgin is drawn; together with the memorial
of her life and death. To this Fountain Pilgrims are accustomed to repair in
their zealous, but blind devotion; and diverse others resort to bathe in,
holding firmly that the water is of much virtue.

There be many red stones in the bottom of this Well, The strange opinion held
of this Spring.
and much green moss growing upon the sides: the superstition of the people
holding that those red spots in the stones were drops of the Ladies blood,
which all the water in the Spring can never wash away; and that the moss about
the wall was her hair, which though some of it be given to every stranger that
comes, yet it never wastes. But howsoever this be carried for truth by the
tradition of time, the moss it self smells exceeding sweet.

There is also hard by Kilken (a small village) within this County, Kilken.
a little Well of no great note, that at certain times rises and falls,
after the manner of Sea-tides.

(9) In the South part of this Country, divided from the rest, is a place (in
some written Copies of Antonine, called Bovium) which we now term Banchor,
Banchor.
first a City, and afterward a Monastery of famous memory, and the first that
is read of in the world: Bedaes report of Banchor Monastery.
wherein (as Beda says) were a great number of Monks, and them divided into
seven Companies, every one having his several Ruler assigned. None of these
Companies had less then three hundred persons devoted to prayer, and to get
living by their own labor, for themselves and the poor: although it has
long since been utterly ruinate, so as now there is scarce seen the face and
outward show of a dead City or Monastery. It has only the names of two Gates
remaining, Port Hogham, and Port Cleis.
one standing a mile distant from another, and betwixt which the River Dee now
runs, where are oftentimes found many peec^s of Roman Coin, and other
tokens of antiquity. But of these shall be more mention made in the following
History.

Another like Monastery, but of lesser account, stood in the Vale beneath Varis
(a little City placed by the Romans in the confines of this Shire and
Denbigh-shire) and upon the Bank of Elwy and Cluyd: Varis Vale.
This the Britains call Llan-Elwy, Llan-Elwy, or Asaph.
of the River; the Englishmen, Asaph, of the Founder; and the Historiographers,
Asaphensis. It is more famoused for antiquity, then for building or bravery:
for about the year 560. Kentigern Bishop of Glasco, Kentigern, Bishop of
Glasco.
being sled hither out of Scotland, placed here a Bishops See, and erected a
Monastery gathering together 663. in a religious brotherhood, whereof three
hundred that were unlearned, His Monastery.
gave themselves to husbandry, and to work within the Monastery; the rest to
prayer and meditations. When he returned into Scotland, The Governor of it.
he ordained Asaph, a godly and upright man, to be Governor over this
Monastery, of whom it took the name, and is called Saint Asaphs.

Another Monastery of great account was at Basingwarke in this County,
Basingwarke.
near unto which began that admirable Ditch drawn thence unto the mouth of
Severne by King Offa, Offae^ Ditch.
the Tract whereof I have expressed through this Shire, and will further speak
thereof in the following History.

(10) This Shire is divided into five Hundreds, The Shires division.
fortified with seven Castles, has only one Market Town, and twenty eight
Parishes, in which there is continual celebration of divine Service.

map of Flintshire FLINT-SHIRE


An Alphabeticall Table of all the Towns, Rivers, and memorable places
mentioned in Flint-shire.
HUNDREDS in Flint-shire.
1. MOuld. 2. Mailers. 3. Rudland. 4. Prestrattyn. 5. Coleshill.
A
Alen. Alen Flu. S. Asaph. Llan Asaphe.
B
Bangor. Basingwarke. Bottesley. Broughton. Bruerton. Burton.
C
CAIER WAS. Cluyn Flu. Comb. Cornish.
D
Darland Green. Demyrchion. Nether Droitwiche. Over Droitwiche. Dyffyrdwy, or
Dee Flu. Dyssart.
E
Escoyte Hall.
F
Fens Hall. Flint.
G
Gronant. Gulgrave. Gwenusker.
H
Hanmere. Harden Castle. Haulton. Holiwell. Horsheath.
K
Kilken. Kinnerton.
M
Maghegreg. Meliden. Merford. Molde. Moston.
N
Nannarch. Chapel Nerquoyes. Northop.
O
Clawdh Offa, or Offas ditch. Old park. Orton madok.
P
Penley Chapel. Potruthan. Potuary. Prestatin.
R
Relusnoyde. Rudland Castle.
S
Sevion Flu. Skiviog.
T
Tegidog Flu. Talarkrey. Treer Castle. Trethyn. Trevealen.
W
Wheler Flu. Whitford. Whitwell Chapel. Willington. Worthenbury.
Y
Yowley Castle. Yowley Hill.
CAERNARVON-SHIRE. CHAPTER XIIII.
The diverse names of this Shire. The Welsh turn M into V or F. So Caer-merdhin,
Caer-Frydhin, Luid Breu. of Brit.
CAernarvon-shire, in Welsh, Sire Ca-er-ar-von, so called because it is just
over against Anglesey, (which the Britains call Mon,) and in composition was
termed also Snowden Forest, before Wales was laid into Shires; the North-side
whereof and the West butt^th upon the Irish-Sea, the South Side is enclosed
with Merioneth, and the East with Denbigh-shires, from which it is severed by
the River Conwey.

The measure.
(2) The form thereof is much like a wedge, long and narrow toward the South,
and growing still wider toward the North: so that from Pevenkel-point
Southward, to Or^s-head-point Northward, are forty Miles, from the River
Conwey Eastward, to the River Llenoy Westward, Miles twenty: and the whole
circumference one hundred and ten Miles.

The Air.
(3) The Air is sharp and piercing, by reason that the Country has not
natural provision to ensconce her self against the extremity of winds and
weather: but especially as may be thought, through the continuance of the Snow
on the hills, which also exclude the Suns aspect and warmth.

The Soil.
(4) The soil cannot be much commended for the fertility, except those parts of
the Seacoasts, which lie on the West toward Ireland: but for the heart of this
Shire, it is altogether mountainous, as if Nature had a purpose here, by
rearing up these craggy hills so thick together, strongly to compact the
joints or this our Island, and to frame the Inland part thereof for a ^it place
of refuge to the Britains, against those times of adversity which afterward
did fall upon them; for no Army though never so strongly, or scarce any
Travelers, Very unpasseable.
though never so lightly appointed, can find passage among those so many rough
and hard Rocks, so many Vales, and Pooles here and there, crossing all the
ways, as ready obstacles to repel any inroades of foreign assailants. These
Mountains may not unfitly be termed the British Alps, British Alps.
as being the most vaste of all Britain, and for their steepness and
cragginesse not unlike to those of Italy, all of them to wring up into the
Air, and round encompassing one far higher then all the rest, peculiarly
called Snowdon-Hill, Snowdon Hills.
though the other likewise in the same sense, are by the Welsh termed Craig
Eriry, as much as Snowy Mountains, taking their name as does (by Plinies
testimony) Niphates in Armenia, and Imaus in Scythia: For all the year long
these lie mantelled over with Snow hard crusted together, though otherwise for
their height they are open and liable both to the Sun to dissolve them, and
the winds to over-sweep them.

The People.
(5) The ancient Inhabitants of this Country were the Ordovices, of whom we have
sufficiently spoken in the description of the former Provinces; neither need I
insist either upon the pleasures or profits that this Country yields, by
reason of the great affinity it has both of Climate and Commodities with
Denbigh-shire and Flint-shire before mentioned: But this beyond the other in
some places breeds certain Shel-fishes, Pearls.
which being conceived by an heavenly dew bring forth Pearls, in ancient times
more reckoned of then now they are.

Places of note.
(6) Touching places of note, that City is very ancient which the Emperor
Antonine calls Segontium, taking name of a River running by, which at this
day is called Seioni: Seioni.
some relics of the walls whereof do yet appear, near unto a little Church
consecrated to the honor of Saint Publicius. Ninnius.
This City Ninnius calls Caer Custenith, which some interpret the City of
Constantine. Indeed Matthew Westminster says (how true I know not) that Anno
1283. Mat. Westminst.
here was found the body of Constantius (Father to great Constantine) which
King Edward the first caused to be sumptuously bestowed in the Church of the
new City, which he raised out of the ruins of the old, and is now called
Caernarvon, Caernarvon.
which gives name to this whole Shire. The Town it self yields a most
excellent prospect toward the Sea, and is encompassed (in a manner) round with
the walls of the Castle: so as we may say, it is a City within a Castle,
Caernarvon in danger of the Sea.
which takes up the whole West Side of it: and great pity it is, that so
famous a work should not be perpetuous, or ever become the ruin of time, which
is much feared, for the merciless underminings of the Sea, that with her daily
and forcible irruptions never cease to wash away the foundations of the key.
The people of this Town are well approved for courtesy, The Government of it.
and also Civil Government, which is administered by the Constable of the
Castle (who is ever Major by Patent) having the assistance of one Alderman, two
Bailiffes, two Sergeants at Mace, and one Town-Clerke. The Townsmen do not a
little glory that King Edward the second was borne there, King Edward the
second borne at Caernarvon.
in a Tower of the Castle, called Eagle-Tower, and surnamed of Caer-nar-von, he
being the first Prince of Wales of the English line. The site of this Town
according to Mathematical observation is in the degree of Longitude 15. and
50. scruples from the first West-point, and the Pole elevated in Latitude 53.
and 50.

Bangor, Ban^hor.
the Bishops See, though it be now but a small Town, yet was it in times past
so large, that for the greatness thereof it was called Banchor Vaur, that is,
Great Banchor; which Hugh Earl of Chester fortified with a Castle: But it has
been long since utterly ruinated and laid level with the ground, insomuch as
there is not any footing to be found, or other monuments left thereof, although
they have been sought with all diligent enquiry. This Bishops See has within
the Dioces ninety six Parishes. But the ancient Church which was consecrated
unto Daniel, sometime Bishop thereof, was defaced and set on fire by that
notorious Rebel Owen Glendowerdwy, Owen Glendowerdwy.
who had a purpose also to destroy all the Cities of Wales, for that they stood
for the King of England. And though the same Church was since repaired about
the time of King Henry the seventh, yet has it scarce recovered the
resemblance of her former dignity.

The River Conwey (which limiteth this Shire on the East Side) is in Ptolemy by
corruption or ignorance of Transcribers called Toisovius, Conwey River.
in stead of Cononius, whence Canonium (a Town mentioned by Antonine) took
name: and albeit both it, and its name be now utterly extinct, yet is there a
covert remembrance thereof in the new name of a poor Village, standing among
the rubbish thereof, called Caer-hean, Caer-hean.
(that is) The ancient City: Out of the spoil whereof K. Edward the first,
built a new Town at the Rivers mouth, Aber-Conwey.
termed thereupon Aber-Conwey, (that is) the mouth of Conwey, which being
formerly fortified by Hugh of Chester, and strongly situated and fenced both
with walls and a fair Castle by the Rivers side, deserves rather the name of a
City then a Town, if it were more populous and traffiqued with Inhabitants.
Neither must I here forget Newin, though but a small Market-Towne, for that it
pleased the English Nobles Anno 1284. to honor it and the memory of King
Arthur, Florilegus.
with triumphant celebrity, after they had subdued the rebellious Ringleaders
of Wales.

(7) Other matters of memorable note this Country affords not much, unless
perhaps this; That just over against the River Conwey, where it issues into
the sea, there sometime stood an ancient City named Diganwey, which many years
ago was consumed by lightning, and so made utterly desolate, as many other
monuments have been, of ancient and worthy memory. As likewise that in the
Poole Lin-Peris, The Fish Torcoch.
there is a kind of Fish called there Torcoch, having a red belly, no where
else seen. For touching these two other miracles famoused by Giraldus and
Gervasius, that on those his high Hills there are two Pooles called the Meares,
the one of which produces great store of fish, but all having only one eye,
and in the other there is a moveable island, which as soon as a man treads
on, it forthwith floateth a great way off, whereby the Welsh are said to have
often escaped and deluded their enemies assailing them: these matters are out of
my Creed, and yet I think the Reader had rather believe them, then to go to see
whether it be so or no.

It is traded with five Market Towns fit for bargaining, Market Towns
buying and selling, fortified with four Castles, and has sixty eight
Parish-churches in it, where the Inhabitants concur and meet together for the
celebration of divine Service.

map of Carnarvonshire CAERNARVON BOTH SHYRE AND Shire-towne with the ancient
City BANGOR described. Anno Domini 16^0


An Alphabeticall Table of all the Towns, Rivers and memorable places
mentioned in Caernarvon-Shire.
A
ABERCONWY Abereach. Apennant.
B
BANGOR. Bardesey Island. Bednell. Bedskrethlim. Bedsyllin. Bethkelert. Bettus
Seyrionython. Bettus Garmon. Botunog. Bodvean. Bodverin Chapel. Braychypult
point. Bryncrois. Brimmoyle. Brynyryn.
C
Caier Ierienrode. Caierhean. CARNARVAN. Carngugh Chapel. Carrog Flu.
Carodinbill-rocke. Clenoguaure. Clenunay. Conwy Flu. Llyn Coulwyd,
D
Daren Flu. Castle Delbadern. Dinas Orveg. Dinas Dynlle. Llyn Dolathelan.
Dolathelan Castle. Dolbemer. Dowye Gonulchy.
E
Earch Flu. Edarne. Eglos-rosse. Saint Elyn.
F
Funnon Llegoe.
G
Gastell Flu. Girch Flu. Guffin Flu. Guffin. Gwely Flu. Gwelyn Island. Gwider.
K
Saint Katherins. Kenhayerne Chapel. Kerig Chapel. Keveamulch. Kreky the
Castle. Kydeo.
L
Llanaber. Llanarmon. Llanbeblin. Llanbedro. Llanbeder. Llanberis. Llyn
Llanberis. Llancastyn. Llandaguinnim. Llandidno. Llandidwen. Llandigaio.
Llandrighla. Llandurog. Llangeby. Llangedol Chapel, or Pentire. Llangenvill
Chapel. Llanghennyn. Llangustennyn. Llanken. Llanlledhyd. Llanlleveny,
Llannor. Llanpenmachno. Llanrughwen. Llannyhangle. Enreage. Llanihangle.
Maghholet. Llannunda. Llanyngan. Llanstidwy. Llanthaniolen. Llanvaier vachan.
Llanvaier Iskaer. Llanvaie Irise. Llanvaglan. Llanvylhayrne. Lledder Flu.
Lleggy Flu. Llenony Flu. Lloinderis. Glyn Llynan. Llynan Flu. Llyndothadern.
Llynhaladoylen. Llynkeggil. Llynmumber. Llyntrevennin. Llynnydulyn. Llynyga.
M
Madryn. Mapanab. May Flu. Mercrosse Island. Mildeyrne. Monithnuehill.
N
Nangunadle. Naulle. NEWIN.
O
Ogwen Chapel. Ormeshead point.
P
Penlleache. Penmen maur. Penmen bychan. Pen morvay. Penry. Penryn. Penvenkle
point. Pistill. Porlerit Flu. Porthathuferye. PULL LHELY.
R
Rhiw. Ryvill Hill.
S
Saint Flu. Sinadon Castle. Snowdown Hill. Stidwell Island.
T
Teduelion. Thenuio. Traythe Maur. Trevelis. Tycomer point.
ANGLESEY. CHAPTER XV.
The first name.
ANGLESEY was in the time of the Romans called Mona, by the Britains Mon, and
Tir-Mon (that is) the Land of Mon, of the ancient English Saxons Moneg: And at
last, after the Englishmen had by their sharp and several assaults brought it
under their rule, and became Lords thereof, it was termed Anglesey, as one
would say, The Englishmens Island.

The form.
(2) For, an Island it is, albeit it be severed from the Continent of Britain,
but with a small and narrow straight of the River Menai, and on all other parts
beaten upon with the surging and troublous Irish sea, in which it lies somewhat
square-wise, not much different in length and breadth; being where it reaches
out in length, Length.
from Beau-marish Eastward to the utmost Promontorie Westward, which we call
Holy-head, twenty miles, and in breadth from Llanbaderik Northward, Breadth,
to the point of Menai Southward, seventeen miles; the whole circuit or
circumference amounting toward seventie miles.

Air.
(3) The air is reasonable grateful and healthful, and not generally subject
to diseases, excepting certain Agues at sometimes, which are occasioned by the
fogs and mi^ty exhalations, which arise from the Sea, called Mare Virginium,
with the which this Isle is encompassed.

Commodities.
(4) The commodities that commend (or rather beautify) this County, are in
corn and cattle, wherewith it not only enricheth it self exceedingly, but
sends out great provision thereof to others to supply their defects: and
although the ground may seem dry and stony, or unpleasant and nothing sightly,
wherein for the outward quality it resembles some other parts of Wales, that
are not so fruitful, yet for the inward bounties of nature, it is far
unlike: for above all the coasts of Wales it is most plentiful of Wheat, in so
much as by Giraldus Cambrensis report, they are wont to say in Welsh, by way of
a Proverb, A Welsh Proverb.
Mon Mam Cambry, which is to say, Mon is the mother of Wales; for that when
other Countries harvest fails round about, or their provision is exhaust and
drawn dry, this alone, like a provident and full-brested mother, is able to
sustain the rest. Whereunto Nature most povidently has added another benefit
serviceable and necessary to the former, in that the Country produces also
those kind of stones which are called Molares, as of all other fittest to make
Millstones or Grind-stones. Grindstones.
In some places also it yields an earth of Aluminous quality, out of which
some not long since began to make Alom and Coperose, Alome.
who (like unflesht soldiers) gave over their enterprise without further hope,
because at first they saw it not answer their over-hastie expectations.

Inhabitants.
(5) The ancient Inhabitants of this Country were the Ordovices, mentioned
before in the precedent Provinces of Denbigh-shire, Flint-shire, and
Carnarvon-shire. And this very Island was that ancient, and so much enobled
seat of the British Druids, who so amated the army of Roman invaders, as
Tacitus reports, and as els-where we have related in the 6t Book and 7th
chapter of our ensuing History.

(6) This Nation was attempted first by Paulinus Suetonius in the reign of
Nero, Roman Governor.
but brought under the Roman Empire by Julius Agricola. When the Empire of the
Romans in Britain began to decline and go downe-ward, Jnvaded by the Irish.
some out of Ireland entered into this Isle by stealth, and nestled themselves
there, as may be gathered by certain Mounts of earth entrenched about, and yet
to be seen, which they call the Irish-mens Cottages: as also by a place named
of the Irish-men, in Hiericy Gwidil, who did there (as is recorded) put the
Britains to flight under the leading of Sirigus. The Norwegians also were often
infestuous to this Island, but K. Ethelreds Fleet, having in the year 1000.
scoured the Seas round about this Isle, far exceeded all both Irish and
Norwegian depopulations, for they wasted the Country in all hostile manner.

(7) After this, two Hughs, both Normans, did greatly afflict this Island. The
one being Earl of Chester, and the other of Shrewesbury; at which very time
Maginus the Norwegian arriving there, shot Hugh Earl of Shrewesbury through
with arrow, and departed after he had ransacked the Island. It was afterward
grievously infested by the Englishmen, who never gave over from time to time to
invade it, until in the reign of King Edward the first, Edward the first.
it was wholly brought under his subjection.

(8) The principal Town in this Isle is Beaumarish, Beau-mariso chief town.
which the said King Edward the first built in the East side thereof, and for
the fair situation, though in a Moorish place, gave it the name which it now
bears, whereas in times past it was called Bonover, which he also fortified
with a goodly Castle.

(9) The Major is the chiefest Magistrate of the Town, The Government of
Beau-marish.
who is yearly chosen, and has the assistance and help of two Bayliffes, two
Sergeants at Mace, and one Towne-Clerke: by whose careful diligence the
affairs of this Town are orderly managed and commanded: whose latitude is 54.
and longitude 15.45. minutes.

(10) Not far from hence is Lhaanvais, in times past a fair Religious house of
the Friars Minors, Antique Religious houses.
which although it be now in a manner razed out of memory, yet antiquity makes
mention that it has been of great regard among the Kings of England, who have
showed themselves very bountiful Patrons unto that Covent, both in respect of
the sanctimonious life of such as conversed there, as also because there the
bodies of very eminent persons (as the daughter of K. John, Many English
Nobility there buried.
the son of a King of the Danes, as likewise of many great Lords, Knights and
Squires) were interred, that were slain in the wars against the Welsh, in the
times of many illustrious Kings of England.

(11) This Isle is reckoned to have had anciently many Villages in it, even to
the number of three hundred threescore and three; and the same even at this day
is very well peopled.

The division of this Isle for disposition of affairs that belong either to the
state of the Crown, The partition of this Shire.
or to the condition of the country, is into six hundreds: in which are seated
two Market Towns, and seventie-foure Parish-Churches for Gods divine honor and
worship, as is Alphabetically gathered in the Table following.

map of Anglesey ANGLESEY Anciently called MONA. Described 1680


An Alphabeticall Table of all the Towns, Rivers, and memorable places
mentioned in Anglesey.
HVNDREDS in Anglesey.
1. TAlibolion. 2. Twrkelyn. 3. Llyfon. 4. Malltraeth. 5. Meney. 6. Tyndaythwy.
A
Aberfro, Mall. Abermenai ferye, Meney. Allow Flu. Amlwoch, Twrk.
B.
BEWMARIS, Tyn. Boddon, Mall. Bodedrin, Llyf. Bodmon hill, Twrk. Bodowervcha,
Meney. Bodowerissa, Meney. Bodwrog, Lly. Brant Flu. Brant Flu.
C
Caergiby, Taly.
D
Dinas wethon, Taly. Dulas Flu.
G
Gronait, Taly. Gweger Flu. Gynt Flu.
H
Hardravie, Meney. Henregadog, Men. Hillary point, Twrk. Holy-head, Taly.
I
Inys wealt, Llyf. Inys lygod, Twrk. Chapel Ithon, Twrk.
K
Saint Katherins, Tyn. Kevenye Flu. Kirghhiog, Llyf.
L
Llanallgo, Twrk. Llanarghymeath. T. Llanbabo, Taly. Llanbadrig, Taly.
Llanbedor, Tyn. Llanbeullan, Llyf. Llanddniolvab, Mean. Llandegvayne, Tyn.
Llandruum, Meney. Llandona, Tyn. Llandourodok Twrk. Llandisilio, Tyn.
Llandrygarn, Llyf. Llandifrydog, Twrk. Llaneaston, Tyn. Llanedwen, Meney.
Llaneigred, Twrk. Llaneleth frenyn, Twrk. Llanelian, Twrk. Llanfechel, Taly,
Llhanfinan, Meney. Llanflewin, Taly. Llangaffo, Meney. Llangefin, Meney.
Llangnewin, Meney. Llangriftioles, Mall. Llangourday, Tyn. Llangoyhlog, Mall.
Llangwildog, Llyf. Llangwyfen, Mall. Llangyd, walader, Mall. Llangynwen, Mall.
Llanheneglos, Mall. Llanllawen vawryn ros golyn, Mean. Llanllibio, Llyf.
Llanridfel, Meney. Llanridlad, Taly. Llauroderis, Twrk. Llanrwydrys, Taly.
Llansadurne, Tyn. Llansanfraid, Taly. Llanthowywer, Me. Llanthufuam, Tyn.
Llanvachraith, Taly. Llanvaethly, Taly. Llanvaier, up wradige, Twr. Llanvaier,
Taly. Llanvaiet eubroll, Llyf. Llanvaier Inhenering, sithay, Tyn. Llanvair
ycromwd, Men. Llanvaiergwin pull gingill, Ty. Llanvair ynghowrnyw, Tal.
Llanvailog, Llyf. Llanvais, Tyn. Llanverion, Mall. Lanvigail, Taly.
Llanvihangle ymhemros, Twr. Llanvihangell, Llyf. Llanvihangle yskiwiog, Men.
Llanvihangell tre^z bard, Tw. Llanuwrog, Taly. Llnwenllwife, Twrk.
Llanyddeysant, Taly. Llanyughenell, Llyf. Llanyhangel, Tyn. Llany trysavit,
Llyf. Llech ryd, Llyf. Llech-gyn farwy, Llyf. Llinon Flu. Lloydearth, Twrk.
Lluidon, Meney. Llyn Corran, Mall.
M
Chapel Maier, Mall. Malltraeth Flu. Mathhanan Flu. Menai flu.
N
NEWBVRGH, M. Place Newith, Tyn.
P
Penmynid, Meney. Pentreath, Tyn. Pontrid pont, Taly. Pontourid, Tyn.
Porthamble, Mean. Porthathuferye, Tyn. Preceadduet, Llyf. Prestholme Island,
Tyn. The Priorye, Tyn.
R
Redgynt, Meney. Redigilio, Meney. Rosbeiro, Twrk. Rownd Table hill, Tyn.
S
Saint Sirian, Tyn. The Sound, Tyn.
T
Chapel Talallayn, Mall. Talyllin, Twrk. Tresdraeth, Mall. Tregavon, Mean.
Trevarthin, Mean. Trewalchmay, Llyf. Trysylwin hills, Tw.
Y
Ycoedon, Twrk. Chapel Yloughroid. Taly.
THE THIRD BOOK: Containing, A GENERAL VIEW OF THE KINGDOM OF SCOTLAND: THE
COUNTIES DIVIDED, AND ISLANDS THEREOF DESCRIBED, AS BY OTHERS HAS BEEN OBSERVED.

WITH A BRIEF RELATION OF SUNDRY MEMORABLE THINGS THEREIN CONTAINED.

BY JOHN SPEED.

LONDON, Printed by John Legatt, for William Humble. 1646.

Cum Privilegio.

DIEV ET MON DROIT
HONISOITQVI MALYPENSE


The Divisions of SCOTLAND. THIS KINGDOM IS PRINCIPALLY DIVIDED INTO TWO PARTS;
NORTH AND SOVTH OF THE RIVER TAYE.
IN THE NORTH. COUNTRIES. 1 Loquabrea. Buquhan. 8 2 Braidalbin. Murray. 9 3
Perth. Rosse. 10 4 Athol. Sutherland. 11 5 Anguish. Cathanes. 12 6 Mern.
Strathnavern. 13 7 Mar. IN THE SOVTH. 1 Teifidale. Arran. 12 2 Merch.
Cluydesdale. 13 3 Lauden. Lennox. 14 4 Liddesdale. Stirling. 15 5 Eskedale.
Fife. 16 6 Annandale. Strathern. 17 7 Niddesdale. Menteith. 18 8 Galloway.
Argile. 19 9 Carrick. Cantire. 20 10 Kyle. Lorn. 21 11 Cunningham.

SVBDIVIDED, ACCORDING TO THEIR CIVIL GOVERNMENT.
COUNTRIES. OR SHERIFDOMES. Edinburgh. Perth. Linlythque. Clackmannan. Selkirk.
Kinros. Roxburgh. Fife. Peblis. Kincardin. Berwick. Forfair. Lanark. Aberden.
Renfrew. Bamff. Dunfreis. Elgin. Wighton. Forres. Air. Narne. Bute.
Innernesse. Argyle. Cromartie. Tarbet. Orknay. Dunbarton. Shetland.
STEVVARDIES. Menteith. Kircudbright. Strathern. Annandale. BAILERIES. Kyle.
Carrick. Cunningham. CONSTABLERY. Hadington.

ALL FOR THE BEST


THE TYPE OF THE FAMOVS KINGDOM OF SCOTLAND, WITH A GENERAL DESCRIPTION OF
SUNDRY THINGS REMARKABLE THEREIN. CHAPTER I.
SCOTLAND, the second Kingdom of Great Britain, and the North part of the
Island, has on the East the Germane Ocean, on the North, the Orkneyes, and
Deucalidon Sea, the West affronted with Ireland, and the South has the River
Tweed, the Cheviot Hills, and the adjacent Tract, reaching to the Sulway Sands,
whereby it is separated from England.

(2) This Kingdom is fair and spacious, and from these South-borders
spreads it self wide into the East and West, till again it contracts it
self narrower unto the Northern Promontories: furnished with all things
befitting a famous Kingdom; both for Air and Soil, Rivers, Woods,
Mountains, Fish, Foul, and Cattle, and Corn so plenteous, that it supplyeth
therewith other Countries in their want. The people thereof are of good
feature, ^^^ong of body, and of courageous mind, and in wars so venturous,
that scarce any service of note has been performed, but that they were with
the first and last in the field. Their Nobility and Gentry are very studious
of learning, and all civil knowledge; for which end they not only frequent
the three Universities of their own Kingdom (S. Andrews, Glasco, and
Edenborough, the Nurseries of Piety, and Mansions of the sacred Muses) but
also much addict themselves to travel into foreign Countries.

(3) The Counties contained in this Kingdom are many, and every where
bestrewed with Cities, Towns, and Borrowes, as is that of England: and, as
England, I intended to describe it, had I not been happily prevented by a
learned Gentleman of that Nation, M. Timothy Ponn.
who has most exactly begun, and gone through the greatest difficulties
thereof; to build upon whose foundations, I hold it injurious: and am so far
from any ambition to prevent his noble purposes, that I heartily wish all happy
furtherances thereto, with a longing desire to see, by his industrious labors,
another Scene added to the perfecting of the Theater of Britains Glory.

(4) Yet, in the mean while, lest I should seem too defective in my
intendments, let me without offense (in this third, though short Book) give
only a general view of that Kingdom, upon observations from others; which to
accomplish by mine own survey (if others should hap to fail, and my crazy aged
body will give leave) is my chief desire; knowing the Island furnished with
many worthy remembrances appertaining both unto them and us, whom GOD now has
set under one Crown: and the rather, for that their more Southern people are
from the same Original with us the English, being both alike the Saxon
branches: as also, that the Picts anciently inhabiting part of that Kingdom,
were the inborne Britains, and such as thither sled to avoid the Roman
servitude: whose names began first to be distinguished under Dioclesian the
Emperor, Cambde. Brit^in d^script. Pict.
when they were termed Picti, for painting their bodies, like the Britains, as
says Flavius Vegetius: which is more strengthened, English Annals.
for that the Northern Britains converted by Saint Columb, are called Britain
Picts.

(5) But the Highland-men (the natural Scot indeed) are supposed to descend
from the Scythians, who with the Getes infesting Ireland, left both their Issue
there, and their manners, apparent in the Wild Irish even to this day: And from
Scythae (as is thought) the name of Scot grew; for so the Netherlanders by
Scutten express indifferently the Scythian or Scot: so Gildas calls the
Irish Britains, Scythians: so King Elfred in translating the History of
Orosius, turns Scotos into Scyttan: and so says Walsingham, from one and the
same original Scythae, Scytici, Scotae, Scotici, take their names, as from
Getae, Getici, Gothi, Gothici have done.

(6) Their Manners were alike, says Diodurus Siculus, and Strabo, and their
garments not much differing, as by Sidonius Apollinaris may be gathered, where
he seems rather to describe the modern Wild Irish, then the antike Get.
Notwithstanding this Nations Original by some has been derived from Scota,
the supposed Daughter of the Egyptian King Pharaoh, that nourished Moses,
afterward married unto Gaithelus, the son of Cecrops, (Founder of Athens)
who first seating in Spain, passed thence into Ireland, and lastly into
Scotland, where his wife Scota gave Name to the Nation; if we believe that they
hit the mark, who shoot at the Moon.

(7) But that the Scythians came into Spain, (besides the Promontory bearing
their Name Scythicum) Silius Italicus, a Spaniard born, does show, who brings
the Concavi, a Nation therein seated, from the Massagetae, which were the
Scythians; and the Sarmatae, whom all confess to have been Scythians, were the
builders (as he says) of the City Susanna in Spain. And how from Spain they
possessed themselves of Ireland, (at the time when the Kingdom of Judah
flourished) Ni^ius the Disciple of Elvodugus does tell, and their own Histories
of Nemethus and Delas, besides Cisnerus and others, do show; who were first
known by the name of Scots, as is gathered out of Porphyry (alleged by S.
Jerome) in the Reign of Aurelianus the Emperor. Gildas calls them the Irish
Spoilers: Giraldus, A Scottish Nation, d^scended from Ireland: which in regard
of them by Eginhardus is termed The I Will of Scots: by Beda, The I Will inh^bited by
the Scots; and by other Historians, Scotland the great; as their seat in
Britain was called Scotland the less.

(8) These, Beda lib. 1. c. 1.
when the Roman Empire was far in the wane, burst into Britain under Reuda
their Captain, who entering amity with the Picts, possessed the North part of
the Island, and assisted them against the Britains, then ready to fall, when
the Romans were gone. But these afterward entertaining dissensions amongst
themselves, put the hazard of their estates on the trial and chance of one
days battle, fought betwixt them in the year of Salvation, 740. wherein the
Picts not only lost their lives, but soon after even their very name also,
and Fortune crowning the Scots with victory, advanced their Kingdom unto such
fame and strength, that the same has long continued without any absolute
Conquest or surprise, against the assaults of whatsoever enemies.

(9) Scotlands South part in Galloway, washed with the water of Solway Bay,
touches the degree 56. of Latitude, and thence inbosoming many Loughes and
In-lets upon the East and West, extends it self unto the degree 60. and 30.
minutes; whose Longitude is likewise laid betwixt the degree 13. and 19. and
the same grown very narrow, being so near the North Pole, as lying directly
under the hindermost Stars of the Greater Bear.

(10) The whole Kingdom is divided into two parts by the great River Tay; the
South whereof is the more populous, and more beautified in manners, riches, and
civiliti^^ the North more rude, retaining the customs of the Wild-Irish, the
ancient Scot, in whose several Territories these Counties ensuing are
contained.

South. North. Teifidale. Galloway. Stirling. Loqunbreo. Buquhan. Merch.
Carricke. Fife. Braidalbin. Murrey. Laudien. Kyle. Strathern. Perth. Rosse.
Liddesdale. Cunningham. Menteith. Athol. Sutherland Eskedale. Arran. Argile.
Aug^is. Cathanes. Annandale Cluidesdale. Cantire. Merns. Strathnavern.
Niddesdale Lennox. Lorne. Mar.

(11) And these again are subdivided into Sherifdomes, Stewardships, and
Bailiwicks, for the most part inheritory map of Scotland THE KINGDOM OF
SCOTLAND
unto honorable Families. The Ecclesiastical Government is also subject unto
two Metropolitan Archbishops, which are of S. Andrews, (the Primate of
Scotland) and of Glasco; whose jurisdictions are as follows: St. Andrews.
Dunkeld. Aberdon. Murray. Dunblan. Brechin. Rosse. Cathanes. Orkeney.
Glasco.
Galleway. Argile. Isles.


Amongst the things worthy of note of Antiquity in this Kingdom, most
memorable was that Fortification drawn from Abercorne upon the Frith of
Edenborough, unto Alcluyd, now Dunbritton, opening upon the West Sea, where
Julius Agricola set the limit of the Roman Empire; past which, says Tacitus,
there was not other bounds of Britain to be sought for: and that here the
second Legion Augusta, and the twentieth Legion Victrix, built a part of the
Wall, certain Inscriptions there dug up, and reserved at Dunloyr and Cader,
do witness: as also an ancient coped Monument of an high and round compass,
which, as some think, was a Temple consecrated unto the god Terminus: others,
a Trophey, raised by Carausius, who fortified this Wall with seven Castles, as
Ninius does declare.

(12) At this place began the great and dark Wood Caledonia, famous for the
wild white Bulls that therein were bred, whose Manes were Lion-like, thick and
curled, of nature fierce and cruel, and so hateful to mankind, that they
abhorred whatsoever was by them handled or breathed upon: these Woods stretched
far and wide with many turnings, dark shades, and dreadful dens, and so
famous in the Roman Writers, that they often used that name for all Britain;
whose inhabitants were the last in this Island, that yielded their necks to the
yoke of subjection, as shall appear in our following Story.

(13) Ninius a Britain is recorded to have converted the South-Picts unto the
Faith of Christ, in the Reign of Theodosius the younger, and the Church in
Galloway bearing his name does witness it: so likewise in the same age
Palladius sent from Pope Coelestine, becam^ an Apostle unto the Scots, whose
relics lay enshrined at Fordon in Mernis, as was verily supposed: but that
Christianity had been formerly planted in this uttermost Province, is
testified by Tertullian, in saying the Britains had embraced the faith further
then the Romans had power to ^ollow or persecute them, whereupon Peter Monk of
Clun in Spain, concludes their conversion to be more ancient then the
Southern Britains.

(14) But touching things observable for the present, surely admirable is the
report of the plenty of Cattle, Fish, and Foul there abiding: their Neat but
little, yet many in number: Fish so plentiful, that men in some places (for
delight) on horseback hunt Salmons with Spears: and a certain Foul, which
some call Soland Geese, spreading so thick in the Air, that they even darken
the Suns light; of whose flesh, feathers, and oil, the Inhabitants in some
parts make great use and gain; yea, and even of Fishes brought by them,
abundant provision for diet, as also of the sticks (brought to make their
nests) plentiful provision for fuel.

(15) With these, as of wonders, I might speak of the natures of those two
famous Loughes, Lomund and Nessa, the latter whereof never freezeth in Winter,
though never so extreme, and the waters of the other most raging in the
fairest and calmest weather, wherein also floateth an Island that removes from
place to place, as the wind forces her spongeous and unfastened body. In
Buquhan upon the banks of Ratra is a Well, whose trickling drops turn (in
Pyramidy-wise) into hard stone, and another near Edenborough that floateth
with Bitumen. In Dee and Done, besides the admired plenty of Salmons, is found
a Shellfish, called the Horse-muskell, wherein Pearls are engendered, most
precious for Physic, and some of them so Orient, that they give not place to
the choicest.

(16) No less strange then any the forementioned waters, but more lamentable
is the remembrance of the great inundation, happening by the sudden rising of
Tay, which bare away the Walls and Town of Berth, and with it the Cradle and
young son of King William into the Sea, wherein the Royal Infant with many
others perished, the King and his Courtiers hardly escaping the danger, with
life. The ^uine of this Town raised another more famous, and more commodiously
seated, even Perth, since called Saint Iohns-Towne.

(17) Islands and Inlets yielding both beauty and subjection to this Scottish
Kingdom, are the Western, the Orknayes, and the Shetlands, reckoned to be
above three hundred in number; their Inhabitants for the most part using the
frugalitie of the ancient Scot.

(18) The Western lying scattered in the Deucalidonian Sea, were anciently
ruled by a king of their own, whose maintenance was out of their common
Coffers, and the Regal authority never continued in Lineall succession, for
(to prevent that) their Kings were not permitted to have wives of their own,
but might by their Laws accompany with other men's: as the like Hect. Boet.
lib. cap. 12.
Law was in the other parts of Scotland, that the Virginity of all new wives,
That Law was made by King Edwin the 3.
should be the Landlords prey, till King Malcolme enacted, that Which is yet
called the Merchets of women.
half a marked should be paid for redemption. The residence of those
forementioned Kings, was chiefly in Ila, Bunals, and Iona, now Columbkill,
where (as Donald Munro, who traveled through these Islands reports) are three
Tombs, having the several Inscriptions of the Kings of Scotland, of Ireland,
and of Norway.

(19) Among these Western Islands, the Hebrides, Sky, Mula, Ila, and Arran,
are the greatest: All of them plentiful of Corn, Woods, Salmons, and
Herrings, as others of Conies, Dear, Horses, and Sheep, where in some they
are wild, and in others without any owners; but the people uncivil, and
lacking Religion, they rather live rudely in state of necessity, then as Lords
of these portions which God has allotted them; and with a sufferable ease,
ignorant of ambition, enjoy those contentments, which some others (though they
no great sum) do more laboriously attain unto by the Precepts of
Philosophy: for, feeding themselves with competencie without any excess, they
return all the overplus unto their Lords, as do the Inhabitants of Hirta and
Rona; but alas, Religion not known among them, these penurious virtues are
rather the curses of Cham, then the followings of Christ, who forbids us to be
too careful for the morrow.

(20) The Isles of Orkenay upon the North of Scotland, lying in a most raging
and tempestuous Sea, are about three and thirty in number, whereof thirteen
are inhabited, and the other replenished with Cattle: in these are no venomous
Serpents, nor other ugly vermin; the air sharp and healthful, and the soil
apt to bear only Oats and Barley, but not a stick of wood: among these,
Pomonia is the greatest, accounted and called the Maine-land, affording six
Minerals of Lead and Tin, and in her chief Town a Bishops See: wherein are
seated twelve Parish-Churches, one of them very Magnificent for so remote a
Country.

(21) Of all the Romans, Julius Agricola first discovered the Orkenayes; yea,
and subdued them, if we will believe Tacitus: but Pomponius Mela, that wrote
thirty years before him, does mention them, and Invenal in Hadrians time after
him, tells us the Romans had won them; and lastly, Claudian names Saxons
that were slain in them, and so does Ninius name Octha and Ebissus, Saxon
Commanders, who in their roving Pinnaces wasted the Orkenayes. These Islands
Donald Bune the usurper of the Scottish Crown, gave to the King of Norway for
his assistance, and by the Norwegians were they held the space of an hundred
and sixty years, until that Alexander the third King of Scotland, with sword
and composition got them from Magnus the fourth, King of Norway, which
afterward King Haquin confirmed unto King Robert Bruce: but lastly, Christian
the first, King of Norway and Denmark, utterly renounced all his right to
those Islands, when he gave his Daughter in marriage unto King James the third,
which deed was further ratified by the Pope, who opens the way to the
possession of Kingdoms with his own key.

(22) More North, and further then this Chart could well express, lie the
Isles of Shetland, of some thought to be Thule, and by the Commenter upon
Horace, the Fortunate Island, where as Tzetzes fabuleth, the souls of good men
are ferryed into those Elizian fields that ever grow green, and whence Julius
Caesar could hardly be drawn, as Muretus has written: but their fictions
intended only that the vert^^^^s souls of the dead passed the uttermost bounds
of earthly abode, and attained to an over-pleasing repose, and ever-flourishing
happiness; which whether they borrowed from the description of Paradise,
(taken both for a fair Garden and the souls happy rest) I cannot define; but
sure they would not have made those fields always green, if they had seen
how they lie ever covered with Ice and Snow, being in the 36. degree of
Latitude, as Ptolemie has placed it, where (for the most part) is a continual
Winter: but for proof that this was the Thule, besides Ptolemies Positure,
Saxo Grammaticus betwixt Norway and Scotland has placed it; and Solinu^, two
days sailing from the point of Caledonia: and Tacitus says, that the Romans
kenned Thule afar off, as they sailed about Britain by the Orcades: and
lastly, Mela makes it to face Berge a City in Norway.

THE FOVRTH BOOK Containing, THE KINGDOM OF IRELAND.

WITH AN EXACT CHOROGRAPHICALL DIMENSION OF THE PROVINCES THEREIN CONTAINED,
AND THOSE AGAIN DIVIDED INTO THEIR SEVERAL COUNTIES.

TOGETHER, With a compendious Description of that NATION, and ISLANDS
COMMODITIES.

BY JOHN SPEED.

LONDON, Printed by John Legatt, for William Humble, 1646.

Cum Privilegio.

THE PARTICVLAR COUNTIES IN THE FOUR SEVERAL PROVINCES OF IRELAND, AS NOW
THEY ARE DIVIDED, AND LIMITED.
MOVNSTER, Limmerick. Kery. Cork. Waterford. Desmond. Holy Cross, in
Typperary.
LEINSTER, East Mead. West Mead. Kilkenny. Caterlough. Queens County. Kings
County. Kildare. Weshford. Dubline.
CONNAVGHT, Clare, or, Towmund. Gallaway. Maio. Slego. Letrim. Roscoman.
VLSTER, Dunghall, or, Tyr-connell. Tyrone-upper. Tyrone-nether. Farmanagh.
Cavon. Monaghan. Colran. Antrim. Down. Armagh. Lough.

DIEV ET MON DROIT
HONISOITQVI MALYPENSE


IRELAND, AS IT WAS, AND IS INHABITED, THE SITE AND COMMODITIES OF THE 1LAND
DESCRIBED AND DECLARED.
How Ireland has been named in times past.
THE Traditions of time have delivered unto us diverse names, whereby this famous
Island is recorded to have been called: yet none of more fair probability,
then that of Orpheus, Aristotle, and Claudian, by whom it is named Ierna: by
Iuvenall and Mela called Inverna: by Diodorus Siculus, The diverse names of
Ireland.
Iris: by Martian of Heraclea, Ioyepnia: by Eustachius, Oyernia, and Bernia: by
the native Inhabitants, Erya: by the Britains, Yuerdon: the Welsh-bards in
their Ballads, Triuolas Totidanan, and Banno: and by the English, Ireland. But
from whence these diversities were derived, arise many opinions. Doubtless it
is, that Hibernia, Inverna and Overnia, came from Ierna, spoken of by Orpheus
and Aristotle; Orpheus. Aristotle.
and the same Ierna, as also Iris, Iuerdhon, and Ireland, and Erin, the term
that the Inhabitants now use. From this Erin therefore (a word proper to the
Nation) the original is most likely to be deduced.

(2) Some derive Hibernia from Hiberno tempore, that is, from the Winter
season; some from Hiberus a Spaniard; some from a Duke named Irnalph; Eulogi^m.
some again from the ancient River Iberus, and some from Hiere, an Irish word,
which signifies the West, or a western coast, whence Erin may also seem to
fetch the derivation: for it lies furthest Westward of any Region in all
Europe. As also for that the River running in the most remote West part of this
Island, is in Ptolemy called Iernus: like as the furthest western Promontory in
Spain, Ptol Geogr. c. 1.
from whence our Irish men came, is by Strabo called Ierne, and the River next
unto it, by Mela, Ierna: Ireland a Western Island.
yea, and Spain it self, for the Western situation, is called Hesperia: the
West-Cape of Afric, Hesperium; and in Germany, Westrich and Westphanlen from
their position have their names. In his public readings in Paris upon
Pomponius Mela.
Postelius (a man that rather followed his own fancy, then the judgment of
others) fetches the original of Ireland from the Hebrews, as if Irin should
be as much as Iurin, that is, the Jews land: which opinion I hold no better,
Vain conjectures.
then those that would have it from the Winter-like storms, although upon
every wind the air is cold there.

Festus Avienus, in his Orae maritimae.
(3) Festus Avienus, in that little book which he entitled Orae maritimae,
calls Ireland, Sacram Insulam, that is, the holy Island: to which opinion the
people are soon drawn, by reason of the many Saints that the Island is said to
produce, No ven^mous Beasts in Ireland.
and the blessed soil that affords no venomous creatures to retain life. It
is thought that Plutarch meant Ireland by his Ogygia, for her great antiquity;
and of latter times by Isidore and Bid it was called Scotia, Ireland called
Scotia.
of those Scots that inhabited it: and that thence the name of Scotland,
together with the Scots themselves, came into Britain.

(4) For largeness and circuit, in times past, this Island challenged the third
place in rank of all the Isles of the then known world: Ireland the third
Island for largeness in the world. The form of Ireland.
for thus have Geographers left us, that the Indian Taproban for greatness was
the first, the I Will of Britain the next, and this of Ireland the third: and for
that cause does Ptolemy call it the little Britain. But howsoever Strabo has
extended the breadth, as broad as the length, and others have formed it in
shape like an egg, yet latter dimensions have found it far otherwise, twice
longer then broad, and may be compared to the forelegge of a Bear, if the
Simile breed no offense. The bounds.
Whose East side has on it that tempestuous Sea that cutteth her channel
betwixt England and this Ireland: the West is washed with the western Ocean;
the North with the Deucaledonian; and the South with the Verginian Sea.

The air.
(5) The air of this Island is delectable and wholesome, though neither so
clear nor subtle as is ours of England, which (as Mela says) is nothing
favorable for the ripening of Corn: Pompon. Mela.
but so grateful to the ground, that it causes grass to grow abundantly, The
plenty.
not only fresh and long, but withal very sweet for all Cattle, and in winter
is more subject to wind then snow: and that I may use the words of Giraldus,
Giral. Cambre.
It is of all Countries most temperate, neither forcing the Inhabitants to seek
shade from the frying heat of Cancer, nor the chilling cold of Capricorn to
drive them to the fire, but at all seasons most mild, betwixt a sufferable
cold, and gentle warm heat.

(6) The soil (says Cambreusis) is uneven, The soil.
woody, wild, waterish and boggie, so full of Loghs and Meeres, that great
ponds of water are found upon the high Mountains. These indeed make the places
somewhat dangerous unto all new comers, by breeding of rheums, The danger.
dysenteries and fluxes, whose usual remedy is Vskebah, a wholesome Aqua
vitae, that dries more, and enflameth less, then many other hot confections.

(7) The commodities of this Kingdom chiefly consist in Cattle, Commodities.
whose feed is so sweet and so rank, that they will soon graze to a surfeit,
if they may be suffered to feed as they will. Pompon. Mela.
Their sheep are many, but bear not the best wool, which twice are shorn
within one year. Of these they make Mantles, Mantles.
Caddowes, and Coverlets, vented from thence into foreign Countries. Their
Hobbies likewise are of great esteem, Horses.
and are answerable to the Iennets of Spain. Bees there are in such abundance,
that honey is found in holes of old trees, Bees.
and in re^ts of the rocks. No annoyance of hurtful Snake or venomous
creatures; and to speak all in a word, nothing wanting for profit or pleasure:
for so much does Giraldus affirm, in saying, that Nature had cast into this
Western Kingdom of Zephyrus a more gracious eye then was ordinary.

(8) Touching the original peopling of this fair Island, if you will believe
their records, The ancient Inhabitants.
they make Antiquity it self but young unto themselves, affirming the damsel
Caesarea, and niece unto Noah, to have found it out before the Flood; and that
three hundred years after; when Iaphets posterity took into these West-parts
of the world, one Bartholanus of his Progeny, a Scythian by birth, encouraged
by the late success of Nimrod (who now had intruded upon the Monarchy of
Syria) wandered so far West, Bartholanus one of Noah's progeny.
that Fortune at last cast him and his people upon the coast of Ireland. There
he settled with his three sons, Languinna, Salanus, His three sons, Languinna,
Salanus, Ruthurgus.
and Ruthurgus, who searching through every creek and corner of the land, left
their own names by three notable places, Languini, Stragrus, and Mount
Salanga, which the revolution of times has since called by other names, as S.
Domincke-hill, Ruthurgi, and Stagnum. Under the government of these three
sons, and their offspring, this Land was kept about three hundred years; at
which time there arrived also in Ireland a Giant-like kind of people of
Nimrods race, Giants of the stock of Nimrod.
who in bodily shape exceeded the proportion of usual men, using their
strength to win soveraignties, and to oppress with rapine and violence.
These growing to numbers, accounted it necessary to prevent dominion, lest the
curse of slavery (prophesied by Noah) should light upon them: to prevent the
which, they set up a King of their own; then quarrels bred daily, either
parties purposing to hold their interest by their swords: against whom, lastly
a battle was fought, and an infinite company of Giants slain; when also died
most of those of the posterity of Iapheth, leaving them of Cham Lords of the
Island.

(9) Whereupon Nemethus a Scythian, with his four sons, Starius. Garbancles.
Anuinus. Fergusius.
arrived in Ireland, and by strong hand seated themselves among these Giants;
where for two hundred and sixty years they kept, but then no longer able to
hold out against them, they left their standings, and departed the Land.

(10) Soon after, the five sons of Dela, descended from the said Nemethus,
Gandius. Geuandius. S^gandus. Rutheranius. Slanius.
came into these coasts, and with manly prowess drove these miscreants out of
Ireland, whereby the seed of Cham was utterly expelled, and these of Iapheth
divided the Land into five parts, whereof they became themselves Kings: but
falling at variance, gave advantage unto others, among whom the Britains set
in a foot.

(11) But to make this Island more famous, certain Historians have fetched
their Kings from most uncertain Records, as namely from Gaothel the Grecian,
The fable of Gaothel and Scota.
and Scota, (the daughter of King Pharaoh, and nourisher of Moses) his wife:
who at that time, when Israel were in Egypt, with a map of Ireland THE KINGDOM
OF IRLAND Divided into several Provinces, and the^ again divided into
Counties Newly described.
Colony, came into Spain, and after into Ireland, where he was made King,
Hector Boctius.
and in honor of his Queen, the land named Scotia, from whom also the
Inhabitants took name: his posteriti^ increasing in the parts of Spain, where
first they had seated, Hibernus. Hermion. Ever. Erimon.
in process of time sought further adventures under the four sons of
Milesius King of Spain, whose names were Hibernus, Hermion, Ever, and Erimon.

(12) These, by the direction, sufferance, and assistance of Gurguntius, King
of the Britains, after that Ireland had been very much dispeopled by a
contagious Pestilence, seated themselves, and from the eldest, Hibernus, called
the Island Hibernia, as some are of opinion: these divided the whole into five
Provinces, Ireland divided into five Provinces.
famously known by the names of Mounster, Leinster, Connaught, Vlster, and
Mead in their midst: and from these the present Irish repute themselves to
come. Yet surely, as I make no question, but that this Island became inhabited
even of old time, when mankind again overspread the face of the earth, so
doubt I not, but that our Britains passed thereinto themselves, such infinite
number of words in the Irish language yet in use, Irish and British word^
agree. Tacit. in vita Agricolae.
such ancient names of Waters, Isles, Mountains, and Places, merely British
words, yet remaining, and the testimony of Tacitus, who says, that their
manners were fashioned to the Britains, inforceth so much; and Ptolemie before
him, calls that Island by the name of Little Britain: all which show a
former interest for Ireland, then that which by conquest under Henry the second
was made.

Ireland never subject to the Romans.
(13) That it ever was subject to the Romans, is doubtful, though Agricola did
wish it, and Tacitus held most necessary: yea, and in the division of their
Empire, Ireland, with Britain and Thule, fell unto Constantine the son of
Constantine the great; yet their manners unreclaimed, and barbarism retained
long after those days, do witness no such civilitie sown, to be in that
plot. But when Romes great Empire began to grow less, the Scots or Scythians
grew mighty in Ireland: Or^sius.
and as Or^sius writes, that Island was wholly inhabited by the Scottish
Nation in the days of Honorius and Arcadius, the Emperors: whose wars and
slaughter, Claudian does lightly touch in this his Verse.

Scotorum cumulos flevit glacialis Ierne.
The frozen Ireland wept to see, her Scots all slain on heaps to be.
(14) As these for the most part, by the testimony of Ninius, The manners and
customs of the wild Irish. Strabo.
were the ancient Inhabitants, so by other ancient Writers, their customs and
manners are thus set forth: Strabo says, The Inhabitants of Ireland are more
rude then the Britains, they feed upon the flesh of men, yea, and think it a
point of worth to eat their dead parents: want only they accompany with Women,
making no difference of other men's wives, their own sisters, nor of their
natural mothers: but of these things (says he) we have no certain witness of
sufficient credit. Pomponius Mela records, Mela lib. 3. Soli. cap. 24.
that the Irish are uncivil, ignorant of virtues, and void of Religion. And
Solinus affirms, that after victory they drink the blood of the slain, and be
smeare their own faces therewith; so given to war, that the mother at the
birth of a man-child, feeds the first meat into her infants mouth, upon the
point of her husbands sword, and with heathenish imprecations, wishes that it
may die no otherwise then in war, or by sword.

(15) But from these ancient and barbarous manners, let us come to the
conditions of their middle time; whom Giraldus Cambrensis describes as
follows: Giraldus Came.
The Irish (says he) are a strong and bold people, martial and prodigal in
war, nimble stout, and haughty of heart; careless of life but greedy of
glory; courteous to strangers, constant in love, light of belief, impatient of
injury, given to fleshly lusts, and in enmity implacable. At the baptizing of
their infants, their manner was, not to dip their right arms into the water,
The mortal disposition of the Irish.
that so (as they thought) they might give a more deep and incurable blow;
never calling them by the names of their Parents whilst they lived together,
but at their death took it upon them. Their women nursed not the children they
bare; and they that nursed others, did affect and love them much more then
their own.

The fantastical conceits of the Irish.
(16) So much were they given to fantastical conceits, that they held it very
ominous to give their neighbors fire upon May Day: to eat an odd egg,
endangered the death of their horse: and before they cast in their seed, they
send salt into the field: to hang up the shells in the roof, was a preservative
of the chickens from the kite: to set up green boughs at their doors in the
Month of May, increased their kines milk: and to spit upon Cattle, the held
it good against Witchery, whereof Ireland was full.

Superstitious of the Irish.
(17) Superstitious Idolatry among the wild Irish was common, yielding divine
honor unto the Moon after the change, unto whom they both bowed their knees,
and made supplications; and with a loud voice would thus speak unto that
Planet: Their gross Idolatry.
We pray thee leave us in as good estate as thou found'st us. Wolves they did
make their Godsips, terming them Charl Christ, and so thought themselves
preserved from their hurts: the hoofes of dead horses they accounted and held
sacred: about childrens necks the hung the beginning of Saint John's Gospel, a
crooked nail of an horseshooe, or a piece of a Wolves skin; and both the
sucking-child and nurse were girt with girdles finely platted of women's hair:
so far they wandered into the ways of error, in making these arms the
strength of their healths.

(18) Their wives were many, Many wives.
by reason of divorcements, and their maids married at twelve years of age,
whose customs were to send their lovers, bracelets platted, and curiously
wrought of their own hair, so far following Venus in the knots of these
allurements. The attire of the men.
The men wore linen shirts exceeding large, stained with Saffron, the sleeves
wide, and hanging to their knees, strait and short trusses plated thick in the
skirts, their breeches close to the thighs, a short skeine hanging point down
before, and a mantle most times cast over their heads. The attire of the women.
The women wore their hair platted in curious manner, hanging down their
backs and shoulders, from under solden wreathes of sine linen, rolled about
their heads, rather loading the wearer then delighting the beholder: for as the
one was most seemly, so the other was unsightly: their necks were hung with
chains and carkaneths, their arms wreathed with many bracelets, and over their
side-garments the shagge-rugge mantles purfled with a deep Fringe of diverse
colour^: both sexes accounting idleness their only liberty, and ease their
greatest riches.

(19) In wars they were forward, Their manner in War.
and fought with Battle-axes, whose bearers were called Galloglasses, the
common soldier but lightly armed, who served with darts and sharp skeines;
their Trumpet was a Bag-pipe, and word for encounter, Pharroh; which at the
first onset with great acclamation they uttered, Their ridiculous conceits.
and he that did not, was taken into the air, and carried into the vale of
Kerry, where transformed (as they did believe) he remained until he was hunted
with hounds from thence to his home.

(20) For the dying and dead they hired women to mourn, Their excessive
mourning for their dead.
who expostulated with the sick, why he would die; and dead, at his Funeral
such outcries were made, such clapping of hands, such howlings and gestures,
that one would think their sorrows unrecoverable, holding the opinion of
Pythagoras for the souls departed.

(21) Their diet in necessity was slender, Their diet.
feeding upon watercresses roots, mushromes, shamrogh, butter tempered with
oat-meale, milk, whey, yea, and raw flesh, the blood being crushed out: their
use was also to let their kine blood, which standing a while, and coming to a
jelly, with butter they did eat, as a very good dish.

(22) That the Gospel of Christ should be preached in Ireland by James the
Apostle, Christianity in Ireland.
I will not affirm, though Vincentius has said it: Vincentius li. 3. cap. 7.
neither will I, with the Scots, bring the Islands conversion from a Christian
woman, who (as their Historians do avouch) first instructed the Queen, and
the Queen her husband, and he again his Subjects, till all became Christians.
But most true it is that the Scots first received the doctrine of Christ in
this Kingdom of Ireland; for thus writes Prosper: Pro. Aquitanus.
Coelestine Pope of Rome sent his Archdeacon Palladius into Britain to
withstand the Pelagian heresy, who at one time did drive out these enemies of
grace, An. D. 431.
and ordained a Bishop among the Scots, Whereby that barbarous Nation embraced
Christianity. Ninius.
Yet Ninius reports, that Palladius did nothing in neither, being taken away
by untimely death: but that S. Patricke, borne at Eiburne in Cluedsdale, the
son of Calphurus, by the sister of S. Martin, was the first Apostle for
Ireland, who sowed his heavenly seed with such plentiful increase, that the
soil it self shortly was called Sanctorum patria, Henricus Antisiodorenfis.
the Country of Saints: for whose Sepulcher after his death rose as great
variance, as was for Homer among them of Greece: Strife for Patrickes bones.
they of Down challenged his grave to be with them, upon certain verses*
written on a Tomb, which ascribes Patricke, Briget and Columbe to be buried
therein: they of Armagh lay claim by the warrant of S. Bernard, who says,
that Patricke in his life time there ruled, and after death there rested.
Glascenbury in England by ancient records will have his body interred with
them; and Scotland avoucheth his birth to be at Glasco, and bones to rest at
Kirk Patricke with them: of such reverend esteem was this Irish Apostle.

(23) This Patricke in his youth had been taken captive by the Irish Pirates,
The life of S. Patricke.
and for six years continuance served Macbuain as his slave, and keeper of his
swine: in which dejected condition, so desirous he was of the Lands salvation:
that in his dreams he thought the infants unborne cried unto him for Baptism;
and redeeming himself thence for a piece of gold found in the field, which a
swine had turned up, in his aged years came back again into Ireland, preached
the Gospel, converted the people, and lastly became Archbishop of Armagh. Of
whose mi^^cles and Purgatory, I leave others to speak; that are m^re
credulous in the one, and have better leisure to relate the other, and will
show thee Ireland as now it is, first in general, and then in parts.

THis Province, called in Irish, Mown; in a more ordinary construction of
speech, The Bounds.
Wown* in Latin, Momonis; and in English, Mounster; lies open Southward to
the Verg^vian Sea: South.
Northward, it affronteth part of Counaught: North.
The East is neighboured by Leinster: East.
and the West is altogether washed with the West Ocean. West.


The length from South to North.
(2) The length thereof extended from Ballatimore Bay in her South, unto the Bay
of Galway in her North, are about ninety miles. Her broadest part from East to
West, The breadth from East to West.
is from Waterford Haven to Feriter Haven, and contains an hundred miles. The
whole circumference, by following the prom^taries and indents, are above five
hundred and forty miles.

The Form.
(3) The form thereof is quadrant or foure-square. The air mild and
temperate, Air.
neither too chilling cold, nor too scorching hot. The soil in some parts is
hilly, Soil.
looking aloft with woody, wild, and solitary mountains: Good and commodious.
yet the valleys below are garnished with corne-fields. And generally, all,
both pleasant for sight, and fertile for soil.

Ancient Inhabitants.
(4) This Province is at this day divided into two parts: that is, the West
Mounster, and the South Mounster. The West Mounster was inhabited in old time
by the Luccui, Luceni. West.
the Velabri, Velabri. West.
and the Vicrim: Vicermi. West.
the South Mounster by the Oudiae or Vodiae, and the Coriondi. The Velabri and
Luceni are said (by Orosius) to have dwelt in that part of the Country, where
it lies outmost Westward, Oudiae. South. or Vodiae. South. Coriondi. South.
and passing toward the Cantabrian Ocean, looks afar off to Gallitia in
Spain The Luceni of Ireland (who seem to have derived their name and
original from the Lucensii of Gallitia, and of whom there still remain some
relics in the Barony of Lyxnauw) are supposed to have been seated in those
parts that lie neighboring upon the bank of the River Shennon. A supposall
touching the Luceni.


(5) The general commodities of this Province are Corn^, Cattle, Wood, The
ri^h commodities of Mounster.
Wool, and Fish. The last whereof, it affords in every place plenty and
abundance of all sorts. But none so well known for the store of Herrings that
are taken there, as is the Promontorie cal^ed Eraugh, Spaniards and Portugals
make here a good profit by fishing.
that h^ between Bantre and Ballatimore Bay, whereunto every year a great
Fleet of Spaniards and Portugals resort (even in the midst of Winter) to fish
also for Gods.

(6) The principal City of the Province is Limericke, which the Irish call
Lowneagh, compassed about with the famous River Shennon, by the parting of the
Channel. Limericke the chie^e of this Province.
This is a Bishops See, and the very Mart-Towne of Mounster. It was first won
by Reymond le Gross an Englishman, afterward burnt by Dunewald an Irish petty
King of Thuetmond. Then in process of time, Philip Breos an Englishman was
in^^offed in it, and King John fortified it with a Castle, which he caused
therein to be built. Fortified by King John Ann. 1332.
In this Castle certain Hostages making their abode in the year 1332. grew
(as is reported) so full of pride and insolency, What happened in this City:
by Insolency, by Valor.
that they slew the Constable thereof, and seized the Castle into their own
hands. But the resolute Citizens, that could neither brook nor bear with such
barbarous cruelty, did in revenge then show such manly courage and vivacitie,
as they soon after recovered the Castle again, The graduation of it.
repaying the Hostages in such hostile manner, as that they put them all to the
sword without partiality. The position of this Town is by Mercator placed for
Latitude 53. degrees 20. minutes; and for Longitude, 9. degrees and 34.
minutes. Near unto the River that Ptolemy calls Daucona, and Giraldus
Cambre^sis (by the alteration of some few letters) names Sauranus and
Sauarenus, which issues ^ut of Muskerey Mountains, Cork City.
is seated the City Cork, graced also with another Episcopal dignity* (and
with the Bishops See of Clon annexed unto it) which Giraldus calls Corragia,
the Englishmen Cork, and the native Inhabitants of the Country Corcach.
Encompass^d with wi^d Irish that often infest it.
This Town is so beset on every side with neighboring, mole^t^rs, as that
they are still constrained to keep^ watch and ward, as it there lay continual
siege against it. The Citizens of this place are all linkt together in some one
or other degree of affinity, The Irish Marriages.
for that they dare not match their daughters in marriage into the Country,
but make contracts of matrimony one with another among themselves. In this
place, that holy and religious man Briock is said to have his birth and
breeding, who flourished among the Gaul, in that fruitful age of
Christianity, and from whom the Diocese of Sanbrioch in Britanie Armori^a,
commonly called S. Brieu, had the denomination.

Waterford the second City in Ireland.
(7) The City which the Irish and Britains call Porthlargy, and the English,
Waterford, though it be last in place, yet is it not least in account, as being
the second City of all Ireland, as well for the convenience and
commodiousnesse of the Haven, Always loyal to the English Crown.
that affords such necessary aptitude for trade and tra^^ique, as also for the
faithful loyalty which it has always showed to the Imperial Crown of
England: for ever since it was won by Richard Earl of Pembroke, it still
performed the obedience and peaceable offices of duty andervice unto the
English, as they continued their course in the conquest of Ireland: whence it
is that the Kings of England have from time to time endowed it with many large
Franchises and l^berties, King Henry the s^venth his bounty to it.
which King Henry the seventh did both augment and confirm.

Christianity in Ireland how it decayed.
(8) Although since the time if S. Patricke, Christianity was never extinct in
this Country, yet the government being haled into contrary factions, the
Nobility lawless, and the multitude wilful, it has come to pass, that
Religion has wa^ed (with the temporal common sort) more cold and feeble,
being most of them very irreligious, and addicted wholly to superstitious
observations: Men turned into Wolfemen.
for in some parts of this Province, some are of opinion, that certain men are
yearly turned into Wolves, and made Wolfe-men. Though this has been
constantly affirmed by such as think their censures worthy to pass for
current and credible; yet let us suppose that happily they be possessed with
the disease and malady that the Physicians call Lycanthropi, The effects of
Melancholy.
which begets and engenders such like fantasies through the malicious
humors of Melancholy: and so oftentimes men imagine themselves to be turned and
transformed into forms which they are not. Some again embrace another
ridiculous opinion, A ridiculous opinion.
and persuade themselves, that he who in the barbarous acclamation and outc^y
of the Soldiers, which they use with great forcing and straining of their
voices, when they join battle, does not howte and make a noise as the rest
do, Of mute soldiers in battle.
is suddenly caught from the ground, and carried as it were flying in the air,
out of any Country of Ireland, into some desert valleys, where he feeds upon
grass, drinks water, has some use of reason, but not of speech, is ignorant
of the present condition he stands in, whether good or bad: yet at length shall
be brought to his own home, being caught with the help of Hounds and Hunters.
A good motive for the converting of the Irish to Christ.
Great pity that the soul fiend and father of darkness should so grievously
seduce this people with misbeliefe, and that these c^rrours be not chased away
with the truth of Christian Religion, whereby as they carry much grace in their
countenance^, they may also not be void of the inward grace of their souls and
understanding.

(9) This Province has been sore wasted in the rebellions of Desmond, The Pope
and King of Spains bad dealings.
to whose aid Pope Gregory the thirteenth, and Philip K. of Spain, sent
certain companies of Italians and Spaniards, who arrived not far from
Dingle, fortified themselves, and gave it the name of Fort de Ore, sounding
loud threats against the whole Country. Desmonds rebellion suppressed by the
Lord Gray, 8000. Spaniards landed in Ireland.
But Arthur Baron Gray, Lord Deputy of Ireland, at the first onset decided
their quarrel, by sheathing his sword in their bowels; and Desmond ^earefully
flying into the Woods, was by a Soldier cut shorter by the head. And again,
when the Kingdom of Ireland lay bleeding, and put almost to the hazard of the
last cast, Don John D' Aquila, with eight thousand Spaniards (upon confidence
of the excommunications of Pius the fifth, Gregory the thirteenth, and Clement
the eight, Popes, all of them discharging their curses like unto thunderbolts
against Queen Elizabeth of blessed memory) landed near unto Kinsal^, Tyrones
rebellion extinguished by the Lord Montioy.
presuming that the rebellions of Tyrone had turned the hearts of the Irish for
Rome: Sir Charles Blunt Lord Montjoy, in the depth of Winter, and with his
tired soldiers, so daunted their Spanish hearts, that with one victory he
repressed their bragging boldness, and recovered the Irish that were ready to
revolt.

(10) God has oftentimes showed his tender love and affection to this people,
in laying his fatherly chastisements and afflictions upon them, Winds. Dearth.
Famine.
sometimes by winds, sometimes by famine and dearth, and sometimes again by
opening his hand of plenty into their laps to convert them to himself, and to
divert their hearts from superstitions. In the year 1330. about the Feast of
Saint John Baptist, Ann. 1330. what happened.
there began such a dearth of Corn in this Country, by the abundance of rain
and the inundation of waters (which continued until Michacimas following) that
a Cranoc of Wheat was sold for twenty shillings, More the same year.
a Cranoc of Oats for eight shillings, a Cranoc of Pease, Beans, and Barley
for as much. The winds the same year were so mighty, that many were hurt,
and many slain ^ut-right by the fall of houses that was forced by the violence
of the same. The like whereof were never seen in Ireland. Ann. 1317. the
effects of it.
In the year 1317. there was such a dearth of corn and other victuals, that a
Cranoc of Wheat was sold for twenty three shillings. And many Householders,
that before time had sustained and relieved a great number, were this year
driven to beg, and many famished. In the time of which famine, the mercy of
God so disposed, that upon the 27. day of June, Ann. 1331. a miraculous relief.
in the year 1331. there came to land such a mighty multitude of great
Sea-fishes (that is) Thurs^eds, such as in many ages past had never been seen,
that the people were much comforted in this distress, and received great
relief and sustenance by the same.

(11) Places of Religion in this Country, Religious places.
were the two Abbeys at Yoghall, called the North-Abbey and South-Abbey: The
two Abbeys at Limcricke, S. Francis Abbey, and S. Dominicke Abbey: The two
Abbeys at Cork, the Abbey of the I Will, and S. Francis Abbey: and the famous
Abbey (in times past) of the holy Cross, which has had many privileges and
liberties granted unto it, in honor of a piece of Christ's Cross, An
unprobable opinion of the Cross of Christ.
that was (as they say) sometimes preserved there. Thus were Christians
persuaded in ancient times. And it is a wonder in what Troops and Assemblies
people do (even yet) conflow thither upon devotion, as unto a place of
holiness and sanctity: so firmly are they settled in the Religion of their
Forefathers, The Irish misled by fault of their teachers.
which has been increased beyond all measure by the negligent care of their
Teachers, who should instruct their ignorance, and labor to reduce them from
the errors they persevere in.

This Province is governed by a Lord President, The government of this Province.
who has one Assistant, two learned Lawyers, and a Secretary to keep it in
duty and obedience. It was in times past divided into many parts* as Towoun,
that is North-Mounster; The old division of it.
Deswoun, that is, South Mounster; Hierwoun, that is, West-Mounster; Mean-Woun,
that is, Middle-Mounster; and Vrwoun, that is, the Front of Mounster. But at
this day it is distinguished into these Counties; The new at this day. King
Henry the seconds grant. King Henry the sixts grant.
Kerry, Desmond, Limericke, Tipperary, Holy-Crosse, Waterford, and Cork: which
County in times past had been a Kingdom, containing with it Desmond also: for
so in the Grant given by King Henry the second unto Robert Fitz-Stephen, and to
Miles de Cogan, it is called in these words: Know ye that I have granted the
whole Kingdom of Cork, excepting the City and Cantred of the Oustmans, to
hold for them and their heirs, of me and John my son, by the service of
sixty Knights. The County of Waterford, Market towns* Castles.
King Henry the sixth gave unto John Talbot Earl of Shrewsbury, with the name,
style, and title of Earl of Waterford, which was afterward again assumed to
the Crown. At Dunkeran.
Touching the County of Holy-Crosse, At Dungarvan.
as the opinion of that much frequented Abbey is much lessened, At Limericke.
so that County is swallowed up altogether in the County Tipperary. Shandon
Castle.
It is fortified with five strong Castles, traded with six Market-Townes,
Cahir Castle.
and divided as follows.

MOVNSTER. Limericke. MOVNSTER. Kery. MOVNSTER. Cork. MOVNSTER. Waterford.
MOVNSTER. Desmond. MOVNSTER. Holy Cross in Tipperary.
map of the province of Munster THE PROVINCE OF MOUNSTER


MOVNSTER DIVISION.
1. LImericke. 2. Kery. 3. Cork. 4. Waterford. 5. Desmond. 6. Holscrosse in
Tipperary.
Adam, Ker. B. Adam, Cor. C. Adare, Lim. Agamer, Cor. Agrum, Des. L. Annagh,
Tip. Anuo, Wa. B. Ard Collum, Tip. Ardey, Des. Ardey-mount, Des. Ardmale, Tip.
Ardmore bay, Wa. Ardmore, Wa. C. Arfsky, Lim. Armagh, Lim. Arne Cragh, Ker.
Arpenes, Cor. C. M. Bryne Arra, Tip. Artenay, Des. Arthully, Des. Arundell,
Cor. C. Asketon, Lim.
B
Ballatimore bay, Des. Ballatimore haven, Cor. Ballen, Cor. C. Balendred, Cor.
M. Balley, Cor. C. Baloughmore, Tip. Baloughnan* Cor. Ballylegban, Lim. Banday,
Lim. Band flu. Barony of Kellpellell, T Barremoore, cor. Barrecourt, cor.
Barremore, cor. Barre-og, cor. Lord Barry Island, cor. Bautrey, Des. Bautrey
flu. Bautry, Des. M. Bay, Lim. C. Bail, Des. Beare-horne bay, Des. Bedechemen,
ker. Bed, Lim. B. Beer haven, Des. Beg, flu. Beghes, Tip. B. Bein kirty, lim.
Belilas, Tip. Bernogh, ker. Berwell, Cor. B. Bishops, Tip. Blackrock, cor.
Blasquo sound, ker. Bockes, ker. Boer, lim. B. Boldauk flu. Borare, Tip.
Botenant, cor. Vicount Botenant, cor. Boy* Wa. C. Brarey, lim. Braver, lim.
Braeykley* lim. Breer, lim. B. Brid flu. Bridge, Wa. C. Britast, Tip. B. Broad
I Will, Des. Bronne* lim. Bryne, lim. Buguin, Wa. B. S. Tilbot Butler, Tip. Buton,
Wa. B.
C
Cadone, ker. Caer, Tip. Caer, Tip. Caer, Tip. M. Caere flu. Caere, ker. M.
Caerdraken, cor. Caernonogher, Tip. Caherilon, ker. C. Calmyn, cor. C.
Caloeghan, Des. O. Camyse, Tip. Canane, cor. C. Can Brow, Des. Can Brigh, ker.
Can Trush, Des. Canerough, cor. Caniconill, Wa. Cankling, cor. Canre, cor. c.
Cantorke, Des. c. Canum, lim. b. Cape known, Wa. Cape clear, Des. Capell I Will,
cor. Capogh flu. Carbre Ca. ker. Caregan, cor. c. Carennow, cor. S. Peter
Carew, Des. Carewmore, Wa. Cargonia, lim Carick-nifeild, ker. Carick necoshy,
Des. Carick-phole, ker. Carienes, Des. Carigonia, Wa. Carigray, Tip. Carick,
lim. Carick never, cor. Carick-capell, cor. Carick done, cor. Carickmona, Wa.
Caricknogh. cor. Carybres, Des. Carychotar, cor. CARYCK, Tip. Cariconan flu.
Caryk dred, cor. Carry krown, Wa. Carrowearbre, cor. Carta Rugh, cor. m. Carta
Rough, c. m. Carta Rugh, cor. m. Cartomelone, cor. Cashell, Tip. Castelan, Tip.
Castelan, cor. Castellan, Wa. L. Lough Castle, ker. Castelton, lim. Castelton,
tip. Castilton, cor. Catherlough, ker. l. Catre, ker. l. The Catte, Des. Cats,
ker. l. Cats, cor. Checo, Des. P. Chera, cor. B. Chergrave, cor. Church, Des.
N* City, ker. B. City, Des. Clancarby, lim. Clangryne, cor. Clankard, Tip.
Clan Mores, ker. Clan Dormond, Des. Claragh, tip. Clegle, cor. B. Clensier,
tip. B. Cloge, Wa. C. Clogh, cor. C. Cloghan, tip. B. Cloghen, Des. Cloghiaten,
lim. Cloghlogan, cor. Cloney, Tip. Cloney, Wa. Cloney, cor. Clone Calker, wa.
Clon kery, E. M. Clonemoghe, tip. Clonmell, tip. Clonmyne, cor. Clonomell, ker.
Cods-head, des. Colyna, lim. Combut, des. Common Tolder, des. Common, cor. C.
Cone, cor. C. Coner, des. O. Coner kerey, ker. O. Conick, lim. B. Coragh flu.
Coragh, cor. M. Corbeg Island, cor. Corck haven, cor. CORK, Cor. Coridone, ker.
Corkenny, tip. Cormog, cor. C. Corre, cor. B. Copingar, cor. C. Cosmay, lim.
Cotton I Will, cor. Craone, cor. c. Crock, wa. b. Crome, lim. Cromewell, ker.
Crow, ker. Crow, Tip. C. Cray, cor. Cureney, ker. c.
D
S. Dermond M. teg. cor. Delees mountains, wa. Vicount Desees, wa. Earl of
Desmond, ker. Earl of Desmond, lim. Diane, ker. c. DINGLE, ker. Dingle haven.
ker. Dingle bay, ker. Dologh, cor. Dolos, ker. c. Donay, wa. c. Doncawin, cor.
Dondanor, cor. Done, cor. c. Doneboy, cor. Donedody can, cor. Donegh, des. O.
Done kyllyn, ker. Donekyne, des. Donell, wa. o. Donelow, ker. Donelough, cor.
Donelre, wa. Donemay, des. Donemore, cor. c. Donemore, coo. Donenan, des. c.
Donenant, des. o. I. M. Donell rimer, ker. Done Patrick, lim. Donesky, tip.
Donin, cor. Donoghan, des. Donoghill, tip. Donogh-moore, des. m. Donyn, cor. c.
Doreley, tip. Doren, cor. Dorses, tip. Dorses, tip. Dovaila, des. Dovegner,
cor. Doule, tip. Down lough, des. Dran, cor. c. Drishall, cor. Droindone, cor.
Droma M. cake, wa. Dromanny, ca. wa. Drombeny, lim. Dromboy, cor. Dromena, wa.
Dromin, lim. Drouth, lim. b. Drynad, ker c. Dulegan flu. Dungarvan, wa.
Dungarvan haven, wa.
E
Ecclys, ker. B. John Fitz-Edmond. cor. Eglohill Rahama, ker. Elogh, cor. b.
Emeley lands, tip. English, lim. c. Enishone, cor. Eniskin, cor. Eragh, des.
Erragh, ker. Eyrleyson. M. ker.
F
Farsehanet, tip. Fathleg, wa. Feriter, ker. b. Feriter haven, ker. I. Fermore,
des. Fetherd, tip. Fiened, ker. Five Castles, cor. Flyx flu. Forrestrand, des.
Fortune, cor. c. Foy flu. Foyne, lim. Fox, wa. c. Freer, ker. b. Fyn, tip. b.
G
Galbally, tip. Gally, ker. c. Galter, wa. b. Galter, wa. Galton, lim. m. Garan
leghan, tip. Garne, lim. b. Garnis, des. Gart, lim. b. Garundie, tip. Gascon
haven, cor. Gatten, flu. Ghedagh, des. Ghedy, lim. b. Gher lough, lim. Gheragh,
wa. c. Earl of ^hyldare, lim. Earl of Ghlydare, ker. Ghylligray, Cor. M.
Glan, lim. c. Glancarta, ker. Earl of Glancarta, ker. Earl of Glancarta or
maccart more, ker. Glan flyx, des. Glancebone, wa. Glanguely, tip. Glore, tip.
Gnyne, cor. b. Grace, wa. c. Graceden, wa. Grand, tip. b. Grange Gleboyne, tip.
Gray, tip. b. Great Isle, des. Greconlogh condain, wa. Greeken, lim. Gregory,
ker. c. Grenand, tip. Grenand, lim. c. Grenand, tip. Grenogh, lim. m. Goelen,
tip. Gorgrey, lim. c. Goule, tip. m. Gule, tip.
H
Haghada, cor. Haghadow, ker. Haghea, tip. Haghwalla, ker. Halan, lim. b.
Hallay, cor. Hell, des. Helonhen, des. Helwick point, wa. Helyn, ker. E.
Herbert, tip. b. Hewart, lim. b. Heska, cor. Hilliobergians, des. Hoe, lim. b.
Hogs, ker. Holay, lim. b. Hologh, cor. b. Holy cross* tip. Honnu flu. Horney,
cor. b. Horpe, tip. Horses, ker. How, tip. b. Howen, tip. b.
I
Island, ker. c. Inche, ker. c. Inche, cor. c. Inche flu. Inchegrade, cor.
Incheguin, cor. Inslonogh, tip. m. Irayle, ker. m. Iverick Isle, wa.
K
Kaer, cor. Kaer trent, ker. Kahadda, cor. Kan mary, des. Karikune, cor. Karne,
cor. Kat^oll, tip. Keale, des. b. Keff, des. O. Kelden, lim. Kelkone, wa.
Kellone, des. Kellpellel. See Barony. Kelrelsholl, tip. Keltenen, tip. Kelwear,
lim. Kenedy fyn, tip. O. Kenedy Ormond Done, T. O. Kenedy Roe, tip. O.
Kenishtuth, cor. Kerves, des. O. Kighlay, ker. Kilbare, wa. Kilberck, tip.
Kildareth, cor. Kilfraer, lim. M. Kilgo, cor. Kilgobin, cor. Kilkenny, tip.
Killare, cor. Kilmalck, lim. Kilmoghney, tip. Kilmoghney, tip. Kilmokwods, cor.
Kilmore, des. Kilmure, des. Kilny Colle, des. Kinsaleheg, wa. Knaum, tip.
Knight of the Valley, lim. Kno-Brandon, ker. Knochone, des. Knock-bernella,
Tip. Knochorden, tip. Knock dromed, cor. Knock eroglo Skardy* ker.
Knockgraffon, tip. Knockhore, des. Knockhore, wa. Knock money, lim. Knocknur,
des. Knock Patrick, lim. Knock Recket, wa. Knocksaloghil, tip. Knockshelbren,
cor. Knock union, des. Knock weldon, wa. Knoclonio, lim. Korkbeg, cor.
Kylbrytayn, cor. c. Kylcasse, tip. c. Kylhagha, ker. M. Kylharnon, ker.
Kylhusteney, ker. Kylm Thomas, wa. Kylmayglin, cor. Kylne mannogh, tip.
Kylnoglose, ker. M. Kylnolan, ker. Kylphell, tip. Kylyland, ker. Kyllygray,
cor. c. Kyllynan, lim. KYNSALE, cor. Kyrnenan, ker. The Knight of Kyry, ker.
L
Lacrenon, ker. Laghera, lim. b. Lancan, cor. Lanras, des. c. Lany, des. E.
Laternis, cor. c. Leaver, ker. L^ Legh lough, des. Lemcon, des. Lemortkaol,
ker. Lestsyn, cor. Letter, ker. c. Leughan, tip. b. Likodone, lim. LIMERICK,
lim. Linde, ker. c. Lisegriffin, cor. Liskin, lim. b. Lismalin, tip. Lismolkey,
tip. Lismore, wa. Lisronogh, tip. Lixnayo, ker. Loaghyne, cor. Lome flu.
Longhill, lim. c. Lon main, ker. Lough, cor. c. Lough, cor. c. Lough, ker.
Loughman, tip. Loughan, des. Lough Barnsey, des. Lough of Inets, tip. Lyn, lim.
b. Lynyliro, cor. c. Lions, cor. Lystoule, ker. Lystor, ker. b. Lyx flu. Baron
of Lyxnay, lim.
M
Mac Owine, lim. Magonien, ker. Magriffin, tip. Magronne, cor. c. Mahund, des.
Mac mahund, cor. Malhanna, cor. m. Malogh, cor. c. Manamore, des. m. Mang, ker.
c. Mang flu. Manian, ker. c. Mare flu. Mare, cor. c. Mare, tip. b. Marow, ker.
c. Martyr, cor. Main flu. Michael, des. M. Michaen, ker. Miles lough, wa.
Miner, ker. c. Mockarle, tip. Mockay, tip. b. Mocolagh, des. Moenter vary, des.
Moghan flu. Mogholl, wa. M. Mogobert, tip. Mokella, cor. Moleshen, lim.
Mollinax, tip. Mollochdeere, des. Mollogasshe, des. Molloghmona, wa. Mollogh
flu. Molloghen, wa. Monegh, cor. m. Monhard, tip. Monks* cor. b. More, des. c.
More flu. Mores, ker. Moore, des. Moore flu. or Brodwater, des. Mountains
delees, wa. Muskere-Querk, tip. Muskere, cor. Muskery Gaghnogh, ker. Miles,
cor. c. Mysker flu. Myslen head, des.
N
Narra, lim. c. Narrowater, cor. Nashe, lim. c. Nath, cor. b. Nay, tip. b.
Neith, tip b. Never, cor. c. Newcastle, wa. Newcastell kenry, lim. Newcast, wa.
Newchurch, wa. Newtowne, ker. Newtowne, lim. Newtowne, wa. Nicoll, tip. b.
Nody, tip. c. Noght, tip. O. Non, ker. c. Now, tip. b.
O
Ogge, cor. Ogham, lim. S. Owin Oswiliant, des. Ottan, ker. m.
P
Palace, tip. Palace, lim. Palace, wa. Palace, ker. Palace-lough, tip. Passage,
wa. Pelgoran, des. Perles, cor. c. The 12. great Hills of Phelem Ghemadona,
Tip. Phillips, cor. Piltowne, wa. C. Polloguere, Cor. Pollydragh, des. Pollyre,
des. Lord Power, Wa. Pracok, Cor. Pracok, cor.
Q
Quella, cor. B. Point Bally Quella, Wa. Quella, Wa. B.
R
Rabbe, lim. Rabony, lim. Raffenin, cor. Raghanan, lim. Rahust, cor. Ranaker,
tip. Raphone, cor. Rariglas, cor. Rathan, Cor. M. Raton, ker. M. Ray, cor. B.
Ray, cor. C. Redman, cor. C. Renie, cor. B. Renlon, des. I. Rephnogh flu.
Reseletan, cor. Rikard, cor. c. Rimbella flu. Ringer, cor. Ringrango, cor. c.
Rishe Isle, ker. Robe, lim. c. Roch, cor. L. Roch, Tip. B. Rock glaskon, cor.
Romore, lim. Roretogh flu. Rosbrenon, des. Rosse, cor. Rosthyche, cor. John
Reynogh, Wa. The great Ryghes, ker.
S
Salmon Lp, des. Sanan, ker. c. Sartbeg, Tip. Saton, Lim. Seven Castles, cor.
Seal, des. Seron calp, cor. Sewer flu. Sewer flu. Sharen, cor. B. Sheappoly,
cor. Shepes-head, des. Shroe, ker. E. Sibbell* ker. c. Simon, Tip. B. The three
Sisters, ker. Skryne, lim. Skryst, des. Green Skyllyghe, ker. Skyrt, wa. c.
Slew, wa. c. Slew Anerogh, ker. Slewbranogh* Tip. Slewboyne, Wa. Slew dakean or
Paps, des. Slew logher, ker. Slew malora, cor. Slew muskere, des. Slew niesk,
des. Slew noman, Tip. Slowboy klan de Rough, des. Soronned, Tip. Speaking
stone, Wa. Spread, cor. b. Stene, lim. c. Sterland, lim. Straghan, lim. Stramo,
Wa. Stranmore bay, Wa. Carick Sulphyn, Tip. Swylyvant moore, Des. O.
T
Tagnelath, Des. Tammay, lim. Tarne, Tip. C. Tarsne, Tip. Tashell, Tip. Tebben,
cor. B. Templehoran, Tip. Templemore, Tip. Terseney, lim. B. Thomas, lim. B.
Traghware, des. M. Tranakan, cor. Tray, Wa. Tremayne, Wa. Trena, cor. Tollagh,
cor. Tomalegh, cor. M. Tomelegh flu. Toragh flu. Torbet, lim. c. Torloboy, lim.
Totes, cor. b. Town, des. Typpelbragny, Tip.
V
Vakere, Wa. Valentia Island, ker. Ventray, ker. Vochbeg, Tip. Voch, cor.
W
WATERFORD, Wa. Waterford haven, Wa. Wenis, des. I. Westell, wa. B.
Whitechurch, cor. White-knight, wa. White-knight, lim. Wilton, lim. B. Weday,
des. E. Wodings, Tip. B.
Y
Yearow, Tip. Youghall, cor. Youghall, haven, Wa.
THIS Country, the Natives call Leighnigh, The bounds.
the Britains Lein; in Latin Lagenia; in the ancient lives of the Saints,
Lagen; and in English, Leinster. It lies Eastward along Hibernicunt Sea: on
Connaught-side Westward it is bounded with the River Shanon; the North with
the Territory of Louth, and the South with part of the Province of Munster.
This County butteth upon England, as Mounster and Connaught do upon Spain.

The form.
(2) The form thereof is triangle, and sides not much unequal, from her
South-East unto the West-point about eighty miles, from thence to her
North-West about seventie miles, and her East-Coast along the Irish Seashore,
eighty: the circumference upon two hundred and seventie miles.

The Air.
(3) The Air is clear and gentle, mixed with a temperate disposition, yielding
neither extremity of heat or cold, according to the seasonable times of the
year, and the natural condition of the Continent. The Soil is generally
fruitful, plentiful both in Fish and Flesh, The Soil.
and in other victuals, as Butter, Cheese, and Milk. It is fertile in Corn,
Cattle, and pasture grounds, and would be much more, if the husbandman did but
apply his industry, to which he is invited by the commodiousnesse of the
Country. It is well watered with Rivers, and for the most part well wooded,
except the County of Divelin, Divelin destitute of word.
which complains much of that want, being so destitute of wood, that they are
compelled to use a clammy kind of fat turfe for their fuel, or Sea-coale
brought out of England.

(4) The Inhabitants of these parts in Ptolemies days were the Brigantes,
Inhabitants.
Menapii, Cauci, and Blani; from which Blani may seem to be derived and
contracted the latter and modern names of this Country, Lein, Leighnigh, and
Leinster, The Menapii (as the name does after a sort imply) came from the
Menapians, a Nation in Low Germany, that dwelt by the Seacoasts. These
Brigantes, called also Brigantes, Florianus del Campo (a Spaniard) labors to
fetch from the Brigants of his own Country, of whom an ancient City in Spain
(called Brigantia) took the name. But they may seem rather to derive their
denomination from the River Birgus, about which they inhabited; for to this the
very name is almost sufficient to persuade us.

Commodities.
(5) The Commodities of this Country do chiefly consist in Cattle, Sea-fowle,
and Fish. It breeds many excellent good horses, called Irish Hobbies, which
have not the same pace that other horses have in their course, but a soft and
round amble, setting very easily.

(6) This Country has in it three Rivers of note, termed in old time the three
Sisters, The three Sisters.
Shour, Neor, and Barraeo, which issue out of the huge Mountain (called by
Giraldus, Bladinae Montes) as out of their mothers womb, and from their rising
tops descending with a downfall into several Channels, before they empty
themselves into the Ocean, join hand in hand all together in a mutual league
and combination.

The Grounds
(7) Places very dangerous for shipping, are certain slats and shallowes in the
Sea, that lie over against Holy-point, which the Mariners call the Grounds.
Also the shelves of sand that lie a great way in length opposite to Newcastle,
which overlooketh them into the Sea from the top of an high hill adjoining.

(8) In this Province are placed many fair and wealthy Towns, Kilkenny.
as Kilkenny, which for a Borough Town excels all the midland Buroughs in
this Island* Kildare, Kildare.
which is adorned with an Episcopal See, and much graced in the first infancy
of the Irish Church, by reason of Saint Bridgid a venerable Virgin, had in
great account and estimation for her virginity and devotion, as who was the
Disciple of Saint Patricke of so great fame, renown, and antiquity: also
Weisford (a name given unto it by these Germans, Wexford.
whom the Irish term Oustmans) a town though inferior to some, yet as
memorable as any, for that it became the first Colony of the English, and did
first submit it self unto their protection, being assaulted by Fitz-Stephen, a
Captain worthily made famous for his valor and magnanimity.

Divelin.
(9) But the City which fame may justly celebrate alone, beyond all the Cities
or Towns in Ireland, is that which we call Divelin, Ptolemie Eblana, the
Latinists Dublinium, and Dublinia; the West-Britaines, Dinas Dulin; the
English-Saxons in times past. Duplin; and the Irish, Balacleigh, that is, the
Town upon hurdles: for it is reported that the place being fennish and
moorish, when it first began to be builded, the foundation was laid upon
hurdles.

The antiquity.
(10) That it is ancient, is persuaded by the authority of Ptolemie. That it
was grievously rent and dismembered in the tumultuous wars of the Danes, and
brought afterward under the subjection of Eadgar King of England, (which his
Charter also confirms, wherein he calls it the noble City of Ireland) is
written by Saxo Grammaticus. Divelin (...) by Ha^^^^ K. of England.
That it was built by Harold of Norway, which may seem to be Harold Harfager,
when he had brought the greatest part of Ireland into an awful obedience unto
him, we read in the life of Griffeth ap Sinan Prince of Wales. At length it
yielded unto the valor and protection of the English, at their first arrival
into Ireland, by whom it was manfully defended from the fierce assaults as well
of Auscoulph Prince of the Dublinians, as afterward of Gottard King of the
Isles: since which time it has still augmented her flourishing estate, and
given approved testimony of her faith and loyalty to the Crown of England, in
the times of any tumultuous straights and commotions.

(11) This is the royal seat of Ireland, Divelin is the Royal seat of Ireland.
strong in her munition, beautiful in her buildings, and (for the quantity)
matchable to many other Cities, frequent for traffic and intercourse of
Merchants. In the East Suburbs, Henry the second, Henry the second.
King of England (as Hoveden reports) caused a royal Palace to be erected:
and Henry Loundres, Archbishop of Divelin, Henry Loundres.
built a storehouse about the year of Christ 1220. Not far from it is the
beautiful College consecrated unto the name of the holy Trinity, which
Queen Elizabeth of famous memory, dignified with the privileges of an
University. The Church of S. Patricke being much enlarged by King John, John
Comin Archbishop of Divel^^.
was by John Comin Archbishop of Dubline, borne at Euesham in England, first
ordained to be a Church of Prebends in the year 1191. It does at this day
maintain a Deane, a Chanter, a Chancellor, a Treasurer, two Archdeacons, and
twenty-two Prebendaries.

This City in times past, for the due administration of Civil Government, had
a Provost for the chief Magistrate. But in the year of man's Redemption 1409.
Henry the fourth.
King Henry the fourth granted them liberty to choose every year a Mayor and
two Bailiffes, Edward the sixth.
and that the Mayor should have a guilt sword carried before him for ever. And
King Edward the sixth (to heap more honor upon this place) changed the two
Bailiffes afterward into Sheriffs: so that there is not any thing here
wanting that may serve to make the estate of a City most flourishing.

(12) As the people of this County do about the neighboring parts of Divelin
come nearest unto the civil conditions and orderly subjection of the English:
The Irish mischievous one against another.
so in places farther off they are more tumultuous, being at deadly feuds
amongst themselves, committing oft-times Man-slaughters one upon another, and
working their own mischiefs by mutual wrongs: The Irish wast Leinster.
for so the Irish of Leinster wasted Leinster with many Towns in the same
Province in the year 1294. And in the year 1301. the men of Leinster in like
manner raised a war in the winter season, setting on fire the Town of
Wykinlo, Rathdon, and others, working their own plague and punishment by
burning up their sustenance, The Irish of Leinster raise war.
and losing their Castle by depredation.

(13) Matter of observation, and no less admiration among them, The Giants
Dance.
is the Giants dance, commonly so called, and so much talked of, which Merlin
is said by Art Magic to have translated out of this. Territory unto Salisburie
Plain: which how true it is, I leave to the vain believers of miracles, and to
the credulous observers of antiquity.

(14) In this County have been erected many famous Monasteries, The Religious
places.
Abbeys, and religious houses, consecrated to devout and holy purposes: as the
Monastery of Saint Mary's of Oustmanby, founded for preaching Friars, unto
which of late days the Judicial Courts of the Kingdom have been translated:
also the magnificent Abbey called S. Thomas Court at Dublin, builded and
endowed in times past with many large privileges and revenewes of King Henry
the second, in expiation of the murder of Thomas Archbishop of Canterbury.
Likewise Tinteru Monastery, or the notable Abbey which William Marshall Earl
of Pembroke founded and called De voto, for that he had vowed to God (being
tossed at Sea with many a fore and dangerous tempest) to erect an Abbey
wheresoever he came to land, and being (after shipwreck) cast upon land in this
place, he made performance of his vow accordingly.

This Province contains the Counties of Kilkenny, Caterloge, Queens County,
Kings County, Kildare, East Mead, West Mead, Weisford, and Dublin (to say
nothing of Wicklo and Fernes, which either be already, or else are to be
annexed unto it) and subdivided into fifteen Market Towns. Market Towns.
It has been fortified with the strength of many Castles against the power of
enemies, and is thus divided: Counties, East Mead. Caterlough. Kildare. West
Mead. Queens County. Weisford. Kilkenny. Kings County. Dublin.

map of the county of Leinster THE COUNTY OF LEINSTER with THE CITY DUBLIN
Described


The Division of LE^NSTER.
1. East Mead. 2. West Mead. 3. Dublin. 4. Kildare. 5. Kings County. 6.
Queens County. 7. Ki-kenny. 8. Cateriagh. 9. Wexford.
A
Areden, East Mead. B Rock Abill. Dublin. ABOY, East Mead. Adama, Wexford. B
Affalla, K. County. Agard, Dublin. Aggregate, Q County. Agra, East M. Akane,
East M. Alen, East m. B Alice, Killed. B Knock Almasa, East m.
Almush, East m. Anke^ Cater. B Anley VVex. B Anna, Killed. B Anna hill, Dub.
Annex, Kilk. Anney Flu, West m. Aran, West m. B Arbraken, East m. Arcanan,
VVex^. Arch^r, West. m. B Archer, Kilk. B Archer hill, Kilk. Ardekell, Kilk.
Ardgate, Q County. Ardragh, East m. AREKLO, Cater. Arga, Kilk. Argath, Dublin.
Arklon, Q County. Armagh, East m. Artaraght, West m. Aspek, West m. B
Astheton, Q County. Ass, East m. Athe, Killed. Auley, Dublin.
B
Babell, Wexford. Bacon, East m. Bagand^^onne, VVexf. Baghill, Dublin. B
Balamore, VVex. Balchare, K. County. Balliner, East m. Mac Ballinglas, Killed.
Balougby, East m. Balrothery, Dublin. Balt Kilk. Bannogh. VVex. Bannough bay,
VVex. Barbe, Killed. B Barde, Killed. B Batter, Killed. B Barnaby, K County. S.
Barnaby ^itz Patrick, Queen County. Barnes, VVex. B Baron, Dublin. Barrets,
VVex. Barrow Flu, Q County. Barrow flu, VVex. Barton, Killed. B Basky, West m. B
Bedell, East m. Beg, VVex. B Beg Island, VVex. Bego, Killed. B Beldengon, Dublin.
Belgar, Dublin. Belgar, East m. Mac Belif, East m.
Bellahon, East m. Bellak^n, K County. Bengue^e, Kilk. Benet, Kilk. Bernes,
Cater. Berie, K County. B Betin, West m. B Bishops Court, Kilk. Blackhaule,
East m. Blackhaule, Dublin. Blackm^rres, Dublin. B^acrath, Killed. Blackrock,
VVex. Blakin, West m. Blaky, West m. Blewroe, Dublin. Bola, Kilk. B Bola,
Kilk. B Bolto^, Killed. Bonney, VVex. B Bonand, Cater. Bonemane, Q County. C S.
Benets I^le, Dub.
Borace, Kilk. Bo^^o, West m. Boye^, Dublin. Boyne flu, Killed. Boyne flu, Q
County. Boyne flu, East m. Boyne flu, East m. B^ackland K County. B^anock,
West m. B B^auner, VVex. B B^ay flu, Dublin. ^. Bray, Dublin.
B^ayne, West m. B^eack, East m. B^enne, West m. C B^enne, Dublin. O Brenno,
VVex. B Brennog, West m. B Bremore, Dublin. Bretherton, East m. B^idge, Kilk.
Brown, Killed. B Brown, Kilk. B Brown, VVexf. C Brown, VVexf. C Brown,
VVexf. C Bryne, West m. O Bu^gage, Dublin. Bu^ley, K County. B Burn Church,
Kilk. Burt Kilk. B Burwaine, Killed. Butler, VVex. B Burton, Dublin.
C
Cabelston, Dublin. Caden, D^blin. Cad^gh, Kilk. B Calen, VVex. Callan, Kilk.
Camenth, Dublin. Canan, Dublin. Canenos, Cater. Cantwell, K^^k. C Cantwell,
K^^k. C Cap, Wex. CARBRE, Killed. Careboy, VVe^^ m. Mac Ca^eles, Kilk. S Peter
Carew, Kilk.
Carik, East m. Carik, VVex. Carikb^ak, Cater. Carikmorrow, Dublin. Carichu^k,
Dublin. Carikok, Q County. Carne Wex. Carolus, K County. O Carow, West m. B
Carth, Dublin. C Caryk new, VVex. Carykett, Killed. Carundine, Q County.
Caseroge, East M. Casin, East M. B Milk Castle, Kilk.
Castleton, Wex. Castleton, Q County. CATERLAGH, Killed. Caterlatth, Kilk. Cavan,
Dublin. Caverno, Cater. Cayth ycam, Kilk. Ceralway, Killed. Church, East M. B
Churley, East M. Claest, Wex. Clancolman, West M. Clandalke, Dublin.
Clanebotane, Q County. Clanmore, Cater. Clan Iores alias Bremecham, Killed.
Clanmore, Killed. Clanmore, Cater. C Clanmollen, Cater. Clan^af Dublin. Vper
Claragh, Kilk.
Claragh, Kil^. S. Clare, Dublin.
Clarence, East M. Cloe, K County. Cloga^an, West M. Cloghan, West m.
Cloghgreenand, Kilk. Cloghkendel, Kilk. Cloghmore, Kilk. Cloghnogh, West M.
Cloglerish, Kilk. Clomoghan, K County. Clomolyn, West m. Clogran, East m.
Clonbogh, Kilk. Clone, Q County. Clone, Kilk. Clone, Kilk. Clone, VVex.
Clonebelek, K County. Clonebolk, K County. Clone de Cow, Q Coun. Clonedewey, K
County. Clonedog-neckly, Wex. Clonegone, K County. Clonekene, Killed. Clonelin, K
County. Clonelose, West M. Clonewel, West M. Clonemoney, Kilk. Clonmore, Kilk.
Clonemore, K County. Clonemuse, Kilk. Clonemyn, Kilk. Clonemine, Killed. Clone
mulend, K County. Clonen, West M. Clonenmore, Dublin Cloney, Killed. Cloney,
West M. Clonogh, Killed. Clonogoskin, East M. Clon^, Wex. Coch, West M. B
Coghan, K County. Coghan, Killed. Colcore, K County. Cole, East M. B Cole, West
M. B Coledoghra, West m. Colma^han, Q County. Colmallen, East m. Cologh, Kilk.
Coltame, Dublin Mac Colyn. K. County. Colynogh. Q County. Combres, West m.
Conaugh, Dublin. Coneboy, West m. Rose Conel, Q County.
Cone^, Wex. Consall, West m. Conogherbo, Killed. Consile, Kilk. Conycarum,
Kilk. Corbell, East m. Mac Corbelyle, Q Co. Corbely, Dublin. Corkey, West m.
Corlus, East m. B Coroghill, Kilk. S. Cort. Dublin. Courhonon, VVex. Coure,
East M. Coupe, East M. Court, West m. B Coutton, Clay, Q Coun. Cotland. Killed.
Coin, K County. B Crabboy, East m. Cradok, Killed. Craghallillo, Dublin. Croghan
hill, K County. Croghoven, West m. Cromlyn, Dublin. Crosekell, East m.
Crossedre, West m.
D
Mac Damore, Wex. Daminkin, West M. Darro, Q County. Darses, West M. Darvers,
West m. B Degan, VVex. Mac Dei, Dublin. Delvin, West m. C Denigary, Killed. Mac
Dermond, Cater. Dese^^, Q County. Great Dingham, Kilk. Dodn Reghan, Q Coun.
Dodingten, Killed. Doghill, K County. Dolar, East m. B Dolknew, Dublin. Domnany,
Q County. Domin, Killed. C Donare, East M. Done, VVex. B Done, K County. B
Done, Q County. O Donnebany, VVex. Donebat, Dublin. Donebet flu, Kilk.
Donodtone, Dublin. Donefert, Killed. Donektle, West m. Donekey, Kilk. Donelaw,
Killed. Donelbrody, VVex. Donomo^e, Kilk. Donosane, East m. Donesoghk, Dublin.
Donoghmore, Q County. Dronogernogh, Wex. Donomo, VVex. Donsaghlin, East m.
Dord, West m. B Dord, Dublin. B Doro flu, Dublin. Doro flu, Q County. Does,
East m. B Dovoghmore, East m. Drakeland, Kilk. Dramdore, Kilk. Drimnogh, VVex.
Drokin, Kilk. Dromboy, East m. Dromeconrogh, Dub. Dromeketyn, Kilk. Dromrayne,
West m. Dromrow, Kilk. Drone, Kilk. O Dronney, East m. B Drymneg, Dublin.
Dublin haven, Dublin. DVBLIN, Dublin. Dulyek, East m. B Dumfert, Kilk.
Dungarvan, Kilk. Dunlaglin, Kilk. Duren, East m. B Duve flu, Killed.
E
Edomana, Dublin. S. Edmond Batler, Cat. Edmunds, West m. B Enon, Kilk.
Eny^eary, VVex. Mac Eren, Q. County. Esker flu, K County.
F
Facacrow, Dublin. Faltren, Dublin. Farleco, West m. B Farthing, West m. B
Fedan, K County. Fedo^rogh Cater. Fe^herd, VVex. Field, Dublin. B Finart, West
m. Fiuck^, Killed. B Forman, Dublin. B Foskin, Killed. B Fox, VVe^^ m. O Frein,
VVex. B Freers, Cater. B Frequens, East m. Frompul, Killed. Fronton, VVex.
Fuller, Killed. B Fuller, Kil^. Fingall, Dublin.
G
Lease Gallen, Q County. Gallon flu, Kilk. Galt^e, East m. Galway, East m.
Garehon, Dublin. Garland East m. B Garmarstou, East m. Garran, Kilk. Garston,
East m. Gart, East m. Gerard, East m. B Geregh, VVex. B Ghelayt, VVex. B
Gheragh. Cater. Ghesell, Q County. GHILDARE, Killed. Gibbes, East m. B Gilbert,
West m. Glandelour, Dublin. Glarard, K County. Glare, West m. Mac Glarkarick,
Wex.
Glashere, Kilk. Glashere, Killed. Glashen, East m. Glaskar, West m. Glasnephin,
Dublin. Glayderen, K. County. B Glogh, Kilk. Glorum, Kilk. Goely, VVex. B
Gown, East m. B Grace Castle. Q County. Grace dew, Dublin. Grace Court, Kilk.
Grace Orchard, VVex. Garlough, Dublin. Mac Gray, Kilk.
Gray, K County. C Grand, Q County. B Granedonkin, Dublin. Grange, Kilk.
Grange, Q County. Grangefort, Cater. Grangeketh, East m. Grangencorne, Killed.
Grany Ratole, Killed. Gregan West m. Gregh, West m. Grentho^d, VVex. Bay of
Greenhord, VVex. Grenek, Dublin. Grenond, Kilk. Greward, East m. Grislin,
Dublin. Groma, Kilk. Guenere, Dublin. Gurchens, VVex.
H
Hagha, Kilk. Haha dew, Cater. Haly, K County. Haly, K County. Halywood,
Dublin. Hamond, Cater. C Hannacle, Q County. Hannacat Q County. Hannaynotlay,
Kilk. Hantney, West m. Herbert, Killed. B Herbert, West m. B Hardley, Dublin.
Hap Belgr^w, VVex. B Hastela, Q. County. B Haley, VVex. B Hathen, West m. B
Haynes, West m. B Hearne, VVex. B Heper, East m. Helpa, VVex. Henogh, West m.
B Henorclay, Dublin. C Herbert, West m. B Herell, Q County. Heren, East m. B
Mac Heren, Q. County.
Hesk^n, VVex. Hesterbeg, K. County. Hew, East m. B Heys, VVex. B H^ckens K^ld.
B Hoke, VVex. Holiwood, Dublin. Hoson, West m. B Horsey, VVex. B Ho^h^^l, K
County. Hotrogh, West m. Houth, Dublin. Howell, Kilk. C Hoyn, West m. B
Hoyre, VVex. B Hugh, Kilk. B Hu^k, Killed. B
I
I Mac Idway, Dublin. Iefferey, Dublin. B Iefferey, West m. B Hugh mac Ihanc,
Dublin. Ihan villa, Kilk. Ihane^, Q County. Ihon, Cater. B Inch Roure, Q
County. Inch que^e, Killed. Ihon, West m. B Jordan, East m. Irish, West m. B
Irlands eye, Dublin. Joh, Dublin. B Juhan, East m. Juhan, East m. B
K
Kaerdess, K^lk. Mac Kalraine, Dublin. Karaldgrange, Dublin. Karne, West m. Can
Karn^al karone, Wex. Kathanghan, Killed. Katohome, Killed. Kayn donkin, Kilk.
Kenynogh, Q. County. Ke^se, Kilk. B Kela, Kilk. B Kelkone, Wex. Kelkolen, Killed.
Kellean, Wex. Kellean, East m. Kellegh, K County. Kellenem, Killed. Kelles, East
m. Keile^, Kilk. Kell, Killed. B Kelhardseni, East m. Kelkenny, West m. Kelrue,
Dublin. Kelkery, West m. Kenne, K County. Kettenen, Wex. Kevegade, West m.
Kilbrakin, Q County. Kilbred, East m. Kilbrew, East m. Kilbery, East m.
Kilbride, West m. Kilbrid, K County. Kileamfort, Q. County. Kilcohan, Wex.
Kilcloc, Cater. Kilcock, Killed. Kilcomin, Dublin. Kilconin, K. County. Kilcoran,
K County. Kildag, East m. Kildernam, Dublin. Kildowan, Killed. Kildrogh, Killed.
Kiltone, Kilk. Kilfield, Killed. Kilgall, Killed. Kilgo, East m. Kilgober, Dublin.
Kilgoghan, K County. Kilgormok, K. County. Kilhaste, Dublin. Kilhester, Dublin.
Kilhill, K. County. Kilhobok, Wex. Kilhobok, K County. Kilicrosse, East m.
Kilkan, Q. County. Killackan* Kilk. Killank, Q. County. Killare, East m.
Kilcore, Killed. Killegore, Q. Count. Killigult Cater. Killina, Q County.
Killinan, West m. Killine, East m. Killinnen, West m. KILLKENNY, Kilk.
Killoghan, Wex. Kill^ride, West m. Kilmacant, K. County. Kilmala^way, Dublin.
Kilmacok, Killed. Kilmanan, Dublin. Kilma^og, East m. Kilmerin, Dublin. Kilmory,
Kilk. Kilmonog, West m. Kilnock, Cater. Kilpatr^ck, Wex. Kilpavick, West m.
Kilsaghlin, Dublin. Kilsaynen, Kilk. Kilshorn, Wex. Kiltober, K County.
Kiltogh, Kilk. Kiltork, Wex. Kilvacock, Kilk. Mac Kilcore, K Coun
King, East m. B KINGSTOWNE, K. Co. Kingstogher, Kilk. Kingsalough, Cater.
Kitchen, Q County. B Knalmogh, West m. Knock Seon, K. County. Knockbourne,
Kilk. Knockbrenack, Kilk. Knoger, East m. Knockarchall, Killed. Knocknee, Cater.
Knockbebay, West m. Knock, Dublin. C Knockyn, Dublin. Kollogh, West m.
Knoghall, Kilk. Kyne, Q County. O Kyfraen, Wex. Kyll^an, West m. Kyrock, Wex.
L
Lachash, Killed. Lackan, Wex. B Lackin, K. County. Lacy* West m. B Ladarath,
East m. Ladones, West m. B Lady, Killed. B Mac our Lady grace, Kilk. Lagen, East
m. LAGHLYN Idogh, Kilk. Lahant, Kilk. Lambey, Dublin. Lemevannon, K County.
Lassenhaul, Dublin. Lease, Q County. Le^^e flu, Kilk. Lench, Kilk. B Leniston,
Dublin. S Leonard, Wex. Lever* ^ County. ^ Lestee flu, Killed. Lewmanhan, K
County. Lilmester, Q County. Lions, Killed. C Lismalin, West m. L^stouen, K^^^.
Lockbay, West m. Locka^* West m. B Logh Q County. C Loghten Dublin. C Lommash,
K County. Long^^^, Dublin. Longwood, East m. Lo^d. Killed. B Loughmeskyn, Wex.
Lowater, East m. B Lowater, Kilk. Lu^k Dublin. Lutcrell, Killed. B Lylin, Killed.
Ly^ges, Wex. C Lysnall, West m.
M
O Magah, West m. O Mahogagan, West m. O Magohla, K. County. Malahedert,
Dublin. O Malalaghlin, West m. Malcheal, Dublin. Malyn, Dublin. Mand, East M. B
Marag, West m. Martin, West m. B Martin, East m. B Mass, East m. B Mass, West
m. B I Mayle, Dublin. Megham, Kilk. O Meloy, K. County. Merewell, Killed. Merin,
Dublin. Mermine, Wex. Mestall. Q County. C Minashell, West m. Mican, Kilk. B
Miche^e, East m. Middle-grounds, Dub. Milag, West m. Great Milk Castle, Kilk.
Miltowne, West m. Minoth, Killed. Mirath, East m. Molle, Kilk. Molle, Cater.
Molen, West m. B Mologh, Dublin. MOLINGAR, West m. Mollita, K County. Mollosy,
East m. C Mollogh, East m. O Mocrough, Wex. Monceton, East m. Moneton, Dublin.
Moneyhone, Kilk. Montgaret, Wex. Lord Mountgaret, Wex. More, West m. C Mores, Q
County. B Morisheller, Killed. Mublin haven, West m. Mac Multiforme, West m.
N
Nanney flu. East m. Naroghmere, Killed. Nash, Killed. C Nauant, East m. Nail,
Dublin. Negler, East m. Newton, Dublin. New, West m. B New, Wex. B New, West m.
C New, Kilk. B New, East m. C New, West m. C New Abbey, Killed. Newbayne, Wex.
Newcastle, Dublin. M Newna, East m. Newtowne, Cater. Newtowne, Cater. Mork
Newton, East m. Neygate, Kilk. Northgrounds, Dublin. Nowall, West m. C Nure
flu, Q County. Nur flu, Kilk.
O
Offere, Q County. Old court, Dublin Fort Only, Cater. Earl of Ormond, Cater.
Owin Mac Hugh, K. Co.
P
Palace, K County. Paltrangan, Wex. Park, Kilk. C Hole Patrick, Dublin. S
Patricks land, Dub. S. Patrick, East m. Pain, Cater. B Pain, Killed. B Pain,
East m. B Paynster, East m. B Peers, Dublin. B Pers, East m. B Petrick Island,
Dublin. Mac Pain, Q County. Phaloghbantre, Wex. Place, East m. Polford, Wex.
Polilester, East m. Polmonton, Cater. Pol^ome K^^k. Pokin, Killed. B Potter,
Dublin. B Potteragh, Kilk. S Poules, Kilk. Pou^es Court, Dublin. Prou^, East m.
B
Q
QVEENS town, Q Cou. Quilibet, Killed. Qu^licum, Q County. Grang. Quimhert, Killed.
R
Rabelta, Kilk. Rabrody, Killed. Racarbo, Kilk. Rahannan Wex. Raheren, Dublin.
Rahn, East m. Ra^o, Cater. Rakavan, Kilk. Raleath, East m. B Ramney, Wexford.
The Ram, Wex.
Ramore, Dublin. Ram^grang, Wex. Rand^a, Cater. Loagh Ranmore, East m. Raphan,
East m. Raphok, Kilk. Raaspek, West m. Rasalough, Killed. Raskoe, West m. Raspak,
Wex. Rath patrick, Kilk. Rathalyn, Kilk. Ratoth, Dublin. Ravore, East m.
Rawire, West m. Ray, K County. Raydon, Dublin. C Raygh, We^^ m. B Ray^on, K.
County. Raymanogh, Q County. Raymund Ogg, K* Coun. Rain, K County. O Reban, Q
County. Recog, Killed. Recohel, West m. Read, East m. B Ree, West m. B Rehela,
Wex. Rehul, Dublin. Remyne, Dublin. Richard, Killed. B Riket, East m. C Rivers,
East m. B Robin, West m. B Roch, Dublin. Roch, K^lk. C Roc. William, Wex.
Rocfall, Kilk. Ro^, Killed. Ro^llyn, Kilk. Rogers, Dublin. Rogormley, East m.
Rohewall, Dublin. Rokel^, Kilk. B Rokhel, Kilk. Roone, West m. B M Rosse, West
m. ROSSE, VVex. Old Rosse, VVex. Rose, East m. B Rose brenno, Q County. Rose
canon, K^^k. Rossec^ea, K County. Rose Garland, Wex. Rosse Laier, Wex.
Rossenals, Q. County. Roseperot, Killed. Rostall, Kilk. Roy, K County. Royne, Q
County. B Royne, Wex. B Roughlin, Kilk. Rou^e, Kilk. Ruder, Dublin. C The
Rushe, Wex.
Ruskey, East m. Knock Ruskey, East m. Ru^^ell, West m. B Ryne flu, East m.
S
Sagard, Dublin. Sanham, Killed. Sannogh, West m. Saret, Q County. Saul, East m.
C Seaton, Dublin. Seden, East m. Selkillo, Kilk. Shelhela, Cater. Shemalyn,
Wex. Shenkin, Dublin. She^ogray, Q County. Sherney, Dublin. B Shewleg, West m.
B Shiphold, Wex. Shopland, Wex. Simylin, Cater. Si^y^k, Q County. Skagh, Killed.
B Skare, VVex. Ska^lock, Killed. B Skark, Cater. Ski^es, Dublin. Skatlok, West
m. B Sk^yne, East m. Skynik, Q County. Slane flu, Dublin. Slain, East m.
Slep^hill, Q County. Slewboy, Killed. Slewcotten, Wex. Slewmerger, Kilk. S Smyth,
East m. So^ue^, East m. B So^k^n, Kilk. Southgrounds, Wex. Speia, K^lk. B
Stamelyn, Dublin. Stancourt, Kilk. Stepleton, East m. Stevens, Kil^. B Steven,
East m. S Stocknelost, Wex. Stokes, West m. B Stonehouse, Wex. Stonegrang,
Dublin. Sutton, Killed. B Sword, Dublin. Knock Swissin, Cater. Symlyn, Cater.
Synnor, Wex. Mac Syrie, K County.
T
Tabraken, Kilk. Ta^un hanc, Wex. Taght, East m. B Tagnam, Wex. B Talbot,
Dublin. B Tank^rd, Q County. Tec^oghan, East m. Teg, VVex. B Temple, Kilk.
Temple gall, VVex. Tenaghill* Wex. Ten^kell, Q County. Tentarne, VVex. Terill,
West m. B Ternes, Wex. Mac Terpon, Kilk. Old Terpon, Kilk. Terra viventium, K
C^. Terragh, East m. C Thomas, K^ld. B Thomas Q County. B Owen Thomas, Kilk.
Tho^dercourt, K^lk. Theord, W^x. Tho^le^, Q County. B Three Castles, D^b. C
Tobe, Kilk. Tobbe, Dublin. Tobber daily, K. County. Togger, K County, Toghcoly
cony, Cater. Toghcolinogh, Carter. Togher, East m. C Tollogh, Kilk. Tollogh,
Killed. Tollogh Dublin. Tollogh, Dublin. Tollogh, East m. Tollogh, Cater.
Tologhah, Kilk. Tolloghtoron, Kilk. Tolven, Kilk. B Tomond, Wex. Tonolla, West
m. Tomegard, Wex. Tonmono, West m. Mac Tonsternog, West m. Torno, Dublin. Mac
Toure, West M. Tou^e of the Hoke, VVex. Trever. East M. Trimbleston, East M.
Trussan, Killed. TRYME, East M. Tully, Killed. Tuscard, Wex* B Tute, West M.
Tymolog, Dublin.
V
Mac Vadock, Cater. Mac Vala, Killed. C Vanney, K^ld. B Ve^a, West m.
W
C Walch, Killed. B Walter. West M. Wardhill, East M. C Warren, Killed. B Warren,
East M. C Warren, Kilk. B Water, Kilk. Water Castle, Q County. B Water, East M.
Waton Grove, Kilk. Wemed, East M. WEXFORD, Wex. Wexford Haven, VVex. B Wey, Q
County. C White, Kl. Wickloe flu, Dublin. WICKLO, Dublin. B Wildock, East M. B
William, East M. B William, East M. B William, Cater. William, West M. B
Wincourt, East M. Wintered, Q County. B Woghan, Dublin. Wogher heart, Killed.
Woodstock, Killed.
Y
B Yage, Killed.
CHAPTER IIII.
The bounds.
THis Province named by Giraldus Cambrensis Conachtia, and Conatia, by the
Irish, Conaughty, and by Englishmen, Connaught: is bounded Eastward, with part
of the County of Leinster; Northward, with part of Vlster; Westward, with the
West maine Ocean; and on the South, it is confined with a part of the Province
of Mounster, closed in with the River Shennon, and butting against the Kingdom
of Spain.

The form.
(2) The form thereof is long, and toward the North and South ends, thin and
narrow; but as it grows toward the middle, from either part it waxes still
bigger and bigger: exceeding in length from the River Shennon in her South, to
Enis Kelling in her North, 126. miles, and the broadest part is from Tromer in
her East, to Barragh-Bay in her West, containing above fourscore. The whole in
circuit and compass is above four hundred miles.

Air.
(3) The air is not altogether so pure and clear, as in the other Provinces of
Ireland, by reason of certain moist places (covered over with grass) which of
their softness are usually termed Boghes, both dangerous, and full of vaporous
and foggy mists.

Soil.
(4) This County as it is divided into several portions, so is every portion
severally commended for the soil, according to the seasonable times of the
year. Twomond
Twomond or the County Clare, is said to be a Country so conveniently
situated, that either from the Sea or Soil there can be nothing wished for
more, then what it does naturally afford of it self, were but the industry of
the Inhabitants answerable to the rest. Galway.
Galway is a land very thankful to the painful husbandman, and no less
commodious and profitable to the Shepherd. Maio, Maio.
in the Roman Provincial called Mageo, is replenished both with pleasure and
fertility, abundantly rich in Cattle, Slego.
Dear, Hawks, and plenty of Honey. Slego (coasting upon the Sea) is a
plenteous Country for feeding and raising of Cattle. Le-Trim.
Le-Trim (a place rising up thorowout with hills) is so full of rank grass
and forage, that (as Solinus reports) if cattle were not kept sometimes from
grasing, their fullness would endanger them. And Roscomen is a Territory,
Roscomen.
for the most part plain and fruitful, feeding many Herdes of cattle, and
with mean husbandry and tillage, yielding plenty of corn. As every particular
part is thus severally profitable by inbred commodities; so is it no less
commended (in the generality) for the many accommodate and fit Bays, Creekes,
and navigable Rivers, lying upon her Seacoasts, that after a sort invite and
provoke the inhabitants to Navigation.

The ancient Inhabitants.
(5) Such as in ancient time made their abode and habitations in this Province,
were the GANGANI, who were also called CONCANI, AVTERI, and NAGNATA^. As the
Luceni (that were next neighbors unto them) came from the Lucensii, (in
Spain) so those Gangani and Concani may seem also to have fetched their
derivation from the Concani (a Nation of the self-same Country) both by the
affinity of name, and vicinitie of place. In Strabo, according to the
diversity of reading, the same people are named Coniaci and Conisci: and
Silius testifies them at the first to have been Scythians, and to have used
ordinarily to drink horses blood (a thing nothing strange among the wild
Irish even of late days.) And some may also happily suppose that the Irish
name Conaughty, was compounded of Concani and Nagnatae: Howsoever, it is sure
that these were the ancient Inhabitants of this Country, as is to be seen in
Ptolemie.

The City of Galway.
(6) The principal City of this Province, and which may worthily be accounted
the third in Ireland, is Galway, in Irish, Gallive, built in manner much like
to a Tower. It is dignified with a Bishops See, and is much frequented with
Merchants, by reason whereof, and the benefit of the Road and Haven, it is
gainefull to the Inhabitants through traffic and exchange of rich
Commodities, both by Sea and Land. Not far from which, near the West-shoare
that lies indented with small in-lets and out-lets, in a rue, are the Islands
called Arran, The Islands called Arran.
of which many a foolish fable goes, as if they were the Islands of the living,
wherein none dyed at any time, or were subject to mortality; which is as
superstitious an observation, as that used in some other corners of the
Country, A superstitious observation.
where the people leave the right arms of their Infants males unchristned (as
they term it) to the end that at any time afterward, they may give a more
deadly and ungracious blow when they strike: which things do not only show
how palpably they are carried away by traditious obscurities, but do also
intimate how full their hearts be of inveterate revenge.

(7) This Province presents no matter more worthy of memory, The battle of
Knoc-toe,
then the Battle of Knoc-toe (that is) The hill of axes, under which, the
greatest rabble of Rebels, that were ever seen before in Ireland, (raised and
gathered together by the Arch-Rebels of that time, An. D. 1516.
William Burk O-Brien, Mac-Nemare, and O-Carrol) were after a bloody overthrow
discomfited and put to flight by the noble service of Girald-Fitz Girald Earl
of Gildare. And the suppression of certain Irish (the posterity of
Mac-William) who usurping a tyranny in these parts, The rebellion of the
posterity of Mac-William.
raged sometimes upon themselves, with mutual injuries, and oppressed the poor
people a long time with extorting, pilling, and spoiling; so as they left
scarce one house in the country unrifled, or unrased; but were bridled and
repressed (even in our remembrance) by the severitie and resolution of the
Commissioner of those times, Sir Richard Bingham.
who in his wisdom and policy well understood that their excessive
insolence, and those their unjust doings, would be a means to draw the people
away from the due obedien^ to their Prince: such therefore as refused to obey
the Laws, The Rebels scattered.
and sided with the tumultuous, with all care and diligence he soon
scattered, forcing their Forts, and driving them into woods and lurking-holes,
(for troubling the blessed estate of tranquillity) till the Lord Deputy, who
took pity of them, upon their humble supplication, They submitted themselves.

They entered into rebellion afresh.


commanded by his missives, that they should be received upon terms of peace.
But they being a stiffenecked people, took Arms again, entered afresh into
actual rebellion, drove away booties, made foul uprores, and upon fair
promises procured the aid of the Scottish Ilanders, from out of the Hebrides:
whereupon the Governor assembled an Army, and pursued them with such
powerful violence through the Woods and Forests, They yielded again and were
received. Three thousand Scots drowned at Moin.
that after six or seven weeks, being grievously hunger-bitten, they
submitted themselves in all humility. The Auxiliary Forces also of the Scots,
he by day and night affronted so near, and followed so hardly, that he put
them to flight, after he had killed and drowned about 3. thousand of them in
the River Moin.

(8) About the year 1316. there was such a great slaughter made of the Irish
in this Province of Connaught, A slaughter of the Irish of Connaught.
through a quarrel that arose there between two Lords or Princes, that there
were slain on both sides about 4000. men; and so great a tribulation at that
time came upon the people, that they did devour and eat one another, so as of
ten thousand there remained not above three hundred living. And it is reported
for truth, that the people were then so hunger-starved, that in Churchyards
they took the dead bodies out of their graves, and in their sculs boiled the
flesh, and fed upon it: yea, and that women did eat their own children. Thus
appeared the ire and anger of God, in punishing their sins, and seeking their
conversion.

(9) Places memorable, Places memorable.

Inis Ceath.

Inis Bovind.


are, Inis Ceath, well known by the Monastery of Colman (a devout Saint)
founded for Scots and Englishmen; and Inis Bovind, which Bid calls White
Calfe Isle. A Monastery at Maio.

Beda lib. 4. c. 4. Curlew hills.


Also Maio, a Monastery built (as Bede writes) for thirty men of the English
Nation. Likewise the Baronie of Boil, under Curlew hills, where in times past
was a famous Abbey built, together with the Abbey of Beatitude, The Abbey of
Beatitude.
in the year of Grace 1152. These Abbeyes and Monasteries erected at the first
for religious services, and through ignorance and other obscurities diverted
since unto superstitious uses, are now made the ruins of time.

(10) The Province of Connaught is at this day strengthened with 14. Castles,
Castles. Market towns.
traded with 9. Market-Townes, and divided as ensues.

Counties, Clare, Maio. or Slego. Twomond, Letrim. Galway. Rescomen.

map of the province of Connaught THE PROVINCE OF CONNAUGH with the City of
GALWAYE Described


The Division of CONNAVGHT.
1. SLego. 2. Maio. 3. Roscomen. 4. Letrim. 5. Longford. 6. Galway. 7. Clare or
Twomond
A
Agarro, Gal. Akill Island, Maio. Baron of Akill, Maio. Can Akill, Maio.
Akill-beg, Maio. Alyne Lough, Letr. Anney Flu. Ara, Clar. Aran Isles, Gal.
Ardelon, Gal. ARDRAGH, Long. Arne knock, Gal. ATLON, Rosc. Atlone Barony, Rosc.
Aurork, Letr. O.
B
Barony of Balantaber, Rosc. Balantcourt, Gal. Balee Cloud, Clar. Balendock,
Gal. Banrale, Clar. Banron, Clar. B. Barnary, Gal. Barrag. Long. Barrogh bay,
Maio. Mac Bavy, Rosc. Beg, Gal. Beghan, Clar. B. Mac Belec, Sleg. Beltree,
clar. Bellemore Baron, rosc. Ben, Gal. Benicolben mountains. sleg. Benicolben,
sleg. Biley, Maio. Bimpall, long. Black-rock, gal. Black-rock, Maio. Blough,
long. Borace castle, maio. Borace Flu. Boure, long. Barony of Mac Boil, rosc.
Boyley, ros. M. Can Brain, clar. Bren, rosc. O. West Brenny, letr. S. Bride,
gal. Le Broke long. Browater Flu. Bursse mountains, long. Mack. W. Burck.
maio.
C
Caherdon, gal. Caherdogh, clar. Caherdoghan, clar. Calbadei, gal. Can Calew,
clar. Camagh, long. Camme, letr. L. Lough Cane, letr. Cang. maio. m. Lough
Carble, gal. Caregoly, clar. Carew M. ville uterhday, maio. Carey, gal.
Cariknew, clar. Carleby Ca. Clar. Carmin, clar. Carohesk, clar. Carowmore, gal.
Cashell, clar. Caslelan, clar. b. Clanerok, M. Owe Fease. Rosc. Clan-hores,
maio. Clanquistulo, maio. Earl of Clanricket, gal. Clare, gal. Barony of
Clare, gal.
CLARE, clar. Mac Clare, clar. Clare, gal. Ca. Clay, clar. Can Clegan, gal.
Clenebo, gal. Ca. Cleray, clar. Enis Clear, maio. Clogh, rosc. c. Clombrok,
gal. Clonebegin, rosc. Clonefort, gal. Cloneghisse, long. Cloney, long.
Clonresh, rosc. Colman, clar. c. Ca. Colyn, clar. Comer Don, rosc. ^. Comer
Roe, rosc. ^. Conogher Og, gal. Corbra, clar. Corkumo, clar. Corneguh, rosc.
Cotrine, clar. Cow Bay, maio. Cragh, gal. b. Crenay, maio. Crobraken, clar.
Croghnene, gal. Cronis, gal. Cuell, clar. c. Curlewes mountains, letr.
D
Daghan, clar. Darra, gal. Darra lands, sleg. ^. Deane, clar. c. Mac Deran,
rosc. Lough Derg, clar. Mac Dermont, rosc. Deser Calo^ gal. Dingham, clar. Mac
Dinhanbeg, clar. Doc, clar. c. The Dog, gal.
Dolphin, gal. Donasse, clar. Arras Dondenell, maio Dondey, maio. o. Ca. Done,
clar. Donebeg, clar. Donegate, clar. Barony Donmore, maio. Hugh Mac Donel. O.
kely, gal. Donel, clar. c. Donell M. Reugh, clar. Donnelleg Cast. gal.
Donemany, rosc. Donemore, clar. Donen castle, maio. Donsanan, clar. Donoghan,
clar. The two Mac Donoghes lands, sleg. Donolans, gal. ^. Donsand, gal.
Dosleepe, maio. Ca. Down, gal. Ca. Down, clar. Drelome, long. Drogh, gal.
Dromayne, long. Dunbroyle, sleg. Dundroes, sleg. Barony of Dunkelir, gal.
E
Enisky, clar. Enis Pyke, sleg. Ereconge, gal. Lough Esk, letr.

F
Fadda sleg. False Sound, Gal. Farolban, long. ^. Farset flu. Fartbeg, maio.
Fartmore, maio. Feg Mac. mahound, clar. Fenna, long. Fergus flu. Fermore hills,
maio. Feunon, clar. Flera, maio.
G
Gallough, gal. GALWAL, Gal. The Bay of Galway, gal. Gally, rosc. Garogh, maio.
Ca. Mac Garret, maio. Gast, gal. b. Glaniog. Cast. clar. Glaine, clar. c.
Glowen, maio. Gnoware Oslart, gal. B. M. Gogen. clar. Great Ca. clar. Great
Island, gal. S. Gregory's, Sound, gal. Grenan, clar. Grenam Cast. long. Gryne,
clar. b.
H
Hanley, ros. ^. Harnalands, sleg. ^. Harra neirough lands, sleg. Hara
Boylands, sleg. Enis Hodi, gal. Here, gal. Herekan, clar. Herk, maio. Hermough,
clar. Hoghmo, gal. Homlyan, long. Huysk, clar.
I
Isor-Island, gal. John Mac Teg, clar. John Amoy, gal. Inchequhin, clar.
Incherone, clar. Ioghint, gal. John Og, gal. S. Iolines, rosc.
Mac Jordan Baron, of Exeter, maio. Can Iores, maio.

K
Kaerdone, clar. Kark, gal. Kelban, gal. Kellegh, clar. Forest of Kellelon,
maio. Kelleneman, clar. Kellewhead, gal. Kellone, maio. Lough Kelley, gal.
Eragh Kenally, gal. Enis Kerin, gal. Cast. Kette, clar.
Enis Kery, clar. Kilbane, long. Kilbaron, gal. Kilfenneragh, clar. Kilgohan,
gal. Kilhoran, gal. Killaboy, maio. Mac Killean, gal. Killenerough, gal.
Killeroghan, maio. Killinard, maio. Kilmacullo, gal. Kilme, rosc. Kilmore,
long. Killone, clar. Kilredon, clar. Kilsh, long. Barony of Kingstowne, gal.
KINGSTOWNE, gal. Kirgh Cast. maio. Cast. Knock, rosc. Knolshehain, rosc. Cast.
Knolles, clar. KILALOE, clar.
L
Lacan, clar. b. Lackfin, gal. Lackin, gal. Lacuath, gal. Lakaath, gal. Leak,
rosc. b. Lekey, gal. Lelen, gal. Can Leame, gal. Can Lean, clar. Mac Leray,
long. Lesalke, gal. Castle Letter, gal. Letrum, gal. Letrum, letr. Liscombe,
gal. Liskeny, clar. Lislishen, clar. Logh flu. gal. LONGEFORD, long. Can
Lotersk, gal. Barony of Lotrim, gal. Lough, Sleg. Lough, long. m. Fin Lough,
maio. Lysnegyn, clar.
M
Barony of Macarne, rosc. Madloghony, clar. Magherladone, gal. Magone, clar
Magraine, letr. o. Magustolo, maio. Maine, maio. Main, long. c. Male, maio, o.
Marogh, gal. Maine Ca. long. Enis May, gal. Meliffi, rosc. b. Can Merin, gal.
Lough Mesks, maio. Milagh, gal. Milech, gal. Milurge, rosc. Mologha, clar.
Monena flu. maio. Montalan, clar. Montaghu Reagh, gal. m. Monterollies, letr.
Morley, rosc. Ca. Moore, rusc.
Moore-bay, clar. Moore Cast. rosc. Castle knock Morelen, gal. Morelon Cast.
gal. Mornin, long. Moshnes Ca. clar. Moy castle, maio. Moy slu. sleg. Moy,
clar. c. Can Moin, sleg. Ca. Mule, clar.

N
Naghlym, long. Port Nahaly, maio.
Nelly, gal. b. Nemene, gal. Nenany, letr. Ca. Neregon, clar. Ca. Nerego, clar.
Neukerk, letr. Lough Nenitie, letr. New, rosc. b. Newcastle, long. Newcastle,
gal. Newcastle, sleg. Newcastle, gal. Mac Newmaris, clar.
Newor, gal. c. Nono, clar. c.
O
Omacoglan, rosc.
P
Pengonell, maio. Phelim, clar. O Mac. Philpin, maio. Enis Pike, clar.
Pontoy, gal. Portevade, maio.
Q
Quella, clar. Quint, clar.
R
Racone, long. Rafraine, maio. Rahone, clar. c. Ralugh, gal. Lough Rea, gal.
Real, gal. Redwater slu. maio. Renilira, maio. Can Renilira, maio. Enis
Rophin, maio. Rosemonagher, clar. ROSECOMEN, rosc. Rosrial, gal. Ca. Roy, clar.
Knock Roy, gal. Rudder, long. b.
S
I Will of all Saints, clar. The Sanctuary, maio. Scardies, gal. Serclaine, gal.
Serne gal. Shaglin, clar. o. Shennon flu. clar. Shenny, rosc. Shog, Ca. rosc.
Slego Flu. Sleg. Slew Neren, letr. Conner Slego, sleg. o. Slego Bay, sleg.
SLEGO Bille, sleg. Slewcolon, clar. Slewkughty Mountains, clar. Small Island,
clar. Sormore, gal. North Sound, gal. South Sound, gal. Stakky, maio. Knock
Stiffingen, gal. Bonow Swilly, gal. Lough Sylon, long.
T
Tabber, rosc. Talegh, clar. Castle Teg, gal. Temple-heran, rosc. Tenelight,
long. Mac Teredah, clar.
Terlough Bryne, clar. m. Terraner, maio. Mac Tibot, maio. Mac Thomas, gal.
Thorn-mountaines, long. Tobercan, rosc. Tollagh, long. Tollegheain Cast. Gal.
Tollogh, clar. Tomalyn, clar. Enis Torke, maio. Tromer, long. Tromro, clar. Ca.
Trough, clar.
Tuork, maio.
V
Vtragh, maio.
W
Bay Whalley, sleg. Slew Welnam, maio.
Wreik, Sleg.
THIS Province, called by our Welsh Britains, Vltw, in Irish, Cui Guilly, in
Latin, Vltonia, and Vlidia, in English Vlster, The bounds of Vlster.
on the North is divided by a narrow Sea from Scotland; Southwaad it extends it
self to Connagh and Leinster; the East part lies upon the Irish Sea; and the
West part is continually beaten with the boisterous rage of the maine West
Ocean. This Province and furthest part of Ireland affronteth the Scottish
Islands, which are called the Hebrides, and are scattered in the Seas between
both Kingdoms; whose inhabitants at this day is the Irish Scot, successor of
the old Scythian.

The form.
(2) The form thereof is round, reaching in length from Coldagh Haven in her
North, to Kilmore in her South, near an hundred miles; and in breadth from
Black-Abbey in her East, to Calebegh point in her West, one hundred thirty and
odd miles: The whole in circumference, about four hundred and twenty miles.

(3) This Country seldom feels any unseasonable extremities, The air.
the quick and flexible winds cooling the heat of Summer, and soft and gentle
showers mollify the hardness of the Winter. Briefly, the frozen nor horrid
Zone have not here any usurpation; the clouds in the air very sweet and
pleasant, yea, and when they are most impure, are not unwholesome, nor of long
continuance, the rough winds holding them in continual agitation.

The soil.
(4) This equal temperature causes the ground to bring forth great store of
several Trees, both fit for building, and bearing of fruit; plentiful of
grass for the breeding of Cattle, and is abundantly furnished with Horses,
Sheep, and Oxen; the Rivers likewise pay double tribute, deep enough to carry
Vessels either for pleasure or profit, and fish great store, both for their
own uses, and commodity of others. Salmons in some Rivers of this County
abound more in number then in any River of Europe. Plenty of Salmons.
To speak (in general) though in some places it be some what barren, troubled
with Loughs, Lakes, and thick Woods, yet is it every where fresh, and full of
Cattle and forage, ready at all times to answer the husbandmans pains. But
Nature is there so little beholding to Art or Industry, Negligence of
husbandmen.
that the various show upon banks, the shadie groves, the green meadows,
hanging hills, and fields fit for Corn, (if they were manured) do seem to
be angry with their Inhabitants for suffering all to grow wild and barbarous,
through their own negligence.

The ancient Inhabitants.
(5) This County in Ptolemies days was wholly possessed by the Voluntii, Darni,
Robogdii, and Erdini, who branched and spread themselves into the several parts
of that Island.

(6) The people of this Province were accustomed in controversies and solemn
protestations, Their custom to swear by S. Patrickes Staff.
to swear by S. Patrickes Staff, which oath they feared more to break, then
if they had sworn by the holy Evangelist. Their ancient custom in making
their King, was this: A white Cow was taken, which the King must kill, Their
custom to choose their King.
and seethe the same in water whole, then must he bathe himself therein stark
naked; and sitting in the Cawdron wherein it was sod, accompanied with his
people round about him, he and they used to eat the flesh and drink the broth
wherein he sat, without cup, or dish, or use of hand. How far these
prescriptions and customs were different from the conformities of other civil
Monarchies, we may well perceive by these and other like observations of those
gross times, and as yet they are more barbarous then is any other part of the
Island besides.

(7) Historians relating of Ireland, tell of several Islands in the several
Provinces: some full of Angels, some full of Devils; some for male only, some
for female; some where none may live, some where none can dye; and such effects
of trees, stones, and waters, that a man (but of easy conceit) may well
esteem them as heedlesse as uncertain. So also S. Patrickes Purgatory (a
thing of much note in the Tract of this Province) is a vault or narrow cave in
the ground, S. Patrickes Purgatory.
near a Lake (called Erne Lyffer) much spoken of, by reason of (I wot not
what) fearful walking spirits, and dreadful apparitions, (or rather some
religious horror) which (as some ridiculously dream) was dug by Ulysses
when he went down to parley with those in hell. This is the cave which the
Inhabitants in these days call Ellan u' Frugadory, Ellan u'Frugadoric.
that is, The Isle of Purgatory, and S. Patricks Purgatory: for some persons,
less devout then credulous, affirm that S. Patricke (or rather Patricius
Secundus an holy Abbot of that name) laboring the conversion of the people of
this Province, and much enforcing the life to come, they replied contemptuously
unto him, that unless they saw proofs of those joys and pains he preached,
they would not lose the possession of their present pleasures, in hope or fear
of things to come, they wist not when. Whereupon (as they say) he obtained at
Gods hands by earnest prayer, that the punishments and torments which the
godless are to suffer after this life, might be there presented to the eye,
that so he might more easily root out the sins and heathenish errors, that
stuck so fast in the hearts of the Irish. But touching the credit hereof
(although common fame, and some records do utter it) I neither will urge the
belief, nor regard, seeing it is no Article of our Creed.

(8) Matters memorable within this Province are these: Matters memorable.
first, that the Bishops of Ireland were wont to be consecrated by the
Archbishop of Canterbury, The Archbishop, of Canterbury wont to consecrate
the Bishops of Ireland.
in regard of the Primacie which they had in this country; until such time as
John Papirio a Cardinal was sent thither from Pope Eugenius ^he fourth, to
reform Ecclesiastical discipline in this Island, which was then grown so loose,
that there were translations, and pluralities of Bishops, according to the will
and pleasure of the Metropolitan. Irishmen wont to forsake their wives at
their pleasure.
Also that the Irish-men were accustomed to leave and forsake their wedded
wives at their own freewilles, whereof Lanfranck Archbishop of Canterbury
complained unto Therdeluac, a King of Ireland. And had not this Nation been
corrupted with this vice, even unto these our days; both the right of lineall
succession had been more certain among them, and the Gentry and Comminalty had
not in such cruelties imbrued themselves, with such effusion of their own
kindreds blood, about their inheritances and legitimation.

(9) The principal place in this Tract is Armagh near unto the River Kalin,
Armagh. Vita Patricii. Marian Scotus.
which (albeit it makes a poor show) is the Archiepiscopall See and
Metropolitan of the whole Island. Before S. Patricke had built there a fair
City, for site, form, quantity, and compass, modelled out (as he says) by
the appointment and direction of Angels, this place was named Drumsalich; the
Irish tell much that it received the name of Queen Armacha: but the better
opinions are, that it is the same which Bed^ calls Dearmach, and out of the
Scottish and Irish language interprets it, The Field of Oaks. Here (as S.
Bernard writes) S. Patricke the Apostle of Ireland ruled in his lifetime, S.
Patricke lived and died here.
and rested after death: in honor of whom it was of such venerable estimation
in old time, that not only Bishops and Priests, but Kings also and Princes were
(in general) subject to the Metropolitan thereof in all obedience, and to his
government alone. Among the Archbishops of this Province, S. Malachy is
famoused, S. Malachy.
who first prohibited Priests marriage in Ireland, and (as S. Bernard says,
who wrote his life at large) borrowed no more of the native barbarousnesse of
that Country, then Sea-fishes do saltness of the Seas. Rich Fitz-Ralf.
Also Richard Fitz-Ralf (commonly called Armachanus) is of famous memory, who
turning the edge of his style, about the year 1355. began to oppose his
opinion against the Order of Mendicant Friars, as detesting in Christians such
voluntary begging. The chief Fort in this Tract is Enis Kelling, Enis Kelling.
defended by the Rebels in the year 1593. and won by Dowdall, a most valiant
Captain: near unto which is a great downfall of water, termed The
Salmon-Leape: The Salmons Leap.
of which there is a common speech current among the Inhabitants, that is was
once firm ground, very populous, and well husbanded with tillage; till it was
suddenly over-flowne with waters, and turned into a Lake, for some filthy
abominable acts of the people against Nature committed with beasts.

(10) The places of Religion, Places of Religion.
sequestered from other worldly services, and consecrated to holy purposes,
erected in this Province, were: The Abbey which shows it self at Donegal:
The Monastery of Derie, where the Irish Rebel Shane O-Neal received such an
overthrow (by Edward Randolph, renowned for his service in the behalf of his
Country) that he could never after recover the loss he sustained at that time:
The Monastery near unto the River Liffer: The famous Monastery at the Bay of
Knockfergus, of the same institution, name, and order, as was that ancient
Abbey in England, near unto Chester, called Banchor: Also Mellifont Abbey,
founded by Donald a King of Vriel, and much commended by S. Bernard: And
lastly, the most renowned Monastery, built as Armagh in the year of our
Salvation 610. out of which very many Monasteries were afterward propagate
both in Britain and Ireland. These places were far and near frequented and
sought unto by great confluences of Pilgrims, till Time proved their devotions
to be erroneous, and the pure light of the Word revealed, opening the eyes of
their understanding, has taught them to shake often the shame of such
Superstitions.

(11) That the people of this County might be kepth within the bounds of their
duty, this Province has been secured with fifty six Castles and Forts; and for
trade of commerce, nine Market-Townes appointed, Market Towns, Castles.
being divided into these Counties ensuing: Counties, Dunghall, or Tyr connell.
Nether Tyrone. Monaghan. Down. Fermanagh. Colrane. Armagh. The division of
Vlster.
Upper Tyrone. Cavan. Antrim. Lough.

map of the province of Ulster THE PROVINCE ULSTER described.


The Division of VLSTER.
1. DVnghall or Tyr connell. 2. Upper Tyrone. 3. Nether Tyrone. 4. Fermanagh.
5. Cavan. 6. Mcnaghan. 7. Colrane. 8. Antrim. 9. Down. 10 Armagh. 11. Lough.
A
Knock-Aboy, Upper Tyrone. Aendone, Monag. The Aggnes, Antrim. Agher, Monag.
Lough Aghre, Down. Aghren, Ant. Aghugh, Arm. Agnaderry, Down. Almore, Dun.
Altyne ella, Col. Anaghalome, Down. Aneregan, Dun. Angwis rock, Down. Anogh,
Col. Castle Antrim, Ant. Aperby hill, Ant. ARDEE, Lough. Ardtra, Nether Tyr.
Arglas, Down. Arglas haven, Down. Mac Argum, Down. Arkine Castle, Down. ARMAGH,
Arm. Castle Arnish, Arm. The North Isles of Arran, Dun. Ashrow Mac, Dun.
Audley, Down. Aurely, Cavan. O.
B
Bably, Upper Tyr. Slew bagh, Ferm. Bagnall, Down. Castle Balan, Ant. Baleghan,
Dun. Balemony, Ant. Baleshanan, Dun. The Bay of Balewilly, Dun. Castle Baltern
Ant. Ballydaly. Upper Tyr. Ban Flu, Down. Bancher, Col. Band Flu, Ant. Band
haven, Col. Barnebal, arm. Mac Banger, Down. Bangidon, Col. Barnemore, Dun.
Baythdone, Upper Tyr. Lough Begna, Down. Lough Beg, Ant. Belfast, Ant.
Belterbert, Ferm. Bencol, Ant. Benebroch, Nether Tyr. Benlintowne, Lough.
Benmadigang, Ant. Bermeth, Lough. Bert, Dun. The Bishops seat, Down. Black
Abbey, Down. Black-head, Ant. Black-water, Neth. Tyr. Black-water Fort, N. Tyr.
Black-water Flu, N. Tyr. The great Black-water, Ferm. Blare, Down. Bonavarga,
Ant. Bonodrium, Ant. Castle Boy, Down. Boyesse Flu, Ant. Boil, Dun. O. Castle
Boil, Dun. O. Enis Boil, Dun. O. Bow Flu, Lough. Terlogh Brassilogh, Arm. Lan
Brassill, Arm. C. Breklin, Down. East Brennie, Cavan. Brian Carrogh, ant. Saint
Brides, down. The Briall, down. Brian Carrogh, Ne. Tyr. Bundorlin Fort, arm.
Buneranagh, dun.
C
Calebeg, dun. Calebeg haven, dun. Mac Camher, down. Camis, Upper Tyr. Camon
Flu, Upper Tyr. Candan point, down. Cane, Col. O. Mac Cane, arm. Capagh, Epper
Tyr. Carick, Monagh. Carlingford haven, Lou. CARLINGFORD, Lo Carmacon, down.
Canantogher, Neth. Tyr. Caroan, dun. Carramore, Upper Tyr. Knock Carry, ant. Mac
Carten, down. Lough Carutell, Nesh. Tyr. Cavan, Cavan. Castle Cavah, Cavan.
Charles Fort, Neth. Tyr. Church-land, Monagh. Cladagh Island, dun. Cladagh-bay,
dun. Clanagher, Neth. Tyr. Clandawell, arm. The nether Clandeboy, ant.
Clantarrin, Cavan. Castle Cloghbally, down. Cloghan, Monogh. Clogher point,
Lough. Cloghera Bishops See, Monagh. Cloghmahar Duory, ant. Clon, Neth Tyr.
Closhagh, Ferm. Clunis Monast. Ferm. Clyffe, down. Clyton, Lough. Cociti Flu,
down. Coldagh, dun. Coldagh haven, dun. Collumkill, down. Colraine mon, ant.
Colraine Castle, co. Lough Cone, down. Conner, down. Conora Bishops See, ant.
Copland Isles, down. Cook, Lough. Lough Coran, Nether Tyr. Coraine Flu, ant.
Cow and Calfe, down. Cragan, arm. Cramfeild point, down. Cremourne, Monagh.
Crog Castle, ant. Cross Isle, down. Lough Cryse, Nether Tyr. Cumber Flu, Ferm.
Cusher Flu, down.
D
Dalgan Flu, arm. Dendough Carrick, ant. Lough Der, down. Derrie, dun. Derrie
Fort, dun. Desert, Neth. Tyr. Devenish, Ferm. Dirgh Castle, dun. Dirgh Flu,
dun. Lough Dirgh, or Saint Patrickes Purgatory, dun. Dirrey, down. Lough
Disart, Nether Tyrone. Disart Crygh, Nether Tyrone. Mac Dogevene, Col. Doh.
Arnbery. ant. Dole, Neth. Tyr. Donanerony, ant. Donaneny Castle, ant. Fort
Donat, Nether Tyr. O. Lough Donat, Nether Tyr. O. DONDALKE, Lough. Dondrom bay,
down. Donegall Monast, dun. Kill Donel, dun. Donelong, Upper Tyr. Donenany
point, Lough. Doneregy, arm. Donglas, Nether Tyr. Donhalieing, ant. Donegalke,
Lough. Temple Donocave, Upper Tyr. Donohelon, down. Donogh, Upper Tyr.
Donoghiddy, Upper Tyr. Slu Donogh, Col. Donoghs inragh, Nether Tyrone.
Donogmore, down. Donomaw, down. Donomore, dun. Donmory, ant. Donomurke, Neth.
Tyr. Knock Donoshery, Col. Temple Donrath, Upper Tyr. Donroe, ant. Dony,
Monagh. Dony, down. Dornous, arm. The Dorterey, Cavan. Dougharty, dun. O.
Downoman, down. Mac Sul Down, down. Droghdagh haven, Long. DROGHDAGH, Lou.
Dromebaly, down. Dromemarke, ant. Dromore, down. Dromshallen, Lough. Dronecan,
Lough. Drumboe, Neth. Tyr. Drumboe, Neth. Tyr. Dundalke haven, Lough. DVNGAL,
dun. Dungall haven, dun. Dungannon, Neth. Tyr. Dunluce Castle, ant. Dunmore,
Lough. Dunseeke, ant. Lough Dunuare, ant.
E
Earne Lough, Ferm. Bishops Eggs, Monagh. Lough Eggs, Monagh. Elowh, dun.
Enesse, down. Enis Garden, down. Can Enis, dun. Enis Macky, Upper Tyr. Enisken,
Monagh. Enis forsed Logan, Col. Enys Pyke, Ferm. Lough Eske, dun. Eske Flu,
dun. Knock Evah, down.
F
Fair forland, ant. Fawn Cast. Dun. Fenlogh, Mon. Fentenagh, Upper Tyr. Finne
Flu, dun. Lough Finne, dun. Castle Finne, dun. Foghan Flu, Col. Island Fongren,
Upper Tyr. An old Fort, Nether Tyr. Forway, Lough. Lough Foil, Up. Tyr. Lough
Foil haven, dung. Freerston, ant.
G
Slew Gallon, Nether Tyr. Garland, Lough. Garstaune, Lough. Lough Gel, ant.
Knock Glad, ant. Glanarme Castle, ant. Glanarme bay, ant. Glandagh, dun. South
Glan de boy, down. Glanharky, ant Glankankyne, Nether Tyr. Glanraven Flu, ant.
Glaspestell, Lough. Glastalagne, ant. The Glinnes, ant. Slew Gore, Monagh.
Gormeley, Ferm. O. Grange, Lough. Grange, ant. Gray Abbey, down. Green Castle,
dun. Green Castle, down. Gudorra Flu, dun. Mac Guere, Ferm. Guherra Flu. Mac
Guilly, ant.
H
Haghnie Mullen, Mon. Hanaloe Flu, down. Lough Hardwarns, ant. Hawks rock,
dun. Haygardes, Lough. Hellaine Ha^rone, down. S. Helena, dun. S. Helens Haven,
dun. Henry, Lough. Hernoh, down. Naghr Hollogh, Cau. Hollywood Abbey, down.
Horrehead, dun. Hugh Mac. Duffe, dun.
I
Inchah, down. I Would, down. Igangoh, down. Ilanay, ant. Inis Castle, dun. S.
John's point, down. Lough Knock Iormy, down.
K
Karne Lough, down. Kasin Flu, arm. Lough Kasin, arm. Karreene, dun. Kelles
Mac, ant. The Kelles Duffree, down. Mac Kenan, Monagh. Kilcorwan, down.
Kill-Cliffe, down. Killeagh, down. Kille-cony, down. Killetra, Neth. Tyr.
Killetro, Neth. Tyr. Enis Killing Fort, Ferm. Mac Killoran, Arm. Killoughter,
Cavan. Killultagh, down. Kilmacrenan, dun. Kilmack, dun. Kilmana, Neth. Tyr.
Kilmore, Monagh. Kilmore, Cavan. Kilrough, Col. Kilrout, Ant. Kilwarlin, Down.
Kite Ba, Dun. Kne Island, ant. Castle Knock, Upper Tyr. Knock Crag, Nether. Tyr.
Knockerunollogh, dow. KNOCKFERGUS, ant. Knomanage, Neth. Tyr. Kolmologcrogh,
Cavan. The Kow, ant. Kullemeor, dun. Lough Kurkan, down.
L
Lambs Island, ant. The Largy, Nether Tyr. Laurie, down. Lecale Fort, down.
Leinwady Castle, Col. Leiston Flu, down. Leyseynnes, Monagh. Lumnart, Lough.
Lough Luske, Nether Tyr. Liffer, dun. Lisemucke, Monagh. Lisekilogham, Ferm.
Lisgold, Ferm. Lisham, Neth. Tyr. Lishanaham, Monagh. Lisnafa, down. Dogan Flu,
down. Castle Lough, down. Lough Swilly, dun. Lough Foil, dun. Lough, Lough.
LOVTH, Lough. Lumnart, Lough. Louth Luske, Nether Tyr.
M
Mac Macomer, ant. Madarge point, dow. Mages Isle, ant. Magroittree, dun.
Castle Maing, Monagh. Mahaline, ant. Mahamley, down. Mahara Ferkin, ant.
Maharla, down. Maharlef gall, Nether Tyr. Maharles, Arm. Maharry, Neth. Tyr.
Mahone gall, down. Mahtra, down. Malin, dun. Markinton bay, ant. Marshals, ant.
Skir Martin, down. Mac Masarmah, ant. The Maidnes, ant. Mehaterry, down. Melogh
Flu, down. Mellogh Carne, Upper Tyr. Mere, Lough. Slew Meser, ant. Six
Milebridge, dow. Miskigh mewgh, dun. Moan Flu, dun. All Mollallan, dun. Mollogh
gora Fort, Upper Tyr. Monaghan Fort, Mon. Montjoy Fort, Nether Tyr. Monuell
Abbey, down. Mourn, down. The mountain of Mourn, down. Mounterburne, Nether
Tyr. Lough Muckne, Mon. Muckne, Mon. Knock Mullagh, ant. Castle Mill, Lough.
N
Castle Narrow-water, Lo. Narrow-water, Dow. Lough Neaugh, Nether Tyr. Mac
Negosarahan, Col. Newcastle, Lough. Newcastle, down. NEWRY, down. Newton, Upper
Tyr. Newtowne, Upper Tyr. Newtowne Abbey, down. Mount Norris, Arm. North-rocke,
down.
O
Odonel, Dun. Henry Ogge, Arm. Olderflet, ant. Olderfleet haven, An. The stone
where male is chosen, Nether Tyr. Omey Castle, Upper Tyr. Mac Omey, Upper Tyr.
Onealand, arm. Slugart Oneale, Dun. Slut Mac Oneale, Down. Orraine, arm. Ousher
flu, dun. Owen Duffe, Nether Tyr. Owen Maugh the ancient seat of the Kings of
Vlster, arms. Roc Owen. Col. Roc Owen flu. Nether Tyr. Inis Owen, Dun.
Owindirgh ant. Oxlogh, Mon.
P
The Pass, Down. The Pass, Lough. Lough Patelegan, arm. Patrik, Down. S.
Patriks rock, dow. Peremucke, ant. Permeferry, down. Bishop Philip, down.
Pisneracregan, Cavan. Plelim, down. Polly, down. Promontary, ant.
R
Ragh Island, down. Ragha Island, Nether Tyr. Raghin, Mon. The Raghlins, ant.
Ramultan Castle, dun. Rane-had, down. Raynold, down. Bishop Reagh, ant. Reagh,
down. Red bay Castle, ant. Red Castle, dun. Red-bay, ant. Red-haven, dun.
Relly, down. Richard, Lough. Rinor, Neth. Tyr. Rock flu, Col. Lough Rosse,
Monagh. Castle Rosse, Monagh. Lough Rose, Monagh. Rosse, dun. The Rowte, ant.
Lough Rush, Col. Lough Ryle, down.
S
Lough Sade-fold, Mon. Sarard, Lough. Salmon-leape, ant. The Salmon Fishing,
dun. Savage, down. Sawell pit a Mew, Col. Scatericke, Down. Scotts, ant. Mount
Sendall, ant. Knock Serabah, Do. Sergeants town, Ar. Sidney Island, Nether Tyr.
Silver hill, dun. Shanan, Lough. Lough Shanahan, down. Sheap flu down. Sheep
haven, dun. Shelton, Lough. Skee, Ferm. Skin flu, Col. Skirres Portrush, Col.
Skirris, ant. Skrine, Neth. Tyr. Smiths Castle, down. Sok-le-boy, An.
South-rock, down. Stokan, Neth. Tyr. Stone-over, ant. Strangford, down.
Strangford haven, dow. Temple Stanhurst land, down. Streband, Upper Tyr. Lough
Swilly haven, dun. Mac Swinne dogh, dun. Mac Swinne Banogh, dun. Mac Swinne
Fannought, dun. Castle Swinne Ado, dun.
T
Tadog, ant. Talbot, down. Tallah, Neth. Tyr. Tallowen flu, Nether Tyr.
Tehevet, ant. Telyn, dun. Tenan, arm. Bay Teraine, ant. Terim flu, Neth. Tyr.
Termon, Upper Tyr. Slew Tgore, Col. Lough Tinan, Monagh. Bishop Togher, down.
Toghraby, Monagh. Tallagh Corbet, Mon. Tollogh Cast, Lough. Tolloghnest, Ne.
Tyr. Tome Fort, Neth. Tyr. Tome lagh, dun. Tor, ant. Tor Island, ant. Torre
Island, dun. Toughagh, arm. Town, Lough. Town Castle, ant. Trigall, Net. Tyr.
Slew Trim, Upper Tyr. Troghenghtro, Mon. Owen ne Trough, Nether Tyr. Trowis
flu. Tullagh, Neth. Tyr. Tullash, down.
V
Uragh flu.
W
Wall, Mon. Walley Bay, dun. Warren Castle, Lough. Warren flu. Welsh Castle,
down. Whithead bay, ant. Whithead Castle, ant. White Castle, dun. White Abbey,
ant. White Land, ant. Whites Castle, down. White Island, down. Bishop Willy
Castle, dun.
THE FIRST INDEX OR ALPHABETICALL TABLE, containing the principal matters in
the Maps both of ENGLAND and IRELAND, the first number noting the Page, and the
second the Section.
A
Fol. Sect. ABer-Conwey Town like a City, 123 6 Aberfrawe the Prince of Wales
his Court, 99 8 Adelme founder of Malmesbury Monastery, 25.8 Adulph reedisieth
Peterborow Monastery, upon what ocsion, 55.7 Iul: Agricola his Trench or
Fortification, limiting the Roman Province, 6.9 Saint Albanes Isle, 94.8 Saint
Albanes Town and Monastery, 39.5 Alcluid, i. Dunbritton, 132.12 Alesbury
wherefore much frequented, 43.7. Alexander King of Scots, King of the Western
Islands, and of Man, 92.16 Alfred (or Elfred) restores the University of
Oxford, 45.7 Builds Colleges, and places Readers there, ibid. Almanac of
Harvest men in Denbigh shire, 119.3 Alney Island, 47.10 Amble-side or Amboglana,
85 10 Ambresbury Abbey, 17.6 and 25.9. Ancalites where seated, 45.4 Anderida
City, 9.4 Andradswald, 9.4 S. Annes-well at Buxstones, 67.8 Anglesey Isle how
confined, 99.8 What Cantreds and Commots it has, 99.8 How named, and why,
125.1 The form and dimension of it, 2 The Air and Commodities thereof, 3 The
seat of the Druids, 5 How divided, Ibid. By whom infested and subdued, 9
Hundreds and Towns thereof 126
Antimonium. See Stibium. Antiquities in West Riding, 79.7 Anwicke field, 89.10
Appleby Town and Castle in Westmoreland. 85.8 Aquila prophsieth, 17.6
Archbishops Sees in Britain three, 2.14 Armagh an Archiepiscopall and
Metropolitan See in Ireland, 145.9 Arran Islands near Galway, 143.6 Arthurs
chair an high mountain, 109.4. King Arthurs round Table at Llansanan in
Denbighshire, 119.6 Prince Arthur keeps his Court at Ludlow, 71.7 Prince
Arthur his Monument or Sepulcher, 51.5 and 23.10 Arvon, i. Cair-Narvon, 99.7.
Ashes making ground fruitful, 119.4 Ashbridge much renowned for a feigned
Miracle, 43.7 Saint Assaph in North Wales an Episcopal See, 99.11 and 121.9
Astroits the precious stone found at Slugbury in Warwick shire, 53.7 Alsoneere
Bever, 61.3
Attrebatii where planted, 27 5 Saint Andree foundresse of Ely. 37.5 Saint
Andrees Liberties, Ibid. Angustine first Archbishop of Canterbury, 6.5
Angustines Oak in Worcestershire, 51.6 Anteri, what people in Ireland, 143.5.
B
Badbury the West Saxon Kings Court, 17.6 Brinbrig an ancient place, 79.7 Bala
Curi, the Bishops Palace of the Isle of Man, 91.5 Baldwine the great Forrester
of Flaunders. 57.2 Banchor or Bangor a City, and the first Monastery, 121 9
The ruins thereof, Ibid. A Bishops See, 99.9
Brakley Castle where King Edward the 2. was murdered, 47.10 Braklow hills in
Essex, 31.5 Bark-shire whence it took ram^, 27.1 How it is bounded, 27.1 The
form, measure, and air thereof, 27.2.3.4 What commodities it yields, 27.4
By whom anciently inhabited, 27.5 What Religious houses it had, 27.10 Hundreds
and Towns in Barke-shire, 28
Barnet field, 29.9 Bartholanus and his three sons planted in Ireland. 137 8
Barwick 89.9 How governed, Ibid. The graduation of it, Ibid.
Battle-bridge, 81.7 Battaile-field, 9.7 Battle of Standard, 81.7 Bathe in
Sommerset-shire, what names it had, and why so called, 23.7 Beault in
Brecknock-shire, 109 5. Beau-marish, why so named, See Bonover, 125.8. Thomas
Becket his Tomb, 7.8 Bid a Monk of Weremouth, where borne, 83 6
Bedford-shire how bounded, 41.1 The form and dimension of it, 41.2 The air,
soil, and commodities of Bedford-shire, 41.3. The ancient Inhabitants thereof,
41.4 Hundreds and Towns therein, 42
Bedford Town and Castle, 41.6.7 How described, and how governed, 41.7 The
graduation of it, 41 10
Of Beeston Castle a Prophecy, 73.9 Belga, where seated, 13.6. and 15 6 and
23.5. and 25.5 Bellona's Temple in York 78 9 Bennones. See Cleicester.
Benonium. See Binchester. Berinus the first Archbishop of Dorchester, 6.8 His
circuit, Ibid. The Apostle and Bishop of the West Saxons, Ibid. Preaches and
baptizeth at Oxford, 45.4 The Apostle also of the South Saxons, Ibid.
Berry, sometimes a famous City in Shrop-shire, 71.9 Berth a Town in Scotland
destroyed by the inundation of Tai, 132.16 Y. Bervedhwald the fourth part of
North Wales: the bounds, commodities, cantreds and commots in it, 99.11 Bever
in Tivi River described, 113.3. Beverley a Sanctuary, 81.5 Saint John of
Beverley, Ibid. Bibroces what people, 25 5 Binbridge Isle, 15.4 Binchester,
sometimes Benonium, 83.9 Sir Richard Bingham his valor and wisdom in
repressing Mac-Williams posterity, 143.7 Bishoprics how many in England and
Wales, 6.4 Blany people in Ireland, 141 4 Blond-raine, 15.8. and 78.9 Charles
Blunt, Lord Mount-Ioy quenched the rebellion of Tirone, 139.9 Bedman, the
middle Town of Cornwall, 21.8 the climate thereof, Ibid. A Bishops See removed
to Excester, 21.10.
Queen Boduo razeth Maldon, 31.8 Bone-well in Herefordshire, 49 6 Benover now
Beau-marish, 129 The government and graduation of it, Ibid.
Borders between Scotland and England, 6.11 Now the midst of the Empire,
Ibid.
Borow, what it signifies, 3.6 Bors-holder or Tithingman, 3.6 Bosham in
Sussex, 9.8 Boskenna Monument or Trophee, 21.9 Bovata. See Oxgang. Bovium. See
Ban^hor. Bows an ancient Town in West Riding, 79.7 Brazen armor dug up in
Cornwall, 21.9 Brazen nose College in Stanford, 59.8 Breake-speare. See
Hadrian the fourth. Breertous death in Cheshire presignified, 73.9
Brecknock-shire, the nature of it, 100.21 What Cantreves and Commots it has,
ibid.
Brecknock-shire how bounded, 109.1 Why so named, ibid. The dimension of it,
109 2 The nature of the soil, 3 By whom inhabited in old time, 4
In Brecknock-shire what Hundreds, Towns, and memorable places, 110 Brecknocke
Town and Castle how seated, 109.6 The graduation of it, Ibid. How governed,
Ibid.
Brigantes in England where seated, 75.5 and 79.4. and 87.5. and 83.5. and
85.5. Brigantes or Birgantes in Ireland, whence they took name, 141.4 Saint
Brigid much esteemed in Kildare, 141.8 Saint Brioch, or Brien, a Town in
Britain Armorica whence it had denomination, 139.6 Saint Briochus where borne
and bred, 139.6 Bristow a beautiful City, 23.7 and 47.8 A County by it self,
23.7 and 47.8 How governed, 23.7
Great Britain how far it extends, 1.2 The greatest Island of the Roman world,
ibid. What Countries abut upon it, 1.3 Her Eulogies, 1.3. and 4 The site
thereof, 1.2 Sometime no Island, 1.6 Slenderly known to Julius Caesar, 2.8
Divided into Kingdoms in Caesar's time, 2.9 The supposed divisio^ thereof to
Brutus three sons, 2.10
Britain into three parts divided, 99.1 Britain the less in Ptolemy is
Ireland, 2.11 Britain great and less how to be taken, 2.12 Britain the
higher, what it is in Dio, 2.13 Britain the lower, what it is in Dio, ibid.
Britain divided by Severus into two Provinces, higher and lower, 2.13 Divided
into three parts, 2 14
Britannia prima, secunda, maxima Caesariensis, 2.14 Britain divided into five
parts, 2.15 Prima, how limited, 2.15 15 Secunda, how bounded, ibid. Maxima
Caesariensis, how limited, 2.15
Britain for greatness the second Island in the world, 137.4 Britains
Conquest highly respected of the Romans, 2 17 Britains triumph magnificent,
2.17 British Brickes, 77.6 British Islands which they be, 1.3
Buckingham-shire, why so called, 43.1 How bounded, 43.2 The dimension of it,
ibid. The air and soil, 43.3 The Commodities, ibid. By whom in old time
inhabited, 43.4 Places of Religion therein, 43.7 Hundreds and Towns therein, 44
Buckingham Town how seated, 43.5 How governed, ibid. The graduation of it,
ibid.
Buleum Silurum, 109.5 Bullingbroke the birthplace of King Henry the fourth,
63 7 Bur^ a River in Norfolk, 35 3 Burgheses, 4.7 Burgh under Stanemore, 85.8
The same that Vertera, ibid.
Busie-gap, 89.13 Buxston Wells, 67.8
C
Caer-Caradoc, why so called, 71.5 Caer-diff, the fairest Town of all
South Wales, 105.4 How governed, ibid. The site thereof, ibid.
Caer-diff Castle, where Robert Curthose was kept prisoner, 105.4 Caer-digan
shire how bounded, 100.16. and 113.1 Towns, Castles, Cantreves and Commots
therein, 100.16 The County given to Gilbert de Clare, 113.5 The form and
dimension thereof, 113.2 Commodities thereof, 113 4 Hundreds, Towns, Rivers,
etc. in it, 114
Caer-digan Town upon Tivi, 100.16 How seated and by whom fortified. 113.7 The
graduation thereof, ibid.
Caer-legion is Westchester, 73 7 Caer-leon an Archbishops See, 6 Caer-lheon
upon Vske, 110 20 Caer-marden shire how divided into Cantreves and Commots,
100.18 How it is bounded, 103 1 The form and air of it, 103.2. and 3 By whom
in old time possessed, 103 4 The Commodities it yields, ibid. 5 Hundreds,
Towns, etc. in it, 104 Roman Coyns there found, 103.4
Carmarden town, what names it has, 103.6 How governed, 103.6 The position
thereof, ibid.
Caernarvon-shire how bounded, 99.9. and 123.1 What names it has, 123 1 The
form and dimension of it, ibid.2 The air and soil, ibid. 3 and 4 In it
Pearls engendered, 123 5 Cantreves and Commots in it, 99.9 By what people in old
time inhabited, 123.5 Towns, Rivers, and memorable places, 124.
Caernarvon Town or City within a Castle, 123.6 The civilitie and government
thereof, 123.6 The position, ibid. 99.9 Caer-Segont, i. Carnarvon. 99.9
Caesaria. See Iersey. Caledonia Wood in Scotland, 123.12 Caledonium or
Deucaledonium Sea, 99.1 Caledonii, 2.12. Calphurnius Father of Saint Patricke,
101.7 Camalet Hill in Sommersetshire, 23.10 Camalodunum. See Malden. Cambria.
Cambri. Cambraoc. 99.2 Cambridge-shire how named by the Saxons, 37.1 How
bounded, ibid. The length, breadth, and circumference of it, 37.2 Whence it came
to be so called, 37.4 What Religious houses therein, 37.3 Commodities thereof,
37 6 Hundreds and Towns therein, 38
Cambridge town and graduation, 37.4 Made an University, ibid.
Came a River in Cambridge-shire, 37.3 Candal. See Kendal. Cangi, where they
inhabited, 37.5 Canterbury a very ancient City, 7.8 The glory and graduation
of it. 7.^
Canterbury Archbishop, Primate of all England, 6.7 Metropolitan, and his
jurisdiction, 5.4
King Canute with his Danes overthrown, 17.4 Canutus Delfe. See Swords Delfe.
57.1 Caractacus a valiant British Prince, 71.5 Caresbrooke Castle in the Isle
of Wight, 15.7 The position or graduation of it, ibid. At Carleton in
Leichestershire they wharle in their speech, 61.2 Carlilo City how seated, 87
7 An Episcopal See, 87.7 What names it had, 87.7 A Colony of Flemmings, ibid.
The Castle built, ibid. The position thereof, ibid.
Carreg Castle, 103.7 Caruca and Carucata what it is, 57.3 Casquets what
rocks, 94.3 Casterford, 78.10 Called Legeolium, ibid.
Cassii what people and where planted, 39.4. Castle Cornet in Garnsey, 94.8
Castor in Norfolk, sometime Venta Icenorum, 35.5 Catarick, or Cattrick bridge
an ancient place, 79 7 Cattieuchlani where seated, 39.4 and 41.4 and 43.4
Catigern slain in Battle, 7 11 A Cave or Chinke yielding a strange noise,
105.6 Cauci people in Ireland, 104 4 Ceangi. See Cangi, Ceaulin defeated by the
Britains dies in exile, 25 6 Robert Cecil, the worthy Earl of Salisbury,
25.7 Centuriatae, or Hundreds why so called, 57.3 Ceorle or Churl, 4.7 Chamber
in the Forest, 73 7 Charlos Duke of Orleance taken prisoner, 9.8 Chersey in
Buckingham-shire, 43.4 Cheese in Essex. 31 6 Cheese in Suffolk, 33.5 Cheshire
how bounded, 73 1 The form, air, and Climate, 73.2. and 3 The soil, ibid. 4
Cheese there the best, 73 4 The men described, ibid. 5 Chief for men and
women, ibid. Always true and loyal to their Sovereign, ibid. Their Gentry,
ibid. Made a Principality, ibid. A County Palatine, ibid. The Commodities
thereof, 73.7 Hundreds and Towns therein, 74
Chester City, alias West Chester, 73.7 The Minster or Cathedral Church by
whom built, 73.7 A Corporation of it self, 73.7 The position thereof, 73.7
Chester Earldom, 73.8
Chester in the Street, sometime Condercum, 83.9 Chichester City, 9.6
Chichester the Cathedral Church built and twice burnt, ibid. Chichester has
borne the title of an Earldom, ibid. The position thereof, ibid.
Chiltern-hills. 43.3 Chirke Castle in Chirkeland, 100.12 Chorographicall Tomb
of this work, 1.1 Christ his Passion cut in stone by David 2. King of Scots,
prisoner, 65.7 Cidre. See Sidre. Cimenshore in Sussex, why so called, 9.7
Cinque Ports, 7.5 Circester why called Passerum Vrbi, 47.9 How named in old
time, ibid. Of what circuit in times past, ibid.
Cites or Kitescote the Monument of Catigern, 7.11 City built Saint Cuthbert
in Farne Isle, 93 Clare County. See Twomund. Clawdh Offa. See Offa ditch.
Clausentium, now Southampton, 13.10 Cleicester where it stood. 61.7 Cley, a
part of Nottinghamshire, 65.7 Coccles on the top of Mountains, 79.6 Coinage in
old time, 57.5 Cole in pits of what substance, 83.4 Cole-pits in the
Bishopric of Durham, 83.4 Cole in pits at Cole-Overton in Leichestershire,
61.1 Colchester by whom built, 31 7 In Colchester Constantine the great borne,
31.7
Colchester how fortified, 31.7 whereof it takes name, 31 7 The civil
government and graduation of Colchester, ibid.
Colleges which were first endowed with lands in all Christendom, 45.7
Columbkill where the Kings of Scotland, Ireland, and Norway were entombed,
132.18 Combat between Edmond Ironside and Canutus, 47.10 Comius Attrebas or of
Arras, 27.5 Commodus the Emperor his Hercules-like Statue, 79.7 Concani. See
Gangani. Concha mother to Saint Patricke, 101.7. and 132.12 Condercum. See
Chester in the Street. Coning. i. King why so called, 4.7 Connaught Province
how it is bounded, 143.1 The form and dimension thereof, 143.2 The Air and
Bogghes, ibid. 3 By whom inhabited in old time, 143.5 Extreme famine there,
143.8 What religious houses there, 143.9 Counties and Towns there, 144
Constantius Chlorus the Emperor died at York, 78.9 His Sepulcher, 78.11
Conwy river how named in old time, 123.6 John Cobland a famous and valiant
Esquire, In the Map of Durham Bishopric, Cobland a part of Cumberland, 87.2
Copper-Mine at Wenlocke in Shropshire, 71.9 In Cumberland, 87.4
Corinaeus, 22 Coritani where they inhabited, 55.4. and 59.6 and 61.4. and 67.4
Corham or Coverham Abbey, 79.8 Cork County in Ireland sometime a Kingdom,
139 Cork City in Mounster, how seated, 139.6 An Episcopal See, ibid. The
marriage of the Citizens, ibid.
Cornavii what countries they held, 51.4. and 53.4. and 69.5. and 71.5. and
73.5. Cornwall why so called, 3.2 and 21.1 Of what temperature for air it is,
21.2 Almost an Isle, 21.4 The soil, 21.3 The dimension thereof, 21.3 The
ancient and modern Inhabitants, 21.5 It gives title of Earl and Duke, 21.6
What commodities it yields, 21.7 Religious houses therein, 21.10 Hundreds and
Towns therein, 22
Cottons Family of Coningham in Huntingtonshire, 58.8 Coventry a well walled
City, 53.5 A Corporation and County by it self, 53.5
Counsel of the Marches of Wales ordained, 71.7 Counsel at York erected, 78
9 Courts of Justice altered by King William Conqueror, 5.3. Caway Stakes, 29.6
Crediton or Kirton a Bishops See translated to Excester, 19.6 Cretingsbury,
58.10 Sir Adam de Cretings, ibid. Robert Bossu Crouch-backe Earl of Leicester
rebelleth, 61.6 Builds the Abbey of St Mary's de Pratls near Leicester, 61.6
He becomes a Canon Regular, 61.6
Cuba an Island, 1.2 Cumberland how bounded, 87.1 The form and air of it, 87
and 2.3 Whence it took name, 87.5 Commodities thereof, 87.4 The ancient
Inhabitants, 87.5 A Kingdom, ibid. Antiquities therein, 87.6 Towns therein, 88
Cumri, 99.2 Custodes. See Lieutenants. Cuthbert Bishop of Lind^ssarne, 93 The
tutelar Patron of Northern Englishmen against the Scots, 83.6 A Saint and
much adored, 83.6 His Tomb much visited by Kings in Pilgrimage, ibid.

D
Lord Dalbney or Daubney with Cornish Rebels overthrown upon Black Heath, 7.10
Danelage, 5.3 Danish Law, 4.8 Danmonii, where placed Danewort herb, why so
called, 31.5 Darby-shire how bounded, 67.1 The form and dimension of it, 67.2
The air and soil thereof, ibid. 3 The Inhabitants of it in old time, 67.4
Commodities thereof, 67 5 What Religious Houses therein, 67.9 Hundreds and
Towns thereof, 68
Darby Town how named in times past, 67.6 Alhallowes Steeple there by whom
built, ibid. The government and graduation thereof, ibid.
Darnii, people of Ireland, 145.5 David Disciple of Dubricius, uncle to King
Arthur Archbishop of Menevia, 6.6 David 2. King of Scots prisosoner in
Nottingham castle, 65.6 Saint David's City, 101.7 A Nurcerie of holy men, ibid.
An Archiepiscopall See, 101.6 The Cathedral Church thereof, ibid,
Saint David Bishop refuteth the Pelagians, 113.7 Dee River glideth through
Pimple mere without mixture, 117.5 Deemsters in the Isle of Man, 91.5
Deheubarth, i. South Wales, 110.15 Deirwand, 81.8 Dela his five sons seated
in Ireland, 137.10 Demetia or Dimetia. i. South Wales, 100.15 Demetiae, what
Nation, and where planted, 101.4 and 103.4 Or Dimetae, 113.5
Denbigh Town and Castle in North wales, 99.11 and 119.7 An Earthquake there
without harm, 119.7 How governed, ibid. The graduation of it, ibid.
Denbigh-shire how limited, 119.1 The form and dimension thereof, 119.2 The
air and soil thereof, 119. and 3.4 By whom inhabited in old time, 119.5 The
Commodities thereof, 119.6 Hundreds and Towns thereof, 120
Depopulation in England complained of, 4.10 Derwent River, 67.3 Earl of
Desmonds Rebellion suppressed, 139.9 Himself beheaded by a Soldier, ibid.
Deucalidonian sea, 99.1 Devils arse in the Peake, 67.8 Devils ditch, 33.7. and
37.7 Devon-shire name whence derived, 91.1 How bounded 91 1 The dimension
thereof, 19.2 The air and soil of it 19.3 What Ports and Havens it has, 19.4
What commodities it yields, 19.5 It gives titles of Duke and Earl, 19.8
What Religious houses in it, 19.9 Hundreds and Towns therein, 20
Diamonds gotten in Cornwall, 21.7 In Somersetshire, 23.6
Dyffrin Cluid. 119.6 The fairest valley within Wales, 99.11
Divelin or Dublin County destitute of wood, 141.3 Divelin City the chief in
Ireland, why called in Irish Bala Cleigh, 141.6 Loyal to the Crown of
England. 141.10 How adorned, ibid. 11 How governed, ibid.
Divet. i. Pembroke-shire, 100 17 Division of this whole work or Theater, 1.1
A division of England fourefold in Canute his days, 4.11 Division of England
according to Jurisdiction Archiepiscopall, 5.4 Dobuni where seated, 45.4 and
47.4 Domesday book, why so called, 5.8 Dopnald King of Man tyrannizeth, and
flies into Ireland, 92.5 Dorchester (by Oxford) an Episcopal See, 45.4
Removed to Lincoln, 6.9 Had Archiepiscopall jurisdiction, 6.8 How seated, 17.5
The civil government thereof, 17.5 The graduation of it, 17.6
Dorcester-shire whence it took name, 17.1 How bounded, ibid. The form and
measure of it, 17.2 The air and soil thereof, 17.3. By whom possessed in old
time, 17.4 The commodities it yields, 17.5 What memorable places there, 17.6
What religious houses, 17 7.8 What Castles, 17.9 Divisions, Hundreds and Towns
therein, 18
Dover the Lock and Key to England, 7.5 Downs in Sussex, 9.4 Sir Francis
Drake compassed the Globe of the earth by Sea, 19.4 Drax an Abbey, 77.7
Dropping Well, 78.11 Dubricius Archbishop of Caerlion, 6.6 Dunstan, against
Priests marriage, his supposed Stratagem, 2^.6 Duwich an Episcopal See, 339
Durol rivae, 58.8 Duro sipont. See God-Manchester. Durotriges where seated,
17.4 Durham Bishopric how bounded, 83.1 The form and dimension of it, 83.2
The air and soil, 83.3 and 4 The ancient Inhabitants of it, 83.5 Towns in
the Bishopric, 84 Bishops their Royalties, 83.6
Durham City a Bishops See, Ibid. A County Palatine, Ibid

E
Eadesburg, where now the Chamber in the Forest, 73.7 King Eadgars triumph at
Chester, ibid.
Ealdermen who in times past, 4.7 East-England, 4.11 East Riding how bounded,
81 East Riding how seated, 77.4 The air, soil, and commodities, 81.2. and 3
In East Riding what Hundreds and Towns, 82
Edel^fleda built Gloucester Church, 47.7 Edel-fleda beneficial to Leicester,
61.6 Edith a Saint, 45.7 Edmund Earl of Richmond father to King Henry the
seventh, 101.7 His tomb, ibid.
Saint Edmunds bury how named in the Saxons time, 33.6 Saint Edmunds-Bury Abbey
and Town praised, ibid. King Edward the second, first of the English Race,
Prince of Wales, 123.6 Murdered by the means of Isabel his wife, 47.7 Enterred
in Glocest. Church, where his Monument remains, ibid.
Einesbury, alias Arnulphsbury, 58.10 Elden hole, 67.8 Eleanor wife to King
Edward the first commended, 63.7 Eleanor widow to King Henry the third
becomes a Nun, 25.9 Elfred (or Alfred) the first that divided his Kingdoms
into Shires, 3 4. and 5 His noble care in restoring the University of Oxford,
45 7
Elie, 37.5 Ella King of Northumberland slain, 78.9 Elmet, 78.10 Elmham a
Bishops See, 35.8 Emerill stone found in Garnsey, 94.6 England on this side
Humber how divided into Hides, 3.3. Little England beyond Wales, 101.4
England shared into Principalities by whom, and to what purpose, 57.30
Enis-Kelling a strong Fort in Vlster, 145.9 Eorles, i. Earls, 4.7. and 11
Erdini, people in Ireland, 145 5 Erminstreet, 37.7 Essex, why so named, 31.1
The form and dimension, 1.2 How bounded, ibid. 3 The air and soil, 31.4 The
ancient Inhabitants, 31.5 What commodities it yields, 31.6 What religious
houses therein, 31.9 Hundreds and towns therein, 32
Excester City whence it named that name, 19 6 It was a Dukedom, Marquisate,
and Earldom, 19 8 The description thereof, 19 6 Her magnificent Cathedral
Church by whom built, ibid. The Bishops See, ibid. It withstood the Saxons 465
years, ibid. How valiant against all her Sieges, ibid. What losses it has
felt, ibid. Resisted William Conqueror till the walls fell down, ibid. How
loyal to King Edward the sixth, ibid. The Climate thereof, ibid. How governed,
ibid. The birthplace of the matchless Poet Josephus Isanus, ibid.
Exchequer Court first erected, 5.3 Exmore Monuments in Devon-shire, 19.7
F
Falmouth Haven commended 21.7 Farne Isle how bounded, 93 The form, air,
soil, and commodities, ibid.
Feldon or Felden a part of Warwickshire, 53.3 Finborow a City, where now the
Chamber in the Forest, 73.7 Fingall King of Man. 9.2 Rich. Fitz-Ralph against
Mendicant Friars, 145.9
Flamins and Arch-Flamins, 6.5 Their places converted into Bishops Sees, ibid.
Flavia Caesariensis, a part of Britain, why so called, 2.15 How limited, 2.16
Fleg, a part of Norfolk, 35.1 Flemins inhabiting Rosse in Wales, 101.4
Flint-shire how bounded, and of what form, 121.1 The dimension, ibid. 2 The
air and Climate, 121 3. and 4 The commodities, 121.5 The ancient Inhabitants,
121.6 Hundreds and Towns there, 122
Flint castle by whom founded and finished, 121.7 The graduation thereof, ibid.
Flodden-field, 89* 10 Foelix, Bishop of Dunwich, 35.8 A Font of solid brass,
39.5 Forest both name and thing whence it came, 57.2 Forest justice, 57.^
Forresters office, ibid.
Fotheriaghay Castle and Collegiate Church, 55.8 Fouldage in Norfolk what it
is, 35.2 Fountain ebbing and slowing, 85.9 Fountains Abbey, 77.7 Freshwater
Isle, 15.14 Friburgi, 57.4
G
Gallena See Wallingford. Galloglasses what they are, 138.19 Galloway County
how commodious, 143.4 Galway the third City in Ireland, and an Episcopal See*
143.6 Gangani a people in Ireland, 143.5 Gaothel with his wife Scota come into
Ireland, 137 11 Garnsay Island how it is situate, 94.1 The dimension thereof,
ibid. The form of it, 942. Sometime called Sarnia, 94.1 The government,
original, and language of the Inhabitants, 94 5 and 8 Market-Townes, Castles,
and Parishes therein, 94 8 No Toade, Snake, or venomous creature there, 94.3
Order of the Garter, 27.8 Gateshed, 89.8 Pierce Gaveston beheaded, 53.4
Gessrey ap Arthur of Monmouth why so called, 107.4 Geese where they sail as
they sly. 81.6 Saint Germane confuteth the Pelagian Heresy, 77.7 H^ sin^ieth
at Oxford, 45.7
Giants teeth and bones dug up, 31.8 Giants dance, translated out of
Leinster to Salisbury Plain by Merlin, 141.14 Gildas the old Britain, Student
in Oxford, 45.7 Gilling Monastery, 79.5 Gisburg Abbey, 81.8 Glamorgan-shire how
limited, 100.19. and 109.1 What Cantreves and Commots it has, 100 19 The form
and measure of i^, 105.2 The air and soil thereof, 105.3 The Commodities it
stands upon, 10^.3 Castles and religious houses in it, 105.8 Hundreds,
Towns, and memorable places therein, 106
Glastenbury Abbey first begun by Joseph of Arimathea, 23.9 Gloucestershire
how it is bounded, 47.1 The dimension of it, 47.2 The form, air, and soil,
47.3 The commodities thereof, 47.3. and 5 By whom in ancient time inhabited,
47.4 Hundreds and Towns therein, 48
Gloucester City how called in old time, 47.6 A Cathedral See, 47.7 The
graduation of it, ibid That Dukedom fatal ever to her Dukes, 47 11
Godiva Earl Leofrikes wife, released Coventry of Tributes by riding naked
through it, 53.5 Godmanchester or Gormanchester, 107.4 Godred the son of
Syrricke King of Man, 92.1 His death, 92.2
Godred Crovan warreth upon the Manksmen, 92.3 Conquereth the Isle of Man, and
is King, 92.3 Buried in Ila an Island, ibid.
Godred son of Olave King of Man, 92.7 King of Dublin, 92.7 He vanquished and
slew Osibeley, 92.7 He tyrannizeth in Man, ibid. Put to slight by Summerled,
92.7 King of the Isles also, 92.9 His death, burial and issue, ibid.
Godred Don, son of Reginald King of the Islands slain, 92.10 Goodwin Sands
dangerous shelves, 7.6 Gog-Magog, 21.1 Gog-Magog hills, 37.7 Grantbridge, 37.4
Grantcester an ancient City, 37.4 Arthur Baron Gray suppresseth Desmonds
Rebellion, 139.9 Gromebridge in Sussex, 9.8 Grounds in the Irish Sea what they
be, 141.7 Grounds made fruitful with burning ashes, 119 4 Guartiger Maur,
111.5 Gwent a part of South Wales, now Monmouth-shire, how confined, 100.20 How
it is divided into Cantreves and Commots, ibid.
Guith, i. the Isle of Wight, 15.7 Guy of Warwick beheadeth Piers of Gaveston,
53.4 Guy-Cliffe, 53.7 Guorong the Lieutenant of Kent, 7.11
H
Hadrians Wall limiting the Roman Province in England, 6.9 Hadria^ 4. Pope,
where borne and his death, 36.6 Hales Monastery, 47.11 Blood of Hales, ibid.
Halifa^ a great Parish, why so called, 77.8 Halifas Law, ibid. Haly-werke
folk, 83.6 Hant-shire how bordered upon, 13.1 The dimension thereof, 13 2 The
air and soil thereof, 13.3. and 4 What Havens, Creekes and Cas^les it has,
13.5 By what people inhabited in old time, 13.6 What commodities it yields,
13.8 What Religious Houses, Hundreds and Towns therein, 13.11
Hardy-Canute his death, 11.6 Lord ^ohn Harrington Baron of Exton, 59.5 His
draught of Rutland-shi^^, ibid.
Harb^h a great town in Merio^th-shire, 99.10 Harb^h town and castle, 117.6
The position thereof, 117.7
Harod Godwins son, King of England, vanquisheth Harold Harfager King of
Norway, 92.1 Harold Olaves son King of Man, drowned in a tempest, 92.12
Havering how it took name, 31.9 Hawad^n Castle, 121.7 Hegl^andmen, 2.12 Heil
Saxon Idol, 17.6 Helb^ks, 79.3 Hell^ettles, 83.7 Hel^et of gold dug up in
Li^oln-shire, 63.6 Hen^st beheaded, 78.10 Hen^ Prince of Wales, Duke of
^ornwall, Englands great ho^, 21.6 Hen^ Prince of Scotland ha^y escapes death
at the sie^ of Ludlow, 71.6 He^ the 4. Emperor of Amain buried in Saint
W^burgs Church at Cheste^ 73.7 Phil Herbert first Earl of Motgomery, 115.5
Her^rd-shire how bounded, 49.1 The climate of what temp^rature, 49.2 Hu^dreds
and towns th^rein, 50
Heref^rd City and Bishopric^e, 49.5 The circuit and graduation th^reof, ibid.
The ^ivill Magistracy thereof. ibid.
Herbe^t Losinga B. of Norwi^ what Churches and Monasteries he built, 35.8
Herefordshire how bounded, 39.1 The form and dimension of it, ibid. The air,
soil, and commodities, 39.3 The ancient Inhabitants, 39.4 H^^dreds and Towns,
^erein, 40
Her^rd town, 39.6 The ^^aduation thereof, 49.8 Hib^ia, whence it took man,
138.12 Hidosland what it signifies, 3.3. and 57.3. Hig^andmen, natural Scots,
11.4. See Heghlandmen. Hill^ie Isle, 9^.8 Saint Hilda his miracle, 81.6
Himinbrooke Nuunery, 57.6 Histricall Tome of this Vorke, 1.1 Hobies Irish in
Leinster, 141.5 Ho Island. See Lindisferne. Ho well. See Winifrids well. Ho
cross in Tipperary within Mounster, 139.11 Ho^nd a third part of Linc^n-shire,
63.10 Hlanders fishing by license ^on the North-East coasts England, 81.3 H^ry
Holland his high desent and calamity, 19.8 H^ Castle in Bromfield, 100 12
Horse Muscles full of good earl, 132.15 Horse-shooe in the Shire-Hall at
Oak^ham, 59.7 ^orsa slain in battle, 7.11 At Horsted his Monument, ibid.
^orton. See Halifax. ^ospitall at Leicester with a Collegiate Church built,
61.6 Charles Howard defeated the the Spanish Armada at Sea, 19.4 Hubblestone in
Devon-shire whence it took name, 19.7 Humber as arm of the Sea, 79.3 Hundreds
what they are 3.4 Hunting^on-shire how it is bounded, 57.1 How ^ivided, 57.3
What manner of Jurisdiction therein at first, 57.4 Hundreds, towns, and
memorable places therein, 58 10
Huntingdon town why so named, and how seated, 57.5 Their Common-seale, ibid.
Their Priory of Black-Canon, ibid. The Castle, ibid. The River there sometime
Navigable, 57.6
Hurles in Cornwall what they be, 21.9
I
James ^he fourth King of Scots slain, 89 10. James 5. King of Scots dies for
grief of heart, 87.5 Iceni, that people, and where seated, 33.4. and 35.3 Icat
or black Amber, 81.6 Iersey Island how seated, 94 The form and dimension of it,
94.2. The air and soil, 94.3.4 Stockings there made, 94.4 The original and
language of the Inhabitants, 94.5 The Commodities, 94.6 How governed, 94.7
An Island floating, 132.15. Ilchester in Somersetshire, 23.10 Kingdom of the
Islands divided, 92.17 Johannes de sacro Bosco borne at Halifax, 77.8 King John
his Monument and Portraiture. 51.5 Saint John's Tomb in Scotland, 132.6 Iona,
i. Columkil, 132.18 Josephus of Exceter (or Iscanus) his praise, 19.6 Ipswich
commended, 33.6 The dimension and site of Ipswich, ibid. How governed, ibid.
Ireland how divided into Provinces and Countries, 135 What names it has, 137*
1 The name whence derived, 137.2 The most Western Island, 137.2 Why called the
holy Island, 137.3 Thought to be Ogygia in Plutarch, 137.3 Called also Scotia,
ibid. The third Island for bigness in the known world, 137.4 When and how it
received Christianity, 135.22 Christianity there much decayed, 139.8 Ireland
of what form it is 137.4 How bounded, ibid. The air and temperature, 137.5
The soil, 137.6 The Commodities, 137.7 The ancient and original Inhabitants,
137.8 By whom divided into five Provinces, 138.12. Called little Britain, ibid.
Irish-mens Cottages in Anglesey, 125 The manners and customs of the Irish in
old time, 138.14 The manner of Baptizing, 138.15 Their Children how nurced,
ibid. Their fantastical conceits, 138.16
Addicted much to Witchcraft, ibid. Their Idolatry, ibid. Their attire, 138.18
They forsake their wives at their pleasure, 145.8 Their manner of War, 138.19
Their mourning for the dead, 138.20
Irish BB. Consecrated by the Archbishop of Canterbury, 145.8 Isca Silurum,
i. Caer-lion, 107.4 Ithancester. See St Peter's upon the wall, ibid. S. Ivo a
Persian Bishop, 15.7 S. Ivoes Priory, a Cell to Ramsey Abbey, ibid.
K
Katherine Dowager of Spain^ where interred, 55.7 Keys of the Isle of Man,
91.5 Kendale or Candale whence it takes name, 85.4 Kendale Town, 85.7 How
governed, ibid. Graduation of it,, ibid.
Kendale Earls, 85.7 Kent, how it is bounded, 7.1. The length, breadth, and
circumference of it, ibid. The form, site, and position of it, 7.2.3 The soil
and Commodities, 7.4 Rivers navigable therein, 7 5 Kent unconquered, 7.7
Receives Christianity first in this Isle, ibid. Troubled with civil
dissentions, 7.10 How governed, 7.11 Made a Kingdom, ibid. Made an Earldom,
ibid. Earls thereof with the Arms of their several families, ibid. How
divided into Hundreds and Parishes, 7.8
Kesteven a third part of Lincolne-shire, 63.10 Kildare adorned with an
Episcopal See, 141.8 Kilkenny a fair Burroughtown in Leinster, 141.8
Kimbolton Manor, 58.9 Kings-delfe. See Swords-delfe. Kingstone upon Hull, 81
4 When built, ibid. How governed, ibid.
The graduation of it, ibid. Kirkstall Monastery, 77.7 Kirkstall battle, 78.10
Knights-fees how many in England in William the Conquerours days, 4.10
Knocktoe battle, 143.7
L
Henry Lacy Earl of Lincoln, his only son drowned in a Well, 119.7
Lactorodum. See Stonystratford, Laford, i. Lord, what it imports, 47
Lagetium. See Casterford. Lagman King of Man, 92.4 He takes the badge of the
Cross of Jerusalem, 92.4 In his journey dies, ibid. His cruelty to his
brother Harold. 92.4
Lambeth commended, 11.7 Lamp burning many ages, 78.11 Llanbadarn vaur an
Episcopal See, 113.7 Lancaster County Palatine, 7^.1 How confined, ibid. The
form and dimension of it, 75.2 The soil and commodities thereof, 75.4
Hundreds and Towns therein, 76 By whom anciently inhabited, 75.5
Lancaster Town, 75.6 The position of it, ibid. How governed, ibid.
Lancaster House and York conjoined, 75.9 Lancastrians put to flight, 78.10
Llandaff city how sited, 105.5 An Episcopal See, ibid.
Llandevi breve, why so called, 113.7 Langley in Hertford-shire. 39.6 Lath what
it is, 4.6 Laws, i. great stones, 89.13 Laws of three sorts in England, 4.8.
and 5.3. Law-troubles none in the Isle of Man, 91.5. Laws ought to be written
and certain, 5.3 Law-land men, 2.12 Lavatrae. See Levatre, Saint Laurence
Island, 1.2 Lead-Mines in Darby-shire, 67.5 Lead-blacke in Cumberland, 87.4
Leet whence it took name, 4.6 Legeolium. See Casterford. Leichestershire how
bounded, 61.1 The Commodities and air thereof, 61.2. and 3 What Religious
Houses therein, 61.8 Hundreds and Towns therein, 62 By whom inhabited in old
time, 61.4
Leicester City or Town the Center of the Shire, 61.5 The position of it,
ibid. What names it had beside, 61.1 An Episcopal See, ibid. Built long before
Christ's Nativitie, ibid. Well traded, and as well walled in times past, ibid.
The graduation thereof, 61 5 Destruction thereof, 61.6
Leinster Province in Ireland, how called, 141.1 How bounded, ibid. The form
and dimension thereof, 141.2 The air, soil, and Commodities, 141.3. and 5 By
whom inhabited in old time, 141.4 Religious Houses therein, 141.14 Irish
therein mischievous one to another, 141.2 Countries and Towns therein, 142
Lonn or Linn an ancient Borrough, 35.6 Made a Corporation, ibid.
Lenn Episcopi, 35.6 Lenn Regis, ibid. Laeth what it is, 4.6 Lettustan Hundred
in Huntingdon-shire, 58.9 Le-trim County, plentiful of grass, 143.4
Levatrae. See Bows. Jews Battle in Sussex, 9.7 Llewellin Prince of Wales,
where slain and beheaded, 111.5 Lichfield City, why so called, 69.8 Lichfield
Arms, ibid. An Archiepiscopall See. ibid. 6.8 What Bishops subject to it, 6.8
The Minster built and new reared by whom, ibid.
Limericke the principal City in Mounster, 139.6 An Episcopal See. ibid. By
whom possessed, ibid. Fortified by whom, ibid. The position thereof, ibid.
Lieutenant in every County called Custos or Earl, 4.11 Lin. See Lenn.
Lincolnshire, how bounded, 63.1 The dimension and air of it, 63.2 Form
thereof, 63.4 Full of Fish and Foul, 63.5 Other commodities thereof, 63.6
Hundreds, Wapentakes, and Towns therein, 64 Lincoln City what names it has,
63.8 How ancient and populous, ibid. How governed, ibid. The position and
situation of it, ibid. Full of Religious Houses, 63.9 How divided, 63.10
Lindisfarne Island, why called the Holy Island, 93.1 How it is situate, ibid.
The form and dimension thereof, 93.2 The Air and soil of it, 93.3. and 4 In
it an Episcopal See, 93.6
Lindsey a third part of Lincoln shire. 63.10 Llinsavathan a strange Mere
near to Brecknock town. 109.4 Supposed to be Loventrium, ibid. Liquorice
growing at Workesop, 65.4. Lithancraces, 89.6
Little- Chester in Darby-shire, a Colony of Romans, 67.6 Lodestone in
Devon-shire, 195 Longovicum. See Lancaster. Loughburrough, 61.7 Lough-Lomund,
in Scotland, most raging in calmest weather, 132.15. Lhoyger, i. England, how
it is bounded, 99.1 Luceni, ancient people in Ireland, where planted, 139 4
Lutterworth, 61.7 London, what names it had, 29.7 Walled by Constantine, the
great, ibid. London-stone, a Mile-mark, ibid. Churches therein, ibid. Wards
thereof, ibid.
How governed, ibid. An Archbishops See, 6.5 Made subject to Canterbury, ibid.
In what graduation, 29 8 London Bridge. ibid.
M
Madagascar an Island, 12 Madning-Money whence so called, 41.8 Magi. See Radnor
Town, 111.6 Magintum, now Dunstable, a Roman Station, 41.4 Magnus son of
Olave, King of Man, 92.14 His death and burial, 92 15
Maiatae, 2.12 Maiden Castle near Dorcester, 17.5 Maiden Castle. 79.7
Main-Amber, a strange rock, 21.9 Maio County what Commodities it yields 143
4 Malden in Essex the byall seat of King Kunobelin 31 8 Malmesburie Monast^e
whence it took name 25 8 William of Malmesburi^ Chronicler, ^bid. Malverne
hills, and the amirable ditch there, 1.6 Man Isle granted to Fury Percy Earl
of Northunerland, 9^7. Granted to the Stanlei and Earls of Darby, I^id. What
names it has, 91 1 How bounded, ^^id. The form and dimen^^on, 9.2 The air,
9.3 The soil, 9.4 The Commodities, 94 and 5 How it is fortified, ib^d. The
Inhabitants Religiou^ 9^6 Malefactors there how excuted, ib^^. Castles, Towns,
Parish, and Villages there, 9 ^ Chronicles of the Isle, 9
Manchester in Lanca-shire 75.^ Mancunium. See Manchester. Manures where they
inhabited, 13.^ March Cross upon Stanemoore, 6.1^ March stone-Crosse upon
Frith-bridge, 6 ^ March, what Country, 9^ Markeley Hill removed, 4^ ^
Marquesite stones where found, 81.6 Marsland, part of Norfolk 35.2 Mary Queen
of Scotland where enterred, 55.7 Mathravall, i. Powis land, 99 ^2 Maudbury a
Trench, 17.5 Meden and Medena, 15.7 Medway, a famous River in Kent, 7 5
Melburne in Darby-s^ire famous for the Captiv^tie of John Duke of Burbo^, 67 7
Melitus Bishop of London, 6 5 Men^pii people of Ireland, 141.4 Menevia an
Archbishops See, 6.6 Called now Saint David's, ibid. What Suffragan Bishops it
had, ibid. Made subject to Canterbury, ibid.
Merchenlage, 5.3 Merchet of Women, 132 18 Mercia, 4.11 Mercian Law, 48
Merioneth-shire how ^ounded, 99.10. and 117.1 Cantreves and Commots therein,
99.10 The form, air, and soil of it, 117.2 Full of spired and clustred
hills, 117.2 Hundreds and Towns in it, 118 Merlin Silvester a Wizard, 193.6
Borne in Caermarden, Ibid. His Prophecy of the Welshmens subjection, 107 4
Merton in Surrey where King Kenulphe dyed, 11.6 Metheglin, what drink, 121 5
Metropolitanes in England two, 5.4 In ancient time three, 6 5
Mice in Essex spoil cattle and grass, 3.6 Saint Michaell in the ^ale, 94 7
Michaell Joseph overthrown upon black heath, 7 10 Middlesex why so called, and
how it is bounded, 29 1 The measure of it, 29.2 The form, air, and soil
thereof, 29.3 The situation of it, 29.4 What ancient Inhabitants, 29 5 Hundreds
and Towns, 30
Middleton Monastery built in Dorset shire, 17.7 Milesius his four son come
into Ireland, 138.11 Milford haven, 101.5 Milfrid a petty King b^lt Hereford
Cathedral Church, 49 5 Millstones and Grin^-stones in Anglesey, 125
Mindip-hills in Summ^rset-shire, 23.6 Why so called, ibid.
Minyd Morgan Mon^ment, ^05.8 Moillenlly hill, 19.6 Mon, i. Anglesey, 99.7 Mon,
Man, Cy, what i^ signifies, 125 Mona Caesaris, i. the ^^e of Man. See Map of
M^n. Monks swarmed in Es^^x, 31 9 Monmouthshire part of ^ales, now laid to
England, 100 2 How it is bound, 107 1
The form, air and (...) of it, 107. and 3 By whom inhabited i^ old time, ^07
4 Hundreds, Towns, and Rivers, therein, 108
Monmouth Town wereof it took name, 107.1 Their Castle the Bir^^place of King
Henry the fifth, 107.4 The Town how sea^ed, Ibid. How governed, ibid. The
position thereof, ibid. Religious houses the^ein, Ibid.
William Montacute Earl of Salisbury wrestet^ Man-Isle out of the Scots hand,
92.17 Sells it and the Crown thereof to William Scroop, ibid.
Montgomery-shire how bounded, 115.1 The form and soil of it, 115.2 Their
horses, 115.4 Ancient Inhabitants, 115.5
Mountgomery town and Castle, 115.5 The position of it, ibid. It gives title
of an Earldome, ibid. Hundreds and Towns there, 116
Moors in Westmoreland, 85 4 Mortimers hole, 65.6 Motingham in Kent, where the
ground sunk, 7.6 Mounster, what names it bears, 139.1 How it is bounded,
ibid. The dimension thereof, 139 2 The form, air and soil, 139.3 How
divided, 139.4 and 11 West-Mounster and South-Mounster how in old time
inhabited, 139.4 The Commodities of Mounster, 139.5
Mounster addicted to superstitious vanities, 139.8 Much wasted by Rebellions,
139.9 Visited with sundry calamities of dearth, 139 10 What Religious places
there, 139.11 How governed, ibid.
Murchard O Brien King of Ireland, 92.2 Mussold or Mossewold heath 35.5
N
Nagnatae what people in Ireland, 143.5 Needles, certain Rocks, 15 9 Nemethus
and his four sons arrive in Ireland, 137 9 Saint Neotus, a Monk of
Glastenbury, 58.10 Saint Neots or Needs Priorie, 58.10 Nessa a Lough in
Scotland never freezeth in Winter, 132 15 Nevils Cross battle, In the Map of
Durham Bishop-ricke. New Castle upon Tine, 89.7. Whence so named, 89.8 Called
Monke-chester, 89 7 A County and Corporation of it self, 89.8 The graduation
thereof, ibid.
New-forrest in Hant-shire fatal to William the Conqueror his Progeny, 13.7
New-Market-heath, 37.7 Newnham Regis medicinable waters, 53 Newport in the Isle
of Wight, 15.7 Made a Corporation, and Maior-towne ibid.
Ninian converted the South-Picts to Christianity, 132 13 Normans-Crosse
Hundred in Huntingdon-shire whence it took name, 58.8 Northamptonshire, how
bounded, 55.1 The form and dimension thereof, 55.2 By whom inhabited in old
time, 55.4 The commodities of it, 55 5 Hundreds and Towns therein, 56
Northampton Town described, 55.6 The dimension thereof, ibid. How governed,
ibid.
Norfolk an Island, 35.1 How bounded and of what form, ibid. The measure and
name, ibid. The position, soil, and air, ibid. Commodities thereof, 35 2. and
8 Commodious Rivers there, 35.3 Families of Gentlemen there, and their
loyalty, 35.3 How Norfolk is governed, ibid. By whom inhabited in old time,
ibid. Replenished with Churches and Monasteries, 35 3 The first Earl of
Northfolke, 35.4 Hundreds and Towns in Northfolke, 36
North Riding in Yorke-shire, how it lies, 77.4 How bounded, 81.1 The air,
soil, and commodities, 81.2. and 3 Hundreds and Towns therein, 82
Northumbre, 4.11 Northumberland how it is bounded, 89.1 The form, air, and
soil of it, 89.2. and 3. and 4 The ancient inhabitants, 89 5 The Commodities
thereof, 89.6 Battles there, 89.10 Antiquities there, 89.12 Towns and Parishes
therein, 90
North Wales how bounded, 99.6 Divided into four parts, 99 7 What Shires it
contains, 115.5
Norwich whence so called, 35.5 How afflicted with Pestilence and other
calamities, ibid. A Bishops See, 35.8
Nottingham-shire why so named, 65.1. How bounded, ibid. The form and
dimension thereof, 65.2 The air and commodities, 65.3 Hundreds, Wapentakes,
and Towns therein, 66
Nottingham town commended, 65.6 How governed, 65.7 The position thereof, ibid.

O
Oaten bread, 91.4 Odiam Castle in Hant-shire, of what strength, 13.5 Offaes
dike, 3.2 How it runs, 99.3 and 111.6
Offchurch, the Palace of King Offa, 53.7 Oisters of Essex the best, 31 6
Oister-hills in Hertford shire, 39.7 Okam, where borne, 11.7 Okham alias Oukham
Royalty, 59.5 The seat in times past of the Ferrars, 59.7
Okham or Oukham Castle, 59 9 Okenyate, 71.9 Olave son of Godred Crovan King of
Ireland, 92.6 His wife, concubines, and issue, ibid.
Olave the second King of Man, 92.10 King of the Isles, ibid. His death and
burial, ibid.
Ordovices a puissant Nation, 115.5 Where planted, 71.5 and 115.5. and 117.4.
and 119.5. and 121.6. and 123.5. and 125. Orewood a weed of the Sea, 21.3
Orkenary Islands how many, 132.20 By whom discovered and subdued, 132.21 How
they descended to the Kings of Scotland, 132 21
Osbright King of Northumberland slain, 178.9 Oswestry Lordship, 100.12 Otho
Bishop of Bareux, first (...) of Kent, 7.11 (...) where (...) 89.5 Otter^^^^e
battle, 89.12 Ounsb^ry hill fore-sheweth (...) and rain, 181 Ou^^ River
greater and less, 35.3. (...) in Hertford-shire stays h^s course, 41.5 ^wen
Glendower his rebellion and death, 117.4 Oxford and Oxfordshire whence so
named, 45.1 How bounded, ibid. The air and soil, 45.2 Rivers thereof, ibid.
The dimension of it, 45 3 The ancient inhabitants, 45 4 Hundreds and Parishes
there, 46
Oxford how ancient an Academie, 45.7 The prerogative thereof, by general
Council, ibid. The second school of Christendom, and pillar of the Church,
ibid. The general University for all England, Wales, Scotland, and Ireland.
In Oxford thirty thousand Students, 45.7 An Episcopal See, ibid. The site of
it, 45.8
Ox-gauge what it is, 57.3
P
Palladius, Apostle to the Scots, 132.13 Palme-Sunday Battle, 78 10 Parishes
in England divided by Honorius Archbishop of Canterbury, 5.4 In England how
many ibid. How many in the Conquerours time, 4.10
Passerumurbs, See Circester. Patricke, the first Apostle for Ireland, 158.22
His life, 138.23 His Purgatory, 145 7 Where he lived, died, and was buried,
145.9 Strife about his Sepulcher, 13^.22
Paulinus Archbishop of York baptized in one day ten thousand, 79 6 Peaceable
and safe traveling over all England in King Elfreds days, 3.4 Pembroke-shire
how limited, 107. and 101.1 What Towns, Cantreves, and Commots therein, 101.2
How near it is adjoining to Ireland, 101.3 The ancient Inhabitants, 101.4 The
Commodities thereof, 101.5 What Religious houses dissolved, 101.8 Castles
therein, ibid. Hundreds and Towns there, 102
Pembroke Town, 100.17 The site of Pembroke, ibid.
Pearls in Cumberland, 87.4 Engendered in Caernarvon-shire, 123.5
Perry a drink in Worcestershire, 51.3 Perth. See Saint John's Town. Saint
Peter's in Cornehill an Archbishops Cathedral Church, 6.5. and 29.7 Saint
Peter's Port, 94 Saint Peter's upon the wall, 31.8 Peter-house in Cambridge
built, 37.4 Peterborow Town and Monastery, 55.7 Peterborow the Cathedral
Church, ibid. Pichford famous for a Well of Bitumen, 71.9 Picts Wall, 3.2 It
was the Romans only Partition Northward, ibid.
Picts the in-borne and natural Britains, 131.4 Why so called, ibid.
Pimble-Mere in Merioneth-shire of what nature it is, 117.5 Plaster of
Lincolnshire harder then that of Paris, 65.4 Plantius first Roman Prefect in
Britain, 2 Plimmouth famous wherefore, 19.4 Plimlimmon Hill, 113.3 Plough-land
what it is, 57 3 Pomona an Island of the Orcades, an Episcopal See, 132.20 What
commodities it yields, ibid.
Pontfret plentiful of Liquorice and Skirworts 78 8 Port, the Saxon, 17.4
Port-land in Dorset-shire, ibid. Port-greeves, 4.7 Pondbery a Trench, 17.5
Powis-land how divided, 99 12 Powis Vadoc, ibid. Powis between Wye and Severne,
100.13 Powis Wenwinwyn, 100 14 Powis Vadoc what Cantreves and Commots it has,
100 12 Powis between Wye and S^verne what Towns and Castles it has, 100 13
Powis Wenwinwyn what towns Cantreves and Commots it has, 100 14 Prestaine a
Town of Commerce in Radnor-shire, 111 6 Process and pleading in the French
tongue, 5.3
R
Radnor-shire how it bordereth, 111.1 The form and circuit of it, 111.2 The
air and soil thereof, 111.3 and 4 The ancient Inhabitants, 111.5 Rivers
there, 111.7 Hundreds, Towns, etc. there, 102
Radnor Town the seat and graduation thereof, 111 6 Radulph Earl of Norfolk,
35.5 Ramsey Abbey, 57.6 Called Ramsey the rich and why, ibid.
Reading alias Redding in Bark-shire, beautified with an Abbey by King Henry
the first, 27.6 The Castle rased by King Henry the second, ibid. The graduation
of it, Ibid.
Reafen the Danes banner, 19 7 Redhorse Vale, 53.8 Redmore, where King Richard
the third was slain, 61 7 Regni, what people, and where seated, 9.5 and 11.4
Reignald son of Olave, usurpeth the Kingdom of Man, 92.9 Deprived of his
eyes and genitories by his brother Godred, ibid.
Reignald son of Godred King of Man. 92.9 Slain, ibid. His body where
interred, 92.9
Reignald or Reignald the second, son of Olave, King of Man, 92.13 Slain by
Yvas, ibid. His burial, ibid.
Repandunum. See R^pton. Repton, 67.7 Rere-crosse or Rey-Crosse upon Stanemore,
6.10 Restitutus Bishop of London in Constantine the great his time, 29.7
Ribble-Chester, ancient and sometime very rich, 75 6 Richard Lord Archbishop
of Canterbury commended, 11 7 Richard Earl of Cambridge beheaded at
Southampton, 13.1 Richard Earl of Cornwall enriched by Tin-mines in Cornwall,
21.3 King Richard the third slain and buried, 61.6 King Richard the second
taken prisoner by Henry of Bullingbrooke, 121.7 Richmond, chief Town of
North Riding, 79.4 How employed, ibid. By whom built and so named, 79.6 How
governed, ibid. The position thereof, ibid.
Ringwood in Hantshire whence so named, 13.6 Riplay the Alchymist, 11 7
Robogdii people in Ireland, 145.5 Rochester, by whom built, 7.9 Rodericke the
great King of Wales, 99.5 His division thereof, ibid.
Rollericke stones, 43 5 Rosamund Clifford poisoned by Queen Eleanor, King
Henry the second his wife, 45.8 Roscaman a commodious Territory in Connought,
143 4 Rugemont Castle, a Kings Palace, 19.6 Saint Rumalds Well, 43.5 Ruthlan
Town and Castle in North Wales, 99.11 Rutland-shire how bounded, 59.1 Why so
named, 59.2 The form of it, ibid. The dimension thereof, 59.3 The air and
soil, 59.4 and 5 The commodities it yields, ibid. The ancient Inhabitants,
and possessours thereof, 59.6. and 7 Hundreds and Parishes therein, 60

S
Sabbath day Market, 111 6 Saffran a Commodity of Essex: 31.6 Salisbury
plain, 25.4 Salisbury City, 25.7 The Cathedral Church, ibid. Earls thereof,
ibid. The situation there, 25 8 Old Salisbury, 25.8
Salmons great and plentiful in Scotland, 103.5 and 132.14 Salmons leap,
113.3 and 145.9 Salt, how made in Lancashire, 75.7 Salt coming from stones,
83.8 Saltry Iudeth why so called, 52.8 Saltry Monastery, ibid. Sand a part of
Nottingham-shire. 65.7 Sangue lac in Sussex, 9.7 Sarnia. See Garnsey, Saxons
Heptarchie whence it first began, 3.1 The seven several Kingdoms how named,
3.1 The Heptarchies Northern limit, 3.2
Saxons states severally how at first divided in England, 3 3 Saxons government
in England how long it continued, 4.11 Saxons first seven Kings Pagan, 4.12
Saxons first seven Kings Christian, ibid. Sceafull Mountain in the Isle of
Man, 91.7 Scope of the Author in this Work or Theater, 1.1 Scotland how
bounded, 99.1 and 131.4 How divided, 129 The form of it, 131.2 The Commodities
thereof, ibid. and 131.14 The feature and nature of The Scots, ibid.
Scotland adorned with three Universities, ibid. The position of Scotland,
131.9
Scotland how divided into Countries or Sheriffedoms, Stewardships, and
Bailiwickes, 191.10 In Scotland Archbishops Metropolitan, 2. and 132.11
Scots Southern of one original with the English, 131 4 Scots natural whence
descended and named, 131 5 Scots vanquish the Picts, and raise their name, 131
8 Scythians come into Spain, 138.7 Sea-coales, 89.6 A Seaman taken, 33.7
Sea-sand making the soil fruitful, 21.3 Seffrid Bishop reedefied Chichester
Cathedral Church, 9.6 Segontium, now Caernarvon, 123.6 Segontians where they
inhabited, 13.6 Selby the birthplace of King Henry the first, 63.7 Selby
Abbey, 77.7 Selonae, now Sandy, 41.4 Sessions four times in the year
ordained, 5.3 Severne a noble River, 47 3. The head thereof, 115.2 Whence it
took name, 115.3
Severus the Emperor died at York, ibid. The manner of his funeral, ibid.
Sexwolfe Bishop of Leicester, 61.6 Shaftesbury, 6 Sheriffs whence they came,
4.6 Shatland Isle, 132.22 Shirburne a Bishops See, 17 7 Translated to
Salisbury, 27 8
Shire whence it comes, 3 4 Shires how many in England at sundry times, 4.8
and 9 Shrewsbury chief Town of Shrop-shire, 71.8 The building, site, trade,
and strength thereof, 71 8 How governed, ibid.
Shrop-shire how limited, 71 1 The form, soil, and air thereof, 71.2.3.4
Castles 32. therein, 71 Hundreds and towns thereof, 72
Sicicle why so called, 15.1 Sidre in Garnsey what drink, 94.4 Sigebert King
of South Saxons skin, 9.4 Silcester, sometimes Caer-Segonte, 13.6 How ancient,
13.10 Destroyed, 13.10
Silures where they inhabited, 47.4. and 493. and 107.4 and 109 4. and 111.5
Described, 49.3 Their valor, ibid. 63.7 Subdued by Vespasian, 49 3
Simon a Monk of Swinstead poysoneth King John. Sisters three, what Rivers in
Leinster, 141.6 Slege County in Ireland what Commodities it yields, 143.4
Smyris. See Emeryll. Snowd^n Hill, 123.4 Soland Geese their use, 132.14
Solemne-Mosse field, 87.5 Somersetshire how bounded, 23.1 Whence it took
name, ibid. The form and dimension of it, 23.2 The air and soil, 23, 3 and 4
The ancient Inhabitants, 23.5 The profit it affords, 23 6 Memorable for
sundry Events, 23.8 Religious houses, 23 9 Hundreds and Towns thereof, 24
Somersham annexed to the Crown, 57.7 Southampton described, 13.10 South Wales
divided into six parts, 100.16 Spring of Salt Water at Leamington in
Warwickshire, 53.7 Springs that ebb and flow, 78.11 Stafford shire how
bounded, 69.1 The form and dimension of it, 69.2 By whom anciently inhabited,
69.5 Commodities thereof, 69.6 What houses of Religion it had, 69.9 Hundreds
and Towns therein, 70
Stafford Town described, 69.7 How governed, Ibid. The site or positure of it,
Ibid.
Sir Hubert Saint Clare his death to save King Henry the second, 7.6 Stamford
sometime an University, 59.8 Stamford bridge Battle, 92.1 Stanneries or
Stanniers, 21.3 Stibium in Darby-shire g^tten, 67.5 Stock-Chappell in Norfolk
why so called, 35.8 Stock Fish gainful to Kingstone men upon Hull, 81.4 Stones
like Serpents, 81.6 Stony Serpents found within round stones, 81.6
Stoney-Stredford, 4.3 6 The Cross there, Ibid.
Stones resembling Shellfishes, 47.10 Stoneheng^ described in the Map of
Wilt-shire. Stoneley Priory in Huntingdon-shire, 58.9 Suffolk how bounded,
33.1 The air thereof, 33.2 The form of it, Ibid. The dimension thereof, 33.3
By whom possessed in old time, 33, 4 What Commodities it yields, 33.5 How
divided, 33.9 Hundreds and Towns therein, 34
Sumatra thought to be the Isle Taprobana, 1.2 Summerled, Prince of Herergaidel
slain, 92.6.8 Sunning, an Episcopal See, translated to Shirburne, 27.8 Surrey
or Suthrey how it is bounded, 11.1. Whence it took name, 11.4 The form of it,
11.2 The length thereof, Ibid. The breadth of it, Ibid. The circumference
thereof, ibid. By whom inhabited in old time, 11.4 Principal places in it,
11.5 and 6.8 The graduation of it, 11.6 Religious Houses in it, 11.9 What
Castles are in it, 11.10 How divided, ibid. Hundreds and Towns in it, 12
Sussex what memorable places it has, 9.8 What commodities it yeildeth, 9.9
Religious Houses built and suppressed, 9.10 How bounded, 9.1 How divided, 9.10
Rapes, hundreds, and towns in it, 10 Why so named, 9.1 The form of it, 9.2 The
length thereof, Ibid. The breadth thereof, Ibid. The air of it, 9.3 Havens in
it uncertain and dangerous, 9.3 Nature of the soil, 9.4. Swale River, 79.3
Swale dale, ibid. Swords Delfe why so called, 58.8 Synod at Colne about
Priests Marriage, 25.6

T
Tamar River boundeth the Britains, by King Athelstanes device, 3.2 Tameworth,
sometimes the Mercian Kings Courts, 69.5 Taprobane the greatest Island, 137.4
Tave-River, 105.3 Teigne-Mouth the landing place of the Danes, at their first
Invasion, 19 4 Saint Telean Bishop of Llandaffe, 105*2 Temple to God Terminus,
132.11 Tetnall, alias Theotnall, what it signifies, 69 5 Teukesbury Field
fatal to the Lancastrians, 47.10 Thane or Thean, 4.7 Under- Thean, ibid.
Theodore a Grecian, Bishop of Canterbury, 7.8 Theon first Archbishop of
London. 6.5 Thetforl a Bishops See. Thrihings and Thrihingreves, 4.6 Thule
where it is seated, 132 22 Thule. See Shetland. Sr. Richard Thumbleby Knight
where buried, 117 6 Thurle-head^, Fishes of the Sea, coming to Land in
Munster, 132.10 Tinne-Mines in Cornwall, 21.3 Tinne-Lawes therein, Ibid.
Tinne-Workes in it, Ibid.
Earl of Tyrone his rebellion extinguished, 139.9 Tithings what they be, 3 4.6
Tithing-man or Borsholder, 3.6 Titus grasped by an Adder, without any harm,
13.6. Torcoch a rare fish, 123.7. Totnesse the landing place of supposed Brute,
19.4 Toulesland Hundred in Huntingdon-shire, 58.10. Towns of Britain were
Woods, etc. 58.9 Towns how many in England in William the Conqueror his time,
4 10 Trees floating in Bagmere, 73.9 Trinobantes what people, and where they
inhabited, 29.5 and 31.5 and 39.4 Turkill the Dane, Earl of the East Angles.
58.8 Twomon^ or County Clare conveniently seated, 143 4
V
Valentia, a part of Britain, why so called, 2.15 How limited, ^.16
Vel^^^^, ancient people in Ireland, where placed, 139 4 Venedotia, i.
North Wales. Venta Belgarum, i. Winchester, 13.9 Venta Icenorum, i. Castor, 35
5 Venta Silurum, i. Monmouth, 107.4 Robert de Vere, Earl of Oxford, Marquess
of Dublin, and Duke of Ireland, 45 5 Verolanium or Verolamium in
Hertford-shire. 39.5. Sacked by Queen Boduo, 39 5 Verterae, a place in
Westmorland, 85.8 Vffines whence so called, 35 3 Vidoms what they were, 4 6
Saint Vincents Rock, 23.6 Virgata, or Yardland, what it is, 57.3 Vlster
Province how bounded, 145.1 The form thereof, 145 2 The dimension of it, Ibid.
The air of it, 145.3 The soil and commodities hereof, 145.4 By whom possessed
in old time, 145 5.6 Their ancient custom of making a King, 145.6 Religious
houses in it, 145 10 Counties and Towns in it, 146
Vodia or Vdiae an ancient Nation in Ireland, where planted, 139.4 Vodius,
Archbishop of London slain by Vortigerne, 6 5 Voluntii, 145.5 Vortigerne
where consumed by lightning, 111.5 Vortimer slew in Battle Horsa brother to
Hengist, 7 11 Vpton in Worcestershire a Station of the Romans, 51 6
Vriconium. See VVroxce^ster. Vsoconia. See Okenyate. Vrsula, the Duke of
Cornwals daughter, with her Virgin-Saints, 21.5 Vske-bah, an wholesome
Aquavitae in Ireland, 137.6 Vterini, ancient people in Ireland where they
dwelt, 139.4
VV
A Wall in Scotland from Abercorne or Abercurving unto Dunbritton 132 11
Wall-towne, 89.12 Wales how confined, 99.1 The dimension thereof, 99 4 Wales
and Welsh, what it signifies, 99.1.2 Counties of Wales twelve, 98. and 100.22
Divided into three Regions or Kingdoms, 99 5 Divided into South Wales, 100.22
Divided into North Wales, ibid. West-Wales, ibid. Wales, why void of woods,
121.5 Princes of Wales sprung from the blood Royal of English Kings, 97
Wallingford Castle and Town, 27.7. Wansdike in Wilt-shire, 25.6 Wantage the
birthplace of King Elfred, 27.9 Wapentach or Wapentake, what it is, 3.6 War
Civil of York and Lancaster, 75.9 Warwickshire how bounded, 53.1 How
divided, 53.3 The form of it 53.2 The Compass thereof, Ibid. Commodities,
ibid. Who inhabited it in old time, 55.4 Hundreds and Towns, 54
Warwick Town by whom built, 53.6 What names it had in old time, ibid. The
position thereof, Ibid. The civil government thereof, 53.6
Washes in Lincolnshire hurtful to King John, 63.4 Wat Tyler an Arch-Rebell
slain, 7.10 Waterfals or Catadupa, 85.10 Waterford the second City in
Ireland, 139.7 Ever loyal to the Crown of England since the first Conquest of
it, Ibid.
Watling-street, 43.6 Waveney River, 35.3 Wedon in the street sometime
Bannavenna, 55.7 Weisford in Ireland, the first English Colony, 141.8 Whence it
took name, Ibid. A Well boiling up with streams of blood, 27.9 Ebbing and
flowing accor-to the Sea, 103.7 and 111.8 Ebbing and flowing contrary to the
Sea-tydes, 105.7 A Well, the droppings whereof turn into hard stone, 132.15 A
Well floating with Bitumen, 132.15
Wells a City in Somersetshire, why so called, 23.7 By what civil
Magistracy governed, ibid. The position or graduation thereof, ibid.
Wentsdale, 79.3 Saint Werburgs Church in Chester, 73.7 Western Islands subject
to Scotland how many, 132 17 How ruled in ancient time 132.18 Their
Commodities, 132 19
Westminster a Bishops See, 29 7 Westmerland how bounded, 85.1 The measure
thereof, 85 2 The form and air, 85.3 The ancient Inhabitants, 85.5 Places of
chief note therein, 85.8 Towns in it, 86
West Saxon Lage, 5.3 West Saxon Law, 4.8 West Sox, 4.11 Whitby Abbey founded,
77.7 Whitgar the Saxon, 15.7 VVhittington Castle, 100.12 Whorwell Monastery
built, 17 6 VViscii, what people 51.4 Wiches, i. Salt pits, ibid. John
Wickliffe, Englands morning star, 61.7 VVight Island described, 15 What names
it had in old time, 15.1 The form and dimension of it, 15.2 The air and soil
thereof, 15.4 The commodities of it, 15 4.5 By whom first inhabited, 15.6 By
whom subdued 15.10 How fortified, 15.9 What Towns, Rivers, and memorable places
are in it, 15.10 How divided, 15.7 and 16
VVike. See Kingstone upon Hull. Saint VVilfreds Needle 78 11 Wilfrids Bishop,
reduced the Ilanders of Wight to Christianity, 15.10 William the bastard
Conquered England, 92.2 and 5.1 William now Bishop of Excester repaireth the
Cathedral Church there, 19 6 William King of Scots taken prisoner, 89.10 His
son drowned with his Cradle, 132.16
Wilt-shire how bounded, 25 1 The form and dimension of it, 25.2 The air and
soil, 25 3.4 By whom inhabited in old time, 25.5 Religious houses in it, 25.9
Hundreds and Towns therein, 26
Winander Mere, 57.7 Winburne Minster, 17.7 Winchester City by whom built,
13.9 What name it had in old time, 13.9. How traded, and how o^t burnt, 13.9
Situation thereof, 13.9 Graduation thereof, Ibid. Fired by the French, 13 10
What Fortunes it has been exposed unto, Ibid. Cathedral Church thereof, 13.9
Windesor Castle, 27.7 The Chapel there the Sepulcher of what Kings, 27 8
Winifride of Devon-shire, the Apostle of the Hessians, etc. 19.6 Winifrides
Well, 121.8 Winwid field, 78.10 Woodland a part of Warwickshire, 53.3 Woods
spared and preserved in Lancashire, 75.4 Wolsey Cardinal where buried, 61.6
Wolves paid yearly for a tribute, 117.3 Women in the Isle of Man girt
ordinarily with their winding-sheets, 91.7 Worcestershire how bounded, 51.1
The form and dimension of it, 51.2 The air and commodities, 51.5 Hundreds and
Towns, 52
Worcester City how named in old time, 51.3 What calamities it has sustained,
ibid. The Cathedral Church built by Sexwolfe Bishop, ibid. The Civil
Magistracy, ibid. The Geographicall position of it, ibid.
Wring-cheese Rocks 21.9 Wroxcester an ancient City in Shrop-shire. 71.9
Y
Yanesbury Trench, 25.5 Yardland. See Virgate. Yeoman and Yeomanry, 4.7 Year
River, 35.3 Yeremouth, or Yarmouth, whence so named, and how seated, 35.7 Made
a Corporation, ibid. A Town very hospitable and famous for Herring, ibid.
Yorks an Archbishops See, 6.5 What Suffragane Bishops it had, and now has,
6.7
York Metropolitan and Primate, 6.7. and 78.9 His Jurisdiction, ibid.
York City what names it had, 78.9 How York is governed, ibid. The positure
of it, ibid. Library thereof, ibid.
Yorke-shire how otherwise called, 77.2 What battles there fought, 78.10 The
soil of it, 77.2 and 5 How bounded, 77.3 Divided into East Riding, 77.4
North Riding, ibid. West Riding, ibid. The dimension of it, 77 4
York Manner-house sometime the Abbey of Saint Mary's, by whom built, 77.7
Z
Zelanders their fishing upon our North-East Sea with license, 81.3
FINIS.

