

What here thou Viewest is the Gravers Art,
A shape of man, Only the Outward part
Peruse the book, therein more plainly read
Vera effigies Samuelis Speed.
F.H. Van Houe fec:


What here thou Viewest is the Gravers Art,
A shape of man, Only the Outward part
Peruse the book, therein more plainly read
Vera effigies Samuelis Speed.
Prison - Piety: OR, MEDITATIONS Divine and Moral. Digested into Poetical
Heads, On Mixed and Various Subjects. Whereunto is added A PANEGYRIC TO The
Right Reverend, and most Nobly descended, HENRY Lord Bishop of LONDON. By
SAMUEL SPEED, Prisoner in Ludgate, London.

Despise not this, 'cause in Confinement writ;
Prisons improve the gifts of Grace and Wit.
For, Before I was aflicted, I went astray: but now have I learned thy Statutes.

LONDON: Printed by J. C. for S. S. and sold by the Booksellers of London and
Westminster. 1677.

TO The most Reverend Father in God His Grace GILBERT By Divine Providence Lord
Arch - bishop OF CANTERBVRY, Primate and Metropolitan Of all ENGLAND.
May it please your Grace:

USe has become a Custom for Writers to shroud their Pens and Parts under the
Patronage of some Honorable and secure Protection; by which, my Lord, I am
emboldened to supplicate your Graces favor; my Attempt carrying with it these
two Reasons to mitigate my Presumption: First, that these my Ejaculations and
Meditations being Divine, they pretend a Title to your Graces Cognizance; with
whose most learned Name being presented to the world, they will undoubtedly
sinde an Acceptance among Pious and Judicious Readers. The other Reason is,
That since your Grace was acquainted with my deceased Grand - father Mr. John
Speed, the English Chronologer, and laborious Genealoger, the Author (and this
his Enchiridion, he) humbly hopes may obtain your favorable Aspect: For which
causes, I am apt to promise to my self a fair Interpretation, though they are
the Issues of my Retirements in a Prison; since from the like place Almighty
God by a Miracle did redeem St. Peter, and our Blessed Savior deigned to love
poor Lazarus, though in a low condition: though I write from a Prison to the
Palace of England's renowned Metropolitan, it is, however, to testify the zeal
I have for your Graces merits. May your Honors, as your hours, increase in
this Age; may your glorious Memory be admired in futurity: And when your Grace
shall exchange your Terrest^ial Theater for a Celestial Throne, may a Crown of
Glory to eternity adorn your Virtues; which is and shall be the continual
Prayer of,

Most Reverend, Learned, and most Pious Patron, Your Graces Most devout, most
humble, and obsequious Servant, SAMUEL SPEED.

To the DEVOUT.
Christian Reader, LOndon's too late and fatal Judgments, the Plague and Fire,
having made me incapable to manage my Affairs with the like success as
formerly, some Creditors, severe as well as covetous, forced me to a
Confinement in Ludgate; where, the bet ter to employ my time, I have compiled
and composed this Manual of Meditations, which consists of Psalms, Hymns, and
Divine Poems: In which act of Contemplation, I made my Prison my Paradise,
being so transported with Raptures, that I banished from my memory all thoughts
of my Affliction: And as I found great satisfaction in the writing, I hope the
Reader will find the like in the perusal; for in it are variety of Subjects,
especially such as are extracted from the Psalms, that book which may properly
be called the Heart of the Bible, and is therefore most fitly placed in the
middle, as the Anatomy of the Soul, the Epitome of the Law, and the Expositor
of the Gospel; the Register, Enchiridion, and Summary of the Holy Scriptures.

And as the writing thereof has been delightful, so certainly in Confinement
no pleasure can exceed a serious (especially if Divine) Study; no Companions
can be better than divine Books; nor can any time be better spent than in
contemplative Devotion. Therefore since this life is as it were a Fair, and
while the Fair lasts there is to be bought in it any thing that is necessary;
if we suffer the time of the Fair to slip away, it is in vain to expect
another: Wherefore before the time be past, which the Lord of the Fair and the
mercy of thy Maker has allowed, be studious to perform Repentance, that thou
may procure Pardon; be diligent to gain Grace, that thou may obtain Glory.

It is reported of Alexander the Great, that when he came to besiege any place
he caused a burning Light to be set up, and then made proclamation, that so
long as the Light burned, he gave his Enemy time to seek for mercy by
surrendering themselves and the place; but if within that time they did it not,
the Sword should destroy them all. Now what is man's life but a burning Light?
and so long as this Light continues, God gives us time to make our peace with
him, and to provide for our future safety; but this Light being once
extinguished before we draw near to God, by Repentance and Conversion, those
two fabrics of Salvation, what remains but a sudden and an eternal
destruction? Therefore since we have filled God's bag with our sins, let us
likewise fill his bottle with our tears.

Wherefore when we waste our time, we ought not to complain for the want of
time; but rather to follow the example of that holy St. Ignatius, who (when he
heard a Clock strike) would say, There Is one hour more now past that I have to
answer for.

Latimer rose usually at Two of the clock in the morning to his Study; and
Bradford slept not commonly above four hours in the night; and in his bed, till
sleep came, his Book went not out of his hand. He counted that hour not well
spent, wherein he did not some good, either with his Pen, his Study, or
Discourse; these Worthies well weighing that truth which Seneca asserts: Time
that is consumed idly, is rather spilt than spent.

Contemplation is the life of the Soul, and the Christians best Companion in
his solitude; but a contemplative life without practice, is like unto Rachel,
Jacob's Wife, beautiful, bright-sighted, but barren. It is good therefore to
have Rachel's beautiful face to be seconded with Leahs fruitful womb. By
Contemplation and Consideration, Solomon got much of his Wisdom, as appears
by his Ecclesiastes, which by some is very aptly called Solomon's Soliloquy.

St. Basil left his friends and acquaintance, retiring himself into a
Wilderness, that he might the more devoutly serve God, and delight himself in
holy Meditations. And St. Hierome comforting a young Hermit, bad him look up to
Heaven, and take a few turns in Paradise, by his Meditations; assuring him,
that so long as he had Paradise in his mind, and Heaven in his thoughts, he
should not be sensible of his Solitariness.

Nor is Contemplation only delightful, but also profitable, by taking the
meditation off from vain Imaginations, idle Company, profane Discourse, and
obscene Songs; all which are too frequent in a Prison, and tend not only to
the corruption of good Manners, but the ruin both of Precepts and of
Principles: for vain Songs are Songs sung to the World, lascivious Ballads are
Songs sung to the Flesh, and Satirical Libels are Songs sung to the Devil;
only Psalms, Hymns, and spiritual Songs, making melody in the heart, are Songs
sung to the Lord.

Spiritual Silence is a sweeter note than a loud (especially if lewd) Sonnet;
and the advice of St. James is both divine and wholesome: Is any among you
afflicted? let him pray: Is any merry? let him sing Psalms.

I know it is a general humor in this Age, to think no Verse good but what is
scurrilous and profane; nor do I promise Elegancy in my style, that being more
proper for dramatick than divine Poesy. Nay, such is the looseness of this
Age, that many are of opinion, that Divinity in verse is unpleasant to the ear
and to the heart: let such be convinced by the Psalms of David, or the Song of
his son Solomon. Divine Verse has these two operations: it is pleasant, and
makes an impression in the memory of the Reader; so true is that of the
excellent Mr. Geo. Herbert, Vniversity-Oratour of Cambridge.

A Verse may take him who a Sermon flies,
And turn delight into a Sacrifice.
As Affliction admits of Contemplation, so Prosperity swells the Heart: this
Agur knew well, and therefore prayed for a Mediocrity. Some are of opinion,
that Solomon's wealth did him much more hurt than his wisdom did him good.
David's first ways were his best ways; neither was he ever so good and tender
as when he was hunted like a Partridge on the Mountains. Indeed of Vespatian it
is storied, that he was made the better man by being made Emperor; but he was
too rare a bird to have his fellow.

Such is the incertainty of humane Affairs, that a full Estate discovers a man
as well as does a low and empty one: To know how to abound, is as high a part
of Grace as to know how to want: God tries in a right-hand-way as well as in a
lefthand-way: Poverty endangers Grace much, but Riches more: To be great in the
World, is a great temptation: it is a hard thing to carry a full Cup with an
even hand. Many when they grow rich in Temporals, wax poor in Spirituals: As
their outward man increases, so their inward man decays; and as the flesh
flourishes, the spirit withers: yet prosperous wickedness is accounted Virtue.

Dionysius, after the spoil of an Idoltemple, finding the winds favorable in
his Navigation, Lo, said he, how the Gods approve of Sacrilege: So diverse
because they are prosperous, are apt to believe themselves pious, and that God
must needs love them because the World does; but a painted face is no sign of
a good Complexion: And Seneca has this saying; The greatest unhappiness is to
prosper in Impieties.

Adversity teaches Humility, and how to pray; Prosperity leads to Pride,
Folly, Vainglory, and all manner of Evils. David in persecution and wars, was
a chaste man; when he came to take his ease, he was caught in the snare of
Adultery. Who ever swam in such a Sea of Honor and Riches as Solomon? and who
sank so egregiously as he? Such as stand upon slippery places, slide ere they
be aware; and the higher the Pinnacle is from whence they do descend, the
greater must be their precipitation: But Godliness with contentment is great
gain. To conclude, I end with that of St. Paul,

1 Cor. 14. 15. I will with heart and understanding sing Praise to the Name of
the eternal King.

From my Chamber in Ludgate. S. S.
THE PRAYER OF St. Thomas Aquinas, WHICH He used to say before he went to study.
OUnspeakable Creator, who from the treasure of thy Wisdom have appointed three
Hierarchies of Angels, and placed them by a wonderful Order above the Heaven;
and have most admirably distributed the parts of the World. Thou, which art
called the true Fountain of Light, of Wisdom, and the Highest Being; vouchsafe
to pour down upon the darkness of my Understanding in the which I was born, the
double Beam of thy Brightness, removing from me Darkness, or the clouds of Sin
and Ignorance. Thou which make eloquent the Tongues of men, and give the
benefit of Utterance, instruct my Tongue, and pour into my Lips the grace of
thy Blessing: Give me quickness of Understanding, capacity of Retaining,
judgment in Interpreting, facility of Learning, and copious Grace of Speaking:
Guide my going in, direct my going forward, and accomplish my going forth:
Teach me to instruct others in thy fear, that they and I may sing Praises to
thee and to the Lamb for evermore.

Amen.
A BRIEF Exhortation to Prayer,
Written by St. Chrysostom.
IT is very meet and profitable that we employ the time of our life in Prayer,
that thereby our hearts may continually receive the sweet dew of God's Grace;
of which all persons have no less need, than Trees and Herbs have of refreshing
waters: for they cannot bring forth fruit except the roots be comforted with
moisture; and in like manner, it is impossible for us to be replenished with
beautiful fruits of Piety, if our hearts be not refreshed by Prayer: for which
cause we ought to forsake our beds, and prevent the Sunrising in God's service.

The like we ought to do when we go to meat, and at night when we take our
rest; yea, it behooves us at all times to offer some Ejaculation to God, to the
end we may continually retain him and his mercies in our minds. Tell me, O my
Soul, how can thou behold the Sun, if thou do not honor him that made
thine eyes to behold that most beautiful Light? How can thou go to the Table
to eat, if thou do not first honor him who gives and furnishes thee daily
with such great benefits? How can thou trust thy self in a dark and dismal
night, when discontents, dreadful dreams, and many dangers might assault thee,
if thou do not defend thy self by Prayer and holy Meditations, which are the
watchful guards that allay and destroy the stratagems of wicked spirits that
continually endeavor to surprise and to devour? but if they see thee furnished
with Prayer or divine Cogitations, they presently retire, even as wicked
thieves when they see the Sword toward them. Wherefore, put you on the Armor
of God, that you may withstand the assaults of the Devil.

Dr. Thomas Cranmer, Archbishop of Canterbury, HIS Prayer for Wisdom.
Let my Prayer be set forth before thee as Incense; and the lifting up of my
hands as the Evening sacrifice.
O God of my fathers, and Lord of mercies, thou that have made all things with
thy Word, and did ordain man through thy Wisdom, that he should have dominion
over thy Creatures which thou have made, and that he should order the World
according to Holiness and Righteousness, and execute Judgment with an upright
heart; give me Wisdom which is ever about thy Seat, and put me not out from
among thy Children: For I thy servant, and son of thy Handmaid, am but of a
short time, and too weak for the understanding of thy Judgments and Laws.
Although a man be never so perfect among the children of men, yet if thy Wisdom
be not with him, he shall be of no value: O send her out therefore from thy
Holy Heavens, and from the Throne of thy Majesty, that she may be with me, and
labor with me, that I may know what is acceptable in thy sight: for she
knows and understands all things; and she shall lead me soberly in my
works, and preserve me in her power: So shall my works be acceptable by Christ
our Lord; to whom, with the Father, and the Holy Ghost, be all Honor and
Glory, World without end. Amen.

The fear of the Lord is the beginning of Wisdom; and the price of Wisdom is
above Rubies.

HOLY RULES FOR The Devout Christian.
IF thou art learned, be also pious: for Learning sanctified, is an Ornament to
Grace; but Learning corrupted, is an Advocate for the Devil.

Call to mind, and oftentimes examine thy self, accounting thy thoughts, thy
words, and deeds, especially after much business, discourses, pastime, etc.

Silence is commendable in things that appertain not to thee; to the end thou
may the better call to mind the sufferings of a crucified Savior.

If God has blessed thee with an Estate, relieve thy Brother; and so live as
having little, yet possessing all things: For remember that Meat, Drink, and
Cloth, are the Riches of a Christian; and since Christ gave himself for thee,
well may thou give some Fruits of thy labor unto his.

Let Death be oftentimes the subject of thy Meditations; yield thy self wholly
to God. If thou art poor, and have nothing to requite him with but thy prayers
and thy self, yet if thou give thy self to his disposal, thou then give all
thou have. The Apostles left their Ships and their Nets: The poor Widow gave
only her two Mites to the poor man's box, and she was preferred before a wealthy
Croesus. He easily despises all things of this world, that does but remember
he must die.

In open Assemblies use not ordinarily all spiritual things, lest thou shall be
thought to be singular; except thou may edisie others, and by thy example
stir them up to the like.

On all occasions prefer the glory of God and his service above all things.

Be a comfort to the Afflicted, reconcile Dissentions, visit the Sick and the
Imprisoned, and forget not to relieve the Poor and needy: Above all things,
have servent love, for love shall cover a multitude of sins.

Fast one day in each month, or oftener if the strength of thy body will bear
it; and remember to distribute thy Alms: for Fasting and Alms are the wings of
Prayer.

If perturbation or discontents arise in thy mind, apply thy self to Prayer.
Go not to thy rest in wrath, lest thou give the common enemy to mankind an
opportunity to surprise thee.

Beware of immoderate Cares, lest you dishonor or deny God: for such cares are
1. Needless, 2. Brutish, 3. Bootless, 4. Heathenish.


1. Needless. What need we care, when Our heavenly Father knows we have need
of these things? And says, Be careful for nothing, but let us cast our cares
on him, for he cares for us.

2. Brutish. Consider the fowls of the air, and ravens that he feeds, they
toil not.

3. Bootless, and in vain. Which of you by taking thought, (...) one cubit to
his stature, or penny to his estate (...)

4. Heathenish. For after all these things the Gentiles seek.

Repent daily; let not the Devil have the Flour of thy age, and God the Bran.

The Spirit of Prayer is far more precious than Treasures of Gold and Silver.

Despise not the Ministers of Christ; for Christ is the Word, and they are his
Ambassadors.

God requires we should mortisie our lusts; for Prayer, without that, is the
service of a Hypocrite.

Sin brings shame and sorrow; but Piety has the portion of everlasting joys.

Let us cloth our selves with Righteousness; it is the safest Armor against
the darts of Satan.

The two Roads that lead to Heaven, are Innocence and Repentance.

Sin is the Christians greatest sore, and Repentance his surest salve: who then
would want the rare Jewel of Repentance? since, If ye seek, ye shall find.

An Alarm to the Drowsy.
PErmit not sluggish sleep
To close your waking eye,
Till you with judgment deep,
Your daily actions try.
He that his sin as Darling keeps,
when he to quiet goes,
More desperate is than he that sleeps
Amidst his mortal foes.
At night lie down, prepared to have
Thy sleep thy death, thy bed thy grave.
DIVINE ADVICE TO THE Devout Soul.
THy Soul is spiritual, and thy Body is flesh; make not then flesh of thy
spirit: for an habitual familiarity with corrupt lusts, perverts it into the
basest flesh.

God has made man a lovely Creature; do not then make thy self a Monster.

He dignified thee at first, to glorify thee at last.

Then let not Carnality deprive thee of thy Blessings.

With thy sins God will not own thee; then tremble to think who it is will take
thee.

If by Lust thou have lost the sense of Honor and Glory, study to recover it
by Grace.

Thy Soul is immortal, cannot die; thy Body is mortal, must die: Let not then
thy Body be preferred above thy Soul.

Thy Body has but a lease for Life; then let not a Moment be preferred before
Eternity.

Study not to satisfy thy Body, and neglect the salvation of thy Soul.

It is madness to seek for an unreasonable welfare for the body, and thereby
eternally ruin both soul and body.

For so the immortal is made damnably mortal, and dies to bliss; and the mortal
miserably immortal, ever living to woe.

Remember, thy Soul is the noble part of Humane nature; wherefore to set thy
affections on Earth, is infinitely below thee, such is thy Nobility.

Thy Arms are the Mind and Will, which were created to embrace Mercy, Truth,
Justice, Charity, etc. and all the Virtues of a heavenly life.

Thy Body is servant to thy Soul; let it tread upon the Earth, for that is
likewise its subject.

Let not then the Soul, which is the Sovereign of the body, set its heart upon
that Earth on which its subject sets his foot.

In thy Soul is the Image of God; let it not then be stained with the
similitude of beast.

Let Reason, not Sense, direct thee; a Rational will, not the appetite of a
Bruit.

He that lives a negligent and careless ^ife, does what he can to outdo the
De^il in his own undoing.

For God has given him Reason, and his depraved nature acts against (...).

If thou would be in eternal bliss, act like man, but appear like God: for
Heaven has no room for beasts.

If a wicked Spirit has deformed thee, let an holy one transform thee.

Every child of God should maintain his Father's likeness, that he may enjoy
his inheritance.

Thy Soul is the Spouse of God, the great Creator is its Husband; no Creature
is worthy to be thy Match or Mate: then consult thy Honor; if thou love the
World and embracest the Earth, can thou hate Adultery with man, and be an
Adultress to God?

Let not a Strumpet stand in thy sight; but especially suffer not thy heart to
whore after Vanity.

If thou fallest into ill Company that shall court thee, let not the Devil woo^
thee.

O my Soul, thou most beloved above all Creatures, that have God for thy
Hu^band, Heaven for thy Dower, and Eart^ for thy Service; suffer not Hell to
(...) thy Pander, to dote upon the World let thy Heart be an Habitation for Go^
and Heaven.

Thy Soul is the Lord of thy Body; take then thy bodies homage, not thine own
ruin: let thy Soul act the will of God, and command the body to execute thine:
Let not thy body be thy God, lest thou becomest a Devil to thy self.

Thy Soul is an Angels peer; let it not then be a companion for Satan.

Let not thy Lordship be sold for slavery and misery: for if thou maintainest
not thy right, Hell must be thy harbor, Torments thy terror, and wicked
Spirits thy company.

Thy Soul, under God, is the supreme Sovereign of thy body; be not then a
subject to thy subject; let not the law of the Members be the law of the Mind:
for the Senses are Handmaids to the Soul, and she is the Princess of Heaven.

Thy Soul is a free-born-childe of Eternity, Heir of Immensity, the Daughter of
Almighty God, who is beyond all bounds of Time and Being: to whom then ought
thou to pay thy duty, but to him alone?

Thy Body is but a prison to thy Soul; thou art enclosed in the walls of Mud
and gates of Sense: Can there then be more pleasure in a Prison than a Palace?
Shall a Bodily Restraint be preferred before a Spirits Liberty? Can thou
count thy Bondage to be thy Bliss? Are Chains of Iron to be esteemed above the
Treasures of Gold? Are Fetters better than Freedom? Earth is but a Goal to
Heaven; then be not so rash as to prize thy Goal before thy Delivery, lest thou
art cast into that Goal from whence there is no redemption.

It is most just, that the Soul that prizeth the Devil's Chain before God's
Liberty, should have the Devil's Prison instead of God's Palace; and before ever
his slave in Hell, that would not be God's servant for a time on Earth.

O thou beloved Dove of God, fly to thy Celestial home; belime not thy
spiritual wings in slime and mud: in Heaven is thy Treasure, and where can
thou find more Riches to invite thee?

Be not like the Crow, to feed upon Carrion; or like the blind Beetle, to
place thy blessedness in Boggs.

Make not sale of thy self to buy a Goal, when thou partest with a Palace for
the purchase, and becomest a Familiar to Bolts and Shackles.

Thy Soul is God's Jewel, and thy Body is the Casket; then keep thy Body clean,
that thy Soul may the better be preserved.

It is a bright Diamond of Heaven, a Spark of the Divinity, and a Ray of Divine
Glory, set for a time in the Foil of Flesh, till it pleases God to take it to
himself, and keep it for ever in his Cabinet.

Let not then thy Soul, that transparent Diamond, be an ornament to the Devil's
finger, when it may sit at the right hand of God, where there are Pleasures for
evermore.

Thy Soul is the Purchase of Christ, bought with no less than the blood of the
Son of God; then sell not that for a Trifle, which cost thy Savior so great a
price: it is better to enjoy the Riches of Eternity, than to purchase Vanity
for a Moment.

Is thy body distempered, then thou requirest Physic; if wounded, thou sendest
for a Surgeon; if naked, it must have Clothes; and if hungry, it must have
Food. For these thou should depend upon God; for he knows all these things
are necessary: But when thy precious Soul lies sick of sin, has wounds of the
spirit, stripped of its innocence, and starved for grace, no regard is given
thereunto; not considering, though thou usest humane helps, it is God that
gives the Blessing, and is the Physician both of Soul and Body.

That Soul that acts the part of a faithful servant to the Lord, shall have a
double reward, The Crown of a Saint, and of a Sufferer.

Certain Considerations, worthy the Devout Souls Meditation.
THe Soul is Spiritual, sin makes it Carnal.

The Soul is Immortal; sin is the death of the Soul, it makes it die to Grace,
and live in Grief.

The Soul is Noble, sin makes it Ignominious.

The Soul is Lord, sin enslaves it.

The Soul is Sovereign, sin brings it in subjection.

The Soul is God-like, sin makes it beastial.

The Soul is the Spouse of God, sin makes it the Strumpet of the Devil.

The Soul is the Jewel of God, sins casts it in the Devil's fire.

The Soul is a freeborn Citizen of Heaven, sin keeps it in perpetual
imprisonment.

The Soul is God's Purchase; sin cheats God of his due, and the Soul of eternal
Bliss.

A MISCELANY OF Divine Maxims: OR, Words fitly spoken, Like Apples of Gold in
Pictures of Silver.
1. Would thou be truly perfect? love God with all thy heart, and thy
Neighbor as thy self.

2. Let thy eye be always upon God and thy self, and thou shall never see him
without goodness, nor thy self without misery.

3. None shall see God so much as he is visible; and none shall ever love God
so much as he is amiable.

4. He that does not covet to love God more and more, can never love him enough.

5. To whom God is all, the World ought to be nothing at all.

6. Let us be what God will, so we be but his; and let us not be what we will
our selves, against the will of God.

7. In the service of God, there is nothing little enough to be rejected.

8. To meditate much upon God is good, but the Souls greater advancement in
Virtue, consists in much loving him.

9. He to whom God alone is pleasing, is displeased with nothing, but that
which displeases God.

10. In Divine matters a generous Soul finds greatest contentment, in believing
things most difficult.

11. All our actions take their value from their conformity to the Will of God.

12. Love and Suffering are the greatest duties we owe to God, they being the
two causes for which he died for us.

13. He that neglects his own will, complies best with God's.

14. So love thy Neighbor upon Earth, as that thou may enjoy his love in
Heaven.

15. Thou can not love thy Neighbor too much, but thou may too much show
thy love.

16. One great argument of our love to our Neighbor, is to bear with his
imperfections.

17. We should never endure to hear evil spoken of any but our selves.

18. We should never under value any person; the workman loves not that his
work should be despised in his presence: wherefore beware, for God is present
every where, and and every person is his work.

19. It is a spiritual injustice to desire to know the secrets of others, and
to conceal our own

20. We ought not to love our Neighbor only because he is good, or because we
hope he will be so, but because God commands us so to do.

21. In holy duties we should speak little, think much, but do more.

22. It is a great evil not to do good.

23. The just man never dies unprepared: for he is well prepared for death, who
perseveres in Christian justice to the end.

24. Confidence in an unfaithful man in time of trouble, is like a broken
tooth, and a foot out of joint.

25. As he that takes away a Garment in cold weather, and as Vinegar upon
Nitre, so is he that sings Songs to a heavy heart.

26. It is no shame to be poor: Nature brought us so into the World, and so we
must return.

27. Do thou want things necessary? grumble not, perchance it was necessary
thou should want; however, seek a lawful remedy; if God bless not thy
endeavor, do thou bless him that knows what is fittest for thee: Thou art
God's Patient, prescribe not thy Physician.

28. Art thou calumniated? examine thy Conscience; if that be spotted, thou
have a just correction; if not guilty, thou have a fair instruction: Use both,
so shall thou distill honey out of gall, and make to thy self a secret friend of
an open enemy.

29. If thine enemy be hungry give him bread, if thirsty give him drink; thou
thereby heapest coals of fire upon his head, and a reward unto thy self.

30. Charity makes God our debtor; for the Poor are his receivers.

31. Have thou an Estate, and would increase it? divide thy Riches to the
Poor; those Seeds that are scattered do increase, but hoarded up they die.

32. Correction without instruction, makes the Master a Tyrant, and the Servant
a novice.

33. That man is a Conqueror that can subdue his own passions.

34. Faithful are the wounds of a friend, but the kisses of an enemy are
deceitful.

35. Arm thy self against a professed enemy; but he that dissembleth friendship
strikes beyond a caution, and wounds above a cure: from the one thou may
deliver thy self, but from the other Good Lord deliver thee.

36. A man that flattereth his Neighbor, s^eadeth a Net for his feet.

37. The Touchstone tries Gold, and Gold tries men.

38. Virtue must be the guide of all Qualities, otherwise the Professors are
undone.

39. As the servants of God are known by their two Virtues, Humility and
Charity, so the servants of the Devil are known by their opposite Vices, Pride
and Cruelty.

40. The best way to keep good acts in memory, is to refresh them with new.

41. To boast is to be vain, since the greatest Conqueror, if he measure his
own shadow, shall find it no longer than it was before his victory.

42. Believe not Soothsayers: for Prophesies are never understood till they are
accomplished.

43. The World is a wide Prison, and every day an execution-day.

44. Our Stomachs are common Sepulchers for Birds, Beasts, and Fish; they all
die to feed us: Lord, with how many deaths are our poor lives patched up! How
full of death is the life of man!

45. Beware of Drink: where Drunkenness reigns, Reason is an exile, Virtue a
stranger, and God an enemy; Blasphemy is Wit, Oaths are Rhetoric, and Secrets
are Proclamations.

46. Whosoever will arrive at a New life, must pass by the death of the Old.

47. He that is truly humble, never thinks himself wronged.

48. The good man lives contented with a moderate Estate, not so much taking
notice of those that have more, as those that have less than our selves.

49. He that most mortifies natural inclinations, receives most supernatural
inspirations.

50. To shun the accidental troubles of this life, is to meditate often upon
Eternity.

51. It is the great misfortune of man, to desire those things which he should
only use.

52. To have a desire to be poor, and not to receive the inconveniences of it,
is too great ambition: For it is to desire the honor of Poverty, and the
commodity of Wealth.

53. There is no better way to end happily a true spiritual life, than daily to
begin it.

54. He that would have a part with Jesus glorified, must first take part with
Jesus crucified.

55. We should live in this present World as if our Souls were in Heaven and
our Bodies in the Grave.

56. In the death of our Passions consists the life of our Souls.

57. It is not Humility to acknowledge our selves miserable, that only is not
to be a beast; but it is Humility to desire that others should esteem us so.

58. There is no reason to be given for the fault we commit in sin; for the
fault would not be sin, if it were not against Reason.

59. Virtues never have their full growth, but when they bring forth desires of
advancing; which like spiritual seeds, serve to produce new degrees of Virtues.

60. We should never speak of God, or of things which concern his service,
carelessly, by way of discourse, or entertainment, but always with great respect
and humble mind.

61. We should sear the Judgment of God without discouragement, and encourage
our selves without presumption.

62. The ready way for the Soul to have peace with it self, is to obtain its
peace with God.

63. We may perform many holy actions, yet not please God, if we neglect to do
what he requires of us, no more than a Painter in representing an Eagle,
pleases him that desired a Be.

64. Let us never look on our Crosses but through the Cross of Christ; thereby
we shall find them pleasant, and have fresh desires to be afflicted.

65. Desire to obtain the love of God, makes us meditate; but that love once
obtained, makes us contemplate.

THE TABLE.
A
ANgel and Man. A Dialogue Page 6 On Ambition 9 An Adieu to the World 14 Almost
a Christian 21 St. Ambrose's Hymn 62 St. Augustine's Hymn ibid. The Ascension
66 An Adoration ibid. The Altar 72 The Ant 78 Antiphon 79 Of Angels 82 On Age
94 Acknowledgments 111 Advice to Prisoners 126 St. Austin's Prayer 134 On
Alexander the Great 161
B
On the Book (misprinted the Tree) of Life 21 On Beauty 41 The Bible 81 The
Beatitudes 82 The Believer 136 Bad at Best 159 On Blasphemy 166 Blessings of
the Righteous, as they are recorded in Holy Writ 172
C
The Christian and Worlding 11 On Conscience 24 On Contentation 30 The
Christians Alphabet 59 On Christ's Death 60 On Christ's Cross 63 The Cross 65
On Christ 68 Christian and Death 71 The Candle 77 Of Christ's Passion 83 On
Christ's Praying 84 On Christ's Nativity 102 Christ's Triumph to Jerusalem 103
Of Christ's Birth in an Inn 104 To the Creator 105 The Caution 112 On the
Conscience 133 On Christ's Nativity expected 137 The Call 138 The Check 149
Christ all in all 152 The Careless Christian 154 The Colestial Painter 156 To
the divine Creator 157 Curses of the Wicked 175
D
On Dives 3 A Dialogue 6 A Dialogue 11 On Death 23 On a Death-bed-Repentance 25
The Dream 39 On Disturbed Devotion 46 On Death 70 A Dialogue 71 Death, Man, and
Grave 73 A Dialogue, in three parts 79 The Dream 81 On the Day of Judgment 91
A Dialogue, in three parts 103 The Divine Inquest 108 Delights of the mind 139
On Death 141 On Darkness 151 Degrees of Love 158 On Drunkenness 165 On
Desperation 185
E
On Envy 34 On Enmity 38 The Evenings Ejaculation 12^ The Ecstasy 138
F
Of Flesh 75 The Free Prisoner 95 Faith's Mystery 97 On Formal Duty 125 The
Flower 150 On Food 152 On Fatherly Affection 180 The Free Giver 182 The
Friendly Advice 183
G
On a glorious Soul 29 On Gods presence 53 Of God 67 God is Love 69 Of Grief 70
The Grave 76 To God the Father 100 -- Son ibid. -- Holy Ghost 101 The Godly
Garden 106 On Greatness and Goodness 107 God and Caesar 114 Gabriel and Mary
115 To the God of Heaven 150 Gabriel and Zacharias 161 On Worldly Gain 162
Gloria in Altissimis: or the Angelical Anthem. 180 On the Gospel 181
H
On the Hypocrite 31 On Humility 50 On Hypocrisy 53 On an Hourglass 56 An
Hymn 62 On Honor and Valor 84 On the Holy Trinity 102 On Humane Frailty 124
On Heaven 142 On Hell 143 The Holy Innocents 156
I
On Judas his Treason 13 On an Israelite 26 On Ingratitude 45 An Infant 76 On
the Judgment 98 On St. John's day 110 Judeth's Prayer 115 Judeth and Holosernes
117 Judeth's Song of Thanksgiving 119 On Judgment 141 Jeremiah's Lamentation
145 On Justice and Mercy 151 I would, but cannot 153 Jesus wept 162
K
On Knowledge 42 Knots 93
L
On Lazarus 4 On Luxury 37 The Litany 85 Of Life 113 On Love and Hatred 151 On
Life and Death 154 On the Lord's Prayer 182
M
On Meditation 1 Of Mirth and Mourning 8 Of Mortality 18 On Memory 25 On the
Mariner 26 On Magnanimity 44 On Mortality 47 On St. Michael the Archangel 87 On
Man and Wife 94 On Man's Creation 121 The Mornings Ejaculation ibid. On Mercy
130 Martha and Mary 162
N
Natures Delight 74 The New Birth 157
O
Oppositions 88
P
The Penitents Praise 5 Of Poverty 17 On Patience 19 Of Presumption 22 On St.
Peter's Enlargement 48 On Prosperity 49 On Pleasures 54 On Perfection 57 On St.
Paul's Conversion 83 The free Prisoner 95 The Petition 97 On the Pharisee and
Publican 99 The Power of Prayer 114 Advice to Prisoners 126 On Peace 129 Prayer
for Peace ibid. The Penitent 131 St. Paul's Petition 133 On Pride 145 On St.
Peter's Perjury 163 On Pusillanimity ibid. On Persecution 170 Praises to God
176 A Panegyric to the Right Reverend, and most nobly descended Prelate,
Henry, by divine Providence, Lord Bishop of London 186
R
On a Rose Tree 59 The Resurrection 65 The Remembrance 69 On Repentance 89
S
The Souls Soliloquy 2 Spiritus Sanctus 10 On Shame 27 On Supplication 35 On
Sin and Sorrow 47 The Souls search 48 Salve for the Sick 56 On Sighs and Groans
93 On Sunday 96 The Shepherds Dialogue, in three parts 103 The Souls Alarm 106
The Souls Yearnings 108 The Sinners Tears 110 The Swine 131 The Soul Awaked 132
The Salutation of Saints 144 On Sin 147 The Seeker 155 The Steward ibid. On the
Spring 164 On Science ibid. The Sick man's Ease 167 On Singing of Psalms 168 On
little Sins 169 On Sleep 172 On Sloth 184
T
On the Tree of Knowledge 12 The Thanksgiving 78 On Tinder 84 On Thoughts 88 On
the holy Trinity 102 Of Thoughts 105 On Tears 122 Time's Travel 160 On
Temperance 170
V
On a Usurer 15 On Vice 52 On Vainglory 128 The Voyage 153
W
The Warning 1 On a Wicked man 19 On the Wilful Impenitent 28 The Wish 112 On
the Worth of Wealth 125 The Widows Mite 160 On Worldly Gain 162
ERRATA.
PAge 21. for the Tree of Life, read On the Book of Life. p. 68. for He it is
that gives us Peace, read He it is that gives us Peace. in line 4. observe
these points are omitted J. ES. u.

To my MUSE.
FOrbear, vain Muse, thy subject is too high;
Thy Saveraign rather, is the Deity;
The God of all the World, whose dreadful Name
Strikes an Amazement in whole Natures frame.
God! what a fright the very sound has made!
My Soul into a Ravishment is laid.
I must repent my rashness; when that is done,
Let us consult how thou shall journey on.
First let thy Meditations, mild and meek,
Direct thy Heart to teach thy Tongue to speak;
And from those pious thoughts (my Muse) distill
Those Fragrants may befit an Angels Quill:
Consider, thou do boldly dare t'aspire
To do the duty of an Holy Quire;
Nay, of a Quire of Angels blessed, who bring
Joy to themselves, and Duty to their King.
Then since thy Task is great, thy Work sublime,
Invoke Apollo to assist thy Rhyme;
Call the nine Muses to inspire thy heart,
That every one with thee may bear a part:
So to preserve your duties from decay,
Striving to Love, to Sing, and to Obey.
It Is not an easy or a common thing,
For Peasants to approach an Earthly King;
Then how much study is to be acquired,
When God, the King of kings, must be admired?
Yet thou, presumptuous Muse, although confined,
Make attempts; I hope because thy mind
Tikes a delight in a Poetic Air,
Converting every Poem to a Prayer.
The Task is great, too great for grave Divines;
Angels and Saints best sing (...) lines.
First let thy Pen in Helico^ be (...);
Soar not too high, because thy Wings are clipped.
PRISON-PIETY: OR, DIVINE POEMS.
The Warning.
ALl idle thoughts from hence depart:
Let none, but what are pure in heart,
Draw near; and those tuned with an Air,
Supposing every page a Prayer.
On Meditation.
IN Meditation let Devotion be
The Handmaid to the Hearts Soliloquie.
The Eagle casts her eye upon the Sun,
So Contemplation does her courses run,
Fixing the mind upon no Object less
Than the bright Beams of the Sun of Righteousness.
Or else unto those Birds (aspiring) rare,
The Soul contemplative I may compare,
Of whom King David worthily attests,
That by the Holy Altar build their Nests:
^o Meditation's said in holy Story,
^o build her Nest about the Throne of Glory.
^his Be of Paradise all days and hours
^ucks Honey from the choicest Garden flowers.
By Contemplation I with God can talk;
In Mansions of Eternity can walk.
Then, O my Soul, what make thou here below
Where naught but thorns do spring, and weeds do grow;
Where nothing thrives but loose unlawful Tares,
Watered with Tears, and nourished with Cares?
Then mount, my Soul, from this terrestrial Bubble,
This heap of Sin, and wilderness of Trouble:
Mount to the Land of Promise, where thy Wings
Shall Consorts find of Angels, and of Kings.
Though present Habitation
Here is given,
Yet let thy Conversation
Be in Heaven.
The Soul's Soliloquy.
COme, Holy Ghost, our Souls inherit
With Beams of thy Celestial Spirit:
Inflame our Hearts, we thee desire,
With Sparks from thy Celestial Fire.
Thou the anointing Spirit art,
Who do thy Sevenfold gifts impart:
Thy holy Unction from above,
Is Comfort, Life, and Fire of Love.
Enable with perpetual Light
The dullness of our blinded Sight:
Cherish and clear our soiled face
With the abundance of thy Grace.
Keep far our Foes, give Peace at home;
Where thou art Guard no ill can come:
Teach us to know the Father, Son,
And thee of both to be but one.
That through the Ages all-along,
This may be our endless Song:
Praise to the Almighty merit,
Father, Son, and Holy Spirit.
The Enquiry.
TEll me, my Soul, where does thy passion bend?
Does it on Heaven, or things on earth attend?
If worldly Objects do thy Reason guide,
Thou may desire, but not be satisfied.
If thou do Beauty love, it is a shade;
But Righteousness does shine, and never fade.
If worldly Wisdom, it is but as a blast;
But heavenly Wisdom does the World outlast.
If earthly Riches, they have wings and fly;
But heavenly Gems do last eternally.
Estates on earth do as in shipwracks reel;
In Heaven's harbor are no thieves to steal.
All thou can compass here, is trifling store;
In Heaven are Crowns laid up for evermore.
Would thou have Honor, which the World depaints?
What Honor can be greater than the Saints?
Or is it Pleasure? 'twill thy Soul destroy;
The Just shall enter in their Masters joy.
But tell me farther, what is it thou would have?
Both Heaven and earth on this side of thy Grave?
Away, vain fancies, ye are Virtues moth,
Pity (...) the promise of them both.
These lustful thoughts lead thee to splendid folly;
But if thou would be happy, then be holy.
On Dives.
SEe with what splendour Dives sits at meat,
With choice of Dainties, courting him to eat.
His Habit Purple, and his L^nnen fine,
As if dressed up on purpose here to dine.
How the Spectators look, and seem to say,
There Is too much store provided for one day:
How many wretched Souls do beg for Bread,
Whilst this same Glutton has his Table spread
With all varieties? And thus they show
Their envy: But alas, did they but know,
And well consider what his wants are, then
They Would pity him, as if the worst of men.
His Talent's rich: on earth there is none above it;
But he wants Grace and Wisdom to improve it.
All his Estate is but a mighty spoil;
He has a Lamp, but that Lamp has no Oil.
He has a Soul, but what does that embrace?
Vain worldly Lusts; the opposites to Grace.
His House shines gloriously; but when all is done,
He has the Starlight, but he wants the Sun.
A Friend to Vice, and Virtue's mortal hater;
Having the Creature, but not the Creator.
This world's a Torrent of false Joys; the boat
Is his vain life, does on it daily float.
His Silver Anchor is as weak as Sand;
Nor can his Gold conduct him safe to Land,
But rather sink him to the Misers Cell,
There to inhabit where damned Spirits dwell.
Can he be worth your envy then? forbear,
Rather in pity shed a Christian tear.
If he be happy, May it be thy will,
O Lord, that I be miserable still.
Give me thy Grace, although I Am clad in Rags;
Let Vice attend the Miser and his Bags.
On Lazarus.
THe wicked Worldling spends his time in laughter,
Having his Heaven here, his Hell hereafter.
Contrariwise, the good man whilst he is here
Lives as in Hell, to sigh, and shed his tear;
But when to Heaven he hereafter flies,
God wipes away all tears from off his eyes.
Though here he suffer scorn, the worlds annoy,
Yet He that sows in tears, shall reap in joy.
The Rich man has his good things in this life,
Lazarus evil things, slights, scorn, and strife;
But meets at last, with what he here does miss,
Eternal joy: it is the poor man's bliss,
Whilst Dives lies, as if with Scorpions stung,
Wishing for Lazarus to cool his tongue;
That Lazarus who whilome lay before
The gilded Postern of the rich man's door,
Begging some mean remainings of his table.
Dives, rapt up in Silks and costly Sable,
Glutted with sumptuous food and choice of wine,
Has neither time nor ear for them that pine.
The very (kinder) Dogs, in pity, then
Licked his Sores, thereby instructing men
To Love and Charity. Observe the end;
Angels upon the Beggar did attend:
He dies, and they to Abraham's bosom fly,
Leaving him there to all Eternity;
Whilst Dives, striving others to excel
When here, tormented is in flames of Hell.
Thus Worldlings ride in pomp to Hell's hot Nest,
And Penitents in Tears swim to their Rest.
The Penitents Praise.
LOrd, now the time returns
For weary men to rest,
And lay aside those pains and cares
Wherewith we are oppressed.
Or rather change our thoughts
To more concerning cares,
How to redeem our misspent time,
With Sighs, and Tears, and Prayers.
How to provide for Heaven,
That place of Rest and Peace;
Where our full Joys shall never wain,
Our Pleasures never cease.
Blessed be thy love, dear Lord,
That taught us this sweet way,
Only to love thee, for thy self,
And for that love obey.
O thou our Souls chief hope,
We to thy mercy fly;
Wheree're we are thou can protect,
Whatever we need supply.
Whether we wake or sleep,
Either to thee is done,
By night we through our eyelids peep
As if the night were gone.
Whether we live or die,
Both we submit to thee;
In death we live, as well as life,
If thine in death we be.
Glory to thee, great God,
One Coeternal three;
To Father, Son, and Holy Ghost,
Eternal Glory be.
Angel and Man. A Dialogue.
Ang. LIsten, Oh Sinner, I shall make it plain,
Mankind is wicked, altogether vain.
Nature instructs the bru^ts to bear in mind
A friendly consort to each others kind;
But Man more monstrous than of brutish hue,
First preys on them, then does himself undo:
Devouring Widows houses, in his way,
Pretending Piety, seems often to pray.
Will with himself and sins oft-times be vexed,
When as his zeal is only a pretext.
Their very Prayers do themselves condemn.
As Citizens of the new Jerusalem.
They would appear, whenas their chiefest care
Should be to crave a Pardon for their Prayer.

Man. What glorious Creature can a tongue rehearse,
May be compared to Man? the Universe
Is subject to him; all things with applause
Pay Homage to him, and obey his laws.
God did not from the Angels nature frame
His own, he took the seed of Abraham.
Man has his saults, which causes melancholy;
Even ye Angels, God does charge with folly.

Ang. Well have ye said, therein we do agree;
For we are charged with such vain things as ye:
We are your Guardians, so to direct;
Ye safely sleep, we Watchmen do protect.
So great a truth it is, no more but thus,
They are well kept that are secured by us.
And from the Sacred Writ we clearly know
That every man makes Vanity his show.
Preferment, Pleasure, Profit, are the three
That do complete the Worldlings Trinity.
He dies a sinner, as when he began
At first to live; So vain a thing is man.

Man. Well may the Angels feet never step aside,
When ye have God to be your glorious Guide.
How can ye wander, or how can ye stray,
When ye are always in, and with your way?
Your Conversations must be void of Strife,
When ye have God your Way, your Truth, and Life.

Ang. Man was created in no less degree
Than the bright Image of the Deity:
He above other Creatures well may boast,
As he is the Temple of the Holy Ghost;
But how has he that glorious form defaced,
Defied his Maker, and himself disgraced;
Retaining principles his Soul bereaves,
Making God's Temple seem a Den of Thieves?
How can Ingratitude sound louder than
Yours to your God? So vain a thing is man.

Man. But if we do repent, and pardon crave,
As God can smite, so the same God can save;
Then bring us Hallelujahs from your Quier,
We'll vie whose notes shall sweetest be, and higher.

Both All Glory be to God on High,
And to the Holy Trinity:
As first it was, is now, and may,
When fading time shall want a day.

Of Mirth and Mourning.
IN midst of Mirth there sadness is,
And so in Grief there is joy;
Whilst wealthy sinners faces smile,
Their hearts do feel annoy.
Carnal delights they are but vam,
And bring vexations too;
They sound like music in a strain,
Whose discord ends in rue.
Thus to the Sensualist they play,
Left he prove dull and sad;
But when the Reckoning comes to pay,
It makes him downright mad.
So true is that of Solomon,
In laughter there is grief;
The end of mirth is heaviness,
And Hell the salse relief.
But he that is truly penitent,
And does his Tears impart,
They are to Angels straightway sent,
Rejoicing his own heart.
They are the solace of his Soul;
If bitter they appear,
His comforts then the sweeter are,
The sinner's Pearl's a Tear.
His Sighs and Groans, if they are deep,
And threaten to destroy,
In peace he may lie down and sleep,
The fuller is his joy.
The beams of Consolation shine
Into this house of grief:
His Soul in travel is; at last
Sweet Peace is his relief.
So that I truly may conclude,
He that does mourn for Sin,
Does weep for Joy; a multitude
Of Pleasure lies therein.
Those Crystal Rivers that do flow
So n^er the Heavenly King,
They their original do owe
Unto a Weeping-spring.
One rich drop from a solid sigh
Pure in a Christal-birth,
Is to be prized (by far) above
Oceans of carnal Mirth.
On Ambition.
Honor's insatiate, never satisfied;
Nor is the Beggar innocent from Pride.
The Labourer a Yeoman fain would be,
The Yeoman would a Gentleman's degree.
The Gentleman must worshipped be at Feast,
And to that end must be a Squire at least.
The swaggering Squire must needs be dubbed a Knight,
Then aims at Baron, as his Title-right.
The Baron must be Lord, to please his Girl;
If that will not do, he must be made an Earl:
That done, Ambition bids him still aspier;
Marquess in Heraldry is one step higher.
The Marquess then casts out his golden Hook
With Cash and Crast, till he becomes a Duke.
The Duke no arguments can him convince,
But that by merit he should be a Prince.
When Prince, he elevates his foaring wing,
Flies to the Throne of a terrestrial King:
Yet there is no rest, so does Ambition gull us,
He must be Caesar, or he will be Nullus.
Caesar will not make him yet the World's Commander,
Wherefore he must be styled an Alexander.
And Alexander, though the whole World's Rod,
Must be adored and worshipped as a God.
After his many wonders, even then
He sound himself to be as other men.
Base Pride eclipses those of high degree;
But before Honor is Humility:
Honor that Furnace which does heat the blood,
Making men act things but profusely good.
Swelling Ambition makes a man its slave
Till Death's sharp Dart does post him to his grave.
But how in play first came this cheating Sin?
Adam would be a God, so it came in.
Other sins fly from God, and shun the chase,
This boldly flies in the Almighty's face.
All that the erring Children have to say
Is this; It was our Father led the way.
Spiritus Sanctus.
COme, holy Spirit, come, and breathe
Thy spicy Odours on the face
Of our dull Region here beneathe,
And fill our Souls with thy sweet Grace.
Come, and root out the poisonous Weeds
That overrun and choke our lives,
And in our hearts plant thine own Seeds,
Whose quickening power our Spirit revives.
First pla^ the humble Violet there
That dwells secure by being low,
Then let the Lily next appear,
And make us chaste, yet fruitful too.
But oh, plant all the Virtues, Lord,
And let the Metaphors alone;
Repeat once more that mighty Word,
Thou needst but say, Let it be done.
We can, alas, nor be, nor grow,
Unless thy powerful mercy please;
Thy hand must plant and water too,
Thy hand alone must give increase.
Do then what thou alone can do,
Do what to thee so easy is,
Conduct us through this World of woe,
And place us safe in thine own Bliss.
All Glory to the Sacred Three,
One Ever living Sovereign Lord,
As at the first, still may he be
Beloved and praised, feared and adored.
The Christian and a Worldling. A Dialogue.
Worcester. IS it not pleasant (Christian) to be great?

Chr. It Is but a moral cheat.

Worcester. Where lies the cheat, when I receive the gold?

Chr. In crying sins untold.

Worcester. Must I be wretched 'cause I Am growing rich?

Chr. Wealth is oft-times a Witch;

Worcester. Amity with the World I never mist.

Chr. That Is enmity with Christ.

Worcester. I cloth the naked, I the hungry seed.

Chr. Those are good acts indeed.

Worcester. My Purse, for Alms, flows like a Conduit p^pe.

Chr. 'Cause ye the Widows gripe.

Worcester. I fear my God, and do my Neighbors love.

Chr. That men may well approve,

Worcester. I relieve those that have in Perils been;

Chr. But only to be seen.

Worcester. This do I do, what is it I should do more?

Chr. Give all unto the Poor;
Then may thy name be in the Christian-list:
And when you are poor, thy treasure is in Christ.

On the Tree of Knowledge.
IN Paradise it was this Tree did grow,
Placed in the midst, that man might thereby know
It was the choicest Plant; but Satan came,
And with his wiles beguiled Adam's Dame.
Taste, Woman, eat, quoth he, it does descry
Both Good and Evil; eat and never die,
Forbear and perish: herein lies the odds,
They that shall eat hereof shall be as Gods.
Is it not pleasant? were it understood,
You Would eat, and say, it is no common Food:
It is an Ointment for your blinded eyes;
First taste, then eat, this Fruit will make you wise.
Eve, like a silly woman, then began
To bite that Bait which Satan cast for man.
She having eat, the next thing she must do,
Is to persuade her Husband do so too.
Adam forsakes his Innocence, and
They each perceived that both did naked stand;
Then clothed themselves with Fig leaves, to prevent
Their present shame, and future punishment.
But the great God (whose ever seeing eye
Discerned their folly) he was straightway nigh.
Perceiving that they for immediate ease
Sought for their shelter among other trees;
But God's loud voice soon pierced the tender bough,
Only with saying, Adam, where art thou?
Adam as conscious that he was betrayed,
(...) he heard God's voice, and was afraid:
He and his Wife, as two poor naked elves,
In dire distress, betook to hide themselves.
Then says the Lord, For what cause wast thou hid?
What, have thou eat the fruit which I forbid?
Who told thee thou art naked? let me know.
Adam replied, This Woman caused my woe:
She whom thou gave me said it was sweet;
She gave me of the tree, and I did eat.
The Woman likewise did her plaint prefer,
Saying the Serpent 'twas deceived her.
Was Eden's Garden barren, was there none
That could invite, but this same tree alone?
That fruitful Soil, whose trees with bending (...),
And justly styled her Mistress of the World,
'Twas there choice dainties made a rich increase,
Paradise then was Natures Masterpiece.
Of all the other trees said God the Lord,
Thou may delight thy self with free accord.
By which it follows with divine attest,
That there were more, and who knows which was best?
This tree like Adam's self might have been hid.
Its fruit was eat, because it was forbid.
Thus did their disobedience usher in
A world of Sorrow, with a world of Sin.
Our God in the beginning did create
Man for himself, Woman man's helpful mate:
'Twas then the Serpent first contrived to scan
To make a Woman prove a Woe [to] man.
Adam's cast out by order of the Lord,
And Cherubs guard the Tree with flaming Sword.
On Judas his Treason.
WHat monstrous Devil, or what horrid Hag
Bewitch^ his mind, with Blood to fill his Bag?
What pains he took for an eternal ^rise,
To sell his Mailer, and the Lord of Life
For thirty Pieces, high Ingratitude,
Treason never wore a guilt could be so rude.
He that is covetous does hug an evil,
Bids God farewell, to entertain the Devil;
Although his mouth be full of Gold, his fate
Is such, he bites at every tempting bait.
Base Avarice, the block 'twixt man and bliss,
Betraying Judas with a Judas-kiss;
A false deluding gloworm to the blind,
And greatest canker of the heart and mind:
'Twas that made him betray his righteous Judge,
And do his homage to the vilest drudge.
A liveless piece of earth, was his request,
Made that his God, to shrine it in his Chest;
Whose frantic mind no reason could control,
He sells for silver both his King and Soul.
Mark the effect of hungring after pelf;
Judas repented, then he hanged himself.
Such is the Character of Avarice,
`Tis Vertu's bane, and it is the root of Vice.
An Adieu to the World.
BE gone, false Joys, ye, and the World are frail,
My Soul's immortal; ye shall not prevail
To cheat me of an everlasting Jewel:
For all your Glories are but menstrous fuel.
God is Eternal; your bewitching Charms
Are merely vain, more vain than false Alarms.
Heaven is my Home, the World is but my Inn,
Stufft up with Straw, with Rubbish, Dung, and Sin.
Your Gold, your Silver, and your Diamonds are
But Dross; Heaven's Blessings are beyond compare.
Here ye have Land, erect your Castles high,
But there are Mansions for eternity.
Your poor deluding Pleasures soon are over,
But there are Pleasures last for evermore.
Here Pride and Envy in swift motion move,
But there the Angels daily sing and love.
Here live rich Fools that glut themselves to Hell,
But there lives none but does your best excel.
God is my Portion, let Earth hallow thee;
Mercy and Goodness both shall follow me:
And whilst the Worldling does in Torments cry,
Glory attends the Righteous when they die.
Heaven's transcendent Joys are firm and true,
There lies my Aim; farewell, fond World, adieu.
On a Usurer.
It Is not the Usurer that gives relief,
But rather robs the Spittle, plays the thief
With privilege; whilst others do abhor it,
He boldly dares to plead a Statute for it.
Tell him of Godliness, you talk in vain;
For it is Gold, is both his God and gain.
Six in the Hundred from the meaner Tribes,
Continuation-money, other Bribes
Which he extorts, do make his bags swell o'r,
And keeps the Borrower continual poor.
(...) (...) of him thus reports,
He Is ^ke a false Physician who exhorts
His feverish Patient take for his relief
Cold Water, which does much augment his grief.
So Money lent on Usury, does seem
Relief, but in conclusion proves a Dream;
And as cold Water gives some present ease,
But the Effect prolongeth the Disease.
He follows Debtors, as the Eagles train
An Army, preying upon those are slain:
And men flock to him, when they seem forlorn,
As birds do gather to an heap of Corn;
For they desire, and strive their Food to get,
'Till they are entrapt within the Fowler's Net.
Idleness is his Darling, Spouse, his Wife;
He lives at ease a sedentary life.
His Pen's his Plow, and Parchment is his Field,
Ink is his Seed, and Time his Crop does yield.
He Is so hemmed in wherever he casts his eye,
He daily views Objects of Charity:
But study'ng then to feather his own Nest,
Minds them of Principal and Interest.
To overreach he bends his utmost strength,
And like the Butler's box sweeps all at length,
Agis the Athenian General set fire
On all the Books and Bonds, for love or hire
He could procure, by those that did adhere
To find them out, as goods of Usurer:
On which Agesilaus was wont to say,
The Market never had fairer Market day.
And Aristotle did this sort decry
As Harpies, strangers unto Unity.
This biting Usurer, or Man-eater, he
Is like the Shark that swimmeth in the Sea,
Devouring lesser Fish: So Ostrich right,
All Metals sure this Monsters appetite.
St. Matthew teaches us in words but few,
Do as you would have others do to you:
Be kind to the unthankful and the evil;
God's children scorn to imitate the Devil.
Nor will this Doctrine reach a Miser's scull,
Be merciful, as God is merciful.
St. Paul most piously advises thus,
In conversation be not covetous.
Thus Usury, throughout the Holy Writ,
Is held a heinous crime, and thought unfit
For Christian practice. Wealth could never buy
One little moment of Eternity.
It was Alphonsus saying, All such gain
Makes a Sepulcher for the Soul: In vain
Let Usurers God's Tabernacle hope,
That give their Conscience such a wretched scope.
Charity's kind, helps to keep all things even,
But Usury excludes the Soul from Heaven.
Of Poverty.
NO stony Walls can make a Jayl,
Though Iron-bars do it surround;
Confinement cannot make him vayl,
That with Contentments does abound.
Men are Trees of one spacious Grove:
The greatest men do seem the tallest;
But Grace makes little Trees improve,
Sweet favor lies in those are smallest.
A poor man may be Godly-wise,
And sin may make a rich man poor:
The silent Lamb's the Sacrifice,
Whilst Lions proudly live and roar.
The Dove, that Bird of Innocence,
Before the soaring Eagle's chose,
That we may justly learn from thence,
Humility to Heaven goes.
Lazarus poor, diseased lay
In misery, Earth was his Hell;
Yet he to Abram found the way,
And Dives went in flames to dwell.
The rich man's title and his name
To learn, men con them over and over;
But they more glory have, less shame,
That study to relieve the Poor.
He that at present lives in state,
Above the reach of worldly wrong,
May in another world relate
He wants a drop to cool his tongue.
The Poor are pious Usurers;
For having lost their earthly leaven,
Their God, with Interest, confers
Glorious rewards on them in Heaven.
Rich men delight to count their Gold,
It Is pastime for their mind and eye:
Content is happiness (in hold)
Such pleasure is in Poverty.
On Mortality.
WHen a rich Worldling dies, first question is,
How Rich he di'd; not, is he gone to Bl ss?
Many make answer, or in love or hate,
Rich, very Rich, he lest a good Estate;
Not well considering 'tshould be understood
Many Estates are greater far than good.
Alas, poor man, his eyes are closed with sleep,
And his Inheritors rejoice, not weep.
He by Oppression heapt up ill got Wealth,
And they carouze it to their Ladies health.
Perhaps when living he undid so many,
He scarce has Tear, so much as Sigh from any.
The Poor, instead of Prayers (so much the worse)
Attend his Corpse with Clamours, and a Curse.
What fruit has man in all these things? his breath
Is spent, his labor too concludes in death:
His Mamon fails him, all his stores so great
Will witness against him at the Judgment Seat.
He leaves to others Principal and Use,
But that which ^ollows him is the abuse.
He casts about to compass his by-ends,
Himself to ruin to enrich his friends:
So that each bag might make this Motto good,
If fixed thereon, This is the price of Blood.
Hark then, my Soul, bestow thy fortunes hoard,
Upon the Members of thy blessed Lord.
Give whilst thou iv'st, it is safe to do so; for
Thine eye is then thine own executor.
The Poor will praise thee in some pious Ditty,
And that may help, for Prayer can save a City.
On a Wicked man.
LOrd, what a creature is a wicked man!
His life is miserable, though a span:
All his Religion is in outward forms;
H^s Dainties, Meat, and Manna, turns to Worms.
The Mercies daily that adorn his table
Do prove his Poison, make him miserable.
If his Estate be large; it does annoy,
His dangers keeping what he cannot enjoy:
Or if he does enjoy, he so does use it,
That the enjoyment is but to abuse it.
Luxury leaves him no time to repent,
But ^ulls him to eternal punishment.
The pleasures of this world do pass away,
But pains and hellish horrors last for aye.
Lord help me then thy mercies to improve;
He is ungrateful gives not Love for Love.
On P^ce.
THe patient man is of a metal made
Not hard, but flexible: He Is overlaid
With heavy burdens, which do try his skill,
Making Affections equal to his Will:
All which he bears rather than feed a feud,
Not out of cowardice, but fortitude.
He by his yielding does his foes condemn;
Rides Conqueror both of himself and them.
He above Nature is; and so prolongs
His Cognizance, that he does tire his wrongs.
To receive injuries that daily fall,
Pronounces him more than Heroical.
He God's best witness is; and when he stands
Before the Bar for truth, his word commands:
He hears his unjust, and with fate
His Innocence dares to expostulate.
His Jaylors that attend him to the Sages,
Are not his Guard so fitly as his Pages.
His earthly Dungeon is an heavenly Vault;
Vertu's his crime, and Patience his fault.
His Rack or Wheel, are the ascending stayers
That reach to Glory, all adorned with Prayers.
Good Laws are his protection, not his ends;
Minds not revenge, but loves both foes and friends.
If crosses do afflict, he does submit,
And is content, 'cause Heaven thinks it fit.
He turns an evil into good: it is he
Can make a Virtue of necessity.
An easy enemy, a certain friend,
To injuries can bow and condescend.
Than others, far more happy, he applies
A satisfaction to his miseries.
He that can keep his angry spirit down,
Is better far than he that takes a Town.
Patience is the Prisoner's Walk,
Patience is the Dumb man's Talk.
Patience is the Lame man's Thighs,
Patience is the Blind man's eyes.
Patience is the Poor man's Ditty,
Patience is the Exiles City.
Patience, the Sick man's bed of Down,
Patience is the Wise man's Crown.
Patience is the Live man's Story,
Patience is the Dead man's Glory.
When your Troubles do control,
In your Patience keep yout Soul.
On the Tree of Life.
HArk, O my Soul, to cane the infernal Pit,
Know it thy name in the book of Life be writ:
And for a certainty the same to find,
Read o'r thy Conscience, and peruse thy mind.
Think not of Heave^s Ro^l to have a view;
Examine thine own Heart, 'twill tell thee true:
For in the Conscience of a Saint does lie
An Holy Record of Eternity.
If in thy Conse ence the have writ God's Word,
Be sure the Book of Life does th^e record.
When at the day of Judgment God shall look
Into his Register, and when the Book
Of Conscience lies open, then indeed
The Saint and Sinner both may trembling read.
Wherefore, my Soul, so govern hand and pen;
Write now, as not to fear to read it then.
On Acts 26. 28.
Almost a Christian.
LEarning well managed make the Graces glad;
But if abused, the learned man grows mad,
And make; his Learning, as an Handmaid, sit
To wait on the profa'ness of his Wit:
But Piety and Parts when they agree,
Learning then makes an heavenly harmony.
So did St. Paul's, that pious Prisoner; for
He was at once a Slave and Orator:
Witness his pithy, and his quaint responds
To King Agrippa; King, except these Bonds
I wish not only thou, but all hereby,
Were both almost, and wholly such as I;
Not half a Christian, but to bear those Arms
Of Faith that may repel the Devil's charms.
An altogether Christian's not depraved;
Almost a Christian shall almost be saved.
Of Presumption.
IF you are a disputant, or proudly wise,
If ignorant, yet seemingly precise,
Beware of being busy with God's Word,
To dive into the Secrets of the Lord.
His Closet is his own, and woe to they
Shall pick the lock, when God does keep the key.
Then be not over-busie; he that will
Be sifting every Cloud to try his skill,
For his presumption he may have the luck,
For daring boldly, to be Thunderstruck.
He that will be familiarly bold
With Heavens mysteries, them to unfold,
May with his judgment overwhelmed be,
As Ad^ was with his unhappy Tree.
The (...) must p^y into the Ark;
God's Judgment was serene, though theirs was dark.
For their presumption this became their gain,
They by the Lord had Fifty thousand slain.
Then hover not about this flame which brings
Soul fatal falls, by scorching of its wings:
I will improve by what we have revealed,
Not strive to know what God would have concealed.
Lord, to prese^ve me from the Devil's gins,
Keep back thy servant from presumptuous sins.
On Death.
SInce nothing is so certain as our death,
And nothing more uncertain than when breath
Expires, we ought each minute to prepare:
Death sends no Summons, but comes unaware.
The grand decry is past; dispute not why
All men have sinned, and all men must die.
Man's days are numbered, he can find no aid;
It Is God has man upon the balance laid,
And found him wanting. God's all-searching eye
Has thus determined, men are Vanity.
Corruption is man's father, and the Worms
His sisters, they have their corrupt conforms.
The Grave it is his Bed, the Sheet his Shrine,
The Earth his Cover, Grass his Carpet fine.
At last Death comes, and he concludes the Theme,
Finds man asleep, and darts him in his Dream.
Such is our sluggish life, a shadow, frail,
A bubble, vapor, and a trifling tale:
So vain a story, that when we grow old
We spend our days before the tale is told.
The World's of contraries a vast compound,
Nothing within it solid is, or sound.
Four Elements in opposition move
Each to the other. The degrees of Love
Cannot be found in a con^used heap;
It Is Heaven does that holy Order keep.
Death gives our earthly bodies a new cast,
Refines us, that we may prove clear at last.
What is corrupt, within the grave must lie,
Till Mortal puts on Immortality.
No man's corruption can be laid aside,
Until his body in the Earth abide.
He chiefly it is that is afeard to die,
Has little hope of an Eternity.
The time we have to live, it is but small,
Less than a point that is Geometrical.
Our common Enemy does promise fair
This world, to cheat us of a world more rare.
Our pleasures do deceitfully entangle,
Smiling even then, when they intend to strangle.
The world is kindest when it most does frown,
And honors list us up to cast us down.
The Christian then should ready be to cry,
When God shall call, Behold, Lord, here am I.
For they of their Salvation never mist,
Have been partakers of the death of Christ.
God on the Righteous always has an eye;
His ear is ever open to their cry:
And he that does a righteous man regard,
He shall receive a righteous man's reward.
Be truly zealous, show no vain pretext,
But live each hour as if to die the next.
On Conscience.
THe Conscience is a Function of the Mind,
A Guide to Straglers, to the Lame, and Blind.
Over the Will the Conscience sits commanding,
And is a Guardian to the Understanding:
For what the Pen of Nature does engrave
Upon that general Knowledge which we have,
Or to our Thoughts, our Minds, or to our Acts,
Conscience applies, and summons up our Facts.
Paul our Example was of Innocence,
Having a Conscience void of all offense
Both toward God, and toward men, so clear,
That his own Conscience was his Overseer.
Christian, unto thy Conscience have an eye,
Lest Conscience does accuse, for that is a spy.
On Memory.
MEmory is the Storehouse of the Soul;
The Will's Dictator; Understanding's Scroul.
There we hoard up the treasures of our Mind,
And fetch them out as we occasion find.
But well it may with filthy Ponds compare,
Wherein fish die, but frogs are nourished there.
So we retain trash that does sour and rot,
Whilst admirable mercies are forgot.
Thus we that should be Temples of God's praise,
Are Graves to bury what his love displays.
All Injuries most men to Marble trust,
But Courtesies are written in the Dust.
What Is bad they can sufficiently retain,
But what is good is idle thought, and vain.
Like Nets, our Memories let clear waters go,
And nothing catch but sticks and weeds of Woe:
Or else like Sieves (so rashly are we born)
That do retain the Chaff, let go the Corn.
But like an holy Ark the Soul should be,
And as the pot of Manna, Memory.
Our faculties herein need no excuse,
Preserving holy Truths for holy use.
On a Death-bed-Repentance.
THis Speech, though sad, it did a King survive;
I now must die, e're I begin to live.
And such is the condition of that man
That dies e're his Repentance is began;
That wants his weapons, can for none implore;
For why? Behold, Death knocks at his door.
What sign^fie Petitions of a Heart
That trembling lies when Death presents his Dart?
Unhappy certainly must be their Dooms
Have Oil to seek just when the Bridegroom comes.
Death and the Devil do their Souls pursue,
And they no refuge have to fly unto.
The seven years of Plenty all are gone,
And years of Famine are not thought upon.
Time that is swift has took his nimble flight;
Travel does tire, yet we want rest at night:
I Will therefore finish every Work I have,
So shall I go with Peace unto my Grave.
On the Mariner.
THe Mariner that is drove by Boreas breath,
Does sail within four inches of his death.
So of the Soul the saying may be true,
That e're it bids its Cabinet adieu,
Four inches is the most that it does keep
Betwixt its life and an eternal sleep.
If the Ship splits, or by a fire does shrink.
The Ship is swallowed, and the Sailers sink.
So if our earthly Vessels break, the Soul
Does to another Habitation roll,
For ever plunged into a boundless Sea,
The bankless Ocean of Eternity.
The Soul should therefore careful be, and strive
To swim, before it come to sink or dive.
On an Israelite.
AS the Tree falls, so does it lie;
And when Death strikes, all men must die:
Only herein the difference is,
God gives us misery or bliss.
As in the Red Sea, if I go
An Israelite, though waters flow,
In triumph I shall tell my story,
And land rejoicing, full of Glory,
While all mine Enemies lie spread
Upon the shore, and each one dead:
But if Egyptian-like I crowd,
And be on this side of the Cloud,
On this side of the Covenant,
And yet run hardened in (for want
Of Grace) amongst proud Phara^h's Troops,
The Sea shall open all her Poops:
And e're I find my Journeys length,
Justice shall swallow me with strength;
An Inundation shall destroy
My Soul, and drown my future Joy.
O Lord, then by thy powerful might,
Make me thine own, an Israelite.
On Shame.
THe age is impudent in which we live;
Men seem ashamed to be ashamed of blame;
And to their Errors such a license give,
That they delight to glory in their shame.
They have a specious Cloak for each offense,
And study how to palliate their Vice.
The Covetous has Husbandry's pretense;
The Prodigal is free, perhaps at Dice.
The Lecher shrouds his sin in the mask of Love;
The Drunkard to good fellowship pretends;
The Cheat does for his Family improve
Ill-gotten goods; each have their private ends.
They blush not at the fact, yet will not own
The Title; by the which we may conclude
The sense of shame, when to perfection grown,
Restrains from sins, can hide a multitude.
But he that is this apprehension past,
Lets loose the Reins of his suborned will,
Goes hand in hand with Satan, till at last
Madness and Mischief are his joy and skill.
The World says to him, Take thy pleasure, swim
In Lust and Liquor: Heart, the Mind, and Eye
Are lively, merry, careless, and so trim,
He does not care though God's his enemy.
Fools show their folly as it suits their name,
But prudent men will be ashamed of Shame.
On the Wilful Impenitent.
TEll me, fond Worldling, why do thou deride
A godly Christian? Is It thy natures pride?
Do thou not daily see his weeping eye
Shed Tears to wake thy sleeping Lethargy?
See how he trembles at the sight of sin!
Whilst thou, lewd actor, longest to begin;
And look on him as pusillanimous,
A Coward, or a Drone. I tell thee, thus
You Are rashly valiant, and do spend thy breath
On Toys, whilst he dare boldly look on Death.
He Is truly noble; and when he appears,
Is not appalled before the King of Fears.
Heaven is his harbor, Grace does most delight him;
Hell's horrors may appear, but not affright him:
But as a Conqueror over Death and Hell,
Can with his Smiles all their Bravadoes quell;
And with a cheerful heart this Ditty sing,
As if in scorn, O, Death, where is thy sting?
Or like a Cherubim that flies on high,
Can say, O, Hell, where is thy victory?
This is the Valediction of a Saint,
Whilst Sinners toil, and in their labors faint.
Where is the Worldling's glory? He can sin,
Can vicious be, and he can boast therein:
Can silence Conscience, and outface a Crime,
And shun a blush to damn his Soul betime.
That man a Coward is, and fights by stealth;
For if a sickness does impair his health,
He then believes Death does a summons beat,
And his large Spirit sneaks to a retreat.
Does he not tremble when he once has got
A shaking Ague, or a Fever hot?
And when he feels the heavy hand of Fate,
He begs for quarter, though it be too late.
What heaviness then fits upon his look?
Terror appears, Conscience unfolds its book,
Charges him to consider well and read;
And just as he begins, Death strikes him dead.
A true Repentance cannot be too late;
Early Repentance is a blessed state.
Thus does a sinner to Perdition fall,
And that which was his Throne, becomes his Thrall.
On a Glorious Soul.
WHenas the Moon her constant course has run,
And draws to a Conjunction with the Sun,
It to the Heavens shines more bright and pure,
And toward Earth seems the more obscure.
So, as the Soul draws near, as like a Spouse,
Shines fair to Christ, is to the World a Blouse.
He that is precious unto God, that man
Is by the World esteemed a Puritan:
And he whose Soul in Glory does inherit,
Appears but odious to an earthly Spirit.
For he that looks with a Terrestrial sight,
Is Lustre-dazled with Celestial light.
Shine fair to God if thou wilt to Heaven go;
Beauty on earth is a beclouded show.
On Contentation.
CYae as asking Pyrrhus his intent,
What he would do after his hazard spent
In many Victories, Pyrrhus did reply,
He Would take his ease, and then live merrily.
To whom Cyneas, That you might have done
Before, were you contented with your own.
It Is not the largeness of the Cage does bring
Notes to the Bird, instructing him to sing.
Moreover, though a Bird has little eye,
Yet he has wings by which he soars on high,
Can see far wider, and abundance better
Than may an Ox, although his eye be greater.
It Is not the great Estate that brings Content,
But Piety, the Christian's Ornament.
The Righteous having little, no promotion;
Yet what he has, when joined with Devotion,
May seel more comfort, more enjoy God's bounty
Than he whose Incomes may command a County.
But few can be content with what they have;
He that has hundreds, still for more does crave:
If his Possessions be in Houses, Land,
He grasps at more, and with a ready hand
Omits no mischief that his Craft can nurse,
To fill his Coffer, or enlarge his Purse.
The greatest thing in little compass can
Be comprehended, is Content in man.
And this great Virtue has its safe abode
Only in him that is a Child of God;
Who sees, and to his brethren cries, Content ye,
Enough's a feast, and Piety has plenty.
As when a Traveller comes to his Inn,
He for a Lodging-room does first begin
T'enquire; but if he cannot please his mind,
He is content with such as he shall find,
Although perhaps his Room may not delight,
Well knowing that it is but for a night:
So is it with the Christian Pilgrim; he
Can use a large Estate, if it should be
God's will to bless him with it, yet his mind
To Heaven's pleasure always is confined.
A little of the Creatures will assuage
Hunger and Thirst in Christian Pilgrimage:
For let his Journeying be sweet or rough,
He knows his Father's house has bread enough;
Therefore as sweetly feeds, in going home,
As Sampson did upon his Honeycomb.
Let no man's mind on Earthly things be bent;
But Having food and raiment, be content.
On the Hypocrite.
THe Hypocrite of Actors is the worst,
His own pretenses making him accursed.
By so much as he acts the better part,
And Janus-like with double face and heart,
He can compose his forehead to be grave,
Although his heart be then his humors slave.
His modest face does show the Characters
Of Justice and Religion; nor forbears
His tongue and gestures so much to proclaim;
But heart and hands, they do recant the same.
When to the Church he comes, he there salutes
One of the Pillars, and on knee confutes
The Atheist, worshipping that God, in part,
Whose Precepts never could affect his heart.
He rises, looks about, and takes his seat;
Complains that Charity is not so great
As he could wish, or heretofore has been.
Perhaps bestows an Alms; but to be seen,
Always sits where he may embrace the look
Of all Spectators: And his Table Book,
In Sermon-time comes from beneath his coat,
As seeming fearful he should loose that Note.
Then takes his Bible, hums to rear his voice,
And turns to some Quotation with a noise:
Then doubles down the leaf, as if the same
Were found; and loudly asks the Preacher's name:
And that his Zeal may fervently appear,
Repeats it, that the standers by may hear.
He can command his Tears, reckon up sins
With detestation; but when he begins
He never thinks, with a true pious wrath,
How many darling-sins his bosom has:
Nor Alms, nor Prayers never fall, unless he spy,
Although at distance, certain witness by;
As if he doubted whether God would own
Receiving them: and is so wary grown,
That left the World should not discern his worth,
His mouth's the Trumpet that does sound it forth.
And when his Bags run over, bethinks to build
An Hospital; and that is straightway filled
With persons indigent, did aged grow,
Poor as when born; for he had made them so.
With flesh on Frydays he will not be fed,
He more abhors it than his Neighbors bed.
Will at the Name of Jesus bow, or nod,
At Church; anon at Tavern swear by God
When his Step-mother's sick, and seems to creep
Toward her Grave, he then brings Tears to weep:
When he has cause to fear she will not die,
He forces a rejoycing-sympathie
With her best friends. It Is hard to rightly paint
An Hypocrite. To strangers he is a Saint;
A mere pretender to the Poors relief;
Private Extortioner; his Neighbors grief;
The blot of goodness; scoff in good men's fight;
A rotten Stick to trust in dark of night;
A Candle tempered ill, with a large snuff;
The Poor man's Plague, and a religious Huff;
The Fool's great Idol, and the Wife man's scorn;
A choking Poppy in a field of Corn:
Abroad an Angel, free from least of evil;
At home none more implacable, a Devil:
And when an Angel worse, a guide amiss;
But when a Devil, shows but what he is.
As the Apostle's Phrase is, many men
Are servants of the eyes; for they shall, when
They are beheld, act Virtue with a grace,
And in their Zeal run with a through pace:
When they perceive Spectators all are gone,
They change their habits, for the Play is done.
They curious Searchers are in others acts,
Careless Correctors of their own foul facts.
They to their Lust and Lewdness are so prone,
They think they are safe, because espied by none.
Thus an ill nature leads man to sin,
And corrupt custom bids him 'bide therein.
When carnal Constitutions get a head,
They, like Commanders, do weak mortals lead:
But for the Hypocrite, he seems a friend
Will promise much, but, not without an end,
Nothing perform; but many he has broke,
Receiving substance, but returning smoke.
And he whose quality is eminent,
More foul's the quality of his intent.
Acts that dishonorable are, look great
In them, by blood or parts, have Honors seat.
The Publican and Sinner have more right
To Heaven's Mansions than an Hypocrite.
I with Prolixity might spoil my Pen,
For he is in verity the scum of men.
The worst of damned Souls their portion have
With him in hot and horrid scorching Cave.
There leave we him and his tormented bone
Measuring minutes with deep sighs and groar
On Envy.
ALl lusts reduced are to Threefold heads,
Lust of the eyes, the flesh, and that which leads
To as much Vice and a continual Strife,
The haughty humor, or the pride of life.
But Envy is the chiefest lust of eyes;
Seeing another good, with him it vies,
Not to be farther good; his envy grew,
Seeing good men beloved and honored too.
Envy thinks all men made of equal stuff:
Why may not envious men be good enough?
It for the Innocent defends a Cause
To seem a Saint, and to procure applause:
But it is a Plague within a man's own breast,
And a Disease will not admit of Rest.
If such a thing as Admiration be,
It Is heart does whisper, That belongs to me.
It is a furious wind, which to rehearse,
Sometimes breaks forth to shake the Universe.
A sharp Malignity, most quick of sight;
An Ostrich with an eager appetite.
Cherish a Do^, and you may make him tame;
Lions by gentleness become the same:
But man grown ^vious, if you speak him fair,
Yet keep at distance, of his wiles beware:
For if he sees you creep, then he proves worse,
May smile upon you when his heart does curse.
(...) the World's frowns do force you to comply,
He gluts himself with your adversity;
And Beetle-like, as I have heard it sung,
When hungry grown, does eat its fellows dung.
Whilst Envy does obliquely look upon
The good of others, all his own is gone:
Or at the least takes no delight; the smart
Is like a Vulture seeding on the heart.
The Basilisk by nature kills all Trees
And Shrubs it breaths on; and when he please
Does scorch and burn all Herbs, and Leaves of Grass
Over the which his body chance to pass.
So Envy is an Aetna in a man,
(Like the Cantharides) if seeding can
Encompass as its stomach does dispose;
And often diets on the fairest Rose.
It is a Passion does ones Health deser,
And proves at last a man's Self-murtherer.
It Is Couzen-German to the sin of Pride,
And each may well be called a Homicide.
Wrath kills the foolish man, when in his way
The envious man the silly Soul does slay.
The eye, alas, is the unhappy pit
That first does this destructive guest admit:
And when it gets a full possession once,
It shrinks the Nerves, and rots into the bones:
Till with Consumption it does man environ,
Feeding on him as Rust does seed on Iron.
Envy believes its will should be its law:
Socrates says, It Is to the Soul a Saw;
Grates without mercy when it does behold
Its dross, and sees another shine in gold.
Like the poor Fly, to put the Candle out,
Does burn it self with buzzing round about.
Or like the Be, that with a humming flies,
Looses his sting, and then at once he dies.
Or Viper-like, to make a Paul expire,
Leaping on him, is cast into the fire.
Envy's a Canker in the Heart and Mind,
Spleen to the good; Great Charity is kind.
On Supplication.
AS in a Ship when sailing from its Port,
The Sails are Loised, thereby to exhort
Some skilful Mariner to show his art,
Who presently does to the Rudder start.
So every morning when we rise from rest,
Our hearts should study for a just Request:
For that is the Rudder of our life and age,
To guide us through our Earthly Pilgrimage.
Heaven is our home, and God alone; to him
Through Rivers of our Tears we ought to swim:
For when God's wrath is kindled to a fire,
No other water can allay his ire.
Christians no better Messengers can send
Than Prayers and Tears, Angels on them attend.
Moses by Prayer, that prevailing Word,
Harmed Amalik much more than Israel's Sword.
The Apostle Paul this golden Rule has laid,
Let supplications for all men be made:
In which great duty let this be observed,
First a due preparation, not with carved
Or starched Expressions made by Wit and Art;
God does desire truth in the inward part.
Consider, thou the Supplicant art dust,
A vile and sinful man, a heap of Lust.
The Lord, to whom thou do thy Prayers apply,
Is Holy, Wise, of Sacred Majesty.
Let Meditation guide thee in thy way,
Lest thy frail mind distracted be, and ftray.
Pray sor things lawful, don't that bound exceed;
For God, before ye ask, knows what ye need:
But silence in the Soul he does abhor;
Mercies are small, if not worth asking for.
Pray not for Mercies as thy fancy drives,
As little Children do for Toys and Knives,
Who when they have them know not how they are used;
Mercies are better wanted than abused.
Make Supplications in the Name of Christ;
Thou may be good, yet show not merits list.
Examine well thine heart, keep Faith therein,
For whatsoever's not of faith, is sin.
Be constant, that thou may abide the touch;
For servent righteous prayer avails much.
Birds without motion cannot fly in the Air,
Nor without work can we persist in Prayer.
Pray in Humility, and nothing fear;
The poor man cried, and the Lord did hear.
In Supplications be importunate;
Pray perseveringly; and in that state
So guide thy thoughts, and so thy heart prepare,
As if thy life were one continual Prayer.
All our Iniquities we must forbear;
In vain we pray, when God shall stop his ear.
On Luxury.
SEneca speaks of some (of tender years
Supposed) that hanged their Lordships at their ears.
And in our time, Gallants, to their disgrace,
Convert their Lands to Feathers and to Lace;
Wasting their Rents to purchase Silks and Stuffs,
Mortgaging Mannours to procure them Muffs.
This they have left, when all things else are gone;
Air for their breath, and Earth to tread upon.
Apicius in his Kitchen did expend
Two millions of Gold; and in the end,
Having devoured so much, begins to think
What might remain of his huge mass of Chink:
Finding Two hundred thousand crowns, no more,
He then concluded he was waxing poor:
Too little 'twas his humor to suffice,
Wherefore he poison drinks, and so he dies.
Thus our Estates, though large, in vain are spent,
When the main thing is wanting; that is Content.
The Glutton Philoxenus did ^inveigh
Against Dame Nature, and for what, I pray?
It was because his neck was made so short,
His eating was no recreating sport,
But wished his neck were like a Cranes for length,
Better to relish his sweet morsels strength.
To the Insatiate, Water, Land, nor Air,
Sufficient is to keep him from despair.
How many golden Mines at stake must lie,
To bear the charge of Prodigality?
Of Henry Duke of Guise it has been said,
Usury was his pleasure and his trade:
For when his large Estate to ashes burned,
At last it all to Obligations turned.
But he that spends all to please his friend,
Perhaps may visit him, but want i'th'end.
But the three B's, Back, Belly, Building, have
To fair Estates each one become a Grave.
Luxurious men this for themselves may say,
Their hands are their Executors, and they
Before old age approach to make their years
Many, their eyes are their own Overseers.
Much of their Patrimonies they expend
Upon their Guts, the rest to Harlots lend;
Who usually do leave him full as bare
As Crows do leave a Carcass; and it is rare
When Riot does into man's Senses steal,
But certain Ruin follows at the heel.
Beggary does on Luxury attend,
When the poor Spendthrift has no other friend;
And does at last so despicable grow,
He is beneath the thought of Friend or Foe.
The Drunkard and the Glutton, e're he die,
Shall know the want of Superfluity.
On Enmity.
PLiny affirms, that the Serpents Brood
Cannot be reconciled to man: nor would
The learned Bodinus this Relation tell,
Did not his own experience know it well.
A capital Antipathy is spread
Between the Woman and the Serpent's head:
So that within a multitude of men
If but one woman crowd in the middle, then
The Serpent does his Enmity reveal
By finding her, and stings her in the heel:
Well verifying what their Maker sed,
Th'Serpent should bruise her heel; her seed, his head.
Persuasions may of come an Enemy;
Irreconcilable is Enmity:
It is a mutual Malevo'ence,
'That between parties studies for offense.
A dire antipathy that does create
The killing Canker of a mortal hate.
Magirus says, Nature makes it appear
In diverse Creatures, namely Horse and Bear,
The Eagle and the Swan, among all Fowl,
The lesser sort of Birds oppose the Owl.
The Toad and Spider likewise do agree
Each one to poison by antipathy.
The stately Lion of courageous stock,
Though bold and fierce, is fearful of a Cock.
But the most sharp hostility indeed,
Is between Satan and the Woman's seed.
The Dream.
MEthinks I hear Six voices cry aloud!
The first of Dying man's, by sickness bowed;
That of the Damned is the second voice;
Thirdly my Soul with an affrighted noise;
The sourth is Christ's with sweet inviting chimes;
The fifth's the charming voice of Evil times;
The sixth a voice that does the Sense allay,
A dreadful Sommons to the Judgment-day.
The Dying man, methinks, does make his moan,
Breathing out sighs, and with each sigh a groan:
Oh, loose no time, call every minute over,
A minute's precious; man's whole life's no more.
Oh that I could make sure of Heaven, for now
My days on Earth unto a period grow.
The Damned cry and roar: O see the end
And sad effects of sin! sorrows attend
The wicked man. I now discern my Crime,
And seel the punishment of loss of time;
And then I hear my Soul expostulate,
Oh, thou my body, frail, of wretched state,
Why should I play the fool to please thy Lust,
When all my Kindnesses are writ in dust?
Nay, in ungrateful dust, that does repay
A Pearl, only besmearing it with clay.
Thou but a moment art of time; but I
Must last for ever, to Eternity.
When thou with Rottenness art whelmed about,
Where shall I be? It Is fit I should get out
Betimes from such an Earthy house as thine,
And, as a Star, in Heaven's mansion shine.
Angels are my Companions there: do think,
To pleasure thee, I Will to Perdition sink?
Is it not better, prithee Mortal tell,
To Heaven we go, than thou bear me to Hell?
And then methinks sweet Jesus is at hand
With invitations thus: Behold, I stand
Here at the door, and knock; I weep, I sue
Until my head is covered over with dew:
I wait and beg to lead thee to Delight,
My locks being filled with the dew of night.
My tears, my groans, my crying blood does knock;
Open to me, thou heart, if not a Rock.
With patience I beseech, let sin no more
A lodging have, and Christ wait at the door.
Let not Damnation gull thee with deceit,
Whilst thy Salvation does entreat and wait.
Then evil times methinks do thus invite:
Oh, now consider, walk as in the light;
Let all your Virtues be adorned with Rays;
Be living Christians, these are dying days:
Be growing Christians, lay aside vain Crimes;
Walk steadfastly in these backsliding times.
Oh, now, or else thou art for ever gone,
Leave Devil, World, and Flesh, make Christ thine own.
Then the Archangels voice at last I hear,
Summoning all the Dead forthwith appear
Before the Judgment Seat, crying, Arise,
Come forth, ye blessed Saints, open your eyes;
With God and Angels each one take his place,
To judge the World, and try the finners Case:
Arise, ye cursed naked Souls, and take
Your standing before God and Angels; quake
At the Tribunal great, from whence shall come
Your fearful, final, and your fatal Doom.
Lord, the first voices let me hear with fear,
That the last voice I may not fear to hear.
On Beauty.
HAve you not heard of the bloody Siege of Troy?
Of Hellens beauty how it did destroy?
The luster of her Beauty did decay,
And she was but a glorious heap of Clay.
Or have you read of Jacob, how he served
Full fourteen years for Rachel, never swerved
From his affections? She, his hearts delight,
Was amiable and lovely in his fight.
Thus we adove those whom we think excel
In Beauty, though a painted Jezebel.
If these deserve so much, then what does he
That made these Beauties? he whose Majesty
Is altogether lovely, does surpass
The glories of an indigested Mass.
The Beauty of the whole Creation is
As dross to him; for the Creation's his.
Be not discouraged, oh my Soul, but place
Thy firm affections on thy Savior's face.
Though Enemies may watch for thy defaults,
Christ can secure thee from their fierce assaults.
Let him be beautiful within thine eye,
And thou shall live, although thou seemst to die.
Be not dsheartned, oh my Soul; for though
Rules may be strict and Duties hard, yet know
They are as (...) against the worst disaster;
Heaven's thy Wages, Christ himself thy Master.
Lord, let my heart thy Beauty understand,
No difficulty then shall reach my hand.
On Knowledge.
THis precious Jewel, Knowledge, may compare
To those the Israelites of old did wear:
For if our Knowledge be improved but half
Of that, I ke them we but erect a Calf.
Their Gold was precious, all that while commodious;
But in an Idol cast, it then grew odious.
So the pure Wit of man, well understood,
Was in the days of Innocence good;
But when corruption seizes on his age,
He becomes vicious that before was sage.
Or it resembles an untilled field
That barren lies, and nothing else does yield
But Brambles, Thorns, unnecessary Weeds,
Till Grace manures it with its growing seeds.
The best of Minerals their poisons have
Until extracted. Flowers sweet and brave,
Their faeces do possess, till art and skill,
By separation takes away the ill.
So the best Wits have folly, until Grace
Plucks up its roots and grows in the place.
In things that do spiritually relate,
The Understanding when it is tried by weight,
Will like (...) much too light be found,
Lighter than Vanity or Verbal sound.
Then let not wise men glory in their parts,
But hoard their Wisdom in unspotted hearts:
For it is a Jewel of an unknown price,
'Bove that of Rubies, or of man's device:
For he that gets wisdom loves his Soul,
Dare oppose dangers, fears no control.
It excels Folly as a glorious Star,
And better is than weapons used in War.
It Is profitable to instruct, direct,
Teaches the Ignorant be circumspect.
Wherefore if any one do Wisdom lack,
Ask of the Lord, for he will not be slack.
It is the gift of God, and he alone
Can Wisdom fix within a heart of stone.
Why are we daily by our sins decoyed?
For want of Knowledge people are destroyed.
With Knowledge put on practice: Satan's brood
Have Knowledge, but it does more harm thad good.
To Appreher sive Knowledge must conjoyn
Affective Knowledge: if those two combine,
They give a Christian courage. No retreat
Is needful when a Saint is armed complete.
When as God's holy Spirit takes in hand
To teach, the Scholar soon does understand.
To a good Soul nothing's of higher prize
Than is the knowledge of deep mysteries.
Austin of God desired no worldly pelf,
But only to know God, and know himself.
Knowledge and Love must both accord, for why?
Knowledge puffs up, but Love does edify.
Foolish were they that Knowledge did despise
Because it puffs up: Rather than wise,
They were resolved continue ignorant
And humble, Pride and Arrogance to want.
Knowledge puffs up, but Grace gives an allay;
For Knowledge can command, and can obey:
But those were like Democritus, half wise,
To shun Uncleanness plucked out both his eyes.
Though Knowledge nimbly on our Senses dance,
It Is greatest part's the least of Ignorance:
Yet we are apt to think, though cannot discern't,
That we know all that can by man be learnt.
As in the host of Alcibiades
All would be Leaders, none Commanders please:
And Epicurus spoke but as a youth,
Boasting he was the first discovered Truth;
For he in many things expressed his mind
Not as a man, but as a Beetle blind.
Aratus the Astrologer did vent
His brags, he knew all Stars in the Firmament.
Laurentius Valla gloried there was none
Writ Logic worth the reading. but his own.
Nestorius the Heretic could boast,
That he alone, on the European coast,
Did understand the Scriptures; when he came,
The World awakned was with his great name.
Well says The Apostle, and it is truly so,
Man knows nothing as he ought to know.
On Magnanimity.
CAesar spoke proudly when he boldly said,
In midst a storm, Pilot, be not afraid;
The angry Surges know not what they do;
Thou carriest Caesar and his fortunes too.
The Cannibals, as History does tell,
Are for their courage thought invincible;
Rather than seem to fear, remissly fly,
Or sue for life, they bravely choose to die.
In Alexander's last and fatal fight,
He showed his Courage was his chief delight,
By boasting 'twas his glory and his pride,
At once the Power of Persia to divide.
Mahomet the Persian Sultan overthrown,
His Passion was to such a fury grown,
He in revenge (perhaps more mad than wise)
Caused his chief Captains ten to loose their eyes,
So to prevent their overthrow again;
And threatened female habits for his men.
Lacedaemonians were wont to cry,
It was a shame for any man to fly
In time of danger: but a cursed fate,
Lacedaemonians should deliberate.
And Socrates, Criton's advice did slight,
When by him wished to make a private flight.
Salisbury's noble Earl, whenas he found
The Sultans Army had enclosed him round,
And he advised to fly, answered in scorn,
Heavens forbid I should for that be born;
Or any of my Father's Blood or Race
Should fear a Sarasin for force or face.
Much less then should a Christian fear, whose eye
Should fix on Christ, who did for Christians die.
Bravely resolved it was of blessed Paul
After Conversion, his aspiring fall,
I ready am not only to proclaim,
But to be bound, and die for Jesus Name.
Who sails with Christ fears neither Rock nor Sand;
Christians through storms must reach the promised Land.
On Ingratitude.
LOrd, what a danger lately I escaped!
Torrents of Terrors just before me gaped:
Upon the brink I was, yet escaped free;
They are well kept, O Lord, are kept by thee.
Surely thy meaning only was to fright,
As an advice that I might shun a smite.
Thus thy great providence does think it fit
To hit the mark sometimes by missing it.
Let me not now appear so idly rude,
To pay my God with my Ingratitude;
And give my thanks to Fortune, as if she
Were Governess of my Tranquillity:
But if my thanks may make a recompense,
I Will pay them to the eye of Providence.
Narrow was my escape; be it my charge,
That therefore I my thankfulness enlarge,
Lest my ingratitude should justly cause,
That since this Arrow seemingly did pause,
By touching of my hat, but missed my head;
The next may pierce my heart, and strike me dead.
The ancient Romans did this Law contrive;
Ungrateful ones should be devoured alive:
He that received, and thankfulness would want,
Was cast, whilst living, to the Cormorant.
Lycurgus made no Law to punish such,
Thinking no wretch could dare to sin so much.
On Disturbed Devotion.
THis morning, Lord, I visited my friend,
But ill came of that good I did intend.
Unhappy I, that then should find the way,
When he to his apartment went to pray.
If I Am incapable my self to build,
Shall I snatch Tools from him is through skilled?
Certainly better far, more pious 'twere
And Christian-like, to join with him in Prayer.
But now how shall I study an amends,
That, as before, we may continue friends?
Lord, what he wanted, if it be thy will,
Be pleased to grant, for he is thy servant still.
Thou know for what he did intend to sue,
And my Petition for him's doubly due.
That neither he nor I may loosers be,
Lord, hear our Savior both for him and me.
On Sin and Sorrow.
OUr Sin and Sorrow two Companions are;
Sin leads us in, and Sorrow feeds the snare.
If our short moments merrily are spent,
Into eternal mournings we are sent.
He that will not weep while he may pardon have,
Hereafter may, in vain, for pity crave.
One bottle full of Tears thy sins may quell,
But a whole Cloud not quench the flames of Hell.
Then let the careless sinner laugh and scorn;
I Will weep at present, not for ever mourn.
Valleys of Tears do show their cleansing skill,
And raise a sinner unto Sions hill:
But the fool's heart is in the house of mirth,
His Joy's his Sorrow, and his Heaven, Earth.
But he whose Cup is filled unto the brink
With sin, he shall in Seas of Sorrow sink.
Wherefore my Sins I Will here in Sorrow steep,
And so weep now, as not for ever weep.
On Mortality.
LOrd, what a Shadow is the Life of man?
A nothing, less than is a little span.
Just as a Bird when as it takes its flight
From off the owners hand, is out of sight.
Our present time is as a fading flower,
A flying minute, or a running hour.
The time to come, after the present's fled,
Uncertain is, next Sun may see us dead.
Lord, in this hour, oh, make me sure of thee,
Lest in the next I miss Felicity.
On St. Peter's Enlargement.
WHen the good Angel brought Saint Peter out
From Prison, there was neither noise nor shout
That should for joy awake the Iron-gate,
Yet of its own accord it opened straight.
But see how all things in their duties vary;
He changed his Prison for the house of Mary
Mother of John, yet stood and knocked at door,
Could not get in, with ease got out before:
The Iron-gate obedience understood,
Yet he found opposition by the Wood.
Easy the answer is, There no man was
The Gate to open, or to guard the pass;
But as in course it usual was before,
A Portress was designed to wait the door.
God would not show his finger where the hand
Of man empowered was to bear command.
Lord, should a wooden Obstacle increase,
Or be a bar unto our hopes of Peace,
An arm of flesh might set a ^ter free
Without those Miracles are wrought by thee:
But should thou leave us^ Lord, do what we can,
We cry, Alas! Vain is the help of man.
To God alone all glory be ascribed:
Jaylors extort, but God cannot be bribed.
The Soul's Search.
LIke weeping Mary, holy sorrow lays
Wait for the Lord, and seeks him diverse ways:
And Saving Faith, like wrestling Jacob, finds
Its Savior out, and firmly to him binds.
Like the devoted Spouse, so fervent love
Does dwell with Christ, not thinking to remove,
This brings the Soul to Pastures fresh and green,
And leads it to the Chamber of the Queen.
Hereafter Christ the blessed Soul does bring
To the Coelestial-chamber of the King:
So that to lodge with Christ and view his face,
Is the perfection of eternal Grace.
Lord, oh my Soul does love no other he:
I sought, have found, and thirst to dwell with thee.
On Prosperity.
IF wicked men in Gold and Silver shine,
Should I at their Prosperity repine?
When I indeed behold their spreading Eay,
And view their Quails, methinks I Am apt to say,
They happy are; but it is when I forget
Their shining-sun does with a twinkle set:
For when into God's Sanctuary I
Once place my foot, I easily descry
That all the Blossoms of their splendid Glory
Are as dull shadows, merely momentory;
The scum of Vanity, a useless froth,
Blasted with one breath of Almighty wrath;
External Pleasures, on which they rely,
Fill up the measures of their misery.
Like the deceitful Salute Joab gave
To Amasa; so all their great and brave
Bespangled Honor mounts them up in Vice,
Only to cast them from a precipice:
Or like the Mule of Absalom, does bear
Them to the Gallows, and so leaves them there.
Like Jaels present in a lordly dish,
It seems to pleasure the luxurious wish;
But in the end, when sensual Lusts prevail,
The dire conclusion shows a fatal nail;
And very frankly chalketh out the way
For a sad Summons to the Judgment-day.
Thus their Prosperity does first betray
With tempting smiles, and in conclusion slay.
As a poor Ox in fatning Pasture feeds
To day, the next he is singled out, and bleeds.
What envy will at Malefactors fly,
Because the day is fair wherein they die?
Why does Iniquity in Glory flourish,
In Pastures large? it only is to nourish
Them for the slaughter. Hear the sum of all;
Experience tells it, Pride will have a fall.
For Mediocrity bent Agur's art;
He knew Prosperity does swell the heart.
On Humility.
NOsce teipsum hard is to be learned;
A man's own faults are not with ease discerned.
The faults of other men are writ in Text,
Easy to read, when ours are not annexed.
The eye that is fixed on Natures choicest shelf,
Can all things see, yet not behold it self.
Presumptuous Confidence goes bleeding home,
When humble Fear triumphantly does come.
Great Alexander would be deifi'd,
Confessed himself a man, his blood espied.
The humble man, within another minds
All things are excellent; but when he finds
He does decline in Virtue, noble Elf,
He is the first that shall condemn himself.
His eyes are full of his continual want,
Sees others worth, and grieves himself is scant.
When he has but a mite of his deserts,
Others he magnifies. Thus he imparts
His generosity to famous use,
Whilst others do repay him with abuse.
From pride and malice none is more exempt;
Ashamed of honor, values no contempt.
Violet-like, he grows low to the ground,
That hides its head with leaves; and he is found
Like that, with fragrant smells which so bewray
That his own Virtues do his Worth betray.
In his Discourse he never flies aloft;
His words are few, and those few words are soft.
Modestly speaking, not self-glorious,
Nor peremptory, nor censorious.
Because he thinks all other men more wise,
Corrects himself by his own modest eyes.
When his Devotions do the time beguile,
He makes himself a nothing, wretched, vile;
Does no man emulate: if understood,
He hates none but himself, because not good.
A mite of Comfort does his wants supply;
And none more patient when in misery,
Because he knows that his deserts are such,
That having sinned, cannot be plagued too much.
He a low Valley is, and planted sweet,
Where fresh and fragrant Odours often meet;
And like the proud man's earth is trampled on,
Though full of wealthy Mines; a precious stone
Fit for foundation-work, not placed aloof,
God's holy Temple built with lowly roof.
Camomile-like, and Palm Tree, when deprest,
Does higher rise, wearied to take his rest.
Zacheus from the Sycamore came down,
And that descension made the Lord his own.
It Is not the Proud that do in Christ believe,
Not Lofty, but the Humble him receive.
Fruitfullest Trees do in the Valleys grow,
And thrive the better for their being low:
When taller Trees an interruption find,
By the strong blast of a contagious wind:
Yet the tall Tree hangs down its head, to say,
For this God made me, and I do obey.
The humble man considers Earth's his Womb,
And then remembers Earth must be his Tomb.
Unto Humility God's Grace is given,
Who with that Grace a Ladder makes to Heaven.
On Vice.
WHen on a Journey, and am weary grown,
I find an Inn within some Countty-town,
And have observed, numbers of Guests do come
First to the Chamberlain to show a Room;
Perhaps one Chamber does contain them all,
Yet on the Chamberlain does each man call:
One to the Table bids him straight attend,
Another does him to the Window send,
A third unto the Chimney must be led,
A fourth would be conducted to his bed,
A fifth man sends him down for Glass or Cup,
And e're he is down, another calls him up.
Thus he is distracted with a sudden moyl,
Scarce can please all, though tired with his toil.
Such is the sad condition of my Soul;
In what a cloud of crosses it does roll!
By Nature I am born a wretched twin;
To sorrow servant, and a slave to fin.
Unto the Window I am called by Pride,
Gluttony next pretends to be my Guide.
By Laziness I Am to the Chimney led,
By Wantonness I Am finely brought to bed.
Ambition calls me up, but I am grown
So coverous, more profit calls me down.
Vices, I see, themselves do contradict;
It Is only Virtue that does Vice convict.
Free me, O Lord, from this distracted case:
Virtue it self is Vice, unless thou place
It in a center, like it self to shine;
A servant unto sin cannot be thine:
For In thy service perfect freedom is:
Sin is a slavery, a dark abyss.
Satan deludes the Soul to acts obscure;
But The commandments of the Lord are pure.
Vice is at best but a diseased Whore
Splendidly painted, making fools adore.
On God's presence.
HEaven it is, ever to be with God;
Without him is in Hell to take abode.
You that in Christ no beauty can behold,
Nor Heavens glory, dare you be so bold
As not to think they all things do excel?
Or can you not behold the flames of Hell?
If in God's presence you do not delight,
Oh, tremble at his absence. If your flight
Be at a distance, as if you did doubt him,
Consider well, and fear to be without him.
Lord, thou my Heaven art, my God, my Guide,
My wedded Husband; and my Soul's thy Bride.
On Hypocrisy.
THe Hypocrite, with his deceitful eye,
Does serve the Devil in God's Livery;
And therefore to the Lord so well is known,
Both Earth and Heaven does his craft disown.
Man sees his Livery and cunning Art,
And hates him; but God does view his heart,
And hates him too. Mensee his outward Zeal,
For which they do deride him. He, like steel,
Grows strong and siubborn, pleased with his own case,
Though God and Man do both abhor his face:
So that he in a Wilderness does rove,
And never does become a Canaan's Dove.
The sum of all his labors does at last
Consume with the Almighty's dreadful blast:
And a dire doom, when he at Judgment stands,
Who has required these things at your hands?
He that so cunningly did others cheat,
Took greatest pains his own Soul to defeat:
He steals his own Damnation, and can tell
(For he with sweat has found) the way to Hell.
So that the Sinner openly profane,
And Hypocrite, as they together reign
On Earth, although in different degrees,
They both at last Jament their little ease.
Only two ways they find unto their fate,
One steals to Hell through the Postern-gate,
The other keeps the open beaten Road;
But both at last in Tophet make abode.
Hypocrites habit is Formality;
But, Lord, cloth me with thy Sincerity.
Perhaps men may not of my state approve;
It matters not, so I obtain thy love.
Saints here but labor to peruse their story,
When they arrive to their eternal Glory.
On Pleasures.
IN all things an immoderated use
Breeds a distate; and man, when grown prosuse,
Does glut himself with Pleasure: He that is wise
Esteems them chiefly for their novelties.
The pleasure of the body gives relief
No otherwise than adding grief to grief.
When Jupiter (as ancient Poets fain)
With all his might and art could not attain
Two great Antagonists to reconcile,
Pleasure and Sorrow, having paused a while
He took an Adamantine Chain, with that
Bound them together, so that then they sat
As fixed Companions: They that were unstable
But just before, were made inseparable.
Affection propagates our Pleasures growth;
Virtue's an Antidote against them both.
Pleasure is the Adulterate brat of Sense,
So very fading, she cannot dispense
To last while Artists shall her Picture frame,
And therefore Memory preserves her name.
All those delights that do the Senses please,
Are one days age, an Ephemerides.
What excellence may that be said to be,
Which the most excellent (as dangers) slay?
Time with the Pleasures of this World is spilt,
Full of the stain of fin, and sting of guilt.
Hannibal his honor lost, and duty,
Being entangled with a woman's beauty.
Antonius his Cleapatra had;
Both were most valiant Captains: but the sad
Effects of Lust did like a Cloud o'recast
All their Archievements, and their labors blast.
Lust is the bane of Kingdoms: done alone,
It would more common be than any one
Of all those Vices that corrupt the eye;
Heathens the first place give to Piety.
And Trismegistus this assertion brings,
Religion is the ground of public things.
God did not cast man out of Paradise,
That man might make another by advice.
Be therefore wary, during time and leisure,
It Is dangerous to take delight in Pleasure:
For it is a Siren does deceive us all;
It gives us dainties, but they are mixed with gall.
The Pitch and Tar of Sin so close do cleave,
That Pleasure waits only to deceive.
Riches seem pleasant things to banish Care,
But are at best but an intangling Snare.
Our Meat and Drink, when taken with excess,
Breaks forth to Surfeitings and Drunkenness.
Silver and Gold seem pleasant things, yet they,
Like thieves, from God do steal our hearts away.
That man that loves pleasure shall he poor;
But God's right hand has pleasures ever more.
On an Hourglass.
AS I in haste did through a Chamber pass,
I had almost destroyed a Crystal Glass.
With fear affrighted, I too soon believed
That I had broke it; thereupon I grieved.
But how much time more precious than that sand
Have I neglected? and with ready hand
Pursued my solly, being round beset
With sins, yet I not thinking of regret.
Though that but Crystal, I my self condemn,
But mind not Time, though every hour's a gem.
The thought of breaking that did me affright;
The other's minded not, though lost outright.
That were but casual, if it had been done;
But with consent my precious Time has flown.
A better Hour glass may be had for cost,
But Time ill-spent is once and ever lost:
For toys our griess can find a certain leisure,
But have no vent for an unvalued treasure.
Lord, let that Hourglass for its service win me,
(Not that stands by me, but) shall be within me,
Teach me to number so my days, that I,
Right soon, my heart to wisdom may apply.
Salve for the Sick.
WHenas some sharp Disease shall visit me,
I sear, with pain, I shall impatient be:
For I am Choleric by nature made,
By temper tender, apt to be afraid;
And such a stranger unto sickness am,
'Twould prove a Lions conquest over a Lamb.
O whither will my mind with wavering sail,
When a Disease shall over me prevail?
O whither will my giddy fancy stride,
When a Distemper's the unstable Guide?
Wilde-fire will sit upon my burning tongue,
When with a Fever every Sense is stung.
Wherefore, O Lord, if it disclose my shame,
Let it give no dishonor to thy Name.
Teach me the Art of Patience whilst I Am well,
That when grown sick, that Virtue may excel.
In that day let me not assistance lack;
Lighten my burden, or improve my back.
In God I Will trust when Life has spun its length;
For In the Lord is everlasting strength.
On Perfection.
IN Humane life there no perfection can
Be said to be an attribute of man.
Lust and the Senses have a constant Jar;
The Flesh and Spirit do maintain a War
Against each other: man may make his moan,
He perfect is in Imperfection.
None but the Lord that Badge of Honor wears;
But man may gain it with his Prayers and Tears;
Cannot enjoy it here, but he must fly
Where it is crowned with Felicity.
They are Celestial plants or flowers, both
Of Paradise, not of Terrestrial growth.
The best in this his Pilgrimage does hault,
Like Jacob with one leg, it is Natures fau't.
Though we have many tongues, as Paul, are apt
To climb like him, till in the third Heaven wrapped;
Though we, with Moses, have in Egypt sought
For all the Learning the Egyptians taught;
Though we (as Ezra did) should understand.
Each Article of every Command
Within the Law of God. Though eloquent
In Scripture as Apollos, we indent
Too far with Sin and Satan, that our care
Has no perfection, but a perfect snare.
We are but Scholars here, to use our Arts
In pious duties to improve our parts.
The clearest Christian has some soil or spot:
Noah with Drinking did himself besot.
Peter with Perjury eclipsed his fame:
And with Dissimulation Abraham.
With loud Contention Paul and Barnabas.
The Psalmist truly does express the case:
The sons of men are so profusely prone,
None perfect are, nor none good, no not one.
The Virtue that a just man has, does lie
In Pious works, and in Humility.
The Author to the Hebrews quotes the name
Of many Worthies blemished in their fame.
Gideon an Ephod made, and that let in
Idolatry; he Israel made to sin:
Had many Wives, to nourish his design
Of Lust, and with those Wives a Concubine.
Barak, although a Soldier, waxed faint.
Sampson, a strong and a courageous Saint,
Defiled himself with Strumpets. Wretched fate
Made Jepthe rash and Inconfiderate.
David was tainted with two horrid sins,
Murder, Adultery, as if two twins
Or brethren; both have his great honor checked.
Samuel observed his Children with neglect.
No Prince or Prophet but his weakness had,
Virtues have opposites in things are bad;
Yet they were men that did with God accord,
And were most highly honored by the Lord;
Faithful to God, obedient to his Law:
That Crystal perfect is that has no flaw.
Show me a Garden that is without its weeds,
I Will yield man perfect by his words and deeds.
Yet let us not upon their errors play;
The Righteous man offends every day:
And if the righteous scarcely can be saved,
It plainly shows whole Nature is depraved.
Would thou of a Perfection have thy share,
Repent, like them; for now they perfect are.
On a Rose-tree.
'TWas in September I observed a Tree
That then bore Roses; stranger 'twas to me.
Others of like kind round about it grew,
Yet all were barren, and those not a few.
The Gardner kindly did the reason give:
In May 'twas closely clipped, that it might thrive
And bud in Autumn. Lord, had I been kept
Curbed in my tender years, whenas I slept
Secure from punishment, my life had been
Gray in its Youth, and when grown aged, Green.
He that intends to win the happy Race,
Must learn in tender years to grow in Grace.
The Christians Alphabet.
AN Angel good Satan himself can make;
But the Apostles true, bid men beware.
Christ had his Paul the drowsy to awake,
Daring even Death it self; such was his care.
Earnest in zealous works, did sharply taste
Fortunes ill will in stripes of cruel measure;
Great was his troubles: he did often forecast
Honor for God, in counting Death his treasure.
In Prisons frequent, from the fight of the Sun;
Killed oftentimes, and yet he did revive;
Lashes five times he had forty save one;
Menacing terms did frequently receive.
Night and day in the deep, and shipwrack'd thrice;
Once was he stoned, and three times beat with rods;
Perils came often; cold he was as Ice;
Quips oftener came than did his days by odds.
Render he did his thanks to God for all,
Such was his holy love and fervent Zeal,
Though first he was a persecuting Saul,
Undoing such as blessed the Commonweal.
Wreaths crown his head because he was a Tree
Xactly good, too precious for the frames,
Yielding such fruit as few have born but he;
Zealous for Heaven, where he in Glory reigns,
and so his Losses turned to be his Gains.
On Christ's Death.
MY God, my God, turn not to night my day;
Shall Man's black Crimes be Darts my heart to slay?
Must my dear blood on sinful dust be spilt
To pay his debt, and wash away his guilt?
My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me?
Must I come from a Diadem to Death,
Leaving my joys, in sorrow spend my breath?
Must I, that am coequal with the Father,
Be crucified, that man may comfort gather?
My God, my God, etc.
I that e're now was clothed in state of Glory,
Am now in Rags of Flesh to tell my story.
I that fill every place in spite of danger,
Yet I, in fear, was cradled in a Manager.
My God, my God, etc.
To Egypt I compelled was to fly;
I am the Life, yet I my self must die.
I am the sole Dictator of the Law,
Yet must be subject now, and stand in aw.
My God, my God, etc.
'Twas I that both the Earth and Heavens made,
But working now at Joseph's homely trade.
Children of men, I have ye ost exempted,
Can bind the Devils, yet must I be tempted.
My God, my God, etc.
I made the World of Nothing, Man of Dust,
Yet I have hungered and have been athirst.
I am become Life to the Lunatic;
If God can die, Nature may well be sick.
My God, my God, etc.
Must I, that keep the Keys of Death and Hell,
Pay visits now where griefs and terrors dwell?
Must Kings be made the subjects of their scorns,
And wear, instead of Stars, a Crown of Thorns?
My God, my God, etc.
My Senses all extremely are agriev'd,
My eyes beholding whom I have relieved,
Mine ears with hearing lewd blasphemous Taunts,
Instead of Hallelujahs sung by Saints.
My God, my God, etc.
Smelling, I find my nostrils straight grow full
Of The evil scent of some corrupted skull.
My Taste is changed with Liquor like my Thrall,
Sower and bitter, Vinegar and Gall.
My God, my God, etc.
My Feeling, with the Spear that pierced my side:
That man might live, I thus was crucified.
At length my Father heard me, bad me die,
But nothing fear, sor he himself stood by.
An Hymn.
By St. Ambrose and St. Augustine.
OUr tongues, O God, thy praise record;
We thee consess our Sovereign Lord.
To thee, Eternal Father, all
Who dwell on Earth, do prostrate fall.
To thee the Angels at all hours;
To thee the Heavens and heavenly powers;
To thee with voice incessantly
The Seraphins and Cherubs cry,
Thou Holy, Holy, Holy one
Of Sabbath, Lord and God alone:
Filled is the Earth, the Heavens, the Sky,
With glory of thy Majesty.
The blessed Apostles glorious Quire,
The Prophets whom thou did inspire,
And all the White-rob'd Martyrs sing
Eternal praise to thee their King.
The holy Church does loudly sound
Thy blessed Name throughout the ronnd
Of the whole Earth, confessing thee
Father of boundless Majesty.
The same is dutifully done
To thy sole Venerable Son:
And to the Holy Ghost that arms
The Soul with consolating Charms.
Thou, Christ, have Kingly Glories won,
Thy Father's dear Eternal Son.
Thou, man to free from endless pain,
A Virgins womb did nor disdain.
That death subduing, did unlock
Heavens Realms unto thy faithful Flock.
On God's right hand thou fit'st as bright
As in thy Father's radiant light.
Our Judge to come thou art esteemed;
Thy servants therefore help, redeemed
With thy most precious blood, and make
Us, with thy Saints, of Bliss partake.
Lord, save thy people in distress,
Thy Heritage vouchsase to bless;
Rule and exalt them without end.
Our daily blessings thee attend.
Thy glorious Name we magnify
From age to age, eternally.
This day, sweet Lord, we now are in,
Preserve us from committ'ng sin.
Have mercy on us, Lord, efface
Our sins with thy Celestial grace.
Let mercy on us, Lord, be seen
As in thy self our hopes have been.
Lord, I have fixed my hopes on thee,
Then let me never confounded be.
On Christ's Cross.
CAn we spell Chris-cross row, and yet not read
That Christ for us was dead?
How he himself did humble unto death,
Loosing his life to give us breath?
But now he shines in the Celestial Frame,
And has received a Name
To which all knees shall bow, and tongues shall say,
This is the Lord, we must obey.
He that does disregard the Cross of Christ,
Of Happiness has mist;
Destruction is his end, his glory shame;
But happy he does love the same.
I will not hate the Cross, nor yet adore
Any but he it bore.
I Will not blaspheme the Cross, because it was died
With his rich blood was crucified.
Rich beyond price; for when that blood was spilt
It cleans'd a world of guilt,
It bought mankind: for when Christ's blood was flown,
As Lord, he called us all his own.
Wherefore I will not worship any one
But my dear Lord alone.
Take up my Cross and bear my Cross I will,
I Will love it and embrace it still.
But to adore my Cross I will not dare,
All knees should that forbear:
In reverence to his Name all hearts shall bow
With pious Zeal, as mine does now.
Christ never wanted crosses, scoffs, and scorns;
His ways were strewn with thorns:
Then may we judge by his most sacred birth,
He Is crossed, wants crosses here on Earth.
The Cross.
Then let us count all things as loss
And Dung compared with the Cross.
This is the Figure of that Tree
That bore the fruit of life for me.
The Emblem of Humility
Expressed in him, did on it die.
To it was nailed the God of Life,
Who did in Love to end our Strife.
God had one Son who had no sin,
But all his Sons have crossed bin.
The Resurrection.
He Is risen now, behold, the stone is gone
Which late was rolled to enclose the Son.
Had the weak Jews so little wit or grace
To trust to that, when he fills every place?
Earth is his footstool, yet he dwells on high;
Holy his Name, himself's Eternity.
The Ascension.
HOw nimbly, and with what a quick ascent
Heaven was scaled by the Omnipotent!
But one days speedy journey; surely then
Sinners are sots, that will not be happy men.
An Adoration to the Lord of the Sabbath.
BEhold, we come, dear Lord, to thee,
And bow before thy Throne:
We come to offer on our knee
Our Vows to thee alone.
Whatever we have, whatever we are,
Thy bounty freely gave;
Thou did us here in mercy spare,
And wilt hereafter save.
But oh, can all our store afford
No better gifts for thee?
Thus we confess thy Riches, Lord,
And thus our Poverty.
It Is not our tongue or knee can pay
The mighty Debt we owe;
For more we should than we can say,
Far lower than we bow.
Come then, my Soul, bring all thy powers,
And grieve thou have no more:
Bring every day thy choicest hours,
And thy great God adore.
But above all, prepare thy heart
Whilst now it is called day,
In humble duty bear thy part
To sing, to love, and pray.
Glory to thee, Eternal Lord,
Thrice blessed three in one;
Thy Name at all times be adored,
Till time it self be done.
Of God.
HE is the Author of the Worlds Creation, Foundation.
The great and mighty Judge of man's Salvation, Damnation.
The glorious Lord, and only God Above, Of Love.
That both to men and Angels is -- A God, A Rod.
He did the World create, and by his hand
Or word, Foundations laid of Sea and Land;
Can save or damn, as he does best approve;
Will be our God, or Rod, as we shall love.
Thou that can hold the Winds within thy fist,
Have mercy on us, oh, thou God in Christ.
Of Christ.
HE it is that gives us Peace, Increase.
He to poor Souls cries, I Am your Jesu, JESUS.
He it is that is our Good, Food.
The Saints with him do trust their Treasure, Pleasure.
He it is can end our Life, Strife.
He it is that gives us Breath, Death.
He is to us a Judge and King, Sting.
He is our Peace, Increase; our J^u, and
An Ease to those that wait on his Command.
Our Good, our Food; our Treasure, and our Joy;
Our Life, to see no Strife shall us annoy.
He gives us Breath, can give us Death, as King,
And un^o death he is become a Sting.
He punish can, or help us in our thrall;
For Christ is God's, and God is all in all.
Would farther know what God is, silly Elf,
Go study first to be a God thy self.
God is Love.
GIve praise unto the Lord above;
Omit no thanks that thou can move.
Do thou not know that God is love?
In Word and Deed make him thy aim,
So shall thy Soul be free from blame.
Let his Commandments be in ure;
Obedience cannot be a clod:
Us he has spared, and does endure
Even still; such is the love of God.
The Remembrance.
ANd now, my Soul, can thou forget
That thy whole life is one long debt
Of Love, to him who on the Tree
Paid back the flesh he took for thee?
Lo, how the streams of precious blood
Flow from five wounds into one flood!
With these he washes all thy stains,
And buys thy Ease with his own Pains.
Tall Tree of Life, we clearly now
That doubt of former ages know;
It was thy wood should make a Throne
Fit for a more than Solomon.
Large Throne of Love, royally spread
With Purple of too rich a red:
Strange costly price! thus to make good
Thine own esteem with the Kings blood.
Hail, fairest Plant of Paradise,
To thee our hopes lift up their eyes.
O may aloft thy branches shoot,
And fill the Nations with thy fruit.
O may all reap from thy increase;
The Just more strength, the Sinner peace,
While our half-wither'd hearts, and we
Engraft our selves, and grow on thee.
Live, O for ever live, and reign,
Blessed Lamb, whom thine own love has slain:
And may thy lost Sheep live to be
True lovers of thy Cross and thee.
Of Death.
1 Cor. chapter 15. v. 55, 56. O, Death, where is thy sting? The sting of death is
sin.
O. Death, forbear, I yet must live:
Stay, Death, till God your Warrant give,
And then where you see best, this heart
Most willing is to seel your Dart.
But, Lord, O let thy servants breath
Preserved be from the sting of Death.
Of Grief.
THe tears come slowly, Lord, my sins remain:
O sting my shallow fords, and make them rain
Rivers of waters; or, if so thou please,
Send daring death my sorrows to decrease.
My grief is great, it is time to rise or fall;
Then cleanse me, Lord, from sin, and ease my thrall,
That I may say, O, death, where is thy sting?
And tell the world, The sting of death is sin.
A Christian and Death. A Dialogue.
Chr. COme; valiant Death, and welcome, do thy worst;
Show me the power thou claimst, as being King.

Dea. Poor mortal, know, alas, thou art but dust,
And I the Sexton that thy Knell must ring.

Chr. Away, lean, half-starv'd wretch, go daunt a sool;
Think not to fright me with, Thy glass is run.

Dea. Thou art my Scholar, therefore come to School;
Delays but waste that time which might be gone.

Chr. Thou seemst a Student, for thou lookst so poor,
That Famine in thy face I plainly read.

Dea. Come, silly wretch, you word it must no more;
See here is thy Glass, thy Doom, and thou art dead.

Chr. Then boldly strike, thou do the body kill,
My Soul shall wait upon its Master's will.

Dea. Lie there, proud dust, all flesh is born to die.

Chr. This is the Road unto Eternity.

The Altar.
A broken ALTAR, Lord, to thee I raise,
Made of a Heart, to celebrate thy praise:
Thou that the only Workman art,
That can cement a broken heart.
For such is mine,
O make it thine:
Take out the Sin
That Is hid therein.
Though it be Stone,
Make it to groan;
That so the same
May praise thy Name.
Melt it, O Lord, I thee desire,
With Flames from thy Celestial fire;
That it may ever speak thy Praise alone,
Since thou have changed into Flesh a Stone.
Death, Man, and Grave. A Dialogue.
Death. COme down, proud Lust.

Man. To what? to Dust?

Grav. I that you must,
and shall.

Man. Thou thing of bones.

Grav. That fetches groans,

Death. From very stones,
and all.

Man. From Dust I came.

Grav. Thou must again.

Death. Sin is thy bain
and thrall.

Man. That Is thee: away

Death. With mortal Clay:

Grav. Why do you stay?
you must.

Death. Come, leave your groans.

Man. To go with bones?

Grav. You must go once,
poor dust.

Death. Nay, do not frown.

Man. Away rude Clown.

Death. I Will strike thee down,
proud lust.

Man. Then I submit; forbear your storms
Seeing I must return a Guest
To my Acquaintance old, the worms,
Farewell, fond World, I Will take my rest.

Grav. I have a Charm will make you sleep;
And all you have you here may trust:
For Watchmen, not a few, I keep,
The harmless Worms, that are so just.
With care they do befriend him
That comes here within this path.
Thus man one world of servants has,
And when he on his Deathbed lies,
Another does attend him.

Nature's Delight.
HArk, my Soul, how every thing
Strives to serve our bounteous King.
Each a double tribute pays,
Sings its part, and then obeys.
Natures chief and sweetest quire,
Him with cheerful notes admire,
Chanting every day their Lauds,
Whilst the Grove their song applauds.
Though their Voices lower be,
Streams have too their melody.
Night and day they warbling run,
Never pause, but still sing on.
All the flowers that gild the Spring,
Hither their sweet music bring.
If Heaven bless them, thankful they
Smell more sweet, and look more gay.
Only we can scarce afford
Due thanksgivings to our Lord.
We, on whom his bounty flows,
All things give:, and nothing owes.
Wake for shame, my sluggish heart,
Wake, and gladly sing thy part.
Learn of Beasts, of Springs, and Flowers,
How to use thy noble Powers.
Call whole Nature to thy aid,
Since 'twas he whole Nature made.
Join in one eternal Song,
Who to one God all belong.
Live for ever, glorious Lord,
Live by all thy works adored;
One in Three, and Three in One,
Thrice we bow to thee alone.
Of Flesh.
ALI Flesh is Grass, does therefore rot.
For why?
Can man be born to live, and not
to die?
It Is happiness to leave this life
and world,
And have our names, where joys are rife,
enrolled.
The dead never fear what Death can do:
his blast
Will come no more; for why? that woe
is past.
Then to the Soul appears Love
and Joy:
For God will not his Turtle-Dove
destroy.
Then though a Torch-light here, it is better far
To be put out, and after rise a Star.
The Grave.
THough Clay, my Cottage is secure:
Princes do dwell with me;
And my foundations do endure
for aye.
Death waits on me, and with his dart
Sends me the stoutest he,
And, Champion-like, commands the heart
to stay.
Then be he Rich, or be he Poor,
A Spark, or else a Clown,
They lie together on the floor,
and so
They sleep as if they lay upon
The softest Bed of Down.
Troubles are fled, and Griefs are gone:
for though
The Body naked in the cold Earth lies,
The Soul sings Hallelujahs 'bove the Skies.
An Infant.
EArths little Morsel, Man's small Letter,
And Adam's Copy; no one better
Before he tasted Eve:
Nature's fresh Picture drawn in oil,
Which time and handling often does spoil.
His Soul appears like Paper white,
That yet had scarce bore word aright;
Neither knew how to grieve.
But purest colors, without pains,
Are subject most to spots and stains.
He is above the tempts of Devil,
Since he cannot understand an evil.
His days are raw and dull:
Nor has he yet agreed with sin
To banish joys, let sorrows in.
He cannot yet be counted wise;
And being dumb, he with his eyes
Sings silent tunes of Lull.
He kisses all, does them approve;
His Innocence is his Love.
Nature and Parents, much alike,
Do sometimes dandle, sometimes strike.
With hidden sugared bait
They him entice, and he does sup
Whatever he finds within the Cup.
Could his weak body find the way
To Bliss, and here no longer stay,
He Would have a happy fate.
Not knowing sin, or mortal crime,
He Would reach Eternity betime.
The Candle.
LIke as vain man I downward grow,
My life is ever wasting;
I fall by fire, still waxing low,
As man did fall by tasting.
My house of Tallow does decrease,
And I that am but Cotton,
Within one hour live and decease,
Am in the next forgotten.
O Lord, pour Oil into my Lamp
To light me to thy home,
That when it shall extinguish't be,
I may a Star become.
The Ant.
ALthough a creature small,
yet all
My labor, pains, and care
('it is rare)
Is in the Summer to provide
Against the Cold and Winter-tide.
And though so small, yet I
an eye
Can have to things: for when
weak men
Waste time in Feasts and Riot,
I study for my Diet.
Idleness breeds Distempers, Poverty,
Gives room for Sin; ye Sluggards, learn of me.
The Thanksgiving.
COme, let us adore the gracious hand
That brought us to this light,
That gave his Angels strict command
To be our Guard this night.
When we laid down our weary heads,
And sleep sealed up our eye,
They stood and watched about our beds,
To let no harm come nigh.
Now we are up, they still go on,
And guide us through the day;
They never leave their charge alone,
Whatever besets our way.
And, oh my Soul, how many snares
(...) (...) before our feet?
In all our hopes, in all our cares,
Some dangers still we meet.
Sometimes the sin does us overtake,
And on our weakness win;
Sometimes our selves our ruin make,
And we overtake the sin.
O save us, Lord, from all those darts
That seek our Souls to slay;
Save us from us, and our filse hearts,
Lest we our selves betray.
Save us, O Lord, to thee we cry,
From whom all Blessings spring;
We on thy Grace alone rely,
Alone thy glory sing.
Glory to thee, eternal Lord,
Thrice blessed Three in One,
Thy Name at all times be adored,
Till time it self be done.
Antiphon. A Dialogue in three parts.
Chor. THanks be to the Lord on high,

Angels. That gave his Son

Men. For us to die.

Chor. He that is the holy One,

Ang. Loved us of old,

Men. For us was sold.

Chor. He that is the God of might

Men. Made us of Dust,

Ang. For us did fight.

Chor. He that is the God most just

Ang. Set us aright,

Men. To us gave light.

Chor. He that made the Heavens, Earth,

Men. And all therein,

Ang. He is more worth;

Chor. He it is that knew no sin,

Ang. Yet suffered death

Men. To give us breath.

Chor. Blessed he hung on the Cross

Men. For our great gain,

Ang. But his own loss.

Chor. He that healed the Blind and Lame,

Ang. Yet sought as thief

Men. For our relief.

Chor. He that died with a kiss,

Men. From wretched man,

Ang. Is now in Bliss.

Chor. He that can the Heavens span,

Men. And do much more,

Ang. Him we adore.

Chor. He that was bound to Herod sent,

Men. And spit upon,

Ang. He is our Tent.

Chor. He that melts hearts of stone,

Ang. With us does stand,

Men. Does us command.

Chor. He that pardon can our sin

Ang. Has broke our snare,

Men. But we fall in.

Chor. He with whom none can compare,

Men. He gave us eyes,

Ang. He made us rise.

Chor. He was scourged with heavy lash,

Men. For us lost blood,

Ang. And us did wash.

Chor. He it is that is the good

Men. Great God alone,

Ang. Heaven's his Throne.

Chor. He that wore a Crown of Thorns,

Men. That does us keep,

Ang. And us adorns.

Chor. He the Shepherd of the Sheep,

Ang. Our choicest stock,

Men. Our only rock.

Chor. Praise him then that did us make,

Men. Does us defend,

Ang. And us did take.

Chor. Bless his Name, World without end,

Men. For his great love

Ang. To us above.
Angels and Men, praise ye the Lord for aye;
Oh, all ye Nations praise the Lord, and say,

Amen.
The Bible.
The Book of Books,
The only good
To him that looks
For heavenly food
A Holy Light
In darkest night
The blessed Word
Of God the Lord.
Divinity
In it does lie.
Indeed it is
The Gate of Bliss.
The Dream.
I Dreamt my Death was but a sleep,
My Grave and Bed both one;
And when the morning forth did peep,
Life came, and Death was gone.
Since so it is, that none can be
Asleep but such as die,
O Lord, I Will sleep to all but thee,
And make my bed on high.
The Beatitudes.
Blessed are the poor, that is, the meek in spirit;
For they the Heaven, God's Kingdom shall inherit.
Blessed are they that mourn away their years;
God hears their sighs, has bottles for their tears.
Blessed are they that thirst for Righteousness;
They shall be filled more than we can express.
Blessed are the tender, mercifus of mind;
They that in mercy give, shall mercy find.
Blessed are the pure of heart; their Sanctity
Shall lead them to the Holy Deity.
Blessed are peacemakers; they shall make abode,
As Children with their Father and their God.
Blessed are they that suffer in a cause
That Is just; their suffering is their applause.
Blessed are they that persecuted are,
And when relivers do no venom spare.
When Disconcent sets all things out of frame,
Patience is Physic; Prophers used the same.
Of Angels.
MY Soul, in thy Devotions always say,
O God, my God, Lord, hear me when I pray:
Let not or Saint or Angel, though sublime,
Share of that honor which is due to him:
For if you give not God your Heart, your All,
You Caesar rob, to pay your Tithes to Paul.
Nor ought we to the Saints to show neglect,
As if the objects of our disrespect.
Dives in his distress cried out for water
To Abraham a Saint: It is no matter,
We know what Dives was, and will forbear
To follow him that ran into a snare.
Of Christ's Passion.
FRom Circumcision to the hour of death,
Alas sad sat!
Christ's Passions still kept even with his breath,
Such was his state.
He first was in a Manger wrapped,
In dangers nursed, and often escaped.
As he of Graces had the richest store, So likewise he
Of Tears, of Sweat, of Blood, and yet much more,
Could not be free:
For Emulation then was understood;
As now it is, 'twas dangerous to be good.
And he that seeks for Peace among men,
Shall find it -- But the Lord knows when.
On St. Paul's Conversion.
SO shined that glorious Sun upon this Saint,
That falling down he did both fear and faint.
It was the Light of God that shined, whose weight
Might sorely press, coming from such a height;
Encompassed round, so that he could not ^lee
From that same vo ce, Why persecut it thou me?
From that same date St. Paul's Conversion came,
And he grew Master of a shining Fame.
On Christ's Praying.
CHrist in the Garden prays, enclosed with Trees,
And earnestly importunes on his knees,
That Cup might pass; but see his Son-like skill
In praying, Father, if it be thy will.
From whence I learn the duty of a Son,
It is to say, Father, thy will be done.
On Honor and Valor.
Honor and Valor being once at strise,
Which should atchieve most glory in their life,
Honor did much, went on, would not give over,
Valor flew boldly on, and did much more.
The World's uncertain; Honor he was beat,
Yet Valor's head must serve for Honor's seat.
On Tinder.
TO Tinder like,
each strike
That Satan gives
My Soul receives.
With every Match
a Catch,
My Soul does get
When he does hit.
Hereafter I
will fly
Temptations all,
so shall
My Voice be rightly tuned, and apt to say,
I Will worship none but God, and him obey.
The Litany.
O God the Father, God the Son,
That made, and did redeem each one,
And God the Holy Ghost, look on
-- us, miserable sinners.
By thy most bloody sweat and Cross,
By thy precious death and loss,
By thy ascending up from dross,
Good Lord deliver us.
In all our troubles, time of wealth,
In time of sickness, or of health,
In Deaths sad hour, which comes by stealth,
Good Lord deliver us.
We sinners do beseech thee, Lord,
To prosper, and increase thy Word;
Unto thy Church good Rules afford,
We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord.
That it may please thee to endue
All Ministers with knowledge true,
That we with profit may it show,
We beseech thee, etc.
That Grace and Wisdom may increase,
That Wars and Jarrings all may cease,
That we, thy people, may have peace,
We beseech thee, etc.
That it may please thee to bestow
On us thy servants here below,
Hearts that shall praise for what we owe,
We beseech thee, etc.
That it may please thee, be the way
For their return that do each day
Deceive themselves and go astray;
We beseech thee, etc.
That it may please thee, by thy hand
To strengthen those aright do stand,
Others to raise by thy command;
We beseech thee, etc.
That it may please thee, succor those
That grief and tribulation knows,
When persecuted by their foes;
We beseech thee, etc.
That it may please thee to preserve
Captives in danger like to starve,
And from Childe-bearers not to swerve;
We beseech thee, etc.
That it may please thee to desend
The Fatherless, and to the end
Thy blessings to the Widows send;
We beseech thee, etc.
That it may please thee, pity all,
And keep our Enemies from thrall;
Fetch home their hearts that from thee fall,
We beseech thee, etc.
That it may please thee to defend
On us the kindly fruits that grow;
Be God and friend unto thy foe,
We beseech thee, etc.
That it may please thee to forgive
Our sins, that we upright may live
According to thy Word, and thrive.
We beseech thee, etc.
O Son of God, we pray thee hear;
O Lamb of God, do not forbear
To look in mercy on each Tear;
We beseech thee, etc.
After our sins, O do not us regard,
Nor after our iniquities reward.
Lord have mercy upon us,
Christ have mercy upon us.
Let us pray. Our Father, etc.
On St. Michael the Archangel.
WE praise thee, Christ, among the quires
Of Angels, who thy voice obey,
That art the life of Heart-desires,
Thy Father's Power and shining Ray.
Whole myriads of heavenly Peers
Fight for thy cause in close array:
But Michael, who thy Standard bears,
The Cross of Safety does display.
He the pernicious Dragon threw
Into the flames of Hell's Abyss;
The Captain with his Rebel-Crew,
He thundered from Celestial Bliss.
Under this Prince let us every one
Against Pride's Captain combat so,
As that the Lamb may from his Throne.
Crown Glories upon us below.
To God the Father, God the Son,
And to the Holy Ghost in Heaven,
As hitherto it has been done,
Let Glory evermore be given.
Oppositions.
GOd is light, and sin is dark;
God lives above, and sin beneath;
God is just, but sin's a Shark;
God is Life, and sin is Death;
God is Heaven, sin is Hell;
God is fair, and sin is foul;
God saves many that rebel;
Sin's Damoation to the Soul.
Adam in Paradise did stand,
Angels in Heaven by God's command;
But sin does, with a gilded Dart,
Not only tempt, but wound the heart.
God does entreat the Soul by love,
Sin with deceit the Soul does move.
Sin laid the cornerstone in Hell;
Sin made this World a Monster swell.
In all to God it is flatly opposite,
It wants the good of Virtue and of Light.
On Thoughts.
STill I am thinking thoughts that are not good,
They are as common as my food,
And do increase like Beans in mud,
As thick as any Wood.
Suppose I harbor some that do no ill,
Nor yet no good, they hurt, when fill
To little purpose, lying still,
And such a hurt may kill.
When I am praying to the Lord my God,
They often on my Prayers have trod;
And when I hope'd to escape the rod,
My sins have still abode.
The reason sure why I am thus possessed
With such a bold unwelcome guest,
(Unto my shame be it consest)
It is because his Nest,
With my consent before, was builded there,
Who now lies lurking like a Bear,
Watching my sinful Soul to tear,
When once got in his snare.
Lord, be my Surgeon, heal my wounded heart,
And give me grace, that by that Art
I may devise a Bolt or Dart
To cause such thoughts depart.
For with repentant tears it is con'est,
Thou art a help to men oppressed;
When we are most of all distressed,
Thou art our chiesest rest.
With fervent Zeal unto thy aid we flee,
Thou art our Rest; Truly our hope's in thee.
On Repentance.
REpentance is a gift which comes from high,
We are not with it born;
None of themselves repentantly can cry,
Or make the World his scorn.
They Are carnal Christians think it is enough
To mingle Lord have mercy with their stuff.
We Jewels buy, and they prove counterfeit,
So man himself undoes.
Thus in Repentance Souls themselves do cheat,
And their rich Jewel loose.
Which made one say, Repentance would not lin,
Until it damned many more than sin.
If we repent for sin, it is nothing worth,
Unless we do refrain
From it as well: for if we from our birth
Delighted to be vain,
Yet sometimes weep, but still our hearts do harden,
God will us with a Contradiction pardon.
The sorrow of this World it works Death,
But godly sorrow that
Repentance works, and that eternal breath:
The Lord himself does hate
Man for his sins, that numberless do flush,
And for those sins does love as much the blush.
Repentance strips us of those Garments black,
That the first Adam's was;
It kills our sins, and keep us from the wrack.
Though now we are but Grass,
It does revive: Our Tears do water so,
That we like Plants of Paradise do grow.
All, above all thou art, O God most just,
Repentance grant to me,
That I may cleanse my Carnal house of Dust,
And make it fit for thee.
Teach me that Lesson which does still remain,
With daily Tears to wash my daily stain.
Repentance should appear before I die;
Nor can I know the when
My dying-day shall come, or when I fly
From hence to thee again:
Therefore g^ve me Repentance every day,
So shall my flight be clear, and thou my way.
No better showers extinguish can the flames
Of Hell, than sinners Tears.
Begin ^etimes, trust not to after-games,
Forthey bring after-fears.
Have little cause to say, Wo's me, that I,
Who lived a sinner, must a sinner die.
We all are apt to think it is too soon
Repentance to begin;
We put it off from morning until noon,
From thence do farther spin;
Whenas we hourly should prepare a room
To entertain our God when he shall come.
Beda makes mention of a certain man,
Who lying very sick,
Was counseled by his Friends his life to scan,
And to repent, while quick:
Who said, His sins he would not yet shake off,
Lest if he should recover, then a scoff
To his Companions he himself should make:
But still he waxed worse;
His Friends then counseled him again to take
Repentance, not his Curse:
He answered them, That then it was too late,
For he was plunged in a condemned estate.
Better it is by far from sin to fly,
Than lack Repentant cure;
For he that has no wounds fears not to die,
But lives safe and sure.
It Is good for any man, more for his ease,
Neither to know the Cure nor the Disease.
On the Day of Judgment.
AH, come it will, that dreadful day,
Which shall the World in Ashes lay.
As David and the Sibyl both could say.
How men will tremble and grow pale
When Justice comes with Sword and Scale,
To weigh the faults, and sort the fates of all!
A Trumpet first shall rend the Skies,
And all, wherever laid, must rise,
And come unto the Bar in Prisoners guise.
Nature and Death amazed will stand
To see each one rebodied, and
Brought to reply himself to each demand.
A written Book lie open shall,
Containing each ones Charge; and all
By those grand Evidences stand or fall.
Then sits the Judge himself, and tries;
No shifting from All-seeing eyes,
Nor scaping seen, whoever deserves it dies.
Oh then poor I! what shall I do?
Which Friend or Patron take me to,
When Saints themselves are scarce secure from woe?
Dread Lord, to thee thy self run I,
Who sav'st the saved without a why,
And so may me, thou source of Clemency.
Think, who did once thy pity move,
And drew thee from thy Throne above,
Cast me not off at last, thy former Love.
Thou tir'dst thy self in seeking me,
And for my sake di'dst on a Tree;
Let not in vain such pangs and labor be.
True, thou have dealt thy mercies home,
Yet acts of grace may deign to some
At least, before that day of Reckoning come?
I guilty am e're thou me try,
My looks and blushes me descry;
But Mercy, Lord, O Lord, do not deny.
Thou, who did once a Magd'len spare,
And of a Thief condemned took'st care,
B'dst me, by these examples, not despair.
Not that my Prayers ought can claim,
But thou art good, be still the same,
That wretched I burn not in endless flame.
When from the Goats thou shall divide
Thy Sheep, let me with thee abide,
Placed in Eternal Bliss, on thy right side:
And then (those great (...) ssizes done,
The Cursed to flames tormenting thrown)
Say, Come ye blessed, meaning me for one.
Lord, this I beg on bended knee,
With heart contrite as ashes be,
That thou take care both of my end and me?
On Sighs and Groans.
SIgh on, sad Heart, as hard as Diamond-stone,
At every breathing usher forth a groan:
For such, although thou do not speak,
Sufficient are thy mind to break.
Or if thy groans are smothered with grief,
And steal out softly as a cunning thief,
God hears and understands the cry
Better than he that lets them fly.
For many sighs and groans are poured out,
Loaded with thoughts; so that this heavy scout
Has such an Errand then to tell,
Where to begin he knows not well.
God has a Bottle for the sinners Tear,
And ready is (as we to speak) to hear:
Heaven is attentive to a sinners suit,
And sighs are vocal, though the tongue be mute.
Knots.
WHo reads a Chapter when to bed,
Shall not have Aches in his head.
Who opes his Purse unto the Poor,
Shall find it filling more and more.
Whose heart and tongue obey God's Word,
Both beats the bush and gets the bird.
Who keeps his thoughts from things amiss,
Is thinking on his way to Bliss.
Who keeps his Conscience pure and clear,
Is always feasting year by year.
Whose stomach does for Dainties crave,
With his own teeth does dig his Grave.
Who loves his Humor to fulfill,
His Humor is himself to kill.
Who does aspire be great and tall,
Should carefully beware a fall.
Who with good works delights to dwell,
Sails fair for Heaven, far from Hell.
On Age.
THe Painter's Pencil sure must go astray
In painting to the life a lump of Clay,
Who does but seem to live, dies every day.
How can he lively paint a man that has
The cold effigies in his face of Death?
On Man and Wife.
SIlence and Patience are the Twins that make
Concord 'twixt Couples never to forsake.
A Husband good in Words ought to be wise,
In Conversation wary, hating lies:
Careful Provision ought he to provide,
In ordering circumspect, a careful Guide;
A Father, Master, and a Friend beside.
The good Wife, when abroad she should be grave,
Discreet in governing at home, and have
Patience to bridle Passions when they move,
Learning her Husband to obey and love:
Kind to her Neighbors, courteous unto all;
Careful of Children, be they great or small.
But chiefly herein there should be no flaws,
She should her Husband fear, and he the Laws.
The free Prisoner.
WHat though a Prisoner I am now?
Time does allow
Instead of liberty, to walk,
To write, or talk.
What though (...) make me sicken?
They do me quicken.
My body in confinement lies,
But my Soul flies.
What though by nature I am dumb?
Then I be ^ome
A silent sinner, and my tongue
Does no man wrong.
Or what although I loose my sight?
Yes if the light
Of Divine Graces shine in me,
My Soul can see
Let sorrows come when God thinks best,
They are my Rest:
For in afflictions it is my Psalm,
The Bruise (...) Balm.
If I Am afflicted in this World,
I am but hu^'d
^o Heaven, where all pleasures stand
At God's right hand.
Th'afflictions of this world of care
Cannot compare
To those blessed Mansions Christ has wrought,
And dearly bought.
Dear may I say, because his blood
Is that choice flood
That drowns my sorrows and my grief,
Gives me relief.
Thus all things work together for their good,
That have loved God, and for his honor stood.
A Jayl's the center of this Iron-age,
Yet not my Prison, but mine Hermitage.
He that can boldly dare, yet justly do,
Fortune's his Subject, and his Vassal too.
On Sunday.
THis is the day the Lord has made,
Then let not Christians be afraid;
Laying aside all sin,
Rejoice therein.
The clearest radiant day that shines
Upon the Christians golden Mines.
God's holy Torch and Light,
That leads aright.
The day of our Consession,
The Ease of our Oppression,
The day of Peace and Rest,
Churches our Nest.
A Light it is to all the Week,
A Summons to the Proud and Meek,
That says to Conscience, Fie,
Ye go awry.
The day that pulls man from Death,
And crowns his head with holy Wreath;
That guides him to his Grave,
Yet does him save.
The Day of God, so God of Days,
It is above my reach of praise:
God's with his free accord
The Sabbaths Lord.
It is the Day-book of a Saint,
A Spring for those that thirst or faint:
Nor can we say there is one day
Like to Sunday;
But we'll such thoughts in silence smother,
Till we can find out such another.
The Petition.
STand by me, Lord, when dangers STARE;
Keep from my Fruit such choking TARE,
That on Confusion grounded -- ARE.
Thou that from Bondage have me BROUGHT,
And my deliverance have -- ROUGHT,
It Is thee that I will praise for -- OUGHT.
O Lord, to evil make me CHILL,
Be thou my Rock and holy HILL,
So shall I need to fear no ILL.
Faith's Mystery.
WIth all the powers my poor Soul has,
O humble Love, and loyal Faith;
Thus low, my God, I bow to thee,
Whom too much love bowed low for me.
Down busy Sense, Discourses die,
And all adore Faith's Mystery.
Faith is my Skill, Faith can believe;
As fast as Love, new Laws can give.
Faith is my eye, Faith strength affords,
To keep pace with those powerful words;
And words more sure, more sweet than they,
Love could not think, Truth could not say.
O dear Memorial of that death
Which still survives, and gives us breath,
Live ever, Bread of Life, and be
My Food, my Joy, my All to me.
Come, glorious Lord, my hopes increase,
And fill my Portion in thy Peace.
Come, hidden life, and that long day
For which I languish, come away.
On the Judgment.
GReat God, that have at thy command
Both Leaden feet and Iron hand,
How shall I stand,
How can I look,
When thou call'st for thy Dreadful Book?
Oh, save me, Lord, I then shall say,
I do confess I went astray.
Thy Judgment stay;
O let thy Rod
Chastise with mercy, O my God.
O, Christ my Savior, may it please
Thee, thy dear Father's wrath appease,
And making peace,
Then I always
Will strive to magnify thy praise.
Some, it is like, may show a Book
So full of Blanks, that when you look
Thereon, a Rook
You Will think that man
That shows a Scrole with nothing on.
But so to do is highly vain:
For he that does just Judgments rain,
Can see each stain,
Keeps just account
How every Sinner's sins amount.
I am resolved, when God does call,
To hide not one, but show him all
That wrought my fall;
But if my will
Exceed my skill, Lord, do not kill.
On the Pharisee and the Publican.
TWo men into the Temple went to pray;
The one a Pharisee, who thus did say,
I thank thee, God, I am no common man,
No unjust person, As this Publican;
Twice in the week I fast from my excess,
And I give tithes of all that I possess.
The humble Publican at distance stood,
With head and eyes dejected, as if food,
Or heavenly Manna then was to be found
Carelessly scattered on the dusty ground:
But as in bitterness of Soul distressed,
He with his hand smote on his troubled breast,
Of his Petition this was the beginner,
O God be merciful to me a sinner:
The other showed (rather than Zeal) his pride,
But the poor Publican went justified.
God does delight the proud look to abase,
And on Humility bestows his grace.
To God the Father.
BEfore the closing of the day,
Creator, we thee humbly pray,
That for thy wonted mercies sake,
Thou us into protection take.
May nothing in our minds excite
Vain dreams and fantoms of the night.
Our Enemy repress, that so
Our bodies no uncleanness know.
To Jesus, from a Virgin sprung,
Be Glory given, and Praises sung.
The like to God the Father be,
And holy Ghost eternally.
To God the Son.
LEt others take their course,
And sing what Name they please;
Let Wealth or Beauty be their theme,
Such empty sounds as these.
I never will admire
A lump of burnished Clay;
For though it shines, it is but dust,
And shall to dust decay.
Sweet Jesus is the Name
My Song shall still adore;
Sweet Jesus is the charming Word
That does my Life restore.
When I am dead in grief,
Or, what is worse, in sin,
I call on Jesus, and he hears,
And I to live begin.
Wherefore, to thee, bright Name,
Behold, thus low I bow,
And thus again; yet is all this
Nothing to what I owe.
Down then, down bow my knees
Still lower to the ground,
While with mine eyes and voice lift up,
Aloud these Lines I sound:
Live Heaven's glorious King,
By Angels bright adored;
Live, gracious Savior of the World,
Our chief and only Lord:
Live, and for ever may
Thy Throne established be;
For ever may all hearts and tongues
Sing Praises unto thee.
To God the Holy Ghost.
COme into us, Holy Ghost,
From thy bright Celestial coast,
Send us a resplendant Beam:
Come, thou Father of the Poor,
Come, thou willing Gift-bestow'r,
Come, thou heart-reviving Gleam.
Thou, of Comforters the best,
Thou, the Souls delightful Guest,
A refreshing sweet relief;
Thou in toil a resting seat,
Temper in excessive heat,
Solace to a Soul in grief.
O thou blessedest of Lights!
Those that love t'observe thy Rites,
With thy self their bosoms fill.
While you are absent, nothing can
Be regardable in man;
Nothing can he act but ill.
What is for did, mundifie;
Water, what is over-dry:
What is wounded, render sound;
Pliant make what is hard to yield;
Cherish what with Cold is chil'd;
Govern what is vagabond.
In the faithful that confide
In thy mercies, cause reside
All the train of Sev'n-fold Grace,
Give what Virtue's merit is,
Give the accomplishment of Bliss,
Joys of an eternal Race.
Amen.
On the Holy Trinity.
IN Sacred sheets of either Testament,
It Is hard to find an higher Argument,
More deep to sound, more busy to s^uss,
More useful known, unknown more dangerous.
On Christ's Nativity.
MYsterious Miracle! the same should be
A Lamb, a Shepherd, and a Lion too!
Yet so was he
Whom first the Shepherds knew,
And readily became
Sheep to their Shepherd-Lamb.
Shepherd of Angels, Men; and Lamb of God,
Lion of Judah: by these Titles keep
The Wolf from all thy harmless Sheep.
Let the whole World flock to thy Fold,
Jews and Gentiles, may they all come
In multitudes not to be told,
Thy Lambs that wander bring them home.
Glory be to God on high,
Glory to the Deity.
On Christ's Triumph to Jerusalem.
BEhold, we stay;
Lord, come away:
Thy Road is ready, and thy Paths made strait,
With languishing expect and wait
The Consecration of thy beauteous seet.
Ride on triumphantly; see, Lord, we lay
Our carnal lusts and wills all in thy way.
Hosanna! welcome to our hearts: Lo here
Thou have a Temple too, and full as dear
As that of Sion; but more full of sin,
Nothing but Thieves and Robbers dwell therein.
Then enter, Lord, chase them, and cleanse the floor;
Crucify all, that they may never more
Profane that holy place
Where thou have chose to set thy face:
And if our stubborn tongues shall be
Mute in the praises of thy Deity,
The stones from out the Temple-wall
Shall cry aloud and call,
Hosanna! And thy glorious footsteps greet.
The Shepherds Dialogue. In three parts.
1.
COme, let us find the Babe
That has made
This our World so full of joy
And expectation;
That glorious blessed boy
That crowns each Nation
With his triumphant Wreaths of blessedness.
2.
Doubtless he is within the throng,
Just among
His Angels that divinely sing,
Taking wing;
So as to echo to his voice,
They rejoice
With Wing, with Tongue, and Heart,
That so they do perceive their happiness.
3.
But attended is as now
With a Cow;
The Ox and Mule do all behold
With wonder,
An homely Stable should unfold
The Thunder.
Chor. What an Almighty God have we!
Great, great, as is our Misery.
On Christ's Birth in an Inn.
Blessed be that Virgin traveled without pain,
And lodged within an Inn,
A splendid Star the sign:
No greater guest did ever come that way;
For therein lay
The glorious Lord of Night and Day,
Who does over Heaven and over Angels reign.
He came in the time of great Augustus tax;
All cried, He comes
To pay the sums,
Or ransom of our lost Humanity,
To set us free
From an Impious Emperie
Of Satan, Sin, that then bore sway.
Inspire our Hearts to be thy lodging place;
In each ones breast
Take up thy rest:
Temples are fitter for thee than an Inn,
And let not sin
Profane the Sacred Deity within,
So to defile the Ornaments of Grace.
Of Thoughts.
To think upon the Power of God, does awe me;
To think upon Gods Justice, does affright me;
To think upon the Love of God, does draw me;
To think upon God's Mercy, does delight me;
To think upon God's Bounty, that does please me;
To think upon God's Favor, does endear me;
To think upon God's Goodness, much does ease me;
To think upon God's Promises, does cheer me.
Thus thinking what I think, does make me say,
The more I think, the more methinks I may.
Lord, let my thoughts so firmly fixed be,
That I may think on nothing more than thee.
To the Creator.
DIvine Creator, bear in mind,
That thou, of our Corporeal kind
The form did take, when heretofore
'Twas thee a Sacred Virgin bore,
Blessed Mary, pre-ordain'd to be
Mother of Grace and Clemency:
Defend us from our mortal foe,
Receive us when from hence we go.
Jesus, all glory to thy Name,
Born of a Virgin; and the same
To The Holy Ghost, and Father be,
Through Ages to Eternity.
The Godly Garden.
A Godly heart's a Garden full of Flowers
Well kept and trimmed, where Herbs of Grace do flourish,
Tears of unfeigned Repentance are the showers
That kindly do those Herbs refresh and nourish.
Faith is the Prime-rose that does first appear,
Which being rooted well, stands firm and fast.
Then grows for every Season of the year,
The choicest Flowers for odor, or for taste.
If Weeds amongst them spring to give offense,
The Gardener plucks them up, and casts them thence.
Lord, give me Grace to keep my Garden so,
That nothing there but Herbs of Grace may grow.
The Soul's Alarm.
A Wake, my Soul, chase from thine eyes
This drowsy sloth, and quickly rise
Up, and to work apace.
No less than Kingdoms are prepared,
And endless Bliss for their reward
Who finish well their race.
It Is not so poor a thing to be
Servants to Heaven, dear Lord, and thee,
As this fond world believes;
Not even here, where often the wise
Are most exposed to injuries,
And friendless virtue grieves.
Sometimes thy hand lets gently fall
A little drop that sweetens all
The bitter of our Cup:
O what hereafter shall we be
When we shall have whole draughts of thee,
Brim-full, and drink them up!
Say, happy Souls, whose thirst now meets
The fresh and living stream of sweets,
Which spring from that blessed Throne;
Did you not find this true, even here?
Do you not find it truer there,
Now Heaven is all your own?
O yes, the sweets we taste exceed
All we can say, or you can read;
They fill, and never cloy.
On Earth our Cup was sweet, but mixed,
Here all is pure, refined, and fixed;
All quintessence of Joy.
Hear'st thou, my Soul, what glorious things.
The Church of Heaven in triumph brings
Of their blessed life above?
Cheer thy faint hopes, and bid them live;
All these thy God to thee will give,
If thou embrace his love.
Great God of rich rewards, who thus
Have crowned thy Saints, and wilt crown us,
As both to thee belong:
O may we both together sing
Eternal praise to thee, our King,
In one eternal Song.
On Greatness and Goodness.
GReatness is with a strong desire affected,
And often sought with hazard, cost, and pain.
Goodness, of greater worth, is less respected,
Prized as a thing both needless is, and vain.
Greatness aspires, and sets it self on high,
While Goodness walks below with humble pace:
The first is followed with an Eagle's eye,
The last is thought unworthy of the Chase.
But Greatness seeks that which is transitory,
And Goodness aims at Grace, which leads to Glory.
Lord, let thy Grace my mundane thoughts defeat,
That I may study to be Good, not Great.
The Soul's Yearnings.
MY Soul pants toward thee,
My God, Fountain of Light and Life:
Flesh strives with me,
Conclude the strife,
That so in blessed peace I may
Unclay
My Spirit; that done, swiftly take
My flight to thy refreshing Spring,
Where for thy sake,
Who art my King,
I may wash all my griefs away
That day,
And conquer Sin and Death.
Thou great Triumpher over the Grave,
Whose life and breath
Was spent to save
A wretched World, make me be styled
Thy Child;
And grant that when I die
And leave this World, that then my Soul
Above the Sky
Thou will enroul,
That in thy arms for ever I,
Even unto Eternity,
May lie.
The Divine Inquest.
TEll me, you bright Stars that shine
Round about the Lambs high Throne,
How though bodies once like mine,
How you are thus glorious grown?
Hark, with one voice they reply,
This was all our happy skill;
We on Jesus fixed our eye,
And his em'nent followers still.
As we clearly saw their mind
Set and ruled, we ordered ours;
Both this state alone designed,
Up toward this strained all our powers.
Taught by Temperance, we abstained
From all less for greater goods;
Slighting little drops, we gained
Full, and sweet, and lasting floods.
Armed with Fortitude, we bare
Lesser evils, worse do fly;
Mortal Death we durst out-dare,
Rather than for ever die.
Justice we observed, by giving
Every one their utmost due,
That in peace and order living,
All might freely Heaven pursue.
Prudence governed all the rest,
Prudence made us still apply
What was fittest, what was best
To advance great Charity.
On those golden wheels of Grace,
That Love's fiery Chariot bear,
We arrived at this bright place;
Follow us and never fear.
O sure Truth, O blessed Attesters;
O that all the World may prove,
Of both these, such strong digesters,
That both these may feed their love.
Him who made us all for this,
Him who made himself our way,
Him who leads us unto Bliss,
May all praise, and all obey.
The Sinners Tears.
SHed forth apace, and make a Bath
To cure my Soul of sin;
Haste out, for God a bottle has
To keep ye in.
Every Tear is worth a Crown;
It lifts the Soul to Heaven,
Supports the same from sinking down
To filthy Leav'n.
They Are comfort to the Heart, they are case,
Ambassadors to God,
To beg he may his wrath appease,
And spare his Rod.
They Are holy Messengers of Saints,
Sent to him to impart.
They Are godly sorrows: each Tear paints
Their grief of heart.
Then flow amain, and weep those fords
Or little Rivers dry,
And when I Have vented all my hords,
Then I
Will groan because no longer cry;
And die,
That I may live eternally.
On St. John's day.
TO day
Let Us sing
Joy to the friend of Heaven's King.
He in his bosom lay,
Secured the Keys
Of his profound and hidden Mysteries.
Those to the World dispensed by his hand,
Did make it stand
In admiration to behold that light
Happily came
From the Throne of the Lamb,
And to invite
Our sinful eyes (which nothing else could see
But Fire and Sword, Hunger and Misery,)
Anticipating by their ravished sight
The beauty of Celestial delight.
Great Lord of all, O hear me when I pray,
That when my heap of Clay
Shall fall away,
O let thy gracious hand support me up,
That on the Lambs rich Viand I may sup^
And that in this last supper I
May with thy friend in thy rich bosom lie
For ever, to eternity.
Acknowledgements.
MY God, had I my breath from thee,
This hour to speak and sing?
And shall my voice, and shall my song
Praise any but their King?
My God, had I my Soul from thee,
This power to judge and choose?
And shall my Brain, and shall my Will
Their best to thee resuse?
Alas, not this alone, or that,
Have thou bestowed on me;
But all I have, and all I hope,
I have, and hope from thee.
And more I have, and more I hope,
Than I can speak or think;
Thy blessings first refresh, then fill,
Then overflow the brink.
Glory to thee, Immortal God,
O great Coequal Three:
As at the first beginning was,
May now and ever be.
The Wish.
OH, that I once were in that City
Where Hallelujah is the Ditty,
Where Contemplation is the Diet;
Sure that is the place where man is quiet.
Oh, that I once were in that Court
Where all good Spirits do resort,
Where Love, and Joy, and Grace abound;
Sure that is the place where man is crowned.
Oh, that I once could sly the wav
From my unfurnished house of Clay;
For should my Landiord sue for Rent,
Too late it would be to repent:
But sighs and tears will pay my score;
He Is merciful, and asks no more.
Then whilst thy Fountain has one Tear to yield,
Weep, oh my Soul, and to the Elysium field
Swim in a River of Repentant Tears;
Thy Rent is paid, and thou art freed from fears.
The Caution.
OPen thine eyes, my Soul, and see
Once more the light returns to thee.
Look round about, and choose thy way
Thou meanst to travel over to day.
Think on the dangers thou may meet,
And always watch thy sliding feet.
Think where thou once have fallen before,
Observe the place, and sin no more.
Think on the helps thy God bestows,
Contrive to steer thy life by those.
Think on the sweets thy Soul does feel
When thou do well, and do so still.
Think on those pains that shall torment
Those sinners bold that ne^e repent.
Think on the joys that wait above,
To crown the head of holy Love.
Think what at last will be thy part,
If thou go on where now thou art.
See Life, and Death, set thee to choose;
One thou must take, and one refuse.
O Lord, be thou my perfect Guide,
So shall I never step aside.
Still make me walk, still make me tend;
Be thee my way to thee my end.
All Glory to the sacred Three,
One undivided Deity:
As it has been in Ages gone,
May now and ever still be done.
Of Life.
AN humane life is but a Play of Passion;
What is man's Mirth but Music of Division?
Our Mothers Wombs the Tyring-houses be,
To deck us up for Time's short Tragedy:
The World's the Stage; Heaven the Spectator is,
To sit and judge who'ts does act amiss:
The Clouds that shade us from the scorching Sun,
Are but drawn Curtains till the Play be done.
The Power of Prayer.
THe Sun by Prayer did cease his course, and staid;
The hungry Lions sawn'd upon their Prey;
A Walled passage through the Sea it made;
From furious fire it banished heat away:
It shut the Heavens three years from giving Rain;
It opened Heavens, and showers poured down again.
O may our Prayers, dear Lord, approach to thee;
Petitions hear, and then propitious be.
Teach us to praise thy Name with one accord,
That we may sing due praise to thee, O Lord.
God and Caesar.
Render to Caesar, and to God, etc.
It Is God's command we should be just: why then
Let Us not wrong him, giving his right to men.
Honor to God it is our due to render,
And Caesar's due we justly ought to tender.
To both we stand indebted; all we have
Must Caesar's be, if Caesar please to crave.
What matter is it? wherein lies the odds?
We all are Caesar's, Caesar's all is Gods.
Gabriel and Mary.
THe Salutation which the Angel brings,
Imports, that joys come and depart with wings.
Gab. -- Hail, blessed Mary, never cast thy mind
To trace the passage of this pleasing wind.

Mary. -- What voice is this that calls me blessed? when --

Gab. -- Stay, wandering thoughts, it is I: you are blessed again,
Blessed of women.

Mary. -- Oh, I faint, I die.

Gab. -- Eternally thou liv'st: Again, it is I;
God has thee favored so, as to entomb
A blessed Savior in thy blessed Womb.

Mary. -- How shall this be? alas, my Lord, how can
I bear a Child, that never knew a man,
But am a Virgin pure?

Gab. -- Farther attend:
Of his Dominions there shall be no end.
Thou shall be shadowed by the Holy One,
And what thou bear shall be called his Son.

Mary. Then, Lord, behold thy Handmaid, let it be
As thou have said, All shall be blessed in me:
That Angels may rejoice, and Men may sue;
That Devils may believe, and tremble too.

Judeth's Prayer.
THus lowly on my face, with Sackcloth spread,
To God on high, with Ashes on my head,
I come to pay my Vows; to him alone,
The Lord God of my Father Simeon,
Who with his Sword became a just Revenger
On a (Virginity) polluting stranger.
O Lord, my God, I pray thee bow thine ears
Unto my Prayers, accompanied with tears.
The Widow of Manasses lifts her voice,
Let all that put their trust in thee, rejoice.
Behold, O God, (though Enemies may smile)
An Israelite in whom there is no guile;
To thee I trust; Experience teaches well,
They Are not all Israel are of Israel.
The Assyrians do multiply each hour
With Horse and man; they glory in their power;
They trust in Shield, in Spear, in Bow, and Sling,
Not knowing thee the Lord, whose breath can bring
Destruction to them all, and lay their Fame
In Ashes; God, the Lord it is thy Name.
Gird me with strength unto the Battle, Lord,
Teach me to manage Holofernes Sword;
Turn thou its edge until, at thy command,
Thy servant Judeth take it in her hand;
Then be my Battel-ax, for, Lord, with thee
I Will Kingdoms ruin, and make Nations flee:
The Horseman and his Rider shall no more
Israel defy; their Captains shall adore
(...) no longer; for thy Rod
Shall make them understand that thou art God.
I, though a widow, have conceived a power;
But my designs lie harbored in a Bower
Of pleasing fancies: for, O Lord, at length
I must to thee for Judgment and for Strength.
Let my deceitful lips find craft to smite
The Assyrian Prince, and those in him delight:
Bring down their pride, that they may understand
Thou can work wonders by a woman's hand:
For, Lord, thy power is not bound by scope,
Thou sav'st in dangers when there is no hope;
And in thy Name I Will go, and dare to do,
That those
Thy Foes
Shall fear and tremble too.
Judeth and Holofernes.
Hol. BE of good comfort, woman, let not fear
Presume to have an habitation here:
I never injured any man or thing
That willing was to serve the Earth's chief King.
What now is happened to thy people, they
By their perverseness have hewn out the way:
But, fairest of your Country, let me know
Whither your wandering Beauty means to go?
And why thou fledst to us, leaving those whom
Dame Nature has commanded from thy Womb,
Thy name in golden Letters to entomb?

Jud. Receive the Cause thy Handmaid shall relate,
Who will resolve in truth the same to state:
Follow the way thy servant shall direct,
And God will thee undoubtedly respect.
As lives Nebuchodonozor thy King,
Who sent thee to support each living thing;
Man shall obedience pay to thee, and all
The Beasts, Fowls of the Air, and Cattle, shall
Live under thy command: for we have heard
Thy wisdom makes thine Enemies afeard.
Most true it is, a Sword is not the Rod
Can scourge our Nation, till against their God
They sin: Now Death has got the upper hand,
Their Meat and Water fail, they are at a stand
What to do next, and do resolve to cause
Some things to be consumed, which the Laws
Of God have held unlawful; Tenths or Oil
Which was once for the Priests, is now for spoil.
A License from the Senate they expect,
As if that Cloak can cover their neglect:
Now when it is brought, they will dote without delay,
And Justice shall condemn them that same day.
And I thine Handmaid, knowing this, am fled,
To work such wonders with thee, when they are spread,
Those that shall hear, shall stand astonished.
Thy servant serves God both day and night,
And is religious, trusting in his might.
Let then thine Handmaid to the Valley go,
And pray to God, then shall she surely know
The time that they intend to act their sin,
And consequently when thou may begin
To seize upon Judea for thine own,
And make their great ones to become as none.
And it shall come to pass that there shall be
Not one shall dare to lift his hand to thee.
Thus will I lead thee through the midst of them,
Until thou come before Jerusalem;
And in the midst thereof thy Throne shall stand,
And give to Nations far and near, command.

Hol. God's strength be with thee; sure he sent thee here
T'encourage us, and put our foes in fear.
Your Beauty and your wisdom do conspire,
The World should Judeth's virtuous name admire.
Proceed, fair Lady; surely if thou do
As thou have spoken, then will I be true
To thee, and to thy God, and thou shall dwell
With Nebuchodonozor. We will tell
The Nations how thy Virtues do excel.
Here Is Wine enough; when this is gone, we'll then
Revive the Banquet with the blood of men.

Jud. My Lord, now will I drink, because my state
Is more by much exalted now of late
Then e're it was, since Nature did display
Over mine eyes the banner of the day.

Hol. This Wine benums my joints, my limbs do feel
As if each one would with the other reel.
Since so it is, I Will stretch me on my bed.

Jud. Do so, my Lord -- And I Will secure thy head.
Thou need'st not fear those at Jerusalem;
They shall not come to thee, thou go to them:

Judeth's Song of Thanksgiving.
WIth Timbrels and with Cymbals raise
A tune, wherewith our God to praise:
Divinity, afford me Balm
For sins, and skill to sing a Psalm
Of praise to God did Heaven frame.
Exalt him, call upon his Name:
He breaks the Battles of the strong,
And I that was the Camps among
Of proud King Assure, even then
When Israel seemed a Prey to men,
Then did the Lord direct my ways;
I came from thence to sing his praise.
Out of the Mountains from the North
The Enemy came thundering forth.
Their strength did threaten dismal ills,
Their numbers covered the hills;
He bragged he would my Borders burn,
And make Jerusalem an Urn;
And kill my young men with the Sword,
Dash Infants brains against the board,
And make my Virgins prove their spoil;
But God prevented has their toil:
A Female hand
By his command
Has conquered the Assyrian Land.
Our mighty foe, he did not fight,
Nor did the Sons of Titans smite:
Neither did Giants force his care,
But Beauty was his only snare.
The daughter of Merari went
With resolution to the tent
Of Holofernes, drank him dead,
And safely brought away his head.
Thus, Lord, I ventured to commit
Two sins, and sacrifice my Wit.
But with a chaste and holy eye
I shunned ways of Carnality.
My people, Lord, I knew should live,
And thou art ready to forgive.
I boldiy went, was not afraid,
Because assured of thine aid;
And to allure, I thought it good
The Garments of my Widowhood
To lay aside, and did attire
My head, to raise my beauty higher.
My Sandals ravished his eyes,
And he became my beauties prize:
For then to give his pride a check,
I struck his Faulchin through his neck;
Which act did make
The Persians quake;
The Medes stout hearts did likewise ache.
Thus my exterminating arm,
By inspiration, did alarm
A mighey Host, and did destroy
Their chief Commander, once their Joy.
A new Song to the Lord I Will sing:
Thou art a great and glorious King,
Wonderful in strength and might,
Invincible, the God of Fight:
To praise thy Name all things accord,
For thou made all things with a word:
In thee all Creatures shall rejoice,
Not any can resist thy voice.
Mountains and Waters shall remove,
Rocks melt as wax, if they not love.
Shall man be subject to obey,
And his Inseriours go astray?
Do we not see, year after year,
God's merciful to them that sear?
All Sacrifice too little is
For him that is the God of Bliss.
The savor of the heart is sweet,
And he that sears the Lord is great.
Woe to those Nations that arise
Against my Kindred: they a prize
Shall be to Worms; their flesh, as meat,
The Ravens of the field shall eat,
Whilst in Bethulia all my days
I Will spend to celebrate his praise.
On Man's Greation.
WE were created with a Word, a Breath;
Redeemed with no less than Blood and Death:
How much a greater labor is it then,
Sinners to cleanse, or breathe Souls into men?
The Mornings Ejaculation.
NOw, that the Day Star does arise,
Beg we of God with humble cries,
All hurtful things to keep away,
Whilst we in duty spend the day:
Out tongues to guide so, that no strife
May breed disquiet in our life:
To shut the casement of our eye,
Lest it admit of vanity;
Preserve the heart both pure and free
From vain, and troubled fantasy:
To tame proud flesh, while we deny it
A full cup, and a wanton diet;
That when the daylight shall go out,
Time bringing on the night about,
We, by leaving worldly ways,
May in silence sing God's praise.
The Evenings Ejaculation.
O Lord, now night's returned again,
Our Bodies and our Souls refrain
From being soiled with filthy stain.
Let not dull sleep oppress our eyes,
Nor us, the enemy surprise;
Nor fearful dreams our mind affright,
While the blackness of the night
Holds from us the cheerful light.
To thee, who do by rest renew
Our wasted strength, we humbly sue,
That when we shall enclose our eyes,
Pure and chaste we may arise,
Making Morning-Sacrifice.
All honor, Lord, to thee be done,
Thou ever-blessed Virgins Son;
With the Father and the Spirit,
As is thine eternal merit,
E're and ever to inherit.
On Tears.
TEars! the sweet Music of harmonious Souls;
Angels rejoice, and ready are in shouls
To dance thereto; it is their heavenly skill,
Their Master's bottle, with such pearls to fill:
And when the Soul in Sin's consumption lies,
No Balsam's better than the briny eyes.
God loves not waters of a common ford;
All Rivers are not pleasing to the Lord.
When Esau wept, it was to think upon
His Brothers fraud; with indignation
His Tears were mixed, his whispring thoughts within,
Cried, It Is my loss I prize beyond my sin.
Tears of Dissimulation too, invite
Men to believe, God knows the Hypocrite.
When in devotion we our Case impart,
We should remember, God requires the heart.
Tears of Contrition give the piercing voice,
At which both God and Angels do rejoice:
Such as were Mary Magdalens, who spent
Full thirty years in weeping, to repent.
St. Peter likewise, waking, looked as sleeping,
His face b'ing surrow'd with continual weeping.
The Spouse, of whom in (...), her fears,
Like pools of Heshbon, glazed her eyes with Tears.
As Music on the water sounds more sweet
Than on the land, so Prayers, with Tears, they greet
Almighty God with prevalence: all hours
God listens to effectual Orators.
Then let our Tears into a deluge flow,
To drown our sins, and wash away our woe:
May they shoot forth like showers in the Spring,
To bathe our Souls in; it is an Offering
Well pleasing to the Lord. When Peter wept,
He looked more lovely than as when he slept.
David pathetically ever sung,
When Heart and Harp with Penitence was strung:
When to repose he laid his weari'd head,
Not Diamonds, but Tears adorned his bed.
And in the sacred Quire there is much more mirth
For one repentant sinner (so by birth)
Than persons just, Repentance needing none,
Though of an hundred there should want but one.
To Heaven comes none but what are pure and clear;
Heaven would not be Heaven, if Sin were there.
On Humane Frailty.
THe World's a Monster,
And a humane life
So full of strife,
That a dry morsel better may suffice
With quiet, than contentions sacrifice:
Man is conceived
In sin; when born
Become a scorn;
Addicts himself to vanities and lies;
Poisons himself with sin, then bursts, and dies.
Then, O my Soul,
That thou may thrive,
Fix thus to live:
Serve God, and love thy Neighbor; not for gains,
Self-service will but cheat thee for thy pains.
Consider well,
Thou can not buy
Eternity,
But pious Prayers and Tears must be thy cost;
For Heaven is not so soon obtained as lost.
Prepare thy heart,
For that is the room
Where God must come:
Then mind not things that are but transitory,
But entertain thy God, the King of Glory.
He when he comes
Will be thy Guest,
Himself the Feast.
Of Earth no expectation thou can have,
But live a sinner, to become a slave.
On the worth of Wealth.
THe good that is in Riches does consist
In the right use thereof: for if we list
To show it in its luster and its worth,
It must be used like Ointment poured forth.
The woman's box, if it had not been broke,
Its virtue (like the dumb) had never spoke.
So hoarded Wealth that has much labor cost,
By being so recluse, its worth is lost:
The sweet refreshments of those glittering Embers
Insuse a heat in Christ's distressed Members.
He that is covetous may justly write
On rusty heaps, This ore corrupts my sight:
They breed but Care, and are for nothing good;
Might cloth the Naked, find the Hungry food.
Chrysostom well observes, he is not rich
That lays up much: He is more happy which
Does much lay out, but not in ways prosuse;
It Is all one, not to have, and not to use.
He that relieves the Poor with what he has,
Makes for himself a purging healing Bath.
He that bath pity on the poor, does lend
Unto the Lord: and God's our firmest friend.
On Formal duty.
TRadition does of Ovid thus relate:
His Father with him holding strict debate
On Poetry, commanded him rehearse
The profits (not the pleasures) of a Verse,
By words as well as srowns, did plainly threat.
Ovid, when thus in danger to be beat,
Begged mercy of his Father for his Crime;
But in his begging made this warbling Rhyme:
Father, on me pity take,
Verses I no more will make.
How many promises, Lord, do I gather,
When I in Prayer petition thee, my Father?
I promise to forsake all sinful snares,
And yet I sin, even when I say my Prayers.
The weakness of my Prayer, time being spilt
In vain, serves only to increase my guilt:
For when at Prayers I seem to wish them past,
As Jews the Passover did eat in have.
Bodily-motion is the cause of heat;
But in Devotion we should sigh, not sweat.
Advice to Prisoners.
A Prison is a Cage of certain Cares,
Whose Birds sing tunes of Discords and Despairs.
So sares it in this fickle World;
Man's like a Football tossed and hurled:
Even the Poor and honest Prisoners lie
Like silver Swans, to sing their last, and die.
But what is a Prison when the Soul is free?
A Jayl is but the World's Epitome:
There ye contemplate how to lie
I'th'Grave, before ye come to die;
Whilst others heaping up their stores of Pelf,
Have no more land, when dead, than you your self.
Consider, there are thousands are so low,
That they would be glad to be as ye are now.
Your want of Liberty's a Rod
To scourge you nearer to your God.
Thus Providence to Prisoners is most kind,
Their eyes to open, leaving others blind.
What Is your Confinement but a certain Rule
That leads to Happiness, Afflictions School?
To know no sorrow, is no more
Than to be equal with a Boar.
A Prison is an honorable Jayl,
When a clear Conscience is the Prisoners Bayl.
Let Reason be your Virtue and your Guide;
Impatience will but make your Wounds more wide,
If any be afflicted, pray:
It is to sorrows an allay.
Is any merry? let this be his Psalm;
Strike harder, Fate, for every Bruise is Balm.
Since by misfortunes it is so decreed,
That ye should all things (but a Prison) need,
Grieve not at sorrows come to day,
To morrow they may pass away.
To be dejected is but to deprive
Your selves of finding out a means to thrive.
If you're despised, pity those poor Elves
That laugh at you before they know themselves,
You have paid dear to know your Doom;
To morrow theirs perhaps may come.
He that can glory in his large Estate,
Is but a subject (as your self) to Fate.
Happy's that Prisoner that can live above
The reach of Malice, or intrigues of Love.
There Is no light object to pervert
The candor of an upright heart.
Those Iron-bars that do your bodies hold,
Are far less burthensom than Chains of Gold.
Where Care will help, there have a careful heart;
Where Care will not, never act a foolish part:
For all the help that Care can do,
Is but to make one Sorrow two.
Pine not with Care, but modestly be jolly:
To be more wretched than ye need, is folly.
On Vainglory.
IN his devotions unto God, the Lord,
He gives no Alms unless upon Record;
And if his good deed happens to appear,
It Is often sent to the Almighty's ear:
Pharisee-like, Behold, Lord, all my store,
Half of the whole I give unto the Poor.
Twice in the week I fast, and do bestow
My Alms on those whom I deserving know.
If an ill fortune does molest his mind,
He Is apt to think God shows himself unkind;
As if it were decreed he should inherit
Heaven, therefore upbraids God with his merit.
He can fulfill Commandments, to try
An earning God with superfluity.
In pious bounties lies upon the lurch,
And writes them in the windows of the Church.
Bare heads in concourse of a public street,
Tickles his fancy more than does his meat.
Stands at his door taking his Fork from sheath,
And though his stomach's empty, picks his teeth.
And when abroad, he is first that does begin
To call for Pheasants at a common Inn:
Cheapens rich Jewels, slighting those are worse,
Although he has no Earnest in his purse.
He Is ever on the stage to show his Art,
And when abroad, still acts a glorious part:
Thinks all men view the Virtues of his mind,
When he is indeed a Bladder full of wind;
Skin full of words, unnecessary tool,
The Fool's great Idol, and the Wise man's Fool.
He that is truly wise is silent found;
The emptiness of knowledge makes a sound.
On Peace.
I Sought for Peace, but could not find;
I sought it in the City,
But they were of another mind;
The more's the pity.
I sought for Peace of Country swain,
But yet I could not find,
So I returning home again,
Left Peace behind.
Sweet Peace, where do thou dwell? said I,
Methought a voice was given,
Peace dwelt not here, long since did fly
To God in Heaven.
Thought I, this Echo is but vain,
To folly it is of Kin:
Anon I heard it tell me plain,
'Twas killed by sin.
Then I believed the former voice,
And rested well content,
Lay down and slept, rose, did rejoice,
And then to Heaven went;
There I inquired for Peace, and found it true;
An Heavenly Plant it was, and sweetly grew.
Prayer for Peace.
BLessed Savior, God of Peace,
When storms arise, or shall increase,
Say thou the word, and they shall cease.
Allay their fury, quench their rage,
Whose factions would disturb the Age,
Their fiery zeal do thou assuage.
Be thou a Comforter to those
That never do the Truth oppose,
Them strengthen, and convert their (...)
On Mercy.
MErcy is comfort to the Poor;
It Is that the Rich desire:
Lord, we thy Mercies do implore;
It Is that the Saints require.
Mercy it was that gave us life,
To move, to think, or say;
Mercy is Physic for our grief,
And teaches us to pray.
O how can we for mercy call,
That have so wicked been!
Our Parents gave us such a fall,
It Is hard to rise again:
Yet it is for Mercy still we crave,
It Is that which must us raise;
Mercy first made, and now will save,
And teach us how to praise.
Our sins increase more than our days,
Yet Mercy lets us live;
It Is God that we for all must praise,
That does these mercies give:
And shall we still run on the score,
Not paying any part
Of what we ought to him before?
He asks but a heart.
My Soul, pay what thou can of all thy store;
He that pays nothing, ever owes the more.
The Swine.
LOrd, I am thine,
Although possessed;
O be thou mine,
And give some rest
To me a beast.
O Christ, be good
To sinful man,
And with thy blood,
Lord, wash me clean:
Be thou my food,
My staff, my stay;
My King, my God,
And thee always
I will obey.
Command my sins into the Sea,
That I may praise and honor thee.
The Penitent.
LOrd, I Am a sinner, and my sins increase
To such an unknown sum,
That should my rockie heart and eyes,
Nay, my whole Microcosm, a flood become,
And drown it self in Tears, 'twould not suffice
To name my score,
Not then to pay:
But, Lord, thy blood is my rich store,
Thou art the Patron of the Poor;
But all the Balsam of thy blood,
Alas, I know will do no good,
Unless I wash my griefs with Tears before.
O thou whose sweet and pensive face
To laughter never gave a place,
Instruct mine eyes,
Without delay,
To melt away,
And then the less of Balsam will suffice.
The Soul awaked.
LOrd, we again lift up our eyes,
And leave our sluggish beds;
But why we wake, or why we rise,
Comes seldom in our heads.
Is it to sweat, and toil for wealth,
Or sport our time away,
That thou preserv'st us still in health,
And giv'st us this new day?
No, no, unskilful Soul, not so,
Be not deceived with toys;
Thy Lord's Commands more wisely go,
And aim at higher joys:
They bid us wake to seek new Grace,
And some fresh virtue gain;
They call us up to mend our pace
Till we the prize attain.
That glorious Prize, for which all run
Who wisely spend their breath;
Who, when this weary life is done,
Are sure of Rest in Death.
Not such a rest as here we prove,
Disturbed with Cares and Fears;
But endless Joy, and Peace, and Love,
The Pleasures of the Spheres.
Glory to thee, O bounteous Lord,
Who giv'st to all things breath;
Glory to thee, Eternal Word,
Who sav'st us by thy death.
Glory, O blessed Spirit, to thee,
Who fill'st our Souls with Love;
Glory to all the mystic Three,
Who reign one God above.
St. Paul's Petition.
FRom Enemies, where're they be,
My God, do thou deliver me:
From them that do against me rise;
From private Foes inventing lies;
From bloody men, who loving strife,
Endeavor to ensnare my life.
The Mighty are against me bent,
Because I sinned, and do repent.
Arise, and visit with thy Rod
Those Enemies of thine, O God;
Their follies show, that they may be
At last, true followers of thee.
On the Conscience.
COrruption now adays does spring so fast,
So regarded,
And rewarded,
That if my tender Conscience would be sold,
Or if for it a Dispensation
Could be but got,
I doubt it not,
I Would store up wealth in this our Nation.
One spark of Flattery would so increase
My evil goods,
So that my woods
Would make a lasting fire, when I decease.
The World's fond love might easily be bought,
If I could tell
The way to sell
The little honesty that I have got.
Were but this World my home, perhaps I might
Be apt to trade,
But here things fade:
Give me the Riches wherein Saints delight.
Though now I live in a corrupted Cell
Which does annoy,
I would enjoy
The peace of Conscience there where Angels dwell.
Love upon Earth is good (...) that does last;
But the choice love
Of God above
Is everlasting, and does never wast.
Tush, wicked World, Heaven is my Merchandise;
If in my way
My sight should stray,
My home shall be the curtains of mine eyes.
A desperate fate it is the Worldlings run,
A Pearl to sell
To purchase Hell:
They must be great, or to be just undone.
St. Austin's Prayer.
Recommended to the devout Christian by P. Urban the 8th.

BEfore thy holy eyes, O Lord,
We sinners heartily accord,
Humbly to own our griefs of heart
Are nothing to our just desert.
The evils we have done, exceed
What we can write, or may be read.
Our Consciences our Souls affright,
And say, Thy Chastisements are light.
We feel the punishments of sin,
And yet we do persist therein.
Weak Nature faints at every scourge,
Yet perverse wills do daily urge.
Our restless minds do still provoke
Thy Justice, and despise thy Yoke.
We sigh away our days in grief,
Yet sorrow gives us small relief:
For when our sighs do once expire,
We wallow in our former mire.
If we repent, it is at a rate,
That we had need repent for that.
If thou revenge our stubbornness,
Thy Justice does our hearts depress.
Thy anger fills our Souls with fears;
We weep, but soon forget our Tears.
If thou stretch out thy hand, we then
Promise to turn to Saints, from men;
But if thy Sword suspension shows,
We then forget to pay our Vows.
If thou do strike, we pardon crave;
And when thou pardon letst us have,
We sin again, and never give over,
With provocations more and more.
Thus we our guilty selves accuse,
Thus we thy mercies do abuse;
Yet Mercy, Mercy, still we cry,
Or we are drenched in misery.
Then, Lord, O let thy goodness give
Those streams by which the Angels live;
Our Souls inspire, amend our days;
Touch thou our tongues, and we shall praise.
All glory be to God on high,
The Father of Eternity,
To Three in One, and One in Three.
The Believer.
HAppy is he that does
The truth
Believe; for he it is
Shall kiss
The Son of Righteousness, shall surely come
By his believing, to believers home.
Let thy belief be true;
But few
There are that do make that
Their State.
Abraham left a Pattern good behind him;
But few there are that seek him, less that find him.
I do believe a Tree
Will be
Pleasantly green, when I
With eye
In Winter judge how leaveless then it stood;
But I confirm it when I see the Bud.
In Thomas 'twas a fault
To hault
In waving Faith, until
His will
Was satisfied; but 'twould a madness been
So to continue, having felt and seen.
Belief, it may indeed
Exceed
The strength of Reason, yet
Does let
No opposition in: Faith likewise will suspense,
'Twill get above, but not against the Sense.
Whilst Faith assures I eat
My sweet
Redeemer, with direct
Effect,
Sense cannot so in ignorance allure me,
As that I cat not bread, but will assure me.
Although I see not all that I believe,
Yet those things that I see I must believe.
Christians must guard their mouths, and watch their actions;
Be pure in heart, and keep their faiths from factions.
On Christ's Nativity expected.
WHen, blessed Lord, shall we
Our safe Salvation see?
Dear Lord, arise,
For our saint eyes
Have longed all night, and 'twas a long night too:
Poor man could never say,
He saw more than a day,
One day of Edeu's seven;
The guilty hours were blasted with the breath
Of sin and death,
And have e're since worn a Nocturnal hue.
But in thy birth is hopes, that we
At length a splendid day shall see.
Wherein each poor neglected place,
Graced with the Aspect of thy face,
Shall glister like the porch and gate of Heaven.
How long, blessed Lord, how long?
The Nations thirst, and throng:
All humane kind
Are now combinde
Into one body, wanting thee, their Head.
Large is our multitude,
And almost vile and rude,
Headless, Great God, for lack of thee,
Unhappy for the want of thy blessed face;
Then come apace,
And thy bright self to our dull body wed,
That thorough thy Almighty power,
Each part that has confusion wore,
May order take, so to appear
Fresh as the dawning of the year,
When thou, dear Lord, shall so united be.
The Call.
COme away, my Lord, my Life,
Thy presence does preserve from strife.
Come away, my Lord, my Way,
Thy presence (...) to obey.
Come away, my Lord, my Truth,
Thy presence turns Age to Youth.
Come away, my Lord, my Light,
Thou do both Sin and Satan fright.
Come away, my Lord, my Feast,
That my poor Soul may be thy Guest.
Come away, my Lord, my Strength,
By thee my days have health and length.
Come away, my holy Joy,
Guard my Rejoycings from annoy.
Come away, my dearest Love,
Lord, let my Call thy presence move.
Come away, Divinest Lamb,
My sins deface, that seek to damn.
Come, my Shepherd, come away,
Thy Flock in danger are to stray.
Come, my Safeguard, and my Shield,
In Fights assist me, lest I yield.
Come away,
Lord, hear my Call;
Make no stay,
Thou All in All.
The Ecstasy.
SUch a Lord and such a Life,
Whose presence bring h Pleasures rise.
Such a way as leads to Bliss,
Who walks therein cannot walk amiss.
Such a Truth whose Ray defies
The Father and the Prince of Lies.
Such a Light as leads us to
Eternal Comforts not a few.
Such a Feast as does rejoice,
Compounded of the best and choice.
Such a Strength as does desend
Not for a day, but to the end.
Such a Joy that gives store
Of Pleasures, lasting evermore.
Such a Love as heard my cry,
Though sin made me his enemy:
Such a Lamb whose sweet abode
Makes every Saint a Lamb of God.
Such a Shepherd of his Sheep,
There Is none can stray whom he does keep.
Shuch a (...) and such a Sun,
Desends (...) shines till all is won.
Open, my heart, and such a God receive;
He Is All in All to them that do believe.
Delights of the Mind.
JEsus, the only thought of thee
Fills with delight my memory;
But when thou do thy presence show,
Heaven seems into my breast to flow.
No Theme so sweet for voice can be,
Nor to the ear such harmony. --
No heart can thoughts for charming frame
As Jesus his most precious Name!
Jesus, when for our sins we grieve,
Thy mercies all our wants relieve.
If good to those that seek thy Grace,
What art thou when they see thy face?
Jesus, in whom we comsort find,
Fountain of Life, Light of the Mind:
Thou do our hearts with comforts feed;
Our utmost wish thy gifts exceed.
No Eloquence of Tongue can teach,
Nor art of Pen this secret reach;
Only th'experienc'd Soul does prove
What sweets they taste who Jesus love.
Him then I Will seek, retired apart,
Shutting the world out of my heart;
And midst my business him I Will strive,
With fresh pursuit still to retrive.
Early with Magdalen, I Will come
A Pilgrim to my Savior's Tomb;
Weeping my sins in mournful cries,
I Will seek him with my mind, not eyes.
My Tears shall on his Grave distill,
And faithful Sighs the Garden fill:
Prostrate before him on my face,
His sacred feet I Will fast embrace.
Jesus, in thy blessed steps I Will tread,
Striving to follow where they lead:
Nor shall my Soul give over to mourn,
Till to thy favor I return.
O Jesus, most admired King,
Who did triumph o'r deaths sharp sting,
Thy mystic sweetness first excites,
Then satisfies all appetites.
Thy quickening visits Life bestow,
Thy lights true good so clearly show,
That they who once have relished thee,
Know all the World's mere Vanity.
Come then, dear Lord, possess our hearts,
Inflame our loves with thy chaste darts;
All Clouds of error drive away,
And change our N ght to thy bright day.
To thee our hearts and voices sing,
To thee our vows and prayers we bring;
That when we end this life's short racc,
In Heaven with thee we may have place.
On Death.
O Death, the Serpents Son,
Where is thy sting? once like thy Sire,
With Hellish torments, ever burning fire;
But those dark days are gone.
Thy peevish spite buried thy sting
In the sacred and wide
Wound of a Savior's side.
Now you are become a tame and harmless thing,
A toy we scorn to fear:
For we hear
That our triumphant God to conquer thee
For the assault thou gav'st him on the Tree,
Has took the keys of Hell out of thy hand,
And forced thee stand
As Porter to that gate of Life.
O thou who art the gate, be pleased that he,
When we shall die
And that way fly,
May open the Courts of Heaven to us through thee,
On Judgment.
JUdge of the World, we wretched sinners quake,
Our Consciences do ache;
And well they may, whenas we think
Of the fierce dreadful fire
Of thine Ire,
And Phials thou fhalt make
Us sinners drink:
For thou the Wine Press of thy wrath wilt tread
With feet of lead.
Wretched notorious duft! what uncouth place
Can shelter from thy face?
The Earth will shrink out of thy sight;
The Heavens too, that cannot err,
Then shall fear
Thee and thy Laws, and from thee take their flight:
So burnt with glory, their bright eyes shall, dead,
Burst from their head.
Great God, can we,
Thy Enemies, abide to see
Such a glorious Majesty?
We beg thy mercy, Lord: Thy Judgment Seat
We dare not to entreat,
For we are all condemned there.
Lord, then O cast a look
On thy Book
Of Life; behold, we read
A Saving Jesus here,
And in that Name our sure Salvation see:
Lord, make us free,
And cross within
Our scores of sin;
That canceled, all our debts are paid by thee.
On Heaven.
BRight glorious Lord, uncircumscribed Treasure
Of everlasting Pleasure,
Thy Throne is placed far
Above the richest Star;
Where thou prepar'st a splendid place
Within the glory of thy face,
That each Spirit
May inherit,
Who builds his hopes (...) thy merit,
And thee adores with holy charity.
No ravished heart, seraphick tongue, or eyes
Inspired, can once surmise,
Or speak, or think, or see,
So bright Eternity.
The glorious King's transparent Throne
Is of precious Jasper-stone,
Where the eye
Of The Chrysolite
With a Sky
Of Di'monds, Rubies, Chrysoprase;
But above all, thy brighter face
Speaks an eternal Charity.
When thou thy Jewels bindest up, that day
Forget not us, we pray;
But there where the Beryl lies,
Crystal too, above the Skies,
That there thou may afford us place
Within the glories of thy face,
And enroul
Each ones Soul
In the Scroul
Of Life and Blessedness, that we
May praise thy Name unto Eternity.
On Hell.
DIsmal darkness, sad, and sore,
An everlasting Night;
Groans and Shricks, when sinners roar
In their abyssful plight.
No corner there but has a Snake
Breeding in the infernal Lake:
Heaps of Fire, and Beds of Snow,
Are the chief delights below.
A Viper springing from the fire
Is his hire
That prizeth moments to Eternity.
O thou God of Day and Night,
Fountain of eternal light,
Allelujahs, Hymns, and Psalms,
Holy Coronets of Palms,
Adorn the Temple evermore.
Almighty God,
Let not thy Iron Rod
Bruise our bones with an eternal pressure;
Let thy mercy be the only measure.
If thou should hoard up wrath in store,
We shall all die,
Not one be left to glorify
The Lord, and tell
How thou preserved have our Souls from Hell.
The Salutation of Saints.
JEsus, who man's Redeemer art,
The solace of each godly heart;
The ransomed World's great Architect,
Chaste light of Souls which thee affect.
What mercy conquered thee, my God,
That thou would bear our sinful load?
And innocent would death endure,
That us from death thou might secure.
Still let commiseration press
To give our damages redress;
And by fruition of thy sight,
Enrich us with a blessed light.
Thou guide to Heaven, and path to Rest,
Be thou the scope of every breast;
Be thou the comfort of our tears,
Our sweet reward above the Spheres.
On Pride.
THe proud man looks that every one should show
A Reverence to him, though none they owe.
I Will value such, as we do coin, set forth
Just what they go for, rather than their, worth.
Pride unto Reason seems ever strange;
Is Reason absent? there it is Pride does range.
And then for Reason, there is none beside
That is so highly opposite to Pride:
For Reason makes Art Dame Nature's ape,
And Pride turns Nature out of Nature's shape.
Jeremiah's Lamentation For Jerusalem's Desolation.
COnsider, Lord, the wretched, poor, and vile;
A glorious City! no, she has lost that style;
She and her joys are under an Exile.
Behold, and see;
Thou, Lord, as in a Wine Press, have her trod,
And crushed her Virgins with an Iron Rod:
Sin was the cause; but, Lord, thou art her God.
May it please thee,
To wipe away her Tears that do pour down,
Cause thou that art the Comforter, do frown;
O let repentant Tears offenses drown,
And send relief.
O all ye passing by, behold her sorrow;
Jerusalem, Jerusalem would borrow
Tears of ye all; but none will say, Good morrow;
The more's her grief.
Her Sucklings sigh, and cry for Corn and Wine,
Whilst she her self for want thereof does pine.
Jerusalem, was ever grief like thine?
Behold, and weep;
She that was called the Joy of all the Earth,
Is Desolation now, and nothing worth:
Her sorrows to her Enemies are mirth.
Her Lovers sleep.
The apples of her eyes do find no rest,
Their streams overflow the floodgates; she is distressed,
And sorrow does become a constant guest:
Does never fail.
Her old and young ones, both lie on the ground;
Her Priests, and Prophets, thou do deeply wound;
Terrors on every side beset her round
On hill and dale.
Wormwood besots, she seems as she were drunk;
This angry tempest has her treasure shrunk;
She that was full of people, now is sunk,
And desolate.
Her Soul's removed from any glimpse of Peace;
Prosperity is fled; there does increase
But sad effects of groans, which never cease;
Such is her fate.
They that on Delicates were wont to feed,
In Dust and Ashes now lament their need:
Jerusalem is bowed, and broke indeed;
But God is just.
The Enemies they did her Maidens find,
And ravished; her Young men forced to grind:
Confider, Lord, how she with grief has pinde
Upon the dust.
Remember, Lord, her Wormwood and her Gall;
Oh hear her sad complaints, and ease her thrall:
Lord, hear my Prayers and Tears, for her I call,
In mercy see.
Oh, lay that darksome Cloud from off thy face;
One smile will say, thou think upon her case:
Oh hear, and help her, Lord, of thy good grace,
Thou glorious Three.
Judge and revenge her cause, O Lord, my God;
Behold her scorners, how they mock and nod;
In mercy toward her withdraw thy Rod.
Lord, let her cry
Unto thee fly,
And let her not
Be quite forgot,
As if, O Lord, she never were,
That she may sing
Of thee her King,
That unto thee none may compare.
On Sin.
SIn is such an uncouth thing,
I cannot well define it;
Death does own it is his sting,
God bids me undermine it.
But it so cunning is, that when
I think to win the day,
It now comes over, under then,
And blows my baits away.
It seized my Parents, and beguiled
More learned men than I;
And when I think it is most mild,
I have most cause to fly.
At Church when I Devotion have,
It hovers over my book,
And bids me think upon my Grave,
And off the other look.
Invisible it is, no doubt,
And felt before it is seen;
It subtly can wheel about,
And like an Angel seem.
Good deeds I know accepted are,
And will be evermore;
But if I do not well, I sear
Sin lies at the door:
Sin, as a Serpent, cunningly
Does lurk upon the scout,
That if my foot but tread awry,
My sins they find me out.
If I with Brother break my word,
The fact may not be great;
But if I sin against the Lord,
Who shall for me entreat?
Many the faults are of my Youth,
I have been often misled;
But they are blessed, faith the truth,
Whose sin is covered.
Wherefore, O Lord, I will confess
What in those days I did;
O grant thy merciful redress,
And let my sins be hid.
But I with heart and knee will bow,
In duty to adore thee;
Then recollect, and study how
To set my sins before me.
Shaped in Iniquity I was,
A wretch of little worth:
In sin my Mothers womb, alas,
Conceived, and brought me forth.
Lord, with thy grace enrich my heart,
Take out the filth therein;
Let fools pursue their idle Art,
To make a mock at sin.
Woe unto them their sins do draw
With ropes, them fast to tie;
That bind Iniquity their Law
With cords of Vanity.
If sinners could but count their score,
They Would fear a future doom:
Let him that sins, sin no more,
Lest worser things shall come.
Whosoever does his transgression love,
Careless, or lose, or win,
He strangely does himself approve
To be a slave to sin.
Lord, fix my heart still toward thee,
Especially at Prayer,
Lest my Petition on my knee,
Become to me a snare.
Surely the quintessence of sin,
Satan that Judas is;
He turns a murderer, when in
Leads the poor Soul amiss,
And kills it with a kiss.
The Check.
PEace, rebel Sin, and dare not to rebel,
For thou art dead
Without the Law; and thou that came from Hell
Art Captive led.
How durst thou say to him that dwells on high,
The Holy One,
Look on the World where all my wealth does lie?
It Is all as none.
Or yet, how durst thou say unto the Christ,
If there be none
Like thee, or if by thee men do subsist,
Make bread of stone?
I read, the sting of Death is sin; but yet
Sin, that came first;
Poor Infant-man no sooner on his feet,
But fell, and burst.
It Is said, that sin the Child is of the Devil;
But sin, thou art
His elder, and the very self-same evil
Caused him to start.
Then prithee say,
What is thy name? for Death and Devil, they,
Right understood,
Are both too good.
To the God of Heaven.
BRight builder of the heavenly Poles,
Eternal light of faithful Souls!
Jesus, Redeemer of Mankind,
Our humble Prayers vouchsafe to mind;
Who, lest the fraud of Hell's black King
Should all men to destruction bring,
Did by a strong impulse of Love,
The fainting World's Physician prove.
Who from a sacred Virgins womb,
Did an unspotted Victim come
Unto the Cross, to cleanse the sin
The wretched World was plunged in:
The sound of whose high Power and Name,
No sooner any voice can frame,
But all in Heaven, and those that be
In Hell, how down their trembling knee.
Thee, Christ, who at the later day
Shall be our Judge, we humbly pray,
Such Arms of heavenly Grace to send,
As from our foes may us defend.
Be glory given, and honor done
To God the Father, and the Son;
And to the Holy Ghost on high,
From Age to Age eternally.
The Flower.
O That I were a lovely Flower
In Christ his Bower;
Or that I were a Weed, to fade
Under his shade.
But how can I a Weed become,
If I am shadowed with the Son?
On Darkness.
HOw, Sinner! Darkness better far than Light
To be preferred? It is because the Night
Draws a thick Curtain over your black deeds;
But God's All seeing eye no Curtain heeds.
If he should show severity to men,
And you in Hell, you would hate your Darkness then.
On Love and Hatred.
I Love too much, to hate what I should love;
I love too much, to love what I should hate.
My Love and Hatred in wrong Centres move,
Such hateful love, God does abominate.
I love not Goodness, neither hate I Evil:
My Hate to Virtue's hot, to Vice is cold.
I love too little God, too much the Devil;
My Love and Hate, wrong Objects do behold.
Lord, change my Love to Hate, my Hate to Love,
That so thy Just ce may of both approve.
On Justice and Mercy.
JUstice does call for Vengeance on my sins,
And threatens Death as guerdon for the same;
Mercy to plead for pardon then begins,
With saying, Christ has undergone the shame.
Justice shows me an angry God offended,
And Mercy shows a Savior crucified:
Justice says, I that sinned must be condemned:
Mercy replies, Christ for my sins has di'd.
Grim Justice threats with a revengeful Rod;
Meek Mercy shows me an appeased God.
Lord, though my sins make me for Justice fit,
Through Christ let mercy triumph over it.
On Food.
A Man with all things needful may be sed;
God for both Soul and Body Food has sent.
That for the Body is material bread,
And for the Soul his Word's the nutriment.
If Bread I want, my Body then must perish;
Without the Word, my Soul will fail to thrive:
He that sends both, sends both of them to cherish,
To keep both Body and the Soul alive.
Famine of Bread is a destructive Curse;
But Famine of the Word is much more worse.
Lord, to my Soul thy Heavenly Food apply;
Give that a life, although my body die.
Christ, All in All.
CHrist is the Rock on which my Faith must build;
Christ is the Staff on which I safe may lean;
Christ is for my defense the safest Shield;
Christ is the Fountain that must wash me clean.
Who builds not on that Rock, does build on Sand;
Who leans from him, trusts to a broken Reed;
He falls that fights not under his Command;
His Blood alone does make me clean indeed.
Christ cleanses, saves, supports my feet from fall:
He is my only Rock, my All in All.
Lord, to my Soul such Heavenly Grace impart,
Thou may be Lord and Tenant of my heart.
I would, but cannot.
I Would be rich, but Riches fly away;
I would be great, but it is with Envy blended;
I would be fair, but Beauty does decay;
I would be brave, but it is with Pride attended.
I would be worldly-wise, but that is Folly;
I would be strong, but it is a Beast-like guise;
I would be thought religious, that is unholy;
I would be learned, but it makes not wise.
These vain Endowments soon draw to an end;
To each there is a But that does attend.
Thus Fate, who stops the race of worldly glory,
Shows such Endowments are but transitory.
The Voyage.
THe World's a spacious Sea that is large and wide,
And man a little Barque that sails therein;
His thoughts do drive him like the Wind and Tide;
The shelf that threatens shipwreck is his Sin.
His Heart's the Pylot that this Ship does guide;
Faith is the Freight with which he freely trades;
His Anchor, Hope: Thus does he safely ride;
Heaven is the Haven where the Barque unlades.
Needs must the Merchant in his Voyage thrive,
That safely does at such a Port arrive.
Lord, be thou Pylot to this Ship of mine,
That both the Ship and Lading may be thine.
The Careless Christian.
I Do desire my Prayers may be heard,
Yet I my self regard not how I pray;
I fear God's wrath, yet have I no regard
To what I do, or what I think, or say.
I know his Promises are just and true,
Yet do I live as I believed them not:
I hear he Judgments has for each ones due,
Yet careless I not terrified a jot.
Searching my heart to find the cause of this,
I find that in my heart no grace there is.
Lord, since thy Grace will rectify my course,
Grant me that Grace which breeds true remorse.
On Life and Death.
THe life I live on Earth uncertain is,
Being attended with a certain death,
Which will produce eternal Bane, or Bliss,
Waiting the expiration of my breath.
It does behove me then to have a care
How I my short and precious time do spend,
Left I, through sin, be trapt in Satan's snare;
Griefs then beginning when my life does end.
Lord, grant as Life and Death do here begin,
My Life may be to grace, my Death to sin:
The (...)
AWay, fond Youth,
Virtue is hid in Truth;
Your Vanities can no contentment bring.
Alas, give over,
Thy pleasure's but a sore,
Honey at first, but in the end a Sting.
Seek not in vain,
So to augment thy pain;
Such is thy grief, that nothing surer is.
Fond Youth, give ore,
Woo not a festring sore;
When thou have found, thou wilt wish that thou did miss.
Love not this world, but mind the things above;
In seeking so, thou shall find love for love.
The Steward.
IT is not much I have, yet I have more
Than some that live more splendidly than I.
Although I am not rich, I am not poor,
But have enough to vanquish penury.
All that I have is lent me, and I must
Give an account to God how I do use it;
Or if I hide it up, and let it rust,
Or by miss spending wastfully abuse it,
It had been better I had poorer been,
Than ti'd a slave (in chains of gold) to sin.
Lord, grant my Talent so on me bestown,
May be employed as thine, and not mine own.
The Celestial Painter.
O Thou most holy God of Bliss,
Who paintst the Heaven's center clear,
In burning brightness fair address,
With goodly lights, as does appear.
Who on the fourth day did ordain
The fiery circle of the Sun,
And for the Moon an order set,
And Stars their wandering course to run:
That thou might give the Nights and days.
Divided bounds to keep them in,
As an allured mark to know
How duly all the Months begin.
Illuminate the heart of man;
Wipe out the soulness of the mind;
Cast down the heaps of our misdeeds;
The bands of guilt do thou unbinde.
Grant this, O holy Father most,
And eke the Son equal to thee,
Together with the Holy Ghost,
That reigns in all Eternity.
The Holy Innocents.
HAil, you sweet and building flowers,
Whom (when you life began to taste)
The enemy of Christ devours,
As whirlwinds down young Roses cast.
First Sacrifice to Christ you went,
Of offered Lambs a tender sort,
With Palms and Crowns, you, innocent,
Before the sacred Altar port.
Glory, O Lord, be given to thee,
Whom the unspotted Virgin bore;
All glory to the Trinity,
From all, both now and evermore.
To the Divine Creator.
O God, which did man create,
And have alone all things assigned,
The Earth to bring forth savage Beasts,
And creeping things each in their kind.
Great bodied Creatures are ordained
By thy great Word and Will, to live,
In times and seasons man to serve,
To whom they all subjection give.
Put from thy servants far away
What to uncleanness may allude,
It self in manners to suggest,
Or in our actions to intrude.
Give us the recompense of jovs,
And yield to us thy graces free;
In sunder break the bands of strife,
Confirm the bands of Unity.
The New Birth.
A Multitude of Creatures do agree
To give their Documents to wretched man,
As Emblems and Examples, whereby he
May learn to write himself a Christian.
The Eagle casts her bill, the Ass his hair,
The Peacoak (...) is plumes, the Snake his skin;
And shall not Man, a Creature far more fair,
Renew himself by shaking off his fin?
Old fins retained do fester as they lie;
To the new man belongs felicity.
He that would clear himself from worldly stain,
To sin must die, to life be born again.
Die to the flesh, and if you would inherit
Eternal life, be born then of the Spirit.
This is the Birth a Christian should prefer;
For being born of God, he cannot err.
Lord, let thy Grace my idle thoughts subdue,
That I may change the Old man for the New.
Degrees of Love.
IF I a Creature love, it may not know
The Channel whence my flood of Love does flow:
But God knows all men's hearts, and will approve
Of love to him; for God himself is Love.
If I a Creature love, it no regard
May have to make amends; God does reward.
But when my kind affections do intrude,
The Creature answers with ingratitude.
If I a Creature love, that Creature may
Be captious, peevish, making me its prey.
The love of God exceeds the love of men;
For loving him, I Have love for love again.
A humor too, may make a Creature fly me;
But loving God, I have him always by me.
If I a Creature love, that very thing
On which I dote, may prove to me a sting
But to love God, brings comfort, joy, and ease;
For he is the everlasting Prince of Peace.
If I a Creature love, my care must be
For that; but God will Angels charge with me.
If I a Creature love, my hearts desire
Is all inflamed but with Terrestrial fire;
But loving God, my Soul and Senses feel
The holy flames of a Celestial Zeal.
If I a Creature love, for face, parts, limb,
That moves; God dwells in me, and I in him.
If I a Creature love, it does not know
All my affairs; God knows whatever I do.
If I a Creature love, it does deceive me;
If I love God, he is ready to relieve me.
If I a Creature love, much pain and grief
Attend; but loving God, I find relief.
If I a Creature love, we both must die;
But God gives life to all eternity.
If I a Creature love, I often behold
Those slights and faults, which make my love grow co'd;
But if on God I firmly fix my love,
The love of God does make my love improve.
He is so good, so noble, rich, sweet, fair,
Mighty and wise, so exquisitly rare,
I Will court his love (as he has taught) with Prayer.
Bad at Best.
MY Practice gives the lie to my Profession;
I give too large a rein unto my Will;
I do not grieve enough for my Transgression,
But do delight in contemplating ill.
I wish for Heaven, but tread the path of Hell;
I love the day, but more the deeds of the night:
Little I have, yet that I use not well;
I covet much, but covet not aright.
Good deeds ill done, run clearly against the byas;
Wishes and words are winds, our deeds must try us.
My ways are evil, sin does too much attend them;
Open mine eyes, O Lord, and I shall mend them.
Time's Travel.
THe uberous womb of Time, since its creation,
Innumerable issues has brought forth,
Of strange, and of prodigious generation;
And glorious things of beauty and of worth:
It Is never barren, but is ever breeding
Unwonted forms, and various shapes of things.
It was, it is, and will through time succeeding,
Continue laboring. The fruit she brings,
Savours of goodness, but much more of evil;
Extols che Maker, but adores the Devil.
Lord, since there is a time to laugh, to weep,
It Is high time I awake out of the sleep
Of sin and death, O then propitious be,
And in due time let true Repentance free
My Soul, and I Will be convert unto thee.
The Widows Mite.
ROom for a wealthy Benefactor; he,
Behold, draws near unto the Treasury:
Others approach with their abundant store,
But here is a Widow, who, although she is poor,
Has outdone all, her bounty to display;
For here is was given, and theirs but cast away.
And she was noted for a true believer;
For God delights in a cheerful giver.
Gabriel and Zacharias.
Gab. Blessed Zacharias, cease to be afeard,
A John shall call thee Father, thou art heard.
He shall be richly stored with Grace and Mirth;
The God of gods shall celebrate his Birth.

Zac. O Lord, whereby can I know this? my life
Is well-nigh spent; likew se my ancient Wife,
Her years are so in number, I am bold
To say, for bearing Children she is too old.

Gab. Is any thing impossible to God,
Whose Power can do it with a word, or nod?
I that am Gabriel, am sent down from high
To do this message from the Deity:
And seeing thou believ'st not what I say,
Behold, thou shall be dumb until that day.
Then will I loosen that which now I strung;
Thou shall have John, and with that John a tongue.

On Alexander the Great.
THou Earth's great Monarch; to thy Valor's praise,
Be it recorded, thou did spend thy days
In Mars his School; but one thing did remain,
Thou should have made thy Piety thy gain,
Not Ostentation. Flesh was made thy slave,
But wherein did thou Satan's works deprave?
Those being vanquished, thou might take thy rest,
And weep for joy, as being stout and blessed.
Alas, his Conquests are as good as none,
That fights for Worlds, and never finds but one.
Jesus Wept.
HEnce may we see Tears are the only things,
When watring well, revives our fading Springs.
Martha and Mary sprinkling pious Tears
Over their Brother, four days freed from fears.
With the sole help of Jesus, when they wept,
His Tears and theirs revived a Saint that slept:
The very words, Come forth, bore such a sound,
Laz'rus straight came, but left death in the ground.
Such love our Savior showed his friend, his eye,
That knew no sin, could weep, when he should die.
The Ancients have this observation kept,
Jesus was never seen to laugh, but wept.
Martha and Mary.
AS Contemplation is the bane of ill,
By that our good is so continued still.
Happy that house which never does m scar y,
Yielding a Martha to complain of Mary.
On Worldly Gain.
THis World yields nothing more than Ca^es and Crosses,
Yet my forced heart dotes on it ne'retheless;
If I cast up my gains, they are but losses:
For more and more I languish in excess.
It shows varieties of sweet content,
Alluring me with fair and golden baits;
But in the taste I find them different,
No real pleasures, but mere counterfeits.
Delusions are the knacks that do excel
For cheats; they show as Heaven, lead to Hell.
Lord, plant thy heavenly wisdom in my heart,
That world and worldly things I may desert.
On St. Peter's Perjury.
SHeathe up that sharp keen Sword, which did befriend thee
In smiting him who gave his car to end thee;
But yet consider, he that does salsely swear,
Is by the Law condemned to loose an Ear.
I tell thee, Peter, e're the Cock crow twice,
Thou art my friend that shall deny me thrice.
But, Peter, thou art favored, take it from me,
Instead of paying one Ear, thou have three.
On Pusillanimity.
REligion made the Martyrs dare, and die;
Honor abhors to dread an Enemy.
Our Actions try our Courage; and our hearts
As Icie weather with its chilly smarts,
Do try our health: and this we yearly find,
Withered leaves fall with the breath of wind.
As rotten Bows no longers hold debate
With strength, but break when they are oppressed with weight,
So Earthen Vessels may be said t'expire,
Exposed when empty to the heat of fire.
This trivial passion of Faintheartedness,
Dispirits man, and makes a dull impress
Upon his body, as if there were writ,
Hire stands a house, but no one dwells in it.
Cowardice does express a man to be
An easy prey unto his Enemy:
Whose cruel mercy suddenly is spent,
Whilst for the Victim no man does lament.
He grew in misery, became forlorn,
Was both to friend and to his foe a scorn.
The righteous man is bold, bids fear adieu;
The wicked flee, when no man does pursue.
On the Spring.
SInce Winters cold blasts are expelled by the Sun,
And Fields that did penance in snow,
Have put Madam Nature's gay Liveries on,
Embroidered with flowers to make a fine show;
The Hills and the Valleys in duty abound,
And men praise the Lord; so the duty goes round.
Hark, hark, how the Birds in sweet consort conspire,
The Lark and the Nightingale join;
In every note is an amorous Quire,
With an innocent mirth to entertain time.
The Hills and the Valleys in duty abound,
And Men praise the Lord; so the duty goes round.
Methinks the God Pan, whose glad subjects we are,
Does sit on his flowery Throne;
We accept his kind Offerings every year,
With Garlands of Roses, and Flowers new grown.
The Hills and the Valleys in duty abound,
And Men praise the Lord; so the duty goes round.
On Science.
MAny for Science seek with care and Art,
When Conscience is the Science of the heart;
Yet that most sacred Knowledge is become
In men's esteem, of Knowledge but the scum.
When as the Heart with Conscience does converse,
Infinite mysteries they then rehearse.
A Conscienoe good and pure, relies upon
The sacred Title of Religion:
That is a Knowledge puffs not up to boast,
But is the Temple of the Holy Ghost:
Built so for Beauty, equalled by none,
Rich as the Temple of a Solomon, The fruitful field of Bonediction.
The joy of Angels, and the Sinners sting,
The Subjects ark, the treasure of the King.
An Habitation for the Saints abode,
The Book of Life, the Princely Court of God:
The Book that is sealed to keep Deeds from decay,
And to be opened at the Judgement-day.
A rich Persume, and a most happy Guest,
A pleasant Friend, and a continual Feast.
A Castle, Tower, a Rock to build upon,
A certain Fabric of Salvation.
The poor man's Comfort, his most trusty Staff;
The rich man's Elegy and Epitaph
Would thou be farther in this Science read?
Then Purge thy conscience from all works are dead.
On Drunkenness.
THis is a Vice that fights without defense;
He that does find this sin, does loose his sense.
I formerly have read of one who stood
Amazed, as lost within a spacious Wood,
When in one Vice he was to build his Nest,
Which of these three he judged to be the best;
To kill his Father, Mother to beguile
With just, or rather to be drunk a while.
He thinking Drunkenness the least of these,
Chose that, thereby God's Justice to appease.
Then drunk he gets, making no more to do;
And when got drunk, acted the other two.
The juicy Vine does to us every year,
Three forts of Grapes at once most duly bear.
The first for Pleasure, Drunkenness the next.
The third for Misery. When man's perplexed
With too much drink, he is as one deceast,
A shape of man, more properly a beast.
If all our Trees were Pens, and Seas were Ink,
They could not write the mischiefs done by Drink.
Awake, ye Drunkards, weep, and howl;
Poison encompasseth your Bowl.
On Blasphemy.
IT sets in mouth against each holy place,
And shoots out words like darts, against the face
Of God; despising his great Majesty,
Imposing things upon the Deity.
Thus written it is by the Historian,
Speaking of the Apostate Julian,
When he engaged against the Parthian Bands,
And then received a wound, with outstretch'd hands
He took his blood (to show he did persist)
And in derifion threw it toward Christ,
Thus saying, to augment his si^ful sum,
O Galilean, thou have (...).
So by an outward gesture we may find
The secret indignation of the mind:
And he that does blaspheme his God, does broach
Designs to cast upon him all reproach
His little Wit or Folly can invent,
Vainly to show the reach of his intent.
But Julian being wounded with a Dart
(Unknown from whence) that reached his wretched heart,
In scorn to Christ, he Galilean (...),
Perished in fin, so this Blasphemer di'd.
Caius Caligula, with judgment dim,
His Statue fixed, that men might worship him.
The holy Temple, with profane abuse,
He dedicated to his proper use,
Making himself a God; but it appeared
At length, that Vengeance this Blasphemes heard.
It is a sin that studies how to fight
Against the dictates of Dame Nature's light;
Which Princess often have punished with death:
The very Turks will not endure that breath
That wounds the Ears of Heaven, but punish those
That to blaspheming Christ their lips dispose.
If Turks to this great fin give a restraint,
How piercing must it be unto a Saint?
The Sick man's Ease.
THe Sick man is a Prisoner to his bed,
When healthy men have room their wings to spread.
Wealth without Health a gilded torment is;
Croesus vast Riches lead not unto Bliss:
Nor can the Wealth of all the Indian shore
Assure the sick from Agues to restore.
Health is a Jewel of such high degree,
Not to be prized until it wanted be.
The sick can nothing do, he is indisposed;
He cannot pray, his eyes are almost closed.
He restless turns, then on his back does lie,
Whilst pain deprives him of his Piety.
But when a good man sickens, God has sed,
He in his sickness will make All his Bed,
His Pillow, Bolster, Sides, the Feet, and Head.
God takes thorough care for his Elect,
In All his Bed he will be circumspect.
And sure that God that suffers a Disease
To reign, is best Physician, giving ease.
Herein his Art is excellently spread;
Not fitting Bed, but Person to the Bed.
His Potion Patience is, and that works so,
What God inflicts the Just does undergo.
But how shall God make my bed? I have none,
Says the poor man, and says it with a groan.
To him God answers, Son, be thou content,
For that is a bed adorned with Ornament.
Jacob slept on the ground; who would not deem
Himself most happy, having Jacob's dream?
Fox in his book of Martyrs, speaks of one,
A woman poor in Jersey, yet though grown
Mean to the World (when Mary, Englands Queen,
Drew on our English Stage a bloody Scene)
God made her bed in that same fiery flake;
And when she came as Martyr to the stake,
A Child came from her, to her hearts desire:
So God brought her to bed by flames of fire.
He likewise threatened Jezabel, that she
Should have a bed of fire. His Justice he
Therein displays: May not his Mercy then
Turn flames of fire to beds for righteous men?
Nothing's impossible if God accord;
Fire shall prove Beds of Ease, say he the Word.
On Singing of Psalms.
BIrds sweetly chirp and sing, but Nature gave
Me a harsh voice, more fit (than sing) to rave.
Should I use Art for a melodious strain,
'Twould be to spend my precious time in vain.
When I sing Psalms and Hymns to God on high,
With devout praises to the Deity,
How can I think my voice shall please his ear,
When to my self it meanly does appear?
Yet though I cannot chaunt a warbling tale
With the sweet music of the Nightingale,
Or with the Blackbird chirp, I Swallow-like
Will chatter, or will with the Raven strike
Or croak my measures, better so to do,
Than to be silent; for there may accrue
A Blessing by my will. If I want Art,
God thus commands, My son, give me thy heart.
Had God bestowed on me a better voice,
With better music I would then rejoice:
But since it is so the Spirits influence
Shall salve my want of skill with store of sense.
To that end, blessed Lord, in me create
A heart unfeigned, new; and in that state,
With heart and understanding, I Will rejoice,
And rest contented with my present voice.
Yet one thing more of God I do desire;
Make me a Quirester in Heaven's Quire.
On little Sins.
SIn at the first seems small; when I begin,
I thus conclude, It Is but a little sin,
I may wade through it dry shod: So on tilt
I run, as if secured from sin by guilt;
But when into my sin I slily creep,
It suddenly appears so soul, so deep,
So dangerous a gulf does widely gape,
That without drowning I can hardly escape.
Thus in extremities I always bleed;
My sins are small, they no repentance need;
Or else so great and heinous is my stain,
That I despair, I cannot a pardon gain.
A Reed out of thy Sanctuary, Lord,
Would truly measure every deed and word.
But O if thou my misery reveal,
Do not thy mercy from my Soul conceal,
Lest if I apprehend my wounds gape wide,
My desperate Soul run out, and thereby glide
Into a world of to ments, if my grief
Seem to be greater than is thy relief.
If sin seems greater by one breadth of hair
Than mercy does, it makes way for despair.
No sins are little: it is the Devil's cheat
So to surmise; for every sin is great.
On Temperance.
THis guides the Reason, gives the Mind delight,
In moderating Lust and Appetite.
The Jews in this great Virtue are expert,
Shunning excess as men of great desert;
Perhaps because it should be understood,
They drank full draughts up of our Savior's blood;
And being sensible they did digress,
May think it time t'abominate excess.
Our English Chronicles do much commend
Their Queen Elizabeth, who did transcend
The Nobles of her age; and England's King,
Edward the Sixth, did in her praise thus sing:
When to discourse on her it was his chance,
He called her his Sweet Sister Temperance.
When at her Table she sat down to eat,
She seldom used more than one sort of meat;
And did in Temperance so much delight,
She ever rose up with an appetite.
Nature is with a little satisfied:
Ebriety and Gluttony have tried,
And conquered many, who to Death did dance.
One of the spirits fruits is Temperance.
On Persecution.
AS the poor Sheep is to the slaughter led
In all humility, and free from dread,
So all God's people may be said to be
As Sheep, the Emblems of Humility.
They harmless are, and profitable too,
Obedient to their Shepherd; in a crew
Led into Folds and Pastures, where, as strangers,
They are obnoxious to many dangers,
Wolves, Briars, Thieves, Dogs, Plagues both great and small;
But God their Shepherd rids them out of all.
Many desire the number may increase
Of God's good Sheep; but it is a golden Fleece
Which they desire to wear: However, they
Most happy are that follow him their way.
Excellent things the Church of God has won;
She Is like a woman clothed with the Sun,
Crowned with Stars, treading upon the Moon;
Yet traveling in Birth at night and noon:
The Dragon in pursuit of her and hers;
But, under God, they still ride Conquerers.
He that would be an Israelite indeed,
Must arm himself completely; taking heed
Of all assaults, all persons, places, times,
Guard his own virtue, resist others crimes.
Elias spoke against the craft of sin;
Then Ahab's hate against him did begin.
Isaiah, as we read, was sawn in two;
It was Manasses pleasure so to do.
And Jeremiah he was stoned, to please
The cruel humor of Tahaphanes.
Stephen was stoned of the Jews; and John
Beheaded was, Herod would have him gone.
Ignatius to the Lions had his doom;
The Clergy likewise hated Chrysostom:
But Justin Martyr slights these things as dirt,
Say^, Persecutors kill, but cannot hurt.
Tertullian well observed, the more they mow
The Christians down, they much the faster grow.
Large Volumes might be filled with the bright names
Of sufferers by swords, by stones, and flames.
True says St. Paul, all that will shun the grave
Of hellish fin, shall persecution have.
Well may the Christian with his God comply
In persecution, Christ himself could die.
On Sleep.
DEath in the Scripture is compared to Sleep:
When Death approacher, then with care we keep
A schedule of our wealth, so to dispose
Of those Estates we then are forced to lose.
So when Sleep comes, methinks my Ev'ning-prayer
Is like the making of my Will; my care
Ought therefore to provide betimes: for why?
There Is danger in a drowsy Lethargy.
In perfect memory, and when awake,
I Will leave my Soul to God; for if he take
Not charge of me, and me in safety keep,
The Devil will attempt me in my sleep.
Though day and night he seeks to devour,
He keeps his markets in the darkened hour.
I on my pillow do my sleep confirm:
Thus man's Vacation is the Devil's Term.
Blessings of the Righteous, as they are recorded in Holy Writ.
HEarken unto the Lord thy God,
His Covenants observe;
So will he kindly spare his Rod,
And not afflict a Nerve.
Blessed shall thou in the City be;
Thy God will Blessings yield,
At home, abroad, at bed, at board,
And likewise in the field.
Blessed shall be thy bodies fruit,
and that upon the ground:
The wicked, be they loud or mute,
Shall neither of them wound.
Thy Cattle shall enrich thy store
With increase of their Kine;
Thy Sheep shall still wax more and more;
Thy Grapes shall yield thee Wine.
Blessed shall thy Store and Basket be;
Blessings shall thence accrue:
Comings and Goings shall agree
To make thee blessed too.
The Lord shall smite thine Enemies,
And put them to disgrace;
The chiefest he will make to fly,
And that before thy face.
Thy foes one way shall thee attempt,
But fly before thee seven;
From Judgment none shall be exempt,
But as the Chaff be driven.
Thy Storehouses the Lord will bless,
And all thou take in hand;
And give to thee a large increase
Of plenty in the land.
The Lord, as he himself has sworn,
He will establish thee;
And farther to exalt thy horn,
His people ye shall be.
Keep thou the Lord's Commandments,
And all the Earth shall see
That thou art great in innocence,
And stand in fear of thee.
The Lord he shall his treasures open,
The Heavens shall give thee rain;
If head or hand with business cope,
It shall be for thy gain.
No discontent shall thee attend,
As free from grief or sorrow:
To many Nations thou shall lend,
But have no need to borrow.
Blessed are they that in him trust,
He will them bless with speed;
For do they hunger, do they thirst,
He is their help at need.
Blessed is he whose sin is hid,
He may with gladness smile;
Whose errors all are covered,
Whose Spirit has no guile.
Blessed are they that now lament,
As being poor in Spirit;
For they are promised by the Lord
His Kingdom to inherit.
Blessed are they that now do mourn,
Thinking their joys are fled;
For though as yet they seem forlorn,
They shall be comforted.
The meek are blessed too; for they
That love not strifes increase,
Shall on the Earth bear happy sway,
Delighting much in Peace.
The hungry too, and they that thirst
For Righteousness as meat,
They shall be filled, when those accursed
Shall nothing have to eat.
Blessed be the merciful to those
Whom they observe in pain;
For he that mercily bestows,
Shall mercy reap again.
Thrice blessed are the pure in heart,
Whose Souls and hands are free
From vanity and wicked oaths;
For they their God shall see.
Blessed the peacemakers are; for they
His children shall be called:
And he that loves and does obey,
Shall never be enthralled.
Blessed are they for Righteousness
Do persecution bear;
Their great reward none can express
But Heaven, it lies there.
Blessed are they that are reviled
Because they seek the Lord;
Be they at home, or if exiled,
His grace will strength afford.
Rejoice, and be exceeding glad,
For great is your reward;
The Prophets by such usage bad,
Did get into regard.
Curses of the Wicked.
HE that does hear the poor man's cry
Shall never fare the worse;
But whosoever turns back his eye
Shall never want a curse.
He that himself has others cursed,
His servant curses him;
The blessings of his flowing Purse
Shall him to ruin swim.
He that bla phemeth God his Lord,
Ought to be stoned to death;
And cursed be that man, abhorred,
Serves other God beneath.
Cursed be he that sets light
By Father, or by Mother;
The people shall him daily slight,
And none his Curses smother.
Cursed be he that does remove
His Neighbors Landmark; then
The people shall him curse, none love,
But each one cry, Amen.
Cursed be he that leads the blind
In an erroneous way;
The Lord for him will torments find,
And be the blind man's stay.
Cursed be he that does pervert
The window, fatherless,
Or stranger, from an upright heart;
Curses shall him oppress.
Cursed, thrice cursed shall he be
Covers his Father's breast;
And that man cursed shall be (as he)
That lies with a beast.
Cursed let him be with Sister lies,
O^ Mother (though) in Law:
Such fins do make those horrid cries
That dreadful curses draw.
Cursed be he that secretly
His silent Neighbor smites:
Murderers too, that cause to die
When a reward invites.
The wicked shall be cursed at home,
And likewise in the field;
His basket and his store at last
Shall Blessings cease to yield.
Cursed be all his sinful fruit
Of body and of land:
His Kine, and Flock, though they are mute,
And all he takes in hand.
Cursed be he when going out,
And when returning in;
That happy 'twere for him, no doubt,
If he had never been.
Praises to God.
Psalm. 65. 1. Praise waits for thee, O God, in Zion.

PRaise the most high, Oh clap your hands!
Praise him, for he the world commands.
Praise him, Mount Zion, Praises sing,
Praise him that is your Cities King.
Praise him with loud and silent Air,
Praise ye the Lord that hears Prayer.
Praise him makes Morning hear his voice,
Praise him makes Evening to rejoice.
Praise him that does prepare our Corn,
Praise him, all ye that are forlorn.
Praise him that duly sends us Rain,
Praise him for Fruits, Herbs, Flowers, and Grain.
Praise him for his refreshing showers,
Praise him for recreating Bowers.
Praise him that does our Pastures fill,
Praise and rejoice, each little Hill.
Praise him, ye Birds, and every Tree,
Praise him that did divide the Sea.
Praise him for Waters from the Fount,
Praise him for Grass grows on the Mount.
Praise him that gives and nothing ows,
Praise him with Sacrifice and Vows.
Praise him that formed us in the Womb,
Praise him that guides us to our Tomb.
Praise him that makes us blessed in Heaven,
Praise him from whom all Food is given.
Praise him, his holy Name adore,
Praise him, O praise him more and more.
Praise God, the Father of the just,
Praise him does raise the Poor from dust.
Praise him that makes the barren bear,
Praise him with duty, love, and fear.
Praise ye the Lord for daily Food,
Praise ye his Name, for it is good.
Praise him who gives success in Wars,
Praise him who numbereth the Stars.
Praise him that builds Jerusalem,
Praise him whose Word is more than Jem.
Praise him that lifts up the meek,
Praise him that does support the Weak.
Praise him who does the Ravens feed,
Praise him, our meetly help at need.
Praise him does cause his Winds to blow,
Praise him that makes the Waters flow.
Praise him in his Angelick Coasts,
Praise him, all ye his mighty Hosts.
Praise ye his Name, both Sun and Moon,
Praise him, ye Lights that shine at noon.
Praise him, ye Heavens never fade,
Praise him, for ye by him were made,
Praise ye the Lord, ye Dragons fell,
Praise him, ye Deeps, his wonders tell.
Praise him, Fire, Hail, Vapor and Snow,
Praise him, ye stormy Winds that blow.
Praise him, ye Cedars, Beasts of the field,
Praise him all things can Praises yield.
Praise him, ye Kings of highest birth,
Praise him, ye Judges of the Earth.
Praise him, ye Rulers whom he raised,
Praise, for he is greatly to be praised.
Praise ye the Lord, both great and small,
Praise him that did create us all.
Praise him within his holy Tower,
Praise him for his Almighty Power.
Praise him for what he to us gave,
Praise Jesus Christ that did us save.
Praise ye the Holy Spirit too,
Praise each with all Devotions due.
Praise all, strive who shall praise the most,
Praise Father, Son, and Holy Ghost.
Praise each with pious Harmony,
Praise ye the blessed Trinity.
Praise ye the Lord with Trumpets sound,
Praise him that healed us with his wound.
Praise him with Harps loud Melody,
Praise him with Song and Psaltery.
Praise him with Timbrel, let the Flute
Praise him, with Organ, Pipe, and Lute.
Praise him with instrumental String,
Praise him with Cymbals, loudly sing.
Praise him with joy, and skilful voice,
Praise with new Songs, the chief and choice.
Praise him that is our Guide, our Light,
Praise him, because his Word is right.
Praise him whose works are done in truth,
Praise him that no injustice does.
Praise him all people, great and less,
Praise him that loves Righteousness.
Praise him whose Goodness fills the Earth,
Praise him with Zeal and pious Mirth.
Praise him the Author is of days,
Praise him that gives us power to praise.
Praise him whose Word the Heavens made,
Praise him whose breath required no aid.
Praise him that does the Wind command,
Praise him that makes the Waters stand.
Praise him whom Sun and Moon obey,
Praise him does Heaven's Scepter sway.
Praise him that does the Heathen awe,
Praise him whose every Word's a Law.
Praise him who does from Heaven behold,
Praise him, ye Rich, Poor, Young, and Old.
Praise him that fashions all our hearts,
Praise him alone does heal our smarts.
Praise him that is the King of kings,
Praise him in grief that comfort brings.
Praise him that governs Sea and Coasts,
Praise him that is the Lord of Hosts.
Praise him who can the Lion tame,
Praise him that Mighty is by Name.
Praise him that guards us day and night,
Praise him the God of Peace and Fight.
Praise him that makes the stoutest yield,
Praise him that is our Help and Shield.
Praise him with both thy heart and mouth,
Praise him in Age, in Strength, and Youth.
Praise him who are with sorrows sad,
Praise, that the humble may be glad.
Oh let the Nations all accord
To praise and magnify the Lord.
Amen, Amen.
Gloria in Altissimis: Or, the Angelical Anthem.
ANgels, Saints, and all men cry,
Glory be to God on high:
And that glory never may cease,
Grant us, Lord, on earth thy peace.
When there is good will toward men,
We shall praise, and praise again.
On Fatherly Affection.
AS in the street I walking cast my eye,
It was my chance two Children to epsy
Fighting together: by and by in have
The Father of the one, who saw what past,
Stepped in, and suddenly, without delay,
He parted both, and took his Son away,
And l^ke a Father, careful of his Son,
Gave him correction for the sau^t he would done.
The other Lad was left without a check,
Which made him strut and boast, and stretch his neck,
Believing he had surely won the day,
Though both alike were equal in the fray.
I thought it hard that one should punished be
And not the other, he escaping free,
At last I guessed 'twas a Paternal care
One to correct, to teach him to beware:
For over him he a dominion had,
But was a stranger to the other Lad.
So when the wicked sin, the godly smart;
God in chas^sing shows Paternal art:
He chastens whom he loves, whilst wicked men
Pursue their sins, and act them over again.
The reason common sense cannot avo d,
Sinners are spared only to be destroyed.
What need a whip for stubborn sinners backs,
When it is decreed their heads are for the axe?
On the Gospel.
THe Gospel ancient as Moses is,
Nay Adam, it was preached in Paradise.
It Is true, before the Gospel came the Law,
Yet from the Gospel we most virtue draw.
Likewise before the Day, appeared the Night,
Yet above Darkness we esteem the Light.
And before Man was made, all Creatures were,
Yet he excells them, they his servants are.
He that before his Lord the Sword does bear,
Is not supposed superior to the Mayor.
All things which in this world we splendid see,
Are not esteemed by their priority.
Says J^hn, There comes one after me, whose shoes
I am unworthy, too low, to unloose.
The Law is most composed of forms of fears;
But in the Gospel streams of love appears.
The Law makes God our foe with pointing -- thus;
The Gospel cries, Emanuel, God with us.
The office of the Law is to accuse;
That of the Gospel is to heal a bruise.
The Law a killing letter's styled by merit;
But the holy Gospels is a quickening Spirit.
Besides, the Gospel is the bell whereby
We all are called to Eternity.
On the Lord's Prayer.
THat Prayer of Prayers, how meanly does it look
Of late, as if Religion's frame were shook!
But if the Lord were just to use his powers,
With how much anger might he look on ours?
Some think that Lesson may their Spirits grieve;
Lord, us forgive, as others we forgive.
Others, like Witches, when in haste they pray,
They it repeat, but do it backward say.
Many with zeal desire their daily bread;
Thy Kingdom come, not much concerns their head.
Thus temp'ral benefits we do prefer
Before eternal blessings, and adhere
To what our present wants require: but oh,
When Death appears, and whispers, we must go.
Then our Petitions, all that we can gather,
From his take pattern, crying, Our Father.
Christ so began to teach us, being weak;
So we conclude when we can hardly speak.
The Free Giver.
GReat Alexander, when he youthful was,
A check received from Leonidas
His Governor, for being too profuse
In wasting his perfumes in pious use:
For on a day being to sacrifice
Unto the Gods, to show himself unnice,
Filled both his hands with Frankincense; that done,
Gave it the fire as his devotion.
But afterward when he became a man,
He conquered Judea, overran
That Country whence those spices took their birth,
Then to conclude his piety with mirth,
He sent Five hundred Talents weight (by odds
Too much) to him grutch'd what he gave the Gods.
Thus they that sowing plentifully keep
A zeal unspotted, plentifully reap.
He that does niggardly his Talent spare,
Shall sow, but in the end reap but a Tare.
Give God the choicest branches of thy fruit;
For by that means God may give thee the Root.
The Friendly Advice.
THe Roman Senators, as we may read,
Thirsted that Julius Caesar might be dead:
Wherefore they then conspired to seek his end.
Artemidorus, who was Caesar's friend,
Gives him a Paper wherein lay his lot,
His life to save by finding out the Plot;
But Caesar being busy with applauds,
With salutations, and the peoples lauds,
Pockets the Paper, as if it had been
Petition-like at leisure to be seen;
So onward walks,-not dreaming of that train,
And going to the Senate House was slain.
The World, the Flesh, and Devil, do beset
Poor man, contriving diverse ways to get
Him in their gin. God's Ministers accord
To bring a Letter, namely God's own Word,
Wherein their plot is publicly revealed,
The wounded man has offers to be healed;
Nay, God himself in clemency does cry,
Oh house of Israel, why will ye die?
But most men generally busy are
About the worlds concerns, though things of air;
They cannot mind their friends advice; to write,
Is to present them with a Paper-kite.
Thus men run headlong to expend their breath,
Forgetting they before were doomed for death.
On Sloth.
THe idle man is like the heavy drone,
That wastes his time in contemplation:
This present hour he is mightily perplexed
With studv'ng which way he shall spend the next;
Not like the wise man, who with lesser pain,
Contrives to make Expenses prove his Gain.
Winter he loves, because the days are short;
Walks in the Summer, as if A-la-mort.
When in the morning he bethinks to rise,
First stretches arms and legs, then wipes his eyes.
His manners-lets the morning rise before him;
And when the Sun shines, seeming to adore him,
Then he bethinks to stir; but first affords
A Prayer to God, not making many words,
And sometimes none, well knowing he can do
With thoughts as much as words, though more than few.
He commonly lies still, his bed to keep,
More out of sloth, than a desire to sleep;
Then yawns and turns himself for want of rest;
Anon for Dinner calls, before he is d^est:
Which having eat, he seems to be in pain,
At last concludes, it is best to sleep again.
That done, he rises, to his Neighbor goes,
And in sew words does thus his mind disclose:
How do you, Neighbor? it is a pleasant day;
What Is the best news? what price are Mackrel, pray?
The days do lengthen strangely, and the Spring
Bids us attend the Birds that sweetly sing.
Then in the end bethinks to bid adieu;
But first he yawns, and cries, What shall we do?
So he concludes his Speech: Perhaps in fine,
They both agree to drink a pint of Wine.
When from the Church all Auditors are gone,
He is found sleeping in his seat alone.
He enters into Bond, never minds to pay,
But forfeits that, 'cause he forgets the day.
To be a Jury-man is his disease;
Rather than fetch his wood, he will choose to freeze.
He Is half a Christian and half a Turk;
His Principle's to steal, and not to work.
He is indeed a proper Standing-pool
That needs must get corruption: It Is a rule
Observable, those P^ts do ^oonest stink,
Whose mud ass^ns to overflow the brink.
The id^e Soul shall find his food grow scant;
Sloth casts a man into deep sleeps and want.
On Desperation.
Cheer up, my Scul, thy griess in time will cease;
Despair is Satan's only masterpiece:
Hearken to that, the Devil soon will tell
The ready road that leads the way to Hell.
My sin, (...) Cain, is great, and I am driven
Justly to ^ear (...) never be forgiven.
With Murder first he did his Curse begin,
And furthers that, by (...) sin to sin.
Then to despair give neither ear nor scope;
Lay hold on Christ, the Anchor of thy hope.
A PANEGYRIC To the Right Reverend, And most nobly descended Prelate, HENRY by
divine Providence, Lord Bishop of London.
ILlustrious Prelate! whom the World must own
A Father of the Church, a Martyr's Son;
Of sacred Function, and of noble Blood;
It Is a dispute whether more great or good.
Thou second Ambrose of the Mitred Lords,
Northampton's Helmets the Arms of Compton.
Helmets joined with London's Swords,
Will keep thy Vineyard from the Forest-boar,
Beyond the skill of them who went before.
In Reverend Heachman we beheld a Look
Much like the Frontispiece of Thee the Book;
Jehovah's Poem, where he has annexed
A gracious Comment to a glorious Text;
Urim and Thummim wrote in words at large.
Thou D'cus and Tutamen of thy charge,
Who ex utroque sitt'st amongst the Peers,
A perfect Nestor at meridian years.
Old Jeroboam, holy Legends tell,
By making Peasants Priests, turned Israel
With her heels upward. That prodigious phrase
Of High swollen Woolsey in King Harry's days,
Ego and Rex, may teach great Monarchs what is
The sad effects of mounting Butchers Woolsey a Butcher's Son of Ipswich.
beats
To any thing but Gibbets. Where such sway,
There Is none so proud, so tyrannous as they
Who suck naught from their Dams but kill and slay.
For take an upstart Groom, who setcht his rise
But lately from a Dung hill, in a trice
He huffs, and Hamans it a^ such a rate,
As if the slip'ry wheels of Rolling Fate
Were scotcht in him, forgetting that the Son
May end as basely as the Sire begun.
Births are th'immediate acts of God; the choice
Of man sounds well, which echoes to that voice.
The Cream of Gentry, not the Scum of Trade;
Princes are born, but Commonwealths are made.
Then blessed be Christ, and Charles his servant, who
To silence the rude Cavils of our foe,
Has raised a Ruler from an ancient stock,
A Swain (like Daphais) faiter than his flock;
In whom, by happy providence, we see
The salse aspersion, and foul caiumnie,
Which Brook of old cast in the Churches face,
Bravely wipt off in nobler Compton's race.
(...) the Great! a Family well known
From Hopton The place where the old Earl was murdered.
Heath, to the Olympic Throne.
Compton the Valiant! that hears a power
From the Imperial The Bishop of London Clerk of the Closet.
Closet, to the Earl of Northampt. Constable of the Tower.
Tower.
Compton the Just! what can be more expressed?
The Guns and Organs shall proclaim the rest.
Nor can the mouth of Spite it self defame
Th'unfulli'd Trophies of that spotless Name:
Nor Malice, choked with Liberty, control
The least attempt of so divine a Soul.
Had all been Lions once, who wore that hide,
And each Lawn-sl^eve so honorably allied,
Save tem'pral envy and spiritual pride,
(...) had not lived, nor Caesar di'd.
The Cassock whilom scared into a jump,
And curta^'d all in reverence to the Rump,
May now exult with Warrantable glee,
In thy serene unblemished Pedigree,
With the white The Bishop of Winton, Doctor Morley.
Prelate of the Garter Blue,
Undaunted Dolben, and courageous Mew,
The Highborn Durham, generous Hereford,
By line a Baronet, by Grace a Lord.
And (who should be first named) Sheldon the prime,
A word too glorious to be blazed in Rhyme.
As learned Lawyers justly boast the worth
Of their Heroic Finch, and Honored North.
When Gospel-sury changed our Oil to Ashes,
And Pulpits turned to Caledonian Dr^m, in the scotch phrase, as appears by
their Letany, Fro au Harlotree, the Dinger of the Swash (i.e. the beater of the
Drum) the foul Fiend, and the Gallowtree, Good Lord deliver us.
Swashes;
When Charity caught cold, and zeal ran mad;
When men of L^vi dwelt in tents of Gad;
Black were our Stars, Cimmerian our Night,
No Darkness like degenerated Light.
But when the Sons of Peers lay down the sharp
Faulchion, to tune the Psaltery and the Harp,
Abandoning the pleasures of Hide-park,
And with King David dance before the Ark,
(...) spirit flies: the Warlike Spear
Being beat into a Sheep-hook, shall we fear
New Curse ye Meroz Doctrines in these Nations,
Clench'd with Edge hill and Naseby applications?
Harry the Eighth, that he might propagate
Feud against Popery, and secure his State,
Disposed the then Top-heavy Churches Lands
In his Nobilities and Gentries hands;
Knowing when time should turn (which often varies)
They Would surely fight pro Focis, if not Aris.
But our blessed Liege, that Piety may greet
Her younger sister Policy, thinks meet
True Honors Ore should wear Religion's Stamp,
To have the Chair recruited from the Camp.
His Majesty, in such designs as these,
Impropriates the Bishops, not the Sees:
Impropriate, did I say? rather restore
Them to the Splendor they maintained of yore;
That when weak Curats fail, these Sons of Thunder
May keep the Dan and Bethil rabble under.
No Northern storms shall then our Temple stir,
Whose Beams are Cedar, though their Rasters Fir.
And the rich Pavement which we walk upon,
Smooth as the Chariot of King Solomon,
Without a stone of stumbling and offense,
Or speaking Treason in a Scripture sense;
Or crushing Texts until they vomit blood,
A sign the Pulpits were not Irish wood.
All peevish Sects shall fall from their extremes,
Won by thy Worth, and melted by thy Beams,
As if thy parts, which we poor Lads admire,
Were mixed of Gunning's ^ht, and Rupert's Fire;
Enough to make a Brownist keep the road,
And (...) chaunt another Palinode.
Abringdon Once Chaplain to M. G. Brown at Abingdon.
Wild, whose Drolls infect the Rout,
May now complain his Pen has got the Gout;
Who bubbled with his once-applauded (...),
Out-did his Name by barking at the Mitre,
Shall cease to stroke his half-dry Muses Duggs,
In tenderness to's Conscience or his Luggs.
The Pagan Saint, whose prerious lips express
Naught but sweet Sippets of Soul-savingness,
Making the splay-mouth'd Brethren mump like Apes,
At Brooks his Apples, and at Titchburn's Grapes,
Shall balk his Canting, and convince the Gang,
An Anthem's better music than a Twang.
And we Plebeian Offsprings, meanly bred,
With a short Grace, an Egg, and so to bed,
Yet having Souls where loyal flames are nursed,
To Charles the good, and James of Charles the first,
Shall (to engage Posterity our bebtor)
Spend our dear blood as free as it 'twere better.
My Lord, accept this Mite; and if it please,
Give us thy benediction, and take these.
May all the Gifts and Graces that befell
On Moses, Joshua, and Samuel,
Enrich thy Breast and Brain in such a sort,
That the whole City, Country, and the Court,
Led by thy good example without stain
Of being factious, brutish, or profane,
May win their pristine Glory once again.
May as benign and prosperous a state
As ever George Wharton could prognosticate,
Light on thy heart, and bless thee over and over,
Wisdom and Wealth augmenting still thy store.
Long may thou govern without Guile or Gall,
And be thy Moderation known to all,
To bring strai'd Sheep, by whatsoever name,
Back to the Fold from whence at first they came.
No private Meetings in thy Diocese,
Except those lawful ones of Truth and Peace:
But if the many-headed Beast should rise
To pluck Kings plumes, and peck out Prelates eyes,
Teach them to crumble, like a tottring Wall,
Or Dagon cripled with a second fall;
Or heads on London Bridge, exposed to sight,
That grin, and show their teeth, but cannot bite:
Lastly, when Paul's Cathedral (whose fair growth
Attends on thine) is finished, when ye both
Piercing the Clouds, have kissed the Lights above,
That by aspiting Towers, thee by Love;
When the whole story of thy span is told,
And deeds, as well as Bays, have made thee old;
When the officious Angels shall have given
Thy better part its proper place in Heaven,
May thy bright Fame outshine the Morning Star,
As Prince, a Prelate, and a Batchelar.
So prays, Most Honored Lord, the humblest and meanest of your Lordships
Servants, Samuel Speed.

ADVERTISEMENT.
THere is lately Published an an excellent Piece, entitled The Vanity of Arts
and Sciences. By Henry Cornelius Agrippa, Knight. Doctor of both Laws, Judge of the
Prerogative Court, and Counselor to Charles the Fifth, Emperor of Germany. To
be sold by most Booksellers.

FINIS.

