A New Quaere, At this time seasonably to be considered, as we tender the
advancement of TRVTH and PEACE; Viz. Whether it be fit, according to the
Principles of true Religion, and State, to settle any Church Government over
the Kingdom hastily, or not; and with the Power commonly desired, in the hands
of the Ministers.

By JOHN SALTMARSH, Preacher of the Word at Brasteed in Kent.

2 Cor. 10. 8. Our authority (which the Lord has given for Instruction, and
not for destruction.) LONDON, Printed for Giles Calvert, at the Sign of the
Black Spread-Eagle, at the West End of S. PAUL'S. 1646.

A Quaere:
Whether it be fit, according to the Principles of true Religion, and State, to
settle any Church Government over the Kingdom hastily, or not; and with the
Power commonly desired, in the hands of the Ministers,
1. THe Rules laid down in the Word for practical Obedience, are these in
part; Let every one be fully persuaded in his own mind, Romans 14. 5. ver. 23.
and whatsoever is not of faith, is sin. Now the settling of any Government upon
a people who are yet generally untaught in the nature and grounds of it, is to
put upon the people the practice of that wherein it is impossible they can be
fully persuaded in their minds, and so either on a necessity of sin or misery.

2, There is great danger of bringing people under a Popish implicit
Obedience, by forcing on a practice of that which they scarce know, or know but
in part: And this is against the National Covenant, to side with any
Principles of Popery: And we know it by experience, that the people have been
ever devoted to any thing the State sets up; all the disputes or conscience of
the common people usually ending in this, Whether it be established by Law or
no; and going usually no higher nor further then a Statute or Act of State for
their Religion.

3. Christ Jesus himself could as easily have settled his Gospell-Government by
miracle, as any can now by a Civil power, if there had been such a primary or
moral necessity of establishing it so soon upon a people scarce enlightened for
any part of it: But we see the contrary, first in himself, he taught long, and
John before him, and so the Disciples; and the g(...) for Government were not
given till he ascended, and the Model for Government not brought forth but by
degrees, and as people fell in and were capable of the Yoke, and would mould
more easily to the Commandments of Christ's; and whether then or no, is yet a
Question which some who have sit out the debates too, See in M. Colemans Sermon.
though not with me, who am fully assured of a power of order which the Apostle
rejoiced to behold; though a power with as little dominion in Government as
tradition in Worship.

4. We never read in the new Testament of a Gospell-government settled upon any
that were not brought first under Gospell-obedience by the power of the Word
and Spirit, which thousands of Congregations in this Kingdom are not: For as in
material Buildings Stone and Timber are not to be clapped together without
h^w^^g and squaring, so nor in the spiritual: And whereas in the Temple there
should neither be Axe nor Hammer heard, because things were fitted before hand,
and so laid together: I question how this could be in our Congregations now: I
believe there would be now more of the Axe and the Hammer heard, then of the
building seen.

5. We have found by experience, that the speedy settling of Government upon the
Nation, has made Reformation take little root, save in the out ward man, or
formal Obedience; and the reason was, Because they received not Reformation
first in the power of the Word, but of the State, which went not so deep into
their Consciences, but they could part with it at any time upon a Law: Oh then,
Why do not days speak, and multitude of years teach knowledge?

6. It is against the nature of Christ's description of himself, and against
that sutablenesse which he presses for, amongst all such as should submit to
his Commandments; He shall not strive, nor cry, neither shall any man hear
his voice in the streets, Matthew. 11. 19. My yoke is easy, and my burden light,
Matthew. 11. 29. His Commandments are not grievous, 1 John 5. 3. Neither do men
put new wine into old bottles. All which cannot be fulfilled in the Parochial
Congregations.

7. The more time for trying the spirits, and proving all things, there is
less danger to that State of errings in things received and authorized, and of
involving it self into the designs of Ecclesiastical power, then which
nothing has sooner broken the Civil power, as may be seen in Popish Kingdoms,
and our late Prelaticall. There can be no great danger in the not sudden
incorporating the two powers: Since Moses is not alive to bring down the just
Pattern of the Tabernacle, there may a new Star arise, which was not seen at
first; which, if we shut up our selves too soon while the smoke is the
Temple, cannot appear.

8. We have not yet any experiment of our new Clergy, who are many of them
branches of the old stock, and so may weild the Government too much of the
Episcopal Faction, as the Samaritans did with the Jewish Government, because
they were not natural Jews. It is not safe trusting a power too far into those
hands. Our Brethren of Scotland have been more used to the way of Presbytery,
and may better trust one another upon mutual experience, then we can yet.

9. We experience in part some remainders of Prelacy working in many, which
shows a constitution not so clear nor pure as the Disciples of Christ should
have; then whether it be safe committing the power too suddenly: For though I
question not but some may be like the ten, yet there are others like the two
Brethren who strove which should be greatest, till the Lord ended the
difference, It shall not be so amongst you. We find the hottest Controversy is
now moved about Church Government; and there has been most written and spoken
this way, and in most violence: Now when the contention for power is so much,
and the Controversy streams most in Government, we may soon discern
dispositions. Well, is it good parting with the stakes yet while there is such
quarrelling for them, and when one party cannot but take it for an injury, if
wholly given to the other? It is to be feared, there is too much of man,
because the bias runs most in these times toward this one truth of government,
and many other are wholly set by, which might well be looked upon with it; which
if there were not a Principle in man more fitted for a truth of this kind then
any other, would not be: But every truth has its age and season. This only for
caution.

10. There is no Religion established by State, but there is some proportion in
the two Powers, and some compliancy betwixt the Civil and Ecclesiastical; so
as the establishing the one, will draw with it some motions in the other: And
we all see how hazardous it is to disinteresse any in the Civil part, even in
Kingdoms that are more firm, as France, where the Protestants are partly
allowed their Religion in pay for their Civil engagements; and so in other
States. And sure I am, that State is most free, where the conscience is least
straightened, where the Tares and the Wheat grow together till the harvest.

11. Our parties or dissenting Brethren being now together, and clasped by
interest against the common enemy, this foundation of common unity is such as
may draw in both affections and judgments* if not too suddenly determined into
Heretics and Schismatics: It is possible, while a Controversy is long
suspended, and time given for conclusion of things, Opinions may be sooner at
peace: A fire let alone, may dye out under that wood which stirred in would
kindle it. The Contentions of Brethren are like the strong bars of a Castle;
and a Brother that is offended is harder to be won then a strong City, Prove.
18. 19.

OBJECTIONS.
I.

But the Temple was builded with all speed in Nehemiahs time; and therefore,
etc. And Haggai calls to the building, Is it time? Hag. 1. 4.

Answ.

Yea, but the matteriall Pattern was more clearly left and known then the
Gospell-patternes: The other were more in the letter, and these more in the
Spirit. Now there must be a proving all things, else there may be more have
then good speed; and the Temple may be built by a false Pattern as well as a
true, and then better no Building, then no right Cedar to build with. And there
were Prophets then, who knew the periods of times, and could Prophecy, as
Haggai and Zechariah; but none so exactly now; and these knew both the fashion
and the time for Building. Yet who ought not to hasten the Temple, if the
Timber be ready, and if the Apostles and Prophets be there for a foundation,
and Jesus Christ for chief Corner-ston? Ephesians. 2.

Object. II.

But Vice, Heresies and Schisms will grow too fast.

Answ.

So they might have done from John's first Sermon to Paul's Epistles* and the
sending of the Spirit; but yet you see there was no Government, till after,
settled upon the people of God. And if Heresies stir up their Patrons against
the State, the Magistrate bears not the Sword in vain? And if moral
transgressions, let the Magistrate be set on in every place to quicken the
Statutes; and Preachers every where sent forth to publish the Gospel. And what
if the Prince of Persia withstand for a while? Truth is otherwise armed from
heaven: Though Satan be in the wilderness with Christ, yet Christ shall
conquer. It is the Papists and the Prelates Jealousies, to keep up their
supposed truths, by suspecting every thing that appears for an enemy. The
Gospel dares walk abroad with boldness and simplicity, when Traditions of
men, like melancholy people, fear every thing they meet will kill them: For
the Angel that comes down from heaven has great power, and the earth is
lightened with his glory, Rev 18. 1.

FINIS.

