THE History and Fate OF SACRILEGE, Discovered by EXAMPLES OF SCRIPTURE, OF
HEATHENS, AND OF CHRISTIANS; From the beginning of the World continually to
this Day.

By Sir HENRY SPELMAN, Knight. Wrote in the Year 1632.

A Treatise omitted in the late Edition of his Posthumous Works, and now
Published for the TERROR OF EVIL DOERS.

LONDON, Printed for John Hartley, over against Gray's- Inn, in Holborn, School.

DEO, ECCLESIAE, ET RELIGIONI. The Priests are appointed to discern between
Holy and Unholy, Clean and Unclean.
In Sacrilegos.
Est Homini laqueus sacra vorare Dei. Prove. 20. 25.
ANgustam ingreditur phialam macilentior anguis,
Furtivoque oleum devorat ore sacrum:
Intumuit venture Saturi, prohibetque recessus
Reddiderat praedam quam tulit usque suam.
Evomit; at factus jam furto pinguior, ipsa
Pinguedo miserum prosiliisse negat.
Ingemit and carnem jejunans conterit alto
Singultu; donec fiat, ut ante, macer.
Sic tandem egreditur. Gens o male conscia rerum
Sacrarum, exemplum sumite ab angue pium.
H. Sp.

THE PREFACE.
THERE needs no more to recommend this Tract to every good English Christian,
than the Nature of the Subject, and the Name of the Author. A Subject of the
greatest Importance to the Honor of God, and the decent Exercise of Religion.
An Author of profound Learning and true Integrity, who devoted his Studies to
the more particular Service of this Church and Nation.

But for the Character of this honored Writer, and the full Account of his
excellent Works, I refer to the Life of Sir Henry Spelman, lately prefixed to
the elegant Edition of his Posthumous Works, by the well known and well
deserving Mr. Gibson; who has Candor enough to think it a pardonable Trespass,
if I transcribe from Him, only so much as relates to this particular Treatise.

Another Work ( says he) in Vindication of the Rights of the Church, is still
in Manuscript, with this Title; The History and Fate of Sacrilege, discovered
by Examples of Scripture, of Heathens, and of Christians; from the beginning of
the World continually to this Day, by Sir Henry Spelman, Knight. Anno Dom. 1632.
The Account which the Oxford Antiquary gives of it is this:

In the Year 1663. Mr. Stephens began to print the History of Sacrilege,
designed and began by Sir Henry Spelman, and left to Mr. Stephens to perfect
and publish. But that Work sticking long in the Press, both the Copy and Sheets
printed off, perished in the grand Conflagration of London 1666. I have been
told by a learned Divine (since a Prelate of our Church) that Mr. Stephens was
forbidden to proceed in an Edition of that Work, lest the Publication of it
should give Offense to the Nobility and Gentry. But, whatever was the occasion
of its continuing in the Press till the Fire of London, it has been taken for
granted, that the whole Book was irrecoverably lost; and I was satisfied of the
same, upon Mr. Wood's Relation of the matter; till examining some Manuscripts,
which were given to the Bodleian Library, by the late Bishop of Lincoln, I met
with a Transcript of some part of it. Upon further inquiry, I found other parts
in other places; so that now the Work seems to be pretty entire.

He begins with a general definition of Sacrilege; then reckons up various
kinds of it, as to Places, Persons, and Things; after which, he enumerates (at
large) the many signal Punishments of it among Heathens, Jews and Christians,
describing more particularly the Instances of that kind, which have formerly
happened in our Nation. Then, he proceeds to give an Account of the attempt
upon the Lands of the Clergy in Henry the IV's time, and how it was
disappointed; afterward he descends to the Suppression of Priories Alien in
the Reign of Henry the Fifth, and so on to the General Dissolution under Henry
the Eighth. Here he shows us the several steps of the Dissolution; the King's
express Promise to employ the Lands to the Advancement of Learning, Religion,
and Relief of the Poor; with the remarkable Calamities that ensued, upon the
King, his Posterity, his principal Agents in that Affair, the new Owners of the
Lands, and the Lords who promoted, and Passed the Dissolution Act; concluding
with a Chapter, which contains The particulars of diverse Monasteries in
Norfolk, whereof the late Owners since the Dissolution, are extinct, or
decayed, or overthrown by Misfortunes and grievous Accidents.

This ( continues he,) is a short account of a large Work, wherein the
judicious Author is far from affirming, that their being concerned in this
Affair, (either as Promoters of the Alienation, or Possessors of the Lands) was
directly the occasion of the Calamities that ensued. On the contrary, he
declares more than once, that he will not presume to judge of the secret
methods of God's Providence; but only relates plain Matters of Fact, and leaves
every Man to make his own Application; though it must be granted, that many of
the Instances, (and those well asserted) are so terrible in the Event, and in
the Circumstances so surprising, that no considering Man can well pass them
over, without a serious Reflection. This Discourse might have appeared among
his other Posthumous Works, but that some Persons in the present Age, would be
apt to interpret the mention of their Predecessors, (in such a manner, and upon
such an occasion) as an unpardonable Reflection upon their Families.

To this fair account of the late Editor I have nothing more to add, but This,
that in him there might be prudential Reasons to exclude this Treatise from the
Volume of Reliquiae Spelmannianae. But it has happened, that a true Copy of the
Manuscript is now fallen into the Hands of (it seems) a less discreet Person,
who will even let the World make what Use of it they please. But, to prevent
all suspicion of any indirect dealings in Mr. G --, I do him this Justice, to
averr, That he is no way, either by Advice, or Consent, or so much as
Connivence, privy to the Publication of it.

There is one other Office of Respect due to the Ashes of the Venerable Author,
which is to observe, that his accuteness of Thought, and propriety of Style,
and other unaffected Talents of his Mind, and Pen, are not to be measured only
by this one Performance; for indeed, this History of Sacrilege, seems the most
Abortive of all his other Posthumous Works. At least, as we now find it, we
have but the rough Draught of some Noble Structure which he had wisely
projected within himself, to be improved and completed at his own leisure; and
therefore the Abruptness here, and the Prolixness there, and the many little
defaults of Language and Connection, would derogate from so great a Hand; but
that the ruder Strokes of some few Artists will be ever more admired, than the
finished Pieces of several Others.

THE HISTORY OF SACRILEGE.
CHAP. I.
SECT. I.
The Definition of Sacrilege, with the several Kinds thereof, manifested out of
Scripture; together with the Punishments following thereupon.

SAcrilege is an invading, stealing, or purloining from God, any Sacred thing,
either belonging to the Majesty of his Person, or appropriate to the
Celebration of his Divine Service.

The Etymology of the Word implies the Description: for Sacrum is a holy
thing; and legium a legendo, is to steal, or pull away.

The Definition divides it self apparently into two Parts; viz. Into Sacrilege
committed immediately upon the Person of God, and Sacrilege done upon the
Things appropriate to his Divine Service.

That of the Person is, when the very Deity is invaded, profaned, or robbed of
its Glory: Of this Kind was that Sacrilege of Lucifer, Esaias 14. 14. that would,
place his throne in the north, and ascend above the clouds, and be like the
most Highest; similis ero altissimo: Of this Kind is all Idolatry; and
therefore when the Israelites worshipped Baal-peor, that is, the God of the
Madianites upon the Hill Pegor, al. Phagor, it is said in Jerome's Translation,
Numb. 25. 18. to be Sacrilegium Phagor, the Sacrilege committed upon Mount
Phagor. So when the Style of God is bestowed upon Stocks or Stones, or living
Creatures; or when Man in Pride of Lucifer will be called God, as Alexander,
Caius Caligula, Domitian, Nero, and others. In this high Sin are Blasphemers,
Sorcerers, Witches and Inchanters: And as it makes the greatest Irruption into
the glorious Majesty of Almighty God, so it makes also the greatest Divorce
betwixt God and Man.

In this Sin above all others, was Satan most desirous to plunge our first
Parents Adam and Eve; that as himself by it had fallen from all Felicity, so he
might draw them likewise into the same Perdition: You shall be, says he, like
God, knowing good and evil. That Divine Faculty of knowing good and evil,
tickled the itching Humor of a weak Woman, and to be like God, fired her
wholly with Ambition, and carried her and Adam into the highest Kind of
Sacrilege, committing thereby Robbery upon the Deity it self: for so it is
censured, Philip. 2. 6. where it is declared, that to be equal with God was no
robbery in the Second Adam, implying by an Antithesis, that it was a Robbery
(and so a Sacrilege) in the First Adam; who is also guilty in the other Kind of
Sacrilege, by taking the forbidden Fruit reserved from him, as the Priest's
Portion; for Knowledge belongs to the Priest.

Thus the first Man that was created fell into Sacrilege several ways, and so
did also the first Man that was born of a Woman. Cain brings an Oblation to
God, but sacrilegiously either withholding the best of his Fruits, and offering
the worst, as some conceived, recte offert, sed non recte dividit, or doing it
hypocritically, as the later expounds it; which soever it was (and like
enough to be both ways) he robbed God of his Honor and Divine Faculty of
knowing all things: he granted him to be Omnipotent but not Omniscient; he did
not think him to be (...), to know the secret Thoughts of a Man's Heart: upon
which reason St. Ambrose charge him also with another Sacrilege ( de
Paradiso, cap. 24.) in answering God, that he could not tell what was become of
his Brother, when himself had murdered him; crimine Sacrilegii (says Ambrose)
quod Deo credidit mentiendum, with the Crime of Sacrilege, in that he durst lie
to God's own Face: A Pattern to the Sacrilege of Ananias and Sapphira in the
Acts of the Apostles.

To my Understanding Cain is yet chargeable with another grievous Sacrilege,
even the Murder of his Brother; for in it he destroyed the Temple of God, and
in that Temple the very Sacred Image of God: Do ye not know, says St. Paul, 2
Cor. 3. 16. that you are the temple of God, and that the spirit of God dwells
in you? and again positively, 2 Cor. 6. 16. Ye are the temple of the living
God. This Temple did Cain sacrilegiously destroy, and the Spirit of God which
dwelled in it, did he also sacrilegiously deface and expel; even that holy
Spirit was the very Image of God, for in the image of God created he him, Genesis
1. 27.

Thus it appears, that Sacrilege was the first Sin, the Master-Sin, and the
common Sin at the beginning of the World, committed in Earth by Man in
Corruption, committed in Paradise by Man in Perfection, committed in Heaven it
self by the Angels in Glory; against God the Father by arrogating his Power,
against God the Son by contemning his Word, against God the Holy Ghost by
profaning things Sanctified, and against all of them in general by invading
and violating the Deity. Let us now see how God revenged himself upon Sinners,
in this kind, and by way of Collation apply it to our selves: for his Wisdom
and Power and Justice are the same perpetually.

SECT. II.
The Punishment of Sacrilege in Lucifer and the Angels, upon Adam, Eve, and
Cain, and upon the old World, by the Flood, and upon them that built the Tower
of Babel, Nimrod, and others.

FIrst, He punished them by disinheriting and casting them out of their
Original Possession. Lucifer is cast out of Heaven; Adam and Eve out of
Paradise; Cain (whose Name signifies a Possession) out of his Native
Possession, to be a Runnagate upon Earth: All of them deprived of the Favor of
God, and all of them subject to a perpetual Curse. Lucifer to perpetual
Darkness, Adam to perpetual Labor, and Cain to perpetual Fear and Instability:
By perpetual, I mean, during their Lives; for at their Death they all meet in
Eternal Damnation. The Life of Satan is till the Day of Judgment; so, though he
lives so long, he reigns in Labor and Travel to work Wickedness: there is
his End, and then is the time of his further and Eternal Punishment; then shall
he and all his Angels be cast into everlasting fire, Matt. 25. 41. 46. there I
leave both him and them hopeless of Mercy, which notwithstanding is graciously
extended to Adam and his Posterity repenting, by the meritorious Passion of our
Savior, who to expiate the Sacrilege committed by Man, in aspiring to be like
God, debased himself, being God, to become a Man: And as Man would have left
the Earth, and have scaled the Heaven, so He left the Heaven, and came down
into the Earth, living here in Subjection to Man, when Man himself would not be
subject to God: Therefore ( ut contraria contrariis curantur) as the Sacrilege
was a Capital Sin, that contained in it many other specifical Sins, Pride,
Ambition, Rebellion, Hypocrisy, Malice, Robbery, and many other hellish
Impieties; so for a punctual Satisfaction he made himself a Capital Sacrifice,
that contained innumerable Graces, Humility, Contempt of the World, and of
himself, Obedience, Sincerity, Love, Bounty, and all other Celestial Virtues.

The Contemplation of this exorbitant Mercy, which I leave to be sounded forth
by the Golden Trumpets of the Church, has led me a little forth of my Course.
I return to Adam and his Posterity, and will go on with them safely, as I find
them left in the hands of Justice, and the dint of the Curse. Adam in his
Children, and they in him are all unhappy: His good Son Abel is cruelly
murdered and by whom? but (to increase his Grief) by his other Son Cain, who
according to the Law of Nature ought to die for it, as himself confesses, Genesis
4. 14. and then was Adam destitute of them both. Yet so is he notwithstanding;
for his Son Cain, the Murderer, is a condemned Person, a banished Man, and a
continual Fugitive to save his Life; which nevertheless was at length casually
taken from him by the hand of Lamech; as St. Hierom (out of an Author
(reports ad Damasum, p... Tom... Thus two of Adam's Sons died unnaturally,
and all the rest, except Seth, living wickedly, are not therefore mentioned in
Holy Scriptures. Touching their worldly Affairs, all was evil, and out of
course; Labor, and Sweat, and Sorrow vex their Persons; the Beasts of the
Earth, and the Fowls of the Air, that formerly were subject to Adam, will
rebel and become his Enemies; the Earth, that formerly gave him Sustenance of
her own accord, will now yield nothing, but by compulsion; and is besides unto
him both false and refractory: He commits his Corn unto it, and it renders him
Thistles and Weeds; he planteth his Vineyard in it, and it brings him Thorns
and Briars: All the Works of Man are now in the sorrow of his hands, Genesis 3.
17, 18, 19. The thoughts of his heart are only evil continually, Genesis 6. 5. and
the earth is corrupt before God, and full of cruelty, ver. 11.

Thus the Soul, the Body, the Mind, and the Manners of Men, the Nature of
Beasts and Fowls, and the Condition of the Earth it self being wholly altered
from the Original Constitution, and corrupted by the Contagion of Sacrilege, it
pleased the Justice of God to bring the Flood upon the Earth, to sweep away all
the Posterity of wicked Cain, in the seventh Generation; and not to spare any
either of Adam's Line, or of Righteous Seth's Generation, and his Family, as a
Type of the Sacred Portion appropriated to his Worship, which those Sinners of
the old World had so much corrupted. Thus for Sacrilege was the whole World
destroyed; in that Universal Destruction was nothing saved, but the Tenth
Generation; that out of it, as from a better Root, the New World might be
produced and replenished.

But the Coals of that old Ambition (which before the Flood, being once fired
by Satan in the Hearts of our first Parents, pricked them on in a Desire to be
like Gods) came by propagation of Original Sin, to be kindled again after the
Flood, in the proud Builders of the Tower of Babel, who by their miraculous
Work would also be like Gods; and by giving themselves a Name upon Earth, live
(as it were) eternally; and withal, provide so against the Hand of God, as they
would be no more in danger of drowning. Go to, (say they) let us build us a
city and a tower, whose top may reach up unto heaven, Genesis 11. 4. that we may
get us a name, lest we be scattered upon the whole earth. These were the Giants
spoken of by the Ancients, that did bellare cum diis; they preferred their own
Glory before the Honor of God, and that Calvin terms -- Sacrilegam audaciam
quae prorumpit contra Deum ipsum, and Gigantum more coelum oppugnat: A
sacrilegious Insolence that breaks out against God himself, and like the
Giants assaults him. See the Punishment; Their sacrilegious Interest is
miraculously defeated by God's own immediate Hand, their Language confounded,
their Society broken; they are cast out of their ancient Habitation, and that
which they most feared falls upon them; to be scattered over all the face of
the Earth, and to be bereaved of their Friends and Kindred. For it is said,
they understood not labium proximi sui, the Language of their Friends and
Neighbors, and were thereby compelled to leave them, as if they had been dead,
and their Family extinct, and to associate with those whom they did understand.

Besides this, as there fell a grievous Curse upon the Posterity of Adam and
Cain for their Sacrilege, so (the Divines observe) did there also upon the
whole Posterity of their Children, that is, upon the whole World. Hodie mundus
hanc calamitatem sustinet, says Calvin, The whole World at this day, feels
the Evil of this Curse of the Confusion of Languages; for by it the strongest
Bond of Humane Society and Concord is broken, the Hearts of Men alienated one
from another, their Means of Commerce taken away, their Manners changed, and
their Minds, Thoughts, Studies, and Dispositions contrary for the most part,
and repugnant.

Sacrilege, being thus got up again, brings forth immediately the other
Branches of Impiety: for Nimrod, the proud Hunter, and chief Builder of the
Tower of Babel, is not satisfied with being like a God, but is adored of his
People as a God indeed, and at length so taken of all the Gentiles under the
Name of Saturn, or Saturnus Babylonicus. So, after him, is his Son, Jupiter
Belus, whom the Scripture calls Bell, Baal, and likewise many other of their
Children and Posterity, by whom the World in a short time becomes full of
Gods: And though they daily saw these their Gods to grow old and feeble, and to
die like Men, and to rot and putrify like the basest Creatures; yet such was
their Stupidity, that out of Wood and Metal they framed their Images, and
styling those blockish Lumps by the Names of Gods, erected Altars and Temples
to them; and honoring them with the Rites of Sacrifices and Divine Worship,
belonging only to the True Living God, did thus bring the Abomination of
Idolatry over all the World.

How fearfully God punished this high Kind of Sacrilege, appears abundantly in
the Book of Josuah and other Scriptures: all the Kingdoms of Canaan, where it
first began to spread it self, were so universally devoured with Fire and
Sword, as never any under the Sun were like unto them. Yea, when there were
strange Gods in the House of Jacob, both against his Will, and perhaps without
his Knowledge, yet the Hand of God was so upon his House, as that his Daughter
Dinah is ravished, his Sons Simeon and Levi commit a cruel Murder on the
Sichemites; Jacob thereby lives in Grief and Fear of his Neighbors, his Wife
Rachel dies in Childbed, and his Son Reuben commits Incest with his
Concubine Bilhah, Genesis 34. 2, 26. and 35. 19, 22.

What should I tell of the 30000 slain at once, about the Golden Calf, Exodus
32. 28. How for Solomon's Idolatry his Issue lost the Kingdom of Israel, 1
Kings 12. 20. How Israel it self was carried Captive into Babylon, 2 King. 17.
4. How Manasses is taken Prisoner by the Assyrians, 2 Chronicles. 35. 11. his Son
Amon slain by his Servants, 2 Kings 21. 23. his Grandchild Josias, a good
King, yet also slain, 2 Kings 23. 3. and his Eldest Son, Jehoahaz, reigning
after him, taken Prisoner by Pharaoh Nechoh, and dying in Egypt; his second
Son, Jehoiakim, succeeding, taken also Prisoner by Nebuchadnezzar; Jerusalem
spoiled, and he, his Princes, People, Treasure, and Golden Vessels of the
Temple all carried to Babylon, and all for Idolatry, 2 King. 24. 2. 25. 1. For
Jehoram's Idolatry Jerusalem is taken, he with his Wives and Treasure; and all
his Sons, save the Youngest, slain; and himself, after a long tormenting
Disease, has his Guts fall out, 2 Chronicles. 21. 17, 18, 19. So Amaziah sees
Jerusalem defaced, the Temple spoiled, his Treasure carried away, and himself a
Prisoner; and being restored, driven out by Treason, and slain at last, 2 Chr.
25. 14, etc.

I will wade no farther in this Kind of Sacrilege, which is never passed over
in Scripture, but with some Remarkable Punishments: Our Country, I hope, does
not at this Day know it.

SECT. III.
Of the other Sorts of Sacrilege, commonly so called, as of Time, Persons,
Function, Place, and other things consecrated to the Worship of God. And first
of Time, in profaning the Sabbath.

I Come now to the second Part, which indeed is that, which the Schoolmen and
Canonists only call Sacrilege, as though the former were of too high a Nature to
be expressed in this Appellation: so exorbitant a Sin, as that no Name can
properly comprehend it. (...), a Warring against God, and (...), a direful
Violence upon Divine Majesty, a superlative Sacrilege.

The other and common Kind of Sacrilege, is (as was said) a violating,
mis-using, or a putting away of things consecrated or appropriated to Divine
Service, or Worship of God: It has many Branches, Time, Persons, Function,
Place; and materially, Omne illud (says Th. Aquinas) quod ad irreverentiam
rerum sacrarum pertinet, ad injuriam Dei pertinet, and habet Sacrilegii
rationem, 2a2ae. qu. 99. art. 1. This Description of Sacrilege may well enough
be extended further than Aquinas did perhaps intend it, to the former or
superlative Kind.

Sacrilege of Time is, when the Sabbath, or the Lord's Day, is abused or
profaned: This God expressly punished in the Stickgatherer. Some Canonists seem
not to reckon this under the common Kind of Sacrilege, Soto, de justitia and
jure, lib. II. qu. 4. fol. 50. 6. So that in all that follows we shall run
the broken Way of the Schoolmen and Canonists.

SECT. IV.
Sacrilege of Persons, that is, Priests and Ministers consecrated to the
Service of God, and the Punishments thereof.

SAcrilege against the Person is, when Priests or Ministers of God's Divine
Service, are either violated, or abused: Again; Fear the Lord, and honor his
Priests, Ecclus 7. 29, 31. For he bears the iniquity of the congregation, to
make an atonement for them before the Lord, Deuteronomy. 8. 17. For the Levite is
separate to the Lord, to minister unto him, to bless thee in his name, Deuteronomy.
10. 8. therefore when Micah had got a Levite into his House, he rejoiced, and
said, I know that the Lord will be good unto me, seeing I have a Levite to my
priest, Judge. 17. 13. Touch not mine anointed, nor do my prophets no harm,
Psalm. 105. 15. Mine anointed, that is, not my Kings, nor my Priests; and Deuteronomy.
12. 19. Beware that thou forsake not the Levite, as long as thou live upon
the earth; Beware, says God, as intimating Danger and Punishment to hang over
their head, that offered otherwise; and what? not for wronging the Levite, (a
thing too impious) but for not loving and cherishing him all the days of thy
Life. I must here note, as it comes in my way, the remarkable Justice and
Piety of Pharaoh toward his Idol Priests; that when by reason of the Famine he
had got and bought unto himself all the Money, Cattle, Lands, Wealth, and
Persons of the Egyptians, yet stretched he not forth his Thoughts to the Lands
or Persons of his Priests; but, commiserating their Necessity, allowed them
a... at his own Charge, that they might both live and keep their Lands, Genesis
47. 22. Musculus hereupon infers, Quantum sacrilegium est in nostris
principibus, negligi legitimos probosque sacrorum ministros? How great a
Sacrilege is it in our Princes, that the good and lawful Ministers of Holy
things are thus neglected? It is to be noted, That as Micah expected a Blessing
from God, for entertaining an Idolatrous Levite into his House; so Pharaoh's
Piety toward his Priests, wanted not a Blessing from God upon his House,
though God hated both the Idolaters and Idolatry it self.

Let us see how Sacrilege in this Kind has been punished. The Benjamites of
Gibeah wronging a Levite villainously, in abusing his Wife, Judge. 19. 25.
Gibeah is therefore destroyed with Fire and Sword, above 26000 valiant Men of
the Benjamites slain, and the whole Tribe almost wholly rased out of Israel,
with their Cities and Castles, Chapter 20.

Jeroboam making Golden Calves drives the Priests of the Lord out of Israel,
and makes himself other Priests, not of the Tribe of Levi: for this he is
overthrown by Abiah King of Judah, and 500000 of his Men slain, his Son taken
from him, and his Posterity threatened to be swept away like Dung; and those of
them that died in the city, to be eaten of dogs, those in the fields, by the
fowls of the air, 2 Chronicles. 13. 9. 1 King. 14. 10. Jeroboam also stretched but
out his hand against the Prophet to have him apprehended, and it is presently
withered, 1 Kings 13. 4.

Joash commanded Zacharias, Son of Jehoiada the Priest, to be slain in the
court of the Lord's house: this done, he is overcome the next Year following by
the Aramites; all his Princes are slain, his Treasure and the Spoil is sent to
Damascus, himself left afflicted with great Diseases, and at last murdered in
his bed by his servants, 2 Chronicles. 24. 21, etc.

Zedekiah King of Judah casts Jeremy the Prophet first into Prison, then for
a season into the Dungeon, and uses him harshly, Jer. 32. 3. 37. 21. 38. 9. He
and those that counseled him to it, are overthrown by Nebuchadonosor,
Jerusalem taken, his Sons slain before his Eyes, and then his Eyes put out, and
the People carried captive to Babylon: but Jeremiah himself is set at liberty,
and well entreated by his Enemies the Chaldaeans, Jer. 39. 1, etc.

SECT. V.
Sacrilege of Function, by usurping the Priests Office; and the Punishment
thereof.

SAcrilege of Function is, when those that are not called to the Office of
Priesthood or Ministry, do usurp upon it. So Gideon made an Ephod, (that is a
Pontifical Ornament of the Tabernacle) not at Shilo, but in his own City Ophra,
whereby the Israelites fell to worship it: or, as others think, that he made
all the things of the Tabernacle, whereby the People were drawn to worship
there, and not to go to Shilo, where the Tabernacle was. This (says the Text)
was the Destruction of Gideon and his House; for his Son Abimelech, rising
against his Brethren, slew 70 of them upon a Stone, and then with a Stone cast
upon him by a Woman, himself was first brained, and after by his own
Commandment, thrust through by his Page, Judge. 8. 27. and 9. 6.

Saul takes upon him to offer a burnt Offering to God in the Absence of Samuel.
The Kingdom therefore is cut from his Family, 1 Samuel 8. 9. and nothing after
prospers with him, but he runs into other Sins, as that of sparing Agag and
the Cattle. He is overthrown by the Philistines, himself and three of his Sons
are slain by them, 1 Samuel 3. 6. Ishbosheth, a fourth Son, by Treachery, 2 Samuel
4. 6. and seven more are hanged for appeasing of the Gibeonites.

Vzzah being no Levite, stretched forth his hand and stays the Ark from
falling: It seemed a pious Act, yet God presently struck him dead for it, 2 Samuel 6. 6, 7.

Vzziah the King, in spite of the Priests, goes into the Sanctuary, and would
burn Incense, which belonged only to the Priest's Office. This (says the Text)
was his Destruction, for he transgressed against the Lord, therefore whilst he
was yet but about it, having the Incense in his hand to burn it, the leprosy
presently rose in his forhead; so that he was not only constrained to haste
himself presently out of the Temple, but to live all his Life after sequestered
from the Company of Men; and, being dead, was not buried in the Sepulcher of
his Fathers, but in the Field there apart from them, 2 Chronicles. 26. 16, etc.

Let those that have Impropriations consider, whether these Cases concern not
them; for, like Vzzah, they stretch out their hands to Holy Things, (but would
God it were to no worse intent) like Gideon, they bring them into their own
Inheritance, and like Saul and Vzziah they take upon them the Priest's Office:
For they are Parsons of the Parish, and ought to offer up Prayers for the Sins
of the People.

SECT. VI.
Sacrilege of Holy Places, Churches, and Oratories consecrated to the Honor
and Service of God: And the fearful Punishments thereof showed by many Examples.

SAcrilege of the Place, is, when the Temple or the House of God, or the Soil
that is consecrated to his Honor is either violated or profaned. When God was
in the fiery Bush at Horeb, the place about it was presently sanctified, so
that Moses himself might neither come near the Bush, nor stand a-loof upon the
holy Ground with his Shoes on, but in Reverence of the Place must be
barefooted, Exodus 3. 5. So when God descended upon Mount Sinai, his Presence
made the Place round about it Holy. He commanded therefore that Marks should be
set upon the Border, to distinguish it from the other Ground; and that if Man
or Beast did but touch it, they should be either stoned, or thrust through with
a dart, Exodus 19. 21.

Thus before the Law; when the Law was given, first the Tabernacle, and then the
Temple were full of Sanctification, both by the Presence of God, and by the
Decree of his Mouth, as appears abundantly in Scripture, Ex. 40. 34, 35. 1
King. 8. 10, 11. Therefore grievous Punishments were always inflicted upon such
as did violate them in any thing. If any man (says the Geneva Translation)
destroy the temple of God, him shall God destroy; for the temple of God is
holy, 1 Cor. 3. 17. The Greek is much more copious, and does not restrain it to
them only that destroy the Temple, but extends it to all that either destroy
or abuse it in any sort; (...). The vulgar Latin does well express it; Si quis
templum Dei violaverit, disperdet eum Deus, etc. for the word (...), is
corrumpo, vexo, calamitatem infero, perdo, defloro, violo, vitio; so that it
contains as well the lesser Injuries done to the Temple, as that great and
Capital Crime of destroying it: but because the Apostle uses one word in both
Places, (...), and (...), they likewise in the... would have one word in both
places... Upon the word destroy, which to my understanding is too particular,
and might have been better expressed by a word of more general Signification;
as to say, If any Man spoil the Temple of God, God shall spoil him; that is to
say, If he spoil the Temple, either by destroying it, or defacing it, or
violating it in any Course, as by robbing, stealing, or taking from it any
Ornaments,... Goods, Rights,... Means of Maintenance, or by abusing it in any
manner whatsoever, God shall spoil him in one sort or other, as of his
Patrimony, Lands, Goods, Liberty, Pleasures, Health, and Life it self;
Children, Family, and Posterity; and not so only, but by casting also upon him
diverse fearful Visitations and Misfortunes, more or less, as in his Wisdom
shall soon... The word destroy is not properly said of any Punishment that
tends only to work Amendment: and God doubtless often spoileth a Man of the
things he delights in, not to his whole Destruction, but to awaken him to
Amendment.

Let us see in what manner God has punished this kind of Sacrilege among the
Jews.

In the time of the Law, though frequent Examples are not to be expected, for
that there was but one Temple of God in both the Kingdoms of Judah and...
namely, that of Jerusalem, built by Solomon, and for the most part, p...
preserved in after Ages. Another there was at Samaria which...builded upon
Mount Gerizim, like to that of Jerulem, by License of Alexander the Great, and
being afterward destroyed by Hyrcanus, King of Judah, gave occasion to the
Samaritan Woman to say unto Christ, John 4. 20. Our Fathers worshipped in this
Mountain --. A third also for the dispersed Jews in Egypt built by Onias Son
of Onias the High Priest, in the time of Antiochus Epiphanes, Joseph. Antiq. l.
12. c. 14. and de Bello Judaico, c. 7. But these two being against the
Commandment of God (who would have no Temple but at Jerusalem) I meddle not
with, nor with the Synagogues of the Jews being many in every City, 480. in
Jerusalem instituted for Strangers, as the Temple was for the Citizens, and
erected of later time without any mention of them in the Old Testament or Books
Apocryphal: Let us see, I say, Examples of this kind.

Nadab and Abihu, Sons of Aaron, polluted the Tabernacle, by neglecting the
sanctified Fire of the Altar, and offering Incense by strange and common Fire;
they were therefore devoured by strange Fire sent upon them by the Lord himself.

Hophni and Phinehas, the Sons of Eli, made a Sacrilegious Rapine upon the
Offering of the Lord, upon the Fat, and upon the Flesh, and upon the Holy
Portion: polluting also the Sanctified Place, with sacrilegious Adultery, 1 Samuel 2. 12. God terms this a dishonouring himself, and says ( ver. 30.) Them
that honor me, I will honor; and they that despise me, shall be despised.
Hereupon, he threatens, First, To cut off the arm of Eli's Father's house, (i.
e. the Authority and Honor of the Priesthood;) which was performed when
Solomon cast out Abiathar... of Eli, out of the Priest's Office, and bestowed
it on Zadock, being of another Family, 1 King. 2. 26. Secondly, That all of his
Family should die before they came to be old; which himself did partly see in
his own Sons. Thirdly, That his sons Hophni and Phinehas should die both in one
day. Fourthly, That he should see his enemy possess his office, and that the
remnant of his family should crouch, and be suitors to him for relief and
favor. All which undoubtedly came to pass: And yet with all this was not the
Wrath of God appeased; but spreading it self into a further Agony of
Indignation, fell not only upon the whole People of Israel, but also upon the
holiest Monuments of the Glory of God. The Word of the Lord became rare and
precious: There was no manifest Vision: The Army of Israel is beaten by the
Philistines, and about 4000 of them slain in one Battle, and 30000 in another:
The Ark of God taken Prisoner, and carried Captive into the House of Dagon, the
Philistines Idol: Hophni and Phinehas died: Eli falls backward and breaks
his Neck: The Wife of Phinehas falls untimely into Travail, and dies with
Grief, (1 Samuel chap. 2. 3, 4.) Fourscore and five Priests of Eli's House are,
at Readiness Commandment tyrannously slain all in one Day. Nob the City of the
Priests, with the Men, Women, Children, Sucklings, Oxen, Sheep, and Asses all
destroyed (22. 18.) And finally, to cut the Priesthood for ever from the House
of Eli, Solomon cast Abiathar out of it (being the fourth in Succession after
Eli), and brought in Zadock of another Family, (1 Chronicles. 6. 8.) Oh the dreadful
Justice of Almighty God! But such of old was the Fruit of Sacrilege; and such
Effects it still produces.

Joash stoned Zachariah in the Court of the Temple. This double Sacrilege of
Person and Place, was punished by the Slaughter of his People, Loss of his
Treasure, Diseases of his Body, and Murder of his Person, as we have already
cleared in Sacrilege of the Person.

So Vzziah entering the Sanctuary by force, and attempting the Priest's Office
in burning Incense, committed Sacrilege of Place and Person, was punished as we
have cleared.

Ahaz commits Idolatry, and spoileth the Temple of the Treasure, and some
other Ornaments. He is first given into the hands of the Azarites or Assyrians;
then Pekah King of Israel slays 120000 of his Soldiers, all in one day, and
taking 200000 Women and Children Prisoners, took away also much Spoil, which
they brought to Samaria. The Edomites also beat him, and captivated his People;
and the Philistines took and inhabited many of his Cities. In this Affliction
he farther spoileth the Temple of the Vessels, and shuts it up; and, dying
an Idolater and Sacrilegious, is not buried in the Sepulcher of his Father, but
apart in Jerusalem, 2 Chronicles. 28.

Nebuchadonosor, otherwise called Nebuchadnezzar, spoileth the Temple, carries
thence all the Treasure and Holy Vessels, 2 King. 24. 13. slays those that
were fled thither for Safety; after by his Servants burnt it, 2 Chronicles. 36. 17.
He is stricken with Madness, cast out of his Kingdom, lives among Beasts, and
like a Beast, feeds upon Grass till his Hairs were grown like Eagles
Feathers, and his Nails like Birds Claws, Dan. 4. 3. And in the Days of his
Grandchild was his Family clean extinguished, and his great Empire taken from
him by Force, and given to the Persians, Dan. 5.

Antiochus Epiphanes, Son of Antiochus the Great, King of Syria, enters into
the Sanctuary, and takes away the Golden Altar, and the Treasure of the
Temple, even 1800 Talents. Presently his Posterity and Glory alters, his
Captains are slain, his Armies beaten, and all his Affairs were so unfortunate,
that calling his Friends unto him, confesses, that he was fallen into that
Adversity and Flood of Misery, for that Evil he had done at Jerusalem, For I
took, says he, all the Vessels of Gold and Silver that were in it,... and I
know that these Troubles are come upon me for the same Cause; and behold I must
die with great Sorrow, in a strange Land. Thus in Passions of Grief he ended
his Days, cap. 6. 11. Yet did not this end his Tragedy, He had a violent Fall
out of his Chariot, and he was termented with an horrible Disease; Worms came
out of his Body, and his flesh fell off for pain, and no Man could endure his
Stink, 2 Maccab. 9. 7, 8, etc.
for his Son Antiochus Eupater was deprived of his Kingdom by his Uncle
Demetrius, and put to Death: and although Alexander Epiphanes, his other Son, a
Brother of Antiochus Eupater, recovered the Kingdom, and slew Demetrius, and
fortified himself by the Marriage of Cleopatra, Daughter of Ptolemy King of
Egypt, to his great Happiness, as he thought, yet God turned it to his own
Destruction; for Ptolemy took both her and the Kingdom from him, and gave them
to his Enemy Demetrius Nicanor; and whilst he fled to save his Life, to his
Friend Zabdiel the Arabian, he struck off his Head, and sent it to Ptolemy, 1
Maccab. 11. 9. notwithstanding this, his Son Antiochus Theos, being but a
Child, by the Help of Tryphon, was restored to his Father's Kingdom, and
overthrew Demetrius Nicanor, Cap. 11. 54. who flying, is imprisoned by Arsaces
King of Persia, Cap. 14. 2. and after slain: so that Antiochus seems not
secure, but the Hand of God is still upon the Posterity of Antiochus Epiphanes
the Sacrilegist; for even now does Tryphon himself murder his Grandchild
Antiochus Theos, Within 30 Years after the Sacrilege.
and, ending that Line, usurpeth the Kingdom, 1 Maccab. 33. 31. Read 2 Maccab.
9. 7.

Touching the Sacrilegious Attempt made by Antiochus and some of his Soldiers,
upon the Temple of... (or Diana, as Lyra takes it) in Persia, and the terrible
Destruction that fell immediately upon them, mentioned, 2 Macc. 1. 16. I pass
it over, as not belonging to this place.

Heliodoras the Treasurer of King Seleucus, is sent by his Master to fetch the
innumerable Money that was in the Temple of Jerusalem, not belonging to the
Provision of the Sacrifices, but deposited there in safety, for Widows and
Orphans. The high Priest Onias declares to him, that there was not above 400
Talents of Silver, and 200 of Gold: and both he and the rest of the Priests,
and the rest of the City, prayed instantly to God to preserve the Treasury;
notwithstanding Heliodorus and his Soldiers approach unto it, and presently
there appeared a terrible Man on Horseback, richly barbed, between two young
Men of notable strength, and the Horse running fiercely upon him, struck him on
the Breast with his Fore-foot, and the young Men scourged him continually with
many sore stripes: so that Heliodorus falling to the Ground, and covered with
great Darkness, was carried away in a Horse-Litter, desperate of Life, till by
Entreaty Onias prayed for him, and thereupon the young Men appearing again to
Heliodorus, willed him to give Onias thanks, because God for his sake had
spared his Life. Seleucus, after this, would have sent another, but Heliodorus
advising him to send his Enemy he gave it over, 2 Macc. 3. 38, 39. If thou have
an enemy or traitor send him thither, and thou shall receive him well scourged:
for in that place, no doubt, there is an especial power of God: for he that
dwells in heaven has his eye on that place, and defends it, and he beats
and destroys them that come to hurt it.

Lysimachus, a Man of great Power in Jerusalem, Brother and Deputy to Menelaus
the High Priest, purloineth much of the Golden Vessels, and in the Geneva
Translation is termed a Church Robber. He falls into hatred of his
Countrymen, the Jews, and having about Three thousand for his Guard, is
notwithstanding in a Tumult of the People oppressed with Clubs, Dust, and
Stones, and in that Manner slain near unto the Treasury with some of his
Company, many others of them being wounded, 2 Macc. 4. 39.

Callisthenes who had set fire upon the holy Gates flying after into a Cottage,
the same was also set on fire and he burned in it, 2 Macca. 6. 33.

Menelaus having obtained by Money the High Priesthood steals certain of the
Golden Vessels out of the Temple, giving part away, and selling part unto the
Tyrians and others, 2 Maccab. 4. 32. he is afterward accused to Antiocbus
Eupater to have been the Author of the evils in Judaea, and for the Sacrilege
committed by him about the Holy Fire and Ashes of the Altar, he is put to death
at Beraea, by an Engine upon the Top of an high Tower, ordained for the
Punishment of Sacrilege, and other great Offenses, by overwhelming the
Offenders with Ashes; and, being dead, he must not be buried, for that he was a
Sacrilegist, 2 Maccab. 13. 4. Let those Clergymen that defraud their Churches
of their Lands or Goods consider this Example.

Nicanor, Governor of Judaea under Eupater, (stretching forth his Hand toward
the Temple) swears, That if Judas Maccabaeus were not delivered unto him
Prisoner, he would make it a plain Field, and break down the Altar, and erect
an... Temple to Bacchus. At the next Encounter Judas with a small Power slays
35000 of Nicanor's Army, and among them, unwittingly, Nicanor himself, whose
Head, and the Hand with the Shoulder, that he had stretched forth against the
Temple, he caused to be cut off, and carried to Jerusalem, and showed there to
the Priests and others; and cut out the Tongue, and minced it, and cast it to
the Birds, and set the Head on the Castle, 2 Macc. 14. 33. and 15. 27.

Thus touching Local Sacrilege, I have gone through the Canonical and
Apochryphal Books of the Old Testament; before I enter into the New, (which
will be very short) I desire to remember one that happened in the mean time.

Pompey the Great (whose Glory and Conquest some in Plutarch compare with
Alexander the Great) by help of Hyrcanus takes Jerusalem, and battering down a
wall of the Temple, makes there a great slaughter, not only of the Jews, but
of the Priests themselves, that even then were at the Sacrifices; and chused
rather to die, than to intermit the same; and then entering with his Soldiers
into the Sanctuary, did behold those Sacred things, which a profane eye never
saw before, the golden Table, the Candlestick, the Sacrificing Instruments, and
what might tempt a wastful General, 2000 Talents of holy Treasure, which Pompey
notwithstanding, to the Glory of his Heathen-piety would never touch, but
commanded that the Ministers should cleanse the Temple presently, and continue
their daily Sacrifices, making Hyrcanus now High Priest. Josep. Antiqu. lib.
14.. 8. Hitherto all Glory and Fortune attended Pompey his Servants, three
times he triumphs, and is as well Conqueror of the Hearts of his Nation, as
of their Persons whom he subdued. Some in Plutarch, where his Conquests are
recited, compare them with Alexander the Great; but after this Sacrilege (to my
knowledge observe it) nothing does prosper with him, but as conducing to his
hurt: Oh, (said Plutarch, p. 70.) would God he had dyed while his fortune was
yet like Alexander's: for in the rest of his Life his prosperities were
hateful, and his miseries bitter. He hastes home into Italy to enjoy the
pleasures of his family and country, where he finds that his wise Mutia had
played the harlot, and therefore divorceth her; that the Senate one while
slight and deride him, another while magnify him and use him for necessity, but
always suspect him, in great opposition with the Principal Men; and when he had
Married Julia, the Daughter of Caesar to be reconciled with him, she became
abortive of her first Child, and dyed of her second, and the Child also, all in
a short space. Then runs the dissension between Caesar and him, which
grows to Arms on both sides, and when Caesar at first had the advantage, yet
he offers Pompey Conclusions of Peace; which Pompey (ordained to destruction)
refuses, and having at last by the confluence of Senators and active Men unto
him more than double the Army of Caesar, besides an invincible Navy to secure
him, he joyneth Battle with great hope and probability of Victory near
Pharsalia in Thessaly, but is overthrown, and flying to his great Friend
Ptolemy in Egypt, is there Barbarously murdered at his landing, in the sight
of his Wife and Son his Head struck off, and his Body cast upon the shore.
Plutarch in his Life admiring whence this change of fortune should come,
supposes it to be for mis-governing the Commonwealth; I by the precedent
Examples impute to his Sacrilege, which after that manner wrought still upon
his posterity to the extirpation of his Family. For his Son Cneus Pompeius
overcome in Spain by Caesar, is slain also in fight, App. lib. 2. And his other
Son Sextus Pompeius driven out of Egypt into Asia, is there slain by the
commandment of Antonius. App. lib. 4.

Thus when Pompey the Great entered into the Temple, and saw the great Riches
thereof, he did forbear to spoil or pillage any part thereof, which makes for
the commendation of his heathenish piety. Joseph. Antiq. lib. 14. cap. 8.

But when Crassus the Roman General entered Jerusalem and the Temple, he did
not forbear, but took away Eight Thousand Talents: Which prosper'd ill with
him; for marching forward with his Army into Parthia, there his Sacrilegious
Money and he perished together. Joseph. lib. 16. Cap. 12.

This larger Account of Crassus's Sacrilege, was found in a loose Paper,
written with Sir Hen. Spelman's own Hard.
Marcus Crassus being the second time Consul with Pompey the Great, had now by
lot the charge of Syria; and marching with a mighty Army against the Parthians,
he came to Jerusalem, and seeing the Treasure of the Temple (which Pompey
forbear to meddle with) he took away Two Thousand Talents of Money, and all the
Gold, amounting to Eight Thousand and besides this, the Golden Beam weighing
750 l. whereon the Veils did hang. To say truth, the Golden Beam was delivered
to him by Eleazar the Priest, as a ransom for all the rest, Crassus swearing to
take nothing else. But having the one, he would not leave the other. The Beam
he broke, and coined it into Money for payment of the Soldiers.

The success was this. Many grievous Tempests of Thunder and Lightning opposed
his Army; a violent Wind brake the Bridge he made for his passage; his Camp was
twice stricken with Lightning; and diverse other such Prodigious events are
noted by Plutarch. Joining Battle with his Enemy, his dear Son was first slain
in his own sight, with the Flower of his Cavalry, and then all the Roman Army
slaughtered or discomfited. Himself, though Surenas the General would have
saved him, was also slain. Being dead, his Head and his Hand, (that committed
the Sacrilege) like Nicanor's in the Maccabees, were stricken off, and with
other Monuments of the Roman Glory, most contemptuously abused and derided, in
Triumphs, Plays, and Public Meetings. It is noted to be one of the greatest
Overthrows that ever the Romans had. Joseph. Antiq. lib. 14. cap. 13. Plutarch.
in M. Crasso. Appian. de Bell. Parthic.

Some report, that the Parthians, in derision of his Avarice, poured molten
Gold into his Mouth; and say also, that he slew himself, by thrusting his
riding-Wand into his own Brains through his Eye. But, I take it, he that thus
killed himself, was Pub. Crassus Nucianus, Brother to the Grandfather of this
M. Crassus, overthrown also in the Parthian Wars by Aristonicus.

It is much to be admired, that none of the Heathen-Emperours of Rome, after
Titus, (many of them being notoriously wicked and prodigal) nor Gensericus and
his Vandals, did not convert such goodly rich Vessels of Gold and Silver, as
those of the Temple were, into Ready Money, for the Maintenance of their great
Armies, and other public Necessities of State; but that they should suffer
them to be preserved without any Loss or Imbezelling, for the Space of 500
Years together. But the Providence of God is very remarkable in preserving
them, until they came to the great Christian Emperor Justinian, who disposed
them to Christian Churches, as is showed.

The Learned Mr. Fuller in his Pis... lib. 3. page 438. thinks that it is
unknown what became of these Vessels, after Titus carried them to Rome. But it
appears he is mistaken in this; though not in his Opinion, That the Holy and
Holy of Holiest remained entire and untortur'd, till all was destroyed at the
Captivity of Babylon; though the outward Courts and Chambers had been often
plundered. And if this be true, as it is very probable, hence may we well
consider, and admire the wonderful Providence of God, in defending the Temple
in the principal Parts of it, for the Benefit of his own Worship and Glory,
though he suffered the outward to be plundered oftentimes, for the Sins and
Wickedness of the People. Though at last, when God resolved to put an end to
the Jews State and Religion, then he suffered the Temple to be burnt and
destroyed utterly; never suffering it to be built again, though it were
attempted diverse times.

But yet the gold and silver Vessels of the Temple, (which were moveable
things, that might be carried away to another Country, and at one time or other
might serve for some good Use and Purpose) God preserved in all the Changes and
Transmigrations that happened, till he brought them at length to the Hands of a
Religious and Pious Emperor, who bestowed them upon Christian Churches, even
at Jerusalem, from whence they came.

Shortly after this our Savior Christ comes into the World; and though
reproving it of all Kinds of Sins, he punishes not one, save only Sacrilege.
He refuses to be Judge in parting the Inheritance between the two Brethren,
and he would give no Sentence against the Woman taken in Adultery; but in case
of Sacrilege, himself makes the Whip, himself punishes the Offenders, himself
overthrows the Money-Tables, and drives out the Prophaners of the Temple, with
their Sheep, and their Oxen; not suffering the innocent Doves to remain, though
all these were for Sacrifices, and put in the Courtyard, John 2. 14. Such was
his Zeal in this Kind of Sacrilege, that he refused not to be the Accuser, the
Judge, and the Executioner, and this not only once, but twice; at the beginning
of his Ministry, recited by St. John, and the last near the Conclusion thereof,
mentioned Matthew. 21. 11.

As for the Sacrilege of Judas and Pilate, the one in robbing the sacred Purse
of our Savior, the other of risling the holy Treasure of the Temple; they are
such petty things in respect of their unexpressible Crimes about the Death of
our Savior, as I dare not apply their Punishment hither. But Judas hanged
himself, Matthew. 27. and throwing himself down headlong, burst asunder in the
midst, all his Bowels gushed out, Act. 1. 18. Pilate in the displeasure of
Caius the Emperor, about the Money of the Temple, is by him banished to Lions
in France; and there, distracted with Grief and Misfortune, slays himself
with his own Hands, Eusebius. l. 2. c. 7.

So Herod is deposed by Caius from his Tetrarchy, and perpetually banished also
to Lions, with his Wife Herodias, and dies miserably; their Goods confiscate by
Caius, and given to Agrippa, Joseph. Ant. lib. 8. cap. 14. who also notes,
That within an hundred Years all his Progeny, except a very few of the
Multitude, were consumed and extinct, lib. 18. cap. 11.

SECT. VII.
Sacrilege of Materials or Things; as of the Ark of God taken by the
Philistines. Of the 200 Shekels of Silver, a Wedge of Gold, with the Babylonian
Garment stolen by Achan, Jos. 6. 7. Of the Money concealed by Ananias and
Sapphira, Acts 5. 6. With the fearful Punishments that fell upon them all.

SAcrilege of the Things and Materials, I call that which is done upon things
properly settled in holy Places, or belonging unto them: Of this sort seems
the very Ark it self, whiles it traveled up and down, and remained not either
at the Tabernacle at Shilo, or the Temple at Jerusalem.

The Citizens and Borderers of Ashdod, overthrowing the Children of Israel,
took in Battle the Ark of God; they use it with all Reverence, and place it in
their Temple, by their God Dagon; but the next Morning their God Dagon was
fallen down on his Face, (as adoring the Ark) his Head and his Hands were
stricken off, and such a Destruction and Death was upon the People, that the
very Cry of the City went up to Heaven, and those that were not slain were
smitten with Emrods, 1 Samuel 5. 4. besides a Plague of Mice that was upon them;
consulting therefore with their Priests, they not only send back the Ark, with
all Honor, but with a Sin-Offering also, of Golden Emrods, and Golden Mice, to
be a perpetual Monument of their Penance and Punishment, 1. Sam. 6. 1.

The Bethshemites (whilst the Ark was among the Philistines) presumed to look
into it; God for this Attempt slays of the People 50070 Men. And the People
lamented, because the Lord had smitten many of the People, with a great
Slaughter. And the men of Bethshemesh said, Who is able to stand before this
holy Lord God? and to whom shall he go up from us? 1 Samuel 6. 19. So for
touching it with unsanctified hands (though to save it from falling) was Vzzah
slain, as we said before, in the Sacrilege of Function, 2 Samuel 6. 7.

Achan, in the Destruction of Jericho, steals 200 Shekels of Silver, and a
Wedge of Gold, from the rest of the Gold and Silver and Metal, that, by the
Commandment of God, Jos. 6. 9. was to be consecrated and brought into the
Treasury of the Tabernacle, and did put it even with his own stuff, says the
Text, verse. 11. This Offense of this one Man, brought a Punishment in general
upon the whole People: In the Assault at Ai, they are overthrown, and can no
more stand before their Enemies (as God himself tells them), till this
Sacrilege be punished and purged, Cap. 7. 12. Therefore not only Achan himself,
but his Sons, and his Daughters, his Oxen, his Asses, his People, and his Tent,
and all that he had, were both stoned and burnt together, Jos. 7.

Of this Sort is the Sacrilege of Spoiling God of his Tithes and Offerings,
Spoken of, Malachi 3. 8. where likewise the Penalty is declared by God's own
Mouth, Ye are cursed with a Curse, even the whole Nation.

Of this Sort also is the Sacrilege of Ananias and Sapphira, in the Acts of the
Apostles, whereof we shall speak anon.

A Multitude of Examples there be of this Kind, but for the most part they fall
as well under the Title of Local Sacrilege, as under this of Holy Things: I
will therefore refer the Reader to that which has been already delivered, and
will here close up the Books of the Holy Scripture, for Matters done before the
Passion of our Savior.

SOME ADDITIONS UPON THE Former Discourse: BY JEREMY STEPHENS.
SECT. VIII.
Some Annotations touching the Omissions of the Presbyterians, in their late
Annotations upon the Bible; with some other Passages.

THE pious Author of this Discourse intended to have added something concerning
the Sacrilege of Ananias and Sapphira, and other places of the New Testament;
but since he did not finish his Purpose, here shall follow, to supply that
Defect, some Annotations, that may, in part, make some Recompense of that
Omission.

And first the late Annotations upon the Bible published Ann. Dom. 1646. by
some Divines called Presbyterians, deserve to be censured for their Omissions,
and dangerous insinuations: for in their explication of some remarkable Texts
and Examples concerning Sacrilege, they do very unworthily discharge their
parts; in that they never mention the principal offense and Sin of Sacrilege,
which is expressly charged in the Text, and by all Expositors both Ancient and
Modern so approved. As touching the Sacrilege of Achan in the 6. and 7.
Chapters of Josua, which is so fully and remarkably set forth by the Holy
Ghost, and Achan so fearfully Punished and Condemned for it, as might well
strike a Terror, not only into the People of that time, but of all Men in
succeeding Ages: for as the Apostle says, 1. Cor. 10. These things are written
for our Admonition, upon whom the ends of the World are come. Yet these Divines
pass all over in general Terms, not mentioning Sacrilege to be the great Sin
for which Achan and his family, and also the People were so severely Punished,
as is manifestly to be observed throughout these two Chapters.

Next for the Sacrilegious offense of Belshazzar in taking the Holy Vessels of
the Temple to drink wine in them at his great feast, they so blanch it over in
their Notes Dan. 5. 2. as if the principal Sin had been drinking excessively;
not profaning the holy Vessels, whereas the Text does not charge him or his
Nobles for excessive drinking (though at so great a feast some might perhaps
offend therein) but for the abuse of the Vessels, which were not to be employed
to any Common or Profane use, as they were not all the time since
Nebuchadnezzar his Grandfather took them from the Temple at Jerusalem, and put
them into the House of his Gods at Babylon -- Cum antehac in Beli Templo
aliquam adhuc sanctimoniam retinuissent (ut not at Hieronymus in Dan. 5.) Quod
tunc piaculum fuit Sacra profanare, nunc and principum and profanorum lusus
est, and adhuc quaerimus, cur bellis tam atrocibus vastitas passim fiat? melius
cavit sibi Justinianus qui vasa Templi secundi, a Vespasiano Romam portata, a
Genserico Romae expilatore Carthaginem, cum per victoriam nactus esset, non in
suos vertit usus, sed in sacram basilicam misit, quae erat Hierosolymis,
narrante Procopio. Thus the learned Grotius does observe in his Annotations
upon this Text; and so Calvin formerly, who says expressly in his Commentary,
Profecto ista profanatio indignissimum fuit Sacrilegium. So also Rolloc and
Willet in their Commentaries upon Daniel, are very clear to this purpose, all
which might have directed them who collected the Notes.

It is not impertinent to note further what became of these Vessels afterward,
because some do think it is unknown; for in regard they were Consecrated to the
Service of God, it appears that they were preserved wonderfully by the special
Providence of God, both in the first spoil of the Temple by Nebuchadnezzar, and
also in the final destruction by Titus: For Nebuchadnezzar having taken them,
did not put them into his Treasury, nor convert them to private Uses, but
placed them in the House of his Gods at Babylon; and at the return of the Jews
from the Captivity, all the Vessels were restored to the Temple, as appears in
Ezra and Daniel. So Titus also did not convert them to any private Use, but
carried them to Rome, where they continued many Years in the Capitol, until
Gensericus the Vandal Sacked Rome, and from thence among other Treasures
carried them to Carthage, and there also they were preserved till Bell, the
great General under Justinian the Emperor, conquered Carthage; and among the
Riches and Plunder that they won there, when Gelimer the Fourth King, a
Successor after Gensericus, was taken, and other Riches and great Spoils, he
took and recovered the Holy Vessels of the Temple, and brought them to
Constantinople to the Emperor Justinian. When Justinian had them he was
informed by a Jew and some others, that they were the consecrated Vessels of
the Temple, and that they would not prosper in any Man's custody; and that for
detaining of them formerly Rome was conquered by Gensericus; and note again
Carthage was overcome for the same Offense, as Procopius relates lib. 2. de
bello Vandalico. And Baronius [...] of him A. Chapter 534. Justiniani 8.... also
Paulus Diaconus, quem ex Codice Palatino edidit Janus Gruterus... quatuor decim
interim dies secura and libera direptione omnibus opibus suis and miraculis
Roma est evacuata, in quibus erant Ecclesiastica (...) sola ex auro and
lapidibus pretiosis ornata, and vasa Hebraica, quae Titus Vespasianus post
captivitatem Hierosolymitarum Romam deliberat, multa Millia captivorum cum
regina Hadoxia, quae Gensericum ad hoc facinus invitaverat, duabusque ejus
filiabus Carthaginem abducta sunt.

When thus the Vessels were brought to Constantinople, and presented to
Justinian the Emperor, he greatly feared, and was very unwilling to convert
them to any private Use, or to his own Treasury; but upon advice sent them to
Christian Churches at Jerusalem, and so cleared himself of them, and would not
be guilty of any suspicion of Sacrilege. Thus we may see in those Days there
was some Piety in the Hearts of Men more than... They took Example by the
Calamities of others, not to be too bold with things Consecrated to God: In a
doubtful matter Justinian resolved rather to employ to some pious Uses, than to
enrich his own Coffers with them; but had they come into the Hands of
Presbyterians in these times, and had any such Men been in those Days, they
would have melted them into Money to pay Soldiers.

Likewise upon Acts 5. the Sacrilege of Ananias and Sapphira, in defrauding God
of a part of that which they had Consecrated to him, the Divines in their
Annotations omit the main Sin, and dwell upon the Circumstances only, as
Hypocrisy, Vainglory, Lying, Covetousness, and the like. But we must
distinguish between Ananias his Fact, and the Manner and Circumstance thereof.
The Fact was Sacrilege in the manner of doing, other Crimes attended as
Handmaids: It will be plain if we ask but these two Questions; First what
Ananias did? The Text will make Answer, he purloined of the holy Money; this
was his Fact. Ask Secondly, How and in what manner he purloined? The Story will
tell us, dissembling and hypocritically, making an appearance to the contrary.
This then was but the Manner and Circumstance of his Fact, and so the Species
of the Fact was to be placed therein, as Mr. Mede does fully show in his
Discourse upon this Text, and does further instance the Particulars accurately,
to whom therefore I refer the Reader.

These two terrible Examples of God's Judgments and Severities against
Sacrilege: The first of Achan, in the beginning of the Church of Israel, at
their first entrance into the Land of Canaan: The other of Ananias, in the
beginning of the Christian Church, are so remarkable, and so punctually urged
by the Holy Ghost, that they may well affrighten all Men in succeeding Ages
from taking away, or seizing upon any part, or parcel of that which is given
and consecrated unto God, and to his Service in any kind. The learned Grotius
says well in his Annotations upon Cassander (ad Artic. 16.) Quod vero dicit
Cassander, Imperatorum and Regum hoc quoque esse officium, ut leges divinas and
canones conservent, verissimum est: debent enim Christo servire etiam qua
Reges. Sed cavere sibi debent, ne Schismati dent causam: sed ita se norint
ecclesiarum sui regni esse tutores, ut simul meminerint Ecclesiae universitatis
se esse filios. Pessime autem officium hic implent principes, qui ea, quae olim
Deo, id est, piis usibus, data sunt, ad suos and quidem profanissimos saepe
usus vertunt, hoc sub praetextu, quod nimis multa possideant Episcopi: si
nimium multa habeant Epis. detur quod superest Presbyteris and Diaconis; detur
Ecclesiis aedificandis aut instaurandis; detur pauperibus popularibus; and si
ei desint externis, sicut olim ab Achaia and Macedonia missae sunt in Judaeam
pecuniae; redimantur qui apud barbaros sunt captivi, quam ob causam multi Epis.
vasa Ecclesiae etiam jam consecrata vendidere, quidam semetipsos dedere
pignori: Miror non terreri eos, qui vetus testamentum legunt Achanis, qui novum
Ananiae exemplo: and haec res praecipua causa est cur tam diu bella durent, non
tantum quia propter ista utrinque bellatur, verum etiam quia Deus contemptum
sui sic ulciscitur.

Leviticus 23. 33, 34. God commands that the Fields of the Suburbs of the
Levites Cities should not be sold, for it is their perpetual Possession. The
Fields belonging to their Forty eight Cities, were the Glebe-lands belonging to
them to keep their Cattle, therefore God commanded that these Fields should not
be sold upon any terms; which Calvin does truly expound in his Commentary,
saying, Hoc non modo in eorum gratiam statuitur, sed quia totius populi
interfuit, dispositos esse quasi in excubiis, ubi locum ipsis Deus
assignaverat. Quod ad Suburbia spectat, vel agros pecoribus alendis destinatos,
vetat Deus alienari, quia hoc modo relicta propria statione subinde alio
migrassent, hanc vero disceptationem non accidere totius populi interfuit. The
same Reason is good at this Day; for the Ministers of the Gospel must have
Houses to live in, and some Glebe-lands for the maintenance of their Cattle,
otherwise they cannot subsist and attend their Duties. But our Presbyterian
Divines do say in their Notes, there was something in practice contrary to
this; as if a bad practice, contrary to the express Commandment, were
sufficient to excuse the Fault: The thing that they mean, and mention is the
particular Example of Barnabas the Levite of the Country of Cyprus (Acts 4.
37.) Having Land sold it, and laid the Money at the Apostles feet. But it is
easily answered, that Barnabas had that Land in the Country of Cyprus, as
Tyrannus says, of which Country he was: For many Jews that were dispersed and
dwelt in other Countries, and had Estates there, and yet came over at the
solemn Feast at Jerusalem for to worship, as now Barnabas did: And if the Lands
which he sold were in Judaea, yet then it might be sold, because the Jews
Polity was at an end, and the old Law of Moses did not bind any longer; Lex
quae Hebraeos certis finibus continebat, jam soluta erat, as Oecumenius and
Chrysostom say upon x. 5.

In the Four last Chapters of Ezekiel, Ezekiel. 45. 1.
the Prophet does there publish a remarkable Prophecy concerning the Christian
Church and State (it being never to be fulfilled in the State and Church of
Israel.) There is appointed by God a Division to be made of Land into three
Parts, whereof the first is an Holy Portion of the Land as an Oblation to the
Lord, which should be employed for the building of the Temple, and for the
habitation of the Priests and Levites: The length whereof shall be 25000 Yards,
and the breadth shall be 10000. This shall be Holy at the Borders thereof round
about. A second Part for the City and People; and a third for the Prince. But
for the Holy Portion for the Temple and Levites, God commands expressly, That
it should not be alienated, exchanged, or sold upon any pretense, Chap. 48. 14.
These Four Chapters of great concernment to the Christian Church are passed
over in silence, and the principal Scope of them altogether neglected: No
marvel they pass over the Apocryphal Books, wherein are remarkable Examples
against Sacrilege, as is already set forth in this Discourse out of them. And
though the Books themselves are not accounted Canonical equal to the rest, yet
for the Historical Truths, concerning the Persecutions and Sufferings of the
Jews, there is no question made of their Credit.

The Authors therefore of the Annotations, though in their Preface they promise
all Sincerity and Fidelity, yet have they failed in both very grossly; They
solemnly attest the Divine Omniscience, and profess with the blessed Apostle
St. Paul, that they are not of those that corrupt the word of God, 2 Cor. 2.
17. or who handle it deceitfully, Chap. 4. 2. nor who wrest any part of it to
the Patronage of any Error of what denomination soever; nor have we added to it
(say they) any of our own preconceived Opinions to imprint a partiality in our
Expositions, nor taken from it, or smothered the least tittle of sacred Truth
contained in it, nor yet have we subtly passed over any difficult place with
silence, as if it had no need of an Annotation to clear it.

But let the Reader judge whether it appears not by these few Observations
touching Sacrilege (which is the crying Sin of this Age) that they have dealt
very slightly and subtly in passing over such remarkable Places with silence,
and smothering the Truth, which might have been confirmed and enforced from
these pregnant Texts. They have plainly discovered their Double-dealing,
Dissembling and Forbearance to denounce the Judgments of God against such a
notorious Sin, so raging and predominant at this time. They have done like the
false Prophets of old that did sow Pillows, and flatter the People in their
evil Courses; whereas Sacrilege is accounted one of the most heinous Sins of
these Days by the best Divines, and other learned Men that have written thereof.

The Apostle says, Romans 2. 22. Thou that abhorrest Idols, do thou commit
Sacrilege? The Presbyterians are very zealous against all sorts of Idols,
Images, Pictures, and Crosses; but for Sacrilege (unless it be for that of the
Sabbath) they are very sparing and silent. But for the Apostles words; it is
true (as one does well infer upon them) these words are spoken as to the Person
of an unconverted Jew, and may be therefore thought to aim only at those Sins,
which were described in the Law of Moses: But do but view St. Paul's way of
Arguing, and you will quickly find they come home to us Christians. He
therefore tells the Jew, that he taught others those things which he would not
do himself, and he strives to make this good by three several Instances. First,
Thou that preachest a Man should not steal, do thou steal? Secondly, Thou
that say a Man should not commit Adultery, do thou commit Adultery? In
both these it is plain, that the Jew he dealt with did the same things he
reprehended: And streightway the third comes, Thou that abhorrest Idols, do
thou commit Sacrilege? So that hence it will follow (if St. Paul's words have
any Logic in them) that these two Sins are of the self same Nature too; and
that to commit a Sacrilege is a breach of the same Law, as to commit an
Idolatry; so that the Crime will appear, without all doubt, a plain Robbery of
God: For he that steals from Men, yea though a whole Community of Men, though
bona universitatis, yet he sins but against his Neighbor, it is but an Offense
against the Second Table of the Law, in these words, Thou shall not steal. But
Sacrilege lays hold on those things which the Latins Laws call bona nullius, it
strikes downright immediately at God; and in that regard no Idolatry can outdo
it: As this is, it is a breach of the First Table of the Law, and both these
Crimes are equally built upon the self same contempt of God: The Offenders in
both kinds, the Idolater and the sacrilegious Person both think him a dull
sluggish Thing. The first thinks he will patiently look on, whilst his Honor
is shared to an Idol: The other imagines he will be as sottishly tame, though
his Goods be stolen to his Face.

XERXES having Ten hundred thousand Men in his Land-Army, and as many, by
Estimation, in his Navy; intends to make an absolute Conquest of Greece, page
13. and spoiling all Phocis, leaves a part of his Army among the Doreans,
commanding them to invade Delphos, and to fire the Temple of Apollo, and to
bring away the Sacred Riches of it. The Soldiers marching toward it, came to
Pronoea, a place not far from Delphos, where a wonderful Tempest of Rain and
Lightning suddenly came upon them; and rending down part of the Mountains,
overwhelmed many of the Army; and so amazed the rest, that they fled away
immediately, in all the haste they could, fearing to be consumed by the God,
who by this prodigeous Miracle thus preserved his Temple. In memory hereof a
Pillar was erected in the Place, with an Inscription to relate it, page 12.

But this seemed not a sufficient Revenge for so horrible a Design, accompanied
with other acted Sacrileges. Nothing therefore prospers with Xerxes: His
invincible Navy is overthrown in a Sea-Battle at Salamis, by Themistocles; his
Land-Army at Plateos, by Pausanias; where Mardonius (Xerxes's General) that
destroyed the Houses sacred to the Gods, was also slain. Both these great
Victories beyond human Expectation, sell against him in one day; and beaten
thereby out of Europe, with the Loss of... thousand of his Men, he fortifieth
the rest of his Navy and Army at Mycale, a City of Ionia in Asia; where
Leotychidas the Lacedaemonian General, obtaining as admirable a Victory of him
as the other, slays above Forty thousand of his Men, putting the rest to
flight: Which struck such terror into the Heart of Xerxes, as upon report
thereof he fled also to Ecbatan; and in this manner ended his Wars with
inestimable Loss, Derision and Shame. Vengeance notwithstanding still pursued
him; so that after many Years, Artabanes the Captain of his Guard (aspiring to
the Kingdom, though he obtained it not) murdered both him and his eldest Son
Darius. Diodor. lib. 11. pa. 15, 23, 28, 53.

Imilco, a famous General of the Carthaginians, for their Wars of Sicily, in
the time of Dionysius, the Tyrant, prevailed very fortunately in all his
Enterprises, till that taking the Suburbs of Archadina, he spoiled in it the
Temple of Ceres and Proserpina. This Sacrilege (says Diodorus) brought a just
Punishment upon him; for in the next Encounter, the Syracusans overthrew him.
And being arrived in his Camp, Fears and Tumults rise amongst his Soldiers in
the Night time, and sudden Alarms as if the Enemy had been upon his Trenches.
Besides this, a grievous Plague at last... in his Army, accompanied with many
fierce Diseases that drove his Men into Frenzies and Forgetfulness; so that
running up and down the Army, they flew upon every Man they met with. And no
Physic could help them; for they were taken so suddenly, and with such
Violence, as they died within five or six days, no Man daring come near them,
for fear of the Infection. Hereupon ensued all other Calamities: their Enemies
assail them both by Sea and Land; they invade their Forts and their Trenches,
fire their Navy, and (to be short) make a general Confusion of the whole Army.
An hundred and fifty thousand Carthaginians lie dead on the Ground. Imilco
himself, who lately possessed all the Cities of Sicily, (except Syracuse, which
he also accounted as good as his own) flies by Night back into Carthage, and
fears now the losing of it. This great Commander (says Diodorus) that in his
Haughtiness placed his Tent on the Temple of Jupiter, and preverted the Sacred
Oblations to his profane Expenses, is thus driven to an ignominious Flight,
choosing rather to live basely, and contemned at home, than to expiate his
wicked Sacrilege by a deserved Death. But he came to such Misery, that he went
up and down the City in a most loathsome Habit, from Temple to Temple,
confessing and detesting his Impiety: and imploring at length some Capital
Punishment for an Atonement with the Gods, ended his Life by the extremity of
Famine. Diodor. Sicul. Hist. lib. 14. p. 285. and seqq. A. M. 3576.

Cambyses, the Son of Cyrus the Great, being at Thebes in Egypt, sent an Army
of 50000 Men, to spoil the Ammonians, and to burn the Temple and Oracle of
Jupiter Hammon. Himself, with the rest of his Forces, marched against the
Aethiopians. But 'ere ever he had gone the fifth part of his Journey, his
Victuals so failed him, that his Men were forced to eat their Horses and
Cattle. And whilst like a Man without Reason, he still forced them to go on,
and to make a shift with Herbs and Roots: Coming to a Desert of Sand, diverse of
them were constrained to tithe themselves, and eat the tenth Man; whereby his
Voyage was overthrown, and he driven to return. His other Army, that went to
spoil and fire the Oracle, after seven Days travel upon the Sands, a strong
South Wind raised the Sands so violently upon them, as they were all
overwhelmed and drowned in them. Herodotus in Thalia, lib. 4. page 167, and 168.

Cambyses, after this, in despite to the Egyptians, wounded the sacred Calf
Apis (which they worshipped for their God) with his Sword upon the Thigh: ( Her.
page 169.) Derided the Image of the God Vulcan, and entering the Temple of the
Cabitans, where none might come but the Priest, burnt the Images of their Gods,
( page 147.) Presently, upon wounding Apis, he fell Mad, and committing diverse
horrible Facts; as he mounted upon his Horse his Sword fell out of the
Scabbord, and wounded him in the same part of the Thigh wherein he had wounded
Apis, and thereon he died, having Reigned but seven Years, and leaving no Issue
Male or Female to succeed him in the great Empire of his Father Cyrus, for
securing of himself and his Posterity, wherein he had formerly murdered his
Brother Smerdis. Herod. Thalia, lib. 3. page 183. and seq.

A Rich Citizen of Egypt, longing to eat of a goodly Peacock that was
consecrate to Jupiter, hired one of the Ministers to steal it; who going about
to do it, was at the first interrupted by a Serpent; and the second time the
Peacock (that had lived by report an Hundred Years) flew toward the Temple,
and resting a while in the mid way, was after seen no more. The practice being
discovered by a brable between the Parties about the Hiring Money, the Minister
was justly punished by the Magistrate for his Treachery; but the Citizen that
longed to eat of the sacred Fowl, swallowed the Bone of another Fowl, was
choked therewith, and died a very painful Death. Aelian. de Animal. l. 11. c.
33.

Dionysius, the elder, rose by his own Prowess from a private Man to be King of
Sicily; and in performing many brave Exploits both in Italy and Greece,
committed diverse Sacrileges upon the Heathen Gods, and defended them with
Jests. Having conquered Locris, he spoiled the Temple of Proserpina, and
sailing thence with a prosperous wind, Lo! (quoth he) what a fortunate Passage
the Gods give to sacrilegious Persons.

Taking the Golden-Mantle from Jupiter Olympius, he said it was too heavy for
Summer, and too cold for Winter, and gave him therefore one of Cloth.

So from Aesculapius he took his Beard of Gold, saying it was not seemly that
the Son should have a Beard, when his Father Apollo himself had none at all.

With such Conceits he robbed the Temples of the Golden Tables, Vessels,
Ornaments, and things of price Dedicated to the Gods. Whereupon ensued a change
of his Fortunes; for afterward he was ordinarily overcome in all his Battles,
and growing into contempt of his Subjects, was murdered by them at last. (
Jus. lib. 20. in fine, pa. 184.) His Son, named as himself, succeeds in the
Kingdom, and ordained as it were to extirpate the Family of his Father, put his
Brethren and their Children to death. He grows Odious also to his Subjects,
and falling into Civil War with them, is thrice overcome by them; and after
various Events, is at last driven out of his Kingdom irrecoverably. He sees
the Death of his Sons, his Daughter violently ravished, his Wife (who was his
Sister) most villanously abused, and in fine, murdered with his Children. His
Days he consumed in Exile among his Enemies; where he lived not only Despised,
but Odious to all, consorted with the basest People, and in the vilest Manner;
and so ending his Tragedy, gave Plutarch occasion to say, That neither Nature
nor Art did bring forth any thing in that Age so wonderful as his Fortune.
Just. lib. 21. pa. 187. Plut. in Timoleon, p. 240.

Antiochus, the Great King of Syria, being overcome by the Romans, and put to a
great Tribute, not knowing how to pay it, thought that necessity might excuse
his Sacrilege; and therefore in the Night spoils the Temple of Didymaean
Jupiter. But the Country People rising upon the Alarm of it, slew both him and
his whole Army. Just. lib. 32. pa.

Q. Fulvius Flaccus Pontifex, spoiled the Temple of Juno... One of his Sons
dies in the War of Illyricum; and the other lying desperately Sick, himself
between Grief and Fear falls Mad, and hangs himself. Live. Dec. 5. lib. 2.
pa. 47. a.

Diverse that had spoiled the Temple of Proserpina, at Locris, were by Q.
Minutius sent fettered to Rome. The Romans sent them back again to the Locrians
to be punished at their pleasure; and caused the things taken out of the Temple
to be restored, with Oblations besides for an Atonement. Live. Dec. 4. lib. 2.
p. 44. b.

Agathocles, surprising the Lipareans, imposes a Ransom of Sixty Talents of
Silver upon them: They made as much toward payment of it as they could, and
desired Day for the rest, saying, That they had never upon any necessity meddled
with that which was consecrated to the Gods. Agathocles would none of that
Answer, but enforced them to bring him that Money, it being Dedicated part to
Aeolus, and part to Vulcan. Having it, he departed; but in his return Aeolus
raised such a Tempest, that many thought him sufficiently revenged; and Vulcan
after burnt him alive. Diodor. Sicul. lib. 20. p. 828. A. M. 3608. circ. pa.
817.

But that which we shall now deliver is most remarkable, both for the excessive
Sacrilege and Punishment. And because the Relation perhaps shall not be
unpleasing, I will presume to be a little the longer in it. The General Senate
(of the chiefest part of Greece) called the Amphictyon, imposed a grievous Fine
upon the Phoceans; for that they had taken a piece of the Ground Cirrhaea,
being consecrate to Apollo, and had profaned it to works of Husbandry; adding
further, that if the Fine were not paid to the use of Apollo, their Territories
should be consecrate unto him. The Phoceans nettled with this Decree, as not
able to pay the Fine, and choosing rather to die than to have their Country
proscribed; by the Counsel of Philomelus, they protest against the Decree of
the Amphictyones, as most Unjust, that for so small a piece of Ground so
excessive a Fine should be imposed; and pretend that the Patronage of the
Temple of Delphos it self (where the famous Oracle of Apollo was) did of
Antiquity and Right belong unto them; and Philomelus undertaketh to recover it.
Hereupon the Phoceans make him their General; he presently draws into his
Confederation the Lacedaemonians (whom the Amphictyones had bitten with the
like Decree) and with an Army on the sudden invadeth and possesses the Temple
of Delphos, slaying such of the City as resisted him. The same hereof flew far
and wide; and upon it diverse Cities of Greece undertake in their Devotion a
sacred way against the Phoceans and Philomelus.

First, They of Locris give them Battle, and are overcome. Then the Boeotians
prepare an Army for their Aid; but in the mean time Philomelus, the better to
defend his Possession of the Temple, encloseth it with a Wall: And though he
had formerly published through Greece, that he sought nothing but the
Patronage; yet seeing many Cities to join in force against him, he now falls
apparently upon spoiling of the Temple for supporting of his War, taking from
it an infinite Wealth in precious Vessels and Oblations. Nor did the progress
of his Fortune suddenly teach him to repent it; for he prevailed still against
the Locrians, Boeotians, Thessalians, and other their Confederates, till the
Boeotians, at last, overthrew his sacriligeous Army, and slaying a great part
thereof, drove himself to that necessity, that to avoid the Tortures incident
to his Impiety, he threw himself headlong down a Rock, and so miserably ended
his wicked Pageant.

Onomarchus (his Partner in the Sacrilege) succeeds in his room of Command
and Impiety; and after variety of Fortune, his sacrilegious Army is overthrown
by King Philip of Macedon; and by his Command the Soldiers, that were taken
Prisoners, were drowned, and Onomarchus himself, as a Sacrifice to his
Sacrilege, hanged.

Then Phayllus, the Brother of Onomarchus, is chosen General; who rotting by
little and little whilst he lived, died at length in most grievous Torture for
his Sacrilege, page 437.

After him succeeded Phaloecus, Son of Onomarchus, who beyond all the former
Sacrilege (wherein some accounted that as much was taken, as the whole Treasure
was worth that Alexander the Great brought out of Persia) added this, That
hearing there was an infinite Mass of Gold and Silver buried under the Pavement
of the Temple, he with Philon, and other of his Captains began to break up the
Pavement near the Tripos; but frighted suddenly with an Earthquake, durst
proceed no further, page 453. Shortly after, Philo is accused for purloining
much of the Sacred Money committed to his Dispensation; and being Tortured
names many of his Consorts, who with him are by the Phoceans themselves all
put to terrible Death, ( page 452.) And the Boeotians, by the aid of king
Philip, put to flight diverse Troops of the Phoceans, whereof 500 fled for
Sanctuary into a Chapel of Apollo's, seeking Protection under him, whose Temple
they had so violated. But the Fire they left in their own Tents fired their
Cabbins; and then taking hold of Straw that lay near the Chapel, burnt it also,
and in it them that were fled into it. For the God (says Diodorus) would give
them no Protection, though they begged it upon their Knees, p. 45, 3.

Now after ten Years this sacred War came to an end. Phaloecus, not able to
subsist against Philip and the Boeotians, compoundeth with him for License to
depart, and to carry the Soldiers he had about him with him.

The Phoceans, without all means to resist, are by a New Decree of the
Amphictyons, or Grand Council, adjudged to have the Walls of three of their
Cities beaten to the Ground; to be excluded from the Temple of Apollo, and the
Court of the Amphictyons (that is, to be Excommunicate and Outlawed;) to keep
no Horses nor Armor, till they had satisfied the Money, sacrilegiously taken,
back to the God; that all the Phoceans that were fled, and all others that had
their Hands in the Sacrilege, should be duly punished, and that every Man might
therefore pull them out of any place; that the Graecians might destroy all the
Cities of the Phoceans to the Ground, leaving them only as Villages of fifty
Houses a-piece, distant a Furlong the one from the other to inhabit; that the
Phoceans should retain their Ground, but should pay a yearly Tribute of Sixty
thousand Talents to the God, till the Sum mentioned in the Registers of the
Temple, at the beginning of the Sacrilege were fully satisfied, page 455.

The Lacedaemonians also and Athenians, who aided the Phoceans, had their part
(and justly) in the Punishment. For all the Lacedaemonian Soldiers that were at
the spoil of the Oracle, were afterward slain by the Lucans, (page 458.) and
all others universally (says Diodorus) not only the principal Agents in the
Sacrilege, but even they that had no more than their Finger in it, were
prosecuted by the God with inexpiable Punishment, page 456.

Nor did Phaloecus escape it, though he compounded with Philip, and lived long
after. For his long Life was no Happiness unto him, but an extension of his
Torture, living perpetually in Wandering up and down, perplexed with restless
Fears, and variety of Dangers; till at last, besieging Cydonia, and applying
Engines to batter it, Lightning falling upon them consumed both them and him,
and a great part of his Army: Yet others say, that he was slain by one of his
Soldiers, page 485. Diodor. lib. 16.

The residue of his Army, that escaped the Fire, were by the exiled Eleans
hired to serve against their Countrymen of Elis; but the Arcadians joining
with the Eleans overthrew their Exiles, and this their Army of sacrilegious
Soldiers; and having slain many of them, divided the rest (being about 4000)
between them. Which done, the Arcadians sold their part to be Bondmen; but the
Eleans, to expiate the spoil of Delphos, put all their part to the Sword. Many
also of the noblest Cities of Greece (that had aided the Phoceans) being
afterward overcome by Antipater, lost both their Authority and Liberty. And
besides all this, the Wives of the prime Men of Phocis, that had made
themselves Jewels of the Gold of Delphos, were also punished by an immortal
Hand: For she that had got the Chain, offered by Helenes, became a common
Strumpet; and she that adorned her self with the Attire of Eriphyle (taken
thence) was burnt in her House by her eldest Son, stricken Mad, and firing the
same.

These fearful Punishments fell on them that were guilty of misusing sacred
Things: Whereas on the other part, Philip the King (that at this time had
nothing but Macedon) by defending the Cause of the Temple and Oracle, came
after to be King of all Greece, and the greatest King of Europe, as Diodorus
Siculus notes, lib. 16. pa. 458. A. M. 2626.

In the next Age after this, Brennus the Gaul (or, as our Chroniclers say, the
Britain; for the Eastern Nations did of old account the Britains under the Name
of the Gauls, as they do at this day under the French,) raising a mighty Army
of Gauls, invaded Greece, and prospering there victoriously, came at length to
Delphos, with an Hundred and fifty thousand Foot, and Fifty thousand Horse;
where his Army endeavoring to spoil the Temple standing upon the Hill
Parnassus, was in scaling of it valiantly resisted by Four thousand Citizens.
But suddenly an Earthquake tearing off a great part of the Hill, threw it
violently upon the Gauls, who being so dispersed, a Tempest of Hail and
Lightning followed, that consumed them. Brennus, astonished at the Miracle, and
tormented at the Wounds he had received, slew himself with his Dagger, Just. l.
24. p. 233.

Another of the Captains, with Ten thousand of the Soldiers that remained, made
all the haste they could out of Greece: but their Flight was little Benefit
unto them. For in the Night they durst come in no Houses, and in the Day they
wanted neither Labor, nor Dangers. Abundance of Rain, and Frost, and Snow, and
Hunger, and Weariness, and the extreme Want of Sleep, consumed daily this
miserable Remnant: and the Nations they passed through, pursued them as
Vagabonds to prey upon them. So that of that numerous Army, which of late in
the Pride of their Strength despised and spoiled the Gods, none was left to
report their Destruction.

Thus Justin affirms: but Strabo says, That diverse of them returned into
their Country (being Tolouse in Provence) and that the Plague there falling
amongst them, the Soothsayers told them, they could not be delivered from it,
till they cast the Gold and Silver they had gotten by their Sacrilege, into the
Lake of Tolouse.

About Two hundred and forty Years after, Q. Servilius Cepio, the Roman Consul,
taking the City of Tolouse, took also this Treasure, (then being in the Temple,
as seems by Aul. Gellius, lib. 3. cap. 9.) and much increased by the
Citizens, out of their private Wealth, to make the Gods more propitious unto
them. The Gold (says Strabo) amounted to a Hundred and ten Minas, and the
Silver to One thousand Pound in Weight. In truth (says Strabo) this Sacrilege
was the Destruction both of Cepio himself and of his Army; and Gellius adds,
That whosoever touched any of that Gold, perished by a miserable and torturing
Death. Hereupon came the Proverb, which this Day is so usual among Scholars,
Aurum habet Tolosanum; spoken (says Erasmus) of him that is afflicted with
great and fatal Calamities, and ends his Life by some new and lamentable
Accident. See more in Strabo.

A Soldier of Antoninus Verus, the Emperor, cutting by chance a Golden-Cabinet
( Arculam) in the Temple of Apollo at Babylon, there issued such a pestilent
Breath out of it, as infected both the Parthians, and all other parts of the
World wheresoever they came, even to Rome. Jul. Capitolin. in Aug. Hist. To. 2.
pa. 120.

It were endless to sail in this Stream, the Heathen Authors are so Copious in
it. But for a Corollary to that has been spoken, I desire to add a Fable of
Ovid's ( Lib. 8. Metam. page 331.) wherein he shows what Opinion the World
then had of Sacrilege, and what Fatalities it brought upon the Offenders in it.
Erisicthones profaning the Grove of Ceres, cutteth down her sacred Oak, and
contemning his Superstition that offered to hinder it, cleaves his Head with
an Hatchet. Ceres strikes him with an unsatiable and perpetual Hunger; nothing
does satisfy him, nothing fills him, nothing thrives with him; all his Wealth
is consumed on his Belly: And when all is gone, then he is driven to dishonest
Shifts, and forbeareth no Wickedness. Her transmutation into these Shapes is
thus expounded.
He prostitutes his own Daughter to one for an Horse, to another for a Bird, to
a third for an Ox, to a fourth for a Deer. And when this is also devoured, his
Hunger, at last, compels him to tear his own Flesh with his Teeth, and by
consuming himself in this horrible manner to finish his Days most miserably.

DIoclefian and Maximianus having divided the Empire between them, Eusebius. l. 8.
cap. 1. and seqq.
this enjoying the West, and the other the East, they united themselves again
in raising the greatest Persecution that ever was against the Christians,
putting Priest and People to death, Seventeen thousand Persons by sundry
Torments, Oros. l. 7. c. 25.
in thirty Days, Carrion. in Ann. 288*
confiscating their Goods, burning the Books of Holy Scripture, rasing and
utterly subverting their Churches, Altars, and Places of Prayer, and Divine
Worship. Having continued in this Fury about 1.
Twelve Years, they grew at last to be troubled in Mind; and in one day
Maximianus at Millan, in the West, and Dioclesian at Nicomedia, in the East, of
their own accord renounced the Empire, and betook themselves to a private Life;
Dioclesian choosing Galerius for his Successor, and Maximianus, Constantius.
Constantine for his. Carrion. in Ann. 288.
But Maximian afterward repenting, Resumed the Purple.
endeavored to have brought his Son Maxentius into the Government, and was
therefore by the Commandment of Constantine, put to death; and Dioclesian,
after long Coffeehouse, slew himself. Yet for a further Revenge of the
horrible Persecution and Sacrilege, God sent a grievous Plague and Famine, lib.
9. c. 8.
as Eusebius reports, over all the World.

Certain Arians, Ann. 356.
by an Edict of Constantius the Emperor, attempt to expel Athanasius from the
Bishopric of Alexandria; and in rifling the Church, a young Man labors to
pull down the Bishop's Seat there, when suddenly a Piece thereof falling upon
him, rent out his Guts, that he died the next Day save one. Another bereaved of
his sight and Sense for the present, was carried forth, and recovering about a
Day after, remembered nothing of what he had done or suffered. But these
Accidents stayed the rest from proceeding farther. Epist. Constantii Imp. ad
Alexand. apud Athanas. Apol. 1. Bar. in An. 356. 35.

Julianus, Am. 362.
President of the East Part of the Empire, and Uncle to Julian the Emperor,
(both Apostates) with Felix the Treasurer, and Elpidius, Keeper of the Privy
Purse, all Persons of high Dignity, come to Antioch, by Commission from the
Emperor, to carry from thence the Sacred Vessels to the Emperor's Treasury.
They enter that goodly Church, and Julian going to the Holy Communion Table,
makes water against it; and because Euzoius offered to hinder him, he gives
him a Box of the Ear; saying, That God regarded not the Things of Christians.
Felix also beholding the Magnificence of the Sacred Vessels, (for Constantine
and Constantius had caused them to be sumptuously made) Lo, (quoth he) in what
State the Sun of Mary is served! Presently the Guts of Julian rotted in his
Body, and the Dung which formerly went downwards, now passes upwards through his
blasphemous Mouth, and so ending his Life. Felix is stricken suddenly with a
Whip from Heaven, casts his Blood day and night, from all parts of his Body
out at his Mouth, and for want of Blood so dies presently. Theod. Eccl. Hist.
lib. 3. cap. 11, 12.

Chrysostom says that Julian burst asunder in the midst... and Ammianus, lib,
33.... that Felix died suddenly ( profluvio sanguinis) of a gushing out of
Blood.

What became of Elpidius, Theodoret does not mention, but Nicephorus, lib. 10.
cap. 29. reports, that though the third Blasphemer was not so suddenly
punished, yet being at length apprehended amongst them that aspired to the
Government, ( tyrannidem) he was stripped of all he had, and suffering much
Misery in Prison, died loathsomly, accounted as a cursed and detested Person.
Bar. Ann. 362. 110.

Diverse Bondmen of a great Person, Ann. 433.
not enduring the Severity of their Master, fly into the Church at
Canstantinople, and with their Swords do keep the Altar, refusing to depart
from it, and do thereby hinder the Divine Service diverse Days together; but
having killed one of the Clerks, and wounded another, they at last killed
themselves. Socr. lib. 7. cap. 33. v. Niceph. lib. 14. cap. 34, 35. Evag. lib.
1. cap. 3, 45. This happened a little before the Council of Ephesus, Ann. 433.
where Nestorius was condemned, and was a Praeludium to those Evils, as it is
said in Socrates, ibid, that then followed in the Church.

Nam saepe signa talia dari solent,
Cum sacra foedum templa polluit scelus.
In the time of Childebertus, King of Paris, and Son of Clodover the First, his
Brother Theodoricus besieges Montclere, the chief City of Avernia, which
Childebertus, his Brother, had taken from him. A Knight then hearing that
diverse Citizens had carried their Goods into the Church of St. Julian, leaves
the Siege, and with his Followers, breaking open the Doors, takes all away.
But God, the just Revenger of Sacrilege, struck them all incontinently with
Madness. Gaguin. in Childeberto, fol. 13. where he admonishes Soldiers, by
this Example, to take heed of Sacrilege; and thereupon adds another Example.
--

Siginaldus (says he) Governor of the Avernians, found this to be true; for
puffed up with a desire of enlarging his Patrimony and Dominion; after he had
wrung many things from the Inhabitants, he took also from the Church of St.
Julian, the Town of Bulgrate, which Tetradius had given unto it; and being
presently stricken Mad, recovered not his Senses till he had left the Town
again unto them, and made a recompense for that he had taken. Idem, tit. ibid.
Chilbert began to reign An. 515. and died about 560.

Some of the Burgundians, An. 508.
with a great Power, besiege Brivatensem Vicum, the Town of Brivat, killing
many, and taking many Prisoners, do also carry away Ministerium Sacrosanctum,
the Implements of the Church. Passing over the River, as they were dividing the
Captives, one Hellidius coming from Vellavum, suddenly upon them with his
Company, slew them all save four, and rescued the Captives. The four that
escaped carried with them into their Country a Dish, and a Pitcher, or
Water-pot ( urceum) called Anax. The Dish they divided amongst themselves into
four parts, but the Pitcher they presented Gundebard, their King, for his
Favor. The Queen finding the Silver they had brought, sent it back to the
Place from whence it was taken, with other Presents added unto it. Gre. Turon.
Glor. Mar. lib. 2. cap. 78. Shortly after this Gundebard, and the Burgundians
are overthrown by the Franks and Goths, and their Country divided amongst
their Enemies. Bar. An. 508. 33, 34.

Whilst King Chramnus was at Averne, An. 556.
five of his People brake by Night into the Oratory of the House of Juacen, and
stole from thence the Ornaments of the Ministry, and flying into the Territory
of Orleans, there divided them: Shortly after four of them were slain in
Tumults; and the fifth, having all the Goods in his House, as Survivor, was
stricken Blind with an Humor of Blood that fell upon his Eyes; which touching
him with Repentance, it pleased God to have Mercy on him; so that recovering
his Sight, he carried back the Ornaments, and restored them. Greg. Turon. de
Gloria Martyr. 166. Bar. 556. 42.

Chilperic, Circ. 570.
King of Suessons in France, who flourished Anno 570. sent his Son Theodebertus
with an Army to waste Normandy, and the other Territories of his Brother
Sigebert. Theodebert, in doing it, forbear not the Christians, but spoiled them
also. At last part of his Army come to Lota, a Monastery of St. Martins; and
twenty of them (the rest refusing) entered into a Bark, and passing over the
River, sacked the Monastery, slew some of the Monks, and carried the Prey into
their Bark. Having lost their Oars, they were constrained to use their Spears
in rowing themselves back, and coming into the midst of the River the Bark
sunk, and they falling down upon their Spears, were both slain and drowned, one
excepted. The Monks recovering their Goods from the Water, buried the Bodies of
them that were drowned. Theodebert himself, and all his Army, falling after
into an Ambush laid for them by Sigebert, were also slain. Aimone de Gest.
Franc. lib. 3. c. 12.

The Leaders of King Guntheranus's Army hearing that Gundebaldus, An. 576.
dislodging with his Forces from the side of the River Garonna, was gone to the
City Convenica; they in pursuit having swam over the River, and drowned some of
their Horse, came with the rest to the Church of St. Vincent, which is near the
Borders of the City Argen;... and finding that the Inhabitants of that part had
carried all their Wealth into the same Church, as supposing the Sanctity of
that place should preserve it, they set the Doors on fire, being fast locked,
and so consuming them, entered the Church, and carried away all the Substance
of the Inhabitants, and what else belonged to the Divine Service, which by the
work of God was presently punished: For the Hands of most of them were
Divinitus.
strangely burned, and made a smoke as things use to do that are set on fire;
some were carried away by the Devil. Many after they were Semoti.
departed wound themselves with their own Weapons, and some of the rest
straggling abroad are slain by the Inhabitants about Conven. Greg. Turo. Hist.
lib. 7. c. 35.

This Author (as Sigebertus says) was made Bishop of Tours, in the Year 571.
is much Honored generally for his Life, Gravity and Fidelity; yet must I note,
that he has delivered this Story somewhat differingly in his Book, De Gloria
Mart. lib. 1. c. 105. though to the same effect (Memory in all Men being
sometime stronger, sometime weaker.) There he says, that the Soldiers could
not of long time, and with much labor make the Church Doors take fire; and
that at last they were fain to use the help of Hatchets, and to chop them in
pieces; that being entered, they took both the things that were there, and slew
all the People that were fled thither for safety: That this was not long
unpunished, for some were Alii a Daemone correpti.
rapt away by the Devil, some drowned in the River Garumna, many lying in the
cold got diverse Diseases, in diverse parts, that vexed them grievously: For, my
self, says he, did see in the Territory of Tours many of them, that were
Partners in his Wickedness, grievously tormented, even to the loss of this
present Life, with intolerable Pains. Bar. 476. 4.

Chilperic, the greatest Man with Sigebert King of Mees, or Austrasia, claims
wrongfully a Town from Franco Bishop of Aquis pretending that it belonged to
the public Revenue, and judicially, before the King and other Judges, does
recover it with Three hundred Crowns ( aureos) Damages. The Bishop, in great
anguish of Mind, goes to the Church, and falling down at the Tomb of St.
Metrias, Patron of the Church, prays for Vengeance, and threatens the Saint,
that there should be neither Lights nor Singing in that Church, until he were
revenged of his Enemy, and the Things restored that were taken away from it so
wrongfully. And laying Thorns upon the Tomb, he shut the Church Door, laying
others there also (for that was a Type that the place was forsaken.) Presently
hereupon Chilperic, that had done this wrong to the Church, falls sick of a
Fever, and continues so for a whole Year, eating little and drinking little,
save Water in the heat of his Fit; but perplexed in his Mind, and Sighing much,
yet Relented not in that he had done. In the mean time all the Hair, both of
his Beard and Head, came wholly off, and all his Head became bare and naked:
Then he bethinks him of the wrong he had done to the Church, and restores the
Town with Six hundred Crowns, for the Three hundred he had received; hoping so
to recover his Health, by the means of the Saint, but died notwithstanding.
Greg. Turon. De Glor. confess. ca. 71. Bar. An. 579. 15. This happened in the
time of King Sigebert, who was this Year murdered by the practice of his
Brothers Wife Fredegundis.

Ruecolenus, An. 579.
with a Power of the Cenomanians, wastes all about the City Tours, so that the
Houses and Hospital of the Church were without hope of Sustenance. He demands
also of the Churchmen there, that they should deliver unto him some that had
taken Sanctuary in the Church, and threatens to fire all if they refused. St.
Gregory of Tours, being then Bishop there, and that writ this Relation with his
own Hand, goes to the Church; and praying for aid ( Beati auxilia flagitamus)
a Woman that had twelve Years been contracted with the Palsy, was made
straight: But Ruecolenus himself being now come to the other side of the River,
was presently stricken with the King's Evil, and with the Disease of King
Herod; and the fiftieth Day after died, all swollen of the Dropsy. This Greg.
Turon. himself (as I find) reports, De Mirac. S. Mart. lib. -- c. 17. Baron.
579. 18.

Certain Servants, An. 596.
or Officers of Egbright the third King of Kent after Ethelbert, had done great
Injury to a Noble Woman, called Domneva (the Mother of St. Mildred); in
Recompense whereof the King promised, upon his Honor, to give her whatsoever
she would ask of him. She begged upon this so much Ground of him to build an
Abbey on, as a tame Deer (that she had nourished) would run over at a Breath.
The King had presently granted it, but that one of his Council, named Timor,
standing by blamed his inconsideration, that would upon the uncertain Course of
a Deer depart with any part of so good a Soil. But presently (says the Author,
William Thorn, a Monk of St. Augustin's) the Earth opened and swallowed him up
alive; in Memory whereof the place till this time was called Timor's Lease. It
may be the Monk has aggravated the matter, and that Mr. Lambard justly does
count it Fabulous; but it seems some notable Misfortune followed upon Timor,
hindering, in this manner, the propagation of Religion in the beginning of our
Church. Yet no learned Man, I think, doubts but that in the first Conversion
of Heathen People, God was pleased to show some Miracles upon sacrilegious
Impediments. The Story goes on, that the King moved with the Event, granted
Domneva's Petition; and that the Hind being put forth, run the space of Forty
eight Plough-lands before it ceased. In which Precinct this Lady, by the King's
help, builded the Monastery for Nuns, called Minister-Abbey, in Tenet. Lambard
Itin. in Tenet. page 99.

Egfrid, An. Dom. 684. Bed. l. 4. c. 26.
King of Northumberland, sends an Army into Ireland, under the Conduct of
Bert; and wasting miserably that harmless Nation, which then was Friend to the
English, spared neither Churches nor Monasteries. The Inhabitants resisted as
they could, but rested not to call upon God with continual Curses for Revenge.
And though those that be accursed cannot inherit the Kingdom of God, yet it is to
be thought that those that are justly cursed for their Iniquity, that the
Vengeance of God does therefore fall the sooner upon them: For this same King,
this next Year after, in a Voyage against the Picts, was drawn into streights,
and both himself and most of his Army slain.

And in the eleventh Year of King Ino (says Huntington) the Earl Berutus felt
the Curses of the Irish People, Lib. 4. p. 337. l. 14.
whose Church he had destroyed, as his Master had done before: For as King
Egfrid entering into the Land of the Picts, was there slain; so he entering it
also to revenge his Masters Death, was likewise slain by them.

Osred, An. 710. circ.
King of Northumberland, being but eight Years old when he began to reign, and
Reigning but eleven Years; even thus young broke the Monasteries, and
deflower'd the Nuns, with much other Wickedness; for which the just Hand of God
being upon him, as Bonifacius, Archbishop of Mentz, and other Bishops assembled
after in a German Council, do testify by their Epistle to Aethelbald, he was
murdered by his Kinsmen, Kenred and Osrick, and his Kingdom Usurped by Osrick,
contrary to Osred's meaning, who had Decreed it to Ceolwulfe, Brother of his
Father, as Beda reports, lib. 5. ca. 24. who says farther, that his whole
Reign abounded with so many Crosses of Fortune, that no Man knew either what to
write of them, or what end they would have. Vid. Epis. apud Malmes. de gest.
Reg. lib. 1. p. 28. Sed fusius apud Baron. in An. 745. nu. 5.

Ceolred, An. 712. circ.
King of the Mercians, or Midland England, was guilty also of spoiling
Monasteries, and defiling of Nuns; and was the first, with Osred, before named,
that since the entrance of Austin, brake the Privileges granted by the Saxon
Kings unto Monasteries, and for these sins, says Boniface, and the other
Bishops in the said Epistle, Justo judicio Dei damnati de culmine regali hujus
vitae abjecti, and immatura and terribili morte praeventi, etc. For Ceolred (as
those that were present did testify,) being at a great Feast among his Earls,
that Evil Spirit which before had moved him to do such wickedness, struck him
there with Madness, and in that case he died Impenitently, the same Year, that
Osred, his fellow in Sacrilege, was murdered, viz. An. 716. Epist. praedict.
and Beda in Epit. It seems his Line was also extinct.

Ethelbald the next Successor of Ceolred in the Kingdom of Mercia, Circ. Ann.
742.
succeeded him also in his wicked Courses. He forbeareth lawful Marriage, but
lives Adulterously with the Nuns, and breaking the Privileges of Churches and
Monasteries, takes away also their Substance, which gave the occasion that
Boniface Archbishop of Mentz, and other German Bishops wrote the forementioned
Epistle unto him, desiring him to mend his course, and the wrongs he had done,
which like a good King he willingly did; and at a Council holden at Clovesho,
now called Cliff, in Kent, acknowledging his Sin, did also by his Charter
restore what he had taken or broken, with an Overplus, and founded the
Monastery of Crowland; yet so was the hand of God upon him, that in a War
unwisely begun, he was treacherously Slain by Bartred, alias Beornred, and the
Kingdom by him usurped Epist. praedict. and Stow, page 88. and Bar. 742, nu. 16.

Celsus Veronensis.
THat many rare and excellent Men, and all Nations attributed the fortunate
Success of the Turks against the Venetians, as the loss of their Island Cubaea,
the lamentable success of their Expedition of Achaia, his last Victory which
made his way broader, and his entrance easier, the Death and Calamity of their
Euripus; many think, and affirm, that God of his righteous and just Judgment,
has brought upon you for your insolent Taxing and Polling of Holy Things
belonging to the Church, and your injurious troubling of the Estate of
Religion. page 212. Compilation and Pilling of Holy Things. page 214. New and
unusual Taxing and Tolling of the Church. page 215.

How many Victories, Conquests, Sports, happy Events, have you had in these so
long Wars, since you invented this strange and pestilent Counsel to lay violent
Hands on Church Goods, and Holy Things dedicated to God? which Impiety,
(believe me) will not help you one whit in these your great Dangers, and
extreme Necessity. page 219.

That the Captivity of Constantinople, was from the discord and departing from
the Church of Rome. page 215.

The Pisans Kingdom prosper'd by Sea and Land, till they laid wicked and
violent Hands on the Church, and the Ministers of the high God. Ibid. Caesar
would not suffer his Sword hung up as a Spoil gotten from him in the Church of
Avernia to be pulled down. Vita ejus, page 219.

Mithridates, in the Life of Lucullus, notably afflicted by Diana, page 226.
Historius Banished, taken Captive by the barbarous, the City burnt over his
Head, his Life always in danger, fell into a most deadly Contagion, his Tongue
eaten out of his Head with Worms, and miserably died. Evagr. Hist. lib. 1. page
169.

Lastly, Propound unto your selves the late Example of Philip Maria, when he
had good Success in all his Affairs, and all things fell out with him as well
as he could wish. At length, he gave over himself to such a madness, that all
fear set apart, he challenged Church Goods to himself. But mark how duly he
suffered worthy Punishment; being wearied with continual Wars, he not only lost
a great part of his own Dominions, his Enemies besieging him even hard unto his
Walls; but also he suffered dangerous and grievous Diseases, so that he being
blind, led a most sorrowful life a long time after. But what became of his
Empire, and by what means his Noble Family is now clear extinguished, and no
Succession left at all, it may easily appear to every Man, the thing being so
fresh in Memory. Cells. Veron. page 241.

Frederick II. made Emperor by Innocent III. having taken the Cross against the
Christian Enemies, even then feared not wickedly to take away the Goods of the
Church to employ them profanely, but made a Sacrilegious pact with the mighty
King of Egypt, the Sultan, concerning the suppressing of Religion and Religious
Houses; but he did not long escape the just Vengeance of God; for after he had
spoiled many Cities, after many Dissensions had with the Church of Rome, after
he had devoured many Temples, after many most cruel and barbarous Sacrileges,
having his own Son in a jealousy, that he affected the Empire, he shut him up
in most filthy Dungeons till he died. And he feeling the great and grievous
censure of the Church, (as the righteous God had appointed) was Strangled by
his own Son Manfredus most cursedly. Celsus of Verona. page 289. The Princes of
Carraria in like Impiety when they began once wickedly to challenge to
themselves the ordering of those things which belong only to the Holy Function,
by reason of the Pestilent Counsel they had taken, very soon after lost the
famous City Patavium, most strong by Situation and free, which was thought
almost to be invincible. Cells. of Ver. page 239, 240.

Eudo, alias Oda, Duke of Aquitane not able to resist Charles Martel, Ann. 730.
draws an excessive Army of Saracens out of Spain unto his aid. They being
come into France, waste all places, and burn down the Churches as far as to
Poictiers. Charles Martel assisted by the Hand of God, encountreth them, and
slays three Hundred seventy five Thousand (others say three Hundred eighty
Thousand) of them, together with their King Abdyrama, losing not above an
Hundred and Fifty of his own Men. Then Eudo himself reconciled to Charles,
spoileth the Camp of the Saracens, and destroys the rest. But fighting again
with Charles in Gascony, loses both his Dukedom of Aquitane and his Life; his
Sons also, Gaifer and Haimald, are overcome, and the Saracens wholly beaten out
of France. Sigeb. An. 730, 732. Guil. de Nanges. Blond. 10. Decad. 1. and
Platin.

The Normans under Ragenarius their Captain, An. 845.
besides other Sacrileges, spoil the Church of St. Germans by Paris, and
attempting to cut down some of the Firr Beams, to repair their Ships, three of
them attempting it, are dashed in pieces. Another hewing a Marble Pillar with
his Sword to overthrow some part of the Church, had his Hand (like Jeroboam's)
dried up, and the haft of his Sword stuck so to it, as it parted not without
the Skin. Many were stricken with Blindness, and as it was commonly reported,
some of their Army died daily so thick of the Bloody Flux, as they feared that
none of them should escape; whereas all the Christians that were amongst them,
were free from it. They hasted therefore into the Country, but died there as
fast, and infected others so grievously, as Horich their Prince fearing, that
both himself, and the Nobility and People should be consumed, commanded the
rest of them to be Beheaded, and tho some fled upon it, yet it was thought they
died of the Disease.

Ragenarius their General and Author of all the Evil, at his return, bragged
before Horich, in the presence of Kobbe, the Ambassador of King Lodwick, and
many others, what great things he had done at Paris; and said, That the Dead
there, had more power than the Living, and that an old Man, whom, they called
German, most resisted him. Speaking thus, he began to tremble, and falling
down, cried out, That German was there, and did beat him with his Staff. Being
presently taken up and carried out, he continued three Days in grievous pains;
whereupon, Repenting of what he had done, he commanded that his Statue should
be made of Gold; and that Kobbe should carry it to the old Man German,
promising, that if he recovered, he would become a Christian; but his Guts
passing from him as if he were burst in the midst, he so died. And because he
was not a Christian, his Statue would not be received, tho it were of Gold.

Kobbe, the Ambassador for Lodwick, King of Bavaria, to the Normans, being yet
Pagans, was an Eyewitness of these things, and related them to Aimoinus, who
living at the same time, and seeing much of it himself, did, by the commandment
of King Charles, write a History of strange things then happening, which he
entitled, De Translatione and Miraculis S. Germani Episcopi, whence this above
mentioned is taken. Bar. An. 845. nu. 22. and Seq.

The Danes with a great Army destroy the Monks and Monastery of Bradney, An.
865.
kill the Abbot and Monks of Croyland, and burn their Church, make the like
havoc at Peterborough, and murder the Nuns at Ely. Shortly after, their whole
Army is overthrown in Battle at Chippenham, by Aelfred, Brother of King
Aethelred, and Hubba their King, with five Earls, and many Thousands of their
Pagan Nation slain. Stow, p. 101. Flor. Wigor. An. 871. Hunting. lib. 5. p.
349. says there were nine Earls slain this Year.

Aboila, alias Agdila, An. 874.
a Saracen Prince, coming with a great Army out of Africa, besieged Salerne,
and made the Church of St. Fortunatus, Caius, and Anches, his Lodging, placing
his Bed upon the Altar, and abus^^g it with all Filthiness; but it happened,
that having gotten a Maid, and going about to Ravish her there, as she resisted
and strugl'd with him, a piece of Timber falling down from the top of the
Church, slew him in his Wickedness, and hurt not the Maid, which seemed
apparently to be the very work of God; for that the Timber fell not
perpendicularly, but aslope. He being thus extinct, the Saracens chose
Abimelech, an Eunuch, King, in his stead. Baron. An. 874. nu. 2. out of
Herempertus de Gestis Longobardorum Principum Beneventanorum, Codice MS.

In the Reign of Carolus Crassus, Circ. An. 888.
(who began 886, and died 891.) there happened a strange Accident memorable in
France, as well by common Fame, as by writing to the later times, that the
Monks of Clunis going forth in their Habit to meet the Earl of Matiscon, he not
only slew them, but with torture and cruelty, and in that manner raged
continually against the Church. It fortuned therefore, that he being one day at
a Feast with many of the Nobility, an unknown Person coming to the Door
required to speak with him; and the Earl going out was never seen after. Some
write that he was carried away, fearfully crying through the Air, with a Black
Horse (pullo equo). Paradinus de antiquo Statu Burgundiae, pa. 62.

Leofstane, a noble Saxon, Circ. Ann. 880.
and of great Authority, in the heat of his Youth entered the Place, where St.
Edmund the King and glorious Martyr of our East Angles, was entombed; and
causing the Tomb or Coffin to be opened, made the Body to be showed forth to
the Beholders, many laboring to hinder it. But in that instant, whilst he
stood looking on it, he was struck with Madness; which his Father, a Religious
Man, hearing, gave Thanks unto the Martyr for it, and casting off his Son,
suffered him to live in great Penury, wherein afterward by the Hand of God, he
was consumed with Worms, and so ended his Life. Jornalensis in S. Edm. vita,
fol. 29. a. 6.

The same Author in the same place tells also, That diverse lewd Persons
robbing in the Nightime the Church where his Tomb was, were all taken, and by
the Judgment of Theodoret, the Archbishop of Canterbury in those days, hanged
together. But adds, That the Archbishop repented the Deed all the days of his
Life afterward, remembering the Speech of the Prophet saying, Eos qui ducuntur
ad mortem eruere non cesses. And that hereupon he put himself to great Penance,
and calling the People of the Diocese together, persuaded them to fast and pray
for him three whole Days, that it might please God to turn the Wrath of his
Divine Indignation from him for doing this deed.

Nicephorus, Circ. Ann. 964.
Emperor of Constantinople, had mavelous Success in all his Affairs, and in a
short time obtained so many, and so famous Victories against the Saracens, as
are scarcely to be believed; he falls then to spoiling of Churches, and
sacred Houses, taking from them that which usually was given unto them, and
pretended that the Bishops consumed the Money that was given to the use of the
Poor, whilst the Soldiers lived in Want and Poverty. After he had thus laid his
Hands upon the Goods of the Church, he not only wasted all his own Goods, but
overwhelmed with Evils, found the Hand of God to be against him, and to pursue
him with Revenge, as the Greek Historians are of Opinion: For by and by his
Army is beaten in Calabria, an innumerable Multitude of his People slain, many
with their Noses cut off are sent back to Constantinople; the Citizens there
Murmur, Mutiny and Rebel, his own Wife conspireth with them, and by the Hands
of John Zomisces, one of his Army, do murder him, and make the same John
Emperor in his room. Curopalates, etc. Bar. Ann. 964. nu. 34. and 968. nu. 3,
4, 5.

Upon the Rebellion of the Welshmen, Ann. Dom. 974.
King Edgar entering with an Army into the Country of Glamorgan, some of his
Soldiers, among other Spoil, took away the Bell of St. Ellutus, and hanged it
about an Horses Neck. It then chanced, as the report was, that King Edgar
sleeping, in the Afternoon, there appeared one unto him, and smote him on the
Breast with a Spear. By reason of which Vision he caused all things that had
been taken away to be restored again. But were there any such Vision or no, it
is said, he died within nine Days; and the truth is that he died indeed at his
Age of thirty seven Years, when he had Reigned sixteen Years and two Months.
Rog. Higd. Chr. p. 161. col. 1. lib. 60.

King Edgar, Ann. 975. Ranulph. Cestr. lib. c. 11.
understanding that the Welshmen were in Rebellion, invaded the Country of
Glamorgan with an Army, and in spoiling of it the Bell of St. Ellutus was taken
away, and hanged about an Horse's Neck. Verba Authoris.
Therefore in Vndertyde, while King Edgar lay on his Bed to rest him (says the
Chronicle) one appeared to him, and smote him on the Breast with a Spear. Then
when the King was waken, he bad restore again all that was taken. But the King
died after nine Days, or as Fabian says, within ten Days. Ranulph. Cestrens.
out of the British History.

This King Edgar was buried at Glastenbury; and when Ayleward, the Abbot there,
had unworthily dug open his Grave, he (the Abbot) fell Mad, and going out of
Church brake his Neck and died. Ibidem immediate supra.

Griffith, the Valiant and Victorious King of North Wales, An. 1054. Hoved. in
An. 1055. p. 443. Hist. of Cambria. p. 99.
in aid of Algar, Earl of Chester, whom King Edward the Confessor had expelled
and banished, invadeth Herefordshire, puts to flight Radulf Earl thereof,
and Son of Goda the Confessors Sister, with his whole Army, and taking the City
of Hereford, fired the Cathedral Church, slew Leogar the Bishop, and seven of
the Canons that defended it, burnt also the Monastery built by Bishop
Aethelstane, carried away the Spoil thereof, and of the City, with slaughter of
the Citizens, and fully restored Algar, the Earl, both now and a second time.
Upon this King Edward sent Harald against him, who upon his second Voyage into
North Wales burnt his Palace and Ships. After this, Griffith raising an Army
for Revenge, and going to meet Harald, was by his own People traitorously
Murdered, and his Head brought to Harald.

Alfgarus, Hist. Eliens. l. 2. Hollinsh. p. 866.
Stalhere (that is Constable of the Army) to Edward the Confessor, invaded the
Town of Estre, otherwise called Plassie, and pulling it from the Monastery of
Ely, converted it to his own use. Circ. Ann. 1068.
The Abbot and Monks there besought him by all fair means to restore it, but
prevailing not they proceeded to denounce daily Curses, and Imprecations
against him, and at last (although he were so great a Person in the Kingdom) to
excommunicate him. Hereupon the King reproving him sharply, and the People
shunning his Company, he at last sought to be reconciled to the Church, and for
obtaining thereof granted by his Deed, and ratified it by his Oath, that the
Town after his decease should again return to the Monastery: Yet (after the
Death of Edward the Confessor, and Harald the Usurper) he was by the Conqueror
cast into Prison, and there, among others in Fetters of Iron, ended his Life.

Jordan, Prince of Capua, Ann. Dom. 1078.
hearing that the Bishop of Rosella had brought, and laid up a good Sum of
Money in the Monastery of Cassin in Italy, sent his Soldiers, and by force took
it out of the Treasury of the Church; but was shortly after stricken Blind.
Leo. Marsic. lib. 3. cap. 45. Upon this Gregory the Seventh calls a Council,
and makes a Canon against Sacrilege; and writing to Jordan reproves him for
this and other Offenses, admonishing him to amend them. Baron. An. 1078. 24.
The Prince, touched with Remorse, grants in Recompense, the next Year after,
to the Monastery of Cassin diverse great Territories and Privileges, with a
Penalty of 5000 l. of Gold upon the Violaters thereof. Leo. Marsic. in Chron.
Cassin. lib. 3. cap. 46.

RIchard, Robert and Anesgot, Sons of William Sorenge, in the time of William,
Duke of Normandy, wasting the Country about Say, invaded the Church of St.
Gervase, lodging their Soldiers there, and making it a Stable for their Horses.
God deferred not the Revenge; for Richard escaping, on a Night, out of a
Cottage where he was beset with his Enemies; a Boor, whom he had fettered a
little before, light upon him, and with an Hatchet clave his Head asunder.
Robert, having taken a Prey about Soucer, was pursued by the Peasants and
slain. Anesgot entering and sacking of Cambray, was struck in the Head with a
Dart, thrown downward on him, and so died. Lo, (says Gemeticensis) we have
here seen that truly performed which we have heard! If any man shall violate
the Temple of God, God shall destroy him, 1 Cor. 3. 17. And admonishing such as
spoil Churches to look about them, and not to sooth themselves in their Sin,
for that God often deferreth the Punishment, he concludes with these Verses of
another Man's, Lib. 6. cap. 13, 14.

Vos male gaudetis quia tandem suscipietis
Nequitiae fructum, tenebras, incendia, luctum,
Nam pius indultor, justusque tamen Deus ultor
Quae sua sunt munit, quae sunt hostilia punit.
Dear bought, for thou must one Day undergo
The price of this, Hell, Darkness, Fire and Woe;
God's Threats are sure, though Mercy be among them,
He guards his Rights, and pays them home that wrong them.
William the Conqueror, in making the Forest of Ytene, commonly called the
New-Forest, is reported to have destroyed twenty six Towns, with as many
Parish-Churches, and to have banished both Men and Religion for thirty Miles in
length, to make room for his Deer. He had ruined also some other Churches in
France upon occasion of War; and in Lent-time, in the fourth Year of his Reign,
he rifled all the Monasteries of England of the Gold and Silver, which was laid
up there by the richer of the People to be protected by the Sanctity of the
Places, from Spoil and Rapine; and of that also which belonged to the
Monasteries themselves, not sparing either the Chalices or Shrines. But he,
that in the like Attempt met with Heliodorus, in the second of Machab. 3. met
with him also grievously, both in his Person and Posterity.

Touching his Person, as God raised Absalom against David, so raised he Robert,
Duke of Normandy, against his Father the Conqueror, and fought a Battle with
him by the Castle of Gerborie in France, where the Conqueror himself was
unhorst, his Son William wounded, and many of their Family slain. Hereupon the
Conqueror (as casting Oil into the Fire of God's Wrath that was kindled to
consume his own Family) cursed his Son Robert, which to his dying Day wrought
fearfully upon him, as shall by and by appear. But to proceed with the
Conqueror himself, it is very Remarkable, that being so great and renowned a
King, he was no sooner Dead, but his Corpse was forsaken of his Children,
Brethren, Friends, Servants and Followers, and wickedly left (says Jo. Stow)
as a barbarous Person, not one of his Knights being found to take care of his
Exequies: So that a Country Knight, out of Charity, was moved to take care
thereof, and conveying the Corpse to Caen in Normandy, the Abbots and Monks of
St. Stephens, there with the rest of the Clergy and Laity of the Town, met it
reverently; but in conducting it to the Church, a terrible Fire broke out of an
House, and spreading suddenly over a great part of the Town, the whole Company
was dispersed, and only the Monks left to end the Office begun. The Funeral
notwithstanding proceeded afterward in great Solemnity; the Bishops and Abbots
of Normandy attending it: But when the Mass was done, and that the Bishop of
Ebroscen, at the end of his Sermon, had desired all that were present to pray
for the dead Prince, and charitably to forgive him, if he had offended any of
them; one Anselm Fitz-Arthur, rising up, said aloud, The Ground whereon ye
stand was the floor of my Father's House, and the Man for whom ye make
Intercession took it violently from him while he was Duke of Normandy, and
founded this House upon it: I now therefore claim my own, and forbid him that
took it away by violence to (...) covered with my Earth, or to be buried (...)
my Inheritance. The Bishops and Nobility hearing this, and understanding it to
be true by the Testimony of others, presently compounded with the Party in fair
manner, giving him 60 s. in Hand for the place of Burial, and promising a just
Satisfaction for the rest; for which he received afterward a 100 l. in Silver
by consent of Henry the Conqueror's Son. This Blur being thus wiped away, they
proceeded to put the Corpse into the Tomb or Coffin, prepared by the Mason,
whereupon another followed very loathsome; for it being too short and strait,
as they strove violently to thrust the Corpse into it, the fat Belly, not being
Boweled, burst in pieces, and vapoured forth so horrible a savor, as the smoke
of Frankincense, and other Aromaticks, ascending plentifully from the Censers,
prevailed not to suppress it, but both Priest and Company were driven
tumultuously to dispatch the Business, and get them gone. Thus much of the
Disasters touching the Person of the Conqueror. To which may be added, that his
very Death proceeded from a violent Accident happening unto him in the Sacking
of Medant, where the heat and heaviness of his Armor, and the extreme clamor
upon his Soldiers, wrought, as was reported, a Dissolution of his Entrails ( a
ruina intestinorum ejus liquefacta, says Gemeticensis) for though he lived a
while after, yet he languish'd till his Death. But note, by the way, that he
who had in his Lifetime destroyed so many Churches and Burying-places, being
dead, although he were so great a King, yet he wanted the Office of his
Children, Friends and Servants, to carry him to Church, or to take care of his
Burial; that being carried thither by others, the very Fire wherewith he had
devoured certain Churches, interrupted his Passage; that being come to the
Church, he that had put so many by their places of Burial, was now put by his
own: And lastly, that when the place of his Burial was obtained for Money, it
happened (fatally) that it was too strait to receive him, as though the Earth of
the Church (which he had so grievously injured) were unwilling to open her
Mouth to entertain him. But after all difficulties, Did he not rest quiet at
last? Reason would he should; for the Grave is Asilum Requiei, the Sanctuary of
Rest, and he did enjoy it for many Ages: Yet the Bishop of Bajeux, in the Year
1542. opened his Tomb, and brought to light his Epitaph hidden in it, Graven
upon a Gilded-plate of Brass. But in the Year 1562. certain French Soldiers,
with some English, that under the Conduct of the Chastillon took the City of
Caen, and fell to spoiling of Churches there, did barbarously break down, and
deface the Monument of this great King, and (as though the Malus Genius of the
Churches, which himself had destroyed, still pursued him with Revenge) did take
out his Bones and cast them away. Verst. p. 184. What befell these Soldiers that
thus rifled Churches, appears not, obscurity and oblivion do conceal them.
But the lamentable end of the Chastillon himself, that suffered this Outrage,
is very notorious in the Massacre of Paris.

To come to his Posterity; his Sons were four, all of them, at times, in War
amongst themselves. Robert, the eldest, deprived of his Birthright, the Crown
of England; first by his Brother William, then by his Brother Henry, who also
took from him his Duchy of Normandy, put out his Eyes, and kept him cruelly in
Prison till the Day of his Death. His only Son Richard, hunting in the
New-Forest, was slain in the Life of his Father, by an Arrow shot casually, as
Florentius Wigorneinsis reports. Others name him Henry, and say he was hanged
there, like Absalom, by the Hair of the Head. Be it one or both, the Death was
violent, and in the New-Forest. But thus Robert died without Issue, nothing
prospering with him (as Stow notes) after his Father Cursed him.

Richard, second Son of the Conqueror, Duke of Beorne (as Stow says) died also
in the same Forest, in the fifteenth Year of his Father, upon a pernicious
Blast that happened on him; but Gemeticensis, lib. 11. c. 9. says, with a blow
of a Tree.

William Rufus, the third Son, was contaminate as well with his own, as his
Fathers Sacrilege; for he would part with no Bishopric that came into his
Hands without Money for it, by reason whereof he had lying upon his Hand (for
want of Chapmen) thirteen Bishoprics at the time of his Death. He was also
slain in the same Forest, An. -- with an Arrow (out of the Quiver of God) shot
casually by Sir Walter Tyrell; and as Florentius reports, in the very
selfsame place, where a Church did stand till the Conqueror destroyed it. He
also died without Issue. Gemeticens. lib. 7. cap. 9.

Henry, the fourth Son, being King Hen. I. abstained (as I imagine) Hunting in
the New-Forest, but God met with him in another Corner; for having but two
Sons, William legitimate, and Richard natural; they were in the fifteenth Year
of his Reign both drowned, with other of the Nobility, coming out of France;
and himself dying afterward without Issue Male, in the Year 1135. gave a period
to this Norman Family. Here I must observe (as elsewhere I have done) that
about the very same point of time; viz. 68 Years wherein God cut off the Issue
of Nebuchadnezzar, and gave his Kingdom to another Nation after he had invaded
the holy Things of the Temple: About the very same point of time, I say, after
the Conqueror had made this Spoil of Churches, did God cut off his Issue Male,
and gave his Kingdom to another Nation, not of Normandy but Bloys.

Inter An. 1061. and An. 1070.
Vrsus, Abbot, was made Sheriff of Worcester by William the Conqueror; and
building a Castle in Worcester, near the Monastery, cut a part of the
Churchyard into the Dike of his Castle, which Aldred the Archbishop of York,
seeing, said to him, Alias Hightest, i. e. Thou art named or called.
Hate thou Urse have thou God's curse, unless thou take down this Castle,
and know assuredly, that thy Posterity shall not long inherit this Ground of
St. Mary' s. He foretold (says Malmsbury) that which I saw performed; for not
long after, his Son Roger Possessing his Father's Inheritance, was Banished by
King Henry I. for putting an Officer of the King's to Death in an headlong
fury. Malms. de Gest. Pont. p. 271. And his Sheriffwick went to Beaumont, who
Married his Sister. Camb. 578.

Hugh, Ann. 1098.
Earl of Shrewsbury, with Hugh, Earl of Chester, was sent by William Rufus to
assail the Welch-men in Anglesey, which they performed with great cruelty, not
sparing the Churches. For the Earl of Shrewsbury made a Dog-kennel of the
Church of St. Fridank, laying his Hounds in it for the Night time, but in the
morning he found them mad. But it chanced, that Magnus, King of Norway came in
the mean time to take also the same Island, and encountering the Earl of
Shrewsbury at Sea, shot him in the Eye, where, only he was unarmed, and the
Earl thereupon falling out of the Ship into the Sea, was both Slain and
Drowned, and died without Issue. Girald. Camb. Hov. in Ann. 1098. and Holl. ib.
Cat. EE. Shrewsb.

Geoffrey, Circa. Ann. 1100.
the 16th Abbot of St. Albans, living whilst he was young a Secular Man, and
teaching at Dunstable, did there, about the beginning of King Henry I. make a
Play of St. Catharine, called, Miracula; and for Acting of it, did borrow of
the Sexton of St. Albans, diverse Copes that belonged to the Quire of St.
Albans, for the Service of God, and having used them profanely in his Play,
both the House wherein they were, and the Copes themselves, were the next Night
casually Burnt. Geoffery for great Grief, hereupon, gave over the World, and by
way of a Propitiatory Sacrifice, offered up himself a Monk in St. Albans, where
afterward in the Year 1119. viz. 19, or 20. of Henry I. he was made Abbot. Lib.
MS. de Abbatibus Sti. Albani.

Madoc ap Meredith, Ann. 1157.
Prince of Powis, spoiling two Churches in Anglesey, and part of the Isle, was
with all his Men, Slain in the return. Stow, p. 217.

Sherbourne in Dorsetshire was made an Episcopal See in the Year, 704, or 705.
And as the use of the time was, with many Curses (no doubt) against him, or
them that should violate it, or should get or procure it to be alien'd from
that Bishopric. St. Oswald (who flourished 270 Years after,) fortified those
Curses, as is reported, with diverse other bitter imprecations. It continued
peaceably in the Possession of the Bishops till the time of King Stephen, then
Roger, Bishop of that See (translated by his Predecessor to Salisbury) building
three sumptuous Castles, one at Sherbourn, another at Devizes, and the third at
Malmsbury; the King supposing they might turn to his prejudice, sent for the
Bishop, and took and imprisoned him, with some others of his Coat; and calling
a Council of the Peers and Baronage, obtained a Statute to this effect; Contin.
Florent in An. 1161. page 28.
That all Towns of Defense, Castles, and Munitions through England wherein
Secular business was went to be exercised, should be the King's and his Barons:
And that the Churchmen, and namely, the Bishops, as Divine Dogs, should not
cease to bark for the desence and safety of their Sheep, and to take diligent
heed that the invisible Wolf, that malignant Enemy wory not, or scatter the
Lord's Flock. Thus the King obtained these Castles that he thirsted after, with
the Bishop's Person and Treasure beside. And being summoned hereupon to a Synod
at Winchester, by his Brother Henry Bishop there, and Legate of the Pope; he
sent Albery de Vere, Earl of Guisne, and Chamberlain of England, a Man of
excellent Speech, and singularly well learned in the Law, (whom, some report,
to be made Chief Justice of England after the said Roger,) him I say, did the
King send to the Synod as his Attorney, or Sergeant at Law, to defend his
Cause, which he did with so great Art and Dexterity, that nothing was therein
determined. But mark the issue, ever a twelve Month came to an end, the Earl
Albery de Vere was Slain in London. Florileg. in Ann. 1140. The King himself
within another twelve month taken Prisoner, and being delivered upon an
exchange for the Earl of Gloucester, spoileth diverse Churches by his Flemish
Soldiers, and builds the Nunnery of Wilton into a Castle; where the Town is
fired about his Ears, his Men slain, his Sewer, Plate, and other things taken,
and himself driven to escape by a shameful Flight. He continues his Wars with
unprofitable Success; falls at discord with his Barons, and is driven to make
Peace with Duke Henry, his Adversary. His Son Eustace displeased therewith,
applies himself to spoil Cambridge-Shire, and those parts, falls upon the
Lands of the Abbey of Bury, and carries the Corn to his Castles; and sitting
down to Dinner, as he put the first Morsel in his Mouth, he fell Mad, and died
miserably. Mat. Par. Ann. 1152. Stow, Ann. 1153.

In the end, he stated the Crown upon the Duke Henry, being compelled thereto;
and dying, had no lawful Issue Male to propagate his Family, his Sons of that
sort being taken away in his Life time.

Having spoken of those Curses set of old like Bulwarks about the Castle of
Sherbourn, to defend it against Sacrilegious Assailants, and of the Operation
they had in those Ancient Days, it falls very fitly in my way to show also in
what manner they have uttered their venom, since that time of old; for, tho
Poison tempered by an Apothecary, with over long keeping, will lose its
strength; yet the Poison that lurketh in the Veins of Curses lawfully imposed,
is neither wasted nor weakened by Antiquity, but oftentimes breaks forth as
violently after many Ages, as if they were but of late denounced. Like the
implicit Curse that devoured the seven Sons of Saul, for breaking the Covenant
with the Gibeonites, made above Five Hundred Years before their time.

See therefore a farther Collection touching this matter, delivered unto me
above three Years since, by a Person of great Place and Honor.

The Castle of Sherbourne, was granted to the Sea of Salisbury by St. Oswel,
with several bitter Imprecations and Cursings on him, or them, that should get,
or procure Sherbourne to be aliened from that See. St. Oswel praying, that he
or they might die Issueless or Unfortunately, that should so take it.

King Stephen was the first that got it from that See, after the first
Donation, Ann. 1139. His Death, and his Son's Dying Mad, make it observable.

Will. Martel, King Stephen's Sewer had it, who being taken Prisoner, gave it
for his Ransom. Ann. 1142. Reg. 7. Hoved. ibid. p. 488.

In Edward III. time, the Earl of Salisbury had it, who died Issueless, and not
Fortunate.

Then the Duke of Northumberland had it, who was Attainted.

After the Duke of Somerset had it, who was Attainted.

After the Lord Paget had a Lease from the Bishop, who was Attainted.

After him, Sir Walter Rawleigh had it, who was Attainted.

After him, the Earl of Somerset had it, who was Attainted for Felony.

The Crown had it, Prince Henry had it; but King James would not suffer Prince
Charles to have it, for the success.

The Earl of Bristol has it.

Received from my Lord Keeper, 9th of May, 1626.

Lodwick Grevil, owner of Micletin, a Manor belonging to Ensham Abbey in
Oxfordshire, had two Sons, whereof Edward, the younger, shooting a piece, by
chance slew his elder Brother, and thereby succeeded in the Inheritance.
Lodwick himself in the... Year of Eliz. standing mute upon his Arraignment, for
Poisoning of... whose Will he had Counterfeited, was Pressed to Death. Edward
afterward Knighted, Mortgaged the Abbey to... Fisher, a Skinner of London, for a
small Sum, and growing farther in with him by borrowing, and Use upon Use, it
came at length by Forfeiture and Entanglement, to be Fishers absolutely; and
Sir Edward Grevil having wasted his whole Patrimony, and sold some part thereof
in Warwickshire, to the Lord Treasurer Cranfeild, became Bailiff to the Lord
Treasurer of the same Land. Old Fisher put over the Abbey to his Son Sir Edward
Fisher, who with extreme Suites, Bribery, etc. so consumed his Estate, that he
was judged to be Eleven Thousand or Twelve Thousand Pound in Debt, and driven
to sell his great Lease of Wrongey, Blackbury, and Grandcourts in Norfolk, and
yet lives in fear of Bailiffs, etc. 12th of October. 1644. Ex relat. John
Wrenham. partim Rob. Mordant. Mil.

Sir Edward Grevil had a Son, that breaking his Leg over a Style, died; his
Daughters are one Married to Sir Arthur Ingram, to whom, he sold the Reversion
of his chief Seat Milcote, etc. and has a Hundred Pound per Ann. during his
Life, and the House.

Circa Ann. Dom. 1142. Stephen, and Geffrey Mandevil, Earl of Essex, being
called among other of the Nobility, to a Council at St. Albans, he was there,
by the King, in revenge of a former Injury, unduly taken at St. Albans,
prisoned, and could have no liberty till he had delivered the Tower of London,
and the Castles of Walden, and Plessy; being thus spoiled of his Holds, he
turned his fury upon the Abbey of Ramsey, it being a place of Security, and
invading it by force, drove out the Monks, and placed his Soldiers in their
room, and Fortified the Church instead of his Castle. The Abbot and Monks
betook them to their Arms, and with all the force they could, shot their Curses
and Imprecations against him and his Accomplices; thus prepared to his
destruction, he besieged the Castle of Burwel, where a Peasant shooting him
lightly in the Head with an Arrow, contemning the Wound, he died of it, in
Excommunication, leaving three Sons Inheriters of that Malediction, but of no
Cat. Com. Essex.
Lands of their Father, the King having seized them. Nub. lib. 1. c. 11. Stow.
An. 9 Steph. Matthew. Westminster. Ann. 1143. Hen. Hunting. Hist. lib. 8. page 393.

Arnulph, his eldest Son, who still maintained the Church of Ramsey as a
Castle, was taken Prisoner by King Stephen, striped of all his Inheritance,
banished, and died without Issue. Hov. in Ann. 1144. Catal. Com. Essex. page
177. Mat. Par. Ann. 1143. page 77. lib. 6.

Geffrey Mandevil, second Son, was restored by King Henry the II. and Married
Eustachia the Kings Kinswoman, but had no Issue by her.

William Mandevil, the third Son, succeeded his Brother, and was twice Married,
but died without Issue. Thus the Name and Issue of this Sacrilegious Earl were
all extinct, and the Inheritance carried to Geffrey Fitz-Peter, another Family
by the Marriage of Beatrix Say, his Sisters Grandchild.

Now we have related the Fortune of the Earl Mandevil and his Children, we must
not omit what Nubrigensis reports, touching two of his Captains, the one of
his Horsemen, the other of his Footmen, both of them cruel Executioners of
his Impiety. The first had his Brains dashed out by a fall from his Horse; and
the other, (whose Name was Rayner,) the chief burner and breaker into Churches,
being passing over Sea with his Wife, they were both of them turned out of the
Ship into a Boat, and so left to Fortune, were there Drowned. More of the Story
you may see in Nubrigensis. lib. 1. c. 11. and Mat. Par. Ann. 1143.

About the same time, Rob. Marmion, a Man of great power, in like manner
invaded the Church of Coventry, and turning out the Monks, placed his Soldiers
in their room; then going to Battle against the E. of Chester, he showed
himself in a bravery before both the Armies; and having forgotten privy
Trenches, which himself had made to entrap his Enemies, or hinder their
approach, he fell (as he pranced up and down before the Monastery) into one of
them, and breaking his Thigh Bone, could not get out; which a Peasant of his
Enemies perceiving, ran to him and cut of his Head. Nub. lib. 1. c. 12. Mat.
West. Ann. 1143. Hunting. lib. 8. p. 393. Mat. Par. 1143.

William Albermarl (whom I certainly take to be William le Gros, Hov. Ann. 1179.
Earl of Albermarl, that died 25th of Henry II.) by the former examples, thrust
the Regular Priests out of the Church of Belingcon, and Fortified it with his
Soldiers. But by example also of their grievous Punishment, it pleased God to
touch him with Repentance, so that to expiate his Sin, he did many Noble Works
of Charity, both in relieving the Poor abundantly, and in Erecting of two (if
no more) worthy Monasteries, that of Melsa, in the Year 1150. and the other of
Torneton, where he was Buried in Peace. Yet God delighted rather in Obedience,
than Sacrifice, cut off the Line of his Family, and transposed his Inheritance
by his only Daughter Hawis (who was thrice Married) to three several Families:
But in the two first it stuck not at all, and but two Descents in the last of
them. Nub. l. 1. c. 12. Hov. An. 1179. Cat. E. Albermarl.

King Henry II. in the Year 1192. and the 16th of his Reign, being in Normandy,
and hearing that Thomas of Becket, Archbishop of Canterbury, after a Peace
lately made between them, carried things so imperiously in England, as there
was no living under him; growing into an extreme Passion, used (as they say)
these words: In what a miserable State am I, that I cannot be quiet in my own
Kingdom for one only Priest? Is there no Man that will rid me of this Trouble?
Hereupon (or upon what other Motives, God knows) four barbarous Knights, Sir
Hugh Murvill, Sir Will. Tracy, Sir Rich. Britain, and Sir Reynold Fitz-Vrs,
hasting into England, slew the Archbishop, at Even Song, in his Cathedral
Church, at the very Altar, embruing it with his Blood and Brains, committing at
once this horrible Murder and tripple Sacrilege: First, in respect of the
Person; secondly, of the Place; and thirdly, of the Time and Business then in
hand. Yet Vengeance seized not presently on their Bodies, but tormented their
Souls upon the rack of Desperation; so that neither trusting themselves one
with another, nor the solitary Woods, nor the mantle of Night, they fled into
several Countries, where they all within four Years after (as it is reported)
died miserable Fugitives, says the Story, pa. 79, 80. Dom.

Touching their Issue; I find that Fitz-Vrs fled into Ireland, and I heard
there that the Wild-Irish, and Rebellious Family of Mac-Mahunde, in the North
Parts, is of that Lineage. The Family of another of them is, at this Day,
prosecuted with a Fable (if it be so) that continues the Memory of this
Impiety; for in Gloucestershire, it is yet reported that wheresoever any of
them Travelleth the Wind is commonly in their Faces.

The Quadripartite History called Quadrilogus, printed at Paris An. 1495.
says, The Murderers, after this Horrible Fact, rode that Night to a Manor of
the Archbishops, named there (corruptly) Sumantingues forty Miles ( Leucas)
distant from Canterbury, lib. 3. c. 20. and that being Men of great
Possessions, active Soldiers, and in the strength of their Age, yet now they
became like Men beside themselves, stupid, amazed and distracted, repenting
entirely of what they had done, and for Penance took their way to the
Holy Land. But Sir Will. Tracy being come to the City of Cossantia, in Sicily,
and lingering there, fell into an horrible Disease; so that the parts of his
Body rotted whilst he lived, and his Flesh being dissolved by the Putrefaction,
himself did, by piecemeal, pull it off, and cast it away, leaving the Sinews
and Bones apparent. In this misery this wretched Murderer (as it was testified
by the Bishop of that City, who was then his Confessor) ended his Days, but
very penitently. His other Accomplices lived not long after, for all the four
Murderers were taken away within three Years after the Fact committed. Dicti.
Libri. lib. 4. c. 71.

RICHARD I.
IT appears by a MS. Copy of Mat. Paris, Ann. Dom. 1199.
which I have, (wanting much of that which is Published, and having much which
the Published wants) that King Richard I. had spoiled some Church of the
Chalice and Treasure; and that it was thereupon conceived, that the revengeful
Hand of God pursued him to his Death. First, by tickling his covetous Mind with
the report of hidden Treasure found by one Vidomer, a Viscount of Britain, in
France, which he (the King) claimed to belong to him by his Prerogative: And
then in stirring him to raise War against the Viscount for it, and to besiege
him in the Castle and Town of Chalus, in the Country of Limosin, whither the
Viscount was fled and had carried the Treasure, as it were, to train the King
to that fatal place, importing the name of a Chalice. But here it so fell out,
that the King being repelled in his Assault, and surveying the Ground for
undermining the Town-Walls, one Peter Basil struck him in the left Arm, or
about the Shoulder, with a Quarrel from a Cross-Bow, out of the Castle. The
King little regarding his Wound, pursued the Siege, so as within twelve Days he
took the Town, and found little Treasure in it. But his Wound, in the mean
time, ^estering deprived him of his Life ( April 9.) in the tenth Year of his
Reign, being about 44 Years old. Hereupon a Satyrist of that time wrote this
tart Dystichon, related in the MS. Mat. Par.

Christ, tui Chalicis praedo fit praeda Chalucis
Aere brevi rejicis qui tulit era Crucis.
i. e.

He that did prey upon thy Chalices,
Is now a prey unto the Chaluces;
And thou, O Christ, rejectest him as Dross,
That robbed thee of the Treasure of thy Cross.
King Edward I. Anno Regni 23. took all the Priories -- Aliens and their Goods
into his Hands; allowing every Monk 18 d. a Week, reserving the overplus to his
Treasury and Wars. And in Anno 1295. Regni ejusdem, caused all the Monasteries
in England to be searched, and the Money in them to be brought up to London. He
also seized, into his Hands, all the Lay-Fees, because they refused to pay to
him such a Tax as he demanded. Stow in dicto An. p. 317. Mat. Westminster. in An.
1296. says, it was a fifth part of their Revenues: And for that being
prohibited by the Council of Lions upon pain of... they refused, he seized all
their Lands and Goods, as well of the Archbishop of Canterbury, Robert
Winchelsea, as other, and put them out of his Protection, etc. Godwin, p. 148.
Presently after this the King's Forces were overthrown in Gascony. Mat. Westminster.
p. 408. And though he prosper'd in his Wars against Scotland, and wholly subdued
it; yet shortly after Rob. le Bruce recovered it from him, and overthrew his
Son Edward II. with a mighty Army at Burnocksbourne; from whence escaping, by
flight, he after suffered great Afflictions and Calamities, by means of his own
Wife and Barons, and was at last Deposed, Imprisoned and Murdered.

Giraldus Cambrensis, a good Author, reports that one Hur, Chaplain to
William de Bruce (a great Lord in Wales in the time of King John) of his Chapel
of St. Nicholas, in the Castle of Aberhodni, did Dream in a Night that one bid
him tell his Lord (that had taken away the Land given in Alms to that Chapel,
and presumed to detain it) that Hoc aufert fiscus quod non accipit Christus:
Dabis impio Militi quod non vis dare Sacerdoti. The King's Exchequer shall take
that from thee, that thou will not suffer Christ to enjoy; and the impious
Soldier, that which thou will not permit unto the Priest. The Words are St.
Austin's, in Sermon. de Temp. spoken against them that invade Tithes and Church
Rights; and that which is there threatened against them, says Giraldus, happened
most certainly in a very short time to this With-holder: Vidimus quippe nostris
diebus, etc. For we have seen (says he) in our own Days, and found certainly,
by undoubted verity, that Princes (and great Men) Usurpers of Ecclesiastical
Possessions, and chiefly by name King H. II. Reigning in our time, and tainted
above others with this Vice; a little Leven corrupting the whole Lump, and new
Evils falling thereby daily upon them to have consumed all their whole
Treasure, giving that unto the hired Soldiers which they ought to have given
unto the Priest.

He mentions not what it was particularly that happened to Bruce, but
commiserating him as a singular good Man, runs out into a long Commendation
both of him and his Wife. The rest therefore of this Tragedy I must supply out
of Mat. Par. who in An. 1209. reports thus, That King John, doubting the
Fidelity of his Nobles, sent a Troop of Soldiers to require of them their Sons,
or Nephews, or near Kinsmen for Hostages. Coming to Will. Bruce's and demanding
his Sons, the Lady Maud his Wife, in the humor of a Woman, preventing her
Husband, said, I will deliver no Sons of mine to your King John, for that he
beastly Murdered his Nephew, Arthur, whom he ought to have preserved
Honorably. Her Husband reproved her, and offered to submit himself to the
Trial of his Peers if he had offended the King; but that would not serve. The
King understanding it, sent his Soldiers in all haste a privily as he could to
apprehend Will. de Bruce, and his whole Family; but he having Intelligence of
it fled with his Wife, Children, and Kinsmen into Ireland; whither the King
coming afterward, besieged his Wife, and his Son William with his Wife in a
Munition in Methe, and having taken them, they privily escaped to the Island of
May, where being again recovered and brought unto him; he now bound them
surely, and sent them to Windsor-Castl^, and there by his Commandment they all
died miserably famished. William himself, the Father, escaping into France,
died also shortly after, and was buried at Paris; leaving all, according to St.
Austin's Words, to the King's Extortioners, page 218, 221. What Reax King John
kept among Churches, K. John.
is generally well known: Yet I find not, that either he destroyed or profaned
any of them, otherwise than by rifling of their Wealth, and persecuting the
Clergy as his Enemies. To say truth, they were not his Friends. But the last
Riot that he committed among them, was in Suffolk and Norfolk as he brought his
Army that way to waste the Lands of the Barons his Enemies, and to pass by the
Town of Lyn (which stood faithful to him when the most of England had forsaken
him) into the North parts. Having lodged there to his great Content; and taking
his Journey, Spoliis onustus opimis, over the Washes, when he came upon the
Sands of Wellstream a great part of his Sacrilegious Army, with the Spoils he
had taken, and his Treasure, Plate, Jewels, Horses, and Carriages were all
drowned: So that it was judged (says the History) to be a punishment by God,
that the Spoil which had been gotten, and taken out of Churches, should perish
and be lost by such means, together with the Spoilers. Stow reports, That the
Earth opened in the midst of the Waves, on the Marsties, and the Whirlpit of
the deep, so swallowed up both Men and Horses, that none escaped to bring King
John Tidings: For he with his Army, going before, escaped (more happily than
Pharaoh) but very narrowly with his Life, especially if it were any Happiness
to live in that miserable Condition he was now brought to, having lost his
Treasure and Fortunes at the very time, wherein, above all other, he had most
need of them, as flying from his Enemy, Lewis the Dauphin of France, called in
by his Subjects to take the Crown; and possessing peaceably the City and Tower
of London, the Cities of Canterbury and Winchester, with all the Castles of
Kent, except Dover, which could not hold out; and all the Barons, in a manner,
with the Citizens of London and Winchester having sworn him Fealty, and done
him Homage; as also the King of Scots for the Lands he held of the King of
England, who likewise had subdued all Northumberland, except Barnard-Castle to
him. If after all this, I say, it were any Happiness to live, yet enjoyed he
that miserable Happiness but a very short time; for whether by Poison given him
at Swinsted-Abbey, as the common report is, or by a Surfeit taken with eating
Peaches, accompanied with an intolerable Grief for his Losses, as others
deliver it; he died about five or six Days after at Newark-Castle, and wanting
all civil Lamentation; was presently so spoiled by his Servants, who fled every
Man his way, as they left nothing worth the Carriage to cover his dead Carcass.

Discite, O Reges sacratae parcere turbae.

Robert Fitz-Walter (so great a Baron in the time of King John, that Mat. Paris
says of him, Cui vix aliquis Comes in Anglia tum temporis potuit comparari)
was a grievous Enemy to the Monastery of St. Alban; and prosecuting it with
many Injuries, did among others besiege the Priory of Binham in Norfolk, (a
Cell of St. Albans) as if it were a Castle, and constrained the Monks there to
extreme Famine; for that John, the Abbot of St. Albans, had removed Thomas the
Prior of Binham, and put another in his room, without the assent of the said
Robert, who was Patron of the Priory, and a singular Friend of Thomas. The
Complaint hereof being brought to the King, he presently sent Forces to remove
and apprehend the Besiegers; but they having notice thereof, O mira and
formidabilis Dei and S. Martyris ultrice Sententia.
departed. Mat. Paris wondreth at the Revengeful wrath of, which thereupon fell
on Robert Fitz-Walter: From that time (says he) he never wanted manifest
pursuit of Enemies, or the afflictions of Infirmities. All that he had is
Confiscate; and during the Life of King John he lived in Exile and Vagrant,
suffering great Adversities and Misfortunes. And tho'King Hen. III. granted
Peace to all; yet did he never recover fully his Favor, but died Dishonorable
and Infamous. Thus Mat. Paris in Vita Joh. Abbat. S. Albani xxi. MS.

Falcasius de Brent, Ann. Dom. 1224. 8 Hen. 3.
a Valiant and Powerful Baron, that on the part of King John grievously
afflicted the Barons his Adversaries, and all England beside, pulled down the
Church of St. Paul at Bedford, to have the Stones and Materials thereof for the
Building and Fortifying his Castle of Bedford. He fell afterward in the... Year
of Hen. III. to be Fined before the Justices Itinerant at Dunstable a 100 l.
a-piece for thirty forcible Entries and Disseissins made by him upon diverse
Men; in all at 3000 l. Upon this, he attempted, by his Brethren and Followers,
to have taken the Justices sitting in Court, and to imprison them in his Castle
at Bedford. But they all, save Henry de Braybrock, escaped; him they
Imprisoned; and his Wife complaining thereon to the King and Parliament then
sitting at Northampton, they all set all other Business apart, and with all
the Power they could make, went and besieged the Castle; which was to the
utmost admirably defended against them, and to the extreme loss of the
Assailants. Yet by raising a Wooden-Tower close by it, which they call
Malvicine, it was at length taken, the Justice delivered, 24 hanged, and his
Brethren: Himself being escaped, lost all his Possessions, and whatsoever else
he had. But for the great Service he had done King John, his Life, upon his
submission, was pardoned, and he banished; yet Vengeance still pursued him, for
he died by Poison.

I must not forget a memorable Relation, which Matthew Paris further makes
touching this matter. The Abbess of Helnestene hearing that Falcasius had
pulled down St. Paul's Church to build his Castle, caused the Sword which was
in the Hand of the Image of St. Paul to be taken out of it, and would not
suffer it to be restored, till now that he had so worthily revenged himself.
Whereupon one writ thus: Perdidit in mense Falco tam fervidus ense
Omne sub saevo quicquid quaesivit ab aevo. Matt. Par. p. 308.

The fierce Sir Falco ere one Month was run
Lost all the Wealth that in his Life he won.


William Earl of Pembroke, An. Dom. 1245.
sirnam'd The great Earl Marshal, Tutor of King Henry 3. took by force of War
two Manors belonging to the Church and Bishopric of Fernes in Ireland. The
Bishop, a Godly Man, required Restitution; and failing of it, excommunicated
the Earl, who little regarded it. The Earl so dies; the Bishop comes into
England, and renews his Suit to Earl William his Son and Heir, obtaining to
have the King his Mediator; but prevailed not; for Earl William and his
Brethren answered, That their Father did the Bishop no wrong, having gotten the
Manors by right of War. The Bishop in the agony of his Spirit, renews the
Curse against their Father and them, and said, That the Lord had cast it
grievously upon Earl William, as is written in the Psalm; In a Generation his
Name shall be put out, and his Sons shall be Vagabonds, as touching the
Blessing promised by the Lord of Increase and multiply.

Earl William the Father, at the time of his Death and Burial (which was in the
New Temple at London, 17. Kal. Apr. 1219. and 4 Hen. 3.) left 5 Sons and as
many Daughters.

Earl William the eldest Son, first married Alice the Daughter and Heir of
Baldwin Earl of Albermarle, etc. After, Eleanor Daughter of King John, and died
without Issue, 6. Apr. 1231. 15 Hen. 3.

Earl Richard the second Brother succeeded; he married the Lady Gervasia, and
was slain in Ireland, 18 Hen. 3. leaving no Issue.

Earl Gilbert the 3d Brother succeeded. He married Margaret Daughter of William
King of Scots, and was killed by his own Horse at a Tornement at Hartford, 21
Hen. 3. 1241. leaving no Issue.

Earl Walter the fourth Brother succeeded. He married Margaret Daughter and
Coheir of Robert Lord Quiney, and died at London 6. Dec. 1245. 30 Hen. 3. (or
as others report, the 24. Nov.) and was buried at Tinterne, leaving no Issue.

Earl Anselm the youngest, was, at the death of his Brother Walter, Dean of
Salisbury; but admitted to be Earl of Pembroke and Marshal, and in haste
married Maud the Daughter of Humphrey de Bohun Earl of Hereford, that he yet at
last might propagate the most noble Family. But Non est consilium contra
Dominum; for he died within 18 or 24 days after his Brother, before he was
actually possessed of his County.

Thus, according to the Malediction of the Bishop, the Name of those great
Earls Marshal was utterly extinct; all the five Brethren being married and
dying Childless within 15 Years. Matt. Par. An. 1219, and 1245. p. 292 and 665,
and alibi.

King Edw. 1. in the zeal of his Religion Edw. 1.
(his Father yet living) took the Cross upon him and went to assist the
Christians in the Wars of Jerusalem. The Pope, in recompense of his Charges,
granted unto him in the second Year of his Reign (he being returned) the tenth
part of all Ecclesiastical Benefices of the Kingdom for one Year, and the like
to his Brother Edmond for another. But afterward the King forgetting his old
Devotion, in the 11th Year of his Reign, seized all the Treasure of the Tenths
collected for that purpose, and laid up in diverse places of the Kingdom, and
breaking open the Locks, caused it to be brought unto him, and employed it to
his own use. Stow.

This taste of things separate to God, drew him on to a further Appetite. In
the 23d Year of his Reign, he took into his hands all the Priories Aliens
throughout the Kingdom; There were at that time, about 110.
committing them (as Charles Martel of old had done in France) to Officers
under him; and allowing every Monk 18d. a Week, retained the rest for the
charge of his War, as he did also the Pensions going out of those Houses to the
greater Monasteries beyond the Seas. Yet obtained he further, in the same
Parliament, of the Clergy and Religious Persons a Subsidy of half their Goods,
to the value of 100000l. whereof the Abbey of Bury paid 655 l. 11d. q. Stow, ib.
p. 316.

King Ed. l. being in great want, by his subduing Scotland, about the end of
the 23th Year of his Reign, caused all the Monasteries of England to be
searched, and the Money found in them to be brought to London. Walls. pa. 65.
Cax. l. 7. c. 39. Shortly after, in the 24th Year of his Reign, at a Parliament
at St. Edmundsbury, he required a Subsidy, which the Laity granted. But the
Clergy (pretending, that Pope Boniface at the same time, had forbidden upon
pain of Excommunication, that either Secular Princes should impose Tallages
upon the Churchmen, or that Churchmen should pay any) they refused to supply
the King's Necessity; and having day to advise better on the matter till the
next Parliament at London shortly after, they persisted in the same mind.
Whereupon the King put them out of his Protection; so that being robbed and
spoiled by lewd persons without remedy, to redeem the King's Favor, the
Archbishop of York and many of the Bishops laid down a fifth part of all their
Goods in their Churches; and some by other courses satisfied the King's desire,
and so recovered his Protection. But all the Monasteries within the Province of
Canterbury were seized into the King's hands, and Wardens appointed in them to
minister to the Monks and Religious Persons therein only what must be had of
necessity; taking all other Moneys and Surplusage to the King's use. So that
the Abbots and Priors were glad to follow the Court and to repair their Error
with the fourth part of their Goods. The Archbishop of Canterbury after all
this, fearing the Pope's Excommunication, continued in his refusal, lost all he
had, was forsaken of his Servants, forbidden to be received either in any
Monastery or without, and rested in the House of a poor Man, only with one
Priest and one Clerk. How these Courses were censured in foro coeli, is not in
me to judge; nor will I pry into the Ark of God's Secrets. But see what
follows in the Story.

King Edward having with great Triumph subdued Scotland, and taken the King
Prisoner, did at this present peaceably enjoy that Kingdom, and governed it by
his own Officers. But e're three Months came to an end, Will. Wallis began such
a Rebellion there as put all in hazard; and in fine, it was so revived by
Robert le Bruce the King's natural Subject, that at length he overthrew the
King's Armies, slew and beat out his Officers, and without all recovery gained
the Kingdom to himself and his Posterity. King Edward attempting the recovery,
died at the entrance of Scotland. His Son Edward II. pursuing his Father's
intent with one of the greatest Armies that ever was raised by the English, was
miserably beaten and put to flight, hardly escaping in his own person. All his
Life after full of Tumult; not only his Nobles but his very Wife, his Enemy;
abandoned of his Subjects, turned out of his Kingdom, imprisoned, and
traitorously murdered. In all which, the Curse which his Father upon his
Deathbed laid upon him if he should break the Precepts he gave him had no doubt
a cooperation; for he observed none of them.

Touching the pulling of Lands from the Church, all have not always been of one
mind. For though the makers of the Statute of Mortmaine did truly think that the
Clergy had so disproportionable a share by way of excess in the Lands of the
Kingdom; yet when in 17 Edw. II. it came to the point, that the Order of the
Templars for their wickedness was overthrown; the Parliament then (wherein many
of those, no doubt, that made the Statute of Mortmain were present) would not
give the Lands and Possessions of the Templars to the King or the Lords of whom
they were holden; but ordained that they should go to the Order of the Hospital
of St. John's of Jerusalem, then lately erected for the defense of Christendom
and the Christian Religion.

Edward le Bruce, An. 1315. 9 Edw. II. Chron. Irel. in eod. An. p. 66. and seq.
brother to Robert le Bruce King of Scots, invadeth the North parts of Ireland
with 6000 Men; and accompanied with many great persons of the Nobility,
conquered the Earldom of Ulster, gave the English many overthrows, and
prevailed so victoriously, that he caused himself to be crowned King of
Ireland. His Soldiers, in the mean time, burn Churches and Abbeys with the
People whom they found in the same, sparing neither Man, Woman, nor Child. And
most wickedly entering into other Churches, spoiled and defaced the same of all
such Tombs, Monuments, Plate, Copies, and other Ornaments, as they found there.
He thus prevailing, and the Irish much revolting to him, the Archbishop of
Armagh blesses and encourages the English Army against him. Whereupon they
joined battle, overthrew the whole Power of the Scots, slew 2000 of their Men;
and amongst them, this their King Edward le Bruce himself.

King Edw. III. to begin his Wars with France, Edw. III.
in An. 1337. takes all the Treasure that was laid up in the Churches
throughout England for the defense of the Holy Land. (Speed, p. 190.) And
whereas there were anciently in England many Cells and Houses of Religion (110
they were counted, and more) belonging to greater Monasteries beyond the Seas,
fraught with Aliens and Strangers, especially Frenchmen, and those of the
Orders of Clunis and Cistertien: King Edward III. at his entry into his French
Wars, An. 1337, Regni 12. (partly fearing that they might hold intelligence
with his Enemies, but seeking chiefly to have their Wealth toward the payment
of his Soldiers) confiscated their Goods and Possessions, letting their
Priories and Lands to farm for Rent, and selling some of them right out to
others of his Subjects. Yet like a Noble and Religious Prince, touched with
remorse when the Wars were ended, viz. An. 1361, regni 35. he granted them all
(save those few that he had put away) back again unto them by his Letters
Patents, as freely as they had formerly enjoyed them. And diverse of those that
were purchased by his Subjects, were by them new-founded and given back to
Religious Uses. This act of the King's was a precedent of singular Piety; yet
was it but a lame Offering, not an Holocaust. He gave back the Possessions, but
he retained the Profits, which he had taken for 23 Years. Speed, p. 211.

King John (whom they so much condemn) did more than this, if he had done it as
willingly. He restored the Lands with the Damages. But let not this good King
want the charitable Commendation due unto his Piety; though having dipped his
Hands in this -- We be driven by the course of our Argument, to observe what
after befell to him and his Offspring. There be some things, says... are
sweet in the Mouth, but bitter in the Belly; pleasant at the beginning, but
woeful in the end. If these Priories and their Churches were of that nature, the
sequel verifies the Proverb. The middle part of the King's Life was most
fortunate and victorious; yea, all the while that these things were in his
Hands, even as if God had blessed him, as he did Obed-Edom (1 Samuel 6. 10.)
whilst the Ark was in his House; and had the King then died, he had been a most
glorious pattern of earthly Felicity. But the Wheel turned, and his Oriental
Fortunes became Occidental. The Peace he had concluded with France for the
solace of his Age, brake out again into an unfortunate War. Many of his
Subjects there rebel: Gascony in effect is lost. Afflictions at home fall upon
him in sequence; his Son Lionel Duke of Clarence dies without Issue-male, and
when he had greatest need of his renowned Son the Prince of Wales (miracle of
Chivalry, and the Anchor of his Kingdom) him even then did God take from him;
his Court and Nobles discontented and in Faction; himself and all things much
misgovern'd by his Son the Duke of Lancaster and others of that part; who by
the Parliament are therefore removed from him, and by him recalled
notwithstanding, to the grief of all the Kingdom. Thus he dies, leaving his
unweildy Scepters to the feeble Arms of a Child of Eleven Years old, King
Richard II. whose lamentable History, for the honor of Kings is best unspoken
of. But so unfortunate he was among his other Calamities, that he was not only
deposed by his unnatural Subjects, but imprisoned and murdered, dying without
Issue, and leaving an Usurper possessor of his Kingdoms; which kindled such
Fuel of Dissension, as consumed almost all the Royal Line and Ancient Nobility
of the Kingdom, by the Civil War between the Houses of York and Lancaster.

To return to the Restitution made by King Edw. III. of the Priories-Alien. An
Historian terms it, A rare Example of a just King; it being seldom seen that
Princes let go any thing whereon they have once fastened. But this King having
made a Door in this manner into the freedom and possession of the Church, all
the Power he had, either ordinarily or by Prerogative, could not now so shut it
up, but that this Precedent would for ever after be a Key to open it at the
pleasure of Posterity; which was well seen not long after. For in the
Parliament, An. 9. of King Richard II. The Knights and Burgesses with some of
the Nobility, being in a great rage (as John Stow says) against the Clergy,
for that William Courtney the Archbishop would not suffer them to be charged in
Subsidy by the Laity; exhibited a Petition to the King, that the Temporalities
might be taken from them; saying, That they were grown to such Pride, that it
was Charity and Alms to take them from them, to compel them thereby to be more
meek and humble. And so near the Parliament Men thought themselves the point of
their desire, that one promised himself thus much of this Monastery, another so
much of another Monastery. And I heard (says Tho. Walsingham) one of the
Knights deeply swear, that of the Abbey of St. Albans, he would have a thousand
Marks by the Year of the Temporalities. But the King, hearing the inordinate
crying out on the one side, and the just defense on the other, denied his
consent and commanded the Bill to be cancelled. Stow, p. 479.

Two valiant Esquires, Richard II.
John Shakel and Robert Hauley, having taken the Earl of Dene Prisoner at the
Battle of Nazers in Spain, and received his Son Hostage for performing
Conditions between them, the Duke of Lancaster in the King's Name, and the King
himself by the Duke's procurement, demanded their Hostage; and for that they
would not deliver him, they were committed to the Tower, from whence they
escaped and took Sanctuary at Westminster. This highly offended the Duke of
Lancaster, who thought that the having the Earl's Son might be some help to his
Enterprise for the Kingdom of Castile. Whereupon Sir Ralph Ferreis and Sir Alan
Boxhull Constable of the Tower, consulting with the Lord Latimer the Duke's
Friend, resolved to fetch them back into the Tower, and on the 11 of Aug. 1378.
with certain of the King's Servants and other armed men (about 50 in all)
entered St. Peter's Church, and the Parties being then hearing of Mass, they
laid Hands upon Shakel, drew him forth of it, and sent him to the Tower: But
Hauley standing upon his defense, they murdered him in the Quire before the
Stall of the Abbot, together with a Monk that besought them to forbear him in
that place.

The Archbishop of Canterbury with 5 of his Suffragans, openly pronounced Sir
Ralph Ferreis and Sir Alan Boxhull, and all that were present with them at this
Murder, accursed, and all them likewise that were aiding or counselling to it;
the King, the Queen, and the Duke of Lancaster nominately excepted. This
Excommunication for long after was denounced every Sunday, Wednesday and Friday
in Paul's Church by the Bishop of London. And though the Duke was excepted in
it, yet did it trouble him very fore for his Friends; it being commonly said,
that they had done what was done, by his Commandment. He causes therefore the
Bishop, to be required by Letters from the King, to come to a Council holden at
Windsor, but the Bishop would neither come nor stay the Curse. Whereupon the
Duke said, that the Bishop's froward dealings were not to be born with; and
that if the King would command him, he would gladly go to London and fetch the
disobedient Prelate in despite of those Ribaulds (so he termed them) the
Londiners. Hol. 421. col. 2.

My method ties me to relate what followed. Yet I dare not suggest this wicked
Sacrilege to be any cause thereof. For God's Judgments are secret; and no
Author does so apply them.

The King himself seems excusable by reason of his tender Age, if the omission
of Justice upon the Offenders in his riper Years lay not against him. His other
Errors were many, as those also of his Grandfather which perhaps were visited
upon him. God left him to follow evil Counsels, he lost the Hearts of his
Subjects, was bereaved of his Kingdom, thrown into Prison, and there miserably
murdered, leaving no Issue to prosecute his Murderers.

The Duke of Lancaster's Issue-male, as well those born in lawful Wedlock as
Legitimate by Act of Parliament, in the 3d or 4th Generation were all extinct.
And though the eldest Line obtained the Crown, yet was it pulled again from them
by the Sword: King Henry VI. being also deprived of it, cast into Prison, and
himself and Son murdered most unmercifully, as in lege talionis for that of
Richard II.

An. 1379, Rich. II. 3o. Sir John Arundel Brother to the Earl of Arundel, with
many noble Knights and Esquires and other Soldiers, were sent to aid the Duke
of Britain. Lying at Portsmouth for a Wind, he went to a Nunnery thereby, and
entreated the Governess that he might lodge his Soldiers in her Monastery. She
foreseeing the danger, besought him on her Knees not to desire it. Her Prayers
availed not; he turned in his Soldiers. They quickly fell to Rapine; brake into
the Chambers of the Nuns, and by report deflour'd many of them and many other
Virgins that were among them for Education, spoiling also the Country about.
Upon the day they went to Ship, they took a Bride as she came from Church, and
many Widows, Wives, and Maids out of the Monastery, to do them Villainy on
Shipboard; and a Chalice off of the Altar from the Priest, having ended his
Mass. Sir John Arundel having heard much complaint, regarded it not; but Sir
Thomas Piercy, Sir Hugh Calverley and others (before they departed) made
Proclamation, that those to whom their Soldiers had done wrong, should come and
have Recompense; which they performed. The People therefore prayed for them and
their Company, but cursed bitterly Sir John Arundel and his Soldiers; which was
much aggravated by the Priest that lost the Chalice: For he drawing other
Priests unto him, pursued them to the Seaside; and there after the manner of
their Devotion cursed them with Bell, Book and Candle; and throwing a light
Taper into the Sea, wished that they might be so extinguished.

Not many hours after, there arose a storm, which the Master of Sir John's Ship
(one Robert Rust of Blackeney) mistrusted by some sore tokens, and persuaded
him to have staid till it were past; but Sir John would not. This grew so
violent, as all presently despaired of Life. First, they threw out what they
might to lighten the Ship. When that served not, the Soldiers with the same
Arms wherewith before they had amorously embraced the Women, with the same now
they tyrannously threw them overboard (60 in number, as was reported) and yet
continued in the Jaws of Death for diverse days together. Tossed thus with
fears, they at last espied an Island on the Coast of Ireland. Sir John being
glad thereof, furiously compelled the Mariners to make for it; though they
importunately (for fear of Rocks) desired to have kept the Deep. Thrusting
therefore between it and the Main, and finding nothing but horrible Rocks,
their fear was multiplied, and their ship now began to take Water also. Yet at
last they perceived where with difficulty they might climb up into the Island;
and therefore running the ship on Ground (that being broken they might escape
by the pieces of it) they got so near the Island, that Robert Rust the Master
leaped to the sands, and many others following him. Then Sir John Arundel
leaped also; and being on the sands he stood as out of danger, shaking the
Water off him that he had taken in the ship, when as the place being a
Quick-sand, began suddenly to swallow him up; which the Master, Robert Rust,
perceiving, stepped to him, and striving to help him out, a Billow coming upon
them, washed them both into the Sea, where thus they ended their Lives, N.
Musard a most valiant Esquire of Sir John's being also leaped on the sands and
having hold of a piece of the Ship, was washed back and dashed in pieces
against the Rocks: so also was one Derrick another Esquire, Sir Tho. Banaster,
Sir N. Trompington, Sir Thomas de Dale, being leaped on the sands, and hindered
by striving to outrun one another, the Billows fetched them also back into the
Deep. Some escaping to the Island all wet, and finding no Houses there, it
being the 16th of December, died for Cold. The rest with running and wrestling
saved their Lives, but in great penury, from Thursday till Sunday at Noon. Then
the storm being ended, the Irish by Boats fetched them to their Houses and
relieved them. It is said, That Sir John Arundel lost in this storm (besides
his Life) 52 Suits of very rich Apparel, much princely stuff, with his great
Horse and other Horses and things of price, to the value of Ten thousand Marks;
and twenty five other ships which followed him with Men, Horses and other
Provision, all perishing with him.

Touching the residue not guilty of this Outrage and Sacrilege, Sir Thomas
Piercy, Sir Hugh Calverley, Sir William Elmham, and the rest of the Army, they
were far and near dispersed on the Seas with the same dangers; but it pleased
God to preserve them. Yet as soon as the storm was ended, a new Misfortune fell
upon Sir Tho. Piercy; for being weak and weather-beaten with all his Company, a
Spanish Man of War now sets upon him singled from the rest of the Navy, and
drives him to bestir himself as he could; which he did so happily, as at last
he took the Spaniard, and bringing him home, brought also the occasion of
double Joy, one for his safety, the other for his victory. And then pawning
that ship for 100 l. he presently furnished himself forth again, and with as
great Joy arrived safely at Breast (whereof he was one of the Captains with Sir
Hugh Calverly) and thus supplied that charge also very fortunately.

Sir Hugh Calverley also and Sir William Elmham with the rest of those Ships,
returned safely into other parts, and by the great Mercy of God lost not either
Man, Horse, or any other thing, in all this so furious a Tempest. All this is
much largerly related by Tho. Walsingham in An. 1379, p. 231. and seq.

Though the Attempts of Rebels and Traitors be usually suppressed by the
Richard. II. An. 4.
Power of the Prince; yet that notorious Rebel Wat Tyler and his Confederates
prevailed so against King Richard II. that neither his (the King's) Authority,
nor the Power of the Kingdom could resist them; insomuch as they became Lords
of the City and Tower of London, and had the King himself so far in their
disposition, as they got him to come and go, to do and forbear when and what
they required: But after they had spoiled and burnt the Monastery of St. John's
of Jerusalem, beheaded the Archbishop of Canterbury, and done some other acts
of Sacrilege, their Fortune quickly changed; and their Captain Wat Tyler being
in the greatest height of his Glory (with his Army behind him to do what he
commanded; and the King fearfully before him, not able to resist) was upon the
sudden wounded and surpised by the Mayor of London, his prosperous Success
over-turn'd, and both he and they (whom an Army could not erst subdue) are now
by the Act of a single Man utterly broken and discomfited, and justly brought
to their deserved Execution. Holinshed and Stow in 4 Rich. II.

CHAP. VI.
The Attempt and Project upon the Lands of the Clergy in the Time of Henry IV.
disappointed.

BY that Time King Henry IV. was come to the Crown the Clergy of England had
passed the Meridian of their greatness, and were onward in their declination.
For the People now left to admire them, as before they had done, and by little
and little to fall off from them in every Place being most distracted, though
not wholly led away by the prime Lectures, Sermons, and Pamphlets of them that
labored for an alteration in Religion. The Commons also of Parliament, which
usually do breath the Spirit of the People, not only envied their greatness,
but thought it against reason, that those whom the Laity had raised, fed and
fatted by their Alms and Liberality, should use such rigorous Jurisdiction (so
they accounted it) over their Patrons and Founders, and against Religion also,
that they who had devoted themselves to Spiritual contemplation should be so
much entangled with the Secular affairs: But above all, that they who labored
not in the Commonwealth nor were the hundredth part of the People, should
possess as great a Portion almost of the Kingdom, as the whole Body of the
Laity. For an Estimate hereof had been taken anciently by the Knight's Fees of
the Kingdom, which in Edward I. Time were found to be 67000, and that 28000 of
them were in the Clergy's hands: So that they had gotten well toward one half
of the Knight's Fees of the Kingdom, and had not the Statutes of Mortmain come
in their way, they were like enough in a short time to have had the better
part. Yet did not the Statutes otherwise hinder them, but that with the King's
License they daily obtained great accessions, and might by the Time of King
Henry IV. be thought probably enough to have half the Kingdom amongst them, if
not more, considering that out of that part, which remained to the Laity, they
had after a manner a tenth part by way of Tithe, and besides that an
inestimable Revenue by way of Altarage, Offerings, Oblations, Obventions,
Mortuaries, Church-Duties, Gifts, Legacies, etc.

The Parliament therefore 6 Henry IV. (called the Laymen's Parliament that all
Lawyers were shut out of it) casting a malevolent Eye hereon, did not seek by a
Moderate course a Reformation, but as may be observed in other cases, to cure a
great excess by an extreme defect, and at one blow, to take from the Clergy all
their Temporalities.

This was propounded to the King by Sir John Cheiney their Speaker, who in
former time had been himself a Deacon, and lapping then some of the Milk of the
Church found it so sweet, as he now would eat of the Breasts that gave it. He
enforced this proposition with all the Rhetoric and Power he had, and tickled
so the Ears of the King, that if the Archbishop of Canterbury had not that day
stood, like Moses, in the gap, the evils that succeeded might even then have
fallen upon the Clergy. But the Archbishop declaring, that the Commons sought
thereby their own enriching, knowing well that they should be sharers in this
Royal prey, assured the King, that as he and his Predecessors ( Edward III. and
Richard II.) had by the Counsel of the Commons confiscated the Goods and Lands
of the Cells or Monasteries, that the Frenchmen and Normans did possess in
England, being worth many thousands of Gold, and was not that day the richer
thereby half a Mark; so if he should now (which God forbid) fulfill their
wicked desire, he should not be one Farthing the richer the next Year
following. This demonstrative and prophetical Speech pronounced with great
vehemence by the Archbishop, it so wrought upon the Heart of the King, that he
professed, he would leave the Church in better State than he found it, rather
than in worse. And thus that Hideous Cloud of Confusion, which hung over the
Head of the Clergy vapoured suddenly at this time into nothing. Yet did it lay
the Train that Henry V. did make a sore Eruption, and in Henry VIIIth's Time
blew up at the Monasteries. The event of which project of the Speakers, his
lineal Heir Sir Tho. Cheiney, Lord Warden of the Cinque Port did then behold,
and shortly felt the wrathful Hand of God, upon his Family; whether for this
or any other Sin I dare not judge.

But being reputed to be the greatest Man of Possessions in the whole Kingdom,
in so much as Queen Elizabeth on a time said merrily unto him, that they two
(meaning her self and him) were the two best Marriages in England, which
afterward appeared to be true in that his Heir was said to sue his Livery at
3100, never done by any other. Yet was this huge Estate all wasted on a sudden.

Yet when the Commons did desire to have the Lands of the Clergy, they did not
design, or wish that they should be otherwise employed, than for public
Benefit of the whole Kingdom, and that all Men should be freed thereby from
payment of Subsidies or Taxes to maintain Soldiers for the Defense of the
Kingdom. For they suggested, that the value of the Lands would be sufficient
Maintenance for a standing Army, and all great Officers and Commanders to
conduct and manage the same, for the safety of the Public; as that they would
maintain 150 Lords, 1500 Knights, 6000 Esquires, and an 100 Hospitals for
maimed Soldiers. Thus they projected many good uses to be performed not to
enrich private Men, or to sell them for small Sums of Money, which would
quickly be wasted; but to be a perpetual standing Maintenance for an Army and
all public Necessities.

Priories Alien, not being Conventual, A* D. 1414. 2. Hen. V.
with their Possessions, except the College of Foderinghay were by the
Parliament given to King Henry V. and his Heirs, he suppressed them to the
Number of 190 and more. Stow, p. 563. But gave some of them to the College of
Foderinghay, p. 551. King Henry VI. gave them afterward to the two Colleges of
the Kings in Cambridge and that of Eaton; yet Henry V. died young, his Son
Henry VI. after many Passions of Fortune was twice deprived of his Kingdom, and
at last cruelly murdered, and Prince Edward his Grandchild, Son of Henry VI.
cruelly also slain by the Servants of King Edward IV. Stow, p. 704, 705.

Cardinal Wolsey intending to build a College at Oxford, A. D. 1527. 16. H.
VIII. circiter.
and another at Ipswich, obtained license of Pope Clement the 7th. to suppress
about 40 Monasteries. In execution whereof he used principally five Persons,
whereof one was slain by another of these his Companions; that other was hanged
for it: a third drowned himself in a Well. The fourth being well known to be
worth 200 l. (in those days) became in three Years time so poor that he begged
to his Death. Dr. Allen the 5th. being made a Bishop in Ireland, was there
cruelly maimed. The Cardinal, that obtained the license, fell most grievously
into the King's displeasure, lost all he had, was fain to be relieved by his
Followers, and died miserably, not without the suspicion of poisoning himself.
The Pope that granted the license was beaten out of his City of Rome, saw it
sacked by the Duke of Bourbon's Army, and himself then besieged in the Castle
of St. Angelo, whither he fled, escaping narrowly with his life, ( Stow, p.
880.) taken Prisoner, scorned, ransomed, and at last poisoned as some reported.
But these five were not the only Actors of this business. For Mr. Fox says,
That the doing hereof was committed to the Charge of Thomas Cromwell; in the
execution whereof he showed himself very forward and industrious. In such sort,
that in handling thereof he procured to himself much grudge with diverse of the
superstitious sort, and some also of noble Calling about the King etc. (in
Henry VIII. p. 1150. col. b.) Well, as he had his part in the one, let him take
it also in the other: for he lost all he had, and his Head to boot; as after
shall appear in the Progress of these his Actions.

Annotations upon this Chapter.
Whereas it is said that the Knight's Fees in Edward Is It. Time were found to be
67000, and that 28000 of them were in the hands of the Clergy; it is to be
considered, that if the Account be rightly made, there could not be above a
third part; for there is as much Land in base Tenures, that were never within
the Fees; besides all Crown Lands, and Eleemosynary-lands, Copy-holds,
Gavel-kind, Burrough-English, etc.

Whereas it is said, That when the Commons did desire to have the Lands of the
Clergy taken away, they did not design or wish that they should be otherwise
employed than for the public Benefit, and that all Men should be freed from
Subsidies and Taxes: and they suggested also that the Lands of the Clergy would
maintain a great Army to be always ready, and for the Conduct thereof many
Lords, Knights, and Esquires, should be maintained out of the Lands; and also
many Hospitals provided for such Soldiers as should happen to be maimed in the
Wars.

And to this purpose it is fit to set down here the Words of my Lord Coke, 4
Institut. page 44.

Advice concerning new and plausible Projects and Offers in Parliament.
When any plausible Project is made in Parliament to draw the Lords or Commons
to assent to any Act, (especially in matters of weight and importance) if both
Houses do give upon the matter projected and premised, their consent, it shall
be most necessary (they being trusted for the Commonwealth) to have the matter
projected and premised (which moved the Houses to consent) to be established in
the same Act, least the Benefit of the Act be taken, and the matter projected
and premised, never performed; and so the Houses of Parliament perform not the
Trust reposed in them. As it fell out (taking one Example for many) in the
Reign of Henry VIII. On the King's behalf the Members of both Houses were
informed in Parliament, that no King or Kingdom was safe but where the King had
three Abilities.

First, To live of his own, and able to defend his Kingdom upon any sudden
Invasion or Insurrection.

Secondly, To aid his Confederates, otherwise they would never assist him.

Thirdly, To reward his well deserving Servants.

And the Project was, if the Parliament would give unto him all the Abbeys,
Priories, Friaries, Nunneries, and other Monasteries, that for ever in time to
come he would take order, that the same should not be converted to private Use.
But,

First, That his Exchequer for the purposes aforesaid should be enriched.

Secondly, The Kingdom strengthened by a continual Maintenance of 40000
well-train'd Soldiers, with skillful Captains and Commanders.

Thirdly, For the benefit and ease of the Subject, whenever afterward (as was
projected,) in any time to come should be charged with Subsidies, Fifteenths,
Loans, or Common-aids.

Fourthly, Least the Honor of the Realm should receive any diminution of
Honor by the dissolution of the said Monasteries, there being 29 Lords of
Parliament of the Abbots and Priors (that held of the King per Baroniam,
whereof more in the next leaf) that the King would creat a Number of Nobles
which we omit.

The said Monasteries were given to the King by authority of diverse Acts of
Parliament, but no provision was herein made for the said Project, or any part
thereof. Only ad favendum populum these Possessions were given, to the King,
his Heirs, and Successors, to do and use therewith his and their own Wills; To
the Pleasure of Almighty God, and the Honor and Profit of the Realm.

Now observe the Catastrophe. In the same Parliament of 32. Henry VIII. when
the great and opulent Priory of St. John's of Jerusalem was given to the King,
he demanded and had a Subsidy, both of the Clergy and Laity; and the like he
had in 34. Henry VIII. and in 37. Henry VIII. he had another Subsidy. And since
the dissolution of the said Monasteries, he exacted diverse Loans, and against
Law received the same.

Thus the great Judge, the Lord Coke does severely censure the ill-doings under
Henry VIII. and shows, that notwithstanding the infinite Wealth in Money,
Lands, and other Riches, which came to the King by the dissolutions, yet the
People were burdened with more Taxes, Subsidies, and Loans, than ever in
former Times. That it fully appears, that as the goodly pretenses to free the
People from Subsidies and several Payments, were but empty and vain pretenses,
only ad favendum populum, to deceive and abuse the People.

So in our late long Parliament many public Projects and Pretenses were
proposed, and the Presbyterian party were zealous to advance the Throne of
Christ, and the Tribunal of Christ, with all his holy Ordinances in full force,
as their Language did propose it. But it was quickly discovered that no such
Matters were truly intended, but only the Land of the Church must be taken to
maintain Armies, to bring in the Scots-Highlanders, Red-shanks, Goths and
Vandals, to subvert the King, his Crown and Dignity; and in the end to take all
the Crownlands, and to divide them amongst the Soldiers and others at their
pleasures.

But the dismal Events and tragical Mischiefs that have happened might have
been foreseen and prevented, but that most Men are ignorant of our own
Histories and Chronicles, as well as of foreign Histories and Examples, wherein
they might easily have observed the fearful ends that have followed upon the
like doings, both in our own Kingdoms and other neighboring Nations, as
France, Germany and Bohemia, especially within these last forty Years. For as
Solomon says, There is no new thing under the Sun. For the like has happened
often both at home and abroad, but that Men will take no warning by any
Examples, but persist in their wicked and sacrilegious Attempts, though in the
end they bring confusion and destruction upon themselves.

Whereas it is said, that when Henry V. suppressed the Priories Aliens, a good
part of their Lands was given to other Religious Houses, both by that King and
his Son Henry VI. who bestowed a great part of those Lands upon Colleges in the
Universities, it is true; but in our Reformation there is no such care taken to
convert any part of the Church Lands to pious and public Uses, but the
Cormorants devour all.

They spoke also of maintaining many Hospitals for relieving of maimed
Soldiers: in our present time there is an infinite Number of maimed Soldiers,
but no Hospitals provided for them; whereas they should have provided some good
Number: and withal an hundred Bedlams to entertain pious, zealous, and
outrageous Puritans, who have lost their Wits and Senses, and are become
extremely mad with distempered Zeal, as the Anabaptists and Fifth-Monarchy-men,
Quakers, and the rest of the Rabble.

Humfrey Duke of Gloucester coming to the Parliament at St. Edmundsbury, 25. H.
VI. A. D. 1447. Cign. Cant. Voc. Hursta. Hollinsh. Stow in hoc An. pa* 639.
and lodging there, in a place (as Leland says) sacred to our Savior; he was
by the Lord John Beaumont then High-Constable of England, the Duke of
Buckingham, the Duke of Somerset, and others arrested of High Treason
suggested; and being kept in Ward in the same place, was the Night following (
viz. 24. Febr.) cruelly murdered by De la Pole Duke of Suffolk. Some judged
him to have been strangled; some to have a hot Spit thrust up his Fundament,
some to be smothered between two Feather-beds. But all indifferent Persons
(says Hall) might well understand that he died some violent Death. In Chron*
Being found dead in his Bed, his Body was showed to the Lords and Commons, as
though he had died of a Palsy or Imposthume, which others do publish. Stow. in
An. 1447. York, pa.


But it falls out, that this Lord John Vicount Beaumont, and the Duke of
Buckingham, were both slain in the Battle of Northampton, 38. Henry VI. The
Duke of Somerset taken Prisoner at the Battle of Exham, York, pa. 480.
An. 1462. and there beheaded. The Duke of Suffolk being banished the Land, was
in passing the Seas surpised by a Ship of the Duke of Exeter's, and brought
back to Dover-Road; where in a Cock-boat at the Commandment of the Captain,
Leland Hollinsh. page 627.
his Head was stricken off, and both Head and Body left on the Shore.

CHAP. VII.
Of the great Sacrilege and Spoil of Churchlands committed by Henry VIII. His
promise to employ the Lands to the advancement of Learning, Religion, and
Relief of the Poor. The preamble of the Statute 27. Henry VIII. to that purpose
which is omitted in the printed Statutes. The neglect of that Promise. The
great increase of Lands, and Wealth that came to the King by the Dissolution,
Quadruple to the Crown Lands. The Accidents which happened to the King and his
Posterity: to the Agents under him, as the Lord Cromwell and others, to the
Crown, and the whole Kingdom, and to the new Owners of the Lands. A View of the
Parliaments that passed the Acts of the 27 and 31 of Henry VIII. and of the
Lords that voted in them, and what happened to them and their Families. The
Names of the Lords in the 27 of Henry VIII. omitted in the Record, but those of
the 31 Henry VIII. are remaining being most the same Men. The Names of the
Lords Spiritual in those Parliaments, and the great Spoil of Libraries and
Books. The Names of the Lords Temporal in those Parliaments with the
Misfortunes in their Families, and Dignity abated. What has happened to the
Crown it self by the loss of Crown Lands. What has happened to the Kingdom in
general, and the great Injury done to the Poor. The Mischief of the Tenure of
Knights-service in Capite, which by Act is to be reserved upon all Church Lands
that pass from the Crown. The ancient Original of Wardship from the Goths and
Lombards, the abuse of it amongst us. The prediction of Egebred an old Hermit.
The unfortunate Calamities of the Palsgrave and other Princes of Germany, by
invading the Patrimony of the Church. How careful the Heathens were not to
misuse the things consecrated to their Gods. King James's Letter to the
University of Oxon about Impropriations.

I Am now come off the Rivers into the Ocean of Iniquity and Sacrilege, where
whole thousands of Churches and Chapels dedicated to the Service of God in the
same manner, that the rest are which remain to us at this day, together with
the Monasteries and other Houses of Religion and intended Piety, were by King
Henry VIII. in a temper of indignation against the Clergy of that time mingled
with insatiable Avarice, sacked and rased as by an Enemy. It is true the
Parliament did give them to him, but so unwillingly (as I have heard) that when
the Bill had stuck long in the lower House, and could get no passage, he
commanded the Commons to attend him in the Forenoon in his Gallery, where he
let them wait till late in the Afternoon, and then coming out of his Chamber,
walking a turn or two amongst them, and looking angrily on them, first on one
side, then on the other, at last, I hear (says he) that my Bill will not pass;
but I will have it pass, or I will have some of your Heads; and without other
Rhetoric or Persuasion returned to his Chamber. Enough was said, the Bill
passed, and all was given him as he desired.

First, In the 27th Year of his Reign all Monasteries, etc. not having 200 l.
per Annum in Revenue; then in Anno 31, all the rest through the Kingdom; in An.
32. cap. 24. the Hospitals and Hospital Churches of St. John's of Jerusalem in
England and Ireland, with their Lands and Appurtenances: and in Anno 37. cap.
4. all Colleges, Free-Chapels, Chauntries, Hospitals, Fraternities, and
Stipendiary-Priests made to have continuance for ever, being contributary to
the payment of First Fruits, Tenths, etc. what should have been next (God
knows) Bishoprics I suppose and Cathedral-Churches, which had been long
assailed in the time of R. II. H. IV. and H. V. but the next Year was the time
of his account to Almighty God, which, as it is said, he passed in great
penitency for his Sins. It is to be observed that the Parliament did give all
these to the King, yet did they not ordain them to be demolished or employed to
any irreligious Uses, leaving it more to the conscience and piety of the King,
who in a Speech to the Parliament promised to perform the Trust, wherein he
says, -- I cannot a little rejoice, when I consider the perfect truth and
confidence, which you have put in me, in my good doings and just proceedings;
for you without my desire and request have committed to my order and
disposition, all Chauntries, Colleges and Hospitals, and other places specified
in a certain Act, firmly trusting that I will order them to the Glory of God
and the Profit of the Commonwealth. Surely if I contrary to your expectation
should suffer the Ministers of the Churches to decay, or Learning (which is so
great a Jewel) to be minished, or the poor and miserable to be unrelieved, you
might well say, that I being put in such a special Trust, as I am in this Case,
were no trusty Friend to you, nor charitable to my Emne-Christen, neither a
lover of the public Wealth; nor yet one that feared God, to whom account must
be rendered of all our doings; doubt not I pray you, but your expectation shall
be served more godly and goodly, than you will wish or desire, as hereafter you
shall plainly perceive.

So that the King hereby does not only confess the Trust committed to him by
the Parliament in the same Manner, that the Act assigns it, viz. to be for the
Glory of God, and the Profit of the Commonwealth; but he descends also into
the particulars of the Truth, f. trust.
as namely for the maintenance of the Ministers, and Advancement of Learning,
and Provision for the Poor.

So likewise in the Statute 27. Henry VIII. c. 28. the Preamble does expressly
ordain that the Lands, Houses, and Revenues should be converted to better Uses,
as appears fully in the Preamble, which because it is omitted in the printed
Edition of the Statutes shall here follow out of the Record -- For as much as
manifest Sins, etc. vid. Monast. Angl. T. 1. p.

But notwithstanding these fair Pretenses and Projects little was performed:
for Desolation presently followed this Dissolution; the Ax and the Mattock
ruined almost all the Chief and most magnificent Ornaments of the Kingdom, viz.
376 of the lesser Monasteries, 645 of the greater sort, 90 Colleges, 110
Religious Hospitals, 2374 Chantries and Free-Chapels. All these Religious
Houses, Churches, Colleges and Hospitals being about 3500 little and great in
the whole, did amount to an inestimable Sum, especially if their Rents be
accounted as they are now improved in these days. Among this Multitude it is
needless to speak of the great Church of St. Mary in Bulloign, who upon the
taking of that Town in Anno 1544, he caused to be pulled down, and a Mount to
be raised in the place thereof for planting of Ordinances to annoy a Siege.
Speed, p. 231. Number 128.


I will not be so bold as to father that which followed upon this that
preceded, but the Analogy of my Discourse, and the Course of [this] History do
lead me to relate what happened after this, (1) to the King himself, (2) to his
Children and Posterity, (3) to them that were Agents in the business, (4) to
the Crown it self, (5) to the whole Kingdom generally, (6) to private Owners of
these Monasteries particularly.

1. First, Then touching the King himself. The Revenue that came to him in ten
Years space was more, if I mistake it not, than Quadruple that of the
Crown Lands besides a Magazine of Treasure raised out of the Money, Place,
Jewels, Ornaments, and Implements of Churches, Monasteries, and Houses with
their Goods, State, and Cattle, First Fruits and Tenths, given by the
Parliament in the 26th of his Reign. Together with a Subsidy, Tenth and
Fifteenth from the Laity at the same time. To which I may add the incomparable
Wealth of Cardinal Wolsey a little before confiscated also to the King, and a
large Sum raised by Knighthood in the 25th of this Reign.

A Man may justly wonder how such an Ocean of Wealth should come to be
exhausted in so short a time of Peace: But God's blessing as it seems was not
upon it; for within four Years after he had received all this, and had ruined
and sacked 376 of the Monasteries, and brought their Substance to his Treasury;
besides all the goodly Revenues of his Crown, he was drawn so dry, that the
Parliament in the 31st. was constrained by his importunity to supply his wants
with the Residue of all the Monasteries of the Kingdom 645 great ones, and
illustrious with all their Wealth and Prince-like Possessions. Yet even then
was not this King so sufficiently furnished for building of a few Block-houses
for defense of the Coast, but the next year after, he must have another Subsidy
of 4 Fifteens to bear out his Charges. And (least it should be too little) all
the Houses, Lands and Goods of the Knights of St. John at Jerusalem, both in
England and Ireland.

Had not Ireland come thus in my way I had forgotten it, but to increase the
Floods of this Sea, all the Monasteries of Ireland likewise flowed into it by
Act of Parliament the next year following, being the 33d. of his Reign to the
Number one and other of --

But as the Red Sea by the miraculous Hand of God was once dried up, so was
this Sea of Wealth by the wastfull Hand of this Prince immediately so dried up,
as the very next year, viz. Regni 34. the Parliament was drawn again to grant
him a great Subsidy, for in the Statute-book it is so styled: and this not
serving his turn, he was yet driven not only to enhance his Gold and
Silver-money in Anno 36, but against the Honor of a Prince to coin base Money,
and when all this served not his turn in the very same year to exact a
Benevolence of his Subjects to their grievous Discontent. Perceiving therefore
that nothing could fill the gulf of his effusion, and that there was now a just
cause of great expense, by reason of his Wars at Bulloign, and in France, they
granted him in the 37th. Year 2 Subsidies at once, and four Fifteens; and for a
Corollary all the Colleges, Free-Chapels, Chantries, Hospitals, etc.
beforementioned in Number 2374. upon confidence that he should dispose them
(as he promised solemnly in the Parliament) to the Glory of God, who in truth
(for ought that I can hear) had little part thereof.

The next year was his fatal Period, otherwise it was much to be feared that
Deans and Chapters, if not Bishoprics, (which have been long levelled at) had
been his next design, for he took a very good Say of them, by exchanging Lands
with them, before the Dissolution, giving them rackt Lands and small things for
goodly Manners and Lordships, and also Impropriations for their solid Patrimony
in finable Lands; like the exchange that Palamedes made with Glaucus, much
thereby increasing his own Revenues; as he took 72 from York, besides other
Lands, Tenements, Advowsons, Patronages, etc. in the 37th of his Reign, which
are mentioned particularly in the Statute 37. Henry VIII. cap. 16. He took also
30 and above, as I remember, in the 27th. Year from the Bishop of Norwich, whom
he left not (that I can learn) one Foot of the goodly Possessions of his
Church, save the Palace at Norwich; and how many I know not, in the 37th. Year
also from the Bishop of London.

I speak not of his prodigal Hand in the Blood of his Subjects, which no doubt
much alienated the Hearts of them from him. But God in these eleven Years space
visited him with 5 or 6 Rebellions. In Lincolnshire, Anno 28, and 3 one after
another in Yorkshire, Anno 33; one in Somersetshire, Anno 29, and again in
Yorkshire, Anno 33. And though Rebellions and Insurrections are not to be
defended, yet they discover unto us what the displeasure and dislike was of the
common People for spoiling the Revenues of the Church; whereby they were great
losers, the Clergy being merciful Landlords, and bountiful Benefactors to all
Men by their great Hospitality and Works of Charity.

Thus much touching his own Fortunes accompanying the Wealth and Treasure
gotten by him, as we have declared by confiscating the Monasteries; wherein the
prophetical Speech that the Archbishop of Canterbury used in the Parliament 6.
Henry IV. seems performed, That the King should not be one farthing the
richer the next Year following.

II. What happened to the King's Children and Posterity.
Touching his Children and Posterity, after the time that he entered into these
Courses, he had two Sons and three Daughters, whereof one of each kind died
Infants: the other three succeeding in the Crown without Posterity. His base
Son the Duke of Richmond died also without Issue; and as the Issue of
Nebuchodonosor was extinct, and his Kingdom given to another Nation the 68th.
Year after he had rifled the Temple of Jerusalem, and taken away the holy
Vessels; so about the same period, that King Henry VIII. began to sack the
Monasteries, with their Churches, and things dedicated to God, was his whole
Issue extinct, Male and Female, base and legitimate, and his Kingdom
transferred to another Nation; and therein to another Royal Family (which is
now His Majesty's singular happiness) that had no hand in the like depredation
of the Monasteries and Churches of that Kingdom, there committed by the
tumultuous, if not rebellious Subjects. Contrary as it seems to the good liking
of our late Sovereign King James, who (as is reported) said, that if he had
found the Monasteries standing he would not have pulled them down; not meaning
to continue them in their superstitious Uses, but to employ them, as Chorah's
censers to some godly purposes. Wherein most piously he declared himself both
in restoring (as I hear) some Bishoprics and diverse Appropriations in
Scotland, and also by moving the Universities of England to do the like, as by
his gracious Letter does appear, which shall here following be expressed in the
end. So his Grandfather King James the 4th. of Scotland, when he was solicited
by Sir Ralph Sadler, then Ambassador from King Henry; to augment his Estate by
taking into his Hands the Abbeys; James refused, saying, What need I take them
into mine Hands, when I may have any thing I require of them? And if there be
Abuses in them I will reform them, for there be a great many good. Which was a
wise answer, and if King Henry had done the like here, he might have had an
immense and ample Revenue out of the Monasteries and old Bishoprics, while
they enjoyed their Lands (being a third part of the Kingdom, as appears by
Doomsday-Book) by way of First Fruits, Tenths, Pensions, and Corrodies yearly;
that he should never have needed at any time to ask one Subsidy of his
Subjects. To return where we left off, having spoken of the extinguishment of
the Issue of King Henry, whereof the immortally renowned Princess Queen
Elizabeth, was the golden period. Let us cast our Eyes upon the principal
Agents and Contrivers of this Business.

III. What happened to the Principal Agents.
The Lord Cromwell was conceived to be the principal mover, and prosecutor
thereof, both before and in the Parliament of 27 and 37 Hen. VIII. and for his
good service ( impenso and impendendo) upon the 18th of April before the
beginning of the Parliament of 31, which was on the last of the Month, he was
created Earl of Essex, and his Son Gregory made Lord Cromwell, yet e're the
Year was past, from the end of the Parliament of 31 he fell wholly into the
King's Displeasure, and in July 32 he was attainted and beheaded, professing at
his Death, that he had been seduced, and died a Catholic. His Son Gregory Lord
Cromwell, being, as I said, made a Baron in the life time of his Father, and
invested with diverse great Possessions of the Church, supported that new risen
Family from utter ruin; but his Grandchild Edward Lord Cromwell wasting the
whole Inheritance, sold the head of his Barony Oukham in Rutlandshire, and
exchanging some of the rest (all that remained) with the E. of Devonshire for
Lalale in Ireland, left himself as little Land in England, as his great
Grandfather left to the Monasteries, and was I think the first and only Peer of
the Realm not having any Land within it: by the feudal Law his Barony I doubt
(if it had been feudal) had likewise gone; but by the Mercy of God, a Noble
Gentleman now holds the Style of it, and long may he.

Having sailed thus far in this Ocean, we will advance yet further (if it
please God to give us a favorable passage) and take a view of the Parliament
themselves, that put the wrackful Sword in the King's Hands. The chief whereof
was (as we have said before) that of the 27 Year of his Reign, touching smaller
Houses, and that of 31 touching the greater. I have sought the Office of the
Clerk of the Upper House of Parliament to see what Lords were present at the
passing of the Acts of Dissolution; but so ill have they been kept, as that the
Names of 27 [ H. 8.] were not then to be found: and farther since I have not
searched for them. The other of 31 [ H. 8.] I did find, and doubt not but the
most of them were the same, which also sat in the Parliament of 27, though some
of them of 27 were either dead or not present in 31. Those that were present at
the passing of the Bill of 31 I have here under mentioned in such order as I
therein did find them; and will as faithfully as I can attain unto the
knowledge of them, relate what after has befaln themselves and their Posterity.

The Names of the Lords Spiritual who were present in the Parliament upon
Friday the 23d of May 31 Hen. VIII. being the 15th day of the Parliament, when
the Bill for assuring the Monasteries, etc. to the King was passed.
1. The Lord Cromwell Vicegerent for the King in the Spiritualties (and having
place thereby both in the Parliament and Convocation-house above the
Archbishops) was beheaded the 28th of July, in the next Year, being the 32 of
the King. Confessing at his death publicly, That he had been seduced but died
a Papist. 2. The Archbishop of Canterbury, Tho. Cranmer D. D. was burnt in the
Castleditch at Oxford, 21. March 1556, 3 Mary. 3. The Archbishop of York, Dr.
Edw. Lee died 13th of September. 1544. 36 H. 8. 4. The Bishop of London John
Stokesley died within 4 Months after, viz. 3. September. 1539. 5. The Bishop of
Durham, Cuthbert Tonstal, was imprisoned in the Tower all King Edwards time for
Religion, and deprived of his Bishopric, and the same inter alia Sacrilegia
non pauca (says Godwin) dissolved and given to the King by Parliament 7 Edw.
VI. but the King being immediately taken away, Queen Mary restored both it and
him, An. 1o. Parl. 2. c. 3. and Queen Elizabeth again deprived him, and
committed him to the Archbishop of Canterbury, where he died in July 1559. 6.
The Bishop of Winchester, Stephen Gardener, was committed to the Tower 30: June
1548, in Edw. VI's time; for that he had not declared in his Sermon the day
before at Paul's-Cross certain Opinions appointed to him by the Council. Two
Years after, because he approved not the Reformation, he was deprived of his
Bishopric, and kept in Prison all King Edward's days, but restored by Queen
Mary. He died of the Gout 12. Nov. 1555, being the 3d of her Reign. 7. The
Bishop of Exeter, John Voisey, (alias Horman) had the Education of the King's
Daughter the Lady Mary, and discontented with the Reformation aliened the Lands
of the Bishopric to Courtiers or made long Leases of them, at little Rent,
leaving scarcely 7 or 8 Manors of 22, and them also of the least, and leased
or laden with Pensions. Nefandum Sacrilegium, says Godwin. Being suspected of
the Rebellion of Devonshire about the change of Religion, he was put from his
Bishopric, but restored by Queen Mary, and died 1555, Mar. 3. 8. The Bishop of
Lincoln, John Longland, the King's Confessor died 1547, 1 Edw. VI. 9. The
Bishop of Bath and Wells, John Clerk, carried and commended in an Oration to
the Cardinals the King's Book against Luther with much commendation: But being
afterward sent in Embassage to the Duke of Cleve, to show the reason, why the
King renounced his Marriage with the Lady Ann the Duke's Sister; for the reward
of his unwelcome Message was poisoned (as they said) in Germany, and returning
with much ado died in England in Febr. 1540, i.e. 32 Hen. 8. 10. The Bishop of
Ely, Thomas Goodrick, continued from and in 26 Hen. 8. till 1. Maii 1. Mariae.
11. The Bishop of Bangor, John Salcot (alias Capen) Abbot of Hide was
consecrated 19. Apr. next before this Parliament, and translated to Salisbury
in August following, where it seems he continued till Q. Mary's time. 12. The
Bishop of Salisbury, Nic. Shaxton, being consecrated 27 Hen 8. was put out July
1539, i. e. 31 Hen. 8. together with Latimer, and for the same cause, but
recanted. 13. The Bishop of Worcester, Hugh Latimer, made 27 Hen. 8. renounced
his Bishopric in July 31 of the King, and was burnt with Dr. Ridley at Oxon.
16. October, 1559. 14. The Bishop of Rochester, Nich. Heath, made 4. April
before this Parliament in 31 Hen. 8. and about 4 Years after translated to
Worcester, was deposed by Edw. 6. but made Archbishop of York 1 Mariae
afterward, also Chancellor of England. 15. The Bishop of Chichester, Richard
Sampson, made June 5. 1536, and 28 Hen. 8. was translated to Lichfield 12. May,
1543. To flatter the King he wrote an Apology for his Supremacy, yet in the
Year of this Parliament 31. he was committed to the Tower for relieving such as
were imprisoned for denying it. But it seems his Apology was written after this
Commitment to recover Favor: About 2 Ed. 6. he declared himself for the Pope,
whom he had written against, and so after diverse turnings and returnings he
died 1554, 2 Mar. 16. The Bishop of Norwich, William Rugg, (alias Rupp) made
1536, 28 Hen. 8. and died 1550 about 4 or 5 Edw. 6. 17. The Bishop of St.
David's, William Barlow, was translated hither from St. Asaph in April 1536, 28
Hen. 8. and by King Edw. after to Bath and Wells; fled into Germany in Qu.
Mary's time, and 2 Eliz. was made Bishop of Chichester. 18. The Bishop of St.
Asaph, Robert Porpey (alias Werbington or Warton) was made 2. July, 28. Hen. 8.
where having sat 18 Years, and nequissimo Sacrilegio, sold and spoiled the
Lands of the Bishopric by long Leases, he was by Qu. Mary, An. 1. translated
to Hereford, where he sat almost till her death. 19. The Bishop of Landaff,
Rob. Holgate, 25. March, 1537, 28. Hen. S. and in the 36th of his Reign
translated to the Archbishopric of York, and by Qu. Mary at her entrance
committed to the Tower, where within half a Year he was deprived. 20. The
Bishop of Carlisle, Rob. Aldrich, was elected 18. July, 1537, 29 Hen. 8. and
died 5 Mar. 1555.
Concerning the Bishops it does not appear how they gave their Voices; but it
may well be supposed that diverse of them were against a total suppression; and
seeing in other Acts it is recorded after that when a Bill was granted with an
unanimous consent of all parties, none dissenting, that then it was past Nemine
dissentiente: yet it is not so recorded upon this, but although many might
dissent, and that publicly, yet there was a major part of Temporal Lords
present, and so carried it by Voices. It is testified of Bishop Latimer, that
he much desired that two or three Abbeys of the greater sort might be preserved
in every Shire for pious and charitable Uses: Which was a wise and godly
motion, and perhaps the occasion that the King did convert some (in part) to
good purposes: Yet the Desolation was so universal that Jo. Bale does much
lament the loss and spoil of Books and Libraries in his Epistle upon Leland's
Journal Leland being employed by the King to survey and preserve the choicest
Books in their Libraries.) If there had been in every Shire of England (says
Bale) but one solemn Library to the preservation of those Noble Works, and
Preferment of good Learning in our Posterity, it had been yet somewhat, but to
destroy all without consideration, it is and will be unto England for ever a
most horrible Infamy amongst the grave Seniors of other Nations. Adding
further, that they who got and purchased the Religious Houses at the
Dissolution of them, took the Libraries as part of the Bargain and Booty --
reserving of those Library Books, some to serve their Jakes, some to scour
their Candlesticks, and some to rub their Boots, some they sold to the Grocers
and Soap-sellers, and some they sent over Sea to the Book-binders; not in small
numbers, but at times whole Ship-fulls to the wondering of foreign Nations. And
after he also adds, I know a Merchant-man, which all this time shall be
nameless, that bought the Contents of two noble Libraries for 40s. a piece, a
shame it is to be spoken: this stuff has he occasioned instead of Gray Paper
by the space of more than these ten Years, and yet he has enough for many
Years to come: a prodigious Example is this and to be abhorred of all men who
love their Nation as they should do. And well he might exclaim, a prodigious
Example, it being a most wicked and detestable injury to Religion and Learning:
Yet thus are Men often transported with Passion in the heat of Reformation, and
fiery Zeal without Wisdom.

The Temporal Lords present in Parliament, 23 Maii, 31 Hen. VIII.
1. Thomas Lord Audley of Walden, Lord Chancellor, died without Issue-male,
30. Apr. 1544, 3 Hen. 8. Margaret his sole Daughter and Heir being first
married to Henry Dudley, Son of John Duke of Northumberland, slain at St.
Quintins, without Issue, Anno 1557. After a second Wife to Thomas Duke of
Norfolk, who was beheaded in June 1572. By him she had Issue, Thomas, created
by King James Lord Howard of Walden and after Earl of Suffolk, and made Lord
Treasurer, but put out of his place and fined in the Star Chamber, termino...
Anno... for miscarriage thereof, and grievously afflicted by the wicked and
odious practices of his Daughter Frances, first married to the Earl of Essex,
then divorced and married to the Earl of Somerset; and they both attainted and
adjudg'd to death for the murder of Sir Thomas Overbury. 2. The Duke of
Norfolk at that time, viz. in both Parliaments of 31 and 27 was Thomas Howard
(the third Duke of that renowned Family) who suffering the spite of Fortune,
was upon the 12th of December, in the 28th of the King, committed to the Tower,
with his magnanimous Son and Heir apparent Henry Earl of Surrey. Upon being
first arraigned and attainted, the King lying on his Deathbed, caused [him] to
be beheaded 19. Jan. and deceasing himself on the 28th of the same Month, left
the sorrowful Duke in Prison, where he remained, as I take it, till Queen Mary
set him at liberty to go against Wyat, and being nothing fortunate in that
employment, the Earl of Pembroke was put in his room and had the glory of the
Service. Thomas Howard, Son of Henry Earl of Surrey beheaded, and Grandchild of
the last Duke was restored by Q. Mary and made the 4th Duke of Norfolk, but
affecting Marriage with the Qu. of Scots was heretofore attainted and beheaded
in June 1572. Philip his eldest Son was in right of his Mother, and by
conveyance of the Castle and Honor of Arundel unto him, Earl of Arundel, and
after restored in Blood 23d of Eliz. yet byfate of his Noble Family, after long
imprisonment and Attainder, died in the Tower, where his most honorable Son,
after restitution to his Earldom and other Dignities, with a reinvesting of the
great Office of Earl Marshal of England, but now by God's Blessing and his own
singular Wisdom has gotten the upper hand of Fortune, and is likely to leave
it to a temperate and virtuous Son. 3. The Duke of Suffolk both in this
Parliament and in that of 27 was Charles Brandon, and though he was not present
at the passing of the Bill, yet being a principal Parliament Man, the King's
Brother by Marriage, and his minion in Affection, it is very credible that he
was a very great advancer of the business. He had four Wives, no Issue by the
first, a base Daughter, and another by a second born in Wedlock. A Son Henry
that was Earl of Lincoln by his 3d Wife the King's Sister and Qu. of France,
and two Daughters and two Sons Henry and Charles by his fourth Wife. His Son
Henry Earl of Lincoln died without Issue in the life time of his Father the
Duke. His other Son Henry was Duke of Suffolk after his Father, but both he and
his Brother Charles died together of the Sweating Sickness the 14th of July,
1551, without Issue. Frances his eldest Daughter by the Qu. of France was
married to Henry Gray Marquess of Dorset, who in her Father's Title was created
Duke of Suffolk, and was beheaded the 23d of Febr. 1 Mariae, leaving no Issue
by a former Wife but three Daughters by this Frances, whereof Jane, married to
the Lord Guilford Dudley, together with her Husband were beheaded without
Issue, 1 Mar. Catharine his second Daughter was married to the Lord Herbert,
and divorced. Mary the 3d Daughter, was married to Martin Reyes, a
Groom-porter, as I have heard, and died without Issue. 4. The Marquess of
Dorset in this Parliament of 31 H. 8. was Henry Gray that married Frances the
eldest Daughter of Charles Brandon Duke of Suffolk by the Qu. of France, King
Henry's Sister, he had Issue by her a Son and 3 Daughters. His Son Henry Lord
Harrington died before him without Issue. The Lady Jane eldest Daughter, as we
said before, was married to the Lord Guilford Dudley, and together with her
Husband was beheaded. Catharine his second Daughter... Mary the third Daughter
was married to Martin Reyes a Groom-porter, and their Father himself was also
beheaded. 5. The Earl of Oxon was John Vere the fiftieth of that Name, whose
Grandchild Edward Earl of Oxon not only utterly wasted the great and most
ancient Inheritance of that Earldom, but defaced also the Castles and Houses
thereof, and leaving a Son by his second Wife named Henry, the 18th Earl of
that Noble Family: The same Henry died without Issue, and this Male Line thus
failing, the Office of Great Chamberlain of England, which had ever since Hen.
the 1st's time gone in this Family, was now by the Lady Mary Sister of this
Edward, being married to the Lord Willoughby of Eresby, by Judgment of the
Upper House of Parliament, Anno... transposed to her Son and Heir the now Earl
of Lindsey. 6. The Earl of South-Hampton was William Fitz-Williams, who being
Lord Privy Seal and Admiral of England was created Earl of South-Hampton at
Hampton Court, Anno 29 Hen. 8. He married Mabell Daughter of Henry Lord
Clifford of Westmorland, and Sister and Heir of Henry the first Earl of
Cumberland, but died without Issue Anno 34 H. 8. 7. The Earl of Arundel was
William Fitz-Alam, who died 35 Hen. 8. He had a Son, and by two Wives four
Daughters, which died without Issue. His Son Henry Fitz-Alam, succeeded in the
Earldom, a Man of great Dignities. He was twice married; by Catharine his first
Wife he had Issue, H. Lord... who being married died without Issue in the life
of his Father, An. 1556. And so ended the Noble Family and Male line of these
Earls of Arundel. But he had also by that Wife, two Daughters and Heirs,
whereof Jane the eldest was married to the Lord Lumley who had Issue by her,
Thomas, Charles and Mary, who died all without Issue. Mary his second Daughter
and Coheir was married to Tho. Howard the last Duke of Norfolk, and by her the
Earldom, Castles and Honors of Arundel were transported to Philip Howard her
Son, and so to her Grandchild Tho. Earl of Arundel, and Earl Marshal of England
now living, in whose line God hold them. 8. The Earl of Shrewsbury was Francis
Talbott, who by his first Wife Mary Daughter of Tho. Lord Dacres of Gilsland
had Issue, George his eldest Son, the sixth Earl of Shrewsbury; and Tho. who
died at Sheffield without issue.Earl George had two Wives and four Sons,
besides three Daughters by his first Wife; no Issue by his second. Francis Lord
Talbott his eldest Son was married, but died without Issue. Gilbert his second
Son was the 7th Earl of that Family, married and had Issue two Sons John and
George, but both of them died in their Infancy without other Issue-Male of
their Father; whose Heirs therefore were three Daughters. Edward, 3d. Son of
George, was the 8th. Earl, he married but died without Issue, 2 Feb. 1617.
Henry the 4th's Son married and died without Issue-Male. Thus was all the
Issue-Male of Francis Earl of Shrewsbury, one of the Peers of the Upper-House
at the passing of the Act aforesaid utterly extinct, and the Earldom translated
to another Family of that Name, the Talbotts of Grafton descending from John
Talbott the second Earl of Shrewsbury (who died Anno 39. Henry VI.) by his 3d.
Son Sir Gilbert Talbott Captain of Calice. York in Tit. Shrewsbury. 9. The Earl
of Essex, Henry Bourchier, that was a Peer of Parliament at the Act of
Dissolution in 27. Henry VIII. broke his Neck by a fall from an Horse about 10
Weeks before this Parliament, viz on the 12th of March in 31. Henry VIII. and
having no Issue-Male, the King gave his Earldom to Thomas Lord Cromwell, who in
his Bipartite Dignity sat among the Ecclesiastical Peers, and first of the
Rank as the King's Vicegerent in Spiritualibus; and here among the Lay-Peers,
as in his own Right a Temporal Earl: and Temporal indeed, for not long after he
was turned out of all his Offices, attainted and beheaded, as we have formerly
showed. He brought in the Bill the 3d. time, and it was expedited the 23d. of
May, but within two Months following, viz 29. July, himself was attainted in
the same Parliament and condemned, so that vengeance fell speedily upon him.
10. The Earl of Darby was Edward Lord Stanley, a Peer of the Realm both in this
and in 27. of the King, he had diverse Sons and Daughters; his eldest Son Henry
was Earl after him, and left two Sons Ferdinando and William. Ferdinando
succeeded in the Earldom, and died without Issue-Male 1594. leaving 3
Daughters, and Heirs, who shared so deep in the Patrimony of his goodly
Earldom, as they not only pulled the Feathers from the Wings of it, (whereby in
times past it has been so powerful) but the Wings from the very Body. 11. The
Earl of Worcester was Henry Somerset Lord Herbert, a Peer also in 27. This
honorable Family seems more fortunate than any of the precedent, for their
lineal descent remains entire and without blemish, having at this day many
Noble Branches. Yet was not the Issue of Earl Henry free from the Hand of God;
for his 3d. Son Thomas Somersett died in the Tower of London, Francis his 4th
and youngest Son was slain at Massellborough-Field, and his Son-in-Law the Earl
of Northumberland, that married his Daughter the Lady Anne, was beheaded at
York, 1572. 12. The Earl of Rutland was Tho. Manours, both in this Parliament
and the 27th. He had 5 Sons and 6 Daughters, and died in 35. Henry VIII. his
eldest Son Henry was Earl after him, and had Issue Edward the 3d. Earl of that
Family, who had only a Daughter an Heir, and died without Issue-Male. John
Brother of Edward was the 4th Earl, he had 3 Sons, Edward that died an Infant,
Roger and Francis. Roger succeeded and was the 5th Earl, he had only one
Daughter his sole Heir, married to Sir Philip Sydney (slain at Zutphen) and
died without Issue-Male. Francis after his Brother Roger was the 6th Earl; he
was twice married; by his first Wife he had Issue only the Lady Catherine,
married to the Duke of Buckingham, who was murdered by Felton. And two Sons by
his second Wife Henry Lord Rosse, and Francis Lord Rosse of Homelake, who died
both young without Issue. 13. The Earl of Cumberland both in 27 and 31. Henry
VIII. was Henry Clifford, who died 34. of the King. He had Issue Henry the 2d
Earl of Cumberland, who had Issue George the 3d. Earl, a valiant Soldier,
successful in his Enterprises. He had Issue two Sons, Francis Lord Clifford,
and Robert that died young, and a Daughter the Lady Anne, married to Richard
Sackvill Earl of Dorsett, who died, as did also this Earl of Cumberland without
Issue-Male. Francis Brother of George was the 4th Earl, who had Issue Henry
Lord Clifford. 14. The Earl of Sussex was Robert Ratcliff created 8. December.
21. Henry 8. He had three Wives, and more Sons besides Daughters, and died 28.
Nov. 1541. 34. Henry 8. his Son and Heir Henry Earl of Sussex had five Sons,
whereof Egremont his Son by the second Wife was attainted of Treason, Thomas
the third Earl, Son and Heir of Henry had two Wives, but died without Issue.
15. The Earl of Huntington was George Lord Hastings created 21. Henry 8. He had
Issue Francis the 2d. Earl, and Sir Edward Hastings whom Queen Mary made Baron
of Loughborough, that died without Issue. Sir Thomas Hastings also who died
without Issue. And Henry and William besides three Daughters. Francis the 2d.
Earl had Issue Henry the third Earl who died without Issue, and four other Sons
whereof William died without Issue. Sir George Hastings Brother of Francis
succeeded in the Earldom, and left many Male-branches, whereof Henry the Issue
of his eldest Son Francis was the fifth Earl, and had Issue Ferdinando. -- 16.
The Earl of Hertford was Edward Seymour created Anno 29. Henry 8. made Duke of
Somerset, etc. Edw. 6. He was committed to the Tower in the third Year of the
King for diverse great Offenses, but then obtained a Pardon, and being arraigned
of Treason and Felony, 1o December. 5. Regis was quit for the Treason, and
condemned for the Felony, and therefore beheaded the 22d of July following. He
had two Sons by his first Wife that died without Issue. Edward his 3d. Son or
eldest by his 2d. Wife the Lady Anne, Daughter of John Stanhope, Esquire succeeded
in all his Fathers Honors for a short time, namely from the Death of his
Father on 22 June 5. Edw. 6. to the End of the next Session of Parliament,
which was the 25th of April following: But the Honors being entailed upon him;
and therefore not forfeited for his Father's Attaindure for Felony. Misfortune
and the Malice of his Adversaries yet so wrought upon him; as in this Session
they were all taken from him by Parliament with most of his Inheritance, which
gracious Queen Elizabeth commiserating, restored him to the Earldom of
Hertford, and Barony of Seymour. To let pass his other Offspring his
Grandchild Edward the 3d. Earl of Hertford fell into King James's displeasure
by marrying the Lady Arabella Stuart, for which both of them were committed to
the Tower. 17. The Earl of Bridgwater was Henry Lord Daubeney created 20 July
30. Hen. 8. He died without Issue Anno Edw. 6. and so his Name, Family and
Dignity was extinct. This Earl of Bridgwater was reduced to that extremity that
he had not a Servant to wait on him in his last sickness, nor means to buy Fire
or Candles, or to bury him, but what was done for him in Charity by his sister
Cicely, married to John Bourchier the first of that Name, Earl of Bathe. Verba
Henrici Bourchier manu sua scripta.

A Catalogue of the Barons present in Parliament.
1. Audley; Then John Tonchet Lord Audley, who had Issue George Tonchet Lord
Audley, who had Issue Henry Tonchet Lord Audley, who had Issue George Tonchet
Lord Audley, and Earl of Castle-Haven attainted and beheaded, and the Barony of
Audley being in see extinguished. 2. Zouche; Was John Lord Zouche, who had Issue
Richard Lord Zouche, who had Issue Edward Lord Zouche (Son of George Lord
Zouche) Lord St. Maur and Cantelupe of Harringworth in Northamptonshire, who
sold his ancient Inheritance, died without Issue-Male, and his Barony extinct,
1 Caroli: His first Wife proving disloyal she was divorced from him, that he
regarded not the two Daughters which he had, whom therefore he suffered to
marry far below his Degree and Honor, as himself says in his Will upon
Record. The Eldest being married to Sir William Tate in Northamptonshire, the
other to -- in Worcestershire. 3. De-laware; Tho. Nest Lord De-laware, Son of
Tho. Lord De-laware that died the 16th. Henry 8. married Eliz. Daughter and
Coheir of John Bonvill, died without Issue. William Nest, Son of George Nest,
Brother of Tho. Lord De-laware being of the Age of 18 Years, 1 Edw. 6. was
disabled by Parliament to succeed his Uncle, as conceived to have imagined his
Death, and 2 or 3 of Philip and Mary was attainted of Treason by Commission in
London. Restored in Blood as Heir to Sir George his Father about 3 or 5 Eliz.
and created a new Baron, De-laware in 8. and had Issue Tho. De-laware, Father
or Grandfather of him now living. 4. Morley; Henry Parker made Lord Morley in
right of Alice his Mother, Daughter and Heir of William Lovell. Lord Morley
died 27 November. 4. Mar. had Issue Henry, who died in the Life of his Father,
leaving Issue Hen. Lord Morley that died at Paris 1578. Had Issue Edw. Lord
Morley who died April 1618, and had Issue William Lord Morley, and made
Montegle 1 Jacobi, and died 1622. and had Issue Henry Lord Morley and Montegle
now living, and Francis. 5. Dacres: Thomas Fines Lord Dacres of the South,
being in company with certain Gentlemen hunting in Nicholas Potham's Park,
there committed a Riot and Murder of Bransrigg. He was hanged at Tyburn on St.
Peter's Day 33 Hen. 8. He had issue, Thomas Lord Dacres who died within age, and
Gregory Lord Dacres who died without issue 1594, and his Family so extinct.
Margery his Sister and Heir was married to Sampson Leonard, who had issue Henry
Lord Dacres, who had issue Richard Lord Dacres Father of -- now Lord Dacres a
Child. 6. Dacres of Gilsland; William died 1563, had issue Thomas Lord Dacres,
Leonard, George S. P. Edward, Francis George Lord Dacres Son of Thomas Lord
Dacres, being but 7 Years old, and granted Ward to the Duke of Norfolk, brake
his Neck by a fall from a Vaulting-horse at Charterhouse, Anno... Eliz. And his
Barony and Family extinct, he dying without issue Male; his two Sisters and
Heirs were married to the Dukes Sons Philip Earl of Arundel, and the Lord
William Howard. Thomas Lord Dacres Son of William Lord Dacres had issue,
William slain at Thetford 1569, his Sisters and Heirs, Anne married to Philip
Howard, Mary married to Thomas Howard, Elizabeth to Lord William Howard. 7.
Cobham: George Brook Lord Cobham (Son of Thomas Lord Cobham, who died 1529)
died 1558; had Issue William Lord Cobham. He died 1597, and five other Sons,
which William had Issue, Henry Brook Lord Cobham, attainted and died 1618, S.
P. and Sir William Brook, S. P. and George Brook attainted and executed at
Winchester, An. 1603, the Barony extinct. 8. Maltravers: Henry Fitz-Alam Son of
William Fitz-Alam the 10th Earl of Arundel; which William died 35 H. 8. was in
the life of his Father Lord Maltravers and Baron of Parliament, and after the
death of his Father the last Earl of Arundel of that Name. 9. Ferrers: Walter
Lord Devreux, Lord Ferrers of Chartley, Son of John Devreux Lord Ferrers, was
created Vicount Hereford 1 Edward 6. had Issue, Richard that died in the life
of his Father, and had Issue Walter Devreux Earl of Essex, suspected to be
poisoned, and had Issue, Robert Devreux Earl of Essex, attainted and executed
1601, and Walter Devreux slain at the Siege of Roan. Earl Robert had issue
Robert restored 1. Jacobi. 10. Powis: Edward Gray of Northumberland Lord Powis,
Son of John Gray Lord Powis, married Anne the base Daughter of Charles Brandon
Duke of Suffolk, and died without issue, and his Family extinct. 11. Clinton:
Edw. Lord Clinton, whose Father died 9 Hen. 8. was made Earl of Lincoln 14
Eliz. and died 27th Eliz. and had Issue, Henry Earl of Lincoln, who had Issue
Thomas Earl of Lincoln Father of Theophilus now Earl. 12. Scroope: John Lord
Scroope of Bolton, Son of Henry Lord Scroope of Bolton; which John in Henry 8's
time married the Daughter of the Earl of Cumberland, had Issue Henry Lord
Scroope, who died 1592, and had Issue, Thomas Lord Scroope, who died 1609 who
had Issue Emanuel Lord Scroope, Earl of Sunderland that died without lawful
Issue, and both Barony and Earldom extinct. 13. William Sturton had Issue
Charles Lord Sturton, who for murdering Mr. Argile and his Son, was hanged at
Sal^sbury 6. March 1565. He had Issue John Lord Sturton S. P. and Edw. now Lord
Sturton. 14. Latimer: John Nevil Lord Latimer lived 23 Hen. 8. and had Issue
John Nevil Lord Latimer, who died 1577, 19 Eliz. without Issue Male, and his
Family and Barony extinct, notwithstanding his four Daughters. 15. Montjoy:
Charles Blunt Lord Montjoy who succeed his Father William Blunt Lord Montjoy,
and died 38 Henry 8. had Issue James Lord Montjoy who died 1581, had Issue
William Lord Montjoy S. P. 1594, and Charles made Earl of Devon 1603 and died
1606 without lawful Issue, so the Family and Barony was extinct, but for a base
Son of his, Montjoy Blunt was created Lord Montjoy 3 Jacobi and afterward Earl
of Newport, Anno 4. 16. Lumley: John Lord Lumley married Jane the eldest
Daughter and Coheir of Henry Fitz-Alam the last Earl of Arundel of that name,
and had by her Charles, Thomas and Mary, who died all without Issue, so his
line was extinct. 17. Montegle: Sir Edward Stanley created Lord Montegle 6
Henry 8. had Issue, Thomas Stanley Lord Montegle, who married Mary Daughter of
Charles Brandon Duke of Suffolk, and had issue William Stanley Lord Montegle,
who died without issue Male and his Barony extinct, till King James Anno 1.
conferred it on William Parker after Lord Morley, for revealing the
Gunpowder-Treason, having married Elizabeth Daughter and sole Heir of the
aforesaid William. 18. Windsor: Andrew Windsor made 21 Henry 8. and died 33,
and had issue William Lord Windsor, q. ob. 1558, who had issue Edward Lord
Windsor, who died 1575, who had Fredrick Lord Windsor who died Sept. 28 Eliz.
and Henry Lord Windsor who died 1605, who had issue Thomas now Lord Windsor,
yet without issue. 19. Wentworth: Thomas Lord Wentworth made 21 Henry 8. had
issue Thomas Lord Wentworth, who died 1590, who had issue William Wentworth,
who died 1582, S. P. and Henry Lord Wentworth, who died 1593, who had issue
Thomas Lord Wentworth, created Earl of Cleveland 1 Caroli, and had issue,
Thomas his Son and Heir apparent. 20. Borough: Thomas Lord Borough had issue,
Edward that married Qu. Catherine now S. P. William who had issue, Henry eldest
Son slain by Sir Tho. Holcroft near Kingston Anno 1578, and Thomas Lord
Borough Deputy of Ireland, and Sir John Borough slain by Sir John Gilbert
1594. Thomas Lord Borough had Issue, Robert Lord Borough that died a Child
without issue 1601, and the Barony extinct. The first Thomas had issue besides
Edward and William Sir Thomas Borough (S. P.) and Henry Father of Nicholas,
who had issue Sir John Borough (ut creditur) slain at Rees. 21. Bray (Sir
Edmund) made Baron 21 Hen. 8. and had issue, John Lord Bray, died without
issue, and so the Barony and Line extinct, but he had six Sisters. 22. Walter
Hungerford made Baron of Hatsbury 28 Hen. 8. was beheaded for Buggery, and his
Barony extinct, yet he had issue Sir Walter Hungerford Knight, who died without
issue Male, and so this Family extinct. 23. St. John: William Paulet was
created Lord St. John of Basing 30 Hen. 8. and made Earl of Wiltshire 3 Edward
6. and 5 Edward 6. Marquess of Winchester, who had issue John Marquess, who had
issue William Marquess, who had issue William Marquess Father of William Lord
St. John that died S. P. and of John now Marquess. 24. Sir John Russel was made
Baron 30 Hen. 8. and Earl of Bedford 3 Edw. 6. he had Woburn Abbey for his
Dwelling House with the Church turned to a strange use even the Stable; he had
Francis the second Earl of Bedford his sole issue, who had four Sons and three
Daughters, 1. Edmund Lord Russel died without issue. 2. John Lord Russel died
without issue Male. 3. Francis Lord Russel treacherously slain by the Scots in
time of Truce; but left two Sons who died without issue, Edward the 4th Earl of
Bedford, and then Sir William 4th Son of the first Francis, was by King James
made Lord Russel of Thornhaugh, whose Son Francis is now the 5th Earl, and long
may he live and prosper. 25. William Parr, made Baron Parr of Kendall 9. March,
30 H. 8. after Earl of Essex, and lastly, Marquess Nortston, had three Wives,
was divorced from his first, and died without issue. York, 186.
Leonard Lord Gray, Lord Lieutenant of Ireland, holds a Parliament in Ireland
1. Maii, 28 Hen. 8. at Dublin, wherein he passes an Act for the suppressing of
Abbeys. Chron. of Ireland, page 100. In the 32 of the King he is called home
and sent to the Tower, and in the 25th of June 33 he was to be arraigned in the
King's Bench at Westminster, and to be tried by a Jury of Knights, being no
Lord of Parliament, but confessing the Indictment, had his Judgment, and was
beheaded at Tower Hill the third Day following; a Man of singular Valor, that
had formerly served his Prince and Country most honorably in France and
Ireland. Stow, 32 Hen. 8. and 33.

Now I labor in observing the Particulars, seeing the whole body of the
Baronage is since that fallen so much from their ancient luster, magnitude and
estimation. I that about 50 Years ago did behold with what great respect,
observance and distance, principal Men of Countries applied themselves to some
of the meanest Barons, and so with what familiarity inferior Gentlemen often
do accost many of these of our times, cannot but wonder either at the
Declination of the one, or at the Arrogance of the other; but I remember what
an eminent Divine once said in a Sermon; he compared Honor among Dignities to
Gold, the heaviest and most precious Metal, but Gold (says he) may be beaten
so thin, as the very Breath will blow it away; so Honor may be dispersed so
popularly, that the Reputation of it will be pretermitted.

To say what I observe herein, as the Nobility spoiled God of his Honor by
putting those things from him, and communicating them to lazy and vulgar
Persons; so God to requite them has taken the ancient Honors of Nobility, and
communicating them to the meanest of the People, to Shopkeepers, Taverners,
Tailors, Tradesmen, Burghers, Brewers, Grasiers; and it may be supposed, that
as Constantine the Great seeing the inconvenience of the multitude of Comites
of his time distinguished them, De Vita Constable. l. 4. c. 1.
as Eusebius reports, into three degrees making the latter far inferior to
the former; so may it one day come to pass among these of our times; and it
shall not want some precedent of our own to the like purpose. Vide, Glossarium
in voc. Comes, page 109.

IV. What has happened to the Crown it self.
It now remains to show how the Lands themselves thus pulled from the Church,
have thriven with the Crown, and in the Hands of the King his Heirs and
Successors; truly no otherwise than the Archbishop I spoke of so long since
foretold. For they have melted and dropped away from the Crown like Snow; yet
herein that Snow leaves moisture, to enrich the Ground, but those nothing save
dry and fruitless Coffers; for now they are all gone in a manner, and little to
speak of remaining for them to the Treasury; for my own part, I think the Crown
the happier that they are gone, but very unhappy in their manner of going, for
as Sampson going out of Gaza carried with him the Gates, Judge. 16.
the Bars and Posts of the City, leaving it thereby exposed to Enemies, weak
and undefenced, so those Lands going from the Crown, have carried away with
them the very Crown Lands themselves, which were in former times, the glorious
Gates of Regal Magnificence, the present and ready Bars of Security at all
Necessities, and like immovable Posts, or Hercules Pillars in all the
transmigrations of Crown and Kingdom, had to our Time (1000 Years and upward)
remained fixed and amor... to the Scepter. These, I say, are in effect all
gone, since the Dissolution: the new Piece has rent away the old Garment, and
the Title of terra Regis, within Doomsday Book, was generally the Targett in
every County, is now a Blank, I fear, in most of them.

But his Majesty has a great Fee-farm reserved out of the greatest part of
both of them, 40000 l. a Year, they say, out of the Crown Lands, and 60000 l.
out of the Church Lands: I confess it makes a goodly sound, yet is it but froth
in respect of the solid Land, which is deemed to be more than ten times, if not
twenty times as much, and this being but succus redditus, a sick and
languishing Rent, will grow daily as our Rents of Assess have already done, to
be of lesser worth, as the price of Lands and Commodities increase and rise
higher; but I hear there is... thousand pounds a Year of the Crown Lands gone,
without any Reservation at all, and above... thousand likewise of the Church
Lands; and to tell the truth, which my self do well know, a great proportion of
the Fee-farm Rents themselves are likewise aliened already, but mihi Cynthius
aurem vellit, I must launch no further.

V. What happened to the whole Kingdom generally.
What the whole Body of the Kingdom has suffered since these Acts of
Confiscation of the Monasteries and their Churches is very remarkable; let the
Monks and Friars shift as they deserved, the good if you will, and the bad
together, my purpose is not to defend their Iniquities; the thing I lament is,
that the Wheat perished with the Darnel, things of good and pious Institution,
with those that abused and perverted them; by reason whereof the Service of God
was not only grievously wounded, and bleedeth at this day, but infinite Works
of Charity (whereby the Poor were universally relieved through the Kingdon) were
utterly cut off and extinguished; many thousand masterless Servants turned
loose into the World, and many thousand of poor People which were constantly
fed, clad and nourished by the Monasteries, now like young Ravens seek their
Meat at God. Every Monastery according to their Ability had an Ambery (greater
or little) for the daily relief of the Poor about them. Every principal
Monastery an Hospital commonly for Travelers, and an Infirmary, which we now
call a Spittle, for the sick and diseased Persons, with Officers and Attendants
to take care of them. Gentlmen and others having Children without means of
Maintenance had them here brought up and provided for, which course in some
Countries, and namely in Pomerland, (as I hear) is still observed, though Monks
and Friars be abandoned. These and such other Miseries falling upon the meaner
sort of People, drove them into so many Rebellions, as we spoke of, and rung
such loud peals in the King's Ears, that on his Deathbed he gave back the
Spittle of St. Bartholomew's in Smithfield (lately valued, says Stow) at 308
l. 6 s. 7 d. and the Church of the Gray-Friers valued at 32 l. 19 s. 7 d. with
other Churches, and 500 Marks a Year added to it, to be united and called
Christ Church founded by King Henry 8. and to be Hospitals for relieving the
Poor, the Bishop of Rochester declaring his Bounty at Paul's Cross, on the 3d
of Jan. and on the 28th day following the King died, viz, the 28 Jan.

This touching the Poor.

VI. What happened to private Owners of the Monasteries particularly.
I turn now to the richer sort, and shall not need to speak of the Clergy,
whose irreparable Misery Piers Ploughman foresaw so many Ages before, saying,
That a King should come that should give the Abbat of Abingdon such a blow, as
incurable should be the Wound thereof. Their Misery and Wrack is so notorious,
as it needs no Pen to decypher it; nor will I speak of the loss that the
Laymen our Grandfathers had by this means in their right of Founders and
Patronage, Meantenures, Rents-services, Pensions, Corrodies, and many other
Duties and Privileges, whereof some were saved by the Statutes, yet by little
and little all in effect worn out and gone. Those, I say, I speak not of, for
that they are Wounds grown up and forgotten; but of one instead of all, that
immortal and incurable Wound, which every day bleedeth more than other, given
to us and our Posterity by the infinite number of Tenures by Knights service in
capite, either newly created upon granting out of these Monasteries and Lands,
or daily raised by double Ignoramus, in every Town almost of the Kingdom. For
as the Abbeys had Lands commonly scattered abroad, in every of them, in some
greater or lesser quantity, according to the Ability of their Benefactors, so
the Leprosy of this Tenure comes thereby as generally to be scattered through
the Kingdom. And whereas before that time, very few did hold on that manner
besides the Nobility and principal Gentlemen that were owners of great
Lordships and Possessions, which from time to time descended entirely to their
Heirs, and were not broken out into small parcels amongst inferior Tenants and
mean Purchasers. Now by reason that those Abbey Lands are minced into such
infinite numbers of little Quillets, and thereby privily sown (like the Tares
in the Parable) almost in every Man's Inheritance, very few (not having their
Tenure certain from the King by Patent) can assure themselves to be free from
this Calamity. The truth is, that originally none held in Capite, but Peers of
the Realm, who were therefore called the King's Barons, and such as by this
their Tenure (as appears by the Council of Clarendon 10 Hen. 2.) had the
privilege to sit in the King's House, and to hear and judge all Causes brought
before the King, and to be of his great Council. And though afterward the meaner
of them were neglected, yet King John was tied by his great Charter to call
them all to Parliament, where the Knights of the Shires in that respect have
their place at this day.

I am too prone (you see) to run out of my way into this Discourse, but to hold
me nearer to my Center, I cannot but admire what moved the Parliament in 27
Henry 8. cap. 27. to enact, that a Tenure in Capite by Knights Service should
be reserved to the King, upon their granting out of their Abbeys and their
Lands, as though it were some singular benefit to the Commonwealth: It may be
they conceived, that according to the Project of the Parliament at Leicester in
2 Hen. 5. that the King should thereby have a perpetual means to support a
standing Army, or to have it ready whenever need required, and so ease the
Subject of all Military Contribution. O how far was that great School of Wisdom
deceived! or what has that Art of theirs produced other than as if some
Scholars had bound their Masters for to whip them soundly; and I suppose they
have had their fill of it long e're this time.

But these Tenures by being by this means multiplied in such excessive manner,
the Kings former Officers, that before could span their Business with their
Hand, could not now fathom this with both their Arms. The greater Harvest must
have greater Barns and more Laborers, and therefore in 32 Hen. 8. cap. 46. and
33 Hen. 8. cap. 22. and 39. the Court now called of Wards and Liveries, with
the Orders, Officers and Ministers thereto belonging, was erected. What is
thereby fallen upon the Subject, I need not relate; heavy Experience makes it
generally known, and generally felt; one while by Wardship and Marriage,
another while by suing out Livery and Ouster se main, by Pardons of Alienation,
Concealments, Intrusions, respite of Homage, and other Calamities accompanying
this Tenure, almost innumerable, consuming the Fruit of the Wards Lands for
many Years, and (as sometimes I have seen) for many Ages the Grandfathers,
Fathers and Sons Inheritance militant together in this Court; the Mother
equally lamenting the Death of her Husband, and the Captivity of her Child, the
Confiscation of his Lands for the 3d part of his Age, and the Ransom of his
Person before he can enter into the World; the Family oftentimes so ruined and
impoverished, as if at last it recover, yet it stands tottering and lame for a
long time after. Marriage is honorable and instituted by God in Paradise; do
you think that a Man by the Word of God may be compelled to pay for a License
to marry? I doubt the Schoolmen would not so determine it; nor did any civil or
moral Nation of old admit it; the Custom rose from the barbarous Goths and
Lo^gobards, and yet I confess not without reason, as the Genius of their Nation
did then lead them, and by their Example, all others where they conquered. It
was an impious manner of those times to hold Malice and Enmity, one Family
against another, and against their Friends and Alliances from one Generation to
another; our Ancestors called it deadly feude, the Feudists, feudam; and
Tacitus in his time notes it of Germans, saying, Inimicitias mutuo ponunt and
suscipiunt. It was therefore of urgent necessity, that the Lord should be well
assured that his Tenant married not unto any Family that might be either in
feud with him, or in alliance with them that were: and to prevent that danger
(as appears by the Charter of Hen. 1. cap. 4.) the Lord would have him bound
not to marry without his consent, for which in the beginning the Tenant gave
his Lord some small matter, as munus honorarium; but from thence it grew
afterward to Nundinaria gratissima. And as Bondmen used to pay to their Lords
Chiefage for their Marriage, so the Tenants by Knights Service, which in the
Feudal Law is called Feudum nobile, is likewise subject to this brand of
Servitude, and more grievously in some respect. But I reverence the Law I live
under and has been so long received and practiced, all I aim at, is only to
show in the course of my Argument, the Evils that have either fallen newly upon
us, or been increased since the Confiscation of the Churches and
Church-patrimony, which if it be not offensive, I may say, does seem to be
foretold 800 Years since by one Egelzedus an Hermit, who assigned three Causes
of those Evils, viz. First, Effusion of Blood. 2ly, Drunkenness, and 3ly,
Contempt of the House of God, telling us farther, That we should know the time
of the fulfilling this Prophecy, by the various fashions and mutability of
Apparel that should be in use, the very ear-mark of the Age we live in.

How this Contempt of the House of God works upon the Sacrilegious
Instruments thereof, is to be seen in the Particulars before recited, to which
if I should run higher into former Ages, or further from home in other
Countries, I might tire you with thousands of Examples. But for a Conclusion
mark this by the way, that as England has not been faulty alone in this kind
of Transgression, so other Nations offending in like manner, have likewise
tasted of the same Corrections, or others like them.

Scotland after the rasing of their Monasteries has had the Royal Throne
removed from them and placed in another Kingdom.

The Low Countries harrassed with a continued War of 60 Years and more.

The Palsgrave beaten out of his own Dominions, and living now with his Royal
Wife and Children in lamentable Exile, to which may be added (as concurring
with the usual Infelicity of meddling with Church Lands) that the Palsgrave
having attained the Crown of Bohemia, and seizing the Ecclesiastical Livings
there for maintenance of his Wars (as the Report goes) he was presently cast
out both of that Kingdom, and of his other Inheritance.

Having mentioned this unfortunate Prince, I must add also another accident
that befell him in this kind. The State of the Low Countries while he lived in
Exile among them, gave unto him as a place of Recreation the Abbey of Regutian
near Vtrecht, where intending a sumptuous Building, he drew out thereof such
Materials of Stone and Timber, as might be useful to his new Designs, and
making a Storehouse of the Abby-Church, laid them up there to be in readiness.
It chanced that the truly noble Lord Craven returning out of Italy (where my
Son was very happily fallen into his Company) i e. Sir John Spelman.
he went to this place to visit the Prince, whom they called the King of
Bohemia. My Son seeing what the King was about, and how he had profaned the
Church by making it a Storehouse, said to my Lord Craven, That he feared it
might be ominous to the King; my Lord answered, I will tell him what you say;
and turning to the King said, This Gentleman fears this that your Majesty does
will not be prosperous to you; the King answered, That was but a Conceit, and
so passed it over. But mark what followed upon it. The King within a few Months
after passing in a Bark with the Prince his eldest Son over the Delf of Harlam,
his Boat was casually stemmed and overturned by a Barge that met him in the
Night, and though he himself with great difficulty was saved, yet that hopeful
Prince his Son had not that woeful happiness to be drowned right-out, but after
he was drenched in the Water, and gotten upon the Mast of the Bark wherein they
perished, he was there most miserably starved with Cold and frozen to Death.
And the Father himself while he lamented the death of his Son, was by an
unusual death of Princes taken away by the Plague, laying thus the first Stone
of his unfortunate Building, like that of the Walls of Jericho, in the death of
his eldest Son, and prevented in the rest by his own death. God's Judgments are
his Secrets; I only tell Concurrences.

The other German Princes persecuted with the Sword, and spoiled of their
Liberties.

How careful the Heathens were not to misuse things consecrated to Almighty
God.
When the Philistines had taken the Ark, they with all Reverence placed it in
the House of their God Dagon; and fearing to keep it, returned it back with
Oblations.

So Nabuchodonosor having taken away the holy Vessels of the Temple, abused
them not to profane uses, but kept them religiously in the House of his God.

And when Belshazar and his Kingdom was by the Justice of God extinguished for
abusing of them, and that thereby they came to the Hands of Cyrus in the
Conquest of Babylon; he understanding that they belonged to the Temple of God
in Jerusalem, would not be owner of them but sent them back to Jerusalem: St.
Jerome notes on Dan. 5. Quam diu vasa fuerunt in idolis Babylonicis non est
iratus Dominus (videbantur enim rem Dei secundum pravam quandam opinionem,
tamen divino cultui consecrasse) postquam autem humanis usibus divina
contaminant statim poena sequitur, post sacrilegium.

Most remarkable is the Piety of the Heathen King Darius, 2 Macab. 1* 34* who
hearing of the Pit, wherein the holy Fire had been hid by the Prophet Jeremy,
and being turned into Water, was after a long time taken thence by Nehemiah,
(for the kindling of the Altar-Fire) he caused the very place wherein these
sanctified things had once been laid, to be walled about, and as holy Ground to
be for ever sequestered from Profanation.

Pompey the Great having taken the City Jerusalem by force, and broken into the
Temple, seeing the inestimable Treasure and Riches thereof, would neither take,
nor suffer any thing to be taken thence, but commanded all things to be
cleansed, and the Sacrifices to be continued as they were formerly.

The Copy of His Majesty's Letter to the University of Oxon touching Glebe
Tithes in Parsonages impropriated to be reduced to the sufficient and incumbent
Minister, as is here mentioned before.
James Rex,

RIght trusty and well beloved, We greet you well; the Zeal that Religion might
be well planted in this Realm, and all other our Dominions has caused Us to
enter into Consideration of all means that might best serve to the furtherance
hereof; Wherein finding that no one thing is a greater impediment than want of
competent living to maintain Learned Men in such places of our Kingdom where
the ordinary Benefit of the Vicarages does not suffice and the Parsonages are
impropriate, and in Laymens Hands, We have found that there could not be a
readier way to supply that defect, than if those Impropriations of Tithes might
be converted again to the right use, for which they were at present instituted;
wherein by God's Grace we have a purpose to do in such of of them as now are,
or shall be in Our Hands, whatsoever Our State may well bear: By which Example
of Ours, we presume to induce all others, possessed of the like, to imitate Us,
as far as with their Ability they may. In the mean time We have considered that
to give beginning to so good a work, none were more fit than the Colleges in
the Universities, who being so eminent Members of Our State, and having diverse
of them many such Impropriations, and some of them also a desire, as We are
informed, to provide for such persons out of such Livings, as shall fall within
their powers to dispose, their Example should have great efficacy into all good
men in this sort to advance the Glory of Christ's Gospel. And because there may
occur in the performance hereof some such particular difficulties as are
unknown to Us, We have thought good before We entered further into it, to
recommend this Matter to your Consideration, requiring you, Our Chancellor,
and in your absence the Vice Chancellor, and Heads of Houses to assemble your
selves, and such discreet Men of all the Colleges, as you shall think meet for
such a Consultation, and to propose that matter amongst you, and to consider
and set down some speedy course, how upon the Expiration of the Years in being,
of any Lease of Tithes or Glebe impropriate, the same may afterward be so
devised, as Ecclesiastical Persons bred in the Houses to whom the same do
belong respectively may be maintained, and enabled to execute their Functions,
and yet the College provided of such things as are necessary for maintaining
the same; whereof We have no intention to wish any prejudice, knowing well how
fit it is, that they be supported by all good means whatsoever; of which your
Deliberation and Resolution, We do require you to advertise Us with as
convenient speed as you may, both by Writing under your Hands, and by some
discreet Persons to be sent to Us, or Our Council, to make Report of your
doings therein. Given under Our Sign at our Castle of Windsor the 10th of July
1603, in the first Year of the Reign of England, France and Ireland, and of
Scotland 30th.


CHAP. VIII.
The particulars of diverse Monasteries in Norfolk, whereof the late Owners
since the Dissolution are extinct, or decayed, or overthrown by Misfortunes and
grievous Accidents.

ABout the Year, I suppose, 1615 or 1616, I described with a Pair of Compasses
in the Mapp of Norfolk, a Circle of 12 Miles, the Semi-diameter according to
the Scale thereof, placing the Center about 24 the chief Seat of the Yelvertons
within this Circle and the Borders of it; I enclosed the Mansion-houses of
about 24 Families of Gentlemen, and the sight of as many Monasteries all
standing together at the time of Dissolution; and I then noted that the
Gentlemen's Seats continued at that day in their own Families and Names. But
the Monasteries had flung out their Owners with their Names and Families (all
of them save 2) thrice at least, and some of them 4 or 5 or 6 times, not only
by fail of Issue, or ordinary Sale, but very often by grievous Accidents and
Misfortunes. I observe yet further, that though the Seats of these Monasteries
were in the fattest and choicest Places of all that Part of the Country (for
our Ancestors offered like Abel, the best unto God) yet it has not happened
that any of them to my knowledge, or any other in all this Country, has been
the permanent Habitation of any Family of Note, but like desolate Places left
to Farmers and Husbandmen, no Man almost adventuring to build or dwell upon
them for dread of Infelicity that pursues them. Let me here report, what has
been related to me from the Mouth of Sir Clement Edmonds, lately a Clark of his
Majesty's Counsel, that did take his knowledge from the Council-books, viz.
that in the beginning of Queen Mary's Reign the Parliament was not willing to
restore Popery and the Supremacy to the Pope, unless they might be suffered to
retain the Lands, which were lately taken from the Monasteries; this Resolution
was signified to Rome, whereto the Pope gave Answer, that for the Lands
belonging to Religious Houses he would dispense for detaining of them, but for
the Situation of the Houses, Churches, and such consecrated Ground, there could
be no alienation thereof to profane Uses, whereupon those that enjoyed them did
not inhabit, or build upon the Houses, but forsook them for many Years, till
the time of Queen Eliz. a great Plague happening, the poor People betook
themselves into the remainder of the Houses, and finding many good Rooms, began
to settle there, till at length they were put out by them, to whom the grant of
the Leases and Lands were made. Mr. Stephen's Treat. 27 Feb. 1625
We see hereby how fearful they were long after the Dissolution to meddle with
Places consecrated to God (though perverted to superstitious Uses) when as yet
they had no experience what the Success would be; let them therefore that shall
read this our Collection following, consider of it as they shall see Cause. I
urge nothing, as not meddling with the secret Judgments of Almighty God, but
relate rem gestam only as I have privately gotten notice of it, and observed
living in these parts almost all my life, and endeavoring faithfully to
understand the truth, yet no doubt many things have been mistaken by those who
related them unto me; and therefore I desire that wheresoever it so falls
out, my Credit may not be engaged for it.

The Collection of diverse Ancient Gentlemen's Families in Norfolk, all standing
and continuing in their Names, and Heirs, with the Possessors of Religious
Houses since the Dissolution; most part whereof are cast out and changed often
in few Years, besides many strange Misfortunes and grievous Accidents happening
to them, their Children and Heirs.

Monasteries. Gentlemen's Families. 1 1 BEdingfield at Oxburgh AT Linn 3 2 2
Spelman at Narburgh 3 3 Yelverton at -- Crabhouse 4 4 Townsend at Kameham
Wrongey 5 5 Farmer at Barsham Blackborough 6 6 Boyenne at -- Wall Deerham 7 7
Calthrope at Coxford Pontney 8 8 Straing at Hunstanton Westacre 9 9 Sharburgh
at Sharburgh Castleacre 10 10 Walpool at Houghton Warham 11 11 Mordant at
Massingham Stronldham 12 12 Cobbs at Sandringham Wendling- Abbey 13 13 Thursby
at Wichen Walsingham- Priory 14 14 Cocket at Brusthorp 15 15 Ashley at Melton
Binham 16 16 Guirney at Barsham Burcham 17 17 Carvyll at S. Marses Peeterston
18 18 Gansell at Watlington Coxford 19 19 Pigat at -- Flitcham 20 20 Gray at
Marton Hempton 21 21 Woodhouse at Kimberley Croake 22 22 Meshold at Langford
Carbrocke 23 23 Jarmy at Streston Tomson 24 24 Badgscroft at Bextel Attleburgh
Burnham 25 25 Pratt at Kaston Hogan at Denton parva. Keps.

Linn Monasteries.
1. Friars Carmelites alias White-Friars in South-lane. 2. Friars Minorites
alias Grey-Friars. 3. Friars Preachers alias Black-Friars. 4. Augustine-Friars.
5. A Cell or College of Priests belonging to Norwich.
The four first were purchased of Hen. 8. by John Eyer, Esquire one of the King's
Auditors or Receivers, a great Receiver of Monasteries, and amongst others of
that of St. Edmondsbury; he married Margaret Daughter of Sir Tho. Blendhasseil,
Widow of Sir John Spelman, eldest Son of Sir John Spelman, and died without
Issue.

He in his lifetime conveyed the four first Monasteries to a Priest, from whom
the Corporation of Linn purchased the Carmelites and Minorites; and being thus
entered into things consecrated to God, purchased also the Impropriation of the
Church of St. Margaret's there, and defacing the Church of St. James perverted
it to be a Townhouse for the Manufacture of Stuffs, Laces and Tradesmen's
Commodities, whereby they thought greatly to enrich their Corporation and
themselves. Great Projects and good Stocks with a Contribution from some
Country-Gentlemen were raised for this purpose, two several times of my
knowledge, but the Success was, that it came to naught, and all the Money
employed about new building and transforming the Church has only increased
Desolation: for so it has stood during the whole time almost of my Memory,
till they lately attempted by the undertaking of Mr. Fr. Gurney, and some
Artisans from London to revive the Enterprise of their Predecessors; but
speeding no better than they did, have now again with loss of their Money and
Expectation left it to future Ruin, thus in this particular has been the
Success of their Corporation: For other matters I will only note what I have
observed touching them in the general, when I was young, they flourished
extraordinarily with Shipping-trading, plenty of Merchandise native and
foreign, some Men of very great Worth, as Killingtree, Grave, Clayburne, Vilet,
Lendall, many of good Note, as Grant, Overend, Hoe, Baker, Waters, and many
more of later time; but all of them with their Male-Posterity are in effect
extinct and gone, and as at this day they have little shipping, or trade
otherwise than to the black Indies, as they call it, (that is Newcastle for
Coal) so there is not a Man amongst them of any Estimation for his Wealth, or
of any Note (that I can hear of) descended from any that was an Alderman there
in the beginning of Queen Elizabeth.

The Friars Preachers came from Mr. Eyers to Tho. Waters, Friars Preachers.
who had Issued Edward Waters, and a Daughter married to George Baker. Edward
died without Issue-Male, leaving a Daughter Eliz. who was first married to
Nicholas Killingtree, then divorced and married to Edward Bacon (qr.) who had
no Issue by her (qr.) after to Sir John Bowls of Lincolnshire.

Sir John Bowls and she sold this Friars to Nicholas Killingtree, who left it
to his Son William Killingtree, and he sold it to Henry Barkenham a Miller, who
sold it to Mr. John Rivett now living.

The Augustine Friars came from Eyer to one Shavington a Bastard, The Augustine
Friars.
who died without Issue, and by his Will gave it to one Waters (other than the
former) and to the Heirs of his Body. This Waters died without Issue, whereupon
the Augustine Friars was to revert to his Heir, but having none, because he was
a Bastard great Suit ensued about it.

But John Ditefield being then in Possession of it, left it by Descent (as it
seems) to his Son John Ditefield, who gave it in Marriage with Thomasin his
sister to Christopher Pickering brother of the then Lord Keeper, and he then
recovered it in Chancery and sold it to John Lease.

John Lease pulling down the Buildings sells first the Stones, and then
dividing the Ground into diverse Garden-rooms, sold the same to diverse Persons.

The Cell of Priests was near the Guildhall, The Cell or College.
and the Prior's House was somewhat remote from it by St. Margaret's Church.

The College was sometime Mr. Houghton's, after Parker's, then Ball's, lately
Sendall's, and now Hargott's, all of them save Hargott are extinct and gone,
and Mr. Hargott is on the declining Hand; the Site of the Prior's House was
lately consecrated and annexed to St. Margaret's Churchyard for a
Burying-place.

Shouldham-Abbey.
Sir Francis Gaudy of the Justices of the King's Bench was owner of it, he
married -- the Daughter and Heir of Christopher Cunningsby Lord of the Manor
of Wallington, and having this Manor and other Lands in right of his Wife,
induced her to acknowledge a Fine thereof, which done she became a distracted
Woman, and continued so to the day of her Death, and was to him for many Years
a perpetual affliction.

He had by her his only Daughter and Heir Eliz. married to Sir William Hatton,
who died without Issue-Male, leaving also a Daughter and Heir, who being
brought up with her Grandfather the Judge, was secretly married against his
Will to Sir Robert Rich now Earl of Warwick.

The Judge shortly after being made chief Justice of the Common Pleas (at a
dear Rate as was reported) was suddenly stricken with an Apoplexy, or double
Palsy, and so to his great loss died without Issue-Male, ever he had continued
in his Place one whole Michaelmas Term, and having made his appropriate
Parish Church a Hay-house, or a Dog-kennel, his dead Corpse being brought from
London unto Walling, could for many days find no Place of Burial, but in the
mean time growing very offensive by the Contagious and ill Savours that issued
through the Chinks of Lead not well soder'd, he was at last carried to a poor
Church of a little Village there by called Runcto, and buried there without any
Ceremony, lies yet uncovered (if the Visitors have not reformed it) with so
small a Matter as a few paving Stones.

Sir Robert Rich now Earl of Warwick succeeded in the Inheritance (by his Wife)
of this Abbey, with the Impropriation, and his great Possessions amounting by
Estimation to 5000 l. a Year, and has already sold the greatest part of them
together with this Abbey and Impropriation unto the Family of Mr. Nich. Hare,
the Judge's Neighbor and chiefest Adversary.

For among diverse other goodly Manours that Sir John Hare has purchased of
him, or his Feoffees, he has also bought this Abbey of Shouldham, and the
Impropriation there, with the Manor belonging to the Abbey valued together at
600 l. yearly Rent.

Binham-Priory.
Binham Priory, a Cell of St. Albans was granted by King Henry 8. to Sir Thomas
Paston; he left it to Mr. Edward Paston his Son and Heir, who living above 80
Years continued the Possession of it till -- Caroli R. and having buried... his
Son and Heir apparent, left it then unto his Grandchild Mr. Paston the third
Owner of it, and thereby now in the Wardship to the King. Mr. Edward Paston
many Years since was desirous to build a Mansion House upon or near the Priory,
and attempting for that purpose to clear some of that Ground, a Piece of Wall
fell upon a Workman, and slew him, perplexed with this Accident in the
beginning of this Business, he gave it wholly over, and would by no means all
his Life after be persuaded to re-attempt it, but built his Mansion House, a
very fair one, at Appleton.

Castle-Acre-Abbey.
Sir Tho. Cecil Earl of Exeter was owner of it, and of the impropriate
Personage here; he had Issue Sir William Cecil Earl Exeter, who married Eliz.
the Daughter and Heir of Edw. Earl of Rutland, and had Issue by her (dying as I
take it in Childbed) his only Son William Lord Rosse.

This William Lord Rosse married Anne the Daughter of Sir Tho. Lake, and they
living together in extreme Discord, many infamous Actions issued thereupon, and
finally a great Suit in the Star Chamber to the high Dishonor of themselves,
and their Parents. In this Affliction the Lord Rosse dies without Issue, and
the Eldest Male-line of his Grandfather's House is extinguished.

Sir Richard Cecil was second Son of Sir Thomas Cecil Earl of Exeter, and had
Issue David who married Eliz. the Daughter of John Earl of Bridgewater, and is
now in expectation to be Earl of Exeter.

His third Son was Sir Edw. Cecil Knight, his 4th and 5th Tho. Cecil and
Christopher drowned in Germany.

Sir Tho. the Grandfather Earl of Exeter made a Lease of this Monastery and
Impropriation to one Pain (as I take it) by whose Widow the same came in
Marriage to Mr. Humfrey Guibon Sheriff of Norfolk, Anno 38. Eliz. whose
Grandchild and Heir Tho. Guibon consumed his whole Inheritance, and lying long
in the Fleet, either died there a Prisoner, or shortly after.

Sir Edw. Coke Lord Chief Justice married for his second Wife the Lady Eliz.
Hatton, one of the Daughters of the said Earl Tho. and afterward bought the
Castle of Acre with this Monastery and Impropriation of his Brother-in-Law Earl
William Son of Earl Thomas, since which time he has felt abundantly the Change
of Fortune, as we have partly touched in Flitcham-Abbey.

West-Acre-Abbey.
This also belonged to Sir Tho. Cecil of whom we have now spoken; he sold both
it and the Impropriation of West- Acre to Sir Horatio Palvicini an Italian,
that before his coming into England had dipped his Fingers very deep in the
Treasure of the Church.

Being in his Youth in the Low Countries (as his Son Edward affirmed to me) he
there secretly married a very mean Woman, and by her had Issue him this Edward,
but durst never discover it to his Father as long as they lived together, his
Father being dead he came into England, and here married a second Wife, by whom
he had Issue his Son Toby, and for his Wive's sake disinherited him his eldest
Son Edward, and conferred all his Lands with the Abbey, and Impropriation of
West- Acre to Toby and his Heirs.

Edward after the Death of his Father grows into contention with his Brother
Toby, and in a Petition to King James accuses both his Father and his Brother
for deceiving (the one) of Q. Eliz. (the other) of K. James, of a Multitude of
thousand Pounds, the Examination whereof was by His Majesty referred unto me
among others, and the two Brethren then agreeing among themselves the Reference
was no further prosecuted. But Mr. Toby Palvicini consuming his whole Estate
sold the Abbey and Impropriation to Alderman Barcham, and yet lies in the
Fleet for Debt, if not lately at liberty.

Blackborough and Wrongey-Abbeys.
These were by -- granted and annexed to the Sea and Bishopric of Norwich,
where Edmond Scaulter being made Bishop 27 Eliz. and doing as much as well he
might to impoverish the Church, made a Lease of most of the Manours and Lands
thereof, and amongst them of these two Abbeys to Qu. Elizabeth for 29 Years at
the lowest Rent he might, which Bishop Goodwin in like cases terms Sacrilege.

Queen Elizabeth assigns this Lease to Sir Tho. he leaves it to his Lady,
after the Countess of Southampton, she sets her term in these Abbeys with
the Manors and Lands belonging to them to one Fisher a Skinner in London, by
the procurement of Wrenham her Servant.

Fisher enters and enjoys them as undoubtedly his own, Leaseth them for 21
Year to Harpley at a great increased Rent, Wrenham dies without contradicting
any thing; his Son John Wrenham pretending that Fisher had the grand Lease but
in trust for his Father (who never paid penny for it) exhibits one Bill in
Chancery against Fisher, another against his Son Sir Edward Fisher as having it
from his Father, a 3d against Harpley the Under-leaser. The Lord Chancellor
Egerton by an order declares Harpley's Lease to be good, who thereupon enjoyed
it quietly and dies, his Executrix sets it to Sir Henry Spelman, Wrenham
exhibiteth a Bill against Sir Henry. The Suits proceed to an hearing betwixt
Wrenham and the Fishers. The Lord Chancellor decrees it against the Fishers
and all claiming under them. The Lord Chancellor Egerton gives over his place,
and Sir Francis Bacon placed in his room. He reverseth the Decree, and decrees
it back again to Sir Edward Fisher, and by another Decree gives also Sir Hen.
Spelman's Lease unto him without calling or hearing Sir Henry. Wrenham
complains in a Petition to King James, and taxes the Lord Chancellor Bacon
of Corruption and Injustice. The King himself peruseth all the proceedings, and
approves the Lord Bacon's Decree, Wrenham is censured for his scandal in the
Star Chamber to loose his Ears on the Pillory, etc.

A Parliament follows in Jacobi, both Wrenham and Sir Henry Spelman severally
complain there. It is found that the Lord Chancellor Bacon had for these
Decrees of Sir Edw. Fisher a Suit of Hangings of eight score pounds. The Lord
Chancellor for this among other such crimes is deposed.

The Bishop of Lincoln is set in his room, the Suits are again in agitation
before him between Wrenham and Fisher, and Sir Henry Spelman, by a Petition to
the King obtains a Review of the Proceedings against him, upon which a
Recompense is given him by Decree against Sir Edward Fisher.

The Bishop of Lincoln is removed by King Charles, and the Lord Coventry made
Lord Keeper, by whom the other Differences are at last compounded, and the
Grand Lease divided into many parcels.

Wrenham that raised this Tempest, besides his misfortune in the Star Chamber,
is never the richer by it, but lives a Projectour.

Sir Edward Fisher of 8000 l. (as Bodon his Servant protests) in the Suit is
consumed, and not to be seen of every Man.

Sir Henry Spelman a great loser, and not beholden to Fortune, yet happy in
this, that he is out of the Briars, but especially that hereby he first
discerned the Infelicity of meddling with consecrated places.

Sir Tho. -- died without Issue Male, and his Family extinct, Mr. James out of
whose Bowels his Father the Bishop hoped to raise a Family of note, has to
this day no Issue at all.

Walsingham-Abby Dedicated to St. Mary, Canons regular, val. at 446 l. 14s. 4d.
One Sydney Governor of the Spittle there, as was commonly reported, when I
was a Scholar at Walsingham, was by the Townsmen employed to have bought the
Site of the Abbey to the use of the Town, but obtained and kept it to himself.
He had Issue Thomas, and a Daughter, Mother to Robin Angust the Foot-post of
Walsingham.

Thomas by the advancement of Sir Francis Walsingham Brother to his Wife, grew
to great Wealth, was Customer of Linne, and about a miscarrige of that place
was long harrowed in Law by Mr. Farmer of Basham, and died leaving two Sons.

Thomas the eldest having the Abbey, etc. married and died without Issue.

Sir Henry succeeded in the Abbey, etc. married and died without Issue.

His Lady a virtuous Woman now has it for life, the remainder being given for
names sake by Sir Henry to Robert Sydney the 2d Son of the Earl of Leicester.

Walsingham-Priory not mentioned in the Tax.
1. Owner.
One Mr. Jenner was Owner of it, and had Issue Thomas, Francis and Bartholomew.

Francis a Lawyer of Gray's- Inn married into Kent, His 2d Son drowned.
and was drowned in going thither by Boat.

Thomas the eldest had the Priory, Two of his eldest Sons are Vagabonds.
and 3 or 4 Sons, and a Daughter, one of his Sons (or as some say two) went up
and down a begging. His eldest he disinherited, settling his Estate upon his
younger Son John, being my Servant, who died in his Father's life.

Then he gave his whole Estate to his Daughter, All disinherited.
married to Bernard Vtbarr, and a Daughter of hers, his Grandchild, with a
particular Sum of Money to maintain Suit against his Son and Heir, if he
claimed any thing after his death. Being dead, his Son entered and got
possession of the Priory, but in fine with some little composition was wrested
out by Vtbarr; and now Vtbarr's Daughter coming to age, it is to be sold by her.

Hempton-Abby al Takenham Dedicated to St. Mary and St. Stephen, Black Canons,
Aug. 39 l. 9 s.
If Sir Hen. Farmer had it, 1. No Issue.
he died without Issue. 2. Without Issue-male. His Brother slain.
Sir William Farmer had it and died without Issue-male. His Brother was slain
at Rising-Chase by the Rebels 2 Ed. 6.

His Son Mr. Thomas Farmer had it and 3. Wasted.
the Impropriation of Basham, and wasting his Estate, sold about 15 or 16
Manors, leaving none but his chief House Basham.

His eldest Son Thomas died a young Man, his three Daughters unfortunate. The
eldest and youngest poorly married. The middle to Mr. Barneys Son of Gunton,
who disinherited by his Father was slain by Tho. Betts his Wives Uncle, of the
half blood, at a Marriage at Litcham.

Nicholas Farmer younger Brother of Thomas was attainted and pardoned for
Coining, His Brother attainted and drowned*
and after taking a Boat to fly from the Sergeants was drowned in the Thames.

William 2d Son of Thomas, a right honest Gentleman, His Son no Issue-male.
still has the Impropriation, and having been married about 18 Years, has
only a Daughter.

Mr. Richard Benson bought the Abbey and Manor of Pudding Norton of Mr. Tho.
Farmer, 4. Ruined.
consumed all and went into Wales.

Mr. Gossald bought the Abbey of Mr. Benson, 5 Owner.
and lest it to his Wife in Jointure.

Mr. Henry Gossald of Ireland his Son and Heir sold the Reversion to Sir Thomas
Holland and goes into Ireland. 6 Owner sells it.


Mr. Nicholas Timperley bought it of Sir Tho. Holland. 7 Owner.


Malsingham-Abby not in the Tax.
It was Sir Tho. Gresham's, who died (as was said) suddenly in his Kitchen
without Issue-male. ^ died suddenly without Issue-male.


His Daughter and Heir was married to Sir William Read who had this Abbey. 2
Owner.


Sir Tho. Read his eldest Son married Mildred Daughter of Sir Tho. Cecil after
Earl of Exeter, His eldest S^n died without Issue.
and died without Issue.

Sir Francis Read his 2d Son, His 2d an unthrift.
an unthrift lived much in the Gaol, if he died not there.

The Daughter of Sir William was married to Sir Michael Stanhope, 3 Owner
without Issue-male.
who died without Issue-male.

Jane the eldest Daughter of Sir Michael married to Sir William is out of her
Wits, His eldest Daughter distracted.
and Sir William her Husband in sore danger of his life about the slaughter of
6 or 7 Men tumultuously killed at --

Elizabeth the younger of his Daughters and Heirs married to the Lord Barkley,
His youngest Daughter distracted.
is out of her Wits.

Flitcham-Abby.
Sir Tho. Hollis had it, and was (by report) at Dinner taken out of it in
Execution for Debt by the Sheriff, and his Goods sold, whereof my Father bought
some. Much suit there was about it between one Pain and him or his Heir, but
the matter being at length reserr'd to the Duke of Norfolk, he bought both
their Titles.

He, the Duke had it, and was attainted and beheaded, and it then came to the
Crown.

King James gave it in Fee Farm to my Lord of Suffolk who was fined in the
Star Chamber and put out of Treasure-ship, and suffered much Affliction by the
Attainder of the Lady Francis Countess of Somerset his Daughter, and of her
Husband the Earl.

My Lord Cook bought it of the Earl of Suffolk, and bought out the Fee-Farm
from King James: He was put out of the place of Chapter Justice of the King's
Bench, fell into great Displeasure of the King, and has been laded with
Afflictions proceeding chiefly from his own Wife, who lives from him in
Separation.

His eldest Son Sir Robert having been married many Years has yet no Issue.

His Daughter the Lady Vicountess of Purbeck, the Fable of the Time, and her
Husband a Lunatic.

Wendling.
Wendling-Abby differed from all the rest of this Circuit, for it was not
dissolved by the Statute or by the Act of Hen. 8. but before that time by
Cardinal Wolsey, and was one of the 40 small Monasteries that Pope Clement the
7th gave him license to suppress for the Erection of his 2 Colleges,
Christ-Church in Oxon, and another at Ipswich.

The Cardinal employed 5 Persons especially in this business, whereof one was
slain by another of those his Companions, that other was hanged for the Fact,
the third drowned himself in a Well, the fourth being a Man of good Wealth in
those days, fell within three years after so poor, that he begged till his
Death, the fifth (Dr. Allen) promoted to a Bishopric in Ireland, was there
cruelly maimed.

The Cardinal himself fell out of favor with the King and Kingdom, and
condemned in a praemunire, lost all his Offices, Honors, Goods, and Estate,
and being called into further danger, died for grief by the way, not without
suspicion of poisoning himself.

The Pope who gave the License, was, by the Duke of Bourbon's Army, driven out
of his City of Rome, it cruelly sacked, and himself besieged in the Castle of
St. Angelo, taken Prisoner, scorned, and put to Ransom: And after all this, was
at last (as some affirm) poisoned with certain of his Cardinals and Friends, by
the Fume of a Torch prepared for that purpose. Stow in Anno Dom. Bale 18. 6.

Besides all these, Mr. Tho. Cromwell, who then was but Servant to the
Cardinal, having a principal hand in the Destruction of these Monasteries given
to his Master, had also a principal share in this Tragedy, for though he were
after promoted to great Honors, yet in the end he was thrown out of them all,
convicted of Treason, attainted and beheaded, as in other places heretofore we
have more fully related.

Now we come nearer to, and particularly to this Abbey, wherein, as also in
others of that Nature in Corporations and Bodies Politic that are the
Seminaries of the Church, little attention is to be expected, yet see what
happened to their Tenants and Farmers, profanely abusing the consecrate places
thereof.

The Cardinal did grant it to his Coll. at Christ-Church in Oxon, and to whom
they first leased it I do not yet find, but Mr. Tho. Hogan of Bradenham that
was Sheriff of Norfolk.

Eliz. died in his Sheriffship, and not long after him his Son Mr. Hen. Hogan,
leaving his Son and Heir very young, who attaining near to his full Age, and
falling sick, acknowledged a fine upon his Deathbed to the use of his Mother
the Lady Caesar that now is, and his half Sisters, and dying without reversing
it, did by that means cut off his Heirs at common Law, and was the last of his
Father's House in that Inheritance: This begat great Suits in the Star Chamber,
Chancery, and Parliament it self.

The Lease is since come to Mr. Hamon.

Nor did the Colleges for which these Monasteries were suppressed by the
Cardinal, and which he meant to make so glorious, come to good effect; for that
of Ipswich was pulled down, and the other of Christ-Church was never finished,
as also neither that of King's College in Cambridge, rising out of the Ruins of
the Priory's Aliens.

Coxford Abbey al Ratha Abbey.
Coxford Abbey after the Dissolution came to the Duke of Norfolk, who was
beheaded 2d June 1572, Eliz. 14.

The Queen then granted it to Edw. Earl of Oxon, who wasted all his Patrimony.

Sir Roger Townsend then bought it, who had Issue Sir Jo. Townsend, and Sir
Robert Townsend: Sir Robert died without Issue, Sir Jo. had Issue Sir Robert
the Bar. and Stanhope, and Ann married to Joh. Spelman; he falling into a
Quarrel with Sir Matthew Brown of Beach-North Castle in Surrey, each of them
slew other in a Duel, 1 Jac. Stanhope Townsend wounded mortally by in a Duel in
the Low Countries, came into England and died at London.

Sir Roger the Bar. intending to build a goodly House at Rainham, and to fetch
Stone for the same from Coxford Abbey, by advice of Sir Nathanael Bacon his
Grandfather, began to demolish the Church there, which till then was standing;
and beginning with the Steeple, the first Stone (as it is said) in the fall
brake a Man's Leg, which somewhat amazed them, yet contemning such
Advertisement, they proceeded in the Work, and overthrowing the Steeple, it
fell upon a House by, and breaking it down, slew in it one Mr. Seller that lay
lame in it of a broken Leg gotten at Football, others having saved themselves
by Fright and Flight.

Sir Roger having dug the Cellering of his new House, and raised the Walls
with some of the Abbey-Stone Breast-high, the Wall reft from the Corner Stones,
though it was clear above ground, which being reported to me by my Servant
Richard Tedcastle, I viewed them with mine own Eyes and found it so. Sir Roger
utterly d^smayed with these Occurrents, gave over his begun Foundation, and
digging a new wholly out of the ground about 20 Yards more forward toward the
North, has there finished a stately House, using none of the Abbey-Stone about
it, but employed the same in building a Parsonage-House for the Minister of
that Town, and about the Walls of the Churchyard, etc.

Himself also showed me that as his first Foundation reft in sunder, so the new
Bridge, which he had made of the same Stone at the foot of the Hill, which
ascends to his House, settled down with a Belly as if it would fall.

But if there be any Offenses or ominous Consequences depending upon such
Possessions, he has very nobly and piously endeavored to expiate it; for he
has given back to the Church three or four Appropriations.

Burnham Priory.
It was sometime the Southwells of St. Faith's, whose Family is either extinct
or gone out of the County. It was afterward Francis Cobbes, Gent. who likewise
is gone; then Sir Charles Cornwallis Knight. wasted, and by him sold to Alderman
Soame, who let the same to John Soame, Esque his 2d Son deceased.

Peterston.
About the latter Years of Q. Eliz. was Rich. Mansers, Gent. who had much suit
and Quarrel with Firmine Gray about a Lease of it, and died without Issue,
disposing it by a Will (as was reported) to one Roger Manser his Brother; but
they were of it by Armiger of Creake who married Richard Manser's Sister, and
left it to William Armiger his Son and Heir, who sold it to my Lord Cook to
secure the Title.

Carbrocke, a Monastery of Hospitallers of St. John of Jerusalem.
Sir Richard Southwell, Knight, (a great Agent in spoiling the Abbeys) was
Owner of it; he married Thomasin the Daughter of Sir Roger Darcy of Dambury,
and living together had no Issue by her, but in the mean time he had by Mary
Darcy, Daughter of Tho. Darcy also of Dambury, Richard Southwell of St. Faiths,
and Tho. Southwell of Mowrton; Mary and Dorothy all born in Adultery, and
Katherine married to Tho. Audeley of Beer-Church in Essex, Cousin and Heir Male
to the Lord Audley (born, as it seems, after the Death of Thomasin his Wife) by
the said Mary, who then and before was by Sir Richard married to one Leech, a
Swallowman of Norwich, that had been his Servant, and now his Lady dying, he
took this Mary from Leech her Husband, and married her himself, alleging that
she could not be Leech's Wife, for that he had another former Wife then living;
hereupon a great Suit ensued in the high Commission Court, where Sir Richard
prevailed and enjoyed her with shame enough.

Sir Richard dies without other Issue than by this Mary, leaving the Abbey of
St. Faiths to his base born Son Richard, and Mowrton to his base Son Thomas.

His Son Richard marries Bridget Daughter of Sir Roger Copley, Knight, and had
Issue by her Richard, Thomas, and Robert. This last Richard married the
Daughter of Sir Tho. Cornwallis, and having Issue by her Sir Tho. Southwell,
and 2 or 3 other Sons, dies in the lifetime of his Father, who for his 2d
Wife marries his Maid, the Daughter of one Styles Parson of Ellingham, and by
her had Issue Sir Henry Southwell, and Dunsarry Southwell, now owner of
Mowrton, and some Daughters, whereof Ann was in London And this Richard the
Father having wasted his Estate, and sold the Abbey of St. Faiths to the Lord
Chief Justice Hobart, died a Prisoner in the Fleet.

Tho. Southwell the other base Son of Sir Richard dies without Issue, and
having given by his Will the Manor of Mowrton to his Sister Audley for Life,
the Remainder to Thomas her younger Son. Sir Tho. Southwell, Nephew of the
Testator, seeks to overthrow the Will, and to have the Manor as Heir at
common Law to Thomas the Testator; hereupon the Heir of Leech strikes in
against them both, laboring with Sir Thomas to falsify the Will against Mrs.
Audley, and excluding Sir Tho. by alleging bastardy against him in Richard his
Father, for that Mary Darcy the Mother of this Richard was Wife to the Father
of this Leech, when Richard and Thomas the Testator was born.

This brought all the filthiness aforementioned to be raked over again, and
when all were notoriously defamed by it, they all sit down without any
recompense.

Tho. Audley that was in remainder died without Issue in the Life of his
Mother, whereby Mowrton came to his Brother Sir Henry Audley.

Anthony Southwell and Southwell Brothers of Sir Thomas were in the Robbery of
Mrs. Grave, and fled into Ireland.

Sir Henry Southwell married the Daughter of the Lord Hor in Ireland without
Issue.

After the Death of Sir Richard Southwell, his Nephew Sir Robert succeeded in
the great Inheritance, and the Hospital of Carbrock, he married the Daughter of
the Earl of Nottingham, and died in the Flower of his Age, leaving his Son the
now Sir Thomas an Infant, who about his full Age had a base Daughter by Dr.
Corbett's Maid, and marrying her privily, lives now in dis -- of her, and
keeps the Daughter of one Eden in a poor House at Notton, and has consumed
the greatest part of his Estate.

His Sister, Mrs. Eliz. Florence lives at Florence in Adultery with Sir Robert
Dudley, having another Wife before he married her, and both of them still
living.

Marham.
Sir Nicholas Hare, Knight, and John Hare Citizen and Mercer of London 3 Jul.
Anno 38, H. 8. purchased of the King... totum fitum, circuitum, ambitum and
praecinctum nuper Monasterii sive domus

De Marham in ac totum sundum, situm and terram, Ecclesiam, Campanile, domus
aedificiorum etc.... necnon manerium nostrum de Marham cum omnibus terris...
etc.

Sir Nicholas Hare married the Daughter and Heir of Bassingbourn, and had Issue
Michael that died without Issue, Robert that died without Issue, and Richard
that died without Issue; and his Inheritance went away to his two Daughters,
the one married to Rouse, Quere, Whether these two Daughters of Sir Nich. are
of his Son Michael or other Son.
the other to Timperley. See more of this Sir Nicholas in the Speaker of
Parliament, Anno 31 H. 8. where he prophesied this ruin of his Family.

John Hare the Citizen had Issue Nicholas the Lawyer, that died without Issue,
Ralph that died without Issue, Edmund Lunatic, at a Lodge in Enfield-Chase,
Hugh that died without Issue, Rowland and John that had Issue, and Thomas of
Oxford that married and died without Issue.

Richard the elder married Eliz. Daughter of... and had Issue Sir Ralph Hare,
Slew Blackwell, and obtained a Pardon with 1200.
Knight of the Bath, and he married... the Daughter of Alderman Hambden, and
John Son of John and Brother of Richard, was Clerk of the Court of Wards, and
had Issue Nicholas, who was Lunatic, and died without Issue, and Hugh now Lord
Colrane in Ireland.

Sir Ralph Hare to expiate this Sin of his Family, gave the Parsonage
impropriate of Marham worth 100 l. yearly to St. John's College in Cambridge,
Anno 16 and died, leaving one only Child, Sir John Hare, who married Sir Thomas
Coventry the now Lord Keeper's Daughter, and has by her, she not being...
Years old... Sons and Daughters, with hope of a numerous Posterity, God bless
them.

Crab-House.
I have yet gotten little Intelligence of this Abbey; but I hear that it was
not long since John Wright's of Wigen-Hall in Marseland, and that he had two
Sons, whereof... his eldest Son consumed his Estate, and sold the Abbey with
the greatest part of the Land and died without Issue.

It came after to Mr. William Guybon of Watlington, and is now in the hands of
his Son and Heir.

Bromill Abbey.
Sir Thomas Woodhouse of Wapham, 38 H. 8. Wapham 1st no Issue. 2d ruined. 3d
litigious, and no Issue Male.
purchased Bromill Abbey of the King, he died without Issue, and Sir Henry
Woodhouse his Nephew succeeded, who utterly consumed his whole Estate, and
selling the Abbey to John Smith, Esquire Suits arose thereupon, which lasted many
Years, till the Death of Sir Henry in Nov. 1624.

Mr. Smith has only Daughters and no Son, so that the Abbey is not like to
continue in his Name.

Ex inform. ipsius, Jo. Smith, 11o. Nov. 1624.
The Impropriation of Besthurst in Lancashire, as I take it, is worth 1600 l.
per Annum, being Sir Vrion Lea's.

Dereham Abbey.
Tho Dereham in the 33 H. 8. bought it of the King: shortly after he was
fetched out of it to the Tower about the Treason of his Brother Francis Dereham
who was executed.

Thomas at length was delivered out of Prison; he had Issue Thomas, Robert,
John and Baldwin, and a Daughter.

Thomas married... and died without Issue Male; Robert and John died without
Issue.

Baldwin a decayed Merchant of London, had Issue four Sons, Thomas Dr. of
Divinity, John, and Martha a Daughter non compos mentis.

Thomas succeeded his Uncle in the Inheritance, and is now Knighted, having
Issue Thomas.

Thomas, eldest Son of Sir Thomas, married... daughter of... Scot, Esque of...
in Kent; she fell Lunatic in Childbed upon the Death of her Son... 1623, and
so continues having yet only a Daughter.

Thetford.
Hitherto I have kept my self within my Circle; let us see for our further
satisfaction, whether the like fortune haunted the Monasteries without it; we
will begin with Thetford.

The Monastery of the Black Nuns of St. Gregory in Thetford, being the
Benedictines, was the Duke of Norfolk's, whose Misfortunes are here before in
other places too often mentioned.

He sold the same to Sir Richard Fulmarston, Knight, who died without Issue
Male, leaving it to his Daughter, and her married to Sir Edward Clark, Knight.

Sir Edward Clark had two Sons by her, and a Son by his second Wife.

Sir Edward Clark Knight of St. Michael the eldest Son, spent most of his Life
in one Prison or other, had Issue a Son Sir Henry Clark, Baronet, that died
without Issue Male in the Life of his Father, who consuming his whole
Inheritance, sold the chief Seat of his Blickling to the Lord Chief Justice of
the Common Pleas, Sir Henry Hobart; and this Monastery upon Exchange and Money
to Mr. Godsalve for Buckingham-Ferry, which he...

Mr. Godsalve put over the Monastery, among other Lands, to Mr. John Smith and
Owen Shepherd, and having consumed all his Estate, went beyond Sea.

Mr. Smith and Mr. Shepherd, had a long and chargeable Suit about Mr.
Godsalve's Estate, and sold the Monastery to Sir William Campion who now has
it, but with Suit and Trouble.

Sir Edw.... the elders second Son Francis died without Issue. This great and
eminent Family is wholly extinct, as those also of Fulmarston's, Godsalve's,
and Smith's for Smith has no Issue Male.

I must here note that this Sir Edward... the Elder, was one of the greatest
Hunters, by way of Concealment, after Church Goods and Lands, that was in his
time, and that sowing these unfortunate Pieces of new gotten Cloth into the
Garment of his old Inheritance, the new has not only rent away the old
Garment, but the Family it self to which it served.

Pentney Priory.
Pentney Priory was purchased of the King Anno 37 H. 8. by Thomas Mildmay the
Auditor, whose Son Sir Thomas sold it to Francis Windham, one of the Justices
of the King's Bench, he entailed it first upon his own Issue, then to his
Brother's Roger and Thomas, the Dr. after to his Sister Coningsby, and after
that to Edmund, and Edmund's natural Brothers, all which dying without Issue,
it came to Thomas Windham Esquire Son of Sir Henry Windham, who in Anno 1622 sold
it to Sir Richard Ballache Knight, and he in Anno 1631 to Judge Richardson.

The Abbey of Radegundis at Bradefalk in Kent by Dover is now Sir Tho. Edolph's
Knight, Kent.
who did lately build a fair House upon the Site of the Monastery, and it has
fallen down three times; his two Brothers lunatique.

Ex relat. Mrs. Meares qui duxit Vxorem Edw. Pegton Baronet.
St. Lawrence-Abbey by Canterbury now in the hands of Edolph lunatique, whose
Grandfather was also lunatique; his Grandfather first purchased the Abbey.

Shirburn.
Shirburn-Abbey (some time a Cathedral-Church) Dorsetshi*
yet belonging to the Bishop of Salisbury, says Cambden, p. 214. impres. 1610.

Sir John Horsey having no Issue, left for Name sake to Sir Ralph Horsey of
Cambridgeshire, the Monastery and Parsonage of Shirburn, who wasting much his
Estate, sold them to Mr. Stikles, and he to my Lord Digby about 1620.

The Castle and the Manner was assigned from the Bishop of Salisbury to Queen
Elizabeth, and by her to Sir Walter Rawleigh after beheaded, then it came to
Prince Henry, who died shortly after, then it came to the Earl of Somerset, who
being attainted, the King granted it to my Lord Digby.

The Bishopric being void, Toby Matthew should have had it, but would not take
it upon Sir Walter Rawleigh's conditions, but Henry Cotton accepting and
performing them, his Son was born blind, who notwithstanding was made a
Minister, had 3 or 4 Parsonages, and was Canon in Salisbury, yet died a Beggar.

Hale's-Abbey.
Hale's-Abbey and Manor for the most part ( viz. 500 Acres) granted to the
Lord Admiral ( Seymor) in fee 19 Aug. 1. Edw. 6. Glocestershire.
He beheaded, Val. l. s. d. 65 14 8.
it returned to the King Edw. who 12 June reg. 4. granted all with the 500
Acres to the Lord Marquess, Val. l. s. 99 16.
who 16 June eodem Anno, leased it to Hodgkins for 21 Years at 159 l. 16 s. but
as it seems came again to the Crown, for Q. Eliz 18 July reg. 7. leased it
again to Hodgkins for 21 Years at 159 l. 16 s. Woods, Regalities, etc. excepted
ut videtur.

Hodgkins had three Sons, all died poorly, but he gave his Estate to his
Daughter married to Hobby.

St. Ousey given by King Edward to Thomas Lord Darcy, and... slain at St.
Quintins. John had Issue Thomas Lord Darcy, whose Issue-Male of his Father and
Grandfather failing, his Daughter is married to Sir Thomas Savage.

At the latter end of Q. Mary's days, Callis being taken, Sir Hugh Paulett took
down the Bells of the Church of Jersey, and sending them to St. Malo's in
Britain 14 of them were drowned at the Entry of the Harbor; and at this day it
is a Byword in those Parts, when a strong ^ast-Wind blows there, that the
Bells of Jersey ring.

Ex relatione Mri. Bandivell Decani, ib.

Traveling through Cambridgeshire, and passing through a Town there called
Anglary, I saw certain ruinous Walls, which seemed to have been some Monastery,
hereupon I asked one of the Town, if it had not been an Abbey? he answered me,
yes; I demanded of him whose it was, he said one Mr. Foulkes; I asked him
further, how long he had had it? he said his Father a Londoner bought it; then
I desired to know of him what Children he had? the Man answered me none; saying
further that he had a Son, who displeasing him once as he was grafting, threw
his grafting Knife at his Son, and therewith killed him.

Passing also another time through Suffolk, I fell in company of a
Gentlemanlike Man, who by way of Discourse, there had been in the Parts we
there were, about 20 Justices of Peace, when he was young, and that at the
present time there were not above three. He named also diverse of the Families
decayed, some in Estate, others for want of Issue-Male, and some by Misfortune.
I having a jealous Eye upon it, asked if they were not settled upon Church-land,
he answered me, yes; as Sir Michael Stanhope at Oxford-Abbey, Sir Anthony
Wingfield at Leveringham-Abbey, both which died, one without Issue, the other
without Issue-Male. Sir Anthony Playford at Playford-Abbey, Mr. Brown at
Lawson-Abbey, where he was murdered by his Wife, she burnt, and her Man
hanged. Mr. Ford at Batley-Abbey, who disinherited his eldest Son, etc. saying
further, that that Part was Church-land belonging to the Abbey of St.
Edmundsbury, and called it St. Ethelreds Liberty. 30 Sept. 16* 9.

In the Sermon of John Bishop of Ely, at the Funeral of Dr. Andrews Bishop of
Winchester, 11 Nov. 1626, at the Church of St. Saviors in Southwark.
Now before I come to his last End, give me leave to tell you, that privately
he did much find fault and reprove three Sins too common and reigning in this
latter Age.

1. Usury, etc.

2. Symony, etc.

3. The third and greatest was Sacrilege, which he did abhor as one principal
Cause among many of the foreign and civil Wars in Christendom, and Invasion of
the Turks; wherein even the reformed, and otherwise the true Professors and
Servants of Christ (because they took God's Portion, and turned it to public
profane Uses, and to private Advancements) did suffer just Chastisement and
Correction at God's Hand. And at home, it had been observed; and he wished that
some Man would take the pains to collect, how many Families that were raised by
the Spoils of the Church, were now vanished, and the Place thereof knows them
no more.

Of Sacrilege touching Bells.
It is reported in our Histories, and I have spoken of it before in the proper
place, that King Edgar leading his Army into the parts of Glamorgan, for
suppressing a Rebellion of the Welshmen, some of his Soldiers, among other
spoil, took away the Bell of St. Ellutus, and hanged it about an Horse's Neck.
And it is noted upon this, that King Edgar sleeping in the Afternoon, saw one
in a Vision that smote him on the Breast with a Spear, and that thereupon he
restored both the Bell and the other spoil; yet died within nine days following.
( Holl. p. 161.) If the Vision be fabulous, I maintain it not: though we have a
Precedent for it in the Ecclesiastical Histories, about the Death of Julian the
Apostate. But the Mythology may be, that Edgar (abounding with Devotion) was
stricken in Conscience with the Spear of Repentance for this Sacrilege; and
that notwithstanding his Restitution, his Life was taken from him very shortly
after.

I shall make a great Leap from thence to these latter Ages; but I can go no
further, than where Authors and my reading carry me. Only for our Fathers
times, I shall report what I have faithfully received by Tradition.

When I was a Child (I speak of about threescore Years since) I heard much talk
of the pulling down of Bells in every part of my Country the County of Norfolk,
then common in Memory. And the sum of the Speech usually was, that in sending
them over Sea, some were drowned in one Haven, some in another, as at Lyn,
Wells or Yarmouth. I dare not venture upon Particularities; for that I then
hearing it as a Child, regarded it as a Child. But the truth of it was lately
discovered by God himself; for that in the Year... he sending such a dead Neipe
(as they call it) as no Man living was known to have seen the like, the Sea
fell so far back from the Land at Hunstanton, that the people going much
further to gather Oysters than they had done at any time before, they there
found a Bell with the Mouth upward, sunk into the ground to the very Brim. They
carried the News thereof to Sir Hamon le Strange, Lord of the Town, and of
Wreck, and Sea-rights there, who shortly after sought to have weighed up and
gained the Bell; but the Sea never since going so far back, they hitherto could
not find the place again. This Relation I received from Sir Hamon le Strange
himself, being my Brother-in-law.

Such other Reports I have often in times past heard, touching some other parts
of that Kingdom; but (as I said) I then regarded them not, and will not
therefore now speak any thing of them.

But dining one day at Lambeth, with the most Reverend Father in God, George
the late Archbishop of Canterbury; it pleased his Grace, in way of Discourse,
to tell me, That being in Scotland, and lodging at his first entrance in
Dunber, he viewed the Church there, and understanding that there was never a
Bell in the Steeple, demanded the reason of the Minister. Who not pleased with
the Question, answered somewhat scornfully, That it was one of the Reformed
Churches; implying thereby, that the Reformed Churches had no Bells. Then going
to Edinborough, he found no Bell in all the City, save one only in the Church
of St. Andrew; and enquiring there also of the reason, it was told him, That
the rest were pulled down and shipped to be carried into the Low Countries, but
were all drowned in Leigh Haven. Such havoc in pulling down Bells and defacing
otherwise of Churches, had no doubt proceeded furiously throughout all England,
if Queen Elizabeth in An. 2. of her Reign, had not by her Proclamations and
course of the Star Chamber, very severely prevented the same.

At the end of Qu. Mary's days ( Callis being taken) Sir Hugh Paulett pulled
down the Bells of the Churches of Jersey, and sending them to St. Malo's in
Britain, fourteen of them were drowned at the entrance of that Harbor.
Whereupon, it is a byword at this day in these parts, when any strong
East Wind blows there, to say, The Bells of Jersey now ring. (Ex relatione M.
Bandinell Decani ibidem.

More to this purpose may appear in the Discourse next following; which lying
now at my hand, I thought good to insert, not only for coherence of the matter,
but also to show the Opinion, Piety, and Tenderness herein, of the greatest
Father and Magistrate of our Church (under the King) at that time living.

Dining yesterday at Lambeth with my Lord of Canterbury, Nov. 13. 1632.
his Grace falling casually into a Discourse of Spanish matters, and the Wealth
of their Churches, said, That he had heard that the very Lamps of Spain were
worth half the Treasure of that Kingdom. And calling to him Mr... Barkley of...
who had been a great Traveller and long in Spain, demanded his Opinion herein.
Mr. Barkley answered, That he thought it to be true, and gave a reason; for
that every body for their delivery from any notable danger, either of Sickness
or otherwise, used to present a Saint by way of gratuity with a Lamp to burn
before it, and commonly of Silver. So that before some one Saint, there were 4
or 5 thousand Lamps: His Grace suggested St. James of Compostella. And Mr.
Barkley affirmed it of St. James; but added, That the Bells in Spain and in
other places of France and Italy, were few and small, yet holden to be very
powerful for driving away the Devils and Evil-spirits. I upon this recited out
of Gregorius Turonensis, the History of Lupus Bishop of Swessons, who by sudden
ringing of Bells drove away the Pagan Army of Normans besieging that City,
having never heard of a Bell before. Much being then said of the Nature and
Office of Bells, his Grace esteemed the Bells of England comparatively with the
Lamps of Spain; and condemning the pulling of them down, complained of the
Deformity they had thereby brought upon the Churches of Scotland; saying, That
at his being there, and lodging first at Dunbar, he went to see the Church,
which being showed unto him by a crumpt unseemly Person the Minister thereof,
he asked him how many Bells they had there? The Minister answered, None. His
Grace thinking that somewhat strange, demanded how it chanced? The Minister
thinking that Question as strange, replied, It was one of the Reformed
Churches. From thence his Grace went to Edinborough, where he found accordingly
no Bell in all the City, save one only in the Church of St. Andrew. And
enquiring, What became of all the rest? it was told him, That they were shipped
to be carried into the Low Countries, but were drowned in Leigh Haven -- I
said, That it was reported, that Queen Elizabeth hearing that Sir John Shelton
for want of other Prey, had brought a Bell from the sacking of Cales, was
highly offended at it, and said, By God's death she would make him carry it
thither again. I might have added, that that Peerless Princess was so far
against defacing the Monuments in Churches, and the pulling down of Bells and
Lead from them, as in the second Year of her Reign she caused many
Proclamations not only to be printed, but signed them also with her own Hand,
and sent them in that manner (the more to manifest her Zeal and restrain the
Sacrilege) about into the Counties. But because I had spoken of sending the
Bell back again, his Grace then requited me with this Relation.

A Gentleman (quoth he) of great descent, richly married, and of fair Estate
(yet not naming him) showed me on a time a piece of Unicorns Horn, Sea Unicorn,
as much as the Cover of a great Salt-celler (which was then standing upon the
Table before Dinner) was about at the bottom; the piece of Unicorn's Horn
having a Crucifix graven upon it, and a gapp in one of the Quarters, where part
had been cut or scraped away for curing Infirmities. I desired to know of him
where he had it; but he refused to tell it me; till after some pressure he
discovered to me, That in his Travels beyond the Seas, he came to a Nunnery,
where the Nuns in courtesy showing him the Relics of their House, he whilst
they heeded him not, slipped this into his Pocket and brought it away. His Grace
reproving him for it, told him, It was Sacrilege, and that although it were
superstitiously used, yet it was dedicated unto God, advising him to use some
means for sending it back again; saying, that the Nuns no doubt suffered great
Displeasure from their Abbess, upon the missing of it. The Gentleman
notwithstanding (quoth his Grace) refused my Counsel; but I observed (said he)
that he never prosper'd after, and at length having consumed his Estate, died
Childless.

It came not then to my Mind upon the sudden; but I might very truly have added
the like of Sir John Shelton, That having married the Daughter of Henry Lord
Cromwell, he died very little or nothing worth, and without any Issue (as I
take it) but certainly without any Issue-male to continue his Family.

[Subscrib'd] Henry Spelman.

I Jeremy Stephens being then present, do testify the truth of this Relation.

Having made mention of Cales and Queen Elizabeth; I will add further what was
lately told me by a Knight of worth (who was himself in the Voyage) much
conducing to the Honor of that renowned Princess, and to the scope also of
this our Discourse. It is said, That when she set forth her Expedition for
Cales, or other Spanish Towns, she gave particular and straight Instructions
that in no Case any Violence should be offered to any Church or consecrated
thing. This notwithstanding, Sir Coniers Clifford, upon the taking of Cales,
fired and burnt the Cathedral-Church there; and Sir Charles Blunt (in the
return from thence) the Cathedral-Church of Pharos in Portugal. It followed,
that Sir Coniers Clifford never after prospered in any thing, and was at last
slain by the Natives in Ireland, leaving no Son to continue his Nominal-line;
and that Sir Charles Blunt, about 2 Years after the Fact, was drowned at Sea in
passing for Ireland. (Ex relat. Will. Slingsby Mil. 22. Nov. 1634.)

FINIS.

