THE CHARACTER OF A Quack-Astrologer: OR, The spurious Prognosticator
Anatomized.
A Quack Astrologer is a Gypsy of the upper Form, a Wizard unfledged, Doctor
Faustus in swaddling Clouts; the fag end of a South-sayer, or the Cub of a
Conjurer not licked into perfection; one that has heard of the Black Art, and
his fingers Itch to be dabling in it, but wanting Courage to meet the Devil at a
personal Treaty, chooses to deal with him obliquely, by way of a cheat, rather
than by the direct Negotiation of a Familiar: A three-penny Prophet, that
undertakes the telling other folks Fortunes, merely to supply the pinching
necessities of his own; whose stock of Learning lies all in Reversion, and his
knowledge only of Futurity, for he understands neither things past nor present,
yet (as Owls see best in the dark) kens to an Hairs-breath those to come. He
boasts himself Heavens Secretary, the Stars Privy Councellor, persuades you
that he can jilt the book of Fate, and pick-lock the secrets of the Destinies,
but is in truth a paltry Hocus, whose Juggling box is a Scheme, Planets houses,
and Aspects his several Properties, and his whole Art but a well contrived
Faculty or Legerdemain to buble inquisitive and credulous Fools of their Money.
He differs from an honest, able Artist, as a Licentiate from a Doctor. His
natural impudence, and a stolen Ephemeris set him up, and he begins at once to
be a Student and a Professor; one night sprouts forth this Mushroom of Science
so high, from its native dunghill, that forthwith, Sublimi ferit sidera vertice.

For by bungling in the worst part of the Mathematics, from saucy Jack in an
instant he commences Master Doctor; no sooner has he learned the Mystery to set
a figure, but he fancies himself, a whole Sphere above Tycho Brahe, or Friar
Bacon; and is more proud of the knack of finding out part of Fortune, than
Columbus of discovering the new golden world, or our Modern Navigators the
Northern Indies; thence-forwards his cloven Tongue is tipped with Prophecy, he
never opens his mouth, but it is Bearded with a Planet; let the discourse be what
it will, he still speaks Astrology, and magnifies Urania, though she may be
(for ought he knows to the contrary) a footer of stockings. Ask him what it is a
clock, he answers, Sol wants three degrees of the Cusp of the mid-heaven.
Inquire what news from the Rhyne, and he will tell you of Jupiter and Saturn at
daggers drawing in the fiery Trigon, that the Dragons tail has stung the
Dog Star, and Vrsa major the blind Bear to be whipped by Gemini, about the
Antartick Pole. Some say, he took his first being from a cunning Woman, and
stole this black Art from her, whilst he made her Sea-coal fires, but he boasts
it is all acquired by his own industry, and if so, you may swear no man ever
more verified the Proverb, He that teaches himself, has a Fool for his Master:
the truth is, if any able Proficient out of a generous charity, discover to him
the first Elements of Art, his gratitude (like Aristotle's to Plato,) is to
abuse his Instructor, with opprobrious epithets of black-mouthed detraction,
and convince the World by railing, that his skill in Star-craft is taller than
his Tutors, by six Cubits and a Span He impudently cites Ptolomy and Cardan,
and makes Haly and Abumazar his common vouchers, yet scarce understands the
Book of knowledge; and his Library for seven years is the Introduction, and Erra
pater. You might know him by his threadbare Blew-gown, that served two
apprenticeships to his back, and was worn without mercy in the hottest of the
Dog-dayes. You may learn Astrology without instruction, by the character of his
face, on which it is as hard to find the Image of God, as to discover the true
Effigies of a Saint by his weatherbeaten Statue: for the wrinkles on his
Necromantick brow represent the 12 signs, and all the Monsters on the celestial
Globe are drawn to the life in his countenance. His prime task is to Con hard
words, with which he startles his trembling Querents, who take them for names
of his confederate Demons. Asmodeus and Mefaustophilus are not half so
terrible: they are too boisterous for Prose; but there are Charms in Verse, we
will therefore shackle them in Meeter, where they run like the hobling rhymes
on the top of an Almanac.

Anababizon, Dodecatemory,
Hermetick, Trutine, Combust, Cazimi,
Horoscope, Animodar, Smoaky denn,
Caput Algol, Hylec, dreadful Almuten,
Alcocodonean, Apheta, Anomaly,
Retrogradation, Orientality,
Apogaeon, Zenith, Nadir, Cosmical,
Acronick, Azimuth, Helio-centrical,
Sextile, Trine, Quadrate, and opposed Aspect,
Excentrick, Epicycle, Polar, Epact,
Grim Trigons, Radix Genethliacal
Refraination, Schemes Profectional,
Direction, Anareta, Transition,
Micros-contaratos, and Cauda's position.
But to proceed more methodically, it is requisite according to rules of art, we
consider the radix of our prodigious Subject.

He was begot (like Merlin) by an Incubus on a Lapland Witch (whence he can
easier resolve any question than who was his proper Father:) The eldest of the
Sibyls played the Midwife to this Moon-Calf, and Dame Shipton his dry Nurse fed
him with May-dew, and Pap of Trismegistus, rocked him to sleep with a
whirlwind, lullabi'd him with the still Music of the Spears, and wrapped him up
in the Zodiac for want of swaddling clouts. Himself is most fit to Calculate
his own Nativity; but if Scorpio be not slandered when it is entitled signum
falsitatis, (a sign of a treacherous Nature) it is doubtless his true ascendent.
Some fancy the Egyptians and Caldeans, (those Bel-weathers of superstition)
were mainly invited to sydereal studies by the plain and champaign situation
of their Countries. Who knows but his lofty education might first set out
Astrologazestar a gog, who sitting many years on his Throne like an Eastern
Monarch, (for, spite of his Doctor ship, he is originally a Knight of the
cross-leg'd order,) in a Garret four stories high, had the better opportunity
to contemplate the celestial bodies, and search out the meaning of their
respective twinklings? He affirms the Patriarchs were all as great Astrologers
as Alphonsus, or the three Kings of Colen, and would gladly at any time
exchange the two tables of Gods commandments, for Enochs pillars. He loves Job
the better for the sweet influences of the Pleiades, and offers to make
affidavit, that Jacobs Ladder was only a Jacobs staff. To see him perpetually
poring on Heaven, makes me wonder, a man should busiehimself so much about a
place he is never like to come to: you would think his eyes were nailed to the
Stars, for he is always looking upwards, yet dares believe nothing above
primum mobile, because it is beyond the reach of his Astrolabe. He is a punctual
time-server, even to a minute, and when he is most busily employed without
Question does nothing. His groundless Guesses he calls Resolves, and compels
the Stars (like Knights of the Post,) to depose things they know no more than
the Man in the Moon; as if Heaven were accessory to all the cheating tricks Hell
inspires him with.

He begins with theft; and to help people to what they have lost, picks their
pockets afresh; not a ring or spoon is nim'd away, but pays him twelve pence
toll, and the Ale-drapers often straying tankerd yields him a constant revenue:
for that purpose he maintains as strict a correspondence with Gilts and
Lifters, as a Mountebank with applauding Midwives and recommending Nurses: and
if at any time, to keep up his credit with the Rabble, he discovers any thing,
it is done by the same occult Hermetick learning, heretofore professed by the
renowned Mall-Cutpurse.

At other times there is nothing more pleasant than his shufling evasions;
first, he gravely inquires the business, and by subtle questions pumps out
certain particulars which he treasures up in his memory; next, he consults his
old rusty Clock, which has got a trick of Lying, as fast as its Master, and
amuses you for a quarter of an hour, with scrawling out the All-revealing
figure, and placing the Planets in their respective Pues; all which being
dispatched, you must lay down your money on his book, as you do the Wedding
fees to the Parson at the delivery of the Ring; for it is a fundamental Axiom
in his art, That without crossing his hand with Silver no Scheme can be
radical: then he begins to tell you back your own Tale in other language, and
you take that for divination, which is but repetition; he neither knows nor
regards the rules of the Ancients, nor the true position of the heavens, but
follows his Fancy, and says what he thinks will please most; to color which
he abuses an honest Aphorism, A te and Scientia. The old Shepherd that got the
repute of being weather-wise, by telling one man it would rain such a day, and
another, that it would be fair, learned that trick of this Hiccius Doctius, who
to hit the white shoots opposite ways, and predicts contrarieties of the same
matter; thus he tells you,

The Lord of the second separating from Saturm, Mercury Peregrine, without
shoe or stocking, beholding the man, and the significator of the thief, in
square to the ascendent, infallibly show your things are stolen; but the Moon in
the seventh house, and the Lord of the Horoscope being Lord of the hour, tell
him, they are only mislaid, or strayed away, and therefore you were best look
carefully for them. Then he asks, if you have never a suspicious person that
much frequents your house? you presently think of some body, and your answer
discovering the Sex, he wonderfully tells you whether it be man or woman. For a
description, he says, he must mix the Testimonies of the Significators, which
he blends so accurately, that your fancy may apply it to any that you please to
mistrust. As to the grand Quere, Shall the movables be recovered? he answers,
after a serious shake of his empty noddle, that although an Infortune retrogade
in the eighth, and the Sun many fathom under earth, have no mind to restore
them till latter Lammas, yet the dispositor of the Moon in partile Trine to the
Ascendent, (being his special friend) has engaged on his honor you shall have
them again by Tuesday come seavennight; and that Mercury that notorious
pilferer, being in Northern sign, and Westernly quarter, in the Southern-angle
of the Oriental Triplicity, plainly shows they are conveyed North and by South,
whereupon he sends you on a fruitless Pilgrimage to Long-lane, Pepper-Alley, or
Cow-cross, yet would have you to know, he could fetch them back in an instant
through the Air, only he fears destroying his Majesty's Fleet, and spoiling
Sherwood-forrest by the violence of the tempest, and would show you the
phantasme of the thief, but that he knows you will be frighted out of your
wits, to see a worse Devil than himself. However he asks how and in what part
you please to have the rogue tormented; and to prevent the like damage
hereafter, offers for five pieces to give you home with you a Talisman against
flies, a Sigil to make you fortunate at Gaming, and a Spell that shall as
certainly preserve you from being robbed for the future, a sympathetical powder
from the violent pains o^ the toothache. This is his greener practice, till
being arrived by the success o^ his villainies to a plush Jacket, he grows too
squeamish to intermeddle with these beggarly Elements, stolen Bodkins, or
she-asses gone astray. For the women hearing of his Fame, throng after in
droves, and a Fleet of Coaches rides every morning at his door. The young
Gallant bribes him with a Guinny, to know when his miserable Father will have
the civility to go to Heaven; and is so pious as to double it, i^ by Art he can
expedite his journey. The Chambermaid lately cured of the Green Sickness, by
lying in the trucle-bed, comes to know whether the Butler will accept of his
Masters cast Suit for a Livery. And the old toothless Lady must needs be
resolved concerning a seventh Husband. All these he dispences Oracles too, with
a confidence equaled by nothing but his ignorance; for if any presume to
scruple his judgment, he flies into a passion, and (as the Poet justified his
Play) seals with an oath, the truth of his predictions.

The best use can be made of him, is as ^ helper forward in an amorous
intrigue; at which he is exceeding dexterous, and so good Natured, that he will
not refuse to pimp for a bountiful querent. He trappans a young Heiress to run
away with a Footman, by persuading a young girl it is her destiny; and sells
the old and ugly Philtress and love-powder, to procure them Sweet hearts. He
finds the minute, the precise one minute that no woman can hold out in, and
when a man may venture on the sweetsin, even in the Park, and defy the
Surgeon. He elects a fi^ time for adulterous meetings, and directs them
whether North or West, Barnet or Battersea will be least obnoxious to
discovery; yet cannot all his skill conceal his own debaucheries: for the
malicious Planets, (in pure revenge 'cause he blabs abroad, so many of their
secrets,) will not suffer him to keep wench in private, or oblige the Parish
with an Astrological By-blow in hand-basket, but they will tell all to the babbling
World, which laughs to be hold the celestial Scout-master, exposed to the
correction of the Sessions and infamy of a penitential sheet.

His mighty ambition is to write an Almanac, which he doubts not but will make
him more famous, than either Copernicus or Kepler, though it only unlock the
Terms, point out highwayes, and direct Mountebanks and Sow-gelders the proper
season of the year to kill or torture in. The frontispeice (if he can go to the
charge,) shall be garnished with a gaudy picture, which he bribes the engraver
to make not like but handsome; this sets off the pamphlet in a Country fair, as
a horse sells the better for the ribbon, wherewith Jockey ties up his tail. He
would willingly (like the grand Signior) strangle all his Brethren, and cries
out against his fellow ignorants, as public whores against private for
spoiling the trade. He takes a world of pains to vindicate himself from certain
magical feats, which no wise man ever believed, he or any body else could
perform: and is so passionate in denying that ridiculous charge, as if he
intended you should still supect him guilty. The first leaf demonstrates
Ptolomy to be as infallible as Euclid, and in six lines confutes all the
learned volumes of Mirandula and Gassendus. His Calender musters up more Saints
than the world now a days yields good Christans, and each month is faced with
such heroic verse, as scorns to be confined to the dull pedantries of measure
and sense. He writes of the weather hab nab, and as the toy takes him, chequers
the year with foul and fair. The novice star-reader peruses it with as much
reverence as a Jew, the Pentateuch; but the Country man makes bold with it for
a registry, wherein he files his most important memoires; when his Mare took
Horse, Puss kitled, or Goreback went to Bull. In the rear of the fardle stands
that ghastly Goblin the Anatomy, under which we have notice of some universal
Pill, or wondrous cures the Author can perform. For you must know, a
cunningman is an infallible introduction to an Emperick, and (as some Rats are
both for land and water,) his judgment at the Scheme and the Urinal is equally
excellent. If the physic of the dog-leech turn not your stomach, lets jog on
to the Prog, and now, Readers! Linguis animisque favete, with reverend silence
attend the oracle, who comes to cut out the fate of the year, and allot each
Kingdom and State its destiny. The Text is Sol in Aries, which he can either
make as terrible as Curse the Meroz of old, and mould into marmalad and sugar
plumbs at his pleasure. Sometimes he threatens Poland; by and by falls upon the
Sweed, (like a renegado from christianity,) brings the Turk into Hungary,
strikes the Pope into a Fever, frights the Empress, and makes her miscarry,
musters up the rebellious Cossacks and sets Prester John, and the Crim Tartar
together by the ears.

All this mischief he performs by the mysterious art of canting, and the help
of his lousy rhetoric, that cheats people into an opinion of his abilities;
having purloyned some shreds of Latin, he lards there with his dry discourses,
and Greek comes to him (as other Brutes have their knowledge) by instinct, for
he writes it before he can distinguish one letter of the Alphabet. He antedates
effects to their causes, and maintains each herb and flower receives its virtue
from the Planets, whereas those were growing before these were created. He
impairs Gods universal monarchy, by making the Stars sole keepers of the
liberties of the subluminary world, and not content they should domineer over
naturals, will needs promote their tyranny in things artificial too, asserting,
that all manufactures receive good or ill fortunes and qualities from some
particular radix, and therefore elects a time for stuing of Pruins, and chooses
a pispot by its horoscope. Nothing pusles him more than fatal necessity: he is
loath to deny it, yet dares not justify it, and therefore prudently banishes it
his theory, but hugs it in his practice, yet knows not how to avoid the horns
of that excellent Dilemma, propounded by a most ingenious Modern Poet.

If Fate be not, how shall we ought foresee,
Or how shall we avoid it, if it be?
If by free will in our own paths we move,
How are we bounded by decrees above?
To conclude; his certainty in declaring future events, is like the predictions
made to Caesar, Crassus and Pompey, or that of Bardugy to the thrice noble
Captain, who all, notwithstanding the promises of such blandishing Hypocrites
of Long-life and prosperity, fell by the strokes of a violent and untimely
fate. To avoid the scandal whereof, he commonly studies ambiguous expressions
applicable to every time, Prince and Nation. And when any extraordinary
accident happens, glories that he foretold it, and fortifies his old
Prognostications with new reasons; or if he be convict of falsehood, excuses it
with blasphemy, or at least, cloakes only with another, saying, the wise man
rules the stars, whereas in truth (as the learned Agrippa long since observed)
neither the Stars rule the wisemen, nor the wisemen the stars, but God
overrules them both.

FINIS.

