FREE GRACE: OR, THE FLOWINGS OF Christ's Blood free' to Sinners.

Being an Experiment o^ Jesus Christ upon one who has been in the bondage of a
troubled Conscience at times, for the space of about twel^^ years, till now
upon a clearer discovery of Jesus Christ, and the Gospel: Wherein diverse
secrets of the se^^^ of sin and temptations, are experimenta^ ^^^^ed, and by
way of Observation, con^^^^ing a natural condition, and a mixed condition of
Law and Gospel: With a further revealing of the Gospel in its glory, liberty,
freeness, andsimplicity for Salvation.

By John Saltmarsh Preacher of the Gospel at Brasteed in Kent.

The second Edition corrected.

London, Printed for Giles Calvert, dwelling at the black Stred-Eagle at the
West End of Paul's. 1646.

TO My Honorable Friends Sir John Wray Knight and Baronet, Sir William
Strickland Knight and Baronet; Both Members of the Honorable House of Commons.
HONORABLE;
I Know ye both well to have loved the acquaintance of Truth long, and in those
times when truth was an error, and light darkness in the account of most;
therefore I hope the same Lord will not cease to reveal to ye more of himself,
till ye come to know as ye shall be known. The truths (if I mistake them not) I
here present you, are of Free Grace, such things as if cleared to the World,
would enlighten us more in the mystery of iniquity then any other. There is one
thing appears to us in the discovery of this, which is love, God loving us
freely, and sending out his Spirit of love into our hearts; this should be that
only principle of power in believers now under the Gospel: love began all the
work of salvation in God, and love should carry on this work of salvation in
men^ This is a way of service which none know, but those whom the Son has made
free indeed.

The Lord fill ye with this love, that ye may obey as gloriously as ye are
commanded in the Gospel, and that the experiences of Free Grace may dwell
richly in ye; that ye may spiritually judge of the siner and more subtle parts
of Antichrist. All is not in that gross Idolatry, which is seen and felt;
there is more of mystery then so in it.

I could not but thus publicly acknowledge ye, who are such public Assertors
of that Liberty we of this Kingdom enjoy at this day, and because ye have
acknowledged me in many favors to my self formerly; for which I am

Your Servant in the Lord, JOH. SALTMARSH.

AN Occasional Word.
IT would be matter of much peace amongst believers, if the names of
Antinomian, and legal Teacher, and the rest, might be laid down, and no mark or
name to know one another by, but that of believers that hold thus and thus for
distinction: Surely, carnal suspicions and jealousy do much increase our
differences. Some, hearing the doctrine of Free Grace, think presently there
will follow nothing but looseness and libertinism; and the other, hearing of
holiness, of duties and obedience, think there will follow nothing but
legalnesse, and bondage, and self-righteousnesse; and upon these jealousies,
each party over-suspecting the others doctrine, bends against one another in
expressions something too uncomely for both; and there are some unwarrantable
notions to be found on all sides. But let us consider:

Can the Free Grace of Jesus Christ tempt any one to sin of it self? Can a good
Tree bring forth evil fruit? And shall we call every one Antinomian that speaks
Free Grace, or a little more freely then we do? If any man sin more freely
because of forgiveness of sins, that man may suspect himself to be forgiven;
for in all Scriptures and Scripture-examples, the more forgiveness, the more
holiness; Mary loved much, because much was forgiven to her; and righteous and
holiness, blood and water, Jesus and Lord and Christ, called and justified,
are still to be found together in the Word.

There are some too of another sort, who make some noise of Free Grace; but if
all were well observed, it is not so free as it seems. I have heard of a
Gentleman, that because he would seem very free to his Neighbors, bid fill out
Wine freely; but he had commanded the servants beforehand to burn it, that it
should be too hot for any of them to drink. I wish the Wine in the Gospel (by
some) be not overmuch heated by the Law, and conditions and qualifications,
that poor souls cannot taste of it freely, and yet seem to fill it out freely
too. Free Grace may be there in the notion of it, yet not in the truth of it.
The Arminians boast themselves to be as great Patrons of Free Grace as others:
And why? Because they teach, that all that is still given to man, is for
Christ, and in Christ; and though by Faith and works, yet all that is
free-gift. So the Papists boast of Free Grace, That Christ is given freely from
the Father for sinners; and it is of Free Grace that we are accepted, though of
works too: So as surely there is some other way of carrying Free Grace, then by
joining men so into the work; for else it is but a Popish, an Arminian
Free Grace.

Jesus Christ has appeared more of late, and his glory has been more abroad,
then this Kingdom ever saw before; and indeed Antichrist goes never rightly
down, but when Christ is lifted up; and if Jesus Christ had been more in the
divinity of these latter times, and in their Preachings for Reformation, and
Moses less, we had not only had more of his grace, but more of his glory then
we yet see.

Yet I do not see that the power of Christ crucified, is so abroad among
believers as it should be; but some several Ordinances are rather the business
of this age: Yet thus it has been always, whenever there were any shadows or
carnal Ordinances, believers went more after them, then Christ himself. Under
the Law it was so, and under the Gospel it is so; some outward truths of Christ
are sought after more then Christ himself, and we make more of the beams then
the Sun of righteousness, and rather warm our selves by the sparks then the
fire; like those Soldiers who cast lots for his Garments, but let his Body
alone upon the Cross; not but that every thing of Christ is precious, yet
nothing so precious as himself. So as These things ought we to have done, and
not to leave the other undone.

I hope by this time Free Grace is no Antinomianism amongst believers; yet it
has been ever Satan's policy and the Lords providence to manage a truth
sometimes through a whole age, yea, and ages too, in another name then its own;
and some other age have seen it for a truth, which God would not reveal to
those unthankful times. Light has walked abroad in a vail of darkness, and
Truth in the likeness of error; and Christ has been crucified by those who
after knew him for their Lord of glory, and were wounded for him whom they had
wounded themselves. O that the times we live in, had not too many of these, who
would persecute that Christ now, whom hereafter they may preach.

But I have done; and if I have erred in any thing (for I see but in part, and
know but in part) it is in filling out that Wine too freely; which the Master
of the Feast, if I mistake not, has bidden me, saying, Drink, yea drink
abundantly, O beloved, Cant. 5.

TO THE READER.
IN the Experiment of this soul, you may see a Spirit of adoption in Bondage,
and one made poor in Spirit through the ignorance of the riches of grace, and
by a legal faith (as I may say) both under Grace and the Law at the same time.
Surely such legal believers are as much subject to death and bondage in their
own apprehensions under the Gospel, as they were before under the Law.

You have here the frame of this soul, or the constitution and condition of a
Spirit before conversion, under conversion, and under the relapse or falling
back into the same sins, and under the temptations for those sins, and under a
legal recovery out of those temptations, and under a fuller revelation of grace
and truth, only drawn out of their own experiences; by which we may see what
the want of the knowledge of Jesus Christ is. And the more Christ is known, and
that love of God to the Sons of men which was manifest in the flesh, the more
that glorious liberty from the Law, Sin, and Satan, is manifested in that soul.
This made Paul desire so to know nothing but Jesus Christ and him crucified:
And the more this light of the Gospel shines in the face of Jesus Christ, the
more does the ignorance of flesh and blood dissolve; and the shadows of the
Law, as doubts, fears, terrors which are cast in, vanish before it: For the
day breaks, and the shadows fly away.

The only scope of this Discourse and Observations is, to hold forth the glory
of Free Grace; and that by this one Experiment, Wisdom might be justified of
her Children. O the riches of his grace! O the fountain of his love! O the
exceeding and comprehensive freeness and the flowing of his blood washing us,
when we are polluted in our own! Thus he calls us beloved, when we are not
beloved; and we who had not obtained mercy, do obtain mercy.

And I thought my self not a little happy to have such an effectual door as
this opened, to deal with the experiences of a soul in this kind.

And for the following Conference, and for my Observations, and other
particulars, I took this occasion to draw out my discourse of Grace and
Gospel-glory, from the faithful experiences of such a soul, wherein the work of
nature and grace, and spirit and Satan, was clearly visible and discernible,
rather then to found them upon mere notions and conjectural Principles. For in
the experiences of a soul, we may more clearly discern the deep things of the
Spirit, reading them in the spirits of such as possess Christ, (as in the
Counterpane of the Scriptures;) for there truth answers to truth, as in water
face answers to face.

THE CONTENTS Of the Book.
CHAP. I.
OF the Parties natural condition, and how they felt themselves in their state
of nature, before they could persuade themselves they had taken Christ. Page 1.
Observations.
1. Of the bondage that a merely carnal man sins in, and where true spiritual
freedom is. p. 3. 2. Of the resistings of sin, and sorrowings for sin, which
are in a natural man. p. 5. 3. How far many go in a formal profession and mere
natural Religion, raise ed up a little by the power of the Word. p. 7.

CHAP. II.
OF the Parties first trouble for the sins they lived in, which is supposed to
be the time of conversion, or calling, or light from Christ. p. 11.
Observations.
1. Of the Preachers several dealings with this Party to settle them, and not
in a way of believing first. page 26 2. The unstablenesse of such as are not
converted in a pure Gospel-way. p. 33. 3. The several ways which the Lord
makes use on to salvation. p. 35. 4. The want of true Gospel-knowledge in Jesus
Christ, is the cause of many distractions in believers. p. 36. 5. The opening
Jesus Christ in the Gospel, is the best and surest way to deal with sinners. p.
39. 6. A further opening of the doubtings of a soul not clearly discerning the
power of the Gospel. p. 43. 7. The working of the Spirit of Christ in a soul,
though not so clearly enlightened. p. 46.

CHAP. III.
OF the Parties falling into the same sins in some measure which they had lived
in, in their unregenerate state, from whence all their late bondage has been.
P. 50. Observations.
1. The danger of placing assurance most in mortification of sin. p. 53. 2. The
danger of drawing our comforts most from the change in the outward man. p. 54
3. The spiritual condition in this life, more in being justified from sin then
cleansed from sin. p. 56. 4. The greatest temptations upon sinning in an
enlightened condition. p. 57. 5. That backsliding or relapsing, is much
mistaken, and mortification of sin; of the more mystical mortification
believers have. p. 59. 6. The sum of the mystery of mortification of sin in a
believer. p. 65. 7. That there is danger in putting too much upon the sin of
relapsing or backsliding in believers. p. 69. 8. The conclusion concerning the
mystical and spiritual mortification. p. 73. 9. Some Scriptures concerning
falling away interpreted. p. 75.

CHAP. IV.
THe Party, after such openings of the frame of their spirit, is now discoursed
with upon certain particular Questions. p. 78. The Parties several Doubts
answered.
1. That they are not therefore beloved of God or in Christ, because they fell
back again into sin. p. 79. 2. Because they found not a change in the whole
man. p. 80. 3. Because they feel not themselves sanctified, they think they are
not justified. p. 81.

CHAP. V.
THe Parties great Doubt concerning faith or believing. p 92. 1. The great
Gospel secret, concerning faith or believing. Ibid. 2. We are first to believe,
and all other gifts will follow. p. 97.
The several ways opened, how the mystery of Godliness and Free Grace has
been received in, and in what degrees it has been enquired for in this present
age. p. 106.
1. GOds first revealing himself to man in goodness and Free Grace. p. 107. 2.
Gods Free grace to sinners more discovered. p. 111. 3. More of Gods Free Grace
and Love; of man's sin, and redemption, discovered. p. 114. 4. The Son of God
how considered in the work of Salvation. p. 119. 5. Gods love manifested in the
Gospel-expressions. p. 124. 6. The new Covenant, no Covenant properly with us,
but with Christ for us. p. 125. 7. Gods manner of Covenanting. p. 127. 8. They
that are under Grace revealed, are no more under the Law. p. 128. 9. When God
is said to be in Covenant with the soul. Ibid. 10. A justified person is a
perfect person. p. 129. 11. Sin separates not his from God, but from Communion
with God. p. 130. 12. Christ in the flesh. Ibid. 13. Christ's being in our own
nature. p. 131. 14. Christ's love. Ibid. 15. Christ doing and suffering for our
sakes. p. 132. 16. Christ's Mediatorship. Ibid. 17. The right general
Redemption, by the second Adam. p. 133. 18. Christ's love. p. 134. 19. Christ's
blood. Ibid. 20. Christ's blood powered out. p. 135. 21. Christ's Vesture dipped in
blood. Ibid. 22. Christ's comeliness. p. 136. 23. Christ's beauty. Ibid. 24.
Christ's names. p. 137. 25. Christ and His. Ibid. 26. Christ's love in Heaven to
us, or Christ exalted. p. 138. 27. The Gospel is Christ revealed. Ibid. 28. The
mystery of Christ in the Gospel, a mystery of love. p. 139. 29. A believers
glorious freedom. p. 140. 30. All the sins of believers done away on the
Cross. Ibid. 31. Christ offered to sinners. p. 141. 32. A believer must live
in Christ, not in himself. Ibid. 33. How Christ and a believer were one in sin
and righteousness. p. 143. 34. We must come before God as having put on Christ
first, not as sinners and unrighteous. p. 144. 35. The Law is now in the
Spirit, and in the Gospel for a believer to walk by. p. 146. 36. Legal and
Gospel-commands and duties. p. 147. 37. The Gospel in the holiness and grace
of it. p. 150. 38. The new Covenant further set forth to be merely a promise.
p. 15^. 39. The way of assurance for believers. p. 155. 40. The Gospel
Ministration very glorious. p. 157. 41. In what kind the Gospel is glorious.
p. 160. 42. The form of the Gospel, or way of dispensation. p. 163. 43. Gospel
promises. p 164. 44. God under the Law; and the Gospel legal, and
Gospel-worshippers. p. 166. 45. God and His in Reconciliation. p. 169. 46. The
fears of weak believers; and their remedies. p. 171. 47. Remedies to each fear.
p. 175. 48. Legal conversion. p. 177. 49. When the Spirit of adoption works not
freely. p. 179. 50. Opinions make men legal. p 181. 51. Jesus Christ offered to
sinners as sinners. p. 184. 52. The simplicity of the Gospel salvation, easy
and plain. p. 190. 53. Christ and every part of Christ to be studied and
believed in. p. 194.
The several ways of Free Grace, and the general point searched. p. 197.
THe first way of Free Grace, free without all conditions of Grace. Ibid. A
second way of Free Grace, free only with conditions. p. 198 A third way of
Free grace, free only upon condition. p. 199. A fourth way of Free Grace, free
merely in extent. Ibid.
Some Truths of Free grace sparkling in former Writers, and in some famous
approved men of our times, in Testimony to what is in this Discourse of
Free Grace. p. 204.
THe Law by the Preaching of it, cannot reform, but only Faith. Ibid. No
preparatory works before Christ. p. 205. Free Grace has many enemies. We
should stand for Free Grace. p. 206. Faith is no condition of the new Covenant
of Grace. Ibid. We have all in Christ. p. 207. Christ is every thing to us. p.
208. God was never an enemy to his. p. 209. That we and those commonly called
Antinomians differ little. Ibid. Concerning our not resting on sight, or our
own graces for assurance. p. 211. The Law as given by Moses, no rule to
Christians. p 212. Faith before Justification is no Grace. p. 213. God is never
an enemy to his though sinning. p. 214. Christ promised to sinners as sinners.
p. 215. A believers Law is Christ, and his Spirit. p. 216.
ERRATA.
Page 198. lin. 19. and page 199. lin. 17. and page 202, lin. 21. for
intervenings read interfeerings.

The flowings of Christ's Blood freely to Sinners; Occasioned by an Experimental
Discourse.
CHAP. I. Of the Parties natural condition, and how they felt themselves in
their state of nature, before they could persuade themselves they had taken
Christ.
Quest. WHat manner of life did you lead* as you can well remember?

Answ.I continued in a course of some particular sins long.

Quest. Had you no fits of terror of conscience in your continuance in those
sins?

Answ. I had some gripings and accusations in my continuance in those sins; but
they tarried not with me.

Quest. Had you any reluctance in sinning, or did you it with full consent?

Answ. Yea; with full consent, to my remembrance.

Quest. Were you much delighted in those sins, so as you committed them with
greediness, or were you over-powred partly through the strength of corruption?

Answ. I delighted in them, and felt no over-powring of that kind.

Quest. In this your natural state, how far did the light of conscience check
you or put you upon any Reformation?

Answ. Upon some duties of Prayer, and hearing the Word; and checks diverse
times I had.

Quest. Were not your checks such as put you upon some other religious duties?

Quest. Did you not see any need of Christ?

Answ. Yea; but it was I thought rather for my self ends, then for love to
Christ. One asked me, if I could be contented without Christ, if it were
possible that I had my sins pardoned, and peace of conscience, and not have
Christ: I answered, I did not know.

Quest. But after all these proceedings, and soul-conflicts, which I perceive
you had, and your dealings with many concerning your condition: How came you to
that assurance of your calling and the spirit, as you were once persuaded you
had?

Answ. I shall relate unto you my experiences which I had (as I was then
assured on) of my calling.

First, When I was minded to make away my self for my sin, the Lord sent into
my mind this word, I have loved thee with an everlasting love: Ah thought I
then, has God loved me with such an everlasting love, and shall I sin against
such a God!

Secondly, I had many doubts and fears, but through the strength of Christ I
overcame all: These doubts and fears arose from the examination of my self how
I could find the work in my soul agreeable to that testimony; for I was much
afraid of being deluded.

Thirdly, The promise in Isai. 55.1. did stay my heart, and Christ in my
partaking of him in his Ordinances, did sweetly witness, and exceedingly, that
he was my Christ.

Fourthly, I went on for some time full of joy and of comfort, upon these
promises, and another I had, Fear not, I will be with thee, I will never leave
thee, I will never forsake thee.

Fifthly, I was in fears again, that I could not pray, but I had a promise, I
will fulfill the desires of them that fear me: These, and many more, were my
grounds and evidences, which I thought were right then when I had them.

Sixthly, Sometimes in hearing the Word, Christ did witness to my soul, yet
but seldom.

But, O how I did strive against this work, as I thought, of my being called,
to put away all promises of mercy from me: I may justly say, The Lord saved me
whether I would or no.

Sometimes I was dead and could not pray, sometimes very much quickened and
stirred up, and I could power out my soul in much sorrow and remorse for sin. O
me thought I could spend a whole night in praying for what my soul wanted!

That which I much desired in prayer, was still, that my sinful soul might be
healed of sin; and that running issue of sin that ran and ceased not, might be
stopped.

Yet in this my time, and those days, I seldom desired pardon of sin till I
were fitted for mercies: But now I see we are pardoned freely, I cannot even
now but say this, O rest not therefore in your own duties, lest you perish in
the sparks you kindle, as I had almost done.

I observed a good providence of the Lord to me, in providing me still many
Christians to complain to in this my condition.

OBSERVATIONS on the former Discourse.
I. Of the Preachers several dealings with this Party to settle them, and not
in a way of believing first.
I Observe, That now this soul questioning the truth of all their assurances,
they labor to persuade it to faith or believing, upon a ground of
Sanctification in themselves, which has no evidence, nor for the present can
bring any demonstration to the spirit: For Satan and the Parties own suspecting
heart, will not let them believe any truth in that which they have found so
faulty; As for instance, a man that has had cause to be jealous of his wife,
and has seen some miscarriages, all the friends she can make, are not able to
satisfy and take away all grounds of fear and jealousy from him by their
persuasion, but he will still suspect, because he once had some real ground;
and unless they can take away this, they cannot persuade him to that: So in
that soul where there has been real failings, and a spiritual discerning of
its own unrighteousness, all the persuasions of others, cannot make it have
any good opinion of it self, nor persuade it of its righteousness, unless
they can take away that unrighteousness and sin, and make it to be no sin and
no unrighteousness; For the soul which is only troubled for sin, must be
settled upon some thing which is not sin; and upon a righteousness, either in
it self, or some other, or there can be no setlement, peace, or comfort in that
soul: And yet this is the common way of dealing with souls, and bringing them
up into assurance, as thus, Repent and pray, and live an holy life, and walk
according to the Law of God; and if they answer, they cannot do thus, O then
say they, can you not desire to pray, and repent? and if they say they cannot
desire, O but then say they, can you not desire that you may desire? And thus
they wind them up by acts of their own spirit, and run them out to the end of
their own workings; when alas, these desires of desires, and the spining of
such fine threads in divinity, are not strong enough to bind up a broken
spirit: This is but the broken work of a soul; for how many have desired to
enter in and have not been able? Nay, Who is there not that have a desire? All
the world of common believers are carried on by this principle of a desire. We
see now the vanity of such reasonings with a soul troubled for sin, and
questioning the truth of the spiritual work in themselves: Such kind of
arguing may give some hints to the soul that has the Spirit of God in it, and
some spiritual actings to pacify and persuade it a while, because it finds
something in it self agreeable to such a discourse; but these are too narrow
and weak to bear up the burden of sin, and legal terrors; like the bottom and
point of a top, which being so small, may for some time that it is in motion
bear up the body of the top as we see; but when the motion is done, the top
falls having nothing proportionable to support it: So the soul turns upon some
hints of comfort a while, but flattens again. And this is the furthest and
strongest satisfaction the discourse of such Divines can give; yet I despise
them not in this Light they have, so they contend not against the more glorious
light of truth; but the Lord (if he please) reveal more unto them. But you will
say, how will you deal then with a soul thus puzzled; and questioning? I
answer, I shall not dare to place them on any bottom of their own
righteousness, or to satisfy themselves by something only in themselves; that
were to take the disease for the Physician, and to give them no ointment but
blood of their own wound to heal them; nor should I take that other way which
many do that are of this legal strain too, as to apply promises to them first,
which many times instead of drawing the soul to Christ, puts it further off,
bringing some conditions, which the soul questioning in themselves, dares not
meddle with before it be prepared by Christ and his freeness. But you will
say, what way will you take then? I answer, That way which the Scriptures
reveal to me; First, the laying down, and establishing, and bringing forth a
perfect righteousness, even the righteousness of Christ, and then showing
forth the way of common right and interest to this righteousness, which is
contained in the freest promises for bringing souls to close with and partake
of this perfection, and righteousness; more plainly thus; Christ crucified is
the foundation, and cornerstone, and rock, for sinners. The righteousness of
this Christ is every way perfect and complete: This righteousness is that
which has taken away the sins of the world, so as no sin is now to be
satisfied for, nor no new righteousness to be wrought by any for salvation;
only, all that will be saved are to believe their interest and right in this
righteousness and already purchased salvation: And for the way of coming by a
right or purchasing an interest in this righteousness or salvation; it is held
out without price or works in the freest, clearest promises of salvation to
sinners only, for taking and receiving, and believing in, all being wrought to
our hands: So us this is as good a ground for one to believe on as another,
without exception; and in this way of salvation, to believe is life eternal,
and not to believe is condemnation; He that believes has everlasting life,
and he that believes not is condemned; and this being a Scripture way, I would
leave the soul upon these principles, and under this Commandment, Believe on
the Lord Jesus Christ; for this is the Commandment that ye believe on his Son,
etc.

But you will say, what if a soul answer, I cannot believe, I am not elected? I
shall answer then to such a soul thus, You are bound to believe, because it is
a Commandment, and you are not to make an objection from election or
reprobation, against your believing; for that were to set one part of the truth
against the other: And thus you misinterpret both God and his Word.

But you will say, How if a soul answer, I cannot believe for all this? I
answer, This being a Scripture-way, and the clearest way revealed to salvation,
I shall commend such to the Lord, who is the only Author and finisher of
Faith, Heb. 12.2. And for establishing souls upon any works of their own, as a
way, means, or ground of assurance, as that upon such a measure of repentance
or obedience, they may believe by, I dare not deal in any such way of our own
righteousness, because I find no infallible mark in any thing of our own
sanctification, save in a lower way of persuasion, or motive I find in the Old
or New Testament scarce any believer that stood the surest, but they had some
cause through sin and corruption, and that unregenerate law in their members to
suspect their righteousness, as David, and Peter, and Paul, etc. And likewise
the stream of the Word runs all against our own righteousness. But you will
say, What are all the diverse Scriptures which set us upon trial and examination
of our says and works? I answer, There is another kind of analogy and rule to
interpret these by more principal, and not of assurance for salvation. These
are rather marks for others, then our selves, to know us by; as in the Epistles
of John and James, etc. And for those other few Scriptures they are rather to
be interpreted to the testimony of the Spirit of God witnessing and persuading,
then to the mixed, spiritually carnal works of our obedience and holiness,
which can give but a mixed act of assurance at the best, being of a mixed
nature of flesh and spirit. But you will say, What way of assurance would you
commend to a soul thus troubled? I answer, Christ in the Word and Promise to
believe in for assurance. This was that way the Lord himself commended to his
Disciples, as to Peter, when he knew he should deny him, and foretold him of
it, and knew how it would discourage him and wound him; yet he puts not Peter
to this course, saying, Peter, thou art an holy, obedient, loving Apostle;
remember this to comfort thy self under thy denial: But he says, Peter, I have
prayed for thee, that thy faith fail not. And thus he laid him in an
encouragement from a word or promise to believe by, and not from any thing in
himself; and so to his Disciples when he was to leave them, he laid them not in
assurances thus, O my Disciples, though I am from you, yet ye have been thus
and thus penitent, humble, loving, obedient; and let this be your ground and
assurance when I am gone: But he lays in words and promises, You believe in
God, believe also in me, I will s^^d the Comforter, and I will see you again:
And these are the grounds for their assurance to believe by; and this was
Abraham's way, He believed the promise in hope against hope: And so all that
walk in the steps of the faith of our father Abraham.

II. The unstablenesse of such as are not converted in a pure Gospel-way.
I observe, that the calling and conversion which souls have in a
legally-Gospel-way, not from a pure and clear apprehension of Jesus Christ
revealed in the Gospel, Covenant, or Promises, though there may be truth in
such a calling, and Christ received, yet the manner being not in the way of
pure Gospel Dispensation, the soul may be exceedingly puzzled and perplexed; so
though Christ may be truly there, yet being not in a Gospel-form, but a legal,
the soul may mistake and lose the knowledge of Christ, as when Christ was in
the habit of a Gardener, many knew him not, and when he walked with the two
Disciples to Emans, they knew him not. And thus many under the Law, though they
had Christ as truly then as now, yet not in that form, not manifested in the
flesh, and the free Promises, as now: And Christ observes this to his
Disciples, Ye believe in God, says he, implying how their Faith was more
carried out to God as then, then to himself; and therefore he adds, Believe
also in me, that is, Now let me manifested in the flesh be the truth whom you
believe.

III. The several ways which the Lord makes use on to salvation.
I observe, That the Lord does improve many ways and means to bring a soul
under the power of the Gospel, as several accidents and occasions, though those
things are not properly or principally to be called the ministry of Christ, or
the Gospel-Ordinance for revealing Jesus Christ; but they are like the Chariot
in which the Eunuch rid, which was only an outward accommodation to his
receiving Christ; but the proper and more immediate means, was the Book of the
Prophets which he had with him in his Chariot. We see Paul was by a sudden
accident brought into a way for the Gospel, to have the free passage to his
soul; nor did that accident or occasion serve as the means of his receiving
Christ, but Ananias was sent to him, the means instituted by the Lord to be a
way of conveying the power of Christ upon his soul. Faith comes by hearing,
and the Gospel is that Power of God unto salvation, and the Spirit comes by the
preaching of Faith.

IV. The want of pure Gospel knowledge in Jesus Christ, is the cause of many
distractions in believers.
I observe, When the Lord sends the light of Jesus Christ into a soul that has
formerly been in darkness, and in the shadow of death, then it begins to see
its corruptions and lusts; and if there were any master-sin, or chief-sin which
had dominion, as lust in some, pride in others, revenge in others, worldly
mindedness in others, then the soul presently is pricked upon the discovery of
that, and there is a remorse and perplexity in the soul: They in the Acts,
after Peter had laid open their sin of shedding the blood of Christ, were
pricked to the heart for it, and were inwardly troubled, and wounded, saying,
Men and Brethren what shall we do? And if there be not a clear understanding of
Jesus Christ and the Gospel, the soul thus wounded, will groan under many legal
convictions, and the soul will hardly distinguish its condition from a worse or
more miserable, even that of sorrowing under the power of the Law. Had not
Peter been assured of the love of Christ, and had his word that his faith
should not fail; his tears, and Judas sorrowing, had been all of one color and
kind, to the present and not clearly enlightened apprehension: as Joseph, who
till he had opened himself to his Brethren, was mistaken by them for a cruel
and a harsh Governor; but when they saw it was their Brother Joseph, O what
meltings and embracings were then amongst them! Many a soul convinced by that
Spirit which Christ has sent to reprovo the world of sin, walks sadly under
the wound or burden, not knowing the nature or condition of such a spiritual
wound; and many Preachers like some Chirurgions who keep their Patients from
healing too soon, that they may make the cure the more admired, do accordingly
keep such souls with their wounds open; and if they power in any thing, it is
rather Wine then Oil, rather something of the Law then the Gospel; so as they
are not only long in healing and getting peace through Jesus Christ: But they
carry a scar with them still, and are as it were lame in their consciences a
long time after, like some poor Patients that have had as much of the sound
flesh cut a way as the rotten, and so have been healed, though but to a bodily
infirmity all their life time. All this is for want of the knowledge of the
Spirit of Adoption being in such a soul, and the spirits workings in the clear
apprehensions of Christ, (as it is not enough to enlighten the world that there
is a Sun, but there must be a clear body of Air for this Sun to shine through)
and of the application of Gospel-promises, of persuading to faith and believing
in Jesus Christ for the pardon of sin, which settle, and assure, and establish
a soul more; and the light that comes in through such Gospel-applications, and
power, will exceedingly melt a soul, and wound a soul: But they are the
woundings and meltings of love, and the Spirit of Adoption, not of fear and
bondage, but of power, love, and of a sound minds. Mary wept, and washed
Christ's feet; Peter wept bitterly, not in fear, but in love; witness her Box
of Ointment, and Peter's profession, Lord, thou know I love thee. The
passions which this Gospel-way works in the soul, are such as bring
inlargements, and flowings, and powrings out of Spirit: But the passions which
the Law works, bring in a straightning, a contraction, or gathering up, or
narrowness into the Spirit; and therefore it is called bondage and fear.

V. The opening Jesus Christ in the Gospel, is the best and surest way to deal
with sinners.
I observe, They that are wounded for sin and are enlightened to discern it, and
are so wrought on by the spirit as to feel and be sensible of it, being taken
into Covenant with God in Christ, and their stony heart taken out, and yet dark
in the purer conceivings of the Gospel; such are ready rather to put away
Gospel-promises, then receive them, and imagine themselves rather in fitness
for judgment, then mercy or grace: And then if Preachers run to the Law in
their dealing with such souls for their through humiliation, as they say or
pretend, and not to the Gospel, and Faith in Jesus Christ; they bring fire, and
not water to quench them, and so kindle them the more; and setting the
everlasting burnings of the Law before their souls, put them all into a
spiritual fla^m and vexation. Nathan dealt otherwise with David, though under
the Old Testament, where there was more privilege for the Law, 2 Samuel 12.13. I
have sinned (says David:) The Lord has put away thy sin (says Nathan.) This
is as Solomon says, To give strong drink to him that is ready to pe^ish, and
wine unto those that be of an heavy heart, Prove. 13.6. If any one sin, says
John, we have an Advocate with the Father, Christ Jesus the righteous. Here is
Gospel applied to the very sin, and the Physician brought home to the sick, and
Jesus Christ brought to the very gates of a groaning spirit.

I know the Divinity of some former ages to these present times, made up all
their receipts for distempered souls of so much Law, and so much Gospel, and
usually but a grane or dram of Gospel to a pound of Law; not being then clear
enough in judgment, to unmingle things which Antichrist had confounded and put
together, as the two Testaments, and two Covenants, and not rightly discerning
Christ's manner or way of preaching, and the Apostles, both in their holding
forth Law and Gospel. Now we know that the Apostle says, Received ye the
Spirit by the preaching of the Law, or the preaching of Faith? Gal. 3.2. And
therefore, they that would make the Law the Ministry of life, and of the
spirit, are not of such a spiritual discerning as the Lord has now revealed:
and such put a soul upon a legal method of conversion, or coming to Christ.
First, they must be kept so long under the Law for humiliation, and contrition,
and confession, and then brought to the Gospel, as many Books and Teachers do:
when as the Law is not of any power to infuse such gracious passions into the
soul as the Gospel calls for. Blessed are they that mourn, and they that are
poor: But this is not the mourning spirit under the Law, nor the poor spirit
under the curse of the Law for sin: But the Gospel-mournings, and
Gospel-poverty, even mournings of love, like the groanings of the Turtle, Cant.
2.12. If they be only such as the Law brings forth, and presses the soul into,
they are no better then the contritions of Esau and Judas; but if they be such
as the Law or Spirit of Jesus Christ, or the Law of life works in the soul,
then they are of a more spiritual and precious nature; but this is from the
Gospel and the preaching of Faith. What Law did Peter preach to Cornelius, or
Philip to the Eunuch, or Ananias to Paul, or Paul to the Jailer, and his
household, but only Jesus Christ? nor can you find the Law, I mean the Law in
its form, or Covenant, preached, but to those that were under the Law, and
pretended to stand by the Law, and to set up a righteousness by the Law, as
the Pharisees and Jews, etc. Though in all this, I esteem no less of the Law
then any other, as it was a Law for the people of God under Moses, and has
something of the Image of God in it: But now we are under a better Law, a more
excellent Law, and a more spiritual Commandment. Even that Law which was but a
few single beams of righteousness, even ten, but a decalogue of
righteousness; yet now in the Gospel, the righteousness of God is brought
forth in more glorious and spiritual Commandments; and for ten, there are
scores; and with this righteousness of God, the righteousness of Christ is
brought forth, which makes the condition of Gods people a blessed condition; so
as they stand righteous now in all their obedience to the righteousness of
God, which is the more pure, transcending, and excellent Law of the
Commandments of the Gospel, or the more perfect Rule of the righteousness of
God in the righteousness of Christ; so as the New Testament is both the Law
and Gospel, or the righteousness of God and Christ more excellently
manifested. Do we therefore make void the Law by the preaching of Faith? Yea,
We establish the Law, Christ being the end of the Law for righteousness.

VI. A further opening of the doubtings of a soul not clearly discerning the
power of the Gospel.
I observe, A soul that is not informed by a pure Gospel Light, nor apprehends
not clearly the way of Faith, of Christ, and the Promises, and the glory of the
New Testament, is ever unsettled, unstable, full of fears, doubtings,
distractions, questioning; and the more such a soul is reasoned with concerning
their condition, the more they question the truth of every spiritual working in
them; and this comes from the power of the Law still upon their consciences,
which is more powerful to convince and accuse them, then the Gospel is to
excuse or acquit them, having more of the ministry of condemnation before
them, or in their eye, then of the ministry of life, and Jesus Christ; and
Satan he takes advantage of their legal condition, and stirs up jealousies and
doubts; and so much as there is of legal apprehensions, so much there is to
hinder the bringing in of the Kingdom of God into the soul, which is not only
righteousness, but peace and joy; and therefore under the Old Testament, where
they saw the Blood of Christ only, through the blood of Bulls and Goats, and
heard the Apostles afar off in the Prophets, and were brought to the Mountain
that smoaked, they lived in much bondage, and being under the Law till the
fullness of time that the Seed came, were like servants, though they were heirs
too; the heir as the Apostle says, then differing nothing from a servant,
though he was lord of all.

There is nothing but the taking in of the Law, and accusings or condemnations
of it, which can trouble the peace and quiet of any soul; for where there is no
law, there is no transgression, and where there is no transgression, there is
no trouble for sin, all trouble arising from the obligement of the Law, which
demands a satisfaction of the soul for the breach of it, and such a
satisfaction which the soul knows it cannot give, and thereby remains unquiet
like a debtor that has nothing to pay, and the Law too being naturally in the
soul, as the Apostle says, the conscience accusing or else excusing: It is no
marvel that such souls should be troubled for sin, and unpacified, the Law
having such a party and engagement already within them; which holding an
agreement with the Law in Tables or Letters of Stone, must needs work strongly
upon the spirits of such as are but weakly and faintly enlightened, and are not
furnished with Gospel enough to answer the indictments, the convictions, the
terrors, the curses which the Law b^ings; therefore all the power of Christ,
and the Gospel, is to be applied to raise up such souls from under the power of
those stones and burdens which the Law would ^oll upon them: Such are to have
more Gospel then ordinary applied, because they have so much Law naturally
within them. Such are to know, they are not now under the Law, but under Grace;
and the Law has no more dominion over them, and they are dead unto that
Husband, and they are now upon a new foundation, Jesus Christ himself being the
chief cornerstone; and we should say to such, Let not your hearts be troubled,
ye believe in God, believe also in Jesus Christ.

VII. The working of the Spirit of Christ in a soul though not so clearly
enlightened.
I observe, That in a soul though legally enlightened, or receiving Christ, yet
there are certain Gospel-workings, whereby it will appear that Jesus Christ is
there.

1. There is a closing or fastening, or clasping about Christ in the Promises of
the Gospel, especially some of the freest and fullest of Grace; for such souls
can only find some freedom of going out to Christ in them, as some who
delights most in men of easiest and hearty behavior, and can sooner make a
friend of them then any other; and if there be but any promises with the least
condition of repentance, etc. they dare not meddle with such, suspecting
themselves not enough prepared for them, and suspecting the promises like
strangers of too narrow behaviors for them to be familiar with, like some
modest homely Maid that is unwilling to go abroad into company of greater
quality then her self, lest she should not be well thought on, or received as
too mean or ill-bred for their society: So are the souls of such as cannot
close with the conditional promises.

2. There is in such, some breathings of soul to God, some flowings out of
Spirit, some meltings of heart in prayer and dispositions; like a birth newly
quickened, where there are many motions of life, so where Christ is new formed;
like a Lock in tune, where there is in every wheel put turnings and stirrings.
My beloved, says the Spouse, put in his hand by the hole of the door, and my
bowels were moved for him. I rose up to open to my beloved, and my hands
dropped with Myrrh, and my fingers with sweet smelling Myrrh upon the handles
of the lock.

3. There is in such, a secret working against sin and lust, or corruption; the
spirit that is come in, is a pure, a clean, an holy spirit; and all the motions
and operations of it, are to make the soul and body clean, and spiritual; as
they that are of a neat and finer disposition, they will not live in a room
unswept, and ungarnished: I have put off my coat, says the Spouse; how shall I
put it on? I have washed my feet; how shall I defile them? And he that has
this hope, says the Apostle, purifieth himself, even as he is pure; and having
received such promises, there will be a cleansing themselves from all
filthiness, both of flesh and spirit: What communion has light with darkness?

4. There is in such, some acts of Communion with God in his several
Ordinances, and with the Spirit, and Christ; such will find a power and
efficacy, a relish and sweetness, a stirring and awakening in the Word
preached, in prayer, in spiritual conference, in every Ordinance, which others
that are yet merely carnal, do not experience: though it fares often with such,
as with Samuel when he was young, and the Lord called him; he thought it had
been Eli that had spoken; he was not acquainted with the voice and speakings of
the Spirit, or of God: So the souls of such, know not the Word not Spirit in
their souls many times; the voice of Christ is not heard for the voice of
Moses; nor the voice of Grace for the voice of the Law; and they know not when
the Lord breathes or comes as Eliah, whether in the wind or in the fire, when
as he is in the still and small voice of the Gospel; there are many things
which hinder such in their discernings and perceivings of the Spirit of Christ;
not only things without, as the Law, etc. but something within, the Passions
and legalnesse of their own spirits, which troubles both their spiritual
hearing and seeing; and that makes many souls walk so little in the Spirit, and
be at such a loss in their Communion with God; and all this is for want of
bringing the soul more out into the glory of the Gospel, being called the
Ministration which exceeds in glory, till with open face they behold, as in a
glass, the glory of the Lord; Which glory would exceedingly force away the
darkness, and clouds of ignorance, fears and doubts from the soul, which like
smoke arises from the fire and kindling of the Law, in weak believers. We know
green wood with any fire in it will set all the room on a smoke; so believers
whose spiritual Principles are but green, and have any sparks of the Law and
the curse for sin kindling in them, will be fuller of smoke then light;
therefore they are called smoking flax. I will not quench the smoking flax.

CHAP. III. Of the Parties falling into the same sins in some measure which
they had lived in, in their unregenerate estate, from whence all their late
bondage has been.
Quest. I Pray relate to me how long you continued in your backsliding, till
the Lord let you see it to the terror of your soul as you thought?

Answ. No long time; for I saw it shortly after; then I had great terrors
almost in a despairing way, and then I questioned all my assurances and
evidences of Gods love I had, and promises I had received.

Then I went to my friend the Preacher, full of terror; who desired to know
the cause, and I told him.

Then he asked me how it came to be so with me, I told him, through violence of
temptation and natural corruption.

He told me, the sin was not mine, but so far as I consented; but that could
not satisfy me.

He asked me, If God were not able to forgive it; I told him, I questioned not
Gods ability, but his will.

I desired some particular instances of him of any falling into the same sin
again. I knew the Saints of God had fallen into diverse great sins, but not into
the same: He then alleged to me that of the Prophet of back sliding Israel;
but because he could not clear to me that it was the same sin, I was not
comforted by it. Many and diverse promises, both he and all the rest applied
unto me; I was sometimes refreshed, yet but for a while.

They chid me oftentimes, and said, I looked for such a measure of grace, which
I did not, but the truth of grace in me; and indeed they never told me of any
promises, but still there was such qualifications in them as I questioned all.

Quest. It seems then this was your case, You could not persuade your self of
the truth of your light, because of your returning to sin; nor find such
conditions in your self, upon which you could rightly as you thought, apply the
promises. I pray let me know some particular temptations you have had, if you
think good?

Answ. I was tempted to make away my self, lest the longer I lived, the more I
should dishonor Religion.

Satan came again to me, to eat something with pins in it, to choke my self,
that it might not appear how I died; which I did; but, in mercy, I found no
harm; the Lord prevented it, I know not how.

Many times I have been tempted by diverse means to destroy my self, but was
still prevented by several providence.

I have been much tempted to keep alone: The temptations I had, came in always
most violently, and furiously; I could scarce hold, I was not my self.

The Lord once when I thought to have stabbed my self, sent in a wicked fellow,
who brought a Book and read, by which I was mercifully prevented.

I found still in all my temptations I was prevented by some providence, and
upheld.

If in the temptation, I could but get to consider once, then it ended; and in
this course I have lived and continued most.

OBSERVATIONS.
I. The danger of placing assurance most in mortification of sin.
I Observe, That Satan does tempt our natural corruption exceedingly to the
same sins which have reigned most in us in the times of our unregenerate
condition; for by that, he may the more easily draw us to unbeleef, and
persuade us against the love of God in Christ, and to question our calling,
because we are naturally apt to take measure of our graces and Gods love to us,
first, by the mortification of sin in us, and dying to former lusts; and if we
find that otherwise then we would, we presently let go our hold upon the
promises, and slaken our believing, and persuade our selves that because it is
thus and thus with us, and corruption quickening again, we were deceived in our
selves, and that sure the Spirit was never in us, because we find some goings
back, and fallings again in the same way we did at first. I confess in natural
causes, and things, the outward working and effects do give the best assurance
concerning the truth of their essence or being; but that is not the only way
of spiritual assurances; they are more by way of word and promise, then work
and operation. Abraham believed in hope against hope, Romans 4.

II. The danger of drawing our comforts most from the change in the outward man.
I observe, That the soul naturally examines its spiritual state or condition
by calling to mind former ways, and times of uncleanness, and by comparing
times and seasons, the latter with the former; and the assurances and comforts
of many, are raised upon this very foundation of comparison: Therefore if Satan
can force them or entice them into any part of the former conversation, he
knows he can exceedingly puzzle and perplex them, and keep them long under
bondage. I know the Apostle sets forth the Churches state of Corinth, etc. by
comparing times; Such were some of you, but ye are washed, etc. But this is not
by way of putting true believers upon a method for assurance; but in describing
and comparing the outward state of the Church Way with what they were before.
And hence it is, that relapsing and fallings again into the same sins, do bring
such anguish and terror upon such souls, even almost to confusion of face;
nay, he makes many souls by this one snare, go desperately forward to sin upon a
new score or tally; as if it were in vain for them to persuade themselves of
Christ or the love of God, but rather to sin it out in this life, not
considering that the Blood of Christ cleanses us from all sin, 1 John 1.7. and
that if we sin, we have an Advocate with the Father, 1 John 2.1. but go upon an
empty and half despairing belief for salvation, like some bankrupts, that
having once broken, ran desperately into more and more debt; and finding
themselves unable to discharge some, they take no care for any; as they who
said, It is vain to serve God, and what profit is it that we have kept his
Ordinance? Mal. 3.

III. The spiritual condition in this life, more in being justified from sin,
then cleansed from sin.
I observe likewise, That a soul which is once brought into these entanglements
of backslidings, and such as have no clear Gospel Light nor understanding to
undeceive and unwinde themselves, fall under very sad temptations at length: For
whither may not Satan roll such a poor soul that is tumbling down the Hill
already? And they that weigh their state of grace only in the scale of
mortification of sin, as it is commonly taken for dying to particular acts,
cannot be so infallibly or certainly persuaded, as they that place their
assurance most in Christ, in the free promises, because sin has ever a
stronger side in us then the spirit; And in this life, the sin is more taken
away then the lust, and our blessedness is more in having the curse of it
removed, then the corruption; and our justification is more glorious then our
sanctification, and our forgiveness from sin, more then our cleansing from
sin. For the just shall live by Faith, which is not a life by sense and
sanctification merely, but a life by believing for life in another, in Christ;
and therefore our life is said to be hid with Christ, and Christ is called our
life; when Christ who is our life, etc. I speak now to the weak and wounded
believers for sin, not to the carnal and unregenerate in sin.

IV. The greatest temptations upon sinning in an enlightened condition.
I observe, That the temptations of self-murdering and self-destroying, are
much from an inward perplexity and restlessenesse of soul for sin in an
enlightened condition, so as a wounded spirit who can bear? And that a yielding
up the soul to the least violence of temptations is very dangerous; and that
the fury of temptations is best allayed by considering and gaining time upon
the temptation, and not closing too soon. These are the fiery darts the Apostle
speaks off; Darts, because they come as shot into the soul, and fiery, as
enflaming the spirit. Now the spirit of God is a more pure, peaceable, and
easy to be entreated spirit, and the workings of it more gracious; temptations
being so quick, violent, and raging, are best resisted in Christ's own way and
method; he did not stand harkening and parleying, but applied the Word
presently in his own power against them; It is written, thus and thus. And in
the Apostles way, Resist the devil and he will flee from you; neither give
place to the devil. And amongst all the spiritual Artillery, the shield of
Faith is the strongest; and we may sooner believe Satan from us, and believe
unto victory, and conquering through Christ, In whom we are more then
conquerours, as the Apostle says, then by reasoning or arguing; for then we
fight against a temptation in our own power; but, by believing, in Christ's
power.

V. That backsliding or relapsing is much mistaken, and mortification of sin,
of the more mystical mortification believers have.
I observe, That this one mistake in some Preachers and people, has deceived
many; That a soul converted, does scarce fall back into the same sin; and that
such a fall or relapse is a ground for us to question all.

Now we must know, that the spring and fount^in from whence that sin flows
which was a powerful sin in the unregenerate state, is lust, or the law in the
members, or the body of sin, or the flesh; there are all these, and more names
for sinful nature: Now the converting a soul to Christ, does not heal this
fountain of sinful nature wholly, nor take it away quite; but there is still a
power in the flesh lusting against the spirit: so as it is both possible and
easy for the same particular sin or act of corruption, to break out and appear
upon the juncture of the same temptations, and Gods taking off for a time his
power of restraint and spirit. We know corruption may gather strength in the
regenerate ones, and so the fountain may bubble at the same place after
conversion as before.

Conversion takes not away corruption from the nature of man, but ingrafts or
plants in a new nature of spirit into the nature of man, which weakens and
impairs and works out the flesh; and the inward growing of the new man, causes
a perishing of the outward man; and we being now in the second Adam who is the
quickening Spirit, the old man or Adam is put off daily with his former lusts;
yet not so, but that we may be much lost in our account, as many are; for there
is great deceitfulness in mortification of sin as it is commonly taken; for
the not actings of sin, or conceivings of lust, is not pure mortification;
because there may be lust or sinful nature; and yet that lust through the power
of some Law, Covenant, Promise, or Legal watchfulness, as is usual with some
under Legal conversion, may be so kept under, that it breaks not out, and yet
it is there; as in the paring of the nails, or cutting of the hair, or pruning
of the tree, there is a cutting off, but not a cutting out, nor an eradicating
or rooting up of such a nature; and so long there may be a breaking out, a
springing a gain; and so in corruption or sinful nature: So as I conceive it is
rather tradition then truth, that converted persons can scarce relapse into the
same particular sin; yet we have been told of a strange power which contrition
or repentance brings with it to the melting away the former sin quite, or at
least, to lay in such a spiritual restraint upon the soul, that it shall scarce
ever commit the particular sin of its unregenerate state again. For my part, I
like the notion well, if it did not cast a snare upon souls that are weak and
of a backsliding nature.

As for example, If one ride through a stony way where he has often fallen, his false may make him ride more watchfully, and carefully; but they cannot secure
him against falling again.

But surely, mortification of sin is not purely understood; it is not the
restraint or legal watchfulness over a particular sin in which many a Papist
as well as legal Professors abound; and so a preserving the soul by a
carnally-spiritual carfulness from tha^ sin, as a Keeper that has a Lion in
a chain who is only tame, because he cannot break out; nor is it only a
spiritual change or transforming power the spirit brings with it into our
nature, but it is a more spiritual thing; yet it is an implanting or embodying
with Christ in the fellowship of his sufferings, passion, death, and
resurrection; and it is a dying to the dominion of sin, more then to the nature
of sin, even to the sting, and strength of sin, which is the Law, as the
Apostle says: For if the not acting such or such a sin, or the
spiritually-carnal change, as the sanctification of this life is, there being
no pure in dwelling inherent righteousness in any, were pure mortification:
Then not only your Popish Anchorites, or Eremites would excel, who live in
their Cell and Wilderness, and keep their corruptions, as Jaylours keep their
prisoners in Irons and Grates, that they break not out and wander so abroad as
other men's corruptions that have more liberty; and yet they are as bad as the
rest, as these in the prison, who are as very thieves in the dungeon, as they
that are robbing by the highway.

But further, there would be something of our sanctification, which we might
call righteousness; and so in time be as confident, as they that will not lose
the merit of their own works.

I speak here, you see, to further and advance a Gospel-mortification, or a
dying to sin in the power and life of Christ, as well as the spiritual nature
or new man: But I would not have the power of mortification and conversion from
sin, mistaken to be in the not acting such or such a particular sin which was
acted before, or merely in the parti-colored change or inchoative
sanctification only; we know what an overvaluing of that has brought, because
such a mortification is too low and legal for pure believers; but in that
implantation and mystical ingrasting the soul into the glorious fellowship of
Christ his death, etc. As for instance, We put not a man's living and excellency
of reason in an outward motion of the body, or some one or two reasonable words
spoken, but in the life, and soul, and glorious spirit within him. We put not
the glory of the light in the Windows or panes of Glass where it shines, and
clearly too: but in the body of the Sun, the Fountain of light below; So pure
and spiritual mortification, is radically or principally in our fellowship and
union with him who killed sin in our nature in the body; and thus we are
spiritually and mystically dead to sin, and that corruption which is within us,
will not be able to live long under the power of such a spiritual death and
nature as Christ's is, but will waste and die daily, though still pure
mortification consists not principally in the not indwelling of corruption, but
in our implantation into fellowship with Christ; for if such dying of
corruption were true mortification, then they that are dead in the Grave and
can sin no more actually, or they that are on their sick bed and disabled to
former sins, were mortified persons: No, it is an higher mystery to be
mortified to sin, then to not sin or not act corruption, or to be spiritually
changed by the spirit, or spiritual nature within; nor can any interpret, as if
they that were thus spiritually mortified, need not strive against sin or the
strength, or the growing of it in the flesh or nature: No, that were a
contradiction, and is an impossibility; for the cherishing corruption and
fomenting or nourishing sinful nature, will no more stand with such ^
spiritually, mystically mortified believer, then liberty to sin will stand with
assurance of pardon for sin in the fame Child of God. Show me any taken into
the fellowship of Christ's death, that can make such provision for sin: I speak
not of some particular acts, and that is the reason we read in Scriptures of so
little conversation in sin, or continuing in sin in the Saints and former
believers; nor do the Scriptures put the form of sin or wickedness upon
particular acts of sin, calling David an evil man for his uncleanness, or Job
for his passions, or Moses for his unbeleef, or Peter for his denial, but upon
sinful and unregenerate nature, as in Cain, Esau, Jeroboam, Ahab, Judas; such
are wicked men in the Scriptures account, who are wicked by nature, not from
any particular action. A Tree is not evil, because it bears evil fruit, but
because it is naturally an evil Tree.

The sum of the mystery of mortification of sin in a believer.
In a word, to gather up this mystery of mortification of sin into a few plain
words, that it may be more clear, both to the comforting weak believers that
are wounded for sin; and to help all believers more powerfully against sin, in
the mortifying of it.

1. First let this be considered, That mortification of sin is not in the not
committing a sin; for then children, and civilly-moral men were mortified
persons.

2. That the fountain of sin or sinful nature, is not wholly taken away by the
spiritual nature begun in regeneration or the new birth.

3. That pure mortification of sin, is not in the mere absence of the body of
sin; for then, dead or sick men were mortified persons.

4. That the pure spiritual and mystical fountain of the mortification of sin,
is the being planted together in the likeness of Christ's death, our old man
being crucified with him, Romans 6.6. Our union with Christ, our head, our
righteousness, our Vine.

Now from these things thus considered, we may raise up this consideration
concerning mortification of sin,

That they who are mystically and spiritually planted into Christ, are
partakers of the power of his death, which that highest, purest, and most
mystical mortification that any have; and with this there goes a spiritual
power, transforming and changing the whole man from former lusts; and this
latter is called a putting on of the new man, and a being renewed in spirit and
in mind, and a putting off the old man which is corrupt, Ephesians. 4.22, 23.
Coloss. 3.10.

Now that power wherein we are perfectly mortified, is our union with Christ,
our being planted in the fellowship of his death, etc. and that wherein we are
imperfectly, or in part mortified, is in that transformed nature, or spiritual
nature, the body of sin being in a believer more or less, till he lay down
this body, and take it up a more glorious one. So as a believer is to consider
himself dead to sin only in the fellowship of Christ's death mystically, and to
consider himself only dying to sin in his own nature spiritually; so as in
Christ he is only complete, and in himself imperfect at the best. We are
complete in him, says the Apostle, Coloss. 2.10. Yet there is such ^ power,
and efficacy, and mighty working in this mystical union and fellowship with
Christ, that he shall find sin dying in him from this, the spirit working most
in the virtue of this; this being like the spice or the spirit it in the wine
that makes it powerful and quick: Therefore we are said to be risen with Christ
and to die with Christ, and our life to be hid in Christ, Coloss. 3.1, 2, 3.
Christ being the life, power, virtue, and energy of the spirit; and the more of
Christ we take against sin, the greater and surer will our Victory against
corruption and sin be: And this would be well observed by those that are a
little legally biassed, or carried to mortify sin by vows, promises, shunning
occasions, removing temptations, strictness and severity in duties, fear of
hell and judgments, scarce rising so high for their mortification as Christ.

Now these in themselves are but empty, weak means of prevailing against sin,
like the mighty sails of a ship without either wind or tide; many of those do
well in their place and order, like Oars in a Boat, which though it be carried
with the tide, if well managed, they may help it to go the faster; as that of
shunning occasions, strictness and severity in duties, and watchfulness: But
it is Christ crucified, which is the power of all, and in all; it is Christ
lifted up as Moses lifted up the Serpent, which strikes in more soundness into
the wounded beholder, then any other merely legal way or experiment, wherein
many believers have toyled and carnally fished all their time for power over
some corruptions; and like Peter and the rest, have caught little or nothing,
because Jesus Christ was not in the company.

There is danger in putting too much upon the sin of relapsing or backsliding
in believers.
To conclude, I would have men tender now they make conversion such a
mortification to that particular sin or act which was the sin of the
unregenerate condition, lest while they lay down a law to prevent a sinning
again, or a second wounding by the same sin, they make that sin if committed
again, as it may be, wound the believer more, even to the danger of unbeleef;
then which, there cannot be a greater to hinder true mortification; because
that any unbeleef keeps the soul and Christ as it were asunder, and from
closing in the souls own apprehension; and all that time, there can be little
power brought home from Christ by Faith against that sin: My reasons are these:

1. Because that sinful nature is not wholly healed in this life; so there
remains a natural inclination to that particular sin as well as another; nay
rather, because nature is more biased toward it then any other.

2. The wound, pricking, or sorrow that any soul enlightened by Jesus Christ,
feels for that sin, is not of such an exceeding or rather infinite virtue, as
to abolish it, or to lay in such a perpetual impression upon the soul, that the
soul should live under the image of that remorse and wound, and so never dare
or adventure to commit it again. I find no such lasting and continuing, and
firm or through work in the spiritual motions, operations, and impressions, but
by degrees; Christ upbraided his Disciples how soon their hearts were hardened;
and we find the spiritual affection and resolution of Peter, wherein his soul
was raised up on high, wasting and flatting in his denial: The gales and
breathings of the spirit are like the wind, Joh. 3. which makes a thing move
or tremble while the power of the Air is upon it; but as that slakens, or
breaths, so does it.

3. There is no promise that I can find for the present, against the never
committing again such a particular act, or sin which he lived in, in his
unregenerate state. I know there are differences made, and certain works set
down to know a sin by, that is committed in a regenerate state, and before, as
the weakness, and contrary dispositions or reluctance in which it is
committed, (...) Paul implies in Romans 7. etc. Though here, some of these
Divines may be puzzled in this way of their differences too; for take a man in
the strength of natural or common light, living under a powerful word or
Preacher, by which his Candle, as Solomon says, is better lighted then it was,
such a man shall sin against as seeming strong convictions as the other, if not
more.

But by the way, I humbly conceive there are certain dampings of Satan, and
flesh and blood, together with the withdrawings of the Spirit on Gods part,
that will puzzle the best that goes so exactly by marks and sense more then by
Faith; for the way of the spirit is not so gross, and carnal, and discernible,
as the Divinity of former times, and of some of this present age would make it.
It is as hard to trace and find the impressions of the Spirit, as the way of a
bird, as Solomon says, in the Air. The Spirit that is of God, knows only the
way of the Spirit. And the Apostle speaks many things too, as he says, because
of the infirmity of our flesh; We must not therefore form up the things of the
spirit too much for the feelings of flesh and blood: And they that write so of
a regenerate man's estate, and set us down such infallible signs as we meet
with commonly, do take their experiences too low, and carnally, and mistaking
the Allegory, and way of the Word or Scriptures which speaks of things because
of the infirmity of our flesh, write upon spiritual workings, as Philosophers
upon Moral virtues, and do bring down the spirit into the very Allegory, and so
allegorize and incarnate or make fleshly the things of the spirit: And so do
many, both preach and write of regeneration as a work of nature, though not a
natural work.

4. The restraints of the spirit, or that Law of Jesus Christ in the soul, is
not made sure to the soul, as concerning particular acts or sins, but only
concerning the power of sinful nature in general, and the weakening and
destroying of that; Neither are the particular Laws or Commandments in the
Gospel, always in their power upon the soul; but when the Spirit of Christ does
take them, and apply them, and quicken them unto the soul, and put a spiritual
Majesty upon them.

The Conclusion, concerning the mystical and spiritual mortification.
To conclude, The experiences of the spirit in those that are spiritual, are
not all in one degree, some more, some less; and the Law of the spirit in
those that are spiritual, will carry them against the law of sin and flesh;
because it is both contrary to the flesh, and likewise of a spiritual and
transforming nature; and so gathers strength in us against the body of sin, and
is still working it self a greater part, and dominion in us, and fashioning us
like unto Jesus Christ, both in righteousness and true holiness; and the
people of the Lord are very rarely found in the great sins of their
unregenerate estate, especially if they were gross ones, such as the light of
their natural conscience abhors, as well as the purer light of the spirit, as
adultery, murder, etc. then they are doubly armed against them, and so may more
rarely commit them; but if they be such particular acts or sins as are not so
clearly condemned by nature, as some kind of lustings, with hypocrisy,
passion, lying, etc. they may the more easily be committed again, because the
light in nature is but faint or little th^^ opposes them, or which takes part
with the light of the spirit against them.

These things may be sufficient to let us see into the nature of backsliding
in the regenerate ones, and to bind up the broken hearted that are fallen, as
well as to show a more excellent way to keep from falling in the strength of
Jesus Christ.

And therefore let this be written upon the heart, and on the palms of the
hands of all, both wounded and whole believers.

That we are completely or perfectly mortified, or dead to sin, by our being
planted into Christ, and the fellowship of his death: And we are but dying to
sin in that spiritual mortification of our sinful nature in this life: And
therefore let not any particular acts of sin discourage any, considering they
are more excellently dead or mortified in Christ; nor let such an excellent and
glorious way of mortification, tempt any to a neglect of mortification of sin
in the body, no more then the free grace of God in forgiveness of sins ought
to tempt any to take liberty to sin.

Some Scriptures concerning falling away, interpreted.
BUt for all this, there are certain Scriptures which have a sound of much
terror in them against back-sliders, as in Heb. 6.4, 5. For it is impossible
for those that were once enlightened, etc. And in 2 Pet. 2.20, 21. For it had
been better for them not to have known the way; and some others of this sort.

Now, these places are much misinterpreted; for these concern not true
believers, but such as fall from the common enlightening, as in Heb. 6.8. 2 Pet.
2.22. and form of Profession which never had the power of God and the spirit in
it; but so far as to bring them into the number of believers, or Church of
visible Saints, of which sort John speaks on, They went out from us, because
they were not of us; yet the Apostles write this to the Churches, because they
should know that a form of Profession merely, cannot secure any, unless there
be the power; and these Cautions, which do more immediately and directly belong
to Apostates, and false Professors, yet have their use upon true believers and
Saints too, as of quickening and watchfulness, and close walking with God, and
of praise, that they whom the Lord preserves from such Apostasy, may be more
awakened to glorify his free grace upon themselves that stand, as appears in
Heb. 6.9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18. In which places the Apostle
raises up their thoughts into the immutability of the Covenant in which they
now stand, and that they cannot fall away now God having assured it by an Oath.

Yet if any shall object further, But these places show how fair a Profession
one may make, and how far one may go in the way of Christ, and then fall off:
And here the soul may doubt, and say, But, O, am not I one of this kind,
because I am fallen back? But I answer, No soul can make any such application in
true a Gospel-sense, unless it fall or apostate from the Faith of Christ,
which is here spoken on and meant, and not of particular sins, or failings
committed. But against the power of these, and all other places which Satan
would interpret, to the wounding of a spirit; we must know the only remedy is
believing, as Abraham did, in hope against hope; and that (...) can never fall
away that can believe; and no sin can damn it, if it will but believe the
pardon of that sin, which every believer ought to do. This is the Commandment
that ye believe, 1 John 5. Not considering sins singly, and by parts, but
considering himself a righteous person in Christ, and justified when Christ
rose for our justification. For the consideration of the pardon of sin in this
sense that our Divines have commonly taught and preached it, not minding the
spiritual Analogy of the Word, concerning the righteousness of a believer,
breeds all this distraction; for some dealt out Christ's blood as the Pope his
pardons, for one sin after another, never stating a believer in the
righteousness of Christ, and so in a fully pardoned condition, Ephesians. 5.27.
Revel. 1.5.

CHAP. IV. The Party, after such openings of the frame of their spirit, is now
discoursed with upon certain particular Questions.
Quest. LEt me know now in order, what your doubts are, which you think, if you
were satisfied in, your soul could be at peace?

Answ. I question whether I am in Christ.

Quest. What grounds have you to question your being in Christ?

Answ.
1. My falling back into sin. 2. I do not find that change in the whole man.
3. I cannot believe.
Quest. Doubt 1. This is then your first Doubt: That you are not therefore
beloved of God or in Christ, because you fell back again into your sin, so as
you did.

Suppose I prove to you, that no sin can make one less beloved of God, or
less in Christ!

Answ. Then I shall conclude that sin cannot hinder the love of God to my soul.

Quest. I shall prove, that no sin can make one less beloved of God or less
in Christ.

1. The mercies of God are called sure mercies, his love an everlasting love,
his Covenant an everlasting Covenant; I am persuaded, says Paul, that neither
death nor life, nor principalities, nor powers, etc. shall be able to separate
us from the love of God, which is in Christ Jesus our Lord: So then, to whom he
is once merciful he is ever merciful; whom he once loves he ever loves; whom he
once takes into Covenant, he is ever theirs. I am the Lord, I change not.

2. Whom the Father loves, he loves in the Son in whom he is well pleased; and
his Son is always alike beloved of him; the same yesterday and to day, and for
ever; and whom he loves in his Son, he accounts as his son; he is made unto us
righteousness, sanctification, and redemption: So as we being not beloved for
our own sakes, but for the Sons, nothing in us can make God love us less
because he loves us not for our selves, nor any thing in our selves, but in and
through his Son in whom he is well pleased.

3. If God should love us less or more, as we are less or more sinful, then
he should be as man, and as the Son of man; and if believers stood upon these
terms with God, then how are these Scriptures true, He rose again for our
justification, who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods elect? Who shall
condemn? There is no condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus: The
Foundation of God stands sure: He ever lives to make intercession for them.
So as God is ever the same that loves, and his love is as himself, ever the
same; and Christ in whom we are beloved, ever the same.

Doubt 2. Your other doubt is this. You find not a change in the whole man.

What mean you by this change, in your own sense?

Answ. I mean not a perfect change, but a newness in all the powers and parts
of soul and body, which I suppose to be sanctification.

Quest. Is the end which you propound to your self in finding out this change
of the whole man, for grounding any assurance on, of Gods love, and your being
in Christ?

Answ. Yea, because they that are in Christ, are so changed, and there is such
a work wrought; all things are become new, and old things are passed away: Now,
I find not this.

Quest. The scope of your doubt then is, that because you feel not your self
sanctified, you think you are not justified.

I shall allow you your sanctification so far as the Scriptures do, as a lower
motive, and more carnally mixed and uncertain way of persuasion and assurance
of justification. But a little to note to you two sides sadly mistaking one
another in points of this nature: The one cries out against the other, as if
they held we were justified partly from our being sanctified, or from our
works; the other on the contrary, cry out that such would cast out all
sanctification: Now such opinions are in neither of them. Justly in them, I
mean in those of both that can spiritually judge: But there are some
expressions on both parts, which make the one pass for legal Teachers, and the
other for Antinomians; The one giving too much in their Sermons and Books to
Faith and Works, in an unwarrantable jealousy lest holiness should be
slighted; some other less then is fit, lest free grace should lose her due;
and both in an unwarrantable jealousy. And indeed, the latter I must prefer
before the former: For if I must err, I had rather cry down men to exalt
Christ, then Christ to exalt men, though I would do neither; but let both have
their place and order.

In this point I hope in the Lord, to keep from dashing against the Scriptures
either way; the Spirit of the Lord lighting my candle.

The Doubt. Because I feel not my self sanctified, I fear I am not justified.

The Doubt being thus, I shall lay down these particulars.

1. If you suppose that God takes in any part of your faith, repentance, or new
obedience, or sanctification as a ground upon which he justifies or forgives
you, you are clear against the Word; For if it be of works, it is no more of
grace, otherwise work is no more work.

2. It must then be only the evidence of your being justified that you seek
for in your sanctification.

And these two things premised, I now proceed.

1. We must allow any to take in any thing of their sanctification to help
their assurance, which the Word allows, as the Spirit, and the fruits of it,
repentance, mortification of sin, new obedience, etc. But then it must be done
in the Scriptures own cautions and way.

2. The Scriptures lay down these following things.

1. Christ's sanctification to ours, or his true holiness.

2. Faith about our own sanctification.

1. As first, Christ is revealed to be our sanctification: Christ is made unto
us righteousness, sanctification. I live, yet not I, but Christ lives in me.
Ye are Christ's; but ye are sanctified, but ye are justified in the name of the
Lord Jesus, He has quickened us together with Christ: We are his workmanship
created in Christ Jesus unto good works. Jesus Christ himself being the chief
corner stone. Christ may dwell in your hearts by Faith. That new man which
after God is created in righteousness and true holiness. We are members of
his body, of his flesh, and of his bones. And be found in him, not having my
own righteousness. I can do all things through Christ which strengthens me.
That we present every man perfect in Christ Jesus. But Christ is all and in
all. Your life is hid with Christ in God. See Heb. 13.20, 21. All these
Scriptures set forth Christ, the sanctifi^ation and the fullness of his, the
all in all. Christ has believed perfectly, he has repented perfectly, he has
sorrowed for sin perfectly, he has obeyed perfectly, he has mortified sin
perfectly, and all is ours, and we are Christ's, and Christ is Gods.

2. The second thing is faith about our own sanctification. We must believe
more truth of our own graces then we can see or feel, which the Lord has in
his infinite wisdom and dispensation so ordered, that here our life should be
hid with Christ in God; that we should walk by faith and not by sight: So as we
are to believe our repentance true in him, who has repented for us; our
mortifying sin true in him, through whom we are more then conquerours; our new
obedience true in him, who has obeyed for us, and is the end of the Law to
every one that believes; our change of the whole man true in him, who is
righteousness and true holiness. And thus without Faith it is impossible to
please God.

This is the Scripture-assurance for a child of God, or believer, to see every
thing in himself as nothing, and himself every thing in Christ. Faith is the
ground of things hoped for, and the evidence of things unseen, Heb. 11.1.

All other assurances are rotten conclusions from the Word; and such things as
true legal Teachers have invented, not understanding the mystery of the Kingdom
of Christ.

The Scriptures bid you see nothing in your self, or all as nothing. These
Teachers bid you see something in your self; so as the leaving out Christ in
sanctification, is the foundation of all doubts, fears, and distractions: And
he that looks on his repentance on his love, on his humility, on his obedience,
and not in the tincture of the Blood of Christ, must needs believe weakly and
uncomfortably.

But now, to propose some questions to you.

Quest. You say you feel not the change of the whole man.

Answ. Yea.

Quest. Then, I must prove your sanctification to you, not your justification.

Answ. Yea; for they that are justified, are sanctified too, which I cannot
find in my self?

Quest. Will you say a thing is not there because you feel it not there?

Answ. But I do not know it to be there.

Quest. But will you conclude it is not there because you know it not to be
there?

Answ. Nay.

Quest. You say well; for David cried out in the bitterness of his soul, that
his sin was ever before him, and then his sanctification was out of his sight,
and that God had forgotten to be gracious: But I said, says he, this is my
infirmity: You know in a house when it is dark, all things are there that were
before; but you see them not till the candle be brought in: The woman's groat in
the Parable was in the house, but she found it not till she had lighted her
candle: Therefore you must say as David, Light my candle O Lord; and the spirit
of man is the candle of the Lord.

Answ. But I feel corruption more violent which would not be if it were
mortified.

Quest. You are mistaken in that, it is from life in you, and spirit in you,
that you feel corruption; if you were dead in sins and trespasses, you could
feel nothing no more then a dead man? These oppositions in you show a twofold
law within you, A law in your members, with the law of your minds: Two natures
in you of flesh and spirit; the flesh lusts against the spirit; nor is the
light of a mere natural conscience, or a soul commonly enlightened such a
strange opposer and complainer against the law of sin in the flesh, as you seem
to have in you; besides, John says, If we say we have no sin we deceive our
selves. But I dare not carry you on too far by signs of this nature without
Christ, who is a believers sanctification as well as righteousness. But to
stop the issu^ of the soul in these questions and scruples with this Question:

Quest. Can you have any assurance that the change that is in any child of
God, in this life, or their sanctification, is such in any particular act or
work, as there is no spot of sin in it? Is it not mixed of flesh and spirit? Why
then do you feel after it so as you do? Since the best and throrowst
sanctification in any, is not pure enough for the eyes of the Lord; why make
you it then any bottom for assurance? You see all the while you have so done,
you can find like Noah's Dove, no rest for the soal of your foot; for says
Christ, When you have done all you can, you are but unprofitable servants; and
all our righteousness is but as filthy rags; and while you gaze on your work
of sanctification, you find a rottenness in every part of it, and call all
into question, and find fault both with your repentance, mortification, and
new obedience and all; therefore you must take Christ in here for
sanctification still, to settle and establish your spirit.

Answ. But what use is there then of my sanctification? Are not the fruits and
effects of the spirit in me, such as follow immediately upon my being justified?

Quest. Yea, they are the natural flowings and workings of your faith, they
help to evidence your faith, and comfort your faith in their kind and degree:
But as I said before, they are given to be a light in some measure to your own,
and others consciences: Let your light so shine before men; and glorify God in
your bodies, and in your spirits. Show me thy faith by thy works; they are the
bracelets of the Spouse, they are the beams of Christ the Sun of
righteousness. Now, clouds may hinder the beams from enlightening a room, but
the Sun is still where he was; the Tree you know is there where it was, when
the Apples or Grapes may be blown down; so the glory of sanctification may be
often darkened, and the fruits of it blown down by the wind of temptation,
spoken on in the Parable: Yet then, such promises as these are laid in for such
a season; Who is among you that fears the Lord, that obeys the voice of his
servant, that walks in darkness, and has no light? Let him trust in the
Name of the Lord, and stay upon his God, Isai. 50.10. And the vision is for an
appointed time, but at the end it shall speak and not lie; though it tarry,
wait for it, wait for it, because it will surely come and not tarry: But the
just shall live by faith, Habac. 2.3, 4.

Answ. But why do the Apostles press sanctification, and the new man so, and
love, and new obedience, etc. in all their Epistles?

Quest. I answered this partly before. Sanctification is the beginning of the
forming of Christ here in this life in one part of him, which is Holiness,
which shall be perfected in the life to come, when we shall be fashioned like
unto his glorious Body. Sanctification is the witness to the Righteousness of
Christ, which being a glory out of sight, to the soul and the world, is made
clearer by faith and holiness to both: So as in sanctification, both soul and
body, flesh and spirit join to glorify the riches of Christ. Ye are bought
with a price, glorify God in your bodies, and in your spirits, and walk as
children of the light, and of the day. So as the wisdom of the spirit is seen
much in the Word, in pressing sanctification, and praising sanctification, both
to set forth the nature of the spirit in believers, and to quicken flesh and
blood against an empty formal Profession.

CHAP. V. The Parties third Doubt concerning Faith or Believing, which I call
the Great.
The third Doubt is WHether you do believe or no?

The great Gospel-secret concerning Faith or Believing.
FIrst, I shall show you my thoughts concerning the nature of this Doubt.

It is one thing to believe, and another thing to know we believe.

I suppose, none ought to question whether they do believe or no, but to
believe till they be persuaded that they do believe, and more and more of the
truth of their faith or belief, righteousness being revealed from faith to
faith.

My grounds for this, are these:

1. Christ's command to believe, and this is his Commandment, That we should
believe on the Name of his Son Jesus Christ. Now, Commands of this nature are
to be obeyed, not disputed. Good servants do not reason their duty out first
with themselves, but fall to doing as they are commanded.

2. I find not any in the whole course of Christ's preaching or the Disciples
when they preached to them to believe, asking the question, Whether they
believed or no, or whether their Faith were true Faith or no? I find one
saying, Lord, I believe, help my unbeleef: But not, Lord whether do I believe
or no? And Lord increase my faith: But not, Lord whether is this true faith I
have or no? It would be a strange question in any that were bidden to a Feast,
to ask the Master of the Feast whether his dainties were real or a delusion?
would not such a question disparage him for a Sorcerer? So in the things of the
Spirit, to be over-jealous of the Truth of them as many poor tempted souls are,
does not be come the faithfulness of Jesus Christ. The way to be sure of the
truth of the good things, is to taste and see how good the Lord is. Spiritual
things are best felt and tasted with feeding upon them. Eat O friends, drink,
yea, drink abundantly, O beloved.

3. For any to doubt whether they do believe or no, I find to be a question
only fit and proportionable for Christ himself to satisfy, who is called the
Author and finisher of our Faith. None can prove more properly to a soul it
believes then he on whom it believes. Who can more properly show one that he
sees, then the light which enlightens him for that very purpose?

4. Faith is truly and simply this; A being persuaded more or less of Christ's
love; and therefore it is called, A believing with the heart. Now, what
infallible sign is there to persuade any that they are persuaded, when
themselves question the truth of their persuasion? There may be some things
which may strengthen and help, which I shall hereafter show you from the Word,
which are by way of effects and properties of this faith and belief; but none
can simply persuade a soul that it does believe, but he on whom it does
believe: God shall persuade Japhet. Who can more principally, and with clearer
satisfaction persuade the Spouse of the good will of him she loves, but
himself? Can all the love tokens or testimonial Rings and Bracelets? They may
concur and help in the manifestation; but it is the voice of the beloved, My
beloved spoke and said unto me, rise up my Love, my fair one, says the Spouse.

5. We ought to believe till we be persuaded that we do believe, because the
more we do believe, the more we shall be persuaded to believe, according to
that place in the Ephesians, In whom also after ye believed, ye were sealed
with the holy Spirit of promise: And he that believes has the witness;
though there is more to be said to this last Scripture. The way to be warm, is
not only to ask for a fire, or whether there be a fire or no, or to hold out
the hands toward it, and away, and wish for a greater; but to stand close to
that fire there is, and to gather heat.

6. We ought I suppose, no more to question our Faith, which is our first and
foundation Grace, then we ought to question Christ the foundation of our Faith:
For as all Christian Religion is destroyed by the one, so all the salvation in
that Religion to any soul in particular by the other: Therefore it is said,
they entered not in because of unbeleef; And again, The Word did not profit
being not mixed with Faith in them that heard it: And hence is the Apostles
caution, Take heed lest there be in any of you an heart of unbeleef.

7. It is Satan's greatest policy to put a soul upon such a question: For by
this he sets on the soul for evidence from things which he knows can afford
little but a questionable assurance, as persuasion most upon marks and signs
of our own sanctification, or works, which cannot hold good without Faith it
self, to bring down Christ upon them; For he puts us clean back if we observe.
We are proving our faith by our works, when as no works can be proved solidly
good but by our faith; for without Faith it is impossible to please God. We
know that every piece of coin or money is valued according to the image and
superscription that it bears; and if Caesar be not there, though it be still
silver, yet it is not coin, it is not so current; and he that has it, cannot
make such use of it, and so assure himself to trade with it, as otherwise he
might do. So there is not any thing of sanctification current, and of true
practical use and comfort to be a believer, unless Jesus Christ be there, and
the Image of Christ which is righteousness, etc. or true holiness. While
Satan puzzles us in questioning our faith or believing, he keeps us off from
believing, knowing that this is the condemnation. He that believes not, is
condemned already.

We are first to believe, and all other gifts will follow, etc.
HEre I cannot but wonder at any that keep souls in acts of preparation and
qualification, from the act of believing, as if we could believe too suddenly;
and many a one loses some degrees of faith while they are seeking it thus in
the evidence of their works; for while faith is kept off from Christ, and the
soul suspended, faith decays, and becomes weaker and weaker; when as if it
were still exercised upon Christ in the promises, it would soon bring a clearer
and more undeceivable evidence with it, then can any other way be ministered
unto it.

In the Gospel all are immediately called to believe; to day if ye will hear
his voice: Sirs says the Jailer, what must I do to be saved? Believe say they
on the Lord Jesus Christ. And this is the work, that ye believe on him whom he
has sent, says Christ; and says Philip to the Eunuch, If thou beleevest with
all thy heart thou may; and he answered and said, I believe.

So as I shall draw this conclusion for many that are in the dark in this
point, both Preachers and people:

That none can believe too hastily in Jesus Christ our righteousness, because
righteousness is revealed from faith to faith; and while we believe not, we
live not properly; for the just shall live by faith; and while we believe not,
we may after a sort be said to be under condemnation; for he that believes not
is condemned. So as we ought not to stay the exercise of our faith, either for
repentance or humiliation, or any other grace; but we ought to believe, that we
may have these; for faith works by love, etc. And add to your faith virtue,
says the Apostle, and to virtue knowledge, and to knowledge temperance, and to
temperance patience, and to patience godliness, and to godliness brotherly
kindness. All these, are to be added to faith, or work from faith; nor are we
to stay our believing till we be assured by some signs that we do believe; we
must believe that we may know that we do believe; for the witness comes by
believing, The spirit bearing witness. Yet to these I allow you any
examination or trial of your faith, which may consist with believing.

Well, I shall put some Questions to you after these grounds.

Quest. Is faith always with full assurance?

Answ. Nay.

Quest. Can you conclude you have no faith, because you have no full assurance?

Answ. Nay.

Quest. You say well; for there are degrees of believing; one degree is to
believe, another is to be assured you believe. There are in the Word believers
of several ages; some are called little ones, weak ones, babes, children,
strong men; some are such as have been sound believers, and are made weak
through sin, and temptation, and ignorance of the Covenant of free grace and
their righteousness in Christ, and the glorious estate of a believer under
grace, as a man that is not perfectly healed of some infirmity.

For the nature and properties of true saving Faith, which I told you on, They
are better discerned in the Word and Christ, then in the soul that has them,
because they are not in the soul purely, but with mixture of corruption; which
like mud in the water troubles the sight, and the spiritual discerning; and
that makes so many believers who can spiritually judge, care so little to see
themselves in their own righteousness; but in Christ's; as Paul, and be found
in him, not having mine own righteousness.

The nature and properties of true saving faith, is almost the business of the
whole new Testament.

1. The nature of faith is this, It is called the ground of things hoped for,
and the evidence of things that are unseen.

2. The properties are everywhere described by repentance, and humiliation, and
love, and godliness, and purity, and charity, and meekness, and all holy
conversation, and prayer, and hearing, and obeying the Will of God. All these
are with true faith; and a believer is one, who though he has all these, yet
he will not behold them in himself, but in Christ, and as Paul, I live, yet not
I, but Christ lives in me.

Now the great mistake which I find in this and ages before, is, the singling
out the properties of a true faith, and sending a believer for his assurance
most thither, in himself; which caused the believers of former ages, to walk in
bondage, though with the spirit of adoption; and to make up their assurance
much like the believers under the Law, from their obedience and repentance, and
humiliation in themselves, Christ being much in the dark to them, and little
seen then. And much of the same darkness covers this age we live in, who are
very dark in that mystery of glory which Paul speaks on in believers, as
sorrowing, and yet always rejoicing, as dying, and yet behold we live, as
having nothing, and yet possessing all things.

But I pray, what temptation had you concerning your not believing?

Answ. I thought I was one of those that could not believe, and that I being
such a sinner, it was not for me to believe.

Quest. For your being one of those that could not believe, I shall speak to it
in these Questions.

1. Is there any exception against you in particular, in the whole Book of God?
As to say, you, such a one, or such a one, cannot believe, you have no right to
Christ?

2. Can the counsels of God, concerning the vessels of wrath be known? Can any
say I am not elected, seeing his wisdom is unsearchable, and his ways past
finding out?

3. Are not some called at the eleventh hour of the day?

1. The thief upon the Cross at the hour of his death?

Is not this Satan's temptation then to persuade you to conclude any thing for
your condemnation before hand?

2. For your other doubt of being such a sinner, and therefore not daring to
believe, I shall put these Questions to you.

1. Do not they that would believe, only if their sins were less or less
heinous, believe rather upon some ground in themselves, then Gods command?

2. Do not the promises belong to sinners as sinners?

Answ. Yea; but as repentant sinners.

Quest. What were the Churches of the Corinthians, Ephesians, Colossians; and
what was Paul before Christ came to him? Were they sinners or qualified? And
what were all that believed, before they believed?

Answ. They were sinners.

Quest. Came not the promise to Adam, even then when he was dead in sin?

Answ. Yea.

Quest. Whether were not you in their condition or no, that is, a sinner,
according to your own apprehension?

Answ. Yea.

Quest. Whether are not you then as free for Christ to come to, as they were?

Answ. Yea.

Quest. Whether are not the promises as free, and open to you, as to them: You
being all alike sinners, and Gods will being revealed no more for ones election
then another, no more for their election then yours?

Answ. Yea.

Quest. Whether are any promises made to any in Christ, or out of Christ, only
in themselves? Is not Christ the only qualified person for all promises? And
so through Christ derived upon all his, we being said to be complete in him;
Does not all fullness dwell in him, and all receive of his fullness? And are
not all the promises in him, Yea and Amen?

These Conclusions then I shall draw forth.

1. Election and condemnation being secret things, belong to the Lord; and were
not revealed in the Word to the end to hinder any from believing; for that were
against Gods goodness and mercy revealed; and they that make such use of them,
serve not the Lords ends, but Satan's; for such an end is against the sweet
simplicity of the Gospel of Christ.

2. The only ground for any to believe, is the Word or Promise, not any thing
more or less in themselves. This is the Commandment that ye believe on the Son
of God.

3. The promises of Christ are held forth to sinners as sinners, not as
repenting sinners or humble sinners, as any condition in us upon which we
should challenge Christ; for then it is no more of grace, but of works. Now we
are freely justified by his grace.

4. What ever promise there is, which has any condition in it, it is ours in
him, that is in Christ, who was the only conditioned and qualified person for
all promises, all being in him Yea and Amen; and all being complete in him who
is the fullness.

A short Preface.
HAving thus far discoursed occasionally upon these Temptations, I shall add a
few Observations more for clearing the way of Salvation a little further, and
then I shall open the several ways of Revelation that the Mystery of
Godliness has been received in, and in what seekings, and in what degrees
Free Grace has been enquired for in this present age.

I. Gods first revealing himself to man in Goodness and Free Grace.
GOD has revealed himself under several notions and names, and orders of
working to man; and in them we are to rest, and not to form up Meditations
beyond them; for beyond them is infiniteness, and glory, and we may sooner be
dazzled then discern any thing of God or the workings in himself. There lie the
depthes of the wisdom of God, and the unsearchablenesse of his ways; and who
can know the mind of the Lord? or who has been his counselor?

God then that he might make himself out to the creature, first reveals himself
in goodness, and makes man according to something in himself; so as there is
more Image of a God in him, then in any other thing below: For God said let us
make man in our Image after our likeness, Genesis 1.26. And herein is the
goodness of God, that he gives any being to any thing but himself, and any
glorious being to man, more then to any other; For what is man that he
regards him, or the son of man that he visits him? He has made him a
little lower then the Angels, and crowned him with glory, Psalm. 8.

Man being thus created, must know himself to be but man, and a creature; and
therefore has a law given out to live by, and to order his obedience to him
that made him: But man being made merely by the will of God, is made only to
continue by the same will, and not unchangeably good; that the creature might
consider the glory he had, not to be his own, but only at the pleasure of him
that made him; which will and pleasure was revealed in the law of the Tree of
life, and executed upon the obedience and disobedience in the creature or man
to this law: And now man sins and disobeyes, and by this is brought to see the
power of him that created him, who in this beginning of things revealed himself
only in glory, power, and dominion, to the world, and in no other form or
notion to the creatures he made but of Lord, or Creator, or Lawgiver.

I find there was infinite wisdom of God appeared in the suffering the fall
and disobedience of man; for by this, the creature came to see and acknowledge
it self under the power of a law, and in subjection, and dependency to him that
created it: So as the glory of God was much advantaged by such a change; which
if the creature had never experienced, could not have been so evident nor
clear: And hence it is, that the Angels or spirits of an higher order fell too,
as well as man; so as by this, the power of God was made known to the creature,
and the creatures subjection or dependency upon God, to it self: This change
running through the order of the whole Creation, Romans 8.

The creature being thus brought by it self under a change of condition, God
raises himself advantages and glory from hence, to make out himself before the
creatures in his power, will, mercy, love, etc. that the world may know him
more, and know that there is yet an infiniteness in him not to be known; and
all our knowledge is bounded in those things which he has made out for himself
to be known by.

To the time of sinning then, or the first disobedience, the Lord revealed
himself only in glory and goodness; his glory was in the creating and
commanding; his goodness in giving any thing a created being or subsistence
for obeying and laying out his Image or resemblance upon one creature above all
the rest, and making man to have dominion under him, yet for him, over the
Creation.

But man now failing under the power and curse of a law, God reveals himself in
mercy, and in a notion of compassion and pity, and seeks out man who was now a
sinner, and brings to him the tidings of something in a promise; which though
it might be dark to him, who was now in the region and shadow of death, yet God
made it something clearer by his dealings and carriage toward him, making
coats for him, and clothing him, and taking care for him; and so holding forth
something of compassion toward him; yet mingling it so with the curse and
change in the creation, and his condition, that he might live as well under the
anguish of the curse, as the power and comfort of the promise: And how much of
Christ Adam knew, how much the first Adam knew of the second, is not revealed,
not much surely; for this time and that under the law, was the time of the
hiding of this Mystery in promises and sacrifices, and the keeping it secret
till that which was called the Fullness of time was come, and Christ was
manifest in the flesh.

II. Gods Free Grace to sinners more discovered.
WE find the Scriptures set forth God in a notion of Free Grace; and therefore
we must so order our apprehensions and conceptions of God, that we may know him
in his Free Grace, as well as in his Love, and look on him and consider him in
this order of working. God first and more properly, had mercy upon man fallen and
under the curse; and he is called a God showing mercies, and great in mercy,
and rich in mercy, and plenteous in mercy, abundant in mercy, and father of
mercies, and the Lord God merciful and gracious: So as sinful man, who by the
power of sin and the curse, was under condemnation (for death entered by sin,)
yet by a power more infinite then that of sin and the curse, was raised up to
be the subject of this mercy, and that only thing about which this free grace
or mercy was exercised: And thus light was wrought out of darkness, and good
out of evil. And now a work of redemption, more glorious then that of creation,
is beginning to the world; and Gods work of mercy is exceeding the work of his
power, and yet infiniteness in both; for God himself was to become a creature,
or the son of man in this second work, which he was not in the first. And thus
we see how this change in the creature makes only way and liberty for the
fullness of God to work out to the sons of men, as well in a work of redemption
as creation; and saving those that were made, as well as making them; yet this
work of redemption was carried at first in a Mystery, rather of mercy then
love; for there was little but a promise of the woman's seed revealed; so as
here was rather mercy appearing as yet then love, and a remedy propounded to
man for sin, by that time the sin was committed, to show that God was never an
enemy, though man was. And so much of Gods good will only revealed, as man
might rather conceive himself not destroyed then saved, and rather not damned
then redeemed; And that in the Prophet, sets forth God rather at first in mercy
and compassion to us, None eye pitied thee, to have compassion of thee; when I
passed by thee, and saw thee polluted in thy blood, I said unto thee Live,
Ezekiel. 16.6. And the Apostle calls us vessels of mercy, that he might make known
the riches of his glory on his vessels of mercy. Romans 9.23. So as in this
manner of revealing the infinite work of Salvation, we may be better satisfied,
then by going out into the glory of Gods counsels, where we may lose our selves
rather in the fullness of Truth then find any. So as thus God has drawn out
things more to our reason; for how can we think God who is infinitely pure,
whose eyes are purer the^ to behold iniquity, can love a sinner as a sinner?
All love is from something amiable in the thing loved; But what is there in man
fallen, and corrupted, for God to love or delight in, to make his delight with
the sons of men; where is the comeliness? Therefore God must from m^er grace
more properly then love, order some righteousness or new glory for man; in
which, he may beautify, adorn, and love him. And this is the righteousness of
Jesus Christ, in which we are said to be chosen and predestined to the
adoption of sons. Thus God in free grace had mercy on us, and gave Christ for
us; and in him we are made capable of the love of God, and ^ccepted in the
beloved, Ephesians. 1.6. and not as some, that man was elected before Christ, the
body before the head, and Christ for man, as shall appear more fully in another
place.

III. More of Gods Free Grace and Love; of man's sin and redemption, discovered.
THe Scriptures reveal to us a pure God, a just God, a perfect Law, the first
man sinning, a Law broken, a Curse entering, mercy working in a promise of
life, a way of salvation darkly discovered, Jesus Christ this way, this Jesus
Christ given for sinners, and yet purchasing sinners; all this wrought in time,
and yet a predestination and election of grace before all time, God loving us
and giving Christ for us, and yet loving us in the same Christ. These things
are thus brought forth in the Word, and the Spirit of God can only guide us
into safe constructions of the mystery thus revealed, and how to draw the work
of Redemption into such order, that sin and death by the first man may appear,
and righteousness and life by the second, and something of the counsels of God
concerning both, before either was brought forth to the world; and yet but
something, and not all.

I find, before sin and righteousness did thus appear in the world, that God
is said to predestinate, and elect, and choose us. I find that all this work,
thus wrought in time, yet is said to be present before God in all time; and
therefore he is called the Lamb slain so long ago; and we are called chosen in
Christ before the foundations of the world were laid.

So as all I can find out of this glorious mystery, which is made up of such
contrary ways, and workings, of sin, and grace, justice, and mercy, an old
Adam and a new, and predestination or election of grace, will only amount to
this; That man sinned, God had mercy, and gave his Son, which was God with him
from everlasting, to be that for man, and in man, which he could not be in
himself, righteousness and true holiness: And thus man becomes a new creature
to God again, not in himself, but in another.

God still is the same, but man was not; nor is God the less unchangeable
because of some several carriages or distributions of the same work about man;
man's falling, and redemption in Christ; man's sin and Christ's suffering, may be
said to be but the love of God ordering man to the praise of his free grace
through several conditions, of innocence, sin, and righteousness.

Yet this I find further, that the main and glorious work of Redemption, was
that full and final work, ordered by God the Father with himself. So as man's
sin was only serviceable to this, and was but for the bringing about of this,
though not decreed of God, but occasioned by man. God fore-knowing the
changeableness of his creature, and so working by that, not taking any new
counsels upon this change in man which he took not before, but ordering this to
that salvation he had ever ordained; nor is the revealing of Gods
predestination or election in Christ, so much to let us see into the order of
his Counsels (for who has known the mind of the Lord) as to set up God in the
glory of his power, will, and wisdom, before our eyes, that we may not look at
any thing as happening from its own causes, and to order us from conceiving any
change in God, as if our sin and Christ's suffering had wrought any alteration
in him, either to enmity or love.

If you would know this Mystery without confusion, and yet in admiration, know
that all this work of free grace, and man's salvation in Jesus Christ, was ever
the same with God, who calls things that are not, as if they were; and man's
sinning, and Gods revealing Christ in promises, and in the flesh, and in the
Gospel, is, That the creature may partake of it; and whereas there is a work of
sin, of time, of persons, of order, of Scripture-notions, of manifestation;
These are but so many several ways by which the work of grace, love, sin,
Christ, and salvation, is finished in the things themselves. and all these
several parcels of Law, Gospel, Sin, Righteousness, Free Grace, Election, etc.
go to the making up this Body of Christ the Elect; the law could not have been
wanting, for then there had been no transgression; and sin could not, for then
there had been no free grace; and righteousness could not, for then there had
been no redemption; and free grace could not, for then there had been no mercy;
and election could not, for then there had been no everlastingnesse of purpose
of God. So as this one infinite work of salvation is manifested in many parts
to us, who could neither enjoy it, nor know it otherwise, not in that fullness
nor infiniteness as it is in God. And these many parts make up that one work
of our Redemption in Jesus Christ; nor can we know any thing of it but thus in
parts, not in the whole or glorious entireness of it, We know but in part.

IV. The Son of God how considered in the work of Salvation.
THere are certain Scriptures which contain the Mystery; yet in the letter of
them, hold it forth under a diverse notion or word.

1. God so loved the world that he sent his only begotten Son, etc. Joh. 3.16.
with other Scriptures of this kind, as 1 John 4.9, 10. etc.

2. Of the other sort are these Scriptures, God has chosen us in him before
the foundations of the world, Ephesians. 1.4.

God has saved us according to his own purpose and grace, which was given to
us through Jesus Christ, before the world was, 2 Timothy 1.5. with other
Scriptures of this kind.

Now these words say, that God loved us, and gave Christ, and that he loved us
in Christ. And these may be both true, according to the manifestation of this
mystery to us; for one Scripture contains not all of this mystery of Gods love
to sinners. Some holds forth only so much of it, as to make power and will in
it appear; some, so much of it as to make free grace appear in it; some, so
much of it as to make love appear in it; some, so much of it as to make
predestination and election appear in it; some, so much of it as to make Jesus
Christ appear as the Lamb slain before the world for sinners; some, so much as
to make Jesus Christ crucified in time for sinners; some, so much as to make
Gods love appear in giving Christ; some, so much as to make Christ's love appear
in giving himself; some, so much as to make Gods love appear complete to us in
Christ; some, so much as to make Jesus Christ appear the Son of God; some, so
much as to make him appear a son of man, and a savior of men; some, so much as
to make him appear to die for all, and for the world; and some, so much as to
make this all, and this world such only as were his before the world, and
only all such as he had loved and chosen.

And thus is the Mystery opened to the sons of men in each part of Scriptures,
which like so many several Stars give out their beams and light for the
manifestation of this Mystery of godliness, God manifested in the flesh.

Now we must be sure in our conceptions and notions concerning this redemption,
that we raise not up nor form any thing to comprehend this mystery which God
himself would not fold up in any single word or notion, there being so many
discoveries and appearances of God; who though he be but one simple, pure,
glorious essence, yet his creature man cannot behold him so, but as in so many
scattered parts and beams of glory. Man cannot take God nor the mystery of God
in, but by way of parts and several kinds of excellency, and so view him in
one thing with another, and so in Jesus Christ.

So as when we would consider the work of salvation in and by Jesus Christ, we
must take heed of straitning it into any such thing as the effect of Gods love
only, lest something be left out by our narrow conception, whereby the mystery
is but in part represented; and the other parts of the work have no room, by
which, though we may know more of one part, yet we may know less of another;
like one who pumping water through a narrow pipe, fills not his vessel, while
another that works through a larger, fills his: And indeed, the not taking in
Scripture notions in their spiritual extent and variety, but going out into
some one notion more then another, which agrees better with some principle in
us, may make us rather opinionated then spiritually wise.

But in the work of salvation, we must consider Jesus Christ as he is revealed
without his incarnation, before his incarnation, and in it; without it he is
revealed to be the Word of God, the Wisdom of God, God with God, etc. Before
it, he is revealed to be the seed of the woman; the Promise, the Elect, the
Covenant, the Angel of the Covenant, etc. In the Incarnation, he is revealed to
be Emmanuel, or God with us, Jesus, Christ, the Redeemer, the Mediator, the
Priest, the Propitiation, the Son, and the Son of man, etc.

Now these several notions will direct us, and order us to a
Scripture-revelation of this Mystery; for when we read of this Son of God,
under the names or notions last spoken of, as the Son, or Jesus, or Redeemer:
Then we are to consider of this work of Redemption in the flesh manifested, and
amongst us; and then consider what part of the work comes under that notion.

And when we read of his other names, we are to consider what part of the
mystery falls under those, either without incarnation, or flesh, and so he was
one with the father, etc. or else before incarnation, and so he was in the time
of the Law of ceremonies and types; and from all these we may safely draw this:

That the Son of God, as Jesus and Christ, and so manifested in the flesh, was
sent out, and given as it were of God; foretold and figured before he was
given, ever with God, being God himself, and everlastingly present, both as
God, and as God and man in the election of grace, being the elect in whom we
are chosen, and whose body we are.

These notions of God as the Word, and as Jesus, Christ, and Redeemer, and
Mediator, is but the drawing forth the Mystery of Redemption in its several
parts and degrees: And all this is true, that God loved us, and gave Christ,
and we were chosen in Christ, and he was the Lamb slain, both before the world
in purpose, and in the world according to this purpose; nor are we to consider
Gods love to us without Christ, nor Gods love to us before Christ, nor
ourselves out of Christ, in whom we are chosen; But rather thus, God loved us
in Christ, and yet gave Christ: And all this is true in the way and order of
manifestation, beyond which we cannot see; nor can we in a Scripture-way
consider any act of grace from God but in the Son, there being no way of Union
and Communion with God for man, but by him who is both God and man.

V. Gods love manifested in the Gospel-expressions.
Wherever there is any appearance of God in mercy, or grace, or love, there is
Gospel; and wherever there is any Gospel, there are such expressions and
appearances of God: As in the old Testament we find him under these names, the
Lord thy God, the Lord, the Lord merciful, and gracious, long suffering, and of
much goodness: A Lord passing by the transgression of his people, loving His
freely, counting them the Apple of his eye, the signet upon his hand, his
Jewels, his Vineyard, his Children.

And in the new Testament, where God appeared in the fullness of love, there he
is called a father of mercies; and his grace, free grace; and his love, a love
manifested, and unsearchable.

And thus the soul is to look on him, and consider him in grace, not in glory;
in love, not in righteousness: And this is that which will draw on the soul to
have communion with him. We have only to do with him now in the
Gospel-appearances and expressions. In our first man Adam we had to do with him
only in a way of subjection and righteousness; But now in our second Adam, in
a way of sonship, or adoption, and free grace.

VI. The new Covenant, no Covenant properly with us, but with Christ for us.
GOd makes no Covenant properly under the Gospel as he did at first; but his
Covenant now is rather all of it a Promise. Man is not restored in such a way
of Covenant and condition as he was lost, but more freely, and more by grace
and mercy; and yet God covenants too, but it is not with man only, but with
him that was God and man, even Jesus Christ; he is both the Covenant, and the
Messenger or Mediator of the Covenant. God agreed to save man, but this
agreement was with Christ, and all the conditions were on his part: He stood
for us, and articled with God for us, and performed the conditions for life and
glory; and yet because we are so concerned in it, it is called A Covenant made
with us, I will make a new Covenant with them; and yet that it may not be
thought a Covenant only with us, as the first was, it is called a new
Covenant, and a better Covenant; and Christ is called the Mediator of it. And
lest we should think some conditions were on our parts, as in the first, it is
added, I will write my Law in their hearts, I will put my spirit within them:
So as in this new Covenant, God is our God of free grace and righteousness on
his part, not for any conditional righteousness on ours; yet in Scripture it
is called still a Covenant, because God is our God still in a way of
righteousness, though of Redemption too, and of condition too; yet not on
ours, but on Christ's part for us; and yet it is a Covenant with us, because we
are Christ's, 1 Cor. 3.

VII. Gods manner of Covenanting.
GOD takes us into Covenant, not upon any condition in us before; he brings
with him Christ, and in him all the conditions, and makes us as he would have
us; not for the Covenant, but in it, or under it; we are not his people before
he be our God first. I will make a new Covenant with thee, I will be thy God,
and thou shall be my people. I will write my Law in your hearts, and put my
spirit within you, Heb. 8.10. You have not chosen me, but I have chosen you.

VIII. They that are under Grace revealed, are no more under the Law.
WHile we are out of Covenant with God, we are in our own judgment and others,
under the curse for any breach of law or disobedience: But when we are once
under grace revealed, we are ever under grace, and no more under the Law: The
Law can only tell a believer he sins, but not tax him for any. We are not under
the law, but under grace. Who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods elect?
Who shall condemn? It is Christ that died. Romans 8.33.

IX. When God is said to be in Covenant with a soul.
A Soul is then properly, actually, or expressly in Covenant with God, when God
has come to it in the promise, and then when it feels it self under the power
of the promise, it begins only to know it is in Covenant; and yet to yield and
obey, as if it were but to enter into that Covenant which God has made with it
in Christ, before it could do any thing; so as they that believe, do rather
feel themselves in that Covenant which God has made with them without any
thing in themselves either faith or repentance, etc.

X. A justified person is a perfect person.
A Person justified or in Covenant, is as pure in the sight of God as the
righteousness of Christ can make him, (though not so in his own eyes, that
there may be work for faith) because God sees His only in Christ, not in
themselves; and if they were not in such a perfect righteousness, they could
not be loved of him, because his eyes are purer then to behold iniquity, or to
love a sinner as a sinner.

XI. Sin separates not his from God, but from Communion with God.
NO sins can make God who loves for ever and unchangeably, love us less; and
yet a believer will grieve for sin, because it grieves the Spirit of his God;
and though he know sin cannot now separate from God, yet because it once
separated, he hates it; and because it separates still; though not from God,
yet from Communion with God, grieving the holy Spirit of God.

XII. Christ in the flesh.
CHRIST in the flesh was God himself* who that he might reveal his love to us,
made us partakers of the divine nature by fashioning our nature for his own
glory to live in, and by being both God and man amongst us and for us; and
herein is the mystery of reconciliation: None but the nature of God could
reconcile God, and no nature but man's that had sinned could properly suffer for
man; therefore there is one Mediator betwixt God and man, the man Christ Jesus.

XIII. Christ's being in our nature.
CHRIST was love, mercy, and riches of free grace manifested in the flesh, and
in our nature, that they might slow out more abundantly upon our nature, on the
vessels of mercy, chosen in this Christ before the foundations of the world.

XIV. Christ's love.
CHRIST'S love must needs exceed all the love of the children of men; for he was
the very love of God clothed in flesh and blood. This is he that was red in his
apparel, as he that treads in the wine press.

XV. Christ doing and suffering for our sakes.
CHRIST came into the world, that he might do what we could not do to the
fulfilling of the Law, and suffer what we could not suffer for the breach of
the Law.

XVI. Christ's Mediatorship.
CHRIST standing now as a Person betwixt God and the children of men, takes in
the fullness of righteousness and sin from both natures; righteousness from
God, and sin from men, whereby all the sins of his people are fully done away
by the infinite glory of that righteousness, both from himself and us.

XVII. The right general Redemption, by the second Adam.
CHRIST is the second Adam, in whom all are made alive, as all in the first
Adam were dead; but not so as if all who were dead in the first Adam, were made
alive in the second; but as the first Adam was the person in whom all that are
dead did die, so Christ is the second Adam in whom all that are alive do live;
for Christ is the common nature of the living mankind who live unto
righteousness, as Adam was the common nature of the dead mankind who die unto
unrighteousness: For as by one man's disobedience many were made sinners, so by
the obedience of one many are made righteous: God has concluded all under sin,
That the promises by faith of Jesus Christ, might be given to them that
believe, Gal. 3.22.

XVIII. Christ's love.
THe love of Christ exceeded in this, that he gave himself to die for us when
we were enemies to him, and crucified him our selves, who came to be crucified
for us; and could neither love him, nor pity him for what he did; For while we
were as yet sinners, Christ died for us; and greater love then this has no
man. This is the mystery that man could not live in Christ, till he had killed
Christ first: And thus he was wounded in the house of his friends. O all ye
that pass by the way, behold and consider if ever there were mystery like unto
this mystery.

XIX. Christ's blood.
THe blood of Christ was not the blood of man only, but the blood of the Son
of God, and therefore it was a price for sin: the very power of the Godhead as
it were bleeding for sin; by which it is called, The Redemption of his blood,
and the blood of the Son of GOD.

XX. Christ's Blood powered out.
THe Blood of CHRIST powered out, wrought greater compassion in GOD toward men
(I speak as a man) then the sufferings of all the men in the world could do,
because he being begotten of GOD himself, and the express Image of his person,
though he could not suffer being so infinite a glory, yet because that person
suffered which was GOD and man, or the Son of GOD in man, the Father in an
unspeakable way beheld the travel of his soul and was satisfied.

XXI. Christ's Vesture dipped in blood.
CHRIST'S Garment which he was described in by the Prophets under the Law, is of
a color to set forth love and suffering under the Gospel; for this is he that
came from Bozra with his garments died red.

XXII. Christ's comeliness.
THe comeliness of Christ in the Gospel is a most desirable comeliness for
the sons of men to love; it is the glory of the only begotten Son of God, full
of grace, the ^weetest object for those in misery to delight in. This is that
beloved which is more then another beloved.

XXIII. Christ's beauty.
CHRIST has both the form and power of love in him, and therefore it is that
his Spouse, or His, behold him as white and ruddy, and the fairest amongst ten
thousands; white in the glory of his Godhead, and ruddy in the sufferings of
his Manhood; and because of his sweet ointments or powrings out of spirit, the
Virgins follow him; for his hands drop myrrh upon the soul, even spiritual
graces upon the handles of the Lock.

XXIV. Christ's names.
CHRIST will be known to His by no other names but names of love and grace, a
Lover, a Bridegroom, a Physician, a Savior, an Emmanuel, or God with us, an
only begotten Son of God, the brightness of his glory, a merciful and
faithful high Priest, a Sacrifice for sin, a Mediator, an Advocate for sin, a
Beloved; and he brings a soul to the banqueting house of spiritual things, and
his banner over it is love.

XXV. Christ and His.
CHRIST having adorned his in the riches of his righteousness, looks on them
and loves them in his own glory, so as they both love one another; Christ and
His, delight in one another, Thou have ravished my heart, my sister, my spouse;
thou have ravished my heart with one of thy eyes, with one chain of thy neck,
says Christ; and says the Spouse, My beloved is the fairest amongst ten
thousands.

XXVI. Christ's love in Heaven to us, or Christ exalted.
THe love of Christ is more now in Heaven toward us, by how much more the love
of God is gloriously shed abroad within him, yet his nature is the same; for he
is no less man, nor more God then he was; but more excellently God and man,
even the man Christ Jesus.

XXVII. The Gospel is Christ revealed.
THe Gospel is Christ himself and love revealed, or the Word of God in the
Word, or the glad tidings of what he has done and suffered for sinners, and
over whom he has conquered, being Captain of our salvation, having spoiled
principalities and powers, making a show of them openly, and triumphing over
them, Col. 1.15. It is the ministry of life and peace, and glory, or God
speaking to men from Heaven, and entreating them to believe, that he was born
of the seed of David, suffered, died, and rose again for their justification;
and that they are sitting together with him in heavenly places.

XXVIII. The Mystery of Christ in the Gospel, a Mystery of Love.
THe whole business of Christ as it was begun in love, and brought forth in
love unto the world, and all the actings and workings of it from Gods being in
Christ, to Christ's sitting at the right hand of God, are but a Gospel or Story
of unspeakable love revealed to the world; so, the carrying on of all yet, is
in love; man in this Gospel is only to be persuaded of such love in love, and
sweetly tempted and drawn to love again in the ministry of the Gospel; and the
Spirit of love and adoption is shed abroad by the Gospel in the souls of men,
to reconcile them who are otherwise enemies in their minds by wicked works,
and to make them love him, who never was an enemy to them in Jesus Christ, in
whom they were chosen, though the mystery is revealed to us under a
parti-colored work of sin and grace.

XXIX. A Believers glorious freedom.
THe Spirit of Christ sets a believer as fr^e from Hell, the Law, and bondage
here on Earth, as if he were in Heaven; nor wants he any thing to make him so,
but to make him believe that he is so; for Satan, sin, sinful flesh, and the
Law, are all so near, and about him in this life, that he cannot so walk by
sight, or in the clear apprehension of it; but the just do live by faith, and
faith is the evidence of things not seen.

XXX. All the sins of believers, done away on the Cross.
THere is no sin to be committed, which Christ did not pay down the price of
his Blood for upon the Cross; making peace through the blood of his Cross;
and yet a believer will sin as tenderly, as if all his sins were to pay for
yet; knowing that he is not redeemed to sin, but from sin; not that he may sin,
but that sinning he may not suffer for sin; Christ is risen for our
justification.

XXXI. Christ offered to sinners.
CHRIST in the Gospel calls out of Heaven to sinners by that very name, and tells
them he has salvation for them if they will believe him. Nor does he stand
upon what sins, less or more, greater or smaller; so as none can say they are
not called on, and proffered salvation, be they never so sinful.

XXXII. A Believer must live in Christ, not in himself.
A Believer has a twofold condition; (yet as a believer but one) in Christ, in
himself; yet he ought ever to consider himself in Christ by faith, not in
himself; in Christ he has perfectly obeyed the whole Law, perfectly suffered
and satisfied for all his sins to the Justice of God, and in Christ is
perfectly just and righteous; and therefore it is said that our life is hid
with Christ in God, and we are raised up with Christ, and made to sit together
in heavenly places in Christ Jesus, even already; but in himself there is a
body of lust, corruption, and sin; and there is a Law revealing sin, accusing,
and condemning; So as if a believer live only by sense, reason, and experience
of himself, and as he lives to men, he lives both under the power and feeling
of sin and the Law; but if he live by faith in Christ, believing in the life,
righteousness, obedience, satisfaction, and glory of him, he lives out of the
power of all condemnation, and unrighteousness. And thus a believer is blessed
only in a righteousness without, not within; and all his assurance,
confidence, comforts, are to flow into him through a channel of faith, not of
works, believing himself happy for what another, even Christ, has done for
him, not what he has done or can do for himself.

XXXIII. How Christ and a believer were one in sin and righteousness.
ALL the ground of a believers righteousness and salvation, and exemption from
the Law, sin, and the curse, is from the nature, office, and transaction or
work of Christ, and Gods accounting, or imputing; Christ stood clothed in our
nature, betwixt God and man, and in that with all the sins of believers upon
him, God having laid on him the iniquities of us all: In his Office he obeyed,
suffered, satisfied, and offered up himself, and now sits as a Mediator to
perpetuate or make his sacrifice, obedience, suffering, and righteousness
everlasting; and thus bringing in everlasting righteousness: And God he
accounts, reckons or imputes all that is done in our nature, as done by us,
calling things that are not, as if they were; and in his person, as in our
person: And thus he is made sin for us who knew no sin, that we might be made
the righteousness of God in him.

XXXIV. We must come before God as having put on Christ first, not as sinners
and unrighteous.
A Believer in all his dealings with God, either by Prayer, or other way of
drawing near, is to state, and consider himself thus in Christ in the first
place, and to put on the relation of Sonship and Righteousness, and to look at
or consider sins no otherwise in himself then as debts paid and cancelled by
the blood of Christ; and by this all bondages, fears, and doubtings are
removed, and his Spirit is free; For the Son has made him free: And now he
comes in the spirit of adoption, and calls God Father; and here begins all
faith, hope, confidence, love, liberty, when as others dare not believe
themselves in such a condition till upon terms of humiliation, sorrow for sin,
works of righteousness, they have as they think, a reasonable measure, price,
or satisfaction to come with, and then begin to believe, hope, and be
confident: And thus in way of compounding and bargaining with God, deal with
him at all occasions; but such submit not to the righteousness of God, and the
free-gift of justification by grace, and give not glory to God: For they that
believe upon something first in themselves, shall as they have kindled a fire,
lie down in the sparks of their own kindling, and have nothing in Christ,
because they will not have all in him; for we must either have all in him, or
nothing: And though some will have all in Christ for salvation, yet they will
have something in themselves to believe their interest in this salvation; and
though this be not to reject Christ for righteousness, yet it is to reject his
free-promise or Word of assurance for this righteousness, and rather to be
persuaded upon sight then faith, and sense then promise, and something in our
selves them in himself.

XXXV. The Law is now in the Spirit, and in the Gospel for a believer to walk
by.
THe Gospel is both a perfect law of life and righteousness, of grace and
truth; and therefore I wonder at any that should contend for the ministry of
the Law or Ten Commandments under Moses, which is of less glory then that
which is now revealed and exceeds in glory; and should strive for a Law without
the Gospel, which is in the Gospel; Nor is the holiness and sanctification now
such as is fashioned by the Law or outward Commandment, but by the preaching of
faith, by which the Spirit is given, which renews and sanctifies a believer,
and makes him the very Law of Commandments in himself, and his heart the very
two Tables of Moses: And though the Law be a beam of Christ in substance and
matter, yet we are not to live by the light of one beam now when the Sun of
righteousness is risen himself; that was a sitter light for those who lived in
the region and shadow of death: And it is with the Law now or light of
righteousness, as it was with the light in the Creation, when that which was
scattered, was gathered into one body of light: So Christ now being revealed,
holiness and righteousness, as well as grace and love, is revealed in him,
and gathered up in him. And what need we light up a Candle for the children of
the day to see by? What, is there any striving for a stream in the channel,
when the fountain is open? Nor does it become the glory of Christ revealed, to
be beholding to any of the light upon Moses face. The word is now made flesh,
and dwells amongst us, and we behold his glory as the glory of the only
begotten Son, full of truth as well as grace.

XXXVI. Legal and Gospel-Commandments and Duties.
GOspel-Commandments and Legal Commandments, do not commandin the same power,
in the same manner, or to the same end; The Law commands us to obey, to love,
to fear, to be holy, that God may be our God, and we his people; the Gospel
commands us to obey, and love, because we are the people of such a God; The Law
commands us in the power of God as a Lawgiver, and Tutor, or Minister; the
Gospel in the power of a Father; the Law commands by promises and threatenings,
blessings and cursings; the Gospel persuades rather then commands, and rather
by promises; and exhorts rather then bids, and reasons us to duty rather then
enforces, and rather draws us then drives us; and by setting forth promises,
and privileges, and prerogatives, and works done on Gods part, and Christ's
part for us, and in love, rather argues us into doing and working, and loving
reflections again; and Christ is chiefly propounded, both for holiness and
obedience, for mortification and newness of life: So as the Gospel commands us
rather by pattern then precept, and by imitation then command, Heb. 12.1, 2, 3.

Nor to the same End. The end of the Law was to bondage, fear, tutorship,
revealing of sin, outward obedience and conformity: The end of Gospel-laws is
to love, newness of spirit, praise and thanksgiving for righteousness, and
life received, and testimony to our righteousness received in Christ. Having
these promises, let us cleanse our selves from all filthiness both of flesh
and spirit, Romans And thus, Christ's yoke is easy, and his burden light, and his
Commandments are not grievous; for they are Commandments that carry life and
power, and quicken to that duty they command, like the Sun who warmeth us in
the very shining upon us; and we work, and walk and live under the Gospel, as
being saved already, and redeemed, and bringing, forth the power of this
redemption and salvation, though the spirit of adoption, freely working to the
praise of that free grace, and freely obeying for such free redemption, and
doing every thing in love, because of the love shed abroad in our hearts; and
neither taking in judgments, nor hell, or damnation; nay, nor Heaven, nor
glory, to force on the work, or quicken the duty; but doing all from the Law of
the Spirit of Life in Christ Jesus, except when corruption or temptation
hinders the freeness and spiritualnesse in the duty.

XXXVII. The Gospel in the holiness and grace of it.
THere is doctrine of holiness in the Gospel, as well as grace and love; and
there are commands for obedience, as well as tidings of forgiveness: The grace
of God that brings salvation, has appeared to all, Teaching us, that denying
ungodliness, etc. we should live soberly, righteously, and godly, Tit. 2.12.
And this kind of Gospel is such in the revelation of it, as fits both God and
man: God the Father may be seen in commanding holiness, and the Spirit in
forming the holiness commanded, and the Son in redeeming us to holiness, even
to the will both of the father and the spirit. And this Gospel fits man, who is
made up both of flesh and spirit, and so has need of a law without, and in the
letter, as well as in the heart and spirit; The Law is spiritual, but we are
carnal, Romans 7. Nor can such a state of flesh and spirit, be ordered by a law
only within; for the Word and Law of the spirit merely is for a spiritual
condition or estate of glory, as Angels, who only live by a law spiritual, or
word of Revelation: But our estate here being partly carnal, must needs be
ordered yet in part by the Law of a carnal Commandment; and yet this Law is not
such as it was before, a mere Law in the letter, but it is now under the Gospel
a law of life, spirit, and glory; it is a Law in the hand of Christ, and with
the promises of Christ about it to make it spiritual indeed. And this is
according to the just, wise, and righteous distribution which God has made to
our diverse estate of flesh and spirit, by dealing out to us both the word and
spirit, the letter and life. Therefore the Word is called Scriptures given by
inspiration, and is profitable for doctrine, etc. 2 Timothy 3.16, 17. And the
Spirit is called the anointing, and teaches all things, 1 John 2.27. And I
will put my Law in their minds, Heb. 8.10.11. And the comforter whom I will
send, he shall teach you, Joh. 14.26. 1 These. 4.9. Acts 2.17.

Thus, whatever doctrine of holiness is in the new Testament, we are to
receive it, because it is now the doctrine of him who is the Lord, Jesus
Christ, the Lord as well as Jesus Christ, and one who commands as well as
saves: Nor is there any Covenant of works in such kind of obedience: Life is
given us to make us obey, but not for obeying.

XXXVIII. The new Covenant further set forth to be merely a promise.
THe Covenant that is called the new Covenant that God makes with his now under
the Gospel, is all on his own part, without any thing on man's; he makes himself
ours, and makes us his; all is of his own doing; though a Covenant in the
strict legal common sense, is upon certain articles of agreement and conditions
on both sides to be performed: Thus stood the old Covenant, there was life
promised on condition of obedience; and so in covenants and contracts betwixt
man and man, but now there is a Covenant or rather promise in Jesus Christ, who
is called the Mediator, or Mannager of the Covenant, in which God gives himself
freely in Christ, to be the God of a poor sinner; Christ undertaking all, both
with the father and the soul; such a kind of covenant was established with
Noah, Genesis 9.11. Behold I establish my covenant, etc. nothing required on man's
part: This is called a new Covenant; for it is clear against the strain of the
old, wherein man was to have his life upon condition; yet it were good, that we
did not rest too much in the notion of a covenant; nor is it the way of a
covenant that the Gospel uses, but rather the promise, or grace, or salvation;
for the Spirit uses the word Covenant only by way of allusion; and because the
soul being under the power of the spirit, does it self contract and covenant
with God to obey, though God gives no life in such a way of a covenant or
obedience. And I observe, that the usage of this word has a little corrupted
some in their notion of free grace, and makes them conceive a little too
legally of it: And I conceive, that the Doctrine of it in Heb. 8.10, etc. I
will write my law, etc. And I will take away your stony heart, etc. And put a
new spirit within you, Jer. 31.31. Hezek. 36.26. does clear it to be only
promise and grace, and free-love to a sinner; for if any thing were to be done
for life or salvation, we should darken the glory of free grace, and make it a
promise neither wholly of grace, nor wholly of works. And if it be of grace, it
is no more of works, otherwise grace is no more grace, Romans 11.6. Nor is this
promise of salvation given to sinners as sinners, barely, simply, and singly;
nor as qualified or conditioned; not to sinners as sinners, for God can only
love in Christ; nor as qualified and conditioned; for so life should be
purchased by us rather then for us; so as we are only sinners in our own and
others judgments, but truly loved in Christ when the promise comes. And thus
the Scripture calls us ungodly, and sinners, and children of wrath: Not that we
are so, but seem so; or not so in Gods account, but the worlds: So as here is
ground enough for any to offer salvation to the veriest sinners, and for the
veriest sinners to receive; for God is in Christ reconciling the world unto
himself, not imputing their trespasses unto them, and has committed to us the
word of reconciliation, 2 Cor. 5.19.

XXXIX. The way of assurance for believers.
THe surest knowledge that any one has that they have received the promise,
is, the closing of their heart with Christ; the real receiving and believing;
the relying and going out of the heart upon Christ; The just shall live by
faith, Romans 1.17. We walk by faith, and not by sight. This was the assurance
the Father of the faithful had, who staggered not at the promise, but gave
glory to God: Yet this assurance is such, as the soul cannot be content with
only; there is something in man beside faith to be satisfied; reason will have
more light to see by; and therefore the working of the spirit in new obedience,
and love, and repentance, and self-denial, are such glimmerings as the soul may
be refreshed by, though not strengthened by, and comforted by, though not
supported by: Works though they cannot assure by themselves, yet raised up by
faith, may with it cheer up the soul; if we believe more of those works then we
see or feel, and so strengthen them by faith, they may be like the tokens and
change of raiment by which Jacob was persuaded that Joseph was alive; by these
we may be better persuaded that we live, and live in Christ: Therefore the soul
being a reasonable and discoursive spirit, is much satisfied in such a way,
when the Spirit of God helps it to reason, and draw conclusions, as thus,

The Word says, Whosoever believes, shall not perish.

But, I believe, says the Soul; and therefore according to this Word, shall
not perish.

The Word says, To believe, is to receive, or put confidence in, or trust, as
in John 1.12.

But, I receive Jesus Christ for mine, I trust in him for salvation; therefore
I believe.

The Word says, Repentance, love, self-denial, obedience to the Will of God,
are all the fruits of the spirit; but these are in me; I can repent and love,
and deny my self, and obey.

The Word says, That we are complete in Christ, and righteous in Christ; but
when I repent, or love, or obey, I believe I am in Christ; and therefore, my
love, and repentance, and obedience is such as I may believe, though not in
themselves, yet in him to be good and spiritual.

And thus a believer may believe for assurance, and yet reason for assurance;
and some other questions a believer may put to his own spirit, and draw it out
into more conclusions for believing; Am I Christ's, or my own? If I be Christ's,
do I walk with Christ? And live to Christ? And obey Christ? Do I delight in
Christ, and those that are Christ's? Or do I live to my self? to my lust? To my
profit, or credit? To others or the world?

XL. The Gospel-Ministration very glorious.
THe ministration of the Gospel exceeds in glory; for now under the ministry
of Jesus Christ himself, the heavenly things themselves are brought forth; the
free-love of God in Jesus Christ, and the free-love of Jesus Christ himself,
all the powrings out of spirit, and the full discoveries of love, were reserved
for Christ's own day; the Kingdom of God, the righteousness, the justification,
the forgiveness of sins, the spirit of comfort, the glorious liberty of peace,
and joy unspeakable, are the glory of Christ come in the flesh, the treasures
that went with his own person; they under the Law saw this day but afar off,
they saw but the blood of bulls and goats, and grace and peace afar off: but
blessed are our eyes, for we see; and our ears, for we hear that which many
Kings and righteous men have desired; we see the Son of God bleeding himself,
and are under a more spiritual sprinkling then they; they were under a fleshly
purifying; they were as children and servants that were not at age, and so had
neither the use, nor freedom of the heavenly inheritance; they were subject to
death and bondage; we are delivered to serve him without fear; they were kept
under the school-mastership of the Law; we (now the fullness of time is come)
enjoy the precious liberty of the sons of God; the light which they lived in
before, was glorious compared with the darkness the Nations lived in even
under a region and shadow of death; but it was darkness compared with the
light of the Gosp^l; now light covers the earth, and it is not such an
enlightening as that of mount Sinai to bondage and fear, a light with smoke in
it, and thunder in it, or a light with types and terror in it; but a more
clear, comfortable, and soul-refreshing light; the beams of Christ now shine
with grace and love upon the souls of his people, like the Sun in the
Springtime, in whose light there goes a virtue which causes the earth to
spring and blossom: so do the souls of the Saints under the Sun of
righteousness now; grace, mercy, and salvation is in the light thereof; and
love, joy, peace, with all the fruits of the spirit do appear.

So as Gospel Times, have the substance and body of Christ, and all that is
Christ's; the Gospel-ministery has the flowings of the spirit Act. 2.17, 18.
Joh. 16.17. has power and life in it, to change the soul from glory to glory
by the Spirit of the Lord 2 Cor. 5. Joh. 5.25. has spiritual freedom to set
souls at liberty from death and the curse; and everlasting righteousness is
brought in, Dan. 9. and the fullness of age is come, so as the severity of the
Law, the Schoolmaster, has done whipping us; we are now under grace, Gal. 4.5,
6. the Gospel-ministery has Jesus Christ himself, no sign of him, no type of
him; here is no sacrifice now, no Moses now, but the very Son of God, and with
him a whole change of the Priesthood and Ordinances; now no more Priests to
reconcile God, but God reconciled, and Ministers of reconciliation; the
Ordinances, few, clear, and spiritual, and the ministry free and large; no
more to Jew only, but to Jew and Gentile, even to the world. God so loves the
world now, that whosoever believes, shall have life, Isai. 54.1.

XLI. In what kind the Gospel is glorious.
THough the Gospel tells of glorious things, yet they that overlook, this glory
may soon see little of it; for in the word, there is but a little noise: A sad
story of one crucified, dead, and risen; all the outside is but mean; the
ministry only a plain business of tidings, or the foolishness of Preaching,
1 Cor. 1.18. The other ways of it, plain and homely, some water for Baptism, a
little bread and wine for food. The meanest and poorest most commonly for
followers and friends of it; not many noble, nor many mighty, 1 Cor. 1. The
Ministers of it, or preachers and publishers of it, but homely; What is Paul or
Apollo's, but Ministers by whom we believe? 1 Cor. 2.5.

The House of God, or family, or Church; some poor ones called Saints in
fellowship; the Officers but few and plain, Pastors, Deacons, Elders; the Laws,
some bare words of entreaty, as well as command; all, both Word, Ministry,
Officers, with all the doings and administrations that concern Christ, all
suited to a poor crucified, dying Jesus, to a state of humiliation: And thus,
all so mean, as to the Jews a stumbling block, and to the Greeks foolishness,
1 Cor. 1.23.

Thus the Gospel looks on the worldly side of it, Thus Christ neither striving,
nor crying, nor any one hearing his voice in the streets. Matthew. 18.19, 20.
Thus is the work of salvation carried in a mystery: This is the wisdom of God
in a mystery, 1 Cor. 2.7, 8. And yet great is this mystery of godliness.

First, In Jesus Christ himself, though he look like the Carpenters Son, yet he
is the only begotten Son of God, full of grace and truth: The brightness of
his glory, and express image of his person, John 1.14. Heb. 1.2.

The Word it self or Scriptures, though a Word or Book like a common writing,
yet it is a Word of truth, The power of God unto salvation, Romans 1.16.

The Ministry, though but a little plain teaching, yet mighty to save, to cast
down high imaginations, to reconcile; and the Ministers of it, Stewards of the
Mysteries of God, Ambassadors in Christ's stead; their feet beautiful, with
glad tidings to sinners, 2 Cor. 47. 2 Cor. 5.20.

The people of God, or friends of this Gospel, though counted the offscouring
of the world; yet a spirit of glory rests on them, 1 Pet. 4.14. As dying, and
yet behold they live; as sorrowful, and yet always rejoicing; as poor, yet
making many rich; as having nothing, and yet possessing all things, 2 Cor.
6.10, 11.

The Kingdom of God, though a thing not seen, yet righteousness, peace, and
joy, Romans 14.17.

XLII. The form of the Gospel, or way of dispensation.
THe Gospel is formed up of exhortations and persuasions. We beseech you to be
reconciled, etc. And suffer a word of exhortation, etc. And of conditional
promises etc. As, Whosoever believes shall not perish, etc. Of threatenings,
as, he that believes not is condemned, etc. Of Commandments; If ye love me,
keep my Commandments, etc.

Now this Gospel thus fashioned, is on purpose for the better dispensing of it
to the souls of his people, that his divine and spiritual things might be more
naturally conveyed, in a notional and natural way; as the Key is made fit to
the Wards of the Lock. And this is the end rather of this Gospel fashion, then
any supposed free will in man as some imagine; for the Gospel is offered not
upon freedom of will in any; but that those who are made to receive it, should
be wrought on in a way as near to their own condition and nature or reason, as
can be; for none are converted against their will, but their will is
spiritually changed, and so they are made willing in the day of his power. God
does not break up the hearts of his people, but does open them, and stands and
knocks. Lydia's heart was opened; and he stands at the door and knocks, Revel.
This is the Gospel-way of his entrance; He does not strive nor cry, nor does
any one hear his voice in the streets; He does not force in himself, nor any
thing of his into the soul, but brings in spiritual things so naturally as they
cannot, nay, will not resist.

XLIII. Gospel-promises.
THe promises are but words of Gods engaging himself to man freely, and of
grace; and as his promises are of grace, so his performances are in
faithfulness: And in these promises, the love of the Father, Son, and Spirit,
are conveyed, and the treasures and riches of salvation to sinners. And thus in
this life, all is passed over upon Word to us, and for our believing this Word,
and taking in the things of Jesus Christ thus upon Gods bare engagement; he
has bound himself freely to give all hereafter, and yet all is of free-gift
too, things freely given to us: And in this time of our waiting, and believing,
and relying, we have one earnest, even a spiritual and glorious earnest, given
to us here; even the holy Spirit of promise, which is the earnest of our
inheritance; though some promises speak of conditions, as of faith and
repentance, etc. Yet they are only ours upon this condition that they were
Christ's before; for in him all the promises are Yea and Amen.

The promises that God makes thus in Christ are free, and being made in Christ
are more free; for Christ is all that to God that we should be unto him; and we
are in Christ so as Christ takes away all discouragements and excuses in any
that dare not believe them to be theirs; and therefore, The spirit and the
bride say, come, and whoseever will let him come, and take of the waters of
life freely, Revel. 22.

XLIV. God under the Law; and the Gospel legal, and Gospel-worshippers.
BEfore Jesus Christ came in the flesh, and offered up himself, God offered him
beforehand in Types and Sacrifices of blood, etc. and the whole Ministry was a
Priesthood, so as the Priesthood and Sacrifices of the Law did set forth and
shadow Christ in way of offering, or sacrifice, to God the Father; and
therefore God under that dispensation, did appear rather under a condition of
reconciliation then reconciled, though all were saved then actually in the same
Christ who was to suffer: But how much of this salvation they knew, is a
question; it is very likely, and something clear from the Word, That God was
very sparing in that time of the discoveries of himself in Christ; and they
rather saw him in his glory above then below; and possessed the inheritance of
the Redemption, rather then the Ministration or Gospel of it.

God appearing thus, the whole ministry of the Law was taken in as agreeable
to this manner or pattern; and the Law of Commandments revealed on Mount Sinai,
did help to the form of this ministry, and made sin appear and abound more;
for which, such sacrifices were prepared. And thus the whole frame of the old
Testament, was a draught of Gods anger at sin; the Law revealing sin, and Jesus
Christ offering for sin: And so God in this time of the Law, appeared only as
it were upon terms and conditions of reconciliation; and all the worship then,
and acts of worship then, as of prayer, fasting, repentance, etc. went all this
way, and according to God under that appearance; and every thing of worship
seemed to bring something of peace and atonement in relation to the great
atonement to come by Jesus Christ: And in this strain runs all the Ministry of
the Prophets too, in their exhortations to duties and worship; as if God were
to be appeased and entreated, and reconciled, and his love to be had in the way
of purchase by duty, and doing, and worshipping; so as under the Law, the
efficacy and power was put as it were wholly upon the duty and obedience
performed; as if God upon the doing of such things, was to be brought into
terms of peace, mercy, and forgiveness; so as their course then, and the
service then, was as it were a working for life and reconciliation.

But now under the new Testament, God appears in Christ, and reconciliation is
finished; peace is made by the blood of his Cross; and now the Ministry of
the new Testament, is not a Priesthood of any more offering Christ to God in
sacrifice, but of offering and tendering the tidings of a fully reconciled God
in Christ to man, and of a sacrifice already accepted for sin; so as now there
are no Priests, but Ministers, or Stewards, or Ambassadors for dealing out,
and dispensing the love of God to man, and for publishing the glad tidings of
peace; so as all worship now, and spiritual obedience, is to run in the way of
this dispensation; not for procuring love or peace from God, nor for pacifying;
but for love procured, and peace purchased by Jesus Christ.

If these things thus stated, were more fully and spiritually opened, there
would be more Gospel-teaching and obeying; for man's obedience toward God is
not so notionally, nor orderly carried, nor so purely as the Gospel calls for,
but they run in a legal strain, and would work God down into his old and former
way of revealing himself as under the Law, when he seemed to be only in the
way to reconciliation and peace, rather then pacified; and thus in prayer, and
fasting, and other acts of obedience they deal with God as they did under the
old Testament, not considering the glorious love revealed in Christ crucified,
and how all Gospel Ordinances are only ways and means for God to reveal this
love and grace by the spirit of adoption, not any ways and means of ours for
getting some love from God which Christ himself has not gotten for us.

XLV. God and His in reconciliation.
THey that have received the word of reconciliation, are in a very precious,
and comfortable and peaceable condition: they are lovers of God and Christ,
they are no more such enemies in their minds by wicked works, they oppose not
the will of God as they did, they resist not the Word of the Gospel, they
slight not the communion of the spirit of God; they are tender of any thing
that is Gods; they count not any thing their own for God; he shall be welcome
to all; if he call for their credit, he shall have it; they know they have a
spirit of glory resting on them; if he call for their possessions, they leave
father, and mother, and brethren, and sisters, and lands, for his Names sake;
they know these are not to be compared to the glory which shall be revealed,
and they shall have an hundred fold in this life; if he call for their life, he
shall have it; they know, he that will lose his life for his sake, shall find
it.

And being thus reconciled to God, they are friends with every thing of his;
every Gospel-Mystery they know they receive; and every thing of his they know
not, they wait till he reveal even this unto them: and though they do not
receive it, because they know it not yet to come from God, yet they do not
reject it, because it comes in the likeness of his Word, lest they be found
fighters against God, and crucify the Lord of glory in ignorance, like the
Jews.

And being thus reconciled to God, they are lovers of all his; they love the
brethren; and if there be a naked disciple, they cloth him; if an hungry
disciple, they feed him; if an imprisoned disciple, they visit him: I was
naked, and ye clothed me, etc.

And being thus reconciled, they behold God reconciled to them too; they are
now in the way of his love; for now God freely communicates with them, and
meets them in Christ; he shines on them in the face of Jesus Christ.

Now God and the soul thus reconciled, are in a full enjoyment of each other,
as the husband and the spouse, the father and the son; there is no parting
rights and propriety; God has not any thing in Christ, in Heaven, or Earth,
but it is theirs: all things are yours, and you are Christ's, and Christ is
Gods, and every thing of theirs is his.

XLVI. The fears of weak believers; and the remedies.
WEak believers are like melancholy people, who think things far otherwise then
they truly are; right smoking flax where there is more smoke then light, more
ignorance then true discerning.

The fears they are in, are of this kind:

1. They cannot be persuaded their sins are pardoned indeed; they would, and
they would not believe it; they cannot, from the spirit that is in them, but
close with Christ, and clasp about him for salvation; yet then they are not
sure they have him; they may be deceived they think in that.

2. If Faith carry them on to believe a little more or better of their
condition; yet the pride of some sins will not down with them: some of their
sins which they have made their darlings more then others, and cherished
themselves in, Oh, these they think are either too great, or too often
committed to be all forgiven, and at once. The remainders of these sins lie
like dregs in the bottom, and their conscience cannot be satisfied that God
has fully pardoned.

3. They look not upon God in the pure simplicity of his Word, and promise; but
they suspect and are jealous God has some reckoning still behind, because they
are sinful, and God is purer then to behold iniquity; and they cannot believe
that God can bear with all those corruptions and transgressions in them.

4. They think, though God may be reconciled with them and love them at
sometimes, (for they (poor souls) only reckon the seasons of the spirits
comforting and breathing for the times of forgiveness;) yet God may be
provoked again, and angry again for new sins and failings: and then they are as
much troubled how to come at any peace again as they were before: and then it
must be only another Sunshine of the like comfort must warm them into peace
and believing.

5. They cannot persuade themselves how they can sin as they do daily, but that
they are accountable for all the breaches; and so set up new scores of sins in
their consciences, and keep reckoning for God, and disquiet themselves in vain.

6. They think every affliction or trouble that befalls them, is a punishment
for some sin they have committed, and they look on them as messengers of wrath
from God, sent upon them in judgment, as if God were satisfying himself upon
them, and pouring out some wrath to appease his Justice for such sins.

7. They mistake the Gospel in the doctrine of it; and every Scripture that
threatens for sin, they interpret to belong to them, because they have
committed that sin.

In a word, these are the fears summed up:

1. They are, and they are not persuaded their sins are pardoned.

2. They are persuaded some sins are pardoned, but not some others which they
have most sinned in.

3. They fear still God does not intend them such grace as he profers and
speaks; and suspect the Gospel.

4. They think if God do pardon them, yet they may provoke him again soon after.

5. They suppose they cannot sin as they do, and not be accountable; and they
cannot but be sinners in Gods sight as well as their own.

6. They think afflictions are sent upon them for their sins; and they cannot
consider God in them but as angry, and so help the afflictions to afflict them.

7. They interpret every curse in the Law and new Testament for sin, their own,
if it be against their sin.

XLVII. The remedies to each fear.
FIrst, We are commanded to believe forgiveness of sins in Jesus Christ
thoroughly, and not in part; Through his Name whosoever believes in him, shall
receive remission of sins, Act. 10.43.

2. We are to consider that one sin cannot be forgiven but all is forgiven:
Jesus Christ has done away all sins, For this man after he had offered one
sacrifice for sins for ever, sat down on the right hand of God. Heb. 10.12.

3. We are to believe God in the plainness and simplicity he speaks in, in
Gospel-promises, and words of grace even to our souls, as if he spoke out to us
by name from Heaven, He that believes not God, has made him a liar, because
he believes not the record that God gave of his Son. 1 John 5.10.

4. We must know, God is not as man, that he should be angry, and pleased, as
we carry our selves: I will be merciful to their unrighteousness, and their
sins and iniquities will I remember no more. Heb. 8.12. I will be to them a
God, and they shall be to me a people. v. 10.

5. We must remember our sins are no more ours, but Christ's; and his
righteousness is ours: God reckons and accounts us as one now: so though we
sin, yet every sin was accounted for in him; and now, there is no condemnation
to them that are in Jesus Christ. Romans 8.1.

6. And for afflictions, though they come in with sin, and for sin, and are the
wages of sin; yet to the righteous, and believers, they are no judgments for
sin; for every thing of Justice against sin was spent upon Christ: so as to us
they are only trials: Count it all joy when ye fall into diverse temptations.
Jam. 1.2.

They are chastenings of love to prevent sin, As many as I love I rebuke and
chasten. Revel. 3.19,

They are in a word, a diverse way or dispensation of love and grace; love
working by that which is evil in it self: We know that all things work together
for good to them that love God. Romans 8.28.

7. We are to consider that though the Scriptures do often set forth the
righteousness of God against sin, and his justice against sin; yet that
unrighteousness being satisfied by Jesus Christ, it has no power against
those that are in Christ; no more then the pursuer had to do with the murderer
in the City of Refuge: For sin shall not have dominion over you, Romans 6.14. Ye
are not under the Law, but under Grace.

XLVIII. Legal Conversion.
THere is much mistake in the business of conversion or regeneration. For
while it is looked upon merely as a change in affection, or conversation, there
is much deceitfulness; there are means which can work that, and yet that shall
be no spiritual work neither; the pressing things legal, and as mere commands
from the Word, may; there is something of the Law in the heart beforehand and
by nature to side with the Commandments in the Word, and so to work something
within as well as without; and so there may be an obedience or conformity of
the spirit of man, and yet no spiritual obedience nor conformity.

2. There are Gospel-terrours as well as legal, as Hell and Hellfire, and the
worm that never dies, and condemnation, and Jesus Christ Judge of quick and
dead, etc. All these in the Word carry such an Image of wrath, as they work
fear and passions, etc. which force on the soul to reform, and yet but to a
form of godliness, not to the power.

3. There are certain ends nature propounds to it self for conforming, as life
eternal, etc. and reputation, and men-pleasing; there are exhortations,
persuasions of preackers, or friends, or acquaintance; there is education;
there is examples of judgment upon sinners, godly society, etc. All these
carry in them a power to make men do something, and but something in the way of
Religion.

All these being of an operative and working nature, may bring forth a thing
like conversion; which indeed is but a restraint at best, or a more purely
natural condition: Nature is of it self excellent, and if not originally
corrupted, more excellent. We see how temperate, meek, just, wise, liberal,
merciful many have been; and amongst Papists, how self-denying, contemplative,
divinely practical, and morally excelling; and amongst Formalists in Religion,
how severe, strict, professing and practicing in Religious duties. So as the
way for pure conversion, and to be spiritually renewed, is by Jesus Christ: He
that has the Son has life: Faith and not works quicken us.

XLIX. When the spirit of adoption works not freely.
WHen they put something of satisfaction toward God, upon any thing they do,
upon any performance, or obedience, as if God were prevailed with by any thing
of their own.

When they take in Christ for a Mediator but by the way, not resting wholly on
him, and in him; but as it were to make up all sure with God, they look rather
on the by upon his intercession.

When they are in bondage to some outward circumstances of worship, as time, or
place, or persons, that they cannot pray but at such hours, or in such places,
etc.

When they do things merely as commanded from the power of an outward
commandment or precept in the Word, that brings forth but a legal, or at best
but a mixed obedience, and service of something a finer hypocrisy.

When they do because of some Vow, or Covenant they have made, etc. it is more
properly the service of the old Testament, and part of their bondage; for
wanting the power and fullness of the Spirit of adoption to work them to
obedience freely from within, they were under the power of outward principles
to put them on from without.

When they come to God in any act of worship, as prayer, etc. as to a Creator
rather then a Father; and as a God rather then a God in Christ, they put
themselves under such an infinite glory, purity, and justice, as they can
neither have access with Faith nor boldness.

When they take any outward thing to move them, rather then apply to Christ for
strength, life, and spirit; for the more any motion or obedience is caused from
things without, the more forced and unnatural is all such obedience, and the
less from a spiritual power within.

When they measure their forgiveness by their sin and sanctification, and can
believe no more then they have peace for; and that peace upon something of
their own performed, and not from believing on him who has performed all. God
has not given us the spirit of fear, but of power, of love, and of a sound
mind, 2 Timothy 1.8. or of a mind not corrupted with any of these.

L. Opinions which make men legal.
THere are certain principles by which some are religious, which carry them off
much from the Gospel-way of obedience.

1. Men naturally think it impossible that they should be accepted of God, and
justified, and do nothing themselves for it, and in it; Hereupon flesh and
blood can hardly be brought off to believe forgiveness of sins, nakedly and
freely for nothing in themselves.

But to take a way this, consider that forgiveness of sins is of a mere grace,
and mercy, and gift. By grace ye are saved; it is the gift of God, Ephesians. 2.8.
and through Jesus Christ; through the Redemption of his blood, Romans 3.24. As a
Prince raises up a beggar, and Pharaoh's daughter brought up Moses; so are we
raised up freely, and in mercy.

2. Men think that whatsoever they perform in obedience to God, that God cannot
but approve it, because they themselves approve it for good; hereupon men come
to look on themselves as doing something for life and salvation.

But to take off men from any such self-love and opinion in the work os
salvation; consider there is sin in every thing they do. 1 John 1 8. If we say
we have no sin, we deceive our selves: And there is none righteous, no, not
one, Romans 3.10. Neither does God judge as man judges. God sees not as man
sees; man looks on the outward appearance, but God beholds the heart, 1 Samuel 16.7. God has balances to weigh thy actions; and to be laid in the
balance, they are altogether lighter then vanity, Psalm. 62.9.

3. Men naturally think it impossible to be damned for good works, and serving
God in a man's own fashion; and surely none are condemned simply for good, but
as that good is evil in some kind or degree; and hereupon men raise up hopes
and comforts to themselves from such a course of life as they live in with God.
Thus from something they fancy good in their own way, and from something they
fancy in God of mercy and forgiveness to sinners, upon this they venture
themselves.

But to take away this, consider though God be merciful, yet he is only
merciful of his own fashion, not of ours, not in the way we may corruptly think
him: Thou thoughtest that I was altogether such a one as thy self, Psalm. 50.21.
Gods love, and grace have ways and fashions of their own they move in; and if
we be not in their way, we shall not receive of his fullness: The Jews were
very zealous after God, yet not in Gods fashion, but went about to establish
their own righteousness. The Papist is a follower after God; and the legal,
formal, poor ignorant Protestant, runs in a course of obedience and serving
God; yet it is not in Gods way of righteousness; and so they miss of
^alvation for not seeking it purely in Christ their righteousness.

LI. Jesus Christ offered to sinners as sinners.
THe Apostle has a precious doctrine, and it is this, This is a faithful
saying, and worthy of all acceptance, That Jesus Christ came into the world to
save sinners, of which I am chief, 1 Timothy 1.15. As if he should say, does any
of your hearts tell ye you are sinners? Let not that be any ground at all to
keep you from Christ, let not any despair because of that; I my self was thus
and thus, a blasphemer, a persecutor; nay, as if that were not enough, I was
the chief of sinners, or the sinner in chief; the grand and supreme sinner, as
if there could not well have been a greater; and I (says he) obtained mercy. So
as here the Spirit has laid in answers to the objecting or doubting soul.

If the soul should object, If I were not such a sinner as I am, I could
believe; the Spirit answers, Jesus Christ came into the world to save sinners:
As if he should say, to save even just such as thou art.

If the soul should object further; but there is not such a sinner as I am; the
Spirit answers, yea: But here is one greater then thou; here is the chief of
all sinners, the Prince of sinners obtaining mercy, of which I am the chief.

So as none can be such a sinner to whom Christ, and the blood of Christ, may
not be tendered and offered; and that upon these grounds.

1. From the order of Gods decree, he loved us, and gave Christ for us when we
were sinners. God commends his love toward us, in that while we were yet
sinners, Christ died for us, Romans 5.8. God so loved the world, that he gave his
only begotten Son, John 3.

2. The offering the Gospel and Jesus Christ to a sinner as a sinner, is but
the bringing out this glorious love of God in time and dispensation; it is but
the offering that love which God loved them with from everlasting: Neither is
it any more to offer Christ to a sinner, then to manifest God in his first
love, when he gave Christ for sinners in his own decree.

3. It exalts grace more, and shows as a gift indeed; what can be more of
grace, then that Jesus Christ should receive a sinner. one who has no money
nor price, no works nor righteousness to bring for him.

4. It is the right lifting up Jesus Christ as Moses lift up the Serpent in the
Wilderness; not for the healed to look upon, but the stung and wounded.

5. It leaves men without all excuse, and brings the greater condemnation; for
when Christ is brought home to the very soul, and the blood offered at every
ones door for receiving, then there can be no objecting; Lord, had I been thus
and thus fit and prepared, then I should have received thee; but I was a foul
sinner at that very time, so and so guilty. O, will the Lord answer, I come
therefore to pardon thee, and to wash thee in my blood, because thou were so
foul; and that is no excuse.

6. It is most agreeable to the Gospel-way of dispensation, and Christ's own
preaching, The whole need not a Physician, but they that are sick: I came not
to call the righteous, but sinners to repentance.

7. All that ever received Christ in the Gospel, received him in a sinful
condition; the many believing Jews in the sin of crucifying Christ; all the
Churches of Corinth, Ephesus, and Colosse, Such were some of you, but ye are
washed, etc. And ye were sometimes darkness, but are now light in the Lord,
Ephesians. 5. Ye who were dead in trespasses and sins; and were enemies in your
minds by wicked works, yet now has he quickened, Coloss. 1.

So as to offer Jesus Christ to sinners as sinners, is but

1. To offer him in time, as God gave him before all time; God gave him to us
because we were sinners, and now he is but offered as he was given.

2. There is more of grace in it to offer him to a sinner as a sinner, that
where sin has abounded, grace may abound much more.

3. There is a clearer lifting up Christ as Moses, for the wounded to look on
as well as the whole.

4. Men are left without excuse, because when he is held out to sinners as
sinners, all are in a condition for him; sin and a savior are most suitable.

5. It is as Christ himself did, who both calls sinners, and converses with
sinners; with Mary Magdalen an harlot, and with the Publicans, and with the
woman of Samaria, who lived in uncleanness when the pure Messiah preached
himself to her.

6. It is as all that ever received him, both in Jerusalem, Corinth, Ephesus,
etc. who had they not been foul, had never been washed; had they not been
darkness, had never been light in the Lord.

But you will tell me of conditions in the Gospel, of faith, and repentance,
etc. and certain legal preparations before Christ should be offered and brought
to the soul.

Yea; but that ye may not be puzzled as many are.

In the Gospel-way or dispensation, faith and repentance is to be preached, but
Jesus Christ still with it. Believe in the Lord Jesus Christ: And you are not
to consider repentance from believing, nor believing from repentance, nor
either from Jesus Christ, nor Jesus Christ without them; and yet neither of
them as bringing in Christ to the soul, but Christ bringing in them, and
working them more and more in the soul, and that upon these grounds.

1. Christ is not ours by any act of our own but Gods, God imputing and
accounting: To make Christ ours, is an Almighty work, and not the work of any
thing created; So as Christ is ours without faith, by a power more glorious and
infinite; but we cannot here know him to be ours but by believing; nor partake
of him as ours but by believing.

2. If faith should give us our interest in Christ, then as our faith
increases, our interest should increase, and we should be more and more
justified and forgiven, which none allow, calling these other acts of faith
faith of assurance, and acts of manifestation; and if faith be thus in its
other degrees of working, why not in its first? It is the evidence of things
unseen, Heb. 11.

3. If Christ should be ours by faith in this sense, then when faith ceases,
shall we cease to be justified. Shall faith begin our interest here, and not be
able to continue it hereafter?

4. Can a sinner be too foul for a Savior, and too wounded for a Physician to
heal, and too filthy for a fountain opened to wash?

5. He that offers Christ, offers all the conditions in him, both of faith and
repentance; For Christ is exalted to give repentance, etc. And faith is called
the faith of the Son of God, Gal. 2.

6. It is no more to offer Jesus Christ, then any grace of Christ's or gift of
Christ's to a sinner; for a sinner is as unprepared and unfit for the one as the
other, equally in sin and pollution to both.

7. This spiritual work is a new creation; and so works of preparation are not
so proper in that: We are (says the Apostle) his workmanship created in Christ
Jesus, Ephesians. 2.10.

And now, why shall any servant of Christ refuse to give out that blood of his
Masters which runs so freely to sinners? And any sinner refuse to receive it,
because their vessels are not clean enough for it, when it is such a blood as
makes the vessels clean for it self?

LII. The simplicity of the Gospel-Salvation, easy and plain.
JEsus Christ, and forgiveness of sins in his Name, and redemption through his
blood, is the first and only thing held forth in the Gospel to sinners; the
other Mystery of righteousness, is revealed to believers; forgiveness of sins
is first taught, that they may believe; and the other glorious Mysteries are
taught, that they may know what they do believe: they are first to see Gods
love, and afterward his glory: Jesus Christ crucified is the best story for
sinners, and Jesus Christ exalted for Saints; and therefore it is that in all
the Apostles Sermons, the story of blood, and redemption, was first preached;
and when they did believe that, then they wrote Epistles and Revelations of
greater things unto them, so as they spoke of Christ only to make them
believe, and wrote to them of him when they did believe.

Salvation is not made any puzzeling work in the Gospel; it is plainly, easily,
and simply revealed; Jesus Christ was crucified for sinners; this is salvation,
we need go no further; the work of salvation is past, and finished; sins are
blotted out; sinners are justified by him that rose for justification. And now
if you ask me what you must do to be saved, I answer, Believe in the Lord Jesus
Christ, and thou shall be saved. All that is to be done in the work of
salvation, is to believe there is such a work, and that Christ died for thee,
amongst all those other sinners he died for.

To believe now, is the only work of the Gospel; This is the work that ye
believe on him whom he has sent. Joh. 6.29. This is the Commandment, that ye
believe on his Son Jesus Christ. 1 John 3.23. That is, that ye be persuaded of
such a thing, that Christ was crucified for sins, and for your sins; and we are
called on to believe, because they only that can believe, are justified; By
him all that believe are justified. Act. 13.39.

So as salvation is not a business of our working, and doing; it was done by
Christ, with the Father; sin, and Satan, and Hell, were all triumphed over by
Christ himself openly for us; and all our work is no work of salvation, but in
salvation; in the salvation we have by Christ, we receive all, not doing any
thing that we may receive more, but doing because we receive so much, and
because we are saved: therefore we work not that we may be saved, and yet we
are to work as much as if we were to be saved by what we do; because we should
do as much for what is done already for us and to our hands, as if we were to
receive it for what we did our selves.

This is short work, Believe and be saved; and yet this is the only
Gospel-work and way. Christ tells ye in few words, and his Apostle in as few; As
Moses lift up the Serpent in the Wilderness, so must the Son of man be lift
up; That whosoever believes on him should have life, Joh. 6. Paul tells you, Say
not in thy heart, Who shall ascend unto Heaven? That is to bring Christ from
above. Or who shall descend into the deep? That is to bring up Christ from the
dead. But what says it? The Word is nigh thee, even in thy mouth, and in thy
heart, the Word of Faith which we preach. If thou shall confess with thy mouth
the Lord Jesus, and shall believe in thy heart that God raised him from the
dead, thou shall be saved, Romans 10.6, 7, 8 9, etc.

So as here is but looking up on Jesus Christ, and salvation is in thy soul;
and believing with thy heart, and thou art saved; thou were saved by Christ
before, but now in thy self.

There are yet these grounds why salvation is so soon done.

1. Because it was done before by Christ, but not believed on before by thee
till now.

2. Because it is the Gospel-way of dispensation, to assure and pass over
salvation in Christ to any that will beleve it.

3. There needs no more on our sides, to work or warrant salvation to us, but
to be persuaded that Jesus Christ died for us, because Christ has suffered,
and God is satisfied. Now suffering and satisfaction is that great work of
salvation.

4. Because they, and they only are justified, who can believe: Righteousness
is revealed from faith to faith; and all that believe are justified, Romans 1.17.
Acts 13.39.

5. That it may be by grace, and not of works. Being justified freely by his
grace, Romans 3.24.

LIII. Christ and every part of Christ to be studied, and believed in.
THere is not any thing of Jesus Christ, but it should be matter for a
Believers faith to be exercised in, from his divine nature to his incarnation,
and so to his exaltation; that they may be able to comprehend with all Saints,
the height, and depth, and breadth of the love of God; for God was infinitely
influencing into every passage of his birth, his growing up, his infancy, his
circumcision, his baptism, his preaching, his praying, his temptations, his
fasting, his obedience to the whole Law, his sufferings, his reproaches, his
poverty, his humiliation, his bloody sweating, his judgment and Judges, his
condemnation, his crucifying, his peircing, his nailing, his drinking Vinagar
and Gall, his strong cries and tears, his crown of thorns, his blood flowing
out from his feet, hands, and side, his giving up the ghost, his death, burial,
resurrection, ascension, exaltation, and sitting on the right hand of God, his
Priesthood, Mediation, Intercession, Dominion: There is infinite virtue in all
these, and the Gospel is made up of these; in these are those unsearchable
riches of grace, love, and Redemption. These are to be the subjects of every
Believers meditation, and he is to seek into the spiritual extent of these, and
deepnesse of these: Out of these he is to draw strength, power, love,
holiness, spiritualnesse, regeneration, mortification, new obedience, faith,
repentance, humiliation, meekness, temperance, etc. Christ and every thing of
Christ, is to be matter for him, and meditation for him. These are those
ministerial and instrumental means of grace and life to sinners; not an
historical or tragical use of these, but a believing use, a relying, resting,
comforting, spiritualizing use: These were all but parcels of the work of
redemption, but parts of the whole; and to all these, there is an infinite
depth of sin and temptations opposed; And therefore the more we are improving
our selves in these things of Christ, the more spiritual and infinitely
provided shall we be against the other: It is not enough to look on Jesus
Christ in his single person glorified and exalted, but to study every part and
parcel, and passage of Jesus Christ: And thus to know nothing but Jesus Christ
and him crucified.

The several ways of Free Grace, and the general point searched.
Free Grace is conveyed to us under several notions in these times; and I shall
in few words gather up the conceptions, intending a larger draught of it
hereafter.

The first way of Free Grace, free without all condition of Grace. THe first
and purest conceive of the Mystery thus:

That God the Father for manifestation of his mercy and love, purposed some to
glory whom he loved freely, and gave his Son to be a way to them (...) and
righteousness, knowing that the ^ould fall under sin and condemnation in the
first Adam (where he might justly have left them, as the rest, in their blood
and pollution) had it not been for that free grace in himself; and therefore
that Son is called the second Adam or quickening spirit, and this mystery of
salvation is free, infinitely free; the Father loving freely, and giving his
Son; the Son loving freely, and giving himself freely; and the spirit working
from them both freely for the manifestation of this salvation in the souls of
his elect, and through the ministry of a free Gospel, even to sinners as
sinners, and children of wrath in themselves.

A second way of Free Grace, free only with conditions.THe second sort hold,
which is called the Reformed opinion, and is the more general:

That God did freely decree or purpose some to salvation in Christ, through the
intervening and instrumental assistance of faith, etc. And that none are
actually justified, nor partakers of this free salvation but by faith; and the
Go^^^^ (...) ministry of conditions or qualificatio^ (...) this salvation: And
this I call a Decr^e with Graces.

A third way of Free Grace, free only upon condition. THe third sort hold,
That God did freely purpose some to salvation, and therefore gave Jesus Christ,
but it was only to those whom he foresaw through the help of a
Gospel-ministery and other spiritual sufficiency would embrace Jesus so given,
yea given for all, if all would have embraced him. And this I call a respective
Decree for Graces.

A fourth way of Free Grace, free merely in the extent. THe fourth sort hold,
That God purposed some to glory and salvation in Jesus Christ, without respect
to any thing but the intervenings of faith. etc. and gave this Jesus Christ to
die for all, not that all should have sa^^^^^on by him, but only the elect who
are only made to believe; and that the Gospel-ministery reveals such a kind
of general Redemption; otherwise the Gospel could not justly be tendered to all;
nor any be condemned for not believing, nor unbeleeving be any sin.

This last I shall only speak on.

This is in part the general point, and it is answered thus:

Some do it by a way of interpreting the general Scriptures; as these of Gods
loving the world, etc. Interpreting the world in opposition to Jews, and by
that understanding the Gentiles who were called the world. And so of sending
Jesus Christ to be a propitiation not for ours, but the sins of the whole
world, etc. Romans 11.11, 12. And so where ever the word all is, that God will
have all saved, etc. they interpret it with restriction to some of all, etc.
Matthew. 3.5. And so for the general tenders of the Gospel, they interpret that
by way of dispensation for the better gathering up the elect from all sorts and
places, Matthew. 24.31. And so for not believing, they say men are not damned for
not believing simply, but from the condemnation (...) ^re left under, though
their not bele^^^^^ may make their condemnation greater.

Some answer it by showing forth the contradiction in this of Christ dying for
all, and saving some, that it is as much as Christ died for all, and not for
all.

Some answer, by turning it into immortality for all, but not salvation for all.

Some answer, by revealing Gods love, and Jesus Christ as the effect of this
love, as it were the instrument and minister of this love; and this love of God
going out only to the elect, for whom Christ is given: This way they conceive
takes off general Redemption. But we must take heed of making Christ more
instrumental and ministerial then the Father has made him, and will stand with
the honor of the Son, who is the first born of the elect the head of the body:
And we must be spiritually wary in distinguishing too curiously upon Jesus
Christ as Son and Mediator, etc. but only in a Scripture-way; for Christ is
but one, and salvation is one.

Thus far some worthy believers go in opposing the general point, but we must
go a little further in finding out the Mystery of the general point, and meet
with it there. Now I humbly conceive the mystery lies only in a rational way
of justice, and Gospel Dispensation, That God will not merely, and arbitrarily
damn any because he will. So as he has put every one under a state of
Redemption, and power of salvation; and they are damned from their own will,
not from Gods: Thus go the deepest and most notional of that way.

And the other part of the mystery which is lowest, and most argued for, in
these times, and by most, is only, that the Gospel cannot rationally be
tendered but upon some such general ground as Christ dying for all.

Thus I have opened, though weakly, the mystery; and the opening it may be
enough, and the whole building of the universal Grations, is all upon a
rational notion strengthened with some general terms in the Word: Now let them
see whether mere Reason is a Principle high enough for a spiritual mystery. And
if bringing salvation down upon such a ground, be proportionable to so glorious
a work as that of Redemption, besides all the intervenings it has with
free grace, and free-justification and election of grace, etc.

Now let the Mystery be looked on in their way, which is this, Christ died for
all, else the Gospel cannot be preached to all.

And in the other way, which is this, Christ died only for his, and it is
offered to all, that his who are amongst this all might believe; and though he
died not for all, yet none are excepted, and yet none accepted but they that
believe, and none believe but they to whom it is given. And in this way of
salvation there lies more mystery, which is more suitable to a divine work.
Great is the mystery of godliness.

And this ground, That none are excepted, is as clear, and spiritually rational
for the Gospel to be preached to all, as this ground, That he died for all.

Seeing upon both grounds, Some only are saved, and not all, and a decree of
mere grace and of faith foreseen, do equally imply an impossibility of all to
be saved; and therefore why is it so contended for that all are redeemed?

Some Truths of Free Grace sparkling in former Writers, and in some famous
approved men of our times, in Testimony to what is in this Discourse in part
asserted, and in these times, by others Assertors of FREE GRACE.
The Law by the preaching of it, cannot reform, but only Faith and Grace.
Dr. Preston in his Sermon. on the new Coven. Comment. in Galat. 3.5. which he
quotes Page 347. IF I should only preach to you the Commandments, etc. I might
preach long enough ere you could keep them: Do you receive the Spirit by the
preaching of the Law? No, but by preaching promise of pardon and forgiveness.

Page 333. 2. If a man would desire to change his course to be made a new
Creature, the way is not to consider the Commandments what he ought to do; but
my beloved, the way is to get assurance that thy sins are pardoned, to consider
the Covenant of Grace, Heb. 9.14.

No preparatory works before Christ.
Master Rogers in his Book of the right way to be saved, etc. P. 54. Diverse
mistake, and look for something to ground on in themselves, and so are woefully
bewildered, and in great perplexity: It is as if one should not set a young
Tree, but let it lie above the ground till they see what it will bear.

Free Grace has many enemies. We should stand for Free Grace.
Dr. Sibbs his Book of the excellency of the Gospel above the Law, Page 241. DO
ye wonder why the Free Grace of God has found such enemies, etc. The heart of
man is in a frame of enmity against God, and sets it self most against that God
will be most glorified in. Let us vindicate nothing so much as grace.

We must live by grace, and die by grace, and stand at the day of judgment by
grace; not in our own righteousness.

Faith is no condition of the new Covenant of grace.
Master Perkins Commentary on the Galathians. P. 157. THe Gospel called by Paul
the Promise, offers and gives life freely, without the condition of any work,
and requires nothing but the receiving of that which is offered. It may be
objected, that the Gospel promises life upon the condition of our Faith. Answ.
The Gospel has in it no moral condition of any thing to be done of us: Indeed
Faith is mentioned after the form and manner of a condition; but in truth, it
is the free gift of God as well as life eternal, etc.

Page 184. We have all in Christ. Thou must not receive the Promise immediately
of God, but Christ must do it for thee; though thou be unworthy, yet there is
dignity sufficient and worthiness enough in him. If thou say that thou must at
the least receive the promise at the hand of Christ; I add further, That he
will not quench the smoking flax, etc. And ou^ salvationg stands in this, not
that we know and apprehend him, but that he knows and apprehends us first of
all.

Christ is every thing to us.
Mr. Calvin in his Book of Institutions, Book 2. chap. 16. P. 167.8. WE must
take heed of drawing any part of Salvation but from Christ: If we seek
Salvation, let it be in the Name of Jesus Christ; if the Spirit, or any gifts
or graces, let us seek them in his Unction; if strength, let us seek it in his
power; if purity, in his conception; if mercy, in his nature, which was touched
with our infirmities; if redemption, in his passion; if forgiveness, in his
condemnation, or being a curse for us; if satisfaction, in his sacrifice; if
cleansing, in his blood; if mortification, in his Sepulcher and death; if
newness of life, in his Resurrection; if immortality, in the same; if an
heavenly inheritance, in his entering into Heaven; if all good things, in his
Kingdom and Dominion here: All treasures are in him, and they who are not
content only with him, shall have no rest anywhere; although too they may look
principally at him.

Nor can there be any unbelief, nor doubtings where his fullness is thus known.

God was never an enemy to his.
Calvin quoting Augustine in his Book of Institut. Tract. in Evangel. Johan.
110.2. Chap. 16. P. 106.1. INcomprehensible and unchangeable is the love of
God, not that love which we obtain from reconciliation by the Blood of Christ,
but wherewith he loved us before the foundations of the world; therefore when it
is said, Christ reconciled us, it is not to be understood as if then he begun
to love those whom he hated before, but he reconciled us even to that love
wherewith he loved us, Romans 5.8. therefore in a wonderful manner he loved us
when it is said he hated us.

That we and those commonly called Antinomians differ little.
Mr. Gattakers Testimony in a late Treatise Gods eye, etc. in Epist. to the
Reader. P. 10. THe matter in controversy between us and these men, is not how
far forth sin is removed or abolished in Believers, or how far forth it is by
Justification abandoned, or in what sense God is said to see or not see sin, or
to take notice of it in believers and justified persons, etc. As if all these
things were granted on both sides.

Note. Men of learning you see and judgment, do not cry out Antinomianism on
Free Grace, or free justification, as others do, etc. But acknowledge a consent
in all these, etc.

Why Luther is not quoted here.
LVther I could quote, but he is now looked on by some as one that is both
over-quoted, and over-writ Free Grace, and bending himself against works, which
was the Popery and Antichristianism of those times. He raised up grace, rather
in opposition (as some think, to whom I dare not so fully agree) to the excess
of works, then to the just advantage of grace; and yet they can allow him in
other things. Thus we can pick and choose from a Reformer what fits to the
standerd of our own Light and Reformation, and cast the other by: I shall
therefore quote some later.

Concerning our not resting on sight, or our own graces for assurance.
Mr. Tho. Goodwin in his Book Christ set forth, in Epist. to the Reader. Page
1, 2. AN immoderate recourse unto signs, though barely considered as such, is
as unwarrantable, when thereby we are diverted, and taken off from a more
constant actual exercise of daily thoughts of faith toward Christ immediately,
as he is set forth to be our righteousness, etc. And yet the minds of many
are so wholly taken up with their own hearts, that as the Psalmist says of
God, Christ is scarce in all their thoughts^ But let these consider what a
dishonor this must needs be unto Christ, that his trai^ and favorites, our
graces, should have a fuller court, and more frequent attendance from our
hearts then himself who is the King of glory; and likewise, what a shame also
it is for believers themselves, who are his Spouse, to look upon their husband
no otherwise but by reflections, and at second hand, through the intervention
and assistance of their own graces, as mediators between him and them.

Now to rectify this error, the way is not wholly to reject all use of such
evidences, but to order them, etc.

We are justified in Christ's Justification, when he rose. Page 202. Christ his
Resurrection was the original act of Gods justifying us in Christ, we were
virtually justified then in Christ his being justified, as in a common person.

God remembers not our sins. P. 207. As by reason of his Intercession God
remembers not old sins, so likewise he is not provoked by new.

The Law as given by Moses, no Rule to Christians.
Mr. Bolton in his Book of the true bounds of Christian freedom. P. 74. OThers
say we are freed from the Law as given by Moses, and are only tied to the
obedience of it as given by Christ; and as Christ renews it, and as it comes
out of the hand and from the authority of Christ; and we have it immediately
from the hands of Christ. I shall not much dislike this, etc.

Believers and God are never at enmity. P. 14. As none of our sins shall
condemn us, so none of our sins shall put us into a state of ^ondemnation more;
none of our sins shall ever put us under the curse, under wrath again.

God does not punish Believers for sin. P. 14. We are freed from all miseries,
afflictions, punishments, which yet are the fruits of sin as they may be
conceived to be fruits of wrath or have wrath in them.

Faith before Justification is no Grace.
Mr. Rogers on the Articles, Art. 13. P. 57. WOrks done before Justification
please not God, before men do please; nothing that they do; can please him;
hereby the vanity of them is perceived who think before man's justification, his
deeds do please God.

Note. What, is faith then to be accounted before Justification, according to
this principle?

God is never an enemy to his though sinning.
Mr. Herbert Palmer in his Charact. of a Christian in Paradox, etc. P. 10. HE
believes the God that hates all sin, to be reconciled to himself, though
sinning continually, and never making, nor being able to make him satisfaction.

We are justified though ungodly. P. 11. He believes the most just God, etc. To
have justified himself though a most ungodly sinner.

We are not saved by any thing we do. P. 58. He knows he shall not be saved by
his works, and yet does all the good works he can.

A believer sins not. P. 68. He cannot sin, yet he can do nothing without sin.

A believer believes against hope. P. 74. He believes like Abraham, in hope
against hope.

God freely pardons. P. 12. He believes himself freely pardoned.

Believers are pure in Gods sight. P. 13. He believes himself to be precious in
Gods sight.

Christ promised to sinners as sinners.
Master Tho. Goodwin in his Book of Christ set forth. P. 30. THere are absolute
promises made to no conditions, as when Christ is said to come to save sinners,
etc. Now in these it is plain, Christ is the naked object of them, so that if
you apply not him, you apply nothing; for the only thing held forth in them is
Christ.

We are justified in Christ's justification. P. 122. Even so it is in the matter
of our justification; it was done virtually in Christ; and afterward when we
believe it is actually passed in, and upon our selves.

So by Christ's being justified, we are all virtually justified, and in Law,
through a secret, yet irrepealable Covenant between God and Christ, who only
did then know who were his.

A Believers Law is Christ and his Spirit.
Mr. Perkins in his Comment. on the Gal. P. 128. THey which are true Believers
are a free and voluntary people obeying God, as if there were no law to compel
them; they have Christ to live in them; the Spirit of life that is in Christ,
is in them, and that is their Law. It is the property of a child of God to
obey God, as it is the nature and quality of the fire to burn, etc.

Thus in the quoting or citing these Divines concerning some precious truths of
Christ, I have done as Paul said to the Athenians when he would prove a God, As
certain also of your own Poets have said. So the truths which are abroad
mistaken by many, are truths, as also some of your own Divines have said.

FINIS.

