THE SPEECH OF A CAVALEERE TO HIS COMRADES, In answer to the Wardens SPEECH.

Written By Agamemnon Shaglock Van Dammee, Clerk of the Regiment.

LONDON, Printed Anno. Domini 1642.

The Speech of a Cavaleere to his Comrades: In Answer to the Wardens Speech.
BRothers and Commanders of this never too civil society, Before I give fire
to those Squibs and Crackers I am to discharge, my courtesy thinks it fit to
present the complement of your poor servant, for your general choice of me to
shake my locks before you this day for the honor I confess, of the Cavaleiry;
which I doubt not (by that unaccustomed quality amongst you called patience, and
upon condition you will not outswagger me) but to finish as well as the maddest
rorer here present. And for testimony of my acknowledgment of your favors, and
as a preparation to the work in hand here is a health of three glasses, when
that is gone round I will proceed you ^ut the business it self in as
newcoyn'd asseverations as my vapouring Genius can perform.

You are now to conceive in what time and upon what occasion this discourse is
grounded. The time is now, just now that I have received my pay, newly repaired
my thredbare outside, and once more do enjoy that miraculous blessing of clean
Linen, before my Fether and Scarf be ruffled, or the dew of Heaven has
fallen upon them, my pockets furnished, my brain inspired with raptures and
enthusiasmes insinuated by the corroborative virtue of this excellent and never
too much admired Cavary. The occasion, since high treason and hanging matters
are become but market-talk* only but a game at Shittlecock, wherein the bold
world dare toss betwixt King and State every idle fear, and frivolous
suggestion which fancy or imagination does prompt and frame, in their half
lost wits, and this kind of desperate communication grown more customary then
the French tongue or fashion. Why should not we as well as all the world
besides take some liberty to prate of great matters to little purpose. And
therefore as these two glasses more shall enable me, I will go forward with
such matters as the heat of my blood and the vertigo in my brain shall drop
into my language.

My Antagonist the Warden begins his Cinquepace with the Liturgy of the Church,
wherein his Scotch Bagpipe whines you out his Aptipathys thereunto in such
abominable out of tune chords that the unparaleld harmony rather begets
ridiculous mirth then any solitude or soul-sympathizing pleasure. Now touching
this subject, I must ingeniously confess (Gentlemen) but pardon me for it,
that the time has been I have seen the inside of a Church, although not often
nor lately, and there although the Organ did exceed the noise of the voices,
whereby not a plain syllable more then O and yaw, he and aise, could be
distinguished, yet I verily believe the Vicars and song-men do mean well by
their ejaculations and gaping upwards and shakeing their graybeards. And
although the Organist do as a Praeludium to the Antheme play Sellengers-round,
yet I must tell you that it is done with so much division both on the treble
and base keys, that no body but himself can tell what to make of it, unless
he tell it to a friend as once he did, which friend began imediately to dance,
and being asked by a Vicar what he meant (quoth he) to serve God as he was
never served in his life, but let that pass. I have seen books with good plate
covers, guilt Candlesticks, Plush Carpets, etc. and so far am I from thinking
any hurt of all this, that I must acknowledge I have many times wished this kind
of Liurgy in mine own chamber, that I might have made much of it, and used it
more frequently then I did. Now for form or essence of worship, I know
(Gentlemen) you will easily give me credit, and not stand upon that needless
trouble of proof, that I have been no extraordinary student therein, nor much
addicted to the discourses thereunto pertaining, whereby I cannot but hope you
will pardon me if I do not give you satisfaction in it. But concerning the
Wardens church which is a conventicle, you may please to understand, that
before I was in service, in regard I owed some money in town, I took occasion
to walk without my Periwig or my Sword, which I left with my then Landlord for
his service, thereby to obscure my self from my Tobacco-Grocer, my Aledraper,
and my Thimble-merchant, and others into whose book I had (by many faithful
persuasions and honest protestations) damned my self in a matter of four
Nobles. And having likewise at that time by a woeful mischance gotten an
imperfection in my nose, whereby I could not choose but speak the right tone, I
was by this means generally taken for a Roundhead, and being on a time
invited to the duties I went along with the party, who conducted me into a
chamber one pair of stairs and a half below stairs, which presented it
self a Cellar, and a Kitchen, where there were a matter of twenty persons of
both sexes. The men saluted me with welcome dear brother, I wish you had
brought along with you a yoke fellow that might be edifyed: The women told me
they should be glad to discover unto me the path wherein I was to tread, and so
presented me with a cup of Muscadine and Eggs, and thus ended the salutation,
for being all very hungry the Bibles were presently said under the Dresser, and
the meat brought to the table, and thus far, nere a man breathing could
complain of their Liturgy; marry after dinner which was finished in less then
four hourres, they fell to (I cannot call it singing, but) howling the 119.
Psalm, the sudden squeaking whereof frighted me out of the house, and has
made me look thus ^^dly ever since. Now for these reasons* I see no hurt in
the Liturgy, and therefore as I love it, so deep will I drink to the full
confirmation and continuation thereof.

The next thing which his Wardenships wisdom flys upon as eagerly as a Hawk,
or a Pussatd seises a Paitridge or carrion, is the Militia, of which kind of
Militia I will not speak one word, it was so well done, (if not over done by
the Warden himself) but I will dilate upon our own Militia, that of us the
Cavaliers, and Gentlemen of this present society, In which you must understand,
I mean not the Cavaliers that belabored themselves so bravely at Westminster,
nor they that now attend at Yorks, for such as they are a thought too great to
be jested withal, and are or may be our paymaisters: no, I mean us the new
made Gentlemen of the times, us that have won our Arms by feats of Crivalry
done in the North of England, where we did nothing at all, and I say what
though we cannot prove the descent from our ancestors. It Is no matter, the
greater glory hangs upon our Swords, and the world shall study new haroldry
purposely to enable us with the Arms of the Gentry. Thou Tom Trimwell wast Sir
John Sucklins Tailor, in making the doublets did reduce as much shavings as
made thy self a suit, so because a Troper and art now a Cavalier. Thou Master
Fawn wast thy Captains man got his cast clothes, and are now a formal
Cavalier, have the garb, the oaths, the vapors, and all things in a Tavern
pertaining to the function, I my self was a Gentleman before indeed, for I was
gentleman usher to the Lady at Ch^^ing-Crosse that has vowed never to sin with
any but Soldiers and has been famous with so many of them, by her
Commendations I was made a Corporal, and am therefore an absolute Cavalier:
And now Gentlemen that we may perfectly attribute the title to our selves, If
there be any amongst us that bears the name of any great Family in the
Kingdom, let him pretend himself of the same house, and blood, twill carry it
amongst those that cannot contradict it, Or besides by the adding, diminishing,
or exchanging a letter or syllable of your own names into other men's it is
easily done: And therefore he whose name is, Person may call himself Percy,
Barton may change to Bar^^^, Cliff. to Cliford, or Clifion, and then again let
the want of means be supplied with excess of swaggering, and domincering, a
kind of testy pragmaticall bearing, and scorning to answer any man that
question's your birth, all easiy ways to preserve your selves under the title
of Cavaliers, which very bare title is enough to make you of that Militia,
which service we hope will not be much more difficult then that Militia the
Warden mentions, so long as one Array continues at York, and the other at
London, and howsoever well their protectors do agree, yet I hope their Armies
may never come nearer then they are, and that partly for the Commonwealths
sake, and partly for our own sakes, for truly these meeting services are not
half so comfortable as those six, or seven score miles distance, And to be a
warrier, a Cavalier a Scldate, and lie in a fetherbed, eat and drink like
Epicures, not to be lowly, why it almost as easy a perfection as to be a Round
head, although the Roundhead be far unfit to be a Cavalier, for surely the
steel Helmet would chafe his ears to pieces, there being no hair to defend
them. Besides the noise of the Guns would run like an Axell through his
ears, and turn his head round about it, for you know he is giddy already; No,
no we are the men that must charge at distance, and stand for the good of that
party that will pay best, and doubt not to defend them bouldly against to
resistance, But I will end this argument lest my cock-braines should hurry me
into such circumstances, as would bring me into question without redemption.

The third discourse his grave frenzy throws him on is the extirpation of the
Papists that giving Religion* that leavies their great Legacies in the hands of
the Priests to be distributed to charitable uses, and make their children
beggars for their better inortification, if they but dare to (...), let us
alone with them now their arms are taken away, Mary if the Protestant Jesuit
were but as well tamed as they are there would be no use for us in England, we
might even trudge as Volunteers to the other Kingdom, where we should hardly
find so good entertainment; and yet we should make pretty work with them, if
they were but disarmed as the papists here are. And Gentlemen, when the
seditions are appeased let us expect no other employment. But this Discourse
tends to my next argument, therefore I will touch it but sparingly, only six
glasses to their destruction before we come that we may have the easier
service; if we be called, I pray you pledge it, that it may be known we can wish
them mischief thus far off, and that at a nearer we might be (...) on to do
something too upon any reasonable odds in Arms and Ammunition.

Then my adversary proceeds to beat out the quintesence of his noddle, Would
that employment of beating out had been mine, I would have done it to some
purpose. But that is of the Irish expedition, in which I will say nothing of
the benefit thereof, more then appertains to our selves, which consists of
these conveniences, naked Arms appearing out of Shamy doublets like Pedlars or
Glasse-carriers with half breeces, footlesse stockins, and over them drawn a
pair of Leather-buskins, which in former days had been boots of a decent
wearing, and near to the primitive nakedness. For diet, think not scorn of
moldy Biscuit, and a fat Coult boild in his own skin, if you can catch it: for
want of diet that precious vapor of Virginia in a leaguer pipe is a singular
prevention to stop the yawning of the hungry stomach; and grudge not now and
then (...) be magnificently starved to death for want of these commodities too;
and the sports and recreations that belong to this employment of standing
centinell four long hours in a frosty night, or lying per deiu in a trench of
cold water, which is a sovereign provocative to that comfortable malady called
the Belly-ach, and yet there may be better accommodations if the Adventurers
will but bring in their money fast enough; but in case they do not the
aforesaid solaces and preferments are like enough to ensue. Now Gentleman, you
know we are the men must actually and personally hazard our selves in these
affairs, whereas that cowardly slave the Roundhead, if he were called to the
employment, would be hanged here for disobedience to his Colors, rather then
stir a foot toward it; and yet at home dares preach against us, yea and pray
too till his eyes be almost started out of his head with praying for our
confusion, tha^ must defend him to live at ease snarling like a dog in a
manger, and will neither do good himself, nor permit others to do it, he vexes
me to the heart, but I w^l dround sorrow in this Beare-boule of Sack, and so
end this business.

Lastly, he proceeds to his period, his pudding prick, his nil ultra coxombry,
his fears and jealousies; for our part Gentlemen, we are now armed cap a pae
with a good grape Armor, and is this a time for us to fear? No, I fear not
the devil himself in any shape whatsoever. I could now outstare a Basilisk,
poison a Crocadile with one puff of my smoke-reek'd nostrils, I durst do any
thing that ever any man or men combined to any other creature ever attempted, O
for an Army of such as we now are ready pitched, to assault all the Rebels in
Ireland joynd before us, S. Patrick himself, were his legend true, should find,
that mortal creatures inspired with immortal Sack, were able to vanquish an
Army of such as himself. nay, since I am now like to be in the Array of one
side or other, let me tell you, I fear not a Roundhead, which of all shapes
else I am the most afraid on, if afraid I could be. But Gentlemen, I have
dilated so long, that I can hold open my eyes no longer. I will therefore comply
with the Warden in one particular, and fall asleep, And that without a quarrel
first had too, which is no ordinary miracle.

FINIS.

