OBSERVATIONS ON Monsieur de Sorbier's VOYAGE INTO ENGLAND.

Written to Dr. WREN, Professor of Astronomy in Oxford.

BY THOMAS SPRAT, ^ellow of the Royal Society.

LONDON, ^rinted for John Martyn, and James Allestry, Printers to the Royal
Society. 1665.

A LETTER Containing some Observations On MONSIEUR de SORBIERE'S Voyage into
ENGLAND.
Written to Doctor WREN, Professor of ASTRONOMY in OXFORD.
By Tho. SPRAT.
Sed poterat tutior esse Domi.
SIR,
I Here send You the Account, which Monsieur de Sorbiere has gi^en of his
Voyage into Enggland. And though it be an insolent Libel on our Nation, yet I
doubt not, but you will peruse it with delight. For when you have beheld how
many errors, and falsehoods, he has committed in this small Relation; you cannot
but be well pleased to find, that whoever undertakes to defame your Country, he
must at the same time, forfeit his Wit, and his Understanding, as well as his
good Manners.

The King of France ha^ already given him an effe^ctual Answer. And it became
the justice of so great a Monarch, while he was defending the Interest of the
Christian Faith with his arms, to punish a pragmatical Reviler of one of the
most powerful Kingdoms in Christendom: and while he was exacting satisfaction
from the Pope himself, for an affront offered to his Ambassador, to take care
that none of his own Subjects should presume to injure the reputation of his
neighbors, and nearest Allies.

This just Reply which has been publicly made to this rude Satyr, was the
cause that it has not bin hitherto confuted by an English Gentleman of your
acquaintance, who had undertaken it, whose Wit we might have opposed against
him, if he had still flourish't at Paris, with the Title of Historiographer
Royal, though all his mighty boasts of his own abilities had been true. But
however, though he is now below our excellent Friends consideration; yet I
think my self engaged to see him corrected. For having now under my hands the
History of the Royal Society, it will be in vain for me to try to represent
its design to be advantageous to the glory of England, if my Countrymen shall
know that one who calls himself a member of that Assembly, has escaped
unanswered in the public disgraces, which he has cast on our whole Nation.

I will therefore Sir, briefly take him into a calm examination. And that you
may understand how I intend to proceed with him, I do here in the beginning
profess, that I will not vindicate the honor of the English, by making
reflections on the French. I will not endeavor to repair our own fame on the
ruins of others. I will have no contention but with himself. I will only put
together, and compare, the mistakes, the incoherences, the vanities of his
Book. And (to confess a secret to you, Sir,) I am resolved to take this course
in answering him; not only because I abhor the sordid way of Wit, of abusing
whole Nations: but also because I am not much inamor'd of the glory of his
punishment. For I cannot think that it is worth a man's while, that can live
quietly here at London, to have the honor of making three or four ill-natured
jests, on a whole Kingdom, with the hazard of being justly bani^ht into Flint
or Denbigh for ones labor.

I must confess Sir, I came at first to read him with some expectations. I had
before seen what he had written in praise of those two great Men, the Ornaments
of France, Gassendus, and De Marcu the Archbishop of Paris. And I had some
good hope, that the familiarity, which he pretended to have had with them, had
taught him some of their good Qualities: that from the first he had taken that
candor, and modesty, which the world admires in his writings: and from the
other he had learned with what respect he ought to treat the fame of whole
Nations, Churches, and Sovereign Princes, by that admirable defense, which he
has made of the Gallican privileges. Besides this, Sir, I took his Book into
my hands with the grea^er good will, because I had some knowledge of his person:
I had seen him at the Royal Society: I had been a witness with what civility he
had been there entertained: I had been informed what kindness he had received
at Oxford: I had heard what favor the King had shown him, by admitting him to
private discourses with him in his Cabinet. And from all this I was encouraged
to believe, that he had given an honorable, or at least a just description of
England. But I quickly perceived how much I was disappointed: I presently saw
what difference there is between scribbling fine Harangues on virtuous Men, and
real virtue it self. I strait found that instead of the good intentions, which
he says, Pref.
he never wants, the greatest part of his Treatise consists of ill-grounded
reproaches: that he has ventured on many things, whereof it was impossible he
should receive an account: that where he might be supposed to have some
tolerable knowledge, his malice has perverted his understanding: and that
through the whole course of his Observations, he has by his own example made
good that character, which he often in this Book bestows on humane Nature in
general, P. 188.
that mankind is most pleased with trifles, and that we are all credulous and
Liars.

In his Epistle Dedicatory, he assures the most Christian King, that the
principal motive of his journey, was a desire to advance his Majesty's glory.
The Design was commendable, and worthy an Historiographer Royal. But what
course did he take to increase his renown? he says, that he travell^d abroad,
on purpose to spread throughout the world, the fame of his Majesty's
munificence to himself. I beseech you, Sir, how long will your English modesty
overwhelm you? how much reason have You real Philosophers, and Mathematicians,
to have high thoughts of your selves, if it shall be allowed to a man, who has
only got some name by creeping into your companies, to believe himself so
considerable, that his Masters liberality to him ought to make to all mankind
admire his Magnificence? The Christian world has better signs of the greatness
of the King of France's mind: his armies, and money have been honorably
employed against Algiers and Constantinople. Amidst all these glorious
expenses, what a mighty sound does it make, that the famous Monsieur de
Sorbiere did receive a small stipend out of his Treasury?

But that you may the better understand, who this great man is, that can either
exalt, or diminish the honor of Princes with a word of his mouth: I entreat you
to hear his own description of himself. I will only repeat in his own words,
the praises, which in the compass of a few leaves, he has given his own merits:
by which you may ghess how uniustly he has misplac't, the titles of proud, and
arrogant, P. 133.
when he bestowed them on one of the best Natured, and bashfullest Nations in
the world. He brags, E. Ded.
that he has spent all his life, in advancing the reputation, and sustaini^g
the interests of the Sciences; E. Ded.
that he has always push't on, and encouraged the great Masters of Knowledge to
labor: that he has made a noise wherever he came: P. 201.
that he has got a discretion how to judge of good things: E. Ded.
that he has mingled himself in the intrigues of the Muses; E. Ded.
that he has been so happy, as to be heard by them, and to get some credit
amongst them: E. Ded.
that he holds a constant commerce with the chief heads of Parnassus: Pref.
that he has either been acquainted with all the learned men of the Age, or has
had certain information concerning them: E. Ded.
that his King did not favor him, without understanding him ^ell.

Now Sir, would not any man that reads this conclude, that Monsieur de Sorbiere
is his own Historian, more then the King of France's. Is this conformable to
his own Rule, which he says he prescribes to himself, P. 93.
not to make Elogies on any man? Before he had da^'d to have said so much of
himself, ought he not to have exceeded Julius Scaliger in his Learning, and his
nobility, as well as he has done in his spite to our Country? whereas the
plain, and the true story of Monsieur de Sorbier's life, is only this, he was
borne at Orange, and for a long time professed the Protestant Religion, all or
the greatest part of his Writings have been only some fe^^ Letters, a small
Panegyric^ or two, a translation of Mr^ Hobbes's de Cive, into French this
Description of England and another of Holland. Hi^ first employment was to
teach a younger Son of the Count de la Suze, then he was made Usher to a Schole
in his Native City. Both these places he lost upon suspicion of some heterodox
opinions in the fundamentals of Christianity. In this discontent he came to
Paris, renounced his Religion, and turned Papist. And at last, by many
insinuations and flatteries, he obtained to have the profits of a small
Canonship of Avignon settled upon him. This Sir, P. 201.
is all the Bruit that Monsieur de Sorbiere has made in the world. And this
Confident of the Muses, this Darling of Parnassus, this Favorite of Cardinals,
this Comp^nion of Governors of Provinces, this Censurer of Nations, this Judge
of Kings, though he strove to advan^e himself by (...) Religions, in the one
did never rise to a higher office then of a Pe^d^nt, in the other never go^ a
greater preferment, then ^ pitiful Sin^ Cure of two hundred crowns a ^ear.

And yet you have no reason to think that he has been wanting to himself all
this while, seeing in this very Epistle you find him in plain terms beseeching
his Majesty, E. Ded.
that he would employ him. It Is a modest request. But what other place is that
which he can desire? he says that he has already been glorified with the title
of Trumpeter. P. 201.

E. Ded.


After this, whither would his Ambition lead him? E. Ded.
In this Warfa^ of Letters (give me leave to prosecut^ his own Metaphor) the
name of Trumpeter best become^ him. For (according to his Brother Trumpeter's
defense of himself in the Fable) it is never required of ^uch officers, that
they should engage in the fight, or do any Real Service, but they are only
used for a show, and to make a noise.

As for his other Qualification of Historiographer Royal, I will show you in
one instance how he deserves it. He tells his King^ that he has reported in
every Country where he came, E. Ded.
the prodigious benefits, that heaven ha^ heaped upon him: that to the
Statesmen he has proclaym'd his Industry in business, and the strength of his
Judgment: to the Soldiers, his Valor: to the Friends of the Church of Rome,
his Piety: to the Grandees, the Pomp of his Court: and to the Fair Sex, his
good Mien. These, Sir, are all Brave words, and he had a glorious subject,
whereon to amplify. But let us consider the authority of his testimony. For
Monsieur de Sorbiere, the Kings Historiographer, when he might have had so much
better intelligence^ when he might have alleged the witness of all the brave
men in France; does yet openly declare, that he received the image of his own
Prince's virtues, from the Report of Madam Fiennes, P. 8.
a Lady whom he met with accidentally at Calais.

Upon the very entrance into his journey, as soon as he sets forth from Paris,
he gives evident proofs of the lightness, and vanity, of his mind. From what he
had said before in his own commendation. I began to fancy in my thoughts, a
grave Philosopher, going forth with the intent to survey all civil States, that
he might bring back their profitable Arts, and enrich his Native Country with
them. I called to mind the Examples of Pythagoras, Solon, Thales, Plato, and
almost all the first wise men amongst the Grecians^ who were wont to make long
voyages into Egypt, and the East, for such honorable purposes. And upon this
thought I was inclined to forgive him all his former Boastings, and to look on
them only as pardonable imperfections, which sometimes accompany great Wits.
And hence, Sir, you may think how much I was surprised, when I saw that the
first fruits of his travels were ^n account of the pleasant company, that he
had on the way, of certain Polacks, that spoke Latin, P. 6.
that could play on the Violin, and that gave him a dance twice a day. But
hold Sir, I will not give him this occasion, to confirm the sentence, which he
has past upon us, that the English are of a gloomy, extravagant, fanatic,
melancholy humor. I am content to allow him these divertisements. It was fit
that he, who went forth to civilize barbarous Nations, should be attended as
they were of old, with harmony. Yet you cannot but be delighted, when you
observe the choice that he made: that he who undertook to censure, and refine
manners, and to promote inventions, he who talks of nothing less then intrigues
with the Muses, should find nothing worth mentioning in his journey from Paris
to Calais, but the Music, and the dancing of Poland. Seeing his skill is so
good in one of the liberal Arts^ seeing he was so well satisfied in France it
self, with a Fiddle of Cracaw, or Warshaw. I wonder he would come into England,
to ^earch for Philosophy, and had not rather gone to the famous University of
Mosco.

And yet, Sir, to speak the Truth, I can easily pardon Monsieur de S^rbier's
affection to a Polish Iyg. This is not the worst thing, in which he h^s
e^pres'^ his inclination to that Country^ He was turned out of his Schole a^
Orange, for being a Socinian. And therefore we may well allow him to be an
Here^ick in their M^sick, seeing he was ^o i^ their Divinity.

In this Jolly posture he arrives at Calais. In the same I^^e lay Madam
^ien^es. P. 6,7.
She was invited the next day to dinnner by Mounsie^^ de Courtebonne. Monsieur
de Sorbiere waits upon her thither. The entertainment pleased him. For this he
commends his Host, for one of the most accomplished, and obliging Gentlemen in
France. And he professes, he thought himself bound in Conscience to make him
this public acknowledgment. What is to be blamed in all this? what could be
more courtly? what a greater sign of a scrupulous, and tender Conscience, then
to believe himself so much engaged to be grateful for a good Potage? what
greater recompense could a Royal Trumpeter make to Mounsieur de Courtebonne,
then thus to sound up his meat? hitherto all is well. But now, Sir, I pray
recollect, whether he deals so fairly, and religiously, with your fellow
Professor, Doctor Wallis? to whom, for all his good cheer, for a hearty
welcome, for showing him the University of Oxford, for imparting to him many
curiosities, which he himself confesses were admirable, P. 94.
he has returned no other thanks then only a ridiculous des^ription of his Cap.
P. 100.


P. 14.
At his landing at Dover, he was saluted with ill language by the Boys. Methinks
the handsome entertainment that he met with there at his return, P. 17.
might have moved him to conceal this ill usage. Though the matter it self, at
the worst, was not worth speaking of^ for he might have considered, that it is
an ordinary thing for Boys, not to have any great kindness for Schole-Masters:
yet hence he takes occasion to inveigh against the rudeness of the whole
English Nation. P. 14.
I have already, Sir, engaged my self, to forbear comparisons: or else, I might
perhaps very justly, contradict what he says, P. 14.
that the English are always welcomed at Deip, and Calais, with so much
obliging care. We are indeed with care enough. For the inhabitants of those
places ^eiz on every part of us, some catch our Cloaks, some our Hats, some our
Cloak-bags: and when we are by piece-meals brought to Shore, our officious
frinds demand their own rates for having thus obliged us: so that sometimes we
can scarce know, whether we should call it a Landing, or a Wreck. This, Sir, is
more then a verbal Incivility. Yet I make no Conclusion from hence against the
whole French Nation, but only against the Porters, and Mariners, of Deip, and
Calais. And the same Right ought Monsieur de Sorbiere to have done us. He
should not have presently exclaimed against the whole Kingdom, for that which
is only to be attributed to the ill Discipline of Dover-Schole. This, Sir, may
serve to give you some light, what kind of Judge we are like to find him in
matters of greater weight: and when you read, P. 12.
that he alleges no other sign of the English Courage, then that their
Butchers are delighted with the noble Combats of Bulls, Bears, and Dogs: I hope
you will remember, that it is the same Man, who is here wise enough to pass a
General Rule, concerning the English ill manners, from the Rude behavior of
the Children of one of our Sea-Towns.

Yet, to do him right, in this particular, he does not cast all the blame on
the English: but he involves the Dutch, P. 15.
and the Italians, in the same common Crime. He here complains, that as we call
the Frenchmen Dogs, P. 15
so the Dutch upbrayd them with the approbrious name of Mushromes, and the
Italians with the worse term of Fools. For my part, I think all this by no
means to be justified, if the accusation be true. But however, how does this
consist, with that Flattery which he uses to his KING, E. Ded.
that wherever he came, he found the whole world ready to submit to the French
Empire? What says he now? Is it probable, that all Nations are willing to make
France the Seat of a Universal Monarchy, when at the ^ame time, he assures us,
from his own experience, that the usual Titles, which their Neighbors bestow
upon them, are those of Dogs, Fools, and Mushromes?

The next part of his Iourny is from Dover to London. His error about the
distance between these two places I forgive: though in threescore miles he
mistakes ten. P. 9.
All the evil touches which he here gives, concerning the Disposition of the
English, I reserve for their proper place. But I must take notice how
particularly the Historiographer Royal describes the Waggoner of Canterbury. P.
18.
The Horses were tied one before another: The Driver clothed in Black: a brave
Mountaero on his Head: a jocund fellow; mighty well satisfied with himself: a
great Droll: in all things appointed like another Saint George. What think you
now Sir? may we not after this believe that Tom Coriat is one of the chief
Heads of Parnassus, with whom he has converst? Where lies the Difference
between these two Learned Authors? That famous countryman of ours was just so
curious in his Relations: neither Horse nor Man could escape his Pen: on his
host's Beard, and his Sign-Post he still declaymd: Here are only wanting the
Frenchman's Bills of Fare every night, and you might have sworn, that Monsieur
de Sorbiere had inherited the great, and inquisitive spirit of the Noble
Traveller of Odcomb.

I will not here much insist on the Irreverence of this zealous Roman
Catholic, as we shall afterward find him to be: though methinks it was not
well done of him, to object to the English their calling Saint Paul, P. 42.
by the familiar Name of Paul; when he himself has compar^d one of our chief
Saints to a Waggoner. Nor am I much concerned, to see him so punctual in
describing the Waggoner of Canterbury to his Shirt, and yet not to make any
mention of Thomas Becket, and Austin the Monck, the renowned Saints of that
place. But yet I will here tell him, that though he was so careless of his
Religion, he might have concealed this Character of the Waggoner upon another
account: For he will hardly be able to persuade his Reader, that the best way
to spread the report of the magnificence of his Patron, P. 18.
was to ride to London in a Wagon.

But to give you farther evidence of the solidity of his humor. In all the
Rode between London to Dover, he forgets not to enlarge upon every thing that
he saw, except only that which is one of the bravest spectacles in the World.
P. 26, 27.
He is very exact in surveying the Bay-Windows of Canterbury. He fully
describes the Bowling-Greens, P. 22.
and the very Rowlers, that make them smooth: he speaks so Romantically of the
Valleys, P. 22, 23, 24.
the Hills, and the Hedges of Kent, that the Authors of Clelia, or Astrea,
scarce ever venture to say so much on the like occasion: P. 29.
he commends the convenient Form of Rochester Bridge: which he says, is so
contrived, that men's Hats cannot be blown over. Who can deny, but in all this
he is a very circumstantial, and Faithful Relator? But I pray, Sir, mark, that
he spends very many more lines in speaking of each of these Toys, then of the
most magnificent Arsenal at Chattam, which lies just below that Bridge. Of this
he only in passing says, that here our Ships of War are built, P. 29.
and here they are laid up, when they return. And has he not here unawares
betrayed the Levity of his own mind? where then was his Philosophical Curiosity?
where his discretion to know good things? where his Love for Great, and
Wonderful Arts,? what was a fitter Prospect to have stopped at? where could the
ancient, or present World have shown a nobler Sight? For there, in one view, he
might have seen the Ships, that command the Ocean: that make this small people
that he despises, terrible to the ends of the Earth. We confess we yield to the
French in the Beauty of their Cities, and Palaces: But in our floting Castles
we outgo them as much. He is in the right, that about Paris, there is a far
greater number of good Buildings: But the Suburbs which London has on the
Thames, and Medway, make a sufficient recompense for this defect; as long as we
exceed all the World, in the Fabrics of Strength, and Empire, we may easily
allow him to object to us our want of those of Pleasure. And without question,
the Sovereign, the Charles, the Prince, the James, the Henry, the London, the
Resolution, and above an hundred more, the best in the World, might have been
thought worthy naming by him, that almost reckons up the Windows, and the
Cellars in Canterbury, and expresses himself so well satisfied to see, that
there was care taken, that a plume of Feathers should not be disordered upon
Rochester Bridge.

In his Description of London, he affirms that it is bigger then Paris; P. 32.
and that it is a vulgar error of his Countrymen to think otherwise. And to
manifest how vast he beleives its extent to be, he professes, that he would not
undertake to frame an exact Idea of it in his mind, P. 37.
under a whole years time. This, Sir, methinks, might have admonished him, that
if he was not able to take a full draught of one City in less then twelve
Months, he has been very presumptuous, (let me return upon him his own word) to
conceive that he could give a Character of the Genius, and Vices of our Nation,
of the Constitution, and Corruptions of our Church, of the Weaknesses of our
Government, of the Pedantry of our Learning, and of the Barbarousness of our
Language, in three Months time. This consideration ought certainly to have
stopped his Pen a little, especially seeing the Streets, and the Alleys of
London stand still, and represent themselves always in the same fashion to our
eyes, and it is enough to know them perfectly only to travel them often through:
whereas it is so intricate a work, to take a right Prospect of the Manners of
Men, the Humors of Nations, and the Secrets of Princes Counsails, that it is
perhaps the most difficult employment of human Wit.

It Is true indeed, he endeavors to fetch a justification of his Insolence, from
the English themselves: But the Apology, which he makes, rather aggravates his
offense. He says, P. 10.
, he is confident, that if he writ in our own language, he should not displease
us. And he gives this reason for it, P. 11.
that the English have often caused their Character to b^ published: and that
they have this peculiar good Quality, that they love to have themselves handled
plainly, and ill-spoken of. This he professes to mention in our praise. And if
this be his Courtesy, I now find, that the Passengers with him in the Wagon
had reason, when (as he complains) they interpreted his very Civilities for
affronts. P. 21.
But hold, Sir, what is this that he here says? has the English Nation ever
caused its Character to be Printed? he speaks of it, as if it had been a thing
done by Act of Parliament, and by the Authority of the whole State. It Is true,
Sir, there was (as you may perhaps remember) a small Pamphlet, that came out
with the Title of the Character of England, about six years ago. But that was
pretended to be a Translation out of French. Or let us suppose that it was an
Englishman that writ it under that disguise: yet has Monsieur de Sorbiere from
thence any ground to say, that the whole English Nation has often printed its
own Character? I will give him one instance to show how absurdly he did thus
conclude, from one particular man, to a whole Country. Monsieur de Sorbiere, in
his Book of Letters, has inserted (as he calls it) a Skeptical Discourse
concerning the City of Paris: wherein he uses the Metropolis of all France,
almost as injuriously, as he does the English in this Relation; with language
as foul, as the Dirt of Paris it self. Now then, because Monsieur de Sorbiere,
a private inhabitant of Paris, has presumed to slander it, in that manner; does
it become me to affirm that the whole City of Paris has written a scandalous
Libel on it self?

But perhaps by this Instance which I have here mentioned, Monsieur de Sorbiere
will raise an Argument, that shall be very much to his own advantage. For now
he will be ready to say, that the English have no great reason to take his
Affronts unkindly, seeing he has been already so free of his Corrections, and
Reproofs, as not to spare his own Countrymen themselves. I accept of his
Apology. It Is Pietatis plena Defensio: It Is an excellent good Natured Defense,
for his railing against Strangers, that he has done the same before, against
his own Fellow-Citizens.

But to return to the English-Book, which he proposes as his Pattern. Seeing we
have but one Libel in our Language, against a whole Country in general, let us
permit the Historiographer Royal, to imitate it. Yet I cannot imagine how he
came to uuderstand that Book alone, when he professes that he was utterly
ignorant of the English-Tongue in all things else. P. 20.
It seems that reviling, and Satyr is so natural to his mind, that he is able
to conceive the sense of it, though the Language in which it is written, be
never so much unknown to him. However, if he compare the times of their
publication, we shall find that there is a great distinction between the crimes
of the English, and the French Satyrist. The first of these was published
during the Tyranny of the late Usurpers: and though it was very severe on the
English in many passages, yet the greatest part was spoken with a good
intention, in reproof of the miserable distractions of that Age, and the many
ill-Customs which a long Civil-War had introduced. I beg of you now, Sir, to
consider, by what an Example he clears himself. Because there was one Satyr
written on our Nation, in a time of Licentiousness, and Confusion: he will
second it now with a Worse, when we are settled in Peace, and Prosperity. Seeing
he thinks this Plea sufficient, for what he says against the Manners of the
English, that an Englishman did the same under Oliver, or Richard: I would
have him also defend himself in all his Slanders on our Court, and the King's
Ministers, with an argument that will resemble the other. For why may he not
assert, that it is lawful for him now to use such Liberty; because Milton was
allowed by the Rump, to write a Villainous Book against the late King of Blessed
Memory?

This weak excuse therefore, Sir, that he makes for his Barbarous way of
handling Us, shall not serve his turn. He is so far from having received
encouragement from the English: that I can show him several Volumes of the
Voyages of some of our Countrymen, into Russia, Persia, Egypt, the
Turkish-Empire, the East Indies, and America, which have given a more
advantageous account of those Infidels, and Barbarians, then he has done of one
of the most polite Countries in Europe. The English have described, and
illustrated, all parts of the Earth by their Writings: many they have
discovered; they have visited all. And I dare assure him, that they have been
always most tender of the Reputation of foreign States, which they have gone to
visit, as they have been most merciful in sparing the Natives blood, in those
Countries which they discovered.

Let us now behold how Monsieur de Sorbiere has conformed himself to this
generous English Spirit. I will give you in a short view some of the good terms
that he has bestowed on our Nation in General. He says, P. 12.
That we have skimm'd all the vices, and disdained the virtues of other
Countries: P. 112.
that we contemn all the rest of the World: that we esteem all mankind besides
miserable: that we scorn to look on them, P. 112.
or to speak to them, when they travel hither: P. 153.
that we frequently menace, and insult over our neighbors: P. 113.
that it is very hard to know, how to get our good will: P. 12.
that we have a strong union amongst our selves against strangers: P. 133.
that we regard the prosperity of others with an evil eye: P. 11.
that we have a natural inclination to idleness, to presumption, to a certain
extravagance of thoughts, which is to be found in our most excellent writings:
P. 11.
that almost all the English are guilty of these faults, because they proceed
from our Soil: P. 12.
that our humor is too free, and arrogant: that we are voracious, P. 151.
and luxurious: P. 122, 123.
that we submit to any, that will fill our Bellies, let us rayl, and will not
disturb our slothfulness: P. 19.
that we are scoffers, and malicious speakers: P. 112.
that we are very irregular, and suspicious: P. 113.
that we are filld with dark thoughts: that we are fierce, and capricious: that
we have a melancholy peculiar to us: P. 19.
that if we once get necessaries to support life, our idleness makes us
careless of any more: P. 11.
that there are every where Doe-littles, proud, and Fanatic Persons to be met
with: P. 21.
that there is nothing so crouching as an English man, if once you can find the
means to make him afraid: P. 21.
that if you take away their Insolence, you take away their courage, and that
they make but one leap, from the greatest ^uffe of pride into the basest
cowardice.

He has wearied me, Sir, and I can follow him no further, in heaping up such
ignominious Trash. He acknowledges, that England is better known then any other
part of the World, by the Britannia of the most Learned Mr. Cambden. And it is
happy for us that it is so. For, if Foreiners should have nothing else to
direct them cencerning us, but this fair Idea which he has here given; I
suppose they would travel hither with the same caution, as we do into
Greenland, to fish for Whales: they would only touch upon our shores, and stand
upon their guard at every noise, least the wild Bears should surprise them
unawares. I entreat you to recall into your mind the description, which Caesar
makes of the salvage manners of this Island, at the time that he conquered Gaul
and Britain together, you will find that Monsieur de Sorbiere is less mild in
his expressions on us now, then that great Conqueror was on the untaught and
original Inhabitants, that lived in Forests, and painted their Bodies, to make
them appear more dreadful. Whatever reflections had been made on our
Imperfections, we might perhaps have patiently received them from the hands of
the Master of Rome, that had civilized us; and it may be too from one of his
Trumpeters, so he had been a Roman: But we cannot from a Schole-Master of
Orange, from a Trumpeter of Little Britain, from a man that came hither to pick
up Presents of Gloves, and Ribbands, and (as he himself confesses) to collect
some certain debts, P. 161, 162.
that were here owing to his Friends.

When I first, Sir, beheld all this good language which he has given us, I did
presently cast about and examine what might be the cause of his Rage. And at
last I had from one of his acquaintance intimation enough to ghess, why he was
pleased to be thus incensed. When he returned from his second visit to the
King, this Gentleman asked him, How his Majesty had received him? he replied,
Kindly enough: but, he expected, he would have presented him with some Medall.
This, Sir, was the Provocation, And this was the occasion, that made him lay
about him so terribly. What Indignation can be great enough against such
baseness? Are these Writers of Letters, and Flatteries, and Romances, such
dangerous men? Must the King of England deal with them, as some petty Bord^ring
Princes are forced to do with the Turk? Must he buy them off, and pay tribute
to them, lest they should invade his Territories at their pleasure? Monsieur de
Sorbiere, Sir, is a man of ripe Age, he pretends to have been familiar with
Ambassadors, Generals, and Nuntio's: he lays claim to the title of
Philosopher, and to the most generous Sect of Philosophy, he tells us he is a
Sceptick. But did he ever yet hear of an Example of a Philosopher, that
preferred a petty gift, before the sweetness, and the obligation of so Great
and so Magnanimous a Prince's conversation? It has indeed been told us, that
some Philosophers of old have transgressed on the contrary, and have refused
the Bounty of Monarchs, that they might preserve the liberty of their minds:
But in all History there can be no such instance shown, that a man should
forfeit his Truth, and Honesty, for the want of a Medall, unless it be of him,
that first renounced his Conscience, and changed his Religion, to obtain a
Pension.

In answer to these calumnies with which he has aspersed us, I will only in
plain and simple terms, say as much as may confute his reproaches: But I will
not set upon a long, and a solemn Panegyric of our Nation: For it is not my
business here to paint, but only to wash.

The first Slander, of which I shall take notice, he pretends to be a
Proverbial-Speech; that we have despised all the good, and skimm'd all the bad,
of other people. As for the first part of it, whether we have scorned all the
good qualities of others, I am content to have tried by his own words. He
graunts, that in very many things, we imitate the magnanimous Spirit of the
Ancient Romans. P. 12.
And if we have been so careful to learn Virtue, from an Empire that was long
ago at an end: how could he imagine, that we contemn all that is commendable in
the Living? I thank him that he has resembl'd us to the greatest men of all
Antiquity: But in the Instance which he alleges, he does well express what
Sense he has of greatness of Mind, and honorable Actions: For, P. 12.
He reckons the Fights of their Gladiators to be one Chief Sign of their
Virtue: Which was a cruelty, that all the Civil World do blame them for
besides. I will confess Mons^eur de Sorbiere to be a better Master of Defense
then any that he saw at the Red-Bull, P. 172.
if after this he can prove to Me, that he is a fit Man to distinguish, what is
Insolence, and what is Courage, in the English; Seeing he counts it to have
been a great piece of Bravery in the Romans, that they were delighted in
beholding their Slaves, and their Captives, murder one another. And whereas he
says, that we are infected with Outlandish-Vices; I cannot forbear telling him,
that if this should be granted partly true, that we are in some measure
degenerated from the Native Virtue, and Innocence of our Ancestors, in Edward
the Third, and Henry the Fifth's time; yet it is easy to tell, from what Coast
the Infection was transported hither; and we may say with Horace in a like
case, though in respect of worse Arts then he intended; Graecia capta ferum
victorem cepit, and Arts
Intulit Agresti Latio.


He next objects to us, That we have a strong union amongst our selves against
Strangers, and that it is almost impossible to get our good will. This, Sir, is
so far from being true, that (you know) it may well be computed, that we have
more Foreiners in Norwich, Canterbury, and London, who are permitted to Trade,
and to enjoy the Privilege of Natives, then there are constantly residing in
any Twenty Cities of Italy, Spain, or France.

He upbraids us with frequent menacing, and insulting over our Neighbors. This
he speaks with particular respect to the Hollanders Trade. But who made him
Judge of the rights of Peace, and War? He acknowleg'd before, that all other
affairs, except only those of the Sciences, and Learned men, Pref.
lie out of his way. Why does he then thrust in to be Arbitrator of the
differences between the Dutch, and Us? to call those Menaces and Affronts,
which an Assembly that represents a mighty Nation, has already styled demands
of just satisfaction? and which the great Sovereign of the Seas will shortly
make appear to be a a Vindication of the Law of Nations? But if Monsieur de
Sorbiere beleives, that our present contentions with the Low-Countrymen, are
only rude Affronts, and not just Grievances; I am certain he was once of
another mind, when he writ his Letter to Monsieur de Courcelles in the year
1652. Wherein he extols the Rumps Victories over them, and presages a glorious
Empire to those Tyrants, from their absolute subduing them.

He says, that we will not vouchsafe to speak to those that travel hither, and
yet he calls us presumptuous, Raileurs, Arrogant, and Evil-Speakers. But to
this it shall suffice me to reply, that seeing the same man condemns our
Silence, and our Speech, it is a good Argument, that we are moderate, and
unblamable in Both.

He declares, that We regard the Prosperity of others with Jealousy: whereas,
there is not one of our Neighbors, to whom our Assistance could reach, but we
have aided in their Calamities. The United Provinces, notwithstanding their
present apprehensions of us, will still confess that their Commonwealth was
founded upon English Valor. The Great Henry of France was established in his
Throne by Queen Elizabeth's succors. And while I am writing this, the
Portuguez behold one of the surest Ramparts of their Liberty, to be the Breasts
of English Soldiers.

He proceeds to affirm, that we will serve any man, that will feed us, suffer
us to rail, and be idle. But to give him a full Testimony, how careful the
English are of their own Liberty, it is enough to say, that they endeavor, more
then most other Nations, to preserve inviolable the freedom of mankind in
general; For they never make Slaves of their Prisoners of War in any part of
Europe, which perhaps few other Nations have forborne. And that the world has a
better opinion of us, he may be convinced by this, that the Natives of all
Trading-Countries, have still maintained a peculiar respect for the English
integrity; and that wherever the Bounds of our Empire have reached in ancient
Times, there still remains on the minds of the people, a Remembrance of the
easiness of the English Government. If all this will not satisfy him, that the
English are not of a more Servile Disposition then other Countries; I will put
him upon an Employment, which may well become his Abilities: Let him make a
computation of the Footmen, Grooms of Chambers, and Cooks in Europe, and then
let him tell me, whether he finds those of the English Nation to be the most
Numerous.

He asserts, that the English are suspicious, dark, irregular, caprichious, and
that they have a Melancholy peculiar to themselves. In this, methinks his
small Philosophy should have instructed him better, that such dismal qualities
are not the necessary Companions of the Complexion of Angels, which he allows
them. But he that went dancing from Paris to Calais, and at Calais, as soon as
he alighted out of the Chasse Marin, could not abstain from going to a
Puppet-Play (for that I suppose he means, when he says, he saw a Comedy there)
is not a fit man to Censure what is the difference, between what is
Fantastical, and good Humor, between the Serious, and the Sullen. However he
has made some Recompense to us for this disgrace. He has described the
Vigorous, and the Sprightly Humor of the French, in such a manner, as makes it
no very desirable Accomplishment. For he tells us, P. 16, 17.
that wherever they come, they make such a Noise, as to draw all the Children,
and the Dogs in the Town after them. And I suppose, it is such a kind of Bruit
as this, tha^ Monsieur de Sorbiere says, he has made in all places, where he
arrived.

He often says, that we are all Idle, Sluggish, and Doe-littles. Upon this he
insists so frequently, that I conceive his French Readers, that never saw
England, will be apt to believe that he found it such a Country as Lubberland:
that he caught all the Inhabitants stretched out on their Backs, and sleeping
under Trees. But whence could he gather this conception of our stupidity? The
places that he visited, were only those on the Road to Oxford, and London, and
some few other Noblemens houses besides. I hope he did not conclude our Nation
to be so lazy, from the quiet of the streets, and the retirement of the
Colleges in the University: yet when I remember what judgment he made on our
Rudeness at Dover, and from whence he took his conjecture, I am likewise
inclined to think that he has discretion enough to determine upon the English
sluggishness, from the private way of living of our Scholars. It must be so,
For every where else he beheld many marks of diligence. In his Journey to
London, he confesses, P. 13.
It was admirable to see, what an infinite number of Seamen, and Shipwrights,
were at work on the Banks of the Thames. In London it self he reports, that
there are more Shops, P. 40.
and better beautified, then in any City in the World. He found every where in
England, men busy about Natural Experiments, from whose labors he is
confident, P. 80.
mankind may expect prodigious Inventions. And are all these the signs of an
overgrown slothfulness? But besides these, Sir, he never saw any of the chief
Seats of the English Industry, he beheld not the Cole-pits of New Castle, the
Clothworks of the West, and the North, the Lead Mines of Derby, the Orchards of
Hereford, the Plough-lands of Devon, the New Rivers of the Fenns, the Tinn
Mines of Cornwall. These, and many more, he should have viewed: he should
thence have passed into our Western Colonies: he should have considered the
Sugar works of the Barbados, the Tobacco Plantations of Virginia, the Silk
Trade that is begun there, and the Vast Mole, which goes on at Tangier, P. 175.
that pitiful place (as he terms it:) after all these surveys he might have
been a fitter Judge of the English labors. This exactness of Information might
have been expected from an Historiographer Royal. But he has been as careful
in this, as in most of the rest of his Intelligence. For as soon as ever he
sets his foot on the English shore, he strait positively condemns all the whole
Nation of laziness, P. 10.
from the first Posthorse that he saw gallop.

His last disgrace is the English cowardice. And the occasion from whence he
takes this Observation is very remarkable, P. 21.
He saw an Oxford Scholar affronted by a Frenchman that had been seven years
the Protectors soldier: And thence He passes sentence on the baseness of our
Nation. What, Sir, will the Dutch and the Spaniards think of this? The one,
when they remember the Battles of Portland, and the North forland; and the
other, when they call to mind Tenariff, and the sandy hills of Dunkirk? Will
they not take it very ill at his hands, that he should reckon all those for
Cowards, whom Cromwells Soldiers had defeated? But if our late civil Wars have
not given an unconfutable evidence of the English valor: if the magnanimous
Deaths of so many Martyrs for the Royal Cause do not prove it: If Eighty
Eight: if the Immortal Sir Richard Greenvill, if our Conquests of Ireland, and
Scotland be forgotten: if the joint Testimony of almost all the Historical
Writers for these last six hundred years be of no account: yet (to say no more)
I could never have believed that any French Historiographer would have given it
under his hand, that the English are Cowards.

And now, Sir, having laid all these Ignominies together, would you not have
ghess'd that he would never have dared, to pronounce so boldly upon us, unless
he had conversed all his Life time with us; unless he had thoroughly studied our
Temper, and deeply pierced by a long search into the Compo^ition of our Nature?
But when I find, that as soon as ever he was called Monsieur by the Children of
Dover, he strait makes Conclusion of our general Inhospitality: and of our
Insolence from the next Carrier that he employed: and of our Abusiveness, from
a silly Zealander, that was his fellow-Traveller: and of our want of Courage,
from a pitiful Fray between a naked scholar, and an armed French Soldier, at
Beaconsfield. This puts me in mind of the Judgment, which one of the greatest
men that ever lived, did pass on the Ancient Gauls. It was the experience of
Caesar himself, of their trifling, and changeable Humor, that in their most
solemn Councils, they determined on the weightiest Affairs, upon the Authority
of any slender Report of the next wandering Pedlar. This I hope I may repeat,
without offending the present French Nation. For I do not say, (as Monsieur de
Sorbiere of us) That it came from the Nature of their Soil, and that therefore
it must needs descend on all that are born on the same Earth. But I only
affirm, that I know a certain French Trumpeter, that has made good this
Observation of Caesar's.

This, Sir, being the Form, which he has fancied in his Brain of the wild
Manners of the English, it is easy to ghess, what thoughts he has of their
Religion. And the Truth is, having represented us, as such Monsters, in our
Civil Customs, and Behavior, he could do no other, then paint us out to be as
bad as Infidels, in ^ur Spiritual Condition. For whosoever are Barbarous in
their Lives, can never be good Christians in their Hearts. It is the peculiar
glory of the True Christianity, that it does not only Save, but Civilize, its
Real Professors.

We shall therefore find, that his reproaches are proportionable, concerning
our Religion. And by the Irreverence of the Language which he uses toward it,
you may perceive, that he did not only learn from the Trooper that was his
Companion to Oxford, that the English are Insolent, and Cowards: But that he
also furnished him with this Intelligence of Church. For this account, which he
has here set down, could have been given by no man Living so properly, as by
one that had been a Soldier in Cromwells Army. P. 21.
To pass by the friendly names of Schismatics, and Heretics, which he as
freely bestows upon us as if they were our National Titles: he has ventured to
say, P. 45.
that We separated from the Church of Rome for shameful causes, that are known
to all the World: P. 43.
that the people has an universal Aversion from the Religion established by
Law: that there is a probability, P. 44.
that all our Sects may shortly unite to destroy it: P. 43.
that our solemn Public Prayers are only a Morsel of a Liturgy: P. 44.
that the King did the most hazardous thing he could undertake, when he
restored Episcopacy: that our Ecclesiastical Government is nothing else, P 44.
but the Shadow, and the Corruption of the true Hierarchy: P. 45.
that the Introduction of our Church Service into Scotland, was the cause of
the shedding of so much Blood in the three Nations: that our chief Clergy men,
P. 53.
who have Pluralities of Benefices, make their Grooms their Curats: that our
Bishops do horribly abuse their Jurisdiction, P. 52.
in their Excommunications, and Impositions: P. 53.
that they are so haughty, that none of the Inferior Priests dare speak to
them: that they rob the Church, P. 62, 63.
by letting its Leases for thirty years; getting all the Money into their own
Pockets, and leaving only a small Revenue to their Successors: that England is
a Country, P. 63.
where no man is afraid of committing Simony. This, Sir, is his Judgment of our
Church. And you may be pleased to observe, that this Catalogue of Slanders is
equally made up of those, which the most furious of the Romanists on the one
side, and the most Fanatic amongst the Non-conformists on the other, are wont
to Revile us withal: So that in repeating them, he does at once act both the
Parts, which he had before played in the World at several times, that of a
violent Calvinist, and a Iesuitical Papist.

And first, it is false that our English Reformation began upon a shameful
occasion, or from the extravagance of a private passion. I know he has the
famous story of King Henry's Divorce to oppose against what I say. But I am not
startled at that, no more then at the Fable of our Bishops Consecration at the
Naggs-head Tavern; or, of the Kentish-mens having long Tayls for the murder of
Thomas Becket. Such frivolous Arguments as these might have served well enough
in the Mouths of the Moncks two hundred years ago: But they will not pass so
easily in a Philosophical, and Inquisitive Age. In brief therefore, Sir, it is
evident that King Henry the Eighth did never intend to proceed to a much
greater distance from the Roman See, then the Gallican Church maintains at this
day. There is no man of our Church, that looks upon his breach with the Pope,
to have been a Reformation. We only esteem it to be of the nature of those
Quarrels, which many Princes in the most Catholic Countries, have managed
against the Holy Chair. The Reformation to which we stand is of a latter date.
The Primitive Reformers amongst us, beheld the Reason of men tamely subjected
to one man's Command, and the Sovereign Powers of all Christendom still exposed
to be checked, and destroyed by the Resolutions of his private Will. Upon this
they arose to perform two of the greatest Works in the World, at once to
deliver the minds of Christians from Tyranny, and the Dignity of the Throne
from Spiritual Bondage. Whatever was the accidental, this was the Real Cause of
our first Reformation, and of their separation from us, not ours from them. And
this was an event which must needs have come to pass near the time in which it
did, though King Henry had never forsaken his Wife. Let him therefore know,
that our Doctrine ( as much spoiled as it is, P. 45.
in his opinion) was established by Christ and his Apostles: and that the
Ceremonies of our Worship, were not set up by faction, or by popular Fury, but
by the deliberate Counsels of Wisemen, and by the authority of that power,
which bears the immediate Image of God. This, Sir, I have said in Vindication
of our Church, not so much to satisfy this idle Dreamer upon Parnassus, as out
of the love which I bear to many well-meaning Catholics amongst us, who have
this Argument sometimes in their mouths, of whom I know very many, whose wishes
for the happiness of their Country, and for its freedom from foreign
Usurpations, are as honorable as any Englishmens living. As for Monsieur de
Sorbier's part, it had been a sufficient Reply to him, that I can name a man,
who has indeed separated from the Religion wherein he was born, for a shameful
cause which is known to all the World.

He declares that the people of England have an universal aversion from the
established Worship. But here I cannot say that of him for which he commends
Doctor Wallis, that He is one of the best Accountants in the World. P. 100.
This positive Computation he never was in any capacity to make, he never saw
any of the middle, or the remoter parts of our Nation, where Nonconformity is
but very sparingly spread. He never conversed with the vast Body of Gentry, and
Yeomanry that live Country lives, who are generally uninfected. It is London
alone on which he must rely for this calculation. And yet even in this too, I
dare openly assure him, that the far greater number is for the Rights of the
Church, then against them. But I advise Monsieur de Sorbiere, that before he
thinks himself able to make an exact judgment of the Number of our Religious
Sects, he would first correct all his errors in Arithmetic, which are to be
found in this Book, about the most obvious things, in reckoning of which, it
was enough to have only had the understanding of the least child that he ever
taught. I will only produce one in this place. Have we not reason to rely upon
his opinion of the difference of the parties in the whole Kingdom; when in the
least number that can be, he has mistaken half: For, he says, that the
double-bottom'd. Vessel has two Masts in the Front, when every Sculler on the
Thames knows it has but One.

He affirms, that the Government of our Bishops is nothing else, but the
shadow, and the corruption of a True Hierarchy. And he gives this excellent
Reason for it, because here the Spiritual submits to the Temporal. P. 44.
This very Argument I will turn upon himself. It is therefore the True, the
Sound, the Apostolical Episcopacy: because it does yield to the Temporal Power,
which else could be nothing but a shadow. It is the glory of the Church of
England, that it never resisted Authority, nor engaged in Rebellion: which is a
praise, that makes much to its advantage, in the minds of all those, who have
read of the dismal effects of the Scotch Covenant, and the holy League.

He says, that our King did put himself on the most dangerous Enterprise that
could be attempted, when he restored Episcopacy. And yet he confesses that our
other Sects are inconsistent with any Government but a Commonwealth. P. 58.
What dreadful danger could be imagined in a Monarchs destroying that, which
must needs fall of it self in a Monarchy? But to show how much he was mistaken,
It is evident, that upon his Majesty's most glorious Return, the Church soon
recovered all its rights of Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, of sitting in
Parliament, and even all its Lands, which had been long held by Armed Usurpers,
without any other Opposition, then what was made by General Vennor, and his
forty men: who it seems did run the greatest hazard of the two.

He declares that there is so great a distance between our Bishops, and our
inferior Clergy, that these dare not speak to, nor stand covered before, them.
This, Sir, you and I can prove to be a manifest Untruth, by several Instances.
But however, what course can we take to please this grave Censurer of our
Civility? He here dislikes the respects, that we show to our chief Churchmen:
and in another place, He condemns the familiar behavior of our common Soldiers
toward their Officers. He abuses the Clergymen for standing bare to those
Reverend and Aged Persons; and the Red-Coats for keeping on their Hatts in the
presence of their Captains. P. 122.
How sufficient a Judge is he of good manners, that would bring the rude
Customs of a Camp into the Church, and the Punctilio's of Observance, and
Courtship, into an Army.

But he accuses us of a greater Crime. It is but just that there should be so
great a distance, if our Clergymen that have Pluralities, make their Grooms
supply their Cures. In this part of his Character he certainly, Sir, mistook
the Country, and intended this for some other Kingdom in Europe, where he had
also missed of a Medall. It is a sign that he is as little acquainted with his
own Church, as he is with ours: or else he would never have objected to us our
Pluralities, which are infinitely fewer, and more confined amongst us: he would
never have ventured to upbraid us with the Ignorance of our Parish Priests,
lest we should have provoked the whole Church of Rome to a comparison. In
brief, Sir, our Slaves do not serve at our Altars: and I will also add, that
our Chief Spiritual Dignities are not intayl'd upon Families, nor possessed by
Children. In all the Parishes of England; I dare challenge not only him that
is a Stranger, but the most bitter Enemies to our Discipline, to show me Twenty
Pulpits, that are filled with men, who have not spent their Youth in Studies to
prepare them, and who have not the Authority of Holy Orders.

That He has presumed to call our Public Solemn Prayers, only a Morsel, or a
Scrap of a Liturgy; I do not much wonder. For he that has long made his own
Religion his Cook (as one of our Poets expresses it) may well be thought
irreligious enough; to take a Metaphor for ours from a Kitchen. But besides
this, he asserts, that the Introduction of the English Liturgy into Scotland,
was the cause of the shedding of all the Blood in the three Nations. This
Speech might have well fitted the mouth of Bradshaw, or the Pen of Ireton. For
it lays all the guilt of so much Slaughter, on the most Innocent, and most
merciful Prince, that ever wore a Crown: by whose special care, an Uniformity
of Worship was attempted in that Kingdom. But to give him better light, and to
let him see, that there were other Causes of our Miseries, in one of these
three Countries at least, I would fain have him ask this Question of the Pope's
Legate that was in Ireland, whether the horrible Irish Massacre was committed
for no other reason, but only out of a tender Brotherly sense of the Yoke which
was laid by the Common Prayer, on the Scotchmen's Consciences.

He tells us, that it is an ordinary thing with our Bishops, to exercise their
Ecclesiastical Censures upon frivolous accounts. But methinks he might have
remembered, that it was not probable, they should seek out any trifling
occasions of excommunication, when, by his own confession, they have so many
weighty Provocations: if that be true, that the whole Nation neglects their
Discipline. But, Sir, you know it is apparent to all indifferent Men, that the
Bishops have been most remarkably moderate in their Visitations: and that the
Punishments, which have been inflicted on the Obstinate, have for the most part
proceeded from the Temporal Sword, and not the Spiritual. But, because he here
quarrels at the Absoluteness of our Bishop's power, I leave him to be answered
by the whole Clergy of the Church of Rome, who ought to be alarmed by this. For
if ours shall be reputed so Tyrannical, what will they be e^teem'd, whose
Jurisdiction is so much larger?

He goes on to de^ame our Bishops. He says, they have imbezled the Church
Lands, to make their own Families Rich. This, Sir, is an Objection, which
though it was at first managed against them with great Clamor, by the common
Enemies of the King, and the Church: yet now upon a calmer consideration of
things, it has universally lost its credit, even in those places where he says,
P. 130.
the English take Tobacco half the day together; from whence he acknowledges,
that he had a good part of his Relations. The first murmurs against them were
raised, because they received altogether, some part of that which was their
due, for twenty years before. But the Envy of that was quickly scattered, when
it was manifest how many public, and Generous works they have promoted.
Besides the first Fruits, and Tenths, and above all the Subsidies, which have
swept away a good part of their gains, they have compounded with a very great
Number of the Purchasers; they have increased the Vicaredges in their Gift to
Fourscore Pounds a year: they have endowed Almshouses, and Colleges, they have
built Chapels, they have repaired the Episcopal Palaces, and Cathedrals, which
were generally gone to Ruin; they have redeemed at once all the English, that
were Slaves at Algiers, and that too I dare assure him, without any intent to
make Curats of them.

The Account which he gives of their letting Leases is most ridiculous. There
is no man amongst them, that lets a Lease for thirty years. The Reserved Rent
is that which was always the standing Revenue of the Church. Nor ought this
Custom to be Objected against the Church of England. It is the same course
which is taken in France, and most other parts of Christendom. Nay, to go
farther, the letting of Church Leases is a business, whose Regulation was
brought about since the time, that the Church of Rome divided from us. Before
Queen Elizabeth's reign, the Churchmen had a power of Farming out their Lands,
not only for Thirty, but for Ninety Nine years. It was She, that first
confined the Term to One and Twenty; and so it still remains. He ought not
therefore to reckon this practice as our disgrace: when the good order, that is
now used about it, is the peculiar honor, that belongs to the English
Reformation.

But to Conclude, if no Man fears Simony in England, then there is no man that
is affrighted with punishment. For our Laws are as strict against it, and as
severely executed, as any where else. However, if it were true, (which is far
from being so) that we Simoniacally employ the Church estate to Secular uses;
yet this sounds very ill from that Layman's Pen, who, when he writ this Voyage,
was maintained out of the Ecclesiastical Revenue. This, Sir, was Monsieur de
Sorbiere's Case. And the first Office of a Churchman that ever he performed,
was in this Book, P. 99.
where He devoutly prays to God, to make Mr. Hobbs a Roman Catholic. Which if
his prayers can obtain from Heaven, he deserves not only to be made a Priest,
or Bishop, but even a Saint too: For this will be a far greater Miracle, then
any of those for which many have been Canonized.

And now, Sir, can you require any greater signs of Monsieur de Sorbier's
Sincerity in his Religion? He has accused of Simony, the most Incorrupt: of
Pride, the Humblest: of Rapacity, the most Innocent: of Ignorance, the most
Learned: of false Doctrine, the most Primitive; of ill Discipline, the most
Decent Church under Heaven. And when nothing else could be said, he even
upbraids it with its Submission and Obedience, To show, (that he is as ill a
Disciple of Mr. Hobbes's, whom he pretends to admire, as he is of the
Apostles.) Notwithstanding all which impudent Disgraces, there remains this one
comfort to the Church of England, that the same man, who now vilifies Her so
basely, had once as mean thoughts of the Godhead of Her blessed Founder
Himself.

But it is easy to conjecture at the Cause of this his harsh Usage of our
Church. He had but lately Apostatized from the Reformed Religion in France: he
was but just entered into the Romish Communion. And he suspected, that there
might be some doubts still remaining on men's minds, of the Reality of his
Conversion, which might turn to the prejudice not only of his Spiritual, but
of his Temporal Estate: he had given himself out for a great Philosopher: and
he understood well enough, that few Philosophers are thought to alter their
minds, that have once been Protestants. He was therefore resolved to give an
Unquestionable proof of his Establishment in the Faith, by reviling the Church
of England. And in performing this, I confess, Sir, he has Counterfeited the
Zealot very well: he has prosecuted Us, with all the Violence, and Bigottry,
which commonly accompanies new Converts. But yet I believe this will hardly do
his business. Even in this very Book, he gives Evidence enough, that Calvinism,
and Heresy, are not wholly rooted out of his Heart. He grossly abuses the most
devoted Children of the Church of Rome, the English Roman Catholics. He
complains of them, P. 64.
that they have no mind to disturb the Peace of their Country tomards the
restoration of their Religion: which is indeed spoken to their Honor, though
he intends it to their Shame. He says, P. 64.
that they are not so zealous in their Way, as foreign Papists, the quite
contrary to which is true: he makes, P. 64.
as if they never saw the True Mass performed: he affirms, P. 64.
that they are all born in Servitude, and debases so many Ancient, Rich, and
Honorable Families, to the condition, and the minds, of Slaves. In all these
Speeches, he does not express any certain mark of a True Proselyte. But above
all, he has set down such a determination of his Faith, that if he had made it
in Italy, or Spain, he had undoubtedly fallen into the Inquisition. He boldly
pronounces, that Transubstantiation, Purgatory, the Merit of Works, P. 48.
Invocation of Saints, the Supremacy of the Bishop of Rome, the authority of
Councils, and the Infallibility of the Pope, are none of them Fundamental
Doctrines. What greater Apology could be made for the Church of England, which
he has so much defamed: seeing these are the only shameful Causes, for which
we dissented from Rome?

But I leave him to be corrected by the Pope's Sentence for these Heresies:
which perhaps the Holy Father has reason to think, do more shake the Holy
Chair, then the five points of Iansenius that he condemned: which Monsieur de
Sorbiere says, P. 60.
did raise a dispute about a matter of Nothing.

From our Religion, Let us follow him of our Government. And here, Sir, I was
at first a little at a stand how to deal with him. But I have heard of the
Magnanimous resolution of the late Duke of Buckingham, who would never permit
any Apology to be written for him. And I consider, that it is almost as great
an arrogance for one obscure Writer, to undertake to defend the Actions of
Great Princes, as it is for another to defame them. I will not therefore
enlarge my Speech in the praises of the present happiness of England, or in
paying all the acknowledgements, which are due to our Sovereign, for the
blessings of His Reign. That is a Subject ficter for a more elaborate Volum,
then a single Letter, and for a far more elegant Pen then mine. I will only
here show the Vanity of our Historiographers groundless suggestions. And as an
Introduction to what he says, concerning the Political condition of this
Nation, I will first observe how he deals with some others of the chief Crowned
Heads in Europe. You will perhaps, Sir, be very hardly induced to believe, that
he can be guilty of disrespect to Monarchy, or Sovereign Princes, when you
behold him so Panegyrically given toward that Government, as to take the
pains, to go five or six thousand miles, to find out a Race of Kings to
commend. For he here speaks very zealously in praise of the most virtuous, P.
117, 118.
and most religious Kings of China. This, Sir, I cannot but applaud in him; and
to show how much this one testimony of his good manners has wrought with me, I
will not be harsh upon him in this place. I will not call in question the
credit of his Intelligence from the farthest East, which you see is so false,
about a Country, that lies only seven Leagues distant from his own. Nay, I will
not so much as inquire whether ever he met with any Chinese Madam Fiennes to
give him this Information. P. 118.
I will grant, that the Kings of China have been great Menders of Bridges, and
Planters of Orchards. But I will only now softly put him in mind, that while
his Pen did overflow with sweet words, upon the Kings of China, he has handled
the Kings of Sweden and Denmark more cruelly, then Dionysius the Tyrant would
have done, when he was a King, much less when he was a Schole-Master.

Of the two last Kings of Sweden he affirms, that their Glory is almost wholly
vanished: P. 116.
and that all moderate men must needs read the Desolations, which they caused
with Horror. You see, Sir, what an excellent occasion he has here given me of
Triumphing over him. You know very well, how many great, and irresistible
arguments, this matter might suggest to me: what might not be said of that
Victorious Nation? how copious might I be in extolling the indefatigable
Industry, the Conduct, the Good Fortune, the Generosity of those Kings? What
Passions might here be raised, in appealing to all Mankind, and in aggravating
the common misery of all Great Commanders of Armies, if it shall be permitted
to every small Pamphleteer to invade their Lives, and to arraign their Ashes,
when he pleases? But there is no need of going so powerfully to work, or of
employing against him any of the Lofty, and Tragical Forces of Eloquence. It
will suffice, if I recall to his Memory, the Title in which he boasts so much.
I will only ask him, how the Historiographer of France can assert the Wars of
Gustavus Adolphus to have been horrible Divastations, without casting some
share of the Dishonor on the Crown of France it self? For (if we will believe
all the French Writers of that time) there was a strict Confederacy, and a real
Union of Interests, between those Two mighty Monarchs. I give him leave to use
the Fame of the Kings of Sweden as he pleases. Let them in his account pass for
Theives, and Oppressors. They deserve so to be used: for they were mortal
Enemies to that beloved Country, with whose Mu^ick, and Latin, and Dancing, he
was before so much ravished. I only bid him look back on the relation, which
Lewis the Just had to Lewis the Fourteenth, and then let him try to vindicate
himself for overturning the Trophies of the Father, in the same Book, wherein
he declares, that He traveled abroad in a Wagon, to spread the glory of the
Son.

But the Fame of those dead Princes is placed above the reach of his Envy: let
us, Sir, consider how he behaves himself toward the living. What a long Story
(or rather, as he himself styles it, Romance) has he here made, of the life of
Vlefelt the Dane, on which he builds the justification of his Crimes, and
condemns the King of Denmark's Justice? And yet at the same time he
acknowledges, that He took the whole Relation, only from the Mouth of Vlefelt's
own Wife. After this, have the Kings of China any great reason to be proud of
this Man's good will? when he has here expressed no more Judgment, nor
Integrity, then from the single and partial Information of a Woman, to acquit a
man that had been hanged in Effigy in Denmark, and has been since killed as he
was pursued for High Treason?

Upon the sight of all this, Sir, I may well return securely Home, to examine
his opinion of the Imperfections of our State. And here I must not forget to
acquaint you, that he is not all over Satirical; But in several places he
sprinkles some few kind words to our advantage. Yet his Commendations are so
directly contrary to his reproaches; that instead of reconciling me to him,
they rather supply me with new arguments against him. And who can desire an
easier Adversary to deal with, then such a one, who, when he speaks against us,
opposes evident Truth, when he speaks for us, contradicts himfelf?

This Inconsistence of his own mind with it self, is apparent in this Political
part of his Relation, which now comes under my Censure: He confesses, Our King
to be one of the best Princes in the World: P. 123.
He declares, that His Majesty used him with all imaginable sweetness, and that
by the Charms of His Discourse, he sent him away as well pleas^d, as if he had
loaded him with his Presents. P. 120.
I entreat you now, Sir, to recollect, how this, and that which follows hangs
together.

First, He suggests, P. 124.
that perhaps there was not so much pretense for the people to rebel in the
late Kings time, as there is at this present. In the reply which I shall make
to this Passage, I cannot, Sir, confine my self to the bare limits of a
satisfactory Answer: but I must permit my Zeal for the Prosperity of our
Country, to break forth into Expressions of Joy, and Gratitude. It is fit that
all the World should know, that as our King was restored with the most
miraculous submission of minds, and interests, that ever any History can show:
as he was established on the Throne of his Ancestors, while there were two
mighty Armies on Foot, that had fought against him and his Father: so there can
be no difficulty in continuing this quiet, now he has all the power of the
Nation in his hands, and now his Enemies are scattered, and disarmed (if yet he
can be thought to have any real Enemies, after so many Heroic Testimonies of
his Mercy) The condition of all his affairs abroad is in such a posture, in
respect of his Neighbors, that he is as far from being liable to receive
Injuries unrevenged, as he is averse in his own disposition from doing wrongs
unprovoked. And the small dissentions that still remain on some of his Subjects
minds at home, are so far from hazarding the safety, that they will rather make
for the Honor of his Reign. For by his renewed and generous endeavors toward
the composing of these differences, there will arise for him a continued
succession of Peaceful Triumphs, of which the occasions had been wanting to
him, if he had found us all of one mind. And many such Victories as these, we
may justly presage to our Sovereigns future Government. The Forces which he
employs against those few that are still contumacious, which are those of
Affability, and Forgiveness, are impossible to be resisted. Who ever contends
with his Adversaries with those weapons, he has not only his own Virtues, but
theirs on his side. And as these are the surest Conquests, so they are of the
greatest renown. In the Triumphs of War, his Soldiers, his Commanders, and
even Fortune it self, would come in for a share in the Fame: But those which
are obtained by pity, and by pardoning, have no Partners in the honor, but are
wholly to be attributed to the King himself.

But for a proof of our calm and well-secur'd condition, I appeal from this
Triflers Conjectures, to the Parliament it self, which is the true
Representative of the Affections of the whole Kingdom. If he would have been
willing to refer the matter to their decision, he might have found all things
so free from any likelihood of new disturbances, that they have been still as
inclined to be severe against the Kings ill-willers, as he himself has been to
be gentle: and so sollicitous to guard his Royal Person, with their lives and
fortunes, as he has been careful, that he might need no other defense, but his
own goodness.

Yet since he is resolved not to stand to the determination of that great
Assembly, which he modestly terms an extravagant Body, P. 130.
let us see what reports he has pick^d up amongst the malcontents of the
Vulgar: He says, that they every where complain of the neglect of the interest
of Trade, of the misspending of the Treasure, of the oppressions of the Court,
and of the decrease of our glory at Sea.

All this, Sir, he professes to take from the murmurs of the multitude. P. 130.
And if they are guilty of such discourses, more then the Communalty of other
Countries, they justly deserve the Titles that he gives them, of a suspicious,
a sullen, an insolent, and an envious Generation. But then, Sir, if the mean
and ignorant people ought so much to be condemned for upbraiding their
Governors, though they only do it in private, when they are heated with drink,
and under the protection of a cloud of Tobacco smoke: P. 130.
what punishment does that Historian deserve, who thought good to collect their
discontents, and to make himself worse then the Authors of them, by being the
first that reports them in this public way? What credit could he expect to
get, by repeating these low scandalls, when it was dishonorable for him only
to confess, that he came into such places, and companies, where he might
over-hear them? This Reprehension, Sir, he ought to have undergone, if all this
that he relates had been true: But if we take it in pieces, we shall find that
^e libells the very Suburbs, and that his ink is black enough to represent the
worst slanders of the Rabble, in darker colors then their own.

As for the repinings which he heard concerning the diminution of Trade: You
know, Sir, that it is the public, and the cheerful voice of all Englishmen,
that are engaged in Traffic, that there have been far more encouragements for
Merchants, and more vigorous attempts for the advancement of Commerce, within
these four years and half, then in many ages before. I might for a proof of
this allege the Royal Council, that is particularly set up for that purpose. I
might instance in the increase of the Customs, which from thirty or forty
thousand pounds in the latter end of Queen Elizabeth's Reign, do now amount to
almost four hundred thousand a year. I might urge all the Proclamations for the
prohibiting of foreign Manufactures, and for the improvement of our own: I
might reckon up the many new Statutes for the repairing of Havens, the mending
of Highwaies, and the cutting of Rivers: But it is enough only to mention the
Institution of the Royal Fishing, and the Royal Company: In both which our King
has prosperously begun a Design, which will infallibly make the English the
Masters of the Trade of the world; and that is the bringing in of our Gentry,
and Nobility, to contribute toward it. When this shall be brought about, not
all the little Crafts of the Hollanders, P. 151, 152, 153.
(which he magnifies so much) will serve their turn: But the English will outgo
them in Industry, and Stock, as much as they do already in Shoars, in Ports, in
Ships, in Valor, in Virtue. This, Sir, we shall undoubtedly live to see
accomplished, ^eeing the Gentlemen of England have so great an Example before
them; of a King, who does not only make the Arts of Commerce and Navigation his
business, and his interest, but his very delight and recreation.

What he says of our Treasure, is most impudently objected against that Prince,
who has retrenched himself in those expenses which his Predecessors maintained,
when the Revenue of the Crown was far less. And he chose a very unseasonable
time, P. 132.
to proclaim, that the Blood-suckers of the Court devour the people, when those
Blood-suckers have parted with their very Food, and the ancient Dues of their
Offices, to lessen the charge of the Public. But his loudest outcrie concerns
the loss of our Dominion at Sea. P. 130.
And here he most invidiously compares the times of the Rump, with our present
Naval Power. First of all, he might have understood, that the Fleets which were
then set forth against the Dutch did mainly consist of the late Kings Ships;
and also that the whole Estates of the Crown, the Clergy, most of the Nobility,
and Gentry, and indeed well nigh of the whole Nation were then at the Usurpers
disposal. From hence he might have concluded, that even the Glory of their
Victories is not so much to be given to the Riches and Interest of Scott,
Hasilrig, or Vane, as to the Treasures of the King, and the Royal Party. But
besides this, Sir, What will he be able to answer me, when I shall tell him,
that our King has made our Sea-provisions far stronger then ever they were in
any Age or Country before; and that too only by the help of a Revenue bounded
by Law, and limited to the strict Rules of Justice? of the truth of this, he
might speedily have been convinced, if he had visited any one of our Royal
Stores, instead of describing Smithfield, Bedford Garden, the Conduits of
London, Morefields, Hatfield Fishponds, and St Catharines College in Oxford.
Never was there a greater abundance of Materials in readiness! Never more
skillfull Builders! Never more formidable Preparations! Never more expert
Seamen! Never more valiant Commanders! and, in one word to perfect all, never a
Braver Admiral! An Admiral of whose undaunted courage, unwearied diligence, and
fortunate Conduct, all the Nations round about us have beheld so many
unquestionable proofs, even from the very first years of his youth. And if I
thought that all the men of Honor, wherewith France now abounds, were not yet
satisfied how little Monsieur de Sorbiere deserves to be Historiographer Royal,
I would desire no other instance to prove it, then only this; that when he
declares he came into England, to content his curiosity, to see all the rare
things, and men amongst us, Praef.
yet he scarce mentions the Duke of York.

I will admit that hitherto he has only recited the extravagancies of the
Rabble; let us now, Sir, come to that place, wherein he has chiefly exercised
the profoundness of his skill, his own speculations, on the defects of our
Monarchy, and the Factions of our Court. And that you may know how conversant
he has been in all intrigues of State, as well as those of the Muses, I will
give you his positive determination of one of the gravest points of Policy that
ever was debated at a Council Table; and it shall be in his own words, to his
intimate Friend Monsieur de Vaubrun. P. 116, 117.
To you Monsieur de Vaubrun (says he) being my Bosom Friend, a man that
esteems me much, and one whom I honor infinitely, being also a Gentleman, that
loves justice, as well as fighting; I will reveal the bottom of my heart, and
tell you the most secret of all my thoughts. What weighty matter does he
introduce with this solemn Preface? He complains that the learned men of the
English are not enough communicative. P. 93.
Certainly we shall find him of a better temper: No doubt he will now unfold
some new Principle of Policy, and of the Laws of Humane Society, which he has
discovered, that is not yet ripe for the public, and only fit to be committed
to the trust of a particular confident. It proves so indeed! The Oracle which he
immediately pronounces, is this: P. 171.
That Man was not made by Nature to fight with Man, but rather to enjoy the
Benefits of peace: that God has not given us horns, hoofs, or claws; but Os
homini sublime dedit.


This, Sir, is all the mighty Mystery, of which he discharges his breast with
so much Ceremony. And in which is he now more ridiculous, his History, or his
Policy? His History, in speaking so many false reproaches aloud; his Policy, in
whispering such trifles with so much caution. I beseech you, Sir, let us allow
him the reputation of this new invention entire. Though he did not think fit to
name the famous Author of the Lunar Globe, which he saw in the Kings Closet:
Yet I intend to be juster to him: And I will propose this Epitaph to be engraved
on his Tomb; Hic jacet primus Author hujus sententiae, Pax Bello Potior.

This, Sir, is one trial of his Contemplative, you shall have more of his
Practical Politics. He has ventured to declare the Queen Mothers thoughts, P.
127.
about her most private, and Domestic concernments; which were so near to her,
that it was impossible for a thousand Madame Fiennes, to have given him any
instruction about them. And in this he had no reverence for the greatest, and
the most virtuous Princess of this Age, for the Mother of our King, nor for the
Daughter of Henry the Great. He has made a disadvantageous Character on my Lord
St. Albans to the French Nation, P. 128.
where he was before so well known, and where he lived long in so much honor.
He has presumed on the King himself: he sawcily conjectures at the reasons of
the choice of his Ministers, P. 129.
as if he had been admitted into his Royal Breast as well as his Cabinet. He
says, P. 121.
that His Majesty is forced to be familiar with his Nobility, and Gentry, to
keep their esteem and good will: and so he endeavors to bring down those
Virtues, of which he himself received so many proofs, to be only works of
necessity. But seeing he confesses this generous affability to be able to
hinder the Kings Subjects from rebellion, methinks it might have prevailed on a
mean stranger, to ^pare the Reputation of his Kingdoms. He insinuates, P. 132.
that the true Sovereign Power amongst us resides in the People. Which is a
Doctrine that was scarce ever heard of in England till the year Forty eight,
and vanished in Sixty. He affirms, P. 148.
that there is a mixture of all sorts of Government in the composition of our
State, notwithstanding that we have so many Acts of Parliament that devolve the
whole power on the Crown. His long discourse of the Privileges of the House of
Commons, P. 133, to 143.
and the degrees of their increase, is nothing, but a wild Whimsy of his own
Brain. There is no mention in any English Historian, that Edward the first, P.
137.
was the King that first called Knights, and Burgesses, to sit in Parliament:
or that when they were so convened, he only used their Counsel, and rejected
those of the Nobility and Gentry. And yet upon these imaginary faults, of which
he supposes Edward the first Guilty, he here takes him into his discipline, P.
141, 142, 143.
reads to him a tedious Lecture of the Arts of Government, and treats the
Wisest and most Victorious Prince of Christendom in that time, as imperiously
as if he had been a Cadet of the House of Suze. But I am weary, Sir, of taking
notice of such errors, which are only mistakes in History or Chronology. At
least I need not go three hundred years back for them, seeing he is so much
besides the Truth, in his account of the most Renowned action in this Age: the
Kings Return: Which he wholly attributes to the Presbyterians. P. 58.
All the circumstances of that glorious Restoration are still, Sir, fresh in
our memories: the very noy^e of those Triumphs, which filled the whole World with
admiration, seems to be yet ^carce out of our Ears. And shall we suffer him to
fix all the honor of that Immortal Work on a private Sect? Whereas it was
accompli^h'd by the immediate favor of divine Providence, by the Wisdom of a
Victorious General, by the perpetual and immovable Fidelity of the Royal
Party, by the Hands, the Wishes, the Tongues, and the united Desires of three
Kingdoms. It Is true indeed, the Presbyterians went along with the mighty
Torrent; But the whole course of this happy Violence is not therefore to be
attributed to them. You see, Sir, I am unawares fallen into a Metaphor, which
does best resemble that Enterprise. It was in that, as in a sudden Land-Flood,
which, as it comes down, carries with it Trees, and Stones, and Houses, and all
that it meets in the way. And even all these which lay before quiet, nay which
resisted the first Waters while they were weak, do add to the impetuosity of
the Current, when it is going. But we must not therefore say that the Flood it
self took its rise from thence: seeing it was, in truth, caused by Rain coming
down from Heaven, and by Streams flowing in from every part of the Country.
This allusion, Sir, I think does represent the whole matter to your mind. If it
does not, however I have returned Monseeur de Sorbiere, an ill Similitude for
one of his, where he compares the Protestants to the Ottoman Empire: P. 47.
which is so much an Intrigue of the Muses, that I will challenge all the Wits
of England, and France, to interpret it. But if the Covenanters shall still be
fond of this praise, which he here allows them, let them remember of how little
value his Panegyricks are, seeing he calls Vsefelt a Hero: and if they will
still maintain that they restored the King, let them take heed lest some
mischievous Royallist should tell them, that in one sense they did indeed
occasion the Kings Restoration. But in the same that Quintus Maximus meant
after he had recovered Tarentum: who gave this answer to another Roman that had
lost that place before, and yet boafted what share he had in regaining it. It Is
true (says he) it was by your means indeed; Nam nisi tu perdidisses Tarentum,
ego nunquam recuperassem.

But the chief Secret into which he has pierced, is the late Controversy
between my Lord Chancellor, and the Earl of Bristol. What subtle conclusions
does he draw from it? what prophetical visions does he here reveal, concerning
the terrible disturbances, that shall arise to our Government, many ages hence,
from an accident, which was at an end, before he got back to Paris? What a
formal division has he made of the whole Nation? Homer himself is not so
punctual in marshalling the forces of the Greeks, and the Trojans: nor is there
less fiction in this History, then in his Poetry. P. 126, 127.
On the Earl of Bristols quarter, he places the discontented against the Court,
the City of London, the Presbyterians that brought in the King, the House of
Lords, a great, and a strong party of the House of Commons, which he says is
the true Body of that extravagant Body the Parliament. An Army numerous and
formidable. On the Lord Chancellors side, P. 127, 128, 129.
he ranks the Royal Family, the Bishops, Dea^s, and Chapters, all the Nobility,
all the Rich Merchants, and Burgesses, (though he had before bestowed the House
of Lords, and the City of London on the Earl of Bristol.) Thus he has drawn the
whole Kingdom into Battalia: It is but now performing his office of Trumpeter,
and a dreadful Battle will no doubt ensue. But how comes it to pass that all
these Rumors of mighty wars did vanish on the sudden? Was it because they were
English Cowards, P. 21.
and dared not fight? Alas, Sir, all this was only a fine story of incounters
in the Air, whereof there was no other foundation then in the wild fancies of
his own making. And may we not give that Character of our Historian, which he
does of one of the Noble Combatants, P. 126.
that his great Wit has inclined him to be Romantic? Is not this the true
trick of a Romancer, to bring in many Princes fighting together in a wood,
without giving any account how they came thither?

But the danger is over. All is quiet again; and long may it so keep. For to
speak t'yee, Sir, from the bottom of Monsieur de Sorbier's heart, Peace is
better then War. Well then. P. 129.
He grants that the Victory did a little incline to my Lord Chancellor's Party:
yet he has shown the bravery of his own mind, by defying the Conqueror. And
here, Sir, I confess he has driven me upon one of the tenderest points in the
world; which is the speaking concerning the fame of a great Man, while he is
living. But I entreat you to lay before your eyes the many powerful arguments,
by which I am moved at least to give a true testimony, though not a long
elogie, concerning him. My Lord Chancellor is a man through whose hands the
greatest part of all the public and private businesses of our Country do
pass^ And it will be most dishonorable for us, to suffer his name to be
reviled in this manner, while he is scarce at leisure to look to its defense
himself, by reason of his eternal Labors for the public Justice and Safety.
And besides this, Sir, I can, for my own particular, allege another motive of
nearer concernment. For I am to consider my self, as a Member of the Royal
Society, and the University of Oxford, and the Earl of Clarendon, as Protector
of one them, and Chancellor of the other.

These, Sir, are some of his true Titles, however Monsieur de Sorbiere is
pleased to pass them over, and give him worse in their stead. First of all, he
says that he is a Presbyterian. P. 125.
At this ridiculous scandal, I assure you, Sir, I am not much grieved. I was
(to tell you true) in a terrible affright, when I read what he reports, P. 127.
that almost all the City of London are Presbyterians. But now this passage has
composed my mind again: For it is like to be a very exact computation, which he
has made of that Sect, when the first man that he names for a Presbyterian, is
my Lord Chancellor. He next tells us, that he is a man of the Law; a shameful
disgrace: the Lord Chancellor of England^ whose Office it is to govern and
moderate the Law, is a Lawyer. As if I should endeavor to lessen the credit of
Monsieur de Vaubrun, and prove him unfit to be Governor of Philippe Ville, and
Colonel of Light Horse, by objecting that he is a Soldier; or of Monsieur de
Sorbiere to be Historiographer Royal, by saying that he is skilled in History.
But he is a Lawyer, and Statesman at once. Can this be any more disparagement
to him, then it is to the whole Body of Lawyers in France, who in all times
have managed the greatest Employments of that State? Could he not have
recollected, before he writ this, that Monsieur de Segnier, the present
Chancellor of France, is a Gentleman of the Long Robe? You see, Sir, what a
good Satyrist we have here got, who would undertake to abuse an English
Statesman with such an argument, which must at the same time reflect as much
upon his own Countrymen, his chief Friends, and Patrons^ to whom he directs
his Speech. But the worst is still behind. My Lord Chancellor is utterly
ignorant of the Belles Lettres. P. 125.
This accusation is as decent as all the former. He dislikes our Carriers, for
not b^ing Courtly; our Soldiers, for not putting off their Hatts well; our
Bishops, for their Gravity; and our Statesmen, for not being Grammarians, and
Critics. But I will prove to him, by his own confession, that My Lord
Chancellor deserves not this reprehension, and that he is a man skillful in all
Polite Learning. He himself allows him to be a great Politician, P. 126.
and a very Eloquent Man. I have obtained, Sir, what I desired. You see how
easy it is to justify the Earl of Clarendon, seeing the very man, that vilifies
him, does at the same time gainsay himself, and suggest to me his praises,
without my interposing any word in his commendation. If we should grant, that
a man may chance to be a great dealer in Politics, without understanding any
thing else (which yet nothing but Monsieur de Sorbiere^s own example in this
place, can persuade us to be possible) yet how can he be thought to attain to a
perfect Eloquence without any skill in the Civil Arts? Where now is his Polite
Learning? whence did he fetch this Idea of Eloquence? Let him produce his Notes
out of Aristotle, Tully, Quintilian, Seneca, or any of the Rhetoricians of
Antiquity; And then let him tell me, whether they do not all with one voice
consent, that an Orator must of necessity be acquainted with all sorts of
useful knowledge? But because he is so free in his reproof of my Lord
Chancellors unskillfulness in the Belles Lettres: I pray, Sir, what signs has
this great Aristarchus himself given, of his own proficience in them? Where do
we find in him any footsteps of the True Spirit of the Grecian or Roman Wit?
What reason have we to envy his judgment in the Classical Authors, when all the
proof that he has given in this Book, of his being conversant in them, are only
three or four pedantical Quotations, of which the chief is, Os Homini sublime
dedit?
Thus far, Sir, in reply to him: But more is to be added concerning the
Honorable Person, of whom he speaks in such mean terms. My Lord Chancellor is
a Gentleman of a very ancient Family, of which Mr Cambden makes mention in his
Britannia. His Education and first years were spent in a strict familiarity
with many of the most Famous Men, not only of that Age, but perhaps of any
other: of whom (to pass by some Reverend and Learned Churchmen that are
living) it is enough to name Mr Chillingsworth, and the Lord Falkland. His
first application to the Affairs of his Country, was in a time wherein
extraordinary fidelity and sufficience were required. His Services to the late
King were requited by the committing of many eminent Businesses to his
management; and by a very high share in his Majesty's Favor; of which there
are indelible proofs in many places of that Excellent Prince's Letters. Under
him he was Chancellor of the Exchequer, Privy Counselor, and designed
Secretary of State. Since that time h^ was Extraordinary Ambassador into Spain,
and attended his present Master in his Misfortunes, which was undoubtedly the
most glorious Scene of Honor in the world. By these several degrees of Great
Employments, he ascended to that illustrious Station which he now enjoyes. And
as for the Qualifications of his Mind, if it be needful to add any thing to
the Votes of the Royal Society, and the University of Oxford, I will declare,
that of all the men of great worth, who have possessed that High Office, since
Learning and the Civil Arts came amongst us, there was never any man that has
so much resembled Sir Thomas More, and the Lord Bacon, in their several
Excellencies, as the Earl of Clarendon.

There might, Sir, much more be answered against all his false Insinuations,
concerning the Political Condition of England. But I have seen a Book of
Monsieur de Sorbiere's Discourses and Letters, whereof many were written to the
late Cardinal Mazarini; and they are so full of gross flatteries, that they
have wholly turned my stomach, from speaking any more of State Affairs: So that
in truth, in the present humor into which the reading of them has put me, I
had much rather offend on the other extreme, by an unjust silence, then by
impertinent praises of the English Government. I will therefore conclude this
whole matter, as I began it, by reflecting on a Passage of his own, in the
story of Vlefelt; wherein he has given undeniable testimony, that he is wholly
ignorant of the Rights of Princes, the true Policy, and the Law of Nations. He
affirms, P. 184.
that Vlefelt fled into Sweden; that he became thereby effectually a Traitor,
that he was the cause of the Swedes last invasion into Denmark, by advising
Carolus Gustavus to turn his Army, from the Poles, against Coppenhagen. These
are his own words. And what more apparent Crime could there be then this, which
had like to have drawn after it the utter Ruin of that Kingdom? P. 186.
And yet immediately after he professes, that he makes no doubt, but the
Illustrious Heroes, Vlefelt, and his Wife, will live to see their great merits
acknowledged, and to enjoy in peace the applauses that are due to them for
their fidelity to their King, and their zeal for the Fundamental Laws of their
Country.

But this, Sir, I suppose, is one of those which he himself calls the Besueues
of his style: Pref.
which though (as he says) Monsieur de Vaubrun uses to forgive, yet the King of
France did not think fit to pass by.

This is the Idea that he has drawn of the Manners, the Religion, and the
Government of the English. But these are not the subjects which he principally
regards: such matters as these, he confesses, that he only uses to touch upon,
as they come in his way. Pref.
I will now therefore, Sir, consider his commerce with the chief heads of
Parnassus, Ep. De.
and his intrigues of the Muses; that is (to speak plain sense, without the
help of Apollo) I will examine some particulars in the account that he gives of
the state of knowledge amongst us: This is the argument in which he triumphs:
This is a Business in whose promotion he has spent the whole course of his
life. Ep. De.
And that he may appear not to have bestowed all his labor in vain, I will
allow, that he ought to be numbered amongst the men of Learning; Provided that
he be content with that definition which he himself has laid down of Learned men
in general; For he says, that it is the good custom of such men, P. 96.
to render themselves ridiculous by their malignity, and their
Billings-gate-language. In conformity to this description, besides what is
already past, let us now behold what he reports of Dr. Wallis, Dr. Willis, Mr.
Hobbs, the Royal Society, the English Stage, their Eloquence, their Language,
and their Authors.

Dr. Wallis he condemns for his ill usage of Mr. Hobbs in the Mathematical
Controversies that have pass^d between them. I will not endeavor to make any
defense for this knowing and acute Professor, as he grants him to be. But yet
let me say, that if Monsieur de Sorbiere himself being the Judge, so much
modesty of language ought to be preserved, even in the contentions of Wit and
Argument, when Passion is apt to overbear the most temperate Minds; then
certainly he himself ought to have been careful of keeping to the same rule, in
an Historical Relation, wherein he had no adversary to put him into a heat, and
nothing but his own natural peevishness to exasperate his Anger. Dr. Wallis
Entertained him at his house, made him partake of his Experiment upon a dumb
Man, and behold the Model of a flat Floor, which (he says) did raise admiration
in Mr. Hobbs himself. P. 94, 95.
And for all this, he might have deserved at least, to have been passed by in
silence. But he had a good subject to be merry with, for want of Polish Music,
and he must needs give the receipt of making an University Cap. P. 100.
Take a Portefueille: cover it with black Cloth: fix a tuft of Silk upon it:
and sew it to a Calot: and you have a perfect four cornered Scholastical
Bonnet. Do you not now wonder, Sir, why he did not call himself Tailor, as well
as Trumpeter, to the Commonwealth of Learning? What kind of good breeding is
this? How can he, after this, object to Dr. Wallis, that he has little in him
of the Gallant Man? P. 100.
Whose behavior has the strongest scent, and wants most to be purified by the
air of the Court? P. 101.
The Geometrician receives him kindly at his Table: The Historiographer Laughs
at the habit of his Host. While he allows him extraordinary abilities, that are
proper to himself, he abuses him for that, which is common with him to the
Sorbonists in France, and almost all the Universities and Clergymen in
Christendom.

He declares that he profited very little by Dr. Willis's company, because he
could not understand his Latin. P. 94.
And upon this he objects, P. 94.
that all the English pronounce that Language with such an odd Tone, as renders
it almost as difficult to strangers, as our own Tongue. I might here, Sir,
allege in defense of our pronuntiation, that We do as all our neighbors
besides: We speak the ancient Latin, after the same way that we pronounce our
Mother Tongue, so the Germans do, so the Italians, so the French. But the
obscurity of our Speech being not only his complaint, but of many other
Foreiners, I will not stand long in its justification. There are so many
peculiar slanders of greater concernment, which he alone has fixed upon us, that
I will not regard this small objection, wherein there may be others, that agree
with him. But however, Sir, from hence I may observe, that it was therefore
impossible for him to take a right measure of the English Manners, and
Disposition, seeing he was incapable of holding any sort of correspondence with
us. He was not in a condition of being informed by our Gentry, our Farmers, or
our Tradesmen, because he understood no English: nor by our Scholars, our
Physicians, our Divines, our Mathematicians, because he professes, that our
Latin was unintelligible to him.

But to return, Sir, to Dr. Willis: I am able to give another Reason, why
Monsieur de Sorbiere did profit so little by his Conversation. The substance of
it was reported to me from Dr. Willis his own Mouth. And I doubt not, but the
remarkable sincerity, and integrity, which that excellent Man preserves in all
his Writings, would make this character of the other's vanity to be believed,
though we had not so many other proofs of it. When Monsieur de Sorbiere came
first to visit him; the Doctor esteemed him to be a man of some real and solid
knowledge: the great names of Des Carts, and Mersennas, which he has
frequently in his Mouth, might have persuaded him as much: he began to treat
him accordingly: he entered into discourse with him, about some parts of
Chemistry, and Physic, in which he desir^d his opinion. The Professor
delivered it franckly, and plainly, as it became a Philosopher, without deceit
or ornament. But expecting that he would have continued the Argument, with some
material Objection, he soon found that the Traveller understood nothing of the
whole matter: but answered him, as little to the purpose, as if he had only
said Pax Bello Potior. He tried him in other subjects. But nothing could he get
of him, except only some few Philosophical terms, P. 206.
and ends of Poetry, as In puris naturalibus Ex aequo and Bono contundantur
grosso modo. P. 188.
Homo est animal credulum and mendax; and Os homini. Upon this he gave him
over, as he would have done a yongtraveller of twenty years old, and left him
to reckon the College Quadrangles, P. 102.
to tell the Pillars in Saint John's Cloisters, to commend their Grove, P. 103.
to measure King Harry's Sword, to describe Saint Catherines College (if there
be any such there,) P. 105.
to examine why one of the Colleges took its name from a Brazen Nose, P. 102.
to number the Books in the Bodleian Liberary, P. 103.
to consider why it was built in the form of an H. and to count how many
Folios, P. 104, 105.
and how many Quar^^^ are above and below in every Shelf. These, Sir, he
perceived were fitter Subjects for Monsieur de Sorbiere ^o handle. And he has
confirmed this his Opinion of him to be true. For his long Tale of his Journey
to Oxford, is made up of such childish contemplations: While he was speaking of
that place, which for the beauty, and convenience of its buildings, for the
vastness of its revenue, and above all, for the sobriety, the virtue, and the
piety of its discipline, is to be preferred before all others that have been
ever dedicated to liberal Studies, in the past, or present times.

But here, Sir, I confess I have been a little too rigid upon him. It was ill
done of me, to expect that he should on the sudden turn so unlike himself, as
to give a good account of our University alone. I will not therefore bestir my
self against him, for having omitted the most memorable things in Oxford. My
quarrel to him now is upon another score. He has here committed a gross
oversight in his own way: For in this exact enumeration of all our fine
Rarities, he has wholly passed by one famous Curiosity, which was of all others
the most proper for such an Historiographer, or at least for such a Trumpeter
to mention, and that is Queens College Horn.

From his new acquaintance, I proceed to his rudeness, toward the only man in
England, to whom he professes himself to have been long familiar. P. 65.
Mr. Hobbs was the chief man for whose sake he came over, and he speaks very
many great things in his commendation: he praises his good humor, P. 66.
his excellent Wit, the vigor of his old Age, P. 97.
and his long and diligent search into Nature. After this, Sir, you will
perhaps think that this Philosopher is safe from his invectives. But you will
find it otherwise, he commends him indeed for that, upon which Mr. Hobbs lays
not so much stress, for his good Breeding: but he wounds him in the most
dangerous place, his Philosophy, and his understanding. He very kindly reports
of him, P. 97.
that he is too dogmatical in his Opinions: P. 99.
that he Writ against the Church of Rome, because he never had a right Idea of
it, in his thoughts, and because he had only read the controversies on the
Protestant side. How d^ye think, Sir, this will sound to Mr. Hobbs, who
professes to have reduced all the Politics to demonstrations, when his
Translator shall tell him, that he concluded against a Church, and a Religion,
before he had heard one word that could be said in their defense? The Title of
Dogmatical which he gives him, being propounded by a declared Sceptick, was the
worst fault that could be charged on a Philosopher: and indeed it is the same,
that he bestows on Borri, From P. 177. to 199.
while he strives in a long Story, to render him to appear nothing but a
foolish Charletan. But let him not fear. I have no mind to aggravate this
injury to Mr. Hobbs. It is the particular manner of his passing this judgment
upon him, of which I will take notice. He tells the World that Mr. Hobbs was
censured for Dogmatical, P. 97.
between his Majesty, and himself, in his private discourse with him. And is
not Monsieur de Sorbiere a very fit man, to upbraid to Dr. Wallis, his want of
good manners: when he himself is at once rude to his ancient Friend, and
insolent to the King himself, in betraying what he was pleased to Whisper to
him in his Cabinet.

But however, to comfort Mr. Hobbs for this affront, I dare assure him, that as
for Monsieur de Sorbiere's part, he understands not his Philosophy. Of this I
will give an unanswerable testimony, and that is the resemblance that he makes
of him, P. 97.
to the Lord Verulam: Between whom there is no more likeness, then there was
between St. George and the Waggoner^ P. 97, 98.
He says that Mr. Hobbs was once his Amanuen^is; that from thence he has
retained very much of him: that he has Studied his manner of turning things:
that he just expresses himself in that way of Allegory, wherein the other
excelled: and that he is in Truth a very remain of my Lord Bacon. This, Sir,
is his opinion: but how far from being True, let any man judge, that has but
tasted of their Writings. I scarce know two men in the World, that have more
different colors of Speech, then these two great Wits: The Lord Bacon short,
allusive, and abounding with Metaphors: Mr. Hobbs round, close, sparing of
similitudes: but ever extraordinary decent in them. The one's way of reasoning,
proceeds on particulars, and pleasant images, only suggesting new ways of
experimenting, without any pretense to the Mathematics. The other's bold,
resolved, settled upon general conclusions, and in them, if we will believe his
Friend, Dogmatical.

But it is the Royal Society, to which he is most favorable, and that he may
show him self a great Benefactor to their design, P. 86.
he has bestowed Gresham College upon them. Whereas, you know, Sir, they only
hold their present meetings there, by the permission of the Professors of the
Foundation of Sir Thomas Gresham, to whom that house does belong. We are
beholding to him for this noble Bounty. But perhaps the Citizens of London, who
are the overseers of Sir Thomas Gresham's Will, may take it ill at his hands,
especialy having such just ground to quarrel with him already: For he said
before, that they are almost all Presbyterians or Phanaticks.

He comes to describe the Weekly assemblies of the Royal Society: and he does
it in words becoming a meeting of Natural Philosophers. The Usher carries a
great Silver Mace before the President, P. 88, 89, 90.
Which is laid on the Cushion where he sits: they have a large Hall, and a
handsome Antichamber: the place where they Assemble is Wainscotted: there is a
long Table before the Chimny, seven or eight gray Chairs about it: some Benches
behind, that are bare: the hindermost higher then the first: the President sits
in a Chair with Arms: his back to the Chimny: holding a wooden Hammer in his
hand, wherewith he sometimes knocks the Table to make silence. Can you, Sir,
endure to read all this stuff with any patience? I suffered his Tittle Tattle
upon Rochester Bridge, upon the Eternal greeness of the Fields of Kent, upon the
Walls of Lincolns-Inn-Fields, on the Guild Hall, on the Rancks of Trees in
Morefields, and many more such pretty Philosophical Discourses: But is not this
a shameful sign of his weakness, that he has insisted so long on such mean
circumstances, while he was describing a subject, that might have yielded him
so much noble matter for his Pen? And when the Royal Society it self is so
careful, that such ceremonies should be just no more, then what are necessary
to avoid confusion? What other Language should he have used then this, if he
had been to inform the World of his own Schole at Orange? Just so he should
have proceeded. He should first have declared, whether the Room were Hung, or
Wainscotted: Next, whether the Master sat with his back toward the Window, or
the Chimny: then how many Seats there were for the Boys to sit upon: at last he
should have drawn himself in a majestic Chair, his Ferula in his hand, and the
poor Scholars trembling for fear at every rap on the Table.

But all this is still pardonable: he has been utterly mistaken in the report
of their main design. There are two things, that they have most industriously
avoided, which he attributes to them: the one is a dividing into parties, and
Sects; and the other, a reliance upon Books, for their intelligence of Nature.
He first says, that they are not all guided by the authority of Gassendus, P.
92.
or Des Carts; but that the Mathematicians are for Des Carts, and the Men of
General Learning for Gassendus. Whereas neither of these two Men bear any sway
amongst them: they are never named there as Dictators over men's Reasons; nor
is there any extraordinary reference to their judgments. He also asserts that
the Royal Society has appointed Lodgings, and established four thousand Livres
a year, P. 87, 88.
upon two Professors, who shall read to them out of Authors, and that they have
begun a Library for that purpose. Whereas they have as yet no Library, but only
a Repository for their Instruments, and Rarities: they never intend a
Professorian Philosophy, but declare against it: with Books they meddle not
farther, then to see what Experiments have been tried before: their Revenue
they design for Operators, and not for Lecturers.

I now pass over to his chief delight, the Belles Lettres of the English. He
grants our Stage to be handsome, the Music tolerable, P. 167.
better I suppose, then that of the Polack Gentleman. But yet he says that our
Poets laugh at the Rules of Time, P. 167.
and Place: that all our Plays contain the Actions of Five and Twenty years:
P. 168.
that we Marry a Prince in the First Act, and bring in his Son fighting in the
Second, and his Grandchild in the Third. But here, Sir, he has committed a
greater disorder of time, then that whereof he accuses our Stage: For he has
confounded the Reign of King Charles the Second, with that of Q. Elizabeth.
It Is true, about an hundred years ago, the English Poets were not very exact in
such decencies: But no more then were the Dramatists of any other Countries.
The English themselves did laugh away such absurdities as soon as any, and for
these last Fifty years, our Stage has been as Regular in those Circumstances,
as the best in Europe. Seeing he thinks ^i^ to upbraid our present Poets, with
the errors of which their predecessors were guilty so long since: I might as
justly impu^e the ^ile absurdities that are to be found in Am^dis de Gaul, ^o
Monsieur de Corneille, de Scudery, de Chapelaine, de ^oiture, and the rest of
the ^amous Modern French Wits.

P. 168.
He next blames the meanness of the Humors which we represent. And here, because
he has thrust this occasion upon me, I will venture to make a short comparison
between the French Dramatical Poetry, and ours. I doubt not, Sir, but I may do
this with the leave of that witty Nation: For as long as I do not presume to
slander their manners (from which you see I have carefully forborne) I hope they
will allow me to examine that which is but a matter of Wit, and delight: I will
not enter into open defiance of them, upon Monsieur de Sorbiere's account, but
I entreat them to permit me only to try a civil Turnament with them in his War
of Letters. I will therefore make no scruple to maintain that the English Plays
ought to be preferred before the French. And to prove this, I will not insist
on an argument, which is plain to any observer, that the greatest part of their
most excellent pieces have been taken from the Spaniard: whereas the English
have for the most part trodden in new ways of Invention. From hence I will not
draw much advantage: though it may ^erve to balance that which he afterward
says of our Books, P. 169.
that they are generally stolen out of other Authors. But I will fetch the
grounds of my persuasion, from the very nature, and use, of the Stage it self.
It is beyond all dispute, that the true intention of such Representations, is,
to give to mankind a Picture of themselves; and thereby to make Virtue beloved,
Vice abhorred, and the little irregularities of men's tempers, called humors,
exposed to laughter. The Two first of these are the proper subjects of Tragedy,
and Trage-Comedy. And in these I will first try to show, why our way ought to
be preferred before theirs. The French, for the most part, take only one, or
two Great Men, and chiefly insist on some one remarkable accident of their
Story: To this end, they admit no more Persons, then will barely serve to adorn
that: And they manage all in Rhythme, with long Speeches, almost in the way of
Dialogues, in making high Ideas of Honor, and in speaking Noble things. The
English, on the other side, make their chief Plot to consist of a greater
variety of Actions, and besides the main design, add many other little
contrivances. By this means, their Scenes are shorter, their Stage fuller, many
more Persons of different Humors are introduced. And in carrying on of this,
they generally do only confine themselves to blanck Verse. This is the
difference. And hence the English have these advantages. By the liberty of
Prose, they render their Speech, and Pronuntiation, more natural, and are never
put to make a contention between the Rhythm, and the Sense. By their
underplots, they often change the minds of their Spectators: which is a mighty
Benefit, seeing one of the greatest Arts of Wit and persuasion, is the right
ordering of Digressions. By their full Stage, they prevent men's being
continually tired with the same Objects: and so they make the Doctrine of the
Scene to be more lively, and diverting, then the precepts of Philosophers, or
the grave delight of Heroic Poetry: which the French Tragedies do resemble.
Nor is it sufficient to object against this, that it is undecent to thrust in
men of mean condition, amongst the actions of Princes. For why should that
misbecome the Stage, which is always found to be acted on the True Theater of
the World? There being no Court, which only consists of Kings, and Queens, and
Counselors of State. Upon these accounts, Sir, in my weak judgment, the French
Drama ought to give place to the English, in the Tragical and lofty part of it.
And now having obtained this, I suppose they will of their own accord resign
the other excellence, and confess that we have far exceeded them in the
representation of different Humors. The Truth is, the French have always
seemed almost ashamed of the true Comedy: making it not much more then the
subject of their Farses: whereas the English Stage has so much abounded with
it, that perhaps there is scarce any sort of extravagance of which the minds of
men are capable, but they have in some measure expressed. It is in Comedies,
and not in Solemn Histories, that the English use to relate the Speeches of
Waggoners, of Fencers, and of Common Soldiers. And this I dare assure Monsieur
de Sorbiere, that if he had understood our Language, he might have seen himself
in all his shapes, as a vain Traveller, an empty Politician, an insolent
Pedant, and an idle pretender to Learning. But though he was not in a condition
of taking advice from our Stage, for the correcting of his own Vices, yet
methinks he might thereby have rectified his judgment about ours: he might well
have concluded, that the English temper, is not so universally heavy and
dumpish, when he beheld their Theaters, to be the gayest, and merriest in
Europe.

Concerning the English Eloquence, he bravely declares, P. 168, 169.
that all their Sermons in the Pulpit, and Pleadings at the Bar, P. 168, 169.
consist of nothing but mean pedantry. The censure is bold, especially from a
man that was so far from understanding our language, that he scarce knew,
Whether we move our lips, P. 169.
or no, when we speak. But to show him, that we can better judge of Monsieur de
Sorbier's Eloquence, I must tell him, that the Muses and Parnassus are almost
whip't out of our very Schools: That there are many hundreds of Lawyers and
Preachers in England, who have long known how to contemn such delicacies of his
style. I will only give one instance for all. I believe, he could scarce have
Bribed any Scriveners Clerk, to describe Hatfield as he has done, and so to
conclude, P. 158.
That the Fishes in the Ponds did often leap out of the water into the air, to
behold, and to delight themselves with the beauties of that place.

I will not attempt to defend the Ornaments, or the Copiousnesse of our
Language, against one that is utterly ignorant of it. But to show how
plentiful it is, I will only repeat an observation, which the Earl of
Clarendon has made; That there is scarce any Language in the world, which can
properly signify one English expression, and that is Good Nature. Though
Monsieur de Sorbiere will not allow the Noble Author of this Note, to have any
skill in Grammar Learning: Yet he must pardon me, if I still believe the
observation to be true: At least, I assure you, Sir, that after all my search,
I cannot find any one word in his Book, which might incline me to think
otherwise.

But I will be content to lay the whole authority of his judgment in matters
of Wit, and Elegance, upon what he says concerning the English Books. P. 168,
169.
He affirms, That they are only impudent thefts out of others, without citing
their Authors, and that they contain nothing, but ill Rhapsodies of matter,
worse put together. And here, Sir, I will for once do him a courtesy. I will
suppose him not to have taken this one character of us, from the Soldier, the
Zealander, the Puritans, or the Rabble of the Streets: I will grant he might
have taken an ill conceit of our writings, before he came over, from the usual
judgment, which the Southern wits of the world, are wont to pass on the wit
of all Northern Countries. It Is true indeed, I think the French, and the
Italians, would scarce be so unneighbourly, as to assert, that all our Authors
are Theivish Pedants. That is Monsieur de Sorbier's own addition, but yet they
generally agree, that there is scarce anything of late written, that is worth
looking upon, but in their own Languages. The Italians did at first endeavor
to have it thought, that all matters of Elegance, had never yet passed over the
Alps: but being soon overwhelmed by Number, they were content to admit the
French, and the Spaniards into some share of the ho^nour. But they all three
still maintain this united opinion, that all wit is to be sought for no where
but amongst themselves: It is their established Rule, that good sense has
always kept near the warm Sun, and scarce ever yet dared to come farther then
the forty ninth degree Northward. This, Sir, is a pretty imagination of theirs;
to think they have confined all Art to a Geographicall Circle, and to fancy
that it is there so charmed, as not to be able to go out of the bounds which
they have set it. It were certainly an easy and a pleasant work to confute this
arrogant conception, by particular examples: It might quickly be shown; that
England, Germany, Holland, nay, even Denmark, and Scotland, have produced very
many men, who may justly come into competition with the best of these Southern
wits, in the Advancement of the true Arts of life, in all the works of solid
reason, nay, even in the lighter studies of ornament, and humanity. And, to
speak particularly of England, there might be a whole Volume composed in
comparing the Chastity, the newness, the vigor of many of our English
Fancies, with the corrupt, and the swelling Metaphors, wherewith some of our
Neighbors, who most admire themselves do still adorn their Books. But this,
Sir, will require a larger discourse then I intend to bestow on Monsieur de
Sorbiere. I am able to dispatch him in ^ewer words^ For I wonder how, of all
men living, it could enter into his thoughts, To condemn in gross the English
Writings, when the best course that he has taken to make himself considered as
a writer, was the Translation of an English Author.

But I beg your leave, Sir, that I may briefly add, That in the first
Restoration of Learning, the English began to write well, as soon as any, the
Italians only excepted: and that if we may guess by what we see of the
Italians at this day, the English have continued to write well, longer then
they. Sir Thomas Moore was contemporary with Erasmus, and though he was a man
of the Law too, yet he yielded not much to that incomparable man, in the plenty
of his invention, or the Masculine easiness of his style. And ever since that
time down to this (if we may take a measure of the English, by what Tully says
of the Romans, in their most flourishing condition, that they had scarce above
one excellent Poet or Orator in an age) we may make a very advantageous
computation, for the honor of our Country. We have at this present, as many
Masters of true and real Wit, as ever Greece produced in one age, whose names
though I conceal, yet posterity shall declare. We have had many admirable
Geniuses in Poetry, who have handled most of the ancient and modern subjects of
fancy, with wonderful success. We can name many faithful and diligent
Historians, P. 185, 186.
such as never strove to frame a Romance out of every story, that they managed.
And the number of these will be shortly increased by the labors of a great
man, from whom we hope to receive the History of our late wars, a subject fit
for the pen of a Privy Counselor to Kings, who had himself a great share in
the conduct of these affairs which he is to relate. Our Mathematicians we may
almost equal to those of all Europe besides: Our Physicians have long bin
applauded by all the Learned world; and certainly their Renowned College at
London deserved to have bin mentioned, as well as the Fencers at the Red-Bull.
Our famous Divines have been innumerable, as the Dutchmen may witness, who, in
some of their Theological Treatises, have bin as bold with the English
Sermons, as with our Fishing, and their robberies have bin so manifest, that
our Church ought to have Reprisalls against them as well as our Merchants. We
have had many Philosophers, of a strong, vigorous, and forcible judgment, of
happy and laborious hands, of a sincere, a modest, a solid, an unaffected
expression, such who have not thought it enough to set up for Philosophers,
only to have got a large stock of fine words, and to have insinuated into the
acquaintance of some of the great Philosophers of the age. And above all, we
have one small Book, which we dare oppose to all the Treasures of the Eastern,
and Western Languages, it is that which was written by our Late King, and
Martyr: Whose Ma^estical style, and Divine Conceptions, have not only moved all
his Readers to admire his Eloquence, but inclined some of the worst of his
enemies, to relent their Cruelty toward him.

After all these signs of his excellent judgment, and generous mind, there
still, Sir, remains that which he has given of his good Palate, For he has
boldly determined the controversy, that had long depended in all the Kitchings
of England, and France, which is the best way of eating, Chines of Beef, and
Mutton, or Bisques, and Potages. This, I confess, was a matter fit to be
decided by that Historian, Critic, Mathematician, Orator, and Physician, Who
had Traveled throughout the world to acquaint himself with all the Learned
men of all countries, and to push on all Sciences to perfection. He has here
indeed behav^d himself like the true natural, and experimental Philosopher,
whose business it is to take in all manner of observations, that can be got
from the Senses. You see, Sir, how fairly I treat him, I allow the very
Criticisms of his appetite to be a part of his Philosophy; and I look upon his
affection to Fricacies before whole Joints, to proceed from his love to the
Doctrine of Atoms, before that of the two great standing dishes of Matter and
Form. But yet I must tell him, that perhaps this Rigid condemning of the
English Cookery, did not so well suit with his beloved Title of Sceptick.
According to the laws of that profession, he should first have long debated
whether there be any taste, or no; whether the steam of a pot be only a fancy,
or a real thing; whether the Kitchen fire has indeed the good qualities of
rosting, and Boiling, or whether it be only an appearance. This had bin a
dispute more becoming a Sceptick, then thus to conclude Dogmatically on all
the Intrigues of Haut gousts; and to raise an endless speculative quarrel
between those that had bin hitherto peaceful and practical Sects, the Hashe's,
and the Surloiners.

You may now, Sir, perhaps expect, that I should make some Comparison between
the French Diet and the English. It were, I confess, a pleasant, and a weighty
argument. But I am resolved to pass it over: not that I think we have the
worst of the cause; but for a particular reason of my own. It is that Monsieur
de Sorbiere may still remain in his error; For as long as he is ignorant that
there is any good House Keeping in England, we are like to have no more of his
company; yet I cannot but say to the advantage of Boil^d Beef and Roast, that
the English have the same sincerity in their Diet, which they have in their
Manners: and as they have less mixture in their Dishes, so they have less
sophisticate compositions in their hearts, then the people of some other
Nations.

But now, Sir, I confess he has quite tyr^d my hand, and I almost ashamed to
behold this heap of his vanities arise to such a Bulk, as he ought to be, that
he has given me this occasion to collect them; I will therefore in few words
come to an issue with him: I will satisfy him in the request which he makes to
this Reader. I am content to conclude from these his three months travells,
what kind of Observations he has made in the world these thirty years. This,
Sir, is his own desire, and I obey him. But then I know not how he will be able
to avoid the imputation of those Crimes with which he has so often slandered
the English, of being a Doe-little, an Idle, a Lazy, and a Useless Person. The
description of his Voyage into Holland is not yet come to my hands: but if it
be of the same thread with this, he had bin much better employed, if he had
only imitated the Roman Emperors journey thither, and gone to gather
Cockle-shells on that shore. If he has any friends amongst all the learned men
of Europe, that were once his familiars, they would do well to advise him what
weight his mind will bear: he is himself in the right, when he acknowledges,
that these matters of state, Ep. De.
Characters of Nations, descriptions of Governments, Churches, and Courts, are
far above the weakness of his Spirit. But yet the Man's abilities are not wholly
to be discouraged; he may still prove a tolerable good flatterer of his
Patrons: he may bring in his Vostre Tres Humble, artificially enough in the end
of an empty Letter of complements: he may serve to commend Philosophers when
they are dead: or (to conclude with his own dear Epithete) he may make a
sufficient Trumpeter in the Commonwealth of Learning. And in truth he has
behaved himself, in this account of his Voyage, like a true Trumpeter; for
Trumpeters, when they are sent into foreign armies or countries, are always
blinded on purpose that they might not be able to give any certain
intelligence, of the places through which they passed.

And now, Sir, having dismissed the Historiographer Royal, that I may speedily
put an end to your trouble, I will only in few words apply my speech to your
self. You may perhaps remember, that we have sometimes debated together, what
place and time of all the past, or present, we would have chosen to live in, if
our fates had bin at our own disposal; and in that discourse, instead of
desiring to have bin born in China, we both agreed, that Rome, in the Reign of
Augustus, was to be preferred before all others. The prerogatives of that time
were very many: That City was then become the established seat of the Empire of
the world: that Emperor had the good fortune to succeed a long civil war: the
minds of all men were easily composed into obedience by the remembrance of
their past misfortunes: the arts of Wit, Reason, and delight were in their
highest perfection: the Court was the place of resort, for all the Lovers of
generous knowledge: and such was the freedom of their manners, that Virgil,
Horace, and Varius were admitted into the privacies, and friendship, of
Agrippa, Mecaenas, and Augustus. Beyond this we could fancy nothing pleasanter
to a Philosophical mind; which was resolved to live according to the
convenience, and Rules of Nature, seeing it might there have enjoyed at once
all the varieties of an active life, and all the quiet, and peace, of a Retired.

This, Sir, was then our opinion: But it was before the Kings Return. For since
that blessed time, the condition of our own Country appears to me to be such,
that we need not search into ancient History for a real Idea of happiness.
It Is true that England is not the seat of the Empire of the world: But it may
be of that which confines the world it self, the Ocean: To this Dominion our
Nation is invited, by the Situation of our shores, the inclination of our
people, and the Genius of a vigorous and skillful Prince. The time wherein we
live is upon the recovery of an Universal peace; a peace established on the two
surest foundations of Fear, and Love: a peace that was accomplished without
proscriptions, and even without the ruin of those that resisted it: a peace
that was produced by peaceful Arts, though it was by the conduct of an Army.
The footsteps of the late dreadful war are not only vanished from our eyes,
but now almost from our thoughts. If any thing of it still remains, it is only
the good effect which it had on our country, the industry that was excited by
it, and the wisdom which such woeful experience has taught us. The Government
which we enjoy, is justly composed of a sufficient liberty, and restraint. And
though it may be suspected in a querulous and discontented Age, a little to
incline the people to disobedience; yet in a calm, and a secure time (such as
this at present) it serves admirably well to breed a generous, an honorable,
and invincible spirit. The temper of the English is free, Modest, Sincere,
Kind, hard to be provoked: if they are not so talkative as others, yet they are
more careful of what they speak: if they are thought, by some of their
neighbors, to be a little defective in the gentleness, and the pliableness of
their humor; yet that want is abundantly supplied, by their firm and their
Masculine virtues: and perhaps the same observation may be found true in men,
which is in Metals, that those of the strongest, and the Noblest substance are
hardest to be polisht. The Arts that now prevail amongst us, are not only all
the useful Sciences of Antiquity, but most especially all the late discoveries
of this Age in the real knowledge of mankind, and nature. For the improvement
of this kind of light, the English disposition is of all others the fittest.
And an universal zeal toward the advancement of such designs, has not only
overspread our Court and Universities; but the Shops of our Mechanics, the
fields of our Gentlemen, the Cottages of our Farmers, and the Ships of our
Merchants. To all this, Sir, may be added the Profession of such a Religion,
and the Discipline of such a Church, which an impartial Philosopher would
choose: which by falling with the Throne, and by rising with it again, has given
evident sign, how consistent it is with the Laws of humane society, and how
nearly its interest is united with the prosperity of our Country.

It Is true indeed that after all these advantages, there may be some room still
left for future amendments, in the union of our minds, the smoothness of our
manners, and the Beauty of our Buildings. This last was the peculiar honor of
Augustus, who is said to have found Rome of Brick, and to have left it of
Marble. In this kind too we every day behold a wonderful progress, by the
powerful influence of a Royal Example: so that I may in general affirm, that
never any Nation in the world has proceeded by swifter degrees, to excel in
Convenience and Magnificence. But whatever is to be added in this, or any other
such way, we can never receive it from the petulant corrections of such vain
Observers, as this whom I have here considered. No, Sir, we are to expect it
from the many Noble and practical English Wits of this Age: and chiefly from
your self. For you must give me leave, Sir, to presage, that to you your
Country is to owe very much of its Ornament, as well as experimental knowledge,
its reputation and indeed all the living, and Beneficial Arts, the enlargement
of their Bounds. This, Sir, I know will offend your modesty; but he is an ill
Englishman, who would not have said as much as this, when your name was
mentioned: which if I had omitted, I had bin almost as injurious to our Nation,
as this very Traveller whom I censure: for as he was un^ust in aggravating the
faults, so I my self had been, in concealing one of the principal glories of
England.

I beg of you now, Sir, only to permit me to conclude with some Apology for my
self. You may, perhaps, wonder all this while to see me undertake such an
argument, and to prosecute it in a manner, which may appear perhaps a little
too sharp for your eye, or my pen. You know, Sir, that I am enemy to all manner
of controversies, that I hate contention, though in matters of the greatest
concernment, and that I had much rather defend, then accuse: To this I can
therefore only reply, for my excuse, that this Letter may not so properly be
called an Accusation, as a Defense: For though I have confuted the sawciness of
one particular Man, yet I have pleaded for a Great, a Valiant, and a virtuous
people. Sir, I am.

London, August 1, 1664. Your most Humble and Affectionate Servant. THO. SPRAT.


