Of Trust in God: OR, A DISCOURSE Concerning the DUTY of Casting our Care upon
God In all our DIFFICULTIES.

Together with An EXHORTATION to Patient Suffering for Righteousness. In a
SERMON on 1 S. Pet. III. 14, 15.

BY NATHANIEL SPINCKES, M. A. A Presbyter of the Church of England.

LONDON, Printed by J. Heptinstall, for Walter Kettilby at the Bishop's- Head
in St. Paul's Churchyard, 1696.

THE PREFACE.
AMongst the great variety of excellent Practical Discourses this present Age
has produced, I have often wondered, that no more has been written concerning
the Duty here treated of. Than which, though no sort of Virtue is more useful
for all Estates and Conditions of Life, and especially for teaching how to bear
Afflictions with a truly Christian Patience, and Resignation to the Divine
Will, yet I know none that has ever set himself to a particular Consideration
of it. The admirable Author of the Whole Duty of Man, the Learned Dr. Hammond,
Dr. Scott, and some others, have recommended it, as a necessary and comfortable
Branch of Christianity. But their more general Designs allowed them not to
enlarge upon it, to the prejudice of those other Duties, they were to insist
upon also at the same time. And none else having undertaken it, (unless perhaps
within the compass of a Sermon) I persuaded my self, that I could not do God
and Religion better service, than by offering what Meditations seemed to me
most proper for inviting to it, nor could propose any Expedient, that might
tend more to Men's Quiet and easy Passage through this troublesome World.

Psalm. 27.13.
I should utterly have fainted, says the devout Psalmist, but that I believe
verily to see the Goodness of the Lord in the land of the living. And even the
very Atque etiam Jovem quum Optimum Maximum dicimus, cumque eundem salutarem,
hospitalem statorem, hoc intelligi volumus, salutem hominum in ejus esse
tutela. Cic. de fin. bon. and mal. l. 3. c. 20.
Heathens could rejoice to think that Almighty God was their compassionate
Protector and Defender, having condescended to take upon him the Guardianship
of Mankind. Nor can any thing be a greater refreshment to an afflicted Soul,
than to remember, that not Fortune, nor Chance, nor Fate, nor the Malice, the
Ambition, the Revenge, the Avarice, the Treachery of wicked Men, nor even the
Power and Spite and Subtility of the Devil, governs the World, but all our
affairs are ordered by an infinitely Wise and Good God, who knows our Condition
much better than our selves do, and loves us much better than we love our
selves, and will be sure to make a far better choice for us, than we could for
our selves.

For my own part, I must confess to my Maker's Glory, that it having been my
portion of late years to have met with troubles of different kinds, I have
always found a serious Reflection upon his good Providence the best support
under them; and the more sensibly so, by how much the more firmly I have fixed
my thoughts upon him, and endeavored to comfort and encourage my self in him.

This put me upon drawing up the following Discourse, and now upon presenting
it to the Christian Reader, in hope that it may not prove wholly useless to
others in the like, or worse circumstances; or at least, that its Defects may
tempt some abler Author to resume the Argument, and supply what is wanting
here. And if it shall have either of these effects, I shall not reckon my time
or pains to have been mis-employed.

And because a constant and conscientious Dependence upon God is an excellent
Preparative for Suffering for Righteousness, whenever he in his wise
Providence sees fit to call us to it, I have ventured to subjoyn a Discourse
also upon that subject; that as the former I hope may be of use for enabling,
so this other may be a means of engaging us, to take up our Cross, and follow
our Blessed Lord through all the Impediments we may at any time have occasion
to encounter with in doing it, fighting manfully under his banner, despising
all terrestrial Advantages, in comparison of the inestimable, unconceivable
Glories of the other State, and studying to express our hearty Sense of what
our Redeemer has so graciously done and suffered for us, by conforming our
selves to his Image, who was made perfect through sufferings, treading in his
steps, and resigning our selves entirely to our heavenly Father's Will,
patiently, undauntedly, and meekly to bear whatsoever is brought upon us for
his sake.

I confess I have all along, in what I have written, proceeded upon Christian
Principles, taking it for a sufficient Proof of a super-intending Providence to
order our affairs for us, that the Holy Scriptures bear such undeniable
testimony to it. Greater Authority cannot be had for any Truth, than the
express Word of God declaring it. And this therefore I have rested upon, as the
best foundation for whatsoever Doctrines I have laid down, or Arguments I have
urged in behalf of them.

Yet considering the shameful degeneracy of our Times, wherein too many, that
bear our Savior's Name, stick not however to decry all Divine Revelation, and
set up for bare Reason and the Light of Nature, as their only Guide. I was once
Chap. 3. Sect. 1.
about to have addressed my self to these in their own way, to show, that
besides the abundant Evidence we have from Scripture, their so much admired
Reason pleads loudly for, nay undoubtedly evinces the Certainty of an
overruling Providence. But finding this undertaking like to swell to a much
greater length than I had expected, and fearing lest it might cause too great a
breach in the thread of my Discourse, and might be tedious and unseasonable to
the better sort of Christians, who are already sufficiently satisfied of this
great Truth, and need not to have it thus inculcated, I altered my design, and
sent the Sheets to the Press, as they now appear, intending only to give some
short intimation of the Arguments I had suppressed, in this Preface.

But I have since been persuaded to perfect what I had thus begun, and to
publish it in this place; where, coming by it self, it will make no
interruption in the body of the Discourse; and besides, will leave the Reader
the more perfectly at liberty, either to peruse, or pass it by, as he shall
think most proper.

Now the Arguments which I designed to have urged in this Case, and which I
here propose to the serious Consideration, of all that are not sufficiently and
undoubtedly convinced of the certainty of a super-intending Providence, and the
just ground they therefore have to rest upon it, are such as arise from these
five following Heads.

I. The Nature of Almighty God, and the Perfection of his Divine Attributes.
II. The Creation of the World. III. The Continuance of things in the state we
see them in. IV. The excellent Order and Harmony of the several Parts of the
World. V. And Lastly, The many extraordinary Effects that have been observed at
any time, beyond, nay contrary to the wonted Power and Laws of Nature.
I. The first (which alone, if rightly attended to, were an abundant proof of
the matter in question) is taken from the Nature of Almighty God, and the
Perfection of his Divine Attributes; whence he not only is able to manage and
order all things, but is likewise inclined to consult the welfare of all. For
none who believes a God, but must believe him to be absolutely Perfect; and
amongst other his Divine Excellencies, must believe him to be infinitely Wise,
Powerful, and Good. And whosoever owns this, must farther own, Quid igitur in
Deo potest esse beatitudo, si semper quietus, and immobilis torpet? Si
precantibus surdus, si colentibus caecus? Quid tam dignum, tam proprium Deo,
quam Providentia? Lactant. de ira Dei, c. 4. Si est Deus, utique Providens est
ut Deus, ibid. c. 9.
that these Attributes necessarily imply an Exercise of them, for the benefit
of any that stand in need of it. For infinite Wisdom will be sure to find out
the streights and troubles of the distressed; infinite Power will easily
furnish out means for their relief; and infinite Goodness will readily excite
to the use of all these means. So that where all these Perfections concur, (as
they most manifestly do in Almighty God,) it must argue great weakness in any
to doubt whether they will exert themselves whenever there appears a proper
occasion for it. And Existimo tamen eam [n. Providentiam] ita consentaneam
esse, naturae Dei, ejusque divinis Proprietatibus, -- ut qui eam Deo competere
dubitare andet, vix inter sanos, and mentis suae compotes; censeri debeat.
Instit. Theol. l. 4. sect. 4. c. 4.
Episcopius therefore had good reason to censure such, as hardly in their
senses, who cannot not but acknowledge a God thus insinitely perfect, and yet
are unwilling to own a Providence; and Cum igitur Providentiam sustulit, etiam
Deum negavit esse. De ira Dei, c. 9.
Lactantius, to charge it home upon Epicurus, that by denying a Providence, he
in effect denied the Being of God too, who could not rationally be supposed to
exist without it. A Deity without a Providence, is an egregious contradiction.
And it were incomparably easier to imagine that the Sun should be without
light, or Fire without heat, than that an infinitely gracious and good God
should be without doing good. In a word, As certainly as God is, he delights in
Mercy and Beneficence; and as certainly as he does this, there is and must be a
Providence concerning it self for the welfare of those that depend upon him.

II. However, for the farther proof hereof, I proceed to argue from the
Creation of the World. For let a Man consider, that the World cannot possibly
have been from Eternity; as, besides the Relation Moses gives of its Original,
is rationally enough collected from the accounts we have of the beginnings of
Arts and Learning; from the want of any, either History or Tradition, ancienter
than the supposed time of the Creation; from the nature of Time and Motion,
each of which implying in it a Succession, must unavoidably imply also that it
had a beginning; from the propagation of Mankind, and other living Creatures;
all which must necessarily have had some first Head or Parent, from whom they
proceeded, though at never so great a distance; and lastly, from the (...).
Aristot. de coelo, l. 1. c. 10. vid. etiam, l. 3. c. 1. Omnibus ad hoc demum
consentientibus, etc. Iren. l. 2. c. 9. Vetus est opinio, atque cogitationes
omnium hominum penitus insedir, Deum esse originis and haberi authorem. Apul.
de Mundo.
general Tradition of Mankind, acknowledging it to have began sometime, though
they knew not when. Let it farther be observed, that this stately Fabric could
never possibly be erected by such a wild fortuitous concourse of Atoms, as was
never known to have built Quod si mundum efficere potest concursus atomorum,
cur porticum, cur templum, cur domum, cur urbem non potest? Quae sunt minus
operosa, and multo quidem faciliora. Cic. de not. Deor. l. 2. c. 37.
a Temple, a City, a House, or so much as a Porch to it. Let us farther attend
to Tanta res, tam ornata, tam magna, neque fieri, neque disponi and ordinari,
sine aliquo prudentissimo authore potuit; and ea ipsa ratio, qua constare ac
regi omnia sentiuntur, solertissimae mentis artificem confitetur. Lactant.
Inst. l. 7. c. 7.
the wonderful Frame and Contexture of the several parts of the World,
bespeaking it to be the work of a most Wise Intelligent Being; and that
therefore Ipsa enim conditio ostendit eum, qui condidit eam, etc. Iren. l. 2.
c. 9.
none but Almighty God can have been the Maker of it. Let it be remembered, that
the Erns (...). Fragm. Pythag.
World thus evidently and undeniably appears to have been at first created by
God; and Quis enim non sentiat hunc mundum, tam mirabili ratione perfectum,
aliqua providentia gubernari? Lactant. Inst. l. 3. c. 20. vid. etiam l. 2. c.
8. Quid enim potest esse tam apertum, tamque perspicuum, cum oculos in coelum
sustuleris, and quae sunt infra circaque lustraveris, quam esse aliquod numen
praestantissimae mentis, quo omnis natura inspiretur? etc. Min. Fell.
who would not be ashamed to suspect that the same infinite Bounty which
persuaded him to create it at first, will not still engage him to look after
it, now it has a Being? It is at least as easy to preserve, and govern all
things now they are made, as it was to make them out of nothing. And it is very
unreasonable to fancy that the same immense Goodness, which was the occasion
of the one, should not as well be an occasion of the other. For that it will,
is so natural an Inference, that Lactant. Inst. l. 1. c. 2.
Protagoras, Democritus, Anaxagoras, and the rest of those amongst the
Philosophers, who denied a Providence, found it necessary to deny the Creation
too.

Dr. Outram Sermon. 1. on S. Matthew. 10 29.
No wise Man, as a late excellent Divine of our own Church reasons, ever
bestowed his pains, and employed his care, and laid out his treasure to make a
house, and then presently left that house, for the Owls and the Batts, for the
Satyr and the Dragon to dwell in; much less can it be supposed, that God made
the World, and then presently deserted it, after it was made, leaving those
things to be governed by Chance, which he had made by Wisdom. But the learned
Grotius proceeds further, arguing for a Providence, not only from the Actions
of Men endued with Reason, but of the Birds and Beasts which have it not, and
yet De verit. rel Christ. l. 1. c. 10.
from a certain instinct of Nature are wont to have a care of the things, which
have been produced by them. Whence he observes the great vanity of conceiting
God, to have created so noble and well-composed a World, and then to concern
himself no farther about it. This were to leave not Mankind only, but all
things else exposed to innumerable mischiefs and disorders, and certain
confusion and destruction, and hence would represent Almighty God, as acting
with less consistence; I say not then Mankind, but then the meanest of his
Creatures, that are capable of acting at all. Wherefore the gross absurdity of
this supposal is a sufficient evidence of its falsity, and consequently is a
very good Argument to evince the certainty of a super-intending Providence.

III. As is also the Continuance of things in the state and order we see them
in. Nihil est quod possit sine ullo moderatore consistere. Sic domus ab
habitatore deserta dilabitur. Navis sine gubernatore abit pessum. Et corpus
relictum ab anima defluit. Nedum putemus tantam illam molem, aut construi sine
artifice, aut stare sine rectore, tamdiu potuisse. Lact. Instit. l. 3. c. 20.
(...). Just. M. Arist. dogm. evers. (...). Salust. Phil. de Diis and mundo, c.
7.
A Man cannot build a House, but it will be thenceforward decaying; and if
neglected, it soon becomes ruinous and useless; and though no unexpected
Accident happen to destroy it, in a little time it perishes of it self, except
due care be taken to repair it. Have a Ship into the Ocean, and leave it there
without any to direct or steer it, and what else can be looked for, than that
it be lost, especially if it be in a place of danger, and the season prove
tempestuous. Our own Bodies in like manner (frail and feeble as we are) if not
constantly supplied with food for their nourishment, and sometimes with
Physic, for their relief against the frequent Distempers to which they are
liable, quickly moulder into dust. And after all our care for their
Preservation, it is not long we can hope to prop them up, before, according to
the course of Nature, we shall be gathered to our Fathers. Whereto if the many
unforeseen Mischiefs be added, to which our selves and all things else are
every day obnoxious, there is no appearance of security in whatsoever
condition. Whence then are we all preserved in being, but from the good Omnia
quae naturaliter, and propterea recte feruntur, Providentiae custodia
gubernantur. Apul. de Habit. Doct Plat. l 1.
Providence of God, continually watching over us for our support? Or (...).
Phil. Jud. de legate. ad Caium.
what else could possibly keep us as we are, but that Almighty Hand of his,
from whence we at first proceeded?

And what clearer proof therefore would any one desire of a Divine Providence,
than that this being the case, the face of things should however after so many
thousand years remain much the same that was at first? that the same Heavens,
the same Earth, the same Species of Animals, etc. that were created at the
beginning, should thus continue from generation to generation? He that can
conceive this to be the effect of any thing else but an infinitely wise and
uncontrollable Power, need not fear to set up for the defense of any the
grossest paradox in the World.

IV. The excellent Harmony of the several parts of the World, that they are not
only preserved in being, -- Aequabilitatem motus, conversionem coeli, solis,
lunae, siderumque omnium distinctionem utilitatem, pulchritudinem, ordinem;
quarum rerum aspectus ipse satis indicaret non esse fortuita. Cic. de not.
Deor. l. 2. c. 5. Nec enim tanta rerum magnitudo, tanta dispositio, tanta in
servandis ordinibus, temporibusque constantia, aut olim potuit sine provido
artifice oriri, aut constare tot saeculis sine incola potenti, aut in perpetuum
gubernari sine perito rectore, quod ratio ipsa declarat. Lact. de ira Dei, c.
10.

At cur dispositis vicibus consurgere signa,
Et velut imperio praescriptos reddere cursus Cernimus, etc.
Manil. Astron. l. 1. (...), etc. Salust. phil. de Diis and Mundo, c. 9. (...),
etc. Arr. Epictet. l. 1. c. 6.


but act by constant Laws and Methods, plainly declares an invisible Hand of
Providence overruling them. If infinite Wisdom were to direct the different
seasons of the year, or appoint the course of the Planets, or limit the returns
of day and night, how could they be expected to be otherwise than they are now,
all proceeding in due order, and serving their proper end, the glory of God,
and the benefit of Mankind?

If infinite Power were to display it self in the Government of the World, what
other effects of it could be hoped for, than that it should prescribe the Sea
its proper limits, lest it should otherwise overwhelm the Earth; should give us
rain from heaven, and fruitful seasons, filling our hearts with food and
gladness; should allow Man the dominion over the beasts of the Earth, that they
prevail not against him, nor destroy him; should cause those amazing
productions which are constantly seen in Trees, and Plants, and Minerals;
should keep all the Elements in aequilibrio, that neither of them may prevail
over the other; should dispose all second Causes to the best advantage; and, in
fine, should oblige them all to operate after the same manner that we daily see
they do? And if infinite Goodness were to unite with both these, what more
could be desired from such a blessed Conjunction, than that all due Care be
taken of particular Persons, and of whole Societies, both to preserve them in
being, and to supply them with all needful blessings? And why then, whilst
these effects appear, should we any more doubt, as Nunquid hi qui sub Romanorum
imperio sunt, quamvis nunquam viderint Imperatorem, sed valde and per mare and
per terram separati ab eo, cognoscent propter Dominum, eum qui maximam
Potestatem habet Principatus? etc. Iren. l. 2. c. 5.
Irenaeus argues, of their true Cause, than they who lived in the remoter
Territories of the Roman Empire doubted, whether there were an Emperor at
Rome, when they were governed by him, though by reason of their distance from
his Imperial City, they had never seen him?

That we have variety of weather suitable to our necessities, that the Earth
produces plenty of useful fruits, store of beautiful and fragrant Flowers,
Grass, and Wood, and Minerals of diverse sorts, that it furnishes us with food
to live upon, with clothes to wear, with materials for Houses to dwell in, with
medicinal Herbs and Waters, and with ornamental Rarities; that the Sea serves
for maintaining Commerce through the several parts of the Globe; that this also
affords food and other considerable advantages; that we have a healthful Air
to breathe in, and whose transparency conveighs to us a due proportion both of
heat and light; that the many different species of Animals are propagated with
the same Shape, the same natural Instincts, the same ways of seeking their own
Provision, and the same Care of their Young; that Mankind are fearfully and
wonderfully made, have an excellent contexture of parts, have so much likeness,
and yet together with it so much Eadem figura omnibus, sed quaedam unicuique
lineamenta deflexa: sic and similes universi videmur, and inter se singuli
dissimiles invenimur. Min. Fell.
difference in their Countenances; that they and other Creatures grow to a
certain Stature, there continue, and then at length decay, and die, and so make
room for others to succeed them; that our food digests and becomes our
nourishment; and that in all respects we are thus admirably accommodated with
what our condition calls for, Manil. Astron. l. 1.
Non casus opus est, magni sed Numinis ordo,this cannot be the work of chance,
but of a wise and good God, who is pleased most graciously to manifest his
kindness through the Universe. It is not possible that a fortuitous jumbling of
uncertain Causes should ever produce such a train of singular Events, as carry
in them the plain footsteps of a divine Disposal. And he must be blind, or
worse, that having this daily experience of the good hand of God over himself
and his fellow creatures, will not yet be persuaded to own his Providence.

There is none, says Instit. Div. l. 1. c. 2.
Lactantius, so rude, or so brutish, but that when he lifts up his Eyes to
Heaven, though he know not the God, by whose influence all that we see is
governed, he will however understand that there is a God, from the large extent
of the things he beholds, and their motion, disposition, continuance,
usefulness, beauty, and temperature. And Quem vero astrorum ordines, quem
dierum noctiumque vicissitudines, quem mensium temperatio, quemque ea quae
gignuntur nobis ad fruendum, non gratum esse cogunt, hunc hominem omnino
numerare neque decet. De legibus l. 2. c. 7. Quis enim hunc hominem dixerit,
qui cum tam certos coeli motus, tam ratos astrorum ordines, tamque omnia inter
se connexa and apta viderit, neget in his ullam inesse rationem, eaque casu
fieri dicat? De not. Deor. l. 2. c. 37.
Tully will hardly allow him the Name and Qualifications of a Man, that can
observe the certain motions of the Heavens, the fixed courses of the Stars, and
the aptitude and mutual connection of all things, and not be forced to confess,
that not Chance, but Reason is the cause of these. And elsewhere Esse
praestantem aliquam aeternamque naturam, and eam suspiciendam admirandamque
hominum generi, pulchritudo mundi, ordoque rerum coelestium eogit confiteri. De
divinat. l. 2.
he affirms the beauty of the World, and the order of the heavenly things to be
an undeniable proof of an excellent and eternal Nature, and that is to be
honored and admired by Mankind. And yet the heavenly bodies are not singular
in their testimony; for there is not a Praesentemque refert quaelibet herba
Deum.
Spire of Grass Here below, not an herb in the Field, much less a stately Tree
in the Wood, or a delicious Flower in the Garden, but are witnesses to this
great Truth.

Wherefore if upon sight of a (...), etc. Theoph. Antioch. ad Autol. l. 1.
Ship under sail, holding on her course, and making readily toward the shore,
it is presently concluded that this vessel comes not of it self, but is steered
by its Mariners, howsoever none of them as yet appear above deck, or Siquis in
domum aliquam, aut in gymnasium, aut in forum venerit; cum videat omnium rerum
rationem, modum, disciplinam, non possit ea sine causa fieri judicare, sed esse
aliquem intelligar, qui praesit, and cui pareatur; multo magis -- statuat
necesse est, ab aliqua mente tantos naturae motus gubernari. Cic. de not. Deor.
l. 2. c. 5.
if observing a House, a School, or a Court, where all things look well, and
with a due decorum, we easily persuade our selves that this comes not to pass
by chance, but by the care of some prudent Master or Governor, much rather
should we attend to the hand of God in the management of the World, when we
observe the manifold instances of his Providence that each day presents us
with. Not to believe in him upon this undeniable evidence, is a height of
perverseness, that may justly prevail with him to withdraw his Protection from
us, and teach us by sad experience, what it is to want it.

Lord Bacon. Ess. 16.
I had rather believe all the Fables in the Legend and the Talmud, says a noble
Author, than that this universal Frame is without a Mind; and adds, that
therefore God never wrought a Miracle to convince Atheism, because his ordinary
Works convince it. And yet these are not the only proof we have of a Powerful
Supreme Being that orders all our affairs for us. For if we proceed to

V. The many Extraordinary Interposals that have been taken notice of in the
World, these also loudly testify that Almighty God interests himself in the
concerns of his Creatures, directing and disposing all things according to his
own good pleasure, and the wise ends of his Government. Of this kind are all
the (...) Salust. Phil. de Diis and Mundo, c. 9.
Predictions of future Events, long before they came to pass, or could possibly
be foreseen without the help of some supernatural Revelation; and all the
Miracles that have from time to time been wrought, contrary to the wonted
methods and Laws of Nature; which, whether any of them were done purposely to
confute Atheism, or not, are yet a most palpable confutation of it. Each of
these demonstrate all things to act in subordination to God's Will, because
otherwise he could neither overrule them, contrary to their usual course, nor
could foretell what should happen, long after without his concurrence. And
therefore if it can be made appear that there has been variety of Prophecies
which have been in due time, and perhaps after many Ages, accomplished exactly
as had been foretold, and of Miracles that have been wrought to the certain
knowledge and astonishment of the beholders, who could not but own the hand of
God to be in them; I presume nothing more can be wanting to put it beyond all
pretense of doubt, that God not only is, but that he continually concerns
himself in the Government of the World.

And for the proof hereof, I desire only this one reasonable Postulate to be
granted me; which yet can with no show of justice be denied; namely, That the
holy Scriptures of the Old and New Testament, and the Writings of the
Christians in the first Ages of the Church, may but be owned as credible
Histories, and the matters of fact related in them as worthy our belief as
those which are recorded by other Historians. This is an equal, and a very
modest demand, considering the sar greater respect that is due to the sacred
Writings, than any other Records whatsoever can possibly pretend to. For
(besides their divine Authority, which I am not now to insist upon) they have
several other very considerable advantages for their Credibility, above any
other History that ever was in the World. Christianity has no greater Enemies
than the Jews have been and still are, and yet they have all along been, and at
this day continue as zealous as ever for the Books of the Old Testament. They
have constantly owned them for Authentic, their Historian Josephus bears
witness to them, and they yet adhere to them as undoubtedly true. And as for
the greatest part of the New Testament, and indeed all that I have need to
recurr to in the case before us, there not only was never any doubt amongst the
regular and orthodox Christians concerning its being genuine, but it was never
questioned by Celsus, or Julian, or any of its most avowed Adversaries, who we
are sure would never have spared the Christians, if they could have found any
pretense for an objection in this respect. And besides, that the Authors of
these holy Writings were Men of untainted reputation, upon whom no instance of
imposture could be fixed, they were moreover so different for quality, some of
them Kings and great Men, some of them mean and illiterate, no better than
Shepherds, or Fishers, or Publicans, some of a middle condition between both,
so many for number, and who wrote in such distant times, that they could never
possibly be thought to have all combined together, to deceive the World, nor
like to have escaped a discovery, if they could have attempted it.

The Authors and Publishers of the New Testament were such who had nothing to
expect in this World, but tribulations, and afflictions, and death, the portion
that our Savior had foretold would be allotted to his Disciples; and in the
World to come they could have no good to hope for, if they had only conspired
to delude Mankind, in transmitting to all generations what they knew to be
false. And hence they could have no other Design to serve in what they
published, but that of propagating the Truth.

And since the writing and divulging of the Scriptures, they have been
translated into abundantly more Languages, have had incomparably more Copies
and Impressions, and been the subject of vastly more Commentaries, Annotations,
Paraphrases, and given occasion for multitudes more of Disquisitions and
Discourses, and upon all these accounts were apparently far less liable to be
corrupted, than any other Authors whatsoever. They have had the testimony of a
whole cloud of Christian Martyrs, who stuck not readily to resign their lives,
in pursuance of the Truth contained therein. And notwithstanding all the
opposition that has been made against them, they have prevailed to that degree,
as plainly to show a divine Blessing going along with them, to give them
success in spite of all the malice of Jews or Gentiles, or the Devil himself,
and his utmost contrivances for their suppression. So that after all this he
must be monstrously unreasonable, that will not yet be induced to place them in
the rank of the most credible Historians, or indeed that sees not of what
unspeakably greater Authority they are, than all other the most celebrated
Histories. The least that can possibly be inferred from these Premises is, that
either Men must utterly renounce all History, and all pretense to the knowledge
of what is past before their own days, or they must be brought to confess the
Scriptures a just foundation for their belief of the Matters related in them.
And this being once granted, there can be no difficulty in the proof of
multitudes both of Prophesies and of Miracles, to evince the certainty of an
overruling Providence.

1. Prophecies. And here, if I should begin with that of Noah, concerning the
Deluge of Waters that was to be brought upon the World of the ungodly, it would
easily be shown that he was certainly a true Prophet, though he had Cassandra's
fate, not to be attended to by an incredulous generation, till their own sad
experience too late convinced them of the reality of his Predictions. He not
only informed them of their approaching destruction, as may justly be collected
from his History in the sixth and seventh Chapters of Genesis, and St. Peter's
affirmation, 1 Ep. 3.20.
that God waited in the days of Noah, while the Ark was preparing, which it is
not conceivable he would do without giving notice of it to the people, whose
repentance he waited for; Noah I say, not only informed the old World of their
approaching destruction, but gave them moreover a daily evidence of his own
belief and expectation of what he warned them to provide against, by building a
capacious Ark, wherein to preserve himself, and his household, and some of all
living creatures, when the rest should be washed away with the Flood, that was
shortly to come upon them. Nor was he disappointed; Genesis 6.
for at the end of an hundred and twenty years, the time prefixed for the
execution of this intended vengeance, the waters came upon them, and destroyed
them all, except those Jew Souls who were with him in the Ark. Than which, one
would not desire a clearer instance of a divine Prescience, and an
uncontrollable Power, that can when it pleases, open the windows of heaven, and
break up the fountains of the great deep, or make whatsoever like alterations
in the course of Nature, that is of an overruling Providence.

If I should mention in the next place, the notice that was given to the
Patriarch Abraham, when as yet he had no child, and had little hopes of any,
that he should however Genesis 12.2.
be blessed, and his Name made great, which is C. 13, 14, 15, 16. etc. 15.5.
afterward explained to import, (not to touch here upon what related to our
blessed Savior) that his seed should be exceeding numerous, as the dust of the
earth, and the stars of heaven, which cannot be reckoned up, and that all the
land he could see, whether northward, or southward, or eastward, or westward,
should be given them to inherit; and C. 17. 4, 5, 6, 7, 8.
again, that he should be the Father of many Nations, and Kings should come out
of him; and to him, and his seed after him, should be given all the land
wherein he sojourned, the land of Canaan, for an everlasting possession; but
withal, that they should not enter upon the inheritance of this promised land,
C. 15.13.
till the fourth generation, when the iniquity of the Amorites would be full,
and would by this means occasion their utter extirpation; this Prediction also
must be granted to have been accordingly fulfilled, when besides the Edomites
and Moabites descended from Ismael, the Posterity of Isaac was increased into a
great People, and being above 400 years after this Promise, conducted by Joshua
into Canaan, and settled there, became in time two potent and flourishing
Kingdoms, and were blessed and highly favored by God above all the nations of
the Earth, and might have continued so had they not by their multiplied
transgressions provoked God to drive them out of the good land that he had
given them, and withdraw his Presence from them.

Whereto if I should farther add that Message of the Prophet Jado, as Antiq l.
8. c. 3.
Josephus calls him, Sameas as Dejejun. c. 16.
Tertullian, Adonias as the L. 4. c. 16.
Apostolical Constitutions, the Prophet who was sent from Judah to Bethel, and
there 1 Kings 13.2.
cried against the Altar in the word of the Lord, and said, Oh Altar, Altar,
thus says the Lord, Behold, a child shall be born to the house of David,
Josiah by name, and upon thee shall he offer the Priests of the high places,
that burn incense upon thee, and men's bones shall be burnt upon thee; what
could have been more expressly fulfilled than this was about three hundred and
fifty years after? The 2 Kings 23.15, 20.
King of Judah being at that time named Josiah, and the Altar in Bethel, and
the high places being broken down by his order, and their Priests slain, and
men's bones burnt upon them, as had so long before been prophesied of him.

To these few instances already mentioned, might be added Joshua's Denunciation
against whomsoever that should ever undertake the re-building of Jericho, n.
that Chapter 6.26.
he should lay the foundation thereof in his first born, and in his youngest
son he should set up the gates of it; that is, that the beginning of his
attempt, the laying his foundation, should cost him his Heir, and that e're he
came to finish it, and to set up the gates, he should have lost the rest of his
children; fulfilled in Hiel the Bethelite, who 1 King. 16 34.
laid the foundation thereof in Abiram his firstborn, and set up the gates
thereof in his youngest son Segub, according to the word of the Lord, which he
spoke by Joshua the son of Nun; Together with Elijah's Prophecy of a 1 King.
17.1.
great drought in the days of Ahab, wherein himself was fed by V. 6.
Ravens, and afterward V. 16.
yet more miraculously; His threatening to this wicked King, that C. 21.19.
in the place where dogs licked the blood of Naiboth, they should lick his
also; and of Jezebel, V. 23.
that the dogs should eat Jezebel by the wall of Jezreel; And Elisha's Prophecy
of a sudden incredible 2 King. 7.1.
Plenty, in a time of great Distress and Famine, which was however brought
about in a very extraordinary and surprising manner; And Jeremiah's declaration
in the Name of the Lord, that Jer. 25.12.
after seventy years the King of Babylon and his Nation should be punished for
their iniquity; which Isaiah also intimates was to be done by Isa. 44.8.
Cyrus, whom God long before calls his Shepherd, because he foresaw that he
would be a Shepherd to the Jews, in commanding the reparation of their
Metropolis and Temple, saying, as the Prophet's expression is, to Jerusalem,
thou shall be built, and to the Temple, thy foundation shall be laid, as he did
in the first year of his reign, according to the history of Ez. 1.1, 2, 3, 4.
Ezra.

But these I content my self to have just mentioned, as also I purposely omit
many others, designing to instance but in one Prediction more, in this place,
but which is of much greater Consequence, and the accomplishment whereof is
more especially remarkable, and the effects of it more visible at this day.

And that is the Notice which had (...) Orig. c. Cells. l. 1. p. 39.
at sundry times and in diverse manners, been given beforehand of our Blessed
Savior's Incarnation, and Sufferings, and the wonderful, stupendous
Deliverance he was to work out for his People. Which, according to all the
Jewish calculations, so evidently pointed at the time of his appearance, that
De veritat. rel. Christ. l. 5.14. Nehumiae illius Magistri Hebraei -- Mentio
fit, in Thalmudicis. Ni fallor est in titulo de Synedrio. Ostendit istum mihi
locum olim Hagae Stoctoxus. Puto ejus fieri mentionem and in Abenada ad
Danielera. Cl. Sarrav. Epist. p. 52.
Grotius tells us of one Nehumiah a Jew, who lived about half an Age before it,
and publicly declared that the coming of the Messiah could not be deferred
above fifty years longer. Nor was this any singular conjecture of his own, but
agreeable to the general opinion of that People, who ordinarily concluded it
could not be long before the promised Deliverer should show himself. Hence at
the time of our Savior's Incarnation we find him spoken of by the name of Quod
magnum aliquem prophetam eo ipso tempore expectarent. Illum nunc (...)
appellant cum articulo, nunc (...), nunc (...). Dodw. c. Grot. de jure laicorum
Sacerdotali, p. 183.
the Prophet, of him that was to come; and again, of the Prophet that was to
come. When John the Baptist his forerunner appeared, we find all Men S. Luke
3.15.
musing in their hearts, whether he were the Christ, or not. Thus we are told
of good devout Simeon, that he S. Luke 2.25.
waited for the consolation of Israel, (that is, for the coming of the Messiah,
Dr. Lightfoot's Harm. of the Evang. Sect. 6.
the expected Comforter,) promising himself to see it in his days; and S. Luke
2.28, etc.
he heartily rejoiced at the sight of it. And one V. 37, 38.
Anna a Prophetess, a pious and aged Widow, who departed not from the Temple,
but served God with fasting, and prayers, night and day, spoke of him to all
that looked for redemption in Jerusalem. And even the Woman of Samaria could
tell our Savior, S. Joh. 4.25.
I know that the Messiah is coming, who is called Christ. Upon this account it
was that the Jews S. Joh. 1.19.
sent Priests and Levites from Jerusalem to John the Baptist, to enquire of
him, Who he was? That is to say, whether he were the Messiah they then looked
for or not? As I take to be very plain from the following words, V. 20.
And he confessed and denied not, but confessed I am not the Christ. And that
the prevalency of this same persuasion gave occasion to the Herodians to look
upon Herod as the Christ, is intimated by -- Herodianos, qui Christum Herodem
dixerunt. De praescr. adv. haeret. c. 45.
Tertullian, and more expressly asserted by Adv. Haeres. l. 1. haer. 20.
Epiphanius.

As others also took hold of it to impose upon the credulity of that Nation, by
pretending severally to be the Savior they expected to come about that time;
Of whom Gamaliel names two, Act. 5.36, 37.
Theudas, and Judas of Galilee, who both perished in their attempt; as Jos.
Antiq. l. 20. cc. 2, 3.
the Jewish Historian also acquaints us. Who tells likewise L. 20. c. 6.
of certain Magicians and Impostours about the same time, that led the people
out into the Wilderness, upon pretense of showing them great signs and wonders
wrought by the finger of God; but who being seized by Felix the Governor's
order, were made to suffer for their presumption. As also he makes mention of
another L. 20. c. 7.
who had deceived the people with promises of Safety, and Deliverance from all
their evils, so they would but attend him into the Wilderness, and hereby
brought destruction upon himself and his deluded followers. As Buxt. Synag.
Jud. c. 50.
Barchocabh, and others did afterward. Which it is very reasonable to suppose
they would not all have done, but that they were encouraged to it, by the
disposition they found in the people at that time, to hearken to every one that
set up for the Messiah, whom they were eagerly waiting for. And the best
account therefore of these several pretenses was, that which the forecited
Josephus gives of their War with the Romans, that they were tempted to it by
the information their Sacred Writings gave them (...). De bello Jud. l. 6. c.
31.
of one to be born amongst them at that time, who should be Ruler of the whole
habitable World.

And for the further confirmation of this opinion, the learned Buxtorf recites
a Tradition amongst them, that erred not much in this point, Prisci Judaei ante
Christi nativitatem, non procul a termino aberrarunt, quum Elias dixit, Mundam
sex mill annos duraturum, nempe per duos mill annos mundum fore (...), inanem
and vacuum, hoc est absque lege Divina, per duos mill annos (...), sub lege,
reliquos vero duos mill fore (...). dies Messiae. Synag. Jud. c. 50.
dividing the Space of this World's duration into three parts, each consisting
of two thousand years, the one before the Law, the next under it, and the other
in the days of the Messiah. Which plainly discovers, that from their several
Prophecies relating to the coming of the Messiah, the properest time they could
fix upon for it, was about the four thousandth year of the World, the very year
in which Archbishop Annal. Tom. poster.
Usher places our Savior's Birth.

This was the time when the Genesis 49.10.
Scepter was upon departing from Judah; now were Dniel's Dan. 9.24.
weeks either fully completed, or at least drawing near a conclusion; and now
was the Temple yet standing, to which the Prophet Malachi had foretold, Mal.
3.1.
The Lord whom they sought should suddenly come, and which was to be made Hag.
2.0.
more glorious than the former, as the Prophet Haggai had foretold, namely, by
his Presence in it; for in all other respects it was far inferior. And this
therefore was the time when the Jews most reasonably might, and when in fact
they certainly did expect the promised Messiah; howsoever because he came not
with that pomp and splendor they had hoped for; but on the contrary, put on a
mean garb, and was attended with a small and very ordinary retinue, and exposed
to the most ignominious of deaths, that of the Cross, they would by no means
own him for the person they had waited for.

However their incredulity is no confutation of the truth of what was thus
signally accomplished, our blessed Lord S. Matt. 1.18, 19, 20. and S. Lu. 1.34,
35.
condescending to be born of a Virgin as had been Isa. 7.14.
foretold of him, and at the time (as I have showed) and in the very S. Matt.
2.5, 6. S. Luke 2.11.
place pre-signified, S. Matt. 11.14.
having had the promised Elias for his forerunner; that is to say, John the
Baptist, who was S. Luke 1.17.
to go before him in the spirit and power of Elias, having S. Joh. 7.16. S. Lu.
4.43, 44.
preached his Father's Will to Mankind, and having in all points lived and died
as had been before declared concerning him, as might easily be shown. Here is
such an admirable complication of Events, in the accomplishment of diverse sorts
of Prophecies, as can never be hoped for in any one besides. And by consequence
we have here a very peculiar and unquestionable proof of that divine Providence
I have undertaken to assert.

Especially considering that this our Savior's appearance at the time pointed
at in these Predictions; that is to say, that he lived and died a little before
the dissolution of the Jewish Polity and Temple, is testified not only in
Scripture, but (which perhaps may signify more with some Men) by Antiq. l. 18.
c. 4.
Josephus the Jew, who in his relation concerning him questions, Whether he may
call him a Man, or not? (if that passage in him be genuine, as Catal. Scriptor.
Eccles.
S. Jerome supposes, and Dr. De Sibyll. orac. c. 11.
Vossius has undertaken to prove it is) and by Impulsore Chresto, Suet. in vit.
Claud. c 25. Sic etiam, Perperam Chrestianus pronunciatur. Tertull. Apol. c. 3.
Suetonius, and Auctor nominis ejus Christus, qui Tiberio imperitante, per
Procuratorem Pontium Pilatum supplicio affectus erat. Tac. Annal. l. 15.
Tacitus. And our selves who bear his Name, and make profession of his
Religion, are a notorious instance of the Belief of it.

But to make the matter yet more plain, to the conviction of the most
incredulous, I will descend a step lower, and only demand that the holy
Scriptures be admitted not to have been any late fiction, but to have been
written about the times they are ordinarily ascribed to, the Old Testament
before the time of our Savior Jesus Christ's appearance in the World, and the
New during the Lives of his Apostles. For even so I may observe two farther
Prophecies, the visible and lasting accomplishment whereof, is a manifest token
of their coming from God, and so at once proves the divine Authority of the
Scriptures, and that which I now produce them for, an overruling Providence.

1. The former is the Pre-assurance that was given of the vast Extent of our
Savior's Kingdom, which he was to erect in the World. Psalm. 2.8.
The heathen were to be given him for his inheritance, and the utmost parts of
the earth for his possession. Isa. 2.2. Mic. 4.1.
The Mountain of the Lords house was to be established in the top of the
mountains, and to be exalted above the hills: and all nations to flow unto it.
Mil. 1.11.
From the rising of the Sun unto the going down thereof, his Name was to be
great among the Gentiles, and in every place incense to be offered in his Name,
and a pure offering. Isa. 42.4.
He was to set judgment in the earth; and the Isles were to wait for his Law;
Ver. 6, 7.
was to be given for a covenant of the people, for a light of the Gentiles; to
open the blind eyes, to bring out the prisoners from the prison, and them that
sit in darkness out of the prisonhouse; and Isa. 49.6.
to be salvation unto the end of the earth. He was in the time of the Roman
Empire Dan. 2.44.
to have a Church, or spiritual Kingdom set up, that should never be destroyed,
but should break in pieces and consume; that is, should prevail over, all the
other Kingdoms, and should stand for ever. And there was to be Dan. 7.14.
given him Dominion, and Glory, and a Kingdom, that all people, nations, and
languages should serve him, even an everlasting Dominion, that should not pass
away, and his Kingdom that which should not be destroyed. The plain meaning of
which Declarations, and diverse others to the same purpose which I shall not
stand to recite, was that by his appearance in the World, at the time appointed
of the Father, he should break down the partitionwall betwixt Jews and
Gentiles, and settle one spiritual Kingdom consisting of both, which should be
of very large extent, and should continue as long as the Sun and Moon endure.

Which Prediction our blessed Lord also himself repeats, to let his Enemies the
Jews see how vain all their attempts for the suppression of his Doctrine would
be; inasmuch as though they should proceed to vent their utmost malice against
him by lifting him upon the Cross, they would certainly find this to prove,
contrary to their expectation, a means of gaining him Proselytes amongst all
sorts of people. S. Joh. 12.32.
If I be lifted up from the Earth, says our Savior, I will draw all Men unto
me: Hereby declaring, that his cruel and barbarous Death would be sufficient to
prevail upon all that would be persuaded to attend to it, and would undoubtedly
engage a very great part of Mankind to become his Disciples. He would be ready
to receive them all, Gentiles as well as Jews; and one remarkable effect of his
Sufferings was to be this, That great numbers of both should flock to him, and
embrace his Religion, and hope for Salvation only through his Mediation.

This might seem a strange paradox to those who fansied that our Savior's
death must necessarily put an end to all his pretenses. But it was no more than
God the Father had pre-determined should be, and therefore had so frequently
presignified, than our Savior himself here promised, and than was afterward
made good, to the Conversion or Confusion of all who had set themselves against
him. For immediately upon his Ascension into Heaven, and the Descent of the
Holy Ghost, his Apostles ^. Mar. 16 20.
went forth and preached everywhere, the Lord working with them, and
confirming their words with signs following. Whence it came to pass, that his
Doctrine was much sooner made known, in the several parts of the World, than
could have been imagined; and prodigious numbers were quickly brought over to
it.

S. Peter converted no fewer than Act. 2.41.
three thousand Souls at one Sermon in Jerusalem. And presently after ( Com. in
Act. Apost. 3.1.
Dr. Lightfoot thinks on the same day, which he conjectures too might most
probably be the same Harm. Act. 3, and 4.
great day of Pentecost, wherein they were thus miraculously inspired, or some
other day of the same feast) the number of Proselytes were reckoned to be Act.
4.4.
five thousand. And when the Word had been preached awhile in this and other
Jewish Cities, and met not with a due reception from this obdurate Nation, the
Apostles thought it time to Act. 13.46.
turn themselves to the Gentiles. Accordingly they took their several courses,
as might seem best to answer the great End of their Embassage, both to preach
the Word, and minister about holy things, and to ordain others to the same
Office. And it pleased God to give them that success, that by their Ministry
the Word of God grew and prevailed against all the opposition, and all the most
inveterate malice, and most exquisite cruelties of its Enemies. Insomuch that
both the Scriptures and other Writers inform us of diverse Churches they had
planted in their lifetime; to some of which S. Paul directed his Epistles, and
S. Peter his first to some others of them; and others again are mentioned in S.
John's Revelation.

And near about the time of this Apostle's death, Pliny, Propraetor of
Bithynia, wrote to the Emperor Trajan, acquainting him, that his Orders against
the Christians could not be pursued L 10. Ep. 97.
without bringing many of every age, rank, and sex into danger; forasmuch as
the infection (as he expresses it) had reached not only the greater Cities, but
their lesser Towns, and Country-Villages. To which I should also have added the
testimony of Tiberianus, President of Palaestine, Usserii Append. Ignat.
professing all his severities unable to overcome the Galileans; that is, the
Christians; but that I think the singularly learned Mr. Dodwell Dissert. de
pauc. Martyr. par. 23, 24.
has said enough to prove his Letter spurious.

However Justin Martyr, who flourished, as Eccl. Hist. l. 2. c. 13.
Eusebius testifies, and the beginning of his own second Apology evinces,
(...), not long after the Apostles, affirms that no sufferings could affright
the Christians of his time from the profession they had taken upon them; but
the more they were persecuted, the more they increased, and (...). Ep. ad
Diognet.
as they that rose up against them multiplied, so did those on the other hand
that were brought over to them. And Clement of Alexandria, who lived about
sixty years after him, declares that in his days (...), etc. Strom. l. 6. p.
667.
the Doctrine of our Master was not confined to Judea, as Philosophy was to
Greece, but spread it self over the face of the Earth, both Greeks and
Barbarians in each City, and Village, and Nation, sometimes whole Houses
together, and at other times single persons only being converted by it, and not
a few of the Philosophers themselves. So his Contemporary Tertullian professes,
that Pars pene major civitatis cujusque in silentio and modestia agimus. Ad
Scap.
the greatest part of almost every City were Christians, and that their Enemies
grew jealous of them, and made Obsessam vociferantur civitatem, in agris, in
castellis, in infulis Christianos, etc. Apol. c. 1.
complaint that their City was beset with them, and that in the Countries, in
the Castles, in the Isles, were Christians; and that it grieved them to see how
every sex, age, condition, and dignity was inclined to this Name. And again,
Vestra omnia implevimus, etc. Apol. c. 37.
We, says he, have filled all places amongst you, your Cities, Isles, Castles,
Buroughs, Councils, Tents, Tribes, Decuries, the Palace, the Senate, the
Forum, and we leave you only your Temples free from us.

And after these Origin for the next Century, and Arnobius and Lactantius for
the former part of the following teach, that (...). Orig. Philocal. c. 1.
all about both Greeks and Barbarians, in great multitudes, forsaking the
Precepts of their Fathers and their supposed Deities, betook themselves to the
Laws of Moses, and the words of the Doctrine of Jesus Christ, (...). Ibid.
though with the apparent hazard of their lives, (...). Ibid.
both wise and unwise, Philosophers and others, in all places, embracing his
Religion; that Nulla jam natio est tam barbari moris and mansuetudinem
nesciens, quae non ejus amore versa molliverit asperitatem ^^am, etc. Arnob.
adv. Gent. l. 2.
Christianity had spread it self, throughout the World, softening men's
manners, and teaching them Candor, Meekness, and Condescension; that the
greatest Wits, Orators, Grammarians, Rhetoricians, Lawyers, Physicians,
Philosophers entertained it, renouncing their former opinions and practices,
and choosing rather to study the Precepts of the Gospel; that Servants could be
content to endure all the severities of their merciless and enraged Masters,
Wives to be parted from their implacable Husbands, Children to be dis-inherited
by their incensed Parents, than forsake the Christian Faith, and treacherously
withdraw themselves from that spiritual Warfare wherein they had engaged; that
when dreadful punishments were decreed for all that adhered to the Laws of
this Religion, it grew by this means, and people were only the more vigorous,
and the readier to proceed undauntedly against all the Menaces, and all those
Interdicts which were designed to work upon their fears, and all the
Prohibitions they met with served but to fix them the firmer in the Faith; that
the divine Law was received Cum vero ab ortu solis useque ad occasum lex divina
suscepta sit, and omnis seuxs, omnis aetas, and gens, and regio, unis ac
paribus animis Deo serviant, etc. Lactant. Instit. l. 5. c. 13.
from the rising to the setting of the Sun, and every Age, Sex, Nation, and
Country set themselves to serve God with one and the same Mind, and everywhere
was the same readiness to suffer, and every where the same contempt of death;
insomuch that it was above the power of racks or sires to overcome, Deest illis
inspirata patientia. Nostri autem (ut de viris taceam) puerr and mulierculae
tortorer suos tacit vincunt, and exprimere illis gemitum nec ignis potest.
Ibid.
not Men only, but Women and Children, or but to squeeze a groan from them, by
reason of that inspired Patience, whereby their God had condescended to prepare
them for this holy Conflict; and in a word, that Ut jam nullus esser tetrarum
angulus tam remotus, quo non Religio Dei penetrasset, nulla denique natio tam
feris moribus vivens, ut non suscepto Dei cultu ad justitiae opera mitesceret
Lact. de mort. Perseq. c. 3.
there was none of the remotest corners of the Earth, whither this divine
Religion had not penetrated, no Nation living so void of all humanity, as not
to be mollified, and brought to a better temper by it.

Notwithstanding that it came to pass, as our Savior had forewarned his
Disciples, that the Profession of his Name was attended with frequent
Tribulations, and Afflictions, and Persecutions, and the cruellest and most
barbarous Tortures and Deaths, such was the Courage and Resolution of the
Christians in those early Ages of our Religion, that there were added to the
Church daily such as should be saved. Till at length Kings became its nursing
Fathers, and Queens its nursing Mothers; and they that before had met together
to worship God, in Mountains, and in Deserts, and in Dens, and Caves of the
Earth, that by this means they might escape the discovery of their Enemies,
were encouraged to do it publicly, in places purposely dedicated to his
Service, and the greatest, and the wisest, and the best of Men gloried in the
Cross of Christ. So mightily grew the Word of God and prevailed against all the
impediments it had to contest with, and settled it self in the World, to the
Honor of God, and the comfort and encouragement of its Professors, but to the
shame and terror of its obstinate Adversaries.

And though diverse of the Churches, that were then and afterward, have since
provoked God by their iniquities to deliver them up to their own blindness and
hardness of heart, and either to let them be overrun with Mahometans, or
perhaps to relapse into Paganism, yet the many Christian Nations that are at
this day, are a sufficient indication, that God is not forgetful of this his
Promise. And these, together with all those Parts that formerly have been
Christian, and might still have continued so, had they but minded to walk
worthy their most holy Profession, and those others that will probably be
hereafter brought over to the flock of Christ, are a sensible proof of the
accomplishment of this memorable Prediction, that our blessed Savior should
draw all Men after him, and that the heathen should be given him for his
Inheritance, and the utmost parts of the Earth for his Possession.

None of those Pseudo-christs before mentioned were able to plant a Doctrine,
or leave a Sect behind them, that should continue any time after them. But our
blessed Lord, the true Messiah, had the number of his Followers soon increased
to a Miracle, his Gospel proving wonderfully prevalent wheresoever it was
preached. His saving Word, like a Sunbeam, says Hist. Eccl. l. 2. c. 3.
Eusebius, enlightened the whole World. the sound of the holy Evangelists and
Apostles going out, as had been foretold of them in the holy Scriptures, into
all Lands, and their speech unto the ends of the Earth: So that throughout all
Cities and Villages sprang up Churches, abounding with an immense multitude of
believers; and they that had from their Infancy been addicted to Superstition
and the worship of Devils, betook themselves to the service of the one God, the
Maker of all things, according (...).
to the divine and sober Religion, that our Savior had sown amongst mankind.
So much concerning the former of these Prophecies, namely of the vast Extent of
our Savior's Kingdom.

2. The other was the Destruction of Jerusalem, and Dispersion of the Jews,
that they should be no more a People, should no more have any Polity, or
settled Government amongst them. And this consists of two branches.

1. The Destruction of Jerusalem and the Temple. 2. The Dissolution of the
Jewish Polity, and Dispersion of the Jews into all parts, to continue a lasting
Monument of God's just vengeance upon them, for all their impieties, and
especially for their intolerable rage and malice in procuring the Crucisixion
of our ever-blessed Savior.
1. The Destruction of Jerusalem and the Temple. This the Prophet Chapter 9.26.
Daniel had long before so plainly intimated, that their own Historian
concludes, (...), etc. Joseph. Antiq. l. 10. c. 12.
they who should consult his Writings could not but admire the singular honor
God had done him, in giving him thus to understand his Will, which he had
manifestly declared beforehand to the confusion of all those Epicureans, who
deny a Providence, and choose rather to ascribe all events either to Chance, or
Mechanism, than to the hand of God. And the same Prediction our blessed Savior
repeated, assuring them that their magnificent Temple, wherein they so highly
gloried, S. Matt. 24.2.
should not have one stone left upon another, that should not be thrown down;
and that S. Luk 1943, 44.
their Enemies should cast a trench about them, and compass them round, and
keep them in on every side, and should lay their City even with the ground, and
its Children within it; and as to the time of this vengeance, that it was not
to be deferred beyond the present age. For so says our Savior, S. Mat. 24 34.
Verily I say unto you, this generation shall not pass, till all these things
be fulfilled. A Prediction as true, as it seemed to the Jews to be improbable.
For (...). Orig. c. Cells. l. 4.
not many years had passed, after they had barbarously put to death the Lord of
Glory, when (whilst part of that Generation were yet alive) Titus Vespasian,
the Roman General, came against them, and cut them off with a very great
slaughter, as De bello Jud. l. 4. c. 21, etc.
Josephus their own Historian reports at large, their Temburied in its ruins.
At which time L. 7. c. 17.
were slain by the Enemy no fewer than eleven hundred thousand persons, and
ninety seven thousand carried captive, besides the vast numbers that had
perished before by the famine, and the pestilence, and the intestine fury of
their fellow-citizens, and countrymen.

And that which makes the completion of this Prediction the more remarkable is,
what L. 23.
Ammianus Marcellinus has recorded concerning Julian's fruitless attempt for
rebuilding this Temple thus destroyed; namely, that when Alypius of Antioch,
with the assistance of the Governor of the Province, had undertaken it,
fearful balls of fire issuing forth near the foundation, and sometimes burning
the workmen, rendered the place inaccessible, and constrained them to desist
from their enterprise. The very same account that is given both by Hist. Eccl.
l. 3. c. 20.
Socrates and Hid. Eccl. l. 5. c. 22.
Sozomen, except that the former of them differs in this circumstance, that he
speaks of the fire, (...).
not as arising from the foundation, but descending from above; and the other
adds a material intimation, omitted by other Authors, that (...).
what they did in this case was done on purpose to deseat our Savior's
Prophecy. And Adv. Judaeos, l. 2.
S. Chrysostom, together with this, mentions also two other attempts to this
purpose, the one under Adrian, the other under Constantine, which both proved
likewise abortive, though not interrupted in so miraculous a manner. And though
there was a City built by the Emperor Aelius Adrianus, in the room of
Jerusalem, yet neither was it called Jerusalem, but Aelius Adrianus, a quo
postea de ruinis Jerusalem urbs Aelia condita est. D. Hieron. in Dan. 9. ult.
(...). Eusebius. Hist. Eccl. l. 4. c. 6.
Aelia, from the Emperor who built it; nor was it ever the Metropolis of the
Jews, as Jerusalem was; but on the contrary had a Baron. Annal. To. 2.137.2, 3.
Sow and Pigs set over its Gate toward Bethlehem, as it were in direct
opposition to the Jews; nor was it ever famous for any thing besides our
Savior's Tomb there.

2. The Dissolution of the Jewish Polity, and Dispersion of the Jews into all
parts, to continue a lasting Monument of God's just vengeance upon them for all
their impieties, and especially for their intolerable rage and malice, in
procuring the crucifixion of our ever-blessed Savior. S. Luke 21.23.
There was to be great distress in the land, and wrath upon this People. Ver.
24.
They were to fall by the edge of the Sword, and to be led captive into all
Nations, and Jerusalem to be trodden down of the Gentiles, until the time of
the Gentiles be fulfilled, according to our Savior's Prediction. And thus much
Adv Jud. l. 2.
S. Chrysostom urges to have been declared by the Prophet Daniel, and admitted
for truth by Josephus, in that the Prophet (from the information of the Angel
Gabriel, foretelling their Captivity by Antiochus Epiphanes, limited it to a
certain time, after which they should be delivered from his Tyranny, (as they
had also long before had a time prefixed for their Deliverance out of Egypt,
and had been delivered accordingly,) but in this Prophecy of the overthrow of
their City and Nation by the Romans, he makes no mention of any recovery, but
affirms at large that their City and Temple should be destroyed, acquainting
them with the Sufferings that were to come upon them, but giving them no
encouragement to hope for a release from them. Which it might have been
expected that he would have done, if he had foreseen that they should be
delivered again, as they had been formerly.

Dan. 9.27. and chapter 12.11.
The Sacrifice and Oblation was also utterly to cease, Mal. 1.11.
and a pure Offering to succeed instead hereof, a more holy and spiritual
Worship, supplying the place of their Carnal Ordinances, and Legal Offerings.
And to this purpose our Savior informed the Woman of Samaria, S. Joh. 4.21,
23, 24.
that the wonted Ceremonious Worship should have an end, there should be no
Sacrifice in Jerusalem, no Image at Samaria, no Ephod at Jerusalem, no Teraphim
at Samaria, (as the learned Third part of the Harmony of the four Evangelists.
Dr. Lightfoot comments upon our Savior's words,) but that those places, and
that manner of Worship should fall and be abolished; and that it was therefore
needless for her to enquire whether Jerusalem, or Gerizim, were the more
eminent place of Worship, for the time was just now in coming, when neither the
one, nor the other, should be the place of Worship at all. Woman, believe me,
says our Savior, the hour comes, when ye shall neither in this Mountain, nor
yet at Jerusalem, worship the Father. The hour comes, and now is, when the
true worshippers shall worship the Father in spirit and in truth; for the
Father seeks such to worship him. God is a spirit, and they that worship him,
must worship him in spirit and in truth.

And not only their Worship, but their Polity too was to have a period put to
it, by the just Judgment of God upon them for their sins. Genesis 49.10.
The Scepter was to depart from Judah, and the Lawgiver from between his feet.
He that had the Dominion, was to be taken away from Judah, and the Scribe from
his Children's Children, as the Chaldee Paraphrast expounds this Prophecy. Or
as the Jerusalem Targum has it to the same effect, Kings, or as Jonathan's
Kings and Princes or Presidents, were to cease from the House of Judah, and
Doctors that teach the Law from his Children's Children. This indeed was not to
be accomplished till the coming of the Shiloh, (...)
the Messiah, says the forementioned Paraphrast, (...)
the King the Messiah, say both Jonathan's and the Jerusalem Targum; but then
this implies, according to all common construction, that at his coming, or at
least not long after it, they might reasonably expect to be reduced to this
desolate condition.

Nor were they only to lose their Government, and be subjected to a foreign
Power, but to be cast out of their own Land, and scattered over the several
parts of the Earth. They had been threatened upon their rebellion against
Almighty God (of which they could not possibly give a greater instance than in
crucifying his only-begotten and well-beloved Son) they had been threatened; I
say to Deuteronomy. 28.25.
be removed into all the Kingdoms of the Earth, to be Ver. 64.
scattered among all people, from the one end of the Earth even unto the other,
and S. Luke 21.24.
to be led away captive into all nations. They were Hos. 9.15.
to be driven out of God's house, to be no longer owned by him as his People,
his Segullah, his chosen and beloved Nation; for he would Ibid.
love them no more, he would not always continue that peculiar favor to them,
which they had so long enjoyed, but had most grossly abused. He had decreed to
Ver. 17.
cast them away, because they did not hearken unto him, that they should be
wanderers among the nations.

The sum is, that the Jewish Church and Polity were but temporary, and were
therefore to have an end, when the measure of their iniquities should be filled
up. That obdurate People were then to remain no longer in their own Land, but
to have their Worship, as well as their City and Temple abolished, and were to
become thenceforward a sort of vagabonds in the Earth, having no Nation, or
Government of their own, nor being permitted to live in any one Country, but
dispersed by parcels over the several Kingdoms, and other Territories of the
Earth.

And whether this remarkable Prophecy has been since as remarkably fulfilled,
is no manner of Question. For as for the ten Tribes, it seems generally
believed, that they never returned into Palaestine, after their Captivity by 1 Chronicles. 5.26. and 2 King. 15.19.
Pull the King of Assyria, and 2 King. 15.29.
Tiglath-Pileser his Successor, and 2 King. 17.6.
Shalmaneser after him. Spes Israelis, Sect. 16, etc.
Manasseh Ben Israel thinks he has sufficiently proved it; and Naphtali, l. 1.
c. 1.
Calvert owns it to be the received opinion of both Jews and Christians, at
least as to the greatest part of them. Though withal he reckons himself L. 2.
c. 1, etc.
to have confuted it, by the diverse Arguments he brings against it. Whether of
these is in the right, I shall not now stand to enquire, but only shall
observe, that if the former, then what if this Prediction related to the ten
Tribes was undoubtedly executed upon them long before our Savior's
Incarnation, and not for his Death, but for their Idolatries, and all their
other Crimes, whereby they had provoked God to cast them off; if the latter,
they were then united to, and included in the Kingdom of Judah, and so must be
supposed to have ever since undergone the same fate with the two Tribes. And
Josephus De bello Jud. l. 6. c. 45. and alibi.
tells us, what miserable slaughter was made of these at the sacking of
Jerusalem, what vast numbers of them were destroyed, and others carried into
captivity by the Romans. And under the Emperor Adrian D. Chrysostom. adv. Jud. l.
2. and Eusebius. Eccl. hist. l. 4. c. 2.
other Writers inform us that their calamities increased upon them, when being
engaged in an insurrection against him, (...). Ibid.
an incredible multitude of them were put to death, and their Leader Barchochab
being taken and made to suffer for his rebellion, the remainder of them were
forbid to come near Jerusalem, and Sulpic. Sever. sacr. hist. l. 2.
a Guard set to keep them off, if they should attempt it.

And Dispersi, palabundi, coeli and soli sui extorres, vagantur per orbem, sine
nomine, sine Deo Rege, quibus nec advenarum jure terram patriam saltem vestigio
salutare conceditur. Tert. Apol. c. 21.
Tertullian and Dispersi and palabundi vagantur, soli and coeli sui profugi,
per hospitia aliena jactantur. D. Cypr. de Idololat.
S. Cyprian testify for their times, that they were dispersed, and wandered
about, banished from their native air and soil, and seeking entertainment
amongst other nations, being without a Name, and without God for their King,
and not permitted to set a foot upon their own land, a privilege that no
strangers are denied. And under Constantine the Great, Adv. Judaeos, l. 2.
their Ears were cut off, and a mark impressed upon their Body, betokening
their Rebellion, and so they were carried about as a spectacle, for the terror
of others that might have been inclinable to the like attempts; as S.
Chrysostom relates, in the place before referred to, and Annal. Eccl. To.
3.315.9.
Baronius from him, who places it in the 315th year of our Savior. And the
same (...). Adv. Jud. l. 1. p. 318.
S. Chrysostom affirms concerning them, (and wonders at the Providence of God
so ordering it,) that whilst all the World where they might not offer Sacrifice
was open to them, and they had liberty to betake themselves to the several
parts of it, Jerusalem, the only place appointed pointed for this sort of
Worship, was inaccessible to them.

And it is visible to this day, that they still remain, as he speaks of them in
another place, (...), etc. D. Chrysostom. in Ps 8. To. 1. p. 577.
Vagabonds and fugitives and wanderers, travelers both by Sea and Land,
without any fixed and certain habitations, deprived of their Freedom, Country,
and Priesthood, and all that they were wont to value themselves upon, scattered
amonost barbarous and innumerable people, hated of all Men, abominated, and apt
to be hardly dealth with by all. What Nation is there under Heaven, that bears
not testimony to this truth? where is it that some of them are not to be met
with? and yet what place is there, that has any considerable number of them?
They have nowhere any Prince or Governor of their own, but live under some
other Power, nowhere any settled Polity distinct from that of the Country
where they sojourn, no Priesthood, no convenience of offering up any Sacrifice,
as heretofore during their abode in Canaan, nowhere the freedom of their own
Laws, are nowhere beloved or much regarded.

And yet they remain Jews still, distinguished from all other people, and as
zealous as ever for their own Law, and as professed Enemies as ever to that
most holy Religion, the contempt whereof has cost them so dear for many
Generations: God in his just judgment upon them having so ordered it, that they
continue a perpetual Monument of his heavy Displeasure against them, and a sure
Evidence of the Truth and Certainty of the Predictions, both of our blessed
Savior, and of the Prophets who had been before him. (...). Ibid.
Whilst they only abused, affronted, and slew the Servants of God, the
Messengers that he had commissioned to warn them of their sins, and the
punishments due to them, killing the Prophets, and stoneing those that were
sent to them, he was ready to be reconciled, and to pass by their iniquities;
but since they had dared to crucify his Son, his dearly-beloved Son, the case
has been altered with them, and their wound has been incurable; they have not
been in a capacity to regain their former station, nor to make any figure in
the World. As of old he most wonderfully manifested his Providence over them,
in conducting them into, and settling them in the good Land of Canaan, in
vouchsafing them his especial Presence, in magnifying them above their Enemies
round about, and in all the Miracles he wrought for them; so does he it now
also in a very eminent manner, in thus signalizing them from amongst the rest
of the World, to Deuteronomy. 28.37.
become an astonishment, a proverb, and a byword among all nations, whither
the Lord shall lead them, as he had threatened by Moses to deal with them upon
their disobedience. Which I have the rather chosen to insist upon, because
being plain matter of fact, at this time, it leaves no room to doubt whether
God has been mindful to make good his Predictions in this respect; and by
consequence the consideration hereof administers an irrefragable Argument for
the proof of an overruling Providence. Thus much of Prophecies, and their
suitable accomplishments.

2. Miracles are another extraordinary and very convincing and satisfactory
evidence of the interposition of Providence, and which may well silence all its
most audacious Adversaries. These are what no natural Power can possibly
effect. And therefore when we either see them, or are otherwise well assured
that they have been wrought, it is intolerably unreasonable not to believe them
to have proceeded from a supernatural Operation. Whatsoever evasions may be
found out in diverse other cases, for avoiding the force of whatever Arguments
are brought for a Providence, there is no pretense for it here. For Miracles
are an ocular Demonstration, that there is some supreme uncontrollable Power,
that can upon occasion invert the usual course of things, bringing its ends
about in an unwonted manner.

But nowhere is this sort of evidence set forth with that advantage, as in the
holy Scriptures both of the Old and New Testament, each of which abound with
very surprising instances of this nature. Such in the first place was the
universal Deluge, which washed away the old World, but whereof Genesis 6.17.
Noah had been forewarned, and from which Genesis 7.23. and 2 S. Pet. 2.5.
himself and his family were wonderfully preserved, to re-people the Earth.
Such was the destruction Genesis 19.24, etc.
of Sodom and Gomorrah by fire from Heaven. And such also (though in yet a less
degree) were the diverse Exodus 7, etc.
sorts of Plagues, that were brought upon Egypt by the Ministry of Moses, and
most of them removed again at his request, and his Chapter 14.21, 22.
dividing the Sea, and making it stand up as a Wall on each side, while the
Israelites passed through, and then causing it to return to its wonted course,
and so to Ver. 27, 28.
overwhelm Pharaoh, and all his Host. Such was God's immediate Presence with
his people, Chapter 13.21, 22.
in a Pillar of Cloud by day, and a Pillar of Fire by night, to direct them in
their journey to the promised Land. Such likewise were Numb. 20.11.
Moses's bringing forth water out of the hard Rock, merely by the stroke of a
Rod; Josh. 10.13.
Joshua's stopping the Sun in the midst of its career; 1 King. 17.16.
Elijah's multiplying the Widow's cruise of oil, and barrel of meal; Chapter 18 38,
39.
and his confuting Baal's Prophets by a fire from Heaven, that both consumed
the Sacrifice, and dried up the water upon the Altar, and in the trenches that
were about it; Jud. 5.20.
the Stars fighting in their courses against Sisera, and his Army, when (as
Antiq. l. 5. c. 6.
Josephus relates) the Heavens poured down a prodigious storm of water and
hail, which beating in their faces, discomposed them to that degree, as to
render their bows, and slings, and swords useless for their defense; the
falling of the Walls of Jericho Josh. 6.20.
upon the People's shouting, and the Priests blowing with Trumpets; Exodus
16.14, 15.
the raining of Manna from Heaven for six days in the week, Ver. 27.
and not the seventh; Ver. 13. and Numb. 11.31.
the Quails that came up from the Sea, and covered the Camp; and many other
instances of God's Almighty Power, together with 1 King. 17.22. 2 King. 4.35.
and 13.21.
some few raised from death to life amongst the Jews.

And if we descend to the time of our blessed Savior's incarnation, and the
following Ages, it would be almost an endless task to recount, what sick were
restored to health only with a word speaking, what lunaticks were recovered to
a soundness of understanding, what lames, what leprous, what paralyticks, what
deafs, what dumbs, what blinds were cured, what Demoniacks were dispossessed;
how the dead were raised to life, the graves were opened, the rocks were split,
the vail of the Temple was rent, the Earth quaked, the prison-doors unlocked
and the chains fell off from the prisoners of their own accord; how Act. 9.3,
etc.
S. Paul was converted by a voice and a light from Heaven as he was traveling
to Damascus; how our blessed Lord appeared to Chapter 7.55.
S. Stephen at his Martyrdom; in what a wonderful manner Chapter 2.1, etc.
the Holy Ghost descended upon the Apostles on the day of Pentecost, and what
were the stupendous effects of this descent, such as speaking with tongues, the
interpretation of tongues, discerning of spirits, healing the sick, and infirm
of diverse diseases, casting out Devils, and the like. Some of which continued
afterward in the Church for some Ages, until our Religion was sufficiently
propagated and confirmed. As the generality of the Writers of those times
inform us, and amongst others Apol. 1, and 2.
Justin Martyr, L. 2. c. 57.
Irenaeus, Apol. c. 5, etc. 32. and ad Scap. c. 2.
Tertullian, P. 89, 90.
Minucius Felix, C. Cells. l. 7. p. 334.
Origin, Adv. Gentes. l. 2.
Arnobius, Retract. l. 1. c. 13. and de civ. Dei, l. 22. c. 8. and alibi.
S. Augustine, De viro perfecto To. 9.
S. Jerome, and L. 5. c. 7.
Eusebius.

Whereto if we add, that a great part at least of these Miracles were wrought
in the sight, as well of Heathens, as of Christians, and many times for their
advantage, and upon their persons; and again, that they were not done
privately, or in a corner, but openly and before the Sun, in the highways and
the streets, at feasts and marriage-entertainments, in the fullest assemblies,
and before the greatest numbers of Spectators, and even of the most avowed
Adversaries to our Savior and his Religion; and this not in one or some few
Countries, but Enumerari enim possunt, atque in usum computationis venire ea,
quae in India gesta sunt, apud Seras, Persas, and Medos, in Arabia, Aegypto, in
Asia, Syria, apud Galatas, etc. Arnob. adv. Gent. l. 2.
as far as India, and amongst the Seres, and the Persians, and the Medes, in
Arabia, in Egypt, in Asia, in Syria, amongst the Galatians, the Parthians, the
Phrygians, in Achaia, Macedonia, Epirus, and in all the Isles and Provinces,
that either the rising, or the setting Sun beholds, and in Rome it self, with
that success, that notwithstanding its inhabitants had been accustomed to
Numa's rites, and superstitions, yet overcome hereby, they made no delay to
forsake their wonted manner of Worship, and betake themselves to our most holy
Religion, which they had seen thus wonderfully attested; if we reflect, I say,
upon these things, it must unavoidably argue a great measure of folly in any
one to require farther Evidence for the proof of what they are alleged for.
For he that will not yet be convinced, might as well put us to prove that it is
day at noon, that the whole is greater than a part, that a Cube, a Cylinder and
a Triangle are not all one, that two and two make four, or any other the
plainest Axiom whatsoever. Thus to stand out against the clearest light is a
sign only of a perverse mind, and unwilling to be satisfied, not of any real
want of satisfaction. And they must be besides themselves, that could behold
these and other the like amazing operations, and not be affected with a sense
of that most mighty hand by which they were wrought.

Especially if they should observe with-all, that these were not done casually
or at random, but when there was some singular occasion for them, and they
might tend in a peculiar manner to God's glory. They were frequentest and most
conspicuous amongst the Israelites, about the time of their Deliverance out of
Egypt, and whilst they were under the conduct of their Lawgiver Moses, and his
Successor Joshua. And after this People were enured to the Law they had
received, and were settled in the promised Canaan, they grew more rare; and
seem to have been wrought only upon some singular emergencies; as in the case
of 1 King. 12 28.
Jeroboam's Calves, which he had set up in imitation of the Egyptian manner of
Worship, which therefore gave occasion for a Prophet to be sent to Bethel, to
prophecy against his Idolatrous Altar there, and to confirm his Prophecy by a
succession of Miracles, 1 King. 13.4, 5, 6. and Josep. Antiq. l. 8. c. 3.
the rending of the Altar, and the withering of Jeroboam's hand, and the
restoration of it upon his submission; or the case of Elijah and Elisha, in
whose time 1 King. 16.30, 31, 32, 33.
Idolatry was grown to that height under Ahab, that there was need of some
extraordinary method to convince them, that not Baal, but the Lord was God, and
that therefore their worship was due to him alone, and only in the way that
himself had appointed. And again they were more illustrious at the first
planting of our Religion, by our blessed Redeemer and his Apostles and
Disciples, and then abated as that came to be propagated and settled in the
World, and so to stand in less need of their assistance. Whence both -- (...),
in 1 Timothy 3.7. (...), l. 4.
S. Chrysostom and Cum enim Ecclesia Catholica per totum orbem diffusa atque
fundata sit, nec miracula illa in nostra tempora durate permissa sunt. De vera
religione, c. 25.
S. Augustine, who lived in the latter part of the fourth and beginning of the
fifty Century, acknowledge them to have ceased by their time. Not that God was
not still as able to work them as ever, nor as ready if he had seen it proper,
but because their business being already done, there was less need of them.
These therefore are another very convincing Proof of an overruling Providence.

Nor is it of any great importance which is here objected, That the silence of
Heathen Authors concerning these Miracles is a great obstruction to their
credibility, and makes it very questionable, whether ever they were wrought or
not. For how could it be, that so many and so prodigious effects should have
been brought to pass, and no more notice taken of them? Might it not rather
have been expected, that the World astonished at them, should have taken care
constantly to transmit their memory from generation to generation? at least
that as much regard should have been had to them, as has been had to preserve
the remembrance of other less surprising occurrences? And this method not
having been observed, except by some whose interest it was to pretend something
of this nature, for carrying on their own designs, there is too just reason to
suspect the traditions that are of them, not to be of that authority the weaker
and more credulous sort of people, or those that are under the power of strong
prejudices may imagine.

This is the Objection; and the Answer to it is very easy, considering the
much greater authority we have for these Miracles, than for other historical
Relations, which yet none seem to question the truth of. Who doubts whether
Diog. Laert. l. 5. in vit. Aristot.
Alexander the Great had Aristotle for his Tutor, or Q Curt. l. 4.
took upon him to be called the Son of Jupiter Ammon? Whether Plutar. in vita
Cicer.
Cicero were ever Conful of Rome, or afterward sent into banishment, and after
that beheaded? Whether L. Flor. l. 3. c. 10. Sueton. in vita ejus c. 25. Jul.
Caes. de bello Gall. c. 4. Plut. in vita J. Caes.
Julius Caesar ever conquered this Island, or was Live. Epit. 116. L. Flor. l.
4. c. 2. Plut. and Suet.
afterward barbarously massacred by Brutus and his accomplices? Who doubts of
these or other the like relations, since they are mentioned by Authors of good
credit, and against whom there is no just exception? Yet we have much greater
Authority for the Miracles I have been insisting upon. For if those be recorded
by some of the Historians, who wrote of the times wherein they were done, we
have the testimony of the holy Scriptures, of the Fathers, and of Historians
for these. If their Authors were Men of credit and veracity, ours much more. If
they had no temptation to bias them in what they related, much less had ours,
when they knew their testifying these things, and adhering to the Doctrines
confirmed by them, was the ready way to set all the World against themselves.
And it is therefore an egregious instance of Partiality, to be willing to
believe the former, and yet not believe the latter, whose authority, if duly
attended to, will be found to be incomparably the greater.

And this will be made yet more apparent, if we proceed farther to consider the
Objection, 1. As it respects the times of the Old Testament. 2. As it respects
the times of Christianity.


1. As it respects the times of the Old Testament, that is from the Creation to
the coming of our blessed Lord, it will need no other answer than what is
contained in these two following Propositions.

1. Diverse of the Miracles of those times are recorded also by Heathen Writers.
The first and most remarkable that I have mentioned was the universal Deluge,
which overwhelmed the Earth in the days of Noah, and from which himself only,
and his wife, and children were preserved. And that a tradition of this was
continued amongst the Heathens, must be owned, till some other account can be
given of what Metamorph. l. 1.
Ovid, and Georg. l. 1.
Virgil, and Carm. l. 1. Od. 2.
Horace, and Sat. 1.
Juvenal, and the rest of their Poets so commonly relate, concerning Deucalion
and his Wife Pyrrha, re-peopling the Earth after a mighty Flood, which
themselves only had escaped. (...), etc. De Dea Sir.
Lucian gives such an account of it, as shows plainly to what it relates,
telling us that they had escaped by getting into a great Ark, whither swine and
borses and lions and serpents came to them by pairs, and were preserved, wh^^^
the rest of the World were drowned. And (...). Plut. de Solertia animalium.
Platarch from the Mythologists speaks of a Dove sent forth by this Deucalio^
cut of his Ark, which informed him of the increase of the waters, by its return
to him for shelter, and again of their abatement by forsaking him to shift for
it self.

The dismal and stupendous overthrow of Sodom and Gomorrha is attested by
(...), etc. l. 16.
Strabo, Hand procul inde campi, quo; ferunt olim uberes, magnisque urbibus
habitatos, fulminum jactu, arsisse, and manner vestigia, etc. Histor. l. 5.
Tacitus, and Longo ab Hierosolymis recessu tristis finus panditur, quem de
coelo tactum testatur humus nigra, and in cinerem soluta, due ibi oppida Sodoma
nominatum alterum, alterum Gomorrum, etc. Pelyhist. c 48. edit. Basil. 1538.
Solinus, to name no more.

And the learned Count du Plessi, collects from Artabanus, or Artapanus (as
Strom. l. 1.
Clemens Alexandrinus calls him) an account of a certain appearance to Moses De
veritat. Rel. Christ. c. 26.
of Fire without fuel to support it, and that he also heard a voice informing
him that he should deliver the Israelites out of Egypt, and that afterward he
caused so great an Earthquake in Egypt, that King Pharaoh hereupon let them go;
but afterward pursuing them, (as some of the Egyptian Priests themselves
related) Moses by God's direction touched the Sea with his Rod, and presently
its Waves stopped, and made a way for him and his whole People to pass through;
but that the Egyptians perished, part by the multitude of Thunderbolts that
were discharged against them, and the rest by the return of the Waters upon
them. Which account varies so little from what the holy Scriptures teach
concerning this whole affair, that none can doubt but it is a corruption of
their truer and more complete Relation. And this, says he, Ibid.
is testified also by Demetrius and Eupolemus amongst the Greeks, with diverse
other circumstances not mentioned here; as there are moreover in Numenius, the
Pythagorean. So (...), etc. Josep. Antiq. l. 8. c. 7.
Menander spoke of the excessive drought in Elijah's time. And (...). B. Cyril.
c. Julian. l. 10.
Julian himself acknowledges that fire descended from Heaven in the time of
Moses, and again in this Prophet's days, to consume the Sacrifice upon the
Altar. So that from this Specimen it appears, that these kind of relations are
not wholly without the countenance of others besides Jewish and Christian
Writers.

2. I come now in the next place to show, that where Heathen Authors say
nothing of them, a fair account may be given of this omission. For, 1. The Jews
were but a single People, a Nation of no great extent, and which kept at a
distance from all other Nations, and -- Credat Judaeus Apella. Horat. l. 1.
sat. 5. Curtis Judaeis. Id. sat. 9. Judaeis querum cophinus foeaumque supellex.
Juv. sat. 3. Qualiacunque voles Judaei somnia vendunt. sat. 6. Quaefitum ad
fontem solo. deducere verpos. Sat. 14. Recutitaque Sabbata palle^ Pers. sat. 5.
(...). Orig. c. Cells. l. 4. p. 181.
was again despised by them. Which makes it no wonder if many things, very
remarkable in themselves, and of a very extraordinary nature, were done amongst
them, and either not known to the greatest part of the World, or not attended
to by reason of the aversion the Gentiles had to this People. They that lived
in Greece, or Italy, at Athens, or Rome, might have no account of many things
that had passed in Palaestine; or if they heard of them, might not think it
worth their while to certify themselves of them, and commit them to writing,
because of the People amongst whom they were done. 2. Besides, if it be
remembered that a long time since, there were but very rare, if any, footsteps
of any credible History, either amongst the Graecians or Romans, concerning any
Persons that lived, or Actions that were done much before the Cur supra bellum
Thebanum and funera Trojae Non alias alii quoque res cecinere poetae. Lucret.
l. 5.
Trojan Wars, this is a sufficient Answer to any pretense that can be drawn
from the silence of Heathen Authors in relation to what passed in those early
times with which they were so little acquainted. Those obscure aenigmatical
intimations of some of them, which occurr in some of their Poets and other
Authors, are more than could necessarily have been required, considering the
little notice they had of these things. 3. And yet again had never such care
been taken to transmit the memory of these things, who knows not what
multitudes of Authors have been wholly lost, or preserved only in some small
fragments, just enough to let us see that once there were such Writers? And if
this has been the fate of many that have wrote since our Savior's time, it
were easy to conceive how diverse good Historics that had been composed many
Ages before, might have perished long ere this and the memory of what was
contained in them might have been past recovery.


And now if we put these things together, that diverse of the Miracles recorded
in the Old Testament are mentioned also in some sort by Heathen Writers, that
the Jews were a people of no great reputation amongst the rest of the World,
and about whose affairs other Nations did not much concern themselves, that we
have a very imperfect account of any thing done in any part of the World in the
times when these Miracles were wrought, except what remains in the Old
Testament and the Jewish Historian Josephus; and lastly, that had more been
written concerning them, there has since been time enough to have had it quite
lost, unless it met with a better sat than the Works of several later Authors.
If we put these things together, I presume I may look upon the Objection to be
sufficiently answered as far as it relates to the times of the Old Testament.

2. And as it respects the times of Christianity, it is capable likewise of as
fair a Solution; though these are the times against which I believe it to be
chiefly levelled, and that it strikes especially at the Miracles of our Savior
and his Apostles and other Disciples which these forementioned considerations
will stand in no stead, because they are said to have been of later date, and
done in times of more knowledge and learning, and in many more parts of the
World, and might therefore easily have had their memory secured in other
Writers besides those we appeal to. For who could think that so many as wrote
of those times could all conspire to bury them in silence, if ever they had
been more than pretended? Why for instance, should not Suetonius and Tacitus,
who both mention our Savior Christ, (as has P. xxxv.
already been observed,) why should not these? why should not many others have
given us some account of them? Do they all use to pass over things of such
importance without any mention of them? They were forward enough to tell of
Miracles said to be done by Sueton. Vespas. c. 7. and Tacit. hist. l. 4.
Vespasian, Justin. hist. l. 20. L Flor. l. 2. c. 12. and l. 3. c. 3. Valor.
Max. l. 1. c. 8.
by Castor and Pollux, Flor. l. 1. c. 5. Cic. de divinat. l. 1. c. 17. Aurel.
Vict. in vita Tarquin. Prisc. Lactant. Inst. l. 2. c. 7.
by Attius Navius, Hierocl. fragm. Pythag. p. 264, 266. Philostrat. de Apoll.
Ty. passim. Et Eusebius. c. Hierocl.
by Apollonius Tyanaeus, by Plurarch. in vit. Pyrrhi.
Pyrrhus, Lactant. Instit. l. 2. c. 7. Herodian. l. 1. sect. 35.
by Claudia, Porphyr. de vit. Pythag.
by Pythagoras, and (...). Eusebius. Praep. ev. l. 4 c. 1.
others; of miraculous appearances to Live. hist. l. 2. c. 36.
Tiberius Attinius, Plurarch. in Bruto.
to Brutus, to Tacit. Annal. 11.
Curtius Rufus, and Valor. Max. l. 1. c. 8. Orig. c. Cells. l. 5.
others; of miraculous Deliverances in Zosim. l. 1.
Cilicia, at Ibid.
Tarentum, at Diog. Laert. l. 5. in vit. Demetr. Phal.
Alexandria, and Jamb. de myster. sect. 3. c. 4. Cic. de divinat. l. 1. c. 26.
Val. Max. l. 1. c. 7. Van Dalen de orac. p. 100. Lactant. l. 2. c. 8.
other places. How then come they to take no notice of those multitudes of
Miracles we Christians boast so much of, if there were any certainty of them?
How come these to be passed by more than the rest? Is not this a just ground of
suspicion, that they were never done at all?

To this I answer in these following particulars.

1. It was by no means to be expected that the Enemies to Christianity should
be ready to bear such ample, such undeniable Testimony to it, as a due
acknowledgment of these Miracles must necessarily have been. When almost all
Mankind seemed to have unanimously conspired to obstruct the propagation of our
Religion, and as much as in them lay to explode it out of the World, both Jews
and Gentiles exerting their utmost force to this purpose, who could think that
their Writers would make it their business, to plead for it, and confirm and
establish it, by acquainting all generations what amazing testimony was born to
it, above any other Doctrine that ever was in the World; what mighty signs and
wonders were wrought for its vindication? This were to contradict themselves,
to build what at the same time they were earnestly endeavoring to pull down,
and in effect to defeat all the most violent attempts of their enraged
Governors for its extirpation. And nothing but the want of a better argument
could tempt Men to urge their silence in this case as a just confutation of
these Miracles, considering the prejudice Mankind were generally under, against
the Religion these were wrought in favor of, and the imminent danger that
might have ensued upon their publication of them. 2. It was enough that these
things were constantly attested by the Christians, and in the publickest manner
that might be, and appealed to as a very signal evidence of the truth of our
Religion, and of the error and wickedness of all that set themselves to oppose
it, and yet could not be denied by Celsus, or Hierocles, or Porphyry, or
Lucian, or any of their most avowed Adversaries, though these we may be sure
would by no means have omitted so fair an opportunity of exposing the Christian
Apologists and other Writers, if they had known how to do it. Had not what was
urged of this kind been too evident to be contradicted, they must have looked
to have heard of it with both Ears. They had to deal with Men, who would
willingly have been at the pains of detecting their forgery, if they had
suspected them to have been guilty of any, and would not have forborne to
divulge it with all the freedom that might be, and all the most heinous
aggravations it had been capable of. And their Silence in this respect is
therefore a much more convincing proof of the truth and reality of the
Christians Pretensions, than it was against them in the other. The same motives
that withheld any from publishing those Miracles they knew to be true, would
no less have prevailed with them on the other hand to make the World ring of
it, if they had been false. And that notwithstanding all their prejudices
against Christianity, and aversion to it, they should patiently hear its
Champions appealing upon all occasions to the testimony of Miracles, as well as
to the other Arguments that tended to recommend and propagate their Religion,
and not have the confidence to contradict it, is a plain intimation of their
assurance of the truth of it, and as great an evidence in its behalf as could
be expected from persons in their circumstances. And this makes it very
unreasonable to call this sort of Testimony into question, only because of the
silence of its enemies, which to any considering person must needs appear to
make much more strongly for, than it does against it. 3. Their setting up Cum
facta ejus mirabilia destrueret, nec tamen negaret, voluit ostendere Apollonium
vel paria, vel etiam majora fecisse. Mirum quod Apuleium praetermisit; cujus
solent and multa and mira memorari. Lactant. Instit. div. l. 5. c. 3. (...);
Celsus apud Orig. l. 2. p. 93.
Apollonius Tyanensis and others, to ape our Savior's and his Disciples
Miracles, was proof enough that they did believe our Savior and his Disciples
to have in truth wrought those Miracles they set themselves thus to confront.
And the reason is plain and obvious; because if they had not been satisfied of
the certainty hereof, their proper method of treating with the Christians had
been, to put them immediately upon the proof of the facts they appealed to, and
not to have taken it for granted that these things were done, and only sought
to lessen their authority by pleading that the Christians were not the only
persons in the World that had done Miracles, but that there were Magicians
amongst themselves, who had done others as considerable for both number and
quality as any they could pretend to. (...). Fragm. Pythag. vid. and Eusebius. c.
Hierocl.
Hierocles makes no question whether our Savior did many Miracles, but only
urges that Apollonius equalled or rather excelled him herein. And (...). Orig.
c. Cells. l. 1. p. 34. (...). l. 1. p. 22.
Celsus only pleads that what Miracles our Savior did, he did by Egyptian
Magic; that P. 89.
our own Scriptures speak of wicked Men and impostours who should come with
these or the like feats, and that Satan himself should be the author of them;
and again, P. 94.
that Zamolxis amongst the Scythians, and Pythagoras in Italy, Rampsinitus in
Egypt, and Orpheus amongst the Odrysae, Protesilaus in Thessaly, and Hercules
and Theseus in Tenarus had done very strange things as well as Christ; with
more L. 1. p. 52, 53.
to the same purpose. I grant that he L. 2. p. 94.
questions whether our Savior rose again from the dead, as is recorded of him,
because he conceives, that none ever did, or could do it; but as to his other
Miracles, he seems to make no doubt of them. Which was a very superfluous sort
of Argumentation if he did any way disbelieve them, and might much better have
been avoided, by coming only to this short issue, whether ever they were done
or not. And since he declined this course, it may very fairly be concluded,
that he had a good reason for doing it; that is, that he was sufficiently
satisfied of the matter of fact, as to the generality of our Savior's
Miracles, and had nothing at all to object against them. 4. And lastly, They
that pretend to disbelieve these Miracles, argue at a very strange rate, whilst
they disown them, and yet daily see the prevalence of that most holy Religion,
which they were designed to propagate; and for which to have prevailed as it
did, against the lusts and temporal interests of Mankind, without the
assistance of any Miracles, had been perhaps no less a Miracle than any of
those I am treating of.
Had Christianity been adapted to the corrupt inclinations of Men, or though
unagreeable to these, had it been promoted, as Mahometanism was, by the power
of the Sword, no wonder if it had gained Proselytes without any farther
assistance. But when the case was just contrary to this; when our Savior's
Doctrine aimed directly at curbing and restraining the vices of its Professors,
indispensably obliging them to an exact uprightness of conversation, to bring
down the high looks of the proud, to allay the impetuous excesses of the
passionate, to subdue the ungovernable appetites of the lustful and
lascivious, to cure the continual cravings of the covetous, to stop the fury of
the malicious and revengefull, and in all respects to make Men holy and
heavenly-minded here, and prepare them for a better state hereafter; and when
moreover all the force and power of the World was against it, endeavoring its
utter subversion, not its propagation; when the blessed Author of this Doctrine
had been despised, calumniated, derided, and at last put to death upon the
Cross under the notion of a Malefactor, and its Professors were to encounter
the greatest difficulties, to struggle with Men and Devils, with their own
sinful inclinations, and with all the outward opposition that could be made
against them, so that they had trouble enough to expect in this life, but no
visible reward before another; when Christianity, I say, had these almost
insuperable discouragements to grapple with, it had need of the clearest proof
that might be, and in particular of good store of Miracles to evince it to have
come from God. And its most inveterate and most prejudiced Enemies would be
hard put to it, to give any tolerable account, (...). Orig. c. Cells. l. 1.
how under these formidable disadvantages it should have conquered so great a
part of the World without them. Insomuch that had we no other proof of them,
but only that our Religion is thus wonderfully spread over the face of the
Earth, (as we have abundance) this one observation would plead hard for the
belief of some Miracles at first, as its Credentials, though we at this
distance knew not of what sort they were. But when we not only see this
surprising effect, but have a full and particular account of these Miracles
too, from those that were best acquainted with them, and best qualified to
transmit them to posterity, it is monstrously unreasonable still to doubt of
them, only because of the silence of some others, whose interest it was to
stifle them all they could.

And thus I persuade my self I have sufficiently established the certainty of
an overruling Providence, which cannot be questioned without questioning at
the same time, all those numerous Prophecies, whose accomplishments long after
(and yet just as had been foretold) have shown them to have proceeded from the
Spirit of God, and all those several sorts of Miracles which we are
sufficiently assured were wrought, and yet could not be wrought but by the
finger of God; and which moreover follows necessarily from the nature of the
divine Attributes, and is farther manifested from the Creation of the World,
and from its Preservation in Being, and especially in that admirable Order and
Harmony, which so loudly proclaims its Maker's Glory. These Considerations
Reason, unassisted by supernatural Revelation, suggests in behalf of a
super-intending Divine Providence, and consequently in order to a steady
Dependence upon it in all our Exigencies. And since they were like to grow to
this length, I hope the Reader will think it excusable that I did not insert
them in the body of the following Discourse, and yet considering that good use
may be made of them, that he will not blame me for having been prevailed with
to add them here.

ERRATA.
PAge xlij. l. 29. r. rather than. p. lv. l. 2. for if r. of. p. 4. l. 22. r.
Epithete. p. 35. l. 31. r. (...). p. 40. l. 11. for recommended r. recorded. p.
42. l. 31. for discretion r. direction. p. 48. l. 11. after that r. admiration
of the. p. 49. l. 8. r. Nests. p. 63. l. 12. for so r. to. p. 70. l. 16. r.
Who. l. 17. r. met. p. 123. l. 18. r. Trebonius. p. 163. l. 11. r. Corpses. p.
173. l. 9. for of r. in. p. 175. l. 29. r. to no more purpose. p. 201. l. 33.
r. he cried out.

In the Margin read,

P. xlij. l. 2. (...). p. 4. l. 5. quidam. p. 29. l. 2. (...). p. 59. l. 8.
quia si. l. 32. adhibetur. p. 60. l. 21. (...). p. 62. l. 8. (...). p. 80. l.
penult. (...). p. 81. (...). p. 108. l. 12. Apul. p. 152. l. 2. (...). p. 163.
l. 12. Herodot. in Euterp. p. 168. l. 22. quadam.

THE CONTENTS OF THE Ensuing TREATISE.
THE Introduction. Page 1. CHAP. I. The Duty of casting our Care upon God
explained. p. 7. We are not to expect that God should fulfill all our
unreasonable Desires. p. 8. Nor those that are reasonable without our own
Endeavors. p. 13. Nor even with them, if we lead wicked and unchristian lives.
p. 18. But yet whilst we faithfully serve God and trust in him, and endeavor
our own welfare, we may reasonably expect all necessary Blessings. p. 26. And
therefore we are only thus far to cast our Care upon God. p. 30. CHAP. II. The
Necessity of Casting our Care upon God manifested from the constant tenure of
Scripture. p. 32. CHAP. III. The Reasonableness of casting our Care upon God
evinced from the Providence of God in general. p. 46. From the peculiar
Promises made to the Righteous. p. 61. And from Experience. p. 77. CHAP. IV.
The Usefulness of casting our Care upon God. p. 94. For obtaining a greater
measure of his Protection. p. 95. For quieting our Minds in all Conditions. p.
105. For preparing for a better state hereafter. p. 133. CHAP. V. The
Insufficiency of all other Helps. p. 147. The Incompetency of all Natural Means
of Safety. Ibid. Of Wealth. p. 151. Power. p. 156. Strength of Body. p. 167.
Courage. p. 170. Wisdom. p. 171. Diligence. p. 174. The Assistance of Friends.
p. 176. The Evil and Danger of Sinful Means. p. 189. The Conclusion. p. 218.
The Sermon. p. 231.
OF TRUST in GOD.
THE INTRODUCTION.
SO numerous, and so pressing are the Troubles that continually attend Mankind,
so many the Losses and Misfortunes to which the Richest, so many the Crosses
and Vexations to which the Greatest, so many the unhappy Disappointments to
which the Wisest are liable; and yet so much more pungent are the Sorrows and
the Wants whereto the generality of Men, but especially the meaner sort, are
exposed; as may well put each one upon a serious Enquiry after the best Method
of arming himself against them. This all are sufficiently sensible of,
howsoever they are too frequently mistaken in the Means they choose to make use
of in order to their welfare.

The common Practice is, to try what may be done by the assistance of Power,
Wealth, Friends, or other the like helps, in hope that these may be able to
render the Owners Lives comfortable and easy. And yet it is observable, that
when Men have diligently labored after these Advantages all their days, they
are but few who attain to any considerable share of them; and again, that when
obtained, and in the greatest plenty, they are still but a very feeble Guard
against diverse of those Evils to which we are all obnoxious. They can neither
preserve from bodily Pains and Diseases, nor compose a distracted Mind, nor
recover a lost Member, nor prolong a decaying Life, nor any other way make
those happy who have nothing better to depend upon. If wisely managed they may
tend much to the Owner's benefit, both here and hereafter; and are therefore to
be thankfully received, and carefully improved to the Glory of God, the Giver
of them.

But yet they fall so far short of what Men are apt to promise themselves from
them, that some who seem to have seriously considered their Insufficiency, have
professed themselves Quod siquis Deus mihi largiatur, ut ex hac aetate
repuerascerem, and in cunis vagiam, valde recusem; nec vero velim, quasi
decurso spatio, a calce ad carceres revocari. Cic. de Senectute.

Ex quo intelligi licet, non nasci long optimum esse, nec in hos scopulos
incidere vitae: proximum autem si natus sis, quamprimum mori, and tanquam ex
incendio effugere fortunae. Cic. de Consolat.

Ita primum bonum esse non nasci, secundum citius mori, etc. Lactant. Instit.
l. 3. c. 19.

(...)
(...). Posidipp.

weary of a Life, whose Inconveniences they have found all these unable to
remedy.

Others have from time to time been wrought upon by the variety of Troubles
they have met with, (...),
(...).
Stob. Sermon. 96.
to become their own Executioners, rather than continue to labor under the
weight of those Grievances they thought themselves no longer able to bear. As
the Histories of all Ages, and our own Experience too sadly inform us.

Others have sought to help themselves by endeavoring after a certain (...).
Epictet. Enchir. c. 10.

(...). Clem. Alex. Str. l. 4.

Noster sapiens vincit quidem incommodum omne, sed sentit: illorum ne sentit
quidem. Senec. Epist. 9.

Dixerit hoc quidem Epicurus, semper beatum esse sapientem. -- Quem quidem cum
summis doloribus conficiatur, ait dicturum quam suave est, quam nihil curo?
Cic. de fin. Bon. and Mal. l. 5.27. and Tusc. Quaest. l. 2. c. 7.


Indolency under all Occurrences, as if the nneasiness we find under the worst
of them proceeded only from our own Fancy, not from any real impressions that
they make upon us.

Others, again, have labored to support themselves with other more generous
Meditations, comforting themselves to think, Tertul. Apol. c. 45. Diog. Laert.
in vita Epicuri. Cic. definibus, l. 1. and 2. Anton. Imp. (...), l. 7. Sect.
23. and 38. Senec. Epist. 24, and 78.
that their Afflictions, if sharp, cannot last long; Unum est levamentum
malorum ingentium, pati, and necessitatibus suis obsequi. Senec. de ira, l. 3.
c. 16. Leve fit quod been fertur onus. Ovid. Ita est vita hominum quasi cum
ludas tesseris, si illud quod maxim opus est jactu non cadit, illud quod
cecidit forte, id at ut corrigas. Ter. Adelph.
that whilst they do last, a patient compliance with them is the most
advantageous way of bearing them; Quam multos militiae morbus eripuit? quosdam
ne ad ruinam domus suae occurrerent, inimicus vadimonio tenuit; ne in piratarum
manus pervenirent, quidem naufragio consecuti sunt. Senec. de beneficiis, l. 6.
c. 9.
that great Benefits many times redound from them; A malis igitur mors abducit.
Cic. Tusc. Quaest. l. 1. Vitae miserae mors finis esse videtur. ibid. c. 42.
and that Death at last will put an end to all our Troubles.

At other times they argued from the commonness of Afflictions; that themselves
were not the only Sufferers, Nae illa quidem consolatio sirmissima est,
quanquam and usitata est, and saepe prodest: Non tibi hoc soli. Tusc. Quaest.
l. 3.
what they endured being no more than the usual fate of Mankind.

And sometimes, again, to induce their Followers to submit the more cheerfully
to Afflictions, they have attempted to satisfy them with this Distinction,
Doceat paratiorem me ad contemnendam pecuniam fore, si illam in rebus
praepositis, quam si in bonis duxero; fortioremque in patiendo dolor, si eum
asperum, and difficilem perpessu, and contra naturam, quam si malum esse
dixero. De finibus bon. and mal. l. 4. Asperum, difficile, odiosum, contra
naturam dicunt, nec tamen malum. Tusc. Quaest. l. 2. c. 7. Nihil agis dolor,
quamvis sis molestus nunquam te esse confitebor malum. ibid. c. 25.
That though they could not but acknowledge their Sufferings to be sharp,
troublesome, hateful, against Nature, and difficult to be born, yet they would
not allow them to be Evils; as if the bare change of an Epithet had been a
Cure for the worst of them, for the acutest Pain, or heaviest Sorrow. Which
Notion Dionysius Heracleotes acknowledged De fi^. bon. and m^l. l. 5. c. 31.
Tusc. Quaest. l. 2. c. 24. and Diog. L^ert. l. 7. in vita D. Herael.
to be sufficiently confuted by a violent pain in his Eyes, and a severe fit of
the Stone.

But our Religion prescribes a far better Remedy for all these Distempers, than
is any where else to be met with; namely, that in all our Exigences we look up
to Almighty God, and cast our Care upon him, who not only is best able to
relieve us under whatsoever Calamities, but has moreover directed us to seek
to him for what things we stand in need of, with a Promise that he will be
wanting to none that duly apply themselves to him, requiring us neither to
suffer our selves to be overwhelmed with any sort of Grief, upon whatever
account, nor to expect Relief against it from any other Hand than his, who
alone is the proper Refuge for the Distressed. To Him we are to present our
Case and make known our Sorrows, and then to rely upon Him, as the surest Help
in all our Needs, and the best Support under all our Troubles. This he has
been graciously pleased to appoint, as the readiest, and in truth, the only
certain way to obtain either Comfort under, or Defense against, or Deliverance
from Wants, Diseases, Losses, Fears, Dangers, or whatsoever Afflictions. This
Duty, therefore, I have undertaken to recommend to each one's serious and
constant Practice. And that I may do it the more effectually, I shall proceed
to discourse of it in this following Method.

1. To consider the Nature and Importance of the Duty. 2. To observe our
indispensible Obligation in the performance of it. 3. To enforce the Practice
of it from the Assurance we have of God's continual Care over us. 4. To
instance in some of the great Advantages, which would accrue to us from a
faithful and constant Dependence upon God. 5. And lastly, To evince the
Insufficiency of all other Means for either securing us from, or supporting us
under Afflictions.
CHAP. I. The Duty of Casting our Care upon God.
I Begin with the first of these Heads, To consider the Nature of this Duty, of
putting our Trust in God, and casting our Care upon him. Now, Trust, or
Affiance in, or Dependence upon another, Principaliter significare videtur,
quod aliquis spem concipiat, ex hoc quod credit verbis alicujus auxilium
promittentis -- Fiducia etiam potest dici, qua aliquis spem alicujus rei
concipit ex aliquo considerato. 2. Secundae Quae. 129.6.
Tho. Aquinas rightly declares to signify principally, that hope of benefit in
any respect, which a Man conceives from the Promises of such an one; but
withal, that it may be grounded upon any other reasonable Consideration. And
upon both these Accounts there is great cause to rely upon Almighty God, as not
only best able to assist us, but farther, as having frequently both by Word and
Deed shown his readiness to do it. And accordingly he expects from each one of
us, that in all our streights we make him our stay and our strength, looking
past the immediate cause of our Fears or Sufferings, Dangers or Necessities, to
that supreme mighty Hand of his which governs and disposes all things, and
endeavoring to work in our selves such a sense of his mavelous
Loving Kindness to all who duly trust in him; that whatever our Circumstances
be as to this Life, we may yet be able to comfort our selves in him whose
Mercies are over all his Works, not doubting of his Protection, whenever we
heartily ^ue to him for it. But then, to the end that this our Dependence upon
him be not vain and groundless, but well fixed and settled, and which may
certainly answer our Expectation, these following Particulars are to be
remembered.

SECT. I.
I. WE are not so to interpret any of God's Promises, as if he had obliged
himself thereby to fulfill all our extravagant and unreasonable desires. It is
a common thing for Men to exceed the measure of God's Promises, in relation to
the Benefits they expect from him; not because he does not promise what is
sufficient for each one of us, but because they are apt to desire more than is
enough: Either they aim at great Matters which are too high for them, or at
least, are dissatisfied if they meet not with all that they apprehend suitable
to their Circumstances; and when any Afflictions befall them, they are tempted
too often to conclude, That their Heavenly Father neglects them, if he do not
think fit presently to set them at ease. And whilst they take upon them thus
inconsiderately to carve for themselves, no wonder if they find those Hopes
defeated, which are not built upon the Divine Promises, but upon their own
covetous or ambitious Desires, or proceed from their unfitness to bear any kind
of Trouble.

1. Wherefore the first Expedient in order to a right performance of this Duty
is, Sis vis Pothydeam divitem facere, non pecuniae adjiciendum est, sed
cupiditatibus detrahendum. Senec. Epist. 21.
To confine our Desires within their proper bounds, not aiming at things above
our reach, and which every one sees we have no reason to expect. Our God is
infinitely merciful, and gracious, and willing to take care of those that
faithfully cast their care upon him; but he has never engaged to give every one
his fill of Wealth and Honor, nor of Power and Authority. Nor indeed is it
consistent with the state of the World that he should do it, since (...). Clem.
Romans Ep. 1. p. 49.
the lower and poorer sort are apparently as necessary for performing the
meaner Offices, as the higher are for Empire and Dominion. A plentiful Fortune,
a splendid Equipage, a richly furnished Habitation, abounding with all sorts of
pleasant Entertainments, an eminent State, and a great Command, and other the
like Advantages, are the Gifts of God, and to be thankfully received whenever
he is pleased to send them, but they are no part of his Promises, they are not
what he has undertaken to provide for all that put their trust in him, nor are
to be reckoned upon as such. The Husbandman may hope for a plentiful Harvest,
the Mariner for a safe and profitable Voyage, the Artificer for a comfortable
subsistence by his Industry; but not for the highest Titles of Honor, not for
the Government of a mighty and victorious Army, not for a Crown or a Kingdom.
As we have not all descended from Princes and Nobles, so neither is it to be
imagined, that all can live in Courts and stately Palaces, and enjoy the same
Privileges with them that have. And if all will be eagerly seeking after those
peculiar Advantages, which they know beforehand very few can attain to, it
will be a just Reflection upon their own Prudence, but cannot possibly argue
any neglect in Almighty God, that the greatest part of them are sure to meet
with a disappointment.

2. Neither are we to imagine the Divine Providence any way defective, though
even in our lower Stations we have not all things correspondent to our Desires.
Because it is very possible that our Desires may be inordinate, and which we
ought rather to moderate, than expect that God should hearken to them, as they
are. We are generally inclinable to be very partial in our own Case; and Cyrum
and Cambysem, and torum regni Persici stemma percense: quem invenies, cui modum
imperii satietas fecerit? qui non vitam in aliqua ulterius procedendi
cogitati^ne ^inierit? Senec. de be^^s. l. 7. c. 3.
were we at liberty to choose for our selves, we should never know when to be
satisfied. And it is therefore a great kindness to us, that we have one to
choose for us, who perfectly understands our condition, who observes all our
wants, and sees beforehand what kind of Provision is most suitable for us; and
who moreover has promised, that if we seek first the Kingdom of God and his
Righteousness; if we make it our business to please him, and then faithfully
cast our care upon him, he will not fail to bestow upon us, whatsoever good
things shall be necessary for us. They are our B. Savior's own words, and
therefore can never possibly deceive us; St. Matt. 6.33.
Seek ye first the Kingdom of God, says our Savior, and his Righteousness,
and all these things shall be added unto you.

And whilst we can be sure of thus much, we must blame our selves only, if we
be unhappy for lack of what is not really needful for us, and what we should
not at all want, were it not for our own Imprudence. S. Lu. 12.15.
A man's life consists not in the abundance of the things that he possesses;
nor its welfare in pleasing Entertainments of all kinds, but 1 Timothy 6.8. (...)
Aelian. var. Hist. l. 4. c. 13. Panem and aquam natura desiderat, nemo ad haec
pauper, intra quae quisquis desiderium suum claudit, cum ipso Jove de
foelicitate contendat, ut air Epicurus. Senec. Epist. 25. (...). Porphyr. de
abstin. l. 1. Sect. 48. (...); ait Socrates, Diog. Laert. l. 2.
having food and raiment, we may very well be content therewith, though the one
be not so delicious, nor the other so gay as our vain Fancies might tempt us to
wish for. Nor are we to extend God's Promises of providing for us any farther
than this comes to. As he is the sole Proprietor of all, he may give us, if he
pleases, not the Necessaries only, but together with them the Superfluities of
this Life; but seeing he has no where obliged himself to it, it must be a gross
mistake to make our own Desires the Standard of our Fortunes, rather than his
Divine Will, and that infinite Wisdom whereby he knows what is best for us, and
what a series of Mischiefs our own choice of greater Wealth or Honor would
expose us to, if not prevented by his Almighty Hand.

3. When we groan under the weight of any affliction, we are not to promise our
selves, that God will observe our time for the removal of it. Aliquando
desideratur ab illo, and non dat, novit horam dandi qui curat. D. August. in
Ps. 144.16.
He may suffer Persons to be in want, or disgrace, or pain, or sickness, or
trouble of Mind, or whatsoever Calamity; and though they cry never so
importunately to him for help, may deferr their Deliverance, and they in the
mean time have no cause to complain of him. As when he promised to Genesis 15.16.
Abraham, that the Land of Canaan should be given to his Posterity to inherit,
he yet determined to delay the completion of this his Promise for above four
hundred years, till the iniquity of the Amorites was full; so may he with no
less reason, on the other hand, forbear to deliver his faithful Servants out of
trouble, until he sees them fitted for a Deliverance. It is sufficient that he
will be ready to Isa. 49.8.
hear us in an acceptable time, vouchsafing us his help when he knows it most
expedient for us. And we must be very undutiful and very ungrateful to him, if
we do not both patiently wait his time for a Deliverance, and thankfully
receive it whenever it comes.

To conclude, All our Dependence being upon God alone, and all our Expectations
being from the benign influence of his good Providence incessantly watching
over us, whether to save us from evil, or to bestow his Blessings upon us,
nothing can be more unreasonable than not to resign our selves perfectly to his
disposal, to receive whatsoever favors from him, and whenever he pleases.
Iniquus est, qui muneris sui arbitrium danti non relinquit. Sense. de consol.
c. 29.
It is too much Presumption for poor ignorant Creatures to prescribe to the
Almighty, at what time, and in what measure he should dispense his Benefits.
And if any have the Vanity to attempt it, they cannot so properly be said to
cast their Care upon God herein, as to seek how they may impose upon
themselves, and provide that they may certainly be disappointed of their hope.
So that as we would study either to please God, or to succeed in our Dependence
upon him, it will concern us in the first place, to see that our Desires be
regular and reasonable, before we venture to make our Application to him, but
especially before we promise our selves that he will vouchsafe to answer us.

SECT. II.
II. BE our Desires never so reasonable, yet are we not to look that they
should ordinarily be granted us, without our own earnest endeavors for
obtaining them. We must not wait for God to bring up Number. 11.31.
Quails wherewith to feed us, as he did the Israelites in the Wilderness, or to
rain down Manna from Heaven, to maintain us in Idleness; but must be ready at
all times to do what in us lies for our own relief, and then referr our selves
to him for the Success. P. 133, 134.
Hierocles in his Comment upon the golden Verses, blames those that sought to
God for the things themselves labored not after, and gives this just Reason of
his Reproof, (...), their Sloth would hinder their Design; and were their
Prayers never so earnest, yet seeing they acted not suitably in other respects,
these would not prevail. And accordingly (...). In S. Matt. Hom. 32.
St. Chrysostom observes of our Blessed Lord, That he forbids not to cast our
Seed into the Ground, but only cautions against an anxious solicitude about its
increase; as neither does he encourage to leave off all Labor, but only
requires not to be too intent upon, nor too nearly concerned for the things we
labor after. He does not simply condemn all Care of things Temporal, but so
far only as it is an hindrance to our Care and Watchfulness for trying and
tasting the Goodness of God, or as it weakens our reliance upon his fatherly
Kindness and Protection. And in truth, to cry to God for help, and yet be
unwilling to help our selves, is not to trust his Providence, but to tempt him,
and savours more of Presumption than of Piety; and hence gives him just cause
to leave us to our selves, without granting the Assistance we thus feebly seek
at his Hands, and yet without which we must necessarily be but in a forlorn
condition.

Whence it follows, that if we would take the right way to Safety and
Happiness, we must not think much to bestir our selves, but must up and be
doing; must consider what is incumbent upon our selves, as well as what
Encouragement we have to depend upon a good God for Relief, and must behave our
selves accordingly. And particularly, we must be careful, 1. To use all proper
means for obtaining our Desires. 2. To add to our own Endeavors, our hearty
Prayers to Almighty God for his Blessing upon them. 3. To avoid whatsoever
tends to frustrate these our Endeavors and Prayers.


1. We are to use all proper Means for obtaining our Desires. (...). D.
Chrysostom. in S. Matt. Hom 23.
As we are not to put our selves out of God's Protection, so neither are we to
be wholly out of our own, but are in subordination to his good Providence, to
take care of our selves, according to our Abilities and Opportunities of doing
it. For though God be ready of his abundant Goodness, to assist our weak
Endeavors, yet can we not promise our selves that he will work Deliverances
for us without them. As he will not give the Husbandman his wonted Crop without
Tilling and Sowing; so it is but vain to imagine that he will make others
Learned without Study, or thriving in the World without Diligence, or safe
without a watchful regard to themselves and their Concerns; that he will set
such above the Attempts of a formidable Enemy, who willingly deliver themselves
into his Hands, or at least, do not resolutely withstand him; will keep their
Houses from being burned, who stand by idly, beholding their Flames, without
ever striving to get them quenched; will rescue those from imminent dangers who
do not so much as seek to shelter themselves against them, or bring those from
under heavy Pressures and Calamities, who lie still and cry to him for help,
but will not be at the pains of trying what themselves can do toward the
removal of them. It is true, he has many times been pleased to work even
Miracles for the Deliverance of them that have faithfully put their Trust in
him; but it is too much to conceit, that he will ordinarily do this, and
especially, that he will do it for any who will not be persuaded to help
themselves. No, whosoever would hope to enjoy his Blessing and the Benefits of
his Protection, must be ready to do his own part for obtaining them, taking
what care he can fairly and honestly of himself, before he presumes to rest
upon God for what he cannot.

2. We are to add to our own Endeavors our hearty Prayers to Almighty God for
his Blessing upon them, without which they will all certainly prove
ineffectual. When we have done all we can, have used our utmost cunning in
contriving and our greatest diligence in carrying on our Designs, and though in
humane probability we have never so fair a prospect of Success, yet must not
our dependence be upon any thing of this nature, but upon Him who is the Rock
of Ages, and a never-failing Strength. We must beware that we do not ruin our
selves by Hab. 1.16.
Sacrificing to our own Net, and burning Incense to our Drag, as the Prophet
expresses it, thereby provoking Almighty God to set himself against us, to
strand us in the very Port, to deliver us up when we think our selves already
Victors, or to cast us headlong when we are almost at the top of our Desires.
Valde namque apud Dominum utraque haec sibi necessario congruunt, ut and
oratione operatio, and operatione fulciatur oration. D. Hicron. in Lament. Jerm.
c. 3.41.
We must by no means suffer any reliance upon our own Power, or Skill, or
Industry to make us regardless of God's good Providence, but must look for a
happy issue of all our most vigorous Endeavors from his Blessing alone. Thus
much the holy Ps^^^ist informs us, Psalm. 127.1, 2, 3. Except the Lord build the
House they labor in vain that build it; except the Lord keep the City, the
Watchman waketh but in vain. It is but lost labor, it is but vain for you to
rise up early, and sit up late, and eat the Bread of Sorrows. It is to no
purpose to promise our selves Success in any of our Undertakings, whether for
preserving us from Evil, or for procuring good Things, any farther than he is
pleased to grant us his Assistance. Deuteronomy. 3.18. 1 Samuel 2.30. Psalm. 91.15, 16.
Job 5.19. Prove. 16.7.
It is he that gives power to get Wealth, that advances to Honor, that
lengtheneth out our Days, that delivers out of Troubles, that makes a Man's
Enemies to be at peace with him; in a word, it is his Providence that governs
the World. And to him therefore we are to address our selves in all our
Necessities, being anxiously careful for nothing, as the Apostle St. Paul Phil.
4.6.
directs, but in every thing by Prayers and Supplications, with Thanksgivings,
making our Requests known to God; who alone can, and if we seek to him in
sincerity, will, in his due time rescue us out of our Distress.

3. We are to avoid whatever tends to frustrate these our Endeavors and
Prayers. The Satyrist Poscis opemnervis, corpusque fidele Senectae;
Esto, age, sed grandes patinae tucetaq, crassa
Annuere his superos vetuere.
Sat. 2. v. 42.
Persius deservedly exposes the folly of some in his time, who prayed to God
for Health and Strength of Body that might endure to a good old age, and in the
mean while lead a life that would naturally impair their Constitutions, and
would hence become an occasion of shortening their days. So the (...) Diog.
Laert l. 6. in vita Diog.
Cynick notes it as a shameful Soloecism to offer Sacrifice for the procuring,
or the preservation of Health, but withal, to run into those excesses in the
very act of Worship, that were naturally destructive of the Health they prayed
for. And indeed, as there is no reason in the World to expect that God will
hear us, when we pray to him with ill Designs, and to bad Purposes, so neither
that he will do it, when our own manner of Conversation manifestly contradicts
our Prayers.

He is very willing, of his immense Goodness, to supply the Needs of all that
seriously address themselves to him; but not to fulfill the vain Requests of
such who show themselves unconcerned whether he hearken to them or not. He will
not miraculously preserve those from being cheated, who resolve to trust Men of
known Dishonesty, or that are apparently Insolvent; nor to secure their
Reputation whose scandalous Wickedness must inevitably blast it; nor continue
their Health who wilfully set themselves to destroy it; nor lastly, will he
give us ease and quiet of Mind if we in the mean time senselesly follow those
methods that most naturally tend to discompose us. And in all other cases it is
absolutely necessary, in order to the Favors we hope for from him, to be at
least as careful for avoiding every thing that may detain them from us at
first, or may afterward deprive us of them, as a great lover of Retirement
would be to keep himself out of a continual Hurry; or rather, as one that is
desirous of Life would be to preserve himself from Poison.

SECT. III.
III. BE our Desires never so reasonable, and our Care for obtaining them never
so great, and never so prudent in other Respects, yet can we not promise our
selves they will be granted us, if we lead wicked and unchristian, disorderly
and sinful Lives. For this is the ready way to defeat the Designs of God's
Goodness to us, and intercept the course of those Blessings which he would
otherwise have bestowed upon us, and which we might yet be made partakers of,
if we would be invited diligently to prepare our selves for them. Those who
first 1 S. Pet. 5.6, 7.
humble themselves under his mighty hand, lamenting and heartily bewailing
their manifold Iniquities, whereby they have at any time provoked him to
execute his Judgments upon them, and then cast their Care upon him, are the
Persons that he has obliged himself to take care of. It is to such only as S.
Mat. 6.33.
seek first the Kingdom of God and his Righteousness that our B. Savior has
promised a competent provision of the things of this Life. And it ought
therefore to be no surprise to others, if they meet not with a like support.

God may suffer wicked Men, whenever he pleases, to taste plentifully of his
Munificence, heaping his Mercies upon them from day to day. There is none of
them but does some good Deeds; and feeing they have no Retribution to expect at
his Hands in a future state, he may hence think fit to allow them the larger
share of temporal Advantages. But then it is to be noted, that this is more
than they know how to depend upon, because all his Promises of this nature are
made only to them that obey his Commands, before they have the Confidence to
commit themselves to his Protection; and as there is no reason to build upon
what he has never thought fit to promise, so neither is there to extend his
Promises farther than himself designed them.

If a professed Rebel should betake himself to his injured Sovereign for
Relief, whereby to enable him to proceed the more successfully in his wicked
Attempts against him, what welcome he might look for from him is very well
known. And can they possibly have any more comfortable hopes, who obstinately
persist in their Disobedience to Almighty God, and yet fly to him for Succor
in their Distress, as though they had done nothing to incapacitate themselves
for it? The Israelites could not prevail against their Enemies, the Jos. 7.11,
12.
Men of Ai, whilst the accursed thing was amongst them. And there is great
cause for People still to fear the like unhappy Disappointments, whenever any
other notorious abomination is found in them. If they adhere not faithfully to
the Lord their God, to obey and serve him, but prefer their Lusts and Passions
before the Observance of his most holy Laws, casting off his Fear, and
multiplying their Provocations, as if he took no notice of them; what can be
more highly becoming his exact Justice, than to make them taste of the fruit of
their doings, by both encompassing them with Miseries, and suffering them to
faint and languish under them?

To use all other means for accomplishing our Ends, but not to forbear
offending God, upon whose Blessing all our hopes of success depend, is just as
if one sick of a violent Fever should resolve constantly to follow his Doctor's
Prescriptions, in duly taking all his Doses, how unagreeable soever, in
bleeding, or being scarified, or otherwise tortured; or in abstaining from
Flesh, or strong Drinks, for fear of heightening his Distemper; but should have
no regard at all to preserve himself from taking Cold, though this be at least
as dangerous as an error, or neglect in any of the other cases; or as if a Man
should call up his Family, and bestirr himself to barricadoe up his Windows,
and guard and secure all the weaker places of his House, from the Attempts of
Thieves, by whom he apprehends himself about to be beset; but should in the
mean time leave the Doors neither shut nor guarded. And it is very reasonable
to think, that being a like preposterous management, it may most probable have
a like fatal Conclusion.

Or if a Man do not live in a professed neglect of God's Commands, but only
through Carlesness or Inadvertency permits himself to be now and then betrayed
into some heinous Wickedness, he may certainly believe it, that each Sin he
thus commits will be a means of alienating God from him in some degree, and
consequently will leave him so much the less ground to rely upon the Divine
Protection Multa cogitur homo tolerare, etiam remissis peccatis, quamvis ut in
eam veniret miseriam primum fuerit causa peccatum. D. August. in S. Joan.
tract. 124.
He cannot think in this case wholly to escape God's Hand, but has all the
reason in the World to conclude, that these his Miscarriages will need some
Chastisement; and if they deliver him not over to eternal Torments, will
however, call for some lighter punishment here in this World, and that he ought
to be very thankful that they end no worse.

God is infinitely gracious, and will not forget to make good all his Promises;
but yet this hinders not but that our selves may put a bar in the way to
prevent our own Happiness, by foolishly incapacitating our selves for it. And
whenever we do so, it is a great weakness to delude our selves with a vain
Expectation, as if our Interest in God's Providence were still the same with
theirs who never offended him as we have done. He tells his own People the
Jews, That he would estrange himself from them by reason of their
Transgressions, and would not attend to them when they earnestly solicited him
to become their Protector. Isa. 1.15.
When ye spread forth your Hands, I will hide mine Eyes from you; yea, when ye
make many Prayers I will not hear. But then he tells them likewise at the same
time, how they might put themselves into better Circumstances, and might regain
his Favor; that is to say, if they would reform their Lives, and turn to him
with all their Hearts, and walk uprightly before him. v. 16, 17.
Wash ye, make ye clean; put away the evil of your doings from before mine
eyes; cease to do evil, learn to do well, seek Judgment, relieve the Oppressed,
judge the Fatherless, plead for the Widow; and then behold for your comfort, v.
19.
If ye be thus willing and obedient ye shall eat the good of the Land. This
therefore is the way to entitle our selves to the many gracious Promises of
Protection that are made throughout the Word of God; namely, to forsake all
those Wickednesses which may hitherto have been a means of with holding his
Blessings from any of us. There is no such contrivance for arming our selves
beforehand against Afflictions, or getting rid of them whenever they befall
us, as utterly to renounce all our Sins, which have brought them upon us. Let
us but amend out Ways, and become as holy, and devout, and religious, as
strict, and regular, and unblameable in our Conversation as our Lord requires
us to be, and we need not question an Interest in all those Mercies and
Blessings, and that Protection, and those Assistances which our God has
designed for his chosen Servants. Psalm. 91.4.
He will gather us under his Wings, and we shall be safe under his Feathers;
his Faithfulness and Truth shall be our Shield and Buckler. If we commit our
Ways to him, casting our selves upon him, and by a thorough Reliance, resigning
all our Desires, Wills, and Interests into his Hands, he will vouchsast us, aut
quod volumus, aut quod malumus, either what we most desire, or what he knows to
be most desirable, what our selves like best, or what he sees to be best for us.

But still it is upon this condition, that we behave our selves holily and
uprightly before him, and do not forfeit his Kindness by any sort of wilful
Disobedience. As may be collected from all the numerous Texts of Scripture
which denounce Misery, and Destruction, and Desolation against all the workers
of Iniquity. Which I the rather mention at present (amongst others) for these
two following purposes.

1. To vindicate the Divine Providence in relation to the manifold Calamities
whereto Mankind are obnoxious, and to show where we are usually to look for the
true cause of our Misfortunes, that we are not to charge them upon God, but
upon our own transgression of his Laws. For after all Men's care in other
respects, it is no reflection upon God's Goodness, though he seem to withdraw
himself from them, when they have given him just occasion for it, by indulging
themselves in their Iniquities. It is a merciful rather, a gentle and moderate
punishment of their Offenses, if he deny them only the Comforts of this Life,
when they have moreover deserved the intolerable severities of the other. And
it is but a just and equal method of procedure toward them, when any are
hardened in their Sins, if he make them to suffer for it, both here and
hereafter. Nor is there any thing more plainly declared in Scripture, than that
Prove. 11.5. c. 21.15. c. 5.22.
the wicked shall fall by his own wickedness, and destruction shall be to the
workers of iniquity; That his own iniquities shall take the wicked himself, and
he shall be holden with the cords of his Sins. And again, Eccles. 8.13.
That it shall not be well with the wicked, because they fear not before God;
with multitudes of other Expressions to the same purpose. The Apostle S. James
charges Men's heavy Disappointments upon their either not seeking to God for
Assistance and Support, or not doing it aright. S. James 4.2, 3.
Ye lust and have not, says the Apostle, ye kill and desire to have, and
cannot obtain; ye fight and war, yet ye have not, because ye ask not; ye ask
and receive not, because ye ask amiss, that ye may consume it upon your lusts.

And the wise man presents us with a terrible Commination of an amazing, and
yet certain contempt that God will have for Persons, when they dare to apply
themselves to him for what they want, without attending to what he requires of
them. Prove. 1.24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31.
Because I have called and ye refused, I have stretched out my band and no man
regarded; but ye have set at naught my counsel, and would none of my reproof: I
also will laugh at your calamity, I will mock when your fear comes. When your
fear comes as desolation, and your destruction comes as a whirlwind; when
distress and anguish comes upon you, then shall they call upon me, but I will
not answer; they shall seek me early but they shall not find me: for that they
hated knowledge, and did not choose the fear of the Lord. They would none of my
counsel, they despised all my reproof. Therefore shall they eat of the fruit of
their own way, and be filled with their own devices. And no marvel if what is
thus threatened be accordingly fulfilled. However this is no prejudice to them
that are duly qualified for the Divine Favor, nor any proof that these shall
not have whatever Promises they meet with for their encouragement, some way or
other made good to them; but it teaches us on the other hand, to what source
the very best are to impute their Sufferings, and that (though God may have
other wise Ends to be served, and good uses to be made of them, yet) their Sins
are the only meritorious cause of them.

2. To caution Persons against the likeliest means of frustrating their Hopes:
For if God's promises of Protection are made particularly and only to the
Righteous, it must needs be, that so far as any one falls short of this
Character, so much the less Interest he will have in those Promises. His
Iniquities, if they do not utterly prevent the Blessings he desires, (as he has
too great reason to fear they may) will yet be sure to deprive him of that
undaunted trust in God's Goodness, which he would otherwise have found to be an
admirable Consolation in all Conditions. So that hereby he becomes at best but
like a desolate Man in the Ocean laboring for his life, or that is left
unfortunately in a desert Island, where he has a possibility to escape, but has
no assurance of it to depend upon. A Vessel may come that way, and ease him of
his fears and dangers, when about to be swallowed up of the merciless Waves, or
devoured by some ravenous Beast of prey, and may bring him safe to his own
Home; but this is more than he can any way promise himself. And if no one in
his Wits would knowingly quit his Ship to run either of these hazards, much
less should any dare to allow themselves in what may expose them to the just
Wrath of Almighty God; and hence may exclude them from that Interest in his
Favor, which is the best Support under all Calamities, and the want whereof,
if it do not prevail with him to deny them whatsoever good Things they ask of
him, yet leaves them at very great uncertainty, whether they shall partake of
them or not; and again, whether it shall be for their benefit if they be
vouchsafed them, or only in order to their greater Condemnation.

SECT. IV.
IV. ALL therefore that I take to be implied in this Duty is a considerate and
a rational Reliance upon God through Christ for the necessary Blessings of
this, as well as the inestimable Rewards of the other Life. It is a Resting
upon him as our great Benefactor, Patron, and Protector, with a firm
persuasion, that whilst we faithfully perform our part, by confining our
Desires and Expectations to necessary Things, and taking the proper Measures
for obtaining them, and capacitating our selves for them, he will not refuse to
grant us a suitable supply of them, but will prosper our Endeavors, and will
also hear our Prayers, and help us out where our Endeavors fail. And so it
consists of these two Branches.

1. A steady dependence upon God to take care of us in all our Streights; and
consequent hereupon

2. A quiet composure of Mind in all our greatest Exigencies, upon
consideration of the Care that he takes of us.

1. A steady Dependence upon God to take care of us in all our Streights, as
knowing, that if we seek to him aright he will be ready to succor and provide
for us, though never so unable to help our selves. There is no case so forlorn
but he regardes it, and has by him a Remedy in store for it, which if duly
applied, will effectually work a cure. If he but command Deliverance for his
Servants, all the Power of Men or Devils cannot prevent it; and this he never
refuses to do, but when persons show themselves unfit for his Kindness, or else
desire what would be no real Kindness to themselves. In all other Cases he is
abundantly ready to dispense his Favors to Mankind, not only beyond their
deserts, but very often beyond their utmost hopes.

And hence he requires us to fix our Eyes upon him in the needful time of
trouble; and if we either foresee any Evil at a distance, which according to
the working of natural Causes must be unavoidable, or groan at present under
any grievous Affliction, which we know not how else to get removed, in neither
of these Instances to distrust his paternal Affection to us, but encourage our
selves in a belief, that upon condition we sue to him, and rest upon him as we
ought, he will be mindful of us, and will be sure, (...), 1 S. Pet. 5.6.
as S. Peter speaks, in due time, when he observes a proper season for it, to
administer to our Necessities.

And, indeed, considering the Transitoriness of our present State, and the
uncertainty of every thing we can possess or hope for in it, and that it is not
in our power to make our Condition as we would have it, or to preserve it if it
were such, but that for ought we know to the contrary, some unlucky chance may
the very next moment either take away all our Enjoyments from us, or us from
them; and therefore we can have no security of any thing but from the good
Providence of God, no prospect of Happiness, whether here or hereafter, but
only from his boundless Compassion; considering these things, I say, it is
easy to infer how nearly our Interest depends upon his gracious Inclinations
toward us, his perpetual Care being our best, our only Defense against those
numerous Evils, to which, were it not for this, each one would lie continually
exposed; and consequently what egregious folly it is not to rely entirely upon
him for those Benefits that are to be expected only from him. I confess, were
Mankind capable of making any tolerable provision for themselves, without the
Divine Assistance, they would have so much the less Encouragement to cast
themselves upon God, and would therefore act with less inconsistence in the
neglect of him. But nothing sure can be more highly reasonable, than for poor
Creatures, who are nothing without God, and neither have nor can hope for any
thing but from his Bounty, readily, to deliver up all their concerns into his
Hands, with all the thankfullest acknowledgments that may be of his unspeakable
Loving Kindness, in condescending to become their Guardian, to manage their
Affairs for them so much more wisely and to so much better advantage than
themselves could. This therefore is the former Branch of this important Duty, a
steady Dependence upon God to take care of us in all our Streights.

2. A quiet composure of Mind in all our greatest Exigencies, upon
consideration of the Care he takes of us. And could we but so cast our Care
upon God, as not to have it still remaining upon our selves any farther than is
requisite in order to the gracious Designs of his Providence toward us, this
would necessarily dispose us not to take thought for the morrow; to forbear
fretting and tormenting our selves with a fearful expectation of what possibly
may happen hereafter, and yet withal, possibly may not; and would enable as on
the contrary, heartily to rejoice that we are not left destitute, but have an
infinitely good God to order all our Affairs for us. There is no better sign of
a perfect Dependence upon God, than a Mind prepared for all Events, and that
fears not to be miserable whilst in his Hands, though in the midst of outward
Dangers and Distractions; nor any thing that tends more naturally to our
present satisfaction.

This is the most sovereign Antidote against that endless Solicitude which the
worldly-wise Men too often labor under. And whosoever sets himself in good
earnest to make trial of it, besides that he acts like a good Christian, and
takes care for Eternity, he will find himself to have moreover laid the best
Foundation for his own Happiness in this World. Wherein, though he cannot
expect to be wholly freed from Troubles, he will certainly be enabled to bear
them with much the greater alacrity, by reason of the assurance he has, that
God on whom he trusts, knows how to overruled them all to his advantage.

Wherefore it was no unaccountable flight of fancy in the Emperor Antoninus,
but the result of a serious Contemplation of the Instability of all earthly
Enjoyments, that he professes, (...), l. 2.8.
He should not desire to live in the World, were it not for a good God and a
Providence; and the inestimable Benefits that hence arise to Mankind. And in
truth, whosoever weighs with himself the infinite variety of Accidents whereto
this Life is obnoxious, and the need there is of an Almighty Hand to direct
them, as may best serve the Ends of living, will find abundant cause with this
Royal Philosopher, (...). L. 6.8.
to adore and confide in, and rely upon the guidance of that infinite Wisdom,
which incessantly exerts it self for the good of the Creation. And being thus
made sensible of his own Insufficiency, and taught to place his Confidence in
God as a sure Defense against all assaults, it is hardly conceivable, that
whatever Misfortunes should make any lasting impression upon him. For having
learned to betake himself to God for shelter, whenever any thing of this
nature appears, he is soon convinced that he needs no longer perplex himself
about it, because his God having undertaken for him, he knows assuredly it
shall never hurt him. Perhaps he may have it speedily removed; but if not, he
will not suffer himself to be terrified at it, but will rather consider, that
it would never be permitted to lie upon him, but for some just and weighty
Reason, and some way or other for his own benefit.

Thus therefore we are to cast our Care upon God, by doing what we are able for
our own Relief, and then humbly and faithfully depending upon his Providence
for the Event. We must see to moderate and restrain our Desires, and to use the
best means we can for obtaining them, must do what is in our power, must pray
to God for what is above it, and must be sure to serve and obey him, and to
shun as much as in us lies, whatever might withold him from granting our
Requests. And then, but not till then, may we safely comfort our selves, with a
firm persuasion that God will certainly be mindful of us, and of our Affairs;
and that we need not therefore torment our selves upon either of these
accounts. For although he will not be pleased with a fruitless reliance upon
him, a stupid neglect of all our concerns, that he alone may take care of us;
yet if we labor aright to entitle our selves to his Protection; that is to
say, if we curb our unreasonable Desires, and in all respects use the best
means we can for getting those satisfied that are reasonable, we need not doubt
but his Kindness will be extended to us. Let us but acquit our selves well in
these Particulars, and we may thenceforward freely depend upon it, that he will
bestow upon us all that he shall see necessary for us; and therefore that we
shall have no cause to be overwhelmed with Fear or Grief, sorrowing as men
without hope, how hard soever our Condition be, but at our lowest ebb may look
upon it as a mighty Consolation, that we have a most gracious God to concern
himself for us, and on whom we may at any time cast our Care, and rest secure
that he will take Care of us when we do so.

CHAP. II. The Necessity of Casting our Care upon God.
I Come now in the Second place to observe our indispensible Obligation to this
Duty of putting our Trust in God, and casting all our Care upon Him. A Duty
which not only Almighty God may justly expect at our Hands, as we are his
Creatures, and have our whole Subsistence from him, but which he has likewise
frequently and very expressly required in the Holy Scriptures both of the Old
and New Testament.

In the former of which the holy Psalmist professes in multitudes of places,
Psalm. 4.5. and 36.7. and 37.3, 5. and 62.8. and 115.9, etc.
That his own Trust was constantly in the Lord, and earnestly invites others in
like manner Ps. 55.22.
to commit their ways to God, and put their trust in him; Ps. 50.15.
to cast their burden upon him that he may sustain them; Ps. 34.8, 22. and 40.4.
and to call upon him in the day of trouble, that he may deliver them. And
again, for their Encouragement herein, Ps. 31.19.
he promises a Blessedness to the man that makes the Lord his trust. And
again, he Ps. 91.3, etc. 112.7.
admires the great Goodness which God had laid up for them that fear him, and
which he had wrought for them that put their trust in him before the sons of
men; and undertakes for such, that they shall be secure, whether from outward
dangers or from inward fears; and that mercy Ps. 32.10.
shall compass them about, and Ps. 125 ^^
they shall be even as the Mount Sion, which cannot be removed, but abides for
ever.

And his Son Solomon speaks also to the same purpose, exhorting Prove. 3.5.
to trust in the Lord with all our heart, and not to lean to our own
understanding, as if we could carve better for our selves; and assures us that
28.25.
he who puts his trust in the Lord shall be made fat and 29.25.
shall be safe, and 16.3.
shall have his thoughts established.

The Prophet Isaiah likewise excites to a ready dependence upon God, as the
best support in all conditions; as a help that will never fail, Isa. 26.4.
Trust ye in the Lord for ever, for in the Lord Jehovah is everlasting
strength; as a help at hand even in the lowest Estate, 50.10.
Who is he among you that fears the Lord, that obeys the voice of his
servant, that walks in darkness and has no light, let him trust in the name
of the Lord and stay upon his God; as a help in whom whosoever trusted, 57.13.
was to possess the Land and to inherit God's holy Mountain; and lastly as a
help that could secure from all hurt, and even from the fear of it, 12.2.
Behold God is my salvation, I will trust and not be afraid; for the Lord
Jehovah is my strength and my song, he also is become my salvation. And at
another time, 26.3.
Thou will keep him in perfect peace, whose mind is stayed on thee; because he
trusts in thee.

And God himself by the Prophet Jeremiah encourages to a reliance upon his
care, even in behalf of those whose condition is oftentimes the most helpless
in this World, the Widows and the Orphans, whom he condescends to promise that
he will look after, when they have none other to take care of them. Jer. 49.1^.
Leave thy fatherless Children, and I will preserve them alive, and let thy
Widows trust in me. 17.7, 8.
And blessed, says the same Prophet, is the man that trusts in the Lord, and
whose hope the Lord is; For he shall be as a tree planted by the waters, and
that spreads out her Roots by the River; and shall not see when heat comes;
but her Leaf shall be green, and shall not be careful in the year of draught,
neither shall cease from yielding Fruit.

And again it is declared of God, Lam. 3.25.
that he is good unto them that wait for him, to the Soul that seeks him,
that he is Nah. 1.7.
a strong hold in the day of trouble, and that he does not overlook the wants
of them that flee to him in their streights, but knows them that trust in him.

And in the New Testament our Blessed Savior diverse times inculcates the
Necessity of this Duty, and presses it by Arguments obvious and intelligible
enough to the meanest Capacity; inferring from our own Inability to help our
selves, in that we can no more preserve our own Lives, or provide for their
support without God's Blessing, than we S. Matt. 6.27.
can add to the height of our stature; and from the Providence of God
manifested in the production and preservation of v. 26, 28, 29.
Birds and Flowers; and from the reflection it would be upon his Disciples, to
be as Diffident of God's Goodness, v. 32.
as the Gentiles who had never known our Savior or his Gospel; and again from
the wonted affection of natural Parents to their Children, inasmuch as S. Matt.
7.11.
if these being evil know how to give good gifts unto their Children, it is an
easy conclusion that our Father which is in heaven will much more give good
things to them that ask him. And in a word our Blessed Savior accounted it a
sufficient Preservative against a solicitous Care of our selves, c. 6.32.
that our heavenly Father knows what things we have need of. The force of all
which arguings of our Savior is this, That the best way to free Men from their
Anxieties upon the account of this Life's inconveniences, is to remember and
lay seriously to heart, that all our own contrivances and endeavors will never
stand us in stead of themselves, and it is Gods Blessing only that can render
them effectual to our support; and by consequence that it is both our Duty and
our Interest, to be entirely at his disposal, hoping for whatsoever we need
from him alone.

And after our Blessed Savior his Apostles in like manner direct us, 2 Cor.
1.9.
not to trust in our selves, but in God who raises the dead; 1 S. Pet. 4.19.
to commit the keeping of our souls to him in well-doing as unto a faithful
Creator; 1 Timothy 6.17
and not to trust in uncertain Riches, but in the living God, who gives us all
things richly to enjoy; and at other times require us Phil. 4.6.
to be careful for nothing, but in every thing to let our requests be made
known to him, 1 S. Pet. 5.7
to cast all our care upon him, and not to cast away our confidence in him,
which, we are certainly informed in the Epistle to the Hebrews, Heb. 10.35.
has great recompense of reward. Where we have also that gracious and
comfortable Promise (made first to Genesis 28.15.
Jacob in his Journey toward Haran, and afterward more expressly Jos. 1.5.
to Joshua when he was sent to conduct the Israelites over Jordan) applied for
the benefit of Christians in general, and delivered in very emphatical and
significant Terms. Heb. 13.5, 6.
(...), I will never leave thee, nor forsake thee. So that each one may boldly
say, The Lord is my helper, and I will not shall fear what man shall do unto me.

And the rather to engage us to behave our selves accordingly, the Holy
Scriptures present us with numerous instances of God's Saints, and even of our
Blessed Lord himself, who in their several Generations have trusted in God, and
have been comfortably rewarded for it. There we have the Faith of Romans 4.18.
Abraham, who against hope believed in hope, or as it is related more largely
in the Epistle to the Heb. 11.17, 18, 19.
Hebrews, who when he was tried offered up his only-begotten son Isaac in whom
the promised seed was to be called, accounting that God was able to raise him
even from the dead; from whence also he received him in a figure, or for a Type
of the Blessed Jesus, who was to rise again from the Grave, as certainly as
Isaac was saved from off the Wood, whereon he was about to have been slain. We
have the Faith of Moses, v. 24, 25.
who when he was come to years, refused to be called the son of Pharaoh 's
Daughter, and chose rather to suffer affliction with the People of God, than to
enjoy the pleasures of sin for a season. We have the Faith of Job, who after
all his dreadful losses, enough to have utterly overwhelmed one of less
patience and resignation than himself, Job 1.22.
sinned not nor charged God foolishly, and under all the farther sufferings he
endured, behaved himself with that continual observance of Almighty God, and
dependence upon him, that God at length saw fit to look more favorably toward
him, and to turn his sorrows into joy, by c. 42.12.
blessing his latter end more than his beginning. We have the Faith of David,
and the admirable benefit he so frequently boasts himself to have found by
it, throughout his Book of Psalms. And to omit multitudes of others, we have
the Faith of our ever Blessed Redeemer himself, professing even at the time of
his apprehending, that he could easily have obtained of his Father S. Mat. 26.53
more than twelve Legions of Angels for his rescue, but that he chose rather to
undergo the utmost cruelty of his Adversaries in obedience to the Father's
Will; and who readily submitted to die upon the Cross, as knowing that he
should quickly rise again; Phil. 2.9, 10, 11.
whence also he was highly exalted, and had a Name given him which is above
every Name, that at the Name of Jesus every Knee should bow, of things in
Heaven, and things in earth, and things under the Earth, and that every Tongue
should confess that Jesus Christ is Lord, to the Glory of God the Father.

And lastly, We have the Faith of the Apostles and first Disciples, who 2 Cor.
1.10.
in the midst of the greatest Dangers, and even of Death it self were not at
all discouraged from continuing their Trust in God, and by this means had the
happiness to prevail in their design of propagating the Gospel here, against
the united attempts of both Jews and Gentiles to the contrary; besides the
singular Honor to which they have been long since advanced in the other World.
Such signal encouragement have we to the performance of this Duty.

And on the contrary, we never find the Israelites murmuring and distrustful of
God's Providence, but they were presently made to smart for it. That Patience
and Long-suffering which bare with them in other cases, would not protect them
when they set themselves thus ungratefully to affront the Majesty of Heaven.
God might well expect that the numerous Miracles he had condescended to work
for them time after time, should have disposed them constantly to place their
whole Trust in him. And when they took the contrary Course, and instead of
praising and admiring his abundant Goodness toward them, stuck not to reflect
upon him, as if he were not duly mindful of them, they might reasonably
conclude that he would avenge himself upon them for it. 2 King. 7.1, 2.
Thus it fared with that incredulous Lord, who would not believe the Prophet
Elisha foretelling that the next day they should be eased of the Famine, with
which they were so severely streightened in the Siege of Samaria, by the Host
of Benhadad King of Syria; for v. 17.
having the Charge of the Gate committed to him, whilst he was attending there
(as a just Judgment of God upon him for his diffidence) the People trod upon
him in the Gate, and he died, after this manner verifying the Prophet's
prediction, that he should behold the plentiful Provision that would be made
for them, but should not be permitted to taste of it.

And thus it was also with their whole People when they were dissatisfied with
that wonderful Providence of God over them above all other Nations, of which
they had had such ample Experience, and began to exclaim against God, saying,
Ps. 78.19, 20, 21, 22.
Can God furnish a Table in the Wilderness? Behold he smote the stony Rock,
that the Waters gushed out and the Streams over-flowed; can he give Bread also?
can he provide Flesh for his People? This was an affront the Almighty could not
bear with, and therefore was wroth with them for it, so that a Fire was kindled
against Jacob, and anger also came up against Israel: And all for this reason,
because they believed not in God, and trusted not in his Salvation.

The Sum is, that faithfully to put our trust in God for whatever good things
we want, whether for Soul or Body, for our selves or ours, is a Duty practiced
and required by the Prophets of old, and by our Savior and his Apostles since,
together with great Promises annexed and Mercies vouchsafed to it, and with
Threatenings on the contrary, and dreadful Judgments inflicted, when Men have
refused to behave themselves accordingly. And now to apply this Doctrine a
little more particularly, though very briefly.

1. If a plain express Command require our Obedience, here is a Duty positively
enjoined, and not once or twice, or only by the by (though this too were enough
sufficiently to notify our Maker's Will) but diverse times, and upon many
occasions, in multitudes of places in the Old Testament in our Savior's Divine
Sermon on the Mount, and in the Writings of his Apostles. Insomuch that it is
impossible for them who have any reverence for the Authority of Almighty God,
any regard for his undoubted and often repeated Commands, to refuse in any case
to put their Trust in him.

2. If Promises of Blessings annexed to a careful performance of this Duty can
engage us to the Exercise of it, we have these likewise, Promises of
Blessedness in general, and again more particularly of Life, of security from
dangers, of peace and quiet of mind, of success in our designs, and of a
competent supply of the good things of this World. Whence to the necessary
Obligations that lie upon us in point of duty to our Lord, here is added
likewise very good encouragement with respect to our present concerns whereby
the rather to invite us to what is thus earnestly pressed upon us. And this
meditation must therefore be a farther aggravation of their Disobedience, who
can find in their hearts to live in contradiction to it.

3. If the Denunciation, or Execution of Punishments upon any that have been
remarkably distrustful of the Divine Protection may serve to awaken Persons
into a better dependence upon God for the future; the History of the Jewish
Nation in the Old Testament presents us with a large Catalogue of heavy
Judgments inflicted upon that murmuring and discontented People. ^ Cor. 10.11.
Of whom the Apostle tells us that they were recommended as Examples for the
Christian World, to the end that we might take warning by their sufferings, and
observing how they miscarried by not relying duly upon God, might become the
more cautious not to split upon the same Rock, by imitating that provoking
Temper of theirs for which they paid so dear.

4. If the Paterns of holy Men before our Savior's Incarnation, and of the
Apostles and others afterward, and even of our blessed Lord himself, that
unspotted Exemplar of an entire submission to his Father's Will, can persuade
us to the imitation of their unwearied dependence upon God for the gracious
Completion of all his Promises, these are to be met with in great perfection,
and great abundance throughout the word of God; and will therefore mightily
shame us, if we steer another course, to God's dishonor and our own prejudice
at least, perhaps to our utter Ruin. Examples are (as Seneca well observes)
the Longum est iter per praecepta; breve and efficax per exempla. Senec. epist.
60.
shortest and readiest way of Teaching, and many times prevail better than
Arguments; nay against all the soundest and weightiest Arguments to the
contrary. And we must leave our selves intolerably inexcusable, if we are
backward to attend to them there only, where they manifestly challenge, and
justly deserve our most serious Attention.

5. Lastly, If the insinite Glories consequent upon the observance of this, as
well as of the other Duties of our Religion can inflame our Souls with an
ardent Desire after them, we have here another especial Motive to a
conscientious Practice of it. We have a recompense of reward set before us that
can never be sufficiently valued, an exceeding and eternal weight of glory, but
which is never to be attained to without a sure Trust in God's Mercy, and a
steady Dependence upon him to take care of us.

And what now can any possibly imagine should excuse their neglect of a Duty,
whereto all are thus indissolubly obliged and are so many several ways invited?
Who can hope to approve himself before God, whilst he refuses to hearken to his
Voice, and be governed by him? Who can think to be safe in this World, that
wilfully neglects the only means of his security? Or who can promise himself to
be happy hereafter? Nay, who can promise himself not to be ineffably and
everlastingly miserable, that estranges himself from him, in whom alone all his
Happiness must consist, by abusing his immense Goodness, and disobeying his
righteous Laws? The case must inevitably be very deplorable, when People
obstinately decline the only means of their own welfare, and will by no
directions, or persuasions, or commands, or promises, or threatenings, or
mercies, or judgments be prevailed with to apply themselves thereto. And
consider I beseech thee, Reader, if it be recorded in Scripture as an indelible
blot upon Asa King of Judah, that being toward his latter end diseased in his
feet, 2 Chr. 16.12.
he sought not to the Lord for a Cure, but to the Physicians only, how much
greater a reproach will it be to us Christians, and how much deeper Guilt will
it imply in us, who are under stronger and more indispensible Obligations to
trust in God and have far greater encouragement in doing it, to be still
unwilling to depend upon him? This argues a notorious Contempt of his
unspeakable Loving Kindness, and is so palpable a Violation of his Laws, and so
utterly unagreeable to a truly Christian temper of mind, that it is sad to
think how any can possibly allow themselves in it.

It was the weakness of (...) Diog. Laert. in vit. Epicuri, l. 10.

(...) Ibid.

Ut and Sext. Empir. Hypotypos. 3.24. Max. Tyr. dissert. 29. Cic. de not.
Deorum l. 1. and Sen. in Claudii Caesaris (...); and Lactant. de ira c. 4. Cic.
de Divinat. l. 2. Salust. Philos. de Diis and Mundo, c. 9.


Epicurus and his Followers to ascribe all Events to a certain blind Fortune or
Chance, because they believed it too great a burden for God to undertake the
Government of the World. As if the same Almighty Power which at first made all
things, could not at least as easily preserve them all in Being and good Order,
when made; or as if the same boundless Goodness which invited to the greater,
would not invite as prevalently to the less. And no less absurd are they who
believe that God governs the World, and that all things are brought to pass
according to the Discretion of his Infinite Wisdom, and yet will not be induced
to cast their Care upon him. For if those argued unphilosophically, these I am
sure act very unchristianly, very unagreeably to the Principles of their most
holy Religion, and very dangerously in relation to their own interest both
Temporal and Eternal.

And, oh that Men would therefore be entreated seriously to weigh with
themselves, how undutiful they are to Almighty God, whenever they refuse to
put their whole Concerns into his hands, and what deadly Enemies to themselves.
Let us remember what it is to distrust his Care of us, that it is no less than
to call his Veracity into question, and to slight that Infinite Authority by
virtue whereof he commands us to rely upon him in all conditions, and that
unspeakable Goodness which inclines him to take care of us; and that the
inevitable Consequence of such a complicated Wickedness must needs be very
terrible.

Had God but barely offered his free Protection to every one that would humbly
seek to him for it, this one would think should have been charm enough to have
induced all that had any sense of his kindness, or any tolerable regard for
their own Welfare, to betake themselves immediately to the shelter of his
Wings. And they that had neglected it, could have blamed themselves only for
all the Evils which they had foolishly brought upon themselves, by not
thankfully embracing so singular a Favor. But when besides this he has
farther condescended to back all his Proposals of this Nature with his positive
and frequent Commands, and his known Vengeance upon the Contemners of them,
still to keep at distance from him, cannot but be an intolerably heinous
Provocation. It is not to be conceived that he would ever have used these
several Methods of address to us, if he had esteemed it an indifferent matter
whether we rest upon him or not. And if he be heartily concerned for it, the
inference is very easy, that he will be highly incensed against all that do
not readily comply with what he so often requires, and is so much concerned for.

And in God's Name what is it we propound to our selves when we act thus
inconsistently with the Principles we profess to be governed by? What occasion
do we hereby give for a like doleful Lamentation, with that of our Blessed
Savior over Jerusalem, when he would have healed them and they would not be
healed, would have saved them and they would not be saved, and for a like
Vengeance too with that which he denounced against that rebellious City. Our
Lord S. Mat. 23.37, 38.
would often have gathered their Children together, even as a Hen gathers her
Chickens under her Wings, and they would not; therefore says he, Behold your
house is left unto you desolate. And should he proceed to a like doom upon our
selves, whilst we persist in a distrust of his Care of us; should he send all
the temporal Calamities to seize us of which our Nature is capable; and when we
are worn out with these, should he deliver us over to his Eternal vengeance, it
must however be acknowledged that he were righteous in all his doings, and our
destruction were only from our selves.

What wonder if that Vessel run a-ground, or split upon a Rock, whose Mariners
in case of imminent Danger refuse the assistance of a skilful Pilot, and choose
to turn her a-drift, and let her steer they know not how? Yet how much less
hope of safety is there for those that prefer their own vain Imaginations
before the Infinite Wisdom of Almighty God, taking upon them to provide for
themselves, rather than wait till he shall be pleased to do it for them? For
such add direct Rebellion to their Indiscretion, not only undervaluing God's
abundant readiness to take care of them, but provoking him also by their wilful
Breach of his known Commands, to send forth Storms and Tempests to overwhelm
them. They highly offend God, and wrong themselves at present, and (to complete
their Folly) they treasure up to themselves wrath against the day of wrath, and
the revelation of the righteous Judgment of God. Which being the dismal, yet
certain Consequence of the neglect of this Duty, it is strange there should be
such need of exhorting to observe it. Nor can any thing but a want of
consideration withold Persons from the constant Practice of it, since without
it they can neither act like Christians, nor show themselves wise for this or
for the other World.

CHAP. III. The Reasonableness of Casting our Care upon God.
THE third thing I propounded was to enforce the Practice of this so necessary
a Duty, from the Assurance we have of God's continual Care of us; that
observing what Regard he has for us, what a good Providence he exercises over
us, and how willing he is to multiply his Benefits upon us, we may hence also
be invited to cast all our Care upon him. And this I shall endeavor to do from
these three following Considerations.

1. Of the Providence of God in general, and the Care he takes of all his
Creatures. 2. Of the peculiar Offers of Protection that are made in Scripture
to the Righteous. 3. Of the Experience we have had of his Goodness hitherto,
and the Reason we therefore have still to depend upon him
SECT. I.
First, OF the Providence of God in general, and the Care he takes of all his
Creatures. Concerning which the Holy Scriptures teach us that God Ps. 119.68.
is good and delights in doing good, that 147.5.
great is our Lord and great is his Power, and his Wisdom is infinite, Isa.
40.28.
neither is there any searching of his understanding, and consequently that he
knows how to maintain and to govern the World and all things therein; that as
He at first Jer. 10.12.
made the Earth by his Power, established the World by his Wisdom, and
stretched out the Heavens by his Discretion; so he still Heb. 1.3.
upholds all things by the word of his Power, and Job 12.10.
has in his hand the soul of every living thing, and the breath of all
mankind; so that nothing can ever happen to any of us without his Order, or at
least his Permission.

All Creatures of whatever sort are his, he made them, and he is their true
Proprietor, and what then can be more natural than for his kindness to be
extended to them? He is the Author of all things, as Minutius Felix Octav. p.
317, 318.
speaks, and he observes all things, nor can ought be concealed from him, for
he is in the darkness, and in our thoughts as in a second darkness; insomuch
that we not only live under him, but may in a manner be said to live together
with him. Whatever good things any partake of, they are wholly owing to the
Bounty of this S Ja. 1.17.
Father of Lights, from whom comes every good and every perfect gift, and Omne
enim bonum nostrum aut ipse est, aut ab ipso. B. August. de Doctrina
Christiana. l. 1. c. 31.
without whose benign Influence there is no subsisting one Moment. He is every
where present, in the Heavens, the Earth, the Seas, the Air, or whatsoever part
of the World, sees all things whether animate or inanimate, takes notice of
what relation and dependence one of them has upon another, beholds the whole
Order of second Causes, and wisely overrules them all that they may serve to
the best purposes. (...). Clem. Alex. s^r. l. 4. p 489.
His goodness diffuses it self through all the Corrers of the Universe, and by
his unwearied Providence and Protection all kinds of Beings are sustained,
there being nothing in all the World too great to need his Care, nor any thing
so little that he does not think fit to take care of it.

Particularly the excellent Beauty, admirable Order, and singular Usefulness of
the Heavenly Bodies loudly proclaim a stupendous Hand of Providence, preserving
that Harmony amongst them, and those regular Motions and Vicissitudes, wherein
we see them. The contemplation whereof deeply affected the Holy Psalmist, and
made him break forth into that Divine Goodness; Ps. 19.1, 2, 3.
The Heavens declare the Glory of God, and the Firmament shows his handy
Work. Day unto day utters Speech, and Night unto night shows knowledge.
There is no speech nor language where their Voice is not heard. There is no
place even in the remotest parts of the World, where these glorious Tokens of
his incessant Care do not abundantly manifest themselves. Job 9.9, 10.
He makes Arcturus, Orion, and the Pleiades, and the Chambers of the South;
and does great things past finding out, yea, and wonders without Number.

Or if we change the Scene and look down upon this lower World, this
Terraqueous Globe, the Scriptures abound with instances of his Care over it in
diverse Respects. They tell us that Ps. 104.24.
the Earth is full of his Riches, 1 Samuel 2.8.
that the Pillars of it are the Lords, and he at first set the World upon them,
and that he yet continues Ps. 75.3.
to bear them up, least it together with all its Inhabitants should be
dissolved, that Ps. 104.9.
he prescribes the Waters of the Sea their bounds, and Psalm. 65.9, 10, 11.
sends refreshing showers upon the Earth making it very fruitful, that it is by
his Order Job 28 25.
the winds blow, and Ps. 107 25.
the storms arise, Ps. 77.18.
the lightnings break forth, and the thunders roar so terribly, that Psalm. 18.7.
the Earth trembles at any time, and the Foundations of the Hills are moved,
and shaken; and again, that he takes care of Ps. 104.11.
the wild Asses, v. 18.
the wild Goats, and the Coneys, v. 21.
the young Lions, 1 Cor. 9.9.
the Oxen, Ps. 29.9.
the Hinds, Ps. 50.11.
and every Beast of the Field, Ps. 104.20.
and of the Forest, S. Matt. 6.28.
most curiously adorns the Flowers, v. 26.
feeds, Ps. 104.12, 17.
and provides Nets for the Birds, Ps. 104 16.
replenishes the Trees with Sap, v. 25, 27.
sustains the Fishes, Ps. 145.16.
opens his Hands and satisfies the Desire of every living thing, and S. Matt.
10.29.
suffers not a Sparrow to fall to the Ground without his observation; and to
conclude, Ps. 145.9.
the Lord is good unto all, and his tender mercies are over, not this or that
sort of Creature, or in this or that part of the Earth, or at one time and not
at another, but absolutely and indesinitely over, all his Works.

But then as Mankind are more nearly related to himself, being made after his
likeness, and designed for the perpetual enjoyment of his Divine Presence, it
is very reasonable to suppose, that they should have a particular Interest in
his Care. And thus much therefore our Blessed Savior (as I have already hinted
in part) teaches in his Sermon upon the Mount, dissuading from an eager
solicitude for the things of this Life, as from the Experience we have had of
God's Goodness to our selves, in giving us our Beings, so likewise from the
regard he has for the Birds, and other meaner parts of the Creation. S. Matt.
6.25, etc.
Take no thought for your life, says our Savior, what ye shall eat, or what
ye shall drink, or for the Body, what ye shall put on; for these following
Reasons: 1. Because the Life is more than Meat, and the Body than Raiment.
Whereby is intimated, that God who has already vouchsafed us the better, will
not refuse us the less; having given us life, he will not deny us those things
which are required for its support. He spoke the word, and we were made; he
commanded, and we were created; and dare any say, that he will not condescend
to order a due provision for those to whom he has thus bountifully given a
Being? It is easy to believe, that his intent in producing us was not that we
might pine away with insuperable hunger, or parch with insupportable thirst, or
that we might starve for want of something to shelter us from the cold; and
that therefore he will not let us languish under any of these Inconveniences
longer than he sees very good reason for it. Having bestowed upon us Life,
which is a much greater blessing than Meat for it, and a Body which is far more
valuable than the Raiment we put upon it, and the production whereof was a far
greater work of his Omnipotence than a supply of these things is, there is no
cause to fear that these shall not also be added to those other in a due
proportion. 2. Because he takes care of the Birds to give them their Meat in
due season. For so it follows, Behold the fowls of the air, they sow not,
neither do they reap, nor gather into barns, yet your heavenly Father feeds
them; are ye not much better than they? As much as to say, Since you are
certainly of far more account with God than the Fowls, and yet he makes such
plentiful provision for them, your own Reason will enform you, that he will
much less neglect your selves. 3. Because his Providence extends it self to the
Flowers of the Field as well as to the Birds, for these also are delicately
clothed by him. Consider the Lilies of the Field how they grow, they toil not,
neither do they spin; and yet I say unto you, that even Solomon in all his
glory was not arrayed like one of these. Wherefore, if God so cloth the Grass
of the Field, which to day is, and to morrow is cast into the Oven, shall be
not much more cloth yeu, O ye of little faith. Where our Savior still
proceeds, a fortiori, as in the former case, only that he does it with more
advantage, arguing, that the Wisdom and Goodness of God manifested in this
lower rank of Creatures ought to convince every one, what reason there is to
conclude, that he will much rather multiply his Blessings upon Mankind, whom he
has created of a nobler Race, and to whom he has all along professed much
greater kindness. And indeed it is not conceiveable, that he will take care,
not only of the Beasts, but of the Birds too, and even of those little
inconsiderable Birds, the Sparrows (as I noted before) that (...). D. Chrysostom.
in loc.
not one of them falls to the ground, or is ensnared and perishes without his
Providence; and of the Flowers to array them in such gorgeous Attire, and that
he will yet be regardless of Man, the masterpiece of this lower World. It is
not to be thought that he will have a constant respect to the Creatures, that
were made for our sake, and Psalm. 8.6.
put in subjection under our feet, and will neglect us for whose sake they were
made, and to whom they were thus subjected. The consideration of a general
Providence sustaining these inferior Beings is on the contrary, a powerful
Argument for engaging Men to hope for a greater Interest in his care, because
of the nearer relation they bear to him.


And what our Savior here proves by a very rational method of deduction, the
holy Scriptures at other times expressly affirm, declaring, That 1 Timothy 6.17.
God gives us all things richly to enjoy, Act. 17.25.
gives us life and breath, and all things; S. Ja. 1.5.
gives to all men liberally, and upbraideth not; that is, that he gives all
necessary things, and this not with a sparing Hand, but bountifully, richly,
and liberally, and not to some select number of Favorites only, but to all
men, of whatsoever Age, Language, Nation, or Religion, that it is in him, or by
his assistance, that Act 17.28.
we live, move, and have our being; and again, That if S. Matt. 7.11.
we being evil, know how to give good gifts unto our Children, our Father which
is in Heaven will much more give good things to them that ask him: And again,
That he Job 5.11.
sets up those that be low, and those that monrn he exalts to safety. v.
18.
He makes sore and binds up, he wounds, and his hands make whole. v. 20.
In famine he redeemeth from death, and in war from the power of the sword.

Sometimes he represents himself Exodus 15.3.
as a man of war, and the Lord of hosts is his name; and again, Psalm. 46.9.
he makes wars to cease unto the ends of the earth; he breaks the bow and
cutteth the spear in sunder, and burns the chariot in the fire. 1 Samuel 2.6.
He kills and makes alive; brings down to the grave and brings back.
Psalm. 146.7, 8, 9. 107.9. and 68.5.
He executes judgment for the oppressed, suiting his Relief to theirs, as he
does also to other Men's Necessities. If People be hungry, he gives them Food;
if Prisoners, he loses them from their Confinement; if blind, it is he that
opens their Eyes; if bowed down, he is ready to raise them up; nor is he
wanting to preserve the Stranger, or to help the Fatherless and Widows in their
streights.

When any are in the wost disconsolate condition, to all outward appearance,
and are neither able to help themselves, nor have any Friend that will stand by
them, and assist them, they have yet this comfort left, that the God of Heaven
sees their Distress, and hears the Sighs and Groans which they send forth in
the anguish of their Souls, and when Psalm. 27.10.
Father and Mother forsake them, and all other hope fails, he will take them
up, and will provide for them.

Neither are they only matters of greater concernment that he attends to, as
Balbus in Magna Dii curant, parva negligunt. De not Deor. l. 2. c. 66.
Tully supposes of the Heathen Deities, but those likewise of least importance,
even the very S. Matt. 10.30.
Hairs of our Head, all which, our blessed Savior assures us, are numbered by
him. There is nothing about us that escapes his notice, nothing in all our
Affairs that he is not privy to, or wherein we may not hope for his Direction
or Assistance, if we be duly qualified for it.

And now the most proper and genuine Conclusion from hence is, That if the
Almighty be graciously pleased to take such abundant Care of us, there can be
no reason for us to be discontented or dejected under any Occurrences. Whilst
he condescends to be our Psalm. 23.1.
Shepherd, we need not fear, that he will suffer us to want any thing whereof
we truly stand in need. And this same Consideration therefore the Apostle St.
Peter urges for inviting to Ep. 5.7.
cast our care upon God, in all our troubles or dangers.

Casting all your care upon him, says the Apostle, your care of whatsoever
nature, or upon whatsoever account, even all your care, for he cares for you.
As if the Apostle should have said, In doing this you don't deceive your
selves, by putting your trust in one who either cannot, or will not help you;
for you only fly to him, who is far better to all that humbly, dutifully, and
faithfully depend upon him, than they can either deserve or desire; who will
stand by you and provide for you when all other helps fail, for he cares for
you.

And very good encouragement it is to put our trust in God under our heaviest
Calamities, that we can assure our selves that he takes notice of it whenever
we do so. How should it transport us to reflect, that our Dependence is not
upon the Arm of Flesh, nor any of those feeble helps, which are too apt to
deceive us in our greatest Exigencies, but upon the Lord God of Hosts, who was,
and is, and is to come. When Clouds gather, and the Sky is darkened, and there
is no appearance of safety from any other Hand, how may we bless our selves to
think, that we have a Refuge that never fails, a God that will never forsake us
in our Distress; and that seeing he undertakes for us, we need fear no evil? It
cannot but administer solid Consolation to every pious and good Christian to
remember, that all his severest Visitations are not without the Providence of
him who is infinitely wiser than all Mankind, knowing our wants much better
than our selves do; and whose ineffable Goodness will certainly incline him to
choose and act for us much better than our selves could; who observes our Frame
and Constitution, and the Circumstances wherein we are set, and orders all his
Dispensations with that admirable Wisdom and Kindness, that when they seem to
us most adverse, we may yet find them very advantageous, unless our selves
prevent it by our mis-improvement of them.

He is not with us as formerly with the Jews, 1 Samuel 8.7. (...). Jos. Antiq. l.
4. c. 8. and alibi. Vid. and Spenc. de legibus Hebr. p. 202. etc.
whose Temporal Prince he was, and Exodus 40.38. Numb. 9.15. Deuteronomy. 31.15. and
alibi.
to whom he vouchsafed his Shecinah, or especial Presence, with whom he
conversed in a very particular manner by the Ministry of Moses, and of other
Prophets immediately inspired, and to whom he spoke besides sometimes 1 Samuel
28.6. Vid. etiam Spenc. de legibus Heb. p. 853, etc. and Cun. de rep. Hebr. l.
c. 2. Medes Diatrib. p. 2. in Deuteronomy. 33.8. and D. Lightfoot's 2d. vol. p. 1067,
and. 68.
by Vrim and Thummim, and sometimes again Talm. Bab. in tit. Sanedrim, c. 1.
fol. 11. Talm. Hieros. in tit. Berachoth fol. 3. More Nevoch. l. 2. c. 43.
(they would persuade us) by the Bathcol, that Daughter of a Voice, which they
tell us, was heard amongst them, after the cessation of their other Prophecies,
which ended in Malachi; but yet he never denies us the happiness of that
general Providence which he exercises over all the Sons of Men; and in the
exercise whereof he is so tenderly careful of us, that he appoints us nothing
but what is best for us, and what we should be sure to wish for our selves, if
we did but rightly understand our own case.

It is true, he many times thinks fit to deny us what we most earnestly beg of
him; and on the other hand, makes us very uneasy under the Afflictions he lays
upon us; but then it is as true, that Male usurus eo quod vult accipere, Deo
potius miserante non accipit. D. August. in Joan. Tract. 73.
there is no cause for us to be dissatisfied at these his Determinations
concerning us. And the reason is plain, because our dislike of them proceeds
only from our own short-sightedness, who are not able to distinguish what is
best for us, and hence are oftentimes grieved at those events which Experience
afterward shows to have been great kindnesses to us, and possibly might have
been much greater, if we had minded to make a right use of them. We are at best
but poor empty Beings, that plot indeed and contrive as if we were very wife,
but if Omnibus in terris quae sunt a Gadibus usque
Auroram and Gangem pauci dignoscere possunt.
Vera bona, atque illis multum diversa remota
Erroris nebula. Quid enim ratione timemus
Aut cupimus.
Juv. Sat. 10. -- Nocitura toga, notitura petuntur Militia. Ibid.
Almighty God should once deliver us up to our own management we should soon
ruin our selves by our own desires. We draw Schemes, and propound to our
selves measures of Action, and then conclude, we have done very understandingly
herein, and presently some unforeseen cross accident or other intervening,
overthrows the whole frame of our imaginary Felicity, and shows us what
miserable wretched Creatures we should be, should but God think fit to leave us
a while to our selves. (...)
(...).
Theogn.
Whereas he knows perfectly what state or condition is properest for us which
undertakings are like to succeed, and which not; what alterations the
Government of the World requires in order to the accomplishment of his wise
Designs and to what changes we must therefore be liable according to the
ordinary course of things; and hence must unquestionably see how to chose for
us much better than we could for our selves. And when he discerns us to stand
in need of Correction if he condescend to use us accordingly, that there is yet
no reason to complain of such his proceedings I shall endeavor to evince by
two familiar Instances; the one of a Father, and the other of a Surgeon; the
former of which I have from Scripture, the other from S. Augustine, S.
Chrysostom, and others, and they are both very pat and pertinent to my purpose.

1. Wherefore let me ask in the first place, Would any one complain of a tender
loving Father, that (though unwilling to chastise his dear Children) he does it
however when he sees it necessary, and that it cannot be avoided without
injuring them by his Lenity? would this be thought to argue a want of Kindness
in him, or would any one blame him for it? It is plain the Wife-man was of
another mind, when he affirmed, That Prove. 3.12.
whom the Lord loves he corrects, even as a Father the Son in whom he
delights; and again, That 13.4.
he who spares the Rod hates his Son, but he that loves him, chasteneth him
betimes. To the same effect likewise speaks Eliphaz the Temanite, pronouncing a
blessedness to the person whom the Almighty thus punishes, in order to his
recovery from any kind of Wickedness. Job 5.17.
Behold, happy is the Man whom God corrects, therefore despise not thou the
chastening of the Almighty. As also does the Author of the Epistle to the
Hebrews, Heb. 12.5, 6, 7.
My Son, despise not thou the chastening of the Lord, nor faint when thou art
rebuked of him. For whom the Lord loves he chasteneth, and scourges every Son
whom he receives. If ye endure chastening God deals with you as with Sons,
for what Son is he whom the Father chasteneth not?

A natural Parent holds himself obliged to restrain and curb his Children, when
they grow extravagant and unruly; and he does it accordingly, not out of any
aversion to them, or from an unconcernedness for their welfare, but just the
contrary, because he accounts of this as the properest expedient for reclaiming
them, and consequently, the greatest kindness he can do them. Cum videris bonos
viros, acceptosque Diis laborare, sudare, per arduum ascendere, malos autem
lascivire and voluptatibus fluere; cogita filiorum nos modestia delectari,
vernularum licentia; illos disciplina strictioricontineri, horum ali audaciam.
Idem tibi de Deo liqueat, bonum virum in deliciis non habet: experitur,
indurat, sibi illum praeparat. Senec. de Providentia, c. 1.

Imo vero cum vexamur ac premimur, tum maxim gratias agimus indulgentissio
Patri: quod corruptelam nostram non patitur longius procedere, sed plagis ac
verberibus emendat, ex quo intelligimus nos esse Deo curae; quoniam cum
peecamus irascitur. Lactant. Instit. l. 5. c. 23.


And if Almighty God condescend to take the same course where he sees it
requisite, this should not only teach us submission to his Divine Will, but
should moreover excite our unfeigned gratitude to him for the use of so
effectual a method in order to our Reformation and Salvation. Which, how
unagreeable soever it may seem to flesh and blood, we shall have great cause to
bless him for, if it but serve in any measure to the promoting this gracious
design.

2. The other Instance I mentioned is of a Surgeon, who, if he be faithful
in his Employment, will search a Sore to the quick, whereby to detect any
latent Ulcer, that might otherwise obstruct the efficacy of his Applications,
and the benefit that is expected from them. As also at other times he lances,
scarifies, lays on Corrosives, or proceeds to Excision, when all other means
appear incompetent, and be the Man never so uneasy under these necessary
Tortures, and make never such complaint of them, he is not discouraged at it;
for Sub medicamento positus ureris, fecaris, clamas: non audit medicus ad
voluntatem, sed audit ad sanitatem. D. August. in Ps. 21. Expos. 2. Plorat
secandus, and secatur; plorat urendus and uritur. Non est illa crudelitas,
absit ut saevitia medici dicatur. Saevit in vulnus ut homo sanetur, quasi
vulnus palpetur, homo perditur. Id. de verbis Domini Sermon. 15. (...), etc. D.
Chrysoft. in Ps. 148. v. 10. Si malum morbi fortius creverit, majora remedia
quaeruntur, and pro salute hominis solicita fortius se medicina opponit; asperi
cibi potus ingeruntur amari. Et si convaluerit malum, and ignis abhibetur and
ferrum. Jul. Firmic. de err. gent. p. 34. (...). Diog. Laert. in vita Platonis,
p. 89.
he hearkens not to the unreasonable Desires of his Patient, but to his
Condition, and the Means that are serviceable in order to his recovery. It is
not his province to attend to the Entreaties of one that would venture the
ruining himself to avoid a present smart; but to consider how his health may be
best restored, and to omit nothing that he knows necessary to this end. And his
doing this is so far from being a fault in him, or an instance of Inhumanity,
or any unkindness, that it is the truest sign of his Fidelity, and will
deservedly gain him the most thanks at last. Which plainly testifies the
intolerable folly and wickedness of imagining Almighty God to neglect us upon
the account of those seasonable wants, or pains, or losses, or disappointments,
which should teach us rather to observe and weigh with our selves how willing
he is to promote our happiness, how truly he consults our Interest, and orders
his Dispensations accordingly, it being many times very apparently no less an
instance of his Goodness Sunt quaedam noscitura impetrantibus, quae non dare,
sed negare beneficium est. Senec. de benef. l. 2. c. 16.
to deny us our Requests, than it is at other times to grant them.

In a word, God is infinitely merciful and gracious, and sometimes treats us as
we desire; and when he does not so, nay when he most directly contradicts our
own desires, he yet deals by us as we would desire, if we were but wife enough.

Which Observation, if rightly considered and applied, would not only silence
all Murmurings and Complaints at the Divine Dispensations, but would dispose us
all in our worst estate, readily to fly to God and put our trust in his Aid.
How would it cause (to use the words of Thophilus Antiochenus, no less
applicable to our present purpose than to his own how would it cause that
(...). Ad Autol. l. 1.
the Husbandman should not more willingly commit his Seed to the Ground, or the
Mariner commit himself to his Ship and his Pilot, or the Sick commit himself to
the care of his Physician, or he that is to learn an Art or Trade, commit
himself to his Teacher, than each one of us would commit himself to his God,
having had so many sure tokens of his kindness to and care over him? It would
be a mighty encouragement to rely upon God at all times, and in all places, and
for all kinds of blessings, whether Spiritual or Temporal, National or
Personal, for our selves or ours.

The truth is, this one single Consideration of Providence in general, that God
governs the World, and seeing he does not overlook the Wants of any the meanest
of his Creatures, but is ready to make a due provision for them, he cannot
possibly be supposed to be regardless of Mankind, who have a more peculiar
Relation to himself; this one Consideration, I say, if rightly attended to,
were a cogent Argument for engaging us to cast our Care upon him in all Cases,
with a confident Expectation of his Protection, even under our most pressing
Fears or Sufferings.

SECT. II.
II. HOwever, for our greater encouragement herein, I proceed further to
consider, Secondly, The peculiar offers of Mercy and Protection that are made
in Scripture to the Righteous, whereby they have an especial assurance given
them, that the Almighty will watch over them for good, and will never suffer
them to be moved. For though Mankind in general are invited to depend
continually upon him, from that good Providence, which he daily exercises over
the several parts of the World, they that have heartily labored to serve and
honor him have far greater reason to do it, as because of the love he bears to
them that fear him, so likewise upon the account of the many gracious Promises
he has been pleased to make to such, that he will not permit them to be
overwhelmed by any Troubles or Calamities, but will either keep them all off
from them, or will enable them to bear up against those that shall befall them.
His unspeakable bowels of Compassion will provoke him to hearken to the Cries
of any who are entirely devoted to his service, and how deaf soever he may be
to others who have less pretense to his Favor, these shall not be rejected by
him. If they with Faith and Humility display their wants before him, and
whenever they find themselves in streights, if they presently make their
applications to him, hoping for safety from him alone, he has declared, Psalm.
50.15. S. Ja. 5.16. 1 S Jo. 5.14, 15.
That their Prayers shall not return without effect, but shall find him readily
disposed to attend to them.

So that Storms may arise, and Dangers threaten them, Fears may surprise,
Losses and other Disasters may alarm them; yet none of these shall be able to
make them miserable; for they are in the hands of a most affectionate Father,
who is heartily desirous of their welfare, and has accordingly declared for
their comfort, That he will in a particular manner take care of them, and will
be with them in their Necessities, sometimes to save them from Dangers, and at
others both to uphold them under, and bring them out of any Affliction he sees
fit to lay upon them.

And though (...). Arr. Epictet. l. 2. c. 5. (...), etc. Clem. Alex. Str. l. 4.
whilst we remain in this present state, and carry mortal Bodies about us, and
have need of temporal good things for our support, and converse with a
treacherous and ill-natured World, it is not to be expected but that even the
very best of Men will be liable to Sickness and Diseases, Losses and
Disappointments, and the rest of those Troubles, to which (as Eliphaz the
Temanite professes, and each one's daily Experience shows) Job 5.7.
Man is as naturally born as the Sparks fly upward, this hinders not but that
the good Man's share of these Troubles may be considerably less than he would
otherwise have met with; and that when they do come, they may both be the more
tolerable, and he may the easier get rid of them.

And indeed it is very reasonable to suppose, that he who is so munificent as
to bestow continual Blessings though where the Severities of his Wrath are
justly due, and who many times gives a plentiful portion in this World, to such
who shall have eternal Vengeance allotted them in the World to come, will much
rather watch over his own Children, to comfort and encourage them in the ways
of Holiness, and so convince them from their observation, that even in relation
to this present life, it is not in vain to serve the Lord. Such is the
Affection he bears to them that fear him, that he cannot but find himself
inclined to take pity upon them, when in the anguish of their Souls they make
their Complaints to him. And whereas there are but three ways wherein they are
capable of relief against Sufferings and Afflictions, either by Preservation
from them, or support under them, or Deliverance out of them, he has therefore
given his word, that he will be helpful to them in each of these respects, that
either his Judgments shall not overtake them; or if they do, they shall neither
prevail against them, nor continue longer upon them, than may make for his
Glory and their own Advantage, either in this or in the other World; as I come
now to prove.

1. And that he will be mindful of the Righteous to protect them from Evils,
may be collected, amongst many other passages in Scripture, from those words of
the Psalmist, Ps. 41.1, 2.
Blessed is he that considers the poor and needy, the Lord will deliver him
in the time of trouble. The Lord will preserve him and keep him alive, and he
shall be blessed upon earth, and thou will not deliver him into the will of his
Enemies. Ps. 91.3, etc.
And those other, Surely he shall deliver thee from the Snare of the Fowler,
and from the noisome Pestilence; he shall cover thee with his Feathers, and
under his Wing shall thou trust, his Truth shall be thy Shield and Buckler.
Thou shall not be afraid, for the terror by Night, nor for the arrow that
flies by Day. A thousand shall fall at thy side, and ten thousand at thy right
hand, but it shall not come nigh thee. Only with thine Eyes shall thou behold
and see the Reward of the Ungodly. Together with that profession of the
Wiseman, who having been speaking of Wisdom, that is, of the fear of God, and
having declared what shall be the deplorable condition of those that regard her
not, concludes with the great benefit of attending to her Counsel, Prove. 1.33.
Whosoever hearkeneth unto me shall dwell safely, and shall be quiet from fear of
evil. Whereby he gives us to understand, that such shall be still, and possess
what they have in peace, when the wicked who are out of God's Favor come to
ruin. Nay, they shall not so much as be disturbed with the fear of Mischief,
but may rest secure of a watchful Providence over them for their good, how many
soever may be the Miseries of the Ungodly. Ephesians. 3.13.
And who is he, says St. Peter, that will harm you, if ye be followers of that
which is good? As much as to say, You need not fear that any will do it, for
whilst you faithfully discharge your duty in pursuing that which is good, you
may reasonably expect to be preserved (as from other evils, so particularly)
from the malice of your most outrageous Adversaries, that they shall either be
content to let you live in quiet, or else, that all their mischievous Designs
against you shall prove abortive. This is the first sort of Security that God
has promised to the Righteous, That he will preserve them from Evils.

2. He will support them under any Evils that befall them, so as that if they
cannot escape Afflictions, they may however be enabled to endure them, with so
little concernment, and with that Courage and Alacrity, that they may appear to
be powerfully armed against them. Agreeably to this sense the holy Psalmist
proclaims, that he had innumerable perplexing Thoughts and anxious Cares, that
had extremely discomposed him, yet he no sooner reflected upon the Divine
Attributes, and began to taste the Comforts that hence arise to Mankind, but
they all vanished, and he suddenly felt an alteration in his Soul, and his
dejected Spirits were presently revived. Ps. 94.19.
In the multitude of my thoughts within me, thy Comforts have refreshed my
soul. But in the 37th Psalm v. 33, 34.
he is more express, saying, The steps of a good man are ordered by the Lord,
and he delights in his way. Though he fall he shall not be utterly cast down,
for the Lord upholdeth him with his hand. Now God upholds and supports Men
under Sufferings, partly by the gracious Promises that are to be met with in
Scripture for their Consolation, both of his Presence with them in this World,
and of those incomparable Glories for which they are designed in a future
state; and farther, by the assistance of his holy Spirit, quickening their
Graces, and increasing their Strength, and hereby preparing them to bear up
cheerfully in times of Affliction. Which he did to a very extraordinary degree
in the Apostles and first Disciples of our Lord, inspiring them with that
wonderful Magnanimity and Constancy amidst their heaviest pressures, that when
they were troubled on every side, S. Paul enforms us, 2 Cor. 4.8, 9.
That they were not yet distressed, though they were perplexed, yet not in
despair; they were persecuted, but not forsaken, were cast down, but not
destroyed. And at other times we read how they rejoiced, that they Act. 5.45.
were accounted worthy to suffer for our Savior's name, and were so little
afraid of Persecutions, and Death it self, that they could willingly undergo
the utmost Cruelties rather than either renounce or dishonor the holy Religion
they were sent forth to propagate. And although the numerous difficulties
whereto they were appointed, required a much greater measure of the Divine
Assistance than is usually to be hoped for, yet need we not doubt of a
proportionable support, if we but seriously labor after it. For what S. Paul
speaks to the Philippians is of more general influence, and concerned not the
first Disciples only, but all Christians without distinction, requiring the
same Duty of all according to their Circumstances, and propounding the same
Encouragement to all according to their needs. Phil. 4.6.
Be careful, says the Apostle, for nothing, but in every thing by Prayers and
Supplications with Thanksgivings, let your requests be made known unto God, and
then the peace of God which passes all understanding, shall keep your Hearts
and Minds in Christ Jesus.

As likewise what the same Apostle says at another time, if rightly applied,
may be a means of no small comfort to all afflicted Christians, though in an
especial manner to any who are called to suffer for God and his Cause. 2 Cor.
12.9.
My Grace is sufficient for thee, for my strength is made perfect in weakness.
Especially, if to this be added another Assertion of the same Apostle,
professing, that 1 Cor. 10.13.
God is faithful, who will not suffer you to be tempted above that ye are able,
but will with the temptation also make a way to escape, that we may be able to
bear it. Which brings me to the other Particular implied in God's Promises of
Protection to the Righteous, that

3. He will deliver them from those Evils, which possibly may for the present
lie heavy upon them. He may permit them for a while to labor under Pressures
and Disturbances, for the trial of their Faith, or the exercise of their
Patience, or the mortification of their Lusts, or the quickening their
Devotions, or to teach them how to value his Mercies when they have them, or to
humble them under a sense of their own Weakness and Insufficiency, or to wean
their Affections from this Life and its Enjoyments, and put them upon a
diligent preparation for a better, or for whatsoever other wise Purpose and
Design (as I shall show Chap. 4. Sect. 2.
hereafter) but when he does it, they have this for their encouragement, that
he will set them again at ease, so soon as his End is obtained, and a
Deliverance will be a real Kindness to them. For not only the Apostle S Peter
teaches, that 2 S Pet. 2.9.
the Lord knows how to deliver the godly out of temptation, but God Almighty
himself, by the Mouth of the Psalmist invites to address our selves to him for
relief from all our Sorrows, with hopes of a gracious answer from him. Ps.
50.15.
Call upon me in the day of trouble, I will deliver thee, and thou shall
glorify me.

And the same Psalmist, upon another occasion, proclaims from his own
Experience, what singular Interest he had observed good Men to have in the
Divine Protection. Ps. 34.17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22.
The Righteous cry, and the Lord hears, and delivers them out of all their
troubles. The Lord is nigh unto them that are of a broken heart, and will save
such as be of a contrite spirit. Many are the afflictions of the Righteous, but
the Lord delivers him out of all. He keeps all his bones, not one of them
is broken. Evil shall slay the wicked, and they that hate the Righteous shall
be desolate. The Lord redeemeth the Soul of his Servants, and none of them that
trust in him shall be desolate. Here is a plain Declaration of God's concern
for those that faithfully cast their Care upon him, together with a full and
free Promise of his Protection, that he is and will be their Keeper, and they
shall not be destitute of help, be the troubles that encompass them never so
many.

And thus I have instanced in some few of those many Texts of Scripture, which
might have been urged, to prove, That God will have an especial regard to them
that love, and fear, and put their trust in him, and will in his wise
Providence so overruled natural Causes and Events, as Romans 8.28.
that all things shall be made to work together for their good.

I grant, that these forementioned, or other the like Expressions in Scripture,
do not import, that good Men are to meet with no Troubles or Afflictions,
whilst they remain in this World, and partake of the same nature with other
Men, and according to the ordinary course of things are in some respects, and
especially at some times more exposed to them than others, and have ever and
anon great need of them. For to affirm this, were not only to contradict each
one's daily Experience, and all those Promises of support under Sufferings,
which plainly suppose the best of Men liable to stand in need of this Support,
and consequently obnoxious to those Sufferings which call for it; but besides,
it were to reflect upon Almighty God, as if he had not that regard for our
welfare, which he has declared himself to have. And we are not therefore to
persuade our selves, that he will never permit his faithful Servants to endure
any kind of Afflictions, though never so necessary and expedient; but only that
he will consider their condition, and will not let them groan under more and
heavier Calamities than he knows to be useful for them. For to keep them from
necessary Sufferings, is not a favor to them, but may prove a very great
diskindness, and cannot therefore be the meaning of those many professions
which he makes from time to time, of this willingness to take care of them Thus
much then, and no more, we may conclude from these and the like Declarations of
God's concern for them that conscientiously serve and depend upon him, that he
will take continual care of them, and will give them as much ease and quiet as
is agreeable to their Circumstances, as much ease from Sufferings, and as much
quiet under them.

Divitiae quippe atque fastigia dignitatum, caeteraque hujusmodi quibus se
foelices esse putant mortales verae illius foelicitatis expertes, quid afferunt
consolationis, cum sit eis non indigere quam eminere praestantius? D. August.
Ep. 121. c. 2.
And what great matter is it, whether of these two be our portion? whether we be
wholly kept from Sufferings, or be enabled to bear them comfortably? whether we
have Riches, or be taught to live contentedly without them? whether we be
honored or disgraced if we can welcome either condition? and whether we be
healthy and strong, if we can but be as happy as those that are? A great part
of our Troubles proceed only from our own Fancies and Apprehensions of things;
and others are much heightened or diminished by them. And if we can but conquer
our selves so far as not to be rufled and discomposed at the Inconveniences we
meet with, our Case may be much better than many others, who abound in the
things we most want, but are uneasy in their own Minds.

Wherefore if Almighty God condescend by the influence of his holy Spirit thus
graciously to prepare us for Sufferings, we need not be dismayed, though the
World frown never so much upon us, and we have never so cross a passage through
it. Woe could think the first professors of our Faith miserable, when they meet
with those Tribulations their Savior had forewarned them of, and yet were not
only patient under them, but could rejoice at, and glory in them? or Henry Voes
and John Esch, went joyfully and merrily to the place of Execution, and
joyfully embraced the Stake, and one of them seeing the Fire was kindled at his
Feet, said, Methinks you do straw Roses under my ^eet. ^ox's Acts and
Monuments, Vol. 2. p. 102.

James Bainham, at his Execution, protested, That in the Fire he felt no more
pain, than if he had been in a Bed of Down; that it was to him as a Bed of
Roses p. 301.

Anthony Pearson, with a cheerful Countenance, embraced the Post in his Arms,
and kissing it, said likewise, Welcome mine own sweet Wife, for this day shall
thou and I be married together in the love and peace of God. p. 554.

Henry Filmer said to Pearson and Testwood his fellow sufferers, Be merry, my
Brethren, and lift up your Hands unto God, for after this sharp Breakfast, I
trust we shall have a good Dinner in the Kingdom of Christ our Lord and
Redeemer. p. 555.

Lawrence Saunders took the Stake to which he should be chained in his Arms,
and kissed it, saying, Welcome the Cross of Christ, welcome Everlasting Life.
Vol. III. p. 144.

Thomas Hawks, when his Speech was taken away by the violence of the Flame,
his Skin also drawn together, and his Fingers consumed in the Fire, so that now
all Men thought certainly he was gone, suddenly, and contrary to all
expectation -- reached up his Hands, burning on a light sire -- over his Head,
to the Living-God, and with great rejoicing, as seemed, struck or clapped them
three times together. p. 266.

Mr. Bradford took a Faggot in his Hand and kissed it, and so likewise the
Stake. p. 307.

See the like also of T. Thomkins (p. 187, 188, 189.) Bp Farrar (p. 216.) Mr.
Denley (p. 396.) Spicer, Denny and Pool (p. 704.) and others.

Beati Martyrs nostri, Hus and Hieronymus, in mediis flammis cantabant hymnos
Deo. Jo. Comenii Paraenes. ad Ecclesias, nominatim Anglicanam, p. 122.

Eos inter qui necati sunt, vidimus puerulum sex vel septem annorum, qui tanto
animi gaudio gestiens, praedicans, and cantans Christianos Psalmos Japonico
sermon ad mortem praparabat, ut in tali aetate mirati id valde simus. Varen.
de religione in regnis Japon. c. 11.


those later Martyrs, who could profess in the midst of their Flames, That they
felt themselves as upon a Bed of Down or of Roses, could embrace and welcome
the Stake, and show other tokens of joy to the Beholders? Not much unlike what
Socrates relates of one Theodorus, Socrat. Hist. Eccles. l. 5. c. 19.
who being tormented with sundry kinds of punishments, and wounded all over his
Body, and then dismissed because he was thought to be past all possibility of
recovery; yet being, through the Goodness of God, restored to his former
Health, acquainted Ruffimis, that his Pains were not like what the Beholders
imagined, for that there stood by him a certain young Man who wiped away his
Sweat, and strengthened his Soul, and made his Sufferings a pleasure to him
rather than a punishment. And if they, instead of complaining of their hard,
their fiery-tryal, seemed rather to be pleased with, and delighted in it, what
reason can our selves have to be afraid of lesser Evils, whilst our God is
ready by his Almighty Power, either wholly to preserve us from them, or at
least to prevent their smart, and take away their pungency that they shall not
hurt us? And that this is not a vain hope, but what we have abundant
encouragement to depend upon, is so evident, that none who is but tolerably
versed in the holy Scriptures can have the least pretense to doubt of it.

I confess God may, and often does suffer wicked Men to proceed in their
Iniquities for a long time together, and perhaps without any visible harm
attending them; but his Patience and Clemency to these is no sign that he puts
not a real difference betwixt such and those that are heartily intent upon the
observance of his Will, or that he is not much more concerned for the one than
he is for the other. For that he is so, the Wiseman assures us, delivering it
as a Truth of which he had sufficiently informed himself, and which we may
therefore certainly depend upon. Eccles. 8.12.
Though a sinner do evil a hundred times, and his years be prolonged, yet
surely I know it shall be well with them that fear the Lord, which fear before
him. It shall be well with them, in as much as besides the advantage they have
an of inward Tranquillity, Peace, and Satisfaction of Mind under all Events,
they are moreover entitled to an Interest in the Divine Providence, which gives
them just grounds to look that even their greatest crosses shall be turned to
their benefit. And of this the holy Psalmist was so fully satisfied, that a
great part of this Book of Psalms is spent in declaring his sense of it. Psalm.
27.1.
The Lord, says he, is my light and my salvation, whom shall I fear? the Lord
is the strength of my life, of whom shall I be afraid? v. 5.
In the time of trouble he shall hide me in his pavillion, in the secret of his
Tabernacle shall he hide me, he shall set me up upon a Rock. 62.1, 2.
Truly my Soul waits upon God, from him comes my Salvation; he only is my
Rock, and my Salvation; he is my Desence, I shall not be greatly moved. 59.16,
17.
I will sing of thy power, yea I will sing aloud of thy Mercy in the Morning:
for thou have been my defense and refuge in the day of my trouble. Unto thee, O
my strength, will I sing; for God is my defense, and the God of my mercy. 9.9,
10.
The Lord also will be a refuge for the oppressed, a refuge in times of
trouble. And they that know thy name will put their trust in thee: for thou
Lord have not forsaken (or as it is in our old Translation, have never failed)
them that seek thee. 18.1, 2.
I will love thee, O Lord, my strength. The Lord is my rock, and my fortress,
and my deliverer: my God, my strength in whom I will trust, my buckler, and the
horn of my Salvation, and my high Tower. 62.7.
In God is my Salvation and my Glory, and the rock of my strength, and my
refuge is in God. With multitudes of other like expressions. Nor does he only
proclaim his own confidence in God, but invites others also to the like. Trust
in him at all times; ye people pour out your heart before him, God is a refuge
for us. And affirms moreover for their encouragement, That 33.18, 19.
the eye of the Lord is upon them that fear him; upon them that hope in his
mercy; to deliver their soul from death, and to keep them alive in famine. And
again, says he, 34.6, 7, 8, 9, 10.
That poor man cried, and the Lord heard him; and saved him out of all his
troubles. The Angel of the Lord encampeth round about them that fear him, and
delivers them. O taste and see that the Lord is good; blessed is the man that
trusts in him. O fear the Lord, ye his Saints; for there is no want to them
that fear him. The young Lions do lack and suffer hunger: (or as these words
are rendered in the Septuagint, (...), the rich are impoverished and brought to
beggary) but they that seek the Lord shall not want any good thing.

But I forbear to multiply Texts of Scripture in so clear a case, and shall
choose rather to make some Reflection upon what I have hitherto been
discoursing, and so proceed to my next Head. And to this end I come to sum up
and apply what has been offered, in these following Corollaries.

Wherefore, supposing us to be of the number of those to whom the Promises of
God are made, such as are careful to please and honor him, and are ready to
cast their Care upon him, (for to such only this Argument is directed;)
supposing us, I say, to be thus qualified, 1. We may hence infer for our
Consolation in all Conditions, that whatever our estate be, how dangerous, or
how dolorous soever, we need never question a deliverance if it be for our good
to be delivered. For that we cannot be mistaken in this is manifest in that our
gracious God has passed his word for it; and Number. 23.19.
that he is not as man that he should lie, or as the Son of man that he should
repent; has he said, and shall he not do it? or has he spoken, and shall he
not make it good? His Faithfulness is engaged on our behalf, and he will so
certainly fulfill what he has undertaken, that it is impossible he should do
otherwise. S. Matt. 24.35.
Heaven and Earth, we may assure our selves, shall sooner pass away, than one
jot or tittle shall fail, of all that is gone out of his mouth. For 2 Cor. 1.20.
all his promises are Yea and Amen; they are unquestionably true, and shall in
his due time be infallibly made good to all that don't incapacitate themselves
for them. 2. And therefore, if at any time we be not delivered according to our
expectation, we ought to do both God and our selves the right to believe, that
it is then best for us that we should not, Si aliquid contra quam oramus
acciderit. -- hoc potius oportuisse quod Dei, non quod nostra voluntas habuit,
minime dubitare debemus. D. August. Epist. 121. c. 14.
it being out of love to us that God is pleased to deny us our Requests,
because he sees them not proper to be granted us. This is a natural deduction
from the former, and which cannot be questioned without impeaching the Divine
Veracity, as though he who is Truth it self, and can no more deceive than he
can be deceived, would not be mindful to perform his Promises. For one of these
two Constructions must necessarily be made, of God's suffering the Righteous to
be at any time in a state of Affliction, either that he does not watch over
them according to his word, or else that it is out of kindness to them that he
lets them be in this condition. And since the former of these is by no means to
be imagined concerning a God of infinite Mercy and Truth, the other therefore
must be owned as the true cause of their Grievances, namely, that God in his
infinite Wisdom observes it to be for their benefit, that they be exposed to
Trials and outward Inconveniences. And by consequence, they ought in this case
to rest satisfied, that though themselves do not, yet God Almighty certainly
knows the denying their Requests will be a greater favor to them, than the
granting them would be. Whence again we may observe, 3. What Opinion we ought
to have of our Afflictions, namely, that we are to look upon them as the
necessary Chastisements of an Indulgent Parent, who would not send them unless
our Case called for them, and who will however be ready to turn them into
Blessings to us, if we but mind to bear them as we ought. And if he let us lie
under them only at such times when they may be advantageous to us, insomuch
that it is best for us not to be delivered from them, what monstrous
undutifulness and ingratitude must it be to complain of this tender usage?
Considering how little reason there is for any kind of dissatisfaction upon
this account, we should be prepared rather to bless, and praise, and magnify
our gracious God, for vouchsafing us these seasonable Medicines for the cure of
our distempered Souls. We might very well resolve to be patient and contented
under the sorest Troubles that God at any time thinks fit to bring us into,
upon the account of that support we may justly hope for from him, whilst they
are suffered to lie upon us. But we should be even ready to rejoice in them,
when we call to mind the good that may redound to us from them, if not
prevented by our own imprudence. We should look both at the rod, and him that
has appointed it, and instead of murmuring and repining at any of our Heavenly
Father's Visitations, should on the other hand, heartily admire his unspeakable
Compassion, all whose utmost Severities to his Children are not without a great
deal of love and tenderness of Affection. Which being so, we may again see from
hence, as the result of all, 4. What signal encouragement we have to the ready
performance of this Duty I am treating of, of putting our Trust in God. For if
God chastise us not but for our good, if he consults our welfare, not only when
he bestows this World's Blessings upon us, but when he withdraws them from us
likewise, and not only when he loads us with outward good things, but even when
his hand lies heaviest upon us, if in all his Dispensations of whatsoever
nature he intend our benefit, what folly may be compared to theirs, who will
not be persuaded to commit themselves to the care of so benign, so gentle, and
affectionate a Lord, who both knows what is fittest for them, and is always
ready to dispose of them accordingly? And what abundant reason have we
therefore heartily to rejoice at the thoughts of so compassionate a Protector,
and to fly to him for shelter in all our streights? As we can never be happy
without his Favor, how large a share soever we have of the things of this
life; so, on the contrary, there is no danger of being miserable, so long as he
undertakes to provide for us, whatsoever either Dangers may threaten, or
Troubles, or Misfortunes may befall us. Which is such an encouragement to a
continual Dependence upon him, that we must be wretchedly wanting to our
selves, and to our Interest as well as our Duty if we be yet backward to repose
our Trust in him.


I shall conclude this Argument in the words of a certain devout Author of our
own. Preparation to a holy Life, p. 151.
He is no good Christian that thinks he can be safe without God, or not safe
with him. Never any Man was a loser by his God, or left in danger and stood to
him. What cannot God do when he will! what will he not do where he loves? O God
they do not know thee that distrust thee!

SECT. III.
III. THE last Consideration I propounded to speak to for evincing the
certainty of God's continual care of us, and the reason we therefore have upon
this account to persist in a constant dependence upon him was of our own
Experience of former Mercies, and Deliverances afforded both to our selves and
others. And one would think we should all be heartily ashamed, to distrust
God's Goodness any longer, when we recollect what pleasure he has hitherto
taken in dispensing his Favors amongst those who have sought to him in their
Necessities.

Now if we look back to the People of the Jews, it were easy to present the
Reader with a long Catalogue of unparalleled Mercies bestowed upon them, and
Deliverances wrought for them from time to time, Ps. 78.43, etc.
The Miracles that God did for them in Egypt, and his wonders in the field of
Zoan; how he turned their waters into blood, so that they could not drink of
the rivers; he sent lice among them and devoured them up, and froggs to destroy
them; he gave their fruit unto the caterpiller, and their labor unto the
grasshopper; destroyed their vines with hailstones, and their mulberry-trees
with the frost; smote their cattle also with hailstones, and their flocks with
hot thunderbolts; cast upon them the furiousness of his wrath, anger,
displeasure and trouble; and sent evil Angels among them; he made a way to his
indignation, and spared not their soul from death, but gave their life over to
the pestilence; and smote all the firstborn in Egypt, the most principal and
mightiest in the dwellings of Ham. But as for his own people, he led them forth
like sheep, and carried them in the wilderness like a flock; he brought them
out safely, that they should not fear, and overwhelmed their enemies with the
Sea; and brought them within the borders of his Sanctuary, even to his Mountain
which he purchased with his right hand; v. 13, 14, 15.
dividing the sea to let them go through, and making the waters to stand on an
heap. He led them in the day time with a cloud, and all the night through with
a light of fire. He clave the hard rocks in the wilderness, and gave them drink
thereof, as if it had been out of the great depth. v. 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28.
He commanded the clouds above, and opened the doors of heaven, and rained down
Manna upon them (so that they are Angels food) and flesh, as thick as dust, and
feathered fowls like as the sand of the sea. v. 55.
He cast out the heathen also before them, and caused their land to be divided
among them for an heritage, and made the tribes of Israel to dwell in their
tents.

Nor did his kindness cease here, but having by a long train of Miracles
brought them to the promised Canaan, he was still with them in a very signal
manner, during the whole time of their Economy, raising them up Judges at the
first to save them out of the hands of their Adversaries, and afterward
appointed them Kings to govern them, and sending his Prophets to make known his
Will amongst them, multiplying them exceedingly, and setting them above the
power of all their Enemies round about. It is a great Truth that Minutius Felix
affirms concerning them, Nam and ipsi Deum nostrum (idem enim omnium Deus est)
quamdiu cast, innoxie, religioseque coluerunt, etc. p. 108.
That whilst they chastely, innocently, and religiously served God, walking in
Obedience to the holy Precepts he had set before them, they continually grew
and increased, of few becoming almost innumerable, of poor becoming wealthy, of
Servants and Slaves becoming Masters and Governors, to the terror and
astonishment of all who set themselves against them. And though he plagued them
for their Sins, when they dared to rebel against him, yet was he always ready
to be reconciled to them upon their hearty Repentance, and to extend his wonted
Favors to them.

Or if from the Jews we descend to the first times of Christianity, it is well
known, not only what Miracles were wrought by the Hands of the Apostles and
other Disciples, but what others were wrought for them too; S. Matt. 14.31.
how strangely one of them was saved from drowning, and Act. 12.7, 8. and 16.26.
he and others had the Prison-doors opened, to release them from their
Confinement; c. 9. 3, 4.
one was wonderfully converted in the heat of his fury, by an amazing light and
a voice from Heaven, and afterward c. 28.5.
shook a Viper off from his Hand without any hurt, when it was expected by the
Spectators that he should rather have swollen and fallen down dead suddenly,
Tertul. de praescript. adv. Haer. c. 36.
another was brought alive out of a boiling Caldron of Oil, and Act. 7.55.
another at the time of his Martyrdom saw the Heavens opened, and Jesus
standing at the right hand of God, for his comfort under his Sufferings. And
after what manner, and to how great a degree the holy Spirit of God continued
with the Christians afterward, was abundantly evident (besides the Testimony
of all their other Miracles) from the stupendous success their Religion met
with in the World, in spite of all the Contrivances of both Jews and Gentiles
for its Extirpation It was no mean token of God's care over them, that when Tot
hosts ejus quot extranei. -- Quotidie obsidemur, quotidie prodimur. Tertul.
Apol. c. 7.
all the Powers on Earth conspired against them, when their Doctrine was hated
and themselves despised, persecuted, and (...). Just. M. Dial. c. Tryph.

(...). Clem. Alex. Strom. l. 2.

Innoxios, justos, Deo charos, domo privas, patrimonio spolias, etc. D. Cypr.
ad Demetr.

Hoc vero inenarrabile est, quod fit adversus eos qui male facere nesciunt,
etc. Lactant. Instit. l. 5. c. 9. Vid. etiam. c. 11. and Tertul. ap. c. 27.
etc. 40.


condemned to the most dreadful Tortures, when both Men and Devils had set
themselves against them, and they could expect nothing but Pains and Crosses
here, and had their Hopes only in a good God supporting them, and a glorious
Reward promised them in a future state, so that in outward appearance they were
(as the Apostle speaks) 1 Cor 5.19.
of all men most miserable in other respects; it was no mean token, I say, of
God's care over them, that in these Circumstances, and under all these
Difficulties and Discouragements, such poor illiterate persons as were at first
sent out, should be able to gain any considerable number of Proselytes, and
that in process of time whole Nations should be brought to embrace the same
Profession with them, not being at all affrighted, but animated rather by the
variety of Cruelties they saw exercised upon others. Yet such was the wonderful
progress our Religion made in the World against all the disadvantages it had to
encounter with, till at length the Obsessam vociferantur civitatem, in agris,
in castellis, in insulis, Christianos, omnem sexum, aetatem, conditionem, etiam
dignitatem transgredi ad hoc nomen. Tertul. Apol. c. 1. Vestra omnia
implevimus, c. 37. Quid facies de tantis millibus hominum, tot viris ac
foeminis, omnis sexus, omnis aetatis, omnis dignitatis. Ad Scapulam. Neque enim
civitates tantum, sed vicos etiam atque agros superstitionis istius contagio
pervagata est. Plin. Epist. l. 10. c. 97. (...), etc. Clem. Alex. Str. l. 6.
(...), etc. Orig. Philocal. c. 1.
whole Empire became Christian, the greatest, the wisest, the best of Men not
being ashamed to glory in the Cross of Christ. Behold here the surprising, the
astonishing love of God, in condescending to take this care of his poor
Creatures and consequently, the indissoluble obligation that lies upon us all
to consider these things, and be deeply affected with them, and mightily
encouraged in a confident dependence upon him, whose goodness has thus
illustriously manifested it self in behalf of them that have put their Trust in
him.

But as the kindness and love of God was not confined to the Nation of the
Jews, and the time of their Dispensation, so neither to the first Ages of the
Christian Church; for if we enquire concerning these latter days, we shall soon
find, that his Arm is not yet shortened, nor his Bowels of Compassion
streightened, nor his loving Mercies abated, but he is the same God and
Savior, yesterday, to day, and for ever. Praefat. in lib. 3.
He is ever rich and without envy, as Irenaeus speaks concerning him, and gives
more things than we can ask of him, Eragment. p. 513.
showing himself full of Pity and Commiseration, and administering Safety even
when Men are brought into peril of Death.

And howsoever he may deal with others, I am very sure we of this Church and
Nation have great reason to praise him for his goodness, and loudly to declare
the wonders that he does for the children of men, and whereof our selves in
particular have had ample Experience. It cannot be denied that we are a very
sinful People, the multitude of whose Iniquities has highly provoked him to
have cut us off long since, and to have sworn in his wrath that we should never
enter into his rest, either here or hereafter, that we should neither continue
the objects of his farther Care and Kindness in this World, nor be made
partakers of a better after our translation hence. Whence we must needs own in
relation to our selves, what Salvian affirms concerning the Romans, That
whatever Miseries have at any time befallen us, De gubern. Dei, l. 6.
Non improvidentia nos Dei, atque neglectu, sed justitia, sed judicio, sed
aequissima dispensatione, and dignissima retributione tolerasse, that it is not
from any neglect in God, or want of his good Providence over us, that we have
born them, but they are sent us in Justice and Judgment, by a most equal
Dispensation, and as the due reward of our Wickednesses.

And yet notwithstanding all our Abominations, how freely has our merciful Lord
made us to taste of his bounty from Day to Day, and from Age to Age? We have
abounded with store of Blessings of all sorts, both Spiritual and Temporal
Blessings, Blessings for Soul and for Body, for this life and in order to a
better. When we have been at our lowest ebb he has not yet overlooked us, but
has called to mind his wonted Compassion, and found out a way for our recovery;
has had a regard for both Church and State, and for particular Persons as well
as the whole Community, to provide for all according to their Necessities and
the Difficulties wherein they have been set. This must needs be acknowledged to
God's Glory, and the shame of our selves his unworthy Creatures, who have made
no better use of all his most gracious Dispensations toward us.

1. For if we look upon our selves as a National Church, and seriously lay to
heart our singular happiness in this respect, what People under Heaven can
compare with us in it? We have a Religion purified from the Innovations, and
delivered from the Encroachments of Popery on the one hand, and yet withal
preserved from those Enthusiastic Principles on the other, which have infected
so many other parts of the Reformation. We are allowed the free use of the holy
Scriptures, and in a Language that we all understand, and have them recommended
to our study, and expounded to us, and their Instructions pressed upon us by
the best and most important Arguments for the orderly government of our Lives.
We have the truly Orthodox Faith professed amongst us, that S. Jud. 3.
Faith which was once delivered to the Saints, without the Superstructure of
other Articles, unknown to all the purest Ages of Christianity; are Members of
a Church that faithfully teaches our Duty to God, to the King as his Minister
and Representative, to all other our regular and lawful Superiors, whether
Civil or Ecclesiastical, and to each other in whatever capacity; and moreover
have the ancient Meminisse autem Diaconi debent, quoniam Apostolos, id est,
Episcopos and Praepositos Dominus elegit. D. Cypr. Epist. 3. Ad omnes
Praepositos qui Apostolis vicaria ordinatione succedunt. Epist. 66. and alibi.
Apostolical form of Episcopal Government preserved amongst us, and have an
admirably pious and well-composed Liturgy, and only such innocent Ceremonies as
are very becoming the service of God, and may tend rather to heighten than any
way obstruct our Devotions. In short, it is our happiness to have been taught
to reverence Antiquity, as the best Expositor of the Word and Will of God, and
to depart no farther from any modern Churches than they appear to have departed
from the truly Ancient and Catholic Church. And as we retain the same Form of
Ecclesiastical Government that the Primitive Church had, and the same
Principles upon which they retained it; so have we also our Worship ordered
suitably to the Worship of the first and best Christians.

And yet this is not all, for as we have been blessed with a Prudent and
Orthodox Reformation, we have likewise been preserved from the Attempts of
those who have sought, either violently to overturn, or secretly to undermine
it. We have had our Adversaries on either hand endeavoring to supplant us, by
various Artifices, as might suit best with their Circumstances, and might seem
most for their Interest, but blessed be God, they have not had their Ends upon
us. Our gracious Lord has often frustrated their Counsels, and brought their
subtilest Devices to naught, and has from time to time (as we hope he will now
again) put a period to our Destractions.

2. If we look upon our selves as Members of a lately flourishing Kingdom, we
have great reason to be thankful also upon this account. We have been very
ready to complain of our Abundance as a burden; such plenty of worldly
Blessings has been vouchsafed us. And what Plots and Contrivances have been on
foot for our overthrow have generally proved abortive; and for the most part
have fallen upon the Authors own Heads. It is true, we were suffered not very
long since to prevail against our selves, till we had made an unhappy
interruption of our Peace and Settlement for diverse years together. Yet (behold
the Goodness of our God) he then heard, at length, the cry of his distressed
Servants, and restored quiet to our Land, together with all those outward
Comforts that usually attend it. And since this, we may remember, that not many
years ago, scarce any part of Europe enjoyed so long and advantageous a Peace
as we did, there being very few of our Neighbors who were not embroyled in an
expensive War, whilst we sat securely (to use the Prophet's Expression) Mich.
4.4.
under our own Vines, and under our Fig Trees. We grew wealthy and proud by
these Advantages; and if it please God now to humble us under his afflicting
Hand, this is no more than our abuse of his former Mercies has too justly
deserved. And when by his Chastisements he shall have fitted us for his more
favorable Dispensations, it is to be hoped he will be graciously pleased to
let us partake of them again as heretofore.

3. Or if again we look upon our selves in our private personal Capacity, who
amongst us can recount the abundant Goodness of God to him every day? We have
in this respect likewise been honored with store of such Blessings and such
Deliverances as may well fill our Hearts with Gratitude, and our Mouths with
Songs of Praise to the God of our Salvation. Quoniam pravitas and fragilitas
and insufficientia nostra ineffabilis est, multaque nimis, ex part nostri
summa requiritur gratitudo. Dionys. Carthus. de vita spiritali Art. 12.
We are nothing, we have nothing, we can do nothing, nor be secure of any thing
without his good Providence taking care of us; and to him therefore we are
heartily to ascribe the Honor and Glory, for all the Blessings we receive, and
for all the Misfortunes and Evils we escape. And yet, oh! our gracious, our
compassionate God, how boundless is thy Loving Kindness to us upon each of
these accounts! Our Lives and Limbs, our Memory and Understanding, our Health
and Strength, our Food and Raiment, and all the common Mercies we receive, we
are too too apt to undervalue, because of our so constant enjoyment of them;
yet these are Blessings that they who want, or are about to lose them, know how
to esteem at a great rate. And how plentifully, I had almost said, how
incessantly are these continued to us? If we have now and then a restless
Night, have we not many, very many good ones for it? If we have lost one Child,
or other dear Relation, how many more have we yet remaining? If we have been
deprived of any other outward Enjoyment or Advantage, are not diverse others
continued to us, or else succeed in the room of what is lost? Or if we have one
Limb distorted, or in pain, or perished, are not all our other parts preserved
in health and good order? Or if our Condition be yet harder, if we have lost an
only Child, or have lost our best Friends, upon whom possibly we had great
dependence, or have lost our whole Estate or Employment, or whatsoever we are
wont to value most, or have our whole Body disordered with Pains or Sickness,
how hard soever our Lot may be in any one or more of these Particulars, are we
not safe as to the rest? Why then should any amongst us suffer his Wants or
Disappointments in one kind, to take away his sense of the many other Favors
that he yet enjoys? especially seeing these are ordinarily many more, much
greater, and more lasting?

Whereto, if I add the numerous Evils from which we are each day delivered
(forasmuch as we have no security that the next House we come into shall not
fall and bury us in its Ruins, the next bit of Meat we eat shall not choke us,
the next breath of Air we take shall not breed some mortal Distemper in us, the
next unruly Beast we meet with shall not prove our Executioner, but only from
God's good Providence watching over us) and those other more imminent dangers,
which we ever and anon narrowly escape, by Day and by Night, at Home and
Abroad, by Sea and by Land, in War and in Peace, together with our diverse
recoveries from very dangerous and even desperate Diseases; I need say no more
to evince the continuance of God's immense Goodness to our Church, our Nation,
and our Selves, and the Care he daily takes of us.

And now, what return shall we make to the Lord for all his Mercies? shall we
senselesly question his farther Loving Kindness? or shall we not rather fix our
hope upon him, as our best defense in all times of difficulty and danger? A
steady Dependence upon him for the future, is so naturally consequent upon a
serious remembrance of his Protection hitherto, that nothing can excuse our
want of it. Had he only promised to Psalm. 50.15.
sustain men when they cast their burden upon him, we ought certainly to have
believed him; but when, besides his Promises of this nature, he has actually
wrought very powerfully in our behalf, this must necessarily be a very
considerable aggravation of the sin of not heartily trusting in him. And the
holy Psalmist therefore held himself concerned to make a very different use of
this Reflection, not suffering himself to doubt any longer, whether God would
condescend to supply his future wants, when he called to mind how largely he
had already tasted of his Goodness. Ps. 3.4, 5.
I cried unto the Lord, says he, with my voice, and he heard me out of his
holy hill. I laid me down and slept, I awaked, for the Lord sustained me. And
now, behold the comfortable and dutiful result of this his Meditation in the
next words, v. 6.
I will not be afraid of thousands of the people that have set themselves
against me round about. This was his support, that how many, or how powerful
soever his Enemies might be, the Lord who dwells on high, and who had
hitherto been infinitely propitious to him, was mightier than them all by far;
whose wonted Goodness had encouraged him to believe, that he should not fail of
being rescued out of the hand of whomsoever that might rise up against him. And
at another time, Ps. 23.1, etc.
The Lord, says he, is my shepherd, I shall not want; He makes me lie down in
green pastures, he leads me beside the still waters. He restores my soul, he
leads me in the paths of righteousness for his name's sake. And then it
follows, Though I walk through the valley of the shadow of death, I will fear
no evil. He could not think that God would ever suffer him to be overwhelmed
with any kind of Misery, since he had all along been thus gracious to him, and
had made such ample provision for him. And once more (to omit multitudes of
other like passages in the Book of Psalms) Ps. 118.5, 6, 7.
I called upon the Lord in distress, the Lord answered me, and set me in a
large place. The Lord is on my side, I will not fear what man can do unto me.
The Lord takes my part with them that help me, therefore shall I see my desire
upon them that hate me. Nor were these bare words, but his Practice was
accordingly. For when he went forth to encounter the mighty Goliath, his
Confidence was this, 1 Samuel 17.37.
The Lord that delivered me out of the paw of the Lion, and out of the paw of
the Bear, he shall deliver me out of the hand of this Philistine.

And the Apostle S. Paul makes the same Inference from the Consideration of
God's Mercy in the preservation of himself and his Fellow-Disciples, declaring
how, when they were encompassed with many and dreadful terrors, which would
otherwise have inevitably driven them past all hope of escaping, they found the
remembrance of God's former Protection, a Cordial sufficient to bear up their
Spirits, that they should not sink under the weight of the worst of Evils that
might befall them, though it were even the cruellest sort of death. 2 Cor. 1.10.
Who has delivered us, says the Apostle, from so great death, and does
deliver us, in whom we trust that he will yet deliver us. And at another time
he speaks to the same purpose, with a more particular respect to himself, and
the success of his Doctrine. 2 Timothy 4.17, 18.
Notwithstanding the Lord stood by me and strengthened me, that by me the
preaching might be fully known, and that all the Gentiles might hear; and I was
delivered out of the mouth of the Lion, and the Lord shall deliver me from
every evil work.

And thus ought every good Christian to encourage himself in his God, by
calling to mind the many signal instances of his willingness to take care of
himself, and others in their distress. A sense of his mavelous
Loving Kindness both in this and other respects should engage persons
faithfully to depend upon him, as their best security in the time of trouble.
It should dispose us all to weigh seriously with our selves, how unequal a
return it is for all his Favors, to let them slip out of our minds, and leave
us in fear, least he should no longer take care of us. And accordingly we
should rather argue thus with our selves: Whatsoever our present fears or
troubles are, have we never known any in as bad a condition, whom God has yet
of his infinite Mercy delivered from it? Nay, possibly this may not be the
first time that our selves have been reduced to these streights, and yet at
length the Storm has blown over, the Air cleared, and we have had a way made
for our escape; and perhaps with that advantage that we have found our selves
in better circumstances than ever before; as Trees are ordinarily observed to
settle the firmer, and take the better root for being shaken by the Winds, and
a broken Limb when set again is generally reported to be stronger than if it
never had been amiss.

How then can we be so ungrateful, so undutiful to our merciful Deliverer, as
to refuse to put our Trust in him still? How should we dread the thoughts of
making no better a Return for all his excessive Loving Kindness: It were
certainly a much properer course, more reverent and becoming in relation to
Almighty God, and tending more to our own security, whatever we suffer,
whatever we fear, whatever we have deserved by our Sins, whatever sorrows may
either threaten, or have overtaken us, nevertheless to remember the Compassion
of the Lord, and the wonders he has wrought, and as to talk of his doings, so
moreover to make use of them for inviting both our selves and others, to a
steady and unwearied dependence upon him. The consideration hereof may serve to
quicken our Devotions, and make us the more importunate suitors to Almighty God
for relief against our Troubles, and may also engage us to offer up a hearty
Sacrifice of Praise to him for all his Goodness; but it should by no means ever
suffer us to despair of a seasonable redress from him, though in the most
calamitous Condition.

It will be utterly impossible to question, whether God can rescue out of the
greatest Dangers or Miseries, when we observe how miraculously and how
frequently he has done it in all times past. And it will be highly unreasonable
likewise, and intolerably disingenuous to distrust his favorable Inclinations
after such abundant experience of his readiness to exercise his Bounty upon all
occasions. And by consequence, we cannot but find our selves indispensibly
obliged to make this use of his wonted Compassion, that we be encouraged
constantly to cast our Care upon him, and under our greatest streights to look
up to him for help, as well knowing that when all outward Comforts cease, he
can easily supply the want of them, and that he will not fail to do it for them
that seriously and dutifully fly to him for shelter.

Thus have I endeavored to prove, That God Almighty never ceases to exercise a
gracious Providence over the whole World, which, as it was at first produced,
is also still preserved and governed by his Wisdom and Power, that he feeds the
Beasts, and Fowls, adorns the Flowers of the Field, and takes care of Man to
that degree, that our very Hairs are numbered by him, and no Evil can possibly
befall any of us without his notice, or lie heavier than he sees fit, or last
longer than he allows it; that besides the general Providence which he
exercises over the Sons of Men, and the Plenty of Blessings he bestows
indifferently upon both Good and Bad, he has farther condescended to promise a
peculiar Protection to the Righteous, that he will watch over them in an
especial manner, to secure them against the manifold Evils which might
otherwise be in danger of overwhelming them; and again, lastly, That the
Experience of all Ages shows how willing and ready he has been to fulfill these
his Promises to the terror and confusion of his Enemies, and the safety and
support of all that have put their Trust in him. And now what greater assurance
would any one desire of a good Providence continually presiding over us? Or
what can any considering person possibly infer from hence, but that it must be
our own fault, if we groan under any unnecessary Calamity or Disaster, or if we
want any suitable Good, since we are hence sufficiently informed, that our God
will never be backward to relieve us in either of these cases, unless we
senselsly provoke him to it. We have all the Encouragement that can be desired
to rely upon him, upon the account of his readiness to assist us when we do so.
And if we but take care to approve our selves to him, and thereby entitle our
selves to his Promises, there is no room left to imagine, that he will be
wanting to us in any respect.

CHAP. IV. The Usefulness of Casting all our Care upon God.
THE Fourth thing I undertook was, To instance in some of the great Advantages
that would accrue to us from a faithful and constant Dependence upon God. That
the Almighty has required this Duty at our Hands, and from time to time, and in
such a manner as shows him nearly concerned for it, were Argument enough one
would think to oblige all who desire either to please him here, or to be happy
with him hereafter, to an uninterrupted Reliance upon him. And were the Duty
thus enjoined by him, never so difficult in it self, never so contrary to the
natural Inclinations of Flesh and Blood, and were it perpetually attended with
the most formidable Dangers, or heaviest Sufferings, yet being absolutely
necessary, no good Christian but would conclude himself nearly concerned, to
encounter all these inconveniences, rather than expose himself to the just
indignation of Almighty God. But if the case be quite of another nature, and
this necessary Duty have none of those frightful Difficulties attending it, but
be agreeable to the dictates of Reason, and for our Benefit in this life, as
well as for the glory of God, and a means of our future Happiness, there
remains no pretense of an excuse for the neglect of it. And that this is the
true state of the matter, I hope I have already in a good measure made
apparent, and shall now proceed to prove it more fully, by considering the
Usefulness of this Virtue, for these three following purposes; 1. For obtaining
a greater Interest in the Divine Protection. 2. For quieting our Minds in all
Conditions. 3. For Entitling to a better state, when we shall be translated
hence.


SECT. I.
I. THIS Duty is of singular use for obtaining a greater Interestion the Divine
Protection. For as to distrust God, and not dare to rely upon him in times of
Danger and Necessity, is the way to offend him, and by this means to have our
likeliest Undertaking miscarry for lack his Blessing; so on the contrary, there
is no furer Expedient for compassing our just and lawful Ends, and promoting
our own Welfare, than to seek an Interest in him by an undaunted Dependence
upon his Providence, what our Savior says in another case, being applicable
also to this, That S. Matt. 25.29.
to him who has shall be given, and he shall have abundance, but from him that
has not, shall be taken away even that which he has. For if common Ingenuity
teaches Men, that it is a great shame to prove false to the Trust reposed in
them, much more will Almighty God esteem it beneath his Divine Attributes, to
slight any of his Servants that cast their Care upon him in obedience to his
own Command.

De cujus open and pietate, qui in eum confidimus, possumus esse securi. Epist.
57.
We that trust in him, says S. Cyprian, may be secure of his help. And the
holy Psalmist speaks to the same purpose, prescribing this as a neverfailing
qualification for the Divine Protection. Psalm. 55.22.
Cast thy burden ( (...).
thy Care or Solicitude, according to the Septuagint) upon the Lord, (...)
he will sustain thee, he will Vid. (...) 1 King. 17.4. and (...) v. 9. etc.
18.4. (...) and v. 13. (...)
maintain thee, will provide for and nourish thee. He affirms Psalm. 33.18, 19.
the eye of the Lord to be upon them that fear him, and put their trust in his
Mercy, to deliver their soul from death, and to feed them in the time of
dearth. He proclaims him to be Psalm. 17.7.
the Savior of them that put their trust in him. He urges it as an Argument
for inclining Almighty God to hearken to him, and grant his Requests, that Ps.
7.1. and 16.1. and 25.20. and 71.1, etc.
his trust was steadfastly placed in him. He blesses himself in the security he
found from his continual Dependence upon God to take care of him, Ps. 26.1.
whereby he was set above the danger of miscarrying. And again, he praises and
admires the great Goodness of God which had been extended not to himself only
and his Contemporaries, but to their Ancestors, who had left them many
remembrances of his Mercy to such as had applied to him in their streights, and
had been helped by him. They cried unto him and prevailed. They were confident
he would be their Defender; and their hope had not made them ashamed. Ps. 22.4,
5.
Our fathers trusted in thee, and thou did deliver them. They cried unto
thee, and were delivered; they trusted in thee and were no^ confounded. From
all which and diverse other like passages in the Book of Psalms, it is easy to
collect, that this Virtue shall not go without its Reward in this present life,
besides the unconceivable Recompense that shall be allotted it in the other.

It is a sight highly pleasing to God, to behold his poor Creatures sensible of
their own insufficiency and flying to him for shelter, and his Bowels are
presently moved toward them. And if their Case be pressing, and themselves lay
no impediment in the way, he will find out a Method for their relief, as he did
for 2 Chronicles. 13.17, 18.
Abijah and the Men of Judah, who when the Army of the Israelites came upon
them both before and behind, to have cut them off, obtained a Victory over them
merely by his Assistance, and because they relied upon the Lord God of their
Fathers. Because they looked up to him in their Distress, as their best
Safeguard against all their Fears and Dangers, and cast themselves wholly upon
his Protection; this wise Behavior of theirs engaged his Providence on their
side, which therefore wrought much more successfully for them than all their
own Conduct, or Strength, or Courage could be supposed to have done.

Thus it is recorded also of Job, that Job 1.14, etc.
when it had pleased God to bring him into a very low condition, having
deprived him of his Children, and his Wealth, and his Health and soundness of
Body, so that c. 2.8.
he took a potsheard to scrape himself withal, and sat down among the ashes,
until c. 30.1.
he became a derision to them whose fathers he would have disdained to set with
the dogs of his flock, as himself expresses it: Still he was not discouraged,
but professes, that though c. 13 15.
God should slay him, yet would he trust in him; though he were at the point of
death, and had no appearance of recovery to depend upon, this should not make
him cast away his Confidence in God, but he would still hope for good from him.
And behold the wonderful effect of this his resolute affiance in God, c. 42.10.
The Lord turned the captivity of Job, and gave him twice as much as he had
before. And v. 16.
after this he lived an hundred and forty years, and saw his sons, and his sons
sons, even four generations.

Another very remarkable Instance we have to this purpose, in the three Jewish
Captives, who with undaunted boldness declared before King Nebuchadnezzar, what
assurance they had that God would rescue them out of his hand. Dan. 3.17.
Our God whom we serve is able to deliver us from the burning fiery furnace,
and he will deliver us out of thine hand, O King. Which confident Assertion of
theirs was soon after verified to his great astonishment, when the more
effectually to defeat their Expectation, he had commanded them to be cast into
the burning Furnace, and burning in a very unusual manner, v. 19, 20.
being purposely heated seven times more than it was wont to be upon other
occasions; but presently he beheld them v. 25.
walking in the midst of the fire, without any manner of hurt, and the Angel of
God with them. And when they came out, it was visible to the King and all his
Courtiers, v. 27.
That the fire had no power upon their bodies, nor was an hair of their head
singed, neither were their coats changed, nor had the smell of fire passed on
them. So miraculously did the Goodness of God exert it self for their
Deliverance.

But not to insist upon particular Instances, the Son of Syrach appeals for the
proof of this Truth to the Experience of many Ages, directing to Ecclus. 2.10.
look at the generations of old, and see, did ever any trust in the Lord, and
was confounded? or did any abide in his fear and was forsaken, or whom did be
ever despise that called upon him? Which direction, whosoever duly follows,
will find no difficulty in assenting to the following words, that v. 11.
the Lord is full of mercy and compassion, long-suffering and very pitiful, and
forgiveth sins, and saves in time of affliction, and that as his Majesty is
great, so is his Mercy. He has always been mindful of them that have fled to
him in their distress, and been ready to proportion his Assistance to their
affiance in him.

In like manner, when Maximin the Tyrant had made a Vow to Jupiter, That if he
got the Victory over Licinius, he would utterly extinguish the Christian Name,
and came on flushed with hopes of an easy Conquest, and with a full
expectation of putting this impious and bloody Design in execution, upon the
earnest Prayers of Licinius and his Army Sum Deus, te rogamus. Omnem
justitiam tibi commendamus, salutem nostram tibi commendamus, imperium nostrum
tibi commendamus. Per te vivimus, per te victores and foelices existimus. Sum
sancte Deus preces nostras exaudi. Brachia nostra ad te tendimus. Exaudi,
sancte sum Deus. Lactant. de Mort. prefect. c. 46.
begging of God to be their Savior and Protector, ascribing all their Power to
him, and humbly recommending their Safety and their Empire to him, and when
their General had tried to persuade the Tyrant to a peaceable accommodation,
but to no purpose, his mighty Army was soon overthrown by a very unequal number
of these Supplicants, and himself forced to fly for his life, and thenceforward
he found all his attempts to regain his former Station in vain; till being at
length seized with severe pains, even to distraction, and having lost his
sight; in this miserable condition he was brought to acknowledge his
wickedness, and begging of Christ to have mercy upon him, Nocentem spiritum
detestabili genere mortis efflavit. Id. c. 50.
breathed forth his guilty Soul in a most detestable sort of death. And the
same account Salvian In discrimine positi opem a Deo postulant, and
prosperitates suas munus divinitatis appellant. De Gub. Dei, l. 7.
gives of the Victories that the Goths and Vandals obtained over the Romans,
That they had learned to seek to God for help in their distress, and to ascribe
all their success to him as the Author of it, and not as Alius hoc ascribit
fortunae, alius eventui, etc. nullus Deo. Ibid.
the Romans did, to Fortune, or Chance, or the Conduct of their General, or the
Wisdom of their Councils, or some other inferior Cause. When these Cum enim
Gothi metuerent, praesumebamus nos in Chunis spem ponere, illi in Deo. ibid.
relied upon the Hunns for help, their Trust was in God alone.

God does and will take care of all his; and though he suffer the Diffident and
Contemners of his Goodness to be miserable, it is otherwise with them that duly
rely upon him. He is their perpetual Defense, constantly watching over them for
good, Ps. 121.5, 6, 7, 8.
Their keeper, and their shade upon their right hand, that the Sun may not
smite them by day, nor the Moon by night. He preserves them from all evil,
preserves their going out, and their coming in, and will not let them be
without any thing he sees needful for them. He will rain Bread from Heaven (as
a learned Man Gataker's Christianman's Care, p. 50.
speaks) and set the Flint-stone a-broach, and turn the dry and waste
Wilderness into Rivers of Water, before his shall pine and perish. If other
means fail, he has Miracles in store for their relief, which, though not
ordinarily to be expected, he will however make use of upon a just occasion. By
one means or other he will bring it to pass, that they who depend upon him for
safety, shall taste the kindly effects of his Care over them.

But what shall we say then to the Case of such, whose Sufferings have been as
eminent as their Piety? His it not been often seen, that the best Men, who have
been most observant of their Duty in all respects, and in particular, have most
firmly trusted in God, have however met with a very troublesome passage through
this World? Our blessed Savior foretold to his Apostles and other Disciples,
that they must be exposed to manifold Tribulations during their abode here. And
it is undeniable, that the first propagators of our Faith, and the Martyrs in
the succeeding Ages of the Church, underwent a large share of obloquy and
reproach, contempt and disgrace, being hated of all men for his name's sake,
and were made to submit to the utmost hardships, and to the cruellest and most
frightful sorts of death. And others who have not been called to bear so
remarkable a Testimony to our Savior's Doctrine, have, notwithstanding all
their Confidence in God, labored under losses and disappointments, wants and
troubles of diverse kinds, as though they had been forsaken of him. And how
shall we reconcile these Men's Sufferings to God's continual Care of all that
trust in him? This Difficulty I have C. 3. Sect. 1. p. 57, etc.
already, in a good measure, removed, but shall endeavor farther to clear it
from these three following Observations.

1. A good Man may have Sufferings of that nature, that no Dependence upon God
can reasonably be supposed to shelter him against them. He may possibly bring
himself into trouble, by his own inadvertence, by not taking care to inform
himself of, or not duly applying himself to the means that are proper in order
to his welfare. Some oversight or other miscarriage of his own may have been
the natural occasion of his misfortunes; and then it is very just and
reasonable that God should permit him for a while to groan under them.

2. God may be pleased to lay his hand upon good Men, not out of displeasure,
or unkindness, or neglect of them, but for other wise reasons of his own, (some
of which I shall have occasion to instance in Sect. 2.
hereafter, and therefore forbear to mention them at present) and may
sufficiently reward them for it another way. Which was the case of the Apostles
and first Disciples, and other Saints, Confessors, and Martyrs, who were to be
especial Instruments of God's glory, by propagating his Fear and Worship
amongst Mankind, and had no cause to think themselves forsaken of him, though
their Fidelity to him cost them dear; because they had an unconceivably
valuable Crown assigned them in the other life, as a Recompense for what they
should undergo upon this account. Hence it was that they scorned to be
affrighted at the sharpest Trials, rejoicing, on the contrary, when they were
counted worthy to suffer for our Savior's sake, triumphing at the thoughts of
that incomparable Felicity, whereto they were shortly to be advanced, and which
would not let them stick at any thing they saw necessary to be encountered in
their way to it. At their lowest and worst estate they could have no more
(indeed they had infinitely less) cause of complaint, than a Subject would
have, who having been earnestly soliciting his Prince for a profitable Office,
should meet with a denial, but withal should at the same time have a free
Estate bestowed upon him of many times the value. And therefore they could by
no means think themselves neglected by God, seeing he had provided so rich a
Reward for them. Nor are their Sufferings any evidence that he will not grant a
suitable supply of the good things of this life to those that live in more
propitious times.

3. God's Promises to them that rely upon him are not all of the same kind (as
I have C. 3 Sect. 2.
already shown) but sometimes of support under Sufferings, as well as of
Deliverance from them at others. And his immense Power and Goodness may
discover themselves as much the one way as the other. The gracious influences
of his Providence are seen, in carrying Men victoriously through the sharpest
Conflicts, taking off the edge of their Afflictions, and enabling them to
suffer or die with cheerfulness, no less than in preserving them from these or
other the like trials. Thus he was with the Martyrs whom he did not forsake in
their severest Agonies, but took an especial care of them, enabling them to
triumph over all the opposition they met with, to the confusion of their most
avowed Adversaries. He did not leave them comfortless, but administered to them
in a very signal manner, making them Romans 8.37.
more than conquerours through him that loved them.

So that as a little Philosophy (as the Lord Bacon Essay 16.
observes) inclines a Man's Mind to Atheism, but depth in Philosophy brings
Men's Minds about to Religion; so here, though a superficial view of the
Hardships and Tortures these Saints endured, may represent their case as very
deplorable, a more perfect insight into it will soon confute this notion, by
manifesting them to have had a singular interest in God's favor, and been his
peculiar care; because it could not otherwise have been that they should so
courageously bear up against those multitudes of heavy pressures, under which
Flesh and Blood must of it self have inevitably sunk.

The sum is, That God is always mindful of them that cast their Care upon
him, and always ready to assist them, though not always the same way. He suits
his Kindness to Men's Trust in him, and by how much the stronger and better
settled this is, so much the more they may expect of his Relief. So that the
less we depend upon our selves, and the more heartily we apply to him for
Succor, in the better case we are at present; and are like, besides, to be
continually improving in his Favor, and hence to enjoy yet greater measures of
strength, and the more lasting safety. Which being the natural effect of a
steady dependence upon God, the more our Confidence in him increases, the more
will his Concern for us increase; and the more his Concern for us increases,
the more still will our Confidence in him increase, till by degrees we find to
our unspeakable comfort, that there is no Security like trusting in him, no
Life like living upon his Providence, no Support in evil times, no Ease, no
Satisfaction, no Happiness on this side Heaven, like casting all our Care upon
him.

SECT. II.
II. THIS Duty of Trusting in God is farther useful for quieting our Minds in
all Conditions. This World being a place of continual Troubles and
Disappointments, where Luctus and ultrices posuere cubilia curae, Pallentesque
habitant morbi, tristisque senectus, Et metus, and malesuada fames, and turpis
egestas. Aeneid. 6.
Sorrows, and Cares, and Sicknesses, and the decays and infirmities of Age, and
Fear, and Hunger, and Want, have taken up their abode; whatsoever tends to
lessen these seldom fails of being esteemed worthy of a regard suitable to the
benefit expected from it. The Error is generally on the other hand, that Men
spend too much time, and take too much pains for this Life, to the hazard of
their eternal state. Like Martha, their diligence about many things occasions
the neglect of the one thing needful, all their study being too often only how
they may make themselves happy here. To which end, no labor is thought too
hard, so there appear any probability of an advantage by it; as if all our
business in this World had been only to make provision for our short
continuance in it.

And yet when all is done, the uncertainty of success in our wisest
undertakings shows beyond contradiction, that there is no surer way to a
perfect enjoyment of one's self, than a serious preparation of Mind for all
Events. Hereby a Man's Thoughts are composed, that before were in continual
agitation, fluctuating and tossed aabout with every blast of Fortune, always in
fear, and always busied with vain Contrivances for the future, never at ease,
and hardly hoping to be so. Experience convinces him of his own inability to
determine his own portion either of Joy or Grief, Happiness or Misery, or to
prevent a thousand chances, which may happen to cross his Designs, in spite of
his utmost power and foresight. When he has employed all his Skill and
Dexterity, all his ingenuity, Wisdom, and Prudence in laying a long train for
compassing his Ends, he knows not what diversity of unexpected accidents may
make it miscarry, at least preventing its intended operation, perhaps giving it
a quite contrary issue And whilst he remains in this wavering uncertain state,
it is impossible he should have any true enjoyment of himself, or whatsoever he
most delights in. It is only a sure Trust in God that can free him from the
burden of his wild roving Fancies, his fruitless Projects, and tormenting
Cares. And this it does by rendering him, 1. Less afraid of any appearance of
Danger. 2. Less affected with any Evils that befall him. 3. Less solicitous for
the future.


1. First, I say, a sure Trust in God renders persons less afraid of any
appearance of danger, whether real, or imaginary only. It must be acknowledged,
that a great part of many Men's fears are perfectly chimerical, the mere
product of their own idle or melancholic Fancies, filling their Heads with
needless Jealousies of what is never like to come to pass but yet the dread
whereof breeds no less uneasiness in their Minds, than if they certainly
foreknew that thus it must be. Quire contrary to him at Athenae. Deipnosoph. l.
12. p. ult.
Athens, who viewing the Port there, and observing the Ships coming in to
unlade their Burdens, conceited them all to be his own, and pleased himself as
much with the conceit, as if it had been true. They expect e're long to groan
under all the Evils they observe to befall others, though in very different
circumstances, and whence there is no pretense to conclude, that themselves
shall become their Fellow Sufferers. And Quis enim potest mortem aut dolorem
metuens, quorum alterum saepe adest, alterum semper impendet, esse non miser?
Cic. Tusc. Quaest. l. 5.
this Expectation is almost as bad to them, as if they really felt the Pains
and Aches in their Bodies, the Wants or Losses in their outward Estates, the
Contempt and Reproaches, or whatsoever sort of grievances they apprehend
themselves most liable to. Now it is some commendation of a steady Reliance
upon God, that it effectually removes whatever disturbances arise from this
source, and teaches persons rather to employ their Thoughts in meditating upon
the manifold inestimable Blessings they may reasonably hope for at the hand of
a most gracious Father, who is infinitely good in himself, and whose delight it
is to be incessantly doing good to his poor. Creatures. It furnishes their
Minds with a more agreeable sort of Contemplations, and so at once diverts
their wonted Suspicions, and administers a supply of substantial Comforts
instead thereof. By directing them patiently to wait for the completion of all
God's Promises, it sets them above the power of many anxious surmises, whereto
they were before in bondage.

But it is much more considerable, that a hearty exercise of this Duty is an
admirable Preparation for those more real Dangers which encompass us at every
turn. There is no living without frequent crosses, and frequenter just grounds
of fear, especially in times of any public Disturbances, or other common
Calamities. And these will sadly imbitter the utmost happiness a Man can hope
to attain to at present, and must inevitably overthrow it, unless prevented by
a cheerful expectation of safety from above. Equidem sapientem illum
conscientia sua fretum, fecurum and confidentem in omni vita dici, and futurum,
quod omnia accidentia reputer ad meliores rations trahens, and quod nihil
morose vel difficulter excipiat sib^que persuadeat pertinere res suas ad
immortales Deos. Apol. de Habit. Doct. Plat. l. 2.
Nothing will ease our Minds in this case like a serious remembrance, that no
Evils, how formidable soever can befall us, but by God's permission, and that
if he do permit it, he knows how not only to keep them from hurting us, but to
give us occasion of rejoicing in them. His All Sufficiency is the most
sovereign Cordial for the support of our drooping Spirits, the safest Armor
against all the assaults of an unlucky Fortune; and whosoever rests entirely
upon this need never fear. Though he walk through the valley of the shadow of
death, he needs not be discouraged, for he knows already that all things are at
God's disposal, and he over-ruleth them as he pleases, but always for the good
of those that rightly put their trust in him. Hence he can securely behold the
World in combustion all about him; and in the midst of its greatest dangers,
when the Winds blow, and the Waves rage and foam, and there is no appearance of
an escape from any other means, Quisquis composito serenus aevo
Fatum sub pedibus dedit superbum,
Fortunamque tuens utramque rectus
Invictum potuit tenere vultum,
Non illum rabies minaeque Ponti
Versum funditus excitantis aestum,
Nec ruptis quoties vagus caminis,
Torquet fumificos Vesevus igneis,
Aut celsas soliti ferire turres
Ardentis vi fulminis movebit.
Boet. de Consolat. l. 1. Metr. 4.
he can sit as upon a Rock, and defy all their Violence, and admire the
singular comfort it is to him, that being in God's Hand no evil can prevail
against him. Having thus fixed his Hope in God, he has a pure Defense. Whatever
mischiefs seem to hang over him, he questions not but to be sufficiently
sheltered against them, that either they shall not reach him, or if they do,
their fall shall have its force so broken, that he shall receive little or no
harm from them. Which is the next Instance of the Usefulness of this Duty for
quieting our Minds, in that as it makes Men less afraid of Dangers, so also,

2. Less affected with any Evils that befall them. Let whatever Misfortunes
come, the good Christian who has learned to cast his Care upon God, finds his
belief in him a mighty abatement of their Burden. As he suffers not himself to
be discomposed with the fear of them whilst at a distance, and in prospect
only, so neither is he overcharged with grief when he comes to feel them. He
looks not so much at the Rod, as at him that has appointed it, and when its
strokes are smartest, he knows from whom they come, and that if rightly
considered, he can have no cause to complain of them. When he perceives himself
under the sorest pressures that at any time seize him, he is not affrighted at
them, because his Trust in God supports him, by suggesting to him these
following, or the like Meditations.

Medit. I. That no Misfortune befalls any of us without God's Providence,
nothing ever happening either well or ill without his Observation; and
consequently, that all our Grievances are from him. Job 5.6.
Affliction does not come forth of the dust, nor does trouble spring out of the
ground: but all, Lam. 3.38.
both good and evil proceeds out of the mouth of the most high, all our
Crosses and Afflictions being known to him, and coming according to the
direction of his infinite Wisdom, and the guidance of his Providence. Am. 3.6.
Shall there be evil in the City, says the Prophet, that is to say, any evil
of Punishment or Suffering, and the Lord has not done it? Quicquid patimur
venit ex alto. Sen. Oedip. 5.2.
Neither particular Persons, nor whole Communities suffer any thing, but as
pleases him.

Medit. II. That God being infinitely Wise and Good sends no Afflictions but
for wise and good Ends. He orders Permittes ipsis expendere numinibus; quid
Conveniat nobis, rebusque sit utlle nostris.
Juv. Sat. 10.
all things with the greatest Reason, as becomes a Being of infinite
Perfections, propounding to himself the best Designs, and always using the best
means for their accomplishment. And though we may not be able to fathom his
intent in the Afflictions he lays upon us, we may easily find abundant cause
readily to submit to them. It is intolerable Irreverence to suspect our selves
hardly dealt by, because the Almighty is not pleased to ask our Advice, or take
those Methods in all his Dispensations, which are most agreeable to our
Desires. When our Case seems most disconsolate, he may have weighty Reasons for
it, that we are not aware of; but if we were, would force us heartily to admire
his ineffable Wisdom, and Goodness, and thankfully to bless and praise him for
his Care of us. As for instance.

The design of our Sufferings perhaps may be, to mortify some unruly Lust or
Passion, or to affect us with a sense of some heinous Crime not duly repented
of; it may be to bring down our proud looks, as it fared with King Dan. 4.32,
33.
Nebuchadnezar; to humble us for some notorious wickedness, as the Message 2 Samuel 24.13.
King David received by the Prophet Gad, or to prevent our being puffed up with
an high conceit of our selves, as S. 2 Cor. 12.7.
Paul's Thorn in the Flesh.

It may be to teach us Patience, that this S. Ja. 1.4.
having its perfect work, we may be perfect and entire, wanting nothing; Romans
5.4.
That our Tribulation may work patience, and patience experience, or rather
(...).
approbation upon trial, and this approbation may produce an hope which makes
not ashamed.

It may be to inform us of the true value of God's Mercies, and Plus sensimus
quod habuimus, postquam habere desivimus. D. Hierom. Epist. 26. Tum denique
homines nostra intelligimus bona, quum quae in potestate habuimus, ea amisimus.
Plaut. Captiv. 1.2.
make us prize them the more highly when we have them, by knowing what it is to
want them.

It may be to wean our Affections from this World, that being experimentally
convinced, how little reason there is to expect a state of Happiness here, we
may be taught to look forward to another Life, and to Phil. 3.14.
press on toward the mark, for the prize of the high-calling of God in Jesus
Christ our Lord.

It may be to heighten our Devotion, and make us the more zealous and earnest
in our Addresses to him, that in our Hos. 5.15.
Affliction we may seek him early.

It may be by way of punishment for some abominable wickedness obstinately
persisted in, as Exodus 9.16.
Pharaoh was raised up for this very cause, that God might show in him his
power, and by his Vengeance executed upon that wicked King, might have his
Justice admired, and his Name spoken of throughout the Earth; or for some
scandalous Enormity, which though repented of, makes it necessary for
vindicating God's Honor, that he take the matter into his own Hands; as 2 Samuel
12.10, 14.
the Prophet Nathan was sent to King David, to acquaint him, that having by his
barbarous usage of Vriah, given occasion to the Enemies of God to blaspheme, he
should therefore be punished with the death of his Child that was to be born,
and that the Sword should never depart from his House. Thus God may deal with
others; and when he does, the consideration of their Transgressions, whereby
they Vim Deo facimus iniquitatibus nostris, iram in nos Divinitatis armamus,
nolentem ulcisci cogimus; parcere volentem non permittimus. Salv. de
Providentia, l. 5.
have provoked him to treat them after this manner, if duly attended to, will
dispose them to reflect upon their own folly, rather than murmur or be
dissatisfied at God's Judgments so deservedly inflicted upon them; and will
teach them for their comfort, how they may get themselves eased of their
Burden, and that it is not God's but their own doing, if they continue to groan
under its weight; and moreover, that it is an abundant happiness for them to be
punished here, rather than in the other World.

Or lastly, It may be for the trial of our Faith, as it was with Job, that
singular Example of a quiet submission to God's Will, and of a steadfast
Fidelity to him, under all his Visitations, and with our Lord's first Disciples
and Apostles; that our Trust in him thus experimented, 1 S. Pet. 1.7.
may be found unto Praise, and Honor, and Glory, at the appearance of Jesus
Christ; to Conflictatio cum adversis probatio est veritatis. D. Cypr. de
mortalit. Cruciate, torquete, atterite, damnate nos. Probatio est innocentiae
nostrae iniquitas vestra. Tertul Apol. c. ult. In tribulationibus quis sit
fidelis agnoscitur. Sext. Pythagor. ex Verse. Ruffim. Apparet virtus,
arguiturque malis. Ovid. de Trist. l. 4. Eleg. 3. (...). Maxim. Tyr. Dissert.
35.
prove our Sincerity in what we profess, and to see whether we will immovably
adhere to God and our Duty, as well when he seems to frown upon us, as when he
follows us with his more favorable Dispensations.

These and many other like Reasons God may have for laying his Hand heavy upon
us, which when discovered, will clearly vindicate his Proceedings. And the
consideration whereof should therefore banish all manner of Dissatisfaction at
the harshest of his Corrections, and should persuade us all, that he always
acts upon just and good grounds, though possibly through the weakness of our
Understanding we may not at present discern particularly what they are.

Medit. III. That whatsoever troubles are thus sent us by God, they can never
hurt us, except through our own fault. They would not be at all sent to us, did
not our selves give occasion for them by our Sins, or want them in order to our
improvement in Goodness here, and our greater Happiness hereafter; or unless we
might be Instruments of promoting God's Glory by a due attendance to them. And
when they do come, they can never make us miserable if we mind to improve them
aright, by endeavoring to answer the Ends for which they are sent.

If they befall us as a just punishment of out Sins, our selves are very
apparently the cause of them, and must therefore seek for a redress from our
selves, by forsaking the Sins which called for them. And if we do not this; and
when they are designed for our improvement in Patience, Humility, or whatsoever
other Virtue, if we do not enquire into God's purpose in inflicting them, they
may prove prejudicial in either of these cases. But then, all the blame of this
lies at our own doors, because we attend not to the reason of their befalling
us, and the use that ought to be made of them.

It is indeed a different case, when our Sufferings are intended only for the
trial of our Fidelity, or that we may be Examples to others of an eminent
Constancy under Afflictions; that is to say, when we are called to bear with
hardships, as good Soldiers of Jesus Christ, and to endure griefs, suffering
wrongfully for conscience toward God, when we do well, and yet are called to
suffer for it. This is one of the Atheists commonest grounds of Exception
against the Divine Providence; and it is, I confess, a considerable difficulty
to Flesh and Blood, and which therefore gave occasion to our Blessed Savior to
caution his Followers so often to expect and prepare for it. But yet, besides
that, this is no more, nay, is incomparably less than our blessed Lord freely
endured upon our account; a sure Trust in God will wonderfully alleviate all
the trouble hereof, by the comfortable hope it sets before us, either of a
glorious and speedy Deliverance here, or an inestimably valuable Reward
hereafter. This it was that so signally encouraged the three Children against
all the Menaces of King Dan. 3.18.
Nebuchadnezzar; whereupon Tertullian cries out, Scorpiac. c. 8.
O martyrium and sine passione perfectum! etc. O Martyrdom even perfected
without Suffering! they had suffered enough, and were burnt enough, whom God
therefore protected, least he should seem to belly his own Power. This made the
first Professors of our Faith Rom 8.33, 36. Act. 5.41. 2 Cor. 4.10, 11.
so forward to undergo the utmost Cruelties for their Savior's sake. This made
those numbers of Martyrs in the following Ages of the Church so willingly
(...). Just. M. Apol. 2. Neque cruciatum, neque mortem, pro fide recusamus.
Lactant. Inst. l. 7. c. 5. Qui se excruciandos and excarnificandos pro
Evangelio furentibus tradidissent, ne Martyrii honorem merito perderent. D.
Cyprian. Epist. 30. Non praescripta exilia, non destinata tormenta, non rei
familiaris damna, non corporis supplicia terruerunt. D. Cypr. de lapsis.
expose themselves to all the Insults and Outrages of their merciless
Adversaries, Sic itaque nos ad Deum expansos ungulae fodiant, cruces
suspendant, ignes lambant, gladii guttura detruncent, bestiae insiliant,
paratus est ad omne supplicium ipse habitus orantis Christiani. Tertul. Apol c.
30.
defying Banishments, Tortures, Losses, Beasts, Fires, Swords, or Crosses, to
make them miserable; (...). De Martyr. Polycarpi.
enduring the sharpest Severities with a wonderful composure of Mind; A
defensione fidei majorum nulla vis depulit, non minae, non blandimenta, non
vita, non mors, non palatium, non satellites, non Imperator, non imperium, non
homines, non daemones. Vin. Lyrin.
neither suffering any kind of Force, nor Threatenings, nor Flatteries, nor
Life, nor Death, nor the Court, nor its Officers, nor the Emperor, nor the
Empire, nor Men, nor Devils, to assright them from the Faith they had received
from their Forefathers; (...). Just. M. Apol. 1. Decretum ex tabella recitavit;
Thascium Cyprianum gladio animadverti placet: Cyprianus Episcopts dixit, Deo
gratias. D. Cypriani Pass. ex Vet. MS.
rejoicing that they should by this means be delivered out of the Hands of
their wicked Masters; (...). Polycarp ad Philip.
esteeming of their Chains as the Crowns, the Ornaments and Diadems of the
truly elect of God and Christ; Certatim gloriosa in certamina ruebatur,
multoque avidius martyria, gloriosis mortibus quaerebantur, quam nunc
Episcopatus pravis ambitionibus appetuntur. Sulpic. Severi Hist. Sacr. in an.
304. Cum omni saevitia vestra concertamus, etiam ultro irrumpentes; magisque
damnati quam absoluti gaudemus. Tertul. ad Scap. Saturninus quidem omnibus
bestiis velle se objici profitebatur ut sc. gloriosiorem gestaret coronam.
Pass. SS. Perpet. and Felic. (...). Just. M. c. Tryph. (...). Ibid.
and rushing with greater eagerness upon these glorious trials, than wherewith
others have since endeavored after the principal Stations in the Church.

And this same Trust in God, together with that Assistance of the holy Spirit
which still goes along with it, (though not in that miraculous manner as
formerly) has enabled multitudes of others since, to take patiently the
spoiling of their Goods, or whatsoever other Barbarities, not accounting their
lives dear to them, so they might finish their course with joy, and might
secure to themselves an Interest in the eternal Rewards of the other Life.

There is a great deal of Satisfaction in suffering in a Righteous Cause, and
when it cannot be avoided without Sin. For a Man to offer himself in this case,
to conflict with Hunger and Thirst, Cold and Nakedness, Watchings and Fastings,
Scorn and Contempt, Pains and Tortures, to be deprived of his ordinary means of
Subsistence, and his wonted capacity of doing good, to be reproached, reviled,
defamed, to be persecuted, afflicted, tormented, and perhaps, at last to resist
unto Blood; thus to be made a spectacle, to the World, to Angels, and to Men,
rather than be induced to depart from his Integrity, is an evidence of an
immovable Confidence in God, and may be expected to meet with a suitable return
of Kindness from him. He has a particular regard for such who thus cast
themselves upon him, and perfects his strength in their weakness, and the more
they rely upon his Care, and the less upon themselves, or the help of others,
the more peculiarly he concerns himself for them. They shall not be left
destitute whilst he beholds their steadfast Dependence upon his Providence, for
he will be sure to find out a means of support for them, that in the midst of
their acutest agonies they shall have no cause to complain of him, or to repent
of the Tribulations they encounter for his sake, and for their constant and
faithful adherence to the Truths delivered in his Gospel, and their
conscientious observance of his Laws. Quam pulchrum est spectaculum cum
Christianus cum dolor congreditur, cum adversum minas and supplicia, and
tormenta componitur? Cum strepitum mortis, and horrorem carnificis insultet?
Min. Fell. Octav.
It is a glorious sight to observe a devout Christian resolutely exposing
himself to Death, or Pains, or Losses, or whatever Persecution, without fear of
being forsaken by God in his extremity. This is the truest and best sign of an
unfeigned Affiance in (as well as of an hearty Love, and entire Resignation to)
Almighty God, and gives therefore the best Title to his favorable Protection.
And if this be not enough to set our Minds at rest, and make us easy under
Troubles, a sure Trust in God suggests farther,

Medit. IV. That they not only cannot hurt us without our own fault, but
moreover, Nullum enim tam grave malum apparebit, quin ex eo bonum aliquod multo
majus, multoque optabilius, magno Deorum beneficio aliquando colligatur. Cic.
Consolat. ad Brut.
it is our fault if we be not benefited by them. As unwelcome as these sort of
Dispensations ordinarily are, they may possibly make for our advantage even in
this present life, whether from their own natural tendency, or from the Mercy
of Almighty God overruling them for our good. They may prove as healthful and
salutary as that stroke of a Sword, Valor. Max. l. 1. c. 8.
which, instead of putting an end to the Sufferers life, as was designed, only
made a seasonable vent to let out an Imposthume, that must otherwise have
speedily dispatched him. They may unexpectedly raise the Sufferers up new
Friends, as Exodus 2.9, 10.
Moses's being exposed in the Nile procured him the honor of being reputed
King Pharaoh's Grandson, and the privilege of being bred up at Court, and Act.
7.22.
instructed in all the learning of the Egyptians: As Bion (...). Diog. Laert.
l. 4. in vita Bionis.
by being exposed to sale, fell into the Hands of a kind Master, who dying left
him his Heir; or as Themistocles's Banishment from Athens, and the Difficulties
and Dangers that befell him hereupon, brought him to the Persian Emperor, by
whom he was entertained with that Kindness, and honored to that degree, that
he professed plainly, (...). Plut. in vita Themist.
He had been undone, if he had never been undone. They may put Men upon some
new and unthought of Employment, as has been observed of Nunciato naufragio,
Zeno noster, cum omnia sua audierit submersa, Jubet me, inquit, Fortuna
expeditius Philosophari. ^^^ec. de tranquil. anim. c. 14. (...) etc. Nonni
(...). Diog. Laert. l. 7. in vita Zen. (...). Plutar. de capienda ex hostibus
utilitate and lib. de animi tranquil.
Zeno, whose misfortune at Sea first brought him to the study of Philosophy,
wherein he afterward became a celebrated Proficient, and very much to his own
Satisfaction. (...). Diog. Laert. l. 2. in vita Socratis, and in vita Phoed.
So Phoedon's Captivity, and his Slavery consequent upon it, was the means of
his coming to Socrates's knowledge, and through his Favor and Kindness, to the
study of Philosophy, and the Skill he attained to in it, and the Fame he got by
it. (...). D. Laert. l. 7. in vit. Chrysip.
And the confiscating of Chrysippus's Patrimony was likewise the first occasion
of his becoming a Philosopher.

Or farther, Men's Troubles may become a step to some extraordinary
Advancement, and which without them they would never have attained to. Genesis
41.40, 41, etc.
Thus Joseph by being sold a Slave into Egypt, came at length to be Governor
of the Land, which he had never been, if he had tarried safe at home in his own
Country, and in his Father's House.

Or they may reclaim them from some costly and pernicious Extravagancies,
wherein they had formerly indulged themselves; S. Luke 15.11, etc.
as it fared with the Prodigal Son in our Savior's Parable.

Or, lastly, they may excite them to greater Diligence for the future, whereby
to arm themselves the better against other like Streights and Exigencies, and
so may put them into a method of thriving for the remaining part of their Lives.

And Multorum mortem distulit morbus, and saluti illis fuit videri perire.
Senec. Epist. 78. Quam multos militiae morbus eripuit? quosdam ne ad ruinam
domus suae occurrerent, inimicus vadimonio tenuit; ne in piratarum manus
pervenirent, quidam naufragio consecuti sunt. Id. de benef. l. 6. c. 9.
many other ways there are, whereby a present loss or other disadvantage may
turn to account in this Life, making our latter end like Job 42.12.
Job's, far better than the beginning.

But this is a small matter in comparison of the inestimable, infinite reward,
which a good improvement of our Sufferings may procure us in the World that is
to come, by reason of the influence they generally have, for putting persons in
mind of a better state, and the duty that is required in order to it. They are
frequently observed to be singularly useful in this respect. And it argues an
ill temper of mind, and a notorious degree of wickedness, where they prove
otherwise. It was a very lamentable Relation that Thucidides L. 2.
gave of the misbehaviour of the Athenians, in the time of their famous
Pestilence, that whilst this Distemper raged most dreadfully amongst them,
overpowring the Skill of their eminentest Physicians, triumphing over all
attempts of Cure, driving the more considerate of them to the Temples, but
sparing them no more there than in other places, when Death appeared every
where in the dismallest shape, and without the least pity, the use their
unhappy Citizens made hereof was but to indulge themselves the more boldly in
their Vices, pursuant to that Epicurean Doctrine mentioned by S. Paul, 1 Cor.
15.32.
Let us eat and drink for to morrow we die. Considering the manifest
uncertainty of their lives, they grew past all shame, resolving to deny
themselves in nothing whilst they lived, nor to confine themselves to the
observance of their duty, because they looked upon themselves and all they had
to be but of a day's continuance. They had no regard to Modesty, Justice, or
any thing that was becoming, but whatsoever they apprehended to be for their
Profit or Pleasure, they were sure to pursue, though by the most unlawful
means, casting off all fear of God, and all respect for Humane Laws, and
gratifying their most unreasonable Desires without control, because they
expected not to live so long as to be brought to punishment for their
Villainies.

And the like miserable account Jacebant interim tota civitate, non jam
corpora, sed cadavera plurimorum; and misericordiam in se transeuntium,
contemplatione sortis mutuae flagitabant. Nemo respexit aliud praeterquam lucra
crudelia, etc. In vita D. Cypriani.
Pontius the Deacon gives of the Carthaginians, and Pestifera namque lues
feraliter insipienti populo incumbit, quae in brevi tantam ejus multitudinem
remoto mucrone, sternit, quantam ne possint vivi humare. Sed hac quidem
emendatur, ut illud Isaiae prophetae quoque impleretur, dicentis: Et vocavit
Deus ad planctum and calvitium, and cingulum sacci; ecce vitulos occidere, and
jugulare arietes: ecce manducare and bibere, etc. De exidio Brit.
Gildas of our own Nation, when they were infested with the same Disease, and
(...). l. 6. c. 38.
Josephus of some among the Jews, when they were plagued with Fire, Sword, and
Pestilence all at once. Ne in summo quidem rerum discrimine, cessasse unquam
vitia civium, usque ad excidia civitatum. Salv. de gubern. Dei, l. 6.
As Salvian also complains of the Men of Treves, that when they were in a most
deplorable condition, they yet persisted in their wickedness without any
amendment. When their City was about to be sacked by the Enemy, they still
proceeded to multiply their Abominations, as though no danger were near them.
And when their Ruin was completed, their City burnt and laid waste, their
People taken Captives or slain, and whatever was left remaining gave such
occasion of sorrow, that In qua nescias poene cujus sit sors pejor ac durior,
interfectorum an viventium. Ibid.

Ludicra ergo publica Trever petis? etc. Ibid.


it was hard to tell whose lot was hardest of the Dead or of the Living, they
were still intent upon their Vanities and Pleasures, requesting of the
Magistrates to have their public Plays, as in times of Safety and Prosperity.
So little influence had all their Sufferings upon them, when they ought much
rather to have humbled them in the deepest manner that might be for all those
sins which had brought these Miseries upon them.

From which, and other like Instances, we may learn, to what excess of
unlimited Impiety Mankind are too prone to be carried on, when they cease to
attend to God's Chastisements, and the End that he designs in them. It was a
mighty aggravation of these Peoples Wickedness that they dared to allow
themselves in it at a time, when God in an eminent manner called to weeping,
and to mourning, and to baldness, and to girding with sackcloth. When they
should have been most solemnly bewailing their Iniquities, and crying earnestly
to God for pardon, and should have unfeignedly resolved upon a better Obedience
for the future, they took a quite contrary course, as if they had no sense at
all of what they already endured, or what more they had cause to fear; and by
this means highly provoked God to have plagued them yet much more severely for
all their Abominations. Which, though very offensive, if they had been
committed at another season, and in other circumstances, were in this case more
intolerably so, as containing in them, together with their own natural
turpitude and immorality, an horrid abuse also of the very means that God
thought fit to make use of in order to their Reformation.

But it was far otherwise with the Ninevites, when the Prophet Jonah was sent
to forwarn them of the Destruction that was preparing for them, and would
speedily overtake them, except they would amend their doings. For no sooner was
news hereof brought Jon. 3.6, 7, 8.
to the King of Nineveh, but immediately he arose from his Throne, and laid his
Robe from him, and covered him with Sackcloth, and sat in Ashes, (as the
manner of those times was in their solemn Humiliations) and he caused it to be
proclaimed and published through Nineveh, by the decree of the King and his
Nobles, saying, Let neither Man nor Beast, Herd nor Flock taste any thing; let
them not feed, nor drink Water; but let Man and Beast be covered with
Sackcloth, and cry mightily unto God; yea, let them turn every one from his
evil way, and from the violence that is in their hands.

Thus De bello civ. l. 2.
Caesar enforms us concerning the Inhabitants of Marseilles, that when C.
Tribonius lay in siege against them, it was easy to be seen from the Camp and
other Eminencies, how the young People in the Town, as well as the Elder and
more serious, and their Wives and Children, and their very Guards fell to their
Devotions, some praying from the top of the Wall, and others flocking to the
Temples to beg a Deliverance.

And thus it was generally observed of the Heathen Mariners, that they were
wont in their Distress, to pray, and make Vows to some of their supposed
Deities, and upon their escape to bring their Oblations to the Temples in token
of their Gratitude.

And because it was not thus amongst the Jews, but they remained incorrigible
under God's correcting hand, he was highly incensed against them, and
threatened to avenge himself upon them for it. He had visited them with diverse
sorts of Plagues, with Famine, and Drought, and Blasting, and Mildew, the
Palmer-worm, the Pestilence, and the Sword, Am. 4.11.
Had overthrown some of them as the Lord overthrew Sodom and Gomorrah, and the
rest were as a firebrand plucked out of the fire; and now he resented it very
highly that they still persisted in their Disobedience, after he had essayed so
many several ways for their Reformation, and therefore makes this complaint of
their unfruitfulness under all his Chastisements, yet have ye not returned unto
me, says the Lord; and so he proceeds to intimate to them, what Vengeance they
were hereupon to expect at his Hands. Whence appears both what the intent of
these severe Judgments were, and how it displeased God that they made no better
use of them. This he accounted a great addition to all their other
Wickednesses, and therefore lets them know, that they must certainly expect to
smart for it, if continued in.

Sufferings have an admirable efficacy for putting a stop to diverse kinds of
Sins, such as Luxury, Idleness, Pride, Ambition, and the like, for weaning Men's
Minds from the things of this World, for elevating their Thoughts and
Affections to, and quickening their Endeavors after a better state, for
enlivening their Devotion, and putting them upon frequent and fervent Addresses
to the Throne of God's Grace, for humbling them under a sense of their numerous
Iniquities, and the Guilt contracted by them, and for inviting to a
commiseration of their Fellowsufferers, and exciting them hereby to all proper
offices of Charity. They are of great use to obstruct the Sinners career of
Wickedness, to reduce the inconsiderate to a sober mind, and to engage those of
a better Disposition to endeavor after farther improvements in Holiness. For
this cause, as (...). Strom. l. 7.
Clemens Alexandrinus speaks, Want and Sickness, and other like trials are
often sent as Monitors, to rectify past Miscarriages, and introduce a better
Obedience for the future. They are intended by God to bring Persons to a
serious consideration of their ways, and their doings, and stir them up to an
amendment of whatever is amiss therein. And it is nothing but our
non-attendance to them, or abuse of them, that prevents their producing this
good effect. If they be bound in fetters, says Elihu in in the Book of C.
36.8, 9, 10.
Job, and holden in cords of affliction, then he shows them their work, and
their transgressions that they have exceeded; he opens also their ear to
discipline, and commands that they return from iniquity. And this holy David
experimented to his great satisfaction, as himself professes; Ps. 119.67.
Before I was afflicted I went astray, but now have I kept thy word; and again,
v. 71.
It is good for me that I have been afflicted, that I might learn thy statutes.

Tum maxim Deus ex memoria hominum clabitur, quum beneficiis ejus fruentes
honorem dare divinae indulgentiae debent. Lactant. Instit. l. 2. c. 1. Sed
videlicet qui corrumpimur rebus prosperis, corrigimur adversis, and quos
intemperantes pax longa fecit, turbatio facit esse moderatos. Salv. de gubern.
Dei, l. 16.
A long Prosperity too often lulls Men asleep in a carnal security, making them
careless and remiss, forgetful of God and their Duty. And hence Afflictions,
and sometimes severe ones, become necessary for them, to awaken them out of
their former stupidity, and put them upon a diligent preparation for another
life. (...). Alcin. dogm. Plat. c. 23. (...). Simpl. in Epicteti Ench. c. 13.
They are highly useful for the cure of our disordered Souls. And if like
other Physic they be unpalatable or uneasy at present, this may very well be
born with, so they but work their designed effect, so they but prove like
Tribulatio necessaria est his qui salvantur, ut quodammodo contriti and
attenuati, and conspersi per patientiam verbo Dei, and igniti apti sint ad
convivium Regis. Quemadmodum quidam de nostris dixit, propter martyrium in Deum
adjudicatus ad bestias: Quoniam frumentum sum Christi. Iren. adv. haeres. l. 5.
c. 28 (...). S. Ignat. Ep. ad Romans
S. Ignatiuss Martyrdom, a means of fitting us for the Banquet of the great
King.

Medit. V. A firm trust in God suggests farther, That when our Afflictions have
done their Office, we shall be sure of a Deliverance out of them. They have
their Bounds set them, in respect to both their weight and their duration, and
they can no more exceed these than the Sea can transcend its Banks and overflow
the Earth. They can neither sit heavier, nor last longer than our gracious God
will permit them; who neither slumbereth, nor sleeps, but has his Eye
continually upon us, to behold our wants, and his Ear open to hear our Prayers,
when we seek to him in our Streights. And since he does not afflict willingly,
nor grieve the children of Men, there needs no proof of his readiness to
withdraw his Hand, whenever we cease to want its corrections, or have
otherwise answered his design in them.

These several Meditations a sure Trust in God offers for quieting our Minds
under all disasters. It directs us to consider, that all our Troubles are known
to God, and come not without his Providence, and only for wise and good Ends;
and as they can never hurt us without our fault, so they may be highly
beneficial to us, possibly here, but most certainly hereafter, if our selves
prevent it not; and again, that how uneasy soever any of them may be, we may
certainly expect a freedom from them in due time. It teaches to observe whence
all our Grievances proceed, and on what errand they come, and when they seem
most terrible, it very much allays their Severity, by fixing our Thoughts and
Hopes upon Almighty God, as our best Security even in the worst Condition. It
disposes us, when any troubles befall us, when we either miss of any thing we
earnestly desire, or are seized with any heavy calamity, to look up to God, and
think what a privilege it is to be under the covert of his Wings, and to rest
fully satisfied, that Conjugium petimus, partumque uxoris; at illi
Notum, qui pueri, qualisque futura sit uxor.

whatever he does is best for us, and it is therefore our Interest as well as
our Duty, to acquiesce in it.

And would persons but be persuaded seriously to apply themselves to the
practice of it, their own Experience would above all other Arguments convince
them of this great Truth. For I am very sure, they would hence find more hearty
Joy and Satisfaction even in the midst of all their Troubles, than they would
be willing to exchange for all things in this World besides. They would quickly
perceive it to be Nam pro jucundis aptissima quaeque Dabunt Dii.
Charior est illis homo quam sibi.
Juv. Sat. 10.
much easier, and safer, and happier, and in all respects abundantly better to
be in God's Hands than in their own. Especially, considering that the exercise
of this Duty, is not only useful for quieting our Minds in all conditions, by
lessening our apprehensions of Danger, and taking off the edge of Afflictions,
but likewise by rendering us,

3. Less solicitous for the future. It is diverse persons great unhappiness to
be continually vexing and tormenting themselves, by putting a wrong
construction upon all the Dispensations of God's Providence toward them.
Contrary to the Rules of common Prudence, which would instruct them to
recollect all the alleviating Circumstances of any trouble, whereby to render
it the lighter, these are sure to allow it all the Aggravations they can think
of, and hereby add a very considerable weight to its burden. They make it their
business to fix their Thoughts upon the less pleasing Prospect of any Event, as
if they must never hope to be happy, because all things don't go at present
according to their Minds. When they look at the Inconveniences whereto they
lie exposed, they take care to magnify them to the utmost, and perhaps much
beyond what they will well bear; but when at the Comforts that may arise from
them, or the other Advantages they enjoy to counterpoise them, or whatever
might tend to lighten them, here they invert the Tube, that so they may keep
off all Consolation from themselves.

Or if they have nothing to complain of at present, they can yet perplex
themselves with fears of being miserable, they know not when, nor how.

Or if things look too clear for this, they still apprehend, that howsoever
themselves escape, their Posterity may be brought to a low condition, and this
thought likewise creates them no small disturbance.

Now all the uneasiness of this kind that any meet with (except where it
depends upon a prevailing Melancholy in the Body) can proceed from nothing
else, but a sinful distrust of God's Goodness. And consequently, the removal
hereof will leave no more room for these surmises For how is it possible for
that Man to dread being left in a forlorn condition, who firmly believes, and
lays to heart the manifold Promises that God has made, and Blessings he has
vouchsafed to them that have cast their Care upon him? What can he lack, as
Eusebius (...). Praepar. Evang. l. 1. c. 1.
well argues, who can reckon upon the great King and Governor of all things,
as his Parent and Protector? Nay, what can he fear either for himself or his,
who calls to mind what a loving, merciful and infinitely compassionate God has
obliged himself to provide for him?

Had we been left to our own management, there would have been just cause to
suspect least every attempt we engaged in might miscarry, either through our
own folly, or weakness, or the opposition of other Men, or a thousand accidents
that might attend it. But it is quite otherwise with all that know themselves
under God's Protection; for he is no less able to perform what he has
undertaken for them, than he was gracious in undertaking it. And they need
therefore be no farther concerned for their own Wants or Infirmities, or
insufficiency in whatever respect, than to take occasion from hence to fly the
more readily to Him for help, and depend the more steadfastly upon him. And
indeed to do otherwise, is but to lay an unnecessary Quid necesse est mala
accessere, and satis cito patienda cum venerint praesumere, ac praesens rempus
futuri metu perdere? Est sine dubio stultum, quia quandoque sis futurus miser,
esse jam miserum. Senec. Epist. 24.
burden upon themselves, to anticipate their Sorrows, and in a word, to make
themselves unhappy at present, for fear they should be so hereafter. Like him
that would wilfully starve himself to day, least he should want Victuals to
morrow.

Why then art thou cast down, O my soul? why art thou so disquieted within me?
Have I not still the same God to trust in, who has hitherto been extremely
bountiful to me? and have I not good reason to rely upon him still as much as
ever? is he not still both as able and as willing to take care of me as
heretofore? (...) Antonin. Imp. (...). l. 7. n. 6.
Away then with all unworthy thoughts of his Providence! away with all needless
solicitude for the future, as if he did not mind my Wants. What irreverence,
what undutifulness, what ingratitude must I be guilty of, before I can suffer
my self to distrust him? And what unnecessary endless Vexations do I also
hereby bring upon my self which might be effectually prevented, if I had but
consideration enough to weigh well with my self, what an incomparable happiness
it is, to have an interest in the Divine Protection, and how easy I might be
under it, were it not for my own Imprudence.

And as to my Family, are not they entitled to God's Protection, no less than
my self? and has he not hitherto taken care of them? how then can I imagine
that he will not continue to do it? He provides now for both my self and them;
and why not as well for them when I am gone? It may be I can leave them a
comfortable Subsistence at my death. But if I cannot, why should I be troubled,
so I can but leave them God's Blessing, which is far better than any temporal
Legacy I can pretend to give them. By an unreasonable solicitude for them I may
offend God, and so may wrong both my self and them; but I am certain I have no
way to promote the welfare of either, like an unfeigned resignation of all my
concerns to God's disposal, and a quiet expectation of Safety and Happiness
from him alone.

This my concern for them may be very absurd, and which would appear so to my
self, if I could but discover how Almighty God has determined to dispose of
those I am so concerned for. It may be he designs that most or all of them
should die before me; and then it is certainly a very needless solicitude that
I have for their subsistence after my death. It may be he sees a mean beginning
to be the best way for them to rise and flourish in the World, and that if they
had been more plentifully provided for at the first they would have been apt to
grow idle and extravagant, and bring themselves into greater streights than
they are like to meet with as they are. Or it may be again that he foresees
some other Provision will be made for them, which I am not sensible of, some
Inheritance like to fall to them, or some kind Friend that purposes to take
care of them, or to bequeath a bountiful Legacy to them, or that has an
advantage and wants only a convenient opportunity of helping them to some place
of profit that may maintain them. Or it may be God sees a plentiful Provision
of the things of this life improper for them, and that they will do best, and
be most mindful of their duty, and most desirous to work out the eternal
Salvation of their Souls in a low condition; and why then should I trouble my
self with an unaccountable fear least God should deal more graciously by them
than I would have desired of him. However the case be with them now, or
whatever it is like to be some time hence, it is plain, all my solicitude
cannot profit them against God's Will, but my Trust in him to take care of them
may very much profit both my self and them. And indeed the truest, the
greatest, and most lasting kindness I can do them, as to their temporal
concerns is to leave them entirely to his disposal.

I confess, it is fit that each one endeavor after a prudent provision for
himself and any that depend upon him, as he shall have opportunity. But when he
does what he can in this respect, it is very unreasonable and absurd not to
cast all farther Care upon God, but to take as much thought for the morrow, as
if he had none but himself to take care of him. S. Matt. 6.34.
Sufficient to the day is the evil thereof, the trouble and vexation that
attends it; but when People will be doubling this by their own dissatisfactions
at present, and their groundless Fears and Jealousies for the future, no wonder
if they make themselves very uneasy. But then it is to be remembered, that this
uneasiness is perfectly of their own procuring, not the Portion allotted them
by Almighty God, but merely the result of their own folly; and so is a burden
which they have senselesly laid upon themselves, or at least which they might
quickly have avoided, if they would have been prevailed with to put their Trust
in God, as becomes good Christians.

This is a second Instance of the admirable benefit of Casting our Care upon
God, that it is a singular means of quieting our Minds in all conditions,
rendering us less afraid of any dangers that threaten us, less concerned for any
Evils that overtake us, and less apprehensive of future Misfortunes.

SECT. III.
III. BUT it is yet farther useful for entituling to a better State, when we
shall be translated hence. To which purpose it conduces these three ways.

1. As it is a necessary part of Christianity. 2. As it is a means of our
greater progress in the other Duties of Religion. 3. As it is a singular
Preparative for times of Persecution.
1. As it is a necessary part of Christianity, a Duty incumbent upon all that
profess themselves our Lord's Disciples, which God has plainly and often
required in Scripture, and the performance whereof he as certainly expects from
us, as of any other branch of our Religion. It is Heb. 6.12.
through Faith and Patience, a steadfast Dependence upon him, and a cheerful
resignation of our selves to his disposal, to bear all that he shall lay upon
us, that we must hope to inherit his inestimable Promises. We must not suffer
our selves to be discouraged by whatsoever difficulties, must never c. 10 35.
cast away our confidence in him, if we would obtain the great recompense of
Reward, laid up for his faithful Disciples in another World. Having had such
express command to cast all our Care upon him, we may as well think to be saved
without a love, or fear of him, or thankfulness for his Mercies, or whatever
other Virtue, as without a conscientious observance of this Command. 2. As it
is a means of our greater progress in the other Duties of Religion. There is
nothing serves more naturally to affright persons from sin, and to make them
indefatigably industrious in the ways of Piety, than a continual sense of God's
Presence with them, observing all their doings, to reward or punish them
accordingly: For it is not easy to imagine, how they should dare to indulge
themselves in any known iniquity when they call to mind that they are under his
All-seeing Eye, and that not the least of their miscarriages can possibly
escape his notice. This, if any thing in the World, will excite their utmost
diligence in exercising themselves to have always consciences void of offense
both toward God, and toward Man.
But now this sense of God's Presence with us is no way so well kept up in our
Souls, as by a continual reliance upon, and application to him for whatsoever
we stand in need of. It can never be that we should forget that infinite Being,
to whom we are perpetually looking up for his Blessing, and whom we are taught
to address our selves to upon all occasions for relief, but withal, whose
Favor we are to hope for no longer than we are careful to observe his Will.

Whence it comes to pass, that our very Wants and Calamities, Fears and Dangers
become a means of our better Obedience, by reminding us of the Relation we
stand in to Almighty God, the Benefits we receive from him, and the returns of
Homage that he expects from us. For howsoever any may encourage themselves in
their Wickedness, whilst they have estranged the thoughts of God from their
Minds, they will very hardly know how to continue this their perverseness, when
they remember they are immediately going to offer up their Supplications to
him, for some good thing they want at his Hands. The meditation hereof will
make them ashamed to displease him, considering the daily Benefits his Bounty
supplys them with; and afraid also to do it, least so he should be provoked to
withold his Hand, and deny them what they come next to petition him for, or
perhaps to send them away with a Curse instead of a Blessing.

It is very serviceable likewise for affecting our Souls with a sense of the
numerous Blessings we daily partake of, and hereby for enflaming them with the
love of our so infinitely generous Benefactor, and an unfeigned gratitude to
him for all his unspeakable Loving Kindness. It teaches to sue to him
beforehand for what we need, and when we have obtained it, fills our Mouths
with hearty Songs of Praise and Thanksgiving for it.

And by how much the easier it renders us under all Afflictions, so much the
more it contributes to a ready and cheerful performance of our Duty in all
respects. It engages us to study what return we shall make the Lord, for all
the benefits that he has done unto us, and leaves us free to apply our selves
to whatever acknowledgments we believe he looks for from us. By not suffering
us to be overwhelmed with grief in any case, it preserves our Faculties in
their due liberty, and so disposes us to hearken to God's Will, and forthwith
to set about the performance of it beyond what might otherwise have been hoped
for. And being thus useful an Instrument in order to an holiness of
Conversation, it must necessarily be owned to be of great importance, for
entituling to an eternal state of Happiness.

3. As it is a singular Preparative for times of Persecution. Which how
intolerable soever in it self, loses a very considerable part of its weight,
when it falls upon such as are in a readiness to receive it. It is a great
support amidst the most formidable Terrors, to have learned to place our Trust
in God as an impregnable Defense against all the assaults of the most
inveterate Adversary, assuring our selves, that far 1 S. Jo. 4.4. and 2 Kings
6.16.
greater is he that is with us, than he that is in the world; and that
therefore, Romans 8.31.
if God be on our side, we need not much concern our selves who shall, who can
be against us. For as he is ready at all times to take care of them that cast
their Care upon him, so does he it in an especial manner, whenever he sees them
willing to expose themselves to hardships for his Name's sake. He will either
deliver them out of the Hands of their Enemies, or if he sees it best that they
suffer by them, will turn their Sufferings to their advantage, causing that
their light afflictions, which are comparatively but for a moment, shall work
out for them (...). 2 Cor. 4.17.
a far more exceeding and eternal weight of glory.

S. Matt. 10.18.
Fear not them, says our Savior, which kill the body, but are not able to
kill the soul: but rather fear him, who is able to destroy both body and soul
in hell. And if ye suffer for righteousness sake, says S. Peter, 1 Ep. 3.14,
15.
happy are ye; and be not afraid of their terror, neither be troubled; but
sanctify ye the Lord God in your hearts. And again, c. 4.16, 19.
If any man suffer as a Christian let him not be ashamed, but let him glorify
God in this behalf; and let them that suffer according to the will of God,
commit the keeping of their souls to him in well-doing, as unto a faithful
Creator.

And of how great importance it is in order to the eternal Salvation of our
Souls, thus to cleave to, and rest upon God, though in the midst of
Tribulations and Tortures, choosing to undergo the utmost Barbarities (if called
to it) rather than depart from our Integrity, our blessed Lord sufficiently
enforms us in these words. S. Matt. 10.32, 33.
Whosoever shall confess me before men, him will I confess also before my
father which is in heaven; but whosoever shall deny me before men, him will I
also deny before my father which is in heaven. Or as it is expressed in S.
Mark's Gospel, S Mar. 8.38.
Whosoever shall be ashamed of me, and of my words, in this adulterous and
sinful generation, of him also shall the son of man be ashamed, when he comes
in the glory of his father, with the holy Angels. As much as to say, He that
owns our Savior's Gospel, and is neither ashamed nor afraid to profess its
Doctrines, and observe its Precepts, in spite of all opposition, shall be sure
to receive an abundant Reward at the last day; but they who are timorous and
faint-hearted, and cannot hold out in times of trial, must expect a different
portion, even the eternal Vengeance of Almighty God, to be poured forth upon
them, as a just recompense of their defection from him. Well therefore might
the ancient Professors of our Faith resolve with the Apostle S. Paul, That Romans
8.38, 39.

Has cogitationes quae persecutio potest vincere? quae possunt tormenta
superare? Durat fortis and stabilis, religiosis meditationibus fundata men's:
and adversus omnes Diaboli terrores, and minas mundi, animus immobilis perstat,
quem futurorum fides certa and solida corroborat. D. Cypr. de exhortat. Martyr.
Hoc est esse discipulum Dei, hoc est militem Christi, quem nullus hostis
expugnet, nullus lupus de castris coelestibus rapiat, nullus laqueus inducat,
nullus dolor vincat, nullus cruciatus affligat. Lact. de mort. persecut. c. 16.


neither death, nor life, nor angels, nor principalities, nor powers, nor
things present, nor things to come, nor height, nor depth, nor any other
creature should separate them from the love of God in Christ Jesus, and from a
resolute obedience to his Gospel. Nay, so cautious were they in this respect,
that they not only refused to deny the Faith upon any terms, but would expose
themselves to the utmost, rather than do what might be misconstrued a denial of
it. Insomuch that when Sozom. Hist. l. 5. c. 15.
Julian set himself to beguile those by subtilty, whom he could not force to
Idolatry, they that understood the cheat, chose rather to suffer for forbearing
to pay their accustomed Homage to the Emperor, than do what would be
interpreted an act of Adoration to the Images of Jupiter, and Mars, and
Mercury, which he had purposely ordered to be placed by his own Chair, to the
end, that when the Christians bowed after their wonted manner to himself, they
might be represented as doing it to these. And when, again, Greg. Naz.
Steletut. 1.
at the bestowing of Donatives amongst his Army, they that stood by the
Emperor, commanded the Soldiers as they came, to throw a little Frankincense
into the Fire (as the manner of the Romans was in the worship of their Gods)
the more intelligent utterly refused it, and the rest being afterward told,
that in complying herein they had denied Christ, and worshipped Idols, they
immediately looked like Men half dead, and running forth, as if they were
besides themselves, they publicly owned themselves Christians, with Tears and
Cries, declaring that what they had done was merely by surprise, returning the
Emperor his Money, and begging Death at his Hand as due to their Apostasy.

Thus S. Epist. 24.
Cyprian tells of a certain Woman named Bona, that being drawn by her Husband
to offer Sacrifice, which she did not of her self, but as her Hands were
overpowered by others, and made to do it, she presently disclaimed the fact, as
theirs only who had offered her this Violence, and so submitted to banishment,
rather than undergo the scandal of being thought to have fallen from the Faith,
when she had not.

And I have Sect. 2. n. 2.
already observed how multitudes of others willingly offered themselves to
undergo all kinds of Tortures for their Savior's sake, Steterunt torti
torquentibus fortiores; and pulsantes ac laniantes ungulas pulsata ac laniata
membra vicerunt. D. Cyprian. Epist. 10. Neque tunc civitas Christi, quamvis
adhuc peregrinaretur in terris, and haberet tam magnorum agmina populorum,
adversus impios persecutores suos pro temporali salute pugnavit, sed potius ut
obtineret aeternam, non repugnavit. D. August. de civ. Del. l. 22. c. 6. Inter
fatigatos carnifices. Lactant. Inst. l. 5. c. 1.3.
discovering a kind of impatience for a Crown of Martyrdom, and even tyring out
the Cruelty of their outrageous Persecutors; insomuch that Arius Antonius
having undertaken to persecute those in Asia, and seeing them so little
terrified at the Severities executed upon their Brethren, that they came
flocking by troops to receive the like Sentence, astonished at this their
unparalleled Courage he put a stop to his proceedings, and dismissed them,
Tertul. ad Scap.
saying, (...), Be gone, ye wretches, and since you are so fond of Death,
either hang your selves, or break your own Necks.

Some indeed there were, who for want of a due Dependence upon God, when
Persecutions threatened them, sought to save themselves by pretending to have
complied with what was required of them, though in truth they had not, Qui
seipsos infideles illicita nefariorum Libellorum professione prodiderant, quasi
evasuri irretientes illos Diaboli laqueos viderentur. D. Cypr. Epist. 30.
procuring Certificates to testify that they had done it, in hope by this
deceitful Artifice to find the better quarter amongst the Enemies of the
Christian Name. Annot. Oxon. in loc.
Some would venture to subscribe a Profession that they were of the Worshippers
of Jupiter and Mars, and the rest of the Heathen Deities, that this being shown
to their Persecutors might obtain their quiet. Others who dared not to proceed
thus far, yet would Ibid.
not discountenance any Libels or Tickets that were either sent them by the
Magistrates, or procured them by any of their Friends, but would make use of
them in order to their Peace. And Ibid. and Epist. 55. Vid. and Annot. in lib.
de lapsis, p. 133.
a third sort there was, who would buy them, who though they would not go up to
the Capitol to offer Sacrifice, would fee some Officer there, to suborn another
to do it in their stead, or to procure a Certificate of their having done it,
when they had not, or some other way to get them excused from doing it, yet so
as that they might pass amongst those who had.

But these indirect and unwarrantable Courses the better Christians utterly
condemned, censuring them as Illicita nefariorum, etc. Ut supra.

Quo non minus quam si ad nefarias aras accessissent, -- tenerentur. Ibid.

Illa professio denegantis, contestatio est Christiani, quod fuerat, abnuentis:
fecisse se dixit, quicquid alius faciendo commisit. De Lapsis.

Servivit seculari Domino, qui obtemperavit ejus edicto; magis obaudivit humano
imperio, quam Deo. Ibid.

Deum tamen judicem subterfugere and vitare non poterit. Ibid.


unlawful and wicked, comparing the users of them to those who actually
worshipped at the Heathen Altars, construing their Profession of having denied
Christ, to be indeed one way of denying him, charging them as vertually the
doers of what any else had done at their instigation, and on their behalf, and
endeavoring to make them sensible that they had herein chosen to serve Man
rather than God, and that God (whom they had thus affronted) would be sure to
take notice of it, and bring them to an account for it.

And what they thus disapproved of in others they were very careful to avoid
themselves. They were Parati ad patientiam carceris, armati ad tolerantiam
mortis; repugnatis fortiter seculo, spectaculum gloriosum praebuistis Deo,
secuturis fratribus fuistis exemplo. Ibid.
prepared to endure Imprisonment, and were armed against the fear of Death;
they valiantly resisted the World, they were a glorious spectacle in the sight
of God, and an eminent pattern for the imitation of succeeding Christians.
Quosdam jam comperi coronatos, quosdam vero ad victoriae coronam proximos,
universos autem, quos agmine glorioso carcer inclusit, pari ac simsli calore
virtutis ad gerendum certamen animatos; sicut esse oportet in divinis castris
milites Christi, ut incorruptam fidei firmitatem non blanditiae decipiant, non
minae terreant, non cruciatus ac tormenta devincant. D. Cypr. Ep. 10.
Whilst part of them actually laid down their lives for their blessed Savior,
others were ready to do it upon the first occasion. They were generally
prepared and animated for their spiritual Combat, as became the Soldiers of
Christ, that the uncorrupted soundness of their Faith might neither be allured
by Flatteries, nor terrified by Menaces, nor overcome by Racks and Tortures.
Famemvincitis, and sitim spernitis, etc. Ep. 37.
They were above the dread of Hunger, and despised Thirst, and undervalued the
filth of the Prison, and the horrer of their Punishment. They overcame their
Sufferings, were out their Torments, and did not fear Death, but wish for it,
as being vanquished by the hope of an immortal Reward, that he which conquers
may be crowned with an eternal Life.

And there is the same reason for persisting still in a resolute adherence to
our Religion, and all the parts of it, notwithstanding the utmost attempts of
Men or Devils for enticing or affrighting from it, the same obligation
willingly to expose our selves to whatever hardships for our Saviors sake, the
same encouragement to them that come off Victors in the Christian Warfare, and
the same danger to him that is overcome. And if they who know thus much, have
not the Courage to demean themselves accordingly, this can be imputed to
nothing else, but too great love to the things of this World, and too little
affiance in Almighty God.

If God's Promises be either not believed, or not attended to, what better can
be expected, than that People should be startled at every appearance of danger?
If their Dependence be more upon this Life's Enjoyments, than upon God, it is a
vanity to think they will ever be persuaded to venture the loss of these for
his sake. They may be willing to serve him, and may seem to do it with great
eagerness, whilst they can do it safely; but when their Estates, or it may be
their Lives are at stake, they will conclude it necessary to take care of these
in the first place. Vera igitur Ciceronis illa sententia est; nemo, inquit,
justus potest esse, qui mortem, qui exilium, qui egestatem timet. Lactant.
Instit. l. 6. c. 17. and Cic. de Offic. l. 2. c. 11.
There is nothing that they apprehend requisite to this purpose, but a fear of
suffering will be apt to put them upon, though in direct opposition to their
known Duty. At least it will bias their Judgments, and make them ready to
hearken to whatever has the show of an Argument, for encouraging them in the
prosecution of what they conceive may most probably answer their design. Some
way or other they will be sure to consult their present Interest and Safety,
whatsoever the consequence may be in another state. The dread they have of
being miserable, will excite them to try all means possible for preventing it,
without troubling themselves to enquire over nicely about the lawfulness of
them.

Whereas, on the contrary, no sooner has a Man learned to repose his trust in
God, as becomes a good Christian, but he thenceforward undervalues all things
else in comparison of an Interest in his Favor. He knows whom he has to rely
upon, and how little all his own attempts will signify without the Divine
Blessing, which he can have no reason to expect, whilst he goes out of God's
way to save himself; and again, how little all the malice of his violentest
Adversaries can hurt him without God's permission. And when things seem at
worst, it is a great ease to his Mind to reflect, that the Case may possibly be
much better than it appears to him, there may be a means of escape that he is
not aware of, or some considerable mitigation of his Fears or Sorrows which he
is not sensible of, but which when he shall come to understand it, will give
him cause to rejoice at what has befallen him.

Or come the greatest hardship that can be, he is sure of an ineffable,
unconceivable recompense for it, that if he be 1 Cor. 15. ult.
steadfast and unmovable, always abounding in the work of the Lord, his labor
shall not be in vain in the Lord, but shall advance him to an heavenly Crown of
glory that fades not away; and consequently, that it must argue an intolerable
weakness and want of Judgment not to secure to himself this inestimable Prize,
though it were by wading through a Sea of Blood.

So that upon the whole matter it is evident, that a conscientious practice of
this Duty is our readiest means of security, against all Evils from whatsoever
Quarter, our only Palladium, which whilst we safely retain, there can be no
danger of miscarrying. It is Habemus maximum tuae fomitem salutis, veram de Dei
gubernatione sententiam, quod eam non casuum temeritati, sed divinae rationi
subditam credis. Boet. de Consol. l. 1. pros. 6.
the wisest method we can take in order to our own happiness at present, and
for pleasing Almighty God, and obtaining a share in those eternal Rewards,
which are promised to all his faithful Servants in another World. It is a kind
of Heaven upon Earth, a foretast of those incomparable Joys, whereto we desire
or hope to be advanced in a future state.

And indeed, had persons but once arrived at this happy temper of Mind, to be
able to put their Trust wholly in God, and comfort themselves in his
All Sufficiency, and his readiness to relieve them, what an invincible Support
would this be to them under their heaviest Crosses and Calamities? What an
abatement of all their fearful Expectations? and with what refreshing hopes of
a seasonable redress, might they be enabled calmly to bear any the greatest
disasters that befall them? Could we but all bring our selves to this pass, we
might bid defiance to whatever threatens us, as not able to make us miserable,
so long as our sure Trust is in the Rock of Ages, and a never failing Strength;
might cry out with the before mentioned S. Cyprian, De Orat. Dom.
Quis ei de saeculo metus est, cui in saeculo Deus tutor est? What can he fear
from the World, who whilst he continues in it has God for his Guardian? and
might resolve with the Prophet Habakkuk, That c. 3.17, 18.
although the fig tree should not blossom, non fruit should be in the vine,
though the labor of the olive should fail, and the field should yield no meat;
though the flock should be cut off from the fold, and there should be no herd
in the stall; yet we would rejoice in the Lord, and joy in the God of our
Salvation. Ps. 46.1.
He is a ready, a very present help in the time of trouble. And could we but
look upon him as our Rock and Refuge, and steadfastly repose our Trust in him as
such, we should not need to fear, v. 2, 3.
though the earth were to be moved, and the hills to be carried into the midst
of the sea; though the waters thereof should rage and swell, and the mountains
shake at the tempest of the same. Nay, Horat. 1. Od. 3.
Si fractus illabatur Orbis, Though the whole World should crack and break in
pieces about our Ears, yet were there no cause to be dismayed if we could but
assure our selves that nothing should befall us, even in this confusion but
what should some way be turned to our benefit. Of such unspeakable advantage is
this Duty to all that are rightly exercised in it. It is the best
recommendation to the Divine Blessing and Protection, the best Antidote against
needless Fears and Cares, the best support under Pressures and Calamities, the
best Preservation against the prevalency of those Temptations, whereby the
diffident and distrustful of God's Providence are sure to be overcome; and in
a word, it is the best and surest way to be Happy both here and hereafter. This
is that complete Security, that perfect Satisfaction and Safety mentioned by
the Prophet Isaiah, as annexed to a steady Reliance upon God, c. 26.3. Thou will keep him in perfect peace, whose mind is stayed on thee; and for this very
reason, because he trusts in thee.

CHAP. V. The Weakness and Incompetency of all Natural Means.
IT remains that I proceed to the last Argument I mentioned, for inviting to
cast our Care upon God; that is to say, The Insuffitiency of all other helps
for either securing us from, or supporting us under Afflictions. Now these may
be considered in a twofold respect; 1. Barely as Natural Means, and which may
lawfully be made use of, as we have occasion; 2. Or as they may be unlawful,
and which cannot therefore be ventured upon without sin. And accordingly in
treating of them I shall endeavor to evince, 1. The Weakness and Incompetency
of the former; and, 2. The Evil and Danger of the latter.


SECT. I.
I. THE Weakness and Incompetency of all Natural means, Sunt infida quedam
refugia, ad quae cum quis aufugerit, magis infirmatur, quam confirmatur. D.
August. in Psalm. 45. v. 1.
which how promising soever, will never stand us in stead without the Divine
concurrence, but perhaps may fail us when we have most need of their
Assistance. They may seem very proper and advantageous, but if God withold
his Blessing they must needs prove ineffectual, and so all our greatest
Expectations from them must become abortive. Is. 44.24, 25.
He stretches forth the heavens alone, and spreads abroad the earth by
himself; he frustrateth the tokens of liars, and makes diviners mad, turns
the wisemen backward, and makes their knowledge foolish; Psalm. 33.10.
brings the counsel of the heathen to naught, and makes the devices of the
people to be of none effect. It is upon him alone that all our best Endeavors,
and most useful Projects depend entirely for success; and though whilst they
are employed only as Instruments of his Providence, in order to our welfare,
there is just reason to hope for a good Conclusion of them, yet if they come
once to be separated from, or set in opposition to the Determinations of
Providence, the case is quite altered, and no marvel if they then meet with a
cross event. All Sufficiency is to be found in none but the Almighty Creator,
the best of other Beings being liable to manifold defects and imperfections,
and depending wholly upon him for both their Subsistence and their Power of
Operation; and therefore to rely upon any thing else than him for safety, is
but to trust in the staff of a broken reed, whereon, if a man lean it will go
into his hand, and pierce it.

All our Abilities, or whatsoever Advantages for helping our selves are but the
Gift of God, and act in subordination to his Will and so far only as he is
pleased to give them leave. He observes and governs them all, and it is but
with him to countermand their Proceeding, and it is presently at an end. 1 Chronicles. 29.11, 12.
His is the greatness, and the power, and the glory, and the victory, and the
majesty; for all that is in the heaven and in the earth is his, his is the
Kingdom, and he is exalted as head above all. Both riches and honor come of
him, and he reigns over all, and in his hand is power and might; in his hand
it is to make great, and to give strength unto all. Wherefore, since the Stream
can in no case rise above the Fountain, and in this case falls infinitely below
it, it is very apparent, that all inferior helps are not to be regarded any
farther than the Divine Providence may be expected to promote their Efficacy;
and that it is therefore an instance of intolerable weakness, for any to look
no higher than these for safety, which are not more likely to answer our
Designs when rightly improved, and with a due reverence to and dependence upon
the first mover and cause of all things, than they are sure to deceive such as
place all their Trust in them.

And thus much Experience also testifies, showing beyond all contradiction,
that it is not Men's own foresight, or labor, or outward advantages of whatever
kind that brings their purposes to effect, but the Blessing and Goodness of
Almighty God. For hence it comes to pass, Eccles. 9.11.
that the race is not always to the swift, nor the battle to the strong;
neither yet bread to the wise, nor yet riches to men of understanding, nor
favor to men of skill, but time and chance happens to them all. God reserves
to himself a power to interpose, and cross, and alter the wonted course of
things, whereby to awaken persons to a consideration of himself, and dependence
upon him, and therefore orders matters so, that though they usually happen
according to the probability of second Causes, sometimes they are observed to
fall out quite otherwise. So that when Men have done all they can, and with the
fairest and reasonablest expectation of success, they many times fail of their
End they know not how.

There is a secret uncontrollable Providence that takes occasion to present
extraordinary opportunities, and offers advantages on the one hand, or lays
impediments in the way on the other, which no humane Wisdom could foresee or
provide against. And this gives success to very unlikely Means, defeating the
swift and the strong, and the wise, and the politic, and them that are best
versed in Men and Business, baulking them of their Hopes, and frustrating their
Designs. Whereas, if any Humane Means were of force enough to answer Men's
Desires without the help of a superior Power, it could not be that they should
so frequently miscarry, when in all appearance they are the best disposed that
can be. And this therefore is a plain proof of the vanity and folly of trusting
to these, without having constant recourse to Almighty God for his Blessing
upon them, and resting upon him to give them the desired success. Thus much in
general.

But that the Insufficiency of all Natural Means of Safety may be made yet more
apparent, it will not be amiss to descend to a more particular consideration of
them: And I take it they may be all reduced to these four Heads, I. Wealth. II.
Power. III. A Man's own Abilities and Industry, his Strength, Courage, Skill
and Ingenuity, and Diligence in the use of all these. IV. The kind Assistances
of Friends.


I. The first is Wealth; Which, as the Wiseman speaks, Prove. 16.11.
is the rich man's strong city, and as an high wall in his own conceit. It is
that which he reckons will answer all things, will supply all his needs, will
uphold and assist him in all Difficulties, will give him the advantage over
those that set themselves against him, will create him Friends in time of
danger and distress, will secure him from fear of want, and will be to him
instead of all other helps. Yet this, as much dependence as there is upon it,
will be found to be very defective, if it be observed that,

1. It is but a partial help (as the rest also are) and Non domus and fundus,
non aeris acervus and auri
Aegroto Domini deduxit corpore febres,
Non animo curas.
Horat. Epist. 2. l. 1. Nec calidae citius decedunt corpore febres
Textilibus si in picturis, ostroque rubenti
Jactaris, quam si plebeia in vest cubandum'est.
Lucret. l. 2.
will not reach to all Cases, nor administer a Salve for all Sores, a cure for
all Maladies; nor is it any kind of Relief against diverse of the severest
Afflictions whereto Mankind are liable. The greatest Treasures cannot prevent a
fit of the Gout, or Stone, or Cholick, or Fever, nor remove any other Distemper
of the Body, nor heal a wounded Conscience, nor recover a lost Member, nor
deliver from Death, nor profit in the day of Wrath. Riches are a great Blessing
of God, and for the most part tend considerably to facilitate the Owner's
passage through this World; and the greater share therefore any have of them,
the more cause they have to be thankful for them. But seeing there are great
troubles of different kinds for which these afford no remedy, it is a necessary
piece of Prudence, to look after some other more substantial Support, that may
stand us in stead where these fail.

2. Where a Man's Wealth is most helpful, it is but a very uncertain Comfort,
because he knows not how soon he may possibly be deprived of it. Prove. 23.5.
Riches make themselves wings and fly away as an eagle toward heaven. They are
a transient deceitful Possession, that like the Apples (...). Joseph. (...).
l. 4. c. 27. Duo ibi oppida Sodomum nominatum aiterum, alterum Gomorrum apud
quae pomum gignitur, quod habeat speciem licet maturitatis, mandi tamen non
potest. Solin. Polyhist. c. 48. Edit. Basil.
of Sodom seem beautiful and enticing at a distance, but being handled, turn
presently into Dust or Smoke, and so do us many times little or no good
Quicquid longa series multis laboribus, multa Deum indulgentia struxit, id unus
dies spargit ac dissipat. Senec. Epist. 91.
After a Man has undergone a course of hard labor for many years together, has
busied his Brain in designing, and his Limbs in acting, that if possible he
might advance himself, and perhaps has at length had the good fortune to obtain
his aim, he knows not how soon he may be reduced to his former, or a worse
condition. If his Soul be not immediately required of him, as the rich Man's in
c. 12.16, etc.
S. Luke's Gospel was, when he had been just now contriving to enlarge his
Barns, and take his ease, and enjoy himself; yet all his store upon which he so
highly values himself, may be taken away from him, and he may have but little
profit of all the labor that he has taken under the sun. Instances (...),
etc. Max. Tyr. dissert. 35.
are numerous in all Ages, of persons who from the greatest plenty, whether by
the immediate hand of God against them for their Sins, or by the malice or
treachery of other Men, or by their own Luxury and Imprudence, have been
strangely reduced to a low state, to the great amazement of the Beholders.
Fires, losses at Sea, or miscarriage at home, the wickedness of a perjured
Villain, the rapine of an Enemy, some flaw in a Title, some part of an Estate
unjusily detained, or some extravagant Humor of his own, is enough to
impoverish a Man in a little time, though at present he seem to be as far from
it as any. But Nempe dat and quodcunque libet fortuna, rapito;
Irus and est subito, qui modo Croesus erat.
Ovid. Trist. l. 3. cl 7.
where these and other like Causes concur, as oftentimes many of them do,
though one had the Wealth of Croesus he could not prevent his own ruin. Thus
it pleases God S Luke 1.51, 52, 53.
to show strength with his arm, and to scatter the proud who are pussed up at
the thoughts of their large Estates, in the imagination of their hearts,
putting down the mighty from their seats, and exalting them of low degree,
filling the hurgry with good things, and sending the rich, in the mean time,
empty away.

3. A plentiful Fortune is not only an imperfect and uncertain Comfort to the
Owner, but it is many times an apparent means of his Ruin. Eccles. 5.13, 14,
15, 16, 17.
There is a sore evil, says Solomon, that I have seen under the sun, namely,
riches kept for the Owners thereof to their hurt, but those riches perish by
evil travail, and he begets a son, and there is nothing in his hand. As he
came forth of his mother's womb, naked shall he return to go as he came, and
shall take nothing of his labor which he may carry away in his hand. And this
also is a sore evil, that in all points as he came, so shall he go, and what
profit has he that he has labored for the wind? All his days also he eats
in darkness, and be has much sorrow and wrath with his sickness. Where the
Preacher not only declares that the rich Man's Wealth shall not accompany him
into the other World, but affirms moreover, that in the mean time it frequently
creates him a great deal of Care and Anxiety, and Fear, and Danger, and Nam
illud praetereo quam multi perierint possessionum, aut opum gratia. Lactant. de
mort. persecut. c. 7.
perhaps is the cause of his death at last, exciting Thieves, or his own
Servants, or it may be his Children or other his Relations to dispatch him out
of the way, to the end they may divide the Spoil amongst themselves. Or else it
exposes him to the Malice or Covetousness of some great Person, whom he is in
no capacity to withstand. Which was the case of 1 King. 21.4. v. 9, etc.
Naiboth, the fairness and convenience of whose Vineyard made Ahab uneasy for
want of it, and thereby put Jezebel upon contriving his death to obtain it. So
-- Jussuque Neronis
Longinum and magnos Senecae praedivitis hortos
Clausit, and egregias Lateranorum obsidet aedes
Tota cohors.
Juv. Sat. 10.
Longinus's plentiful Revenues, and Seneca's stately and pleasant Gardens cost
each of them his life, which they lost only by having so tempting a Bait for
the greedy Tyrant. And thus it often happens, that an Sed plures nimia congesta
pecunia cura

Strangulat. Ibid.


overgrown Estate raises the Envy of some, and works upon the Avarice of
others, and so the Possessor comes to pay dearly for it. For in the conclusion,
either he is secretly murdered, or (which is worse) is taken Ubicunque
cultiorem agrum viderat [Dioclesianus] aut ornatius aedificium, jam parata
Domino calumnia, and poena capitalis. Lactant. de mort. persec. c. 7. Cum opus
esset [Maximiano Herc.] non deerant locupletissimi senatores, qui subornatis
indiciis affectasse imperium dicerentur, ita ut effoderentur assidue lumina
Senatus. Ibid. c. 8.
off by false Accusation and a pretense of Justice, and so is made to suffer in
his Life, in his Estate, and in his Reputation all at once, whilst his poor
Neighbors that have no such inviting prey for the rapacious Harpies, live
safely by him unmolested. And this difference proceeding only from their
differing Circumstances, it is a natural and easy Consequence, that Wealth can
be but a feeble Support of it self, which sometimes makes Men's Lives the
pleasanter, and their passage through this World the more agreeable, but which
at other times becomes an occasion of their fall, and perhaps of undoing their
whole Family together with them.

It was therefore good Advice in point of Prudence, as well as a necessary
Caution in point of Duty, which the Apostle directs to Timothy, to give the
rich Men of the World in charge, 1 Timothy 6.17.
That they be not high-minded, nor trust in uncertain riches, but in the living
God, who gives us all things richly to enjoy. As the Psalmist also long before
had taught not to depend upon unjust gain, nor even upon that which is better
gotten, for fear of a disappointment from it. Psalm. 62.10, 11.
O trust not in wrong and robbery, or if riches increase, though by lawful
means, set not your heart upon them. God spoke once, and twice I have heard the
some, that Power belongs unto God. Power belongs unto God, and he will do
more abundantly for all that trust in him, than can be expected from the
greatest affluence of worldly Wealth. To this purpose says the Wiseman, Prove.
11.28.
He that trusts in his riches shall fall, but the righteous shall flourish as
a branch. The one shall thrive and prosper by the good hand of God upon him,
but the other, notwithstanding all his Confidence, shall decay and perish like
a withered Leaf. So much safer is it to place our hope in God, than in all
earthly Treasures. These are at best but Opum magna vis est mihi. Anceps and
onerosa foelicitas, and quae plus invidiae sit habitura quam gaudii. -- Opes
multas habeo. Habes rem quaesitu difficilem, custoditu anxiam. amissu flebilem.
Petrarch de rem. utr. fort. l. 1. Dial. 53. Multis mortem attulere divitiae,
requiem fere omnibus abstulere. Ibid.
imperfect deceitful helps, and which frequently prove burdens and
temptations, and are dangerous and destructive to the Owner; but God is a sure
Defense, that never fails; Prove. 18.10.
His name is a strong tower, whereunto the righteous may freely run, and be
safe from those Evils, against which no store of Riches could secure him.

II. A second means of Safety is Power. And indeed wheresoever there is a
sufficient Stock of this, there is usually no great cause of Fear. For if I be
incomparably stronger than another, and so better able to defend my self
against him than he is to hurt me, I shall ordinarily have but little reason to
be afraid of his attempts, which I am thus far qualified to defeat. They may
occasion me some trouble, but will hardly prevail against me, whilst I am
capacitated thus effectually to withstand them, so I will but be at the pains
of doing it. Thus much is plain.

And yet it is as plain, that there are some Cases, wherein the greatest Humane
Power is a very incompetent Security; and particularly there are these three.

1. The case of common Mortality, from which Kings and Emperors, and the
greatest and most famous Conquerors are no more exempt than the rest of
Mankind. They are but Men like others, Pallida mors aequo pede pulsat pauperum
tabernas,
Regumque turres.
Horat. l. 1. od. 4. Et magna titulis fulgeat claris domus,
Mors spernit altam gloriam.
Involvit humile pariter, and celsum caput,
Aequatque summis infima.
Boet. de consol. philos. l. 2. Metr. 7.
subject to the usual Infirmities of Humane Nature, and must therefore expect
to be sick and die as well as they. Nor will all their Grandeur procure them
one hour's reprieve when the fatal time comes; but perhaps may be an occaon of
shortening their days, by engaging them in bold and hazardous undertakings,
which not succeeding, may bring them to an untimely end. Psalm. 82.6, 7.
I have said ye are Gods, says the Psalmist, and all of you are children of
the most high. But ye shall die like men, and fall like one of the princes.

2. The case of a sudden Surprise, which many times overturns the whole Scene
of Affairs, beyond what could ever have been imagined. By this the most
puissant Generals, with their Armies, are ever and anon baffled, and made to
yield to a very unequal Enemy, and whom they could otherwise have despised as
not worthy of their regard. By this the most potent Prince falls a Prey to the
Avarice, or Malice, or Ambition of ill-designing Men; but whom, had he been
aware of their Intentions, he could without any trouble have put beyond all
thoughts of Injuring himself or any else. Nor is it possible to prevent the
mischief that often ensues upon unexpected Accidents, or some subtle
undiscovered Stratagems, though a Man be never so powerful in all respects.

3. The Case of the Divine Interposal, when God has some wise Ends to bring
about by defeating the too confident Expectations of the greatest Potentates,
and blasting their likeliest undertakings. Job 12.21.
For he pours contempt upon princes, and weakeneth the strength of the
mighty, c. 34.24.
breaking them in pieces without number, and setting up others in their stead.
All Perfection of Power is in him alone, Is. 40.15.
all the nations of the World being in comparison of him, but as the drop of a
bucket, or as the small dust of the balance, in no wise able to put the least
stop to any thing he decrees. And accordingly he (...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
Hesiod. (...). l. 1.
advances or depresses, gives Success or denies it, grants Safety or sends
Miseries and Calamities, as seems best to his infinite Wisdom, and none, not
the haughtiest amongst all Mankind, Dan. 4.35.
can stay his hand, or say unto him, what do thou? Men may summon together
all their Forces, for their defense in time of danger, and may try to
strengthen themselves by Foreign Aids, whereby to secure themselves the better;
but when all is done, the Success depends solely upon God's good pleasure, in
whose power it is to deal by them as himself sees fit.

The horse, says Prove. 11.31.
Solomon, is prepared against the day of battle, but safety is of the Lord. And
so says the Psalmist, Psalm. 18.32, etc.
It is God that girdeth me with strength, and makes my way perfect. He makes
my feet like hinds feet, and sets me upon my high places. He teaches my
hands to war, so that a bow of steel is broken by mine arms. Thou have also
given me the shield of thy salvation; and thy right hand has holden me up, and
thy gentleness has made me great. Thou have enlarged my steps under me, that
my feet did not slip. I have pursued mine Enemies, and overtaken them; neither
did I turn again till they were consumed. I have wounded them, that they were
not able to rise, they are fallen under my feet. For thou have girded me with
strength unto the battle; thou have subdued under me those that rose up against
me, etc. Where the devout Psalmist at large ascribes all his Strength, and the
Success of it, all his Advantages over his Enemies, together with his ability
for obtaining it, solely to the defense and assistance of the Almighty. He knew
very well, that it was not his own Sword, nor his own Arm that brought him this
Salvation, but God's right hand, and his arm, and the light of his countenance,
because he had an Interest in his Favor. And therefore says he at another
time, Ps. 20.7, 8.
Some trust in chariots, and some in horses, but we will remember the name of
the Lord our God. They are brought down and fallen, but we are risen and stand
upright. And again at another, 44.6, 7, 8.
I will not trust in my bow, neither shall my sword save me. But thou have
saved us from our enemies, and have put them to shame that hated us. In God we
boast all the day long, and praise thy name for ever. He was too sensible of
his own Infirmities to expect Deliverance out of Trouble by his own means,
notwithstanding the many peculiar Advantages for it, which his high station
afforded him, above those of a meaner rank. And therefore when he found himself
delivered, his way was presently to break forth into Songs of Praise and
Thanksgiving to the God of his salvation. He had put his Trust in God
beforehand as his best, his only Safeguard, and when he had obtained his End,
he ascribed the Praise of it not to himself, but to God who enabled him to
obtain it.

And that this would be a very proper course, and highly becoming the greatest
and best of Men, to take still upon all occasions, cannot be questioned by any
who consider their miserable Insufficiency of themselves, and the undoubted
hazard whereto they expose their Affairs, whenever they venture to trust to
any Humane Power for Safety, whether it be to their own Authority and Command,
or to the Force of powerful Confederates. As I shall endeavor more
particularly to prove,

1. Wherefore, to begin with the former of these, Their own Authority and
Command over others, who are bound to be at their beck, and venture the utmost
in their service, whenever they are called to it. This qualifies them for
bold attempts, and too frequently renders them the Pests of the World, and
Disturbers of Mankind, but is very far from securing them against the very same
mischiefs they design for others. When once a confidence of their Strength
makes them regardless of Almighty God, the Lord of Hosts, and the
uncontrollable Sovereign of themselves and all their Forces, upon what variety
of disadvantages do they hereby cast themselves? How many of them miscarry in
their undertakings, and never arrive at the Benefit, the Glory or Gain, the
Honor or Profit they aspire after? And of those that do, how many are there
who when advanced to the height of worldly Greatness, yet find but little
Satisfaction, and perhaps, less Security in it? The Satyrist observed long ago
of the Romans, That Ad generum Gereris sine caede and sanguine pauci
Descendunt reges, and sicca morte tyranni.
Juv. Sat. 10.
to ascend the Throne amongst them, was but to make way ordinarily for a more
deadly fall, and possibly before they were well warm in it: And the Histories
of all Ages and Countries contain too many Instances of this kind, of persons
who have hazarded their Souls, Bodies, Estates, Honors, Friends, all that was
dear to him, to advance themselves, and yet have not succeeded in their
Attempts; and of others who have succeeded for a while, and yet have fallen far
short of the Happiness they had vainly promised themselves, and at length have
died much more miserably, and left their Posterity in a worse condition than if
they had continued in their former obscurer Post.

And in truth, how should it be otherwise, when poor mortal Creatures take upon
them to carve out their own Fortunes, as if there were none above them to
control their Pride? This may justly provoke God, to put forth his Hand, and
humble them for their Insolence, letting them see to their cost, That Ps. 99.1,
2.
the Lord is King be the people never so impatient, that he sits between the
Cherubims, be the earth never so unquiet, and is great in Sion, and high above
all people. And the Prophet Habakkuk denounces a woe against such, that might
well affright all who have any regard to it from ever daring thus to set their
faces against Heaven. Hab. 29, 10.
Woe to him that coveteth an evil covetousness to his house, that he may set his
nest on high, that he may be delivered from the power of evil. Thou have
consulted shame to thy house, by cutting off many people, and have sinned
against thy soul. Where the Prophet taxes the Babylonians with having used all
means to raise themselves, without sticking at the injustice of any of them;
that they had coveted what they had no right to; and to obtain it had committed
a great deal of Rapine and Bloodshed, and made miserable Desolation in many
places, to the end that they might get above their Neighbors, and might use
them as barbarously as they pleased, and not be afraid of them, but might
securely look down upon them, as a Bird from her high-built Nest looks down
without fear upon those Vermin whom she knows unable to reach her at that
distance; but he tells them withal, that this care would not answer their
Expectation, for it should not tend to their Safety but their Ruin, for all
their Cruelty and Injustice should return upon themselves, and as high as they
had advanced themselves, and as secure as they thought themselves in their
usurped Power, they should be brought down, and subjected to the Dominion of
the Medes. Which came to pass not very long after (but about 71 years, if Vet.
Test. Annal. An. Mundi 3466.
Archbishop Usher's Calculation be right) when Darius came upon King Nabonidus,
otherwise called Belshazar, at his impious Feast, and took away the Kingdom
from him, together with his Life. Which he did, says Dan. 5.30, 31.
Daniel, being about threescore and two years old. Whence it may not be amiss
to observe, with the Chron. of the O. Test. p. 134.
learned Dr. Lightfoot, That he was born in the year of Jehoiakim 's death, and
Jehoiakin 's Captivity; and consequently, that it pleased God to provide, that
in that very year, when the Babylonian was most busy to captive and destroy,
the Captiver and Destroyer of Babylon should be born.

And no less remarkably (though after another manner) did it please God to
discomfit the proud Sennacherib, when big with his former Victories over diverse
Countries, he had sent Rabshakeh to dissuade the Jews from trusting in God, 2
King. 19.12, 13.
as supposing him no more able to save them out of his Hand, than the Gods of
other Nations had been to deliver their People. v. 32, 33, 34.
Concerning the King of Assyria, says God, he shall not come into this City,
nor shoot an arrow there, nor come before it with shield, nor cast a bank
against it; by the way that he came, by the same shall be return, and shall not
come into this City, says the Lord. But I will defend this City to save it,
for mine own sake, and for my servant David's sake. And then follows the
miraculous completion of this Prediction in the next words, v. 35.
It came to pass that night that the Angel of the Lord went out, and smote in
the camp of the Assyrians an hundred and fourscore and five thousand, and when
they arose early in the morning, behold they were all dead corpse.

The greatest Monarch is no more in his Hand than the meanest Peasant, but both
alike fall at his Command. For Jud. 7.7. 1 Samuel 14.13, etc. Ideo illi
infirmissimis hostibus cuncta tradidit, ut ostenderet scilicet non vires
valere, sed causam. Salv. de gub. Del. l. 7.
it is the same thing to him to conquer by many, or by few, or by no apparent
means at all, by an arm of flesh, (which is his most usual way) or 2 King. 6.17.
by an invisible Host, by 2 Samuel 17.14.
infatuating their Counsels, as Absalom, or 2 King. 6.18.
siniting them with Blindness, as the Syrians; or c. 7.6, 7.
by an unexpected noise in the Camp, as he put the same People to flight;
Euterp. c. 141. and Joseph. Antiquit. l. 10. c. 1.
by an Army of Mice devouring their Harness and Bowstrings, as is related of
the Assyrians; by Exodus 14.28.
overwhelming them in the Sea, as the Egyptians; by the Josh. 6.20.
sounding only of Ramshorns, as he threw down the Walls of Jericho; by an 2
King. 3.21, etc.
appearance of Blood, as he disordered, and thereby defeated the Moabites; by
Josh. 10.11.
a storm of Hail, as he overthrew the five Kings that fought against Gibeon; or
by Jud. 7.22.
setting them one against another, as the Midianites, and 2 Chronicles. 20.23.
as the Children of Ammon, and Moab, and the Inhabitants of Mount Seir. And
this a Dr. Jackson on the Creed, as l. 6. p. 2. c. 28.
great Man gives as the reason why God is so often in Scripture styled, The Lord
of hosts, as by a most special and peculiar Attribute; That his peculiar hand
is not in any subject of humane Contemplation more conspicuons than in the
managing of Wars. In short, Ps. 33.16.
there is no King saved by the multitude of an host, neither is any mighty man
delivered by much strength; all the Success of the most formidable Forces
depending entirely upon the Pleasure of Almighty God, who orders them all as
may best serve the Ends of his infinite Wisdom. It is not their own Foresight,
or Conduct, or the strength of their Armies, but it is God himself that Ps.
144.10.
gives salvation unto Kings, and delivers his servants from the hurtful
sword. And they are always the safest, when they trust more to his Protection,
than to their own Armies, how numerous soever.

2. And the Case is much the same in relation to powerful Confederates. For
these being in like manner at God's disposal, and having their Subsistence, and
all their Power and Might from him, can do nothing without his Permission. Job
9.13.
Ij he at any time will not withdraw his anger, if he design to execute his
Judgments upon a sinful People, by giving them up into the hands of their
Enemies, and will not be prevailed with to also his Decree, the proudest of
their Helpers must necessarily stoop under him. And accordingly he has
threatened in Scripture, that because of the Jews seeking out to Egypt, instead
of addressing themselves to him for Succor in their Distresses they should
certainly have cause to repent and be ashamed of this their Folly, when their
own Experience should have taught them, that th^^ was not the way to be
delivered out of trouble but to be involved farther in it. Is. 31.1, 2, 3.
Woe to them that go down to Egypt for help, and stay on horses, and trust in
chariots, because they are many; and in horsemen, because they are very
strong; but they look not unto the holy one of Israel, neither seek the Lord.
Yet he also is wise, and will bring evil, and will not call back his words; but
will arise against the house of the evildoers, and against the help of them
that work iniquity. Now the Egyptians are men and not God, and their horses
flesh and not spirit; when the Lord shall stretch out his hand, both he that
helps shall fall, and he that is helped shall fall down, and they all shall
fall together. And to the same purpose God sends the Prophet Hanani to acquaint
King Asa, that his Confederacy with Benhadad should not profit him; it might
cause Baasha to desist from building of Ramah, but should not settle the
Kingdom of Judah in Peace. 2 Chronicles. 16.7, 8, 9.
Because thou have relied on the King of Syria, and not relied on the Lord thy
God, therefore is the host of the King of Syria escaped out of thine hand, so
escaped and gone, as that thou art to expect no relief from it in thy distress.
Were not the Ethiopians and the Lubims a huge host, with very many chariots and
horsemen? yet because thou did rely on the Lord, he delivered them into thine
hand; because thou then actedst more wisely, and as became thee, putting thy
Trust in him who alone could save thee, therefore he took pity on thee, and
made thee Conqueror over these so formidable Enemies. For the eyes of the Lord
run to and fro throughout the whole earth, to show himself strong in behalf of
them, whose heart is perfect toward him. Herein thou have done foolishly,
therefore these thy Confederacies shall not secure thee, they shall not be a
means of thy Quiet, but of thy farther Trouble and Sorrow, for this will
certainly be thy portion, from henceforth thou shall have wars.

Thus the Scripture testifies single and confederate Forces to be equal in
relation to God's overruling Providence; but considered in themselves, with
respect to their own natural Capacities they are not so. For the latter have
diverse peculiar Inconveniences attending them, which make them a far less
probable Instrument of Safety than the other, unless counterpoised by Numbers,
or some other remarkable Advantages. Perhaps they may not all be hearty in what
they undertake. Or if they be, yet there may be points of Honor to be adjusted
amongst their Officers, which may occasion Differences amongst them, or
separate Interests may be carrying on, each one endeavoring to favor his own
Men, and lay the Burden rather upon his Allies. And at best, their Proceedings
will be backwarder, their Counsels slower, and their Designs more liable to be
discovered and prevented. Upon all which accounts there is less reason to
promise our selves Security from any Assistances of this kind. God may bless
the Means, and make them effectual to the Ends for which they are designed; but
if he do, it is to his Blessing upon them, not to the Means themselves without
his Concurrence, that we are to ascribe our Welfare.

The plain and most natural Inference from which Considerations is that of the
Royal Psalmist, Pal. 118.8, 9.
It is better to trust in the Lord, than to put any confidence in man; it is
better to trust in the Lord, than to put any confidence in Princes, all humane
helps whatsoever being perfectly useless without him. He can and will save his
faithful Servants, who heartily depend upon him, though by very unlikely
Means, causing the Destruction their Enemies had prepared for them to fall upon
their own Heads. He can overpower all their Might, detect their most secret
Designs, counterwork their subtilest Stratagems, and when they seem most secure
of Success, can presently convince them to their sorrow, that their Hopes are
vain. It is but for him to say it and all Nations must fall before him; the
most potent Kings with their Armies must fly and be discomfitted, and leave
them of the household to divide the spoil. And so says God by the Prophet
Isaiah, Is. 57.13.
When thou criest, let thy Companies deliver thee, but the wind shall carry
them all away, vanity shall take them: but he that puts his trust in me
shall possess the land, and shall inherit my holy mountain.

III. A third Means of Safety is, a Man's own Personal Abilities and Industry.
By which I mean these four things; 1. Strength of Body. 2. Courage, and
Stoutness of Mind. 3. Wisdom in the management of Assairs. 4. Diligence in the
use of any or all of these. Now as to the first of these,


1. Strength of Body, it is very obvious to observe, how vain a thing Man is at
his best estate, how easily carried off by any cross Accident. Valor Maxim. l.
9. c. 12.
A Grape-stone, Drexel. Prodr. aetern. c. 1. Sect. 20.
a Fishbone, Ibid.
a Hair either swallowed, Dela Valle 's Travels, p. 464.
or pulled off from the Skin, (...). Diog. Laert. l. 6. in vita Diog. Theodorus
Lysimacho mortem minitanti, Magnum vero, inquit, effecisti, si Cantharidis vim
consecutus es. Cic. Tusc. Quaest. l. 5.
a Fly, Odor illi, saporque, and lassitudo, and vigilia, and humor, and cibus,
and sine quibus vivere non potest mortifera sunt. Senec. de Consol. ad Marciam,
c. 11. Non cibus nobis, non humor, non vigilia, non somnus, sine mensura
quaedam salubria sunt. Sen. Not. Quaest. l. 6. c. 2.
an ill Smell, unwholesome Food, too much Pains, or Watching, or Drink, or Meat;
(...). Diog Laert. l. 7. in vita Chrysip. Si per risum ut P. Crassus. Tertul.
de anima, c. 29. Philemonem autem vis risus immoderati abstulit. ^aler. Max. l.
9. c. 12.
a fit of Laughter, Quem pavor repentinus, aut item ex improviso sonus auribus
gravis excutit. Senec. ad Marc. c. 11. Scilicet ex emendatione Just. Lypsii.
a sudden Fright, Frigoris, aestus, laboris impatiens. Senec. Ibid.
an excess of Heat or Cold, Si prae gaudio quis spiritum exhalet, ut Chilon
Spartanus dum victorem Olympiae filium amplectitur. Tertull. de an. c. 29.
Multorum animas praeceps and inspectata laetitia excussit, quod Chiloni
Lacedaemonio, and Rhodio Diagorae contigisse accepimus, etc. Drex. prodr. aet.
c. 1. Sect. 20. Annon illa Romana pietatis notissimae matter, nuncio mali
Cannensis exterrita, filio reduce, quae flebat, diriguit in mortem? nec par
esse gaudio poterat, quae superfuerat orbitati. L. Pacati Dr. Panegyr.
Theodosio dict. p. 514. Sophocles ultimae jam senectutis -- causam mortis
gaudium habuit. Valor. Max. l. 9. c. 12.
of Joy, or 1 Samuel 4.18. Non vulgaris etiam Homeri mortis causa fertur, qui in
insula, quia quaestionem a piscatoribus propositam solvere non potuisset,
dolor absumptus creditur. Val. Max. Ibid.
Grief, Cum mors ubique praesto sit, and undique occurrat; nihilque sit tam
exiguum, quod non in perniciem generis humani, satis valeat. Senec. Not.
Quaest. l. 6. c. 2.
there is nothing so mean and contemptible but can quickly put an end to his
Days, if once God give it commission. Ps. 89.48.
What man is he, says the Psalmist, what (...)
strong Man, it is in the Original, that lives, and shall not see death? shall
he deliver his soul from the hand of the grave? When a fit of Sickness comes,
the Strongest are frequently snatched away sooner than those of a feebler
Constitution. And since there are multitudes also of other Dangers whereto they
are obnoxious, that may presently put a stop to their noblest Designs, and
perhaps may ruin themselves together with them, what vanity it is to boast
themselves in these Circumstances? There is none that can pretend to compare
with Sampson or Goliath for Strength; yet no sooner is the Lord departed from
one of them, Jud. 16.20.
but the Philistims abuse him to a great degree; and see 1 Samuel 17.40, etc.
how speedily, and how contemptibly the other falls, when Almighty God
condescends to direct the Stone, though but from a Stripling's Sling. He came
forth with a mighty Expectation of Success by reason of his unparalleled
Stature and Strength, defying the Armies of the living God, and glorying in the
appearance of an easy Victory, v. 44.
Come, says he to David, and I will give thy flesh unto the fowls of the air,
and unto the beasts of the field. And yet v. 50, 51, 52.
this very David whom he so despised, as by no means a fit match for one of his
figure, was made the instrument of his death, and the Defeater of all those
hopes that were built upon him. And this not by any skill in War that he had
above him, whereby to supply his want of Strength; for he was v. 15, and 33.
but a youth, and whose business it had been to keep his Father's Cattle; but
the other was a man of war from his youth; not by a Bow, or Sword, or other the
usual Instruments of War, for he only v. 49.
put his hand into his bag, and took thence a stone and slang it, and smote the
Philistin in his forehead, that the stone sunk into his forehead, and he fell
upon his face to the earth.

Lo here an abundant proof of Humane Frailty, and which may well humble the
most conceited of their own Strength, and teach them to distrust themselves,
and look up to Almighty God for Safety, who whenever he pleases can cut them
off in the midst of their Glory; as also at other times he can change the
Scene, and let them live to see themselves despised; can send a Clement or
Ravillac to dispatch them, or deliver them into the Hand of a Woman, as Judge.
4.21.
Sisera, or as Herodot. Cli. c. 214.
Cyrus; or order them to be devoured by Vermin, as Act. 12.23.
Herod; or if it please him better, can give them to be carried in triumph, as
Knoll's in the Life of Bajazet the Fourth King of the Turks.
Bajazet; or used for a Footstool, as Lactant. de mortibus persecut. c. 5.
Valerian; can deprive them of their Understanding, as Ibid. c. 17.
Dioclesian; or send them forth to beg their Bread, as Volat. Com. Urb. l. 23.
Belisarius. He has ways enough to avenge himself upon the haughtiest amongst
the Sons of Men. And they must therefore expect that when they grow forgetful
of him, he will take a time, whether sooner or later, to convince them of their
own weakness, and to show them by an undeniable Experiment, that all their
Undertakings come to nothing without his assistance, and that 1 Samuel 2.9.
by strength no man shall prevail.

2. Courage and Stoutness of Mind. This is a good Preservative from needless
Fears, and a Preparative for Difficulties, and bold and hazardous Enterprises,
and hence many times turns to good account; but withal, it has need of great
Prudence to regulate it, and a proportionable Strength to support it, or
otherwise the effects of it may prove very sad. If it grow excessive, and so
degenerate into Rashness, or if it meet with greater opposition than was
expected and provided against, it is a ready way to Ruin, by involving men in
dangers, out of which they are in no wise able to extricate themselves. And at
best it is but a feeble support against any Adversity, unless men had strength
of Body, and all other requisite Qualifications, for carrying them through all
the difficulties wherein it may engage them. It stirs them up to noble
Achievements, and when attended with good Success in them is a means of their
advancement at present, and perhaps of transmitting the lasting Fame of their
daring Exploits to many Generations. But it is not always thus prosperous. And
when it is, the Honor of it is due to Almighty God, for granting his Blessing
to it, which had he withheld, it must necessarily have had a quite contrary
event.

A mistaken notion of Courage is a common (alas! God knows, too common)
occasion of needless and most mischievous Quarrels and Duels, and ends in the
destruction of such as are apt to value themselves most upon it. And when
better understood, and used with more consideration, and to better purposes, it
is no security against the multitudes of Evils whereto we are continually
obnoxious, and must be whilst we remain in this state of Sin and Sorrows. It
may preserve from some disadvantages, but it is well if it do not at other
times expose to more and greater. And though it may be helpful for obtaining
some good, it may possibly more than counterbalance this by the mischiefs it
brings along with it.

3. Wisdom. Of what constant use this is in the mangement of all Affairs, how
Policy oftentimes supplies the defect of Strength or Numbers, or whatsoever
other Advantages, and how the want of it on the other hand is a likely cause of
ruining the probablest Undertakings, is too well known to need that I should
insist upon it. Prudence, and Foresight, and a good contrivance beforehand,
and a due attendance upon the Inconveniences that there is most danger of
meeting with in the prosecution of a Design, are of such necessity in order to
its success, that nothing of difficulty can ordinarily be expected to be
brought to a good conclusion without them. But where these concur in any
considerable degree, they give a Man a strange advantage for great and noble
Undertakings. Yet are they, like Job's Friends, but Job 16.2.
miserable Comforters, whenever they are separated from a Dependence upon
Almighty God, for his Blessing upon them. Nor can they at any time be securely
relied upon, as an infallible provision against whatsoever danger, or a sure
means of obtaining any good. They may give reasonable grounds of hoping well,
but leave us after all at great uncertainties, inasmuch as the most
quick-sighted Observer can never discover all the secret Springs of Nature, and
their several tendencies in relation to such and such an Action, much less can
dive into the unfathomable Designs of the Divine Providence in respect to it;
which yet are necessary to be known before a right Judgment can be made of it.

It pleases God many times to cut off cunning and mighty Men in the height of
their Expectations, when they think they have well nigh surmounted all the
Impediments they had to conflict with, and are upon the very point of enjoying
the fruit of their Endeavors. He lets them go on with an appearance of success
for a good while together, when yet there is an unknown Train laid to blow them
up, even when they least dream of it. He causes Is. 29.14.
the wisdom of the wise men to perish, and the understanding of the crafty to
be hid; hereby teaching them how weak and defective all their own Contrivances
are, and how unfit of themselves for accomplishing their Designs; and
consequently, in how wretched a condition they must be, and what frequent and
fatal disappointments they must look to meet with, if they had no better
Security to rely upon.

Of which, see an eminent and singularly remarkable Instance of the defeat of
Caesar Borgia, Son to Pope Alexander the Sixth, a Man of great Ambition, and
who would try all ways to advance himself: This Man fearing least after his
Father's death he should come to be stripped of all that he might in the mean
time have received from him, or might otherwise have made himself master of,
set himself (as Machiavil relates concerning him) Match. Princ. c. 7.
to consult the best Expedient for prevention of this Misfortune, and indeed
had laid a Train for it, which he concluded to be past danger of miscarrying.
But all this while, says the forenamed Author, he had not considered, that at
the time of his Father's death, Jamque eo tempore, quo Julius Secundus Pontifex
maximus fuerat creatus, mihi dixerat se ad omnem rerum eventum, quem a patris
morte futurum putaret, long in posterum prospexisse, atque remedia comparasse:
illud unum duntaxat se praeteriisse, quod scilicet nunquam putarat sub ejus
morte, sibi etiam cum morte esse confligendum. Ibid.
himself might happen to be at death's door likewise, and so not in a capacity
to pursue his proposed method. Here to his great regret his Policy showed it
self deficient, in that when he had been eagerly busying himself for so long a
time together, to find out the best means for his Establishment, he had not yet
been apprehensive that he should not be in a condition to make use of them.
Thus it seems good to God to Job 5.12, 13.
disappoint the devices of the crafty, so that their hands cannot perform their
enterprise. He takes the wise in their own craftiness, entraps them in their
own Stratagems, and how cunning soever their Projects may have been, either for
their own advancement, or for the ruin of others, he sees and overrules them
all, and will be sure to bring things to pass, as shall best suit with his
infinite Wisdom.

4. Diligence in the use of any or all of these. Prove. 13.4.
The soul of the sluggard, says Solomon, desires and has nothing; and c.
18.9.
he that is slothful in his work is brother to him that is a great waster; and
again, c. 19.15.
the idle soul shall suffer hunger. And both Scripture and Experience inform us
no less on the other hand, that c. 10.4.
the hand of the diligent makes rich, and c. 13.11.
he that gathers by labor shall increase; that is, that an industrious
application to Business is the likeliest course a Man can take to thrive in the
World; though it is not so certain, but that he may sometimes meet with a
disappointment though he labor never so heartily to prevent it; and especially
if he have the vanity to depend solely upon his own Endeavors.

Diligence is the properest natural Means in order to our present welfare; but
yet there may be cases wherein God may think fit to deny his Blessing to it,
and Jer. 12.13.
so they that have sown wheat, may reap thorns: and after they have put
themselves to pains, may not profit, but may be ashamed of their revenues; and
the small return they enjoy from all the labor they have taken. This account
the Prophet Haggai gives of the state of the Jews in his time, when they took
care for themselves, but regarded not the House of God, but suffered it to lie
wast, and thereby provoked God to obstruct their other Attempts. Hag. 1.6.
Ye have sown much, says the Prophet, and bring in little: ye eat, but ye have
not enough: ye drink, but ye are not filled with drink: ye cloth you, but
there is none warm: and he that earneth wages, earneth wages to put it into a
bag with holes. And the case may be the same with any else, that are not
mindful to secure an interest in God's Blessing, as well as to try all other
courses for bringing their Designs about. For he can nip the fruit of their
Endeavors in the Bud; or if he suffer it to grow can parch it up with a blast,
or wither it with an excessive drought, or can send an Army of Locusts, or
Caterpillars, or Snails to devour it.

Jer. 10.23.
The way of man is not in himself; it is not in man that walks to direct his
steps. He may contrive, and may use his utmost Industry, but it is not in his
power to order his Affairs, so as that he can certainly expect them to succeed
to his mind. He may take a great deal of pains in carrying on his Designs, and
promise himself a great deal of advantage and satisfaction from them; and yet
he knows not whether all his Care shall not prove in vain, or indeed whether it
may not possibly be an occasion of some unexpected ill to him. It is no new
thing to have labored for the wind, to have put one's self to much trouble,
and spent much time to no purpose, than if he had set himself, with the
Danaides, to pour Water into a Sieve; or with Sisyphus, to roll a Stone up the
steep side of a Hill, and let it go again when just at the top.

If Men's own Endeavors could entitule them to Success without God's Blessing,
I know none could have had a fairer pretense to it than the Builders of Babel,
when Genesis 11.1.
the whole earth was of one language, and of one speech, and when they had
unanimously set themselves to carry on this magnificent Pile; and yet how
strangely were they disappointed upon that confusion of Tongues which was sent
amongst them. They could then no longer pursue their Undertaking, but were v. 8.
scattered abroad upon the face of the earth, and forced to leave off building
their city And no wonder if it fare accordingly with others, who have the
hardiness to rely upon their own Attempts for accomplishing their Ends, without
referring themselves to that overruling Providence, which thus signally
defeats the vain Hopes of the most Confident in their own Performances.

IV. A fourth means of Safety is the Assistance of Friends. Which is said by
some of the Philosophers to be (...). Secundi Philos. Sentent.
the Refuge of Misfortune, the Comfort of Want, the Cure of Misery, and in a
word, to be (...). Demophili similit.
that to Life, which a safe and seasonable Haven is to a weatherbeaten Ship.
And it is certainly a mighty abatement of the greatest Streights or shardest
Afflictions to meet with Friends that are ready to pity and relieve us, as they
shall have ability and opportunity. And yet what S. Augustine affirms of them
is too true, that they are but unsafe Shelters and feeble Supports, that have
no power to cover or uphold us in time of Adversity, and Sunt quaedam refugia
ubi non est virtus, quo quisque cum fugerit, magis infirmatur, quam
confirmatur. D. Aug. in Ps. 45.
too often prove an occasion of farther sorrow rather than an help. As will
easily be made to appear from a brief inspection into the nature of that
Assistance we expect from them in our Necessities. Which so far as it falls
under our Consideration at present, I take to consist only of these three
parts; 1. Advice in our Streights. 2. Defense against Troubles. 3. Support in
our Needs.


1. Advice in our Streights. Now it is certainly a friendly Office, and a
considerable piece of Charity, to be ready at all times to counsel those that
are in Difficulties and Wants, and therefore seek for direction to deliver
themselves out of them. But it is plain, all Men are not capacitated to
undertake this Office, because, to perform it aright it is requisite that the
Adviser be a Man of Prudence and Understanding, and that moreover, if it may
be, he apprehend the Circumstances of those that want his Advice, at least as
to the Case they advise about. And when such an one is found, it is possible he
may be modest and unwilling to venture too far upon his own Judgment, and hence
may be backward to speak his Sentiments in matters of most Intricacy, and which
therefore need his help most; or he may be wary and cautious, and loath to
meddle with things that do not immediately concern himself; or he may have some
Interest of his own depending, or some Design in hand, or a Relation to some
Friend whom this Case may affect, which may make him partial in it, and not to
give the best Advice he can. Or if none of these happen, but he be ready to
speak his Mind freely and openly, yet being but a Man, and therefore subject to
manifold infirmities, he may perhaps be mistaken, in part at least of his
Advice, and by this means may prove a cause of much mischief to the person, to
whom he meant a kindness. Or if not this neither, but he gives the best, the
fittest, the properest Advice that can be, still this is but Advice, and can
operate no farther than I am both capable and careful to put it in practice.
And yet if I knew how to follow it as I ought, it depends however upon God's
Will, whether I shall reap the benefit from it, that I may in all appearance
have reason to expect. It is scarce to be thought that I should ask Counsel of
a subtiler Politician than Achitophel, yet the Lord in his wise Providence 2 Samuel 17.14.
appointed to deseat the good counsel of Achitophel, to the intent that the
Lord might bring evil upon Absalom, who had taken him for his director.

Every Man is not prepared to follow good Advice, when freely and faithfully
given him, any more than 2 King. 12.13.
Rehoboam was to hearken to the Counsel of the Old Men, for his rejecting
whereof the ten Tribes of Israel revolted from him. And of those that are, God
may have (if not the same, yet some other) just reason to say, as he did of
Syria, Ephraim, and the Son of Remoliah, Is. 7.7.
Thus says the Lord, it shall not stand, neither shall it come to pass. And if
he once contradict it, there is nothing can withstand his Power, or hold out
against his Word. That which he resolves, none can ever defeat, that it shall
not certainly obtain its effect. One Generation passes away and another comes
in its stead but his Purposes are still immoveably the same and shall
undoubtedly prevail throughout all Ages. Thus much the Psalmist assures us in
these words, The counsel of the Lord stands for ever, and the thoughts of his
heart to all Generations.

But Man's Imaginations, on the contrary, are but vain. His Directions may
prove advantageous in some cases, and when duly followed, but since there is no
certainty that they will, it must be a very great weakness to rely upon them,
as if there were.

A Physician may give the best Advice he can for his Patients recovery; but in
some critical cases he may mistake the nature of his Distemper, and order him
an unsuitable and hurtful Medicine. And when his Prescriptions are in all
respects the most apposite that may be, this signifies nothing, unless they be
regularly attended to. And if they be most strictly observed, it still belongs
to God to give a Blessing to them, which yet except he do, the Patient may be
long enough before he receive any benefit from them.

2. Defense against Troubles. When Calamities apparently hover over us, some
kind Friend may possibly step in, and ward off the blow, either entirely or in
part, or if a Wound be already given, may with the good S. Lu. 10.34.
Samaritan, bind it up, suppling it with wine and oil, or doing what else seems
necessary to a Cure. But alas! where are they ordinarily to be found, that will
be thus ready to concern themselves for us? Two in our Savior's Parable passed
by v. 31, 32, 33.
the man that had fallen amongst thieves, for one that would vouchsafe to
commiserate his distressed condition, and take care of him. And in the ordinary
course of the World the disparity is far greater, scarce one in a multitude of
Spectators thinking it needful to trouble himself about other persons
Sufferings, any farther than formally to profess a sorrow for them. And how
little is the Ability of them that are more heartily compassionate? Whilst they
are Men, subject to the Infirmities of Humane Nature, and liable to the
manifold Misfortunes that usually attend this frail uncertain Life, they cannot
save themselves from Troubles, and are therefore at least as unable to keep
them off from others, how earnestly soever they desire, and endeavor it, and
watch all opportunities for it.

3. Support in our Needs. To feed the Hungry, give Drink to the Thirsty, cloth
the Naked, lodge the Stranger, and visit the Sick and the Prisoner, is a
necessary branch of Christianity; so necessary, that our Blessed Lord to
impress these Duties the more effectually upon the Minds of his Followers, and
make them the more carefully observant of them, chooses in his account of the
last Judgment, to instance in the exercise or neglect of them, as the Criterion
or Test whereby the Sheep and the Goats shall be discriminated, when they come
to appear before his Tribunal. And none therefore who has any regard to the
Obligations that lie upon him from his Religion, but will find himself nearly
concerned to be frequently employing himself in Duties of this nature, as he
shall have Ability, and shall meet with proper Objects for his Relief. Or
whereinsoever else he can be helpful to those that need it, he will see a
parity of Reason directing, not to omit a fair opportunity of exercising his
Kindness to God's Glory, and his afflicted Neighbor's Benefit.

Nevertheless it must be owned, that if a Man's own Possessions are but an
imperfect feeble remedy against this Life's Inconveniences, a Precarious
dependent Subsistence by the Charity and Favor of others cannot be better. I
wish I could say, it were not abundantly worse; besides that it is less easy
to a Man's Mind, that it were not also far more uncertain, and less like to
answer his Necessities. For that it is so will easily appear from these
following Particulars.

1. Possibly these Obligations of Christianity may make little or no impression
upon those, who thou hoped'st would have been thy truest Friends, and best
support in thy Exigencies; and they may pass by thee without regard, as the
Priest and Levite by the wounded Man, in the S. Luk 10.31, etc.
forementioned Parable, or like him in the Apostle S. James, may only S. Ja.
2.16.
say, be warmed and filled, without giving thee any of those things which are
needful for the body. Whatever expectation thou had from them, and whatever
occasion for it themselves may have given thee, (...),
(...).
Theogn. Quum fortuna manet, vultum servatis amici,
Quum cecidit, turpi vertitis ora fuga.
Petron. Arb. c. 40. Donec eris foelix multos numerabis amicos,
Nullus ad amissas ibit amicus opes.
Ovid. Trist. l. 1. El. 8. Crescat, sive adveniat egestas, decrescent, abibunt,
seu verius detegentur amicitiae. Petrarch. de rem. utr. fort. l. 1. di. 50.


there is no certainty that they will not leave thee to take care of thy self,
when they see thee come really to want their Kindness. Wealth, as the Wiseman
Prove. 19.4.
speaks, makes many friends, but the poor is separated from his neighbor. v.
7.
All the brethren of the poor do hate him, how much more do his friends go far
from him? 2. If thy Friends be willing to assist thee, and most heartily desire
it, it is possible that they may be no more in a capacity of doing it, than
Genesis 21.15, 16.
Hagar could supply her Son Ismael with Drink, when at the point of Death for
lack of it. Motherly Affection made her very uneasy, and her Soul was truly
grieved within her, at the sight of her Child's forlorn Condition, and what
would she not have done for his Relief? But Water she had none, and she could
not create it; and so was forced, sore against her Will, to leave him and
withdraw her self, that she might not be a spectator of his Death. As a Power
to help does not always imply a Willingness, so neither does the earnest desire
of doing it imply a Power answerable to such Desire. 3. Suppose there be both
Will and Power at present, God Almighty can easily find out ways to prevent
this for the future.
1. He can suffer some Accident to happen that may make a breach, and cause an
irreconcilable Animosity betwixt thy Friend and thee, like that betwixt v. 9,
10.
Sarah and the forenamed Hagar, upon the indecent behavior of her Son; of as
it is said of 2 Samuel 13.25.
Amnon, in relation to his Sister Thamar, whom he had treacherously deflowred,
that he afterward hated her exceedingly, so that the hatred wherewith he hated
her, was greater than the love wherewith he had loved her before. Considering
the fickleness of Humane Nature, and how easily most Men are led aside by their
Passions, or Humors, or Interest, how quickly many take up a Prejudice against
others, and how hardly they are prevailed with to lay it aside, though never so
groundless and unreasonable, it is easy to conceive that God may make use of
these Differences to humble those that had been prone to place their Trust in
their more wealthy Benefactors, rather than humbly seek to him for whatever
they have need of. 2. If no such variance happen, and thy Friend is yet as
solicitous for thy welfare as ever, and as desirous to promote it, the case
perhaps may be greatly altered with him in a little time Tanta tamen hujus
saeculi incerta sunt, and ita potentum ruinae quotidianae crebrescunt, ut quum
ad tale refugium confugeris, plus ibi timere incipias. D. August. in Ps. 45.
; so that he who now so generously supports thee, may come to stand in need of
the like Relief from others; or at least, may be utterly incapacitated for his
wonted Bounty. I have already observed the great instability of all Earthly
Enjoyments, which when they promise fairest, may speedily take their flight,
and leave the Owner no longer in a condition to provide for himself, much less
for others. How many may our selves have known that have lived in great Pomp,
and been accounted to have large Estates, that yet have of Unusque Titan vidit,
atque unus dies
Stantem and cadentem.
Herc. Oet. v. 423.
a sudden been blown up and gone? How many have had their whole Revenues
violently seized by a merciless Enemy? How many have gone Quos soelices Cynthia
vidit,
Vidit miseros abitura dies.
Rarum est felix, idemque senex.
Ibid. v. 641, etc.
Rich to Bed at Night, and before Morning have had their Houses, Goods, and it
may be their whole Estate consumed to Ashes? He that is most munificent to Day,
has no assurance that he shall not be destitute of all things by to Morrow; or
that his Plenty shall not be turned into extremity of want. None can seem safer
in this respect than Job might, of whom we have this account given, That he was
the Father of seven Sons and three Daughters, and Master of seven thousand
Sheep, three thousand Camels, five hundred Yoke of Oxen, and as many She-Asses,
and a great number of Servants to receive his Commands; and in a word, that Job
1.2, 3.
he was the greatest among the men of the east, having none to compare with him
for Substance in all that part of the World; and yet, behold, in one Day's time
he has lost them all, and is left alone to bemoan his desolate condition. And
this may be the fate of any whose Grandeur thou most admirest, or from whose
Liberality and Kindness thou have the greatest Expectation. 3. Should thy
Friend or Patron be in no danger of any such Misfortune, his Life is but a very
transient uncertain Tenure, and though his Riches be not taken from him, none
knows how very soon he may be snatched from them; and then they may come into
the Hands of one that will have no farther concern for thee. It is no unusual
sight to behold persons of great Hopes and Expectations exposed to as great
hardships, when their Patrons die, upon whom they had their Dependence. Then
they sadly Simulac perierit cui initebaris, tanquam arundini fluctibus
quassatae, vento raptae, nullus eris. Scribanii Philos. Christ. cap. 4.
experiment, if not before, how insufficient a help the truest and kindest
Friends are in times of Adversity, and what reason they therefore have to
secure to themselves an Interest in God's Protection, who never dies, nor will
ever fail any that heartily put their Trust in him. To this the Royal Psalmist
advises, and from this same Consideration, which I am now mentioning for the
same purpose. Put not your trust in Princes, nor in the Son of Man, in whom
there is no help. His breath goes forth, he returns to his earth; in that
very day his thoughts perish. Happy is he that has the God of Jacob for his
help, whose hope is in the Lord his God.
The sum of all is, That there is no Safety in any kind of Natural Means,
neither Wealth, Power, Personal Strength, Courage, Wisdom, Diligence, nor the
best of Friends, but only in Almighty God. He is a sufficient Help in all
Cases, a ready Support in all Distress, and whosoever steadfastly casts his Care
upon him need be afraid of nothing, because he knows nothing shall befall him
but for his good. But they that depend upon inferior helps leave themselves
exposed to every blast of Fortune, and when they meet with a shock, have
nothing they can rely upon for a Redress. The whole World and all the parts of
it are at God's command, and when Men have taken the utmost care that is
possible to shelter themselves by other means, his Quiver is stocked with
variety of Arrows against which there is no manner of Defense. He can plague us
by those of our own rank, suffering wicked Men to execute their Malice upon us,
as a just punishment (though not so designed by them) for all our
Transgressions of his Divine Laws. Or he can send a Legion of inanimate
Creatures upon the same Errand, which accordingly fail not to come at his
Command. Psalm. 148.8.
Fire and hail, snow and vapors, and stormy Winds fulfill his Word. And so do
the worst of Diseases, whenever he thinks fit to let them loose upon a
disobedient and gainsaying People. And against these no preparation can be
made, because sometimes they come too powerful to be checked by all the Art or
Care of Man, and because when less violent, they come yet for the most part
without observation or foresight. Dr. Jackson's 1st. Sermon. on Jer. 26.19.
And one of them (as a very learned Author speaks) can execute another's Office
or Charge, or every one accomplish that Work, which the Armies of Men might
intend, but could not have executed.

That scarcity of Bread, or other Calamity, (as he proceeds) which sometime
suddenly arises in some Limb or Corner of a Kingdom, by want of Trade, or by
shutting up too great a multitude of Ships, for a long time in one Harbor,
whilst the Enemy or Pirates annoy the Coasts; how easily might it be much
increased, if he that keeps the Winds as in a Treasure-house, should shut up a
greater multitude of Ships for a long time in the same Harbor by a contrary
Wind, albeit their Enemies in the mean while became their Friends; albeit they
were provided of an invincible Navy at an hours warning. Or in case they did
know whence the Wind comes, and whither it is going; or could so covenant,
that it should blow when and where they listed; yet if the Lord of Hosts be so
pleased, he can bring a greater Dearth and Scarcity upon the most fertile
Provinces of the Land, than either the Enemy, or contrary Winds can occasion;
either by withdrawing the sweet Influence of the Heavens, or by corrupting the
Seed lately sown, or Corn ready to be reaped, with abundant moisture. Or admit
any People or Nation by Miracle or Divine Dispensation might have authority,
not over the Winds only, but over the Clouds, the Rain, and Dew; or such a
power of shutting and opening Heaven, as Husbandmen have of letting in Brooks
upon their Meadows, and taking them off again at their pleasures; so as they
might have Seed-time and Harvest as seasonable, their Fields as fruitful, the
Sea as open as their Hearts could desire; yet the very freedom of Commerce and
Traffic may bring in a greater Inconvenience (which no Plenty can hold out)
than the Enemy, than unseasonable Wind and Weather could threaten. Want of
Trade and want of Victuals are Plagues or Punishments sent by God; but the
Plague of Pestilence, which is ost-times the Companion of Peace and Plenty, the
usual effect of free Trading or Traffic, is more terrible than either of the
former wants. And thus may every part of the Reasonless Host accomplish what
the other had omitted; and this in spite of all the Contrivances of the most
cultivated Wit of Man to the contrary. In these and multitudes of other Cases
of more common and ordinary Occurrence, it is as impossible for Mankind to
protect us, as it is to pull the Stars from Heaven, or dry up the Waters of the
Sea. The serious Meditation whereof must inevitably leave us in a very
disconsolate condition, were it not that we have a good and a gracious God to
whom we may apply our selves for Relief in all our Streights, and may be safe
in his good Providence, when we can be so no ways else.

Is. 2.22.
Cease ye therefore from Man, the Wisest, the Stoutest, the Richest, the
Carefullest, and the most Powerful among the Sons of Men, for wherein is he to
be accounted of? They that trust in God have an impregnable, a present, and an
everlasting Defense, to which, whosoever sleeeth in his Distress, is sure to
find Shelter. But Ps. 144.4.
Man is like to vanity, his days are a shadow that passes away; and he is
therefore a very improper Instrument to be rested upon for Safety and Happiness
either by himself or any else. And so are all his uncertain transitory
Possessions, and outward imperfect Assistances; which can never answer his
Expectations but by God's Blessing, nor any longer than seems good to his
Divine Majesty. All their Power and Efficacy they receive from him; and the way
therefore to enjoy them to the best advantage is not to trust to them in
neglect of his gracious Protection, but to cast our Care upon him, humbly
entreating that he will mercifully condescend to take care of us.

Jer. 9.23, 24.
Let not then the wise man glory in his wisdom, neither let the mighty man
glory in his might; let not the rich man glory in his riches, but let him that
glories glory in this, that he understands and knows the Lord, who
exercises lovingkindness, judgment and righteousness in the earth; that he
considers that there is an infinitely wise and good God, who orders all things
according to the pleasure of his own Will, and that he has learned to hope in
him for a Blessing upon all his most valuable Enjoyments, and his most
courageous, wisest, and most laborious Undertakings. Since Scripture, Reason,
and Experience testify, that the best of Men are nothing without him; common
Prudence (were we not obliged to it in duty) would teach any considering Person
to apply to him in all cases, as the best, the only Security from fear of Evil,
and the readiest, the only effectual Succor in time of need.

So much concerning the Insufficiency of all Natural Means, considered barely
as such, which when they may be lawfully made use of, are of no avail in order
to our welfare, except as God is pleased to bless them to us.

SECT. II.
BUT these Means may be considered also as unlawful (which they too often
happen to be) and which cannot therefore be ventured upon without sin. And here
my business will be to show,

II. The great Evil and Danger of them, and that howsoever the Success which
such indirect Attempts frequently meet with in the World may incline too many
to look upon them as the properest Instruments for accomplishing their Designs,
they grossly deceive themselves herein, as in truth they often find to their
cost. They may fancy themselves to outwit or overpower others, but by the just
Judgment of God upon them for their Wickedness, the event ordinarily shows them
to have most outwitted themselves. Job 13.7.
Will thou speak wickedly for God, said Job, and talk deceitfully for him?
plainly intimating, that God being All-sufficient of himself, has no need of
any of our Iniquities for effecting his Designs; for whatever he in his
infinite Wisdom determines, he knows how to perform it without our Assistance,
but especially without our Sin. Which being always an intolerable Abomination
in his sight, he therefore utterly disallows of it in all cases, as what can
never be to his glory, though committed upon never so specious a pretense.
Though it were to preserve a discountenanced Religion, or to save a sinking
Church, or upon any other the most weighty occasion, he permits not a Lie to be
told, much less an apparently ill Action to be done. And if it be not lawful
to speak or act unrighteously for God, and with an intent to advance his Glory,
who can conceive it safe to do it for our own sakes, though in our most urgent
Necessities? His Eye is always upon us, to observe all our Circumstances, and
to make provision for us, as he sees most suitable to our needs. And if he
think fit to lay his Hand heavy upon us, all our own attempts will signify
nothing toward the removal of it, till he shall be pleased to release us.
Whilst they are agreeable to his Will, they may be useful for our Deliverance,
but when contrary to it, we may justly look that they should hinder and
prevent, rather than be a means of promoting it. The Wiseman I am sure is very
express to this purpose, when he affirms, That Prove. 11.6.
the righteousness of the upright shall deliver them, but transgressors,
(Transgressors indefinitely, whosoever they be, or upon whatsoever account they
are such) shall be taken in their own naughtiness. And again, a man, says he,
c. 12.3.
shall not be established by wickedness; intimating, that all his sinful
Contrivances how promising soever in appearance, shall not be sufficient to do
his business.

Since it is from God's Blessing alone (as I have been endeavoring to show)
that Success is to be hoped for, and not from our own heartiest Endeavors
without it, and this Blessing we may be sure is no longer to be relied upon
than we keep to the observance of his Will, there is no room left to promise
our selves Security when once we have begun to transgress his Laws. Men may
involve themselves in Labyrinths and inextricable Difficulties, by not waiting
for God's Assistance, in his own time, and by his own means, but they know not
in any wise how to perfect their Designs without him. Whenever any go out of
his way, though upon the fairest prospect of success, it is impossible to
foresee what mischiefs they may bring upon themselves by those very means,
whereby they vainly strive to secure themselves against them.

Exercitat. Bibl. 6. c. 5.
Morinus mentions a Tradition of one of the Rabbis, containing a peculiar
method of God's punishing a greedy Worldling, who sought to enrich himself by
Sacrilege, and found himself at length to have been sadly impoverished by it.
The Method he took was this; His Estate having brought him in a thousand
Measures of Grain by the Year, instead of paying an hundred for Tithe, he
withheld ten, and paid only ninety. Whereupon it pleased God to order, that
the next Year, his Ground should yield him but nine hundred Measures, being
just the quantity he had tithed for the Year before. Upon this he brings but
eighty, and accordingly the next Year his Income was but eight hundred; and so
on, till it fell gradually to one hundred Measures in the whole, and might have
come to less if he had not taken warning then, and penitently acknowledged his
Offense, and resolved upon an amendment for the future. I don't vouch for the
truth of this Relation; but however it naturally hints to us, how easy it is
for God to find out wicked Men, when they think themselves most exquisitely
subtle and private in their Iniquities, and to show them how vain a matter it
is to attempt the bringing their Designs about without him. All the pains that
are taken in this case may be to no purpose, or to a very bad one, leaving
persons at last in as ill, if not a far worse condition than they were in
before.

For to make use of any kind of Sin in order to our welfare, is a very
preposterous course in relation to Almighty God, arguing an unreasonable
diffidence in him, as if he would prove worse than his word, and would not take
due care of us, notwithstanding he has so often and so plainly declared he will.
It implies a distrust that either he cannot, or will not help us, and so calls
either his Power, or else his Goodness and Veracity into question. Whence it
must necessarily appear to be an act of high Disingenuity and Undutifulness;
and consequently to be utterly unbecoming our Christian Profession. It is at
best but a doing ill with a good intent. And how dishonorable this is to
Almighty God, and how dear it is like to cost the Doer, unless prevented by a
sincere Repentance, may be collected from those words of the Apostle S. Paul,
Romans 3.8.
And not rather as we be slanderously reported, and as some affirm that we say,
let us do evil that good may come; whose damnation is just.

But because the generality, even of them that call themselves Christians, are
more in love with the things of this World, than with those that are infinitely
more valuable in another, and hence Arguments that relate to these, too
frequently work more upon them than those which are taken from the other, not
to say, more than any that are brought from a bare consideration of their Duty,
I will therefore apply my self to them in their own way, and endeavor to show,
that all sinful and unwarrantable practices in order to our Security and
Happiness, are very improper and disadvantageous in regard to this present
life, as well as a ready way to everlasting Misery in another; and so are
intolerably dangerous in respect to both this and a future State. And
particularly upon these following accounts.

1. Because in seeking to help our selves by these means, (...). Diog. Laert.
l. 6. in vita Diog. Cynici.
we may possibly take the direct contrary course to that we design, and may all
the while be drawing upon our selves what we labor to avoid, or laying a sure
train to miss of what we aim at. Considering the shallowness of our Capacities,
it is easy to suppose, that we may be mistaken, and may judge those methods
most conducive to our good, which either in their own nature, or in their
necessary consequence are most prejudicial to it; like him that in a fright
casts himself into the Water for fear of being drowned, or runs into the Fire
to escape burning; or Aegrotantes contraria delectant, and cum corpus hominis
adversa valetudo possederit, contra salutem suam a laborantibus perversa
poscuntur. Jul. Firmie. Matern. de err. gent.
like a sick Man, whose Disease many times makes him most earnestly desire
those things that are most hurtful to him, whilst in that condition. These
Persons do not intend their own Ruin, but not having the proper use of their
Understanding, by reason of an unusual commotion and disorder of the Animal
Spirits, putting them for the present besides themselves, they cannot judge
aright of what they do; and this makes them act in direct contradiction to what
they would, if they were truly sensible of their own case. And whilst Mankind
in general have their apprehensions of things bewildered in like sort, though
not to the same degree, what else can be expected than that they should be
continually running upon one Inconvenience or another, though not in so gross a
manner? We are neither competent Judges of what is really best for us, nor how
what we think so may be best obtained, and must therefore inevitably lie
exposed to multitudes of Mischiefs, whilst we take upon us to be our own
carvers.

1. We know not what is really best for us. Every one is sensible enough what
it is he actually desires, but who is it understands what state or condition of
life is in truth most desirable for him? Here we are all at a loss, being too
liable to wish for what, if granted, might prove no less destructive to us,
than Rachel's desire of Children was to her. Genesis 30.1.
Give me Children, said she, or else I die. But the accomplishment of this
desire cost her her life, instead of comforting her as she expected, with the
sight and enjoyment of her Offspring. For though upon the birth of her first
born v. 23.
Joseph, she blessed her self to think that God had taken away her reproach,
that lay upon her for her Barrenness, yet no sooner was she made the Mother of
c. 35.17, 18.
Children by another birth, but she died of her hard labor. When we leave it
to God to choose for us, we are sure we cannot do amiss, because we have one in
this case to take care of us, who best understands our Wants, and is best able
to relieve them. But when we seek to take this work out of his hands, we are
apt to run our selves into needless troubles, for want of Judgment to discern
wherein our true Interest consists. (...), etc. Arr. Epictet. l. 13. c. 15.
This Estate, that Preferment, such a Post of Honor, looks very charming, but
we know not what Mischiefs and Inconveniences are to go along with it, as its
inseparable attendants, which if we did, there would appear far less cause to
be fond of it. We cannot foresee all the Difficulties that are to be undergone
in order to it, what canvassing there may be for it, what sneaking and cringing
there must be, and what services undertaken to obtain it. And when this is
done, and the prize obtained, we are not aware what envy it may create us, what
perplexing cares for securing our Interest in it may incessantly molest us,
what other burdens it may bring upon us, or how unfit our selves may be for
such a new course of life. Our Heads perhaps may grow giddy if raised too high,
and we may be in danger of falling lower than we are at present. Instead of
wholesome Food, we may desire what in the consequence will prove mere Poison;
and in most particulars it is almost an equal lay, (as Dr. S. ot's Christian
Life, Part 1. c. 3. n. 6.
a late learned Divine speaks) that we do so.

2. And no less prone are we to err in the choice of means for the obtaining
what we thus desire. It is above Humane Capacity to dive into the wise Methods
of God's Providence, and fathom the measures he propounds to himself for the
Government of the World, or to discover the several windings of the train he
lays for bringing his Ends about. No Man is sensible what unforeseen
impediments will arise, to obstruct his most plausible Contrivances, nor what
may be the effect of them; and how then can any one think himself able
certainly to attain his End? Had Joseph's Brethren aimed at his advancement,
they would, no doubt, have pitched upon any other method for it, sooner than to
sell him to the Ismaelites, to be a Slave all his days. Yet this they
afterward found to be the way, whereby the All-wise God had determined to
exalt him to the Government of Genesis 45.8.
Egypt, to be a father to Pharaoh, and Lord of all his house, and ruler
throughout all the land. And on the contrary, had 1 King. 2.24, 25.
Adonijah known beforehand that his request of Abishag the Shunamite to be
given him to Wife, would have been the occasion of his Death, and not of his
wished Succession to the Throne of Israel, he would never have entreated of
Bathsheba to petition her Son Solomon on this behalf. As neither would 2 Samuel
15.1, etc.
Absalom have tried by Flatteries and Fawning to steal away the Peoples Hearts,
whereby to usurp his Father's Crown, if he had foreseen that this would prove
his inevitable ruin.

In a word, there is no Man sure not to be entrap'd in the works of his own
Hands, or ensnared in his subtilest and best laid Devices. And therefore none,
if he certainly knew wherein his present Interest consists, could yet have any
reason to persuade himself, that his endeavors for promoting it shall never
have a quite contrary tendency. But when neither of these are understood, when
we neither know what makes truly for our welfare, nor by which means what we
think such may be securely advanced, what unpardonable folly must it be in any
one, out of a fond conceit for his own Abilities, to trust to these for Safety
and Happiness, rather than to the gracious Protection of Almighty God; or in
other terms, for any one to dare purposely to commit the least sin, though for
avoiding the greatest hurt?

2. But the impropriety and disadvantage of these attempts is farther manifest,
because if we really knew wherein our present Interest consists, and which were
the most natural and useful means for promoting it, this one fault of their
being sinful, and consequently, displeasing to Almighty God, were enough to
defeat the whole design of them. For,

1. When it appears that God is about to inflict his Judgments upon us, to
endeavor the avoiding of them by any unlawful means is no better than an
attempt to frustrate his Designs. And how vain this is the Wise Man informs us,
saying, Prove. 19.21.
There are many devices in a man's heart, nevertheless the counsel of the Lord,
that shall stand. In which words is averred, that though Men may plot and
contrive, and when they impatiently desire what they have not, or are possessed
with a fearful expectation of some impending Calamity, or groan under some
heavy Burden, may employ their Wits to find out means of removing these their
fears or troubles, yet if these means agree not with the Will and Word of God,
and the wise Determinations of his Providence, their Purposes must needs become
abortive, there being, as he speaks in another place, c. 21.30.
No wisdom, nor understanding, nor counsel, against the Lord God is infinite in
Knowledge and Power, and Is. 40.28.
there is no searching of his understanding, nor any resisting his Arm. Dan.
4.35.
He does according to his will in the army of heaven, and amongst the
inhabitants of the earth, and none can stay his hand, or say unto him, what
do thou? And v. 3^.
those that walk in Pride, as all do who thus inconsiderately set themselves to
countermine his proceedings concerning them, he is able to abase. This the
great Nebuchadnezzar found to his sorrow, when he had been magnifying his own
Glory and Grandeur, the stateliness of his Palace, and the extent of his
Dominions, the might of his Power, and the honor of his Majesty, and was
hereupon immediately driven from among Men, and forced to herd with the Beasts
of the Field, v. 34.
till he was brought to bless, and praise, and honor the most high, who lives
for ever, and to acknowledge, that his dominion is an everlasting dominion, and
his kingdom from generation to generation. And who art thou, O Man, that
think to withstand his decree? or how will thou be better able than this
potent Monarch to defend thy self against him? The least thou can possibly
expect in this case, is, that he should withdraw his Blessing from these thine
endeavors, and render them fruitless for want of it.

To this purpose the excellent S. Chrysostom comments upon those words of our
Blessed Savior, S. Mat. 10.16.
Behold I send you forth as sheep in the midst of Wolves; be ye therefore wise
as Serpents, and harmless as Doves. (...). D. Chrysostom. in (...).
Let us therefore, says he, be ashamed to act contrarily, by setting upon our
Enemies like Wolves. For so long as we retain the Meekness of Sheep, and act
like them, we are sure to come off Conquerors. Though many thousands of Wolves
should encompass us, we shall yet be able to overpower and subdue them. But if
our selves once become Wolves, we must expect thenceforward to be overcome;
because hereby we lose our best security, the care and protection of the
Shepherd.

2. In flying to unlawful Means in order to our welfare, we take the surest
course to set God at enmity with us, provoking him not only to deny us his
Blessing, but purposely to blast all our best-laid Designs. This is a direct
violation of his Laws, and may justly excite him to plague as far beyond our
utmost fears. It is to show aware regard to Man, or other inferior causes man
to God himself, the Supreme Lord and Governor, the great Creator, and prime
mover of all things. And how terrible the Consequence of this may be, he best
knows, in whose power it is to make us as miserable as he pleases. I am very
sure he deals very graciously with us, if he be not hereby prevailed with to
inflict upon us some sorer Judgment, than any we might hope to prevent, or
remove by it.

And the reason is plain, for when Men betake themselves to these sinister
courses for aid, they are so far from casting their Care upon God, that they do
what they can to take it off from him, and to put themselves together with all
their concerns, out of his Protection into their own, as if they understood
their own Wants better than he does, or could make better provision for
themselves than he will. Or rather, it is no less than a going from God to the
Devil for help; and consequently is the most effectual contrivance for bringing
down the Severities of his Vengeance upon them, to punish them for this their
Wickedness.

This the People of the Jews sadly experimented, when they had used their
utmost Interest and Endeavors to get our Blessed Savior put to death, least
otherwise the more powerful S Jo 11.48.
Romans might be tempted to come against them, and take away both their place
and nation, but by this same Project, as useful as they thought it for their
Preservation, provoked God to deliver them up into the Hands of the same
People, against whom they sought thus impiously to secure themselves. They
looked upon the removal of our Savior out of the way, as the properest
expedient for diverting so potent an Adversary; but because this was a most
heinous Offense against God, it made way for that very Destruction to overtake
them, which they were thus earnestly desirous to prevent.

And the like unhappy disappointment the learned Dr. Hammond understood our
Blessed Lord to have threatened to his Disciples, if they should seek to save
themselves, from the numerous dangers whereto they were obnoxious, by any
indirect and forbidden means. S. Matt. 16.25.
Whosoever will save his life, says our Lord, shall lose it; and whosoever
will lose his life for my sake shall find it. As if our Savior should have
said, They who by Persecutions should be brought to apostatize, and join with
the Jews, should with them be certainly destroyed in the great slaughter of
them; but they that should hold out, and venture the utmost for the confession
of the Truth, should be most like to be delivered from that dreadful
Destruction in which the rest would be involved. These were to have a Eusebius.
Eccl. Hist. l. 3. c. 5.
Pella provided for them, as a Reward of their Fidelity, a place of retreat
wherein to shelter themselves, whilst those others, who thought to secure
themselves by their sinful compliances were cut off.

In short, he that studies to save himself, or to promote his Interest, by any
known sin, takes a very likely way to have his Designs frustrated, and in
effect, embraces what he hates, and opens a door for all those Evils against
which he so foolishly arms himself to enter in. He prepares to himself needless
difficulties, and at the same time deprives himself of that succor, without
which he could not think to be safe in better Circumstances. And as if this
were not misfortune enough, he farther exposes himself to all the Miseries
which are threatened to the Refractary and Disobedient. By forsaking his God to
save himself, he flies from him who alone can protect him against all
Disasters, and runs into the open jaws of the Devourer. He takes care to create
himself an Enemy, that will easily turn all his wisest Counsels into
Foolishness, and render all his Undertakings successess; and who on the other
hand can as easily overwhelm him with all sorts of Plagues and Calamities.

3. If God should be pleased to grant success to these Attempts, beyond what
there is any reason to hope for; (...),
(...),
(...),
(...).
Aristot. Rhetor. l. 2. c. 24.
this possibly may be but to make way for some severer misery to overtake us.
Such as Philip of Macedon was afraid of, when having received three joyful
Messages at the same time, namely, that his Chariot had come off Victor in the
Olympic Games, that his General had routed his Enemies, and that his Wife had
born him a Son, cried out hereupon, with hands lift up to Heaven, (...).
Plutarch. de Consolat. ad Apollon.
Oh that after so much good news, it might be only some common calamity that
should befall him! Or as befell Theramenes at Athens, who having met with a
wonderful Deliverance (when the House wherein he was with others at Supper had
fallen and slain the rest of the Company without hurting him) was (...). Ibid.
shortly after put to a more cruel Death by his Colleagues in the Tyranny.

God may please for the clearer manifestation of his Power, Consuesse enim Deos
immortales, quo gravius homines ex commutatione rerum doleant, quos pro scelere
eorum ulcisci velint, his secundiores interdum res, and diuturniorem
impunitatem concedere. J. Caes. de bello Gall. l. 1. Miseri in hoc altius
tolluntur. ut decidant altius; hi enim ut victimae ad supplicium saginantur, ut
hostiae ad poenam coronantur. Min. Fell.
to exalt wicked Men, and give them their fill of Wealth and Authority, and
Honor, and to allow them the free enjoyment of all these, only in order to
their heavier fall. As he did sinful Pharaoh, of whom the Scripture says
expressly, Exodus 9.16.
In very deed for this cause have I raised thee up, for to show in thee my
power, and that my name may be declared throughout the earth; meaning, That God
had not only (...). Romans 9.7.
set him in an eminent station, by by making him a potent King, but had
moreover (...), apud 72. Interp.
preserved him alive after all the Plagues his Land had suffered for his
Obstinacy and Disobedience, had made him (...)
to stand (as it is in the Original) to the intent he might become a lasting
Monument of the Divine Vengeance upon incorrigible Offenders. An Example well
worthy the serious consideration of those that promise themselves Safety any
other way than God has appointed. For howsoever such flatter themselves in
their Wickedness, at present they know not how soon a Day of Reckoning may
come; and then they must look to pay dear for all their Abominations.

Sometimes God may permit Men's Ungodliness to succeed, and to answer their
Expectations for a while, but withal, may cause it to be attended with some
other inconvenience, that shall more than compensate for all the benefits
arising from it. As in the case of 2 King. 5.21, 22, 23.
Gehazi, who hoped to make an advantage of the lie with which he pursued Naaman
the Syrian, and so he did for the present; but then upon his return into his
Master's sight, v. 27.
he was seized with a Leprosy that was never to leave him all the days of his
life, nor his Seed after him.

Sometimes he may cut them off before they come to taste the fruit of what they
have unlawfully obtained, as he did Faust. and Marcell. libell. precum.
Potamius Bishop of Lisbon. This Bishop was first Orthodox, but afterward
denied the Faith, and turned Arian, in hope of an Estate to be bestowed upon
him by the Emperor. Which, though granted him, proved a very poor Recompense
for his Infidelity; for as he was going to take possession of it, a certain
pain seized him in his Tongue, wherewith he had blasphemed God, and his
Distemper increasing upon him, he died by the way Nullos fructus fundi vel
visione per^^piens. Ibid.
without the satisfaction of having seen what he so eagerly thirsted after.

Sometimes again he may let Men go on in their Wickedness, and proceed from one
degree of it to another, and after a while may put a very remarkable stop to
their career, and perhaps not without the loss of their Life. As it happened to
Hosius Bishop of Corduba, who after he had been zealous for the Orthodox Faith
in the time of the Arian Persecution, and had censured and rejected the
forenamed Potamius for his Apostasy from it, was yet wrought upon in his old
Age, (...). Socrat. Hist. P. l. 2. c. 31.
by the threats and punishments of the Emperor Constantius, to subscribe the
Arian Confession, and returned back from him into Spain, with Commission to
banish all that refused to join in a Communion with him. But it came to pass,
that being about to pronounce the Sentence of Deposition upon Gregory of
Eliberis, in order to his Banishment, he was struck by the Hand of God, De
sessu in terram eliditur, atque illic exspirat; aut, ut quidam volunt obmutuit.
Inde tamen effertur ut mortuus. Libel. prec. Ibid.
Fell from his Seat to the earth, and there expired; or at least had his speech
taken away, and was carried out for dead.

Or else when Men grow impetuous, and excessively extravagant in their
Impieties, he may seem to connive at them for a time, and when that is past may
take them down, in the height of their Pride, and make them acknowledge his
Hand visibly upon them for their Crimes. Thus he avenged himself upon two
notorious Adversaries to his Church, Antiochus a professed Enemy to the Jewish,
and Julian a subtle underminer of the Christian Worship and Religion. The
former of whom having forbidden the Jews to Sacrifice, as their Law required of
them, having offered Swinesflesh upon their Altar to profane it, having
prohibited their initiatory rite of Circumcision, and burnt their Scriptures,
yet before his death, finding his illness very hard upon him, he declared to
his Friends about him, (...). Josep. Antiq. l. 12. c. 13.
that he endured all this for the Cruelties he had exercised upon the Jews, and
for his robbing their Temple, and despising their God. The latter had been
educated from his Childhood in the Christian Religion, and though as he grew up
he began to have most Inclination for the Heathen Idolatries, Socrat. Hist.
Eccl. l. 3. c. 1. Am. Marcel. l. 22. Theod. Hist. l. 3. c. 2. Greg. Naz. (...).
yet openly made profession of Christianity, and took upon him a Monastic
Life, and was a Reader in the Church of Nicomedia in Bithynia, till at length
he thought it a proper time to lay aside his Vizard, and then he disowned the
Religion he had hitherto professed, went publicly to the Heathen Temples,
sacrificed to the Images he found there, and called himself their High Priest.
Thenceforward he set himself against the Christians, and spoke and wrote
against their Doctrine, Sozom. Hist. l. 5. c. 17.
trying all ways, Theod. l. 3. c. 22.
by fair Words, Theod. l. 3. c. 16.
by Promises and Rewards, Socrat. l. 3. c. 13, 14, 15, 16, 19.
by Terrors and Sufferings, Am. Marcell. l. 22. Optat. Meliv. l. 2.
by Toleration, Soz. l. 3. c. 17, 18. Greg. Naz. Stel. 1.
by Tricks and subtle Artifices to win them off from their Christianity. But
after all, it is related of him, that having received his mortal Wound, and
considering the Hand of God upon him in it, Quanquam Nazarenum nostium, and ut
ipse solebat dicere Galilaeum, statim in praelio senserit. D. Hieron. Epist.
84. (...). Sozom. l. 6. c. 3. (...). Theodorit. l. 3. c. 25.
he could not but declare (though he did it in an undecent manner) that that
Christ, whom he had so despised and reproached, and whose Worship he had
labored by so many various methods to extirpate out of the World, was not too
hard for him.

Thus it pleases the great God to execute his Wrath in an extraordinary and
signal manner, when Men grow audacious and incorrigible in their Wickedness,
and provoke him to that degree, that he can no longer bear with them. All the
present success such meet with is no security to them against a more deadly
stroke, when the measure of their Iniquities is filled up. This is the proper
season for him to vindicate his own Honor and Justice, and to let themselves
and the rest of the World see, that he is not an unconcerned Spectator of their
doings. And accordingly he takes occasion many times to inflict some immediate
Judgment upon them; or else he makes some other way for his Indignation, which,
if attended to, must necessarily convince them of their folly, in having
departed from his Precepts, how inviting soever the temptation might have
appeared to them.

And if we appeal to the ordinary course of the World, it must be acknowledged,
that though a Man may contrive to advance himself for the present (which yet is
more than many can do with all their Cunning, and all their Wickedness) though
a Man may contrive, I say, to advance himself for the present, by Cheating,
Oppression, Sycophantry, Perjury, Subornation, Time-serving, or other evil
Practices; these seldom last long without recoiling upon him to his sorrow.
They may prove serviceable whilst he can put a fair gloss upon them; but if
once they come to be publicly taken notice of, his Credit is presently
impaired by them, and either he is at length undone, or at least, finds himself
in worse circumstances than if he had kept to the undoubted Rules of Honesty.
And such an one being brought into Streights, his former ill dealings not only
occasion him fewer Friends amongst Men to assist him in his necessity, but give
him likewise just ground to expect far less of the Divine Favor and Compassion
than he might otherwise have hoped for. Whence his fall becomes the greater,
and the more grievous, the greater Nam in omni adversitate fortunae
infoelicissimum genus est infortunii, fuisse foelicem. Boet. de Consol. Philos.
l. 2. pros. 4.
by how much the higher he had been advanced, and the more grievous by how much
the less pitied he falls by those about him, and the less hope he has
therefore of a recovery.

And the case is much the same in relation to Treasons, Rebellion, Robbery,
Murder, or other the like dangerous, as well as unconscionable Practices.
Except that these not only fail in time to answer the Offender's Expectation,
(as the former) but besides, are frequently attended with some ignominious
punishment at the last, and it may be to the utter overthrow of themselves, and
their Estates, and Honors together at one blow; after this manner verifying
the saying of the Wiseman, Eccles. 9.10.
As the fish that are taken in an evil net, and as the birds that are caught in
the snare: so are the sons of men snared in an evil time, when it falls
suddenly upon them; and that other of the Psalmist, Ps. 92.7.
When the wicked spring as the grass, and when all the workers of iniquity do
flourish, it is (this is the time, whilst they are thus in their Splendour) that
they shall be destroyed for ever.

But farther, if through the immense Clemency of God, the Sinner should escape
all these forementioned Inconveniences, neither erring in his Choice, nor in
the Means he uses in pursuit of it, nor having his Designs defeated, nor any
heavier Judgment inflicted upon him during the whole time of his abode in this
World; supposing all this, still the impropriety and disadvantage of unlawful
Means in order to our welfare will appear.

3. Because there are other dreadful mischiefs that usually accompany them.
The danger is not over upon obtaining the End aimed at, but there are ill
consequences of the Means in order to it yet remaining, which will more than
recompense for the benefits redounding from them. And especially these two.

1. The trouble, anxiety, and perplexity of Mind, that may justly be expected
to follow upon them here in this World. 2. The intolerable tortures that are
due to them in the other.
1. The trouble, anxiety, and perplexity of Mind, that may justly be expected
to follow upon them here in this World. For it cannot be other than a very
considerable abatement of any the greatest outward Happiness, Nullum maleficium
sine formidine est, quia nec sine conscientia sui. Tertull. adv. Marcio. l. 4.
c. 17. Nemo malus foelix. Juv. Sat. 4. v. 8. (...). Pythagorae fragment. pros.
apud Hieroclem, and Demophilii sentent. Pythag. Si sera Deorum vindicta sit,
noluerunt tamen impios ipso in facinore adeo exultare, ut non angore
conscientiae fraudisque cruciatu, tanquam domesticis furiis, affidue vexentur.
Cic. Consol. ad Brut.
to remember that it has been acquired by the wilful transgression of God's
Laws. When the Possessor blesses himself most in his unjust seize, this
one thought will be enough (like the Dan. 5.6.
Handwriting on the Wall to Belshazzar) to imbitter all his Joys, to strike
his Limbs into a fit of trembling, to cover his Face with paleness, and fill
his Mind with horror and confusion. What a damp must it be to his compleatest
Satisfactions, to recollect, that they have been the purchase of his Sin, and
that he must therefore look to suffer one day severely for them? How gawdily
soever he may appear, or whatever show he make, Dii deaeque, quam male est
extra legem viventibus? quicquid meruerunt, semper expectant. Petron. Arb.
Satyr. c 85.
his Mind may yet be very uneasy, Is. 57.20.
like the troubled Sea, whose Waters cast up Mire and Dirt. And none but
himself knows what private Pangs and Agonies seize him in his most Halcyon
days; Poena autem vehemens, ac multo saevior illis,
Quas aut caeditius gravis invenit, aut Radamanthus.
Nocte dieque suum gestare in pectore testem.
Juv. Sat. 13. v. 195.
what Anguish, Fear, and Grief possess his Soul; how dissembled his Joys are
for the most part, and how much more miserable he is in truth, than those who
are most tempted to envy his Success. His seeming advantages above others are
no evidence that all is right within; for notwithstanding these, his Mind may
be continually upon the Rack, and he may hereby pay dearly, even at present,
for what he so values himself upon.

Instances are frequent in History, of Persons whom no outward Grandeur,
Wealth, or Power, could set at rest, that their own guilty Consciences should
not fill their Souls with dread and terror, as if they were just upon the
point of coming to account for their Iniquities. Such as Tacit. Annal. l. 6.
Sueton. in vit. Tiber. c. 63, 64, 65, 66.
Tiberius, Id. in vit. Call. c. 51.
Caligula, and Zon. Annal. To. 3.
Anastasius of Rome, Cic. Tusc. Quaest. l. 5. c. 20.
Dionysius of Corinth, P. de Comines. l. 6. c. 7.
Lewis XI. of France, and Speed, Baker, Trussel, and al.
Richard III. of our own Nation, etc. whose frightfull Dreams by Night, and
restless Fears by Day were a sufficient confirmation of the Poet's Assertion,
that Afferat ipse licet sacras Epidaurius herbas,
Sanabit nulla vulnera cordis open.
Ovid. l. 1. de pont. El. 4.
Aesculapius with all his Medicaments had no cure for a troubled Conscience. If
the greatest affluence of outward Enjoyments could set a Man at ease, sure
Kings and Emperors should have the best Title to it; yet these forementioned,
and others show, that they are many times farther from it than the meanest of
their Subjects. When once the greatest of Men rebel against God, on whom they
have their whole Dependence for their Lives and all their Enjoyments, they may
conclude, that he will have no regard to them more than others, but will be at
least as highly incensed against them. And consequently, they must have as much
cause as any to dread the heavy effects of his Displeasure.

There is a great deal of Truth in that of the Moralist, That Tutum aliqua res
in mala conscientia praestat, nulla securum. Putat enim se etiamsi non
deprehenditur, posse deprehendi, and inter somnos movetur, and quoties alicujus
scelus loquitur de suo cogitat. Senec. Epist. 105.
he who has a guilty Conscience may sometimes be safe from any present danger,
but never from the fear of it. For though his Sin be not yet discovered, he
knows not how soon it may, and is disturbed in his Sleep, and as often as he
mentions another's Wickedness, is possessed with a tormenting remembrance of
his own. But if to this be added the Consideration of another Life, and the
extremity of those dismal Tortures the Sinner must then expect to undergo, no
wonder though he find himself very uneasy at the thoughts hereof. These will
pursue him into his closest Retirements in spite of all the care he can take
to prevent them, and will be as so many Darts piercing him to the quick. The
remembrance of having acted unagreeably to his Profession, a sense of the guilt
hereby contracted, and a fear of present Sufferings, together with the dread of
an approaching Judgment, and the ineffable Terrors of the Lord in the other
World, will cut him to the Soul, will even overwhelm him with Grief, and if
duly attended to, will make him heartily repent, that ever he should have taken
so indirect a course to promote his own welfare. And yet all this is but the
beginning of Sorrows, and is nothing in comparison of what I mentioned in the
Second place, namely,

2. The intolerable Tortures that are due to these Practices in a future state;
when both Soul and Body shall be everlastingly punished in Hellfire, with the
Devil and his Angels. This will undoubtedly be the Portion of all that fear not
God; and amongst others, in particular of those whose distrust of his Goodness
has put them upon unwarrantable Contrivances for their own Safety or
Advancement. There is nothing more certain, than that 2 Cor. 5.10.
we must all appear, and God knows how soon, before the judgment seat of
Christ, that every one may receive the things done in his body, according to
that he has done, whether it be good or bad; and then Romans 2.6, etc.
will he render to every man according to his deeds; to them who by patient
continuance in well doing, seek for glory, and honor, and immortality, eternal
life; but to them who obey not the truth, but obey unrighteousness, indignation
and wrath, tribulation and anguish, upon every soul of man that does evil,
though for never so plausible an End, and upon never so advantageous a
Prospect. Nothing of this Nature will then be allowed of, as an excuse for
having transgressed God's Laws, or will deliver from the Severities denounced
against such as knowingly transgress them. But howsoever they escape at
present, they will be sure (unless a timely Repentance prevent it) to be
confined hereafter to unavoidable, insupportable, and yet incessant Agonies.

And how disadvantageous a bargain this will be to them, may be collected from
those words of our Blessed Lord to his Disciples, S. Matt. 16.26.
What shall it profit a man, if he shall gain the whole world, and lose his own
soul? or what shall a man give in exchange for his soul? If a Man can possibly
satisfy himself in any profitable, or otherwise useful Wickedness at present,
yet he will find a doleful, and an amazing change, when he shall come at last
to Is. 50.11.
lie down in sorrows, and Rev. 20.10.
be tormented day and Night for ever and ever. For if the gain of the whole
World would be an unequal Compensation for the loss of a Soul, as our Savior
teaches us, how egregious must their folly be, that will dare to ruin their
Souls beyond hope of recovery, only for some small inconsiderable advantage,
which may soon be gone again, and whilst it lasts, may administer but little
satisfaction; or for the avoiding some present uneasiness, which possibly might
have been soon over without it, and much better and more desirably than with it.

It is no slight matter to be condemned to everlasting Burnings amongst the
accursed and damned Spirits, to languish in extremity of Hunger and Thirst, and
Pain, and Grief, to have a guilty Conscience within, gnawing like a neverdying
Worm, and without the company of Devils terrifying and tormenting, the heat of
unquenchable Fire parching, dismal Darkness evershadowing us, and not one drop
of Water, or any the least mitigation of these dolours to be procured upon any
terms, nor any Nec videt interea qui terminusesse malorum,
Possit, nec quae sit poenarum denique finis.
Lucret. l. 3.
hope that the utmost period of time, though after Millions of Millions of
Ages, will put an end to them. There will be yelling and howling, weeping and
gnashing of Teeth, Pangs and Agonies, Fear and Dread, blackness of Darkness,
Horror and Confusion, and no expectation of any Good, or of freedom from any
Evil. And which is the Completion of all, there will be no end of these
Sufferings, nor any the least hope of it. In short, Min. Fell. Octav.
Nec tormentis aut modus ullus, aut terminus, these Torments will be infinite
as to both their intenseness and their duration, will be unspeakably,
unconceivably sharp, and yet withal will endure to all Eternity. Insomuch that
Aetna and Vesuvius with all their Roarings, and all their fiercest and their
hottest Streams of Sulphur, are a very faint Emblem of these more dreadful
Flames. Wherein the Flesh shall for ever fry, the Blood for ever boil, the
Veins be for ever scorched, the Nerves for ever racked, Serpents shall for ever
devour the Body, and Furies for ever tear the Soul.

Oh the dire Vengeance of an incensed Deity, that will thus eternally pursue
and torture the guilty Sinner! and oh the intolerable stupidity therefore of
venturing to expose one's self to it, for whatsoever worldly advantage! It is a
sign persons have little apprehension of their own good, when they will choose
to be uneasy in their Minds here, and thus excessively miserable hereafter,
rather than undergo a little present smart, or it may be than want some place
of Honor or Profit, which yet they might be very well without, if they would
but heartily endeavor it.

And thus I hope I have sufficiently evinced the Unreasonableness of seeking to
Unlawful Means for Relief in whatever Case, and by consequence, that if People
would study their own truest Interest, and would be wise to the best purposes,
they must be ready to suffer, or part with any thing in this World, rather than
commit the least Sin, and not only so, but if they would take the surest course
to be happy at present, they must be very cautious of offending God, least
otherwise they provoke him to disappoint their Hopes, to frustrate their
Endeavors, and to plague them for all their Iniquities. The Lord knows how
to deliver the godly out of temptation, and to reserve the (...), 2 S. Pet. 2.9.
unjust, or Unrighteous, under which Character they are certainly included, who
make Sins their Refuge in their Distress, unto the day of judgment to be
punished. Those that stick close to him, relying faithfully upon his good
Providence in all their Necessities, he both can and will save without the help
of wicked Artifices for their Deliverance; and those that betake themselves to
Unlawful Means for Refuge, he will make either first or last to smart for it.
And besides, all Events at present depend more upon the Influence of God's
overruling Providence, than upon any Humane Means; nor will the best-laid
Designs turn to any account without his Concurrence. 1 Samuel 2.6, 7.
He brings down to the grave, and brings back again, makes poor and makes
rich, brings low and lifts up. And though in keeping to his ways, as Of
Christian Prudence, etc. chapter 8.
a late learned and pious Author of our own Church speaks, we should have no
visible preparations to trust to, yet is Providence, the ground of our
Confidence, full of invisible ones; which do abundantly more assure Deliverance
or Success than any others; and which like Elisha 's Mountain full of Horses
and fiery Chariots, are discernible to the Eye of Faith, though not to the Eye
of Flesh. He can make us happy if he pleases without our selves (though this be
more than we are ordinarily to expect) but we can never make our selves so
without him. The subtilest undertaker can do nothing but by his assistance,
which if he determine to withold, there needs nothing more to Job 5.13
disappoint the devices of the crafty, so that their hands cannot perform their
enterprise.

And in how forlorn a condition must Men be, when they fall into trouble, after
they have parted with their Innocence, and dared even to damn their Souls, and
hereby have forfeited the Favor of both God and Man to avoid it? If it be an
abatement of the greatest Temporal Happiness, that it has been obtained by the
help of some Sin (as I have endeavored to show it is;) much rather will it be
a mighty aggravation of all the Sinner's Fears or Sufferings, Wants or
Disappointments, to consider that he has ventured thus hard for the cure of
them, and yet has not been able to obtain it.

The properest Support under any affliction is, a sense of a Man's own
Integrity, an hope of God's Favor and Blessing, the Assistance of the Holy
Spirit, and a Meditation of the cause of his Sufferings, and the Benefits that
may redound from a good improvement of them. And since he that wilfully runs
into any known Sin, evidently deprives himself of all these grounds of Comfort,
his Case must be very highly deplorable, and so much the more, by how much the
more provoking his Wickedness has been. In his most flourishing Estate (...).
Diog. Laert. l. 1. in vit. Chil.
he will have just cause to repent of his Folly; but if he find all his
Attempts prove vain, for want of God's Blessing, and be made to groan under the
Evils which he had been striving against, he will meet with a very considerable
foretaste of those unconceivable Torments, to which without a sincere and
timely Repentance, he must be everlastingly consigned in the other World.

Never therefore let any think of sinning for their own profit or security, of
Rom 3.8. (...). Anton. Imp. (...). l. 3. n. 14.
doing evil that good may come, or of committing the least Wickedness, for any
the most desirable End. For when all is done, there is no safety without God,
who alone protects in the midst of the greatest Dangers, supports under the
heaviest Burdens, and on the other hand, as easily defeats the Expectations of
the most secure in their Attempts against him. And although sometimes, for
reasons best known to himself, he may permit the most ungodly undertakings to
succeed, there is no ground to conclude, that he will do it whenever we
engage in them, or indeed at any time, unless it be in Wrath, and to the
intent, that we may be the rather Nihil est infoelicius foelicitate peccantium,
quia poenalis nutritur impunitas, and mala voluntas velut hostis interior
roboratur. D. August. Epist. 5.
hardened in our Sins, and may hereby be prepared for the severer Destruction.

The Conclusion.
AND now for a Conclusion of the whole I only add, that the Design of this
plain Discourse is this, That even in our lowest, our worst, and most
deplorable estate, when our Grievances lie heaviest upon us, and all other
Means of Comfort fail us most, we be ready to rest entirely upon God for a
Redress, encouraging our selves with the thoughts of his infinite
Loving Kindness, and never suffering our selves to doubt of his Protection,
whatever our Circumstances be, so long as we sincerely apply our selves to him
for it. Be our Case never so dark and gloomy, and though whether we look to the
East, or to the West, or to the North, or to the South, there be no appearance
of Safety from any of these Quarters, yet Almighty God can immediately command
a Deliverance for us. It is but for him to speak the word, and his servants
shall be healed. No sooner can he appear for our Relief, but all our Clouds
shall immediately be dissipated, and all our Fears removed, and Is. 58.8.
our light shall break forth as the morning, and our health shall spring forth
speedily. No such Night of Affliction can possibly seize us, but that our Mal.
4.2.
Sun of Righteousness may presently arise with healing in his wings.

Our God can quickly curb the Fury of the most outrageous Adversaries, either
by converting them, as Act. 9.5, 6.
S. Paul; or mollifying them, as Esth. 8.8, etc.
Ahasuerus, or Eusebius. Hist. Eccl. l. 8. c. 17. and Lactant. de mort. persec. c.
33, 34.
Galerius; or cutting them off in their Wickedness, as Exodus 14.28.
Pharaoh, or Joseph. Ant. l. 18 c. 11.
Caligula, or Lact. de M. pers. c. 3.
Domitian; can Numb. 16.48.
check the most dangerous Distempers, 1 King. 17.6, and 16.
supply the most pressing Necessities, S. Matt. 9.20, etc.
and cure the most fixed and chronical Diseases; can stop Dan. 6.22.
the Lion's Mouth, Cum apro subministraretur (n. Saturus) venator potius qui
illum subligaverat, suffossus ab eadem bestia post diem muneris obiit. Et cum
ad ursum substrictus esset in ponte, ursus de cavea prodire noluit, itaque
secundo Saturus illaesus revocatur. Pass. SS. Perpet. and Foelicit.
divert the fury of the Boar, and quell the fierceness of the Bear, and (...).
De Martyr. S. Polycarpi.
restrain the violence of the Flames; can rescue out of the greatest Miseries,
Dan. 3.26.
out of the Fiery-furnace with the three Children, Act. 16.26.
out of the Prison with S. Paul and Silas, Jerem. 37.16, 17.
out of the miry Dungeon with the Prophet Jeremiah, and Jon. 2.10.
with Jonas out of the Whale's Belly, and from the depth of the Sea. There is
no condition so forlorn, and past all hope, but he has a remedy in store for
it, if duly sought to for his help. And he is as willing as he is able to exert
his Power, and show his Might in behalf of his poor Supplicants, that
faithfully cast their care upon him, and to let them see to their unspeakable
Comfort, that he is a strength to the poor, a strength to the needy in his
distress, a refuge from the storm, a shadow from the heat, when the blast of
the terrible ones, is as a storm against the wall; as the Prophet speaks Is.
25.4.
.

Ps. 113.6, 7, 8.
He takes the sunple out of the dust, and lifts the poor out of the mire, to
set him with the Princes, even with the Princes of his people. He makes the
barren woman to keep house, and to be a joyful mother of children. He advanced
Exodus 2.3. and 3.10.
Moses from the Ark of Bullrushes, to be the Conductor of his People out of
Egypt, 1 Samuel 10.1, 2.
Saul from seeking his Father's Asses to the Kingdom of Israel, Psalm. 78.71.
David from following his Father's Sheep to be Ruler of the same People, Genesis
41.40.
Joseph from a state of Slavery, and a Prison, to the second place in Egypt;
Rex ego qui sum Sicaniae, figulo sum genitore satus. Auson. Epig. 8.
Agathocles from among the Pots to be Governor of Syracuse, and Herodot. Cli.
c 113. and Justin. Hist. l. 1.
Cyrus from a Shepherd's Cottage to be the Emperor of the Medes and Persians,
and Plutarch. in vit. Romans L. Flor. l. 1. c 4. Live. l. 1. c. 41. and al.
made Romulus from a like despicable condition Founder of the Roman Empire. And
how often may our selves have observed our own or others Mournings unexpectedly
changed into Mirth, by some strange alteration of Affairs, beyond what we could
have looked for? Why then should we despair of the like in any other case? why
should we not rather meditate with our selves that our God is still the same,
as able as ever to relieve us, and he will do it as he sees occasion?

Deliverance is oftentimes nearest, when nothing but sudden and severe
Destruction seems to hang over our Heads. Nor is there any fitter time for God
to put to his Hand, to arise and exert his Almighty Power for the preservation
of his Servants, than when all other helps fail. When Is. 59.14, 15, 17, 19.
Judgment is turned away backwards, and justice stands afar off, when truth
is fallen in the streets, and equity cannot enter, and he that departs from
evil makes himself a prey, then is the time for him to put on righteousness as
a breastplate, and an helmet of salvation upon his Head, to put on the garments
of vengeance for clothing, and cover himself with zeal as with a cloak, and to
repay fury to his adversaries, and recompense to his Enemies, till they be
brought to fear the name of the Lord from the west, and his glory from the
rising of the Sun. Or whatever other Grievance any labor under when it seems
most incurable, it may in truth be soonest cured.

Possibly some unobserved natural way for an escape may in due time discover it
self; or if not, we know as certainly as God is, that he can order some other
method of Relief for us. He ordinarily works by the use of Means (and this
therefore is the course in which we are generally to expect his Blessings) but
he is not confined to these, but works as easily without them, when they fail,
and in direct opposition to them, when they are not for his purpose; and will
be sure to do so as often as he sees it requisite. He will not prostitute his
Miracles, and make them cheap, by vouchsafing them when there is no sufficient
reason for them; but he will make use of those, rather than break his word;
which he never has done, nor ever can do, though the other he has done
frequently, to the great consolation and advantage of his faithful Servants.
And indeed God's Providence many times is nearest and his help readiest, when
he sees us the most destitute of Succor from any inferior Means. Our Fathers
and Mothers may forsake us, they from whom there is reason to hope for most
kindness may cast us off, and all other Creature Comforts may deceive us; but
our good God will never do it, but will take us up in the midst of all our
Distractions. This being the time when his Power is most seen in the delivery
of his Servants, and so his glory most advanced by it, whilst Men are forced to
acknowledge it to be in a signal manner Psalm. 64.9.
God's doing; and being moreover the time when his kindness is apt to make the
deepest impression upon the persons delivered, who are never so sensible of the
great benefit of ease and rest, as when almost worn out with some violent
paroxism, some pinching and dismal Calamity; he will not therefore neglect so
fair an opportunity for bringing Honor to his own great Name, and safety to
his poor afflicted Creatures that run to him for shelter. And so himself
professes by the Mouth of the holy Psalmist, pointing out this as the properest
season of applying to him for assistance. Psalm. 50.15.
Call upon me in the day of trouble, or when thy Wants are most pressing, and
thy Sorrows most pungent in (...)
the time of streightening and distress, I will deliver thee, and thou shall
glorify me.

And there is no reason therefore to be discouraged, though he do not
immediately work Deliverance for any that call upon him, since we know
assuredly he will do it in his due time. He may possibly withold his Hand for
a while on purpose that we may become the more earnest Supplicants at the
Throne of his Grace, that we may be brought to cry mightily unto him for the
redress we hope for at his Hand. And yet our condition may be nevertheless safe
for the future, though at present it be most disconsolate. He will certainly
take the best, that is his own, time to do us good, and perhaps will set us at
rest when we think least of it.

And by how much the less he seems in the mean time to concern himself for us,
so much the greater virtue it is to cast all our Care however upon him. It is
no great matter to rest upon him, Imperia dura toll, quid virtus erit. Sen.
Herc. Fur. act. 2. sc. 2.
when things go according to our own desires, and we have little more to hope
or wish for from him. Nor is it much greater to do it, when Afflictions befall
us, but at the same time bring with them also a plain and easy direction for
getting rid of them in a little while. But the difficulty is to confide
steadfastly in God, when he frowns upon us, when his Hand lies heavy upon us,
and he appears unwilling to remove it; to be able to say with Job, that
admirable example of a sure Trust in God, as well as of an unwearied Patience,
Job 13.15.
Though he slay me, yet will I trust in him; with the Patriarch Abraham, Romans
4.15.
To believe against hope; and to be like the Apostles and first Disciples of
our Lord, who 2 Cor. 1.8, 9.
when they were pressed out of measure, above strength, insomuch that they
despaired even of life, and hence could trust no longer in themselves, yet
continued to put their Trust in God, which raises the dead, and can at least
as easily work any less Deliverance for us. For a Man to repose himself, and
all his concerns after this manner upon the Divine Providence is an Argument of
a truly Christian Temper, and evidences him to be acted by solid Principles,
and that he is in good earnest in what he professes, and is fully persuaded of
the truth of God's Promises, and has a Mind deeply affected with them. Nor is
there any readier way to bring Honor to our Religion, than by showing our
selves thus entirely influenced by it, in that we can faithfully adhere to God,
and cast our Care upon him, notwithstanding all the outward inconveniences
that may threaten us in, or for so doing.

And we must therefore by no means content our selves to trust in God in our
Prosperity only, when there is less occasion for the exercise of this Duty, but
must persist in it likewise, when he seems most plainly to have withdrawn his
Countenance, and takes least notice of us. We must not allow our selves to be
discouraged in our hardest Circumstances, as though he would no longer have any
regard for us, least so we provoke him by our Diffidence to deal with us
according to our Surmises; but should rather earnestly endeavor to raise up
our Spirits, and animate and comfort our selves with an assurance of his
gracious Protection, as of a sufficient cure for all our Maladies.

Wherefore never let any imagine, that they have performed this excellent Duty
as they ought, till they have brought themselves to that steady dependence upon
God, that howsoever he deals by them at present, or whatsoever portion he in
his infinite Wisdom judges fit to allot them, they do not fail however to rest
satisfied with these his Determinations, in a confident expectation of Relief
against them, when it shall be properest for them. He is the best Judge of all
Men's Necessities, and what Application he knows to be truly requisite, he will
certainly administer, though not always in the same manner as they desire. And
those persons must therefore be highly inexcusable, that suffer any measure of
Afflictions to affright them from that Affiance which they ought always to have
in him.

It is an intolerable shame to behold mere Heathens cheerfully resigning
themselves up to God's disposal, to wait for Safety from him alone, and only
for so much of it as he shall be pleased to vouchsafe them, and yet not
endeavor to outstrip them, in this so rational a Confidence; to hear (...) l.
40. c. 20.
Amonine the Emperor advising himself to live like one that had committed all
his Affairs to God, with all his Soul; and Plato saying, (...). Plat. Crit.
If this is what God likes best, oh let it be; and Epictetus considering the
Divine Dispensations, (...). Simpl. in Epict. c. 38.
as the result of the perfectest Knowledge and good Providence; and again,
professing himself (...). Arr. Epict. l. 3. c. 26.
to have entirely conformed his Will to the Divine, to be sick whenever God
would have him, to undertake whatever God requires of him, to desire what God
likes best, to enjoy what God judges most convenient, and to die when God would
have him (which by the way, is one of those Methods that God uses for the
deliverance of his Servants when worn out with Afflictions, for he takes some
of the Righteous away from incumbent Evils, as well as others from the Evils to
come) looking upon his own Will and Desires, whilst thus composed, as no more
capable of being crossed, than God's is, with which they always go along; and a
little after, (...). Ibid.
prescribing it as the most useful course in order to a secure passage in this
World, to commit one's self to God, by considering his Divine Will, and most
wise administration of Affairs: It is an intolerable shame, I say, to observe
this readiness in Heathens to cast all their Care upon God, and at the same
time to think how scandalously most Christians come behind them in it, how apt
we are to whine, and be dejected, and out of heart, only because God is not
pleased to follow our own Imaginations in his dealings with us; and
particularly, because he condescends to visit us sometimes with his necessary
and salutary Chastisements, and will not be entreated to withdraw his Hand,
before we are fit for the removal of it.

Blessed God! is this our Resignation to thy most holy Will? is this all our
Trust in thee? alas, how far are we from duly casting our Care upon thee,
whilst we thus senselesly suffer any cross Accidents to estrange our Souls from
thee? It is gross folly to expect, or desire all clear Weather, nothing but
fair Sunshine Days, without Foggs or Rain, or to repine at wholesome Winds to
fan the Air and disperse its Vapors, or seasonable Showers to refresh the
Earth, and make it fruitful. And no less unreasonable is it in relation to our
selves, to reckon upon nothing but Ease and Plenty, and abundance of
Satisfaction in the enjoyment hereof, without recollecting what need we have of
Afflictions to purify and exalt our Minds, and put us upon preparing for a
better state, or to think our selves neglected by God, whenever any remarkable
portion of them falls to our share. Whereas the consideration hereof should
dispose us on the contrary, to look up to God, as knowing that they all come
from him, and to endeavor heartily to approve our selves to him, as firmly
believing, that he will not fail to put an end to them, when he sees us rightly
prepared for it, and that it will be for our good; and in the mean time, till
he does it, comforting our selves in the assurance we have of such his abundant
Goodness to us. The fittest time for manifesting our sure Trust in God is, when
we labor under heavy Pressures and Calamities, and have no hope of help from
any else. And accordingly it is an indispensable duty in this case, still to
persevere in an unwearied Dependence upon him, cheerfully and comfortably
waiting his Time for a Deliverance.

And would persons be prevailed with to make this their constant Practice;
would they but consider what I have written, not as a speculative Doctrine, but
as a necessary matter of Duty, in order to the amendment of their Lives; and
instead of senselesly aggravating any Evils they lie under, or Dangers that
threaten them, would they be persuaded seriously to meditate upon the singular
encouragement God has given them to look up to him for a seasonable redress of
all their Grievances; and would weigh well with themselves how ready he is to
help those who make him their Refuge; not so much attending to the Rod, as to
him that has appointed it, and thinking how easily he can remove it, and what
cause they have constantly to trust in him; they would soon perceive a very
remarkable abatement of their Sorrows. This would prove an admirable course for
easing their Minds in all conditions, by taking off the edge and pungency of
their Sufferings of whatsoever nature.

The Root of Man's Misery, says an ingenious Sir Ph. Warwick, of Government.
p. 159.
Author, is not in daring to trust himself unto the Law of his own Nature, and
the Providence of his Maker. And it is very certain, that this sort of
mismanagement creates Men a great deal of trouble and perplexity, which might
be avoided, if they were but more mindful of God's Protection, and the reason
they have to rest quietly upon it, without fretting and tormenting themselves
to no purpose. And till they have conquered themselves in this respect, I
cannot much wonder, if they be ready to sink under the weight of every Calamity
that befalls them.

AN EXHORTATION TO PATIENT SUFFERING FOR Righteousness, IN A SERMON ON 1 St.
PET. III. 14, 15.

What shall it profit a Man, if he shall gain the whole World and lose his own
Soul? S. Mar. 8.36. Sic itaque nos ad Deum expansos ungulae fodiant, cruces
suspendant, ignes lambant, gladii guttura detruncent, bestiae insiliant,
paratus est ad omne supplicium ipse habitus orantis Christiani. Tertull. Apol.
c. 30. (...). Clem. Alexand. Stro. l. 4. LONDON, Printed by J. Heptinstall, for
Walter Kettilby at the Bishop's-Head in St. Paul's Churchyard, 1696.

An Exhortation to Patient Suffering for Righteousness.
1 S. Pet. III. 14, 15. But and if ye suffer for Righteousness sake, happy are
ye, and be not afraid of their terror, neither be troubled: But sanctify the
Lord God in your hearts, and be ready always to give an answer to every one
that asks of you, a reason of the hope that is in you, with meekness and
fear.
OUR Blessed Savior in his Divine Sermon on the Mount, to encourage his
Disciples to proceed the more comfortably and vigorously in the profession of
his Name, declares a Blessedness to belong to those S. Matt. 5 10, 11, 12.
that are persecuted for Righteousness sake, and that they are hereby entitled
to a place in the Kingdom of Heaven, exhorting them to rejoice and be exceeding
glad at the forethought of so incomparable a Reward reserved in store for them
till a future state. At other times he cautions them to expect their share of
Reproaches, Afflictions, and all kinds of Indignities, informing them that they
should certainly S. Mar. 13.9.
be delivered up to the Councils, and beaten in the Synagogues, and should be
brought before Kings and Rulers upon this account, that they should be S. Mat
10.22.
hated of all men for his Name's sake; that S. Jo. 16.33.
in the World they should have tribulation; that they should be Ibid. v. 2.
put out of the Synagogues; yea more-ever, that the time would come, when Men
would think to do God good Service in putting them to death; but comforting
them likewise in the mean while, with an assurance that seeing he had already
v. 33.
overcome the World for them, they needed not therefore to be affrighted at all
its Threats and Cruelties. And again, he acquaints them S. Matt. 10.28.
what abundant reason they had to fear God more than Man, and his Eternal
Vengeance infinitely beyond the utmost Evils that could possibly befall them in
this World; and bids them S. Lu. 12.32.
not fear, because it was their Father's good will to give them the Kingdom,
implying, that having destined them to that singular happiness he would not
fail to take care of them in the mean time.

And the same Doctrine our Apostle S. Peter here inculcates on the Strangers
dispersed throughout c. 1.1.
Pontus, Galatia, Cappadocia, Asia, and Bithynia; whom he advises to account it
as a Blessing, and a Favor, rather than a Grievance and a Vexation, when they
should be called to suffer for a good Conscience, and therefore not to be
disturbed or afraid whatsoever dangers they inight be threatened with, from the
Power and Malice of their enraged Adversaries, but to sanctify the Lord God in
their hearts, by an humble, earnest, and steady dependence upon his good
Providence to take care of them, and an undaunted perseverance in their Duty,
how hard or dangerous soever, being ready upon all occasions, and in the worst
of times, to confess him before Men, and submissively and patiently to bear all
the Severities, whereto they might possibly find themselves exposed for their
adherence either to his Doctrines or Precepts, to the Principles of the
Christian Faith, or to the faithful and conscientious observance of those most
holy Commands he had given them in charge. But and if ye suffer for
righteousness sake, happy are ye, and be not afraid of their terror, neither
be troubled, but sanctify the Lord God in your hearts, and be ready always to
give an answer to every man that asks you a reason of the hope that is in
you, with meekness and fear.

Which being a Doctrine that concerned not the first Christians only, but all
that at any time fall under Persecutions for the sake of their Religion and
their Savior, as some have in all Ages, and many in our own times, in several
parts of the World, and many more possibly may; that therefore which I design
at present from these words, is, to apply the Doctrine seriously to our selves,
to try if we can be prevailed with to prepare our selves for the constant
practice of it, as often as we may have occasion. And to this end I shall beg
leave to enforce it from these several following Considerations.

1. To be willing to suffer when called to it, is no more than our Religion
enjoins us from time to time, as a necessary qualification for being our Lord's
Disciples, and absolutely requisite in order to Salvation. 2. It is but what
our blessed Lord has done for us in a very extraordinary manner. 3. This is the
best and most effectual way of defending our Religion. 4. It is a Service that
will undoubtedly meet with an abundant Recompense. And lastly, 5. It is no such
dreadful Task as Men are wont ordinarily to imagine. Of these in their order,
and I begin with the first of them.
1. To be willing to suffer whenever called to it is no more than our Religion
enjoins us from time to time, as a necessary qualification for being our Lord's
Disciples, and absolutely requisite in order to Salvation. It is not the
portion of all actually to suffer for our Savior's sake; but there is no
possibility of approving our selves good Christians at present, or being happy
hereafter, without a Readiness and Preparation of Mind to do it, as often as
occasion offers it self; that is to say, whenever it cannot be avoided
without Sin. There is no temporal Advantage so valuable, nor any Loss or
Cruelty so formidable, but that we must be content to conquer our selves in
relation to it, even to part with S. Matt. 5.29, 30.
a right eye, or hand, or what perhaps may be as dear to us, before we can
promise our selves, that our Lord will own us for his Followers here, or admit
us into his Heavenly Kingdom when we shall be translated hence.

S. Lu. 9.23.
If any man will come after our Savior, he must deny himself, and take up his
Cross daily and follow him. If any would be S. Matt. 10.32, 33.
confessed and owned by him before his Father which is in Heaven, he must not
be ashamed nor afraid to own Him, and his Doctrines, and Commands, though in
the most perilous times. If any would be accounted v. 37, 38, 39. and S. Lu.
14.26.
worthy of him, he must be disposed to leave all his nearest and dearest
Relations, yea, and his own life also, upon his account; which whosoever
refuses to do, he cannot be his Disciple. It often happens, that they 2 Timothy
3.12.
who would live holily in Christ Jesus, must unavoidably suffer Persecutions,
and must Act. 14.22.
enter through many Tribulations into the Kingdom of Heaven. And hence we are
directed to esteem our selves happy, if we be reproached and abused for the
Name of Christ, and to S. Ja. 1.2.
count it all joy when we fall into temptations, and whilst we 1 S. Pet. 4.19.
suffer according to the will of God, for our firm adherence to his Laws, to
bear it patiently and quietly, never attempting to cast the Cross off from our
Shoulders by any unwarrantable means, but committing the keeping of our Souls
to him in well-doing, as unto a faithful Creator, and v. 12, 13.
not to think it strange even concerning the fiery trial, if that should prove
our lot, as though some wonderful matter had befallen us, and with which other
Christians had been unacquainted, but to look upon it rather as a just ground
of Joy and Comfort when we are thus made like to Christ in Suffering; in hope
that at the last day S. Lu. 12.4.
when his transcendent Glory shall be revealed, we also shall have abundant
cause to be glad with exceeding joy.

We must not stand in S. Matt. 10.28.
fear of them that can kill the body, and after that have nothing more that
they can do, but of God Almighty, who is infinitely greater than the most
powerful of Men, and able to punish infinitely beyond all the Barbarities of
the most outrageous Adversary, by destroying both body and soul in Hell; must
be sure in all things to Act. 5.29.
obey God rather than man, whatsoever the consequence be in this World; and
must constantly persist in well-doing, and whatever we suffer for our
Integrity, must yet be mindful to 1 S. Pet. 2.20.
take it patiently, with an hearty zeal for God's Glory, and an entire
Resignation to his holy Will, as well knowing that this is an acceptable
Service with God, and highly pleasing in his sight.

This is the plain Doctrine of the Gospel. And it is therefore a great vanity
to talk of treading in our Savior's steps, or entituling our selves to the
inestimable benefits of his Death and Resurrection, if we permit our selves to
live in contradiction to it, or to conceit, that we shall be accepted as his
Followers, if we think much to S. Matt. 20.23.
drink of the cup that he drank of, or to be baptized with the Baptism of
Sufferings that he was baptized with. He has sufficiently declared, that he
will admit of none but upon condition of being Romans 8.29.
conformed to his image, by enduring all those evils whereto they shall at any
time find themselves exposed for the sake of a good Conscience; assuring us
moreover, that S. Mar. 8.38.
whosoever shall be ashamed of (or unwilling to own) Him and his Words, (both
his Doctrines and his Precepts) in the midst of an adulterous and sinful
generation, of him also shall the son of man be ashamed, when he comes in the
glory of his Father, with the holy Angels.

This is the first Consideration; and is sufficient, one would think, to engage
all who have any Reverence for their crucified Redeemer, or any love for their
own Souls, readily to subject themselves to all kinds of Losses, Reproaches, or
other the severest Afflictions, rather than both dishonor their holy
Profession, and ruin themselves to all Eternity. However, that we may all be
the rather invited to a cheerful suffering for the sake of our Savior, and
the necessary Points and Principles of his Religion, I propounded in the next
place, and now accordingly proceed to remind you, that

2. This is but what our Lord has done for us in a very signal manner. Who, 2
Cor. 8.9.
though he were rich, yet became poor for our sakes, that we through his
poverty might be made rich. Though he were Phil. 2.6, 7, 8.
in the form of God, and thought it not robbery to be equal with God, yet made
he himself of no reputation, but took upon him the form of a servant, and was
made in the likeness of men: and being found in fashion as a man, he humbled
himself, and became obedient to death, even that vile, servile, ignominious,
and cruel death, the death of the Cross. He who had from all Eternity been
infinitely happy together with the Father, out of his immense compassion to
fallen Man, condescended in time to be born into the World, of a poor Virgin,
to lead a mean and despicable, a troublesome and uneasy life, exposed to all
the Infirmities of Humane Nature, Sin only excepted, and to die in the most
contemptible and painful manner, that hereby he might redeem us from Sin,
Death, and Hell, and might restore us to his Father's Favor, and procure us a
Title to the ineffable Glories of his everlasting Kingdom.

What intolerable Disingenuity therefore, what monstrous Ingratitude must it
be, for any of those whom he has thus excessively commiserated to stick at any
the severest Sufferings, much more to be unwilling to part with only some
present possessions, or other outward conveniences in obedience to his
Command? Whenever thou call to mind what Pain and Shame, what Reproach and
Contempt, what Wants, what Affronts, what Tortures, what Agonies he underwent
upon thy account, how Is. 53.3.
he was despised and rejected of men, and became a man of sorrows, and
acquainted with grief; that v. 5.
through his stripes thou might be healed, how v. 8.
he was wounded for thy transgressions, and bruised for thy iniquities, was
taken from prison, and from judgment, and was cut off out of the land of the
living; and all this to make Atonement for thy Sins, and redeem thee from the
unconceivable Miseries justly due to them; when thou reflectest, I say, upon
this singular Love of thy incarnate and dying Savior, how can thou find in
thy Heart to refuse dying again for him? But especially how can thou possibly
prefer some fading transitory Privilege or Enjoyment before thy Duty to him?
Had not he given himself for thee thou had been irrecoverably ruined for
evermore; and how can thou then be backward to make him the best return for
it thou art able? How can thou be afraid of suffering, when thou have him for
thy Guide, and seriously layest to heart, that 1 S. Pet. 2.21.
he also suffered for thee, leaving thee an Example, that thou should tread
in his steps? The Meditation hereof, if duly attended to, would make thee
almost ambitious, Dum mori post mortem timent, interim mori non timent. Caecil
in Min. Fell. Si nondum nostrum sanguinem fudimus, sed fudisse parati sumus,
nemo hoc dilationis nostrae moram Clementiam judicet, quae nobis officit, quae
impedimentum glorioe facit, quae coelum differt, quae gloriosum Dei conspectum
inhibet. D Cyprian Epist. 31. Edit. Ox. Poena illic subigitur, cruciatus
obteritur, nec mors metuitur sed optatur. Epist. 37. Cum omni saevitia vestra
concertamus, etiam ultro irrumpentes: magisque damnati, quam absoluti,
gaudemus. Tortull. ad Seap.
with the Primitive Christians, of the Crown of Martyrdom. At least it would
certainly engage thee to a resolute and undaunted observance of all thy
Savior's Laws, and thy indissoluble obligations to him; and so would dispose
thee 2 Timothy 2.3.
to endure hardships as a good Soldier of Jesus Christ, to esteem the Heb.
11.25, 26.
reproach of, or for, Christ, greater riches than all earthly treasures, and to
choose rather to suffer affliction with the people of God, than to enjoy the
pleasures of sin for a season. Especially if it be again considered, That,

3. This is the best and most effectual way of defending our Religion, Salus
autem civitatis Dei talis est, ut cum fide ac per fidem teneri, vel potius
acquiri possit, fide autem perdita ad eam quisque venire non possit. D. Aug. de
Civit. Dei, l. 22. c. 6.
which whilst People take any other course to preserve they know not what
mischief they may do it by those attempts, and whether instead of protecting
and maintaining it, they are not giving it its mortal wound. Histor. Eccles.
Sclavon. p. 58.
Joannes Commenius, the last Archbishop of Prague, bewails the miserable
condition whereinto the Churches of Bohemia and Moravia were brought by
attempting to save themselves by Arms, which could not secure them, as they
expected, but became an inlet to their ruin, to that degree, that he complains
a little after, Ut intra Bohemiam and Moraviam, nullum amplius Evangelicis
restet Templum, nulla Schola, nullum privatum religionis exercitium, nulli
sacri libri, exustis Bibliorum codicibus aliisque purioris divini cultus
adminiculis, p. 59.
they had neither Church allowed them, nor School, nor private exercise of
their Religion, and had their Bibles, and other useful Instruments of Devotion
taken from them.

Whereas on the contrary, there is nothing more recommends Religion to Mankind,
than to behold its Professors ready with unshaken Courage and Resolution to
expose themselves and all that is dear to them in this World upon its account
This Nam cum videat vulgus dilacerari homines variis tormentorum generibus, and
inter fatigatos carnifices invictam tenere patientiam; existimant, id quod res
est, nec consensum tam multorum, nec perseverantiam morientium vanum esse nec
ipsam patientiam sine Deo cruciatus tantos posse superare. Lactant. Instit. l.
5. c. 13.
convinces Men that such persons are really persuaded of the truth of those
Doctrines, and the reasonableness of those Precepts, which they have embraced,
and for which they are fully set upon suffering in the World, and hereby
inclines them to hearken the rather to those Arguments, which are offered for
inviting themselves also to the same choice.

It was a famed Observation amongst the ancient Christians, Nec quicquam tamen
proficit exquisitior quaeque crudelitas vestra, illecebra est magis sectae.
Plures efficimur quoties metimur a vobis, semen est sanguis Christianorum, etc.
Tertul. Apol. c. ult. (...). Just. M. Ep. ad Diog. (...). Ibid. Cum autem
noster numerus semper Deorum cultoribus augeatur; nunquam vero, ne in ipsa
quidem persecutione minuatur. Lactant. Instit l. 5. c. 13
that the Blood of the Martyrs, which was barbarously shed in so many several
parts of the World, was but the Seed of the Church. And Ad multiplicandam
Ecclesiam valuit sanctus sanguis effusus seminatione. D. August. in Psalm. 40.
Multiplicati sunt magis magisque Christiani, etc. Ibid. De sanguine occisorum
tanti exsurrexerunt a quibus illi interfectores martyrum superarentus. Ibid. in
Psalm. 134.
indeed it was good Seed, and brought forth a plentiful Crop of new
Professors, to the honor of God, and his Religion, and the terror and
astonishment of their Persecutors. Their (...). Greg. Naz. (...). 1.
Religion was not overthrown by all the Tortures they underwent; but on the
other hand, their brave and truly Christian manner of bearing them, improved
them to a better purpose, making them an occasion of gaining numbers of other
Proselytes to that Faith they saw thus outraged, but which withal so
wonderfully influenced its Professors, enabling them to despise all the Malice
of Men or Devils, and all their extravagant endeavors for its extirpation.

Besides, to suffer for Religion, rather than seek to preserve it by any
sinful either Compliance or Resistance, is Defendenda enim religio est, non
occidendo, sed moriendo, non saevitia, sed patientia, non scelere, sed fide.
Lactant. Inst. l. 5. c. 19
the surest course that can possibly be taken to obtain the compleatest
safeguard both for it and our selves, I mean the Divine Protection. This argues
an hearty resignation to the Divine Will, and a steady Faith and Trust in God,
and obedience to his Laws, though when they seem most directly contradictory to
our present interest; and may therefore justly be concluded of very great use
for procuring his Favor and Defense. Which whilst we can assuredly depend
upon, we may safely aver with the Prophet Elisha, upon the news of the Forces
which the King of Syria had sent to seize him, 2 King. 6.16.
They that be with us are more they that be with our Adversaries; or with the
holy Evangelist, That S. Jo. 4.4.
greater is he that is in us than he that is in the world. He is greater and
infinitely more powerful than all that can possibly set themselves against us,
and can therefore easily defeat all their most malicious Designs, and place us
in security; whilst they that trust more to their own Attempts than to his good
Providence are frequently entrapp'd in the works of their own hands, and so are
taught by sad Experience, what egregious folly it is, to forsake their God to
save themselves. But this is not all; for,

4. To choose Suffering rather than Sin, is not only a necessary Duty, required
in Scripture, and enforced by our Savior's Example, and his Commiseration and
Goodness to fallen Man, and a means of maintaining, adorning, and propagating
the Religion for which we thus suffer, but it is moreover what shall be
abundantly rewarded in a future State. When our Lord shall appear at the last
day to render to every man according to his doings, he will have a singular
regard for those that have forsaken Father, or Mother, or Brethren, or Sisters,
or Houses, or Lands, to follow him, but especially that shall have resolved to
part with their Lives sooner than with their Integrity. He will remember all
their Losses, Reproaches, Tortures, or whatever they had willingly endured for
him, and will convince them to their endless Comfort, That their Quid enim, si
(ut Furius dicebat) rapiatur, vexetur, exterminetur, egeat, auferantur ei
oculi, damnetur, uratur, miseris etiam modis necetur; perdetne suum praemium
virtus? An potius peribit ipsa? Minime! sed and mercedem suam Deo judice
accipiet, and vivet, and semper vigebit. Lactant. Instit. l. 5. c. 18.
light afflictions which were but for a moment, had served to work out for them
a far more exceeding and enternal weight of glory. And if there be different
degrees of Happiness for the Saints in Heaven, (as it needs not in the least to
be doubted but there are) then may it more than be presumed, that the chief
Seats there, the more honorable Thrones will be allotted to them who have
waded through the sorest Trials here, and by suffering most have most
effectually triumphed over the Malice of their Adversaries. And thus much
perhaps may be implied in those words of our Blessed Savior; S. Lu. 6.23.
Blessed are ye when men shall hate you, and when they shall separate you from
their company, and shall reproach you, and cast out your name as evil for the
son of man's sake: Rejoice in that day, and leap for joy, for behold your
reward is great in heaven.

S. Ja. 1.12.
Blessed, also is the man, says S. James, that endures temptations, for when
he is tried, he shall receive the Crown of Life, which the Lord had promised to
them that love him. And S. Paul not only delivers it as an undoubted truth,
That 2 Timothy 2.12.
if we suffer with Christ, or for his Honor and Glory, we shall also reign
with him; but declares likewise the wonderful disparity that is betwixt our
present transient Tribulations, and the inestimable Felicity whereto they lead!
such as that these seem of little account, whenever we seriously fix our
thoughts upon it. Romans 8.18.
For I reckon, says the Apostle, that the sufferings of this present time, are
not worthy to be compared with, or bear no manner of proportion to, the glories
that shall be revealed in us. Which, whosoever duly considers with himself, one
would think he should need no other Argument for encouraging him to despise all
the Flatteries and the Terrors of this World, and even Life it self, in
comparison of so unconceivably valuable a Recompense of Reward. And yet I have
one thing more to add; which is, That

5. To suffer for our Savior's sake, or in his Cause, is no such dreadful
Task, as Men are wont ordinarily to imagine. As I shall endeavor to prove by
these following steps.

1. Perhaps our Sufferings may not be great. We may only be stripped of some O
infoelicem aegrum! quare? quia non vino nivem diluit, quia non rigorem potionis
suae, quam capaci scypho miscuit, renovat fracta insuper glacie: quia non
ostrea illi Lucrina in ipsa mensa aperiuntur; quia non circa coenationem ejus
tumultus coquorum est, etc. Senec. Epist. 78.
Superfluities of Estate, or some Title or Post of Honor, neither of which are
necessary to our Welfare; and which it would not much grieve us to be deprived
of, if we were but rightly apprehensive how well we may live without them, if
we please. Or if we be touched more nearly in our persons, this it may be
reaches only to an inconvenient and chargeable Confinement, or some other like
tolerable punishment; which though uneasy in it self, may however very well be
born, considering the occasion of it, and the vast advantage that may
reasonably be expected to redound from it. Or if our Lot be harder, and we have
a heavier portion of Miseries to conflict with, we have still this comfort
left, That

2. They cannot last very long. None of our Afflictions can possibly affect us
beyond this present life, Compendio rem dicamus: Vita est,
Somnus, bulla, vitrum, glacies, flos, fabula, foenum,
Umbra, cinis, punctum, vox, sonus, aura, nihil.
Drexel. prodr. aetern. c. 1.30.
which at best we know is of no certain continuance, but liable to a thousand
Accidents which may soon dispatch it; or if they do not, is however constantly
hastening toward a Conclusion, like S. Ja. 4.14.
a Vapor that appears for a little time, and then vanishes away. There is none
of us all knows how quickly he may be summoned hence, and whether he shall not
immediately be called for, and when he least expects it; like the rich Man in
S. Luke's Gospel, who had been heaping up Wealth, and was now promising himself
a comfortable enjoyment of it, had filled his Barns well, and was blessing
himself to think what satisfaction he should have in the emptying them again,
but Lu. 12.20.
suddenly came a surprising message to acquaint him, that he might no longer be
permitted the enjoyment of what he had thus amassed together, not one day more
might be allowed him to taste the fruit of all his Labor, so uncertain and
precarious is this Life's Tenure.

And at its utmost extent it is but of little duration, and in no wise fit to
be set in competition with a future eternal state. Thus true is that saying of
the Son of Syrach, Ecclus. 18.8, 9, 10.
What is man? and whereto serves he? what is his good? and what is his evil?
The number of a man's days at the most are an hundred years. As a drop of water
unto the sea, and a gravelstone in comparison of the sand, so are a thousand
years to the days of eternity. And those Afflictions therefore which concern us
only during our stay in this short, transient, uncertain life, are by no means
to be reckoned upon as very long. But besides,

3. It is pos2ible they may be very short. Quodcunque illud est malum, tecum
ipse metire, ac timorem tuum taxa: Intelliges profecto, aut non magnum, aut non
longum esse quod metuis. Senec. Epist. 24. Nemo potest valde dolere, and diu.
Epist. 78.
When they are in extremity, they are a very likely means of shortening a Life,
which according to the course of nature could not be long without them, and so
of putting a period both to it and themselves together. And when they have not
this effect, it may please God to remove them some other way, that so we may
have no cause to complain of having been made to groan under them for any time.
He may vouchsafe to S. Mark 13.20.
shorten the days of any Persecution, for the elects sake, whom he has chosen,
and out of pity to those that do, or are like to labor under it, that they may
not be opprested with overmuch sorrow; or if the time of Trial be prolonged may
yet condescend to deliver us from it, Am. 4.11.
plucking us as a firebrand out of the burning. He may Act. 23.20, 21.
unexpectedly detect the wicked Contrivances of his Enemies, Esth. 8.8.
or abate their Malice, Isai. 37.29. and 1 Samuel 23.28, 29.
or defeat their Designs, Joseph. (...). l. 2. c. 17. and Socrat. Hist. Eccl.
l. 3. c. 19, 20, 21.
or cut them off in the midst of their career, and Exodus 14.27.
bring the mischief they had intended for us upon their own Heads, and by any
of these Means, or what other he pleases, may deliver us out of our Troubles.
And yet if he do not, we may farther remember for our encouragement, That
whilst they last,

4. They frequently administer a great deal of Comfort and Consolation to the
Sufferers. 2 Cor. 1.3, 4, 5.
Blessed be God, says S. Paul, even the father of our Lord Jesus Christ, the
father of mercies, and the God of comfort, who comfort us in all our
tribulation, that we may be able to comfort them which are in any trouble, by
the comfort wherewith we our selves are comforted of God. For as the sufferings
of Christ abound in us, so our consolation also abounded by Christ. And again
he professes himself to have c. 12.10.
taken pleasure in infirmities, in reproaches, in necessities, in persecutions,
in distresses for Christ's sake. And of the rest of the Apostles we read, that
they Act. 5.41.
departed from before the Council, who had sentenced them to be scourged,
rejoicing that they were counted worthy to suffer shame for the name of Christ.
And doubtless all that tread in the same steps with these blessed Propagators
of our Faith, being followers of them as they were of Christ, and offering as
they did to suffer, and perhaps to die in his Cause, shall meet also with their
proportion of the like Consolation. Such have a continual feast within. Their
Sufferings may grate hard upon them, but they are sensible all the time, that
these are not of their own procuring, for they befall them only by reason of
their steady perseverance in the ways of Righteousness; their chief care is to
approve themselves to God above, and this is the true cause of the Enmity and
Indignities they meet with from Men. And this reflection furnishes them with a
calm quiet, and serenity, peace, delight, and satisfaction of Mind. which they
would not exchange for great Riches. It is natural for them likewise to look
beyond their Troubles, and bethink themselves of that transcendently happy
state, which they expect to succeed in lieu of them. And how must this
necessarily transport them? How must it cheer their Spirits, and elevate their
Souls, to think how inconceiveable the Glories are, which they are thus
vigorously endeavoring to secure to themselves? Here is matter of joy and
rapture, such as no wicked Man can purchase for the greatest price. And this
cannot but be a mighty Beatus est igitur sapiens in tormentis: sed cum
torquetur pro fide, pro justitia, pro Deo, illa patientia doloris beatissimum
facier. Est enim Deus qui solus potest honorare virtutem, cujus merces
immortalitas sola est. Lactant. Firm. Instit. div. l. 3. c. 27.
support to the Christian Sufferer, and which will strangely abate the
sharpness of all his Conflicts, and will enable him to continue on his course,
and when beset with the greatest difficulties, nevertheless to encourage
himself in his God, and willingly to encounter the utmost Dangers rather than
fall short of the Prize that is set before him. And yet once more,

5. The Christian Sufferer is not without the peculiar assistance of the Holy
Ghost, for setting him above the Power of all Opposition. As it did the
primitive Christians and Martyrs, who being supported and animated by the
influence of this Blessed Spirit, could readily defy all kinds of Terrors,
resolving that no Trial or Temptation whatsoever should ever Romans 8.38, 39.
separate them from the love of God, which is in Christ Jesus our Lord. To them
Phil. 1.29.
was given in behalf of Christ, not only to believe on him, but also to suffer
for his sake. And they did it in so remarkable, so eminent a manner, as may
teach us all to conclude, that they must necessarily have been inspired with a
supernatural Courage, since nothing less than this could have made them such
illustrious Conquerours over all the formidable Difficulties they were to
grapple with; and consequently, that there is justreason to expect the same
Assistance in other Ages of the Church, as far as there shall be a like
occasion for it. Hence it was that P. 121
Minucius Foelix, Epist. 6. ^dit. Ox. and Epist. 76.
S. Cyprian, L. 5. c. 13.
Lactantius, and others boast so much of the Sufferings of their
Fellow Christians, how not Men only, but Women and Children could undervalue
Crosses, and Tortures, and wild Beasts, and all kinds of Punishments, and could
patiently overcome the Malice and Cruelty of their Adversaries. And S.
Chrysostom professes, (...), etc. Cont. Judaeos l. 3.
That their Conflicts were greater than could proceed from a mortal Nature, and
that they slighted this present life, and trampled upon Racks and Torments,
contemned Death, and were upon the wing toward Heaven, got free of the
Tempestuous Sea of terrestrial Affairs, and sailed into the Haven of Quiet and
Security. And with what surprising Joy both they and others since have
triumphed over the heaviest Sufferings, is too large a Field for me to enter
upon at present. But the serious meditation of it ought certainly to convince
us all, that it is no such mighty business to suffer in a just and righteous
Cause, and that we may reasonably believe, that whatever Evils befall us upon
this account will be found upon trial to be far more tolerable and easy, than
they had appeared to be whilst at a distance, and we feared, but had not felt
them.

The sum of all is, That to be ready to suffer upon a good account, is a
necessary Christian disposition of Mind, and the least return we can make to
our Blessed Redeemer, who has done and suffered so much for us; and is moreover
the properest course we can take to secure and propagate our Religion, and the
only sure way to be for ever happy; and yet that it will most probably be found
a far easier task than most Men think it, nay, may possibly prove a just
occasion of Joy and Exultation in this present World, besides the incomparable
Glories wherewith it will be attended in the other.

It therefore now remains, that we be entreated to behave our selves
accordingly, that we be not affrighted from our profession by whatsoever
Terrors, but adhere firmly to our Religion and all the Principles and Branches
of it, as well in times of Danger, as when we may do it more securely; Vir
bonus -- statuit omnem cruciatum perferre, intolerabili dolor lacerari, potius
quam aut officium prodat aut fidem. Cicer. Quaest. Acad. l. 2. c. 8.
that we resolve by God's Grace and Assistance to expose our selves to the
utmost, and to endure the severest Trials, rather than temporize, or act
insincerely in any respect; remembering always, that the S. Matt. 10.24.
Disciple is not above his Master, nor the Servant above his Lord, and that
considering what rough treatment our Savior met with from the World, his
Followers ought not to be surprised, if they meet also with the like. True
Christianity, like the blessed Author of it, has been, is, and will be attended
with frequent opposition, and the earnest endeavors of the Kingdom of Darkness
for its Extirpation. And where there is no hope of wholly ruining it, the
Tempter's next Contrivance is to deprave and corrupt it with such Innovations,
and false Glosses, and erroneous Interpretations as may endanger the Salvation
of those that admit of them; and then to try if any Persuasions, or Entreaties,
or Promises, or where these fail, if any Terrors or Sufferings can prevail
with persons to embrace them. And they are not worthy the Name of Christians,
that cannot resolve to persist in defiance to all these Encounters, that cannot
bear their Cross after their Savior, and be ready to lay down their Lives for
him. It Is true, this is no very agreeable Doctrine to the corrupt Inclinations
of Mankind, as not suiting well with Flesh and Blood; and hence it comes to
pass, that Men had rather hear of, than practice it. But this makes it not at
all the less necessarily incumbent on such as took up their Religion upon the
condition of suffering for it; which they cannot therefore decline, when
required of them, without a notorious violation of all the Obligations they
have laid upon themselves to fight manfully under our Savior's Banner. You can
have no grounds to expect the Advantages, without being willing to bear also
with the hardships of Religion.

And yet, my Brethren, 1 S. Pet. 4.15.
let none of you suffer as an evil-doer, in any Case; because so all your
Sufferings will lie wholly at your own Doors. For it is not the weight of any
one's Cum martyrem non faciat poena, sed causa. D. August. Epist. 61. and
Epist. 167. and Cont. Crescon l. 3. c. 47. Nam si poena martyrs faceret, omnia
metalla martyribus plena essent; omnes catenae martyrs traherent, omnes qui
gladio feriuntur, coronarentur. Id. in Psalm. 34. Non ergo qui propter
iniquitatem, and propter Christianae unitatis impiam divisionem, sed qui
propter justitiam persecutionem patiuntur, hi martyrs very sunt. Epist. 50.
Sufferings, but the Righteousness of his Cause that makes the Martyr. Men may
have imbibed false, and perhaps very pernicious Principles, and Notions, and if
these bring them into trouble, they may suffer only as Heretics, or
Schismatics, or Traitors, not as faithful Disciples of our Lord Jesus Christ.
Or if their Principles be right and Orthodox, but they think to express their
Fidelity to them by a lewd and vicious, tumultuous, or other immoral Behavior,
and hereby bring themselves into Difficulties, this is not yet to suffer as
Christians, not God but themselves, not their Religion but their own Folly
being the occasion of what Inconveniences befall them in this case. 1 S. Pet.
2.20.
But to do well, to keep within the bounds of Duty both to God and Man, and yet
to suffer patiently for so doing, this is acceptable with God.

Wherefore it very nearly concerns persons in all places, and upon all
appearances of trial, to see that they be rightly principled, and have due
Notions and Apprehensions of things, before they venture to suffer for them,
least otherwise they offer the Sacrifice of Fools, bearing only the due demerit
of their own Guilt, or at least, the natural effect of their Imprudence,
instead of honoring God by a faithful Confession of him. But being once well
assured in this point, and having duly informed themselves of the Justice of
their Cause, and the necessity they are under of being true to it, they must
proceed vigorously against all the Difficulties that can attend it, as not fit
to be put in the Balance with that far more exceeding and eternal weight of
glory which is promised to them that come off Victors in this Spiritual
Warfare. It is infinitely beneath the hope of an heavenlyminded Christian, to
stick at such Rubs as these, and not rather to make his way courageously
through all the transitory Impediments wherewith he finds himself beset. Justum
and tenacem propositi virum,
Non ardor civium prava jubentium,
Non vultus instantis Tyranni
Mente quatit solida.
Hor Carm. l. 3. Od. 3. (...). Just. Mart. c. Tryph.


No Threats or Frowns of the greatest Tyrant, much less the insults of those of
meaner Quality, should ever drive him out of his Road, or incline him to do any
thing unbecoming his Character. Quam pulchrum spectaculum Deo cum Christianus
cum dolor congreditur, cum adversum minas, and supplicia, and tormenta
componitur? cum strepitum mortis, and horrorem carnificis irridens insultat?
cum libertatem suam adversus reges and principes erigit? soli Deo cujus est,
cedit? Min. Foel. Octav.
He should continually encourage himself, by revolving in his Mind how pleasing
a sight it is in the Eyes of the Almighty to behold his faithful Servants
struggling with Griefs, bearing up against the severest Menaces and
Punishments, and triumphing over the noise of Death, and the dread of the
merciless Executioner, and keeping themselves free from the unjust Commands of
Kings and Princes, that they may be at liberty to serve and obey their God
only; should constantly remember that God is the Supreme Lord of all, and Act.
4.19. etc. 5.29.
his Laws are therefore above all to be attended to, and Da veniam; tu
carcerem, ille gehennam minatur. D. August. de verbis Domini Sermon. 6.
that his Terrors are infinitely beyond all that the most exquisite Malice,
backed by the greatest Power, can possibly inflict here in this World.

And indeed they that labor not to bring themselves to that pass, that they
can readily undergo the greatest Indignities for their Savior's sake, show but
a mean respect to him, and that they undeservedly bear his Name. For who is
there would not willingly serve him, so long as it costs him nothing? Who would
not profess himself his follower, whilst he finds it for his present advantage?
But to continue faithful to him when it cannot be done without apparent and
very considerable damage, to persevere in our Duty to him in times of sore
Temptations, conscientiously and strictly to observe his Commands when we are
like to pay dear for it, this is the truest Criterion of our Love to him. In
tribulationibus quis sit fidelis agnoscitur. Sext. Pythag.
Our Fidelity is best tried in troublesome times, and always appears most
illustrious when exposed to the greatest Hardships, and forced to undergo the
sharpest Conflicts, and if it will not hold out in these Circumstances there is
too apparent cause to question its Sincerity.

And I cannot therefore but think it a great mistake in any of us, at any time
to terrify our selves, and each other with a frightfull Scene of Persecution,
as though it were an intolerable burden; and not rather to fix our Meditations
on the other hand, upon the admirable Comforts that usually accompany it, and
the unspeakable Benefits, that will at length arise from it. Instead of thus
dressing up the Miseries of a Suffering Estate in all the most unagreeable
Circumstances, enough to transport us too often beyond the bounds of Patience,
we should do far better service to God and our holy Religion, and take a much
more effectual course for securing our own Eternal Welfare, if we would make it
our care to form to our selves a compleater and less partial Character of those
Sufferings to which our Religion may at any time expose us, not harping only
upon the Prisons, and the Fetters, and the Gibbets, and the Tortures, the
Reproaches, the Banishments, the Wants, the Degradations, the Confiscations,
and the Flames of Martyrdom, which we are generally too too apt to be
affrighted at, but laboring to make our selves truly sensible on the other
side, of the admirable Consolations that mightily abate its Terrors, which if
duly attended to, would make People almost in love with it, Bonum agonem
subiturae estis, in quo Agonothetes Deus vivus est: Xystarches Spiritus
Sanctus; corona aeternitatis: brabium, angelicae substantiae politia in coelis,
gloria in saecula saeculorum. Tertull. ad Martyrs, c. 3.
that it is a Service highly pleasing to God, and for the Benefit and Honor of
his Religion and its Profesfors, and that it wants not the support of his holy
Spirit for carrying us through it in a triumphant manner, making us Romans 8.37.
more than conquerours through him that loves us, nor the promise of an
incomparable unconceivable Crown of Glory consequent upon it in the other Life.
This prospect of Martyrdom would presently possess Men's Minds with such a
notion of it, that they would not know how to use any indirect or unlawful
attempts for avoiding what they are thus assured may be tolerable in this
World, but will unquestionably be of unspeakable advantage in another. It would
tempt us to take all opportunities for preparing our selves and each other for
the Fiery-tryal, or whatever other less Instances of Suffering for Christ,
encouraging one another to follow the Example of the Apostles and other
Disciples and Confessors, who (as the great Apostle of the Gentiles speaks of
himself) Act. 20.24.
thought not their Lives, (not to say their Estates, Preferments, or Honors)
dear to them, so they might finish their course with joy; but especially of our
Blessed Lord himself, Heb. 1^.2.
the author and finisher of our Faith, who for the joy that was set before him,
endured the cross, and despised the shame, and is set down at the right hand of
the throne of God. Thus it was with our Lord himself; and great numbers of his
Followers drank deep of the same bitter Cup, without ever seeking how they
might get out of the way, and so escape it. Et nunc praesentia rerum est medius
ardor, ipsa canicula persecutionis ab isto scilicet Cynocephalo. Alios ignis,
alios gladius, alios bestiae Christianos probaverunt: alii fustibus interim and
ungulis insuper degustara martyria in carcere esuriunt. Tertull. Scorpiac. c. 1.
It would grieve you to the Heart to hear through what Seas of Blood they
waded, during the hotter times of Persecution, how they passed through good
Report and bad Report, with what gainsayings and abuses they conflicted, how
they were forced from City to City, what Buffetings and Revilings, what Flames
and Swords, what Racks and Gibbets, what Teeth of Beasts, and other Methods of
Cruelty they underwent for the Love of their Savior, and through hope of the
Prize that was set before them. (...). Just. Mart. Apol. 2.
They were hated and unjustly persecuted by Men of all Ranks, Degrees, and
Professions, whether Jews or Gentiles, whether bond or free, whether high or
low, whether rich or poor, all Men had set themselves against them, to cut them
off from the face of the Earth. Insomuch that no where could they be at rest,
but into whatever City or Town they entered, they were forthwith in danger of
being seized, and brought to an untimely and undeserved Execution. And yet such
was their Constancy and Resolution in the Profession of their Religion, such
their fear of God, and such their care to demean themselves as in his sight,
that they were almost unconcerned at whatever could befall them in this World.
Though they were 2 Cor. 4.8, etc.
troubled on every side, yet were they not distressed; though perplexed, yet
not in despair; though persecuted, and carrying in their body the marks of the
Lord Jesus, yet they fainted not, v. 16.
but whilst their outward man decayed, their inward man was renewed day by day.
They looked past this present World to that which is to come, and had their
Minds, their Thoughts and Desires so fixed upon it, that they could stick at
nothing that lay in the way to it.

Wherefore seeing we are compassed about with such a multitude of Examples,
such a cloud of Witnesses that have gone before us, and have left us plenty of
Instances of their Victories over Persecutions and Temptations, what an
indelible Shame and Reproach will it be to you and me, if we shall yet draw
back, and like the Seed sown in the stony Ground, in time of temptation fall
away, and by so doing dishonor God, and expose our selves to his eternal
Indignation? This would be an egregious affront and provocation to Almighty
God, whom we profess our selves so fearful to offend, would be a shameful
blemish to, and perhaps might greatly endanger the subversion of that Religion
which we would be thought so zealously concerned for, would argue the highest
Ingratitude toward our Blessed Savior, who has been so infinitely gracious to
us, would deprive us of that inestimable Crown which we make continual show of
seeking after, and would farther deliver us over to all those eternal Tortures,
Pangs, and Agonies which are threatened to the Timorous and Faint-hearted.

And oh that we would therefore be persuaded to take a contrary course, to walk
as Strangers and Pilgrims upon Earth, That have here no continuing city, but
seek one to come, looking not at the things which are seen and are temporal,
and fading, but at the things which are not seen and are eternal, and disposing
our selves to part with all things here below, rather than endanger the
Salvation of our immortal Souls This is to be wise indeed, to be wise to the
best and most serviceable Purposes of Wisdom, and ought therefore to be the
great care of all that hope either to please God or to be for ever happy with
him.

And here I might have concluded, but that the Text suggests one farther
Direction which I must not omit, in relation to the manner of our Suffering for
Righteousness, or in a just and righteous Cause, that it must be with Meekness
and Fear, as well with Meekness toward Men, as with Fear toward God; that as
the one is serviceable to prevent our drawing back and seeking basely to
shelter and save our selves, when called out to suffer, so the other may
withhold us from all undue Excesses when we do suffer; that none of our
Sufferings may transport us beyond the (...) temper of Christianity, and make
us any way unjust and unreasonable toward the Instruments and Abettors of
them, either in our Censures or Actions, much less may put us upon studying how
we may possibly be able to revenge upon them all their unchristian behavior
toward us. I am not bound to receive all things with a Stoical Apathy, as if I
had no sense of any Cruelties that may be exercised upon me at any time; but
yet I must consider the Authors of them, as Rods in God's Hand for the just
punishment of those numerous Offenses against him, which have deserved a much
severer Treatment. I may not suffer my Passions or Resentments to prevail above
my Reason and my Duty; but must remember that by the Laws both of God and Man,
Justice is owing to my most implacable Adversaries, and I am no more to wrong
them than other People, whether it be in respect to their Bodies, Goods, or
Reputation. Their unwarrantable usage of me is no license for me to treat them
again in the same unchristian manner, if it happen at any time to be in my
power. For if I do, I no longer resemble my Blessed Savior, that unparallelled
Pattern of an invincible Meekness, 1 S. Pet. 2.22, 23.
Who did no sin, neither was guile found in his mouth, who when he was reviled,
reviled not again, when he suffered he threatened not, but committed himself to
him that judges righteously; and who has accordingly commanded me, S. Matt.
5.44.
To love my Enemies, to bless them that curse me, to do good to them that hate
me, to pray for them that despitefully use me and persecute me, that so I may
be the child of my Father which is in heaven, who makes his Sun to rise on the
evil and on the good, and sends his rain on the just and on the unjust.

In a word, to acquit our selves good Christians, we must be always prepared
both to suffer whenever our Christianity, or any part of it, requires it of us,
and to do it after a Christian sort, with an entire Resignation to the Divine
Will, and Patience, and Meekness toward our greatest Adversaries; earnestly
beseeching Almighty God, for our selves, that he will give us Grace to hold out
to his Glory, and our own Salvation, and for our Enemies, Persecutors, and
Slanderers, that it may please him to forgive their Sins, and to turn their
Hearts, through Jesus Christ our Lord, to whom with the Father, and the Holy
Ghost, be all Honor and Glory now and for ever more. Amen.

FINIS.
BOOKS Printed for, and Sold by Walter Kettilby, at the Bishop's Head in St.
Paul's Church yard.
A Discourse concerning Lent, in two Parts: The First, an Historical Account of
its Observation; the Second, an Essay concerning its Original. This sub-divided
into two Repartitions; the First is Preparatory, and shows that most of our
Christian Ordinances are derived from the Jews; and the Second conjectures that
Lent is of the same Original. By George Hooper, D. D. Dean of Canterbury, and
Chaplain in Ordinary to His Majesty. Octavo.

An Enquiry into the New Opinions, chiefly propagated by the Presbyterians of
Scotland; together also, with some Animadversions on a late Book, entitled, A
Defense of the Vindication of the Kirk, in a Letter to a Friend at Edinburgh.
By Alexander Monrow, D. D. Octavo.

Bishop Overal's Convocation-Book 1606. concerning the Government of God's
Catholic Church, and the Kingdoms of the whole World. Quarto.

True Conduct of Persons of Quality: Translated out of French. Octavo.

Mysteries in Religion, vindicated: or, the Filiation, Deity, and Satisfaction
of our Savior, asserted, against Socinians and others, with Occasional
Reflections on several late Pamphlets. By Luke Milbourn, a Presbyter of the
Church England. Octavo.

A Treatise relating to the Worship of God: divided into six Sections;
concerning, First, the Nature of Divine Worship. Secondly, The pecuculiar
Object of Worship. Thirdly, The true Worshippers of God. Fourthly, Assistance
requisite to Worship. Fifthly, The Place of Worship. Sixthly, The solemn Time
of Worship. By John Templer, D. D. Octavo.

A Defense of Revealed Religion, in six Sermons, upon Romans 1.16. Wherein it
is clearly and plainly shown, That no Man can possibly have any real Ground or
Reason to be ashamed of Christianity. By Henry Halliwell, M. A. Vicar of
Cowfold in Sussex. Octavo.

A Discourse concerning the Nature of Man, both in his Natural and Political
Capacity, both as he is a Rational Creature, and Member of a Civil Society;
with an Examination of some of Mr. Hobb's Opinions relating thereunto. By James
Loud, Rector of Settrington in Yorkshire, and sometime Fellow of Clare-Hall in
Cambridge. Octavo.

The Doctrine of the Glorious Trinity, not Explained, but Asserted by several
Texts, as they are Expounded by the ancient Fathers and later Divines, for the
satisfaction of such as doubt, the Conviction of such as deny, and the
Confirmation of such as believe this mysterious Article of the Christian Faith.
By Francis Gregory, D.D. Rector of Hambledon in the County of Bucks. Octavo.

An Essay to revive the ancient Charity and Piety, wherein God's Rights in our
Estates and our Obligations to maintain his Service, Religion and Charity, is
demonstrated and defended against the Pretenses of Covetousness and
Appropriation, in two Discourses: written to a Person of Honor and Virtue. By
George Burghop, Rector of Little-Gaddesden, in the County of Hertford, and
Chaplain to the Right Honorable John Earl of Bridgwater. Octavo.

Six Sermons preached before the late incomparable Princess Queen Mary, at
White Hall, with several Additions and large Annotations to the Discourse of
Justification by Faith. By George Bright, D. D. Dean of St. Asaph, and Chaplain
in Ordinary to His Majesty.

Two Assize-Sermons, preached at the Assizes at Winchester.

Piety's Address to the Magistrate, delivered in a Sermon at the Assizes at
Winchester, July 11.1695. Both by E. Young, Fellow of Winchester College, and
Chaplain in Ordinary to His Majesty. Quarto.

A Sermon preached at the Anniversary-meeting of the Sons of the Clergymen, in
the Church of St. Mary-le-Bow, on Tuesday, December. 3. 1695. Printed at the
Desire of the Stewards, to whom it is most humbly presented, by Tho. Whincop,
D.D. Rector of the United Parishes of St. Mary Abchurch and St. Laurence
Poultney, London.

Dr. Hickman's Sermon on St. Cecilia's Day. 1695.

Dr. Wyvill, Dean of Rippon's Thanksgiving-Sermon on the Taking of Namur.

Dr. Lamb, Dean of Ely's Sermon before the King at St. James's, Jan. 19. 1695/6.


